• ^
                .;^1



\




    \




                     X




                     %




        \




        -   *-l ;




                -4
Between Old and New
Harvard Middle Eastern Studies 15
Sultan Selim III (1789-1807).
Portrait by Konstantin Kapidagli,
dated 121811803-4.
Between Old and New
  The Ottoman Empire
 under Sultan Selim III
         1789-1807




    Stanford J. Shaw




     Harvard University Press
     Cambridge, Massachusetts
              1971




  NORTHWEST MISSOURI STATfi
     ONIVERSITV ulBRAR'^'
    MARYVILLE, MO 64468
                                  V




© Copyright 1971 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved

Distributed in Great Britain by Oxford University Press, London

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 74-131465
SBN 674-06830-0
Printed in the United States of America
SS3j^
        This book is humbly dedicated to my teacher,
        colleague, and friend, Hamilton A. R. Gibb,
        without whose inspiration, encouragement, and
        support it would never have been written.
                                               4

                                          .    ''                                                                                       I            ?!
                                                          v'-*                  .
                                                *•1              '              '




                                                                                                       :ii



                                                                                    Hn
                                                      :   i                     ■               4.y

                                                                                                                                                             X
                                                                                    '*.'.          •
                                                                                                                              I




                                                                                                                                                             (»•


                                                                                                                                                "N




         >>              Y '7’ •
         1.-       '*/g,.**          M

                                                                                                                     >
                                                                                                                                                      .       "1
                                                                                                             ■   -   V*   •                 1
                                     >                                                                                                                       /3
               >

                                         ■’         '. ■•            »                  ■#                                                                ' ‘’1
                                                                                                                              bi
                                                     V                                   * •<
V-                                                                                  ■
                                                                                                                                                             s
     V
                                          ■*                  ■ /           ♦       *'■*.                                         <* i- •                     I

                                                    * •>             *. ■           '           - .1

                   '   -4 *^)» 4 -




     »
                           Preface




While the French Revolution convulsed Europe, the Ottoman
Empire also reached a crucial point in its long history. Centuries
of decay had brought it to a point where internal stresses and
forefgn dangers threatened its very existence. Previous efforts
to rescue the empire by internal reform had been entirely un¬
successful, and it was continuing to survive more as a result
of its enemies’ inability to agree on a division of the spoils than
anything else. Even the most intelligent Ottomans were hardly
aware of the extent of the danger and conceived reform to be no
more than a sterile restoration of the institutions and practices
which had brought success in the past. Starting in the second
quarter of the nineteenth century, however, and continuing into
modern times, a new concept of reform arose which enabled the
Ottomans to restore their empire from within —the idea that
the old institutions had to be entirely abolished and replaced
by new ones, largely imported from the West and far better
suited to meet the problems and needs of modern times. This
new concept is usually identified with the Tanzimat movement,
which lasted from 1839 until the accession of Sultan Abd ul-
Hamid II in 1876. It actually was inaugurated in 1826, when
Sultan Mahmud II destroyed the Janissary corps, the military
pillar of the old order. Yet, in many ways, it was during the
reign of his predecessor, Selim III, that conditions arose which
made this new idea of reform inevitable in the years which fol¬
lowed. In most ways Selim was a failure. His reforms were limited
and were eventually dissipated in foreign conflicts and internal
revolts. He went little beyond strictly military and technical
innovations to the more fundamental political, social, economic,
and judicial developments which had'provided the necessary
context for their successful operation in Europe. Yet in his efforts,
and in the factors which defeated them, lay the seeds of modern
Turkish reform.
 The great detail of this study, particularly in its description
of diplomatic and political affairs, may seem anachronistic
in an age in which historians have turned to synthesis and
interpretation and to emphasis on social and economic develop¬
ments. Yet I have felt my approach to be the correct one for
the study of nineteenth-century Ottoman history because of
the absence of previous studies of the kind that historians of
Europe and America have been able to rely on for two genera¬
tions. The historian must walk before he can run. It is not pos¬
sible to describe Selim’s reforms and the reasons for their fail¬
ure without placing them in the context of the political, military,
and diplomatic events of their time. The momentous events of
the era of the French Revolution and of Bonaparte have been
touched on in numerous studies, but never with the Ottoman
Empire as their focus, never in relation to Ottoman problems,
Ottoman conditions, and Ottoman policies, and—most important
of all —never on the basis of Ottoman sources. An attempt has
been made here to remedy these defects by giving a balanced
account of events in all parts of the empire during this period:
internal conditions and revolts in southeastern Europe, Ana¬
tolia, and the Arab provinces; European diplomacy in relation
to the Eastern Question; and the various military campaigns
and diplomatic maneuvers in which Selim was involved with
the powers of Europe. The results of previous European research
on these subjects have been incorporated. At the same time,
I have added new information from Ottoman Turkish sources in
an effort to provide a more balanced and objective account than




                              Preface
would have been possible in a study based solely on European
sources.
  Recent Turkish studies of Selim’s reign have been supple¬
mented by detailed original research in all the source materials
from his reign remaining in the Ottoman archives and libraries.
The materials used in this work were gathered during a series
of trips to Istanbul, Ankara, London, Paris, and Vienna between
1957 and 1967, made possible by fellowships and grants from
the Harvard Center for Middle Eastern Studies, the Harvard
Foundation for Advanced Study and Research, the Rockefeller
Foundation, and,the Royal Institute of International Affairs,
London. I would like to express my gratitude to the friends and
colleagues who gave me every possible assistance and encour¬
agement during the course of my research; in particular to
Midhat Sertoglu, Director of the Ba§ VekMet Ar§ivi in Istanbul;
the late Haluk Y. §ehsuvaroglu, former director, and Hayrullah
Ors, present director of the Topkapi Saray Museum and Archives
in Istanbul; Aziz Berker, former Director of the Department
of Libraries in the Ministry of Education, Ankara, who made
available the vast resources of manuscripts in the Turkish
national library system; and to the directors and staffs of the
Belediye Library and Archaeological Museum Library in Istan¬
bul; the Tiirk Tarih Kurumu Library in Ankara; the Public
Record Office and British Museum in London; the Archives
Nationales, Archives du Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres,
and Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris; the Archives du Ministere
de la Guerre, Chateau de Vincennes; the Haus-Hof- und Staats-
Archiv, Vienna, and the Harry Elkins Widener Library at
Harvard.
 My special thanks go to Sir Hamilton A. R. Gibb, who origin¬
ally suggested this study, and to whom it is dedicated as a small
token of appreciation for the advice, encouragement, and stimu¬
lation he has given me during the course of my work.
  Because the sources used in the research were in various
languages, and the provinces included in the Ottoman Empire
at the time of the study have been replaced by a number of
independent states, each with its own system of spelling and
transliteration as well as its own place names, this work had a




                             Preface
number of peculiar problems in this regard. For example, the
city of Plovdiv (Bulgarian) used to be called Philippopolis (Greek)
and Filibe (Turkish). The letter c is pronounced j in modern
Turkish and ^ in Serbo-Croat. In addition, the sound ch is
rendered by 5 in Turkish and by c or c in Serbo-Croat; and the
sound ^ becomes § in Turkish and Rumanian and s in Serbian.
The letter for j in Arabic represents g in Egypt and ^ in the
Lebanon, and so forth. For this reason, the following system has
been employed in this work: in the t,^xt itself, all proper nouns
and technical words have been transliterated in a way to make
them easily pronounceable by the English-speaking reader.
In most cases, the traditional Western-language names for
cities, towns, and provinces have been preferred to those cur¬
rently used in the modern states; thus "Semendria” rather than
"Smederevo,” "Philippopolis” rather than "Plovdiv”, "Cairo”
rather than "al-Kahire,” and so forth. But when the modern
names have achieved common usage in English, these have
usually been accepted, along with their current spellings, in
place of the traditional ones: thus "Istanbul” rather than "Con¬
stantinople,” "Edirne” rather than "Adrianople,” and "Skopje”
rather than "Uskiip.” On the other hand, in the footnotes and
bibliography, because of the need to cite recent publications
in the various Balkan and Middle Eastern languages, current
spelling systems had to be preserved, so all references and
citations were made according to the transliteration systems
currently in use for the language in which each of them was
written. As a result, while the text reads "Jevdet,” "Chorbaji,”
and "Nish,” in the footnotes and bibliographies the same names
are spelled "Cevdet,” "Corbaci,” "Ni^” This change seemed
necessary to satisfy the needs of readers and researchers alike
and to prevent the text from becoming a morass of different
spelling and transliteration systems. A complete glossary of
all the names applied to each important city or town mentioned
in the text is included in the index.


S. J. S.
Los Angeles, California




                             Preface
                         Contents




                       Part I. Introduction:
                        Prelude to Reform

I      Decline of the Ottoman Empire              3
II     Education of a Prince                     12


                   Part II. War with Russia
                   and Austria, 1787-1792

III    Origins of the War under Ahd ul-Hamid I   21
IV     The Campaigns of 1787-1789                28
V      The Winter of 1789-90: Diplomatic
       Activities and Internal Developments      40
VI     The Campaign of 1790                      51
VII    The Campaign of 1791 and the Conclusion
       of Peace                                  61


                   Part III. The "'New Order”
                            of Selim III

VIII   Wartime Reforms, 1789-1792                71
IX     The Reformers                             86
X      Military Reforms                          112
XI     Technical Reforms                         138
XII    Revival of the Ottoman Navy               150




                                XI
XIII    Administrative, Economic, and Social Reforms      167
XIV     Window to the West                                180


               Part IV. Disintegration of the Empire:
           Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars, 1792-1807
XV      Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798           211
XVI     The Eastern Question, 1792-1798                   247
XVII    The War of the Triple Alliance, 1798-1802         257
XVIII   Disintegration of the Empire' 1799-1806           283
XIX     The Eastern Question, 1802-1807                   328


                      Part V. The Triumph
                           of Reaction
XX      The Politics of Ottoman Reform                    367
XXI     The Revolt                                        378
XXII    Epilogue: Mustafa IV and the Ottoman Reaction     384
XXIII   The Deposition of Mustafa IV                      396


Appendix                                                  411
Abbreviations                                             414
Notes                                                     416
Bibliography                                              488
Index                                                     511




                            Contents
                        Illustrations




                   /




Unless otherwise indicated illustrations are from Mahmud Raif, Tableau
des nouveaux reglemens de I’Empire Ottoman (Istanbul, 1798).


Sultan Selim III (1789-1807). Portrait by Konstantin,
  Kapidagli, dated 1218/1803-4. Topkapi Saray Portrait
  Collection, Istanbul.                                   Frontispiece

New Barracks of the Mortar and Mine-Laying Corps, con¬
  structed 1793.                                                  200
Training Ground and Barracks of the Nizam-i Jedid Army
  and Bostanji corps at Levend Chiftlik.                          201
Imperial Cannon Foundry {Tophane) and Barracks of Ar¬
  tillery Corps (Topji) and Cannon-Wagon Corps {Top
  Arabaji) at Tophane, Istanbul.                                  202

Interior of the New Gunpowder Works at Azadh.                     203
New Gunpowder Works at Azadh, constructed 1794.                   204

The New Drydock at the Ottoman Naval Arsenal under
  Selim III.                                                      205
The Ottoman Naval Arsenal under Selim III.                        206
Modern Ottoman Ship of the Line, Constructed under
  Sultan Selim III.                                                207
Reception of Foreign Ambassadors by Sultan Selim III in
  the Topkapi Saray, Istanbul. Topkapi Saray Portrait
  Collection, Istanbul.                                            208




                                   xiii
Part I. Introduction:
 Prelude to Reform
■   <*;
          V                 ‘ V-’         '‘ 4 ;»'n, ^


          •r . ■   •¥   k    ^   <




    ,C'
                                     ‘®
                   /. Decline of the
                   Ottoman Empire




On Thursday morning, December 24, 1761, Mustafa III, twenty-
sixth sultan of the Ottoman line, received the welcome news
that at long last, after almost five years on the throne, he had
been presented with a son and heir by his fifth wife, Mihrishah
Sultan. As the sound of celebrations reverberated throughout
the ancient capital, the young prince and heir was given the
name Selim, and his father rejoiced that the Ottoman lineage
had been preserved.
  The state which young Prince Selim came to rule twenty-
eight years later was a far cry from that which his ancestors
had controlled two centuries before. Ten great sultans had
built a mighty empire which stretched from Hungary and the
gates of Vienna south through the Balkan Peninsula and Ana¬
tolia, down the valleys of the Tigris, Euphrates, and Nile to the
Persian Gulf and Red Sea, and across Syria and Egypt almost
to the Atlantic. But starting in the reign of Suleyman the Mag¬
nificent (1520-1566), a long series of weak, incapable, and
dissolute rulers had gradually undermined the entire structure
of Ottoman society.* The Ottoman system had been developed
in a complicated series of overlapping and intertwined classes,
institutions, and organizations which depended largely on the
person of the sultan himself for cohesion as a workable whole
                                            1



4   as well as for successful operation within their own limited
    spheres. With such dependence on the rulers, it was inevitable
    that when the sultans became unwilling or unable to guide
    and direct the system, it should decay and decompose. At first,
    it was expected that strong grand vezirs* might rjgpl^ce the sul¬
    tans in this role, but they proved to be inadequate because
    they could not replace their masters in their most important
    role, as a focus of loyalty in the empire. S'q a vacuum of power re¬
    mained at the center, and struggled to fill it led to the rise of
    factions in the Palace and Porte, and to nepotism, inefficiency,
    dishonesty, and anarcj^„in all parts of the empire. Weakening
    central control and misrule and tyranny by the representatives
    of the sultanate led to increasing disorder and anarchy, and
    the rise of local brigands, autonomous notables,** and others
    who sought to use the situation for their own advantage. Because
    the provincial revenues gradually diminished and most of the
    revenues left to the central treasury fell into the hands of the
    ruling class, the whole structure of Ottoman military and civil
    organization weakened further, and the vicious cycle was repeat¬
    ed again and again over the centuries.
      Furthermore, to the internal causes of decay was added an
    external one —an increasing inferiority to the West. The great
    new nation states and empires of Europe were using their
    political unity to develop tremendous power; developments in
    science and technology during and after the Renaissance and
    Reformation were enabling them to build armies with weapons
    far more efficient than any known before; and the great gold and
    silver discoveries in the New World and the development of
    imperialism and international trade and commerce on a large
    scale were giving them the economic strength to support their
    new-found political and military power. In all of this activity
    the Ottoman Empire took no part. At best it remained stagnant,
    with a vast government unable to lead, hardly able to rule.
    As Europe became unified, the Ottoman Empire disintegrated;


        *The Grand Vezir, called Sadr-i Azem by the Ottomans, was the chief exec¬
    utive and military officer in the traditional Ottoman state. See Gibb and Bowen,
    I/l, pp. 107-115.
       **Generally called Ayan; see chapter XV.




                                 Prelude to Reform
as Europe developed a new military technology, the Ottomans           5
relied on the weapons and techniques of the past; and European
economic developments were viewed by the Ottomans with
disdain. Ottoman merchants rarely participated in international
trade, and the precious metals coming from the New .World,
when combined with great population increases during the
sixteenth century and after, served only to fan the chronic
inflation, famine, and economic and political chaos, which were to
characterize Ottoman society during the remaining centuries
of its existence.^
  Much of the blame for these conditions must go to the peculiar
reaction of the Ottoman ruling class. The primary characteristic
of the Ottomans throughout these centuries was almost complete
isolation and a lack of awareness of developments outside
their own sphere, and the consequent assumption that the causes
of Ottoman decline and its remedies lay entirely within their
own practice and experience. Europe was wholly outside the
frame of reference of even the most well-educated Ottomans.
This was both cause for and manifestation of an unshakable
belief in the superiority of Ottoman ways to anything which
the infldel could possibly produce, an idea developed in an age
when the Ottoman world was, indeed, more advanced, but which
remained long after its basic assumption was entirely disproved
by developments in Europe. Consequently, when the new armies
of Europe beeran to defeat those of the Porte in the seventeenth
century, the Ottomans assumed that their defeat was caused not
by the superiority of Western armies but rather by their own
failure to apply fully the organization, weapons, and techniques
of warfare which had been so successful for them in the past.
Moreover, most of the ruling-class Ottomans actually benefited
from the abuses and stagnation. With revenues coming to them
from salaries, fiefs, and bribes, for which they were required to
do little or no work, and with their status and position in Ottoman
society directly dependent on continued adherence to the tech¬
niques and ways of the past, it was inevitable that they should
oppose any efforts to change, despite the consequent weakness
of the empire in relation to the West.
  During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, there-




                   Decline of the Ottoman Empire
 fore, when increasing dangers threatened the empire on which
 their privileges depended, the "reforms” which they introduced
 were merely efforts to restore the past, without the realization
 that what had been successful in the sixteenth century could not
 possibly succeed against the power developed in Europe since
 that time. The most famous of the seventeenth-century re¬
 formers were Sultan Murad IV (1623-1640) and the Kopriilii
 Grand Vezirs, Mehmed (1656-1661) and Ahmed (1661-1676).^
 Each rose to office as the result of external crises and military
 defeats accompanied by internal decay. Each temporarily saved
 the empire by forcing it back into the patterns of the past; each
 eliminated corruption, weeded out the corrupt and incompetent
 from the army and government, and ruthlessly restored honesty,
 efficiency, and order. But they were doomed by their very success,
 since they were able to act only against the results of the decay,
 not the causes. The selfish rule of the vested interests and their
 absorption in the glories of the past remained unbroken, and as
 soon as the immediate dangers were overcome, the reforms were
 forgotten and the old ways resumed. What saved the Ottomans
 more than anything else in the seventeenth century was Euro¬
 pean ignorance of the extent of their decay and the absorption
 of the West in its own internal wars so that it was unable or
 unwilling to take advantage of this weakness.
   Only with Kara Mustafa Pasha’s failure to take Vienna in
 1683 and the resulting collapse of his army did Europe become
 fully aware of the Ottoman situation and move to take advantage
 of it. Hapsburg Austria now sought to reconquer Hungary,
 Serbia, and the eastern Balkans, and to reach the Mediterranean.
 Venice hoped to regain its Adriatic colonies and the Morea.
-Russia worked to extend its lands through the Balkans and the
 Straits to the open sea. All of them fought the Porte by fomenting
 dissatisfaction among its non-Muslim subjects and by forcing
it into a series of wars which occupied most of its attention in the
closing decades of the seventeenth century and throughout the
eighteenth century: from 1683 to 1699 ending in the Treaty of
Carlowitz; a somewhat more successful war with Russia in
 1710 and 1711, ended by the Treaty of the Pruth (1711); the war
of 1714 through 1718 with Venice and Austria, ended by the




                         Prelude to Reform
Treaty of Passarowitz (1718); and a war with Austria and Russia       7
from 1736 to 1739, ended by the Treaty of Belgrade (1739).
As a result, the Ottoman Empire lost Hungary, Serbia north of
Belgrade, Croatia, Slavonia, and Transylvania; its boundaries
in Europe were pushed all the way back to the Danube,- where
they had last rested before Suleyman the Magnificent’s conquests
early in the sixteenth century. Moreover, only a year after
Selim’s birth, Russia came under the rule of the dynamic Cath-
erine the Great (1762-1796), and it was not long before she was
undertaking new efforts to push her realm into the Ottoman
territories bordering the Black Sea and the Straits, and through
them to the open sea.
  As the danger signals became more and more apparent during
the eighteenth century, the isolation of the Ottomans was slightly
diminished. Ottoman ambassadors went to live in Europe for
a time, to sign peace treaties, arrange alliances and the like, and
their oral and written reports made at least a few Ottomans
aware of what had gone on in Europe during the preceding two
centuries. In addition, as large numbers of European merchants
and diplomats poured into the empire to take advantage of its
weakness, opportunities for contact between them and members
of the Ottoman ruling class greatly increased, and Ottomans
began to see at first hand the kind of life Europeans had made
for themselves. An increasing number of European "renegades”
now came to serve the empire, bringing with them considerable
information about developments in Europe. For the most part,
however, these channels of contact were simply ignored by the
vast majority of Ottoman rulers and subjects alike. Such infor¬
mation did not fit into the patterns of life and thought of even
the most well-educated Ottomans, so its effect was superficial
at best.
  But there were some changes — at first in manners and tastes.
During the "Tulip Period” (1717-1730), led by Sultan Ahmed
III and Grand Vezir Damad Ibrahim Pasha, many members
of the court and ruling class sought to imitate European archi¬
tecture, court life, and entertainment. Chairs and sofas began
to replace the lush pillows and divans of the past. The palaces
of the French kings provided models for buildings and gardens




                   Decline of the Ottoman Empire
8   built along the Bosporus and at the "Sweet Waters” at the head
    of the Golden Horn. The lavish entertainments of Versailles
    produced their direct counterparts in the Ottoman capital.
    The Tulip Period did show for the first time some awareness of
    Europe among upper-class Ottomans, but it was no more than
    this. The awareness was very limited, even for those who benefited
    from it at the time. Among the mass of rulers and subjects,
    European ways remained entirely foreign and unwanted and
    stimulated a violent revolt in 1730^ which swept away all the
    leaders and accomplishments of the period.^
      This defeat was only temporary, however. The increasing
    contacts with Europe, and numerous European victories during
    the century diminished the isolation of the Ottomans further.
    In 1727 a Hungarian renegade named Ibrahim Miiteferrika was
    allowed to establish the first Turkish-language printing press
    in the empire, and he and his successor issued a series of books
    from then until 1742, when it was closed. Most of the printed
    texts were on traditional themes, in the classical manner,
    with little or no attention to the problems and needs of the time,
    but there were a few exceptions, of which the most outstanding
    was a treatise written by Ibrahim Miiteferrika himself for
    Mahmud I (1730-1754) describing the countries and armies of
    Europe and emphasizing the importance of imitating them in
    order to save the empire.^
      There were more concrete effects in the army, where the most
    damaging consequences of the decline were felt. Some isolated
    efforts were made to introduce European cannons, rifles, and
    other weapons along with the organization, discipline, and tactics
    which they required. These were brought by foreign renegades
    in Ottoman service. One of the earliest and most famous of these
    was the French Count Alexander de Bonneval, known as Hum-
    barajibashi Ahmed Pasha, who between 1729 and 1742 built
    a bombardier corps along European lines and established the
    first engineering school in the empire to introduce some of the
    basic elements of the new science and technology of the West.
    His efforts had no effect at all on the main stream of Ottoman
    military development at this time. The older corps sternly
    opposed all attempts to extend his teachings to them, since




                            Prelude to Reform
they felt —quite rightly—that the new techniques threatened            9
their old established privileges, security, and status. The new
bombardier corps was no more than a mercenary body hired for
a special purpose, and it was eliminated soon after its creator
died. Yet its influence lived on. During the next decade,,one of
the school’s instructors, Mehmed Said, wrote a geometry book.
Other books    appeared on medicine,      military sciences, and
European affairs — mostly translations, but important beyond
measure for Ottomans never before even aware of the existence
of such things.®
  During Selim’s/childhood, these limited reform efforts con¬
tinued on an ever-increasing scale. Under Grand Vezir Ragib
Pasha (1757-1763), Bonneval’s modern bombardier corps was
revived. His geometry school was secretly reopened and enlarged,
with its teachers mainly coming from among the men trained
in Bonneval’s time.^ Ambassador Ahmed Resmi visited Vienna
(1757) and Berlin (1763) and sent back enlightening accounts
of European events and conditions.® The Sultan himself had a
special passion for astronomy and secured various works on
astronomy and mathematics from the French Academy. Some
of them were translated into Turkish and made available in
manuscript and in printed form.®
  But starting late in Mustafa’s reign and continuing into that
of his brother and successor, Abd ul-Hamid I (1774-1789),
the external and internal dangers again became acute. A dis¬
astrous war with Catherine’s Russia began in 1768. In addition
to the army’s defeats on land, the Ottoman navy was almost
                                                                   V
entirely destroyed with a single blow at the Battle of Cheshme
(1770). A Russian fleet from the Baltic, under Admiral Orloff,
cruised the waters of the Adriatic and Mediterranean urging the
Greeks and other subject peoples to rise against their masters.
The fateful Treaty of Kiichuk Kaynaija (1774), which concluded
the war, gave to Russia the lands west of the Black Sea between
the Dnieper and the Bug. The Ottoman vassals living to the north
and east and the Tatars of the Crimea, Koban, and Bujak were
left in a precarious independence which made them virtually
defenseless against the expanding Russian power. At the same
time, Russia gained dominant influence in the empire through




                   Decline of the Ottoman Empire
treaty clauses allowing the use of the Black Sea and the Straits
for its shipping, giving its merchant^ privileges equal to those
of Britain and France, and permitting it subsequently to claim
the right of intervention on behalf of the Sultan’s Orthodox
Christian subjects. Moreover, Russia was provided with the
means of extending that influence by establishing consuls and
agents anywhere it wished in the Sultan’s dominions.
  In the years which followed, the provincial anarchy became
worse. Anatolia and the Balkans w^fe infested by brigands and
autonomous notables who acknowledged little more than the
Sultan’s suzerainty at best. In the Arab lands, Zahir al-Omar
and Jezzar Pasha in Syria, and Ali Bey ul-Kebir in Egypt,
Suleyman Pasha in Iraq, and the Saudis of Arabia, were be¬
coming   virtually   independent,    thus   depriving the Sultan’s
Treasury of its most fruitful sources of revenue and Istanbul and
the other great cities of the empire of some of their principal
sources of grain. Russian intervention in the Danubian Prin¬
cipalities increased, and its occupation of the Crimea in 1783
had to be recognized by the Sultan in return for no more than the
vaguest provisions allowing him to retain a position as Caliph
there and for Russian promises — soon to be violated—to end
its intervention in the Principalities and elsewhere.
  In response to these dangers, Abd uI-Hamid I introduced
important reforms into the Ottoman armed forces. The navy
was rebuilt under the leadership of one of the few Ottoman heroes
to emerge from the Battle of Cheshme, Gazi Hasan Pasha, who
served as Grand Admiral from 1774 to 1789. Foreign naval com¬
manders and shipbuilders helped him develop the navy along
modern lines and to train its officers in a new naval engineering
school (Muhendishane-i     Bahri-i    Humayun),    established   at
Aynahkavak in 1784.*^’
  Starting in 1773 Baron de Tott, a Hungarian officer in French
service, formed a new corps of rapid-fire artillery men {Siiratji)
and engineers, built a gun factory to manufacture modern
cannons and rifles, modernized and rebuilt the fortifications
at the Dardanelles and along the Danube, established a new
army engineering school at Haskdy, and modernized and en¬
larged the mathematics school. A group of French officers ex-




                        Prelude to Reform
panded the new artillery corps into a group of two hundred           11
and fifty men able to use modern cannons. They continued to
practice until 1781, when they were dissolved and the French
officers went home.“ Under Grand Vezir Halil Hamid Pasha
(1782-1785),   strenuous   though   largely   unsuccessful efforts
were made to reform the traditional Ottoman bureaucracy, the
financial system, the Janissaries, and the feudal cavalry, with
particular attention paid to weeding out the corrupt and those
who would not or could hot perform the duties assigned to
them. The old press originally established by Ibrahim Miite-
ferrika was revived, and books were once again produced, in¬
cluding important Turkish translations of European technical
texts for use in the new schools. The foreign advisers were re¬
called to resume their work not only on the rapid-fire artillery
corps, but also on the older artillery corps, and a new fortifica¬
tions school was established. The rapid-fire cannon corps grew
into a force of 2,000 men, and it was provided with the highest
possible salaries in order to attract into its service the best
fighting men of the empire. This work continued until 1787,
when the new Ottoman war with Russia and Austria led Louis
XVI to recall the French instructors on the pretext of retaining
his neutrality.
  But in the end, these reforms succeeded only when they did
not harm the interests or monopolies of the established army
corps. Only the navy, the artillery corps, and the new cannon
corps were affected; here, new corps were induced to use new
weapons, but the older corps were left without reform, living in
the past, no longer able to fight the enemy successfully but still
strong enough to resist the reforms at home and to prevent
their application on a wide enough scale for them to be really
effective. Here, then, was traditional Ottoman reform as applied
during the eighteenth century. The main question we must
examine in this study is whether Selim III merely carried on
this tradition, or whether it was he who forged the new paths
which led to its replacement by the much more radical mid¬
nineteenth-century Tanzimat reform in which the old institu¬
tions were entirely destroyed and replaced by new ones imported
from the West.




                   Decline of the Ottoman Empire
                            II. Education
                              of a Prince




This was the world of young Prince Selim. What was his role in
the momentous events swirling around him? What circumstances
of his childhood made him different from his father and uncle?
The beginnings were not promising. During the first five years of
his life, Selim’s education was handled entirely by the Ulema* in
the traditional way. He concentrated on memorizing the Koran
and learning the traditional religious sciences. After 1770, how¬
ever, during the later years of his father’s reign, Selim was allowed
far more freedom than was customary for Ottoman princes at that
time. Mustafa began to prepare his son for affairs of state as the
Ottoman sultans had done in the sixteenth century and before.
Father and son attended meetings of the Imperial Council and,
more important, went to watch the new artillery and rifle corps
training under the direction of Baron de Tott and others. ^ Selim
grew up in the company of a number of young palace slaves who
shared his adventures and who, with him, planned to revive and
rejuvenate the empire when he came to power. These were his


   ■'* The Ulema, or "men of/Zm/knowledge” in Islamic society, were the members of
the Ilmiye institution of the Ottoman ruling class, which dealt with all matters of
religion, culture, education, and law for the ruling class and the Muslim millet.
See Gibb and Bowen, 1/2, pp. 81-164.
equerry, Hiiseyin Agha (later Kiichuk Htiseyin Pasha), his sec¬       13
retary, Ebubekir Ratib, Shakir Agha, Osman Efendi, Defteri
zade Izzet Bey, Sirri Selim Pasha, and a somewhat older boy
named Ishak Agha, stepson of Safiye Sultan, who had been a boy
on an Ottoman ship at Cheshme, and who on his return had en¬
tered into the palace service through the influence of his patron,
Gazi Hasan Pasha.^
  When Mustafa died and his brother, Abd ul-Hamid I, came to
the throne in 1774, Selim became the eldest male in the family
and therefore the ranking heir to the throne. In such a position,
he could no longer enjoy the relative freedom allowed by his
father, and he and his companions were shut into the traditional
palace cage. If he had remained there from birth, entirely under
the influence of the eunuchs and women who composed the harem,
he would never have been aware of the outside world, and so
would have made no more of an effort to break down the barriers
than had any of his predecessors. But because he had been ex¬
posed to the outside world during the first thirteen years of his
life, he was not content with the isolated, benign existence of the
harem, and through his uncle’s indulgence, he was allowed to
continue to read and study, thus making the cage more of a school
than anything else. While Selim himself had to remain in his
place, his companions were not restricted. They attended the new
schools, talked with foreign ambassadors and technicians, and
thus kept him in touch with what was going on in the empire and
the world. The foreign ambassadors sought to influence these
companions in the hope of using them to control the future sul¬
tan. Kiichuk Hiiseyin and Izzet Bey were influenced mainly by
the British and Austrian ambassadors, Shakir Agha and Sirri
Selim by the Russians, and Ishak Agha and Ebubekir by the
French, who in the end proved most active and successful. Am¬
bassadors Saint-Priest and Choiseul-Gouffier maintained contact
and influence with Selim also through his private physician. Dr.
Lorenzo, one of the few outsiders allowed to penetrate the harem
walls and enter the cage for the purpose of ministering to the
young prince and his companions. Lorenzo brought the prince
books and papers and spoke with him about the outside world in
a way which the Ottomans themselves never could have done.^




                       Education of a Prince
14      In 1785 disaster struck. Grand Vezir Halil Hamid Pasha tried
      to put Selim on the throne in place of Abd ul-Hamid, but through
      the efforts of Gazi Hasan Pasha, he failed and was then dismissed.
      Selim’s connection with the plot is not certain, but with Gazi
      Hasan’s encouragement, Abd ul-Hamid I now tightened the
      young prince’s conditions of confinement and for the most part
      cut off his connections with the outside world. Dr. Lorenzo alone
      maintaining some sort of contact.^ At the same time, Jshak Bey
     became friendly with Major Zorich^ d Russian officer just released
     from the prison at Yedikule, and this brought down on his head
     the wrath of his old patron, Gazi Hasan, whose anti-Russian
     fanaticism had been nourished through the years since Cheshme.
     Gazi Hasan now set out to punish his former protege by securing
     his demotion and execution. Ishak desperately sought to save
     himself by leaving the country, and Choiseul-Gouffier suggested
     that he go to France for an education. There he would not only
     come into direct contact with Europe so that he could advise his
     master on his return, but he also would be assimilated to French
     culture and become a firm and permanent friend of France in a
     way which would be impossible so long as he remained in Istanbul.
       It did not take much correspondence for the ambassador to con¬
     vince Foreign Minister de Vergennes of the value of his plan
     especially since de Vergennes himself had been ambassador at
     the Porte for a number of years under Selim’s father. The French
     government agreed to provide funds for Ishak Bey’s trip, living
     expenses, and education, and a young French orientalist named
     Pierre Ruffin was chosen to house him in Versailles and to guide
     his education. Selim readily accepted the idea. Unable to expe¬
     rience Europe for himself, he felt his young slave would be a good
     substitute. On his return he would be appointed to a chief position
     of government, where he could put his experience to good use. At
     the same time, Selim entrustedkhak with two letters, one for de
     Vergennes and the other for Louis XVI, who by now had become
     for hini. the model of the enlightened monarch he himself hoped
     someday to be. These letters are important clues to Selim’s state
     of mind at this time. While he mentioned reforms and asked for
     French assistance, his emphasis always was on revenge against
     Russia for the defeats of the past. Nowhere was there any indi-




                             Prelude to Reform
cation that he had gone beyond Mustafa III or Abd ul-Hamid I in
his concept of reform.^ To Ishak Bey he wrote:


   Expose to him [Louis XVI] actively my intentions and my
   way of being and thinking. Tell him that Russia, our main
   enemy, victorious during the long war which it made on my
   late father, affronted this prince and his people and took by
   surprise, ruse, and treachery many of our provinces, and that
   it pursues more conquests by such illegitimate means . . .
   France has been our friend from times immemorial; when she
   reads my heart," she will understand that friendship shows it¬
   self especially in circumstances as critical as those of today. It
   is to her dignity to show us this sentiment while preparing
   for war. Russia believes itself superior to all other courts. It
   is not suitable for those which are older, especially as old as
   France, to allow Russia to maintain this pretension any longer.
   This is your mission.®


  The letters to Louis XVI and de Vergennes were even more spe¬
cific and hardly calculated to secure the favor of their recipients.
Selim declared that it was as a direct result of French encourage¬
ment that Mustafa III had entered the war with Russia in 1768,
despite contrary warnings from Britain and Prussia; that the
Ottoman defeat was due mainly to French failure to provide his
father with promised military and diplomatic assistance; and
that France therefore now had a duty to help the Ottomans re¬
build their strength and regain their possessions from the Czars.
"We are meditating in secret on the proper means to repair the
evils, damages, and losses that our enemies have caused us . . .
When by the grace of God, the predestined day comes for our ad¬
vancement to the throne of Suleyman, it will be for us to recognize
and pay in return for whatever friendship and courtesy we have
been given previously.”^
  While Abd ul-Hamid restricted the young prince’s movements \
more during 1786, he agreed to allow Ishak Bey to leave, appar¬
ently in order to save him from Gazi Hasan’s vengeance. Ishak
arrived in Paris in December 1786. He presented his masters
letters, began to receive his monthly allowance, and took up resi-




                        Education of a Prince
16   dence in Ruffin’s house. Repelled by Ruffin’s discipline and rigor¬
     ous lessons, however, and attracted by the pleasures of the French
     capital, it was not long before he moved to new quarters and be¬
     gan to participate fully in Parisian society. While largely ignor¬
     ing the original objects of his mission, he did occasionally visit
     French naval and military establishments and report on them in
     a series of somewhat vague letters to his master. He stated that
     he was delighted by the weapons, capnons, and powder that he
     saw, that he had become friendly with a number of French gen¬
     erals and officers, and that they would be happy to come to Turkey
     and help if the Sultan would give them only a little more salary
     than what they received at home. But he spent most of his time in
     debauchery, extorting money from the French foreign minister
     and others under the threat of turning his master against them
     when he returned home.®
       While Ishak Bey became increasingly troublesome to his hosts,
     Louis XVI largely ignored Selim’s letter, and when he finally
     delivered his answer on May 20, 1787, it was hardly of the type
     which the future sultan had envisaged. Selim had been blunt, and
     Louis was equally blunt. Denying that France had encouraged
     Mustafa to war with Russia or had promised his assistance, he
     urged Selim to avoid wars of revenge until he had the power to
     avgdd disaster and made only vague promises of the same kind of
     limited technical assistance which Abd ul-Hamid I had received
     for some time:


        It appears to us, after a hard examination, that the late Em¬
        peror of France did not take it upon himself to cause your Glo¬
        rious father to attack the Russians, although he was per¬
        suaded that it was to his interest, and that sooner or later war
        between him and the Empress of Russia was inevitable. But
        without returning to an event so far removed, your Imperial
        Highness cannot ignore the fact that since we came to the
        throne, we have used all our efforts to prevent a new war
        which would cause only embarrassment to the Porte, and that
        we are convinced that before thinking of avenging injuries it
        has received, it should prepare some indispensable way for
        placing itself outside the possibility of all insult. We have done




                              Prelude to Reform
   more, we have sent at our cost to Istanbul officers and artisans   17
   to give the Muslims demonstrations and examples of all as¬
   pects of the art of war, and we are maintaining them so long
   as their presence is judged necessary. We are occupying our¬
   selves to set aside the subjects of dispute between the Sublime
   Porte and its neighbors. Our friendship can do nothing more
   in the circumstances, and we hope that on his side His High¬
   ness will take no step that might lead to a rupture. War has
   become a very difficult science. To undertake it without being
   put on the level of one’s adversaries is to expose oneself to
   certain losses. If God brings your Imperial Highness to the
   throne, the maturity of your spirit is a certain guarantee to us
   that you will not engage in any enterprise without putting in
   order all that can assure you of success.®


  Selim was bitterly disappointed by the answer, and only the
entreaties of Ebubekir Ratib prevented him from replying in a
manner which would have severed his relations with the French
court once and for all. But at this time, with the beginning of war
and the withdrawal of the French technicians, Selim was forced
to sit back and wait and see whether the limited reforms intro¬
duced during the previous two decades would serve to keep the
empire from suffering even more damage before he finally could
come to the throne.




                      Education of a Prince
                                                                                                                       „                ■ • - .•

                                         f{ „•. I .-. .                                                                    - #1
                                                                                                                                  is . '
                                , l.-^         t                         -ill        ,'r>                  ^   I       *    r


                                                                                                                                        ■T ’ •♦           *••(,
                                                           ■   V
                                                                                                                                                   >5
                                         Au                                                                                                                       I



                                , ■ \ ■■'' ’•' •■•' -                           :       *'5‘   V   %

                                                                             '■c^         S
                                                                         .          n


              •■   •   ->                     ■>       '



’/
              >             ''2,',                 •


                                 ♦* ^i                 t       *                    itV
          f’
 ? ' M
^•jl 4f. I,". •                           '.'Wl ^
             •'•vjv,'


              . ‘ .;•■
            ■?• I* f«             •i.,    .
                                    f
                            I


                                                                         .»!» 1


                                         '■ .' "i..
                                         —Ca»»




                                                                                                                                                   •j-i




                                                                   • j                                 «           «•       ' f
                                                                                                       V                    f ■--

                                                                                                                   I
                                                                                                                       ** •••       ,

                                                                                                            'Wl                            y'
                                                                                                           sK'                          *,«-M


                                                                                      ■.A*                                          ?      ...1
Part II. War with Russia
and Austria, 1787-1792
             III. Origins of the War
             under Abd ul-Hamid I




When Selim III came to the Ottoman throne in April 1789,
he found the empire embroiled in a disastrous war with Russia
and Austria, already in progress for over a year, and his long-
nurtured plans for reform had to be subordinated to more press¬
ing military needs. It was only after peace was concluded in
1792 that he and his associates could move ahead to examine
the ills of the empire and attempt to solve them. The war itself,
the long campaigns and battles, and the complex workings of
European diplomacy which accompanied it are for the most
part outside the scope of this study, so they cannot be examined
here in detail. A brief account of the war must, however, be
included, for in the military frustrations and diplomatic triumphs
lay much of the background of Selim’s accomplishments and
failures during the years that followed.
  The origins of the war are well known. It evolved from the
peace of Kiichiik Kaynarja, concluded between the Porte and
Russia in 1774, but looked on by both as no more than a truce.
To Catherine II of Russia, it marked only one more step along
the road toward driving the Turk from Europe and the Straits !
and replacing him with Russian dominion, a dream nurtured
since the time of Peter the Great.* With singular energy and
devotion, the Russian Empress devoted the years following the
peace toward achieving her objective. Russian championship
of Byzantine revival was given its modern expression in Cath¬
erine’s "Greek Scheme,” embodied in a secret agreement of mon-
archs concluded with the Emperor of Hapsburg Austria in 1783.
The essential basis of the agreement was the expulsion of the
Ottomans from Europe and division of the spoils among the
signatories in a mutually satisfying way. Wallachia, Moldavia,
and Bessarabia would be united in a new independent Orthodox
state to be called Dacia. Russian influence over it would be
assured by the appointment, as its first prince, of Count Pot¬
emkin, Catherine’s old favorite and commander of her southern
armies, and in addition by Russian annexation of the great
fortress of Khotzim on the Dniester as ,well as the area lying
between the Dnieper and the Bug. In addition, the Russian
presence in the eastern Mediterranean would be established
by the occupation of a few strategic Ottoman islands. Austria
would take over the western part of the Balkans — Serbia, Bosnia,
Herzegovina, and the strips of land along the Dalmatian coast
still under the control of the dying Venetian Republic, which
in compensation would receive the Morea and the strategic
islands of Crete and Cyprus. Finally, and perhaps most important
of all in Catherine’s eyes, the great city of Istanbul would be
joined with Thrace, Macedonia, Bulgaria, and northern Greece
in a restored Byzantine state under the rule of Catherine’s
grandson Constantine, who since birth had been trained specifi¬
cally for this role.^
  Even France, the Porte’s chief defender in the councils of
Europe, was involved in the scheme. Since the accession of Louis
XVI and his Austrian queen, Marie Antoinette, France had
been turning toward a policy of cooperation with Austria and
Russia and abandonment of the Ottomans to their fate as part
of a general reversal of alliances which was transforming the
diplomatic alignment of Europe after the Seven Years War.
According to the Greek Scheme, France was to receive Syria
and Egypt and, thus, a virtual strangle hold on the Levant
trade, to be shared perhaps only by England in return for her
acquiescence in the plan. In consequence, France gradually
withdrew her support and assistance from the Porte. In 1786,




                  War with Russia and Austria
the French officers and technicians who for over a decade had
been training units of the Ottoman army were recalled. In
January of the next year, France signed a new treaty of friend¬
ship and trade with Russia, and allowed a similar one with
England to lapse, thus exposing her new orientation unmis¬
takably.^
  Against this background, Austria’s bitter rival in Germany,
the rising Prussian state, was moving closer and closer toward
an alliance with England iti order to make a joint effort to pre¬
serve their position in Europe by saving the Ottoman Empire
from its predatory neighbors. Prussia had become aware of
the full extent of Russian and Austrian intentions only a short
time before, when its effort to join them in alliance with the
Porte to preserve the provisions of Kuchiik Kaynarja was re¬
jected by Catherine.^ For England, rumors of the Greek Scheme,
when added to the first partition of Poland, had stimulated a
major re-examination of her eastern policy, a soul searching
which was still in progress. During the first half of the eight¬
eenth century and before, Russian advances at the expense of
the Porte had been looked on in London disinterestedly, if not
with outright pleasure at the thought of the terrible Turk
being pushed out of Christendom. Britain had originally wel¬
comed Russia’s entry into Europe both because of its use as a
counterweight to French pre-eminence on the continent and
as a reliable source of raw materials and markets for its newly
rising industries. But now for the first time Britain was be¬
ginning to see clearly how much it was to its own interest to
preserve the Ottoman Empire as a barrier against Russian            vX
expansion to the south and east. Britain’s nineteenth-century
role as defender of Ottoman integrity was evolving toward its
definitive form.^
  Furthermore, the Russian military threat to the Ottoman
Empire was becoming more immediate and alarming in the years
following Kiichiik Kaynarja. One of the most painful concessions
which the Porte had been forced to accept in the treaty had
been the establishment in independence of the Crimean Tatar
state which had long acknowledged Ottoman suzerainty and
made important contributions to the Ottoman army. In August




              Origins of the War under Abd ul-Hamid I
     J
                                            i
                                      %


24    1783, this state was annexed to the Russian Empire, and six
     months later the Porte was forced to recognize this annexation
     in the Treaty of Aynalikavak.® Soon after, Russian soldiers
     entered the Caucasian principality of Georgia under the pretext
     of protecting its prince from his Ottoman suzerain. The Crimean
     example left the Porte with little doubt as to ultimate Russian
     intentions east of the Black Sea as well.^
         In addition, Potemkin was beginning to undertake positive
     military measures north and west of the Black Sea. At the south¬
     ern tip of the Crimea, to which the Greek name Thauridia was
     now given, the great new port of Sevastopol was built to serve
     as the base of the Russian fleet created to challenge the Ottoman
     naval monopoly in the area. To the west, at the mouth of the
     Dnieper, a small but no less important base was built at the an¬
     cient Greek colony of Kherson to receive and store the ships and
     supplies being sent down the Dnieper and the Bug in ever-in¬
     creasing amounts for service in the Black Sea area.
         In May 1787 Russian ambitions were publicly demonstrated
     by Catherine’s triumphal tour through her new province. Accom¬
     panied by the chief personages of her court and the ambassadors
     of Austria, England, and France, the Empress traveled by land
     from St. Petersburg to Kiev, and then in a great fleet of galleys
     down the Dnieper to Kherson. Meeting Joseph II of Austria out¬
     side the city, she entered it on May 14, passing under a triumphal
     arch on which the Greek inscription "The way to Byzantium”
     made her objectives apparent to all who could see. From there,
     the two monarchs continued on to the Crimea, passing through
     hastily erected villages and assembled masses of apparently
     enthusiastic subjects arranged by Potemkin to give at least
     the appearance of growth and confidence. At Sevastopol, the
     tour was concluded with a lavish display of the new Black Sea
     fleet, and the Empress distributed honors and rewards to her
     southern commander in return for all he had done and would
     do to expand her empire even more.®
         Nor did Catherine neglect the Orthodox subjects of the Sultan,
     stirring them to rise against their master despite the failure
     of such efforts to produce lasting results in the previous war.
     The Treaty of Kiichiik Kaynarja had allowed Russia to establish




                         War with Russia and Austria
consulates at Jassy, Bucharest, and Scutari, and these now           25
were being used as bases for Russian agents who spread through
the Balkans fanning the flames of dissatisfaction and revolt.
In the Mediterranean and Aegean seas, Greek pirates were at
least partially armed and financed by Russia, and their attacks
on Ottoman shipping and shores were increasing in frequency
and intensity.®
  In Turkey itself, the general, almost universal, reaction to
these events was an increasing hatred of the infidel and, in
particular, a desire for revenge and a determination to regain
the Crimea by force if necessary. But there was great disagree¬
ment among the Ottoman leaders as to how and when this could
be accomplished. Gazi Hasan Pasha, Grand Admiral of the
Sultan’s fleet, led those who felt that the time was not yet right
for an armed attack on the Russians. While Britain and Prussia
were encouraging the Porte to stand up against further Russian
encroachments, no firm commitments had been made for finan¬
cial and military support in case of war, and without such
assistance Gazi Hasan felt that a new war could only be useless,
if not ruinous. The military reforms which he was directing had
just begun. The bulk of the army and navy was in the same
disorganized and backward state which had led to defeat in
the previous war. However, as Catherine’s ambitions became
more apparent and her insults more frequent after 1783, the
partisans of war, led by the Grand Vezir Koja Yusuf Pasha,
rose toward ascendancy in the Sultan’s court. To them, as indeed
to the people of Istanbul, there was only one honorable solution,
one way to atone for past defeats, and that was war —forceful
reclamation of previous losses. This group felt confident that
the military reforms introduced during the past decade had
restored the Ottoman armed forces to a state in which they
could defeat anything the European powers could mount against
them, and restore Ottoman prestige and authority in Europe
to the position which they had held under Mohammed the
Conqueror and Suleyman the Magnificent. Their traditional
outlook led the Ottomans, still almost completely unaware of
the extent of European technical progress and seemingly un¬
affected by the defeats inflicted on the empire during the past




             Origins of the War under Abd ul-Hamid I
century, to assume that a revival of the old Ottoman institutions
and ways would be entirely sufficient to restore Ottoman suprem¬
acy over their neighbors. Yusuf Pasha argued that the informal
encouragements which he had received from the British and
Prussian ambassadors would inevitably be followed by open assist¬
ance if the Ottomans would only have the courage to throw down
the gauntlet and move openly against their tormentors.*®
  In the spring and summer of 1787, conditions in the dominions
of its enemies seemed to confirm the arguments of the "war
party” and make the time right for a new Ottoman move. Even
while Joseph II had accompanied Catherine through the Crimea,
news came of a revolt in his Netherlands possessions, where
he was forced to rush with most of the afmy which he had been
preparing to move south across the Danube into Ottoman
territory. In Russia, drought and famine were causing increas¬
ingly serious internal discontent which any foreign adventure
could only intensify. At the same time, in Istanbul, Gazi Hasan’s
departure for Egypt at the head of an expeditionary force in¬
tended to reduce the rebellious Mamluk rulers there left Ottoman
policy entirely in the hands of the advocates of immediate war.
The Porte’s demands that Russia evacuate Georgia and its re¬
fusal to accept Russian intervention in the Principalities strained
relations even further and made some sort of conflict inevitable.
When in August 1789 Grand Vezir Yusuf Pasha demanded re¬
moval of the Russian consuls in Egypt and the Principalities on
the grounds of their encouraging and assisting local revolts, and
ordered an inspection of all Russian merchant ships passing
through the Straits, the Russians were indeed startled, for the
Porte had long been the passive, although evasive, recipient of
similar Russian demands. Now for the first time the game was
reversed. In the absence of any Arm Russian reply, on August 14
the Grand Vezir pushed the Imperial Council to an open declara¬
tion of war together with a demand for immediate Russian evacu¬
ation of the Crimea and the Caucasus as the only way to avoid it.**
  Now it was Catherine’s turn to be perplexed. She wanted a
war with the Porte but only when she was ready, at a time and
occasion of her choosing. And although the declaration was
not directed against Austria, Joseph II was even more alarmed.




                   War with Russia and Austria
He was fully occupied with internal discontent. He wanted to         27
keep the Russian alliance in order to secure support against
Prussia, but he did not want to be put in a position where he
could do this only by joining a war against the Porte. Aside
from the strain this would put on his own resources, it might
also drive England closer to his Prussian enemy and might even
lead to a war with both of them. So the allies entered into urgent
diplomatic efforts to avoid war by peaceful means. The Austrian
ambassador at the Porte,' Baron Herbert de Rathkeal, was
ordered to offer "disinterested” Austrian mediation, with the
implied threat of intervention on behalf of Russia if some kind
of peace was not made. The French ambassador at the Porte,
Choiseul-Gouffier, made similar representations for Catherine.^^
But the Sultan rejected all efforts at mediation and replied that
peace could be made only on the basis of the conditions set out
in his ultimatum, in particular by immediate Russian evacuation
of the Crimea and Caucasus. This Catherine refused to do, so
she finally issued a formal declaration of war on September ^
15, a full month after that of the Sultan. Joseph IPs entry was
delayed, both to enable him to move his armies back to the
Danube from the Netherlands and to try to get the Ottomans
to make the quick peace which he and his ally wanted at this
time. It was only because of his failure to move the Sultan that
Austria too finally declared war on February 19, 1788.




              Origins of the War under Ahd ul-Hamid I
                TV. The Campaigns
                   of 1787-1789




If the Ottoman army had been poised on the Danube waiting for
the signal to attack, it might well have achieved significant gains
and at least captured the important Danubian forts before the
surprised Russians and Austrians could organize themselves to
resist. However, one of the main reasons for the lack of prepara¬
tions north of the Danube was the certain knowledge in Vienna
and Saint Petersburg, on the basis of their efficient spy networks
in the south, that there had been no Ottoman build-up for such a
campaign. The Ottoman commanders were as surprised as their
enemies by Yusuf Pasha’s sudden war declaration, so they were
in no position to take advantage of the situation. ^ As a result,
what was left of the 1787 campaign season was devoted mainly to
preparations on both sides. The few engagements which did take
place were indecisive but indicative of what was to follow in sub¬
sequent years. In October an Ottoman effort to storm the great
Russian fort at Kinburn, located at the point where the Dnieper
and Bug join and flow into the Black Sea, was repulsed by the
vastly outnumbered Russian garrisons as a result of a series of
brilliant tactical moves on the part of their commander. General
Alexander Suvorov, combined with confusion and inefficiency on
the part of the Ottomans.^ In the Black Sea, Russian attempts to
supply Kinburn through a series of convoys were frustrated more
by storms than by the Ottoman fleet.^ The only allied initiative      29
came on December 2, when the Austrians tried to seize Belgrade
by a surprise attack in advance of their war declaration but were
repulsed as a result of their own blunders and lack of coordination
at the crucial time.^
  In 1788 both sides were diverted by bitter internal disputes and
consequent delays in war planning and preparations. Gazi Hasan
Pasha, now returned from Egypt, quarreled bitterly with the
Grand Vezir over the timing of the war declaration and manage¬
ment of the campaign.^ Russian preparations were delayed by
the sloth and indecision of Catherine’s commander in the east,
Potemkin, by the formation of a new Triple Alliance of Great
Britain, Prussia, and the United Provinces (June 13, 1788) di¬
rected mainly against Catherine, and by Sweden’s effort to take
advantage of Russia’s Ottoman diversion and regain Finland by
surprise attack. Catherine’s two naval commanders in the Black
Sea, the German Prince Charles of Nassau-Siegen and the Amer¬
ican revolutionary hero, John Paul Jones, continually fought
with each other and with Potemkin over who should take the lead
(and the credit), and as a result there was a complete absence of
coordination of the various Russian military groups in the area.®
The Austrian forces in the west, ready and waiting to move across
the Save, the Danube, and the Carpathians, were frustrated by
Russia’s consequent failure to divert the Ottomans in the east.^
  As a result neither side took the initiative until the summer
was almost over. On June 28, Gazi Hasan Pasha’s fleet was routed
by Nassau-Siegen and Jones at the mouth of the Bug, but the lack
of cooperation between the two Russian commanders made pos¬
sible an Ottoman withdrawal with relatively minor losses.® On
July 9, Gazi Hasan forced the return to Sevastapol of a Russian
fleet attempting to reinforce Kinburn, but his own effort to rein¬
force Oczakov was in turn beaten off by the Russians.® Sweden’s
collapse and withdrawal from the war in late July enabled Cath¬
erine to reinforce Potemkin, who as a result finally opened the
siege of Oczakov on September 1, taking it by storm on December
17.Although the season was too far advanced for the Russians
to take advantage of the victory, it prepared the way for an ad¬
vance to the Danube and beyond as soon as spring arrived.




                    The Campaigns of 1787-1789
30     But the siege and capture of Oczakov were the only important
     actions in the east. On the whole, both the Russians and Otto¬
     mans remained quiescent, and most of the action during the sum¬
     mer of 1788 took place in the west. At first, the initiative was
     taken by the Austrians, who moved into Bosnia and gained com¬
     plete control of the Save up to Belgrade by the time summer had
     arrived.” At the same time, in April, a large Austrian force cap¬
     tured Jassy without resistance as the result of the help of the
     Ottoman Hospodar of Moldavia, 4^1exander Ipsilanti, who de-
     sorted the Grand Vezir at a crucial moment in the campaign.*^
     This broke the land connections of the great Dniestr fort of
     Khotzim with the main Ottoman army and enabled Marshal
     Coburg to take it on September 19, after a long siege.Ottoman
     rule in northern Moldavia thus came to an end, and a push against
     Bender during the next year’s campaign was made possible.
     While the Austrians were relatively successful in west and east,
     in the center the Grand Vezir achieved the most brilliant Otto¬
     man victories of the war. Koja Yusuf was emboldened to action
     by Emperor Joseph IFs failure to attack Belgrade as well as by
     the initial Russian failure to move against Oczakov. So in August
     the Grand Vezir led the main Ottoman army out of Wallachia,
     across the Danube, and into the Austrian Banat, where he took
     the key fortress of Mehadiye, on August 30. This gave the Otto¬
     mans control of the entire southern Banat and the whole length of
     the Danube from Orsova to Belgrade, and they quickly poured
     thousands of troops across the Danube.
       Joseph II moved to stop the surprise invasion, but his own con¬
     servatism and indecisiveness and the skillful moves of the Otto¬
     mans enabled the latter to rout the main Austrian army at
     Slatina, September 20, opening the entire Banat and parts of
     Hungary to Ottoman attack. Only the valiant efforts of the Em¬
     peror’s rear guard in defending the passes leading into Transyl¬
     vania kept the Ottoman army and raiding parties in check until
     the approach of winter forced their withdrawal back across the
     Danube.” Yusuf Pasha had bolstered the confidence of his men; he
     had defeated and disorganized the main Austrian army while
     securing huge stores of needed ammunition and supplies for his
     own forces; and he had held the Austrians and Russians far short




                       War with Russia and Austria
of their objectives. Yet his gains were ephemeral. As the new year       31
came, the Austrians were once again poised for an attack all
along the Danube and the Save, and the Russians, with Oczakov
in hand and with the Swedish diversion settled, were finally
ready to make a coordinated push in the east.^^
  Despite their relatively advantageous situation, Russia and
Austria were more anxious than ever to make peace with the
Ottomans as soon as possible. Joseph II faced new difficulties in
the Netherlands, where a revolution seemed about to break out.
Britain, Prussia, and the United Provinces were taking diplo¬
matic steps against the allies wherever they could, and in partic¬
ular they were helping Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden to prepare
a new attack on Russia. Negotiations also were begun for Polish
alliances with Prussia and the Ottomans, and for Ottoman finan¬
cial assistance to both the Swedes and the Poles if they attacked
Russia. In the face of all this, and especially in view of their rela¬
tive failure against the Porte in 1788, Catherine and Joseph
made overtures for peace, directly through agents sent to the
Grand Vezir’s winter camp at Ruschuk and indirectly through the
mediation of the French ambassador in Istanbul. But neither was
willing to give up the conquests already made, while Abd ul-
Hamid I still insisted that the Crimea and Oczakov be returned as
part of any peace settlement, a determination in which he was
encouraged and supported by the British and Prussian ambassa¬
dors in his capital. To strengthen this determination, Prussia at
long last began negotiations for a formal alliance with the Porte,
and Sweden followed suit shortly thereafter. With this sort of
backing, the Sultan felt it would be foolish for him to leave the
war without achieving his territorial ambitions.
 In the spring of 1789, the Russians planned to move through
Wallachia to the left bank of the Danube, with Kilya, Ismail, and
Ibrail as their main objectives. Austria planned to cooperate by
sending one army east from Galicia along the Sereth River to
Galatz and Ibrail, while the army of Transylvania would move
across the Carpathians into Wallachia toward Sistova and Rus¬
chuk in order to prevent the main Ottoman army from moving
north to defend against the Russian attack. To the west, the main
Austrian army would besiege and take Belgrade, while the army




                     The Campaigns of 1787-1789
                                         %


32        of Croatia planned to move into Bosnia toward Sarajevo and Novi
         Pazar. It was hoped that a rapid victory on all fronts would force
         the Sultan to reconsider his decision and make peace so that the
         more pressing European problems could be dealt with.*’'
           But once again, it was the Grand Vezif who seized the initia¬
         tive. Leaving a large force on the lower Danube to guard against
         enemy activity in Moldavia, Yusuf Pasha moved toward the Car¬
         pathians with the intention of breaking through into Transyl¬
         vania and thus disrupting whatever' Offensive plans the Austri¬
         ans might have had. At the same time, the Hospodar of Moldavia,
         Prince Mavrogeny, moved north in Wallachia against the Rus¬
         sians and Austrians at Jassy, where the winter garrisons had
         not yet been reinforced for the spring. ^ Since the Carpathian
         passes were still blocked by ice and snow, Joseph II was unable to
         send reinforcements, and it seemed certain that Jassy would fall
         within a short time. But at this critical moment, the news came
         that a new sultan had come to the throne in Istanbul. Yusuf
         Pasha and Mavrogeny immediately pulled back their forces to
         await the orders of their new master. Once again the advantages
         of surprise were lost, and no advantage was taken of a very favor¬
         able situation.*®



                            Accession of Selim III
     ,     Abd ul-Hamid I fell ill of a stroke on the evening of April 6,
     r 1789, and died the following morning, at the age of sixty-eight.***
         Within three hours, Selim III came to the throne, and all the
         officials still in the capital swore their allegiance to him.^o Abd
         ul-Hamid in his later days had become increasingly addicted to
         the pleasures of the harem, and his prosecution of military and
         state affairs had become correspondingly lethargic and aimless.
         Much of the popular unrest which arose during the previous win¬
         ter had come in reaction to the Sultan’s luxurious and wasteful
         existence, which was contrasted unfavorably with the demands
         which the Grand Vezir was making for new sacrifices in order to
         prosecute the war. On the other hand. Prince Selim had already
         acquired a reputation for ability and energy, and his accession
         was therefore welcomed with enthusiasm by administrators.




                            War with Russia and Austria
soldiers, subjects, and foreign ambassadors alike.^' The various                  33
ceremonies associated with the new Sultan’s accession were
watched by masses of wildly cheering people who felt confident
that they finally had acquired a leader who would be able to pull
the empire out of the morass into which it had fallen.
  Selim’s initial moves seemed to confirm these hopes. As soon as
he was officially installed, he immediately sent an order to Yusuf
Pasha at Ruschuk confirming him and all his chief officials in
their positions and urging'them to resume the campaign against
the enemy as soon as possible and with all their energy.                What¬
ever desires Selim may have had to reform the empire, he saw
that he could not make very profound changes so long as the war
continued, and he determined to carry it on to a successful con¬
clusion by reviving and invigorating the old institutions and ways
without attempting to introduce anything new. His first effort
was to raise the spirit and morale of his people and soldiers. In
his accession speech, he glorified the past deeds of the Janissar¬
ies, attributed their current difficulties to a failure to obey their
traditional laws and regulations, and urged them to make new
efforts to return to their old ways. He stirred the emotions of all
by appealing for revenge against the infidel, who had taken the
lands of Islam and killed and imprisoned thousands of Muslims.
Selim told his soldiers to be brave as of old, to trust in God and
their leaders, and to fight on until the Crimea was retaken and
Ottoman honor avenged.^^ He rejected the efforts of the Spanish,
French, and Prussian ambassadors to secure a settlement and
determined to go to the Danube himself, if necessary, to assume
direct command of the army in the tradition of his illustrious
ancestors. To assure military support, he issued the regular
quarterly wages a month in advance and added substantial bo¬
nuses in observance of an old tradition which Abd ul-Hamid I
had allowed to lapse.        To get the support of the Ulema, he re¬
placed the reforming Mehmed Kamil Efendi as Sheyh ul-Islam*
with Mehmed Sherif Efendi, a favorite with most of the Ulema,
who had been sent into exile by Abd ul-Hamid three years before
because of corruption and lack of ability. In addition, he reim¬
posed and strengthened the old sumptuary laws which regulated
 *Head of the learned corporation of Ulema. See Gibb and Bowen, 1/2, pp. 84-86.




                      The Campaigns of 1787-1789
34   the clothing worn by persons of different religions, classes, and
     professions and which imposed certain restrictions on non-Muslim
     subjects.2^ The reformer Selim thus had to undo many of the ad¬
     vances made by his predecessor in order to prosecute the increas¬
     ingly dangerous and difficult war.
       On April 20, Selim made his most important move. Gazi Hasan
     Pasha, the hero of Cheshme, who had directed the Ottoman fleet
     for two decades and who had been the leader of reform in the em¬
     pire ever since the death of Halil Hamid Pasha, was now relieved
     of his command.^® This important change was the result of many
     factors. Gazi Hasan, the reformer, was the leader of those opposed
     to the Grand Vezir Yusuf Pasha, who led the conservative, anti¬
     reform elements which had managed to eliminate Halil Hamid
     and slowly rise to ascendancy in the following years. Hasan had
     bitterly criticized the manner and timing of the Grand Vezir’s
     declaration of war as well as his conduct of the campaign of 1788,
     and he had argued with the new Sultan that a more honest and
     vigorous man was needed to lead the empire in difficult times.
     Yusuf Pasha and his supporters were determined to get the
     Grand Admiral out of Istanbul as part of the reward they were to
     get from the Sultan in return for their continued support of the
     war effort, and now they were able to use his failure to save Ocza-
     kov to accomplish this.
       In Gazi Hasan’s place as Grand Admiral, Selim appointed
     Giritli Hiiseyin Pasha, who had distinguished himself as acting
     fleet commander while his chief had been in Egypt. Even more
     important, Giritli Hiiseyin had been a close companion of the new
     Sultan while he was still a prince in his uncle’s palace. So while
     Selim sacriflced Gazi Hasan to the Grand Vezir, he used the occa¬
     sion to install in his place one of his own trusted confldants as a
     first step toward strengthening his personal power in preparation
     for the day when the war would be over, the conservatives could
     be driven out, and the contemplated reforms begun.
       But Selim was convinced that Gazi Hasan was in fact far too
     able and loyal a man for the empire to lose his services entirely,
     so he appointed him as governor of Ismail and commander of the
     land armies in Moldavia with the specific task of directing the
     effort to retake Oczakov and move to the Crimea by land, an im-




                        War with Russia and Austria
portant task, indicative of the Sultan’s continued high regard for   35
the former hero. The Grand Vezir was ordered to concentrate his
efforts more in Wallachia and in the defense of Belgrade against
the contemplated Austrian attack. Yusuf Pasha happily agreed
in the hope that the new campaign would even further diminish
the prestige of his enemy and make possible his complete elim¬
ination from the scene. Then Selim made preparations for a new
effort to remove the Russians from the Caucasus. Mehmed Kalga,
son and heir of the Crimean Tatar Han, was appointed commander
in the Kohan area with the task of raising all the Caucasian
Tatars against the Russians as well as supporting the Ottoman
effort to retake the Crimea.^^
  With this encouragement, Yusuf Pasha and Prince Mavrogeny
were ahle to resume their operations in Wallachia in mid-April.
But hy then the Russian and Austrian forces had been reinforced
and prepared so that it was impossible for the Ottomans to repeat
their earlier successes. An initial Ottoman effort to take Galatz
and clear the Russians from Moldavia was quickly foiled.^® In the
west, Joseph II devoted all his resources to preparation for an
attack on Belgrade, so the Banat and the Bosnian front remained
relatively quiet during the remainder of the summer.
  It was at this point that politics emerged to undermine the
Ottoman military effort, as the Sultan moved to secure a Grand
Vezir more to his liking. Selim actually had wanted to dismiss
Koja Yusuf Pasha as soon as he became Sultan, for Yusuf had
played an active part in suppressing the abortive attempt by
Halil Hamid Pasha to bring Selim to the throne in place of Abd
ul-Hamid. Selim also was unhappy with the unrivaled power
which Gazi Hasan’s transfer had given the Grand Vezir and his
associates, and he further wanted to secure in his place a man
who would be more sympathetic to his own reform plans. But
Yusuf had a good military reputation as a result of his Banat
campaign and a strong following among the conservatives in the
palace and government and among the Ulema, so for the moment
Selim did not dare to dismiss him. But the Austrian victories in
Moldavia gave Selim the pretext he needed. It did not take very
long to tear down the reputation Yusuf had built up. Selim stated
that his Grand Vezir had failed to make proper preparations for




                   The Campaigns of 1787-1789
36   the campaign during the previous winter and that he spent most
     of his time with his concubines and cronies instead of caring for
     the affairs of state and of the army. On June 7, Yusuf Pasha
     was replaced as Grand Vezir and commander of the Ottoman
     armies hy Hasan Pasha, who had distinguished himself as com¬
     mander of Vidin during the previous year’s fighting against the
     Hapshurgs. Yusuf Pasha was given the choice of becoming com¬
     mander in Wallachia or at Vidin, and he chose Vidin.
       The new Grand Vezir set in motion a new series of military
     moves which led to the first major Ottoman disaster of the war
     and began the process by which the Ottoman army dissolved in
     the months which followed. In response to reports that Suvorov’s
     main Russian force in Moldavia was about to unite with the Aus-
                                                >

     trians under Coburg to attack Bucharest and occupy all Wal¬
     lachia, the Grand Vezir sent the bulk of his army and Mavrogeny’s
     to Fokshani to keep the two enemy forces apart. By means of a
     brilliant forced march, however, Suvorov managed to reach the
     Austrians at Martineshti, a few miles to the south, shortly before
     the Ottomans arrived. Then on the morning of July 30, the two
     surprised and completely routed the Ottoman army, which had
     been completely unaware of the arrival of the Russians. The
     Allied victory at Fokshani was itself of little strategic signifi¬
     cance since the routed Ottomans were still only auxiliaries and
     reserves of the main army of the Grand Vezir, which remained at
     Ibrail waiting for the order to move into Wallachia. Coburg and
     Suvorov had too few soldiers to follow up the advantage by pur¬
     suing the routed armies, completing their destruction, and occu¬
     pying new ground. But the rout was important in that it mani¬
     fested and stimulated a growing disorder and lack of discipline
     in the Ottoman ranks which began with Yusuf Pasha’s replace¬
     ment and which had first shown itself in the failure at Galatz.
     Following Fokshani, the disorder spread rapidly. The Ottoman
     army began to fall apart, with desertion and confusion spreading
     like a disease. The remainder of the year witnessed a series of
     increasingly serious routs which ended with the army entirely
     destroyed and the way open for a rapid enemy advance all the
     way to Istanbul.
       For the moment, Selim’s response was a desperate effort to




                        War with Russia and Austria
find more soldiers, while for the first time he began to consider                   37
the possibility of accepting the peace offers coming to him through
neutral channels. He still was determined to regain the Crimea
before peace was made, however, and he hoped he could get bet¬
ter terms by continuing the war until his enemies were desperate
enough to give him anything he wanted.^® So he raised new troops
in Anatolia and Bosnia and ordered the Grand Vezir to reform
his army and move to the attack once again. At the same time, on
July 11, Selim gained wKat seemed to be a major diplomatic
triumph when he signed a treaty of alliance with Sweden agree¬
ing to provide annual cash subsidies of 2,000 purses* over a pe¬
riod of ten years in return for a renewal of the Swedish land and
naval attacks against the Russians in the north. The allies bound
themselves to continue the war until both secured satisfactory
settlements, with neither making a separate peace without the
agreement of the other.The treaty was a victory for Prussia,
which had urged Selim to continue the fight, while it was a defeat
for France, which had taken the lead in trying to arrange a nego¬
tiated peace. Selim tried to follow up this alliance by securing
similar agreements with Prussia and Great Britain, but here he
was less successful. While they were willing to encourage and,
to a certain extent, assist continued Ottoman campaigns against
Austria and Russia, they were not willing to join the war openly
or to commit themselves to assisting the Ottomans in any formal
way.^^
  Although disappointed by his friends, Selim still was suffi¬
ciently encouraged by the Swedish alliance and Prussian prom¬
ises to order the Grand Vezir to attack the enemy in northern
Moldavia.^^ The Ottoman army moved through Wallachia and
Moldavia until on September 17 it reached the Rimnik River, the
last main barrier before the Austrian camp at Fokshani. But
once again, Suvorov and the Russians came to the rescue at the
last minute, and the Ottomans were routed after a fierce battle
(September 21).^^ The Battle of the Rimnik, known to the Otto-

  *By Ottoman financial reckoning, each "purse” (called kise or kese) contained
500 piasters (kurush) traditionally, but at the end of the 18th century, this had
been reduced to 416 piasters. The total promised therefore was approximately
832,000 piasters.




                       The Campaigns of 1787-1789
     \1
                                                  \
                                            \




38          mans as the battle of the Boza (Buzau) River and to the Austrians
            as the Battle of Martineshti, was the decisive encounter of the
            war. The vast new army gathered during the winter by the Grand
            Vezir was shattered. The inefficiency and disobedience shown by
            Ottoman commanders and men alike showed clearly that the
            untrained peasants and tribesmen who now formed the bulk of
          y the army were incapable of performing the simplest maneuvers
            and were no match for the well-trained and brilliantly led Allied
            forces. Once again, there were no imshediate results of the battle.
            Potemkin seemed to be jealous of the credit which Suvorov gained
            from the victory, and ordered him to return to his previous posi¬
            tions in Moldavia without occupying any new territory or pur¬
            suing the Ottomans.^^ Coburg had no pew instructions from
            Vienna, so he retired to Fokshani.^^® The Grand Vezir returned to
            Ibrail, where he hoped to re-form his army, but since most of the
            survivors had already crossed the Danube and fled before his
            arrival, he finally gave up and followed them across, broken in
            body and spirit.^^ The news of the disaster also had a demoralizing
            effect on the remaining Ottoman forces in Wallachia, Serbia, and
            Bosnia, so for all practical purposes, no organized Ottoman force
            remained to meet the enemy attack.^® The most immediate Allied
            benefit from the victory came to the west in Serbia, where a month¬
            long Austrian siege finally overwhelmed the defenders of Bel¬
            grade (October 8),^** the great bastion of the Danube defense line.
            The news electrified Europe and Istanbul alike. Only Nish re¬
            mained as a major fortress between the advancing allied forces
            and Istanbul itself. The way seemed open for a spring offensive
            which might drive the Turks out of Europe.
              The news of Belgrade encouraged the Russian and Austrian
            commanders in the Principalities to move forward and take ad¬
            vantage of the Ottomans’ helplessness following the battle at the
            Rimnik. The surviving Ottoman forces now saw it would be im¬
            possible for them to retain their positions on the left bank of the
            Danube, so they retired to Kilya, Ismail, and Vidin, which they
            hoped to hold to defend the Danube line in the east.^® Potemkin
            reached the Dniester on October 1, and soon was able to take the
            great forts of Akkerman (October 11)^* and Bender (November
            14),^^ both without resistance since shortages of men and supplies




                                War with Russia and Austria
and the entreaties of the local populations to avoid bloodshed and   39
damage induced the local Ottoman commanders to surrender.
And in Wallachia, Coburg and the Austrian army came out of
winter quarters in mid-October upon the direct order of Joseph II.
They crossed back through the Carpathians and occupied Bucha¬
rest, again without resistance (November 9), while the Ottoman
garrison fled toward the south.   Thus concluded one of the most
disastrous campaigns in Ottoman history.




                   The Campaigns of 1787-1789
 V. The Winter of 1789-90: Diplomatic
 Activities and Internal Developments




                                     V




As the winter began, the Ottoman Empire was on the brink of
disaster. The new Grand Vezir was unable to administer the gov¬
ernment and the army at the same time, and both were falling
apart as a result. The Danube defense line had been broken by
Austria in Serbia and Bosnia, and by Russia in the Principalities,
and both were in a position to drive into the heartland of the
empire during the next campaign. But as the winter passed, the
diplomatic and political situation in Europe changed so radically
that by the time spring arrived, the danger was eased, at least for
the moment.


                     Diplomatic Factors
  The first and most important element which produced a change
in the situation was a greatly increased desire on the part of all
the European powers, including the belligerents, for the war to be
brought to an end. In Sweden, Gustav III had used popular anger
at the unpatriotic actions of the nobles to force through a new con¬
stitution which gave him supreme power, so he was ready and
able to resume his campaign against Russia in Finland. In Po¬
land, the nationalists were making new efforts to strengthen
their government and escape from foreign control. In the Neth-
erlands, there was widespread unrest and open revolt against the      41
Hapsburgs. In Hungary, separate racial and national interests
had been causing greatly increased antagonism toward Austrian
rule. Joseph II’s efforts to incorporate Hungary into a single
centralized administration had led to a situation approaching
open revolt.
  At the same time, the advent of the French Revolution and an
increasing desire to stifle its growth before its "seditious” doc¬
trines could spread over the entire continent led the members of
the Triple Alliance to try even harder to secure a peace with the
Porte as rapidly as possible. The Prussian foreign minister. Count
von Hertzberg, was attempting to follow a policy very much like
that of Frederick II at the time of the first partition of Poland —
to use an eastern war in order to get territory and prestige for
Prussia. Hertzberg hoped to act as a mediator who could dictate
terms to the belligerents in such a way as to secure advantages
for his master. He felt that the Ottomans had suffered such stag¬
gering defeats in 1789 that they would have to agree to make
some concessions to Austria in the Principalities in order to save
themselves. Austria, weakened by internal troubles, would have
to accept the dictates of the balance of power while enlarging her
territory at Ottoman expense. In return for her acquisitions
along the Danube, she would have to give all or part of Galicia
back to Poland. The Poles would reward Prussia by ceding it
Danzig and Thorn, which would give the Prussians complete
control of the Vistula.
  Von Diez, Prussian ambassador at the Porte, led a group which
advocated a far more aggressive policy than Hertzberg’s, involv¬
ing the cooperation of the Triple Alliance with the Porte, Sweden,
and Poland in order to dictate their will to Austria and Russia, by
force if necessary. Poland would be rewarded for its cooperation
by being freed from Russian control. With its new strong govern¬
ment, it would form a permanent bar against any further Russian
advance to the west, while the rescued Ottoman Empire would
perform the same function to the south. Austria would have to
give up the Netherlands as well as Galicia, and would submit to
Prussian ascendancy in Germany. Thus while Hertzberg’s policy
would avoid war, von Diez’s would almost certainly bring it about.




                          The Winter of 1789-90
42   but it offered far more attractive rewards in the event of success.
       Selim III strongly favored von Diez’s plan; in fact, he had heen
     pushing for an open alliance with Prussia and England since
     1787. But after the defeat at the Rimnik, he reluctantly decided
     that if he could not get such assistance from his European friends,
     he would have to make peace without achieving the territorial
     ambitions for which Abd ul-Hamid had entered the war. He was,
     however, fully informed about events in France and elsewhere in
     Europe. The British ambassador insparticular pointed out to him
     how much the French Revolution was changing the diplomatic
     alignments of Europe and causing all its monarchies to end their
     foreign wars so they could join their forces against the contagion
     of revolution. As a result of this, by Febjruary Selim wanted to
     continue the war through another summer so that both his ene¬
     mies would become anxious enough that they would at least re¬
     turn their conquests of the current war in exchange for peace.
     He felt that he could not continue the war successfully without an
     alliance and active assistance from Prussia or Britain, and he
     issued an ultimatum to that effect in November—alliance or
     peace. At the same time, he moved to strengthen his govern¬
     ment by important changes of personnel.



                         Internal Preparations

       All through October and November 1789, the news of the suc¬
     cessive disasters at Galatz, at Fokshani, at the Rimnik, at Bel¬
     grade, and finally at Bender had produced a crisis of the first
     order in Istanbul. The loss of Wallachia also deprived the capital
     of a major source of grain, and as the winter approached shortages
     of food added to popular dissatisfaction. Crowds were coming into
     the streets, looting shops and homes, and setting fires to show
     their discontent and alarm. Demands for the deposition of the
     Grand Vezir and his associates were increasing in frequency and
     intensity.* While much of the enthusiasm which accompanied
     Selim’s accession had worn off, the anger of the crowd still was
     focused on the ministers rather than on the Sultan himself. In
     reaction to this popular protest, a large number of Selim’s chief
     ministers wanted to make peace, and on October 23 a Grand




                         War with Russia and Austria
Council met in the presence of the Sultan to consider the new         43
proposals. Because of the Sultan’s opposition, however, nothing
was decided, and instead orders were sent out to prepare for the
new campaign.^ To provide the money, Selim publicly sent his
own gold and silver plate to the Imperial Mint to be melted down
and made into coins, and he ordered all the notables of the empire
to do likewise. Orders were again sent out prohibiting the use of
gold or silver plate on houses, persons, and horses, and requiring
all persons to deliver their valuable utensils to the Mint as soon
as possible.^ All male subjects of the Sultan between the ages of
fifteen and sixty were ordered to prepare themselves to serve in
the army if they were needed. Decrees were issued to provide
regular provisions and pay for the army which was to be newly
created to go on the campaign. At the start of November, rumors
abounded that the Austrian forces were already heading for Nish,
and on the fifteenth, 5,000 Janissaries were sent from Istanbul to
Sofia to meet them, despite the critical need for their services to
keep order in the capital.^
  Selim also moved to restore order and discipline in his govern¬
ment and army. Said Ahmed Pasha, able commander of the for¬
tress at Sofia, was appointed governor of Rumelia, in place of
Abdi Pasha, who, it was widely rumored, had accepted Austrian
bribes to prevent the reinforcement of Belgrade at the critical
time. The Sultan’s brother-in-law, Mustafa Pasha, was sent to
replace him as governor of Sofia, with orders to prepare it for a
last ditch stand if necessary against the expected Austrian
attack.®
   On November 21, Selim made his most important move since
coming to the throne. He removed Hasan Pasha as Grand Vezir
and replaced him with the hero of Cheshme and Ismail, Gazi
Hasan Pasha, the only commander who had been able to resist
the Russian advance after the debacle at Fokshani and whose
continued resistance at Ismail was the only bright spot in the
otherwise dismal news that fiowed from the front.®
  Gazi Hasan now went to work with a ferocity and energy which
astonished his colleagues and European observers alike. Most of
the officers whom he considered responsible for the disasters of
the previous year were executed, including all the garrison com-




                       The Winter of 1789-90
44   manders who had surrendered their posts without resistance. He
     appointed his predecessor as governor of Ruschuk, with the re¬
     sponsibility of preparing to resist any Austrian effort to push
     south across the Danube from Bucharest. Selim issued a decree
     giving his new Grand Vezir absolute authority in all matters and
     stating that no one else should interfere in state affairs or dispute
     what he ordered. In the middle of January, Hasan Pasha was so
     satisfied with his work that he left his camp, led a force of 10,000
     men into northern Bulgaria, and successfully wiped out the ban¬
     dits who had been interrupting his communications with the cap¬
     ital.^
       But despite his successes, despite his energy, despite the free
     hand which the Sultan had given him, it did not take long before
     Gazi Hasan and Selim III came into conflict. The first point of
     conflict came when the new Grand Vezir dismissed his successor
     as Grand Admiral, Giritli Htiseyin Pasha, and replaced him with
     the former Grand Vezir, Yusuf Pasha, then commander at Vidin.
     Hiiseyin had been Selim’s personal choice as Grand Admiral, so
     the Sultan refused to approve the change, stating that an able
     commander was needed at Vidin and that Yusuf Pasha was by
     far the best qualified man for this post.® Gazi Hasan deeply re¬
     sented this interference with the "full powers” which had been
     given him by decree, but he avoided an open conflict with the Sul¬
     tan by accepting his decision without protest and turning back to
     his military preparations at Shumla.
       But in the end, the most important area of conflict came over
     the question of war or peace. Gazi Hasan Pasha had opposed the
     war right from the start. While he still was commander at Ismail,
     he had sent the Sultan a long and detailed report describing in
     agonizing detail the plight of the army and strongly recommend¬
     ing that peace be made at once. Now that he was Grand Vezir,
     he continued to recommend strongly that the European offers be
     accepted as soon as possible. Soon after his arrival in Shumla, he
     received direct peace proposals from Potemkin based on the status
     quo ante bellum, with Russian evacuation of Bessarabia but
     retention of the Crimea and the island of Tamara in the Koban.
     Similar proposals were also received from the Hapsburg Marshal
     Loudon, and Gazi Hasan sent them on to Istanbul together with
     his strong recommendations that they be accepted. At the same



                         War with Russia and Austria
time, he sent his agents to Potemkin and Loudon, and thus started             45
peace negotiations on his own without waiting to hear from his
master.


                 The Alliance with Prussia
  On November 26, the Prussian ambassador in Istanbul, von
Diez, had offered a formal alliance to the Porte in order to keep it
in the war. He told Selim that a Prussian war with Austria would
divert Austria from the Ottoman front, and he supported this
argument by pointing out how the Prussian alliance with Eng¬
land had prevented the Russian Baltic fleet from passing to the
Mediterranean, and how recent Prussian purchases of large
quantities of supplies from Poland had already caused Field
                                                                       '1.   S'
Marshal Romanzov, Suvorov’s commander in Moldavia, consid¬
erable difliculties in getting his own supplies for the new cam¬
paign. Diez promised Selim that Prussia would declare war on
Russia and Austria in April if the Porte agreed to the alliance,
and that it would fight on until both the Crimea and the Cauca¬
sus, as well as all their gains in the current campaign, were evac¬
uated by the Russians. In return, he asked only for Ottoman sup¬
port of Prussian claims to Danzig and Thorn and for the return of
Galicia to Poland. Although Britain and Prussia were closely
allied, the British ambassador in Istanbul, Sir Robert Ainslie,
was not informed about these negotiations, since Britain now
preferred to end the war with the Porte as soon as possible by
peaceful means rather than by an enlargement of the conflict. The
French and Spanish ambassadors led the opposition to the Prus¬
sian proposal, telling Selim and his ministers that the Russians
were now in control of the Polish Diet, that Gustavus Adolphus
was losing his hold over the nobles in Sweden, and that Prussia
would surely desert the Ottomans and make a separate peace
just as soon as its own ambitions were satisfied. But Selim was
not moved. The news of Austria’s failure to take Ismail and
Orsova at the end of the campaign strengthened his resolve and
spirits.
  On January 15, he summoned a formal Imperial Council, in¬
cluding representatives of the Ulema and the various military
corps, to discuss the matter, but by this time he had definitely



                       The Winter of 1789-90
resolved to accept the proposal and sign the alliance despite the
anguished protests of his Grand Vezir. He allowed debate only on
the question of whether such an alliance with an infidel power
would be legal according to the Sharia. Ataullah Mehmed Shani-
zade, then an important member of the Ulema and later imperial
historian, said that such a pact would not be legal. But the Sheyh
ul-Islam, Hamidi zade Mustafa Efendi, managed to produce suffi¬
cient traditions to support the legality qf the move, and with the
backing of the Sultan this view wa!s accepted.
  The formal alliance was signed on January 31, 1790, by the
Reis ul-Kuttab, Mehmed Rashid Efendi, and the chief judge of
Rumelia, Mustafa Ashir Efendi, for the Porte, and Ambassador
Baron von Diez in the name of the King of Prussia. Prussia, "be¬
cause of the prejudice which enemies have brought to the desired
and necessary balance of power by crossing the Danube,” agreed
to declare war and move with all its power against Russia and
Austria in the spring of 1790, and to continue in the war until the
Porte secured a peace which would be satisfactory to it. In return,
the Sultan promised to do all he could to obtain the restoration of
Galicia to Poland. This would serve as a replacement for Danzig
and Thorn, whose cession by Poland to Prussia would also be sup¬
ported by the Porte. In addition, the Porte agreed to prevent at¬
tacks on Prussian trade ships by North African pirates in the
Mediterranean, and in return Prussia agreed to demand the re¬
turn to the Ottomans of Bender, Oczakov, the Crimea, and other
areas lost in the current war before it would make peace. The
Porte promised to make no peace in which Prussia, Sweden, and
Poland were not included, and once peace was concluded, to re¬
gard as an attack on itself any attack made by Austria and Russia
on any of those powers. The latter engagement was to be recipro¬
cal among the four courts, who thus were to be joined in a mutual
assistance pact once peace was concluded. It also was agreed that
the Porte would not make peace with Russia except through the
mediation of England and Holland. A relatively long term of five
months was set for ratification of the treaty in order to give Prus¬
sia a chance to use all possible means to get Russia and Austria to
accept a peaceful solution before it accepted the obligation to
attack them.^




                   War with Russia and Austria
  Although Selim III ratified the treaty at once, Prussian ratifica¬   47
tion experienced various delays and difficulties. The Prussian
government recalled von Diez soon after the treaty was signed
on the grounds that he had exceeded his authority, and he was
replaced as ambassador at the Porte by Knobelsdorf. Final rati¬
fication was postponed despite urgent Ottoman inquiries and re¬
quests for some definite statement on the subject.*® But in spite
of the delay, the treaty had a tremendous effect in Istanbul. The
peace talks, which had been carried out in Istanbul through
the mediation of the French embassy as well as in the camp of the
Grand Vezir, were'now suspended.** Orders were issued for the
levy of two hundred thousand additional men in Anatolia and
the Balkans. Work was resumed on several new ships. Rumors
were spread that Selim himself would go to Edirne to lead the
new campaign.*^ Orders were sent to the Grand Vezir in Shumla
to redouble his preparations for war but to keep the treaty secret
and continue his talks with the enemy representatives in order to
deceive them into foregoing their spring preparations.*^
  Although Gazi Hasan Pasha himself was bitter and disap¬
pointed, he resumed military preparations with his accustomed
vigor and made such strenuous efforts to discipline and reorgan¬
ize his army that the Janissary corps revolted against him on
February 15, forcing him to flee until the dispute was settled.*^
It was only on February 22 that the treaty was announced pub¬
licly, after which the Grand Vezir had to suspend his negotia¬
tions for peace. The Austrian and Russian representatives left
Shumla to return to their camps, and war preparations were in¬
tensified on both sides. Gazi Hasan sent large numbers of men to
strengthen his advanced posts, especially at Giurgevo, in Wal-
lachia, where the Hospodar of Wallachia was building up a large
force to defend his position against an Austrian offensive in the
spring.*^


              Changes in the Grand Vezirate
  At this point, Selim’s war effort suffered a staggering blow.
Gazi Hasan had been under a great deal of pressure, not only be¬
cause of the effort involved in rebuilding his shattered army but




                       The Winter of 1789-90
                                           I




48   also because of criticism from his political enemies in Istanbul,
     who were trying to use the military failures of the previous cam¬
     paign to remove him from power before he could turn against
     them. The frustrations and anxieties resulting from his various
     disputes with the Sultan also took their toll, for the sincerely
     loyal and able minister desperately tried to satisfy his master
     while pursuing a course which he felt to be in the best interests of
     the empire. The final blows were inflicted by his own disorderly
     and rebellious men, who met every* order with sullen resentment
     and, sometimes, with open resistance. All these factors exhausted
     the energy and strength of the Grand Vezir, and left him an easy
     prey to illness. On March 24, he took to his bed with a bad cold
     and fever. Within five days he was dead, taking with him Selim’s
     last hopes for an efficient and successful campaign against the
     enemy. The British and French ambassadors in Istanbul circu¬
     lated reports that he had been poisoned by his political enemies
     or by the Sultan in an effort to offer up a scapegoat to the public
     for the defeats of the previous year.^® But most Ottoman and
     Western observers who were witnesses to his fatal illness re¬
     ported that it came from natural causes, and the rumors of foul
     play seem to have been without foundation in fact.'^
       The debates bn Gazi Hasan’s replacement were long and acri¬
     monious. For the first time, Selim’s confidants and ministers were
     beginning to group themselves into political factions, with the
     occupants of the harem and officials surviving from previous
     reigns gathering under the leadership of Yusuf Agha, the Lieu¬
     tenant of the Queen Mother, and those who had risen to power in
     company with the new Sultan accepting the leadership of his
     closest friend, Kiichiik Htiseyin Pasha. As was the case in pre¬
     vious centuries, these political groupings resulted more from con¬
     siderations of personal relationships and advantages than from
     matters of principle and policy. Each group struggled to secure
     the Grand Vezirate and as many of the other important govern¬
     ment positions and revenues as possible in order to increase its
     own power and prestige. The groups united only in a determina¬
     tion that whoever was chosen as grand vezir should be amenable
     to their direction and should not be a man like Gazi Hasan, with
     sufficient energy and strength to endanger their positions and




                        War with Russia and Austria
revenues. For three weeks, the factions argued, bickered, and           49
maneuvered for advantage without reaching any agreement.
Without a leader, the army languished, preparations for the new
campaign were halted, and the Treasury was rapidly emptied of
its last resources. Finally, despairing of obtaining any recommen¬
dation to which all parties would agree, the Sultan appointed the
obscure and incapable governor of Ruschuk, Chelebi zade Sherif
Hasan Pasha on April 16,1790.Son of the chief notable of Rus¬
chuk, the new Grand Vezir proved to be a tool not of the capital
factions surrounding the Sultan, but of the Balkan notables from
whose ranks he came. He also was incapable of carrying out the
difficult military and political tasks which fell to him. But for the
moment at least the political crisis was solved and the increas¬
ingly powerful and vocal factions were satisfied, if not contented.
Selim at once sent his new Grand Vezir a stern order to end brib¬
ery and misrule and prepare the army for the spring campaign.^®
  While Selim III was preparing to continue the war, events in
Europe were moving in the opposite direction; his allies and ene¬
mies alike were preparing for peace. On February 20, 1790, the
Hapsburg Emperor Joseph II died and was replaced by his able
and intelligent brother, Leopold II, who inherited an empire
racked by internal dissension and desperately needing peace so
that its house could be put in order. Prussia’s recent alliance with
the Porte had made an Austrian-Prussian war inevitable if the
Hapsburg armies moved south of the Danube into Ottoman ter¬
ritory, but with revolt threatening in both Hungary and the
Netherlands and dissatisfaction and disorder widespread in the
Austrian homeland, Leopold realized that Austria was not ready
or able to fight Prussia at that time. He was not dazzled by the
Russian Empress as his brother had been, and he was perfectly
willing to abandon his ally if that would bring peace. He shrewdly
perceived that Britain and Prussia had essentially different ob¬
jectives in their alliance. Britain’s main object was to limit Rus¬
sian advances, and it had no special quarrel with Austria. Prus¬
sia’s hostility was directed primarily toward its German neighbor
rather than against Russia; the effect of the Austrian alliance
with Russia was to push Britain into supporting Prussia against
Austria. Leopold therefore decided that the best way to counter




                        The Winter of 1789-90
Prussian advances in Germany, while at the same time avoiding
war, was to conciliate Britain by coming to terms with the Otto¬
mans, thus suspending operation of the Russian alliance without
openly breaking it. During the spring, therefore, he initiated
proposals along those lines, with a general European peace set¬
tlement now seeming much closer at hand than before.
  The chief negotiations were now going on between the courts of
Berlin and Vienna. Frederick William'still had not ratified his
                                         A

alliance with the Porte, and he offered not to do so if Leopold
would agree to return to the lines established by the Treaty of
Passarowitz and give back Belgrade and parts of Moldavia and
Bosnia to the Ottomans. In return, Prussia would agree not to
recognize the independence of the revolt^ing Belgian provinces,
nor would it make any effort to stop Austria from forcing them to
submit. In return for the latter concession, Prussia demanded
that Leopold change his alliance with Russia into a purely defen¬
sive agreement and that he return to Poland all of Galicia except
for the border province of the Bukovina. Leopold rejected these
conditions, unwilling to cede anything to Poland. He did agree,
however, to return to the Ottomans all districts on the right
banks of the Save and the Danube as well as Belgrade on condi¬
tion that the Porte cede to him Khotzim and its surrounding area,
the portion of Wallachia lying on the right bank of the Aluta
River, and the part of Bosnia bounded by Croatia and the Unna.
To support these demands, he assembled a large army in Bohemia
under the command of Field Marshal Loudon. With the break¬
down of the negotiations, the Prussian armies in Silesia and east¬
ern Prussia likewise were ordered to move south and begin hos¬
tilities. Frederick William left Berlin at the start of April to put
himself at the head of his Silesian army, and all Europe braced
itself for a general war over the Eastern Question.^”




                   War with Russia and Austria
                 VI. The Campaign
                      of 1790




While the peace negotiations waxed and waned, the armies of the
belligerents moved back into the field. Sherif Hasan Pasha led
the Ottoman army out of Istanbul toward Vidin and Nicopolis
with the intention of fortifying the last remaining portion of the
Danube defense line against enemy attack. But he soon found
that it took more than good intentions to revive the army of the
Porte, which had received such a severe beating the previous
autumn. Weapons, ammunition, tents, and uniforms had been
lost to the enemy in large quantities, and after Gazi Hasan died,
his successor’s efforts to replace them had been swallowed up in
the struggles for positions and revenues on the part of the polit¬
ical parties in Istanbul. The new Grand Vezir had neglected his
military duties while trying to strengthen his political position in
the capital before embarking on the expedition, so little had been
done to fill the storehouses and send out the food and supplies
which the army would need. Moreover, the loss of Wallachia had
deprived both the capital and the army of their most important
source of grains remaining after Egypt had fallen to local usurp¬
ers. The frontier fortresses still in Ottoman hands were badly in
need of reinforcements and supplies if they were to meet new
enemy attacks; wagons and horses were needed to transport
them; men had to be mobilized and sent where they were needed;
52   but none of these things had been done. So the Grand Vezir had
     to stop his march only a few miles outside of Shumla while orders
     were sent out to fulfill the army’s needs. Various Balkan notables
     and bandit leaders had been ordered to send contingents of
     mounted men to the Grand Vezir as soon as possible, but almost
     no preparations had been made and the army remained immo¬
     bilized. ‘
       The British ambassador in Istanbul made a new effort to medi¬
     ate a peace, but Selim said he wouldMo nothing without the agree¬
     ment of his Prussian and Swedish allies. For the moment, however,
     neither the Austrians nor the Russians moved to take advan¬
     tage of the Grand Vezir’s difficulties. Leopold still was hoping
     that peace might be concluded, while the>Russians suffered from
     Potemkin’s annual spring lethargy. Selim was pouring hordes
     of Anatolian troops across the Bosporus with their own ammuni¬
     tion and supplies in the hope of reinforcing the Grand Vezir be¬
     fore it was too late.- In mid-May, Leopold II became aware of
     these activities and decided that a show of strength was needed
     to press the Ottomans toward an early settlement. He ordered
     Marshal Coburg to march toward Ruschuk, with the implied
     threat of crossing the Danube unless the Ottomans began to
     negotiate in good faith. When he reached Giurgevo on the Dan¬
     ube, however, the Ottoman garrison resisted so fiercely that the
     arrival of reinforcements from Ruschuk panicked the Austrians,
     who fled back toward Bucharest, leaving all their equipment and
     supplies behind.'^
       The news of Giurgevo strengthened Selim’s determination to
     resist, exactly contrary to Leopold’s intention. It also encouraged
     the Ottoman commanders to make a new push across the Danube
     in pursuit of the fleeing Austrians, but strong resistance by the
     Austrian rear guard at Kalafat caused the Ottomans to retire.
     For all practical purposes, military contact between Austria and
     the Porte was ended and awaited only a political settlement to
     confirm the fact.


                   The Agreement of Reichenbach
       Political settlement came not as a result of the bilateral nego¬
     tiations, however, but in consequence of intervention on the part




                          War with Russia and Austria
of the concert of Europe. As a result of Frederick William’s assur¬   53
ances to the Ottomans that he would soon attack Austria, all of
Europe was alarmed at the specter of a general European war
over the Eastern Question. To prevent this possibility, a confer¬
ence was assembled on June 27 at Reichenbach, a small town
located only a few miles away from Frederick William’s camp at
Schonewalde. He agreed to forego his intended march against the
Austrians with the understanding that the conference would
achieve a settlement satisfactory to him. To Reichenbach came
representatives of the Triple Alliance powers and Poland. Rus¬
sia wished to treat separately with the Turks, so it refused to
participate. Although the Ottoman Empire was directly con¬
cerned with the deliberations, the Porte was neither notified nor
invited, since each of the participants hoped to "represent” its
interests in such a way that it would be forced to provide territo¬
rial and economic rewards in return. Prussia, as the only Otto¬
man ally, claimed the particular right to represent the Sultan in
all deliberations of this kind, but neglected to inform the Sultan
of this sudden change from military to diplomatic efforts to secure
their common ends.
  Prussia made the conference possible by modifying its previous
demands on Galicia, asking that only a part of it be returned to
Poland, although this still would be the compensation for Polish
cession of Danzig and Thorn to Prussia. Prussia also agreed to
leave the Ottoman areas of Orsova, Turnul, Giurgevo, and Ibrail
to Austria so long as the latter returned the remainder of its con¬
quests and agreed to the Polish cessions to Prussia. However,
Austria’s continued insistence that no part of Galicia be trans¬
ferred stalled the conference and threatened it with failure.
  At this point a number of relevant changes took place in Po¬
land. A party arose in the national parliament which opposed the
cession of Danzig and Thorn and chose to renounce the Galician
acquisition which Prussia was offering in return. This party man¬
aged to get Britain and Holland to persuade Frederick William
to abandon his plan. Despite his disappointment, he finally agreed
to drop the project until more propitious times and to adopt a
policy of securing a general settlement on the basis of the status
quo ante bellum so that some sort of union could be formed as




                       The Campaign of 1790
                                    1


54   soon as possible against the French Revolution. More than any¬
     thing else, it was the growing importance of events in France
     which caused him to reach this conclusion, the spread of revolu¬
     tionary agents throughout Europe with doctrines subversive to
     the existing social order. The sovereigns meeting at Reichenbach
     were now convinced that they had to forget their differences at
     once and unite against the menace emanating from the West, and
     a return to the status quo ante bellum seemed to be the best way of
     accomplishing this.               ^
       Finally on July 15, the Prussian Foreign Minister Hertzberg
     came forward with a plan which proved to be most acceptable to
     all, and it became the basis of the final agreement. He declared
     that his master would desist from the demand for a cession in
     favor of the Polish republic, but that in return he would demand
     that Austria renounce its claim to Wallachia in favor of the
     Turks. On July 25, Leopold IPs acceptance arrived from Vienna.
     Peace was to be re-established on the basis of a strict status quo
     ante bellum although he declared his hope that, in the course of
     the negotiations which were to follow, the Porte would agree to
     minor modifications needed to assure the security of the Austrian
     frontiers. He added that if a peace between Russia and the Porte
     was not achieved at the same time, he would retain the fortress of
     Khotzim, which had been taken by a joint Russo-Austrian attack,
     and would maintain it as neutral until a Russo-Ottoman peace
     allowed him to return it to the Porte. The same day, Frederick
     William gave his official agreement, stating that he understood
     that the modifications of the status quo ante bellum mentioned
     by the Austrians would be only those to which the Porte agreed of
     its own will, through the mediation of the European powers, and
     that Prussia was to be fully compensated for any Austrian terri¬
     torial gains made at Ottoman expense, however minor they might
     be. The ratifications of this agreement were exhanged at Reichen¬
     bach on August 5, and they were immediately transmitted to the
     Porte along with Prussia’s entreaties that they be accepted.^
       The agreement of Reichenbach marked an important turning
     point in European diplomatic affairs. The threats of a war be¬
     tween Austria and Prussia and of a general European conflict
     over the Eastern Question were averted. Austria escaped from




                        War with Russia and Austria
its most serious crisis since that which followed the death of         55
Maria Theresa. The Triple Alliance was now absorbed into the
more general European concert, which was rising to meet the
new problems imposed by the appearance of re volutionary France.
  In the meantime Selim III had had no word of the Reichenbach
conference. He continued to count on Prussian and Swedish mili¬
tary assistance for a new concerted attack on the enemy. Reports
that the Ottoman fleet had defeated a Russian squadron off Kafa
in the Black Sea and that'Prince Coburg was taking his army
back into Transylvania because of internal difficulties in Galicia
strengthened his resolve and led him to order the Grand Vezir to
march toward Bucharest at the beginning of August. At the same
time, he ordered that all peace negotiations be ended in Istanbul
and at the Grand Vezir’s camp, and the Austrian and Russian
agents were sent home. The Grand Vezir left a large force to
guard Ruschuk and Shumla, and on August 5 he set out toward
Bucharest with an army of about 50,000 men, mostly cavalry.
Strong forces were sent to reinforce the garrisons at Ibrail, Silis-
tria, Ismail, and Varna. On August 7, the Prussian ambassador
officially informed the Porte that the alliance finally had been
ratified in Berlin a month before, and he reassured the Sultan
that Prussian military operations would soon begin. Koja Yusuf
Pasha, the former Grand Vezir, was ordered to take his army
from Vidin and move north, crossing the Danube, in order to as¬
sist the Grand Vezir in Wallachia.®
  Then on August 18, the bombshell of Reichenbach was dropped
into the Ottoman camp. The Prussian ambassador in Vienna
came to the Grand Vezir, informed him of the European agree¬
ment, and stated that he would have to move back south of the
Danube and begin negotiations with the Austrians at once in
order to conform with it. On August 24, the Grand Vezir’s mes¬
senger arrived in Istanbul with the news, which left Sultan,
ministers, and people alike in a state of fury at the betrayal which
had been inflicted by the infidel ally. Seemingly Prussia had
joined the enemy to bring the Ottomans to their knees.
  Selim’s immediate reaction was to order the Grand Vezir to
ignore the Prussian order and attack the Austrians, and he deliv¬
ered to the Imperial Council a long speech bitterly criticizing the




                       The Campaign of 1790
56   Prussians for violating their agreement not to make a separate
     peace without Ottoman approval. During the next week, the
     Council discussed the matter, with a relatively even division
     arising between those who wished to fight to the bitter end and
     those who favored peace and acceptance of the agreement. A num¬
     ber of ministers and most of the Ulema felt that Austria was so
     burdened by internal difficulties that it would even give back
     Galicia and Bukovina as well as its conqpests in the current war
     if only the conflict was prolonged anti pressed. They seemed to be
     gaining the upper hand in the debates when the arrival of the
     news that Catherine had signed a separate peace with Sweden
     swung the Council in favor of peace, although not after hearing
     savage attacks on the infidel allies who had deserted the Porte in
     its time of need. The Ottoman government agreed to enter nego¬
     tiations with Austria on the basis of the Reichenbach agreement.
     Selim asked England and Holland to use all their power to pre¬
     vent the Russian Baltic fleet from passing into the Atlantic and
     Mediterranean, and he advised the new Prussian ambassador,
     Knobelsdorf, that Prussia would now be expected to live up to its
     obligations by attacking the Russians in order to force them to
     relinquish the Crimea and Oczakov. To push this demand, Ahmed
     Azmi Efendi was sent as Ottoman ambassador to Berlin with the
     rank of plenipotentiary. Selim also ordered the Grand Vezir to
     persuade Coburg to evacuate Wallachia before he entered nego¬
     tiations, or at least to obtain his permission for the Ottoman army
     to march through the Austrian-controlled areas of Wallachia so it
     could move against the Russians as soon as possible. But Prus¬
     sia and Austria both refused these requests, stating that their
     main aim was to secure an Ottoman peace with Russia as well so
     that it, too, could be brought into the European concert against
     France.®


                          Peace Negotiations
       On September 17, the Grand Vezir and Coburg signed a nine-
     month truce at Giurgevo, and preparations for a formal peace con¬
     ference were begun.^ Feelers which had been received from Po¬
     temkin for a peace on the basis of the status quo ante bellum were
     rejected, and the main Ottoman army moved from Ruschuk toward



                         War with Russia and Austria
Silistria in order to meet the Russians.® Official Ottoman accept¬    57
ance of the terms of the Reichenbach conference was communi¬
cated to the ambassadors of England and Holland in Istanbul,
and they were subsequently asked to go to the peace conference
with the Prussian ambassador in order to mediate on behalf of
the Ottomans, as stipulated in the Reichenbach agreement. Prus¬
sia hoped to enhance its own prestige by having the congress held
on its territory as a "disinterested party.” But the British ambas¬
sador in Istanbul, Sir Robert Ainslie, encouraged the Ottomans to
insist on one of their own cities, and this view finally prevailed
with the choice of Sistova, in northern Bulgaria on the southern
bank of the Danube. The actual negotiations began in mid-
December, and they continued throughout the winter and spring
of 1791.®
  In the meantime, Ottoman-Russian negotiations foundered.
In April 1790, Potemkin had proposed peace on the condition that
Bender and Akkerman would be returned to the Ottomans as
well as the two Principalities. The Ottomans would be allowed to
appoint whom they wished as princes, but once appointed they
could not be changed so long as they ruled justly and well. The
fort of Oczakov would be destroyed, and the area between the
Dniester and Bug rivers would be left as a neutral zone occupied
by the subjects of neither power. Russia would agree not to inter¬
vene in Georgia and to respect whatever arrangements the Otto¬
mans were able to make with all the local princes in the Cauca¬
sus. There was no mention of war indemnities, but the Porte
would agree to use its infiuence to prevent Prussia from attacking
Russia. Selim, still unaware of the approaching European detente,
refused these proposals and continued to rely on the expected
assistance from Prussia and Sweden.*® So, while the negotiations
with Austria proceeded at Sistova, the war with Russia continued
and in fact was extended to a new front, the Caucasus, for the
first time.


                    New Military Actions
  According to the Treaty of Kuchiik Kaynaija, the Ottomans
had left the Kabartay area north of the Caucasus Mountains to
Russia, which had built up its military strength in the entire area



                       The Campaign of 1790
                                            {
                                      1


58   north of the Black Sea to facilitate a subsequent move into Geor¬
     gia as well as the Crimea. Starting in 1787, the Ottomans had
     stirred the people of Daghistan, Circassia, and Kabartay against
     the Russians and incited the Khan of Tiflis to move secretly against
     his new Russian protectors. In October 1787, the governor of
     Trebizond, Kdse Mustafa Pasha, was sent to Anapa with a force of
     about 10,000 men to aid the revolts which Ottoman agents had
     been fomenting among the Caucasian tribes. At this time Rus¬
     sian attention was focused in the Balkans, so no attempt was
     made to meet this Ottoman incursion until the spring of 1789,
     when a strong Russian force moved to attack Anapa, the base of
     the Ottoman activity. In response to this attack, in March 1790,
     Selim sent Battal Hiiseyin Pasha with a relief force of 5,000 men.
     Landing at Anapa, he successfully beat off the Russian attack,
     but he failed to aid the rebellious Kabartay and Caucasian tribes
     as he had been ordered to do. It was only in response to repeated
     orders from Istanbul that he finally left Anapa on August 8 with
     a large force, in the hope of helping the Kabartay tribes against
     the Russians. He seemed not at all anxious to fight the Russian
     army, and he moved as slowly as he could, not arriving at the
     Koban River until September 14. There he was met by the chief
     princes of the Kabartay, who told him that they had 30,000 men,
     who would join him when he attacked the Russians. Apparently
     Battal Hiiseyin was in correspondence with the Russian com¬
     mander, and in return for a large bribe he refused the Kabartay
     offer of cooperation. Instead he sent a small force of his own men,
     numbering between 4,000 and 5,000 against the main Russian
     army, which had retired from Anapa, but it was smashed and fell
     back toward Anapa with the Russians in hot pursuit. Although
     the rest of the Ottoman force remained undamaged and untried,
     Battal then surrendered to the Russians, in accordance with the
     secret arrangement which had been made. Left without a chief,
     the men of the Ottoman force fled in disorder.
       When the news of the betrayal and disaster reached the Sultan,
     he immediately sent San Abdullah Pasha to command at Anapa,
     but he also was not eager to reach his new post; and while travel¬
     ing from Erzurum to Trebizond, he stalled as long as he could on
     the pretext that he was putting down the various local rebels in




                        War with Russia and Austria
that area. In the meantime, Battal Pasha’s desertion, the flight of    59
the Ottoman army, and the failure of the new Ottoman com¬
mander to appear finally disquieted the Caucasian tribes, and
they dispersed to their homes, entirely giving up the fight against
the Russians. The Russians then were able to move against Anapa
once again in early 1791, finally taking it after a long siege. Thus
ended the last hope the Ottomans had of retaining their posses¬
sions north and east of the Black Sea."
  The summer of 1790 also saw the Russian army make impor¬
tant new gains against the Ottomans west of the Black Sea. The
original allied plan for 1790 had Potemkin crossing the Danube
at Ibrail and marching south along the Black Sea coast while
Coburg would cross at Ruschuk and then move to the east in
order to catch the Ottomans in a pincer movement. But with
Austria’s defection and the need to send large forces to watch the
Polish and Prussian frontiers, Potemkin was forced to make
much more limited plans for the campaign. As soon as the Austro-
Ottoman peace was announced, Suvorov, who had been sent to
Wallachia to coordinate operations with Coburg, was recalled.
He then occupied Galatz and worked to build up a fleet of armed
boats to assist Potemkin’s advance when it came.*^ Conditions in
the Ottoman army and navy also made the situation ripe for a
Russian advance. The army of the Grand Vezir became increas¬
ingly disorderly and disorganized while waiting at Giurgevo most
of the summer. After he moved to Silistria, at least half of his
force melted away as a result of desertion and the desire of the
feudal cavalry members to return to their fiefs for the winter. The
situation was very similar among the garrisons of the main Otto¬
man forts on the lower Danube —Kilya and Ismail —and as a
result there were not enough men to defend them against a deter¬
mined Russian attack.*^ At sea the Ottoman plight was almost
as bad. In July and again in early September, Ushakov’s Sevasto¬
pol squadron inflicted decisive defeats on the remnants of the
Ottoman Black Sea fleet, forcing it to retire to the Bosporus and
leave the sea entirely under Russian control. The Russian Danube
flotilla secured a similar supremacy, and this left the Danube
entirely open to Potemkin whenever he chose to move across it
and march to the south." But despite these advantages, he re-




                        The Campaign of 1790
     V




60       mained inactive most of the summer, and only in mid-October,
         when the campaign season was almost gone, did he attack and
         take the principal Ottoman forts remaining along the Danube—
         Kilya (October 30),*^ Tulcha (November 16),‘® and Ismail (Decem¬
         ber 22);*^ Ismail was of special significance since it was located at
         the intersection of the roads to Galatz, Khotzim, Bender, and
         Kilya, and was the storehouse for the entire Turkish defense
         system in the area.
            The news of Ismail’s fall in particular astounded Europe and
         was celebrated in verse by Byron. At Sistova, negotiations were
         suspended for three days by the Reis ul-Kuttab* for fear that
         Austria would refuse to negotiate on the same basis as before be¬
         cause of the disaster. In Istanbul, the news led to the usual popu-
     ^ lar tumults, with riots in the streets, fires, stonings, and the like.
         To restore calm and order, Selim sacrificed almost all his chief
         officers as scapegoats to popular feeling.On February 14,1791,
         the Grand Vezir, Sherif Hasan Pasha, was shot in Shumla on
         Selim’s orders. Two weeks later Koja Yusuf Pasha was made
         Grand Vezir for the second time because of his strong following in
         the army and among the Ulema. Sherif Hasan’s associates also
         were replaced, and the Ulema and politicians whom he had ban¬
         ished were returned to their posts with honor. In addition, to
         appease popular Muslim feeling, the new Grand Vezir prohibited
         the use of wine and spirits and closed all the cabarets in Istanbul,
         although he did try to soften the blow to the Christians by giving
         them a week to store up supplies before the order went into
         effect.*** Selim thus turned to the reactionary opponents of his
         internal policies in order to get the support needed to continue
         the external struggle.

            *The Reis ul-Kuttab, or "chief of scribes” (sometimes called also Reis Efendi),
         was at this time not only the Director of the Scribes of the Treasury but also in
         charge of the technical aspects of foreign relations, including the conduct of nego¬
         tiations with foreign representatives as well as the dispatch of ambassadors and
         other emissaries. See Pakahn, III, 25-27; also Halil Inalcik, "Re’is ul-Kuttab,”
         L4, vol. IX, 671-683.




                                 War with Russia and Austria
         VII. The Campaign of 1791
         and the Conclusion of Peace




Negotiations continued at Sistova until February 10, 1791, when
they were broken off as a result of Austrian efforts to renege on
previous promises to restore the status quo ante bellum. At the
same time, Prussia encouraged new negotiations to renew the
Ottoman alliance with Sweden; the Porte was to agree to supply
at once the balance of the money it formerly had promised to pay
over a long period of time, and Sweden was to obligate itself to
attack Russia.^ Prime Minister William Pitt of England contin¬
ued to support the Ottomans in the negotiations, over the oppo¬
sition of the liberals, Edmund Burke and Charles James Fox,
who condemned the policy of "allying England with the barbarous
Turk.” Although Parliament agreed to increase naval forces to¬
ward this end, Pitt finally decided against going through with his
ultimatum to Austria because of the divided state of the country.
Pitt had clearly seen how much it was to the interest of Britain to
keep the Porte from falling into the hands of the Russians, but
public opinion followed far behind, and less drastic means had to
be used to bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion.^
  While Yusuf Pasha remained at Shumla trying to restore his
battered army and Sultan Selim rapidly changed his ministers
in a futile effort to restore order at home, the Russian army, com¬
manded by Prince Repnin while Potemkin wintered in Saint
62   Petersburg, moved to surprise the Ottomans with an attack in the
     early spring of 1791. On April 4, Repnin routed the Turkish gar¬
     rison at Machin, a small town located about ten miles southwest
     of Ibrail, occupying a key position which controlled the passes
     through the mountains parallel to the Danube.^ Despite the large
     number of men in the Ottoman army it was clear even to Yusuf
     Pasha that their discipline, morale, and training were poor and
     that he lacked sufficient supplies and 'munitions for a serious
     campaign. But before the Ottoman al^my could retire to new posi¬
     tions, Repnin daringly recrossed the Danube and completely
     routed the Ottoman force (July 8), with only the opposing contin¬
     gent sent by Tepedelenli Ali Pasha of Epirus giving a good account
     of itself.^ But by now peace negotiations had come so close to suc¬
     cess that Repnin contented himself with destroying the Ottoman
     camp and then returning to his original positions across the Dan¬
     ube. For all practical purposes, the Ottoman army was gone —the
     defense line was smashed once and for all. With the defeat at
     Machin, the game was up.
       It was at this point that peace came between Austria and the
     Porte, largely as the result of the mediation of Britain and Prus¬
     sia, who forced the Sultan’s representatives to accept the Aus¬
     trian demands in order to secure peace and thus assure the pre¬
     servation of the European concert against revolutionary France.^
     The basis of the Treaty of Sistova,® which was signed on August 4,
     was the status quo which existed before the war, essentially a
     return to the Treaty of Belgrade as modified by the cession of the
     Bukovina to Austria in 1775. A full amnesty was given the sub¬
     jects of both powers who helped the enemy during the war, and in
     particular the Christians of Montenegro, Bosnia, Serbia, Walla-
     chia, and Moldavia who had assisted the Hapsburg armies. The
     Porte confirmed its previous orders, promising to protect Aus¬
     trian ships against attacks by North African pirates and to pro¬
     vide compensation for any damage resulting from such attacks,
     confirming freedom of trade and travel for Austrian subjects in
     the Ottoman Empire, and allowing fiocks coming from Transyl¬
     vania to pass the border freely and graze in Wallachia and Mol¬
     davia.
       In return Austria agreed to restore to the Porte in the condition




                        War with Russia and Austria
in which they were taken all territories and forts conquered          63
during the current war, in particular Wallachia and the parts of
Moldavia which it occupied. Khotzim and its district were also to
be returned but only after the Porte made peace with the Rus¬
sians and under terms of evacuation agreed on with them. Until
that time, Austria would remain in Khotzim, which it specifically
promised to keep as a neutral place without giving any direct or
indirect assistance to the Russians. All prisoners of war and
slaves were to be exchanged without the payment of any pur¬
chase prices or ransoms. Subjects of either party who went to the
territory of the other before or during the war and lived there of
their own free will were not to be returned without their consent
but were required to take the citizenship of the country in which
they chose to reside and to dispose of their former properties
except insofar as they were allowed to retain them under condi¬
tions granted to all subjects of the country to which they now were
to be attached. All incursions on both sides were to be suppressed.
Article 12 confirmed the provisions of the Treaty of Belgrade,
allowing to Catholic priests and communicants in the Ottoman
Empire absolute freedom to practice their religion and maintain
and repair their churches and holy places and visit the latter
without any hindrance on the part of the Ottoman government or
its officials. The treaty was followed by a separate declaration by
the ministers of Britain, Prussia, and Holland stating that it had
been concluded by their mediation, thus satisfying their honor
without actually including a specific statement in the treaty.
  In a separate convention concluded the same day,^ the Porte
agreed that the town and area of Old Orsova would remain in the
possession of Austria so that the Czerna would form the perpet¬
ual frontier between the two countries, but under the condition
that the Hapsburgs would never fortify any part of the district
ceded under this convention. The small plain north of the fort of
the Island of Orsova was to remain neutral territory, as provided
in article 5 of the Treaty of Belgrade, with neither side laying
claim to it nor attempting to settle or use it in any way. The
district situated on the left bank of the Upper Unna was ceded to
Austria up to its western sources, where the Turkish, Austrian,
and Dalmatian boundaries came together, leaving Stemiza




                       The Campaign of 1791
64   under Ottoman control. The Austrian government promised not
     to build fortifications in any of the areas ceded to them by this
     agreement and to regard the settlement as definitive and not
     subject to futher claims or alterations. Ratifications were ex¬
     changed within a week, thus bringing to a conclusion a war which
     had cost both sides very heavily in manpower and resources and
     which left both near collapse. Selim immediately sent Ebubekir
     Ratib Efendi to Vienna as ambassador with the special task of
     restoring good relations between the two powers and getting
     Austrian assistance for the reforms which he was planning to
     introduce as soon as the Russian war was ended. Various dis¬
     putes on the exact boundary delimitations kept the boundary
     commissions working until late 1795, however, and it was only
     after that time that relations fully returned to normal.


                         The Treaty of Jassy
       Shortly before the Treaty of Sistova was signed, a truce was
     finally agreed upon between the Porte and Russia. Immediately
     after the Agreement of Reichenbach, Frederick William II had
     urged Catherine to accept his mediation to secure peace with the
     Porte, but she refused on the grounds that she could make a
     peace with her enemies without any foreign intervention. This
     stirred Frederick William to prepare for possible military action
     in order to force Russian compliance. While peace negotiations
     went on at Sistova in December 1790, he gathered an army of
     90,000 men while Catherine prepared to meet his threat by re¬
     cruiting men in Livonia and White Russia. Britain gave its full
     support to Prussia, telling Catherine that while it would not
     demand that Russia accept its mediation, it would not allow a
     settlement which would impose undue sacrifices on the Porte,
     and it declared its determination to secure an agreement based on
     a strict status quo ante bellum arrangement. Britain had just
     completed its war in Spain, and its fleet was now released for
     action in the Baltic and Mediterranean if it should prove neces¬
     sary. In February 1791, the powers of the Triple Alliance were
     granted the good offices of Denmark in their effort to get Cather¬
     ine to return her conquests to the Porte, and while she rejected




                        War with Russia and Austria
the idea of status quo ante bellum, she finally accepted the Danish    65
mediation, declaring that the honor and security of her empire
would not permit her to accept the conditions which the powers
wished to impose but that she would be willing to accept a
modified status quo agreement by which she would return the
bulk of her conquests but would retain the town and district
of Oczakov. The Danes proposed that Russia be given Oczakov
and all the territory up to the Dniester, under the condition
that they remain without" fortifications, but all concerned ob¬
jected to this. The Porte was not consulted during these negoti¬
ations since the ihain object of the Tripartite Alliance was to
make a settlement at the Sultan’s expense.
  On May 26, the members of the Triple Alliance proposed a
peace settlement by which Oczakov would be ceded to Russia
on the principle that it was required for the security of Russia’s
frontiers. They elaborated this in a new plan by which the area
enclosed by the Bug and the Dniester, including Oczakov, would
become independent. On July 20, the Empress replied that
she could not agree to destroy the fortress of Oczakov because
that would leave her frontier unguarded, but she added that
she would agree to free navigation on the Dniester. The me¬
diating powers and Catherine finally agreed on the cession of the
area between the Bug and the Dniester with the condition that
all other Russian conquests be evacuated, adding that if the
Porte refused this arrangement, they would abandon it.® Thus the
basis for peace negotiations was laid, and only the Sultan’s
agreement was needed before the final talks could be begun.
  In Istanbul, Selim had continued to hold out for war in the
hope that Prussia would join the attack on Russia. But in early
July, a series of new disasters finally forced him to give in to the
inevitable. The news of Prussia’s desertion as a result of the
Reichenbach agreement was only the beginning. On July 5 Selim
received reports (subsequently learned to be false) that the
Wahhabi sect had captured and pillaged Mecca, the holiest place
in Islam.® Five days later, he learned that the Russian army which
had been besieging Anapa since the previous autumn finally had
taken it in April, thus eliminating the last Ottoman foothold
north of the Black Sea. The arrival of the news from Machin




                       The Campaign of 1791
(captured on July 9) was the last straw, so on July 15, two weeks
before the powers presented their ultimatum, Selim instructed
his plenipotentiaries at Sistova to proceed to similar negoti¬
ations with the Russians as soon as their work was completed,
and he ordered the Grand Vezir to meet Repnin at once to arrange
a truce, which was signed at Galatz on July 31. Catherine
concealed these arrangements from the western allies until the
last minute in an effort to demonstrate that the essential peace
arrangement with the Ottomans had been made directly, with¬
out their pressure and mediation.*® Ahmed Vasif Efendi, official
court historian of the Sultan, who had accompanied the Grand
Vezir’s army during much of the previous year, was sent to Galatz
to continue the talks with the Russians in preparation for the final
peace conference. Vasif was instructed to try to get the Russians
to modify their demand to extend their boundary to the Dniester,
but in this he was entirely unsuccessful because the mediating
powers had previously agreed to this line.
  In order to show sincerity and good faith, Selim ordered the
immediate release of a large number of Russian merchants who
had been held as prisoners in Istanbul since the start of the war.
The Russians in turn released a number of Muslim war prisoners,
including Mehmed Pasha, grandson of Tepedelenli Ali Pasha,
who had been captured at the battle of the Rimnik. The main
terms of the truce agreement were that the Ottomans would
accept as the basis of negotiations the Treaty of Kiichuk Kaynarja
with the exception that the Russian boundary would be moved
up to the Dniester, thus including Oczakov and all of Bessarabia.
The Russians thus were able to dictate the principal territorial
arrangements in direct negotiations with the Ottomans and
present the mediators with a fait accompli when the actual peace
conference opened.**
  Negotiations were then transferred to Jassy, where Potemkin
set up his headquarters. After a delay due to Potemkin’s death,
discussions resumed on December 1. While the principal terri¬
torial arrangements had been agreed on in advance, the confer¬
ence dragged on, with disputes on Russian demands for war
compensation of 12,000,000 piasters and for territorial conces¬
sions east and west of the Black Sea preventing a final settle-




                   War with Russia and Austria
ment.*^ Finally, Russian submission on the former demands, and        67
Ottoman on the latter, led to an agreement, which was signed on
January 9, 1792J^
 A "perpetual and solid” peace was established between the
two empires, and a general amnesty and pardon was given to the
subjects of both. All those banished or exiled from one, because of
service for the other, were allowed to return to their former homes
if they wished. The Treaty of Kiichiik Kaynaija formed the basis
of the agreement, as amerided by the treaty of 1783, accepting
the incorporation of the Crimea into the Russian Empire and
fixing the Koban River as the frontier between the two north of
the Black Sea, thus also confirming the Russian protectorate
over Georgia. In accordance with the truce agreement signed at
Galatz, the Dniester was established as the perpetual boundary
between the two. Russia received the port of Oczakov as well as
the tongue of land extending between the Bug and the Dniester,
on which the great port of Odessa was soon to be built as the
center of the Russian naval establishment on the Black Sea.
Russia agreed to evacuate Moldavia, Akkerman, Kilya, Ismail,
and Bender by the end of May, and the Porte promised to restore
all former privileges to Moldavia, to exempt it from all taxes
for a time so it might recover from the damage caused by the
war, and not to demand from it any taxes in arrears or special
contributions to pay for war expenses. In addition the Porte
agreed to order the governor of Ahiska to prevent Ottoman
subjects from raiding across the Koban into the Russian prov¬
inces of Tifiis and Carthalina and to pay compensation for any
damage caused and booty taken in such raids as well as in North
African pirate attacks on Russian shipping in the Mediterranean.
All prisoners of war taken during the war were to be exchanged
except for those who voluntarily accepted the citizenship or re¬
ligion or both of the other and who wished to remain in their new
homes.
  One month later, ratifications were exchanged and the war
was officially over. The Ottoman Empire had entered the war
to regain the Crimea but instead had seen its boundaries driven
back to the Dniester and the Koban. Russia was finally and
definitively entrenched on the shores of the Black Sea, with




                       The Campaign of 1791
68   Kherson and Sevastopol established as great naval bases and
     the territory provided for the emergence of Odessa as the new
     instrument of Russian naval supremacy. Russia now controlled
     the mouths of most of the major rivers empt5dng into the Black
     Sea. The Porte had been saved from even greater damage more
     by the grace of the French Revolution and the dictates of Euro¬
     pean concert diplomacy than by its own efforts. The war had re¬
     vealed the extent of Ottoman weakness not only to all of Europe
     but also to Sultan Selim and to many of his associates, and they
     emerged from it with a determination to reform the empire at
     once before it was too late.




                        War with Russia and Austria
Part III. The ''New Order”
        of Selim III
        %




            \




h

                1




    s
              VIII. Wartime Reforms,
                    1789-1792




What did "reform” mean to the Ottoman Sultan? The letters
which Selim wrote to the King of France and others while he
was still a prince as well as his actions after coming to the throne,
make it clear that at that time his concept of change and reform
was little different from that of his predecessors. As far as he was
concerned, the empire was in difficulty abroad because the tradi¬
tional institutions were not being operated properly; it could beJ)
saved only if they were restored to their original state. Abuses ,
and inefficiency had to be ended and discipline and obedience
re-established.   Only where military necessity required the
acceptance of modem weapons and techniques developed in the
West could new military organizations be created to make use
of them so that the equilibrium of traditional Ottoman society
would not be upset by damage to one of its intergral parts.
Throughout his reign Selim did little more than apply this
concept, although the conditions in which he found himself
caused its manifestations to be more grandiose, more signifi¬
cant, and more striking than ever before.
  The immediate, pressing needs of prosecuting a war against
powerful European enemies caused Selim to subordinate even
this limited concept of reform to the necessity of securing the
full cooperation of the established military and religious classes
                                               I
                                         1


72        until the war could be brought to an end. However inefficient
      these groups might be, however much they might ignore their
      own laws and regulations, they still provided the only administra¬
          tion and army which the empire had, and without them the enemy
      simply could not be held off at all. Selim understood quite well
      what his successor Mahmud II was to find out from bitter experi¬
      ence three decades later —that destruction of the old institutions,
      however bad they might be, would be disastrous if it was ac¬
      complished at a time when foreign anbmies were ready and wait¬
      ing to take advantage of every weakness. So for the moment, the
      emphasis had to be on restoring order and discipline in the regu¬
      lar military corps and the administration and on raising the
      morale and spirit of the people.



                            Reform by Consultation
            The most important change which the Sultan introduced in the
          wartime period was less a reform than it was an elaboration of a
      /

          traditional process — consultation with all segments of the ruling
     X^lass on important matters facing the empire. In the past, all
          laws and regulations introduced in the Sultan’s dominions had
          been drawn up and applied by the Sultan and his ministers, who
      together constituted the Imperial Council (Divan-i HiXmayun).
          Legislation and administration thus were concentrated in a
      single all-powerful body composed of the appointees and assist¬
      ants of the Sultan. Other members of the ruling class had no voice
      in its deliberations and decisions beyond the right to submit
      petitions and to appear before it on request. When unusually
      important matters required wider support, the approval of spe¬
      cially assembled councils of notables, representing all the groups
      of the ruling class, was sought and obtained. But this was the
      exception not the rule, and for the most part, these assemblies
      did no more than sanction policies previously decided upon by
      the Imperial Council.
           They did provide Selim with a precedent, however, an existing
      body which could be developed to fill a new need without offend¬
      ing those who would be angered by open innovation. The need
      was simply obtaining the advice of those who were experts in




                            The "New Order” of Selim III
the areas of Ottoman life which the Sultan sought to reform.
The members of the Imperial Council could not be —and were
not —experts in all aspects of the Ottoman system, so they could
not draw up the kind of detailed regulations that the Sultan felt
were necessary preliminaries to, and parts of, reform. To obtain
the needed advice, the previously infrequent councils of notables
now were made regular, permanent parts of the legislative and
executive processes. Starting in 1789 and continuing throughout
Selim’s reigns, specialized 'councils were assembled to discuss
particular areas, to draw up regulations for them, and to see that
those regulations Were carried out. To these new bodies, the
Imperial Council in fact transferred most of its legislative and
administrative duties, with only the formality of legal assent
left to the ministers of whom it was composed. Thus a major
step was taken to secure more efficient and regular handling of
the affairs of state. By this device also, Selim was able to secure
the assistance and sanction of many members of the existing
ruling class for the program of restoration and reform which he
hoped to accomplish.^
  On May 14, 1789, a little over a month after Selim came to
the throne, he inaugurated his reforms by calling a general
consultative council {Mejlis-i Meshveret) of notables, which met
in the Revan Pavilion of the Imperial Palace three days later.^
To it came over two hundred leaders of the ruling class—judges
and administrators, scribes and teachers, active and retired
military officers and soldiers, all invited to discuss what could be
done to save the empire.
  The meeting was opened with a short speech by the Sultan,
who asked all those present to give him their frank evaluations
of the ills of the empire and the remedies which could be applied.
The Reis ul-Kuttab then read a list of subjects to be considered,
the areas of the Ottoman structure where the disorder was espe¬
cially apparent, in particular the army, the provincial adminis¬
tration, and the systems of justice and finance. Those in attend¬
ance were also asked to add any other subjects which they
thought appropriate. After the Reis sat down, there was a long
period of silence. Many of the officials who were present benefited
in some way from the abuses which the Sultan wanted them to




                         Wartime Reforms
74        expose. Most of them were not accustomed to speaking out freely
          and frankly in the presence of their master. No one wanted to
          be the first to criticize the established order.
            Finally, the Sultan’s childhood tutor in the Imperial palace
          and now Rumeli Kadiasker (Judge of Europe), Hamidi zade
          Mustafa Efendi, rose to lead the discussion, apparently by pre¬
          arrangement with his master. Soon to be appointed as Sheyh
          u-Islam, known to be a close friend of tl(ie Sultan, he was a man
          who clearly was to be heard and thken as an example.^Mustafa
          Efendi pointed out that the subjects of the Sultan were being
          oppressed in innumerable ways, in violation of the religious and
          civil laws of the empire, that extralegal taxes were being collected
          from them for the benefit of corrupt officials, and that in such a
          situation it was impossible for them to provide the material and
          manpower which the empire needed in its time of crisis. He went
          on to describe in detail the disorder which was becoming wide¬
          spread in the army, the inferiority of its tactics and weapons,
          and the breakdown of its supply system. Diplomatically, he added
          that these conditions had developed long before the time of his
          master, but he emphasized that they would have to be corrected
          at once if the European enemies were to be defeated. This state¬
          ment set the tone for the discussion which followed. It indi¬
          cated to all those present the type of criticism which the Sultan
          would accept and the extent to which they could propose reform
          without incurring his wrath.
            Once the ice was broken and the lines of conduct made clean,
          similar statements came thick and fast. The commander of the
          fortress of Tirana, Niman Bey, described how judicial decisions
     j    in his district were given in favor of those who offered the largest
     \J   payments to the judges, how cultivators were turned out of their
          lands so the tax farmers could substitute persons paying them
          bribes and increased taxes, how the bulk of the military positions
          in the empire were held by persons unable or unwilling to per¬
          form their duties, and how as a result the army was composed
          primarily of untrained and undisciplined rabble plucked from
          the streets in times of crisis. Niman Bey was followed by Hakki
          Efendi, former Director of the Imperial Treasury, who gave de¬
          tails on how nepotism and corruption had destroyed the once




                              The "New Order” of Selim III
efficient administrative and financial systems of the empire and       75
deprived the Treasury of the bulk of its tax revenues. Other offi¬
cials recited similar tales of abuse and incompetence, supple¬
menting in detail the grim picture drawn by their predecessors.
But speaker after speaker offered as remedy no more than the
elimination of the abuses and restoration of the institutions to
their original state and mode of operation.
  For two days the statements continued. After all the notables
who wished to had spoken,' the Sultan himself rose once again
and read a prepared statement in which he appealed to all his
subjects to do what they could to end the oppressions, injustices,
and inefficiencies which had been described. Asking those present
to draw up detailed written statements containing their analyses
of difficulties and proposals for reform, he promised to receive
and consider their proposals and to cut off the heads of anyone
who dared to betray state and religion by opposing them.
  The great Imperial Council held in mid-May 1789 was a public
proclamation of the Sultan’s determination to reform the empire.
It was followed by similar councils held at periodic intervals in
the Imperial palace and in the quarters of the Sheyh ul-Islam.
So long as the war went on, their deliberations resulted in little
positive action. But various efforts were made to remedy at least
the principal sources of popular discontent, manifested in in¬
creasingly violent uprisings during 1790 and 1791.


                       Sumptuary Laws

  The rise of prices and scarcity of food, the spread of nationalism
among minorities, the arrival of bad news from the war fronts,
and the flight of peasants from provincial misrule into the
overcrowded cities, made the urban population an increasingly
uncontrollable and volatile mass ready to vent its frustrations
at the slightest provocation. The most numerous and in many
ways most successful of the wartime reform measures were those
which were introduced to end the resulting social ferment, which
was disturbing order and security in the large cities of the empire.
These measures were restrictive, rather than palliative. All
members of the subject class resident in Istanbul, Galata, Eyiib,




                         Wartime Reforms
                                                        4'




76     and Edirne, were registered by officials of the census department
       in 1790 and again in 1792. Those who could not show evidence of
       regular employment were required to leave the cities at once and
       return to their village homes. Only persons who could demon¬
       strate long-standing urban domicile and employment or, in the
       absence of these, could produce a guarantor among established
       urban residents willing to pay for their housing and food were
       allowed to remain. Lodging houses in working-class quarters
       were closed so that vagrants and vagabonds would have no place
       to stay, and persons harboring them were subjected to severe
       penalties. Guards stationed at the gates leading into the cities
       were instructed to admit only those peasants who could dem¬
       onstrate pressing business and prove that, they planned to return
       to their homes in a short time. In many cases, peasants were
       required to leave their children as hostages at the city gates to
       guarantee their prompt return. By driving the peasants back to
       the land, Selim hoped to restore large areas to cultivation while
       at the same time relieving the cities of the worst problems of
       overpopulation.^
          These efforts were at least partially successful, but ferment
       remained common in the towns, and more direct measures
       finally were introduced in an effort to control it. The most impor¬
       tant of these restored the laws of previous centuries regulating
       the dress and conduct of individuals in the streets and other
       public places. In the multinational and multireligious Ottoman
       Empire, social order traditionally had been preserved by a system
     \J of compartmentalization in society, that is, the isolation and sepa¬
       ration of the various social, religious, and economic groups. The
       basic division between ruling Ottoman and subject raya* classes
        was supplemented by guild organizations and milled* com-


           ‘qn Ottoman Turkish re'dya, or "protected flock” of the Sultan. In Ottoman
       usage, this name was applied to all subjects of the Sultan, not only non-Muslims,
       but also all Muslims who were not members of the ruling class. See Gibb and
       Bowen, 1/2, pp. 252-3.
         ‘‘"^n traditional Ottoman usage, all subjects of the Sultan were divided into
       autonomous communities called millet, each led by its own religious leader.
       Each millet was governed according to its own laws and maintained its own
       systems of education, justice, social security and the like, all of which were outside
       the scope of the central government. See Gibb and Bowen, 1/2, pp. 219-226.




                                The "New Order” of Selim III
munities, each governed by its own leaders according to its own       77
laws and traditions. The place of each individual in Ottoman
society was determined by a combination of his class, institution,
millet, and position, and indicated by his dress and headgear.
These provided instant indications of his rights, privileges, and
duties and thus enabled everyone else to treat him properly and
avoid violating or infringing on them in any way. The clothing
regulations thus played an important part in maintaining the
social fabric of the community.'’
  Since by the end of the eighteenth century, the social order, and
the clothing regulations which went with it, had broken down
almost completely, Selim assumed that men attacked each other
on the streets, robbed each other’s houses, and violated the lives
and properties of others mainly because failure to observe the old
clothing regulations had made the status of individuals unclear.
Jewish and Christian merchants who had amassed huge fortunes
had begun to flaunt their wealth by wearing the more pres¬
tigeful satins and silks set aside by law and custom for members
of the ruling class. Members of the military corps wore the cloth¬
ing set aside for artisans and merchants, because they were more
artisans and merchants than they were soldiers. Since individ¬
uals no longer limited themselves to the clothing and headgear
prescribed for them, it was impossible to tell their rank and posi¬
tion merely by looking at them, and numerous disputes and
conflicts resulted. With this simple analysis, the solution was
obvious. Decrees were issued requiring all subjects to wear only
those garments, hats, and decorations to which they were en¬
titled by law. Heavy punishment was provided for violators,
and inspectors were sent out into the streets and markets to
check on compliance. Sultan Selim himself began to roam his
capital in disguise to uncover violators and turn them over to
his officials for punishments.®
  In the same way, decrees were issued ordering the suppession
of dissolute and sinful behavior among Muslims and non-Muslims
alike. The sale and use of spirits was prohibited although non-
Muslims were allowed to continue their use in the privacy of
their own homes. Taverns and coffeehouses were closed on the
not entirely unwarranted premise that they were centers of




                          Wartime Reforms
                                            I




78   misbehavior and stimulants of the mass actions which periodi¬
     cally engulfed the capital. These particular restrictions were
     the result of various factors which had exacerbated relations
     between Muslims and non-Muslims for several decades. The
     influx of non-Muslim merchants and soldiers from Europe into
     the empire, and the general relaxation of the old Ottoman urban
     codes during the last years of the eighteenth century, had led to a
     proliferation of public taverns, especially in Istanbul and Galata,
     and the relative ease with which Ispirits could be purchased in
     these places led an increasing number of Muslims to succumb to
     the temptation. Muslims who were not themselves seduced were
     increasingly irritated by the sight of practices which they be¬
     lieved to be sinful and to be leading their fellow believers into
     wrongdoing, and on various occasions their efforts to close or
     wreck the taverns and prevent the sale of spirits led to large-
     scale battles among members of different millets. Consequently,
     in the interest of social harmony and order, these particular
     irritants were prohibited, although the fact that these decrees
     were continually repeated throughout Selim’s reign indicates
     the government’s lack of success in enforcing them.^
       Administrative Reforms. Efforts also were made to allay popu¬
     lar discontent in town and country by reforming the judicial and
     provincial administrative systems. The state of the religious class
     had fallen to a new low in the eighteenth century. The ranks of
     the Ulema had been flooded with persons who were entirely igno¬
     rant of religious law and practices and who had managed to pur¬
     chase their positions or transfer their military or civilian salaries
     into Ulema pensions in order to avoid the service they were sup¬
     posed to perform in return. Such persons were able to appropriate
     the leading positions in the Ulema and use them for their per¬
     sonal profit. Through their efforts, admission to the class was
     given more and more to those who could pay the highest bribes,
     without consideration of qualifications. Standards of education
     inevitably declined as these men occupied most of the teaching
     positions and gave the degrees and certificates of accomplishment
     in return for bribes and fees rather than as the result of proper
     examinations. Persons appointed as judges in the provinces
     farmed their posts to the highest bidders, who made use of the




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
courts to recoup their purchase prices and make a profit by selling
justice to those who paid the most.
  Here, too, Selim’s sole object was to restore the religious class
to its previous state and to eliminate the abuses in its operations.
In December 1789, Hamidi zade Mustafa Efendi was appointed
Sheyh ul-Islam with the specific task of reforming the Ulema, and
with the support of the Sultan he moved to accomplish this task
as rapidly as possible. Inspectors were sent into the provinces to
see whether the holders of judicial and teaching posts were actu¬
ally performing their duties and performing them adequately.
Those found to be absent or incapable were dismissed and their
appointments nullified. In the schools, enrollment, promotion,
and graduation were made subject to a rigid system of examina¬
tions. Efforts were made to examine the teachers, with those
unable to pass being removed to less demanding work. The tra¬
ditional admonitions against bribery and corruption were issued
frequently, as they had been in the past.*^
  Selim’s provincial reforms were also very limited and very con¬
servative. During the last half of the eighteenth century, the
breakdown of government at the center had led to a similar dis¬
solution of its provincial branches and to the rise of virtually
independent provincial and local notables. As the central govern¬
ment had lost its ability to control its own officials and as their
tyranny and misrule consequently increased, notables (ayans)
arose among the local bandits, as well as some of the leading fam¬
ilies, first in response to the need of the people for some sort of
protection against official tyranny, and eventually because of the
government’s need for some local force to balance and play off
against its increasingly disobedient and disloyal agents. It was
also necessary for someone to organize and carry out the basic
functions of security, irrigation, and taxation, which the regular
officials had largely abandoned in their search for personal profit.
  Abd ul-Hamid I had tried to control these notables and enlist
them in the service of the state by adapting an old and forgotten
position especially for them, that of Shehir Kethildasi (City Stew¬
ard). This position was supposed to be filled by election among the
local inhabitants under the supervision of the Ottoman governor.
Its functions were essentially those which the notables had pre-




                          Wartime Reforms
viously assumed for themselves. The Shehir Kethudasi in each
town was supposed to organize cultivation, tax collection, and
security, and represent the local inhabitants in their relations
with the central government and its officials. Thus the notables
were brought under state control by putting their elections under
government supervision and making them subject to the laws and
regulations of the state. However, as was the case with so many
other efforts to remedy abuse, the new position became no more
than another level of misrule and tyfanny over the people. While
it might have solved the problem if the governors had been honest
and loyal men, the problem had in fact arisen because they were
not, and the new office did no more than give them another oppor¬
tunity to sell positions to the highest bidders, with the successful
purchasers overtaxing and tyrannizing to recoup their payments
and make a profit. At the same time, those notables who had risen
to power because of their military strength were able to ignore
the new officials as they previously had ignored the other Otto¬
man laws and officials. They continued to exercise their local
authority as before, hampered only by the need to deal with one
more Ottoman authority.^
  The war of 1789-1792 served only to increase the strength and
bargaining power of the notables as opposed to the governors and
the Shehir Kethudasi. Since the regular Ottoman standing army
was unable to supply sufficient numbers of trained men to fight
the Russians and Austrians, Selim III was absolutely dependent
for such troops on the notables. In return for military contribu¬
tions at critical times, Selim had to abandon his predecessors’
efforts to control the notables. In 1790, the position of Shehir
Kethudasi was abolished, and orders were issued for the Ottoman
governors to accept as notables anyone who was able to get the
approval of the local population, that is, those notables who had
the force to establish their local domination. In many cases, Selim
had to go even further than this and appoint the notables as gov¬
ernors to secure their military support. Under existing condi¬
tions, this was the only thing he could do. The notables were in
fact far more able to perform the duties of local administration
and provide military contingents than were the regular Ottoman
officials.*** However, the long-term consequences of this policy




                    The "New Order” of Selim III
were much more serious; they will he dealt with in the next                81
chapter.
  Selim’s financial measures during the war were less reforms
than they were desperate efforts to secure sufficient money for
needed war expenditures. The drop in cultivation and, conse¬
quently, in land tax revenues, the subjection of large areas of the
empire to independent notables, and the loss of numerous tax-
paying provinces to the enemy reduced the revenues of the Im¬
perial Treasury just at the time when the needs of war raised its
obligations enormously. Each winter’s preparations for spring
operations consisted mainly of frantic efforts on the part of the
Sultan and Grand Vezir to scrape together all the money they
could find to secure the supplies which the army needed and to
provide pay for the men, who would and did revolt whenever their
salaries fell into arrears, even during the campaigns. The large
sums of money paid to the Swedish government in return for its
alliance only added to the Treasury’s difficulties.
  Selim tried various expedients to raise the money he needed,
but they were useless or self-defeating. He tried to borrow from
Holland, but its merchants refused because they considered the
risk to be too great in view of the Ottoman military defeats. He
then turned to Spain, which refused on the grounds that it would
violate its neutral position by giving money to any belligerent, a
decision which was determined and reinforced by dynastic con¬
nections with the Hapsburgs of Vienna. In desperation, Selim
turned to his own vassals, the King of Fez and the Deys of Algiers
and Tunis, whose treasuries were bulging from the profits of
pirate raids against Ottoman and European ships alike, but he
received in response only evasions and excuses." These rebuffs
forced him to turn to the more traditional Ottoman solutions for       ^
financial difficulties. Coins were clipped and debased so the Treas-   ^
ury would not have to pay the face value of its debts. Decrees were
issued prohibiting the manufacture or use of implements made of
gold and silver, except for women’s ornaments and rings, and
requiring all subjects of the Sultan and members of the ruling
class to sell their gold and silver objects to the Imperial Mint .j
at fixed prices considerably below those of the free market. These
objects were then melted down and made into coins, but at




                          Wartime Reforms
82   weights and alloys far inferior to those established by law.'^
       Military Reforms. Finally, efforts'were made to restore some
     sort of order and discipline in the Janissary corps and the other
     elements of the permanent Ottoman military establishment. The
     state of these corps was indeed lamentable. In 1790, it was esti¬
     mated that of the 12,000 names registered in the Janissary rolls,
     only 2,000 could or would perform service when needed in cam¬
     paigns. Most of the corps members actually were women, child¬
     ren, artisans, and merchants, urttrained in the military arts,
     holding their memberships only for their revenues, and com¬
     pletely unable and unwilling to perform the military services
     supposedly required of them in return for their salaries. The con¬
     sequent dependence of the Porte on contributions of men sent by
     the provincial notables and vassals and on rabble dragged from
     the streets of the major cities produced a body of untrained and
     undisciplined soldiers, better able to ravage friend and foe alike
     than to combat the disciplined, well-armed, and well-trained
     troops of the enemy. In addition, few of the officers were trained in
     the military arts. Most of them held their positions only for the
     revenues they brought. Officers often kept the salary and ration
     monies of their troops and sold the ammunition and supplies sent
     them by the Grand Vezir, further contributing to the lack of dis¬
     cipline of their men.’^ Disorder, desertion, and revolt were normal
     conditions in the Ottoman army, no matter how great the danger
     it faced.
       As the war went on, Selim did make some efforts to remedy
     these conditions. He ordered the immediate retirement of old and
     infirm members of the corps so their positions could be filled by
     young recruits able to perform the tasks expected of them. Inspec¬
     tors were sent to the army to compare the rolls of each corps with
     the men who actually reported for duty, and orders were issued
     for the dismissal of all those who did not appear or who sent sub¬
     stitutes. The Janissaries were ordered to wear their uniforms at
     all times and to drill regularly in their established techniques.
     Efforts were made to revive the feudal cavalry corps sent from the
     provinces. Inspectors were sent to the fiefs, and orders were issued
     for all those too ill or old to perform their duties to be retired, and
     their fiefs given to persons able to provide military service in




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
return. All fief-holders who refused to perform their duties were      83
to he dismissed. Efforts were to be made to assemble as many
Spahis as possible and to send them to the Balkan front.Selim
admonished all the corps to observe their old laws and customs, to
expel persons who violated them or could not perform their du¬
ties, and to accept new weapons when they were necessary.^®
  Special attention was paid to the mortar (Humbaraji) and
mine-laying {Lagimji) corps. New regulations were drawn up to
provide them with modern organization and techniques, and a
few officers came from France and Sweden to train them and help
build new weapons dnd wagons. A new barracks was built for the
mortar corps at Saadabad in order to end its previous fragmen¬
tation among the infantry barracks at Tophane, Haskoy, and the
Imperial Arsenal.The engineering school at Haskoy was en¬
larged and efforts were made to expand its curriculum and stu¬
dent body. Plans were drawn up for an entirely new building, and
funds were provided for its construction although this finally was
postponed until the conclusion of the war.‘* Members of both corps
as well as students in the school were subjected to regular exam¬
inations, and those receiving poor grades were removed from the
corps or retired, according to their age and experience.


                Results of Wartime Reforms
  All these wartime efforts barely touched the manifestations of
an illness whose origins lay far deeper in the Ottoman body pol¬
itic, far beyond the power of such limited measures to affect or
change. The conditions leading to disruption of Ottoman society
had been developing since the seventeenth century, and the war¬
time efforts were no more than pinpricks which hardly touched
the manifestations, let alone the causes. Exemptions from the
sumptuary laws were easily purchased by all those able to pay.
The efforts to cut down Istanbul’s population were similarly un¬
successful. Those who returned to their villages found only local
maladministration and disorder, and this drove them to join
marauding bands and maintain themselves by pillaging their
more fortunate brethren who remained on the land. In the end
even more peasants fled to the cities despite all the efforts of the




                         Wartime Reforms
   Sultan to stop them. In Istanbul in particular thousands of unem¬
   ployed men and women were hidden from the police and census
   takers by sympathetic friends and relatives and by innkeepers
   who stood to lose all if the decrees were effectively applied. Selim’s
   financial measures, when combined with the inevitable results of
   depopulation of the countryside, loss of fertile lands to the enemy,
   and the need to divert existing resources to feed the army, led to
   rapid inflation and increasing shortages of food and supplies,
   which in turn added to the difficulties. These conditions were a
   legacy of the war which was to plague the Sultan long after it
   ended.
     In addition, Mustafa Efendi’s stern efforts to restore the courts
   and schools created so much opposition on the part of the Ulema
   and religious students that Selim was forced to remove him in
   March 1791 and replace him by a man much more to their liking,
   Yahya Tevfik Efendi, who had been banished by Abd ul-Hamid I
   because of corruption and nepotism.^® The effort to reform the
   Ulema created such an intense reaction that Selim did not dare
   to resume it even after peace was finally attained.
     The provincial reforms restored some sort of order because they
s/ / recognized the fact that the notables were autonomous and en-
 \tirely ended the efforts of the central government to regulate
   them. By depriving the central government of any effective
   means of controlling the notables in peacetime, however, the
   reforms sowed the seeds for complete provincial autonomy and
   even independence, especially once the notables’ fear of foreign
   attack was ended and the Ottoman state, whose survival was a
   necessary prerequisite for their own existence, was made secure.
     Nor were the wartime military reforms any more successful.
   The Janissary corps absolutely refused to accept the Sultan’s
   decrees.^’ While its members were no longer capable of fighting
   the armies of Europe on an equal basis, they still had enough
   power to impose their will at home by force if need be. Selim’s
   agents were simply murdered whenever they tried to find out
   which members of the corps were serving and which were not,
   which of the officers and men were capable of further service and
   which should be removed. Whenever the Treasury cut off the
   salaries of Janissary members who were not performing their




                       The "New Order” of Selim III
duties, the entire corps revolted, whether at home or on the bat¬      85
tlefield, and the Grand Vezir usually was forced to yield to their
demands as the result of the exigencies of war. Efforts to make
the Janissaries use new weapons or even to train with the old
ones were met in the same way. Selim’s efforts to reform the mor¬
tar and mine-laying corps were somewhat more successful, but
the difficulty of obtaining experts from abroad combined with the
opposition of the Janissaries to every move limited their progress.
Fewer than 1,000 men were Enrolled under their banners, and the
Janissaries’ refusal to serve with them forced the Grand Vezir
to leave them at home whenever campaigns were undertaken.
  The experiences of the war thus showed the Sultan quite
clearly the difficulties involved in trying to reform or even change
the older corps. The lesson was not lost on him.




                          Wartime Reforms
                    IX. The Reformers




                                      N




  Much more significant than Selim’s limited and often frustrated
  wartime reform efforts were the plans he was drawing up for far
  more extensive and fundamental peacetime reforms and the ef-
V" forts he was making to huild up a cadre of reformers to carry them
  out. From the day of his accession, he began to surround himself
  with men who thought as he did about what was wrong with the
  empire and how it could be saved, men whom he felt he could
  depend on to carry out his wishes in more propitious times, and
  whom he gradually placed in key government and army positions
  as they became vacant. Most of the members of this new elite had
  grown up with Selim as his slaves, companions, and friends while
  he was still a prince in the palace. Some of them were young men
  recruited after his accession from among apprentices and lower
  officials in the scribal and military institutions, whose intelli¬
  gence and goodwill seemed to qualify them to join in the reform
  effort which was to follow. A few of them were older men who long
  had served in the institutions of state but who had broken out of
  the bonds of the traditional Ottoman beliefs sufficiently to see the
  extent of change which was needed in the established order if it
  was to be saved. But no matter what their origin, they agreed on
I certain common ideals. They shared with the Sultan the revela¬
  tion that what had strengthened the West might also revive the
East if wisely applied. They dared to hope that in him they had       87
found a champion who would give them the means of making fun¬
damental reforms and who would support them in the face of
opposition.
  While the war went on, these reformers met together with each
other and with the Sultan; they debated, discussed, and planned.
In the years that followed, some of them held important military
and administrative positions. Others influenced events from be¬
hind the scenes and were Poticed neither by Ottoman nor by
foreign observers. But together they provided the real directing
force in the Ottoman government regardless of who was Grand
Vezir and what were the decisions of the Imperial Council. They
formed a "Kitchen cabinet” which met informally with the Sultan
to formulate laws and regulations which later were submitted for
more open consideration by the official councils of state. They
were the driving force and backbone of the "New Order.”
  Never numbering more than twenty at a single time, often
falling to half that number as its members were removed by death
and the vagaries of political life, the elite was a vague, shadowy
institution whose existence was known to only a few. The most
important of the reformers by far was Chelebi Mustafa Reshid
Efendi, the spiritual teacher of the Sultan.' Like most of his col¬
leagues, Mustafa Reshid came into the Ottoman system as a
slave of Selim and rose to power with him. Between 1793 and
1798 he served as director of the Nizam-i Jedid infantry and
artillery men in the use of new weapons and maneuvers (see page
129). After that time, he served as Director {Defterdar) of the
Imperial Treasury, but regardless of his official position, he al¬
ways remained the Sultan’s closest confidant and the power be¬
hind the throne in his reform efforts. Of all the cabinet members,
he was the most sympathetic to England, depending on the Brit¬
ish ambassador’s physician for books and advice and on the am¬
bassador himself for gifts of various kinds. He always advocated
the use of British advisers and accession to British desires in
Ottoman foreign and military policy.
  Only a short distance behind him in influence and power was
Kuchiik Hiiseyin Pasha, a man of Circassian origin who had en¬
tered the Imperial palace as Selim’s slave and so captured his




                           The Reformers
affections that he was allowed to marry Selim’s cousin Esma Sul¬
tan, a daughter of Abd ul-Hamid I, and to become Grand Admiral
of the fleet in place of the grand old hero and reformer, Gazi
Hasan Pasha. Despite his lack of naval training, he turned out to
be an excellent commander, an energetic reformer, and because of
his personal connections with the Sultan, an expert and powerful
politician within the councils of state, leading the more radical
reformers against those who wished to'study, examine, and con¬
ciliate.^                           V
  The third most active figure in the councils of the sultan was
Yusuf Agha, the Lieutenant of the Queen Mother. Born in Crete,
one of the four sons of a poor cobbler, he was sold at the age of
seven to the Janissary leader in Crete, Suleyman Agha, who
educated him as his own son. When Suleyman became chief of
the Janissary corps in Istanbul, Yusuf became his Seal-Bearer
{Muhilrdar), and when he rose to be Lieutenant of the Grand
Vezir, Yusuf went along to the Porte as his personal secretary.
Through the influence of his master, Yusuf later served in other
posts, finally rising to be director of the Imperial powder works at
Gallipoli and chief of the palace kitchens. It was while he was
serving in the latter post that he became acquainted with some
members of the harem, a connection which led to his appointment
as Lieutenant of Mihrishah Sultan, Selim’s mother, in 1789.^
Selim apparently was very fond of Yusuf because of some assist¬
ance he once had given to Selim’s sister Beyhan Sultan,^ and this
made him a very powerful member of the reforming elite until
the Queen Mother died in October 1805.^
  Yusuf Agha was not a visionary and reformer in the same
sense as were most of Selim’s other advisers; neither was he a
reactionary opponent of reform. He advocated caution so as not
to stir up the older corps, and the Sultan valued his counsel be¬
cause of his personal knowledge of the feelings and ideas of those
who directed the Janissaries and the Ulema. Through this in¬
fluence with the Sultan as well as his connection with the Queen
Mother, he became the leader of the party of harem inhabitants
and functionaries and army officers who had been in power before
Selim’s accession and who opposed those who rose to power with
him. So while not an opponent of reform, for political reasons he
opposed those who advocated reform most strongly and so ac-



                   The "New Order” of Selim III
quired the reputation of being the leader of the conservatives.        89
Despite the Sultan’s usual support for those whom Yusuf Agha
opposed, he did nothing to remove Yusuf or stifle his party be¬
cause he found it useful to play them off against the reformers,
the traditional means by which sultans divided and controlled
various political groups for their own purposes.® Throughout Se¬
lim’s reign, Yusuf Agha remained a powerful figure and a man
whose opinions and desires always had great weight.
  Mahmud Raif Efendi, son 6f Abd ul-Hamid I’s granary director,
was educated in the bureaus of the Sublime Porte and rose in
Selim’s early years'as the protege of the Reis ul-Kuttab, Mehmed
Rashid Efendi. In 1793 he was app)ointed chief scribe of the Porte’s
first ambassador to England, Yusuf Agah Efendi, and he remained
there for several years learning western geography, history, and
politics, as well as English and French. Between 1800 and 1805
he served as Reis ul-Kuttab, now the Sultan’s chief adviser on
foreign affairs and main contact with the foreign ambassadors
and technicians then swarming into Istanbul. His most impor¬
tant function, however, was unofficial. Far less of a power in the
councils than the three persons mentioned above, he was a leader
in the effort to spread knowledge of western technical advances
among the members of the Ottoman ruling class and to secure
their support, or at least acquiescence, in the Sultan’s efforts. By
translating western books into Turkish, by importing and using
western clothing and furniture, and by aping the manners and
customs of westerners living in the capital, he provided a most
important channel for transmitting western ways and ideas to
the Ottoman ruling class. He was always closest to the British,
and so imitated their ways that he was called Ingiliz Mahmud
Efendi, "Mahmud the Englishman,” by his contemporaries. He
finally was killed by the guards of one of the forts along the
Bosporus when he tried to clothe them in the new European uni¬
forms on the instructions of his master, the event which touched
off the revolt against Selim in May 1807.^
  Tataijik zade Abdullah Efendi, oldest of Selim’s major sup¬
porters, was born in 1730, the son of a member of the Ulema, and
was himself a judge in Jerusalem, Cairo, and Medina before Selim
came to the throne. He served Selim as judge of the Imperial army
during the campaigns of 1789 and twice as chief judge (Kadiasker)



                           The Reformers
90   of Rumelia, in 1789-90 and again in 1795. A firm advocate of
     reform in his own profession, he also became an expert on military
     matters and helped to direct the reorganization and moderniza¬
     tion of the Imperial cannon foundry as well as to instruct the
     soldiers of the artillery corps in the new ways until his death
     in 1797.»
       Ebubekir Ratib Efendi, son of a judge, was educated in the
     Treasury and became a close friend of young Prince Selim when
     assigned to train him in the scribal arts. During Abd ul-Hamid
     I’s later years, Ebubekir served as Selim’s personal scribe, and in
     fact composed the letters sent to Louis XVI and acted as his prin¬
     cipal adviser at the time. When Selim came to the throne, one of
     his first acts was to send Ebubekir as ambassador to Vienna to
     restore good relations with the Hapsburgs after the Peace of
     Sistova and to observe and report directly on the modem ways of
     Europe. On his return in May 1792, he presented a detailed re¬
     port on Austrian military, social, and governmental organization,
     which he had secured from personal observations and from con¬
     versations with various Austrians.® Ebubekir served as Reis
     ul-Kuttab between May 1795 and August 1796, and then as direc¬
     tor of provisions (Zahire Naziri) but he fell victim to the intrigues
     of his enemies and was executed by Imperial order in 1799.*®
       Ibrahim Nesim Efendi was the son of a former chief treasurer
     and one of Selim’s few close associates who did not enter the Otto¬
     man class as a slave. Called "gizli sitma” (meaning literally
     "itch” or "pruritus”) because of his merciless character and deter¬
     mination to push through reforms at all cost, he reorganized the
     Imperial Treasury and was also director of the shipyard of Istan¬
     bul. While he was an ardent reformer and promoter of Selim’s
     policies, he became a bitter political opponent of Mustafa Reshid
     and for that reason usually cooperated with the party led by
     Yusuf Agha.**
       Mehmed Rashid Efendi, son of a scribe in the offices of the
     Imperial Council, received his education as an apprentice in the
     Beylikji department* and rose through its ranks until he became

       *The main function of this department was the preparation and conservation of
     imperial orders and decrees. Gibb and Bowen, I/l, p. 121; Pakalin, I, 221. The
     Beylikji was under the supervision and control of the Reis ul-Kuttab.




                            The "New Order” of Selim III
its director in 1786. After 1787, he served as Reis ul-Kuttab three    91
times, in 1787-88, when he accompanied the Grand Vezir on his
successful campaign into the Banat, in 1792-1794, when he re¬
placed his bitter rival Abdullah Berri Efendi in that post, and
from early 1797 until his death in March 1798. In between these
terms, he also served for a time as director of the Imperial Arsenal
and energetically promoted reforms in the construction of ships
and the recruitment and training of sailors.
  Arabaji zade Ibrahim Efendi was the son of an Imam at
Khotzim. After his father’s death he was raised by the mother of
Arabaji Bashi Mehmed Agha, whose nickname (Arabaji Bashi)
he carried thereafter. Later he was sent to Istanbul and trained
in the offices of the Porte, rising until he became chief scribe
{Ser Halife) in 1793 and chief letter-writer (Mektubi) a year later.
After that he served several times as Lieutenant of the Grand
Vezir and secretary of Selim’s sister Beyhan Sultan, through
whom he gained a voice in the Sultan’s councils. Ibrahim Efendi
died less than a year later, while participating in a campaign
against Russia.*^
  While there were other men who planned or administered re¬
forms in one way or another, these were the leaders, the most
forceful and effective advocates of change, the men who deter¬
mined what would be done, and who drew up most of the legisla¬
tion pushed through the councils of state during Selim’s reign.



                       Reform Proposals
  Perhaps the most interesting and significant product of the
wartime period was a series of reform proposals written at Selim’s
request for presentation to the Imperial Council by his close
associates as well as others, twenty-one Ottomans and two Euro¬
peans in all. Of these reports, three came from members of the
Imperial Class, those who directed the overall operations of the
Ottoman system under the immediate supervision of the Sultan:
Koja Yusuf Pasha, then serving as Grand Vezir for a second time,
a man who had demonstrated unusual military ability and who
possessed considerable support among the Janissaries and the
other older military groups;^'* Mehmed Hakki Bey (later Pasha),




                           The Reformers
92   who was just rising as a leader of the Ottoman efforts against the
     bandits and rebels who arose in the Balkans during and after
     the war;^^ and Mustafa Reshid Efendi, then Lieutenant of the
     Grand Vezir as well as leader of the Sultan’s private reform coun¬
     cil.’® Five reports came from members of the religious class:
     Ahmed Esad Efendi, then chief judge of Anatolia and later a re¬
     forming Sheyh ul-Islam between 1803 and 1806;’^ Ashir Mustafa
     Efendi, then chief judge of Rumelia aird subsequently Sheyh ul-
     Islam between 1798 and 1800;’® 'Emin Mehmed Efendi, three
     times chief judge of Rumelia and one of the wealthiest men of his
     time;’® Hafiz Hayrullah Mehmed Efendi, later chief judge of
     Anatolia;^® and Tatarjik zade Abdullah Efendi, the author of the
     longest and most influential of the reports.^’
       By far the bulk of the reform proposals came from members of
     the Ottoman scribal class, however, those who at one time or
     another had served in the offices of the Grand Vezir, the Imperial
     Council, and the Treasury and were expert in the day-to-day
     operations of the Sultan’s administration: Abdullah Berri Efendi,
     Reis Efendi between 1789 and 1792 and chief Ottoman pleni¬
     potentiary at the congresses of Sistova and JassyMustafa
     Rasih Efendi, once a scribe in the rapid-fire rifle corps founded by
     Baron de Tott, and chief executive of the Sultan’s offices in the
     Imperial palace when he submitted his report, later ambassador
     to Russia in 1793-94;^® Mehmed Rashid Efendi, at this time chief
     of the Chavush corps (Chavush Bashi) an appointment which
     provided him with a position and revenues in Istanbul until a
     more important position could be made available for him;^^
     Sadullah Enveri Efendi, official chronicler in the Imperial army
     between 1788 and 1792 and a holder of a number of important
     Treasury posts;^® Halil Nuri Bey, his successor as official chroni¬
     cler until 1798;^® Sherif Mehmed Pasha, chief treasurer from
     October 1790 until April 1793;^^ Morah Osman Efendi, director
     of the Imperial Arsenal in 1792, subsequently chief treasurer,
     noted for his unusually penetrating knowledge of Ottoman flnan-
     cial affairs;^® Ibrahim Nesim Efendi, then chief accountant in the
     Treasury;^® Laleli Mustafa Efendi, who had retired after many
     years of service in the Treasury and was especially esteemed for
     his wisdom and experience;®® Ali Raik Efendi, once dismissed as




                        The "New Order” of Selim III
chief treasurer because of corruption, who was serving as chief                     93
Ruznameji* of the Treasury;^^ Mustafa lifet Efendi, then chief of
the palace kitchen;^^ Safi Efendi, at that time secretary of the
Imperial Council;^^ and Firdevsi Mehmed Emin Efendi, second
Ottoman plenipotentiary at Sistova and Jassy and now Tezkere-i
Evvel** in the Treasury.^^ The two foreign advisers who sub¬
mitted reform proposals were the well-known Armenian chief
dragoman of the Swedish Embassy in Istanbul, Mouradgea
d’Ohsson,^® and a French artillery officer named Bertrand, one
of the French officers who trained the Ottoman mortar corps.^®
There were others who submitted notes and small papers to the
Sultan on various subjects, but these were the only ones whose
reports were broad enough in scope and detailed enough in lan¬
guage and comprehension to merit full discussion in the Imperial
Council.
 The reports themselves are of extreme interest, not only for
what they describe of the Ottoman system but also for what they
reveal of the outlooks of their authors, the limitations imposed
by the Ottoman system on even the most liberal of its members,
the extent to which observation was affected by background and
tradition, and the individual’s position in the Ottoman system.®^
In areas touching their own positions and interests, the authors
of the reports were, not unexpectedly, vague and hesitant, except
for Tatarjik Abdullah, who presented a detailed statement on all
aspects of Ottoman society including the religious institution
with which he was intimately connected, and who included recom¬
mendations for basic changes, many of which were later adopted.®®
  Concerning his own class, he recommended that all members
be examined by a special board appointed by the Sultan and that
those found wanting be expelled at once and that bribery and
nepotism be replaced by strict examinations for all future admis¬
sions and promotions. The numbers of positions and salaries avail¬
able to members would be restored to their original limits to save


   * Keeper of the daily register (Ruzname) of Treasury revenues and expendi-
tures.
   ** Chief of the section in charge of issuing payment documents {tezkeres), en¬
titling the holders to certain privileges or to collect certain revenues from the
Treasury.




                                The Reformers
the Treasury a considerable amount of money and prevent the
use of the religious institution as a gigantic source of extra income
for members of the other institutions of the Ottoman ruling class.
Positions in the Ulema would be given only to persons able and
willing to perform the various tasks required of them in return
not as sinecures for members of the military and administrative
classes. Only honest and able persons would be appointed as
Sheyh ul-Islam and to the other chief religious positions, and they
would be given terms of five or ten years so that they would have
the time and freedom needed to investigate the situation, weed
out incompetents and restore the order of Ulema to its original
state without fear of imminent dismissal as the result of pres¬
sures imposed by those whose interests would be harmed. Even
this was not a recommendation for radical change. There was no
thought of changing or modernizing the type of education re¬
quired of the Ulema or the means by which they secured and held
their positions and exercised their authority, but at least it was a
proposal comparable to those in the military field to make the
institution in question operate as it was supposed to do.
  In analyzing the Sultanate and the Imperial Institution closely
attached to it, Tatarjik Abdullah laid the blame for many of the
troubles of the empire on the manner in which these institutions
had developed in the previous two centuries, and in particular to
the isolation which had increasingly separated the Sultan from
his people and the army. While the first Ottoman sultans had
lived with the men of their army and had been readily available
to their subjects, those who ruled following the conquest of Istan¬
bul had found themselves increasingly isolated by the compli¬
cated systems of protocol and ceremonial inherited from their
Byzantine predecessors. According to Abdullah, this deprived
the Sultan and his ministers of any sort of detailed knowledge of
actual conditions in the Empire which they ruled, and left them
at the mercy of reports submitted by subordinates, who thus
were in a position to shape them to suit their own interests and
to suppress or distort unfavorable information. Abdullah’s recom¬
mendation for change was simplicity itself. From time to time,
the Sultan and his ministers should leave their palaces and go
into the country to find out how their policies were operating,
what the needs of the provinces were, what the people were think-



                   The "New Order” of Selim III
ing, and what they wanted. This would indeed have been a radical         95
change for rulers whose only contact with the outside world in
the eighteenth century consisted of furtive incognito prowls
through the back alleys of Istanbul.
  In dealing with the bureaucracy, Abdullah Efendi attributed
most of the nepotism and corruption then existing in their ranks
to the heavy fees and bribes imposed on the higher officials by
the Sultan and those surrounding him in the palace, and on the
consequent charges of a sirhilar nature which they imposed on
their subordinates in the hierarchy in return for appointments
and reappointments every year. This procedure inevitably caused
positions to be given to those who could pay the most rather than
to the best qualified, and required able and incompetent officers
alike to treat their posts as means of recouping these fees and
securing profits for themselves rather than as opportunities for
service to subjects and state alike. Abdullah’s solution was to
abolish or considerably lower official appointment fees and to
eliminate the possibility of bribery by imposing systems of ratings
and examinations for all positions. In addition, he proposed that
the established one-year terms of office be replaced by terms of
three to five years, both to reduce opportunities for bribe-taking
each time an appointment was made, and to give officials in the
provinces and towns the security and wealth needed to carry out
their duties effectively and according to current needs, without
having to worry about sudden changes in their status and posi¬
tion as the result of politics and other factors in Istanbul. Finally,
he offered the interesting suggestion that wealthy men be pre¬
ferred for the higher positions of government since they would
have no reason either to steal from the subjects and the Sultan
or to require bribes from their subordinates. This would effec¬
tively end the vicious cycle of bribery and corruption in the bu¬
reaucratic ranks, which had to be suppressed if the government’s
efficiency was to be restored.
   The only other report received by the Sultan in these years with
breadth, detail, and impact at least approaching that of Tatarjik
Abdullah was the memorial submitted by Ebubekir Ratib Efendi
as the result of his observations while serving as Ottoman am¬
bassador to Vienna in 1792 and 1793. It was not one of the reform
memorials submitted to the Sultan following the Peace of Sis-



                            The Reformers
tova. It was rather an ambassadorial report submitted as the
result of a prior request, but it was of the same general nature
and organization, and although cloaked in the form of a descrip¬
tion of Austrian institutions and ways of doing things, it was sub¬
mitted about the same time and was considered along with the
regular memorials, thus meriting our consideration here.^®
  Ebubekir wrote in detail about what he had learned of the
military and civil organizations of the European states, their
methods of taxation, their military and financial organizations
and practices, their postal systems, roads, mines, agriculture,
industry, trade, banks, and the like. He praised the freedom left
to individuals to do what they wanted without restriction by the
state, an ideal which had little appeal to Ottoman and Turkish
reformers even into the twentieth century. He stressed the Euro¬
pean idea that government was instituted to look out for the wel¬
fare and security of individuals, a concept in stark contrast to the
traditional Ottoman idea that the sole purpose of government was
to extend, defend, and exploit the wealth of the empire for the
benefit of the ruling class.^*^

   In European states, the laws, organizations, principles and
   taxes laid down by their kings are observed properly by high
   and low persons. So long as their taxes are paid on time, no
   king or general or official can interfere with anyone because
   of it . . . Whatever cloth a man wants, he buys. He says what
   he wants, and there is no restriction on a person’s eating and
   drinking and going and coming, nor is there interference with
   his food and clothing and shops and earnings."*'


Turning his attention to the courts, Ebubekir Efendi remarked:


   They have no religious law. That is, out of the laws set down
   by Jesus, there remains only something of value in regard to
   marriage, and even this is not always administered according
   to Jesus in the case of kings. Religion is no longer observed in
   the matter of inheritance, so at present the European states
   are in such a form that they can no longer be called people of
   the book.^^




                      The "New Order” of Selim III
Novel ideas indeed, even for the relatively liberal mind of           97
Selim III, as Ebubekir was to find out seven years later when he
was executed by order of his master.
  To Ebubekir, a major problem which the Sultan had to face was
the immense size of the empire and the consequent difficulty
which the central government had in controlling the various
officials and provinces. To him, the essential bases of European
greatness were: (1) the organization and obedience of the soliders;
(2) the efficiency and fullness of the Treasury; (3) the honesty,
ability, and loyalty of the ministers and bureaucrats; (4) the ar¬
rangements for the tranquility, comfort, and protection of the-'
people; and (5) the ability of the European states to cooperate for
their mutual benefit and to make agreements for mutual assist¬
ance. These were the objects which the Sultan would have to keep
in mind in reforming his state if he wished to achieve the gran¬
deur and power of those he sought to imitate. Although he did not
say so explicitly, what Ebubekir meant here was that the Otto¬
man Empire would have to undergo the same sort of basic social
and economic changes which the states of Europe had experienced
if it wished to achieve their unity and strength. No longer could
government be instituted by and for the ruling class alone; the
interests, cooperation, and support of the mass of the people also
would have to be considered if the techniques and forms of organi¬
zation invented in Europe were to be successfully applied to the
Ottoman situation.
  Much of Ebubekir’s report paralleled the other memorials in
content and recommendations. He stated that the Ottoman sul¬
tans had been the first rulers in the world to establish military
laws in order to organize their armies, so that the imposition of
such laws in the nineteenth century would hardly be an imitation
of Europe. Ottoman cavalry and infantry had achieved greatness
because they had observed their laws and supplemented them
when necessary. It had been the failure of their successors to
observe them and change them according to the needs of the times
which had led to disintegration and disorganization. This was
the reason the military corps had become filled with men unable
to perform military duties adequately or to accept the discipline
required by battle and war. The old laws, modified according to




                           The Reformers
    the needs of the time, had to be restored. Able soldiers and officers
    had to be secured and given the weapons and training required
    to combat the modern armies of Europe. He described the tre¬
    mendous advances which Europeans had made in the military
^   arts—the light and powerful new cannons, rifles, and ships —and
    he strongly recommended that they be introduced into the Otto¬
    man Empire at the earliest opportunity. Every European state
    had created what he called a "New Order” {Nizam-i Jedid) to
    make use of these weapons, and th^ Sultan would have to do the
    same —here were the direct antecedents of the reforms and even
    the terminology which Selim was to adopt within a few years’
    time. To Ebubekir Ratib Efendi, it was self-evident that every
    state strengthened itself by accepting the^laws and organizations
    of war developed by states superior to it, by using its own knowl¬
    edge and energy to apply these to its own needs and ways of
    thought and life.
      Here were two powerful and analytical statements to the Sul¬
    tan, that of Tatarjik Abdullah representing the best which could
    be produced by traditional Ottoman training, and that of Ebube¬
    kir Ratib Efendi showing how much the traditional Ottoman out¬
    look could be affected by even a short period of direct contact with
    the new forms of political, economic, and military organization
    developed in the West. Both of them were debated at length in the
    councils of the Sultan, and the recommendations of both came to
    fruition often in the deluge of laws and decrees which followed.



                    Military Recommendations
      There were other reports, the vast majority of the memorials,
    which paralleled those of Tatarjik Abdullah and Ebubekir only in
    length, not in understanding and breadth. For the most part, they
    gave primary emphasis to military reform since the danger there
    was seen most clearly and, perhaps even more important, since
    none of the writers was directly involved, none of them were
    members of the military corps or had any direct connection with
    them. Since few of the writers had any military experience or
    knew an3dhing of the European techniques they wished to imi¬
    tate, many of their recommendations were of limited value.




                        The "New Order” of Selim III
There were certain things on which all the reports agreed: Mili¬            99
tary decay was due mainly to a failure to obey the traditional         \/
laws and customs of the individual corps. It could be remedied
by their restoration. Men should be chosen for ability alone. The
corps should be inspected to determine which members were able
and willing to serve and which held the positions only for the
revenues which they made possible, and the latter should be
dropped from the rolls as soon as possible to make room for youths
who could be molded into expert and brave soldiers from an early
age. The men had to be kept together in the barracks in order to
be subjected to iron discipline, and they should be prevented
from accepting outside employment and income. Preferably they
would be unmarried in order to be available at all times for
regular training and military service.
  According to almost all the writers a major component of the
decay of the military was the practice of selling the leading posi¬
tions of the corps to the highest bidders regardless of their mili¬
tary qualifications or experience although the question of whether
this was the cause or result of decay was not considered. The
result of this practice was said to be that even the few soldiers
who did remain in the army and did report for training and service
were poorly led. In addition their officers withheld all or most of
the wage money and supplies sent by the Treasury, even going so
far as to conceal vacancies resulting from illness or death and con¬
tinuing to collect for their own profit the salaries and wages for
vacant positions. The result was that only a small portion of the
names on the rolls of the corps assembled when they were called
on to fight, and those who did join the army were riotous, undisci¬
plined, liable to run in the face of danger, and dependent for their
subsistence on booty secured from friends and foes alike along the
road of march. An initial solution proposed for these conditions
by almost every writer was to appoint only able and honest officers
and abolish the fees required in return, although how this was to
be accomplished in the face of an Ottoman society that was almost
entirely built around such a system was not discussed. Once these
almost universally accepted diagnoses were set down, the writers
became much more varied in their proposals on how new and able
men and officers should be recruited, organized, and trained.




                           The Reformers
100     Moral! Osman and Tatarjik Abdullah felt that the decline of
      the Janissaries in particular was due to their resentment of the
      government’s increasing neglect of them in favor of the experi¬
      mental new rifle and cannon corps and their consequent loss of
      prestige in Ottoman society. If they were given the proper sup¬
      port, if they were given able oflicers exempted from all fees —in
      other words, if they were given their old prestige and esteem—
      they would automatically return to tlheir own discipline and
      ways, and they might even be willihg to accept the new weapons
      and methods. European experts could be summoned to train the
      Janissaries and the other old corps, but they would have to accept
      Islam since true believers could not be expected to accept the state¬
      ments and teachings of infldels. Such were the words of two of the
      most enlightened members of the Ottoman ruling class.
        Sherif Efendi and Mehmed Hakki Bey attributed many of the
      army’s difficulties to its annual winter dispersal. Many of the
      enemy gains had occurred after the Ottoman army had evacuated
      its advanced positions for winter quarters leaving behind only
      token guards. As solutions, both suggested the division of the
      entire army into summer and winter groups, each serving six
      months and spending the rest of the time training and working
      at other gainful occupations which would give them sufficient
      revenue to maintain and supply themselves at minimum cost to
      the state. Hakki Bey went on to suggest that the winter soldiers
      be drawn from the Janissary corps and feudal contingent of
      Rumelia and the summer soliders from the other standing corps
      and the Anatolian feudal contingents. In addition, each minister
      and official in the service of the Sultan, especially each provincial
      governor, would assume the burden of recruiting, training, and
      maintaining a certain number of disciplined soldiers in his own
      entourage, supplying them as recruits to the regular corps when¬
      ever vacancies occurred and also for special service with the
      Imperial Army in summer or winter, as they were needed. The
      cost of maintaining this reserve force would be met partly by the
      Imperial Treasury, partly by the officials involved, and partly by
      wealthy judges in the provinces. Thus for the first time in Otto¬
      man history, a kind of reserve army was proposed.
        Enveri, Salih zade, Nuri, and Rasih felt that the army’s dis-




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
orderliness in peace and war was due mainly to the enrollment                            101
of far more men than the corps’ old regulations permitted and to
the government’s insistence that they remain in service during
peacetime. To remedy this difficulty, Salih zade recommended
that vacancies be ignored until the corps were reduced to their
original numerical limits, and after that time they be filled only
by youths willing to serve all their lives. He felt that only a few
Janissaries and members of the other corps should be kept in
Istanbul and that these should be kept busy training in the use of
weapons and tactics. The remainder would be sent to serve with
the provincial governors and along the borders for terms of five
years, afterwards returning to the capital for further training.
Enveri, on the other hand, proposed a partial demobilization of
the corps in peacetime, with their members forming a kind of
ready reserve available for service at a moment’s notice. They
would return to their homes and keep up their skills by participat¬
ing in weekly training periods directed by the local governors
and district officers. At the same time they would serve periodi¬
cally in the governors’ suites to assist in the task of maintaining
peace and security.
  Ibrahim Efendi and Yusuf Pasha proposed a plan which would
revive the Deushirme recruiting system, which had manned the
Janissary corps during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.*
The best of the rayas would be recruited by periodic forays through
the Christian provinces. They would be trained as Ajemi Oglan
slaves in the suites of the provincial governors or in special camps
established for them in the vicinity of Istanbul, When they were
ready, they would be supplied to the regular corps as needed to
fill vacancies and thereafter would serve as regular salaried
soldiers except that they would be required to remain in service
all their active lives. The willingness of the subject Christians
to cooperate in such a plan was not discussed.
  Mustafa Iffet Efendi felt that the best way of securing a steady
flow of qualified recruits for the army was for the corps them-
   *In this system, Ottoman recruiting officers periodically went on tours {dev-
shirme) of the principal Christian provinces, chosing the best youths in each dis¬
trict for a lifetime of service to the Sultan. The recruits were brought to the courts
of the Sultan and other major Ottoman officials, where as "foreign youths”
{Ajemi Oglan) they were trained to be Ottomans.




                                  The Reformers
                                              i
                                        1


102   selves to maintain auxiliary groups of trainees, numbering 100 or
      200 youths each, who would serve a& apprentices and assistants
      to the regular soldiers while in training, and who would have first
      call at filling vacancies in the corps. In addition all ministers and
      officers assigned to duty in the provinces would have to take along
      with them between 100 and 1,000 trainees each. These trainees
      would be drilled and maintained at the expense of the ministers
      and officers concerned, and would form an additional pool of 10,000
      to 15,000 trained men ready to fill vacancies in the corps.
        Ashir Efendi felt that a major difficulty with the corps was that
      their officers came from their own ranks and essentially repre¬
      sented them against the central government. His solution was
      for the chief officers of the corps to be appointed from among the
      Sultan’s men in the inner palace service. Such men would be far
      more loyal to him, they would prevent any independent action on
      the part of the corps, and they would keep the soldiers disciplined
      and obedient. No mention was made of how such palace men with¬
      out military experience would be able to improve the military
      abilities of the corps in question.
        Sherif Efendi concentrated his attention on the salaried border
      guards stationed along the Danube, contending that their officers
      kept most of the salaries and supplies sent from the Porte and
      actually maintained only a very small number of men for border
      duty. His solution was the abolition of these corps, with half their
      salaries being eliminated and the other half given as bonuses to
      the officers and men serving on the Russian front. Hajji Ibrahim
      Efendi perceived the same weakness in the border organization;
      but instead of eliminating it, he suggested that it be reorganized
      and reformed, with the local judges supervising wage distribution
      so that only persons actually performing the service would be
      paid and vacancies would be uncovered and filled.
        Many of the reports devoted particular attention to the estab¬
      lished artillery corps —the cannon, cannon-wagon, rapid-fire,
      mortar and mine-laying corps — since it was they who showed the
      clearest inferiority to the Austrians and the Russians and also
      since the tradition of reform in this field had already been estab¬
      lished in previous reigns.
        Yusuf Pasha and Sherif Efendi felt that the older artillery




                           The "New Order” of Selim III
corps had been demoralized by the attention paid to the rapid-           103
fire artillery corps and that the latter were of little use and should
be abolished and replaced with a system in which each high offi¬
cial in Istanbul and the provinces would be given two new can¬
nons and one mortar and required to train and maintain-seven
men for each of them. In this way, a large number of trained
artillerymen would be available for service with the infantry
and cavalry corps whenever they were needed. Hayrullah Efendi
said that the rapid-fire artillery corps should be retained, but only
as a training and recruiting vehicle, with its men being assigned
to the regular artillery corps for service in battle.
  Tatarjik Abdullah, Rashid, and Rasih felt exactly the opposite.
Instead of abolishing the rapid-fire artillery corps or limiting
its importance, they wanted it to be expanded and sent into battle
as a unit rather than as a part of the older corps. While they felt
that efforts should certainly be made to reorganize and restore
the older artillery corps, to them only the rapid-fire corps offered a
possibility for immediate reform, hence they had to be expanded
and put under the direction of foreign officers as soon as possible.
To restore the cannon and cannon-wagon corps, Sherif Efendi pro¬
posed that since they were complementary they should be united
into a single service, given 200 of the most modern cannons
available, with 100 men assigned to each of the large divisions
and 50 to the small, forming a corps of about 15,000 men. With
the distinction between those who fired cannons and those who
moved them eliminated, improved efficiency and discipline would
be possible. Each group of men would be assigned to a specific
cannon which they would be in charge of maintaining, moving,
and firing in battle. If it was disabled, they would have to repair
it, or at least make sure that it did not fall into the hands of the
enemy. If a cannon was left behind in battle, the men attached to
it would be dismissed from service and held up to scorn and mock¬
ery by the people.
  Ibrahim Efendi proposed that an elite of 100 master cannoneers
be trained to act as supervisors for the older corps and that special
funds be provided to assist them in their efforts and to provide
them with the new cannons and equipment they needed. Both
Osman Efendi and Rasih Efendi felt that the best solution was to




                            The Reformers
104   cut the number of men in each artillery corps in half and double
      their salaries to assure that they got^the best possible men. Fifty
      men would be attached to each cannon and given special bonuses
      in return for their standing in turns by their cannons day and
      night, year after year, so that they would be prepared to take them
      into action at a moment’s notice. When they were fully trained,
      they would be sent in rotation to the various border forts, provin¬
      cial governors, and others needing their services, and would
      serve for periods from six months 46 a year before returning to
      Istanbul for further training.
        Yusuf Pasha reported that the mortar and mining corps were
      filled with ignorant persons entirely incapable of using the old
      weapons which they had, let alone the copiplicated new weapons
      being imported from Europe, and recommended that they be
      entirely replaced. He also proposed that the previous system by
      which the officers and more experienced men in these two corps
      were rewarded with fiefs instead of salaries be abolished since it
      enabled them to become independent of their officers and to leave
      their positions to sons or relatives regardless of ability. Salaries
      would have to be provided for all members of the two corps as the
      best means of keeping their members disciplined and orderly.
        The statements concerning the Ottoman cavalry corps were of
      a similar nature. Rashid Efendi reported that of the 30,000 men
      then on the rolls, only 2,000 to 3,000 horsemen could be counted
      on to report when summoned for battle although all of them
      managed to show up whenever wages were paid. The solutions
      proposed by almost every writer involved the usual combination
      of weeding out incompetents, raising salaries, and training the
      men in the use of modern rifles. Abdullah Efendi despaired en¬
      tirely of making the Spahis into an efficient and useful military
      force within the foreseeable future because of the tremendous
      stake of the vested interests in the status quo. He suggested that
      an entirely new, regular, salaried cavalry corps be formed from
      the irregular mounted men called Delis, who in the past had been
      recruited from the "bandit” bands of Rumelia for service during
      campaigns and had been supported entirely by the booty they
      were able to amass for themselves. He felt that this reorganiza¬
      tion would require so much energy and effort, however, that it




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
would have to be postponed until after the reorganization of the        105
Janissaries was completed, and that the new corps would there¬
fore have to be developed quickly to perform cavalry service in
the meantime. Ibrahim Efendi also realized the vast difficulties
involved in attempting to restore the cavalry and suggested that
the reforms be introduced very gradually, with experts spending
a number of years investigating conditions before any final pro¬
grams were put forward. Enveri and Firdevsi Efendi attributed
much of the cavalry’s difficulty to the addition of over 20,000 men
above the numerical limits established during the eighteenth
century and recommended a return to the original number as the
best way to restore the corps.
  Bertrand and d’Ohsson, the two foreign experts who submitted
reports, were much more hesitant to include details, apparently
because of a realization that they could easily disturb their own
position by angering one or another of the many factions within
the Imperial court. They did, however, at least risk such difficul¬
ties by referring to the problem with which they were most famil¬
iar—that of the foreign advisers in the Ottoman service —and
blamed much of their lack of success on betrayal by the Ottoman
officials with whom they came into contact, on their neglect in
carrying out the recommendations of their advisers, and on their
acceptance of many reform ideas without making any further ef¬
fort to carry them out, coordinate them, or consider their effect
on the state and army as a whole. Bertrand stated that most of
the Ottoman reformers seemed content just to issue orders, with¬
out bothering to see that they were properly executed. He sug¬
gested that they be required to inspect their commands regularly
to eliminate difficulties as they arose, instead of letting them drag
on interminably until the entire reform program was undermined.
D’Ohsson disapproved of the Sultan’s stress on the artillery corps
and emphasized that new weapons and techniques should be
given to all soldiers of the Porte, and in particular to the old
infantry and cavalry corps since they remained the bulk of the
standing army.
  Thus far we have been discussing primarily the manner in
which the various reports described conditions in the established
corps, with recommendations for their reform. This always was




                           The Reformers
                                            I
                                      1



106   their emphasis. Only a few of them actually suggested that new
      corps be formed to take over the infantry and artillery tasks pre¬
      viously performed by the Janissaries, Spahis, and others. Yusuf
      Pasha admitted that it would indeed be a long and difficult task to
      restore the old corps, but he felt that this would have to be done in
      the long run. For the moment, to protect the state until this re¬
      organization was completed, he suggested that a number of en¬
      tirely new groups be created to meet the immediate need. Ten to
      twelve thousand youths would be recruited in Anatolia and
      Rumelia and organized into new artillery and mortar corps, which
      would be given separate barracks and subjected to intensive
      discipline and training under the supervision of foreign officers.
      In addition, an even more novel and revolutionary proposal was
      made by Yusuf Pasha, the creation of provincial rifle militias
      manned by a type of universal conscription among the peasants.
      A new census would be carried out all over the empire, and on the
      basis of its findings, one man out of three in each house would be
      enrolled under the command of the provincial governors. They
      would remain in their own homes and perform their normal daily
      occupations but would be required to come to provincial or local
      training centers twice a week for intensive training in the use of
      European-style rifles under the direction of officers sent from
      Istanbul. Whenever the Ottoman Empire went to war, these
      militiamen would be brought into the regular army under the
      command of their governors in the same way that the latter
      served as commanders of the feudal contingents under the old
      Timar "fief” system. The men would be paid regular wages only
      while they were on active duty in the army. When they served
      in the reserve in their own homes, their compensation would be
      limited to tax exemptions for themselves and their families. The
      governors would be responsible for making sure that a sufficient
      number of trained and armed men were available at all times in
      the provincial militias to augment the army when needed; fur¬
      thermore they would be punished for neglect of this obligation
      and for any consequent efforts to fulfill their contributions at the
      last minute by conscripting untrained peasants as had been done
      in the past. Thus for the first time in Ottoman history, the
      Turkish peasants of Anatolia would be conscripted into the mili¬
      tary service of the empire on a large scale. A Turkish national



                          The "New Order” of Selim III
guard would be created to save the empire from its enemies.                        107
  Tatarjik Abdullah Efendi also suggested that new rifle and
cannon corps be established in the provinces in addition to those
already present in the capital, but he preferred that they be
placed under more direct central control than was suggested in
the plan presented by Yusuf Pasha. Expert officers would be
sent by the central government to the villages and towns, where
they would enroll young peasants and instruct them in the use
of the new weapons. Once trained, the peasants would be sta¬
tioned near their own homes, but under the command of these
central government officers rather than the governors, and
supported both by the Treasury of Istanbul and provincial
sources. He forecast that within eight years a force of about
42,000 men could be prepared in this way. They would be sum¬
moned to the Porte from time to time so the Sultan could inspect
them to see that they were being prepared properly. Thus there
would be a provincial militia formed of Turkish peasants, but
it would be as much an instrument of central control in the
provinces as it was a reserve for the national army. Abdullah
Efendi also proposed the novel plan of eliminating provincial
disorders by giving large bribes to provincial bandits and then
settling them on fiefs along the borders of the empire, thus
channeling their destructive energies directly into activities
which would benefit the state. This would restore provincial
security and give the frontiers the kind of permanent protection
they once received in olden times from the Gazi organization.*
  Mehmed Rashid Efendi, on the other hand, felt that general
conscription for a new corps of the type proposed by Yusuf Pasha
and Abdullah Efendi was not the answer to the empire’s military
problems. He pointed out that the Janissaries of old had achieved
spectacular success through a system of recruiting a small
number of candidates especially selected for their strength and
intelligence and subjecting them to intensive training in the
arts of government and war so that they truly merited their
place as the ruling and military elite of the empire. Such men
did not attack subjects along the road. They obeyed their officers,

  ‘‘'The name Gazi was traditionally applied in Islamic society to the "fighters
for the faith” against the Infidel. The Ottomans themselves arose as Gazis in
western Anatolia fighting against the Byzantines.




                                The Reformers
108   punished those of their fellows who violated their laws and
      customs, and were eager to accept new weapons and techniques
      in order to maintain their supremacy at home and abroad.
      Therefore the solution to the Ottoman problem was to collect
      youths in Anatolia and Rumelia through a kind of Devshirme
      system for Muslims and non-Muslims alike, to form them into
      a new elite corps especially to use the new weapons, just as the
      Janissaries had been established in the'fifteenth century to make
      use of the newly invented muskets and gunpowder, to provide
      them with European officers and instructors, food, clothing, sup¬
      plies, and modern weapons, and to make them into the new mili¬
      tary elite. In return, those enrolled in this new corps would agree
      to serve the empire all their lives, to reipain unmarried so they
      could live in their barracks at all times, and to pledge loyalty to
      the Sultan. To avoid trouble with the older corps, this new unit
      would be attached to the Janissaries at the start until it had
      20,000 to 30,000 well-trained rifle and cannon men, after which
      it could become fully independent since it would be in a position
      to beat olf any attacks that might be made. He recommended
      that the menbers of this corps be given salaries almost twice
      those paid to the members of the older corps at that time so the
      very best men would be attracted to and retained in the new
      corps but that this high salary be paid them only so long as they
      were able to train and participate in battles. If they became old
      and infirm, they would be retired at once on special pensions
      provided by the Treasury so their salaries in the corps could be
      used to pay newly enrolled younger men.
        Abdullah Berri Efendi felt that 20,000 new infantrymen and
      5,000 cavalrymen should be enrolled as soon as possible from
      among youths aged between ten and twenty-five, primarily
      Anatolian village boys who never had seen cities or towns or
      had any contact with corrupting influence of the older corps.
      Barracks and training grounds able to accommodate 5,000
      recruits at a time would be built, preferably far from Istanbul in
      order not to excite the populace or members of the old corps
      until they were ready. He   also   mentioned      the   possibility of
      recruiting strong and brave city youths if they were orphans
      and unemployed and desperate enough to give their whole lives




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
to the service of the Sultan. The recruits might include non-                         109
Muslims, but they would have to be circumcised and converted
to Islam during the course of their training. To train these re¬
cruits instructors would be imported from Europe, to each of
whom ten Ottoman officers would be assigned so that in a single
year 100 Europeans might be able to train 3,000 to 4,000 recruits.
Within three years there would then be 20,000 infantry and
5,000 cavalrymen trained in the new ways and ready to engage
in battle at a moment’s notice. After they were trained Abdullah
Berri wanted them to be isolated from the old corps, however
much the latter might be reformed, so they would not be diluted
or contaminated by the ideas and ways of the past. This could
best be accomplished by stationing the new corps along the
borders of the empire until they were needed by the army itself
  Mustafa Reshid’s proposals in this respect were very similar
to those of Abdullah Berri. He also attributed the military dis¬
asters of the past to the army’s winter dispersals and proposed
to remedy this difficulty by creating an entirely new army which
would serve in the winter alone. For it, 15,000 to 20,000 youths
aged about fifteen would be recruited and trained in places far
from the cities of the empire, with the well-known name Segban*
applied to them so they would not attract the suspicion of the
old corps while they were in training. At first a group of no more
than 400 recruits would be intensively trained in order to form
the vanguard of the new army and to lead and train its recruits
as it gradually expanded. To finance the new army a special
Irad-i Jedid treasury would be provided, separate and distinct
from the regular Imperial Treasury, with appropriate taxes
established to support it. With this winter army the empire could
once again compete with the powers of Europe, reconquer
Rumelia, save Muslims from oppression, suppress the provincial
rebels, and restore order and good rule in the dominions of the
Sultan. Here was a direct source of Selim’s reforms.


  *This term (also corrupted to Segmen) originally was applied to a subordinate
wing of the Janissary corps. Later it was applied to infantrymen in general, and
particularly to the provincial infantry corps under the command of the provincial
governors. See Gibb and Bowen, 1/2, pp. 59 and n., 60 and n., and notes on pp. 181,
191, 193, 315, and 321; also Pakalm, III, pp. 145-146.




                                 The Reformers
110               Non-Military Recommendations
                                            \


        On the subject of the administrative and religious institutions
      of government, the bulk of the reports were far more vague, far
      less specific, far less radical. Most of them admitted that unqual¬
      ified persons occupied positions of importance, that corruption
      and nepotism had increased, and that the government simply
      was not as efficient as it should be. But'inevitably their solutions
      followed the same pattern — follow^ the old laws, restore the old
      ways, eliminate the abuses. The abolition of fees and bribes
      required for appointments would end the necessity for officials
      to steal from the subjects and the state. The institution of a
      system of examinations for appointments and promotions would
      end nepotism and ensure that the best men were chosen. The
      production of decrees banning sin and crime, and suppressing
      wrongdoing and evil, would automatically restore the empire to
      the state of the past.
        Perhaps it is not fair to judge Selim’s advisers on the basis of
      their proposals. These were areas which had not been touched in
      past reforms, problems which had been discussed only briefly in
      the councils of state. Besides they were areas in which the writers
      of the reports had a great deal to lose if the abuses which they
      described were remedied. How much safer it was for them to con¬
      centrate their attacks on their opponents in the Ottoman system —
      the officers and soldiers of the military corps —where patterns for
      criticism and reform had already been established and where the
      writers knew how far they could go without incurring Selim’s
      wrath. It is mainly on the basis of the military recommendations,
      therefore that this series of reports must be judged. Here the
      writers were willing to make basic criticisms and suggest impor¬
      tant changes although most of their reports did no more than
      recommend the same sort of restoration which they wanted for
      the administrative and religious fields of Ottoman society. In
      proposing the establishment of new corps to make use of modern
      weapons and techniques they were going no further than Meh-
      med II had done when he expanded the Janissary corps, making it
      the greatest military unit of the age by its use of new muskets and
      gunpowder only recently imported from abroad. Nowhere was




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
there any proposal for the destruction of the older corps, although   HI
a few of the reports did come close enough to this by recommend¬
ing that the new corps be kept hidden until they became strong
enough to deal with any opposition, presumably that of the older
corps.
  Many of the writers used the reports to advance their own
interests and to secure the favor of the Sultan in some way. Some
used the occasion to try to discredit the reforms and, covertly,
even the Sultan, with the people as a whole. Nevertheless if
even the limited reforms that were proposed had been carried out,
something of value might well have been accomplished in a state
which was rapidly falling apart.




                          The Reformers
         Chapter X. Military Reforms




                                   \




As soon as the Peace of Jassy relieved the Ottoman Empire of
the immediate pressures of war, Selim III and his followers were
able to proceed to the even more difficult task of introducing some
of the changes which were envisaged in the reports and plans.
During the remaining years of Selim’s reign, while the empire
teetered precariously on the brink of involvement in the wars
resulting from the French Revolution, an unprecedented number
of laws and regulations were issued. While all aspects of Ottoman
life were in some way affected, the emphasis was laid on the mili¬
tary, for it was there that the war had made decay most apparent,
the danger most immediate, and the cure most evident. It seemed
to the Sultan and to most of his supporters that if only the army
and navy could be restored, the other institutions of the empire
would remain relatively untouched, and could restore themselves
without outside pressure or assistance. As a result, the primary
efforts of Selim’s reign went into restoring the feudal cavalry,
the Janissaries and various other infantry corps, and the groups
associated with artillery.



                    General Regulations
  Military decrees came with a rush in the two years which
followed the Peace of Jassy. ^ Their analyses of the faults of the
old military institutions invariably paralleled those of the             113
"memorials to the Sultan” on which they were based. The solu¬
tions ordered in each law for each corps were almost identical,
with only minor variations imposed by the nature of the services
to which they were being applied. To each corps a supervisor
(Nazir) was appointed from among the men of the Imperial
Council, those with the greatest political influence of the time,
so that the corps would have adequate representation when their
interests were under discussion. Each supervisor was directed
to manage the administrative and financial activities of his corps
so that the commander (Agha), formerly the sole authority,
would be free to concentrate on his military duties —the re¬
cruitment, training, and leadership of the corps in peace and war.
Each corps was to be administered jointly by these two. Orders
could not be sent to the men, appeals for new laws and revenues
could not be directed to the Porte, and salaries and bonuses could
not be paid without the participation and consent of both.
  The current commanders and other officers were examined by
special agents sent from the Porte, and those found deficient
in ability or honesty were replaced by men fully trained in the
particular arts of their corps, especially those who served in one
of the units trained by European advisers in the time of Selim’s
predecessor. The terms of the commanders and the other officers
were set at three years, and they were supposed to be appointed
without any fees or bribes but only according to their ability.
The corps were divided into regiments (orta) and these into
squads (bdliik) of various sizes according to the nature of the
service in question. In the artillery corps, the squads were at¬
tached directly to the cannons or mortars, the size and require¬
ments of which determined the exact number of men in each.
The operations of each regiment were directed by a colonel
(Chorbaji) assisted by a steward (Odabashi). Each squad was
commanded by a captain (Bdliik Bashi) assisted by a sergeant
(Chavush) and other subordinates. All official positions were
arranged in a hierarchy; and whenever one of them became
vacant, it was filled by the officer holding the position immedi¬
ately below it, with everyone else moving up one rank, the vacan¬
cies at the bottom of the offiicers’ corps being filled by the highest
ranking noncommissioned officers in the division.



                           Military Reforms
                                            i




114     Standard regulations were drawn up for the regular soldiers
      in each corps. Those already enrolled were subjected to immediate
      examination. Men who refused to report or were found incapable
      were dismissed on the spot although special pensions were pro¬
      vided for those who had performed honorably in the past. Enroll¬
      ment was limited to unmarried youths under twenty-five. Only
      officers above the rank of colonel were allowed to be married.
      Men who married after enlistment were not allowed to rise above
                                                A


      the rank of steward. In the mortar torps, marriage was prohibited
      entirely for officers and men alike. Common soldiers already in
      the corps who were not trained up to the new standards were
      given various periods of time, ranging from one to two years,
      to get the training they needed, and it was only after that time
      that they were finally dismissed if they still proved to be deficient.
      The apprentices were usually children of officers and soldiers,
      but, occasionally, outsiders who performed exceptionally well
      as irregulars in battle were also appointed. They were supposed
      to assist the regular members in peace and war, care for their
      equipment and animals, and the like. At the same time, they
      learned the arts of war so that when vacancies occurred they
      could be filled by these trained and experienced replacements.
      Children were no longer allowed to inherit directly the positions
      and revenues left by their fathers but were given a better than
      even chance of entering their fathers’ corps if they had the
      ability to pass through this apprentice stage. Promotion within
      each regiment and squad went according to a strict hierarchical
      system which was arranged in the same way as that of the
      officers. If the colonel died, he was replaced by the steward of the
      regiment, with everyone else moving up one notch, the highest-
      ranked common soldier being appointed as sergeant to fill the
      lowest officer’s post in the squad. Where there were several
      candidates of equal ability, examinations were supposed to be
      held to determine the best one, but preference was given to
      children of current or former members.
        Barracks were provided for each corps in Istanbul, and where
      they already existed, they were enlarged and modernized. Train¬
      ing grounds were also set aside in the vicinity of each barracks,
      r id where there was no room, private homes and shops were torn




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
down to provide it. Members of the army practiced with weapons        115
five days a week, with Tuesday and Friday usually being left for
rest and relaxation. Some of the corps were too large for all their
members to practice at the same time, so they came in rotation,
which permitted each group to get to the training grounds at .least
two or three days a week. Failure to appear was grounds for
severe punishment up to and including dismissal from the corps
for both officers and common soldiers.
  In addition to his salary,'each officer and enlisted man was
given daily rations of bread, meat and condiments. Officers were
given far more than what they needed for their personal use so
they could feed and maintain their private servants and others
in their personal employ. Salaries and wages were usually dis¬
tributed quarterly in the Imperial Council of Istanbul to the
scribes of the corps, in the presence of their supervisors and
commanders, and they in turn distributed them to the officers
and soldiers in the barracks. Members were required to collect
salaries, wages, and rations in person, so that they could not turn
their positions over to agents or others as was the practice in the
past. If the men whose names were on the rolls did not appear,
the scribes were supposed to keep their money for a certain
length of time, usually between six months and a year. If the man
in question appeared at the barracks during that time, he was
entitled to receive his money only if he was able to prove that his
absence was due to illness or assignment to a distant post, or
some other legitimate cause.
  The men of each corps were admonished to go on expeditions
whenever required and never to abandon their weapons so that
they could fall into the hands of the enemy. If such a thing
happened and the men survived, their names were stricken
from the rolls and they were subjected to severe punishments.
Civil and religious judges and policemen had no jurisdiction
over corps members —they had to turn such military prisoners
over to the corps authorities. In return for this autonomy, the
corps were required to make sure that their members were
punished for such violations, and in fact punishments meted out
by the corps in such cases usually were much more severe than
those set by nonmilitary authorities for similar crimes.




                          Military Reforms
                                                     i



116      The old practices by which officers failed to report vacancies,
      and collected these salaries for their own profit, were strictly
      prohibited, and investigators were constantly sent out to uncover
      violators     and inflict punishments.             Officers were specifically
      forbidden to collect the salaries or wages belonging to any indi¬
      vidual in a position in the corps other than their own, and imme¬
      diate dismissal was the punishment for any violation of this
      regulation.                                        '
         Retirement on pension (vazife\ was allowed only to active
      soldiers and officers who had served honorably and had to retire
      because of old age or infirmity, in which case the pension usually
      equaled one half of the individual’s active salary at the time of
      his retirement; if retirement was because of wounds or other in¬
      juries received in battle, he was entitled to a pension equaling the
      full amount of his active salary or even more in certain cases. In
      the mortar corps, however, the pensions were doubled, with a man
      retiring because of old age or illness receiving his full salary as
      pension, and a man retiring because of service disability receiv¬
      ing double his salary. Individuals in all corps were given bonuses
      in addition to their regular salaries and wages* in return for acts
      of heroism in battle, special services to the state, and the like,
      with special bonuses called ihbariye (information fees) provided
      for those who reported violations of any of the military regula¬
      tions.^
         These rules were repeated in the regulations decreed for each
      corps during Selim’s reign. They were general standards which
      the Porte applied to all the military units regardless of their
      specialties. In addition there were regulations which varied sub¬
      stantially according to the nature, function and past organization
      of each corps.


            Reform Regulations in Corps of the Old Army
        In the case of the Spahi cavalry corps the reform efforts,^
      which were applied mainly to the fiefs which supported them,

        *In Ottoman financial usage, a distinction was made between the "annual
      salaries,” called Sdliydne, paid to the principal officers of state, and the "wages,”
      called Mevdjib, given to lesser officials as well as to members of the salaried
      military corps. Regardless of the name, both categories usually were paid on a
      monthly basis.




                              The "New Order” of Selim III
were based primarily on the proposals submitted by Tatarjik            117
Abdullah Efendi.'* The Alay Bey (Commander) and other officers
of each feudal district (sanjak) drew up new registers of all the
the fiefs under their supervision together with the names and
descriptions of the individuals to whom they were assigned.
They then traveled around their districts to make sure that the
nominal fief holders were permanently residing on them and per¬
forming the required agricultural and administrative duties and
that they were persons who were able and willing to supply mili¬
tary service to the army when required. In addition inspectors
were sent from the Porte every three years to make sure that fief-
holders and officers alike were performing their duties and that
the commanders were really eliminating all those who violated
the regulations. If the fief-holders were not present on their fiefs
when the inspectors came or if they did not respond to calls for
their military service, they were supposed to be dismissed at
once, but the frequency with which this regulation was repeated
during Selim’s reign seems to indicate the difficulty which the
government had in enforcing it.^
  A pool of apprentices had long existed to assist the feudatories
and provide trained replacements for them when needed, but by
Selim’s time it had become little more than a catch-all for child¬
ren and relatives of the fief-holders to provide them with addi¬
tional revenue without requiring any service in return. An effort
was therefore made to revive and reorganize the apprentice sys¬
tem. The number of apprentices in each district was limited to
10 per cent of its active fief-holders, and it was stipulated that
only these apprentices could replace the feudatories when the
fiefs became vacant. Inheritance was allowed here much more
than in the salaried infantry corps. Fiefs were not supposed to be
declared vacant (and thus available for an apprentice) if the fief-
holder in question died honorably in active service and left heirs
capable of taking over his position at once. If the feudatory died
of natural causes, his heirs could not inherit his position. If he
left sons who were not of age, they could not inherit his fief, but
they were allowed to join the corps of apprentices ahead of other
applicants when they came of age.
  One of the principal causes of Ottoman failure in the war with
Austria and Russia was the insistence on the part of the feudal



                          Military Reforms
118   contingents that they be allowed to return home to administer
      their fiefs during the winter months.'Under the traditional feudal
      system, it was, indeed, necessary for them at some point to collect
      the revenues they needed to maintain themselves and their suites
      in the Imperial army. As a result of this practice, much territory
      taken by successful military action against the enemy during the
      summer was lost without a fight during the winter months.
      Under the new reform policy, Selim tried to satisfy the needs of
      the feudal system without disrupting the army by decreeing that
      the feudatories no longer had the absolute right to return to their
      fiefs during the winter months; it was now to be only a privilege
      granted them by the Sultan at his pleasure. Every ten feudatories
      in the army holding lands in the same ,or neighboring districts
      were allowed to get together and choose one of their number to go
      home for a time to administer his own lands and the lands of the
      others, who continued to serve in the army.
        Special efforts were also made to secure capable and honest
      men as feudal officers. District Commanders {Alay Bey) were
      chosen for three-year terms by vote of the fief-holders in each
      district. Local and national officials were prohibited from inter¬
      fering in these elections or from collecting fees or bribes in return
      for confirming their results. To make certain that each fief pro¬
      vided revenues sufficient to support the armed contingents which
      its holder was supposed to send to the army, Selim ordered that
      fiefs whose annual revenues were less than 500 piasters be joined
      to others of the same size. Fiefs over that amount could not be
      included in such unions, so as to prevent the establishment of
      unusually large fiefs whose revenues would give their holders
      dominant power in their districts. Appointments to vacant fiefs
      were to be made only from among the apprentices of their dis¬
      tricts by the district commanders. Officials in Istanbul and pro¬
      vincial governors were specifically enjoined from attempting to
      secure the appointments for their own favorites or relatives.
        Efforts were also made to curb the practice of giving military
      fiefs to persons serving the government in Istanbul to provide
      them with revenues in addition to their salaries without requir¬
      ing them to perform the military services for which the fiefs in
      question were originally set aside. This practice had deprived the




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
state of a great deal of needed military service and at the same      119
time had made the officials in question much more independent of
the Sultan and the Grand Vezir than they would have been if
they were dependent for their maintenance on Treasury salaries
alone. About five hundred fiefs held in this way were abolished,
and only a small number was set aside to support certain palace
and scribal officials who were not given regular salaries in return
for their work. Thus an effort was made to restore the feudal sys¬
tem to the state in which it 'had operated so successfully in pre¬
vious centuries.
  Turning to the Janissary corps, the Sultan hoped that a similar
process of inspecting the currently enrolled members would re¬
duce the corps from the 50,000 men currently enrolled to less than
half that number, and that this would automatically increase the
efficiency and ability of those remaining in the corps. The pro¬
vincial governors were ordered to train men in their own entou¬
rages to provide pools of experienced replacements when needed.
Sons of current or former members were allowed to enter the
corps in preference to outsiders, but only if they were willing to
accept its duty and discipline and to devote their entire lives to
its service.*^
   Orders were also issued for the provision of new European-type
rifies and ammunition to the Janissary corps as soon as possible,
and it was hoped that they would be entirely armed with the new
equipment by the end of 1794. Each regiment was given eight
trained riflemen and eight assistants to teach the men to use the
new weapons and to lead them in campaigns.^
  Thus the government had a dual purpose —to restore the Janis¬
saries’ traditional organization while at the same time getting
them to accept new rifles and tactics. The Sultan tried various
devices to conciliate both the Spahis and the Janissaries so they
would be willing to accept the new ways. Salaries and wages were
paid on time and in full for the first time in over half a century
although efforts to make up the more than four years of arrears
which had accumulated were largely unsuccessful.® The Janis¬
sary barracks in Istanbul were rebuilt and enlarged. Various tax
farms were turned over to key officers of the corps, virtually as
bribes for their acquiescence.*^ Decrees were repeatedly issued




                          Military Reforms
                                           i

120   assuring the corps that the Sultan had no intention of violating
      their traditional rights and immunities and re-emphasizing their
      position as the most favored and important of the soldiers defend¬
      ing the Porte.'” The Sultan even went so far as to pay them the
      "accession tax” (julus bahshishi), traditionally delivered by each
      new sultan to the principal military corps but discarded by Abd
      ul-Hamid I." But all these efforts were to little avail.
        It is not known whether Selim and those around him actually
      believed they could reform the Spahis 'and Janissaries by these
      methods, but it is known that all efforts made to enforce these reg¬
      ulations were vigorously and violently opposed. The inspectors
      sent to examine the provincial fiefs had to rely on information
      supplied by the local feudal officers and men, who managed to
      conceal anything which it was not to their advantage to reveal.
      While some fiefs were seized and turned over to the Irad-i Jedid
      treasury, the vast majority of them remained in the hands of their
      previous owners, few of whom performed the military duties
      expected in return. For all practical purposes, the feudal Spahi
      cavalry did not exist as a fighting force during Selim’s reign. The
      cavalry forces used in his army came from a corps of about 10,000
      newly hired salaried Spahis maintained by the Imperial Treasury
      and by contributions of provincial notables in times of emer¬
      gency.'- Efforts to deprive Ottoman officials of fiefs held for in¬
      come alone were effectively counteracted by bribery and mutual
      cooperation.
        Nor were the Janissaries any more cooperative. They rioted in
      the streets whenever any effort was made to give them new uni¬
      forms or weapons or to provide them with instructors trained in
      the new ways. Each effort made to reduce the size of the corps by
      dismissing inactive members who were artisans or merchants
      was successfully opposed, and the number of men in the corps
      actually increased from 43,402 in 1776'” to 54,458 in 1794,'^
      55,256 in 1800,'^ 98,539 in 1806,'” and 109,791 in 1809,'^ thus
      becoming a heavy burden on the Treasury. Yet when they were
      called on to attack the independent Balkan notables and when
      they moved against the French invasion of Egypt between 1798
      and 1802, their fighting qualities proved to be just about as bad
      as they had been before 1789.'”




                         The "New Order” of Selim III-
  The Sultan’s efforts to apply similar reforms to the established     121
artillery and mortar corps were much more successful, perhaps
because they had been anticipated by similar attempts during the
two preceding decades and because these corps were less closely
tied to the interests of the Ottoman ruling class than were the
infantry and cavalry corps. In the fifteenth and sixteenth cen¬
turies, Ottoman artillery had been the most advanced in Europe.
The Ottoman cannoneers had made vital contributions to the
conquest of Istanbul and to Selim Fs successful sweep through the
Arab world. During subsequent centuries, however, the same ele¬
ments of decay which had sapped the other branches of Ottoman
society also had made the artillery corps only caricatures of their
former selves. In 1776, there were 3,258 men enrolled in the can¬
non corps and 1,482 men in its auxiliary, the cannon-wagon corps,
but only 500 of these actually reported for duty in the campaigns
against Russia during the same year.^*^ Most of the corps member¬
ships were held by Istanbul investors and officials as income-
producing property, and only a few were left to pay for artillery¬
men actually serving in the army. In addition, its equipment was
no longer equal to that used in Europe. The Ottomans remained
attached to the old Balyemez and Shahi cannons long after they
were completely outmoded by new developments in ballistics in
Europe. And even these weapons were often unusable as a result
of graft and corruption in the Imperial Cannon Foundry and Pow¬
der Works.
  Under Abd ul-Hamid I, the new-style artillery corps trained by
Baron de Tott had been increased in size from 500 to 2,500 men,
and a foundry established for them under the direction of a Scotch
renegade named Campbell, called "Ingiliz Mustafa by the Otto¬
mans. In 1783 also a French officer named Lafitte had begun a
military engineering school to produce officers for the corps, and
a rapid-fire rifle and light artillery corps was also created.^® All
of these reforms were introduced and directed by the Grand Vezir
Halil Hamid Pasha, but they had only begun when Janissary
opposition led to his deposition and execution in late 1788.^* In
the meantime the older corps, which continued to perform most of
the service of this kind in the army, had been left untouched and
unreformed.




                          Military Reforms
                                     1


122     Starting in the spring of 1793, Selim moved to change this situ¬
      ation by reforming the artillery corps, the foundry, and the
      powder works. The first artillery unit to feel the effect of the new
      program was the cannon corps, for which a new code was promul¬
      gated on March 1, 1793.^“ The Sultan’s urgent desire to revive
      the corps was demonstrated by the appointment as its supervisor
      of his close friend, Mustafa Reshid Pasha, with instructions to
      eliminate all opposition and reform the corps as soon as possible.
      The barracks and training grounds of the corps were enlarged
      and modernized.The inefficiency and duplication of effort re¬
      sulting from the existence of two independent groups concerned
      with artillery were ended by uniting their direction, with the
      supervisor of the cannon corps being ,also appointed as com¬
      mander of the foundry. The supervisor was in charge of all admin¬
      istrative and financial affairs of the two corps including the acqui¬
      sition of equipment and supplies, while each corps continued to
      have its own commander to deal with the more technical prob¬
      lems of training and leading the cannoneers and manufacturing
      the cannon and powder which they needed.
        To assist the supervisor and the commanders in using the new
      weapons, European artillery officers were assigned, the most in¬
      fluential of whom were the French officers Cuny and Aubert, who
      had served Abd ul-Hamid I in a similar capacity before they were
      withdrawn by Louis XVI in 1788.24 Most of the soldiers serving in
      the corps were dismissed, and new ones were enrolled, mainly
      from the province of Bosnia.^^ Each regiment was given 10 can¬
      nons, of which 4 normally were the new rapid-fire (Surat) can¬
      nons, 2 were the smaller Abus cannons and 4 were the older
      Balyemez and Shahi, making a total of 250 cannons in all. Ten
      men were assigned to each cannon, forming a squad.^®
        Expansion of the corps went ahead rapidly, and by the end of
      1796 there were 2,875 well-trained cannoneers stationed at the
      Tophane, organized in fifteen companies of 115 officers and men
      each along with an additional company of 115 men stationed at
      Levend Chiftlik to assist the new Nizam-i Jedid army. In 1806,
      it had 4,910 men, who were reputed to be by far the ablest fighting
      men among the old established corps.^^
        A month after the basic artillery law was issued on April 19,




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
1793, the same sort of reform was extended to the allied cannon-       123
wagon corps, which cared for the transport of the cannons of the
Topji corps and for the maintenance of the animals and wagons
provided for this task hy the state.^® Both by origin and function,
this corps was auxiliary and subordinate to the cannon corps, but
traditionally it maintained an independent organization with
separate regulations and officers. Now the position of cannon-
wagon supervisor was joined to that of cannon corps supervisor,
thus uniting the administrative and financial operations of the
two groups. The selection and promotion of officers and men and
the supervision and command of their training and service in
war was left to the individual commanders of the two corps as
before. The cannon-wagon corps originally was given a comple¬
ment of six hundred men and officers organized into five regiments,
but it expanded almost continuously to keep pace with the in¬
creasing needs of the cannon corps: 759 men and officers in 1793,
902 in 1803, and 2,129 in 1806.^** Strenuous efforts also were made
to attract the ablest artisans to serve the corps. Special bonuses
were provided in addition to their regular salaries, and in peace¬
time, artisans were allowed to work privately in their own shops
when the corps had no immediate need for them. Those who ac¬
cepted the "retainer” in peacetime and then tried to evade their
obligation in war were punished by long prison terms, which in
most cases continued until they were able to repay all the wages
which they had received since entering the corps.^°
  Similar efforts also were made to expand and revive the mortar
and mine-laying corps. Traditionally organized as independent
groups for the purposes of recruitment and training, they were
in fact little more than financial fictions for their members, who
spent all their time serving in the infantry and artillery corps.=**
Originally supported entirely by fiefs, the mortar corps had shared
the decay of the Spahis, in particular after 1689. In 1731, part of
it had been reorganized in the European manner by Count Bon-
neval, who established a salaried mortar corps separate from the
older feudal one, recruiting able Bosnians for both and building
new barracks and training grounds for them as well as a factory
to manufacture the mortars and shells which they needed. His
aim was eventually to wipe out the feudal corps so that the mor-




                          Military Reforms
                                           i
                                    1


124   tar men remaining would be dependent on salaries and therefore
      more obedient and disciplined than feudal men could be. By the
      time Bonneval left Ottoman service, the corps had been built up
      into six regiments of 100 men each, with approximately 300 men
      paid by salary and 300 continuing to hold their fiefs.^^ But his
      departure was the signal for a new decline and disintegration.
      De Tott’s efforts to reform them in 1783 and 1784 were only mo¬
      mentarily successful,^^ and when Selim came to the throne, they
      were almost entirely useless from 4 fnilitary point of view.
        Starting in September 1792, strenuous attempts were made to
      revive the mortar corps with the assistance and advice of Aubert
      and Cuny. New barracks, stables, and storehouses were built for
      them at Haskoy and Siitliije, on the northern shore of the Golden
      Horn in Istanbul. As was the case with the other corps, a super¬
      visor was appointed to handle financial and administrative mat¬
      ters, while the former chief, the Humbaraji Bashi, was limited to
      military affairs. In one respect the supervisor had greater power
      over the corps than similar officers in the other corps, for he was
      empowered to dismiss the corps commander without reference to
      the Imperial Council if he felt him to be inadequate for the job or
      violating the regulations of his position in some way. Thus the
      supervisor was the supreme officer and the commander (Dizdar)
      was his subordinate whereas in the other corps they commanded
      jointly.^^
        The new organization laid out for the mortar corps during the
      spring of 1793 was somewhat special by virtue of the special
      nature of its military task. The corps had 50 mortars in all and
      to each of them there were assigned teams of 9 mortar men com¬
      manded by one assistant (Halife) helped by 9 apprentices. The
      teams were organized into five companies, each composed of 191
      officers, men, and assistants, under the command of a Ser Halife.
      This organization provided a total of 450 men, 450 apprentices,
      50 Halifes and 5 Ser Halifes, with the superintendent, the com¬
      mander, and 3 subordinate corps officers bringing the total of men
      and officers to 960 in all. Whenever new cannons or mortars were
      added to the corps along with their men, new companies were
      created for them, so that the size and organization of the existing
      companies remained as they were established in the regulation.^^




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
  Because of the special skills and discipline required of members     125
of this corps, they ordinarily were not allowed to marry, regard¬
less of rank, and had to live in the barracks at all times. Salaries
and wages were higher than those paid for service in the other
corps, and the pensions were considerably better. Those members
who held fiefs were allowed to go to them only once every three
years, so that no more than one third of the men would be away
from the barracks at any one time. Special agents were appointed
by the commander to administer the fiefs.
  As was the case with the other artillery corps, most of the re¬
cruits came from Bosnia, often from members of bandit groups
who sought to better their circumstances by entering the service
of the Sultan.^^ In addition, the mortar and mine-laying corps both
received a considerable number of able recruits from the Spahi
feudal cavalrymen of Albania who had been dispossessed by the
sultan to provide revenues to the members of his Nizam-i Jedid
army.^®
  At the same time, the mortar corps’ affiliated group, the mine¬
layers corps, was subjected to similar reforms.^** Traditionally, it
was divided into two groups, one attached to the Jebejis (armor¬
ers)^” and receiving monthly salaries from the Treasury, and the
other a group based on fiefs, but both had decayed considerably
before 1792. Now the supervisor of the mortar corps was appointed
to a similar position with the mine-laying corps to supervise the
reform and end the duplication of effort between them. In 1794,
two new barracks were built for the corps in Haskoy, near those
of the mortar corps, and members were required to remain in
them at all times so that they could receive the necessary train¬
ing. The corps was divided into two groups, according to specialty,
with the first concentrating on the sciences and techniques in¬
volved in preparing and laying mines, and the second being an
engineering group in charge of the various branches of military
architecture.^^ Direction of its military and technical activities
was left to the Lagimji Bashi (head of the mine-laying corps) who
also cooperated with the supervisor in administrative and finan¬
cial functions. The corps at this time was formed primarily of men
supported by fiefs, but their number was restricted to 200, and
after that figure was reached, vacancies were retired by the Treas-




                          Military Reforms
126   ury as soon as they became available. In addition, 50 orderlies
      were evenly divided between the mine-laying and engineering
      divisions of the corps, and given the sole right to take over the
      regular positions in the corps as they became vacant.
        If children of current or former members wished to enter the
      corps, they were allowed to do so only by serving first as orderlies
      and then advancing into the regular mine-laying corps ranks
      through the normal processes of promotion. The mine-laying
      corps members were not allowed to leave their positions or fiefs
      to their children under any circumstances.^^
        The last of the established military forces to be reformed and
      reorganized during Selim’s reign were those which garrisoned
      the forts scattered along both sides of the Bosporus. Those on the
      Anatolian side were given 500 additional men and officers, bring¬
      ing their grand total to 1,000,^^ and they were placed under the
      command of a Bosporus superintendent (Bogaz Naziri). The men
      were given considerably higher salaries than those in the regular
      infantry corps because of the constant attendance to duty re¬
      quired of all of them during both winter and summer.^^
        The forts on the Istanbul side were given a somewhat different
      organization since they were composed entirely of batteries guard¬
      ing the Black Sea entrances to the Bosporus. Their garrisons were
      tied entirely to the new corps being trained at Levend Chiftlik,'*^
      which provided both men and officers trained in the new ways."*®
        These then were the efforts which Selim made to reform the
      older corps: new commanders, organizations, methods, officers,
      and men where possible. In the artillery corps Selim was far more
      successful than in the Janissary and Spahi corps, where the
      force of resistance was too strong. Information on the fate of
      these reforms, however, is very limited. The Ottoman sources
      themselves do little more than repeat and summarize the official
      decrees without describing how they were applied. The foreign
      reports, even the secret ones sent by the foreign technicians to
      their home governments, are so vague as to be almost useless.
      Nevertheless it is clear from the fate of the Ottoman army during
      the wars in which it fought under Selim that the reforms, how¬
      ever thoroughly they were applied, had little effect on the fight¬
      ing ability of the Ottoman army as a whole. The infantry and




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
cavalry alike were just as disorderly in 1800^^ and 1807^® as they
had been earlier.



                    The Nizam-i Jedid Army
  In the long run, however much attention Selim gave to the
older corps, most of his hopes and a good portion of his energies
went into the creation of an entirely new army, the Nizam-i Jedid
or "New Order” and an independent treasury organized specifi¬
cally to support it, the Treasury of the New Revenue (Irad-i Jedid
Hazinesi). And it was in this effort that Selim was most success¬
ful.
  The nucleus of the "new army” actually came into being some
time before the Sultan knew about it or had made a definite de¬
cision to organize such a force independent of the older corps. In
late 1791, while Koja Yusuf Pasha was still in the field against
the Russians, he assembled a small number of renegades captured
in the course of the campaign. Working with a few members of
Yusuf’s personal guard, they began to train with captured Rus¬
sian weapons, using European-style exercises and maneuvers
and performed periodically in front of the Grand Vezir’s tent as
a kind of entertainment to divert the army’s leaders from their
increasingly difficult problems. At this stage, the new group was
no more than a toy, a personal caprice of the Grand Vezir. No
effort was made to force the other corps to accept or even observe
the infidel practices since such a revolutionary step had not yet
been authorized by the Sultan.^^
  When peace was concluded and the Imperial army returned to
Istanbul, the Sultan went to see the new corps perform. He was so
impressed with the massed firepower it was able to assemble
that he decided to create the new army mentioned in Yusuf’s re¬
port, with this group as its nucleus.^® In late March 1792, the
British ambassador provided a few new muskets and bayonets
for the Grand Vezir on an informal basis and asked his govern¬
ment for permission to provide additional assistance of the same
sort.®! To nian the new corps, one hundred Turks were enrolled
from the streets of Istanbul, and the German and Russian rene¬
gades brought back by the Grand Vezir became its officers and




                          Military Reforms
                                           i




128   drill masters. In April, Levend Chiftlik, an isolated spot ten
      miles north of the capital, formerly used by the rapid-fire cannon
      force trained by de Tott, was chosen as the drill grounds since it
      was far enough from the population and the old corps that it
      would not excite their disapproval or anxiety.In addition, much
      to the chagrin of the British ambassador, four French infantry
      officers were appointed to advise on its operations.Up to this
      point all of this action was taken secretly by the Sultan and the
                                               A

      Grand Vezir, without obtaining any formal approval from the
      Imperial Council. It was only during late April and early May
      that approval was obtained in a Series of meetings held in the
      rooms of the Imperial Council.®^ Since the Sultan’s determination
      to establish the corps was made clear right from the start, there
      was little open opposition to its establishment, and the only dis¬
      putes came over the question of whether it should be independent
      or part of one of the older corps. The proponents of the latter
      view, led by Yusuf Ziya Pasha, argued that an entirely new corps
      outside the established military hierarchy would needlessly an¬
      tagonize the Janissaries before the new army was strong enough
      to defend itself. They stated that if the new force was in some
      way made part of the old system, at least in form, its true signifi¬
      cance would be veiled and the opposition deluded until it was too
      late. The advocates of independence, led by Tatarjik Abdullah
      Efendi, emphasized the financial aspect, pointing out that the ex¬
      penses involved in creating the new army would overwhelm the
      established treasury, and offering a new treasury with new
      taxes supplying an independent army as the best solution. In the
      end, on May 14, 1792, a compromise was reached. The Sultan
      decided to create a new treasury with new taxes to provide for the
      new army, but both were clothed in the garb of established or¬
      ganizations in the Ottoman system in order to satisfy the con¬
      servatives and delude the reactionaries.
        Since the financial aspect always was considered to be the most
      important aspect of any Ottoman administrative operation,
      legislation for the treasury came first. On March 1, 1793, an
      entirely independent treasury was established for the new army
      with the name Irad-i Jedid, or "New Revenue.”^® Mustafa Reshid
      Efendi was made director of the entire Nizam-i Jedid organiza-




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
tion, with the formal titles of Irad-i Jedid Defterdari (Treasurer     129
of the New Revenue) for his financial duties and Talimli Askeri
Naziri (Supervisor of the Trained Soldiers) for his military ones.
To provide him with rank and prestige in the regular Ottoman
hierarchy, the now-honorific post of Shikk-i Sani Defterdari (Sec¬
ond Treasurer)^® was set aside for him, thus making him an equal
with the other chief officers of state in the Imperial Council. As
revenues for the new treasury, the Sultan gave it all the tax
farms (Iltizam) belonging todhe state treasury and to the Holy
Cities which produced annual profits of more than ten purses
each to the tax farmers who administered them. To lighten the
effect of the loss of these revenues on the state treasury, the Sul¬
tan also decreed that this transfer should take place only when
the holdings in question were vacated by their current tax farmers,
and that as soon as the new treasury took them over, it should
pay the state treasury the purchase price it normally received
for those farms, equal to five years profits of their tax farmers,
in addition to the regular annual taxes which it normally re¬
ceived from the tax farmers.In essence then the new treasury
itself became the tax farmer of these holdings for the state treas¬
ury, administering them by "subfarming” them to its own tax
farmers.In addition, all fiefs previously set aside for members
of the mortar corps and the navy and all military fiefs worth more
than 15,000 piasters per year whose holders were found to be
absent from their lands or failing in their duties in any way were
seized for the new treasury. In addition various excise taxes were
turned over to it or created especially for it. The Imperial Treas¬
ury thereafter had to pay only those expenses incumbent on it in
peacetime before the Nizam-i Jedid corps was established and
the artillery and navy reformed. The new treasury was provided
with special revenues to pay for the reforms plus all extraor¬
dinary expenditures required by wartime expeditions. All sur¬
pluses left in the new treasury at the end of each fiscal year had
to be placed in a special war chest and saved for emergencies in
 order to spare the new and old treasuries alike from the extra¬
 ordinary burdens of military emergencies.'^^
   Mustafa Reshid immediately set about to organize his treas¬
 ury and collect its revenues.®® In 1793 and 1794, no more than




                           Military Reforms
130   200 men and officers were enrolled, and most of its resources
      were used to build barracks and prepare drill grounds at Levend
      Chiftlik, to import officers and equipment from Europe, and to
      make new uniforms and weapons for the men. At the same time,
      efforts were initiated to popularize the new force among the people
      of Istanbul and the men of the older corps, or at least to break the
      news gradually so that when the establishment of the new corps
      itself was publicly proclaimed, they would not be taken by sur¬
      prise and goaded into sudden, viol^Pt action.®*
        It was only in the late summer of 1794 that the Sultan and his
      advisers were satisfied that the public was prepared. The official
      regulations establishing the military organization therefore were
      finally proclaimed on September 18, almost two years after it
      originally began its work.®- In order that the Nizam-iJedid army
      would fit into the established Ottoman military hierarchy and
      attract as little attention as possible, it was attached to the old
      Bostaniyan-i Hassa corps as its infantry-rifle branch, the Bostani
      Tiifenkjisi {Bostani riflemen) corps.®** While the regulation ex¬
      pressed the hope that the full corps would eventually have 12,000
      officers and men, for the moment a single regiment of 1,602 offi¬
      cers and men was organized at Levend Chiftlik as a model for
      later expansion.®‘* The basic internal regulations of the corps were
      very similar to those given to the older corps two years before. A
      regular hierarchy of promotion was established, with vacancies
      filled by the persons occupying the posts immediately beneath
      them. Provision was made for the advancement out of order of
      unusually qualified men in special cases, especially if they had
      demonstrated their ability in battle. Among persons of equal
      ability, however, preference had to be given to age and seniority.
        At the time the regulation was issued and the organization of
      the Nizam-i Jedid corps officially proclaimed, there were only 468
      men and 20 officers training at Levend Chiftlik, and they were
      living in tents and flimsy wooden shacks because the regular bar¬
      racks had not yet been completed.®® Nevertheless during the next
      six months recruits came rapidly, mainly from among unem¬
      ployed youths roaming the streets of Istanbul and from the pri¬
      vate armies of the leading notables of Anatolia,®® and the regi¬
      ment soon reached its full strength. At the same time, most of the
      permanent buildings were soon completed, including three bar-



                         The "New Order” of Selim III
racks, a rifle factory, two mosques, and a school.®^ Members of the    131
corps were dressed in the French manner, with blue berets and
red breeches and jackets.®® Training went ahead rapidly under
the direction of Veli Agha and the French official advisers and
under the frequent inspection of the Sultan and his officials. At
the same time, the Irad-i Jedid treasury collected its revenues so
efficiently that it was left with a large surplus even after all its
obligations were met.®®
  With this very favorable financial situation, the Sultan finally
felt that the new corps could be safely expanded, and with the
added stimulus of the French invasion of Egypt, a second regi¬
ment was created on November 23, 1799. The organization of the
new force was somewhat different from that of the original one.
The various provincial governors were ordered to recruit men lo¬
cally and train them in the Nizam-i Jedid way under the direction
of officers sent from Istanbul, with their salaries and equipment
provided by the Irad-i Jedid treasury. Here indeed was the pro¬
vincial militia proposed by Yusuf Pasba.'^® While these men were
to continue to serve with the provincial governors in order to
maintain order, a central regiment was established for them at
Uskiidar to direct their operations and control their training. By
1800, barracks and training grounds were built for it at Kadikoy,
including a hospital, a library, and a press.^^ Most of the men in
this regiment came from the villages of Anatolia; it was almost
entirely a Turkish peasant force, something without precedent in
Ottoman history, with enlistment encouraged not only by high
salaries but also by tax exemptions given to the families of those
who enlisted.^- The internal organization of the Uskiidar regi¬
ment was exactly the same as that of Levend Chiftlik, with the
exception that its total number was without limit. To coordinate
the activities of the two Nizamd Jedid regiments, a new post was
 created, Ojak Kethiidasi (Lieutenant of the Corps), and it was
 given to one of the Binbashis of the two regiments. Finally, the
 new regiment was given the color light blue for its jackets and
 breeches, to distinguish its men and officers from those of Levend
 Chiftlik.^® At the same time, the old barracks at Levend Chiftlik
 were repaired and expanded and a second regiment was created
 there.
   With three regiments and with large and increasing revenues.



                           Military Reforms
                                            1


132          the Nizam-i Jedid corps expanded rapidly. In May 1797, it had
             2,536 men and 27 officers.^'^ By September 1799, this number had
             increased to 4,317 men and 30 officers, and it continued to rise to
             6,029 men and 27 officers in April 1800, and 9,263 men and 27
             officers in July 1801.Not all the governors recruited and trained
             Nizam-i Jedid men, but nine did, of whom the most active were
             Abdurrahman Pasha, governor of Karaman and Alaiye, who was
             appointed colonel of the entire regim'^nt in 1801, Jebbar zade,
             and Suleyman Pasha, independent^overnor of Baghdad.^^
               Starting in 1802, Abdurrahman Pasha developed a system of
             military conscription throughout Anatolia to provide men for the
             Nizam-i Jedid. Each provincial and district official and notable
             was required to send a certain number> of men to Uskiidar for
             training in the new army, for periods of between six months and
             one year. Generally, half the contingents were trained as infantry
             for service in the regular Levend Chiftlik and Uskiidar corps. The
             other half were trained as cavalry so that they could return to
             form the local militias of the provincial governors and district
             notables.^® After 1804 an effort was made to transform the entire
      ^      Timar feudal system into the base for this Nizam-i Jedid militia.
             Fiefs were seized on the flimsiest of pretexts and administered by
             the Irad-i Jedid treasury as tax farms to provide revenue to sup¬
             port the recruitment and training of the same number of men for
             the Nizam-i Jedid militia as were formerly supported on a feudal
             basis. The fiction of feudal organization was preserved by the
             application of the name Sanjak Bey to their officers, but these
             were in fact salaried officers sent to the provinces by the Levend
             Chiftlik and Uskiidar corps. Regular barracks were built for the
             new provincial militia at the expense of the Irad-i Jedid treas¬
             ury, at Ankara, Bolu, Kastamonu, Kiitahya, Kayseri, Nicopolis,
             Kirshehir, Chorum, Menteshe, and Izmir, while elsewhere they
             were housed in buildings previously used by the local security
             forces. By the end of 1806, as a result of these efforts, there were
          J 22,685 men and 1,590 officers enrolled in the Nizam-i Jedid army,
             of whom approximately half were stationed in Anatolia and the
            balance in Istanbul and the Balkans.^*^ The success of this Ana¬
            tolian venture led the Sultan to attempt the creation of a similar
            corps in Europe, with its central base at Edirne.^*’ But the Euro-




                                The "New Order” of Selim III
pean parts of the empire by this time were entirely too far re¬
moved from central control for this sort of levy to be effective; it
was entirely unsuccessful. In this area, therefore, the Ottoman
army continued to depend almpst entirely on the independent
local notables.                                                ,
  The rapid increase in the number of men enrolled in the new
army after 1794 created a number of new problems, principally
the same sort of disorderly, undisciplined behavior which had
brought the older corps into'disrepute. In the early days of the
Nizam-i Jedid, most of the enlisted men were Turks enrolled
mainly in Istanbul from among the large group of unemployed,
who joined as the only alternative to starvation. Most of them
were accustomed to the discipline, restraint, and sanitary meth¬
ods required by living in close proximity to large numbers of per¬
sons. In contrast, most of the new men enrolled after 1794 came
from Anatolia; the enrollment lists show that by 1800, 90 per
cent of the enlisted men in the army were Turkish peasants and
tribesmen.*^' Many of them joined more for the weapons and plun¬
der they hoped to gain than for anything else. Resistant to disci¬
pline and unaccustomed to the kind of life required by the corps,
they became increasingly turbulent and disorderly, and there
were frequent incidents in which they descended to the Bosporus
at Tarabya, Yeni Koy, and Beshiktash, attacking and robbing at
will. Many of them fled from the camps shortly after receiving
their uniforms and weapons, complaining that the work was too
hard, the discipline too severe, and the pay too low. Forming
powerful new robber bands, they began to plague notables and
governors alike in western Anatolia and the Balkans, the super¬
ior weapons provided by the Sultan giving them an inestimable
advantage over their opponents.^-
  To combat these problems, various changes were made in the
organization of the corps. Additional officers were appointed. Pun¬
ishments for infractions of the rules were made more severe.
Efforts were made to control the men when they were not actu¬
ally in the field or training at the practice grounds. The rapid
increase in the number of men had so far outstripped the facili¬
ties at Levend Chiftlik and Uskiidar that it was impossible for
all the men to practice daily, as was originally envisaged in their




                          Military Reforms
regulations. Those unable to practice were left with nothing to
do for a good part of the time sincg such a contingency had not
been provided for. The resulting idleness and lack of supervision
were considered a major cause of the difficulties which the army
was now experiencing. As a partial solution, new training regu¬
lations were introduced on April 6, 1801.®^ A regular system of
training rotation was set up in a manner similar to that of the
artillery corps. As an additional measure to relieve the pressure
of idleness, those men wishing tp 'engage in an outside trade
when they were not required at the practice field were allowed to
do so if they had performed their duties in full, if their work was
"a trade in keeping with the honor of the corps,” and if they were
located near enough to their barracks so that they could return at
night and be called up for instant duty when required. For the
first time, officers were allowed to marry, but the men were sup¬
posed to remain single so that they could be subjected to the
severe discipline of the corps.
  In addition, in order that the men might be commanded and
supervised more efficiently, it was decided that the financial and
military duties originally united in the person of the supervisor
were in fact too much for a single man to perform properly, and in
late 1801 they were separated, with the post of Talimli Askeri
Naziri being transferred to the supervisor of the cannon and
cannon-wagon corps, while the Nizam-i Jedid supervisor was left
with the posts of Treasurer of the New Treasury and the rank of
Second Treasurer of the Imperial Treasury.^^
  These reforms had some effect, but disciplinary cases on the
part of members of the Uskiidar mounted corps in particular
continued to be reported periodically, manifesting a continued
decline in the discipline and efficiency of the corps and also in¬
flicting a final, crushing blow against the government’s effort to
popularize the new army among the people.**'^
  This then was Selim’s Nizam-i Jedid corps. By the end of his
reign it numbered almost 23,000 men, who were armed with
modern weapons, trained by European officers, and praised for
their efficiency and good bearing by almost all the Europeans
who observed them.”® Together with the reformed and revamped




                   The "New Order” of Selim III
artillery corps, it should have provided the Sultan with an effec¬         135
tive military force capable not only of meeting the enemy on
equal terms but also of protecting the Sultan and itself against
any attacks. On the occasions in which it was employed, the
Nizam-i Jedid army effectively demonstrated its superiority nver      l/
the Janissaries and the Spahis. In 1799, approximately 200 of its
men were sent by sea to Gaza, where they performed important
service in assisting its governor, Ahmed Jezzar Pasha, in his stal¬
wart defense of that fortress'against the French army of Bona-
parte.®’^ In 1800, when the British fleet blockaded the French in
Alexandria, 2,000 Nizam-i Jedid soldiers were landed along with
6,000 regular Ottoman troops, and they managed to maintain a
successful blockade against the French at Rosetta, eventually
forcing them to surrender in April 1801.®* During the next six
years the new army soldiers performed important, although some¬
what limited, service against the mountain bandits in the Balkan
and Rhodope Mountains.
  But the old corps absolutely refused to accept the new training
and weapons, and those politicians who were associated with
them deviously undermined the efforts of the European advisers.
In 1800, the British ambassador in Istanbul, Lord Elgin, reported
that "during the whole of their [the European advisers’] stay in
Turkey, a very great deal of intrigue has been successfully ex¬
erted to impede the operations of the detachment and prevent the
utility they were enabled to render this country. Every trick has
been used to disgust the officers and men. Those who were anxious
that no English land officers should be employed with the Grand
Vezir, and those who wish the power of Turkey to be kept under,
have been equally busy.”**" Similar complaints came from the
French and from others.^' As a result of the Janissaries’ refusal
to serve with the new troops in the most important campaigns
during the last decade of Selim’s rule, against the French in Egypt
and the Serbs and Russians in 1806 and 1807, the Nizam-i Jedid
troops performed only token service, and the main Ottoman army
continued to be composed primarily of the unruly and ineffective
Janissaries and Spahis, with disastrous results. *"
  General Koehler, who was the principal adviser for the regular




                          Military Reforms
136   Ottoman army during the Egyptian campaign, described it to his
      superiors in London:                  »


           As deficient as they are in all the camp duties of security
         and defense, than which nothing can be worse, so they are
         with respect to any rational system or foresight with respect to
         the plan of operations to be carried on against the enemy, so
         weak, so frivolous and childish thht an infant three years old
         would have more forecast.      ^
           They are scattered over a large extent of ground in separate
         encampments according to their own fancy. The Grand Vezir
         is exceedingly civil, has shown the greatest attention, pro¬
        vided you will talk about his fine horses, the great superiority
        of the Turks on horseback, or about his little fountain of water
        with a child’s ship in it, but directly to touch upon anything
        which relates to military operations or the enemy, he waives
        the conversation.
           What is expected from such troops, or rather mob thus com¬
        manded? Nothing but shame and disgrace, and yet they have
        fine men, excellent horses, good guns, plenty of ammunition
        and provisions and forage, and in short great abundance of
        all the materials required to constitute a formidable army,
        but they want order and system, which would not be difficult
        to establish if their principal officers were not so astonishingly
        adverse to anything tending toward it . . .
           The camp is composed of many different nations and natures
        of troops, which though properly speaking are subject to the
        same sovereign and pretending to the same religion are how¬
        ever extremely distinct as to their views and separate inter¬
        ests, jealous of each other with very little public spirit, and
        only serving for plunder or personal advantage, and have very
        little zeal when they have no immediate prospect of satisfying
        their own particular views.
          The authority of the Vezir is equally incomprehensible; an
        apparent great submission and immediate power of life and
        death over individuals, but he himself seems to stand in great
        apprehension of offending them, seems not to dare to order
        such a detachment to encamp in this or that place, nor to give




                        The "New Order” of Selim III
   them the least interruption or inconvenience, is obliged to use    137
   the most gentleness and leniency towards them to prevail
   upon them to do anything of the most trifling nature and to
   prevent their entirely abandoning him . .
                                                             #

  In 1807, when the opposition of the vested interests finally led
to open revolt against Selim, the new army was almost completely
ineffective in defending its master and itself against the common
enemy. The reasons for this failure to use the Nizam-i Jedid
army, as well as, indeed, the failure of Selim’s entire reform pro¬
gram, will be examined in subsequent chapters.




                          Military Reforms
              XL Technical Reforms




                                   \




Up to now we have been dealing with changes in the direction
and organization of the military establishment and improvements
in the training and discipline of its men. But such reforms, how¬
ever successful they were in themselves, could have been really
effective only if they were accompanied by even more drastic
improvements in the weapons and equipment provided for the
use of these men. The disorganization and inefficiency of the
established Ottoman military corps had been compounded by an
inferiority of arms which had become increasingly more serious
since the end of the seventeenth century, when Europe had begun
to develop the science of arms manufacture on a large scale. In the
West the awkward and heavy muskets with their sputtering and
inefficient firing pins, had long since been replaced by light and
mobile rifles with flintlock firing systems, which could be carried
easily both by horsemen and infantrymen and which could be
fired regardless of the weather. The old ponderous and awkward
cannons, of use only in attacking and defending fortresses and
much too heavy to be used in large numbers on warships or on
the battlefield, were likewise replaced by much lighter and more
mobile instruments. Changes in the compound ratios of salt¬
peter, charcoal, and sulphur used to make the gunpowder em¬
ployed in these weapons made it far more stable and dependable
than that previously employed. Similar developments in the alloy        139
of the metals used in these weapons and in the arts of ballistics
contributed even further to the vast superiority of the modern
weapons of Europe over the older ones still used by the Ottoman
army at the end of the eighteenth century.*
  In fact the isolation of the Ottoman ruling class from Europe,
its inherent conservatism and pride, its scorn of all things infidel,
its continued worship of everything that had brought the Otto¬
mans greatness in the past, prevented it from accepting the new
weapons. The repeated demands of the few European techni¬
cians who, for one reason or another, were employed in the army
during the eighteenth century had fallen on deaf ears for the
most part. Worse yet, the old-style weapons still used by Ottoman
soldiers and sailors at the end of the eighteenth century were
poor imitations of those of the past. The anarchy which had in¬
fected the military organization had spread to the factories. As a
result the weapons were of extremely poor quality, with the metal
badly forged and very brittle, the gunpowder filled with impuri¬
ties and, in consequence, highly erratic, the cannons and muskets
easily breakable and of varying dimensions, and the bullets and
bombs of various sizes and qualities.^ As late as 1793, a French
observer, B. Jumelin, reported to the French Foreign Ministry
that "until today, the Turks have founded only bronze cannon and
their army and navy have no other. Their foundries and their
forges are pitiful. Their projectiles are older than their cannons,
and their artillery men are good enough only to use such equip¬
ment.”** Under such conditions, even the most modern military
organizations, kept under the tightest discipline and training,
would have had little success, and Selim seems to have fully
realized this.^
  To secure modern weapons and ammunition for all the armed
forces, importation from Europe was simply not enough. Com¬
munications were too slow and too likely to be severed or inter¬
rupted in wartime. It was obvious that factories had to be built
within the empire to make the new army and navy relatively
independent of foreign sources. For this it was necessary to sum¬
mon European experts to direct the new factories and instruct
the Ottoman officers and soldiers in the manufacture and use of
the new weapons.



                          Technical Reforms
140     The Manufacture of Cannons and Rifles. Selim’s first efforts in
      the technical field went into the modernization of the Imperial
      Cannon Foundry (Tophane), located next to the barracks and
      drill grounds of the artillery corps. Starting in March 1793, Selim
      introduced the most important changes in this area since the
      time of Suleyman the Magnificent. Houses and shops near the
      foundry and barracks were purchased and destroyed to make way
      for the new barracks and factories; the old buildings were mod¬
      ernized; new machines were impo]>ted from England and France,
      and the training grounds were expanded considerably.^ A year
      later the buildings in Haskoy, originally constructed by Baron
      de Tott to manufacture the new style rapid-fire cannon and subse¬
      quently used in part for the assembly of the old-style muskets and
      bullets reintroduced after de Tott’s departure, were turned over
      to a group of cannon founders and artisans sent by the French
      Directorate as the result of repeated Ottoman requests for tech¬
      nical assistance of this kind.® The Directory actually went far
      beyond the original Ottoman request in its desire to strengthen
      the Sultan’s loyalty to revolutionary France. Seventy master
      workers were sent under the direction of Guion Pampelonne,
      Assistant Director of the foundry of Valence, to establish a can¬
      non foundry, a mine and bomb factory, a shop for the manufacture
      and repair of rifies, a powder factory and a saltpeter factory, and,
      in addition, Pampelonne was authorized to take all the machines
      and equipment he needed from the Arsenal at Valence.’^ Selim
      did not wish to depend entirely on a single European power for
      all his arms manufacture, however, and he assigned Pampelonne
      to manufacture cannons and mines only. The manufacture of
      rifies and bullets was transferred to new shops built at Levend
      Chiftlik by a Spanish expert named Volla and at Dolmabahche
      by a British officer.®
        In order to attract the best Ottoman artisans to serve in these
      shops, very high salaries were provided, strict examinations were
      set up, and the artisans were allowed to continue to work in their
      own private shops whenever their services were not required by
      the state. All the foundries and riffe factories were placed under
      the joint control of the supervisors of the artillery and Nizam-i
      Jedid corps, who were personally responsible for the success of




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
their operations.® From 1795 to the middle of 1798, all the arms       141
factories except the one in Haskoy were placed under the tech¬
nical supervision of the two French experts, Aubert and Cuny,
replaced during and after the French expedition to Egypt by
English and Swedish officers.^® Plans, models, and samples of
numerous modern calibers and types of bombs, cannons, rifles,
and bullets were sent to the Porte as gifts by the monarchs of
France, England, Prussia, and Sweden as part of their efforts to
secure the support of the Sultan in the diplomatic and military
conflicts then going on in Europe." Thus, in many ways, Selim
III was the first ruler of an "underdeveloped country” to manipu¬
late and take advantage of the rivalries of the great powers to
secure assistance in the development of his country.
  For one reason or another, none of these factories was entirely
successful. Rivalries among the various foreign contingents,
sloth, negligence, and inefficiency on the part of the foreign ex¬
perts themselves, many of whom were men who had failed in
their own countries, opposition to the entire program by the
Janissaries and others, general disinclination on the part of
Ottomans and Muslims to obey the orders of infidels, and cor¬
ruption and political intrigues among Selim’s cabinet ministers
greatly limited the effectiveness of these efforts.'^ Pampelonne
suffered the greatest difficulties. He was astounded to discover
that the Porte would accept only twenty-five of his men as a result
of the intrigues of the anti-French elements in the Imperial Coun¬
cil. The extra artisans were forced to return home without work¬
ing at all for the empire, which in fact desperately needed them.
Those remaining in the Ottoman service with Pampelonne were
constantly disturbed by irregularity in the payment of salary and
delivery of supplies, interference with their activities by the pro-
British ministers, and the like, so they finally withdrew at the
end of 1797 as part of a general withdrawal of French technicians
at that time.*® It has been commonly assumed that the French
technical assistants remained in Ottoman service until they were
forced to leave by the outbreak of war between the two nations
in 1798. In fact, however, it was the internal conditions within
the Ottoman state which largely nullified their efforts and forced
their departure before political and military events would have




                         Technical Reforms
142   led to the same end.*^ As a result, once the war with France was
      concluded in 1802 neither the Ottomans nor their European
      "friends” were overanxious for a resumption of this sort of as¬
      sistance, and only a few European technicians served at Istanbul
      during the last five years of Selim’s reign. As a result of these
      difficulties, although the Ottoman arms factories greatly improved
      their product in both quantity and quality over that produced
      before 1794, the results were never as'outstanding as was hoped
      for at the start.v
         The Manufacture of Gunpowder. Without a doubt, the most
      successful of Selim’s technical efforts was that aimed at securing
      better gunpowder for new and old weapons alike. Before 1789,
      Ottoman gunpowder was manufactured,at the Imperial Powder
      Works {Baruthane-i Amire) at Bakirkoy (built 1698), just north
      of Istanbul on the Sea of Marmara, and at provincial works located
      at Salonika, Galipoli, Baghdad, Cairo, Belgrade, and Izmir. Each
      of these factories was under the direction of an independent officer,
      who purchased his position as a tax farm, or a retired officer of
      the Porte who was given this job as a kind of pension reward for
      previous service. Invariably the directors knew nothing about
      the manufacture of gunpowder, and for the most part they re¬
      mained in Istanbul and did nothing to supervise the factory op¬
      erations. They treated the factories principally as means of en¬
      riching themselves and diverted to their own profit most of the
      money provided for equipment and supplies. As a result, the
      powder was of extremely bad quality. The saltpeter, charcoal,
      and sulphur required for gunpowder were still mixed with the
      sixteenth-century formula of 6-1-1, with 8 okkes* of materials
      producing 7 of powder. Even when manufactured properly this
      mixture produced an extremely unstable compound which ex¬
      ploded more as the result of changes of weather, humidity, and
      precipitation than it did in response to the urgings of a lighted
      fuse. The addition of dirt and other base substances by dishonest
      factory directors only heightened this tendency. As a result, even
      when the gunpowder did explode in the cannons and rifles, the
      explosive force was either so weak that the ball or bullet would

          " The okke, or vakiyye (also called kiyye), was an Ottoman unit of weight equal
      to 400 dirhems or 2.83 pounds. The exact equivalent varied according to the ma¬
      terial being weighed and the place.




                              The "New Order” of Selim III
not go as far as it was supposed to or so violent that the weapons          143
themselves were blown apart. In addition no more than 3,000
kantars** of even this poor-quality gunpowder were produced
annually for the Ottoman army,l® an amount considerably below
its regular needs.
  Since the beginning of the eighteenth century Europe had
produced a far more stable and dependable type of powder from
a new compound mixed in the proportions of 75-15-10.'^ The
Ottomans had not adopted this ratio for their own manufactures,
but since 1768 they had recognized its superiority and had im¬
ported it in small amounts. Since the importation of this sort of
powder in sizable quantities was extremely expensive and un¬
reliable, Selim was determined to manufacture it in Turkey if
at all possible. In 1790 a Venetian traveler managed to convince
the Sultan that he was an expert in the modern techniques of
making gunpowder, and he was given a large grant from the Im¬
perial Treasury to build a factory for that purpose at San Stefano.
Having stolen all the money for himself without even beginning
the work he had contracted for, he was arrested and imprisoned in
January 1791.^*^ Selim’s first effort to manufacture gunpowder
was stillborn. No new efforts were made until the summer of
1794, when an attempt was made to reorganize and modernize
the existing powder works. The works at Bakirkoy, Galipoli, and
Salonika were placed under the direction of a single supervisor,
Tevkii Ali Raik Efendi,'® who was ordered to reorganize the
factories and their staffs and bring in new equipment from Europe
so that at least 5,000 kantars of high-quality European-type
powder could be manufactured every year. The supervisor was
put under a strict system of controls so that he could not purchase
inferior qualities or quantities of the raw material and pocket
the difference for himself as others had in the past.^'’
  Raik Efendi proved to be no more capable or honest than his
predecessors, and little was done to implement these regulations
until April 1795, when he was replaced by the former chief treas¬
urer of the empire and governor of Jidda, Mehmed Sherif Efendi.
Under his direction, and with the assistance of several British
gunpowder experts, the twenty old wheels at Bakirkoy were re-

  **The kantar was an Ottoman unit of weight which normally came to 56.41
kilograms and was divided into 44 okkes.




                           Technical Reforms
144   modeled and five new ones were added, and within a year the
      previous annual production of 1,500 kantars of poor-quality
      powder was replaced by twice as much of a much better quality.^'
      Similar reforms were made in the powder works at Galipoli and
      Salonika, which at this time were used primarily to supply the
      gunpowder needs of the Ottoman Mediterranean fleet.
        In addition Sherif Efendi soon discovered that it was impos¬
      sible to make fine powder of constant qiiality so long as the ma¬
      chines and wheels in the factories Were moved by animal power,
      which was quite variable. Water power was far more suitable in
      all respects, but the Bakirkoy factory was not located anywhere
      near streams which could be used to move the wheels in the de¬
      sired manner. As a result of these considerations, he began to
      search for a new and more suitable location — a place far enough
      away from settled communities so that it would not endanger
      them yet close enough to a running stream for power and to the
      Sea of Marmara for both supplies and products to be transported
      easily. After a long search, an ideal location was found at Azadli,
      further west on the shore of the Sea of Marmara, immediately
      north of Kuchiik Chekmeje lake and village near the Karimburgaz
      caves. Under the management of an Armenian artisan named
      Erakil Efendi, a huge new powder works was built here during
      the spring of 1794. Its wheels and machines were moved entirely
      by water supplied by canals built between the factory and the
      nearby stream.It was so successful that after 1797 the old Im¬
      perial powder works at Bakirkoy was used only to store raw
      materials and finished products, while those at Galipoli, Salo¬
      nika, and Izmir were closed entirely,^'* and the Porte was com¬
      pletely relieved of the necessity of purchasing gunpowder abroad.
      Consequently, depending on the extent that the Ottoman mili¬
      tary corps could be provided with modern cannons and rifles,
      ammunition for both was available after 1795 in sufficient quan¬
      tities to assure their proper use.



                            Technical Schools
        In addition to reorganizing the military corps and modernizing
      their weapons, Selim and his ministers also gave a great deal of




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
attention to educating their officers in the new techniques and          145
sciences of war so that they could eventually take over direction
from the foreign advisers who had to be relied on at the start.
  The engineering schools which had been developed in Turkey
during the eighteenth century were intimately associated with
the military services whose officers they trained. The schools of
naval engineering (Muhendishane-i Bahri-i Humayun) and artil¬
lery {Topji Mektebi), founded in the years following the defeat at
Cheshme, had introduced western military sciences and tech¬
niques into Turkey on a relatively large scale for the first time.
They had been limited in scope, mainly emphasizing artillery.
They had little to do with the arts of fortification, laying siege,
navigation, and the like, which also were essential elements of
modern armies and navies, and they went little beyond the prac¬
tical techniques involved to their scientific bases. In addition, they
depended primarily on French experts and teachers, and when
these were withdrawn by Louis XVI in 1788, the schools fell into
a rapid eclipse. From this experience, and from the renewed
defeats suffered in the wars of 1787 to 1792, Selim learned to his
sorrow that in order for reforms to be effective, they had to encom¬
pass all the military arts, not just those shown most inferior in
previous campaigns, and that it was very dangerous to rely on
the assistance of a single European power for technical develop¬
ments of this kind. Both these lessons bore fruit in the years
after 1792. The only technical schools which Selim was able to
continue during the war, although on a reduced basis, were the
naval engineering school and a small new engineering school
established by the Sultan {Muhendishane-i Sultani) in Eyiib to
train some of his young servants and companions in the elements
 of arithmetic and geometry, both to provide them with the basic
 education they needed to aid his reform efforts and to prepare at
 least some of them for the higher technical schools which he was
 planning to reopen after the war. Most of the teachers in the new
 school were trained in a small engineering school maintained at
 Kagithane for a short time in the 1780s by Grand Vezir Halil
 Hamid Pasha, and many of its graduates went on to teach in the
 new schools subsequently established by Selim and his succes¬
 sors.^'"^




                          Technical Reforms
146      With the end of the war and the influx of western officers, it was
      possible for Selim to reopen and expand the technical schools, hut
      the number of students ready to take advantage of them was
      strictly limited. The Sultan preferred to concentrate the efforts
      of his foreign advisers in the field, to train his soldiers. It was only
      after this training was well along that Selim was willing to use at
      least some of these advisers to develop a full-fledged army engi¬
      neering school out of the old artillery sfchool, on the model of the
      long-established naval one.            v
        Essentially what Selim now hoped to do was to provide the
      army with a higher-level technical school which would give its
      officers intensive training in the theoretical and practical sides
      not only of artillery, but also of fortifica,tion, mine-laying, and
      engineering. The Sultan’s engineering and naval schools provided
      a nucleus of staff and students for the new army engineering
      school. Selim originally planned its buildings at Kagithane, near
      his summer palace at Saadabad, so that he could himself attend
      classes and exercises and follow what was being done. This idea
      was eventually abandoned because of the difficulties involved in
      establishing the school so far from the barracks and training
      grounds of the military corps with which it was to be associated.^*^
        In the summer of 1793, the new school was formally established
      as the Imperial     Land Engineering School {Muhendishane-i
      Berri-i Humayun), incorporating the old artillery school together
      with whatever educational classes had been maintained by the
      mortar and mine-laying corps. Its basic regulations were included
      with those of the mine-laying corps issued at the same time.^^ At
      first a teaching staff of five persons was provided, with one Bash
      Hoja (chief teacher) and four teaching assistants. Instruction on a
      small scale began with forty students in special rooms in the mor¬
      tar corps barracks at Haskdy while work also began on an entirely
      new building for it in the vicinity. The final regulation for the
      organization and curriculum of the school was issued only in
      1795, when the new building was opened; it expanded gradually
      thereafter, with the number of instructors being raised to four
      and the students to eighty during the course of 1797.2^
        The chief teacher was for all practical purposes the principal of
      the school, under the general control of the supervisor of the three




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
artillery corps. He was responsible for making appointments of        147
teachers, assistants, and students, for preparing and enforcing
the programs of class instruction, and for supervising the activi¬
ties of students and teachers alike. From 1793 to 1800, this vital
post was held by Abdurrahman Efendi, an intellectual and edu¬
cational leader of the time,^^ and for the rest of Selim’s reign it
was under the capable direction of Hiiseyin Rifki Efendi, who
managed to retain this post until 1815.-*'’
  When the school first opehed and Abdurrahman Efendi was the
only regular instructor, a good deal of the teaching was done by
his four assistants. In addition a number of teachers came from
the naval school once a week, and the students of the army school
went to the naval school twice a week to take advantage of its
superior equipment and shops. After 1795, when the army school
secured its own building and equipment, and especially after
1797 when its teaching staff was enlarged, the connection be¬
tween the two schools became less direct although they were com¬
bined administratively for a short time, between 1803 and 1805.'^’
  The assistants who helped the instructors were chosen from the
best graduates of the school although on occasion expert persons
coming from outside were appointed if they were able to pass
special examinations and suitable school graduates were not
available to fill them. Assistants who showed special ability and
promise were promoted to be instructors when vacancies occurred,
but most of them were sent to the three artillery corps as officers
after serving four or five years in the school. While serving as
assistants, they were required to continue their studies under the
direction of those whom they assisted and had to pass periodic
examinations in order to retain their posts and advance in the
army hierarchy. During this time they also were given practical
experience through special missions with the army in times of
war, preparing batteries, mines, and the like, while securing the
combat training they needed.
  Originally provision was made for forty students (Shakirdan),
 of whom ten were assigned to specialize in each of the four
 branches of the school: artillery, fortification, mine-laying and
 engineering. In 1798, the student body was doubled, with the stu¬
 dents in a 20-10-30-20 ratio among the four specialties. Students




                          Technical Reforms
148   usually entered between the ages of ten and twelve, although
      occasionally youths up to fifteen werfi admitted if they had pre¬
      viously served in one of the corps. Admission was allowed only
      as the result of special examinations administered by the school
      faculty under the supervision of the members of the Imperial
      Council and the Sheyh ul-Islam, and nepotism and favoritism
      were strictly prohibited.
        Students were divided into four one-year grades, with those of
                                                'V

      the first grade studying the lessons formerly given in the Sultan’s
      engineering school; calligraphy, spelling, writing numbers, draw¬
      ing, introduction to geometry, arithmetic, Arabic, and French.
      The second-year class studied arithmetic, geometry, and geog¬
      raphy, in addition to continuing Arabic apd French. In the third
      year, the students divided into separate classes for their special¬
      ties, and took common lessons in geography, plane trigonometry,
      algebra, surveying, the history of war, and recitation of the Koran.
      In the fourth and final year, in addition to the specialized lessons,
      common classes were given in conic mathematics, differential
      calculus, tangents, and astronomy. The students were given gov¬
      ernment salaries and rations which varied according to their
      class and distinction. They had to attend all class meetings and
      were subject to punishments ranging up to dismissal from the
      school for unexcused absences as well as for violations of the other
      regulations. Until 1801, they were given practical training in
      their specialties at training grounds near the school. After that
      time, this sort of training was given by their participation in the
      regular exercises of the cannon, mortar, and mine-laying corps.
      Students of the senior class were allowed to secure even more
      experience by accompanying the assistants when they left the
      school to perform special duties with the army.^^
        Until 1796, there were few textbooks available, and the stu¬
      dents made their own by writing down the lectures of their in¬
      structors. After that time, a press was established at the school
      under the personal direction of Abdurrahman Efendi and it
      printed textbooks needed by the students as well as translations
      of technical books made by the various members of the staff. This
      became the principal press in Turkey until a new and larger one
      was begun in Uskiidar four years later.^^




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
  From the time the school was established, its graduates who           149
did not remain to teach or assist were assured of officers’ positions
in the cannon, mortar, and mine-laying corps. The engineers were
required to continue their studies while serving in the corps, and
from time to time they returned to the school for further training
so that they would not fall behind the new developments in their
arts. Although these men were required to remain near the regi¬
ments to which they were assigned, they were not subject to the
strict marital regulations applied to the enlisted men. They also
were allowed to live with their families if they were resident
nearby and this did not interfere with their service to the corps.'^^
As far as can be made out, none of the foreign advisers and Turk¬
ish graduates of these schools were allowed to serve with the Jan¬
issaries. However, they did gradually take over most of the offi¬
cial posts in the Nizam-i Jedid army and the artillery corps and
thus provided a nucleus of well-trained, modernist, and reformist
officers to assist Selim and his successors in their efforts.^'’




                            Technical Reforms
                     XII. Revival of
                   the Ottoman Navy




                                       V




With the heartland of the empire surrounded by water, with
great forests able to provide wood and masts in abundance, with
numerous fine ports on every coast, and with thousands of sub¬
jects whose lives and livelihoods were intimately tied to the sea,
the Ottoman Empire had all the attributes needed for maritime
greatness. In the sixteenth century, under the successive com¬
mands of Hayruddin Barbarossa and Turgut Reis, the Ottoman
navy fully exploited these advantages, and Ottoman naval su¬
premacy was accepted throughout the Mediterranean area. Even
after the Battle of Lepanto, when the elements of decay which
gnawed away the great institutions of Ottoman life also affected
the navy, the Ottomans were still able to maintain at least a
semblance of their old position in the eastern Mediterranean, if
for no other reason than the similar decline of their traditional
naval enemy, the Republic of Venice. It was only the long period
of peace during the second and third quarters of the eighteenth
century which left the Ottoman navy idle and led to its rapid
disintegration in the years that followed.
  As was the case with the other institutions of the empire, decay
in the navy began at the top, in this case the great Arsenal of
Istanbul, which was its military, administrative, and financial
center, as well as the source of most of its ships and their principal
anchorage. Negligence and corruption in its adminstration, when        151
combined with the stifling effects of the half century of peace
after 1718, reduced it to almost complete impotence by the end
of the century. Most of its positions were held as sources of extra
revenue by persons serving elsewhere in the government. With¬
out the stimulus of active direction or military necessity, its
officers were able to divert more and more of its resources to
their own benefit. The few ships which were built and launched
at this time, as well as aM the older ships, were so stripped of
essential maintenance and supplies that they often sank within
a stone’s throw of/their docks.
  Without the addition of significant numbers of new ships, the
forms and lines of the fleet remained little altered from those of
the seventeenth century, completely ignoring the important
changes which had been made in European shipbuilding since
that time. The ships of the Ottoman fleet at the end of the eight¬
eenth century were invariably massive and bulky, with exces¬
sively high poops, superstructures, and riggings, almost as wide
as they were long, and with unusually deep drafts which denied
them access to any but the deepest harbors. These ships were
extremely difficult to maneuver in the ordinary course of sailing,
let alone in battle, and were prone to capsize as the result of sud¬
den movements by inexperienced hands during storms or battles.
In addition the ships were structurally unsound: excessive dis¬
tances between their principal beams caused them to break up
entirely during violent storms; the use of soft wood, because
of its finer appearance, and the failure to apply caulking regu¬
larly between the underwater planks caused them to be unusu¬
ally porous and to ship water almost continuously.
   Nor were they better manned. Corruption, negligence, and
inefficiency among their commanders were inevitable results of
conditions in the Arsenal. The captains and other officers pur¬
chased their positions for profit and obtained it by depriving their
men and ships of even the meager moneys which the Treasury
provided for them. Needed repairs were avoided, and the men
were often left without pay and adequate rations. Captains re¬
duced the actual complements of their ships far below those es¬
tablished by law by failing to report deaths, by discharging many




                     Revival of the Ottoman Navy
152   of their men at the most convenient ports, and by entering the
      names of nonexistent persons in their places in order to collect
      their salaries and rations.
         Even those few sailors who remained to man the ships were
       unable to perform their tasks adequately because of the ignorance
      and lack of ability of their officers. Since captains and other offi¬
      cers were picked according to the amount of money they could
      pay rather than according to their ability, they often had very
      little knowledge of the tasks they were supposed to perform. Few
      knew more than the most elementary essentials of seamanship
      and navigation. The Greeks and North Africans employed to
      guide the ships across the seas were themselves usually ignorant
      of anything more technical than what they acquired by practical
      experience in navigation. Often there was not a single man on
      board who could determine position and course by celestial read¬
      ings. Even at the very end of the eighteenth century, there were
      many Ottoman ships that had to keep in sight of land in order to
      find their way. The erratic and disorganized maneuvers of the
      ships composing the squadrons of the fleet were inevitable causes
      of defeats, founderings, and abandonments. Few of the sailors
      were experienced or capable. The poor pay and conditions caused
      by corrupt captains led the best seamen to avoid service whenever
      they could. Most of the men recruited to sail the ships were inex¬
      perienced peasants and vagabonds impressed by force whenever
      the fleet was ready to leave. Many of them were the worst sorts of
      thieves, murderers, and ruffians, who were incapable of absorbing
      instruction and accepting discipline even if these had been ap¬
      plied as required. The consequent disorderliness of Ottoman
      crews was well known throughout the Mediterranean. Even in
      Istanbul itself, the concentration of more than a few ships in the
      harbor was sufficient reason for most of its inhabitants to close
      their shops and retire to their homes in fear of robbery and mur¬
      der at the hands of the crews. Since the fleet, like the army, was
      disbanded and the men dispersed during the winter months, it
      was impossible for any sort of permanent, trained, and experi¬
      enced body of sailors to be built up and maintained.’
        Nor was this all. Conditions aboard ship were chaotic. Huge
      areas were set aside for the captains and chief officers, conse-




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
quently most of the men had to sleep on deck or in the hold. The          153
officers and men were divided into many small food messes, each
of which kept and cooked its own food and maintained its own
kitchens and dining areas for this purpose. The ships were there¬
fore filled with small shacks along all the decks and corridors set
aside for this purpose, as well as with shops maintained by pri¬
vate merchants who sold articles to the men. Little effort was
made to insulate the wooden beams of the ships from the stoves of
the crews, and as a result ifiore ships were lost as a result of inter¬
nal fire than from any other cause. Crew members of various na¬
tionalities and religions formed themselves into violently hostile
groups whose efforts to settle grievances and arguments by organ¬
ized actions often left their ships in utter anarchy. In addition, as
in the army, each ship was armed with a miscellaneous assort¬
ment of cannons of various dimensions and calibers requiring
shot and powder of different sizes and quantities, and the effort to
match cannon and shot often consumed the bulk of the men’s
energies during the course of their battles. Often the guns were
placed on the decks with no regard at all for their weight and
effect on the ship’s sailing qualities and stability, and frequent
groundings and capsizings resulted from this fact alone.^
  In sum, neglect and corruption, incapable officers and men,
poorly designed and built ships, and disorder and anarchy aboard
them caused the Ottoman fleet in every way to mirror the inter¬
nal condition of the empire which it was intended to defend.
  Eighteenth-century Naval Reforms. Selim was not the first
eighteenth-century Ottoman monarch to make an attempt to
correct the situation. The disastrous defeat at Cheshme (1770),
in which almost the entire Ottoman fleet was destroyed by a
small Russian squadron sent to the Mediterranean from its base
in the Baltic, had stimulated a series of naval reforms directed
by the only genuine Ottoman hero to emerge from that affair,
Gazi Hasan Pasha, who served as Grand Admiral of the fleet
during most of the subsequent years until shortly after Selim’s
accession.^ Efforts were made to correct the principal causes of
decay. Under the guidance of two French naval architects, LeRoy
and Durest,^ new ships were built on modern lines. Inefficient and
absentee captains were summarily dismissed. Action was taken




                     Revival of the Ottoman Navy
154   to establish a corps of regular, salaried, disciplined, and trained
      sailors, and barracks were built forxthem at the Arsenal. The
      impressment of inexperienced ruffians and vagabonds was re¬
      stricted although not entirely eliminated. In 1773, the Grand
      Vezir, Halil Hamid Pasha, assigned Baron de Tott, an English
      convert, Campbell Mustafa Agha, and a Frenchman, Karmoran,
      to set up a new mathematics school {Mekteb-i Riyaziye) at Okmey-
      dan to provide technical training to yPunger naval officers.® In
      1776, this developed into an engineering school (Hendese Odasi),
      which was located in the Arsenal, with one instructor, two assist¬
      ants, and ten students. The first instructor was Gazi Hasan Pasha
      himself. In 1783, it was given a new building next to the Jamialti
      mosque and expanded into a full-fledged nqval engineering school
      with foreign and native teachers instructing officers and poten¬
      tial officers of the fleet in the sciences and techniques of their
      trade.®
        As a result of these efforts, some advances were made. In 1784,
      the Ottoman fleet had twenty-two ships of the line and fifteen
      frigates, of which only nine were considered to be in poor condition
      by a French observer of the time.’’ These physical improvements
      were not accompanied by a similar improvement in the men ap¬
      pointed to serve the ships, however. Only a small number of offi¬
      cers attended the new schools. Appointments continued to be
      made in return for bribes and in disregard of ability despite all
      the efforts of the Grand Admiral. Conditions aboard the ships
      remained about as bad as they had ever been, and the few able
      officers trained by Hasan Pasha were frustrated and driven to
      despair by their complete inability to alter the situation. Gazi
      Hasan Pasha himself by now had become old and, according to
      the historian Asim, had built up a large fortune for himself by
      accepting bribes in return for appointments, thus returning to the
      practices he had earlier attempted to end. How much the fleet had
      declined was aptly demonstrated by its fate in 1791 at the hands
      of a Russian Black Sea fleet which itself was newly created and
      hampered by similar conditions, although on a smaller scale.
        In 1789, Gazi Hasan Pasha was replaced by Giritli Huseyin
      Pasha, but the demands of war and the ineptitude of the entire
      officer corps gave little opportunity for change. With the end of




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
the war, however, Hiiseyin was replaced as Grand Admiral by            155
the far more energetic Kiichiik Hiiseyin Pasha.® With the assist¬
ance of the Sultan’s boyhood companion and private envoy to
France, Ishak Bey,® he managed to push through a series of radi¬
cal and far-reaching reforms in the Arsenal, the fleet, and the
system by which officers and men were appointed and educated,
all of which completely revolutionized the fleet in a way that
Selim was never able to do with his land forces.
  In late 1791, Selim ordei'ed that only able men be appointed as
captains and that their salaries be increased to compensate them
more fully for their responsibilities and end the need for bribery.
Then starting in July 1792, a series of decrees was issued which
entirely reorganized the naval service. To attract and retain
knowledgeable officers of high quality, a regular hierarchy was
established, with appointments and promotions based on experi¬
ence and ability rather than bribery and nepotism. When vacan¬
cies occurred in senior posts, promotions were given to the officers
holding those posts immediately below them in the hierarchy,
the post of admiral going to the vice admiral (Patrone), the post of
vice admiral to the commander of the port of Istanbul {Liman
Reisi), the post of port commander to the rear admiral (Riyale),
and so on down the line. The salaries of officers and men alike
were doubled. In addition the previous practice of lowering the
officers’ salaries to almost nothing while they were in port was
changed to payment of a sum equal to one-half their salaries
when they were on active duty. Pensions equal to one-third their
active-duty salaries were provided for those who retired because
of old age, and to one-half or more if they retired because of serv¬
ice-acquired disability.*®
  Regulations were introduced in order to prevent the captains
from using the food and equipment assigned to their ships for
their own profit. Each captain had to give detailed receipts to the
Arsenal and port commander for all food and equipment on board
before every cruise. The men and officers were required to sign
statements for everything used or lost during the voyage, at the
end of which the vessel was examined once again, and the cap¬
tains were required to pay personally for anything which was not
accounted for in some way. The captains were admonished to do




                    Revival of the Ottoman Navy
156   all they could to prevent the loss and waste of supplies and to
      make sure that the men received all'the food and salaries they
      were entitled to; bonuses were provided for anyone who reported
      violations.
        Important reforms were also made in the supply of food to the
      ships. The numerous kitchens and stoves which had cluttered
      Ottoman ships for generations were replaced hy central kitchens
      and dining quarters, with cooks paid by the Treasury and com¬
      mon meals served at regular hours. The old practice of delivering
      the rations for each voyage to the men in their own homes in
      advance of sailing was also abandoned, and all food was delivered
      to the captains, who were solely responsible for its distribution
      during the course of each cruise under the>regulations mentioned
      above. Iron plates were affixed to the inner sides of the ships
      where the common galley stoves were located in order to lessen
      the danger of fire."
        Once the matters of equipment and supply were settled, Hiiseyin
      Pasha was able to turn to the systems of recruitment and train¬
      ing of sailors, which were reorganized in a series of regulations
      issued during January and February 1793.'^ The Treasury had
      always supported a small group of regular professional sailors,
      but by this time all of these positions were held for purposes of
      income alone by persons unwilling to perform service in return.
      Now they were inspected, and within a year almost all of them
      were dismissed and replaced by youths enlisting for life terms in
      the navy. A strong effort now was made to develop the sailors into
      a professional and permanent group serving the navy in winter
      and summer alike. To man this corps, a kind of conscription was
      restored to the Aegean coastal provinces traditionally included
      within the sphere of the navy. All the men living in these areas
      who were experienced at sea, whether as fishermen, merchant
      sailors, or navy men, were registered in a special survey carried
      out by the census department. Three thousand of them were
      conscripted for immediate service in the navy on a salaried basis.
      They were required to remain at their barracks in the Arsenal at
      all times and to accept whatever training, discipline, and duties
      were imposed on them. No more than one sailor could be taken
      from a single family without its consent. Conscripted men were




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
allowed to avoid service by hiring a substitute and paying a "sub¬    157
stitute tax” {Kalyonju Bedeli) to the naval treasury. Half the
wages of these men was paid them when their ships left Istanbul
for the summer cruise. One quarter was paid immediately after
their return in November, and the other quarter was kept from
them until March, so that they would have enough money and
food to sustain them through the entire winter season.*^ Pro¬
visions were introduced for regular examinations of the men to
rank and promote them acfcording to ability. Those who merited
promotion were allowed to rise to the ranks of officers.
  Revival of Ottoman Shipbuilding. Starting in the summer of
1793, efforts also were begun to modernize the Arsenal itself so
that it could build the new ships which the fleet needed. Almost
all the men serving in the Arsenal up to that time were dismissed,
and salaries and conditions were improved enormously in order
to attract the best artisans of Istanbul. As added inducements,
they were allowed to continue their private work whenever they
were not required at the Arsenal and to live at home with their
families.’^ At the same time, the work of shipbuilding at the
Arsenal was reorganized on European lines under the direction
of Jacques Balthasard Le Brun, a French naval architect who
entered Ottoman service in June 1793, and his two associates,
Jean Baptiste Benoit and Toussaint Petit. They did not return to
France until 1804, having established a surprisingly modern
naval establishment in Istanbul and trained a number of highly
capable Ottoman naval architects to continue their work.’-'^
  Between 1792 and 1797, the construction and repair facilities
at the Arsenal were modernized and enlarged, under Le Brun’s
guidance.'® The two old wooden drydocks previously in use, which
were almost constantly in need of some sort of repair and rebuild¬
ing, were replaced by three permanent stone ones which were far
superior in capacity, efficiency, and durability."’ Five new ship¬
building forms were constructed as well as a new drydock designed
on the model of the drydock at Toulon.'®
  With the foreign experts virtually directing shipbuilding opera¬
tions in the Arsenal of Istanbul, Hiiseyin Pasha was free to devote
his herculean energies to reviving the ruined Ottoman shipyards
elsewhere in the empire.'® Arrangements were made to supply




                    Revival of the Ottoman Navy
158   them regularly with oak, pine, iron, and other shipbuilding
      materials.^® To secure these supplies in sufficient quality and
      quantity, the traditional Ottoman government efforts to obtain
      them at below-market prices were replaced by a system allowing
      the shipyard directors to purchase them as needed at the normal
      market rates.^*
        French models were used for all new ships, and in addition, as
      time permitted, the older ships of the fleet which were still serv¬
      iceable were remodeled along the same lines. The poops and super¬
      structures were lightened and lowered considerably and the drafts
      were raised in order to improve the maneuverability of the ships,
      and copper plates were applied to the hulls of new and old ships
      alike to increase their maneuverability and speed.^^
        As a result of these efforts, forty-five modern fighting ships
      were built and launched between 1789 and 1798.^^ These in¬
      cluded three of the largest ships the Ottoman fleet ever had pos¬
      sessed, each forty-seven meters long and with three cannon
      decks, all built by Le Brun: the Selimiye, with 122 cannons and
      1,200 men, launched in 1796,^'* the Badi-i Nusret, with 82 cannons
      and 900 men, launched in 1797,^® and the Tavus-u Bahri, with the
      same complement, launched a year later.^® The fleet increased in
      size from 17 ships of the line and 20 frigates and corvettes in
      1796 to 20 ships of the line and 25 frigates a decade later, and
      with 2,156 cannons and 40,000 sailors and seagoing soldiers, it
      was able to compete with the fleets of Europje in a way that the
      Ottoman army was unable to do at that time.^^
        While reforms were carried out in the Arsenal and the fleet,
      important changes were also introduced in the Imperial Naval
      Engineering School at Haskoy. Previous to 1787, training here
      had been primarily in geometry and arithmetic. Practical sea¬
      manship and navigation had been taught the graduates only after
      they joined their ships and went to sea. Since no comparable
      infantry engineering school yet existed, the naval school also
      had to provide some training in the theory and practice of forti¬
      fication and mine-laying for students preparing for the army, and
      this further limited its ability to meet the more practical needs
      of its naval students.^** After 1786, the chief instructor of the
      school was Gelenbevi Ismail Efendi,^^ who taught geometry, and




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
his only assistant was the supervisor of the school, Kasap Bashi        159
zade Ihrahim Efendi, an expert in mathematics.^® In addition
there were three French naval officers who gave lessons in navi¬
gation and seamanship; most of their lectures, translated into
Turkish, were printed by the French embassy press in Istanbul
for the use of the students.®' After the French experts were with¬
drawn in the middle of 1788, and especially until the war’s end
in 1792, the lack of qualified teachers caused Ismail Efendi and
Ibrahim Efendi to use theii'best students as instructors, teaching
them three days a week and sending them to teach the rest of the
students what they had learned every Tuesday and Friday.
  During the war the naval school continued to emphasize mathe¬
matics and geometry. It was only in 1792 that special lessons in
seamanship and navigation were introduced for those planning
to enter active sea service; but even then, the students received
most of their training in these subjects only after they went to
sea. There was no training in naval architecture at the school;
this was handled entirely through the apprentice system by Le
Brun and his associates in the Arsenal. It was not until the es¬
tablishment of the army engineering school in 1793 and the con¬
sequent transfer of the mine-laying and fortification classes to it
that the naval school was able to expand its curriculum to in¬
clude these more practical naval subjects. At the same time,
Le Brun began to appeal strongly for the establishment of a
regular division of naval architecture in the school so that the
students could secure a more systematic and complete education
than was possible at the Arsenal and also so his own staff would
be released for its primary duty, that of shipbuilding.
  As a result of his recommendation and the generally felt need
for changes in the school’s curriculum, it was given an entirely
new building in the Arsenal in 1795, and a year later it was re¬
organized, with two distinct divisions established to meet the
needs of the students. The navigation division {Fenn-i Derya ve
Jugrafya) was devoted to navigation, geography, and cartography,
and a new construction (Inshaiye) division was established with
Le Brun as chief instructor, assisted by two of his Turkish pupils.®®
Ten students were enrolled in the construction division and twenty
in the navigation division, with students attending classes from




                    Revival of the Ottoman Navy
160   nine in the morning until sunset daily except Friday and Sunday.
      Both divisions first met in common classes for their arithmetic
      and geometry lessons, and they then split into specialized sec¬
      tions for the remainder of the day. On Fridays the navigation
      students were required to go to the shipyards for observation and
      practical training, and on Mondays and Thursdays they went to
      the army engineering school for lessons with its newer and much
      superior equipment. In addition to the regular teachers, the navi¬
      gation section also employed a fewy^hip captains, who came on
      special occasions to give students and teachers alike the benefit
      of their experience. In 1796, a group of twenty apprentices was
      established to provide servants for the teachers while preparing
      the youths involved for entry into the school as vacancies oc-
      curred.^^ After that time, no one could become a student without
      first serving at least a year as an apprentice.
        Although continuous records of the school are not extant, there
      are enough references in other sources to indicate that it operated
      successfully through the crisis of the French expedition to Egypt,
      and was in operation when Selim was deposed. In 1805, Osman
      Efendi was its chief instructor, and it had forty regularly en¬
      rolled students, of whom twenty-four were present at the school
      and sixteen were with the fleet. The course apparently was for
      three years, and the students in their senior year were allowed
      to serve as apprentices on naval ships if they could And captains
      willing to take them. At the same time, there were twelve stu¬
      dents in the architectural section studying four-year courses.



                          Naval Reorganization
        With the rapid development of the navy and its schools during
      the decade following the Peace of Jassy, the relatively simple
      organization established in 1795 became inadequate to the in¬
      creasingly complex tasks of administration which arose. The
      original failure to define and distinguish the responsibilities and
      authorities of the Grand Admiral and the chief of the Arsenal led
      to continuous disputes, which began to disrupt the efficiency and
      proper development of the entire naval service.^^ To resolve these
      problems, a series of regulations were issued between November




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
1804 and May 1805, by which the navy was almost completely
reorganized and a ministry of the navy was established for the
                                                                      161   ,
first time.^®
  The post of chief of the Arsenal was abolished and replaced by
a new Umur-u Bahriye Naziri (Superintendent of naval affairs).
For the first time, the Admiralty was given its own independent
treasury {Tersane Hazinesi), with revenues assigned to it from
the Jizye (poll tax) collected from non-Muslim subjects, the
Avariz (household tax), the naval substitution tax paid by naval
conscripts wishing to avoid service, and from the Nizam-i Jedid
treasury.®^ The director of the Arsenal treasury {Tersane Hazinesi
Defterdari) was also given the position of third treasurer {Shikk-i
Salis) of the Imperial Treasury to provide him with rank and
revenues in the Ottoman hierarchy, thus placing him immediately
after the director of the Irad-i Jedid treasury, who retained the
rank of second treasurer.®®
  In addition to the regular taxes set aside for the navy treasury,
it was also given a number of tax forms as well as all the fiefs
previously given to naval officers, and it was ordered to farm
theni out to the highest bidders to secure further revenues for
its operations. As in the case of the Irad-i Jedid holdings of the
same kind,®® the naval treasury was required to pay the Imperial
Treasury the regular purchase price of the tax farms, equal to
five times their average annual profit to the tax farmers.
   Aside from his financial duties, the director of the Arsenal
treasury also was in charge of enrolling and conscripting the men
subject to service in the fleet and of collecting the substitution
taxes from those wishing to evade this service. The Mediterranean
and Aegean Islands, which traditionally had been held as fiefs
by the Grand Admiral to provide the fleet with men and revenues,
now were administered jointly by the Treasurer and the Grand
Admiral, who were admonished to act justly and avoid any sort
of misrule. While sharing responsibility and authority, the
Grand Admiral was primarily responsible for administering the
islands and the Treasurer concentrated on recruiting and tax¬
collecting.
  The naval treasury was given a separate building in the Im¬
 perial Palace and was required to use its funds to meet all ex-




                    Revival of the Ottoman Navy
penses of the Arsenal, the construction and repair of ships, the
wages and rations of the sailors and artisans, and the ammunition
and other supplies needed by the ships of the fleet. All supplies
had to be purchased at the market price and in cash, and various
checks and balances were introduced to prevent corruption in the
process.
  The minister and treasurer of the navy were required to follow
complicated legal channels before they'could make any major
purchases. They had to send specif agents to the markets to
determine the current prices of every article they wanted and
then send lists of articles and prices to the Porte for approval
before the actual purchases could be made. At the end of each
year, detailed registers were drawn up of all the ships built, the
materials and supplies used in them, and the wages paid out.
  To assist the minister, he was given an executive assistant
called Kalyonlar Katibi (naval scribe), who was not a treasury
scribe but a member of the Imperial Council with previous scribal
training. Thus it was a major political post which had to be filled
by someone with rank in the Ottoman hierarchy. He was appointed
for a term of three years, without payment of fees or bribes, so
that he would not be tempted to use his position for personal gain
or profit.
  For all practical purposes naval affairs were divided into two
separate but interdependent divisions, military and administra¬
tive. The organization, arrangement, equipment, and training
of the fleet in peace and war, command and direction of naval
maneuvers and tactics, the organization, assignment and dis¬
ciplining of all captains, officers, and men, and the maintenance
and administration of all ships, were primarily assigned to the
Grand Admiral, with the minister of naval affairs having super¬
visory powers at most. However, the minister of naval affairs was
appointed Lieutenant {Vekil) to the Grand Admiral so that when¬
ever the Grand Admiral was absent from Istanbul on naval duty,
the minister had to take over his duties.
  All matters concerned with provisions, supplies, and weapons
of the Arsenal and ffeet, the food, rations, and salaries of officers
and men, the acquisition of grains and other supplies, the manu¬
facture and distribution of ammunition, and the collection and




                   The "New Order” of Selim III
expenditure of all Arsenal and fleet revenues were assigned to           163
the minister of naval affairs, acting as, or through, a director of
the naval treasury. In addition to these administrative and finan¬
cial duties, he was also responsible for supervising and managing
the building and repair of ships in all the shipyards of the empire,
in Istanbul and elsewhere.
  In addition, detailed regulations were issued concerning the
officers and men of the fleet, and their enrollment, promotion,
training, wages, and rations. A strict hierarchy of rank was es¬
tablished. In the first rank of officers below each ship captain were
his executive officer {Reis-i Evvel), artillery chief (Ser Topi-i
Kalyon), and chief scribe and instructor {Bash Hoja). The second
group of officers included the executive assistant {Reis-i Sani) and
the chief sailmaker {Bad Bani-i Kalyon). The lower officers were
placed in similar groups. Three-decker ships were staffed with
370 officers of various ranks, including the carpenters and caulk¬
ers, who, as already noted, were given officers’ rank under the
new regulations. Smaller galleons with fewer than 55 cannons
were given 242 officers. Frigates had 163, and corvettes 116, of¬
ficers, with lesser numbers assigned to smaller ships.
   Seamen were supposed to be enrolled only from among able-
bodied men with sea experience, and they came mainly from the
Greek Islands and from the area surrounding the capital. Efforts
 also were made to send graduates of the naval schools aboard
 ships as instructors to train both officers and men. Three instruc¬
 tors were carried on the largest ships. One would serve as chief
 instructor, caring for the captain’s correspondence and the ship’s
 accounts, keeping and using the signal flags, and keeping regis¬
 ters of the men and supplies aboard together with their disposi¬
 tion. The second instructor was in charge of the cooking and dis¬
 tribution of meals, along with the accounts of the food stocks and
 their use. The third instructor kept the ship’s log of daily events.
 All the instructors also held daily classes for the officers and men,
 and the captains were required to educate them in the more
 practical aspects of seamanship and navigation. One or two in¬
 structors were assigned to each of the smaller ships, according to
 need and the desires of the captain.
   The entire force of officers and men was formed into a strict




                      Revival of the Ottoman Navy
hierarchy, with promotions based almost entirely on seniority.
Salaries were raised considerably over the amounts set in 1795,
and the captains’ salaries in port were increased from one-half
to two-thirds of their active campaign pay.
  When the post of vice-admiral of the Imperial fleet (Kapudane-i
Hiimayun) was vacated, the commander of the port of Istanbul
was supposed to All it, and everyone else moved up one notch.
When there was a vacancy among the captains, it was supposed
to be filled by the executive officer {^ash'Reis) on the same ship,
with preference given to the former if they came out equally well
in their examinations. When the post of Bash Reis was vacated,
it could be filled either by the second or third Reis or by an expert
sailor in the same crew, whichever man did best in the examina¬
tion. Only if none of these proved capable of filling the post in
question, could officers and men on other ships be considered.
While the fleet was in port, an officer called Lonja Bashi (club
chief) were appointed to make sure that its officers and sailors
were properly dressed at all times and to prevent persons not in
the fleet from claiming its rights and privileges.In addition, a
regular corps of enlisted salaried naval riflemen was established
on the model of the Nizam-i Jedid corps to serve on the ships of
the fleet as marines. In previous campaigns, such men had been
assigned from the regular land corps, and in particular from the
Nizam-i Jedid army, but they had proven to be unsuitable for
regular sea service because of their unfamiliarity with its special
conditions and needs. The new naval rifle corps was given organi¬
zation, discipline, and training very similar to those of the
Nizam-i Jedid army, but changes were made so that they could
fit in with the existing naval organization and the unique condi¬
tions at sea. A corps of 1,000 men was established in two regi¬
ments of 500 men and officers each. The chief officer of the corps
was called the Tufenkji Kapudani (rifle captain), with each regi¬
ment commanded by two of his assistants {Tufenkji Kapudani
Mulazimi) and divided into ten companies of 45 men each. All
men who entered the corps had to serve first as ordinary riflemen,
and they were allowed to rise through the ranks after demon¬
strating their ability through service and examinations. The
wages and salaries of the corps were the same as those provided




                   The "New Order” of Selim III
in the Nizam-i Jedid corps. These men and officers were also            165
trained in the regular naval skills of seamanship and navigation
so they could handle their ships when required. As a result, if
they wished, they were allowed to transfer to the active branch
of naval service and to rise as high as they could.'**
  Efforts were also made to improve naval medicine. In the past,
so-called doctors had been hired to accompany the ships and do
what they could for the men, but few of them had any training
in medicine, and they kneW nothing aside from what they could
learn from experience. In general their efforts were of little value,
and once a man was wounded, there was little chance of his re¬
covering. In 1806, a full-fledged medical school was established
at the Arsenal. A chief doctor {Hekim Bashi) and chief surgeon
(Jerrah Bashi!Ser Jerrah) were appointed to direct the education
of doctors and surgeons and their assignment and service with the
fleet.^^ Students were taken into the hospital for the first time in
late 1806, with the hope that they would be trained in sufficient
numbers so that each ship could be given at least one doctor and
one surgeon. Students there were given training in both medicine
and surgery. In their third year, they were supposed to be sent
out with the fleet to obtain experience under fire and to assist the
regular ships doctors. Students were required to serve the state
at least four years after graduation in order to pay back the cost
of their education. If they chose to enter private practice after
completing their terms of service, the chief doctors and surgeons
supplied them with diplomas (ijaze), indicating the length of
their training and service, and these were confirmed by special
decrees of the Imperial Council issued upon application by the
minister of the navy.
 European medical books were translated into Turkish by mem¬
bers of the staff. Instruments and books were purchased for the
school from Europe with the assistance of the various European
embassies in the capital, and a number of European medical
journals were secured for its library. Each of the medical students
was required to serve at least one day and night per week in the
public hospital (Bimarhane) of Istanbul as well as in the Arsenal
hospital. A special hospital was built in an isolated section of the
Arsenal to be used for treating infectious diseases, in particular




                      Revival of the Ottoman Navy
166   for persons suffering from the plague. Thus for the first time the
      idea of quarantine penetrated into a land which had accepted the
      plague almost without question for centuries. Prisoners who died
      in the Arsenal jail were turned over to the medical students for
      their anatomy lessons and experiments although this was kept
      very secret so as not to antagonize the more orthodox elements of
      the community. Surgical instruments and medicines were now
      regularly supplied to each ship so that the doctors and surgeons
      would have sufficient equipment for their work.
        In this way a regular state medical service based on modern
      principles and methods was introduced into Turkey. Once again,
      basic reform entered the Ottoman system through the military
      although in this case it was the navy whiqh led rather than the
      army. Since the medical reforms were legislated in 1805 and be¬
      gun in 1806, only a start had been made before Selim’s deposition
      brought them to a sudden halt. By the summer of 1807, there
      were no more than two doctors and six students comprising the
      staff of the uncompleted Arsenal hospital.'*^ Yet this was an im¬
      portant beginning, and a nucleus of doctors and medical students
      was left for a renewal of the effort in subsequent reigns.




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
     XIII. Administrative, Economic,
           and Social Reforms




                 /




Selim III was a true heir of the eighteenth-century Ottoman re¬
formers in devoting most of his attention and energy to military
reform. There is little to show that he or his advisers understood
how much the technological reforms of Europe were themselves
the product of the social, economic, and political revolutions
which had been going on since the Reformation, and how they
could not be successfully applied in the Ottoman Empire except in
the context of the economic, social, and political development
which had produced them. Nowhere was this more evident than
in the attempts at administrative reform.
  The anarchy within the Ottoman adminstration at the end of
the eighteenth century, reflected so often in military dissolution,
need not be described again. Bribery, corruption, nepotism, negli¬
gence, venality, and cruelty, all were endemic to the Ottoman sys-
tern. Few officials thought of their positions as anything other
than means for personal profit at the expense of state and sub¬
jects alike.
   Even more serious, the central government had almost no con¬
trol at all over the expenditure of its funds. There was no central
budget in the modern sense. Traditionally in the Ottoman fiscal
system each government department and bureau was assigned
specific Treasury revenues to spend as it saw fit. If these were not
    sufficient, the department directors were able to issue promissory
    notes obligating the Treasury to pay back whatever they borrowed
    to meet expenses in addition to the customary ones and, of course,
    to fill their own pockets. The traditional means by which the
    fiscal activities of each department were checked within the
    Treasury had broken down. The Treasury and Imperial Council
    had no effective control over the issuance of these promissory
    notes, but they still had to pay for them. There was no effort at
    all to draw up a budget of revenues ^t the beginning of each year
    and to allocate expenditures according to means. There was no
    one who knew what the total revenues and expenditures of the
    government were. Government officials had always been rela¬
    tively independent in their posts according to the dictates of the
    Ottoman concept o{''hadd”^ and so long as they had been bound
    by the moral and religious codes of the Ottoman ruling class,
    this independence had never become license. But now they were
bound by nothing except their own greed, which was limitless in
    most cases. And of course this sort of disorganization and anarchy
at the center had weakened central control over the provinces,
over both the Ottoman provincial officials and the local notables,
who had taken advantage of central weakness to interpose ef¬
fectively between the government and the people.^
/    Selim’s response to these conditions in no way equaled his mili¬
tary reforms, either in intensity or in success. In 1793, his princi¬
pal administrative reform was introduced, an attempt to restore
the corps of ministers (sing, vezir, pi. vilzerd), the highest-ranked
administrative officers of state, who occupied the principal
government positions.^
      In 1797, efforts were made to equalize the revenues available
to the various officials holding the rank of vezir. Most of them
secured most of their revenues by serving as provincial governors,
holding their provinces as tax farms, delivering a fixed annual
amount of tax revenue to the Treasury, and keeping the balance
of their tax collections as profit for themselves. Ordinarily, vezirs
served as governors of the twenty-eight provinces of the empire:
Egypt, Damascus, Baghdad, Basra, Shehrizor, Aleppo, Karaman,
Rakka, Diyarbekir, Adana, Sidon, Mosul, Anatolia, Trebizond,
Erzurum, Childir, Van, Kars, Marash, Sivas, Jidda, Tripoli of




                      The "New Order” of Selim III
Syria, Crete, Rumelia, Serbia, Bosnia, the Morea, and the Aegean       169
Islands. However, Kars, Marash, and Adana at this time were
relatively poor provinces, which could not produce sufficient
revenues to support separate vezirs. Mosul was traditionally
given to whoever was governor of Tripoli, and the provinces of
Shehrizor and Basra were reserved for the governor of Baghdad.
Moreover, much of the land belonging to the provinces of Belgrade
and Vidin had been lost to the enemy in the last war, so these
positions too were no longer sufficient for vezirs. This left only
twenty regular provinces still producing enough revenue for a
uezir-governor to/ maintain himself and his suite. By Selim’s
time, however, there were over thirty-five men having the rank
of vezir. So that they would be satisfied, they were given jobs
ordinarily going to persons with the next lower administrative
rank of beylerbey, and so on down the line, the general administra¬
tive hierarchy thus being upset.
  Selim’s solution was to order the number of vezirs drastically
cut —no more than twenty-three vezirs were allowed at one time,
with three of them serving the Sultan as Grand Vezir and sub¬
ordinates and the remaining twenty serving as governors. No
vezir thereafter was to be allowed to hold any job not specifically
set aside for a person of his rank, and care was to be taken that
only experienced and intelligent persons were appointed as vezirs,
preferably those who had demonstrated their merit by previous
service in lower ranks.^
  Detailed regulations were issued to reorganize fees and pay¬
ments required from officials in return for their appointments
and the profits received from their positions. The principal gifts
of this kind by Selim’s time were the Yillik-i Humayun (annual
Imperial payment), given by most officials to the Sultan and mem¬
bers of his family every year at the beginning of Ramazan, Idiye
(holiday) payments given by subordinates to superiors in the
bureau of the Treasury and the Grand Vezir’s office at the same
time, and Iftariye gifts of watches provided for members of the
Ulema by the Grand Vezir shortly before the close of Ramazan
each year. The multiplicity of gifts which each official was obliged
to provide proved to be an extremely heavy burden far beyond the
ability of their regular salaries to satisfy, and so they were




            Administrative, Economic, and Social Reforms
                                           1


170     forced to use their positions for personal profit, even in cases
        where they did not wish to do so.^ Seliip hoped that by regulating
        and limiting these gifts, he would relieve his officials of the neces¬
        sity and desire to steal and thus provide the key to restoring
        equilibrium and order to the traditional administrative system.
        In 1795, the gifts in kind were abolished and replaced by estab¬
        lished cash sums, which were raised or lowered according to the
        annual revenues of each official. The annual Imperial payments
        were now required only from offiicial^ who could afford them and
        then only on a very restricted basis.®
          Efforts also were made to increase the power and prestige of
      ^the provincial governors [vali] so that they would be much better
        able to resist the efforts of the local notables to gain independence
        from Ottoman authority and carry out their obligations and
        duties. To accomplish this, Selim ordered that their terms be
        increased from one to three or five years. During a term they
        could not be dismissed unless they were convicted of crimes con¬
        nected with their official activities. In addition Selim provided
        that if provincial governors were found to have ruled well, their
        terms could be extended indefinitely so that state and subjects
        alike would benefit from continuity and good rule.
          The Sultan also issued various regulations to lessen the burden
        imposed on his subjects by officials traveling through the empire.
        Every official had the right to impose the cost of his food and
        lodging on the inhabitants of the villages through which he
        passed. The empire was filled with governors and their assis¬
        tants moving back and forth, using this right as a means of in¬
        flicting heavy charges on the hapless people living along their
        routes. Selim hoped that this source of tyranny might be elimi¬
        nated by strictly defining the charges which could be levied and
        by reducing the number of officials traveling on official business.
        In late 1796, he instituted the first part of this program by de¬
        creeing that when governors were transferred to new positions,
        care should be taken that they be located close to their previous
        ones so they would have to travel as little as possible.^ All officials
        with the rank of vezir were divided into two great geographical
      V services, those of Anatolia and Rumelia, and it was expressly
        stipulated that those in one service should not be transferred to




                            The "New Order” of Selim III
positions in the other without special approval.® The governors        171
were strictly limited in the number of agents {mubashir) they
could send through the provinces, but a failure to define specifi¬
cally the fees each agent would charge nullified this reform in
practice.®
  Nor were the operations of the central administrative and
financial departments entirely ignored. Most of the normal ad¬
ministrative tasks of government, the reception and disposition
of petitions, letters, and communications of various kinds, and
the issuance of official decrees and statements had been concen¬
trated in the scribal departments of the Imperial Council, directed
by the Reis ul-Kuttab, under the traditional Ottoman system.
But as the Council lost its importance during the eighteenth
century, these departments had gradually been transferred to the
authority of the Council of the Grand Vezir (Ikindi Divan), lo¬
cated at the Sublime Porte {Bab-i Ali), which in response to its
new position gradually assumed the name Bab-i Asafi and be¬
came the principal administrative center of Ottoman govern¬
ment.’® All of these reforms had been accomplished informally.
Nothing had been done to alter the laws to correspond with the
fact or to adjust the regulations of the Grand Vezir’s office to in¬
clude its new obligations and powers, and those of the Imperial
Council to cover its losses. The result was administrative chaos,
confused lines of authority, and an increasingly rapid decline of
the Ottoman scribal standards, which had been maintained at a
fairly high level until that time.
  It was only under Selim III that efforts were made to regulate
and regularize the new system and, in particular, to establish
regular channels of authority and lines of control in the greatly
expanded Bab-i Asafi administrative department of the Grand
Vezir.” Supreme executive authority in the expanded depart¬
ment was now given to his Lieutenant, the Kethiida-i Bab-i
Asafi, who thus became in fact the administrative director of the
central government, assisted by the Reis ul-Kuttab}^ The four
departments now officially transferred from the Imperial Council
to the Grand Vezir’s office were: (a) the Amedi bureau, directed
by the Amedji {Amedi Efendi), which was assigned to care for the
records, correspondence, and decrees of the Grand Vezir, agree-




             Administrative, Economic, and Social Reforms
172   ments and correspondence with foreign states and subjects as
      carried on by the Reis ul-Kuttab, and communications between
      the Imperial Council and the Sultan;^^ (b) the Beylikji or Divan
      Kalemi, directed by the Beylikji Efendi, which had the job of re¬
      cording the deliberations and decisions of the Imperial Council,
      including its Muhimme registers, and the various firmans and
      decrees issued by the council;*^ (c) the Riius-i Hiimayun depart¬
      ment, which was in charge of recording the positions and tax
      farms held by all members of the ruling class except those with
      the rank or Vezir and Beylerbey and those holding fiefs;'® and (d)
      the Rise department, also called Nishan Kalemi and Tahvil
      Kalemi, which was in charge of recording possession and trans¬
      fers of all fiefs held by officials of the Porte.'® The functions of
      these offices thus remained about the same as they always had
      been; but now their distinct duties were set down, and their inter¬
      relationships and their relations with their new superiors, and
      their internal regulations were revived, restated, and restored.
      The Imperial Council was left with only two bureaus of any con¬
      sequence; the Teshrifat Kalemi, in charge of protocol, ceremonies,
      and rewards bestowed by the Sultan,"’ and the Vak’aniivis Kalemi,
      the office of the official state chronicler.'®
        Emphasis was also given to an improvement of the quality of
      the scribes and of their work in the bureaus of the Grand Vezir.
      During the last quarter of the century, the number of scribes,
      students, and apprentices in each department had expanded far
      beyond their original numerical limits and the number actually
      needed. Most of these posts had come to be filled by relatives and
      children of the older scribes, many of whom were entirely un¬
      qualified for them. In addition the general overcrowding of the
      existing office space left the departments in a state of anarchy. To
      end this sort of situation strict limits now were applied to the
      number of scribes, students, and apprentices who could be em¬
      ployed in each office and new high standards were imposed on
      the process by which they were selected. All new appointments
      were suspended for two years so that posts could be abolished as
      they became vacant until the original limits of each cadre were
      restored. During this time, no more than twelve new students
      could be appointed each year, of whom six were for the Divan




                           The "New Order” of Selim III
office, and three each for the Riius and Rise departments. Prefer¬     173
ence was given to applicants with previous experience, but ex¬
aminations were required for all in place of the recommendations
which had formerly enabled ministers and notables to get their
own favorites and relatives enrolled. In 1797, the number of new
students who could be enrolled each year was doubled to twenty-
four because of an urgent need for them. Of these, twelve were
assigned to the Divan offices each year and six each to the Riius
and Rise departments. The section in charge of keeping the
Miihimme registers of the Imperial Council was separated from
the Beylikji department and made into an independent division,
with fifteen scribes assigned to its service. Each of these was
allowed one apprentice and one student appointed from among
scribes who had performed previous service in other departments.
The Mektubi bureau of the Amedi department, which cared for
the Grand Vezir’s correspondence, was limited to forty scribes
and thirty apprentices and students, but children of members
were allowed to serve as apprentices without regard to these
limits. In the other parts of the Amedi department, the number of
scribes was cut to six and total number of apprentices and stu¬
dents was also cut to six, all coming from service in the other
departments of government.
  New regulations were also introduced concerning the service
and compensation of scribes and apprentices. Compensation was
provided for most of them from fiefs still attached to their depart-
ments.^® The administration of the fiefs was assigned to special
agents appointed by the grand vezirs so that the scribes them¬
selves would be entirely free to perform their duties at all times.
An effort also was made to restore the standards of scribal skill
and calligraphy. Scribes were required to write the various docu¬
ments and registers in the proper scripts and according to the
traditional methods, with the traditional forms and phraseologies,
and the new tendencies toward individualistic and careless writ¬
ing and expression were sternly suppressed under threat of heavy
penalties. Scribes were also cautioned time and again to make
certain that the facts presented in petitions to the Imperial
Council and the Grand Vezir were not incorporated intact into
the resulting Imperial orders unless they were verified by investi-




            Administratiue, Economic, and Social Reforms
                                        %



174   gation. They were also ordered to refuse bribes offered in return
      for the incorporation of such false information in official docu¬
      ments and to ascertain that they were within the powers and au¬
      thority of their particular departments when they issued admini¬
      strative decrees and regulations.^^
        Ordinarily, vacated scribal posts were supposed to be given to
      the most qualified of the apprentices and students in the depart¬
      ments concerned, but Selim made various modifications in this
      rule in order to improve the morale of the scribes and make them
      much more amenable to his administrative reforms. Scribes were
      allowed to bequeath their posts and the attached fiefs to their
      sons if they were qualified and willing to perform their duties.
      Only if such heirs were not available were, the posts in question
      declared vacant and awarded to students and apprentices. Those
      sons and heirs of dead scribes who were minors were not allowed
      to assume their fathers’ posts and fiefs, but provisions were made
      for them to serve as assistants of fief-holders in Anatolia until
      they reached their majority and could become apprentices in
      their fathers’ departments.^^
        As a result of these efforts, the number of scribes, apprentices,
      and students serving in the offices of the Porte was reduced from
      over 200 in 1789 to 110 in the spring of 1798,^“* and the efficiency
      and standards of the departments were improved enormously.-^
        Similar regulations were issued in the departments of the
      Treasury. The number of scribes, students, and apprentices serv¬
      ing in its various branches was reduced from 170 to 60, with
      strict entrance examinations and work regulations restoring a
      great deal of the Treasury’s old standards and efficiency.^® Noth¬
      ing was done to modernize its methods, however, and much of the
      work which was accomplished was offset by the creation of the
      new Irad-i Jedid treasury. Although it operated in a much more
      modern fashion, using European accounting principles and the
      like, and while it attracted many of the best scribes of the Imperial
      Treasury because of the higher salaries which it offered, the
      resulting duplication of effort and overlapping of authority, plus
      the failure to distinguish exactly between the revenues and ex¬
      penditures assigned to each of the two treasuries, created new
      confusion and inefficiencies and doubled the opportunities for
      theft and misrule.



                         The "New Order” of Selim III
              Economic and Social Reforms                               175

  Selim’s efforts to improve the chaotic state of Ottoman society
followed closely the policies inaugurated in the years immedi¬
ately after his accession.^® Periodic efforts were made to reduce
the population of Istanbul and to force those without homes or
jobs to return to the villages from which they had come.^® Decrees
were issued closing taverns and coffeehouses,^® prohibiting the
construction of new hotela {han) to house transients,®* and re¬
quiring persons to wear only the clothing allowed to them by
their class and rapk,®® but this did little to calm the discontent.
Efforts made to purify the Ulema and to substitute examinations
in place of influence and bribes for appointments and promotions
were largely unsuccessful.®®
  Selim’s economic and financial measures also imitated those
adopted during the 1787-1792 war. Although the conclusion of
peace removed the pressure of military expenditure upon the
state Treasury, the tremendous expense of the Sultan’s military
reforms, combined with the rise of Balkan notables and bandits
who not only cut off the Treasury’s provincial revenues but also
forced the Porte to spend large sums for annual expeditions
against them, further increased the financial difficulties of the
state and made it very difficult for the Sultan and his ministers
to find sufficient money to run the government.
  In response to these difficulties all they could do was to increase
taxes, debase coins, seize private property, and melt down gold
and silver utensils (the tried and true Ottoman methods of
financial survival), but these efforts had the same unfortunate
results as before — economic disorder, inflation, famine, and
chaos. The devaluation of coins and increase in foreign imports
led to general price increases and a further flow of Ottoman pre¬
cious metals abroad, thus increasing the economic difficulties.®'*
  The most concrete and successful of Selim’s economic programs
were those introduced to organize the provision of grain and
coffee for the great cities of the empire. Recurrent shortages,
beginning during the war and continuing sporadically thereafter,
had been a principal cause of popular discontent, and had been
used by the opponents of the Nizam-i Jedid to foment opposition
to it. Now the previously unimportant position of supervisor of



            Administrative, Economic, and Social Reforms
176   grains (Hububat Naziri) was raised in status so that its holder
      would have the power to enforce the new grain regulations intro¬
      duced by the government. He was provided with the rank of
      Third Treasurer of the Imperial Treasury, so that he would not
      only have a place in the Ottoman hierarchy but also the authority
      needed to carry out his duties.
        The principal problem of the supervisor was to provide Istanbul
      with sufficient grain to feed all its inhabitants during the winter
      months. A combination of high seas', muddy roads, and piracy
      had made it increasingly difficult to bring grains to the capital
      from Egypt and Anatolia. The grains of the Principalities, form¬
      erly procured without difficulty, had been unobtainable since
      1792. To solve the problem, large state granaries were now built
      in Istanbul so that grains still available from Anatolia could be
      brought into the city more easily for storage during the summer.
      Since private merchants in the past had used the slightest hints
      of shortages to raise prices, often withholding supplies from the
      famished population in order to increase their own profits, the
      provision and supply of grains in Istanbul was socialized under
      the direction of the supervisor of grains. He was given state funds
      totaling 125,000,000 piasters as capital to set himself up as the
      sole grain merchant in the capital, buying all grains from their
      producers at the current market prices, storing them in the vari¬
      ous granaries put at his disposal, and selling them at fixed prices
      to the bakers and householders of the capital in summer and
      winter alike. In addition he was given absolute authority to en¬
      force established retail prices for all bread and grain goods and
      to punish with death any merchants who violated these regula¬
      tions. One of the duties of the department was supervising the
      bakers of the capital, checking on standards and prices of bread,
      and making sure that each loaf had the proper amount of flour
      and was not filled with straw and other waste materials. When
      necessary, the supervisor of grain was also authorized to pur¬
      chase extra grains from the state granary, which received them
      as tax revenues and was ordinarily supposed to use them only for
      the rations given to various employees of the state.^®
        Similar efforts were made to regulate the distribution of coffee.
      Merchants often had mixed grain with the coffee sold in the mar-




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
ket, and the tax farm monopolies held for the sale of coffee had      177
been misused for the profit of the holders at the expense of the
state Treasury and the consumer.^® Early in 1794, Mustafa Res-
hid, treasurer of the Irad-i Jedid, was appointed to investigate
the entire problem, and his report was used as the basis of a new
coffee regulation introduced in the spring of 1795.^^ The most
essential element of the new law was its abolition of the tax farm
which controlled the coffee trade. No longer was the power of
regulation to be held by a tkx farmer who collected taxes from the
coffee merchants and turned over only a portion of them to the
state Treasury. Control of the entire coffee industry now was
placed in the hands of a salaried Ottoman official, the Tahmis
Emini, assisted by four of the most knowledgeable coffee experts
available. He enforced standards of quality and price on all coffee
producers and merchants in the empire and was specifically pro¬
hibited from collecting any sort of tax from them in return. Only
the state roasting plant was allowed to levy specified charges on
the coffee brought in by merchants for roasting and grinding,
but these were considerably smaller than those applied by the
tax farmers in former times. Strict regulations were introduced
to prevent attempts to mix anything with the coffee before selling
it to consumers, and inspectors were sent into the markets by the
Tahmis Emini to make certain that these regulations were
obeyed.^®
  Some efforts were also made to improve the position of the
Ottoman Empire in international trade. In the past, almost all
goods shipped into and out of the Empire were handled by foreign V
merchants in foreign ships. The Capitulations "rights” of foreign V
merchants in the Empire, originally granted as privileges by
the powerful sixteenth-century sultans, had become means for
them to ignore Ottoman laws and regulations entirely and thus
acquire considerable advantages over those Ottoman subjects
who attempted to compete with them. Those Ottomans who did
try to participate in foreign trade, for the most part members of
the non-Muslim minorities, had to acquire a competitive position
either by obtaining foreign nationality from sympathetic Euro¬
pean ambassadors or by acquiring European protection and thus
becoming members of the ever-increasing "protected” ihimayelu)




            Administrative, Economic, and Social Reforms
                                               1


178        class. Many Ottoman merchants acquired such protection hy
           being appointed to the post of "translator” or to other positions
           in the foreign consulates since such employees, by definition,
           were included in the Capitulations rights. These appointees and
           their families were excused from all Ottoman taxes and were
      ^    entitled to pay the same low customs duties charged foreigners
           under the various Capitulations treaties. Foreign consuls clearly
           abused this right by selling such appointments at considerable
           profit to Ottoman merchants wishing to escape the regulation
           and control of the Sultan’s laws.
             Selim made strenuous efforts to curb these abuses. Starting in
           1794, he ordered that foreign ambassadors should appoint no
           more translators and others than those actually needed, and that
           such persons who were not performing real service as prescribed
           by the Capitulations treaties should be subjected to all the laws
           and taxes to which they were liable by virtue of their Ottoman
           allegiance.^® In addition efforts were made to force foreign mer¬
           chants to pay at least the three per cent customs tax on imports
           and exports required by the treaties and to eliminate the abuses
           which corrupt customs officials had brought into the system by
           charging considerably less than the legal customs rate and ac¬
           cepting bribes for themselves in return.^® Restrictions were im¬
           posed on Ottoman subjects desiring to transfer to foreign national¬
           ity and protection.^* Efforts were also made to interest Ottomans
           in carrying on foreign trade. The Sultan encouraged wealthy
           officials to build and sail their own merchant ships in order to
           build up an Ottoman merchant fieet, and for the first time in over
          , a century a few Ottoman trade ships began to make their ap-
           pearance in the ports of the Mediterranean.^^
             These economic regulations were almost entirely unsuccessful,
           however. Periodic shortages of grains and coffee, as well as price
           inflation, plagued Istanbul throughout Selim’s reign.^® The conse¬
           quent price rises and famines contributed in large measure to the
           increasingly hostile attitude of the people toward his reforms.
           International trade continued in the hands of foreigners. Otto¬
           man efforts to rationalize the Capitulations and reduce abuses
           in their administration were violently and successfully opposed
          by the European ambassadors and consuls, who saw in every




                              The "New Order” of Selim III
reform only a new attempt to reduce the profits which they and
their proteges received from these abuses.^^ The European repre¬
sentatives at the Porte thus began a policy which was to prevail
during much of the nineteenth century despite idealistic senti¬
ments for reform. They opposed really fundamental reforms be¬
cause of the threats posed to their traditional privileges. Thus in
many ways Europeans in the Empire became as strong defenders
of their vested interests and opponents of real reforms as were the
most reactionary members of the old Ottoman ruling classes.


                  /




            Administrative, Economic, and Social Reforms
                      XIV. Window
                       to the West




                                      V




Most of Selim’s military, administrative, financial, and economic
reforms were at best only partially successful, but they were
opening wedges and essential guides for the efforts of his suc¬
cessors. At the same time and perhaps even more meaningful and
important in the long run was the concurrent introduction into
the empire of an awareness of the AVest which had harely ex¬
isted before his time. The iron curtain protecting the "Ottoman
way,” erected in an age of greatness and maintained in times of
decay by a ruling class convinced of the superiority of its institu¬
tions over anything which could possibly be conceived in an
infidel world, had effectively prevented the entry of the ideas
and artifacts of the Renaissance and Reformation and the move¬
ments which they had spawned and encouraged in the West. But
now this iron curtain was pierced on a large scale for the first
time, although it still was not destroyed, and into the Ottoman
world flowed not only the military and technical achievements of
Europe hut also many of the political, economic, and social ideas
and institutions which had made possible those achievements —
such as a recognition of the rights of the individual and of the
duty of the state to protect and serve him, and the need to provide
some means hy which all classes of society might participate in
their own government. To be sure, in a society long confined
within itself and based on a religion which provided a close-fitting   181
cloak of protection for the traditions of the past, such an opening
could at best have a very slight effect. Yet it laid the groundwork
for more widespread and significant penetration in later years,
when the real foundations of modern Turkey were laid.
  The channels through which knowledge of the West penetrated
the East during the era of Selim III were many and varied. Dif¬
ferent levels of Ottoman society were affected in different ways.
  Military Instruction. By 'far the most important of these chan¬
nels was the process by which the military techniques and wea¬
pons of the West were introduced into the Ottoman Empire.
Western languages and ways of thought, imparted to hundreds
of young Ottomans enrolled in the new corps and schools, opened
for them the whole scope of western civilization and broke down
the confines and restrictions imposed by traditional Ottoman
training as nothing else had ever done. Those whose training was
limited to technical and military subjects were able to understand
all aspects of European thought and achievements as no other
Ottomans before them could.
  The principal agents of transmission in the military field were
the European technical experts who came to the empire with the
new weapons and ideas of the West. To be sure, there had always
been western experts of this kind in the empire. Western rene¬
gades had taught the Ottomans how to use the cannons, rifles,
and gunpowder which made possible the great Ottoman con¬
quests in Europe and Asia. But during the eighteenth century,
the culmination of centuries of internal decay in increasingly
serious military defeats had led to a rapid increase in their mili¬
tary advisers. The Count de Bonneval and Baron de Tott were
only the most conspicuous of these. In addition there were numer¬
ous unnamed Europeans who fled from the lands of their births
for one reason or another and who assumed the identities and
habits of the East so completely that their true origins will for¬
ever remain a mystery, although the evidences and results of
their work are clear. But even the technical contribution of these
men was strictly limited to their own years of service and to the
individual Ottomans with whom they were in contact. Their in¬
fluence extended little beyond the small corps which they created




                         Window to the West
182       or served in and was usually wiped away after their departure.
          Furthermore they were almost invariably constrained to accept
          the dress and life of the society which they came to serve and were
          isolated from the mass of Ottoman society; hence their role in
          transmitting western culture and thought to traditionally edu¬
          cated Ottomans was negligible.
            It was only in Abd ul-Hamid I’s later years and in particular
          under Selim III that such military technicians and instructors
          had a significant and widely felt effect on Ottoman society. Most
          of them now came to Turkey in groups in response to specific
          Ottoman requests to their governments for assistance of various
          kinds. They were no longer renegades absorbed into Ottoman
          society but salaried foreign advisers who yvere allowed to retain
          their own identities and uniforms and to have contacts far wider
          than those of their predecessors. The Porte invariably stipulated
          that these men be of high ability, character, and morals, and that
          they agree to remain in Ottoman service for at least three years.
          In the contracts issued early in Selim’s reign, they were required
          to wear Ottoman uniforms and reside in buildings close to their
          places of work so as not to arouse the reactionaries, and they
          were warned to refrain from association with any Ottomans other
          than those they supervised or instructed. But these stipulations
          were largely ignored and were omitted entirely from the contracts
          issued after 1795. To secure foreign advisers of high quality, the
          Porte agreed to pay their travel expenses and to give them sal¬
          aries and wages considerably higher than those paid Ottomans
          with the same ranks and duties. Technicians were given special
          servants and guards, and those who particularly pleased the
          Sultan were presented with huge bonuses on special occasions,
          making this service far more profitable than similar work in
          Europe.
            The individual technicians and their work have already been
          mentioned in the sections devoted to the military corps which
          they served. About six hundred foreign technicians were in the
          pay of the Porte at any one time. Of these approximately half
          came from France and the balance from England, Austria and
          Sweden. These men comprised the first western social group ever
      V
          thrust into the midst of Ottoman society without special arrange-




                             The "New Order” of Selim III
merits designed to prevent their contact with the Ottomans. While   183
the Sultan ordered them to live and work away from the populace,
it was not long before they roamed the streets of the capital at
will, frequenting its places of amusement and commerce, and in
the process demonstrating western dress and behavior to all
classes of Ottoman society, most of whom had never seen Euro¬
peans before and who had cultivated unspeakable images of life
beyond the pale of Islam.*
  This is not to say that the appearance of these westerners in
Ottoman society had an entirely beneficial effect on the cause of
modernization of ^Turkey or that their contacts with Ottomans
were uniformly influential and without incident. While many of
them were experienced and experts in their trades and willing
to do their jobs, many were not. Some were men who had failed
in their own countries and who took advantage of unsuspecting
and inexperienced Ottoman officials to present themselves as
experts in fields of which they really knew nothing. Many came
only for the financial rewards and chose to spend most of their
time savoring the entertainments and enticements of Istanbul.
The boisterous and rowdy behavior of a few of the European
artisans and soldiers and their evident scorn for Muslims led to
numerous clashes with the mobs of Istanbul and was hardly
conducive to endearing the western way of life to those Ottomans
who were unfortunate enough to encounter them.^
  Nor were the abler members of these foreign delegations as
effective as they wished to be. Much of their work was of course
undermined by negligent and incapable colleagues sent from
Europe. But more than this, the limitations of the Ottoman
outlook made it very difficult for even the most sincere Ottoman
partisans of reform to accept or even comprehend what they
had to say, and in many cases their instructions and advice were
simply ignored. In addition there were many Ottomans who
joined the reform movement only for the financial and political
rewards offered by the Sultan, and who obstructed the tech¬
nicians’ efforts for their own personal advantage. The influence
and positions of the technicians became closely attached to those
of the politicians who arranged for their employment, and they
and their work soon were involved in the complicated political




                        Window to the West
184   rivalries of Selim’s court. Each ambassador did all he could to
      complicate and nullify the work of^ his enemy’s technicians,
      working through politicians favorable to his own cause. The
      inevitable consequence of all these factors was delay, frustration,
      and often defeat of the efforts of even the most sincere and expert
      foreign advisers, with promised equipment diverted to other uses
      and salaries and expense moneys delayed interminably.^ But at
      least in their contacts with individual Ottomans as well as in
      their instruction itself, the technicians certainly did have some
      effect. If nothing else, the stark contrast of continued Janissary
      and Spahi failure as opposed to the successful operations of the
      new corps when they were employed most certainly made many
      Ottomans much more amenable to change than they had been
                                                  >

      before.
        Rise of an Ottoman Press. An extremely important by-product
      of the military reforms introduced under Abd ul-Hamid I and
      Selim was the concurrent revival of a Turkish-language press.
      The first Turkish press in the Ottoman Empire, established by
      Ibrahim Miiteferrika in 1725, had been used only sporadically
      after his death a few years later. Abd ul- Hamid I had revived it
      under the direction of the official historians, Vasif and Rashid,
      who purchased the remnants of Miiteferrika’s equipment and
      added machines and type purchased from the French embassy in
      Istanbul. But, soon after, Vasif went to Spain as ambassador and
      the press lapsed again into relative inactivity.^
        Under Selim III, the old Miiteferrika press was restored under
      the direction of Rashid Efendi, and it printed three military
      technical books by Vauban, translated into Turkish by Con¬
      stantine Ipsilanti, for use as textbooks in the new technical
      schools.^ This press seems to have been too small to meet the
      demand, for when the engineering school was built in Haskoy in
      1795, it was given a new press and funds for fifteen workers to
      operate it under the direction of Abdurrahman Efendi. During
      the next seven years it printed eight large volumes, including
      Mahmud Raif Efendi’s French-language description of Selim’s
      reforms. Tableau des nouveaux reglements de V empire ottoman.
      In the summer of 1802, the Miihendishane press was given an
      additional building with new equipment in Uskiidar to print




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
                                                                           K


books of general interest and technical books, both under the              185
continued direction of Abdurrahman Edendi. The Imperial press
remained at Uskiidar until 1831, when it moved hack to Istanbul
by order of Sultan Mahmud II.® These presses made an important
contribution to transmitting knowledge of Europe to the Ottoman
Empire. Their publication and diffusion of Turkish translations
of western-language books made available to those who read
only Turkish the mass of information which previously had been
available only to the very few who had learned the languages of
the West.
  Diplomatic Missions. While the military teachers and their
presses provided important windows to the West for upper- and
lower-class Ottomans alike, the various channels of diplomacy
also made their contribution in this respect, although in a more
limited way. The principal agents of this sort of transmission
were the Sultan’s representatives sent to the important capitals \/
of Europe, and those of the various European powers stationed at
the Porte.
  Throughout the centuries of Ottoman greatness and decay, no
permanent Ottoman embassies were established in Europe since           V
it was felt that nothing could be learned from the infidels of the
West and that it was for the inferior monarchs of Europe to
petition for the Sultan’s favor through their representatives at
the Porte. Special Ottoman missions were sent to European
capitals but only for limited times to accomplish specific purposes,
principally to sign trade agreements and, more and more fre¬
quently during the eighteenth century, treaties of peace ceding
territories and making other concessions to the victorious powers
of Europe. In general the Ottomans who were sent on these
missions were neither qualified nor motivated to go beyond their
instructions and observe the lands through which they passed.
Only a few of them submitted any reports at all, and these for
the most part went little beyond descriptions of the ceremonials
and negotiations participated in during their trips. But there
were some exceptions.
  In 1664, Kara Mehmed Pasha, a member of the Bostanji corps,
was sent to Vienna with a suite of almost a hundred and fifty
persons, and his short description of that imperial capital was the




                        Window to the West
                                            i
                                      %




186   first work of any kind to give the leaders of the Porte a look at
      western life/ In 1720, Second Treasurer Ibrahim Pasha provided
      a similar short description of the same city on his return from
      negotiations there in coimection with the execution of the Treaty
      of Passarowitz/ In the same year, Yirmisekiz Chelebi Mehmed
      Faiz Efendi was sent to Paris as special Ottoman ambassador
      to the court of Louis XIV and, after a stay of two years, submitted
      to his master a long and detailed report, describing life not only
      in the French capital, but also in^ several other French cities
      which he visited, by far the most important and detailed report
      of this kind received by the Porte until the time of Selim III/
      In 1754 and again in 1764, the scribe of the Silahdar corps,
      Mehmed Dervish Efendi, was sent as Ottoman plenipotentiary to
      Saint Petersburg, and his reports gave a great deal of detail on
      the Russian modernization program then in progress/® Ahmed
      Resmi submitted two reports of this kind, one describing Vienna
      during his sojourn there in 1757-58 and the other depicting
      Berlin in great detail, as a result of his mission to the Prussian
      court in 1764/’ Mehmed Nahifi Efendi a member of the mission
      sent to Saint Petersburg in 1772 to negotiate the peace treaty
      signed two years later at Kiichuk Kaynarji, provided the Sul¬
      tan with another account of the things he saw in Catherine’s
      capital, as well as of the negotiations themselves/^
        None of these reports are of great value by our standards;
      many of them are more interesting for what they did not include
      than for what they did. Yet they did provide the sultans and
      those around them with some notion of the technical and moral
      achievements of the West and they were, in the absence of
      anything better, means of making some breaks in the wall of
      Ottoman isolation. For the most part, however, the sultans had
      to rely on the European ambassadors and others resident in Istan-
      bul for regular reports of events and conditions in Europe. Since
      each ambassador naturally limited and distorted the news so as to
      favor the prestige and position of his own country, the sultans
      and their ministers remained by far the most poorly informed of
      any European rulers concerning events and conditions outside
      their own domains.
        By Selim’s time, the conditions which made possible such




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
ignorance were changing so rapidly that progress would probably          187
have been made even if the Sultan had not been especially eager
to learn about Europe. The Ottoman government was now be¬
coming intimately involved with European powers by military
alliance. It was seeking their technical and financial assistance
on a large scale. It was maneuvering for position among them.
This hardly fitted in with the old picture of a Porte content to
wait for foreigners to come and beg favors. The Porte now re¬
quired a knowledge of European affairs far more regular, de¬
tailed, and objective than that which seemingly had sufficed
before. When addgd to Selim’s desire to learn of European life
and technical accomplishments, reform of the Ottoman diplo¬
matic service was inevitable, and in 1793 it was decided to estab¬
lish permanent Ottoman legations in the important capitals of
Europe as soon as possible.
  It would seem that Paris should have been the most natural
choice for the first Ottoman embassy. Selim had always been
most favorable to France, and he hoped that it would provide
most of the technical assistance that he wanted. Europe was now
embroiled in the opening stages of the wars of the French Revolu¬
tion, however, and while Selim was most anxious to receive tech-     h
nicians from revolutionary France, he was quite unhappy about
the fate of the French king with whom he had corresponded so
hopefully only a few years before. Moreover France was in mortal
combat with most of the royal powers of Europe, who hoped to
stamp out the "contagion” of democracy before it could spread.
The new regime had been outlawed, and no one had yet officially
recognized it. An Ottoman embassy to Paris at this time would
most certainly have involved official recognition, and Selim did
not wish to recognize the new government until a precedent
had been established by another great European power. So
France was ignored at the start.Likewise Selim did not wish
to honor the court at Saint Petersburg with one of his represent-    ^
atives because of the bitterness engendered by the recent war
and various disputes which had arisen over the execution of the
Treaty of Jassy.
  So it was that in 1793 the first permanent Ottoman legation \A
was established at the Court of St. James, a traditional and




                        Window to the West
188     important friend, second only to France in the Sultan’s eyes.
        As his first ambassador to London, Selim appointed Yusuf Agah
        Efendi, a member of the Ottoman scribal class, who previously
        had served as chief scribe of the Grand Vezir and then of the
        naval Arsenal.*^ To assist him a young scribe in the offices of the
        Grand Vezir named Mahmud Raif Efendi was appointed as first
        secretary,*® along with several Christian translators appointed to
        help them in a land of whose language neither man had more
        than an elementary command. For ^ttvo years, this was the only
        permanent Ottoman embassy in Europe. Then in April 1795, a
        decision was made to extend Ottoman representation to the two
      ,J courts of Germany, with Ibrahim Afif Efendi, scribe of the Lieu¬
        tenant of the Grand Vezir, appointed as ambassador to Vienna,
        and Morali Ali Efendi, Kisedar (purse bearer) of the Imperial
        Treasury, appointed to Berlin. The French agent in Istanbul,
        Raymond Verninac, still not recognized officially as ambassador
        and unable to occupy the palace of the French embassy, protested
        so vigorously about the continued slight to the prestige of his
        own nation that Selim decided to delay indefinitely the departure
        of these two ambassadors, and the situation remained as it had
        been for another six months.*^
          It was only in the fall of 1795 that French successes in Europe
        emboldened the Sultan sufficiently to decide to recognize the
      J French government and to add an embassy in Paris to those
        established in London, Vienna, and Berlin a few months before.
        To accomplish this, Morah Ali Efendi was transferred to Paris
        from his original Berlin assignment and was replaced as ambas¬
        sador to the Prussian court by the scribe of the cannon-wagon
        corps, Naili Mehmed Efendi.*® The latter was unable to accept
        this appointment because of illness and was replaced early in
        1796 by the former treasurer of the province of Belgrade, Ali
        Aziz Efendi.*** At the same time, Yusuf Agah Efendi’s three-year
        appointment as ambassador to London was coming to an end,
        and he was replaced by the director of the Imperial granaries,
        Ismail Ferruh Efendi,^*’ Within a few months, all of these ambas¬
        sadors set out for their posts with the secretaries and translators
        assigned to them, and for the first time the Porte was represented
        by permanent missions in all the European capitals with the




                           The "New Order” of Selim III
                                                                     V




exception of Saint Petersburg, and thereafter it received regular    ^   189
reports from them on European events and conditions.^'
  Morali Ali Efendi served until 1802 as the first Ottoman am¬
bassador to the court of France with the assistance of his chief
interpreter, Codrika, a Greek subject of the Sultan’s who was
actually in the employ of the French.He was replaced suc¬
cessively by Halet Efendi (1802-1805)^^ and Muhib Efendi
(1806-1811),24 with Vahid Efendi (1807-1808P and Galib Efendi
(1802 and 1811)^® coming 'to Paris as special plenipotentiaries
for short periods of time.
  In Great Britain, Ismail Ferruh Efendi served as ambassador
from 1796 through 1802^^^ and then was replaced by Neshet
Efendi, who remained in London for most of the remainder of
Selim’s reign.^® In Vienna, the most important Ottoman ambas¬
sador was the Sultan’s close friend and confidant, Ebubekir Ratib
Efendi, who was sent in 1791 to establish relations following the
Treaty of Sistova and was instructed to study Austrian military
and civil institutions and report on them directly to the Sultan.
During his stay, he came into very close contact with an Austrian
junior consular official named Joseph von Hammer, later to be¬
come the founder of Ottoman historical studies in Europe, and
their exchanges seem to have been of immense value for both,
before Ebubekir returned to Istanbul at the end of 1792.^®
Ibrahim Afif Efendi served in Vienna between 1797 and 1800.
The Sultan’s most important representative in Prussia was
Ahmed Efendi, who remained in Berlin from 1790 to 1794.®®
Ali Aziz Efendi served in Berlin during most of 1797 and 1798.
  The only Ottoman ambassador to Saint Petersburg during
this period was Mustafa Rasih Pasha, sent in 1792 in accordance
with the Treaty of Jassy stipulation that the signatories exchange
diplomatic missions. In return, the Czar sent General Kutuzov
with a large entourage.®' The two met briefly on the Dniester as
they passed into each other’s territory on June 4, 1793. Little
was accomplished, however. Rasih ran into difficulties from the
start with the Russian insistence that the Porte return all cap¬
tives, including those converted to Islam during the war. As a
result he left on February 8, 1794, and Kutuzov had to leave
Istanbul because of the reciprocity involved. Since both sides




                         Window to the West
190   regarded the Treaty of Jassy as no more than a truce, the type
      of permanent representation entablished in the other countries
      was clearly impossible here.
        Whether appointed a regular ambassador, a secretary, or a
      special representative, each Ottoman sent abroad was spe¬
      cifically instructed to do all he could to learn about the country
      to which he was assigned and to send regular messages and
      periodic reports in order to provide the Porte with a regular flow
      of detailed information of all kinds^ about Europe,^^ But only a
      few of them were successful in this. Azmi Efendi presented a
      short report describing the cities and towns through which he
      passed in Hungary and Austria and his experiences in the Im¬
      perial capital during his eleven-month s,tay.^^ Ebubekir Ratib
      Efendi submitted a long and detailed report full of information
      about Europe’s achievements, and, as already noted, this report
      was a major influence on the Sultan’s reform efforts.Galib
      Efendi’s reports from Paris were unusually detailed and useful,^^
      and Muhib Efendi’s description of Paris was second only to that
      of Ebubekir Ratib in understanding and detail but had less
      influence because his master was dethroned shortly after re¬
      ceiving it.^®
        But these were notable exceptions. For the most part, the same
      factors which limited the effectiveness and understanding of ear¬
      lier ambassadors also applied to Selim’s representatives. They
      were Ottomans, trained in the Ottoman tradition and limited by
      Ottoman attitudes. Most of them were members of the scribal
      class and recipients of its traditional education, which included
      Arabic and Persian but none of the modern western languages or
      technical education introduced in the military schools. The few
      Ottoman Turks who did have a good command of western lan¬
      guages at this time as the result of education in these schools
      were needed too much at home to be sent abroad. And while a few
      Ottoman Greeks, Jews, and Armenians were sent along as trans¬
      lators, they invariably sold their services to the governments to
      which they were accredited and conspired with them to control
      and limit the information offered to the Ottoman envoys.®^
        With the exceptions already noted, most of the reports were
      filled with news of ceremonies, negotiations, and problems of




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
diplomatic protocol, with occasional reference to European thea-                191
ters, fashions, and foods, but little more.^® And many of these did
not even reach the Ottoman capital, for the Porte itself main¬
tained no regular courier service of its own between Europe and             ^
Istanbul. Its representatives had to entrust their reports and          ^
messages to the couriers of the powers to which they were accred¬
ited, who made a regular practice of opening and reading all such
documents entrusted to them and of "losing” those injurious to
their interests.So in the end, Selim and his ministers were
forced to continue their reliance on foreigners at the Porte for
information about the outside world.
                   /

  Many of the European ambassadors resided in the Ottoman
Empire for years. They were acquainted with its languages and
customs, and cultivated close and lasting relationships with Otto¬
man officials, paying regular bribes in order to learn their policies
and decisions and to influence them when possible.^® As a result,
the reports they sent to Europe concerning internal Ottoman af¬
fairs give far more reliable and detailed information on Turkey
than do the Ottoman chronicles and governmental materials of
the time. At the same time, each European nation maintained its
own regular courier service to and from the Porte, sending news¬
papers and memoranda containing information and news, and
these were often passed on to Ottoman officials through various
channels, providing them with their only regular news of Europe.
  While Selim was still a prince in the palace of Abd ul-Hamid I,
his main source of contact with the outside world had been the
French ambassadors. After Selim’s accession, he continued to rely
on the French ambassador Choiseul-Gouffier more than any other
European, often meeting him outside the Palace in disguise in
order to dispense with the formalities required by protocol.^^
But Choiseul, a nobleman and royalist, was ousted by the revo¬
lutionary government of France in October 1792 and fled to
Russia in exile two months later, leaving France without official
representation.^^ During the next three years, France was repre¬
sented by agents sent to secure Ottoman favor and official recog¬
nition if possible. Citizens Semonville, Henin, Descorches, and
Raymond Verninac. Verninac re-established a regular French
embassy after Ottoman recognition in late 1795.^^ He was fol-




                         Window to the West
                                       %


192   lowed as ambassador by General Aubert du Bayet, who served
      between 1796 and 1798 and was an important provider of tech¬
      nicians, equipment, and ideas to the Ottoman Sultan although he
      never achieved Choiseul’s unusually close personal contact with
      Selim.^^
        In addition to these ambassadors, very important sources of
      ideas and information for the Ottomans were the Jeunes de
      Langues in the service of the embassy. These were French youths
      trained in Arabic, Persian, and Turkish by the most outstanding
      French orientalists in order to serve in French diplomatic and
      consular posts and enable the French representatives to dispense
      with the uncertain, inaccurate, and often disloyal services of local
      Armenians, Greeks, and Jews formerly used for such tasks. The
                                                  >

      most important of those who served the French embassy during
      the age of the French Revolution were Venture de Paradis, later
      chief interpreter for Bonaparte’s expedition to Egypt; Amedee
      Jaubert, also later involved in the Egyptian expedition; Daniel
      Kieffer and Xavier Bianchi, authors of an important Turkish-
      French dictionary later in the nineteenth century; and Pierre
      Ruffin, subsequently one of France’s leading orientalists.^^ These
      men were able to discern local conditions, report on events and, at
      the same time, inform and influence Ottomans as no one else
      could in their own embassies or the embassies of other powers.
      Without the need for interpreters, they were able to establish
      personal friendships with Ottomans and discuss things with them
      in a way that persons not knowing Turkish were unable to. Ruffin
      in particular was close to Chelebi Mustafa Reshid and Kiichtik
      Hiiseyin and was Selim’s most important advocate in his appeals
      for aid to the French government.^® It also fell to his lot, however,
      to be France’s charge d’affaires in Istanbul when war broke out in
      1798, so he and his associates were forced to spend three years in
      the dismal confinement of the Ottoman political prison at Yedi-
      kule.^^ After peace was restored, the French ambassadors and
      their Jeunes de Langues secretaries regained a strong position of
      influence at the Porte, with the Sultan relying more and more on
      the advice of the last two French ambassadors of his reign. Mar¬
      shal Marie-Anne Brune (1803-1804) and Bonaparte’s confidant
      and advisor. General Horace Sebastian! (1806-1808).




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
  There were other European representatives at the Porte who          193
were able to influence certain Ottoman officials, but none with the
consistency of the French. The most important of these were the
British Ambassadors Robert Ainslie (1772-1793), Sir Robert
Liston (1793-1799), Lord Elgin (1799-1802) and C. Arbuthnot
(1804-1807); the Austrian internuncio during most of Selim’s
reign, Baron Herbert de Rathkeal; the Swedish dragoman and
later minister at the Porte, Mouradgea d’Ohsson; the minister of
Denmark and Saxony, Baron de Hiibsch; the Prussian ambassa¬
dor Knobelsdorf; and the Russian ambassadors. Count Mikhail
Golenischev-Kutu2yDv (1792-1794), Victor Pavlovich Kochubeg
(1793-1798), and Vasily Tamara (1798-1802). Each of them had
excellent sources of information at the Porte and contributed in
various ways to Ottoman awareness of the West.
  Of course all these diplomatic contacts had only a slight effect
on Ottoman society as a whole. Access to the reports sent from
Ottomans in Europe, as to the Europeans themselves at the Porte,
was limited to a very few Ottomans who were directly concerned
with foreign affairs. The knowledge imparted through these
sources was transmitted to other Ottomans only indirectly, if at
all. However, in the unofficial activities of the European repre¬
sentatives, merchants, and technicians now present in increasing
numbers in Istanbul, there was an impact which was much more
extensive and in the long run even more significant for the whole
of Ottoman society.


                        Social Contacts
  The time of the French Revolution saw a tremendous relaxa¬
tion in the social barriers which isolated the Europeans in the
Ottoman Empire from the Ottomans among whom they lived. In
previous centuries the few foreigners who did reside in the Sul¬
tan’s dominions isolated themselves almost entirely in their own
compounds. Mutual distrust and even hostility and scorn, com¬
bined with a more practical and justified European fear of con¬
tracting the plague then widespread in the empire, limited contact
to purely formal occasions. And even then most of the actual
intercourse was left to the mediation of translators serving both




                         Window to the West
194   sides, who used their positions to advance their own causes and
      interests at the expense of those whom they were supposed to he
      serving.
         But new developments during Selim’s reign made it impossible
      for this sort of isolation to continue. The very fact that foreign
      diplomats, merchants, and soldiers were living in Istanbul in
      far greater numbers than in earlier times made it inevitable that
      opportunities for contact would greatlyvincrease. Selim’s reforms
      and his efforts to popularize them w^hett6d the appetities of many
      Ottomans, at least to the extent of making them for the first time
      somewhat curious about the strange infidels in their midst and
      desirous of learning of their manners and ways. Moreover Euro¬
      peans long content to ignore the Ottomans in the past were now
      compelled by the need to compete for the favor of the neutral
      Porte to try to cultivate the friendship and understanding of all
      segments of the population.
        As a result of these factors, intercourse increased on all levels
      of society. European parties and entertainments held in the great
      embassy palaces and private homes were now attended by Otto¬
      man officials, including the Sultan himself in disguise. Upper-
      class Ottomans began to imitate the practices of European society
      and hold parties in their own homes and palaces, into which their
      European acquaintances were invited for the first time. Western
      merchants, technicians, and soldiers met subjects of the Sultan in
      the streets, bazaars, and coffeehouses. Street performances by
      European actors, buffoons, jugglers, and the like became regular
      features of lower-class Ottoman city life.^*^ The large cities of the
      empire witnessed a craze on the part of all classes of the popula¬
      tion for European clothing, architecture, and furniture, so much
      so that the British ambassador. Sir Robert Liston, reported in
      1796 that "the fashion of the day is strongly in favor of European
      imitation in every rank of society.”4*^ Selim himself is said to have
      invited European actors to perform in his palace, attempted imi¬
      tations of western music and poetry in his own compositions, and
      imported western flowers and miniature pictures for his personal
      use.^°
        These were the effects produced by Europeans of all nationali¬
      ties, but in addition the French had a special impact. Turkey at




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
this time was one of the few neutral countries in Europe, and it       195
therefore provided a unique place where friend and foe of the
Revolution could dwell in uncomfortable proximity. Exiled French
royalists lived side by side with the most ardent supporters of the
Revolution, and conflicts and competition were inevitable. The
Jacobins in Istanbul affixed revolutionary emblems to their per¬
sons and homes, held public ceremonies to celebrate the great
events of the Revolution, and did all they could to secure public
and private support for their' cause among Ottomans and foreign¬
ers alike. They went into the coffeehouses, spoke of the rights of
man and the evils of the old regime, and distributed Turkish- and
French-language leaflets and broadsheets expounding the ideas
of liberty, equality, and fraternity.^^ In many cases, they tried to
provoke riots among the volatile Istanbul mob as a means of
exerting pressure on the Turkish government to support the new
regime in France.In January 1793, they even went so far as to
plant a Tree of Liberty on a terrace in full view of the Sultan’s
palace!
  Much of this activity was inspired and directed locally by
Frenchmen in Istanbul wishing to show their loyalty to the new
regime. Some of it was directed by agents sent from France. Num¬
erous revolutionary societies and clubs were organized, of which
the most important were the Societe Republicaine des Amis de la
Liberie et de I’Egalite, established by Descorches in August,
1793,^^ and the Societe Populaire Republicaine, inaugurated by
Henin about the same time.^^ These, and others as well, occasion¬
ally cooperated, but more often they were as violently hostile to
one another on ideological and personal grounds as they were to
the royalists.Once the French government was officially recog¬
nized by the Porte and French ambassadors came from Paris to
occupy the palace of the embassy, these groups were directed on a
more centralized basis and their mutual hostility was curbed
although not entirely eliminated. The French embassy now also
took the main role in spreading revolutionary propaganda in the
empire. In April 1795, Louis Allier, director of the Imprimerie
Nationale in Paris, was sent to Istanbul with two new presses and
several assistants to reorganize and expand the small press pre¬
viously operated at the embassy there under Descorches’s aegis.^®




                         Window to the West
                                              \



196   Biweekly bulletins of European and French news were begun,
      and these were replaced on September 23, 1796 by the Gazette
      Franqaise de Constantinople, a newspaper supposed to be issued
      fortnightly but which in fact appeared somewhat more irregu¬
      larly during the next two years.^^ In addition, the Bulletin de la
      Legation de la Republique Franqaise pres la Porte Ottomane was
      also published by the French Embassy to provide information on
      the deliberations of the National Convention in Paris and to pre-
                                                  %

      sent various official bulletins and announcements of the French
      government.^® The Constitution of the French Republic, the Dec¬
      laration of the Rights of Man, and other revolutionary documents
      were translated into Turkish and widely distributed although it
      was admitted by the translator that "therp were great difficulties
      offered by the translations . . . all of whose ideas are so strange to
      the Turks and almost all of whose expressions lack equivalents in
      the Turkish language.Although the embassy press was con¬
      fiscated during the Ottoman-French war, it was restored in 1803
      and was very active during the remainder of Selim’s reign. On the
      whole, the activities of French propagandists in Istanbul were so
      widespread during this time that Lord Elgin wrote home with
      alarm that "the propagation of democratic principles here is, I
      am afraid, extremely rapid.
        These revolutionary activities were supported by a number of
      foreign sympathizers living at the Porte, of whom the most ef¬
      fective was Mouradgea d’Ohsson, who finally was expelled by the
      Ottomans in 1798 as a result of his open activities on behalf of
      the French.®* A most unusual case was that of John Montagu
      Humphrys, a British national who had been born in North Amer¬
      ica, from which he had fled because of the American Revolution.
      He seems to have converted to the revolutionary cause, for he
      came to Turkey with his family to establish a trading company
      and spent most of his time joining revolutionary meetings and
      publishing English-language pamphlets on their behalf, much to
      the disgust of the British ambassadors.®2
        The spread of revolutionary propaganda was just as vigorously
      opposed in Turkey as it was elsewhere in Europe. The ambassa¬
      dors of England, Austria, Prussia, and Russia were especially
      vehement in their demands that the public demonstrations and




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
propaganda be curbed, pointing out the effect that such ideas         197
might have on the Ottoman Empire itself.®^ The French royalist
emigres organized their own societies on lines similar to those of
the Jacobins and attacked them openly, often in the full view of
the amused Turks.Most of this counterrevolutionary activity
was financed by the British ambassador, who also arranged for
the dispatch to Istanbul of thirty French royalist officers pre¬
viously resident in England.®^ An antirevolutionary newspaper
entitled Le Mercure Oriental was published irregularly after
September 1796, presenting European news and reports unfavor¬
able to the French/ Revolution and its armies.®® In addition, a
violently antirevolutionary French-language newspaper printed
in Frankfurt was imported and distributed regularly by the
Austrian embassy.®^ Similar pamphlets were published in Eng¬
lish by the British embassy, although its efforts in no way equaled
those of the French revolutionaries either in volume or effective¬
ness.®®
  During most of this time, the Ottoman government was trying
to maintain its neutrality among the warring European powers,
and this effort was reflected in its attitude to the revolutionary
and antirevolutionary activities and appeals. The Ottoman cabi¬
net itself was divided on what should be done. Kuchiik Hiiseyin
Pasha, the Treasurer Ibrahim Efendi, and Ebubekir Ratib Efendi
usually advocated a conciliatory policy toward the Jacobins,
while Mustafa Reshid and Yusuf Agah led those who favored the
British and royalist position.®® As a result, the Porte vacillated,
sometimes restricting the Jacobins and sometimes giving them
full freedom so that in the end they were able to continue their
work most of the time.^®
 There was also another channel through which revolutionary
doctrines entered the Ottoman Empire at this time. In Paris, the
documents of revolution were translated into Serbian, Greek, and
Armenian, as well as into Turkish, and these were disseminated
widely in the European portions of the empire and the Mediter¬
ranean islands. Even in times of closest French cooperation with
the Porte, French agents were sent to Ali Pasha of Janina, to
Dalmatia, to Serbia, Greece, Crete, and Cyprus, preaching the
advantages of republicanism and liberty and trying to make




                        Window to the West
                                              i



198   certain that if the Porte did choose to side with the enemies of the
      Revolution, France too would have its friends within the Ottoman
      dominions/* French occupation of the Venetian territories along
      the Adriatic and of various Mediterranean islands served to
      intensify these activities which, although they were resisted
      strongly by Ottoman, British, and Russian agents, were quite
      successful, inaugurating a ferment which led directly to the sub¬
      sequent Balkan revolts against the Sultan.
        Another source of transmission ^hicH cannot be entirely over¬
      looked was provided by non-Muslims in the service of the Porte
      and the Sultan. Selim himself had a German and an Italian doc¬
      tor, who used their positions to tell him of the West and to stimu¬
      late his taste for it.^^ There were European women in the harem
      of the Sultan, and they are reputed to have provided important
      channels of contact between the Palace and the West. Also the
      Jews of the empire as well as Greek and Armenian merchants
      and aristocrats long had been in intimate contact with relatives,
      friends, and business associates living in the various countries of
      Europe. Through private correspondence, they were in constant
      touch with Europe, and it must be assumed that they passed on
      at least a certain amount of the information derived to their
      Ottoman associates. The most direct means by which this sort of
      information was communicated to the Porte was through the
      office of Bash Terjuman, the chief translator of the Imperial Coun¬
      cil and official in charge of relations with foreign representatives.^^
      After the late seventeenth century, this important position was
      held exclusively by members of the wealthy Greek Phanariote
      families of Istanbul, who kept it just because their contacts with
      the West made them more knowledgeable of Europe than their
      Ottoman brothers.^^ In addition, these and other Greek and Ar¬
      menian families often sent their children to be educated in Europe,
      in Italy in particular, thus preparing them both linguistically
      and intellectually to receive the new western ideas of their time
      and to transmit them to the Ottomans at the Porte.^^
        It is difficult to assess the extent to which these Western in¬
      fluences and ideas took root among the Ottomans of Selim’s time.
      The fact that he and those around him did try to imitate Europe
      in some respects, and the certainty that their efforts had some




                          The "New Order" of Selim III
support among rulers and subjects alike, would seem to indicate        199
that there was at least some effect. Yet this should not be over¬
stressed. As we have seen, most of the "reforms” were in fact
traditional Ottoman responses to the needs of the time, and the
relative ease with which Selim was deposed in 1807 indicates his
lack of deep-seated support among rulers and subjects alike.
That the Sultan himself retained in essence the spirit and men¬
tality of the past is demonstrated further by the nature of the
literary efforts which were supported in his court. With the doc¬
trines of revolution swirling around him, Sultan Selim chose to
promote the efforts' of poets and writers who reflected only the
themes and values of the past. Thus the great writers of the French
Revolutionary era in Istanbul were the Mevlevi leader Sheyh
Galib (1757-1799) and his brother dervishes at the Galata monas¬
tery, Hulusi Dede (d. 1805) and Esrar Dede (d. 1797) as well as
Seyyid Vehbi (d. 1809) and the great Fazil Bey (d. 1808), who rep¬
resented the last great flourish of the traditional Ottoman literary
schools. For them, as for their patron, it was the empty, mystical
searchings for the supreme being and the never-ending descrip¬
tions of court frivolities that excited attention rather than the
political, social, and economic problems of their time. That no
modern school of literature appeared in Selim’s time seems to
be clear evidence that the ideas of the West, however freely they
came into the capital, took no root but at best left the seeds for
a flowering which was to come only under Selim s successors.^®




                         Window to the West
                                                                      200




New Barracks of the Mortar and Mine-Laying Corps, constructed 1793.
See page 124.
Training Ground and Barracks of the Nizam-i Jedid Army and Bostanji Corps at Levend Chiftlik.
See pp. 130-131.

                                                                                                201
                                                                            202




Imperial Cannon Foundry (Tophane) and Barracks of Artillery Corps (Topji)
and Cannon-wagon Corps (Top Arabaji) at Tophane, Istanbul.
See page 140.
Interior of the New Gunpowder Works at Azadli
See page 144.


                                                203
                                                   204




New Gunpowder Works at Azadli, constructed 1794.
See page 144.
The New Drydock at the Ottoman Naval Arsenal under Selim III.
See page 157.

                                                                205
                                             206




The Ottoman Naval Arsenal under Selim III.
See page 157.
Modern Ottoman Ship of the Line, Constructed under Sultan Selim III.
See page 158.


                                                                       207
208
Part IV. Disintegration of the Empire:
 Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars,
             1792-1807
           XV. Disintegration of the
             Empire, 1792-1798




                   /




The Treaty of Jassy left Selim III relatively free from foreign
dangers for almost six years, yet even then his efforts to take ad¬
vantage of this respite to strengthen the empire by internal re¬
forms were for the most part frustrated by the need to undertake
regular campaigns against revolts which sprang up everywhere V
in his empire. These uprisings diverted more and more of his
energy and resources and at the same time sapped the strength
and vitality of the central government.
  Internal disintegration certainly was not a problem unique
Selim’s age. One of the earliest evidences of Ottoman decline —
even in the sixteenth century—had been the central government’s
increasing inability to enforce its will in the provinces. Incompe¬
tent, tyrannical, and dishonest officials, and economic and social
chaos led to the rise of numerous separatist movements, them¬
selves both causes and manifestations of the decline.
  The notables were responsible for one kind of revolt. Individ- /
uals and families who were locally prominent because of wealth
or religious and social prestige had come to occupy influential
places in their communities. They were called notables (ayan) ]C
and were looked to as arbiters and leaders by those around them.
Because of their influence with the people, they were increasingly
consulted and used by Ottoman officials to secure local compliance
        with their orders and desires. During the eighteenth century
 ^      their positions often became hereditary. They assumed the func-
        tion of mediating between the people and the government officials
        and, as the latter became more corrupt and tyrannical, of inter¬
        vening to protect the people from the officials. And finally, as the
        officials no longer were able or willing to carry out the duties of
        government, these notables stepped in to take over police duties,
        apportion and collect taxes, organize irrigation and cultivation,
        arrange for the supply of food an^ otlier necessities, and even
       provide soldiers and military provisions for the Imperial army.
       They thus became the principal administrators of local govern¬
       ment and the defenders of their communities against the worst
       excesses of the increasingly incompetent and dishonest officials
       sent from Istanbul. The Ottoman government began to recognize
       them officially in an effort to exercise some supervision and con¬
       trol over them, but for the most part they continued to be chosen
       locally and to operate in almost complete independence.
         At the same time, cultivators and townfolk driven from their
       homes by vexation, oppression, and insecurity, soldiers fleeing
       from the tyranny and incompetence of their officers as well as
       from defeats at the hands of superior enemies, and tribesmen and
       mountain dwellers, ever willing to oppose settled authority, came
      / together with the worst elements of the population to form bandit
y I    armies which devastated the length and breadth of the empire,
       from the mountains of Bosnia to the valleys of the Tigris and the
       Nile. In the absence of effective government opposition, many of
       them came to control whole districts and even provinces, and
     .^(Aheir chiefs, known in some places as Derebeys (Lords of the Val¬
       ley), made themselves almost entirely independent of central
       control, while the government officials supposed to administer
       their areas became little more than ambassadors to their courts.
       Usually called mountain brigands and usurpers by the Ottoman
       chroniclers of the time, they became for all practical purposes
       vassal princes, maintaining autonomous powers over large areas
       with only minimal acknowledgement of the suzerainty of the
       Sultan. As they came to control the large towns in their areas,
       there was little to distinguish them from the local notables, who
       in many cases led, or at least encouraged, supplied, and used
       them.



                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
  Some of these Derebeys and notables were closely related to         213
local families and identified the prosperity and security of the 1/
area with their own self-interest. Within limits, such leaders did
a good deal to develop and restore agriculture, trade, and industry
and to protect their holdings against the attacks of rivals. Since
most of them maintained their positions for long periods of time,
they were able to consider the long-term interests of the lands
which they ruled to a far greater extent than could the Ottoman
officials who had to use their relatively short terms mainly to
raise money to pay off the bribes they were forced to pay in order
to secure and keep^their positions. Often the rule of the notables
was therefore preferred by local inhabitants to an3dhing govern- y'
ment officials could accomplish.
  In addition since the military corps, which traditionally pro¬
vided men for the regular Ottoman army, had become disorgan¬
ized and incapable of carrying out their military functions, the ^
Porte was forced to rely more and more on these local leaders for
men to fight its wars. They in turn used these military activities
to increase their own power, by taking vast amounts of booty
from Ottoman and enemy populations alike and by absorbing into
their own armies many of the enemy troops as well as the regular
Ottoman soldiers with whom they served. So in the end, they re¬
turned to their homes with far more powerful forces than when
they departed, leaving the Porte increasingly unable to suppress
their independence.
  In fact by Selim’s time the Porte had little desire to suppress
them, even if it had the ability to do so. The regularity and size
of their tribute and tax payments and the effectiveness of their
military contingents contrasted quite favorably with those from
areas under direct Ottoman rule. Moreover these notables and
Derebeys were able to create, in the capital, political parties
favorable to their interests by providing regular subsidies to
influential persons who did all they could to prevent or frustrate
actions against their patrons.
  The most that the Porte did, or tried to do, was to keep the
loyalty and friendship of the predominant notables to retain the
tribute and military assistance which they provided. This was
accomplished by various means. For one thing, the Porte was well
aware of the fact that the degree to which these notables con-



               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
214    tinued to accept Ottoman suzerainty and to carry out their ob¬
       ligations varied in direct relation to the extent of local opposition
       they had to face. Those who had to fight the attacks of relatively
       equal opponents were quite willing to accept whatever assistance
       the Ottoman officials could give them and to honor their obliga¬
       tions to the Porte in return. When they were able to rid them¬
       selves of their principal competitors, Ottoman control and influ¬
       ence declined accordingly. A major task for the Ottoman officials
      ^ therefore was to keep the conflicting local notables and factions
       equally matched so that all would continue to seek Ottoman
       support and perform their obligations in return. It was only when
       local notables obtained absolute, uncontested power in their
       areas and disregarded their tribute and^ military contributions
       to the Porte that efforts were made to control them by more force¬
       ful means.
         Another means by which the notables were kept loyal to the
       Ottoman cause was by their appointment to official ranks and
       positions, including that of governor in the districts which they
       dominated. In many cases, where military dangers became press¬
       ing, important notables were actually appointed as military
       commanders (serasker) of the Ottoman army on the fronts where
       their forces were needed and used. Under these circumstances,
       the Porte lost its ability to play off, control, and use local factions,
       and its long-range ability to maintain its position and fulfill its
       desires declined accordingly.*
         In the age of the French Revolution, there were innumerable
       "despots,” "tyrants,” and "rebels” operating all over the empire.
       Their constant raids as well as their struggles among themselves
       and with Ottoman expeditionary forces fill large sections of the
       chronicles of the time. To enumerate and describe them all would
       be a complicated, unending, and fruitless task, yet to leave the
       subject without discussing the most important of them would be
       to ignore an essential portion of Ottoman history at that time.


                                    Anatolia

         By the end of the eighteenth century, and throughout Selim
      Ill’s reign, notables and Derebeys ruled all of eastern Anatolia




                         Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
and much of the west, with only Cilicia and the districts of          215
Kiitahya, Manisa, Aydin, and Menteshe in the southwest remain¬
ing under some sort of direct administration hy officials sent from
Istanbul. Among the most important and long-lived ruling fami¬
lies of this kind in Selim’s time were the Kiichilk Alioglu around
Payas and Adana, the Ilyasoglu in the area of Milas and Mente¬
she, the Tekeli Ibrahimoglu at Antalya, the Tuzjuoglu at Rize,
the Jemshitoglu around Trebizond, the Nazuhoglu at Gediz, the
Kalyonjuoglu in Bilejik, the-Ajemoglu at Ushak, the Yilanhoglu
at Sparta, and the Katiboglu family of Izmir. Of particular inter¬
est and reputatioij were the Karaosmanoglu, who dominated
large areas of southwestern Anatolia, the Chapanoglu, who con¬
trolled much of the central plateau, and the Janikli Ali Pashao-
glu, who ruled the northeast. These we must consider in more
detail.
  Founded late in the seventeenth century by Mehmed Chavu-
shoglu Kara Osman Agha (d. 1706), the Karaosmanoglu dynasty
was a Turkoman family which first rose to power in the area of
Manisa. During the eighteenth century, it extended its direct
control to the districts of Aydin, Bergama, and Saruhan, and its
influence to most of western Anatolia from the greater Menderes
River all the way to Izmir and the Sea of Marmara. Throughout
Selim Ill’s reign, its leaders strongly supported his reforms and
participated actively in the development of the Nizctm-i Jedid
army, both by supplying money and men to the corps in Istanbul
and by accepting officers sent to train its own men in the new
tactics and weapons.^
  The Chapanoglu dynasty was established at Yozgat in the early
years of the eighteenth century and held power in the districts of
Kayseri, Sivas, Amasya, Chorum, Tokat, Ankara, Konya, and
Nigde in central Anatolia during the remainder of the century.
Under Selim, Chapanoglu Suleyman Bey extended his rule south
to Karaman and at times east to Diyarbekir, and he also played
an important role in developing the Nizam-i Jedid army in his
area. At the same time, much of his energy was absorbed by ri¬
valry with the Janikli dynasty ruling to the east, against whose
rebellious ambitions he became the Sultan’s principal military
arm.'^




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
                                                 l’




216          The Janikli d5niasty was the most active and rebellious of the
           Anatolian notable groups during Splim’s time. It first became
           powerful in northeastern Anatolia during the last quarter of the
           eighteenth century, when its founder, Janikli Ali Pasha (1720-
           1785), was given territories there in return for his military serv¬
           ices to the Porte in the war against Russia which ended in 1774.^
           In 1771, he was appointed governor of Trebizond, which remained
           as the center of the family power thereafter. After his death in
           1785, the bulk of his possessions wept to'his lieutenant Abdullah
           Pasha, while his son Battal Hiiseyin Pasha was given only Sinop
           and Janik. Battal was quite unhappy about this, so when he and
           his son Tayyar Mehmed Pasha were assigned to defend the Cau¬
           casus and Anapa against the Russians in the war of 1787-1792,
           they betrayed their supporters as well as the Sultan and sur¬
           rendered the fort and its environs to the Russians, whose service
           they entered. In Istanbul, both were accused of treason, their
           families and relatives were executed, and their lands and proper¬
           ties were confiscated and turned over, at least in part, to the
           Chapanoglu family, whose rule was thereby extended to eastern
           Anatolia.^
       ^     After the peace of Jassy, the Russian ambassador in Istanbul
      /( compelled the Sultan to restore Battal Pasha to his posts at Sinop
           and Janik. His son remained in Russia in the service of General
           Suvorov, but in 1793 he was dismissed and imprisoned on the
           grounds that he had been in secret correspondence with the Porte
           and was attempting to organize a revolt of the Crimean Tatars
           against Russian rule. Within a year Tayyar was able to escape
           from Russia; but since he still was accused of conspiracy in Istan¬
           bul, he went to his old friend Ibrahim Efendi, governor of Bender,
           who had a good deal of influence in the Sultan’s palace because of
           his previous service as lieutenant of the Sultan’s sister, Shah
           Sultan. In the meantime Russia’s loss of influence with the Porte
           combined with the intrigues of the Chapanoglu led to Battal
           Pasha s dismissal from his posts. Ibrahim Efendi soon managed to
           secure pardons for father and son, however, and Battal Pasha was
           restored to the governorship of Trebizond and Erzurum in 1798.
           In return he agreed to organize and lead an army of 20,000 men
           to assist the Ottoman army, so, for the moment at least, the major




                           Internal Revolts and Foreign ITars
Anatolian notable families were united in their obedience to the        217
Sultan."


                     The Arab Provinces
  In Egypt, Syria, Iraq, and Arabia, Ottoman weakness also left
political vacuums, but these were filled less by local movements
with popular support than they were by Ottoman officials and
Mamluk and bedouin chiefs' who sought to seize power for their
own benefit. The Arabic-speaking natives were no more than pas¬
sive observers of their struggles, neither participating in nor
benefiting from them.
  During the last half of the seventeenth century, power in Otto¬
man Egypt gradually fell from the hands of Ottoman officials,
who composed the official hierarchy of government, to their Mam¬
luk slaves, who gained their freedom and rose to be rulers and
masters. By 1671, the transition from Ottoman to Mamluk con¬
trol was largely complete, with most of the administrative and
military positions being filled by members of the Mamluk fac¬
tions, the leader of the most important of these acting as the real
ruler of the country with the title Sheyh ul-Beled or "chief of the
city.” Only the position of governor (vali) continued to be filled by
vezirs appointed from Istanbul. While these governors relin¬
quished most of their administrative functions to the Sheyh ul-
Beled, they continued to perform an important role by playing
off the various Mamluk factions against one another and keeping
them relatively equal so that they were eager and willing to rec¬
ognize the Sultan’s suzerainty and to pay the taxes and tribute he
demanded in return for his support. So long as the governors were
able to maintain such a balance, the Ottoman treasury secured
sufficient revenues to fulfill its financial needs in Egypt, and was
content to leave the actual functioning of the government in the
hands of the Mamluks. But after 1779, Egypt fell under the con¬
trol of a Mamluk coalition led by Murad and Ibrahim Beys, who
ruled almost continuously for the rest of the century. For a time
they continued to pay their taxes and tribute. But once they had
eliminated their rivals and established virtually unopposed rule
after 1783, they reduced and largely ended their payments. Only




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
218   then did the Porte send a military expedition to curb them, under
      the leadership of the Grand Admiral) Gazi Hasan Pasha (1786).
      His object was not to restore direct Ottoman administration since
      he was well aware that the Porte would lack the power to enforce
      such a position once his expeditionary force returned to Istanbul.
      Rather he sought only to restore the various Mamluk factions so
      they would be able to administer the country while paying for the
      governor’s encouragement and support.' Since the outbreak of a
      new war with Russia (1787) forced Gazi Hasan to leave before he
      could bring about a satisfactory solution, it was not long before
      Murad and Ibrahim returned to power. As a result of Hasan’s
      work in building up the other Mamluk factions, however, Murad
      and Ibrahim never were able to eliminate their rivals entirely
      thereafter, and they remained sufficiently dependent on the Porte
      to be forced to pay taxes and tribute although at an ever-decreas¬
      ing rate.
        As a result of this rivalry, during the last quarter of the eight¬
      eenth century there were constant struggles among the various
      Mamluk factions, with Murad and Ibrahim never being able to
      achieve sufficient strength to overcome them and establish rela¬
      tive calm. Each faction ravaged town and country alike to finance
      its efforts, and none of them had the ability or time to perform the
      duties of police and administration needed to keep order and se¬
      curity in the land. Consequently by 1798 Egypt was in political,
      economic, and social chaos. The depredations of Mamluk and
      bedouin bands, the disintegration of the irrigation system, and
      the ravages of plague rapidly depopulated the country and left it
      an easy prey to whoever chose to attack it from outside.^
        In Syria the outstanding Mamluk leader of Selim Ill’s time was
      Ahmed Jezzar Pasha. Originally a Bosnian, he entered Ottoman
      service in the household of Hekimoglu Ali Pasha and in 1756
      accompanied his master to Egypt, where he was appointed gov¬
      ernor. When Ali returned to Istanbul at the end of his term,
      Ahmed managed to remain in Cairo and soon allied himself with
      the famous Ali Bey al-Kabir, first as the slave of one of All’s
      Mamluks and later as a Mamluk of Ali himself. It was during this
      period that Ahmed acquired the nickname of Jezzar (the butcher)
      as the result of his ferocious efforts in the internecine Mamluk




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
struggles for power and in the suppression of the hedouins in the      219
Delta.«
  Ahmed quarreled with Ali’s chief lieutenant, Abu al-Zahab,
and was forced to flee from Egypt in 1769. For a time he served
the Ottoman governor of Damascus against the rebel riojer of
Acre, Zahir al-Omar. During these campaigns, Ahmed won the
attention and favor of Gazi Hasan Pasha, and as a result he him¬
self was appointed governor of Acre (1775). At this time he sup¬
pressed the rebellions of Zahir’s sons and the efforts of the bed¬
ouin tribes to ravage the agricultural areas. As reward he was
made leader of theXlttoman pilgrims’ caravan to the Holy Cities
(1770) and then governor of Sidon (1775) and later of Damascus
as well (1785).Ahmed now attracted into his service large num¬
bers of Bosnians and Albanians left in Syria by the Ottoman
armies, and he soon built them into the strongest army in the
area. With his base continuing at Acre, he expanded his authority
and influence throughout much of Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine.
Local ruling families had to accept his authority both as Ottoman
governor and local notable, and they paid tribute in return for
his "protection.” With these revenues, he not only paid all the
taxes he owed to the Sultan, but also enlarged his army, built a
small navy, and so extended his power that he was by far the
strongest ruler in Syria during the last quarter of the century.
  The only successful opposition which he met came from Mount
Lebanon and in particular from the Shihabi Emir Bashir II, who
was first chosen as governor of the Lebanon by its leading fami¬
lies in 1789. Bashir actually was given power by the Janbulat
chiefs with the assistance of Jezzar’s soldiers, but Bashir success¬
fully countered Jezzar’s efforts to extend his power into the moun¬
tain. Despite his ostensible submission, he gradually built up his
own power in the Lebanon by playing off the various families
against one another and gradually confiscating their properties
for his own benefit. As a result, by the end of the century he was a
powerful rival.
  Ottoman authority also began to wane in Iraq in the last years
of the seventeenth century. For over a half century thereafter
struggles for power continued without end, with the bedouins
ravaging the countryside and the province falling into political.




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
220   economic, and social chaos. It was only in the middle of the eight¬
      eenth century that the vacuum was at last filled hy the Mamluk
      slaves brought in to serve the Ottoman officials in the same way
      as they had in Egypt. But unlike the Egyptian example, once the
      Mamluks gained control in Iraq, they filled all the offices in the
      Ottoman hierarchy of government, including the governorship,
      which came to he held hy the chief of the dominant party. For
      this reason, the Porte never was abld to maintain competing
      Mamluk factions for its own benefit', and the Sultan’s treasury
      therefore never secured the same sort of financial reward as it
      had from Egypt. While the Iraqi Mamluks did divide into compet¬
      ing factions, there was always one which was able to achieve
      unchallenged control for long periods of,time. With the fear of
      oppression removed, their rulers were far freer to develop the
      security and prosperity of the country and to restore its adminis¬
      tration than the Mamluks were in Egypt.”
        This trend culminated under the greatest of the Mamluk rulers
      of Iraq, Suleyman Pasha "The Great,” whose period of enlight¬
      ened rule (1780-1802) largely coincided with that of Selim III.
      When Suleyman came to power, he found that the interregnum
      following the death of his predecessor, Umar Pasha (1764-1780),
      had been used by the bedouins of the Middle Euphrates, Arabia,
      and Syria, to ravage the countryside and defy the authority of the
      central government. At the same time, local rulers had declared
      their independence in the north at Mosul and Mardin and in the
      south at Basra, withholding the tax revenues of their areas for
      their own treasuries. To meet these challenges, Suleyman first
      had to establish his position in Baghdad itself. By restoring order
      and security in the capital, he gained the support of the local
      merchants, whose businesses had been ruined by the previous
      disorder. At the same time he found the long-established Janis¬
      sary corps to be as disorganized and ill-fitted for fighting as were
      their namesakes in Istanbul, while the Mamluks were dispirited
      and reduced in numbers as a result of the long years of factional
      disputes. Suleyman decided to rebuild the Mamluk forces to pro¬
      vide the base for his power. To do this he imported large numbers
      of slaves from Georgia and quickly trained them into an effective
      fighting force. He then appointed the best of them as officers in




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
the Janissary corps, and used the Mamluk army to force the Jan¬        221
issaries to accept discipline, training, and new weapons. So with¬
in a short time, he created an effective fighting force for himself.
  Once this was accomplished, Suleyman moved to restore order
in the countryside. He sent out regular expeditions which re¬
moved the bedouin tribes from the cultivated areas and forced
them to perform in his service, both to guard caravans and boats
and to serve in his armies against those of their fellows who had
not yet accepted his rule. The river and road bandits were almost
entirely eliminated, and once again the Tigris and Euphrates
were open for communications. Some of the stronger bedouin
tribes managed to retain their independence, however, and they
periodically threw off Suleyman’s domination and carried out
raids as far as Baghdad itself The leader of this opposition was
Sheyh Thuwaini, leader of the Muntafik tribe of Suk ul-Shuyuh,
who had attracted large numbers of bedouins and Mamluks who
refused to accept Suleyman’s domination. In 1784, Thuwaini
captured Zubair and Basra, arrested Suleyman’s officials, and
forced the local notables to petition the Sultan to appoint him to
Suleyman’s place in Baghdad. To combat this move, Suleyman got
the support of Thuwaini’s rival among the Muntafik, Hamid
al-Thamir, who gathered the bedouins of the Middle Euphrates
and some Kurdish tribes from the north. The combined govern¬
ment-bedouin force smashed Thuwaini at Umm ul-Abbas (Octo¬
ber 1787). Hamud now was appointed in place of his rival as
chief of the Muntafik, and Suleyman re-established his direct
authority in Basra.Thuwaini managed to escape capture and
took refuge in Arabia, where the rising Wahhabi movement
based its power. With Thuwaini’s encouragement, the Wahhabis
turned their attention to Iraq, and their raids in subsequent
years came to occupy most of Suleyman’s attention.
  In Arabia revolt against Ottoman rule during the late eight¬
eenth and early nineteenth centuries was focused in the activi¬
ties of the Wahhabi religious movement and the armies of the
Saudi family, who first rose to power in the middle of the eight¬
eenth century. The founder of the Wahhabis, Muhammad ibn
Abd al-Wahhab, was born in 1703 at Ayaina, near Riyadh. He
was the son of an extremely pious local judge who bitterly op-




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
222   posed the way in which his religion, as it was practiced in central
      Arabia at that time, had become a cult of superstitious beliefs
      in the efficacy of sacrifices, charms, and visitations to holy places,
      very much like the primitive religions which had existed in Arabia
      in the "age of ignorance” preceding the rise of Islam in the sev¬
      enth century. Muhammad accepted the teachings of his father;
      and after traveling to the Holy Cities and Basra for study, he
      began to preach a message of moral and spiritual regeneration,
      abandonment of idolatrous practiceis,' and return to the original
      religion of the Prophet. As soon as he attracted some followers,
      however, he encountered the opposition of local merchants whose
      businesses benefited from the traffic stimulated by the worship
      of saints and pilgrimages to holy places. They finally forced him
      to leave and return home, where he remained in study and medi¬
      tation until his father’s death in 1740.
        It was at this point that Muhammad moved to spread his mes¬
      sage by allying himself with local civil rulers and working with
      them for mutual advantage. In Ayaina he married the daughter
      of the local ruler, Uthman ibn Muammar, who gave him political
      support for his campaign for the first time. Under Muhammad’s
      spiritual direction and with Uthman’s army, Ayaina was trans¬
      formed into a model Muslim community of the type they hoped
      to spread to all of Arabia. Trees, saints’ tombs, and other objects
      venerated by the ignorant were destroyed; vice was eliminated;
      adulterous women were stoned to death; all opposition was vig¬
      orously suppressed. But Muhammad soon met the same sort of
      opposition he had encountered earlier in the Holy Cities. Not
      only did the populace object to interference in their lives, but the
      local merchants also felt the loss of revenues from the pilgrims’
      traffic, and they finally forced Uthman to get rid of him in 1745.
        Muhammad then moved to the nearby town of Dariye, where he
      rapidly built up a new circle of persons devoted to his message.
      It was not long before he came into contact with the ruler of nearby
      Turaif, Muhammad ibn Saud, who saw in the Wahhabi message
      an opportunity to spread his political rule in the area. Once again,
      Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab allied himself with a political
      ruler for mutual advantage. He provided Saud with a doctrine to
      attract supporters and followers while Saud gave him the finan-




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
cial and military support and protection needed to spread and         223
enforce his teachings.
  Dari ye now became the center of the Wahhabi moral and spir¬
itual revival movement. People flocked to hear Muhammad ibn
al-Wahhab’s teachings, coming not only from the immediate
vicinity, but from all over Arabia, so the movement soon ceased
to have a merely local character. Muhammad expanded his mes¬
sage to include the idea of holy war against enemies of Islam,
including all Muslims who were not true to their faith, that is,
everyone who refused to accept his teachings, with one-fifth of
the booty from su9h wars reserved for prince and preacher to
assure the strength and vitality of both civil and religious as¬
pects of the alliance. The wealth and manpower coming through
the Wahhabi movement enabled Ibn Saud to eliminate his princi¬
pal enemies in the Nejd by 1758. With his death in 1765, the first
stage in the rise and expansion of the Wahhabi-Saudi state was
brought to an end.*^
  Abd ul-Aziz I Ibn Saud had assumed actual political and mili¬
tary leadership of the state some time before his father’s death,
so there was no problem or dispute over succession. The bedouin
tribes which had declared allegiance to his father did not hesi¬
tate to transfer their support. It was under Abd ul-Aziz that the
state founded by his father expanded out of the Nejd to rule most
of Arabia and in fact to threaten the foundations of the Ottoman
Empire. Abd ul-Aziz first continued his father’s policy of consoli¬
dating his power in the Nejd by pushing his suzerainty to oasis
after oasis and tribe after tribe, each of which accepted the Wah¬
habi teachings, at least formally, as part of the price of submis¬
sion. The Nejd now began to suffer from drought and locusts, so
to find food and fodder for his followers and their animals, in
1769 Abd ul-Aziz inaugurated a series of raids into southern
Iraq. The raids were successful, and he acquired more and more
support among tribes not only in the Nejd but also in the Hijaz
and along the coasts of the Persian Gulf. As the political succes¬
ses mounted, the religious message became more specific. To the
followers of the Wahhabi message, all the rituals of religion had
to be obeyed to the letter as manifestations of sincere belief, and
all aberrations, including failure to pray even a single time, were




              Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
224   considered to be the worst sort of sin, punishable by death. To sins
      such as the construction of tombs, lighting of candles, and venera¬
      tion and worship of saints and prophets were added the use of
      drink and tobacco and the playing of music, which were considered
      to be heretical innovations since they were not specifically men¬
      tioned in the Koran. All Muslims who had not yet accepted the
      Wahhabi teachings were considered to be pagans or polytheists
      who had to be converted or killed. To be sure, this doctrine alone
      could not have attracted the sincere support of the free-living
      townsmen and tribesmen of Arabia, but the political and military
      success that went with it, and in particular the possibility of
      acquiring large amounts of booty, seemed to be worth the price
      of accepting at least formally the doctrines which accompanied
      them.*®
        At this time, Ottoman rule in Arabia was concentrated at a few
      forts located along the Red Sea coast as stations for the annual
      pilgrimages to the Holy Cities, the ports of Yanbo and Jidda and
      tbe Holy Cities themselves. All of these were under the governor¬
      ship of the Sherif of Mecca, who, in addition to being the repre¬
      sentative of the Sultan, was accepted as suzerain by most of the
      bedouin tribes who lived in the peninsula. In 1787, this post was
      assumed by the Sherif Galib ibn Musaid, who bore the brunt of
      the Wahhabi attacks into the Hijaz during the remainder of
      Selim’s rule.*^ For the moment, the Saudis preferred to avoid open
      conflict with the Ottoman forces, so they continued to concentrate
      their activities in the north and east of the peninsula, with their
      occasional raids into southern Iraq hardly noticed by the center
      of power as anything more than the usual bedouin attacks on
      settled areas. Sherif Galib was much more aware of the religious
      and political threat of the Wahhabi-Saudi movement, and he
      considered it his duty to do all he could to stamp it out before they
      became an important danger. His messages to Istanbul had little
      impact among the increasingly decadent and worldly members
      of the Ulema, however, and without their support he was unable
      to convince the Sultan that major reinforcements were required
      to quell the movement. At the same time he also was diverted by
      internal difficulties, with a revolt led by his brother Abdullah
      preventing him from doing much about the Wahhabis for some
      time after his. accession.*®



                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
  In the meantime, as Abd al-Aziz ibn Saud and Muhammad ibn           225
al-Wahhab advanced in age, they jointly named the former’s son
Saud ibn Abd ul-Aziz as political and spiritual successor to pre¬
vent disputes over the right of succession and, just as important,
to assure a continuity of the loyalty of tribal and town vassals
should one or both of them die. With no effective internal op¬
position, the movement maintained its vitality and continued to
expand, and early in 1790, the elimination of the last important
rivals to their power within the Nejd, the Beni Halid princes of
al-Ahsa, set the stage for expansion to the north and south on a
scale not attempte/1 previously.
  Despite the absence of Ottoman reinforcements, as soon as
Sherif Abdullah’s revolt was put down, Sherif Galib organized
an army of about 10,000 men, including bedouin vassals sum¬
moned from all over the Hijaz and even a few places in the Nejd;
and in 1790 he marched toward Dariye, intending to eliminate
the Saudi threat once and for all. When he failed to take the
fortified town of Kasr Bassam, the lure of booty was effectively
dissipated, and the army broke up before reaching its objective.
During the next two years, Abd al-Aziz scattered the Nejd bedouin
tribes which had responded to Galib’s call, thus making very sure
that they would not respond again. At the same time the death of
Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab, at the age of eighty-nine, left
Abd al-Aziz as undisputed spiritual as well as political leader of
the community. Between 1792 and 1794, he conquered al-Hasa
and made it an integral part of his state, and with its wealth, he
was able to build a regular administration and army for the first
time. The desert kingdom now was becoming a state, and the
danger which Galib had feared a reality. Wahhabi forces began to
move out of the Nejd on a large scale. Various groups pillaged
the frontiers of the Hijaz and of Iraq and moved into Katar and
Kuwait along the Persian Gulf, with their preachers going along,
arousing scorn for everything the Sultan stood for. The continued
Wahhabi successes and the huge amounts of booty secured in
these raids attracted the fealty of more and more tribes, including
many of the Iraq and Syrian frontier bedouins who were severely
harried by the raids and discouraged by the failure of Baghdad
and Damascus to defend them.^*^ As a result the Saudi army now
became by far the strongest military force in the Arab world.



              Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
226     Up to this time, the extent of the Saudi threat was not under¬
      stood in Istanbul, and the complaints, arriving from Mecca, Da¬
      mascus, and Baghdad continued to be received with scorn. The
      Saudis still were considered to be no more than another one of
      the innumerable bedouin forces which had troubled the empire
      over the centuries, and the regular defenses were felt to be quite
      adequate to deal with them, especially in view of Selim’s desire
      to concentrate on internal reforms at this time. But starting in
      1796, this situation changed rather ^quickly as a result of Saudi
      attacks on the centers of Ottoman power in the Arab world, at¬
      tacks which were at least partially provoked by Galib’s efforts
      to crush the movement before it became a threat.
        Galib’s first attack, in the spring of 1796, was routed by the
      Saudis at Nil, on the caravan trail between the Nejd and the
      Hijaz.^® Suleyman Pasha of Baghdad persuaded Sheyh Thuwaini
      to return from exile and organize a coordinated campaign of all
      the bedouin princes and chiefs driven out of northern Arabia and
      southern Syria by the Wahhabi advance. But just as they were
      about to meet the Wahhabi army at al-Hasa, Thuwaini was as¬
      sassinated by a slave (July 1797) and his army broke up, thus
      ending disastrously the first important Iraqi counterattack
      against the Saudis.The threat of continued attacks both from
      Mecca and Iraq caused Saud to attack and ravage Kuwait in the
      spring of 1798 in order to get needed supplies and camels to de¬
      fend himself. This victory caused most of the Hijaz tribes to trans¬
      fer their allegiance from Mecca to Saud, thus becoming a major
      factor in advancing the Wahhabi cause. In the summer and fall
      of 1798 and winter of 1799, a regular Ottoman force sent from
      Baghdad under the command of Suleyman’s chief lieutenant,
      Kethiida Ali Pasha, moved into the Nejd and captured a number
      of villages. But despite the use of regular Janissary and Mamluk
      soldiers and of artillery, he was unable to take the important
      forts of Hufhuf and Mubaraz. When Saud ibn al-Aziz moved north
      with a rescue army in April 1799, Ali Pasha, fearing he would
      be cut off, abandoned the siege, destroyed all his heavy equip¬
      ment, buried his ammunition, and fled toward the coast with
      Saud in hot pursuit. The Ottomans thus retired and left the Saudis
      in control of al-Hasa without having to pay any tribute or in-




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
demnities for their previous attacks. As a result, Galib despaired     227
of being able to defeat the Saudis by force, so he agreed to make
peace with them, and in 1799 and 1800 Wahhabi pilgrims were
allowed to come to the Holy Cities for the first time.^^
                               *

  As the century came to a close, all Ottoman efforts to check the
Saudis had failed. This dangerous political and religious move¬
ment ruled without check in most of Arabia. The Sultan’s failure
to punish it caused him tremendous loss of prestige in the Mus¬
lim world, and left it in a 'position to gain new adherents and
new power at the expense of the Ottomans in the years which
followed.          ^                                           yf ,1


                          The Balkans                           ^
  In the European parts of the Empire, conditions engendered by
two wars with Russia had led to the rise of numerous bandit ^
forces, often encouraged, supported, and emulated by the increas¬
ingly independent local notables. Between 1787 and 1795 in
particular, these "mountain rebels,” as they were called by the
Porte, expanded their activities almost without opposition in the
area between the Danube, the Balkan range, and the Adriatic,
and along the Maritsa River. Between Edirne, Sofia, and Bel¬
grade, the roads were infested by bandits who raided caravans,
travelers —and even military expeditions—and exacted heavy
tribute from the towns and villages which lay along their routes.^^
In Rumelia the most important chiefs of this sort were Veysioglu
Halil Usta of Dimotica, Dagdevirenoglu, and his ally Ali Molla,
who ruled the area of Edime, and Tokatjikli Suleyman Agha of
Giimiiljine, whose authority extended as far as Salonika and
Drama. To the north along the southern borders of Wallachia,
Yillik zade Suleyman Agha controlled Silistria and Deliorman;
Ibrail, Ismail, and the Danube shores between them were under
Nazir Ahmed Agha; while the areas of Nicopolis, Sistova, and
Ruschuk were controlled by Tirsiniklioglu Ismail Agha. The
lands between Vidin and Sofia were under Pasvanoglu Osman
Pasha of Vidin, whose forces also ravaged large sections of west¬
ern Wallachia and eastern Serbia. To the west, northern Albania
was ruled by Bushath Mahmud Pasha, notable of Scutari. In the




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
228   south, rule in Epirus was shared by Ibrahim Pasha of Avlonya
      in central Albania; and Tepedelenli Ali Pasha of Janina to the
      south.

                           Ali Pasha of Janina (I)

        Ali Pasha of Janina, descended from a Turkish dervish who
      had come from Kiitahya in the seventeenth century, was born in
      1750 in the town of Tepelen (Tepedelen) in Epirus, where he
      spent his early years. His grandfatjier and father were among
      the numerous district notables who ruled Albania at this time,
      but his father died in battle in 1763, while Ali was too young to
      defend his patrimony, so he fled into the hills and, like many
      around him, became a brigand, gradually building up his own
      band and raiding the surrounding area. At this time, the Ottoman
      governor of Epirus, Kurt Pasha of Berat, was attempting to sup¬
      press these bandits and, to get Ali’s obedience and cooperation,
      invited him to his capital and promised him the hand of his daugh¬
      ter. As soon as Ali disbanded his force and entered Ottoman
      service, however, Kurt Pasha reneged on his promise and a feud
      began which was to end only with his death. Ali then entered the
      service of Kurt’s rival, the mutasarrif (administrator) of Delvino,
      Kokka Pasha, whose daughter he soon married (1761). It was
      not long before the ambitious Ali attacked his father-in-law
      and then proceeded to take over his lands and properties, rapidly
      expanding his power in the area between Janina and the Adriatic
      coast. The Porte recognized his power in 1784 by appointing him
      governor of Delvino in place of his late father-in-law. At this
      point, however, Ali’s old enemy Kurt Pasha, still governor of
      Epirus, managed to have him transferred to the sanjak of Trikala
      in Thessaly, hoping to end his rise by removing him from the
      base of his power. But Ali managed to turn this move to his own
      advantage, acquiring considerable wealth and a large number of
      followers in his new dominion while still retaining his former
      possession. In the new Russian war which began in 1787, he
      rendered important assistance to the Porte along the Danube and
      in clearing Epirus and Thessaly of bandits, and at the same time
      he managed to incorporate most of the bandits into his own army
      while retaining the bulk of the booty instead of sending it to




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
Istanbul. On the pretext of pursuing bandits, he seized the entire     229
district of Janina and persuaded the Porte to appoint him its
governor with the rank of vezir in 1788.^^
  With this official position, Ali expanded his power rapidly.
                               ♦

Using the prestige of his military victories, he attracted, large
numbers of the local armatolis into his service, and managed to
use the wartime disorder to attack and kill his old rivals in Epirus
and take over their territories, one after the other. While the
Porte condemned him for these acts, it did not dare to act openly
against him because of his important contributions to the war,
so he was able to extend his power all the way from Elbasan in
central Albania south to the Gulf of Corinth.^® The only impor¬
tant resistance came from the inhabitants of the mountainous
regions along the coast of Epirus, in particular those of Shimari,
opposite Corfu, and Suli, in the hills above Parga, whose inhabit¬
ants had never recognized the Ottoman governors in the past and
certainly did not intend to accept Ali’s rule now. The Shimariotes,
generally Muslim, were ruled by their own beys, who fiercely
kept their independence of one another as well as from the Porte
and united only when they were threatened from the outside. The
Suliotes were mainly Christians who had fled to this region in
the seventeenth century from the lowlands of Epirus to escape
absorption by the Muslims around them. Protected by their lofty
mountains, they were divided into clans, whose chiefs exercised
executive and judicial power. All decisions of major importance,
particularly those of war and peace, were decided by an assembly
of all the inhabitants, who met together when conditions required
it. In times of war, these united forces were led by generals from
clans with traditional rights to military leadership. Since agri¬
culture was impossible in their barren and rocky land, raiding
their settled neighbors in the valleys was their sole occupation;
they also managed to collect a good deal of tribute in the form of
food and money from those who accepted their guarantee against
such action.
  The Venetian rulers of Corfu and Parga long had maintained
their influence on the mainland by encouraging anti-Ottoman
action by the Suliotes and Shimariotes who now, with the encour¬
agement of Russian agents, formed a loose confederation to resist




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
230   Ali of Janina.^® Ali was not able to do anything about this until
      he returned from the Russian war early in 1791. Then he moved
      against the Suliotes hoping to catch them by surprise. But while
      he caught two clans, the rest escaped into their mountain fast¬
      nesses and soon routed his forces, inflicting heavy losses in men
      and prestige during 1792 and 1793.^® Having realized the difficul¬
      ties involved in conquering Suli, Ali abandoned his effort for the
      moment and turned to establishing his power elsewhere in the
      area, particularly to the north, where a new rival was rising.

                           Kara Mahmud Pasha

        In northern Albania, the principal ruling family was the
      Bushath. The base of the family’s power, was Scutari, which it
      apparently had occupied since before the Ottoman conquest,
      converting to Islam in order to keep its property and position.
      Over the centuries, there were many conflicts for power among
      members of the family, and it was only under Gazi Mehmed
      Pasha in the mid-eighteenth century (1748-1770) that family
      unity was established and its territories united under a single
      ruler.   He managed to gain power by acquiring large flefs and
      turning them into his private property, and also by allying with
      the Malisars (highlanders) against the Tosks of the south. During
      the war of 1768-1774, his son and successor, Kara Mahmud
      Pasha (1770-1796), was given the honorary Ottoman post of
      governor of Albania with the rank of vezir, and he performed im¬
      portant military services against the Austrians in the north and
      the Greek rebels in the Morea. At the same time, he and his sons
      built up the family power by entering into marriage and military
      alliances with the principal Gheg families of northern Albania
      while destroying those who resisted his power. By the end of the
      war, he had achieved such complete control in northern Albania
      that the Porte was forced to appoint him governor of Scutari in
      1779.31 His continued expansion and attacks on Ottoman gover¬
      nors and vassals alike, combined with a failure to pay his tribute
      to the Sultan, Anally led to an attack against him by a combined
      land and sea expedition under the command of Gazi Hasan Pasha
      in 1784-1785. Mahmud was forced to surrender, but in the end he
      was pardoned and restored as governor in return for large pay-




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
ments of tribute and promises to restrain his territorial ambitions       231
in the future.
  But as soon as the Ottoman army departed, Mahmud turned
his attention to Montenegro, which he invaded for the first time
                               f

late in 1785. Having enjoyed some autonomy in the Ottoman
Empire, Montenegro had been attempting to evade central au¬
thority even more since the end of the seventeenth century. By
Selim Ill’s time, it consisted of a league of clans headed by the
council of clan chiefs and the Vladika (Prince-Bishop), whose
main job was to get their agreement on common problems and
unite them in the/military struggles against the Porte. At this
time Montenegro was under the rule of Vladika Peter I Petrovich
Niegos (1784-1830), who, although installed through Austrian
influence, wa^lpse tp .Catherine II, whose court he was visiting      ^
to secure assistance for a new revolt against the Ottomans.®'^
Kara Mahmud used his absence to sow dissension among the var¬
ious chiefs. When he attacked Montenegro, therefore, he encount¬
ered little resistance as he expanded his power.^^ Fearful of a new
Ottoman attack as a result, he contacted Austrian agents in Mon¬
tenegro in the hope of securing an alliance against the Sultan.
Since the Emperor and Czar were then meeting to prepare the
war they were to declare against the Porte shortly thereafter,
Mahmud’s offer was greeted favorably, and he was promised
Austrian recognition as ruler of an independent Albania in return
for his assistance against the Porte and his conversion to Christi¬
anity. On his return to Albania he assembled all the Christian
chiefs with the Muslim chiefs especially loyal to him and swore
them on the Bible and the Koran to fight the Ottomans until the
death. This led to a second Ottoman expedition against him late
in 1786, which was led by Aydoslu Mehmed Pasha and included a
number of contingents of Balkan notables led by Tepedelenli Ali
Pasha, now governor of Janina and Trikala. Mahmud took pos¬
session of the fortress of Rusafa, on the hill overlooking Scutari,
and successfully held off the besiegers for several months. Finally
by feigning surrender, with the assistance of some allies within
the besieging army, he surprised and routed it.^^
  The new war with Russia and Austria in 1787 forced the Sultan
to abandon his efforts to suppress Mahmud and instead to offer




              Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
232   him a full pardon on condition that he provide military assistance
      to the Ottoman army fighting against Austria. Catherine called
      on all the Balkan Christians to revolt against the Turks and help
      the Russian army and fleet which would soon arrive on the Dan¬
      ube and in the Mediterranean.^® Emperor Joseph sent a Colonel
      Vukacevich to Montenegro and Albania with a similar proclama¬
      tion, promising independence under Austrian protection once the
      war was over. Arriving with 2,000 Austrian soldiers and 400 Ser¬
      bian and Bosnian volunteers, Vukacievich set to work to organize
      and train those Montenegrins wishing to fight the Sultan.®^
        To Scutari in May 1788, he sent an agent named Brugnard with
      several soldiers and splendid gifts for Mahmud. At that time the
      Ottoman army was overrunning the Austrian positions and ad¬
      vancing into the Banat of Temesvar. Fearing that his new friends
      would be unable to help him, Mahmud massacred the Austrian
      agents and sent their heads to the Sultan along with a declaration
      of submission and a promise to join the Ottoman army.®®
        He therefore was appointed governor of Scutari once again and
      his brother Ibrahim Pasha was given the post of mutasarrif
      Ohrid, previously held by Ali of Janina’s son, Veliuddin Pasha.®®
      The two families thus became embroiled in a conflict over terri¬
      tories. The traditional Ottoman device of divide and conquer was
      introduced once again, with the Porte working to balance the two
      families off so they would continue to pay tribute and provide mil¬
      itary assistance while at the same time maintaining order in an
      area where the regular Ottoman officials found it impossible to
      keep the tribes and notables in line. Mahmud’s defection left the
      Montenegrins without the expected assistance from Albania, but
      this did not stop several thousand of them from joining the Herze¬
      govinians and Bosnians in attempting to assist the Austrian
      army during the war. As a result, Kara Mahmud Pasha, who be¬
      came governor of Anatolia and military commander of the Novi
      Pazar front in Bosnia on the death of Abdi Pasha in 1789, was
      sent on several campaigns against them.
        In October 1789, Kara Mahmud led his army against a Monte¬
      negrin rebel force near Podgoritza but was routed; the victors
      then ravaged and burned the Muslim villages in the vicinity.
      Kara Mahmud was compelled to make peace with the Vladika




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
(Prince-Bishop), who agreed to pay tribute to the Sultan in return              233
for the right to annex the entire valley of the Moraka River to¬
gether with the fortresses of Podgoritza and Zabliak.^® The Mon¬
tenegrins had no intention of keeping even this peace, however,
and after new arms and ammunition arrived from Trieste, they
attacked again and pursued Kara Mahmud’s men into Albania to
the point where the Moraka empties into the lake of Scutari
(spring 1790). In a three-day battle, which included a direct clash
between Ottoman and Montene^rairjboats on the lake, the invad¬
ers emerged victorious once again, taking and destroying the fort
of Zabliak before retiring to the north with the spoils of victory.
They then moved into Bosnia and Herzegovina and ravaged large
areas, thus undermining the entire Ottoman effort against the
Austrians along the Save.'"
  For the moment, however, Kara Mahmud ignored the Monte¬
negrins as he turned back to the job of building his power within
Albania. By the end of the war, he had eliminated almost all op¬
position as far south as Elbasan. He therefore came into direct
territorial contact and conflicts with Ali of Janina’s state to the
south. But at this time, he assisted a number of French royalists
who escaped through Germany across the Alps. Since this vio¬
lated Selim’s effort to remain neutral, a third Ottoman expedition
was sent against him in 1793, this time under the command of the
governor of Bosnia, Ebubekir Pasha. Scutari was besieged, but
once again Mahmud routed the Ottoman army and captured its
supplies with the same sort of surprise attack which had won for
him a decade before."*^
  In the meantime, in the south, Ali of Janina responded to the
increasing Bushath threat by emphasizing his loyalty to the Sul¬
tan and serving him wherever desired. In 1792 and 1793, his sons
Muhtar and Veliuddin led a highly successful series of campaigns
against brigands in Macedonia. In return, and also to balance off
the power of the Bushaths, in 1794 the Sultan gave him the rank
of mirmiran* took Ohrid from Ibrahim Pasha and gave it to Muh¬
tar Pasha, and ordered Ali and his sons to prepare a campaign


   *The same as beylerbey, the second highest ranking in the Ottoman adminis¬
trative service, immediately after vezir.




                Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
                                      1


234   against Kara Mahmud as soon as possible.         Happy to comply
      with this order, Ali moved into the mountains separating middle
      Albania from Macedonia, taking Ohrid and Goritza from Kara
      Mahmud. These conquests cut Kara Mahmud off from possible
      assistance from the east and at the same time opened the way for
      Ali to make new conquests into Thessaly. Ali now reached new
      heights of power, extending his influence among the Albanian
      clans by marriage alliances as well as by force. His main opposi¬
      tion came from Ibrahim Pasha, who^had 'succeeded his old enemy
      Kurt Pasha at Berat, allied with the highlanders of Suli and
      Shimari. Venice, from its coastal naval bases at Parga, Preveza,
      Vonitza, and Butrinto, provided them with material assistance
      in order to prevent Ali from overwhelming them as well.^^ In
      response to this pressure, Kara Mahmud once again asked for and
      received a pardon from the Sultan, agreeing to pay all his back
      taxes and to participate in a new invasion being prepared against
      Montenegro (1794).
       There the Vladika and his people had been bitterly disap¬
      pointed by the peace treaties. While Russia and Austria had got¬
      ten the Porte to give amnesty to those people of the Balkans who
      had helped their war efforts, nothing had been done to diminish
      Ottoman sovereignty, establish their autonomy or independence,
      or, in the case of Montenegro, confirm the conquests they had
      made in northern Albania, Herzegovina, and elsewhere. So the
      Vladika refused to recognize the peace and continued to harass
      the Ottomans. At the same time, representatives were sent to
      Saint Petersburg demanding that Catherine fulfill her promises,
      but she replied that for the moment the new peace made it impos¬
      sible for her to do anything to help them against the Sultan.^^
        During 1796, Kara Mahmud led two expeditions against the
      Montenegrins, but both were routed. Mahmud was captured and
      beheaded along with almost 3,000 of his men."*® For Ali and the
      Ottomans, this event marked the end of the Bushatli danger, at
      least for the moment, since Mahmud’s brother and eldest son
      began a struggle for power which effectively diverted their inter¬
      ests from their neighbors for two decades, until it finally was set¬
      tled in favor of Mahmud’s son.'^^ There was now no reason for the
      Sultan to build up All’s power, so Muhtar was dismissed as gov-




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
ernor of Ohrid on the pretext of misrule, and Ali was called to        235
serve in a new campaign being organized in the north against the
rising power of Pasvanoglu.^* At the same time, however, Ali
used the new Bushath weakness to extend his power into north¬
ern Albania while continuing his fruitless efforts to suppress the
the Suliotes and Ibrahim Pasha in the south. As for the Monte¬
negrins, their victory ended the long duel with the Bushaths and
left them independent for the moment. Vladika Peter turned to
administrative and judicial reforms and abandoned his efforts to
attack Bosnia and Dalmatia, thus leaving them in peace for a
time.^*^         ^
  In the meantime, to the East, between 1789 and 1796, the Sul¬
tan sent annual expeditions into Bulgaria, but they had little
success against the brigands who infested the area. The local
notables invariably refused to help for fear that the Porte would
interpret any lessening of the bandit danger as a cause to move
against them as well. When the Ottoman governors attempted to
move ahead without their cooperation, they sent formal protests
to Istanbul, and their powerful political allies in the capital usu¬
ally were able to secure the appointment of less active and able
men. In addition whenever the Ottoman army actually did catch
the brigand forces, the brigands usually were able to flee un¬
harmed into the mountains and to resume their activities as soon
as the army moved on.
  The most successful Ottoman governor in this area was Abdi
Pasha, governor of Silistria, who in 1795 was appointed to at¬
tack the strongest of the Bulgarian brigands, Haji Manav of
Vidin and Plevna. Abdi Pasha first tried to suppress Haji Manav
by force, and he took Plevna after a long siege; but when he tried
to move into the mountains to reach the bandit’s main camp near
Lofcha, his army was routed. He then tried a soft approach, par¬
doning Haji Manav and inviting him and his chief lieutenants to
Plevna for conversations and to receive various appointments
and honors from the Sultan. As soon as Manav and his men
reached Yeni Pazar, Abdi surprised and massacred them, but Haji
Manav himself was able to escape and flee south to Gumtiljine,
where he soon set to work gathering new followers.^® For the
moment, however, Abdi was able to clear northern and eastern




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
236   Bulgaria of most of the remaining bandits, and relative order
      and security were re-established. But while he was busy there,
      other bandits increased their activities in the south, raiding all
      over Thrace and much of Macedonia, and cutting off Istanbul and
      Edirne from their regular shipments of provisions from the Princi¬
      palities. During the winter of 1795-96, Abdi Pasha moved south
      and was able to defeat a good number of them, but those who sur¬
      vived secured refuge and assistance froih a number of new power¬
      ful Danubian notables who had taken advantage of Ottoman
      weakness to build large empires of their own and so pose a new
      threat to Ottoman suzerainty of the kind previously presented
      only in Albania.^^ The most important of these were Tirsiniklioglu
      Ismail Agha of Ruschuk and Pasvanoglu of Vidin.

                          Ismail Agha of Ruschuk
        Ismail Agha was the brother of Tirsiniklioglu Omer Agha,
      notable of Ruschuk, who was executed in 1791 because of his
      misrule and his failure to pay tribute to the Sultan. The Porte
      replaced him with a local notable from another family. Ismail
      managed to escape despite orders that he too be executed. He
      then built a small bandit force of about thirty men, who ravaged
      and robbed in the areas of Ruschuk and Sistova for about three
      years. In 1795, the ayan of Ruschuk, then serving also as governor
      of Silistria, sent a large force against Ismail’s camp on an island
      near Sistova, but Ismail routed them, and with the resulting
      prestige he attracted large numbers of followers and emerged
      more powerful than ever.^^ At this point, through the intercession
      of the Hospodar of Wallachia, Alexander Ipsilanti, he was par¬
      doned and allowed to return to Ruschuk and live in his family
      house on condition that he give up his bandit activities and re¬
      frain from interference in local politics (1796). He honored the
      first promise but completely ignored the second. It took him less
      than a year to gather together his father’s old partisans. With
      their assistance he regained power in the city, and the Porte was
      forced to recognize him as notable. His power now expanded
      rapidly as large numbers of bandits joined his service, both those
      particularly attracted by the opportunities offered for booty and
      those defeated by the Ottoman armies and seeking some means to




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
recoup their fortunes. Within a year he also controlled Hezargrad     237
and Tirnovo and was the major power in central Bulgaria from
the Danube to the Balkan mountains.

                           PasVanoglu

  At the same time, Pasvanoglu Osman Pasha rose in the area
of Vidin as one of the most powerful notables of Selim’s reign.
The family originally came from Bosnia, but in 1739 Osman’s
grandfather Pasvan Agha vfas given two villages near Vidin in
return for services in the recently concluded war against Austria.
Osman’s father, Omer Agha Pasvanoglu, a member of the Janis¬
sary corps, inherited these villages and became a minor notable
in the area. Because of his rebellious tendencies, however, he was
executed by the local Ottoman governor, and Osman himself was
able to escape the same fate only by fleeing to Albania. Thus at
the age of twenty-five, he had lost his patrimony and was no more
than one among thousands of landless men then roaming the
Balkans as robbers and thieves in search of their fortunes.®^
  Osman participated in the war of 1787-1792 as a volunteer in
the Ottoman army and on his return to Vidin with a number of
his army friends formed a bandit force and began raids into
Serbia and Wallachia. When the Ottoman governor of Vidin tried
to suppress his band, Osman went into the mountains, built up a
large robber army, openly declared a revolt against the Sultan
and began to devastate the area. Within a year he captured Vidin
and built it into a major fortress. He now attracted into his serv¬
ice thousands of bandits from all over Bulgaria, Serbia, and
Wallachia, and also large numbers of Janissaries, driven from
Belgrade after 1792. He thus became the principal focus of all
the unemployed bands roaming the area at the time, assisting
independent brigands to attack settled areas, and reorganizing
and supplying them when they met defeat at the hands of the
Ottomans. At the same time, since most of his regular force came
from those driven out of Serbia by Selim’s reforming governor,
Osman became a leading opponent of the entire Nizam-i Jedict
program and attracted the allegiance and support of other op¬
ponents of the program, not only in the Balkans but also among
the politicians of Istanbul. With their assistance he was able to




              Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
                                      1


238   conceal the extent of his power from the Sultan and his ministers
      until he was ready to meet them in open conflict.®^
        In 1795, he openly declared his independence from the Sultan,
      beat off an attack by the governor of Belgrade, and rapidly ex¬
      tended his power in western Bulgaria, from the Danube south
      almost to Sofia and east to the environs of Plevna.^® Unlike his
      contemporaries in Albania and eastern Bulgaria, he was in a
      state of open revolt from the start. He' refused to recognize the
      Sultan’s authority and drove out QttOman officials wherever he
      went. All Ottoman efforts to conciliate him with pardons and
      official appointments and honors were brusquely rejected.®^ Once
      his power around Vidin was consolidated, he began to extend his
      financial resources by raiding north into the Principalities and
      west into Serbia.
       Across the Danube, the Principalities had been left in devasta¬
      tion by the wartime campaigns, and the consequent famine and
      plague had been intensified by the exactions of the Greek Phana-
      riote hospodars (princes) who ruled in the name of the Sultan.
      During the decade following the peace of Jassy, six princes in
      Wallachia and five in Moldavia used their short terms to secure
      vast revenues for themselves, with the intrigues of the Russians
      and family rivalries in Istanbul further complicating the situa¬
      tion and worsening the plight of the people whom they ruled.
      The Suzzos were bitter rivals of the Moruzis, who conflicted with
      the Ipsilantis and Callimachis for power in Istanbul as well as
      in the Principalities. Wallachia in particular was ravaged after
      the war by Hospodar Alexander Moruzi (1793-1796), who ex¬
      torted large loans from the local monasteries to buy wheat from
      Bulgaria, which he then sold to the desperate populace at enor¬
      mously inflated prices. What was left was carried off by raiders
      coming across the Danube from Serbia, in particular those sent
      by Pasvanoglu and Ismail Agha. The peasants in the Principali¬
      ties were thus the most completely oppressed of all the Balkan
      peoples in this period.®®
        While things went from bad to worse in the Principalities,
      Bulgaria, Albania, and northern Greece, Selim was making a
      valiant effort to prevent a similar situation from arising in the
      province of Belgrade, located south of the Danube and the Save,




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
separated from Bosnia to the west by the Drina and the Uvatz,         239
bounded on the east by Wallachia and Bulgaria and on the south
by the province of Rumelia.
  The Treaty of Sistova had left the Serbs in deadly fear. Long
years of mistreatment at the hands of the Ottoman Janissary
yamaks (auxiliaries), who garrisoned the country, and the Greek
millet leaders had led thousands of them to join the Hapsburg
army or at least provide it with sympathy and supplies as it
passed through their lands. Many Serbs had retired to Hungary
once peace was reached and the Porte reclaimed the lands south
of the Danube and ttie Save. Many more fled across the Danube in
the months following the peace in fear of Ottoman vengeance for
their wartime treason, and those who remained behind were
certain that they would not easily escape the wrath of the Porte.
  Selim III had no thought of exacting vengeance from his reluc¬
tant Serbian subjects. His main desire was to remedy the sources
of their discontent, in particular the power of the Janissary
yamaks, who in the past had provided the bulk of Serbia’s Otto¬
man garrison. He now felt he could use their inefliciency in guard¬
ing the Danube fortresses as a pretext to move against them. In
1793 he appointed Ebubekir Pasha as governor of Belgrade, with
the task of restoring its defenses, eliminating yamak strength
wherever possible, and above all, conciliating the local inhab¬
itants. His first order was to prohibit the yamaks who had fled
during the war from returning to Belgrade or anywhere else
in the province. He then not only confirmed the amnesty included
in the peace treaties but also invited those who had left Serbia
to return to their homes with guarantees that their former posses¬
sions and positions would be returned. While many of the Serbian
emigres accepted his assurances and returned, most of those who
had risen to become officers in Hapsburg service remained at
their posts at Carlowitz.
  Ebubekir then moved rapidly ahead to restore Ottoman rule
and establish a regime of security, tolerance, and justice as a
model for the reforms which his master intended to apply to the
other provinces as well, once they were restored to order and
obedience. To eliminate the financial base of yamak power,
yamaks were prohibited from holding lands in the province in




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
                                     1
           '      ^    »


240   any way. The district Serbian knezes (princes) were given the
      right to apportion and collect taxes in their districts, and tax
      exemptions or reductions were granted to all married men under
      an obligation to pay. Efforts were made to rebuild damaged Chris¬
      tian churches and to clear the area of bandits and yamciks, and
      peace and security soon were re-established.
        But the yamaks and their partisans found welcome refuge in
      the neighboring provinces, in particillar across the Drina in
      Bosnia. There the eighteenth century had seen the rise of power¬
      ful Muslim feudal beys who, strengthened by the arrival of large
      numbers of Janissaries from the lost provinces north of the Dan¬
      ube, were able to make themselves entirely independent of the
      Ottoman officials, usurping both their revenues and powers. At
      the same time, they were supported by the thousands of Muslim
      refugee Spahis from the ceded areas of Hungary, Slavonia,
      Croatia, and Dalmatia, who were very bitter against Christians
      and were extremely sensitive to any sort of concessions to the
      rayas in the fear that they might be expelled from their homes
      once again. Both beys and Spahis bitterly opposed the reforms in
      Istanbul and Belgrade, and did all they could to defeat them,
      while at the same time oppressively taxing the rayas and caus¬
      ing a series of uprisings, which were bloodily suppressed. By the
      end of the century, the beys were so powerful around the Bosnian
      capital of Sarajevo that the Ottoman governors virtually aban¬
      doned it to them and took up their headquarters at Travnik. At
      the same time, to the east, Pasvanoglu offered a haven to the
      yamaks at Vidin and in the Kraina, and communicated with the
      Bosnian beys in an effort to coordinate their attacks on the re¬
      forms, both in their own provinces and at Istanbul.^**
        As Pasvanoglu built up his power in western Bulgaria, he
      began to raid across the border into Serbia, and in particular
      into the Kraina. This district was located at the northeastern tip
      of Serbia between the Timok and the Danube. It was ruled by
      an autonomous Christian bey who paid a regular annual feudal
      tribute to the private treasury of the daughters of the Sultan,
      and it was therefore subject not to the regular Ottoman taxes but
      only to those which the bey chose to levy to fulfill his obligations
      to the fief-holders. The area was under his direct administration.




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
No Ottomans could enter it without his permission, and he usually    241
provided far more orderly and efficient government than was the
case elsewhere in Serbia. However, with Pasvanoglu’s invasion
all this changed. The bey was quickly driven out and replaced by
one of Pasvan’s men, taxes were increased to pay for the. con¬
queror’s military activities, and many of the yamaks fleeing from
Belgrade were settled there to administer the new order in their
own ferocious way. At the same time, intrigues by Pasvanoglu’s
friends in Istanbul led in th6 spring of 1795 to the appointment
of Shashit Pasha as governor of Belgrade in place of Ebubekir
Pasha, who was transferred back to Bosnia, where he undertook
a similar program of reforms, curbing the power of the yamaks
and the Muslim nobles and Spahis in favor of the local peasants.®®
  In Serbia the new governor, Shashit, vigorously restored the
old order. He entered into close relations with the yamaks serving
Pasvanoglu as well as those in Bosnia, who now fled from Ebube¬
kir and returned to Belgrade in large numbers. When the Serbian
princes came to protest, Shashit informed them that he was re¬
storing direct collection of taxes by the yamaks and ordered them
to return to their homes and tell the peasants to accept the new
situation. The princes then signed a collective petition to the
Sultan warning him of the possibility of a revolt if the governor
was allowed to continue his policies. In July 1795, Selim used
this as a pretext to replace Shashit with Hajji Mustafa Pasha,
chief architect of Belgrade, who was much more sympathetic to
the Sultan’s ideas.®'
  Hajji Mustafa immediately moved to restore Ebubekir’s poli¬
cies. Once again, the princes were instructed to collect taxes,
and the yamaks left in large numbers, fleeing to Pasvanoglu,
who took up their cause and ravaged large areas of Serbia while
retaining his control over the Kraina. Mustafa Pasha was able
to continue and extend his reforms in 1796 and 1797, increasing
the privileges given the Serbian peasants, because Pasvanoglu
now was diverted by new attacks from the east by the Ottomans
and their supporters.®^
  With the campaigns against the bandits largely frustrated by
incompetence and political interference, and with conditions
getting out of hand as the result of the rise of Ismail Agha and




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
242   Pasvanoglu along the Danube', Selim finally decided that stronger,
      more determined, measures were needed to remedy the situation
      in the Balkans while there was still a chance to do so. To accom¬
      plish this, in January 1796 he appointed as governor of Rumelia,
      with the specific duty of stamping out rebel bandits and notables,
      Ahmed Kamil Pashazade Hakki Pasha, who had acquired an
      excellent reputation for honesty, efficiency, and ferocious deter¬
      mination in his previous efforts to reorganize the feudal system of
      the empire.®^ Recognizing the difficulties his predecessors had
      suffered from political interfererifce, Selim gave Hakki Pasha
      absolute and full powers in all matters concerning Rumelia, with
      direct access to the Sultan and with no one having the right to
      question or refuse to obey any of the orders which he issued. To
      carry out his mission, Hakki was given direct command of a force
      of 2,000 artillery, cannon-wagon, and mortar troops. In addition,
      the mutasarrif of Kojaeli in Anatolia was sent with 1,000 riffe-
      men, the Karaosmanoglu family contributed 500, and the Chap-
      anoglu family 1,000 horsemen, all trained and disciplined.
      Hakki also was authorized to requisition all the additional men
      and supplies he needed from the Ottoman governors and local
      notables in the areas of his operations, and the Sultan assured
      him that the Imperial Treasury would provide necessary funds so
      that sufficient numbers of soldiers would be available at all
      times.®^
        Hakki Pasha’s reputation preceded him, and as he left Istan¬
      bul (February 21, 1796) and marched toward Edirne, most of the
      bandits operating in that area ffed north to safer places.®® Many
      of the local notables were overawed and sent protestations of
      loyalty and contributions of assistance. Ali Pasha of Janina even
      sent his son Veliuddin Bey to Hakki’s camp, ostensibly to assist
      him, but actually as a hostage for his father’s good behavior.®®
      Against those who attempted to resist, Hakki took strenuous
      measures. Orders were sent out prohibiting travel or movement
      anywhere in the Balkans without a specific order from his office
      in Edirne. Anyone who assisted bandits in any way, whether
      willingly or under compulsion, was subjected to punishments
      ranging up to execution according to the importance of the bandits
      involved and the seriousness of their crimes. All houses, schools.




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
hans, and caravanserais that sheltered bandits were closed.®^         24S
In addition, notables were officially charged with the duty of
clearing out the bandits in their districts, an obvious move which
previous governors had not dared to attempt for political reasons.
Hakki attempted to divert Pasvanoglu and prevent him from
helping his bandit friends by appointing Ahmed Pasha,'sanja^
bey (district governor) of the Bosnian district of Srebrnitza, to
replace him as governor of Vidin, and charging Hajji Mustafa
Pasha, governor of Belgrade, with the task of installing him in
his new position. But Pasvanoglu quickly and decisively defeated
Hajji Mustafa’s army in the Kraina (April 1796), killing Ahmed
Pasha and forciiig the Serbian army to return to Belgrade.®*^
  Hakki Pasha had his most successful campaign against the
Bulgarian bandits during the spring and summer which followed,
defeating their forces and executing many of the notables who
had assisted them.®® But many of them, led by Sinap Agha, man¬
aged to escape into the Rhodope Mountains, establish themselves
in bastions, and emerge from time to time to ravage the area be¬
tween Philippopolis and Pazaijik.^® As time passed, they began
to establish a regular system of heavily fortified villages in the
valleys as well. Whenever Hakki approached, they were able to
hold out until assistance came from the hills, and the Ottoman
force was usually routed in the end.’’^ At the end of the summer,
however, Hakki Pasha killed Sinap and routed his army by means
of a surprise move into the mountains. This demoralized the
organized bandit opposition and enabled him to clear out the
entire area between Philippopolis and Sofia. Strong bandit ac¬
tivity continued only in the areas around Vidin, Nicopolis, Rus-
chuk, and Silistria because of the strong support and material
assistance given them by Pasvanoglu and Ismail Agha. When the
Ottoman army retired to Edirne for the winter, the surviving
bandits came out of the mountains and resumed their former posi¬
tions and activities in southern Bulgaria. Kara Feyzi now be¬
came the most important of them, capturing Tirnovo and ravag¬
ing the outskirts of Philippopolis.^^
  In April 1797, Hakki Pasha moved back from Edime, and
within a short time he was able to drive out the bandits and estab¬
lish a state of security and calm which had not been seen in




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
244   Rumelia since the early years of the century. However, his suc¬
      cesses caused the local notables to abandon their differences and
      come together for a supreme effort'against him. Publicly they
      promised to obey his orders and help his campaigns, but secretly
      they sent large sums to Istanbul to finance the activites of his
      enemies, now led by the Grand Vezir Yusuf Ziya Pasha, who
      feared that Hakki would use his victories to return to Istanbul
      and take his place as Grand Vezir.Orders were sent to Hakki’s
      subordinates to sabotage his efforts and ignore his orders. They
      created confusion, allowed trapped bandits to escape, and at times
      openly supplied them with arms and ammunition.Arrange¬
      ments were made for the large-scale dispatch to Istanbul of com¬
      plaints from notables and common folk alike against the rigorous
      measures Hakki introduced to eliminate the bandits. When
      Pasvanoglu’s lieutenant, Hajji Ali of Servi, and the bandit Gavur
      Imam began large-scale attacks in the areas of Tirnovo and
      Plevna, the Grand Vezir was able to use them and the complaints
      to secure Hakki’s dismissal and transferral to Aleppo on the
      grounds that his efforts had been unsuccessful (May 1797).^®
      Thus once again, as so many times before in Ottoman history, an
      energetic and honest official was frustrated by the combined
      efforts of those who benefited from the established order. In his
      place, Shenekzade Mustafa Pasha, military governor of Belgrade,
      was appointed governor of Rumelia and commander of the cam¬
      paign against the bandits, while Seyyid Ali Pasha, governor of
      Anatolia, was ordered to assist him. Bitterly disappointed, Hakki
      Pasha obeyed the order, and with a small personal army crossed
      into Gallipoli on his way to Syria. Even here, he managed to
      eliminate several bandits whom he encountered along the way,
      but the Grand Vezir used these skirmishes to secure his banish¬
      ment to Istankdy Island, where he remained for two years while
      Rumelia lapsed again into chaos.
        With Hakki Pasha out of the way, it was not long before the
      notables and bandits of Rumelia resumed their former activites.
      In the early summer of 1797, Kara Feyzi and others ravaged the
      area of Philippopolis. When Mustafa Pasha moved against them,
      they routed the Ottoman force, after which he pardoned them
      and returned to his base, allowing them to plunder at will. Ali




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                      i

Pasha became so disgusted with Mustafa’s apparent connivance              245
with the bandits that he retired to Gallipoli and prepared to
return to Anatolia, leaving the task of suppressing them entirely
to Mustafa, who was unable or unwilling to do anything/^
  Pasvanoglu now declared his loyalty to the Sultan, but at the
same time moved to take advantage of the political and military
vacuum by occupying the entire area between the Danube and
the Balkan range. He extended his authority to the east, taking
Nicopolis, Tirnovo, and Sistova, and then drove Tirsiniklioglu
Ismail Agha out of Ruschuk and Shumna as the summer came to
an end.^® For the moment the Porte was forced to rely on Ismail
Agha to stop hinf, for Mustafa Pasha seemed unable to do any¬
thing. He was eventually replaced by Ali Pasha of Janina as
governor of Rumelia in the fall of 1797.^*^ With the assistance of
the governors of Silistria and Belgrade, Ismail routed Pasvano-
glu’s army near Shumna in October, and re-established his own
position in eastern Bulgaria.®® Of course Ismail had his own
ambitions in Bulgaria, but for the moment he was happy to co¬
operate with the Sultan since this alliance served to weaken the
only real rival he had in the area. Blocked in the east, Pasvano¬
glu moved west and south, besieging Belgrade and Nish, but in
both cases he was driven off by the local governors assisted by
Ismail Agha.®' In January 1798, Ali Pasha regrouped the Otto¬
man army and moved against the bandits in western Bulgaria,
defeating Pasvanoglu’s lieutenants in a series of battles near
Sofia and Nicopolis and pacifying the area between Ruschuk and
Belgrade. Under his leadership, Gurgi Osman Pasha took Rus¬
chuk and Tirnovo and Kurd Osman Pasha captured Sofia, thus
limiting Pasvan to Vidin itself, to which he withdrew in early
February, fortifying himself for an expected attack.®^
  For the moment things were quiet. Ali Pasha and his lieu¬
tenants retired to Gallipoli and drilled and provisioned their men.
At the same time, a major Ottoman army was prepared at Istan¬
bul under the command of the Grand Admiral, Kuchiik Hiiseyin
Pasha, with the intention of ending Pasvan’s threat once and for
all. At this point Russia proposed joint intervention to protec|,\,
Wallachia from Pasvan. While the Grand Vezir rejected the idea,
he ordered Kuchiik Hiiseyin to set out at once so that Pasvanoglu




              Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
246   could be suppressed before tlie foreigners could intervene uni¬
      laterally. So in early April he began to move through Thrace with
      an army of approximately 50,000 mfen. This force was consider¬
      ably enlarged by men and supplies contributed by the notables
      through whose territory he passed, so that it had almost 100,000
      men by the time it reached Vidin early in May.®^ At the same
      time, an Ottoman fleet sailed through the Black Sea and up the
      Danube, bearing supplies, artillery, and heavy siege equipment.*'*
      Wallachia, now under the rule of            Constantine Hangerli
      (1797-1799), was forced to provide hiost of the wheat and animals
      needed by the besieging army, and they were secured by large-
      scale confiscations which ravaged the province just as it had
      begun to recover from the events of the 1787-1792 war.*^
        On June 20, 1798, after careful preparation, the siege began.
      At long last it seemed that the Porte had managed to organize an
      attack which would eliminate Pasvanoglu once and for all. While
      he managed to hold out against repeated attacks during the sum¬
      mer, his defeat still seemed inevitable.*® At that point, however,
      news arrived of an event which changed the entire situation and
      forced Hiiseyin Pasha to abandon the siege: Egypt had been in¬
      vaded by the forces of Napoleon Bonaparte. At long last, Selim’s
      empire was embroiled in the wars of the French Revolution.




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign IFars
          XVI. The Eastern Question,
                         1792-1798




While the Ottoman Empire was not directly involved in Europe’s
wars for six years following the Treaty of Jassy, it was naturally
interested and vitally affected by the momentous events taking
place around it. The key issue of its foreign relations at this time
was its attitude toward the French Revolution and in particular
toward the new republican government, which was being ostra-           ^
cized by the monarchies of Europe. Since the Ottoman Empire,
despite its fragility, was one of the few major European powers to
remain neutral, revolutionary France sought its diplomatic ^
recognition as a means, however feeble, to break the bonds of
isolation forged around it, while its enemies strove with equal
vigor to prevent such recognition at all costs.
  The Ottoman attitude toward the Revolution itself was a curious
consequence of self-interest, utter ignorance of European condi-
tions, and pure romance. The Sultan was naturally disturbed by
the violent death of Louis XVI, whom he considered to be a per¬
sonal friend because of their abbreviated exchange of letters in
the years preceding his accession.' While the ideas of the French
Revolution were highly subversive to the entire Ottoman social
and political structure as well as to the position of the Sultan
himself, there was at no time any particular dread of them by the
Sultan and his officials or a desire to join the movement to stop ^
      the contagion. There were many reasons for this contradictory
      attitude. For one thing, in the past, the Ottomans had witnessed
      executions of their own sultans without the institution of the
      sultanate and the society which it maintained being brought into
      disrepute or question. Besides, even the most well-educated
      Ottomans were still sufficiently isolated from Europe that they
      could not only accept the events and ideas of the revolution as an
      "internal affair of Christendom, having no relevance to the
      Ottoman Empire, which as a Muslim State was immune to this
      sort of contagion,”^ but also as additional examples of the essen¬
      tial inferiority of Europe to the Ottoman system. In the end
      Selim’s attitude toward France was determined less by the new
      issues raised by the Revolution than it was by the traditional
      bonds which had brought them togethe,r in the past —mutual
    ^ fear of Austria and Russia and a common desire to strengthen the
      Ottoman Empire as the best means of countering the aggressive
      designs of its neighbors. At the same time, Selim actually went
      so far as to welcome the advent of the Revolution because of the
      very conflicts which it spawned, all serving to divert his enemies
      from his own empire while it lay weak and open to attack. But
      in the end, while sympathizing with France, Selim preferred to
      stand aside, avoiding alignment with either side and playing
      off the ambitions and interests of both to secure their assistance
      for his reforms.^
        To accomplish this goal, Selim required a more intimate knowl¬
      edge of European affairs than his predecessors had, so for the first
      time permanent Ottoman embassies were established in the
A     great capitals of Europe, first in London (1793), and soon after in
    \_Vienna, Berlin, and Paris.^ While these emissaries conducted
      some negotiations with the governments to which they were as¬
      signed, for the most part they acted more to gather information,
      while Ottoman foreign relations continued to be handled with
      the European ambassadors at the Porte by the Sultan, the Reis
       ul-Kuttab and the Bash Terjuman (chief translator) of the Im¬
      perial Council, a post invariably filled by a member of one of the
      Phanariote Greek families. So long as the Porte maintained its
      neutrality, Istanbul was one of the few places in Europe where
      representatives of all the warring powers were bought into un-




                          Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
easy contact, and their struggles for the Sultan’s favor were, as
a result, especially vigorous and determined. The initiative was /C.
taken by revolutionary France. While its internal regime had
changed, its political position in Europe and commercial interests
in the Levant dictated that its basic policies toward the Porte
remain approximately the same as those of the old regime. Under
the direction of Talleyrand, these policies were pursued with a
brilliance and consistency unmatched by any of its rivals during
this period. While Ottoman recognition of the new government
was withheld in order to retain neutrality, France still strove to
restore the close ties which had gradually weakened after 1756 as
a result of the couft-inspired rapprochement with Vienna in the
last years of the ancien regime. By playing on the latent Ottoman
desire to regain territory lost to Austria and Russia and the fear ^
engendered by the partitions of Poland, France strove to per¬
suade Selim to re-establish the traditional French political and
commercial dominance in his empire.^
  To exert influence in the absence of a regular ambassador,
various means were employed. A French-language press was
established in Istanbul by French merchants, and regular reports
favorable to the new regime were published and distributed to the
leaders of government and other influential persons. Ottoman
requests for technicians and military assistance were generously
and promptly granted.® Stories were spread about Russian agita¬
tion of the subject peoples in the Balkans and continued Russian
ambitions to control the Black Sea and the Straits, and the pres-      (
tige of Great Britain was blackened by association. Bribes were
liberally distributed in Ottoman government circles to secure
policies favorable to France and to counter similar activities on
the part of her enemies. French emissaries were sent to Ali of
Janina and Pasvanoglu as well as to other notables in Albania,
Serbia, Bulgaria, and the Principalities to ascertain their situa-^
tion and secure friends wherever possible. And these efforts
gradually bore fruit. ^
  Even before recognizing the new French regime, the Sultan
and his ministers treated its unoflicial agents who had been sent
to Istanbul with an esteem and sympathy which excited the
envy and anger of the other powers. When the first French agent.




                  The Eastern Question, 1792-1798
Descorches, arrived in June f793, the efforts of other European
powers to prevent his meeting Ottoman officials on the grounds
that he was not accredited were simply ignored. Although he was
required to reside in a private house instead of the old French
embassy, negotiations began despite the continued protests of
the British and Russian ambassadors.® Protests against the dis¬
play of the tricolor, now emblem of the Republic, were met with
amused toleration. The activities of French revolutionary soci¬
eties in Istanbul, their public demonstrations of revolutionary
fervor, and their revolutionary bA)chures and newsletter, were
also openly tolerated.® French ships were allowed to secure re¬
pairs and provisions in Ottoman ports, with the port officials
supplying them with arms and gunpowder as well as food, and
the anguished protests of the ambassadors were met by the reply
that the Porte had to give equal facilities to the ships of all
nations in order to preserve its neutrality.'® Ships flying the
tricolor were even allowed to pass through the Straits into the
Black Sea."
  This sort of sympathy was as far as Selim went in the early
years of the decade. The experiences of the last war convinced him
that his empire could only suffer mortal damage from partici¬
pation in European wars, that no matter what guarantees were
given him by friends or allies, they would in the end consider
their own interests first and desert him at the first opportunity if
it was to their advantage to do so. While he appreciated that the
primary physical threat came from Russia, not France, and that
alliance with France was therefore logically desirable, he refused
official recognition, let alone alliance, so long as France’s triumph
in Europe was not certain. He refused to take a step which would
draw the disfavor of the enemies of France so long as he was not
positive that it could and would defend him against the conse¬
quences of such an action. It was only after the Republic’s vic¬
tories over Prussia and Holland in 1795 that Selim granted
formal recognition and dispatched an ambassador to Paris.
Although an unofficial agreement was made by which Selim
agreed not to join the coalition against France in return for its
unconditional guarantee of Ottoman territory and assurances of


            \




                  Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
help against any attack, he still refrained from an open alliance       251
and continued to maintain his neutrality.*^
  What of France’s adversaries during this period? Great Britain
still had not formulated a clear Middle Eastern policy based on its
own particular interests. This was to be crystallized only grad¬
ually by the events of the revolutionary period itself. At thfe time,
Great Britain’s attitude toward the Ottoman Empire was based
principally on the need for Russian cooperation against France in
Europe, and so its interests in the Middle East continued to belt
subordinated to those of its ally. Russia’s long-range policy
remained based on the essential presumption that it must acquire
the Ottoman possessions in the Balkans, as well as the Straits,
and that while Ottoman disintegration might not be pushed by
an open attack for the moment, still no other power could step in
to revive the empire or to occupy the portions of its lands which
Russia had reserved for itself. Bonaparte’s successes in Italy
(1796-1797), combined with the rise of French influence in Istan¬
bul before and after formal recognition of its regime, raised in
Saint Petersburg the specter of French naval control in the
eastern Mediterranean and possible French entry into the
Balkans, the Straits, and the Black Sea.*^ The arrival of French
officers to train the Ottoman army and to build fortifications at
the Straits and along the Danube — clearly directed against
possible Russian attacks — Ottoman assistance to refugee Polish
agents, and a plan to send French merchant ships into the Black
Sea to get food for Istanbul from the Anatolian ports all con¬
tributed to Russia’s alarm. And the increasingly insistent and
insulting Russian protests in reply, her demands that her war¬
ships be allowed to use the Straits at will, added to the stepped up
activities of her agents among the Balkan Slavs and Greeks,
only increased Ottoman hostility during          1796   and   1797.*^
  Austria’s activities in the empire at this time were less impor¬
tant as a result of the Emperor’s preoccupation with French
activities in Europe; nevertheless relations with the Porte be¬
came increasingly unpleasant because of difficulties along the
Hapsburg border with Bosnia. A long series of negotiations be¬
tween the two parties, undertaken in compliance with the Treaty




                  The Eastern Question, 1792-1798
      A-
                                                 i'


252        of Sistova, had been fruitless'since local Bosnian resistance to
           frontier rectifications of any kind forced the Sultan to take an
           increasingly rigid stand. At the same time, Spahi raids across the
           border led to a series of complaints to Istanbul and hostile replies
           which further exacerbated relations.
            In the end then, between 1792 and 1797, the Ottoman Empire
           remained out of the European wars more as a result of determina¬
           tion to avoid confiict and of Russian, Austrian, and British preoc¬
           cupation with western Europe than bec,ause of friendly relations
           between the Sultan and the powers'allied against France. Despite
           the official Ottoman neutrality, its dominant sympathies clearly
           lay with Revolutionary France during this time, with French
           influence predominating at the court and in the deliberations of
           the Sultan’s ministers.
             But on October 17, 1797, Hapsburg Austria signed a separate
           peace with France at Campo Formio, by which the Emperor
           abandoned his allies and agreed to recognize the various French
           conquests in western Europe in return for territorial compensation
           in the east. By the terms of the agreement, the Republic of Venice
           was at long last brought to an end, and its territories were di¬
           vided up to satisfy the ambitions of both states. Austria obtained
           soverainty over the Istrian Peninsula, Dalmatia, the Gulf of
           Cattaro, and the former Venetian Islands in the Adriatic, while
           France received the Ionian Islands of Corfu, Paxos, Santa Maura,
           Ithaca, Cephalonia, Zante, and Cerigo, as well as the port cities of
           Parga, Preveza, Butrinto, and Vonitza, located along the Adri¬
           atic coasts of southern Albania and northern Epirus.^® France
           thus joined Russia and Austria as an immediate neighbor of the
           Ottoman Empire. While this gave the French an opportunity to
           offer the Sultan the military guarantees he had so long asked for,
           at the same time, by allowing the establishment of French
           military bases in close proximity to the Ottoman possessions in
           the Balkans, the agreement also created a new threat to the
           Sultan. Selim’s attitudes toward France necessarily changed as a
           result, and there began a rapid reversal of the diplomatic align¬
           ments which had been built up during the previous five years.
              While Selim already was disturbed when rumors of the camp
           negotiations first reached his ears in June, he became positively




                             Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                         -V
alarmed by the haste with which Bonaparte occupied Corfu and             253
the Austrians moved into Dalmatia and Istria in July 1797,
even before the agreement was officially concluded.      Ali Pasha of
Janina was even less pleased, since he long had conveted the
Venetian Islands and ports for himself. Ali feared the French
garrisons would also threaten his own independence, so he sent a
series of notes to the Sultan warning him of the danger.^®
  Ali’s fears were soon dissipated by the French commander at
Corfu, who notified him that France would respect his inde¬
pendence and would send artillery and infantry officers to train
his army.^® At the same time, Ali secured French support and
assistance for a fiew campaign against the Shimariotes and
Suliotes, whom the Venetians had always protected to balance
his rising power. In the spring of 1798, Ali and his army were
allowed to pass through French territory near Butrinto. This
enabled him to surprise and massacre most of the Shimariotes,
thus removing a major source of opposition to his power in the
area.^® While he assured Selim of his continued loyalty and sent
assistance to the Ottoman forces then besieging Pasvanoglu at
Vidin, his continued close relations with the French further
served to alarm the Sultan. These fears were not without founda¬
tion. In fact at this point Ali secretly offered to revolt against the
Porte in return for French financial and military assistance and
France’s agreement to turn over to him the mainland ports and
island of Santa Maura, and it was only because the local French
agents were unable to promise anything of this magnitude with¬
out reference to Paris that he continued to recognize and support
the Sultan.^^ French agents also were sent from Corfu to Pasva¬
noglu and to the Morea, but at the time both the physical diffi¬
culties involved and the French desire to preserve Ottoman
friendship prevented the sending of assistance.
  At the same time that French advances in the Adriatic were
serving to strain relations with the Porte, internal changes in
Russia were making its policy much more acceptable to the
Sultan. With the death of Catherine II in November 1796, much y
of the antagonism created by her conquests was dissipated. Her
son and successor. Czar Paul, abandoned the haughty and aggres¬
sive attitude of the past and began to press for a rapprochement




                  The Eastern Question, 1792-1798
      X:
                                  ^              1

254        with the Porte on the basis of Aiutual advantage. He felt that the
           only way to counter the French advances into the Adriatic and
           eastern Mediterranean as the result nf Campo Formio was to get
           Ottoman permission for his warships to use the Straits, and the
      X only way to do this, other than conquest, which was clearly im¬
           possible for the moment, was to remove the old Ottoman fears of
           Russian intentions and to substitute Russian for French influ¬
           ences in the councils of the Porte.^^* So his ambassador, Kochu¬
           bey, and his successor in August 1797,, General Vasili Tamara,
           himself of Greek origin, brought'•with them an entirely new
           image, the happy and benevolent friend anxious to protect the
           Sultan and establish friendship and harmony between the two
           empires.^^ Reports arriving from Russian agents in the Balkans
           concerning the French negotiations withAli of Janina and other
           notables were regularly turned over to the Sultan.^^ The new
           French ambassador, Aubert du Bayet, was able to counter this
           move by using Russia’s gains from Poland in the Third Parti¬
           tion to convince Selim of the Czar’s continuing ambitions and
           intentions against the empire.^® In the early months of 1798,
           however, news of French intrigues with Pasvanoglu, whose re¬
           peated victories over the Ottoman forces sent against him in¬
           creased the Sultan’s fears of a French invasion from the Adriatic,
           made the French diplomatic position in Istanbul virtually im-
      ^ possible. Pasvanoglu also was in contact with the Austrian and
           Russian consuls in Bucharest, but when he tried to use French
           mediation to get peace with the Porte, France’s position in Istan¬
           bul fell to a new low, and Selim began negotiations with Russian
           and British ambassadors for a full defensive alliance against
           this new threat.^’'
             Selim’s fears were well founded. By this time, Bonaparte and
           Talleyrand had abandoned any hope that the Sultan could hold
           his empire together. They were now convinced that it was about
           to fall apart and wanted to make certain that France would get
           its share. They had great admiration for Pasvanoglu in particular
           and hoped that they might even go so far as to set him up as Otto¬
           man Sultan with the job of reviving the empire under French pro¬
           tection and control.^® At the same time, they decided to strike
      ^ back at Britain by getting control of Egypt, which could be used




                             Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
as a base both for penetration of the Levant and for a new expe¬         255
dition on the road to India. So in March 1798, the Directory ap- /
pointed Napoleon Bonaparte as chief of the "Army of the Orient,”
and he immediately began to prepare an expeditionary force at
the naval base of Toulon.^® To mask its real intentions, the word
                               »

was spread through Pierre Ruffin, now charge d’affaires in< Istan¬
bul, and Seyyid Ali Efendi in Paris that the object of the prepara¬
tions was England and that the Sultan had nothing to fear.^*’ Tal¬
leyrand actually hoped that the invasion of Egypt, when it came,
would not lead to a break'in relations, let alone war, with the
Porte, and he prepared to tell the Sultan that its only object was
to restore the Mamluks to obedience and thus to help him defend
his crumbling empire.^*
  While the Army of the Orient busily prepared itself in Toulon,
the British fleet ringed it with a full blockading force under the
command of Lord Horatio Nelson. Despite the French denials,
Selim was convinced that the blow would still fall on his domin¬
ions, with the Morea and Albania considered to be the most likely
targets. The arrival of new reports about French intrigues with
Ali of Janina and Pasvanoglu seemed to confirm his worst suspi¬
cions.^^ So in June 1798, he ordered all the French technicians in
his service to return home, required all French nationals resident
in the empire to register at once with the nearest Muslim courts,
and thereafter sternly resisted all French efforts to get his recog¬
nition of the Treaty of Campo Formio.^^
  On May 19, the fleet carrying Bonaparte’s Army of the Orient
set sail in Toulon harbor and, taking advantage of a sudden
storm, evaded Nelson’s force and vanished into the open waters of
the Mediterranean. While Nelson vainly sought his foe in the
Atlantic, Bonaparte sailed directly east to Malta, which he took
from the Knights of St. John on June 9. Eight days later, after
replenishing his supplies and refreshing his men, he took his
fleet out of the harbor, and once again it disappeared into the wide
expanses of the Mediterranean. It was only in late June that Ruf-
fln in Istanbul received official word of the true object of the expe¬
dition. When on July 7, the Porte finally learned of the conquest
of Malta, all Ruffin could say in reply to the persistent Ottoman
inquiries was that a French attack on the empire was impossi-




                  The Eastern Question, 1792-1798
256   ble.^^ The Sultan and his Rei& ul-Kuttab, Atif Efendi, were not
      deceived, hut they still were convinced that France’s prohahle
      objective was the Morea or perhaps Crete or Cyprus. Ah Efendi
      was ordered to warn the French that aggression against any Otto¬
      man possession would result in immediate war, but when this
      threat was communicated to Talleyrand in late July, he evasively
      replied that the real object of the expedition was to destroy the
      pirates then operating around Malta and that he hoped it might
      be possible for the French and Ottoma^ fleets to cooperate sub¬
      sequently against the Russians in the Adriatic and Black Seas.
      While considering an attack on Egypt unlikely, the Ottoman Im¬
      perial Council also decided to fortify its coast, and Ahmed Erib
      Bey was sent to make the arrangements and at the same time to
      assure the suspicious Mamluk leaders thqt the fortifications were
      intended entirely against possible foreign enemies and were not
      directed against them.^®




                   \




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
            XVII. The War of the
          Triple Alliance, 1798-1802




                  J.




Erib Bey was still at sea on July 17 when the news reached Istan¬
bul that French troops were landing at Alexandria and an inva¬
sion of Egypt was under way. Thus were inaugurated the momen¬
tous events which were to throw the Porte into the arms of
Britain and Russia and force the Sultan once again to postpone ^
his reforms while the empire was embroiled anew in the wars of
Europe.


             The French Expedition to Egypt
  The course of French military action in Egypt has been the sub¬
ject of numerous detailed studies and need only be summarized
here. The original landings at Alexandria on July 1, 1798, wereX
not opposed.* Most of the Mamluks fled to Upper Eg)T)t without
offering resistance, and those who stayed to fight were routed by
the well-trained and disciplined French infantry at Rahmaniye
(July 13),^ and again at the Battle of Gize (July 21).** Cairo was
occupied without resistance (July 25), and Bonaparte was able to
consolidate his control of the Delta within a short time. But he
was largely unsuccessful in his efforts to catch and destroy the
Mamluks before they could move up the Nile and organize new
resistance in the south.^ As a result, while several expeditions
258       were sent as far as Aswan, Bonaparte never was able to gain firm
          control of Upper Egypt, nor could he even establish French con¬
          trol of its Red Sea port, Quseir.^ His effort to consolidate his flanks
          by conquering Syria culminated in a startling failure to take the
          fort of Acre, stoutly defended by Ahmed Jezzar Pasha with the
          aid of the Ottoman and British fleets and a large contingent of
          Nizam-i Jedid soldiers sent from Istanbul (March 23-May 21,
          1799).® Thus cut off from the east, Bonaparte was isolated from
          home by Lord Nelson’s destruction of his fleet at the Battle of
          Abukir (August 1, 1798).^ With the'expedition doomed to slow
          strangulation, Bonaparte and his chief aides abandoned it in
          search of greater glory in France (August 22,1799), while leaving
          its final liquidation to subordinates. His immediate successor.
          General Kleber, made an evacuation agreement with the Grand
          Vezir at al-Arish (January 24,1800), but this was overturned by
          the opposition of Great Britain and Russia, who did not want the
          Porte to make a separate peace, and who preferred to save Egypt
          for the Ottomans as the result of their own efforts.® Although the
          French subsequently routed the Grand Vezir’s army at the Battle
          of Heliopolis (March 20, 1800)® and managed to gain control of
          much of Upper Egypt by means of an agreement with the Mam-
          luk leader Murad Bey,‘® Kleber himself was removed from the
          scene by assassination (June 14, 1800). His successor Abdullah
          Jacques Menou attempted to establish a permanent French col¬
          ony in the country, but in the end a combined Ottoman-British
          expeditionary force obtained their surrender, and the final
          French evacuation was accomplished on August 31, 1801.“
      A     The French expedition remained in Egypt a little over three
          years. It was cut off from its source of supplies and doomed to a
          sterile existence within two months of its arrival. Efforts were
          made to liquidate it during its last two years. And yet, more than
          any other event or influence, it began the process by which the
      k long-established institutions of society and government in Otto¬
          man Egypt were overturned and replaced by new ones imported
          from the West.*^ This was achieved principally by eliminating the
          old ruling class, Mamluk and Ottoman alike, so that its departure
          left a political and social vacuum which had to be filled by new
          elements. How was this change accomplished? To what extent




                             Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
was it a product of deliberate policy, and how much was it simply       259
an inevitable and unintentional result of the French presence?
  French policy in Egypt was a curious combination of timid con¬
servatism and radical innovation and change, of professed respect
for native traditions yet a complete disregard for them in practice.
Bonaparte declared time and again that the laws, practices, tra¬
ditions, and customs of the Egyptians had to be respected by his
men, to whom he declared: "The people among whom we are going
are Muslims; their first article of faith is this: 'There is no God
but God and Mohammed is his prophet.’ Don’t contradict them,
treat them as you have treated the Jews and Italians. Have re¬
gard for their muftis and their imams as you have had for the
rabbis and the bishops. For the ceremonies that the Koran pre¬
scribes and for the mosques have the same tolerance that you
have had for convents and synagogues, for the religion of Moses
and of Jesus Christ . . . You will find here customs which are dif¬
ferent from those of Europe; you must become accustomed to
them. The people among whom we are going treat women differ¬
ently than do we; but in all countries, be wbo violates women is a
monster. Pillage enriches only a small number of men; it dis¬
honors us, it destroys our resources, it makes for us enemies of the
people who it is in our interest to have as friends.”'^ And to a
commendable extent these injunctions were obeyed.
  Basically and simply, the French expedition revolutionized
both government and society in Egypt by removing its ruling class
in a single blow, by substituting French and native officials for 7.,
the Ottomans and Mamluks who previously had combined to rule
the country. For however much Bonaparte professed to support
Ottoman suzerainty, the fact remained that in view of the Sul¬
tan’s declaration of war, the only way he could solidify his posi¬
tion was to fight Ottomans as well as Mamluks. French victory
meant the flight of the Ottoman governor and his men, as well as
that of the Mamluks, who comprised the majority of the adminis- 'i"-
trators and tax farmers in the country. In order to rule Egypt, the
French suddenly had to create an entirely new class of adminis¬
trators, tax collectors, policemen, and the like. The conquerors
alone could not provide all of these, not only because their num¬
bers were limited but also, and more important, because of the




                   The War of the Triple Alliance
260   need for persons who knew "Egypt and understood the long-
      established practices which they had to administer. So for the
      first time since the Ottomans conquered Egypt three centuries
      before, the Egyptians themselves were called on to participate
      directly in their own rule.
        Executive authority was divided between French military offi¬
      cers and councils composed of leading mercantile and religious
      figures in Cairo, the provinces, and for a time in the districts and
      villages as well. Each council was charged with legislating, main¬
      taining order, preventing quarrels among various elements of the
      populace and, most important, serving as an intermediary be¬
      tween the people and the French authorities. Thus in many ways,
      they fulfilled the duties performed by notables in Anatolia and
      the Balkans. But there was one essential difference. In Egypt
      these councils were only advisory, and the real military and p)olit-
      ical power remained in the hands of the French officers assigned
      to each place.
        The most important council was that of Cairo, which included
      among its members the Sheyh ul-Sadat, or leader of the seyyids of
      the country, and the head of the Azhar and leader of the orthodox
      Egyptian Ulema, Sheyh Abdullah al-Sharqawi. In addition to the
      provincial councils and the council of Cairo, Bonaparte also estab¬
      lished a General Council {Divan ul-Umumi) to meet periodically
      and debate issues of national concern. Thirteen provinces each
      sent delegations of nine men—three members of the Ulema, three
      merchants, one peasant, one village chief, and one bedouin
      chief—thus representing all elements of the population. The
      first General Council met from October 5 to 20, 1798, and dis¬
      cussed problems of organizing provincial and local councils, civil
      and criminal justice, the law of inheritance, and the tax system.
      It recommended various changes in the Ottoman tax system,
      including the abolition of all past illegal charges, but added that
      it felt the Muslim system of justice and laws of inheritance should
      be maintained. This council was dismissed because of its complic¬
      ity in a popular revolt against the French which broke out in
      Cairo and the Delta in the late summer of 1798. A second council
      was summoned in December of the same year, however, and fif¬
      teen of its members also were chosen to form a special council




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
{Divan ul-Hususi), which met regularly thereafter to advise the          261
French authorities on the daily problems of administration.^^ As
a result of this activity, the people of Egypt, and in particular
their religious leaders, gained a desire to rule themselves.
  In administration and finance, the flight of the old ruling class
dictated the introduction of increasingly radical changes. At
first, under Bonaparte himself, the changes resulted less from
intentional alterations in structure and practice, as was the case
with the development of representative councils, than they did
from a complete alteration in personnel. Gone were almost all the
Ottoman treasury officials as well as the Mamluks who as tax
farmers had supervised cultivation and assessed and collected
most of the taxes before the arrival of the French. The Treasury
now was transformed along French lines into the Administration
Generate des Finances, and it was put under the direction of a
French economist, Jean Baptiste Poussielgue, who had been
financial director of the expedition since its landing. It was his
job to carry on the administration of the central Treasury and to
arrange for tax collection. The Muslim scribes who had fled were
replaced by Coptic money changers (Serrafs), who previously had
acted as financial experts, advising the Ottoman and Mamluk
officials but never holding official positions. The chief of the guild
of money changers, Serraf Bashi Girgis ul-Gohari, was made
intendant-general of the Treasury, with the task of actually di¬
recting the tax system under Poussielgue’s supervision. This dual
system at the top was paralleled all the way down to the provin¬
cial and village levels, as teams of Coptic intendants and French
agents went to each locality to supervise cultivation and tax col¬
lection under the direction of the French military officers and
with the advice of the local native councils.*®
  Bonaparte chose to retain the old Ottoman tax system intact at
first as the best means of securing as quickly as possible the food
and money needed to sustain his army. While reform might be
preferable, it would disturb the process of tax collection at a crit¬
ical time, so it had to be postponed, with French energies devoted
primarily to making the old system operate as well as possible.
But as it turned out the old system remained more in theory than
practice because of the departure of the Mamluks. Those few tax




                    The War of the Triple Alliance
          A

262       farmers who-were not Mamliiks and those few Mamluks who
          entered French service were left with their possessions, and they
          continued to carry out their traditional functions. But all the tax
          farms and other properties belonging to those Mamluks who re¬
          fused to cooperate with the French or fled to Upper Egypt, or both,
          were conflscated and placed under the administration of a sepa¬
          rate bureau of national domains. This meant that in fact most of
          the rural and urban sources of wealth in the country were admin¬
          istered and taxed by this department, rather than by the depart¬
          ment directed by Poussielgue, and Since it was entirely new and
          created on French lines, the result was considerable alteration in
          the means by which taxes were assessed and collected in the areas
          under its authority. At first efforts were made to preserve the tax
          farm system under state regulation. Copt&and Egyptian Muslims
          were urged to take over the tax farms held by the national do¬
          mains, but few citizens came forward in response to the invita¬
          tion, so in the end the village chiefs were appointed to administer
          directly the lands under unallocated tax farms in their villages. A
          direct system of administration by village officials thus replaced
          the indirect tax farm system previously in use, although for the
          moment at least the old forms remained intact.
      I        The old ruling class was gone. It was replaced by native Mus¬
          lims, in particular by the village chiefs and members of the Ulema
          and by the Coptic intendants. The Mamluks who had dominated
          the country for two centuries lost not only their positions but also
          their revenues so that even when they returned after the French
          left the country, they found the entire basis of their power under¬
          mined. Their revenues and positions were in the hands of native
          Egyptians who had been shown for the first time that it was to
          their benefit and interest to manage the affairs of their own coun¬
          try, a lesson which was not lost on them in the years which
              followed.


              Ottoman Involvement in the War of the Triple Alliance
                The most immediate result of Bonaparte’s expedition was the
              loss of the Porte to France’s enemies. Great Britain and Russia.
              The news of the French landings created overwhelming popular




                              Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                                       >

feeling in Istanbul for war. Yet while a fetva* authorizing war                        263
was issued on August 3, 1798, no actual declaration was pro¬
claimed because the pro-French party in the Imperial Council, led
by the Grand Vezir and Sheyh ul-Islam, wished to arrange a dip¬
lomatic settlement with France, and the anti-French faction
agreed that a declaration of war would be useless so long ‘as the
Ottoman army and navy were not ready and alliances had not
yet been concluded with Britain and Russia.^® The Porte’s ap¬
proaches to the French were without success. When the news of
Nelson’s victory at Abukir reached Istanbul on August 14, Selim
finally was convinced that it was safe enough to enter the war
formally,^*^ but the'^French partisans in the council, with the sup¬
port of the ambassadors of Austria, Spain, Sweden, and Holland,
still managed to delay the declaration for a time. It was only
after the Russians forced the issue by sending their fleet from ,
Sevastopol to Istanbul that war finally was proclaimed (Septem-                    ■
her 2, 1798).^*’ The pro-French ministers were arrested, and in
their place Yusuf Ziya Pasha, an ally of the Ulema, was made
Grand Vezir and his close ally Ashir Efendi became Sheyh ul-
Islam. Once again, just as in 1791, the demands of war forced
Selim to desert his liberal friends to get the support of the con¬
servatives.^* In Istanbul, the French ambassador and his subor¬
dinates were cast into the Prison of the Seven Towers (Yedikule).
Orders were sent out for the arrest and imprisonment of French
merchants and advisers and the confiscation of their property all
over the empire. Thus did Bonaparte’s rash gamble cost France
its Middle Eastern position and assets, which had been built up
for centuries.
  The die was cast, but it was still some time before the alliance
was formally concluded. While the diplomats talked, permission
was given for the first time for Russian warships to pass through
the Bosporus to take part in a joint naval expedition with the >
Ottomans against the French in the Mediterranean area. Ad¬
miral Uchakov’s fleet anchored at Buyiikdere, fifteen miles north
of Istanbul, while he came to the Porte on September 5 for mili¬
tary talks. The main point of discussion was the immediate prob-

  *Legal opinion issued by a jurisconsult according to the Muslim religious law.




                       The War of the Triple Alliance
lem of how the Ottoman and Russian fleets should cooperate and
what their objectives should be, the Adriatic and Malta or the
coasts of Syria and Egypt. The primary Russian aim at this time
was to prevent a French invasion of the Balkans, so it preferred
to emphasize action to oust them from the Ionian Islands and stop
them in the central Mediterranean, saying that the British fleet
which had recently won at Abukir would be quite sufficient to
blockade the French there. The British, on the other hand, now
represented by their ambassador in Istanbul Spencer Smith,
cared less about this possibility than they did about French inten¬
tions in the Levant, so they preferred allied emphasis on a coastal
blockade to the uncertain results of trying to intercept the enemy
in the wide expanses of the Mediterranean. Because of the imme¬
diate danger in the Adriatic, the Ottoman representatives leaned
toward the Russian position, preferring to use a land campaign
to defend Syria and retake Egypt. In the end, Atif Efendi proposed
a compromise which was accepted by all. The naval campaign
along the coasts of Egypt and S3n:-ia was left primarily to the Brit¬
ish fleet, which was to be reinforced by an Ottoman squadron sent
from Istanbul. The main Ottoman-Russian combined fleet, under
Uchakov’s supreme command, was to move to get control of the
Adriatic and drive the French out of the Ionian Islands, after
which it would go to assist the British in the south.^^
  On September 17, the Russian fleet set sail from Istanbul, with
an Ottoman fleet of approximately twenty-flve ships under the
command of Admiral Kadri Bey following the next day. Two days
later, the two fleets rendezvoused at the Dardanelles, and on
October 1 they set sail for Rhodes to begin the campaign. The
same day a smaller squadron left for Alexandria to join the Brit¬
ish fleet hovering in the vicinity.^^
  Talleyrand now understood that there was no hope of keeping
the Porte out of the hands of Russia and Britain, so he planned to
help Pasvanoglu overthrow the Ottoman dynasty and establish
himself in its place; Talle3n-and prepared to accomplish this over¬
throw by an invasion of the Morea and Macedonia. He was sure
that the Greeks and Ali of Janina would assist him in this en¬
deavor and immediately sent agents to secure their support. But
the Sultan moved first. He promoted Ali to the rank of vezir of




                  Internal Revolts and Foreign IFars
three horse tails, gave formal recognition to all his conquests, and    265
got him to agree to take the Albanian coastal ports from the French
and defend the coast against any further infidel incursions.^^ The
Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Istanbul, at Selim’s behest, warned
his followers in the Morea against accepting the French blandish-
                              #

ments, pointedly reminding them of the fate of similar»efforts
made at Russia’s urging in 1770-1772.^^ At the same time, the
Ottoman campaign against Pasvanoglu was ended and the siege
of Vidin withdrawn. He was now officially appointed governor as
well as notable of Vidin ahd thus was given the opportunity to
expand his possessions at will, so he too was neutralized as far as
the French were concerned.^®
  As soon as Ali returned from Vidin in September, he impris¬
oned the French agents sent to him and took Vonitza, Butrinto
(September 28) and Preveza (October 13), most of whose Greek
population fled in terror to Corfu and Santa Maura. Ali finally
was in a position where he could successfully outflank and block¬
ade the Suliotes and people of Parga and thus fully establish his
control of the Albanian coast for the first time. At the same time,
he moved to satisfy his long-standing ambition to add the Ionian
Islands to his state. He immediately began to prepare an expedi¬
tionary force for this purpose and requested the Sultan’s permis¬
sion to accomplish this in his behalf.^^
  Much to Ali’s chagrin, the combined Ottoman-Russian fleet
arrived just in time to forestall him. After leaving the Dar¬
danelles on October 1, the fleet had first gone to Hydra, where joint
proclamations were sent to the people of the islands asking for
their cooperation against the French and promising to establish
any form of government they wanted once peace was achieved.^®
French rule in the islands since 1797 actually had been extremely
beneficial to the inhabitants. The native aristocracy, which had
ruled dictatorially under the Venetians, had been undermined by
reforms abolishing feudalism, freeing the peasants from forced
labor, reorganizing justice, and extending education. However,
increasingly heavy taxation to support the French garrison and
the arrogant and forced manner by which the reforms were intro¬
duced alienated not only the aristocrats and the church, who
spread anti-French propaganda, but also most of the common




                    The War of the Triple Alliance
266   people.^® So when the allied fle^t movfed to the attack, the natives
      supported itslandings, and the French garrisons were forced to
      surrender with only negligible resistance at Cerigo (October 13),
      Zante (October 24), Cephalonia (October 28), Santa Maura
      (November 13), and Ithaca (November 15). The French in Corfu
      successfully resisted the first attacks, so it was put under siege.
      While Ali was disappointed at his inability to take the islands
      ahead of the allies, he accepted their invitation to join the siege
      of Corfu, which went on through the winter and into the spring.
        In the meantime negotiations for formal alliances dragged on
      in Istanbul. Selim was resisting Russian demands for permission
      to station troops in the Balkans, fearing that he would fall en¬
      tirely under their control. On the other hand since Great Britain
      seemed to have no territorial ambitions in the Near East, Selim
      had far more trust in it and his main effort at this time was di¬
      rected toward securing an arrangement which would include
      Britain to protect him against the overly tight embrace of her
      ally.^‘ In pursuance of this policy, he accepted the services of a
      group of British rifle, artillery, and engineering officers sent to
      help train and lead the Ottoman army under the overall command
      of General Koehler, who previously had served for a time as an
      expert in Selim’s new army.^^ There was a stalemate: the Rus¬
      sians persisted in their demand, and the Sultan found it completely
      unacceptable. France still tried to secure peace and frustrate the
      negotiations through the efforts of its neutral friends in Istanbul,
      but the only result was their expulsion as the result of complaints
      made by the British and Russian envoys.^^ Seyyid Ali Efendi re¬
      mained in Paris, and Talleyrand tried to open negotiations with
      him to get a settlement, but Ali said he had no authorization to
      grant a settlement and asked permission to leave. While nothing
      further happened for a time, the French government refused to
      grant the request and maintained him in comfort through the
      rest of the war in the hope that he might be a useful contact at
      some future time.'*'* In late December the Istanbul negotiations
      were at last brought to a successful conclusion when Great Britain
      persuaded the Sultan to accept the Russian troop offer on condi¬
      tion that he have full control over their disposition and use.'*^




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                     •<

So on January 3 and 5, 1799, the Ottoman alliances with Russia       X    267
and Britain respectively were finally signed.
  The Sultan’s alliance with Russia,^® concluded for a period of ^
eight years, confirmed the Treaty of Jassy and provided for mutual
assistance against all enemies and mutual consent to any peace.
Each was to provide necessary materials and supplies for all
troops and naval contingents operating in the territory of the
other, and the warships of each were to have free passage and full
assistance in the waters of the other. In a secret agreement, the
Porte specified that the Russian warships were being allowed to
use the Straits and ports of its empire only for the duration of the V
war, and the two parties agreed to consult on joint naval opera¬
tions with Britain, which was to be invited to join the agreement.
The warships of all other powers were to be kept out of the
Bosporus and the Black Sea. Russia would send an army of 80,000 >
men to help the Sultan in the Balkans but only at a time and in
a manner determined in advance by the Porte.
  The Ottoman-British alliance,®^ also concluded for eight years,
included a formal guarantee of Ottoman territorial integrity,         y
thus finally crystallizing and setting down the new British policy
which had been evolving in the last few years and which was
henceforth to become the basis of British action on the Eastern
Question. Britain was joined to the Ottoman-Russian defensive
alliance. Each of the three powers would treat as enemies any
enemies of the other two. They would consult on common opera¬
tions against all enemies. They would not make a separate armis¬
tice or peace. The Sultan would raise a land army of at least
100,000 men and would use his entire fleet in cooperation with
those of Britain and Russia. Bonaparte’s invasion of Egypt thus
had transformed Ottoman enmity for Russia and Britain into an
alliance with them against France, and a new phase of the East¬
ern Question was about to begin.
  Meanwhile in the Adriatic the allied fleets continued their
naval siege of Corfu, while Ali of Janina’s army, now based at
Butrinto, entirely cut off Corfu’s supplies from the hinterland.
At first the Corfiotes cooperated with the French in the fear of
occupation by Ali’s Albanians if the allies won out. The block-




                    The War of the Triple Alliance
268    ade caused such heavy demands and requisitions hy the French,
       however, that the natives finally rose in a series of revolts which
       forced the defenders to surrender to Admiral Uchakov on March
      ^ 3, 1799, thus bringing the first phase of the Adriatic campaign
       to a successful conclusion.^®
         Up to this point the Ottoman and Russian naval leaders had
       achieved a rare degree of mutual trust and cooperation. But
       once the French were driven out, the allies soon fell out over the
       political settlement which was to follow. Ali Pasha demanded
       that he be allowed to garrison Corfu and Parga, but both parties
       refused; Kadri Bey because of the fear of making him too power¬
        ful in Albania, and Uchakov because of the Czar’s desire to estab¬
        lish them as Russian bases, although publicly he used the pretext
        that their Christian inhabitants would b6 pushed to open revolt
        if the Muslim Albanians were left in command. Kadri Bey, while
        happy to accept assistance in pushing the French out and limit¬
        ing Ali’s expansion, did not want to supplant these dangers with
        an even greater danger from Russia. Moreover for some time
        he and his officers had nourished a growing resentment over the
        tendency of Uchakov and his men to ignore Ottoman opinions and
        advice during the campaign. The French insistence on com¬
        municating with the Russians and surrendering to them alone
        further inflamed these suspicions.®®
          Despite these differences, the allies did manage to agree on a
        provisional system of joint occupation. Kadri Bey’s forces ad¬
        ministered the town of Corfu itself and the Russians manned the
        other forts scattered throughout the island. In compliance with
        their preinvasion promises, provisions were made for elections
        in the islands to choose representatives to a senate, which was
        then to draft a permanent constitution which had to be confirmed
        by both the occupying powers before it would be considered valid.
        Most of the islands’ aristocrats had opposed the French because
        of the threat to their positions and properties, and they now ad¬
        vocated some sort of Russian guarantee and protection for the
        islands with the same consideration in mind. They were opposed
        by a smaller group of nobles who felt that Ottoman suzerainty
        and guarantee would, in the long run, interfere less with their
        own independence and that of the islands. In addition to the




                         Internal Revolts and Foreign ITars
                                                                       X

question of garrisoning and protecting the islands, the allies             269
also disputed the question of whether their vacant orthodox
clerical positions should he filled by priests trained in Russia or
Istanbul, that is, those under the influence of the Czar or the
Sultan.40
                                                             9

  In the fall of 1799, the tension heightened when over 8,000
Russian soldiers were brought through the Straits and landed at Y
Corfu, ostensibly to help the King of Naples against the French
but in fact to strengthen the Russian position in the islands if a
showdown came."** Kadri Bey, while resisting the Russian claims
in the negotiations^ still strove to retain a good working relation¬
ship with the Russians, much to the chagrin of many of his officers
and crews, including his Vice admiral, Abdul-Fettah Bey, who
bitterly resented the Russian demands and wanted forceful action
to remove them from the scene. He communicated with the Grand
Admiral, Kuchiik Hiiseyin Pasha, who ordered Kadri to sail at
once to Alexandria with a large squadron to support the opera¬
tions against the French now that the Adriatic campaign was
over. Kadri refused to go because of the justifiable fear that he
would be dismissed as soon as he joined the Grand Admiral. A
number of his captains then openly revolted against his authority
and sailed out of Corfu harbor toward the south. When Kadri
tried to pursue them, his own crew mutinied and, together with
the crews of a number of other ships, landed on the Albanian
coast and joined Ali Pasha of Janina. Ali, also bitterly hostile to
Kadri because of the rejection of his ambitious demands, accepted
these men into his own army despite the Admiral’s orders that
they be captured and returned to the fleet. Kadri Bey, left with
only six ships manned by reduced crews, was forced to take them
back to Istanbul. The Russians therefore remained alone in oc¬
cupation of the islands.^^
  However, this development did not mean that Uchakov was
free to impose whatever settlement he wished, for by now negotia¬
tions on the final arrangement were going on in Istanbul. There
the Russian ambassador Tamara and the Reis ul-Kuttab were
joined by the new British ambassador. Lord Elgin, who was ad¬
vocating a plan to form the islands into an independent republic
under Ottoman protection in order to keep the Russians out.




                   The War of the Triple Alliance
270   Selim encouraged British intervention in this matter to get their
      support against the Russians, but Tamara vigorously protested
      against British mediation, saying this was a matter which had
      to be decided by direct negotiation between the two allies, and
      Elgin was forced to withdraw. Once again, Britain had to sub¬
      ordinate its newly found interests in the Ottoman Empire to its
      interests in Europe, which required the retention of the Russian
      alliance at all costs.^^           ,
        In the end, an Ottoman Russian, convention was signed on
      March 21, ISOO.'*^ By the terms ot the agreement, the Ionian
      Islands together with a number of smaller islands along the
      Albanian coast were organized into the "Republic of the United
      Seven Islands” or Septinsular Republic. This union was given
      virtual independence, but was placed under the suzerainty of
      the Sultan, to whom an annual tribute had to be paid, and under
      the joint guarantee and protection of both Russia and the Porte.
      The Russians thus were left with the naval base at Corfu they had
      long sought, while the independence given to the republic, to¬
      gether with the right of Ottoman troops to garrison the island,
      seemed to provide the Porte with sufficient assurance that the
      Russians would not be able to extend their influence in the islands
      and use them as bases for later expansion into the Balkans and
      the eastern Mediterranean. While this assumption subsequently
      proved to be without foundation and led to a good deal of friction
      between the allies, for the moment both parties were satisfied.
        The four coastal ports were returned to direct Ottoman sov¬
      ereignty but under a special administration set up to guarantee
      local rights and customs and to protect them from the advances
      of Ali of Janina. Each was to be governed by a special agent sent
      directly from Istanbul. Decrees were issued guaranteeing that
      these agents would abide by local laws and customs and that all
      other local administrative officials would be chosen from among
      the local Christian inhabitants. Full property rights were recog¬
      nized, no mosques or convents were to be built, and no Muslims
      other than the four Ottoman agents were to be admitted at any
      time. Ali of Janina was enraged by the settlement, for not only
      was he forced to renounce his ambitions in the islands and at the
      port of Parga, but he also had to evacuate the three ports he had




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign VTars
                                                                       1/


taken from the French and recognize the new administration es¬         271
tablished under the terms of the agreement. To compensate him
for these losses, the Sultan appointed him governor of Rumelia.
Ali had to accept the settlement but he vowed to reverse it as soon
as possible.                    '


                  The Conclusion of Peace
  Even before the French evacuation of Alexandria, negotiations
to end the War of the Triple Alliance had begun. In Istanbul,
London, Paris, and Saint Petersburg, the politicians and diplo¬
mats were working to secure a definitive peace agreement, not
only for Egypt and the Porte but for all of Europe. In 1799, Britain
had prevented Bonaparte from transforming the convention of
al-Arish into a separate peace with the Porte, thus forcing Selim
to join his interests to those of his allies in the general European
peace negotiations then in progress. But during the late summer
of 1800, Czar Paul had become unhappy about his ally’s unilateral X
naval actions in the Mediterranean and rigid interpretation of
the laws of neutral shipping in the Atlantic and the Baltic. The
British landings in Egypt and the arrangement under which Ali
of Janina sent two regiments to serve under British command
there had stirred Russia’s resentment against the encroachment
of outsiders on what it considered to be its proper spheres of in¬
fluence, both in the Balkans and in Egypt. Paul therefore was
driven closer and closer to Catherine’s attitudes toward the Porte
and further from his British ally, and as a result in September
1800 he withdrew from the alliance."*®
  While the Sultan’s allies began to compete for his favor, the
Porte itself had been engaging in a form of direct negotiations
with the French through the person of its ambassador in Paris,
Morah Ali Efendi. Starting in February 1800, Talleyrand and
Ali engaged in a series of conversations on the question of a direct
peace between France and the Porte. Ali insisted on a prior French
evacuation of Egypt as a necessary prerequisite, but Bonaparte
said that this would be dangerous unless arrangements were
made to keep Egypt out of the hands of Britain and Russia. But in
fact, Ali did not have plenipotentiary powers to negotiate with




                    The War of the Triple Alliance
                               \              ^


272    the French, and in Istanbul, the new Reis ul-Kuttah, Mustafa
       Rasih Efendi, as the result of British and Russian urgings, de¬
        nounced Ali’s activites and reiterated that the Porte had no inten¬
        tion of making a separate peace without the participation of its
        allies.^^ With Russia’s withdrawal from the alliance with Britain
        in September 1800, Talleyrand became a little less cautious in
        his dealings with Ali, demanding an immediate agreement and
        threatening to send reinforcements to Egypt if no agreement was
        forthcoming. He even went so far to suggest Ottoman complicity
        in Kleber’s assassination. Ali denied the charge, asserted that
        the Sultan would drive the French out by force if they did not
        agree to peaceful means, and continued to insist on French
        evacuation as a prior condition for negotiations. In December,
        Bonaparte wrote a personal letter to Selim in an effort to secure
        direct negotiations, blaming the British for the failure of the
        al-Arish convention and pointing out that France could not leave
        Egypt unless it was sure that the Porte could defend it against
        occupation by others.^®
          Selim was very anxious to secure peace with France, by direct
        negotiations if possible, in order to avoid just the kind of influ¬
        ence over his government which his allies sought. So on July 24,
        1800, he appointed as Reis ul-Kuttah his close friend Mahmud
        Raif Efendi, who was the strongest proponent of an agreement
        with France. So long as the French remained in Egypt and the
        joint Ottoman-British operations against them continued, peace
        was impossible, but as the expedition became little more than a
        mopping-up operation in the spring of 1801, Mahmud Raif felt
        much freer to pursue his objective and negotiate with the French.'*^
          At the same time, following Czar Paul’s assassination in Sep-
      V tember 1800, his successor Alexander I restored the Triple Alli-
      ^ ance. Although the factors which had led to the break remained
        to disturb relations among the allies, Alexander now moved to
        set Russia up as the Porte’s principal protector by trying to medi-
        ate its peace with France in return for economic and political con¬
        cessions in the Balkans and the Levant. In August 1801, Tamara,
        still Russian ambassador in Istanbul, achieved an important suc¬
        cess by securing the release of Pierre Ruffin, the French consul
        imprisoned in Yedikule at the start of the war. Tamara now placed




                          Internal Revolts and Foreign IFars
Ruffin under his protection and began to work through him to            273
arrange an Ottoman-French agreement.®®
  Mahmud Raif, still striving to avoid the Russian embrace,
asked the British ambassador, Lord Elgin, to mediate a peace
with France with only three conditions: evacuation of Egypt,
recognition of the autonomous Ionian Republic and its evacua¬
tion by all foreign troops, and French agreement to compensate
the Ottoman government for the damage caused in Egypt, in
return for which the Porte would pay all damages for wartime
French property losses throughout the empire. At the same time,
he also opened direct negotiations with Talleyrand by sending
instructions to Ali Efendi to ascertain exactly under what condi¬
tions France would agree to peace, with Ottoman insistence on
evacuation of Egypt as a prior condition for negotiations. France
would have to recognize the Ionian Republic, but in return its
former commercial privileges would be restored.®*
  In the meantime, the direct British-French negotiations con¬
tinued in London during the summer and fall of 1801. Egypt re¬
mained the main obstacle to an agreement, with Britain con¬
tinuing to insist on full French evacuation and threatening to
form a new coalition and go to war if Bonaparte refused. Bona¬
parte now urgently felt the need for peace and decided that there
was no alternative but to accept the British proposal.®^ So on
October 1, 1801, Britain and France signed the Preliminary t
Peace of London, and the long war between them was at long last
brought to an end, at least for a time. In regard to the Ottoman
Empire, Bonaparte agreed to respect Ottoman territorial integ¬
rity and to recognize the Ionian Republic, and in return Britain
did not press the question of French compensation to the Porte
for damage in Egypt.®^
  With the first step toward general peace accomplished, Britain    ^
and Russia renewed their efforts to mediate Ottoman peace with
 France, although Bonaparte became more determined than ever
 to negotiate directly, without outside interference. Lord Elgin
asked the Sultan to entrust Ottoman interests at the future peace
conference to the British representative.®^ Russia and France
signed a peace agreement in Paris which included a secret provi¬
sion that the Russians should mediate an agreement between




                   The War of the Triple Alliance
       /<


274    France and the Porte which would be subsequently negotiated in
       Istanbul.^^ Bonaparte turned to Morali Ali Efendi once again. Ali
       had said that there would be no grounds for hostility once the
        French left Egypt, and their departure had now been assured. Ali
        apparently assumed that Mahmud Raif s instructions sent in
        August were an authorization to conclude an agreement, and
        when Bonaparte agreed to all the conditions mentioned in these
        instructions, he saw no reason to delay negotiations.
            So on October 9, 1801, Talleyrand ai^ Ali Efendi signed a di-
      ^ rect preliminary peace treaty bet>Veen France and the Porte.^®
        France agreed to evacuate Egypt, thus giving the appearance
        that it was acting of its own volition rather than by the force of
        its enemies. France also recognized and guaranteed Ottoman ter¬
        ritorial integrity and that of the Septinsular Republic and ac¬
        cepted the additional guarantee of the islands by Russia and the
      ^ Porte. The question of compensation for property destroyed or
        confiscated, or both, by both sides was to be settled by subsequent
        negotiations in Istanbul, but prisoners would be released as soon
        as the agreement was ratified. All former French rights and
        privileges in the empire would be restored, with the addition of
        the new concessions given to other powers in their peace settle¬
        ments. Ali Efendi thus actually did manage to obtain the condi¬
        tions mentioned in Raif Efendi’s instructions. But Britain and
        Russia wanted more than this. France had to be punished for her
        invasion. Her prewar dominance in the Ottoman Empire had to
        be ended once and for all. And it had to be ended through Russian
        and British mediation so that they would be sure of its taking
        place. Therefore, when the news of the treaty arrived in Istanbul,
        their ambassadors worked vigorously to prevent ratification on
        the grounds that Ali Efendi was not authorized to negotiate or
        conclude such an agreement.
            Events in Egypt following the French evacuation further com¬
        plicated the situation. First of all, the Ottoman authorities and
        the remnants of the Mamluks resumed their old struggle to fill
        the vacuum of power which remained. Selim and his ministers
        hoped to re-establish direct Ottoman rule, so the Ottoman ex¬
        peditionary force was left in Egypt as garrison. Hiisrev Pasha,
        Lieutenant {Kethiida) of the Grand Admiral, was made governor.




                          Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
and Sherif Mehmed Efendi, former director of the Arsenal in           275
Istanbul, was made chief treasurer with the duties of re-estab¬
lishing and reforming the Ottoman administrative and financial
institutions in the country. For the moment, Hiisrev and Sherif
Mehmed understood that they lacked the power to defeat the
Mamluks completely, so they sought to lull them into d false
sense of security by assuring them that the prewar situation
would be restored, while retaining the ultimate intention of
killing or banishing them, or both, in small numbers whenever
                            4

possible.®’'
  The Mamluks, on the other hand, were laboring under severe
difficulties in theif efforts to restore their old dominance. The
French expedition had confiscated their properties and eliminated
their revenues, thus undermining the financial bases of their
houses. Their numbers had been depleted and their best soldiers
had accompanied Bonaparte and Menou back to France, where
they joined the Imperial Army. Moreover the surviving Mamluks
were deeply divided into factions which began to struggle among
themselves openly as soon as the French left. After Murad Bey’s
death, a good number of his followers joined the house of his ally
Ibrahim Bey, who returned from exile in Syria in the company
of the Grand Vezir. But most of them joined in a powerful new
house under the leadership of Bardisi Osman Bey, who now be¬
came one of the most important of the Mamluk leaders. While
Ibrahim and Bardisi Osman were cooperating with each other
for the moment, the other major factions surviving from before
1798, led by Muhammad Elfi Bey and Hasan Bey Jeddawi, bit¬
terly opposed them.®®
   Political struggles between Ottomans and Mamluks and among
Mamluk factions were not new in Ottoman Egypt, but three new
elements now were added to the scene. For one thing, the people
of Egypt, and in particular their religious and commercial leaders,
had tasted the sweet wine of political power under the French and
now sought to continue their influence in the era which followed.
 Seyyid Umar Makram Asyuti, the Nakih ul-Eshraf, Seyyid Mu¬
hammad Efendi, the Sheyh ul-Sadat, and Sheyh Abdullah al-
 Sharkawi, head of the Azhar and the orthodox Ulema, now rose
 to popular political leadership and tried to make certain that




                   The War of the Triple Alliance
276   they would have a voice in the political settlement.®^ In addition,
      there were the Albanian contingents brought to Egypt with the
      Ottoman army, who, under their cotnmander Tahir Pasha and
      his lieutenant Muhammad Ali Bey, began to assert their inde¬
      pendence from the Ottoman commanders, entering the struggle
      for p)ower on their own.®® And there was the British garrison re¬
      maining in Egypt, still under the command of General John
      Hutchinson, which as the strongest military power in the country
      held the balance of power among these various interests and also
      sought to use its position to assurd postwar British commercial
      and political interests in the country.
        Officially the British position was that so long as a vacuum of
      power remained with various parties competing to fill it, the
      French might still be able to intervene and use the situation to
      their own advantage. Britain therefore was trying to secure a
      settlement among the parties to assure the continuation of Otto¬
      man sovereignty and prevent further French interference. Un¬
      officially, however, the over-all commander of the British Expedi¬
      tionary Force in Egypt, Sir Sydney Smith, and his lieutenants
      felt that the Ottomans would never be able to rule Egypt suc¬
      cessfully or defend it against a new French attack. They had
      learned to respect the military and political abilities of many of
      the Mamluk leaders and believed the only solution was to turn
      the country over to them. So during the campaign, they per¬
      suaded Selim to issue an amnesty to all the Mamluks who co¬
      operated against the French, and then they used this amnesty
      decree to make an agreement with Elfi Bey, Ibrahim Bey, and
      Osman Bardisi Bey by which they agreed to continued British
      occupation of the port cities of Alexandria, Rosetta, and Damietta
      in return for promises that the beys would be restored to power so
      long as they made regular payments of tribute to the Sultan.®^
      Officially, Hutchinson did this in compliance with Selim’s am¬
      nesty decree, but in fact he clearly was going far beyond his own
      instructions and directly contrary to the Sultan’s plans for the
      country.
        The Grand Admiral, Kiichiik Hiiseyin Pasha, who was still on
      the scene during the late summer and early fall of 1801, was




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
actually pro-French and anti-British, and he sent a series of         277
messages to Istanbul warning his master and others of the situa¬
tion.®^ The Ottoman government in turn complained bitterly to
the British ambassador about Hutchinson’s dealings with the
beys. While Elgin in reply only restated the official British posi¬
tion, in his message to London he warned that Hutchinsoh’s ac¬
tions were undermining Britain’s entire position at the Porte.
But Hutchinson went right ahead with his own policies regardless
of all complaints.®®
  Then in mid-October Selim decided to settle the matter on his
own. He annulled all the promises of amnesty and protection
earlier made to thh beys in return for their service. On October
22, the Grand Vezir and Grand Admiral invited the chief beys to
negotiations at their headquarters in Cairo and Alexandria, re¬
spectively, and there arrested them on the pretext that they were
preparing a new revolt against the Sultan.®^ When Elgin and
Hutchinson complained that these actions dishonored their own
king’s promises to the Mamluks as well as those of the Sultan,
Selim refused to listen. At this point Hutchinson, on his own ini¬
tiative, threatened to attack the Ottoman forces in Egypt, and
the Ottoman commanders were forced to turn the prisoners over
to him. He immediately released them, and they fled to Upper
Egypt, where they regrouped their forces and prepared for a new
advance to the north.®® British military intervention thus clearly
upset the Ottoman effort to eliminate the Mamluks. Selim sent a
strongly worded protest to George III declaring that he had a
full right to punish the beys for their many revolts and attacks on
foreigners as well as on Ottoman subjects and asking that Hutch¬
inson be punished and ordered to change his policies. A series of
diplomatic exchanges followed, but nothing specific was accom¬
plished.®®
   Just as Hutchinson’s actions were driving Selim to new pro¬
tests, in London Britain was repeating its demands that he reject
the Paris Treaty on the grounds that he had no right to make a
separate agreement with France without the consent of his allies,
and also because more favorable terms had been secured for him
in the preliminary agreement with France at London. A Euro-




                       The War of the Triple Alliance
278   pean peace conference now was being assembled at Amiens, and
      the British requested that the Sultan give their plenipotentiary
      the right to negotiate there in his behhlf.
        Selim did not wish to accept the British demands, not only be¬
      cause of his anger over the situation in Egypt but also because of
      his desire not to alienate the French, who, now that they were out
      of Egypt, could be used to counter British and Russian influence,
      and who also might attack the Ottoman Empire again, perhaps in
      the Balkans, if they were angered.®^ Bonaparte did all he could
      to widen the split within the Triplb Alliance by sending his old
      friend Horace Sebastiani to Istanbul as a special agent, with the
      assignment of securing Ottoman ratiflcation of the Paris pre¬
      liminaries and using British actions in Egypt to restore France’s
      old position in the Ottoman Empire. He ’also continued to work
      through Russia, which was demanding that Selim accept it as a
      mediator in direct Ottoman-French negotiations to be carried on
      in Istanbul without British intervention.But Selim saw that if
      these proposals were accepted, he would alienate Britain and lose
      its support against possible Russian or French attacks.
        In Istanbul new political factions arose in response to the diplo¬
      matic situation. The Grand Admiral, now back from Egypt, led
      those who, alienated from Britain by the Mamluk problem,
      wanted ratification of the Paris agreement and conclusion of an
      alliance with France against Russia. On the other side, Yusuf
      Ziya Pasha, Mustafa Reshid Efendi, Ibrahim Nesim Efendi, and
      Ibrahim Kethiida led those who felt that the friendship of Britain
      had to be kept at all costs as a bulwark against both Russia and
      France.®^
        In the face of these diplomatic and political pressures, Selim
      sought to play the three powers off against one another as much
      as possible, using their conflicts to maintain his own freedom of
      action. As much as he might have preferred a French alliance, he
      saw that so long as the British remained in Egypt and the Rus¬
      sians in the Ionian Islands, they were a threat to his empire,
      especially since a peace agreement had not been signed. So he
      decided to ratify only those articles of the Paris agreement which
      would not offend the British, while asking the French to modify
      the others to bring them into accord with his allies’ desires. Ali




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
Efendi was ordered to go from Paris to Amiens to act as Ottoman         279
plenipotentiary, but to defer to the opinions and desires of the
British and Russian representatives.^® Selim thus hoped to satisfy
the demands of all the powers while retaining his ability to play
them off against one another for his own advantage.
  But the powers were not willing to play. Each continued to
press its own particular demands and work to frustrate Selim’s
efforts to solve his dilemma. A split now rose between Britain and
Russia over Russia’s efforts to mediate a direct French-Ottoman
settlement and its opposition to the special trade concessions
which the British were trying to get in return for evacuating
their troops from' Egypt. Only their common agitation over
Sebastiani’s activities at the Porte and the possibility of increased
French influence there prevented an open break. In the early
months of 1802, Bonaparte also frustrated Selim’s efforts by re¬
fusing to agree to Ali Efendi’s admittance to the Amiens negotia¬
tions on the grounds that he lacked proper credentials, and that
because he had not been present when the talks began, he would
only complicate them by entering at such a late date. He added
that the Porte’s only interest at Amiens anyway was peace with
France, and this issue did not require the active participation of
the Porte since all it had to do was ratify the preliminaries of
Paris in full in order to secure peace.
  Ali Efendi therefore remained in Paris, and the Amiens talks
proceeded without Ottoman representation, and with each of the
powers trying to represent the Sultan’s interest in a manner best
calculated to benefit itself. Bonaparte’s action was well calcu¬
lated, for as time passed, Ottoman resentment against the con¬
tinued British presence in Egypt increased and drove the Sultan
closer and closer to him. In Istanbul, Ruffin and the Grand Ad¬
miral, taking advantage of the increasing Russian-British split,
gradually gained support for full ratification of the Paris pre¬
liminaries. So in March, Selim sent Sidki Efendi as a special
agent to London to demand British evacuation of Alexandria,
threatening immediate ratification if his demand was not met.
Tamara also threw his full support on the side of those favoring
ratification.^^
  Elgin warned that such a course would end the Ottoman-Brit-




                    The War of the Triple Alliance
                               \              •


280    ish alliance and lead to indeffnite British occupation of Egypt.
       He finally convinced the Sultan to send a new plenipotentiary to
       Amiens to negotiate and sign the European agreement, thus
       forestalling the conclusion of a separate Ottoman-French agree¬
       ment.^^ To this mission, Selim appointed Mehmed Said Galib
       Efendi, chief secretary of the Imperial Council and immediate
       subordinate of the Reis ul-Kuttab, an extremely capable and en¬
       lightened supporter of reform, who was admired by most of the
       foreign representatives in Istanbul as, well as by the Sultan.
       Galib was instructed to sign the peafee agreement but to make cer¬
       tain that he cooperated with the British and Russian negotiators
       and did not alienate them in any way. If the British and French
       already had concluded an agreement by the time he arrived, he
       was authorized to sign on behalf of the Porte whatever separate
       agreement seemed appropriate to secure           peace.   Although
       Galib’s mission was suggested by Lord Elgin, Ruffin, at the last
       minute, managed to assure French influence by getting the ap¬
       pointment of two of his agents as Galib’s secretaries and trans¬
       lators, Franchini, one of the dragomans of the French embassy,
       and Prince Moruzi, brother of the former prince of Wallachia and
       member of a Phanariote family long favorable to France.
          Galib Efendi left Istanbul on April 1,1802, actually some time
      ^ after the Treaty of Amiens had been signed but before this news
       reached Istanbul. He arrived in Vienna on May 16, where he
       learned of the treaty from the British and French ambassadors.
      ^ The articles concerning the Ottoman Empire guaranteed the
      A integrity of its possessions as they existed before the war, recog¬
       nized the Septinsular Republic, declared that the treaty included
       the Porte and invited its ratification as soon as possible.^® News
       of the agreement reached Istanbul on April 22. Selim was very
        angry that the British and Russians had accepted a final settle¬
        ment without living up to their promises to consult with an Otto¬
        man plenipotentiary, so while he ratified the treaty by a firman
       on May 13, he sent new instructions to Galib Efendi to negotiate
      Va separate treaty with France without any consultation with the
        British and Russians on the matter. To further express his feel¬
        ings, he recognized Bonaparte’s new Republic of Italy, despite
        strong objections by the British and Russian ambassadors in
        Istanbul.



                         Internal Revolts and Foreign IFars
 Before Galib Efendi arrived in Paris, Ali Efendi resumed nego¬
tiations with the French on the basis of the plenipotentiary
powers sent him for the Amiens congress. By May 1802, a draft
agreement had been reached which included provisions for
French evacuation of Egypt, recognition of the Septinsular Re¬
public, and French agreement not to foment distrubances dmong
Ottoman subjects and to accept the 3 per cent customs duty in
Ottoman ports previously agreed to by the other powers.'^® When
Galib Efendi reached Paris on June 2, he informed Ali Efendi
of his suspension and recall and immediately entered into nego¬
tiations with Talleyrand and Bonaparte, with Ali’s agreement
forming the basis &f the discussions. The French now attempted
to add a provision giving them the right of free navigation in the /n
Straits and the Black Sea, and telling Galib that the Russians
had already agreed to this. When Galib refused to concede the
point, a deadlock ensued, which was only resolved when he re¬
quested permission from the Sultan to grant the French request
and then did so on condition that his government’s authoriza¬
tion would be received subsequently. Selim was now anxious to
secure peace without further delays, so he quickly sent his agree¬
ment to Paris along with his ratification of the Treaty of Amiens.^®
  The peace treaty between France and the Ottoman Empire was
finally signed on June 25, 1802, and ratifications were exchanged
on September 8 of the same year.®® Peace and friendship between
the two powers were restored. Provision was made for mutual
assistance in case of hostilities and for guarantees of each other’s
territories against all enemies. All prewar treaties and capitula¬
tion agreements were renewed, and French merchant ships were
given the right to navigate in the Straits and Black Sea in return
for the same right for Ottoman ships in French waters. Compen¬
 sation for war damages was to be determined by subsequent
 negotiations in Istanbul, and the existing customs duties were
 to remain in effect for French merchants until new ones could be
 agreed on. No mention at all was made of Egypt and the Ionian
 Islands since France had in fact been driven from both by force of
 arms.                                                          ^
   Thus the course of the diplomatic revolution caused by France s
 occupation of these Ottoman territories was reversed soon after
 their evacuation was accomplished. The Triple Alliance was



                    The War of the Triple Alliance
282   broken up by conflicting Russian and British plans for the Otto¬
      man Empire and by the Sultan’s determination to avoid the
      domination of his allies by playing them off against each other
      and against the French. France, by diplomatic means, was able
      to restore the diplomatic and commercial position in the Levant
      which had been lost by her military actions and in fact to gain
      new privileges in the Straits and the Black Sea. Selim had re¬
      gained his lost territories and escaped from involvement in the
      wars of Europe without the kind of damage that previous engage¬
      ments of this kind had cost. Once ^igain he had obtained a short
      respite in which internal reforms might be undertaken, with the
      setbacks experienced by the older military corps during the war
      providing new impetus for change. Once again he was able to
      resume his role of neutrality in the European conflicts which
      soon broke out anew.®‘




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
        XVIII. Disintegration of the
            Empire, 1799-1806

                                                         9




The Peace of Paris, like the peace signed at Jassy a decade be¬
fore, did nothing to help Selim put down the numerous provincial ^
revolts which were stimulated by the events of the war. They now
emerged to plague him with renewed vigor, thus once again di¬
verting him from the reforms which he might otherwise have
undertaken.


                           Anatolia
  In Anatolia the situation remained relatively unchanged dur¬
ing and after the war. Chapanoglu Suleyman Bey and Karaos-
manoglu Ahmed strongly supported the Sultan and served to
quiet the brigands and introduce the Nizam-i Jedid reforms in
their areas. Battal Pasha acted as governor of Trebizond and
Erzurum after his restoration in 1798, and his son Tayyar Pasha
served the Sultan in the Balkans during the war, thus indicating
that the Janikli family also was now accepting Selim’s policies,
leaving Anatolia quiet.^
  With the death of his father in 1801, Tayyar Pasha returned to
Eastern Anatolia to take over the family possessions, becoming
governor of Janik and Samsun and Muhassil (district administra¬
tor) of Amasya, Merzifon, and Sinop. He also was appointed
284   temporary governor of ErzuruAi and Diyarbekir, in order that he
      would be supplied with the financial resources needed for the
      task of pursuing and capturing Gurgi Osman Pasha, former
      governor of Rumelia, who had now come to Anatolia and re¬
      volted. Tayyar accomplished this within a year; but instead of
      giving him the expected rewards, Selim took away a number of
      his lands and positions and limited him to the Black Sea coast,
      ostensibly at least because of the fear that he still might be in
      treasonable contact with Russian agents. In fact, this action was
      the result of intrigues of the Chapandglu family, which convinced
      Selim and his ministers that the Janikli family was becoming too
      powerful and would revolt unless curbed. The lands taken from
      Tayyar Pasha were given to Chapanoglu Suleyman Bey, who was
      thus made the principal Ottoman agent to curb Tayyar in eastern
      Anatolia, one more example of the old policy of "divide and con¬
      quer” as it was applied to the notables in the Ottoman Empire.
        But Tayyar refused to accept the Sultan’s order. He made him¬
      self entirely independent in his own provinces, ravaging the lands
      around to such an extent that he came to be known as the "chief
      of thieves” among Europeans resident in Istanbul. At the same
      time, he expanded his territory to Samsun and Amasya and de¬
      clared his complete opposition to the Nizam-i Jedid reforms, re¬
      fusing to allow the levy of men or provision of funds or supplies
      for the new army from the lands in his domain.^ By these acts,
      he gained the encouragement and support of Selim’s cousin
      Prince Mustafa, eldest son of Abd ul-Hamid I, who long had
      sought to secure the throne for himself through opposition to the
      reforms, as well as of Yusuf Agha and Ibrahim Nesim Efendi, two
      powerful leaders of the secret opposition among the ministers.
      They worked to arouse popular sentiment in favor of Ta5^ar
      Pasha and against those who sought to suppress him.^
        Selim now feared Tayyar might ally himself with Russia to
      assure his independence, so in the fall of 1804 he dismissed him
      from all his posts, and Chapanoglu Suleyman was ordered to
      lead an expedition against him. Chapanoglu’s army was organ¬
      ized and trained according to the new methods and armed with
      modem weapons, while that of Tayyar Pasha was more of a tradi¬
      tional Turkoman bandit force. European observers felt that never¬
      theless Tayyar had the advantage because his own men were



                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
hardy mountaineers while Chapanoglu’s men were mainly culti¬           285
vators conscripted for service and unaccustomed to the difficult
terrain of northeastern Anatolia. While Chapanoglu prepared his
expedition, Ta5^ar moved to take the initiative. In January 1805,
he established his main base at Sinop, leaving a garrison of about
50,000 men, including an artillery corps built on European-lines,
under the direction of two Russian deserters from Georgia. He
then took an army of equal size into Chapanoghlu’s territories,
captured Amasya, Chorum, and Sivas, and marched on Suley¬
man’s capital, Yozgat, which he took after routing the defending
army and capturing Suleyman. Bandits from all over Anatolia
now saw in him a man who could successfully lead them to booty,
and they came to join him in increasing numbers. For all prac¬
tical purposes, Ta5^ar Pasha was now the ruler of Anatolia as no
Ottoman force of any size remained there to oppose him.^
  Since Selim’s effort to suppress Tayyar had been completely
unsuccessful, he tried the opposite tack. Yusuf Ziya Pasha, now
retired from the p)ost of Grand Vezir, was sent to negotiate with
him, offering a full pardon if only he would end the revolt. Yusuf s
enemies in Istanbul feared that the prestige he would get from
settling the affair might enable him to regain his old post, how¬
ever, so they sent their own agents to Tayyar to undercut Yusuf
by telling him that if the rebellion continued long enough, the
Sultan would be forced to give him large sums of money and all
his old positions in addition to the pardon. Yusuf responded by
telling Tayyar that if the revolt continued, Selim would also in¬
 sist on his making peace with Chapanoglu and paying indemni¬
ties as part of the settlement. Tayyar reacted by attacking and
 pillaging both camps of negotiators and sending them fleeing
 back to Istanbul. He openly declared his disdain for the Sultan
 and established himself in full independence, extending his in¬
 fluence until it stretched from Trebizond west to Bursa by the end
 of Selim’s reign.^


                      The Arab Provinces

   In the Arab provinces, the local notables were more powerful
 and independent now than before the war. But the Sultan’s suze¬
 rainty continued to be recognized everwhere except in Arabia,



                Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                             s              I


286   where the Wahhahis assumed’ a position very similar to that of
      Tayyar Pasha in Anatolia.

                                    Egypt

        In Egypt, the Peace of Amiens had no immediate result, as the
      British continued to maintain themselves in Alexandria and four
      main Mamluk factions struggled among themselves and with the
      Ottomans, Albanians, and popular elements led hy their religious
      leaders. The British supported Elfi Bey,']t)ut when late in 1802 he
      went to London to get their help f(»r an open revolt against the
      Sultan, he was met with no more than good wishes, for the cabi¬
      net now understood the effect such an action would have on its
      own position in Istanbul. The French supported both Ibrahim Bey
      and Osman Bey ul-Bardisi.® The Ottomans were divided into two
      hostile camps. Hiisrev Pasha had the support of the garrison of
      5,000 Ottoman soldiers left by the Grand Vezir plus a small force
      of Nizam-i Jedid men, partly those brought from Istanbul and
      partly men whom he hurriedly trained locally. But Tahir Pasha
      and his Albanians had thrown off all pretense of obedience and
      were working openly to secure power and revenues for them¬
      selves, in the process cooperating with the Mamluks in ravaging
      cities and towns. The popular leaders at this point supported
      Hiisrev Pasha’s efforts to curb the disorder and re-establish reg¬
      ular administration and security. So long as the British re¬
      mained, they managed to curb the worst excesses of the con¬
      flicting parties and balance them off; but with their evacuation
      on March 14, 1803, the situation was altered considerably as
      each group moved without restraint to further its interests.^
        During the following spring, Hiisrev Pasha tried to curb the
      Albanians by reducing their salaries in order to pay for the
      Nizam-i Jedid troops he was training. The result was a number of
      pitched battles between the two groups, with the Albanians in¬
      variably emerging as victors.® On May 1, Tahir Bey led his men
      in an uprising to secure back pay. Within a few days, they took
      over all Cairo, seized many of the boats on the Nile to secure food
      and supplies, and forced Hiisrev Pasha to flee for his life to Da-
      mietta. Tahir Pasha declared Hiisrev deposed because of misrule,
      assumed the position of Kaymakam for himself, and asked the




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
Sultan to send a new governor, who would be more amenable to            287
his wishes. Mamluks all over the country now openly revolted
against the Sultan, and a number of them returned to Cairo
from Upper Egypt to join Tahir’s army.® But on May 25, Tahir ^
was assassinated by agents of his lieutenant, Mohammed Ali, r
who now himself took the post    Kaymakam and assumed leader¬
ship of the Albanian-Mamluk coalition.^® The Ottomans fought
back on two fronts. Ahmed Pasha, governor of Medina, arrived in
Cairo and tried to assume command of the Ottoman garrison
fighting against the Albanians, but Mohammed Ali defeated and
killed him. In Alexandria, Husrev Pasha tried to gather the
Ottoman forces scattered in the Delta for an attack on the usur¬
pers, but Mohammed Ali anticipated him by marching on Alex¬
andria before he was ready, defeating Hiisrev’s garrison, and
bringing him back to Cairo as his prisoner.^
  Soon after, the new Ottoman governor, Trabluslu Ah Pasha,
arrived in Egypt to replace Husrev, and he was formally in¬
stalled at the Citadel by Mohammed Ali and his Mamluk friends.
But Trabluslu Ali was no more willing than Husrev to accept
this sort of local control. He tried to separate the Albanians and
 Mamluks by pardoning only the latter in order to arouse Mo¬
 hammed Ali’s jealousy, and then negotiating with him against
 them; but Mohammed Ali informed Bardisi, who had the gover¬
 nor assassinated (January 31, 1804).'^
   Now that Mohammed Ali had achieved power with the help ot
 the Mamluks, he moved to lessen their power over him by seeking
 to encourage and exploit their latent divisions. When Elfi Bey
 returned from Great Britain (February 14, 1804), the Albanians
 joined Bardisi in attacking him and forcing him to flee to Upper
 Egypt, thus removing Bardisi’s main rival from the scene. E
 then gathered around him all those who were unhappy with
 Bardisi’s dominance and prepared to march north to Cairo. When
 Bardisi prepared to meet the attack, Mohammed Ah refused
 assistance unless his Albanians were given all the back pay due
 them from the Treasury. This forced Bardisi, now Kaymakam in
 the absence of the governor, to levy a heavy new tax on the mer¬
 chants of Cairo to get the money. In response to this, the people of
 Cairo revolted against him and asked for the help of Mohammed




                Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
288   Ali, who quickly ended the affair by proclaiming an end to the tax
      and amnesty for all who had taken part in the revolt. He thus
      achieved popular support by first forcing Bardisi to make him¬
      self unpopular and by then leading the movement against the
      new taxes. With this popular backing, he attacked and defeated
      Bardisi and his Mamluks in mid-March, forcing them to flee to
      Upper Egypt and thus leaving himself in sole control in Cairo.
        Mohammed Ali then decided to release Hiisrev Pasha and re¬
      store him as governor in order to legitirtiize his own position with
      respect to the Porte, but his Albanian troops refused to allow this
      because they held Hiisrev responsible for Tahir Pasha’s death.
      The Porte tried to appoint Jezzar Pasha to the post, hoping he
      would be able to bring Mohammed Ali into line. But Jezzar, now
      old and ailing, wisely declined. Mohammed Ali then proposed the
      governor of Alexandria, Hurshid Pasha, who was much more ac¬
      ceptable to the Albanians, and when his confirmation came from
      Istanbul, he was installed at the Citadel with the traditional
      ceremonies.
        With Hurshid Pasha’s support, Mohammed Ali formed a large
      army and marched into Upper Eg5rpt to crush the Mamluks once
      and for all. Hurshid tried to take advantage of Mohammed Ali’s
      absence to build a new army in Cairo, and he summoned a large
      number of Ottoman troops from Syria for this purpose in the
      spring of 1805. When Mohammed Ali heard this, he immediately
      returned to Cairo on the pretext that the Porte had not paid the
      salaries and wages due his men and officers. Hurshid immediately
      summoned the notables and religious leaders of Cairo and got
      them to condemn Mohammed Ali for returning without per¬
      mission.*^
        The Ottoman forces marched out of Cairo in early April hoping
      to meet the Albanians before they could reach the environs of the
      Capital. When the two forces approached each other at Kasr ul-
      Ayni, however, Mohammed Ali managed to get the support of the
      Ottomans by spreading rumors that they also would not be paid
      once they had accomplished their mission. The latter joined the
      Albanians in entering and ravaging Cairo to get their money.
      Mohammed Ali then persuaded the city notables to demand that
      Hurshid remove the Ottoman forces from Egypt and promise an




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
end to all illegal taxes. When Hurshid refused, Mohammed Ali            289
told the notables that he would carry out these measures if they
would support him as governor in place of Hurshid. As a result,
on May 14,1805, all the religious leaders and notables of the city
gathered together at the Azhar, deposed Hurshid Pasha on the
grounds that he was a tyrant and responsible for the recent rav¬
aging of the city, and proclaimed Mohammed Ali as governor in
his place. Hurshid refused to accept their decision, saying that
only the Sultan had the right to depose him. While many of his
soldiers remained with Moliammed Ali, Hurshid still was able to
gather sufficient Ottoman regulars to hold out in the Citadel
while the Albanians and the populace besieged it. The siege be¬
gan on May 18 and went on for one month, with the governor
heavily bombarding Cairo in order to maintain his position. In
reply, Mohammed Ali brought his artillery to Mount Muqattam
and began to bombard the Citadel from the rear.
  By this time, Selim was very anxious to settle the Egyptian
problem because of the increasing Wahhabi danger in Arabia. So
in mid-June he sent Salah Agha as agent to Cairo with the duty of
investigating the situation and giving official support to which¬
ever party was in control so peace and order could be restored as
soon as posssble. Salah saw that while the governor was able to
hold out in the Citadel, Mohammed Ali controlled Cairo and the
Delta and had the majority of the people behind him. So he con¬
firmed him as governor and ordered Hurshid to leave the country
with him.*^
 Mohammed Ali thus first gained power by allying himself first
with the Mamluks against the British; then with the people of
Cairo against the Mamluks and the Ottomans; and finally with
the people and the Ottomans, as governor, against the Mamluks.
So long as the Mamluk danger remained, he was content to per¬
form the duties of governor, recognizing Ottoman suzerainty and
paying the regular tribute to the Sultan. At the same time, he
began to prepare the Ottoman garrison and his old Albanian
army for a new expedition against the Mamluks.
  The Mamluk opposition was now led by Elfi Bey, who managed
to eliminate most of the old factional rivalries in order to meet the
danger posed by Mohammed Ali’s rise to power, Elfi Bey had the




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                                 \              i


290     support, of the British and a cdnsiderahle number of Ottoman
        ministers in Istanbul, who intrigued to have Mohammed Ali
        transferred from Egypt and appointed 'governor of Salonika. Elfi
        and the other Mamluk leaders promised faithfully to pay their
        full annual taxes to the Sultan if only he would help them.*®
        Selim’s position was that he wanted to secure peace in Egypt at
        any price so he could get its military assistance against the Wah¬
        habis, and that while he always had wanted to rid Egypt of Mam¬
        luk rule, he did not want it to be replace by Albanian domination.
        So in response to Mamluk demands, he appointed the governor of
        Salonika, Musa Pasha, as governor of Egypt, and named Moham¬
        med Ali to replace him at Salonika. In May the Ottoman fleet
        was sent with one thousand Nizam-i Jedid soldiers to enforce the
        order since it was feared that if Janissaries .were sent, they would
        only go over to the Albanians or the Mamluks on their arrival.
        Elfi Bey also was given permission to build up his force by buying
        slaves in Istanbul, in return for his paying the back taxes which
        he owed. On June 28, the Ottoman fleet arrived off Alexandria,
        and it received large amounts of food and supplies from Elfi Bey,
        whose army then was operating in the Delta. At the same time,
        Elfi turned over one-third of his tax debt to convince the Porte of
        his sincerity and good intentions. Orders were immediately dis¬
        patched to Mohammed Ali in Cairo to prepare himself and his
        men for transport to Salonika.
          But when the order arrived, Mohammed Ali refused to depart
        on the pretext that he was needed in Egypt to prevent revolts and
        violence. On July 28, Musa Pasha landed at Alexandria, and pre¬
        pared to march to Cairo with Ottoman and Mamluk support. In
        the meantime, however, Mohammed Ali had left Cairo secretly,
        and he now surprised and routed Elfi Bey’s Mamluks at Rah-
        maniye, thus depriving the invading armies of their main local
        support. This also convinced the Ottoman commanders that a
        major expedition would be needed to dislodge Mohammed Ali and
        that he in fact had far more general support than Elfi Bey had
        reported. Furthermore Mohammed Ali had been paying his tax
        obligations on time and in full while the Mamluks had paid only
        a part of what they owed. As a result, the Grand Admiral Anally
      '^decided to support him and in mid-October officially confirmed




                         Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                    ■J




him as governor of Egypt. The Ottoman fleet then sailed away'/           291
carrying Musa Pasha back to Salonika and also bearing Moham¬
med Ali’s son Ibrahim Pasha, who went as a hostage to Istanbul.^
  Once again Mohammed Ali ruled supreme in Cairo. Elfl Bey
escaped to Upper Egypt, however, began to organize a new Mam-
luk army, and again appealed for British assistance. As d result
of this threat, Mohammed Ali continued to accept the Sultan’s
suzerainty, and Selim was able to turn his attention elsewhere.

                          '   Syria
  While Mohammed Ali gradually eliminated his competitors
and established himself as supreme ruler in Egypt, to the north,
in Syria, the Porte managed to maintain more direct control by
playing off against one another various notables of about equal
strength. When the war ended, the rebellious Jezzar Pasha con¬
tinued to control Palestine, much of coastal Lebanon north to
Tripoli, and the Bikaa. In 1800, Bashir II had been returned to
power in Mount Lebanon and Jebel Druze with the assistance of
the British, and now, with the additional help of the Janbulat
family, he built up a powerful army capable of both beating off
Jezzar’s attacks and eliminating his own rivals within the Leb¬
anon.*® Aleppo and northern Syria were under the control of
Ibrahim Agha Katar Aghasi, who since 1792 had managed to
maintain and extend his own power by playing off the local Jan¬
issaries and notables against each other and against the Ottoman
governors of Aleppo, reducing them to little more than ambassa¬
dors to Ibrahim’s court.*** Finally, in Damascus, the Ottoman
governor Azm zade Abdullah Pasha continued to exercise direct
control through the garrisons left there by the Grand Vezir as
he passed on the way back to Anatolia from Egypt.
  Jezzar Pasha had cooperated with the last Ottoman march into
Egypt in 1801 and had expected to receive the governorship of
Egypt in return. When Husrev Pasha was appointed instead in
1802, Jezzar returned to his former intransigeance, attacking the
Ottoman supply lines and preparing to move once again against
Bashir 11. Yusuf Ziya Pasha was determined to suppress Jezzar,
but he was recalled to Istanbul immediately after the French
evacuation, before he could undertake this task. As he passed




              Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
292   through Palestine, he left Abu Merak Mehmed Pasha as governor
      of Jaffa with a force of approximately 2,000 men, mainly to watch
      Jezzar. In September 1802, Jezzar drove out this Ottoman force
      and also began to fight with the Ottoman mutesellim of Gaza.
      Selim therefore declared him a rebel, dismissed him from all his
      positions, and ordered his properties confiscated.
        Jezzar naturally refused to obey the order, and since the Porte
      had no armies in the vicinity able to enforce it, it remained a dead
      letter. Finally, in October 1803, because\of the increasing Wah¬
      habi menace, Selim pardoned Jezzar'and appointed him governor
      of Damascus on condition that he serve as commander of the expe¬
      ditionary force being sent to Arabia. But by this time Jezzar was
      old and ill, so he sent his slave Suleyman Pasha in his place to
      take over Damascus and eliminate his enemies. Soon thereafter,
      the death of Jezzar, on April 23, 1804, ended the last important
      threat to Ottoman suzerainty in Syria.^”
        As soon as the news of Jezzar’s illness reached the Porte, Selim
      secretly appointed Ibrahim Pasha of Aleppo as governor of Da¬
      mascus, Tripoli, and Sidon and commander of the Arabian expe¬
      dition, and ordered him to confiscate Jezzar’s possessions and pro¬
      perty as soon as he died. When the news of Jezzar’s death reached
      Aleppo on May 12, Ibrahim immediately published the orders of
      his appointments and left his son Mehmed Pasha to administer
      northern Syria while he marched south with an army of 3,000
      Janissaries. As soon as he got control of Damascus, he arrested
      the Janissary leaders who accompanied him and subsequently
      paroled them in the custody of Bashir II, who had appealed for
      their release.^' In Aleppo, the local notables and Janissaries used
      Ibrahim’s absence to revolt and drive Mehmed Pasha and his
      troops into the hills (July 1, 1804). The Porte immediately sent
      an agent to try to settle the revolt, while Bashir II sent the impris¬
      oned Janissary Aghas to prolong it in the hope of using the affair
      to extend his influence into northern Syria.In the meantime,
      Mehmed Pasha regrouped his forces, got the assistance of some
      Kurdish tribes from the north, and began to besiege Aleppo in
      early September. The local Ottoman representative was unable
      to mediate a compromise, and the siege dragged on.
        In late October a compromise was reached by which Mehmed




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
Pasha was appointed as governor, but real power continued to be       293
held by the Janissaries and the notables, their allies, who were
given all the other important positions of govemment.^^ During
1805, Mehmed Pasha gradually regained his former power by
stirring up friction between the allies, who finally began to fight
each other openly in the streets of the city. While the people suf¬
fered at the hands of both parties, Mehmed Pasha held his troops
back, hoping that the allies and the Janissaries would exhaust
each other. But the Janissaries defeated the notables, forcing the
governor to defend himself in the Citadel, now supported by the
surviving notables, who feared Janissary rule above all else. Both
sides bombarded the city, which suffered increasingly from fam¬
ine and plague as well.^^
  Events in Istanbul now affected the course of political life in
Syria. With the dismissal of Yusuf Ziya Pasha from the post of
grand vezir (April 24, 1805), it was not long before his proteges
in Syria and elsewhere suffered the same fate. On June 9, a fir¬
man arrived in Aleppo ordering Mehmed Pasha to go to Tripoli
as its governor and replacing him at Aleppo with Selim’s brother-
in-law, Alauddin Pasha. Ibrahim Pasha joined his son in trying to
prevent the transfer as it threatened the power they had built up
in Syria over the years, but Ibrahim also was dismissed at Damas¬
cus and ordered to go to a lesser post at Diyarbekir.^^
  Alauddin Pasha was actually not able to reach Aleppo until the
winter of 1805 because of the need to subdue a revolt near Kars
first. At the same time, Ibrahim and Mehmed refused to go to
their new posts, instead bringing their armies together and lin¬
gering between Aleppo and Damascus in the hope that their
friends in Istanbul might still be able to annul the orders. In
Syria the local notables were able to use the threat of these ar¬
mies, combined with the absence of the new governors, to re-form
their alliances and restore their power so that when the governors
did arrive, they had little authority.^® This situation remained
without change during the next three years. Aleppo and Damas¬
cus were officially governed by a series of Ottoman vezirs who
actually were under the control of local factions. But so long as
the possibility persisted of an Ottoman expedition, or an attack
by Ibrahim and Mehmed, the Janissaries and notables were com-




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
294   pelled to continue to acknowledge the Sultan’s suzerainty and
      remit their regular tribute and taxes. Although Ibrahim and
      Mehmed tried to get the Porte’s help to reconquer the cities, they
      were unsuccessful because the Sultan was satisfied by the contin¬
      ued payment of financial obligations by the local factions who
      were in control. At times, Mehmed and Ibrahim were able to stir
      up disputes between the notables and Janissaries, but whenever
      they moved to take advantage of the disputes, the alliances were
      always restored and the attacks repelled,^
        In Palestine in the meantime, Jefezar’s lieutenant, Suleyman
      Pasha, made a deal with Ibrahim to take over most of Jezzar’s
      possessions himself while Ibrahim went north to deal with the
      trouble in Aleppo. He now took advantage of the new uncertainty
      to regain most of Jezzar’s territories, while Bashir II concentrated
      on eliminating his rivals in Mount Lebanon and Jebel Druze.^^

                                Arabia and Iraq

        The situation was far more threatening to Ottoman interests in
      Arabia and southern Iraq, where the Saudi-Wahhabi danger
      fiared anew during the last five years of Selim’s reign. Since 1799,
      a truce had been arranged and maintained between the Saudis
      and their principal opponents, Suleyman Pasha of Iraq and Sherif
      Galib of the Holy Cities, with the Wahhabis refraining from any¬
      thing more serious than normal bedouin skirmishes and raids in
      return for permission to participate regularly in the annual
      pilgrimages.
        By the end of 1801, however, Suleyman Pasha was a helpless
      invalid, and the strong administration which he had established
      was rapidly falling apart. His children were disputing among
      themselves over the succession, and his army had to spend most of
      its time fighting the bedouin tribes in the Middle Euphrates and
      the Kurds in the north.
        In 1802, Abd ul-Aziz and his son, Saud, took advantage of the
      situation to undertake a number of destructive raids into southern
      Iraq. Abd ul-Aziz then moved back into the Hijaz and captured
      and sacked Taif, which Sherif Galib left without defense when he
      saw the size of the attacking enemy army. For the moment, how¬
      ever, the attacks were limited to raids. Abd ul-Aziz retired back




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
into the Nejd with his spoils.^** But the attacks meant that war       295
had in fact been declared, and the Wahhabis were on the prowl
once again. Saud immediately inaugurated a series of raids in
Iraq and the Hijaz which shook the empire. In the spring of 1803,
he took Mecca without resistance after the heavily guarded pil¬
grims’ caravan returned to the north, and Galib retired to the
fort of Jidda without daring to resist the Wahhabi hordes openly.
Saudi rule was proclaimed in the Holy Cities. An amnesty was
declared and alms distributed to the indigent and holy men. All
the notables assembled at 'the great mosque, where the Wahhabi
precepts were read publicly and all present forced to declare their
adherence. The Saudi forces then spread out through the city,
killing those who refused to accept the new doctrines and des¬
troying tombs and other objects of veneration. All hookahs and
intoxicating beverages were confiscated and destroyed. Theolog¬
ical discussions were held between the Wahhabi preachers and
the local orthodox religious leaders, and those leaders who re¬
fused to accept the new doctrines were eliminated.
  Sand’s forces were unable to penetrate the strong fortifications
of Jidda and Yanbo, however, so they finally retired to the Nejd
with their booty at the end of May. Although garrisons were left
at Taif and Mecca, Galib was able to drive them out and retake
the cities within a short time.^” The Saudi gains of 1803 proved
only temporary. But the attacks for the first time made Istanbul
aware of the extent of the threat. Up to now no one at the Porte
really had known what the Wahhabi movement represented as a
political or religious challenge to the established order. The
Ottoman Ulema were so uneducated and ignorant that few of
them knew or cared about the theological debates inspired by the
Wahhabis in much of the Arab world under the Sultan’s dominion.
Militarily the brunt of the Wahhabi attacks had been borne by
nomadic tribes and relatively minor governors in Mecca and
Baghdad. But now they had ravaged holy places which the Sul¬
tan was supposed to defend as part of the basic duties of his of¬
fice. They had challenged the official state religion of the empire
in the streets of the holiest place of Islam. And when Selim finally
turned his attention to them, he found that they controlled all of
the Nejd, Bahrein, Lahsa, Oman, and Muscat, and were threaten-




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
296   ing to take over southern Iraq, Hijaz, and even the Yemen. Their
      successes were attracting the allegiance of most of the nomadic
      tribes of the Arabian Peninsula as well as of southern Syria and
      Iraq. And these victories were inevitably strengthening those in
      Istanbul who long had opposed Selim.
        In the summer of 1803, the Porte took cognizance of the Saudi
      threat and tried to deal with it. Orders were sent to Hiisrev Pasha
      in Egypt and Ali Kethiida in Baghdad, ordering them to prepare
      expeditions against the Wahhabis as soon as possible; the gover¬
      nors in Anatolia and the Balkans wtere ordered to raise and send
      contributions of men and supplies to help in the effort. Firmans
      were sent to the bedouin tribes throughout Arabia, reminding
      them of their loyalty to the Sultan and forbidding them any rela¬
      tions with the Wahhabis. Religious tracts refuting the new doc¬
      trines were sent to Cairo and Baghdad for distribution in the
      infected areas.
        But there was little response to the Sultan’s appeals. Jezzar
      Pasha’s death removed the one Arab leader who was strong
      enough to organize and lead an expedition of the magnitude
      needed to overcome the Wahhabis. The only immediate response
      came from Ali Kethiida of Baghdad, who in the fall of 1803 at¬
      tacked and scattered a number of Iraqi tribes who had accepted
      Wahhabi suzerainty. But the rulers in Istanbul still did not real¬
      ize the extent of the Wahhabi military power, so Ali’s appeals for
      reinforcements were denied and he therefore had to avoid any
      sustained contact with the Wahhabi armies.And this was the
      best response the Sultan obtained. Internal political disputes in
      Egypt and Syria at the time prevented the local authorities from
      organizing any expeditionary forces. And the Sultan himself had
      too many other problems in the Balkans to allow him to divert
      significant strength from his garrisons there and in Anatolia.
      The way was therefore wide open for further Wahhabi advances.
        They were not long in coming. In 1804, the Saudis took and
      ravaged Medina and then moved into Iraq, routing the Shamiye
      and Muntafik tribes and advancing all the way to Baghdad. The
      next year, Saud routed Galib’s army and took Medina once again,
      and only his inability to break into the fort at Jidda prevented
      him from making his conquest permanent. While the annual pil-




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
grims’ caravan was able to get as far as Mecca, Saud refused to        297
allow it to complete the rest of the ceremonies in Medina and at
Jebel Arafat without acknowledgment of the Wahhabi doctrines,
so it turned back. The next year it was able to get through only
by acceding to Saud’s demands, thus further damaging the Sul¬
tan’s prestige in the Muslim world.^^
  The Ottomans were unable to do anything. Abu Merak Meh-
med Pasha arrived in Jidda from Egypt to replace the now de¬
ceased Sherif Pasha, but the 500 men he brought with him were
unable to do anything mord than defend Jidda, the limit of Otto¬
man efforts in the past.^^ Sherif Galib finally despaired of getting
any effective assistance against the Wahhabis, so at long last he
tried to accommodate them, allowing Mohammad ibn Abd al-
Wahhab’s grandson to come to Jidda and read the Wahhabi trea¬
tises publicly, and then introducing simplified prayer and pil¬
grimage rituals and banning the use and sale of tobacco in Jidda.
These measures did not satisfy Saud, however, who was deter¬
mined to show that he and not Selim was the real master of the
Holy Cities. To do this, in February 1807, he assembled a large
army outside Medina and ordered it not to allow the entry of the
Syrian pilgrimage, which was then on its way from Damascus.
Word of this action came to the Emir ul-Hajj (Leader of the Pil¬
grimage) while he was marching through the desert, so he turned
around at once and returned without performing any of the rit¬
uals. Saud then entered Mecca and Medina once again, carried
out the pilgrimage, and completed his earlier efforts to destroy
the tombs and carry off the jewels and valuables. He substituted
his own name for that of the Sultan in the Friday prayers, the
most important symbol of sovereignty in the Muslim world. The
local judges and superintendents of the Holy Places who refused
to practice the Wahhabi teachings or who were of doubtful loyalty
were replaced by his own men, and W^ahhabi doctrines and prac¬
tices were introduced to the holiest places of Islam. Saud added
insult to injury by inviting Selim himself to come to Mecca and
accept the Wahhabi teachings.^^ Not only was the Sultan’s pres¬
tige in the Islamic world further damaged by these events, even
more important at the moment, the bedouin tribes of the Hijaz,
who previously had accepted Ottoman suzerainty, now came for-




                Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
ward to declare their loyalty t6 Saud, who thus for all practical
purposes replaced the Sultan as ruler of Arabia.


                          The Balkans
  Much of the reason for the Sultan’s failure to take decisive
action against the separatist movements in his Arab provinces
lay in his preoccupation with superficially similar, but actually
far more dangerous, threats in the Balkans during and after the
war with France.                 v
 Since Egypt and Syria were the main theaters of action during
the war, most of the remaining Ottoman garrisons in the Balkans
gradually were drained of their men and weapons to provide for
the expeditionary forces organized by the. Grand Vezir. To com¬
pensate for this loss, the Sultan’s only recourse was to pardon the
most important notables, such as Ali of Janina and Pasvanoglu
Osman, and appoint them as governors of their areas in the hope
of enlisting their services in suppressing the lesser bandits and
notables and of curbing their own ambitions. But with the ab¬
sence of Ottoman soldiers to enforce their obligations, the no¬
tables used these appointments primarily to advance their power
even more. As a result the other Balkan notables and bandits
were relieved of even the threat of official suppression of the kind
which had hindered their activities during the previous decade,
and they also took advantage of the situation to increase their
fortunes and territories. In the end it was only the conflicts among
those who sought to take advantage of the Sultan’s preoccupation
in the east which enabled him to maintain some sort of suze¬
rainty in the area until the arrival of peace allowed him to under¬
take more forceful efforts toward this end.

                     Ali Pasha of Janina (II)

  In the west, Ali Pasha of Janina took advantage of the War of
the Triple Alliance to build an empire of major proportions,
stretching from northern Albania to the Gulf of Corinth and
bounded by Ohrid in the east and the Adriatic in the west. In
1799, the Porte appointed him as governor of Rumelia both as
compensation for his failure to get the Ionian Islands and Al-




                 Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
banian port cities, and also to secure the services of his army        299
against Pasvanoglu and the other notables and bandits who were
infesting Rumelia at that time. Bitterly disappointed by the
settlement, Ali chose to ignore his new position, leaving its
capital, Monastir, in the hands of subordinates while he re¬
mained in Janina to concentrate his efforts on building his own
empire there with the help of his two sons, Muhtar Pasha and
Veliuddin. Although Ali was ordered to send to Istanbul all the
French officers and technicians captured during the course of
the campaign, he retained a good number of them in his own
service — building forts and batteries, training his infantry,
artillery, and navEil forces, and creating a lavish palace and court
for him in the European style.
  The establishment of the Septinsular Republic convinced Ali
that the Porte was determined to do all it could to prevent any
further expansion on his part. At the same time, as soon as the
Russian garrison established itself at Corfu, it began to follow
Venice’s old policy of supporting Ali’s immediate neighbors, the
Suliotes to the south, and Bushath Mustafa Pasha, who, since
the death of his father, Kara Mahmud of Scutari, had ruled
Delvino and Skopje while striving to regain the family posses¬
sions in northern Albania from his uncle, Ibrahim Pasha of
Berat. Surrounded by enemies, Ali entered into contacts with
French agents sent to Corfu and began to plot new means of
expanding his empire with French assistance. During the winter
of 1799-1800, Ali prepared to attack his enemies, with the Suli¬
otes at the top of the list. The French Colonel Charbonnel was
named to command his artillery corps. Albanian and Greek
peasants were drafted into his army and navy, which were
rapidly developed under French instruction. Ali also managed
to get the military support of most of the Muslim beys in Para-
mythia for a supreme effort to drive the Christians and their
friends out of Epirus and the Ionian Islands. While the news of
these preparations spread rapidly, Ali tried to conceal their real
object by spreading rumors that he was preparing to lead an
expedition against the French in Egypt.^®
  In the spring of 1800, Ali moved to the attack. He first marched
north against Mustafa Pasha in Delvino, and while he was unable




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
300   to penetrate the walls of this'powerful fortress, the continual
      bombardment inflicted by his new artillery finally compelled
      Mustafa to surrender and promise military assistance. In the
      meantime the Suliotes, with Russian arms, ammunition, and
      encouragement, began to leave their mountain retreats for
      surprise raids into Ali’s territory, with devastating results.
      All’s agents prepared the way for a counterattack by taking
      advantage of dissension among the Suliotes, using bribes and
      rumors to get the support of a number, of chiefs, thus dividing
      their clans and making cooperation^difficult.^^
        In June, as soon as Delvino was safely in hand, Ali led an army
      of 10,000 men south against the Suliotes. Although they were
      taken by surprise, they were able to resolve their internal differ¬
      ences quickly and withdraw into their mountain retreats before
      Ali could cut them off. Thus began the last and most famous of
      the sieges of Suli. Through the summer and fall of 1800, into the
      winter and spring of 1801, Ali’s army surrounded Suli and tried
      to starve out its inhabitants. Charbonnel’s artillery tried to
      demoralize and scatter the defenders by a continuous bombard¬
      ment on a scale previously unknown to the area, but still the
      Suliotes held out. As the siege wore on, Ali himself began to
      suffer increasing difficulties. Shortages of food and the spread of
      diseases soon sapped the loyalty and ability of his own men and
      those of his allies. Many of the Greek conscripts in particular
      sympathized with the Suliotes and secretly sent them food and
      supplies, thus nullifying most of the effects of the siege. Nor was
      the disloyalty limited to the men. Charbonnel and his officers had
      agreed to remain in Ali’s service for only two years, and once their
      contracts expired they stole away and returned to Corfu. In addi¬
      tion, Ali’s main Muslim allies began to grow cautious as they
      realized that a victory over the Suliotes would increase his ability
      to suppress them. Consequently, they relented in their efforts,
      and as a result the Suliotes were able to secure fresh supplies
      from Parga. In the spring of 1801, the Suliotes persuaded Ibrahim
      Pasha of Berat, Mustafa Pasha of Delvino, and most of the
      Muslim beys of Shimari to abandon the alliance and join a new
      "League of the Chiefs of Epirus” against Ali.^*^
        In response Ali used the vast wealth which he had gathered




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
to undermine each of his opponents. He stirred a revolt among         301
the local beys in the district of Berat, forcing Ibrahim to return
home to deal with them. He gained the support of a dissident
group of soldiers in the Delvino army, who drove out Mustafa
Pasha, forcing him to spend much of the next year struggling to
regain his own command before resuming assistance to the
Suliotes. Most of the beys of Shimari were simply bought out by
All’s agents although many of them continued to provide secret
assistance to Suli. Only Islam Progno of Paramythia was entirely
impervious to All’s efforts and continued to support the Suliotes
regularly as the siege went on. With the league weakened, if not
destroyed, Ali tridd negotiations with the Suliotes, promising
them large sums of money and free passage if they would only
agree to leave their homes, but they invariably refused. He got
the Metropolitan of Arta to excommunicate them, but this did
not disconcert them in the least. All’s expansion was stopped in
its tracks, and, as his prestige consequently fell, many of those
whom he had conquered during the previous years attempted to
throw off his domination. Although the siege went on, Ali was
forced to dispatch many of his men to maintain his rule in the
north.
  To counter his loss of prestige, Ali turned once again to the
Porte, and in return for a pardon in late 1801, he agreed to accept
a new appointment as governor of Rumelia and to send military
contingents to assist the Porte against new difficulties which had
arisen to the east. But, feigning illness he returned to Janina
and instead sent his son Muhtar Pasha, recently named governor
of Lepanto. The siege of Suli went on, but attention turned to
Rumelia during the winter of 1801-1802.^**

                 The Rise of the Balkan Notables:
                Macedonia, Thrace, and Bulgaria

  In Macedonia, Thrace, and Bulgaria, the withdrawal of the
Ottoman garrisons let loose all the bandits and notables who had
been bottled up during the previous decade. Brigand armies, of
which the most important still was that led by Kara Feyzi,
attacked Edirne several times and ravaged the entire area be¬
tween it, Sofia, and Belgrade, largely severing communications




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
302   through the Balkans. The Alhknians previously sent by Ali of
      Janina also ravaged and burned the area on a large scale. The
      only effective Ottoman resistance came from the military gover¬
      nor of Edirne and Gurgi Osman Pasha, governor of Silistria.^®
      Pasvanoglu, despite his formal submission and appointment as
      governor of Vidin in 1798, encouraged the bandits to assist his
      own efforts to occupy the area between the Danube and the Bal¬
      kan mountains.     Tirsiniklioglu Ismail Agha concentrated on
      defending his possessions south of the Danube between Ruschuk
      and Tirnovo, not only against the attacks of Pasvanoglu but also
      against a new notable who now rose in the east. Yillik Suleyman
      Agha of Silistria. Born nearby, Siilleyman first rose to power as
      notable of Deliorman in 1792. Six years later, the ayan of Silistria,
      Battal Agha, himself a vassal of Tirsiniklioglu Ismail, revolted
      against the Sultan in an effort to take advantage of the new
      anarchy. To attract the support of the bandits operating in the
      area, he gave them a free hand to take as much as they wanted
      from the populace in his district. Since the main duty of the nota¬
      bles, in fact the reason that their rule was accepted, was to protect
      the people against such attacks, the merchants and religious
      leaders got the Ottoman governor to replace him with Suleyman
      Agha in January 1800. Ismail Agha offered no objection. Pre¬
      viously he had cooperated with Suleyman against Pasvanoglu
      and assumed that he would accept his subordination as Battal
      Agha had done. Instead Suleyman got Pasvanoglu’s help to
      throw off Ismail’s suzerainty and move against him from the
      east. Through the spring and summer of 1800, Pasvanoglu and
      Ismail Agha fought each other between Vidin and Ruschuk,
      and the forces of Ismail and Suleyman clashed regularly in the
      areas of Silistria and Deliorman; in the process they ravaged
      the area just as fiercely as the bandits had done. In the mean¬
      time Kara Feyzi built up an army of 5,000 men and extended his
      raids all the way to the Black Sea coast, where Burgas and Varna
      became the special objects of his attentions.^*
        This was just the time that the Convention of al-Arish broke
      down in Egypt, and the Ottoman army was sent reeling back to
      Syria in disorder. Selim had neither time nor men to deal with
      the Balkan situation, and the most he could do was to order the




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign IPars
governors of Salonika and Nicomedia to join the Bostanji corps        303
of Edirne in a march north to the Danube to restore order (March
1800). In addition he ordered the closing of the passes leading
from Albania into Rumelia, prohibiting Albanians from going
there without special passes issued by their governor.Prepara¬
tions also were made to send the Nizam-i Jedid corps to'assist
since it had been effectively excluded from the Egyptian opera¬
tions because of conservative and Janissary opposition in Istanbul.
Kara Feyzi and Pasvanoglu appealed to the notables against the
use of the corps in the Balkans as a price for their submission.
Despite these protests, an army of 5,000 picked Nizam-i Jedid
men under the command of Kadi Abdurrahman Pasha, governor
of Karaman, left Istanbul for Thrace on March 5,1800. Soon after
their arrival in Edirne, they were joined by a force of local war¬
riors sent from Nicomedia. During April these two forces cooper¬
ated with the Bostanjis in a series of successful campaigns against
the bandits, who were forced to flee into the Macedonian moun¬
tains. Order thus was restored and communications through the
Balkans opened for the first time in a year. Hundreds of severed
bandit heads now arrived in Istanbul at the same time as con¬
tingents of soldiers sent by the Anatolian notables for Balkan
operations.
  Selim’s main fear at this time was that the notables might
cease fighting each other and join in an alliance with Kara Feyzi.
This would pose a major military threat to Istanbul, for the
notables had most of the troops left in the area and Istanbul’s
garrison had been sent to join the effort to regain Egypt. The
Nizam-i Jedid army therefore marched to the attack and soon
inflicted a major defeat on a concentration of bandits who had
fled into the mountains near Rodosto.^^ But it was not long before
the bandits regrouped and rearmed themselves, mainly with
the assistance of Pasvanoglu, so that as summer arrived they
were once again attacking Edirne and penetrating Thrace and
Macedonia. Selim finally decided that the only remedy was to
appoint a strong governor for Rumelia, with the power to co¬
ordinate and lead all the various Ottoman forces available in
the area as Hakki Pasha previously had done. For this purpose
he chose the governor of Silistria, Gurgi Osman Pasha, who im-




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                              s              »


304   mediately intensified the military pressure on the bandits. As a
      result most of them were suppressed during the summer, but he
      still was not able to do anything against the notables themselves,
      who continued to rearm the bandits and send them out time after
      time, thus, in the long run, nullifying his efforts.'*® Pressure from
      the notables and from the conservatives in Istanbul finally forced
      the Sultan to withdraw the Nizam-i Jedid force which had oper¬
      ated so successfully against the bandits up to that time, as a price
      for their cooperation in the campaign^ then being undertaken
      against the French in Egypt. Without this force, Gurgi Osman
      had to abandon his campaigns and concentrate his remaining
      forces at Silistria and Edirne to meet possible attacks. Pasvanoglu
      used this respite to rearm the bandits who fled to him. During
      the rest of the year they ravaged the area between Vidin and
      Edirne once again, while at the same time still demanding an
      end to the reforms and the return to Istanbul of all the Ottoman
      armies remaining in the Balkans.'*^
        In response Selim sent across the Bosporus a force of 7,000
      men brought from Anatolia by Tayyar Pasha of Erzurum for the
      Egyptian campaign but now diverted for the more immediate
      danger in the Balkans. Large numbers of Albanian contingents
      also were summoned from various local governors and beys, and
      they also were put under Tayyar’s direction. When Tayyar’s
      army arrived in the area, however, his men refused to fight on
      the grounds that it was wrong to fight other Muslims. Without
      their assistance, an army of 4,000 Albanians sent by Ali of
      Janina was routed at Plevna in December, after which the bandits
      infested the area between Vidin and Edirne once again. The
      Albanian contingents and the men in the Ottoman forces of
      Gurgi Osman Pasha and Tayyar Pasha then began to ravage
      the towns and villages as much as the local bandits, so the in¬
      habitants began to support Pasvanoglu in the belief that he was
      the only one in the entire struggle with the power to restore and
      keep order if he got absolute control.*®
        While the Balkan notables concentrated most of their efforts
      south of the Danube, they did not entirely ignore the rich Princi¬
      palities lying helpless to the north. Tirsiniklioglu Ismail Agha
      sent regular expeditions into the Dobruja, eastern Wallachia,




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
and occasionally into Moldavia, whose hospodars, Constantine           305
Ipsilanti (1799-1801) and Alexander Suzzo (1801-1802), fled to
Bessarabia whenever he approached. Pasvanoglu’s lieutenant,
Manav Ibrahim, undertook similar campaigns into Little Wal-
lachia, at times looting Craiova and threatening Bucharest so
seriously that the local princes and flef-holders were compelled to
flee to Transylvania. Pasvanoglu forced the Wallachian princes
to pay heavy annual contributions of wheat, fodder, and salt and to
provide artisans to build and maintain his forts and cannons as
well as money to pay them, 't'he princes in turn took all they could
from the peasants to meet these obligations.        Whenever the
princes got the help of Ottoman contingents from Bulgaria, the
latter were just as rapacious as those whom they were invited to
repulse, so in the end the princes preferred to forego such assist¬
ance and began to look longingly for help from Russia, whose 'A
agents were beginning to spread its influence in the area under
the pretext of wartime cooperation with the Sultan.^®

                              Serbia
  Pasvanoglu’s allies also used wartime conditions to regain
control in Serbia. While he had promised Selim to end all raids
and support the Ottoman presence in Serbia as part of the ar¬
rangement by which he was pardoned in 1798, he was allowed to
leave his second lieutenant, Molla Idris Agha, as governor of the
Kraina, and this gave him the entering wedge he needed to re¬
sume his activities as soon as the Ottomans were no longer able
to enforce his obedience. Soon after Selim withdrew large num¬
bers of Ottoman soldiers to participate in the campaign against
the French, Pasvanoglu resumed his old ways, giving shelter to
refugee yamaks and sending them on regular pillaging expedi¬
tions into Serbia as far as Belgrade. The Serbian princes com¬
plained to the Sultan, threatening to flee to Austria unless order
and security were restored. The governor of Belgrade, Hajji
Mustafa Pasha, managed to quiet the situation during the sum¬
mer of 1799 by a campaign into the Kraina and also by besieging
and capturing a large number of yamaks at Shabatz, forcing the
rest to flee across the Save into Bosnia. Mustafa Pasha then told
the princes that the only way he could provide regular protection




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
      V
306   of this kind was to increase the size of his army and improve its
      armaments, which would require an increase in taxes; the choice
      lay between insecurity and high taxes. The princes objected and
      persuaded Mustafa to agree to an important compromise in its
      place. Instead of relying entirely on Ottoman troops supported
      by salaries, he would allow the princes to organize and arm native
      Serbian troops as auxiliaries, and these would be supported
      directly by the local population without the necessity of new
      Ottoman taxes. Thus for the first time'jn centuries, rayas were
      allowed to bear arms in defense of thteir homes.
          While the new Serbian units were being assembled and trained,
      the Ottomans withdrew more and more of their regular men to
      meet the needs of the Egyptian campaign. In November 1800
      Pasvanoglu moved, trying to take advantage of the reduction in
      Ottoman forces before the new local defense forces were ready.
      The yamaks moved from the Kraina and Vidin into Serbia and
      took Passarowitz, Semendria, and Belgrade against very limited
      resistance. Hajji Mustafa Pasha managed to hold out in the
      Belgrade citadel until the princes arrived with a large force of
      armed Serbs who drove the yamaks all the way out of Serbia and
      back to Vidin. Thus did the Christian rayas rise in defense of
      their Ottoman overlords, a unique action in the long annals of
      Ottoman rule.^^
          But this successful defense only stimulated new complaints
      on the part of the Janissaries and Ulema and their supporters,
      not only in Belgrade, but also in Istanbul and Sarajevo. How
      could infidels be armed and used against believers in the true
      faith, whatever their crimes might be? What would the conse¬
      quences be? To calm their hostility, Selim pardoned the yamaks
      crowded into Vidin and allowed them to return to Belgrade on
      condition that they agree to obey the orders of his governor there.
      They promised but of course had no intention of obeying. As soon
      as they were strong enough, they revolted against Mustafa Pasha,
      who once again took refuge in the citadel while the yamaks oc¬
      cupied the town (August 20, 1801). Mustafa again called for the
      help of the Serbs, while the mutesellim of Nish, Mustafa Agha,
      prepared to move to his assistance.®^ Mustafa Agha was pre¬
      vented from helping by Pasvanoglu, who marched his main army




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
quickly from Vidin to the Morava, thus effectively cutting off
Belgrade from the south.^^ In the meantime, in Belgrade, Mustafa
Pasha got the assistance of the Janissary lieutenant, Halil Agha,
who suppressed the yamaks and restored order. However, Halil
then himself assumed leadership of the yamaks and killed the
unsuspecting Mustafa Pasha and his chief officers before the
Serbs could reach them.^^
  The yamaks now established their government in Serbia on
the model of the government established by the military corps in
North Africa two centuries before. Rule was shared by Halil
Agha with four yamak chiefs, who took the title dahi* to indicate
their special position independent of the regular Ottoman hier¬
archy. To avoid punishment and condemnation from Istanbul,
they forced the Serbian princes and local Muslim and Christian
religious leaders to denounce Mustafa Pasha and his soldiers as
tyrants and declare their gratitude for the new regime.Under
Halil Agha’s direction and with Pasvanoglu’s support, the dahis
began a reign of tyranny and exploitation on a scale never before
seen in Serbia. They soon extended their activities beyond the
rayas to the Muslim feudal Spahis, who previously had remained
almost untouched by the political vicissitudes swirling around
them. Yamaks from Bosnia and bandits from Rumelia flooded
into the province, attracted by the booty they could secure in the
service of the dahis. The princes were deprived of all their official
powers and forced to watch helplessly as the new regime ex¬
tracted all it could from its subjects.^®
   With rebels in control of much of Serbia, Bulgaria, Albania, V
and Greece, drastic measures were needed. But it was only when
victory in Egypt was assured in the spring of 1801 that Selim ^
dared to defy the conservatives and do something to remedy the
situation.


                          Hakki Mehmed Pasha

  On April 23, 1801, Selim transferred Gurgi Osman Pasha to
the district of Salonika and replaced him with the man who had

 ^Vulgarization of the title da% or dayi (Fr, dey) used by the Janissary leaders
who ruled Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli.




                 Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
308   so frightened the notables ancf their supporters before the war,
      Hakki Mehmed Pasha. In order that he would have the prestige
      and authority necessary to accomplish his mission, the Sultan
      gave him absolute power to act in any way he wished without
      question, appointed him supreme commander of all the Ottoman
      soldiers in Europe, and promised him a term of at least three
      years, a rare arrangement in an empire where short terms and
      limited powers had become the rule.^^
        Hakki Pasha moved to Edirne before publishing the firman of
      his appointment so that he could take command of his new army
      before Gurgi Osman would be able to object to it. Gurgi Osman
      in fact was terrified by the news, fearing that Hakki also had
      received secret orders for his execution, a practice not unusual
      in the empire at that time. While Gurgi Osman was soon relieved
      by the news of his appointment to Salonika, he was still bitterly
      hostile, and intrigued against Hakki Pasha through his enemies
      among the Rumeli notables and Istanbul political leaders. He
      simply refused to go to Salonika on the grounds that he was
      needed to fight bandits in Macedonia. As soon as Hakki Pasha
      reached Edirne, Gurgi Osman seized Sofia and began to gather a
      force of brigands and mountaineers from Bulgaria and Albania,
      men who had long sought such a leader to coordinate their efforts
      against the Porte. Osman wrote Hakki to stop at Skopje, where
      he had moved in order to prepare his army, but as soon as Hakki
      learned of this new development, he immediately led the forces
      at his disposal toward Sofia for a showdown before Osman could
      get the support of the brigands in the area. Osman immediately
      sent a communication to the Grand Vezir complaining that
      Hakki’s advance would only cause disturbances in Rumelia and
      help the brigands, and he requested an order for Hakki to stop
      where he was and return to Edirne, or at least to Philippopolis.
      He was supported in this request by the notables of Sofia, who
      feared that they would lose their lives and property if Hakki
      stormed or besieged the city. Hakki’s enemies in Istanbul were
      able to use this threat to have him ordered to return to Edirne,
      while Osman Pasha’s assignment was changed from Salonika to
      the much more prestigeful post at Silistria.^®
        Hakki obeyed the Sultan but complained bitterly about the




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign W^ars
interference with the "full powers” which supposedly had been        309
granted. To salve Hakki’s feelings, Selim extended his term of
office to five years, and despite everything repeated his previous
order that Hakki had absolute power in all matters relating to
Rumelia.^^* Within a short time, the excesses committed by the
bandits in Gurgi Osman’s army so outraged the citizens of Silis-
tria that their complaints, combined with Hakki’s continued
protests and intrigues, caused the Sultan to transfer him to
Berkovatz on the Ogustul, as military governor with the re¬
sponsibility for fighting thehandits in the area.®”
  In the meantime, Hakki began to summon military contribu¬
tions from all over the Balkans and move to the main object of
his mission. Through the autumn and winter of 1801 and into the
spring of 1802, he vigorously suppressed disorder and restored
security between Edirne and Haskovo, killing the notables who
attempted to help the fieeing brigands. Hakki was able to get
men and supplies from both Tirsiniklioglu Ismail and Ali of
Janina, who were happy to help clear out the opposition in order
to facilitate their own subsequent expansion into the same
areas.
  The intrigues of Hakki’s enemies continued, however, and
gradually shut off the money and supplies supposed to be sent
to him from Istanbul. In consequence his men became more and
more rebellious and increasingly amenable to the terms of¬
fered them by agents of Pasvanoglu and Gurgi Osman. So in
March 1802, Hakki wrote to the Sultan demanding that Osman
Pasha be punished and that all money and supplies sent him from
Istanbul be cut off so that the regular Ottoman army could be
maintained. When there was no answer, Hakki asked to be ex¬
cused from his post on the grounds that he was not being given
the support needed to carry out his mission. Selim persuaded him
to withdraw this request by writing that he had been diverted
by continuing problems in Egypt and Syria and that the needed
money and men would soon be on the way. But Hakki still was
unable to pay his men’s wages, and their dissatisfaction was
fanned by his enemies into a series of open revolts supported
by the bandits they were supposedly repressing.®^
  In September, Hakki sent his chief lieutenant, Chelebi Omer




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                              s             t


310   Agha, to Istanbul to deal with Yhese problems and in particular
      to get the Sultan to cut off all funds from Gurgi Osman so that
      his men would desert him. But Omer'Agha was won over by the
      Grand Vezir, who promised him the governorship of Rumelia if
      he could get rid of his master. Omer therefore reported to Selim
      that Hakki’s soldiers would desert if they were forced to attack
      Gurgi Osman and that the best solution was to appoint Gurgi
      Osman to a post in Anatolia and to send him money so that he
      could pay his men and get them to go with him. An incident would
      thus be avoided, and Hakki Pasha ^ould be able to carry out his
      work in the Balkans unhindered. Thinking that this advice came
      from Hakki Pasha, the Sultan agreed and issued the necessary
      orders, although in fact this meant that Gurgi Osman was being
      given just the financial support he needed to further undermine
      Hakki Pasha’s position with his own men.®^
       When the news of the new orders reached Edime, Hakki’s
      men began to desert him in large numbers. At the same time,
      the Grand Vezir declared that Hakki had failed in his mission
      and asked the Sultan to replace him with Omer Agha on the
      grounds that Omer came from an old Macedonian family, knew
      the areas of Edirne and Philippopolis far better than Hakki, and
      would be much more influential with the notables and the people.
      Since Yusuf Pasha now had tremendous prestige in the capital
      because of his successes against the French in Egypt, Selim
      agreed. It was decided to dismiss Hakki, but in order that he
      would not be forewarned and thus organize the same sort of re¬
      sistance as Osman Pasha had done, the dismissal order was kept
      secret. Omer Agha ostensibly was appointed as governor of Bel¬
      grade in place of the recently assassinated Mustafa Pasha. Omer
      was to march to Edirne, supposedly on the way to Belgrade, but
      actually to deliver the dismissal order to Hakki and take his
      place at once.   Hakki’s chief supporter in Istanbul, Kiichiik
      Hiiseyin Pasha, was ill at the time and not informed of these
      measures, so he did not communicate the news to his protege
      until it was too late. Hakki Pasha was a very skillful Ottoman
      politician, and when he received the news of Omer’s appointment
      to Belgrade, he understood its true significance and tried to
      intrigue against it. But in the face of the Sultan’s decision, all




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
he could do was send a desperate letter to Kuchiik Hiiseyin, who       311
had become aware of the order too late to do anything about it,
and intrigue with Ali of Janina’s sons, Muhtar and Veliuddin,
in the hope that they would block Omer’s march to Edirne. Now
that Hakki had cleared Thrace of Ali Pasha’s opponents, how¬
ever, Ali was happy to be rid of him and to have the area clear
for his own expansion.
  Hakki now understood that the game was up, and even before
Omer Agha arrived he left Edirne and proceeded to his home on
Chios, to which he was theh banished by the Sultan. His soldiers
immediately rioted, broke into his house, and plundered Edirne
to collect what was due them. When Omer Agha arrived, they
imprisoned him as a hostage for the money still due, and it was
only after considerable negotiation that he was released and
allowed to assume his post.®^
   Thus for the second time, Selim III allowed political intrigue to
deprive him of the only man able to curb the notables and re¬
establish order in Rumelia. Once again he sacrificed one of his
reformers to maintain his own position, providing a lesson for
all those who sought to introduce change into the empire with
his support. Omer Agha, now Pasha, soon proved too weak for
his post. Brigands and notables ravaged Bulgaria, Thrace, and
Macedonia again, with Ali Molla actually surrounding Edirne
and making raids as far as Istanbul, and Kara Feyzi ravaging
the area of Silistria and occupying Varna during 1802. At the
same time, the Albanian troops previously sent by Ali of Janina
to support Hakki’s efforts now refused to accept Omer Pasha’s
command and set out on their own to ravage and raid.®®

                     Ali Pasha of Janina (III)

  Since Hakki had fallen twice as a result of the opposition of
the notables, Selim now thought that a notable as governor might
produce results much more palatable to all concerned. It must be
remembered that the Porte’s main object at this time was not to
replace the notables but rather to use them to keep order and
collect taxes. While Hakki Pasha had been a successful adminis¬
trator, by attacking the notables he had removed the only alter¬
native to a type of direct administration which the Porte was no




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
         1/



312     longer able to provide. To accofnplish the same end by different
        means, on January 28, 1803, Selim appointed Ali of Janina as
      A governor of Rumelia, mainly because he was not directly involved
        in territorial conflicts with the Bulgarian notables, and so might
        be better able to get their cooperation for the common effort.
        His only important rival, Ibrahim Pasha of Berat, who previously
        had been built up by the Porte as a rival to balance All’s growing
        power in Albania, now was ordered to accept his leadership and
        provide men and supplies for the Rumelia campaign. All’s son
        Muhtar Pasha was appointed gove^’nor of Trikala once again,
        thus removing a principal block to All’s expansion in Thessaly
         and restoring his prestige in Albania just as Suliote resistance to
        his attacks had begun to cost him many supporters. Now Ali was
         able to summon the help of notables from all over Macedonia and
         Epirus to help him "defend Epirus against the infidel French”
         as well as to establish order elsewhere in Rumelia.®®
              In March 1803, Veliuddin led an Albanian force of almost
         10,000 men through Macedonia into Thrace. When the bandits
         heard he was coming, they were so frightened that they sent
         three hundred of their number to Trikala as hostages for their
         good behavior and immediately withdrew into the mountains
         and promised to refrain from all attacks in the future. Those who
         resisted his efforts were defeated and either forced to settle near
         Haskovo or Philippopolis or incorporated into his army, which
         was immensely strengthened as a result. At the same time, the
         Albanians who had been ravaging the area were quickly rounded
         up and returned to their homes, so that by the end of the summer,
         relative peace was restored in all Rumelia.®^
              But Gurgi Osman still remained a problem. At the time Omer
         Agha was appointed governor of Rumelia, Osman was made
         governor of Diyarbekir, and he immediately crossed from Gal¬
         lipoli with all his men to assume his new post. As he moved east,
         however, he began to gather local bandits into his service. By the
         time he reached Ankara, he was leading a full scale revolt against
         central authority, demanding that he be restored to his positions
         in the Balkans. Only a full-scale expedition against him, in¬
         cluding Nizam-i Jedict troops sent by Karaosmanoglu and forces
         sent by Tayyar Pasha of Erzurum, finally defeated him in March




                           Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
1803. But once again his friends in Istanbul interceded to secure     313
not only a pardon but also an appointment as governor of Silis-
tria, a far cry from the punishment he deserved.®*
  In the Balkans, All’s successes frightened Pasvanoglu and
Tirsiniklioglu Ismail, who feared that Ali might go on to annex
to his own possessions the lands he was clearing out in the name
of the Sultan, and that the order which he had established would
enable the Sultan to move against them later. So they com¬
plained of his "tyranny” and "oppression,” and through the
liberal use of bribes managed to secure his dismissal in August
1803, on the pretext that he had failed to rid the area along the
Danube of bandits. Veliuddin returned to Albania to deal with
the Suliotes, and his father was replaced as governor by the
mutasarrif of Salonica, Vani Mehmed Pasha, who soon showed a
complete lack of the kind of ability and power needed to curb the
notables.®* Suleyman Agha now expanded from Silistria toward
Ruschuk and effectively prevented Gurgi Osman Pasha from
assuming his post, compelling the Sultan to send him to Ismail
instead and to leave Silistria to the administration of a low-
ranking miitesellim whom Suleyman Agha could easily control.
Ismail Agha expanded his territory to include most of Bulgaria
between the Danube and the Balkan range, taking Yeni Pazar,
Juma, Shumla and Hezargrad as well as beating back most of
Suleyman’s advances in this direction. He soon was able to force
the reluctant Sultan to acquiesce in these conquests by appoint¬
ing his men as their mutesellims and ayans, with his chief lieu¬
tenant, Bayrakdar Mustafa Agha, now coming on the scene for
the first time as his notable in Hezargrad. At this time, with
Egypt in anarchy, the valley of the Danube had become Istanbul’s
chief source of grains, so Selim wished only to secure some sort
of order there so that needed supplies would be assured. But
Ismail and Suleyman’s continued rivalries were devastating the
cultivated lands in both their territories while at the same time
making it impossible to make gains against the bandits. Selim
was advised by most of his ministers to support Ismail Agha
against both Pasvanoglu and Suleyman Agha, in the hope that
Ismail would be more loyal than either of the latter if he obtained
absolute power in the area. Selim so mistrusted Ismail, however.




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
314   that he found it impossible to do this, and so the clashes and dis¬
      putes continued while more and more lands fell out of cultivation
      and less and less food reached Istanbul.
        Selim now tried to pacify the Balkans by a new effort at direct
      action. The indecisive and incompetent Vani Mehmed Pasha
      was replaced by Ibrahim Pasha, governor and notable of Scutari
      and Berat, who was also appointed as commander-in-chief of
      the Ottoman forces fighting south of the Danube. In the spring of
      1804, Ibrahim Pasha arrived at Sofia > with a force of 30,000
      Albanians, hoping to suppress the bandits without antagonizing
      the notables. For a time, like his predecessors, he found it impos¬
      sible to do this since whenever he defeated bandits, they fled to
      the protection of Suleyman Agha and Hiiseyin Bey, notable of
      Philippopolis. He finally moved against them during the summer
      of 1804, and with the assistance of a large force of Nizam-i Jedid
      soldiers sent under the command of Abdurrahman Pasha, he
      drove out the main bandit force near Malkara on July 17,1804.^’

                          The Rise of Ismail Agha

        For the moment, eastern Bulgaria and the Balkan range were
      cleared. Abdurrahman Pasha returned to Anatolia and Ibrahim
      Pasha to Scutari in the fall of 1804. At the same time, Selim
      decided to make a new approach toward peace in the area by
      accepting the urgings of his advisers and appointing the principal
      notables to keep the peace in their own areas from that time
      forth. Ismail Agha was appointed governor of Silistria, in charge
      of order and security in eastern Bulgaria, and Pasvanoglu was
      made military governor of Vidin with the same assignment in
      the west. These appointments fitted in with Ismail’s plans, since
      for some time he had been expanding his power in the guise of a
      loyal Ottoman agent, so he immediately set to work to carry out
      Selim’s instructions. Pasvanoglu ignored his assignment, how¬
      ever, as he had ignored similar orders in the past. To show his
      scorn of the Sultan, he also began to intrigue to gain the throne
      for the Crimean Tatar prince Selim Giray and sent Manav Ibra¬
      him with a large army to raid Ismail’s territories around Rus-
      chuk, Hezargrad, and Shumla. While Ismail was busy defending
      himself against this attack, Suleyman Agha moved to his rear.




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
ravaged the eastern areas, and entirely cut off the caravans           315
coming from Istanbul via Varna to Ruschuk.’^^
  In July 1805, Bayrakdar Mustafa Agha, now Ismail’s chief
general, caught and besieged Manav Ibrahim at Tutrakan, on
the Danube halfway between Silistria and Ruschuk. Suleyman
Agha moved to assist him, arranging for his secret departure
from the besieged city in order to negotiate a formal alliance.
Since the Albanians in Manav Ibrahim’s force did not wish to
join Suleyman, Manav was forced reluctantly to reject the offer
and return to his men in Tutrakan. At this point Manav Ibrahim
made an agreement to ally himself with Ismail Agha against
Pasvanoglu. The besieged force then left the city and joined
Ismail’s army for a supreme effort against their former master.
But Manav’s men were not able to overcome their former habits.
They soon began to ravage the areas around their own camps and,
in addition, to cross the Danube and raid north into Wallachia,
whose prince, Constantine Ipsilanti, immediately complained to
Istanbul. Ismail Agha was left with little choice. Despite the mili¬
tary assistance offered by Manav Ibrahim, Ismail could not retain
his pose of allegiance to the Sultan so long as he remained in
Manav’s service, so he finally got Alemdar Mustafa to attack and
kill Manav and scatter his followers.^^
  With Pasvanoglu now occupied in Serbia, Ismail was able to
turn his full attention to Suleyman Agha, occupying most of his
territories in eastern Bulgaria up to the Black Sea and north into
the Dobruja during the course of 1805. He then continued his
advance through the Balkan Mountains. By the spring there
seemed little to stop him from occupying all of Thrace and cap¬
turing Edime if he wished. Although he advanced under the
pretext of securing revenge from Suleyman Agha, he had in fact
gone far beyond the Suleyman’s territories and built a state of
major proportions which could easily threaten the center of
Ottoman power in Istanbul.^^

                     Ali Pasha ofJanina {IV)

  In the meantime Ismail Agha’s actions in the east were par¬
alleled by those of Ali of Janina in the west. Veliuddin returned
from Rumelia in the fall of 1803 greatly strengthened by his




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
316   successful actions against the’bandits, not only in prestige but
      also in men enlisted in his cause from among the defeated ban¬
      dits, and in booty secured from them' as well as from the people
      of Thrace and Macedonia. The siege of Suli had continued. Its
      defenders had managed to hold out, mainly because of the food
      and arms they received from Russian and French agents at
      Parga. Ali now cleverly used Veliuddin’s successes to arouse
      Selim’s fear of foreign intervention in the Balkans and get
      official Ottoman support for the campai^. As a result, during the
      summer of 1803, he was joined by numerous local governors
      from Thessaly, Macedonia, and Bosnia. Their support finally
      made it possible for him to set up a complete blockade for the first
      time.^® In September, Veliuddin took the offensive, pushing the
      Suliotes into three small villages, where they began to suffer
      greatly from hunger and cold as the winter approached. Finally
      on December 25, they agreed to surrender on the same conditions
      offered them two years before. They were to leave Suli with their
      arms, ammunition, and property and were to be allowed to settle
      wherever they wished in Albania or elsewhere.^® As soon as the
      evacuation began, however, Ali moved to secure the revenge he
      had long sought. Most of the Suliotes were massacred as they left
      the shelter of their forts, and only a few managed to reach Russian
      protection at Parga. From there they went to settle in Corfu
      after signing an alliance with the Russians against Ali (July 2,
      1804).^^
        With the end of Suliote resistance, Ali was able to complete
      his conquest of the seacoast of Epirus and secure the allegiance of
      all the local beys, both Muslim and Christian. This frightened the
      Russians in Corfu, who rightly saw All’s increasing power as a
      direct threat to their position. They attempted to meet the
      challenge by building up a new league of All’s enemies, thus
      resuming the old Venetian policy of controlling the mainland by
      dividing its rulers. In June 1804, the beys of Paramythia and
      Margariti allied themselves with Mustafa Pasha of Delvino and,
      with Russian arms and munitions and the aid of three hundred
      Suliote refugees from Corfu, they moved to attack Ali on his home
      ground. The Porte at this time chose to remain neutral and left
      Ali to his own devices, ostensibly on the grounds that it could not




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
legally prevent Russia from aiding the league, actually because it         317
hoped, like the Russians, that the league would curb All’s power
and make him more amenable to its commands and wishes.
Within a short time, however, Ali conquered the league army and
forced its leaders to accept his suzerainty once again.
  Since Ibrahim Pasha had failed to accomplish much in Rumelia
during the summer of 1804, Selim ordered Ali himself to go in the
following year, and he agreed because the Suliotes were out of the
way. While Ismail Agha was building up his power in eastern
Bulgaria and Thrace, and Pasvanoglu was occupied in Serbia,
Ali was able to chase the bandits into the Macedonian mountains
and re-establish order and security. But, just as in 1802, he took
into his own army not only many of the bandits whom he defeated
but also large quantities of booty, including most of the cannons
found in the forts which he passed. As a result, after his return to
Albania in the fall of 1805, Rumelia was even less able to defend
itself than it had been before, while All’s power and prestige
increased immensely.'^® To reward Ali for his services, and also
to satisfy his demands without forcing him to revolt, Selim
appointed Veliuddin Pasha governor of the Morea and Muhtar
Pasha governor of Thessaly at Trikala, thus completing the
family’s control of Greece as well as much of Albania. Only
Attica, Boeotia, and Negreponte remained out of his dominion in
Greece, while his court in Janina reached new heights of wealth
and grandeur, and western adventurers in his service trained an
army second to none in the area.®® Ibrahim Pasha now was the
Porte’s last hope, and in 1806 he was appointed governor of
Rumelia for the second time, mainly in the hope of providing him
with the power and prestige needed to counter All’s empire.
But the hope was not realized. Ali of Janina was supreme in
Albania and Greece.


            The Serbian Revolution, 1802-1806
  To the north in Serbia, the years following the Peace of Amiens
saw an even more drastic erosion of the Sultan s authority             y
dahi tyranny finally drove the Serbs to open revolt.
   Following Hajji Mustafa Pasha’s death late in 1801, Selim




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                               s            4


318   attempted to -curb the yamaks' and restore direct Ottoman rule
      with an expedition led by Ebubekir Pasha, governor of Bosnia,
      who organized an army and moved to'prevent any further flow of
      supplies to the rebels from their sympathizers in Macedonia. The
      Sultan also requested the Austrian border authorities to prevent
      the flow of supplies to Belgrade from the north, and he appointed
      Hasan Pasha as the new governor of Belgrade, with the duty of
      securing the cooperation of the Serbs themselves. Pasvanoglu’s
      control of the area between Vidin and So^ia prevented the Sultan
      from mounting a major offensive dgainst the rebels or sending
      more than a token amount of arms and ammunition. But arms
      coming to the rayas from Ebubekir’s capital at Travnik, together
      with a supply from Austrian agents sent in the hope of using the
      expected revolt for their own ends, did provide encouragement for
      resistance. Yet Serbian aspirations still reached no further than
      to help their Ottoman master throw off the rebel yamaks and
      re-estahlish his direct control.®*
        In response to the threat of revolt, the dahis terrorized the
      population and executed hundreds of local leaders during Jan¬
      uary 1802, hoping to stifle resistance hy depriving the rayas of
      their natural leaders. But many Serbs escaped into the hills and
      joined the mountaineers (hayduks) who for a long time had re¬
      sisted established authority. They now began large-scale raids
      into the lowlands, attacking not only the yamaks and their of¬
      ficials but also the Turkish rayas and Spahis, who responded in
      kind. Thus was inaugurated a reign of terror which was to cause
      suffering and despair to all elements of the population, while at
      the same time transforming Serbian resistance to the yamaks into
      a revolt against the Sultan.®^
        These hayduk bands now grew into major resistance move¬
      ments in all parts of the province. On the whole they were inde¬
      pendent and spontaneous, responding to local grievances, and
      coordinating their efforts more by example than anything else.
      Of particular importance were the bands in the north western
      Serbian forest district of Shumadia, south of Belgrade between
      the Morava and the Kalubara. In 1802, they agreed to coordinate
      their efforts under the direction of a former soldier in the Aus¬
      trian army named Kara George, a pig merchant who previously




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                      X
had distinguished himself in the fights against the yamaks. They          319
soon achieved such success in Shumadia and wide repute through¬
out Serbia that early in 1804 the dahis tried to conciliate them by
promising that the princes alone would have the right to collect
taxes and that Turks would no longer live outside the cities, and
by offering to appoint Kara George as chief of all the princes in
return for Serbian acceptance of their rule.
  Kara George declared his agreement but demanded in return
that the dahis accept foreign guarantees of their promises as
well as a delay so he codld convoke an assembly of Serbian
notables to ratify the agreement. But the dahis rejected these
terms, in their probably wholly justified fear that Kara George
was only stalling for time to strengthen his forces in the Shum¬
adia and to extend his influence throughout Serbia.®^
  With the breakdown of negotiations, the rebels redoubled their
attacks on Ottoman officials, yamaks, Spahis and others consid¬
ered to be responsible for misrule. Still preserving the guise of
loyalty to the Sultan against the rebel yamaks, Kara George and
his followers received large quantities of arms and ammunitions
from Ebubekir of Nish and Constantine Ipsilanti of Bucharest as
well as from the mutesellim of Usitza. The arrival on March 12 of
an Ottoman firman declaring as legitimate the armed Serbian
resistance against yamak oppression, inviting all the officials and
people of Serbia to join them, and promising tax exemptions for
nine years following the conclusion of peace, gave impetus to the
movement. Four days later, Belgrade was put under siege, and
several forts were captured and their Turkish garrisons tom to
pieces. At the start of April 1804, Kara George had a force of
30,000 men under his command, most of whom were besieging
Belgrade, while the balance went through Shumadia disarming
Turks and forcing them to submit. By the end of the month, the
entire district was under Serbian control with the exception of ^
Belgrade itself.®^
 In the meantime, the yamak misrule and dahi massacres of the
 princes had led to similar uprisings elsewhere in Serbia. West of
 the Kalubara in northwest Serbia, the Serbs of Brankovina
 formed their own resistance movement under the leadership of
 Jacob Nenadovich, brother of one of the massacred princes of




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                              ^              4


320   that district. Help came from private sources in the Hapsburg
      dominions as well as from many Serbian emigres who now re¬
      turned to their homes to help. Here also the appeal was to clear
      the area of the yamak tyrants in order to prepare the way for the
      arrival of Ottoman troops who would join in an attack on the
      dahis in Belgrade. Munitions were secured from the Ottoman
      governor of Srebrnitsa, across the Drina in Bosnia, who long
      had been a foe of the yamaks in his own province. In addition
      a flow of arms came from Austrian officials north of the Danube
      although they officially refused to do an3d-hing for fear of offend¬
      ing the Sultan. The Austrian commander at Zemlin offered to
      mediate between the Serbs and dahis, but his offer was rejected
      on the grounds that the Serbs were fighting rebels against the
      Sultan and that surrender or death were, the only alternatives.
      By the end of April, the Serbs held most of the northwest corner
      of Serbia between the#Drina and the Save, including the impor¬
      tant towns of Valievo and Shabatz, although to secure their
      surrender, they had been compelled to allow their yamak garri¬
      sons to retire to Belgrade with all their arms and ammunition.*^
      In the meantime, the Serbian siege of the capital went on, with
      the yamaks resisting strongly while Hasan Pasha continued to
      maintain an uneasy neutrality. Shortages of food and supplies
      made it seem very likely that Kara George would soon attain his
      objective.
        While the rebels still expressed their loyalty to the Sultan,
      their continued successes frightened Hasan Pasha as well as the
      dahis, who Anally agreed to the proposal of the Austrian governor
      of Salvonia that he mediate a peaceful settlement of the dispute.
      On May 10, 1804, a meeting was held at Zemlin, with the Serbs
      represented by sixteen men, including Kara George and Arch¬
      bishop Mathiew Nenadovich, and the Ottomans by muhassil Ibra¬
      him Agha, chief of customs collections in the province, and
      Ibrahim Bey, lieutenant of Hasan Pasha. The Serbs demanded
      that the dahis be deprived of all power and the yamaks forbidden
      to hold any rural properties, in accordance with Ebubekir’s
      original reform orders issued in 1793. The Serbs would be offi¬
      cially pardoned by the Sultan, and orders would be issued pro-




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign ITars
hibiting the exaction of any vengeance from them once order was      321
restored. Kara George would provide the governor with a guard
of fifteen hundred men for his protection until the Sultan was
able to send a regular Ottoman force to take their place. The
province thereafter would be governed in accordance with Ebube-
kir’s reforms. The Ottoman governors would agree to accept the
elected princes as leaders of the rayas and a chief prince elected
from among them to represent them regularly with the Ottoman
authorities. Taxes would once again be collected by the princes
and delivered to the chief prince, who would turn them over to
the governor. There would be no arbitrary tax increases, and the
courts would be strictly administered in accordance with the law.
Orders would be issued guaranteeing free exercise of religion and
freedom to repair churches and monasteries as well as free trade
and communication within the province without interference by
taxes or other artificial barriers. In return for all these guar¬
antees, the Serbs promised to acknowledge again their loyalty to
the Sultan and to obey all his orders in full.
  The Ottoman representatives seemed agreeable to the Serbian
proposals, but the dahis in Belgrade took advantage of the
absence of the rebel chiefs to attack their strongholds around
the city, burning and pillaging raya houses as they went. When
news of this action reached the negotiators, the Serbs and Aus¬
trians reproached the Ottoman representatives, who could only
protest their lack of complicity. The Serbs then demanded that
Hasan Pasha turn the dahis over to them, and when he refused,
Kara George broke off the negotiations on the grounds that the
Porte would be unable to guarantee dahi obedience to the terms.
For the moment, the efforts to end the rebellion shifted to Istan¬
bul, where the Orthodox Patriarch made representations on be¬
half of the Archbishop of Belgrade, and the Russian minister
tried to intercede in favor of the rebels.*^®
  In Serbia the rebellion resumed during the summer of 1804.
The rebels now received considerable amounts of arms and money
from the merchants of Zemlin with the compliance of its Austrian
authorities. The rebel forces were transformed into a regular
army under the direction and leadership of Serbian officers sent




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
by the Hapsburgs. The hayduks began to attract the support of
Greek armatolis from Thessaly and Macedonia, many of whom
had been suppressed by Ali of Janina and were happy to find a
new outlet for their energies. This inaugurated a Greek interest
in the Serbian revolt which was shared by the Phanariote princes
of Wallachia and Moldavia.^^ For the first time also, efforts were
now made to secure Russian help, both directly and through the
efforts of Constantine Ipsilanti. At the end of July, a delegation of
three Serbs crossed the Danube on the way to St. Petersburg.
In February 1805, they returnedvwith the Czar’s promise to
promote their case in Istanbul.®®
  In the meantime the siege of the yamaks in the Belgrade citadel
continued. In mid-June 1804, Jacob Nenadovich and Kara George
led a combined force along the Danube to Rassarowitz, which they
captured after a short siege. They then moved on to Semendria.
At first they assured its garrison that it would not be attacked
since it had not participated in the misrule. But its defenders re¬
fused his demand that they confine themselves to the fort, so it
was also put under siege.®® Belgrade was therefore now entirely
circled by rebel troops, from the Save all the way around to the
Danube. Kara George and other Serbian leaders met with a group
of Ottoman officials from Belgrade and agents sent from the prov¬
inces of both Principalities and demanded that thereafter all the
forts of the province be garrisoned by Serbians and that the Porte
provide assistance against the yamaks continuing to operate in
the south. The Ottoman representatives said they had no author¬
ity to grant even these concessions, however, so nothing was ac¬
complished.®® The Serbs than moved to clear the yamaks out of
southern Serbia on their own, and a summer of heavy fighting
brought them success. The power of the yamaks and dahis was
finally destroyed outside Belgrade, and the Serbian movement
was greatly strengthened as a result.®*
  Selim then moved to settle the conflict before it got out of hand
and led to international complications. At the start of June, he
appointed Suleyman Agha, former muhassil of Belgrade, as its
new governor and named Ebubekir Pasha, then in Bosnia, as his
official plenipotentiary with authority to negotiate a final settle¬
ment with the rebels. Selim also instructed Ebubekir to use the




                 Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
occasion to end the power of the dahis and yamaks once and for        323
all. As soon as this news reached Kara George, he suspended hos¬
tilities to await Ebubekir’s arrival.
  Ebubekir was delayed during most of June by revolts among
the Bosnian yamaks, who sought to protect the interests of their
counterparts in Belgrade. But negotiations finally began in mid-
July. Included among the delegates were agents of the princes of
Moldavia and Wallachia, who had been instructed by the Sultan
to urge the Serbs to accept his terms. While these delegates pub¬
licly obeyed these instructions, in private those sent by Constan¬
tine Ipsilanti urged the Serbs to hold out and get Russian help.
In addition the dahis refused Ebubekir’s request that they evac¬
uate the fort, so talks had to be suspended until this condition
could be obtained by force. Ebubekir marched east along the Dan¬
ube, relieving and occupying Semendria while waiting for the
Serbs to accomplish their goal. The dahis still hoped to retain
their power and sent secret emissaries to Ebubekir proposing a
coordinated attack on the Serbs, but the proposal was rejected.^^
On August 5, Halil Agha, the four dahis, and their chief support¬
ers left the citadel by night and fled on the Danube toward safety
at Vidin. On August 7, they were intercepted and immediately
executed by the governor of New Orsova, thus removing from the
scene the principal fomenters of the revolt.
  Negotiations for a new agreement began as soon as the dahis
left Belgrade. The Serbs now demanded the following terms: (1)
The Sultan would recognize Kara George as chief of the Serbs,
with the sole right to levy and collect taxes and to direct the ad¬
ministration of the country; (2) no Turk would be allowed to set¬
tle anywhere in Serbia outside Belgrade without the permission
of both Kara George and the governor; (3) all Turkish customs
and justice officials in the provinces would be replaced by Serbs;
(4) all fortresses in the provinces would be garrisoned jointly by
equal numbers of Ottoman and Serbian troops, and Kara George
would be allowed to maintain a special personal guard of five hun¬
dred Serbians of his choice; (5) the Serbs would pay a regular
annual tribute of 500,000 piasters and would provide the Otto¬
man governor with funds sufficient for his own maintenance and
that of his staff; (6) and Ottoman fulfillment of the agreement




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                              \              4


324   would be guaranteed by a forfeign power. These points actually
      were no more than those agreed on earlier at Zemlin, and Ebube-
      kir was disposed to accept all of them except the last, which he
      felt constituted foreign intervention in an internal matter. On
      this point, the negotiations stalled in mid-September, and no
      agreement was reached.®^
        Nor did the flight of the dahis mean that the yamaks were
      entirely bereft of their power. In western Serbia along the Drina,
      they still held a number of forts and mountain strongholds from
      which they continued to ravage the surrounding areas as they
      had in the past. In Belgrade, leadership of the yamaks was as¬
      sumed by a mercenary named Gushanatz Ali, who managed to
      retain possession of the upper citadel while demanding that
      Ebubekir provide the back pay owed his men by the dahis before
      he left.
        Ebubekir now was trying to restore normal conditions to the
      province. The governorship was turned over to Suleyman Pasha,
      who confirmed the popularly elected princes and decreed that
      they would have the sole right to collect taxes. Efforts were made
      to get the Spahis to leave their fiefs and settle in the towns, where
      they would receive the tax revenues collected by the princes.®®
        But Ebubekir soon had to send a large number of his men back
      to Bosnia to curb its beys and Spahis and to meet Montenegrin
      raids from the south. The yamaks and their supporters in Bel¬
      grade took advantage of the absence of Ebubekir’s men to imprison
      him in his own palace and regain control of the citadel and part
      of the town. They began to attack Serbs in the streets and also
      to arouse Serbian-Turkish animosity in order to make impossible
      any agreement injurious to their interests. After forcing Ebube¬
      kir to empty his treasury to provide their overdue wages, they
      allowed him to leave and return to Bosnia with the remnants of
      his army.®^
        This did not mean that the yamaks now were in control of Bel¬
      grade, for they met resistance not only from Kara George’s Serbi¬
      ans, but also from Suleyman Pasha and his Ottoman garrison.
      During the winter and early spring of 1805, the yamaks devas¬
      tated the countryside and caused a new famine in Belgrade, but
      they lacked sufficient strength to overcome their opponents




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
entirely. Without Ebubekir’s assistance, Suleyman Pasha was             325
unable to eliminate them or stop their raids. So there was a stale¬
mate, with the province rapidly falling into anarchy. With Suley¬
man Pasha hardly able to defend himself against the yamaks, let
alone stop their ravages, Kara George and his supporters left
Belgrade and raised a new army in the area between Belgrade
and Shabatz, organizing and training them at Ravanitza, which
he made his capital for the time being.®* On May 7, an order ar¬
rived from the Sultan directing the Serbs to lay down their arms
and rely for protection on Suleyman Pasha and a large Ottoman
army already on the way, but in view of the continued yamak
raids, it was ignored. For the first time, the will of the Sultan had
been defied, and the uprising thus became a revolt.®® Neverthe¬
less Kara George decided to make a final attempt to negotiate a
settlement with the Porte. On May 14, 1805, Alexai Lazarevich,
Archbishop of Belgrade, and Stephen Yivkovich, a wealthy mer¬
chant, left for Istanbul with the Serbs’ final proposals. Since
Serbia had been decimated by three years of war and could no
longer afford to pay the taxes required by a regular province, it
would be lowered to the rank of a district, and the governor re¬
placed by a muhassil. The district would then be divided into
twelve communes, each ruled by an elected prince, with a grand
prince at Belgrade representing the Serbs in all dealings with the
muhassil and other Ottoman officials. All taxes would be collected
by agents of the princes, including those on fiefs, whose holders
thereafter would have to reside in Belgrade and receive their
revenues through the muhassil. The yamaks would no longer be
allowed to live in the province, and order and security would be
cared for jointly by the grand prince and the muhassil, both of
whom would be allowed to maintain armies for this purpose.^®®
  In Istanbul the news of Kara George’s new army and of up¬
risings in hitherto quiet southern Serbia at Nish and Krushevatz
finally forced the Sultan to consider the Serbs as rebels and to
plan more vigorous action against them. A full-scale expedition
against them was prepared, and all the governors and district
commanders in Bosnia, Macedonia, and Thrace were ordered to
prepare forces to join it. Hafiz Pasha, currently governor of Nish,
was appointed new governor of Belgrade, ostensibly to conduct




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
negotiations with the rebels but actually to command the expedi¬
tionary army which was to be assembled at Skopje. These orders
were actually sent three days before the Serbian delegation ar¬
rived from Belgrade, but they were kept secret, and negotiations
were begun so as not to warn the Serbs of the new danger.
  In Belgrade, Kara George waited impatiently for news of the
negotiations. In the meantime he was joined not only by large
numbers of Serbians but also by Christians from Bulgaria, Mon¬
tenegro, and Albania who came to help him.*®^ When no news
came from Istanbul by the end of May, he moved to take up posi¬
tions along the Drina and at Nish, to set up a defense against
possible attacks from the west or south. On June 15, 1805, he
took Krushevatz, northwest of Nish, and finally learned of the
Ottoman plans from a captured official. He immediately moved
west toward Bosnia, and on July 12 he met and defeated on the
Drina an Ottoman force on its way to join Hafiz Pasha at Nish.
Hafiz then left Skopje and headed for the Morava, where he hoped
to join the Bosnian force for a joint attack on the Serbs. Kara
George sent a force under Milenko Stoikovich to intercept him,
and at Ivankovatz, on the Morava, the two forces came together
on August 18. Hafiz tried to continue his pose as governor of Bel¬
grade, saying that he was going to his new post and offering to
make Stoikovich chief prince of Belgrade in return for his assist¬
ance. Stoikovich refused to allow him to pass, but in the hope of
avoiding an open conflict he used the pretext that since Hafiz
Pasha held his post by an Imperial order, he would have to use
the regular Imperial route, which went west of the Morava and
via Yagodina to the north. Hafiz replied that he was an Ottoman
vezir and did not have to ask the permission of brigands to take
any route he wished. But when he attacked the Serbs, he was
routed and suffered heavy losses; abandoning all his baggage and
artillery he fled back to Nish with the remnants of his army.^®^
Thus the first Ottoman effort to quell the rebels met an unex¬
pected and staggering defeat.
  The Serbs now felt they had nothing to fear from the Porte for
the moment since they controlled almost all of Serbia with the
exception of Belgrade and Semendria. So they turned to internal
affairs. At the end of August, a representative assembly (skupch-




                Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
tina) met at Borak and decided to set up a permanent senate as        327
the supreme administrative and legislative authority, with its
members chosen in each district by the local priests, monks, no¬
tables, and town majors. Kara George was elected as supreme
executive chief to carry out its .decisions.
  With this business out of the way, the sieges of Belgrade and
Semendria were renewed. On November 21,1805, Semendria fell.
The garrison was allowed to retire to Vidin, but all its artillery,
munitions, arms, and provisions were left to the victors. Since
Semendria had been the capital of the independent Serbian des-
potate in the fifteenth century, before its capture by Mehmed II,
its occupation had political as well as military significance. The
senate was transferred there and a regular independent govern¬
ment was established.'®^ One more province thus was lost to the
Sultan, and it seemed that little remained to prevent a complete
breakup of the Empire, in Europe as well as Asia. At this point
it was inevitable that the Ottomans should once again become the
focus of European diplomatic action.




                Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
              XIX. The Eastern Question
                     1802-1807




    With the Serbian rebels moving rapidly toward victory, their
    fate, as well as that of the entire Ottoman Empire, now fell into
i\ the hands of the European powers who had interests in the area,
    and diplomacy became as important as victories on the battlefield.
      The Peace of Amiens had given Selim III a second respite from
y   involvement in the wars of Europe, but this did not mean that he
    or his people were removed from the conflicts of European diplo¬
    macy. The most salient characteristic of Ottoman diplomacy in
    this period was a gradual reversal of the alliances molded by
    Bonaparte’s invasion of Egypt and a return to the more tradi¬
    tional bonds forged by longer-standing considerations of national
    self-interest. With the resumption of the war between Britain
    and France in 1803 and the entry of Russia and Austria into the
    Third Coalition two years later, it was inevitable that this rever¬
    sal should begin and that the currently neutral Porte should be
    pressured for support by both sides.^


                          Foreign Relations

      Istanbul once again was one of the few places in Europe where
    representatives of the combatants could and did live in uneasy
    propinquity, so it became a center of diplomatic intrigue on a
scale not seen there again until World War 11. As usual Bonaparte       329
was most active. As soon as relations with the Porte were restored
in 1802, he appointed as his new ambassador his former comrade
in arms in the Netherlands, General Brune, with the mission of
regaining Ottoman confidence and restoring France’s political
and economic position in the Levant as well as obtaining compen¬
sation for the losses suffered by French subjects in the Empire
during the war. In addition Horace Sebastiani was sent on a spe¬
cial mission to Istanbul and the Levant with the object of formu¬
lating long-range policies not only to regain France’s former posi¬
tion in the area but also to expand it through the Black Sea, east
across Anatolia, and west into Danubian Europe. New French
consulates were established in various places to promote these
new political and economic ambitions. One of the earliest results
of Sebastiani’s mission was a French effort to expand its political
influence in the Arab world by championing the Sultan’s Catholic
subjects there, thus adapting the policy followed by the Russians
toward the Orthodox since 1774. Brune cultivated connections at
the Porte, not only to learn of its plans but also to influence deci¬
sions which might run counter to the interests of his master. In
particular, Selim was urged to maintain a firm policy against the
autonomous notables then troubling him because of the possibil¬
ity that conciliation would lead to the triumph of persons who
were under the influence of France’s enemies. At the same time,
however, agents also were sent to the same notables to make cer¬
tain that if they did succeed, they would turn to France for assist¬
ance against the Porte.^
  Russia, on the other hand, had gained enormously from the
Peace of Amiens, and the Czar’s main objective now was to pre-
serve those gains. The 1799 alliance with the Porte assured Rus-
sia access through the Straits to the Mediterranean. This, com¬
bined with its protectorate over the Ionian Islands, gave it
predominant naval power in the Eastern Mediterranean as well
as in the Black Sea. While it stayed out of the renewed war be¬
tween Britain and France, it tried to use its neutrality and alli¬
ance with the Porte to further advance its position at the expense
of both. But this was essentially a passive policy. Czar Alexander
I was anxious to make a much more active approach. Fearing the




                   The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
      A
                                    \              I               ,     .   ♦   »

330          effect of the rapid restoration of the French diplomatic position in
             Istanbul, he decided that the only way to counter this possibility
             was to resume Catherine’s efforts to fan the flames of revolt in
      '1     the Balkans in order to force the Sultan to rely more and more on
             his powerful ally to the north. Of course, Alexander could not
             encourage this sort of activity openly since it clearly would nul-
      ^      lify the efforts of his ambassador, Italinsky, in Istanbul. So his
             agents worked covertly and silently to carry out his wishes in this
             respect.^
               Great Britain’s view of the situafidn in the Eastern Mediterra¬
             nean, on the other hand, changed considerably as a result of the
             war. Long-standing fears of French advances in the area now
             were supplemented by a new determination to keep Russia from
             using the new situation to advance its position within the Otto¬
             man Empire. But Britain could not act openly to oppose Russia’s
             desires because of London’s need to secure the Czar’s support
             against France in Europe. Britain therefore worked to frustrate
           / Russian ambitions by urging the Sultan to strengthen his empire
             internally and thus enable it to resist subversion and attacks
             without foreign assistance of any kind. Beyond this, the princi¬
             pal task of British statesmen at this time was to prevent relations
             between Russia and the Porte from reaching a point where a
             choice would have to be made between them.'*
               Sultan Selim was unhappy about having to continue to accept
             Russian protection and advice. The Czar had made peace with
             France in 1801 without consulting him in advance; he was aware
             that, despite its soft words, Russia was stirring up and helping
             revolts against him in Serbia and Greece. Russia had recently
             occupied Georgia and was beginning to threaten the Ottoman po¬
             sitions in the Caucasus and eastern Anatolia as well. Neverthe¬
             less Selim still did not wish for a complete break with Saint
             Petersburg because he knew this would mean a rupture with
             Great Britain as well —and he wanted above all London’s con¬
             tinued support against both Russia and France. Selim did not
             want to rely entirely on Bonaparte any more than he wanted to
             rely entirely on the Czar. So he worked to maintain a delicate
             balance between these interests —encouraging the French by
             admitting their diplomats, merchants, and agents, but at the




                              Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                   >/


same time avoiding any extreme positions or actions which might           331
drive off the British and the Russians.^
  Selim was in a very difficult position. It was hard to avoid
Italinsky’s persistent efforts to embrace the Porte more fully in the
protection of his master. In 1802, Italinsky managed to strengthen
the Russian position in the Empire by negotiating a new conven¬
tion with the Porte which replaced the vague "right of interces¬
sion” in the Principalities received in the Treaty of Aynah Kavak ^
(1779) by provisions which enabled Russia to control the appoint¬
ment and dismissal of the princes and thus to secure men favor-
able to its own interests. Princes thereafter were to be appointed
for seven-year terms by the Sultan with Russian consent, and no
prince could be dismissed before the end of his term without spe¬
cific Russian approval. All taxes introduced after 1773 were re¬
voked, and all offices were to be given to natives where possible,
with the Russians being given the right to intervene in Istanbul
whenever violations of these regulations were reported.
  Italinsky then secured the appointments as princes of Moldavia
and Wallachia for two close allies among the Phanariote families
of Istanbul, Alexander Moruzi and Constantine Ipsilanti - and
during the next few years, he was able to use their dependence on
him to expand Russian interests both in the Principalities and at
the Porte.® Ipsilanti in particular had given up the hope that the
Porte could effectively protect the Principalities from the raids of
the Danubian notables. Therefore he now sought to achieve real
protection by securing some sort of union of the Principalities and if"
then forming a strong army with Russian assistance. At the same
time, he made an agreement to gain the support of Ismail Agha
of Ruschuk, who was very happy to join any movement which
would help him against Pasvanoglu. Ipsilanti first sought Se¬
lim’s permission to organize an army but met with immediate
rejection. Selim still hesitated to provide infidels with arms which
might subsequently be used against Muslims. Ipsilanti then
sought Russian and Prussian intervention to obtain a reversal of
this decision but with no result not only because of Ottoman fears
but also because of Russian apprehension of the effect an inde¬
pendent Principalities army might have on its own plans in the
area. Ipsilanti finally turned to cooperation with the Serbian 4.




                   The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
332   rebels in the hope that they nfight paralyze Pasvanoglu’s ability
      to strike across the Danube/
        It was not until 1804 that Selim finally was forced to make a
      choice between the two contending blocks by the question of
      recognition of Bonaparte’s declaration of himself as Emperor.
      Since the Porte was one of the few countries of Europe to continue
      diplomatic recognition of France, Bonaparte insisted that Selim
      recognize the new empire in the hope that this would both break
      the diplomatic isolation forged by the 'I'piple Alliance and also so
      embroil the Porte with Britain and^Russia that it would be forced
      to ally itself with France once and for all. Bonaparte threatened
      to break relations if Selim refused recognition, while Britain and
      Russia threatened the same if he did. Selim tried to avoid the
      trap by stalling, telling Brune that he could not recognize Bona¬
      parte’s claim in advance of the rulers of Austria and Russia, since
      they were the only rulers of Europe with the status Bonaparte
      was now claiming—a far cry indeed from the former Ottoman
      claim to superiority among the rulers of Europe. At the same
      time, however, Selim secretly decided that if France continued to
      press the point, he would withhold recognition since Russia and
      Britain were in far better positions to attack than were the French
      at this time.®
        Brune attributed the Ottoman delays to anti-French ministers.
      Bonaparte tried to counteract this influence by writing a personal
      letter to the Sultan denying further ambitions in Egypt and
      Greece and recommending once again that the rebels be sup¬
      pressed and that direct Ottoman administration be established in
      Serbia, Egypt, S5n’ia, and the Holy Cities.® Throughout the sum¬
      mer of 1804, the arguments raged back and forth, and Ottoman
      recognition continued to be withheld. But at the same time, Selim
      allowed a series of Russian military convoys to pass through the
      Straits to reinforce their fleets in the Ionian Islands. On Novem¬
      ber 7, Bonaparte finally presented an ultimatum, demanding im¬
      mediate recognition of the Empire and also the closing of the
      Straits to Russian warships, and threatening a break in relations
      if these things were not done. Selim continued to avoid a definite
      answer, so on December 22, Brune left the French palace in Istan¬
      bul. He remained another four days in Istanbul in the hope that




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign IFars
                                                                      r,

Selim might respond to the pressure at the last minute, but to no          333
avail. As a result, he finally departed from the Ottoman capital
at the end of the month.
  With the suspension of relations between France and the Porte,
Russian influence reached new heights. French merchants and
proteges throughout the empire began to seek the protection of
other European powers. Russian warships and transports passed
regularly through the Straits. Italinsky moved to take advantage
of the situation by getting Selim to renew the 1799 alliance and
so bind the Porte to Saint Petersburg that another restoration of ^
French influence in Istanbul would be impossible. The subsequent
renewal of the old Anglo-Russian alliance against France (April
1805) intensified the Russian pressure on the Porte, and to this
was added a British claim for renewal of its alliance as well.
Italinsky also demanded that as part of the new agreement, the
Turks cooperate to expel France from Italy and some sort of au¬
tonomy be given to Serbia, Montenegro, and the Ionian Islands,
ostensibly to prevent further uprisings but actually to assure
that if the Ottoman Empire did break up, these provinces would
automatically gravitate to Russia. But the Porte was not over
anxious to revive the old alliances or to secure new ones. Selim
refused even to discuss the possibility of secret terms on the
grounds that he was still at peace with France. But he did
inform his negotiators that they could conclude a secret alliance
with the Russians if France declared war on them or on the
Porte. “
  Now faced with the threat of Ottoman adherence to the Euro¬
pean coalition against it, France moderated the demands which
had led to the break. Talleyrand ordered his agents in Egypt to
stop cooperating with Mohammad Ali against the Porte. The
demand for recognition of Bonaparte as Emperor was changed to
recognition as the Sultan’s equal, with the title of padishah, no
longer equal in Ottoman and western eyes alike to the rank of
Emperor enjoyed by the rulers of Russia and Austria. But now
Selim could only reply that he no longer could agree even to this
request because of threats of Britain and Russia. At the same
time, however, he did not wish to close the door to France entirely
and thus make himself wholly dependent on the Third Coalition.




                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
  In reply to the Russian demands, he said that he would agree only
  to a defensive alliance since the Porte was not then at war with
  France and did not wish to be dragged in as long as it was not
  openly attacked. He also refused to include clauses desired by
)( Russia allowing its intervention on behalf of the Sultan’s Orthodox
  subjects and its occupation of the Principalities and Britain’s
  occupation of Egypt to frustrate possible French action; and as a
  result of his continued stubbornness on these points, they were
  dropped.*^
    The Ottoman-Russian treaty of Alliance finally signed on Sep¬
  tember 23,1805, was for the most part a nine-year renewal of the
  defensive clauses of the 1799 treaty.The signatories agreed to
  act jointly in all diplomatic matters, to repel attacks against each
  other, to guarantee mutually the integrity of each other’s terri¬
  tories, and to act jointly to secure peace with their enemies. In
  the secret articles, Selim agreed to cooperate with the Triple
  Alliance’s war against France by facilitating the passage of
  Russian ships through the Straits, and by supporting Russian
  efforts to get other neutral states to join the alliance. He agreed
/ to rule justly in Albania and to allow the Russian ambassador in
^ Istanbul to intervene if complaints arose; to confirm the con¬
  tinued Russian occupation of the Ionian Islands, cooperate with
  Russia if necessary to prevent any other naval powers from
  entering the Black Sea, and to accept Russian help in defending
  the Straits if this became necessary. Thus it seemed that the
  Ottoman Empire was more firmly than ever in the unwelcome
  embrace of Russia.



                 Foreign Relations, 1805-1807
    The close relations between the Ottoman Empire and Russia
  did not last long. The news of Bonaparte’s victories over the
  armies of Austria and Russia at Ulm (October 17, 1805) and
  Austerlitz (December 2,1805) and of France’s acquisition of Istria
  and Dalmatia from Austria by virture of the Treaty of Pressburg
X (December 26, 1805) convinced Selim III that the Triple Alliance
  was dead and that he therefore was entirely free to ignore his
  agreements with its members — in fact, that he was bound to do so




                   Internal Revolts and Foreign IFars
in order to preserve his Empire in the light of Bonaparte’s ap¬          335
parent triumph in Europe. The French charge d’affaires in Istan¬
bul, Pierre Ruffin, followed up this news by promising France’s
help to regain the Crimea and assuring Selim that since Russia
was the enemy of France, Bonaparte would never make a separate
peace prejudicial to Ottoman interests. It was inevitable then that
Selim would reconsider his position, and in a short time he en¬
tirely suspended his negotiations with the British ambassador.*^
  Ruffin now moved to use the new situation in order to obtain
the long-desired Ottoman recognition of Bonaparte’s full imperial
title. The Russians and British used all their influence to prevent
this and to avoid a full Ottoman-French rapprochement. In this
they were strongly supported by the Moruzi and Ipsilanti Phan-
ariote families, who had a powerful influence over Ottoman
foreign policy by virtue of their control of the post of chief drago¬
man {Bash Terjuman) at the Porte as well as of the Principalities
of Moldavia and Wallachia. But at this point they were success¬
fully countered by the French partisans in the Sultan’s Council,
led by the Reis ul-Kuttab, the official historian {Vakaniivis)
Ahmed Vasif Efendi, who used successive reports of Bonaparte’s
recent military victories to win the Sultan over to his view. As a
result, at the end of February 1806, Selim officially recognized
Bonaparte as Emperor and dispatched his close friend Muhib
Efendi to France to establish the new relationship.*^
  With the backing of France, Selim moved to mobilize his armed
forces for a full-scale campaign against the Serbs, as well as to
guard against any hostile moves on the part of Russia or Great
Britain. Orders were issued for the confiscation of all arms in the 'A
possession of the rayas in Bulgaria, Macedonia, and the Princi¬
palities, in the wholly justified fear that they might easily rise/
to assist the Serbs or the Russians if conflict were to break out.
It was not long before Selim secured a fetva from the Sheyh ul-
Islam declaring the Serbian rebels to be enemies of Islam, and a
formal declaration of war against them followed. Ibrahim Pasha
of Scutari was named commander of the Ottoman expeditionary
force to be formed against them in Macedonia, and he was given
the sort of full and complete powers in the area that formerly
had been given only to Hakki Pasha in his war against the




                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
      X



336       bandits and'rebels. Hiisrev Mehmed Pasha, governor of Egypt
          during the time between the French evacuation and the rise of
          Mohammad Ali, was made governor of Bosnia, with the job of
          arranging a push against the rebels from the west, while Ibrahim
          Pasha was supposed to lead the main Ottoman army up the
          Morava into Serbia from the south. Finally, the Danubian for¬
          tresses were strengthened against possible Russian attacks
          through the Principalities.*®
            While the Ottoman empire openly mobilized through the spring
          and summer of 1806, the Russiahs, French, and Serbs moved
          ahead toward their own objectives. At the end of January, a
          squadron of six Russian ships of the line commanded by Vice
          Admiral Senyavin arrived at Corfu after a journey of over two
          months from the Baltic, with the immediate objective of pre¬
          venting a possible French attack on the Ionian Islands following
          Nelson’s death at Trafalgar.*^ At the same time, Bonaparte
          moved quickly to occupy his new possessions along the Adriatic.
          For him Dalmatia was less important in itself than it was as a
          gateway into the Balkans. In the north, through Bosnia, it would
          enable him to enter relations with the Serbian rebels. In the
          south, Cattaro would open the way to Albania, and through
          Albania was a route to the Ionian Islands, which he planned to
          build into an impregnable Mediterranean naval base easily able
          to rival and overawe the British base at Malta. From there it
          would be only a small step to lead the Greeks in revolution against
          the Sultan. Moreover, as a powerful neighbor of the Porte, Bona¬
          parte would be in a position easily to regain the traditional French
          position in the empire and shut out both the Russians and the
          British once and for all. And if the Ottoman empire should fall
          apart, the French garrison along the Adriatic would be in a good
          position to take France’s full share of the spoils.
            The Treaty of Pressburg ceded Dalmatia to the Kingdom of
          Italy, so it was from there that the occupation was directed and
          prepared, under the leadership of General Lauriston, who planned
          to occupy the ceded areas as the Austrians evacuated them by
          terms of the treaty in January and February of 1806.*® But as
          soon as Senyavin reached Corfu and learned about Pressburg, he
          realized the threat that a French occupation of Dalmatia would




                           Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
pose to the Russian position in the Balkans and prepared to           337
frustrate it. His first step was a successful effort to convince
Cattaro to reject the idea of occupation by revolutionary France.
Cattaro was an independent republic like Ragusa. It had accepted
protection and suzerainty from Venice and then from Austria
when it replaced Venice in the Adriatic area as a result of the
Treaty of Campo Formio. But now, under Russian pressure, its
leaders opposed Lauriston’s plans. Claiming that their Austrian
protector had no right to cede their territory, they asked for the
assistance of the Russian fleet and also of the formidable fighting
forces of Montenegro led by Prince-Bishop Peter I, himself a
Russian vassal maintained by an annual subsidy sent by the
Czar.i"
  In response to Cattaro’s request, Senyavin’s fleet sailed up and
down the Adriatic coast, effectively blocking any French effort to
move their forces from Italy to Dalmatia by sea. In response
Lauriston sent a land force under the command of his chief aide.
General Molitor, and it moved from Trieste south along the
Dalmatian coast during February, planning to occupy Cattaro
and Ragusa as soon as jxjssible. Croatia was passed with no
difficulty as the Austrian authorities there readily gave their
consent. After Knin and Zara were occupied, the French occupa¬
tion of Dalmatia was formally proclaimed.       But at this point
Molitor had to pause to await the arrival of the main French
army, which was on a forced march from Trieste under Lau¬
riston’s personal command.^® The delay proved costly to French
ambitions, for the Russians and Montenegrins moved rapidly to
forestall him in the south. Peter and his Montenegran army
descended into the Sutorina valley, a Russian squadron set up a
blockade of the Gulf of Cattaro, and Russian troops landed at
Castelnuovo, which the Austrians were compelled to surrender
to them along with the strategic forts of Risano and Cattaro.
During March and April, another squadron seized most of the
coastal islands and blockaded Ragusa and the other ports to
prevent the French from sending troops or supplies to them across
the Adriatic.21 Molitor bitterly criticized the Austrians for sur¬
rendering without a fight, but he decided not to move ahead to
contest the Russians for fear of a Russian advance through Wal-




                   The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
338   lachia and Bosnia to Croatia, Vhich would effectively cut off any
      possible retreat to the north. At this point the Ragusans, ever
      willing to blow freely with the winds, renounced their previous
      welcome of the news of Pressburg and of the French occupation
      of Zara and now sent supplies to Senyavin and recognized the
      Czar as their sole protector. While they publicly agreed to be
      absolutely neutral in the struggle between France and Russia, in
      fact they stalled negotiations with the Russians in the hope that
      the French would arrive in time to prefect them.
        Senyavin was effectively deceived, and while he passed the
      time negotiating endlessly with the Ragusans, Lauriston by¬
      passed Molitor, moved rapidly inland toward Ragusa, and finally
      occupied it (May 27), while Senyavin headed to sea and the in¬
      habitants put up token opposition in the hope of convincing the
      French to take only the outlying forts so that when and if the
      Russians returned, they would not attack the city itself.Molitor
      and Lauriston now combined their forces and prepared for the
      Russian reply, which was not long in coming. While the Mon¬
      tenegrins moved in with a large army, including many local
      inhabitants and Albanians, in mid-June the Russians landed a
      large expeditionary force and put Ragusa under a complete
      blockade. As its inhabitants and the French defenders began to
      suffer increasingly from famine as well as a constant Russian
      bombardment, surrender seemed imminent. But the arrival of
      Molitor (July 6) with reinforcements saved the day. Lauriston
      now was able to beat back the allied attacks and retain French
      control of the city. With the failure of the siege of Ragusa, Senya¬
      vin and his fleet withdrew to the Gulf of Cattaro and pondered
      their next move.^^
        It was at this point that the entire situation was changed, for
      Senyavin received the news that the Czar’s representative in
      Paris, Pierre d’Oubril, had just signed an agreement with Bona¬
      parte (July 20, 1806) by which the Russian-French war would be
      brought to an end and Russia would leave Dalmatia to the French
      in return for Bonaparte’s promise to leave Germany. In early
      August, d’Oubril directly instructed Senyavin to leave the Adri¬
      atic and Dalmatia in accordance with this agreement. While the
      Admiral did pull his forces out of the Dalmatian islands, he




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
delayed compliance at Cattaro on the grounds that he could not           339
leave his post until he received official notification of ratification
from Saint Petersburg.^'* As things turned out, this was indeed a
wise move on the part of Senyavin.

                                             >-C-


                               Serbia
  Much of the Czar’s reaction to the d’Oubril Treaty was deter¬
mined by activities in Serbia and Istanbul in the months since
Senyavin had arrived in the Adriatic. In Serbia the Ottoman
military preparations had caused Kara George to convoke on
December 1, 1805, "a second great assembly of all the principal
Serbian chiefs at the former palace of the Ottoman governor at
Semendria. Warning of the danger of a massive Ottoman attack
from all sides, he was able to get the assembly to agree to the
immediate formation of a national army, put under strict dis¬
cipline and trained by European officers as well as Serbs trained
in the Austrian and Russian armies. This new force was to be
maintained by a decentralized financial system, with each unit
paid and provisioned by a commune or district specifically as¬
signed to it. Indiscriminate demands for food by soldiers were
strictly forbidden under the penalty of death, and the siege of
Belgrade was pushed with new vigor in the hope that it might
be taken and fortified before the expected Ottoman offensive
could begin.^^
  The remainder of the winter of 1805-1806 was spent raising
 and training the new army and fortifying the strategic positions
 through which the Ottoman armies would have to pass to enter
 the province. In the east and south, this was relatively easy to
 accomplish since geography narrowed the possible invasion
 routes to a few places. To defend the Morava Valley against any
 attack from Macedonia or Bulgaria, a fort was established at
 Deligrad, thirty miles north of Nish, and in the rear Parachin
 and Krushevatz were siezed and garrisoned. In the Danube
 Valley, the choice fell on the island of Porech, one hundred miles
 east of Belgrade, which commanded all navigation at a point
 where the river rushes out of the Iron Gates on its way to the
 south. The western frontier was more difficult to prepare since




                    The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
there were no such natural dtefense points against attacks across
the Drina from Bosnia, but several small forts were established
along the Drina, and units were sent out from them to patrol
the river.
  Nor did Kara George neglect his diplomatic preparations. The
Serbian Senate quickly petitioned the Czar for arms and ammuni¬
tion as well as intervention in their behalf at the Porte. This put
the Russians in a difficult position. In Europe, their old friend
Austria had been humiliated, and the Peace of Pressburg had put
France in a position where it could threaten the Balkans once
again. The Serbs were intimating that they would turn to the
French if Russia did not intervene, so the Czar was in a position
where his entire influence among the southern Slavs would be
placed in jeopardy if assistance to the Serbs continued to be with¬
held for fear of the Ottoman reaction. In response the Czar was
considering a full-scale military occupation of southeastern
Europe. During 1805, an army had been prepared in Bessarabia
under the command of General Michelson. Selim’s recognition of
Bonaparte’s empire and the Austrian surrender of Dalmatia had
moved the Czar’s foreign minister, Czartoryski, to advise im¬
mediate preventative occupation of the Principalities, but Czar
Alexander decided against this for the moment until there was
more obvious evidence of Ottoman hostility to Russia. However,
starting in March 1806, under British pressure, a series of stiff
notes were sent to the Porte demanding an end to Ottoman mili¬
tary preparations and guarantees against any further favors to
France, with an implied threat of invasion if these measures were
not carried out at once.
  At this point, the Czar was willing to accept a rapprochement
with France if Bonaparte would be content with supremacy in
western Europe and would evacuate Dalmatia and accept con¬
tinued Russian protection of the Ottoman Empire. Russia would
then arrange to separate Serbia, Montenegro, Herzegovina,
Albania, and Macedonia from the Ottoman Empire and establish
them as independent monarchies under its suzerainty and pro¬
tection. D’Oubril originally had been sent to Paris to secure
French evacuation of Dalmatia and agreement to the establish¬
ment of independent Slavic states in the Balkans as the first




                 Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                        Y

step toward fulfillment of this plan.^^ Selim reacted by prohibiting        341
Russian warships from passing through the Straits on the pretext
that they were involved in offensive actions against France and
were not therefore covered by the Ottoman-Russian defensive
alliance. Italinsky refused to agree, on the grounds that the treaty
covered all types of ships,    and for the moment the Sultan—
satisfied with form rather than substance — did nothing to en¬
force his prohibition.^®
  Selim now also attempted to lessen the influence of foreign
agents on his non-Muslinl subjects, particularly that of Russia
among the Orthodox Slavs and Greeks, by severely limiting their
traditional capitulations right to give orders (herats) of protection
which effectively removed their proteges from the jurisdiction of
Ottoman laws. Such patents thereafter were to be limited only to
Ottoman subjects in the active service of foreign consulates and
embassies; all other persons were given only a very short time to
surrender their patents or become liable to the confiscation of
their property.^® These measures, combined with Selim’s con¬
tinued refusal to end his preparations against the Serbs, convinced
the Czar that the Porte was now under effective French control
and that only drastic action could prevent further French ad¬
vances in the east. Alexander therefore decided to make one last
effort to get the Ottomans to accept the Serbian demands, and if
that did not work to abandon caution and give full assistance to
the Serbs. Kara George and Selim were advised to forego all
military action and to accept Russian mediation in order to
secure a peaceful solution.®®
  While Russia hardened its position toward the Porte in re¬
sponse to Serbian pressure, Kara George also sent agents to
Vienna to secure military and financial assistance from his most
immediate neighbor to the north. But Emperor Francis II was
even more anxious than the Czar to avoid providing open assist¬
ance. With Russian agents already fanning out in the Principali¬
ties and in Serbia, and with the French moving into Dalmatia,
Francis felt that a successful Serbian revolt could only help one
or both of these powers at the expense of Austrian influence in
the area, and that such an event might also cause new unrest
among his own Serbian subjects resident in southern Hungary.




                   The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
342   So from Vienna came advice to have recourse to the Sultan while
      trusting in Hapsburg intervention at the Porte to secure the
      desired results.In response Kara George sent a new petition
      to Istanbul (February 1806), repeating previous professions of
      loyalty and willingness to pay tribute and asking only for an end
      to the tyranny of the yamaks. At the same time, the Emperor
      wrote a personal letter to the Sultan asking him to suspend
      hostilities and give clemency to the rebels and offering Austrian
      mediation to end the dispute. In April orders were issued to all
      Austrian frontier authorites to allow free passage to all unarmed
      Serbs wishing to cross the Danube to escape possible vengeance
      in the event of an Ottoman victory over Kara George.®^ A nega¬
      tive Ottoman response therefore was clearly anticipated.
        It was not long in coming. Selim III refused to accept all offers
      of mediation. Supported and encouraged by France, he declared
      that if the Serbs wished to resume their former loyalty, he would
      accept it without malice; but they would have to make such a
      move themselves without foreign mediation or protection since
      that would compromise Ottoman sovereignty in the area. With
      French support Selim was certain that he could avoid foreign
      intervention and force a direct settlement with the rebels on his
      terms.^^
        But as spring turned into summer, nothing of significance
      resulted. The Ottoman armies preparing in Bosnia and Mace¬
      donia did no more than attempt a few raids into Serbia, and they
      were quickly pushed back by the rebel defenders. The only violent
      conflicts came in Belgrade, when the yamaks began to make
      destructive sorties into the town and its environs, and the Serbs
      made a number of unsuccessful attempts to storm the ramparts
      of the Citadel, where their enemies were entrenched.^"* But with
      the threat from the Porte persisting, such a respite could only
      stimulate the Serbs to greater efforts. Kara George took ad¬
      vantage of the situation to continue to build up and train his
      army and strengthen his defenses. In June a Russian officer
      arrived with instructions to examine the Serbian position and
      find out what was needed, but he brought only hopes and prom¬
      ises for the future.^^ Kara George therefore decided to make
      another effort at direct reconciliation with the Sultan, this time




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign IFars
sending as his agent Peter Ichko, former dragoman in the Otto¬       343
man legations in Vienna and Berlin and now resident in Zemlin,
across the Danube from Belgrade. Kara George clearly hoped that
since Ichko knew Turkish well and was a close acquaintance of a
number of high Ottoman officials, he would be more successful
in presenting the Serbian point of view and getting a favorable
response than the foreign diplomats had been. While Ichko was
authorized to state that the Serbs still were willing to recognize
Ottoman suzerainty and pay a fixed annual tribute, Kara George
now added the stipulation 'that he would allow an Ottoman agent
to come to Belgrade only to collect the tribute, and all other ad¬
ministrative and''military tasks would be cared for by Serbs. In
other words, the demand now was for full autonomy, with tribute
remaining as the only direct tie with the Porte. All Ottoman
troops, not just the yamaks, would have to leave the province, and
Serbs would man all forts in the future.^® These conditions were
not acceptable to the Sultan.
  As the summer progressed, whatever military contacts did
occur between the Ottomans and the Serbs made it seem very
unlikely that the Sultan would have an easy job suppressing his
recalcitrant subjects if he chose to do so on a large scale. Early
in May the main Ottoman army moved north from Skopje and
began to besiege Nish under the leadership of Ibrahim Pasha.
But the Serbs successfully held out, and the entire Ottoman
advance from Macedonia was stalled for the rest of the summer.^^
In July and August the attack from Bosnia met a similar fate.
Crossing the Drina in large numbers, the Bosnian army advanced
slowly in two columns, one heading toward Shabatz and the other
moving to relieve the garrison at Belgrade. On July 23, Shabatz
was taken, but on August 13, Kara George struck at the main
Ottoman force at Mishar, forcing the survivors to flee toward
the Save and Drina and capturing a large number of prisoners
and much booty. When news of this action reached Nish, Ibrahim
Pasha gave up the siege and returned to the south; Shabatz was
abandoned, and Serbia once again was largely free of foreign
occupation. Autonomous Serbia thus had successfully defeated
all the Ottoman efforts made to force it into obedience once
again.




                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
344     French Activities. During the spring and summer of 1806,
      Bonaparte moved to counter Russia’s diplomatic advances on
      two fronts. His agents fanned out through the Balkans to extend
      France’s political and economic interests and counter the activi¬
      ties of Russia’s agents and friends. In the Principalities, F. Rein-
      hard became French consul general in Bucharest. He began to
      develop latent pro-French sentiment among the native boyars,
      most of whom resented the pro-Russian policies of Moruzi and
      Ipsilanti.^® In Jassy, St. Luce worked with some success to frus¬
      trate Ipsilanti’s efforts to send provisions to the Russian troops
      massed on the other side of the Dniester and to get Kara George
      to seek direct Russian assistance for his revolt.^® To the south,
      adjutant commanders Charroy Bailleul and A. Meriage were
      sent to reside with Bayrakdar Mustafa, Pasha at Ruschuk and
      Pasvanoglu at Vidin, respectively.'** In the west, Pierre David
      was sent from Dalmatia to Travnik as French consul in Bosnia,
      Serbia, and Montenegro. He was particularly successful in se¬
      curing the sympathy and assistance of the Muslim beys, who
      bitterly resented the new raya mood of independence rising in
      response to the Russian urgings. David established a vice-consul
      at Ibrahim Pasha’s capital of Scutari to get his assistance against
      the Russians and Montenegrins if it should prove necessary.^^
      In Albania, Frangois Pouqueville and Julien Bessieres visited
      Ali Pasha in Janina, and they quickly secured his promise of
      support against the Russians in Corfu and Parga. While Bessieres
      returned to Paris with Ali’s amicable letters to Bonaparte,
      Pouqueville remained in Janina for some time to strengthen the
      new relationship."*^ The only serious competition with these
      efforts came from a British agent, J. P. Morier, who visited Scu¬
      tari, Berat, and Janina several times between 1804 and 1806.
      But while he had some success with Ibrahim Pasha and Kara
      Mustafa because of their reliance on Russia for help against Ali
      of Janina, he made no progress at all with Ali Pasha because of
      Russia’s help to his enemies. As a result, Pouqueville had a clear
      field. 4"*
         On May 2, Bonaparte pushed to extend his influence in Istanbul
      by appointing as ambassador his old friend, Horace Sebastiani,
      with the tasks of securing alliances with both Turkey and Iran




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
and arranging for Ottoman cooperation with the army in Dal¬           345
matia to push the Russians out of Montenegro and Albania and
end their influence in Greece and the Principalities once and for
all. He was also to secure closure of the Straits to Russian and
British ships and continue to press French claims for Ottoman
compensation for damages suffered by its subjects during the war
of the Triple Alliance. These were to be reduced in amount, how¬
ever, and in return for their payment France would agree to
allow increases in Ottoman customs duties on its goods in order
to compensate the Porte for the continuing drop in the value of its
currency. Sebastiani also was to support Pouqueville’s efforts
with Ali of Janina with the idea that he might at some time
represent French interests in the Adriatic area. He was instructed
to convince the Porte that France was moving into the Adriatic
only to keep the Russians out and to end Montenegran aid to the
Serbs, not to take or threaten Ottoman territory. He also was to
urge Selim to suppress the Serbian rebels and intervene in the
Principalities in order to end the possibility of Russian inter¬
vention in those places.



                     The Edirne Incident
  With the Serb rebels defeating the best armies which could
be sent against them, with the Montenegrins cooperating with
the Russians in their support, with powerful French armies
in occupation of Dalmatia and Ragusa, with Ali of Janina, Pas-
vanoglu, and Tirsinikli Ismail Agha extending their dominions
in Albania, Greece, Macedonia, Bulgaria, and Thrace, and with
the British, French, and Russians all combining professions of
friendship with threats of attack, Selim was in a quandary.
Danger lurked whichever way he chose to turn.
  To add to his difficulties, a dangerous new threat arose much
closer to home during the summer of 1806, making it impossible
for him to deal adequately with any of his problems. During the
previous year, Tirsiniklioglu Ismail Agha, ayan of Ruschuk, had
built up a major state in eastern Bulgaria and Thrace. This put
him in a position to threaten Istanbul and Edirne if he chose to
do so. Up to this time his ambitions had been limited entirely to




                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
346   personal aggrandizement, whfch he achieved under the guise of
      defending the Porte against Pasvanoglu and the other notables
      who refused to obey the Sultan. He^ had not been interested in
      internal Ottoman politics and had made no move to oppose or
      support Selim’s reforms. But with Selim’s order in 1805 for the
      organization of a Nizam-i Jedid army in Edirne through general
      conscription in the Balkans, this situation changed.^®
        At this point the Grand Vezir, Hafiz Ismail Pasha, moved
      secretly to use Ismail Agha for his owri^ ends. An agreement was
      made by which Ismail would capthre Edirne, march to Istanbul
      with his army and allies, and there help the Grand Vezir elimi¬
      nate his enemies and the Nizam-i Jedid. In return, Ismail Agha
      would be given large subsidies as well as an appointment as
      governor of Rumelia in the new order which would follow. Ismail
      Agha thus became a principal supporter of reaction and a threat
      to the capital. In early June he began to march toward Edirne
      with an army of 80,000 men, together with units sent by the
      notables of Macedonia and Thrace who supported him in his new
      effort.^’^
         In the meantime, the reform faction in the capital had arranged
      for the commander of the Nizam-i Jedid army. Kadi Abdurrah¬
      man Pasha, to come to Uskiidar. There he assembled 24,000 of
      his best men from all over Anatolia, ostensibly for service against
      the Serbian rebels but actually to provide the reformers with
      military strength in the capital in case their opponents attempted
      to use the Janissaries against them.^® On June 20, Selim ordered
      him to lead this army to Edirne, where he was to suppress the
      Bostanji corps, now ravaging the area in the guise of keeping
      order. He then was to leave half of his men to defend the city
      against Ismail Agha and go with the rest of his force to Skopje to
      assist the expedition against the Serbs. On his return, he would
      reorganize the whole Bostanji corps, limiting it to 1,000 men
      under strict discipline and with high salaries, so they would no
      longer have any desire or reason to steal. Instead of setting out
      at once, however, Abdurrahman remained in Istanbul for over a
      month putting on demonstrations of the new corps for the Sultan,
      and it was not until August 5 that he and his men finally set out
      for Edirne.'*^




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
  The Grand Vezir and Ismail Agha took advantage of the delay        347
to prepare their resistance in Thrace. Ismail Agha formed a
coalition of its main notables and brigands and got them to with¬
hold supplies intended for the new army and to attack the army
as it passed through their, territories. With letters of protest
inspired by the Grand Vezir and Ismail Agha coming in from all
over Thrace and Macedonia, Selim responded to the news of these
events by ordering Abdurrahman Pasha to stop his advance and
withdraw to Silivri to await further orders.^® Shortly thereafter
the Sultan dismissed him as commander of the Nizam-i Jedid
and replaced him with Ebubekir Pasha, who was ordered to take
the army back td Anatolia as soon as possible. Edirne remained
in the hands of the rebels, and there was nothing to stop Ismail
Agha from marching on Istanbul.
  How much had been lost by the Sultan’s capitulation was
realized shortly afterwards, when the news arrived that on
August 16 Ismail Agha had been assassinated by an agent of
Kadi Abdurrahman Pasha. Shortly afterwards, Ismail’s chief
subordinates elected as his successor Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha,
notable of Hezargrad and his master’s chief commander in the
wars against Suleyman Agha and Pasvanoglu. Pasvanoglu im¬
mediately moved to take advantage of Ismail’s death, and Bay¬
rakdar was forced to withdraw all his troops from Thrace and to
secure Ottoman support by paying his master’s overdue taxes
and tribute to Istanbul. Selim was quite impressed with Bayrak¬
dar Mustafa, but he did not want him to be as powerful as Ismail.
So although accepting him as ayan of Ruschuk, he withheld
recognition for Ismail’s second post as ayan of Tirnovo, and gave
it instead to a local notable as a tax farm. Ebubekir Pasha was
appointed governor of Silistria with the specific task of securing
Mustafa Pasha’s cooperation, but he was prevented from be¬
coming too powerful or independent by building up his opponents
in the area and encouraging clashes among them. Ebubekir now
began to support the claims of Ismail’s other lieutenant. Rose
Ahmed Efendi, who contested Mustafa’s right to supremacy in
their master’s house.^*
  Mustafa was faced with a dilemma. He did not wish to defy
the wishes of the Sultan openly, but at the same time he was




                 The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
348   determined to inherit Ismail’s entire realm north of the Balkan
      Mountains. So he moved to counter Ebubekir’s efforts by getting
      all the local ayans to declare their'support for him again and
      demand Ebubekir’s removal as governor. In response Selim re¬
      placed Ebubekir with Laz Ahmed Agha, previously a bitter
      opponent of Ismail’s. Mustafa Pasha declared he would not accept
      this change unless he was confirmed as ayan of Tirnova and
      Sistova and promised a free hand in the entire province of Silis-
      tria. So Selim appointed the military governor of Khotzim,
      Mehmed Pasha, as governor of Silistria with instructions to use
      Yilhk Suleyman Agha, now ayan of Ibrail, to counter Mustafa’s
      rising power. Suleyman immediately moved against Mustafa,
      taking Yeni Pazar and Silistria and preparing to march to Rus-
      chuk with an army of about 1,000 men. But Mustafa was too fast
      for him. Gathering the support of Ismail’s old subordinates, he
      occupied Silistria by a surprise night attack and forced Suleyman
      Agha to escape to Ibrail, which was placed under siege. Mustafa
      then moved quickly to follow up his advantage. By the end of
      1806, he held all of the Silistrian province and had eliminated
      the few notables who supported Suleyman or refused to recognize
      his authority. Selim now had no choice. Just as he had recognized
      Ismail’s conquests as a means of controlling him, now Selim ac¬
      cepted Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha and his subordinates as nota¬
      bles of the important cities in central and eastern Bulgaria.^^
      For the moment at least, Baju-akdar turned his attention to in¬
      ternal consolidation, and the direct threat to Istanbul disap¬
      peared. Thrace remained under direct Ottoman administration,
      and the kind of menace posed by Ismail Agha no longer troubled
      the Sultan. But this relief was accomplished at a great price. The
      men of the Nizam-i Jedid had been cruelly betrayed. Power had
      been placed in the hands of men who might pose even greater
      threats to the Sultan than had Ismail Agha once they had con¬
      solidated their positions and prepared their forces. Selim in fact
      had administered to the entire Nizam-i Jedid and to its sup¬
      porters a blow from which they would not recover. And in the
      process he had doomed himself.
        The immediate effect of the Edirne Incident was to stir the
      Russians to open attack. Czar Alexander now was convinced




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
that the Ottoman Empire was on the point of collapse. With the            349
Serbian victories seemingly driving the Porte closer and closer
to Bonaparte, he resolved to take drastic action to save Russia’s
position in the Balkans. Instructions went out to General Michel-
son to prepare his army for an immediate push into the Balkans
and to provide officers and weapons to the Serbian rebels in order
to assure their victory and make certain that they would be
firmly committed to the Russian cause. Since the d’Oubril treaty
did not secure French withdrawal from Dalmatia, it was finally
rejected by the Czar, and an order was sent to Senyavin to remain/^
at Cattaro and expel the French from Dalmatia by force. Senyavin y
immediately resumed the siege of Ragusa, and he moved to re- ^
occupy the evacuated Dalmatian Islands. General Marmont,
now in full command of the French forces there, took most of his
army to Castelnuovo in the hope of driving the Russians out
before they could be reinforced. But as winter arrived, neither
attack had succeeded. Ragusa and most of Dalmatia remained
under firm French control, and this pushed both the Czar and the
Sultan to important new policy decisions.
  In the meantime, events moved toward an ominous climax in
Istanbul and the Principalities. Sebastiani arrived in Istanbul
on August 15. With Bonaparte’s prestige and money behind him,
he soon became the most influential foreign representative at
the Porte.And repeating his assurances of French assistance,
it was not long before he was able to get the Sultan to decide to
make a new effort against the Serbs as well as to do something ^
about the situation in the Principalities where the princes were ^
now openly under Russian control. As a result when Ichko reached
Istanbul with Kara George’s new proposals, he was completely
ignored. Selim went on to dismiss Ipsilanti and Moruzi on the         K
grounds of treasonable complicity with the Serbs and Russians.
He replaced them in Wallachia and Moldavia with their pro-
French Phanariote rivals, Charles Callimachi and Alexander
Suzzo, respectively. Ipsilanti’s property in Istanbul was con¬
fiscated and his father executed, so he fled to Transylvania and
from there went to Belgrade, hoping to arrange for Serbian co¬
operation with a Russian move into the Principalities. Moruzi
fled to Mustafa Bayrakdar Pasha at Ruschuk and joined his




                 The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
350   entourage.^^ These dismissals Were clear violations of the Turko-
      Russian convention of 1802, since the princes had been removed
      before the expiration of their terms and without Russian consent.
      Italinsky immediately sent a vigorous protest to the Porte, de¬
      manding that the Sultan restore the princes, end all restrictions
      on Russian movements through the Straits, and renew his alli¬
      ance with Great Britain, with the threat of open Russian occupa¬
      tion of the Principalities if these demands were not met. Up to
      this point, Britain had sternly refused, to allow a preventative
      Russian occupation of the Princip^ilities, but Selim’s deposition
      of the princes provided the Czar with a convenient pretext to
      compel British support. Arbuthnot therefore now supported the
      Russian demands and added his own grievances concerning
      Selim’s favoritism in regard to the berats and the customs in¬
      creases. However he still hoped to forestall Russian intervention
      by pressuring the Sultan to comply with Italinsky’s demands.
      Sebastiani tried to bring the crisis to a head by demanding that
      the Sultan either stop the passage of Russian troops through the
      Straits or allow the French army to move from Dalmatia through
      Bosnia and Serbia in order to suppress the Serbs and fight the
      Russians on the Danube.^®
       At this point Selim received the news of his army’s failures
      against the Serbs, and he decided that before attempting to re¬
      sist the Russian and British demands, he would have to settle
      the two main issues that were dividing the empire internally,
      the Serbian revolution and the Nizam-i Jedid reforms. So on
      September 10, he received Ichko in the company of the Russian
      ambassador and agreed to all the rebel demands. The next day
      Ichko was sent back to Belgrade in the company of Hasan Bey
      of Nish, who was appointed muhassil of Belgrade with authority
      to present Selim’s offer to Kara George and to sign a convention
      if the terms were agreeable. In addition, to show his good faith,
      Selim issued orders incorporating the Serbian demands in antici¬
      pation of agreement. A full amnesty was granted to all the rebels
      and their supporters. The province thereafter would be admin¬
      istered by their supreme prince and the twelve district princes
      already elected. All the yamaks as well as the Ottoman adminis¬
      trative officers were ordered to leave as soon as possible. Aside




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign VTars
from the muhassil, the only Ottoman troops left in Serbia would      351
be 300 regulars assigned to garrison the citadel of Belgrade along
with 500 Serbs; all other forts would be manned wholly by natives.
The Serbian government would receive all revenues of the prov¬
ince except for those of the, fiefs, which would be administered
by Serbs, while the Spahis remained in Belgrade and collected
their revenues through the muhassil. In return the Serbs would
continue to acknowledge the Sultan’s suzerainty and pay an
annual tribute of 6,000,000 akches to the Porte.
  Four days later Selim acted to solve his political problems at
home by giving in to the demands of the reactionaries. Ismail
Hafiz Pasha, a cdnservative, was replaced as Grand Vezir by one
of the leading opponents of the Nizam-i Jedid, Janissary Agha
Ibrahim Hilmi Pasha. Mehmed Ataullah Efendi, one of the most
reactionary members of the Ulema, was made Sheyh ul-Islam.
The Nizam-i Jedid reforms were suspended, and assurances
were given that the new army would no longer be used for mili¬
tary campaigns. All the rebellious notables still in Edirne were
pardoned and given large subsidies in return for their agreement
to return to their homes and provide military assistance to the
Ottoman army.^®



            New War with Russia and Britain
  While the Ottoman government was in a state of flux, with
reforming ministers and their subordinates being replaced
en masse, nothing was done to answer Italinsky’s note. So on
September 22, he sent a second one, stating that the British navy
in the Mediterranean and the Russian army on the Dniester were
preparing to come to Turkey’s assistance if the French attacked
but that these forces "might be used for other purposes” if the
Porte’s "hostile” policies were not changed. Four days later Selim
replied in a conciliatory manner on the matters of tariffs and
berats but said nothing to change his earlier declarations on the
passage of Russian warships through the Straits, and he added
that he could not restore the princes because they had engaged
in treasonable activities against him. In addition he continued
to refuse further negotiations on a renewal of the Anglo-Turkish




                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
      V


352       alliance.^^ On September 28, Ftalinsky learned for the first time
          of the Czar’s intention to invade the Principalities regardless of
          the Sultan’s reply, so he answered Selim’s note by repeating his
          demands and threats in full without any concessions. Arbuthnot
          supported him in a similar note, still hoping to pressure the Porte
          into concessions which would avoid war.®® Sebastiani continued
          to urge the Sultan to defy the Russians, assuring him that Bona¬
          parte would never abandon him,          even though he privately
          reported to Paris his doubts as to the ^Turks’ ability to defend
          themselves in the Balkans or at the Straits. In response to Se-
          bastiani’s urgings, Selim ordered new efforts to strengthen his
          forts along the Danube and the Dniester. His efforts to secure
          additional military contingents from the Balkans met with con¬
          siderable success as soon as the Balkan notables left Edirne and
          returned to their homes.®'
            But in the end Arbuthnot’s support of Italinsky to the point of
          war and the fact that the Russian danger in the Principalities
          was far greater and more immediate than that of the French in
          Dalmatia caused the Sultan to give in to the Czar’s pressure. On
          October 16, he restored Ipsilanti to Wallachia, and the next day
          he reappointed Moruzi to Moldavia. At the same time, he agreed
          to allow Russian warships to use the Straits and to renew his
          treaty obligations with Russia in the Principalities.®^ Arbuthnot
          was jubilant. The Russians no longer had a pretext for invasion.
          Just to make certain that the Sultan would not change his mind
          once again, he requested a British squadron under Rear Admiral
          Sir Thomas Louis to move from Malta, and it anchored off Tenedos
          on November 21.®® But Sebastiani persisted with his efforts to
          secure an Ottoman-French alliance and again turn the Porte
          against Russia and Britain. When in mid-November the news
          arrived of Bonaparte’s victory over Prussia at the Battle of Jena
          (October 14, 1806), Selim was so impressed that he informed
          Sebastiani of his decision to go ahead with military preparations
      ^against Russia and to send an agent to Paris to conclude a formal
          alliance.®^ In response Arbuthnot called Louis’s squadron from
          Tenedos through the Dardanelles, and it arrived off Istanbul late
          in the afternoon of November 18. A second squadron left Malta
          for Tenedos under the command of Sir John Duckworth, arriving
          at its destination at the start of December.®®



                           Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
  All of Arbuthnot’s efforts to conciliate Russia were of course
doomed by the Czar’s prior decision to invade the Principalities
regardless of what the Sultan said or did and by his order to ^
Michelson to cross the Dniester as soon as he was ready.®® On
November 24, the Russian army began to move in two divi¬
sions.®^ A force under General Meyendorff crossed directly into
Bessarabia and moved down the Dniester, taking Khotzim (No¬
vember 24) and Bender (December 8) and then completing its
occupation of the province by capturing Akkerman (December
16) and Kilya (December 18) without meeting any serious oppo¬
sition. Michelson led the main Russian force through Bessarabia
and across the Pfuth into Moldavia, and by November 30, Jassy
and the northern part of the Principality were entirely under his
control.®® He then issued a proclamation that he had come only
to protect the Porte from Bonaparte and that he would leave as
soon as the Sultan fulfilled his treaty obligations. A copy of this
proclamation was sent to Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha at Ruschuk
in the hope of securing his support, but Mustafa had his own
plans for Wallachia. He informed the Sultan of the Russian action
and himself crossed the Danube into Wallachia to "defend” it
against the Russian attack.®® His lieutenant, Pehlivan Ibrahim
Agha, rode with a large force through the Dobruja and reached
Ismail just in time to save it from Meyendorff s attack; Ismail
thus remained the only part of Moldavia not in Russian hands.^®
  Constantine Ipsilanti came to Moldavia with the Russian army,
and Michelson appointed him Russian governor of both Princi¬
palities, with the duty of getting the cooperation and assistance
of the local boyars and notables. But Bayrakdar Mustafa moved
quickly to organize resistance. Moruzi had fled to Ruschuk after
his deposition, and Mustafa now used him and the French consul
in Bucharest, Reinhard, to get the cooperation of a large number
of the boyars against the Russians.An agreement for joint
action was also made with Pasvanoglu, whose position and
revenues were directly threatened by the Russian advance.
Together they planned to form an alliance of the Balkan notables,
including Ali Pasha of Janina, to oppose the Russian advance and
to suppress the Serbs.But these Balkan armies were no match
for the Russians in open conflict. In a six-week campaign, the
Russians conquered most of Moldavia, Wallachia, and Bessa-



                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
354   rabia, and they were able to go into winter quarters with the
      assurance that victory would be theirs in the spring/^
        It was not until December 12 that the news of Michelson’s
      invasion of the Principalities reached Istanbul. The Ulema and
      Janissaries immediately began to lead mobs through the streets
      attacking foreigners and burning and looting shops as well as
      the homes of Ottoman officials whom they disliked for one reason
      or another. The Reis ul-Kuttab and his pro-Russian colleagues
      held out for peace as the only means of getting British support
      against the Russians, but in view of the invasion, war was clearly
      the Sultan’s only course. On December 18, the Sheyh ul-Islam
      issued an authorizing opinion, and four days later the formal war
      declaration was issued and circulated to the foreign embassies.
      Ipsilanti and Moruzi were dismissed once again, and Alexander
      Suzzo was appointed to rule both provinces; both moves were
      received with great popular enthusiasm. The Bosporus was
      closed to the ships of all nations, and Russian subjects in Istanbul
      were allowed to take refuge on the British ships anchored in the
      Sea of Marmara. While the populace clamored for the imprison¬
      ment of the Russian ambassador, Sebastiani convinced Selim to
      end this practice on the grounds that such things were not done
      by civilized nations; so Italinsky and his staff also went aboard
      the British ships at the end of December.
        Grand Vezir Ibrahim Hilmi Pasha was appointed commander
      in chief of the army, which was to be prepared in Istanbul for
      operations against the Russians in the Principalities. Ten regi¬
      ments of Istanbul Janissaries were immediately dispatched to
      the Danube to help Bayrakdar Mustafa and the fort of Ismail,
      and orders were sent out to governors and notables all over the
      empire to prepare their contingents and armaments for the
      spring. Ebubekir Pasha was made governor of Anatolia and Com¬
      mander of the east, with the job of preparing an army to resist
      possible Russian attacks through the Caucasus into eastern
      Anatolia. Hadimoglu Osman Bey was appointed governor of the
      Dardanelles, and to advise him Sebastiani sent Baron Juchereau
      de Saint Denys, previously an instructor in the Ottoman army.
      He reported that under current conditions, British ships would
      be able to pass through without any difficulties whatever. Work




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
immediately began to correct the situation under the direction         355
of several officers sent from Dalmatia and of Feyzullah Efendi, a
subordinate of the Grand Admiral’s. However because of short¬
ages of materials and conflicts between the French advisers and
Ottoman officers and workers,- work went very slowly.
   On February 5, 1807, Pasvanoglu died after a long illness.
His chief lieutenant, Molla Idris Agha, was chosen by the chief
aghas to take over his master’s position and property in Vidin.
Selim immediately tried to restore Ottoman power there by
appointing Hurshid Pasha, governor of Nish, instead of Molla
Agha, in Pasvan’s place as military governor of Vidin. But Molla
Agha refused, offering instead to pay tribute and make an imme¬
diate contribution of men to the Ottoman army, and the Sultan
was forced to agree. At the same time, Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha’/C^
now commanded the area from Nicopolis to the mouths of the
Danube with an army of 60,000 of the hest troops in the empire.
During the winter a Russian force had moved through Wallachia
to the Danube opposite Ruschuk, but Mustafa had beaten them
off. It was obvious that he was the only notable capable of stopping
the Russians; accordingly, late in February, Selim appointed
him governor of Silistria and commander of the Danube front, ^
putting him in charge of preparations for the spring campaign in
this area. The French immediately moved to get the support of
both notables. Meriage persuaded Sebastian! to support Molla
Agha’s confirmation by the Porte, with the understanding that
otherwise Molla Agha would be forced to support the Russians.
Meriage then got Molla Agha to move his troops into Little
Wallachia and occupy Craiova in order to erect a firm barrier
against a Serbian-Russian junction there.^®
   Sebastian! and Meriage also worked through Gereral Marmont
and Bayrakdar Mustafa to secure the dispatch of French troops
from Dalmatia both to the Danube to fight the Russians, and to
Istanbul to help the Ottomans there in their defense prepara¬
tions. While there were no special objections to having French
troops in Istanbul, both Bayrakdar and the Bosnian Muslim
beys vigorously opposed their presence on the Danube, albeit
for different reasons. Bayrakdar Mustafa felt he could defeat the
Russians with his own forces, without the assistance of French




                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
356   soldiers whose presence in the Principalities would most certainly
      curb his own plans for the area.’^^ Although Marmont used
      David’s influence with Hiisrev Mehmed Pasha, governor of
      Bosnia, to get his permission for the transit of French officers to
      Istanbul and acceptance of a small group of French artillery
      offices and cannons to train his forces in the modern ways, he was
      absolutely unyielding in his opposition to the passage of French
      troops through his territory to the Danube. His stand was less a
      reflection of his own wishes than the result of the strong fears
      of infidel troops on the part of the Muslim beys of the province,
      who had become sufficiently alarmed already by the presence of
      infidels in neighboring Dalmatia and of Russians not far away in
      the Principalities. So while a few French officers did go through
      Bosnia to Istanbul nothing more was done about the plan to send
      an army to the Danube, and Bayrakdar Mustafa moved ahead
      with his own plans.Marmont was on good terms with the
      mutesellim of Trebinitza in Herzegovina and in February sent
      him arms and a column of troops as an aid against rebels in the
      area. Ali of Janina also entered into correspondence with Mar¬
      mont through Pouqueville, asking for men, arms, munitions, and
      money to help him against the Russians, but for the moment, the
      French delayed because of their experience with him in 1799 and
      their fear of alarming the Sultan. Marmont’s main military
      efforts went into the construction and maintenance of roads along
      the coast in order to assure his communications with the north
      and assist its defense against possible new Russian attacks from
      the sea.^*^
        Sebastiani also pressed the Sultan to make a direct settlement
      with the Serbs before the Russians could reach them. When
      Ichko and Hasan Bey arrived in Belgrade in mid-October, Kara
      George convoked the national assembly at Semendria, and the
      princes agreed to accept Selim’s proposals. However, Gushanatz
      Ali and his yamaks had continued to hold out in the citadel
      mainly because of their ability to secure supplies from Zemlin
      across the river. But in mid-December, Kara George occupied the
      island located at the junction of the Save and the Danube, effec¬
      tively blocking off this last route; as a result, on December 29,
      Gushanatz Ali and his men surrendered and immediately left




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
for Vidin. When Suleyman Pasha tried to occupy the fort with         357
his own troops, a short battle ensued with the Serbs, and it was
only on January 6, 1807, that they finally occupied it.®° The last
Ottoman stronghold in Serbia now was Shabatz, which was
manned not only by the regular garrison but also by reinforce¬
ments sent from Bosnia together with many refugees from
the battle of Mishar. When Kara George demanded that it also
surrender, the garrison refused until January 6, when it received
a formal order to surrender from the governor of Bosnia. As a
result, the entire province was now under Serbian control.®*
In the meantime Kara George sent Hasan Bey back to Istanbul
with his own agents, and on January 25, 1807, a convention was
signed there, confirming what the Sultan previously had offered.®^
  But Michelson had already moved to make sure that the Serbs
would not make peace with the Porte. Soon after his occupation of
Moldavia, he sent large amounts of money and ammunition and
several officers to Belgrade and urged Kara George to fight
on for full independence instead of the autonomy which he
previously had sought. Under this influence and that of Con¬
stantine Ipsilanti, Kara George and his associates decided to
reject the convention and fight on. And on March 7, they suddenly
turned on Suleyman Agha and his Belgrade garrison and massa¬
cred them without warning. At the same time when the Ottoman
and Serbian agents bearing the convention back to Belgrade
reached Parachin, the local Serbian rebels massacred the Otto¬
mans, so the convention was effectively annuled. Russian offi¬
cials and soldiers now began to come to Belgrade to help Kara
George develop his administration, army, and fortifications, and
plans were made to effect a union between the Serbian and
Russian armies in the spring.®®
  The Porte still remained officially at peace with Great Britain,
since the British had not yet made any direct attack on Ottoman
territory and the Sultan hoped that they might still intervene to
protect him from the full force of the Russian attack. Arbuthnot
remained in Istanbul, trying to get the Ottomans to accept the
Russian demands, but his efforts were effectively countered by
the strong pro-French ministers then in control of the Imperial
Council.®^ On January 29, he learned from a spy in the Sultan’s




                 The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
358   palace that war had just been declared against Great Britain and
      he was about to be arrested, so he quickly left the city with most
      of the important British merchants'. To conceal his intentions
      from the Ottoman authorities, he left his own family along with
      those of the merchants in their homes in Istanbul. With those
      chosen to accompany him, he went to the British ship Endymion
      anchored in the harbor, ostensibly for a dinner party. Then in the
      middle of the night, the ship weighed anchor and sailed out of the
      harbor. When the Endymion reached the Dardanelles, the Grand
      Admiral let it through, not knowing the identities of its impor¬
      tant passengers. When it reached Tenedos and was no longer in
      danger of capture, Arbuthnot sent a note to the Porte giving the
      reasons for his departure, demanding full acceptance of the
      Russian demands, and threatening an’attack by the British
      fleet if these demands were not met.®^
         On February 10, Duckworth and his squadron from Malta
      joined Louis and Arbuthnot at Tenedos. The British were now
      in a position to force the Straits and move against Istanbul if
      they wished, and when the prevailing winds were favorable, on
      February 19, they began to do so. The fleet sailed into the Sea of
      Marmara and toward Istanbul, and the Ottoman guns and ships
      which attempted to stop it were destroyed with relative ease. The
      next morning, the British ships anchored before Istanbul, which
      they could have bombarded or taken with ease in view of the
      Ottoman capital’s complete lack of preparation. But Arbuthnot
      preferred to secure what he wanted through negotiation if at all
      possible. While his agents talked with the Ottomans, Sultan
      Selim and his associates were persuaded by Sebastiani to defend
      their city, prepare fortifications and arm the population, at the
      same time stalling off the British as long as possible.^® By the morn¬
      ing of February 22, the defenses were ready, and Selim was em¬
      boldened to act. First he formally recognized Bonaparte’s brothers
       as kings of Naples and Holland and requested an alliance and
       military assistance as soon as possible.*^’^ The British and Russian
      threats thus had completely reversed the consequences of the
       French Expedition to Egypt and had thrown the Porte into the
       hands of the French. Arbuthnot still tried to negotiate a settle¬
       ment, and Selim continued to stall the discussions while further
       defensive preparations were made. On February 25, he sent Ishak


                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
Bey to Duckworth with the declaration that he would not nego¬        359
tiate any further until the British fleet retired outside the Dar¬
danelles, and that since Russia was the aggressor, he would not
agree to peace except with modiflcations of the treaty provisions
concerning the Principalities.^®
  With Istanbul fortified and the negotiations ended, Dudkworth
realized the danger of his position. If the Ottomans could fortify
the Dardanelles before he returned, his fleet would be trapped; so
on March 1, he set sail and two days later passed back through
the Straits, suffering heavy casualties and damage from new
shore batteries as he went.®® In Istanbul, the enemy’s departure
was greeted with mass hysteria. Franks, Muslims, Christians,
and Jews embraced each other with a frenzy of comradeship that
would not be seen again in the Sultan’s dominions for almost one
hundred years. Selim showered Sebastiani with gifts. His long¬
standing faith in France seemed to have been entirely vindicated,
and he once again turned to prosecute the war against the Rus¬
sians with renewed vigor.
  Senyavin’s Russian fleet reached Tenedos from Hydra on March
7, three days after Duckworth dropped anchor there upon his
return from the Straits. Senyavin now proposed a joint effort to
force the Dardanelles for a second time, but while Sir Sidney
Smith enthusiastically espoused the idea, Duckworth refused and
on March 13 sailed away to join Admiral Collingwood and the
Mediterranean fleet at Malta, ostensibly because even together
there would not be enough ships to counter successfully the fire¬
power now ready to meet them at the Straits and at Istanbul but
actually because Britain did not want the Russian fleet in Istan¬
bul under any circumstances. With the Czar’s armies marching
south from the Danube, this would assure final and permanent
Russian control of the Straits and perhaps of the eastern Mediter¬
ranean as well.®®
  Without British cooperation, and in view of Duckworth’s pes¬
simism about forcing the Straits, Senyavin hesitated to try it
alone and instead set up a blockade of the Dardanelles in order to
starve the Porte into submission.®*
  In the meantime the British fleet went from blunder to blunder.
Fearful that Senyavin’s blockade of the Straits was only a prelude
to a Russian attack on the Ottoman capital, anxious that the


                    The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
 French might reply with a new Invasion of Egypt, and encouraged
 by the British consul in Cairo to believe that Elfi Bey had won
 over most of the Mamluks to support a British invasion to save
 them from Mohammed Ali, Collingwood decided on a new British
 invasion of Egypt. Landings at Alexandria were made without
 resistance on March 16.^^ However four days later Mohammed
 Ali and his army killed Elfi Bey and scattered his supporters at
 Siyub. This deprived the British of the men and food they had
 expected and forced them to send out ^ series of expeditions to
 secure the necessary provisions.**^ ^It soon became evident that
 they lacked sufficient men for the task. Their attack on Rosetta
 (March 31) was beaten back with heavy losses, and enemy threats
 to encircle and annihilate their remaining forces finally caused
 them to retire to Alexandria and wait until they could be evac¬
 uated.**^ Through the spring and early summer the British made
 no further offensive efforts, and Mohammed Ali used the victories
  to consolidate his political position in the country. Most of the
  remaining Mamluks now came to join his ranks, including their
  former chief Ibrahim Bey. Selim ordered an expedition against
  the British in Egypt under the command of the governor of Sidon,
  but he had only begun to organize it when Mohammed Ali put
  Alexandria under siege (August 17) and forced the British to
  evacuate it by negotiation (September 17).**^ Thus ended the affair.
  All the British had succeeded in doing was to drive Selim further
  into the arms of the French and unify all elements of the Egyptian
  population behind Mohammed Ali as nothing else could have done.
    While the sea war went on during the spring and summer of
y 1807, in Istanbul and the Balkans, all sides were going forward
  with military and diplomatic preparations. Selim sent Vahid
  Efendi to Paris with a request for a formal alliance and military
  help first in Egypt and then in his planned campaign to regain
  the Crimea. He also asked for 25,000 French soldiers to pass from
\ Dalmatia through Bosnia and Serbia to the Dniester to help
  Bayrakdar Mustafa drive the Russians from the Principalities.**®
  The main Ottoman army was delayed in Istanbul by the British
  naval attack, but it finally moved to Edirne in late April.®^ At the
  same time, the news that large Russian forces were moving
  through the Caucasus toward Ahiska and Kars caused Selim to




                   Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
appoint the former Grand Vezir Yusuf Ziya Pasha as governor of       361
Erzurum and commander of the eastern armies and to send him
to gather an army in the east and to organize a force capable of
meeting the Russians if they came.®®
  In the meantime Bonaparte disappointed the Sultan by reply¬
ing evasively to his requests, for by now he had decided to^make a
settlement with the Russians and was no longer anxious to take
important offensive actions against them. Selim heard rumors to
this effect but discounted them, believing that Bonaparte would
never desert him. Without the expected military assistance, how¬
ever, he was compelled to limit his plans for the current campaign
to Serbia and th^ Principalities. Soon after the departure of the
Grand Vezir, Selim sent his remaining reserves through Thrace
to Nish and appointed its governor, Hurshid Ahmed Pasha, as
governor of Rumelia and commander of the Macedonian army,
with orders to gather the Balkan notables and princes and then
move up the Morava Valley to cooperate with the Grand Vezir.®®
  Selim’s plan was for the governors of Bosnia, Vidin, and Nish
to attack the Serbs on both sides to prevent them from joining or
helping the Russians. At the same time, the Grand Vezir would
march from Edirne through the Dobruja to Ismail, where he
would join Pehlivan Agha, cross the Danube, and move against
the Russians in Moldavia. A segment of his force would remain at
Silistria to march on Bucharest from the east in conjunction with
Ba5n’akdar Mustafa, who would cross the Danube at Ruschuk and
attack it from the west. The Russians in Moldavia and Wallachia
would thus be cut off from each other and from the Serbs and could
be defeated, or at least forced to withdraw from most of their
conquests.*®®
  On the other hand Michelson planned to establish a defense
line all the way from the Black Sea to the Adriatic, along the
north bank of the Danube to Orsova and from there through Bel¬
grade, Herzegovina, and Montenegro. This would prevent any
French effort to move inland from Dalmatia to support the Otto¬
mans in the Principalities, and at the same time it would make it
impossible for the various Balkan armies to cooperate with the
Russians against Istanbul in the south and Dalmatia in the
west.*®* To carry out this plan, he needed the enthusiastic coop-




                 The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
eration of the various Balkan leaders, and during the winter and
spring, his agents and those of the French competed vigorously
for their favor.
  Vladika Peter I of Montenegro was willing from the start. Kara
George had toyed with the idea of a separate peace with the Porte,
hut his massacre of the Ottoman envoys in March had convinced
him it would be prudent to cooperate with the Russian officers
sent to him.”’^ In the east things were quite different. Meriage
got Molla Idris Agha’s unqualified suppqrt by supplying him with
arms and money, and by getting Sebastian! to use his influence at
the Porte to gain Selim’s recognition for him as Pasvanoglu’s
legitimate successor. Molla Agha completely blocked any direct
Russian-Serbian union by means of his well-manned forts at
Vidin and elsewhere, and Kara George’s attempt to break through
in April was frustrated and he suffered heavy losses. Meriage also
tried to get Molla Agha to provide military assistance for Bayrak-
dar Mustafa Pasha’s advance into Wallachia. But in this he was
less successful because of the conflicting territorial ambitions of
the two notables and because of Bayrakdar’s dislike of the idea of
bringing a French army to the Danube, so Meriage’s plan was
quietly abandoned. But for the moment at least, Molla Agha suc¬
cessfully prevented Michelson and Kara George from joining
forces.
  In Albania, Ali of Janina’s bitterness at Russian occupation of
the Ionian Islands and Parga made the mission of Britain’s agent
Morier entirely useless, so he departed in March, leaving the way
entirely open for the French. Pouqueville’s offer of arms and offi¬
cers to help Ali conquer the islands and coastal ports was warmly
received. Since the British and Russian fleets were now operating
in the Aegean and eastern Mediterranean, the way was open for
Ali and the French to move. Marmont began to send him by sea
large quantities of cannons, rifles, and ammunition together with
officers to organize and lead his army, which now was assembled
at Preveza. At the same time, under French direction fortifica¬
tions were prepared along the coast, and a small fleet was built to
carry this army to its objectives.
   At the same time, the Septinsular Republic assembled its own
 army and built fortifications to resist the attack, wherever it
 might come. While the main Russian fleet was now with Senya-



                  Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
vin, a number of ships arrived from Venice with some arms and         363
ammunition. In early April Ali made a preliminary attack on
Santa Maura to size up its defensive positions and found them so
formidable that he decided to postpone any attacks until he could
get further assistance from the French. As a result, although prep¬
arations continued at Preveza, the attack was never laiinched,
and it was not long before the Treaty of Tilsit gave the islands to
France, thus frustrating Ali once again.*®^
  In Bosnia Pierre David had no difficulty convincing the gover¬
nor and the Muslim beys of the necessity of defending their prov¬
ince against a Russian or Serbian attack from the east. But they
equally feared arfy infidel army, and the governor informed him
that neither he nor the beys would ever permit the French to
march across their territory to the Danube. In early February
Selim instructed Hiisrev Pasha to allow the passage of a few
French officers and artillerymen who were being sent to Istanbul
to help fortify the Dardanelles, but there was no mention of any¬
thing more than this. In April, following the defeat of the British
attack on Istanbul, Selim ordered Hiisrev not only to raise an
army against the Serbs and Russians but also to call for French
aid and allow the passage of French troops from Dalmatia when¬
ever it was deemed necessary. A large number of Bosnian beys
vigorously opposed the execution of these orders, however, and
Hiisrev therefore delayed the negotiations interminably with
such questions as whether the French should dress in Ottoman or
French uniforms.*”^
  During the spring the Russians and Montenegrins wintering at
Cattaro received invitations from the Christians of Herzegovina
asking for their assistance against the Ottoman governor. An
allied force moved to help the district in April, but it was beaten
back. The Bosnian beys had been sufficiently frightened however
that they allowed the entry of a small French contingent, which
helped the governor to repulse another allied attack in late May
and to suppress the Christian notables and beys who had provoked
the attacks in the first place. But the Bosnians continued success¬
fully in their opposition to any large-scale French movement to
the Danube.*”®
  As spring arrived, the Ottoman position in the Principalities
seemed far more favorable than it had only a short time before.



                 The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
 The fort of Vidin was heavily manned, and Molla Agha had strung
 out a large number of men between there and Gladova to block
 any attempt by the Serbs and Russian's to join forces. Strong Otto¬
 man garrisons manned the forts at Ruschuk, Silistria, Ibrail, and
 Ismail. The Grand Vezir brought an army of 30,000 men to Edirne
 where he remained during April, gathering the Spahis and no¬
 tables of Macedonia and Thrace and planning his campaign.^®^
 He finally arrived at Silistria on May 24, and shortly thereafter
 crossed the Danube and captured Kalarash, which then became
 his beachhead for the attack on Ehicharest. At the same time,
 Bayrakdar Mustafa crossed the Danube at Ruschuk and moved
 on Bucharest from the south.      In addition the Ottoman garrisons
 successfully prevented the Russian-Serbian junction. In mid-
 April, Kara George’s effort to reach the Danube at Negotin was
 pushed back with heavy losses.^"® When Michelson’s force tried
 to cross the Danube at Giurgevo soon after, it also was repelled by
 Bayrakdar Mustafa’s garrison at Ruschuk."® A Russian effort to
 take the island of Ostrova (May 29) was equally unsuccessful.^"
 Finally an Ottoman force from Bosnia crossed the Drina and with
  the assistance of cannons sent by General Marmont routed the
  Serbs at Loznitza (June 3), causing Kara George to retire from the
  Danube in the fear that the Ottomans were beginning a major
  offensive from Bosnia."^
    Meanwhile Michelson ordered the commander of Bucharest to
  evacuate it as soon as the enemy approached, but the Ottoman
  forces arrived from Ruschuk and Silistria before he could do so,
  and a siege began on June 2. The population immediately fled
  from the city, and the boyars, fearing what would happen if the
  city were taken by storm, entered negotiations with Mustafa
  Pasha and the Russians to secure its surrender."® Victory thus
  seemed near. The Russian effort to join the Serbs had failed;
  Bucharest and southern Wallachia were about to come under
  Ottoman control once again. At this point, however, the opera-
y tions of both sides were paralyzed by startling news from outside.
^ In Istanbul Sultan Selim III had been overthrown by a revolt,
/ while at Tilsit Bonaparte and Alexander I were signing a peace
  which would completely transform the diplomatic and military
  position of Selim’s successor.




                   Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
Part V. The Triumph
     of Reaction
                                 4




                                         \

 J




ft.




          t
                                 « ..


              i.   X
                       - p. ■■       ♦


      .J'-t
                         ’.     -• -
                       >*»»*■ I


                                             V
                   XX. The Politics
                  of Ottoman Reform




It is not surprising that the many foreign and domestic wars
which Selim III had to face limited and frustrated his reforms.
But they alone would not have heen sufficient to defeat him en¬
tirely had not he and his supporters themselves created conditions
which made it possible for those with vested interests in the old
order to raise mass opposition to his efforts. In Selim’s time chronic
insecurity, disorder, famine, and inflation were normal accompa¬
niments of life in town and country alike. The misery in which the
vast majority of people were forced to live was in stark contrast
to the lavish western-style palaces and entertainments introduced
by the reformers along with European painters, singers, actors,
and writers imported in order to create an image of modern, west¬
ern life in their homes. Since these conditions were combined
with regular reports about the Wahhabi and Serbian revolts and
the triumphs of men such as Pasvanoglu, Ali of Janina, Tayyar
Pasha, and Jezzar Ahmed Pasha, it was inevitable that accusa¬
tions of "sinful innovation” and "infidel oppression” hurled by the
Janissaries, the Ulema and others, and their effort to attribute
these conditions to the reforms, should find ready response among
those whom the Sultan intended to help.*
  Much of Selim’s difficulty could have been avoided if he himself
had possessed a strong and dominating personality and had driven
                                s             I

        and led the reformers toward the common goal or, in the absence
368
        of this, if the reformers themselves had been characterized by sim¬
        ilar qualities of mind and body. But perhaps this was too much of
        a change to expect in a single generation. Selim III, although he
        had good intentions, was a relatively mild and weak person who
        sought to direct and control his subordinates not by strength of
        leadership but by the more traditional Ottoman method of turn¬
        ing them against one another in continuous struggles for his
        favor. In his later years in particular, iij response to frustrations
        and defeats, he gradually lost interest in the reforms and reform¬
        ers and retired to the pleasures of his palace, while leaving the
        reformers to fight among themselves as well as with those who
         sought to destroy what little had been accomplished.^
           The result was continuous political instability, which prevented
      \J the reformers not only from making any serious attempt to solve
         the wider political, economic, and social problems which accom¬
         panied and endangered their efforts but also from pushing their
         reform measures through to final success. During Selim s eighteen
         years on the throne, there were nine grand vezirs, ten sheyh ul-
       i islams, seven grand admirals, eighteen chief treasurers, sixteen
         reis ul-kuttabs, and nine bash terjumans, each with his own ideas
         and policies —and even more important, each with his own politi¬
         cal ambitions, which he sought to promote by means of the powers
         and revenues granted by his office. This was the greatest tragedy
         of Selim’s reign. The reformers split into numerous factions strug¬
         gling for power, which when obtained was used more for their own
         benefit than it was to achieve the policies which they originally
         had sought to undertake.
           The political factions and their alignments were constantly
         changing and adjusting. With the Sultan acting mainly to keep
         them equally balanced and to prevent any one of them from pre-
         vailing over the others for more than a short time, and with the
         factions themselves aiming mainly at the positions and revenues
         of government as means and manifestations of power, there were
         constant appointments and dismissals at all levels of the bureauc¬
         racy, the religious hierarchy, and the army. Efficiency, honesty,
         and steadfastness were the inevitable victims. It would be fruit¬
         less to trace the endless political maneuvers and alignments




                               The Triumph of Reaction
which arose during Selim’s reign, but the main lines of the strug¬   369
gles must be presented to provide some understanding of the im¬
mensity of the confusion which engulfed the reformers during
the period of his rule.
  It was only with the Peace,of Jassy that Selim was able to give
the reformers a free hand by dismissing Grand Vezir Koja Yusuf
Pasha (May 3, 1792) and replacing him with a puppet, the aged
and ailing Melek Mehmed Pasha, who was over eighty years of
age and entirely without power of his own. For all practical pur¬
poses, real authority was now in the hands of the reformers, some
holding official positions and some not, who met regularly in an
unofficial reform council as well as in the regular Imperial Coun¬
cil to debate, enact, and execute their reform decrees. Leading
this group were those who had risen with the Sultan and sub¬
mitted the reform memorials to him during the course of the war:
Chelebi Mustafa Reshid Efendi, lieutenant of the Grand Vezir
and originator of the Nizam-i Jedid army and treasury; Kuchiik
Hiiseyin Pasha, whose power rested not only on his close friend¬
ship with the Sultan and successes with the fleet, but also on his
marriage with Abd ul-Hamid I’s daughter, Esma Sultan; Yusuf
Agha, Director of the Mint, particularly powerful because of his
position as lieutenant of Selim’s mother, the Valide Sultan;
Tataijik Abdullah Efendi, who had a great deal of influence not
only as a result of the length and breadth of his reform proposals
but also because of his position as the only member of the Ulema
in the group, and thus Selim’s only hope of reconciling the re¬
forms with them; and three somewhat less influential men who
alternated as Reis ul-Kuttab to handle foreign relations, Ingiliz
Mahmud Raif Efendi, Mehmed Rashid Efendi, and Ebubekir
Ratib Efendi.^
  Almost as soon as the reformers came to power, began to enact
their decrees, and met some opposition, their coalition broke up.
Each man strove to divert popular displeasure onto his colleagues
in order to advance his own position at their expense. Less than
two months after the Peace of Jassy was signed, in April 1792, the
rivalry began when Yusuf Agha and the Valide Sultan got Selim
to take Kuchiik Hiiseyin out of the palace, appoint him as Grand
Admiral, and send him on a long naval expedition to the Mediter-




                  The Politics of Ottoman Reform
370   ranean in the hope of using his absence to end his influence.^
      Hiiseyin managed not only to counter this threat but to increase
      his power and prestige also by the spectacular manner in which
      he defeated the pirates then infesting the Aegean, and as soon as
      he returned in September, he got back at his enemies by using
      Janissary complaints about debased coins to have Yusuf Agha
      dismissed from the Mint although he still managed to retain con¬
      siderable power and influence through the person of the Valide
      Sultan.^
        Yusuf Agha then moved to appease the Janissaries and regain
      their support by securing the removal of Chelebi Mustafa Reshid
      as lieutenant of the Grand Vezir (October 1792). Although Chelebi
      Mustafa soon after was appointed director of the Nizam-i Jedid
      (March 1,1793), since he no longer was in the palace or the Porte,
      he was never able to regain the power and influence he had exer¬
      cised previously.® With Kiichiik Hiiseyin at sea and the others
      flghting among themselves, Reis ul-Kuttah Mehmed Rashid
      Efendi was able to dominate the councils of state until well into
      the summer of 1794. For the most part, he accomplished this by
      allying himself with the Sheyh ul-Islam Durri zade Arif Efendi
      and with Yusuf Agha against Kiichiik Hiiseyin and Tatarjik
      Abdullah, whom he Anally managed to have dismissed and ban¬
      ished as the result of some presumed insults during the negotia¬
      tions then in progress with France.^
        The balance of power now deflnitely was shifting in the direc¬
      tion of the faction led by Yusuf Agha, so Selim soon moved to
      strengthen the other. In August 1794, he placed the blame for the
      current inflation and famine on Mehmed Rashid and arranged
      for suflicient public clamor to have him replaced as Reis by one of
      Kiichiik Hiiseyin’s men, Durri Mehmed Efendi. Mehmed Rashid
      then allied himself with Chelebi Mustafa, went to Levend Chiftlik
      to help build up the new army, and soon after returned to the
      Porte as an official in the Treasury. But while he retained his
      place on the reform council, like his new ally, his power at the
      Porte and in the palace was lessened by his distance from them.®
      Then in October Selim shifted the balance further in favor of
      Kiichiik Hiiseyin by dismissing the powerless Melek Mehmed and
      replacing him with Izzet Mehmed Pasha, one of Hiiseyin’s own




                           The Triumph of Reaction
men, who was young, vigorous, wealthy, and politically influen¬      371
tial. With Hiiseyin dominating the council, Selim appointed
Ebubekir Ratib as Reis in May 1795. The Sultan soon moved to
limit the Grand Admiral’s power by encouraging the Grand
Vezir to rival him and build up his own power. Izzet Mehmed did
this by allying himself with Constantine Ipsilanti and Tatarjik
Abdullah Efendi, whom he brough back from exile and appointed
as Bash Terjuman and Kadiasker of Rumelia, respectively, dur¬
ing the course of 1796.®
                           4

  At this point there were three factions among the reformers,
dominated by Kiichuk Hiiseyin, Yusuf Agha, and Izzet Mehmed.
With foreign relations becoming more and more important, the
ambassadors resident in Istanbul worked through these three
groups to secure the favor of the Porte, mainly by providing
their principal members with financial subsidies and gifts of
various kinds. As a result Kiichiik Hiiseyin and his chief allies,
Ingiliz Mahmud, Ebubekir Ratib Efendi, and the Sultan’s old
friend Ishak Bey, favored the French; Yusuf Agha, the Valide
Sultan, Chelebi Mustafa Reshid and Mehmed Rashid united in
support of the Russians and British; and Izzet Mehmed and his
associates, as well as many of the lesser members of the council,
remained neutral, receiving bribes from all the ambassadors and
shifting their support from one to another according to the polit¬
ical and military exigencies of the time.^® During the remaining
years of Selim’s reign, these alliances between the principal re¬
form factions and the foreign ambassadors remained virtually
unchanged, and they had an important effect on the Porte’s diplo¬
matic positions in these critical times.
  Since the factions were fairly evenly balanced in the palace and
Porte during 1796 and 1797, they sought to strengthen their posi¬
tions by outside means, and in particular by using the armed as¬
sistance of various groups in the streets of Istanbul. Kiichiik
Hiiseyin and his partisans depended mainly on the sailors of his
fleet; Chelebi Mustafa on the soldiers of the Nizam-i Jedid army
and reformed artillery corps; and Yusuf Agha and the Valide Sul¬
tan tended more and more to associate with the Janissaries and
Ulema and to encourage their rioting and setting of fires in order
to express their common opposition to the groups in power. The




                  The Politics of Ottoman Reform
                             \             ^



372   resulting clashes among the various military groups and between
      them, the populace, and the Ulema only made worse the chronic
      anarchy and insecurity then prevalent and bred the consequent
      popular distaste for the entire reform program.
        When British and Russian influence with the Sultan increased
      during the summer of 1796, Selim dismissed and then Anally
      assassinated Ebubekir Ratib Efendi. Then after a year of service
      by Mustafa Rasih Efendi, he restored Mehmed Rashid Efendi as
      Reis ul-Kuttab on August 18, 1797, in order to facilitate relations
      with his new friends. But Izzet Mdhmed managed to regain the
      Sultan’s favor by presenting him with a magnificent new pleasure
      palace built on the shores of the Bosporus in Amavutkoy. Selim
      in return presented Izzet Mehmed with a firman giving him abso¬
      lute and unquestioned powers to issue decrees without reference
      to the council or the palace. This enabled the Grand Vezir to dis¬
      miss Rashid (March 3, 1798), who soon thereafter was entirely
      removed from the scene by apoplexy, the first important member
      of the reform group to be swallowed up by its internal difficul¬
      ties.
         The French expedition to Egypt led Selim to dismiss Izzet Meh¬
      med in order to provide the necessary scapegoat for the masses.
      (August 30,1798). To get the support ofthe Janissaries and Ulema
      for a united war effort against the infidel invasion, he appointed
      Kor Yusuf Ziyauddin Pasha, previously governor of Erzurum,
      and also replaced the reforming Sheyh ul-Islam Durri zade Meh¬
      med Arif Efendi with the conservative Mustafa Ashir Efendi and
      later with the reactionary Omer Hulusi Efendi (July 11,1800).^^
      Yusuf Pasha obtained conservative support for his campaigns by
      curbing reforms and restricting the operations of the Nizam-i
      Jedid army. He also used the authority given him to build and
      lead the army to create a party for himself, and he maintained
      power in the councils of state by allying himself with Yusuf Agha,
      his Lieutenant Ibrahim Nesim Efendi, and Ingiliz Mahmud Raif
      Efendi, who now led the British-Russian party. Opposed to them
      were the Grand Admiral, Ishak Bey, and the Chief Eunuch of the
      Palace, who sought to end the war and restore the French alliance
      as much to lessen the power of their rivals as for any other rea¬
      son.   These alignments remained unchanged throughout the




                            The Triumph of Reaction
war, with the British-Russian party necessarily in control so long     373
as the French remained in Egypt. Although Kiichuk Huseyin
used the defeats inflicted on the Ottoman army to intrigue against
Yusuf Pasha, he was unsuccessful as long as the need for Janis¬
sary and Ulema support compelled the Sultan to maintain the
Grand Vezir in office.
  With the final evacuation of Egypt by the French expeditionary
force, Selim felt free to build up the French party in Istanbul once
again, as a necessary part of his plan to restore relations with
France in order to balance it off against the British and Russian
allies who had dominated him during the war. To accomplish this,
in May 1803, Ahmed Esad Efendi was appointed as Sheyh ul-
Islam, both to resume reforms of the Ulema and to strengthen
Kiichiik Huseyin Pasha’s party in the councils of state. Mehmed
Kadri Pasha, Kiichuk Hiiseyin’s chief lieutenant in the fleet and
commander of the Ottoman detachment which had cooperated
with the Russians in the Adriatic, was appointed in place of his
master when Kiichiik Hiiseyin died in December 1803. At the
same time, Ibrahim Nesim Efendi rose to take over the leadership
of Kiichiik Hiiseyn’s pro-French group.At this point the council
continued to be divided into three groups, now led by Yusuf Agha,
Chelebi Mustafa Reshid, and Ibrahim Nesim, who in foreign rela¬
tions represented the Russian, British, and French interests,
respectively. For almost three years, following the war, Yusuf
Ziya managed to retain his position by using the prestige gained
by his defeat of the French in Egypt and by allying himself with
Yusuf Agha while at the same time retaining good relations with
Ibrahim Nesim and his group.
  Yusuf Ziya’s effort to extend the reforms into the Balkans by
organizing a Nizam-i Jedid contingent at Edime during 1804 and
early 1805 so enraged the Balkan notables, as well as the Janis¬
saries and Ulema leaders, however, that Selim was compelled to
dismiss him on April 24, 1805, after an unparalleled term of
almost seven years as Grand Vezir. He was replaced by Kadri
Pasha’s successor as Grand Admiral, Hafiz Ismail Pasha, also
originally one of Kiichiik Hiiseyin’s men but now a secret op¬
ponent of the reforms and an ally of the party’s enemies.Hafiz
Ismail worked to build up his own party by appointing conserva-




                   The Politics of Ottoman Reform
374   tives to positions in the government and the army, but with the
      Sultan’s support the reformers continued to monopolize the chief
      positions. In June Selim tried to strengthen the reformers by
      appointing Chelebi Mustafa Reshid as director of the Imperial
      Treasury, Ibrahim Nesim Efendi as Lieutenant of the Grand
      Vezir, and Ibrahim Efendi as director of the Irad-i Jedid treasury,
      hoping thereby to satisfy all three factions and secure their union
      and cooperation against the common danger.*^
        In spite of these changes, their struggles continued, and as the
      summer progressed they were intensified when the Valide Sultan
      fell ill and died. Her death occasioned Yusuf Agha so much loss of
      power that Ibrahim Nesim was able to effect Ingiliz Raif’s re¬
      placement as Reis ul-Kuttab by the official court historian, Ahmed
      Vasif Efendi (August 4, 1805).i« As a result, the rivalry was
      intensified between Ibrahim Nesim and Chelebi Mustafa Reshid.
      The latter then allied himself with Yusuf Agha, who still retained
      some influence at the Porte although not as much as previously.
      Ibrahim Nesim responded by joining the Grand Vezir, and to¬
      gether they secured Yusuf Agha’s exile to the Holy Cities on the
      pilgrimage of October 1805.
        Hafiz Ismail now skillfully kept the reformers divided and
      bickering among themselves by strongly supporting Ibrahim
      Nesim against Chelebi Mustafa Reshid. At the same time, he
      actively courted the support of the Balkan notables and Istanbul
      reactionaries, leading, as we have seen, to the "Edirne Incident”
      in early June 1806. The Sultan’s refusal to use the new army
      against the rebels when the crisis came and his subsequent dis¬
      missal of Kadi Abdurrahman Pasha as its commander greatly
      increased the Grand Vezir’s prestige with the opponents of re¬
      form, who saw in him a man who might be able to accomplish
      their aims with a minimum of difficulty.Although the auxilliary
       corps remained in Istanbul and the Nizam-i Jedid army in Levend
       Chiftlik and Uskiidar, presumably to protect the Sultan, the
       reformers lost heart and thereafter devoted their efforts pri¬
       marily to saving themselves.
        With the Serbian revolt apparently a success, with the new
       Wahhabi attacks in Arabia, and, most important, with the
       imminent threat of a new Russian invasion, Selim sought to




                            The Triumph of Reaction
conciliate the Janissaries and Ulema by suspending his reform         375
program and placing the conservatives in the government during
the late fall of 1806. In mid-November he replaced Hafiz Ismail
with the Janissary Agha Ibrahim Hilmi Pasha, and as Sheyh ul-
Islam he appointed the most powerful and reactionary of the
Ulema leaders, Sherif zade Mehmed Ataullah Efendi, whd there¬
after became the leader of reaction in the country. While Selim
also dismissed Ibrahim Nesim Efendi and Chelebi Mustafa, the
chief objects of the conservative attacks, he still sought to main-
                           4

tain some of the lesser reformers in the government in order to
balance them off against the reactionaries —so he chose Mehmed
Galib Efendi as 'Reis ul-Kuttab and Morah Osman Efendi as
director of the Imperial Treasury.^' But once again the Sultan’s
temporizing solved nothing. These appointments antagonized
the conservatives and cost him whatever credit he might have
gained with them by appointing Ibrahim Hilmi and Ataullah to
positions in the government; at the same time, they did nothing
to restore the reformers’ confidence in him or to give them power
sufficient to counteract the threat of reaction now facing them.
  The Russian ambassador now began openly to support the con¬
servatives because of Selim’s new friendship with the French.
And it was not long before the wealthy Ipsilanti and Moruzi
families and their friends among the Phanariotes likewise joined
the opponents of reform after losing the Principalities to their
rivals as a result of French influence. Under the urgings of these
powerful families, the conservatives moved more and more
toward the idea of dethroning Selim and replacing him with the vX
late Valide’s son. Prince Mustafa, who, since he had spent most
of his life in the palace and was without education and experience,
would be completely unable to resist their control and domina¬
tion. With a willing candidate on whom they could focus their
activities, and with Russian and Phanariote funds used to at-Y
tract supporters, Ibrahim Hilmi and Ataullah rapidly built up a
large party and prepared to take full power as soon as circum¬
stances warranted.^^
  For the moment the Russian invasion of the Principalities in
December saved the Sultan since his opponents were forced to X
concentrate on the immediate measures needed to defend the




                   The Politics of Ottoman Reform
                             \              »



376   empire. Selim’s role in successfully repulsing the British fleet
      from Istanbul during February 1807 so strengthened his position
      that he could easily have eliminated the conservatives had it
      not been for the more urgent need of securing their military and
      financial support for the spring campaign planned against the
      Russians. With Ibrahim Hilmi and most of the Janissaries march¬
      ing to the Danube in April, conservative leadership in Istanbul
      fell to his lieutenant at the capital, Rose Musa Pasha, and to
      Ataullah Efendi and the Ulema, who > worked to restore their
      prestige and undermine the Sultan’s. Their efforts were greatly
      assisted by the food shortages and inflation which plagued the
      capital during the spring as a result of the enemy occupation of
      its principal grain sources in the Principalities and of the Russian
      blockade of the Dardanelles, which effectively prevented the
      arrival of supplies usually sent from the Anatolian seacost by
      ship. These conditions were further aggravated by the presence
      in the capital of large numbers of Anatolian troops passing
      through on their way to the Danube, who used force to obtain
      for themselves most of the supplies that still remained in the
      Imperial stores. When the news arrived of the Wahhabi attacks
      on the Holy Cities and the British invasion of Egypt, Selim’s
      remaining popularity rapidly evaporated, and Ataullah and his
      cohorts prepared for a final outburst against those considered
      responsible for all the difficulties in which the empire now found
      itself.
         But caution still was necessary. Selim and the reformers had
      preponderant military strength in and near the capital, with
      20,000 Nizam-i Jedid men at Levend Chiftlik, 5,000 artillery
      men at Tophane, and 8,000 men and officers of the fleet at Kasim-
      pasha at least nominally supporting them. With the Janissaries
      now mostly in Rumelia, the rebel leaders in Istanbul had to sus¬
      pend execution of their plans until their return or until they
      could get the support of the only other important military force
       then stationed near the capital, approximately 3,000 yamaks.
       These were mostly Albanian and Circassian mercenaries, who
       were officially connected with the Janissary corps and, in the
       absence of the regular army, garrisoned the Bosporus forts. Their
       loyalties were at best uncertain, but since they currently were




                             The Triumph of Reaction
under the command of the former Reis ul-Kuttah, Raif Mahmud             377
Pasha, now in charge of all the Bosporus forts, it seemed very
unlikely that they could be used for the revolt unless they were
alienated from him in some way.^^ Moreover as long as all the
Sultan’s military supporters^ remained in Istanbul, even the
yamaks would not be sufficient to support a popular revolt. Early
in April therefore Ataullah sent Pehlivan Hiiseyin Agha to the
front to try to get the support of the Janissaries and other soldiers
there and persuade them to return to Istanbul to take up arms
against the Sultan.^^
  Pehlivan Hiiseyin Agha’s mission became less important when
on May 10, 1807, the Grand Admiral led his entire fleet out of the
harbor and into the Sea of Marmara with the object of doing
battle with the Russian fleet and ending its long blockade of the
Dardanelles. With the sailors out of the way, the conservatives
had much more of a chance for victory, if only the yamaks could
be won over.
  Rose Musa had carefully concealed his alliance with the con¬
servatives, and he now persuaded the unsuspecting Raif Mahmud
to try to win the yamaks over to the Nizam-i Jedid while the
Janissaries were still absent from the capital. Orders went out
incorporating them into the new army; officers were sent to train
and discipline them; and new western-style uniforms were pre¬
pared for them at the clothing factory in Uskiidar. But at the
same time, Kose Musa and Ataullah sent their own agents to the
yamaks reminding them of the glorious past of their Janissary
allies and arousing them against any sort of connection with the
"renegades, infidels, and bad Muslims” who composed the new
army.   So when the Nizam-i Jedid men arrived to train the
yamaks, fights broke out between them. As the bad feeling in¬
creased, the plotters saw that it would be not too difficult to set
off a.yamak revolt with only a single spark.^®




                   The Politics of Ottoman Reform
                  XXI. The Revolt




                                   V




The spark that was needed to set off a yamak revolt was unwit¬
tingly supplied by Raif Mahmud Pasha himself. On the morning
of Monday, May 25, 1807, in the company of a small Nizam-i
Jedid contingent led by one Halil Agha he went by boat to Rumeli
Kavak to pay the yamaks their regular quarterly wage and also
to persuade them to accept the new training and uniforms. But
as soon as Halil Agha began to distribute the uniforms, the
yamaks set upon him and tore him apart. The revolt had begun.
Mahmud and his men managed to escape by boat and land at
Biiyukdere, hoping to go on overland to Levend Chiftlik, but the
yamaks caught and executed them as soon as they landed. The
news soon spread to the yamaks in the other Bosporus forts, and
they rose to kill their officers and the Nizam-i Jedid officers sent
to train them. As evening approached, they gathered at Biiyuk-
dere, and chose as their leader one of themselves, Kabakji Mustafa
Agha, who immediately sent out the call to all the soldiers in the
capital to join the revolt and end the "infidel innovations” once
and for all.
  When news of the yamak actions reached the palace, Selim
called an urgent meeting of all his ministers and advisers the
same evening. While they were deliberating, a message arrived
from Kabakji Mustafa stating that the revolt would end if the
Sultan agreed to remove the Nizam-i Jedid men from the Bos¬           379
porus and order them to remain in their barracks. Selim im¬
mediately issued orders to this effect, thus again dismaying his
supporters and stimulating the conservatives to greater efforts.
Musa Pasha and Ataullah Efendi, still concealing their connec¬
tions with the rebels, did not want the revolt to end with this
concession, so as soon as Kabakji Mustafa’s message arrived,
they sent an appeal to the Janissaries remaining in the capital
advising them that the time had finally come to destroy the re¬
forms. The Janissaries then sent several of their elders and
officers to Biiyukdere, where they got the yamaks to agree to
continue the revolt until this end was reached, regardless of the
Sultan’s capitulation to their original demands.*
  On Tuesday morning,^ May 26, Musa Pasha met in council
with the other ministers and advisers. While they decided to take
firm action if the yamaks continued their revolt, he got them to
agree to keep the Nizam-i Jedid men in their barracks and do
nothing overt in order to avoid antagonizing the mass of the
people and perhaps causing the revolt to spread. Musa thus
gained time for the rebels to prepare their plans and secure
partisans in the capital while continuing to deprive the Sultan
of the only force he could rely on to resist them.
  Finally on Wednesday morning. May 27,^ approximately six
hundred yamaks set out from Biiyukdere and marched along the
Bosporus shore toward Istanbul, gathering vagrants and others
as they went. Since Musa Pasha continued to hold the Nizam-i
Jedid men in their barracks, there was no opposition, and the
yamaks marched along at a rapid pace. As night fell they reached
Ortakoy, where they were joined by three hundred of their
comrades who had come by boat, and they camped there for the
night. In Istanbul, Selim summoned Musa Pasha to the palace
along with a number of Janissary leaders and elders, including
one Bakirji Laz Hajji Mustafa Agha, himself a Laz like most of
the yamaks, who agreed to go to Ortakoy and use his influence to
quiet the rebels in return for a promise to end the Nizam-i Jedid
once and for all and to disperse its men. Selim thus sacrificed the
major accomplishment of his reign in order to save himself. He
now was certain that the revolt would be ended without further




                              The Revolt
380   difficulty. The ministers and a’dvisers left the palace and returned
      to their homes, and the Sultan withdrew to his harem for the
      night.
         Thus Musa Pasha alone was left in control of the government
      and the army, and he quickly used his position to good advantage.
      He immediately sent new orders to the Nizam-i Jedid men to stay
      in their barracks and to all the other corps to join the yamaks.
      Towards midnight Kabakji Mustafa and his men went by boat
      from Ortakoy to Tophane, where they^ were joined by the entire
      artillery corps in obedience to Miisa^s orders. With the Nizam-i
      Jedid immobilized, the sailors at sea, and the artillery corps
      with the rebels, the Sultan no longer was supported by the ma¬
      jority of the military forces which he had commanded only a short
      time before. During the rest of the night,and the following morn¬
      ing, yamaks came by boat to Istanbul, Uskiidar, and Galata,
      scattered to the military barracks and quarters of artisans
      favorable to them, and spread a message for everyone to assemble
      the next day in At Meydan, the classical hippodrome, located in
      front of the Sultan Ahmed mosque, only a short distance from the
       palace. There they were to present their grievances but with the
       promise that they would not harm the lives or property of anyone,
       including Christians as well as Muslims, and that they would
       demand nothing that was not sanctioned by the Sheyh ul-Islam.
       Despite these assurances, it seemed obvious that the rebels were
      now on their way to success.
        On Thursday morning. May 28,^ Kabakji Mustafa, the yamaks,
      and the artillery men went by boat around the Galata point into
      the Golden Horn, and landed at the Unkapani quai, at the foot
      of the modern Atatiirk Boulevard. The men immediately pro¬
      ceeded up the hill of the old city to Et Meydan southeast of the
      Byzantine aqueduct, where they were joined by thousands of
      soldiers, artisans, and vagrants, coming in response to the pre¬
      vious night’s call. With Musa Pasha in charge of the government,
      no effort was made to impede their progress or to prevent the
      assembly. In the meantime the Janissary leaders met with
      officers of the other corps at the Siileymaniye mosque. After a
      spirited debate over the legality of their actions, they agreed to
      support the revolt and went to the Janissary barracks at Et




                             The Triumph of Reaction
Meydan, located between the Unkapani and At Meydan, where                381
Kabakji Mustafa and the other yamak leaders awaited them.
The city was now in panic. Those who did not join the assembly
at Et Meydan shut their shops and homes and hid themselves
and their families despite rebel assurances that no harm would
come to them. At Levend Chiftlik, the Nizam-i Jedid men took
up their arms and prepared for battle, but they still waited for
instructions to come to Istanbul and help the Sultan. But by now
it would have been too late even if such instructions did come,
for Levend Chiftlik was far from the scene of action.
  At noon Kabakji Mustafa and the other leaders left the Janis¬
sary barracks and"^ proceeded up the hill toward Et Meydan. In
the palace, on the opposite side of the city, Selim III was terrified.
While Ibrahim Nesim urged him again and again to summon the
Nizam-i Jedid army, the Sultan accepted Musa Pasha’s advice
that they instead be officially dissolved forthwith, and orders to
this effect were issued at once. Musa Pasha and Ataullah Efendi
left the palace and went to Et Meydan to announce this news just
as Kabakji Mustafa and the rebel leaders arrived on the scene
from the opposite direction. While the rebel leaders paused to
decide his fate, Selim ordered the palace gates entirely shut, and
he waited in his rooms for the results of the meeting.
  But the Sultan’s hesitations and concessions only encouraged
the rebel leaders to increase their demands. After a short dis¬
cussion with Musa Pasha and Ataullah Efendi, Kabakji Mustafa
declared to the assemblage that the Sultan’s order was not
enough; eleven reform leaders accused of various crimes, ranging
from killing Muslims in the Edirne Incident to violating Muslim
law and tradition in their reform efforts, would have to be handed
over for execution before they would disperse. These were Ibrahim
Nesim Efendi, Hajji Ibrahim Efendi, and Yusuf Agha; Selim’s
private secretary, Ahmed Efendi; the Director of the Mint,
Ebubekir Efendi; the Irad-i Jedid director, Ahmed Bey; the
Reis ul-Kuttah’s Lieutenant, Safi Ahmed Bey; the Director of
Grains, Memish Efendi; and a teacher in the technical schools,
Lutfullah Efendi. Ataullah Efendi now revealed himself for the
first time; he issued a fetva supporting all the rebel demands and
sent it to the palace with the recommendation that Selim agree




                              The Revolt
382   at orice in order to save himself. There still was no public evi¬
      dence of any desire to depose Selim—only his evil ministers and
      associates would be disposed of and the reforms ended. With
      Ottoman society restored to the old ways, all would be well.
        When Selim received Ataullah’s message and the rebel de¬
      mands, he declared his acceptance at once, but tried to save
      Ibrahim Nesim Efendi, Hajji Ibrahim Efendi, and Ahmed Efendi,
      whom he allowed to escape by means of a rear door through the
      Giilhane park. Memish Efendi, Shpkir Efendi, and Safi Efendi
      were in the palace, but rather tha'h sending them to the Et Mey-
      dan for a savage death, the Sultan had them executed in his
      private quarters, and then sent their heads out to the rebels.
      Ebubekir Efendi heard about the order while he was at the
      Porte, but as he moved outside its gates’in an attempt to flee, he
      was caught and executed by a group of yamaks. Yusuf Agha was
      in exile in Bursa, so he escaped assassination at this time. The
      remaining persons on the list were outside the palace when the
      demands were made, and as soon as they heard the news they hid
      themselves while the Janissaries scattered through the city to
      find and execute them as well as all the Nizam-i Jedict leaders
      whom they could find. Of the reformers in the city, only Chelebi
      Mustafa Reshid Efendi managed to escape by disguising himself;
      the only other survivors were the lesser figures who were with
      the Imperial army at the time.
        Finally on Friday, May 29,^ the revolt reached its culmination.
      Shortly after midnight the Sheyh ul-Islam and Musa Pasha
      secretly met with a representative of Prince Mustafa, and for the
      first time the idea of putting him on the throne in place of Selim
      was openly discussed and agreed on. Early the next morning
      Kabakji Mustafa arrived at the Janissary barracks with about
      thirty yamaks, and for the next hour he harangued the occupants.
      The Janissaries had been avenged for their long years of suffer¬
      ing; their enemies were dead, the Nizam-i Jedid destroyed. But
      Sultan Selim still remained: he who had scorned the traditional
      laws, persecuted the older corps, disdained the Ulema, and
      consorted with infidels. Now he had consented to their demands
      in the face of armed men, but what was to prevent him from
      resuming his old ways once the soldiers went back to their posts?




                           The Triumph of Reaction
The evil could be eradicated only at its source; to assure the
permanence of the reaction, Selim would have to be deposed.
The Janissaries agreed wholeheartedly, and they poured out of
their barracks toward the palace. Kabakji Mustafa and the
Janissary elders then went ,t0 Ataullah Efendi, who issued a
fetua authorizing the deposition on the grounds of misrule and
violation of tradition and religion.
  While the soldiers headed through the At Meydan toward
the palace, Ataullah Efendi went down to the Porte where all the
Ulema were waiting. When he read the fetva, they shouted their
approval and agreed to support the deposition. In midafternoon,
the soldiers and thh Ulema massed in front of the palace shouting
their support for "Sultan Mustafa Han.” At the same time,
Selim’s secretary Ahmed Bey was torn apart in front of the Porte
and his head sent in to the terrified Sultan, who then gave up all
thoughts of resistance and agreed to give up his throne in return
only for guarantees of his personal safety.
  Selim immediately summoned Prince Mustafa, who after
feigning reluctance, agreed to accept the throne. The Imperial
Throne was set up in front of the third gate of the palace, the
Bab us-Saadet, and the rebels fiooded into the great courtyard
before it. Late in the afternoon, while Selim retired to rooms set
aside for him in the harem, his cousin ascended the throne as
Mustafa IV, and the ceremonies of homage and testimonies of)"
loyalty were carried out. Thus the revolt had reached its goal, the
"infidel Sultan” was deposed, and his reforms could now be
dismantled.




                             The Revolt
      XXII. Epilogue: Mustafa IV and
           the Ottoman Reaction




                                       V




With Selim in the cage and Mustafa IV on the throne, power fell
into the hands of Kdse Musa Pasha and Ataullah Efendi, who
moved quickly to eliminate the last traces of the previous regime.
On June 3, the Nizam-i Jedid was abolished along with all the
new institutions and schools associated with it. Stating that the
reforms had been created by evil associates of the Sultan in order
to secure power and money for themselves, the decree declared
that they had destroyed order, violated laws and traditions, and
caused all the anarchy, misrule, and defeats which had torn the
empire apart during the preceding years. Hereafter, it was de¬
clared, the traditional laws of the empire would be carried out in
full; the older corps would remain to carry out their assigned
functions according to the established organizations and laws.
All the new taxes introduced during the previous reign were
abolished, and the older ones restored. The Ottoman Empire
would continue its friendship with its friends and bitter enmity
to all those who sought to hurt it.*
  At the same time, Musa and Ataullah acted quickly to stabilize
their personal power by dispersing those who brought them to
success and expected to share the fruits of victory. An agreement
was made between the Sultan and the Janissary elders and
leaders in the capital by which the soldiers returned to their
barracks and agreed to cease interference in state affairs in         385
return for assurances that they would be absolved of all responsi¬
bility for the revolt and that the reforms which they disliked so
much would be completely abolished.^ At the same time, to get
the yamaks out of the city, Kabakji Mustafa was appointed com¬
mander of the Bosporus forts on the Rumeli side, so he and his
men left the capital, leaving full power in the hands of the new
government.®
  While it was impossible to eliminate everyone who had served
the previous Sultan, almost all the important reformers still
alive were now denied office, and new persons were found for
most of the higher* positions in the treasury, the army, and the
palace. But it was not long before the victors fell out among them¬
selves. Musa and Ataullah soon began a struggle for power, with
each trying to get as many positions as possible for men loyal to
him or his party. Not all the Nizam-i Jedid men were kept out of
office; those against whom the rebel groups had no special griev¬
ance were brought back to the government, with Halet Efendi,
former ambassador to Paris, becoming treasurer, Chelebi Mus¬
tafa Reshid going to the dockyard as its director and chief of
the Naval Treasury, and Galib Efendi becoming Nishanji (chief
assistant of the Reis). Hurshid Pasha became governor of the
Morea and commander of the army based in Sofia; and Asim
Efendi was made official historian and chronicler of the new
regime.^
  On the Danube, even before the revolt, Pehlivan Hiiseyin had
taken over command of the Janissary corps as its Agha and in¬
cited his men to demand permission to return to Istanbul so they
could participate in the momentous events about to unfold. Grand
Vezir Ibrahim Hilmi Pasha vigorously opposed this, thinking
that the revolt would be postponed until the enemy was dealt
with and he could return home. He feared that if his army was
dissolved, the military gains of the previous months would be
dissipated; Bucharest would be lost and the Russians and Serbs
could unite their forces and move across the Danube, imperiling
the entire European part of the empire. So in response to the
Janissary demand, he tried to replace Pehlivan with his own
lieutenant, Eyub Agha. But with the army supporting him,
Pehlivan held the upper hand and simply ignored the order. In



                             Epilogue
386   the absence of permission to depart, he and his men remained
      at their posts instead of returning to Istanbul. But when news
      of the revolt arrived on June 1, he immediately deposed the Grand
      Vezir, and his men began to attack and kill all the Nizam-iJedid
      partisans and supporters of the old Sultan they could find. Until a
      new Grand Vezir could be sent from Istanbul, Pehlivan Agha
      took de facto command of the army, although for the sake of
      formality, he appointed as Kaymakam Ebubekir Pasha, who had
      just come from the capital with orders from Musa Pasha.^ Pehli¬
      van Agha immediately began to ciismiss the officers he did not
      like, and his men spread disorder and anarchy in the camp. The
      principal commanders of the other corps reacted by calling for the
      assistance of Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha, who on June 8 arrived
      in the camp at Giurgevo, drove out Pehlivan and his supporters,
      and restored order and discipline in the army.®
        Bayrakdar Mustafa expected to be appointed Grand Vezir and
      commander of the new army as a reward not only for this action,
      but also for his successes against the Russians during the pre¬
      vious year. But when the news of the army revolt reached Istanbul
      on June 18, Ataullah Efendi managed to get the Grand Vezirate
      for one of his own men, Chelebi Mustafa Pasha, then commander
      of the Dardanelles fortifications.^ Bayrakdar was so furious that
      he and his men abruptly departed for Ruschuk, taking with them
      all the reformers and supporters of Selim who wished to go.
      Bayrakdar now suspended all relations with the army, refused to
      supply it with food or provisions, and invited all those wishing
      to desert to join him in Ruschuk. Pehlivan Agha became second
      in command, and his supporters were installed in all the other
      key positions. As the Janissaries began to seize all the remaining
      food for themselves, the army soon fell into anarchy. Within a
      month the Grand Vezir was forced to send it into winter quarters,
      leaving care of the Danube front entirely to Bayrakdar Mustafa
      and his forces.®
        As the summer progressed in Istanbul, Musa Pasha and Ataul¬
      lah Efendi were about equal in the struggle then going on for
      control of the government, so the balance of power fell to Kabakji
      Mustafa and his yamaks, who used their position to interfere in
      state affairs and inaugurate a reign of terror in the streets of




                           The Triumph of Reaction
Istanbul despite their previous promises to stay on the Bosporus.     387
The political factions gathered vast amounts of money for them¬
selves by confiscating the properties of their enemies and of the
reform leaders and selling for their own profit most of the sup¬
plies supposed to be sent to-the imperial army on the Danube.
  Meanwhile the British remained entrenched at Alexandria,
and there seemed no way to get them out. On the Danube the
army was in chaos, but the Russians made no move to take ad¬
vantage of the situation, so^it was simply ignored in Istanbul. The
Russian blockade continued outside the Dardanelles, and the
capital suffered more and more from famine and inflation. Sultan
Mustafa finally ordered Seydi Ali Pasha to move out of the safety
of the Straits and engage the Russians, in the hope of opening
the way for grain ships being loaded in Egypt and on the southern
coasts of Anatolia. Senyavin’s main fleet was cruising in the
Archipelago, and the few ships he had left to guard the Straits
were badly outnumbered, so they fled to Tenedos with Seydi Ali
in hot pursuit. The Ottomans had begun to land men on the island
when Senyavin’s approach caused them to break off the action
and flee for home. On reaching the Straits, however, Seydi Ali
found a large new Russian force waiting for him, so he was com¬
pelled to turn back to meet Senyavin. Between July 1 and July 4,
there was a series of engagements between the two off Lemnos;
although several Ottoman ships were sunk, Senyavin also suffered
such heavy losses that he was forced to return to Tenedos, leaving
the Straits unguarded. The blockade was suspended, and the
capital at long last began to receive the needed grains, thus re¬
ducing the tension which had built up during the previous few
months.®
 The way European events took shape once again saved the
Ottomans from the consequences of their weakness. As late as
May, Vahid Efendi and Talleyrand had been negotiating at the
Emperor’s winter quarters at Warsaw, and it seemed that an
agreement might be reached for joint action against Russia and
Great Britain. But Selim had held back. While he wanted an
alliance with France, he wanted it directed only against Russia,
refusing to include Britain because of Bonaparte s inability to
help him against the British in Egypt. He refused to allow Vahid




                             Epilogue
      ./
                                   V             i


388        Efendi even to discuss French demands for food and transport
           for the French officers and troops who were to operate in his
           territory, including those about to pass through on their way to
           carry out a new alliance recently signed with the Shah of Iran.
           Nor did he accept Bonaparte’s demands for special commercial
           privileges and compensation for French property losses in the
           empire during the expedition to Egypt.*” So the negotiations
           dragged on without result. Then Bonaparte’s great victory over
           the Russians at the battle of Friedland (June 14, 1807) largely
           ended his need for an Ottoman alliance, so the idea was quietly
           dropped shortly thereafter. Bonaparte now was ready for peace
           with Russia in order to stabilize his new European empire and
           concentrate his military efforts against Great Britain. Czar Alex¬
           ander also was ready to desert Britain ahd make peace, not only
           because of the disastrous defeat but also because of shortages of
           food and supplies in his own army and disappointment over a lack
           of assistance from the British during the previous months. So on
           June 24, the Emperor and the Czar came to Tilsit and began to
           negotiate a settlement which would recognize Bonaparte’s con¬
           quests in Europe in return for peace for all concerned.
             During the course of the negotiations, the news about Selim’s
           deposition increased Bonaparte’s determination to abandon the
           Porte. After all, although Selim had been under Sebastiani’s
           influence, the new Sultan and government might not be sympa¬
           thetic. Moreover Selim’s removal provided Bonaparte with the
           excuse that any personal obligation to consult the Sultan on
           peace negotiations was now nullified. Alexander I also wished to
           discuss Ottoman dissolution and partition of the spoils, but Bona¬
           parte was able to use the continued uncertainty about events in
           Istanbul to avoid any agreement on these points." While the
           treaty signed on July 7 was concerned primarily with European
           matters, there were a number of important points of direct con¬
           cern to the Porte.Russia agreed to conclude an armistice with
           the Ottomans, to turn over the Ionian Islands and Cattaro to the
           French immediately, and to evacuate the Principalities, although
           the Ottomans were not supposed to move into them until a final
           peace was reached. France would mediate a peace settlement
           between the adversaries in return for a similar effort by the Czar




                                The Triumph of Reaction
for a Franco-British agreement; but Bonaparte agreed that if the     389
negotiations failed, he would join the war against the Porte and
make further arrangements to divide the European parts of its
empire. Istanbul and its hinterland were excluded from these
provisions for the moment. This was a great victory for the French
Emperor. Russia had recognized his conquests and empire and
left Britain to fight on alone. The Russians had been kept out of
the Balkans and the Straits, and France had achieved uncon¬
tested control of the Adriatic regardless of what might happen
in the negotiations still to take place in Istanbul and Paris.
  Alexander now sent orders to the commanders of all his ships
in the Mediterranean and Adriatic to return to the Black Sea via
the Straits if the Porte permitted, otherwise to the Baltic. The
Russian troops at Cattaro and the Ionian Islands were to go to
Trieste or Venice as soon as possible. At the same time. General
Marmont was ordered to send a garrison to Cattaro and Corfu
and to re-establish friendly relations with the Montenegrins, who
previously, under Russian influence, had raided Dalmatia almost
continuously.
  From Tilsit, Bonaparte and Alexander sent agents to General
Michelson, the Grand Vezir, and Selim’s successor, Sultan Mus¬
tafa, to get their agreement on an immediate armistice, Russian
withdrawal, and peace negotiations. Sebastiani was instructed
to work toward these ends and to maintain Ottoman-French
friendship by pointing out that the Tilsit agreement had been
made to help the Porte against its enemies. He was to get the new
Sultan to negotiate for peace with the Russians, to refrain from
occupying the Principalities until peace was signed, and to accept
French occupation of the Ionian Islands and Cattaro.
  During the spring and early summer of 1807, before Istanbul
heard about the agreement at Tilsit, Sebastiani had made con¬
siderable progress in getting the support of the new government.
Despite their rejection of Selim’s internal policies, Mustafa and
the men around him had early decided to maintain the associa¬
tion with France so long as Russia remained in the Principalities
and Britain in Egypt. The strongly pro-French Mehmed Efendi
was therefore appointed as Reis ul-Kuttab despite his close con¬
nection with the previous regime. In response to Sebastiani’s as-




                             Epilogue
      A

390        surances of continued French'support, new orders were issued
           prohibiting British commerce in the empire and organizing an
           inventory of British properties and goods in preparation for their
           eventual confiscation. In early June when Colonel Pozzo di Borgo
           and Lord Arthur Paget came to Tenedos with full powers from the
           Russian and British governments, respectively, to negotiate set¬
           tlements with the Porte and arrange evacuations of its territories,
           they were denied permission even to go on to Istanbul to present
           their proposals formally on the grounds that the Ottoman Em¬
           pire could now engage in negotiatiohs only at a general peace con¬
           ference through the mediation of France.
             When news of the Franco-Russian agreement finally became
           known in Istanbul on July 18, the initial Ottoman reaction was
           one of intense fury. Sebastiani was hurriedly summoned to the
           Porte. Mehmed Efendi told him that Bonaparte should not have
           ratified the peace without prior consultation with his ally the
           Sultan; the Ottoman Empire had been sacrificed, left in the hands
           of Russia to do with as it wished; all the promises made on the
           subject of its integrity had been violated; it was impossible for
           the Ottomans not to reoccupy the Principalities as soon as the
           Russians left; France had abandoned the Porte, betrayed it; Paget
           would be summoned from Tenedos, and negotiations would be
           opened for an immediate peace with Great Britain.*® The next
           day all the French officers and soldiers in Ottoman service were
           sent back to Dalmatia, with the sole exception of Juchereau de
           Saint Denys. In Istanbul and along the Danube, wild rumors
           accompanied the news: the empire would be divided, Bosnia and
           Herzegovina would be joined to Dalmatia, the Morea to the King¬
           dom of Italy, Serbia to Austria, Moldavia and Wallachiato Russia,
           and so forth. Mobs began to roam the streets, attacking Ottoman
           officials and foreigners alike in protest against this new betrayal
           by a Christian ally. The Grand Vezir was so angry that he ar¬
           rested the French courier bringing the news and refused to allow
           him to proceed on to Istanbul.*®
              It was not long before there were second thoughts at the Porte.
            When Sebastiani communicated the full text of the agreement,
            it was seen that there was a great deal to be said for accepting it.
          Y Militarily, Russia had agreed to abandon its conquests in the




                                  The Triumph of Reaction
Principalities; this meant an end to its assistance to the Serbian    391
rebels, who could therefore be suppressed easily once peace was
secured. Politically, the Treaty of Tilsit would be a new blow at
Selim’s policies, since it was he who had inaugurated the pro-
French policies of the Porte oyer a year before. So on July 25, the
Grand Vezir sent Galib Efendi from Silistria to negotiate an
armistice.'^ The negotiations were set for the Slobosia fortress
near Giurgevo, but it was not until three weeks later, on August
12, that work actually began because of a delay in sending Galib’s
documents of authority from Istanbul. The discussions then
dragged on for two weeks, with the parties disputing bitterly the
question of whether the Porte would occupy the Principalities
immediately after the Russian evacuation and whether guaran¬
tees for a Serbian settlement would be included. In the end Galib
Efendi gave in on the first point and the Russians on the second.
A temporary boyar government would be established to rule both
Moldavia and Wallachia until a peace settlement allowed a new
Ottoman occupation; nothing at all was said about the Serbs,
who thus also found betrayal at the hands of their friends.'®
  On August 23, Mehmed Efendi informed Talleyrand in Istan¬
bul that the Porte would observe the Treaty of Tilsit and accept
French mediation for peace negotiations with Russia, to be carried
out at Paris with the Ottoman ambassador there, Muhib Efendi,
being appointed with full plenipotentiary powers to represent
the Sultan.'® A day later the armistice was signed at Slobosia
for a term ending on March 21, 1808. Within thirty-five days,
Russian troops would leave Moldavia and Wallachia, while the
Ottoman army would move south of the Danube, with the right
to leave garrisons only at Ismail, Ibrail, and Galatz to provide
for police and security. The last Russian ships in the Mediter¬
ranean, now at Tenedos and in the Archipelago, would leave and
presumably be allowed passage through the Straits into the
Black Sea.""
  The Porte ratified the armistice in a communication to Sebasti-
ani on September 21, and its armies immediately withdrew to
Silistria. General Michelson died soon after the agreement was
reached, and although it was ratified by his successor. General
Meyendorff, the Russians never fulfilled it. They left Bucharest




                             Epilogue
          J

392       and Ostrovo, thus temporarily severing their connections with
          the Serbs, but they remained in Craiova and Moldavia and re-
      ^   fused to budge any farther without orders from the Czar confirm¬
          ing the agreement. When Galib Efendi complained, the Russian
          agent Lazarev replied that the Ottomans had failed to provide
          sufficient police protection in Bucharest and the area between it
          and the Danube, that Ottoman troops had served mainly to
          pillage, and that he had ordered the evacuation to cease until
          further instructions arrived from Sainf, Petersburg. At the same
          time, Senyavin remained at Tenhdos with the same excuse.^*
              As soon as the Czar returned to his capital from Tilsit, he re¬
          fused to ratify the armistice on the pretext that Meyendorff had
          no authority to sign it. Actually he felt that it was far too favora-
          ble to the Porte. Apparently relying on an oral promise made by
          Bonaparte at Tilsit that he would not openly oppose a continued
          Russian occupation of the Principalities and Tenedos, Alexander
          decided to retain his forces there until a peace treaty actually
          was signed so that they could be used to pressure the Porte to
          accept his conditions on Serbia, trade, and other matters.^^
          Lazarev informed Galib Efendi that the Czar had added condi¬
          tions concerning the Serbs and that no further evacuation could
          take place without new negotiations; Galib therefore declared
          the armistice at an end and returned to Istanbul. On October 21,
          General Prosorovich arrived at Bucharest to take command of
          the Russian army, and both sides began preparations for a spring
          campaign.^^ The war went on, albeit somewhat sporadically, and
          was actually ended only five years later by the Treaty of Bucha¬
          rest. The immediate Ottoman reaction in Istanbul was renewal
          of the earlier anti-French feeling; once again, it was felt that
          Bonaparte had betrayed the Sultan at Tilsit, that Bonaparte
          never intended that the Russians evacuate their positions, and
          that Sebastiani had intentionally been trying to deceive the
          Sultan. Mehmed Efendi tried to save himself from the conse¬
          quences of failure by complaining about Sebastiani’s deception to
          the Imperial Council and to Bonaparte, asking for his immediate
          recall. At the same time, he called Paget to Istanbul and began
          secret negotiations to secure British evacuation from Egypt.




                                 The Triumph of Reaction
Although the evacuation took place in mid-September, Sebastiani       393
now exercised such political power at the Porte through the Bash
Terjuman, Alexander Suzzo, that he was able to disrupt the peace
negotiations and secure Mehmed’s removal and banishment at
the end of October, and his .replacement by a French puppet,
Musa Efendi.^^                                        *


          Preparations for a Spring Campaign
  With the armistice definitely broken, both sides did their best
to prepare for resuming their campaigns in the spring. In the
east a Russian arrdy moved into Anatolia, and on the Arpa Su it
defeated an Ottoman army of 30,000 men under the command
of the former Grand Vezir, Yusuf Ziya Pasha, now governor of
the province of Erzurum; preparations were then made to move
along the Black Sea coast in the spring.^® In the west, at the same
time, 10,000 Russian soldiers moved across the Dniester and
took up positions in Moldavia and Wallachia in preparation for a
new advance in the spring.^® In Serbia Kara George’s state now
controlled all of the ancient kingdom with the exception of Nish,
Leskovatz, and a few small places at the foot of the mountains
leading into Macedonia and Albania. A Russian agent, Rodo-
finikin, was occupied with reorganizing the government and
army, and special efforts were being made to organize the popula¬
tion en masse and to transform the various semi-independent
rebel bands into regular disciplined regiments under a central
command.^’^
  Nor did the Ottomans neglect their preparations. Orders were
sent out to Anatolia, Bosnia, and Macedonia for troops to be raised
and sent for the spring campaign. Hundreds of men were soon
crossing the Bosporus and moving through the capital on their
way to Edirne. In Bosnia the governor had a force of 10,000 men
ready at Travnik to move toward the Drina. Efforts were made
to replace Yusuf Pasha at Erzurum and send him as governor to
Baghdad, but when he refused to leave, he was retained in his
post and ordered to regroup his army as soon as possible.^® On
March 23, a full Imperial Council, meeting at the Porte in the




                             Epilogue
394   presence of all the military, administrative, and religious leaders
      of the ruling class, decided to gather the Imperial army at Edirne
      and send it north as soon as it was re'ady.^® On April 12, it set out
      for the Danube in the company of the Grand Vezir and chief
      treasurer.^®
         In the Adriatic and along the Albanian coast, conditions had
      changed considerably during the winter. The French had oc¬
      cupied Corfu and the other Ionian Islands in September 1807.^'
      While Pouqueville continued to secure Ali of Janina’s coopera¬
      tion, the ruler of Albania and Greece was quite unhappy at his
      continued inability to secure these places for himself, so he now
      moved to secure the assistance of the foreign power whose own
      interests best corresponded with his own. Great Britain.^^ In the
      past Britain had been able to do little with Ali, or in fact with the
      Porte, because of the long-standing Anglo-Russian alliance in
      Europe. But now this alliance was broken, and it no longer con¬
      strained the Cabinet in London from considering its own interests
      in the Middle East and the Balkans. The Treaty of Tilsit had
      made it unnecessary for Britain to continue a war with the Porte
      which it had entered primarily to preserve the Russian alliance;
      so while Britain arranged for evacuation of Egypt, and negotia¬
      tions began for an Anglo-Ottoman peace which would be signed a
      year later. All’s overtures for help against the French were met
      with a ready response. To establish the new relationship. Admiral
      Collingwood sent from Malta Captain W. M. Leake, who had
      previously gone to Janina when Morier made his unsuccessful
      effort in 1804. Meeting secretly with Ali at Preveza on Novem¬
      ber 12, Leake got him to agree to cooperate with the British
      against the French forces in Dalmatia and the Ionian Islands but
      with the understanding that he would break with the French
      only when the British actually sent a squadron to his assistance.
      Collingwood was unable to send help for the moment because of
      other needs in the Mediterranean, so Ali preserved op>en neu¬
      trality while in fact making Pouqueville and the other French
      agents at his court virtual prisoners and preparing to move
      against Corfu and Santa Maura as soon as British assistance
      arrived.^^ Thus a collaboration was inaugurated which was to




                             The Triumph of Reaction
drive the French from the Ionian Islands and benefit both sides   395
considerably in the years ahead. At the same time that Ali made
his plans, the French occupied the islands and Dalmatia and
controlled the Adriatic, and this threat from the rear was an
important calculation in the Ottoman military plans for the
spring.




                  /




                           Epilogue
             ^   XXIII. The Deposition
                    of Mustafa IV




                                    \




  While conditions were ostensibly returning to normal in Istan¬
 bul, and the Imperial army along the Danube prepared for the
  spring campaign, momentous efforts were being made at Ruschuk
 to reverse the reaction and restore Selim to the throne from which
  he had been so abruptly removed the year before.
    While most of the Nizam-i Jedid leaders had been either killed
  or absorbed by the reaction, their subordinates had been with the
  Imperial army at the time of the revolt. Most of them moved
 back to Ruschuk with Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha when he split
 with the Grand Vezir and returned home in early July 1807.
y There they accepted his protection, and with his approval and
  inspiration, they formed a secret committee with the aim of re-
^ storing Selim and reviving his reforms.* Led by Bayrakdar
 Mustafa himself, the committee included Mustafa Refik Efendi,^
 a member of the scribal class who had served as Lieutenant of the
  Grand Vezir immediately before the revolution, Mehmed Said
 Galib Efendi,^ Chief Assistant of the current Grand Vezir and
 ostensibly stationed at Ruschuk to carry on the negotiations
 with the Russians at Slobosia; Abdullah Ramiz Efendi,^ a mem¬
 ber of the Ulema who had served as judge of the expeditionary
 force sent against the French in Egypt before entering the scribal
 class and serving as supervisor of the Mortar corps and Chief
Accountant in the Treasury before the revolution; Mehmed             397
Tahsin Efendi,® also originally a member of the Ulema, who had
transferred to the scribal class and risen to be secretary of the
Grand Vezir at the time of the revolution; and Mehmed Emin
Behij Efendi,® who as chief buyer of the Imperial army in 1806
and 1807 had come into close contact with Bayrakdar Mustafa
during the course of the campaigns. The moving intellectual force
behind the committee was Ramiz Efendi, who wrote a long report
to Bayrakdar describing the foreign and domestic situation at
that time, praising the virtues of Selim and his reforms and
urging his restoration in order to save the empire.
  Ba3u-akdar Mustafa was hardly an intellectual, nor was he a
strong partisan of reform. His beloved master, Ismail Agha, had
ended his life as a firm opponent of everything Selim stood for,
and most of his fellow notables, led by Pasvanoglu, had con¬
stantly opposed the reforms as direct threats to their autonomy
and power. In a sense, his new emphasis was not as much a de¬
parture from their policies as might be imagined. The notables
had maintained and emphasized their autonomy by opposing
those in power in Istanbul, and they had secured their following
mainly from among Janissaries and others who had suffered at
the hands of government, so they opposed reform. But now it was
the Janissaries and reactionaries who ruled in Istanbul, and once
in power they disliked ayan autonomy in the Balkans just as
much as Selim had. It was therefore natural for Alemdar Mustafa
and his friends to support Istanbul’s opponents, who now were
represented by Selim’s partisans. He was won over by their
preaching and gave full support to their plans.
  The committee members decided almost at the start that the
only way to accomplish their ends would be to bring Bayrakdar’s
army to Istanbul to overcome their enemies by force. But this
was not possible without sacrificing the life of their hero Selim,
who was completely in the hands of his cousin. The Sultan would
hardly welcome the unexpected arrival of an army from Ruschuk.
He would most certainly execute Selim and his cousin Mahmud
in order to leave himself as the only male member of the Ottoman
dynasty and thus to assure his position regardless of who was in
power. In order to solve this problem, the committee decided to




                   The Deposition of Mustafa IV
                             s             i


398   get the Sultan and the Grand Vezir to call Bayrakdar to Istanbul
      to help throw off the tyranny of the Janissaries and yamaks as
      well as that of Musa Pasha and Ataullah Efendi. In addition, so
      that they would know what was going on in Istanbul and, if
      necessary, prevent any sudden attempt to assassinate Selim,
      they decided to plant some of their group in the government by
      sending them back to declare their loyalty to the new regime/
      At first Grand Vezir Chelebi Mustafa was unmoved by this ap¬
      peal. He feared and hated Bayrakdap M'Ustafa and did not want to
      help him get the credit for overthrowing the tyrants in Istanbul.
      So in response to the committee’s appeal, he summoned Bay-
      rakdar’s   bitter   enemies —Yilikoglu   Suleyman   Bey,   former
      notable of Silistria and now leader of a small band of raiders
      operating in eastern Bulgaria and Thrace; Laz Ahmed Agha, who
      as governor of Ibrail had opposed Mustafa soon after he came to
      power; and Gavur Hasan, one of the bandit leaders who pre¬
      viously had cooperated with Pasvanoglu against Mustafa. And
      plans were made for a new attack on Ruschuk.® At this point,
      however, events in Istanbul changed the Grand Vezir’s mind.
        For some time the real power in the capital had been held by
      the triumvirate of Ataullah Efendi, Musa Pasha, and Kabakji
      Mustafa. But in mid-July 1808, Musa got the Sultan’s permis¬
      sion to try to eliminate Ataullah and appoint Omer Hulusi
      Efendi in his place as Sheyh ul-Islam. Halet Efendi got the Janis¬
      saries to rise and march on the palace, forcing the Sultan to
      rescind the appointment. Taking advantage of the situation,
      Ataullah used the Janissary pressure to get the Sultan to dis¬
      miss Musa Pasha as Kaymakam and send him into exile, appoint¬
      ing in his place Tayyar Mehmed Pasha, former notable and gover¬
      nor of Trebizond, who in 1805 had fled to Russia after being de¬
      feated by Yusuf Pasha and Chapanoglu Suleyman Bey, and who
      had been pardoned and returned to his lands and positions only
      after the revolution. Ataullah now installed him to increase
      his own power in the government. This angered the Sultan, who
      saw clearly how weak he really was; it alarmed Chelebi Mustafa,
      who feared Tayyar would replace him as soon as he made a false
      step against the Russians; and it worried Selim’s partisans, who
      remembered how much Tayyar had hated Selim in the past and




                             The Triumph of Reaction
feared he might use his new position to get the former Sultan out      399
of the way before they were ready to act.^
  In mid-August the Ruschuk committee again tried to seduce
the Grand Vezir and this time found him much more amenable.
Mustafa Refik went to his camp outside Edirne, and on October 28
he was sent to Istanbul as Reis ul-Kuttab in place of Arif Efendi,
who had proved unable to fill the post.^^ As soon as Refik reached
Istanbul, he got the support of a number of the Sultan’s close
servants, and with their assistance met secretly with Mustafa IV
and presented Bayrakdar’s plan to march to Istanbul and help
him throw off” the tyrants. Mustafa IV realized that he would not
gain much if he had to depend on one group to throw off another,
so he preferred to try to gain power by playing Kabakji Mustafa
and Ataullah off against each other and against the other factions
then rising to fight for power at the Porte. Although he confirmed
Refik as Reis ul-Kuttab and secretly invited other members of the
committee to return to key posts in Istanbul, for the moment he
refused permission for Bayrakdar to approach the capital and
commanded that he continue his preparations for the spring
campaign against the Russians. Mehmed Behij Efendi now also
came to Istanbul, and on May 7 he was appointed director of the
Imperial Treasury in place of Mehmed Emin Bey, who had been
appointed to that post just a year before by Selim. “
  While the Sultan encouraged the Ruschuk committee, he also
worked in other directions to preserve his own position. Within
a short time he won the support of Tayyar Pasha with the promise
of the Grand Vezirate if he was able to get rid of the domination of
his patron, Ataullah Efendi. Preparations were made to replace
Ataullah with Osman Pasha zade Izzet Bey, Kadiasker of Anatolia,
but so long as the Janissaries supported Ataullah, this was post¬
poned as impractical. The Sultan also worked through Chelebi
Mustafa Pasha, plotting with him and Tayyar to secure the
assassination of both princes in the palace so that he would re¬
main as the sole surviving male Ottoman. But Ataullah found
out about the Sultan’s dealings with Tayyar Pasha and used the
threat of a new Janissary uprising and a revolt against Tayyar in
eastern Anatolia by Chapanoglu Suleyman and Yusuf Ziya to
secure his dismissal on March 21, 1808.Ataullah was stronger




                    The Deposition of Mustafa TV
400   than ever; he had got rid of Musa Pasha and of Musa’s replace¬
      ment, Tayyar Pasha. Yusuf Ziya and Suleyman Pasha were
      overjoyed. But Tayyar was bitter a'gainst Chelebi Mustafa and
      Ataullah Efendi, and when he reached his place of exile, he soon
      got into communication with Bayrakdar Mustafa, who promised
      to protect him in return for his help and got Istanbul to appoint
      him military governor of Varna at the end of April.At this
      point Mustafa IV worked to strengthen the Ruschuk committee
      and get its support against Ataullah by promoting Refik Efendi
      to be Lieutenant of the Grand Vhzir in Istanbul and replacing
      him as Reis ul-Kuttab by Galib Efendi. Tahsin Efendi also was
      brought to Istanbul as Chief of the Chavush Corps, and Behij
      Efendi remained Chief Accountant. By this time four members of
      the committee were with the Grand Vezir, and only Ramiz Efendi
      remained in Ruschuk with Bayrakdar Mustafa.
        Refik Efendi now discovered that Yilik Suleyman, Gavur
      Hasan, and Ahmed Agha were still at Edirne. He informed
      Bayrakdar Mustafa, who immediately marched there with a
      force of 10,000 men on the pretext of going on a hunt. This sud¬
      den move frightened the Sultan and Grand Vezir as much as it
      surprised the Ruschuk committee members. Mustafa IV decided
      to temporize rather than force trouble, so he ordered Chelebi Mus¬
      tafa to get rid of Bayrakdar Mustafa’s enemies, who immediately
      left Edirne and returned to their homes.Mustafa was still not
      satisfied. He decided to use the occasion to get rid of the Grand
      Vezir as well and sent a series of complaints against him to Istan¬
      bul, and Chelebi Mustafa also sent complaints about the notable
      of Ruschuk. The committee now worked to bridge the dispute
      since it needed the help and cooperation of both men. Behij Efendi
      finally managed to smooth over the situation and arrange an
      agreement. Bayrakdar Mustafa would retain command of the
      Danube army, and the Grand Vezir would stay with the Imperial
      army in Edirne; when necessary he would send assistance to
      both the Serbian and Russian fronts although he himself would
      come only if requested to do so by Mustafa.*®
        Behij Efendi then went on to Istanbul, where he worked to get
      not only the Sultan’s approval for this agreement but also his
      permission for Bayrakdar to come with his army to carry out the




                           The Triumph of Reaction
plans they had discussed earlier. The committee for some time           401
had developed good relations with two of the Sultan’s closest
associates, Guiju Fettah Efendi and Nezar Agha, both officials in
the palace, who now supported Behij’s claim that Bayrakdar was
loyal to the Sultan and would .only act to support him against the
tyrants before returning to the Danube. The Sultan demanded
however that Selim and possibly Prince Mahmud also be assassi¬
nated before Bayrakdar Mustafa came to the city. Behij Efendi
resisted this idea, but to retain his credit with the Sultan, he
                             4

based his opposition on the assumption that so long as the people
of Istanbul, the notables of Anatolia and the Balkans, and the
mass of soldiers \^ere opposed, assassination was not possible
without stirring up a new revolt which might end the dynasty
altogether. He finally convinced the Sultan, but still Bayrakdar’s
permission to march was withheld.'^ Behij Efendi was appointed
Treasurer (May 7) so he could use the Imperial Treasury and its
salaries to stifle any effort by the military corps to oppose Bayrak¬
dar. Bayrakdar now came to Edirne on the pretext of discussing
spring campaign plans with the Grand Vezir but actually to
arrange the march on Istanbul while at the same time taking
care that the Russian army did not take advantage of the situa¬
tion to move across the Danube.*®
  Ataullah Efendi and his creatures in Istanbul, frightened by
the presence of such a large force in Edirne, ordered both Chelebi
and Bayrakdar Mustafa to go to the front at once in anticipation
of a Russian attack. The two commanders decided to leave the
bulk of the regular army at Edirne while they themselves
marched to Istanbul with approximately 15,000 men from the
Ruschuk army on the pretext of going to discuss with the Sultan a
shortage of supplies and the consequent increasing disorder in
the Balkan armies and garrisons.*®
  On Thursday, July 14, the army set out for the capital, with the
Grand Vezir leading the way and Bayrakdar Mustafa and the
members of the Ruschuk committee following. In order that
Ataullah not be forewarned of the march any earlier than neces¬
sary, arrangements were made to suspend all communications
and close all the roads between Edirne and the capital. As the
army marched along, only its commanders knew where it was




                    The Deposition of Mustafa IV
402   going. Secret messages were sent to Fettah and Nezar for de¬
      livery to the Sultan, stating that the army had fallen into dis¬
      order as a result of supply problems dnd that the two commanders
      were merely coming to Istanbul to discuss the matter with the
      Sultan. Bayrakdar also sent Hajji Ali Agha, notable of Pin-
      arhisar, with a group of horsemen who set out overland to Rumeli
      Feneri, where they attacked and killed Kabakji Mustafa, cut
      off his head, and scattered his men. This action effectively pre¬
      vented the yamaks from moving intp Istanbul to save their allies
      when the crisis came.^”           '
        On July 18, the advancing army reached Silivri, and it seemed
      certain to arrive at the capital the next morning. Mustafa IV
      met with the Sheyh ul-Islam and Kaymakam in the palace and
      called a formal council meeting for the next morning to discuss
      the march, which had been carried out without his permission.
      But the next morning the council decided that since the Grand
      Vezir and Bayrakdar Mustafa had come this far, nothing could
      be done, so they proceeded directly through the city and outside
      the walls to meet them.^‘
        On the afternoon of Tuesday, July 19, the Grand Vezir and
      Bayrakdar Mustafa were first received by Ataullah Efendi and
      the other state leaders, after which the Sultan formally received
      them. Since Ataullah had failed to stop Bayrakdar, he now tried
      to secure his support, and proposed an alliance against the Grand
      Vezir, who would then be replaced by Bayrakdar both as Grand
      Vezir and commander of the Imperial army. Bayrakdar rejected
      the offer out of hand.^^ The Sultan then returned to his palace
      followed by the Grand Vezir and the state officials. Bayrakdar
      Mustafa and his army set up camp outside the city walls at
      Chirpiji, where they remained for two nights while the members
      of the Ruschuk committee entered the city to prepare for their
      arrival. Finally, on July 21, Bayrakdar entered Istanbul with a
      force of between 3,000 and 5,000 men. He immediately met the
      Grand Vezir, who got the Sultan to dismiss Ataullah and replace
      him with Arab zade Arif Efendi. With Bayrakdar’s men stationed
      at key places throughout the city, the Janissaries were kept
      effectively under check, and there was no effort to oppose the
      order. By secret agreement Bayrakdar and the Grand Vezir




                           The Triumph of Reaction
planned to punish the tyrants who had opposed the Sultan and          403
mixed in state affairs, and then Bayrakdar and his men would
return to their regular duties on the Danube. In the days which
followed, they set to their work with a vengeance. Most of the
Ulema and others who had played important roles in Selim’s
deposition were exiled, and the Janissaries and yamaks who had
participated in the riots were put down; within a week all opposi¬
tion was ended. The Grand Vezir was very happy because he
finally had sufficient power, to administer the government with¬
out any opposition at all.^^
  But it was not long before Bayrakdar Mustafa and the Grand
Vezir split on the question of whether or not the Ruschuk army
should return home now that its work was done. The immediate
spark for the quarrel came over the question of the Grand Admi¬
ral, Seydi Ali Pasha, who the Ruschuk committee said had been
in close relations with Ataullah Efendi and should be dismissed.
The Grand Vezir considered Seydi Ali one of his chief supporters
and refused to dismiss him, insisting on his right to make final
decisions on such matters. Bayrakdar was enraged and said
that none of the tyrants could be pardoned if the evil was to be
eradicated and the state saved from those who would usurp
power.Bayrakdar Mustafa and the Ruschuk committee mem¬
bers now worked to get Selim out of the palace so they could
put him on the throne and depose both the Sultan and the Grand
Vezir. Early on the morning of July 27, however, Chelebi Mustafa
learned of this plan from spies in Bayrakdar’s army. At long
last he realized what was happening and what had been planned
all along, and he sent a message to this effect to the Sultan. But
Mustafa IV did not take the message seriously, and did nothing
about it. Chelebi Mustafa then moved to act on his own, if not
against Selim at least against the Ruschuk committee members.
He got Nezar Agha to agree that all committee members in the
city should be killed during the night and the gates closed against
Bayrakdar Mustafa and Ramiz Efendi, who were camping with
their men outside the walls. Since Nezar Agha still believed in
Bayrakdar and thought he had come to Istanbul to kill Selim,
not save him, he stated that the Grand Vezir was mistaken and
left the Porte without taking any action. He then immediately




                   The Deposition of Mustafa IV
404   informed the Ruschuk committee and Bayrakdar of his talks
      with the Grand Vezir, and they decided to take direct action as
                                           V

      soon as possible.^®
        On the morning of July 28, Bayrakdar Mustafa and Ramiz
      Efendi marched into Istanbul with the entire army of 15,000 men.
      When it arrived at the Bayezid mosque, the force was divided,
      with one group moving across the peak of the Istanbul hill di¬
      rectly toward Et Meydan and the palape, and the other descend¬
      ing the slopes to the Porte to take control of it before moving to
      join their commander at the palace. By noon the Grand Vezir had
      heard the news and closed the gates of the Porte. When he refused
      to open them, Bayrakdar’s men broke them down, forced him to
      turn over the seal of office, and then sent him out of the city.^®
      On the advice of Ramiz Efendi, Bayrakd’ar summoned the Sheyh
      ul-Islam and other leaders of the Ulema to the Porte and got
      them to agree to restore Selim and to accompany him up the hill
      to the palace. Early in the afternoon, this group went into the
      palace and marched up to the Bab as-Saadet gate. Bayrakdar
      Mustafa and his entourage withdrew into the imperial council’s
      meeting room and told the Sheyh ul-Islam to go to Mustafa, and
      persuade him to abdicate his position and to send Selim out to
      them so he could be restored to the throne. Here Bayrakdar
      Mustafa made his fatal mistake. Mustafa IV refused to listen to
      the Sheyh ul-Islam, accused him of conspiring with the rebels,
      and sent him back to Bayrakdar Mustafa in terror. Before
      Bayrakdar could muster his forces and move to enforce his revolt,
      Mustafa had the gates closed, and he immediately sent his per¬
      sonal slaves to assassinate both Selim and Mahmud. Selim was
      caught in his apartment and killed after a short struggle; but
      Prince Mahmud was forewarned sufficiently to escape the assas¬
      sins and flee over the roofs to Bayrakdar Mustafa, who immedi¬
      ately placed him on the throne as soon as he learned of Selim’s
      fate.^^
        Selim’s death was apparently the result of two fatal blunders on
      the part of the plotters; they had failed to act for a week, giving
      the Sultan and Ataullah a chance to find out what was happening
      and arrange resistance, and when they moved into the palace,
      instead of attacking at once, they tried to mediate a settlement,




                           The Triumph of Reaction
thus giving Mustafa a chance to get rid of Selim. Mustafa now         405
was dethroned after a reign of little over a year, and in his place
Prince Mahmud ascended the throne as Mahmud II. The rebels
were successful, but now they had to work to restore the Nizam-i
Jedid through the offices of an unknown and untried young
prince. With Mahmud’s accession a new and eventually much
more successful and fruitful period of Ottoman history was
begun, and Selim’s era came to an end.


  Despite indications that Selim was a "modernist” in many
ways, the evidence at hand seems to indicate strongly that he
was a man of his time and no more, that at most he was a link
between the traditionalist reformers who preceded and the mod¬
ernist reformers who followed.
  Selim’s attitude toward reform was molded by events. In his
letters as prince to Louis XVI, when speaking of reform, he men¬
tioned only the military changes necessary for the Ottoman '/
Empire to secure revenge from Russia and to regain the terri¬
tories lost to Catherine II. After he came to the throne in 1789,
his efforts went entirely into modernizing and reforming the
existing military corps, the Janissaries, the cavalry, and the
artillery. It must be granted that the danger of the war itself
made more comprehensive and radical reforms impossible. But
after the war was over, there was only one important change. In
addition to continuing his efforts to reform the old corps, or at
least those able and willing to accept such reforms, Selim also
responded to Janissary and cavalry military weakness and obdu¬
racy by introducing the Nizam-i Jedid army. But this was not
the new idea of nineteenth-century reform. Ottoman sultans had
been introducing new corps and new armies to make use of new
weapons and military techniques ever since the Janissary corps
had been specially created in the fifteenth century to use the
rifles, cannons, and gunpowder then introduced for the first time.
The Nizam-i Jedid army was no more than an enlarged and
modernized model of the rifle and cannon corps created during
the eighteenth century by Bonneval, Baron de Tott, and other
European advisors. So long as the establishment of the new army
was not accompanied by an effort to eliminate those members of




                   The Deposition of Mustafa IV
406   the afmy, government, and society who refused to accept reform
      and lived in the past, and so long as the Nizam-i Jedid and tech¬
      nical innovations were not in the context of the radical political,
      social, and economic reforms which made possible their develop¬
      ment and successful operation in the West, they cannot be consid¬
      ered as anything more than the last gasp of a dead tradition. One
      may argue that Selim would have gone on to such policies once
      his Nizam-i Jedid army was strong enough to overcome the
      resistance of the vested interests. Perhaps so, but during the
      entire eighteen years of his reign,^ Selim showed little evidence
      that he had intented to push on into these new fields or had the
      ability to do so.
        Selim was a ruler with good ideas but without the moral
      strength or the ability to put his ideas into practice. As soon as
      his limited military reforms aroused opposition, he modified
      them, he limited the size of the new army, he appointed conserva¬
      tives to key positions and he retired to the pleasures of the harem
      while leaving his reforming friends to fight their enemies. Instead
      of leading his supporters with an example of strength and deter¬
      mination, he sought their control by stimulating them to struggle
      for his favor, thus creating the same sort of political factionalism
      which had paralyzed Ottoman governments in the past.
        But as a man of his time, Selim did witness the introduction of
      new institutions, practices, and ideas into his empire, which
      necessarily began the process by which the old concept of reform
      was replaced by the new. The old tradition was molded by an
      Ottoman attitude which was largely isolated from the outside
      world, and which consequently assumed that the modern Otto¬
      man inferiority was due more to disruption of the older ways
      than it was to any new and more powerful institutions and prac¬
      tices developed in Europe. It was only when this Ottoman "iron
      curtain” of the past was broken down so that Ottomans could
      clearly see the tremendous political, economic, and social strength
      of the new Europe, that the old concept of reform was necessarily
      replaced by the new. And the events of the age of the French
      Revolution pierced this iron curtain in such a way that it never
      could be restored, no matter how many reformers were killed and
      institutions torn asunder. The incursions of European armies




                            The Triumph of Reaction
onto Ottoman soil, the arrival of large numbers of European         407
diplomats, soldiers, and merchants in the great cities of the
empire, the dispatch of numerous Ottomans to reside in the capi¬
tals of Europe, the blossoming of European society in Istanbul,
and the increased contacts between Ottomans and Europeans
accomplished this. Moreover even Selim’s limited military re¬
forms bore fruit far beyond their limited objectives. Men trained
in foreign languages and techniques for military purposes were
able to penetrate the great store of European literature and to
perceive more clearly the whole range of European life and
thought. The effectiveness of the new army, when contrasted
with the increasing inefficiency and anarchy of the Janissaries
and Spahis, provided a fitting lesson for all who could see. Al¬
though when the crisis came Selim betrayed the reformers to
their enemies in order to save himself, enough of them survived
and benefited from experience to nourish the seed and provide a
cadre of men able and willing to restore the reforms and move
beyond them as soon as the political situation made this possible
in the reign of Mahmud II.




                   The Deposition of Mustafa IV
    s



V
  Appendix
Abbreviations
   Notes
Bibliography
   Index
   *
                                            1
                                             ■1

                          .i




                                            V.
        i ’   •




I
                      V




                  [




                                        A




I

r
i

    s                                       '1
                                             ■i




                                        I
                           tl ,
                          i.
                                  L'A
                                                                                  o                                                                                            411
                                                                                  Oi
                                                                                  l>                               uo
                                                                                  1-H                   _U         O CD
                                                                                                                                   00
                                                                      05          rCj                   S
                                                                                                        g 00
                                                                                                          05 00  ®

                                                                                                                                               27 Qada 1203/19 August 1789
                                                                      00           o
                                                                                                 (N
                                                                                                 05
                                                                                                             ’-I 00                o
                                                                                   Sh lO                ^ » r- -H                  00
                                                                                   CO
                                                                                                 t-
                                                                                                                   U     Sh
                                                         o                                              Sh         Dh 01
                                                         CO           o;                                (D
                                                                      C                           to,
                                                         CO                       o              -cfl   Xi




PRINCIPAL OFFICIALS UNDER SELIM III AND MUSTAFA IV
                                                     •

                                                         s                        CO LO                 So         te
                                                                                                                   ^
                                                                                                                   Cn 05
                                                                                                                      j>
                                                         CO                             o                                          00
                                                                                        (N              O                          (N


                                                                                                                                               27 Muharrem 1204/17 October
                                                                      CO
                                                                      o
                                                                                                        o o §:!                    CO
                                                                                                        (N    CO                   (M
                                                                      oa                     05 (M                            05 (M
                                                                                                        05    CO              (N ,-1
                                                                                     'o                 O     tH
                                                         o            c                      . fl       (N    (M
                                                                      cfl         ,a ca
                                                                                   ID p      ^ ca                  gt (M  • t—I
                                                                      N                                             U £2 K «
                                                                      ca          '5?        2   ca                 ca   ^ 'O


                                                                                                                                                 1789
                                                                       6 JO OS ^             u   S      -O X5      'S
                                                                                                                    D D D E
                                                                       ca 0)     x>              ca     D     D
                                                                      OS 0^ ^     0)                    OS OS S ’5? PS             §
                                                                      po ic CO o ^ (N                   ID 00
                                                                                                        (M T-l                rH




                                                                                                                      X




                                                                                                                                               26 Jumada I 1202/4 March 1788
                                                                      CD                                              O
                                                                      X 05 CO                           (M
                                                                                                                   X 00
                                                                      o- X l>           o         Oj               05
                                                                                                        05 t> !>• r-H              i>
                                                                      i-H o                             t> ^                       o
                                                                                        t>       U                                 X
                                                          SS                                     X         ;h            Oh        1-H
                                                                                                 0)
                                                                                                                                    0)
                                                                      t § y a                    t>     ^ o
                                                                                                        ^ -8
                                                                                                                   be (M           0
                                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                 (N
                                                                                   y ■<                 Tt O
                                                          O                                      IC           < o
                                                                      Tt CO P CD                 o      X o o
                                                          a               O CO !;;;;;[           (N     o c<i X ^
                                                                      o (M                                                    3 (N
                                                                                                                          IT (M
                                                                      o t-H O o                                    5? -
                                                                                                                   cq D 1-1  <N



                                                                                                                                               27 Qada 1203/19 August 1789
                                                          o           (N (=! oq <M                      IS (N
                                                          Cu              c3
                                                                          N
                                                                                                  cd    ^ 1—I      1—1 Jh (M i-H
                                                                                                                          (M HH
                                                                                                 'T3                      tH HH
                                                          e               cd     IS               cd     Cd        i-i 13
                                                                      X
                                                                       0) c3
                                                                       _
                                                                            a    ca
                                                                                X!
                                                                                 D
                                                                                                  a      s X IS
                                                                                                         ca y D k2
                                                                      0:5       X                       OS OS OS S
                                                                                w
                                                                      CO CO                      CO     (M US X '!}'
                                                                            1-1                  CKI    i-l (M --I oq


                                                                                                         ca
                                                                                                        X           ca
                                                                                                         to
                                                                                                         ca        JS


                                                                                                                                                . Mehmed Kamil Efendi
                                                                                                        PM          to
                                                                                                                    ca
                                                                                                        X          PM              ca




APPENDIX.
                                                                OS                                       y
                                                                            cd
                                                                                   cd                    e
                                                                                                                    IS        2 ®        hJ
                                                                S           rC                          X          X     ca              O!
                                                           ci   N      cd  03 cd X                ca     y                               HH
                                                                HH         Cd      CO                                                     I
                                                           o          X            cd            js                 0 to
                                                         ■ *H                                                       ca ca p ^            hP


                                                                                                                                               ;. Esad zade Mehmed Sherif
                                                                       CO Oh   CO                 cc
                                                          HhA   >
                                                         ' *H          cd      cd Oh              ca                      •p cd
                                                                           O Oh                                     ^ P                  P
                                                                                                                   N 7;: H CO
                                                           CO                                    PL,
                                                      o         Q     Ph
                                                                           cd      o
                                                     PM         Iz:
                                                                      Chh  CQ a cd               Cw
                                                                                                                   Cm ca                 ffi
                                                                           cd cd CO               S
                                                                <      CO          cd             to
                                                                os
                                                                          ffi CO
                                                                               cd ffi             S                 S 2                  H
                                                                           <D ffi                       T3          s ^ .§ ^
                                                                o          N                     >-'     ca              a D             ffi

                                                                                                                                                    Efendi
                                                                                                                       N
                                                                       Cd ‘Cd                     ca                                     M
                                                                              •S ■§                     S           Sh ^ ca "d
                                                                       O’ a cd                   ‘o’    ca         :0 cd
                                                                           a>
                                                                              O M                       Q          w ffi eS O
                                                                      t-h   oq X                 X      X l> X 05 O i-H                        rH              oq
                                                                                                 Tf
412                                                                                              O in
                                                                                                    CO
                                                           CO     X                           o 00
                                                           o                                  00 rH ®   !h
                                                                                                     00 S
                                                                  o                                                       o
                                                                                           (M tH U
                                                00
                                                05         00     00
                                                                        o                         0)                      00       00
                                                l>                1-H                   05 05                             t-H      o




      8 Rejeb 1205/13 March 1791
                                      05
                                           (M i-H o                                     00 I> (D
                                                                        00

                                                                                                    I I Or >
                                                     o            Vh                    t>» t-H                b     05            00
                                           05 ^            CO     (D
                                      XI
                                           i>   m 00              Xi                    ^ X
                                                                                                          05
                                                                                                          >                   Cd
                                       o Z 5                      B05                               05                              tc
                                       Sh                                                           O
                                                                                                    05
                                                                                                       O Tf                         0
                                                                  > CO                  Or S Q            ;z: CO rH       X         bo
                                                                  O                                            o Si        05       s
                                                           00                           < S                               Em
                                                                                                   CO CO ,-H                       c
                                                           (M       (N                  o             oo CO               Tj<
                                                                    (N                  CO 1-H 00 05 ^     CO             CO       CO
                                                                                                           rH                      CO
                                                                                        CO <£> CO CO
                                                           6                                           6
                                                                                        o o t-H t-H 05 C         t-H
                                                                                                                 CO                CO
                                                           05     (N t-H                CO CO          iH   Cd   CO                CO
                                      SS2
                                        I—I
                                                                                                o c iH N
                                                                                                cd cd  Cfl Cd
                                                                                                                 t-H
                                                                                                                                   CO
                                                                                                                                   r-H
                                      X cS                 CO           T3              X
                                      O     _jQ            X      Xi o3                  05    X X X
                                                                                                cd cd       B CO 05                X
                                                                                                                                    05
                                      5? cd ^              O      •Si. B                 05 05 X X 0 cd o
                                           O'PCh                   0/ 3                 Pi Pi CQ CO S E« 55 ffi                    •fl?

                                      (N (N 00 00 05                                    Tf CO CO o Tj* o         CO
                                                                                                                                   Pi
                                      (N (M i-l iH (N             i-H O                 CO >-H CO CO CO <-1




                                                                                                          CO g


                                                                  O §                                                         M    c-
                                                                                        l>         t-H '-I 00                 3    o



      27 Muharrem 1204/17 October
                                                     00
                                                     <05                                t-H    CO U4 Sh    t-H
                                                                                                        1> _              X        00
                                         05                             t-H              .. 05 (35     X 33                   B3   t-H
                                      05 o CO              o                            ^ C50 t>
                                      C-    05             o                                                   ^ ft
                                                      M    00
                                                                                        3           T-H
                                                                                                          I 1              >
                                                                                                                           o
                                      X
                                      C5
                                      u
                                                     a            2 6
                                                                  g ^
                                                                                        ^ ^ X

                                                                                             ft  «
                                                                                                    ^
                                                                                                          C5
                                                                                                      05 T®
                                                                                                    p Iz; oo
                                                                                                               ^
                                                                                                                          ;z:
                                                                                                                          rH
                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                    cd

                                                                                                                                   $-1
                                                                                                                                   X
                                      cd                   o                             cd                               (M       0)
                                                                  00    O                05 c S <N Tj< O
                                                                  rH    ^                            t-H (CO (N           rH
                                          t>                                            “o
                                                                                        00 s
                                          CO                                                         00 :3c
                                                                                                         05 ^             (M
                                                                  rH                                                      (N       oq
                                          in       m                                    'll CO X (N (CO                   rH
                                      in o         rH
                                                                  i^                        o O  ■ -H         B3              a
                                                                                                                                   rH
                                                                                                                                   (N
                                      o CO <N t-H (M                                    I—I (CO (N



        1789
                                      CO           tH                                                 3 3 M                   cd   (M
                                                                                                          3 M                 N
                                             rH                                                                                    rH
                                      t-H
                                          X cd      u             cd
                                                                                        X X     X X   cd
                                                                                                         X X
                                                                                                               3              cd
                                                                                                                                    <D
                                      X 05         .cd            X X                    05  05  05       3 3                 63
                                       05 a> cd 0^ «cd
                                                                  3 05                  Pi  •^'o?
                                                                                                      cd
                                                                                                    .X. X
                                       «’Ph O’tf O)                     'W               05 K Pi CO CO                    Ph (50 ffi
                                      Pi (N (N CO 00              05 Pi                              r- o
                                      05 CO (N ^ rH               (CO                       (CO t-H (CO (CO (CO


                                                TO TJ
                                                3     3




      1. Hamidi zade Mustafa Efendi
                                                (S c2             X
                                                                        I
                                             H H
                                             M
                                             L.
                                                >H P
                                                X
                                                   ^
                                                                  w
                                                                  X -y
                                                                        I         X                  3
                                          T3 c CQ                 3
                                                                   CO         ffi c            cd
                                      ;;;
                                             X <
                                                   K              w X         CO              XCO    3 X             3
                                                3                   3             (—(                                X
                                      c2        s ciS      s
                                                                  X
                                                                   3     B    p
                                                                                        cd
                                                                                        x: cu
                                                                                              cd
                                                                                                     3 P
                                                                                                                     X
                                                                                                                     3        3
                                      p ■x                         fi X           Q
                                                      cd
                                           X                                                                         p    X         3
                                         3 3
                                      X B s
                                                      CO   o      X
                                                                      3       :z: <     cd     ^   'C                         m    X
                                                                                                                                    X
                                                           (D                              *>> (15 'ti               X        3
                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                               .2  ^                 3    p
                                           X    3                        3    Q p       5  02
                                                                                        C5 ^
                                                                                                               cd    B             p
                                           3
                                            X 0) cd        X                            cd          a w
                                            3
                                                  N                           p
                                                                              p c
                                                                                                               B
                                            N cd •12 Td 3N N X
                                                                                        3 K                     CO
                                      3 -3                                                                                    3
                                      >T      N
                                                  §  J     '3 B               c Pi      X -       N
                                                                                                               HH
                                                                                                                          CO
                                      XX                X  X iB                         — X O Jm cS                                X
                                      3 <15       3
                                                        X
                                                           I (H
                                                         3 X
                                                            3 Ed
                                                                                        3 .B   a; cd 3
                                                                                                                          •

                                                                                                                                    3
                                            Q    CO     CO CO                           o o a s a                    a    a        CO
      00                                   in X t> 00             05‘ (X                t-H   (N    (C3   X    m     X             0C5
                         Tt<
                                lO
                                                                 o                                                                                413
                         Oi     05
                                                                 o
                                                                 00
          $1      Sh            t>
          C)       m            i-H                   00            uo                               o
                                                                                             I>




                                                                                                                 late Jumada II 1226/early July
                                                      05         -u O
                  X3
                         CO
                                            CO        t>          3 00
                                                                                   3         o       00
          6                     t:          05                                    -Q         00      rH

                                                                  I"
                   e     3

          a
          m
                   0)
                  -4J
                   a
                  a>
                         be
                         3
                         c
                                2^
                                3

                                 3 05
                                 3 t>
                                    c-
                                            l>


                                            2
                                                                          CO
                                                                          3
                                                                          be
                                                                                  B
                                                                                  CJ
                                                                                  O
                                                                                             3
                                                                                                     0)

                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                           00
                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                           00

          M       w
                         o      '-0 rH                                    3                          3
          00
          (N
                  CD
                  ^      SJ     lO                                        <                  lO
                                                                                             CO
                                                                                                     o Di
                  O
                         05
                         O
                                05    iS <3                                                  CO
                                                                                                     00    <1
          o       CO     CO
                                O
                                CO          I> cc           c    s o              CO         CO
                                                                                                     CO
                                                                                                           CO
                                    in         CO    CO CO                        CO         CO      CO
                                    CO               rH CO                                           CO

          B
                          63    I—I 05 rH
                                           CO
                                                3 CO                              3                  iH CO




                                                                                                                    1811
                                 3 O CO CO 3                                       3
          o
          u               I:               r-,  N <N                              pO         3
                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                        CO
                                T3
                                 ^ _J ^                                                      X
                          3      3      V4        U
                                                3 ^ 3 '3^                          3
                                                                                  Xi
                                                                                             3        3
                                                                                                     pO b
           cS _
          jC
          "3 00
                  3 CO                           c2 B i5                  3                  2
                                                                                             3
                                                                                                      3 ciS
                                      ^ cd 3          3                                 O    0       p3 3
          « t>    Isl           '-3   ^ CD CQ                                           00
                                                                                        _I    •'     W CO
                                                                                  cd
                  05     ?0     CO    cs'S lO lO O'!-?                                       0:1     U5 05
          CO             CO     i-H CO           CO rH 05            3 00         CO                 CO 'H




                                      >3
          00                                                                                               o
          00       ;h     Sh                                00                    uo
                   3      3           in
                                                                                  o                  I> o
          t-
          tH      p3     pft    -u    p          CD
                                                            05
                                                            t>            ai      00
                                                                                             0)      O 00
                                 CO                                                          X
                  B3      B3                     05                                                  00 1-4




                                                                                                                 19 Safar 1223/16 April 1808
          0)      -ij    -SH
                                 3    >2         o
                                                      rH    p3 05         I
                                                                                             B3            Sh
                                ^ § 10
          Xi
          B3
                  ft      ft        05 4^             +4     P                               o       p^ p3
                   3
                  CO
                          3
                         CO
                                < §
                                O   ^ 3
                                                       CQ
                                                       3
                                                             3
                                                             3
                                                                 ^        3
                                                                                  a
                                                                                  3
                                                                                                     3 P
                                                                                                         3
          >
           o      CO
                  CO
                         CO     2J !3       b ^                                   c                  13 O
                                                                                                     CO
                                S
                                            3 <;      <              ft ^                               00
                                O ^
          :z:
                         o        o                (M            c s                         CO      CO CO
          i>      o      CO                t> 00 . ,                              o          CO      CO
          CO      CO                T-l 13 1-4 th                31 CO            CO                 CO CO
                  1—1                   CO ^4 CO                                  CO                    CO
          CO
          o        B3     B3     B K
                                 3
                                        05 1—t 1—1
                                                                 c:i
                                                                 CO                           3
                                                                                              3
                                                                                                        CO
                                                                                                           1-4
          CO              Sh     Sh 3 O CO CO                    1—1                                  3
                                                                 CO                          p3            3
                   Sh     Sh            CO '-I                            pO       3          3      T3
           Sh      Sh     3      3 CS       Sh                   ■    ■    0)     TO                  3    3
                                                                                             pOl
          C+H
           3
                   3
                  p3
                         p3
                          3    1 ^ a p3 c2  ^     3 3 cb         "S
                                                                 p2
                                                                                o a
                                                                                ® 3
                                                                                   3         CO 50   a   3
                                                                                                      3 p3
                                                                                                           p3


                   3
          CO                                     CO CO ct3                                           >-a CO
                  S            i ^ ^ O'
                         05      CO CO     CO IC l>                                                  05 13
          CO      CO             CO 1-1 CO    CO 1-4 05                   3       00          3      1-4 CO




                                      TS
                                       3
                                      pp
                                      Shh
                                      H                                   d                          •rH
     Pi                                                                   X                          'd
m <                      -3                                                                           d
                                       a




                                                                                                                 16. Mehmed Galib Efendi
                                           ^3 3                           H                          X
c H       tS      TJ      3     TJ
                                     O      s
H W        3       3     pP
                         S+H     3 w ^      fi pP
                                               ttH                                'd          d      PP
          pP                                                              cd                            •^
H Pi      3h      pP
                  M-l           pP
                                E*h      W     w                                   d                 no TO
P o               w             w      3 ^ w                     w                X          W        2 a
UJ u
 I   CO
          'C
           >1
                  ’C
                   u
                         X
                          m
                                "TO
                                 3 p3
                                       a                         pOl d
                                                                 •
                                                                       T3         w
                                                                                             »^
                                                                                                      a B
X
P ;z:
           3      •^
                  pp
                          3      a
                                pO!
                                    3
                                                                   (/}
                                                                   cd a
                                                                       p3
                                                                                   rH
                                                                                   CO
                                                                                  <cd
                                                                                             9
                                                                                             0
                                                                                                     -a w
                                                                                                      p 9

    o
CO HH
1-4
          a
          TS
                  X
                  p3
                         Ph
                         no
                                 3    •b «
                                      -i*! cb
                                       3 <3
                                                                 P:^ 3

                                                                     s
                                                                                  >          TO
                                                                                              3
                                                                                                     CiH
                                                                                                      u Pi
                                                                                                           0)
           3              3                                                       tS
w
Pi
    Ee]
    p:^   a
          p43
                  9
                         X
                          a      t
                                            PQ   «                cd
                                                                 to
                                                                      2
                                                                                  a
                                                                                   3          a
                                                                                             pft
                                                                                                            3
    O             T3
                          3
                                            3 2                   d 93                        3      p2    3
    p4
          3       pft            3                                    3
                  C             Q                                    1-4                     s       a s

                  CO     CO     Ttu:)coi>ooo50i-»                                 CO         CO      Tti id
                                                                                  tH         tH      ^ 1-H
414                            ABBR^IVIATIONS

      AE        Archives des affaires Etrange^es, Paris. See Bibliography, III.
                Archival Materials, B. Archives in Europe.
      AF        Archives Nationales, Paris. See Bibliography, III. Archival
                Materials, B. Archives in Europe.
      BIE       Bulletin de I’Institut d’Egypte.
      BVA       Ba§ Vekalet Ar§ivi. Archives of the Prime Minister’s Office, Is¬
                tanbul. See Bibliography, III. Archival Materials, A. Archives
                in Turkey.                       v
      Cevdet    Cevdet classification, Ba§ Vekalet Ar§ivi, Istanbul.
      Cevdet*   Ahmed Cevdet Pa§a, Cevde^Tarihi, 1st ed., 10 vols. (Istanbul,
                1854-1875).
      Cevdet^   Ahmed Cevdet Pa§a, Cevdet Tarihi, 2nd ed., 12 vols. (Istanbul,
                1884-1885).
      CHE       Cahiers d’Histoire egyptienne.
      D         Ismail Kami Dani§mend, Izahli Osmanli Tarihi Kronolojisi,
                4 vols. (Istanbul, 1947-1955).
      EHR       English Historical Review.
      EP        Encyclopaedia of Islam, ed. Th. Houtsma and others, 4 vols.
                and Supplement (Leiden, 1913-1938).
      EP        Encyclopaedia of Islam, new ed., ed. H. A. R. Gibb, J. Schacht,
                C. Pellat and others (Leiden, 1960 to date).
      FO        Foreign Office Archives, Public Record Office, London. See Bib¬
                liography, III. Archival Materials, B. Archives in Europe.
      HH        Hatt-i Humayun documents collection, Ba§ Vekalet Ar§ivi,
                Istanbul.
      HW        Enver Ziya Karal, Selim Ill’un Hatt-i Humayunlari (Ankara,
                1942).
                Enver Ziya Karal, Selim IlPun Hatt-i Hiimayunlari—Nizam-i
                Cedit—1789-1807 (Ankara, 1946).
      HHS       Haus- Hof- und Staats-Archiv, Vienna. See Bibliography, III.
                Archival Materials, B. Archives in Europe.
      lA        Tiirkiye Cumhuriyeti, Maarif Vekaleti, Islam Ansiklopedisi
                (Istanbul and Ankara, 1940 to date).
      JA        Journal asiatique.
      JAOS      Journal of the American Oriental Society.
      JWH       Journal of World History.
      MID       Ministerstvo Inostrannikh Del SSSR, Vneshyaya Politika Ros-
                sii XIX i nachala XX veka. Dokumenti Rossiiskogo Minister-
                stva Inostrannikh Del. Seriya Pervaya, 1801-1815, 6 vols.
                (Moscow, 1960-1967). See Bibliography, II. Collections of
                Documents.
      OM        Bursah Mehmed Tahir, Osmanli muellifleri, 3 vols. (Istanbul,
                1915-1928).
OT     Osmanli Tarihi, 8 vols. (Ankara, 1947-1959). Vols. I-IV by     415
       Ismail Hakki Uzungargih; vols. V-VIII by Enver Ziya Karal.
       See Bibliography, V. General Histories.
RHD    Revue d’Histoire Diplomatique.
SO     Mehmed Siireyya, Sicill-i Osmani, 4 vols. (Istanbul, 1890-
       1893).
TCY    Tiirkiye Cumhuriyeti, Istanbul Kutilphaneleri Tarih-Cbgrafya
       Yazmalari Kataloglari, I. Tilrkqe Tarih Yazmalari, 12 fascs.
       (Istanbul, 1943-1957).
TD     Tarih Dergisi.
TKS    Topkapi Saray archives and library, Istanbul. See Bibliogra¬
       phy, III. Archival Materials, A. Archives in Turkey.
TM     Tilrkiyat Mecmuasi.
TOEM   Tarih-i Osfnani Encilmeni Mecmuasi.
TSD    Tarih Semineri Dergisi.
TTEM   Turk Tarih Encilmeni Mecmuasi.
TV     Tarih Vesikalari.
ZDMG   Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenldndischen Gesellschaft.
                                                i'

416                                    f^OTES


                          I. Decline of the Ottoman Empire

          1. The decay of the Ottoman Empire is discussed by B. Lewis, "Some
      Reflections on the Decline of the Ottoman Empire,” Stadia Islamica, IX
      (1958), 111-127, and idem. The Emergence of Modern Turkey, 2nd ed.
      (London and New York, 1968), pp. 21-39. Contemporary Ottoman
      analyses of the situation include those oflKogi Bey, Kogi Bey Risalesi
      (Istanbul, 1277/1860, 1303/1886, 1939; , Paris, 1861; London, 1862);
      German trans. by W. F. Behrnauer^in ZDMG, XV (1861), 272-332;
      XVI (1862), 271-290; XVIII (1864), 699-740; French trans. by Petis de la
      Croix (Paris, 1725); Russian trans. by Vassily Dmitrievich Smirnov,
      Kotschybey (Saint Petersburg, 1873); Liitfl Pa§a, Asafname (Istanbul,
      1909; Berlin, 1910); San Mehmed Pa§a, Nasaih ul-vuzera vel-iimera,
      trans. by W. Wright as Ottoman Statecraft (Princeton, N. J., 1935);
      Haci Halife (Katib ^elebi), Dilstur iil-Amal li-Islah al-Halal (Istanbul,
      1280/1863); German trans. by W. F. Behrnauer in ZDMG, XI (1857),
      111-132. See also B. Lewis, "Ottoman Observers of Ottoman Decline,”
      Islamic Studies, I (1962), 71-87.
          2. The economic background of Ottoman decline is discussed in
      Ferdinand Braudel, La Mediterranee et le monde mediterraneen a I’epoque
      de Philippe II, 2nd ed., 2 vols. (Paris, 1966); and in a brilliant study by
      Halil Inalcik, "Osmanli Imparatorlugunun kurulu§ ve inkigafi devrinde
      Tiirkiyenin Iktisadi vaziyeti iizerinde bir tetkik miinasebetile,” Belleten,
      XV (1951), 629-684, with an English summary, "Remarks on an essay
      on the economical situation of Turkey,” on pp. 685-690. See also Mustafa
      Akdag, "Osmanb imparatorlugunun kurulu§ ve inkigafi devrinde
      Tiirkiye’nin iktisadi vaziyeti,” Belleten, XIII (1949), 497-571, XIV
      (1950), 319-418, an article which Inalcik shows must be used with
      considerable caution. On Ottoman internal disorder during this period,
      see the excellent contributions by Mustafa Akdag, "Celali Fetreti,”
      Ankara Universitesi DU ve Tarih-Cografya Fakultesi Dergisi, XVI (1958),
      53-107; idem, Celali Isyanlari, 1550-1603 (Ankara, 1963); and idem,
      Buyiik Celali Kari§ikliklarinin Ba§lamasi (Erzurum, 1963).
          3. On Murad IV’s reforms, see Ahmed Refik, "Sultan Murad-i Rabi’
      nin Hatt-i Hiimayunlari,” TOEM, III (1916), 129-141; Cavid Baysun,
      "Murad IV,” lA, VIII, 625-647. On the Kopriilii family, see Tayyib
      Gokbilgin, "Kopriiliiler,” lA, VI, 892-908; Paul Rycaut, The Present
      State of the Ottoman Empire, 2 vols. (Cologne, 1676); idem. The History
      of the Turkish Empire, 1623-1677, 3 vols. (London, 1680; Paris, 1683);
      also M. Brosch, Geschichten aus dem Leben dreier Grosswesire (Gotha,
      1899); and Petis de la Croix, Etat general de I’Empire Othoman (Paris,
      1695).

                   N




                                 Notes to pages 3-6
    4. On the Tulip Period and Patrona Halil’s reaction, see M. Miinir        417
Aktepe, Patrona Isyani, 1730, (Istanbul, 1958); de Crouzenac, Histoire
de la derniere revolution arrivee dans I’Empire Ottoman (Paris, 1740);
Ahmed Refik, Ldle Devri (Istanbul, 1932); and Mary Lucille Shay, The
Ottoman Empire from 1720 to 1734 As Revealed in the Dispatches of
the Venetian Baili (Urbana, Ill.,'1944). On the diplomatic and military
struggles of the time, see L. Cassels, The Struggle for the (Ottoman
Empire, 1717-1740 (London, 1966).
    5. Tibor Halasi-Kun, "Ibrahim Muteferrika,” 7A, V, 896-900; Server
Iskit, Turkiye’de ne§riyat hareketleri tarihine hir bakiq (Istanbul, 1939);
J. H. Mordtmann, "Ibrahim Mutafarrika,”           II, 467; A. von SimonIFy,
Ibrahim Muteferrika (Budapest, 1944); Franz Babinger, Stambuler
Buchwesen im 18. Jahrhundert (Leipzig, 1919); G. Toderini, Letteratura
turchesca, 3 vols. (Venice, 1787), III, 97-108.
    6. Albert Vandal, Le Pacha Bonneval (Paris, 1884); de Ligne, Mem-
oire sur le Comte de Bonneval (Paris, 1817); Mehmed Arif, "Humbaraci
ba§i Ahmed Pa§a Bonneval,” TOEM, III, 1153-1157; IV, 1220-1224,
1282-1286; Harold Bowen, "Ahmad Pasha Bonneval,”           I, 291-292;
Heinrich Benedikt, Der Pascha-Graf Alexander von Bonneval, 1695-
1747 (Graz and Cologne, 1959); see also Lewis, Emergence of Modern
Turkey, pp. 47-48.
    7. Osman Nuri Ergin, Tttrkiye Maarif Tarihi, 5 vols. (Istanbul,
1939-1943), I, 50; A. Adnan-Adivar, Osmanli Turklerinde Him (Istan¬
bul, 1943), pp. 182-183; Lewis, Emergence of Modern Turkey, p. 48.
    8. Franz Babinger, "Ahmad Rasmi”,E/-, I, 294-295.
    9. Adnan-Adivar, Him, pp. 178-180.
   10. Ismail Hakki Uzungar§ili, "Cezayirli Gazi Hasan Pa§a’ya dair,”
TM, VII-VIII (1942), 17-40; idem, Osmanli Devletinin Merkez veBahriye
Teqkildti (Ankara, 1948), pp. 502-511, 529-533.
   11. Ismail Hakki Uzungar§ib, "Sadrazam Halil Hamid Pa§a,” TM,
V (1935), 213-267; idem, OT, IV/1, 473-484; Auguste Boppe, "La France
et le 'militaire turc’ au XVIIP siecle,” Feuilles d’Histoire (1912), pp.
386-402, 490-501; Adnan-Adivar, Him, pp. 183-185; Lewis, Emergence
of Modern Turkey, p. 49.
  12. Uzungar§ili, OT, IV/1, 479-486; Lewis, Emergence of Modern
Turkey, pp. 48-49; Baron F. de Tott, Memoires du Baron de Tott sur les
Turcs, 4 vols. (Amsterdam, 1785); Uzun5ar§ib, "Halil Hamid,” pp.
225-227, 233-238.




                       II. Education of a Prince


    1. E. Habesci, Etat actuel de I’Empire Ottoman, 2 vols. (Paris, 1792),
I, 96-98; Leonce Pingaud, Choiseul-Gouffer. La France en Orient sous




                          Notes to pages 8-12
418   Louis XVI (Paris, 1887), p. 86; HW, pp. 5-8; Ahmed Jevad, Etat mili-
      taire Ottomane (Istanbul, 1882), 1,316; de Tott, III, 41.
          2. Omer Efendi, Tarih-i Sultan Sclitn-i Salis vs Mahmud-i Sani,
      Siileymaniye Library, Istanbul, Esad Efendi MS 2152, fols. 13a-16b.
          3. HH^, pp. 10-12; CevdeP, VIII, 149; Habesci, Empire Ottoman, I,
      96-98; Omer Efendi, fols. 16a-17a. On Selim Ill’s activities as a poet,
      see Necati Elgin, Selim Ill-Ilhami (Konya, 1959).
          4. Uzungargih, "Halil Hamid,” pp. 239-241; A. Cevat Eren, "Selim
      III,” lA, X, 441; the incident is described in detail in the unpublished
      Tarih of Cabi Said, found in a unique ma'nuscript copy in the library
      of the Istanbul University Department^of History (Tarih Semineri), p. 8.
           5. The circumstances of Ishak Bey’s mission to France and Selim III s
      corresp)ondence with Louis XVI are discussed in Ismail Hakki Uzun-
      Qar§ili, "Selim IH’iin Veliaht iken Fransa Krali Lui XVI ile Muhaber-
      eleri,” Belleten, II (1938), 191-246; and Salih Munir, "Louis XVI et le
      Sultan Selim III,” RHD, XXVI (1912), 516-543.
         6. Munir, "Louis XVI,” p. 530.
         7. The drafts and Turkish copies of the letters are given in Uzun-
      5ar§ih, "Muhabere,” pp. 221-227; the French text is given in Munir,

      "Louis XVI,” pp. 526-529.
         8. Ishak Bey’s life in France is described in Henri Deherain, La vie de
      Pierre Ruffin, Orientalists et Diplomats, 1742-1824, 2 vols. (Paris, 1929-
      1930), I, 57-60, 68, 104-105, 233; II, 9, 22-23, 84-85; see also Uzungar-
      §ih, "Muhabere,” pp. 204-205; and Munir, "Louis XVI,” pp. 531-536;
      also Pingaud, Choiseul-Gouffer, pp. 87-90; and Lady Elizabeth Craven,
      Journey through the Crimea to Constantinople (London, 1789), pp.
      279-280.
          9. The translation is from the original French copy of Louis XVI’s
      letter, given in Munir, "Louis XVI,” pp. 532-534; the Turkish transla¬
      tion is in Uzungar^ih, "Muhabere,” pp. 227-230; a photograph of the
      letter appears as plate 9. Tahsin Oz, "Fransa Kirali Louis XVI’nin
      Selim Ill’e namesi,” TV, I, (1942)198-202 gives the French text (with
      photographs) and a Turkish translation of a similar letter written to
      Selim in 1789. For Ishak Bey’s life and career after 1787, see Faik Re§it
      Unat, "Baghoca Ishak Efendi,” Belleten, XXVIII (1964), 89-115.




                   III. Origins of the War under Abd ul-Hamid I


          1. On Catherine the Great’s ambitions and policies in relation to the
      Ottoman Empire, see Boris Nolde, La formation de VEmpire Russe,
      2 vols. (Paris, 1952), II, 53-114; A. Sorel, La question d’Orient auXVIIP
      siecle: Le partage de la Pologne et le trade de Kainardji (Paris, 1889),
      trans. into English as The Eastern Question in the Eighteenth Century:




                                Notes to pages 13-21
The Partition of Poland and the Treaty of Kainardji (London, 1898);          419
J. A. R. Marriott, The Eastern Question: An Historical Study in Euro¬
pean Diplomacy, 4th ed. (Oxford, 1940), pp. 142-159; R. H. Lord, The
Second Partition of Poland: A Study in Diplomatic History (Cambridge,
Mass., 1915); G. S. Thomson, Catherine the Great and the Expansion of
Russia (London, 1947), pp. 170-182.
   2. Marriott, pp. 154-157; A. von Arneth, Joseph II und Kdtharina
von Russland, Ihr Briefwechsel (Vienna, 1869); A. Beer, Die orientalische
Politik Oesterreichs seit 1774 (Prague, 1883); I. H. Castera, Histoire de
Catherine II, Imperatrice de Russie, 4 vols. (Paris, 1880); N. lorga, Ges-
chichte des osmanischen Reiches 5 vols. (Gotha, 1908-1913), V, 47-53;
J. W. Zinkeisen, Geschichte des osmanischen Reiches in Europa, 8 vols.
(Gotha, 1840-1863), VI, 407-411.
     3. Andre Soularige-Bodin, La diplomatie de Louis XV et le pacte de
famille (Paris, 1894); A. J. Zorn de Bulach, L’ambassade du Prince
Louis de Rohan a la Cour de Vienne, 1771-1774 (Strasbourg, 1901);
A. Jobez, La France sous Louis XVI, 3 vols. (Paris, 1877-1893); Jean
Lemoine, "The Reversal of Alliances and the Family Compact,” Cam¬
bridge Modern History, vol. VI. The Eighteenth Century (Cambridge,
1925), 329-360; Zinkeisen, VI, 416-425; R. Waddington, Louis XV et le
reversement des alliances ... 7 754-1756 (Paris, 1896).
     4. C. V. Easum, Prince Henry of Prussia: Brother of Frederick the
Great (Madison, Wis., 1942); W. F. Reddaway, Frederick the Great and
the Rise of Prussia (London, 1904); R. Koser, Geschichte Friedrichs des
Grossen, 7th ed., 4 vols. (Berlin, 1921-1925); P. Gaxotte, Frederick the
Great (New Haven, Conn., 1942); P. Bailleu, "Graf Herzberg,” Histo-
rische Zeitschrift, XLII (1879), 442-490; H. Temperley, Frederick the
Great and Kaiser Joseph (London, 1915).
     5. G. B. Hertz, British Imperialism in the Eighteenth Century (Lon¬
don, 1908); Sir Richard Lodge, Great Britain and Prussia in the Eight¬
eenth Century (Oxford, 1923); Basil Williams, Stanhope: A Study in
Eighteenth Century War and Diplomacy (Oxford, 1932); Marriott, pp.
159-163; Zinkeisen, VI, 434-435.
     6. Nolde, II, 161-172; D, IV, 62-63; Cevdet, II, 193-196, 203-205,
257-260, 286-289; Mesut Pa§a, Mecmua-i Muahedat, 5 vols. (Istanbul,
1292-1298/1876-1882), III, 319; G. Noradounghian, Recueil d’actes
internationaux de VEmpire Ottoman, 4 vols. (Paris, 1897-1903), I, 377;
Ch. de Martens and F. de Cussy, Recueil manuel et pratique de trades,
conventions, et autres actes diplomatiques, 7 vols. (Leipzig, 1846-1857),
III, 707; lorga, V, 3-15, 21-37; Cevdet^ III, 117-118,277-302; C. G. Koch,
Histoire abrege des trades de Paix entre les puissances de I’Europe depuis
la paix de Westphalie par feu M. de Koch. Ouvrage entierement refondu,
augmente et continue jusqu’au congres de Vienne et aux trades de Paris
de 1815 parF. Schoell, 15 vols. (Paris, 1818), XIV, 455-458; Uzungar^ih,
OT, IV/1, 487-497.




                          Notes to pages 22-24
         7. D. M. Lang, The Last Years of the Georgian Monarchy, 1658-1832
420
      (New York, 1957), pp. 175-186, 205-210; Nolde, II, 364-387; Cevdet^ II,
      215-217, III, 196-209; Zinkeisen, VI, 529-<-539.
         8. Thomson, Catherine the Great, pp. 182-193; lorga, V, 49-53.
          9. lorga, V, 43-47.
         10. Cevdet^ III, 13-50; 52-65; Uzun5ar§ili, OT, IV/1, 499-503.
         11. Cevdet^ III, 249-268, IV, 6-23; Uzungar§ili, OT, IV/1, 506-518;
      Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. II, pp. 46-48, vol. XIX, part 1, pp. 310-313;
      BVA, Cevdet Hariciye 3493, 6759, 6974. A copy of the statement sent
      to the European ambassadors in Istanbul explaining the Ottoman de¬
      cision to declare war is given in Cevdet^, IV, 280-281. The full statement
      is found in BVA, Name-i Hilmayun register No. 6, p. 6; Zinkeisen, VI,
      623-630.
        12. William Coxe, History of the House of Austria, 3rd ed., 3 vols.
      (London, 1889), III, 515-516; Zinkeisen, VI, 630-641; FO 78/8, no. 4,
      Ainslie to Carmathan, 22 Jan. 1789; Uzungar^ili, OT, IV/1, 521-522.
        13. Uzun5ar§ili, OT, IV/1, 522-524; Cevdet^ IV, 31-32, 282-284;
      Koch, XIV, 465-466; Zinkeisen, VI, 644-646; Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1,
      vol. II, pp. 50-51.




                            IV. The Campaigns of 1787-1789

          1. BVA, Cevdet Askeriye, 10376; Cevdet^, IV, 32-39; Edward S.
      Creasy, History of the Ottoman Turks (London, 1878; repr. Beirut, 1961),
      pp. 426-427; Charles Marie, Marquis de Salaberry, Histoire de I’Empire
      Ottoman, depuis sa fondation jusqu’d la paix d’Yassy en 1792, 4 vols.
      (Paris, 1813), IV, 105-106; lorga, V, 53-70.
          2. Cevdet^, IV, 26-27; Creasy, pp. 427-428; Salaberry, IV, 107-110;
      R. C. Anderson, Naval Wars in the Levant from the Battle of Lepanto to
      the Introduction of Steam, 1559-1853 (Princeton, N. J., 1952), pp. 319-
      321; W. Lyon Blease, Suvorof (London, 1920), pp. 86-90; G. Mesherya-
      kova, A. V. Suvorov, 4 vols. (Moscow, 1949), II, 338-360; Uzungar§ih,
      OT, IV/1, 520-521.
          3. Anderson, Naval Wars, pp. 321-322; Uzungar§ili, OT, IV/1, 537
      n.; BVA, Cevdet Hariciye 3773.
          4. Coxe, III, 516; Oskar Criste, Kriege unter Kaiser Josef H (Vienna,
      1904), pp. 153-154; the attack is described in detail in A. Sutherland,
      A Tour up the Straits, from Gibraltar to Constantinople (London, 1790),
      pp. 307-311; Zinkeisen, VI, 642-643.
          5. Cevdet^, IV, 23-25, 27-32; Enveri, fols. 4b-6b; Edib, fol. 2b;
      Uzungar§ih, "Hasan Pa§a,” lA, V, 322.
          6. Mesheryakova, II, 385-430; Criste, pp. 160-161; Lodge, pp. 324-
      326; Sutherland, pp. 340-341.




                                 Notes to pages 24-29
    7. Coxe, III, 517; Criste, pp. 149-156; Creasy, pp. 429-430.              421
    8. Suleyman Nutki, Musavver muharebat-i bahriye-i osmaniye
(Istanbul, 1307/1889), pp. 85-87; Lincoln Lorenz, The Admiral and the
Empress; John Paul Jones and Catherine the Great (New York, 1954),
pp. 614-634; F. A. Colder, John Paul Jones in Russia (Garden City,
N. Y., 1927), pp. 51-57; Andersoti, Naval Wars, pp. 322-323; Salaberry,
IV, 118-119; Uzungar§ili, OT, IV/1, 537-538; Edib, fols. 17b-18b'; lorga,
IV, 74-75; Cevdet^, IV, 101-102; Hurmuzaki, XVI, 586-588.
    9. Nutki, pp. 87-88; Anderson, Naval Wars, pp. 328-332; Cevdet^,
IV, 42, 102-105; Edib, fol. 36b; Uzungar§ili, OT, IV/1, 538; Hurmuzaki,
XVI, 589-590.
    10. Cevdet^, IV, 105-120; Uzungargih, OT, IV/1, 538-543; D, IV, 67;
lorga, IV, 76-77; Salaberry, IV, 120-121; Blease, pp. 90-91; Mesber-
yakova, II, 452-456;^dib, fols. 43a-44a; Zinkeisen, VI, 655-658; Enveri,
fols. 94a-97b; Hurmuzaki, XVI, 592-594, 599, 603-605.
    11. Criste, pp. 159-176; Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. Ill, fasc. 1, pp.
84-87; XVI, 584-603.
    12. Cevdet^, IV, 99; Uzungar^ili, OT, IV/1, 537; Enveri, fols. 18a-19b;
Criste, pp. 171-174; Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. II, 53-54,57-58, 585-586,
591-594, 596; XVI, 584, 595.
    13. Criste, pp. 174-176; Cevdet^, IV, 100; Uzungar§ili, OT, IV/1,
537; Zinkeisen, VI, 653; Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. II, 59-60.
    14. Enveri, fols. 28a-29b, 30b-32a, 36b-37a, 39b-40b, 43a-47a,
58a-73a; Cevdet^, IV, 52-72; Uzungargili, OT, IV/1, 531-535; Criste,
pp. 161-166; Salaberry, IV, 115-116; Sutherland, 340-342; Edib, fol.
39a-b; Hurmuzaki, XVI, 597-599, 600-602.
    15. Uzungar^ili, OT, IV/1, 535; Criste, pp. 165-166; Cevdet^, IV,
72-74, 91-99; Enveri, fols. 73b-75a; Hurmuzaki, XVI, 601.
    16. Lodge, pp. 327-329; Zinkeisen, VI, 671-688, 698-721; Edib, fol.
68b; Vasif, III, 14b; Cevdet^, IV, 132-185; Enveri, fol. llOa-b.
   17. Criste, pp. 177-181, 187-189.
   18. Creasy, p. 433; Criste, pp. 188-189; Enveri, fols. 83a-91a; lorga,
V, 77.
    19. D, IV, 67; Cevdet^, IV, 192-196; Edib, fols. 46b-47a; FO 78/10,
no. 15, 7 April 1789; BVA, Ali Emiri, Abd ul-Hamid 1,1107; Uzunpargili,
OT, IV/1, 546-547; Enveri, fols. 91a-b, 98a-99a.
   20. Vasif, III, 4a-b; Edib, fols. 55b-56a; Cevdet^ IV, 217-221;
Enveri, fols. 103a-105a; Esad Efendi, Tesrifat-i Kadime (Istanbul, n.d.),
pp. 110-117; Ismail Hakki Uzungar§ili, Osmanli Devletinin Saray
Te§kilati (Ankara, 1945), p. 200; Tayyarzade Ahmet Ata, Tarih-i Ata, 5
vols. (Istanbul, 1292-1293), IV, 57.
    21. lorga, V, 79; Edib, fols. 56b-57a; HHS, Tiirkei 11-97,7 April 1789;
FO 78/10, no. 15 (7 April 1789); Zinkeisen, VI, 722 n.
  22. Edib, fol. 57a-b; Vasif, III, 5a, 8a; Cevdet, IV, 230-231; FO 78/10,
no. 17 (15 April 1789); HH\ pp. 21-22.




                          Notes to pages 29-33
422      23. HH\ 25-27; Cevdet^, IV, 298-299; Edib, fols. 57a-b, 60b-61a;
      Enveri, fols. 106a-107a.
         24. Cevdet^ IV, 231, 234; HH\ pp. 27-29; Enveri, fols. 109b-110a.
        25. Vasif, III, 5b, 27b; Cevdet^ IV, 220, 255-256; Edib, fol. 71a-b;
      HHS, Tiirkei 11-97 (22 Aug. 1789); FO 78/10, no. 35 (22 Aug. 1789); AE
      180, no. 36 (22 Aug. 1789).
         26. Cevdet^ IV, 226-228; Edib, fols. 64a-64b; Vasif, III, 12a; FO
      78/10, no. 18 (22 April 1789), no. 19 (1 May 1789); Enveri, fols. 112a-
      113a; A. Cevat Eren, "Selim III,” lA, X, 443; Mustafa Nuri, Netayic ul-
      Vukuat, 4 yo\s. (Istanbul, 1908-1918), IV, 24.
        27. FO 78/10, no. 18 (22 April 1789); Cevdet^, IV, 227; Edib, fol.
      59a-b.
         28. Cevdet^, IV, 231; FO 78/10, no. 21 (8 May 1789); Vasif, III, 8a;
      Uzungar^ih, OT, IV/1, 547; lorga, V, 79-80; Enveri, fol. 114a-b; Blease,
      pp. 93-95; Salaberry, IV, 129-130; Creasy, 434; Criste, pp. 187-191.
         29. The Battle of Fok§an is described in Mesheryakova, II, 458-471;
      Criste, pp. 192-195; Vasif, III, 22a-b; Uzungargili, OT, IV/1, 549-550;
      Cevdet^ IV, 256-258; D, IV, 68; Karal, OT, V, 18; Blease, pp. 95-98;
      maps of the battle are given in Mesheryakova, II, facing 454, Criste,
      insert 3, and Blease, p. 97. Salaberry, IV, 130, and Enveri, 163a-171a
      also describe the battle; Hurmuzaki, XVI, 610.
          30. FO 78/10, no. 28 (1 July 1789); Edib, fol. 70b; Karal, OT, V, 19;
      AE 180, no. 29 (8 July 1789); Cevdet^ IV, 248-249; Zinkeisen, VI, 726-
      734; AE 180, no. 31 (27 July 1789); Instructions to Choiseul-Gouffier in
      AE 180, fols. 37-38, dated 13 July 1789; AE, 180, fols. 75-80 (4 Aug.
      1789); AE 180, no. 35 (15 Aug. 1789); Hurmuzaki, Suppl. I, vol. 2,69-73.
         31. The text of the Swedish alliance is found in Mesut Pa§a, Mecmua-i
      Muahedat, I, 160-162; Noradounghian, II, 1-11; Cevdet^, IV, 296-298;
      the alliance is summarized and discussed in FO 78/10, no. 30 (14 July
      1789); Cevdet^, IV, 244-250; Re§at Ekrem, Osmanli Muahedeleri ve
      Kapitiilasyonlar, 1300-1920, ve Lozan Muahedesi (Istanbul, 1934), pp.
      108-110; D, IV, 68; Uzungar^ili, OT, IV/1, 543-546; AE 180, no. 29
      (8 July 1789); FO 78/10, no. 32 (22 July 1789); no. 34 (8 Aug. 1789); AE
      180, no. 34 (14 Aug. 1789); AE 180, no. 38 (8 Sept. 1789).
          32. Vasif, III, 27b; Edib, fol. 71a-b.
          33. Uzungargih, OT, IV/1, 550-551; Cevdet-, IV, 258, 298-299.
          34. The events of the Battle of the Rimnik/Boza/Martineshti are
      described in Cevdet^, IV, 261-267; Criste, pp. 202-209; Mesheryakova,
      II, 474-489 (with a map of the battle facing p. 474); Blease, pp. 99-107;
      Uzungargili, OT, IV/1, 552-555; Edib, fols. 71b-72a; Salaberry, IV, 130-
       131; Vasif, III, 24a-b; D, IV, 69; Criste, insert 6; Blease, p. 101; Enveri,
      fols. 169a-171b; Hurmuzaki, XVI, 612-614.
          35. Blease, pp. 109-110; Mesheryakova, II, 489-497; Enveri, fol.
      181a-b.

                   \




                                Notes to pages 33-38
   36. Criste, pp. 209-210.                                                   423
   37. Cevdet^, IV, 267; Vasif, III, 24b-26b; Edib, fol. 72a; Enveri, fols.
179-180a, 191a.
   38. Cevdet^, IV, 268-274; Enveri, fols. 180a-184a.
   39. Edib, fol. 72b; Cevdet^, IV, 244-248; Vasif, III, 28a-30a; Enveri,
fols. 183a-b; Criste, pp. 198-202, 210-214, insert 5; Uzunparpili, OT,
IV/1, 555.
    40. CevdeC, IV, 272, 279; Enveri, fols. 180a-b, 184a-185a; Vasif,
III, 31b.
     41. Cevdet^, IV, 273-274; Enveri, fols. 184a-185a; Vasif, III, 31a;
Edib, fol. 74a; M. I. KutuzovyM. I. Kutuzov, Sbornik Dokumentov, ed.
L. G. Beskrovno, 5 vols. (Moscow, 1950-1956), I, 90 (a sketch of the fort
appears on the plate facing p. 90).
     42. Enveri, fol. 197a-b; Vasif, III, 34b-35a; Edib, fol. 74a; Hur-
muzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. Ill, fasc. 1, pp. 93-94; XVI, 618,621-622; Uzunjiar-
pih, OT, IV/1, 558-559.
     43. Criste, p. 219; CevdeC, IV, 267; Hurmuzaki, XVI, 619-621.



                        V. The Winter of 1789-90

    1. AE 180, no. 50 (30 Oct. 1789); HHS, Tiirkei 11-97 (10 Nov. 1789);
Edib, fol. 72b; Cevdet^ V, 4.
     2. AE 180, no. 50 (30 Oct. 1789); Edib, fol. 73a-b; AE 180 no. 52
(8 Nov. 1789); FO 78/10, no. 40 (8 Nov. 1789); no. 41 (22 Nov. 1789).
     3. Vasif, III, 32a; HHS, Ttirkei 11-97 (8 Nov. 1789); Ismail Baykal,
"Selim III. devrinde 'Imdad-i Sefer’ i^in para basilmak iizere saraydan
verilen altin ve gumu§ e§ya hakkinda,” IV, III (1944) 36-50; A. Cevat
Eren, "Selim III,” lA, X, 443-444.
    4. FO 78/10, no. 41 (22 Nov. 1789); Enveri, fol. 98a-b; Edib, fol. 78a.
    5. HHS, Tiirkei 11-97 (8 Nov. 1789); Enveri, fol. 193a; Edib, fol. 74a.
    6. Uzungar§ili, OT, IV/1, 557; CevdeC, V, 4-7; Enveri, fols. 189a-
191b; Vasif, III, 32a-b; Edib, fols. 72b-73a.
    7. Cevdet^, V, 5-7; Uzungar§ili, OT, IV/1, 557; Enveri, fols. 193b-
195a; Vasif, III, 33a.
      8. Cevdet^, V, 8; Vasif, III, 33a.
      9. The Ottoman-Prussian alliance is discussed in Nihat Erim,
Devletler arasi hukuk ve siyasi tarih (Ankara, 1953), p. 157; Eren, "Selim
III,” I A, X, 444; Cevdet^, V, 13; Koch, XIV, 473-476; Uzunpargili, OT,
IV/1, 559-562; Karal, OT, V, 20. The text can be found in Cevdet^ V,
242-244; Mesut Pasa, Mecmua-i Muahedat, I, 90-94; Martens, IV, 466-
471; Noradounghian, II, 3-7; also enclosed in FO 78/11, no. 5 (26 Feb.
1790).
   10. Zinkeisen, VI, 758-763.




                          Notes to pages 38-47
424      11'. Uzunijargih, OT, IV/1, 5^2; AE 181, no. 3 (7 Feb. 1790); no. 4
      (8 Feb. 1790); no. 5 (22 Feb. 1790); HHS, Tiirkei 11-97 (8 and 22 Feb.
      1790); FO 78/11, no. 4 (22 Feb. 1790). v
         12. FO 78/11, no. 3 (8 Feb. 1790); HHS, Tiirkei 11-97 (8 Feb. 1790);
      Cevdet^, V, 13; Enveri, fol. 199a-b; Vasif, III, 35b-36a; Edib, fols. 73b-
      74a.
         13. Edib, fol. 73a.
         14. HHS, Tiirkei 0-97 (8 and 22 Feb. 1790).
         15. Vasif, III, 35a-b.
         16. Hafiz Huseyin Aksarayi, Hadikat'ul-cevami, 2 vols. (Istanbul,
      1281/1865) II, 20; HHS, Tiirkei 11-97 ^and 98 (25 April 1790).
         17. Cevdet^ V, 13-15; Edib, fol. 73b; Vasif, III, 36a; Enveri, fols.
      199a-201a; Uzungargili, OT, IV/1, 562; BVA, Ali Emiri, Abdulhamid I,
      1043; Uzunear§ili, "Hasan Pa§a” pp. 38-40; FO 78/11, no. 8 (8 April
      1790); AE 181, fols. 136-142 (8 April 1790); Uzungargili, OT, IV/2, 450.
         18. Vasif, III, 36a; Cevdet^, V, 16-17; Edib, fol. 73b; Enveri, fols.
      203a-205a; Vasif, III, 36a says he was appointed Tuesday, 14 Receb;
      Edib, fol. 73b says 18 Receb; Vasif, III, 36b says 1 Saban Friday; D, IV, 70
      says 29/30 March 13/14 Receh Monday/Tuesday night 1790-1204; FO
      78/11, no. 8 (8 April 1790) says Gazi Hasan died 29 March; news arrived
      first on 1 April, and the appointment was made the same day; Enveri,
      fol. 203 says 22 Receb; Uzungargili, OT, IV/2, 449 says he died Tuesday
      night of 14 Receb 1204/30 March 1790; he says in a note that 1 Receb is
      Wednesday by the rasad (astronomical) calendar; so 14 Receh is Tues¬
      day; by our calendar he died on the night going from Monday to Tuesday,
      with 14 Receb equaling Monday.
         19. Enveri, fol. 205a-b; SO II, 160; Uzun^argih, OT, IV/1, 562-563;
      IV/2, 450-451.
         20. Koch, XIV, 477-478; Lodge, 332-333; Zinkeisen, VI, 763-780;
      Hurmuzaki, XVI, 630.


                             VI. The Campaign of 1790

           1. CevdetS V, 26-27, 36-38; Enveri, fols. 207b-208a, 210a-216a;
      Uzuncar§ili, OT, IV/1, 566-567; FO 78/11, no. 9 (22 April 1790); Vasif,
      III, 42a; Edib,fol. 74a-b; HHS, Tiirkei 11-97 (8 May 1790); AE 180, no. 10
      (8 May 1790); FO 78/11, no. 11 (22 May 1790).
            2. Enveri, fols. 217a-220a; Cevdet^, V, 42-44; Enveri, fols. 222a,
      226a-b, 230a-b; Vasif, III, 34b, 37b, 42a.
            3. Cevdet^, V, 44-45; Enveri, fols. 230b-232a, 233b; Uzun5ar§ili,
      OT, IV/1, 567-568; Edib, fol. 74a; AE 181, fol. 214-219 (18 June 1790);
      D, IV, 70; Vasif, III, 44a-b; FO 78/11, no. 13 (22 June 1790); lorga, IV,
      83; Hurmuzaki, XVI, 631.




                                Notes to pages 47-52
    4. Lodge, p. 334; Koch, XIV, 476-482; Baron I. de Testa, Recueil          425
des traites de la Porte Ottoman avec les puissances etrang'eres depuis
1536, 11 vols. (Paris, 1864-1911), IX, 177-180; Cevdet^ V, 48-49;
Zinkeisen, VI, 790-794.
     5. Cevdet^, V, 46-47; Enveri, fol. 233a-b, 234b; Edib, fols. 75b,
76a-b; FO 78/11, no. 17 (22 July 1'790); FO 78/11, no. 18 (30 July 1790);
no. 19 (8 Aug. 1790); AE 181, no. 21 (8 Aug. 1790); no. 22 (22 Aug.*1790);
FO 78/11, no. 20 (22 Aug. 1790); Vasif, III, 45b, 46b, 47a.
     6. Cevdet^, V, 49-51, 65; Vasif, III, 47b; FO 78/11, no. 21 (29 Aug.
1790); AE 181, fol. 177-81 (1 Sept. 1790); FO 78/11, no. 23 (8 Sept. 1790);
no. 24 (16 Sept. 1790); AE 181, fols. 300-304 (22 Sept. 1790); Hurmuzaki,
XVI, 631-634.
     7. de Testa, IX, 183-186 (text); Uzunyargih, OT, IV/1, 570, Hurmu¬
zaki, XVI, 633.
     8. Vasif, III, 45b; Enveri, fols. 239a-243b; Cevdef^, V, 52; Hurmu¬
zaki, XVI, 634-635.
     9. Vasif, III, 67a-b, 83a-84b.
    10. Koch, XIV, 498-502; Vasif, III, 86b; Cevdet^ V, 52, 61-66;
Zinkeisen, VI, 834-835; Hurmuzaki, XVI, 634.
    11. Vasif, III, 42a; HHS, Turkei 11-97 (22 May 1790); FO 78/11,
no. 11 (22 May 1790); AE 181, fol. 218 (18 June 1790); Uzungar^ili, OT,
IV/1, 582-584; Cevdet^, V, 111-127.
    12. Zinkeisen, VI, 794-795; Mesheryakova, II, 502-517.
    13. Enveri, fols. 253a, 258a; Cevdet^, V, 67-68.
    14. Anderson, Naval Wars, pp. 335-343; Nutki, 91; Cevdet^, V,
33-35; Edib, 76a-76b.
   15. Uzungar^ili, OT, IV/1, 574-575; Kutuzov, 1,91-108; Hurmuzaki,
Suppl. 1, vol. Ill, fasc. 1, pp. 94-95; Cevdet^, V, 67-68; Hurmuzaki,
XVI, 635-636.
    16. Anderson, Naval Wars, pp. 341-343; Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol.
Ill, fasc. 1, pp. 95-96; XVI, 637. Uzungarsili, OT, IV/1, 575; Enveri,
fols. 269a-270b; Cevdet^, V, 69-70, 71.
    17. Blease, 112-121; Mesheryakova, II, 542-577 (plan facing p.
542); Kutuzov, I, 112-119 (plan facing p. 112); Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1,
vol. Ill, pp. 96-97 (plan facing p. 96); XVI, 638-639; Uzungargili, OT,
IV/1, 576-577; Enveri, fols. 270a-271a, 272b-276a; Vasif, III, 54b-56a;
Cevdet^, V, 71-75, 77-79; AE 182; no. 3 (22 Jan. 1791); Salaberry, IV,
140-143.
   18. Vasif, III, 56a-57b, 58a; Cevdet^, V, 75-76, 82-90; Uzunjariili,
OT, IV/1, 577-580; AE 182, no. 4 (22 Feb. 1791); Edib, fols. 82b,
83a.
   19. Vasif, III, 100a; Edib, 79a; AE 182, no. 3 (22 Jan. 1791); Eren,
"Selim III,” lA, X, 445.




                           Notes to pages 54-60
426          '            '   VII. The Campaign of 1791

             1. FO 78/11, no. 12 (8 June 1790);vno. 17 (22 July 1790); AE 181,
      no. 21 (8 Aug. 1790); no. 22 (22 Aug. 1790); FO 78/11, no. 21 (29 Aug.
      1790); no. 23 (8 Sept. 1790); no. 24 (16 Sept. 1790); AE 182, fols. 74-76
      (8 March 1791); AE 182, no. 7 (20 April 1791).
             2. Creasy, p. 442.
             3. Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. Ill, fasc. 1, p. 101; Uzuncar§ili, OT,
      IV/1, 580; Hurmuzaki, XVI, 642-643.
           4. Cevdet^ V, 107-109; Enveri, fols. 295b-297b; Kutuzov, I, 148-
      152 (plan facing p. 148).             ^    '
            5. Uzun^argili, OT, IV/1, 570-571; Cevdet^, V, 56-58, 138-180;
      Koch, XIV, 485-490; Zinkeisen, VI, 806-828; Vasif, III, 67a-b, 83a-84b;
      Hurmuzaki, XVI, 639-640, 642, 645; Tahsin Oz, "Selim Ill’un Sirkatibi
      tarafmdan tutulan Ruzname,” TV, HI (1944), 117-118.
            6. The Treaty of Sistova text is given, in Mesut Pa§a, Mecmua-i
      Muahedat, III, 156-163; Noradounghian, II, 6-12; Cevdet^ V, 259-268.
      It is analyzed in Uzun9ar§ib, OT, IV/1, 570-572; Koch, XIV, 490-493;
      Zinkeisen, VI, 828-830; and Cevdet^ V, 182-183.
          7. Cevdet^ V, 267-269; Mesut Pa§a, Mecmua-i Muahedat, III, 163-
      166; Noradounghian, II, 12-16; de Testa, IX, 166-169; Koch, XIV,
      493-494.
           8. Koch, XIV, 498-502; Lodge, 336-337; Martens, V, 277-291; AE
      182, fols. 149-154 (7 May 1791); no. 9 (22 May 1791); Hurmuzaki, XVI,
      646.
             9. AE 182, no. 14 (12 July 1791); Tahsin Oz, "Sir Katibi,” pp.
      187-188.
         10. Cevdet^, V, 130-131; Enveri, fol. 316a.
         11. Cevdet^ V, 269-272; Uzungargili, OT, IV/1, 585-590.
         12. CevdeP, V, 194-201; Enveri, fols. 331a-335a.
         13. The Peace of Jassy is summarized and analyzed in: Koch, XIV,
      503-506; Uzungar§ih, OT, IV/1, 591-595. The text is in Cevdet, V, 272-
      279; Martens, V, 291-300; Mesut Pa§a, Mecmua-i Muahedat, IV, 4-19;
      Noradounghian, II, 16-20; Hurmuzaki, IX, 260-265.



                                VIII. Wartime Reforms

           1. Uzungar^ili, Merkez Te§kilati, pp. 1-38; Pakalin, I, 462-465;
      HH-, p. 148; G. A. Olivier, Voyage dans I’Empire Othoman, I’Egypte et
      la Perse, fait par ordre du gouvernement, pendant les six premieres annees
      de la Republique, 2 vols. (Paris, 1801-1807), I, 324-326; Juchereau de
      Saint-Denys, Revolutions de Constantinople en 1807 et 1808, 2 vols.
      (Paris, 1819), I, 176 points out that Selim’s assumption of the right to




                                 Notes to pages 61-73
determine what could be discussed by the councils considerably decreased     427
the power of the Grand Vezir.
     2. The proceedings of this meeting are summarized in Vasif, III,
9b-llb; Edib, fols. 62b-64a; Cevdet^ IV, 238-240; BVA, HH 8578; HHS,
Tiirkei 11-97 (25 May 1789).
     3. SO, IV, 452-453; D, IV, 545.
     4. Vasif, III, 92a; BVA, Cevdet Dahiliye 4044; HHS, Turkef 11-98,
no. 2 (10 Jan. 1792); Mehmed Galib, "Selim-i salisin bazi evamir-i
miihimmesi,” TOEM, I (1911), pp. 500-504.
      5. Musahipzade Celal, Eski Istanbul Ya§ayi§i (Istanbul, 1946),
pp. 121-141; R. Naumann, Ed/, Turkische Gewdnder um 1700: Les por¬
traits des differens habillemens qui sont en usage a Constantinopel et
dans tout la Turquie (Graz, 1963).
     6. Mouradgea d’Ohsson, Tableau general de I’Empire Othoman,
2nd ed., 7 vols. (Paris, 1788-1824), VII, 145-146; Cevdet^ IV, 241-242;
Vasif, III, lla-b; Edib, fol. 65b; J. Dallaway, Constantinople Ancient and
Modern, 2 vols. (London, 1797), I, 84;        pp. 101-102; BVA, HH 9780,
9781, 9782; Oliver, I, 317; HHS, Tiirkei 11-97 (15 May 1789); FO 78/10,
no. 23 (22 May 1789); BVA, Miihimme 220, p. 2 (27 Hijje 1217).
     7. BVA, Cevdet Maliye 19655; Cevdet Dahiliye 6248; HH 8458,
9720, and 11470 all give lists of the taverns which were closed. See also
       p. 99; Ahmed Refik, "Sultan Selim-i Salisde Halk ve Milliyet
Muhabbeti,” Yeni Mecmua, I (1917), 449-452, in particular p. 450; FO
78/13, no. 12 (23 May 1792).
    8. Cevdet^ IV, 236, 240; Edib, fols. 62b-63a; see also Qavanin-i
Sultan Selim, a complete register of the laws and decrees of Selim III,
held as MS Y-534 in the library of the Tiirk Tarih Kurumu, Ankara,
especially fol. 46a.
    9. Edib, fol. 62b; Olivier, I, 313; Avdo Suceska, "Bedeutung und
Entwicklung des Begriffes A’yan im Osmanischen Reich,” Sudost-
Forschungen, XXV (1966), 3-26.
    10. Cevdet^ IV, 235, 241; Edib, fol. 63a-b.
    11. Ismail Baykal, "Imdad-i Sefer”, TV, III (1944), 36-50; Kazim
§inasi "On iigiincu asirda Istikraz I§leri,” Yeni Mecmua, II (1918), 309-
312; Edib, fol. 63a; Vasif, IV, 32a; Abdurrahman §eref, "Acanibden Ilk
Istikraz Te§ebbusumuze ait bir kag vesika,” TOEM, II (1914), 321-337;
FO 78/10, no. 5 (1 Feb. 1789).
   12. Cevdet^ IV, 243-244; V, 26; Vasif, IV, 32a; BVA, Muhimme 189,
p. 2; BVA, Cevdet Darbhane 630 and 911.
    13. Cevdet^, V, 185-189.
    14. BVA, HH 8745.
    15. BVA, HH 10376.
    16. HH^, pp. 23-25; Cevdet^, IV, 234.
    17. BVA, HH 8431.




                         Notes to pages 73-83
                                               i
                                        1
428      18. BVA, HH 8394.              '
         19. BVA, HH 7852.
         20. D, IV, 545; Vasif, III, 59a; Cevdet^, V, 89-91; FO 78/13, no. 25
      (25 Sept. 1792).
          21. Saint-Denys, Histoire, II, 13-14; FO 78/13, no. 25 (25 Sept. 1792);
      FO 78/15, no. 11 (3 July 1794).



                                 IX. The Reformers
                                               \

           1. J. Dallaway, II, 35; Saint-Deipys, Histoire, II, 126; Suleyman
      Faik, Halifet ul-Ruesa Zeyli, 3 vols. (Istanbul, 1269/1853), II, 151-155;
      Zinkeisen, VII, 321-323; FO 78/30 (28 July 1800).
           2. Vasif, III, 101a-103a; Saint-Denys, Histoire, II, 16; Ata, II, 193-
      198; SO, II, 218; Olivier, I, 56-59; Nejad Goyiing, "Kapudan-i Derya
      Ku9uk Hiiseyin Pa§a,” TD, II (1952), 35-5(1; FO 78/15, no. 11 (3 July
      1794); HHS, Turkei 11-97, no. 8 (25 Oct. 1791).
           3. BVA, HH 54092, 55709.
           4. BVA, HH 54092.
           5. BVA, HH 53367, 53849.
           6. Ismail Hakki Uzun5ar§ili, "Nizam-i Cedid ricalinden Valide
      Sultan Kethiidasi me§hur Yusuf Aga ve Kethiidazade Arif Efendi,”
      Belleten, XX (1956), 485-525, and especially pp. 485-492; SO, IV, 668-
      669; FO 78/15, no. 11 (3 July 1794).
           7. Ihsan Sungu, "Raif Efendi, Mahmut (Ingiliz Mahmut Efendi),”
      Ayhk Ansiklopedi, V (1948-1949), 1482-1484; SO, IV, 329-330; D, IV,
      643. See also Zinkeisen, VII, 324; FO 78/14, no. 20 (24 Aug. 1793); FO
      78/17, no. 8 (10 June 1796); HHS, Turkei 11-103, no. 3 (25 Jan. 1793).
           8. Cevdet^, VI, 206; SO, III, 390.
          9. Lewis, Emergence of Modern Turkey, p. 57.
          10. Enver Ziya Karal, "Ebu Bekir Ratib Efendi’nin 'Nizam-FCedif
      Islahatinda Rolii,” V. Turk Tarih Kongresi, Ankara 12-17 Nisan 1956:
      Kongreye sunulan tebligler (Ankara, 1960), pp. 347-355; Vasif, IV,
      252a-254a; D, IV, 642; SO, II, 346; Cevdet^ VII, 45-46; FO 78/17, no. 17
      (25 Aug. 1796), no. 18 (10 Sept. 1796), no. 19 (25 Sept. 1796); FO 78/18,
      no. 2 (25 Feb. 1797).
          11. SO, I, 148.
         12. Vasif, IV, 181b-183a; Cevdet^, VI, 222-223.
         13. SO, I, 148.
         14. SO, IV, 667-668; D, IV, 487; Cevdet^, V, 84-87; Uzungargili,
      OT, IV/2, 439-444.
         15. Ismail Hakki Uzunear§ili, "Vezir Hakki Mehmed Pa§a, 1747-
      1811,” TM, VI (1936-1939), 177-284; Mahmud Kemal, "Mehmed Hakki
      Pasha,” TOEM, VII (1926), 351-367.




                               Notes to pages 83-92
   16. SO, IV, 456.                                                           429
   17.   Asim, I, 119; D, IV, 546.
   18.   SO, III, 281; D, IV, 546.
   19.   SO, I, 417.
   20.   SO, II, 318.
   21. SO, III, 390.
   22. SO, III, 391.                                               '
   23. SO, II, 237-238; Nedim Hayruddin, ed., Bir Elginin Tarihge-i
Sefareti (Istanbul, 1333/1917).
   24. SO, IV, 267.
   25. SO, I, 440; OM, III, 22-23; Babinger, pp. 320-322; Mehmed
Cemaleddin, Osmanli tarih ve muverrihleri (Istanbul, 1314/1896), pp.
57-58; T.C. Maarif VekMeti, Istanbul Kutuphaneleri Tarih-Cografya
Yazmalari Kataloglari, I. Tilrkge Tarih Yazmalan, 12 fascs. (Istanbul,
1943-1957), fasc. 2, pp. 143-146.
   26. SO, IV, 590; OM, III, 156; Babinger, 323; Cemaleddin, p. 59;
Tarih-Cografya Yazmalari, p. 221.
   27. SO, III, 143-144.
   28. D, IV, 619, 621; SO, IV, 441, 815.
   29. SO, I, 148.
   30. SO, IV, 454-455.
   31. SO, III, 550-551; D, IV, 619.
   32. SO, IV, 456-457.
    33. Divan-i Humayun Katibi. Cevdet^, VI, 9, gives this name as
Sam‘i Efendi, but the manuscript reports themselves invariably give
Safi, and a person of this name was Beylikci of the Imperial Council at
this time (SO, III, 236), while no record can be found of a Sam'i Efendi
in Ottoman service at this or any other time.
    34. D, IV, 642.
    35. D’Ohsson served as Dragoman to the Swedish embassy in Istan¬
bul for many years, and then as Swedish minister to the Porte between
1796 and 1799. His sympathy with the French Revolution and assistance
to its agents in Turkey eventually led to his dismissal in disgrace, and
he spent the remaining years of his life petitioning various governments
for money to maintain him while he compiled his massive description of
the Ottoman Empire, which was eventually published as Tableau gen¬
eral de I’Empire Othoman, 2nd ed., 7 vols. (Paris, 1788-1824). Although
this work was written during Selim’s reign, it has very little to say about
his reforms directly. His role is discussed in FO 78/15, no. 7 (10 April
1797).
    36. AE 193, fol. 245.
    37. The original reports, submitted as memorials (Idyiha) to the Sul¬
tan, are found in envelope E447 in the Topkapi Saray Archives in Istan¬
bul. Summaries can be found in Ahmed Cevad, Tarih-i Askeri Osmani,




                          Notes to pages 92-93
430   vol. II (MS TY 4178, Istanbul University Library), 10-16; CevdeU, VI,
      4-44; Asim, I, 34; HW, 34-41; and Ahmed Hamdi Tanpinar, Ondoku-
      zuncu Asir Turk Edebiyati Tarihi, 2nd ed., vol. I (Istanbul, 1956), 19-20.
      The memorials were also summarized in an anonymous contemporary
      document, found in two identical manuscripts in Istanbul, MS Ali Emiri
      Tarih 71 in the Millet Library, and MS Yeni Gelenler 4050 in the Top
      Kapi Saray Library. This summary was published in transliteration hy
      Enver Ziya Karal in "Nizam-i Cedide dair layihalar,” TV, I (1942), 414-
      425; II (1942-43), 104-111, 342-351, 424-432. For contemporary com¬
      ments on the reports by Ottomans, see CevdeU, VI, 7-8; comments of
      Europeans in the Porte are reported \n'FO' 78/13 (25 Sept. 1792).
          38. Tatarcik Abdullah Efendi’s report, consisting of nine chapters
      and a conclusion, was published in full in the TOEM as "Nizam-i Devlet
      hakkmda mutale'at,” III (1916), 257-284, 321-346; IV (1917-18), 15-
      34. It is also available in manuscript form in numerous collections, in¬
      cluding those of the British Museum (OR. 1377) and the Bibliotheque
      Nationale in Paris (MS Turc. Suppl. 1105). A summary can he found in
      CevdeU, VI, 36-43.
          39. Ratib Efendi’s report is available in four manuscript copies in
      Istanbul, Ali Emiri Tarih 845 (Millet Library); TY 2733 (Istanbul Uni¬
      versity Library); Hasan Pasha no. 878 (Hiisrev Pa§a Library); Esad
      Efendi no. 2235 (Siileymaniye Library). An index is available in manu¬
      script form in the Austrian National Library, Vienna, Mxt. 308. The
      report is summarized in Enver Ziya Karal, "Ehu Bekir Ratib Efendi,”
      pp. 347-355; Lewis, Emergence of Modern Turkey, p. 57. The Esad Efendi
      manuscript copy of the report has been used for this study.
          40. Ratib Efendi, p. 411.
          41. Ratib Efendi, p. 406.
          42. Ratib Efendi, p. 420.



                                X. Military Reforms


           1. The military decrees issued in Selim’s reign are found in the
      various document collections of the BVA archives in Istanbul, and these
      are cited in the sections devoted to the branches of the Ottoman military.
      In addition to the original decree documents themselves, copies of the
      decrees have been collected in an unpublished register entitled Qavanin-i
      Sultan Selim, held in the library of the Turkish Historical Society (Tiirk
      Tarih Kurumu) in Ankara, as MS Y-534. They are summarized and dis¬
      cussed in Cevdet^, V, 235-242; VI, 44-61; Cevad, Tarih-i Askeri Osmani,
      II, 10-61; Karal, OT, V, 66-74; HH\ pp. 43-93.
           2. Vasif, IV, 94a; Nuri, fols. 178b-179b.
           3. The basic law for the timars dated 21 Muharrem 1207/8 Sep-




                               Notes to pages 93-116
tember 1792 is given in Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fols. lb-7b; Vasif, IV,        431
43a-52a; and Nuri, fols. 77b-84b. It is summarized in Mahmud Raif,
Tableau des nouveaux reglemens de I’Empire Ottoman (Istanbul, 1798),
pp. 11-13; Cevdet^, VI, 52; HHS, Tiirkei Il-lOO, no. 32 (25 Sept. 1792);
HHS, Tiirkei 11-102, no. 5 (25 Feb. 1793).
     4. See Chapter IX, note 38. . ^
     5. BVA, Miihimme 200, p. 61 (end Cumada II 1208); Miihimme
203, p. 8 (5 Receb 1211), p. 31 (start Rebi 11211), p. 283 (end Safar 1212).
     6. The basic law for the Janissary corps is found in BVA, HH 3701
and HH 9775. It is summarized and discussed in Ismail Hakki Uzun?-
ar§ili, Kapukulu Ocaklari, 2 vols. (Ankara, 1943-1944), I, 240, 334, 343
419, 495-497; Mahmud Raif, pp. 16-17.
      7. BVA, Miihimme 201, pp. 28-29 (start Rebi I 1209), p. 91 (start
Receb 1209).          ''
      8. Nuri, Netaic ul-Vukuat, III, 87; Uzun5ar§ili, Kapukulu, I, 419;
Omer Efendi, fol. 29a.
      9. BVA, Miihimme 201, p. 150 (end §aban 1209); Miihimme 202,
fol. lla-b (end Hicce 1209); Miihimme 204, fols. 75a-76a (Receb 1212).
     10. BVA, Miihimme 198, fols. 211a-212a (end Hicce 1206); Miihimme
199, fol. la-b (Rebi 1207).
     11. BVA, Cevdet Askeri 50601.
     12. TKS, D 802 (Muharrem 1219); BVA, Cevdet Maliye 3558 (Receb
1222).
   13. BVA, Cevdet Maliye 30949.
   14. BVA, Cevdet Askeri 37004.
   15. TKS, D 802, series 1.
   16. BVA, Maliyeden 3558 (Receb 1222).
   17. TKS, D 802, series 1; HHS, Tiirkei 11-104, no. 22 (10 Aug. 1793);
HHS, Tiirkei 11-117, no. 5 (10 Feb. 1798).
  18. Cevdet^, VII, 241-242, 248-250; VIII, 41-42, 45, 91-93.
   19. BVA, Cevdet Maliye 30949.
   20. Uzungar^ili, "Halil Hamid,” pp. 239-245; Cevdet^, III, 85, 133;
VI, 4.
   21. Uzungar§ih, "Halil Hamid,” pp. 225-227, 231-233; Cevdet^ V,
225-232.
   22. The basic law for the artillery corps, dated 15 Receb 1207/1
March 1793, is given in Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fols. 27a-35a; Istanbul
University Library, TY 3208, fols. 1-10; BVA, Cevdet Maliye 8982, pp.
14-22; Vasif, IV, 80b-91b; Nuri, fols. 165a-176a. Subsequent supple¬
ments izeyl) to the law are found in Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fols. 47a-
49a; Istanbul University Library, TY 3208, fols. 10-15, BVA, HH 4356A
and 13247. The law is summarized in Cevdet^, VI, 298-300 and Asim I,
43-46.
   23. Mehmed Raif, Mirat-i Istanbul (Istanbul, 1314/1927), pp. 369-
372.




                          Notes to pages 117-122
432      24. Chenier, "Apercu de la situation militaire des Turcs,” AE Tur-
      quie 191, fols. 345-364^, in particular fol. 347; FO 78/16, no. 23 (16 June
      1795); FO 78/16, no. 24 (25 June 1795),
         25. Chenier, "Apergu de la situation militaire,” fol. 352b.
         26. BVA, HH 8978, 9634; Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fols. 47a-48a.
         27. Cuny, "Apercu de la situation des artilleurs et de I’artillerie de
      terre de la Sublime Porte ottomane au 1^’' Brumaire de la 4<’ annee repub-
      licaine,” AE Turquie 192, fols. 99-100; BVA, Maliyeden 3558 (Receb
      1222).
         28. The full Arabaci code, dated 9 Ramazan 1207/20 April 1793, is
      given in Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fc^ls. 35b-40a; Vasif, IV, 95a-104a;
      Nuri, fols. 180a-189b; BVA, Cevdet Maliye 8982, pp. 184-192. Sum¬
      maries are found in Cevdet^, VI, 51, 300-301; Asim, I, 46-49; and Mah¬
      mud Raif, pp. 28-30. The following supplements have been found: one
      dated 1 Muharrem 1208/9 August 1793 is in BVA, Cevdet Maliye 8982,
      p. 162 and Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fol. 49b; two dated 7 Cumada 11208/
      11 December 1793 and 19 Cumada I 1208/23 December 1793 are in Is¬
      tanbul University Library, TY 3208. One dated 7 §aban 1220/2 Novem¬
      ber 1805 is BVA, HH 4356A.
         29. BVA, Cevdet Askeri 37004; TKS, D 802; BVA, Maliyeden 3558
      (Receb 1222).
         30. Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fol. 49b; BVA, Cevdet Maliye 8982,
      p. 162.
          31. Uzun5ar§ih, Kapukulu, II, 117-127.
          32. Ibid., pp. 119-120.
          33. Ibid., p. 120; CevdeP, III, 85; BVA, Muhimme 181, fol. 125.
          34. The text of the Humbaraci regulation, dated 9 Safar 1207/27
      September 1792, is given in full in BVA, HH 3727; Qavanin-i Sultan
      Selim, fols. 8a-12b; Vasif, IV, 104a-116a; Nuri, fols. 189b-217a. It is
      summarized in Mahmud Raif, pp. 33-36; CevdeU, VI, 295-297; and
      Asim, I, 55-57. A supplement to this decree, dated 12 Ramazan 1211/10
      March 1797, is BVA, HH 3728. Decrees covering aspects of this reform
      are found in BVA, HH 7852 and 14552; and TKS, E 3411.
          35. Vasif, IV, 161a-b; TKS, E 2747.
          36. BVA, HH 8795, 8832, 8843, 12534; Cevdet^ VI, 195.
           37. BVA, HH 3722, 3728, 8832, 9289.
           38. Cevdet', XII, 166; Chenier "Apergu de la situation militaire,”
      fol. 352b; BVA, HH 832, 3713, 8795, 8843, 10359.
           39. The text of the Lagimci regulation, dated 9 Safar 1207/26 Sep¬
      tember 1792, is given in full in BVA, HH 3722; Qavanin-i Sultan Selim,
      fols. 12b-15a; Vasif, IV, 116a-129a; BVA, Cevdet Askeri 26148 and
      33419; Cevdet Maarif 7058; HH 13243. It is summarized in CevdeU, VI,
      297-298, and Asim, I, 57-58. A supplement to it, dated 12 Ramazan
      1211/10 March 1797 is in BVA, HH 3712 and 3713 and is summarized
      in Cevdet^ VII, 195.
          40. In the traditional Ottoman military organization, the Cebeci



                               Notes to pages 122-125
corps performed most of the functions of a supply service for the fighting     433
corps. Its members were in charge of obtaining, storing, and supplying
ammunition, weapons, supplies, and food for the regular army, so its
barracks and headquarters, the Cehhane, was the Arsenal of the Otto¬
man army. As Ottoman military practices were modernized, each of the
fighting corps took over these functions for itself, so that by the start of
the nineteenth century the Cebeci corps had largely lost its old impor¬
tance and was little more than an anachronism, serving only as a means
of providing salaries and pensions to persons deserving rewards from the
State. Selim III made no effort to modernize it although there is evi¬
dence that he did plan to abolish it once his Nizam-i Cedid army was
strong enough to accomplish this. It was only in the reign of his suc¬
cessor that the idea of a modern, centralized supply corps was introduced,
a curious reversion''to traditional Ottoman practice. See Uzun5ar§ih,
Kapukulu, II, 3-31; and Mehmed Zeki Pakalin, Osmanli Tarih Deyim-
leri ve Terimleri Sozlugu, 3 vols. (Istanbul, 1946-1955), I, 263-264.
     41. Vasif, IV, 119a-121a.
     42. BVA, Cevdet Askeri 33419; Cevdet Maarif 7058; Cuny, "Apergu
de la situation des artilleurs,” p. 110; BVA, HH 8697, 12515, 12558,
13243, 14922; Ali Emiri, III Selim 13375; HH 3724, 4356, 8202, 8697,
15162,16188.
     43. Cevdet", VI, 181-182; Vasif, IV, 131a.
     44. Nuri, fol. 2a-b; Omer Efendi, fol. 26a; Vasif, IV, 129a-130a.
     45. Vasif, IV, 131a-132a; Cevdet-, VI, 181-182; Nuri, fols. 217a-
219b.
     46. AE 184, fol. 284 (26 March 1793); BVA Cevdet Askeri 26164;
AE 187, fol. 434 (6 Florial an II); AE Mem. et Doc. Turquie Suppl. 23,
fol. 42 (27 Messidor an IV).
     47. The chaotic state of the Ottoman force which was routed by the
French Expedition in March, 1800 is described in Christopher Herold,
Bonaparte in Egypt (London and New York, 1963), p. 356; also Vasif, IV,
130a-131a.
   48. On the state of the Ottoman army in 1807, see Chapter XIX.
   49. W. A. Eton, A Survey of the Turkish Empire, 2nd ed. (London,
1799), pp. 98-99.
   50. BVA, HH 7037.
   51. FO 78/20 (1 March 1792); AE 184, fol. 284 (26 March 1793);
FO 78/13, no. 8 (10 April 1792); FO 78/15, no. 31 (25 Dec. 1794).
   52. Levend Qiftlik originally was given by Sultan Abdul-Hamid I
to Gazi Cezayirli Hasan Pasha as an estate in reward for his long and
meritorious service. Gazi Hasan mainly used marines (called levends)
from the fleet to farm this estate, and so it came to be called Levend
Qiftlik. Construction of the Nizam-i Cedid barracks began there in
August of 1792. Olivier, I, 95; FO 78/14, no. 14 (25 May 1793); HHS,
Tiirkei Il-lOO, no. 33 (10 Oct. 1792).
   53. BVA, HH 12193.



                          Notes to pages 125-128
434      54i UW, p. 49.
         55. The regulations establishing the new Irad-i Cedid treasury are
      given in full in Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fols. 42-45b; Vasif, IV, 72b-80b,
      Cevad, Tarih-i Askeri Osmani, II, 14-19. They are summarized in
      Uzuncar§ih, Merkez Te§kildti, p. 36; Mahmud Raif, pp. 9—14, Nuri, fols.
      155a-167a; HH^, pp. 49-59, 81-93; Cevdet^ VI, 47-52; FO 78/14, no. 6
      (11 March 1793); HHS, Ttirkei 11-102, no. 6 (11 March 1793); FO 78/26
      (15 April 1799); FO 78/30 (28 July 1800); these measures also are de¬
      scribed in J. C. Hobhouse, A Journey through Albania and the Other
      Provinces of Turkey in Europe and Asia to Constantinople, during the
      years 1809 and 1810, 2 vols. (London, 1813)', II, 1030-1022; and Thomas
      Thornton, The Present State of Turkey, 2 vols. (London, 1809), I, 248.
          56. The §ikk-i Sani Defterdarlik was created after the conquest of
      the Arab provinces to deal with their financial affairs as well as those
      of Anatolia, but these two areas were divided soon thereafter, with the
      second Defterdar dealing thereafter mainly with the financial problems
      of Anatolia. See B. Lewis', "Daftardar,” EP, tl, 83; Pakahn, I, 411-418;
      and Mehmed Zeki, "Te§kilat-i Atikada Defterdar,” TTEM, VIII (1926),
      pp. 96-102, 234-244.
          57. BVA, Cevdet Maliye 2019; TKS, E 3967. Tax farms (Iltizam)
      were purchased at auctions (Mizad or Muzayede), at which those wishing
      to acquire them competed with each other, with the highest bidder being
      awarded the contract for the year. Ordinarily tax farm contracts were
      awarded only when the bidding pushed the sale price over an amount
      equal to five times the average annual profit (faiz) left to the previous
      tax farmer. When the Irad-i Cedid treasury took over an IItizam formerly
      farmed out by the regular treasury, it paid the latter the equivalent of
      this price. Once a tax farm was given to a tax farmer {Multezim), he was
      required to deliver a certain amount to the Treasury every year, and was
      allowed to keep the balance as profit for himself. The Irad-i Cedid treas¬
      ury now took over this function for the tax farms in question. See Stan¬
      ford J. Shaw, The Financial and Administrative Organization and
      Development of Ottoman Egypt (Princeton, N. J., 1962), pp. 34-40;
      Pakahn, II, 57-58; BVA Muhasebe 6094, fol. 128b.
          58. BVA, Tapu 946.
          59. TKS, E 2053.
          60. BVA, Cevdet Maliye 3106; Cevdet Dahiliye 8750. Complete
      lists of fiefs seized for the Irad-i Cedid treasury between 1793 and 1800
      are found in the following BVA registers: Tapu 941; Kepeci 615; Maliye
      3106, 4567, and 7082; Muhasebe 6094; BVA, Ali Emiri, III Selim
      17665.
          61. AE 184, fol. 284 (26 March 1793); AE 189, fol. 159 (5 Frimaire
      an III), fol. 71-73 (19 Vendemiaire an III); HHS, Tiirkei 11-103, no. 18
      (28 June 1793); TKS, E3786, E7016, E8421.




                               Notes to pages 128-129
    62. The full text of the regulations establishing the Nizam-i Cedid      435
corps, dated 21 Safar 1209/17 September 1794, are found in Qavanin-i
Sultan Selim, fols. 52b-56b; Istanbul University Library, TY 3208,
fols. 33b-37a; Ahmed Cevad, Tarih-i Askeri Osmani, 3 vols. (vol. I
published in Istanbul, 1889; vols. II and III in manuscript form, Istanbul
University Library TY 4178 [vol. II] andTY 6127 [vol. Ill]), II, 23-31.
It is summarized in Cevdet^, VI, 58-61,304-305; D, IV, 72-73.
   63. The Bostaniydn ("gardeners,” also called Bostanci ocak), led by
the Bostanci Ba§i (Chief Gardener), were watchmen and guards of the
pavilions in the Topkapi Saray palace grounds as well as at many of its
gates and walls. They included the personal guards of the Sultan. Gibb
and Bowen, I/l, 84; Pakahn, I, 239-240; Ismail Hakki Uzungargili,
"Bostandji,” EP, I, 1277-1279.
     64. D, IV, 72; TfCS, E10550. The Ottoman archives have two com¬
plete registers of the Nizam-i Cedid corps at Uskiidar: Kepeci 6632 (year
1216/1801-1802) and Kepeci 6630 (year 1217/1802-1803).
     65. BVA, HH 9759.
     66. HHS, Tiirkei 11-103, no. 14 (10 May 1793); no. 20 (25 July 1793).
     67. BVA, HH 7137 and 12087.
     68. Cevad, Tarih-i Askeri Osmani, II, 31.
     69. BVA, Cevdet Maliye 19808; Kepeci 2381.
     70. See Chapter IX on his report to the Sultan.
     71. Mehmed Raif, Mirat-i Istanbul, I, 80-84; Saint-Denys, Histoire,
II, 22; TKS, E 1113, E 3752; BVA, HH 3732; Vasif, IV, 82a, 204b; Cevdet^
VII, 77; Omer Efendi, fols. 28b-29a.
    72. BVA, Cevdet Maliye, 4327; Cevdet Askeri, 34197.
    73. Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fol. 57b; CevdeP, VII, 38-39.
    74. BVA, HH 7137.
    75. BVA, HH 9759; Cevdet Maliye, 4222.
    76. BVA, HH 6768.
    77. TKS, E 1113; BVA, HH 3666, 3671; 3671A, Saint-Denys, His¬
toire, II, 23-24; CevdeP, VIII, 91-97; CevdeP, VII, 242; Asim, 1,102-113.
    78. The supplements to the Nizam-i Cedid corps regulations pro¬
viding for the addition of new units outside Istanbul and Uskiidar are
given in BVA, HH 4372 (3 Saban 1220) and HH 4356B (7 Saban 1220).
See also BVA, Cevdet Askeri, 6749, 26304, 37917, 38983, 50900; Cevdet
Maliye, 4222; Ali Emiri, III Selim 13177, 14194, 15199, 17018, 17655,
19191, 19947; HH 3676, 3686, 3720, 3743, 4365; CevdeP, VIII, 91-95;
Cevdet^, VII, 38-39, 129-130; Vasif, V, lb-3a.
   79. BVA, Cevdet Askeri 26193, 35308.
   80. BVA, Cevdet Maliye 28741; HH 3718, 36791; FO 78/48, no. 17
(10 April 1805); Asim, I, 105-106.
   81. TKS, E3404.
   82. BVA, HH 9125, 10731; HHS, Tiirkei 11-104, no. 24 (24 Aug.




                        Notes to pages 130-132
      1793); 106, no. 16 (16 May 179’4); TKS, E3752; BVA, Cevdet Askeri
436
      35308.
         83. The supplementary regulations^ for the Nizam-i Cedid corps,
      dated 21 Dhu 1-Qa‘da 1215/6 April 1801, are given in Qavanin-i Sultan
      Selim, fol. 71b; and Istanbul University Library, TY 3208.
          84. Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fol. 46a; Cevad, Tarih-i Askeri Osmani,
      II, 18-20.
          85. BVA, HH 10731.
          86. Chenier, "Apergu de la situation militaire,” pp. 362-363; Olivier,
      I, 95-96; HHS, Tiirkei 11-107, no. 29 (10' Sept. 1794); 108, no. 32 (25
      Oct. 1794).                        ^    '
         87. CevdeU, VII, 249; Cevad, Tarih-i Askeri Osmani, II, 43; TKS,
      D7014, E3404. BVA, HH 13828; Saint-Denys, Histoire, II, 15; HHS,
      Turkei-120, no. 13 (25 Feb. 1799); no. 14 (2 March 1799); no. 33 (18 May
      1799); no. 37 (3 June 1799).
         88. TKS, E2320, E4241; BVA, Kepeci 3247; HHS, Turkei 11-122,
      no. 11 (26 March 1800); Cevdet^, VII, pp. 97-100, 249.
          89. TKS, E3752; HHS, Turkei 11-113, no. 31 (31 Oct. 1796); 122,
      no. 11 (29 March 1800). AE 211, fols. 91-92 (15 Feb. 1806); HHS, Turkei
      11-128, no. 13 (25 May 1802). Cevdet^, VII, 249-250.
         90. FO 78/28 (29 Jan. 1800).
         91. FO 78/25 (25 May 1799).
         92. Saint-Denys, Histoire, II,    16-36.   Hobhouse,    II,   1009-1017.
      Cevdet*, VIII, 92-96; CevdeU, VIII, 54-60.
         93. FO 78/28 (29 Jan. 1800).



                               XL Technical Reforms


           1. Developments in European weapons during the seventeenth and
      eighteenth centuries are outlined in Albert Manucy, Artillery through
      the Ages (Washington, D. C., 1949); M. Surirey de Saint-Remy, Mem-
      oires d’artillerie, 3rd ed. (Paris, 1745); Col. Fave, Etudes sur le passe et
      I’avenir de I’artillerie (Paris, 1863); H. W. L. Hime, The Origin of Ar¬
      tillery (New York, 1915).
            2. The state of Ottoman artillery and other weapons at the end of
      the eighteenth century is exhaustively described by Cuny in "Apergu
      de la situation des artilleurs,” fols. 99-104, 167-168. See also Eton,
      pp. 76-77 and Uzungargih, Kapukulu, II, 48-51.
          3. Anon., "Reflexions sur I’empire ottoman,” AE, Mem. et Doc.
      Turquie, no. 15.
           4. HH\ pp. 59-63.
          5. Hiiseyin Aksarayi, Hadikat ul-Cevami, 2 vols. (Istanbul, 1281/
      1864), II, 76; BVA, HH 6739, 10798; AE 198, fol. 8 (3 Germinal an VI);




                               Notes to pages 132-139
HHS, Turkei 11-103, no. 4 (10 April 1793), no. 19 (10 July 1793); Olivier,     437
I, 107.
    6. BVA, HH 12193. A list of all the artisans who accompanied
Pampelonne, including biographies and vital statistics for each, is given
in AE 194, fol. 41 (3 Messidor an V) and AE 196, fols. 150-151.
     7. AE 196, fols. 291-292; Antonin Debidour, ed., Recueil des actes
duDirectoireExecutif, A \o\s. (Paris, 1910-1917), I, 585.
     8. BVA, HH 8978, 10101; FO 78/15, no. 31 (25 Dec. 1794); Chenier,
p. 361; Olivier, I, 95-96.
    9. Vasif, IV, 92b-93b; Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fol. 48a-b.
  10. BVA, Cevdet Bahriye 1204.
  11. AE 191, fol. 7 (2 Flordal an III); AE 193, fol. 25 (6 Pluviose an IV);
AE 196, fols. 50-51;^Saint-Denys, I, 12.
  12. AE 192, fols. 115-116 (4 Brumaire an IV).
   13. AE 193, fols. 390-391; AE 195, fol. 349 (2 Pluviose an V), fols.
361-366 (5 Pluviose an V), fol. 390 (8 Pluviose an V); AF III-75 (24
Frimaire an V).
   14. AE 196, fols. 291-292; AE 197, fol. 74 (20 Brumaire an VI),
fols. 99-100 (11 Frimaire an VI); AE 198, fols. 110-113 (3 Floreal an
VI), fols. 158-159 (2 Prairial an VI); Olivier, 1,27.
   15. Turgut I§iksal, "III Selim’in Tiirk Topguluguna dair bir Hatt-i
Hiimayun,” TD, VIII (1955), 179-184; Chenier, "Apergu de la situation
militaire,” pp. 353-354; FO 78/15, no. 31 (25 Dec. 1794); BVA,HH 14553;
Kepeci 6618.
   16. Muzaffer Erdogan, "Ar§iv vesikalarma gore Istanbul Baruth-
aneleri,” Istanbul Enstitusii Dergisi, II (1956), 115-138; Tahsin Esen-
can, Nizam-i Cedidden euvel ve sonra Tiirk topqulugu ve kaynaklari
(Ankara, 1946), pp. 48-51; Chenier, "Apergu de la situation militaire,”
p. 356; BVA, HH 6707.
    17. Manucy, Artillery through the Ages, p. 23.
    18. Olivier, I, 98-99; Chenier, "Apergu de la situation militaire,”
p. 361; AE 191, fols. 345-364.
    19. The slave of Bozogli Mustafa Pasha, he rose in the Inner Service
of the Imperial Palace as Mabeyinci (Court Chamberlain) and then
Kethiida (Lieutenant) of the private treasury of the Sultan {Hazine-i
Hiimayun). He then served as Ba§ Muhasib (Chief of the Accounting
Department) in the Imperial Treasury {Hazine-i Amire) of the state
three times, in 1774, 1779, and 1784. In January 1787, he became
Director of the Istanbul shipyard (Tersane Emini), but he was dismissed
after a few months as a result of a dispute with the Grand Vezir. He
then returned to the Imperial Treasury, where he served as Ba§ Mu¬
hasib for a fourth time in 1788 and as Ruzndme-i Evvel in 1789. After
Selim’s accession, he was appointed as Chief Treasurer {Defterdar-i
Shikk-i Evvel) in April 1790, but he soon was demoted to the post of




                          Notes to pages 139-143
438   Ruzname-i Evvel once again because of irregularities in his conduct.
      In 1791-92 he became TevkVi, and two years later he was appointed to
      direct the Baruthane. Once again, he was dismissed after only a short
      time in office because of irregularities. He died in May 1794. SO, III,
      550-551.
         20. Nuri, fols. 70b-72b.
         21. Erdogan, "Baruthaneleri,” pp. 121-125; Cevdet', V, 353-355;
      Nuri, fol. 74a-b; FO 78/15, no. 31 (25 December 1794).
         22. Erdogan, "Baruthaneleri,” pp. 130-138; Ata, IV, 121-123, 128-
      129; Cevdet^ VI, 181; Tahsin Oz, "Sir Katibi,” p. 197; BVA, Cevdet
      Askeri 3603, 38593.               v
         23. BVA, Cevdet Askeri 5035, 5136, 5688, 6366; Erdogan, "Baru¬
      thaneleri,” p. 118; Cevdet', VI, 181; Ata, IV, 121-123; Nuri, fols. 70b-
      75a; Vasif, IV, 38a; Cevdet^ VI, 180-181, 263; Mahmud Raif, pp. 25-28;
      HH\ pp. 61-62; BVA, Cevdet Askeri 1425 and 3603; AE 190, fols. 14-16
      (4 Nivose an IV); Tahsin Esencan, Nizam-i Cedidden evvel ve sonra
      Turk topgulugu ve kaynaklari (Ankara, 1946), pp. 48-51.
          24. AE 191, fol. 363; Mahmud Raif, pp. 27-28.
          25. A. Adnan-Adivar, Him, p. 186; Ergin, Turkiye Maarif Tarihi
      p. 274; Mehmed Esad, Mirat-i Miihendishane-i Berri-i Humayun (Istan¬
      bul, 1895), p. 9.
          26. BVA, HH 9783A, 9783B.
          27. Esad, Mirat, pp. 13-15.
          28. BVA, Cevdet Maarif 222.
          29. SO, III, 325; Esad, Mirat, pp. 38-39, 61; Qagatay Ulugay and
      Enver Kartekin, YiXksek Miihendis Okulu (Istanbul, 1958), pp. 87-93.
         30. Ulucjay and Kartekin, pp. 61, 81, 85, 505, 645,
         31. The most famous of the Hocas who taught in the school under
      Selim III in addition to the directors were;
            a. Kirimli Haci Hiiseyin Efendi. His books included: Lagim Risa-
      lesi, Usul-u Hendese, Imtihan ul-Muhendisin, Humhara Ate§ Cedveli,
      Telhis ul-Eskal, Irtifa Risalesi, and a translation of Euclid’s Mathe¬
      matics under the title Usul-u Hendese (Ulucay and Kartekin, p. 72).
          b. Seyyid Ali Efendi, who taught lessons in fortification and geom¬
      etry and published two books, Mahrutiyet and Istihkamat-i Cesime
      (Ulugay and Kartekin, p. 73).
          c. Seyyid Mustafa Efendi, a student of Le Brun’s in the shipyard,
      himself the builder of a number of ships in Istanbul and elsewhere.
          d. Selim Efendi, an English convert who specialized in mathematics
      (Ergin, Turkiye Maarif Tarihi II, 270-271; BVA, Cevdet Maarif 5689).
          e. Ingiliz Mahmud Raif Efendi.
         32. BVA, Cevdet Maarif 6201; HH 10330.
         33. Selim Niizhet Gergek, Turk Mathaaciligi (Istanbul, 1928), pp.
      85-88.




                              Notes to pages 143-147
  34. Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fols. 70b-71b; Cevad, Tarih-i Askeri          439
Osmani, pp. 42-44; Cevdet^ VII, 43.
  35. Cevdet*, VII, 122.



                   XII. Revival of the Ottoman Navy

      1. Olivier, I, 60-64.
      2. Conditions in the Ottoman fleet at the end of the eighteenth
century are described in the anonymous "Essai sur la puissance navale
des Turcs,” AE, Mem. et Doc,, Turquie no. 30, fols. 350-361; see also
Uzungargili, Merkez Te§kilAti, pp. 500-503; Olivier, I, 64-65; Nuri,
fols. 89a-90a; HH^, pp. 63-71.
     3. Cezayirli Hasan Pasha’s career and naval reforms are described
in Uzungargili, "Hasan Pa§a,” pp. 17-40.
     4. BVA, Cevdet Bahriye 5849; Olivier, I, 58.
     5. This school is described in Uzun5ar§ili, "Halil Hamid,” pp.
233-238 and BVA, Cevdet Bahriye 5084. It seems likely that the Kar-
moran mentioned in the Ottoman sources was the Breton Professor
Kerwomand, under whom an Ottoman military school was established
in 1775 according to the Annual Register, XVII, 107.
     6. It is described in d’Ohsson, IV, 214-215 and BVA, Cevdet Bah¬
riye 5849, 5861.
     7. "Essai sur la puissance navale des Turcs,” AE, Mem. et Doc.
Turquie, no. 30, fols. 361-367; Karal, "Osmanli Tarihine dair vesikalar,”
Belleten, IV (1940), 175-180.
     8. On the life and career of Kiichiik Huseyin Pasha, see Nejad
Goyiing, "Kapudan-i Derya Kiigiik Huseyin Pa§a,” TD, II (1952), 35-50.
     9. Ishak Bey’s career until Selim Ill’s accession is discussed in
Chapter II. After 1787, he maintained himself on a lavish scale in Paris
by securing money and other gifts from the French Foreign Minister
and the British and Russian ambassadors, promising each of them that
he would use his influence with the Sultan on their behalf. His dissolute
behavior and increasingly imprudent demands finally caused the French
government to encourage him to depart, and he left Marseilles in Feb¬
ruary 1790. But rather than going directly to Istanbul, he first landed
at the Dardanelles and then went to Izmir, where he waited to find out
whether or not his master had forgiven him. In the capital, the diplo¬
matic maneuvers of the various foreign ambassadors for the moment
concentrated on Ishak Bey, with the French striving to have him ad¬
mitted and the British and Swedish representatives trying to secure his
punishment and banishment in the fear that he would persuade Selim
to favor the French. In April 1790, he returned to Istanbul but was at
once banished to Lemnos, where he spent the next three years. Finally,
in the spring of 1794, he was pardoned and returned to Istanbul. But he




                        Notes to pages 148-155
440   n6ver achiBved the high position which Selim as prince had originally
      intended for him, and he was given a relatively minor position as assist¬
      ant to the Grand Admiral Kiichuk Huseyin Pasha, who became his
      guardian and protector. Thereafter Ishak acted mainly as French trans¬
      lator for the Grand Admiral and as a guide for foreigners who wished to
      visit the shipyard.
         Biographical material on Ishak Bey up to the time of his return to
      Turkey can be found in Munir, "Louis XVI,” pp. 516-548, and Uzungar-
      §ili, "Muhabere,” pp. 191-246. The information on his two sojourns in
      France and his life in Turkey after returning in 1790 has been secured
      from the Archives of the French Mipjstfy of Foreign Affairs: AE 180,
      fol. 22, no. 29 (8 July 1789), no. 34 (14 Aug. 1789), no. 36 (7 Sept. 1789),
      no. 37 (8 Sept. 1789), no. 39 (14 Sept. 1789), no. 41 (22 Sept. 1789), no.
      42 (22 Sept. 1789), no. 43 (1 Oct. 1789), fol. 221 (30 Sept. 1789), fols.
      231-233 (8 Oct. 1789), AE 181, no. 9 (22 April 1790), no. 10 (8 May 1790),
      no. 11 (22 May 1790), no. 12 (22 May 1790); AE 182, fol. 21 (6 Jan. 1791).
      Also FO 78/11, no. 9 (22 April 1790); Omer Efendi, Tarih-i Sultan
      Selim-i Sails ve Mahmud-i Sani, Suleymaniye Library, Istanbul, Esad
      Efendi MS 2152, fol. 30b.
         10. Selim’s naval regulations, dated 21 Zilkade 1206/12 July 1792,
      are given in BVA, HH 4497, 4500, 4546; Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fols.
      15b-18b. They are summarized in Cevdet*, V, 235-237 and Asim, I, 52-
      55.
            11. FO 78/15, no. 31 (25 Dec. 1794).
            12. These regulations are given in Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fols. 18b-
      20b.
         13. The winter salary was called Maa§-i §ita‘i officially and Ki§
      Ulufesi by the men themselves; the literal translation of both terms is
      "winter pay.”
         14. See Shaw, Financial Organization, p. 278; Qavanin-i Sultan
      Selim, fols. 15b-18b.
          15. AE 184, fols. 120-121 (30 Dec. 1792); AE 186, fol. 330 (1 Messidor
      an II), fol. 411 (18 Frimaire an II); AE 191, fols. 52-55 (1 Prairial an III);
      FO 78/18, no. 14 (15 June 1797); FO 78/14, no. 14 (25 May 1793); BVA,
      Cevdet Bahriye 1444; Thornton, II, 112; HHS, Turkei-118, no. 35 (25
      Sept. 1798), 120, no. 6 (16 Jan. 1799); AE 205, no. 13 (19 Brumaire an
      XI); AE 210, fol. 406 (30 Brumaire an XIV); AE 211, no. 3 (13 Feb. 1806).
          16. AE 191, fols. 231-233; AE 194, fols. 238-248; AF III-75 (25
      Floreal an V); Enver Ziya Karal, "Selim III devrinde Osmanh Bahriyesi
      hakkinda vesikalar,” TV, I (1942), 203-211, gives the name ofthe builder
      of each ship.
          17. Nuri, fol. 101a.
          18. Olivier, I, 68-69; FO 78/18, no. 14 (15 June 1797); HHS, Turkei
      II-llO, no. 42 (24 Dec. 1795); Debidour, I, 561; II, 630-632; HHS, Turkei
      11-102, no. 4 (9 Feb. 1793); AE 191, fols. 231-233 (7 Frimaire an IV); AE




                                 Notes to pages 155-157
194, fols. 239-248 (1 Fructidor an IV); AE 196, fols. 218-219 (10 Prairial    441
an V); AE 198, fol. 59 (21 Germinal an VI); AE 198, fol. 174 (12 Prairial
an VI); AF III-75 (21 Germinal an V); AE 204, no. 48 (12 Messidor an X);
Vasif, IV, 101a-103a. The basin was 14 zira deep and 24 zira long,
Cevdet^, VII, 83-84. On the Gemlik shipyards, see Olivier, II, 5-7; BVA,
Cevdet Bahriye 6383; FO 78/14, no. 27 (25 Nov. 1793); HHS, Tiirkei II-
101, no. 36 (10 Nov. 1792).
     19. BVA, Cevdet Bahriye 4830 and 5794; AE 191, fol. 24b; Uzungar-
§ih, Merkez Te§kilati, pp. 503-506; Olivier, I, 34, 59; HHS, Tiirkei 11-97,
no. 10 (26 Nov. 1790), no. 11 (12 Dec. 1791); Istanbul University Library,
TY 8827, fols. 64a-66a; Karal, 'lOsmanh Bahriyesi,” pp. 209-211; Vasif,
III, 147b.
    20. D'Ohsson, VII, 422-423.
    21. BVA, HH 11308.
    22. AE 193, fol. 346.
    23. Karal, "Osmanli Bahriyesi,” pp. 203-211, inventories these ships
in full, giving the number of officers and men in each together with
their sizes, cannons, and builders.
   24. The anonymous French "Essai sur la puissance navale des
Turcs,” fol. 355 says that the Englishman Spurring built the Selimiye.
The Ottoman document published by Karal, "Osmanh Bahriyesi,”
says it was Le Brun.
   25. Unzungar§ih, Merkez Te§kilati, pp. 505-506; HHS, Tiirkei II-
114, no. 7 (25 Feb. 1797).
    26. HHS,Turkei 11-112, no. 9 (10 March 1796).
    27. In 1784, a French naval officer named Bonneval (not the artillery
officer of that name earlier in Ottoman service) reported that at that
time the Ottoman fleet had 24 ships of the line (of which 16 were in good
condition, 6 in bad condition, and 2 under construction), 15 frigates
(of which 12 were in good condition and 3 in bad), and 16 smaller ships,
totaling 68 in all (Karal, "Osmanli tarihine dair vesikalar,” Belleten, IV
[1940], 175-189). In May of 1788, a Venetian in the service of the
Austrian consulate, Ludolf, reported that the Ottoman fleet had 24 ships
of the line (including 5 under construction), 10 frigates, and 176 smaller
ships and boats, with 3,422 cannons and 30,000 men in all (HHS, Turkei-
II, 96). The anonymous Ottoman list made in 1800 and reprinted by
Karal described 45 newly built ships of the line, frigates, and corvettes
constructed between 1789 and 1800, with these ships alone having
22,245 men and officers and 2,376 cannons.
   In January 1806, Pierre Ruffin, then acting French ambassador in
Istanbul, reported that the Ottoman fleet had 20 ships of the line (with
between 118 and 50 cannons each), 20 frigates (between 30 and 48
cannon), and 14 corvettes (24 to 20 cannons), with an additional 5 ships
of the line under construction at Istanbul, Bodrum, Gemlik, Rhodes, and
Sinop (AE Turquie 211, fol. 51, 10 Jan. 1806). At the same time, the




                         Notes to pages 157-158
442   anonymous French official report "Essai sur la puissance navale des
      Turcs,” fols. 350-357, which was submitted in 1806 but presumably
      must have been based on information gathered in previous years,
      estimated that the Ottoman fleet had 120 ships in 1789, including 17
      ships of the line and 20 frigates and corvettes, and 25,000 sailors; 20
      ships of the line, 15 frigates, many small boats, and 25,000 sailors in
      1805; and 20 ships of the line, 15 frigates, 32 small boats, 2,156 cannons,
      and 40,000 sailors and seagoing soldiers in 1806. In January 1807, the
      British ambassador in Istanbul, James Arbuthnot, reported that the
      Ottomans had 9 ships of the line, 14 frigates, 10 corvettes, and some
      small ships anchored at Istanbul or vicinity, but that "there is hardly a
      man on board the ships who can be called a real seaman” (FO 78/55, no.
      10, 27 Jan. 1807), Cevdet^ (VII, 292-294) reported that in the year 1219/
      1804, the Ottoman fleet had 20 ships of the line, 22 frigates, 15 corvettes,
      totaling 61 warships in all. In 1803, the British ambassador in Istanbul,
      Drummond, reported to his government that the Ottoman fleet at that
      time was one of the "finest fleets” he ever saw (FO Turkey 40, 11 June
      1803).
         28. Olivier, I, 59-60; Uzungargih, "Halil Hamid,” pp. 233, 236; BVA,
      Cevdet Bahriye 5849.
          29. Born in 1730, Galenbevi Ismail Efendi was the son of a member
      of the Ulema class, and trained in the religious schools of Istanbul. He
      entered the Ottoman religious class and became a Muderris (teacher in a
      Medrese) in 1763, rising until he was a Kadi at the time of Selim’s
      accession. At the same time, he specialized in mathematics — with
      particular attention to logarithms and trigonometry, according to the
      traditional Eastern techniques — and wrote numerous works on these
      subjects, becoming a recognized authority. Under Abd ul-Hamid I,
      he was close to Grand Vezir Halil Hamid Pasha and Grand Admiral
      Cezayirli Gazi Hasan Pasha, who appointed him to teach in their new
      mathematics school shortly after it was opened. Continuing in that posi¬
      tion during Selim’s first year, he finally was appointed A’acf / of Yeni§ehir
      in 1790 as a reward for his long service, but he died within a year. For
      accounts of his life and works, see OM, III, 293-297 and Uzungargih,
      OT, IV/2, 622-623; SO, I, 372.
          30. Uzungar§ili, OT, IV/1,483,486; Ulugay and Kartekin, pp. 25-26,
      472.
         31. Lafayet Kilave, Elements de castrametation de fortification
      passagere (1787), translated into Turkish as Usui ul- Maarif fi tertib ul-
      ordu ve tahsinuhu (1788), in 2 vols. (copy in TKS, no. 510135, 923).
      Charleton, Trade de manoeuvre pratique, translated into Turkish as
      Usui ul-Maarif fi fenn-i vech-i tasnif-i sefain-i donanma ve fenn-i tedbiri
      hdrekatiha (1202/1788), 96 pages and 13 illustrations (copy in the
      Archeological Museum, Istanbul, no. 5814; and in TKS, no. 573/35,




                                Notes to pages 158-159
937). Tondo, "Traite de pildage et de navigation. Elements de geomet-          443
rie,” translated into Turkish but never printed.
    32. BVA, HH 10405.
   33. BVA, Cevdet Bahriye 5849; Uzungargili, Merkez         Tegkilati, pp.
531-541; Kurdoglu, Deniz, II, 3-12.
   34. Kurdoglu, Deniz, II, 37-38; Uzungar§ili, Merkez Te§kilati, p. 509.
   35. BVA, HH 11907; Uzungar§ih, Merkez Te§kilati, p. 509. ’
    36. These naval regulations are given in full in the Istanbul Mu¬
nicipal Library (Belediye Kiitiiphanesi), MS Cevdet Yazmalar B25,
fols. lb-18b. Part of it is published by Safvet as "Umur-u Bahriye
Nezareti,” TOEM, I, (1911),<pp. 1350-1351. Summaries are given in
Nuri, fols. 89b-101a; Vasif, IV, 70a, 165a; Cevdet^, VI 118, 181; Omer
Efendi, 30b; Eton, 81-90; Karal, OT, V, 69;HH^, pp. 63-71; Uzungar§ib,
Merkez Te§kil&ti, pf). 528-541; Kurdoglu, Deniz, II, 1-37; J. Dallaway,
45-46.
   37. BVA, HH 8591; Cevdet Maliye 7508.
   38. Cevdet^ VII, 240-241; Vasif, V, 163a-b.
   39. BVA, Cevdet Maliye 2019; TKS, E 3967.
   40. BVA, HH 7860.
   41. BVA, Cevdet Bahriye 8709.
   42. Istanbul Municipal Library, Cevdet Yazmalar B25, fols. 16b-
17b; AE Turquie 211, fols. 249-252 (28 April 1806).
   43. Bedi N. §ehsuvaroglu, "Tiirkiyede Tip Ogretimi,” Istanbul
Universitesi Tip Fakiiltesi Mecmuasi, XXII (1959), 735-752; Qavanin-i
Sultan Selim, fol. 47a.



          XIII. Administrative, Economic, and Social Reforms

     1. The power, status, and duties of every individual in the Ottoman
ruling class was determined by his rank and position, and was indicated
and defined as his Hadd, or "limit,” within which he was free to act
according to law and custom but beyond which he could not transgress.
To "violate the limits” of one’s own Hadd or that of another Ottoman was
considered a flagrant violation of the mores of Ottoman society and was
cause for severe punishment, in degrees up to the loss of position in the
Ottoman ruling class itself. Stanford J. Shaw, ed. and trans., Ottoman
Egypt in the Eighteenth Century (Cambridge, Mass., 1962), p. 23 n.
     2. See Avdo Suceska, "Bedeutung und Entwicklung des Begriffes
A'yan im Osmanischen Reich”. Sudost-Forschungen, XXV (1966), 3-26.
     3. Ottoman society was divided into a small group of slaves of the
Sultan who, as such, formed the Ottoman ruling class, and the mass of
subjects {reayd). The ruling class divided itself into a number of "institu¬
tions” to carry out its functions, and of these, the Imperial Institution,




                         Notes to pages 159-168
444   which managed the entire structure, gave the rank of vezir to its higher
      officials. The display of three horse-tails was allowed to publicly indicate
      this rank. See Pakahn, III, 590-593; Uzungar§ili, Merkez Te§kild,ti, pp.
      195-213.
           4. On the Mir-i Mirans and Beylerbeys, see V. L. Menage, "Begler-
      begi,” EP, I, 1159-1160; Gibb and Bowen, I/l, 137; Pakahn, I, 216-222.
           5. The laws reorganizing the corps of vezirs are given in full in
      Istanbul Municipal Library, MS Cevdet Yazmalar 032, fols. 25b-28a,
      and in Qavanin-i Sultan Selim, fols. 23a-26a; also Cavdet^, VI, 301-304;
      BVA, Maliyyeden Miidevvere 7584; they are summarized inUzun?ar§ili,
      Merkez Te§kil&ti, p. 196. The laws on Cailte fees alone can be found in
      Cevdet Yazmalar, 032, fol. 4a-b, dated 22 Ramadan 1206/14 May 1792.
      They are discussed in HHS, Tiirkei 11-103, no. 10 (12 April 1793).
           6. The Yillik-i Humayun (Annual Imperial Payment) was made by
      most high officials to the Sultan and members of his family once a year,
      usually at the start of the month of Ramazan. It was finally abolished in
      1836 by Mahmud II. Pakahn, III, 637.
          7. BVA, HH 6878.
          8. BVA, Cevdet Maliye 1082.
          9. BVA, Cevdet Bahriye 8709.
         10. Bernard Lewis, "Diwan-i Humayun,” EF, II, 337-339;           Midhat
      Sertoglu, Muhteva Bakimindan Ba§vekalet Ar§ivi (Ankara, 1955), pp.
      13-14; Uzungargili, Merkez Te§kilati, pp. 1-110; d’Ohsson, VII, 211-232.
         11. Sertoglu, Bagvekalet Ar§ivi, p. 45; Uzungargih, Merkez Te§kildti
      249-267. Vasif, V, 166a-b.
          12. Gibb and Bowen, I/l, 117, 121-124; UzunQar§ih, Merkez Tes-
      kildti, pp. 242-248; Pakahn, III, 25-27.
          13. Gibb and Bowen, I/l, 122; Pakahn, I, 55-57; Uzungargili, Merkez
      Te§kildti, pp. 55-58; M. Tayyib Gdkbilgin, "Amedji,” EF, I, 433; Ser¬
      toglu, Ba§vekalet Ar§ivi, p. 13.
          14. Pakahn, I, 221; Uzunfar§ili, Merkez Te§kildti, pp. 40-43; Gibb
      and Bowen, I/l, 121-122; M. Tayyib Gokbilgin, "Beylik,” EF, I, 1191;
      Sertoglu, Ba§vekalet Ar§ivi, p. 14.
          15. Gibb and Bowen, I/l, 121-122; Uzungar§ili, Merkez               pp.
      45-55; Sertoglu, Ba§vekalet Ar§ivi, p. 30.
          16. Nedim Filipoviy, "O izrazu 'tahvil’. L'expression 'tahvil,’ ” Pril-
      ozi za orijentalni filologiju i istoriju jugoslovenskih naroda pod turskom
      vladavinom, II (1951), 239-247; Uzungargili, Merkez Te§kildti, pp. 43-
      45; Sertoglu, Basvekalet Ar§ivi, p. 30; Gibb and Bowen, I/l, 121-122.
          17. Uzun5ar§ili, Merkez Te§kildti, pp. 58-64; Sertoglu, Ba§vekalet
      Ar§ivi, p. 31; Gibb and Bowen, I/l, 120-121; d'Ohsson, VII, 170; Pakahn,
      III, 477-478.
           18. Uzungar^ih, Merkez Te§kildti, pp. 64-68; Pakahn, III, 574-575.
      On the official Ottoman historians, see Babinger; Cemaluddin, Osmanli
      Tarih ve Muverrihleri (Istanbul, 1314/1898-99); and see the following




                                Notes to pages 169-172
articles in Historians of the Middle East, ed. Bernard Lewis and P. M.        445
Holt (London, 1962): Halil Inalcik, "The Rise of Ottoman Historiogra¬
phy,” pp. 152-167; V. L. Menage, "The Beginnings of Ottoman Histori¬
ography,” pp. 168-179; Erciiment Kuran, "Ottoman Historiography of
the Tanzimat Period,” pp. 422-429.
   19. BVA, Miihimme 203, p. 7 0 Rebi I 1211), Miihimme 222, p. 60
(end Zilhicce 1219); Vasif, V, 166a-167a.
   20. The scribal regulations are given in full in BVA, Kalem Nizam-
namesi, reg. no. 37, pp. 1-30, and are summarized in Vasif, IV, 142b.
   21. BVA, Miihimme 204, p. 4 (12 Rebi II 1213).
   22. Cevdet^, VI 195; Vasif, iV, 142b-143b.
   23. BVA, Cevdet Dahiliye 2080.
   24. BVA, Cevdet Dahiliye 2080.
   25. BVA, HH 10^97.
   26. BVA, Cevdet Dahiliye 2080-2081; HH 8978.
   27. Nuri, fols. 39a-43a.
   28. See Chapter VIII.
     29. HHS, Tiirkei 11-138, no. 13 (24 May 1806); Vasif, IV, 5a-b; Nuri,
fol. 88b.
   30. BVA, HH 3702, 11470; Cevdet^ VIII, 61;          p. 99; Ahmed
Refik, "Sultan Selim-i Salisde Halk ve Milliyet Muhabbeti,” Yeni Mec-
mua, I (1917), 450.
   31. HHS, Tiirkei 11-138, no. 13 (24 May 1806); BVA, HH 3870;
Vasif, III, 99b; Edib, fols. 157a-158a; Cevdet^, VIII, 61; Asim, 1,138-140.
   32. BVA, HH 9782; HH^, pp. 101-102; Vasif, V, 55b-56a; Cevdet^,
VII, 147-148.
   33. Vasif, IV, 116a-b, 120a, 139b-140a; Cevdet*, VIII, 79; Cevdet^,
VII, 82, 84, 207.
   34. Ekrem Kolerkilig, Osmanli Imparatorlugunda Para (Ankara,
1958), pp. 112-117; BVA, HH 3732, 4371, 4414; Vasif, III, 120b-123a,
162a-163a, 177b; IV, 104b-105a, 115b, 119b; V, 94a; Nuri, fols. 10a-
13b, 150b-154a; Cevdet*, VI, 148-154; VIII, 187-188; Cevdet^, VI, 225-
226; VII, 84, 219.
   35. AE 190, fol. 210 (29 Pluviose an III).
   36.        pp. 137-139; Karal, OT, V, 74; Vasif, IV, 22a-24a; Pakalin,
III, 646.
    37. Vasif, IV, 89a, 145a.
    38. A copy of the coffee regulation is given in Vasif, IV, 145-146a,
with a summary in Cevdet^, VI, 195.
    39. Cevdet*, VIII, 107-108; Cevdet^, VIII, 61; Asim, I, 127-129;
BVA, HH 13962; FO 78/50, no. 23 (5 May 1806).
    40. Cevdet^, VII, 134; Asim, I, 130-131.
    41. Cevdet*, VIII, 107-108; Cevdet^ VIII, 61; Asim, I, 131-132.
    42. Vasif, III, 124a-125b, 154a-b; Nuri, fol. 101a; Asim, I, 130-133;
BVA, HH 5140; Cevdet, VI, 69-70.




                         Notes to pages 173-178
446       43. Uzungargih, OT, IV/1, 597-602. The only detailed information
      we have on the price level in Istanbul at this time comes from a report of
      the British ambassador in Istanbul, dated 25 March 1801, showing the
      price rises for major commodities during the previous half century (FO
      78/32, 25 July 1801). (Prices in paras per okke, 400 dirhems = 2.8 lb.)


          Commodity           1756 to 1779        1780 to 1789    1790 to 1800

      Beef                      —        5        10       12       12      16
      Veal                      -        9        14       15       18      20
      Mutton                    8       10    ,   16       18       16      24
      Lamb                     10       12 ''     18       20       18      24
      Best fish                20       24        40       50       80     100
      Ordinary fish             5        6        20       30       20      30
      Bread                     -        5         -       10        -      12
      Common wine                -       3         7        8        -      14
      Barley                   15       16         26      30       50      60
      Straw                    13       15         30      40        -      90
      Firewood                   -      25         40      60        -      70
      Charcoal (per cwt.)        -      60          -     100        -     200
      Chickens                   4       5         10      20       16      18
      Pigeons                    -       4         10      12       16      18
      Mecca coffee               -      66          -     100      220     240
      Rice                       6       7          8      10        -      28
      Oil                       12      14          -      20        -      32
      Soap                      13      15         16      20        -      36
      Tallow candles            13      16         26      28       28      40
      Wax candles                -     100          -     130        -     140
      Butter                    12      17         40      45       40      50
      Milk                       -       4          -       6        8      12
      Powdered sugar           20       25          -      30      110     120
      Loaf sugar                -       50          -      70      160     200


         44. Vasif, III, 124a-125b, 154a-b; Nuri, fol. 101a; Asim, I, 130-133;
      BVA, HH 5140; Cevdet, VI, 69-70.



                              XIV. Window to the West

           1. FO 78/18, no. 13 (10 June 1797).
          2. See Chapter XI.
          3. FO 78/28, no. 33 (18 March 1800); HHS, Tiirkei 11-109, no. 27
      (25 Aug. 1795).
          4. The history of the Turkish press during the 18th century is dis¬
      cussed in T. Halasi-Kun, "Ibrahim Miiteferrika,” lA, V, 896-900;




                               Notes to pages 178-184
Osman Ersoy, Tiirkiye’ye Matbaanin Giri§i ve Ilk basilan eserler (An¬     447
kara, 1959); Ahmed Rasim, Matbuat Tarihine Medhal,Ilk Biiyiik Muhar-
rirler (Istanbul, 1927); John Kingsley Birge, "The Printing of Books
in Turkey in the Eighteenth Century,” Moslem World, XIII (1943),
292-294; Gergek, Turk Matbaaciligi; Server Iskit, Tilrkiye’de Neqriyat
Hareketleri Tarihine bir baki§ (Istanbul, 1939); H. Omont, "Documents
sur rimprimerie a Constantinople au XVIIP siecle,” Revue des Biblio-
theques (1895), pp. 185-200, 228-236; Toderini; Ahmed Refik, Ilk Turk
Matbaasi (Istanbul, 1929); Hasan Refik Ertug, Basin ve Yayin hareke¬
tleri tarihi (Istanbul, 1959).
    5. Ger9ek, Turk Matbaaciligi, p. 86; Karal, OT, V, 70; Ergin,
Turkiye Maarif Tarihi, p. 274; BVA, Cevdet Maarif 2905.
    6. Iskit, Turkiye’de Ne§riyat Hareketleri, pp. 27-29; Gergek, Turk
Matbaaciligi, p. 68.
    7. Kara Mehmed Pasha’s report is printed in Mehmed Ra§id, Ra§id
Tarihi, 5 vols. (Istanbul, 1867), I, 120-125, and in Fmdikhh Silahdar
Mehmet Aga, Silahdar tarihi, 2 vols. (Istanbul, 1928), I, 403-409, and
it was translated by J. von Hammer in Archiv fur Geographie, Historie,
Staats- und Kriegskunst, XIII (1822), 257-259. On Kara Mehmed, see
SO, IV, 186; Kopriiliizade Ahmed Pa§a and Ahmed Refik, Viyana’da
Osmanli Sefiri (Istanbul, 1932), pp. 40-42; Mehmed Zeki Pakahn,
"Begte Osmanli Sefiri”, Edebiyat-i Umumiye Mecmuasi, no. 15/46 (1932),
pp. 325-329; Faik Re§it Unat, Osmanli Sefirleri ve Sefaretndmeleri
(Ankara, 1968), pp. 47-49.
     8. Ibrahim Pasha’s report was published by Ahmed Refik as "Pasa-
rofge Muahedesinden sonra Viyanaya sefir izami,” TOEM, III (1918),
pp. 211-227, and translated by Kraelitz as "Bericht fiber den Zug des
Grossbotschafters Ibrahim Pascha nach Wien im Jahre 1719,” Sitzungs-
berichte der Wiener Akademie der Wissenschaften. Philosophische-
Historische Klasse, 158 (Vienna, 1907), 9-65. On the author, see SO,
II, 120 and Mehmed Ra§id, Ra§id Tarihi, V, 131-136; Unat, Osmanli
Sefirleri, pp. 52-53.
     9. Mehmed Efendi’s report was published in Paris in the original
and with French translations in three editions: Relation de I’Ambassade
de Mehemet Effendi a la cour de France en 1721, ecrite par lui-m^me et
traduite du turc (Paris, 1757); Mehmet Efendinin SefaretnamesilRela¬
tion de I’ambassade de Mohammed Effendi (Paris, 1841); and by Ali
Suavi as Elgi Mehmet Efendinin takririlTakryr ou Relation de Mo¬
hammed Effendi (Paris, 1872). It was published in Turkish in Istanbul
as Sefaretname-i Fransa (Istanbul, 1283/1866), by Ebuzziya Efendi as
Paris Sefaretnamesi (1306/1890), and in Mehmed Ra§id, Ra§id Tarihi,
V, 330-367. On the embassy and the report, see A. d’Aubigny, "Un
ambassadeur turc a Paris sous la regence. Ambassade de Mehemet
Efendi en France . . . RHD, III (1889), 78-91, 200-235; John Seeker,
Voyage d’un ministre ottoman, Mehemet Effendi (Montpellier, 1874);




                        Notes to pages 184-186
448   Babinger, pp. 326-327; Tiirkiye Cumhuriyeti, MaarifVekaleti,/stanbu/
      Kutuphaneleri Tarih-Cografya Yazmalari Kataloglari, 12 fascs. (Istan¬
      bul, 1943-1957), pp. 780-782; Unat, Osmanli Sefirleri, pp. 53-58; SO,
      IV, 225; OM, III, 164.
          10. Mehmed Efendi’s report was summarized in Vasif, I, 64-68 and
      translated by J. Dumoret as "Relation de I’ambassade du dervich Me-
      hemmed Efendi a St. Petersbourg, en 1168 de I’hegire (J.-C. 1754),
      extraite des annales de I’empire ottoman de Vassif Efendi et traduite
      du Turc par J. du Moret,” JA, VIII (1826), 118-125. See also SO, II, 333;
      Babinger, p. 328; Unat, Osmanli Sefirleri, pp. 99-102.
          11. Ahmed Resmi’s report on Viejjna was published under the title
      Viyana Sefaretnamesi by the Ebuzziya Press (Istanbul, 1304/1888) and
      in Vasif, I, 77-85. His report on Prussia was published by Ebuzziya as
      Sefaretname-i Ahmet Resmi (Istanbul, 1303/1887) and in Vasif, I, 154-
      168. It was translated by Willy-Bay Bolland as Ahmed Ressmi Effendi,
      eine ttirkische Botschaft an Friedrich den Grqssen (Istanbul, 1903). Both
      reports were translated together by J. von Hammer as Wiener und Ber¬
      liner Gesandtschaftsbericht: Resmi Achmet Effendi, Gesandtschaftliche
      Berichte von seinen Gesandtschaften in Wien imJahre 1757 und in Ber¬
      lin im Jahre 1763 (Berlin and Stettin, 1809). See also SO, II, 380; OM,
      III, 58; Unat, Osmanli Sefirleri, pp. 102-105, 112-116.
           12. Mehmed Nahifi Efendi was in the suite of the Ottoman ambas¬
      sador Abdiilkerim Efendi; his account was published in Istanbul as
      Sefaretname-i Abdiilkerim Pa§a (1316/1900). See Babinger, p. 329;
      Unat, Osmanli Sefirleri, pp. 129-133; SO, III, 355; OM, III, 189.
           13. CevdeP, VI, 88-89; Zinkeisen, VI, 858-859; B. Lewis, "The
      Impact of the French Revolution on Turkey”; Journal of World History,
      I (1953), 105-125; E. de Marcere, Une Ambassade a Constantinople,
      I, 35; Erciimend Kuran, Avrupa’da Osmanli Ikamet Elgiliklerinin
      Kurulu§u ve Ilk Elqilerin Siyasi Fadliyetleri, 1793-1821 (Ankara,
      1968), p. 13.
         14. Nuri, fol. 29a; Zinkeisen, VI, 846-847; Halil Inalcik, "Ya§ mua-
      hedesinden sonra Osmanh-Rus miinasebetleri,” Ankara Universitesi
      DU ve Tarih-Cografya Fakultesi Dergisi, IV (1946), 202; Kuran, Ikamet
      Elgiliklerin, p. 14.
          15. Cevdet', VI, 89; HH^, pp. 169-177; Kuran, Ikamet Elgiliklerin,
      pp. 15-22; Unat, Osmanli Sefirleri, pp. 168-178; SO, IV, 671; OM, III,
      190; Ismail Hakki Uzun(;ar§ih, "Ondokuzuncu asir ba§larina kadar
      Turk-Ingiliz miinasebatma dair vesikalar,” Belleten, XIII (1949), 573-
      648. Yusuf Ag4h Efendi’s report was published in Cevdet^, VI, 357-385
      and in Muharrerat-i Nadire (Istanbul, n.d.), pp. 384-396; also in part
      by Mehmed Zeki, Edebiyat-i Umumiye Mecmuasi, II (1335/1919), 36-41.
      It was translated by J. von Hammer as "Account of the Mission of Yusuf
      Agha, Ambassador from Turkey to the British Court,” Transactions of




                               Notes to pages 186-188
the Royal Asiatic Society, VIII (1833), 496-505. The only known copy           449
of the full report is Ali Emiri Tarih MS 840 in the Millet Library of
Istanbul (22 fob).
    16. Mahmud Raif Efendi’s unpublished Journal du Voyage de Mah¬
moud Raif Effendi en Angleterre, ecrit par luy meme, is found at the
Topkapi Saray, Istanbul, Ahmed III collection MS 3707. Upon his re¬
turn from England, he did publish a French-language description of
Selim’s reforms, entitled Tableau des nouveaux reglements de I’Empire
Ottoman (Istanbul, 1213/1798), printed at the Miihendishane press in
HaskOy; Icalet ul-Jugrafya (Istanbul, 1219/1804), printed at the new
Miihendishane press in Uskiidar. He later held important positions at
the Porte, including that of Reis ul-Kuttab from 1800 to 1805, but was
killed by the group of Bosporus soldiers whose uprising began the revolt
that overthrew Selim'^ III. Lewis, "French Revolution”, p. 112; SO, IV,
329-330; OM, III, 317; Unat, Osmanli Sefirleri, pp. 178-179.
    17. Cevdet^ VI, 231-232; HH\ pp. 167, 177; Zinkeisen, VII, 18;
Kuran, Ikamet Elgiliklerin, pp. 23-24.
   18. Vasif, IV, 140a; SO, IV, 530; Kuran Ikamet Elqiliklerin; p. 24;
Cevdet, VI, 232.
   19. Vasif, IV, 140a; Kuran, Ikamet Elqiliklerin; pp. 24-25; Cevdet,
VI, 232.
    20. He was officially appointed on 26 Rebi II 1211/30 Oct. 1796;
Vasif, IV, 142a, 262a; Kuran, Ikamet Elqiliklerin, p. 24.
   21. General accounts of these appointments are given in Kuran,
Ikamet Elqiliklerin, pp. 23-26; and in HH'^, pp. 167, 177; Cevdet^, VI,
257-260; Uzunsar§ih, "Tiirk-Ingiliz Miinasebatina dair Vesikalar,”
pp. 581-648; Enver ZiyaKaral, Fransa-Misir ve Osmanli Imparatorlugu,
1797-1802 (Istanbul, 1940), pp. 169-171; Zinkeisen, VII 18-27; Lewis,
"French Revolution,” p. 112; Lewis, Emergence of Modern Turkey, p.
61. On Ibrahim Efendi’s appointment to Vienna, see Vasif, IV, 164b;
V, 203a; Nuri, fols. 222a-223b; Cevdet^, VII, 119.
    22. For the biography of Seyyid Ali Efendi, see SO, III, 554; OM,
III, 190; and Unat, Osmanli Sefirleri, pp. 179-181. His arrival in Paris
is described in Nuri, fol. 224b and Vasif, IV, 165a. He returned from
Paris on 8 Safar 1218/30 May 1803 with a report which was published
by Ahmed Refik as "Morali al-Sayyid Ali Efendinin Sefaretnamesi,”
TOEM, I (1329/1911), 1120-1138, 1246-1259, 1332-1343, 1378-1390,
1458-1466, 1548-1560. It was described and summarized in Enver Ziya
Karal, Fransa-Misir ve Osmanli Imparatorlugu, 1797-1802 (Istanbul,
1940) and CevdeU, VIII, 219. On his mission, see Maurice Herbette,
Une ambassade turque sous le directoire (Paris, 1902), and Kuran,
Ikamet Elqiliklerin, pp. 25-35; Shafik Ghorbal, "The Missions of Ali
Effendi in Paris and of Sedki Effendi in London, 1797—1811, Bulletin of
the Faculty of Arts, University of Cairo, vol. I (1933), 114-129; and Ismail




                         Notes to pages 188-189
450   Soysal, Fransiz Ihtildli ve TUrk-Fransiz diplomasi milnasebeleri, 1789-
      1802 (Ankara, 1964).
          23. His mission was analyzed and many of his reports were published
      by Enver Ziya Karal, Halet Efendinin Paris Biiyiik Elgiligi, 1802-1806
      (Istanbul, 1940). See also Kuran, Ikamet Elqiliklerin, pp. 48-52; Ercii-
      mend Kuran, "Halet Efendi,” EP, III, pp. 90-91.
          24. Muhib Efendi’s embassy in France is described in detail in Ku¬
      ran, Ikamet Elqiliklerin, pp. 52-63 and Unat, Osmanli Sefirleri, pp.
      184-201. See also OM, III, 145, 189; SO, IV, 98; Babinger, pp. 341-342;
      and Ayntabi Ahmed Asim, Tarih-i Asim, 2 vols. (Istanbul, 1867), I,
      75-90,141-146.                        '   '
         25. Mehmed Emin Vahid Efendi^ report on France was published
      with translation as Sefaretname-i Seyyid Mehmed Emin Vahid Efendi:
      Relation de I’ambassade de Mohammad Wahid Effendi (Paris, 1843),
      with the Turkish text being printed in Istanbul as Sef&rtndme-i Seyyid
      Vahid Efendi (Istanbul, 1283/1837-38) and Fransa Sefaretnamesi (tem-
      sil-i sani) (Istanbul, 1304/1886-87). On his life and embassy, see Unat,
      Osmanli Sefirleri, pp. 201-203; SO, IV, 605; OM, III, 160, 189; Asim, I,
      174-177, II, 119.
          26. Unat, Osmanli Sefirleri, pp. 181-184; Vasif, V, 203a; Cev-
      det^, VII, 119; SO, III, 615; OM, III, 114, 190; Ismail Hakki Uzun-
      (;ar§ili, "Amedi Galip Efendi’nin Murahhasligi,” Belleten, I (1937),
      357-448. His report exists in a unique manuscript copy in the Millet
      Library, Istanbul, MS 832, and it was published in part in the Edebiyat-i
      Umumiye Mecmuasi, I, 160-163, 204-206, 222-223, 336-339, and
      236-239.
          27. CevdeU, VII, 136; Kuran, Ikamet Elqiliklerin, pp. 35-41.
          28. Vasif, IV, 262a; Kuran, Ikamet Elqiliklerin, p. 47.
          29. Von Hammer then was a student at the Oriental Academy and,
      along with a number of his colleagues, he was assigned to serve as
      Ratib’s translator during his visit to Vienna. Hammer describes his
      meetings with Ratib Efendi in his "Erinnerungen aus meinem Leben
      1774-1852,” Fontes Rerum Austriacarum, Akademie der Wissenschaften
      in Wien, Philosophisch-Historische Klasse, Historische Kommission
      (Vienna and Leipzig, 1940), Bd. 70, pp. 26-27 and his Geschichte der
      Osmanischen Dichtkunst bis auf unsere Zeit, 4 vols. (Pest, 1837), FV,
      418-419, but says he had no influence on him.
          30. For accounts of the life and career of Azmi Efendi, see OM, III,
      189; SO, III, 466; Babinger, pp. 329-330; on his report, see note 33.
          31. For Mustafa Rasih’s biography, see SO, II, 347 and Babinger,
      p. 331; also Ahmed Resmi, Halifet ul-Ruesa (Istanbul, 1296/1880), pp.
      140-141. His report was published by Hayr ud-Din Nedim as Bir el-
      qinin tarihqe-i sefareti (Istanbul, 1333/1917). On his mission, see Halil
      Inalcik, "Ya§ muahedesinden sonra Osmanh-Rus Munasebetleri; Rasih
      Efendi ve General Kutuzof elgilikleri,” An/eara Universitesi DU ve Tarih-




                                 Notes to pages 189
Cografya Fakultesi Dergisi, IV (1946), 195-203; F. Clement-Simon, "Un       451
ambassador extraordinaire russe a Constantinople”, RHD, XXI, 1907,
pp. 25-39.
    32. HIP, p. 79; Karal, OT, V, p. 11; Lewis, "French Revolution,”
p. 112; d’Ohsson, VII, 509-510, 513.
    33. Azmi Efendi’s report on Prussia was published in Istanbul in
1303/1887 by the Ebuzziya Press under the title Sefaretname-i Ahmed
Azmi, and in Cevdet*, V, 411-426, and Cevdet^, V, 285-296. It was trans¬
lated by Dr. Otto Miiller-Kolshom as ‘Azmi Efendis Gesandtschafts-
reise an den preussischen Hof. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der diplo-
matischen Beziehungen Preussens zur Hohen Pforte unter Friedrich
Wilhelm H (Berlin, 1918).
    34. See Chapter IX.
    35. Galib Efendi’^ report describes his trip to Paris via Bulgaria
and Austria, and something of the negotiations which led to peace with
France in 1802; the only extant text is available in MS form as Ali Emiri
Tarih, no. 832, Millet Library, Istanbul. His even more valuable dis¬
patches were published in part by Ismail H. Uzungargih, "Amedi Galib
Efendinin Murahhashgi ve Paristen gonderdigi §ifreli mektuplar,”
Belleten, I (1937), 357-410.
    36. Muhib Efendi wrote two reports on Paris. The longer one, in¬
cluding information on French administration, economics, finance,
art, science, and the army, is available only in MS form in Istanbul
at the Millet Library (Ali Emiri 833, 834 and Re§id Efendi 614) and at
the Beyazit Library (Cevdet-Veliuddin 128). The shorter report, with
more general information on Paris, was published by Bertrand Bareilles,
ed., as Un Turc a Paris, 1806-1811. Relation de voyage et de mission de
Mouhibb Effendi (Paris, 1920).
    37. Ali Aziz Efendi, Ottoman ambassador in Berlin in 1797-98 ex¬
changed notes with the German orientalist Friedrich von Diez on philo¬
sophic and scientific matters, but while he demonstrated some interest
in these matters, his replies showed once again the limits of Ottoman
training-he had no idea whatsoever about experimental science and
the rational philosophy developed in the West since the Enlightenment.
See Erciimend Kuran, "Osmanh daimi elgisi Ali Aziz Efendi’nin Alman
§arkiyatgisi Friedrich von Diez ile Berlin’de Ilmi ve Felsefl muhaberati,
 1797,” Belleten, XXVII (1963), 45-58.
    38. Cevdet^, VI, 253; Zinkeisen, VII, 18-19, 558; AE, Mem. et Doc.
Turquie 23, suppl., fols. 52-53,58; FO 78/18 (10 Feb. 1797).
   39. FO 78/21 (25 Feb. 1799), 78/26 (30 June 1799), 78/29 (23 July
1800); Thornton, 1,34.
    40. Bertold Spuler, "Die evu-opaische Diplomatie in Konstantinopel
bis zum Frieden von Beograd,” Jahrbuch Kultur Geschichte Slaven, Nf.
11 (1935), 53-115, 171-222, 313-366, continued in Jahrbuch Geschichte
Osteuropas, I (1936), 229-262; 383-439.




                         Notes to pages 190-191
452      41. AE Turquie 182, fols. 361-366 (9 Jan. 1790); HHS, Turkei II-
      95 (3 Feb. 1785).
         42. FO 78/13, no. 32 (27 Dec. 1792); HHS, Turkei II-lOl, no. 41
      (27 Dec. 1792).
          43. E. de Marcere, Une ambassade a Constantinople: La politique
      orientate de la revolution frangaise, 2 vols. (Paris, 1927), II, 103-105.
          44. General du Bayet was born in New Orleans and fought in the
      American Revolution under the leadership of Lafayette before joining
      him in France and fighting in the French Revolution (Lewis, "French
      Revolution,” p. 116).
         45. Dehe'rain, Ruffin, I, 4-5; Del^e'rain, "Les Jeunes de Langue a
      Constantinople sous le premier empire,” Revue de I’Histoire des Colonies
      Frangaises, XVI (1928), 385-410.
          46. FO 78/16, no. 5 (15 July 1795).
          47. FO 78/13 (25 April 1792).
          48. FO 78/18, no. 13 (10 June 1797).
          49. FO 78/17, no. 12 (25 Aug. 1796). Asim, I, 374-376; Cevdet*,
      VIII, 196-203; Lewis, Emergence of Modern Turkey, pp. 71-72.
          50. FO 78/15, no. 26 (25 Nov. 1794); HHS, Turkei Il-lOO, no. 29
      (15 July 1792).
          51. AE 185, fols. 420-424 (20 Sept. 1793); FO 78/14, no. 3 (25 Jan.
      1793) , no. 5 (25 Feb. 1793), no. 17 (10 July 1793); HHS, Turkei 11-103,
      no. 3 (25 Jan. 1793), 106, no. 8 (25 Feb. 1794); Cevdet', VI, 119-121.
          52. FO 78/15, no. 3 (10 Feb. 1794); Marcere, I, 33-35, 217-219.
          53. AE 185, fols. 307-312.
          54. AE 185, fols. 365, 394. This society was closed 19 December
      1793 by order of the French government, and Henin was recalled to
      Paris because of his efforts to undermine Descorches and his mission.
      The two had quarreled for some time as to who was the rightful and
      leading agent of the Revolution at the Porte (AE Turquie 185, fol. 434).
          55. FO 78/14, no. 15 (10 June 1793), no. 20; FO 78/15, no. 2 (25 Jan.
      1794) . Henin arrived in mid-August 1793, and left in late 1795, despite
      efforts of the French government to recall him during the previous two
      years. Descorches arrived 10 June 1793 and left in December 1795,
      after Veminac’s arrival. See "Sommaire de la correspondance d’Etienne-
      Felix He'nin, charge d’affaires de la Republique Fragaise a Constanti¬
      nople,” AF, AD’^'', 54.
          56. L. Lagarde, "Note sur les journaux frangaises de Constantinople
      a I’epoque revolutionnaire,” JA, 236 (1948), 271-276; Selim Ntizhet
      Gergek, Turk Gazeteciligi, 1831-1931 (Istanbul, 1931), pp. 10-16.
          57. AE 195, fol. 482 (15 Oct. 1796). Copies of the Gazette Frangaise
      were enclosed in the Austrian, British, and French ambassadorial re¬
      ports sent from Istanbul. I have consulted the following numbers: no.
      1 (2 Vendemaire an V/23 Sept. 1796); no. 3 (7 Brumaire an V/28 Oct.
      1796); no. 4 (3 Frimaire an V/3 Dec. 1796); no. 6 (13 Pluvibse an V/1




                              Notes to pages 191-196
Feb. 1797); no. 7 (20 Ventose an V/10 March 1797); no. 8 (1 Floreal an      453
V/20 April 1797); no. 9 (7 Flore'al an V/6 May 1797). A photograph of
no. 8 in full is presented in Niizhet, Turk Gazeteciligi, pp. 10-:14.
    58. HHS, Tiirkei II-llO, no. 37 (10 Nov. 1795).
    59. HHS, Turkei 11-103, no. 20 (25 July 1793); AE 182, fols. 279-
280 (31 Oct. 1791), fols. 290-300 (12 Dec. 1791).
    60. FO 78/18, no. 11 (5 April 1797); Lewis, "French Revolution,”
pp. 114-115; H. von Sybel, "La propaganda re'volutionnaire en 1793 et
1794.” Revue Historique, XI (1879), 107-108.
    61. FO 78/15, no. 7 (10 April 1794); Zinkeisen, VI, 861, 867, 880;
VII, 70-73, 755; Sybel, pp. Hl-113; Lewis, "French Revolution,” p.
115; HHS, Turkei II-lOl, no. 41 (27 Dec. 1792).
    62. FO 78/14, no. 3 (25 Jan. 1793), no. 18 (25 July 1793); 78/15, no.
2 (25 Jan. 1794); AE 191, fol. 382 (4 Sept. 1795).
    63. HHS, Turkei 11-103, no. 3 (25 Jan. 1793); FO 78/14, no. 9 (10
April 1793).
    64. FO 78/14, no. 24 (25 Oct. 1793).
    65. HHS, Turkei 11-102, no. 45 (7 Sept. 1792); FO 78/14, no. 21 (15
Sept. 1793). A number of royalist officers entered Ottoman service in
1794 and 1795 on the recommendation of the British ambassador; most
of them were French emigre officers living in England. These included
M. le Comte de Bizemont, Chevalier des ordres de St. Louis et St. Lazare,
former Captain of the Royal Regiment, 41 years old, who was attached
to the Ottoman general staff; M. le Chevalier de Montclair, Chevalier de
Malte, former Captain of the artillery regiment of Besangon, aged 42;
M. de Cauessin, Lieutenant in the artillery regiment of Auxonne, aged
32; M. le Baron de Merle, former Captain of Cavalry, now with rank of
Colonel; M. Guief de Ville, Colonel in the artillery regiment of Auxonne
and later sub-director of the Arsenal at Valenciennes, aged 40; M. de
Tardif, Captain in the artillery regiment of Auxonne, aged 45; M. de
Montpesat, Captain in the same regiment, aged 40; Marquis de la
Riviere, Brigadier des armes du Roi; Mismond, Chevalier de Montclair
and M. de Cauessin came from London on October 27. They were hired
for terms of six years from 1 July 1795 (HHS, Turkei II-llO, no. 37,10
Nov. 1795).
    66. Each issue was eight pages long and cost 13 piasters. Two issues
were supposed to be printed every month. The first issue was printed
on the French Embassy press before the ambassador discovered its anti¬
revolutionary sentiments. FO 78/18, no. 10 (10 May 1797); no. 12 (25
May 1797); AE Turquie 196, fol. 302 (22 June 1797). The only issues I
have seen are no. 5 (12 June 1797) and no. 6 (21 June 1797), both en¬
closed in HHS, Turkei 11-107, no. 20.
    67. AE Turquie 195, fol. 482.
    68. FO 78/15, no. 3 (9 Feb. 1794).
    69. HHS, Turkei II-lOl, no. 39 (10 Dec. 1792); FO 78/14, no. 29




                        Notes to pages 196-197
454   (12 Dec. 1793); HHS, Turkei 11-106, no. 12 (31 March 1794); FO 78/17,
      no. 19 (25 Sept. 1796).
          70. FO 78/14, no. 17 (10 July 1793); Karal, HaletEfendi, pp. 56-57;
      E. Driault, La politique orientate de Napoleon: Sehastiani et Gardane
      1806-1808 (Paris, 1904), p. 76.
         71. FO 78/14; AF, BIII/415.
         72. FO 78/15, no. 26 (25 Nov. 1794); HHS, Turkei Il-lOO, no. 29 (5
      July 1792).
          73. On the Chief Translator {Ba§ Tercuman), see E. I. Stamatiadis,
      Biographies of the Greek Dragomans in the Service of the Ottoman Porte
      in Greek (Athens, 1865), trans. into Rumanian by Constantin Erbiceanu
      as Biografiile marilor dragomani greci din Imperial otoman 1661-1821
       (Bucharest, 1897); J. Gottwald, "Phanariotische Studien,” Viertel-
      jahrschrift fur Siidosteuropa, V (1941); Gibb and Bowen, I/l, 123; J. H.
      Kramers, "Terdjuman” EP, IV, 762-763; d’Ohsson, VII, 165-166; 506;
      Ergin, Turkiye MaarifTarihi, II, 611-615; Uzun5ar§ih, Merkez Te§kilati,
      pp. 71-72.
          74. M. Guboglu, Paleografia Si Diplomatica Turco-Osmana (Bucha¬
      rest, 1958), pp. 107-108 lists every Chief Translator who served the
      Porte. Those who served in Selim’s time were: Manuil Caradja (1788-
      1790); Alexander Constantin Moruzi (1790-1792); Gheorghe Con¬
      stantin Moruzi (1792-1794); Alexander Callimachi (1794); Gheorghe
      Moruzi (1795-1796); Constantin Alexander Ipsilanti (1796-1799);
      Alexander Nicolae Suzzo (1799-1802); Alexander Mihail Suzzo (1802-
      1807).
         75. Lewis, "French Revolution,” p. 113.
         76. E. J. W. Gibb, A History of Ottoman Poetry, 6 vols. (London,
      1900-1909), IV, 107-323; Tanpinar, Edebiyati Tarihi, I, 18-29.



                         XV. Disintegration of the Empire

           1. The brigands and notables active in the Ottoman Empire during
      the 18th and early 19th centuries are described in Avdo Suceska, "Be-
      deutung und Entwicklung des Begriffes A'yan im Osmanischen Reich,”
      Sudost-Forschungen, XXV (1966), 3-26. See also Ismail Hakki Uzungar-
      §ili, "Ayan,”M,II,41-42; HaroldBowen, "Ayan,”E/^,1,778; OsmanNuri
      Ergin, Mecelle-i Umur-u Belediye, 5 vols., (Istanbul, 1912-1917), I,
      1654-1668; Nuri, Netayic ul-vukuat, III, 74; FV, 35-36, 42, 71-72, 98-
      99; A. F. Miller, Mustafa Pasha Bayrakdar (Moscow, 1947), pp. 363-365;
      Ismail Hakki Uzungar^ili, Alemdar Mustafa Pa§a (Istanbul, 1942), pp.
      2-7. On the Celali movement, which left a basis for local separatism in
      Anatolia, see Mustafa Akdag, Buyilk Celali Karisikliklarinin Ba§lamasi
      (Erzurum, 1963), and idem, Celali Isyanlari, 1550-1603 (Ankara, 1963).
           2. J. H. Mordtmann, "Derebey,” EP, II, 207-208; Qagatay Ulugay,




                              Notes to pages 197-215
"Karaosmanogullanna ait bazi vesikalar,” TV, II (1942-1943), 193-207,         455
300-308, 434-440; Qagatay Ulu§ay, Manisa Unliileri (Manisa, 1946),
pp. 54-62; F. W. Hasluck, Christianity and Islam under the Sultans, 2
vols. (Oxford, 1929), II, 597-603; Koniglichen Museum, Altertumer von
Pergamon, 2 vols. (Berlin, 1885), I, 84-91.
      3. J. Macdonald Kinneir, Journey through Asia Minor (London,
1818), pp. 84-91, 107-109; Georges Perrot, Souvenirs d’un voyage en
Asie Mineure (Paris, 1864), pp. 386-392.
      4. Cevdet^, III, 144-146; SO, III, 548-549; Uzungar§ih, OT, IV/1,
447-451; IV/2, 32-33; B. Lewis, "Djanikli Hadjdji ‘Ali Pasha,” EP, II,
446-447.
      5. Edib, fols. 85a-88b, 126b; Vasif, III, 77b-79a; CevdetS V, 110-
127, 209.
      6. Cevdet^ V, 110-127.
      7. The history and administration of Ottoman Egypt are discussed
in Shaw, Financial Organization; idem. Eighteenth Century; Stanford
J. Shaw, trans., Ottoman Egypt in the Age of the French Revolution (Cam¬
bridge, Mass., 1964). Also see E. Combe, UEgypte Ottomane de la con-
 quete par Selim {1517) a I’arrivee de Bonaparte, 1798 (Cairo, 1935); H.
 Deherain, UEgypte Turque, Pashas et Mameluks du XVF au XVIIP
 siecle (Paris, 1934); J. J. Marcel, Histoire de UEgypte depuis la conquete
des Arabes jusqu’d celle des Frangais (Paris, 1848); and Gibb and Bowen.
      8. ‘Abd al- Rahman b. flasan al-Jabarti, ‘Ajd’ib al-Athar, 4 vols.
 (Cairo, 1888-1894), III, 321; Cevdet, III, 10. On his life and career, see
 Shaw, Eighteenth Century, p. 7 n.; M. C. §ehabeddin Tekindag, "Cezzar
 Ahmed Pa§a,” lA, III, 156-158; IJaydar Ahmad Shihab, Talrikh Ahmad
Basha al-Jazzar, ed. Antuniyus Shibli and Ighnatiyus ‘Abduh Khalifa
 (Beirut, 1955).
      9. Vasif, III, 130a; CevdetS VI, 88, 173-174; Said Efendi, Vasf-i
 Cezzar Ahmed Pa§a, Istanbul University Library, MS TY 6206, fol. 5;
 HHS, Tiirkei II-lOl, no. 36 (10 Nov. 1792); M. Chebli, Une histoire du
 Liban a I’epoque des emirs, 1635-1841 (Beirut, 1955), pp. 125-147.
     10. H. Lammens, La Syrie: precis historique, 2nd ed., 2 vols. (Beirut,
 1921), II, 115, Sheykh b. Yusuf al-Shadyak, Akhbar al-aydn ft Jebel
 al-Lubndn (Beirut, 1859), 417; Jabarti, III, 321; W. R. Polk, The Opening
 of South Lebanon, 1788-1840 (Cambridge, Mass., 1963), pp. 13-18;
 Chebli, pp. 192-202.
     11. 'Abbas al-'Azzawi, Ta’rtkh al-Iraq bayn Ihtilalayn vol. V: 1639-
 1750 (Bagdad, 1953); vol. VI: 1749-1831 (Bagdad, 1954); S. H. Long-
 rigg, Four Centuries of Modern Iraq (Oxford, 1925), pp. 75-186; Rasul
 Havi Efendi, Devhat ul-Viizerd (Bagdad, 1830); Emin ibn Hasan al-Hal-
 wani al-Madini, MutaW us-Su‘ud (Bombay, 1885); Sabit (Suleyman
 Bey b. Haj Talib Kethtida), Bagdad kblemen hukumetinin te§kilile inki-
 rdzina dair risale (Istanbul, 1875).
     12. Longrigg, pp. 187-203; ‘Azzawi, VI, 103-152; Olivier, vol. IV;




                          Notes to pages 215-221
456   J. Jackson, Journey from India towards England in .. . 1797 (London,
      1799); Rasul Havi, Devhat ul-Vuzera, pp. 183-226; Sabit, MutaW us-Su-
      ‘ud, pp. 58-103.
          13. Longrigg, pp. 203-212; ‘Azzawi, VI, 94-101, 118-119; Devhat
      ul-Vuzera, 194-202; Sabit, MutaW us-SWud, pp. 103-167; Edib, fols. 84b,
      119b; W. Franklin, Observations made on a tour from Bengal to Persia
      in 1786-7 (London, 1790), pp. 263-264; T. Howel, Voyage en retour de
      rinde par terre (Paris, an V/1797-98), pp. 23-36; H. St. John Philby,
      Saudi Arabia (London, 1955), pp. 75-76, 78.
          14. Philby, pp. 30-40; George Rentz, ('Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wah-
      hab (1703/4-1792) and the Beginnings of'Unitarian Empire in Arabia”
      (Ph.D. diss.. University of California, Berkeley, 1947); ‘ Azzawi, VI,
      121; CevdeU, VII, 152-161.
         15. Philby, pp. 40-59; ‘Azzawi, VI, 125-126.
         16. Philby, pp. 60-100.
         17. CevdeU, VII, 161.
         18. Cevdet", V, 30-31, VII, 161-162.    ’
         19. CevdeU, VI, 100-102, VII, 44, 77, 162; Vasif, III, 132b-133b;
      Philby, pp. 81-84.
         20. CevdeU, VII, 162; Philby, 85.
         21. Philby, 86-88; Vasif, IV, 169a-b; Nuri, fols. 231b-232a; CevdeU,
      VII, 26.
         22. CevdeU, VII, 26-29, 69, 162-164; Philby, 89-93; ‘Azzawi, 126-
      136, 140-141; Vasif, IV, 270b.
         23. HHS, Ttirkei 11-103 (10 July 1793); 100, no. 31 (10 Sept. 1792);
      Vasif, IV, 112b; Edib, fol. 112b; FO 78/15 (10 May 1794); Em. Gh. Pro-
      topsaltis, "Le mouvement revolutionnaire grec pendant la deuxieme
      guerre russo-turque (1787-1792) sous Catherine 11”, Deltion Tis Istori-
      kis ke ethnologi^is etaireias tis ellddos, XIV (1960), 33-155 (in Greek,
      with French summary).
          24. Vasif, IV, 36a, 67b; Nuri, fol. 104a; CevdeU, VI, 175-6; HHS,
      Ttirkei 11-106, no. 1 (9 Jan. 1796); FO 78/15 (15 May 1794); AE Turquie
      207 (18 Brumaire an XII).
          25. Tepedelenli Ali Pasha’s rise to power is described in detail in P.
      Aravantinos, Historia Ali Pasha (Athens, 1895), pp. 1-57; F. C. H. L.
      Pouqueville, Histoire de la regeneration de la Grece, 4 vols. (Paris, 1824),
      1,1-42; G. Remerand, Ali de Tebelen, Pacha deJanina, 1744-1822 (Paris,
      1928), pp. 11-32; W. Plomer, Ali the Lion: Ali ofTebeleni, Pasha ofJan-
      nina, 1741-1822 (London, 1936), pp. 17-47; Cavid Baysun, "Ali Pa§a,
      Tepedelenli,” lA, I, 343-344; BVA, Miihimme 182, fol. 100.
          26. BVA, Miihimme 187, p. 242; Baysun, "Ali Pa§a, Tepedelenli,”
      lA, I, 344; Plomer, pp. 55-58; Remerand, 38-41; Pouqueville, Regenera¬
      tion, III, 42-62.
          27. The Suliotes are described in Notis Botzaris, Visions balkaniques
      dans la preparation de la revolution grecque, 1789-1821 (Paris, 1962),




                               Notes to pages 221-229
pp. 47-48; Ch. Perraivos, Historia tou Soulliou kai Parqas, ed. Karabi-       457
nis, 3rd ed. (Athens, 1857), pp. 11-16; and Aravantinos, pp. 69-72; see
also Remerand, pp. 43-44; Plomer, pp. 58-61.
    28. Rem6rand, pp. 44-46.
    29. Botzaris, pp. 51-52; Aravantinos, 86; Pouqueville, Regeneration,
I, 115, 125; Plomer, pp. 61-65; Remerand, 44-48.
    30. Cevdet*, 284; Cavid Baysun, "Mustafa Pa§a, I§kodrali, Bu§atli,
§erifi,” lA, VIII, 727-730; Uzungargili, OT, IV/1, pp. 615-617; S. Gopce-
vic, Geschichte von Montenegro und Albanien (Gotha, 1914), pp. 222-
232.
     31. Gopcevic, pp. 245-246;., F. Lenormant, Turcs et Montenegrins
(Paris, 1866), pp. 213-214; Remerand, pp. 44-46, 50-51.
     32. BVA, Ali Emiri, I Abd ul-Hamid, 997; Cevdet^, VI, 198.
     33. Gopcevic, pp. '225-232; Lenormant, pp. 208-209; Glogor Stano-
jevic, "Vasilije Brkic u Crnoj Gori 1788,” Istoriski Pregled, 2 (1954), 63-
67; S. Miju§kovic, "Politicki manevri guvemadura Jovana Radonica,”
Istoriski zapisi, IX (1953), 161-182; Dusan Vuksan, Mitropolit Petar I
Petrovic-Njegos i njegovo doba (Cetinje, 1951); Dusan Lekic, Spoljna
politika Petra I Petrovica Njegosa (Cetinje, 1950); Zgodovina Narodov
Jugoslavije. Druga Knjiga, Od Zacetka XVI, stoletja do knoca XVIII.
 stoletga (Ljubljana, 1959), pp. 1066-1080.
     34. Gopcevic, pp. 246-247; Lenormant, pp. 214-215; A. Andric,
 Geschichte des Fiirstentums Montenegro von der dltesten Zeit bis 1852
 (Vienna, 1853), p. 57; P. Coquelle, Histoire du Montenegro et de la Bosnie
 depuis les origines (Paris, 1895), pp. 238-239; Trifun Dukic, "Izvestaji
 o bojevima Crno-goraca s Mahmut pasom Busatlijom” Istoriski zapisi,
VII (1951), 480-487.
   35. BVA, Miihimme 178, p. 344; Lenormant, pp. 217-219; Gopdevic,
pp. 247-248; Coquelle, Montenegro, pp. 239-240.
    36. Lenormant, pp. 221, 355-359; Gopcevic, pp. 248-249; Coquelle,
Montenegro, pp. 239-240.
  37. Gopcevic, pp. 249-265; Coquelle, Montenegro, p. 240; Lenor¬
mant, p. 221.
  38. Gopcevic, pp. 250-251; Coquelle, Montenegro, pp. 241-242; Le¬
normant, pp. 222-223.
   39. Cevdet^ VI, 197-198; Vasif, III, 142a.
   40. Andric, Montenegro, p. 64; Coquelle, Montenegro, p. 244; Lenor¬
mant, p. 227; Gopcevi6, pp. 266-267.
   41. Andric, Montenegro, pp. 60-61; Medakovic, Povijestnica Crne-
gore od najstarijeg vremena do 1830 (Zemun, 1850), p. 85; Coquelle,
Montenegro, p. 245; Lenormant, pp. 227-228.
  42. Gopcevic, pp. 267-270; Coquelle, Montenegro, pp. 245-247; Le¬
normant, 234-236.
   43. Cevdet^, VI, 198; BVA, Ali Emiri, I Abd ul-Hamid, 1945.
   44. Coquelle, Montenegro, p. 244; Andric, Montenegro, p. 64; Lenor-




                          Notes to pages 230-234
458   mant, p. 227; Gopcevic, pp. 266-267; Remerand, pp. 50-51; Plomer, p.
      45; HHS, Turkei 11-107, no. 36 (25 Sept. 1794); Cevdet^ VI, 201; Vasif,
      IV, 144a.
         45. Gopcevic, pp. 270-272; Lenormant, pp. 236-237; Medakovic, pp.
      86-88; Cevdet^ VI, 201; Vasif, IV, 144a.
         46. Gopcevic, pp. 274-278; Lenormant, pp. 238-239; Coquelle, Mon¬
      tenegro, pp. 249-250; Andric, Montenegro, p. 69.
          47. Gopcevic, pp. 279-280; Coquelle, Montenegro, p. 251; Lenormant,
      p. 241; Medakovic, pp. 95-100; Andric, Montenegro, p. 73; Cevdet^, VI,
      197-200.
         48. Cevdet^ VI, 201; Vasif, IV, :^44a.'
         49. Lenormant, pp. 359-369, gives the full text of the judicial code.
      See also Coquelle, Montenegro, p. 254.
          50. FO 78/13 (24 March 1792); HHS, Turkei 11-98, no. 7 (10 March
      1792) , no. 10 (24 March 1792); 104, no. 22 (10 Aug. 1793); 106, no. 9 (16
      March 1794), no. 13 (10 April 1794); Vasif, IV, 36a, 72a.
          51. Cevdet^ VI, 176-178.
          52. Cevdet^, V, 223; BVA, Cevdet Maliye 2261, 9499; Cevdet Dahi-
      liye 6447, 16960; BVA, Miihimme-i mektum, II, 46.
          53. Nikolai Todorov, Polozhenieto Na Bulgarskiya Narodpod Tursko
      Robstvo (Sofia, 1953), pp. 168-181; HHS, Turkei 11-104, no. 11 (23 March
      1793) , no. 22 (10 and 17 Aug. 1793).
          54. On the life of Pasvanoglu, see Auguste Boppe, "La mission de
      I’adjutant commandant Meriage a Widdin”, Annals de VEcole des Sci¬
      ences Politiques, I (1886). G. Yakichitch, "Notes sur Passvan-Oglu 1758-
      1807 par Tadjudant-commendant Meriage, "La Revue Slave, I (1906),
      261-279, 418-429; II (1906), 139-144, 436-448; III (1907), 138-288.
      Fehim Bajraktarevic, "Paswan-Oghlu,” EP, III, 1034-1035; 1. Pavlovic,
      Ispisi iz francuskih arhiva (Belgrade, 1890), pp. 103-128; S. Novakovic,
      Tursko Carstvo pred srpski ustanak, 1780-1804 (Belgrade, 1906), pp.
      332-389; Asim, I, 218-223; Cevdet^, VIII, 87-88; C. Jirecek, Geschichte
      der Bulgaren (Prague, 1876), pp. 486-503; A. Hajek,Ba/gariera unterder
      Turkenherrschaft (Berlin and Leipzig, 1925), pp. 64-82; J. Georgiev,
      Kardzaliite i Osman Pasvantoglu (Tirnovo, 1900).
          55. Hajek, pp. 65-69.
          56. Cevdet^ VI, 177-178; HHS, Turkei II-llO, no. 35 (24 Oct. 1795),
      no. 39 (25 Nov. 1795).
           57. HHS, Turkei II-llO, no. 39 (25 Nov. 1795), no. 42 (24 Dec. 1795);
      III, no. 4 (2 Feb. 1796), 6 (10 Feb. 1796); 115, no. 15 (10 May 1797). Cev-
      det^, VI, 244-247; Zinkeisen, VII, 222-240; lorga, V, 118-123.
           58. A.-D. Xenopol, Histoire des Roumains de la Dade Trajane, 2 vols.
      (Paris, 1896), II, 245-258; R. W. Seton-Watson, A History of the Rou¬
      manians from Roman Times to the Completion of Unity (Cambridge,
      1934), pp. 155-158.
         59. Branislav Djurdjev, "Bosna,” EP, I, 1268; Zgodovina Narodov




                               Notes to pages 234-240
Jugoslavije, pp. 1113-1133; Ivo Andric, Bosnian Chronicle (New York,          459
1963); Edib, fol. 108b; G. Yakschitch, L’Europe et la resurrection de la
Serbie, 1804-1834 (Paris, 1907), pp. 17-21; Leopold von Ranke, The
History of Servia and the Servian Revolution trans. A. Kerr (London,
1853), pp. 67-68; HHS, Turkei-II, 101, no. 36 (10 Nov. 1792); H. Kresev-
Ijakovic, "Cefilema sarajevskih krscana iz 1788 godine; La caution (guar-
antie) collective des chretiens de Sarajevo en 1788,”Prito2i,III-IV (1952-
53), 195-214; idem, "Prilozi povijesti bosanskih gradova pod turskom
upravom: Contribution a I’histoire des villes de Bosnie sous I’adminis-
tration turque,” Prilozi, II (1951), 115-184; V. Stojancevic, "Prvi srpski
ustanak prema Bugarskoj i Bugarima. La Premiere insurrection serbe
et ses relations avec la Bulgarie,” Istoriski glasnik, 1-2 (1954), 121-147.
    60. On the special status of the Kraina, see Dusan Pantelic, "Oko
krajinski povlastica,^’ Istoriski Glasnik, 1 (1949),62-82; and Zgodovina
Narodov Jugoslavije. Druga Knjiga, Od Zacetka XVI, stoletja do konca
XVIII. stoletja (Ljubljana, 1959), pp. 952-978. On Pasvanoglu’s attacks,
see HHS, Tiirkei 11-106, no. 9 (16 March 1794); Yakschitch, Resurrec¬
tion de la Serbie, pp. 21-22; Vasif, IV, 69b-70a; Nuri, fols. 66a, 104a.
    61. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, p. 22; Vasif, IV, 152b;
Nuri, fol. 138a.
   62. Cevdet^, VI, 243-244; HHS, Tiirkei 11-112, no. 17 (10 June 1796).
   63. An exhaustive study of Hakki Pasha’s career is provided in
Ismail Hakki Uzungar§ili, "Hakki Pa§a,” pp. 177-284; see also Ibn ul-
Emin Mahmud Kemal Inal, "Mehmed Hakki Pa§a,” TTEM, VIII (1926),
351-367.
    64. Vasif, IV, 41b-42a; Nuri, fols. 76b-77b; Cevdet^, VI, 178-179;
AE Turquie 193 (15 Pluviose an IV). Uzungargili, "Hakki Pa§a,” pp.
182-183.
    65. HHS, Tiirkei II-lll, no. 7 (25 Feb. 1795).
    66. Cevdet^, VI, 178; Nuri, fol. 247a-b; FO 78/17 (10 March 1796);
Uzungar§ili, "Hakki Pa§a,” pp. 183-185.
    67. BVA, HH 394 (14 Ramazan 1210/19 March 1796); Uzun5ar§ili,
"Hakki Pa§a,” pp. 184-185.
    68. Cevdet^, VI, 177; FO 78/16 (10 July 1795).
    69. Vasif, IV, 72a; Nuri, fol. 104a; HHS, Tiirkei II-lll, no. 1 (9 Jan.
1796).
    70. Cevdet^, VI, 178; HHS, Tiirkei 11-112, no. 9 (10 March 1796), no.
10 (25 March 1796), no. 11 (9 April 1796), no. 13 (25 April 1796), no. 14
(10 May 1796), no. 15 (25 May 1796); Uzun5ar§ili, "Hakki Pa§a,” p. 185.
    71. HHS, Tiirkei 11-112, no. 17 (10 June 1796), no. 18 (25 June 1796);
113, no. 20 (9 July 1796), no. 22 (25 July 1796).
    72. HHS, Tiirkei 11-113, no. 24 (10 Aug. 1796), no. 26 (10 Sept. 1796),
no. 27 (24 Sept. 1796), no. 30 (25 Oct. 1796), no. 34 (25 Nov. 1796), no.
38 (24 Dec. 1796); 114, no. 5 (10 Feb. 1797), no. 7 (25 Feb. 1797); HHS,
Turkei 11-113, no. 9 (24 March 1797), no. 10 (3 April 1797), no. 11 (10




                         Notes to pages 241-243
460   April 1797), no. 13 (25 April 17’97); Uzun9ar§ili, "Hakki Pa§a,” pp. 175-
      176.
         73. Cevdet^, VI, 203-204; AE Turquie 207, no. 12 (4 Frimaire an
      XII); UzunQar§ili, "Hakki Pa§a,” pp. 187-188.
         74. Cevdet^ VI, 246; Cevdet^ VI, 202-203; Uzun5ar§ili, "Hakki
      Pa§a,” p. 186.
         75. Cevdet^ VI, 202; Nuri, fols. 140b-141a, 138b; HHS, Tiirkei
      11-115, no. 16 (24 May 1797).
          76. Ahmed Refik, Tiirk Idaresinde Bulgaristan, 973-1255 (Istanbul,
      1933), pp. 66-68; FO 78/18 (20 July 1797); HHS, Tiirkei 11-115, no. 16
      (24 May 1797), no. 20 (26 June 1797^, no. 2l (10 July 1797); Uzunprgili,
      "Hakki Pa§a,” pp. 187-189; BVA, Mtihimme-i mektum. III, 30-31.
          77. HHS, Tiirkei 11-115, no. 24 (25 July 1797), no. 25 (10 Aug. 1797),
      no. 28 (9 Sept. 1797), no. 30 (10 Oct. 1797); 116, no. 34 (10 Nov. 1797).
          78. HHS, Tiirkei 11-116, no. 38 (25 Nov. 1797); Cevdet^ VI, 263.
          79. Cevdet^, VI, 242-244, 263; Vasif, IV, 90a-b.
          80. Vasif, IV, 170b-177b; Cevdet^ VI, 218.
          81. Cevdet^ VI, 242-244.
          82. HHS, Tiirkei 11-117, no. 2 (11 Jan. 1798), no. 5 (10 Feb. 1798),
      no. 6 (24 Feb. 1798).
          83. HHS, Tiirkei 11-117, no. 12 (11 April 1798), no. 13 (25 April
      1798); Zinkeisen, VII, 230; BVA, HH, III Selim 2185, 2379, 2521, 2550,
      6605, 8263, 8779, 15482.
         84. HHS, Tiirkei 11-117, no. 6 (24 Feb. 1798), no. 8 (10 March 1798).
         85. Xenopol, II, 255-256.
          86. HHS, Tiirkei 11-117, no. 19 (9 June 1798), no. 20 (25 June 1798),
      no. 25 (10 July 1798); BVA, HH, 2378a, 2378b, 2378d.



                            XVI. The Eastern Question

          1. Cevdet^, V, 220-222; Zinkeisen, VI, 858-859.
         2. B. Lewis, Emergence of Modern Turkey p. 64.
         3. Cevdet^, VI, 151-158; Tahsin Oz, "Sir Katibi,” 184; Halil Inalcik,
      "Osmanli-Rus,” p. 202; Zinkeisen, VI, 846-847.
         4. See Chapter XIV.
         5. AE Turquie 184, fols. 125-140; Marcere, vols. I and II; M. S.
      Anderson, The Eastern Question, 1774-1923 (London, 1966), pp. 23-24.
         6. See Chapter XL
           7. Cevdet^, VI, 153-154, 162-163; AE Turquie 188 (21 Thermidor
      an II); AF‘“ 75/308 (7 Oct. 1793).
          8. Cevdet^, VI, 152, 157-159; AE Turquie 185 (9 June and 8 Aug.
      1793).
          9. AE Turquie 185 (8 Aug. 1793); HHS, Tiirkei 11-107, no. 26 (9
      Aug. 1794).




                              Notes to pages 244-250
    10. Cevdet', VI, 140,183-184; Cevdet^, VI, 151-159; Marcere, I, 94-       461
284; Zinkeisen, VI, 851-872; lorga, V, 109,112, 115; FO 78/15 (25 Aug.
and 10 Sept. 1794); FO 78/18 (10 Aug. 1797; 10 Feb. 1798).
    11. FO 78/18 (10 Aug. 1797); AE Turquie 196 (3 April 1797).
    12. Marcere, I, 89-90; Cevdet*, VI, 159, 202-203; Cevdet^ VI, 161,
165-167; Zinkeisen, VI, 866-872; Enver Ziya Karal, Fransa-Misir,
pp. 56-57, 106; FO 78/14 (11 March 1793).
   13. Boris Mouravieff, L’Alliance russo-turque au milieu des guerres
Napoleoniennes (Neuchatel, 1954), pp. 7-8; A. Lobanov-Rostovsky,
Russia and Europe, 1789-1825 (Durham, N.C., 1947), p. 24; Vasif, IV,
147a; Nuri, fol. 138a; H. Temperley and L. M. Penson, Foundations of
British Foreign Policy from Pitt, 1792, to Salisbury, 1902 (Cambridge,
1938), pp. 1-22.
   14. Marcere, II, 142-143; FO 78/18 (10 Aug. 1797); Karal, Fransa-
Misir, p. 59; Vasif, IV, 149a-b.
    15. Vasif, IV, 67a; HHS, Tiirkei 11-116, no. 38 (25 Nov. 1797); 117,
no. 2(11 Jan. 1798), no. 13 (25 April 1798), no. 20 (25 June 1798).
    16. G.-Fr. Martens, ed., Recueil des principaux trades de 1761 h
1801, 7 vols. (Gottingen, 1791-1801), VI, 460.
    17. Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp. 63-64; Cevdet^, VI, 231-235, 277-280,
285-286, 295; Asim, I, 62, 71; lorga, V, 128-129; Zinkeisen, VII, 37-38;
P. Pisani, La Dalmatie de 1797 a 1815 (Paris, 1893), pp. 32-47; FO 78/19
(10 Nov. 1797); AE Turquie 196 (31 Aug. 1797); 197 (10 Nov. 1797).
I. H. Uzun5ar§ili, "On dokuzuncu asir ba§larina kadar Tiirk-Ingiliz
rniinasebatma dair vesikalar,” Belleten, XIII (1949), 589.
    18. BVA, HH 1987 (15 Sevval 1215); Remerand, p. 52.
    19. Plomer, 84; Rdm^rand, pp. 54-55; Auguste Boppe, L’Albanie et
Napoleon, 1797-1814 (Paris, 1914), pp. 1-9; AE Corfu II (14 March 1798).
    20. Remerand, p. 55; Plomer, pp. 85-86.
    21. Remerand, pp. 55-56; Boppe, L’Albanie et Napoleon, pp. 9-11;
AE Corfu II (14 March 1798); J.-P. Bellaire, Precis des operations gen¬
erates de la division frangaise du Levant (Paris, 1805), p. 20; Olivier, I,
192-223.
    22. Boppe, L’Albanie et Napoleon, pp. 12-15; D. and N. Stephanopoli,
Voyage de Dimo et Nicolo Stephanopoli en Grecependant les annees 1797
et 1798, 2 vols. (London, 1800); E. Driault, Napoleon et la resurrection de
la Grece (Paris, 1924); C. Kerofilas, "Napoleon et la Grece,” Les etudes
franco-grecques, II (1919), 145-155, 202-211, 273-281.
    23. Lobanov-Rostovsky, p. 16; Cevdet^, VI, 207-208, 233; FO 78/18
(15 May 1797); AE Turquie 196 (31 Aug. 1797); Zinkeisen, VII, 26-27.
    24. FO 78/18 (15 May 1797); AE Turquie 196 (1 Dec. 1797); Karal,
Fransa-Misir, pp. 57-58; Karal, "Yunan Adalarinm Fransizlar tarafin-
dan i§gali ve Osmanli-Rus miinasebati,” TSD, I/l (1937), pp. 100-125.
    25. Karal, "Yunan Adalari,” pp. 113-117; Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp.
63-64, 113-114; CevdeP, VI, 248-249, 282-284.




                         Notes to pages 250-254
462       26. Karal, "Yunan Adalari,” pp. 119-120; Karal, Fransa-Misir, p.
      58; AE Turquie 196 (15 Jan. and 15 Sept. 1797).
          27. lorga, V, 123-124; Zinkeisen, VII, 25; Cevdet^, VI, 233-235, 283,
      289; Marcere, II, 338; FO 78/19 (24 July 1798); AE Turquie 196 (25 April
      1797); 197 (27 Dec. 1797, 1 and 10 Feb. 1798); Deherain,          1,122-
      123, 134-137.
         28. lorga, V, 123-124; Marcere, II, 338; FO 78/19 (24 July 1798);
      AE Turquie 197 (18 Jan. 1798).
          29. Napoleon Bonaparte, Correspondance de Napoleon F’’: publiee
      par ordre de I’empereur Napoleon III, 32 vols. (Paris, 1858-1870), III,
      215, 236; IV, 52-53; Shafik Ghorb^l; The Beginnings of the Egyptian
      Question and the Rise of Mehemet Ali (London, 1928), pp. 12-13, 52-53;
      Mouravieff, p. 14; Pisani, Dalmatie, 199; Zinkeisen, VII, 34 n.; Maurice
      Herbette, Une Ambassade Turque sous le Directoire (Paris, 1902), pp.
      212-217; J.C. Hurewitz, Diplomacy in the Near and Middle East: A Doc¬
      umentary Record, 2 vols. (Princeton, N. J.,,1956), I, 62.
          30. Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp. 62-66, 149-153; Herbette, pp. 219-226;
      Cevdet^ VI, 236-237, 327, 332; Karal, "Yunan Adalari,” p. 113; AE
      Turquie 198 (25 May 1798); AE Turquie 23 suppl. (15 Aug. 1798).
          31. AE Turquie 197 (15 March 1798); Ghorbal, Egyptian Question,
      pp. 34-35; Deherain, Ruffin, I, 126-130; Mouravieff, p. 169; Marcere, II,
      313; AE Turquie 198 (16 Sept, and 5 Oct. 1798), 199 (3 Oct. 1798).
          32. AE Turquie 198 (15 June 1798).
          33. FO 78/21 (24 March 1799); AE Turquie 198 (3 July 1798); Cev-
      det*, VI, 295; C. de la Jonquiere, L’Expedition d’ Egypte, 1798-1801, 5
      vols. (Paris, 1899-1907), I, 587.
         34. Deherain, Ruffln, I, 131-134; CevdeP, VI, 319-334; Karal,
      Fransa-Misir, pp. 67-68; Herbette, pp. 219-220; AE Turquie 198 (20 and
      27 June 1798); FO 78/20 (11 Sept. 1798).
         35. Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp. 68-69, 154-157; CevdeP, VI, 290, 321-
      322; AE Turquie 198 (26 July 1798).
          36. Karal, Fransa-Misir, p. 69; CevdetS VI, 290-291, 332-333; Cev-
      det^, VI, 240-241; AE Turquie 198 (24 July 1798); FO 78/19 (23 and 25
      July 1798).



                        XVII. The War of the Triple Alliance

           1. The most important accounts of the French Expedition are Jon¬
      quiere; L. Reybaud, Histoire scientifique et militaire de I’expedition fran-
      caise en Egypte, 10 vols. (Paris, 1803-1836); Gaston Wiet, ed. andtrans.,
      Nicolas Turc, Chronique de’Egypte, 1798-1804, (Cairo, 1950); ‘Abd al-
      Rahman b. Hasan al-Jabarti, ‘Ajh'ib al-Athdr, 4 vols. (Bulak, 1888-
      1894); French trans. by Chefik Mansour Bey and others as Merveilles
      biographiques et historiques ou chroniques du Abdel-Rahman el-Djabarti,




                               Notes to pages 254-257
9 vols. (Cairo, 1888-1896). See also Shaw, French Revolution; Christo¬        463
pher Herold, Bonaparte in Egypt (London and New York, 1963) and ‘Abd
al-Rahm&n al-Rafi‘i. Ta’rikh al-Harakat al-Qawmiyye wa tatawwur
nizam al-Hukm ft Misr, 2 vols. (Cairo, 1948). A complete bibliography of
the literature on the Expedition is found in H. Munier, Tables de la
description de I’Egypte suivies d’uhe bihliographie sur Vexpedition fran-
gaise de Bonaparte (Cairo, 1943). The archives of the expedition are held
by the French Ministry of War, Archives de la Guerre, Chateau de Vin¬
cennes, Paris.
       2. Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 21-22; Herold, pp. 88-95; Rafi'i, I, 195-
200.
     3. Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 23-24; ‘Ali Pasha Mubarak, Khitat el-
Taufiqiyya, 20 vols. (Bulak, 1306/1888), VIII, 89-91; Jabarti, III, 63-66;
Rafi'i, I, 207-220; Hei-old, pp. 96-100.
     4. Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 26, 28-37; Rafi'i, I, 193-200; Karal,
Fransa-Misir, p. 81; Herold, pp. 100-101; Jabarti, III, 3.
     5. Rafi'i, I, 354-368, 378-416; Herold, pp. 225-262; Jonquiere, III,
531, 607; Vasif, IV, 198a-204b.
     6. Herold, pp. 267-284, 287-300, 309-310; Jonquiere, IV, 1-238,
241-354, 355-439, 463-638; Rafi‘i, II, 20-36; Cevdet^ VII, 13-21; Napo¬
leon Bonaparte, Correspondance, V, 3982, 4011, 4018, 4026, 4035; Wiet,
Nicolas Turc, pp. 53-65; Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, p. 85; Chebli, pp.
203-208; Shihab, pp. 186-192; Vasif, IV, 221a-222a; TKS, E113, E7016;
HW pp. 66-67; P. Benoit, "Saint Jean d’Acre,”           des Deux-Moncfes,
XXV (1935), 721-748; XXVI (1935), 1-34, 241-267; Ismail Hakki Uzun-
5ar§ih, "Bonapart’m Cezzar Ahmed Pa§a’ya mektubu ve Akka muhasa-
rasina dair bir deyi§,” Belleten, XXVIII (1964), 451-457.
     7. Rafi'i, I, 221-231; Herold, 102-129; Wiet, Nicolas Turc, 39; Ghor¬
bal, Egyptian Question, pp. 56-58; Jonquiere, II, 399-425.
     8. Rafi'i, II, 116-120, 320-325; Vasif, III, 157a-b; IV, 263a-266a,
270a; Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 85-96; Cevdet^, VII, 62-63, 282-285;
Herold, pp. 353-355; F. Charles-Roux, "Une negotiation pour I’evacua-
tion de I’Egypte. La convention d’El-Arich, 1800,” RHD (1923), 48-88,
304-347; A. M. Blanc d’Hauterive, Observations et pieces relatives a la
convention d’El-Arisch (Paris, an IX/1800); H. Nahoum, Recueil des
Firmans Imperiaux Ottomans addresses aux Valis et aux Khedives d’
Egypte, 1597-1904 (Cairo, 1934); HIT, pp. 75-76; FO 78/26 (23 Sept.,
17 Nov., and 15 Dec. 1799); AE Turquie 201 (24 Jan. 1800), 202, fols. 97-
103; FO 78/23 (31 Jan. 1800), 78/28 (16 Feb., 4 and 5 March 1800); FO
78/29 (27 April 1800).
     9. Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 96-98; Cevdet^, VIII, 62-68; Rafi‘i, II,
121-133; Herold, pp. 356-357; FO 78/29 (19 March, 1 and 11 April 1800).
    10. Cevdet^, VII, 74-75; Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 115-116, 123; Shi¬
hab, II, 312-314; RM‘i, II, 137-143, 325-329; G. Rigault, Le general Ab¬
dallah Menou et la derniere phase de Vexpedition d’Egypte, 1799-1801




                           Notes to pages 257-258
464   (Paris, 1911), pp. 163-164, 288-289; Deherain, UEgypte Turque, pp. 74,
      510-514; AE Turquie 201 (8 Oct. 1801); FO 78/29 (17 May and 6 June
      1800).
         11. Herold, pp. 383-388; Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 136-137; Cevdet^
      VII, 105, 109; Anderson, Naval Wars, 391; Noradounghian, III, 41-47;
      Rafi‘i, II, 335-344; de Testa, II, 37; Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp. 134-135;
      Zinkeisen, VI, 899-904; Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, p. 137; FO 78/32
      (21 Sept. 1801).
          12. French internal policy in Egypt during the Expedition is outlined
      in Shaw, French Revolution, pp. 22-29, 99-100, 116, 123-125, 142-144,
      147-148, 156-163. See also M. R. X. EsteVe, Compte-rendu de Vadminis-
      tration des finances pendant I’etablissement des Franqais en Egypte”,
      (Paris, 1802); M. Chevalier, "La politique financiere de I’expedition
      d’Egypte”, CHE, VII (1955), 165-186, 223-243; VIII (1956), 47-68, 176-
      197, 213-240.
         13. Deherain, UEgypte Turque, p. 250.^
         14. Rafi'i, I, 93-115; Shaw, French Revolution, pp. 23-24.
         15. Rafi‘i, II, 14-19; Shaw, French Revolution, pp. 24-25.
         16. Shaw, French Revolution, p. 26.
         17. Ibid., pp. 142-143, 158; Chevalier, VIII, 213-222; G. Rigault,
      pp. 112-135, 240-260.
          18. Karal, "Yunan Adalari,” pp. 123-124; idem, Fransa-Misir, pp.
      98-99; FO 78/19 (23 July 1798); AE Turquie 198 (24 July, 1 and 10 Aug.
      1798).
          19. Cevdet^ VI, 283-292; Asim, I, 70-71; Karal, "Ingilterenin Ak-
      deniz Hakimiyeti Hakkinda vesikalar, 1798-1805,” TV, I (1941), 122-
      134; Karal, Fransa-Misir, p. 93; AE Turquie 198 (25 Aug. 1798); FO
      78/19 (3 Sept, and 26 Oct. 1798); J. Kabrda, Quelques firmans concernant
      les relations franco-turques lors de I’expedition de Bonaparte en Etypte
      (Paris, 1947), pp. 64-70.
          20. Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, pp. 61-63; Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp.
      95-96; Herbette, pp. 238-246; Kabrda, pp. 13-14; FO 78/20 (1 and 2
      Sept. 1798); AE Turquie 198 (Sept. 1798).
          21. Cevdet^ VI, 264-267, 294; Vasif, IV, 188a-b; HIT, pp. 55-56;
      Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp. 94-95; AE Turquie 198 (30 Aug. 1798); FO
      78/20 (3 Sept. 1798).
          22. P. Pisani, "Une expedition russo-turque aux lies loniennes”,
      RHD, II (1888), 190-225; Cevdet^, VII, 5-6; Vasif, IV, 212b-217b; Mou-
      raviefF, pp. 18-19; Asim, I, 62, 70-75; Pisani, Dalmatie, p. 205; FO 78/20
      (8 and 10 Sept. 1798); J. C. Hurewitz, "The Background of Russia’s
      Claims to the Turkish Straits: A Reassessment,” Belleten, XXVIII
      (1964), 459-503, esp. pp. 482-483.
          23. Cevdet^, VII, 6; Asim, I, 71; MouraviefF, pp. 16-18; Anderson,
      Naval Wars, p. 367.




                              Notes to pages 258-264
   24. Boppe, L’Albanie et Napoleon, pp. 14-15; Napoleon Bonaparte,          465
Correspondance, V, 233-234; AE Turquie 199 (27 Sept., 8 Oct., and 23
Dec. 1798); FO 78/20 (2 Nov. 1798); Cevdet^ VII, 6-8; Remerand, pp.
56-60; lorga, V, 128-129; Zinkeisen, VII, 84-98.
   25. FO 78/21 (24 March 1799); AE Turquie 198 (25 Sept. 1798).
   26. Zinkeisen, VII, 239-240;-Cevdet^ VII, 37-38; FO 78/21 (7 March
1799); BVA, HH, III Selim, 2252, 6856, 12505.
    27. Remerand, pp. 58-62; Zinkeisen, VII, 184-188; Cevdet^, VII, 7;
E. Rodocanachi, Bonaparte et les lies loniennes: Un episode des conquetes
de la Republique et du Premier Empire, 1797-1816 (Paris, 1899), pp.
67-78, 105-115.
    28. Karal, "Yunan Adalari,” pp. 100-112; Mouravieff, p. 20; FO
78/21 (24 March 1799).
    29. Rodocanachi^, pp. 1-66, 79-104; G. Pautier, Les lies loniennes
pendant I’occupation frangais et le protectorat anglais (Paris, 1863), pp.
12-20; FO 348/2 Corfu (5 July 1797).
    30. Cevdet^, VII, 7; Rodocanachi, pp. 116-133.
    31. Hurewitz, "Background of Russia’s Claims,” p. 479.
    32. CevdetS VI, 284; Asim, I, 67; Zinkeisen, VII, 45; Ghorhal, Egyp¬
tian Question, pp. 65-66; FO 78/19 (28 Aug. and 25 Sept. 1798); 78/20
(3 Oct. 1798); AE Turquie 199 (7 Oct. 1798). The Koehler mission is
described by its physician, William Wittman, in his Travels in Turkey,
Asia Minor. . . (London, 1803). Koehler’s reports are found in the dis¬
patches of the British ambassadors to London in FO 78.
    33. Marcere, II, 320; Zinkeisen, VII, 755-756; Kabrda, pp. 82-85;
Cevdet^ VII, 4-5.
    34. Herbette, pp. 245-257; AE Turquie 199 (8, 27, and 31 Nov. 1798).
    35. FO 78/20 (30 Dec. 1798), 78/21 (6 Jan. 1799); AE Turquie 199
(2 Nov. 1798); Cevdet^ VII, 788; Asim, 1,62; UzunQar§ih, "Tiirk-Ingiliz,”
pp. 589-590.
    36. The public text of the Turko-Russian alliance is given in full in
Mesut Pa§a, Mecmua-i Muahedat, IV, 14-19; Noradounghian, III, 24-
27; Vasif, IV, 204b-207b; CevdeC, VII, 254-257; it is discussed in Cev-
det^ VII, 7-8; Asim, I, 62; Karal, OT, V, 33-35. The French text of
the secret agreement is found in BVA, Muahedeler, 481-482, and is re¬
printed in Hurewitz, "Background of Russia’s Claims,” pp. 498-500. The
Ottoman text is given only in Asim, I, 65-68, and is discussed in Hure¬
witz, "Background of Russia’s Claims, pp. 483-486, and Karal, OT,Y,
35. Both public and secret articles are given in full in FO 78/21 (24
March 1799) and summarized in Re§at Ekrem, Osmanli Muahedeleri
ve Kapitulasiyonlar, 1800-1920 (Istanbul, 1934), pp. 114-118.
    37. The text of the Turko-British alliance is given in full in Mesut
Pa§a, Mecmua-i Muahedat, I, 262-263; Noradounghian, III, 28-31; J. C.
Hurewitz, Diplomacy in the Near and Middle East: A Documentary




                         Notes to pages 265-267
466   Record, 1535-1914, 2 vols. (Prfnceton, N. J., 1956), I, 65-67; Cevdet^,
       VII, 257-260; Asim, I, 68-70; Vasif, IV, 207b-210b; FO 78/21 (6 Jan.
       1799) ; and Uzungar§ili, "Turk-Ingiliz,” pp. 590-592.
          38. Pisani, "Une expedition,” pp. 197-221; Uzun5ar§ili, "Ar§iv vesi-
      kalarma gore Yedi Ada Cumhuriyeti,” Belleten, I (1937), 627-630;
      Vasif, IV, 249a-b; Mouravielf, pp. 24-25; Anderson, Naval Wars, pp.
      367-371; Asim, I, 71-72; Kabrda, pp. 86-90; AE Turquie 199 (20 Feb.
      and 18 March 1799); FO 78/21 (3 March 1799); Rodocanachi, pp. 129-
       173; Remerand, 63.
          39. Asim, I, 71; Rodocanachi, pp. 175-178; FO 78/21 (5 Feb. 1799),
      78/22 (17 Feb. 1800); AE Turquie 20L (13 March 1800); lorga, V, 133,
       137; Uzungar§ili, "Yedi Ada,” pp. 63i-637.
          40. Mouravielf, pp. 28-29; Pisani, "Une expedition,” pp. 218-219;
      lorga, V, 137-138; Uzungar§ili, "Yedi Ada,” pp. 634-638.
          41. AE Turquie 201 (13 March 1800); FO 78/22 (25 Oct. 1799).
          42. Vasif, IV, 255a; Mouravielf, pp. 39-40; Anderson, Naval Wars,
      pp. 380-383; FO 78/22 (19 and 22 Sept, and 7 Oct. 1799).
          43. FO 78/24 (24 Dec. 1799), 78/28 (29 Jan. 1800), 78/29 (8 April
      1800) ; Rodocanachi, pp. 177-178; Cevdet^, VII, 43.
          44. The text of the convention is found in Mesut Pa§a, Mecmua-i
      Muahedat, IV, 28-34; Noradounghian, III, 36-41; Asim, I, 71-75; FO
      78/30 (10 Oct. 1800); AE Turquie 201 (8 Aug. 1800). It is discussed in
      Cevdet^, VII, 43; Uzun5ar§ili, "Yedi Ada,” pp. 637-638; Re§at Ekrem,
      pp. 353-354; Selim’s firman authorizing the establishment of the repub¬
      lic and describing its administrative and military organization is in
      Institut Scientifique de I'Histoire du Peuple Macedonien, Documents
      Turcs pour I’histoire Macedonienne, 5 vols. (Skopje, 1951-1958), I, pp.
      38-41, 138 (20 Oct. 1800).
        45. Remerand, p. 64; Boppe, L’Albanie et Napoleon, pp. 23-23; Doc¬
      uments Turcs, I, 38-41, 138.
         46. Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp. 185-187; FO 78/21 (19 Jan. 1799); FO
      78/22 (22 Sept. 1799); FO 78/23 (5 Dec. 1799); FO 78/28 (17 Feb. 1800);
      FO 78/30 (27 Dec. 1800); AE Turquie 202 (24 Dec. 1800); FO 78/31 (5
      April 1801).
         47. Herbette, pp. 246-257, 264-265; Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp. 174-
      184; FO 78/29 (23 June 1800); AE Turquie 204 (9 June 1802).
         48. Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp. 188-190; AE Turquie 202 (16 Dec. 1800).
         49. FO 78/24 (28 Dec. 1799); 78/30 (24 and 28 July 1800); AE Tur¬
      quie 201 (25 July and 27 Aug. 1800).
          50. Zinkeisen, VII, 111; FO 78/32 (26 Aug. and 4 Sept. 1801); AE
      Turquie 202 (3 and 11 Sept. 1801); Cevdet^ VII, 109-116; MID, I, no. 4
      (28 March/9 April 1801), no. 6 (9/21 April); no. 16 (16/28 July 1801) is
      a clear statement of Russian aims at this time, authored by N. P. Panin;
      see also a communication by Czar Alexander I on the same subject in no.
      18 (10/22 Sept. 1801). The agreement with France is in no. 21 (26 Sept./




                             Notes to pages 268-273
8 Oct. 1801) and no. 22 (22 Sept./lO Oct. 1801). See also no. 14 (9/21 July   467
1801), no. 24 (1/13 Oct. 1801), no. 33 (31 Oct./12 Nov. 1801), and no. 36
(2/14 Nov. 1801).
    51. Herbette, p. 265; Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp. 132-133; FO 78/32
(1 and 31 May, and 1 Sept. 1801).
    52. Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, p. 140; Napoleon Bonaparte, Cor-
respondance, VII, 5649, 5749.
    53. Cevdet^ VII, 117-118; FO 78/33 (3 Oct. and 22 Nov. 1801).
    54. FO 78/33 (3 Oct. 1801); Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, p. 142.
    55. MouraviefF, pp. 64-65; Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, p. 143; MID,
I, no. 21 (26 Sept./8 Oct. 1801); no. 22 (28 Sept./lO Oct. 1801).
    56. Text in Noradounghian, III, 47-48; de Testa, I, 495. See also
Herbette, pp. 184, 267-274; Cevdet^, VII, 118; Ghorbal, Egyptian Ques¬
tion, p. 143; FO 78/§3 (22 Nov. 1801).
    57. Cevdet^ VII, 107-108; Vasif, VI, 157a-b, 179b; Rafi'i, II, 229,
259- 260.
    58. Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 139-142; Jabarti, III, 167-171, 173,197-
198, 217-218; Rafi'i, II, 230-232; Cevdet^ VII, 110-114; H. Dodwell,
The Founder of Modern Egypt: A Study of Muhammad Ali (Cambridge,
1931). On the service of a number of Mamluks in Napoleon’s army, see
Jean Savant, Les Mamluks de Napoleon (Paris, 1949).
    59. Rafi‘i, II, 232-255.
    60. Rafi'i, II, 255-263.
    61. G. Douin and B. Fawtier-Jones, L’Angleterre et VEgypte. La poli¬
tique mameluke, 1801-1803, 3 vols. (Cairo, 1929), I, viii, xi, 10, 36, 68-
77; Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, pp. 155-166; FO 78/27 (15 July 1800),
78/30 (4 Dec. 1800), 78/31 (13 Jan., 5 and 16 Feb., 5 May, and 25 July
1801); AE Turquie 202 (10 Feb. 1801); Zinkeisen, VII, 106 n.; Uzunqar-
§ili, "Tiirk-Ingiliz,” pp. 93-96.
     62. Karal, "Akdeniz Hakimiyeti” pp. 130-133; FO 78/32 (1 Aug.
1801); the letter of Hiiseyin Pa§a is preserved in TKS, E 980.
     63. FO 78/33 (16 Nov. 1801); Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, pp. 160-
161; W. R. Hamilton, Remarks on Several Parts of Turkey, Part I: Aegyp-
tiaca or Some Account of the Ancient and Modern State of Egypt, as Ob¬
tained in the Years 1801, 1802 (London, 1809), pp. 2-4; Cevdet'^, VII,
113-114.
   64. Jabarti, III, 217-220; Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 141-144; Rafi'i, II,
260- 265; Vasif, VI, 171b; Cevdet^, VII, 111-112; Douin and Fawtier-
Jones, pp. 100-123, 403-404; FO 78/33 (19 Oct. 1801); F. Charles-Roux,
L’Angleterre et I’expedition Frangaise en Egypte, 2 vols. (Cairo, 1925),
II, 198.
    65. Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 146-149; Cevdet^, VII, 112-113; Douin
and Fawtier-Jones, I, 110-113; Angelo Sammarco, Histoire de I’Egypte
moderne, 1801-1882.1. II regno di Mohammed Ali nei documenti diplo-
matici italiani inediti (Cairo, 1933), 12-13; FO 78130 (29 Jan. 1802);




                         Notes to pages 273-277
468   Zinkeisen, VII, 116-125; Omer’Efendi, fol. 62a; Karal, "Akdeniz Haki-
      miyeti,” p. 130.
         66. Cevdet^ VII, 135-136; Douin.and Fawtier-Jones, I, 114-208.
         67. Cevdet^, VII, 118; Karal, Fransa-Misir, p. 137; FO 78/33 (12 and
      22 Nov. 1801); AE Turquie 203 (19 Nov. 1801).
         68. P. Coquelle, "La Mission de Sebastiani a Constantinople en
      1801,” RHD, XVII, 1903, pp. 442-443; AE Turquie 203 (25 Oct. and 19
      Nov. 1801); FO 78/35 (22 Nov. 1801); MID, I, no. 48 (10/22 Dec. 1801).
         69. Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp. 191-193; Asim, I, 235-236, II, 147; AE
      Turquie 203 (20 Dec. 1801; 6 March 1802); FO 78/32 (25 July 1801);
      78/33 (18 Nov. 1801); 78/35 (25 Feb.^and 5 March 1802); MID, I, no. 44
      (22 N0V./4 Dec. 1801); no. 56 (2/14 Jan. 1802); no. 57 (16/28 Jan. 1802);
      no. 58 (16/28 Jan. 1802); no. 61 (30 Jan./ll Feb. 1802); no. 63 (15/27
      Feb. 1802).
          70. Karal, Fransa-Misir, p. 138; Herbette, pp. 277-278; Uzun5ar§ih,
      "Tiirk-Ingiliz,” pp. 599-605; AE Turquie 2Q3 (19 Nov. 1801).
          71. Cevdet^, VII, 118; Coquelle, "Mission de Sebastiani, 1801,” pp.
      441-451; Zinkeisen, VII, 125-127; Vasif, VI, 33a; Deherain, Ruffin, I,
      235-237; FO 78/33 (22 Nov. and 10,12, and 28 Dec. 1801), 78/35 (6 Jan.
      1802); AE Turquie 203 (22 Nov. 1801); MID, I, no. 59 (17/29 Jan. 1802);
      no. 64 (22 Feb./6 March 1802); no. 65 (28 Feb./12 March 1802); no. 66
      (18/20 March 1802).
          72. Shafik Ghorbal, "The missions of Ali EfFendi in Paris and of
      Sedki EfFendi in London, 1797-1811,” Bulletin of the Faculty of Arts,
      University of Cairo, I (1933), pp. 114-129; Cevdet^, VII, 136; Vasif, VI,
      33a; UzunQar§ili, "Ttirk-Ingiliz” p. 599; FO 78/34 (29 Jan. 1802), 78/35
      (25 Feb. and 5 March 1802); AE Turquie 203 (9, 20, 27 Feb., and 5 and
      6 March 1802).
          73. FO 78/35 (5 and 8 March 1802); 78/36 (20 March 1802); AE
      Turquie 203 (11, 14, and 25 March 1802).
          74. Cevdet^, VII, 119; Vasif, VI, lla-12b; Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp.
      194-199; FO 78/35 (11 March 1802); AE Turquie 203 (11, 18, 21, and 25
      March 1802); Deherain, Ruffin, I, 241. The origins of Galib Efendi’s
      mission are described in Uzungar§ili, "Amedi Galib Efendinin Murah-
      hasligi ve Paris’ten gonderdigi §ifreli mektuplar,” Belleten, I (1937),
      pp. 357-410; his reports to the Sultan are given on pp. 364-410 of the
      same article. On his career, see Uzungar§ili, Karesi Me^ahiri (Istanbul,
      1925); and Orhan Kopriilu, "Galib Pa§a,” I A, IV, 710-714.
          75. Deherain, Ruffin, 1,241; AE Turquie 203 (11 and 25 March 1802).
          76. The clauses in the Peace of Amiens concerning the Ottoman Em¬
      pire are given in Noradounghian, II, 49; de Testa, II, 125. On Galib
      Efendi’s trip and learning of the Treaty, see Uzungar§ili, "Galib Efendi,”
      pp. 364-371. See also FO 78/37 (6 April and 17 May 1802); Zinkeisen,
      VII, 138.




                              Notes to pages 277-280
   77. FO 78/37 (17 May 1802); AE Turquie 204 (10 May 1802); Cevdet^,        469
VII, 136-137; MID, I, no. 69 (1/13 April 1802); no. 70 (16/28 April
1802); no. 72 (25 April/7 May 1802); no. 74 (1/13 May 1802); no. 78
(16/28 May 1802).
   78. AE Turquie 204 (12 and 24 May, and 12 June 1802); Asim, I,
130-131.
    79. Uzungar§ili, "Galib Efendi,” pp. 372-374, 403-407; Herbette,
pp. 284-286; AE Turquie 204 (25 May, and 21 and 23 June 1802); FO
78/35 (25 Feb. 1802).
    80. The text of the Franco-Ottoman treaty is given in Noradoun-
ghian, II, 51-54; de Testa, II, 146-150; Mesut Pa§a, Mecmua-i Muahedat,
I, 35-37; Hurewitz, Diplomacy, I, 71-72. See also Karal, Fransa-Misir,
pp. 141-143.
    81. Karal, Fransa-Misir, pp. 135-136; MID, I, no. 84 (16/28 June
1802); no. 85 (21 June/3 July 1802); no. 87 (22 June/4 July 1802); no.
88 (24 June/6 July 1802).


                  XVIII. Disintegration of the Empire

     1. Vasif, VI, 81a-b; Cevdet^ VII, 79-80; HHS, Tilrkei 11-123, no.
32 (25 Sept. 1800), no. 36 (25 Oct. 1800).
     2. Vasif, VI, 533a; Cevdet^, VII, 81; AE Turquie 210 (8 Thermidor
an XIII/1805) —a report on Battal and Tayyar by M. Pierlapier, who
served them after being dismissed from the French Foreign Oilice.
     3. Cevdet^, VIII, 18-19; AE Turquie 210 (5 Thermidor an XIII/
1805).
    4. AE Turquie 210 (5 Thermidor an XIII/1805).
    5. Vasif, VI, 233a-237b; Cevdet*, VIII, 54-55; AE Turquie (22
Thermidor an XIII/1805).
    6. G. Douin, "L’ambassade d’Elfi Bey a Londres,” BIE, VII (1925),
97-98; Rafi‘i, 230-233; Cevdet^, VII, 136; G. Douin, UEgypte de 1802 a
1804 (Cairo, 1925), pp. 27-38; Douin and Fawtier-Jones, I, 190-208;
Vasif, VI, 26a; Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 149-150.
    7. Vasif, VI, 49b-50a; Cevdet^ VII, 149-152; Douin, UEgypte de
1802, pp. 35-38; Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 154-155; Rafi'i, II, 262-279.
    8. Rafi'i, II, 268-275; Cevdet^ VII, 181; AE Turquie 209 (5 Floreal
an XIII/1805).
    9. Rafi'i, II, 273-278; Cevdet^, VII, 181,189; Vasif, VI, 71a-b; Wiet,
Nicolas Turc, pp. 158-165; Jabarti, III, 244-247; Douin, UEgypte de
1802, pp. 48, 51; Shihab, pp. 371-373; Sammarco, I, 72-73.
   10. Rafi'i, II, 279-280; Vasif, VI, 94b-96b; Cevdet^ VII, 202-204;
Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 165-170; Jabarti, III, 247-248; Douin, UEgypte
de 1802, pp. 55, 59, Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, pp. 211-212.




                         Notes to pages 280-287
470      11. Rafi‘i, II, 279-280; Cevdet^, VII, 203-204; Wiet, Nicolas Turc,
      pp. 170-173; Jabarti, III, 249-251.
           12. Rafi‘i, II, 281-285; Cevdet^ VII, 204; Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp.
      173-217; Jabarti, III, 274-275; Douin, Egypte de 1802, pp. 130-132.
           13. RM‘i, II, 288-293; Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 217-246; Jabarti,
      III, 276-287.
           14. Rafi'i, II, 294-295; Cevdet^, VII, 204; Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp.
      246-252; Jabarti, III, 288.
         15. Rafi‘i, II, 295-314; Wiet, Nicolas Turc, pp. 252-279; Jabarti,
      III, 291-300; Cevdet', 49-52.
           16. Cevdet^ VIII, 20-22, 68-71- Jabarti, III, 199-300, 224, 287-
      288, 302-303, 328-330; IV, 3-5, 7-11, 14-18, 20-23, 26-43; F. Mengin,
      Histoire de UEgypte sous le gouvernement de Mohammed Aly, 2 vols.
      (Paris, 1823), I, 117, 430-431, 444; L. Reybaud, Histoire scientifique et
      militaire de Vexpedition frangaise en Egypte, 10 vols. (Paris, 1803-1836),
      IX, 52-55, 188-190, 228-232; Douin, UEgypte de 1802, pp. 223-224,
      241, 244.
         17. G. Douin, Mohamed Aly, pacha du Caire, 1805-1807 (Cairo,
      1926), pp. 7-8, 27-28, 34-41, 64-67, 74-79, 82-83, 99-104, 106-121,
      128-131.
         18. Polk, pp. 17-19; Chebli, pp. 208-218; Shihab, 198-211.
         19. Herbert L. Bodman, Jr., Political Factions in Aleppo, 1760-
      1826 (Chapel Hill, N. C., 1963), pp. 117-120; SO, III, 144.
         20. Cevdet^, VII, 137-138; Bodman, p. 122; Tekindag, "Cezzar
      Ahmed Pa§a,” lA, III, 158.
         21. Bodman, pp. 122-123; Shihab, pp. 416-447; Chebli, pp. 222-224.
         22. Bodman, p. 123; Cevdet', VII, 271; J. L. Burckhardt, Travels in
      Syria and the Holy Land (London, 1822), p. 651; Chebli, pp. 225-227.
         23. Burckhardt, p. 651; E. B. B. Barker, Syria and Egypt under the
      Last Five Sultans of Turkey, 2 vols., (London, 1876), 1,80.
         24. AE Alep XXIII (28 April 1805); Bodman, p. 125.
         25. Shihab, p. 434; Bodman, p. 125; AE Alep XIII (21 June 1805).
         26. AE Alep XIII (22 June, 14 July, 29 Aug., and 10 and 19 Sept.
      1806); Bodman, pp. 125-126.
         27. Burckhardt, pp. 653-654; Bodman, p. 126; Cevdet^, VII, 224-
      228; Chebli, 228-233.
         28. Cevdet^, VII, 140-141; 'Azzawi, VI, 145-146; Longrigg, pp. 216-
      219.
         29. Cevdet^ VII, 140-141, 165-166; Vasif, VI, 16a-18a, 21b-24b;
      ‘Azzawi, VI, 140-141; Philby, pp. 93-94.
         30. Cevdet^ VII, 171-179, 231; Philby, pp. 95-96.
         31. HHS, Tiirkei 11-132 (19 July 1803) has a series of reports on the
      Ottoman reaction to the Wahhabi attacks. The Ottoman dehates and
      orders are found in HH 3754 through 3856B; Cevdet^ VII, 190, 204-
      207,230-231; Vasif, VI, 70a-72a, 80a-84a; Zinkeisen, VI, 194.




                              Notes to pages 287-296
   32. Cevdet^ VII, 199-202, 231; ‘Azzawi, VI, 161; Sabit, Mutall‘          471
us-Suud, pp. 136, 174; Longrigg, p. 229.
   33. Cevdet^ VII, 228-229; Vasif, IV, 180b; AE 211 (23 May 1806);
Philby, pp. 101-107; ‘Azzawi, VI, 168-169; Rasul Havi Efendi, Devhat
ul-Viizerd, p. 232.
   34. CevdeP, VII, 229.
   35. Cevdet^, VIII, 68, 102-103; Philby, pp. 108-109.
   36. Remerand, pp. 64-81; Boppe, L’Albanie et Napoleon, pp. 28-34;
Documents Turcs, I, 144; Plomer, pp. 93-94.
   37. Remerand, p. 68; Botzaris, pp. 52-53.
   38. Remerand, pp. 69-72; Plomer, pp. 94-100; Botzaris, p. 53.
   39. Remerand, pp. 72-73; Plomer, pp. 100-101; Botzaris, pp. 53-54.
   40. HHS, Turkei 11-121, no. 39 (19 June 1699), no. 42 (3 July 1799),
no. 45 (25 July 17^9), no. 47 (24 Aug. 1799), no. 61 (25 Oct. 1799);
CevdeP, VII, 37-38, 78-79.
   41. Mehmed Ataullah §anizade, Sanizade Tarihi, 4 vols. (Istanbul,
1875-1876), 1,152; HHS, Turkei 11-122, no. 11 (26 March 1800); CevdeP,
VII, 122-123; Zinkeisen, VII, 222-227, 235-240; lorga, V, 134-135.
   42. Documents Turcs, I, 11-12, 134-136 (order dated end Safar 1215/
end June 1800).
   43. HHS, Turkei 11-122, no. 11 (26 March 1800); Asim, I, 102-103.
   44. HHS, Turkei 11-122, no. 12 (3 April 1800); Cevdet^, VII, 79;
Asim, I, 103-104.
   45. HHS, Turkei 11-122, no. 13 (14 April 1800); Asim, I, 104-107.
   46. HHS, Turkei 11-122, no. 15 (28 April 1800); Uzun5ar§ili, "Hakki
Pa§a,” p. 190.
    47. HHS, Turkei 11-123, no. 24 (10 July 1800), no. 35 (10 Oct. 1800);
BVA, Miihimme 215, p. 2; Asim, I, 106-107.
    48. HHS, Turkei 11-123, no. 36 (25 Oct. 1800), no. 38 (2 Nov. 1800),
no. 40 (10 Nov. 1800); 124, no. 1 (10 Jan. 1801); CevdeP, VII, 79-81
Vasif, VI, 132a.
    49. Xenopol, II, p. 258; Seton-Watson, pp. 158-159; Botzaris, p. 43;
I. Neacsu, "Cu privire la componenta sociala a locuitorilor din Oltenia,
participant la lupta impotriva pazvagiilor si la razboiul ruso-turc
(1806-1812),” Studii, XIV (1961), 1203-1210.
   50. CevdeP, VIII, 88,125-126; Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie,
pp. 24-25; Ranke, p. 70.
    51. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, p. 25; Ranke, pp. 70-71;
Vasif, VI, Ola-101a.
    52. Hazim Sabanovic, Turski Izvori o Srpskoi Revolutsiui 18041
Sources Turques concernant la Revolution Serbe de 1804, Kniga/Book
1, Spisi Tsarske Kantselarive 1789-1804!Documents de I’Administration
Imperiale, 1789-1804 (Belgrade, 1956), pp. 84-85 (Report of Mustafa
Aga, Mutesellim of Ni§, to the Governor of Rumelia, 12 Rebi II 1216/22
Aug. 1801).




                        Notes to pages 296-306
472      53. Sabanovic, pp. 130-137 '(report of Hafiz Aga, of Ni§, to Hakki
      Pa§a, 23 Rebi II 1216/2 Sept. 1801).
          54. Sabanovic, pp. 123 (Mustafa Pa§a to the Grand Vezir, 19 Rebi II
      1216/29 Aug. 1801), pp. 142-143 (Hakki Pa§a to Grand Vezir, 4 Cumada
      I 1216/12 Sept. 1801); Cevdet^, VII, 122-128; Vasif, VI, 190a-191a.
          55. Sabanovic, pp. 69-82 (Mazhar of inhabitants of Belgrade to Selim
      III complaining about misrule of Mustafa Pa§a, 10 Rebi II 1216/20 Aug.
      1801); pp. 82-83 {Ham of Kadi of Belgrade with the same message;
      same date); pp. 145-147 (report on events in Belgrade by two of its
      Muslim inhabitants who come to Istanbul; 29 Rebi II 1216/8 September
      1801) ; pp. 151-152 (Report to Grand ^Vezif by military governor of Bel¬
      grade, Mustafa Pa§a; 7 Cumada I 1216/15 September 1801); Nenado-
      vich, p. 58; Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, p. 28.
          56. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 28-29; Ranke, pp.
      73-77.
          57. The text of the order is given in yzun5ar§ih, "Hakki Pa§a,”
      pp. 228-233, and in Documents Turcs, I, 59-64.
          58. Vasif, VI, 136b-137b; AE Turquie 204, no. 40 (4 Prairial an X),
      no. 47 (7 Messidon an X); Uzun5ar§ih, "Hakki Pa§a,” pp. 192-194, 236-
      258; Cevdet^ VII, 130-133.
          59. Vasif, VI, 160a-b; BVA, Miihimme 215, p. 9; Uzungar§ili, "Hakki
      Pa§a,” pp. 195, 258-263.
          60. Cevdet^, VII, 130-133; Vasif, VI, 159a; FO 78/35, no. 6 (5 Jan.
      1802) .
         61. HHS, Tiirkei 11-126, no. 35 (25 Sept. 1801), no. 34 (10 Oct.
      1801) ; Uzungar§ili, "Hakki Pa§a,” p. 195.
         62. Uzun5ar§ih, "Hakki Pa§a,” pp. 195, 263-264; Vasif, VI, 134b.
         63. Uzungarfili, "Hakki Pa§a,” pp. 196-198; BVA, Cevdet Dahiliye
      832.
        64. Uzungar§ih, "Hakki Pa§a,” pp. 198-212, 264-268; BVA, Cevdet
      Dahiliye 12377; Vasif, VI, 199b-201a; Cevdet^ VII, 127.
        65. AE Turquie 207 (18 Brumaire an XII), 209 Pluviose an XIII);
      AF 1688 dos. 2, no. 11 (4 Prairial an XI).
          66. Cevdet^ VII, 128, 133; Vasif, VI, 207a-b; HHS, Tiirkei 128, no.
      10 (26 April 1802). The text of Selim Ill’s firman appointing Ali of
      Janina with full powers is given in Documents Turcs, II, 5-6 (Serbian
      translation), 125 (French summary); Remerand, pp. 75-76; Plomer,
      120.
          67. Cevdet^, VII, 129, 146-148; Vasif, VI, 207b-209a; HHS, Tiirkei
      11-128, no. 10 (26 April 1802), no. 11 (10 May 1802); no. 17 (24 July
      1802) ; FO 78/37 (25 June 1802); Plomer, pp. 118-119; Remerand, p.
      76; a copy of Veliuddin’s principal decree to the people of Rumelia (dated
      13 Qada 1217/7 March 1803) is given in Documents Turcs, II, 6 (Serbian
      translation), 125 (French summary); on the incorporation of bandits and




                              Notes to pages 307-312
peasants from Rumelia into Veliuddin’s army, see letter from Ali Pa§a         473
to Veliuddin in Documents Turcs, p. 125.
   68. CevdeP, VII, 130-133; Vasif, VI, 3a, 34a, 77a; HHS, Tiirkei II-
11-128, no. 11 (10 May 1802), no. 14 (12 June 1802), no. 15 (26 June
1802).
    69. Selim III firman to Vani Mehmed Pa§a, Documents Turcs, p.
126 (French summary only); Cevdet^, VII, 213-215,237-239.         *
    70. Vasif, VI, 63a-b; Cevdet^, VII, 214-215; Ismail Hakki Uzun-
9ar§ili, Meqhur Rumeli Ayanlarindan Tirsinikli Ismail, Yilik oglu
Suleyman Agalar ve Alemdar Mustafa Pa§a (Istanbul, 1942), pp. 11-13.
    71. Documents Turcs, II, 129; BVA, HH 3697; HHS, Tiirkei 11-128,
no. 13 (25 May 1802); AE 207, no. 17 (20 Nivose an XII/1804).
    72. Cevdet^ VII, 236-238; AE 209, no. 16 (6 Ventfise an XIII);
Uzungarfib, Alemdtar, pp. 36-38; Vasif, VI, 10a-15a.
    73. Uzungargili, Alemdar, pp. 20, 36, 56.
    74. Ibid., pp. 24-25.
    75. Botzaris, p. 54; Re'merand, pp. 75-76; Plomer, pp. 108-111.
    76. The text of the agreement is reprinted in Remerand, p. 77; also
Botzaris, p. 55 n., F. C. H. L. Pouqueville, Histoire de la regeneration de
la Gr'ece, 4 vols. (Paris, 1824), I, 139-140; Pouqueville, Voyage dans la
Gr'ece, 6 vols. (Paris, 1826), V, 181-184.
    77. Remerand, pp. 78-79; Plomer, pp. 111-117; Botzaris, pp. 56-57;
Pouqueville, Regeneration, I, 138-147.
    78. Remerand, pp. 86-87; Pouqueville, Regeneration. I, 150-151.
    79. Remerand, pp. 88-90; Plomer, pp. 118-123; Pouqueville, Regene¬
ration, I, 151-162.
    80. Remerand, pp. 90-100; Pouqueville, Regeneration, I, 164-171;
Plomer, pp. 124-129.
    81. Cevdet^, VII, 128, VIII, 89; Sabanovic, pp. 136-137 (report to
Hakki Pa§a by Hafiz Aga of Ni§, 27 Rebi I 1216/6 Sept. 1801); pp. 159-
161 (report on situation in Serbia, 12 Ramazan 1216/16, Jan. 1802).
    82. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 29-34; Sabanovic, pp.
161-163 (report by dahis to Pasvanoglu, mid-February 1804); Ranke,
pp. 76-77; Cevdet^, VIII, 88-89.
    83. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 34-35; Ranke, pp.
78-80; Cevdet^, VIII, 89; Vasif, VI, 162a-163b; Dragoslav Jankovic,
La premiere insurrection serbe dans la presse frangaise (Belgrade,
1959), pp. 23-24.
   84. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 35-36; Cevdet^, VII,
238-239, VIII, 89; Ranke, pp. 78-88; Jankovic, pp. 24-30.
   85. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 37-42; Ranke, pp.
80-81; Jankovic, pp. 31-34.
   86. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 43-46; Vasif, VI,
150a-b; Jankovic, pp. 35-41.




                         Notes to pages 313-321
474      87. Yakschitch, Resurrection' de la Serbie, p. 48; Botzaris, pp. 60-61;
      Vasif, 156a-158a; Jankovic, pp. 42-46.
         88. Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, Vol. II, 313; Ranke, pp. 93-94; Yakschitch,
      Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 48-49; Gopcevic, pp. 292-302.
         89. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, p. 48; Jankovic, pp. 47,49.
         90. Ranke, p. 94; Vasif, V, 158a.
         91. Ranke, pp. 95-96; Jankovic, pp. 48-49; Yakschitch, Resurrec¬
      tion de la Serbie, p. 47.
          92. Cevdet^, VII, 238; Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, p. 49;
      Jankovic, pp. 48-49.
          93. Panaitescu, Corespondenta lui Constantin Ipsilanti cul guvernul
      rusesc (Bucharest, 1933), p. 101; M. Vukicevic, Cerni Djordje, 2 vols.
      (Belgrade, 1907-1912), II, 237-240; Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Ser¬
      bie, pp. 50-51; Jankovic, pp. 50-51, 54-60.
          94. Cevdet^, VII, 238-239; Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie,
      pp. 51-52; Jankovic, pp. 63-64.
          95. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 52-53; Jankovic, pp.
      63-64.
          96. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 62-63; Jankovic, pp.
      66-75.
          97. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 63-64; Jankovic, pp.
      75- 82,86-88, 91-95.
         98. Jankovic, pp. 82-83, 101-102; Yakschitch, Resurrection de la
      Serbie, pp. 66-67.
         99. Jankovic, p. 103.
        100. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, p. 69; Jankovic, p. 113.
        101. Cevdet^, VIII, 17; Asim, I, 133-134; Yakschitch, Resurrection
      de la Serbie, pp. 70-72.
        102. Botzaris, pp. 60-61.
        103. Jankovic, p. 114, 116, 117, 120-121; Yakschitch, Resurrection
      de la Serbie, p. 75.
        104. Ranke, pp.   118-125; Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie,
      76- 77.
        105. Jankovic, pp. 121-123; Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie,
      pp. 77-78.




                            XIX. The Eastern Question


          1. Cevdet^ VII, 217-218; Vasif, 59a-61a.
         2. V. J. Puryear, Napoleon and the Dardanelles (Berkeley and Los
      Angeles, 1951), pp. 1-17; Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, pp. 185-186;
      Napoleon Bonaparte, Correspondance, VIII, 637-638; AF iv 1688, dos.
      2 (16 Pluviose an XI/1803); Cevdet^ VIII, 49.




                              Notes to pages 322-329
                                                                    -i-
     3. MouravieiF, pp. 75-94; Cevdet^ VIII, 48-49; MID, I, no. 87 (22        475
June, 4 July 1802); no. 88 (24 June/6 July 1802).
     4. Temperley and Penson, pp. 10-21; see also A. W. Ward and G.
P. Gooch, eds.. The Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy, 2 vols.
(Cambridge, 1939), I, 265-286, 309-371.
     5. CevdetS VIII, 56, 73-74; CevdeP, VIII, 41, 48, 51; AE Turquie
209 (20 Germinal an XIII/1805); Noradounghian, II, 69-70.
     6. Xenopol, II, 260-265; Seton-Watson, p. 160; Hurmuzaki, Suppl.
I, vol. II, pp. 257, 327; Vasif, VI, 66a-67a; Botzaris, pp. 43-44; the text
of Selim’s order concerning the Principalities is given in Noradounghian,
II, 55-67; for the Russian diplomatic correspondence on the Princi¬
palities, see MID, I, no. 90 (4/16 July 1802); no. 91 (14/26 July 1802);
no. 92 (16/28 July 1802); no. 95 (21 July/2 August 1802); no. 96 (21
July/2 Aug. 1802); no. 105 (16/28 Aug. 1802); no. 119 (30 Aug./ll Sept.
1802); no. Ill (1/13 Sept. 1802); no. 116 (16/28 Sept. 1802); no. 117
(1/13 Oct. 1802); no. 124 (16/28 Oct. 1802); no. 125 (16/28 Oct. 1802);
no. 127 (2/14 Nov. 1802); no. 128 (2/14 Nov. 1802); no. 138 (30 Nov./12
Dec. 1802).
     7. Botzaris, p. 45.
     8. E. Driault, Napoleon et I’Europe: Tilsit, France et Russie sous le
premier empire: la question de Pologne, 1806-1809 (Paris, 1917), pp.
80-90; Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, pp. 202-203; Puryear, pp. 23-25;
Karal, Halet Efendi, pp. 71-77; AE 208 (9 Messidor an XIII/1804);
Vasif, VI, 67b-70a; MID, I, no. 256 (17/29 Feb. 1804); no. 259 (26 Feb./9
March 1804).
   9. Puryear, pp. 23-24; 27-28; de Testa, II, 256-263; Karal, Halet
Efendi, pp. 74-76.
    10. Puryear, pp. 35-36; de Testa, II, 349-350; Karal, Halet Efendi,
pp. 76-77; FO 78/42 (28 May, 6 June, 17 Sept., and 25 Dec. 1804);
MID, I, no. 259 (26 Feb./9 March 1804), no. 260 (26 Feb./9 March 1804);
no. 265 (8/20 March 1804); MID, II, no. 11 (16/28 April 1804).
    11. Hurewitz, "Background of Russia’s Claims,” p. 481; Mouravieff,
pp. 24-95; S. N. Goriainov, Le Bosphore et les Dardanelles (Paris, 1910),
p. 6; N. Dascovici, La Question du Bosphore et des Dardanelles (Geneva,
1915), pp. 150-151; Cevdet^, VIII, 47; BVA, HH 146H.
    12. Karal, Halet Efendi, p. 81; Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, pp. 204-
205; FO 78/45 (4 Aug. 1805), 78/46 (24 Sept. 1805), 65/58 (3 Sept. 1805);
CevdetS VIII, 56-57, 73-75; Georges Douin, Mohamed Aly, Pacha du
Caire (1805-1807) (Cairo, 1926), pp. 62-63; Puryear, pp. 38-39; AE
Turquie 209 (18 April 1805); BVA, HH 7104B; Hurewitz, "Background
of Russia’s Claims,” pp. 481-482; MID, II, no. 75 (3/15 Dec. 1804); no.
133 (29 May/10 June 1805); no. 145 (8/20 July 1805); no. 180 (2/14 Sept.
1805).
   13. The text of the Treaty is found in Mesut Pa§a, Mecmua-i Mua-
hedat, IV, 35-48; Noradounghian, II, 70-78; Hurewitz, Diplomacy, I,




                         Notes to pages 330-334
476   72-77; Cevdet^, VIII, 281-288; MD, II, no. 184 (11/23 Sept. 1805). See
      also Goriainov, p. 6; Muravieff, pp. 197-205; the secret clauses are
      found in dossier 886 of the Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs archives,
      Istanbul, and are reprinted by Cevdet^, VIII, 44-45, 48-50; MID, II
      no. 184 (Jan. 1806) and Hurewitz, "Background of Russia’s Claims,”
      pp. 467-494.
           14. HHS, Turkei 11-106 (11 Feb. 1806); FO Turkey 78/49 (26 Jan.
      1806); MID, II, no. 204 (18/30 Dec. 1805); MID, III, no. 4 (3/15 Jan. 1806);
      no. 9 (18/31 Jan. 1806); no. 19 (23 Jan./4 Feb. 1806); no. 13 (2/14 Feb.
      1806).
           15. Driault, Napoleon et VEurope^^ pp. 395-396; Hurmuzaki, Suppl.
      1, vol. II, pp. 324-325; FO 78/49 (15 Feb. 1806); Cevdet*, VIII, 75-76;
      Cevdet^, VIII, 44-49, 50; Asim, I, 141-149; Puryear, pp. 85-86; MID,
      III, no. 14 (3/15 Feb. 1806); no. 19 (18 Feb./2 March 1806); no. 20 (18
      Feb. /2 March 1806); no. 21 (18 Feb./2 March 1806).
          16. CevdeP, VIII, 105-106; Cevdet^, VIII, 60-61; Asim, I, 97-101;
      MID, III, no. 22 (22 Feb./4 March 1806); no. 25 (2/14 March 1806); no.
      26 (2/14 March 1806); no. 32 (19/31 March 1806); no. 36 (31 March/12
      April 1806).
         17. Anderson Naval Wars, pp. 430-431; Mouravieff, pp. 114, 118.
         18. Pisani, Dalmatie, pp. 145-147.
        19. Mouravieff, pp. 118-119; Pisani, Dalmatie, p. 160; Anderson,
      Naval Wars, p. 431; MID, III, no. 69 (23 May/4 June 1806).
        20. Pisani, Dalmatie, pp. 147-149.
         21. Pisani, Dalmatie, pp. 160-165; Mouravieff, p. 122; Anderson,
      Naval Wars, pp. 431-432; Coquelle, Montenegro, p. 263; MID, III, no. 37
      (1/13 April 1806).
         22. Pisani, Dalmatie, pp. 165-173; MID, III, no. 69 (23 May/4 June
      1806).
         23. Pisani, Dalmatie, pp. 173-184; Anderson, Naval Wars, pp. 433-
      434; MID, III, no. 79 (16/28 June 1806); no. 99 (18/30 July 1806); no.
      100 (22 July/3 Aug. 1806).
          24. Puryear, pp. 93-97; Paul F. Shupp, The European Powers and
      the Near Eastern Question, 1806-1807 (New York, 1931), pp. 95-102;
      Mouravieff, pp. 144-151; MID, III, no. 100 (22 July/3 Aug., 1806); no.
      101 (31 July/12 Aug. 1806); no. 110 (18/30 Aug. 1806).
         25. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 77-78; Jankovic, pp.
      123-124.
         26. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, p. 78; Jankovic, pp. 125-
      141, 146; Ranke, pp. 102-104.
          27. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 88-89; AE Turquie
      211, fol. 184-186; Cevdet^, VIII, 60; Shupp, pp. 20-25; Puryear, pp.
      30-31, 79; Mouravieff, pp. 168-195; Driault, Mohamed Aly, pp. 392-
      394; MID, III, no. 14 (3/15 Feb. 1806); no. 41 (18/30 April 1806); no. 73
      (2/14 June 1806); no. 63 (13/25 May 1806).




                               Notes to pages 335-341
   28. Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, p. 233; Mouravieff, pp. 205-206;         477
Shupp, p. 55.
   29. Cevdet', VIII, 107-108; Cevdet^ VIII, 60-61; Asim, I, 127-134;
Shupp, pp. 132, 144-145; FO 78/50 (9 April 1806).
    30. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 88-89; AE Turquie
211, Ms. 184-186; AE Autriche, 376, M. 168 (12 March 1806); Cevdet^,
VIII, 60. MID, Ilf, no. 24 (1/13 March 1806); no. 26 (2/14 March 1806);
no. 32 (19/31 March 1806); no. 45 (30 April/12 May 1806).
    31. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 82-83; Adolf Beer, Die
orientalische Politik Oesterreichs seit 1774 (Leipzig, 1883), pp. 190-
193.
    32. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 77-80; Beer, p. 194.
    33. AE Turquie 211 (14 May 1806), 215 (15 August 1806); Yaks¬
chitch, Resurrectioh de la Serbie, pp. 92-93; Asim, I, 155-157, 97-98;
MID, III, no. 60 (12/24 May 1806); no. 63 (13/25 May 1806).
    34. Jankovic, pp. 148-150; Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie,
pp. 94-95; 152-155; Hurmuzaki, XVI, p. 776.
    35. Shupp, pp. 177-178; Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp.
95-96; B. Kallay, Die Geschichte des serbische Aufstandes, pp. 13-14.
    36. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 96-97; Shupp, pp.
178-179.
    37. Jankovic, pp. 168-170.
    38. Jankovic, pp. 171-176; Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie,
pp. 98-100; Cevdet^, VIII, 60.
    39. Napoleon Bonaparte, Correspondance, XII, 10339; Hurmuzaki,
XVI, 695-698, 702-704, 708; Shupp, pp. 69, 171-177.
    40. Hurmuzaki, XVI, 697-698, 702-703.
    41. A. Boppe, "La mission de I’adjudant commandant Meriage a
Widdin,” Annals de I’Ecole des Sciences Politiques, I, (1886).
    42. A. Dumaine, "Un consulat de France en Bosnie sous le premier
empire: Pierre David,” RHD, XXXVIII (1924), 129-169, 301-328;
V. J. Puryear, Napoleon and the Dardanelles (Berkeley and Los Angeles,
1951), p. 84.
   43. Pouqueville, Regeneration, I, 164-174; Pouqueville, Voyage
dans la Grece (6 vols., Paris, 1826) is a full account of his mission.
See also Remerand, pp. 103-118; Plomer, pp. 125-136; Boppe, LAlbanie
et Napoleon, pp. 37-51; Napoleon Bonaparte, Correspondance, XII,
10378.
   44. Morier’s mission is examined in J. W. Baggally, Ali Pasha and
Great Britain (Oxford, 1938); see also Shupp, pp. 280-281,289.
   45. Sebastiani’s mission is studied in M. P. Coquelle, "Sebastiani,
ambassadeur a Constantinople, 1806-1808,” RHD, XVIII (1904), 574-
611. See also de Testa, II, 276-277; AE Turquie 212 (23 June and 24
Aug. 1806); Shupp, 75-76.
  46. Miller, Mustafa Pasha, pp. 123-125.




                        Notes to pages 341-346
478      47. Cevdet^, VIII, 52-54; Asim, I, 104-107.
         48. Cevdet", VIII, 50-52, 91-93; BVA, HH 3712; Asim, I, 102-106.
          49. FO 78/50 (20 June 1806); Asim, I, 104-105; FO 78/50 (20 June
      1806); Cevdet*, VIII, 93-94; Cevdet^ VIII, 51, 52.
          50. Uzun^arsili, Alemdar, pp. 26-28; Asim, I, 106-107; FO 78/50
      (10 July, 9 Aug. 1806), 78/51 (9, 14, and 25 August 1806); Shupp, pp.
      139-140; AF*'' 1688, dos. 3, no. 81; Cevdet*, VIII, 94-95; Cevdet^, VIII,
      52-56.
          51. FO 78/51 (25 Aug. 1802); Kalost Arapyan, Ruscuk Ayani Mustafa
      Pa§a’nin Hayati ve Kahramanliklari (Ankara, 1943), p. 3; Uzungar^ili,
      Alemdar, pp. 44-50; Asim, I, 107-108^^ 125.'
          52. Asim, 1,194-5; 215-216; Uzungar§ili, Alemdar, pp. 50-55.
          53. MouraviefF, pp. 152-160; Pisani, Dalmatie, pp. 257-266; Ander¬
      son, Naval Wars, pp. 435-437; Shupp, pp. 117-119; MID, III, no. 93
      (16/28 July 1806); no. 100 (22 July/3 Aug. 1806); no. 110 (18/30 Aug.
      1806).
          54. Cevdet', VIII, 108-113; Cevdet^, VIII, 61-62; Puryear, pp. 100-
      101; Shupp, pp. 143-144; Asim, I, 161-165; MID, III, no. 105 (11/23
      Aug. 1806); no. Ill (18/30 Aug. 1806).
          55. Cevdet^, VIII, 62; Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. II, p. 345; AE Tur-
      quie 212 (5 Aug. 1806); Asim, I, 157-158, 214-215; FO 78/51 (25 Aug.
      1806); Shupp, pp. 145-146; Xenopol, p. 265; Puryear, p. 102; MID, III,
      no. Ill (18/30 Aug. 1806).
          56. Shupp, pp. 149-153; Puryear, pp. 102-105; FO 78/51 (28 Aug.
      1806); Cevdet^ VIII, 62-65; AE Turquie 212 (16 Sept. 1806); MID, III,
      no. Ill (18/30 Aug. 1806); no. 117 (26 Aug./7 Sept. 1806); no. 125 (3/15
      Sept. 1806); no. 126 (3/15 Sept. 1806).
         57. AE Turquie 212 (30 Oct. 1806); Yakschitch, Resurrection de la
      Serbie, pp. 108-110; CevdeP, VIII, 112-113; MID, III, no. 126 (2/15
      Sept. 1806); no. 127 (10/22 Sept. 1806); no. 129 (6/18 Oct. 1806); no.
      153 (2/14 Nov. 1806).
         58. Cevdet^ VIII, 113; Asim, I, 119-120; FO 78/51 (8 and 15 Sept.
      1806); Shupp, pp. 180-182; 78/52 (30 Oct. 1806); Mustafa Necib, Tarih-i
      Mustafd Necib. Vaqa-i Selimiye (Istanbul, 1863-1864), pp. 12-13.
         59. Cevdet^ VIII, 63-64; FO 78/51 (26 Sept. 1806); de Testa, II,
      279-291; Asim, I, 165-171; Puryear, pp. 105-106; Shupp, pp. 155-156;
      MID, III, no. 127 (10/22 Sept. 1806).
          60. Shupp, pp. 156-157; Puryear, p. 106; Goriainov, p. 12; Hurmu¬
      zaki, Suppl. 1, vol. II, pp. 352-353; MID, III, no. 139 (6/18 Oct. 1806).
          61. Puryear, pp. 104-105, 109-110; Shupp, pp. 153-154, 160-161;
      Cevdet^ VIII, 64; de Testa, II, 284; FO 78/51 (29 Sept. 1806); AF iv 1688,
      dos. 2, no. 28 (5 Oct. 1806).
         62. Puryear, pp. 109-110; Shupp, pp. 168-169; Cevdet^ VIII, 63;
      FO 78/51 (17 October 1806); MID, III, no. 139 (6/18 Oct. 1806).
        63. Anderson Naval Wars, p. 437; Puryear, p. 112; Shupp, pp.




                              Notes to pages 346-352
238-239; MID, III, no. 153 (2/14 Nov. 1806); no. 159 (15/27 Nov. 1806).       479
    64. Shupp, 234-236, 239-241; Puryear, pp. 113-118; AE Turquie
212 (8 and 24 Dec. 1806); de Testa, II, 284-285.
     65. Piers Mackesy, The War in the Mediterranean, 1803-1810
(London, 1957), pp. 162-163; Anderson, p. 437; Shupp, p. 242; MID,
III, no. 159 (15/27 Nov. 1806); no. 170 (1/13 Dec. 1806).
     66. Mouravieff, p. 207-208; Shupp, pp. 203-204; S. D. Bradisteanu,
Die Beziehungen Russlands und Frankreichs zur Tiirkei in den Jahren
1806 und 1807 (Berlin, 1912), pp. 100-101; D. A. and C. C. Sturdza
and C. Colescu-Varti, Acte si documente relative la istoria renascerie
Romaniei 9 vols. (Bucharest, 1885-1901), I, 518-533; E. Driault, La
politique orientate de Napoleon: Sebastiani et Gardane, 1806-1808
(Paris, 1904), p. 70; FO 78/52 (4 Dec. 1806); MID, III, no. 131 (22 Sept./4
Oct. 1806); no. 147^19/31 Oct. 1806); no. 158 (15/27 Oct. 1806).
     67. A detailed account of the Russian campaign is given in the
"Memoire du Comte de Langeron,” published in Hurmuzaki, Suppl.
1, vol. Ill, pp. 107-390. The Ottoman reports on the same campaign are
summarized in Cevdet^, VII, 79-90, 111-115; and Asim, 1,177-213,223,
261-301.
     68. Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. II, p. 365; vol. Ill, pp. 112-113; Cev-
det^, VIII, 79-81; Asim, I, 184-194; Shupp, pp. 244-246.
    69. Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. II, pp. 366-370; Cevdet^, VIII, 81-82;
Shupp, pp. 246-247; MID, III, no. 166 (21 Nov./3 Dec. 1806).
    70. Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. Ill, pp. 118-120; Cevdet^ VIII, 142-
143; Cevdet^, VIII, 82-83; Asim, I, 194-198.
    71. Hurmuzaki, XVI, 784-788, Suppl. 1, vol. II, pp. 371-372; Shupp,
pp. 247-250; Bradisteanu, pp. 113-115. Reinhard cooperated with the
Ottomans and French until he was imprisoned by the Russians on No¬
vember 30 (Hurmuzaki, XVI, 795-796).
    72. Bradisteanu, p. 115; Shupp, p. 247.
    73. Bradisteanu, p. 117; Hurmuzaki, XVI, 806-807; Suppl. 1, vol. Ill,
pp. 115-116.
    74. Cevdet^ VIII, 83-84; Asim, I, 177-184; FO 78/52 (22 and
28 Dec. 1806); AE 212 (24 Dec. 1806); AF*'' 1688, dos. 5, no. 6
(15 Jan. 1807), no. 9 (9 Feb. 1807); Shupp, pp. 254-264; Puryear, pp.
118-124.
    75. CevdetS VIII, 143; Cevdet^ VIII, 85-87, 91; Juchereau, II, 48;
Mouravieff, p. 209; Shupp, p. 264; Goriainov, p. 12; Asim, I, 213-215;
HIT, p. 96; FO 78/52 (23, 24 and 26 Dec. 1806); AE Turquie 212 (24
Dec. 1806); Zinkeisen, VII, 418-420; Bradisteanu, pp. 124-125.
    76. Asim, I, 215, 218, 223; Cevdet^ VIII, 87-88; Shupp, 478-482;
Boppe, "Meriage,” pp. 270-275; AE Turquie 213 (14 and 15 April 1807);
AF iv, 1688, dos. 5, no. 6 (15 Jan. 1807), no. 31 (13 April 1807), no. 32
(29 April 1807), no. 33 (30 April 1807), no. 36 (9 May 1807); Uzungar§ih,
Alemdar, pp. 57-58; BVA, Cevdet Askeri 1298.




                         Notes to pages 352-355
480        77. Boppe, "Meriage,” pp. 274-275; AE Turquie 213 (26 March 1807);
       Shupp, pp. 481-482. See also Andric, Bosnian Chronicle.
           78. AF‘^ 1688, dos. 5, no. 9 (9 Feb. 1807), no. 31 (31 April 1807); Pur-
       year, pp. 130-131, 120-121; Pisani, Dalmatie, pp. 266-267; Shupp, pp.
       472-477; Dumaine, "Pierre David,” pp. 156-169,301-313.
           79. Pisani, Dalmatie, pp. 267-272; Shupp, pp. 469-472.
           80. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 110-111; Jankovic,
       pp. 190-208; Shupp, p. 461.
           81. Jankovic, pp. 209-211; Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie,
       pp. 112-113.
           82. Yakschitch, Resurrection de IfL'Serbie, pp. 114-116; Jankovic,
       pp. 211-212; Shupp, p. 462.
           83. Kallay, pp. 15-22; Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp.
       117-122; Shupp, pp. 462-464; Jankovic, pp. 212-219; MID, III, no. 181
       (30 Dec./ll Jan. 1807); no. 182 (31 Dec. 1806/12 Jan. 1807); no. 192
       (11/23 Jan./1807); no. 195-(18/30 Jan. 1807);,no. 227 (9/21 April 1807).
           84. Shupp, pp. 365-368, 371-374; FO 78/55 (15, 26, and 27 Jan.
       1807); AE Turquie 212 (27 Jan. 1807); AF‘\ 1688, dos. 5, no. 9/ (9 Feb.
       1807); Cevdet^, VIII, 83-84, 91; Puryear, pp. 128-137; MID, III, no.
      227 (9/21 April 1807); no. 213 (26 Feb./lO March 1807); no. 223 (28
      March/9 April 1807).
           85. Asim, I, 216-217; Cevdet^, VIII, 91-92; FO 78/55 (8 Feb. 1807);
      Shupp, pp. 369-370; HHS, Tiirkei 11-128 (1 Feb. 1807); Ghorbal, Egyp¬
      tian Question, p. 245.
           86. Cevdet^, VIII, 93; Asim, I, 226-229; Saint-Denys, Revolutions,
      II, 74-75; Driault, Politique orientate, p. 103; AF*'', 1688, dos. 5, no. 13
      (20 Feb. 1807); Shupp, pp. 383-384; Puryear, pp. 140-141.
          87. Cevdet^, VIII, 93-99; Asim, I, 229-238; Saint-Denys, Revolu¬
      tions, II, 84-88; KF'\ 1688, dos. 5, no. 3 (9 Feb. 1807).
          88. Anderson, Naval Wars, p. 441; Mackesy, pp. 172-174; Cevdet^,
      VIII, 94-95; Shupp, pp. 384-386.
          89. Asim, I, 238-245; Anderson, Naval Wars, p. 441; Mackesy, pp.
      176-177; Cevdet^, VIII, 97; Shupp, pp. 385-387.
          90. MouraviefF, pp. 243-251; Anderson, Naval Wars, pp. 442-443;
      Shupp, pp. 388-389.
          91. MouraviefF, pp. 251-257; Anderson, Naval Wars, pp. 446-454;
      Cevdet^, VIII, 98; Shupp, p. 389-391; Mackesy, pp. 177-181.
          92. Ghorbal, Egyptian Question, p. 229; Puryear, p. 147; Shupp, pp.
      392-396; Douin and Fawtier-Jones, pp. xxiv, 1-2; Mackesy, pp. 182-186.
          93. Anderson, Naval Wars, p. 444; Mackesy, p. 187; Cevdet^, VIII,
      105; Shupp, pp. 397-399; Douin and Fawtier-Jones, pp. 20-34, 183-194.
          94. Mackesy, pp. 192-194; Cevdet^ VIII, 105-106; Shupp, pp. 402-
      412; Douin and Fawtier-Jones, pp. 50-54,68-73.
          95. Douin and Fawtier-Jones, pp. 91-122; Cevdet^, VIII, 106.




                               Notes to pages 356-360
    96. Puryear, pp. 123, 154-155; Shupp, p. 431; Cevdet^, VIII, 84-86;      481
Vahid Efendi’s account of his mission has been published as Vahid
Efendi Sefaretnamesi (Istanbul, 1286 and 1304; Paris, 1843); AE Tur-
quie 213 (10 March 1807).
    97. Asim, I, 260-261, 300-301; Cevdet^, VIII, 111-112; AE Turquie
213 (22 March 1807); Mustafa Necib, pp. 21-22,26.
    98. Asim, I, 299; Cevdet^, VIII, 112.                         '
    99. Asim, I, 300-301, 311; Cevdet^, VIII, 113; AE Turquie 213 (14
and 28 April and 9 May 1807); Documents Turcs, p. 131.
   100. Cevdet^ VIII, 89, 113; AE 213 (22 March 1807); Bradisteanu,
p. 199; Shupp, p. 490.
   101. Boppe, "Meriage,” p. 277; AE Turquie 214 (1 June 1807); Hur-
muzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. Ill, pp. 117-119.
   102. AE Turquie^213 (28 April 1807).
   103. Boppe, "Meriage,” pp. 270-272; Shupp, pp. 478-482.
   104. Shupp, pp. 467-470; Boppe, L’Albanie et Napoleon, pp. 66, 70-
74; Auguste Boppe, "Le colonel Nicole Papas Oghlou et le bataillon des
Chasseurs d’Orient, 1798-1815,” Carnet de la Sabretache (1900); Pou-
queville. Voyage dans la Grece,lll, 178; Remerand, pp. 113-117; Plomer,
pp. 130-133; Pisani, Dalmatie, p. 266; Botzaris, p. 62.
   105. Boppe, "Meriage,” pp. 274-275; Shupp, pp. 481-482; Cevdet^
VIII, 115; Pierre David, "Extraits du journal de Pierre David,” RHD,
XXXVIII, 156-165.
   106. Gopcevic, pp. 337-338; Shupp, pp. 475-476; Pisani, Dalmatie,
pp. 267, 280-281.
   107. AF*'' 1688, dos. 5, no. 22 (22 May 1807); includes F. F. Schmidio,
"Principatiuim Moldaviae et Walachiae” showing dispositions of Otto¬
man forces.
   108. Asim, I, 300-301, II, 93; Mustafa Necib, pp. 27-28; Cevdet^,
VIII, 113-114,155; Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. Ill, pp. 139-140.
   109. Asim, I, 302-303; Cevdet^, VIII, 89.
   110. Cevdet^, VIII, 113; Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. Ill, pp. 141-142;
Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, p. 121.
  111. Yakschitch, Resurrection de la Serbie, pp. 121-123; Hurmuzaki,
Suppl. 1, vol. Ill, pp. 142-143; Jankovic, pp. 226-227.
   112. Cevdet^, VIII, 113-114; Jankovic, pp. 228-233.
  113. Cevdet^, VIII, 114; Shupp, 492; Bradisteanu, pp. 199, 202; Hur¬
muzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. Ill, pp. 139-140; Asim, I, 303.


                 XX. The Politics of Ottoman Reform


    1. Nuri, 49b-50a, 143a; Edib, fob 152b; Vasif, III, 120b, 123a; V,
161b, 181a; Tahsin 6z, "Sir Katibi,” pp. 189-195; Cevdet^, V, 75, 84,




                         Notes to pages 360-367
482   211-213, 225; VI, 76-79; Asim, ll, 1-20; HHS, Tiirkei II, no. 26 (10 Aug.
      1792) , no. 32 (25 Sept. 1792), no. 35 (25 Oct. 1792); 103, no. 18 (28 June
      1793) ; 120, no. 16 (18 March 1799); FO 78/13, no. 9 (21 April 1792), no.
      12 (23 May 1792), no. 20 (22 July 1792); AE Turquie 209, fols. 272-
      275 (20 Germinal an XIII); Rauf Yekta, "Selim-i sails musiki§inas,”
      Yeni Mecmua, no. 16 (1917), pp. 309-340; B. Lewis, Emergence of Mod¬
      ern Turkey, pp. 64-72; Zinkeisen, VII, 455-457.
           2. HHS, Tiirkei 11-99, no. 20 (25 June 1792); 100, no. 16 (10 June
      1793); FO 78/43, no. 50 (10 Sept. 1804); AE 208, fol. 238 (23 Fructidor
      an XII); AE 210, fol. 451-452 (15 Dec. 1805).
           3. Cevdet^ V, 59, 222-223; Vqslf, fll, lOla-b; Edib, fols. 132a,
      146b-148a; Tahsin Oz, "Sir Katibi,” pp. 189; BVA, Cevdet Dahiliye
      3891; HHS, Turkei 11-97, no. 8 (25 Oct. 1791), no. 12 (24 Dec. 1791),
      no. 14 (10 May 1792); 99, no. 15 (25 May 1799), no. 32 (25 Sept. 1792);
      FO 78/13, no. 11 (10 May 1792); AE 183, no. 7 (10 May 1792).
           4. BVA, Cevdet Dahiliye 15110; HHS, Turkei 11-98, no. 8 (10 March
      1792), no. 11 (10 April 1792), no. 13 (25 April 1792); 99, no. 14 (10 May
      1792) ; FO 78/13, no. 8 (10 April 1792), no. 11 (10 May 1792).
           5. Edib, fol. 148a; Cevdet^ V, 223-224; AE Turquie 187 (21 Floreal
      an II); FO 78/13, no. 15 (9 June 1792), no. 19 (10 July 1792), no. 24 (10
      Sept. 1792), no. 26 (10 Oct. 1792), no. 31 (24 Dec. 1792); HHS, Turkei II-
      99, no. 18 (11 June 1792), no. 22 (10 July 1792), no. 26 (10 Aug. 1792).
           6. Cevdet*, VI, 129-130; Cevdet^, V, 214; Tahsin Oz, "Sir Katibi,”
      pp. 185-186, 193; Vasif, III, 190b, 116a; Omer Efendi, fols. 25a-25b;
      BVA, Cevdet Zabtiye 556.
           7. Cevdet', VI, 130-134; Cevdet^ VI, 80; Vasif, III, 107b-108a,
      llOa-b, 112a-b, 211a, 134a; Edib, fols. 152b, 157a; Tahsin Oz, "Sir
      Katibi,” p. 191; BVA, Cevdet Dahiliye 14099; FO 78/14, no. 16 (25 June
      1793) ; 78/15, no. 10 (10 May 1794); HHS, Turkei 11-103, no. 10 (12 April
      1793), no. 14 (10 May 1793); no. 22 (10 Aug. 1793), no. 24 (24 Aug. 1793);
      106, no. 4 (25 Jan. 1794), no. 15 (10 May 1794), no. 16 (16 May 1794);
      AE Turquie 185 (1 Sept. 1793); AE 186 (20 Oct. 1793); AE 187, fol. 132-
      133 (25 Feb. 1794), fols. 344-345 (10 April 1794).
           8. Nuri, fols. 38b-39a; HHS, Turkei 11-107, no. 26 (9 Aug. 1794),
      no. 28 (25 August 1794), no. 16 (25 Aug. 1794).
           9. Cevdet^, VI, 206; Nuri, fols. 4a, 38b-39a, 57b; Tahsin Oz, "Sir
      Katibi,” TV 197; Cevdet', VI, 136-139; Vasif, IV, 41b; HHS, Turkei II-
      108, no. 32 (25 Oct. 1794), no. 33 (10 Nov. 1794), no. 37 (10 Dec. 1794),
      no. 39 (24 Dec. 1794); AE Turquie 189, fol. 144-147 (4 Brumaire an III).
          10. Cevdet^ VI, 61-62, 189; Nuri, fols. 70a-62a, 76b-77a; Vasif,
      IV, 138a; HHS, Turkei 11-109, no. 1 (10 Jan. 1795), no. 3 (24 Jan. 1795),
      no. 7 (25 Feb. 1795), no. 9 (10 March 1795), no. 11 (24 March 1795), no.
      15 (25 April 1795), no. 17 (9 May 1795), no. 22 (25 June 1795); 110, no.
      24 (10 July 1795), no. 26 (10 Aug. 1795), no. 27 (25 Aug. 1795); FO 78/16,




                              Notes to pages 368-371
no. 16 (9 May 1795), no. 23 (16 June 1795); AF"‘ 75/301 (1 Fructidor an       483
IV).
    11. Cevdet^, VI, 180-181; Vasif, IV, 137b-138a; 152b, 155a; HHS,
Tiirkei II-lll, no. 1 (9 Jan. 1796), no. 3 (25 Jan. 1796), no. 6 (10 Feb.
1796) , no. 25 (25 Aug. 1796), no. 26 (10 Sept. 1796); 114, no. 3 (25 Jan.
1797) , no. 5 (10 Feb. 1797), no. 15 (10 May 1797); FO 78/17, no. 18 (10
Sept. 1796); 78/37, no. 16 (10 July 1802).
     12. Cevdet^, VI, 189-191, 216-218, 222-223; VII, 38-39; Vasif,
IV, 181b, 252a-253b; Nuri, fol. 146b; Tahsin Oz, "Sir Katibi,” p. 199;
HHS, Tiirkei 11-115, no. 27 (25 Aug. 1797), no. 30 (10 Oct. 1797); 117,
no. 3 (25- Jan. 1798), no. 5 (10 Feb. 1798), no. 7 (7 March 1798); AE Tur-
quie 198, fol. 182 (12 June 1798), fols. 212-213 (26 Prairial an VI); FO
78/18, no. 19 (25 Aug. 1797).
     13. CevdeP, VlP, 95-98; Cevdet^ VII, 5-6; Vasif, IV, 29b, 217b,
223a-b; HHS, Tiirkei 11-118, no. 32 (10 Sept. 1798); 119, no. 47 (17 Nov.
1798) ; 120, no. 1 (3 Jan. 1799).
     14. Cevdet^, VII, 78; Vasif, IV, 79b, 95b-96a, 123a, 187b-188a, 199b;
V, 9a, 47b-48a; HHS, Tiirkei 11-120, no. 16 (18 March 1799), no. 33
(18 May 1799), no. 53 (25 Sept. 1799); 122, no. 9 (10 March 1800); 129,
no. 18 (10 Aug. 1802); AE Turquie 205, no. 49 (25 Messidor an X/1802),
no. 52 (21 Thermidor an X/1802); 206, fols. 4-10 (1 Germinal an X/1801);
AF"' 1688, dos. 2, no. 15 (24 Nivose an XII/1804).
     15. Cevdet^, VII, 223; VIII, 59; Vasif, IV, 118a; V, 75b, 77a, 79b,
 101a-103b, 164b; BVA, Cevdet Saray 268; AE Turquie 207, no. 11 (3
Frimaire an XII), no. 12 (4 Frimaire an XII), no. 17 (20 Nivose an XII);
AF'" 1688, dos. 3, no. 89 (8 Sheval 1218); FO 78/40, no. 3 (11 June 1803);
78/41, no. 5 (10 Dec. 1803).
     16. CevdeP, VIII, 44-45, 58; Cevdet^ VII, 241-251; Uzungargili,
Alemdar, p. 63-64; Tahsin Oz, "Selim III, Mustafa IV, ve Mahmut II.
zamanlarina ait birkag vesika,” TV, I, (1942), 20-29, and in particular
p. 25; FO 78/48, no. 17 (10 April 1805), no. 19 (25 April 1805).
     17. Uzungargili, Alemdar, p. 64; AE 210, fol. 248 (23 June 1805);
FO 78/44, no. 25 (25 June 1805); 78/45, no. 7 (18 July 1805).
     18. Cevdet*, VIII, 45, 57; HHS, Tiirkei 11-137, no. 18 (10 Aug. 1805);
AE Turquie 210, fol. 194 (14 Thermidor an XIII).
     19. AE 210, fols. 403-404 (16 October 1805), fols. 451-452 (15 Dec.
 1805); AE 212, fols. 167-168 (30 Aug. 1806); AF*'' 1688, dos. 2, no. 15
(28 Fructidor an XII).
    20. FO 78/50, no. 40 (10 July 1806); 78/58 (3 June 1807); AE Turquie
209, fols. 264-266, no. 32 (19 Germinal an XIII), fols. 272-275, (20 Ger¬
minal an XIII); AE 210, fols. 207-208 (16 Thermidor an XIII); AF*''
1688, dos. 3, no. 31 (translation of a Turkish letter from Istanbul to
Abdurrahim Efendi at the Ottoman embassy in Paris, dated 21 Receb
1221); Uzungargili, Alemdar, pp. 64-65.




                         Notes to pages 372-374
484       21. CevdetS VIII, 103-104; (;evdet^ VIII, 58-59; Asim, I, 119-123,
      135; AE Turquie 210, fols. 3-13 (2 Messidor an XIII); AE 212, fols. 203-
      205 (21 Sept. 1806); FO 78/51, no. 62 (16 Sept. 1806); FO 78/52, no. 75
      (30 Oct. 1806).
          22. AF‘'' 1688, dos. 5, no. 31 (13 April 1807); AE Turquie, Suppl. 24,
      fols. 127-128; Cevdet*, VIII, 271-272; Mustafa Necib, fols. 28-29.
          23. Cevdet*, VIII, 145-146, 202-203; Asim, I, 212-213, 245-246;
      Mustafa Necib, fol. 26; Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 107-108; Driault,
      Politique orientate, pp. 186-190; FO 78/58 (29 April 1807); Zinkeisen,
      VII, 455-457.
          24. Saint-Denys, Revolutions, 11,^108-109; D, IV, 86; AE Mem. et
      Doc. Turquie 30, fols. 360-363.
          25. Uzunear^ili, Alemdar, p. 65.
          26. Cevdet', VIII, 202-205; Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 109-111.


                                  XXL The Revolt'

           1. CevdetS VIII, 206-207; Asim, II, 20-22; Risale-i Sultan Selim,
      Siileymaniye Library, Istanbul, Zuhdi Bey collection MS 453, fols. lb,
      29a; Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 111-113; Driault, Politique orientate,
      pp. 191-192; AE 214 (27 May 1807); Ismail Hakki Uzungar§ili, "Kabakgi
      Mustafa Isyanma dair yazilmi§ bir tarihge,” Belleten, VI (1941), 253-
      261.
           2. CevdetS VIII, 208-209; Asim, II, 23; AE 214, fol. 75 (28 May
      1802), fol. 94-102 (1 June 1807); Driault, Politique orientate, pp. 192-
      193.
           3. Cevdet*, VIII, 209-213; Asim, II, 230-32; Mustafa Necib, p. 32;
      Risale-i Sultan Selim, fols. lb-5a; Driault, Politique orientate, pp. 193-
      194.
           4. Cevdet*, VIII, 213-220; Risale-i Sultan Selim, fol. 28b-29a;
      Mustafa Necib, pp. 32-52; Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 114-128; Dri¬
      ault, Politique orientate, pp. 194-195.
           5. Cevdet*, VIII, 220-231; Asim, II, 33-53; Mustafa Necib, pp.
      52-55; Risale-i Sultan Selim, fols. 10b-12b; Saint-Denys, Revolutions,
      II, 129-142; D, IV, 87.


                                   XXII. Epilogue

          1. Asim, II, 56-60, 91-92; copy in HHS, Tiirkei VII-1, no. 19 (25
      June 1807), dated 12 Rebi II 1222. See also Talat Miimtaz Yaman,
      "Nizam-i Cedidin Lagvina dair bir vesika,” TV (1942-43), II, 433.
          2. CevdetS VIII, 251; Mustafa Necib, pp. 59-63; Risale-i Sultan
      Selim, fols. 13a-15a; Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 146-147; AE 214,




                              Notes to pages 375-385
fol. 161-164 (15 June 1807); HHS, Tiirkei VII-1, no. 24 (25 Aug. 1807);       485
amnesty copy dated 3 Rebi I 1222.
      3. Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 147.
      4. CevdetS VIII, 242-243; Asim, II, 57-63; 68-71; Mustafa Necib,
pp. 59-60; FO 78/58 (3 and 10 June 1807); AE 214, fols. 126-129 (9 June
1807); HHS, Tiirkei VII-1, no. 18 (10 June 1807).
      5. Cevdet*, VIII, 244-245; Asim, II, 96; BVA, Sadaret Mektupcusu
defteri, XVIII, 129; D, IV, 88-89; Uzungar^ili, Alemdar, pp. 66-68; Hur-
muzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. II, p. 429.
      6. Uzungar^ili, Alemdar, pp. 69-70; Asim, II, 99; D, IV, 89; Cevdet*,
VIII, 245-246; Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. II, pp. 425-426, 429.
      7. Cevdet*, VIII, 248.
      8. Cevdet*, VIII, 247-249, 277-282; Asim, I, 304-305; II, 95-100,
102-103; Uzungar§ili, Alemdar, pp. 73-74, 77-81; Hurmuzaki, Suppl.
1, vol. II, pp. 442-445.
      9. Cevdet*, VIII, 258-259; Anderson, pp. 447-454.
     10. Puryear, pp. 171-175; Shupp, pp. 430-432, 537-538; Driault,
Politique orientate, pp. 198-200.
     11. Puryear, pp. 179-182, 184-191; Shupp, pp. 539-544; Driault,
Politique orientate, pp. 200-207; Driault, Napoleon et l’Europe,pp. 155-
167,171-188.
     12. Albert Vandal, Napoleon et Alexandre P^, 3 vols. (Paris, 1891), I,
499-507; Driault, Politique orientate, pp. 207-214; Shupp, 545-546;
Driault, Napoleon et I’Europe, pp. 188-199; Puryear, pp. 191-195.
     13. Driault, Politique orientate, pp. 208-209, 216-218; Shupp, 546-
547; Puryear, pp. 195-197; Zinkeisen, VII, 473-474.
     14. Cevdet*, VIII, 313-317; Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 151-154;
Driault, Politique orientate, pp. 219-222; Puryear, pp. 181-184, 201-204;
Shupp, pp. 442-448, 515-518, 547-553; AE Turquie 214, fols. 323-
325 (25 July 1807); Zinkeisen, VII, 481-482.
     15. Puryear, p. 207; AE 214, fol. 275 (7 July 1807).
     16. Puryear, pp. 208-209; Shupp, pp. 552-553; Driault, Politique
orientate, pp. 224-227.
     17. AE Turquie 214, fol. 356-366 (9 August 1807); Shupp, pp. 553-
555; Driault, Politique orientate, pp. 227-230.
     18. Shupp, pp. 555-556; Driault, Politique orientate, p. 230.
     19. AE 214, fols. 379-386 (23 August 1807).
    20. Puryear, pp. 213-214; Shupp, pp. 556-557; Driault, Politique
orientate, pp. 230-231; Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. II, pp. 451-452.
    21. Asim, II, 103-109; Driault, Politique orientate, pp. 231-232;
Shupp, p. 557; Puryear, pp. 222-223, 226-227; Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1,
vol. II, 455-459, 563-573.
    22. Shupp, pp. 557-558; Puryear, pp. 222-223,226-227; Hurmuzaki,
Suppl. 1, vol. II, pp. 485-486.




                         Notes to pages 385-392
486       23. Driault, Politique orientate, pp. 233-254; Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1,
      vol. II, pp. 475-482.
          24. §anizade, I, 249; Asim, II, 140,144-152.
          25. Puryear, pp. 228-229.
          26. Driault, Politique orientate, pp. 256-258, 260; Hurmuzaki, Suppl.
      1, vol. II, pp. 481-482, 495-496, 501-502, 508-510.
          27. Driault, Politique orientate, pp. 258-260; Jankovic, pp. 231-232,
      234-238, 243-268, 270-272.
          28. Asim, I, 299-300, II, 169-171; Puryear, p. 273.
          29. Asim, I, 260-261, II, 171-174; Jankovic, pp. 269-270.
          30. Asim, I, 300-301, 303, II, 91^93; Hurmuzaki, Suppl. 1, vol. II,
      pp. 505-506, 515-516.
          31. Driault, Politique orientate, pp. 216, 267-268; Remerand, pp.
      119-121; Rodocanachi, pp. 190-196.
          32. Driault, Politique orientate, p. 269; Remerand, pp. 121-122.
          33. Baggaly, pp. 29-38; Driault, Politique orientate, pp. 269-280;
      Remerand, pp. 122-144; Rodocanachi, pp. 197-211; W. M. Leake, Travels
      in Northern Greece, 4 vols. (London, 1835).



                       XXIII. The Deposition of Mustafa TV

           1. CevdetS VIII, 249-250; Uzungar^ili, A/emrfar, pp. 82-84.
           2. SO, II, 414-415.
           3. SO, III, 615-616; Babinger, p. 331; Uzungar§ili, "Galib Efendi,”
      pp. 357-410.
           4. SO, II, 367.
           5. SO, II, 48.
           6. SO, II, 35.
           7. Uzungargib, Alemdar, pp. 84-85.
           8. Uzuncar^ib, Alemdar, p. 85; Asim, II, 73-74.
           9. Cevdet*, VIII, 282-283, 285-286; Asim, II, 74-81, 113-119;
      Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 146-148; Uzunfar§ili, Alemdar, pp. 91-
      92; FO 78158 (25 June, 11 July, and 10 August 1807).
          10. Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 167-168; Uzungargili, Alemdar,
      pp. 85-86.
          11. CevdetS VIII, 217, 282-284; Cevdet^ VIII, 234-235; Asim, I,
      114, 183; Inal, "Mehmed Hakki Pa§a,” 351-367; Uzungarpili, Alemdar,
      pp. 86-87.
          12. Asim, II, 140-142, 162; Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 155-166;
      Uzuncar§ili, Alemdar, pp. 88-89, 91.
          13. Asim, II, 166-167; Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 147-150; Uzun-
      Qar§ib, Alemdar, pp. 89-90, 92-94.
          14. Asim, II, 114, 142-143, 163-164; Uzungar§ili, Alemdar, pp.
      94-95.




                              Notes to pages 392-400
    15. Cevdet*, VIII, 284; Uzunpar^ili, Alemdar, pp. 95-96.                487
    16. Asim, I, 186; Uzungar§ili, Alemdar, pp. 97-98.
    17. Asim, II, 130-134, 192; Cevdet*, VIII, 284-285; Uzungargih,
Alemdar, pp. 98-111.
    18. Uzungargili, Alemdar, pp. 112-113; Cevdet*, VIII, 265.
    19. Uzunpargih, Alemdar, pp; 115-116; Cevdet*, VIII, 265.
   20. Cevdet^, VIII, 246-248; Asim, II, 191, 194; BVA, Cevde£ Saray
470; BVA, Miihimme-i Mektum, V, 130; Uzungar§ili, Alemdar, pp. 113-
114, 116-117; Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 169-176.
   21. CevdetS VIII, 298-299; Cevdet^ VIII, 248; Asim, I, 193-197;
Uzungargili, Alemdar, pp. 114-rll8.
   22. Asim, I, 197; Cevdet^ VIII, 249-250; Cevdet', VIII, 299; Saint-
Denys, Revolutions, II, 178-199; Uzungargili, Alemdar, pp. 118-119.
   23. Asim, I, 198,'^ Cevdet*, VIII, 300; Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II,
179-180; Uzuncar§ili, Alemdar, pp. 119-120.
    24. Cevdet*, VIII, 303; Cevdet^, VIII, 250-251; Uzun5ar§ili, Alemdar,
pp. 120-121.
    25. Cevdet', VIII, 303; Cevdet^ VIII, 251; Asim, II, 201-202; Uzun-
gar§ili, Alemdar, pp. 121-122.
    26. Cevdet^, VII, 252-253; Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 182-183;
Uzungar§ili, Alemdar, pp. 122-123.
    27. Cevdet*, VIII, 305; Cevdet^, VIII, 253-255; Sanizade, I, 259-260;
Asim, II, 203; Saint-Denys, Revolutions, II, 183-189; Uzungar§ili, Alem¬
dar, pp. 124-137; FO 78/60 (29 June 1808).




                        Notes to pages 400-404
488                              bibliography

                             I. REFERENCE WORKS

      Babinger, Franz, Die Geschichtsschreiber der Osmanen und ihre Werke
           (Leipzig, 1927). (Abbreviated as Babinger.)
      The Encyclopaedia of Islam, ed. by M. Th. Houtsma, T. W. Arnold, R.
           Basset, and R. Hartmann, 4 vols. and suppl. (Leiden and London,
           1913-1938). (Abbreviated as EP.)
      The Encyclopaedia of Islam, New Edition, ed. H. A. R. Gibb, J. H. Kra¬
           mers, E. Le'vi-Provengal, J. Schacht,'B. Lewis, C. Pellat, and V.
           Menage (Leiden and London, 19^4 — ). (Abbreviated as EP.)
      Fliigel, Gustav, ed.. Die Arahischen, Persischen und T'urkischen Hand-
           schriften der Kaiserlich-Koniglichen Hofbibliothek zu Wien, 3 vols.
           (Vienna, 1865).
      Mardesic, Petar, and Zvonimir Dugacki, Geografski Atlas Jugoslavije
           (Zagreb, 1961).
      Mostras, C., Dictionnaire geographique de I’Empire Ottoman (St. Peters¬
           burg, 1873).
      Pakalm, Mehmed Zeki, Osmanli Tarih Deyimleri ve Terimleri Sozliigu,
           3 vols. (Istanbul, 1946-1955). Excellent dictionary of Ottoman ad¬
           ministrative terminology. (Abbreviated as Pakalm.)
      Siireyya, Mehmed, Sicill-i Osmani, 4 vols. (Istanbul, 1890-1893). Bio¬
           graphical dictionary of famous Ottoman soldiers, statesmen, and
           authors. (Abbreviated as SO.)
      Tahir, Bursali Mehmed, Osmanli Muellifleri, 3 vols. (Istanbul, 1915-
           1928). Biographical and bibliographical dictionary of Ottoman
           authors. Indexed separately by Ahmed Remzi as Miftah ul-Kutub
           (Istanbul, 1928). (Abbreviated as OM.)
      Turkiye Cumhuriyeti, Maarif Vekaleti, Islam Ansiklopedisi (Istanbul
           and Ankara, 1940 — ). (Abbreviated as lA.)
      -Istanbul Kutuphaneleri Tarih-Cografya Yazmalari Kataloglari,
           I. Tilrkge Tarih Yazmalari, 12 fascs. (Istanbul, 1943-1957). Cata¬
           logue of Turkish historical manuscripts found in Istanbul libraries.
           (Abbreviated as TCY.)
      Unat, Faik Re§it, Hicri tarihleri miladi tarihe gevirme kilavuzu, 3rd ed.
           (Ankara, 1959). Conversion tables for Muslim and Christian calen¬
           dars, including the Ottoman financial year as well as the regular
           Muslim calendar.


                      II. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

      Debidour, Antonin, ed., Recueil des actes du Directoire Executif 4 vols.
          (Paris, 1910-1917).




                                    Bibliography
Douin, G., and E. Fawtier-Jones, eds., L’Angleterre et UEgypte, La poli¬          489
     tique mameluke 1801-1803, 3 vols. (Cairo, 1929).
Ekrem, Re§at, ed., Osmanli Muahedeleri ve Kapitulasyonlar, 1300-
     1920, ve Lozan Muahedesi (Istanbul, 1934).
Filitti, J., Lettres et extraits concernant les relations des Principautes
     roumaines avec la France, 1720-1810 (Bucharest, 1915).
Hurewitz, J. C., ed.. Diplomacy in the Near and Middle East: A Documen¬
     tary Record, 1535-1914, 2 vols. (Princeton, N. J., 1956).
Hurmuzaki, Eudoxiu de, ed., Documente privitdre la istoria Romanilor,
     24 vols. (Bucharest, 1876-1962). (Abbreviated as Hurmuzaki.)
Vol. VII. Document adunate' ed. E. Hurmuzaki (Bucharest, 1876).
Vol. XVI. Corespodenta diplomatica si rapoarte consulare franceze, 1603-
     1824, ed. N. Hodos (Bucharest, 1912).
Vol. XVIII. Corespodenta diplomatica si rapoarte consulare franceze,
     1595-1851, ed. N. Hodos (Bucharest, 1916).
Vol. XIX. part 1. Corespodenta diplomatica si rapoarte consulare austri-
     ace, 1792-1797, ed. I. Nistor (Bucharest, 1922).
Vol. XIX, part 2. Corespodenta diplomatica si rapoarte consulare austri-
     ace 1798-1812, ed. I. Nistor (Cernauti, 1938).
Suppl. 1, vol. II. Documente culese din Arhivele Ministerului Afacerilor
     straine din Paris, 1781-1814, ed. A. Odobescu (Bucharest, 1885).
Suppl. 1, vol. III. Documente culese din Arhivele Ministerului Afacerilor
     straine din Paris, 1709-1812, ed. A. Odobescu (Bucharest, 1889).
Suppl. 1, vol. IV. Documente adunate, ed. D. A. Sturza, D. C. Sturdza, and
     O. Lugosianu (Bucharest, 1891).
Serie Noua, vol. I. Rapoarte consulare Ruse, 1770-1796, (Bucharest,
     1962).                                     ,
Institut za Natzionalna Istoriya, Turski Doeumenti za Makedonskaia
    Istoriy>a, 5 vols. (Skopje, 1951-1958). (Abbreviated as Turski Docu-
    menti.)
lorga, N., ed., Acte si fragmente cu privire la Istoria Romanilor, 3 vols.
    (Bucharest, 1895-1897).
Jankovic, Dragoslav, ed., Franp^uska Stampa o Pr^om Srpskom Us-
    tankujLa premiere insurrection serbe dans la presse franqaise (Bel¬
    grade, 1959).
Karal, Enver Ziya, ed., Selim IH’un Hatt-i Hiimayunlari (Ankara, 1942).
    Selim Ill’s statements and orders on diplomatic, military, and polit¬
    ical affairs. (Abbreviated as HH\)
- Selim IH’un Hatt-i Hiimayunlari—Nizam-i Cedit—1789-1807
    (Ankara, 1946). Selim Ill’s reform ideas and programs. (Abbrevi¬
    ated as HH\)
de Koch, C. G., ed., Histoire abregee des trades de Paix entre les puis¬
    sances de VEurope depuis la paix de Westphalie par feu M. de Koch.
    Ouvrage entierement refondu, augmente et continue jusqu’au congfes       'P




                              Bibliography
                                              i


490       de Vienne et aux traites de Paris de 1815 par F. Schoell, 15 vols.
         (Paris, 1818).
      Martens, G.-Fr. de, ed., Recueil des traites qui embrassent la periode
          de 1494 a 1896:
         I. -Recueil des principaux traites de 1761 a 1801, 7 vols. (Got¬
            tingen, 1791-1801).
        II. - Supplement au recueil des principaux traites de 1761 a
            1801, 4 vols. (Gottingen, 1802-1808).
       III. -and Ch. de Martens, Recueil des traites d’alliance, de paix,
            etc., de 1761 a 1808, 8 vols. (Gottingen, 1817-1835).
       IV. -Ch. de Martens, F. Sa^lfeld, and F. de Martens, Nouveau
            recueil de traites d’alliance, de paix, etc., de 1808 a 1839, 16 vols.
            (Gottingen, 1817-1842).
        V. F. Murhard, Nouveau supplement au recueil de traites, etc., de
            1761 a 1839, 3 vols. (Gottingen, 1839-1842).
       VI. -Ch. Murhard, J. Pinhas, Charles Samwer, and Jules Hopf,
            Nouveau recueil general de traites de 1840 a 1874, 20 vols. (Got¬
            tingen, 1843-1875).
      Ministerstvo Inostrannikh Del SSSR, Vneshnyaya Politika Rossii XIX
          i nachala XX veka. Dokumenti Rossiiskogo Ministerstva Inostran¬
          nikh Del. Documents on Russian foreign affairs during the 19th and
          20th centuries, published by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Mos¬
          cow. (Abbreviated as MID.)
       Seriya Pervaya, 1801-1815:
         Tom Pervii, Mart 1801 g.-Aprel 1804 g. (Moscow, 1960).
         Tom Vtoroi, Aprel 1804 g.-Dekabr 1805 g. (Moscow, 1961).
         Tom Tretii, Yanvar 1806 g.-Iul 1807 g. (Moscow, 1963).
         Tom Chetvertii, lul 1807 g.-Mart 1809 g. (Moscow, 1965).
         Tom Pyatii, Aprel 1809 g.-Yanvar 1811 g. (Moscow, 1967).
         Tom Shestoi, 1811-1812 gg. (Moscow, 1962).
      Mesut Pa§a, ed., Mecmua-i Muahedat, 5 vols. (Istanbul, 1292-1298/
          1876-1882). Official Ottoman collection of treaties in which it was
          involved.
      Nahoum, H., ed., Recueil des firmans imperiaux ottomans addresses aux
          Valis et aux Khedives d’Egypte, 1597-1904 (Cairo, 1934).
      Napoleon Bonaparte, Correspondance de Napoleon P’’: publiee par ordre
          de I’empereur Napoleon 111, 32 vols. (Paris, 1858-1870).
      Noradounghian, Gabriel, ed., Recueil d’actes internationaux de I’Empire
          Ottoman, 4 vols. (Paris, 1897-1903).
      Panaitescu, ed., Corespondenta lui Constantin Ipsilanti cul guvernul
          rusesc (Bucharest, 1933).
      Refik, Ahmet, ed., Turk Idaresinde Bulgaristan, 973-1255 (Istanbul,
          1933). Ottoman documents on Bulgaria ^etween 1565 and 1839.
      Sabanovic, Hazim, ed., Turski Izvori o SrpskofRevolutsipi 1804ISources
          Turques concernant la Revolution Serbe de 1804IKnigalBook 1,




                                    Bibliography
    Spisi Tsarske Kantselarii/e 1789-1804IDocuments de VAdministra¬         491
    tion Imperiale, 1789-1804 (Belgrade, 1956). Turkish documents con¬
    cerning Serbia between 1789 and 1804, with Serbian translations
    and commentaries.
Sturdza, D., ed., Acte si documente relative la istoria renascerei Roman-
    iei, 10 vols. (Bucharest, 1889-1909).
de Testa, Baron Ignaz, ed., Recueil des trades de la Porte Ottoman avec
    les puissances etrangeres depuis 1536, 11 vols. (Paris, 1864-1911).
Todorov, Nikolai, ed., Polozhenieto Na Bulgarskiye Narod Pod Tursko
   Robstvo (Sofia, 1953).
Ulugay, M. Qagatay, ed., 18 ve 19 yiizydlarda Saruhan’da E§kiyalik ve
   Halk Hareketleri (Istanbul, 1955).



                     III. ARCHIVAL MATERIALS


                         A. Archives in Turkey

1. Ba§ Vekalet Ar§ivi (also called Ba§bakanlik Ar§ivi), Istanbul. (Abbre¬
     viated as BVA.) Materials consulted in the following collections:
   A. Miihimme registers of the decrees of the Imperial Council, vols.
      185-227, from 1202/1787 to 1222/1807.
   B. Muhimme-i mektum registers of secret decrees, vols. 1-3, from
      1203/1788 to 1225/1810.
   C. Muhimme-i asakir registers of decrees on military affairs, vols.
      1-4, from 1196/1781 to 1222/1807.
  D. Muhimme-i Misir registers of decrees concerning Egypt and Ara¬
     bia, vols. 1-10, from 1119/1707 to 1225/1810.
  E. Muhtelif ve miitenevvi defterler. Collection of miscellaneous regis¬
     ters:
     No. 37. Kalem Nizamnamesi. Registers of decrees on scribal organi¬
       zation from 1211/1796 through 1268/1851.
     No. 42. Alay beylik ve ahkam-i saire der canib-i Hotin. Register of
       decrees concerning Khotzim and district from 1125/1713 to
       1279/1862.
     No. 64. Atik §urut defteri. Register of decrees concerning the Mili¬
       tary Engineering School (Milhendishane-i Berri-i HUmayun)
       after 1217/1802.
     No. 76. Muhendishane kanunu. Register of organizational codes
       for the Military Engineering School issued in 1222/1807 and
       thereafter.
  F. Hatt-i HUmayun tasnifi collection of documents concerning the
     Ottoman Empire from 1730 to 1832, with particular emphasis on
     the reigns of Selim III, Mustafa IV, and Mahmud 11. (Abbreviated
     as HH.)




                             Bibliography
492    G. Ali Emiri Tasnifi docuirients collection. 24,679 documents on
          Selim III, 1,932 on Mustafa IV, and 10,046 on Mahmud II.
       H. Ihn ul-Emin Tasnifi documents collection, arranged according to
           subject. The following groups were consulted:

                                                       Number of documents

            1. Adliye (Justice)                                   91°
            2. Askeri (Military)                                8,227
            3. Bahriye (Navy)                                   1,687
            4. Dahiliye (Interior)             '                3,066
            5. Saray (Palace)             ^        '            3,286
            6. Hariciye (Foreign Affairs)                       1,441
            7. Maliye (Finance)                                12,209
            8. Timor (Fief holdings)                            1,214

        I. Cevdet Tasnifi documents collection (Abbreviated as Cevdet). Ar¬
           ranged according to subject. The following groups were consulted:

             1. Adliye (Justice)                                6,371
             2. Askeri (Army)                                  54,984
             3. Bahriye (Navy)                                 12,743
             4. Dahiliye (Interior)                            17,468
             5. Belediye (Municipal)                            7,597
             6. Iktisat (Economics)                             2,261
             7. Hariciye (Foreign Affairs)                      9,327
             8. Saray (Palace)                                  9,019
             9. Timar (Feudal holdings)                         8,794
            10. Zaptiye (Police)                                4,550
            11. Eyalat-i mumtaze (Privileged provinces)         1,032
            12. Maori/'(Education)                              9,242

      For fiudher information on these archives, see Midhat Sertoglu, Muhteva
          Bakimindan Ba§vekalet Ar§ivi (Ankara, 1955) and S. J. Shaw,
          "Archival Sources for Ottoman History: The Archives of Turkey,”
          JAOS, 80 (1960), 2-6.
      2. Top Kapi Sarayi Ar§ivi. Archives of the palace of the Sultans, Istan¬
          bul. (Abbreviated as TKS.) Arranged in two major collections: (1)
          Defter (registers), and (2) Evrak (documents), abbreviated respec¬
          tively as D and E. Catalogued according to subject in Tahsin Oz,
          Ar§iv Kilavuzu, 2 vols. (Istanbul, 1938-1940) and in unpublished
          catalogues available at the archives.
      3. Tiirk Tarih Kurumu. Turkish Historical Society, Ankara. Register
          of laws and decrees issued during the reign of Selim III, entitled
           Qavanin-i Sultan Selim. MS Y-534.




                                   Bibliography
                         B. Archives in Europe                                493
1. Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv, Vienna. (Abbreviated as HHS.) See L.
    Bittner, Gesamtinuentar des Wiener Haus-, Hof- und Staats-archivs,
    5 vols. (Vienna, 1936-1940), I, 442-466, 471-508, 529-584.
2. Archives du Ministere des Affaires Etrang'eres, Paris. (Abbreviated as
    AE.) Materials concerning the Ottoman Empire are in Corr^spond-
    ance politique, Turquie (Abbreviated as AE Turquie) and Memoires
    et Documents, Turquie (Abbreviated as AE Mem. et Doc. Turquie).
    See: Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres, Etat numerique des fonds de
    la correspondance politique de I’origine a 1871 (Paris, 1936), and
    Inventaire sommaire des archives du Departement des Affaires Etran¬
    geres. Memoires et Documents, 3 vols. (Paris, 1883-1896), esp. vol. II,
    Fonds divers (Ppris, 1892); see also F. Masson, Le Departement des
    Affaires Etrangeres pendant la revolution, 1784-1804 (Paris, 1877).
3. Archives Nationales, Paris. (Abbreviated as AF.) Materials concerning
    the Ottoman Empire are in the collections of Consular correspond¬
    ence. See Leonce Celier, "Archives Nationales, affaires etrangeres.
    Repertoire numerique de la correspondance consulaire.” (Available
    in the reading room of the Archives Nationales.)
  Archives de la Guerre. Archives ofthe French Ministry of War, Chateau
    de Vincennes, Paris. Includes military reports and correspondence
    concerning French officers and technicians in the Ottoman Empire.
    Collection B® contains records of the Armee d’Orient in Egypt (1798-
    1801): see Marc-Andre Fabre, Inventaire des Archives conservees au
    service historique de I’etat-major de I’armee, Chateau de Vincennes,
    archives modernes, 2nd ed. (Paris, 1954), pp. 36-40. The materials
    on Istanbul, Anatolia and the Balkans are catalogued in the Mem¬
    oires historiques et reconnaissances, catalogued by Louis Tuetey,
    Archives de la guerre, 3 vols. (Paris, 1912).
  Public Record Office, London. The reports from British ambassadors
    and other representatives in Istanbul are found among the Foreign
    Office papers (abbreviated FO), in particular in the FO 78 group.
    This collection is indexed in the Lists and Indexes, no. LII, List of
    Foreign Office Records to 1878 Preserved in the Public Record Office
     (London, 1929).



   IV. OTTOMAN CHRONICLES (arranged in chronological order):

Mehmed Ra§id, Ra§id Tarihi, 5 vols. (Istanbul, 1867). Official chronicle
    for 1660 to 1721.
Ismail Asim, Kiigiik C;elebi zade, Asim Tarihi (Istanbul, 1867). Official
     chronicle for 1721 to 1728.




                               Bibliography
494   Mehmed Subhi, Mustafa Sami And Hiiseyin §akir, Tarih-i Subhi, Sami
          ve §akir (Istanbul, 1783). Official chronicle for 1730 to 1740.
      Suleyman Izzi, Tarih-i Izzi, 2 vols. (Istanbul, 1784). Official chronicle
         for 1744 to 1747.
      Mehmed Hakim, Hakim Tarihi. MS in Topkapi Saray, Istanbul-
         Bagdad kosk collection, MS 231 and 233; also Istanbul Archaeo¬
         logical Museum Library, MS 483 and 484. Official chronicle for
          1747 to 1766.
      Qe§mi zade Mustafa Re§id Efendi, Qe§mizade Tarihi, ed. Bekir Kutiik-
          oglu (Istanbul, 1959). Official chronicle for 1766 to 1768.
      Trabzuni Sadullah Enveri, Tarih-i Erj-veri. Official chronicle for 1182/
          1768 to 1206/1791. (Abbreviated as Enveri). Copies used are: Top¬
          kapi Saray Library, Istanbul, Hazine collection, MS 5994 (428 fols.,
          1182/1768-1188/1774); Hazine collection, MS 5995 (290 fols., 1188/
          1774-1202/1787); Millet Library, Istanbul, Ali Emiri collection,
          MS 67/1 (413 fols., 1201/1786-1206/1791). See OM, III, 23; SO, I,
          440; Babinger, pp. 321-322; Mlinir Alctepe, "Enveri. Anvari, al-
         Hacc Sa’dullah”, lA, IV, 281-283.
      Ahmed Bahaeddin Cizyedar zade, Gazavat-i Yusuf Pa§a. History of the
         operations of Grand Vezir Yusuf Pasha against Russia in 1787-
         1790. Millet Library, Istanbul, Ali Emiri MS 205 (18 fols.).
      Ahmed Cavid, Hadikat ul-Veka’i. History of the Ottoman Empire in
         1789 and 1790. Istanbul University Library, MS TY 6037, TY 5945,
         and TY 5943.
      Mustafa Rasih Efendi, Tarih-i Veka’i. History of the Ottoman-Russian
         war between 1787 and 1792. Siileymaniye Library, Istanbul, Esad
          Efendi MS 2281.
      Edib Mehmed Efendi, Edit Tarihi. Official Ottoman chronicle for 1202/
          1787 to 1206/1792. (Abbreviated as Edib). Istanbul University Li¬
          brary, TY 3220 (155 fols., copy date 1208/1793). See OM, III, 23;
          SO, I, 317; Babinger, pp. 334-335; Aziz Berker, "Te§rifatl Naim
          Efendi Tarihi”, TV, III, 69-80, 230-240 (where Edih’s work is
          wrongly identified as that of Naim Efendi).
      Ahmed Vasif Efendi, Tarih-i Vasif Official Ottoman chronicle for 1166/
          1753 to 1219/1805. (Abbreviated as Vasif). Copies used:
        Published edition, 2 vols. (Cairo, 1830). For 1166/1753-1188/1774
          only.
        MS vol. I (1188/1774-1198/1784). Topkapi Saray, Hazine collection,
          MS 1406 (100 fols.).
        MS vol. II (1197/1783-1202/1788). Istanbul Archeological Museum
         Library, MS 355 (309 fols., author’s copy).
        MS vol. Ill (1203/1788-1209/1794), Istanbul University Library, MS
         TY 5980 (232 fols.).
        MS vol. IV (1209/1794-1214/1799). Istanbul University Library, MS
         TY 5979 (278 fols.).




                                    Bibliography
 MS vol. V (1214/1799-1217/1802). Istanbul University Library, MS            495
  TY 6012 (210 fols.).
  MS vol. VI (1217/1802-1219/1805). Millet Library, Istanbul, Ali Emiri
    MS 609 (164 fols.).
  See SO, IV, 599; OM, III, 160; Babinger, p. 337; Bekir Kiitiikoglu,
  "Miiverrih Vasifin Kaynaklarmdan Hakim Tarihi,”, TD, V, 69-76,
  VI, 91-122, VII, 79-102.
Ayntabi Ahmed Asim, Tarih-i Asim, 2 vols. (Istanbul, 1867). Official
    chronicle for 1206/1791 to 1223/1808. (Abbreviated as Asim). See
    SO, III, 283; Babinger, p. 340.
Halil Nuri, Nuri Tarihi. Official Ottoman chronicle for 1209/1794 to
    1213/1798. (Abbreviated as Nuri.) Copy used is Istanbul University
    Library, TY 5996 (293 fols.). See SO, IV, 590; OM, III, 156; Babinger,
    p. 323.          /
Omer Efendi, Tarih-i Sultan Selim-i Salis ve Mahmud-u Sani. Unofficial
    chronicle for 1202/1787 to 1229/1813-1814. Siileymaniye Library,
    Istanbul, Esad Efendi MS 2152.
Tahsin Oz, ed., "Selim IITiin Sirkatibi tarafindan tutulan Ruzname”,
    TV, III (1944), 26-35, 116-126, 183-199. Publication of part (1791-
    1797) of a daily chronicle of Selim Ill’s personal life, kept by his
    private secretary.
Ahmed Cevdet Pa§a, Cevdet Tarihi. Official chronicle of Ottoman his¬
    tory from 1188/1774 through 1241/1825. Published in two editions,
    the first, 10 vols. ([abbreviated as Cevdet'] Istanbul, 1854-1875),
    arranged in the traditional chronological manner, and the sec¬
    ond, called Tertih-i Cedid, 12 vols. ([abbreviated as CevdeU]
    Istanbul, 1884-1885), rearranged with some changes, according
    to subjects within each year. See SO, II, 90; OM, II, 120; K. Siis-
    sheim, "Ahmed Djewdet Pasha”, E/', 1,197-198; H. Bowen, "Ahmad
    DJewdet Pasha,” EP, I, 284-286; Ali Olmezoglu, "Cevdet Pa§a,”
   lA, III, 114-123.
Hasan Izzet Efendi, Ziyaname. History of Yusuf Ziya Pasha’s expedition
   against the French in Egypt in 1799-1802. Millet Library, Istanbul,
   Ali Emiri MS 413; Istanbul University Library, MS TY 6115 (264
   fols.).
Anonymous, Sultan Selim-i salisin haVine dair risale. Contemporary
   description of Selim Ill’s deposition. Millet Library, Istanbul, Ali
 Emiri MS 33.
-Risale-i Sultan Selim. Contemporary description of Selim Ill’s
 deposition. Siileymaniye Library, Istanbul, Zuhdi Bey collection
   MS 453.
Mustafa Necib, Tarih-i Mustafa Necib. Vaka-i Selimiye (Istanbul, 1863-
   64). Contemporary description of the overthrow of Selim III.
Mehmed Ataullah S^nizade,             Tarihi, 4 vols. (Istanbul, 1875-
   1876). Official Ottoman chronicle for 1223/1808 to 1237/1821-22.




                              Bibliography
496                         V.' GENERAL HISTORIES

      Dani§mend, Ismail Hami, Izahli osmanli tarihi kronolojisi [Explanatory
         chronology of Ottoman history^ 4 vols. (Istanbul, 1947-1955; reprint,
          1963). (Abbreviated as D.)
      lorga, N., Geschichte des osmanischen Reiches, 5 vols. (Gotha, 1908-
         1913; reprint, 1962).
      Karal, Enver Ziya, Osmanli Tarihi, vol. V, Nizam-i Cedit ve Tanzimat
         Devirleri, 1789-1856 [Ottoman History in the Nizam-i Cedid and
          Tanzimat periods, 1789-1856] (Ankara, 1947). (Abbreviated as
         Karal, OT, V.)                   , , >
      Mustafa Nuri Pa§a, Netayic uUVuJhiat, 4 vols. (Istanbul, 1909-1918)
         Arranged in sections on diplomatic, political, military, administra¬
          tive, and economic developments in each time period.
      Saint-Denys, Juchereau de, Histoire de I’Empire Ottoman depuis 1792
          jusqu’en 1844, 4 vols. (Paris, 1844).
      Salaberry, Charles Marie, Marquis de, Histoire de I’Empire Ottoman,
           depuis sa fondation jusqu’a la paix d’Yassy, en 1792, 4 vols. (Paris,
          1813).
      [Sertoglu, Midhat], Resimli-Haritali Mufassal Osmanli Tarihi [De¬
          tailed Ottoman history with illustrations and maps], (Istanbul,
          1962), Vol. V. Written by the director of the Ottoman archives, this
          volume covers the years 1703-1839.
      UzunQar§ih, Ismail Hakki, Osmanli Tarihi, vol. IV, part 1, Karlofga
          anla§masindan XVIII. yilzyilin sonlarina kadar [Ottoman history
          from the Treaty of Karlowitz until the End of the eighteenth Cen¬
          tury] (Ankara, 1956); vol. IV, part 2, XVIII. Yiizyil [The Eighteenth
          Century] (Ankara, 1959). (Abbreviated as Uzun9ar§ili, OT, IV.)
      Zinkeisen, J. W., Geschichte des osmanischen Reiches in Europa, 8 vols.
          (Gotha, 1840-1863).



                    VI. SPECIAL STUDIES AND REPORTS

      Adlerhold, G., Neue und accurate Vorstellung des grossen Ottomanischen
          Oder Turkischen Reiches (Nuremberg, 1793).
      Adnan-Adivar, A., La science chez les Turcs ottomans (Paris, 1939);
          translated, with additions, as Osmanli Turklerinde Him (Istanbul,
          1943).
      Aksarayi, Hafiz Huseyin, Hadikat ul-cevami, 2 vols. (Istanbul, 1281/
          1864-65).
      Aktepe, M. Miinir, Patrona Isyani, 1730 (Istanbul, 1958).
      Anderson, M. S., "Great Britain and the Russo-Turkish war of 1768-
          1774,” EHR, LXIX (1954), 39-58.
      -The Eastern Question (London and New York, 1966).




                                   Bibliography
Anderson, R. C., Naval M^ars in the Levant from the Battle ofLepanto to          497
   the Introduction of Steam, 1559-1853 (Princeton, N. J. 1952).
Andric, A., Geschichte des Fiirstentums Montenegro von der dltesten
   Zeit bis 1852 (Vienna, 1853).
Arapyan, Kalost, Rusquk Ayani Mustafa Pa§a’nin Hayati ve Kahram-
   anliklari (Ankara, 1943). Turkish translation of contemporary
    Armenian description of "Standard bearer” Bayrakdar/Alemdar
   Mustafa Pasha.
Aravantinos, P., Historia Ali Pasha (Athens, 1895).
Ameth, A. von, Joseph II und Katharina von Russland,Ihr Briefwechsel
   (Vienna, 1869).            ^
Ata, Tayyarzade Ahmet, Tarih-i Ata, 5 vols. (Istanbul, 1292-1293/
    1876-1877).
Auriant, "Les corsaires grecs allms de laRussie, 1787-1789,” L’AcropoZe,     y
    IX (1934), 20-28.
‘Azmi Efendi, Ahmed, Prusya Sefaretnamesi (Istanbul, 1310/1887)
    Account of Ahmed ‘Azmi’s diplomatic mission to Berlin in 1791-
    1792.
al-‘Azzawi, ‘Abbas, Td’rikh al-Jraq bayn Ihtilalayn, vol. V, 1639-1750
     (Bagdad, 1953); vol. VI, 1749-1831 (Bagdad, 1954). Chronicles of
     Iraqi history.
Babinger, Franz, Stambuler Buchwesen im 18. Jahrhundert (Leipzig,
     1919).
Baggally, J. W., Ali Pasha and Great Britain (Oxford, 1938).
Bajraktarevic, Fehim, "Paswan-Oghlu,” EP, III, 1034-1035.
Barker, E. B. B., Syria and Egypt under the Last Five Sultans of Turkey,
     2 vols. (London, 1876).
Barrow, John, The Life and Correspondence of Admiral Sir William Sid¬
     ney Smith, 2 vols. (London, 1848).
Baykal, Ismail, "Selim III devrinde Tmdad-i Sefer’ igin para basilmak
     iizere saraydan verilen altin ve gumu§ e§ya hakkinda,” TV, III,
     (1944) 36-50. An account of gold and silver utensils contributed by
     the Ottoman palace for minting coins in the reign of Selim III.
Baysun, Cavid, "Ali Pa§a, Tepedelenli,” lA, I, 343-344.
- "Mustafa Pa§a, I§kodrali, Bu§atli, §erifi,” lA, VIII, 727-730.
Beer, A., Die orientalische Politik Oesterreichs seit 1774 (Prague, 1883).
Benedikt, H., Der Pascha-Graf Alexander von Bonneval, 1695-1747
     (Graz and Cologne, 1959).
Benoit, P., "Saint Jean d’Acre,” Revue des Deux-Mondes, XXV (1935),
     721-748; XXVI (1935), 1-34, 241-267.
Birge, John Kingsley, "The Printing of Books in Turkey in the Eight¬
     eenth Century,” Moslem World, XIII (1943), 292-294.
Blease, W. Lyon, Suvorof (London, 1920).
Bodman, Herbert L., 3r., Political Factions in Aleppo, 1760-1826 (Chapel
    Hill, N. C., 1963).




                              Bibliography
de Bonnac, Marquis, Memoire'historique sur I’ambassade de France a
   Constantinople, ed. C. Schefer (Paris, 1894).
Boppe, Auguste, L’Albanie et Napoleon, 1797-1814 (Paris, 1914).
-"Le colonel Nicole Papas Oghlou et le bataillon des Chasseurs
     d’Orient, 1798-1815,” Carnet de la Sabretache (1900).
-"La France et 'le militaire turc’ au XVIIIe siecle,” Feuilles d’His-
    toire, 1912, pp. 386-402, 490-501.
- "La mission de I’adjudant commandant Me'riage a Widdin,”
    Annals de I’Ecole des Sciences Politiques, I (1886).
-Les peintres du Bosphore au dix-huitieme siecle (Paris, 1911).
Botzaris, Notis, Visions balkaniques dans'la preparation de la revolution
    grecque, 1789-1821 (Paris, 1962y
Bowen, Harold, "Ayan,” EP, I, 778.
Bradisteanu, S., Die Beziehungen Russlands und Frankreichs zur Tur-
    kei in den Jahren 1806 und 1807 (Berlin, 1912).
Brydges, H. J., A Brief History of the Wahauby (London, 1834).
Burckhardt, J. L., Travels in Syria and the Holy Land (London, 1822).
Castellan, A. L., Moeurs, usages, coutumes des Ottomans, et abrdge de
    leur histoire, 6 vols. (Paris, 1812).
-Lettres sur la Gr'ece, VHellespont, et Constantinople (Paris, 1811).
Castera, I. H., Histoire de Catherine H, imperatrice de Russie, 4 vols.
    (Paris, 1880).
Cevad, Ahmed, Tarih-i Asker-i Osmani. History of the Ottoman army.
    The first volume, covering the years before Selim III, was published
    in Istanbul in 1889; the remaining volumes are in manuscript form
    in the Istanbul University Library, vol. II (1789-1839) is MS TY
    4178 (194 pp.); vol. Ill (1839-1876) is MS TY 6127 (267 pp.).
Charles-Roux, Frangois, Bonaparte: Governor of Egypt (London, 1937).
-UAngleterre et l’exp4dition franqaise en Egypte 2 vols. (Cairo,
    1925).
- Une negotiation pour I’evacuation de I’Egypte. La convention
   d’El-Arich, 1800,” RHD, XXXVII (1923), 48-88, 304-347.
Chauvin, V., La legende egyptienne de Bonaparte (Mons, 1902).
Chebli, Michel, Une histoire de Liban 'a I’epoque des emirs, 1635-1841
   (Beirut, 1955).
Chenier, "Apergu de la situation militaire des Turcs,” AE Turquie 191,
   fols. 345-364.
      Revolutions de lEmpire Ottoman, et observations sur ses progr^s^
   sur ses revers, et sur I’etat present de cet Empire (Paris, 1789).
Chevalier, M., "La politique financiere de I’Expedition d’Egypte, 1798-
    1801,” CHE, VII (1955), 165-185, 223-244; VIII (1956), 47-68,176-
    197,213-240.
Christowe, S., The Lion of Yanina (New York, 1941).
Clement-Simon, F., "Un Ambassadeur extraordinaire russe a Constanti-




                             Bibliography
    nople a I’epoque de Catherine II et de Selim III,” RHD, XXI (1907),       499
    25-39.
Combe, E., L’Egypte Ottomane, de la conquete par Selim, 1517, a I’arrivee
   de Bonaparte, 1798 (Cairo, 1935).
Coquelle, P., Histoire du Montenegro et de la Bosnie depuis les origines
   (Paris, 1895).
-"Sebastiani, ambassadeur a Constantinople, 1806-1808,'’ RHD,
   XVIII (1904), 574-611.
Coxe, William, History of the House of Austria, 3rd ed., 3 vols. (London,
    1889).
Craven, Lady Elizabeth, Journey through the Crimea to Constantinople
    (London, 1789).
Creasy, E. S., History of the Ottoman Turks (London, 1878; repr., Beirut,
    1961).
Criste, Oskar, Kriege unter Kaiser Josef II (Vienna, 1904).
Cuny, "Aper^u de la situation des artilleurs et de I’artillerie de terre de
    la Sublime Porte Ottomane au 1®’’ Brumaire de la 4® annee repub-
    licaine,” AE Turquie 192, fols. 99-129.
Dallaway, James, Constantinople Ancient and Modern (London, 1797).
Daressy, G., "Moustapha Pacha, le prisonnier d’Aboukir,” BIE, XI
    (1930), 43-70.
Dascovici, N., La question du Bosphore et des Dardanelles (Geneva,
    1915).
David, Pierre, "Extraits du journal de Pierre David,” RHD, XXXVIII
    (1924), 156-165.
Deherain, Henri, L’Egypte Turque, Pachas et Mameluks du XVP au
    XVIIP si'ecle (Paris, 1934).
-La vie de Pierre Ruffin, orientaliste et diplomate, 1742-1824, 2
   vols. (Paris, 1929-1930).
Dodwell, H., The Founder of Modern Egypt: A Study of Muhammad AU
   (Cambridge, 1931).
Douin, G., "L’Ambassade d’Elfi Bey a Londres,” BIE,Yl\ (1925), 95-120.
-L’Egypte de 1802 a 1804 (Cairo, 1925).
-Mohamed Aly, Pacha du Caire, 1805-1807 (Cairo, 1926).
-"Le retour de Bonaparte d’Egypte en France,” BIE, XXIII (1941),
  185-216.
-and B. Fawtier-Jones, L’Angleterre et I’Egypte. La politique mame-
    luke, 1801-1803 (Cairo, 1929).
Driault, E., "Correspondance du general Sebastiani, ambassadeur a
    Constantinople, 1806-7,” Revue des Etudes Napoleoniennes, IV
 (1913), 402-425.
-- Napoleon et I’Europe: Tilsit, France et Russie sous le premiere
 empire: la question de Pologne, 1806-1809 (Paris, 1917).
-Napoleon et la resurrection de la Grece (Paris, 1924).




                              Bibliography
500   -La politique orientate de Napoleon: Sebastiani et Gardane, 1806-
         1808 (Paris, 1904).
      Dukic, Trifun, "Izvestaji o bojevima Cmo-goraca s Mahmut pasom
          Busatlijom,” Istoriski zapisi, VII (1951), 480-487.
      Dumaine, A., "Un consulat de France en Bosnie sous le premier empire:
          Pierre David,” RHD, XXXVIII (1924), 129-169, 301-328.
      Erodogan, Muzaffer, "Ar§iv vesikalarina gore Istanbul Baruthaneleri,”
          Istanbul Enstitiisu Dergisi, II (1956), 115-138. History of the gun¬
          powder factories in the Ottoman empire through the reign of Selim
          III and up to 1877.
      -"Abdurrahman Pa§a, Kadi,” Aylik Ansiklopedi, V (1948), 1431-
          1432.                            ^
      Eren, A. Cevat, "Selim III,” lA, X, 441-457.
      Ergin, Osman Nuri, Mecelle-i Umur-u Belediye, 5 vols. (Istanbul, 1912-
          1917). History of municipal organization in Turkey.
      -Tiirkiye Maarif Tarihi, 5 vols. (Istanbul, 1939-1943). History of
          education in Turkey.
      -Turkiyede §ehirciligin Tarihi /n^j§a/r(Istanbul, 1936). Short his¬
          tory of municipal organization in Turkey.
      Ersoy, Osman, Tiirkiye’ye Matbaanin giri§i ve ilk basilan eserler (An¬
          kara, 1959). The introduction of printing in the Ottoman Empire.
      Ertug, Hasan Refik, Basin ve Yayin hareketleri tarihi (Istanbul, 1959).
          History of the press and publishing in Turkey.
      Esad, Mehmed, Mirdt-i Muhendishane-i Berri-i Humayun (Istanbul,
          1895). History of the Ottoman army engineering school.
      Esencan, Tahsin, Nizam-i Cedidden evvel ve sonra Turk topqulugu ve
          kaynaklari (Ankara, 1946). History of Turkish artillery before and
          after Selim Ill’s reforms.
      Esteve, M. R. X., Compte-rendu de Vadministration des finances pendant
          I’etablissement des Frangais en Egypte (Paris, 1802).
      Eton, W. A., A Survey of the Turkish Empire, 2nd ed. (London, 1799).
      Franklin, W., Observations made on a tour from Bengal to Persia in
          1786-7 (London, 1790).
      Georgiev, J., Kardzaliite i Osman Pasvantoglu (Tirnovo, 1900).
      Gergek, Selim Niizhet, Tiirk Matbaaciligi (Istanbul, 1928). History of the
          Turkish press in the 18th and 19th centuries.
      Ghica, J. D., "La France et les principautes danubiennes, 1789-1815,”
          Annales de I’Ecole libre des sciences politiques, XI (1896), 208-229.
      Ghorbal, Shafik, The Beginnings of the Egyptian Question and the Rise
          ofMehemetAli (London, 1928).
             "The Missions of Ali ElFendi in Paris and of Sedki Effendi in Lon¬
          don, 1797-1811,” Bulletin of the Faculty of Arts, University of Cairo,
          I (1933), 114-129.
      Gibb, E. J. W., A History of Ottoman Poetry, 6 vols. (London, 1900-1909).




                                   Bibliography
Gibb, H. A. R., and Harold Bowen, Islamic Society and the West: A Study    501
    of the Impact of Western Civilization on Moslem Culture in the Near
    East, vol. 1 in 2 parts, Islamic Society in the Eighteenth Century
    (London, New York, and Toronto, 1950-1957).
Golder, F. A., John Paul Jones in Russia (Garden City, N. Y., 1927).
Gopcevic, S., Geschichte von Montenegro und Albanien (Gotha, 1914).
Goriainov, S. M., Le Bosphore et les Dardanelles (Paris, 1910).
Gbyiing, Nejad, "Kapudan-i Derya Kiiguk Hiiseyin Pa§a,” TD, II (1952),
    35-50.
Griffiths, John, Travels in Europe, Asia Minor and Arabia (London,
     1805).
Habesci, E., Etat actuel de VEmpire Ottoman, 2 vols. (Paris, 1792); Eng.
    trans. Present State of the Ottoman Empire (London, 1794).
Hajek, A., BulgarieH unter der Turkenherrschaft (Berlin and Leipzig,
    1925).
Hamilton, W. R., Remarks on Several Parts of Turkey,Part I: Aegyptiaca
    or Some Account of the Ancient and Modern State of Egypt, As Ob¬
    tained in the Years 1801,1802 (London, 1809).
Havi Efendi, Rasul, Devhat ul-Vuzera (Bagdad, 1830). History of Iraq in
    the Ottoman period.
Herbette, Maurice, Uneambassadeturquesous le directoire (Paris, 1902).
Herold, Christopher, Bonaparte in Egypt (London and New York, 1963).
Heyd, Uriel, "The Ottoman ‘Ulema and Westernization in the time of
    Selim III and Mahmud II,” Studies in Islamic History and Civiliza¬
    tion. Scripta Hierosolymitana, IX (Hebrew University, Jerusalem,
     1961), 63-96.
Hobhouse, J. C., A Journey through Albania and the Other Provinces of
     Turkey in Europe and Asia to Constantinople during the years 1809
     and 1810, 2 vols. (London, 1813).
Hurewitz, J. C., "Russia and the Turkish Straits: A Revaluation of the
     Origins of the Problem,” World Politics, XIV (1962), 606-632.
-"The Background of Russia’s Claims to the Turkish Straits: A
     Reassessment,” Belleten, XXVIII (1964), 459-503.
Inal, Ibn ul-Emin Mahmud Kemal, "Mehmed Hakki Pa§a,” TTEM, VII
     (1926), 351-367.
Inalcik, Halil, "Ya§ muahedesinden sonra Osmanli-Rus miinasebetleri:
    Rasih Efendi ve General Kutuzof elgilikleri,” Ankara Universitesi
    DU ve Tarih-CografyaFakultesiDergisi, IV (1946), 195-203.
I§iksal, Turgut, "HI Selim’in Tiirk topguluguna dair bir Hatt-i Huma-
    yun,” TD, VIII (1955), 179-184.
al-Jabarti, ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Hasan, ‘Aja’ib al-Athar, 4 vols. (Cairo,
     1888-1894). Contemporary history of Egypt in the 18th and early
     19th centuries.
Jirecek, Constantin, Geschichte der Bulgaren (Prague, 1876).




                             Bibliography
502   Kabrda, J., Quelques Firman^ concernant Les relations franco-turques
          lors de I’expedition de Bonaparte en Egypte (Paris, 1947).
      Karal, Enver Ziya, "Ebu Bekir Ratib Efendi’nin 'Nizam-i Cedit’ Islaha-
         tinda Rolii,” V. Turk Tarih Kongresi, Ankara 12-17 Nisan 1956:
         Kongreye sunulan tebligler (Ankara, 1960), pp. 347-355. Discussion
         of Ebu Bekir’s proposals to Selim III for reform.
      -Fransa-Misir ve Osmanli Imparatorlugu, 1797-1802 (Istanbul,
         1940). Ottoman-French relations during the French expedition to
         Egypt.
      -Halet Efendinin Paris Buyilk Elgiligi, 1802-6 (Istanbul, 1940).
         Halet Efendi’s mission to Paris between 1802 and 1806.
      - "Ingilterenin Akdeniz Haki)^niyeti hakkinda vesikalar, 1798-
         1805,” TV, I (1942), 122-134. Documents concerning British naval
         control of the Mediterranean between 1798 and 1805.
      -"Nizam-i Cedide dair layihalar,” TV, I (1942), 414-425; II (1942-
        43), 104-111, 342-351, 424-432. Summaries of the reform memo¬
        rials submitted to Selim during and after the 1792 war with Russia.
      -"Osmanli tarihine dair vesikalar,” Belleten, IV (1940), 175-189.
        Documents on Ottoman naval and military reforms in the 18th
        century.
      - "Selim III devrinde Osmanli Bahriyesi hakkinda vesikalar,”
         TV, I (1942), 203-211. Proposals to Selim III for changes and re¬
        forms in the Ottoman navy.
      -"Yunan Adalarinm Fransizlar tarafindan i§gali ve Osmanli-Rus
        miinasebati, 1797-8,” TSD, I (1937), 100-125. Ottoman-Russian
        relations as the result of the French occupation of the Ionian Islands
        in 1797 and 1798.
      Kerofilas, C., "Napoleon et la Grece,” Les Etudes Franco-Grecques, II
          (1919), 145-155, 202-211, 273-281.
      Kinneir, J. Macdonald, Journey through Asia Minor (London, 1818).
      Kolerkihg, Ekrem, Osmanli Imparatorlugunda Para (Ankara, 1958).
          History of coinage and money in the Ottoman Empire.
      Kopriilvi, Orhan, "Galib Pa§a,” lA, IV, 710-714.
      Kramers, J. H., "Selim III,” EP, IV, 219-222.
      Kresevljakovic, H., "Cefilema sarajevskih krscana iz 1788 godine: La
          caution (guarantie) collective des chretiens de Sarajevo en 1788,”
          Prilozi, III-IV (1952-53), 195-214.
      -"Prilozi povijesti bosanskih gradova pod turskom upravom: Con¬
          tribution a I’histoire des villes de Bosnie sous Tadministration
          turque,” Prilozi, II (1951), 115-184.
      Kuran, Erciimend, Avrupa’da Osmanli Ikamet Elciliklerinin Kurulu§u
          ve Ilk Elgilerin Siyasi Fadliyetleri, 1793-1821 (Ankara, 1968).
      Kutuzov, Mikhail Illarionovich, M. I. Kutuzov, Sbornik Dokumentov,
          ed. L. G. Beskrovno, 5 vols. (Moscow, 1950-1956).




                                   Bibliography
Lagarde, L., "Notes sur les journaux frangais de Constantinople a I’epoque   503
    revolutionnaire,” JA, 236 (1948), 271-276.
- "Note sur les journaux fran§ais de Smyrne a I’epoque de Ma¬
    hmoud II,” JA, 236 (1950), 103-144.
Lammens, H., La Syrie: precis historique, 2nd ed., 2 vols. (Beirut, 1921).
Leake, W. M., Travels in Northern Greece, A wols,. (London, 1835).
Lekic, Dusan, Spoljna politika Petra I Petrovica Njp^osa (Cetinje, 1950)
Lenormant, F., Turcs et Montenegrins (Paris, 1866).
Lewis, Bernard, The Emergence of Modern Turkey (London and New
  York, 1961; 2nd ed., 1968).
-"Djanikli Hadjdji ‘Ali Pasha,” EP, II, 446-447.
- "The Impact of the J'rench Revolution on Turkey,” JWH, I
    (1953), 105-125.
Longrigg, Stephen, Four Centuries of Modern Iraq (Oxford, 1925).
Lorenz, Lincoln, John Paul Jones (Annapolis, Md., 1943).
-The Admiral and the Empress; John Paul Jones and Catherine
    the Great (New York, 1954).
al-Madini, Emin b. Hasan al-Halwani, MutdW us-Su‘ud (Bombay,
   1886). Iraq in the Ottoman period.
Mackesy, Piers, The War in the Mediterranean, 1803-1810 (London,
   1957).
Marcel, J. J., Histoire de I’Egypte depuis la conquete des Arabes jusqu’a
    celle des Frangais (Paris, 1848).
de Marcere, E., Une ambassade a Constantinople: La politique orientate
    de la Revolution frangaise, 2 vols. (Paris, 1927).
Medakovic, Povijestnica Crnegore od najstarijeg vremena do 1830 (Ze-
   mun, 1850).
Mehmed, Serif, "Sultan Selim Hani Salis devrinde Nizam-i Devlet
   hakkinda mutali'at,” TOEM, III, 74-88, 257-284. Proposals to
   Selim III for military and administrative reforms.
Mengin, F., Histoire de I’Egypte sous le gouvernement de Mohammed
    Aly, 2 vols. (Paris, 1823).
Mesheryakova, G., A. V. Suvorov, 4 vols. (Moscow, 1949).
Mijuskovic, S., "Politick! manevri guvernadura Jovana Radonica,”
    Istoriski zapisi, IX (1953), 161-182.
Miller, A. F., Mustafa Pasha Bayrakdar (Moscow, 1947).
Mordtmann, J. H., "Derebey,” EP, II, 207-208.
Mouravieff, Boris, L’Alliance russo-turque au milieu des guerres Na-
   poleoniennes (Neuchatel, 1954).
Munier, H., Tables de la description de I’Egypte suivies d’une biblio-
   graphie sur I’expedition frangaise de Bonaparte (Cairo, 1943).
Munir, Salih, "Louis XVI et le Sultan Selim III,” RHD, XXVI (1912),
    516-548.
Miinib, Mehmed, Hulaset ul-Kelam fi Redd ul-Avamm (Istanbul, 1911).




                               Bibliography
504       Contemporary discussion qf Seliih’s reforms. Translated as "An
          explanation of the Nizam-y-Gedid institutions, and some curious
          remarks concerning it . . . in W. Wilkinson, An Account of the
          Principalities of Wallachia and'Moldavia (London, 1820), pp.
         216-294.
      Nedim, Hayreddin, ed., Bir Elqinin Tarihqe-i Sefareti (Istanbul, 1333/
          1917). Excerpts from Mustafa Rasih Pasha’s report on his mission
         to Saint Petersburg in 1793.
      Novakovic, S., Tursko Carstvo pred srpski ustanak, 1780-1804 (Bel¬
         grade, 1906).
      -Die Widergeburt des Serbischen ^taates, 1804-1813 (Sarajevo,
         1912). .                      V
      D’Ohsson, Mouradgea, Tableau general de I’Empire Othoman, 2nd ed.,
           7 vols. (Paris, 1788-1824).
      Olivier, G. A., Voyage dans I’Empire Othoman, I’Egypte et la Perse, fait
          par ordre du gouvernement, pendant les six premieres annees de la
           Republique, 3 vols. (Paris, 1801-1807). >
      Omont, H., "Documents sur rimprimerie a Constantinople au XVIIP
           siecle,” Revue des Bibliotheques (1895), 185-200.
      OrlofF, N., Shturm Ismaila Suvorovym y 1790 godu (Saint Petersburg,
           1890).
      Oz, Tahsin, "Selim III, Mustafa IV, ve Mahmut II zamanlarma ait birkag
           vesika,” TV, I (1942), 20-29. Documents concerning Selim III,
           Mustafa IV, and Mahmud II.
      Pantelic, Dusan, "Oko krajinski povalstica,” Istoriski Glasnik, 1 (1949),
           62-82.
      Pautier, G., Les lies loniennes pendant Voccupation franqaise et la pro-
          tectorat anglais (Paris, 1863).
      Perrot, Georges, Souvenirs d’un voyage en Asie Mineure (Paris, 1864).
      Philby, H. St. John, Saudi Arabia (London, 1955).
      Pingaud, Leonce, Choiseul-Gouffer. La France en Orient sous Louis XVI
          (Paris, 1887).
      Pisani, P., La Dalmatie de 1797 a 1815 (Paris, 1893).
      -"Une expedition russo-turque aux lies loniennes” RiTD, II (1888),
        pp. 190-225.
      Plant, J. T., Tiirkisches Staats-Lexicon, fur Zeitungsleser und Freunde
          der Staaten- und Vblkerkunde (Leipzig, 1793).
      Plomer, W., Ali the Lion: Ali ofTebeleni, Pasha ofJannina, 1741-1822
          (London, 1936).
      Polk, W. R., The Opening of South Lebanon, 1788-1840 (Cambridge,
          Mass., 1963).
      Porsch, R., Beziehungen Friedrichs des Grossen zur Tiirkei, 1740-1767
          (Marburg, 1896).
      Pouqueville, F. C. H. L., Histoire de la regeneration de la Grece, 4 vols.
         (Paris, 1824).




                                    Bibliography
-Voyage dans la Grece, 6 vols. (Paris, 1826).                                505
-Voyage en Moree, a Constantinople, en Albanie, et dans plusieurs
    autres parties de I’Empire Othoman, pendant les annees 1798,1799,
    1800 et 1801, 3 vols. (Paris, 1805).
Prevost, Baron, "Constantinople en 1806 et 1807,” Revue Contemporaine,
    XIV, 5-24, 161-186, 321-341, 481-505.
Puryear, V. J., Napoleon and the Dardanelles (Berkeley, Calif., 1951).
Rados, C., Napoleon      et la Grece (Athens, 1921).
Rafi'i, ‘Abd al-Rahman, Ta’rikh al-Harakat al-Qawmiyye wa tatawwur
     ni:^dm al-Hukm fiMisr, 2 vols. (Cairo, 1948). History of Egypt during
    the period of the French expedition.
Raif, Mahmud (Ingiliz), Tableau des nouveaux reglemens de I’Empire
     Ottoman (Istanbul, 1798).
Ranke, Leopold vqn, The History of Servia and the Servian Revolution,
    trans. A. Kerr (London, 1853).
Refik, Ahmed, "Moreli us-Sayyid Ali Efendinin sefaretnamesi,” TOEM,
I (1329/1911), 1120-1138, 1246-1259, 1331-1343, 1378-1390, 1458-
     1466, 1548-1560. Ali Efendi’s mission to Paris.
Remerand, G., Ali de Tebelen, Pacha de Janina, 1744-1822 (Paris,
     1928).
Rentz, George, "Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab (1703/4-1792) and
     the Beginnings of the Unitarian Empire in Arabia” (Ph.D. diss..
     University of California, Berkeley, 1947).
Reybaud, L., Histoire scientifique et militaire de Vexpedition franqaise
     en Egypte, 10 vols. (Paris, 1803-1836).
Said Efendi, Vasf-i Cezzar Ahmed Pa§a, Istanbul University Library,
     MS TY 6206. Biography of Ahmed Jezzar Pasha.
Saint-Denys, Juchereau de. Revolutions de Constantinople en 1807
    et 1808, precedees d’observations generates sur I’etat actuel de
    I’Empire Ottomane, et des considerations sur la Grece, 2 vols. (Paris,
    1819).
Sammarco, Angelo, Histoire de I’Egypte moderne, 1801-1882.1. II regno
    di Mohammed Ali nei documenti diplomatici italiani inediti (Cairo,
    1933).
Savary, C. E., Lettres sur I’Egypte, 3 vols. (Paris, 1785-1786).
Savant, Jean, Les Mameluks de Napoleon (Paris, 1949).
- "Napoleon et la liberation de la Grece,” L’Hellenisme contem¬
    poraine, 1951, pp. 320-341.
Schlechta Wssehrd, C., Die Revolutionen in Constantinopel (Vienna,
    1882).
Seton-Watson, R. W., A History of the Roumanians from Roman Times
    to the Completion of Unity (Cambridge, 1934).
Sevin, F., Lettres sur Constantinople, ecrites pendant son sejour en cette
    ville au comte de Caylus; suivies de piasters lettres contenant des
    details sur I’Empire Ottoman (Paris, 1901).




                               Bibliography
506   Shaw, Stanford J., "The Established Ottoman Army Corps under Sul¬
         tan Selim III (1789-1807),” Der/s/am, 40 (1965), 142-184.
      -"The Origins of Ottoman Military Reform: The Nizam-i Cedid
         Army of Sultan Selim III,” Journal of Modern History, XXXVII
         (1965), 291-306.
      - The Financial and Administrative Organization and Develop¬
         ment of Ottoman Egypt 1517-1798 (Princeton, N. J., 1962).
      -, ed. and trans., Ottoman Egypt in the Eighteenth Century (Cam¬
       bridge, Mass., 1962).
      -, trans., Ottoman Egypt in the Age of the French Revolution (Cam¬
       bridge, Mass., 1964).
      -The Budget of Ottoman Egypt, 1005-1006!1596-1597 (The Hague
       and Paris, 1968).
      -"Turkish Source-materials for Egyptian History,” Political and
        Social Change in Modern Egypt, ed. P. Holt (London, 1968), pp.
        28-51.
      -"The Origins of Representative Government in the Ottoman Em¬
        pire: An Introduction to the Provincial Councils, 1839-1876,” Near
        Eastern Round Table, 1967-68, ed. R. B. Winder (New York Uni¬
        versity, New York, 1969), pp. 53-142.
      - "Landholding and land-tax revenues in Ottoman Egypt,” Po¬
       litical and Social Change in Modern Egypt, ed. P. Holt (London,
       1968), pp. 91-103.
      -"The aims and achievements of the nineteenth century Ottoman
        reformers,” Beginnings of Modernization in the Middle East. The
        Nineteenth Century, ed. W. R. Polk and R. L. Chambers (Chicago
        and London, 1968), pp. 29-39.
      - "The Central Legislative Councils in the Nineteenth Century
       Ottoman Reform Movement before 1876,” International Journal of
       Middle East Studies, I (1970), 51-84.
      Shay, Mary Lucille, The Ottoman Empire from 1720 to 1734 As Revealed
          in the Dispatches of the Venetian Baili (Unbana, Ill., 1944).
      al-Shadyak, Sheykh b. Yusuf, Akhbdr al-ayanfi jebel al-Lubnan (Beirut,
          1859).
      Shihab, Ta’rikh Ahmad Bdsha al-Jazzar, ed. Antuni3dis Shibli and Igh-
          natiyus 'Abduh Khalifa (Beirut, 1955).
      Shupp, P. F., The European Powers and the Near Eastern Question,
         1806-1807 (New York, 1931).
      Sonnini, C. S., Voyage en Grece et en Turquie, fait par ordre de
         Louis XVI, et avec Vautorisation de la cour ottomane, 2 vols. (Paris
         1801).
      Sorel, A., L’Europe et la Revolution Franqaise, 4 vols. (Paris, 1909).
              La question d’Orient au XVIIF siecle: Le partage de la Pologne et
          le trade de Kainardji (Paris, 1889); English translation. The East-




                                   Bibliography
    ern Question in the Eighteenth Century: The Partition of Poland          507
    and the Treaty of Kainardji (London, 1898).
Stanojevic, Gldgor, "Vasilije Brkic u Cmoj (jori 1788,” Istoriski Pregled,
    2 (1954), 63-67.
Stephanopoli, D., and N. Stephanopoli, Voyage de Dimo et Nicolo Step-
    hanopoli en Grece pendant les annees 1797 et 1798, 2 vols. (London,
    1800).
Stojancevic, V., "Prvi srpski ustanak prema Bugarskoj i Bugarima. La
    premiere insurrection serbe et ses relations avec la Bulgaria,”
    Istoriski glasnik, 1-2 (1954), 121-147.
Suleyman Bey b. Hac Talil^ Kethiida, Bagdad kolemen hukumetinin
     te§kilile inkirazina dair risale (Istanbul, 1875).
Sumner, B. H., Peter the Great and the Ottoman Empire (Oxford, 1949).
Sungu, Ihsan, "Raif Efendi, Mahmut (Ingiliz Mahmut Efendi),” Aylik
    Ansiklopedisi, V (1948-49), 1482-1484.
Sutherland, A Tour up the Straits, from Gibralter to Constantinople
    (London, 1790).
§ehsuvaroglu, Bedi N., "Tiirkiyede Tip           Istanbul Universitesi
    Tip Fakiiltesi Mecmuasi, XXII (1959), 735-752.
§eref, Abdurrahman, "Acanibden ilk Istikraz tegebbiisumuze ait bir
    ka? vesika,” TOEM, II (1914), 321-337.
§inasi, Kazim, "On iiguncii asirda Istikraz Isleri,” Yeni Mecmua, II
   (1918), 309-312.
Tanpmar, Ahmed Hamdi, Ondokuzuncu Asir Tiirk Edebiyati Tarihi,
    2nd. ed., vol. I (Istanbul, 1956).
Tansel, S., "Biiyiik Fredrich devrinde Osmanli-Prusya miinasebetleri
    hakkmda,” Belleten, X (1946), 133-165, 271-292.
-"1768 Seferi hakkmda bir arastirma,” Ankara Universitesi DU
    ve Tarih-Cografya Fakiiltesi Dergisi, VIII (1950), 477-536.
Tatarcik Abdullah Efendi, "Nizam-i Devlet hakkmda mutaleat,” TOEM,
    III (1916), 257-284, 321-356; IV (1917-1918), 15-34.
Tekindag, M. C. §ehabeddin, "Cezzar Ahmed Pa§a,” lA, III, 156-158.
—-"XVIII. ve XIX. asirlarda Cebel Liibnan. §ihab-Ogullari,” TD,
   IX (1958), 31-44.
Temperley, H., and L. M. Penson, Foundations of British Foreign Policy
   from Pitt, 1792, to Salisbury, 1902 (Cambridge, 1938).
Thomson, G. S., Catherine the Great and the Expansion of Russia (Lon¬
    don, 1947).
Thornton, Thomas, The Present State of Turkey, 2 vols. (London, 1807).
de Tott, Baron F., Memoires du Baron de Tott sur les Turcs, 4 vols.
     (Amsterdam, 1785).
Tiirkiye Cumhuriyeti, Biiyuk Erkani Harbiye IX Deniz §ubesi, Deniz
     Mektepleri Tarihge^i, 2 vols. (Istanbul, 1931-1941). Official history
    of the Turkish naval schools.




                              Bibliography
Ulugay, Qagatay, "Karaosmanogullanna ait bazi vesikalar,” TV, II
    (1942-43), 193-207, 300-308, 434-440. Documents concerning the
   Karaosmanoglu family in Anatolia.
-Manisa Unliileri (Manisa, 1946). History of the city of Manisa
   with particular attention to the Karaosmanoglu family.
-and Enver Kartekin, YiXksek Muhendis Okulu (Istanbul, 1958).
   History of the army engineering school in Istanbul from Ottoman
   times to the present.
Unat, Faik Re§it, Osmanli Sefirleri ve Sefaretnameleri (Ankara, 1968).
   Ottoman ambassadors and embassies from the 17th to the mid 19th
   century.
Uzungargili, Ismail Hakki, "Amedi Oalib Efendinin Murahhasligi ve
   Paris’ten gonderdigi §ifreli mektuplar,” Belleten, I (1937), 357-
   410. Galib Efendi’s embassy to Paris and copies of a number of his
   letters sent to the Sultan in 1802.
- "Ar§iv vesikalarma gore Yedi Ada Cumhuriyeti,” Belleten, I
   (1937), 627-641. Ottoman archival documents concerning the es¬
   tablishment of the Septinsular Republic in the Ionian Islands.
-"Ayan,” lA, II, 41-42. Study of the Ottoman provincial notables.
-"Ba§vekalet argivinde Bonapart’in Akka muhasarasina dair bir
   vekainame,” TSD, II/l, 3-32. Transliteration of a short Ottoman
   chronicle concerning Bonaparte’s siege of Acre.
-"Cezayirli Gazi Hasan Pa§a’ya dair,” TM, VII-VIII (1942), 17-
   40. Documents concerning Gazi Hasan Pasha’s efforts to revive the
   Ottoman navy under Abd ul-Hamid I.
-"Kabakgi Mustafa Isyanma dair yazilmi§ bir tarihge,” Belleten,
   VI (1941), 243-261. Transcription of a contemporary account of
   the revolution led by Kabakci Mustafa which resulted in the over¬
   throw of Selim III in 1807,
-Kapukulu Ocaklari, 2 vols. (Ankara, 1943-44). History of the
 organization and development of the Ottoman army from earliest
 times to the end of the 18th century.
-Meqhur Rumeli Ayanlanndan Tirsinikli Ismail, Yilik oglu Suley¬
 man Agalar ve Alemdar Mustafa Pa§a (Istanbul, 1942). Monograph
 on the Balkan notables and rebels in the late 18th and early 19th
 century, with particular attention to Alemdar Mustafa Pasha.
- "Nizam-i Cedid ricalinden Valide Sultan Kethiidasi me§hur
 Yusuf Aga ve Kethiidazade Arif Efendi,” Belleten, XX (1956), 485-
 525. Study of two of the leading politicians in the imperial palace
 during the reign of Selim III.
-"On dokuzuncu asir ba§larina kadar Tilrk-Ingiliz miinasebatma
  dair vesikalar,” Belleten, XIII (1949), 573-648. Documents con¬
  cerning Ottoman-British relations from the 17th century until the
  start of the 19th century.
-Osmanli Devletinin Merkez ve Bahriye Teskildti (Ankara, 1948).




                            Bibliography
    Organization of the Ottoman state administration and of the navy.    509
       Osmanli Devletinin Saray Te§kildti (Ankara, 1945). Ottoman
   palace organization.
- "Sadrdzam Halil Hamit Pa§a,” TM, V (1935), 213-267. The
   career of Abd ul-Hamid I’s Grand Vezir, Halil Hamid Pasha.
- "Selim IlPun Veliaht iken Fransa Krali Liii XVI ile Muha-
   bereleri,” Belleten, II (1938), 191-246. Selim’s correspondence as
   prince with Louis XVI of France.
-"Vezir Hakki Mehmed Pa§a, 1747-1811,” TM, VI (1936-1939),
   177-284. Selim’s efforts to suppress the provincial notables and
   rebels in the Balkans. ^
Vahid Efendi, Seyyid Mehmed Emin, Sefaretndme-i Seyyid Mehmed
   Emin Vahid Efendi: Relation de I’ambassade de Mohammed Wahid
   Efendi (Paris,'' 1843); reprinted as Sefaretname-i Seyyid Vahid
   Efendi (Istanbul, 1283/1837-38), and as Fransa Sefaretnamesi
    temsil-i s&ni (Istanbul, 1304/1886-87).
Vandal, Albert, Une ambassade francaise en orient sous Louis XV. La
    mission du Marquis de Villeneuve, 1728-1741 (Paris, 1887).
-Napoleon et Alexandre           , 3 vols. (Paris, 1891).
-Le Pacha Bonneval (Paris, 1884).
Volney, C. F. Chasseboeuf, comte de. Voyage en Syrie et an Egypte,
    pendant les anne'es 1783,1784, et 1785, 2 vols. (Paris, 1787).
Vukidevic, CerniDjordje,2 vols. (Belgrade, 1907-1912).
Vuksan, Dusan, Mitropolit Petar I Petrovic-Njegos i njegovo doba
    (Cetinje, 1951).
Wiet, Gaston, ed. and trans., Nicolas Turc. Chronique d’Egypte, 1798-
    1804 (Cairo, 1950).
- ed.. La chute d’el-Arich: Journal historique by E. Bouchard
    (Cairo, 1945).
Wittman, William, Travels in Turkey, Asia Minor, Syria and across the
    Desert into Egypt during the years 1799,1800 and 1801, in Company
    with the Turkish Army and the British Military Mission (London,
   1803).
Xenopol, A.-D., Histoire des Roumains de la Dade Trajane, 2 vols.
   (Paris, 1896).
Yakschitch, G., L’Europe et la resurrection de la Serbie, 1804-1834
  (Paris, 1907).
-"Notes sur Passvan-Oglu 1758-1807, par I’adjudant-commandant
  Me'riage,” La Revue Slave, I (1906), 261-279, 418-429; II (1906),
   139-144, 436-488; III (1907), 138-288.
Yaman, Talat Mumtaz, "Nizam-i Cedidin Lagvine dair bir vesika,” TV,
   II (1942-43), 433. A document on the abolition of the Nizam-i
   Cedid in 1807.
Yekta, Rauf, "Seiim-i salis musiki§inas,’” Yeni Mecmua, no. 16 (1917),
    pp. 309-340.




                            Bibliography
i
    3




        I;   ’V*! ’ A’



               ''Si       V       ■■'   ■   -




                                                V


                 f    V       N

                           **
                ’ ’' 4 s?: *’
        4
                                    Index



                                                                         »




                      /




  Entries are spelled in accordance with the transliteration system used in the
text (see pp. ix-x). Alternate spellings found in the footnotes and used in modern
Turkish and other languages are added in parentheses. Individuals and places
are identified only when significant and particularly useful for the reader. Alpha¬
betization is by name, without regard to titles and ranks.


Abdi Pasha, 43, 232, 235-6                  Abdullah Efendi —continued
Abd ul-Aziz I Ibn Saud, Saudi-Wahhabi        117, 128, 369, 370, 371, 430n38
 Arabian leader (reigned 1765-1803),        Abdurrahman Efendi, Director of
 223-5, 294                                  Muhendishane-i Berri-i Hilmayun
Abd ul-Fettah Bey, 269                       (1793-1800), 147, 148, 184, 185
Abd ul-Hamid I, Ottoman sultan              Abdurrahman Pasha, Kadi, Anatolian
  (reigned 1774-89), 9, 10, 13, 14, 21,      notable, 132, 303, 314, 346, 347, 374
 31, 32, 33, 35, 42, 79, 84, 89, 90, 120,   Abu al-Zahab (al-Dhahab), slave and
  121, 122, 182, 184, 191, 284, 369,          lieutenant of Ali Bey ul-Kebir of
 418-420, 433n52, 442n29                      Egypt, 219
Abd ul-Hamid II, Ottoman sultan             Abukir, Battle of (1798), 258, 263, 264
  (reigned 1876-1909), vii                  Abus cannons, 122
Abdullah Pasha, 216                         Acre (Akka, St.-Jean d’Acre), 218, 258
Abdullah Pasha, Azm zade, governor          Adana, SE Anatolian town, in Cilicia
 of Damascus, Tripoli and Aleppo, 291         on Anatolia-Syria road, 487 km SE of
Abdullah Berri (Birri) Efendi, Reis           Ankara, 168, 169, 215
  ul-Kuttab (1789-1792), 46, 91, 92,        Adriatic Sea (Adriyatik, Bahr-i Vene-
  108-9,413                                   dik, Venedik Kbrfezi), 6, 9, 198, 252,
Abdullah Ramiz Efendi, leader of Rus-         254, 256, 264, 267-8, 298, 337, 339,
 chuk Committee (1807-8), 396, 397,           345, 361, 373, 389, 394,395
 400, 404                                   Aegean Sea (Ege, Adalar denizi), 25,
Abdullah Pasha, San, 58                        156,161, 169, 370
Abdullah al-Sharqawi, 260, 275              Agriculture, peasants, 80, 81, 84, 96,
Abdullah, Sherif (§erif), 224-5               212, 213
Abdullah Efendi, Tatarjik (Tatarcik),       Ahiska (Akhaltzikhe, Yeni Kale), capi¬
  reforming member of [//ema (d.l813),        tal of Samtskhe principality in Cau¬
  89-90, 92-95, 100, 103, 104, 107,            casus, 110 km E of Batum, 67, 360




                                        511
                                                    4

512    Ahmed III, Ottoman sultan (reigned        Alexander I, Russian czar (reigned
         1703-1730), 7                             1801-1825), 272, 277, 329-30, 340,
       Ahmed Bey, 381, 383                         341, 348, 364, 388, 389, 392
       Ahmed Efendi, Ottoman ambassador          Alexandria (Iskenderiye), 135, 257,
         to Prussia (1790-4), 189                  264, 271, 276, 279, 286, 287, 288,
       Ahmed Pasha, 243, 287                       290, 360, 387
       Ahmed Atif Efendi, Reis ul-Kuttab         Ali Pasha, Ottoman Grand Admiral
         (1798-9), 256, 264, 413                   (1807-8), 387, 403, 412
       Ahmed Azmi Efendi, Ottoman ambas¬         Ali Aziz Efendi, Ottoman ambassador
         sador to Prussia, 56, 450n30, 451n33      to Prussia (1795-8), 188,189,451n37
       Ahmed Erib Bey, 256, 257                  Ali Agha, Hajji, Bulgarian bandit and
       Ahmed Esad Efendi, Sheyh ul-Islam           notable, 244, 402
         (1803-6), 92, 373, 412                  Ali Pasha, Hekimoglu (Hekimoglu),
      Ahmed Pasha, Humbarajibashi. See             \^18
         Bonneval, Alexander de.                 Ali Pasha, Janikli (Canikli), 216
      Ahmed Jezzar Pasha (6..1804), gover¬       Ali Bey ul-Kebir (d.l773), Mamluk
         nor of Acre and Sidon, Syrian notable     ruler of Ottoman Egypt (1760-1773),
         (1775-1804), 10, 135, 218-9, 258,          10, 218, 219
         288, 291, 292, 294, 296,367             Ali Kethiida (Pasha), governor of Bagh¬
      Ahmed Bey, Karaosmanoglu (Karaos-             dad (1802-7), 296
         manoglu), 283                           Ali Molla, Thrace notable, 227, 311
      Ahmed Efendi, Kose, 347, 381               Ali Efendi, Seyyid, Morah, Ottoman
      Ahmed Agha, Laz, 348, 398                    ambassador in Paris (1795-1802),
      Ahmed Agha, Nazir, Wallachian nota¬          188, 189, 255, 256, 266, 271, 273,
         ble, 227                                  274, 278-9, 281, 449-50n22, 468n72
      Ahmed Resmi Efendi, Ottoman ambas¬         Ali Raik Efendi, Tevkii, 92-3, 143,
         sador to Vienna and Berlin, 9, 187,       437-8nl9
         448nll                                  Ali Pasha, Seyyid, governor of Anato¬
      Ahmed Bey, Safi, 381                         lia, 244, 245
      Ahmed Pasha, Said, 43                      Ali Efendi, Seyyid, teacher, 438n31
      Ahmed Vasif Efendi, Ottoman chroni¬        Ali Pasha, Tepedelenli (Ali Pasha of
        cler (d.l807), 66, 184, 335, 374, 413      Janina), notable of Greece and Al¬
      Ainslie, Sir Robert, British ambassador      bania (d.l822), 62, 66,197, 228-230,
        to the Porte (1772-1793), 45, 52, 57,      231, 232, 233-5, 242, 245, 249, 253-
         193                                       255, 264-272, 298-301, 302, 304,
      Ajemoglu (Acemoglu), Anatolian nota¬         309, 311-314, 315-317, 322, 344-5,
        ble family, 215                           353, 356, 362-3, 367, 394, 456n25
      Akkerman (Ankirman, Cetatea Alba),         Ali Pasha, Trabluslu, governor of
        Bessarabian fort at mouth of Dniestr       Egypt (1803), 287
        on Black Sea, 38, 57, 67, 353            Allier, Louis, 195
      Alaiye (Alaiyye, Alanya), Anatolian        Aluta River (Alt, Oltu), 50
        port on Mediterranean, 150 km SW         Amasya (Amasca), NCentral Anatolia,
        of Konya, 132                              128 km S of Samsun, 215, 283, 284
      Alauddin Pasha, 293                        Amedi bureau, Amedji (Amedci),
      Alay Bey, 117, 118                          Amedi Efendi, 171-3
      Albania, Albanians, 125, 219, 227-34,      Amiens, Treaty of (1801), 278-81, 286,
        235, 237, 238, 249, 252, 255, 264-5,      317,328,330, 468n76
        268, 270, 276, 286, 287, 288, 289,       Anapa, Black Sea port, 100 km E of
        290, 298-301, 302, 303, 304, 307,         Straits of Kerch in Circassia, 58, 59
        308, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316,        65,216
        317, 326, 334, 336, 338, 340, 344,       Anatolia (Asia Minor, Anadolu), 3, 37,
        345, 362, 376, 393, 394                   47, 106, 108, 130, 131-3, 168, 170
      Alemdar Mustafa Pasha. See Mustafa          174, 176, 214-7, 242, 244-5, 260,
        Pasha, Alemdar/Bayrakdar.                 283-5, 291, 296, 304, 310, 314, 329,
      Aleppo (Haleb), 168, 244, 291, 292-3        330, 346-7, 354, 376, 387, 393, 399




                                           Index
Ankara (Angora, Ancyra), 132, 215,         Aubert du Bayet, Jean Baptiste, French      513
  312                                       ambassador to the Porte (1796-8),
Antalya (Attalia), SE Anatolian port        192,254, 452n44
  on Mediterranean, 364 km SW of           Austerlitz, Battle of (1805), 334
  Konya, 215                               Austria and Austrian Government.
Arab provinces, Arabs, 217-227, 285-        Ambassadors to the Porte, 13, 193,
  298, 374. See also Egypt; Syria; Iraq;    196, 197, 263; diplomatic relations
  Lebanon; Palestine; North Africa.         with Ottoman Empire, 6, 7,'22, 26-
Arabaji (Arabaci) corps, Arabaji Bashi      28, 41, 45, 49, 53-56, 60-64, 90,
  (Arabaci Ba§i). See Cannon wagon           185-6, 188-9, 193, 196, 248-9, 251-
  corps.                                    2, 263, 341-2; Ottoman ambassadors
Arabian Peninsula, Arabia, 220-227,         to, 182, 186, 188-9; role in Greek
  294-298, 285, 289, 292, 296. See also     Scheme, 22; agents sent to Ottoman
  Saudi dynasty; Wahhabi movement.          Balkans, 231, 232, 234, 239, 254,
Arabic language, 148, 190                   305, 318, 320-322, 339, 341; acquisi¬
Arbuthnot, Charles (1761-1850), Bri¬        tion of Venetian territory on Adri¬
  tish ambassador to the Porte (1804-       atic, 252-3, 337, 390. See also Otto¬
  7), 193, 350, 352-3, 357-8, 442n27        man Empire, wars of 1736-9, 1787-
Archives, 491-3                             92.
Arif Efendi, Arab zade, Sheyh ul-Islam     Avariz tax, 161
  (1807-8), 402, 404                       Avlonya (Valona), Adriatic port in S
al-Arish, Treaty of (1800), 258, 271,        Albania, 228
  272,302                                  Ayaina (Uyaina), town in the Nejd,
Arithmetic, 145, 148, 158, 160               Arabia, 221, 222
Armatolis, 229, 322                        Ayan (notable), 79-80, 211-214, 236,
Armenians, 190, 192, 198                     313, 347, 348, 397. See also Notables.
Army. See Military organization.           Aydin, SW Anatolian town, 125 km
Arnavutkoy, suburb of Istanbul on            SE of Izmir, 215
  Bosfxirus, 372                           Aynalikavak, in Haskby on Golden
Arpa Su, Battle of (1808), 393               Horn in Istanbul, 10
Arsenal of Istanbul. See Tersane; Jeb-     Aynalikavak, Treaty of (1779), 24, 331
  hane; Tophane.                           Azadh, N of Kiichuk Chekmeje, near
Arta (Narda, Larta), Greek village,          Istanbul, 144
  60 km S of Janina, 301                   Azadh gunpowder works, 144
Artillery, Artillery corps, 10, 11, 12,    al-Azhar mosque (Cairo), 260, 275, 289
  90, 102-4,106-7, 113, 120-6, 134-5,
  140-2, 145-7, 149, 242, 285, 299,        Bab-i An (Sublime Porte), 89, 91, 171
  371, 376, 380, 431n22, 436n2. See        Bab-i Asafi, (Office of the Grand Vezir),
  also Tophane.                              171-3
Artisans, 120, 123, 134, 140-1, 144,       Bad Ban-i Kalyon, 163
  157,162,305, 380, 437n6                  Badi-i Nusret, 158
Ashir Efendi. See Mustafa Ashir            Baghdad (Bagdad), 132, 142, 168-9,
  Efendi.                                    219-221, 225-6, 294-5, 296, 393
Asim Efendi, Ahmed, Ottoman chroni¬        Bahrein, 295
  cler (A.123511819-20), 154, 385, 495     Bailleul, Charroy, 344
Astronomy, 9, 148                          Bakirkby (Makrikdy), 2 km W of Istan¬
Aswan (Egypt), 258                           bul on Sea of Marmara, 142-4
At Meydan (opposite Sultan Ahmed           Balkan Mountains, 237, 238, 245,
  mosque, Istanbul), 380-1,383               302-4, 313-5, 348
Ataullah Mehmed Shanizade (§ani-           Balkan Peninsula, Balkans, 3, 6, 22,
  zade), Ottoman chronicler (A.1826),        47, 92,132-3,135,198,227-46,251,
  46, 495                                    254, 260, 264, 266-7, 270, 298-327,
Attica, 317                                  296, 329, 340, 349, 352, 360, 373,
Aubert, French artillery expert, 122,        389,397
  124, 141                                 Balyemez cannons, 121-2




                                     Index
                                                   I

514   Banat of Temesvar, 30, 35, 91, 282        Bessarabia, between Dniestr and Pruth
      Bandits, brigands, 44, 83, 125, 133,         rivers NW of Black Sea, 22, 44, 66,
        135, 212, 221, 227-9, 235-7, 240,          305,340, 353
        242-4, 283,298,301-4, 307-9, 311-       Bessieres, Julien, French agent to Ali
        4, 316-8, 322, 326, 347, 454nl. See        of Janina, 344
        also Notables.                          Beyhan Sultan (1766-1824) sister of
      Barracks, 114, 119, 122-5, 130-2,140,        Selim III, 88, 91
        146,154,156, 380                        Beylerbey, 169,172,233n, 444n4
      Baruthane-i Amire (Imperial Gun¬          Beylikji (Beylikci) department, 90,
        powder Works), 142-4. See also Gun¬        172-3
        powder.                                 Bianchi, Xavier, 192
      BashHoja (Ba^ Hoca), 146,163              Bika'a (The Lebanon Trough), Syrian
      Bash Muhasib, 437(19)                       agricultural plain NE of Beirut he-
      Bash Terjuman {Ba§ Tercuman), chief       V tween Lebanon and anti-Lebanon
        translator of Imperial Council, 198,      mountains, 291
        248, 335, 368, 371, 393, 454n73,        Bilejik (Bilecik, Birecik, al-Bira), SE
        454n74                                    Anatolian town, 45 km E of Gazian-
      Bashir II al-Shihabi, Emir of Lebanon       tep, on Euphrates river, 215
        (1789-1840), 219, 291, 292, 294         Bimarhane (General Hospital), 165
      Basra, Iraqi port at head of Shatt al-    Binbashi (Binba^i), army major, 131
        Arab near Persian Gulf, 168-9,          de Bizemont, Comte, 453n65
        220-2                                   Black Sea (Kara Deniz, Bahr-i Aswad),
      Battal Agha, 302                            7, 9, 10, 24, 28, 58-9, 65-7, 68, 126,
      Battal Hiiseyin Pasha, Anatolian nota¬      246, 249-251, 256, 267, 281-2, 284,
        ble, 58-9, 216, 283                       302, 315, 329, 334, 361, 389, 391,
      Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha. See Mus¬           393
        tafa Pasha Bayrakdar/Alemdar.           Bodrum (Halicarnassus) SW Anatolian
      Bedouins, 217-221, 223-226, 260, 294,       port on Aegean, 160 km S of Izmir,
        296-7                                     441n27
      Belgrade, capital of Serbia, at conflu¬   Boeotia, Greek agricultural plain NW
        ence of Danube and Save, 7, 29-31,        of Athens between Thebes and Li-
        35, 38, 42-3, 50, 142, 169,227,237-       vadia, 317
        241, 243-245, 301, 305-7, 310, 318-     Bogaz (Bogaz) Naziri (Superintendant
        320, 322-7, 339, 342-3, 349-51,           of Bosporus forts), 126
        356-7, 361                              Bolu (Bithynium), NW Anatolian town,
      Belgrade, Treaty of (1739), 7 , 62 , 63     253 km E of Istanbul, 132
      Bender, capital of Bujak province in      Bo'liik, Bdliik Bashi (Ba§i), 113
        Bessarabia on Dniestr river, 110 km     Bombardier corps. See Humbaraji
        NW of Akkerman, 30, 38, 42, 46            corps.
      Beni Halid, Arab tribe, 225               Bonaparte,      Napoleon    (1769-1821),
      Benoit, Jean Baptiste, 157                  First Consul (1799-1804), Emperor
      Berat (Arnavut Belgradi), Albanian          of France (1804-14,1815), 135, 192,
        town, 50 km SW of Elbasan, 228,           246, 25, 253-5, 257-61, 263, 271-5,
        234,299-301, 312, 314                     278-9, 281, 328-330, 332-6, 340,
      Berats of protection, 341, 350              344-5, 349, 352-3, 358, 361, 364,
      Bergama (Pergamon, Pergamus), Ana¬          387-390, 392
        tolian town, in valley of Bakir Chay    Bonneval (French naval officer), 441-
        river, 110 km N of Izmir, 215             n27
      Berkovatz (Berkofcha), Serbian town       Bonneval, Alexandre de (Humbaraji-
        on Ogustul river, near Nish, 309          bashi Ahmed Pasha), 8, 123, 181,
      Berlin, 186, 188-9, 248. See also Prus¬     405, 417n6
        sia.                                    Borak, Serbian town 17 km S of Bel¬
      Bertrand, 93, 105                           grade, 327
      Beshiktash (Be§ikta§), N of Istanbul      Bosnia (Bosna), Bosnians, in NW Yugo¬
       on Bosporus, 133                           slavia between Dalmatia and Serbia,




                                           Index
Bosnia — continued                         Biiyiikdere, on Bosporus N of Istanbul,    515
  22, 30, 32, 35, 37-8, 40, 50, 62, 122,     263, 378-9
  123, 125, 169, 212, 218-9, 232-3,
  235, 237, 238, 240, 241, 252, 305,
  307, 316, 318, 320, 322-6, 336, 338,     Cairo (al-Qahira), 89, 142, 257, 260,
  340, 342-4, 350,355-7, 360-1, 363-         277, 286,287-290, 296, 360
  4, 390, 393                              Caliph, Caliphate, 10
Bosporus (Bosphorus, Bogaz Id), 8, 59,     Calligraphy, 148             »
  127, 133, 263, 267, 304, 354, 372,       Callimachi, Alexander, Phanariote
  379, 393                                   Greek notable. Bash Terjilman {1785
Bosporus forts, 126, 376-8, 385-7            -8,1794), 454n74
Bostaniyan-i Hassa corps, Bostani Tii-     Callimachi, Charles, Phanariote Greek
  fenkjisi {Tilfenkcisi) corps, 130,435n     notable, Hospodar of Wallachia
  63                                         {1806), 349
Bostanji (Bostanci) corps, Bostanji        Campbell Mustafa Agha, 121, 154
  Bashi {Bostanci Bap), 185, 303, 346      Campo Formio, Treaty of {1797), 252,
Boza (Buzau, Buza, Rimnik) river,            254,255,337
  separating Moldavia and Wallachia,       Cannons, cannon foundries, cannon
  38                                         corps, 90, 100, 102-4, 107, 113,
Brankovina, Serbian mountain district        121-3, 134, 138-42, 147, 149, 242.
  SW of Belgrade, 319                        See also Artillery corps; Tophane.
Bribery, 43, 79, 95, 120, 154-5, 167,      Cannon-wagon corps, 102-4, 121, 123,
  174-5, 249, 371                            134,242, 432n28
Brugnard, Austrian agent to Balkans,       Capitulations treaties, 177,178
  232                                      Caradja (Caragea), Manuel, Phan¬
Brune, Marshal Marie-Ann {1763-              ariote Greek notable. Bash Terju-
  1815), French ambassador to the            man {1788-90), 454n74
  Porte {1802-4), 192, 329, 332            Carlowitz (Karlowitz, Sremski Kar-
Bucharest, capital of Wallachia, 25,         lovci), Danubian Serbian town NE of
  36, 39, 44, 52, 55, 254, 305,319,344,      Belgrade, 239
  361, 364, 385, 391, 392                  Carlowitz, Treaty of {1699), 6
Bucharest, Treaty of {1812), 392           Carpathian mountains, run N/S, sepa¬
Bug (Aksu) River, N/S Podolia river,         rating Moldavia from Transylvania,
  empties into Black Sea at Oczakov,         29, 31, 32, 39
  9, 22, 24, 28, 29, 57, 65, 67            Carthalina, district of Georgia, in Cau¬
Bujak (Bucak, Bu^ak) province, in            casus, 67
  Bessarabia, 100 km N of Black Sea,       Cartography, 159
  9                                        Castelnuovo, Adriatic port in S Dal¬
Bukovina, SE Galicia province, NW            matia, 100 km NW of Scutari, 337,
  of Moldavia, 50, 56, 62                     349
Bulgaria (Bulgaristan), 22, 44, 227,       Catherine II The Great, Empress of
   235, 236-46,249,301-4, 307-8, 311,        Russia (reigned 1762-96), 7 , 21-22,
   313-7, 326, 335, 339, 345, 348, 398        24-5, 29,31,49, 64-6,231, 253, 271,
Burgas (Burgaz), Black Sea port in            330, 405, 418nl
  Thrace (modern Bulgaria), 70 km S        Catholics in Ottoman Empire. See
  of Varna, 302                               Subjects, non-Muslim.
Bursa, in NW Anatolia, 80 km S of          Cattaro (Kotor), Adriatic port in S Dal¬
  Istanbul, 285, 382                          matia, 10 km E of Castelnuovo across
Bushatli family, Albanian notable             Gulf of Cattaro, 252, 336-8, 349,
  dynasty, 230, 233-5. See also Mus¬          363,388-9
  tafa Pasha, Bushatli; Mahmud Pa¬         Caucasus, 26-7, 35, 45, 57-9, 215,
   sha, Kara, Bushatli.                       330, 354, 360
Butrinto (Buthrinto), Albanian port on     Cavalry, 82, 104-5, 106-8, 121, 125,
   Adriatic opposite Corfu, 234, 252,         132, 138, 405. See also Spahi corps.
   253, 265, 267, 270                      Census, 76, 84




                                      Index
                                                   t'

516   Cephalonia, largest of Ionian islanfls    Corfu island —continued
         NW of the Morea, 252, 266                bania, 229, 252-3, 265-270, 299-
      Cerigo (Quka), Island S of the Morea,       300, 316, 336, 344,389,394
         252, 266                               CoHnth, 229, 298
      Chapanoglu (Qapanoglu), Anatolian         Corruption in Ottoman Empire, 33, 74,
         notable family, 215-6, 242, 283-4.       79, 84, 93, 95, 110, 151, 162, 167,
        See also Suleyman Bey, Chapanoglu.        169-70
      Charbonnel, Colonel, 299, 300             Craiova (Karayova), capital of little
      Chavush (Qavu§) corps, Chavush Bashi        Wallachia, in SW Wallachia, 210
        (Qavu§ Ba§i), 92, 113, 400                km W of Bucharest, 305, 355, 392
      Cheshme (Qegme, Chesme), Aegean           Crete, 22, 88, 169, 197, 256
        port 60 km W of Izmir, opposite         Crimea, Crimean Tatars, 9, 23-27, 31,
        Chios, 9                                  33-5, 37, 44-6, 56, 58, 67, 216, 314,
      Cheshme, Battle of (1770), 9, 14-4, 34,   ^ 335,360
        43, 145, 153                            Croatia, N and W of Bosnia in NW of
      Childir (Qildir), 75 km N of Kars in E      modern Yugoslavia, 7, 32, 50, 240,
        Anatolia, 168                             337,338
      Chios (Sakiz) island, 100 km W of Izmir   Cuny, 122, 124, 141
        in Aegean, 311                          Customs duties, 178, 281, 320, 345,
      Chirpiji (Qirpici), 402                     350 >
      Choiseul-Gouffier, comte Marie Gab¬       Cyprus, 22, 197, 256
        riel Auguste Florian de, French am¬     Czartoryski, Prince Adam (1770-1861),
        bassador to the Porte (1784-92), 13-      Russian advisor on foreign policy
         14, 27, 191                              and Deputy Minister for Foreign
      Chorbaji (Qorhaci), 113                     Affairs (1804-6), 340
      Chorum (Corum), in NC Anatolia,           Czerna (Cerna) river, runs S from Ba-
        255 km NE of Ankara, 132, 215             nat into Danube at Orsova, 63
      Christians in Ottoman Empire. See
        Subjects, non-Muslim.
      Cilicia (Kilikya), NE Mediterranean       Dacia, 22
        coastal province in SE Anatolia, 215    Dagdevirenoglu (Dagdevirenoglu), no¬
      Circassia (Qerkezistan), NW Caucasus       table of Thrace, 227
        mountain district along NE coast of     Daghistan (Dagistan), NE Caucasus
        Black Sea, 58, 87, 376                   mountain province along W shore of
      Clothing, clothing regulations, 34, 77,    Caspian Sea from Baku N to Kelen-
        175                                      cha, 58
      Coburg, Prince Josias von, commander      Dahi, Dahis of Belgrade, 307, 307n,
        of Austrian army against Ottomans        317-324
        in 1787-92 war, 30, 36, 38-9, 52, 55-   Dalmatia, N/S province along Adriatic
        6, 59                                    coast of Bosnia and Herzegovina
      Codrika, Pangiotis, 189                    from Croatia to Montenegro, 22, 63,
      Coffee, coffee houses, coffee distribu¬     197, 235, 252-3, 334, 336-8, 340,
        tion, 175-8                              344-5, 349, 350, 352, 354-6, 360-1,
      Coinage, coins, 43, 81-2, 175, 370         363,389-90, 394-5
      Collingwood, Admiral Sir Charles          Damascus (Sham, §am), 168, 219,225-
        (1750-1810), commander of British        6,291-3, 297
        naval squadron in eastern Mediter¬      Damietta (Dimyat), Egyptian port on
        ranean, 1805-10, 359-60, 394             Mediterranean at NE mouth of Nile,
      Conscription, 106-8, 132, 156, 161,        276,286
        299, 346                                Danube (Tuna) river, 7, 10, 26-33, 38,
      Constantine, grandson of Catherine II,     40, 44,46,49-52, 55, 59-60, 62,102,
        22                                       228, 232, 236-240, 242, 245-6, 302-
      Copts, 261-2                               3, 313-5, 320, 322-3, 332, 336, 339,
      Corfu island, northernmost of Ionian       343, 350, 352-6, 359, 361-2, 364,
        islands, in Adriatic opposite S Al¬      376,385-7, 390-2, 401, 403




                                           Index
Dardanelles (Qanakkale bogazi), 10,         Dohruja—continued                          517
  264-5, 354, 358-9, 376-7, 386-7.           modern Rumania, 304, 315, 353, 361
  See also Straits.                         Drama, on Serez river in Macedonia,
Dariye (Dariyye), town in Nejd, cen¬          30 km NW of Kavalla, 227
  tral Arabia, 40 miles N of Riyadh,        Drina river, runs N/S between Bosnia
  222, 223, 225                               and Serbia, 239, 240, 320, 324, 326,
David, Pierre, French agent in Bosnia,        340, 343, 364, 393
  344,356, 363, 477n42                      Druzes, 291, 294             *
Defterdar, Defterdar-i Shikk-i Evvel        Duckworth, Admiral John Thomas
  iSikk-i Evvel), First Treasurer of the      (1748-1817), commander of British
  Imperial Treasury, 87, 437nl9               squadron besieging Istanbul (1806-
Defterdar-i Shikk-i Sani iSikk-i Sani),       7), 352, 358, 359
  Second Treasurer, 129, 134„ 161,          Durest, 153
  434n56
Defterdar-i Shikk-i Salis (Sikk-i Salis),   Eastern Question, 6-7, 9-10, 21-68,
  Third Treasurer, 161, 176                   247-258, 262-282, 328-364, 387-
Deli, Delis, Ottoman auxilliary troups,       393, 418-426
  104-5                                     Ebubekir Efendi (A.1807), director of
Deligrad, 45 km NE of Nish on Morava          Mint of Istanbul, 381-2, 386
  river in Serbia, 339                      Ebubekir Pasha (A.1813), governor of
Deliorman, 227, 302                           Bosnia, Belgrade, and Nish, 233,
Delvino (Delvine), 80 km NW of Janina         239, 241, 318-9, 321-5, 347-8, 354
  in S Albania, 228, 299-301, 316           Ebubekir Ratib Efendi (A.1799), Reis
Denmark, 64-5, 193                            ul-Kuttab (1795-6), 13, 17 , 64, 90,
Derebeys, 212-7, 454-5n2. See also            95-8, 189-190, 197, 369, 371, 372,
  Notables.                                   413, 428nl0, 430n39, 450n29
Descorches, Marie Louis Antoine, Mar¬       Economic problems, development, 175-
  quis de Saint Croix, French agent in        9, 213, 367, 406
  Istanbul (1793-5), 191, 195, 250          Edirne (Adrianople), on Maritza river
Devshirme (Dev§irme) system, 101,108          in Thrace, 232 km NW of Istanbul,
von Diez, Henric-Frederic, Prussian           47, 132,227,236,242-3,301-4, 308-
  ambassador at the Porte to 1790,            11, 315, 345-7, 351, 360-1, 364, 373,
  41-2,45-7                                   393, 394, 399-401
Dimotika (Dimetoka), 35 km S of Ed-         Edirne Incident (1806), 345-51, 374,
  irne on Maritza river, 227                  381
Divan    ul-Hiimayun.     See Imperial      Egypt (Misir), 3, 22, 51, 168, 176, 217-
  Council                                     218, 298, 332, 333, 336, 455n7; Mam-
Divan ul-Hususi, 260-1                        luks in, 217-220; Ottoman expedi¬
Divan Kalemi, 172-3                           tion to (1787), 26, 29,34,218; French
Divan ul-Umumi, 260                           expedition to (1798-1801), 120, 131,
Diyarbekir, SE Anatolian tovra, 190            135, 141,160,192, 246, 254-82, 299,
  km SW of Lake Van, 168, 215, 284,           302, 304, 306, 309, 328, 372-3, 388,
  293,312                                     433n47, 462-3nl, 464nl2; British
Dizdar, 124                                   occupation of (1801-3, 1807), 276-7,
Dnieper river (Ozii, Ek§i su), runs SW         279-80, 286,290,360, 376, 387, 389,
  into NW corner of Black sea at Kher¬         392; politics in, 1801-1807, 275-82,
  son, 9, 22, 24, 28                           286-91, 296-7, 313, 360
Dniestr river (Turla), runs SE as bound¬    Elbasan, 120 km SE of Scutari in Al¬
  ary between Bessarabia and Podolia           bania, 229, 233
  into NW corner of Black Sea at Ak-        Elfi Bey, Mohammad, Egyptian Mam-
  kerman, 38, 57, 65-7, 344, 351-3,            luk leader (d.l807), 275-6, 286-7,
  360, 363                                     289-90, 360
Dobruja (Dobruca), between Danube           Elgin, Lord, British ambassador to the
  and Black Sea, E of Wallachia, S of          Porte (1799-1801), 135, 193, 196,
  Moldavia and Bessarabia, in SE of            269, 270, 273, 277, 279,280




                                       Index
                                                     1

518   Emin Mehmed Efendi, 92              *       France — continued
      Enveri Efendi, Sadullah {A.1794-5),            131, 140-2, 145, 157-9, 182, 192,
        Ottximan chronicler, 92, 100-1, 105,        249, 251, 253, 255, 299, 354, 356,
        494                                         360, 362-4, 388, 390, 437n6,453n65;
      Epirus, NW Greece/S Albania province,         peace treaty with Ottoman Empire
        capital Janina, 62, 228-9, 252, 299,        (1801-2), 278-81, 286, 317, 328,
        312, 316                                    330, 468n76, 469n80; revolutionary
      Erakil Efendi, 144                            agents and propaganda in Istanbul,
      Erzurum, NE Anatolian town, 327 km            188, 191-2, 193-9, 249-50; territor¬
        SE of Trabzon, 58, 168, 216, 283-4,         ial acquisitions in Southeastern
        304, 312, 361, 372,393                      Europe, 252, 265-8, 334, 336-8,
      Esma Sultan (1782-1848), daughter of          388-9, 394-5. See also Egypt, French
        Abd ul-Hamid I, wife of Kiichiik            expedition to; French Revolution.
        Hiiseyin Pasha, 88, 369                   Franchini, 280
      Esrar Dede id.l797), 199                    Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor
      Et Meydan (Istanbul), 380-2, 404              (1792-1806), becomes Francis I,
      Euphrates (Firat) River, 3, 220, 221,         Emperor of Austria (1806-1835),
        294                                         341-2
      Eytib, at NW corner of Golden Horn in       Frederick II the Great, King of Prussia
        Istanbul, 75, 145                           (reigned 1740-86), 41
      Eyiib Agha, 385                             Frederick William II, King of Prussia
                                                    (reigned 1786-97), 50, 53-4, 64
      Factories, 10, 123, 131, 139-144            French Revolution, effect on Ottoman
      Famine, 175, 178, 238, 370, 376, 387          Empire, 41, 42, 54-5, 62, 68, 112,
      Fazil Bey (d.l808), 199                       187, 191-2, 193-9, 247-51, 406-7,
      Fettah Efendi, Giirjii, 401-2                 429n35
      Feudal organization, fiefs, 82-3, 104,      Friedland, Battle of (1807), 388
         106, 117-20,123, 125,129, 132, 161,
         172-4, 230, 240, 242, 305, 307, 324-     Galata, section of Istanbul, 75, 78,199,
        5, 351, 430-ln3, 434n60                     380
      Feyzi, Kara, 301-3                          Galatz (Kalas, Galati), port on L bank
      Feyzullah Efendi, 355                         of Danube in Moldavia, 20 km N of
      Financial organization, problems, and         Ibrail, 31, 35-6, 42, 59-60, 66-7, 391
        reforms, 37n, 43, 49, 73, 74, 75, 81-2,   Galib, Sheyh, 199
        84, 90, 96, 109, 167-70, 175, 261-2.      Galib Efendi, Mehmed Said (1763-
        See also Treasury.                          1828), Reis ul-Kuttab (1806-7,1808-
      Finland, 29, 40                               11) and Ottoman ambassador, 189-
      Fokshani (Fokshan, Focziani), 50 km           90, 280-1, 375, 385, 391-2, 396, 400,
        E of Sereth river in Moldavia, 36, 37,     413, 450n26, 451n35, 468n74
        38                                        Galib ibn Musaid, Sherif of Mecca
      Fokshani, Battle of (1789), 36, 42, 43        (1787-1813), 224-7, 294-8
      France, agents and ambassadors to the       Galicia, N of Moldavia/Hungary/Car¬
        Porte, 13-14, 31, 33, 45, 47, 48, 191-      pathian mountains, 31, 41, 45-6, 50,
        2, 195-8, 249-50, 329, 349, 429n35;         53,55-6
        agents sent to Ottoman subjects in        Gallipoli (Gelibolu) peninsula, 88,142-
        Balkans and Arab world, 197, 249,          4, 244-5, 312
        253-5, 264, 281, 299, 316, 329, 333,      Gavur Imam, Bulgarian bandit, 244
        336, 344-5, 355-6, 362, 363, 375,         Gaza, 135, 292
        394; diplomatic relations with Otto¬      Gediz river, runs E/W 20 km N of Iz¬
        man Empire, 10-11, 14-16, 22-23,           mir, 215
        27, 37, 42, 54-5, 186-99, 247-282,        Gemlik, NW Anatolian port on Sea of
        329-336, 340-45, 351-61, 370-75,           Marmara, 40 km W of Iznik, 441n27
        387-95, 451n35, 451n36; officers and      Geography, 148, 159
        technicians in Ottoman service, 10-       Geometry, 9, 145, 148, 158-60, 438n31
        11, 8, 17, 22-3, 83, 93, 121-2, 128,      Georgia, province in S central Cauca-




                                             Index
Georgia — continued                        Greek Scheme of Catherine II, 22          519
  sus, S of Caucasus mountains, 24,26,     Gumuljiine (Giimulciine, Komotini), in
  57-8, 67, 220,330                         W Thrace, 100 km SW ofEdirne, 227
Ghegs, 230                                 Gunpowder, gunpowder factories, 88,
Girgis ui-Gohari, 261                        108,121,138-9, 142-4
Giurgevo (Giurgiu, Yerkoyii, Yerkokii),    Gushanatz Ali, 324, 356
  on L bank of Danube in Wallachia         Gustav III, King of Sweden (reigned
  opposite Ruschuk, 47, 52-3, 56, 59,        1771-1792), 40, 45
  364, 386,391
Gize, Battle of (1798), 257                Hadd, 168, 443nl
Gladova (Feth ul-Islam), on R bank of      Hafiz Pasha, governor of Nish, Bel¬
  Danube in the Kraina, 90 km N of           grade, 325-6
  Vidin, 364                               Hakki Efendi, second Treasurer under
Gold, 81, 175                                Abd ul-Hamid I, 74
Golden Horn (Halic), 8, 124, 380           Hakki Pasha, Ahmed Kamil Pasha-
Goritza (Ghoritscha), 40 km S of Tri-        zade Mehmed (d.l811). Governor of
  kala in Thessaly, ^34                      Rumelia (1796-7, 1801-2), 91-2,
Grain, grain supplies, granaries, 10,        100,242-4,303,307-11,335,428nl5,
  42, 51, 89, 175-6,178, 236, 238, 313-      459n63
  4, 376, 381, 387                         Halet Efendi, Mehmed Said (1761-
Grand Admiral (Kapudan-i Derya, Ka-          1822), Ottoman ambassador to
  pudan Pasha), 13, 34, 44, 88, 154,         France (1802-5), 385, 398, 450n23
  160-2, 274, 358, 368-70, 373, 412        Halil Agha, 307, 323
  (list)                                   Halil Hamid Pasha (d.l784). Grand
Grand Vezir (Sadr-i Ali, Vezir-i A‘zem),     Vezir (1782-5), 11, 14, 34, 35, 121,
  4, 36, 38, 48-9, 85, 91-2, 119, 136,       145, 154,417nll, 442n29
  169, 171-3, 263, 293, 368, 370, 372-     Halil Nuri Bey (d.1798-9), Ottoman
  3, 386‘, 399, 411 (list), 426-7nl          chronicler, 92, 100-1, 495
Great Britain, alliances with Ottoman      Halil Usta, Veysioglu (Veysioglu), Bal¬
  Empire, 267, 465-6n37; ambassadors         kan notable, 227
  to the Porte, 13, 31, 45, 48, 52, 57,    Hamid al-Thamir, 221
   135, 193-4, 196, 269-70, 273, 277-      Hammer-Purgstall, Joseph von, 189,
  80, 350-3, 357-8, 442n27; diplomatic       450n29
  relations with the Ottoman Empire,       Hangerli,    Constantine,   Phanariote
   15, 23, 25-7, 37, 42, 45-6, 49-50,        notable, Hospodar of Wallachia
  52-3, 56-7, 61-4, 89, 187-9, 193,          (1797-9), 246
   196-7, 248-51, 253-4, 258, 262-80,      Harem, 88, 198
  286, 330-5,340,350-3,357-60,371-         al-Hasa, village in Northern Nejd,
  3, 387, 390, 394-5; Ottoman ambas¬         Arabia, 225-6
  sadors to, 187-9; military assistance    Hasan Pasha, governor of Belgrade,
  to Ottoman Empire, 127, 135, 141,           318,320-1
   143, 182, 266, 438n31, 441n24; ac¬      Hasan, Gavur, Balkan bandit, 398, 400
  tions against French Expedition to       Hasan Pasha, Gazi, Jezayirli (1713-
  Egypt, 255, 258, 263, 264, 271, 276;        1790), Ottoman Grand Admiral
  occupation of Egypt (1801-3), 276,          (1774-89) and Grand Vezir (1789-
  279-80, 286, 290, 376; occupation of        90), as Grand Admiral, 10,13,14,15,
  Egypt (1807), 360, 387, 389, 392;           25, 26, 29, 34, 153-4, 218-9, 230,
  naval blockade of Istanbul (1806-7),        412, 433n52, 417nl0; as military
  352, 354-5, 357-9, 376; intervention        commander, 34-35; as Grand Vezir,
  in Southeastern Europe, 394, 344,           43-8, 411; death of, 48, 51, 424nl8
  362                                      Hasan Bey Jeddawi, Egyptian Mamluk
Greece, Greek Millet, Greeks, 9, 22,          leader, 275
   152, 163, 189-90, 192, 197-8, 230,      Hasan Pasha, Jenaze (Cenaze), Grand
   238-9, 248, 264, 298-301, 307, 317,        Vezir (1789), 36-8, 40, 42-4, 411
  322, 330, 332, 336, 345, 394             Hasan Pasha, Sherif, Chelebizade (§e-




                                      Index
520    Hasan Pasha, Sherif—continued           '    Huseyin Pasha, Kuchuk — co/itiuMCcf
           rif, Qelebizade), Grand Vezir (1790-         (d.l803), Ottoman Grand Admiral,
           1), 49, 51-2, 55-6, 59-60, 411               1792-1803, 13, 48,87-8,155-7,192,
       Haskovo (Haskoy), in Thrace (Bul¬                197, 245-6, 269, 276-9, 290, 310-1,
          garia), 90 km NW of Edirne, 309,              369-73, 412, 428n2, 439n8, 440n9
          312                                       Huseyin Agha (Aga), Pehlivan, 377,
       Haskoy, on the Golden Horn, NW of                385-6
          the Tersane in Istanbul, 10, 83, 124-     Huseyin Bey, notable of Philippopolis,
          5, 140-1, 146,158, 184                        314
       Hayduks, 318, 322                            Huseyin Rifki Efendi, 147
       Hayrullah Mehmed Efendi, Hafiz, 92,          Hiisrev Mehmed Pasha, (d.l855) gov¬
          103                                          ernor of Egypt, Bosnia, 274-5,286-8,
       Hekim Bashi {Ba§i), Chief Doctor, 165           291, 296, 336, 356, 363
       Heliopolis, Battle of (1800), 258            Hhtchinson, General John (1757-
       Hendese Odasi, 154                              1832), British commander in Egypt
       Henin, French revolutionary agent in            (1801-2), 276-7
          Istanbul, 191, 195, 452n54, 452n55        Hydra (Camhk) island, in Gulf of Nau-
       von Hertzberg, Count, Prussian For¬             plia, E of Morea, 265, 359
         eign Minister, 41, 54
       Herzegovina (Hersek), between Bosnia        Ibrahim Agha (Aga), 320, 353
         and Montenegro, separated from            Ibrahim Bey, Egyptian Mamluk leader
         Adriatic by S Dalmatia, 22, 232-4,            (d.l816), 217-8, 275-6, 286, 360
         340, 356, 361, 363, 390                   Ibrahim Efendi, governor of Bender,
       Hezargrad (Razgrad), 60 km SE of               216
         Ruschuk in Bulgaria, 237, 313-4,          Ibrahim Efendi, director oiIrad-i Jedid
         347                                          treasury, 374, 381-2
       Hijaz (Hicaz), NW Arabia coastal prov¬      Ibrahim Kethoda, 278
         ince on Red Sea, including Mecca          Ibrahim Pasha, Ottoman ambassador
         and Medina, 223-6, 294-7                     to Austria (1720), 186, 447n8
      Holy Cities, 129, 219, 222, 224, 227,        Ibrahim Pasha, son of Mohammad Ali
         295, 297, 332, 376. See also Mecca;          Pasha, 291
         Medina.                                  Ibrahim Afif Efendi, Ottoman ambas¬
      Hospitals, 131, 165-6                           sador to Austria (1797-1800), 188-9
      Hospodars, princes of Moldavia and          Ibrahim Efendi, Arabaji (Arabaci)
         Wallachia, 30, 47, 236, 238, 246, 331        zade. Lieutenant of Grand Vezir, 91,
      Hubsch, Baron de. Ambassador of Den¬            102
        mark and Saxony at the Porte, 193         Ibrahim Pasha, notable of Berat and
      Hulusi Dede (d.l805), 199                      Scutari, 228, 234, 299-301, 312, 314,
      Humbaraji (Humbaraci) corps. Mortar            317,335-6, 343-4
        corps, Humbarajibashi (Humbara-           Ibrahim Pasha, Damad, 7
        ciba§i), 83, 85, 93, 102-4, 106, 114,     Ibrahim Pasha, Governor of Damascus,
        123-5, 146, 148-9, 242, 396, 432n34          Aleppo, 292-4
      Humphrys, John Montagu, 196                Ibrahim Hilmi Pasha, Kegi boynuzu
      Hungary, 3, 6-7, 30, 41, 49, 239, 240,         (d.l818), Ottoman Grand Vezir
        341
                                                     (1806-7), 351, 354, 375-6, 385-6,
      Hurshid Ahmed Pasha, governor of               396, 411
        Nish, Alexandria, 288-9, 355, 361,       Ibrahim Efendi, Kasap Bashi (Ba§i)
        385                                          zade, 159
      Huseyin Pasha, Battal; see Battal          Ibrahim Agha (Pasha), Katar Aghasi
        Hiiseyin Pasha                               (Agasi), 291
      Huseyin Pasha, Giritli, Ottoman Grand      Ibrahim Miiteferrika, operator of first
        Admiral (1789-92), 34, 44, 154-5,           Ottoman Turkish printing press, 8,
        412                                          11,184, 446-7n4
      Huseyin Efendi, Kirimh, Haci, 438n31       Ibrahim Nesim Efendi (1770-1807),
      Huseyin Pasha, Kuchuk (Ku^uk)                 Defterdar (1793-4, 1796-9), 90, 92,




                                            Index
Ibrahim Nesim 'EtenAi —continued           Ishak Agha —continued                        521
   101-3, 105, 197, 278, 284, 372-5,          371-2, 418n5, 418n8, 439-40n9
   381-2                                   Islam Progno, 301
Ibrahim Pasha of Scutari, 233, 235         Ismail, in Bessarabia on L bank of N
Ibrail (Braila), in Wallachia on L bank       branch of Danube mouths, 50 km W
   of Danube at confluence of Sereth          of Kilia, 31, 34, 38, 43, 44, 45, 55,
   river, opposite Machin, 40 km S of         59-60, 67, 227,313, 353-4,361,364,
   Galatz, 31, 36, 38, 53, 55, 59, 227,       391
   348,364, 391,398                        Ismail Ferruh Efendi, Ottoman am¬
Ichko, Peter, Serbian agent sent to           bassador to England (1796-1802),
   Istanbul, 343, 349-50, 356                 188-9
Idiye, 169                                 Ismail     Efendi,  Gelenbevi,     158-9,
Idris Agha (Aga), Molla, assistant to         442n29
   and successor ofPasvanoglu at Vidin,    Ismail Pasha, Hafiz (d. 1807), Ottoman
   305, 355, 362                              Grand Admiral (1804-5), and Grand
Iftariye, 169                                 Vezir (1805-6), 346-7, 351, 373-5,
Ihbariye, 116                                 411-2
Ikindi Divan, 171                          Ismail Agha (Aga), Tirsiniklioglu (Tir-
Iltizam (tax farm), 434n57. See also          siniklioglu) (d.iSOd), notable of
   Taxes, tax farms.                          northern Bulgaria, 227, 236-8, 241,
Ilyasoglu (Ilyasoglu), Anatolian nota¬        243, 245, 302, 304-5, 309, 313-5,
   ble family, 215                            317, 331,345-8, 397
Imperial class iMulkiye), 91, 94-5         Istanbul (Constantinople), 10, 22, 26,
Imperial Council {Divan-i Hiimayun),          38, 43, 47, 51, 108, 119, 121, 124,
   72-3, 90-2, 113, 115, 128-9, 148,          126-7, 131-3, 142, 157, 163, 165,
   162, 165, 168, 171-3, 198, 248, 263,       176, 185, 193-9, 215-7, 226, 235-8,
   280, 357, 369, 371,379,392-4               240-2, 244, 248, 277-8, 280, 286,
Imperial Palace (Topkapi Saray), 73,          288, 290-1, 293, 296, 303, 306-11,
   161, 380, 404-5, 435n63                    313, 315, 321-2, 325, 328, 330-3,
Industry, 10, 44, 96, 123, 131,139-213        325, 328,330-2, 335, 339, 342, 345-
Inflation, 84, 175, 178, 370, 376, 387        9, 354-7, 360-1, 373-4, 376-7, 385-
Inheritance, 114, 117, 126, 174               6, 388-92, 397-9, 401-2, 407; dis¬
Ionian Islands, 252, 264-70, 273-4,           order and popular unrest in, 25, 42-
   278, 281, 298, 299, 329, 332-4, 336,       3, 60, 75-6, 78, 178, 354, 370-2,
   362, 388-9, 394-5. See also Septin-        379-83; food supplies for, 236, 313-4,
   sular Republic                             387; population control of, 76, 83-4,
Ipsilanti, Alexander (1725-1807), Pha-        175, 390. See also Great_ Britain,
   nariote notable, Hospodar of Wal¬         naval blockade of Istanbul.
   lachia (1774-84, 1796-7) and Mol¬       Istankoy     (Stankhio,   Los)     island,
   davia (1786-8, 1807), 30, 236              Aegean island opposite Bodrum on
Ipsilanti, Constantine (1760-1816),           SW coast of Anatolia, 244
   Phanariote notable, Hospodar of         Istrian Peninsula, 252-3, 334
   Moldavia (1799-1801) and Wallachia      Italinsky, Audrey Yakovlevich (1743-
   (1802-6, 1807), Bash Terjuman of           1827), Russian ambassador to the
   Porte (1796-9), 184, 305, 315, 319,        Porte (1803-6,1812-16), 330-1, 333,
   322-3, 331, 335, 344, 349, 352-4,          341,350-2, 354
   357, 371, 375, 454n74                   Ithaca Island, one of Ionian islands, E
Irad-i Jedid (Irad-i Cedid), the New          of Cephalonia, 252, 266
   Treasury of Selim III, 109, 120, 125,   Izmir (Smyrna), Aegean port in SE
   127-9, 131-2, 161, 174, 177, 374,          Anatolia, 132, 142, 144, 215
   381, 434n55, 434n57                     Izzet Bey, Defteri zade, 13
Iran, 344, 388                             Izzet Mehmed Pasha (A.1812), Otto¬
Iraq, 219-20, 223-6,294-6                     man Grand Vezir (1794-8), 263,411,
Iron Gates of Danube, 339                     370-2
Ishak Agha (Bey), 13-16, 155, 358-9,       Izzet Bey, Osman Pasha zade, 399




                                      Index
                                                      I

      Jaffa, 292                                   Juma (Cuma), 50 km SE of Hezargrad
522
      Jaize (Caize) fees, 444n5                      in Bulgaria, 313
      Janbulat, Lebanese notable family,           Jumelin, B., 139
        291
      Janik (Canik, Canit, Miisliiman Sam-         Kabartay, in C Caucasus N of Cauca¬
        sun), in environs of Samsun, on              sus mountains, 57-8
        Black Sea, 216, 283                        Kadiasker, 89, 371, 399
      Janikli Ali Pashaoglu (Canikli Ali           Kadikoy (Chalcedon), S of Uskiidar on
        Pagaoglu), Anatolian notable family,        Sea of Marmara opposite Istanbul,
        215-6, 283-4                                 131
      Janina (Yanya, loannina, Gianina,            Kadri Bey/Pasha, Mehmed, Ottoman
        Yannina), capital of Epirus, in NW          Grand Admiral (1803-4), 264, 268-9,
        Greece/S Albania, 228, 231, 299, 301,       373,'412
        317, 344. See also Ali Pasha, Tepe-        Kafa (Kefe, Theodosia, Feodosia), SE
        delenli (Ali Pasha of Janina).              Crimean port, 100 km W of Straits
      Janissary (Yenigeri) corps. Janissaries,      of Kerch, 55
         vii, 33, 43, 47, 82, 84-5, 88, 91, 100-   Kagithane (Saadabad, Syndaris), at N
         1, 105-7, 110, 119-121, 126, 128,          end of Golden Horn in Istanbul,
         135, 141, 149, 184, 220-1, 226, 237,        145-6
         239-40, 290-4, 303, 306-7, 346,           Kalafat,’ on L bank of Danube in Wal-
         351, 354,367, 370-3, 375-7, 379-80,        lachia opposite Vidin, 52
         382, 384-6, 397-9, 402-3, 405, 407,       Kalarash, on L bank of Danube in Wal-
         431n6                                       lachia opposite Silistria, 364
      Jassy (Ia§i, Ya§), capital of Moldavia,      Kalubara river, branch of Danube,
         25, 30, 32, 234, 344, 353                  running S/N to point W of Belgrade
      Jassy, Congress and Treaty of (1792),         in Serbia, 318-9
         64-68, 92-3, 112, 160, 187, 189-90,       Kalyonju (Kalyoncu) Bedeli, 57, 161
         211, 216, 247, 267, 283, 369, 426nl3      Kalyonlar Katibi, 162
      Jaubert, Amedee, French diplomatic           Kalyonjuoglu (Kalyoncuoglu), Anato¬
         agent in Turkey and Iran (1804-5),         lian notable family, 215
         192                                       Kapudan-i Derya, Kapudan      Pasha.
      Jebbar zade, 132                              See Grand Admiral.
      Jebeji (Cebeci) corps, 125, 432-3n40         Kapudane-i Humayun, 164
      Jemshitoglu (Cem§itoglu), Anatolian          Kara Feyzi, Bulgarian bandit, 243-4,
         notable family, 215                        311
      Jena, Battle of (1806), 352                  Kara George (Karageorgii, Black
      Jerrah Bashi (Cerrah Ba§i), 165               George, George Petrovich) (1760-
      Jerusalem, 89                                 1817), leader of Serbian Revolution
      Jeunes de Langues, 192                        (1804-13), 318-27, 339-43, 344,
      Jews, Jewish Millet, 77, 190, 192, 198.       349-50, 356-7, 362, 364, 393
         See also Subjects, non-Muslim.            Karaman (Larende, Laranda), S Cen¬
      Jezzar Pasha; see Ahmed Jezzar Pasha          tral Anatolia, 111 km SE of Konya,
      Jidda (Cidda), W Arabian port on Red          132, 168, 215, 303
         Sea, W of Mecca, 168, 224, 295-7          Karaosmanoglu (Karaosmanoglu), An¬
      Jones, John Paul, 29                          atolian notable family, 215, 242,
      Joseph II (1741-90), Hapsburg, Holy           312
         Roman Emperor (1780-1790), 24,            Karimburgaz, adjacent to Kiichiik
         26-7, 30-2, 35, 39,41,49,232               Chekmeje, W of Istanbul, 144
      Juchereau de Saint Denys, Baron,             Karmoran, 154, 439n5
         354, 390                                  Kars, in NE Anatolia, 223 km NE of
      Judicial organization and reform, 73,         Erzurum, 168-9, 293, 360
         76n,78-9, 115, 260                        Kasimpasha (Kasimpa§a), on N shore
      Jiilus Bahshishi (Ciilus bah§i§i), ac¬        of Golden Horn in Istanbul, 376
         cession fee, 120                          Kasr ul-Ayni, suburb of Cairo, 288




                                              Index
Kasr Bassam, 120 miles NE of Riyadh,      Krushevatz—continued                      523
 Arabia, 225                                80 km NW of Nish in Serbia, 325-6,
Kastamonu, in N Central Anatolia,           339
 201 km SW of Sinop, 132                  Kiichiik Alioglu (Kiigtik Alioglu),
Katar, peninsula in E Central Arabia        Anatolian notable family, 215
 on Persian Gulf, 225                     Kiichiik Kaynarji (Kiigiik Kaynarca),
Katar (Kotor, Cattaro), on Adriatic         10 km S of Silistria in Bulgaria,
  coast of Dalmatia, 50 km SE of Ra-        9-10
  gusa, 252, 336-8, 349, 363, 388-9       Kiichiik Kaynarji, Treaty of (1774),
Katiboglu (Katiboglu), Anatolian nota¬      9-10,23-4, 57, 66-7
  ble family, 215                         Kurds, 221, 292, 294
Kayseri (Caesarea), in central Ana¬       Kurt Ahmed Pasha, notable of Berat,
  tolia, 326 km SE of Ankara, 13,2, 215     228,234
Kherson (Kerson), port at mouth of        Kiitahya, in E Central Anatolia, 260
  Dnieper river on Black Sea, 90 km E       km S of Izmit, 132, 215, 228
  of Oczakov, 24, 69                      Kutuzov, General Mikhail Illarinovich
Khotzim (Hotin, Chocim), port on R          (1745-1813), Russian ambassador to
  bank of Dniestr in upper Bessarabia,      the Porte (1793-4), 189-90, 193,
  22, 30, 50, 54, 60, 63, 91, 238, 353      450-ln31
Kilya (Kili, Kilia, Chiba), port on N     Kuwait, in NE Arabia on Persian Gulf
  branch of Danube mouth, in Mol¬           S of Shaft al-Arab, 225-6
  davia, 50 km from Black Sea, 31, 38,
  59-60, 67, 353                          Lafitte, 121
Kinburn (Kilburun), fort at tip of pen¬   Lagimji (Lagimci) corps. Mining corps,
  insula where Bug and Dniepr reach         Lagimji Bashi (Lagimci Ba§i), 83,
  Black Sea, opposite Oczakov, 28-9         85, 102-3, 104, 123-6,146,148-9
Kirshehir (Kir§ehir), in central Ana¬     Lahsa (el-Hasa) NE Arabian town and
  tolia, 192 km SE of Ankara, 132           province on Persian Gulf, 295
Rise (Kese), Rise department, 37n,        Lauriston, General Jacques Alexandre
   172-3                                    Bernard (1768-1828), commander of
Risedar, 188                                French forces in Dalmacia and Ra-
Kleber, General, French commander in        gusa (1807-8), 336-8
  Egypt, 258, 272                         Lazarev, Russian agent to Porte (1807),
Knin, in N central Dalmatia, 90 km E        392
  of Zara, 337                            Lazarevich, Archbishop Alexa, 325
de Knobelsdorf, Friedrich William,        Leake, W. M., British agent to Ali
   Prussian ambassador to the Porte         Pasha of Janina (1808), 394
   (1790-4), 47, 56, 193                  Lebanon, 219, 291, 294
Koban (Kuban), province in NW Cau¬        LeBrun, Jacques Balthasard, French
   casus, N of Caucasus mountains, N        naval architect in Ottoman service,
   of Circassia, 9, 35, 44, 58, 67          157-9, 438n31
Kochubeg, Victor Pavlovich (1768-         Lemnos (Limni) Island, opposite Dar¬
   1834), Russian ambassador to the         danelles in Aegean Sea, 387
   Porte, 1792-8, 193, 254                Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor
Koehler, General, British military ad¬      (reigned 1790-2), 49, 50, 52, 54
   visor in Ottoman service, 135-6, 266   Lepanto (Inebahti, Naupaktos), port
Kojaeli (Kocaeli), W Anatolian village      on SW coast of Northern Greece and
   on Black Sea, 90 km NE of Adapa-         Gulf of Corinth, 150, 301
   zan, 242                               Le Roy, 153
Konya (Iconium), S Central Anatolia,      Leskovatz, 200 km S of Belgrade on
   260 km S of Ankara, 215                  Morava River in Serbia, 393
Kraina, NE section of Serbia, 240-1,      Levend Chiftlik (Levend Qiftlik), cen¬
   243, 305-6, 459n60                       ter of Nizam-i Jedid corps in Istan¬
Krushevatz (Alacahisar, Krukovatz),         bul, 122, 126, 128, 130-3, 370, 374,




                                     Index
524   Levend ChiftlWi —continued                Marash (Mara§, Germanicia, Mara-
        376, 378, 381, 433n52                      sim), SE Anatolia, 207 km NE of
      Liman Reisi, 155, 164                        Adana, 168-9
      Liston, Sir Robert (1742-1836), British   Mardin (Marde), SE Anatolia, 96 km S
        ambassador to the Porte (1793-9),          of Diyarbekir, 220
        193-4                                   Margariti, 316
      Lofcha (Lovatz), 120 km NE of Sofia in    Marmara, Sea of, 142, 144, 215, 354,
        Bulgaria, 235                              358, 377
      London, 248, 271, 273, 277.               Marmont, General Auguste (1774-
      Lonja Bashi (Lonca Ba§i), 164                1852), French commander in Dal¬
      Lorenzo, Dr., 13-14                          matia (1806-9), 349, 355-6, 364, 389
      Loudon, Marshal, 44-5, 50                 Martineshti (Martinestji), on Rimnik
      Louis XVI, King of France (reigned           river, boundary between Moldavia
        1774-92), 11,14-16, 22, 90,122,145,     '' and Wallachia, 36
        187, 247, 405, 418n9                    Martineshti, Battle of (1789), 36-38
      Louis, Sir Thomas, British naval com¬     Mathematics, 8-10, 149, 154, 159,
        mander in Mediterranean (1806),            438n31, 442n29
        352,358                                 Mavrogeni, Nicolai, Phanariote nota¬
      Loznitza, W Serbia, 100 km SW of Bel¬        ble, Hospodar of Wallachia (1786-
        grade, 364                                 90), 32, 35-6
      Lutfullah Efendi, 381                     Mecca, 65, 224, 226, 295, 297
                                                Medicine, medical education, 9, 165-6
      Macedonia, 22, 233-4, 236, 264,301-4,     Medina, 89, 287, 296-7
       308, 311-2, 316-8, 322, 325, 335,        Mediterranean Sea, 6, 9, 22, 25, 45-6,
       339-40, 342-3, 345-7, 361, 364, 393         56, 64, 67, 150, 153, 161, 178, 198,
      Machin (Magin, Matschin), fort on R          232, 251,254-5,263-4, 270-1, 329-
       bank of Danube in Dobruja 10 km             30, 336, 351, 359, 369-70, 389, 391,
       SW of Ibrail, 62                            394
      Machin, Battle of (1791), 62, 65          Mehadiye, on Bela river in Banat of
      Mahmud I, Ottoman Sultan (reigned            Temesvar, 20 km N of Orsova, 30
       1730-54), 8                              Mehmed Pasha, Abu Merak, 291, 297
      Mahmud II (1785-1839), Ottoman Sul¬       Mehmed Pasha, governor of Aleppo,
       tan (reigned 1808-39), vii, 72, 185,        292-4
       397, 401, 404-5, 407                     Mehmed Agha, Arabaji Bashi (Arabaci
      Mahmud Pasha, Bushath, Kara, Al¬             Ba§i), 91
       banian notable (1770-96), 227, 230-      Mehmed Arif Efendi, Durri zade, Sheyh
       5, 299                                      ul-Islam (1792-8), 370, 372, 412
      Mahmud Raif Efendi (d.l808), Ingiliz,     Mehmed Ataullah Efendi, Sherifzade,
       Reis ul-Kuttdb (1800-5), 89,184,188,         (1759-1821) Sheyh ul-Islam (1806-
       272-4, 369, 371-2, 374, 377-8, 413,          7), 351, 375-7, 379, 381-6, 398-404,
       438n31, 449nl6                            412
      Malisars, 230                             Mehmed Pasha, Aydoslu, 231
      Malkara (Malagra, Syracellae), in SW      Mehmed Dervish (Dervig) Efendi, 186,
       Thrace (European Turkey), 52 km W         448nl0
       of Tekirdag, 314                         Mehmed Efendi, Durri, Reis ul-Kuttab
      Malta Island, 255-6, 264, 336, 352,        (1794-5), 370, 413
       358, 394                                 Mehmed Emin Bey, 399
      Mamluks, 26, 217-8, 220-1, 226, 255-      Mehmed Emin Behij (Behic) Efendi,
       9, 261-2, 274-8, 286-91, 360              397, 399-401
      Manav, Hajji, 235                         Mehmed Emin Efendi, Firdevsi, Reis
      Manav Ibrahim, lieutenant of Pas-          ul-Kuttab (1795), 413
       vanoglu, 305, 314-5                      Mehmed Faiz Efendi, Yirmisekiz Che-
      Manisa (Magnesia, Magnisa), E cen¬         lebi, 186, 447-8n9
       tral Anatolia, 43 km NE of Izmir, 215    Mehmed Galib Efendi; see Galib Efendi




                                            Index
Mehmed Pasha, Gazi, Bushatli, nota¬       Menteshe (Mente§e), district of SW          525
 ble of Albania (1748-70), 230              Anatolia, S of Menderes river to
Mehmed Pasha, Hajji, Ottoman Grand          Aegean, capital Milas, 132, 215
 Admiral (1805-6), 412                    Merchants, mercantile affairs, 77,120,
Mehmed Hakki Pasha; see Hakki Meh¬          176-9, 260
 med Pasha                                Meriage, Baron A., French consul at
Mehmed Halet Efendi, 385         '          court of Pasvanoglu in Vidin (1807-
Mehmed Hayri Efendi, Reis ul-Kuttab         9), 344-5, 362, 477n41       '
 (1788-9), 73, 413                        de Merle, Baron, 453n65
Mehmed Izzet Pasha, Grand Vezir           Mevlevis, 199
 (1794-8), 263, 370-2, 411                MeyendorfF, General Kazimir Ivano¬
Mehmed Kalga, 35                            vich (1749-1813), Russian com¬
Mehmed Kamil Efendi, Sheyh ul-lslam         mander in 1787-92 and 1806-12
 (1788-9), 33, 411                          wars against Ottomans, 353, 391-2
Mehmed Pasha, Kara, 185, 447n7            Michelson, General Ivan Ivanovich
Mehmed Efendi, Me^ki, Sheyh ul-Is-          (1740-1807), Russian commander
 lam (1791-2), 412                          against Ottomans in 1806-7 cam¬
Mehmed Pasha, Melek, Grand Vezir            paigns, 340, 349, 353-4, 357, 361-2,
 (1792-4), 369-70, 411                      364,389,391
Mehmed Nahifi Efendi, 186, 448nl2         Mihrishah (Mihri§ah) Sultan (d.lSOd),
Mehmed Naili Efendi, 188                    mother of Selim III, Valide Sultan,
Mehmed Rashid (Ra§id) Efendi (1753-         48,88,369-73, 381-2, 428n6
  1813), Reis ul-Kuttab (1787-8,1792-     Milas (Mylasa), capital of Menteshe,
  4, 1797-8), 46, 89-92, 103-4, 107-8,      30 km W of Mugla in SW Anatolia,
 369-72, 413                                215
Mehmed Said, 9                            Military organization, corps, service,
Mehmed Sherif (§eri0 Efendi, Esad           reforms, schools, 8-11, 25, 36, 38, 40,
 zade, Sheyh ul-Islam (1789), 33, 411       43, 45, 47, 51-2, 59, 62, 71, 73-4, 77,
Mehmed Sherif (§erif) Efendi/Pasha,         81-5, 98-109, 113-149, 150-166,
 Defterdar (1790-3), lieutenant of          180-4, 212-3, 216, 225-6, 306, 352,
 Grand Vezir, 92, 100, 102-3, 143-4,        355, 361, 376, 385, 393, 407, 430-
 275                                        43
Mehmed Tahsin Efendi, member of           Millet system. Millets, 12n, 16-1, 76n.
 Ruschuk committee (1807-8), 397,           See also Subjects, non-Muslim.
 400                                      Ministers. See Vezir.
Mehmed Tayyar Bey/Pasha; see Tay-         Mint of Istanbul (Darbhane), 43, 81,
 yar Mehmed Bey/Pasha                       369-70, 381
Mehmed Efendi, Ulu Arif, Reis ul-         Mirmiran, 233, 444n4
 Kuttab (1807), 389-90, 392, 413          Mishar (Mi§ar), in N central Serbia on
Mehmed Pasha, Vani, 313-4                   Danube, 2 km E of Sabac, 343,
Mejlis-i Meshveret (Meclis-i Me^veret),     357
 consultative council, 73-5               Mizad, auction of tax farm, 434n57
Mekteb-i    Riyaziye    (Mathematics      Mohammad Ali Pasha (Mehmed Ali
 school), 154, 439n5                        Pasha), Governor of Egypt (1808-
Mektubi Efendi, 91, 173                     1849), 276, 287-91, 333, 336, 360
Memish (Memi§) Efendi, 381-2              Mohammad Elfi Bey. See Elfi Bey,
Memorials to Sultan, 7, 9, 16, 90-111,      Mohammad.
 113, 185-7, 190-1, 369, 429-30n37,       Mohammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab (1703
 447-51                                     -92), Saudi-Wahhabi leader in
Menderes River, in SW Anatolia, S of        Arabia, 221-5
 Izmir and Aydm, 215                      Mohammad ibn Saud (d.l765), Saudi-
Menou, General Abdullah Jacques,            Wahhabi leader in Arabia, 222-3
 French commander in Egypt, 258,          Mohammad Efendi, Seyyid, 275
 275                                      Moldavia (Bogdan), NE province of




                                      Index
      Moldavia—continued                         Muhendishane-i      Berri-i   Hiimayun
526
        Rumania,      between     Carpathian        (Army Engineering School), 10, 83,
        mountains and Pruth river/Bessara¬          146-9, 159-60, 184, 438n31. See also
        bia, 22, 30, 32,34-8,45,50, 57,62-3,       Schools, military/technical.
        67, 238, 304-5, 322-3, 331, 335, 344,    Muhibb Abd ul-Rahim Efendi (d.l821),
        349, 352-4, 357, 361, 390-3. See also      Ottoman ambassador to France,
        Principalities of Rumania.                 (1806-11), 189-90, 335, 391, 450n24
      Molitor, General, assistant to General     Muhtar Pasha, Ahmed (d.l822), eldest
        Lauriston commanding French forces         son of Ali Pasha of Janina, 233-5,
        in Dalmatia, (1807-8), 337-8               299,301, 311-2, 317
      Monastir (Manastir, Bitolj), 180 km        Muntafik tribe, 221, 296
        NW of Salonica in Macedonia, 299         Murad IV, Ottoman Sultan (reigned
      de Montclair, Chevalier, 453n65              1623^40), 6, 416n3
      Montenegro (Karadag, Czernagora),          IViurad Bey al-Qazdughli, Egyptian
        located between Bosnia and Albania,        Mamluk leader (d.l801), 217-8, 258,
        separated from Adriatic by S Dalma¬        275
        tia, 62, 231-5, 324, 326, 333,337-8,     Musa Pasha, Kose/Selanikli, governor
        340, 344, 345, 361-3, 389. See also        of Salonica, lieutenant of Grand
         Vladika.                                  Vezir (d.l808), 290-1, 376-86, 398-
      Moraka River (Moraca), runs N/S in           400     ’
        Montenegro, emptying into N end of       Mustafa III, Ottoman Sultan (reigned
        Lake Scutari, 233                          7757-74), 3, 12-3, 15
      Morava River and Valley, runs S/N in       Mustafa IV, Ottoman Sultan (reigned
        Serbia, emptying into Danube 35            1807-8), 284, 375, 382-405
        km E of Belgrade, 307, 318, 326, 336,    Mustafa Ashir Efendi, Reis zade, Sheyh
        339,361                                    ul-Islam (1798-1800), 46, 92, 102,
      Morea (More), 6, 22, 169, 230, 253,          263, 372, 412
        255-6, 264-5, 317, 385, 390              Mustafa Agha, Bakiiji (Bakirci) Laz,
      Morier, John Philip (1776-1853), Brit¬       306,379
        ish agent in Albania, Greece and         Mustafa Pasha, Bayrakdar (Alemdar)
        the Morea and representative to Ali        (1765-1808), notable of Ruschuk
        Pasha of Janina (1803-9), 344, 362,        (1806-8), Grand Vezir (1808)-, rise
        394, 477n44                                to power to 1807, 313, 315, 344,
      Mortar corps; see Humbarqji corps            347-9, 353-6, 360-4; leads opposi¬
      Moruzi (Morusi, Mourouzi), Alexander         tion to Mustafa IV, 386-405
        (d.l816), Phanariote notable, Hospo-     Mustafa Pasha, Bushatli, Albanian
        dar in Wallachia (1793-6, 1799-            notable (1796-1806), 299-301, 316
        1801), and Moldavia (1792-3,1802-        Mustafa Agha, Campbell, 121, 124
        6, 1806-7), 238, 280, 331, 335, 344,     Mustafa Pasha, Chelebi (Qelebi),
        349, 352, 354, 375, 454n74                 Grand Vezir (1807-8), 386, 389-91,
      Moruzi, Gheorghe Constantine, Phan¬          394,397-403, 411
        ariote notable. Bash Terjuman (1792      Mustafa Pasha, Chelik (Qelik) (d.7 798),
        -4), 454n74                                husband of Beyhan Sultan, 43
      Mosul, in N Iraq (Mesopotamia), 168-9,     Mustafa Efendi, Hamidi zade, Sheyh
        220                                        ul-Islam (1789-91), 74, 79, 84, 412
      Mouradgea d’Ohsson, Ignatz (1740-          Mustafa IfFet Efendi, 93,101-2
        1807), Swedish translator and repre¬     Mustafa Agha, Kabakji oglu (Kabakci
        sentative in Istanbul, 1795-9, 93,         oglu) (d.l808), initiator of revolt
        105, 193, 196, 429n35                      against Selim III, 378-87, 398-9,402
      Mubashir, 171                              Mustafa Pasha, Kose, 58
      Muhassil, 283, 320, 322, 325, 350-1        Mustafa Efendi, Laleli, 92
      Muhendishane-i Bahri-i Hiimayun            Mustafa Rasih Efendi (d.7S03), Reis
        (Naval Engineering School), 10, 145        ul-Kuttab (1796-7, 1799-1800), Am¬
        -7, 158-9. See also Schools, military/     bassador to Russia (1792-4), 92,
        technical.                                 100-1,103,189-90, 372,413




                                            Index
Mustafa Refik Efendi id.l808), Reis       Nishanji (Ni§anci), 385                   527
 ul-Kuttab (1807-8), 393, 396, 399-       Nizam-i Jedid (Cedid) army and or¬
 400, 413                                  ganization, 87, 98, 122,125,127-37,
Mustafa Reshid (Re§id) Efendi (Pasha)      140, 149, 161, 164, 175, 215, 237,
 (d.l819), Director of Nizam-i Jedid       258, 283-4, 286, 290, 303-4, 312,
  (1793-8), Defterdar (1799-1800,          314, 346-51, 369-86, 396, 405-6,
  1805-6), lieutenant of Grand Vezir,      433n40, 433n52, 435n62, 435n78,
 87, 90, 92, 109, 122,128-9,177, 192,      436n83
  197, 269, 278, 369-75, 382, 385         North African pirates, 46, 62, 67, 81,
Mustafa Efendi, Seyyid, 438n31             152
Mustafa Pasha, Shenekzade (§enek-         Notables (Ayan, Derebey), 4, 10, 43,
 zade) (d.l801), governor of Belgrade,     72-3, 79-82, 84, 92, 120, 168, 170,
 241-5, 305-7, 310, 317                    211-4, 454nl, 454n2; of Balkans,
Mutassarif 228, 232, 242, 313              Southeastern Europe, 49, 52, 120,
Mutesellim, 306, 356, 292, 313, 319        133, 175, 227-46, 249, 253-4, 260,
Miizayede, auction of tax farms, 434n57    298-327, 339-55,361-4, 367, 373-4,
                      ✓
                                           396-8, 401; of Arab provinces, 217-
Nakib ul-Eshraf 275                        27, 285-98; of Anatolia —see Ana¬
Nassau-Siegen, Prince Charles of, 29       tolia.
Navigation, 145, 152, 158-60, 165         Novi Pazar (Yeni Pazar), in SE Bosnia,
Navy, naval organization, reform,          32,232
  9-10, 28-9, 59, 144, 150-66, 246,
  264-70, 290, 299, 387                   Oczakov (Ozii, Uzun Kale, Ochakov,
Nazuhoglu     (Nazuhoglu), Anatolian        Ocsakow), fort at point where Bug
  notable family, 215                       and Dniepr empty into Danube in N
Negotin, in Kraina section of NE Ser¬       Black Sea, on mainland, opposite
  bia, 10 km W of Danube, 364               Kinburun,29-31, 34, 46,56-7, 65-7
Nejd, N central Arabia, 223, 225-6,       Odabashi (Odaba§i), 113
  295                                     Odessa, 67-8
Nelson, Lord Horatio (1758-1805),         Ogustul River, in N central Serbia, 45
  255, 258, 263, 336                        km SE of Sabac, 309
Nenadovich, Jacob (1765-1836), 319,       Ohrid (Ohri), 75 km NW of Monastir in
  322                                       Albania, 232-5, 298
Nenadovich, Archbishop Mathiew Al-        Ojak (Ocak) Kethildasi, 131
  exeiiev, 320                            Omer Agha (Pasha), Chelebi, lieuten¬
Netherlands, 26-7, 41, 49, 52, 56, 63,      ant of Hakki Mehmed Pasha, 309-12
  81, 250, 263                            Omer Hulusi Efendi, Samani zade,
Newspapers, 195-7, 249-50. See also         Sheyh ul-Islam (1800-3), 372, 398,
  Press.                                    412
Nezar (Nezir) Agha, 401-3                 Omer Agha, Pasvanoglu (Pasvanoglu),
Nicomedia (Izmit, Iznikmid), NW Ana¬        237
  tolia, 95 km E of Istanbul, 303         Omer Agha, Tirsiniklioglu (Tirsinik-
Nicopolis (Nigbolu), on R bank of Dan¬      lioglu), 236
  ube at confluence of Osma river in      Orloff, Admiral Vasili Petrovich (1745-
  Bulgaria, 50 km W of Sistova, 51,         1801), 9
  132, 227, 243-4, 355                    Orsova Island (Ir§eve), in Danube, 200
Nigde, in S central Anatolia, 204 km N      km E of Belgrade, 30, 45, 53, 63, 323
  of Adana, 215                           Ortakoy, on Bosporus N of Istanbul,
Nile River, 3, 212, 257, 286                379-80
Niman Bey, 74                             Osman Efendi, 13, 160
Nish (Ni§, Nis, Nissa), in SE Serbia on   Osman Bey, Bardisi (d.l806), Egyptian
  Nisava river, 5 km E of Morava           Mamluk leader, 275-6, 286-8
  river, 38, 43, 245, 306, 319, 325-6,    Osman Pasha, Gurgi, 245, 284, 302-4,
 339, 343, 361, 393                        307-13
Nishan (Ni§an) Kalemi, 172                Osman Bey, Hadimoglu, 354




                                     Index
                                                    i'

      Osman Agha, Kara, 215                 *    Pasvanoglu — continued
528
      Osman Pasha, Kurd, 245                       Vidin and northern Bulgaria, 227,
      Osman Efendi, Morali, Defterdar(1795,        235-46, 249, V253-5, 264-5, 298-9,
        1806-7), 92, 100, 103-4, 375               302-9, 313-8, 331-2, 344-7, 353,
      Ostrova Island (Qingene Adasi), in           355,362,367, 397, 458n54
        Sava River, 10 km E of Belgrade,         Patriarch of Istanbul, 265, 321
        364, 392                                 Patrone, 155
      Ottoman Empire, administration, 72-        Paul I (1754-1801), Czar of Russia
        5, 92, 94-5, 110-1, 167-74, 259-62,        (reigned 1796-1801), 253, 271-2
        385; decline and territorial losses,     Payas (Baiae), in Cilicia on Mediter¬
        vii, 3-11, 62-3, 66-7, 150-3, 167-8,       ranean/Gulf of Alexandretta, 50 km
        416; European influence on, techni¬        N of Antioch, 215
        cal aid to, 7-11, 13, 78, 83, 87, 89,    Paxos (Paksos) Island, one of Ionian
        100, 105, 109, 121-2, 127-8, 134-5,       VIslands, in Adriatic S of Corfu and
        139-42, 144, 146,154, 157-9,177-8,         W of Parga, 252
        180-99, 249, 266, 299, 367, 405-7,       Pazaijik (Pazarcik, Pazargich), 35 km
        446-454; foreign relations organiza¬       NW of Philippopolis in Bulgaria, 243
        tion, 171-2, 185-193, 248-9, 335,        Pehlivan Ibrahim (1760-1820), lieu¬
        369, 371; foreign relations —see Aus¬      tenant of Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha,
        tria, France, Great Britain, Poland,       353, 361, 364
        Prussia, Russia, Spain, Sweden, and      Pensions (Vazife), 78, 114, 116, 142,
        Venice; representatives of in Eu¬          155
        rope, 7, 89, 185-91, 360, 447-51; war    Persian language, 190
        of 1736-9, 237; war of 1768-74,9-10,     Persian Gulf, 3, 223, 225
        15, 216, 230; war of 1787-92, 21-68,     Peter I the Great (1672-1725), Czar
        117-8, 216, 228, 230-1, 233, 237,          of Russia (reigned 1689-1725), 21
        418-26; war of 1806-12, 353-364          Peter I Petrovich Niegos (1747-1830),
      d’Oubril, Pierre (Peter Yakovlevich)         Vladika (Prince) of Montenegro (1782
        (1774-1847), Russian diplomat in           -1830), 231, 235, 337, 362
        Paris (1803-4), 338-41, 349              Petit, Toussaint, 157
                                                 Phanariotes, Phanariote Greeks, 198,
      Paget, Lord Arthur, British ambassa¬         238, 248, 280, 322, 331, 335, 349,
        dor to the Porte (1807), 390, 392          375, 454n73, 454n74. See also Cal-
      Palestine, 219, 291-2                        limachi; Ipsilanti; Moruzi; Hangerli;
      Pampelonne, Guion, 141, 437n6                Suzzo.
      Parachin, in central Serbia on Morava,     Philippopolis (Plovdiv, Filibe), 150 km
        50 km N of Nish, 339, 357                  SE of Sofia in Bulgaria, 243-4, 308,
      Paramythia, in Epirus (S Albania/N           310, 312,314
        Greece) between Janina and Preveza,      Pilgrims Caravan, Pilgrimage to Holy
        299, 301, 316                              Cities of Islam, 219, 227, 295-7, 374
      Parga, Adriatic port of Epirus, 77 km      Pinarhisar (Kirkkilise, Kirklareli), in
        SW of Janina, 229, 234, 252, 265,          Thrace, 64 km E of Edirne, 402
        268, 270, 300, 316, 344, 362             Plevna (Pleven), 138 km NE of Sofia,
      Paris, 188, 248, 271, 279, 360. See also     Bulgaria, 235, 238, 244, 304
        France.                                  Podgoritza (Podgorija), in Albania, 10
      Paris, Peace of (1802), 281-2                km S of Lake Ohrid, 232-3
      Passarowitz (Pasarofga, Poharevatz,        Poland, 31, 40-1, 45-6, 50, 53-4, 249,
        Pojarevatz, Pozarevac), 25 km SE           254
        of Belgrade, 306, 322                    Political alignments, politics in Istan¬
      Passarowitz, Treaty of (1718), 7, 50,        bul, 33-35, 48-9, 51, 60, 72, 84,
        187                                        88-91, 95,128,141, 183-4, 235, 237,
      Pasvanoglu (Pasvanoglu, Pazvantoglu,         241, 244, 263, 276-8, 284-5, 293,
        Pazvandoglu, Passavand oglou), Os¬         296, 303-6, 308-13, 346-8, 351,
        man Pasha (1758-1807), notable of          367-77, 379, 384-5, 387, 391, 393,




                                            Index
Political alignments —con^mwed             Pruth, Treaty of (1711), 6                 529
  397-400, 401-3, 406, 417n5. See also
  Reform in Ottoman Empire, advo¬          Quarantine, 165-6
  cates of.                                Quseir, Red Sea port of Egypt, 258
Porech Island, in Danube, 75 km E of
  Belgrade, 339                            Ragib Mehmed Pasha, Ottoman Grand
Potemkin, Count Gregory Alexandro¬           Vezir (1756-63), 9
  vich (1739-91), 22, 24, 29, 38, 44-5,    Ragusa (Dubrovnik), Adriatic coast of
  52, 56, 59, 61, 66                         S Dalmatia, 337-8, 345, 349
Pouqueville, Frangois Charles (1770-       Rahmaniye, suberb of Cairo, 257, 290
  1838), French agent at court of Ali      Rakka, 120 km E of Aleppo, Syria, 168
  Pasha of Janina (1805-12), General       de Rathkeal, Baron Herbert, Austrian
  Counsul in Patras (1812-7), 344-5,         Internuncio at the Porte, 27, 193
  356, 362, 394, 477n43                    Ravanitza (Novi Sad), on L bank of
Poussielgue, Jean Baptiste, French           Danube, 75 km NW of Belgrade, 325
  financial director in Egypt (1798-       Rayas (Reaya), 76-7, 101, 240, 443n3.
  1801), 261          ^                      See also Subjects, non-Muslim.
Pozzo di Borgo, Karl Osipovich (1768-      Red Sea, 3, 224, 258
  1842), Russian agent to the Porte        Reform in Ottoman Empire; advocates
  (1807), 390                                of, 34, 48, 86-111, 263, 346, 351,
Press, printing in Ottoman Empire, 8,        367-77, 379, 381-2, 384-6, 396-7,
  9, 11, 131, 148, 159, 184-5, 195-7,        406-7, 428-30; during 1787-92 war,
  249-50, 417n5, 446-7n4, 452-3n56,          26, 33, 71-85, 426-8; ideas and pro¬
  453n57, 453n66                             posals for, 5, 8, 73-5, 91-111, 190,
Pressburg, Treaty of (1805), 334, 336,       240, 405-6, 429-30n37; administra¬
  338,340                                    tive, 6, 11, 79-80, 84, 110-1,167-74,
Preveza (Preveze), Adriatic port of          239-40, 275, 443-4; educational, 8,
  Epirus on Gulf of Narda, 234, 252,         10-11, 79, 83-4, 94, 144-9, 165-6,
  265, 270, 363, 394                         384 (see also Schools); financial, 11,
Prices, price controls in Istanbul, 75,      81, 84, 175, 275 (see also Irad-i Je-
  176-8, 446n43                              didy, judicial and legal, 78-9, 84,
Principalities of Rumania, 10, 26, 40-       175, 373; military, 6, 8-9, 10-11,
  1, 57,176,236,238,249,304-5,322,           25, 33, 43-4, 82-5, 88-9, 97-8, 98-
  331, 334-5,340,341, 344-5, 349-54,          110, 112-66,175, 180-4, 284-5, 299,
  355-6, 359-64, 375-6, 388, 390-2.          303, 306, 339, 345, 370, 377-8,405-
  See also Moldavia; Wallachia.              6, 430-43 (see also Nizam-i Jedid;
Prosorovich, General, 392                    Military organization); religious,
Provinces of Ottoman Empire, pro¬            78, 84, 93-4, 175, 222-4, 295, 373
  vincial organization, 4, 73-5, 79-80,      (see also Religion; Religious organi¬
  95, 118, 132, 168-70, 211-2, 217-8,        zation; Ulema)-, provincial, 239-44,
  323,325                                    303, 307-11, 314, 321 (see also Prov¬
Provincial militia, armies, 100-1,106-       inces); economic, 175-9, 213
  7, 119, 131, 132, 215                    Reichenbach, Treaty of (1790), 52-57,
Provincial revolts, 4, 10, 44, 83-4,         64-5
  211-46, 283-327, 346-8. See also         Reinhard, F., French consul in Bucha¬
  Notables.                                  rest, 344,353
Prussia, 15, 22, 25-7, 31, 33, 37, 41-2,   Reis (ship captain), 163-4
  45_7, 49-50, 52-57, 61-8, 141, 186,      Reis-i Evvel, 163-4
  188-9, 193, 196, 250, 352, 423n9,        Reis ul-Kuttab (Reis Efendi), director
  451n33, 451n37                             of Foreign Affairs, 46, 60, 60n, 73,
Pruth River, from Galicia runs N/S           89-92, 171-2, 248, 256, 280, 335,
  between Moldavia and Bessarabia            354, 368-75,381,389,393, 399-400,
  into N mouth of Danube at Galatz,          413 (list)
  353                                      Religion, Religious class, organiza-




                                      Index
                                                    I

530   Religion—con^t7^«e<i                   '    Ruschuk (Rusguk, Rusciuk, Ruse), on
         tion, practices, freedom, 63, 76, 76n,      R bank of Danube in Bulgaria, 75 km
         78-9, 92-4, 222-224, 260, 269, 295-         E of Sistova, 31, 33, 44, 49, 52, 55-6,
         6,321,442n29                                59, 227, 236, 243, 245, 302, 313-5,
      Repnin, Prince Nicolai Gregorevich             331, 344, 345, 347, 349, 353, 355,
         (1778-1845), Russian military com¬          361, 364, 386, 396-400
        mander, 61-2, 66                          Ruschuk Committee, 396-400
      Rhodes Island (Rodos), 264, 441n27          Russia; ambassadors to Porte, 13, 189-
      Rhodope mountains (Rodop Daglari,              90, 193, 196, 216, 254, 269-70, 272,
        Despot Daglari), branch of Balkan            279, 330-1, 333, 341, 350-2, 354;
        mountains separating Thrace and             activities among Ottoman subjects
        Macedonia, extending to Aegean              in Balkans, Southeastern Europe,
        Sea, 135, 243                               9-10, 24-6, 229-31, 234, 238, 249,
      Rifles, Riflemen, 119, 138, 140-2, 164,     v 251, 254, 266, 268, 270, 299-300,
        242                                         305, 316-7, 321-3, 329-34, 336-40,
      Rimnik River (Rymnic), branch of              342, 344-5, 350-2, 362, 389, 393;
        Danube running W/E as boundary              alliances with Ottoman Empire, 267,
        between Moldavia and Wallachia, 37          270, 331, 334; diplomatic relations
      Rimnik, Battle of (1789), 37-8, 42,           with Ottoman Empire, 6, 9, 15, 187-
        66,422n34                                   90, 216, 245, 248-54, 258, 262-74,
      de la Riviere, 453n65                         278-80, 329-339, 340-1; wars with
      Riyadh, in the Nejd, Arabia, 211              Ottoman Empire —see Ottoman Em¬
      Riyale, 155                                   pire, war of 1768-74, war of 1787-
      Rize, Black Sea port in NE Anatolia,          92; annexation of Ottoman territory,
        79 km E of Trabzon, 215                     23-6, 66-7, 330, 337-8, 388-90
      Rodofinikin, Constantine (1760-1838),       Riius-u Hiimayun, 172-3
        Russian agent to Serbia (1807-9),         Ruzname-i Evvel, 437nl9
        393                                       Ruznameji (Ruznameci), 93
      Rodosto (Tekirdag), 50 km E of Istan¬
        bul on sea of Marmara in Thrace
        (European Turkey), 303                    Saadabad, at Kagithane, end of Golden
      Romanzov (Rumiantzev), Count Peter             Horn, in Istanbul, 83, 146
        Alexandrovich (1725-96), Russian          Sadullah Enveri Efendi (d.l 794), Otto¬
        commander against Ottomans in                man chronicler, 92, 100-1, 105, 494
        1768-74 war and 1787-92 war, 45           Safi Efendi, 93, 382, 429n33
      Rosetta (Re§id), Mediterranean port of      Safiye Sultan, 13
        Egypt at NW mouth of Nile River,          Said Ahmed Pasha, 43
        135, 276, 360                             St. Luce, French agent in Moldavia,
      Ruffin, Pierre Jean Marie (1742-1824),        344
        French orientalist, consul in Istan¬      St. Petersburg, 62, 186, 189-90, 271,
        bul (1797-8, 1802), 14, 16, 192, 255,       322
        263, 272-3, 279-80, 335, 418n8,           Saint-Priest, Frangois Emmaneul de
        441n27                                      Guignard, comte de, French ambas¬
      Rumelia (Rumeli) Province (including          sador to the Porte (1770-85), 13
        Thrace and Macedonia), 43, 46, 104,       Salah Agha, 289
        106, 169, 170, 227, 242-3, 271, 284,      Salih Pasha, Grand Admiral (1806-7),
        298-9, 301, 303, 307-10, 312, 315,          412
        317, 346, 361, 371, 376                   Saliyane (salary), 116n
      Rumeli Feneri, on Bosporus N of Istan¬      Salonica (Selanik, Thessaloniki), p)ort
        bul, 402                                    on Aegean coast of Macedonia, 142-
      Rumeli Kadiasker (Judge of Rumeli),           4, 227,290-1,303,307-8,313
        74,89-90                                  Samsun, N central Anatolian port on
      Rumeli Kavak, on Bosporus N of Istan¬         Black Sea, 425 km NE of Ankara,
        bul, 378                                    283-4




                                            Index
San Stefano (Ayastefanos, Ye§ilk6y),        Selim \11 —continued                      531
  12 km W of Istanbul on Sea of Mar¬          341; personality of, 367-8, 405-6;
  mara, 143                                   weakness of, 311, 346-8, 351, 374,
Sanjak {Sancak), 117                          379, 381-2; attitude to French Revo¬
Sanjak Bey, 132                               lution, 247-51, 254-6, 263-6, 272,
Santa Maura (Aya Mavri, Levkada)              276-82; poetry of, 194, 199, 418n3;
  Island, one of Ionian Islands, in Adri¬     foreign policy attitudes, 1802-7,
  atic SW of Preveza, 252-3, 265-6,           330-5, 387-8; as wartime leader,
  363, 394                                    1789-92, 33-35, 42-4, 47-9, 55-58,
Sarajevo (Bosna Sarayi, Saray-i Bosna),       60-1, 64-66; political activities of—
  capital of Bosnia, 32, 240, 306             see Political alignments
Saruhan (Lydia), province in W central      Selim Efendi, 438n31
  Anatolia, NE of Izmir, 215        «       Selim Giray, Crimean Tatar prince,
Saud ibn Abd ul-Aziz, Saudi, Wahhabi          314
  ruler (1803-14), 225-6, 294-8             Selimiye, 158
Saudi dynasty, 10,65, ^21-227,294-9         Semendria (Semendire, Smederevo),
Save (Sava) River, runs W/E, forming          40 km SE of Belgrade in Serbia on R
  N boundary of Serbia and Bosnia W           bank of Danube, 306, 322-3, 326-7,
  of Belgrade, where it runs into Dan¬        339, 356
  ube, 29-31,50,233, 238-9, 305, 320,       Semonville, Citizen, 191
  322, 343, 356                             Senyavin, Admiral Dimitri Nikolaye¬
Schools in Ottoman Empire, military,          vich (1763-1831), commander of
  technical, medical, 8-10, 83, 121,          Russian fleet against Ottomans
   144-9, 154,158-60,163,165-6, 181,           (1806-8), 336-9, 349, 359, 362-3,
   184, 190, 438-9                            387, 392
Scribal organizations, scribal class,       Septinsular Republic, 268-70, 273-4,
  scribes, 86, 92, 162, 172-4, 189-90,         280-1, 299, 362-3, 466n44. See also
  261,386-7                                   Ionian Islands.
Scutari of Albania (Uskiidar, Skadar),      Ser Halife, 91, 124
  NW Albania, SE coast of Lake Scu¬         Ser Jerrah (Cerrah), 165
  tari, 25, 227, 230-3, 299, 314, 344       Ser Topi-i Kalyon, 163
Scutari of Istanbul. See Uskiidar.          Serbia, Serbs, Serbian Revolution, 6-7,
Sebastian!, General Frangois Horace           22, 38, 40, 62, 169, 197, 227, 232,
  Bastien (1772-1851), French agent            237-41, 243, 249, 305-7, 315, 317-
  to the Porte (1801-3, 1806-8), 192,          27, 330-3, 335-6, 339-46, 349-51,
  278-9, 329, 344-5, 349-50, 352,              353, 355-7, 360-2, 364, 367, 374,
  354-6, 359, 362, 388-93, 468n68,             385,390-3, 400
  477n45                                    Sereth River, from Galicia runs N/S
Segban, 109                                    through Moldavia to Danube at
Selim III (1761-1808), Ottoman Sultan          Ibrail/Galatz, 31
   (reigned 1789-1807), viii, 284, 289-     Serraf (Sarraf), money changer, 261
   90, 292,331,347-8,250-3, 354, 366,       Sevastopol, 24,29,59,68, 263
   360, 362, 363; birth of, 3; as prince,   Shabatz (Bogiirdelen, §aba5, Czabacz),
   9, 12-17, 32, 86, 90, 191-2, 417-8;         on R bank of Danube in Serbia, 70
   correspondence with Louis XVI, 14-          km W of Belgrade, 305, 320, 325,
   15; accession of, 21, 32-33; as war         343, 357
   leader, 1789-92, 33-35, 42-44, 45,       Shah Sultan (1761-1803), sister of
   47-49, 55-6, 58, 60-1, 64; personal         Selim III, 216
   attitudes to reform, 14-15, 33, 71-      Shahi (§ahi) cannons, 121-2
   72, 86-7, 110, 145, 167, 194, 199,       Shakir (§akir) Agha, 13
   226, 405-7; reform activities of dur¬    Shakir (§akir) Efendi, 382
   ing 1789-92 war, 33, 71-111; re¬         Shamiye tribe, 296
   form activities of, 1792-1807, 112-      Sharia, Muslim religious law, 46,
   94, 237-44, 303-4, 307-li, 313-4,           74




                                       Index
                                                     I

532   Shashit (Sa§it) Pasha, governor of Bel¬      Sistova (Zishtova, Shistova), on R bank
         grade, 241                                   of Danube in Bulgaria, 76 km W of
      Shehir {§ehir) Kethiidasi, 79-80                Ruschuk, 31, 57, 61, 227, 236, 245,
      Shehrizor (§ehrizor, §ehr-i Zur), 150           348
         km Nof Baghdad in upper Mesopo¬           Sistova, Congress and Treaty of (1791)
         tamia, 168-9                                 57, 60, 62-4, 90, 92-3, 95-6, 189,
      Sherif i§erif) of Mecca, 224. See also          239, 252, 426n6
         Galib ibn Musaid.                         Sivas (Sebastea), in N central Anatolia,
      Sheyh {§eyh) ul-Beled, 217                      448 km E of Ankara, 168, 215
      Sheyh (§eyh) ul-Islam, leader of the         Skopje (Uskiip, Skoplje, Skopi), on Var-
         Religious/Cultural institution (II-          dar river in Yugoslav Macedonia,
         miye) of the Ottoman Ruling Class,           299, 308, 326, 343, 346
         33, 46, 74, 79, 92, 94, 148, 263, 335,    Skupchtina of Serbia, 326-7
         351, 354, 368, 372-3, 375, 380, 382,      Slaves, Slavery, 63, 87-8, 101, 218,
         398, 402, 411-2 (list)                       220, 290
      Sheyh i§eyh) ul-Sadat, 260, 275              Slavonia (Esclavonia) NW Yugoslav
      Shihabi (§ihabi) dynasty, Lebanese              province N of Bosnia between the
         notable family, 219; see also Bashir         Drava and Sava rivers W of Semlin,
         II                                           7, 240, 320
      Shikk-i Sani (^ikk-i Sani) Defterdari,       Slobosia’, Armistice of (1808), 391, 396
         second Treasurer, 129, 134, 161,         Smith, Sir Sidney William (1764-
         434n56                                       1840), British admiral commanding
      Shikk-i Salis (§ikk-i Salis) Defterdari,       eastern Mediterranean squadron,
         third Treasurer, 161, 176                    1801,1807, and 1812, 276, 359
      Shimari, Shimariotes, Albanian coastal      Smith, Spencer, British ambassador to
         mountain area opposite Corfu, 229,          the Porte in 1798, 264
         234, 253, 300-1                          Sofia (Sofya), 43, 227, 238, 243, 245,
      Shipbuilding, ships, 47, 90-1,151,154,         301, 308, 314, 318, 385
         156-63, 178, 438n31, 441                 Spahi (Sipahi) cavalry corps, Spahis,
      Shumadia (Sumadija), N central Ser¬            83, 100, 194-6, 116-20, 125-6, 135,
         bian district between Belgrade S to         184, 240-1, 252, 307, 318-9, 324,
         Kragujevac, 318-9                           351, 364, 407
      Shumla (Shumna, §umna, Sumnu, Sc-           Spain, 33, 45, 64, 81, 184, 263
        humla), 70 km SE of Hezargrad in          Sparta (Isparta), SE Anatolia, 175 km
        Bulgaria, 44, 47, 52, 55, 60-1, 313-4        N of Antalya, 215
      Sidki Efendi, 279                           Spurring, 441n24
      Sidon (Sayda), on Lebanese Mediter¬         Srebrnitza (Srebrenica), 100 km E of
        ranean coast 50 km S of Beirut, 168,         Sarajevo, 15 km from Drina in Bos¬
        219, 292, 360                                nia, 243, 320
      Silahdar corps, 186                         Stoikovich, Milenko, 326
      Silistria (Silistre), on R bank of Danube   Straits, 6-7, 26, 249-51, 254, 267, 281-
        in Bulgaria, 110 km NE of Ruschuk,           2, 329, 332-4, 340, 350-1, 358, 387,
        55, 57, 59,227,235-6,243, 245, 302-          389, 391. See also Bosporus; Dar¬
        4, 308-9, 311, 313-5, 347-8, 355,            danelles.
        361, 364, 391, 398                        Subjects of Ottoman Sultan, 74-8, 94,
      Silivri (Selymbria), 78 km W of Istan¬         101, 443-4; non-Muslim, 9-10, 24,
        bul on coast of Sea of Marmara, 347,         34, 60, 62-3, 67, 101, 108-9, 161,
        402                                          177, 229,239-40, 268, 270, 306, 316,
      Silver, 81, 175                                318, 326, 329, 331, 334-5, 341, 359,
      Sinap Agha, Bulgarian bandit, 243              363
      Sinop (Sinope), N central Anatolian         Suk ul-Shuyuh (§uyuh), 221
        Black Sea port, 458 km NE of An¬          Suleyman I The Magnificent, Ottoman
        kara, 216, 283, 285, 441n27                 Sultan (reigned 1520-66), 3, 7, 25
      Sirri Selim Pasha, 13                       Suleyman Agha, 88




                                            Index
Suleyman Pasha, governor of Baghdad          Talimli Askeri Naziri, 129, 134             533
  {1780-1802), 10, 132, 220-1, 226,          Talleyrand, Prince Charles Maurice
  292,294                                      (1754-1838), French Minister of
Suleyman Pasha, governor of Bel¬               Foreign Affairs (1797-1809), 249,
  grade, 322,324,325                           254-6, 264, 266, 271-2, 274, 281,
Suleyman Bey, Chapanoglu (Qapano-              333, 387, 391
  glu), 215, 283-5, 398-400                  Tamara Island, in Kuban river, NE of
Suleyman Agha, Tokatjikli (Tokat-              Black Sea, 44
  cikli), notable of Thrace, 227             Tamara, General Vasili (1740-1813),
Suleyman Agha (Bey), Yillik, notable           Russian ambassador to the Porte
  of Bulgaria, 227, 302, 313-5, 348,           (1797-1802), 193, 254, 269-70, 272,
  357, 398, 400                                279
Suli, Suliotes, 40 km E of Parga,in S        de Tardif, 453n65
  Albania, 229-30, 234-5, 253, 265,          Taverns, bars, cabarets, 60, 77-8, 175,
  299-301, 312-3, 316-7, 456-7n27              427n7
Sultan, Sultanate, 3-4,, 94-5, 119, 169,     Tavus-u Bahri, 158
  172, 185, 224-5, 227, 238, 241, 247-       Taxes, tax farms, 74, 80-82, 96, 119,
  8, 270, 295-6, 297, 401                      129, 132, 142, 161, 168, 170-2, 175,
Sumptuary laws, 33-4, 60, 75-8, 83,            177-8, 212,217,240-1, 259-62, 289,
  175, 295, 297                                294, 306, 319, 321, 323, 351, 384,
Siirat, rapid fire cannons, Siiratji (Su-      434n57
  ratci) corps, 10, 11, 122, 128. See also   Tayyar Mehmed Pasha, Anatolian
  Artillery corps; Rifies.                     notable, 216, 283-5, 304, 312, 367,
Siitluje (Siitluce), on Golden Horn in         298-9, 400
  Istanbul, 124                              Tekeli Ibrahimoglu (oglu), Anatolian
Sutorina, Dalmatian port, 30 km S of           notable family, 215
  Ragusa, on Gulf of Cattaro, 337            Tenedos (Bozcaada) Island, Aegean
Suvorov, General Alexander Vasilie-             island, 15 km S of Dardanelles, 352,
  vich (1730-1800), Russian com¬                358-9, 387-92
  mander against Ottomans in 1787-           Tepelen (Tepedelen), 110 km NW of
  92 war, 28, 36-8, 45, 59, 216                Janina, 228
Suzzo, Alexander {d.l807), Phanariote        Tersane, (Naval Arsenal), on N shore
  notable, Hospodar of Moldavia                 of Golden Horn in Istanbul, 150-2,
  (1801-2, 1806), 305, 349, 354, 393            154-165, 188, 275, 437nl9
Suzzo, Mikhail, Phanariote notable,          Teshrifat (Te§rifat) Kalemi, 172
  Hospodar of Wallachia and Mol¬             Tezkere-i Evvel, 93
  davia (1791-5), Bash Terjuman              Thessaly (Tesalya), NE province of
  (1802-7), 454n74                              mainland Greece, S of Macedonia,
Sweden, 29, 31, 37, 40-1, 45-6, 52, 55-         228, 234, 312, 316-7, 322
  7, 61, 81, 83, 93, 141, 182, l93, 263,     Thrace (Trakya), European Turkey
  422n31, 429n35                                and Bulgaria S of Balkan mountains,
Syria, 3, 22, 218-20, 225-6, 244, 258,          22, 236, 246, 301-4, 311-2, 315-7,
  264, 275, 291-4, 296-8, 302, 309,             325, 345-8, 361, 364, 398
  332. See also Damascus; Aleppo;            Thuwaini, 221, 226
  Lebanon; Jerusalem; Palestine.             Tiflis (Tiblisi), capital of Georgia in S
                                                central Caucasus, 58, 67
Tahir Pasha (Bey) (d.l803), leader of        Tigris (Dicle) River, 3, 221
  Albanian contingent in Ottoman Ex¬         Tilsit, Treaty of (1807), 363-4, 388-9,
  pedition to Egypt (1801-3), 276,              390, 392, 394
  286-8                                      Timar ('fief’), 106, 132, 430-ln3. See
Tahmis Emini, 177                               also Feudal organization.
Tahvil Kalemi, 172                           Timok River, runs NE as boundary be¬
Taif, Yemeni coastal town, 100 miles            tween Kraina and Serbia, into Dan¬
  SW of San’a, 294, 295                         ube 10 km E of Negotin, 240




                                        Index
                                                   t

534   Tirana (Tiran), 40 km NW of Elbaskn        U lema — continued
         in Albania, 74                            class, 12, 12n, 33, 35, 45-6, 56, 60,
      Timovo (Timova), 75 km SE of Nicop-           78-9, 84, 88-9, 93-4, 169, 175, 224,
         olis in Bulgaria, 237, 243-5, 302,        260, 263, 275, 288, 289, 295, 306-7,
         347-8                                     351, 354, 367, 369, 371-3, 375-6,
      Tokat (Eudoxia), N central Anatolia,         382-3, 396-7, 403-4, 442n29
         100 km SE of Samsun                     Ulm, Battle of (1805), 334
      Tophane (Imperial Arsenal of Ord¬          Umar Pasha, Governor of Baghdad
         nance and Artillery), on Bosporus         (1764-80), 220
         N of Istanbul, 83, 91, 121-2, 140-2,    Umar Makram Asyuti, 275
         376, 380. See also Artillery.           Umm ul-Abbas, 221
      Topkapi Saray (Imperial Palace),           Umur-u Bahriye Naziri (Minister of
         Istanbul, 73, 380, 404-5, 435n63          Naval Affairs), 161-3
      Tosks, 230                                 Unna River, W extension of Save
      de Tott, Baron Francois (1733-97),           River, running between Bosnia and
        Hungarian/French artillery officer         Croatia, 50, 63
        in Ottoman service (1773-5), 10, 12,     Uskiidar (Scutari of Istanbul), 131-3,
        92, 121, 124, 128, 140, 154, 181, 405,     135, 148, 184-5, 346, 374, 377, 380,
        417nl2                                     435n78
      Trade and commerce, 10, 25, 62, 96,        Uskiidat of Albania. See Scutari.
         177-8, 213                              Uthman ibn Muammar, 222
      Translations into Turkish, 8, 9, 11, 89,
         148, 159, 165, 184, 185, 196, 197       Vahid Efendi, Mehmed Emin (d.iS2S),
      Transylvania (Erdel, Siebenburgen), 7,       Ottoman agent to France (1807-8),
        30-2, 55, 62, 305, 349                     360, 387-8, 450n25
      Travnik, on Lasva River, 80 km NW of       Vali, provincial governor, 170, 217. See
        Sarajevo in Bosnia, 240, 318, 344,         also Provinces.
        393                                      Valievo (Valjevo), on Kolubara River
      Treasury organization, revenues, ex¬         in NE Serbia, 35 km SE of Shabatz,
        penditures, 10, 60n, 74-5, 81, 90, 92,     320
        97, 100, 107, 109,120, 128-9,161-9,      Van, on E shore of Lake Van in SE
         174-5, 261, 368, 370, 374-5, 385,         Anatolia, 168
        397, 399, 401, 434n55, 434n56,           Varna, Black Sea port of Bulgaria, 55,
        437nl9                                     302, 311, 315, 400
      Trebizond (Trabzon), NE Anatolian          Vazife, (pension), 116
        Black Sea Port, 58, 168, 215-6, 283,     Vehbi, Seyyid (A.1809), 199
        285,398                                  Veli Agha, 131
      Trikala (Tirhala, Tricca), N Thessaly      Veliuddin Pasha, son of Ali Pasha of
        (NE Greece) 100 km E of Janina,            Janina (A.1821), 232-3, 242, 299,
        228, 231, 312, 317                         311-3, 315-7, 472-3n67
      Tripoli (Trablus) of Syria, 168-9, 291-3   Venice, 6, 22, 150, 229, 234, 252-3,
      Tiifenkji (Tiifenkci) Kapudam, 64            265, 299, 316, 337, 363,389
      Tulcha (Tulfi, Tulcea), on R bank of       Venture de Paradis, 192
        Danube in the Dobruca, 60                Verninac de Saint Maure, Raymond
      Tulip Period (Lale Devri), 7-8, 417n4        (1762-1822), French ambassador to
      Tutrakan (Tortokai), on Danube be¬           the Porte (1795-6), 188, 191
        tween Silistria and Ruschuk, 315         Veysioglu (Veysioglu), Halil Usta,
      Tuzjuoglu (Tuzcuoglu), Anatolian not¬        Balkan notable, 227
        able family, 215                         Vezir (pi. Viizera), Ottoman minis¬
                                                   ters), 168-70, 172, 217, 229, 230,
      Uchakov, Admiral Fedor (1744-1817),          265, 444n3, 444n5
       Commander of Russian fleet in Black       Vidin, on R bank of Danube in NW
        Sea, 59, 263, 268-9                        Bulgaria, capital of Pasvanoglu, 36,
      Ulema,    Ottoman religious/cultural         38, 44, 51, 55, 169, 235, 237, 240,




                                           Index
Yidin — continued                         Yemen, 296                                535
  243, 245-6, 253,265,302,304,306-        Yeni Koy, on Bosporus, N of Istanbul,
  7, 314, 318, 323, 327, 344, 355, 361,     133
  362, 364                                Yeni Pazar, 5 km NE of Shumla in W
Vienna, 3, 5, 90, 185, 188, 248, 280,       Bulgaria, 235, 313, 348
  341-2. See also Austria.                Yenishehir (Yeni§ehir), 442n29
de Ville, Guief, 453n65                   Yilanboglu (Yilanlioglu), Anatolian
Vladika, Prince-Bishop of Montenegro,       notable family, 215
  231-5, 362. See also Montenegro.        Yillik-i Hiimayun, 169, 444n6
Vonitza, on S shore of Gulf of Narda      Yivkovich, Stephen, 325
  (Arta), 20 km from Preveza, 234,        Yozgat, in C Anatolia, 221 km E of
  252, 265
Vukacevich, Colonel, 232                  Yusuf Agih Efendi (1744-1824), Otto¬
                                           man ambassador to England (1793-
Wages and salaries, 78, 106, 108, 113,     6), 89-90, 188, 197, 448-9nl5
 115-6, 119, 123, 125, 140, 148, 151,     Yusuf Pasha, Koja (Koca), (d.1800).
 155, 157, 162-4, l69, 174, 396,           Grand Vezir (1786-9,1791-2), 25-6,
 440nl3                                    28-36, 44, 55, 60-2, 66, 91, 101-4,
Wahhahi movement, 65, 221-7, 286,           106, 127-8, 131, 369, 411
 289-90, 292, 294-8, 367,374, 376         Yusuf Agha, Muhiirdar (d.i807), lieu¬
Wallachia (Efiak), S province of Ru¬       tenant of Valide Sultan, 48, 88-9,
 mania, 22, 30-2, 35-9, 42, 47, 50-1,       284, 369-74, 381-2, 428n6
 54-7, 59, 62-3, 227, 236-9, 245-6,       Yusuf Ziya (Ziyauddin) Pasha, Kor
 280, 304-5, 315, 322-3, 331, 335,          (d.l819). Grand Vezir (1798-1805),
 338, 344, 349, 352-5, 361-2, 364,          128, 244, 263, 276-8, 285, 291, 293,
 390, 391, 393                              308, 310, 361, 372-3, 393, 398-9,
Weapons, 104, 123, 130, 133, 138-44,        400, 411
 162, 436nl
                                          Zahir ul-Omar al-Zaydani (d.2775),
Yagodina (Jagodnja), in W Serbia, 30        governor of Acre (1746-75), 10, 219
 km S of Loznitza, 326                    Zahire Naziri, 90
Yahya Tevfik Efendi, Sheyh ul-Islam       Zante (Zanta) Island, one of Ionian
 (1791-2), 84, 412                          Islands, W of Morea, 242, 266
Yamaks (auxilliaries of Janissary         Zara (Zadar), port on N Dalmatian
 corps), 239-41, 305-7, 317-27, 342-        coast of Adriatic, 100 km S of Rijeka
 3, 350,356,376-80,382, 385-7, 398,         (Fiume), 337-8
 402, 403                                 Zemlin (Semlin), opposite Belgrade on
Yanbo (Yanbu‘), Red Sea port of Hijaz,      Danube/Save, 320-1, 324, 343, 356
  150 miles N of Jidda, 224, 295          Zorich, Major, 14
Yedikule prison, 14, 192, 263, 272        Zubair, 221




                                      Index
              Harvard Middle Eastern Studies
                     Out of print titles are omitted.




 2. Middle Eastern Capitalism: Nine Essays. By A. J. Meyer. 1959.
 3. The Idea of the Jewish State. By Ben Halpern. 1961. (Second edi¬
    tion, 1969.)
 4. The Agricultural Policy of Muhammad ’ Ali in Egypt. By Helen Anne
    B. Rivlin. 1961.                      '
 5. Egypt in Searth of Political Community: An Analysis of the Intellec¬
    tual and Political Evolution of Egypt, 1804-1952. By Nadav Safran.
    1961 (also a Harvard Political Study).
 6. The Economy of Cyprus. By A. J. Meyer, with Simos Vassiliou. 1962.*
 7. Entrepreneurs of Lebanon: The Role of the Business Leader in a De¬
    veloping Economy. By Yusif A. Sayigh. 1962.*
 8. The Opening of South Lebanon, 1788-1840: A Study of the Impact of
    the West on the Middle East. By William R. Polk. 1963.
 9. The First Turkish Republic: A Case Study in National Development.
    By Richard D. Robinson. 1963.
10. The Armenian Communities in Syria under Ottoman Dominion. By
    Avedis K. Sanjian. 1965.
11. Muslim Cities in the Later Middle Ages. By Ira Marvin Lapidus.
    1967.t
12. Tripoli: A Modern Arab City. By John Gulick. 1967.
13. Pioneers East: The Early American Experience in the Middle East.
    By David H. Finnie. 1967.
14. Shaykh and Effendi: Changing Patterns of Authority Among the El
    Shabana of Southern Iraq. By Robert A. Fernea. 1970.
15. Between Old and New: The Ottoman Empire under Sultan Selim III,
    1789-1807. By Stanford J. Shaw. 1971.


* Published jointly by the Center for International Affairs and the Center
for Middle Eastern Studies.
t Published jointly by the Center for Middle Eastern Studies and the
Joint Center for Urban Studies.
                                                        >,.             i         ^ V                              1
I                                            T
                                     \       '
                        • r ■’                       ' ■ ’?^'jf.'.

                                                 S''vJ;';f;;
                                                 A     *,,.•,                     :-rv- ■


                                                              • ^ i!<:                      t-
                                                                                             *1
                                                                                                                                                                ,(

                                 r
                                                                                                                                                      i,   -'
                                                                            • >
                                                                                                                                            ' jT'-
                                                                                                                                            ‘ f< -1
                                                                                                                                                      ^
                                                                                                                                                           .■*^ 3
                                                             $                                                                                        >
                                                                                                                       0


                                                         c»



                                             f
                                                       4 ^                    ' '. ,    •    f.:
                                                                                                           4|l,o           «•


W       •'
                                                                 r»->                                  i
^-■..             mi-.. *. ■■■

             :■



                                         ;
                                                                                                 t
                                                                                            ‘ (' •

                                                                                                                                       Dj




                                                                                                                                               -».T . '         ■ -•.
                                                                                                                                V..*



                                                                                            V*

                                                                                                   »
I
                                     n.
                                               Kt’.t 4-5’''' *1*


                                                                                       if ■'
                                                                             «N »                    f          ifir
                                                                                               JV',             -
                      J-*./ \
                                                                                    ■' ’>9:
                                             nT




/■          Ji'-#      '■'         ' '.'     '■'**           ”




                             iT-
                                                  -■V




i f                                \ ..
                                                                                                         .          ■
                                                                                               ■V >


                1* 41 :l-
                                                     ■           K

                ii^                  - jt^     • ''. *'-*‘''/ '•

                                                                 ft




                                                                      ^,)r


                                                                                              . p'

      I ,< .•         >1 ^
                                                                                          11   ".'



                                      •A. "I             '
                                                                                                             .tJ . 0
         DATE DUE




      y/VlTHUF cAWN
1   0 /\/E.Nv>
         N.W.wl
               L
                 IDE?
                 IdKAIAr?Y1
                  Q \ t-
