3  3433  00005630  3 


Digitized  by  Google 


j 

4 


1 

I 


/ 


V 


DigHized  by  Google 


I-'-' 


Digitized  b' 


y  Google  j 


Digitizer  by  LiOO^itl 


DigilizeKi  by  Goo^  ' 


ACCOUNT 


KINGDOM  OF  CAUBUL, 

AND  rrS  DEPENDENCIES 

« 

IN  FERSIAy  TARTARY,  AND  INDIA} 


A  VIEW  OF  THE  AFOHAUN  NATION, 


A  HiJiTOHY  Of  THE  DOOBAUNEE  MONARCHY. 


By  the  Hon.  MOUNTSTUART  ELPHINSTONE, 

OF  THE  HONOURABLE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S  SERVICE;  RESIDENT  AT  THE 
COUBT  OF  POONA  J  AMD  LATE  ENVOY  TO  THK  KING  OF  CAUBUL. 


LONDON: 


Digitizea  by  Uoogle 


I 


Prinlad  by  A.  Sirtbtn, 


Digitized  by  Google 


niEFACE. 


As  I  hm  mm  but  a  part  of  ihe  eountriet  wlncli  I  «n  Bbout  to 
.   dBtaibe,  h  ia  wBemary  that  I  flhoold  g^e  an  aeooimt  of  tiio 
'  ^w"—  fioiD  wfaidi  I  haro  diawn  vay  iiifiiniiatioii  j  and  I  taka  tbo 
oppoftmutjt  thus  aflbrdoili  of  adouMrledgpig  my  ofaUgHtionft  to  die 
^mllmeii  fion  iHMm  I  lime  veeoivad  iMiitaDGaii 

I  wm  apgnffd  fer  a  ynr  on  my  jouniej  to  the  Kuig  of  GMtfafnTa 
court,  and  another  year  elapsed  bdbfe  the  mianon  was  finally 
dinolved.  The  whole  of  that  period  was  employed  in  such  encjuiries 
regarding  the  kingdom  of  Caubid  as  were  likely  to  be  useful  to  the 
Bntiflli  government.  The  first  part  of  the  time  was  spent,  by  all  the 
members  of  the  mission,  in  the  acquisition  of  general  information  j 
but  during  the  remainder,  ;i  prrrisc  ninn  wns  arranged  among  the 
party,  and  a  partii  ular  bratich  ot  the  iuvestigation  assigned  to  evesj 
gentleman  who  look  a  share  in  it. 

The  geoj^rapli}  w  allotted  to  Lieutenant  Mnrartnev,  (Mr.  Tickell, 
the  other  8ur\eyor,  having  been  sent  back  to  India  v>ii  duty;)  and  he 
was  assisleil  by  Captain  llaper,  already  known  to  tiic  rubhc  by  his 
account  of  a  Journey  to  the  Sources  of  the  Ganges.  The  climate, 
toil,  piodnoe  end  Imebandiy  irare  mdeitakeii  by  Lie^^tOfiJir^ine; 
nd  the  tiade  and  xerome  by  Mr.  Ridund  Stfadicj.'  "iPY^er^tory. 
fell  to  Mr.  Robert  Alexander,  and  the  goveniment  and  tfae^mdiiji^fs: 
ef  ibe  people  to  me.  L 3  v*N  AI'C  Y 

We  bad  abundant  opportunities  of  enquiiy  wbtle  in  the  A^ion 
dominioni;  and*  after  our  .  return  we  oontiniied  to  eseniine  the 
nomenMie  nali?ei  of  tboee  countries  that  aooomponied  ih^  and  those 
whom  we  eonld  meet  wilb  at  Belly  and  in  iti  ne^bowbood.'  We 

A  8 


Digitized  by  Google 


PREFACE. 


also  wciiL  to  the  fair  at  Hurdwar  (the  great  rendezvous  for  natives 
of  the  countries  north-west  of  India)  and  into  the  Aigliaun  colony 
of  Rohilcund.  By  these  means  we  completed  our  reports,  which 
were  transmitted  to  Government  in  the  end  of  1810 ;  at  wiiicli  time 
I  aeC  out  for  Hie  Deckaa»  and  ooiuidered  my  datre  in  the  trans- 
actkms  of  the  Caubul  munon  §■  afc  an  end.  Mr.  Irvine  had  then 
lihoui^  of  writuig  an  aoooimt  of  the  A^aiuia,  for  which,  fiom 
Uie  diligence  and  extent  of  his  rewarcfaes,  he  waa  wdl  prepared; 
hat,  aa  it  had  fimn  die  fiiit  been  lew  his  btgeet  to  describe  a  par- 
tiotthr  people^  than  to  cnlsige  his  acquaintanoe  with  the  histoiy  of 
human  sodety,  his  jnyestigBtions  mxm  led  him  to  some  geneial 
ykm»f  whidi  he  thenceforth  determined  to  pumna  For  this  pur- 
pose he  has  been  occupied,  during  the  last  three  years,  in  iaborions 
enquiries  into  the  condition  of  different  oriental  nations^  and  his 
acoonnt  of  Caubul  has  in  consequence  been  abandoned. 

I  was  first  determined  to  undertake  the  task  by  the  suggestion  oi  ■ 
Sir  James  Mackintosh,  whose  zeal  for  the  promotion  of  knowledge 
has  been  felt  even  m  fliese  remote, countries.  He  strongly  recom- 
mended that  the  geograpliical  information  tolleLted  by  the  gentlemen 
of  the  mission  should  in  some  shape  be  comniiinicated  to  tiic  }\iblic; 
and  his  kindness  in  offering,  on  his  fit  parture  for  England,  to  .super- 
intend the  printing  of  wliat  1  niigiit  prepare  for  publication,  removed 
the  greatest  obstacle  to  my  entering  on  the  design.  About  llie  same 
time,  accidental  circumstanoes  brought  a  number  of  Afghauns  from 
the  parts  of  the  country  with  which  I  was  least  acquainted,  to 
Bonibay  and  Poona:  I  accordingly  renewed  my  invest^pitions  with 
\:    ibiox  assijitiui^  and  Inow  lay  the  result  befiire  the  Pubfic. 

\.T.\\^  'I'.':l]ATe  already  said  has  m  some  measure  eocphiined  my 
^  yit^ii^U>Yi&:'  Bj  the  kindnem  of  die  other  ipenllemen  of  the  mksiont 
Vit-snbidid^^  the  use  of  their  reports*  of  which  I  hatre  often  wailed 
myselft  both  to  dlvaet  my  enquuriest  and  to  supply  the  defidences  of 
mj  iniformation. 

I MU  indebted  to  Mr*  Strachej  ibr  many  materitds  relating  to  the 
royal  nvenue^  the  teanies  of  land*  the  price  of  eomuiodities,  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


PREFACE.    '  V 

the  trade  of  the  kingdom,  ^fr.  Strachey  had,  beside!=i,  the  goodness 
to  allow  me  the  use  of  his  journal  to  correct  my  own,  in  drawing  up 
die  narrative  of  our  prt>ceedin^.  The  history  of  the  three  last 
reigiiii  ii»  itkken  from  Mr.  Alexander;  but  it  by  no  means  gives  a  just 
idea  of  the  interesting  details  which  his  work  contains. 

I  find  some  difficulty  in  explaining  my  obligations  to  Mr.  Irvine. 
I  have  drawn  from  him  most  of  the  tacts  reltUing  to  the  rainy  seasons 
of  Aighaunistauuy  much  of  the  slender  aoeouiit  I  have  given  of  the 
animals,  minerals,  and  vegetahlea ;  a  large  portkni  of  mj  infiinnatioii 
OB  the  husbandry  aad  pradnoe^  and  aome  fiwta  in  the  geography  and 
alatiades  $  but  I  have  left  the  gretler  put  of  hia  Tafaiable  sqioit  ofr- 
toucfaed;  and  although  I  have  ilw»ya  had liieteqMotfivhttopmioiii 
which  iadnetdthe  caie  and  aoctUMgr  of  his  Mteuchei^  jet  Ilunre^ 
m  many  caaoi,  had  ofipoituiutiesof  uiveitigatu^  myadf  the  aulgeoti 
to  whkfa  they  idate^  and  of  tmtxdng,  cm  my  own  eudiodity*  the 
fiMts  he  has  recorded.  On  the  other  hand,  the  constant  coromunicft* 
tkm  I  had  with  Mr.  Irvine,  till  the  final  dissolution  of  the  miiaiont 
ga?e  me  opportunities  of  dertfing  much  information  from  him  on 
subjects  unconnected  with  his  own  branch  of  the  inquiry,  and  renders 
it  impossible  for  me  to  discriminatelihe  ideas  I  owe  to  hint  6om  those 
which  occurred  to  myself. 

From  the  late  Lieutenant  Macartney  T  have  taken  the  direction  of 
the  mountains,  the  course  of  the  streams,  the  relative  position  of  the 
townt;,  and,  in  short,  almost  the  whole  of  the  information  contained 
in  the  map.    I  have  also  obtained  from  that  officer*s  memoir  many 
particulars  wiiicli  I  have  used  in  my  descriptive  and  statistical  accounts 
of  the  country.    The  zeal  and  abiliiie:*  of  the  Iftte  Mr.  ii^fljcartiaey  arje  ■  ;* - 
well  known  to  the  government  which  he  served;  and  his  finnk  and  ' 
disinterested  liberality  in  conmumicating  hia  ]nfonnatibni'wSBP''lDDg.-  . 
be  lemetaibered  by  all  who  were  mteieited  in  the  geography^iaf-tfiflttr  v' 
oountries  to  whidh  he  had  at  ^ffbrent  llmea  directed  his  attention* 
'I  eould  not  lefoun  fitom  thia  tribute  to  the  merita  of  thia  mmch  re*. 

gMtted  officer  ^  but  it  would  Bl  eoooid  with  tlie  moden^  aid  enreiw 

-  » 


« 


Digitized  by  Google 


vi  VREFACE. 

sion  to  dispky  for  which  he  was  Jiiinself  tUmkin^iia^pA^  to  indnlge  Is 
•ny  further  panegyric.  * 

I  take  this  method  of  returning  my  best  thanks  to  Mr.  W,  Erskine 
at  Bombay,  for  his  readiness  in  repljino;  to  my  references  on  many 
points  connected  with  the  geography  and  history  of  Asia,  The  Pub- 
lic will,  I  trust,  ere  long  be  enabled  to  judge  of  the  raiue  of  the 
time  which  he  sacrificed  from  so  kind  a  motive. 

It  will  be  sufficiently  obvious  that  I  have  not  had  any  professe<lly 
litenay  assiatance  in  the  composition  or  correction  of  my  book ;  but 
I  have 'not  neglected  to  aviil  mjMlf  of  tin  adiriee  of  my  friends,  by 
nUdi  many  impeifectiona  liaivie  been  removed. 

Meiefindta  of  it^noidd  be  of  little  cooaeqnenoei  if  the  subaCamse 
of  my  aooount  were  firee  ftom  error.  SVom  the  nature  of  my  undeiw 
taking,  many  mMkm  will  doiibtlew  be  diacovered,  wben  onr  ae- 
qoaintanee  with  ibe  ocamtries  I  treat  of  ia-iuGieaaedi  but  in  the  pr^ 
lent  state  of  onr  kaawhiigb,  no  attempt  to  elucidate  iJiem  can  be 
ledumed  presumptimufi,  and  whatever  errors  I  may  be  found  to  bave 
committed,  will  not,  I  troat^  be  ascribed  to  want  of  indnatij,  or  to 
Hidifference  about  truth. 

Among  tlioae  to  whom  I  am  moat  indebted  for  advice,  I  may  take 
the  liberty  of  naming  Mr.  Jenkins,  resident  at  the  court  of  Nagpore» 
and  Captain  Close,  a.ssistant  to  the  residency  at  Poona.  To  the  latter 
gentleman,  indeed,  I  am  bound  to  acknowlcHcro  my  obligations,  as 
well  for  the  aid  he  affordrd  in  collecting  and  arranging  some  parts  of 
mv  materials,  as  for  the  brnofit  T  derived  from  his  judgment  in  the 
general  execution  of  my  work.  I  In  lieve  I  have  now  noticed  all  the 
:f«^.6uxi'.l  ^Ety0  received,  which  are  not  adverted  to  in  the  places  to 

V*;>l  jfegfe^ifeajm  part  oT  Mr.  llMwtaij'i  nup  U  tinmdy.  In  nqtie  mamant  bdbn  At 

*I*ublIc,  *t)ie 'first  draft  of 'f  >i;t'i'iv':  Het n  introduced,  with  some  variation,  into  the  map 
■  prefixed  to  Mr.  Maodoiiald  Kinncirs  Geographical  Memoir  of  the  Persian  Empire.  The 
Mitnttpartd«obpidbtfafypiililUMdbdi»eddi^  aai^^  it 
wm  •boat  to  wfftut  in  a      of  ladfe  wkUk  Ifr.  AinwiMi  wm  pnpail^g  ir  pab& 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


which  they  refer.  I  am  indeeci  atraid  that  I  ha\  e  said  more  on  (his 
subject  than  the  importaacre  of  the  whole  productioa  wiii  be  thought 
to  justify. 

I  hav  e  a  lew  wordfi  to  say  on  the  spelling  of  die  proper  names.  It 
U  always  diffimlt  to  represent  Asiatic  words  in  our  characters,  and 
Ifak  fi  ineweMed  tile-  pwwopt  fautnioe  bj  tlis  wmt  of  a  uniform 
wifVbem,  lieutmiit  Miqirtnex  had  adoplad  Dr.  Gildifisk*^  otdick 
graphy,  iH|idi  iirt)»efli«p«  the  beil  cxfanft  ibr  the  eccnrate  eapressMn 
ef  Aaiatie  MNuidi»  «iid  whkfa  is  elto  hyht  the  most  genendfycnnM 
hk  }  hot  m  h  it  little'lmown  in.  Ennpei  Lheve  given  e-lable  pi 
the  powen  it  ■adgDB  to  the  ktten  s  ^dndnnU  enable  the*  reader  t» 
patonounce  all  the  words  where  it  if  made  use  of*.  I  mjidf  used  no 
pertaoilar  alphabet,  but  endeavoured  to  express  all  words  in  our 
letters  without  altering  the  sounds  which  ibejr  iitnally  have  in  Eng- 
lish. This  plan,  however,  has  led  to  some  inconvenience,  for,  as  I 
was  guided  entirely  by  my  ear,  and  as  the  same  sounds  can  be  ex- 
pressed by  different  letters,  there  was  nothing  to  fix  the  scheme  I 
had  adopted  in  my  memory  ;  and,  in  consequence,  when  a  word 
recurred  after  a  long  5nt«^rval,  I  frequently  changetl  the  sjielling  with^ 
oat  designing  it.  This  l  \  il  was  increasetl  by  the  many  niterruptions 
I  was  exposed  to,  whicli  at  different  times  obliged  me  to  suspend  niy 
proceedings  for  many  months  together ;  and  my  attempts  to  recon- 
cile the  jnconsistencica  dma  produoei^  have  rather  increased  than 


*  Dr.  Oilckriat  has  giren  the  following  table  for  the  vmvda,  tadk  of  wbidk  ii 

RnDBnoed  aa  it  is  in  the  EDglish  words  written  over  it : 

BaU   Sun    Thtrc    Beer    Bill    PoU   Poor   Our  Dry. 
AUE  EoIOOoOuY. 

Tbe  comonanta  are,  I  believe,  prorHninced  aa  in  RngKiih,  except  C  and  G,  which  are 


TTse  *\gn»  Gh  and  Kb  art-  adfli'^i,  ami  rcprf>?pnt,  the  first,  fhe  lound  of  tbe  PL-rsian 
Obioc^  wbicb  ia  umiIj  tbe  wuue  a*  a  Northumberiaiul  man  would  giro  to  R;  and  tbe 
Moond  Mpmaentfl  d>e  Perdan  Kbe,  and  haa  a  reaemhknce  to  die  Scottiih  and  Iriihcfafai 
lodi  (a  Idtt).  It  is  to  be  observed,  tliat  when  a  consonant  is  repeated  it  is  to  be  pn>- 
nm]nr(><!  doubk.  TbiM  dd  ia  HOC  to  be  firaooiiBieed  ain^  ia  paddock,  bat  doabl^ 
in  mad-dog. 


bigitizea  by  Oougle 


i 


^  FK£FACG. 

fOBBoved  tiie  eonfiinoo.  Hie  moit  material  ifwd$,  lioweter;  ate 
pretty  'wiilbniiijr  apdlftd,  and  I  hope  no  great  embamannent  will 
ariae  fiovi  the  in^olari^  of  the  othera. 

The  ei^gnmngtaKe  all  portniia»  except  mmnbect  IIL  XIIL  and 
XIV.f  which,  though  aconnite  rapieaentationa  of  the  dreawB  iaiid 
e(|iupment8  they  are  designed  for»  are  not  likeoeaaeB  of  Individuals. 
Hmj  are  all  done  by  Iiulian  artists*  eioqpt  numbers,  V.  VL  VIL 
and  VULy  which  are  sufficiently  distinguished  by  the  superiority  of 
their  execution  :  for  them  I  am  indebted  to  Lieutenant  R.  M.  Grind- 
lay  of  the  I^ombay  establishment,  who  drow  thODl  firom  A^jhaiUia  juflt 
acrived  ixom  their  own  country. 


PoflWA*  JuMx  4.  1S14. 


Digitized  by  Google 


■ 

KOtlCE  BEGABDING  THE  MAP. 

T  INTENDED  in  this  place  to  have  given  an  aooomt  of  tht  node  adoptad 

*■  by  Mr.  Macartney  in  the  construction  of  his  map,  and  to  have  shiini  in 
detail  what  part  of  niv  {geographical  information  was  borrowed  from  hint,  awf 
on  what  points  his  opinion  and  mine  disagreed  ;  but,  on  consideration,  I 
think  it  better  to  give  tiie  most  important  part  of  Mr.  Macartney's  memoir  in 
an  Appandti^  and  to  it  I  beg  leave  to  veftr  my  readers  1m  will  them  ftid> 
hmdm  tiie  aurtter  'to  whidi  I  piinc^paBy  alhid^  good  aooounts  of  the  (ham, 
the  livon  of  die  Funjaub  and  other  interesting  aobjecta.  I  have  atiU,  ho«w 
ever,  some  observations  to  o£fer.    Mr.  Macartney's  design  in  forming  his  map 
was  to  embody  all  the  information  he  had  himself  collected,  and  to  leave  the 
task  of  comparing  it  with  the  <jjnaions  of  other  geographers,  to  those  who  had 
txu)ite  lebure  and  better  opportunities  of  consulting  printed  authorities.   It  is 
not*  tfaerefiir^  to  be  ondentood  when  he  diffiaa  flom  hit  pfedeoeNOca,  that 
ho  had  annMiwwod  and  revened  thdr  deeiaiona*  but  menly  that  die  aooomrta 
he  had  received  differed  £n»  those  already  in  the  poaiewion  of  the-  pnUic^ 
Of  the  value  of  hia  accounts,  it  may  be  well  to  say  a  few  words.   The  foun- 
dation of  the  whole  rests  on  the  lines  formed  by  the  route  of  the  mission, 
where  the  bearings  and  distances  were  taken  by  three  different  geutlenxen, 
each  of  whom  had  a  purambulator  of  his  own.    The  latitude  of  the  hahing 
places  was  also  ascertained  by  observatioo*  aa  waadieloiigitude  of  the  principal 
•pointa  on  the  route* 

Mr.  Macartney  h«e  hunaelf  exphbod  (Appendix  D.)  manner  in  which 
be  kid  down  the  country  beyond  thoae  bgr  meana  of  native  inftmiation. 
It  is  obvious  tliat  tliis  part  cannot  be  so  accurate  as  the  former,  and  can 
scarcely  hope  to  go  beyond  an  approximation  to  the  tnith  ;  but  it  dii^^JLt  to 
hi  imic  li  more  exact,  as  well  as  more  liili,  tixan  any  thing  we  alrcxuiy  possess 
on  the  subject.  The  surveyed  line  is  advanced  many  hundred  milea  beyond 
what  it  waa  when  the  lait  m^»  waa  roade^  and  the  number  of  rontea  collected 
fim  the  people  of  the  country  give  a  great  adnbtage  over  the  alender  mate- 
rials before  obtained :  nothiilg  indeed  gives  a  higher  idea  of  the  genius  of 
Miyor  Rennell  than  a  comparison  of  the  matcrialH  he  possessed  with  his  suc- 
cess in  setthng  the  geography  of  the  countries  iu  questioti.  A  good  deal 
floigfat  be  said  to  prove  that  the  new  informa^on  is  not  to  he  disr^arded 


Digitized  by  Google 


«v!  MOTTCB  HEOARDINO  THE  BCAP. 

becai!'?*»  it  ]<!  procured  from  the  natives;  and  it  might  be  urged,  that  the 
Algiiauns  are  remarkable  for  observation  and  veracity,  and  that  it  is  common 
among  them  ibr  a  man  to  repeat  a  route  alter  a  long  interv  al,  without  vas)' 
ing  ddier  in  fbe  diatttice  <u  direction  «f  •  noj^  stage ;  but  ibts  qnefltion  ' 
if  of  tiie  lew  cootequeDoe^     noUung  is  Imown  of  the  geogiiplij  of  tihe 
oountriet  in  question  that  il  not  derived  from  the  natives.   Mr.  Foster,  it 
il  true,  lias  publidied  tiia  route  througli  the  Caubul  dominions,  but  he  gives 
the  number  of  Jarsangs  in  each  stage,  according  to  the  information  he  re- 
ceived, and  not  the  number  of  mileSf  as  he  wouid  liave  done  had  his  distances 
been  the  result  of  his  own  observations.    I  consider  this  preference  of  Mr. 
Ibster's  as  a  proof  of  his  judgment,  for  he  had  no  instnunents,  and,  how- 
ever  soperior  he  waa  to  the  natives  in  all  tlie  other  zequiaitea  of  a  traveller* 
he  could  not  he  so  good  n  judge  of  the  length  of  «  stage  as  a  perHm  who 
had  often  travelled  il*  and  nw  bcsidas  accustomed  to  esttmate  the  rate  at 
which  camels  move. 

The  principal  alterations  I  have  myself  made  in  the  map  lie  to  the  south 
of  Ghuznee,  and  to  the  north  of  Hindoo  Coosh.    Mr.  Macartney  ])osscssed 
fewer  routes  in  the  south  of  Afghauuistaun  than  in  any  otiier  paii.  of  die 
hangdom*  and  the  infonnation  I  obtained  in  the  Deocan  refimed  principally 
to  that  quarter;  I  therefbra  constructed  the  southOTi  part  of  the  niap  anew, 
and  am  answerable  for  as  much  of  the  tract  between  the  parallds  of  Ghuznee 
and  Shikarpoor,  as  lies  west  of  the  range  of  Solimaun,  and  south  of  the 
river  Tumuk.    In  framing  this  I  derived  great  advantage  from  using 
Kelauti  Nusseer  Khann  (the  position  of  which  has  been  ascertained  by 
Messrs.  Christie  and  Fottinger)  lur  one  of  my  dxed  points,  as  well  as  from 
the  meaw  I  possessed  of  tettling  the  position  of  Dauder  with  tolerable  pre* 
dsion.  It  stiU  stands  nearly  ^riiere  LUutenant  Macartnej  put  it  (  but  hu 
judgment  has  been  confirmed  by  many  routes  of  mine,  and  by  a  map  drawn 
up  by  Mr«  Fbttinger,  in  which  it  is  placed  within  a  few  mil^  of  its  position 
in  Mr.  Macartney's  map.    All  to  the  south  of  the  parallel  of  Shikarpoor 
will  be  found  in  the  printed  maps:  I  have  notliing  to  add  to  the  public 
information.    In  the  south  west  I  have  availed  myself  of  Mr.  Christie's 
route,  (published  fay  Mr.  Macdonald  Kinnier)  for  fixing  the  position  of 
JeUsUabed  in  Seestaun.  i  have  nuMle  but  a  alight  deviation  fronithe  panted 
jvatB,  and  that  ibr  leaaoos  #hich  appeared  to  jnstiiy  the  change ;  but  I 
have  retained  Furrah  wd  Hennt  in  ^  situations  assigned  to  them  by  Mr. 
Macartney.  No  other  position  of  Heraut  would  agree  with  Mr.  Macartney's 
routes*  or  my  own  inlbrmation*   I  have  not  indeed  been  able  to  ascerlam 


Digitized  by  Google 


KOrrCB  BEOABDIKO  THE  ICAP. 

the  authority  on  wliich  it  has  been  placed  in  the  position  now  generally 
adopted-  Major  Rennell  proceeded  on  the  information  ot  Mr.  Foster ;  but 
that  traveller  observes  that  the  road  from  Gimmuch(Diinmuk)toHerautUa8 
nearly  a  northern  course  (VoL  IL  Page  115),  and  if  audi  ft  dinctkn  W«fe 
^ven  fioD  the  point  fixed  fbr  Gimmudi  in  M^or  Bcnndl's  Mtip,  it  mwld 
bring  HefMttnMMrtotbepoatiittMMgiiedtoitby 
other  that  lies  jet  been  thought  of. 

Mr.  Macartney  liad  placed  Bokhara  in  latitude  37=  45'  north,  and  longitude 
6f  10  east,  which  was  so  contrary-  to  received  opinious,  that  i  was  induced  to 
exanune  it  particularly ;  and  I  soon  found  it  equally  inconsistent  with  my 
own  information.  1  have  no  doubt  Mr.  Macartney  was  under  a  mistake  and 
lhat  he  was  led  into  it,  partly  by  a  very  enooeods  mte  (the  only  one  hepoe* 
aesaed  between  Heraat  and  Bokhara),  and  partly  by  hia  overlooking  the  pro- . 
veriiial  length  of  the  marches  in  Toorldstaun.  My  information  confirms  his 
poflitiona  on  the  toad&  to  Bokhara,  south  of  Hindoo  Coosh  ;  but  from  that 
mountain  I  find  many  of  them  too  short.  I  am  not  satisfied  witli  my  own 
position  of  Bokhara,  which  is  in  39°  27'  north  latitude,  and  62°  45'  ea.^t  lonc^i- 
tude.  Anthony  Jenkinson,  who  took  an  observation  in  155B,  declares  tiie 
latitude  to  be  39*  10' $  while  lfr.lliofiHWBi»  win  viaM  Bokhaia''kk.i74o, 
aMertB  it  to  be  in  latitude  39*  30^*  though  without  wyiag  whillier  <he  bad 
obterved  it  or  not  Mfl|or  Rennel  places  it  some  ndniftes  to  tlie  south  of 
jqT  30^:  but  the  greatest  variation  is  in  the  longitude,  wliich  Major  Rennel 
fives  upwards  of  forty  minute;  further  west  than  I  have  done.  I  should  have 
bcvA)  inclined  to  adopt  his  account  irom  respect  ibrtusauthorily,  but  it  could 
not  be  reconciled  to  my  intormation.  • 

On  the  whole«  I  cannot  hope  for  nuch  aecuracy  in  rajdabai^  of.tfie  ni^ 
haniig  never  before  attempted  an j  thing  of  the  Idnd  |  but  I  hope  it  may  be 
niefiil  till  noinething  better  ia  hrout^t  forward,  and  that,  even- itfler  the  priiu 
cipal  poinia  are  Hxed  with  flKne  acoisacy,  the  Intermediate  rootea  will  be 
found  of  some  aervioe*  - 


•  The  route  from  Bokhara  to  Cliushmch  Morco,  and  that  from  Bulkli  to  tho  same  place  were 
taken  down  from  the  infornoation  of  a  rery  intelli^enl  native  of  tlie  last  named  city  :  they  were 
dten  protracted  without  the  least  alteratioa  in  the  distances  or  directions,  and  agreed  within  a  m3« 
«rtirointli«MMitioBofCbiwhindiMot«e.  I  «m  obliged  to  alter  Ui«  directum  of  m/im^riMle 
from  Ghoafanm  Mbrae  to  Herant.  The  ftmner  direction  would  fan  placed  Henuit  twenty 
■tlee  weat  of  it*  present  Kituatioo,  wlridi  could  not  have  been  reconciled  to  die  route  to  the  same 
dty  ftom  Merocnaak.  The  third  rente  fVoni  Kubbermauch  was  taken  Iroin  Mr.  Macartney's 
mop,  without  any  alteration  in  the  distances.  It  was  inserted  into  mine  after  all  the  a  ljoiiiing 
posilions  had  been  fixed,  aud  titttd  its  place  with  the  utmost  exactuess.  it  i*  worth  wltile  to 
observe  that  (he  place  where  Mour  or  Mcrvc  falls  in  these  routes,  is  nfwrljf  Thtl  MOW  m  AM 
wtigiied  to  it  by  Mr.  Macdonald  Kionier  on  grounds  cattirdy  diMinct. 


Digitized  by  Google 


LIST  OF  PLATES. 


Map  of  the  Kingdom  oi'  Caubvil»  -  -   to  face  page  83 

Plate   I.  A  Sofe  of  Mauiiikyaula  -  -  -  -  


11.  Uooraunee  Shepherds  .... 

239 

III.  A  Dooraunce  Gentleman  ... 

414 

IV.  A  Taujik  in  the  Summer  Dress  of  Caubvil 

4.34 

V.  A  Hindkee  in  the  Winter  Dress  of  Peshawer 

VI.  An  Eusofzye  - 

347 

VII.  An  Afghaun  of  Damaun  ... 

36g 

VITI.  A  Dooraunee  Villager  with  his  Arms 

406 

IX.  A  Khawtee  Ghiljic  in  his  Summer  Dress 

443 

X.  A  Khojeh  of  Uzbek  Tartary 

469 

XI.  A  Man  of  the  Tyraunee  Eimauks 

481 

XII.  A  Hazaureh  ..... 

483 

XIII.  The  Chaous  Bauahee  in  his  dress  of  office  (referred  to  p.  519) 


to  face  the  title 

Xiy.  The  Umla  Baushee  in  his  Dress  of  Office         -  page  519 


I 


1 


r, 


EBBATA. 
^58.  line  4.  hr  JVrftjgw  vmA  R^tgiA 

■■74.  31.  f(  r  Tu'fch  rend  FuUA, 
.75.  _   3.  figc  7lN<tob  iwdAMd. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


rON  TF.NTS. 


INTRODITCTTON. 

CONTAINING  a  narrative  of  the  journey  of  the  niiiaion  to  PeiiliawCT,  of  its  transac- 
tiom  at  that  city,  and  of  it»  return  to  India  -  -  -  Page  t 

BOOK  1. 

GKOGBAPHICAL  DESCRIPTIOK  OF  AFGHAUNISTAUK. 

CHAP.  I. 

BITDATION'  AND  BOUNDARIES  OF  ArOHACNISTAUy. 

HenuJleh  and  Hindoo  CooaK.  —  Paropamiaua.  —  Mooz  Taagh.  —  Table  land  of  Tibet 

—  Little  Tilx-t.  —  Katishkaur.  —  Pamer.  —  Beloot  Tnug.  —  Countries  amon;;  the 
branch»»  of  Deloot  Tati^.  —  Kurrateggeen.  — ■  Durwaii7~  —  Wuk)i<t  hii  and  Budukh* 
ahiuifi. —  Rivwg  north  of  Hindfx)  Coosti.  —  .Tiixnrtps.  —  Oxiia. —  CoinitrieH  on  tha 
Jaxartes. —  Fer^^liauna  or  Kokaun. —  Kirghizzes  and  Kuzzauks.  —  Kingdoms  of  Qr- 
gunge  and  Bokhaura.  —  LimitH  of  Toorkiytaun.  —  Bulkh.  —  Countries  Bouth  of  Hin» 
dfX)  Oxjsh.  —  Ca^hmeer.  —  Punjauh.  —  Indian  desart.  —  The  Indus.  —  Plain  of  the 
Indus.  —  Sind.  —  Scwccstaun.  —  Range  uf  ISoliniaun.  —  Table  land  of  Kclaut.  — 
Great  aalt  desart.  —  Btmiidaries  of  Aighaunistaun.  —  General  conformation  of  the 
country.  —  Nanie  of  the  country    -  -  -  -  -  -  83 

CHAP  IT. 
MOUKTAlWg  OF  AgOHAUMiaTAPW. 

Hindoo  Coosh.  —  Snowy  ridge.  —  Inferior  ranges.  —  Countriet  among  the  southern 
branchesi  of  Hindoo  Coosh. —  Booncrc. —  Swaut,  Punjcora  and  Bajour. —  Caufcristaun 
in  tl>e  mountains.  —  Volley  of  the  Caubul  river.  —  Valleys  opening  into  it  from 
Hindoo  Cooeh,  C<x)nner,  ^\lingaur,  Alislimig,  Lughmaun,  Oozbccn,  and  Tugow. 
——the  Cobittaun  of  Caubul,  including  Nijrow,  Punjsheer,  and  Gborebund.  —  CohdaUr* 

a 


X  CONTENT& 

mun.  —  Country  of  the  Eimaaks  and  Hazaurcba.  —  Range  of  Solimatm.  —  Orifytn  and 
direction  of  the  chain.  —  Suff'uid  Coli  minor  ritn^cs.  —  Rranchet  towards  the  east, 
branch  oF  PumiiuUw,  branch  of  salt  hilLs  branch  of  34°  north  latitude,  brandies 
towards  the  west  —  Hills  on  the  west  of  A%hauni«tami.  —  Khojeh  Amraun.  —  Range 
of  Tukkatoo.  —  Range  of  Khurlukkec.  —  Hills  emt  of  lopgitode  68°  euL —  Range 
tootb  of  tlic  Turnuk  —  Range  of  ijoorghur  -  -  -  Page  94 

rHAP.  ITI. 

ni\nERS   OF  AFGHAl  NISTAUM. 

The  Indus,  joined  by  the  river  of  Ladauk  and  Iry  the  Abaseen.  —  The  river  of  Kausb- 

k,uir.  —  The  rnoT  of  Caubid.  —  The  Koorruni.  —  The  Gomul.  — Thr  Zhnhc.  —  Tlif> 
Helmund.  —  The  LTrghundaub.  —  The  Khashrood.  —  The  Furrali  rood.  —  The  Tur- 
nuk.  —  Tlie  LTgliessaun.  —  Tlie  Lora.  —  The  Ochus,  Poolccmaulaim,  or  Tejend  — 
Auhistaudtii  lake  -  =  -  z  :  -  =  loS 

CHAP,  rv. 

yATiTRAi.  Ayn  POUTICAL  Divisioyg  OF  ATOBAinffaf AVV- 

Lower  and  Upper  ^d.  —  Damaun,  iu  divisions  and  inhabitants.  —  Tribes  in  the  range 
of  Solimaun.  —  Tribes  among  its  eastern  branches.  —  Plain  of  Peshawer.  —  Euso6cyes. 
Tribes  between  Hindoo  Coosh  and  Su£bid  Coh,  —  Khybcrees.  — Jellallabad.  —  Nin- 
grahaur.  —  Plain  of  Caubul.  —  Wurduka  —  Ck>untrie8  on  the  west  of  the  Solimatmee 
range,  Lognr,  &c  —  Boson  of  the  Aubi*taudch.  —  Valley  of  the  Tumuk.  —  Country 
between  the  Urghandaub  and  the  Helmund.  —  Country  west  of  the  Helmund.  — 
Coontrie*  west  of  the  range  of  Solimaun  resumed.  —  Sauleh  Yesoon,  &c  —  Pisheen.  — 
Shawl  and  Moostoong.  —  Dushti  Bedowlch.  —  Zawora  and  Tul.  -—  Chooteeallee.  — 
Boree.  —  liiobe  -         •         -         -         -         -  . 

CItAP.  V. 

OF  THK  n.TMATF.  OF  AFGHAtTXIRTAnH. 

South-west  Monsoon.  ^  Winter  rains.  —  Spring  rains.  —  Temperatmne.  —  Winds.  — 

General  remark*  on  the  climate  and  its  cfTecta   -  -  -  126 

CHAP.  VI. 

AWIMAIA  VEQgTABlBS,  ASP  MntEHAlS  OF  ATGHAUMIBTAUN. 

The  Hon.  —  Ti^er  and  leopard.  —  Wolf,  hyaena.  —  Bear.  —  Wild  boar.  —  Wild  ass.  — 
Deer.  —  The  horse,  mule,  and  ass.  —  Camel  and  dromedary'.  —  Boffaloe.  —  Ox.  — ■ 
^eep.  —  Gc»t.  —  Pog.  —  Cat.  —  Birds. —  Gome  and  other  birds.  ~  Reptiles.  — 
laaect*  Trees.  —  Bushes.  —  Flowers.  —  Minerals  -  -  -  141 


CONTENTS  ia 
>OOK  TT. 

CENERAL  ACCOUNT  OF  THK  INHARIT ANTS  OF  AFaHAI-VlSTArV. 

IHTEODUCTION.  OHIGIW.  AKD  KABLY  HlgTORY  0>  THK  ATOHAims. 

Fint  impression  made  b}-  the  Afp;liaun  chnrncter  —  on  a  traveller  frtim  Europe,  —  and  on 
one  from  India.  —  Name  of  the  At'^haim  nation.  —  Early  history  from  foreign  atithors. 
Descent  of  the  Afghauua  from  the  Jews   -  -  -  Page  148 

CHAP.  IT. 

B1VI3IONS   AN-n   BOVKUS-MFNT  OF  THE   ATGHAl^N  NATIOV. 

Common  origin  of  all  the  Afghaum.  — Their  divigion  into  tribes  Formation  and  divi- 
sions of  an  Oolooss.  —  Tlie  Khaun.  —  The  Jecrga  Afghauns  attached,  not  to  the 

chief,  but  Qorlooss.  Internal  mtlit.'^rv  cstablislnnent.  —  Internal  revenue.  —  Internal 

adminiiitration  of  justice.  —  Pooslitoonwuilee,  or  customary  law.  —  Private  reven^. 

—  Meana  of  rcstrainin<>  the  bad  effects  of  private  revenge.  —  Forms,  powers,  and  cha- 
racter of  the  jmticial  Jecrgas.  —  Other  modes  of  adjusting  diK}?utes.  —  Mixed  OolooaBcg. 

—  Hum:tauyahs  or  Denizens.  —  General  government  of  the  Atghaun  nation.  —  The 
King.  —  His  powers.  —  Opinions  of  different  parties  regarding  th«m.  —  How  exer- 
cised. —  DLjadvaDtages  of  tlxis  form  of  govenimeot.  —  Iti  advantages  -  

CTIAP.  III. 

MARBIAOEg.  COKDITION  OF  WOirew,  TlTNERALa.  8tC 

Marriage.  —  Pecnliar  customs  rdating  to  marriage.  —  Condition  of  the  women.  —  Love- 
story  of  Audam  and  Doorkhauncc.  —  Fiuicrals   -  -  -  179 

CHAP.  TV. 

■PtTCATlOy,  LATTOtHOB,  AND  LEARNING  OF  THg  ArOHACTTS. 

Education.  —  Pushtoo  language.  —  Its  origin  and  character.  —  A%baan  authorg.  •— Spe- 
cirooM  of  Pu&htoo  poetry.  —  J  .winiing  of  the  AfghauoB   -  -  'i8g 

CHAP.  V.  ..... 

REtlQIOH,  mCTB,  MOOIXAHS,  gUrgMTITIONa,  &C.  ' 

ReUgioD  Toteration  Conduct  to  Hindoos.  —  To  Christiana. — To  Sbecahs  Sliort 

account  of  the  sect  of  ijoofccs.  —  Libertine  »cct  of  MooUa  Zukkcc.  —  Koushnneea  sect. 

a  2 


Xii  CONTENTS 

Effect  of  religion  on  the  manners  of  the  people.  —  Prayers.  —  Fasts.  —  Pilgritn«^. 
Alms.  —  Dice  and  wine  forbidden.  —  The  office  of  Moohtet<ib,  and  other  means  of 
epforcinK  observance  of  religion  and  morals.  —  MooUiilis.  —  Tlieir  numbers.  —  Their 
power  and  influence.  —  Their  vice*. «—  Their  means  of  Urelihood.  —  How  invested  with 
the  character.  —  Under  no  church  government.  —  Manners.  —  Question  regarding  their 
utility.  —  Dervises,  sointa,  and  other  holy  men.  —  Sm^erstitions.  —  Alch>Tny  and  ma- 
gic. —  Tlic  ^dens  of  Junishecd.  — Ghools  or  spirits  of  the  waste. — Ghosts. —  Dreams. 
Divination  Sortcs  Virgilianoe   -  -  -  -  Page  200 

rHAP  VT. 
HOSriTAUTYt  PRtDATOHY  HABITBt  &C. 

Hospitality.  —  Nannawautec  and  other  methods  of  supplication.  —  Sanctity  of  a  guest. 

—  Mixture  of  hospitality  and  rapacity  Rapine,  how  occasioned.  —  WTicre  most 

prevalent.  ■—  Safeguards  -  -  -  -  -  -  226 

CHAR  VTL 

MANNERS,   CUSTOMS,  AND  CHARACTEn  OF  THE  AFGHAUSg. 

Division  of  the  Afghauns  into  inhabitants  of  tents  and  of  houjics.  —  Increase  of  those  in 
houaes.  —  Causes  of  that  incrett.se.  — Doubts  reparditig  an  opinion  of  Volney.  —  Housea 
and  furniture  of  the  common  {xx^plc.  —  Manner  of  sitting.  —  Way  of  pacing  time. 

—  Smoking.  —  Kuliiauns.  —  Snuff.  —  Reception  of  a  visitor.  —  Feasts.  —  Talcs,  songs, 
and  music  —  Amusements.  —  Hunting.  —  Races.  —  Military  .porUi.  —  Dances.  — 
Games.  —  Dress  of  the  inen.~  Drei»s  of  the  women.  —  Conveyances  of  Afghaunistaun. 

—  Horses  and  their  furniture. —  Elephants.  —  Littert. —  Couriers. —  Of  slaves. — 
Whence  procnred.  —  llieir  condition  and  cniplo^-ments.  —  Emancipation.  —  Tlie  Af^ 
ghauns  abhor  man-selling.  —  Form  and  appearance  of  the  people. — Distinction  between 
Eastern  ami  Western  Afghauns.  —  Manners.  —  Character  -  -  331 

CHAP.  VtIL 

nv  Tine  iiywABiTANTS  OF  Tovrtts. 

A&rhatms,  few.  —  Bankers.  —  How  treated  by  the  government.  —  Merchants.  —  Shop- 
keepers  and  artizans.  —  Oppressions  arising  from  the  system  of  purveyance,  —  and 
from  the  strictness  ot  the  police.  —  Afghaun  division  of  the  day  and  year.  —  Hours  and 
m«^^«  of  tlie  conunon  people  in  towns.  —  Butli*.  —  Food,  with  the  price  of  mmc  art^ 
dea.  Amusements.  —  Way  of  life  of  a  baker  retired  from  business —  Athletic  exer- 
cises of  India  and  Persia.  —  General  condition  of  tltc  inhabitants  of  to^-ns  254 

It 


CONTENTa  xlii 


CHAP.  IX. 

OF  THB  GREAT. 

The  housca  and  fiiraitare  of  the  great.  —  Drew,  ornaments  and  arms  of  tlie  men.  — ■ 
Dress  of  the  ladies.  —  HouschoUl  and  retinue  of  the  great.  —  Fidelity  of  the  gervanM. 
—  Life  of  the  great.  — Description  of  mix  entertaii intent  t  Peahawer.  —  Entertainment 

at  the  gardens  of  TJmoor  Shauh.  —  Character  of  the  great.  —  Account  of  the  prin« 
cipal  nobles  of  t}>e  court  of  Shauh  Sitoojau.  —  Muddud  Khaun.  —  Goolistaun  Khaun. 
■— Amim  Khaun. —  Meer  Hotuk  Khaun. —  Ahmetl  Khaun  Noorzye.  —  Negociationa 

witli  Persian  miniatcrs,  —  and  with  Doorraunce  Sirdara   -  -  Page  267 

Note.    Condition  of  Europeans  in  Afgbaunigtwin   -  -  -  -  288 

TRADE  OF  CAUBUl, 

Mean*  of  transport.  —  Caravans.  —  Thoee  with  wandering  tribe*  —  Thoae  composed  of 
merchants  alone.  —  Foreign  trade  —  with  India,—  with  Toorkistaun,  —  with  Persia,  — - 
with  Chinese  Toorkistaun. —  Internal  trade  of  the  kingdom.  —  The  horse-trade.  390 

CHAP.  XT. 

HUgBANDllY  OF  CAUBOT.. 

Claaaeti  of  caltivator*.  —  Proprietors.  — X'alue  of  land.  —  Tenants.  —  Rent-Buzgurg  or 
Metayers.  —  Labourers.  —  Spring  tmd  autumn.  —  Harvests  of  Atghaunistaun.  ■ — 
Paulaiz.  —  Graina  n»ed  for  food.  —  Garden  StuiR.  —  Sugar  Cane.  —  Cotton.  —  Oil 
plantft.  —  Madder.  —  Asafoetida.  —  Artificial  gra»>»cs.  —  System  of  farming.  —  Irriga- 
tion.—- Streams. — ■  Cauraizes  or  Calireczes.  —  And  other  modes  of  irrigation.— 
Khooahkanl)eh  or  unwatcre<i  land.  —  Procosji  of  cultivation. —  Wind-mills.  —  Water- 
roilU-  —  Hand-mills.  —  Svicccsaion  of  crojis.  —  Cattle   -  -  

CHAR  XIT. 

TAUJIK8,  HIKDKEB8  AWP  OTHER  INHABITANTS  OP  AFGHAUNISTAUX. 

Cohiataunees.  —  Rurrukeea.  —  Poormoolees  or  Fermoolees.  —  Sirdeli^s.  —  Jat«.  — - 
Awaum.  —  Puraunchehs.  —  Hindoos.  —  Diggauns.  —  Shulmauncea.  —  S^'autccs.  — 
Teeiyea.  —  Kuzzilbaushca.  —  Araba.  —  Aiinenian>.  —  Abysginiana.  —  Caimuka  309 


r 


xiv  •  CONTENT& 


BOOK  TTT. 
CHAP.  I. 

PARTICULAR   ACCOUMT  OF  THE  ATQHAITH  TRTWr.fl. 

Eastern  trilies. — The  Ikniooraunccs.  —  Extent  and  houndarie!*. — Qgneral  fhftrflrt<»r 
of  the  pfople.  —  Goondees  or  a?tsociations.  —  Description  of  the  Btrdixiruimee 
country  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Page  3  24 

 EUSQFZYES. 


Description  of  tlieir  country.  —  Valley  of  Chumla.  —  Valley  of  Swaiit.  —  Boonere.  — 
The  Judoom  of  DtinUour.  —  ILittory  ot'  the  Eusol'/ye:^.  —  Tlieir  eini^atton  from 
Khorassaun,  and  settlement  in  their  present  seats.  —  Majiners  in  former  days.  — 
Di"-  --  n'.  of  the  laiui--  ot  tlic  tribe.  —  Singiiliir  custom  of  Viiish  or  infi  rc  luuij^'i  ot  .aiuis. 
—  Anarchy  dt  ttir  I'.i!>of/y(.'S. —  I'Orm  (it  ^ti\-f  riini(  ii'  iii  a  t/vi:  ()ll!lJ^;^.-  -  DftaiU'd 
account  of  the  distractions  in  a  Euiiof^ye  clan.  —  Account  of  a  particular  feud.  — 
Effects  of  ttiis  anarch)'  —  Wars  between  Ooloosae;-..  —  Varieties  in  tlic  governments  of 
Eu&ofeye  OoloossQs.  —  Despotism  establij^lu-d  by  Kaussim  Khaun  of  Deer.  —  Numbers 
of  the  Eu&ofz^cs. — Condition  of  the  Fakcer.s  or  Villains.  —  Artizans  attached  to  a 
division  of  on  Oooloss.  —  C  ustoms  levied  by  Qoloosscs.  —  Houses,  food,  dress,  and 
manners  of  the  Euaofeyea.  —  Their  character   -  -  -  -j-io 

TOUCOLAUKEEB. 

Description  of  Bajour.  —  Description  and  numbers  of  the  inhabitants.  —  Govcmrocnt  of 
the  Turcolaunccs.  —  Manners  and  character  -  -  -  -  351 

OTMAtrnKHAn, 

Face  of  the  country.  —  Government,  manners,  and  character  of  the  people.  —  Numbers 

3S3 

ITPPrW   MOM  UN  OS. 

Face  of  the  country. —  Currapa  pass.  —  Numbers.  —  Government.  —  Employment  of  the 
population  -  -  -  -  -  -  ^  -  354 

KirvUF.RF.ES. 

Face  of  the  country.  —  Divirions  and  numbers  of  the  Khyl>erccfi.  —  Khyber  paaa.  — 
Pemiom  for  securing  it  —  Depredations.  —  Appearance,  manners,  and  character  354 

TMBES  or  PESHAWEIU 
Face  of  the  cotmtry.  —  Divisions  and  numbers.  —  History  of  the  Ghoreeakhail.  —  De- 
pendence on  the  King.  — -  Internal  government,  dreais,  niaoners,  and  character  358 


CONTENTS.  XY 

KWflTTITKa. 

Numbers.  —  Face  of  the  cotintry.  —  Plains  on  tlic  north.  —  Dtrisions  and  ntunben.  — - 
GovenuaeQt  and  character.  —  Mountaiss  in  the  south.  —  Bauriks  ->  Page  360 

BUXGITSHES   AN-n  OTHER  TRIBr.S. 

Face  of  the  country  of  the  Buoguahes.  —  Grovemment  and  character.  —  Tooreea.  — 

Jaujccit.  —  Esaukhail.  —  Shcotuk.  —  Buiuioo.  —  Dour. —  KJiost. — Tunnccs  in  Drugyew 
Vizet^rees  -  -  -  =  ^  -  ^  -  jgj 

CHAEOL 

Limitg.  —  Divigions.  —  Tribe  of  Murvut.  —  Damaun  Proper  and  iftidwMong.  —  Comitry 

of  the  tribes  of  Gundehpoor  and  Dowlut  Khail.  —  Country  of  the  Mecnun  Khail« 
Bauhoors,  and  StoorcH'aiinccs.  —  Produce  oF  Damaun.  —  General  character  of  the 
tribes  of  Daiqaon.  —  Remarkable  temporary  niapistrac\^  of  the  Chclwushtec  or  Dictator 

DOCLtrrKHAIL. 

Estftblishment  of  deapodam  in  a  free  tribe  illiwtrated  by  the  history  of  the  Dowlut  Khafl. 

—  Usur;)ntioii  of  Kuttaiil.  —  His  death.  —  Successful  usurpation  of  bis  80D  Surwur. — 
Gundehp<H)r8.  —  Mccankhail.  —  Biikhtccaure<t>  a  Persian  tribe  united  with  the 
Mfcmikhail.  —  BaulKX)rs.  —  Stooreeauneea.  —  Forsake  paataraj^e  for  tilla^.  —  Ge» 
npral  confederacies  of  all  the  trilx-s.  —  Kamom  tribes  of  Soor  and  Lodi. — Damatm 
much  frequented  by  pastoral  hordes  -  -  -  -  -  368 

.  CHAP.  Ill, 

iinmrrAiv  ttrm.  — yiiiTnitPKB-  —  hhrkraukeis. 

Face  of  the  cocntry.  —  Dress,  manners,  and  habits  of  the  people.  —  Peculiar  gOTcro- 

mcnt,  founded  partly  on  rtnipect  for  birtli,  and  partly  on  superstition. —  Chcl^iislitecs  

MooUas.  —  Predatory  character  of  the  Sheeraunee^.  —  Their  wai-8.  —  Countries  west  of 
the  Sheeraunees.  — MurhaiLi  of  Spusta.  —  Tribes  of  Kuppeep  and  Mureepaul  380 

Face  of  the  country.  —  Predatory  character  of  the  people  Manners  and  habits  of  life. 

—  Peculiar  custom  relating  to  marriage.  —  The  Jadrauns.  —  Countries  west  of  the 
Vizeereem  &c.  —  Dumtaunecs  of  Wauoeh  i  ^  *  ^84 


'       by  Google 


Xvi  CONTENTS. 

CHAT.  IV.  . 
WESTERN  ATOHAUNS.     DOORRAVNEEB,  CITY  OF  CANDAHAR,  TEREENS  AKD  BARArCHEt. 

General  degicriptioa.  —  Imprejaion  made  oo  the  wegtem  tribes  by  the  monarchy.  —  Pas- 
toral tribes  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   Page  388 

Extent  and  boundaries  DcBcription  of  the  country  (in  five  divisions)  —  1st.  Tlint  \ye»t 

of  loag.  63^  east.  —  2d.  That  from  long.  63-  east  to  the  meridian  of  Candaliitr.  — 
3d.  That  in  the  hills  aouth  of  the  Purt>panii!ian  range.  —  4th.  Tliat  round  Candahar.  — 
5 til.  Tliat  in  the  south-east  of  the  Doorraunee  ct>iintry.  —  .\niinals  in  the  Dcx)rraunee 
country.  —  Name  and  early  history'  of  the  Doorraunecs.  —  Divisions. —  Populzye.  — 

.    Baurikzyes.  —  .\tchik7.ycs.  —  .\lizycs.  —  Alekkoxycs.  —  I»k.haukh/yc8.  —  Maukoos  and 

Khou^aunfes.  —  Population  of  the  Doorraunee  cotmtry  Internal  ^vernnient  of  the 

tribe.  —  The  King  Chief.  —  Favourable  ctFect  of  tlie  com[x'tition  l>etwcen  the  crovtii 
and  the  nobles.  —  Internal  government  of  each  clan.  —  Agricultural  Doorraunees.  — 
Form  of  viUagea. I  louses  and  furniture.  —  Shopg.  —  Public  apartment. —  Employ- 
ments. —  Castles  of  p^'tty  Khauns.  —  Character  of  that  class.  -  Humsauyahs  or  r)e. 

nizens.  —  Pastoral  Doorrauiiees.  —  Description  of  a  black  tent.  —  Cantps  Shepherds 

to  Bcattered  tents.  —  Charms  of  the  pastoral  life —  Way  of  life  of  the  shepherds  of 

Toba.  Connx)sition  of  a  camp  Eni])loymcnt.s  of  the  people.  —  Dress  of  the 

Doorraunecs.  —  Food.  —  Appearance.  —  Manners    and    condition.  —  HospitaUty.  

Character.  —  Esteemed  by  the  other  tribes.  —  Account  of  the  clan  of  Atchikzyes.  . 

Account  of  Candahar      -r  -  ;  ^  ;  -  -  jpi 

WABAirHEB. 

Description  of  Shoraubuk.  —  Camels  used  to  ride  on  and  to  plough.  —  Cooddools  or 

houses  of  hurdles.  -  -  -   z  :  =  426 


Divigion  into  white  and  black.  —  Description  of  Pishecn.     Syuds  of  Pisheen.  —  Speen 

pr  white  Terecns  in  Tull  and  Chooteallee  -  -  -  -  428 

rwAP.  V 

OHUJIBS,  aTIBS  of  OHUZNEE  and  CAUBUL,  WVRDUXS  and  CAUKEB8. 

OHILJIES. 

^Smdaries.  —  Description  of  the  country.  —  Valley  of  the  Tumuk.  —  Tract  under  the 

Paropamisan  hills.  —  Tract  snath  of  the  valley  of  the  TutTiuk.  — Tract  south  of  lati- 
tude 32°.  —  Muuunyc.  —  Ba»oa  of  the  Aubistaudeb.  —  City  of  Ghuznec  Gbiljic 


CONTENTS  icVii' 

country  under  the  rangg  of  Solimann.  —  City  of  CaubuL  —  Diviaons  of  the  tribe  of 
Ohfljie.  —  Hotukeo.  —  Tokheea.  —  Tiimikeot.  —  Undera.  —  Kharotees.  —  AlikhaiU. 

—  Solrmaunkhnils.  —  Suhauks.  —  .Shtvqjawt.  —  DtffcrtiiLe  between  the  eastern  aiid^ 
western  Ghiljics.  —  Government  of  the  tribe.  —  Former  tK)wcr  of  the  Ghiljic  Kings.  -— 
Lootje  government  at  present.  —  Example  of  the  Kulunderkhail,  a  clan  of  tl>e  southern 

Solimaunkhail.  —  Manners.  —  The  Ahmetl^yes.  —  Cliaractcr  of  the  Ghiljies  PartU 

cular  accoaot  of  the  Kharotees.  —  MoMntaim.  —  Vallqrs.  —  Prodnce.  —  Oorenimcnt 

—  Birth  little  regarded.  —  Employment.  —  The  pastoral  Kharoteea,  how  led  to  that 
mode  of  life  =  =  -  -  -  -  =  Page  433 

Booodaries.  —  Face  of  the  country.  —  Burshorc.  —  ShawL  —  Punnees  in  Seewee.  -> 
Tribe  of  Lonee.  —  Zawura.  —  Tull  and  Chooteeallce.  —  Boree.  —  Zhobe.  —  DiTiaiona 
of  the  tribe  of  Cnuker.  —  Account  of  a  clan  of  the  western  Catikers.  —  Goveniment. 

—  Destruction  of  a  Ueloche  army  by  Tahmas  Khann  of  Do^hukh.  —  Powers  of  the 
Khaun  of  the  clan  of  Sunnateea.  —  Manners.  —  Eastern  Caukers  exemplified  by  an 
account  of  Boree.  —  Other  Caukers        -  -  -         -         -  448 

CHAP.  VT.  • 

The  Nans^crs  have  no  ccwmtry.  —  Wandering  life.  —  Detailed  accoont  of  their  marches. 

—  Battles  with  the  Vizcerecs.  —  Life  in  Damaun.  —  Employment.  ■ —  Manners.  — 
Causes  of  their  eujoyinjj  a  tree  government,  though  a  pastoral  tribe       »       -  457 

BOOK  IV.  ■  ' 

TMg  PBnVtTtfrF.S. 

CHAP.  T, 

BULKH,  OK  BACTRIA  A»I»  THE  VZtttKA  -  -  -  -  -  462 

CHAP.  II. 

THE  EIMAUKH  AND  HAZAUREHS  -  -  -  -  -  478 

CHAP    fTI.                *                           '       ■  * 
OTRAUT         .......  m  .  488 

CHAP.  IV, 
b 


xviS  CONTENT& 

CTIAP.  V. 

BKLOCHIBTAPy  AVD  lOWZB,  8IND  -  -  -  -   t*age  4Qg 

CHAP.  Yl. 

UPPEB  glKP,  MOtTLTAVy,  LYA,  ASP  THE  COUNTRIES  BETWEEN  LEIA  AND  CASHMBER  gOI 

CHAP.  VfT. 

r  BOOK  V. 

THK    ROYAL  OOVKRNMENT   OF  CAtJBTIT.. 

i 

*  -  '    CHAP,  f. 

OF  THE  KJKOi 

SccceaMon  to  the  crown.  —  Royal  family.  —  King's  title.  —  Hi*  powere.  —  Domqitic  and 
foreipi  policy  of  the  govemment  of  Caubul.  —  lt«  character.  —  Proent  ttate  511 

CHAP.  TT. 

ADMlNlSniATION  OP  THF.  onvTftWMKMT. 


CHAR  TH. 

or  THE  DIVISIO.V  OF  THE  K1NGU(»M  INI  O  I'KOVINCES 

521 

CHAP.  IV. 

OF  THE  BXVENUE                 .                 -                 -  - 

CHAP.  V. 

JVSTICB  AND  POUCE  OF  THE  KINGDOM 

CHAP,  VI.  ' 

THE  MIMTAnV-  EST-MU  ISHMENT. 

Doorauncee.  —  Ghohuuns,  or  King's  guards;  —  Karra  Ndrar.  —  Eeljauree.  —  Dawatul- 


r 


CONTENTS  xix 

hxb,  or  volont«er».  —  Principal  military  oflSoere.  —  Anm  and  eqnipment.  —  Dkc^lne 

and  mode  of  war.  —  Civil  wara  ^  ^  -  :   Page  530 

CHAP.  VII. 

THE  RKLIOTOU8  ESTABLTSHMEWT   -  -  -  -  -  539 


APPENDIX  A. 

HISTORY  OP  THE  KINGDOM  OF  CAUBDL  FROM  THE  POUNDATIOK  OF  THE 

DOORAUNEE  MONARCHY. 

;  . 

AHMED  SHAUH. 

Early  history  of  tlie  Dooraunees.  —  Ahmed  Shauh  assumes  the  crown.  —  Form  of  his 
government,  and  its  policy,  internal  nrnl  external.  —  Ahmed  Shauh  takes  Ghuznet^ 
Caubul,  aud  Pcshawcr.  —  Aluiicd  Shauh's  first  expedition  to  Iiidia.  —  Defeated  at 
Sirhind.  —  The  Ponjaub  annexed  to  the  Dooraunee  monarchy.  —  Ahmed's  first  expe- 
dition to  Pmian  Khorassaon.  —  Second  expedition  to  Persian  Khorasaaun,  reductioa 
of  the  province.  —  Second  expedition  to  India :  conquest  of  Caahmeer.  —  Third  expe- 
dition  to  India :  capture  of  Delly.  —  Mahratta  war.  —  Revolt  of  Nusseer  Kliaun, 
cliief  of  the  BelcKhes.  —  Suppressed.  —  State  of  the  Punjaub. —  Fourth  expedition  to 
India.  —  Second  capture  of  Delly.  —  Battle  of  Pauniput  —  Fifth  expedition  to  India. 
—  Sixth  and  last  expedition  to  India.  —  Third  expedition  to  Persian  Khoraasaun.  — 
Deatli  and  Character  of  Ahmed  Shauh.  —  His  policy  towards  the  different  classes  of 
his  subjects  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  .-  J41 

TIMOUR  SHAUH. 

Fruitless  plots  to  oppose  the  accession  of  Timoor  Shauh.  —  Timoor  Shaidi's  system  of 
government  —  Insurrections.  —  Conspiracy  of  FeizooUah  Khaim.  —  Expedition  to  the 
Moultaun.  —  War  with  the  King  of  Bokhaura.  —  Death  of  Timoor  Shauh  558 

SHAUH  ZEMAVN. 

Accession  of  Shauh  Zemaun.  —  Opposed  by  prince  Hoomayoon.  —  Prince  Hoomayoon 
defeated.  —  Bulkh  invaded  by  the  Uzbeks.  —  Troables  in  other  parts  of  the  country, 
Rebellion  of  prince  Mahmood.  —  Troubles  in  Bdochistaun.  —  Defeat  and  seizure  of 
prinoe  Hoomayoon. — Character  and.  projects  of  Shotih  Zemaun.  —  Power  of  Jthe 

b  2 


xx  CONTENTS 

Tiawr  Wuffadar  Khattn.  —  His  cliarHCtcr.  —  Shauli  Zemoun  acta  oat  to  inyade  the 

Pimjaub.  —  Khorassaiui  invatkxl  by  the  King  of  Persia  Shauli  Zomaun  invatleis  the 

Punjnub.  —  Alarm  throughout  India.  —  Robollioii  of  prince  Mahmood.  —  Second  in- 
Ta-sion  uf  the  Punjaub.  —  Attempt  on  Ileraut  by  Mahmood.  —  Fhght  of  Mulunood  to 
Bokhaura.  —  Shaidi  Mahmood  jointtl  by  Fiitteh  Klinim.  —  Enters  the  Afghaim  do- 
minions. —  Taki-s  Candahar.  —  Misconihict  of  Shauh  Zemaiui.  —  I  lis  flight.  —  Shauh 
Zemaun  betrayed.  —  Blinded  and  imprieoacd  -  -  -  Page  564 

OHAirH  MAHMOon. 

Joy  of  the  people  on  the  acceaaion  of  MahmoocL  —  Diaorders  of  Mahmood's  government. 

—  Prince    Shuja  proclaimed  King  at  P>.-shawer.  —  Delmteti. — Ghiljie  rebelUoii.<— 

Danger  of  the  Doorauncc  monarchy  Second  rising  of  the  Ghiljiea. —  Final  i>up- 

pression  of  tlic  Ghiljie  rebellion  Second  defeat  of  Prince  Sluijali.  —  Weakjie;>s  of 

the  government.  —  Couque^it  of  Persian  Khorashami  by  tlie  Feroiaiiaii.  DiMx>ateat  of 
tl)c  people.  —  Character  of  Mokliuur  Oodoulaii,  and  of  the  Meer  Waunez.  —  Battle 
between  the  Sheealis  and  Soonccs.  —  Mahmootl  deposed  -  -  579 

■HAUH  SHITJA. 

Acdaoed  state  of  the  power  of  the  crown.  —  Wi^e  measoi^  of  the  new  government.  — 
Rebellion  of  prince  Kysjer.—  Intrigues  of  Fottc^i  Khaun.  —  Dissensionji  between  the 
King  and  the  vizier  Mokhtanr  Oodoulah.  —  The  yizier'a  expedition  to  reduce  Cash- 

■  meer.     Intriguea  and  commodons  excited  by  Futtd  Khann.  —  Attach  on  Herant  by 

•   Ae  Persians.  —  Increns«l  dissension  between  the  King  and  the  vizier.  —  Escape  of 

,   Shauh  Mahmood.  —  Rebellion  ol'  be  vizier  Defeat  and  death  a£  the  vizier.  — 

-    MmKt'^O^  ""d  FiittA  Khaiin  take  CitfiHahHr.  —  Are  defeated  -  580 

APPFNDTX  B. 

Ml^  PUHIE'8  MARBATrVE   ^  ^   -    *  Z  <O0 

APPEXDIX  C. 

ArcoUNT  OT  SOME  NBIQHBOOTIIKQ  COCimilM. 

r^tyifirirtann.  —  Budukhshatin.  —  Kaushkaur  -  -   2  ^'7 

APPENDIX  D. 

EXTRACT  FROM  UEUTENANT  MACARTNEY'S  MEMOIR. 

Construction  of  the  map.  —  Face  of  the  country.  —  Hindoo  Koosh,  of  Great  Snowy 
Ridge.  .^Pamer  Ridge.  —  Budukaban  Ridge.  — Teera,  or  Khyfaer  Range.  —  SooU^ 
IXMB  Rid^e.  —  Oroupea  of  hilla  extending  etfitward  from  the  Suolimau  Ridge  down 


CONTENTS,  XXi 

towards  ihe  Indus. —  Groupos  of  hills  oxtontl'mg  wpsfward  from  the  Sooliman  Ridge. 
—  Kohirtan,  north  of  the  Cnubul  RiTer.  —  Ranges  of  hilla  eaat  of  the  Indus.  —  Table 
Land  of  Little  Tibet  and  the  hills  extending  north-west  to  Yarkund.  —  Rivera.  — 
The  liiver  Aiuinu,  or  Oxu^.  —  The  Kokcha,  or  Dudukahan  river.  —  The  AksurraL  — 
The  Huaar,  or  Kttfirnihan  river.  —  The  TuruiVhan.  —  The  Murghab  river.  —  The 
river  Sirr.  —  The  river  Sind,  or  Indus.  —  The  Abba  Seen.  —  The  Kama  River.  — 
Hie  Ghur  Sheen.  —  The  S^ran  river.  —  The  Koonn  river.  —  The  Jelom,  Bcfaut,  or 
Vidusta  (Hydo&pes).  The  Chnnab  (Acesines^ — The  Ravce  (Hydraotes).  —  The 
Beyali,  or  Beyaa  (Hyphasis). — The  rivers  of  Khoritsan.  —  The  Kirniund,  or  Hel- 
bund.  —  The  IJr^hundab  river.  —  The  Kliaahrood. — The  Turnuk.  —  The  Furrah* 
rood.  —  The  PooIimaJan,  or  Ilirat  river  -  -  -  I*age  63 1 

APPENDIX  R. 

FUSH  TOO  VOr-ABULARV  ^  -  ^  ^  -  -  -  66$ 


V 


1  «• 


Digitizixi  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digilizea  by  tjOOgle 


I 


I 


I  'll'  v;ir       1-    \  ■  ; 


a  I 


I'»r»'»v'..f  I  ft  w:!-  • 

»«.  i)'»il>  tor  it<i  *  ji  ;  i.itrtit,    An  <'V», .!  -.s 
t'>  Hvcon»j>^i:y  U ;  a>id  th.*  i^'l.  nir  .  »  ..  -  i* 


t>'.ixrt:0ff,       FniMT  «Ti<l  Mr.  fii.  )  l*i  'J-  ! . 

•  C  ft/*.- VI /. ..    I /i .  l',t'i,t. 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


NARRATIVE  OF  THE  PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  MISSION. 

IN  the  year  1 808,  when,  from  the  embassy  of  General  Gardanne  to 
Persia,  and  oilier  circumstances,  it  appeared  as  if  the  French  in- 
tendetl  to  <  in  \  tlie  w.n  into  Asia,  it  was  thought  expedient  by  the 
British  Gen  f  ruuieut  m  to  send  a  mission  to  the  King  of  Caii- 

bul,  and  I  was  ordered  on  that  duty.  As  the  court  of  Caubul  was 
known  to  be  haughty,  and  supposed  to  entertain  a  mean  opinion  of 
the  European  nstioas,  it  ww  detennfaied  diat  the  muaion  abould  be 
m  ft  style  of  great  magmficence  i  and  suitable  preparations  were  made 
at  DeQy  for  its  equipment  An  exoellent  seleotion  was  made  of  offi-. 
ten  to  aeoompany  it;  and  the  foUowing  was  the  establisbinqit  of  the 


Seeretmyy  Mr.  Richard  Straehev. 

Atmlonii,  Mr.  Fnuet  and  Mr.  JEU.  7  Of  the  Honorable  East  Indift 
'  Alexander.  3     Company's  Qvil  Service. 

Surgeoth  Mr.  Macwhirter.   Bengal  Establishment 

Commm^ng  tke  Eifbortt 
Oqptain  Fitnuun,  Sd  Battalion*  0th  Begunent,  Bengal  NatiTe  In- 
fimtry. 

lieutenant  Macartney*  5th  Begmient*  Bengal  Natbe  Compsnyt 
(commanding  the,cavalry  of  the  esooit*)  and 
Ticfcei^  Bengal  Engbeeis. 

B 


Digitizeo  by  LiOOgle 


S  DTTRODUCnON. 

Officers  attached  to  the  Escoii. 
Captain  Baper,  1st  Battalion,  10th  Regiment. 
Lieutenant  Harris,  Artillery.  ♦ 
lieatenant  Cunningham,  2d  Battalion,  27th  Regiment, 
lientenaot  Boss,  2d  Battalion,  6th  R^ment 
lieutenant  Irvine,  Ist  Battalion,  11th  R^ment 
lieutenant  Fitz^oeakl,  Glch  Regiment,  Native  Cavalry. 
Lieutenant  Jacob,  2d  Battalion,  23d  Rc^ment. 

The  escort  was  compose^  •  troop  from  the  5th  Raiment  of  Na- 
tive Cavalry  and  a  detail  from  the  6th  (making  one  hundred  men), 
two  hundred  infimtiy,'  and  one  hundred  irregular  cavalry. 

All  things  being  prepared,  the  embassy  left  Delly  on  the  13th  of 
October,  1808.  From  that  city  to  Canoimd,  a  distance  of  about  one 
hundred  mileti,  is  throuirh  the  British  dominions,  and  neefl  not  be  de- 
f^crilu  d.  It  is  sufficient  to  say,  that  the  country  is  saudy,  though  not 
ill  cultivated. 

On  approaching  Canound  we  had  the  first  specimen  of  the  desart, 
to  which  we  were  looking  forAvard  vvitli  anxious  cunosity.  Tliree 
miles  before  reaching  . Uiat  place,  we  came  to  sand  hills  which  at  first 
were  covered  with  bushes,  but  afterwaids  were  naked  piles  of  loose 
sand,  rising  one  after  another  Hke  the  waves  of  the  sea,  and  marked 
on  the  surfiice  by  the  wind  like  drifted  snow.  There  were  roads 
through  them,  nuide  solid  by  the  freaiiuig  of  animals  s  but  off  the 
road,  our  hofscs  sunk  into  di^  san^  above  the  kne& 

We- set  dff  ftom  .Gbnound  on  the  2l8t  of  October,  and  in  the  course 
of  the  march  we  quitted  the  dependencies  of  our  own  Government, 
and  entered  the  district  of  Shekhawuttee  (so  called  from  a  predatoiy 
tribe  of  Raujpoots  who  inhabit  it),  the  country  becoming  more  and 
more  desart  as  we  advanced.  On  the  22d,  we  reached  Singauna,  a 
handsome  town,  built  of  stone,  on  the  skirts  of  a  hill  of  purplish  rock, 
about  six  hundred  feet  high.  I  was  here  met  by  Raja  Ubhee  Sing, 
the  principal  chief  of  the  Shekhawut  tribe.  He  was  a  little  man  w  ith 
large  eyes,  inflamed  by  tlie  use  of  opium  :  He  wore  his  beard  turned 
up  on  each  side  towards  his  ears,  which  gave  him  a  wild  and  fi^ce 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION.  ^ 

tffemnce ;  his  dven  wm  pliin ;  and  his  ipeech*  and  ninuMit*  Wot 
tfiose  of  all  his  countrymen,  rude  and  unpolidied*  He  wm»  however* 

very  civH,  and  made  manj  fMPofesaians  of  respect  and  attachment  to 
the  British.  I  saw  him  several  times,  and  he  was  always  drunk  either 
with  opimii  or  brandy.  This  was  indeed  the  case  with  all  the  Shek- 
hawiittee  Sirdars,  who  are  seldom  in  a  condition  to  a|ipear  till  the  ef4 
feet  of  their  last  dehuiich  is  removed  by  a  new  dose ;  consequently  it 
is  only  in  the  interval  betwe^  sohrietv  and  absolute  stupe&ctiou  that 
they  are  fit  for  buiiiness.  Two  marches  irom  SLn|!:Enna  brought  us  to 
Jhoonjhoona,  a  handsome  town,  witii  some  trees  and  gardeuH,  which 
look  well  in  such  a  depart.  Each  of  the  Chi^,  who  are  five  in  num- 
ber, has  a  caiitle  here ;  and  here  they  assemble  when  tlie  public  af- 
isirB  require  a  oomfidL  At  this  place*  1  saw  the  rpjnaining  four  Shek- 
hsint  diiefe ;  they  were  pilatn  snoi.'  One  of  theaii  IShsam  8ing, 
was  remarikaUy  mild  and  well  behaved;  but  some  c£.the  otihen  hose 
strong  marka  of  the  eflhcts  of  opium  in  thieic  ef^and.oountaBana& 
Thiey  were  aU  eonsias,  and  seemed  to  lire  in  great  baimoiijr-;'  biai 
scanely  had  I  cromed  the  dssart*  when  I  heard  lhat  Shaim  Sing  had 
niodered  the  'tfavte  odiets  at  a  6aife»  stahbing  the  £nt  of  than  witk 
his  own  hand.  * 

■After  another  march  and  a  half  over  sand,  from  Jhoonjhoone  io» 
wards  Chooroo,  we  quitted  the  Shekhawuttee.  This  cuiuilry.eartendi 
about  eighty  miles  from  north  to  south,  and  less  from  east  to  west 
It  has  the  extensive  dominions  of  the  Raja  of  J_vT>oor  on  tlie  s<^uth  ; 
on  the  oast  iho  (lepeiiHencreH  of  the  British  (iovernment ;  and  on  the 
west  the  terriii»ries  of  iiikaneer ;  on  the  iionh-west  it  has  the  barren 
country  of  the  Bailees,  a  plundering  tribe,  remarkable  for  carrying  on 
their  depredations  on  loot,  and  still  more  so,  for  the  length  and 
rapidiiy  uf  the  incursions  thus  made  :  on  the  north  is  Hunecaua,  tlie 
scene  of  the  exploits  of  George  Thomas,  which,  though  on  the  bor- 
ders of  the  desart,  is  celebrated  for  the  verdure*  from  which  it 


*  Hnrya  is  the  Hindoitaiiee  for  green.  This  verdore  probaUjr  only  last*  during  the 
rainy  sphsod. 

a  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


.  4  INTRODUCTION. 
I  • 

{  dewei  itt  ntaaae,  tat  the  herds  of  cattle  that  nte  peskuied  on  ik»  fin* 
f  the  Imnui  thrt  it  prodaoeBr  end  for  the  ▼aloiir  mdepend^ioe  of  its 
mhabitants.  It  now  bekmgs  to  the  British.  The  Shekhawuttee  itself 
is  a  sandy  plain*  scattered  with  rocky  hiUfl*  ill  watered,  and  badly 
cultivated ;  yet  it  contains  several  large  towns,  of  which  the  chief  arc 
Seekur,  FuttefapooEr*  Khetiee,  and  Goodha:  the  sandg  are  <tprinkled 
with  tufts  of  \on^  pjrass  and  bushes  ot'  l^uubool  *,  Kureelf*  and. 
Pliolre.  which  last  is  peculiar  to  the  clesart  and  its  borders  \, 

The  Sheklumnittces  owe  tribute  and  military  service  t<>  tin  Raja  of 
Jypore ;  it  was  by  the  assistance  ot"  that  government  tliat  they  were 
enabled,  at  no  vorv  romott  period,  to  wrest  their  present  territory 
from  the  Kjauukhiiunees,  a  tribe  of  converted  Hindoos. 

A  few  miles  beyond  the  Shekhawuttee  border,  we  entered  the  ter^ 
ritocies  of  .the  I^a  of  Bikaneer.  Tbh  R^a  is  perhaps  the  ktart  udk 
pottant  of  the  five  princea  of  Raujpootaima.  Humo  of  Jypoor  aod 
Joodpooff  are  at  the  head  of  considerable  states ;  the  redueed  poweic 
of.  the  Riga  of  Ondl^KXHr  is  kept  from  insijgnififnoe  by  his  lugh  rank 
and  the  respect  whidi  is  paid  fahn ;  but  the  territories  of  the  Rqas,  of 
Joaachnoor  and  Hkatteer«  are  merely  the  most  habitable  parts  of  the 
desart,  and,  conse(]uenily,  have  little  to  boast  in  popnlatum  ox 
■onices.  The  &iya  of  Bikaneer's  rerenne  only  amounts  to  4^50,000, 
but,  as  his  troops  are  paid  by  assignments  of  land,  he  was  able  to  keep 
up  2000  horse^  8000  foot,  and  thirty-five  piec^  o£  field  artillery,  evcaa 
after  the  defeat  he  had  suffered  previous  to  my  arrival  at  his  capital, 
Tlie  style  of  his  court  also  was  ver\- fur  from  indicating  the  poverty  of 
his  governmcnL  His  frontier  plat  e  towards  the  Shekhawuttee,  and  con- 
sequently the  first {Murt  of  his  territories  which  we  approached,  .was 


•  Mimosa  Aral)ic«.  f  Cnpparls.    Tlw  tii|H'r  tree. 

It  is  a  plant  from  foor  to  five  feet  high,  quite  greeoj  although  it  has  no  leaves.  Ita 
bniiMciNa  ran  ^kto  lender  twigg,  wMch  tenainnte  in  Inocto  of  the  svie'inatcaial,  but 
fioA(.-r  tind  fuller  of  mp.  It  bears  clusters  of  flowen,  Whidi  are  eaten  by  tlte  naitive%  and 
has  its  seed  in  a  pod.  It  is  tli*-  fnvouriti-  f>>od  of  the  camel,  wlfnni  it  in  comt^  ^iifriiure 
indwnnifies  for  the  kuig  privation  ui  water  wiiicb  be  is  often  obliged  to  iuSer  in  tli«  desart. 
It  vas  firKaeratothewMtaf  GanoDJid,  andooiilimiedthn^^ 

to  ' 


Digitized  by  GoQgle 


INTRODUCTION.  $ 

C3KX»ao^  wfakli  nuy  be  x^Asmui  the  aeocmd  town,  in  lib  dommioiM. 

Ik  is  near  a  in&  aod  a  half  round,  without  counting  its  large  but 
mean  subuibe  $  and*  diough  situated  among  naked  sand  hills,  it  has  a 
very  handsome  appearaaoe.  The  houses  are  all  terraced,  and  boththef 

and  the  walls  of  the  town  are  built  of  a  kind  of  lime-stone,  of  so  pure  a 
white,  that  it  gives  an  air  of  great  neatness  to  every  thing  composed 
of  it.  It  is  however  soft,  and  cnimhies  into  a  white  pov.  <l(<r,  mixed 
here  and  tliere  witli  shells.  It  is  lumid  in  large  beds  in  iri  mv  parts 
of  the  desart.  The  chief  of  Chooroo  is  a  dependent  ratlier  than  a 
subject  of  the  Raja  of  Bilianeer. 

The  Shckhawuttce  couiiti  y  seenui  to  lose  its  title  to  he  included  in 
the  desart,  when  compared  with  the  two  hundred  and  eighty  miles 
between  its  western  frontier  and  Baliawuipoor,  and,  even  of  this,  only 
die  la^  hundred  miles  is  absolutdy  d^tute  of  inhabitantSt  water,  or 
vegetation.  Our  joomqr  Bnmi  the  Shekhawut  frontier,  to  Pooggul,  a 
distance  of  (me  hundred  and  miles,  was  over  hills  ud  TsUefs 
of  loose  and  heavy  sand  Hie  hiUs  were  exactij  Uke  those  idueh 
are  sometimes  fiirmed  bj  the  wind  on  4he  sea  shore,,  hot  frr  exoeed- 
ing^  them  in  thefar  heig^  whidi  was  from  twenty  to  one  hundred  feet, 
niey  ate  said  to  shift  Ihmr  positions,  and  to  alter  their  sbipeB,  aooord* 
ing  as  dMy  are  affected  by  the  wind ;  and  in  Summer,  llie  passage  oH 
many  parts  of  the  desart  is  said  to  be  rendered  dangerous  by  the 
clouds  of  moving  sand ;  but  wh«a  I  saw  the  hills  (in  winter),  they 
seemed  to  have  a  great  d^ree  of  permanence,  for  they  bore  a  sort  of 
grass,  besides  llioke,  and  the  thorin  hushes  of  the  Baubool,  and  the 
Rnir.  or  Jujube,  which  ahoixptlii  r  gavf  tin m  :in  ^pearanr(  tliat  some- 
times amounted  to  verdm  f.  Among  the  most  dismal  hills  of  sand, 
one  occasionally  meets  wilh  a  village,  if  sucli  a  name  can  be  given  to 
a  few  round  huts  of  straw,  with  low  walL  uud  euriical  rool's,  like  little 
stocks  of  com.  These  are  surrounded  by  hedges  ol"  tliorny  brandies 
stuck  in  the  sand,  which,  as  wdl  as  the  houses,  are  so  dry,  that  if 
they  happened  to  catch  Bre,  the  village  would  be  reduced  to  ashes  in 
five  minutes.  These  misendile  abodes  are  sorroanded  by  a  few  fidda, 
whidi  depend  Ibr  water' on  the  rains  and  dews,  and  .whidi  bear  thii^ 


•   Digitized  by  Google 


6 


INTEODUCTION. 


Crops  of  the  pooreat  kind  of  pulae^  and  of  Bajri,  or  Hdon  SpicHtea, 

and  diia  hat,  though  it  flourishes  in  the  most  sterile  countries,  grows 
hoe  with  difficulty,  each  stalk  sevenl  &et  fiom  its  aei^ibour.  The 
wells  are  often  three  hundred  leet  deep,  and  one  wia  Ihxet  hundred 
and  ibrty-five  feet.  With  this  enormous  depth,  aome  wete  only  three 
feet  in  diameter ;  the  water  is  always  brackish,  unwholesome,  and  ao 
scanty,  that  two  bullocks  \vorkIn<r  for  a  night,  easily  emptied  a  well. 
The  water  was  poured  into  reservoirs  lined  with  clay,  which  our  party 
drank  rlr^  in  an  instant  after  its  arrival.  These  wells  nrp  all  lined 
witii  niasonrv.  Tlie  natives  have  a  way  ot"  covering  them  with  boardsi 
heaped  with  suiul.  that  effectually  conceals  them  from  an  enemy.  In 
the  midst  of  so  arid  a  conntrv,  the  water-melon,  the  most  juicy  of 
ftiiits,  is  iit>und  in  profusion.  It  is  really  a  subject  ot"  wonder  to  see 
melofis  three  or  four  £eet  in  circumference,  growing  fit>m  a  stalk  as 
dender  aa  that  of  the  common  melon,  in  the  diy  aand  of  the  deaart  ' 
They  eve  aown,  and  perhaps  require  some  colthratioo*  but  dwjr  are 
acattered  dbKmt  to  aU  apfpeasance  aa  if  they  grew  wild. 

Hie  oonupon  inhabitants  axe  Janta.  The  upper  daaaea  areRatfaore 
Ratgpools.  The  formor  ave  little*  hla^  and  iU  looking,  and  bear 
strong  aqapearanoea  of  poverty  and  wretchedness  The  latter  are 
atout  and  handsome,  with  hbolced  nbeea,  and  Jewish  featnres.  They 
are  haugh^  in  their  maunen,  very  indolent,  and  almost  oontinuaUy 
dnmk  with  opium. 

The  atock  consists  of  bullocks  and  camels,  which  last  are  kept  in 
nnmerous  herds,  and  are  used  to  carry  loads,  to  ride  on,  and  ev  en  to 
plough.  Of  the  wild  animals,  the  desart  rat  deserves  to  he  men- 
tioned for  its  numbers,  though  tiot  tor  its  size;  the  innumerable  holes 
made  by  these  animals  where  tlie  ground  is  solid  enough  to  admit  of 
it,  are  indeed  a  serious  iticonvenience  to  a  horseman,  whom  they  dis- 
tress even  more  than  ilie  Ju-avy  sunii.  it  is  more  like  a  squirrel  than 
a  rat,  has  a  tuft  at  the  end  of  its  tail,  and  is  often  seen  sitting  upright, 
with  ita  finoifeet  croaaed  like  a  kangaroo.  It  w  not  unlike  the  jerboa, 
bnt  ia  much  leas»  and  naeaall  ita  feet  lit  ia  not  peculiar  to  the  d»> 
aact,  bemg  found  in  moat  aandy  placea  on  the  weat  of  die  Jumna*  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


IKTftODfJCXIOW 


•7 


ndld^ctedin  tbebookof  Job*.  This  nimal'Mi  eametimeg  found 
ilooe,  but  giA«ner  in  heidi.  It  resenlbleB  a  mule  ndwr-tfaan  ah  ai^ 
bill  is  of  the  colour  of  tbe  latter.   It  is  remarkable  ftr  its  ibynBMb 

and  still  more  for  its  speed:  at  a  kind  of  shuffling  Hot  peculiar  to 
itaelf,  it  will  leave  the  fleetest  horses  behind.  Hie  foxes  may  also  be 
mentiooed;  they  are  less  than  our  fox»  but  somewhat  larger  than  the 
common  one  of  India ;  their  backs  are  of  the  same  brownish  colofur 
witli  the  latter,  but  in  one  part  of  the  desart,  their  legs  and  belly  up 
to  a  certain  height,  are  black,  and  in  another,  white.  The  line  be- 
tween those  colours  and  the  brown  is  so  distinctly  marked,  that  the 
one  kind  soems  as  if  it  had  been  wading  up  to  the  belly  iu  mk,  and 
the  other  in  wliite-wash. 

The  rest  oi  the  desart  lor  about  one  hundred  miles  from  Poc^gul 
to  Bahawuipore,  "wsm  a  flat  of  hard  clay  which  sounded  under  our 
bcwses  feet  like  a  board.  In  lome  places  siuall  hills  were  formed  by  saiul 
apparoiiUy  blown  offier  |be  clay ;  on  these  were  aamebinhes  of  Fhoke^ 
sad  seme  little  plants^  wild  ni^  and  of  a  kind  called  Linri»  wbidi 
besrs  a  strong  resemblance  to  eyfiriastingb  aiid  wbidi »  said  to  yieU 
idmhdanoe  of  alkali  when  bailed.  Tbe  da^  was  destHute  of  all 
veg^tatioDf  and  in  tliis  .tractt  «iee|pfting  the  ftrt  andpocd  of  Moajgnr, 
snd  two  wells  about  siztesn  miles  fiom  Bshawnlpooir,  there  is 
neithw  water  nor  inhabitants  to  be  fimnd ;  jet,  as  we  traveled  fiom 
the  first  on  tbe  rOad  adopted  by  all  caravans,  it  may  be  psciiimed 
that  we  saw  the  most  habitable  portion  of  the  whole. 

It  h  obvious,  that  a  desartt  sodi  as  I  have  described,  could  not  be 
passed  without  preparation  ;  camels  had  accordingly  been  hirctl  at 
Canoimd  to  carry  wat^  and  pioviaiiHia»  which  completed  the  number 


*  Who  hai  aent  oat  the  wild  tm  free?  or  who  has  kxwod  the  bond*  of  the  wild  a^? 
whose  house  I  have  made  the  wilderness,  and  the  barren  land  Ids  dwellings :  he  soora^ 

the  multitude  of  the  city,  neither  rc^j  irtl;  tli  lu-  the  crying  id' tin-  driver.  Tlie  range  of  the 
mountainB  i»  hi*  pMture,  and  he  eearciies  after  every  grocn  thing.  Job  xxxIx.  5,  6,  7> 
ndS. 


Digitized  by  Google 


S  INTRODUCTION. 

of  our  fsttudft  to  six  hundred,  besidet  tmelwe  or  thirteen  elephants* 
Our  water  was  carried  in  leathern  bags,  made  of  the  skins  of  riieep, 
besides  some  mudb.  huger  one^,  made  of  the  hides  of  oxen,  and 

twenty-fonr  large  copper  vessels,  two  of  which  were  a  load  for  a 
camel.  These  were  made  for  the  Hindoo  St-fioys,  and  proved  the 
best  contrivance,  as  the  skins  gave  a  j^jreat  ileal  of  trouble,  atxl  spilled 
much  water  after  all.  In  providing  water  for  the  animals,  we  took  no 
account  of  the  camels,  that  creature  bearing  thirst  for  a  period  which 
is  almost  incredible. 

The  women  who  had  accompanied  the  mission  were  sent  back  I'rom 
Chooroo  with  a  guard,  and  manj  of  our  servants  were  allowed  to  re- 
turn by  the  same  opportunity,  but  this  itid  not  secure- us  the  services 
of  the  remamder ;  finr  such  was  their  dread  of  die  desart,  that  men  of 
all  descriptions  deserted  bj  twenties  and  thirties  till  we  were  so  &r 
advanced  as  to  render  their  return  impossible.  As  there  was  a  war 
in  ffikaneer*  ai^  as  the  road  was  at  all  times  exposed  to  the  depre- 
dations of  the  Bhuttees  and  other  plunderers^  we  eng^iged  one  hun- 
dred horse  and  fifty  foot  in  the  Shekhawnttee^  to  assist  our  regular 
escort  in  protecting  our  long  Ime  of  baggage. 

All  these  arrangements  being  completed,  we  marched  from  Choo- 
roo on  the  30th  of  October.  VVe  marched  in  the  night  as  we  had 
done  since  we  entered  the  Shekhawuttee  ;  we  generally  begun  to  Ifiad 
by  two  or  three  in  the  afternoon,  but  it  wm  long  before  we  w(  i  r  ^ihle 
to  proceed ;  and  the  head  of  our  line  never  reached  the  encamping 
ground  till  tweh'e  or  one.  On  manv  occasions  we  were  much  later; 
aad  once  or  twice  it  was  broael  da>  Ijefore  we  arrived  at  our  stage. 
The  marches  were  seldom  very  long.  Hie  l<»gest  was  twenty-six 
miles,  and  tibe  shortest  fifteen ;  but  dw  firtigne'iHddi  our  people  su£> 
iered  bore  no  proportion  to  the  distance.  Our  line»  'when  in  the 
closest  Older,  was  two  miles  long.  The  path  fay  which  we  travelled 
•wound  mudi  to  avoid  the  sand  hills.  It  was  too  niirow  to  allow  of 
two  cameb  going  abreast;  and,  if  an  animal  stepped  to  one  side,  it 
sunk  in  the  sand  as  in  snow ;  so  that  the  least  obstruction  towards 
the  head  of  the  line  stopt  the  whole,  nor  could  the  head  move  on 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 


INTRODUCTION.  0 

if  the  rear  was  detained,  lest  that  division,  being  separated  from  the 
guides,  might  lose  its  way  among  the  «and  hills.  To  prevent  this,  a 
siijnal  was  pnst  along  the  line  by  beat  of  drum,  when  anv  rirentn- 
stauce  occasioned  a  stoppage  in  the  rear,  and  a  tnimpet,  sounded 
tirom  time  to  time  at  the  heatl  of  the  line,  kept  all  informed  of  the  di- 
rection in  which  the  column  was  proceeding.  The  heavy  sand  made 
marchiiig  iaiiguuig  that  we  were  obliged  to  allow  camels  ibr  half 
tlie  iofiuxtry  S^ys,  thit  Hiey  might  ride  by  turns,  twa  on  a  camel ; 
we  hid  besides  ci;|s«as  (or  large  pannkn  on  cameb),  for  the  sick. 
Hie  wmojanoe  of  Che  march  was  greatly  moreased  by  the  mcredible 
mnnber  of  a  sort  of  small  biin»  which  stuck  to  every  thing  diat  toadi- 
ed them*  and  occasioned  great  uneasmess.  They  aie  however  useful, 
inasmudi  as  they  farm  a  fivoorite  fiiod  Ibr  horses*  and  the  seed  is 
eaten  even  by  men.  Hie  wmt  of  water,  and  the  quality  of  that  wUdi 
we.  met  with,  was  also  a  great  hardship  to  our  men  and  followers ; 
and,  though  the  abundance  of  water  mektos  sfibrded  occasional  relief 
to  their  thirst,  its  effect  on  their  health  was  by  no  means  salutary. 
Such  were  the  combined  effects  of  fatiffue,  bad  water,  and  the  exces- 
sive use  of  water  melons,  that  i  L^reat  proportion  of  the  natives  who 
accompanied  us  became  aMicted  with  a  low  fever,  accompanied  by  a 
dysentery  ;  and  to  such  a  degree  did  this  extend,  that  thirty  Sepoys, 
without  reckoning  followers,  were  taken  ill  in  tlie  course  of  one  day 
at  Nuttoosir,  and  forty  persons  of  all  descriptions  expired  during  the 
first  week  of  our  halt  at  Bikaneer.  The  great  difference  between  the 
temperatine  of  jdie  days  and  n^hta  no  doubt  ooirtribated  to  this  moiw 
taiUl^.  Even  the  English  gentlemen'  used  to  su£kr  fiom  cold  doicing ' 
the  night  marphes,  and  were  happy  to  kindle  a  large  6re  as  soim  aa 
we  reached  our  ground  j  yet  the  sun  became  poweefol  90  early  in  (he 
.  moffttii^  that  we  always  yfoke  with  a  fiveiiah  heat  whidi  lasted  till' 
sunset  The  Europesns,  howevo',  did  not  suffer  any  serious  iUness.' 
Some  instances  of  violent  inflamation  in  the  eyelids  wet^  the  only  dia> 
orders  of  which  we  had  to  complain. 

Our  march  to  Bickaneer  was  attended  with  few  adventures.  Parties 
of  plundoeis  were  twice  seen,  but  did  not  attack  our  baggsge.  Some 


Digitized  by  Google 


XO  INTBODDCTIOH. 


of  the  people  also  lost  their  way,  and  were  mif<s?n<^  for  a  day  <»r  two, 
during  wbicb  time  they  were  in  danger  ot  being  lost  in  the  uiuulia- 
bited  pHrLH  tjl  the  desart,  and  were  fired  on  by  all  the  villages  which 
they  a]>proached  in  hopes  of  getting  guides  or  directiom  ibr  tbeir 
journey.  -    ;     ■     '"       .     •.    I  '  .  ^^ 

'At  iMt'oD  the  5tb  of  November,  in  iSmvdM,  ai  m  tnwt  of  iliaM 
ttan  ordSanacy  dosdlrtion*  we  diMowrad  the  ivsUa  ind  tawen'oi 
kaneer,  whidi  preMBCed  the  appearanee  ut  a  great- end  magnifibent 
citj  Inthemidrt  of  a  wildenieiK  Eyea  afteriwe  nedied  cor  pound 
Ihate  were  dupiitee  m  enn^  whedierit  ok Bdlf  was  moit  mbsanmi 
but  «H«tteikiheraoqu«Dtaiiee  removed  tinaimpiei^^  Tkmimm- 
viB  sunounded  bj  a  fine  wall,  strengthened  with  many  round  towers, 
andcrownedwiththenaiialLidian  battlements.  It  contained  some  hig^ 
hfloaasy'  and  tome  temples,  one  of  which  had  a  lofty  spire,  and  at  one 
comer  was  a  very  high  and  showy  £oxt.  It  was  distinguished  by  the 
whiteness  of  all  the  buildings,  arising  from  the  material  already  de- 
scribed at  Chooroo,  and  by  the  absencp  of  trees,  which  givp  most  In- 
dian towns  the  ap[:>earance  of  woods  ratht  r  ilian  of  inhabited  places. 
The  beauty  of  Bikaneer  however  was  all  i  xiemal.  On  entering  the 
gates  most  of  it  was  found  to  be  cr>m|)(  >sfHl  of  huts,  with  mud  walls 
painted  reel  It  was  exceedingly  populous,  perhaps  from  the  number 
of  people  who  had  fled  to  the  capital  in  consequence  of  the  state  of 
Iheoonatry.  ■  ' 

Bikaneer  waft'at  this  time  invaded  by  Ato  dilfeFent  amiiea ;  one  of 
which  beSonging  to  tibe  Bije  of  Joudpoor,'and  15j000  strongs  had  aap- 
rived  widiin  a  few  mites  of  the  dty.  -  Anodier  amaUer  Ibrce  was 
equally  near,  while  the  rest  were  endeavouring  to  reach  ^  same 
pomt  by  different  nmtea*.  A  number'  of  predatoiy  hone  iiad  also 
been  let  loose  to  cut  off  the  supplier  of  provisions  fipoan  the  surround- 
ing  countries,  on  which  a  city  situated  like  Bikaneer,  must  obviously 
depend  finr  existenoe.   The  RiKjay  on  the  other  band*  filled  up  all  the 


iMtwen  d»  lUiM  «f  Jowlpoar  end  Jjrpoq^^ 


Digitizer  by  Google 


nfivouuciiioN. 


n 


wells  within  ten  mile.^  cif  hin  capital,  and  trosledlbrdeiivwraocetotfae 
desolation  which  surrounded  hirn. 

This  state  of  fiffairs  wm  not  very  favourable  for  supplying  the  wants 
of  the  mission,  and  wr  ilioiiijiht  ourselves  lucky  in  bein^  enabled  to 
renew  our  march  within  eleven  days.  During  this  time  miliiai  v  ope- 
rations wore  carried  on  between  tlie  parties.  The  smallest  of  the 
armed  bodies  near  Bikaneer  waa  obliged  to  fill  b>A  a  mardi.  A  con- 
voy fion  tWcaiCMHid  alio  fimed  ilt' wby  itfcta  ih»  town  j  and  anotlier 
going  to  llie'  aumy,  in»>  cnt  off*  by  liie  ]bija*t  troops.  Many  mm 
mie'kiOed^oaiilua  oecaaioii«  aiidiiiiich]^iiiidi^waB  taken  by  tba  tio* 
tarn,  Tbm  appmtmiet,  as  tbey'paued'near  our  camp*  was  mSk  dea^ 
oibed'by  QAe  of  tlio  gcntUman  of  tiie  minimi,  bi  oaoplaca  Wa 
saan  »  parti^  chiving- m  caeot  in  another  some  loaded  carts,  herd  a 
lawaianail  pricking  on  a  captured  camel  with  his  long  spear,  and  there 
a  gun  draped  slowly  through  the  sand  by  fifteen  or  twraty  buUooks. 
Disorderly  bands  of  ragged  soldiers  were  seen  in  all  directions,  most 
of  tham  with  plonder  of  some  kind»  and  all  in  spirits  with  their  vio 
tor y. 

In  the  mGantime,  I  was  aaseilefl  1)V  both  parties  with  constant  ap^ 
plications,  the  Joudpoor  general  urging  me  to  come  to  his  camp,  and 
the  Aa)a  desiring  me  to  Like  part  with  him.  The  former  couid  only 
throw  out  hinto  m£  danger  fimn  omitting  to  comply  with  his  wishes, 
bat  the'Baja  oonU  at  pleaane  accelerate  or  ictvd  the  proniion  -of 
oar  catde-and  wppUot  t  and  by  placing  a  guard  ovnr  tfae  ifdl  miAA 
had  been  allotted  to  iM>  he  one  day  shawad  to  opt  no  small  friieasineaa 
hoWoomplekelylielMd-iw  in  his  power.  l!heieilri<tiocilio««»erw*i 
leinoTed  on  a  renaonibanee,  and-ini|^  have  been'oooaaioned  b^*  tbe  . 
water  being  leqoired  ebewbere^  iir  while  we  were*  taking  m-tntter 
§m  our  janmey,  we  were  ouaetrts  obliged  to  place  guards  over  die 
vttU,  and  to  vrithhold  water  entinly  ton'  onr  camels  ibr  the tifo  or 
three  la.st  days  of  our  stay. 

The  time  of  our  residence  was  variously  occupied.    At  first  there 

was  some  novelty  in  observing  the  natives,  with  whom  our  cainj)  was 

crowded  like  a        Nothing  oonld  exceed  their  curiosity ;  and  when 

■    0 «  ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


IS  INTRODUCnOM. 

one  of  us  appeared  abroad,  he  was  stared  at  like  a  prodig>'.  They 
wore  loose  clothes  of  white  cotton  or  muslin,  like  the  people  of  Hin- 
doostaii ;  but  were  distinguished  from  them  by  their  Kaujpoot  teatures, 
and  by  their  remarkable  turban,  which  rise*  high  over  the  hem!  like 
a  mitre,  and  has  a  cloth  of  some  other  colour  wound  round  the  hui- 
tom.  Some  of  our  party  went  into  the  town,  where,  althou^i  curio- 
aky  drew  a  mob  round  them,  they  were  treated  with  great  cirUity : 
Odien  rode  out  into  the  deaaart,  but  were  soon  wearied  with  tJiedieMj 
and  mnwied  prospect  it  afibfded ;  'for  frithin  ten  yards  of  the  town 
as  waate  aa  the  wUdeat  part  '<o(  AxAim.  On  the  northan  aide  alone 
there  waa  aometlung  like  a  woody  vallefr.  The  moat  curioiia  ai|^  at 
Bikaneer  a  well  of  fine  water,  immediately  undte  the  toii»  which 
ia  the  reaidmce  of  the  Raj^  It  was  three  hundred  feet  deef^  and  M- 
teen  or  twenty  feet  in  dianieter.  Four  buckets,  each  drawn  by  a  pur 
of  Qzeu,  worked  at  it  at  once  f  and*  when  a  bucket  waa  let  down,  ita 
atriking  the  water  made  a  noise  like  a  great  gun. 

Great  part  of  our  time  was  taken  up  with  the  Raja*s  visit,  and  our 
attendance  m  his  palace.  The  Raja  came  to  my  camp  through  a 
street,  fornied  by  his  own  troops  and  joined  by  one  of  our's,  which  ex- 
tended from  the  skirts  ot  the  camp  to  the  tent  where  lie  was  received. 
He  was  carried  on  men's  shoulders  in  a  vehicle,  like  the  bndv  of  an 
old-faaliioned  coach,  lie  was  preceded  by  a  great  uiauy  cliolxiars, 
bearing  slender  silver  maoes,  with  laxge  knoba  at  the  top,  whidi  they 
waved  over  their  heads  in  -the  -airs  and  foDowed  by  a  nomeibaaTfr* 
tanue.  He  aat  down  on  a  mnannd  (a  kind  of  throne  composed-of 
owhiont)*  under  a  canopy,  or  rather  an  awmng  of  red  vdvet,  embxot- 
deved  and  hioed  .with  gdd,  and  auppovted  b)r  fiNtf  aOver  pillais,  all  of 
whidi  be  had  aent  out  iae  the  puirpoae.  We  comiaed  on  varioni 
aiifajecta  for  an  hour.  Among  other  topics,  the  Raja  enquired  about 
the  age  of  the  King,  the  climate  of  England,  and  the  politics  of  the 
nati<»i.  He  ahowed  a  knowledge  of  our  relation  to  Fiance ;  and  one 
of  the  company  asked,  whether  my  mission  was  not  owing  to  our  wnr«i 
with  that  nation.  Presents  were  at  !nst  put  before  him  mid  his  COUT* 
tiers,  according  to  the  Indian  custom,  after  which  he  withdrew. 


•  Digitized  by  Google 


INTaODUCTIOM.  \^ 

Ki^  Soon*       is  m  im&  of  a  good  height,  and  a  Me  tmnpAezioiiy 
ftr  on  Uun.   He  has  black  ^sken  and  •  beard  (except  on  the, 
middle<lf  hit  dini)»  e  long  nosei  and  lUojpootiealn^  he  has  a  good 
&oe»  end  a  smiliiig  ooontenaaoe.  He  is  reckoned  an  eppMiTe  princa 

it  n  stronc^ly  suspected  that  he  poisoned  his  elder  brother*  whom  he 
succeeded  ;  and,  it  is  certain,  that  he  murdered  an  agient  sent  fitntl 
the  Vizier  of  Hmdoatan  to  the  King  of  Caubul.  Yet,  as  he  is  Teiy 
strict  in  his  devotion<i,  and  particular  in  the  diet  prescribed  by  his  re- 
ligion'*', his  suV)jects  allow  him  the  character  of  a  sainti 

I  returned  his  visit  on  the  next  day  but  one,  having  hepn  invited 
by  his  second  son,  who,  thou^li  m  infant,  wns-  sent  for  that  purpose 
with  a  <^eat  retinue.  The  fort  Itmked  well,  as  we  approached.  It 
was  a  confused  assemblage  of  towers  and  battlements,  overtopped  by 
houses  crowded  together.  It  is  about  a  (]uarter  ol  a  mile  square,  sur- 
rounded with  a  wall  thirtjr-feet  high,  and  a  good  dry  ditch.  The 
palace  whs  aeurioosdd  boildbig^  hiivhidi»  After  ascending  Several 
flights  of  slqis,  we  came  to  a  oomt  sdrKwmded  bj  building  and  then 
had  one  huiidred  yards  to  go»  btefbrewe  reached  a  snudl*  stonie  hall, 
supported  faj  pillan,  where  the  Biya  took  hw  seat  nnikr  hia  canof»y« 
court-was  diflhrent  fiom  any  thing  I  had  seen,  those  present  b^ 
big '  fiurer  tiian  other  Hindostanees,  and  marked  by  their  Jewish  &^ 
tares  inid  showy  txirbans.  Tlie  Raja  and  his  relations  had  turbans  of 
mai^  colours,  richly  adorned  widi  jewels,  and  the  Raja  sat  resting;  his 
arms  on  a  shield  of  steel,  the  bosses  and  rim  of  which  were  set  with 
diamonds  and  nibies.  After  some  time,  the  llajali  proposed  that  we 
should  witliciraw  trom  the  heat  and  crowd,  and  conducted  us  into  a 
very  neat,  C04>1,  and  private  apartment,  in  a  separate  court ;  the  walls 
were  of  plaster,  as  fine  as  stucco,  and  were  ornamented  in  good  taste  5 
the  doors  were  closed  with  curtains  of  China  satin.  WTien  we  were 
seated  on  the  ground,  in  the  Indian  way,  the  Raja  began  a  speech,  in 
wfafch  he  said  he  was  a  subject  of  iAb  throne  of  DeUy«  that  tkSfy  waa 


•  It  in  wbimiucal  that  tbg  Hindoo*  of  the  anndaof  Rikanopr  ■hould  partMwhurljr  ol^ect  to 


X4  ICMTBODDCmON. 

jiom  in  our  hands,  and  he  seized  the  opportunity  of  my  oOTning,  to 
ackncwleilge  our  sovereignty.  He  then  called  for  the  keys  of  his 
fort,  and  insisted  01  my  taking  them,  which  1  letused,  disclaiming  the 
extended  rightn  ahcrilied  to  us.  Alter  a  long  contest,  the  Ruju  con- 
sented to  keep  the  ke>& ;  and  w  hen  some  more  conversation  had 
passed^  a  mob  of  daucing  women  eutei:ed,  aod  daoced  and  sung  till 

.We  at.  )aii(.nwiwMfimnBSIwk9eroa  .«lie  of 
November.  Thf)i«Hiiiti^.>rapMBed.aii  thetvofinj^ 
llwife  tUnmSi^:  ^fmtSbed^  and  opir  .  people  irera  10  6tigind«ft«r  the 
■eqoQ^ innnih,  4t«t  ye.mteoded  to Iwte lialtedft  daj  to  nfietb  tliem» 
when  lihA  Demiim  of.  tli0  Bej»of  Bikaneer  wcgueinted  iiaivith  loiiie 
movement^'Of  a  certain  partizan,  and  some  of  the  predatory  tribet 
of  the  desart,  which  induced  us  to  move  in  the  dUy  Uliteed  of  -the 

•  B%ht,  to  enable  us  the  better  to  protect  our  baggage. 

In  consequence  of  this  clnin«je,  the  generale  beat  at  two  o'clock  in 
the  mormng  (November  iyth),  l)ui  it  was  day-light  before  our  water 

•  and  all  our  other  loads  were  prepared,  and  it  was  dark  before  we 
reache<l  our  iriouiul  iii  Vuo<z^i\j  after  a  march  of  twenty-four  miles. 
The  whole  was  wavy  baiui-inlls,  some  of  them  of  aii  tuilonishing 
height  Ojir  people  were  in  great  distress  for  water  during  the  whole 
daj*  v'At  Pooggulf  bbire^er,  we  fetuid  abimdaiioe  of  good  water  fof 
«lew  .It  wea  nvwailer  pieiefved  hi  anall leienroin^  vaiilted  over 
irith  brick  and  mortar,  Hieie  wu  wdUHvatar  alao^'vdiidi  waa 
hnddah*  Iwt  «ot  .noadaiiBi  Ilka  waUa  wm  not  mart  than  half  aa 
deep  aa  thoae  of  Bikaiieer,.  .  . 

We  haked'on  the  @Otb  of  November,  to  take  in  waleiv  and  I  had 
a  good  opportune  oC«xamining  the  place.  If  I  eoold  present  to  my ' 
readier  the  fore-ground  of  high  sand  hills,  the  village  of  straw  huts^ 
the  clay  walls  of  the  Httle  fort  going  to  ruins,  as  the  ground  which  ' 
supported  them  was  tilown  away  by  tlie  wind,  nnd  the  sea  of  sand 
without  a  sign  of  vegetation,  which  formed  the  rest  of  the  prospect, 
he  probabljr  would  feel  as  I  did,  a  sort  of  wonder  at  the  people  who 


Digitized  by  Google 


HOTRODUCnON. 


15 


eoiild  voiide  m  «o  dismal  a  wUderne^'  and  of  lunar  at  the  life  to 
iriudi  they  seemed  to  be  mndemned 

On  the  21st,  we  marched  at  daj-breftk,  and  for  the  Qitf,  tenor 
twelve  miles  were  in  sand  as  above  described,  after  which  we  reached 
the  !\ard  plain.  No  sooTier  were  we  clear  ot"  the  snnd-hills,  than  our 
camels  movoi  up  into  a  line  of  twelve  or  fifteen  al)reast,  and  the 
whole  of  our  caravan  begun  to  move  with  tolerable  speed.  The  con- 
trast beivviM?n  this  and  the  sand-hills  was  very  exhilarating,  though* 
even  those  had  not  been  unpleasing,  while  they  had  nuvelty  to  re- 
oommend  them%  In  the  course  of  the  day  we  were  overtaken  by  a 
■tdgectof  Btlkumvii  XhaunB,  irfioliad  kMt  liiM  way  fai  traddng  some 
Gamda  cmied  <tf  in .  an  .eiaitriaii  ojT  die  Baigpoots,  had  eihamitcitf 
bis  akin  of  water,' and  had  tasted  no  food  Ibr  two  days.  We  fed 
and  put  Imn  on  a  eameL  Bdbve  dad^  we  met  a  party  of  one  lno^ 
dredand  fifty  toildien  on  donda*  betonging  to  Bahawnl  Khiun,  the 
cbief  of  one  of  the  king  of  Gaiilml's  eaatam  proriiMies. '  Hiere  were 
two  men  on  each  camel*  and  each  had  a  long  and'gUttering  match-' 
lock.  They  advnnoed  and  saluted  in  three  or  fear, very  good  lines, 
llwir  camels  seemed  as  manageable  as  horses,  and  their  ^pearanoe 
was  altogether  novel  and  striking;  their  commander  had  a  long 
beard,  and  was  dressed  in  a  Persian  tunic  of  buff  broad  cloth,  with 
gold  butttnis,  and  a  low  cap  like  the  crown  of  a  hat.  He  was 
mountetl  on  an  excellent,  light,  speetly,  and  easy  camel,  with  a  very 
showy  saddle  and  two  reins,  one  passing  through  a  hole  in  each  nos- 
toil  of  the  camel.  His  language  was  scarcely  intelligible  to  any  of 
our  party.  He  brought  us  one  hundred  caiwels,  carrying  four  hun- 
dred skins  of  water  from  Moujghur.  He  had  fdso  fbnr  brazen  jam  of 
water  from  the  Hyphasis,  whidi  was  intended'  fi»r  oar  own  diinking, 
and  was  aesled  up  widi  the  Khaon's  signet  We  soon  after  en- 
camped in  the  midst  of  the  desait,  sboat  twenty^wz  nules  flom 
PoogguL  We  enjoyed  the  water  of  the  Hyphasis  extremely,  and 
were  all  ddig^itfed  widi  the  new  people  we  wore  gettmg  among,  and 
the  new  scenes  we  were  appioacliing. 


16  '  IHTRODUCTnON. 

On  the  22d,  we  made  a  inarch  of  thirty  miles  to  Moujgur ;  the 
heat  of  the  aftefnoon  was  intenset  while  we  halted  as  usual  in  the  - 
nsked  plain,  to  give  our  people  some  water,.and  to  take  some  refresh- 
ment ouisdves.'  In  the  coarse  of  the  day  sevml  hundred  skins  of 
water  came  to  us  firom  Moujgur,  where  BoJiawul  Khaun  had  sent  his 
prindpal  c^lcers  to  reoeiye.us.  Towards  evening  many  persons  were 
astonidied  with  the  appearance  of  a  long  lak^  enclosing  several  little> 
islands ;  notwithstmiding  the  well  known  nature  of  the  country,  many 
were  positive  that  it  was  a  lake }  and  one  of  the  surveyors  took  the 
bearings  of  it.  It  was,  however,  only  one  of  those  illusions  which  tlie 
French  call  mirage^  and  the  Persians  sirrnuh.  I  had  ininirined  this 
phenomenon  to  be  occasioned  by  a  thin  \a|)i  ui  (or  soinetiung  resem- 
bling a  vapour),  which  is  seen  over  the  ground  in  the  hot  weather  in 
India,  but  this  appearance  was  etitirely  different,  and,  on  looking 
along  the  ground,  no  vapour  ^^i^alever  could  be  perceived.  The 
groimd  was  quite  level  and  smooth,  composed  ol'  dried  mud  or  day, 
mixed  with  particles  of  sparkling  sand :  there  were  some  tufls  of 
grass,  and  some  little  bushes  nie»  at  this  qpot,  which  were  re- 
flected as  in  water,  and  this  .appearance  continued  at  the  ends,  when 
viewed  ftom  the  middle.  I  shall  not  attempt  to  aocount.for  tlus  apr 
pearanoe,  but  diaU  merely  remark,  that  it  seems  only  to  be  fivund  in  . 
Ipvel,  smooth,  and  dry  places.  The  ppsitioa  of  the  sun  with  refer^ 
ence  to  the  spetkator,  iqppears.  to  be  immaterial.  I  thou^  at  first 
tibat  great  heat  always  accompanied^  its  appearance;  but  it  was  afteiw 
wards  seen  in  Damaun,  wh«i,  the  westher  was  not.hotter  than  is 
experienced  in  England, 

About  sun-set  w(>  descried  the  high  wall  and  towers  of  Mouj^ir, 
with  u  conspicuous  mosque  which  stands  over  the  gatewav,  and  a 
tomb  with  a  cupola,  ornanu-nted  with  painted  tiles,  resembling,  as  I 
was  told,  tlip  tombs  of  Iniaumzjuldahs  in  Fersia.  We  arrived  a  little 
after  dark,  and  encamped  near  the  fort,  which  is  small  and  weak. 
We  winidned  b«e  two  days,  taking  in  water.  Bahawul  Kliaun's 
Dewaiin,  and  another  of  his  <^cer8,  who  joined  ua  here^  were  Hin- 
doos, the  third  was  a  MonUah  of  Monltaun,  whose  dress,  language, 

10 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION.  .  17 

iiid  manners,  were  very  like  those  of  Persia.  Even  the  Ifindoot 
HwnetimeH  used  the  Persiwi  idom  in  speaking  Hindodtanee,  and  the' 
Dewaim  looked  and  spoke  more  like  a  Persian  MooUah  than  «  Hin- 
doo. On  the  25th  of  November,  we  nuBched  tweii^-Mrven  miles  to 
two  wells  in  the  desart.  In  the  way  we  saw  a  most  magnificent 
mirage,  whicli  looked  like  an  extensive  lake,  or  a  very  wide  river. 
Tho  water  seemed  clear  and  beautiful,  and  the  figures  of  two  gentle- 
men who  rode  along  it,  were  retlected  as  distinctly  as  in  water. 
A  small  but  neat  tower  was  seen  in  this  inarch,  and  we  were  told  it 
was  a  [dace  of  refuge  for  travellers,  against  the  predatory  hordes  who 
inlest  the  route  ot  caravans.  There  were  some  stunted  bushes  ot  the 
IfinKNMi  Arabica  on  the  iiiiicliv  and  at  the  ground  was  something  that 
niglit  be  odled  ft  tree. 

On  llie  anil,  we  merdied  efc  day-light,  md  paiiod  over  hm  end 
bimyUs  efkiose  sand,  and  botlonis  of  hind  clay,  till  efter  tmveUiqg 
twelve  mileB,  we  perceived  loinrtihmg  stiefccfaed  actott  in  filonfe  of  Wk 
wfaicb  aoon  after  appeared  to  be  tieM.  We  tiien  poAed  oil  wilii  in- 
creased alacritj,  aad.aoon  reached  a  place  where  the  dewrt  and  the 
*  cultivated  country  were  separated,  as  if  by  a  line.  A  hiii||^iow.  of  treat 
fan  along  the  edge  of  the  sands ;  and,  beyond,  it,  were  clumps  of  trees, 
green  fields,  and  wells  of  abundant  and  clear  water,  with  homes,<  'and 
every  sign  of  fertility  and  cultivation.  One  of  the  first  things  we  saw 
was  a  well,  worked  by  a  Persian  wheel,  which  was  pouring  out  water 
in  the  jrrpatrst  ahundance.  The  trees,  though  only  low  tamarisk, 
seemed  enchanting  to  us  ;  and  every  thing  was  welcome  after  our  Hve 
weeks  sojourn  in  the  desart.  We  past  for  a  mile  and  a  half  under  the 
wails  of  Bahawulpore,  which,  as  well  as  the  roati-s,  were  crowded  with 
spectators,  who,  in  their  turn,  afforded  no  uninteresting  spectacle  to 
us.  A  striking  dij9b:ence  was  observable  betwera  them  and  the  peo>' 
pie  on  the  east  of  4iie  desait  Thooe  we  now  saw,  wste  stron^^  daik^ 
handi ftatnred s  had  their  hair  and  beards  long;  wore  eapa olUner 
than  toibans ;  and*  tpdte  a  hnguagB,  antird;  nninteBigihile  to  oqr' 
Hmdoostanny  attendants,  Ihe  better  sdrtwicife  the  diess,  and  «flbafe>' 
ad  the  mannera  of  Persia.  After  crossii^  i^amaU  Onal,  and  passing 


Digitized  by  Google 


18  AmtODucaioii'- 


throuirh  some  fields,  we  left  the  woods,  mid  at  JengLli  icaciieii  the 
banks  of  tlie  HypliasLi.  1  was  much  disappointed  iu  the  breadtli  of 
the  river,  as  well  as  with  the  appearaace  of  its  shores ;  but  it  wajs  iiu- 
pOMible  to  look  widioiit  intemt  on  •  atraunwhidL  had  bome'tliA 
fleet  of  AleKandgr. 

On, tbe  next  day  but  <aie^  BilunnilrKhMm  arrived*,  haviiig  come 
iatty  miles  on  pupoae  to  thew  sfctention  fcojthe  mission.  Indeed  hit 
wliole  oonduct  fimn  the  time  we  sffprasdied  his  fi!OBtier»  shewed;* 
spitit  of  kindness  and  hoqntaMt^  which'ooiild  not  be  surpassed,  nor  did 
it  cease  when  we  left  this  ooiuitry ;  for,  even  after  w^  had  passed  the 
InduSy  he  ocmtinued  to  send  us  intelUgence,  and  to  take  every  oj^iw 
tonity  of  showing  us  attention.  In  our  first  intercourse  with  him,  we  ' 
be^ui  to  determine  tlie  presents  to  be  made,  expecting  to  have  a  long 
stnif^ofle  afrninst  his  rapacity,  as  is  usual  on  such  occasions  in  roost 
parrs  ol  India;  but  we  soon  found  we  hati  to  encounter  a  difficulty  of 
another  kind.  Baliawul  Khaun  would  take  nothing  witliout  a  nego- 
tiation ;  while  he  was  anxious  to  shew  his  own  liberality  to  an  extent 
which  we  were  uuwiiling  to  admit. 

On  the  day  of  his  amval,  he  sent  ei|^hlgr  sheep,  one  Inmdred  maunds  " 
of  flour,  andollier  articles  ,iDf  the'same  kind*  Nwt  day,  he  sent  one 
hondredpotsof  swcctmeat%  a  vast  number  of  baskets  of  oiaiiges»  ten 
bagiof  almondraadiaiabiSi  and  five  ba^  eacih  containing  1000 
pees  (equ^to  lflO^.).to,be  given  td'the  servants.  •  I  was  ^little  embsop- 
lassed  fajtlns  laiApieeeof  hoq»itality  {  .but  was  obliged  to  satHnit,  on 
eondition  that  the  Khaun's  senrania  should  aooefit  a  nmilar  donation 
flom  me. 

On  the  ^h,  Mr.  Strachey  and  Captain  Raper  pud  a  visit  to  the 
Khaun,  and  returned  charmed  with  the  polite  and  cordial  reception 
he  gave  them.  Among  other  conversation,  he  praised  the  King  of 
C^vihul  highly ;  but  said  he  had  ntn  er  set^u  him.  "  He  feared  tlie 
•*  snows  ol Caubul,  and  was  besides  ;i  d  w  eller  oi  the  desart,  and  un- 
•*  worthy  to  appear  before  so  great  a  monarch."  On  the  Ist  of  Decem- 
ber, he  came  to  my  lcul.  He  was  a  plain,  open,  plea^iant  man,  about 
^Krty-fiye  or  iiily  years  of  age:  he  had  ou  a  white  tunic*. with  small 


Digitizea  by  LiOOgle 


INTRODUCTION. 


gold  bnttontf  omtyiA]kkw9»vmiiamaAe<£  vwy  M 
Jbl  gqldfafDoade:  on  bia  bead  wm  y  cap  of  brodudet  and  over  itt 
knigee  (or  ailkeo  tubaii),  twMd  kbady.   Abont  aix  of  bin  atuind* 
uila  aat,  the  raat  atood  ioiiiid»  aiid  w«re  wdl  dreeaed,  and  M^)^^ 
'    Oar  cimvemrfaoii  tiiRifld  on  India  «Dd  En^^a^ 
Ebaun  femitfked  it*inM|;eCtiiig  Jatie. 

On  the  2d,  I  vatdined  bia  visaL  The  streets  were  ciowded  to  «a 
incredible  degree^  and  the  terraced  tops  of  the  houses  were  covered 
with  spectators.  They  left  the  part  of  the  street  tbrou^  which  we 
were  to  pa55S  quite  clear ;  and,  except  now  and  then  an  exdamatfon  of 
snrpriso  when  we  came  in  sight,  thev  kept  n  profound  silonre.  The 
Khaun  received  us  in  a  handsome  room  vvitli  attic  windings,  round 
which  a  neat  and  orderly  company  were  seated  on  a  Persian  carpet 
He  converstnl  freely  on  all  subjects :  said  he  ha<l  never  seen  the  King, 
and  please  God  he  never  would  ,  he  could  live  la  his  desart  and  hunt 
his  deer,  and  iiad  no  desire  to  follow  courts.  He  shewed  me  a  curious 
clock,  made  by  one  of  hia  own  people.  The  works  seemed  very  good. 
Ibe  bell  w«8  bdow  tbe  wmlDat  and  libe  wbdle'iMUFbi  a  ease  of  gold, 
wftb  very  thick  cbiyatal  ddaa.  He  alao  ahewod  an-  ensdlent  gun 
lollct  nkade  at  Babuihi^pobr.  He  gave-  ma  twoftie  faamfca^  aonu^'gnj 
honnda^  Inro  bdiaea  (ontf  wbii  gold,  and  ibe  other  with  enamdted 
fenppmga)»  a  niy  beaalM  laatcMoek,  irfddy  eaameilled,  witb  a  pow- 
der liaak  in  tbe  English  model,  and  some  tnjs  of  dotba  of  the  plao^ 

Chi  Uie  4th,'we  maiclied.  Bahawol  Kbaun  sent  out  atentlntd  'tbe 
neighbotnbood  of  ours,  where  we  had  a  parting-meeting  while  our 
laat  baggage  was  crossing  tbe  river.  He  introdiioed  tbe  mechanic 
who  made  the  clock,  and  presented  me  to  several  p^^ns,  who  he  said 
were  IJlema  (or  Mahome<lan  school  divines).  Afterwards,  he  retired 
to  a  car|iet  at  some*  distance  from  the  tents  with  Mr.  Strachey  and 
aae ;  and  there  spoke  tidly  on  all  subjects,  giving  me  all  the  advice 
and  information  in  his  power,  lie  ended,  by  saying,  that,  m  he  was 
the  first  subject  of  Khorassaun  witli  whom  we  had  met,  he  ho|Hitl  we 
would  preserve  the  remembrance  of  him  after  we  had  extended  our 
acquaintance*    We  took  ieave  of  him  witli  great  regret.  He  had  beeu 


20  WTRODUCTION. 

liberal  and  kind  to  ut  during  our  stay,  .without  over  cxnlkj  or  oer^ 
mony ;  and»  he  liad  an  appearance  of  sincerity  in  every  thing  be  taid, 

which  made  lus  diew  of  friendship  the  more  agreeable. 

We  lode  out  during  our  luJt  at  Bahawulpoor,  and  saw  the 
town  and  its  environs.  The  town  is  about  four  miles  in  circumfe- 
rence ;  but  there  are  pirdens  of  mangoc  trees  within  the  walk.  The 
houses  are  of  unburiit  bricks,  witli  terraces  of  mud  :  Tlie  city  wall  is 
of  mud,  and  very  thin.  Bahawulpoor  is  remarkable  for  the  manufac- 
ture of  lougees,  or  silken  girdles,  and  imhans.  The  inhabitants  of 
tliis,  *antl  all  the-  lu  iglibouring  countries  on  the  west  and  north,  are 
principally  Juts  and  Beloches,  who  profess  the  Maliommedaa  reiigion. 
There  are  more  Hindoos  at  Bahavrulpoor  than  any  of  the  other  pro- 
vinoea  the  miaiion  peaaed  through :  A^anna  are  fiweigners  thera 
Hie  oountiy,  ibr  four  or  Bve  milea  on  each  aide  of  th6  Hyphasis,  ia 
Jbrmed  of  Ihe  alime^  depoaited  b^  the  river.  It  ia  very  rich*  and  o£> 
len  ao  aoft  that  it  «annot  be  ridden  on.  Some  parte  are  highly  cuUi- 
vaM»  and  othera  are  covered  with  ooppioe  of  low  tamariak^  in  which 
pre  many  wild  boars,  and  hog  deer;  wild  geese,  partridtges*  florilEcna, ' 
and  other  game  are  alao  abundant  on  the  banks  of  the  river. 

The  river  winds  much  at  this  pUce,  and  is  very  muddy,  but  the 
water,  when  cleared,  is  excellent  It  is  here  called  the  Gfaarra,  and 
ia  formed  by  the  joint  atreama  o£  the  Hyphasiai  or  -Begah|  and  Hyni^ 
dnis,  or  Sutletlge. 

The  mission  marcheil  on  the  5th  of  Der(  nil>er  from  the  right  bank 
of  the  Hyphasis,  and  re  u  hed  Moultaun  on  the  11th,  a  distance  of 
near  seventy  miles.  Alter  the  first  five  or  six  miles,  the  country  was 
in  general  dry,  sandy,  and  destitute  of  grass,  l)ul  scattered  with 
bushes.  Immediately  roiuid  tiie  villages,  which  were  pretty  aumep* 
ous,  were  fields  <^  wheat,  cottcua,  and  turnips,  in  a  thriving  condition* 
Them  were  ao  great  a  number  of  laige.  and*deq»  water-ooniaea 
throughout  the  whole  joumey*  that  judging  ficoin  them  aloo^  one. 
would  have  suppoaed  the  ooontiy  to.be  highly  coHivited. 

Aefoff^  we  reached  Koultaun,  we  f«m  .overtaken  by  twenty^* 
cimela^  aent  op  by  Baiunrul  JKhaun.  .Ihet  cfai^  ia  fionoua  for  hia: 


Digitized  by  Google 


nmoDucTioM.  .21 

.  ♦ 

enndi)  ioine  of  which  he  kaept  tat  his  own  nie,  waA  dwaji  himti 
upon  them.  TTiey  are  very  generally  jised'  in  dl  the  deaart  ooantiyv 
and  are  admirably  calcnkitod  for  long  jonmejs.  An  elderly  nunirter 
of  the  Raja  of  BUunoieen,  whom  I  met  at  Sii^puu,  had  just  oome.dn 
a  camel  from  Bikaneer  (a  distance  of  one  hundred  and  aeveaty-'&ve 
miles)  in  three  days.  Several  of  our  party  liked  them  so  weU,  as  to 
continue  to  ride  them  for  pleasure,  after  we  had  croaaed  the  Indilt. 
Their  walk  and  trot  are  far  from  being  very  uneasy. 

The  city  ot  Moultaun  stands  about  four  rnik  s  fixmi  the  lett  bank 
of  the  Chenaub,  or  Acesines.  It  is  abt)ve  fuur  miles  and  a  half  in 
circumference.  It  is  surrounded  with  a  line  wall,  between  forty  and 
fifty  feet  high,  with  towers  at  regular  distances,  it  has  also  a  citadel 
on  a  rising  ground,  and  several  fine  tombs,  particularly  two,  with  very 
high  cupolas,  ofnemented  with  tlie  painted  and  i^aied  tile  alieadj 
notieedf  which  altogether  give  it  a  magnificent  appearance.  Theae 
tomba  are  seen  itom  a  great  diataaoe  all  lound  the  town.  Mtndtaim 
ia  fiuKMia  toot  ita  ailka»  and  lor  a  aoit  c£  carpet,  mndi  inferior  to  thoae 
cf  Fenna.  Hie  oountiy  immediately  nrand  the  cily  W!aa  vecy  pleaa* 
hm^  firtile»  well  cultivated,  and  well  watered  from  wcilla.  The  pedple 
were  like  those  at  Bahawulpoor,  except  that  there  were  more  men 
who  looked  like  Persians  mixed  with  thcan ;  theae^  however*  were  in- ' 
^viduala,  and  chiefly  horsemen. 

The  mission  remained  for  nineteen  days  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Moultaun,  and  as  most  of  the  party  were  out  almost  every  day  from 
seven  or  oi^ht  to  three  or  ibur,  shooting,  hunting,  or  hawking,  we 
had  froocl  opportunities  of  observing  the  country.  The  land  was  flat, 
ami  tlio  soil  excellent,  but  a  large  proportion  ot  the  villages  were  in 
ruiuti,  and  iliere  were  other  signs  of  a  well  cultivated  country  going 
to  decay  ;  about  one-half  was  still  cultivated,  and  most  abundantly 
watered  by  Persian  wheels :  the  produce  was  wheat,  millet,  oottOD» 
. turnips,  eanrota,  and  indigo.  The ireea  wcie  chiefly  neem*  and  date^ 
with  here  and  there  a  peepnl  f  tie&   The  uncokivated  country  near. 


9 


IK  INTRODUCnOM. 

the  river  was  covc?red  with  thick  copse-wood  of  tamarisk,  mixed  with 
a  tree  like  a  willow,  about  iwcnty  feet  high:  at  a  distance  from  the 
river^  it  was  bare,  except  for  scattered  tufts  of  long  grass,  and  here 
and  there  a  date  tree.  The  country  abounded  in  game  of  all  kinds; 
The  weather  was  delightAil  duniig  chut  staj ;  the  thermometer,  when 
«l  file  lomti  wat  A  SB*  at-miMiae:  thaie  were  slight  fioste  ia.^ 
ni^t,  but  die  days  vrme  nther  warn. 

We  were  detained  tfaoa  long  at  Monltaini  hy  the  ntemity  ci-  piuv 
cfaMUig  and  hiring  eundai  and  of  obtaining  eoneot  intelligence  <^ 
tfie.Sing  of  CSaiibal'a  motiona,  aa  well  aa  of  wndang  for  »  Miehnian- 
danr*  from  His  Majesty,  to  accompany-tlie  miaaion  after  it  enteied 
the  lands  of  the  Afghaim  tribes.  We  were  alao  occupied  in  change 
ing  the  camels  vhidi  we  brought  from  Hindoatan»  for  thoae  o£  the 
country,  in  making  warm  clothing  for  the  Sepoys,  and  in  procuring 
horses  to  mount  many  of  our  attendantSt  ■*^H'"g  to  the  CUItom  of 
the  country  we  were  about  to  enter. 

The  principal  events  of  our  stay  were  our  meetings  with  the  governor 
of  the  province.  Tlie  natnc  of  tliis  personage  was  SeralVaua  Khaun, 
and  as  his  government  wa^  in  India,  he  ha<i  l  lie  title  of  Nabob.  He  was 
©t  an  Ai^imun  family,  of  the  royal  tribe  of  Suddozye,  but  his  ances- 
tors had  so  long  been  settled  in  Moultaun,  that  he  had  lost  most  of 
the  chamcteriatica  of  hia  nation.  He  aeema  to  have  been  aeised  with 
•  fMHiie  at  aoon  aff  faeheeid  of 'the  approodi  of  the  miaaioD,  and  the 
whole  of  hia  bduvnonr  to  the  end,  was  nuuhed  with  BDapidon  and 
diatnJat  He  ahut  the  gpitea  oif  the  dly  ^^ainat  na,  and  allowed  none 
of  dormen  oribUowecatoentetyWithooteBqweaapeniiiadon*  He  alao 
doubled  his  guards,  and  we  hefffd  fiom  good  authority,  of  debatea  in  - 
hia  council,  whether  it  wet  moat  probable  that  we  ahould  endesvour 
to  surprize  the  city,  or  dut  we  ahoiild  procure  eoesaioii  of  it  to  us 
from  the  King.  He,  however,  agreed  to  visit  me  on  the  15th  of  De- 
oember,  and  a  veiy  laige  tent  waa  pitched  Ibr  hia  reception.  One  end 


*  An  officer  appointed  to  iMciff*  Hid  do  tins  banonn  to  Midi  goeito  as  ibm  IDagigiAm 
19  dww^attCQtioii  to. 


Digitized  by  Google 


oi  it  .fpas  open*  and  from  the  entrance  two  canvass  skrecns  ran  out* 
9Q,«k'to  baa.  «i  dUey  abonfc  tirqity  yards  long,  which  was  lined  with 
wnaato-  in  Ihroy,  otibcr  aerviBts  extending  beyond  iL  The  troops- 
veie  alao  dnam  iq>  m  ltne  'aloqg  the  road  to  the  tent 

Mn  Stmdbjay  mwt  to  meet  tl»  governor,  and  fiiimd  him  mounted  • 
en' ft  uliite  hone»M*idi  gold  tiappingay  attended  hy^hia  offioeia  end 
iinnmiatea^  aniromided  with  laige  rtandarda>  and  haam 
dred  horse,  and  three  tfaooaand  foot  The  dust,  crowd,  and  coninsUm 
of  the  meetings  efe  repreaented  by  Mr.  Strache^,  aa  be^nrnd  ail  d»^ 
scription.  The  governor  weloomed  Mr.  Sirachey  according  to  the 
Persian  custom,  after  which  they  joined,  and  proceeded  to  the  tent,; 
the  pressure  and  disorder  increasing  as  they  went.  In  some  places 
men  were  fi«;hung,  and  in  others  people  were  ridden  down ;  Mr." 
Strachey's  own  horse  was  nearly  lx>rne  to  the  ground,  and  onlv  re- 
covered hi  tnseli  by  a  violent  exertion*  When  they  approat  Ik  d  the 
tent,  they  missed  the  road,  came  in  front  of  the  line  of  troops,  and 
ruslied  on  tlie  ~  cavalry  with  sucli  impetuosity,  that  there  was  barely 
timeto  whed  badiCy  eo  tti  to  alloar  a  paasi^  In  thia  manner  the 
tide  poured  on  tovards  the  tent:  the  line  'of  aervants  wereewept 
awftff  the  akieena  were  torn  ddwn»  andtranq^led  undertfeot,  and  even 
the  tent  ropea  were  aaaailed  with  ancfa  fiuy,  diet  the  whole  tent  wai 
nearly  struck  over  our  heads.  The  inside  was  crowded  and  darkened 
in  an  inatanfe.  Th6  governor  and  about  tea  of  hia  oompaniona  aati 
the  rest  aeemed  to  be  armed  attendants ;  and,  indeed,  the  governor 
seemed  to  have  ettouied  to  nothing  but  the  numi )or  of  his  guacdii 
He  sat  but  for  a  very  short  time,  during  the  whole  of  which  he  was 
telling  his  beads  with  the  utmost  fervency,  and  addressing  me  with 
*'  You  are  welcome,  you  are  very  welcome,"  as  fast  a^  ho  could  re- 
peat tlie  words.  At  last,  he  said  he  was  nfraid  ihe  crowd  must  annoy 
me,  and  withdrew.  Suralrauz  Khaun  was  a  good  looiiiri;^:  voung  man, 
he  wore  tlie  Persian  dress,  with  a  cap  and  a  shawl  turban  uver  it,  and 
spoke  very  good  Persian.  His  attendants  were  large,  lair,  and  hand- 
some A%hauns,  most  of  them  very  well  dressed,  but  in  no  aevt  of 
eider  or  diactjpline.   On  the  same  evening  I  letomed  hia  viait»  and 


Digitizer  by  LiOO^lC 


INTBODUCriOM. 


found  him  littiBg  under  an  ftwning,  on  a  temioQ>  in  one  of  hii  gu^ 
deoB, '  He-had  s  huge  company  sitting  with  him  in  good  Ofder.  ttuj 
diflered  greatly  in  appearanoe  fiom  Ibe  natives  of  India,  but  wero 
neither  ao  handaomdy  dresied^  nor  ao  deoonNia  aa  Feraiana.  The 
Kabob  being  now  fiee  fiom  alaim,  waa  dvi]*  and  agreeable  enoii|^ 

While  at  MoiiItaun«  and  in  the  neigfabonihood,'  I  leceiTed  visita 
from  Molla  Jaffer  Seestaunee,  from  the  kin^a  deputy  Hircana  Baa- 
shee,  or  Newswritert  and  from  various  other  persons.  My  intercourse  . 
with  one  person  deserves  to  be  mentioned,  as  characteristic  of  the 
government  of  Moultaun.  Secunder  Khaun,  the  Nabob's  uncle,  be- 
in^  once  hunting  near  my  camp,  sent  to  me,  to  say  that  he  had  en- 
closed tliree  wild  boars  within  his  nets,  and  to  beg  I  would  come  and 
join  in  the  chace  of  them.  I  thought  it  prudent  to  excuse  myself, 
but  I  sent  a  native  gentleman  with  a  civil  message,  some  fine  gun- 
powder, and  a  spy-glass.  Secunder  Khaun  returned  me  an  indifferent 
horsct  and  sent  a  boar  to  be  hunted  at  leisure.  Thus  far  all  was  well* 
but  two  days  afterwards,  he  Beat  back  my  present,  and  desired  to  have 
his  horse  iMdc,  aa  he  waa  in  danger  of  being  oonfiiied>  or  pot  to  death 
.  frr.  intriguing  with  the  English. 

On  the  16th  of  December,  we  moved  to  the  banlDi  of  the  Acesines^ 
.  hcae  called  the  ChenanK  It  has  received  the  waters  of  the  Hjda^ea 
and  Hydraotesi  befisre  it  readiea  ibis  plaoei 

We  pasaed  the  rirer  on  the  2l8t  of  December  (our  baggage  having 
taken  some  days  in  crossing  before  us),  and  we  pitched  about  three 
miles  from  the  right  bank  of  the  river.  From  this  ground  we  first 
discerned  the  mountiuns  of  Afghaunistaun.  They  appeared  at  a  great 
distance  to  the  west,  and  must  have  been  the  part  of  the  range  of  Soli- 
maun,  which  is  to  the  north-west  of  Dera  Ghauzi  Khaun,  and,  con- 
set|uciill\.  seventy  or  ei^^lirv  iniieH  firom  Mooltaun.  At  length  our 
prepHr;itioiis  were  completed,  and,  after  many  pro>iects  for  overcoming 
tlie  diiiicuiti^  of  a  journey  thiougli  tlie  snow  to  Candahar,  we  had 
the  satisfaction  ot  learning  that  the  King  h;ul  set  out  on  the  road  to 
CSaubui.  We,  therefore,  renewed  our  marcli  on  tlie  29tli  ot  Decem- 
her«  and  bqgan  to  cross  the  little  desart,  whidi  extends  from  north  to 

^  to 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


INTRODUCTION.  ^ 

'WOttOsk  npwirdi  of  two  Imndred  ud  fi%  buImi  bat  the  braadHh  of 
wliidi'wai  BO  little  mdiispert,  Uut  we  croMed  it  in  two  nuocfaee. 
It  fills  up  tluit  past  of  the  oouatiy  betvreeo  the.Hydaipeft  and  In- 
dna,  whidi  is  not  inundated  by  those  rivers,  and  ezfeoids  from  H^ie 
ktitude  of  Oooh,  where  the  inundated  knds  of  both,  join,  to  the  Salt 
raige.  It  seems  to  be  a  part  of  the  great  deaart  cot  off  fimn  the 
main  body  by  the  ziveis  and  their  rich  banks.  We  entered  it  a  fear 
miles  west  of  our  encampment  near  the  Acesines.  Tlie  line  between 
Ae  cultivated  country  and  the  desart,  wa.s  marked  and  decided,  and 
we  fownd  ourselves  at  once  among  sand  hills,  stunted  bushes,  burs, 
and  pfiokc :  vet  those  were  not  so  c(»niinon  as  to  preclude  the  necos^ 
«ity  of  airrying  torage  tor  our  cattle,  fhe  sand-hills  were  lower  than 
those  of  the  great  desart,  and  here  they  were  grey,  while  those  had 
been  reddish  yellow.  Tlie  water  was  bradcish.  At  the  end  of  our 
second  march,  we  were  within  the  limits  of  the  irumdation  of  the 
Indus ;  and  on  the  morning  of  the  .31st  of  December,  Mr.  Strachey, 
Lieuteuaiit  Alacartney,  and  I,  iicl  out  for  the  banks  of  Uiat  celebrated 
nf&[.  We  had  a  guide  on  a  camel,  some  troopers,  and  three  or  four 
servants  on  camels  and  horses.  .  We  passed  over  a  rich  aoQ,  covered 
with  long  grass,  in  ivhich  were  nuxed  many  trees  of  the  kind  like 
willow,  and.  hero  and  there  patches  of  odtivatioD*  The  day  was 
doudy,  with'Oocaaiaaal  drops  of  rain,  and  a  veiy  cold  wind  Uew  till 
after  noon.  The  hills  were  dirtnictly  in  sig^  during  the  whole  of 
eur  ride^  Their  wppetxmce  was  beautifidj  we  dearly  jsaw  dme 
nBgea,  the  last  of  wlddi  was  vmy  hi^  and  we  often  doubted 
rVdiether  we  were  deceived  by  the  clouds,  or  really  saw  atiU  hi^er  ranges 
beyond.  While  we  were  looldng  at  the  hills,  a  mass  of  heavy  clouds 
-rolled  down  those  most  to  the  north,  so  as  entirely  to  conceal  them 
fiom  our  sight,  and  a  line  of  clouds  rested  on  the  middle  of  those  to 
the  west,  leaving  the  summits  and  the  bases  clear.  On  the  next  dav, 
these  clouds  had  passeil  away,  and  had  left  the  hills  covered  with 
snow.  We  were  anxious  and  Iiappy  as  we  approached  the  river,  aiid 
were  not  a  little  gratihed  whraatlast  we  fi>und  ourselves  upon  its 


Digitized  by  Google 


26 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  Indus,  besides  itfl  great  nalne,  and  the  interest  it  excites  as  the 

boundary  of  India,  was  rendered  a  noble  oJbgect  by  its  own  eactont,  and 
by  the  lofty  hills  wliich  Unmied  the  back  ghmnd  of  the  view.  We 
were  however  a  little  disappointed  in  its  appearance,  owing  to  an  is- 
land, whiili  divitled  it,  and  impaivpil  the  effect  of  its  stream.  There 
were  other  islandit  and  sand  banka  in  the  river  •  hut  near  the  side 
where  we  stood,  it  came  up  to  the  edge,  and  seemed  deep  and  rapid. 
Wliile  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  we  met  a  native,  to  whose  conversa- 
tion, and  tliat  of  the  guide,  we  listened  witii  great  interest  and  curi- 
osity. The  plains  on  the  opposite  shore  we  found  were  inlmbited  by 
Beludies,  and  the  mountains  by  the  Sheeraunees,  a  fierce  and  turbu- 
lent tribe.  On  the  o^er  side  of  the  range  were  tribet  and  places,  of 
which  we  had  never  beard  the  nanea^'whUetlMMe  we  hid  learned 
fym  our  maps,  were  equally  new  to  onr  informants.  AH  we  could 
learn  wbb»  that  beyond  the  bills  was  aoinfifhing  wi3d» atrange,  andnew» 
wbidi-  w^  m%bt  hope  one  day  to  eqilore. 

-  EnxiB  Oodoo  da  Kote^-  near  wbidi  we  fiiat  aaw  the  IndMUh  to  tibe 
hny  of  Kflheeree*  where  we  created  it»  ia  about  aevenfy^^lire  milei. 
It  is  a  narrow  tract,  conteated  between  the  inver  and  the  deaait»  If 

in  hunting,  we  were  led  many  miles  to  die  west  of  the  road,  we  got 
into  branches  of  the  river,  and  troublesome  quicksands,  among  thick- 
eta  of  tatnurisk  or  of  reeds;  and,  if  we' went  as  &r  to  the  right,  the 
appearance  of  sand,  and  even  in  some  places  of  sand  . hills,  admonish- 
ed us  of  the  neighbourhood  of  the  desart.  Many  parts,  however,  were 
cultivated,  with  great  pains  and  metho<l,  and  produced  good  crops  of 
wheat,  hnrl{>v.  turni})s,  and  cotton.  Tlio  fi(»lds  were  always  enclosed, 
either  with  huil-^cs  of  dry  tliorn,  witii  lua  dies  of  willow,  or  with  fences, 
made  ol  stiff  mats  (  f  reeds,  supported  by  stakes.  The  houses  were 
often  built  ol  the  same  material.  We  were  struck  with  thv  neuiness 
jof  the  farm-yards,  so  unlike  those  of  Uindostan.  They  were  regularly 
endoaed;  Irad  gates  of  three  or  four  hoxs ;  and  contained  sheds  Ibr  ' 
the  cattle,  dung-hills,  Bus,  It  was  alao  new  to  ut  to  obaenre  band- 
binsofwa,  and  to  aee  oxen  ted  witii  tuisipa.  Some  of  the  hooaes'near 
die  river  attracted  our  attention,  being  raiaed  on  platfonna,  auppairted 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION.  ^ 

bf  aferoog  posts,  tweke  or  fifteen  &et  liigfa*  We  told  diej  wieie 
iiMMBt  to  take  nibge  in  dnriiig  the  immdiirioo,  iduaa  theaninAi^.fcv 
ten  or  twdveoOM  (twenty  or  twoatj-ibar  inileB)*  hmitrnhnHawtn 
uideff'initer.  -i-. 

Thcf  people  were  remarkably  civil  and  well  behavecL  T^eir  feii^ 
tures  were  "moTO  pleasing  than  those  of  the  people  at  Bahawulpore 
and  ]\Ioiiltnun  ;  and  their  nppcarance  and  complexion  continuwl  to 
improve  as  we  got  nortlnv-nd,  till  we  reached  the  ferry  :  their  dress 
improved  in  the  same  manner.  Even  towards  the  south,  the  men 
were  ali  dre^.8ed  in  gowns  of  white  or  bine  cotton,  and  had  no  part  of 
their  bodies  exposi  il,  which,  with  their  ix  aids,  and  th^  gravitv  and 
decencv  of  their  bf  fi  iviour.  tvkuIc  them  look  like  Moulavees  (or  di>c- 
tors  of  Mahomuiedaa  law),  in  llindoostan.  Even  there,  they  wore 
brownish  grey  great-coats  of  coarse  woollen  cloth ;  and  that  dress  be- 
came iiM»e  copunoD  towards  the  north,  where  all  the  people  wore 
eo1<mred  dodiea, blue,  red,  orchMiE;  die  tnitNUi  aim  la  tharo  ev*- 
changed  fyt  caps  of  gilted  8ilk»  not  ttnUke  Wdah  wigs,  and  OMCaifilji 
not  handaome.  Oar  ludting  placea  were  generally  at  large  villager 
One  waa  tA  hem,  wbich  although  it  girea  its  name  to  the^pio^iiMte^'  b 
apoor  plaee^  eontainingabont  fiye  hnndied  hoiuea. 

At  nUBj  of  liheae  viUagea.jae  tombai  like  tfaoae  aliead^  oa^oed 
Ibe  handaomeat  k  iShtA  ■  of  MahonuiMd  Baojlui,  it  e  irjUt^je  .tbaA 
hem  hia  name.  It  b  an  octagon  buildiug*  tfaaree  or  four  atories  high* 
and  covered  with  painted  tika»  At  .^h  comer  of  the  lower  story  la 
a  onall  loond  tower,  ammoiinted  hy  a  little  minaret,  vbich  has  a  gdod 
cAbct  lliese  tomba  aie  teoepicuoua  objecti,  hsmg.gmaiify  amx 
fiom  stage  to  stage. 

T  ouijht  also  to  notice  a  hijih  bank,  which  ran  to  the  rifjlit  of  our 
road,  from  the  march  north  of  Leia  to  the  ierry  ;  thougii  now  seven 
miles  from  the  Indus,  it  is  said  to  have  been  the  eastern  bank  of  that 
river  at  no  very  remote  periotl,  and  its  appearance  is  favomable  to  the 
storv.  At  T^eia,  I  was  joined  by  two  Lk>oraunee  horsemen,  the  first 
I  had  an  opportunity  of  observ  ing.  They  were  sent  by  the  governor 
of  the  province  to  accompany  me  to  lua  imuts.  They  botii  wore  laxge 

E  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sg  INTRODUCTION. 

fed  mantles,  lined  or  edged  with  fiir.  One  was  fair,  with  a  high  nose, 
and  a  pleasing  countenance :  he  wore  a  silken  tui  ban  owr  a  small 
cap.  The  other  was  dark,  with  coarse  blunt  fratiurs,  and  a  hardy 
look:  he  wore  a  sheep-skin  raj>,  like  a  Persian,  but  lower,  lioth  were 
civil  and  attentive.  Al  Lt  aki),  I  was  visited  by  a  Persian  attend- 
ant ol*  the  King's,  and  hy  a  voung  Hindoo,  a  bioLlier  of  Muddud 
Khaun's  De^  aun,  who,  though  dressed  like  a  Dooraunee,  still  bore 
strong  traces  of  his  origin.  I  was  a  good  deal  surprised  at  the  free- 
dom with  whicii  all  my  viaitors  spoke  of  the  Govenunent;  and  of  the 
civil  1VBR.  Boides  tbove  peiwns  whom  we  met  in  towns,  and  the 
labouring  people,  the  genenl  desiie  to  aee  us  gave  us  oppoi^- 
'tiuitiea  of  obaemng  afanoat  all  descriptions  of  men.  Sbmetimes  a 
niunber  of  honiiBmen  would  join  us  on  ihe  line  of  march,  twoor  thtee 
sallying'  fimm  ereiy  Till^e  we  passed:  they  were  often  on  maref, 
with  die  fbak  nmning  after  them*  and  armed  with,  long  spears.  Hmj 
were  always  very  dvIL  The  notions  entertwned  of  us  by  the  peo- 
ple were  not  a  little  extraordinary.  Th^  had  often  no  conception  of 
our  nf^on  or  religion.  We  have  heea  taken  for  Syuds,  Moguls, 
A%haun8,  and  even  for  Hindoos. 

They  believed  we  carried  great  guns,  packed  vp  in  trunks ;  and  that 
we  had  certain  small  boxes,  so  contrived  as  to  explode,  and  kill  half 
a  dozen  men  each,  without  hurting  us.  Some  thought  we  could  raise 
the  dead ;  and  there  was  a  story  current,  that  we  had  made  and  ani- 
•  rnatod  a  wooden  ram,  at  Mooltaun  ;  that  we  had  sold  him  as  a  ram, 
and  that  it  was  not  till  the  purchaser  began  to  eat  him,  that  the  mate- 
rial of  which  he  was  nia<lo,  was  discovered. 

At  the  ferry  on  die  Indus,  we  met  some  siik-merchants,  who  had 
gone  as  far  as  Demaun  to  purchase  madder.  T^iey  described  the 
Afghaun  tribes  us  generally  kind  to  travellers,  and  hoiiei>t  in  their 
dealings ;  but  one  tribe  (tlie  V^izeerees),  tliey  said  were  8avages,  and 
eat  human  flesh.  .    .  .  .. 

We  crossed  the  Indus  at  the  Kaheiee  ferry,  on  the  7ih  of  January. 
The  main  stream  was  there  1010  yardr  broad,  though  its  breadth 
WW  'dirnhDshed  by  sevend  parsUel  branches,  one'of  which  was  tvn 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


hnndred  and  fifly  yards  broad.  We  passed  in  good  fl«t4lOttOMWwl 
^iO«tfl»  made  of  fir,  and  capable  of  csnybig  &mn  thirty  to  forty  tons. 
Our  camels  had  their  feet  tiedt  and  were  thrown  into  the  boats  like 
any  other  baggage ;  our  horses  also  crossed  in  boats.  Tlie  elephants 
alone  swam,  to  the  f?rpat  astonishment  of  the  people  of  the  country, 
who,  probably,  had  never  seen  an  animal  of  the  kind  before.  1  t  orn 
tlie  ferry  to  Dcra  Ismael  Khaun  waa  tliirty-five  miles.  The  country 
was  covered  with  thickets  of  long  grass  and  thorny  shrubs,  full  o( 
game  of  all  kinds,  from  partridges  to  wild  boars,  and  leopards. 

The  cultivation  was  flourishing,  but  was  not  extensive,  though  wa- 
ter is  dljundant ;  and  the  soil  to  appearance,  enjoys  all  that  richness 
and  fecundity,  (or  «lu^  inundated  countries  are  so  &mous. 
.  We  lencfaed  Den  Isnuel  Khaim  on.t]ie  11th  of  January;  Befaie 
we  entered  Dei^  we  were  met  by  Tutteh  Khaun,  a  Belocbe,  who  go- 
▼ems  ihia.provmoe  as  deputy  for  Mahonuned  Khaun»  to  iriiam  it>  as 
weU  as  Lda,  is  asngned  by  the  Kug.  He  was  splendidly  atdiedt  and 
accompanied  by  a  few  infimtijt  and  a  troop  of  ill  drened  and  01 
nioonted  horsey  armed  with  long  spean.   He  and  hiaeompanioiis  ex- 
patiated on  the  greatness  of  their  master;  on  the  strength  of  bis  twen-- 
ty  feitSy  the  number  of  his  cannon,  the  forty  blacksmiths  who  were 
employed  night  and  day  to  make  shot  for  them,  and  other  topics  of 
the  same  kind.    In  the  coui^se  of  the  day,  Tutteh  Khaun  sent  na  m 
present,  including  six  bottles  of  Caubul  wine,  and  two  of  the  essence 
of  a  plant,  much  vaunted  in  the  £ast»  and  called  the  bedee  mishk  or  - 
musk  wilUtw. 

We  rciiiaitM>d  near  a  mouth  at  Dera  Ismael  JKhaun,  waiting  for  a 

MehmRuiKtaur. 

Tin-  town  is  >iniated  in  a  large  worn!  of  date  trees,  within  a  hun- 
dretl  \  ards  of  tlu'  Indus.  It  lias  a  ruinous  wall  of  urnbumed  bricks, 
about  a  mile  and  a  liall  iii  ciicuiuference.  The  ndiabitants  of  tlie 
town  were  chiefly  Beloches,  though  there  were  also  some  A%hauns, 
and  Hindoos :  the.  latter  have  a  tmple  In  the  town.  The  country 
people  aire  Bdodhes  and  Juts,  resembling  those  on  the  opposite  bank 
of  Iftie  Indus.   We  saw  many  Afghauns  fiom  Bemaun,  who  diflfered 


Digitized  by  Google 


so  HITEODUGTIOK. 

rmich  trom  the- Beioches.    They  were  lai  <.'(\  and  liouy  men,  with  lortf^  ■ 
coarse  hair,  loose  turbans,  and  sheep-skin  cloaks  :  plain,  and  rough, 
but  pleasing  In  their  manners.    We  Imd  often  groupes  of  horsemen 
round  our  camp,  who  came  from  a  distance  to  In  ik  sit  ns,  andvisitofs 
who  were  prompt^  b)  curiosity  to  court  our  iuxjuauiLaucti. 

'JTlierc  were  several  hordes  of  wandering  shepherdii  encamped  in 
dilierent  parts  of  the  vant  plain  wli^e  we  ware.'  We  went  on  the 
day  after'4mr  irrivftl  to  examine  one,  wbifih  li^nged  to>  <3ie  Khaio- 
tees,  the  ioiktt  of  all  tSie  pasCbcal  tfibea.  We  tad»  about  tan  mOes 
to  tliis  ouapf'em  i  p^aiar  of  bard  mad>  like  part  of  die-  deaait,  !biit 
covaced  with  boabes  of  jannd  and  kiiiieel»  and  evidently  iich»  though 
neglected.  Onoiirway,weaanviomeA^iadnAfl|»hetda,diitingabeid 
of  ^K>ut  fifty  cameb,  towards  Dei»!  one  <^  <Jie  oamda  'Wtt  'pure 
whiter  with  bine  eyea*.*  "Die  A^iauna  apoke  no  Berriaii^  nor  Huh 
doostanee.  Hiey  were  very  ciyil  \  stopped  the  white  camel  till  w«b 
had  examined  it,and  shewed  us  their  swords, 'which  we  were  desirous 
to  look  at,  because  the  hilts  differed  from  those  both  of  Pei^ia  and 
India :  they  were  most  like  those  of  the  latter  country,  but  neater. 
At  last,  after  a  ride  of  ten  miles,  we  reached  the  camp.  It  was  pitdl- 
ed  in  n  circle,  and  the  tents  were  coarse  brown  blankets,  each  sup- 
port id  by  two  little  poles,  placed  upright,  and  one  laid  across  for  a 
ridge  pole.  The  walls  wore  made  of  dry  thorn.  Our  appearance 
excited  some  surprise ;  and  one  man,  who  appeared  to  have  heeii  in 
India,  addressed  me  in  a  kind  of  Hindoostanee,  and  asked  what 
brought  us  there?  whether  we  were  not  contented  wiili  our  own  pos- 
sessions, Cawnpore,  and  Luckntjw,  aiul  ail  those  fine  places  ?  I  said, 
we  came  as  £riends,  and  were  going  to  the  King.  After  this  we  soon 
gat  intmiate  i  and,  by  d^rees,  we  were  aunounded  by  people  Btom 
the  camp. .  The  number  of  chikben  was  incredible ;  they 
ly  ftir,  and  haadsomew   The-girls,  I  psaticulaily'obaerved,  had  aquW 


*  Tr  was  aft«rwar  bought  by  a  gentleman  of  tha  llliMial^  vko  gVW  H  smij  in  Ibdllll 
•Did  it  ia  nt^Vj  I  nnderrtand,  exhibited  in  Loadon. 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTBODUCTION. 


line.  D0te%  and  Jevvuh&atuKs.  T1iemmwmgncmDydiiik,dMNie|i 
mmeywesfe  quite  jGur..  .  One  ywrng  mam  ln.particiil«r».iviio  atood^  wd 
Btaied  in  ailient  amaaement,  Jiad  esactly.  tfw  ttAaatt  i&i^baea^  and  ap* 
pearanoe  of  jBO  Inah  liajmalcer.  They  had  genefaUyhigh  nbsea.;  and 
their  stature  wa§  father  small  than  laige.  ^me  had  brown  wooUen 
great-ooats,  hot  moat  had  white  cotton  clothes and  they  all  wore  white 
ttulMma^  Ui^  wcK.Tery  diirfy.  They  did  not.  aeem  «t  all  jealous  of 
their  women.  Men,  women,  and  children^  orawded  round  lUf  ftlt 
our  coats,  examined  our  plated  stirrups,  opened  our  holsten,  end 
shewed  irreat  nirioHity,  but  were  not  troublesome.  Scarce  oneof  them 
uuderstood  any  l;inmiairo  but  riishtoo ;  but,  in  their  manners,  they 
were  all  Tree,  good  limnoured,  and  civil.  1  learnt  that  they  had  been 
there  three  months,  and  were  to  return  in  two  more,  to  pass  the  sum> 
mer  near  (Tiiuznee.  They  said,  that  was  a  far  su})erior  country  to 
Demaun.  I  coulcl  mak*  out  little  even  of  what  the  linguist  said,  aud 
there  were  too  luaii  v,  both  of  English  and  Aighauns,  to  admit  of  any 

attempt  at  a  regular  conversation.    '  .< 

,  Before  we  left  Dera,  two  of  our  party,  Mr.  Fraser  and  Lieutenant 
Harris,  set  out  on  an  expeditaon  of  eonwdemhb  hazard  and.difficulty. 
Tlieir  objeot  1^  to  aacend  the  peak  called  IVddite  Sdlhnamii  sr 
BoiKman'a  tfarone*  where  the  people  of^the  c^ountiy  beUeve  iheraiklb 
hsve  mated  after. the  dehigew  After  two  deyVmacdiiovei^einkked 
plain,  thejiolBBA  tQ  en  aaoent,  and,  four'  naflea  fimfaeeon^  letlke 
village  of  Dennbund»  the  chief  place  of  the  little  tribe  of  Maeaunk* 
heiL  Ifc  ia  a  neat  little  toim  on' e  fine  deer  cold  JtroBmyMz  mileaftom 
the  hifla.  They  wera  received  by  the  chiePs  bio(hear»  who  had'  joat 
eeme  in  fiom  hiuif ing^  '  He  wea  a  fiur  good  looldng  young  man,  widi 
a  irudie  but  becominc^  dreaa*  a  bow  and-ipiiTer  at  his  btick,  a  harela 
aeut  in  his  turban,  and  two  fine  grey  hounds  following  him.  Hit 
leoeption  of  the  strangers  was  kind  :  he  ordered  dinner  to  their  tcm^ 
and  proposed  that  his  brother  should  wait  on  them,  but  did  not  pr»s 
the  visit  on  their  excusing  theinselves.  For  dirmer  the^^  had  a  good 
pilow,  and  a  plate  of  the  fat  of  the  tail  of  the  Doomba  sheep  to  steep 
tlieir  bread  in.   Next  moniing  Omar  Kbaun,  the  chiet^  came  ,  while 


INTEODUCTION. 


the  gentlemen  were  dieBsing ;  he  waited  wi^out  the  tent  till  th^ 
were  ready,  and  then  entered.  He  was  an  uneommonly  handsome 
&ir  man,  under  tliirty  yean  of  age.  He  wore  a  black  shawl  turban, 
and  a  light  blue  dLoakt  ornamented. with  black  silk  fbogs  at  the  breast 
His  manners  were  very  pleasing,  and  his  demeanour  dignified  and 
easy.  After  tliov  became  acquainted,  he  told  them  that  he  was  in 
much  distress  at  that  time,  owing  to  factions  in  his  tribe  ;  asked  tlieir 
advice,  and  even  begged  them  to  give  him  a  talisman  to  secure  his 
success.  While  at  Deraulmiid,  the  two  gentlemen  were  riding  out 
with  two  or  three  lliiidoo>t;nii  i  iiorsemen  behind  them,  when  the 
latter  were  mobbed,  and  a  sliaiiger  of  the  tribe  ot"  Solimaun  Khail, 
struck  one  of  them  thrice  with  the  fiat  of  a  naked  sword.  The  cause 
could  not  be  discoTered*  as  the  A%haiuis  spoke  nothing  but  piuhtoo : 
Omar  Khami  alone  having  been  at  Gaubul,  spoke  Ptfrian^  of  which 
amne  Moollaa  also  knew  a  few  words.  Omar  Khaun  endeavoured  to 
diasnade  the  gentlemen  from  their  entefprise^  as  being  too  dangeRniss 
but  findix^  that  vain«  he  contrived  to  procure  safeguards  fiom  hia 
own  enemies  the  GBieeraimeeS)  in  whose  country  ^e  mountun  lay; 
he  also  made  the  gentlemen  cover  themselves  up,  so  as  to  look  as  like 
natives  of  the  country  as  they  could,  and  he  advised  them  to  leave  all 
their  Indians  behind.  They  then  set  off  into  the  hills.  They  found 
the  north  side  sloping,  covered  with  fir  trees,  and  abounding  in  rocks 
of  a  kind  of  pudding  stone ;  there  were  many  vallejrs  divided  by  nar- 
row ridges,  and  eadi  watcrcil  by  a  clear  brook.  So  circuitous  was  the 
road  by  whicli  the\  travelled,  that  after  they  had  advanced  about 
twelve  miles,  they  tbuml  tliey  were  stil!  tliree  days  jouniev  from  the 
top;  thty  ;ilsi>  learnetl  thai  the  upper  j)art  of  the  nu»iiiit;iiii  was  re!i- 
dered  inaccessible  by  tlie  snow  ;  and  these  <  OTisiderations,  witli  tlie 
intended  departure  of  the  mission,  rendered  it  necessary  for  them  to 
return.  They  slept  that  night  in  a  Sheeraunee  village,  lodging  in  a 
low  hovel,  partly  sunk  in  the  ground.  They  were  olfcrcd  bread  and 
ineat  Ixuled  in  smaU  lumps,  but  so  bad  that  they  could  not  eat  it. 
<Th^  were  lighted  by  pieces  of  a  Und  of  deal,  so  fiill  of  tnrpentmii^ 
tfiit  they  bumed  like  tovehes.  Thej  then  returned  to  Dennhiind, 

ti 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTBODUCTIQN. 


«ld^8fter  ghring  preMnta  to  the  diief  and  his  bnitfaer,  they  set  out 
far  camp.  Hicj  both  spoke  highly  of  the  kindDess  of  Omar  Ehami, 
and  were  alsopleased  vHh  the  attentions  of  one  of  the  leaders  of  the 
party  opposed  to  him. 

t  On  Iheir  way  htnA^  as  they  approached  a  mined  viUage,  they  saw 
spears  rise»  and  seven  horsemen  issue  forth ;  the  gentlemen  had  but 
one  innn  ^vith  them,  but  Ibftnnately  he  was  the  guide  furnished  by 
Omar  Khaun:  the  party  in  ambuscade  was  commanded  by  that 
chief  s  nephew,  who,  thou^  he  probably  was  as  hospitable  as  the 
test,  while  tho  o;entlemen  were  his  guests,  thought  himself  at  fuU 
liberty  to  plunder  them  after  they  had  quitted  the  lands  of  his  tribe. 
He  was,  however,  persuaded  by  the  guide  to  go  away  without  injurirjg 
them.  Sooti  after,  tliey  were  called  to  bv  a  man  on  foot,  and 
desired  to  stop;  on  their  disrpj:?nrdin<i  liim,  the  man  lav  down,  and, 
fixing  his  matchlock  on  its  rest,  took  a  verv  liberate  aim  at  Mr. 
Harris.  Here,  however,  the  guide  again  interposed,  and  they  reached 
camp  without  any  farther  ailventures.  Some  of  the  people  of  Derau- 
bimd  afterwards  came  to  our  camp,  and  received  ample  returns  of 
hospitality  Irom  the  gentlemen  who  had  visited  them. 

Near  the  end  of  January  we  received  intelligence  ftom  Mahomr; 
med  Shaan,  that  the  King  was  oertunly  coming  to  Besbawer,  and 
diat  Moolla  Jaftr  Seestaimee  was  appomted  to  attend  us.  till  some 
person  of  rank  could  join  us.  After  the  passage  of  several  chupperst 
or  couriers,  on  horseback,  ftom  the  court,  Moolla  Jafier  joined  us, 
and  we  beg^  to  get  ready  far  our  march*  Moolla  JwSEst  had  heep 
a  schoolmaster  in  his  native  country  of  Seestsun*  but  had  afterwards 
oome  to  court  to.  better  his  fartnne :  he  had  some  success  in  com- 
merce and  had  an'  cppcnrtunity  of  obligbg  the  King,  and  enricliing 
faimadf  at  onoe^  by  purchasing  some  of  His  Miyesty*s  jewels,  duihaig 
his  mitfartunes,  and  flight  to  the  mountains.  He  was  now  in  grei^ 
&vour,  ihou^  he  maintained  .the  style,  and  manners  of  an  ordinary 
merchant.  He  was  a  grave  old  gentleman,  shrewd,  sensible,  and 
good  humoured^  but  blunt,  and  somewhat  passionate.  Under  his 
guidance  we  set  out  fiom  Deralsmael  Khaun  on  the  7th  of  Ffsbruaiy. 

p 


Digitizixi  by  Google 


8(  INTRODUCTION. 

Our  road  kj  through  thickets,  as  above  described  on  the  river  side. 
When  we  got  near  the  end  of  our  mardi,  we  diaoovered  a  party  of 
Peisian  or  Doonumee  horse,  drawn  up  across  the  way,  and  soon 
learned  they  were  one  hundred  horse  who  hm}  come  from  the  King, 
and  brought  me  a  letter.  Tlie  whole  of  the  trooj>s  were  dressed  like 
Persians,  with  coloured  clothes,  boots,  and  low  sheepskin  caps.  They 
hatl  verv  neat  honsinj^s  of  lw]iard  skin  and  other  materials.  They 
wore  Persian  liilted  swords,  and  had  generally  matchlocks  ;  some  had 
very  short  blunderbusses,  with  verv  small  stocks,  and  barrels  of  ex- 
ceedingly thin  iron,  tied  to  their  girciles.  They  had  small,  but  light 
aad  good  horses.  Tliey  were,  on  the  whole,  a  ve  ry  lieat  and  orderly 
party.  After  we  came  to  our  ground,  they  sent  us  twenty  mule  loads 
of  the  Emits  of  Caubul,  apples,  grapes,  &c. 

Ln  the  evening,  I  went  to  a  tent'pitdied  about  one  bnndred  yards 
from  mj  camp,  to  receive  a  dress  of  honour  sent  me  fiom  ibe  King. 
I  found  die  tent  filled  with  the  principal  people  fiom  the  King,  stand* 
ing  with  tbe  same  reqpect  as  if  Hu  M^esty  had  been  present  I  was 
instruoted  to  bow  to  the  dress^  and  was  afterwards  invested  widi  a 
laige  flowing  lobe  of  goild  dotib,  lined  widi  sstin*  wbidi  I  was  toM 
die  King  bimself  bad  worn :  a  sbawl  was  wound  round  my  hatp  and 
tbe  King's  letter  was  stuck  in  it;  another  shawl  was  ghren  to  me  for  a 
girdle,  and  all  present  said  a  short  prayer.  Tlie  dreis  was  ridbt  and 
the  shawls  costly. 

Next  day»  after  passing  through  a  country  like  that  of  the  last  day, 
we  came  to  sand,  and  soon  after  reached  the  village  of  Paharpoor, 
which  is  scarcely  less  than  Dera.  We  had  hea:vy  rain  that  night,  and 
at  day-break  we  were  struck  with  the  appearance  of  the  mountains  of 
Solimnim,  which  had  been  concealed  for  a  week  or  more,  by  tliick 
vapour,  and  now  stood  forth  in  new  splendour ;  the  pure- 
ness  of  the  air,  and  the  great  addition  of  snow  making  them  seem 
higher  and  nearer  than  ever.  (Xir  march  lay  over  sand,  but  betbre 
the  end  of  it,  we  reached  scattered  hills. 

Our  camp  w  jus  pitched  near  the  village  of  Puneealla,  in  a  cheerful 
and  beautiful  spot,  sucli  as  one  would  iiguiu  a  scene  in  Arabia  I'elix. 


Digitized  by  Google 


nrrAQDucTiOM. 


h  WM  a  andy  filtegr,  bagnded  bjr  craggy  hiDi,  vMeraA  by  4  Utile 
droimj  and  intefapanad  with  dtnnpt  of  date  traet*  tod  widi  patcbei. 
of  gveen  oofo.  llwviUi^iladf  atood  in  s  deep  grove  of  diile.tiMi» 
on  the  aide  of  «  biU,  Aom  ^^ikh  manj  atnama  goalied  tfavoqgli  litllat 
cavema  in  tlie  tfaidioat  part  of  die  wood.  The  inhabitanta  tram 
Brioches  and  flbaifcha,  of  Aiebian  deacent  Hiey  plunderodaome  of 
our  people^  and  made  odian  priaonen ;  and  thonigh  tlda  wae  macbt 
np,  and  we  hiied  a  atio^g  lafe-guard  from  them,  we  still  lost  aone 
eamela>  and  had  atnggjbit  plunderod  after  we  had  left  the  place.  ■ 
'  The  next  forty  nulea  of  our  jouni^  were  up  the  valley  of  Laijga^ 
.  frtiidi,  thoi^  oolj  aepaniled  fay  a  ridge  of  hills  fitom  the  Indus,  was 
so  dry  and  aandy>  tliat  we  wpie.obUged  to  carry  water  as  in  the 
desart;  yet  even  there  we  saw  some  camps  of  shepherds  of  the 
Afghaun  tribe  of  Murwut,  to  whom  the  country  belongs.    After  two 
dreary  marches  through  the  valley,  we  came  into  a  rich  and  beautiful 
plain  thirty-five  miles  in  diameter,  encircled  witli  mountains,  and 
dividpf?  by  the  Indus.    We  encamped  that  day  on  the  river  Koor- 
nuTi,  then  shallow,  though  broad,  but  in  Summer  a  deep  and  rapid 
river.    From  this  we  made  three  marches  across  the  plain  to  Calla- 
baugh,  or  Karra-baugh.     The  country  belonged  to  the  tribe  of 
EsaukhaiL    It  was  naluially  fertile,  highly  cultivated,  and  watered 
bv  canals  four  feet  broad,  and  as  many  deep.  The  people  were  more 
swarthy  than  we  expected  to  see  men  of  their  nation,  and  looked 
more  like  Indians  than  Persians ;  they  were,  however,  easily  distin- 
guished fiom  the  finnier  people,  by  their  kmg  and  thick  hidft  liieir 
beaida,  the  iooae  felda  of  tfadr  tulMnia,  and  a  eertatn  independent 
and  manly  air,  that  mafked  tlienL  finr  A%iiauna.   They  are  notorioua 
fobben^  and  carried  off  aome  of  our  cameiat  and  of  the  Sng^a  Imniei 
but  their  otdinaiy  behaviour  waa  civil  and  decent   I  wm  auipmaed 
tt  ihmt  simplicity  and  equality:  though  they  ave  a  wealthy  and 
floDiiahing  tribe,  their  dne^  who  aooompooied  me  throu|^  the  whole 
of  their  knds,  waa  aa  phnn  m  hia  dieaa,.«iid  aa  aimple  hi  hia  manneia, 
as  the  moat  orduuny  peraon  in  the  txibOi 


Digitized  by  Google 


$B  INTRODUCTION. 

While  in  the  Esaukhtul  oo«iiitry»  we  were  met  by  Moossa  Khaun 
Akkkasy^  the  Doominee  nobleman  who  wee  tent  by  the  King 
to  oondnct  UB  to  court.  He  was  a  tall  man,  rather  corpulent,  but  of 
a  good  figure.  He  had  a  fine  beard,  and  was  handaomely  drcaecd  in  ' 
doth  of  gold,  with  fine  shawls ;  his  sword,  and  other  accoutrements, 
were  mounted  in  cro\d  ;  his  horses  were  good,  his  trappings  hand- 
some, and  lie  hnd  ;jf)mi  pistols  in  his  holsterv,  with  lions'  heads  in 
gold  upon  the  bulls.  Though  he  scarroh-  looktMl  forty,  he  was  near 
sixty,  had  been  engaged  in  civil  anti  iurciMn  wars,  and  had  been 
raised  by  his  party,  dunn<^  a  rebellion,  to  ilc  liigh  rank  of  Sirdar. 
He  had  travelled  in  his  own  country,  and  hatl  lonfi  heen  stationed  in 
Cashmeer,  in  praise  ol"  which  country,  or  rather  of  its  liceiiUous  plea- 
sures, he  used  oflen  to  enlarge.  Altogether  I  found  him  very  lively 
and  entertaining,  and  perfectly  gentlemanlike  in  his  manners.  He 
w«8  accompanied  by  a  party  of  four  or  five  hundred  horse,  who  be> 
longed-  to  a  Caltnuk  Duatdh,  or  regiment,  though  I  saw  no  OBlmnka 
amon^  them.  He  was  also  aooompanied  by  the  diieft  of  the 
A%baun  tribes  of  Bungush  and  Khiittukt  and  by  the  diief  of  the 
town  of  Kam^bangh,  pUiin  men  like  Anba»  -who  aooompanied  ua  as 
6r  aa  the  plain  of  Feriunrer,  each  bringing  a  ftroog  body  of  mUitia 
as  we  entered  hia  landa. 

'  Galla^baiigb»  where  we  left  the  plain,  well  deaerves  a  minute  de- 
•criptibn*  The  Indua  is  here  compressed  by  mountains  into  a  deep 
diannel,  only  three  hundred  and  fifty  yards  broad.   The  moontaina 

on  each  side  have  an  abrupt  descent  into  the  river,  and  a  road  is  cut 
along  their  base,  for  upwards  of  two  miles.  It  had  been  widened  for 
us,  but  wa,<^  st?]!  »o  narrow,  and  the  rock  over  it  so  steep,  that  no 

camel  with  a  bulky  load  could  pass:  to  obviate  this  inconvenience, 

twenty-eight  boats  had  horn  ])repared,  to  convey  our  largest  packages 
up  the  river.  The  first  part  of  this  pass  is  actually  overhung  by  the 
town  of  Calla^bflUgh,  which  is  built  in  a  singular  manner  upon  the 
face  of  the  hill,  every  street  rising  above  its  ni  i;^'^liliour5  and,  1 
imagine,  onlv  accessible  by  means  of  the  flat  roofs  of  ihe  houses  be- 
low it.    As  we  pa^ed  beneath,  we  perceived  windows  and  balconies 


Digitizer  by  LiOOgle 


INTRODUCTION. 


n 


«t  ft  gtta^  hdi^t,  crowded  with  women  and  children.  Tbe  road  be- 
jond  WW  cat  oot  of  sckUd-Mk,  at  the  foot  of  cliffs  of  that  mineral,  in 
aame  places  mofe  dian  one  hundied  feet  high  above  the  river.  Hie 
nlt'ia  hard,  clear,  and  almost  pine.    It  would  be  like  chrystal,  were 

it  not  in  some  parts  streaked  and  tinned  with  red.  In  some  places, 
salt  springs  issne  from  the  foot  of  the  rocks,  and  leave  the  ground 
t  oNored  with  a  crust  of  the  most  lirilliant  whiteness.  All  the  earth, 
particularly  near  the  town,  is  aliuusi  l)lu<Hi  red,  and  this,  with  the 
strangle  and  beautii'nl  spectacle  of  the  salt  rocks,  and  tlie  Indus  flow- 
in^;  in  a  deep  and  clear  htieam  through  lofly  mountains,  past  thia 
extrai>rdinarv  town ;  presented  suclt  a  scene  of  wonders,  as  is  seldom 
to  be  witnessed.  Oui  camp  was  pitched  beyond  the  pass,  in  the 
mouth  of  a  n^ow  valley,  said  in  the  dry  bed  of  a  torrent.  Near  it 
were  pQw  of  Mkin  ktgefalodn  QSkBHUfom  at  a  quarry),  lying  ready  for 
ex|wttalaoii,  cither  to  Indk  or  KhorMtam  It  would  have  taken  a 
wedc  to  aattify  oa  with  the  sight  of  CaUa4NH]g|i }  but  it  threatened 
nun,  and  had  the  tonrcnt  Med  while  we  were  tbm  our  wMe  camp 
moat  have  been  swept  into  the  Indus. 

'  On  the  16th  of  Februaiy  we  wv^*^  vp  the  ytSkjt  which  became 
narrower  as  we  advanced.  After  proceeding  about  seven  miles,  we 
entered  a  winding  passage^  so  namnr  that  in  many  placet  our  camds 

could  scarody  pass :  the  rock  rose  some  hundred  feet  on  eadb  side* 

This  passage  continued  with  a  gentle  ascent  for  three  or  four  miles, 
during  which  time  we  saw  nothing  but  the  rocks  on  each  aide,  and 
the  sl^  overhead ;  at  length  the.  ascent  giew  more  sudden,  the  hills 
on  each  side  became  gradually  lower,  and  more  sloping,  and  after 

going  over  some  ven'  rough  and  steep  road,  we  readied  the  top  of 
the  ])afis.  The  view  thnt  now  presented  itself  was  singularly  wild  and 
desolate.  We  were  on  tlu' 1ii:;he^  part  of  the  mountains,  anil  be- 
neath us  were  tlip  barr.  broiven,  and  irregidar  bumraits  of  the  rest  of 
the  ran^c,  aiuoiiji  which  we  saw  several  vnllevs  Jike  that  we  had 
ascended.  Tliere  were  also  still  higher  muuniains  to  the  north, 
covered  with  snow.  We  were  sliow  n  w  hat  seemed  a  little  brook  for 
the  Indus  ;  and  some  smoke  on  its  banks,  was  ndid  lu  mark  the  sitCt 


Digitizer  by  Google 


38  .  INTRODUCTION. 

of  the  town  of  Muckud.  Many  other  places  were  pointed  out,  but 
m  MMdi  ft  ooniniion  of  hills  and  vaUe7a»  ilotfaiiig  made  a  distinct  im- 
pression.   From  this  pcnnt  we  descended  a  steep  and  ragged  mfld* 

where,  for  the  first  time,  we  saw  the  wild  olive.  We  encamped  in  m 
hollow  in  the  face  of  the  mountains,  ei<yhtecn  miles  from  our  last 
ground.  This  place  was  called  Cluishmeh  (the  spring),  from  the 
rare  eircumstancc  of  its  having  tVcsh  water ;  it  had  also  some  deep 
soil,  and  hail  been  cultivated  by  the  Bauriks,  a  wild  trilie.  to  whom 
these  mountains  belong.  It  rained  hard  before  we  <T<)t  t  o  our  ground, 
aiiii  in  the  midst  of  it  I  observed  iVloolla  Jafier  trotting  on,  sheltered 
by  a  cloak  of  stiff  lelt,  which  came  to  a  point  over  his  head,  and 
Coveretl  him  and  all  the  hinder  part  of  his  horse*  like  a  tent ;  behind 
him  was  iiis  servant,  with  a  cullean  packed  into  boxes,  which  were 
fixed  to  his  saddle  like  holsters,  and  a  chaffing-dish  of  burning  char- 
eoai  swinging  fimli*  a  dbain  benaedi  his  hone*s  belljr,  and  sparkling 
in  tpite  of  the  ibid.' 

The  lain  continued  aU  nij^  and  neKt  moEBiDgwefqiiBd  it  almost 
impossible  to  move.  It  waa  neoesaaiy»  however,  to  try,  aa  onr  prarnh 
aions  irefe  likely  to  nm  ahoit;  and»aooordinj^,  we  be^  our  maidif 
amidst  a  diMnil  aeene  of  mountains,  sommiided  with  doada» 
flhioded  vaUeys,  and  btating  rain.  Our  road  lay  down  a  steep  ytmh 
and  then  down  the  channel' of  a  salt  torcent*  which  was  running  with 
gntm  Som  Though  we  began  to  load  the  cattle  at  noon,  it  was  kte 
at  m^jtk  befere  any  of  us  reached  a  reces8  between  the  torrent  and  the 
IWdkB,  <Nlly  a  mile  and  a  half  fi-om  the  place  we  had  left;  Many  of 
Cttr  people  wandered  about  all  night  in  the  rain  and  cold ;  and  all 
were  not  arrived  by  two  on  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day.  Some  of 
our  camels  died  during  the  march,  and  the  Bauriks  took  advantafre  of 
the  fonfiision  and  disorder,  to  plunder  some  of  our  baggage.  The 
rain  fell  heavily  during  the  whole  of  the  next  day. 

On  the  momint?  of  the  19th,  it  was  fair  when  the  dav  firoke,  and 
at  ;^f  ven  we  proceetied  on  onr  journey.  The  torrent  had  run  off,  and 
its  bed  was  now  an  excellent  road.  The  air  was  clear,  and  the  moun- 
tain scenery  picturesque  and  agreeable.    Ln  the  course  oi'  the  niorch 


Digitized  by  Google 


r 


"I 


IMTBODUGTXON.  ^ 

wt  had  nMMe  tliMi  onoe  lo  CMMt  a  rapid  toif«iit».ii  deep  ia  could  wij| 
befittded.  OtoitobMik«>  we  met  Moow  Shmt  who  wefimiidl^ 
hhbwIk^  fbrwwd  on  the  lGth«  and  waa  soon 

er  lebim :  hia  proviaiiNu  hed  ran  out ;  and  thefe  bad  been  a  battle 
in  faia  oanip»  and  aevend  penona  wounded.   Some  of  his  men  had 

been  carried  down  in  endeavouring  to  swim  the  torrent ;  but  thagt 
had  legpuned  the  shore,  and  no  lives  were  loiL  We  afterwards  went 
en  through  the  hills,  and  croaaed  two  cotuls  or  passes ;  froBL  the  laal 
end  steepest  of  which,  we  descended  into  Malgeen.  This  wa«.a.gte8A 
and  pleasant  valley,  about  twelve  miles  long,  and  five  broad,  surround- 
ed by  mountains,  of  which  the  most  remote  (those  on  the  north  and 
west)  were  covered  witii  snow.  The  troops,  and  part  of  the  baggage 
had  arrived  by  sunset,  when  a  report  was  brought  that  our  rear  was 
attacked.  Our  own  cavalry,  and  some  of  the  Calmuks,  were  sent 
back,  antl  arrived  in  time  to  prevent  aii^  serious  loss.  ll  was  how- 
ever too  iate  ibr  the  rest  of  the  ba^age  to  cross  the  cotul ;  and  a 
eompany  of  Sepoys  T,vas  sent  over  to  protect  them.  Next  morning 
we  were  all  assembled,  and  ejiabled  to  enjoy  a  day's  rest,  which  was 
much  required  aller  the  distresses  of  the  journey.  Our  Sepoys  and 
ibllowers  had  not  had  a  regular  meal  for  three  days,  during  which 
time  they  were  ea^KMed  to  aU  tbeindemencj  of  die  weedier.  Itmm 
aurprising  how  wdl  thejr  boore  die  ooldt  idiich  (although  there  waa  no 
finat)  waa  ao  aevwe,  diat  aome  even  of  the  European  part  of  die  mis^ 
aion  wan  glad  to  wear  a  Ibr  peiiaae  and  omaUa  and  daj,  d»- 
ling  the  nuL 

We  nuHcfaed  again  on  die  Slqt  of  Fetenaiy;  and»  after  eroaaiiig  a 
lew  rocky  paaa,  dwcended  into  the  oountry  of  the  Shaodee  Khafl» 
wimae  principal  villaga  we  paaaed  It  waa  very  pleaau^y  aitiiatod 
among  tieea»  on  die  banfca  of  the.  Toe^  a  deep  and  dear  stream,  floww 
tag  rapidly  duoiij^  a  pietoreaqne  vaU^*  the  view  up  which  was  tev-> 
nmmtJiA  g/^  no  great  distaooe  bgr  anowy  mountains.  The  roads  near 
tfaia  were  crowded  with  Afghamia»  aome  of  whom  weloomed  us,  wbikt 
all  bduKved  with  civility^  At  our  encamping  ground,  near  Uie  verji 
Itaga  Tilli^  of  J>Qdefa»  we  were  met  by  Omar  iOuum  (the  aon  of  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


40 


INTRODUCTION. 


Baagush  chief)*  with  «even  or  eight  hundred  match-lock  mmt  dress- 
ed in  blue.  Thh  place  was  in  the  plain  of  Cohaut,  whidi  is  a  circle 
of  atipat  twehre  miles  in  diameter.  The  hills  aFoand  were  varied  and 
pictuFaKjue;  and  those  above  the  town  of  Cohaut  were  ooreMd 
with  siiow^  The  plain -was  green,  and  well  watered,  and  there  wieie 
Httle  groves  up  and  down  its  face.  The  climate  was  delightful.  Snow 
never  lies  long  on  the  lower  hills  about  Cohaut,  and  had  not  fallen  in 
the  plain  for  some  years:  ihi>  fruitii  and  flowers:  of  rlimates  were 
said  to  be  prcxiuced  in  the  plain.  We  reacheii  t  oiiaut  on  tlie  next 
day.  It  was  a  neat  town,  and  hm\  a  little  fort  on  an  artificial  mound, 
which  had  been  ruined  ni  a  struggle  for  the  chiefship,  that  was  scarce- 
ly settled  when  we  were  there.  Near  the  town  runs  a  stream,  as  clear 
as  chrystal,  which  issues  from  three  fountains,  and  is  first  collected  in 
a  reservoir,  not  far  below.  It  is  hot  in  winter,  and  ( <  >ki  in  summer. 
Tlie  chief  accompanied  us  to  sec  these  springs ;  and  tlicu  left  us  to 
breakfast,  on  excellent  butter,  milk,  eggs,  and  honey,  whicli  he  had 
provided  in  great  plenty.  He  also  piesenled  me  widi  a  box  of  moo- 
meed  or  mammjt  made  at  G)|]jHit.  It  was  of  the  Idnd  called  moo* 
meea  maadenee  or  mummy  of  the  mine.  It  is  made  fimn  a  sort  of 
stone,  which  is  bofled  in  water ;  asfter  bebg  rediioed  to  powder,  an  oil 
ioats  on  the  top,  which  hardens  into  a  substance  of  the  appeaianoe 
and  consistence  df  ooaL  It  is  a  &mou8  medicine  throughout  all  the 
East,  and  is  said  to  operate  almost  miraculous  cures  of  fractures. 
Here  we  found  a  garden,  wfaidi  aflbrded  us  peat  <l#light,  thouglh  pcii- 
•haps  a  portion  of  its  charms  consisted  in  its  abounding  in  ^^gUfh 
pLmtB,  from  which  we  had  been  long  estranged  in  the  dimate  of  Ko- 
dia.  Their  beauty  was  rather  augmented  than  diminished  in  our 
eyes,  by  their  being  out  of  leaf,  and  putting  frvrth  new  buds.  The 
garden  spr^d  along  the  bank  of  the  stream  I  have  described.  It  was 
enclosed  by  a  hedge,  full  of  wild  raspberry  and  bladcberry  bushel^ 
and  contained  plum  and  peach  trees  in  full  blossom,  weeping  wilknn^ 
and  plane  trees  in  leaf,  together  with  apple  trees,  and  many  others 
that  ronld  not  he  di'^tinguished  from  having  lost  their  foliage.  There 
were  also  numerous  fine  vines,  as  thick  as  a  man's  1^  twisted  xound 


Digitized  by  GoQgle 


unsGDucnoML 

tte  trccij  M  if  they  wwe  wild.  Hie  walki  wme  oomBd.  with  green 
iod»  wliich  looked  the  moie  Kng^iiih,  becvue  Hmie  witfa^ued  giMt 
WW  mm  among  the  full,  bqA,  and  fiedi  verdure  of  the  new  year. 
There  waa  abo  cknrert  Ghid;-weed»  plantainBy  iib«gran>  dandelion^ 
coBuium  dock,  and  many  other  Eni^ish  weeda.  Weavurhweabb^ 
very  like  a  gddfindi,  and  another  of  the  aame  aiae»  remarkable  for 
the  beauty  of  its  plumage,  which  was  of  the  finest  crimscm,  exoept  on 
the  head  and  winga,  which  were  black.  Some  of  the  gentlemen 
thought  tliey  saw  and  heard  thnwhcai  and  blackbirda.  The  celdicated 
Bedee  Mishk  was  among  the  plants  of  this  garden ;  and  I  was  sur^ 
^iaed  to  find  it  waa  a  aoit  of  willow,  with  sweet  acented  yellow  flow* 
ers,  of  which  the  beet  aie  very  fond»  and  well  known  in  Britain,  by 
the  name  of  Palm. 

On  the  23d  of  February,  we  marched  from  Cohaut ;  and,  in  about 
three  miles,  came  to  the  foot  ot  a  tre  mendous  cotul.  The  road  up 
was  only  a  mile  and  a  halt  long,  aitiiough  it  wound  much ;  but  it  waa 
cxcoedin<jlv  steep,  and  often  went  over  lar^^'i^  jtiecea  of  rock,  which  it 
was  siu  jirising  that  any  animals  could  surmount.  We  went  uji  with 
Moosa  ivliHun  ;  and,  when  we  reach^  the  top,  we  sat  down  to  wait 
till  the  camels  slioukl  pass.  We  were  joined  by  the  Bungnsh  chiets, 
and  some  Doorauiiees  of  Moosa  Kliauii's  party,  and  spent  two  hours 
in  conversation.  After  this,  the  Khauns  proposed  some  luncheon, 
wad  we  assenting,  they  produced  a  napkin  with  some  cold  fowls,  and 
bread,  of  which  we  all  partook  very  Bociably,  sitting  in'  %  ctrd^  and 
eating  with  our  handa.  When  we  had  finiabed  our  lun^hm*  and 
tmoked  a  cnlleaun,  iriiich  pened  round  the  company,  we  proceeded 
on  onr  joum^.  We  then  deaoended  into  a  valky,  about  five  hnii4> 
dfed  yards  brood,  belonging  to  the  tribe  of  Khciber,  whoae  predatoty 
diancter  ia  ao  well  deacrihed  by  Mr.  Foster*.   We  aaw  numy  of 


•  To  shew  lljf  divati  entertained  of  the  XIk  i!  n^rces,  Mr.  Fo<?ter  mt>ntion!i  nn  Amicniftti, 
wbo^  after  he  had  reached  Pcftbawer  on  hu  wa^  to  Caubu),  wai>  ho  icrrUied  at  what  he  board 

O 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTBQDUCnCM 


limm  ttunliden  in  tlw  mtmeot  our  nuuidij  bot  ouf  biUBMBWtt 

:ioo  well  guanded  to  alloir  of  tlietr  attackiiig  it  We  halted  that  day 
it  Zerghoon  Khiils  "ind  it  is  remarkable  thi^  the  hilb  wefe  so  hi^ 
and  the  iwlleja  ao  deep  in  thi^  Ukardhi  that  the  Survejws  could  not 
•ee  the  «an  to  take  an  observitian  ai  noon  day. 
'  We  marched  early  next  morning ;  and,  ^er  some  fine  wem  in  the 
Valley,  we  reached  its  mouth,  when  a  -nut  range  of  aobwy  roountama 
began  to  appear,  and  soon  disclosed  a  spectacle  of  unequalled  magni- 
ficence. We  learned  from  our  gtiides  that  it  was  part  of  the  chain  of 
Hindoo  Coosli  (the  Indian  Canrnsus),  and  that,  immediately  beyond 
it,  were  Cash^^ai  ,  Riidukhshauii,  and  Tartary.  By  tliis  time  we'ha<l 
approachetl  a  little  ruined  tower  in  tlie  mouth  of  the  vallev,  nnd  dis- 
covered a  great  many'  armed  KJieibure<'s,  sitliag  on  the  hiils,  looking; 
.  wistfidly  at  the  camels  passing.  Moojia  Khaun  immediately  halted 
the  few  horse  he  had  with  him,  and  proposed  that  we  should  stay  in 
the  tower  ull  ail  our  baggage  Wim  |)ust :  thither  we  went,  and  pre- 
aeAtly' Were  joined  by  all  the  Kheiberees  in  a  body.  The  chiefs  only 
cathe  up  to  us,  and  aflkad  ibr  «  preaent}  but  Mooss Khaun  told  them 
U>=  'Come  to  our  (Samp  after  every  thing  «raa  past,  and  we  mfuld  oao» 
aider  of-  ic«  an  arrangement  they  did  not  aeem  to  approve.  It  gave 
ine  a  atSfangfe  notion  of  tlie  aystient  of  mamiiBis  in  Caiibul>  that  theie 
tUft»«ed' iobben  ahould  come  iq>  and  aak  ibr  a  preaent;  and  that 
Blooto'^iion»  hi  .hia  rich  dreaa,  and  golden  annfl»  ahoold  ait  alnoat 
nniittdfdedin  the  midat  of  their  mrtddockai  and  refuae  them.  We 
wete  iktm  stored  on  tiie  plain  of  F6alunver»  over  ivhich  we  dontinued 
to  -mudi  tin  three  in  the  aftomoon,  utei  we  encamped  at  the  vil- 
lage of  Budabeer,  six  miles  from  the  city. 

Though  I  do  not  intend  to  touch  on  my  ncgotiatioiM,  it  will  dn* 
ddate  my  interoonme  with  the  people  at  Peshawer,  to  atate  the  man- 
ner  in  which  the  mission  was  regarded  at  Court.  TTie  newa  of  its  ar- 
rival reached  the  King  while  on  his  my  from  Candahar,  and  its  ol>* 
ject  was  at  first  regarded  with  strong  prejudice  and  distrust  The 
Kinff  of  Caubul  had  alwavs  been  the  resource  of  all  the  disaffected  in 
India.   To  him  Tippoo  Sultaun,  Viaeer  Ally,  and  ail  other  Mahom- 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


INTSODUCXIOK. 

medm,  who  had  ai]tuuml  eithor  ilntb«ftor  the  ManttMs  hadlmg 
been  m  the  habit  of  eddrnming  their  ooiqikiiite;  .andf  m  later  timmh 
Holcar,  himael^  a  Maiatta»  htdmat  m  embaaay  to  aoUoift  aMiitanae 
Bffsnm  US.-  Bimjeet  fiSng^ -iSbk  Bfl)ah«  br  at  Jie  eaDs  hinuri^  .the 
JKiii^  of  the  Fmijaiib;  toahr  a  great  ahwai  at  the  opannig^oC  a  iomiiiiii^ 
ntca^cm  between  two  powevv  whom  he  loolced  oii  aa  liiB  natmal  eBM» 
Msest  and  did  all  Jie  ocNddtoeonvineeihftCQiiitof  Gaubulof  Ae 
dangerous  nature  of  our  designs.  The'  Haokima  o£  Leia»  4if .  Ifiouk 
taon,  and  of  Sind^  (eaah'imagiiiiiig  that  the  embassy  coidd  have  ne 
other  object  but  to  procure  the  eaorion  of  his  partimdar  {nodnce), 
did  what  they  could  to  tbwait  its  nieoeis^  'and,  at  the  saoie'tmie*  the 
Dooraunee  Lords  were  averse  tA  an  alliance,  which  might  strengdian 
the  King,  to  the  detriment  of  the  aristocracy  ;  and  the  King  himadtf 
thought  it  very  natural  that  we  should  profit  by  the  internal  disseii- 
tious  of  a  neighbouring  kin^Tflom,  and  endeavour  to  annex  if  fo  out 
ein])ire.  The  exaggeratetl  reports  he  received  of  the  splendour  ot  the 
enihfjss\ ,  and  of  the  sumptuous  presents  bv  which  it  was  accompanit^ 
seetu  more  than  any  thing  to  have  determm€Hi  the  King  to  admit  the 
mission,  an«l  to  «?ive  it  an  honourable  reception.  When  the  nature  ot" 
the  embassy  r;iine  known,  tiie  King,  without  laying  aside  his  dis- 
trust, appears  to  have  entertained  a  hope  that  he  might  derive  greater 
advantage  from  it  tliaii  he  hud  at  I'lvsi  adverted  to ;  and,  it  then  be- 
came an  object  with  each  of  the  ministers  to  obtain  the  conduct  of 
the  negotiations.  ■  '        ••  ...     .  ; . 

There  were  two  puitke  faithe-Goort^  one  headed'bjr  Aktatn  KfaauBt 
n  great  Doofaunee-  lioid»  the  aetoal  piitne  minister ;  -and  the  btherp 
oomposed  of  the  Persian  mtmstevsy  wlks'bebig  shont-the  ISing's  per- 
•  son,  and  entirely  dependant  oto  his  fikvonr*  possessed  a  secret-inflD- 
ence^  wfcKb.  thej  i^ben  employed  in  of^Kieitaon  to  Akram'Ehann)  • 
the  duef  of  these  warMeer  Abool  Hassan  ^Khaun.  This  'last  pait^ 
obtiuned  the  earliest'  inlbrmation  about  the  'eiBbassy,  and  nanagid  to  ^ 
leetire  the  MehouHmdaittree ;  bat  it  was  still  undetermined  who  #oidd 
be  entrusted  with  the  negotiatlcm*  The  Persians  took  pains  to' ocni- 
viiHSe  me  that  the  King  was  Jealous  of  AJuram  Khaun»'  and  the  graat 

6  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


44  IKTBODUCnON. 

DoQMiiiees,  wdwkhed  to  treat  with  xm  thxoagli  Us  penonil'nd 
confidentul  i^ents ;  and  Akram  sent  me  a  meMsge  hj  an  adherent 
of  hit  imni,  to  say  that  he  wished  me  well,  and  deured  to  be  employ- 
ed in  my  negotiatioiu»  but  that  if  I  left  him  out,  I  must  not  complain 
if  he  did  all  in  his  power  to  cross  me.  From  that  time  his  oondulBt 
was  uniformly  and  zealously  friendly,  nor  dad  he  expect  that  anj  ie> 
serve  should  be  maintained  with  the  opposite  party,  a  circumstanoe 
in  his  character  that  prevented  much  embarrassment.  He  had  how- 
ever marched  for  Cashmcer  when  1  arrived,  and  to  this  I  attribute 
many  :i1t(Vcntions  to  nhich  I  was  at  first  exposed. 

On  the  nirirniijg  ot  the  25th,  after  some  cnnfnsion  nhont  the  mode 
of  our  rece]>li()ii,  we  made  our  entry  into  iVsliawer.  Uiere  was  a 
great  crowd  all  the  wav.  The  banks  on  each  side  of  the  road  were 
covered  with  people,  and  inaiiy  ci imbed  up  trees  to  see  us  pass.  The 
crowd  increased  as  we  approached  the  city,  but  we  were  })ut  to  no  in- 
convenience by  it,  as  Uie  Kiug's  horse,  tliat  liad  come  out  to  meet  us, 
charged  the  mob  vigorously,  and  used  their  whips  without  the  least 
compuiHsli<m.  One  man  attracted  patticidar  notice  t  he  wore  a  hi^ 
red  ci^  of  a  conical  ahape,  with  aome  fidda  of  cloth  round  the  bot- 
tom, and  a  white  plume  j  he  had  a  short  Jacket  of  akin.  Mack  panta- 
loona,  and  Ivown  boota :  he  waa  an  uncommonly  fine  figure,  tall, 
and  thin,  with  awdling  muades,  a  h^'  nos^'  and  an  animated  coun- 
teoaaioe:  he  was  mounted  <m  a  vei^  fine  grey  horae^  and  rode  with 
kmg  sthvups,  and  very  well  He  carried  a  long  spear,  without  a 
head,  with  which  he  cbai^ged  the  mob  at  speed,  shouting.with  a  loud 
and  deep  voice.  He  not  only  dispersed  die  mob,  but  rode  at  grave 
people  aitting  on  terraoea  with  the  greatest  fury,  and  kept  all  clear 
wherever  he  went.  His  name  wa6  Russool  Dewauneh,  or  Ruaaool  the 
Mad.  He  was  well  known  for  a  good  and  brave  soldier }  but  an  iiw 
regular  and  unsettled  person.  He  aiierwards  was  in  great  favour  with 
most  of  the  mission  ;  and  was  equipped  in  an  English  helmet,  and 
cavalry  uniform,  which  well  hccamc  liiin.  By  the  time  we  had  entered 
the  town,  the  roads  were  so  narrow  that  our  progress  became  very 
alow,  and  we  had  time  to  hear  the  remarks  of  the  spectators,  which 


Digitized  by  Google 


nmaaacnoiiu  ^ 

*i#ere  expremn  ei  wonder  at  the  prooflwaii,  and  of  good  will  towards 
us }  but  the  crowd  and  bustle  was  too  great  to  adnut  of  any  ^"t'TYf 

observations.  At  length  we  reached  the  house  prepared  for  us,  and 
were  usliercd  into  an  apartment,  spread  with  carpets  and  felts  for  sit- 
ting on.  Here  we  were  seated  on  the  f^round  in  the  Persian  manner, 
and  trays  ot  swe<  f meats  were  plticed  betbre  us.  They  ronsisted  of 
sugaretl  almonds,  ami  there  was  a  loal  of  '^nfjar  for  making  sherbet  in 
the  midst  of  tiidi  tray.  iSoon  atter,  our  conductora  obi>erved  tfayq^  we 
required  rest,  and  withdrew. 

We  luitl  now  time  to  examine  our  lodging,  which  liad  been  built 
by  the  King's.  Aubtiaur  liaiishee  (chief  butler),  not  very  long  belbie  he 
went  into  rebellion.  It  was  large,  and  though  quite  unfinished,  it 
was  a  muich  loote  (SawmaaA  house  than  could  have  been  expected, 
•i  a  tiMiii  wlilflb  ia  not  the  fiaied  reridence  of  the  couft»  and  whae 
many-  of  the  prindpel  nobility  were  finroedt  during  their  stay,  to  put 

'  up  with  very  mean  dwellings.  Die  whole  of  our  premiaea  conaiated 
of'a  flqoai%  endoaed  by  a  rampart  of  earth,  m  unbumed  bridk,  within 
which  waa  another  aquaie^  endoaed  by  high  waUa.  The  space  be- 
tween the  waUa'andthe  iampart  waa idivided  into  manyoourta,  in 
one  of  whiah  waa  e  little  gaRlen»  where  there  were  amall  treea*  -  foae 
bushes,  stock  gilliflowers,  and  other  flowers.  Ihe  inner  square-  waa 
divided  hy  a  high  wall  into  two  courts,  and  at  one  end  of  each  was  e 
boose,  containing  two  large  lu^jis  c^the  whole  he^it  of  the  buUding: 

'  on  each  side  of  the  halls  were  many  smaller  rooms  in  two  stories, 
some  of  which  looked  into  the  halls.  One  of  the  courts  contained  no 
other  building  ;  but  the  three  remaining  sides  of  the  other  court  were 
occupied  by  apartments.  All  the  windows  in  this  last  court  were 
furnished  with  sashes  of  open  wootl  work,  which,  while  they  admitted 
the  air  and  light,  prevented  the  room  from  being  seen  into  from 
without  ;  and  there  were  fire-pliicen  in  several  of  the  rooms  in  both 
courts.  VV'hat  struck  us  most,  was  the  cellars  mtended  for  a  retreat 
from  the  heats  of  summer.  There  was  one  under  each  house:  one 
was  only  a  spacious  and  haadsoiiio  hall  i>l  burnetl  brick  and  mortar  j 
but  tiie  other  was  exactly  of  the  same  plan  aud  dimensions  as  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


46 


INTRODircriON. 


home  tiadfr  wilh  the  same  halls  and  the  same  tputttenls  in  two 
il6rie8>  as  above  ground.  The  whole  of  lihis  subtetfineoiii  imuirioii 
was  lighted  by  broad  but  low  window*  near  the  top.  Hie  one  I  ain 
fl|»eaking  of,  was  unfinished;  but  when  complete,  the  cellars  are 
painted  and  fumiKhed  in  the  same  manner  as  the  rooms  above,  and 
have  generally  a  fountain  in  the  middle  of  the  hall.  These  apart- 
ments are  called  Zeerzemeenes  and  Tehkhaunelis.  Even  the  poor  at 
Peshawer  have  them  under  their  houses,  but  they  are  not  refjuired  in 
the  temperate  climates  further  west.  I  al\yays  sat  in  mine  in  the  hot 
weather,  and  found  it  equally  agreeable  and  whol^ome. 

'  On  the  day  of  our  arrival,  our  dinner  was  coniposed  of  the  dishes 
sent  us  by  the  King,  which  we  found  excellent.  Afterwards  we  had 
always  our  English  meals ;  but  the  King  coutinue<l  to  send  breakiast, 
liuicheon,  and  dinner  for  ourselves,  with  provisions  f(«  two  tbousftiid 
perijon.s  (a  numba'  eatoeeding  that  of  the  anbassy),  and  two  hniidrad 
liorsea»'  beaMles  el^hanta,  ftc  nor  waa  it4ril]iout  great- difficuitf  th«t 
I'pe^Milecl^ii  His  Majesty,  ait  the  6»d  of  a  moiith»  to  dupenae  with 
Uib  eaqpcnaive  proof  of  his  hospitality. 

■  I  receiyed  visits  after  mj  snbrtl  from  many  persons  of  iank»  ivlio 
GBitte  on.  the  King's  part  or  tlieir  own.  I  had  mudi  intensomse  with 
Sheer  Mahomed  Kinun,  the  brother  of  Aknm  Khann,  and  Meef^ 
•anee  Sbaiiht  the  VHwmm  of  the^sameministerr  who  had  both  heia 
left  on  purpose  to  ttioawer  the  mission ;  I  also  saw  a  good  deal  of 
Mehmanndaur,  Meer  Abool  Hussun  Khaun,  a  Persian,  whose  famUy 
had' long  been  settled  in  Caubul,  and  who  had  himself  risen  from  the 
hnmhle  rank  of  a  private  soldier  (report  said  even  from  that  of  a 
taylor),  to  be  Sundookdaur  Bauahee  (keeper  of  the  wardrobe),  Kooler 
Aghassee  (commander  of  the  guards),  and  Governor  of  Peshawer. 
He  hatl  ii  very  fair  complexion,  and  red  cheeks,  but  his  person  was 
small,  his  voice  feeble,  and  his  manner  timid,  so  that  our  first  im- 
pression of  him  wa-s  unfm oui  able  :  he,  nevertheless,  turned  out  to  be 
one  of  tlie  best  of  his  nation,  anil  to  have  a  degree  of  simplicity 
about  him,  seldom  met  with  in  a  Persian. 


Digitized  by  GoQgle 


IKTHUDUCTlOli;  47 

tbe  fint  wmk  iBmsat  mrMk  part  wUhmt  m  kmng  iakM(dMi 
the  taag,  m  oMMqnaBOtt  of m diipnte  1110111; tlie ibnis <£»iint'ff&' 
wntatloo.  The  comnM:  ftnns  df  the  coiBlh*'  tiiough  ^tlie  sihiiMen 
alleged  that  they  had  btm  oonfonned  to  by  jmbaitidan  from  PeMii^ 
•nd  U^iiek  Tartary,  and  er«n  by  the  brother  of  the  ktter  Monaicht 
appeared  to  us  a  little  unseasonable.  The  innbassador  to  be  intro* 
duced,  .k  bdougfat  iodo  a  coBrt  by  two  officers,  who  bold  -him  firmly 
faj  the  armiB.  On  coming  in  si^t  of  the  King,  who  appears  at  a  fai^ 
window,  the  ambassador  is  made  to  run  forward  for  a  certain  distance, 
when  he  stops  for  a  moment,  and  pravs  for  the  King.  He  is  then 
made  to  run  forward  again,  and  pravs  once  more  ;  nnd,  ailer  another 
run,  the  King  calls  out  "  Khellut."  (a  (ircjss,)  which  is  followed  by  the 
the  Turkish  word  "  Getsheen,"  (begone,)  irom  an  officer  ot  state, 
and  tht  untortunntp  ambas^iador  is  made  to  run  out  of  the  court,  and 
sees  no  more  ot  the  King,  unleia  he  is  summoned  to  a  private  audi- 
ence ill  His  Majesty's  closet. 

Every  thing,  hovve\  er,  wa.s  ui  the  end  adjusted,  and,  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  5th  of  JVlarch,  we  set  out  in  procession  for  the  palace. 
Wepassed  for  about  three  quarters  of  a  mUe  through  the  streets, 
Kfaicfa  as  well  aa  the  windows  «kd  saoft  cf  HbB  hoMMt,  im^  cMnvded 
nsth  spectetots.  At  -length  we.mdied  an-^pan  ipaee  under  llie 
pakuse^  or  cartfe»  in  wlucii  the  king  xendeB:  diia  apen  wia  filled  ivith 
people,  wlio  eonrerad  the  tide  of  the  hill  on  «4ndi  iSbit  caade  standi* 
like  the-  anriifwi*  at  a  thcatra.  When  we  niached  the  gate,  over 
niiich  tfaeKing^a  band  was  pitting,  w»  we  raqneiled  to  teeve  the 
greater  part  of  our  attendenta  behind,  end-bete  oar  dilutta  and  trum- 
pets ivere  leqnind  to  oeaae  gpkyii^  Some  time  aftat^  we  entered 
tlua  gitfearay,  we  diamounted,  and,  after  walking  abont  one  hundred 
jBids,  we  Mcended  a  flight  of  steps,  and  entered  a  long  narrow  room, 
where  about  one  hundred  and  fifiy  persons  were  seated  in  greet 
ecder  akkig  die.  walla.  This  was  caUed  the  Kidiik  Khauneh,  or 
guard-roooa.  ite.had  never  been  handsome,  and  was  now  out  of  re- 
pair. It  was  spread  with  carpets  and  felts.  We  were  led  straight  up 
to  the  head  of  the  room,  wheie  eevend  men,  richly  dresfled,  rote  aa 


48  INTRODUCTION. 

|pe  i^proached,  and  we  were  received  by  a  fair  and  poitly  personage^ 
whom  I  afterwards  understood  to  be  the  King's  Iinaaiiiy  and  the  head 

of  the  religious  eatabliahment  He  bowed  as  T  rfime  up,  took  my 
hands  between  his,  and  placed'  me  by  him,  aller  which  he  went 
through  the  usual  forms  of  welcome  and  inquiries.  Opposite  to  me 
were  many  of  the  chief  lords  of  tlie  ccnii  t.  some  of  whom  had  their 
caps  ornamented  with  jewels,  and  suruiouutei)  hv  plumes :  lower 
down  were  msny  pei\soii>,  some  like  Persianis  and  some  like  Doorau- 
U^»;  aud  st  iil  lower,  were  some  of  the  chiefs  of  the  hill  tribes  near 
Peshawer ;  at  the  bottom  were  several  persons  in  the  strange  fancifiil 
caps  whu  ii  are  employed  to  distinguish  the  officera  of  the  household. 
They  are  generally  black  and  red,  but  their  varicU  and  their  whimsi- 
cal shapes  baffle  all  description :  little  taste  is  displayed  in  them,  and 
tfa«  efl^  IB  not  good. 

ThelflUHim  was  »  ruddy,  good^bumoaied  jboking  mnif  abdut  fiwrty^ 
dreseed  in  a  abawl  mantle^  lined  with  fur,  and  in  all  respects  like  • 
layman,  Ha»  however,  soon  cleaced  up  bis  diaractarf  by  beginning- 
a  diapQurse  on  leligion.  He  inqiuied  leapectiag  tlie  difbrent  secli 
aa^ong  Chiistia&a,  and  eKpUdned  dioae  of  bis  own  feligion.  A  good 
looking  and  wdl  dressed  man,  wbo  aat  on  die  opposite  aide  of  the 
foom,  at  some  distance,  then  inquired  into  the  state  of  kaming  in 
Pngland,  the  number  of  umversities,  and  the  sciences  taug|it  at  those 
seminaries;  when  these <  questifNis  were  answered,  the  same  person 
desired  an  explanation  of  our  astronomical  system ;  but  at  tliis  time, 
tlie  Chaous  Baushee  entered,  and  called  out  some  words,  on  which  all 
present,  except  Mecr  Abool  Hussun,  and  his  son,  rose  and  followed 
him.  We  had  before  this,  more  than  once,  heard  a  noise  like  a 
charge  of  cavalry,  vvhich  was  occasioned  by  tlie  iron  heeled  boots  of 
the  guards  and  otlu'rs,  who  were  introduced  by  divisions  to  salute  the 
King,  and  wlio  retired  at  a  run,  alter  the  ceremony  was  over. 
■  We  were  now  lefl  for  some  time  in  the  Kishik  Kliaum  li,  dm  11114 
vvhich  Meer  Abool  Hussun  converseil  with  us,  and  discovered  a  luoat 
extraordinary  ignorance  of  every  thing  concerning  us.    He  had  at 

^st  thou^t  Uiat  Calcutta  was  in  England,  and  now  discovered  his 

I 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION.  49 

bdief  that  the  gendemen  of  the  embtMy  im  bom  in  lodb  tfioiii^ 
of  En^idi-pannts.  At  length  the  Chaoiis  Bauahee  cmme  to  lis :  he 
hod  been  lobburing  hoid  at  o  liat  of  our  nuam,  and  gare  it  up  with 

the  fqipearanGe  of  estipetne  vexation*  in'  deqiair  of  maatering  audk  a 
collection  of  stm^  words.  He  now  ezpkined  the  ceremoniea  to 
be  obaerved,  in  a  Tery  ooniteoua  manner,  and  then  entreated  us 
aeFOvaUy  to  whisper  our  names  tohim»  when  he  should  touch  ua» 
He  then  oondacted  us  up  a  sloping  passage,  and  through  a  gate,  after 
which  we  passed  behind  a  sort  ot"  screen,  and  suddenly  issued  into  a 
hrrre  court,  at  the  upper  end  of  which  we  ww  the  King  in  an  elevated 
building. 

The  court  was  oblong,  and  liaci  high  walls,  painted  witli  the  figures 
of  cyprpssps.  In  the  middle  was  a  pond  fuid  fountains.  The  walls 
on  each  side  were  lined  with  the  King's  guards  three  deep,  and  at 
various  places  in  the  court,  stood  the  officers  of  state,  at  difterent  dis- 
tances  tVom  the  Kin^,  iiccoi  ding  to  their  degree.  At  the  end  of  the 
court  was  a  high  buiidmg,  llie  lower  story  of  whicli  was  a  solid  v.  all, 
ornamented  with  ^se  arches,  but  without  doors  or  windows  ;  ovei 
this  mm  anothw  story,  the  roof  of  which  was  supported^  by  pillars 
and  Moorish  ardies,  highly  ornamented. '  In  the  eentve  ardi  sat  the 
Kin^  on  a  rBty  large  thnme  of  goAd  or  gilding.  His  iqppearanoe'waa 
magnifioent  and  rojral :  his  crown  and  all  his  drew  were  one  Uace  of 
jewiia.  He  was  denoted  above  the  heada  of  the  eunndia  who  snr* 
nmnded  his  throne,  and  who  were  the  onlj  persons  in  the  krge  hafl 
where  he  sat :  all  waa  silant  snd  motioniesB.  On  oondng  in  aiglit  of 
the  King*  we  all  pulled  off  our  hats,  and  made  alow  bowt  we  then 
held  up  our  hands  towards  heaven,  as  if  praying  for  the  King,  and 
afterwarda  advanced  to  the  fimntatn,  where  the  Chaous  Banshee  re-^ 
peated  our  names,  without  any  tide  or  addition  of  respect,  ending 
"  They  have  come  from  Eiux>pe  as  ambassadors  to  Your  Mqeslrjr. 
"  May  your  misfortunes  lie  turned  upon  meV*  The  King  answered 


*  Some  fowo  of  prayer  lifa  thh  ii  ahfayi  mad  on  addiwring  the  King^  ItcoR«|Mnda  • 
tothe  **Okii^Hvefacva>,'*€fdieaticM»tBeniBiii. 

H 


Digitized  by  Google 


50 


INTRODl  LTION. 


ilk  a  loud  and  Honorous  voioe»  They  are  welomie;"  on  whidi  we 
pmyed  tor  him  again,  and  repeated  the  ceremony  enoe  niore»  when 
lie  ordered  as  dresses  of  hofiour.  After  this^  some  officer  of  the 
ODiirt  called  oat  something  in  Turkish,  on  which  a  division  of  the 
floldien-on  each  side  filed  off,  and  ran  out  of  the  court,  with  the 
UFnml  noise  of  their  boots  on  the  pavement,  accomjianied  by  the 
(.lashinjT  of  their  armour.  The  call  was  twice  repeated,  and  at  each 
call  a  division  of  troops  ran  oft  :  at  the  foiirtli,  the  Khauns  ran  off" 
aJso.  with  the  exception  of  a  certain  number,  wlio  were  now  ordered 
to  come  tbrward.  The  King,  in  the  mean  time,  rose  majesticnily  from 
liisihrone,  descended  the  steps,  leaning  on  two  eimuchs,  and  witli- 
drew  trom  our  sight.  ITie  Khauns  who  were  .suuuuoned,  ran  on  as 
usual,  while  we  walked  on  to  the  toot  of  a  slair-case,  covered  witli  a 
very  rich  carpet :  we  paused  here  till  the  Khauns  had  run  up,  and 
ipere  amngiBd }  after  whidi  we  ascended,  and  entered  the  haU,  vHheie 
the  King  was  now  seatedon  a  low  throne  opposite  the  door.  We 
stood  in  a  line,  wliHe  the  King  of  Gnibul  asked  after  the  health  of 
His.Majesty  and  the  Govemdr  General,  inquired, into  the  length  of 
our  joumej,  and  opieaaed  hia  wiah  that  the  firiendaiiip  betwixt  his 
nation  alid  oura  might  be  increaaad ;  to  all  which  I  made  veiy  brief 
regies.  The  gentlemen  of  the  embaasy  now  retired,  leading  me  and 
'  Me^  ftracheji  who  were  desired  to  seat  ourselves  near  His 
Mqeatgr.  The  Imaum  and  the  Moonshee  Bamhee  (or  head  secretary), 
stood  near  m,  and  the  other  Khaima  stood  along  one  side  of  the  hall. 
The  Governor  General's  Persian  letter-  was  now  opened  and  r^ul 
with  striking  distinctness  and  el^ance,  by  the  Moonshee  Baushee, 
and  the  King  made  a  suitable  answer,  declaring  his  iriendship  for  the 
English  nation,  his  desire  of  an  intimate  alliance,  and  his  readiness  to 
pay  the  utmost  atte?ition  to  any  connnunication  with  which  1  might 
be  charged.  At  u  r  i  had  replied,  PI  is  Majesty  changeil  the  subject  to 
inquiries  respecting  our  journey,  and  questions  about  our  native  coun- 
try. When  he  understood  that  the  climate  and  productions  of  Eng- 
land greatly  resembled  those  of  Caubul,  he  said  the  two  kingdoms 
were  made  by  nature  to  be  united,  and  renewed  his  professions  ol' 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTEODUCTION.  51 

friendihip.-  I  thai  inqniied  whether  It  was  Hb  Majest/s  pleaaute  to 
enter  .oD  businen  it  that  time?  To  which  he  replied,  that  I  nt^^ 
consult  mj  own  .oonreniettoe  letpecting  the  time^  and  might .  oom** 
mwiieate  with  hia  miniflterty  or  with  himself*  as  I  diose.  I  that 
eaq^ained  the  olQeots'of  my  mission  at  length;  to  which  His  Mtyes^ 
made  aTery  fiieodly  and  judidofiia  lepfyf  and  soon  after  I  Withdrew. 
The  King  of  Canbid  was  a  handsome  man^  ahoat  thirty  yeati  of  age^ 
of  aniolive  oontplexion,  with  a  thick  black  beard.  The  eiqpreflsion  of 
his  countenance  was  dignified  and  pleasing :  his  voice  deu,  and  his 
address  prhioely.  We  thought  at  first  that  he  bad  on  armour  of 
jewda,  hnlv  on  dose  infection,  we  found  this  to  be  a  mit^ake,  and 
his  real  di^  to  consist  of  a  green  tunic,  with  large  flowers  in  gold, 
and  precious  stones,  over  which  were  a  large  breast-plate  of  diamonds, 
shapod  Tike  t\ro  flattened  flenr  de  lis,  an  ornament  of  the  same  kind 
on  e:t(  li  ihiuli,  lai  Lre  emerald  bracelets  on  rlie  arms  (above  the  elbow), 
jiTid  iiumy  otliei  jewels  in  ditierent  places.  In  one  of  tiie  liracelets 
was  the  Cohi  Noor,  known  to  be  one  of  the  largest  diamonds  in  the 
world  *.  There  were  also  some  strinjjs  of  verv  large  pearls,  put  on 
like  cross  belts,  ljuL  kM>se.  The  crou  u  was  about  nine  inches  high, 
not  ornamented  with  jewels  as  European  crowns  are,  but  to  appear- 
ance entirely  formed  of  those  precious  materials.  It  s^med  to  be 
radiated  like  andent  cMsms*  and  beihind  the  rays  appeared  pei^  of 
purple  velvet :  aome  smaE  brandieB  with  pendanta,  seemed  to  project 
fiom  Uie  craam  $  but  the  whole  was  so  oomplicatedt  and  so  dasaling, 
that  it  waa  diffiodt  to  understand,  mA  impossible  to  descnboi  The 
throne  waa  covered  with  a  doth  adorned  with  pearls,  on  whidi  lay  a 
aword  and  a  small  mace,  set  with  jewels.  The  room  was  open  all 
romid.  Ihe  centre  was  sii|»ported  by  Ibur  faigfi  pillars,  in  the  midst 
of  which  was  a  marble  fi>imtain*  Hie  floor  was  covered  with  the 
richest  carpets,  and  round  the  edges  were  slips  of  silk,  embroidered 
with  gold,  for  the  Kliaans  to  stand  on.   The  view  from  the  hall  waa 


*  8e»  •  pnnt  of  it  in  Tnvernier's  Tlravels.  « 
H  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


52 


INTRODUCTIOK. 


beauti&L  Immediately  below  was  an  extensive  jrarrlen,  full  of 
cypresses  and  other  trees,  and  beyond  was  a  plain  of  the  richest  ver- 
dure :  here  and  there  were  pieces  of  wntcr  and  shinino;  streams  ;  and 
the  whole  was  bounded  by  mountains,  some  dark,  and  others  covered 
with  snow.  When  i  letl  the  King,  I  was  recondm  (lmI  to  the  Kishik 
Khaiineh,  where  all  the  gentlemen  of  the  nnssion  receivetl  rich 
dresses  of  honour.  In  the  above  description,  I  have  chiefly  confined 
myself  to  what  ^vas  splendid  in  the  ceremony.  I  must  however  men- 
tion, before  1  conclude,  that,  although  some  things  (tlie  a|>peuiance 
of  the  King  in  particular)  exceeded  my  expectations,  othei^  fell  far 
abort  of  tbem,  and  all  bote  lees  the  appearance  of  a  state  in  pK»- 
perity»  Uian  of  a  splendid  monarchj  in  decay.  *' 
.  Such  is  the  pnbUc  ceremofiial  of  the  Court  of  CmbuL  I  had  afters 
wards  an  opportunity  of  aemag  the  forms  observed  by  the  King  in 
more  fimiliar  'interoourse.  Hu  Majesty  had  eipressed  a  desire  to  see 
Mr.  Stiacbey  and  me  in  private^  in  an  ifwrtment,  bdongiI^^  to  flie 
Sen^io ;  and,  as  this  was  not  a  place  to  which  strangers  were  usuaUy 
admitted,  we  were  requested  to  come  slightly  attended,  and  in  the 
.night.  Accordingly  we  were  conducted  by  the  son  of  our  Mehmaun- 
dsur»  to  the  side  of  the  Balla  Hissaur,  opposite  to  that  where  our  pub- 
lic reception  took  place.  When  we  reached  the  foot  of  the  hill,  we 
left  the  few  attendants  that  hnd  accompanied  us,  and  clambered  up 
witli  some  difficulty  to  a  narrow  Hitjht  of  steps,  which  our  conductor 
could  scarcely  find  in  tlie  extr(  nir  diirkness  of  tlu-  [liiiht.  At  the 
bead  of  these  steps,  a  small  door  opened  into  tlie  castle  j  and  we  found 


*  Our  pretenU  for  the  King  were  carried  into  the  palace  vdule  we  vrete  in  the  KiAik 
Kbaimeh.  Nothing  could  exceed  the  meanness  and  rapacity  of  dw  officers  who  received 
charge  of  thctn.  Tliey  kept  the  camels  on  which  some  of  them  were  sent,  iitul  even  seized 
four  riding  camels,  which  had  entered  the  palace  by  mistake.  They  »uripped  tlie  elejduuU- 
driven  of  tlMirUviei7$  and,  gmv^  inaktad,  tlut  two  E^^[|Bdi  aernnti,  wIm  were  aant'lo 
put  up  the  lu8tre«,  were  j>:'-rt  of  tli  -  ]iri-r nt  Of  all  the  presents  mndc  to  him,  the  King  wa« 
DMMl  pkaied  with  a  pair  uf  magaiiicent  pii»tob  (which  bad  been  made  &r  the  Grand  Sig- 
iiiorXwdwidianoiyuL  Hehadtaken  luiticeof  oar  ailkatoddnga;  andtent  aineaaagc, 
dtdi^dMt  MMM  in%htbe  ghmto  him ;  and  nidi  UmtalaQiiewwiDiMlipleMed. 

t 


Digitizeo  by 


IKTRODUCTION. 


58 


ftfuid  of  Indians,  droMod  like  Sepoya»  a        which  we  ne- 

ter  saw  again.  We  were  then  oonducted  in  silenee  thzoog^  various 
courts,  filled  with  giuods,  and  up  sevraral  flights  of  steps  scarcely  li^il> 
ed,  till  we  csme  to  a  small  lobby  ahnost  dark,  at  tbe  .foot  of  a  long 
and  narrow  stahrcase.  Here  we  finmd  a  £ew  penmis»  Mnong  whan 
waa  Meer  Abool  Hvstmi  Khaun,  some  sitting*  and  some  atandingb 
like  servants  in  their  master's  lobby.  After  some  time,  a  man,  very 
richly  ilressed,  came  to  summon  us  to  the  Kin^.  We  ascended  the 
narrow  stair-case,  entered  a  small  room,  neatly  painted,  and  spread 
with  a  very  fine  silken  caqiet,  and  went  on  through  several  rooms  of"  the 
same  kind,  and  through  sworal  passa«;e8.  The  doors  ot'  liII  wore  closed 
by  curtains  of  embrmdered  silk  or  brocade.  All  the  rooms  \vi k  batiiy 
lightetl,  and  all  were  empty  but  one,  where  the  King's  caileaunchee 
sat  in  a  niche  in  the  wall.  At  lengtli,  on  raising  a  curtain,  we  dis- 
covered a  room  well  liL^hteil  up,  where  the  King  was  seated.  It  was 
a  small  but  verv  neat  and  conilbrtable  apartment,  with  a  ree^s  or  bow 
window,  a  few  inches  liigher  than  the  rest  of  the  room,  from  which  it 
was  divided  by  two  or  three  painted  pillars.  The  Kiiig  sat  back  ia 
the  middle  of  the  recess,  and  a  eunvdi  stood  in  each  of  its  six  comers 
with  his  hands  croasod  befiwe  Um.  We  sat  in  the  lower  pait  of  tbe 
roonif  dose  to  tiie  pillars.  Hie  Imaum  s^ood  by  us,  and  Aleer  Abool 
'Hussmit  widi  three  other  persons,  stood  beliind  us  against  ihe  wiilL 
Hie  Kjng  wore  a  mantle  of  shawl,  embroidered  with  gold,  wludi  had 
a  very  handsome  border  wrou|^  with  jewcila.  His  crown  -  waa  qoite 
different  from  that  we  first  saw :  it  was  ahi^  red  cap,  round  the  bot- 
tom of  which  was  a  broad  border  of  jeweb,  fixed  on  black  velvet* 
with  a  magnificent  oraamait  in  firont;  fiom  this  border  rose  two  nar* 
warn  aidies  of  gold  and  jewds,  which  crossed  each.other,  like  Ihoseqf 
an  ^nopean  oown.  The  whole  had  a  fine  elfecL  On  entering,  we 
made  a  bow,  and  sat  down.  The  Kix^  welcomed  us ;  and  said  he 
had  sent  for  us  that  we  might  converse  without  reserve.  He  after- 
wards expressed  his  hope  that  we  did  not  find  our  residence  at  Be^ 
faawer  unpleasant,  and  his  regret  that  he  was  not  at  Caubul  when  we 
arrived.   Uesaid  something  in  fivronr  of  that  country*  which  was  ta^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


54 


INTRODUCTION. 


koi'Up  by  the  LiiAum,  who  enlarged  on  its  beauties,  and  then  eniime- 
rated  every  province  in  His  Majesty's  extended  domini<)ina»  pratnng 
arid  magnifying  each,  but  giving  Caubul  the  preference  over  them  alL 
Hie  King  smiled  at  the  InvHun^s  harangue,  and  said  it  shewed  hit 
potiaHty  for  his  native  country.  He  ^en  said  lie  hoped  we  should 
see  Guibul  and  all  his  terntoiies»  which  were  now  to  be  considered  as 
oar  owni  He  then  made  some  enquiries  respecting  the  places  I  liad 
fleen ;  after  which,  he  told  Mr.  Strachey,  he  understood  he  had  been 
in  Persia,  and  asked  him  some  questions  respecting  that  country. 
Daring  this  conversation,  n  eiiinirh  brouglit  in  I  lis  Majesty's  cuUeaun. 
T  nvvev  saw  uny  thing  more  nui^rnilicent :  it  was  of  p-oM,  cnainclled, 
and  richly  set  wit li  jewels.  Tht-  jmrt  where  the  tobacco  wus  placed, 
was  in  the  sliujjc  of" a  peacock,  about  the  size  ot  a  pigcHjt),  with  plum- 
age of  jewels  and  enamel.  It  was  late  at  night  when  tlic  Jniaunigave 
us  a  hint  to  withdraw.  We  were  let  out  as  we  came  in ;  and  return- 
ed through  the  town,  winch  wai*  now  quiet  and  silent.  This  inter- 
view with  the  Shauh,  made  a  very  lavoiuabk  impression  on  us.  It 
will  scared}  be  believed  of  an  Katitera  monarch,  how  much  he  luid 
the  manners  of  a  gentlenuuii  or  how  well  he  preserved  his  digiiily, 
while  he  seemed  only  anxious  to  pleaae. 

Tin  oar  presentation  to'  the  King  was  Gver»  none  of  the  gentlemen 
of  the  miBsion  went  bat,  except  once  to  an  entertainment  $  but  after 
that  time  we  generally  rode  dbout  the  ooantiy  far  tome  horn  in 
the  mocningi  and  evenings ;  and,  as  we  abo  went  to  different  parts  of 
the  town  to  wait  on  the  great  men  who  had  visited  me»  we  soon  be- 
came  well  acquainted  with  F^shawer  and  its  environs.  . 

The  plain»  in  ^diich  the  city  is  situated*  is  nearly  drcnUuv  and  about 
thirty-five  miles  in  diameter*  Except  for  a  small  space  on  the  Eastt 
it  is  suiTounded  widi  mountains,  of  which  the  lai^  of  the  Indian 
Qsucasns  on  the  north,  and  the  Peak  of  8u£bidooh  on  thesputb^esti' 
are  the  most  conspicuous.  The  northern  part  is  divided  by  three 
branches  of  the  Canbnl  riA  er,  wliich  unite  before  they  leave  the  plain* 
It  -is  also  watered  by  the  rivulets  of  Barra  and  Budinib  which  flow 
from  the  mountains  to  the  river  of  Caubul. 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTKODUCnON.  55 

•  '  ■      ,  ♦ 

IVIitt  «e  entond  PadiiMvr  in  Muclit  theopper  pa^ 
timt  flraund  weie  oofeied  wkh  maofWt  while  the  plain  was  cbtbad 
with  the  richest  vesduie^  and  the  cSinute  was  deiickmSi  Most  o£.th* 
tieea  wave  then  haic^  hut  cnou^  wece  in  leaf  to  ^veriohnes&andiVa- 
riely  to  die  prospect  j  and,  in  the  comae  of  a  finfcni^itf  the  dnmaidue 
gardens  and  scattered  trees  were  coveved  with  new  fiiliage^  which  haid 
a  fieshneas'and  hrilfianc^,  ne^er  sete^in  die  peipetnal  aunmier  of  ha^ 
dia.  Many  streams  ran  through  the  plain.  Their  banks  were  fringed 
with  willows  and  tamarisks.  The  orchards  scattered  over  the  oooh 
tKjt  oootained  a  profusion  of  plum,  pkach,  apfde*  pear,  qmnce^'  and 
jpieineipranate  trees,  which  afforded  a  greater  display  of  blossom  than 
I  ever  before  witnessed ;  and  the  uncultivated  parts  of  the  land  were 
oomed  with  a  thick  elastic  sod,  that  perhaps  never  was  equalled  but 
in  England.  The  greater  part  of  the  plain  was  highly  cultivated,  and 
irrigated  by  many  ^Mttt  r  courses  and  canals,  Nover  was  a  spot  of 
the  same  extent  lietter  peopled.  From  one  hei^^lit.  Lieutenant  Ma^ 
cartnev  took  the  bearings  of  thirtv-two  villages,  all  withiu  a  circuit  of 
four  miles.  The  villages  were  gctierally  large,  and  remarlvably  clean 
and  iicati  and  almost  all  set  oti  with  trees.  There  were  iiitle  bridges 
of  mason rj,  over  the  strums,  each  of  whicli  had  two  small  towers  for 
oruaniciil  at  each  end.  The  greater  part  of  the  trees  on  the  plain 
were  mulberries,  or  other  fruit  trees.  Except  a  few  picturesque 
groupes  of  dates,  the  only  tall  trees  were  the  Ficus  Religiosa  or  pee- 
pul,  and  the  tamarisk,  which  last  grows  here  to  the  height  of  thirty 
or  finty  feet.  Its  leaves,  being  like  those  of  the  cypress,  and  verjR 
thidE,  the  groves  compoaed  of  it  are  eitremefy  dark  and  ^£x>wlj. 
Hie  town  of  Pesfaaiw^  itsdf  standa  on  en  nnevoi  suzfiee.  .  It  is  1^ 
waida  of  five  miles  soond ;  and-  contains  about  lOOyOOO  inhabitants. 
Hie  houses  are  built  of  farick  (generally  unbnxnt),  in  wooden  fiRsmes : 
they  are  conunoalj  three  stories  high,  and  die  lower  story  is  gene- 
laUy  occupied  by  shops.  The  streets  are  narrow,  as  might  be  eiq»ect^ 
ed,  where  no  wheeied<»rriages  are  used:  they  are  paved,  but  the 
pasnement  sloping  down  to  the  kennd,  whidi  is  in  the  middle»  they 
ana  slippory,  and  inconvenient.   Two  or  three  brooks  run  through 


Digitized  by  Google 


56  INTB<H>UCTI01«. 

afferent  parts  of  the  town ;  and,  even  there,  nro  skiited  wt^  willows 
and  mulberry  trees.    They  are  crossed  by.brid^iy  none  of  whicfat 

however,  are  in  the  least  remarkable. 

There  are  m^ivw  mosques  in  the  town  ;  but  none  of  them,  or  of  the 
other  public  buldings,  deserve  notice*  except  the  Balla  Hissaur.  and 
the  fine  Caravansera.  The  Balla  Hissaur  is  a  castle  of  no  sirejigtii, 
on  a  hill,  north  of  (he  town  :  it  contains  some  fine  halls,  com- 
mands a  romantic  jnospect,  ami  is  adorned  with  some  very  pieati- 
ing  and  spacious  gardens;  but,  m  it  oiilv  tlie  occasional  residence 
of  the  King,  it  in  now  much  neglected.  On  the  north  it  presents  a 
commanding  aspect ;  but,  a  \  iew  of  it  from  the  side  nearest  the  town, 
discloses  strong  signs  of  weakness  and  decay.  .  Some  of  the  palaces  of 
the  great  are  splradid,  but  fern  of  the  nobiiity  have  houses  here» 

The  inhabitants  of  Feshawer  are  of  Indian  origin,  but  speak  Fkiah^ 
too  es  wdl  as  Hindkee.  Hiere  ue,  howeirer,  many  other  inhafaitanta 
of  an  nations }  and  the  concourBe  is  increased»  daring  the  King's  visits 
to  Peahamer.  We  had  many  opporti&iities  of  observing  this  assem- 
bh^  in  returning  fiDom  our  morning  rides  {  and  its  efiect  was  height- 
ened by  the  stillness  and  solitude  of  the  streets,  at  the  .early  hour  at 
wiaxh  we  used  to  set  ont  A  little  before  sunrise^'  people  began .  to 
assemble  at  the  mosques  to  their  morning  devotions.  After  the  hour 
of  prayer,  some  Sew  appeared  sweqiing.the  streets  befine  their  doofs^ 
and  some  grei^  men  were  to  be  seen  going  to  their  early  sttendamce 
at  Court.  They  were  always  on  horseback,  preceded  by  from  ten  to 
twelve  servants  on  foot,  who  walked  pretty  fast,  but  in  perfect  order, 
and  silence :  nothing  was  heard,  but  the  sound  of  their  feet.  But, 
when  we  returned,  the  streets  were  crowded  with  men  of  all  nations 
.  and  languages,  in  every  variet^  of  f^rrss  and  npp<  nratice.  The  shops 
were  all  open.  Dried  fi^iits,  and  auis,  bread,  meat,  boots,  slioes,  sad- 
dlery, bales  of  cloth,  hardware,  ready-made  cloaths,  and  posteens, 
books,  ike.  were  either  displayed  in  tiers  in  front  of  the  shops,  or 
hung  up  on  hooks  trora  the  roof.  Amongst  the  handsomest  shops 
were  the  li  uiu  rers,  (where  apples,  melons,  plums,  and  even  oranges, 
thougli  th^ti  are  rare  at  Teshawer,  were  mixed  iii  piles  witii  some  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


IKTRODUCnOH  57 

13»  lodSm  htSA) ;  aod  die  eook-ihap^  iphm  every  thing  wtmmn^A 
in  eutfaen  dishes,  painted  and  j^ased,  so  as  to  look' like  china*  v  ht 
Am  streets  were  pMpfe  cijing  gieBnSf-cmd%  ftQ^.  and  ]Bsn»  esnjing 
water  in  leadfeem  higi'at  their  faapfis^r«Qd  'amMnmring  liieir-ooniniD- 
dity  beating  en  m  InaM  eop^  in  vhich'  they  gite  e.  dBpagiii  a 
posenger  ftr  4  triflbg  pasoe  «f '  meMjr.  With-  titee.  vere  nlM 
peopledf  the  town  in  white  tmfcaiis,  some  in  laige  white  or  darit 
blue  frbdEBy  and  others  in  sheep-skin- clpaia ;  Fersiaiis,  and  Afghauns» 
in  brawn  wooUan  tunics,  or  flowing  mantles,  and  cafB  of  black  sheep- 
Mb  ■  er  eoioered  sflk ;  Khybere»^  with  the  straw  sandals,  and  tlse 
wild  dress,  and  air  of  their  mountains ;  Hindoos,'  uniting  the  peculiar 
features  and  manners  of  their  own  nation,  to  the  long  beard,  and  the 
dress  of  the  country  ;  and  Hazaurehs,  not  more  remarkable  for  their 
conical  caps'  of  skin,  with  the  wool,  appearing  like  a  tViTiije  round  the 
edge,  and  tor  their  broad  laces,  and  little  oses,  than  lor  their  want  of 
the  bearil,  which  is  the  ornament  ot  ev  pi  v  otlun  tace  in  the  city. 
Aniontj  these,  might  be  disOTvered,  a  few  women,  with  long  white 
veils,  that  reached  their  feet,  and  some  of  the  King's  retinue,  in  the 
grotesque  caps,  and  fantastic  habits,  whicli  mark  the  class  to  wiiich 
each  belongs.  SoiiicttmcH  a  troop  of  iinued  horsemen  passed,  and 
their  appearance  was  announced  by  the  clatter  of  their  horses  iioofs 
on  the  pavement,  and  by  the  jingling  of  their  bridles.  Somedmeii 
idieQ  t^e  King  was  gouig  out,  the  streets  wvve'cfaoaked  with  hotse 
and  foot,  and  dnMnedariea  beerii^  awivels»  and  largs  mmng  red  nfi 
green  flags ;  and»  at  aO  times,  keded  dxomedaiiea,  or  heavy  Bactrian 
esmds,  oorared  with  ahagyy  hair,  made  thdr  way  slowly  lihrough  the 
streets ;  and  mnles»  fistened  together  in  drdes  of  &ffxt  ot  ten*  were  • 
seen  (tf  the  road,  going  round  and  round  to  cool  them  after  dielr  W 
hour,  while  their  keepers  were  Indnlgu^  at  an-efting-hoiiaek  or  cigoy^ 
faig  e  amake  of  e  hiied  oiilleeann  in  the  street.'  Amidatallitliia 
throng,  we  generally  passed  without  any  notice,  ex6ept  a  salaom  ahd- 
kum  flrom  a  passenger,  accompanied  by  a  bow,  with  the  hands  crossed 
m  ftxmtt  or  an  application  from  a  beggtu-,  who  would  call  ont  fer- re- 
lief from  the  Teringee  Khaons,  admoniah  us  that  life  was  short,  and- 

1  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


SB 


INTRODUCTION. 


the  benefil  of  charity  famnortaly  or  ienund.  vs  that  what  wm  little  to 
OS  was  ft  grert  dHl  ta  him.  •   '  .     .  - 

It  aometimet  happened^  'that  we  were  ^leflflfied  hy  a  boy  ficm  a 
window ;  .and  'hia  thoot  of  Ooph  Teringee.  would  bring  a&  the  women 
and  chiUnn  in  the  hooae  to  aliBfe  at  na  till  we  were  out  of  sight.' 
,  The  loada  In  the  cotm£ry  were  addom  very  fidl  of  people  thoun^ 
they  were  '  soraettfl&es  .enliTaied  by  a  groiipe  of  hocaemen  going  out 
to  feiage,  'and  listening  to  a  Pknhtoo  or  Benian  sisng*  which  waa 
ohouted  by  one  of  tlieir  companions.  It  was  common  in  the  conaiiy 
to  meet  a  man  of  the  lower  order  with  a  hawk  on  his  fist,  and  a  poin- 
ter at  his  heels ;  and  we  frequently  saw  fowlers  catching  quails  among 
the  wheat,  after  the  harAest  was  far  enough  advanced.  A  net  was 
fastene<l  at  one  corner  of  the  field,  two  men  held  each  an  end  of.a 
rope  stretched  across  the  opposite  comer,  and  dragged  it  forward,  so 
as  to  shake  all  the  wheat,  and  drive  the  (juaiis  before  it  into  the  net, 
which  was  dropped  as  stion  as  they  entered.  The  numbers  caught  in 
this  manner  axe  almost  incredible.  *  , 
•  Nothing  cotdd  exceed  the  civility  of  the  country  ])eople.  We  were 
often  invited  into  gardens,  and  we  were  welcomed  in  every  village  by 
almost  every  man  that  saw  us.  They  frequently  entreated  tlie  gen- 
tlemen of  the  embassy  to  allow  diem  the  honour  of  being  their  hdrta; 
and,  sometimes  would  kj  hold  of  their  bridles,  and  not  pennit  them 
to  pass'  tiH  diey  had  pramised  to  breakfiut  wilih'tfaem.on  some  fiitdie 
dsy,  and  ewoi  oonfirmed  the  promise^  by  putting  their  hands  bebraan 

theint* 


•  The  passkm  of  all  the  Afphatuis  for  hunting  and  hawking  is  prodigious.  The  King, 
himself  cometiines  went  out  Iiawkiug,  in  tlie  disguise  ot'  a  common  AFghaun,  widi  a  ioicon 
OA  Idi  ilst,  Hid  scoonipMiisd  \tfotitf  one  attwHiiit. 

f  The  fbUoni^gMSfioeBt  of  mi  «ltertaininent  of  this  sort,  which  was  accepted,  afipeaxad 
iltth<"  Cnlnittn  newspajxi-rs,  and  iseridenth'  written  by  some  gentleman  of  the  mission. 

*•  i  he  ajjpoujloi  day  having  arrived,  we  went  to  the  village,  in  conformity  with  our  en- 
<«^i^;allalt,  and  wisM  received  most 

**  gro^^  mulberry  tree*,  skirted  on  one  side  by  a  TOiming stream.  Couches,  spread  with 
I*  cool  flutsi  were  laid  out  Six  v^iin  i^icb  aumbeni  that  they  formed  a  huq^e  ciicl^  vithio 


Digitized  by  Google 


» 

INTRODUCTION.  09 

•  JMinllieiiMmof  dieooimftijytheehannt  of 

cned  by  novelty,  and  bj  the  eipecUitioiii  we  fbmed«f  the  inci 

a  people,  k msjrbe  rappoiedllMt  diete  moni^ 

and  urterefldng.  Oar  cveniiigndei  weieiMit  leas  ddi(^iftfii],  when 
we' went  oat  among  the  gudena  found  die  cit^,  and  admired  the  ikb- 
naaa  and  repose  of  the  1ahdiciye»  oootraated  with  the  gloomy  magni- 
ficence of  the  ajnroonifing  momitaina,  which  were  often  involved  in 
clouds  and  tempesta,  while  we  enjoyed  the  quiet  and  sunshine  of  the 
plain.  The  gardens  are  usually  embellished  with  buildinga,  tmoog 
which  Uie  cupolas  of  Mahomedan  tombs  make  a  conspicuous  figure. 
The  chief  objects  of  this  nature  are  a  lofty  and  spacious  building, 
which  ends  in  several  hi^h  towers,  and,  at  a  distance,  has  an  ap]>ear- 
ance  of  grandeur,  wliu  h  I  believe  it  does  not  preserve  on  a  nearer 
view;  a  garden  liou.se,  wliicli  lias  onct^  been  splendid,  erected  hv  A)t 
Merdaun  Khaun,  a  Persian  nobleman,  who  has  iiiied  tiie  country  irora 
INIeshhed  to  Dehli  with  monuments  of  his  taste  and  magnificence ; 
and  soiue  considerable  tombs  and  religious  edifices,  more  remarkable 
from  their  effect  in  enlivening  the  prospects  of  the  groves,  with  which 
tliey  are  surrounded,  than  ibr  any  merit  of  their  own. 


**  which  the  gretOcst  part  of  the  viUngc  wa»  assembled.  We  mt,  and  convened  for  about 
•nbons  TCipeetingAaKiB|&tlwc«B>>y»  th«  crops,  lt«.  Tlegrlmhed  us  togoon^ 
"  and  hawk  with  them;  but  tl  vn-  tlim  too  hot  for  such  an  antuBement.  Wlien  convcr- 
**  ntioa  began  to  flag*  the  Schoolmaster  and  Priest  of  the  village  altemately  cbaunted  the 
"venttaMdodeaorilaflz.  TheaoAiewasallagedMriiiortiiiterarttng,^ 
**  The  Schoohnaater  was  a  wit  aiul  a  punster,  mod  FriMt»  not  disdaining  a  jc«t,  tbey  cut 
*«  continn  il!v  nt  each  other.  Wlien  breakfast  wns  ready,  we  wont  into  the  house  to  eat  it. 
**  It  coiisi&tcd  of  excellent  pillow,  and  delicious  milk;  and  we  made  a  nuwt  hearty  ineaL  We 
«  ffrinnied  to  toim  very  miidiple«Md  with  oiir«nlRlBin^^  and  dMpeople ; 

"  having  left  them,  with  u  promise  to  return  afra'm  some  morning  early  to  aniut-e  nnr^r-lres 
*<.with  their  hawks :  ami  to  teach  them  to  ^oot  birds  fljii^.    In  the  course  of  tiiis  visit,  I  , 

milt  an  old  nun,  who  was  with  Ahmed  Shah  at  the  battle  of  numipat.  Be  beailed  of 
*  taiffog  plundered  Dehli,  Muttra,  and  Agra.   He  wn  ninet]Mii«  jeers  of  iige;  co«ld  no 

pwft^.  end  had  iNiam  eneflent  mOaelioiv'' 

I  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


60 


IKTRODUCTIOH. 


^he  Empeiw  BnAer  qMsks  id  rafrturea  <tf  the  oountiy  round  JBbs> 
liaiw^  md.  painfi^  in  the  most  ^ammg  ooloiiii,  the  aneniaiiifli  and 
othv  wild  floww  iihafc  axwa  the  meadoHi^  in  the  deighboiifliaod; 

^th  all  my  respect  for  the  accuracy  of  this  illu^rious  author^  Xmntt 
confess  I  saw  nothing  to- jnstify-hift  deacriptume  |  but  the  want  <tf 
those  rich  prospeots  was  oompenMted  in  our  eyes  by  the  danddion 
and  other  we^,  whidi-ave<comnKm  in  England.  I  must,  however^ 
mention  the  abundanoe  of  roses,  which  struck  me  much  towards  the 
b^inning  of  summer ;  at  tliat  time,  scarcely  a  beggar  or  a  ragged  boy 
was  to  be  seen,  whose  hands  were  not  filleti  with  those  flowers. 

In  the  gardens,  indeed,  fiowcrs  aic  al)uiidLint,  and  dis|)<)st  (l  with 
considerable  tauste.  A  descripium  oi  one  of  tluni  that  hrloiit^nxl  to 
the  KincT,  and  is  the  fin^t  at  Pesbawer,  will  give  a  true,  tiiough  £»- 
vourable  idea  of  the  rest    ■  ' 

It  is cdiled the ^u^n of  Shauh  Lemaun.  lis  sliajn  is  oljlong.  Some 
handsome  structures  belonging  to  the  Bulla  Hissaur,  i'unn  ihe  south- 
ern side  ;  and,  part  of  the  hill  aa  which  that  castle  stands,  is  included 
id  .the  garden :  the  othear  aidee  «e  inclosed  with  walls.  The  north* 
era  past  of  the  garden,  which  is  cot  off  fixan  tlie  rert,  is  laid  oitt  iri»> 
gularly,  and  is  fttU  «f  trees.  The  nntainder  ibnns  a  sqnate,  divided 
by  anrenues,  whidi  cross  eadi  other  in  the  middle  of  die  garden* 
That  which  rans  from  east  to  west,  is  finrmed  by  stately  rows  of  alter- 
nato  cypresses  and  planes;  and  contains  three  parallel  walks,  andtwo 
long  h«ds  of  poppies.  At  thereat  end  of  this  walk  is  the  entrance; 
ai^  at  the  west,  a  handsome  housoi  containing  a  haO,  and  two  other 
apartments.  The  space  from  north  to  south  is  also  bordered  by  cy« 
presses  and  fdanea,  beneath  which  are  boshes,  planted  very  thtdc,  cf 
-fed*  white,  yellow,  and  China  roses;  white  and  yellow  jasmine^ 
flowering  cistus,  and  other  flowering  shrubs,  of  which  I  have  seen 
some  in  England  or  India,  and  others  were  entirely  new  to  me.  At 
the  north  end  of  this  opening  is  a  house,  such  as  I  have  already  de* 
s(  ril)L  (l.  Thrspnce  between  the  walks  is  filled  up  by  six  long  ponds, 
close  to  each  other;  and,  so  contrivccl,  that  the  watt^r  is  continually 
falling  m  little  cascades  from  one  to  another,  and  ending  in  a  bason 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION.  1^ 

ia1^iMaM^Q£ibe  gjBsedea,  :lnthe  rieiitrp  of  thii  biion  ii  ttmoBaam* 
lMMfle»  Ism  ttoriv  Ujg^  iiiRoitiided'hgr  IfaniikaiiM;  «idiheieaiiwfeiin» 
tMM'ln  ft  rbw  die  middle  of  all  the.pondi :  dm  en  dztjrtme 
faintant  dtogediet,  wUdi  oontiniied  fo play  dmiiig  the  wbole'deyt 
«B- spent  «fe<tfi0|{arden,  and  mve  extremelj  agreeafalsi  a^theaontlMV 
ma  then  ftr  adiwioed.  Xlieiest  of  the  garden  was  fiUed  iqy  wiftfa  e 
paofiiaioii.  of  the.  fruit4reeey  whidi  I  beve  mentioned,  ea  gcowaig  el 
Peshawer.  Some  of  them  wen  to  thick  that  the  sun  could  dol7|Miie^ 
tmte  them  st  noon,  wh^  they  afibrded  a^duiE,  000I9  md^pktsaimtpt 
fcUcel.  We  passed  the  forenoon  either  here  or  in  the  summer-housey 
where  we  had  a  luncheon  of  bread,  and  plain  roast  meat,  at  noon  ; 
after  which,  wc  retired  to  one  of  the  houses,  which  was  spread  with 
carpets  nnd  lelts.  Ht  ie  fruit  was  brought  to  ns,  nnrl  we  Spent  our 
time  in  rcadiui;  (In-  imuiutous  Persinn  verse^j  that  were  written  on  the 
walls:  most  ot  thern  aliuded  tt)  ilic  instability  ot  ibrtune.  atid  soi^ie 
were  verv  applicnble  to  tlie  King's  actual  condition.  About  tlireo, 
we  went  out  tn  walk.  The  views  up  the  east  and  \\a  st  walks  wero 
beautiful,  and  each  was  closed  by  high  naountains ;  but  lliat  of  the 
i»p:u f,  wliich  runs  from  north  to  south,  far  surpassed  ererN  Lhmg  that 
I  have  seen  in  an  Asiatic  garden.  We  stood  under  the  liuUa  Hissaur, 
which  on  this  side  is  very  handsome*  The  i'ountains  were  sparkling 
with  the  sun,  whose  rays  shone  bri^bt  on  the  trees,  shrubs,  and  flow- 
en  oo  one  lidet  ttid  nude  a  fine  oontfMt  with  die  deep  «lifldfe  of  die 
odier.  Hie  bulldiiifa  looked  rich,  light,  aad  nJited  %o  a  garden.  The 
eovntry  beyond  was  green,  and  itiidded  widi  dumps  and  single  trees ; 
and  mountainiy  which  are  diera  very  high,  gave  a  ihie  temnna- 
don  ta  die  prospeeti  and,  being m  levenl niigei»  at  diflfeMnt^dia- 
tanoes)  displayed  die  freatCBtTariely'oftinland/iiit^^  AfteraaiiihU 
ingoirer  the  guden*  we  joined  die  gaidenifln«  who  wwe  appeiMled 
to  entertain  as,  whom  we  found  litting  ttf  onedCdiepond^  anditeidi* 
ing  diemidveai  iteoping  their  hailds  in  the  water.  '  After  aoOM 
aoimeadon  with  diem*  we'lcft  die  garden,  rlitde  before  amuet  - 

It  would  be  endless  to  reooiint  the  visits  we  reo^ved,  and  tedioiie 
to  ndidoii  thoie  we  paid,  fllie  letnlt  of  my  tibmvilimm'm  thoae 


Digitized  by  Google 


68 


INTRODUCTION. 


ocwioiMif  will  be  Men  in  anodier  plioe.  Tiro  of  the  moti  vnnnk- 

able  of  our  bfdinary  visitors,  were  Meeraa  Geraumee  Khaun,  imd 
Moolla  Bdiramund.  The  fovmer,  who  was  the  son  of  a  Persiaa 
noblenuBi  of  hi^  rank,  had  been  in  India,  and  had  observed  our 
enitoais  with  great  attention  and  acnteness.  His  exile  to  India*  was 
occasioned  by  his  &inily*8  and  his  own  attachment  to  Shauh  Mah<^ 
mood.  He  was  now  enabled  to  return  by  the  protection  of  Akram 
Khaun,  and  was  o)>li(][P(l  to  steer  a  cautions  course,  being  still  sus- 
pected of  f;u iiuriiiL':  his  lormer  partv,  to  which  he  was  in  reality 
attached.  Thr  nit'onnatu )ii  he  liad  acquired  dnriuf?  lii'^  residence  in 
India,  was  surprising,  when  it  is  considered  tliaL  llie  division  of 
Europe  into  nations,  is  known  to  few  in  Alghaunistan,  and  tiiat  none 
of  tlie  events  in  our  European  history  have  been  he^d  of  even  in 
liidiii,  1  had  one  day  been  mentioning,  to  the  amazement  ol  :*ome 
visitors,  tliat  there  had  not  been  a  rebellion  in  our  nation  since  174^ 
and  had  afterwards  allnded  to  our  power  at  sea :  when  the  rest  of  <he 
oompany  were  gone,  Meexss  Geranniee  told  'me  with  a  smiley  diat  I 
had  fatgat  the  Americaii  w«r ;  and  then  asked  serjoiialjr,  the  feasoo 
why  the  instuence  of  ships  sbodld  be  raised  so  high  by  the  success  of 
the  Frendi  privateers,  when  we  had  so  manifest  a  siqieriori^  at  aeai 
Hits  gendeman  is  now  Moonshee  Bsnsheo*  or  secretary  of  state  at 
QaibiiL  MooUa  Bdnamimd  was  a  man  of  retired  and  studioas 
habits,  but^reslly  a  man  of  gemus*  and  of  insatiiUe  thirst  fi»  know^ 
Mgfr  Thon^  well  versed  in  metaphysics,  and*  the  mohd 
sciences  known  in  his  country,  his  passion  was  for  mrthematics,  and 
he  was  studying  Shanscrit  (a  language  of  which  none  of  his  country- 
men know  the  name),  with  a  view  t  o  discover  the  treasures  of  Hin^ 
doo  learning.  We  had  many  other  Moollas,  some  ieiunedi  and  some 
worldly,  some  Deists,  others  rigid  Mahommedans,  and  some 
overflowing  with  the  mystical  doctrines  of  the  Sofccs.  We  were  also 
entertained  bv  poets,  who  would  come  with  panejrvrics  on  the  Kel- 
chee  (ambassador),  and  other  KhoatiTioenee  I  ereng  (European 
Khaun s)  ;  and  who  would  follow  up  tliose  juidresses  with  endless 
quotations  and  specimeos  of  their  own  works.    Among  our  visitors. 


Digitized  by  Google 


IMTKODUOnON.  «g 

natt  also  tiie «lu«fr  of  tlie^tribet 'tiAnltVmitum»9  woma  respectMi 
Booraunee  and  Fenian  mctcliMito,  the  loir«r  clan  ot 
die  agents  of  llie  great  kndi  (  moat  of  thcan  wne  i^pweable  and'oon*' 
venible  peiople»  fiom  whom  much  local  ' infimnatimi  was  to  be  gained. 
Hie  genefal  etiriosit)r  to  see  us,  the  distincdon  of  bdi^  nooved  bj 
VB»  and  the  hope  of  profiting  by  our  liba^dily,  indeed*  brought  many 
more  visiton  than  we  could  admit*  and  our  gates  were  always  sup* 
founded  by  numbers  of  the  lower  orden,  whom  it  required  the  vigeur 
of  two  of  the  King's  Caupoochees,  or  porters,  to  keep  fiom  farcing  aan 
entrance.  Among  the  visits  I  paid,  I  must  not  omit  one  to  a  cele- 
brated saint,  iKuned  Shaikh  £wuz,  who  was  often  visited  by  the  King 
and  prime  minister,  neither  of  whom  ever  would  be  seated  in  his 
prcscnco,  till  repeatedly  commanded.  I  paid  my  visit  to  him  In  liis 
little  garden,  where  I  perceived  a  number  of  well  dressed  people  ap- 
proachinor  at  a  distance,  and  was  (joiniif  to  salute  them,  when  some- 
body close  to  m*'  hade  rae  wekdiiiis  on  which  I  looked,  and  saw  an 
old  man  dressed  like  a  labourer,  who  seemed  to  have  been  digging  in 
the  garden  :  this  was  the  saint,  and  the  others  were  men  of  high 
rank,  who  stoo  l  at  a  distance  from  respect  :  among  them  was  a  young 
man,  who  wa.s  brother  to  the  Queen,  and  ison  to  Wuffadar  Khuun, 
formerly  Vizier.  The  Shaikh  made  us  sit  down  upon  the  clods 
which  had  just  been  turned  up,  and  began  to  convene  very  agreeably; 
OB  sH  subjects,  eieept  religion ;  he  said  he  heavd  the  people  about 
Feshawer,  had  been  mean  cgnough  to  importune  me. iSw  presientSt  and 
said  that  the^ighMin  chieft  had  .  become  such  a  set  of  sooundns3s» 
that  be  was  adiamed  of  them.  He^  however*  pmiaed  the  King*  .  He 
talked  readily  and  fluently,  gave  himself  no  airs,  of  aholy  man>  and 
ahowedno  sftctation,  eioept  in  lamenting  that  he  had  nodiing  ur  the. 
house  to  offer  us,  and  pioposmg  to  send  to  a  oook  diqp  iat  a  dSoner 
to  entertain  us  with.  There  was  another  celebrated  deifise^  who 
declined  my  vnit,  saying  that  he  had  renounced  the  world,  sod  wis 
entirely  engaged  in  prayer  and  meditation.  I  sent  him  a  huge  |tfe» 
sent  in  moncjt  b^ggmg  him  to  give  it  in  chari^*  Vid  to  pmy  ^  the 


INTRODUCTION. 

He  peremptorily  refused  liie  money,  but  prayed  fiir  thto 
And  fiir  nw^  and  «ent «  gratefld  meiMge  £»-my  alten^^ 

i  have  now  come  to  a  point  in  my  narrative,  some  acoonnt 

of  the  state  of  affiun  at  the  court  is  neoeMary,  to  expkm  my  <ywii 

Shaiiii  Shujau  ool  Moolk  had  succeeded  to  his  half  brother  Shauh 
Mahmood,  who  was  deposed  in  consequence  of  a  jiopular  insurrec- 
tion. He  had  reigned  about  six  years,  when  1  entered  his  kin*,'ii()m, 
and  as  he  had  quashed  an  iniexpected  rebeUion  ot  his  own  V  izier 
about  a  year  before,  he  was  considered  as  very  firndv  estaWished 
on  the  throne ;  and  shortly  before  my  ai  ri%'ai,  iSiiauh  Aluhinood, 
assiiiLed  by  i  uLteh  Khaun,  head  ol  the  clan  of  Baurikzyeii,  had  made 
a  fedjle  attempt  to  recover  the  crowu.  The  King  had,  however,  8tn>> 
coeded  in  lepffVMing  kit  fint  attenqit  at  inauireotifln  in  Ite  west,  and 
ftit  -ao  aeaiie  flom  lua  dengnat  that  be  nunwd  eait  to  FetiuMrar» 
wlieDioe  he  innediatdj  despatdied  Akram  inimiw,  witb  aU  tbe  fiowe 

a  abo  of  the  lebel^ 

lipiia  vtrier. ... 

Not  long  after  their  march,  newt  amvad  of  the  aqptnie  of*  Caada- 
hir  hy  Shaiih  Mahmoodi  irfiich  at^first,  oeoanoned  lome  depnameat 
liiit  that  waa  removed  by  &vouraUe  rejports  from  the  wert. .  ^tha 
nme  time,  newa  daily  arrived  of  Akram  Khaun's  successful  ptofprieM, 
and  all  Periiawer  was  in  daily  expectation  of  the  fall  of  Caahmeer, 
and  the  return  of  the  army,  whidi  would,  have  been  attended  with 
tiie  immediate  dispersion  of  the  rebels  in  (he  west.  All  these  hopes 
were  quashed  by  intelligence  which  was  received  on  the  23d  of  Aprtl» 
of  the  entire  defeat  and  destruction  of  Akram  Khaun's  army. 

That  minister  had  reposed  r^ront  confidence  in  Mofnwnllv,  the  hill 
chief  of  Mozufferabad,  and  h;iti  depended  on  liiin  fin  sii|)])lies  and 
guides  ;  at  the  same  time,  hi.s  ungovernable  pride  ami  a\  aiice  led  him 
to  offeTid  this  very  man,  in  whose  hands  he  had  put  the  safetv  of  his 
whole  army.  The  effect  of  these  mistakes  was  soon  felt  in  the  want 
of  supplies,  but  Akram  had  now  arrived  at  the  last  pass,  which 
though  defended  by  a  wall  and  towers,  would,  probably,  have  soon 


Digitized  by  Gopgle 


INTRODUCTION. 


been  carried*  iiod  the  anaOents  been  apimateri  by  that  spirit  irbidt 
has  always  enabled  the  needy  armies  of  the  west  to  finoe  Ihe  entrance 
of  this  ridi  valley.  Akiam,  however,  lent  an' ear  to  the  persoasions 
of  Motawulleet  who  undertook  to  shew  him'  a  pass,  by  whidi  he  mig^ 
turn  the  flank  of  the  enemy's  work*  Aeoor£ii^y  the' army  marched 
off  fiom  the  front  of  the  entrenchmenty  and  moved  up  a  vaiUey»  secur- 
mg  the  mountains  on  each  ride  by  parties  of  Khyfoeree  and  Chiljie 
infantry.  Its  march  was*  however^  soon  discovered,  and  its  infimtiy 
dcit-munbered  and  driven  in  $  in  additicm  to  which»  it  was  ascertained 
rumoured,  that  the  upper  put  of  the  valley  was  choked  with  im- 
panable  snow.  Akram  Khaun  now  lost  all  confidence :  he  remained 
for  a  day  in  the  valley  without  supplies,  and  exposed  to  the  fire  of 
the  enemy's  in&ntiy,  which  was  disheartening  to  his  troops,  thou^ 
too  distant  to  be  injurious.  This  situation  produced  many  desertions, 
which,  added  to  the  perfidy  of  Motawiillee,  completed  Ak ram's 
alarm,  and,  knowing  liow  unpo]in]:ir  ho  in  the  army,  he  began  to 
fear  that  he  would  be  seized  and  delivered  to  the  chief  of  Cashnieer, 
the  disgrace  and  death  of  whose  fatlier  he  had  ocoasione<l.  The  result 
was  a  resohition  to  fly ;  and,  accordingly,  in  the  course  of  the  night, 
all  the  chiefs  abandoned  the  army,  and  each  separately  endeavoured 
to  effect  his  escape  through  the  passes  of  the  mountains.  Most  of 
theiu  were  |iluiiilpred  by  Motawullee's  mountaineers,  before  they 
passed  Mi>/iiiieial)ail ;  and  Akram  himself  is  said  to  have  been  sur- 
rounded, and  only  to  have  escaped  by  scattering  pieces  of  gold  among 
the  plunderers,  and  flying  during  the  scramble^  At  length  he  crassed 
the  Indus,  and  leached  the  town  of  Aeora}  where  he  received  thoae 
who  went  to  meet  him  without  the  smallest  abatement  of  his  former 
pride*  The  troops,  when  deserted  by  thehr  chiefi,  Bar  the  most  port 
laid  <k>wn  then  arms.  Some  endeavoured  to  force  their  way  throui^ 
the  hiDs,  but  shared  the  fiite  of  thc9T  superiors.  Of  the  whole  army, 
not  above  two  thousand  men  arrived  at  Peshawer,  dismounted*  dis* 
anned,  and  almost  naked.  This  disaster,  great  as  it  was,  was.ezag« 
gerated  when  first  heard  of  at  Peshawer ;  the  whole  army  wiis  said  to 
be  annihilatiadr  Aknan  Khann  was  missing,  and  JMuddud  Khann  had 


66 


JNTBODUOTHOH. 


deaertod.  At  the  8ane  iaine».«n4iicntie'.iiitel]^ 
odraoiee  of  Ghsnh  Maibmood*  and  of  tlie  oaptiice  of  CaidM  tp  which 
tkiepcgt  was  added*  of  the  mnediate  AdiiaMO  of  the  memj  tcnfarda 
Foiunpcr.  Some  of  the  oei^'faoiiziDg  tribes  who  WH^.in<^Jiiied  to  Mbhr 
mood*  were  abo  aaad  to  be  aimed*  and  nady  iti  start  at  e  mp* 
meat's  wainring:  the  troops  were  reppBacpted  as  oii  the  efve  of  a 
mutiny^  and  ihe  Kiii|^  it  wis  rumoured,  hud  sent  off  his  most  valiiable 
jewels,  and  was  about  to  flj  £rom  the  city.  Certain  it  is,  tliat  for 
some  tima^  there  never  was  a  night  on  which  one  could  be  oonfident 
that  there  would  not  be  a  revolution  before  morning  Our  anxiety 
on  that  head  was  somewhat  augmented  by  the  irank  avowal  of  our 
Mchmanndanr,  that  in  the  event  of  any  f>;eneral  confiision,  we  should 
be  attacked  b\  tho  KhvborcM  and  f^ffnT  pUnulerers  without  delay. 
Nevertheless  t)u  c  i!  \  k  tiuuned  as  quiel  as  on  thv  first  day.  People 
talked  openly  of  the  state  of  things,  hvt  nohody  acted  as  if  a  revolu- 
tion were  at  hand.  This  panic  at  leugtii  subsided.  The  enemy  were 
found  to  have  remained  at  Caiibul,  iand  it  was  now  certain  that  they 
were  (hsputiug  amoii^  tiieniselves :  Akram  Khaun  iiad  ako  returned, 
and  hatl  begun  to  assemble  the  wreck  of  the  Cashmeer  army,  to- 
gether Willi  such  troops  as  had  been  left  at  Peshawer,  or  could  now 
"be  raised.  The  King^s  situation »  however,  was  still  far  from  promi^- 
h^  EVery  thing' depended  on  money,  with  which  he  was  very  iH 
proirkied;'  "Many  of  die  chiefib  with  him  covUd  at  ofioe  have'  femedied 
lUs'^enW  but  few^mreanffioiently  Mkms  to  do  so :  .aod  even  .Akiam 
Khaun,  who  had  ooca«k)iitedi.iiKMt  of  the  Sing's  miafintunesi  and  who 
knew  %hat -he  moat- stand-  or  .inU  with  his  master,,  mi  bo  blinded  by 
hia  mvariee,'  that  he-  raftaed  to  gpre  or  hiod.aDy  part  of  the 
snrca-  which'  he  had  inherited  fiom  hia  fither,.  and  amaaseS'  himadC 
The  character  of  tfab  minister  was  one  great  cause  of  the  King's 
weakness.  HMugh  so  diiikient  in.political'oounge,  even  Ida  enenuea 
allowed  that' he  was  endowed  mth  :tbe  graateit  .pcmooal  bmvery»  an^ 
that  he  was  sincere  in  his  attachnienta,  true  to  his  word/etstrict  obr 
aerrer  of  justice,  and  .  perfectiy  direct  and  op^  in  his  dealings  ;  but^ 
OB  the  other  hehd,  Jie*  was  extandLy  avaiidoiia,.  and  of  >  hisnghty* 


Digitized  by  Google 


umuxDucnoN. 


67 


gnllen,  and  suspicious  temper ;  arrogant  and  irritable  to  thofeanMiid 
him,  difficult  of  access,  ami  tenacious  of  respect. 

In  my  own  intercourse  with  him,  liowcver,  I  found  l\im  to  possess  all 
the  good  qualities  ascribed  to  him,  without  any  one  of  the  had. 
Akram  Khaun  was  a  very  strong  man,  upwards  of  six  feet  hifj;h, 
with  a  !»ullen  conntenance,  and  an  apparent  ciisposition  to  taoituriiitv; 
this  however  wore  oft',  and  he  talked  without  resen'-e  of  his  deleat, 
which  he  aiScribed  to  treacherv  in  his  army,  and  of  all  other  subjects 
which  were  likely  to  interest.  His  dress  was  very  simple,  and  his 
manners  plain.  With  Akram  Kliauii  all  Liie  Dooraunee  Khauus  who 
had  been  with  the  army  had  returned,  and  I  now  exchanged  visits 
nith  tlMm  kSL .  I  fiwiid  their  sociely  wjr  pleiWMit }  they  generally 
tilked  of  Inmkiiig  and  Junrking,  honm  and  aiBU ;  .Mked  questfiaiM 
about  ^blfanatemd  pfodmsCiona  of  Knffm^  md  India,  -and'.eiB^ 
pliBied  those  of  tfanr  own  ooiBilxy:  ibay  alsfraflmedmea-lnld.  Httlo 
meodbteB,  or  foooanfeed  emta  m  wfaidi  they  had  becni  engaged* 
ftoaentg.  WBto  alwvjra  intecchanged  after -the "^liiha.  'I.  apnt.tiw 
fioonuuieea  aitiidles-  o£  £iira|iean  or  TnwBfliw  mfmiQwiffrf^ '  and-thiiy 
pcre  me  hofwa*  dogty  and  hawks. 

Soon  «fter'  the  arrival  of  then  Khauna,  and*  befeie  the.fint;alam 
oieated  by  the  bad  man  tpw  ofinv  a'Hmdoo  waa  aeised  m  ooeof  the 
passes  on  the  way  to  Gailbul»  and  a  report  immediately  spread  throe^ 
Feshawer,  that  he  was  a  servant  of  mine,  charged  with  lettera  to 
Shauh  Mahmood,  begging  him  to  pnah  on  to  Peahawer,  and  engaging 
for  the  capture  of  the  Balla  Hissaor,  and  the  seizure  of  Shauh.  Shujan. 
This  story  was  accompanied  by  a  rumour,  that  the  King  wa*  on  the 
point  of  giving  up  bur  property  to  phmder.  Tlie  whole  town  was, 
in  consequence,  in  a  ferment ;  peoplr  were  runninf;  up  and  down  in 
alf  fhrocfrons,  getting  their  arms  in  mder,  and  lighting  theii  matiht^s, 
and  a  great  mob  soon  assembled  at  our  gates.  All  tlie  gentlemen  of 
the  embassy  wore  sitting  at  this  time  in  the  liail,  receiving  company ; 
but  Captain  Pitman  quietly  doubletl  the  guards,  and  took  other  mea- 
sures of  defence.  In  the  mean  time,  Mooiia  Jaflfer  and  another  of 
4>ur  friends  urived  in  much  alarm,  and  there  was  a  great. deal  of 

K  2 


0B 


INTRODUCTION.' 


whispering  and  agitation  ;  but  when  things  were  at  their  height^ 
Akram  Khaun  liappene<l  to  come  in  on  a  visit,  and  it  may  be  sup- 
posed that  (lie  crowd  did  not  remain  long  after. 

Notliing  else  took  pla<  c  tliaf  need  be  mentione*!  here,  except  that 
on  the  4th  of  Jtnie,  tlie  ^mty  of  troops  with  the  mission  was  exer- 
cised in  honour  ol  His  Majesty's  birth  day.  Akram  Khaun  and  many 
other  persons  of  all  ranks  were  present.  The  spot  was  achnirably 
calculati  (1  lor  a  small  body,  bcmg  a  green  plain,  coufmed  by  hillocks. 
The  Dooraimees  werc^  orreatly  delighted  with  the  cxhiijition,  and 
even  the  King  viewed  iL  liirough  a  telescope  from  the-  top  of  the 
Balhi  Hissaur. 

During  this  time,  the  King  was  exerting  liimself  to  get  together  an 
army.  Many  of  the  troops  who  had  been  taken  in  Cashineer,  were 
allowed  to  letuni,  but  half  of  them  were  dismount^  and  disarmed, 
aDd'the'rest  were  full  of  latitude  to  the  gov^Kur  of  Caduaeer*  and 
morK  inclined  to  ium  'than'  to  tbe  fijog.  'Bte  army*  indeed,  waa 
generally  disafleoted  { the  chiefr  wefe  disgusted  wifli  Aknm  Khaun* 
and  the  aoldien  eoxaged  at  their  diagraoea  and  diaaateia»  and  dio- 
treased  for  want  of  pay.  They  acarcely  attempted  to  eonoeal  thia 
diqpoaition,  but  openly  ocooated  .gentlemen  of  the  miaoon  in  the 
atieeta, .  ainudng-  Alaram  Khann,  and  not  even  aparing  the-Kuig; 
Akfam*i  weight  hod  indeed  declined  even  with  Hia  M^jeaty^-  and 
Abool  Husaun  Khaun  uaed  aometimea  to  expreaa  his  bopes-of  being 
able  to  grt  him  removed^-  and  the  diieotion  of  afiiia  given  to  Miid> 
dud  Khaun.  Hie  eflbct  of  thia  change  was  felt  in  the  King^a  council) 
where  the  opiniona'  of  the  chieb  of  dans  were  at  all  timea  .treated 
with  great  attention,  hut.wheiew  at  present,  nobody  had  a  preponder- 
ating influoice ;  consequently,  'nothing  was  evear  brought  to  a  deci- 
sum  at  their  debates,  which  often  ended  in  mutual  reproach  and 
recrimination.  It  was  .at  length  detennined  to  march  lor  Caubul, 
and  the  King's  tents  were  ordered  to  move  out.  A  gun  was  fired  at 
an  hour  fixed  by  the  Imaum,  and  at  the  same  time  the  King's  mun- 
zilnoomau  was  crectctl.  This  was  a  kind  of  obelisk  formed  by  can- 
vas mad.  iu  a  particular  manner  round  a  pole  about  thirty  ieet  high* 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTBQDUCTIONv 


at  the  top  of  whick  was  a  luge  afarer  balL  The  canvas  itsdf  wiM 
led.  Its  me  wm  to  made  the  encamping  ground  The  King's  tents 
were  nfberwafds  sent  out  The  finest  was  about  thirty  feet  bfoadi 
and  very  Icmg.  It  was  formed  of  wooden  frMneSf  in.  which,  were 
placed  canvas  pannels  in  compartments  -of  various  colours.  The 
roof  was  pink,  mid  was  supported  by  four  poles,  each  of  wliich  had  a 
silver  ball  nt  the  top.  Behind  this  we  re  many  other  tents  of  a  smaller 
size,  and  tfic  whole  wa-s  surrounded  l)^'  ji  wall  of  cotton  skrcens. 
Two  sets  ot  tfiits  like  this  always  accoin|)aii\  tlu-  King,  and  with  each 
is  a  wooden  lunise  two  stories  high,  whit  li  ovic  luiin lied  workmen  can 
pitch  in  an  hour.  The  town  was  full  oi  bustle  4  a  number  ol  troops 
were  encamped  under  llu  b.dla  Hissaur.  and  the  streets  were  crowded 
with  horsemen  ;  but  the  tranquillity  ol  the  city  was  not  otherwise 
disturbed.  At  length  the  King  moved  out  to  his  cauip,  and  a.H  it  was 
not  the  policy  of  the  British  government  to  take  any  share  in  the  civil 
war ;  it  became  necessary  to  fix  on  a  spot  to  which  the  mission  should 
retire.  All  the  ministers  agr^d  in  representing  that  Feshaw^  waa 
an  imfit  . place  to  nmiam  m-dnring  troufaled'  timea  :  md  AkiMB 
BbaiiOt  after  oonaideiiiig  and  rejeding  a  plan  £ir. our  retiring  into  the 
mountains  of  the  Euaofyzes,  offered  to  allow  na'to  occupy  the  &it  of 
Atfcoek»  which  woiild,  be  peffeetly  safe  in  all  extnemitiea.  Thialwiaa 
dedtned,  and  it  waa  fixed  tfaait  we  thoold  go  to  the  eaatcm  fiontief» 
whidier  die  KngV  femily  waa  alsp  to  be  aent  lliia  being  Brranged; 
we  went  on  the  ISth  of  June  to  the  £3ng^8  camp  to  take  leaTe.  The 
atieeta  were  more  crowded  than  ever»  and  we  aaw  many  partiea  of 
cavalry,  and  aome  exodlok  horaeiB. 

The  King^a  tents  Were  pitched  in  a  g»den  on  the  banks  of  a  pond> 
round  which  was  a  temkoe  of  masonry.  The  great  tent  occupied  one 
side  of  the  pond:  <»  two  of  the  other  sides  were  the  Khauns  of  the 
oourt»the  greater  on  the  King's  right,  and  the  lesser  on  his  left(  the 
kmrth  side  waa,  open,  so  as  to  allow  of  the  King's  seeing  down  a  street 
finrraed  by  two  raidcs  of  guards^  which  eattended  from  the  pond  to  the 
prindpal  gate  of  the  garden.    We  were  introduced  by  a  side  gate, 

and  led.  op  tQ  the  .ri^  hand»  where  we  stood  with  all  the  gre«t 

10 


Digitized  by  Google 


TO  INTRODUCTION. 

Khauns.  While  m  were  tliiere,  several  parties  who  hadootfne  ovif 
filnn-  llie  enemy,  were  suocessiYely  introdliocld.  Xhejr  catered  by  the 
gate  opposite  the  King's  twt,  where  they  were  drawn  up  in  aliMb 
Uieiff  namte  were  announced,  and  they  went  through  the  usual  form 
of  praying  for  the  King,  after  which  they  retired.  At  the  end  of 
each  prayer,  the  whole  of  the  guards  called  out  Aumeen  (Amen). 
Wlien  this  waK  over,  we  were  requested  to  go  up  close  to  the  King, 
accompanied  bv  Akram  and  Muddud  KJiaun.  The  Kin£j  thou  ad- 
dressed me,  saying,  that  we  must  be  unaccustomed  to  so  luisettleti  a 
govemmpnt  as  his  was  at  present,  and  that  altlumgh  he  parted  with 
us  with  reluctance,  yet  he  was  uuwiliing  to  ex[>osc  us  to  the  incon- 
venience of  a  campaign,  and  he  therefore  wished  us  to  retire^to  some 
place  on  the  frontier,  from  which  we  could  either  join  him,  or  return 
to  Intlia,  as  suited  our  convenience.  In  the  course  of  the  conversa- 
tion-which  followed,  His  Majesty  spoke  in  high  terms  of  the  British 
nAdon,  and  hoped  he  should  be  able  to  cany  vm  with  fasm  to'  Candid 
hvendHennitt  When  be  had  conelq<ied>  Aknm  Kh«un»  Miiddnti 
KiMim,  iad  the  fibgf •  Jnumm,  leveielly  made  ipeeohei  eiMiewwi  t» 
the  Kiiig»  eommwting  on  What. His  Majesty  had  said,  and  enlaignDg 
in  the  jiutio^  good  laith»  and  military  rqmtation  of  the  Britiah,  Mid 
en  Uie  advaiiti^et  to-be  derived  from  an  alliance  with  sudi  a  people* 
At-thia  audience^  the  Kinig  wore'a  hig|i  cap  of  plain  red  docfaf  widi » 
blaek  Tehret  band  nmnd  the  bottom.  He  had  no  jewda  on:  a  maoe^ 
a  iwoidt  and  a  caibine^  lay  bafeie  hkn  on  a  cnahion.  Several  penona 
were  'in  the'  tent- with  hiraf  ftnning  him  by  turaa*  and  among  lh«n 
was  Meer  Abool  Hnssun  Ehaun.  Th»  King  looked  iU  and  haggaid*' 
as  if  exhavflted  by  the  heat,  and  by  anxiety  of  mind. 
-  On  the  two  nest  daysi  we  had  latewell  visits  from  Akram  Ehatni 
and  many  other  persons ;  andon  the  1 4th ,  i  n  the  ev^iing»  we  commenced 
our  march  ibr  the  Indus.  The  King's  affairs  were  now  in  a  highly- 
prosperous  oot^dition.  He  had  equipped  a  tolerable  army,  and  was 
ready  to  mc>ve  against  the  enemy,  whose  dissensions  had  come  to 
such  ;i  pitc  h,  that  Futteh  Khaun  had  seized  his  rival  in  the  midst  of 
the  court,  and  had  thus  occanmsed  the  deiection  of  two  oi'  the  great 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


71 


Dooraunee  dans.  Aooor^iigly  all  parties  seemed  t9  look  ftrward 
with  certainty  to  the  suooeBS  of  Shauh  £Sli4<u**  cause,  an  event  ^hich 
mw  called  for  by  the  prayers  of  the  people,  to  whom  the  Shauh'a 
moderation  and  jusfioe  had  greatly  eodeaied  him.  » 

Our  first  march  was  to  Chumkuny,  a  villa^'o  oiil  v  four  miles  from 
Pesliawer.  The  country  was  now  becoming  a  little  unsettloti,  and, 
instead  of  a  few  foot-patb  who  iisetl  to  plunder  single  men  when  we 
first  arri\  ed,  there  were  now  bands  of  robbers  who  carrieil  otf  se\'cral 
loadL-d  camels  that  were  going  to  camp  wiilinut  a  guard.  The 
accouiilant  of  the  mission  allowed  a  mule  of  own,  lotuled  with 
rupees  to  tiie  \itine  of  ^'1000,  and  also  with  fine  shawls,  to 
loiter  behind:  the  mule  having  thrown  the  muleteer,  and  laid 
him  wmwlm  on  the  ground,  fan  through  the  crowd,  and  shook 
off  itai  valnaUe  Imiden,  idiich  was  instantly  pillaged  by  the  by« 
standeia. 

On  the  15th  we  continued  our  inardit  The  appearance  of  oor 
line  was  now  much  altered  by  the  great  proportion  of  mulea  and 
ponies  employed  in  caoying  die  baggi^>  by  the  number  of  good 
horses  which  were  to  be  seen  mounted  or  led,  by  the  use  of  Persian 
and  Uabek  saddles  and  bridles,  as  well  as  of  boots  and  mantles 
among  the  upper  classes  of  our  Indian  attendants,  and  by  the  num- 
ber of  Peshawerees  and  other  people  who  spoke  Persian,  that  now 
accompanied  us  in  various  capacities.  A  rmniber  of  persons  followed 
us  from  the  city  as  lar  as  this  day's  march,  some  to  show  tlieir  atten- 
tion, but  more  to  importune  us  for  presents,  of  which  all  the  people 
at  Peshawer,  except  the  highest  classes,  wer«'  inordinatelv  f^reedy. 
Our  march  on  this  day  lay  through  a  good  deal  of  wood  ot  tamarisk 
trees. 

On  the  16th  we  left  tlie  wood,  and  marched  over  an  extensive  plain 
of  green  turf,  only  varied  by  the  low  plant  called  Jouz  by  the 
A%haun8,  and  Ehauree  Sbooiuree  by  the  Persians*  and  by  a  plant 

•  K  4 


72 


DnmoDucnoN. 


very  common  about  Pcslmwer,  which  much  resembles  that  m  Enghab 
gardens  caJltnl  Devil  in  the  bnsh. 

We  encamped  on  a  very  agreeable  spot,  where  a  point  covered 
with  green  sod,  and  sliiided  by  some  trees,  projects  into  the  deep, 
cl^r,  and  rapid  strciiiu  of  the  Caubul  rivert  here  about  four  hundred 
yards  bioad ;  on  tlic  oppmite  shore  is  llie  village  of  Nou^hehra. 
Mauy  Eusoizyes  crossed  the  mer  to  see  us.  I  waa  much  stnidk  on 
this  day  with  llie  long  duratioD  of  the  twilight,  which,  with  the  length 
of  the  day,  is  novel  to  a  tmyetter  fiom  India:  day  luoke  (on  the  16kh 
June)  at  .a  quarter  after  three^  and  the  sun  did  not  rise  tall  within  tan 
minuttti  of  five. 

Our  neit  maich  waaalong  the  Caubul  river  to  Aooia,  the  princqial' 
town  of  the  Khuttuks,  where  we  mw  Asoph  Khaun,  the  diie^  and 
many  of  the  principal  men  c£  the  tribe.  Asoph  Khaun  was  a 
very  respectable  looking  man,  very  handsomely  drened,  and  well 
lUt^ded.  The  others  were  m<»tly  elderly  men,  dressed  in  dark 
blue,  or  black,  with  fiur  csomplei^ona,  long  beards,  and  reverend 
countenances. 

The  whole  of  our  march  had  hitherto  betn  between  a  range  ot 
hills  on  the  south,  and  the  Caubul  river  on  tJir  north,  which  had 
approached  each  other  at  Noushehra,  so  as  only  to  leave  room  to 
.  encamp  between  them. 

On  the  march  of  the  18th,  which  reached  to  the  Indus,  the  hills 
came  dose  to  the  nver  of  Caubul,  so  that  we  were  obliged  to  cross 
them.  Ihfij  belong  to  the  same  range  which  we  paieed  near  Cohauft, 
and  we  were  reminded  that  Ihey  contained  the  lame  iwtWM^^mj  bj 
finding  Khuttuk  guar^  poeted  in  the  paaa  to  protect  our  baggage 
fiom  the  KheibCTcci* 

Fam  the  top  of  the  pass  we  eaw  to  the  nag&t  the  Indus  iseuing 
In  a  vaat  number  of  channela  fiom  a  mass 
.  aearoe  allowed  ua  to  see  the  toountains  thiou^  which .  it  had 
llmd.  It,  however,  fi>imed  but  two'  channela  when  it  readied 


Digitized  by  Google 


JNTRODUCnON. 


tlie  hill  wbiaee  we  Hood,  at  the  IboC  of  ubicli  it  was  jdned  by  the 
t  Ginbiil  river«  lliere  were  nunMRMu  Tocks  et  the  point  of  junotioiir 
and  as  bodi  riTets'ian  with  great  impetiioei^,'  ilie  tifftk  and  the 
aaand»  pcodnced  by  the  daahing  of  tlieir  waten»  were  very  noble. 
After  this  tbe  riven  were  coitteoted  intoone  disnnel,  and  r»itlii«Nigb 
the  moontsins  in  a  deep  but  nanow  stream'  between  high  banks 
of  perpendicular  rock.  The  fixt  of  .  Attock  was  also  plainly  seen 
from  this,  and  on  desooidin^  we  encamped  On  a  qpot  oppose  to 
that  place. 

The  Xndm  was  here  about  two  hundred  and  sixty  yards  broad, 
but  too  deep  and  rapid  to  be  correctly  sounded.  Its  banks  are  of 
black  stone,  polished  by  the  force  of  the  stream,  and  by  the  white 
sand  which  it  carries  along  with  it,  so  as  to  shine  like  black  marble* 
and  always  to  look  as  if  it  were  wet. 

In  the  midst  are  the  famous  rocks  of  Jellalleea  and  Kenialleea; 
but  the  whirlpool  oi'  which  we  had  heard  so  much,  did  oot  rage 
at  the  season  when  we  passed. 

The  fort  of  Attock  stood  on  a  low  hillock  on  the  left  bank.  It 
is  a  parallelogram,  of  which  the  shortest  Aces  (tliose  parsllel  to  the 
livw)  are  about  four  hundred  yards  long,  the  others  are  of  twice 
diat  kngth.  Ihe  walls  are  of  polished  stone^  but  tfaoni^  the  place 
.  makes  a  handsome  show,  it  is  commanded  hy  a  louj^  bill,  only 
divided  fiom  it  by  a  laTuie ;  and  being  on  a  dofe,  almost  the  whole 
of  the  interior,  and  the  lerccse  of  the  walls  on  three  &oes»  are 
Tunble  from  the  opposite  bank.  The  town,  though  now  decayed,  was 
once  very  considerable. 

The  villsge,'  at  which  we  encamped,  was  a  small  one,  distinguished 
Ibr  a  sort  of  fort,  said  to  be  Iniilt  by  Nadir  Shauh,  and  for  a  fine 
aqoedoct  made  by  some  fimner  chief  of  the  Khuttuks,  to  water  the 
aeighbourmg  lands. 

Notwithstanding  the  violence  of  the  stream,  the  boats  passed 
quicker  here  than  at  any  river  we  had  yet  crossed.  We  also  saw 
many  people  crossing,  or  floating  down  the  riv^,  on  the  skins  of  oxen 

♦a  5 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


inflated,  on  which  thcv  rode  astride,  but  with  most  of  their  bodies  in 
the  water.  This  contrivance  is  also  jnade  use  of  in  the  Oxus,  and 
appeals  to  be  as  ancient  as  tlie  days  of  Alexander*  * 

We  crossed  on  the  20th,  passed  through  the  loil,  and  were  wel- 
comed to  India  by  all  the  Atghauns  of  our  party.  We  halteti  for  two 
days  at  Attock,  and  were  visited  by  the  chiefs  of  the  neiglibour- 
hood. 

The  Governor  of  the  provmise  was  a  respectable  Dooraimee^  with  the 
oomplexioii  and  dfeaa  of  Khonumun  j  but  the  people  of  the  country, 
whether  fiiuofzyes  or  DoomuneeB,  (&r  many  of  that  tribe  have  been 
settled  here  lor  seven  gener>timi8»)  had  a  dress  and  ^pearance .  re* 
sembUog  tfaotfe  of  Ihdianib  One  man  strode  me  pertbularlyf  who 
belonged  to  the  Kantir8»  so  Indian  tribe,  who  inhabit  the  ahnoat  in- 
aoeesaible  hUls  to  the  south  eeat  of  Attock.  He  was  vei^y  blade,  with 
a.kmg  beard ;  and  had  the  shy  look  of  a  savage,  without  any  appear- 
jsnce  of  ferocity  :  he  had  dirty  clothes,  with  a  small  turban,  strangely 
put  on,  and  clutched  his  beard  as  he  sat,  like  the  picture  of  Judas 
Iscariot  in  Lavater. 

The  heat,  during  the  last  night  of  our  stay  at  Attock,  was  extreme. 
A  strong  hot  wind  blew  all  nif?ht  over  the  low  hills  to  the  sotitli  of 
our  camp  ;  and  the  thermometer  was  at  96 '  between  three  and  ibur 
in  the  moriiuig. 

From  Attock,  the  mission  made  three  marches  to  Huhsiui  Ab- 
daul.  The  first  was  over  the  plain  of  Chuch,  which  was  en- 
tirely covered  with  wheat,  and  nearly  flat,  except  for  a  hillock  here 
and  there,  on-  iduch  was  dways  a  viBage.  other  two  were 

through  a  oountiy,  whidi  rose  into  high  waves,  wkh  deep  nmnes  in 
the  hollows.  It  was  generally  dry,  and  unicultivBteiL  'Hie  ooantzy 
began  to  resemble  Hindoostan,  dthon^  a  willow  was  still  now  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTIOM.  f$ 

ikm^-tkmne^^  11iepeapb)wtookoflltediiiig^)  li^ftfiUa^ 
bundled  oonU  ipMk  Ttnum,  «ad  the  A^^taunaliad  loflk  the  M  €f 
the  Fkiihtoo  lan^dtga  They  iHock  ne*  m  the  Mdeif«  and  raort^ 
aannt  people  I  had  y A  ittD.  I  ivas  adoompaaied  fiom  AtliMfc 
Hobeb  Khaun,  the  chief  df  BcxMraun,  and  Hussun  AbdiuL  Hfl  had 
•boot  one  hundsed  horse,  all  dresaed  in  the  Indian  way»  willi  wbaibk 
turbans,  white  coats  of  quilted  cotton,  IndiaD  hilts  t6  thttr.awdrdn 
Indian  Aaabxae  on  their  honesy  and  no  boots }  but  they  all  wofo  ei- 
ther cuirasses  of  leather,  or  shirts  of  mdl,  and  carried  loi^  •pean* 
Their  long  beaidt,  and  wild  auTf  diatingniahed.lhani  at  once  from 
Hindofltoupeei ;  and  their  appeaianoe  was  akogether  peculiar.  Amidst 
bU  these  signs  of  India,  the  valley  of  Hussun  Abdaul  recfdled  to  our  re^ 
collection  the  country  we  had  lelL  It  had  indeed  been  famous  in  all  ages 
for  its  beauty,  and  had  been  a  favorite  resting  place  of  the  great  Moguls, 
on  their  annual  migrations  to  Cashmeer ;  nor  could  there  have  been 
a  scene  better  fitted  for  the  eniovment  of  their  easy  and  hixorioiis 
grandeur.  The  mHuence  of  tlie  rains  of  Hindoostaun,  which  now  be^ 
gan  to  reach  us,  iiad  cooled  the  air,  nnd  jjiven  it  a  peculiar  soilness 
and  pleasantness,  which  disposed  us  to  a  more  perfect  enjoyrtient  of 
the  beauties  ol  the  place.  There  also  was  a  garden,  which  resembled, 
and  almost  equalled,  that  of  Cohaut.  Near  this,  was  the  tomb  of 
Hussun  Abdaiil,  from  winch  the  place  is  named.  It  is  partly  Com- 
posed of  nunbie,  and  stands  in  a  square  enclosure,  within  which  are 
two  very  fine  old  cypresses,  of  remarkable  height.  Hussun  (whose 
surname  Abdaul  is  the  Pushtoo  for  inad,)  was  a  famous  saint  of  Can- 
ddbar,  where  he  is  known  by  the  name  of  Babba  WuUe(6.  About  two 
miles  off,  was  a  royal  garden,  now  gone  to  decay.  There  was  sCtme* 
thing  mebmcholy  and  desolate  in  erety  thitig  about  it,  whidi  iMs 
soaice  less  impMsirotban  its  original  ^endonr*  U  tentained  soma 
daqisndateBQvehasoa^  filled  wi^  the  pm  water  <»f  these  Idlk 
some  jmincd  hniUhigs  (one  of  wfakli  was  imoaibdjlj  deganl) } 
here  we^  ibr  the  hist  time,  saw  the  plaoe-tKeet  wfaieh  iortna  tbe  fiivOu^ 
rite  omamaiit  of  all  the  gardens  of  die  West. 

It  was  at  Hussun  Abdaul  that  tihe  mission  was  to  have  KBmaumd 
tiailw  teof  dmldiHsdomof  OsobnlwAsdeoidads  Ira^bafim 

h 


Digitized  by  Google 


74  INTRODUCTION. 

od  thit  plaoe^  I  had  NoeiTed  oidan  to  retum  to  the  British  provinoM^ 
ind  had  ttmounoed  my  lecill  to  the  King.  Ifc  was,  however*  neoef^ 
nij  to  wait  Hia  M^esty's  answer,  and  also  to  settle  with  the  Sika 
about  a  passage  through  their  territories,  which,  at  first,  they  positire- 
Ij  refused.  This  occasioned  a  halt  of  ten  days ;  during  which  time, 
I W9B  Tisited  by  some  chiefs  of  the  neighbourhood,  and  received  a  lei^ 
ter  Jrom  the  Sultan  of  the  Guckers,  aceompanied  by  a  vast  quaatil^ 
of  grapes,  which  grow  wild  in  his  country.  The  Guckers  are>wdl. 
known  for  the  trouble  they  used  to  occasion  to  the  great  Mbguls. 
They  once  possessed  the  whole  country  between  the  Indus  and  lly- 
daspes,  but  have  been  driven  out  by  the  Siks.  They  have  still  a  high 
military  reputation. 

I  also  receiv  ed  a  visit  from  Moolla  Jaffer,  who  liad  come  with  the 
King's  ha  ram  to  Attock,  whence  they  were  to  fly  to  the  Sik  coun- 
try, if  the  Kiii  L^'s  affairs  took  an  unfavourable  tnrn. 

8()(  >ti  iitter,  1  received  my  answer  from  the  King ;  and,  every  thing 
being  settled  with  the  Siks,  T  was  preparing  to  commence  niy  march, 
when  one  night  I  was  surprised  to  hear  that  the  peesh  khauneh  or  ad- 
vanced tents  of  the  haram  had  arrived  close  to  camp.  This  boded  no 
good,  and  reports  were  soon  circulated  th^  the  King  had  been  de- 
feated. 

The  next  day  showed  a  great  change  in  the  state  ol'  atlans,  the  re- 
port being  now  generally  believed.  All  the  King's  partisans  were 
depressed,  while  some  adversaries  of  his  started  up  where  they  were 
litde  eiqpected. 

MooQa  Jaflkr.  arrived  m  Ihe  ooune  this  day*  and  produced  a  let*- 
ter  fiom  the  King ;  in  which*  he  8aid»  that  his  troops  had  hdiaVcd 
with  fidelity,  hat  that  he  was  defeated;  that  sncfa.  and  sncfa  chiefi 
were  sale;  and  Uiat  no  expense  was  to  be  spared  in  conveying  the 
haram  to  a  place  of  secority.  It  turned  out,  that  the  army  was  at* 
tacked  by  a  small  fiwoe  under  Tntteh  Khaim,  as  it  was  straggling  ofi» 
mixed  with  the  baggage».  after  a  very  long  march  through  the  moun^ 
tains.  Hie  King  and  Akram  Khaun;  were  in  the  rear ;  bot  the  ktteri 
who  had  his  aruKmr  on,  rode  strai^  to  the  scene  of  action.  He  had 
not  above  one  or  two  fanndied  men  when  he  set  out,  and  moat  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


75 


Itoe  were  left  bfihind  as  he  advanoecL  The  day  was  dedded  before 
he  irrivvd;  but  he,  nevertheleaa,  puihed  on,  and  had  penetrated  to 
iSttB  place  whore  Tutteh  Khaim  wa.s,  ^vh^^  he  was  overpowered  and 
daiDf  after  a  Terjr  brave  resistance.  The  King  fled  to  the  moimtaiD^ 
ftom  whence  he  soon  after  issued  to  take  Candahar.  That  enterpriae 
was  alao.  uHimately  unsuccessful.  He  hat  made  two  more  attenqrta 
dnoe  tlieas  and haa  twice  takoa  Beshswert  but  is  now  onoe  more  in 
exile. 

On  the  morning  after  the  bad  news  (July  4th,)  we  set  out  on  our 
march,  as  had  been  previously  settled  ;  we  first  went  to  the  camp  of 
the  haram  to  take  leave  of  Meer  Abool  Hussun  Khaun.  The  camp 
00ntaine«5  nttmerous  enclosures  of  serrapurdahs  or  canvas  screen^?,  and 
a  vast  number  of  cajawas  or  (  an^t  l  panniers,  in  which  women  travel, 
and  we  wanderp<l  long  through  them  betorc  we  couhl  find  the  Khaun. 
He  was  much  less  dcprcssofl  tliaa  I  had  expe<  teil ;  but  talked  with- 
out reserve  of  the  hopelc  ssik  ss  of  the  King  .s  ailairs,  and  of  the  un- 
certainty of  the  rereption  tlie  haram  would  m&it  with  from  the  Siks. 
We  took  a  uidaru  lioK  leave;  and,  crossing  the  hills  Lu  the  south. of 
the  valle),  we  quitted  the  King  of  Cauburb  doiiiiniona.      '  '  ' 

We  were  received  by  a  party  of  Siks  soon  after  we  passed  their 
fiY>ntier ;  and,  from  this  time,  we  met  with  no  trace  of  Dooraunee 
language  or  nunmna  among  the  people,  lliough  pleased  with  the 
flUw  on  the  borders*  we  could  not  but  be  struck  with  the  rough  man- 
ners,'the  barfoatous  language,  and  the  naked  bodies  of  the  people, 
amof^  whom  we  were  oome ;  nor  waa  it  with  any  partiality  thiBt  we 
peiodhred  an  inereared  roflcmbhmce  to  the  cnatomaof  Ifindoatan.  in 
three  mardiet  we  readied  Rawil  Findeen  .  The  country  waa  uneolti* 
vated,  and  much  intersected  by  deep  and  eoLtenarre  ravines.  In  the 
ooone  of  theteoond  march*  we  paased  a  ridge  of  hiUs*  which  would 
hsvebeeo' difficult  to^  cross  had  not  die  Mogul  emperors,  with  (heir 
wonted  nufflificenoe,  cut  ,  a  road  through  the  solid  rocL  lliia  road 
ia  about  three-feurths  of  a  mOe  long,  and  paved  with  great' masses  of 
a  haid.Uue  stone,  well  fitted  in,  and  still  in  good  repair. 

Hie  town  of  Bawil  Findae  is  large  and  populous.   It  ia  a  prett;f 

L  2 


7i 


INXaOOUCTIOM. 


place,  is  compoaed  of  tenmoed  hiMMW»,  mdis  vtgy  like  fttovtt  w«t  of 
the  Indiii*  The  oonntiy  idubiI  b  <^>en,  acefetared  with  fingle  hilky 
and  toknUy  oiihivated.  We  halted  here  no.  d&ya  to  get  Runjeet 
Sing^B  leave  to  advaooei  *  We  now  iaw  a  good  deal  of  the  Sika,  whom 
we  ibnod  diapoaed  to  be  oiTQ,  end  by  no  meana  impleaaing.  They 
were  manly  in  their  appearanco ;  and  weie  tall,  and  thm,  though 
muacolar.  They  wore  little  dolihe^  thdr  legsy  half  their  llii|^  and 
generallj  thdr  arma  and  bodiea,  being  bare;  but  they  bad  often  huge 
aoarfa,  dnown  looadjr  over  one  ahoulder.  Their  tuibana  were  not 
larger  but  high*  and  rather  flattened  in  front.  Their  beards,  and  heir 
on  their  heada  and  bodiea*  ane  never  touched  by  sciusra.  They  ge> 
nemUy  cany  matchlocka,  or  bowa,  the  better  sort  generally  bows } 
and  never  pay  a  visit  without  a  fine  one  in  their  hand,  and  an  emlmtt- 
dered  quiver  by  their  side.  Tliey  speak  Punjaubee^  and  aometimeA 
attempt  Hindostauneei  but  I  aeidom  understood  them  without  an  in* 
terpreter.  Petaian  waa  quite  unknown.  They  do  not  know  the  name 
of  the  Dooraunees,  though  that  tribe  haa  <rfUn  conquered  thair  oomi" 
try.  They  either  call  them  by  the  general  name  of  Khorassaunees,  or 
by  the  erroneous  one  of  Ghtlj^  Jewun  Sing,  the  chief  of  Ravdl 
Pindee,  and  one  of  the  greatest  in  the  Punjaub,  visited  me  here.  He 
was  a  plain,  civil  man,  only  distinguished  from  his  followers  by  his 
decent  appearance  and  manners.  His  numerous  companions  and  at*  ' 
tendants  sat  down  promiscuously  in  a  circle,  and  seom«„Hl  nil  on  a  foot- 
ing of  eqiialitv.  A  Sik  in  my  sm  ice,  once  dined  wiili  tliis  Sirdnr, 
and  found  at  least  two  hundred  and  tifty  guests,  all  the  soldiers  in  his 
immediate  employ  partaking  of  his  fare  even-  day.  When  we  wished  to 
return  his  visit,  we  found  that  he  and  all  his  attendants  were  dnmk ; 
but,  about  four  in  the  afternoon,  he  was  reported  sober,  and  received 
us  in  a  little  smoaky  hovel,  in  a  small  garden,  his  people  in  confu- 
sion as  before.  Most  of  them  continued  to  sit,  while  he  got  up  to  re- 
ceive us.  While  we  were  al  Hawii  Pmdee,  the  haram  overtook  us, 
and  with  it  came  Shaiili  Ztjuiaun.  We  visited  him  on  the  10th  of 
July,  and  were  not  a  little  inleiej^led  by  the  sight  ol  a  2klunaich,  wiiose 
reputation  at  one  time  spread  bo  wide  boiii  m  Persia  and  India.  We 


Digitized  by  Google 


XKTRODUCTIOli. 


rr 


Saaod  him  amded  on  a'  phtn  ocmch,  in  a  neat,  but  nM  » large  tent, 
qpiread  widi  cafpets  and  fdts.'  We  stood  opposite  to  him,  till  he  de*> 
lired  ua  to  be  seeted.  Hia  dsesi  waa  plain ;  a  white  mantle,  faoed 
vith  FBnian  brocade,  and  a  bhnk  shawl  tmban;  but  his  afipearanoa 
waa  yety  kingly.  He  looked  about  forty  when  we  mw  him.  He  had 
a  fine  fboe  and  person.  His  voice,  and  maimer,  strongly  resemUed 
Shauh  Shujaua  $  but  he  was  taller,  and  had  a  longer,  more  regular 
laoe,  and  a  finer  beaid.  He  had  b^  no  means  the  appearance  of  a 
blind  man :  his  eyes,  thou^  phdidj  injured,  retained  black  enoo^ 
to  give-nvaci^  to  his  countenance;  and,  he  always  tinned  ihem  to 
wadk  the  petaon  with  whom  he  was  cokirening.  He  had,  however, 
some  appearance  of  d^ectioa  and  melaachofy.  Afixr  we  were  soeted, 
a  hmg  sQence  ensued,  which  Shauh  Zemaun  broke,  bj  -ifjeaildng  cf 
his  bvothei^s  misfortmic^  and  saying  they  had  prevented  his  showing 
lis  the  atientlim  he  otherwise  woold.  He  then  spoke  of  the  state  of 
affiun,  and  expressed  his  hopes  of  a  duu^e.  He  said,  such  reversti 
were  the  cMumoh  portion  of  Kings ;  and  mentioned  the  hi^rical  ao* 
counts  of  astonishing  revolutioDS  in  the  fortones  cf  various  princes, 
particularly  in  thai  of  Tamerlane.  Had  he  gone  over  all  the  history 
of  Asia,  he  could  scarcely  have  discovered  a  moce  remarkable  instance 
of  the  mutability  of  fortune  than  he  himself  presented ;  blind,  de« 
throned,  and  exiled,  in  a  conntry,  which  he  had  twice  subdued. 

We  marched  from  Kawil  Pindee  on  the  i2th  of  July*  and  reached 
the  Hvdaspes  in  ten  marches.  The  first  six,  were  like  those  already 
meiilioned,  unniltiyatCKl  country,  niuf  }i  c  ut  with  dee|>  ravines  and 
torrent-coui s(  s,  and  (like  the  whole  country  between  the  Hvdaspes 
and  Indus,)  pastured  on  by  droA  e*j  of  horses  of  a  very  good  breed. 
The  part  most  to  the  east  was  l^etter  cultivated  than  the  rest.  In  the 
first  oi  tiiese  marches,  we  crossed  tlie  8vvun,  a  large  rivulet,  which, 
though  only  up  to  our  horses  girths,  Mas  so  rapid  as  scarcely  to  be 
fbrdable.  Several  of  our  camels  w^e  swept  down  by  the  stream. 
The  la,st  four  marches  were  among  hills,  interj^eraed  with  country 
like  tliat  already  described.  The  high  hills  on  'the  north  were  ge- 
nerally concealed  by  fogs,  but  sometimes  we  saw  them  rifling  to  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


78  INTRODUCTION. 

great  hmfjOA  above  the  douds.  The  whole  of  our  joiimcj  acroM  the 
tcact  between  the  Indiu  and  Hydaspes  waa  about  one  hundred  and 
aixty  miles ;  for  which  flpaoe»  the  oountiy  ia  among  the  ationgest  I 
haye  ever  aeen.  The  difficulty  of  our  passage  across  it  was  increaaed 
by  heavy  rain.  On  one  oocaBion»  the  rear  guard*  with  some  gentle- 
men of  the  mission,  were  cut  off  from  the  rest  by  the  awdling  of  a 
brookf  whk^  had  not  been  a  foot  deep  when  they  be^n  to  cross.  It 
came  down  with  suiprising  violence»  carrying  away  some  loaded  ca- 
mels that  were  crossing  at  the  time^  and  rising  about  ten  feet,  within 
a  minute.  Nothing  could  be  grander  than  this  torrent.  Such  was 
ita  force,  that  it  ran  in  waves  like  the  sea,  and  rose  against  the  bank 
in  a  ridge,  like  the  surf  on  the  coast  of  Coromandel. 

While  in  the  hilly  country,  our  road  sometimes  lay  through  the 
beds  of  torrents  like  this,  between  moderately  high  hills,  which,  though 
by  no  means  so  strikinjj  as  the  passes  of  the  same  sort  in  Afrrhaunis- 
taun,  were  no  less  dan^a  rous.  In  one  of  these  defiles  the  mission 
was  stopped  by  a  body  of  Siks,  who  occupied  the  liills,  and  commen- 
ced an  attack  on  us ;  first,  by  rolling  down  laigt  stones,  and,  at  last, 
by  opening  a  fire,  which  was  immediately  returned.  Tlieir  fire  was 
at  length  put  a  stop  to,  by  the  interposition  of  the  Siks,  wiio  attended 
the  mission  on  the  pan  of  Jewun  Sing,  l  inturtimately  not  till  one  maa 
had  been  killed  in  the  valley,  and  1  uptaui  i'lLnian  shot  through  the 
arm,  while  ascending  the  hill,  at  ihe  head  of  a  party  of  Sepoys. 

The  most  remarkable  sight  we  met  with  in  this  part,  and  perhaps 

in  the  whole  of  our  journey,  was  an  edifice  About  fifteen  miles  fixim 

Banda,  our  aeoond  march  fiom  Hawil  findee.   The  heaviness  of  tfie 

rain  prevented  our  tpfiwKmg  from  that  place  on  the  day  after  we 

leachod  it;  and  as  we  were  near  the  [dace  which  Ma|or  l¥i]fovd  sup- 

poaes  to  have  bean  the  site  of  Taxila,  a  party  determined  to  set  oat 

in  quest  of  die  ruina  of  that  ckj.  In  the  conne  of  a  drcuit  of  about 

forty  milea,  we  eaw  the  nuns  of  some  Gucker  towns,  destroyed  by  the: 

Sik%  and  thoae  of  aome  othera  still  more  andent*  which  had  sufoed 

the  same  fote  from  the  Mnaaufanans.s  we  alao  saw  one  or  two  cara-. 

wmmi  here  called  Rabauts;  and  we  heard  of  an  obdiaic  of  a  ain|^ 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTBODUCTION.  f9 

■tone,  fifly  or  asty  feet  at  ft  plioe  oiled  Rswieey  which  wis  too 
distant  to  visit:  but  we  met  willi  no  ruins  of  such  antiquity  as  to 
have  any  pietenaioos  to  a  connection  with  Taxila.  however,  at 
length  discovered  a  remarkable  building,  which  seemed  at  first"  to 
be  a  cupola,  but  when  approaclied,  was  found  to  be  a  soHd  striiutare, 
on  a  low  artificial  mound.  The  height  from  the  top  aiibe  momid  to 
the  top  of  the  building  was  about  seventy  &et,  and  the  drcumferenee 
was  found  to  be  one  hundred  and  fifi^y  paces.  It  was  built  of  large 
pieces  of  a  hard  stone  common  in  the  neighbourhood  (which  appeared 
to  bo  composetl  of  petrified  vegetable  matter),  mixed  with  smaller 
pieces  of  a  sandy  stone.  The  greater  part  of  the  outijidc  was  cased 
with  the  first  mentioned  stone,  cut  (^nite  smooth,  and  the  whole 
seemed  intended  to  liave  been  tluis  tuf  ril,  (iu)ii£^b  it  had  eulu  r  Ijocii 
left  iiicompiete,  or  the  casing  hatl  tailen  down.  The  plan  ot  the 
whole  could,  however,  be  easily  discovered.  Some  broad  steps  (now 
mostly  ruined)  lead  to  the  base  of  tiie  pile :  round  the  base  is  a 
mouitiing,  ou  which  are  pilasters  about  four  feet  high,  and  six  feet 
asunder ;  these  have  plain  capnals,  and  support  a  cornice  marked 
with  parallel  lines  and  headings.  The  whole  of  this  may  be  seven  or 
cigliL  feet  high,  firom  the  uppermost,  step  to  the  top  of  the  cornice. 
The  building  then  retires,  leaving  a  ledge  of  a  foot  or  two  broad, 
fiom  whidi  fises  a  pcrpen^cular  wall  about  six  feet  higli :  aboitt  a 
loot  ab07e  the  ledge  is  a  fiUet,  fonned  by  stones  projecting  a  veiy 
little  ttom  the  wall,  and  at  the  top  of  the  wall  is  a  more  pio|ecting 
Qornloe^  fipom  which  the  sphere  springs.  Hie  stones  of  the  fiidng  are 
about  three  feet  and  a  half  k)n|^  and  one  and  a  half  broad*  and  are 
so  pot  in,  that  the  ends  only  are  exposed.  The  top  is  flat,  and  on  it 
thcf  fenndations  of  walls  are  disooveiaUe,  endbphig  a  qpaoe  of  eleven 
paces  long  by  five  broad ;  a  third  of  this  area  is  cut  offby  the  feun- 
dation  of  a  cross  waU.  These  was  nothing  at  all  Hindoo  in  the  ap- 
pearance of  this  building ;  most  of  the  party  thoui^t  it  decidedly 
Grecian.  It  was  indeed  as  like  Grecian  architecture  as  any  building 
which  Europeans,  in  remote  parts  of  the  country,  could  now  construct 
by  the  hands  of  unpractised  native  builders. 


M  INTRODUCTION. 

Ths  iMtiires  called  it      Tope  o£  Afiutiiof Miit»  iad  «dd  k 
buill  by  the  9odi.  *  ■ 

MiDy  bwheit  and  cue  pretty  kiige  BiDyaii  tiee^  grew  out  of  Uie 
building. 

Befiire  we  reached  the  Hydaspes,  we  had  a  viev  of  the  famous  foft 
of  Rotas,  but  it  waa  at  a  great  distahoe^  owing  to  our  having  left  the 
main  road,  and  crossed,  fifteen  or  sixteen  miles  lower  donm  than  the 
oinal  lerxy  at  Julum.  Rotaa  ire.utidenrtood  to  be  an  estebaEvre  bat 
strong  fort  on  a  low  Iiill. 

We  crossed  the  Hydaspes  at  Jellalpoor,  in  the  course  of  fire  days, 
from  the  22d  of  July  to  the  2Gth  inclusive.  I  was  greatly  struck 
with  the  difference  between  the  banks  of  this  river ;  the  lefl  bank  had 
all  the  characteristics  of  the  plains  of  India,  it  was  indeed  as  flat  and 
as  rich  as  Bengal,  which  it  trreatly  resembled  :  the  ri;iht  hank,  on  the 
contrary,  was  formed  bv  the  end  of  tlu^  ranjio  of  s  alt  liills,  formerly 
seen  at  C  alla-baugh,  and  had  an  air  of  extreme  ruggedness  and  wildness, 
that  must  inspii  e  a  fearful  presentiment  of  the  country  he  was  entering, 
into  the  mind  oi  a  traveller  from  tlie  east.  The  hills  still  retain  the  red 
colour  for  which  they  were  so  remarkable,  where  we  crossed  them 
before.  Tliev  came  lu  the  edge  of  the  river,  which  being  also  divided 
by  islands,  presents  exactly  the  appearance  one  expects  from  the 
accounts  of  the  ancients.  So  precisely  does  Quintus  Curtius's  de- 
scription of  the  scene  of  Poms's  battle  ccurrespond  with  die  part  of 
the  Hydaspes  where-  ire  crossed,  that  several  geutkmen  of  die  mi^ 
SHKi  iribo  leUdthepaasage  on  the  spot,  were  pertnaded  that  it  reftfied 
to  the  Teiy  ]^Acd  befivre  their  eyea. 

After  passing  the  Hydaspes,  ire  continnad  our  march  aanoas  the 
P^anb,  vduch  oeenpied  fiom  the  flSdi  ef  My  tOl  the  99th  of  An. 


*  Tope  i»  an  eiqpreuion  used  for  a  mound  or  burrow  as  far  west  as  Peshawer,  and 
itaanioynh  ivtlieiHme  of  •»  adjoining  village.  The  chawing  was  made  at  Pbouaundtf 
my  direction,         sketches  made  by  different  gendomcn  on  the  day  after  our  viait  t» 
Maunicyaula.    In  such  circumstances,  minute  accuraqr  cannot  be  expected,  but  ifae 
neral  idea  oiuiT^ed  by  the  drawing  is  I  tliink  correct 


4 


.  Digitized  by  Google- 


■ 

I 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION.  S| 

giMb  Mj  acooimt  of  thb  pwt  of  the  journey  need  not  bt  long :  as 
&r  weA  it  Lahore  has  been  visited  by  English  gentlemcai ;  mil  Snr 
John  Malcohn  hm  alraadjr  given  all  that  is  datiiable  to  know  iMpect 

ing  the  Siks,  the  most  wwqarlmMe  part  of  the  population. 

The  fertility  of  the  Punjaub  appears  to  have  been  too  much  ex- 
tolled bv  our  fTfOfrraphers  :  except  near  rh  ers,  no  part  of  it  will  bear 
a  comparison  witli  the  British  pro\  ince.-,  in  Hindostan,  and  still  less 
witii  Jieiifral,  which  it  has  been  thouglit  to  resemble.  In  the  part  T 
passed  through,  the  soil  was  generally  sandy)  and  by  no  means  rich  : 
the  country  nearer  tiie  iiiils  was  said  to  be  better,  and  that  further  to 
the  south,  worse.  Of  tlie  iour  divisitHih  oi  the  I'unjaub  east  of  the 
Hydaspes,  the  two  nearest  to  that  river  are  chiefly  pastured  on  by  herds 
of  oxen  and  buffaloes  :  and  that  most  to  the  east,  towards  the  Hysu- 
drus,  or  Sutledge,  though  most  sterile,  is  best  cultivated.  The  two 
former  are  quite  flat ;  the  latter  is  wavyt  but  there  is  not  a  hill  to  the 
east  of  the  Hjrdaspes,  and  nrdj  a  tiee^  except  of  the  dwarfish  race 
of  BaubooL  On  the  wholes  not  a  third  of  the  oountxj  we  aaw  was 
eoltivated*  It,  iMwerer,  oontained  many  &ie  villages,  and  acme  laige 
towna,  hnt  moat  of  the  latter  bore  'strong  marks  of  decay.  Unuitsb 
slone^  lihe  sacred  dty  of  the  SBks*  and  IsAdy  the  seat  of  thdr  nadonal 
oouncils,  fl|ypesired  to  be  mcreasing  $  on  die  contrary,  Lahore  is  has- 
tening fint  to  ruin,  bnt  the  domes  and  minarets  of  the  moaqjues,  the 
lofty  walls  of  the  fort,  die  Qiassy  terracea  of  the  garden  €)£  Shaulimar, 
llie  iqp]en£d  mansoieum  of  the  emperor  Jehangew,  and  the  number^ 
less  inferior  tombs  and  places  of  worship  that  surround  the  town,  stiU 
render  it  an  object  of  curiosity  and  admiration. 

The  inhabitants  become  more  and  more  like  the  natives  of  Hin^ 
doetan,  as  we  move  towards  the  east :  the  most  numerous  class  were 
the  Juts,  and  next  to  them  the  Hindoos :  the  Siks,  though  the  mas- 
ters of  the  country,  were  few  in  nninber  ;  we  ot)cn  made  a  whole  march 
without  seeing  one,  and  ihev  no  wiiere  bore  any  proportion  to  the  rest 
of  the  population.  Afler  crossing  the  Hydaspes.  we  found  the  Silcs 
unmannerly  and  sullen,  probably  firom  political  caui»es>  for  they  are 

M 


Digitized  by  Google 


i 


$2  IHTRODUCTION. 

naturally  a  merry  people,  careless,  chiUlish.  nncl  easily  amused,  fond 
of  hunting,  and  friven  up  to  driukiiig  and  (kl)auchery.  Almost  the 
whole  of  the  Tunjaub  belongs  to  Runjeet  tjiiig,  who  in  1805  was  but 
one  of  many  (  hicts,  but  who,  when  we  passed,  had  acquired  the 
sovereignty  of  aii  the  biks  in  the  Punjaub,  and  was  assuming  the  title 
of  King.  Towards  the  east,  his  territories  are  bounded  by  states  un- 
der the  protection  oi  the  British,  but  on  all  the  other  sides  he  is 
busied  in  subjugating  his  weak  neiglibours,  by  the  same  mixture  of 
force  and  Liati  that  he  so  successfully  employed  against  the  chiefs  of 
bis  own  nation.  On  crossing  the  Sutledge,  we  reached  the  British 
cantonment  of  Lodeeana,  firom  whence  the  mission  proceeded  straight 
to  DeUy,  a  diitanoe  of  two  himdied  mika. 


Digitized  by  Google 


BOOK  I. 

GEOGRAPHICAL  DESCRIPTION  OF  AFGHAUNISTAUN. 


CHAP.  L 

i  SITUATION  AND  BOUXDABIfS  OF  iVPGHAUNISTAUN. 

¥T  b  dHBcuIt  to  fix  the  limits  of  the  Idqgdom  of  CmbuL  Tfaa 
^  oountnet  under  flie  wvenaffOj  oi  the  King  of  Craln]],  onoe  eix^ 
tended  iny^f*"  degrees  in  longitude  from  Siriiindf  about  cme  hnndied 
and  fifkjr  mike  fiom  Dolly,  to  Meshhed,  about  an  equal  distuMO  fiom 
the  Caspian  sea.  In  breadth  they  reached  firom  the  Oxus  to  the 
Persian  gulph,  a  space  indnding  thirteen  dc^greee  of  latitude^  or' nine 
hundred  and  ten  miles.  ' ; 

But  this  great  empire  has,  of  late,  suffered  a  considerable  diminu> 
tion,  and  the  distracted  state  of  the  government  prevents  the  King's 
exercising  authority  even  (n  er  sevt  ral  of  the  countries  which  are  still 
iiicUuled  in  his  domiuious.  In  thi^  uik  ortaintv  I  shall  adopt  the  test 
made  use  of  by  the  Asiatics  themselves,  and  sliail  consider  tlie  King's 
sovereignty  as  extending  over  all  the  coiinLriea  in  which  the  *  KhooUia 
is  read,  and  the  money  coined  in  his  name. 

In  this  view  the  present  kmgdom  of  Caubul  extends  from  the  west 
of  Heraai  iti  longitude  62',  to  the  eastern  boundary  of  Cashmeer  in 
longitude  77"  east,  and  from  the  month  of  the  Indns»  in  latitude  24% 
to  ixe  Oxus,  in  ]«Utude»  nocth. 

The  whole  space  included  between  thoee  Hnee  of  latitude  and  loa- 
gitode*  does  not  belong  to  the  Kmg  of  Caubul,  and  it  will  hereafter 


*  The  Khootba  U  a  part  of  the  Mahonunedan  service,  in  which  the  king  of  the  counti^ 

is  prayoi}  for  Inserting  a  prince's  name  in  the  Kliootbn,  and  inscribing  it  on  the  current 
coiUf  ore  reckoned  in  the  East  the  most  certain  ackuowledgments  of  jWTereign^. 

♦  M  « 


Digitized  by  Google 


SITUATION  OF  AlVtHAUNISTAtm. 


appear,  that  of  those  u  hich  may  be  considered  as  annexed  to  hit 
crown,  many  o^vr  iiiiu  l)!it  a  nominal  obedience. 

This  kingdom  is  bounded  on  the  east  by  Hindustan,  in  which  it 
however  comprehends  Cashmeer,  and  the  countries  on  the  left  bank 
of  the  Indus.   On  tfaeaontli  it  may  be  oosiMljMid  to  ba^e  the  Per* 
nan  gulph ;  and  on  the  west,  a  deaait  eitendfl  along  Ihe  whole  of  the 
firontiai.   Its  northern  frontier  is  fi»nied  by  the  mountains  of  the^ 
eastern  Gsucasus,  which  are,  however,  inchided  within  the  western 
part  of  the  boundary  there  formed  by  the  Qxns. 

AlOCOrdmg  to  the  nomenclature  of  our  latest  m^^Mi*,  it  compre- 
hends Afghaunistaun  and  S^^tan,  with  part  of  Khorasan  and  of  Mak- 
ran ;  BaUc,  with  Tokarestann  and  Kilan ;  Kuttore,  Caubul,  Candahar, 
Sindy,  and  Cashmeeri  together  witfai  a  portion  of  l4diore^  md  the 
grcitsr  part  of  Moultan. 

The  whole  population  of  tlir  1<  inborn  cannot  be  under  fourteen 
tnillions.    This  was  flic  tiuinln  i  fixed  bv  oup  of"  the  gentlemen  of 
the  mission,  on  a  (  alcuhition  of  tiie  cxient  aiul  comparative  popula- 
tion of  the  different  proviiu  i  s.    All  extensive  desarts  wen^  excluded} 
no  greater  rate  of  population  than  one  bundled  to  tbe  Ntjunre  mile, 
was  allowed  to  any  large  tract  except  Caslmieer,  and  sonictimeii  (as 
in  the  whole  country  of  the  Hazaurelis)  only  eight  souls  were  allowed 
to  the  square  mile. 

The  diflbrent  nations  who  inhabit  the  kingdom  of  Caubul  were 
fqiposed  to  oontrtbote  to  tiie  population  inthe  ibUowing  proportions: 
Afghauns,    -   --   --   --   --   -  4,300,000 

t  Beloches,     -  --   --  --   --  1,000,000 

tlWrtazsofandescriptkms,  .  -  :  -  IfiOOfiOO 
Fsrsians  (indnding  Taujiks),  ...  -  1,500,000 
Indians  (Cashmeeiees,  Juts,  &c  &c.)  .  -  ^700,000 
IfisoeUaneous  tribes,  flOOyOOO 
Jim  principal  part  of  my  aoooont  of  Csubul,  wiU  be  occupied  by 
the  A^hauns,  but  I  shall  first  give  a  sketch  of  the  whole  kingdom  $ 

•  Airnwi^nillli's  Asia,  1801, 

t  i  coacave  the  Belocbai  and  Tartan  to  be  much  tmdar-rated  is  this  taUe. 


.  Digitized  by  Google 


and,  as  the  surrounding  countries  mav  not  be  sufficiently  familiar  to 
my  r^ulers,  to  enable  ihem  to  undei  stiuid  the  limits  of  the  kinirdom, 
or  the  frequent  allusions  to  its  neighbouring  states^  I  aliaii  b^in  witk 
a  slight  account  of  the  part  of  Asia  in  which  it  is  situated. 

If  we  traverse  the  iuti^doms  of  Hmdoataii  and  Caubui,  trom  the 
Mat  of  Bengal  to  Henot,  we  shall  find  them  every  where  bounded 
on  the  north  by  a  diflin  of  nomitauis  which  is  covered  with  perpetual 
iiMnr,  ahnoat  tfa»  whole  of  that  €Xtflat»  and  from  which  all  the 
great  rivon  of  both  oonntriw  appear  to  UBoa.  "Biisdiauiooimneiioea 
near  the  Bommpooter,  and  tuna  neadjuocth-weflt  aa  ftr  as  Gaah- 
meer:  during  lifab  part  of  ita  oouiae  it  ia  called  Hemalleh  by  the 
nithrea  of  the  ndg^ibonring  oountriea.  Fraoi-Gaahnieer  ita  graend 
diieotion  ia  a  little  to  the  aoiith-i«peat>  aa  fiur.aa  the  hiffk  anowy  peak 
of  Hindoo  Coosh,  nearly  nofdi  of  CanbnL  Prom  thia  peak  ita  hei^ 
diniinidiea»  it  no  longer  bears  perpetual  snow,  and  is  soon  aftffl'  lost 
in  a  gnnpBci  momitains*  wtuch  stretch  in  length  from  Caubui  almost 
to  Heraut,  and  ceeapy  more  than  two  degrees  of  latitude  in  their 
breadth.  Some  ranges  issue  from  this  maaa  on  the  west*  and  extend 
go  far  into  Persia,  as  to  justify,  if  not  completely  to  establish,  the 
opinion  of  the  ancients,  which  connected  the  range  I  have  be^  de* 
scribing,  with  mount  C  aucasus  on  the  west  ot  the  Caspian  sea.  * 

From  Cashmeer  to  Hindoo  Coo-vh,  the  whole  range  is  known  by 
the  name  of  that  peak.  From  thence  to  the  meridian  of  Heraut,  the 
mouulains  have  no  general  name  among  the  natives,  and  I  shall  call 
them  by  that  of  Paropamisus,  which  is  already  applictl  to  them  by 
European  GeograpliL Ts.  But,  although  the  chain  of  mountains  which 
I  have  described,  appears  troni  the  south  to  form  the  natural  boun- 

•  The  follo\',  inn- pa«?age  in  Arrinn  (hook  Hi.  r^mp.  iS.)  will  show  the  oxtr-nt  firtrihtitri?  hy 
the  Greek*  to  thin  mountain.  It  is  mtruductxi  when  Alexandor  arrives  at  the  ibot  of  mount 
Chiwawi  at  apoint  ivltidi  all  geografdien  have  pland-in  die  iiriglihiwilMWifl  OmMiMr. 
X>  it       ^  X»¥**c9<  th^nXOT  fta  tfii,  &c.  &c  &C.    "  The  mpuiitnin  of  Caucasus  is  fAid  by 

Aristobuliu  to  be  aa  high  as  any  in  Asia,  but  it  ia  bm  in  most  parts,  aod  paiticularlj  ia 
**  this  place.  It  stretche*  for  a  great  extent,  «o  Aat  mount  Taurus,  wlildi  dlvids  FteiK 
**phj4^lirandicia,  ia  said  tabs  partof  it,  as  well  as  other  high  mountains,  distinguished 

**  Gkmu  CaneaSUt  by  vnrioTi«:  Tinrnf»<?,  »ir!-?nc^  from  thf  fliffen'nt  nations  to  whnw  country 
**  extend."  A  more  detailed  account  ot  tiua  moiuiuun  will  be  tuund  m  tlie  same 
mtar,  book    dnfi.  3  md  {.  and  in  FBoykNatarsl  EHMai;^^  boA«  ds^h  a;. 

•  If  3 


86: 


TABLE' LiUND  Gt  TIBET. 


dary  of  Iliiidostan  and  Caubul,  we  mufit  lodk  fivther.noidi  for  ihe 
ridge  liiai  terminates  the  natmaL  dMalon,  in  which  thoae.oouiitriei 
are  situated,  and  containa  the  remoteat  aouzcea  of  their  greateatriTCora. 

Our  geographers  lay  down  a  fange  of  mountauia  under  the  name 
of  Mns  Tag,  which  aeema  to  oommeace  to  the  north  of  the  eastern 
extremity  of  Hemalleh,  and  to  run  paraUel  to  that  numntain  on  the 
north,  as  fir  as  the  sixty-seventh  degree  of  east  longitnde. 

The  inquiries  made  on  the  Ckubul  miaaion,  have  tiaoed  but  a  small 
part  of  the  extent  of  this  diain.  LAeutenant  Macartney  could  follow 
it  with  certainty  no  fitfther  than  from  Auksoo  to  the  west  of  Leh,  or 
Ladauk,  but  the  reaming  part  of  its  alleged  course  is  probable,  and 
thom^  I  have  not  access  to  the  proofs  of  its  existence,  I  have  no 
reason  to  doubt  it ;  I  shall,  therefore,  take  that  part  of  the  chain  finr 
granted,  and  include  it  in  the  namp  of  Mooz  Taugh.  * 

Though  this  mountain  stands  on  hio;licr  ground  than  Hindoo 
Coosh,  its  height  i'ram  its  base,  and  perhaps  the  absolute  elevation  of 
its  summits,  are  inti  rior  to  those  of  the  hitter  mountain. 

It  is  in  the  southern  side  of  Mooz  Taugh,  tliat  the  Indus  appears 
to  have  its  source,  and  on  the  opposite  side  the  waters  run  north  into 
Chinese  Toorkistaun. 

The  slope  of  the  countries  on  each  side  of  the  mountains,  is  pointed 
out  by  the  direction  of  the  streams ;  but  on  the  north,  the  descent, 
«a  far  at  leaat  aa  my  inlbnnation  goes,  is  generally  gradual  and  unin- 
terrupted: while,  on  the  aouth,  (iiere  is  a  table  land  beneath  Moo* 
Taugh,  which  ia  supported  by  Hemalldi  and  Hindoo  Gioah,  and 
from  which  the  deseent  is  oomparativdy  sudiden  mto  the  plama  of 
Hindostan,  and  of  the  north  cmHtom  part  of  the  Gmbul  dominions. 

The  medium  breadth  of  this  Table  Land  may  be  about  two  hun- 
dred milea,  but  I  have  before  said  that  I  hsTe  no  mfoimation  about 
it  eaat  of  the  meridian  of  Ladauk.  The  eastern  part  of  it  ia  oocnpied 
by  the  extensile  country  of  Tibet;  weat  of  which  are  Little  Tibet 

*  'Diis  term,  which  in  Turklsl!  signifies  ice-hill,  is  appli«?<l  to  onr  plnrr  in  t>if  range  at 
Ittist,  where  it  m  occasioned  by  a  glacier  uear  ihe  rotui  Irum  Varciuid  tu  Laudauk.  Tliis 
tmge^  oraiMrtiGiibrpassini^iiMrdMnMd  jwtnMtte  Is  «dl  lawmiaToiMlM» 
t«m  b!f  the  mm*  of  .KaRflMcimiiii. . 


Digitized  by  Google 


IT 

I 
I 


BEIXXn' TAtJOH.  ffj 

"  -  • 

and  Kauflhkaur,  mountainous  countries  df  no  great  extent.  To  the 
north-w^.  of  the  kit  mentioned  country,  is  the  pbin  of  Funcm 

I  Kaothkaur  uid  Famere  are  bounded  on  the  west  hy  a  range  of  mouiip 

;  tuns,  which  runs  from  the  chain  of  Mooz  Taugh  to  that  uf  Hindoo 

Coosb,  and  which  supports  the  western  face  of  the  Table  Land. 

;  This  range,  though  inferior  in  height  to  that  of  Hindoo  Coosh,  has 

snow  on  its  summits  throughout  the  most  part  of  the  year,  at  lea^jt  as 
far  as  its  junc  t  ion  with  Mooz  Taugh.  It  leaves  the  range  of  Hindoo 
C«H»^h  in  longitude  71 '  east,  and  runs  in  a  direction  to  the  ea<;t  ot 
north,  till  it  rneets  Mooz  Taugh :  a  range  of  mountains  running  also 
north  and  south,  is  crossed  further  north  hy  tiie  road  from  Kokaun 
to  Cashgar,  and  niuA  be  considered  as  a  continuanoii  of  this  chain. 
It  is  there  lower  ilian  before ;  so  that  it  is  only  hi  severe  seasons  that 
it  retains  its  snow  longer  than  the  beginning  of  summer :  a  little 
to  the  north  of  this  road,  it  gives  rise  to  (he  Jaxartes ;  and  beyond 
tius  my  inlfaffmfltiffli  oenes.  Our  maps,  however,  continue  it  towsfds 
the  nozth,  till  it  leaches  a  lange  of  mountains  which  divides  Chinese 
Tartaiy  from  SQwria,  and  separates  the  wsitav  of  the  fonner  .oountiy 

j  fiom  those  that  flow  into  the  Aictic  Ocean. . 

Our  nu^  call  the  range  which  runs  fiom  Moos  Tau^  to  Hindoo 
Cooah»  Bdnr  Tag,  whidi  is  evidently  a  corruption  of  the  INirkiah 
wQiA  BdwA  Tmi^  oar  Cloudy  Mountains ;  as  I  know  of  no  g^oeral 
name  iqpiilied  fay  the  people  of  Toorkistaun  to  this  range,  I  shall  use 
Ihe  term  Beloot  Tsn^  ibc  it,  on  the  &w  occasions  I  shall  have  for 
moitioning  it 

Beloot  Taug^  forms  the  boundary  between  the  political  divisions  - 
of  Independent  Toorkistaun  and  Chinese  Toorkistaun.  It  also  forms 
I  these  two  countries  into  two  ni^ural  divisions,  since  it  separates  thdr^ 

istreamSf  and  gives  rise  to  rivers  which  water  both  countries. 

I  know  of  no  branches  sent  out  by  Beloot  Taugh  towards  the  east. 
To  the  west  it  sends  out  several  branches,  which,  with  the  valleys  be- 
tween them,  form  the  hitiv  rotnUries  of  Kurrateggeen,  Slioi^'hnaun, 
and  Durwaus.  The  most  southerly  of  them  bounds  Budukhahaua  on 


Digitized  by  Google 


88  OXU& 

die  north,  aa  Hindoo  Coosh  does  on  the  souIJl  .  I  know  little  of  the 
extent  or  direction  of  these  beanches,  but  one  of  them  seems  to 
stretch  westerly  to  n^r  Samarcand.  These  are  the  principal  ranges 
of  mountainf?  north  of  Hindoo  Coosh  ;  hid  a  fow  words  are  required 
respecting  the  rivers  and  coimtries  between  that  rapge,  ilfeioot  Xaugh, 
and  tlie  Caspian  sea. 

I  have  already  mentioned  the  source  of  the  Jaxartes.    It  holds  ft 
course  to  the  north  oi  west,  till  it  falls  into  the  Lake  of  Arul. 

The  Oxus  rises  in  a  glacier  near  Pooshtee  Khur,  a  loftv  peak  oi' 
Beloot  Taugh,  in  the  most  northerly  part  ot  iiudukhshuun.  Its  ge- 
neral course  is  west  as  liir  tui  the  sixty-tliird  degree  of  longitude,  from 
whence  it  pursues  a  north-westerly  course,  through  a  desai^,  to  the 
lake  of  And.  The  rough  oountry  about  the  sounse  of.  the  Jaxartes* 
is  udbabited  by  waadeihig  Kirghizzes  s  but,  from  the  fdeoe  ivbere  h 
kftvee  the  hOls  to  longitiide  66*  or  67^*  east*  both  banks  are  oecn|iied 
by  the  tlriiek  kingdom  of  Ferghauiwy  called  also  KcJawm  from  Ihe 
lesideBoe  of  die  sovereign.  To  the  west  of  longitude  W  easti  llie 
northem  batik  is  inhalnted)  fint  by  JQighiises»  and  than  by  Eusf' 
aanksy  both  rude  ^nd  pastoral  nations.  On  the  sonthem  bank^  ta 
the  ivest  of  longitude  66"  east,  is  a  desatt,  wliich  extends  m  a  soutli- 
^pesterly  direction  to  the  inhabited  couhtiy  of  Kkoiassaun.  Its 
breadlli  varies,  but  in  latitude  40 it  is  seven  days  journey  broad,  and 
it  there  separates  the  Uabek  kingdoms  of  Orgunge  and  Bokhaura  ; 
the  first  of  which  lies  on  the  Caspian,  and  the  other  between  the 
Oxus,  the  desart,  and  the  mountainous  countries  under  Beloot  Taugh. 
The  character  of  these  kingdoms,  or  at  least  of  Bokhaura,  is  that  of 
desart,  enclosing  oases  of  various  size  and  fertility.  All  the  country  • 
west  of  Bf'loot  Tan»h,  and  north  of  the  Oxus.  is  railed  Toorkistaun, 
a  term  which  m;»v  be  extended  to  the  east  oi  Ht  loot  Taugh,  as  far  as 
there  is  reason  to  think  the  f  urkish  language  is  spoken ;  but  when  I 
have  occasion  to  speak  of  that  division,  I  shall  call  it  Chinese  Toor- 
kistaun, and  the  oilier  Toorkistaun  alone.  The  name  of  Tartary  is 
unlmown  in  those  regions.    There  remains  a  tract,  bebweea  the  Oxm» 


Digitized  by  Google 


'and  tlie  Paropanman  mountains,  which  ought  to  be  mentioned  witli 
ToorkisUau  f  a'?  its  principal  population  is  Uzbek),  tliough  it  is  a  pro- 
vince of  Caubiil.    It  has  Butiukshauii  on  the  cast ;  and  the  thinly  in- 
habited t  (mill  I  \ ,  which  joins  to  its  west,  about  Shibbergaun,  is  mclad* 
ed  in  Ivliorassami.    The  ojuntry  slopes  towards  the  Oxus.    Small  as 
it  is,  it  inchidci  hcverai  piiueipalities ;  and  is  diversilied  with  liiil  and 
plain,  marsh  and  desart.    Our  geographers  coramonlj  call  the  whole 
division  Bulkh,  from  the  principal  city  it  contains,   Tliis  name  is  in- 
Mwrate ;  imt  *  at  I  know  no  odier  general  name  ior  the  wboltf  taet^ 
I  dmlk  fsoodiiiie  to  apply  it  to  Ab  dmUoii,        whidi^  I  dnfl;ddM 
my  aooonnt    liie  oomitry  noith  o£HindM  CooA> 
'  Hie  dMuitnes  immedialrfy  to  the  •onOi  of  HednUelnmd'Htkdflit 
Gboih  ate  reiidmd. ragged  by  lower  moiinteiii%'whioli  ran  -pendlelte 
thegfeet  nyage»  aad-  bybfwcfaea  which  UNue  ftom  it.  Jn  But^xSiy 
vegpOM  thw  Mned  are  AilMni  Beptwit  -NipeiiU  Kunmoa^  MiBi  fli* 
rteiiggurr  ^1  imder  Hcmillefa.  Where  Ciie  gieeti'nttige  t»ri»  'tty 
file  wert,  diew  lopwer  mountdiis  eie  moie  feiiuite.fidiii  lt»'  end-tke  ^• 
Ugjh  Telley  of  Cmhieher  oeeaiue*.'l&e  imerviiL'  To  tfafe  mii£bt  4dA 
iOQtib<we8t  of  OMhmoer>  ia  a  mouDtmoui  cbiiiili^yf  .wlueh  boosAi  Ai^ 
AmjaMb  cn  the  north»  end  si^lieB  its  ttremii  with  water ;  £hr»of  the 
Sm.nr&n^  which  inteniecl;  tiiot  country,  the  Hydaapee  aloseciiBiea 
thnpQ|^  Caahmeer,  aiid  has  its  sonroe  in  l^ie  more  remote  mount^he 
on  the  north.    This  mountainous  country  is  inhabited  by  difierent 
ngsB  of  Iwlisn  descent  -  The  plains  of  the  Punjaub»  with  some  trifl* 
ing  esceptioiiir  belmig  to-  the  Siks ;  and,  from  the  southern  frontier 
of  that  cQcrata7»  there.eaEfeenda  a  saad^  desert,  elmoet*  to  the,ge)|ih  of 
Cutch* 

This  desart,  which  is  about  four  hundred  miles  broad  from  east  to 
west,  is  in  some  places  entirely  uninhabited,  and,  in  others,  thinly 
flcatteiedt  with  yiUages,  and  cultivaition.   The  greater  part,  if  not  the 


*  It  might  perhaps  have  b€«Q  prdenible  to  have        tlie  nunie  ot*  Bactria,  tiiuugh  that 

N 


Digitized  by  Google 


90 


SOLDfAUM* 


\\  hole  of  it,  is  cornposeii  ol:'  sand  kills,  or  still  more  barren  plains  of 
liaid  clay.  The  edge  of  it  on  the  north  is  moderately  fertile,  and 
forms  the  banks  of  the  Acesines.  On  the  east,  k  nms  gradually  into 
the  well  cultivated  parts  of  India ;  and  on  the  souili,  it  is  separated 
from  the  sea  by  pwrt  of  the  country  of  Cutch.  Its  western  boundary 
.  will  appear  when  I  htxe  described  the  Indus,  wbich  divides  India 
fiom  die'ocnmtries  v^ch  I  am  Dext  to  8k«l^ 

The  indiis  issues  ^nm  the  'moiintaina  of  Hiiidoo  Coeah*  in  ht.  9ff 
\osig.  yS'' i  md  ram  non^thi^o^  It  ibtnu  the  iiit» 

nl  boimdaij  of  Caubul  aod.Hindosian)  but*  is  in  lealitj  indudiai^ 
during  the  whole  of  its.  oomse  in  the  provinces  or  dependencies  of 
the  Ibrmer  nioaaichy.  Asfivas  Caidabeughinlat.  99".  7'.  it  maybe 
said  to  mm  throogli  mountains;  but,  from  that  pcnnt  to  hit  fl^^^  itdl-  , 
vides  a  fertflo,  tfaoogli  iU  cultivated,  plain  %  bounded  on  the'  east  :.by  ' 
the  desaity  and  on  jthe  west  by  the  mountains  of  Soliraaun.  *  When 
tbe  lange  of  SoUmaun  ends,  sbbut  lat  99"  nbrth«  the  phun  extends 
to  the  WfBstwafdf  and  has  new  boundaries.  Qnthe  norlJiit  IwahiQiy 
which  stvetdi'east  and  west  at  ri^t  angles  to  the  lange  of  SoUma^ 
On  the  west  it  has  the  table  land  of  Kelaut ;  on  the  south,  the  'sea;; 
and  on  l^-^st,  the  Indus*  The  part  immediately  adjoining  to  the 
river,  Is  included  in  the  province  of  Sind,  (which  ocGapies  both.banlGS 
of  the  Indus,  from  let.  SI"  north  to  the  sea).  The  western  pait'  df 
the  plain  iaraa  n  geographical  division,  which,  in  Akber's  time,  was 
eaiied  Seeweestauh.  It  would  now  be  better  known  by  that  of  Cut- 
diiee»  or  Cutch  Gundawa;  but,  as  ddier  of -those  name.s  would  lead 
'to  mistakes,  I  shall  adhere  to  the  ancient  term.  It  is  a  low  and  hot 
plain,  fertile  in  many  places,  but  in  others  destitute  of  water. 

The  *  range  of  Solimaim  commences  nearly  to  the  south  of  the 
point  where  Beloot  Taugh  is  joined  to  Hindoo  Coosh,  and  is  connect- 


*  The  natives,  a»  usual,  have  no  nauie  fur  Uiu  raiigc ;  at  least,  iMNie  liiat  would  be 

OTsryiHMve  laklsnlood.  Ic  it  cdled  di»  GolMe  SoUnunai,  or  monulaint  ot  finBmswi^  ia 
book%  tibo«^1ih*tmai»dMtejnsde.ti»coB)p«diendioawo^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


SALT  D|;SART.  9J 

<d  witik  the  ■notWn  bmidws  of  Uie  Jtotler  mogntwib  Usgnenldi- 
vdaim  U  ionlliirij^M  &r  10  Ut  28*  noftli. 

.  ft  MDds  tlifee  branches  to  the  eut,  betwoeo  Ut  841*  and  lat  88% 
and  ttrd  oftfaem  cross  the  Indus. 
From  its  terminatioa  in  lat.  29*  a  chaiii  «f  hiUa  zuna-imurlj  wettJto 

the  table  land  of  Kelaut. 

'  That  table  land  is  of  considerable  elevation  ;  and  fills  up  the  space 
between  long.  64"  east  and  long.  67**  90f  eaat,  lat  26>  88'  i|orth  and 
kit*  89^  15*  north.  It  comprises  the  provinces  of  Jallawaun  and  Seh- 
ini9wm»  and  the  district  of  Kelaut,  which,  with  Seeweestaun,  form  the 
dominions  of  a  Beloche  Prince,  dependant  on  Caubul,  and  are  chiefly 
inhabited  by  Beloches.  The  Table  land  is  every  where  hilly  and  bar- 
ren. Tlie  highest  ]>art  of  it  is  towards  the  north,  where  Kelaut, 
the  capital  of  the  principahty,  is  situated.  A  narrow  tract  of  the 
same  level  with  Seeweestaun,  lies  between  the  foot  of  this  Table 
land  and  ttie  sea.  On  the  south-wcsi  tlie  table  land  has  lower  hills 
mid  plains  included  in  iVUkiHuu  ;  :uid  extending  in  lat.  from  26' 
north  to  28'  north.  On  tlie  north  ot  Mdaraun  is  the  Salt  Desart,  the 
eastern  extremity  of  which  Ues  under  the  western  rampart  of  the 
Tal:ile  land. 

The  north  eastern  edge  of  this  desart,  may  be  loosely  said  to  lie 
between  the  64th  and  65th  lines  of  east  longitude,  till  it  reach  30" 
north,  Ironi  which  latitude  it  becomas  difficult  to  fix.  It,  however, 
encloses  the  small  coimtry  of  Seestaun,  and  bounds  the  A%haun 
^xnmtry  up  to  near  Heraut*  where  a  habitable  tract  commences,  and 
stretches  iike  ao  Isthmus  between  this  desart,  and  that  which  extends 
.  'to  the  Jiaurtes.  This  tnct  is  in-  some  parts.'biUj,  and  in  o4ihera:so 
aandj.  and' arid,  that  it  can  acarody  be.'said  to  sepante  tiie  deaarts. 
:  '  The  ei^e  of  tbe  desart  win  appear  bei«Bfter  to  be  iU  defined.  In 
aoine  pboea  it  inns  into  iihe  hahitahift  oountry ;  and,  on  the  otber 
bendi'tiie  banks  of  the  Hdniundt  which  flows  tfarough  part  of  thede*  • 
aart-  into  the  hke  of  finnwwtsnni  aie  everywhere  iertiliaed*  by  that 
R^er* 

N  S 


Digitized  by  Google 


APaHA,f7in8TAUN. 


I  am  novr  enabled  to  describe  the  complu;^t(J  limits  of  the  coimtrv 
of  the  Al^hauns.    On  the  north,  it  has  Hindoo  Coosh,  and  the  i^aro- 
amisan  range.    The  Indus  is  its  boundary  on  the  east,  as  long  as  that 
river  continues  near  the  hills ;  that  is,  as  far  as  lat,  32  20  .  The  plain 
on  tbe  right  bank  ot  On^  hadus,  south  of  lat  32*  20',  is  inhabited  by 
Bekxihes ;  but  the  chain  of  Sofimaun,  with-  <iti  •aU»rdii»te  riuiges* 
Mid  tlieoouDtiyJmniediately  aft  their  baaei  beknigt  to'the  A^|hMn«* 
The  hilbi.which  have  been  mentioned,  as  boiindiDg  Seewecrtaim  on 
tfae^north,  fi«n  'thie,aoiithem.liznits  of  the  ooontiy  of  the  A^jjhauvei 
The  A^^un  connti^rJinmediatdy  to  the  north  of  thcie  mountain^ 
dpet  not  at  Ant  coctend  an  far  ifeat  aa  to  xeadi  the  Td>le  hiid  of 
Kalaati  lrat.it.afberwaidB  ahooti  )paat  it  ou  the  north,  and  leeefaea  to 
Uie  deiarty  iiUch  ia  its  nbrth-inertcirn  bonndaiy.  It  iadHliciilf;  to  len- 
this  incignhtt.boiuidaiy  jateDigible;^faut»itissti]lnM»esoto^ve^ 
in  a  general  desciij^on,  A  netkm  of  the  countiies  whioh  it  oompin* 
hends.    They  are  so  vaiious  In  their  levels  dimate,  soil,  and  pvodno^ 
tlons,  that  I  shall  not  attenrpt  at  pr^ent  to  diiitiwgwiih  them  i  biit» 
shall  onljr  remark,  that  the  whole  of  A%hauniitaiui»  west  of  the  range 
of  8oliniann»  is  a  Table  land,  lying  higher  than  most  of  the  neighboiKw 
ing  countries.    Hindoo  Coosh,  which  is  its  northern  bulwark,  looks 
down  On  the  low  lands  of  Bulkh.    On  the  east,  k  is  equally  eWated 
above  the  still  lower  plain  of  the  Indus.    On  the  south,  it  overlooks 
Seeweestaun  ;  and,  the  deep  valley  of  Bolaun,  on  the  south-west,  runs 
between  it  and  Belochistaun.    On  llie  west,  indeed,  it  slopes  gradu- 
ally down  to  the  desart ;  and,  on  the  north-west,  it  loses  its  appear- 
ance of  elevation  betore  the  Paropamisan  mountaim.    'I'he  Table 
land  of  Kelaut,  ouc-ht  perhaps  to  be  considered  as  a  coiitiiiiiation  of 
that  I  have  just  desi:  i  i!)pd  ;  but,  the  low  country,  extending  to  the 
desart,  and  tlie  valley  ot  Bolaun,  so  nearly  divide  them,  tliat  it  will  be 
con\  enient  to  treat  them  as  separate.    The  Afgnauns  have  no  gene* 
ral  name  for  their  country;  but,  that  of  Afgliaunistaun,  which  was 
probably  first  employed  in  Persia,  ia  Irequently  used  in  books,  and  is  not 
unknown  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  to  which  it  applies.  I 


Digitized  by  Google 


AFGHAUNISTAUN. 


98 


ihiUt  tbenfere,  use  it  in  future  to  myfmB  the  country,  of  wbidi  i 
hum  just  deflcribed  the  limits.  As  much  of  the  A%haun  country  aa 
lies  to  the  west  of  the  parallel  of  Mookioor,  in  longitude  GH^  80^  if' 
included  in  the  celebrated  and  extensive  province  of  Khorassaun* 
The  remaining  part  of  Khonssaun,  (the  boundaries  of  which  may  be 
lootely  fixed  by  the  Oxus,  and  the  desart,  through  which  that  rhrer 
runs ;  the  Selt  Desart ;  and  the  Caspian  Sea),  belongs  to  Feida. 
Kermaun  is  said  to  have  been  <Mice  included  in  KhoTWiwanni  aa  ' 
Seeircotlann  ficequenily.  ia  ftilL 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  »4  > 


CHAP.  IL 

MOUNTAINS  OF  AFOHAUNISTAVN. 

I HAVE  alieady  described  the  general  ooune  of  the  great  ridge  of 
Hiiidoo  Goodi,  and  have  traced  the  lower  ranges  on  its  touthem  aide 
aa  &r  east  as  the  Indus.  I  shall  now  proceed  to  a  particular  descrip- 
tion of  the  part  which  bounds  A^aunistaun  on  the  north. 

From  the  Indus  to  longitude  71%  it  pursues  a  westerly  oouise ;  but, 
from  that  point,  its  directum  becomes  uncratain.  To  a  person  view- 
ing it  from  the  south,  the  snowy  ridge  appears  to  make  a  considefable 
cnrre  towards  him :  but,  our  information  leaves  it  doubtfu],  whether 
it  does  make  such  a  curre^  whether  the  principal  range  oondnues  ita 
weateily  oouisef  and  sends  out  a  branch  towards  the  south»  or  wh^ 
ther  It  is  crossed  by  Beloot  Taugh*  which  joins  it  at  the  point  oppc^ 
site  to  the  place  where  the  mountain  i^pears  to  behd. 

From  the  Indus  to  this  curve  is  the  part  of  these  mountains  with 
which  I  am  best  aoqnaintecU  having  seen  it  for  some  months  frnm 
Peshawer  $  and,  a  particular  account  of  it,  may  serre  to  ffve  an  idea 
of  the  rest  of  the  range. 

On  entering  the  plain  of  Peshawer,  on  the  21th  of  February,  1809, 
four  ranges  of  mountaiiis  were  distinctly  seen  on  the  north.  The 
lowest  range  had  no  snow.  The  tops  of  the  second  were  oomed 
with  it,  as  was  the  third,  half-way  down. 

The  Iburtli  wa-s  tlie  principal  range  of  the  Indian  Caucasus,  which 
is  always  covered  with  snow,  is  conf?p!cuous  from  Bactria,  and  the 
borders  of  India,  and  is  seen  from  places  far  off  in  Tartary.  We  first 
saw  these  mountains  at  tlie  distance  of  one  hundred  miles  ;  but,  they 

would  have  been  visible  long  before,  if  the  view  had  not  been  shut 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


MOUHTAINS  OF  AVOIlAUNISTAUN. 


95 


ont  by  the  lulli'tliioiigli  trliich  ire  tnrdkd*.  In  appt«Mice»'  hami 
ever,  -they  were  very  near.  The  ridges  and  hollows  of  their  sides 
were  dewly  diMemable  ;  and,  this  distinctness,  jmned  to  the  softneat 
tad  transparency  which  their  distance  gave  them,  piodnoed  a  siiiga> 
-lar,  and  very  pleasing  effect. 

The  snowy  raiif^e  is  bv  no  means  of  equni  elcvnfion,  bf  iri^  in  some 
places,  surmounted  by  peaks  of  jxreat  height  and  magnitude,  which  do 
not  taper  to  a  poiiu,  but  rise  at  once  &om  their  bases^  with  amaaing 
boWnrss  and  andeiir. 

.  Tlie  stupendous  height  of  these  mountains  ;  the  magnificence  and 
variety  of  their  lottv  summits  ;  tlie  various  nations  bv  whom  thov  are 
seen,  and  wdo  seem  to  be  brought  together  by  this  common  object ; 
and  the  awtiil  and  iindistiubed  solitude,  which  reigns  amidst  their 
eternal  snows;  fill  the  mind  with  admiraiion  and  astonishment,  that 
no  language  can  express.  The  height  of  one  of  these  peaks  was 
taken  by  Lieutenant  Macartney,  and  appeared  to  be  20,493  feet.  If 
this  measurement  be  correct,  the  peaks  of  Hindoo  Coosh  are  higher 
than  those  of  the  Andes,  f  The  meajsuienifliit  made  by  lieotenint 
Webbf  in  the  eteventfa  Volume  of  the  Asiatic  Reieaiehes,  givte  a.atill 
perter.'hei^it  to  thete.af  Hemalleh. The'  height  of  Hindoo  Coo^ 
is  mdoubtedly  very  great;  .imee  we  oonULpereeivci  no  dinunution  in 

*  •  •  *  « 

'  -  *.  I  liftfe  aen  ibe  ridge  of  Imtos  (or  Sfenalldt)^  at «  dbtMneeof  150  mSicB  t 
Uare,  they  were  to  be  seen  at  950. 

f  (The  followin<fiN  Lieutenant  Macartney's  account  of  the  opcrntion,  which  he  givef 
wUh  consulerable  dit»iru8t).  "  I  txMik  the  distance  of  tome  of  the  most  remarkable  peaks,  in 
**die  ridge,  by  cron bearings,  with  die  dieodolitei  and  fimtid,  at  tfaedistanoeof  onehniidTed 
"jsiloii  the  apparent  altitude  of  some  was  i""  30',  which  gives  a  perpenAndar  hnifiltt't£ 
**  20,493  feet  But,  of  course,  this  could  not  l>e  jiositively  depciuiwl  on  for  so  smnll  an  angle^ 
<•  and  so  great  a  distance.  The  most  triiiiug  eiTor,  which  might  not  appear  in  the  corrco- 
"tion  of  tiieliutnuiMn^  iiwld  here  make  a  great  dil^^  It  wai,  bowncr,  lo  correct, 
*'  that  I  have  taken  the  sun's  altitude,  and  the  latitude  came  out  within  two  of  the  latitude 
*'  taken  mth  the  sextant ;  and,  thr  distunoe  may  be  dopapded  on»  for  I  hada  baiwlinei  mfn* 
"  surcd  of  forty-hve  miles,  which  gave  a  good  angk/'  ^       •  , 


Digilized  by  Google 


96  BAJOint 

the  snow  on  my  part  of  the  range  in  the  month  of  Jiiii%  wliflB  Ae 
thermometer  in  the  plain  of  Pesliawer  was  at  113  '. 

The  inferior  ranges  decrease  in  height,  according  to  their  distance 
from  the  principal  cliain.  The  tops  of  the  highest  are  bare ;  but 
their  sides,  and  the  whole  of  the  lower  ranges,  are  well  woodpd. 
niouffh  three  lower  ranges  onl\  are  distinguishable  when  seen  from 
the  plain,  many  more  are  probabiv  passed  before  reaching  the  snowy 
ridge.  There  is  a  phiin  between  tlie  first  and  second  ranges;  and,  it 
is  probable,  that  narrower  and  more  elevated  valleys  separate  the 
higher  ranges,  till  the  increasing  rouglniess  of  the  country  makes 
them  scarcely  observable ;  and,  that  the  distinction  between  the 
ranges,  is  at  lentrth  lost  in  a  confused  mass  of  niountainiS. 

There  are  tluee  Inanches,  which  stretch  from  the  ridge  at 

right  angles  to  the  inferior  ranges.  The  first  is  close,  to  the  InduSf 
and  ends  at  a  point  opposite  Torbaila.  •    r       ./  . 

The  next,  which  is  called  Ailum,  and  is  of  considerable  heigiit  and 
breadth*  is  divided  fiom  the  fbnner  hy  the  valley  of  JBoonere.  Ths 
fluid  is  divided  Born  Ailum  by  ihe  vaU^  of  fliraHt»  mfp  wfaidi  md> 
ther  vsUegr*  ceUed  Fimjcora,  op^  fiom  the  iioi(ik*wesb :  TI16  bet 
fasanch  is  nmch  breeder  thn  either  o£the  tilhens  end  extends  ee'ftr 
to  the  sonith  as  to  join  ^  voota  of  So&id.Goh^  the  nkiat  nofifaerly 
point  in  the  range  of  Solimaun.  Ihoi^  not  high,  it  is  steq>f  and 
rugged.  It  is  covered  with  pine  fimts,  and  inhabited  by  the 
A%baun. tribe  of  OtmaunhhaiL  Between  it  and  the  southern pngec- 
tion,  is  the  low  and  hot  plain  of  Bigour.  .  .  •  . 

The  lower  hills  may  be  imi^pned  ftom  a  description  of  those  hi  Ihe 
district  d  Swaut  In  that  disfatict  snow  lieson  them  fiir  finir  jtnontbs 
in-  the  year.  Their  'tops  have  but  few  trees,  hot  their  skies  are 
onvered  with  forests  of  pin^  oak,  and  wild  olive ;  lower  dtzwii  ate 
many  little  valleys,  watered  by  clear  and  beautiful  streams,  and  eor 
joymg  a  delicious  climate.  Their  sides  afford  a  prolusion,  of  JSurk 
pean  fruits  and  flowers,  which  grow  wild  in  the  utmost- variety  and 
perfection.   The  hiUa  bear  many  pretty  sorts  of  fern  and  simOar 

10 


Digitized  by  Google 


€AUFIBI8TAUN*  97 

pknts,  with,  several  elegant  shrubs,  aodmn  the  rocCs  are  rendved 
beautiful  by  the  rich  verdure  of  the  mosses  with  which  they  are 
eovered.  In  the  midst  of  ihe  pnncqp«i  vaUey»  is  the  river  of  Swaut, 
wetenng  a  rich  though  narrow  plain,  which  yields  two  harvests,  and 
produces  most  sorts  of  grain :  on  the  plain,  bendes  cultivated  fruit- 
trees,  are  numerous  mulberry  trees  and  planes. 

The  hills  of  Boonerc  greatly  resemble  those  of  Swaut ;  thev  enclose 
many  litlle  valleys,  all  opening  on  one  great  one,  which  nms  south- 
east,  and  contains  the  brook  of  Bnrrundoo.  Tliese  valleys  are  nar- 
rower, and  worse  watered  than  those  of  Swaut,  and  are  consequratly 
less  fertile. 

I  have  now  come  to  the  seeming  cur\'e,  which  is  observeti  from  the 
south  of  Hindoo  Coosh,  and  wliich  rises  over  Bajour  on  the  west.  That 
projection,  with  the  nearest  jints  of  Hindoo  Coosh,  and  some  of  the 
neighbouring  branches,  is  inhabited  by  the  Seeapoosh  Cauhrs,  a 
straui^e  and  interesting  people. 

The  ascent  to  their  country  leads  along  fHghtful  precipices,  and 
through  deep  and  narrow  hxdlowa,  where  the  traveller  is  exposed  to 
danger  by  the  pieces  of  rock  that  roll  ftom  the  mountains  above  him, 
cither  looaened  by  rain  and  wind,  or  pot  in  motion  by  the  goata 
and  wild  MiiiwaU  that  browse  on  die  diffi  wliich  omhang  the  road. 
Hie  Cnfiit  inhabit  nanow.hiife  nch^and  pleasant  spots,  producing 
abundance  of  grapes,  and  for  the  moat  part  innnoonted  by  anow^r 
sanmnts.  Hie  ooontiy  of  the  Caufira  extends  b^ond  the  western 
ai^le  finmied  bj-the  curves  and  the  xi^^  then  pursues  its  ooiuae 
westwavdf  until  it  is  lost  in  the  PBropsmisan  mountains. 

•Tlie  hiflj  tract  formed  bj  the  inferior  ranges,  is  nariiiw  an^ 
in  tins  pact  of  the  ^ain  $  and  particularly  at  the  point  of  the  southem 
ptoyection»  where  the  snowy  mountain  descends  abruptly  into  the 
low  plain  of  JeDaUafaod.  When  the  range  resumes  iits  westerly 
course^  the  hills  at  its  foot  recover  their  extent  and  their  character ;  , 
tiiey  then  form  the  Odiistann,  or  High  Lands  of  CSaubul,  a  country 
watered  by  many  streams,  and  described  as  even  more  dehghtlul  than 
Swaut. 

o 


Digitized  by  Google 


AUNGAUR. 


The  nature  ot"  the  valleys  in  this  part  of  the  range  caiiiiot  well  be 
understood  until  i  Imve  described  the  space  into  which  thev  all  open. 
1  iiib  is  the  valley  of  the  Caiibul  river,  which  separates  tlie  southern 
projection  of  Hindoo  Coosh  from  the  mountains  of  Solimaun,  and 
seems  to  be  a  breBch  in  a  continued  chain  once  formed  by  those 
lidgea.  Hie  breidlii  between  them  is  now  in  loiiie  pieces  twoity- 
fiyetnllefl. 

U  is  occupied  towaids  tbe  east  bj  hilb,  wbicb  stretch  from  iiioinw> 
tain  to  moiiiitauii,thoi]^  firom  their  very  inferior  height,  they  cannot 
'  be  said  to  preserve  the  continiiify  of  the  range.  West  of  those-  hiDs 
is  the  plain  of.  JeUallabad,  and  still  fiurthor  west  the  country  rises  so 
much,  that  although  Gundamnk  be  in  a  valley  with  respect  to  the 
Bouthem'projection,  or  to  the  hills  of  Solimann»  it  is  on  a  mountain 
when  compared  with  Jellallabad*  The  river  of  Caabid  flows  through 
the  oentie  of  the  space  which  I  have  been  describing)  and  into  k,  as 
I  have  already  mentionedf  all  the  vaUeys  in  this  part  of  Hindoo 
Coosh  open*  The  first  of  these  to  the  west  of  B^nr  is  Coonner, 
through  which  the  great  river  of  Kanshkanr  runs  to  join  that  of  Cau- 
buL  The  cUmate  of  the  lower  part  of  Coonner  is  very  hot.  The 
U^per  part  terminates  In^  long  glens,  many  of  which  point  north-west 
towards  the  high  snowy  peak  of  Coond,  which  is  probably  the  point 
of  the  southern  projection.  Coonner  is  inhabited  by  a  peculiar  peopfe 
called  Derrcrauns,  who  will  be  mentioned  hereafter. 

At  Mundroor,  about  twenty  miles  to  the  west  of  Coonner,  the  water 
of  Alingaur  joins  the  Caubul  rive::.  It  comes  down  a  valley,  at  the 
upper  part  of  which  two  others  join,  and  form  a  figiue  like  the  letter 
Y;  the  ea^stern  one  is  calierl  Alingaur,  and  the  western  AHshung. 
Each  of  them  runs  into  (he  inouni  .lins  for  about  twenty  miles.  These 
valleys,  with  the  plain  of  Jeilaliabad,  aiiri  the  surrounding  mountains, 
form  the  district  of  Lnghmaun.  Alingaui  is  a  widt  \  alley  inhabited 
by  Ghiljies.  Its  head  inclines  nortli-east  towards  Cooiid.  It 
duces  all  sorts  of  grain,  and  many  glens  open  into  it  on  the  right  aiul 
left*  some  of  which  are  only  s^arated  by  narrow  sunmiits  Irom  those 


Digitized  by  Google 


HINDOO  COOSH.  99 

of  Coonner.   Alisbung  is  narrower*  liii  &ircr  ifm,  sod  »  chiefly  in- 

halMtod  by  converted  Cauiirs. 

The  abort  vallej  of  Oo2beeii»  inhabited  bj  Ghiljies,  lies  next  on  the 
weaty  aifter  which  that  of  Tugow  opens  on  the  river  of  Caubul,  at  ita 
junction  with  that  of  Punjsh^r.  Tugow  is  considerably  longer  than 
any  of  the  vaUeys  yet  mentioned.  The  lower  part  is  inhabited  by 
the  Saufees  (an  independent  Afghaium  tribe,  whom  I  may  not  have 
occasion  to  mention  again);  but  the  upper  part,  which  is  nanrower 
and  less  fertile,  belongs  to  Cohistaunee  Taujiks.  * 

The  mouths  of  these  vallevs  are  hif^hcr  in  [>roportion  as  they  are 
further  west ;  but  those  of  Oozbeen  and  Tugow  are  very  sensibly 
elevated  above  Uic  others,  and  have  the  climate  of  CaubuL  For  tliia 
reason  thev  nre  sometimes  included  in  the  Cuhislaun  of  Caubul, 
wliich,  in  strictness,  only  consists  of  the  valleys  of  Nijrow,  Fuujsheer, 
and  Ghorebund,  with  the  minor  valleys  which  open  into  them.  Of 
these,  the  most  remarkalile  are  Sunjt  c  r  (between  Nijrow  and  Pimj-  . 
sheer),  and  Doomaumeh,  and  Saulch  Ouluug  (bcLwcen  Punjsheer  and 
Ghorebund).  South  of  the  Cohistauu  is  the  Cohdaumun,  a  country 
Ibnned  of  little  fertile  plains  among  the  skirts  of  Hindoo  Coosh. 

The  Pan^pamisan  chain,  which  bounds  the  Cohistaim  on  the  west, 
aitenda  thjtee  handled  and  fifty  miles  from  eaat  to  weit»  and  two 
Inndrad  finn  north  to  aoutl).  Tliewfaoleorthiaaimceiaiiidiamaae 
of  momitaina  as  the  inoat  intiniafce  knowledge  w«^ 
to  tneet  and,  tfaouf^  it  affiwda'a  habitation  to  theEhnauka  and 
Haaanrdiflf  k  ia  ao  difficult  of  aoeesa*  and  io  little  frequented*  tliat  no 
ivedae  aooovnta  of  its  geogr^hy  aio  to  be  obtainedi 

ii  ia  eertaint  hoiwever,  that  the  range  of  Hindoo  Goodb  ia  no  longer 
Mo  lofly,  aa  to  be  conapicuoua  among  tbe  moontaina  by  which  it  ia 
uniiiuiidedf  and  dut  no  oontmned  bne  of  pefpetnal  anow  can  aity 


*  Thu  term  is  applied  to  aii  people  of  A^haunistaun,  wbow  vemscular  language  » 

o  2  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


100  MOUNTAINS  OF  SOLIMAUN. 

more  be  traced.  The  eastern  half  of  this  elevated  region  is  inhabited 
by  the  Hazaurchs,  and  is  cold,  rugged,  and  barren :  the  level  spots 
are  little  ciiltivatcdv  and  the  hills  are  naked  and  abrupt.  The  western 
part,  which  belongs  to  the  Eimauks,  though  it  has  wider  valleys,  and 
is  better  cultivated,  is  still  a  wild  nnd  poor  country.  Tlic  northern 
face  of  these  mountains  has  a  .Multlcn  dcsrent  into  ilio  province  of 
Bulkh  :  their  acchvity  is  loss  on  their  other  extremities,  except  per- 
haps on  the  west  or  houih-wrst.  On  the  north-west  they  seem  to 
sink  gradually  into  the  plain  which  borders  on  the  desart. 

The  slope  of  the  wliole  tract  is  towards  the  west. 

The  range  of  Solimaun  commences  at  tiie  lofty  mountain  which 
has  derived  the  name  of  Sufiaid  Coh,  or  White  Mountain,  from  the 
snow  with  which  it  is  always  covered  *.  Suifaid  Coh  stands  to  the 
south  of  the  projection  of  Hindoo  Coosh,  and  is  only  separated  fiom 
H  by  the  yalley  of  the  Caubul  nver,  fiom  ivhidi  it  rise*  with  a  rerj 
steep  aoeliTily.  It  is  oonnected  with  Hitidoo  Coosh  fay  the'hitts  of 
die  Otmiuiiidiail*  and  odier  subofdinate  langes  extending  acroiM  ^be 
CBufanl  liver^  in  whidi  they  cause  iiumeioug  lapidS)  in  some  places 
flifanost  amoimting  to  cascades.  On  these  grounds^  the  range  of  Soli* 
maun'  otigbtt  periiaps,  to  be  Tcgaided  as  a  bnmch  of  Hbdoo  GMsh, 
and  even  as  a  eontinuadon  of  Beloot  Taog^,  but  it  willy  nevenhelcss» 
be  oonyenient  to  oonrider  it  separately.  fVom  Snffidd  Coh,  the 
hig^ieBt  ridge  of  the  range  runs  8ontfa.soiitb«a8t,  and  passes  thimigfa 
ihe  Jaigee  country  near  Huiyoob,  twdlve  miles  sooth  of  which  it  is 
pierced  by  the  river  Koorrum.  It  then  proceeds  in  a  southerly  diree- 
tion,  and  ibrms  the  mountainous  country  of  the  .Tadrauns,  whiefa  ex^ 
tends  to  the  southward  of  latitude  dl"  north.   Thus  far  the  course  of 


*  Tli«  A%lMiiMiBoiiefieqpiaittycaU  Aiiinoimtim  Speenghur  Aan  SnAid  Colk  Tlie 

former  has  the  same  meaning  in  Pushtoo  that  the  latter  has  in  Persian.  I  may  here  re- 
mark that  as  Persian  was  the  langiiage  In  which  I  conununicntrd  '«vith  the  Afghnuns,  I 
have  often  made  use  of  Persian  word^  and  phrases,  where  they  would  have  used  Pu&htoo 


Digitized  by  Google 


SUFFAID  COH.  101 

like  ridge  is  aatjM  to  liMJe  dodbt  From  Uie  Jadmiti  oomitty,  its 
direetioDf  sod  even  its^odntiiudty  become  mora  questioiisble^  bui»  ss 
it  is  certain  that  hills,  which  it  takes  two  days  journeys  to  pass 
arm,  are  cvossed  faj  traveUers  from  Kauneegoonum  to  Ootj^maa^  ?re 

may  safely  conjecture  that  this  is  the  ridge  in  question,  and  may  pre- 
sume that  the  hills  irtiich  we  find  still  farther  south,  •  on  the  left  <)£ 
the  river  Gomnl,  are  a  continuation  of  it:  certain  it  is»  that  from  the 
Jaudraun  country  to  the  Gomul,  is  a  mountainous  cotmtiys  t**'^*^ 
with  pine  forests,  which  shelters  the  wild  hill  tnbe  of  Yizeeree. 
From  the  Gomul  the  course  of  the  hills  again  becomes  certain,  and 
is  continued  tlirongh  the  country  of  the  Sheeraunees,  and  that  of  the 
Zmurrees,  from  whence  it  eztenda  to  latitude  2Q\  where  k  seems  to 
end. 

Tlic  hoifrlit  of  the  Solimaun  range,  thouLrli  much  interior  to  that  of 
Hindoo  Coosli,  is  still  consideralile.  Its  fii^hest  pnrt  is  undoubtedly 
near  its  commencement.  Suftaid  Coh  is  covered  with  snow  through- 
out the  year,  but  I  believe  no  odier  part  of  the  rnnffe  has  snow  after 
the  end  of  spring;  some,  however  of  those,  as  f":ii  south  as  latitude 
81",  have  snow  upon  tlu;ai  in  \s  inter,  which  is  a  proof  of  no  incon- 
aiderahlc  altitude  in  so  low  a  luLilade. 

The  part  inhabited  by  the  Wuzeerees,  is  probably  as  nmcli  raised 
above  the  surrounding  country,  as  that  which  belongs  to  the  Jadraunsj 
but  its  abst^te  height  is  in^k>r,  as  the  country  at  its  base  slopes 
mtKh  to  the  soodiward.  la  tiie  southern  part  of  the  Wnseeree 
countiy>  where  tins  range  is  passed  through  by  the  nTer  Gomul*  it  is 
low  in  bodi  sensest  but  it  rises  again  in  the  Sbeeiannee  coontry,  and 
finrns  tile  Idfy  mountain  of  Cussay  Ghur,  of  wiiidi  the  Tokbt  SoE- 
mauUf  or  Solomon's  lliron^  is  the  highest  pealt  *,  snow  lies  on  this 
peak  Ibr  three  months  in  the  year,  and  on  the  surrounding  mountains 
for  twob  The  countiy  of  tfae  Zmursees  is  certainly  as  hi^  as  most 
parts'  of  Cussay  Gbur,  but  I  hanre  not  the  means  of  judging  of  the 
heigiit  or  character  of  the  range  to  the  southward  of  this  point 

From'  the  southern  boundaiy  of  A4^iannistann»  as  %  north  as.the 


Digitized  by  Google 


river  (jiomul,  the  descent  from  the  Solimauny  raiign  into  the  lof- 
huids  on  the  riizlit  bank  of"  the  Tnfhi«.  is  deep  arul  sudden  :  on  the 
opposite  side,  tlic  lU  sceul  seems  to  be  as  abrupt,  tiiough  by  no  means 
so  considerable,  the  country  to  the  west  of  the  range  b^iiig  moie  ele- 
vated than  that  on  the  east. 

To  the  north  of  the  Gromul,  both  sides  of  the  range  become  per- 
plexed by  tlie  numerous  minor  hills  which  it  sends  out  to  the  east 
and  west ;  but,  ^us  ikr  as  1  can  conjecture,  the  descent  becomes  more 
gradual  on  the  east,  as  it  certahdy  does  on  the  west ;  where  the  plain 
country  rises  to  meet  it,  and  is  perhaps  as  high  to  the  east  of  Ghuz- 
nee,  as  manj  parts  of  the  nsge  itself  to  the  BonlJi  of  that  point . . 

Thore  are  two  minor  ranges  paralld.  to  the  range  of  Snlgmawp> 
which  accon^Masy  it  on  its  eartm  ude  fiom  the  soutfaem  borden  of 
AilljuwinMtamn,  as  ftr  at  leaat  as  Rughzee  in  latitude  aS*  Hie 
tint  of  tfaeae  langea  ia  lower  than  the  principal  ridge.  The  leoond  ia 
still  lowers  and  between  it  and  the  fiivt  ia  a  counftiy  wtadk  I  ma^im 
ia  nigged,  but  cultivated  by  the  Shecfannees*  All  of  tliaee  vu^bb 
are  pierced  bj  yallc^  which  nin  fiom  the  higli  oonntiy  on:  the  west* 
and  lend  out  itreama  into  Banunm:  other  stseama  liae  in  the  prin4»> 
pal  range*  and  run  through  valleys  which  cut  the  lower  <«ies. 

The  Solimauny  range  ia  described  aa  being  composed  of  a  hard 
black  stoneL  The  next  range  is  a' red  stone  equally  hard:  but  the 
lowest  range  consists  of  a  friable  grey  sand  stone.  The  topa  of  all 
these  moontaina  are  bare ;  the  sides  of  the  high  range  are  covered 
with  pineaj  and  those  of  the  mast  with  olives  and  other  trees:  the 
lowest  range  is  entirely  baie^  except  in  the  hoUows,  which  contain 
some  thickets  of  brush-wood. 

I  shall  now  mention  the  minor  hills,  which  run  east  and  west  from 
the  great  chwin  just  describeti.  The  first  tliat  occurs,  proceeding 
from  tlie  southward,  is  a  range  which  seems  to  Gommence  to  the 
north  of  Kughzee,  and  extends  to  Punniallee. 

This  branch  is  steep,  craggy,  and  bare,  and  can  scarcely  be  crossed 
except  in  one  plaoe»  where  there  is  a  breach  in  the  hill.    It  ends  in 


Digitized  by  Google 


MURWUT& 


103 


an  abrupt  diff, '  about  nine  hundred  feet  high,  opposite  the  viUi^  of 
Fbnoiallee.  Its  whole  length  is  not  above  sixty  miles,  but  it  desem» 
to  be  mentioned,  as  it  mariB  the  boundary  between  the  phun  of  the 
Indus  and  the  hilly  country  which  I  am  next  to  mention. 

The  next  branch,  which  may  be  called  the  Salt  Range,  ^loots  out 
from  the  south-eastern  side  of  Sufiaid  Coh,  and  extends  in  a  south- 
easterly direction,  bv  the  south  of  Teeree  to  Calla-baugh,  It  there 
crosses  the  Indus,  stretches  across  part  ot"  the  Funjmib,  and  ends  at 
JellaiiIpor)r,  on  the  right  \>ank  of  the  Hvfiaspes.  It  becomes  lower 
as  it  tjets  tarther  from  the  mountains  ol  iSol  innun.  This  ranjje  is 
both  hi<;her  and  broader  than  the  last.  It  abounds  in  sah,  which  is 
dug  out  in  various  forms  at  dillV  i  c ni  phu  es.  To  the  eastward,  it 
yields  a  rock  salt  of  a  brownish  < ulour,  which  is  imported  into  Hin- 
dooslitn,  arid  kiiiiv.  ri  by  the  naiiu:  of  l^^ore  salt. 

The  third  range,  to  the  northward,  extends  from  tfie  eastern  side 
of  Sufiald  Coh,  straight  to  tlie  Indus,  which  it  crosses,  but  doi>$  not 
rwch  6r  beyond  its  eistem  side.  As  it  lies  durii^  the  whole  of  its 
eonne  betiroea  the  durty-lUnl  and  thuty-fonfth  fines  of  latitude*  I 
AaU  call  it  the  range  of  d4f  north  latitnde.  It  is  much  hi|^  thaa 
my  of  the  other  Mnges,  and,  thoui^  its  valleys  are  wider,  its  ridjge  is 
move  diiBcdt  tb  pass.  Like  those  ranges,  it  decreases  in  height  aa  it 
runs  eastward,  but  as  &r  east  as  Cohant,  the  snow  Mes  on  its  summits 
tiU  the  spring  is  &r  adiranced,  and  a  little  snow  fidls  in  winter  even 
on  the  parts  towards  the  Indus.  Hie  hig^iest  parts  of  it  bear  pineq, 
and  the  lower  oliTes. 

Between  the  Range  of  d4°  and  the  Ssk  Range,  lie  some  plains  and 
TaUeys,  belonging  to  the  tribes  of  Bungusli  and  Khuttuk.  Tliejr  slope 
towards  the  Indus,  but  are  separated  from  the  river  by  a  low  range  of 
liiUs  running  north  and  south.  In  the  northein  part  of  the  space  be> 
iweeu  the  Salt  Range  and  that  of  Punniallee,  the  valleys  of  Dour, 
Bunnoo,  ^lutuk,  and  Esaukhail,  descend  like  steps  from  the  Soli- 
maun  ee  ridge  to  the  Indus,  in  the  southern  part  of  the  same  space 
are  the  hills  and  valleys  of  the  Murwnts,  and  the  desart  valley  of 


104  WE8TEBN  BRANCHES. 

Largee,  which  last  is  separated  from  tiie  Indus  by  a  hill  about  thirty 

miles  long. 

These  three  branches  are  crossed  by  low  ranges  mnning  north  and 
south,  two  of  whirli  mav  y)orhaps  be  consiclerwi  as  coiiliuuatidns  of 
those  already  mentioned  as  parallel  lo  ihe  mountains  <A'  Solimaun. 
They  divide  Dour  from  Bunnoo  ;  Bunnoo  Irom  Esaukliail ;  and  Lar- 
gee from  the  Murwut  country,  which  is  itself  so  crossed  by  ilitK  icnt 
ranges,  that  it  resembles  a  network  of  hills  enclosing  cultivated  plums. 
None  of  the  inter\  als  between  the  Uircc  great  branches  are  indeed  to 
be  considered  as  uninterrupted  valleys ;  besides  the  ranges  which 
cross  them  at  right  angles,  they  are  rou^ened,  particokrly  towards 
the  west,  by  minor  projections  from  the  principal  chain*  aooe  of 
which,  homevetf  are  deserving  of  much  notioe^  even  if  it  were  posnble 
to  acquire  accurate  notions  regarding  them.  As  the  Salt  Range,  the 
Range  of  84'.  >nd  the  low  ridges  whidi  run  across  the  valley  of  the 
Gaubul,  all  issue  from  the  eastern  side  of  Suffii^  Coh»  and  graduaflj 
divei^  from  ^tut  mountain,  the  country  near  the  point  of  their 
separation  is,  of  course,  veiy  mountainous.  It  is  inhabited  by  fixir 
tribes,  who  are  comprehended  under  the  general  name  of  Khjiieiee. 

The  branches  which  issue  fiom  the  Solinuumy  range  to  the  west^ 
ward,  are  more  difficuk  to  trest  of,  than  those  I  have  jusi  mentioned. 

I  shall,  however,  give  such  conjectures  as  my  infoimation  has  led 
me  to,  which  althou|^  they  will  probably  not  be  correct,  may  be  near 
enough  the  truth  to  assist  in  finmiag  a  general  idea  of  the  oonfop- 
mation  of  the  country. 

,  The  space  induded  between  the  valley  of  the  Caubul  river,  the 
parallel  of  Ghuznce ;  the  meridian  of  Caubul,  and  the  Solimannee 

range,  appears  to  be  a  mountainous  region,  containing  some  laige 
valleys.  I  cannot  discover  by  how  many  branches  it  is  formed,  or 
whether,  as  is  probable,  they  are  crossed  by  ridges  parallel  to  tlie 
principal  chain  :  but  the  mountains  certainly  extend  nearly  to  tlie 
road  from  (.huznee  to  Caubul,  nm\  leave  but  a  narrow  valley  between 
tliem  and  tiie  Paropamisan  hiiis.  Their  Streams  flow  towards  the 
west,  into  the  valley  just  mentioned. 

10 


Digitized  by  Gopglc 


TUKKATXKX  105 

Tbe  first  branch  of  which  I  hm  aaj  SifltiiiGt  inforinfltum,  leaves 
the  great  chain  to  the  eaai  or  north-east  of  Sirufza,  passes  to  the 
north  of  that  place,  runs  in  a  southerly  direction  alidiig  the  wetUni 
bank  of  the  Gomul,  passes  to  the  west  of  Mummye,  and  aeparatea 
that  small  country  from  Kuttawauz.  Beyond  this,  its  course  becookflt 
uncertain,  and  I  believe  it  siuks  into  low  and  sqattcred  hills. 

Thero  are  three  branches  more  to  the  south,  wliich  scarcely  deserve  ' 
to  be  mentioned,  one  of  them  scparaten  Simtza  from  Oorglioon, 
another  passes  to  the  noi  tli  of  Wauneh.    None  ot  these  ranges  ex- 
tend further  west  than  the  ( .rnnuL 

I  liave  no  distinct  accounts  of  any  hills  issuipg  £rom  the  range  of 
Solimauii  to  tlie  south  of  the  Gomul. 

I  am  still  less  acquainted  with  the  hills  in  the  west  of  Aighaunis- 
taun,  than  with  those  I  have  been  describing. 

A  chain  of  hills,  which  coimuences  at  the  northern  extremity  of 
the  Table  Land  of  Kelaut,  appears  to  extend  to  the  north-east  as  far 
as  the  Ghiljie  country  in  latitude  32'.  It  at  first  separates  Shoraubuk 
fimn  Fisheeii»  being  called  the  hill  of  Speen  Taizheh  in  this  part  of 
,  kitaant.  It  then^under  llie  mmies  of  Eochnk  and  IDiojeh  Aini^ 
fimna  the  mrthem  boimdarjr  of  Pisheen,  and  afterwards  takes  thi 
name  of  Toba,  from  a  ocnnitiy  thiou^  which  it  nins.   Hie  inort 
norllierly  part  of  it  is  a  pass  called  Gul  Iftsrrye,  east  of  the  vaUej  of 
Ui^eaaan,  and  not  fir  from  the  laaige  of  Toriowinea 
-    I  shaD  call  the  whole  cange  I  have  been  describing,  by  the  name 
of  Khqjdi  Ami«nn»  &r  the  convemenoe  of  »  genend  name.   It  Is 
inoady  but  not  hi||^  nor  abeep :  mow  only  liea  for  «  short  time  on 
Speen  Taiahebt  but  furtfaer  to  tbe  noitb^eaa^  it  liea  Ibr  tbiee  nUmliha 
in  the  year. 

Anodier  range  appears  Co  leave  the  TableLand,  neady  at  Ibe  same 
point  witb  that  I  have  joat  deacribed.  It  nms  eaat,<  and  fimns-tlie 
sonthem  boundary  of  Fisheen,  which  it  divides  from  £9iawl.  The 
part  nearest  the  Table  Land  is  called  Musailugh,  and  towards  the 
€entie»  it  is  called  Tukkatoor  whidi  being  the  h^eat  part  of  tt^  may 

p 


Digitized  by  Google 


KtJND. 


give  it  s  najno  to  the  range.  1  can  only  trace  this  range  about  fifty  tniles 
to  the  east  ot  tlic  pl  ice  where  it  leaves  the  Table  T^aiid,  but  it  is  not 
improbable  that  it  iiiav  be  connected  with  one  ot  tliose ranges  which 
will  be  iierealler  nientioned  as  crossing  the  country  of  the  (^aukcrs, 
and,  in  that  case,  its  length  will  be  much  more  considerable  than  I 
have  stated. 

It  seems  to  be  steep  and  high  in  proportion  to  the  neigiil>oiinng 
hills,  as  snow  lies  on  it  as  long  as  on  any  ot  those  before  mentioned* 

Another  range  called  Khurleekkce,  leaves  the  Table  Land  of  Ke- 
laut  nearly  in  latitude  30  north,  and  extends  to  the  east^  as  as 
the  67  of  east  longitude,  separi^ing  the  iiigli  plain  of  Bedowki  from, 
the  low  andhot  countiy  of  Seewiintnui. 

A  range  of  hills,  risuig  over  tbe  llrtter  oountiy  neerljr  in  latitude  89* 
north,  has  already  been  mentioiied  as  Ibnning  the  southern  boundaiy 
of  Ai^aoniststuL   The  spacer  extending  firam  the  sbcty-eighth  de- 
gree of  east  longjtudei  lo  the  rahge  of  SoUmaun*  and  lying  between 
the'twenty-ointh  and  tbirtj4lrst  degrees  of  north  ktitiidei  b  &U  of 
hills,  chiefly  in  ranges  running  east  and  west  It  also  contains  mmf 
plains,  jMirtictdiurly  in  the  eastern  part  of  the' division.  The  west  is 
Ihe  most  hiUy,  and  there  are  even  traces  of  a  veiy  hig^  range  in  dMt 
quarter,  which  seema  to  run  north  and  south,  and  to  connect  afl  the 
minor  ranges  just  mentioned.    Hie  existence  of  audi  a  range  is 
ibunded  on  the  facts,  that  liCDoa  Dbugh  arid  Toba  are  separated  iiom 
Zpope  by  a  rai^  of  mountains,  which  is  known  to  be  continued  to 
Tubbye,  the  source  of  the  river  Loca.  Still  fiuther  south,  in  the  same 
line,  is  a  high  motmtain  called  Kund,  which  is  said  to  run  noith  and 
south ;  similar  ridges,  running  in  the  same  direction,  are  met  at 
C'hirry  (south  of  Kund),  and  at  Isupper  (south  of  Chirry),  and  a  high 
ran^':c  continues  to  the  left  of  the  road  from  Shawl  to  Dander,  nearly  , 
to  thr  l  iit  mentioned  place.    The  line  I  have  marked  out,  whether 
occupied  by  a  range  of  mountains  or  not,  certainly  divides  the  waters 
of  this  part  of  Afghaunistaun,  some  of  the  streams  which  rise  in  it 
luaning  east,  and  others  west.    There  only  remain  to  be  mentioned 


Digitized  by  Google 


SOOEGHUB.  107 

tmo  nmges  of  biHst  one  .of  nbkii  oommencei  to  thejoutli  of  Kim^ 
boDj^  at  no  greit  distanoe  fiom  tlie  PiniopuniMin  niouptenii»  and 
nm»  paraUd  to  die  left  bank  of  the  Tumuk,  almoat  to  the  67'  of  eaat 
.longitude:  the  other  range begina.  neizly  where  the  jfifit  enda,  and 
-nuia  eaat  Thia  range  la  called  Socar^ur  to  the  weat,  and  Tue 
^ninee  to  the  east ;  and  With  It  I  believe  I  have  completed  the  meiw 
tkn  of  aU  reniaihableniigea  of  hilla  in  A%hanniataun. 


(    108  ) 


CHAP.  IIL 

UVnS  OF  AroHAOKISTAUll. 

\  FGHAIJNISTAlJNhaBfeiirlargerivefsfbraGotmtryofsuchei;- 
'^^.teht.  Ezoqpt  the  Indm,  there  is  no  river  in  all  theooimtiy  which 
is  not  fbidable  throu^ioat  its  course  for  the  greater  part  of  the  jear. 
The  hngeit  partake  of  die  character  of  tOTToits,  and  though  diey  often 
oovne  down  with  great  Ibrce^  they  soon  run  off  Their  importance  is 
diminished  by  the  drains  which' are  madefiom  them  for  the  purpose 
of  irrigating  the  fiddss  by  which  a  laige  stream  b  sometimes  entirely 
consumed,  before  it  reaches  any  other  river.  It  may  be  observed  of 
all  the  rivers  in  Aighaunistami,  that  their  size  at  their  mouths  is  never 
equal  to  the  ezpectatioas  they  raise  when  they  first  issue  from  the 
mountains. 

The  supplies  which  they  yield  to  the  cultivation,  and  the  interrup- 
tion they  occasion  to  travellers,  are  the  only  considerations  whicli 
make  thcni  of  importance.  The  Indus  alone  is  always  navigable^  and 
httle  use  is  made  even  of  its  navigation. 

The  Indus,  from  the  lenfrth  of  its  course,  and  the  volume  of  water 
which  it  carries  to  tlie  ocean,  must  be  reckoned  among  the  first  n\  ers 
in  tlie  world.  Tlie  distance  from  its  head  to  the  sea,  cannot 
be  exactly  aHcertained.  but  it  has  been  traced  for  1.3.50  miles,  and 
there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  its  whole  leni^th  is  much  greater  j  many 
of  its  tributary  streams  are  themselves  littlt  interior  in  extent  to  some 
of  the  most  considerable  rivers  of  Europe  *.    The  source  of  this  noble 


*  In  length  oF  course,  tlioiigh  not  in  deptli  or  pcrmnnmrc,  the  I  lydnspcs,  the  Hy- 
draotes,  and  the  Uytudrus,  arc  sttperior  to  the  Khoae;  the  course  of  the  Hyphatw  w 


Digitized  by  Google 


I19DU& 


109 


river  is  not  yet  euo^y  ascertained.  The  stream  is  traced  with  cer- 
tainty only  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Draus,  a  town  in  Little  Tibet, 
which  Lieutenant  Macartney  places  in  longitude  76  '  48',  and  latitude 
35  '  55*.  The  main  strenm  comes  to  this  point  from  the  north  of  cast, 
hut  its  course  higlK  r  up  is  unknown.  At  the  point  nbo"\  e  Dr.niH  just 
meiitioued,  the  mam  stream  is  met  by  a  smaller  hrauch  whkh  ha» 
been  traced  from  Rodauk  in  Tibet,  a  distance  ot  two  hundred  and 
fifty  miles.  It  passes  near  Ladauk,  the  c  apital  of  Little  Tibet,  irom 
which  it  is  callod  the  river  of  Ladauk.  it  is  joined  near  that  citv  by 
aiiudier  .'.uearn  from  the  north-west,  which  Mr.  Macartney  coujecLures 
to  issue  from  the  lake  of  Surickol.  I  have,  howe\'er,  been  informed 
by  an  Uzbek  of  Ferghamia,  that  a  stream  issued  tVoiii  a  glacier  in 
Mooz  Taugh,  on  the  road  between  Yaurcund  and  Ladauk,  and  that 
he  followed  it  from  the  glacier  to  near  Ladauk,  without  noticing  the 
jimetMm  of  any  conridenble  atieim  bom  ihe  westmu-d ;  by  Us  ks 
<XNiiit,  tlmefiife^  the  mer  has  its  soiin»  hi  diis  ^ader  $  and  though 
I  do  not  think  his.  infinnnatiea  to  be  oompased  to  that  aequiied  fay 
I  limtflnant  Macartnty»  yet  it  may  ^fnefid  to  stateit  on  so  abscue  a 
point. 

It  occasiiimed  great  regret  to  Mr.  Mscaitney,  that  he  ivas  not  able 
to.fiz  the  somoas  of  the  Indus}  but  if  we  consider  the  desotete  die- 
laeter  of  tiie  oounby  thxou^  whicfa  that  riyer  nms,  before  it  enten 
A%baimlstBun,  we  shaU  find  aooie  season  to  be  smprised  at  the  suo« 
oeas  with  which  he  haa  traoed  the  early  part  of  its  ootnrpe^  than  at  his 
Mure  in  discovering  its  remotest  spring. 

His  discovery  regaiding  the  course  of  the  river  of  Ladauk  is  a 
point  of  great  intefest*  and  ^e  coincidence  between  his  informadoa 


forty  miles  longer  than  that  of  the  Elbfl^'  and-  otiy  dxty  less  than  timt  of  the  BUbcu 

Pvr  n  the  river  of  Kashkmir  i^:  eighty  miles  longer  thm  the  Pn ;  ami  the  AbboflOeo,  thfl 
Kisurruin,  the  Gooaul,  and  the  Swati,  are  none  of  tbem  much  inferior  in  length  of  ooufM 
l»  As  Tksdwii  tkwgh  tbty  axu  Among  ||ie  mtUm  of  fbm  vmn  tfuS  gonfribntf  ip 

■tMorniftisdM. 


110 


INDUa 


wd  tite  wmy  of  die  Gwiges  made  by  lieutenint  Webbe  ib'180I^ 
9Cives  to  ttfengthen  die  wdicmtj  of  both. 

.It  was  ftnrmcrly  belieT'ed  diet  the  river  of  Ladauk mm  one  of  die 
principal  streams  of  the  Geiiges,  and  th«k  opinion  'mv  iiqpptNrted  by 
the  hi^  withoritv  of  Major  Reimei  ;  but  that  esuneiit  Geo||pnpfaer 
»eems  to  have  been  led  to  this  conclusion  by  the  erroneous  acoounte 
el*  the  huBUM,  and  of  P.  Tiefentaller.  Captain  Baper  and  Mi*  Webbe 
were  sent  on  puq)ose  to  ascertain  the  souioe  of  the  Ganges,  and 
found  it  to  be  in  the  south-eastern  side  of  Hemalleli ;  far  to  the  south 
of  what  was  formerly  supposed  *.  It  was  now  proved  that  the  river 
of  Ladauk  did  not  flow  into  the  Ganges,  but  its  re;il  course  remained 
unknown,  till  Mr.  ^lacartuey  ascprtained  its  junction  wit  h  the  Indus 
near  Draus  t.  From  Draus,  the  Indus  pursues  its  solitary  course 
through  a  mountainous  country,  Kttie  visited  by  travellers.  Mri 
Macartney  had  information  to  which  he  gave  credit,  that  a  branch 
separated  from  the  Indus  below  Draus,  and  passing  tlu  oiigh  (^ash- 
meer,  formed  the  principal  stream  of  the  Hvdaspes.  Though  such  a 
separation  often  occur  in  champaign  countries,  as  in  the  instance  of 
the  Ganges ;  there  is  some  improbability  in  its  taking  place  in  a 
rapid  river,  and  in  a  mountainous  country:  yet  even  in  such  situations 
we  sometiiiieB  aee  riven  divided  by  rocky  ialanda;  and,  whca  die  8e» 
paration  is  onoe  Biade»  tliere  la  na  difficult  in  mqppoaing  tbenatnie 
eiftheooantijtobesochaa  tD  oontaniieit*  At  Mnllau,  after  It  baa 
pasnd  thzoagb  die  mnge  Hindoo  Cooiii*.  the.  Indus  leeeivea  fieaa 
the  north-weat  the  Abbaaeen*  a  amaU  river  whidi  riaea  in  that  tn§t 
about  'one  hnndied  and  twenty  mflca  o^  and  which  thend^^ibeiinng 
Afghanna  aecnn  fidadfjr  to.hanw  im^pnedtebediepiindpal  ateea^ 
die  InduB.  It  th«i  proceeda  for  fifly  milea,  through  the  lower  hilla 
of  Hindoo  Coodi,  to  Toibailai  where  it  iaauea  into  an  open  eountiyy 


•  See  an  account  of  their  journey  in  the  eleventh  volume  of  tht>  A'^intit-  RpMeflrchcK. 
1  It  i»po«abie  du^  the  ttreaiais  which  are  said  to  mae  from  tb«  lak«  Mamaroor  to 
die  MMdi  cf  the  liver  of  Ladauk,  may  be  die  msia  etnam  of  tlie  httu. 


Digitized  by  Google 


nmua  iii 

Mid  iiuediate^  ipreMk  llidf  over  tiie  p]am»  sndmloMiimninier* 
■ble  iffliiM^i 

FbttyinilM  kiwer  doim,  nd  new  diA  ibit  of  Atto^ 
npid  m«r  of  Caubul,  and  soon  after  rushes  throng  a  narrow  open- 
ing into  the  nudst  of  the  bsanchet  of  the  Soliniaimy  range.  Even 
when  the  water  is  lowest,  the  meeting  of  those  riverSf  and  their  course 
through  the  rocks  before  they  are  buried  in  the  mountainst  is  full  of 
waves  and  eddies,  and  produces  a  sound  like  that  of  the  sea.  ^t, 
when  they  are  swelled  by  the  melting  of  the  snow,  they  create  a  tre- 
mendons  v  hirlj^ool,  the  roaring  of  which  can  be  heard  at  a  great  din- 
tance,  and  which  often  swallows  up  boats,  or  daslies  them  against  the 
rocks.  The  Indus,  which  is  so  widely  spread  in  the  jihiin,  is  contract- 
ed at  Attock  to  the  breadth  of  about  three  hundred  yards.  It  be- 
comes still  Tiarrower  where  it  enters  the  hills  ;  and  at  Neelaub,  a 
town  fifteen  miles  below  Attok,  it  is  said  to  bv  no  more  ilian  a  stone's 
throw  Hcross,  but  exceediugly  deep  and  rapid.  1  rum  Neelaub,  it 
winds  among  bare  lulls  to  Clarrabauijh,  where  it  passes  tiirough  tlie 
salt  range  in  a  deep,  clear,  and  tranquil  st  i  t  ani.  From  this  to  the 
sea  it  meets  with  no  interruption,  and  is  no  loisger  shut  iu  by  hills. 

It  now  runs  in  a  southerly  course,  and  is  poured  out  o%  er  the  pl  iia 
in  many  channels,  which  meet  and  sepu'ate  again,  but  seldom  are 
found  all  united  in  one  stream. 

[  Nou"  Ouch,  it  receives  the  Punjnud,  a  riverformed  by  the  junction 
of  those  of  the  Fkmjaub,  which,  though  a  great  body  of  water,  is  much 
inferior  to  the  Indus  above  the  jnnction.  .  Hie  river  then  mns 
sonthnvest  into  Sind>  where  it  is  discharged  through  many  mouths 
into  the  Giilph  of  Arabia.  In  the  part  of  its  comsei  south  of  noon- 
tainsi  it  fiequently  eats  away  its  banks;  and  gradually  changes  its 
course;  and,  at  its  annual  risin|^  it  inundates  the  country  for  many 
miles  on  each  side  of  its  bed  *. 


"  Sincf  fh<>  account  of  the  source  of  the  Indus  wrut  written,  I  hare  received  a  highly 
iaU;rtrt>uog  journal  from  Meer  Izzut  Odlab,  a  veiy  mtd%ent  native  of  Delly,  who  vt» 


112  KAITSHKAUR.. 

I  ahall  my  nothing  in  this  place  of  the  rivers  which  join  the  Indus 
fiom  the  east,  which  are  fully  described  by  Lieutenant  Macartney.* 

Of  those  which  join  it  from  the  west,  I  have  already  menticmed  the 
Abbft  Seen.   The  next  river  is  that  of  Kauahkhiiwr»  which  tmm  in 

^^^^^^  ^^^J^J^^^^^^— •l^w 


mdttced  by  Mr.  Moteeraft,  niperilltendatit  of  the  Company's  Stud,  to  undertake  a  journey 
into  Tartary,  for  tlicpiirpnso  of  ascertaining  the  possibility  of  grtting  horsps  for  the  Bcngnl 
Cwalryin  tbjit  country.  Ue  went  from  Caahmeer  to  l.i«dauk,  and  from  thenoe  to  Yarcund ; 
add  die  fidloiring  infimnatkMi,  respecting  the  mm  uliich  hefMcd,  ia  fiMind  in  difl^nnt 
|larts  of  his  journal.  At  Mutauyen,  (a  pUkCA  ibout  forty  coss  from  the  dly  of  Caithmcer,  in 
a  direction  to  the  north  of  cast),  the  waters  run  partly  to  Caahmeer,  and  partly  to  Tilx-t- 
The  stream,  which  goes  to  Cashmeer,  is  called  the  Sind»  (which  name  itretains  throughout 
dwv«Ocy).  llieodKr,  kcdMtliewalwdrTibeC:  itflowinord^^ 
(a  village  on  Izzut  Oollah's  route,  about  thirty  ooss  north-cast  oi  Mutauyen) ;  and,  from 
that  place,  it  tnkcs  a  westerly  direction,  passes  throttp;h  Little  Til)Ct,  and  flows  under  Mt>- 
zudt^rabad)  wiicre  it  lakett  the  name  of  that  town,  A  coss  below  MoKutl'crabtui,  it  is  joined 
bjr  dw  river  of  CMhrnwr^  (dM  Sind  above  nwntiflnklX  and  flow*  tlumigb  the  Pu^ui^ 
where  it  is  culletl  tlic  Jelam  or  Behut,  (IT  ,  1 1  ]i  ,\  Tliis,  tlienfore,  is  the  Kishen  Giinga, 
which  Mr.  Macartney  supposes  to  have  separated  from  the  Indus,  a  notion  by  no  meaiu 
surprizing,  considering  how  xwar  the  head  of  die  former  river  is  to  the  course  of  the  latter. 
About  twenty  coss  from  Pishkum,  in  a  direction  to  the  east-~of  north,  is  the  village  of 
Ktitll-rh,  where  T/ziit  Oollah  first  met  the  rive  r  ul' T  id  iisk,  on  which  hr  ruak'  -  tin  f'  H  rv- 
ing  observations.  "  Two  coss  Jjefbrc  you  come  to  Khillich,  the  road  goes  along  Utc  left 
«*  bank  of  a  river,  i«liidi  flowi  into  die  i4ver  «f  Atfeofc  (the  bda»).  It  ooaKi  ftvm  dw 
<*  north-east,  and  flows  towards  tlie  south-west;  and,  it  is  said,  that  this  river  joins  the 
u  river  of  Shauyook,  (the  source  of  which  is  between  Tilx-t  and  V-irkmul),  and,  piusing 
**  through  the  country  of  the  Euso&yes,  and  Kieer,  and  I'urnoul,  joins  the  river  of 
<*  Cbnbid  abow  die  ibrt  ef  AtMlc  This  rivnr  has  hen  no  proper  nauM;  but  k  called 
"  San  PoOt  which,  in  tlic  liinguape  of  Tibet,  sigtiifics  great  river."  From  KhlHid>,  latut 
Oollah  acconipnnied  this  river  to  Ley  or  Ladauk,  ivhich  stands  on  its  right  bank.  Tlis 
route  to  Ley  would  make  tiiat  city  more  to  the  south,  and,  consequently,  nearer  to  the 
eonmoB  podtion  dian  lientcnant  Macartney  has  done ;  ixit,  by  an  obaervatian  which  he 
took  with  a  very  coarse  instrument,  '*for  want  of  an  astrolabe,"  he  makes  the  latitude  37° 
40'  north,  which  is  still  iiirth.  r  north  than  Mr.  Macartney's.  From  I^y,  Izzut  Oollnh 
proceeded  to  Yarkund ;  uud,  about  eighteen  coss  to  the  east  of  north  from  Ley,  he  met  the 
river  Shatqwok,  wUdi  he  acoampatded  bcyoad  the  Olader  of  KhiBudaiiD  to  'ib  aoiute 
under  the  ridge  of  Carrakoonnn,  nearly  due  nortli  of  Ley,  at  the  distance  of  fifteen 
marches  by  the  toad.  Izzut  Oollah  docs  not  describe  the  Glacier,  iis  forming  part  of  the 
range  of  mountains,  but  as  a  separate  mouniaiu  of  ice,  seen  on  tlie  lelt  ui  the  rmul,  two 
Juarezes  before  reaching  KurrakooRimi,  and  extending  two  hundred  omr  frtan  Tibet  of 
Bald  to  Svrrik  KoL  Though  Izsot  Oollah  does  not  speak  of  the  range  at  ""ow^'H™  at 

•  10 


Digitized  by  Google 


iboahtii^  Kl»ni»  tihe  pe«k  in  Bedoot- Taugh,  wllieh  contaim  the 
lomee  of  like  Qsus.  Umb  Kmiwlihiftr  li^  iatues  torn  the 
ridte  of  ihe-pedcy  aod  ii  divided  ftom  Che  Oxob  bjHie  chain' of  Belodi 
IVni^  wUch  nms  aleog  its  Ti|^ bank  w  Gooah^  ani 
on  its  left»  is  the  ^ountiy  of  KaniiUiaort  fiom  wiudi  it  d^f«a  ili 
aamft  After  paasmg  Hindoo  Cooah,  it  liia  *  on  itarig^ 
fiton  fiNMU  that  mountain,  bo  often  mentroned  bcfixet  On  ila  left,  it 
has  moontains  perall^  to  dut  prq^ectbUf  of  great  height^  hat-not 
bearing  petpetual  inofr.  It  then  passes  through"  the  hilly  country 
beneath  the  great  ranges,  and  rushes,  with  wpriamg  iriolence,  into 
the  vallej  of  the  Caobul  liver.  I  give  that  name,  in  oonformity  to 
former  usage,  to  a  river,  formed  by  different  stieama,  unitii^  to  the 
East  of  Canbul.  Two  of  the  most  considerate  come  from  Hindoo 
Coosh,  through  Ghorebund  and  Punjsheer,  and  derive  their  names 
from  those  distnct«i,  Thpv  join  to  the  north  of  (^aubul  j  and  pursue 
a  south-€'a.steriy  course,  till  tlu  v  reach  Haiirt  okaub.  A  stream  httle 
inferior  to  those  just  mentioned,  comes  trom  the  west  of  (-rhuznee, 
and  is  joined  to  the  east  of  Caubul  by  a  rivulet,  which  rises  in  the 
I  Paropamisan  moimtains  iu  the  hill,  called  Cohee  Baba.  This  rivulet 
I  alone  passes  through  Caubul,  and  may  be  said  to  have  given  its  name 
to  the  whole  river.  •  '  

•         •     ■  ,  •    .  ^      ^  _jS 

'  '        ~    '        '      "  •  I 

of  the  eleviitwl  tract,  which  extends  fi>r  three  marciies  on  the  highest  part  of  the  amntrv 
between  Yorkund  and  Ley.  llie  source  of  th«  liva  of  Ywrkund  is  divided  by  the  rklgie 
from  the  Shauyook,  and  distant  dghtetfn  mardm front  Tarirand,  m  a  Arectioa  lb  tlig^Mt 
«f  iooth.  It  is  obviotik  that  this  uccouiit  of  thelndiu  agrees  entirely  with  Mr.  MacartMjr'ik 
exrrrt  tfint  it  makes  the  .ShauytxJi  haTC  it*  source  in  Mooz  Taugh,  and  not  in  the  lake 
ol  Surik  Kul.  There  in  another  ap|)arent  dtsagreoneat,  which  it  is  not  difficult  to  remove, 
bnt  OoDah  pmmtd  dmNi{g|b  Ili«m%  afaont  ibc  con  norlih-cait  of  Mutalqren;  hnt  leavd 
nodung  of  the  janction  of  the  liw  of  Ladank  wiA  the  Indus,  stated  by  Mr.  Macartnqr 
to  take  place  tiear  the  town  of  Draus.  It  is  howevw  evident  from  Ixxut  Oollah's  account 
of  the  river  of  Lwlauk,  that,  unless  that  stream' alters  its  course  after  passing  KhiiUcb,  it 
iiMiit  floir  'at  no  great  distance  to  the  loudiwaitl  of  the  point  where  he  crMwd^dietrlet  of 
Draus ;  and  it  is,  therefore,  more  probable  than  ever  dwt  the  jvtedan  ftated  tien tenant 
llMeitiMj  takes  place  in  the  south  of  that  district. 


I 


Digitized  by  Google 


9 

114  OOMUL. 

AB  the  streanis  I  have  mentioned  unite  at  Baureekaub,  and  form 
the  river  of  Caubul*  which  flom  npidly  to  the^eaaty  iBcraaied  1^  all 
the  faKOoka  from  the  hills  on  each  side.  It  receives  the  river  <^ 
Kaushkaur  .  at  Kaumeh,  near  Jellallabad ;  and,  thence  runs  east, 
breaks  through  the  minor  branches  of  Hindoo  Cooab,  and  ^osfSA  nu- 
niPT-nus  rapids  and  whirlpools,  * 

After  entering  the  plain  of  Feshawer,  the  Caubul  riv'or  loses  a  p^ood 
deal  ot  its  violence,  but  is  still  rapid.  It  breaks  into  dilU n  nt 
branches,  vi^ch  join  again  after  they  have  received  a  river,  formed 
by  two  streams,  which  come  from  the  valleys  ot  Punjcora  and  Swaut ; 
and,  having  now  collected  all  its  waters*  it  enters  the  Indus  a  little 
above  Attok. 

The  Caubul  river  is  very  inferior  to  the  Indus,  being  fordable  in 
many  places  in  the  dry  weather.  The  Indus,  indeed,  was  forded 
above  the  junction  by  Shauh  Shuja  and  his  army,  in  the  end  of  the 
frinter  of  1809;  but,  this  wu  talked  of  aa-ftiniraclei  wniuglbft  in -the 
Cqg^B  &TOiiri  and»  I  never  heaid  of  any  other  Ibxd  in  die  Jbidlii^ 
from  the  place  ' where  it  issues  fimm'  the  mountains  to  the  see.  > 

Behm  Attok^  the '  LomIiis  leoeiTes'  the  Toe  and  other  taooks ;  bot^ 
nothing'deserving  of  the  name  of  a  rivor^  till  it  reaches  the  soutihem 
psrt  of  Fwmkhail  It  is  there  joined  by  the  Koimmi,  whidi  rises 
near  Hoiyoob^  beyond  the  ridge  of  the  Solimauny  mountainsy  and 
runs  east  throQgli  a  very  deep  valley  in  tiiat  ridge»  aa  6r  as  Bimak- 
haOy  where  it  turns  more  to  the  south,  and  enters  the  Indnay  near 
KaggalwaUa.    Its  bed  is  there  broad,  but  very  shallow. 

^le  only  river  which  runs  into  the  Indus,  south  of  this,  is  the  G<n 
nral  \  andy  eren  it  can  scarcely  be  said  to  do  so^  since  its  waters  ate 
spent  in  the  cultivation  of  the  north  of  Danunm»  and  never  reach  the 
InduSf  but  when  swelled  with  rain. 


*  Dangerous  m  mich  a  navigation  must  people  oAen  descend  it  from  Jdlallabad  on 
taAs,  whidi  daoot  down  ibe  Mream  with  ineradible  vdod^ :  but  not  without  coiuiderabl^ 
diiifw  Am  tke  «ogIi%  sad  ikom  tlw  violam  ef  dw 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


4 


HELMUND.  115 

'  Hie  Gfoonil  Tbes  M  Dooidiellj  to  the  MKith.of  Sbnliaj  and  aeeiiif 
fiiH  to  nan  aontli-wieBt  It  aoonionn  HMtlii  and  continuea  in  tlutt 
course  to  Domundee.  It  there  receives  the  stream  of  Mummjr^  and 
the  Coondoor,  which  rises  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Temra.  From 
this  plac^  the  course  of  the  (romul  is  easterly  to  Sirmaugha,  where 
it  is  joined  by  the  Zhobe,  a  stream  little  infeiior  to  the  Gromul  itsctf, 
which  rises  in  the  hill  of  Kund,  east  of  Burshore,  and  runs  through  e 
country,  to  which  it  gives  its  name.  A  little  to  the  east  of  Sirmaugha, 
the  Gomul  pierces  the  mountains  of  Solimaun,  passes  Rugluceet  end 
fiartilizes  the  lands  of  Doulut  Khail,  and  Gundehpoor  tribes. 

Allthetormer  part  of  its  course  is  tbrouL'li  uninlmliitetl  motintains. 
The  stream  is  everywhere  fordable,  except  when  swelled  with  rain, 
,  and  even  then  the  water  soon  runs  off. 

Difierent  streams  issue  from  the  mountains  at  Zirkmiee,  Derau« 
bund,  Choudwa,  and  Wukwa.  They  all  run  through  valleys  ;  and,  the 
two  last,  completely  pierce  the  range  of  Solimaun ;  one  rising  in 
Spusta,  and  the  other  in  the  Moosakhail  country,  both  west  of  the 
range.    The  two  last  reach  the  Indus,  when  swelled  with  rain. 

The  greatest  of  the  rivers,  which  run  through  the  west  of  A%hau- 
nifltflon,  ia  the  Hebnund,  or  Etymander.  It  liaea  wt  Gohee  &ba» 
twenty  or  thirty  nitea  weat  of  Caubul,  on  the  eaatem  edge  of-tiia 
PluOpaonaan  ntt^  It  luna  through  thoaemoiaitehia  for  upwarda. of 
two  handled  mOear  wad  then  isauea  into  the  cuhivifted  pUdna  of  the 
Doonumeeai  -  Hik  tract,  however,  ia  not  at  the  pUwe  alluded  to,  of 
any  greet  breadth}  and  the  Hellnund  aoon  entera  e  deaart, -which 
estenda  -to  ita  termination  in  the  lake  of  Seestaun.  Hie. immediate 
hanka  Of  the  Hdmmid,  and  the  coontrjr  within  half  a  mile  or  emile 
of  them»  ate  eveiywhere  lertfle^  and,  in  moat  plaoea,  waU  eohivated. 
-  'The  iHiole  loigth  of  the  courae  of  the  Hehnni^  ia  about  four  hundred 
miles.  Though  fordable  for  moat  pert  of  tiie  year  throoghout  the 
whole  of  ita  coarse,  the  Helraund  is  rtill  a  considerate  streun :  even 
in  the  dry  seaaon,  it  ia  breaat  deep  at  the  fords  nearest  to  the  place 
where  it  leaves  the  mountaina;  and,  at  the  time  of  the  melting  of  the 
imowa,  il^  ia  «  deep  end  rapid  river.  Beaidea  the  riven  which  will  be 

•  a  8 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 


116  LOEA. 

hereafter  enumerated,  it  roceives  a  stream  from  Seeahbund,  which 
leaches  it  fourteen  miles  alK>vr  dirislik,  alter  a  course  of  oifrht\' mi^es. 

The  LTrjrhimdaub  rises  at  a  piace  in  the  Hazaureii  inouatLiins, 
eighty  miles  north-eft,'<t  of  Candahar,  and  (  onsiderably  to  tlie  south  of 
the  source  of  the  {lelmund.  Its  eouise  lies  to  the  southward  of  that 
river,  which  it  joins  below  C.inshk,  after  ])a.ssing  within  a  few  miles 
of  Candahar,  and  watering  the  richest  part  of  the  Doorraunee  coun- 
try. It  is  a  suiiili  stream  in  winter,  but  deep  ■diid  rapid  when  swelled 
by  the  melting  of  tlie  mow.  It  is  never  more  tliau  one  hundred,  uiid 
fifty  yarda  broad. 

The  Khaahrood  rum  at  Saialdlir,  mmetj  milet  sotilJi-eaat  and  by 
aoiilh  fiom  HesMil)  and*  after  a'coune  of  one  hundred  and  fifty 
miles,  joins  die  Helmwnd,  near  Khooniwaheen  in  the  Gwmaeer.  -  It 
ia  a  iBpid  river,  and  laiger  tliaa  tbe  Uighondaub. 

Tlie  FmraliHrood  riiea  near  that  last  mentioned,  and  is  s  mndi 
move  oonsidBrBble  stream.  It  is  uncertain  whether  it  reaches  die 
hdce'  of  Scestaun  or  is  lost  in  the  aands ;  but»  in  either  case^  its  oouiae 
is  not  lam  than  two  hundrad  miles  long.  Hie  Turauk  rises  near 
Mooklcoor,  and  at  first  pursues  a  soirfh^^wcsteffy  ooutse  along  the 
road  to  Candahar.  It  then  turns  west,  peases  to  the  south  of  Canda- 
har, and  joins  the  Ur^undaub,  about  twenty-five  miles  west  of  that 
dty.  The  Tumuk,  generally  speaking,  runs  through  a  plain  country, 
and  is  not  remarkable  for  rapidity.  To  the  south  of  Candahar,  it  le* 
ceives  the  Urghessaur),  wliich  rises  near  Caufirchauh,  and  waters  a 
country  which  is  known  by  its  name.  It  is  a  rapid  torrent,  never 
remains  deep  for  more  than  two  or  tlivcc.  days,  and  leaves  its  bed  dry 
for  a  great  part  of  the  year.  Still  lower  down,  the  Turnuk  receives 
the  Shorundaum,  a  petty  rivulet,  and  the  Doree,  which  rises  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Rabaut.  Notw^ithstanding  tliese  additions,  it  seems 
rather  to  tlecrease  in  size  from  the  losses  it  suflers  from  the  dryness 
of  the  couiiLiy,  and  the  demands  of  the  cultivation  ;  so  that,  irifter  a 
course  of  two  hundred  mUes,  it  is  still  asmiall  stream  when  it  joins 
the  Uij^undaoh. 

The  Lora  rises  at  TVibbye,  in  die  mcuntam  of  Kund,  and  nms 
through  Burdkore  into  FisheoL  Itifaerereoeivea  as  much  aa  escapes 


Digitized  by  Google 


117 


trom  tlie  cultivation,  of  the  Soorkaiib,  a  rivuJet,  which  rises  in  the 
hill  of  Kund,  near  the  source  of  tlie  Zhobe.  It  aiWwarils  runs 
through  a  narrow  delile  iii  the  hills  of  Speen  Taizeh  into  Shoraubuk, 
where  it  breaks  iuto  two  branches.  They  unite  again  to  the  west  of 
that  country  ;  and  the  whole  is  lost  in  the  neighbourhowl  ol  Choghje 
in  tlie  (lunnseer.  The  length  of  Lora  is  near  two  hundred  miles, 
aad  it  ia  of  a  considerable  breadth ;  but  never  too  deep  to  be  forded, 
fixr  more  than  a  weA.  at  a  time.  h»  banks  are  bo  high  in  Fiaheen,  as 
to  prevent  its  bdng  employed  for  irrigation }  but  in  Shoraubuk  they 
are  lower,  and  it  supplies  almost  all  the  water  nsed  in  agriculture. 

The  river,  which  was  anciently  caUed  the  Orchufl»  can  scarcely  be  - 
reckoned  to  belong  to  A%hauni8taun.  It  rises  at  Oba  in  the  Fkuo- 
pamisan  mountains,  and  nms  past  HerauL  U  continues  to  run 
westerly  for  a  short  distance,  through  A^l^aun  and  Persian  Khoras- 
saun  ;  after  which,  it  runs  north,  and  enters  the  deaart  on  the  left  of 
the  Oxus.  It  is  said  formerly  to  have  reached  the  Caspian  Sea;  but 
I  believe^  it  is  now  lost  in  the  desart.  It  is  crossed  between  Merve 
and  Meshhed ;  but  I  have  no  particular  information  regarding  ita 
lower  course.  It  was  anciently  ciilled  Herirood  j  but  is  now  known 
to  the  Persians  and  Afghauns  by  the  name  of  PooUee  MauUum,  and 
to  the  l^zbeks  by  that  of  Tejend. 

Thouiih  there  are  m an v  streams  in  Aftrhaunistann  as  larfje  in  thorn- 
selves  as  some  of  those  I  have  mentioned,  i  need  take  no  noiice  of 
them,  unless  their  importance  is  raised  by  their  contributing  to  a 
great  river,  or  by  some  other  circumstance  of  that  kind.  It  there- 
fore only  remains  to  mention  tlie  streams,  which  form  the  only  lake 
of  which  I  have  heaid  ia  A^haunistaun.  The  Pultsee,  the  Jiiga, 
and  another  rivulet,  issue  from  the  mountains  of  Solimaun,  north  of 
the  range  of  Sirrufka,  and  flow  west  into  the  lake,  irihich  is  situated 
to  the  south-soiitb-west  of  Ghnaneo»  and  about  two  mazdbes  south- 
west of  Mybolank. 

It  was  on  one  of  these  stranns  that  Sukaun  Mahmood  huQt  his 
fiunous  embankmoit,  which  siqiplied  the  city  of  Ghusnee^  and  ita 
neig^bouiiiood,  with  water  $  and  whSdi  was  destroyed  by  one  of  the 

•  ♦  Q  3 


lis 


AUfilSTAMDEH. 


early  Afghaun  kings,  before  he  iiad  succeeded  in  overturning  the  em- 
pire of  Ghuznee.  Besides  other  little  streams,  tlie  lake  receives  a 
rivulet  from  the  souUi,  which  rises  near  Gwaushta ;  and,  the  whole 
united,  make  apiece  tii  witer,  wbidi  in  die  dzy  weiHier ii  oaljrdiiee 
or  four  mfles  in  diameter,  and  about  twice  as-mudi  after  floods.  Hie 
water  of  the  lake  i>  aalt,  as  is  that  of  some  of  the  rivdeta  which  join 
it  ft  is  caUed  Aiibistandeh»  which;  in  Fenian,  means  sbundlu^ 
water* 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  119  ) 


CHAP.  IV. 

'  KATOftAL  Aim  POUTICAL  DIVXflONB  OF  AraOAtnaSTAUN. 

THE  plain  of  the  Indus  from  the  sea  to  Siingur,  is  included  in  Sind. 
Of  this  di¥uion,.the  part  which  extends  from  theMft  toShilnrpore, 
is  inhabited  by  SuufeeB,  under  a  native  prince,  but  tributary  to  CaulNiL 
Hub  u  now  generally  called  Suide»  by  the  English ;  but,  may  with 
*  moie  propriety,  be  tetmed  lAwer  Sbd.  Fkom  ShilGvpoor»  induaive 
tp.8angar,  nwy  be  called  Upper  Sind.  The  part  of  it  which  Ilea  to 
Ae  weat:ofthe  Indna,  ia  chiefly  inhabited  by  Bekidiea ;  and,  with^ 
CKoeption.of  a^amall  tract  norUijof  Shiharpoor,  ia  diieotly  under  $he 
govemmoit  of  Canbud..  Above  Snngur,  aa  fir  aa  the  eaotern  brandiea 
qf  the  Solimann  range,  ia  DamaBP*  The  hiUsiouth  of  the  aalt  ranges 
and  the  plains  and  valleys  which  they  enclose,  are  also  generally  in* 
eluded  in  Damaun.  Hie  plain,  immediately  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
Indus,  and  north  of  Sungnr,  ia  .inhabited  by  Beloches ;  and  is  some- 
times diatingiiiAed  from  Damaun,  and  called  by  the  Beloche  or  Hin- 
dpostaunee  name  of  Muckelwaud.  Damaun  b  then  only  appli^  to 
the  skirts  of  the  hills,  which  indeed  is  the  original  meaning  of  the 
word.  In  this  sense,  the  southern  pwrf  of  Damaun  is  inhabited  by  the 
hitooreeaunees,  after  whom,  to  the  north,  are  the  Bauboors,  Meeaiui- 
kliaiis,  Gimdehpoors,  Douliitkhails,  and  Munvuts  ;  hU  Aighaun  trilies. 
To  the  north  oi  the  latter,  and  aloii^  t  he  utiDost  Viournlnry  of  Dnmaun, 
in  this  extended  sense,  are  the  At<^haun  t  ribe?),  who  inhabit  Ivhost, 
Dour,  and  Bunnoo.  and  that  ol  Ksaukhail.  In  the  same  extent  of  the 
range  of  3olimaun,  iive  the  Zmurre^  Sheeraunees,  Wuzeercc3,  and 
Jadrauns.  • 


1 


120  COHISTAUN. 

Hie  Jsigeea  tad  Torees  inhabit  a  deep  vaUey*  wbich  appears  to 

be  cut  hj  tiMS  Koocnim  in  the  SdUmauny  range :  between  the  salt 
range  and  that  of  34%  are  hills  and  valleys,  inhabited  by  the  tribes  of 
Bungush  and  Khuttnk.  The  lattefi  in  some  places,  extends  to  the 
south  of  the  salt  ranges  and  even  crosses  the  Indus  about  Muckud. 
To  the  north  of  the  range  of  S4 is  the  rich  and  extensive  plain 
of  Peshawer,  watered  by  the  river  of  Caubul,  and  bounded  on  the  east 
by  the  Indus.  The  Khuttuk-^  extend  ox  er  the  south-<"nsfcrTi  part  of 
this  plain.  The  northern  part  belongs  to  the  EusofV'.  i  s,  who  inhabit 
also  the  country  among  the  hills,  which  I  have  mentioned,  under  the 
names  of  Boon  ere,  Swaut.  and  Punjoora,  Some  of  the  Ensofzye  tribes 
extend  to  the  east  of  the  indus.  Tlic  rest  of  the  pi  am  ot  Peshawer 
belongs  to  certain  tribes,  often  comprehended  in  the  name  of  the 
tribes  of  Peshawer. 

■  The  plain  of  Peshawer  is  bounded  on  the  west  by  the  subordinate 
fange*  which  crosses  from  ffindoo  Coosh  to  Sofflud  Goh*  The  south- 
em  part  of  these  hiUs*  which  is  nakedandbanen^bdoogs  to  the  upper 
Mbmunds.  The  northern  part  is  covered  with  pines,  and  belon^ps  to 
the  OtmannHiaa.  To  ^  wert  of  this  lenge  of  hills,  is  the  qMcioaa 
vaUierjr  of  Bajour,  which  nms  into  that  of  I\iiiJooM,  mid  which  is  suiw 
mounted  on  the  west  hf  the  southern  projection  fiom  Hindoo  Cbosh. 
West  of  the  plain  of  Peshawer  is  valley  of  the  'OMibd  thr«r,  the  ^ 
eastern  part  of  which  is  little  hif^ier  than  Peahaweif ;  hut  the  Western 
is  elevated  to  the  level  of  the  conntriel  west  of  the  tUige  of  Solimann. 
The  ooimtries  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river  have  already  been  described, 
owing  to  their  tonttoctioii  wiiti  Hindoo  Coosh.  On  the  right  hani^ 
there  is  first  tlie  country  of  the  Khyberecs ;  and,  farther  west,  the 
rich  plain  of  Jellallabad.  West  of  JeUallalMid,  are  Gundamuk,  and 
Jugdilhdc,  which,  with  all  the  high  country,  extending  from  the  plain 
of  Canbul  to  the  hills  of  the  Khyberees  ;  bounded  on  the  south  by 
Suffaid  Coh,  ;iTid  on  the  north  by  the  plain  on  thp  Caubul  river,  is 
called  Nimgrahaur  or  *  Nungnehaur.   The  Ck>hi8taun  of  Caabid  iias 

  _  ^   _   •  •  -  ■ 

*  FiQMtbcniiMitieiiiMtdiidiiMMfifnnht  MW^  in  FtaditotH  aigni^pi^g  nlaes  «b<I 
lUbmm,  a  tmni. 


Digitized  by  Google 


121 


been  described:  south  of  it,  i8;tfa0 plain  of  Csubul,  which  is  spofaoi 
enchmtf.ing  by  all  who  have  seen  it.  It  has  the  Patopamisaii 
mountains  on  the  west,  part  of  the  Cohistaun  on  the  north,  the  vailej 
of  the  Caubul  river,  and  the  hills  of  Ningrahaur  and  Logur,  connected 
with  the  range  of  Solimaun  on  the  east.  To  the  south,  it  opens  on  a 
long  valley  aacending  towards  Ghuzneo.  the  cfi  cHd  r  part  ol  which  is 
inhabited  by  the  Afghaim  tribe  orWiinluk.  On  tin'  west,  this  valley 
has  the  Taropaniisan  range;  and  on  the  east,  it  has  ditfeitfit  hranclies 
of  the  range  of"  Solimaun,  including  vailies,  of  which  the  principal 
are  Logur,  Speiga,  Kimrwauii,  and  ZoonnooL  The  three  first  slope 
towards  the  river  of  (xhiiznee  ;  but  the  water  of  Zoorinool  runs  intd 
the  Aubistaundeh.  All  the  streams  west  of  the  range  of  Mummye, 
north  of  Ghwaushteh,  south  of  Ghuznee,  and  &ist  of  the  {Parallel  of 
Mookkoor^  run  into  the  same  lake  f  so  that  the  ooaniti^  within  those 
]miitB»-fi)niia«ban  fiee  fiom  failis,.  and  modeiateljrftitlle»<on  tlia 
kiglieBt  patt  of  an  dbvated  phin.  Tliia  aatnnl  <y  viskm  inclindari 
Vtmny  litdedl8tfkla»  of  which  the  principal,  beginning  from  th*  floatb« 
are  Ghwaushtdb*  Kuttawam*  Mvbolndb  .fihibmri  -C^tuni^  anil 


•  Hmm  ii  no  maikfid  ll]iiit.betwwa  the  bason  of  the  AnbiataiidBl^- 
«ad  the  eonrt^  want  of  ihe  ineiidian  of  Hookhoor ;  ihehrfier»'  ho^ 
€vitr>'has  a  westesn  nchnatMNi*  ■ 

It  is  indodadbefcwoen  the  Paropamisan  moimtains  sod  the  range  of 
Khcg^  Amrann,  mtA  may  be  divided  into  the  talleyof  the  Uigbe»» 
saun,  that  of  the  Tumuk,  and  the  high  country  between  those  mank 
The  former  is  not  broad,  nor  remarkably  fiertile :  it  slopes  to  the  north- 
west It  is  inhabited  by  Doorraunees ;  and  the  mouth  of  it  extends 
to  the  neighbourhood  of  Candahar.  To  the  south-east  of  it,  is  a  hilly 
and  pastoral  country,  extending  to  Shoraiibuk.  Tlie  country  between 
the  Urghessann  and  Turniik.  is  composed  of  the  ranges  of  MookkoOf: 
and  Torkaunee,  and  the  plains  which  i  liey  enclose. 

The  general  slope  of  the  valley  ol"  Turnuk,  from  Mookkoor  to 
Kelauti  Ghiljie,  is  to  the  south-west.  It  also  shelves  towards  the  river 
firom  the  Paropanii»an  mountains,  and  from  the  high  land  before  men- 

B 


Digitized  by  Google 


OOUNTEY  "WEST  OF  THB  HELMTJND. 


tioned,  in  the  parallell  of  Kellot  e  Abdooreheem.  But.  except  in  the 
most  northerly  part  of  this  natural  division,  these  slopes  are  so  modf»- 
rate  that  the  tract  may  with  propriety  be  described  as  a  wavy  pium, 
scattered  with  hills.  It  is  not  infertile,  and  in  many  places  it  is  well 
cultivated  ;  but,  in  general,  it  is  tlry,  and  a  large  portion  of  it  is  lelt 
waste  for  that  reason.  It  is  destitute  of  trees.  The  uncultivated  parts 
abound  in  buolies,  which  serve  for  fuel  and  for  the  food  of  caiuels,  but 
which  do  not  form  continued  tracts  of  brushwood,  such  as  are  common 
in  India.  The  breadth  of  this  valley  is  about  sixty  miles,  and  the 
Imigthof diepart IhairedeacsribeduTeiy UttlemoiA  HuiBbabitod 
by  Ghfljies. 

Hie  Urg^nndanb  is^iies  from  the  mouiituiis  to  the  north  of  Kdauti 
Ghtljie.  From  that  river  to  the  Udmund,  i*  »  hilly  oountcy,  cnnnectfid 
on  the  north  with  the  Fuopamiaan  mountainst  end  reaching  nearly  to 
the  paraUd'ofCandahar  on  the  south.  The  aouthem  part  of  this  tiaet 
ia  unfertile.  Tbe  rest,  in  which  are  tnduded  the  districts  of  Khauk-* 
nix,  Laum,  and  perhaps  some  others,  contains  some  fertile  plains^ 
among  hiUSf  which  bear  al  m  ond  and  other  trees. 

The  country  round  Candahar  is  fertile^  and  highly  cultivated.  Still 
fiuther  soothe  it  is  poor,  and  becomes  more  so  as  it  extends  west  |  so 
that,  for  many  marches  towards  the  left  bank  of  the  Uelmund,  it  Is  a 
complete  desart.  Both  banks  of  the  Helmund,  however,  are  fertile, 
and  compose  the  country  of  (lurmsecr.  Its  limits  on  the  east  and 
west  are  formed  by  the  desart ;  on  the  south  it  has  Seestaun,  and  on 
the  north  thr-  part  of  the  Doorraunoe  countrv,  lower  down  the  Hel- 
-  mimd  than  dirishk.  This,  and  the  countiy  round  Girishk,  are  fertile, 
near  the  Helmund.  At  a  distance  from  the  river  it  is  sandy,  but  not  a 
desart*  Still  further  up  the  river,  on  its  right  bank,  lies  the  rich  coun- 
try of  Zemeendawir,  which  has  the  I'aropamisan  niountain.s  on  the 
north,  and  some  bills  connected  with  that  range  are  found  within  its 
limits.  This  fine  country  exteiub  for  fer^  or  fifty  miles  to  the  west  of 
theHdmund.  To  the  nocthFweat  of  Zemeendawir,  lies  the  oonnlay  of 

Seeahhund,  dong  thefeot  of  the  Paiopamisan  mountains..  It  is  nat»>. 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


COUNTRIES  WEST  OF  THE  80UMAUN. 


12S 


nUy  fstUi^  and  w«U  Mood;  but  k  u  Uttte  cuiavirted,  and  chiefly 

used  for  pasture. 

To  the  aoutfa-weii  of  Seeahbundy  and  east  of  Furrah,  the  oountiy 
becomes  move  and  inoEe  arid  aa  it  feoedeafironi  the  hilla*  till  it  eodi  in 
the  desart 

Furrah  is  a  considerable  town,  and  the  country  round  it  is  fertile,  but 
it  is  of  no  great  extent ;  so  that  Furrah  itself,  and  some  other  tracts  to 
tbe  north  and  south  of  it,  seem  rich  islands  in  the  midst  of  a  waste, 
approaching  in  appearance  to  a  desart.  Yet,  this  land  dcM  s  not  appear 
to  be  naturally  incapable  of  cultivation  j  and,  it  is  probable,  that 
^vherever  there  is  water  it  is  productive. 

About  twenty  miles  to  the  north  of  Furrah,  wc  meet  the  mountains, 
which  stretch  across  from  tiie  Paropaiiiisan  range  into  Persian  Kho- 
rassttun.  Among  these  mountains,  which  are  covered  with  ibrests, 
we  find  the  extensive  and  fertile  plain  of  Subzaur  or  Isfezaur. 

Some  more  bairen  country  intervenes  before  we  readi  Horaut, 
whidi  ia  aituated  in  an  ample  plam  of  nnequaUed  iertilityy  and  aof* 
vounded  by  hi^mountainSi 

.  The  idiole.fif  tlie  country  I  hanre  been  deaaihing,  fiom  Kdbnti 
*  Cad^  to  HcttHitt  encgpt  Seeahbwnd  and  flnhnaiir,  ie  inhaliifaHi  byiSbm 
tribe  of  BoorauDee*  whidi  is  the  greateit  among  the  A^haulu.  Its 
l^eDeral  alope  ia  to  the  south.  randahar»  and  the  country  to  the  weat 
itf  lUavethebweatof  ail  the  tiacta  I  haive  yet  deacribedweatof  the 
wage  of  Solimawn ;  butt  even  they  are  much,  more  elevated  than  thd 
plaina  on  the  east  of  thoae  mountains. 

Returning  to  the  neiglibourhood  of  Ghfimee,  we  find  Zoonnool 
divided  firom  Sirufze  on  the  south,  by  a  branch  from  Cohee  Solimaun. ' 

'  CBni&a,  Oorghoon,  and  Wauna,  have  been  described  as  descending 
in  stages  to  the  Gromul,  which  bounda  them  on  the  south,  and  as  sl<^ 
inlg  from  the  mountains  of  Solimaun  westward  towards  the  upper 
course  of  the  same  river,  which  fonns  their  western  boundary.  They  are 
divided  from  each  other  by  branches  of  the  Solimnunco  mountains,  and 
are  «11  little  cleared  plaina  among  mountains,  covered  with  forests  of 

E  8 


124 


DUSHn  BEDOWLER 


pitaK  Tkey  are  higlii  «nd<Gold  countries ;  but  all  theaer  qualities  mn 
found  less  in  the  southern  parts  than  the  northern.  Sumfita  belongs 
to  the  Kharotee  tribe  of  Ghiljies,  as  does  the  southern  part  of  the 
plain  of  Oorghoori,  under  the  name  of  Seroba.  Ooorghoon  itself 
belongs  to  the  FermoollcFs,  a  Persian  tribe.  Waunch  belongs  to  an 
A%haun  tribe  called  Durataumi).  To  the  west  of  Wauneh,  beyond 
a  range  oi  hills,  in  the  mountainous  country  of  Mumniye,  the  slope 
of  which  is  east  towards  the  (romuL  Mummye  is  divided  on  the 
west  by  the  same  branch  which  pasaes  to  tlie  west  of  Sirutza,  from 
the  bason  of  the  Aubistaudeh. 

In  the  riKuint  tins  to  the  south  of  Mummye,  are  the  valleys  of 
Oozdeh,  Couzidour,  (ScC  and  the  plains  of  Doclieena,  Turrukghuz,  &c. 
all  sloping  east  to  the  Gomul.         ...  .    • . 

To  the  west  of  these  is  a  high  tableland,  sloping  west,  supported  on 
the  north-wertby  the  range  of  Qiajdh  AmTatiti»  and  oontainiug  Can- 
ftidiaiihtiSnildi  Yeacx>n,  Secoona  Baug  and  Tob^  The  Tnliey  of 
Boiehim  deaeenda  from  thia  table  land  into  Fiaheen»  which  atao  lies 
MMith  of  Toba.  Bnnhofe  is  a  fertile  vaUey^  watered  by  the  Lofa. 
Elaheen  i»  low,  biit.  higher  than  Gndihar.  It  is  a  plain  not  miafk- 
flfely .fertile.  To  dieaonih  tif  Pitheenia  Shawl,  diiridedfrom  it  by  the 
lange  t»f  Tnkkatoa  It  is  higher  than  Sidieen^  but  lowop  than  Mooa- 
tODog,.*  plam  to  the  wesb  of  it,  odder  the  table  land  of  •  Kebmt,  Sfa«wl 
and  Moostoong  both  belong  to  the  Bdodhe  Flrinoe  of  Eelaut,  tfKNi^ 
the  former  is  chiefly  inhabited  by  A%hauns.  Both  areftitile^  Imt 
from  £3iawl  .the  land  rises  gradually  to  Khmlukkeef  and  gets  mbfe  dry 
and  barren  as  it  iqpproadies  that  lange;  a  pzoc^  that  the  range  is  not 
high,  though  it  rises  so  much  above  Sweestann  on  the  south. 

The  barren  country  between  Khurlukkee  and-  Shawl,  ut  called  the 
Dushti  Bedowleh,  or  The  Unhappif  Plain. 

To  the  oHst  of  it  and  Shawl,  are  the  mountains  which  I  suppose  to 
fiurm  a  continued  rang^  ljx>m  Khurlukkee,  by  Tsupper  and  Chirry,  to 


*  Dang  is  the  Piuliioo  Imr  a  plaii^  Seeoons  it  Ae  warn  of  •  tiibe  «f  Onkm 
lAo  inhabit  this  qpaoew 


Digitized  by  Google 


B01i£E.— ZHUBE.  125 

KiDid.  Eflit  of  tihose  nunmtainsi  I  have  described  diflerent  langee 
of  bills*  as  nmnii^  east  towsids  the  ningeof  Solimaun.  The  most 
tootberty  of  tlwse  bounds  A^^kannistsun  on  the  souIIl  Betwoen 
that  lange  end  the  next,  lie  tfie  vallej  of  Zawuia  and  the  plain  of 
Tul  and  CShooteeallee.  The  latter  places  are  in  one  plain  of  oonsi- 
derable  extent,  of  hard  day  like  that  of  the  Indus.  Zawura  is  much 
narrower  than  TutXIhooteeallee,  but  both  are  fertile,  and  inhabited 
hy  Speen  Teieens,  a  diviaiott  of  the  Al^iaun  tribe  that  possesses 
Hsheen. 

To  the  north  of  these,  and  divided  from  them  by  hills,  is  Boree,  a 
more  extensive  plain  than  cither  of  the  former,  and  rich  and  well  wa- 
tered. Other  hills,  some  of  which  appear  to  be  a  continiMition  of 
Tukkatoo,  bound  Boree  on  the  north,  and  separate  it  iirom  other  dis- 
tricts less  level  and  less  fertile.  r    .         •  . 

North  of  this  tract,  is  Zhobe,  so  (  ;iIIp(1  from  the  river  which  waters 
it.  It  is  a  diversified  country,  but  tlie  wliol<-  is  ill  cultivated  :  some 
parts  are  hilly:  in  I'tliers  are  open  plains;  ami  on  the  river  are  plains 
covered  with  i  tiiiiarii.k  trees  and  busiies.  To  the  north-west  of  Zhobe 
is  Khyssore,  which  seems  to  be  a  valley  under  the  hills  which  support 
the  table  land  of  Seeoona  Daug :  x>n  the  north-east  Zhobe  opens  on 
the  valley  of  the  Cdmul,  and  on  the  east  ittiM  theliilly^coiintflesiin- 
dHrtteimgeof  fiolhnaitn*  the  most  northeHy^fivlHdilidb^ 
Huirepind  diviskm  of  the  Sheenttmeea^  to  the  soudi  of  wfaocn  a<e  a 
drvisioii  of  the  Bsnboorsi  sad  then  Cankers,' in  ttome  pfaMes.  mixed 
wiUi  Bdocbesr  .  I  conceive  Boree  end  INill-Cliooteeallee  to  be  about 
as  hi^asCandahar:  ftom  Boree  the  eountxy  rises  to  the- noithwaxd^ 
as&r  astfaehotdmof  Zhobes  and  then  descends  tosrarda  the  GomoL 
The  narrow- valiey  of  the  GomuU  thou^  sank  among  the  samranding 
hiUa,  is  modi  move  eleVated  than  tlie  pUun  of  the  Indns,  -andplobably 
even  than  Ciindahflr ;  the  paits  near  the  mcuntainsk  to  rthe  east  and 
west,  are  higher  than  those  in  the  Centre,  but  the  greatest  elevatibo  ia 
tomfirda  the  west 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  1«  ) 


CHAP.  V. 


OP  THE  CUMATE  OP  APGHAUNISTAIIN.  KAIN. 

« 

S  the  occasional  showers  which  fidl  throughout  the  year  in  England, 


aie  unknowii  in  most  Anadccoiintries,  the  first  particular  toattend 
to  in  f«ft"*'"Hg  thnr  dimale,  is  the  season  and  die  quantily  of  the 
periodical  laina.  It  is  this  which  regulates  husbandr)^,  and  on  which 
in  many  countries  the  temperature  and  suooeasion  of  the  seasons  in  m 
great  measure  depoid. 

The  most  rfwnarirahle  rainy  season,  u  that  called  in  India  the  soutb- 
west  monsoon.  It  extends  fix»m  Africa  to  the  )dal*  peninsula,  and 
deluges  all  Uie  intnmediate  countries  within  ceattam  lines  of  Isftitude^ 
ibr  fiHir  months  in  the  year.  In  the  south  of  India  this  m<msQon  com- 
mences  about  the  beginning  of  June,  but  it  gets  later  as  we  advance 
towards  the  north.  Its  approach  is  announced  by  vast  masses  of 
clouds  that  rise  from  the  Indian  ocean,  and  advance  towards  the  nattb- 
east,  gathering  and  thickening  as  they  approach  the  land.  After  some 
threatening  days,  the  sky  assumes  a  troubled  appearance  in  the  even- 
ings, and  tho  monsoon  in  general  sets  in  during  the  night.  It  i» 
attended  with  such  a  thunder-storm  as  can  scarcely  be  imagined  by 
those  who  have  only  seen  tlmt  plu  iioiiit  iion  in  a  temperate  Lliniate. 
It  generally  begins  with  violent  blasts  of  wind,  wliich  are  siicceeded  by 
floods  of  rain.  For  some  hours  ligiitning  is  seen  ahnost  without 
intermission,  sometimes  it  only  illuminates  the  sky,  and  shows  the 
clouds,  near  the  horizon  j  at  others  it  discovers  the  disLauL  lulls,  and 
again  leaves  all  in  darkness,  when  in  an  instant  it  re-appears  in  vivid 
and  auocessive  flashes,  and  ezliibita  the  nef^^st  objects  in  all  the  bright- 


Digitized  by  Google 


SOUTH-WEST  MONSOON.  Ig7 

Bcnofd^.  DnringaUthii  tune  the  distal 
nU,  andiBonljailoioed  by  Mmie  meaierpeilfiHiicli  bunts  on  the  ear 
with  such  a  sudden  and  tremendous  crash  as  csn  scwcely  &0  to  strike 
the  most  it) sensible  heart  with  awe*.  At  length  the  thunder  ceases* 
and  nothing  is  heard  but  4he  oontinned  pouring  <^  the  zsan,  and  the 
rushing  of  the  rising  streams.  The  next  day  presents  a  j^oomy  q^ecv 
tacle :  the  rain  still  descends  in  tonent8»  and  scarcely  allows  a  view 
the  bkudcened  fields :  the  rivers  are  swoln  and  discoloured*  and 
sweep  down  along  with  them  the  hedges,  the  huts,  and  the  remains 
of  the  cuhOTatikn  which  was  carried  on,  during  the  dry  seasout  in 
tlieir  beds. 

This  lasts  for  somr  da vs,  after  which  the  sky  clears,  and  discovers 
the  tact  (»f  nature  clianged  as  if  by  enchantment.  Before  the  "^torm 
the  fields  were  pardied  up.  and  except  in  the  beds  of  the  rivers, 
scarce  a  blade  of  vegetatiuu  was  to  be  seen  :  the  clearae«s  of  the  sky 
was  not  interrupted  by  a  single  cloud,  but  the  atmosphere  was  loaded 
with  dust,  which  was  sufficient  to  render  distaui  objects  dim,  as  in  a 
mist,  and  to  make  the  suu  appear  dull  and  discoloured,  till  he  at- 
tained a  considerable  elevation :  a  parching  wind  blew  like  a  blast 
from  a  furnace,  and  heated  wood,  iron,  andevery  other  scdid  material, 
•ven  in  the  shade }  and  immediately  belbre  the  monsoon,  tins,  wind 
had  been  snooeeded  by  still  more  sultry  calms.  But  when  the  first 
violeooeofthe  storm  is  over,  the  whole  earth  is  covered  with  asudden 
but  hizuriaiit.vefdure :  the  rivers  are  full  and  tranquil:  the  airis  pure 
and  delidoas}  and  the  sky  is  varied  and  embellished  with  douds; 
The  effiict  of  the  change  is  visible  on  aD  the  anhnal  creation,  and  can 
only  be  imagined  in  Europe  by  anpposing  the  depth  of  a  dieaiy  wio-t 


•  To  pcrnon*  wlio  linvo  long  resided  in  India,  these  storms  lose  much  of  their 
grandeur,  yet  they  sometunes  rise  to  such  a  pitch,  at  to  make  an  impreasion  on  those 
BUMt  habitnatedto  them.  I  hAvebten  told  byagentleiiianiriiolMdbeenibrwiiietiite 
Mal&biir,  the  pro\nnc€  tiK -^t  distinguiiihed  for  the  violence  of  the  monsoon,  that  he  there, 
beard  a  clap  of  thtin<ler  which  prnrl-iced  a  sil<  iice  of  nuniltS  in  a  laig^  pWlgr  of  offioen, 
and  made  a  great  part  of  the  compaoy  torn  pale. 


128 


JBOITTH-WEST  UONSOOK. 


(er  lo  start  at  once  into  all  the  freshness  and  brilliancy  of  Spring: 
From  this  time  the  rain  falls  nt  intervals  for  about  a  month,  when  it 
comes  on  ntirt'\i\  w  itii  ;:reat  violence,  and  in  July  the  rains  are  at  their 
height:  ilurm^^  thi  Lhird  month,  they  rather  diminisii,  but  are  still 
heavy  :  and  ni  8eptenil)er  thev  ^aduallv  abate,  and  are  otten  entirely 
suspended,  till  near  ttie  eiul  oi  tlie  month  j  when  they  depart  amidst 
thunders  and  tempests  as  they  came. 

Such  is  the  monsooa  in  the  greater  part  of  India.  It  is  not,  lujw- 
e\'er,  without  some  diversity,  the  principal  feature  ot  which  is  t  he  de- 
lay in  its  commeucemeut,  and  the  diminution  in  the  quantity  of  ralu, 
as  it  recedes  fi*om  the  sea.  In  the  ooimtries  whiclk  are  the  Aibject  of 
the  present  inquiry,  the  moDMxm  is  felt  with  mudi  kisviolenoefliea 
in  Luliaf  end  it  cathaurted  at  no  gneat  distance  fiom  the  aea,  ao  that 
notraoe.ofit  can  be  perceived  at  Candahar«  A  Nmarinble  exception 
to  this  lule^  is*  howerer»  to  be  obaerved  in  the  nocth«east  of 
A%hanntrtann,  which  although  much  farther  fibm  the  sea  than  Can^ 
didar,  ia-aobject  to  the  monaoon*  and  what  is  eqiiaUj  jeitiaofldinaiji 
leodves  it  from  the  east. 

These  anomaliei  may  perhaps  be  accounted  &r  by  the  iblkipi^g 
conaideratlona.  It  is  to  be  obae«ved«  that. the  douda  are  formed  by 
ths^rapoura  of  the  Indian  ocean,  and  are  driven  over  the.  land  by  a 
wind  from  the  south-west  Most  part  of  the  tract  in  which  the 
fcmyliMm  of  Caubul  lics,  is  to  leeward  of  Africa  and  Arabia,  and  re* 
eeives  only  the  vapours  of  the  narrow  sea  between  its  southern  ahdres 
and  the  latter  country,  which  are  but  of  small  extent,  and  arie  ex* 
hausted  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  coast  India  Ijring 
further  east,  and  beyond  the  shelter  of  Africa,  the  monsoon  spreads 
over  it  witlmut  anv  obstruction.  It  is  nnfurollv  most  'severe  near  the 
sea  firom  which  it  draws  its  supplies,  and  is  exhausted  after  it  has  past 


*  Hie  eniMt  of       loath-west  wind  nqdn  «  tepante  dkeamkm,  vneomiectad 

with  nn-  oh] ret,  irliirh  is  tn  rxj  lain  the  '^xmmvr  rains  of  the  Kingdom  of  Caubul.  It 
i«  milBcicnt  tor  my  purpose  that  tb«  prenraienoe  of  this  wind  to  the  extent  aUcged,  k 
wifnraaUy  acknowledged. 


Digitized  by  Google 


MUTH.WE8T  MONSOON. 


QfVfT  »  gntt  extant  of  knd.  F<ir  Hiii  tmamk  tfae  nfin  isa  vidie  «t 
kM  plcntifbl  in  eftch  cotmtrjr,  ■coording  to  te  dntanoe  from  die  ■e*^ 
except  in  those  neAr  high  niouiit«u»  wfaieli  nrait'ihe  ekndit  mmI 
procure  skiger  supply  ^ndn  for  the  ttei|^ibouriDgtnoti»  thunroold 
hnre  fidlen  to  iheir  diare^  If  the  pMsige  of  the  chmd^ 
stfucted* 

Hie  obstacle  presented  to  the  donds  and  winds  by  the  mountifais 
hes  another  eflbct  of  no  small  importance.  The  souA-Weat  mnasomi 
blowa  over  the  ocean  in  ka  natural  direction ;  aild,  thoogh  it  hh^ 
expenence  smne  diveirities  after  it  readies  theland^  ita  general  ooorae 
over  India  may  attll  be  said  to  be  tomuds  the  hartb4»8t,  till  it  is  eot^ 
hauatedoblhe  western  and  central  parts  of  the  peninsula.  Hie  prvM 
viiioes  in  the  north-east  recei^ra  the  monaoon  m  a  diiSerent  manner  i 
the  wind  which  brings  the  raina  to  that  part  of  the  continent,  origK 
naUy  blows  from  the  south-west,  over  the  Bay  of  I^ngal,  till  the 
mountains  of  Hemalleh*  and  those  which  join  them  from  the  souths 
stop  its  progress}  and  oompd  it  to  follow  their  cour^  towards  the 
north-west.  The  prevailing  wind,  therefore,  in  the  region  south-west 
of  Hemalleh,  is  from  the  south-east,  and  it  is  from  tliat  quarter  that 
our  provinces  in  Bengal  receive  their  rains.  But  when  the  wind  has 
reached  so  far  to  the  north-west  as  to  meet  with  Hindoo  Coosh,  it  is 
again  opposed  by  that  tnountain,  and  turned  off  along  its  face  towards 
the  west,  till  it  meets  the  projection  of  Hindoo  Coosh  and  the  range 
of  Solimauii,  whicli  prevent  its  further  progress  in  that  direction,  or, 
at  least  compel  it  to  part  with  the  clouds  with  which  it  was  loaded. 
Tlie  viYvct  of  the  mountains  in  stopping  the  clouds  borne  by  this 
wind,  is  different  in  different  places.  Near  the  sea,  where  the  clouds 
are  still  in  a  deep  mass,  part  is  discharg( d  on  the  hills  and  the  coun- 
try beneatli  tli  la,  and  part  passes  uj)  to  the  north-west;  iMit  part 
makes  its  way  over  the  first  hills,  and  produces  the  rains  in  Tibet* 
In  the  latitude  of  Cashmeer,  where  the  hills  are  considerably  ex- 
hausted, this  last  division  is  little  perceived :  the  southern  face  of 
tiie  hills  and  the  country  still  farther  south  it>  watered }  and  a  part  of 

s 


Digitized  by  Google 


180 


SOITTH-WEST  MONflOOM. 


the  ckNids  oontinue  their  progresA  to  Aff^hauniitMiii ;  but  few  malBft 
their  way  over  the  mountains,  or  reach  the  valley  of  Cashmeer.  Hie 
douds  which  pass  on  to  Afghaunistaun  are  exhansted  as  they  go : 
the  rains  become  weaker  and  weaker,  and  at  last  are  merely  sufficient 
to  water  the  mountains,  without  much  affecting  the  plains  at  their 
base. 

The  above  obscr\'ation.s  will  explain,  or  at  least  connect  the  follow- 
ing facts.  The  south-west  monsoon  commences  on  the  Malabar 
coast  in  May,  and  is  there  very  violent ;  it  is  later  and  more  mo- 
derate in  Mysore;  and  tiie  ( Oroniandel  coast,  covered  by  the  moun- 
tainous countries  on  its  west,  is  entirely  exempt  from  it.  Further 
north,  the  monsoon  begins  early  in  June,  and  loses  a  ^no{\  deal  of  its 
violence,  except  in  the  places  influenced  by  the  neigh ix)urhood  ot  the 
mountains  or  the  sea,  where  the  fall  of  water  is  verv  considerable. 
About  I)t  it  does  not  begin  till  the  end  of  June,  and  the  faU  of 
rain  is  greatly  inferior  to  what  is  felt  at  Calcutta  or  Bombay.  In  the 
north  of  the  Puiijuub,  near  the  hills,  it  exceeds  that  of  Delly ;  but, 
in  the  south  of  the  Punjaub,  distant  both  from  the  sea  and  the  hills, 
very  little  rain  falls.  The  countries  under  the  hills  of  Cashmeer,  and 
those  under  Hindoo  Coosh,  (Fukhlee,  Boonere,  and  Swaut)  have  all 
didr  shaie  of  the  rains ;  but  ihey  diminidi  as  we  go  west,  and  at 
Smut  are  leduoed  to  a  month  of  clouds,  with  oocasi  In 
the  same  month  (the  end  of  July  and  beginning  of  August)  the  mon* 
soon  appears  m  some  cJouds  and  showers  at  Peahawer,  and  m  .die 
Bwngnah  and  Khuttok  oountries.  It  is  stiU  kssifelt  in  the  yalley  of 
the  Cauhvd  river*  where  it  does  not  extend  bejond  Tiughmaun; 
but  in  Bigour  and  Fhmjoora,  under  the  southeni  pnjection*  in  th^ 
pnt  of  the  Caufir  conntxy,  which  is  situated,  on  the  top  of  the  same 
prqjectiont  and  in  Teera,  .situated  in  the  angle  formed  by  Tukhti 
SoUmaun  and  its  eastern  branches,  the  south-west  monsoon  is  heavy, 
and  finrns  the  prindpal  rains  of  the  y&a.  There  is  rain  in  this  sea^ 
son  in  the  country  of  the  Jaujees  and  Torees,  whidi  jnrobably  is 
Inonglit  fiom  the  nocth  by  the  eddy  in  the  winds;  but  I  have  not  in^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


t 


WINTER  RAINa  181 
Jbnliitiiiii  OKNiglli  to  enabk  me  to  oaig^^ 

in  Bmiiioo  hmI  the  nd^boiiriiig'coimtries  is  to  be  lacribed  to  tibit 
cause,  or  to  the  rcguhr  monsoon  from  the  aonth-wcat. 

The  regular  monsoon  is  felt  as  fiur  west  as  the  utmost  boundaiy  of 
Mekraun  ;  it  is  not  easy  to  fix  its  limits  on  the  north-west  with  pre- 
dsUMit  but  I  have  no  accounts  of  it  beyond  a  line  drawn  through  the 
nogrthem  part  of  the  table  land  of  Kelaut  and  the  northern  parts  of 
Shoiaubuk,  of  Pisheen,  and  of  2bobe,  to  the  source  of  the  Kooiv 
rum ;  it  £Jls,  however,  in  very  different  quantities  in  the  various 
countries  south-east  of  that  line.  Tlie  clouds  pass  with  little  obstruc- 
tion over  Lower  Sind,  but  rain  more  plentifully  in  Upper  Sind  and 
Domaun,  where  these  rains,  though  not  heavy,  are  the  principal  ones 
in  the  year.  On  tlie  sea-coast  of  Luss  and  Mekraun,  on  the  other 
hand,  they  are  arrested  by  tlie  moantains,  and  the  monsoon  resembles 
that  of  [ndia.  In  Seweestauu  the  monsoon  is  probably  the  same  as 
,  in  Upper  Sind  and  Duiviann  :  in  Boree  it  is  only  about  a  mouth  of 
cloudy  and  showery  weather  :  it  is  probably  less  in  Zhobe :  and  in 
the  other  countries  within  the  line  it  only  appewrs  in  showers,  more 
precarious  as  we  advance  towards  the  north.  * 

The  second  rain  to  be  noticed,  is  that  which  falls  in  Winter,  and 
which  assumes  the  form  of  rain  or  snow,  according  to  the  tempera- 
ture of  the  place ;  it  extends  over  all  the  countries  west  of  the  In- 
dus, as  far  as  the  Hdlespont,  and  is  of  much  greater  importance  to 
hiisbendry  than  the  aonUfe-wesk  monaoon,  except  hi  the  dSstriott 
alieady  specified ;  it  ia  mdeed  the  most  considefable  nuny  seaaob  in 
all  die  eombiea  I  hare  to  mentionf  excepting  those  Included  in  In- 
die; it  even  i^ppeazs  in  India,  but  only  lasts  ibr  two  or  ihree  dajs 
ebont  Oinstnlas,-  and  tfaon^  of  some  mip(aCaDce  to' the  cdthratibn, 
oannot  always  be  rdied  on* 


•  I  hope  all  the  above  infomintion  will  be  found  correct;  but  I  am  not  sanguine 
about  the  theory,  which  I  ahould  have  sufipreMfid,  if  I  had  not  thoa^  it  uaefUl  in 
connecting  the  facts. 

s  S 


Digitized  by  Google 


4 


18f  TIMFSBATI7B& 

Whore  it  falls  in  the  form  of  snow,  it  is  the  modt  im]5ortant  to 
fljtrit  nil  lire,  but  where  it  falls  as  rain,  it  is  less  so  than  thut  of  the 
Sprin;L': ;  (hr  inferiorif  v  of  the  quantity  of  the  latter  beiii^  more  than 
compensated  by  the  oiiori  uneneaa  of  its  fall. 

Tlie  Spring  rain  geueraily  falls  at  different  times  during  a  jx  riod 
extcndmg  in  some  places  to  a  fortnight  and  in  others  to  a  nionth; 
it  extends  over  Afghauni.staun,  Toorkistann,  and  all  the  other  coun- 
tries which  I  have  to  mention.  In  most  parts  of  India,  some  showers 
fall  at  the  same  season,  and  delay  the  approach  of  the  hot  wiiuis,  but 
iiave  little  effect  on  the  cultivation.  In  all  the  other  countries,  it  ia 
of  the  utmost  consequence  to  husbandly,  as  it  falls  at  the  time  when 
the  most  important  aeop  ia  beginning  to  ^pear  dbore  ilie  ground. 
BodidM  and  the  innlwr  rain  aie  add  to  oome  finm  tlie 

The  danate  of  A^aimiiitann  variea  extieBidy  in  dSflbrant  p«il»«f 
Aft  ooontej.  Thia  it  in  woie  meamue  to  be  attributed  to-lihe  diflbn. 
mu»  of  ladtude^  but  stiU  more  to  the  difeent  degtees  of  elevitioii 
o£  difibrent  teaeta.  Hie  dlfceetion-  of  the  prevaOing  wmdftalao 
todaHy  aftata  thedinialle;  scnehbw  over  mowy  mountahia?  odienp 
aie  heated  in  summer,  and  cendaaed  cold  in  winter,  by  liieir  peiaag» 
am  dBHirte,.and  other  arid  tracts  of  g^eat  extant;  some  pbusea 
an  lefreahed  in  summer  by  faieaaea  frommoisler  countries,  and  tome 
are  so  surrounded  by  hilLs  as  to  be  inaccesnUe  to  finy  wind  at  alL 
.  I  shall  begin  with  describing  the  temperBtoxtt  of  the  pkin  of  Pbshiu^ 
WBKt  vliicliit  fioom  the  length  onr  residence  there,  is  better  known  ta 
me  than  that  of  any  part  the  Afghaun  dominiona.  W|ien  it  is 
described*  1  aheOi  have  a  standard  with  whidr  the  tempiBratore  of  the- 
rest  of  the  country  may  be  compared. 

Peshawer  is  situated  on  a  low  plain,  surrounded  on-  idl  sides  except 
the  east,  with  hills.  Tlie  air  is  consequently  much  confined,  and  the 
heat  greatly  increased.  In  the  summer  of  1809,  which  was  reckoned 
a  mild  one,  the  thennc  inotor  was  for  several  days  at  112'  and  113',  in 
a  large  tent  artificially  cooled,  whicii  is  as  liifrh  as  in  the  hottest  parts 
of  India.   The  duration  of  this  heat  is  not,  however,  so  great  aa  that 


Digitized  by  Google 


of  an  Indian  Summer,  and  it  is  compensated  by  a  mucli  ceider 
Wiitter.  The  ibUowiag  is  an  acoaunt  of  the  piogres»  of  tike  seasons 
at  Pesliawer. 

The  mission  arrived  in  the  plain  of  Peshawer  on  February  23d, 
Tlie  weather  was  then  cold  at  night,  bitt  perfectly  a^eeabie 
in  t  he  day,  and  not  hot#  even  m  the  sun,  at  any  part  of  tl  ie  twentj- 
four  hours.    The  ground  was  frequently  covered  with  hoar-frost  in 
.  the  morning,  as  late  as  the  8th  of  March,  but  by  the  middle  of  that 
montii  the  sun  was  dLsagreeable  by  eight  in  the  morning.    The  wea- 
.   tber  after  this  became  gradually  hotter,  and  the  heat  of  the  sun  grew 
more  intense,  but  the  air  was  often  refreshed  by  showers,  and  it  wa» 
always  cool  in  the  shade,  till  the  first  week  in  Ma}-,  when  eren  the 
u  iiitl  b<jgau  lo  lie  heated.    At  ilie  time  of  our  arrival,  the  new  grass 
wa»  springing  up  throagh  the  withered  grass  of  the  last  year ;  some  of 
the  early  trees  were  budding,  but  all  the  other  deciduous  plants  were 
lMEe»   Xlift  appieaeh  of  Ae^  Spring  was  howevi^  veiy  rapid.   In  the 
fiiit  wsfikin  Maidhy  pcadi  and  plum  tiM  began  to  Uonom ;  apple, 
qmnce»  and  miilbeiij  UiMWurote-ip  bloom  kilbeooaafaeoftiheaeeoiKt 
iWflks  bdmthe  end  of  Mndit  tbe^ trees- were  in  fiill  i>fiag^  vasfy 
in  A|^  barley  began  to*  be  in  ear,  and  it  began  to  be  cat  down  dol- 
ing the  fint  W9A  in  Ma^   Amn  that  timetbe  heat  incKeaaed,  and 
WW  ofteniiteir^  aefere»  eveft  in  the  night,  tiOlihe  beginning  o(  Jmti, 
wfaen  Awlibfe  nig^  of  itraiig.het  wind  firom  dte  norlih-weBt  was  buc- 
cseded  faj  aoaii  a  coolneas  in  the  air  as  was  nneomibrtable  in  ifiet 
morning,  bnfc  pJeiwiuit  during  the  rest  of  the  day.  Tfais  oodness  was 
not  of  any  great  duration,  and  the  heat  was  at  its  utmost  heag^  hj* 
^  88d  of  Jnnei  wlien  we  awiscd?  tlie  Indus.   Vblent  hot  winds 
iixMn  the  aoodi  Mew  aU  ni^it,  tiH  the  kst  day  we  were  in  the  plain 
of  Peshawer,  when  the  wind  came*  RNmd  to  the  north-east,  and  waa' 
<ttJigli*Aillj  oool.  From  that  time  we  undeistood  that  the  heat  would- 
Hgpin  inrrmiMT  till  the  middle  of  July,  when  a  cold  wind  would  set  in- 
from  the  east,  and  be  snooeeded  by  oool  and  dondy  weather.  The 
lart  half  of  Septanbcv  m  ondeMtoed  was  thnjn  so  oold,  as  to  be 


Digitized  by  Google 


TEIOPERATDBE. 


counted  in  winter,  aiul  the  succeeding  months  were  sait]  to  become 
colder  and  cokler  till  February.  The  cold  even  in  Winter  is  not  very 
severe,  though  irost  is  frequent  in  the  nights  and  mornings,  it  never 
lasts  long  after  the  sun  is  up,  and  snow  luis  only  been  once  seen  by 
the  oldest  inliabitaiUis.  Some  of  the  Indian  plants  remain  in  leaf  all 
the  year.  From  the  reinoLeiiess  of  my  station,  I  liave  not  now  access 
to  the  diaries  of  those  gentlemen  oi  ihe  mission  who  kept  an  account 
of  the  tliermometcr,  but  I  imagine  that  its  greatest  height  in  the 
shade  is  about  120*,  and  its  greatest  depression  in  the  course  of  the 
year  about  25  '.  It  is  to  be  oboegrved  tbat  Hie  Summer  of  1809,  was 
leckoned  very  cool,  but  there  caOt  I  tlimk»  be  no  doubt  that  in  everf 
year  the  Summer  of  Fesfaawer  is  more  modeiate  than  that  of  Hm- 
ckMtattn»  while  the  Winter  is  much  colder.  Tlie  &voQiafale  opinion 
which  I  have  formed  of  the  dimate  of  PeahMrer,  fiom  a  oompariaoB 
with  that  of  India,  by  no  means  occurs  to  apenon  accustomed  to  tiie 
oooJness  of  the  western  part  of  the  A%|h«un  dominioos.  Thenatives 
of  Caubul  and  Gmdahar,  who  were  at  Peshawar  with  the  King,  coo* 
curred  in  exchumtng  i^gainst  the  intokraUe  heat;  and  Terses»  epi« 
grams,  and  proverbs,  without  number,  were  quoted  to  shew  the  bfd 
opinion  ^diicfa  was  generally  entertained  <^  that  dimate. 

The  toopLperstuie  of  the  other  countries,  in  tiie  notdi  of  A%hauni- 
staun,  is  as  various  as  mig^t  be  expected  fiom  the  difference  of  their 
elevation  and  circumstances.  The  low  parts  are  hot,  the  middle  temp 
perate,  and  the  high  cold }  but,  generally  speaking,  the  average  heat 
of  the  year  does  not  reach  that  of  India,  nor  the  odd  that  <tf 
£nghuid. 

Tiie  extremes  will  be  shown  by  examining  the  dimate  of  Lu^^ 
maun  west  of  Feshawer.  There  is  not,  indeed,  in  the  whole  kingdom 

of  Caubul,  so  remarkable  for  the  variety  of  its  dimate,  a  more  sur- 
prising instance  of  great  difference  of  temperature  in  little  space,  than 
is  exliibitcd  in  the  tract  I  have  selected.  In  the  height  of  Summer,, 
while  the  plain  of  Jellallabad  is  intolerably  snltrv.  and  while  the  very 
wind  is  so  hot  as  oiien  to,  occasion  the  deatli  of  persons  exposedto.it,. 

lO 


Digitized  by  Google 


TEMPERATURE.  XS5 

the  nuNiBtaiii  of  Snffidd  Goh  lifts  Its  headt  cfowned  irHh  perpetual 
mwt  immflJiiitely  from  the  phun.  The  a^arartnortliern  hills  oeoolcU 
wd  the  move  f«iiiote  covered  with  snow ;  and  the  table  land  of  Gaii- 
bttl,  to  the  west  of  Lugjhmann,  enjoys  the  coolness  and  inardure  of  a 
temperate  summer.  This  contrast  is  a  constant  theme  of  wonder  to 
tmvellera  £rom  more  unifiMm  climates.  The  Emperor  Bauber,  gives 
the  IbUowmg  aoooont*  (in  his  commentaries)  of  the  impression  made 
on  him  by  this  .sudden  change,  on  his  first  jonrney  to  the  east  of  Can* 
buL  "  I  had  never,*'  says  be,  **  before  seen  the  hot  dimsCes,  or  the 
**  Indian  coontry.  When  I  reached  the  pass,  I  saw  another  worid* 
**  The  gnwB,  the  trees,  the  birds,  the- animals,  and  the  tribes  of  men: 
"  All  was  new !    I  was  astonished." 

Betoming  to  the  south  of  the  fierdooraunee  country,  Bunnoo  ap- 
pears to  be  as  hot  as  Feshawer,  and  the  Fmiukhail  perhaps  hotter. 
Khost  and  Dour,  as  they  are  hi^ber  than  Bunnoo,  are  probably  cooler* 

The  Murwut  country  is  made  up  of  hills  and  plains,  and  consequent* 
ly  has  not  a  uniform  climate.  The  plains,  at  least,  are  very  hot,  and 
parched  up,  by  the  heat  of  summer.  Laigee  was  fiur  firamcool,  .even 
in  January. 

The  winter  of  Damaun  is  very  agreeable,  being  colder  than  any  part 
of  Ilindostaun.  Frost  is  common  in  the  morning  ;  and,  the  tliermo- 
meter,  in  1809,  was  generally  some  dt^irrees  below  the  freezinp  point  at 
cLiv-brrak.  The  summer  is  intolerably  liot.  I  have  lieard  mhabitants 
ot Damaun  say,  that  they  have  never  e\'|)iTienced  in  India  any  weather 
so  oppressive  as  that  ot"  Damaun.  Ttie  lieat  of  tlie  niglits  is  scarcely 
iiilrriiir  lo  that  of  the  day.s.  The  inliabitants  are  obliged  to  wcl  iheir 
clot  1  It  -  before  they  €»n  go  to  sleep  ;  and,  every  man  places  a  large  ves- 
sel ol  water  by  his  bed  to  relieve  the  thirst,  with  which  he  is  sure  to  be 
tormented  during  the  niglit.  The  climate  of  the  countries  in  the 
range  of  Solimaun,  varies  of  course  with  their  level.  In  general  they 
are  cold,  and  moat  so  towards  the  north.  The  valleys  between  the 
parallel  ranges  are  little  cooUer  than  Damaun.  The  heat  of  8sad  is 
at  least  equal  to  that  of  Damaun ;  and,  probably,  increases  as  we  go 
towards  the  south,  till  itismodentedbybreeies  fimnthesea.  See- 


Digitized  by  Google 


1S6  TEMPERATURE. 

wwitiim  it  •  verj  faoi  oountty;  sad  Scwee  is  ptanMuHj  His 
iMitteitfikoe  in  die  Idngdom  of  Citib^ 

TiiltGiooteeBllee,and  Zawurehuo,  Biebjno  meini  so  betas  fiewee  i 
■nd  the  dimate  of  Boree  is  temperate  thnmi^out  the  jesr ;  the 
winter  leans  to  be  ss  cold  a.s  that  c£  Feshswer,  and  the  summer  less 
hot  I  can  only  speak  of  Zhobe  by  conjecture}  but  I  should  think  it 
iKSs  oooUer  than  Boree.  If  we  ascend  horn  Seweestaun  into  Khoras« 
san,  at  a  point  to  the  westward  of  the  countries  I  have  just  described« 
we  find  the  Dushti  Bedowleh,  the  cold  of  which  is  described  as  being 
very  levevs  in  winter ;  in  Shawl,  it  is  more  moderate ;  and  in  Pisheen 
still  more  so  than  in  Shawl ;  yet,  even  in  Pisheen,  standing  water  freezes, 
and  snow  sometimes  lies  for  a  fortnight.  Burshore  is  st  ill  colder  than 
Pisheen  ;  but  Shoraubiilv,  lying  lower  than  Plshecn,  and  bordering  on 
thcdosart,  has  a  hot  climate  ;  snow  never  falls  ;  the  edges  and  sur- 
face ot  standing  water  freeze  in  winter;  but,  in  summer,  the  siiul  is 
heated  to  such  n  degree  as  to  render  it  impossible  to  walk  on  it  bare 
footed.  North  of  Pisheen  are  the  hills  of  Toba,  in  which  was  situated 
the  summer  retreat  of  Ahmed  Shauh.  Of  them,  and  oi  the  other 
mount;iiiis  .ilioul  Pisheen,  and  tliosr  in  the  west  of  the  Canker  country, 
which  aiijoiu  to  tiiem,  I  can  only  make  the  same  obvious  remark  whicli 
I  have  applied  to  other  mountains,  that  the  climate  of  |)laces  in  them 
raries  witii  the  elevation.  Going  nortii  trora  Pisheen,  the  heat  increases 
till  we  reach  C'antlahar.  The  Doorannee  country  is  generally  tempe- 
rate towards  the  north,  and  hot  towards  the  south,  but,  probably,  in  no 
part  so  hot  as  Peshawer ;  where  it  includes  part  of  the  Paropainisaa 
range,  as  to  north  of  Candahar,  the  cold  in  winter  and  heat  in  sum- 
mer  ave  both  severe.  Zemindawer,  which  lies  immediately  to  the 
south  of  those  moiBitatns,  is  described  as  a  temperate  and  sgreesble 
diniate.   In  the  most  northerly  part  of  the  Dooraunee  ootmtiy,  nest 


*  I  har«heMid  asq^g  about  Scwee,  which,  however,  'i»  applied  by  the  Fusions  to 
many  other  romnrkultlv  hot  places.  "  Ai  Kli  ontia  Choon  Scewee  daushtee  chenDotoUl 
Saukhtee."    U  God,  when  you  had  iSeewee,  why  iimi  you  have  toiKk  Hell? 


Digitized  by  Google 


TEMPERATURE. 

Hmntt  the  edd  o£  winter  is  ray  tmrne ;  but  the  tanuner  ironU  be 
boi,  were  not  tlie  air  refreshed  by  a  pennonent  wind  from  the  naitb- 
weit  In  the  high  lyi^g  diitriet  of  SnhfMir  or  Isfemir,'  aoiitfa  of 
ItwiHTt^  mow  is  udd  to  lie  for  five  months ;  and  all  tlie  water  is  frozen, 
except  that  of  the  river  which  is  then  swollen  and  rapid  Yet  the 
beat  of  smnrner  it  described  at  oppraMive^  and  even  the  wind  iaaoine^ 
tim^  heated. 

The  Gurmseer  on  the  lower  Hehnund,  receives  its  name  from  the 
heat  of  its  climata  Candahar  has  a  hot  climate.  No  snow  falls  in 
winter ;  and,  the  little  ice  that  is  formed  on  the  edges  of  the  streamSy 
melts  before  noon.  The  heat  of  the  summer  is  great :  hot  winds  are 
rtot  unusual  ;  and,  even  the  fatal  simoom  has  been  known.  Yet  the 
heat  is  said  not  to  be  disagreeable  to  the  feelings,  and  the  oUmate  ia 
bullous  for  its  salubrity. 

In  proceeding  east  from  Candiiliar,  the  cold  of  the  winter  increases 
at  every  stage*  and  the  heat  of  the  summer  diminishes  in  the  same 
proportion.  Even  at  Kelauti  Ghiljie,  snow  falls  often,  and  lies  long, 
and  the  Turnuk  is  often  fiozeii  so  da  to  bear  a  uian.  The  summer 
also  is  cool,  and  iiut  wiiid^  are  unknown.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that 
Kelaut  is  in  the  lowest  part  of  the  valley  of  the  Turnuk.  In  the  iiigk 
tract  to  the  south  of  that  valley,  the  cold  appears  to  be  as  great  as  in 
any  pert  of  Afgfaanhiatiyin ;  at  Kelaee  j&bdooiehe«m,  the  snow  liea 
for  three  or  four  months*  and  all  that  time  the  stresms  are  froaen  so 
eatobear  emanonhoiaebaek.  Ascending  the  valley  of  the  Tumuk, 
we  at  last  leacb  the  lerd  of  Ghuenee^wbidi  is  generally  mentionedaa 
thecoldeatpertoftheidauiooimtiyUk  tfaeCanbiddoini^^  The 
ooldof  Ghiianee  is  ipoken  of  aa  eEoeaahre^  eren  by  the  inbsdbttanta  of 
the  cold  countries  in  its  ne^j^KNuiiood.  For  the  greater  part  of  the 
winter,  the  inhabitants  sddom  quit  thdbr  houses ;  and»  even  in  the 
dty  of  Gbune^tibeanow  hea  been  known  to  lie  deep  for  some  time 
after  the  vernal  equinox.  Traditions  prevail  of  the  city  havuig  been 
twice  destroyed  by  foils  of  snow,  in  which  all  the  inhabitants  were 
buried.  The  dimate  of  the  flat  country  to  the  south  of  Ghnsuieev 
sieena  little  more  mild  than  that  of  the  ci^itMsl^  In  Kuttawm,  the 

T 


Digitized  by  Google 


18ft 


.TIMPIRATD&E. 


snow  is  very  deep  for  upwards  of  three  months ;  and  is  frozen  over 
SO)  that  men  can  travel  on  it  without  sinking.    The  strt  ains  are  fro- 
zen I  and,  fur  part  of  the  winter,  wiU  btiar  even  loaded,  camels.  The 
summer  is  scarce  so  hot  as  that  of  England,  and  only  one  harvest  is 
reaped  in  the  year.    In  the  country  of  the  Kharoties,  the  cold  is  sUU 
move  severe.   It  ia  ooosideniUe  in  the  other  dutncfta  vmong  the 
bmkdies  of  Solimauii,  but  diminuliea  as  we  get  towarda  the  •oull^ 
Tothe  aoith  of  Ghiiniee^  the  cold  dunhuahea  aawe  leeede  ficom.  that 
city  tin  we  reach  the  Cohdaumun  and  Cohiataun,  north  of  Caqbu}« 
irheie  the  cold  morcaaca,  and  amtiiniea  to  incieaie  aa  the  eountij 
liaes  towaida  the  ridge  of  Hindoo  Cooah.   Canbui  Hadi^  hehig  hnrer 
than  Ghumee»  and  more  encioaed  by  hills,  ajqpears  not  to  sufe  ao 
anch  firam  eold>  The  eold  of  the  wiatec*  ^  not  gieater»  ia  moce 
steady  than  that  of  England ;  but  the  sununer  ia  hotter  than  wn$  ao 
much  so  that  the  people  ana  unwiUing  to  expose  thcnudvea  t«i  the 
aoB  in  that  season.   The  great  diffmnoe  between  the  •mom  and 
tl^quickness  with  whidi  they  change,  has  a  striking  effect  on  the  cus* 
tema  ef  the  inhabitants*   in  winter,  the  people  are  aU  clad  in  wooUa» 
garments^  and,  in  aome  places,  in  clothes  of  felt ;  over  whioh  they 
nniversally  wear  a  large  great-coat  of  well  tanned  sheep  skin,  with  the 
long  shaggy  wool  inside.   Tliey  have  fires  in  their  houses ;  and  often 
sleep  round  stoves,  with  their  legs  and  part  of  their  bodies  covered  by 
large  pieces  of  tanned  slicep  skin,  which  are  thrown  over  the  stove, 
so  as  to  ronfiTie  thf  heat.    They  -seldom  leave  their  houses,  unless 
when  urgent  busiix  ss  re<|uires,  or  when  the  young  men  go  to  bunt 
wolves  in  tb<'  snow.    But,  when  the  ^vernal  e<|uinox  is  past,  the  snow 
suddenly  disappears,  the  countrv  is  covei cd  witii  young  grass,  the  buds 
burst  forth,  ami  are  soon  Ibllow  ed  1)\  a  j  ii  ot  iision  of  flowers.    The  in- 
habitants leave  their  towns,  and  spread  u\ei  iht  country  on  partii':^  of 
business  or  pleasure.    They  change  tlieir  wuUcr  laiment  for  a  ihiu 
dress  of  chintz  or  cotton  ;  and,  c^en  sleep  at  night  under  trees,  or  in 
the  open  air.    The  nourooz  or  vernal  equinox,  has  always  been  a  time 
of  great  rejoicing  in  these  countries ;  but,  tJie  Persians,  havuig  engraft* 
ed  some  &ble  about  Ali,  the  p^ion  of  their  reUgious  se<^  upon  thii 


Digitized  by  Google 


WIND&  . 
die  o|qp<Mb«  belief  s  iad  the  obiervm 

,  totSxmkf  to  mtnfi^  mi  by  ^M  «xivil  of  the  JognMtt  lOiton,  whioh 
k  WM  intMided  to  cddbctto^  * 

Icinaaylittleofthewmdiof  A^^^Bl^»wp|.  A  atrang  aoftheriy 
or  iMsMlMMiteriy  wind  bloini  through  the  whole  of  Tooifctttaim  and 
KhmtMan,  for  a  period  of  <nie  hundred  and  tratjr  daj^  It  begbtti 
cboHtthe  middle  of  summer;  and  its  cammmcmmt  mad  ditntikill 
aie  oounted  on  by  the  nattve*  with  the  greatest  cottfidencA. 
■  The  prevailing  winds  throughoi^  ihe  A%hauii  country  are  from 
the  west.  It  is  a  general  remark  among  the  natives,  that  westerly 
vvnnds  are  cold,  and  easterly  winds  hot.  It  is  also  said,  that  easterly 
winds  bi  injj  clouds,  and  west  erly  winds  shed  \he  contents  of  theOL 
A  pestilential  wind,  called  Sinroom,  is  known  in  .some  of  the  hot 
parts  of  the  country.  It  sometime*  blows  on  the  plain  oi^  I'eshawCT, 
in  Bajour,  and  in  the  valley  of  the  Canbul  river.  It  is  known  in  the 
south  of  the  Doorraunec  country,  and  even  in  Shawl }  but,  in  n;enc>ra?, 
k  is  unknown  in  the  cold  clims^es.  It  is  t>aid  rie\'er  to  blow,  except 
in  bare  countries,  and  never  to  last  above  a  tew  minutes  at  a  tim^ 
Its  approadi  is  discovered  by  a  particular  smell,  which  gives  sufBdeat 


•  T  cannot  rrfrnin  rrrmi  ndd-rrT  ;,n  account  of  the  cUmat"  of  Caubul,  from  the  coramcu- 
tarifis  of  the  Eutperor  lk.ulx;r,  a  wotii  not  more  remarkable  Iratil  die  dtafactef  of  iti 
■Mfadr,  aai  th*  ilnpUdty  and  spirit  «r  ili  «yie,>       to  the  aMitf^ 
MdIw  the  countries  which  igrm  the  WCM  of  the  Emperor's  conqt^ 

"  The  cold  and  hot  countries  are  very  near  to  tuch  other  ut  this  pluce.  One  daj'**  journey 

firom  Caubul,  you  may  find  a  place  where  snow  never  fklis ;  and,  in  two  h(mti  Jouiticy, 
liM»«lMMthe«MirM«Mai^4Mr  iMhib  1bft«irbdeH||MM.  I  tfaM*  MlM» 
•*  there  is  another  pluot-  like  Caubul  in  tlie  w'orld.  One  camiut  sleep  therf  in  summer 
"  without  a  posteen.  (a)  In  winter,  though  there  is  so  much  snow,  the  cold  is  not  excessive. 
«  fluMMSlid  UidTAtirisarefanKmfifdr  dieir  climate;  but  they  areflot  to  be eatil|NMil  tfr 
H  OnbiiL  Hie  fruits  of  cold  dunatot^ :  gmp«r  {MBMgnbiBtes,  apricots,  apf^  i(fltlt0t, 
**  penchps,  pears,  plums,  almonds,  and  walnat.s  are  nbuTithuu.  (i)    I  planted  a  cherry  tree 

myself  at  Caubul :  it  grew  very  wcU,  and  was  thnving  when  I  left  it.  Oranges  and 
**  dtKNM  eoiM-m  plenty  from  Luglunwub  IcMNedM^gMT  CMietobephnliBdat  Oubiil,fte.** 

(a)  A  dieep-ikiB  doek.  The  Empeffor  eeons  to  hew  »  Kttk  ciniCgented  teoool^ 
efiheiiyiisatOHibiiL  (ft)  Ghmies  are  now^  cooiBMni  at  CenbuL 

T  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


140 


DISEASES. 


warning  to  a  pexMn  ■ft|HMnt4»<  with  it,  to  allow  of  hit  nmiii^g  into 

shelter  tiU  the  simoom  has  passed  over.  When  a  man  is  caught  in 
it,  it  generally  occasions  instant  death.    Tlie  sufiferer  fiills  senseless, 

and  blood  bursts  from  his  mouth,  nose,  and  oars.  His  life  is  'some- 
times saved,  by  administering  n  strong  acid,  or  by  immersing  him  in 
water.  The  people  in  places  where  the  simoom  is  frequent,  eat  gar- 
lic, and  rub  their  lips  and  nose*?  with  it,  when  they  go  out  in  the  heat 
of  summer,  to  prevent  their  sufTci  iiig  by  the  simoom.  This  wind  is 
said  to  blast  trees  in  its  passage  ;  and,  the  hydropiiobia,  which  affects 
the  wolves,  jackails,  and  dogs,  in  some  parts  of  the  country,  is  attri> 
buted  to  it. 

To  sum  up  the  cliaracter  of  the  climate  of  the  whole  country, 
A%haunistaun  must  be  pronounced  dry,  and  little  subject  to  rain, 
doudi^  or  Iag9.  Its  annual  heat  on  an. average  of  different  places,  is 
greater  thaii  that  of  England,  and  Imt  than  that  of  India.  Hie 
difeenee  of  temperature  between  aimiiiier  and  winter,  and  ewm 
between  day  and  night,  is  greater  than  in  either  of  those  eoun- 
tiiei.  Judging  from  the  sisoi  strength*  and  activity  of  the  in- 
habitants* we  should  pnmounce  the  climate  finrourable  to  the  human 
otmsdtution ;  and  ioany  parts  of  the  oountiy  are  certiinly  remark* 
able  fiv  their  salubrity.  But^  on  an  inflection  of  ftetSi  it  sp- 
pesrs  doubtfiil  wheth^  tlw  diseases  of  A^j^iaunistann  are  not  move 
fiUal  than  those  of  India.  Yet,  those  diseases  are  not  numennis,  and 
few  of  them  are  of  those  deicriptionB  which  make  most  havock  in 
otfa«r  countries.  Fevers  and  agues  are  common  in  antmnn,  and  are 
also  ftk  in  spring.  Colds  are  very  troublesome^  and  sometimes 
daogorous  in  winter.  The  small-pox  carries  off  many  persons,  though 
innoculation  has  long  been  practised  by  the  Moollaha  and  S^fuds  in 
the  most  remote  parts  of  the  kingdom.  Opthalmia  is  comrooiL 
These  are  the  principal  disorders  of  A%jbaunisteu& 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  I4X  ) 


CHAP.  VL 

ANIICALS,  YJBOETABLES,  AND  MINERALS  OF  AFOHAUNISTAUN. 

1 

T  CAN  bjno  m«HU  prebend  to  give  a  ioU  aoooimt  of  the  antmiib  ef 
the  ooimtries  I  am  deacribing.   I  dull  011I7  mentioo  a  £bw  that  I 

have  heavd      withoat  tahhig  it  upon  me  to  nj  that  I  have  not 

omitted  more  than  I  have  stated. 
The  lioDt  ihoof^  ab  common  in  Fenia,  and  lately  found  in  such 

nnmben  in  Gnieiat  and  in  ^  Huniana»naith-iwe0t  of  Belly,  is  veiy- 

me  m  A^jfaannifltann.  The'odj  place  irheate  I  have  heard  of  liont,. 

ia  in  the  hiUy  country  about  Caubul»  wad  there  they  are  small  and 

iraah;  oompared  to  the  African  lion.   I  even  doubt  whether  they  aie 

liona. 

Tsgen  are  found  in  most  of  the  countdea  eaat  of  the  range  of  Soli- 
mamiy  and  it  is  there  that  leopards  are  moat  common.  They  are^ 
)ioiwever»  to  be  met  with  in  moat  of  the  woody.parta  of  Afghauni- 
ataun. 

Wolves,  hyaenas,  jackalls.  foxes,  and  liurcs,  ;irc  common  every 
where.  Tlic  wolves  are  particularly  tbrniidable  during  the  winter  in 
cold  countrief?,  whtii  (litv  form  into  troops,  frequently  destroy  cattle, 
and  somt  times  even  attack  men.  Hyaenas  never  hunt  in  liodies,  but 
th(  V  Mill  sometimes  attack  a  bullock  singly;  and  both  they  nnd  the 
wolves  always  make  great  Iiavoc  among  the  sheep.  Hares  are  kept 
for  the  market  at  Caubul,  and  two  sell  for  a  rupee. 

Bears  arc  very  common  in  all  the  woody  mountains,  but  they  sel- 
dom quit  their  haunts,  except  where  sugar-cane  is  planted,  whidi 
t^pts  them  into  the  cultivation.   Th^  are  of  two  kinda,  one  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


143  ANIMAIS  OF  AFDHAmnSTAUN. 

wiiich  is  the  black  beax  of  India,  the  other  is  of  a  dirty  whit^  or  rather 
of  a  yellow  colour. 

Wild  boars  abound  in  Persia  and  India,  but  are  rare  in  Caubul ; 
and  the  wild  ass  appears  to  be  confined  to  the  T>ooiaunoe  country, 
the  (lumscer,  and  the  sandy  country  south  of  Candahar.  iMany  kinds 
of  deer,  in  which  the  elk  is  inchitieti,  are  found  in  all  the  mountains ; 
but  antelopes  are  rare,  and  confined  to  the  plains.  The  wild  sheep 
and  wild  goat  «ie  commoo  in  the  emtm  bSlB.  The  BMMt  remark- 
able of  the  deer  spet^ed  is  one  which  I  think  is  called  Pause»  in 
flian.  It  is  remarkable  fiir  the  use  of  its  honiB>  and  fixr  the  strong  but 
iiot  dlMg^eeble  amdl  of  its  body*  Ibe  Tolgar  believ9  thit  it  Vtfe§ 
on  annkes;  and  a  hard gioen  snbatanoe»  sibout  the  sise  of  a  Windsor 
bean,  is  found  la  some  {Mvt  of  ift,'«faicli  is  ledraoed  an  inftlltbte  ouve 
ibr  the  bite  of  a  serpent 

The  only  wM  animals  that  I  fanre  beanio^  boiidss  those  aliieii^ 
aK»  poreu|M]MS,  hadgahogs»  and  monkies,  (which  lastm 
only  fivond  in  the  noxtih-east  part  of  A^haunistaun).  MongtNisasy 
ferrets,  and  wild  dogs.  Moles  are  only  found  in  Cashmeer.  The 
King  has  a  few  elcfihantS)  but  they  are  all  brought  from  India ;  nei- 
ther that  animal  nor  the  ihinoceros,  being  found  in  any  part  of  hia 
own  dominions. 

The  horse  claims  the  first  notice  of  all  domestic  animals.    A  omi- 

siderable  number  are  bred  in  the  A%haun  dominions,  and  those  of 
Heraut  are  ^■ery  fine.  I  have  seen  one  or  two  that  had  the  figure  of 
the  Arab  with  superior  size.  A  good  breed  of  the  Indian  kind  called 
Tatizee,  is  also  found  in  Bunnoo  and  Damaiin  ;  and  ex<%llent  horses 
of  the  same  s<^rt  are  bred  between  the  Hyda^jx  s  and  Indus ;  but  in 
general,  the  hors^  of  the  Afghan n  Lioininions  are  not  remaikably 
good,  excepting  in  the  province  ot  Balkh,  where  they  are  excellent 
and  very  numerous,  A  very  strong  and  useful  breed  of  ponies, 
called  Vaudoos,  is  however  reared,  especially  about  Baumiaun.  Tliey 
ate  used  to  carry  baggage,  and  can  bear  a  great  load,  but  do  not 
sbnd  a  kiig  oontmiuaoe  ctf  hard  vork  so  well  as  mules. 


Digitized  by  Google 


cnevML 


148 


■  Moles  are  little  used  in  India,  and  are  moil;  wratalfeed  where  thc^ 
do  exiflt.  In  the  west  of  the  Punjaub  however,  are  some  bettor 
mules :  those  west  of  the  Indus  are  better  itiU,  and  they  (xmtinue  to 
Improve  as  we  get  westward,  though  they  never  equal  those  of  f^ig- 
land.  The  same  obser\*ations  apply  to  the  asses,  and  these  animfds 
are  of  much  importance,  tlie  mules  hf^'mfr  much  used  in  carrying  the. 
baggage  ot  avmi(?s.  atid  the  asses  being  the  principal  moans  of  carry- 
ing manure  and  other  futicles  from  one  part  of  a  to  another^  aa 
well     of  transporting  the  produce  to  market. 

Camels  are,  however,  on  the  whole,  the  animal  most  r'm))lo\eci  for 
OBrriage.  The  dromedary  is  found  in  nil  tlic  plain  country,  but  most 
fal  sandy  and  dry  parts  ;  this  is  the  tall,  long  legged  animal  common 
tn  Tiulia.  The  Bactrian  camel  (which  I  understand  is  called  Uzhree 
in  Toofkee)  is  much  more  rare,  and  I  believe  is  brought  from  the 
Kuzzauk  coumtry  beyond  the  Jaxartes.  He  is  lower  by  a  third  at 
iaaat  than  tiM  otbor,  is  very  stout,  and  ooyered  with  shaggy  black 
hairy  and  hm  tm  ^ystiBct  Immps,  instead  of  the  one  bnndi  of  tfie 
dKonedaiy*  The  Boghdee  cflnid»  in  the  loiitb^mBt  <ii  KhorMDomii 
if  ahaped  like  the  .  last  mentioned,  but  is  as  tall  as  the  dzomedsij. 
Ihren  this  last  varies,  the  diOBedaffies  of  Khoiassaim  bemgloperaad 
aloater  then  those  of  India. 

BidBdoas,  which  aflhct  hot  and  moist  eountries,  are  natuiaUj  rare; 
they  are  howerct  to  be  found  in  many  parts  of  A^hannlstaink 

Hie  OK  M  used  to  i^mifjlk  att  over  the  Gsirinil  dominions,  imless^ 
periiiqp8»  in  Bulkh,  where  horses  are  so  common.  The  species 
sembies  iheox  of  india,  In  having  a  bump }  but  it  is  inforior  in  most 
leapects.  Oxen  are  imfioited  from  the  Bi^poot  country,  where  thero 
ase  the  best  in  India,  except  perhaps  Guiexat.  No  herda  of  oxen 
ero  k^  except  round  the  lake  of  Seestaon,  and  according  to  some 
aeoounts,  in  part  of  the  Canker  country. 

llie  great  stock  of  the  pastoral  tribes  is  sheep,  and  those  of  the 
kind  called  in  Persian  Doomba,  and  remarkable  for  t«ils  a  foot  broad, 
and  ahnost  entirelj  composed  of  &t.   This  kind  in  other  respecta  re- 


144  WKI» 

sembles  the  English  sheep,  and  is  both  handsomer  and  better  thaa 
that  of  India.  Tlie  Indian  species,  wiiich  has  not  Uip  tajt  tail,  is  the 
only  sort  in  Sind  and  Seweestaun. 

Goats  are  common  in  all  the  n^puntainoua  parts  of  the  country,  and 
are  by  no  means  scarce  in  the  plains.  Some  breeds  have  remarkably 
long  and  curiously  twisted  horns. 

TTie  dogs  of  Afghaiitiistaun  deserve  to  be  mentioned.  The  grey- 
hounds are  excellent  i  they  are  bred  in  great  numbers,  particularly 
among  ihe  pastoral  tribes,  who  are  much  attached  to  hnnting.  What 
k  mm  remarkablfi,  punten  leaemlilhig  our  own  m  ahape  and  qiift- 
Utj,  axe  by  no  meana  unoommon,  though  I  cannot  aacertain  firom 
whence  the  breed  was  procured.  Tbey  are  called  Khnndfle.  I  had 
two,  one  of  whidi  waa  a  very  fine  one;  and  another  gentleman  had 
one  that  would  have  been  much  admued  in  any  oountiy. 

The  cats  must  also  be  noticed,  at  leaat  the  long-haired  apedea 
called  Boorauk,  as  th^  are  exported  in  great  numbers,  and  every 
where  called  Persian  cata,  thou^  they  are  not  numeroua  in  the  ootu^ 
try  firom  which  they  are  named,  and  are  seldom  or  never  exported 
thence. 

A  aimple  enumeration  may  suffice  for  the  few  birds  I  can  remem- 
ber.   Hiere  are  two  or  three  sorts  of  eagles,  and  many  kinds  of 

hawks  ;  among  wliich  are  the  gentle  falcon,  which  is  the  best  of  all ; 
the  large,  grev,  short  winged  bird,  called  Bauz  in  Persian,  and  Kiizzil 
in  Turkish,  which  I  believe  is  the  fjoshawk  ;  the  shauheen,  which  is 
taught  to  soar  o%'er  the  iiiiconer's  ht  ad,  ;iiKl  strike  the  quarrv  as  it 
rises.  The  chirk,  which  is  taught  to  strike  the  antelope,  and  to 
fasten  on  its  head,  and  retard  it  till  the  grey-hounds  come  up :  and 
several  other  kinds.  Nor  is  there  any  want  of  game  for  liawking; 
herons,  cranes,  and  storks  are  common,  as  are  wild  ducks  and  geese, 
swans,  partridges,  quails,  and  a  bird  whicli  is  called  Cupk  by  the  Per- 
uana and  Ai^hauns,  and  the  hill  Chichore  by  the  Indians,  and  which 
I  undetatand  ia  known  In  Europe  by  the  name  of  the  Gredt  P^v- 
tridge.  There  ia  a  amiUer  bird  called  Sooae^  whidi  baa  a  reacm  - 

lO 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


VEGETABLES.  X4S 

blance  to  that  lait  maitioii«d»  and  wfakh  I  hsve  nerer  faevd  of  bnl 
Bi  A%haMnirtainn.   Pigeons,  dovwt  eR>w%  qniioira,  &c  are  aamMm 

to  all  countries ;  cuckoos,  which  are  rare,  and  magpies,  which  are  uh> 
known  in  India»  are  abundant  in  the  cold  climates  of  Afghaunistum, 
while  peacokS)  so  common  in  India,  are  there  only  to  be  found  do- 
meaCkated  as  in  England ;  and  parrots  and  njnaa  (Coraciaa  Indica) 
are  only  found  in  the  east  ' 

Hie  reptiles  do  not  call  for  much  notice.  The  snakes  are  mostly 
innocent ;  the  scorpions  of  Pcshawer  are  notorious  for  their  size  and 
venom,  yet  their  bite  is  seldom  or  never  fatal.  I  have  not  heard 
much  of  the  fishes  of  the  country.  Hiere  are  no  crocodile.  Xurtlea 
are  comintm,  as  are  tortoises. 

Greut  tiigbts  of  locusts  are  not  of  frequent  occurrence,  yet  the  lew 
famines  that  have  been  felt  in  Khorassaun,  were  occasioned  by  their 
devastations.  Bees  are  comnmn  in  tliej*e  countries,  especially  to  tlie 
eaiit  of  the  range  ol  ISolimaun,  but  are  domesticated  in  Cashmeer 
alone.  Mosquitoes  are  less  troublesome  than  in  India,  except  in 
Seestaun,  where  they  are  very  formidable :  the  inlialjitants  are  there 
obliged  to  iiave  mosquitoe  curtains,  as  in  Bengal  ;  and  either  these 
animals,  or  a  sort  of  gad-fly,  often  harrass  horses  till  they  pine  aiid  die.  ' 

It  is  still  more  difficult  to  give  an  account  of  the  vegetables  than  of 
the  animals,  when  neither  have  been  examine  by  any  person  con- 
venant'whli  natmal  histoiy.  Of  the  great  number  of  trees  unknit>vm 
m  Europe,  vMdi  are  common  in  India,  very  few  ne  to  be  (bond  east 
of  the  nmge  of  Solimaun*  and  perhaps  none  west;  on  .tbe  other 
handy  many  of  our  own  European  trees  are  common  in 
atann*  imdmoat  of  our  fineqt  Ihuts  grow  wild  in  diflbrent  parts  of^ihaft 
country.  These  are  also  common  m  gardens  and  ofchaids.  Th^ 
commonest  trees  in  ihe  mountains  are  pines  of  diflkent  kinds*  one  of 
wludi,  the  Jdgoosdif  is  remaikabSe  for  cones  larger  dian  artkiiofcesi 
and  containing  seeds  resembling  pistachio  nota.  Two  kinds  of.  oaks 
(one  of  which  is  that  cslled  by  botanists  Qncieus  Bdoot*) oedaia^ 
-  •  .      ..  —  ... 

*  I  have  taken  ail  the  botoaicai  names  I  huvc  had  occasion  to  use  from  Dr.  Hiui-'  - 
flu's  HufddoiiMiiee  IMetiaavj,  -  ■ 


Digitized  by  Google 


146  MIKERALS. 

and  a  sort  of  gigantic  cypress,  are  also  among  the  natives  of  the 
mountams ;  as  are  the  walnut  and  the  wild  olive.  The  western  hills 
abound  in  a  tree  called  U  unna  (a  word  alno  used  generally  for  a  tree), 
which  bears  an  eatable  berry,  known  by  the  name  of  Shnee,  I  believe 
some  of  the  hills  also  produce  tiie  birch,  the  holly,  and  the  hazle  ;  as 
they  do  masUch,  a  tree  called  Khur^ud,  and  one  called  ()<>ln<ih(ye  in 
Pushtoo,  and  Wisk  in  Persian.  The  pistachio  t  ree  also  grows  ^\  ild  iu 
Hindoo  Coosh.  On  the  plains,  the  commonest  wild  trees  aic  the 
mulberry,  the  tamarisk,  and  the  willow  (of  which  we  may  distinguish 
the  weeping  willow,  the  palm,  and  two  sorts  called  by  the  natives  the 
ved  and  the  green  willow).  The  plane  and  the  poplar  aro  alao  com- 
mon on  plains ;  as  are  the  trees  called  Seeahdt&bt  Pmra,  BMuAf 
and  Zwnmg^  wUdi  I-  have  never  seeHf  and  hanre  not  been'aUe  to  re- 
cognise fiom  descripdon. 

Many  bniliei  may  alio  be  mentioned.  The  barbeny,  tbe  JT** 
fiowHia  (Garissa  Garoimda)>  and  other  busheB,  which  bear  eatafaJe 
berries ;  audi  as  tbe  Uniook,  the  Goorgoor^  Sec  are  comitum  in  the 
hfUsy  as  are  wild  gr^iea;  but  of  all  the  dmd»>  the  moat  odebiated  la 
Ibe  Ag^ammmf  wbich,  though  it  bears  the  same  name  with  the 
aaemoae»  gfowa  to  such  a  hdj^t  aa  ahnoat  to  entitle  it  to  the  name 
of  a  tree. 

The  English  flowers,  roses,  jessamines,  poppies,  narcissuses,  hj»* 
oimlis,  tuberoses,  stock,  &c.  &c  are  found  in  gardens,  and  many  of 
diem  wild.  Other  v^etables  will  be  mentioned  hereafter*  i|i  de- 
scribing the  places  where  they  grow. 

I  need  scarcely  give  a  separate  chajiter  to  the  minerals,  concerning 
wbicli  I  only  possess  a  few  particulars,  picked  out  of  Mr.  Irvine's 
report,  to  which  also  I  am  mucli  indebted  in  the  two  last  heads. 

Gold  does  not  seem  to  be  tbund  in  Afghaunistaun,  except  in  the 
streamn  th;it  flow  from  the  Hindoo  Coosh  range.  Tlie  fable  which  is 
current  respecting  vegetable  gold,  said  to  be  produced  in  the  country 
of  the  Eusofzyef,  no  doubt  arises  from  the  particles  washed  into  the 
fields  by  those  streams.  Silver  is  found  in  siii;il]  quantities  in  the 
cotmtry  of  the  Caufirs.  Rubies  are  found  in  Eudukhshaun,  but  not 
in  the  A^^iaun  side  of  Hindoo  Coosh :  whole  cliSli  of  lapis  lazuli, 


Digitized  by  Google 


MINES.  147 

however,  onAuuig  the  river  of  Kiimhkiwr,  between  Chitzeol  end  the 
£uso&ye  country. 

There  are  mines  of  lead  and  taojaoony  mixed  in  the  country  of  the 
Afieede^  and  in  that  of  the  Hazaurehs ;  and  of  lead  alone  in  Upper 
Bungiuih,  and  in  the  coontriea  of  the  fihainwaurees,  Kaukers, 
urehs  and  Eimanks,  as  well  as  in  the  province  of  Bulkh.  The  coun- 
try of  the  Vizeerees  abounds  in  iron,  as  does  Bajour  and  the  adjoin- 
ing hills,  where  there  are  also  indications  of  copper.  Sulphur  is  found 
in  BuUvh  and  in  Seeweestaun.  The  crreatest  place  for  salt  has  been 
mentioned :  rock  salt  is  also  found  in  Bulkli,  and  salt  is  made  from 
Sj)rintjrs  and  ponds  in  Khorassaiin.  Saltpetre  is  made  every  where 
from  the  soil,  AUum  is  got  from  the  clay  at  Caila-baugh,  and  orpi- 
ment  is  found  in  &ilkh  and  in  the  Hazaurdi  country. 


v  9 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


(    148  ) 


BOOK  11. 

GENERAL  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  INHABITANTS  OF 

AFGHAUNISTAUN. 


CHAP.  L 

IKTSOOUCTION*  <MUCIN,  AND  £A£JLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  AFGHAUNS. 

THE  description,  which  T  have  attempted,  of  the  country  of  the 
Afguauns,  has  been  rendered  difficult  by  the  great  variety  of 
tlie  regions  to  be  described,  and  by  the  diveisitj,  even  ol  contiguous 
tiactfl.  No  less  a  diversity  will  be  discovered  in  the  people  who  in- 
habit it;  and,  amidst  the  contrasts  that  are  apparent,  in  the  govern^ 
ment,  mannen»  diew>  and  babita  af  4be  difimit  txibeS)  I  'find  it 
difficult  to  adect  those  grea£  &atuTea»  which  all  poasesa  in  oommout 
and  which  ffve  a  mailed  nadonal  character  to.  the  whole  of  the 
A1^anna>  Thiadifficuity  ia  increaaed  by  thefitct,  that  those  qualities 
which  distinguish  them  fiom  all  their  neighbouis,  are  by  no  means 
the  same^  which,  without  reference  to  such  a  comparison*  would 
appear  to  Europeans  to  predominate  in  their  character.  Thefireedom 
which  Ibims  their  grand  distinction  among  the  nations  of  the  East, 
m:^ht  seem  to  an  Englishman  a  mixture  of  anarchy  and  arbitrary 
poww  I  and  the  manly  virtues,  that  raise  them  above  their  nei^-* 
hours,  might  sink  in  his  estimation  almost  to  the  level  of  the  opposite 
may.  tfaetdbre^  assist  in  appreciating  their  situation  and 

tt 


Digitized  by  Google 


AFOHAUN  CHARACTER.  14^ 

character  to  figiiietfae  aspects  they  WMld  poreaant  to  a  -titviiUer  from 
B^g^md,  and  to  one  from  lpdi>. 

Ifu  iii«D:00ii]d  be  traiuported  from  England  to  the  Afghaun  obunp 
try,  without  passing.  tbroii|^  the  dominions  of  Turkey,  Persia,  or 
Tartary,  he  would  be,  amazed  at  the  wide  and  iinfreqiiented  desarts, 
and  the  mount^i»,  covered  with  perennial  snow*  Even  in  the  culti- 
vated part  of  the  country,  he  would  discover  a  wild  assemblage  of  hills 
and  wastes,  unmarked  by  enclosures,  not  embellished  by  trees,  and 
destitute  of  navigable  canals,  public  roadn.  and  all  the  fjreat  and  ela- 
borate productions  of  hnmnn  industry  and  retinement.  He  would  find 
the  towns  few,  and  far  (ilstaiit  from  each  other  ;  and,  ho  would  look  in 
vain  for  inns  or  other  convenuMicies,  which  a  traveller  vxnild  meet  with 
in  the  wildest  piwrts  of  Great  Britaiii.  Yet,  he  would  sometimes  be 
delighted  with  the  fertility  and  populuusuc^s  of  particular  plains  and 
valleys,  where  he  would  see  the  productions  of  Europe,  mingled  in 
profusion  withtiboae  of  the  torrid  aone ;  and,  the  land,  laboured  with 
en  indniCfj  and  a  judgment  no  where  aiirpiMcd.  He  ironld  see  llie 
'  uihihitMit8»  ibUowing  their  flodb  in  tcnta»  or  Msemhled,  in  viUagei^ 

which  the  teifpobd  roofii  and-  mud  walla  gjlvean  appeannee.eiitMj 
new.  He  would  be  atruck  wt  fiiat  wttli  their  blf^  and  em  hanh  . 
ieatnre^  their  fpivbumed  oountenattOBt*  their  long  beards*  thtir  loose 
gnments,  and  dicir  ahi^ggj  mantles  of  skms.  When  he  entered  Into 
the  Bocietr*  he  would  notice  the  ribsancft  of  femilar  coufts  of  iiistioBb 
and  of  ereiy  thing  l|ke  an  ciigantaed  police.  He  would  be  surprised 
at  the  fluctuation  apd  instability  of  the  dvU  institutions.  He  would 
find  it  difficult  to  compr^end  how  a  nation  oould  anbsist  in  suchdl^ 
order ;  and  would  pity  those,  who  were  compelled  to  pass  their  dAys 
in  such  a  scene,  and  whose  mindv  txained  by  their  unhappy  situ- 
ation to  fraud  and  violence,  to  rapine,  deceit,  and  rer^nge.  Yet,  he 
would  scarce  fail  to  admire  their  martial  and  lofty  spirit,  their  liospi- 
tality,  and  their  bold  and  simple  manners,  equally  removed  from  the 
suppleness  of  a  citizen,  and  tlie  awkward  rusticity  of  a  clown  ;  and^ 
he  would,  probably,  before  long  discover,  among  so  many  ij^ualitiea 
th»t  e;}u;it^  his  disgu^^      rudiments  of  mapy  virtues. 


Digitized  by  Google 


150  •  •  AFGHAUN  CHAllACiER. 

Bat»  an  EngHi'FK  tiwetter  fimn  Lndia,  would  view  them  with  a  more 
fiic70iiniUe  eye^  He  would  be  pleased  with  the  cold  diiiiiite«  elevated 
by  the  wild  and  novel  scenery,  and  del^hted  by  meeting  many  of  the 
productions  of  his  native  land.  He  would  first  be  iCnick  with  the 
thinneBB  of  the  fixed  population,  and  then  with  the  appearance  of  the 
people ;  not  fluttering  in  white  muslins,  while  half  their  bodies  are 
naked,  but  aobeily  aad  decently  attiied  in  dark  coloured  woollen 
clothes;  and  wrapt  up  in  brown  mantles,  or  in  large  sheep-skin 
cloaks.  He  would  admire  their  strong  and  active  forms,  their  fkir 
complexions  and  European  features  ;  their  industry,  and  niteqinse ; 
the  hospitality,  sobriety,  and  contempt  of  p!p:i<;ure,  which  appear  in 
all  their  habits  ;  and,  above  all,  the  indej)riidriice  and  energy  of  their 
character.  In  India,  he  would  have  left  a  country  where  every  move- 
mcnt  orijrinates  in  the  government  or  its  agents,  and  where  the  peo- 
ple absohiteij  go  for  nothing ;  and,  he  would  find  himself  among  a 
nation  where  the  controul  of  the  government  is  scarcely  felt,  and 
where  every  man  appc  irs  to  pursue  his  own  inclinations,  undirected 
and  unrestrained.  Auudbl  ihe  sLorjuy  independence  of  this  mode  of 
life,  he  would  regret  the  ease  and  security  in  which  the  state  of  India, 
and  even  the  indolence  and  timidity  of  its  inhabitants,  enable  mo^ 
parts  of  that  country  to  repose.  He  would  meet  with  many  produc- 
tioiiB  of  ait  and  naibife  lliat'do  not  exist  in  India;  but,  in  general,  he 
mwM  find  the  aita  life  less  advanced,  and  many  of  the  luxuries  of 
HindDStao  unknown.  On  the  wholes  his  impression  of  his  new  ao^ 
quaintances  would  be  fevonrable;  althou|^  he  wouM  feel,  that 
williout  having  lost  die  ruggedness  of  a  bariiaxons  nation,  they  were 
tainted  with  the  Tioes  eommon  to  aU  Asiatics.  Yet,  he  wonld  reckon 
them  virtuous,  compared  with  the  people  to  wbom  he  had  been  aceus- 
tonaeds  would  be  inclined  to  regard  them  with  interest  and  kindness; 
nd  could  scarody  deny  them  «  portion  of  his  esteem* 

Such  wonld  be  the  impressions  made  on  an  European,  and  an  In> 
dian  traveler,  by  their  ordinaiy  intereourae  with  the  A^^unms. 
When  they  be^  to  investigate  their  political  eonstitntbn,  both 
would  be  alike  peipkied  wilh  Hs  apparent  inoonsistendea  and  eon- 


Digitized  by  Google 


NAME  OF  THE  NATION.  t5| 

tradiccions,  and  with  the  union  which  it  exhibits  of  turbulent  inde- 
pendence and  gross  opprefflion.   Bat»  the  former  would,  perhaps,  be 
iiioet  stnK^  with  the  deipotie  preteoiiom  the 
nd,  die  Uft(er»  with  the  demoentie  licence}  which  preveik  in  Ihe  gf>' 
TWDineiit  of  ^le  tribfiB* 

-  Let  m  adwr  try  whethcr»  in  e  pmticMlg  eiaminalion  of  the  hiatoty 
end  pieaait  oonditiim  of  Ihe  A4^uniiii»  tome  of  thefeatuiea  exhibited 
IB  iheie  two  pietoiei  wiU  not  be  aoilened  do^  end  aome  appaient 
inoooditeneieBieooiieiled;  but,  thiooglioiit  the  wholes  let  it  be  borne 
in  mind,  that  ahhoogli  I  hftve  endeevoiired  to  meenue  them  by  the 
aeale  which  will  be  applied  in  Emope}  jet  Ihe  fiiat  and  moat  natnnl 
proceoi  by  which  I  estimated  their  chaiecter  waa  a  oompariaoD  with 
their  Indian  and  Fenian  neighbotm. 

The  origin  of  the  name  of  Afghaun,  now  bo  goierally  applied  to 
the  nation,  I  am  about  to  describe,  is  entirely  uncertain ;  but  is,  pro- 
bably, modem.  It  is  known  to  the  A^baans  themaelvea  only  dmMi^ 
the  medium  of  the  Persian  language.  Their  own  name  for  tiheir 
nation  is  Pooshtoon ;  in  the  plural,  Pooshtauneh.  The  Berdoorau- 
nees  pronounce  this  word  Pookhtaunch  ;  whence  the  name  of  Pitan, 
by  which  the  A^^^hauus  are  Juu>wn  in  India,  may  probably  be 
derived. 

The  Arabs  call  them  Solimaunee ;  but,  whether  from  the  ir  pos* 
sessin^  the  mouiiLaiiis  ot  Solimaun  from  the  name  ol  some  cluef  who 
maj  liave  headed  tliem,  when  first  invaded  by  the  Arabs,  or  from 
some  circumstance  conne<:Aed  with  their  supposed  descent  from  the 
Jews,  is  entirely  uncertain.  Tliey  have  no  general  name  for  tlit'ir 
own  country ;  but  sometimes  apply  the  Persian  one  of  A%haunistaun. 
Doctor  Ijeyjea  has  mentioned  the  name  of  Fboshtoonkhau,  as  bear- 
'  ing  this  Boiae;  but  I  never  heard  it  used.  Ihe  term  Sirhud  i* 
aometimei  made  nae  hot  eKeLodea  the  plaina  onthe  eaatem  lideef 
^  range  of  SoUmaun ;  and  is,  in  &ct,nothing  more  than  the  P«srBian 
word  for  a  cold  country.  The  name  most  generally  qvplied  to  the 
whole  coontiy  by  its  inhabitanta  is  JEXammmni;  but  this  t^pelktloD 
is  obviously  incorrect.  For,  on  the  one  hands  the  whole     the  A£- 


Digitized  by  Google 


152  lABLV  HisrrcmT. 

I^bmn  oouBtry  k  not  included  within  the  strict  limits  of  Khorassaun ; 
and,  an  the  other,  >  caontiderable  part  of  that  provinoe  is  not  inhabited 

by  Afghauns.  * 

I  know  verv  little  of  the  earlv  historv  of  the  Aftjhnnns.  Their  own 
accotmts  of  their  ori^i)i,  appear  u>  me  to  be  fabulous ;  and,  I  shall 
therefore  state  the  few  tacla  Lo  be  Itiuiid  in  forpi^ni  historians,  before 
I  proceed  to  those  recordetl  or  invented  by  themselves,  f  '  - 

All  accounts  agree  that  they  inhabited  the  mountains  of  (liiorc  at 
a  very  remote  period,  and  they  seem  early  to  liave  possessed  the 
mountains  of  Solimaun  ;  which  term,  in  its  most  extended  seu^e,  com- 
prehends all  tlic  southern  mountains  of  Afghaunistaim.  They  also 
appear  by  Ferislita,  to  have  been  established  in  the  nortli-eastern 
mountains  of  A%haunistaun,  in  the  ninth  century.  At  that  period, 
the  greater  partof  ifae  aadon  is  said  iiy  the  same  mthor  to  have  been 
snfageot  to  <he  Arabian  dynasty  of  Samaimee.  Hie  Afghanns  seenr 
to  haveiiuiiiafaed  %  Urge  part,  and  probably  the  principal  part,  of  the 
may  of  Mafamood,  and  the  other  Ghnsnevide  kings  but,  those  who 
infaaUted  the  mountains  of  Ghore,  retMned  their  wMiapfidBiifft^  jaw! 
wm  governed  by  a  King  of  thdr  own,  who  drew  his  deacent  tfaroa^ 
a  long  line  of  Soreragns,  fiom  Zohauk,  «me  of  the  earliest  Idngji  -of 
Persia.  IMs  geneskgy,  though  asserted  by  Meer  Khonde,  and  ocNi-  > 
firmed  faj  Ferishte,  may  be  oonsiderad  as  doubtful  at  least;  but,'it  is 
certain,  that  the  princes  of  Ghore  belonged  to  the  A%iiaun  tribe  of 


*  In  some  English  Sookii  I  have  seen  the  A%haan  country  called  Roh;  a  word, 
which  I  unrlorntand,  means  a  hill  in  Punjauby,  hjk)  which  h  onlylmoiiB  lo  UMB  t£ 
the  Afghauns  tiirough  .the  madiiim  of  booki^  written  lu  India. 

f  A  dO^^joifc  mrdi  iato  ihe  Peniin  and  Anbiu  Uitoriei  woM  probably  fiuniiih 
more  information  concerning  the  antiqaitiat  of  diit  people,  and  would,  at  least,  enal^ 
at  to  tnce  the  history  of  thdr  country  from  the  time  of  MahmnncI  of  Ghuzni ;  but 
die  neoenary  books  are  difficult  to  be  procured,  and  would  take  a  lung  time  to  explore. 
As  I  may  have  to  tdet  hereafter  to  mmay  fiMls  in  Aabtie  hufeoiy,  I  take  tUe  oppoiw 
tunity  of  nckTio'.rVflping  that  I  have  scarcely  unv  ncrpinintance  with  the  witers  on  that 
subject  but  what  I  have  derived  from  a  tiew  ol  iho«e  which  have  been  translated  into 
"EgifiAat  TnoA,  aiidaitinaiBalkr  luiinberinFerataa  and  Pusbtots  «4iidi  rdateasujir 
dvdy  to  the  A%Imiiiim. 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 
I 


Sooree,  and  thnt  their  dynasty  was  allowed  to  be  ot  very  great  antiquity 
«ven  in  the  eleventh  century.  Their  prindpal  cities  seem  to  -^ve 
been  Ghore,  i*  eerooz  Coh,  and  perliapi>  iiaurneeaii.  * 

There  are  different  accounts  of  the  religion  of  the  Afghaun^  of 
Gtea  Some  aay the^  wcfe  oooTertadto  the  Mahomedan  &ith  soon 
tAoi  the  prophet ;  while  otli»  iniintim  Aitt  'duy  wmn  idolaten  in 
<fae  t«Bth  .cnfewy. ,  TIm  idob  tod  met  vi  Jkmammm  appeta  to 
Miebluh  tfaii;  the  inhihUrtrfii  of  that  amtry  weta  «fc  ton* 
imAi|y|iwii  of  Boodh* 

Tbm  peuiile'wii  gownnd  in  tltt  niffi  oC  Mahmood  of-fiJraBir.b^ 
■  i|Biioeiin»d  MilMMiiiie  il.  who  mw  rtfifiwtcd  end  (thm  ptiMMt 
h^  thai  oonqncivr.  Hia'deMBdwte  mfltarad  nnj  iipniei  fiom'tfae 
Howe  of  Ghaenee^taitfae  middle  of  the  twdfih  emtmy,  wfa«n  thiy 
•t  laat  took  up.aiBMy.difealed  and  dethroiMd  the  King  of  Ghumee» 
Mid  burnt  that  iMgnifiowt  eepiul  to  the  groand.  jChejc  afterwarda 
eonlaiiiied  to  extend  their  empir^  and  by  d^ees  reduced  under  thei» 
government,  the  whole  of  the  present  ^f'"gdffin  of  CJnbidy  India* 
ftijitjip  BiidiikhrfMiiuni  aad  a-iprent  pert-  of  KhDnMaan* 


*  TlwlMtcfduMplarnksdlltlieMiUofagowniiiienttotheiiordH^^ 

HMmMNBooh  Tnny  he  prr^iiTned  to  have  given  its  nnmr  to  thr  Fmnnks  nf  Froroosecohee ; 

fa^  fimn  t}ie  positioa  of  tbaz  rtnimee,  we  abouldi  pkce  it  to  the  east  of  UemiL  Biil» 

not  rery  obvious,  ^vln\h  of  the  three  was  the  seat  of  the  Ghoree  kings.  The  fintif  to 
the  •ot^-ens't  of  Buikh  ;  thr  pcronrJ,  north-'vrc't  nf  Ghn^ncy  ;  nnt!  thr  third,  east  of  PoiTb, 
The  Skw  native  opiBkitW  1  have  heard  ttx  t»i  the  last  menUoned  pkcei  and,  i  am  atrongly 
iadinedtoi^^iHdillMn,  from  die  coBodenlim  oT  a  passage  in  I)^  IMdM 
Gaiatheddin),  where  one  of  the  kings  of  Ghorc  is  said  to  have  reducetl  "  Raver  and  Ker- 
menir,  wiuch  acponte  Ghore  from  Hindostan."  These  countries  must,  therefore,  have 
Uil  to ^  east  of  (^loce.  As  k  andg  are  expressed  by  the  same  litterfa  FHraian,  th^a 
cm  be  no  ilimlil  lliil  fliiiiiMni  m  niiiiiiieiiiii  is  meant  by  the  second  of  these  words ;  tnKl 
Raver,  probnMy  Tncan-;  the  nr^ioininp  district  of  D.i\vcr,  or  Zemeen  Dawer  (the  kiui  ui" 
Dawer).  The  dose  res^blanci  !  <  -.-u  the  Per^iaa  d  and  r,  may  have  led  to  this  mi»- 
tik%«yAbMbM«nedly  eopii.^!  byate<Mfanlali«la.  Gertifa  ft  fa,  tkit  fte  aanM 
of  Raver  and  fTftmiltr  are  not  nam  to  be  found.  Now  of  the  three  Ghorees,  that  near 
Fumdi  alone  is  to  the  we«t  nC  Oiimi»[^r  nrif]  Dawer,  aJld|  OOtMCqoentfy  it  elone  CBB  bc  Mid 
to  be  separated  from  Hindostan  by  tiiosc  districts. 


Uigitizeaby  Googlc 


151 


EARLY  mSTOBT'  FBOM  VATm  AUTHOR& 


-fVom  that  time  till  the  invasion  of  Baeuber,  a  period  of  three  ceiv 
tanm,  different  dynasties  of  Af<;hauns  reigned,  with  some  interrup-' 
tiohs,  over  India;  but  the  other  dominions  of  the  House  of  (Thore' 
were  early  wrested  Irom  them  by  (h(  King  of  Khwarizm,  from  whom 
they  were  com|uereti  bv  Jengheez  Khaun  ;  and  the  tribe  of  iSooree  is 
now  reduced  to  a  few  fHTTuUes  in  Damauu. 

During  the  government  of  the  descendaTits  of  Jengheez,  aad  of 
Tamerlane,  and  liis  offspring,  tlie  Atghauii-  nppear  to  have  main> 
tained  their  independence  in  the  mountains;  and  at  the  time  of  Bau- 
her,  they  seem  to  have  been  unconnected  with  all  foreign  powers. 
Bauber,  the  descendant  of  Timour,  and  the  aooeitor  of  1h»'Omilt 
Moguk,  began  his  eatea  bj'dM  tancpeit  of  Ciiibiilr  irtiiah'ww  lu» 
<«HMf^i  tiU  ths  end  of  lib  raian.  Qn  d<nrh_  CSMibul  lOOMintod 
H^bject  to  one  of  his  80iu»  wUle  the  otfaor  wm  caqpeWfd  ftom  Indiv 
by  Sheer  fihaul^  who  fixuided  enodier  Afgfaaun  dynasty,  of  do  long 
dufatioD.  At  hut  the  Houae  of  Tunoar  «m  6niil3r  eefbiiahed  nt 
India;  ihe  capital  of  their  empire  waa  tianafaved  fiom  Ganbol  to 
Delly;  and  the  piaina  of  Ajghiwinittimn  were  dhniled  befenean  Ae 
onpirea  of  Hindoatan  and  Fenia }  but  the  mountahia  were  never 
aubjected  to  either. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  Aighaun  tribe  pf 
Ghiljie  fMinded  an  empire  which  included  all  Persia,  and  extended 
on  the  west  to  the  prea^  Umita  of  the  Buaaian  and  Turkish  empires. 
Part  <Mily  of  Afghaunistaun,  however,  acknowledged  their  dominionu- 
Naudir  Shauh  overtlirew  tliis  dyniisty,  and  annexed  most  of  Afghauni- 
staim  to  Persia ;  and,  on  his  death,  the  present  Afghavm  monarchy 
was  founded  ;  whicli  at  its  height  extendtnl  from  tlie  nciHi!)ourltood 
of  tlie  Caspian  sea,  to  that  of  the  river  Jiinma,  and  iix>m  Uie  Oxna  to 
the  Indian  ocean. 

After  this  cursory  notice  of  the  facts  relating  to  the  Afgliauns, 
whicii  are  ascertained  by  authentic  history,  we  may  now  examine 
what  they  say  of  themselves.  The  account  they  give  of  their  own 
Origin,  is  worthy  of  attention,  and  has  already  attract  ed  the  iiotice  of 
an  eminent  orientaliat*   They  maintain  that  they  are  descended  &om 

II 


Digitizeo  by  LiOOgle 


DESCENT  OF  THE  AFGHAUNS  FROM  THE  JEWS.        .  1^ 

Ai^aun.  the  son  of  Irmia,  or  Berkia,  son  of  Saul,  King  of  Iflfae!; 
and  all  their  hiatories  of  their  nation  begin  with  relating  the  tmnwr 
tions  of  the  Jews  from  Abtaham  doim  to  the  (Mf»tivity.  Their  naiw 
rative  of  those  transactions  appears  to  agree  with  that  of  the  other 
Mahomedans ;  and  though  interspersed  with  some  wild  fables,  does 
not  essentially  differ  from  Scripture.  After  the  rapti\nty,  they  allege 
that  part  of  the  children  of  Ai'ghaiin  withdrew  to  the  moimtaios  erf' 
Giu)r(\  n??H  part  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Mecca  in  ArahiH. 

So  tar  tiiis  account  is  by  no  ineans  tlestitiite  of  probabihty.  It  is 
known  that  ten  of  the  twelve  tribes  rem;iii)eil  in  the  east  after  the  re- 
turn of  their  brethren  to  Judea ;  and  liie  supposition  that  the 
A^;faauns  are  their  descendants,  explains  easily  and  naturally  both 
tfie  disappearance  of  the  one  people,  and  the  origin  of  the  other. 
Hie-  reat  of  the  atoi7  »  contniied  by  the  &ct,  that  the  Jeira  wen 
very  nmnerow  in  Afibk  al  the  dme  of  Mahomet,  and  that  the  pnn- 
<ipaldt?iraof  Ifaem  botetheappeUfllieiiof  JDiyte  adU 
tfae  Mraeof  sdutrictm  A^^iaoniataun,  if  not  of  an.A%h«nn  tribft. 
The  theory  is  plaoaible,  and  may  be  true;  buft  whan  doidy  ^afnniiMMi 
it  wiU  appear  to  leat  on  a  Tague  tradidon  akme;  and  even  that  tnidi* 
tion  is  clouded  with  many  inooBiialeiiclea  and  contradictions. 

The  Afghaun  historians  proceed  to  rekte,  that  the  children  of 
Israel,  both  in  Ghore  and  in  Arabia,  preserved  their  knowledge  of 
the  unity  of  God,  and  the  purity  of  their  religious  belief,  and  that  on 
the  appearance  of  the  last  and  greatest  of  the  prophets  (IMahomet), 
the  Afi^liauns  of  Ghore  listened  to  the  invitation  of  tlieir  Arabian 
brethren,  the  chief  of  whom  was  Khauled  (or  CAled)  the  son  of  Wa^ 
leed,  so  famous  for  his  conquest  of  Syria,  and  marched  to  the  aid  of 
the  true  iaith,  under  the  command  ol"  Kyse,  aitervvards  surnamed 
Abdoolre^eed.  The  Araluan  historians,  on  the  contrary,  bring  the 
descent  of  Khaided  from  a  well  known  tribe  of  their  own  nation, 
omit  the  name  of  Kyse  in  their  lists  of  the  prophet's  companionit  or 
sifiea,  *  and  an  entirely  silent  on  the  airibject  of  the  A^unm  sue- 


Digrtized  by  Google 


UH^         DESCENT  OF  THE  AFGHAUNS  FROM  THE  JEWK. 

CDMM*  £f«rt  the  Ay*—"^  hi^rians,  although  they  describe  their 
eountrymen  as  •  nunMrcMis  people  during  their  Arabian  canapoigD^ 
and  though  it  appears  from  a  sarcasm  attributed  by  those  hiBtorians 
to  the  Prophet  (who  declared  Pushtoo  to  be  the  language  of  hell), 
that  thov  already  spf^tkc^  their  national  and  peculiar  tongue,  yet  do 
not  scruple  in  aiiuthii  place,  to  derive  the  whole  nation  irom  tUe 
loins  of  the  verv  Kyj»e,who  oommanded  during  the  period  of  the 
above  trauisactions. 

If  any  other  argument  were  icqLiired  to  disprove  this  part  of  the 
insiory,  it  h  furnished  by  the  Alghaun  iastorians  themselves,  vvliu 
state  that  Saui  was  the  I'ortjrfitth  in  descent  from  Abraham,  and 
V  Kyse  the  thirtynseventh  Ccom  SauL    The  first  of  these  geneeLogies 

if  utterly  inooniHteBt  with  thoie  of  tlw  8«ered  Writingi,  «Bd  tii« 
woond  eUowv  only  thirty-seven  generatioos  jbr  .  a  period  of  sixteen 
Iwadrad  yetrt^.  If  to  these  fiicta  we  tddL,  tfart  Saul  hed  bo  ton 
named  either  Imia  or  Bevkia^  and  ihafc  if  the  esuiteiuae  of  hi^gMiidr 
Kxt  A^lfr— m  be  admitted*  no  tvaoe  of  that  Jteiarch*e  immm  lemaina 
among  his  deaoandanfta;.  and  if  we  oontider  the  eaaj  fiyth  with  which 
all  rude- nations  receive  accounts  £i,vourable  to  their  own  antiquity ; 
I  liear  we  must  dasa  the  descent  of  the  Afghauns  from  the  Jews,  with 
that  of  the  Romans  and  the  British  fijmn  the  Trcyan^  andthat  of  jthe 
If! ah  &tm  the  Milfffiaffff  or  the  Siranuna*.']*. 


•  Thtt  nnmhfr  from  the  Taureckhee  Sheer  Shauliee.  The  Taureekhee  MoniMl 
give*  a  muc^  greater  number,  but  thui  it  iiiuruduces  tbr^-five  generatuuu  between  Abra* 
Ikav  and  Jaoofau 

t  Tliis  subject  is  briefly  discussed  by  Sir  William  Jones,  in  a  Note  on  a  Translation 
by  Mr.  Vaiwittart  (Asiatic  Researches,  Vol.  II.  Article  IV.)  That  elegant  schdAT  i«  iB> 
dined  to  balisvt  tiu»  supposed  descent,  which  he  strengthens  by  foor  reaamw. 

His  first  affgunent  is  drawn  irom  die  rescinblancc  of  the  name  of  Hazaur^  to  Ausp 
reth,  the  country  whithrr  the  Jews  arc  said  by  Ebuliju*  to  have  retired;  but  thin  rrti-onirip', 
which  waa  never  veiy  satisfiictory,  is  destrcryed  by  the  fact,  that  the  Hazaurehk  arc  a 
mtiom  wholwrahit  weetatdy  4Keafiied  mi  yren  tfa«r  naiaatoapaitof  A%hamiwtainfc 
TIk-  swoiul  argument  is  built  on  the  traditions  examined  in  the  text,  and  on  the  a«sertioD 
of  Persian  historiana,  jprobably  derived  from  tboae  traditioii%  and  at  mo  time  very  deserv- 
iogoTfiidi. 


Digitized  |?y  Google 


DESCENT  OF  THE  AFGHAUNS  FROM  1  HE  JEWS.  157 

The  third  ia  founded  on  the  Jewish  iiomc;  .>}"  the  Atghauuv  ;  but  thiyse  they  probably 
bcve  derived  from  the  Antbc)  like  all  oth«:r  Mahututnedan  natioiw.  Their  ouMt  aactent 
names  have  no  mwinilihnfn  to  dxwe  of  the  Jews. 

The  last  argunKUt  k  feon^d  <hi  a  supposed  resemblance  between  the  Pushtoo  and 
Chalduic  languages ;  of  which  the  reader  will  hereafter  be  enabled  to  judge.  Many  points 
ot  reMUublance  between  the  maiuiers  of  the  A^hauns  and  those  of  the  Jews  ui^ht  be 
Adduced,  bet  ndi  a  ■tmOarilj  is  usual  between  nations  in  the  same  stage  of  society; 
and  if  it  were  admitted  as  o  proof  of  identity,  the  Tartars  an<l  the  Arab«s  the  Germans 
and  the  Rusaiansy  migjbt  be  pcoved  to  be  the  sauie.   It  is  also  maintained  hy  more  than 
one  European  writer,  that  the  A%hauns  are  a  Cancasian  tiibe^  and  pwlienlariy  that 
they  are  descended  from  the  Arnutiians.    In  the  extent  sometimes  allowed  to  the  name 
of  Caucasus,  tlie  Afghsiuns  still  inhabit  that  celebrated  tnotmtatn ;  but  if  it  be  meant  that 
they  ever  lived  to  the  west  of  the  Caspian         the  assertion  a}>pettri»  lu  be  ujii>uppoil«d 
kfrproof.  Their  Amenhn doNCftt M  vilei^  uiioioim  to  thtmidvV)  th^ 
in  the  ircu  tti^  of  the  Arnicnians;  and  the  story  told  by  tlie  latter  people,  of  the  A^haoM 
having  bec«>me  Muwiilmans  to  avoid  the  long  iksts  prescribed  by  their  uwn  churdv 
k  too  hmuiirfeltiit  with  history  to  .dcaerre  »  monMOi^e  ooosideiiMioD.   I  may  add,  that 
I  have  compared  a  short  Amflliin  vocabulary  with  the  Pushtoo,  and  cotdd  perodwno 
resemblance  between  the  huigusges;  and  that  I  once  read  a  good  deal  of  a  Pushtoo  Tt)ca* 
bulary  tp  a  well  informed  Armenian,  who,  though  he  strenuously  asserted  the  descent 
of  the  A^omw  flroai  his  couuLryuwn,  yet  owned  that  he  oonid  not  diooower  a  wad 
common  to  their  language  and  his  own.    I  have  not  had  the  some  advantage  with  the 
languages  of  other  Caucasian  tribe»,  but  I  compared  about  two  hundred  and  fifty  Geor> 
fftn  words  with  the  corresponding  ones  in  Pushtoo,  and  nothing  coidd  be  more  di^itent; 
and  I  know  no  ground  far  oonnecdng  the  A%faaun«  with  the  western  Cauca-^iis,  cxcsft 
tfke  assertion  oi'  li  C'  rtmtri  traveller,  who-^r  ti  mie  I  facgC^  thatho  mor  A%haiUia  tlMK 
Aoting  the  last  century,  which  proves  too  much. 


Digitized  by  Google 


(    158  ) 


CHAP.  II. 


DIVISIONS  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  AFUHAUN  NATION. 


[ATEVER  doubts  may  be  entevtauied  of  the  pedigree,  tiid 


even  of  the  exiatence  of  Kjae  Abdooteaheed,  it  is  to  him  th«ft 
all  the  A^^iaun  genealogies  refisr,  and  on  those  genealoj^es  the  iHiole 
of  the  divisions  and  interior  gov^nment  of  the  tribes  depend.  As 
eadi  tribe  has  a  goveninient  of  its  own*  and  constitutes  a  ommpliito 
eommoowealth  within  itself  it  may  be  well  to  examine  the  rise  and 
present  situation  of  those  commonwealthSf  befi»e  we  proceed  to  con- 
sider th^  as  oomposmg  one  state»  or  one  oonftdeEscy*  under  a  oom^ 
men  sovereign. 

From  the  four  sons  of  Kyse,  Serrabim,  Ghoorghooaht,  Bctnee»  and 
Kurleh,  sprung  the  four  great  divisions  of  the  A^hauns,  which  still 
bear  their  names.  The  Afghaun  tribes  are  the  faniihes  of  the  de- 
scendnnts  of  these  ibur,  and  each  bears  the  name  of  its  immediate 

progenitor. 

Taking  the  descent  of  the  Afghauns  from  one  ancestor  for  granted, 
it  is  probable  tliat,  as  long  as  the  number  of  families  was  small,  they 
were  all  under  the  direction  of  their  common  progenitor  :  that  as  they 
grew  aioio  lumu  l  ous,  the  four  great  div  isions  separated,  ami  were 
each  under  the  head  of  its  eldest  branch,  but  that  when  the  nation 
spread  over  an  extensive  country,  and  the  tribes  <£  the  same  division 
began  to  be  remote  fiom  each  other,  theb  Gonnectitm  loosened*  and 
each  tribe  at  last  remained  under  its  own  hereditary  diiei^  entirely 
independent  of  the  common  head  of  the  raofe 

Hie  fimr  original  divisions  ate  tuvw  disused,  and  aie  only  men- 
tioned in  the  genealogies  of  the  tribes. 


Uigitizeo  by  LiOggle 


OOV£RNMENT  OF  AN  OOLOOa  THE  KHAUN.  159 

The  trite  oootiiiiie^  in  m  gem  n«tniro  wmwiwi,  {mA  hmring 
territory  coinpfld;).  Tkey  fltOl  letitui:  die  ]MtriBdial  ywfmiiMnt  I 
hefe  eilndeil  toi  and  the  operation  of  the  prihcqfiie'iHbjdr  I  iinnwitn. 
to  have  sepanted  them,  is  attU  very  obiervaUe.  Eadi  tribe  hag 
brandrad  into  several  divisions,  and  in  the  move  nnmemii  and  the 
more  scattered  tribet>  those  branches  have  separated,  and  are  each  ^po> 
vemed  by  its  own  independent  chief;  they,  however,  retain,  tjiei 
common  name,  and  an  idea  of  community  of  blood  and  interests; 

The  name  of  Oolooss  is  applied  either  to  a  whole  tribe,  or  to  one 
of  tliese  independent  l)ranches.  The  word  seems  to  mean  a  clanish 
commonwealth.  An  Oolooss  is  divided  into  si  n cral  branches,  each 
under  its  own  chief,  who  is  subordinate  to  the  chief  of  the  Oolooss. 
Th^e  branches  are  again  divided,  and  this  operation  is  repeated  (more 
or  less  often  according^  to  the  size  of  the  Oolooss),  till  the  last  subdi- 
vision coiuains  but  a  few  iauiilies.  Each  subdivision  has  its  chiei  man, 
subordinate  to  the  chief  of  the  division  in  which  it  is  comprehended. 

Eacfi of  tiiefle  bmdies  has  Ha  own  immediate  ancestor*. 

The  Cbae£c£  m  Oolooss^  is  called  Khaon.  He  is  always  chosen 
fimn  tlie  ddest  fiuiuly  of  the  Oolooss.  In  most  casei^  the  selecdon 
rests  with  the  JSjog^  who  can  remove  a*  Khaon  at  pleasure,  appointing 
one  of  kis  relations  in  his  stead.  In  some  Ooloosses,  Ibe  Khaun  Is 
elected  by  the  people.  In  both  cases,  some  attention  b  paid  to  pri- 
mogeniture {  but  more  to  age»  experienee^  and  character.  This  un- 
settled nicccsaioo  occasions  many  disputes.  When  the  Khaun  dies, 
two  or  more  of  his  sons  or  nqphews  endeavour  to  make  parties  in  the 
tribe  I  to  conciliate  the  King,  by  promises!^  contributions  or  attach- 
ment ;  and,  to  bribe  his  ministers.  The  unsuccessful  party  continues 
his  exertions  after  the  successor  is  choem.  Sometimes,  but  rarely» 
part  of  the  Oolooss  secedes  with  him.  More  firequently,  he  continues 
his  iBtngues  at  Court*  or  stirs  up  open  war  in  the  Ooloos*  |n  whid^ 


*  This  will  be  made  mare  obvioiM  hf  «  tree,  representing  the  ikiCHBl  of  a  diviiian  of 

the  Ghfljics,  with  their  goveninutit  as  it  actually  exists.  Ft  is  howe%'er  to  he  ohsfrv<vl, 
that  although  the  head  ot  the  tiUl«»t  iiuniiy  is  stiil  chief  of  the  Ghiijies,  and,  thou^ti  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


160 


GOVERNMENT  OF  AN  OOLOOS.    THE  KHAUN. 


he  is  somatiiiMi  mpported  by  a  hostile  tribes  .  During  civil  wars  in 
tb»  nitioii*  the  unmioeeKfid  candidate  for  the  command  of  an  Ooktoii* 
Joinf  llie  pretender  to  the  duoM^  and  ia  brouight  into  pomr  on  dm 
anccnw  of  hia  party. 


MuDect  and  moat  recent  di^dtum  hvii  M  thnr  chkfii^  jet  tha  inaiiiban  of  tone  of  die 

ratermcdiate  hninchi:^>;  havu  <7qi.i rated  from  Mth  tfdMi  ttdl  httW  nOW  CQimO  1mi4> 
M  in  tbe  divi^toitt  of  J^qtMWia  aad  Xzzilb. 


Bbdbofdi«tifiia1»aiMlMaaliBlo«lidhWaM«^^  to 


Digrtized  by  Google 


THE  JEXBffA.  161 

The  head  of  a  subordinate  difinoii  ia  alwajs  elected  by  Uie  pec^la 
£Kim  tlie  oldest  fiunily  in  it ;  except  in  the  lowest  subdi\n>don»  where 
the  superiority  is  often  natural,  as  when  an  old  man  is  head  of  the  ten 
or  tweh  e  families,  formed  by  his  sons,  nephews,  and  grand-children. 

The  internal  goverinnetU  ofthe  Oolooss  ia  carried  on  by  the  Khauns, 
and  by  assemblies  of  the  heads  of  diTisioiia*  Tbeae  assemblies  are 
called  Jeergas. 

The  Khaun  presides  in  tlie  principal  Jeerga,  which  is  farmed  by 
the  chie&  of  the  great  branches  of  Oolooss.    Each  of  these  holds  his 


The  Gov,?rnnif-nt  will  he  bost  illn^frit^j  by  nn  prample;  and  I  shall  take  that  of  the 
£«aukhail  divisiun  of  the  SoUnuiun  Kiiail,  {mx  *  in  the  tree).  Evety  &mily  in  the  Esauk- 
Wni^flf  Qonni  iO««RidlfcyllsinnsdiM»t>^  Bwfy  tw  or  tmlvp  ftiBilica  are  go- 
Terned  by  their  common  ancestor  if  he  be* alive,  or  by  hi*  representative  if  he  bo  dead; 
and  these  heads  of  a  fiew  iamUiGs  are  called  l^iean  Zberai  or  £ldera,  (literally,  white 
beards).  Every  ten  or  tmitn  EUr*  m«  ««l3)eet  to  a  Condeadnr,  or  bead  of  a  Mehel^ 
.llohuUa,  or  QiMtaTi  w|0  M  fhi  representative  of  Adroonunon  anchor,  A  certam 
number  of  these  compose  a  subdivision,  ruled  by  the  representniive  of  the  ancestor  of  all 
its  meoibera,  who  is  called  Mullik  or  Muushir :  several  subiiiviaions  form  a  division  go- 
WHMd  as  before ;  several  divisions  oompoM  die  Kbail,  vrhid^  in  tllo  MM  dlnded  to,  h 
under  Abdor>l!i  Khnun.  Tlie  Esau  Khail,  and  six  othrr  KliaiU,  compo«r  the  clan  of 
Ahmedzje,  wluch  is  governed  by  Khaunaun  Khaun,  the  representative  of  Ahmed,  their 
eonanoD  anoestor.  Tbe  Abmtdsye,  and  Axee  odier  dan*,  pcsnpose  the  Ismaelzye;  but 
they  arc  not  under  tbe  authority  of  aaj  oomwb  dii^  apd  Ao  bml  AbdI^  ctiithh 
dimI^jio  )s  cactinct  <i(riM|I^Mtid> 

Hie  aim  dTIiBHid  and  thoae  of  Pfteh^  fenu  die  Solimaun  Kbail,  the  d^efof  lAidi  ir 
Hmti  Kbaon,  the  representative  of  Solimaan.  There  is  now  no  head  to  the  house  «ff 
Boorhaan,  composed  of  the  Sc^maan  Khail  and  the  Ali  Khail ;  but  the  chiefs  of  those 
two  dans,  and  tho6e  of  sfrcn  other  clans  similarly  coni][x>$«d,  all  acknowledge  the  supre- 
mmgy  of  AbdOMAeem  Khaun,  the  head  of  the  eldest  branch  of  the  tribe  of  Ghiljie.  I  beg 
my  rendfr?  to  remark,  that  hereafter,  when  I  speak  of  thr  rnrnt  i!ivi'-nnTi=;  of  the  AtVluuitis, 
1  shall  call  them  inbes ;  and,  when  the  component  parts  of  a  tribe  are  mentioned  with  re* 
fincnee  to  Ihe  Iribe,  I  diell  eall  die  fint  dividoiu  etsiu;  diooe  which  cotopoae  a  dub 
Khaihi  &c.  a«  above.  But,  when  I  am  treating  of  one  of  tho5<e  divisions  ns  an  Independ- 
ent body,  I  shall  call  it  OcAfxm,  and  its  oomponwit  parts  dam,  UmIs,  &c.  according  to 
dwfMondMybeor  tt»tiheOolooi^  wIfdM  yterwervatrilM  Khail  ia  a  connptioB 
of  the  Arabic  word  Khjdc^  a  bond  or  assemblage ;  and  Zye^  so  often  affixed  to  the  names 
of  tribes,  clans,  and  families,  means  ton^  and  is  nddetl  as  Mar  is  prefixed  by  the  Highland- 
tn.  lite  t«nu  Mullik,  which  it  apphed  to  the  head  of  a  subdivision,  means  King,  in 
Mae;  and  Madiir  j%  I  a  fampliaB  of  dia  Aidiie  «|»d  Ifoodiaer,  (a 

CoBDtdlor)i 

Y 


Digrtized  by  Google 


16S 


THE  JBEROA. 


own  Jeer^a  of  the  heads  of  divisions  :  these  again  hold  their  Jeei  fjas  ; 
and  the  members  of  the  lowest  Jeer^a  are  either  ai  ([unintcd  with  tlie 
seDtiments  oi  tlxe  individuab  under  ihenit  or  are  able  to  persuadue  them 
to  adopt  theii'  own. 

In  cases  of  little  consequence,  or  on  an  emergency,  the  Khatm  acts 
without  ci)nsulLing  the  Jeerga,  who  on  similar  occasions  give  their 
opuiion  witiiout  consulting  the  Jeergas  below  them  ;  but,  in  inattenj 
of  importancse,  when  circumstances  will  aduiii,  the  sentiments  of  the 
whole  tribe  are  aicei  tained  before  any  thing  is  decided. 

The  system  of  government,  which  I  have  described,  is  so  often  de- 
ranged hy  chrcumstances  Uke  the  lUlowiiig,  that  it  ie  Mldom  finind  in 
fidl ibreei  and  mitat*  tbeidore>  be  oonaidered  rather  as tiieiiiodd  on 
whidh  all  the  governments  of  tribes  aie  fbnned  than  a  oovrect  clca» 
cription  of  any  one  of  theon.  There  is  probably  no  case  where  some 
Hnk  Is  not  vailing  in  the  chain  <^  aiitheritiea»  whldi  oug^  to 
descend  frmn  the  Khann  to  the  heads  of  fiunHies.  *  A  dan,  khail> 
or  other  branchf  often  becomes  indepoident  in  all  internal  affiufSt 
without  throwing  off  all  oonneetion  with  its  superiors }  so  that  it  is 
neither  subordinate  as  a  branch  of  an  Ooloossi  nor  independent  as  an 
Oplooss. 

'  The  vribole  constitutioa  is  also  sometimes  overturned.  In  sonse 
rare  cases,  the  Khaun  establishes  arbitrary  powert  and  acts  without 
consulting  any  of  the  Jeergas  under  him ;  and  his  example  is  ibUowed 
by  the  subordinate  diieft.  But  more  frequently,  the  cfaiefii  are  ne- 
glected, and  every  subdivision,  every  quarter,  and  even  every  family, 
throws  off  its  dependence  on  its  superiors,  and  acts  according  to  its 
own  interest  or  inclination.  This  last  evil  is  remedied  in  some  cases 
by  the  appointment  of  a  temporary  magistrate,  chosen  on  account  of 
his  abilili(  s.  A  sort  of  Dictator,  who  has  great  powers  during  the 
war  or  other  occasions,  for  which  he  is  appointed  ;  but,  who  returns 


tiw. 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


AFOHiLtTMS  NOT  ATTACHED  TO  THE  CHIEF.  X68 

tD  dw  iilnitfaoii  of  •  privilep«fm  when  llw  period  of  fab  ofltebas 

expired. 

It  mmy  be  wtalk  while  to  remark  the  circuniitinoet  on  whkh  die 

extent  of  tlie  power  of  the  chiefi  dep^d«.  In  tribes  that  are 
to  the  King,  the  Khaun  derives  much  influence  firom  his 
iployment  of  collecting  the  royal  revenue  and  raising  the  militwy 
and  indirectly,  firora  the  emoluments  attached  to  those  duties.  His 
personal  character  materially  affects  his  power  and  influen<»  The 
possession  of  wealth,  by  enabling  him  to  keep  numerous  retainers, 
and  to  confer  obligations  on  the  heads  oi  his  Oolooss,  igfreatly 
strengthens  his  power.  On  the  other  hand,  where  the  tribe  is  smaU^ 
or  its  inhabited  lands  very  compact,  the  heatU  of  all  the  divisi^nns, 
great  and  small,  often  meet  in  one  Jeerga,  which,  uniting  the  whole 
strength  of  the  Oolooss,  can  never  be  controuled  by  the  Khauu.  The 
Khaun's  having  a  powerlul  rival  in  Ins  iaiiiily,  tlie  facility  which  a 
discontented  division  may  possess  of  seceding  and  joining  some  other 
Oolooss ;  aadi  any  circumstance  which  disposes  the  people  to  con- 
tentioManesB  and  jealousy,  always  ttml  io  Vaat  theKh«an*8  authority. 
On  the  wheleii  it  it  generally  obflcmble  that  €be  tribea  nkwt  nndat 
tlie  Kng*a  inftnwice  ue  moit  obedient  to  their  EhHm»  thoii|^  them 
ale  Kime  atriking  esoqBtianB  to  this  ndew 

Throughout  all  die  tribes*  the  danniah  attaduneiitof  the  AJfffmmh 
nnlike  that  of  the  Hi^dander^  b  father  to  the  commmiit^  than  to 
the  cfaiaf  I  an^  thoogh  in  their  notion  of  their  Ehaiin,  ike  idea  of  a 
mi^iatraie  set  upftr  the  pnUUc  good  ia  oertainlj  mixed  with  that  of 
n  painaichal  md  natmd  aoperiort  yet  the  former  impiMrion  will 
always  be  Ibond  to  be  die  Wrongest.  Accordingly  the  power  of  *  life 
and  death,  so  commonly  exeiciaed  by  cfaie6  in  (he  Hi|^hlands  wheH 
chMwhip  was  in  its  vigour,  is  scarcely  ever  poaaewed  by  an  Afghaun 
Khaun ;  and  it  is  but  rardty  that  the  personal  interests  of  the  KhalHl 
would  lead  a  tribe  to  take  any  atep  inoonaiatent  with  its  own  honour 
or  advaoti^ 

Y  2 


I 

Digrtized  by  Google 


.:DniBBNAL  MILITART  ESTABUSHBimrr. 

Hie  western  A%fa«iintf  with  the  enepdon  of  the  Ghiljies  in  the 
muOk^Batt  have  no  qiianek  with  their  countrymen  *,  but  there  is 
scarcely  any  tribe  among  those  of  the  east,  that  is  not  in  a  state  of 
actual  war,  or  suspended  hostility.  Most  of  them  have  lasting  enmi- 
ties with  each  other,  but  do  not  break  out  into  open  violence,  unless 
when  some  circumstinu  e  has  inflamed  their  animosity;  and  this 
sometimes  does  not  happen  lor  several  years.  A  few  (as  the  jfc^usot- 
syes)  are  never  at  peace. 

Those  who  have  only  occasional  wars  (which  happenn  oftenest  in 
Damaun),  join  in  temporary  confederacies,  and  the  .Teergas  of  all  the 
allied  tribes  I iieel  ni  one  a^ssciublyto  concert  plans  of  operations,  or  to 
consider  terms  of  peace.  Tliose  most  engaged  in  war,  often  have 
p^manent  alliances,  like  thoee  of  Gem  and  Saumil,  among  the  Bin^ 
doorsimees,  and  the  Uack  and  white  leagues  in  Khoat  llieae  wan 
are  aoinetiniea  confined  to  piedatoiy  incunions  of  amall  parties  on 
eadi  side,  but  when  the  occasion  is  important,  the  Khaun  and  die 
leeiga  call  out  all  the  fighting  men  <^  iJie  Oolooss.  Hie  tribes  vAn 
engage  little  in  wars,  call  on  vohinteen,  and  every  man  who  has  affmi 
coines.  Tboae  who  have  occasional  wan,  make  eveiy  ^own  up  man 
serfoi  and  the  Euso&yes,  whose  ooiitiniial  atrife  baa  made  tbebi  sys- 
tematic in  war,  require  the  service' of  a  foot  soldier  fiir  every  pkraglh, 
or  of  a  hoiseman  for  every  two.  Shame  is  in  geneiai  powerfid' 
enongjb  to  prevent  non^rttendance,  but  a  fine  is  also  prescribed  to 
punish  it,  among  the  tribes  yrtach  have  frequent  wars.  Large  hot 
undisciplined  bodies  are  thus  assembled:  a  tumultuous  conflict  takes 
place :  one  party  is  defeated  without  any  great  8lau|^iter:  the  victors 
waste  the  lands  of  their  enemy ;  and  the  war  is  then  suspended,  till 
the  vanquished  is  able  to  take  the  field  again,  or,  perhaps,  till  a  new 
provocation  is  given.  Tlie  troops  nrc  ;i!mo:^t  all  foot.  The  chiefil 
retain  the  same  stations  of  command  in  war  as  in  peace. 


*  Tht  war  for  sovereignty  between  the  Ghiljies  and  Duoraunecs,  i»  obvMiuly  ol  a  Uil- 
ferait  iMtoM  from  the  CMrtiaawi  petty  miftte  here  rilnded  to. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  mm  ttemmnopiyi  bm  in  aome  tiilwib  if  *  iMmip 

UHedt  the  mriMCfao^tvMtlMi  price  0mn  afiindibrmedby  fiiM«,iuid 
fay  atn  on  ihe  tiibft 

'  This  pnctioe  k  oonfined  to  the  nmlli  ceilii  ii  tribci»  wiu>  inilrfd 
•ie  the  enlj  onet  that  have  any  fevenue  at  all.  Even  widi  thiaiii» 
taxes  are  only  impoaedt  when  money  ia  netaMaiy  Ibr  Bome  puipoia  of 
public  utility.  Their  amount  depends  on  the  sum  required,  and  tht 
money  ooUeded  is  ^ricdy  applied  to  the  public  tervice.  I  do  not 
know  two  instances  of  a  Khaun  taxing  his  Oolooss  for  his  own  bene* 
fit ;  but  the  regular  tax  on  Humsauyas,  the  infidel  tax  on  Hindoos, 
and  the  custonis  collected  on  merchandise  pa.ssiiig  through  the  lands 
of  tiie  Oolooss,  are,  in  several  cases,  appropriated  by  the  Khaun.  The 
two  first  of  tliese  3m]>osts  will  be  explained  hereafter.  They  are 
generally  rolletled  by  individuals ;  but  the  custoni^i,  tlujugli  some- 
times divided  fiTDonf?  the  Oolooss,  are  more  li-equently  received  by 
the  Khaun  :  they  are  only  le\  ied  by  Ooloosses,  a  little  under  the  King, 
who  sometimes  have  fixed  rates,  and  sometimes  make  a  bargain  with 
the  merchant  j  in  whicli  case  the  merchant  may  cither  be  considered 
as  paying  duties,  or  as  compounding  with  the  Oolooss,  to  prevent 
being  plundoed. 

Hmk  it  acaroely  a  aobdtviaion  tbroug^nt  tbe  nationy  which  doea 
notmaike  Ita  own  arrangementa  toptoHdefiir  the  maintenance  >of 
MooTlaiha  (Mahommedan  prieat8)f  and  fyr  the  leoeptwn  of  gneatai 
bnt  the  manner  m  which  those  fimda  are  jwovided*  will  be  fidly 
■eipbnaied  hereafter. 

The  geneial  hrar  of  the  kingdom  is  that  of  Mahomet,  which  ia 
adopted-indvflactioBa  in  the  Oolooaaea  also;  but  their  peculiar  oodo, 
and  the  only  one  applied  to  their  MmuU  aidhninistration  of  oiminal 
jnatioe,  is  the  PooshtoonwuUe*  or  usage  of  the  Afghauna;  a  rude 
vyttem  of  customary  law,  founded  on  principles  such  as  one  woidd 
suppose  to  huve  prevailed  before  the  inatitution  of  civil  government. 

The  opinion  that  it  is  every  man*s  right  and  duty  to  do  himself 
•  justice,  and  to  revenge  his  own  injuries,  is  by  no  means  eradicated 
&om  among  the  Afghauxu;  and  the  right  of  the  society  .even  to  re- 

il 


Digrtized  by  Google 


166 


PRIVATE  KEVENOfi. 


atnin  4be  r>><oii>b1e  pmaooM'^  in#ridmii,  tmd  to  Ukm  tbe  nAtem 

«f  wToaipt  iadii^  pm&ikmmA  of  crimei,  into  Its  ofm  lmds*  M-^fiU 
ray  imperfecdyuiideiatood;  or  if  it  it  im^entoodf  it  ■dMpm.pwcnt 
iotiieilioiiglilt  bf  difi  people.  This  piwtioe  wait  hava  JwA  ittixi* 
gin  at  a  tinffe  idien  the|;ovenimeiit  afoded  no  protectioo  to  indi* 
viduals,  and  in  inch  Girosmstaiices,  it  must  be  allowed  to  be  bene- 
ficial,  and  eraa  necessary ;  but  it  has  taken  foot  in  the  lulails  of  the 
A^aun  nation,  and  aithoagh  in  moflt  paito  of  their  country,  jua* 
tioe  mig^  now  be  obtauied  by  other  means ;  and  though  private  re- 
venge 18  every  where  preached  against  by  the  Moollahs,  and  forbid- 
den by  the  government,  yet  it  is  still  lawful,  and  even  honourable,  in 
the  es  of  the  people  to  seek  that  mode  of  redress.  The  injured 
party  is  considered  to  be  entitlpd  to  strict  retaliation  on  the  aggres- 
sor: an  eye  for  an  eve,  a  tootli  tor  a  tooth,  and  so  on.  If  the  offender 
be  out  of  his  priwer.  lie  may  wreak  his  \  t ugeauce  on  a  relation,  and 
in  some  cases,  on  any  man  of  the  tribe.  If  no  opportunity  of  exer- 
cising this  right  occur,  he  may  defer  his  revenge  for  years ;  but  it  is 
disgraceful  to  neglect  or  abandon  it  entirely,  and  it  is  incumbent  on 
his  relations,  and  sometimes  on  his  tribe,  to  assist  him  iu  his  re- 
taliation. 

ReteiiaCion  thus  exercised,  of  confae  'leada  to  new  digpates ;  the 
tpaacnA  beoomel  invMerate,  and  in  aerioiis  caaea,  it  ia  often  tmm^ 
milted  fiom  fttfaer  to  aon  finr  aeveral  generatimia.  . 

Hie  remote  eflbcte  of  thia  ayatem»  in  cncomaging  aawwinarion  wifli 
■  ita  attendant  habita  of  diaaimnlation  and  cruelty,  and  in  wnwttltng  tlie 
aodety,  and  aoeuatoming  ita  members  to  scenes  of  tumolt  and  blood, 
ne  probably  not  diaoovered  by  the  rude  legialatora  of  A^^ianniatmni 
bat  the  alarms  and  diaoideni  wideh  It  immediately  {wodueea,  muat  be 
felt  by  allt  and  accordingly  we  find  in  eveiy  trib^  aome  meaaorea 
adopted  for  repressing  ita  activity.  In  a  few  Oolooaiea,  the  adjust- 
ment of  disputes  is  left  to  mediation  and  persuasion,  to  which  the 
chief  and  elders  always  lend  their  weight,  but  if  these  means  are  in- 
sufficient to  prevail  on  the  aggressor  to  ofier  compensation,  or  the  in- 
jured person  to  imgiv^  the  aociety  learea  the  httter  to  parane  hia 


I 


Digitized  by  Google 

I 

J 


JUDICIAL  JEER0A8. 


167 


mm  fevcii9&  la  other  trib^  and  indeed  in  most  tribei^  the  mmmC^ 
interposes  widi  more  ngsmt,  and  compel]  s  the  obstinatQ  parly  to  aub- 

mit  to  its  decision,  or  to  quit  the  Oolooss ;  but  in  manj,  even  of 
these  cases,  the  sole  object  is  to  reconcile  the  parties,  uid  to  pfevent 
present  disturbance,  nor  is  it  thought  that  the  society  is  injured,  or 

that  it  has  any  riglit  to  punish  for  the  sake  of  example,  after  the  ac- 
tual surtiTer  has  been  satisfied  *.  In  some  cases,  however,  the  Ivhaun 
or  tlie  Jeemn,  but  more  particularly  tlie  Khaun  (for  it  is  ( omiiionest 
in  Qoloosses  where  the  chief  is  powerful)  not  only  compels  the 
offender  to  s^isty  the  injured  party,  but  levies  a  hne  ibr  the  state 
besides. 

All  crimmal  trials  are  conducted  befoie  a  Jeeiga,  whicii  is  coiuposed 
of  Khauns,  Mulliks,  or  elders,  assisted  by  Moollahs,  and  even  by 
grave  and  experieoced  penMms  of  inlSerior  rank  to.tJkMe.  PeUy  ofr 
ftocea^aie  settled  by  the  Jeerga  of  the  village  or  aubdiviaion  in  which 
th«j  occur;  but  caaea  are  refierred  to  higher  authoritieay  in  propor- 
tioo  to  their  importanoey  ao  that*  in  well  rcgubted  Oolyoatea,  the 
mon  aarioaa  onaa  are  tried  befixe  the  Khaon,  and  the.heada  of  dana; 
fast  inTciy  Uxiaely.gotvenied  tribea,  eveiy  aubdivifion  acta  ibr  it«el£  f 

A  Jeeig^-  ta  generally  aasembled-  by  the  local  due^  but  in  moat 
tnbca»> any  man  who  ia  fit  to  be  a  nieinb^r,  may  summon  a.meefcuigi 
and  in  many  tribea,  non-attendance  ia  puniahed  by  a  fine. 


'  This  view  of  :hc  ra-r  ]-a  tal-cn  n'vcn  by  tlu;  Mnhomctfln  lew,  M;i!iftrTir't,  in  com- 
pliance with  tlie  prejudices  ot  hi£  countrymen,  mid  {>tThap8  wiU>  iiis  own,  has  left  the 
pnnjAifig  of  A  nmrdBTCr,  mi  even  tlie  cbdce  of  punisliing  lilm,  or  pardoning  him,  jRjr 
ft  fixed  compeiMition  to  the  rektion!»  of  the  deceased ;  while  he  wisely  tosk  dw  of 
judging  of  his  fTuik  out  of  their  l  and!!,  and  truu&rred  it  to  th*>  Cnuzy. 

f  Hie  Poo6htuonwullt!e  acta  on  the  iome  principle  in  enforcing  civd  rig^its,  with  that 
wMeh  ft  ikmtwm  fa  grimiiMJ  cftncefc  «im  nun  JhM'«  cbfan  on  anodwr,  liit  ooty 
remedy  is  to  seize  on  an  ox,  a  horse,  or  sonic  otlior  property  of  his  dcbtor'd,  which 
be  retains  w  a  pledge  for  the  liquidation  of  his  demand;  but  the  Poosbtoouwtiilee  it 
mm  alnaat  emnvly  diacantfaiMd  ia  ehil  ihmmi.  Vfhen  Hatan  k  a  Gauzy,  or  a  Cauzy*! 
JMpdtf  widrinTeach,  the  dispute  h  referred  toUsi  |  and  in  places  at  a  distance  from  the 
•Ml  of  tho<K>  roy^i  ofFictT^  .  it  it  dstanntnad  faj  anMnUjof-'Moalkli^  natlwpiiaci* 
ffln  ol  the  Mahomclau  law. 


168 


When  the  membeis  are  assembled^  they  all  take  their  seats  on  die 
bare  gtowad,  and  the  principal  person  present,  after  a  short  prayer, 
repeats  a  Pushtoo  verse,  importing  that  Events  are  with  God,  but 
deliberation  is  allowed  to  man."  The  accuser's  story  is  then  heard, 
and  if  the  defence  is  at  variance  with  it,  witnesses  are  called,  and  ex- 
amined till  all  the  facts  are  ascertained.  If  (as  it  is  most  common)  the 
accused  admits  the  facts,  but  pleads  circumstances  in  his  justification, 
the  Jeerga  inquires  into  the  matter,  and  decides  accord in^  to  its 
merits.  TIilic  is  a  pena!t\  fixed  ibr  each  offence;  except  among  the 
Berdoovauuees,  wiiere  it  is  determined  by  tlie  Jeerga. 

It  always  includes  a  public  and  humble  submission  and  apology, 
and  in  serious  cases,  a  certain  number  of  young  women  from  the 
family  of  the  criminal,  are  given  m  marriage  to  the  person  aggrieved 
and  his  relations.  * 

A  shew  is  always  made  of  deliveiing  up  the  criminal  to  the  accuser, 
end  of  giving  him  the  dboioe  of  retaking,  but  it  ia  well  nnderBtood 
that  he  is  to  comply  with  the  desire  of  the  Jeerga,  and  to  accept  the 
compensation  decreed  to  him.  After  iriiich  the  parties  are  made  to 
inlute  eadi  other  with  the  usual  address  of  Salaum  alalkum.  Peace 
beuntothee^and  to  partake  of  each  otha^s  hospitality;  and  in  most 
tribes,  ibis  reooncQiation  ia  coidial  and  permanent  If  the  accused 
leihae  to  attend,  some  tribes  proceed  with  the  causes  and.decide  e9&> 
parte;  but  others  either  drag  the  reftactory  penon  to  the  Jeeiga,  or 
send  MboiUaha  to  curse  him,  give  up  his  pioperty  to  plunder,  and  ex- 


*  TUt  laacliM  orighiitai  ia  dw  uspmm  of  pvrcka«ing  a  bride  from  bar  &tber  on 

4|idinflry  occH'imnR.  Among  the  western  Aff^hnuns,  t}ie  exjMatiLin  of  n  nninl  r  is  n:ade 
1^  giving  twelve  joung  women,  six  with  poruoos,  and  ux  wiLiiuut.  The  poituNi  of 
inong dM oooinoB ptopK  fe  ifatty  Fbrcatdi^ 
off  a  hand,  an  ear,  or  a  note,  they  give  six  women  :  for  breaking  a  tooth,  three  women : 
for  a  wound  above  the  forehead  one;  a  wound  Ixilow  tbe  forehead  (unless  it  take  n  vear  to 
beal),  or  any  other  small  o£fenoe,  is  expiated  by  apologies  and  subnus&ion.  Among  the 
man^  Ai^^unns,  fewer  yoaii|f  waoMn  are  given,  and  wan  noMyi  aad  <pi  IIm  iribfll% 
the  penalty  i«i  liclitoi'.  Thirrr  nrp  rqiiivalcnrs  for  the  wonm  fixed  IB  MMMft  irfdrfl  tflS 
penon  to  whom  compensaUoo  is  awarded,  may  take  ii'  be  please. 

i 
I 

%  I 

Digitized  by  Google 


JUDICIAL  JEERGA& 


169 


pel  him  the  Ooloon.   The  same  is  done  to  way  00%  who  nfiiMt  to 

•bide  by  their  deovee,  and  they  often  empower  the  acciLser  to  execute 
exact  letaliation  on  the  defemknt*  if  he  refuses  to  pay  the  compenn* 
tion  decreed.  Where  the  compensation  is  fixed,  or  when  it  has  been 
settled  at  a  high  rate  by  the  .Teerga,  they  always  intercede  with  tftie 
oflbnded  party  to  fiugiye  part  of  it. 

I  was  at  first  surprised  to  find  that  JeeigM  w«n  more  nraLy  em- 
ployed in  ascertaining  the  guilt  of  an  accused  pmm,  than  in  judging 
of  the  circumstances  which  justified  his  alleged  offence,  and  in  deter- 
mining the  compensation  wbit  !i  he  was  to  make  to  the  injured  party; 
but  bv  degrees,  reason.s  appeared  v  liy  acts  of  violence  should  seltlom 
be  concealed.  The  Pooshtoonwulhf  gives  a  man  a  right  to  revenge . 
his  own  injuries,  and  the  opinion  of  the  Afghauns  makes  it  a  point 
of  honour  to  assert  that  right :  all  motive  for  concealment  is,  there- 
fore, withdrawn,  unless  the  party  is  sensible  that  he  is  in  the  wrong; 
and  on  the  other  hand,  publicity  is  necessary  to  clear  his  honour. 
The  Afghaun  notions  on  this  subject  are  illustrated  by  those  ot  our 
own  nation  on  the  practice  of  duelling,  which  is  only  a  generous  and 
well-regulated  mode  ol  priv  ate  revenge. 

•  On  the  whole,  these  judicial  Jeergas  are  useful  inst  il  utions.  In 
most  cases  they  conduct  themselves  with  tolerable  impartialiLVs  al- 
though they  cannot  be  exempt  from  the  influence  of  friendship  and 
enmity,  and  may  perhaps,  in  some  instances,  be  accessible  to  solicita- 
tiOD^  snd  even  to  oonuptioik  Oae  Bstmally  imagines  their  debates  to 
be  tmrndtuoiis  and  dtsoiderly,  but  I  enderstand  tbat  this  U  not  often 
tbe  case;  and  in  some  tribes,  tbe  Jeergas  are  remadoiUe  Ibr  order 
and  gravity,  and  for  a  rnde  kind  of  eloquence^  mudi  admired  by  thor 
countrymen. 

Hie  Jeeiga  is  rendered  umeoessaiy  in  sonoe  cases  by  the  extenstre 
powers  of  the  Khann,  and  in  odieis  it  is  rendered  nugatory  by  tiie 
mnnUness  of  tbe  people.  Tbe  moat  powerful  Khaun,  however,  is 
glad  o£  the  countenance  of  a  Jeeig^^  when  he  has  to  deal  with  a 
powttful  oflbider.;  and  among  the  Doocaonees,  where  the  chief  acts 
by  the  Kingf  s  sinthority,  and  is  supported  by  hu  power,  he  still  finds 

E 


170  OTHER  MODES  OF  ADJUSTING  DISPUTES. 

* 

it  convenient  to  Avail  himself  of  the  advice  of  a  Jeeiga:  this  hwt  ob^ 
sen  ation  applies  to  deliberations  on  all  sulyecto,  as  well  aa  to  the 
trial  of  offences.  Even  where  Jeeigas  are  in  use,  all  crimes  are  not 
brought  before  them.  It  u  always  reckoned  an  admission  of  weak- 
ness to  complain  to  a  JeergSy  and  consequently  less  honourable  than 
to  obtain  Justice  by  force ;  accordingly  men  of  lank  in  the  Ooloos8» 
and  powerful  people  (that  is,  people  who  have  many  xelati<His)»  are 
always  unwilling  to  compromise  an  affront,  and  to  agree  to  a  recon- 
ciliation, till  the  injuries  on  both  sides  are  etjual.  Tliis  U  carried  so 
far,  that  the  injured  party  affects  reluctance  to  be  reconciled,  even 
when  the  affair  has  been  brouf^ht  to  the  Jeerga  at  his  own  request. 
In  many  tribes,  tlie  Jeerga  docs  not  interfere,  until  a  complaint  is 
made  to  it ;  and  iu  some,  not  till  botli  parties  are  persuaded  to  sub- 
mit to  its  award ;  but  in  others,  the  local  chief  assembles  a  Jeerga 
whenever  he  hears  of  any  serious  ofieiice,  and  brings  the  parties  be- 
fore it. 

In  serious  cases,  sudi  as  murder,  the  ofi^nder  often  flies  the  coun- 
try, but  if  he  is  unwilling  to  leave  his  tribe,  he  is  sensible  of  the 
danger  he  incurs  by  remaining,  and  determines  to  submit  and  obtain 
forgiveness  from  the  person  he  has  injuretl.  In  that  case,  lie  goes  as  a 
suppliant  to  the  house  of  some  considerable  man,  and  begs  liim  to  in- 
tercede, and  procure  his  pardon.  By  the  custom  of  the  A%hauns,  a 
suppliant  can  seldom  be  refused,  and  the  person  applied  to,  is  obliged 
to  agree.  He  assembles  some  other  respectable  moi,  some  MooUahs 
and  Syuds,  and  proceeds  with  the  oflender  to  the  house  of  theii\}iired 
person,  The  whole  of  the  party  are  now  suppliants ;  and,  as  they 
oumot  be  refiised,  the  peraon  oflended,  if  unwUling  to  make  up  the 
quarrel,  leaves  his  house  before  they  arrive,  or  endeavours  to  conoeal 
himsdfi  When  he  is  found,  the  criminal  a|^peais  dressed  in  a  shroud, 
puts  a  naked  sword  into  the  hand  of  his  enemy,  and  teUs  him  that 
hia  life  is  in  his  power.  At  the  same  time  the  chieft  and  MnnJi^f 
put  themsdvea  in  an  attitude  of  entreaty,  and  h^  foig^vencstf  for 
the  suppliant.  It  ends  in  the  uyured  pefsoniiaidoQing  the  ikflbnoe^ 
wnd  reoeivuig  a  oompenaatibii*  .  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


HUMSAUYAHa  171 

oommu- 

nitjr,  tbe  oomponent  parts  of  whidi  are  classed  aooording  to  llidr  de^ 
•cent ;  but,  thoni^  this  is  the  conunoiiett  fonn  of  die  society,  U  is 
not  wHhout  varisdons  and  exoejitions.  Itos  of  two  subdiTuions  may 
inhabit  the  same  viUage^  andinthat«ase,ihoii|^eadihasaheadof 
Its  own,  they  hold  their  Jeeigas  in  common*  and  act  eiactly  as  if 
iSm^  were  one  subdivision. 

A  divinon  whidi  quits  its  own  Odiooss,  may  be  adopted  into 
another.  It  lipart  of  the  A^iaimrnlesofhos|^aUty,totrest  stran- 
sucii  drcumstanoes  with  particnhur  sftootion.  lliey  are  as- 
signed lands  by  t]ie  tribes  which  they  jdn.  Their  chief  has  a  seat  at 
the  principal  Jeeiga,  his  people  retain  their  tnteiiial  government,  and 
axe  exactly  on  a  Noting  with  the  ocigbal  members  of  the  Odooss: 
they  are  suigecttothe  same  laws,  enjoy  the  same  privil^es,  enttiK 
into  the  wars  and  alKsnees  of  the  Oolooss  which  they  have  joined^ 
and  thougli  they  retain  the  name  of  that  from  which  they  are  sprang 
they,  Ibr  die  time,  lose  aQ  oonnectioii  with  it.  .  Thsj  dcs  however, 
sometimes  return  to  their  original  Oolooss,  and  in  the  ,event  of  a 
war  between  it  and  that  which  has  idopted  them,  they  would  not, 
among  the  western  tribes,  be  expected  to  take  any  part.  Among  the 
eastern  Afghauns,  they  would  be  obliged  to  assist  the  Oolooss  with 
which  they  lived. 

These  adopted  divisions  are  much  infierior  in  numbers  to  the.  rest 
of  the  Oolooss. 

Individuals  who  leave  their  tribe  from  disgust,  without  selling  their 
lands,  arc  in  many  cases  received  into  the  Oolooss  which  th^  join, 
and  have  lands  assigned  them ;  but  persons  who  sell  their  lands,  and 
'leave  their  tribe  firom  poverty,  are  placed  in  the  dass  of  daiiaen% 
which  is  next  to  be  mentioned. 

£very  Oolooss  has  many  people  attached  to  it,  who  are  not  Af- 
ghauns.  These  are  called  Humsauyaba.  * 


* 

Digitized  by  Google 


172  KING'S  POWER. 

'  ITiey  have  no  place  at  the  Jeeiga»  but  their  interests  are  watched 
over  by  the  divisimi  to  which  they  belong,  and  by  the  individuals  ib 

whom  they  have  attached  themsdres. 

It  is  a  point  of  honour  for  every  man  to  protect  his  Huirtsauyehs  j 
andi  consequently,  their  condition  is  little  inferior  to  that  of  the 
members  of  the  Oolooss.  * 

AighiHins  who  join  an  Oolooss,  afler  quitting  their  own  from  po- 
verty,  are  considered  a.s  Humsauyehs,  but  arc  treated  with  more  re- 
gard than  the  rest  of  that  class.  In  one  tribe,  the  Gundehpoors,  the 
numbers  of  Humsauyehs,  of  the  Beloche  and  other  nations,  greatly 
exceed  those  of  the  Oolooss  ;  and  there,  1  believe,  they  take  the 
name,  and  enjoy  all  tlie  privileges  of  members  of  the  Oolooss, 
which  is  constantlv  reproached  with  this  corruption.  In  general, 
they  are  very  interior  in  numbers  to  the  Oolooss,  and  in  some 
of  the  tribes  at  a  difstancc  from  the  great  roads,  there  are  scarce 
any  Humsauyehs  at  all.  Humsauyehs  have  not  in  general  landed 
propertyli 

An  assemblage  of  many  commonwealths  such  as  I  have  described, 
composes  the  Afghaun  nation,  and  the  whole,  or  nearly  the  whole,  is 
formed  into  one  .state  by  the  supreme  authority  of  a  common  sove- 
reign. 

The  King  is  the  natural  head  of  the  tribe  of  Dooraunee,  the 
greatest,  bravest,  and  most  civilised  in  the  ni^on ;  but  his  paramount 
authority  over  the  other  tribes,  has  been  superinduced  by  causes 
which  will  hereafter  be  eKplamed. 

That  authority  extends  to  a  genersl  superintendanoe  over  the 
whole  kingdom,  and  to  die  levying  fixed  proportions  of  troops  or 
money,  or  both,  from  each  tribe,  for  the  conmion  defence.  The  whole 


*  One  of  the  few  quarn-ls  I  have  beard  <tf  among  the  Dooraunees,  origitiated  hi  m 
injury  oArad  to  a  Hmmauy*  )i.   A  Hindoo  Hvmiaiiiydi  at  one  Noonye  due^  hod  gone 
*  to  the  village  of  another ;  while  on  Us  return,  he  was  seized  by  a  third,  on  pretence  of 

his  owint'  tills  chiet"  money.  The  two  other  chiefs  joined,  lUid  attacked  the  one  who  hod 
seized  the  i^iummuycli,  Uluud  wax  shed,  aud  it  required  the  interposition  of  the  Naib  of 
Gandabar  to  oompow  die  qoarrd. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


  KINGS  POWEB.*  ,173 

iwtidtit  howmr;  ia  seldoiii  animated  by  one  iBpHt»  and  tbe  individwl 
intererta  of  eadi  Ooloow  attrad  more  of  Ha  attention  than  the  gener 
fal  wMte,  Some  of  the  flaim  round  towns,  mudb  of  the  portion 
of  A^^iaimistaim*  which  is  exclusively  inhabited  by  Taujeksy  and 
an  the  focdgn  provinces  of  the  states  are  entirely  under  the 
authority  of  the  King,  who  is  thus  enabled  to  collect  a  revenue 
independent  of  the  tribes*  and  to  maintain  an  amy  without  their 

In  consequence  of  these  drcnmatances,  thece  is  some  distinction  of 
interests  between  the  King  and  the  nation,  and  a  still  greater  differ- 
ence of  opinion  regaidtng  his  l^al  powers ;  the  King,  the  Courtiers, 
and  the  MooUahs,  maintaining  that  he  has  all  the  authority  pos- 
sessed by  Asiatic  despots ;  and  the  people  in  the  tribes  consider- 
ing him  as  a  monarch  with  very  limited  prerogati\ es-.  Tliis 
produce^i  a  good  deal  of  divearaity  in  the  actual  exercise  of  the  royal 
ftutliurity. 

The  government  of  the  tribe  of  Dooraiinee  centres  in  iht  King-, 
though  even  there,  he  is  generally  obliged  to  attend  to  the  wislu  s  of 
the  lieads  of  clans.  He  also  interferes  in  the  interior  management 
of  the  tril)L's  on  the  plains,  and  near  great  towns ;  but  he  contents 
himself  w  itli  levying  liis  supplies  of  men  and  money  from  the  rest, 
without  any  iurther  interference  in  their  af&irs,  than  is  occasionally 
required  to  preserve  the  public  triui^iuillity.  One  or  two  tribes  are 
independent  of  his  government.  This  is  not  tlie  place  to  enter  into 
a  detailed  aecount  of  the  royal  governinerit,  but  a  loose  reference  to 
a  monarchy  whidi  is  better  known,  may  serve  to  render  the  aubfl^ 
quent  account  intelligible  to  the  reader,  till  he  arrives  at  the  infermA^ 
tion  whicb  will  enable  him  to  form  a  judgment  for  himsel£  With 
the  exception  of  the  rqpiiblican  govemmeut  of  the  Ooloosaesi  the 
situatioa  of  the  A^^bann  country  appean  to  me  to  bear  a  strong  ^ 
semUanoe  to  that  of  Sootknd  m  ancient  times:  the  duect  power  of 
the  Ejnff  over  the  towns  and  the  countrjr  immediatdj  around;  the 
pceanioua  submiiaion  of  the  nearest  dans*  and  the  independence  of 
the  remote  ones;  the  tnoidinate  power  and  ftction  of  the  nobility 


Digrtized  by  Google 


174 


ADVANTAGES  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT. 


most  oonneded  with  the  oouft;  and  the  relitunu  borne  by  all  the 
great  loida  to  the  crown,  resemble  each  other  so  closely  in  the  imo 
■tatea,  that  it  will  throw  light  on  the  character  of  the  Doonmnee 

gov^emment  to  keep  the  parallel  in  view. 

The  defects  of  this  system  are  obvious,  and  when  we  come  to  ob- 
mrre  in  detail  the  anarchy  and  disorder  which  so  often  arise  under 
tiie  republican  government  of  the  tribes,  we  mi|^t  be  induced  to  un- 
deaMrate  the  quantum  of  happiness  it  produces,  and  to  suppose  that 
the  country  would  derive  more  advantage  &om  the  good  order  and 
tranquillity  which  an  absolute  monarchy,  even  on  Asiatic  principles, 
would  secure ;  but  .the  more  I  have  learned  of  the  actual  state  of  the 
Aighauus,  the  stronger  ia  my  convictioQ  that  such  an  estimate  would 
be  erroneous). 

We  may  easily  ajiprLNL'Iate  tho  benefits  of  an  exemption  froni  the 
vexatious  interfeix^nce  ot"  ilu-  ofHccrs  of  a  illstanr  King,  and  from  the 
corruption  and  oppression  with  which  such  iuleiiereiice  is  alwavs  ac- 
companied in  Asia ;  nor  must  we,  amidst  the  alarms  and  contusion 
which  will  he  forced  on  our  attention,  overlook  the  pai  tiality  of  the 
Afghauns  for  their  preiient  ccmsiitution  ;  the  occupation  and  interest, 
the  sense  of  independence  and  persoual  conseipience  w  hich  result 
from  a  popular  government,  however  rudely  formed ;  and  tlie  cou- 
rage, the  intelligence,  and  the  elevation  of  character  which  those 
occupations,  and  that  independence  can  never  fail  to  inspire.  * 


*  Hie  iUgfaauns  theouelTes  endt  in  ihe  free  <ipirit  of  their  institution*.  Those  who 
an  little  imdcT  ll»c  royal  nnfhorit}'.  arc  protid  of  their  independence,  which  thoso  undt-r 
the  Kiag  (though  not  exposed  to  the  tyranny  common  in  every  other  country  in -the  east) 
•AdN^  end  fldnirodd  imitale;  iWy  »ti  i—mtiA«j  A.»  «  .11  a^^>««— 

•re  equal,"  which,  though  it  i$  nOi,  nor  ever  was  true,  still  ihein  tibeir  notions  and  their 
wishes.  I  once  stronp-ly  urged  to  a  very  intelligent  old  man  of  the  tribe  of  Meeankhail, 
the  superiority  ot  u  quiet  and  iieciire  life,  under  a  powerful  monarch,  to  the  discord,  the 
abrm,  and  theUood,  irludi  diey  oiwed.  to  their  pnatBt  wjfUm,  The  old  men  rcfiKad 
witih  great  warmth,  and  thus  concluded  an  indignant  harangue  against  arbitrary  power, 
f  We  aire  eontent  with  djsoordt  we  are  coDtent  with  alenns,  we  aire  eontou  wiUi  blood. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ADVANTAGES  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT.  175 

Another  incakailable  advantage  of  the  present,  syvtem  is,  that 
.tiMUgb  it  mBOangjBB  attie  diaofrden,  it  idBbids  m  effectual  security 
agnost  the  general  revoliitioni  and  calamities  to  which  despotic 
.  oountries  in  Asia  are  so  frequently  wrti^ect.  In  Persia  or  India,  the 
passions  of  a  bad  king  are  felt  through  every  part  of  his  dominioiu} 
And  the  civil  wars  which  ooair  almost  as  often  as  a  Kuig  dies,  never 
fail  to  throw  the  kingdom  into  a  state  of  misery  md  disorder :  part 
of  the  inhabitants  are  exposed  to  the  licence  and  cruelty  of  the  am- 
tending  armies,  and  the  rest  suffers,  nearly  in  an  equal  degree,  from 
the  anarchy  that  follows  a  dissolution  of  the  government  which  has 
hithprfo  maiTttain^  the  pubhc  tran(|uillity.  The  consequence  is, 
that  a  tyrant,  or  a  disputed  succession,  reduces  the  natiou  to  a  state 
of  weakness  and  decav,  from  which  it  cannot  wholly  be  retrieved, 
before  its  recovery  is  checked  by  tlie  recurrence  of  a  sinular  calaniitv. 
In  Afghaunistaun,  on  the  contrary,  the  interiiel  government  ol  the 
tribes  answer-;  its  oiul  so  well,  that  the  utmost  disorders  of  the  royal 
goveniiiieiit  never  derange  its  operations,  nor. disturb  tiie  lives  of  the 
-people.  A  uumber  of  organised  and  high-spirited  republics  are 
readv  to  defend  their  rugged  country  against  a  tyrant;  uikI  are  able 
to  defv  the  feeble.efforts  of  a  party  in  a  civil  war.  Accordingly,  if  we 
compare  the  condition  of  tlie  two  kingdoms,  we  find  Persia  in  a  state 
of  decay,  after  twenty  yean  ci  entire  tranquillity  j  whUe  A%hauni* 
staun  omtinaes  the  progressiye  impiovement*  wludi  it  haa  kept  up 
during  twdve  yeaia  of  civil  warfare^  New  aqiiedncta  aie  constantly 
made,  and  new  lands  bibii|^  into  cnltiTation:  llie  towns  and  the 
oowrtry  roond  theni»  indeed^  as  well  as  that  on  the  great  roads*  are 
declining ;  bat  the  cause  u  obvious*  in  tiheir  being  immedistd^  ex* 
posed  to  the  power  of  the  competitois  &r  the  oown^  and  to  the  pil- 
lage of  their  annies. 

But  even  if  we  admit  the  infericmly  of  die  A^^iaun  institations 
todmae  of  the  moreyigoious  governments  of  other  Attatic  oouiilries, 
wis  cannot  hut  be  struck  with  the  vast  superiority  of  the  materials 
Ifafij  aiford  fiir  the  constmction  of  a  national  oonstitotioiu '  The  olji^ 

tt 


1 76  ADTAMTAOBS  OP  THE  GOVEBmiEMT. 

nitkms  are  better  adapted  to  a  bad  than  to  a  good  government  They 
cm  all  be  brought  to  contribute  their  whole  force  to  the  support  of  a 
dM|iuiiam>  vithin  the  time  that  is  required  to  over-run  their  territory; 
and  ages  must  pass  away,  before  the  slaves  of  India  or  China  could 

he  made  capable  of  taking  a  share  in  the  government  of  their  coimtry ; 
but  if  a  King,  of  sufficient  genius  to  form  the  design  of  cordially 
uniting  his  subjects,  should  fspring  up  among  the  Afghauns,  he  would 
necessarily  fall  on  a  beautiful  form  of  government,  as  the  oidy  one 
by  which  he  could  possibly  accomplish  his  design.  An  ordinaf}' 
monarch  might  endeavour  to  reduce  the  tribes  to  obedience  bv  force  ; 
but  one  Afghaun  King*  has  already  had  the  penetration  to  discover 
that  it  would  require  a  less  exertion  to  conquer  all  the  neighbouring 
kingdoms,  than  to  subdue  his  own  countrymen.  A  monarch  such  as 
I  have  supposed,  would  therefore  be  obliged  (as  the  Kin^  is  at  pre- 
sent f)  to  concert  his  measures  tlu-  1  km (.-(iitary  Kl^auiis;  and  the 
necessity  of  consulting  the  niLeresls  ol  the  wliole,  would  uiduce  them 
to  carry  on  their  debates  in  a  general  assembly :  such  an  arrange- 
ment would  be  congenial  to  the  habits  of  their  internal  government, 
and  couti  II  mable  to  the  practice  which  the  King  now  observes  with 
the  Doorauiiee  Sirdars  j  and  it  would  tbnn  a  council  of  the  nobility, 
connected  both  with  the  King  and  the  people,  though  more  imme- 
diately with  the  King.  In  most  Ooloosses.  the  Khauns  can  levy  no 
taxes,  and  can  take  no  public  measures,  without  the  consent  of  the 
elected  Mulhks,  who  are  obliged,  in  their  turn,  to  obtain  the  consent 
of  their  divisions.  The  King  might  try  to  strengthen  the  Khauns, 
and  by  their  means  to  draw  a  supply  from  a  reluctant  people,  but  un- 
leaa  he  began  with  greater  means  thim  the  Kings  have  yet  possessed, 
his  attempt  would  probably  be  attended  with  as  little  success  j  nd  If 


•  Alntd  Bbuih, 

t  No  neanire  nm  rtrtunwhwd  m  in  SUnh  tini^  wiliMMt  a  ogmwa  «f  dw 

Bowamkmk. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ADV ANTiLOBS  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT.  X77 

hm  nUM  Ar  gautal  tod  emdhl  tiA,-  ifmrnthe-^pncnmi  bf  adliMw 
€Bee  totlie.preaent  .i7fleiii»'  and  by  dbtaining  die  odntoii  «f  tlM'ttfr* 
doiL  Thus  the  Ehauiu  would  be  MOt,  m  diej  now  are^  to-pcmde 
Uieir  triba  to  oontribnte  to  the  general  revenue.   Tbay  wmdili  find 

the  p^ple*8  ignorance  of  the  national  exigencies,  a  bar  to  their 
gmating  any  addition  to  the  estabUflhed  supplies  1  and  it  auieljr  woidd 
not  be  an  unnatural  expedient  to  preml  on  them  to  dapnto  one  or 
two  of  the  wisest  of  their  Mulliks,  to  asceMlUn  at  the  court  the  real 
akate  of  the  public  aflbirs.  An  elective  aasemhly  would  thus  be 
formed,  of  which  every  individual  would  be  dosdy  coimeoted  with  his 
constituents,  and  would  be  r^arded  by  them  as  their  natural  and 
hereditary  head ;  they  would  represent  a  people  accustomed  to  re- 
spect their  chiefs,  but  as  much  accustomed  to  debate  on,  and  to  ap- 
prove or  rejert,  the  measures  which  those  chiefs  proposed.  'Vhe 
militia  of  the  tribes  woukl  (  oustitute  an  armv  whi(  li  would  be  invin- 
cible by  a  foreign  in\  aik  r,  while  the  King  would  he  without  any 
fore  0  Uiat  could  offer  a  moment's  resistance  to  a  general  combina^n 
of  liis  subjects. 

The  sUghtest  alteration  would  Ibrm  a  combination  between 
the  Jeergas  and  the  Cauzees  ajipoiutrtl  by  the  King,  which 
would  be  admirably  adapted  to  the  administration  of  justice, 
and  a  government  would  thus  be  established,  as  well  suited  as  any 
that  can  be  imagined  for  promoting  the  gr^Uaiess  and  happiness  of 
the  nation. 

Such  are  the  pkaai^g  reveiiea  to  which  we  are  led  by  a  eonndanh 
tkm  of  the  mataSala  cif  which  the  A%haun  goventment  ia  composed* 
Init  a  veij  Utile  reflection  muit  convince  ns,  that  tfacae  ipecnUrtioBa 
are  never  likely  to  be  realtaed.  Hie  example  of  nei^bonrmg  dea- 
potimu^  and  the  notiona  abeady  imbibed  by  the  court  of  CanbuU 
predode  the  hope  of  our  ever  aeeing  a  Ku^  capable  of  fimning  the 
deoffki  and thare  ia  leaaon  to  fear  that  the  locietieB  into  wfaidi  the 
natioD  b  divided,  poneia  within  thanuelvea  aprincqpleof  repulnon 


Digitized  by  Google 


J  78 


ADVAJJTAGES  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT. 


and  disunion,  too  strong  to  be  overcome,  except  by  such  a  force  as» 
while  it  united  the  whde  into  one  solid  body»  would  crash  aod  oUi- 
tente  the  features  of  ereiy  one  of  the  parts*  * 


•  Tliere  arc  trn(  ( s  in  the  vilhiL'P  government  of  India,  of  the  existnioe  of  a  sjatem 
iwiwnHing  that  of  the  A^^auu  OolocMaoi;  the  remaiiM  of  it^  whidb  bsvc  MirviMd  • 


long  coniie  of  oppretsion,  ttill  dfiird  waant  Mfief  fitm  As  ^lovdnt  of  die-goTaD« 
SMttt,  and  »»pflfy  die  solution  of  a  difficulty,  whidi  muit  be  cqpcrienced  by  dl  tl^ 

VellcTS  in  the  centre  of  India,  re<poctinp        flnnrishiiig  elite  tt  |Mlti  t£  tlw 
from  which  all  gov«nuu£Qt  appears  to  be  witiuirawn. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


{  ITO  .) 

•» 

CHAP.  m. 

JCABUAOSS.  — CONDITION  OP  WOMXN.^FUNUULSy  && 

THE  Aig^iwmii  pprdune  ihgfcr  wiyet.  lliepnctioe  10  xeeogDlsed 
'by  the  Mahometan  linr,  and  ia  followed  ih  moat  parts  of  Aaia^ 
even  among  nafeiona  IBoe  tihe  CSunew^  wfaeielihe  Maaaufananteii^on 
-ia  unknown.  The  price  variea  among  the  A^haimg,  accowKng  i» 
the  qrcumalMMiea  of  the  hrideggoomir  The  eAcC  of  thepracttoe  ia, 
ibat  .womeOf  tboa|^  genernQj  well  treated,  are  in  some  meaanie 
ooaisidered  as  prapeity;  A  husband  vm  divorce  his  wife  wHhont 
.  niinigning  anj  leaMXDi  but  the  wife  cannot  divorce  her  huisband ;  -  ahe 
may  sue  for  a  divorce  on  good  grounds  before  the  Cauzj,  but  even 
thia  ia  little  practised.  If  the  husband  dies  befiMre  his  "wi^  his  rehp- 
tions  receive  the  price  that  is  paid  fiir  her,  in  case  of  a  second  mar- 
riage; but  among  the  A%hauns,  as  among  the  Jews,  it  is  thought  in- 
'combent  on  the  brother  of  the  deceased  to  marry  his  widow,  and  it  is 
a  mortal  affiront  to  the  brother,  for  any  other  person  to  marry  her 
without  his  consent.  The  widow,  however,  is  not  compelled  to  take 
,  a  husband  against  her  will,  and  if  she  have  children,  it  18  thoog^ 
most  becoming  to  l  emain  sinrrle. 

The  common  age  i'or  marriage  throughout  the  Afirhaiin  conntry 
is  tweJiLy  for  the  man,  and  fifteen  or  sixteen  for  the  woman.  Men 
vmable  to  pay  the  price  of  a  wife,  are  otien  mimarried  till  forty,  and 
women  are  sometimes  single  till  twenty-five.  On  the  other  liand, 
the  rich  soinetimes  marry  before  the  age  of  puberty  ;  people  in  towns 
also  marry  earlv,  and  the  eastern  Afghauns  marry  boys  of  fifteen  to 
.  giik  of  tweh  o,  and  even  ertrlier  when  they  can  afford  the  expense. 
The  western  Aigiiauua  iieicloin  marry  till  tiie  maii  lia^  attaiued  his 

A  A  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


180 


MARAIAOEa 


611  ■trengtfay  and  till  hii  beard  is  grown  $  and  the  Ghi^ea  bare  stifi 
later  maini^;eB.  In  all  parts  of  the  oountiy,  the  age  at  which  eveiy 
individual  marriiefly  is  rcigulated  by  his  ability  to  puidiaae  a  wile^  and 
to  maintain  a  fimily.  In  general,  men  marry  among  their  own  triboi 
but  the  Ai^iauna  olten  take  Taujik,  and  enrea  Fenian  wives.  Tliese 
matches  are  not  at  all  discre^table»  hvA  it  is  reckoned  a  mark  of  in- 
feriority to  give  a  daughter  in  mamagei  and,  consequently,  the  men' 
of  rankt  and  the' whole  of  the  ]>ooraunees»  refuse  ihek  daugjhters  to 
men  of  any  odusr  nation* 

In  towns,  mm  have  no  opportunities  of  seeing  the  women,  and 
matches  are  generally  made  from  connderations  of  expediency. 
When  a  man  has  thoi^^  of  a  particular  ^r1,  he  sends  a  female  rela- 
iion^  dt  neighbour,  to  see  her,  and  report  on  her :  if  he  is  pleased,  the 
same  lady  sounds  the  girl's  mother,  and  discovers  whether  her  fiunily 
are  dispose<3  to  consent  to  the  rnatch  :  and  if  the  result  be  &vourablei| 
she  msk^  an  ofi't  r  in  plain  terms,  nrtd  settles  n  ilav  for  a  public  pro- 
posal. On  the  appointetl  day,  tlie  tkther  of  tlie  suitor  goes,  with  a 
party  of  his  male  relations,  to  the  girl's  father :  while  a  similar  depu- 
tation of  women  waits  on  her  mother,  and  inalces  the  ofter  in  torm. 
The  suitor  si  uds  u  ring,  a  slias\  1,  or  some  such  present  to  his  mis- 
tresii,  and  his  lather  begs  the  girl's  faliK  r  to  accept  his  son  ior  his 
servant;  the  girl's  father  answers  MolHiurik  baitxhud,  "  May  it  be 
auspicious  upon  this,  sweatmeats  arc  brought  in,  of  which  both 
parties  partake,  after  solenuily  repeating  the  Fauteheh,  or  opening 
verse  of  the  Korauii,  and  praying  ibr  a  blessing  on  the  couple:  the 
girl's  father  makes  some  trifling  present  to  the  lover,  and  trom  this 
jthne  the  partis  are  considered  aa  affianced.  A  considerable  time 
e^pses  befiim  the  mamage  is  edehmted.  It  is  employed  by  the  re- 
ktiona  of  the  bride  in  preparing  her  dowry,  which  generally  consists 
in  artidei  of  hoasehold  iisEiiitarek  eaipets^  plates,  brsBen  and  iron 
vessds,  and  personal  acnameota.  The  biidegroem  m  llie  mean  time^ 
is  collecting  the  price  of  his  wifek  whsdi  always  greatly  exceeds  her 
dower,  and  in  preparing  a  honaae^  and  whatever  -eilae  Je-niiBeauai'j  Ar 
actth^  up  a  .Aanily.   Wben  the^bridegmim  Sn-pa^f/.tbeBeprepaca- 

♦ 

i:  A 


Digitizeo  by  LiOOglc; 


lURBUGE  CUSTOM&  181 

tioM  MmMiiilea' occupy  a  year  or  tw9i  hat  whea  he  19  iicli«  tibf 
period  if  not  abo^e  two  or  three  numtha.  The  eeremonle^  of  the 
marriage «se  w  ezacdj  the  same  with  those  of  the  Persians,*  that  a 
a  ahoft  teoouift  of  them  here  wfll  suffice. 

The  marriage  contract  is  drawn  up  by  the  Ganay*  and  ^nmally 
igreed  to  hy  the  woman  as  weO  as  by  the  man,  (the  consent  of  teta^ 
tionsbemgof  noavail).  The  articles  simulate  fiv  a  pnmsion  for  the 
wife^  in  ctoe  of  a  divorce  or  of  her  husband's  death ;  and  are  s^ed  by 
'both  parties,  as  well  as  by  the  Cauay  and  competent  witnesses.  Soon 
aftor  this,  the  bride  andhridiegroom  dye  their  hands  and  feet  with  por- 
tionsof  the  same  henna,  (a  (htant  used  for  this  species  of  ornament  by 
women  and  young  men  in  Aiost  Asiatic  countries).  On  the  next  night, 
the  bride  goes  in  prcHsession  to  the  houseof  her  future  husband,  attended 
by  a  band  of  nuiue  and  singers,  by  the  relations  of  both,  and  by  parties 
of  the  neighbour,  wheeling  in  circles  on  horseback,  firing  their  match- 
locks, and  flourishing  their  swords.  When  the  bride  reaches  the 
house,  she  is  presented  to  her  husband,  and  the  whole  condudee  with 
a  wedding  fuy^per. 

A  marriage  is  conducted  in  the  same  matiner  in  the  country  j  but, 
as  the  women  there  to  unveiled,  and  there  is  less  restrairtt  in  the  in- 
tercourse i)olwe«n  the  sexes,  the  match  generally  ori^inati's  in  the 
^tachmeiU  of  (be  parties,  and  all  the  previous  negoci;! lions  ;in-  saved. 
It  is  even  in  the  power  of  an  enteq)riziiig  lo\  t  1  to  obtani  his  mistress 
without  the  consent  of  her  parents,  by  seizing  an  opportunity  of  cutting 
off  a  lock  of  her  haii,  snatching  away  her  veil,  or  throwing  a  sheet 
over  her,  aiul  proclainiing  her  his  affianced  wife.  These  proceedings, 
which  are  supposed  to  be  done  with  the  girl's  comiivaiice,  would  pre- 
vent any  other  suitor  proposing  to  her,  and  would  incline  the  parents 
to  bestow  her  on  the  declaared  lover ;  but;  as  they  would  not  exempt 
him  from  the  necessity  of  paying  some  price,  and,  as  they  mi^  be 
taken  up  aa  an  affiont  by  the  relations,  they  are  not  often  resorted  to  i 


•  gee  FwaMiBfti  Ten  to  Blwicgw 


Digitized  by  Google 


1S2 


MARRIAGE  CU8T0lf& 


ted»  when  the  oonMt  of  the  paienti  cuaiot  be  obtained,  die  most 
oommon  eiqiedient  is  to  elope  with  the  girL  This  is  bonsideied  ss  sa 
outrage  to  a  &siilj9  eqnal  to  miiideringoiie  of  its  membeny  laid  is 
pursued  with  the  same  fanoour,  but  the  possession  of  the  gitl  is  se» 
cured,  the  ftigitiTes  take  refuge  in  the  lands  of  some  other  tribes 
and  are  slue  of  the  protection  which  the  A^^uum  customs  s£^Mrd  to 
.  every  guest,  and  still  more  to  every  suppliant. 

Among  the  Eusofip^,  no  man  sees  his  wife  till  the  marriage  oeio* 
monies  are  completed ;  and  with  all  the  Burdooraunees,  there  is  great 
reserve  between  the  time  when  the  parties  are  betrothed  and  the  ma^ 
riage.  Some  of  them  live  with  their  future  father-in-law,  and  earn 
their  bride  by  their  services,  as  Jacob  did  Rac  hel,  without  ^ver  seeing 
the  object  of  their  wishes.  But,  all  the  rest  of  the  A%hauns,  the 
Eimauks,  the  Hazaurehs,  the  inhabitants  of  Persian  Khorassaun,  and 
even  the  Taujiks,  and  many  of  the  Hindoos  in  those  countries,  have  a 
far  different  practice,  and  permit  a  secret  intercourse  between  the 
bride  and  bridegroom,  which  is  called  naumzud  bauzce,  or  the  sports  of 
the  betrothecL  With  them,  as  soon  as  the  parties  are  affianced,  the 
lover  steals  by  night  to  the  lioiisc  of  his  mistress.  The  mother,  or 
some  other  of  the  feniali-  r(  lations,  favours  his  design  ;  but  it  is  sup- 
posed to  be  entirely  coucealeii  {i^om  the  men,  who  would  affect  to 
consider  it  as  a  great  affront.  He  is  admitted  by  the  niother> 
and  conducted  to  his  mistress's  apartment,  where  the  lovers  are 
left  alone  till  the  a})]  M oach  of  morning.  The  freest  intercourse,  the 
most  imreserved  conversation,  and  even  kisses,  and  all  other  innocent 
freedoms,  are  allowed  ;  but,  the  l;ust  liu  our  is  always  to  be  withheld, 
and  tlie  strongest  cautions  and  prohibitions  are  used  by  Uie  mother  to 
both  partis  separately.  Nature,  however,  is  generally  too  strong  ftir 
hyonctiohs,  and  the  marriage  begins  with  all  the  diMciuhy  and  inteiAt 
tsf  aa  micit  amour.-  There  have  e?en  been  esses  where  the  bride'has 
brou^t  her  husband  two  or  three  children  when  she  was  ibtmally  re* 
ceived  as  his  wifej  but,  this  is  very  scandalous,  and  sddbm  hippens. 
The  custom  prevails  eren  among  men  of  rank ;  and  the  King^  himself 


Digitizeo  by  Google 


CONDITION  CM?  THE  WOMEN. 


sometimes  exposes  his  perscm  alone  in  the  midnight  advie^ures  of 
naumzud  ban  zee. 

Polygamy  is  known  to  be  allowed  by  tin  MuhdiniiuMl  lu  law  i  but» 
the  bulk  of  the  people,  cantioL  afford  to  avail  Lheniselves  of"  the  per- 
mission. Tlie  rich,  indeed,  exceed  ihe  legal  number  of  four  wives, 
and  keep  crowds  of  female  slaves  besides.  But  the  poor  content 
themselves  with  one  wife;  and  two  wivjes^  with  as  many  concubines, 
ifi  nxkfrnH  iililrmil  ffrtiMiAitiflnfi  firrthiT  mMiftn  Tlmwii.  ' 
.  The:opiKUfcio^    Uie  wopien  Ttriei  with  tbdr  iank. ;  Tlioae  of  iJm 

-  upper  elmm  we  efitiiely  copccdted ;  but  iiiedUoirodaUdieoda^nMa 
•nd  luziiries,  wlacli.tlieir  sitiMitioii  Mbnits  o£:  Thomt  of  die  poor,'  do 

.die  KOik  of  the  hoiuey  and  bring  in,  witery  &o.  Among  the  rudeii 
tribeiy  they  bsirct  4i.ah«ie.ui.t]ie  work  of  the  men  out  of  doocs:;:but» 
m  .no  part  of  tlie  conntryiaie  they  .en^Ioyiid  ai  in  Indi%  where 
ba^f.tl^.  luted  labouiera  in  biu]din|^.&&  ace  wpmeoj  and  where  tibiere 
i«r.0carei9  ^'difibtcnoe-  between  the.  work  done  by  ihe  two  aeiaea. 
Thie.jMrfHMnmedan  law  aUowa  the  husband  to  beat  his  wife ;  but  it  ia 
reckoned  discreditable  for  a  man  to  avail  himself  of  this  privily.'  . 

The  ladies  of  the  upper  classes  frequently  leam  to  read,  and  aonae 
of  them  .  shew,  .oonaidierable  talents  for  literature.  At  the  same  time, 
it  is  thou^t  immodest  in  a  woman  to  write,  as  she  might  avail  herself 
of  her  talent,  to  correspond  with  a  lover.  I  have  known  several'  fa- 
milies, which  were  principally  guided  by  women  of  more  than  ordi- 
nary talents ;  and,  in  tliose  cases,  they  never  hesitated  to  correspond 
on  any  business  that  concerned  their  sons.  These  are  chiefly'  the 
mothers  of  families,  hut  the  wives  also  otteii  gam  a  great  ascendant; 
and  all  the  advantages  given  by  the  Malidninietlan  law  are  not  always 
sutHcicnt  to  prevent  the  husband's  sinking  into  a  secondary  place  in 
his  own  house.  Women  of  the  lower  orders  have  ail  the  domestic 
amusements  of  their  husbands  ;  und  none,  that  I  know  of,  peculiar  to 
themselves.  Those  in.  towns,  are  always  wrapped  up  in  a  large  white 
dbeet,  which  covers  them  to  their  feet,  and  completely  hides  their 
figure.  They  are  oiabkd  to  see  by  means  .of  a  net-work  in  thawhite 
hood,  .whkdi.  (oovoi.  tfaeb  bead.  .  Wonueii  of.  ioonditiufi  alM>  wear  tbia 


184 


UQVB. 


dreMf  when  they  come  out  ;  and,  as  tiiey  arc  then  gt^nerally  on  hors^ 
back,  they  weai  a  pair  of  large  white  cottttn  Ixjots,  which  hide  the, 
shape  of  their  legs.  They  also  travel  in  c  a  |a\\  as  (or  hampers,  one 
on  each  side  of  a  camel),  which  are  lon^'  ( nou^'li  to  allow  a  womwi  io 
lie  nearlv  at  length  ;  but,  as  they  arc  coveictl  \Mth  a  case  of  broad- 
cloth, they  must  be  suffocating  in  hot  weailu  r.  The  women  are  al- 
lowed to  go  about  the  town  \  t  iled  in  tlie  manner  I  have  described, 
and  they  form  a  considerable  p:irt  of  all  the  crowds  that  gatlu  r  to  see 
spectacles.  Thev  also  make  parties  to  gardens ;  and,  though  more 
scrupulously  concealed,  are  not  much  more  confined  than  women  in 
India.  On  the  whole,  their  conditiua  is  veij^  Iki  troni  Ik  ing  un happy, 
compared  w  uh  that  ol  the  women  of  the  neighbouring  countries. 

In  the  country  they  go  unveiled,  and  are  under  no  other  restraint 
among  people  of  their  own  camp  or  village,  than  what  is  imposed 
by  the  general  opinion,  that  it  is  indecent  to  associate  with  the  men* 
But  ihey  innmeduitdy  eover  didr  fimiB,  if  tiiey  lee  •'insn  wA  whom 
ihey  ore  not  intimatei  mnd  iddom  oome  into  the  pnbKcapaitnientQf 
tfadrlMUMif  if  Ifaflro  b  a  stranger  thwe.  Thief  do  nott  ham&m, 
itsnd  on  ihia  emmooj  with  Aimomatta»  Pendapw,or  Hindoos^  ^trlioni 
iSbof  conttt  tat  nothing.  Thejr  receive  gueata  wbon-  their  husband 
era  fiom  home^  and  tmt  them  with  dl  the  attentioii  theft  Is  veqiiiied 
by  hospitality  %  but,  Ae  c^iaati^  €>f  the  ooontiy  women,,  and- padkv- 
Iffdy  of  ihoie  of  the  shepherdst  if  a  theme  pf  piaiie  to  aU-peoplfr«o- 
qtu^nftedwith  their  nunnen.  Thei^  are  no  cooinion  proaCittitai 
flompt  in  the  towns,  and  Teiy  tew  even  there*  pntioalailjr  In  the 
weet  It  is  reckoned  very  disreputable  to  fiequent*  them ;  . but,,  their 
knowledge  of  the  world,  die  polish  of  theur  mannenii  and  the  arts  they 
use  to  attract  admiration,  afibrd  so  much  interest  and  vari^,  thai  all 
the  ktkude  allowed  in  wives  and  concubines,  is  insuffidceA-to  |Mrei>«i 
ndinicn  from  seeking  their  socieQr. 

Ism  not  sure  that  then  is  iBijpeopke  in  the  East,  ausept  the 
^baims,  where  I  hm  seen  my  trace  of  the  sentiment  of  love,  according 
to  our  ideas  of  the  passion.    Here  it  is  very  prevalent.    Besides  the 
mmerous  eluftements,  the  daageis  of  which  are  encouatewd  far  kyf% 


Uigitizeo  by  Google 


AFOHAUM  LOV£  TALE.  ' 

it  k  oommoil  ibr  »  mmiso  plight  his  ftitb  to  »  pafticalar  girl,  and.  then 
'  Mtofftoaxemototofrnj  or  evento'Indk^tbiaoqa^ 

necMtary  to  obtiim  her  fiom  herfrienda.  I  aaw  a  young  man  ab  Pooii% 
yho  waa  in  tfaia  prediciMneDt,  HehsdiaiUeamloire  inthtliedadg^itep 
«f  a  MnUik,  who  returned  Ids  attadunent  The  fiitfa«r  ooiiseiited;;!^ 
l^mm»g(di  Imtaaidhia'dan^ilev^ahoiioiirnqpired  that  the  ah<^ 
bring  at  haegft  a  fintune  as  tlie  o&er  women  of  her  fiunily.  The^two 
loveiB  w«e'  niudi  afflioted*  aa  the  young  man  bad  nothing  but  vome 
land  and  a  few  bullocks.  Atlaatt  he  leaolvedto  aetoffto  India.  Hbr 
.  mistress  gave  him  a  needle  used  for  puttfaig  intimony  on  the  eyelida, 
IB  a  pledge  of  her  affection  ;  and,  he  seemed  to  hsveilo  d(yubt  that  she' 
would  remain  single  till  his  return.  Theae.amoui^  are  generally  con- 
fined to  die  countiy  people,  where  great  ease  and  leisure  8ie>&vourable 
to  audi  sentiments,  particularly  when  combined  with  the  partial  seclo^-' 
aion  of  the  women,  (which  lendem  them  sufficiently  inaccessible  to 
excite  interest,  while  th^  are  seen  enough  to  be  admired).  lUey  a^ 
sometimes  found  even  among  the  higher  orders,  where  they  are  leaa 
to  be  expected.  It  was  a  love  afiair  between  the  chief  of  the  Turco- 
launees  and  the  wife  of  the  Kliaun  of  a  division  of  the  Eusofzyes,  that 
gave  rise  to  the  war  between  the  Ooloosscs,  which  lasts  to  this  day. 

Many  of  tlie  iVlghaun  songs  and  tales  relate  to  love,  and  mof?t  of 
them  speak  of  that  passion  in  the  most  glowing  and  romantic  lan- 
f^iia^iiC.  A  favourite  poem,  which  tells  the  storv  of  Audani  and 
Dodtkhaunoe,  is  known  to  most  men  in  ihe  nation,  and  is  read,  re- 
peated, and  sung,  through  all  parts  of  the  country  *.  Audam  was  the 
handsomest  and  bravest  young  man  of  his  tribe,  and  Doorkhaunee 
the  most  bt  autiiul  Mid  uiosL  amiable  of  the  virgins  ;  butafeud  between 
then  lanulies  long  prevented  their  meeting.  At  last  an  accidental 
rencounter  took  place,  which  ended  in  a  mutual  and  vi<^^t  passion.' 
The  quarrela  of  the  &milies,  however,  still  kept  the  kveCB  separate, 


•  r  once  jx>ss«>8«l  a  copy  of  this  poem,  of  wliicli  T  should  hjivc  been  glad  to  have 
translated  aome  extracts ;  bot  I  h$w  unoe  lost  it»  and  the  abstract  X  have  given»  was 
wpertrf  to  »#  fa  miiwlm  by  la  Al^haaa'qf  Dteariwnd. 

•  B 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 


igg  AFGHAUN  tOVE  TAUL 

fad  ynAaf  in  .igikmioe  of  eiidil.  a<ih^*s>  aenUmcBts, '  till  Door1[r^ 
*'liwmee,Wffl.«(MnpeHed  bj  her  relations  to  marry  a  neighboiiii]ig'dbii£ 
Xbe  gffif^ww  of  her  lover  may  be  imagined,  and  his  lament«tioni> 
fnd  tbtfi  letters  that  famed  between  him  and  Doorkhaunee,  fill  a 
laige^pKt  of  the  poem  ;  till  at  last,  after  overoommg  nnmberleBs  ob- 
titnciVfij  Audam  succeeded  in  prevailing  on  hi*  mittrefls  to'aee  hmu 
Xb^y  Idid  ^veral  meetings,  but  Doorkhaunee  still  preserved  her 
purity,  and^jccgected  alike  the.impODrtunitiea  of  her  lover  and  her 
h^sbaod. 

.  Audam's  visits  did  not  long  escape  the  husband,  who  was  til  lid 
with  jealousy  and  desire  of  vengeance.  He  took  the  opportuimy  of 
his  rival's  next  visit  to  way-lay  him,  at  the  head  of  several  of  his  own 
relations:  and  thoui?h  liis  attack  was  bravely  repelled,  and  his  o^^po- 
nent  escaped  with  a  desperate  wound,  he  resolved  to  try  it  Autlani's  . 
suit  was  favoured,  by.observiug  Uie  effect  of  a  report  of  Ills' death  on 
I^porkliaunee.  ' 

Duurkhaunee'is  only  pleasure,  during  the  long  inten  als  of  her 
lover's  visits,  was  to  retire  to  a  garden,  ami  10  cultivate  t\so  liowers, 
one, of  wllid^  she  named  atier  herself,  and  Llie  other  aller  the  object  , 
of  her  affection.  On  the  day  of  the  ambuscade,  she  was  watching 
bar.  flowers,  M^hen  abe  obaerved  that  of  Audam  hmguidi 'lfipoai-d|jnii- 
pHlby  .witb-hia  leoent  nuaittttanfi;  and  befive  afae  feooveaeft  fioni'iier 
fiii|ma«»  jdie  1^  aocoated  by  her  hiiaband^  who  approadied  her  with 
adrarwn  aiifolyiU.and  bqaated  (hat  it  waa  wet  with  the'  bk>od  of  Andmu 
Diia  tnal  wjaa'fatal  to  Doorkhaiineej  whd  sunk  to  the  ground*  oviv- 
whdkned  with  ginef  and  horrolir»  and  expired  on  tbe's^ioti  Tbe  inemB 
waa-brooght'  tp  Aiuhuik,  who  woimdad  near' the  iacene  o^  the  wm^ 
bmeade,  avd  no.  >ooner  Jiad  he  heard  %  than  he^allisd  on  hia  nds- 
tieaa'a  name,  a,nd  breathed  his  Jaat  They  were  buried  att  a  diatance 
firom  eacli  other;  but  th^h>ve  prevailed  even  in  dftatli,  andthnr 
bodies  were  Ibund  to  have  met  in  one  grave.  Two  trees  spfun|(  from 
their  remains,  and  mingled  their  branches  over  the  tomb. 

M(Xit  people  will  be  struck  with  the  resembhuice  of  this  story,  and 
{Nuticidarly  of  the  ooDduaion»  to  many  Ei^rapeaa-  tales.  It  ia,  indeed* 


Digrtized  by  Google 


renurkahl^  how  many  stories  are  comnioii  to  Emope  and  Asia,  and 
that*  not  only -in  works  of  imagiiMtioiiy  but  in  &cts  attributed  to  leal 
personage  and  reoocded  in  history*  One  exMnple  msjr  snflfice  out 
of  many  which  mig^  be  brought  forward.  The  stratagem  of  tnmmg 
loose  oxen,  with  toidies  on  th»r  borm^  by  lAich  Hamiibal  is  said  to 
have  eacaped  iiom  Fabius,  is  attrilyitfed  by  the  A^^unms,  with  all  its 
particulars,  to  one  of  their  own  chiefs ;  and  ihit  scene  of  it  is  fixed  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Heraut  In  the  same  manner,  a  vast  number 
of  our  jests  are  told  In  Asia,  and  half  of  Joe  Miller  might  be  disputed 
belwuen  <i  the  finetums  Tom  JOl^ew;*  and  **  s  eeitain  scholar,*'' of 
some  city  in  the  east.  -  ' 

The  foneiais  of  the  Afghaima  do  not  difier  from  those  of  the  otiiar 
Mahommedans ;  a  man  in  his  last  moments  k  attended  by  a  Moolla^ 
wAiA  admonishes  him  to  repent  of  his  sins;  the  sick  man  repeats  his 
creedf  and  appropriate  prayers,  and  expires  with  his  to  Mecca^ 
proclaiming  that  there  is  no  God  but  God,  and  that  Mahomet  is  his 
prophet  When  he  is  dead,  the  corpse  is  washed,  wrap^ied  up  in  a 
shroud,  and  huried,  after  the  usual  prayers  have  been  said  \>y  a  M00I+ 
lah,  and  joined  in  by  the  numerous  relations  and  neighbours,  who 
attend  the  funeral.  If  the  deceased  was  rich,  MooUahs  ore  empioyad 
to  re;ad  the  Koraun  for  some  days  over  his  grave.  •    •  ■ 

The  ceremonv  of  circuniciiiion  is  the  same  in  all  Mahommedan  . 
countries.    It  is  attended  with  a  feast  and  great  rgoicing. 


B  ■  8 


Digitizeo  by  LiOOglc 


(   188  ) 


CHAP.  XV. 

EDUCATION,  LANGUAGE,  AND  LITERATURE  OF  THE  AFGUAUNS. 

A  LL  the  Afghauos  are  sent  in  ti^ir  infimc^  lo  •  Moolkklbc 
education.  Some  leam  no  more  than  their  regular  Namau2> 
and  oilier  occasional  prajert  and  passages  of  the  Koraun,  with  the 
ceremonies  of  their  reli^on,  and  the  duties  of  a  Mussulman.  About 
Pcshawer,  and  among  the  Dooraunees,  the  next  step  is  to  learn  to 
read  the  Koraun  in  Arabic,  often  without  understanding  it ;  but  in 
other  tribes  tins  studv  is  reserved  for  a  more  atlvanced  stno^e.  This  is 
tlie  cdti  cation  of  the  lower  orders^  of  whom  not  a  quarter  can  lead 
their  own  language. 

The  rich  keep  MooHahs  in  their  boases  to  teach  their  children,  but 
allow  them  all  tlie  power  of  a  cormnon  st  hcjolmash  r.  The  Moollah 
who  had  ehar,(:^e  of  the  prime  minister'-,  son  {a  liov  of  sixteen  vviien  1 
saw  lumj,  told  mc  that  he  kept  him  to  his  booii.  lor  almost  the  whole 
daj. 

There  is  a  schoolmaster  in  every  village  aud  camp,  who  is  main- 
tained by  a  piece  of  land  allotted  to  him,  and  by  a  small  contribution 
which  he  receives  from  his  scholars.  His  office  is  sometimes  united 
wUh  diat  of  the  prieat  the  village ;  but  H  ia  oftener  distinct,  espe- 
cially in  lai^  places.  In  towns  there  are  legular  scliocdss  like  those 
in  European  countries,  where  the  master  is  maintained  bj  hii 
scfaolais  alone.  Die  sum  commonly  paid  to  a  sdwolmaster  m  VeAu^ 
wer,  is  about  fifteen  pence  armonth ;  but  the  paymenta  are  in  propoi^ 
tion  to  the  circumstances  of  the  boy's  fiitlier.  In  most  parts  of  die 
country*  the  boys  live  with  their  fiidiers,  and  only  attend  the  school 
dtaang  the  day ;  hut  among  the  Berdooraunees,  a  boy  is  sent  at  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


J 


'  EDUCATION. 


189 


rmyMy  ig»  diftiAt  nUige^  nh/ke  he-Uwrn  m-  the  wnqmi  tub* 
fliilB  fa^  tiuBf  ■m^iiM'Iittle.otiiio  iutereoone  with  hu  paraoti,  but  ii 

The  Allowing  is  the  course  of 'stiidf  pursued  abo^  Peahawdr:  a 
child  begins  its  letters  (in  cobformitjr  to  atraditMNud  injunction  of  the 
FNi|ib8t)iwheii  k  b  £oar  years,  four  months,  sid  fimr  days  old ;  but 
its  ttii3ies<aie  hninediately  laid  aside,  and  not  resumed  >tiU  it  is  six  or 
teven  ymn  oKI,  when  it  learns  its  letters,  and  is  taught  to  reiMi  a  little 
Fnsian  poem  of  Saadis,  which  points  out  the  beauty  of  eadi  of  the 
virtues,  and  the  cblbrmit  y  of  each  of  the  vices,  in  very  sunple,  and  not 
inelegant  language.  This  takes  from  four  months  to  a  year,  according 
to  the  child's  capacity.  After  this,  common  people  learn  the  Koraiin, 
and  stiulv  some  books  in  their  own  language;  people  of  decent  tor- 
tune  proceed  to  read  tjie  Persian  classics,  nml  a  little  of  the  Arabic 
grammar  :  boys  who  are  to  be  brought  up  as  Moollahs,  give  a  great 
deal  oi  ilirir  time  to  this  last  study,  which,  as  the  Arabic  ^luuiiuars 
are  very  t  laliouitr.  and  coinprchcnd  a  great  deal  of  science,  tliat  we 
do  not  imx  Willi  Uie  rudiincntj>  oi"  a  language,  sometimes  occupies 
several  years.  When  a  yoimg  Moollah  has  made  sufficient  proficiency 
in  this  study,  he  goes  to  Feshawer,  Hushtnu^;ur,  or  some  other  place 
hmam  S»  ift  flfiidlalifl^  and  bcgios  on  logic,  law,  and  theology.  No 
taBt(ha  teowlad^  ia  xequiied  to-oamplete  a  MpoUah's  cdueatioii,  but 
many  push  tbdr-  te9earchee  into  etfaids,  metaphysics,  and  die  ajBtem. 
of  physios  loioirn'  in  ihe  eaaty  aa  well  as  hiatofj,  poetry,  and  medieinc^ 
wbidtk  laat  is  a  fimhionable  study  for  men  of  all  prafessions.  For  those 
stnjBes,  and  far  the  more  advanced  brandies  of  dieology  and  law,  they 
often  trarel  to  distant  cities,  and  even  to  Bokfaauia,  which  is  agreat 
seat  of  Mahommedan  leaniing ;  but  Feshawer  seems,  on  ihe  whole, 
to  be  the  most  learned  dtj  in  these  countries^  and  nunj  more  stu- 
dents come  thither  fiom  Bokhaara*  than  repair  to  that  city  from 
Feshawer.  India  has  not  a  great  reputation  for  learning,  and  the 
heresy  of  the  Fernans  makes  all  Soonnees  avoid  the  infection  of  their 
ooD^ges. 


I 


190  PUSHTOO  ULNQUAGE. 

in^.aod,  comaeguently, bendet iht  Kiag^  eall^gea»>  tbeamii  ao'aite* 
bluimMDl  m  erexy  village  for  MiiiBtirinii^.ahidwiiafc'  lli^'ooiiwqiianM 
tty.tbafc'ibe  mmuIcj  is  om«im  ipith  ]iatf4»ig|it>M9o1]«hi»  iNio  lal&er 

iiiif»ede'dhin  pawBiateililte  progress  of  real  leamo^  * 

B^fete  aaying  moite  abovt  the  learning  of  the  A^haone,  it  wQl  be 
wdl  to  give  some  account  of  their  language,  whieht  *b  I  haveialfMd;^ 
mentioiied,  k  ddled  Pushtoo.  Its  origin  it  >  not  easily  disco  wefed> 
A  iaiBge  portion  of  the  word»  that  compose  it,  spring  from  .aoma 
unknown  *  root,  and  in  thia  portion  ere  included  moat  of  those  wndi 
which,  from  the  early  necessity  for  designating  the  objects  tbeyw 
presmit,  must  have  formed  parts  of  the  original  language  of  the  peo* 
plo ;  yet  some  of  this  very  class  belong  to  the  Zpnd  and  Pehle%*ec  j 
such  at»  the  terms  for  father  and  mother,  sister  and  brother.  This 
seems  also  to  be  tlie  c^ise  wiih  tiie  numerals;  thon^b  the  Zenti  and 
Pehlevee  numerals  bear  so  strong  a  resemblance  to  tiie  Shanscrit  ones, 
that  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  them.  Most  of  the  verbs,  and  manv 
of  the  particles  agani  Ijclong  to  the  unknown  root.  Tiie  words  can-' 
nected  with  religion,  go\  eruinent,  and  science,  are  mostly  introduced 
from  the  Arabic  through  the  Persian.  "     ■  ' 

•  -  Of  two  hundred  and  eighteen  hundred  words  which  I  compared  f 
mih  the  corresponding  ones  in  j^rsiaD,  Zend,  Fdilevee,  Shanscrit; 
Hiadoatanneey  Aiiibi<^  AzBMniaii,  Geoiigiaa,  Hebiew,  and  Quddaic^ 
I  fimBdone  hnndiedandten  that  ooold  not  be  nAnedtomj  of 


*Ithi»bbsU*BU7«r  dMMWoiAiuglilliBtBload  to  •laOnmrnM,  irdl%efl% 

nfted  by  an  Oriental  tidtahr.   I  bMtt  OfUnei,  la  llw  IMXt  wHlt^  ik^fufom  ihtf  Imw 

undergone  m  my  liands. 

f  The  comparibuu  wai»  made  iii  tlie  ibtiowing  manner : — 1  drew  up  a  Pushtoo  vocabu- 
knr,  which  I  believe 

one  compiled  by  Mr.  Irvine :  similar  vocabulnrie*  of  the  Zend  and  Pehlevee  languages 
ijTtfe  made  for  me  by  a  friend  to  vhoae  kimlnew  I  have  otion  bc-vn  indebted.  They  were 
'  liilEm  from  two  learned  Pluraeea,  and  oompared  with  Auqueiil  du  Perron's  lists.  The 
imw  frbnd  pfocufed  the  Georgian,  Armenian,  Hebrew,  mi  Gbaldee  vocabolanet.  Iff 
own  MqDMntanoe  with  Paraian  and  Hindortanee  wis  cnfidoit,  widi  th«  ha^  of  AdioQ- 


Digitized  by  Google 


f  a 

HUM' hngau^  M  turn  oil  id^Aiotiad  wigmaL  *  OtHbm  nfiMnier, 
lijr<liff  the  gnater  p8E|;!«cfeiiBbdem  Ftiiriiiii  [  biit>floine«f  thMe  fMM 
faitwdiidrf  intdtlietlMr  luguage  &om-tlifi''Z  and  manj  mora 
fianr^-lJMt  'Pciilflvee).  wliaer'tf  ymd  .Tiarnhtr  viere  wovdi  of  tlftMd  ln> 
gnagHi-iMie  euafiaytA  m  inbdMirBBftiaii*'  'Spnie  of  lliei^'Znidiiid 
Md^fae-woidi  flftt^  homrrer,  comMtkm  to  iibt  SImment,  dw'.tlme 
ImguflgiB  httriiig  a  great  affinity ;  ami  aome  ivorda  abo  oooir,  whkli 
«e  W  befbnbndm  ShnamtdoDfl^  iaa  do  fire 'or  ah  woida  of  tba 
BinloBftaiitaee  laiigittga^>  it  ia  inobabfe  aome  FtanjatdMe'imida  vf^^ 
aiao  be  detected  if  Ifas  lkt  were  oompared  with  a  VocabuKu^'Of  tlMt 
ku^^nage.  Not  one  word  of  the  two  hundred  nnd  eig^rteoD  has  the 
amalleat  appearance  of  beiiig  deducible  horn  the  Uebieir  or  CbaMnc, 
€reorgia»  or  Amouan.  • 

The  Afghauns  use  the  Persian  alpbabefc*  and  generally  write  ia  the 
Nuahk  diaraeter.  •  As  thej  have  aome  adundi)  which  are'  not  repre«> 
•aoted  by  any  Persian  letters,  they  express  them  by  adding  paiticulaor 
poipti  or  other  Boai^  to  the  neareat  Pegaian  tetter>* 

■   ■  f       ■  I  ■  ■       i  ,  ..   — 

friios  for  the  purpose  t  had  m  view ;  and  Ibr  the  Shanscrit^  aidk  word  was  compared 
with  all  th<7  ntimer^us  srnoitytns  in  the  Amerdosh,  which  www  AMd>to  aie  bjr  »  Ppndilik 
I  Ivtve  i^yen  part  of  my  vocahnhuy,^  tt^  4ppeBiUx  (i:^^  ■  . 

*   SBnee  I  wiote  the  above,  I  bsve  had  an  opirartunity  of  examfaifaig  •  liat  of  about  one 

hundrctl  Cunllsh  wortli,  and  T  find  anioii^  tlicni  five  ofthf  luindred  ant]  t:  n  nhich  I  huve 
mentioned  tt«  orii^'in  J  'Htghaon  words,  besides  several  common  to  tlie  Curdish  and  Persian 
both  lan^  uagi  .   I  n  gi  et  that  I  have  not  an  opportmuty  of  following  up  the  {nrdstigatioa. 

•  ♦  These  sounds  are  the  hard  JJ,  1\  and  Bj  and  tlte  Csh  ul  tlui  bhaxMcrit.  The 
Vanvile  kttani  in  P^iahtqo  '•eem  to.  ber  thp  Qkm  (the  MWid  of  wlMi  cannot  bo 

exprt">se<l  in  Kngllsli  characters,  but  which  has  a  resoni!  '  inn  to  the  North  inn berland 
Beer\  and  IQuy^  which  has  the  power  of  2  in  azure,  or  ^  in  ocier.  Such  is  the  fond- 
n<»3  of  the  A^faatms  finr  dwae  letters,  Ast  they  often  chai^  die  of  words  adopted 
from  the  Persian  into  Chains,  and  the  Zt  (and  evoj  the  M*)  into  SSIfc  Uli^  alsO 
olUii  change  F  into  /',  D  into  T,  and  even  D  into  L;  and  they  frequently  turn  O 
into  J^M,  as  lloz  (day)  liwuz.  The  eastern  A^hauns  again  have  some  pennutatioos 
pecnlinr  to  Aenudves,  *dntt  they  change  Zk  uito  Gt  and  51  into  Kk*  lliese  dun^gcn 
sometimes  disguise  a  word  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  render  it  a  matter  of  difficulty  to 
£soover  its  e^ymologjr.  Nobody  woold  tusfect  that  Okm^  the  eastern  A%h8tiDee  for 


Digitized  by  Google 


192 


▲FGHAUK  AUTHORS. 


The  lftiilifeO(H  tlumg^  mtlwr  rovgh,  is  a  manly  langnagc,  and  not 
miplraring  to  an  ear  accufltomed  to  oriental  taognes.  The  dialects  of 
the  East  and  West,  differ  not  only  in  the  pfdnunctation,  but  in  the 
words  they  make  use  of,  to  a  de^ppee  at  least  equal  to  the  difierence 
between  Soots  and  Eng^h.  None  of  the  famous  Puahtoo  authors 
are  of  more  than  a  century  and  half  old  ;  and,  I  should  imagine,  that 
there  were  no  books  in  the  language  that  can  pretend  to  more  than 
doable  that  antiquity.  What  literature  there  is,  has  been  derived 
from  that  of  the  Persians ;  and  their  compositions  would  resemble 
that  model,  but  for  their  greater  rudeness  and  superior  simplicity. 
I  have  the  names  of  ei^it  or  nine  A%haun  poets,,  besides  tranaUtors 
£rom  the  Persian. 

Tlie  most  popular  of  all  the  poets  is  Rehmaun,  wliose  works  ttinsist 
of  ocies,  exartlv  like  th(>s(»  of  the  Persians.  T  can  perceive  no  merit 
in  those  of  his  poeinK,  wluch  T  have  had  explained  to  me;  but  this  is 
no  proof  that  he  is  uiiworthv  of  his  reputation.  Alost  Persian  odes 
arc  very  unequal ;  and,  even  in  ilariz,  the  beautiftd  ainl  -.Lihlinie  pas- 
sages, which  excite  so  much,  admiration,  are  almost  lost  In  a  mass  of 
verses  that  are  lur  below  mediocrity. 

Klioosliliaul  appears  to  me  a  far  superior  poet  to  Reliinaun,  and 
his  productions  are  highly  characteristic  of  himself  and  his  nation. 
They  are  more  than  ordinarily  mde,  and  are  often  intolerably  flat  and 
pfosaic ;  but  they  are  often  uupired  with  the  unconquerable  ^irk  of 
their  author  j  and  glow  with  the  noUeat  scnthnenta  of  liberty  and  in- 
dependence; Khooahhaul'waa  Khaun  of  the  Khnttuhs,  a  trib^  utn- 
ated  to  the  east  of  Peshawer.  Hia  life  was  sgiaH  in  struggleB  against 
the  great  MogoL  AumngBeber  and  many  of  his  poemB»  are  intended 
to  animate  his  countrymen  to  the  defence  of  their  ind^endoiGe^  and 


an  ear,  could  be  derived  from  the  Persian  Gosh,  fr  <  m  .vlncli  however  it  is  clearly  deducible 
tj^  the  foregoing  rules.  The  Puahtoo  is  distinguished  from  Persian  ond  Hindostmee  by 
ItsftnchieMlbr  <iie  letter  8,  preceded  or  Mmrad  fay  a  oonsonant  at  the  begimiijig  of  a 
iryiA ;  n  irmMnntiTm  rnilmi"^  iHir  irthfr  tTwIii^igrii  Of  dusnatnit^*  iufwjpv,  aa 
cy^  and  4p(ai^  wbUe^  ai  «dl  as  jwAar,  a  iwlt  md  ift^^ 


Digitizeo  by  LiOOglc 


to  fenMdiB  them  tor  ootiboid  and  ttiaASsuAm^  M  the  'oafy-ttan  of 
nicoen.  Hb  wwkB  contain  •  foil  aoeount  of^liiiiiMl^  «m1  liii  |iio« 
oeedingiB.   One  poem  begini  thus: 

"  Com*,  and  listen  to  niy  story, 
In  whirl)  hotli  ir<KHl  and  evil  are  displayed. 
It  contaiiiii  boUi  precept  and  example^ 
Agreedbfe  to  the  understanding  of  Ae  viWi 
I  am  WMMiAlif^ilj  Aegon  ^tAmtJhMMkm  » 

Descended  from  a  race  of  warriors. 
Shaubauz  was  the  son  of  NVhcin  Khaim, 
Like  whom  there  never  wafi  another  youths 
Ydieia  Kbaon,  of  Aoont» 
Wlio  was  a  Sidtan  at  tJbe  sword. 

He  wa»  both  gallant  at  the  use  of  the  swofdf'  -  * 

And  a  master  of  archery  with  \m  bow. 

Any  enemy  that  agpeared  against  him 

800Q  frp'Mt  bit  plaoa  in  4ia  tMwiK 

He  had  both  dtt  awofd  and  dte  boaid} 

Bodk  coinage  and  courtesy. 


His  compnoions 

•  Wfliani^io^ipiritywlioqNirtedtrilliduirlimi 
And  m  nIT  fraBiaftiraM  ihrjr  wxrn  ninrrrw 

They  went  to  their  graves  dyed  wtth  blbol  ' 

Such  Iieroes  were  they  all. 
,        >         The  laiuily  bccftmc  numerous ; 

And  moat  of  them  tamed  out  worthy  men, 
Unilad  in  efayanderlaldDg. 

Honour  and  reputation  were  dear  to  them  atL 
It  was  in  the  year  of  the  Hcjra  lolif  , 
.  ■    ■   '   ■    That  i  came  ixito  tins  world."  '  •  * 

* 

-  tL%  then  goes  ion  to  teO,  hov  on  fan  &ther*»  deitth,  fae  booame  die 
great'Xhim  of  hit  tribe ;  faow  he  ruled  Sorer  $0^000  Khuttak%  and 
fiTod  in  gicater  aplendoor  than  any  of  hia  anceiton.  He  enimienteil 
IdtlioseeBf  faitfainrlEg»  and  hia  hoands}  andlioaati  of  theliieiwnidt 
thafc.had  partaken  of  his  hoipitality.  He  then  alludes  to  bis  niifittw 
tunes ;  and  bunts  into  invectiTes  against  the  Mognls,  isnd  into  bitter 


Digitized  by  Google 


Axam^w  POETRY. 


tepamdMBB  'iig^SM  iMie  DCrliw  ,  -aaiiB,  .who  had  been  aeduced  by  tbe 
pmpedt  of  dLVanceliiesit  to  join  jibe  cpeqilieB  of  their  oountiy.  • 

*•  I  am  thf  eiiomy  of  Aurunfr/elx",  tlu'  King; 

Hiuugb  iiiy  head  be  uti  the  luuuulAiiiii,  uad  in  tlie  wilderness. 

I  am  for  the  honoiir  af  the  A^wun  name ; 

And  they  have  taken  part  with  the  Blogula. 

They  always  prowl  about,  like  hungry  dogs. 

Alter  the  soui)  and  tlic  bread  of  the  Moguls, 

In  hopes  of  an  increuik.'  ot  their  rank. 

Hiey  an  alwaji  ia  ponitit  of  mei 

My  hand  could  reach  t)len^  even  now : 

Bntf  I  tviU  not  deatfoij  my  own  aoul." 

He  long  continued  hi^  exertions^  with  the  courage  and  palnotisni 
of  a  Wallace ;  sometimes  succeeding  in  destroying  royal  armies,  and 
sometimes  wandering  almost  alone  through  the  mountains.  He  at 
one  time  ftll  into  hands  of  Aurungzebe,  was  canned  to  India* 
and  was  confined  lor  three  years  in  a  dungeon  in  the  hiU*£»rt  of 
Givalior,  the  great  state  prison  of  tfaoae  dliya.  * 

During  this  imprisonment*  he  composed  an  degy ;  in  which,  after 
bm^ting  his  tmn  misfortunes  «nd  tiiose  of  his  country,  he  ooodudea 
with  this  spirited  dedaratibn. 

"  But,  in  all  these  misfortunes,  I  still  thank  God  for  two  things. 
One  tlmt  I  am  an  A%haun ;  and  the  other,  that  I  am  KhooeUiauI  Khuttn^** 

He  was  at  length  released,  I  ]mow  not  by  what  means,  and  oncer 
more  returned  to  his  native  country,  where  he  published  a  vast  num- 
ber of  y^oems,  and  a  history  of  the  A^hauns,  fiom  the  Babylonish 

captivity  to  his  own  time. 

The  following  poem  was  composed  at  a  time  when  Kliooshhaul 
and  his  few  confederates  had  gained  many  brilliant  victories,  but  had 
been  intoxicated  by  their  succ^s :  had  engaged  in  separate  attacks 
on  Uie  enemies  ibrces  i  and,  in  OMisequence  of  this  want  of  co-ope- 


*  SeeBcniier; 


Digitized  by  Google 


ntjoOf  bad  all  been  defeated  '  At  this  tiine;  Khdoiiihaul  set  out  for 
the  ooontry  of  tine  Enaoftyea*  and  kft  liothing  imattempted  to  stir  up 
that  poweifiil  tribe  to  join  ip  the.  w.. .  Vt^eisa  appears  Ijo  hm  been 
an  mclination  for  peace  eren  Maonghiaown^pj^Mig,  ifjiifj^  thit  pftfltn 
aeema  deaigned  to  ooanteiaiGt,  by  TemindtBg  them  of  their  Tiotorieat 
by  pointing  out  AunmgBcl>e*a  YindKctiTe'^<&a|iatitionj  aiidbia  h^tiH^ml 
perfidy,  and  by  oonvmcbig  them  that  ibel^  oiily^  resource  waa  m  war, 
and  their  only  aafety  in  union.  It  k  bat  justioe  te  KbooaliluHil,  to 
mention  ihat  it  ia  one  of  the. only- thiee  poem^  irhick iteie  lead  to 
me  with  little  or  no  acHection,  fiom  hia  ^erf  velnmime  wwka. 

J*oem  of  KkqothhauL  .  '\ 

**  Whence  has  this  spring  i^ipeared  again,  ^ 
Which  has  made  tlie  country  nl!  around  one  row  garden. 

anemone  is  thene,  the  sweet  kerbs,  the  iria,  and  the  basil, 
The  jasn>ine,  ,tbe«U8bdil,  ,the  i^rciwu»»  uad  pooMgranitte  flower. 
TIm  liiNMn  of  iIm  ipnBg  an  of  all  colowt} 
But  the  cheek  of  the  red  tulip  glows  most  aflun^  dMM  tiU  I 
The  niaidon"  havo  hflndfiih  of  ro  ,c  ;  in  thnr  Ixisoms. 
The  ^o^iths  hjive  bunciii^  oi  ik>weri>  in  lUeir  turbana* 
TW  awwidaa  qppliea  hia  bow  tohla  chcighaMneh, 
And  acMdna  out  tii*  nriediw  ot  rnmj  akdi^ 
Come,  O  cup  bearer,  bring  full,  full  cups  : 
Lai m.l^  atttttad^vith  pnfixym* .... 


*  T1wdescriptioBoftlwapHPKJ«ii»^aae«f  thaiMEq^Uk' 
times  open  with  a  prelude  of  theaaoM  Idnd^  ipifwipeotpd Mi^iMA  of  iht  poon. 
Hina  m  the  nmance  of  MarUu. 

**  Mirie^  it  is  in  time  of  Jiuu^ 

When  fenfliiaugcth  abroad  ia  town. 

.  ,  ,  \')olet,  and  roee  flower, 

V."  iir  til  then  in  maiden's  bowar.  ^ 
The  Sonne  in  hot,  the  day  is  lao|^ 
Foolia  mdtetii  nurie  Bong.   ■  . 

King  Arthour  bar  Coroun, 

In  CardaU%tjbat  ooblc  town."  &c. 

Elliot  ^pecimau.    VoL  L 

C  C  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


196  .iUTGUAUN  FOETRY. 

•  Tlie;Adyiiilll90lldlli«ve  nddened  theur  bandit 

As  a  falcon  dyes  its  ttdons  in  the  bloo<l  of  its  quarry. 
They  have  uuuk  their  wliite  swords  rosy  with  blood* 

*  As  a  bed     tulips  blooiuing  in  t»uuuiier. 

f.  Amafl  Khaun  and  Derry  a  Khaun  were  the  heroes. 

Eadi  emulous  of  the  other, 
r  They  Btauied  the  valley  of  Kheiber  with  blood ; 

And  potire<l  the  tumult  (of  war)  on  to  Currupa. 

*  Up  to  Currupa,  and  to  Bi^our,  the  mountains,  and  the  plains 
'  -  ^ncnibM,  at  wiA  an  cwtfiqiMke^  ^""^ 

I  .  It  is  now  five  years,  that  in  those  quarters, 

Every  day  hns  been  heard  the  clashing  of  bri^it  nPOldL 
Since  I  left  tliat  country,  I  am  annihilated. 
Am  I  diMul,  or  are  tlioie  around  me  dead  ? 
I  call  aloud  Ibr  tfoopa  till  I  am  weaiy: 
But  those  around  OM  We  denf  l>oth  to eompbintt  and  npraadkei^ 
Had  I  known  the  state  of  the  F^usofzyes,  • 
I  should  liave  pr<  ferniH  flying  to  Dumghaur. 
"    The  dugs  of  the  Kiiulluks  wottld  be  better  than  the  Eu&o&ycs, 
Etch  if  the  Kharttuka  thgnadw  were  no  better  than  dogs. 
Hie  whole  of  die  A%litini%  from  Candahirto  Attod^ 
Rely  opetdy  or  "secretly  on  each  other's  honour. 
Yet^  see-ho«-  many  battles  have  taken  place  in  all  quarters^ 
And  yet  the  Eusofzyes  have  shewn  no  sense  of  shame. 
The  first  battle  was  behfaid  the  hill^ 
^^crc  forty  thousand  Mogtds  woe  eot  to  pfeoMi 
TTieir  wives,  and  their  daughters,  were  the  prisoners  of  the  Aignauni> 
And  strings  on  !^trings  of  horses,  uuucls,  and  elephanta  were  takeQ. 
The  second  was  fought  by  Meer  H ossein,  in  the  Oooaub^ 
When  Uahc^waacnMhedUke  tfaakef  asMke. 
After  that,  was  the  fight  of  the  Fort  of  Nonshdira, 
"\^'}iirh  rriTim  etl  the  intoxication  from  the  head  of  the  Mognln 
Attcr  it,  came  Jeswunt  Sing,  and  Shoi^aut  Khaun, 
Whom  Amail  defeated  at  Gundaub. 

The  sDEdi  battle  was  iriA  Mooknrnim  Khaon,  aodShnmsbeer  Khaun, 

Whom  Amail  cut  up  to  his  hairt's  content. 

Wp  >inve  nlwnys  Iiithcrto  been  victorious  in  battle; 

And  therefore,  heoceftirward,  let  us  trust  ia  the  Lord. 


Digitized  by  Google 


AFGtUUN  POETHY.  '  ,19' 

Aunm^xebe,  Ibr  the  last  year,  ha^  been  encamped  against  ns: 
Diaordered  in  hi»  sppeoraace,  nnd  peiplcsed  ia  tu»  Jiuod* 
All  hia  nobles  have  &llen  in  battle ; 
And,  iHe  soldiert  ivbo  ha««  pmAerf,  who  can : 
HiQ  tr{>asiire8  of  Hindostaun  have  been  scattevad  i 
Th(  Ti\}  i:n>ld  Mohan  have  bwu  -iunk  in  the  motmtaiiM, 
No  auua  would  have  found  out,  iu  uighlcen  gu«w«ii, 
Hiat  siu;h  tinnaartiom  would  have  taken  place  in  this  country. 

A*  Bji^s  nuii^Bi^  it  QOtdUimlMd; 
Wliich  fbfBMily  dreif  down  dia  cuneoffaixnin  ftdiv*' 

No  dqsendanoe  cao  ba  placed  on  the  Kin^ 
For  he  haa  ill  designs,  and  is  fulne  and  treacherom* 
No  other  issue  can  be  discovered  in  this  affair; 
£i liter  llie  Moguls  must  be  annihilated,  or  the  A^hauns  undone. 
If  lUi  ba  the  couna  «f  tfaa  iplMKa  wUch  wa  aca ; 
ITit  baOod'a  pleanire  (diet  we  perish),  ht  tlys  be  die  tine. 
The  heavens  do  not  always  re\'o!ve  in  the  same  niHnm"-. 
They  are  sometimes  suited  to  the  rose,  and  sometimes  to  the  tbarib 
Ttm  time  (of  danger)  is  the  time  for  honour. 
WithoathoMW,  whi«  wMiId  beeoBBeaf  the  A%h«aM? 
If  Aegr  harbour  any  other  thought,  it  is  dectractian. 
Tl»rrf     no  f^f^liverance,  but  in  tlie  swortl. 
The  Atgiiauns  arc  better  than  the  Moguls  at  die  swofdt 
If  U)e  understanding  of  the  A^MUna  wi 
If  Ilia  OobaaMa  wmdA  gife  dMT  tfapport  1 
tbtgn  Wmld  soon  be  prostrate  before  them. 
But,  dissension  and  concon?,  m-'huess  and  prxidcnce. 
Are  all  in  the  hand  who  assigiii>  tu  each  man  his  diaxe. 

Yen  wOI  aaa  wbat  dw  Afiieedces,  Molunends,  and  Shabwanreei,  wfll  da^ 
^Whoi  dielfdgnl  anny  haa  cmamped  m  HGngnhmat, 
I  alone  foel  for  the  bonour  of  our  name ; 
While  the  Euso&yes  are  cultivating  their  fleUa  at  diear  < 
He  that  now  is  guilty  of  mdk  wantof  ^udt 
Will  ace  in  the  and  die  remkof  bMooodnct 
To  nqr  niiiid»  deadi is  better  dian  life; 
"^Tien  life  can  no  Uinger  be  held  with  honour* 
We  Ftrp  liot  to  live  for  ever  in  this  world : 
But  tlie  memory  ol'  KhooiJihttui  Kliutluck  will  remain." 


«'  SlHidi  Utmmi  ndNm  Aunuigiaba  dtpoied  kiid  iaqfirieoiiCd.' 


198 


LEARIOMO  OF  THE  AFOHAUN& 


Among  the  Pushtoo  poct3  we  inust  not  omit  the  name  of  Ahmed 
Shauh,  who  composed  a  book  of  odes  in  that  InTi^^uap^e,  ot>  which 
there  is  .  a  laborious  and  voluminous  commentary  b^^the  Khauni 
Ooloom. 

Besides  their  original  poetry,  the  A^{)iauu8  .have  translations  of 
manv  of  the  best  Persian  poets. 

Their  prose  authors  are  chiefly  writers  on  theiilogy  aud  law  ;  but 
they  have  also  several  histories  of  particular  periods  in  tlieir  own 
transactions.  The  books  writteu  in  I'usIucm),  are  not  to  be  relied  on 
as  giving  any  standard  of  the  h^arning  of  the  nation;  for  Persian  still 
continues  to  bo  the  language  of  composition,  apd  in  it  almost  all 
books  of  science  are  written.  It  is  not  easy  to  fix  the  number  of 
their  writers  in  this  language :  if  we  count  all  -  tlMise  who  have  writ- 
ten in  A^hatimrtMiii,  we  shall  include  totae  of  the'  gretitest  Persian 
authors!  but  if  we  confine  ourselves  to  those  who  belonged  to  the 
A^^unm  tribest  the  list  wSl  be  bioii^  within  very  nanow  bounds. 
This  much  is  oeitain,  that  aU  the  Penian  anthon  aie  liuniliarly 
in  A^hannistaun,  but  the  leamtog  tod  aocomplishm'ente  the  pep- 
ple  are  inferior  to  those  of  the  Persians..  Hie  sdenoes  are  the  saae 
as  those  to  which  the  Persians  apply  themselves.  The  wny  of  study- 
ing them  is  as  methodical  as  in  odier  Asiatic  oounlTws.' .  A  learned 
man  of  those  countries^  meedng  another  with  whom  he  is  not  ac- 
quainted, will  ask  him  what  sdoioes  he  has  studied  (m  question  whidi 
would  pnnle  vo/oat  wdH  informed  Englishmen)^  md  then  ask*  what 
books  he  has  read :  to  which  the  other  wiQ  answer*  **  iqp  to  so  and 
**  so»**  which  will  be  at  once  understood,  as  iSkey  read  all  books  in  a 
fixed  order  like  school-boys.  Hiis  practice  pi^vents-  their  haviqg 
much  of  the  miscellaneous  knovriedge  of  European  gentlemen» 
though,  on  the  other  hand,  they  generally  know  what  they  have 
lesmedy  well.  It  seems  likely  to  damp  curiosity,  and  to  check  fJi 
excursions  of  the  mind ;  and,  accordingly,  there  is  generally  a  w^ 
of  ardour  in  pursuit  of  knowledge  among  the  Asiatics,  which  is  par- 
taken by  the  Afghauns,  excepting,  howe\*er,  in  the  sciences  of  dia- 
lectics and  meta{»hy8ic89  in  which  they  take  much  interest*  and  here 


Digitizeo  by  LiOOglc 


LEiLRMING  OF  TH£  AFGHAUN&  199 

nude  no  oootMnptllile  progress,  llie  degree  of  encontagementwliMii 
leanuiig  has  reodved  fiom  the  A^^iMtn  Kings,  deserves  to  be  re* 
marked.  Alimed  Shaiih  was  very  find  of  ]ettefs»  and  used  to  bave 
once  a  weA  a  MijUssee  Oolnna  (or  assembly'of  ihe  learned),  the 
early  part  of  which  was  devoted  to  subjects  of  .divinity  and  law,  but 
which  ahvaya  concluded  with  convenations  on  poetry  and  sdence^ 
and  were  often  prolonged  till  near  morning.  TImoiir  Shank  retained 
these  meeting, 'and  used  to  have  his  own  tomposHions  read  at  them ; 
nor  has  the  practice  been  laid  aside  to  this  day.  Timour  Shauh  pub- 
IMied  a  book  of  odes  in  Pei^ian,  which  is  highly  spcdbeii  o(  but  is 
mid  to  Iiave  been  conected. and  improved  by  Feroghee*  a  oelebrated 
poet  of  Timour*s  cooit.  Ahmed  fihauh  alao  wrote  several  poems  in 
Persian,  and  I  am  in  possession  of  a  poetioai;  epistie  in  that  la^uag^ 
from  ^lauh  Zemann  to  his  brother  Shuja,  which  (though  the  person 
idbo-^ve  it  to  me,  pretended  that  he  had  greatly  embellished  it  at 
Z&OMun's  desire),  is  still  a  vcrv'  poor  performance.  Shauh  Zemaun^ 
indeed,  is  said  to  be  the  most  illiterate  of  his  family.  He  was  at  one 
time  persuaded  by  his  Alooliabs  to  issue  n  prod fim  at  ion,  forbidding 
the  studv  of  lo^ic,  as  dangerous  to  the  ]\T;iii(.>iiiinL'(lan  f-iifh  ;  but  his 
edict  iiad  no  effect,  except  occasioniiig  great  raerrbnent  anions  ihf)se 
lo  whom  it  was  addrett^ed.  I  have  not  heard  of  any  works  ot  bhauh 
Alahmood ;  but  Shauh  Shuja  is  an  Arabic  scholiir,  makes  tolerable 
verses,  And  is  reckoned  learned  and  accomplished  ibr  a  King. 


1 


(   200  ) 


CHAP.  V. 

EELIGION,   SECTS,  MUOLLAIIS,  StPCRSTlTIONS, 

THE  Mahoinmedan  religion  is  so  well  known,  and  all  details  re- 
garding it  are  to  be  found  in  so  many  books,  that  it  is  quite  . 
unnecessary  to  mention  any  of  its  forms  or  tenets,  except  sucli  as  are 
pfirticnlarlyobservcMl  hv  the  nation  which  lam  descrihin;:!;.  llu"  Af^diauns 
are  all  of  the  sect  called  ^^oonnee,  which  acknowledo-es  the  tliree  first 
caliphs  as  tlie  lawful  successors  of  Mahomet,  and  admits  their  inter- 
pretation of  the  law,  and  their  traditions  of  the  Prophet's  precepts. 
They  are  op^wsed  to  the  Sheeahs,  who  reject  the  three  first  caliphs, 
as  rebels  and  usurpers  of  an  office  which  belonged  of  right  to  Ali,  the 
nephew  of  Mabomet,  and  the  fturtli  of  bit  successQn.  Him  laat  sec* 
is  confined  to  tlie  Bonlana  and  tibeir  deseendiiiCs  s  all  tbs  otiier  Mm* 
bometans  being  Soonneea.  The  diflhtence  between  them,  though  I 
da  not  bdieve  it  is  kifficient  to  afiect  any  aerious  part  of  Iheb  con- 
dnct,  is  enpai^  to  craate  a  bitter  enmity  between  the  two  aecta.  The 
mdeamedpart  of  the  A%haun  nadon  certalnlycoaaidecaSSieeahaamoffe 
an  infidd  than  a  Hindoo,  and  have  a  greater  aversion  to  the  ^niana 
for  their  reUgioa,  than  for  all  the  mjuries  the  oomitry  has  auflbred  at 
their  hands.  The  feelings  of  the  A^hauna  towards  people,  of  a  reli- 
gion atfMy  di^rent  ikmi  their  own,  ia  however  firee  fiw^ 
as  long  as  they  are  not  at  war.  They  hold,  like  all  other  Mussulman^ 
that  no  infidel  will  be  saved,  that  it  ia  lawful,  and  even  meritorious  to 
make  war  on  unbelievers }  and  to  convert  them  to  the  Mmwmlnlan 
fiuth,  or  impose  tribute  on  them ;  «id,  I  imagine,  to  put  them  to 
death,  if  they  refiise  both  of  those  conditions.  It  is  true,  that  Shauh 
Zemaun,  in  his  two  conqueats  o£  the  Fkmjaub,  allowed  die  Siks  entire 

li 


Digitized  by  Google 


* 


CONDUCT  TO  HINDOOS.  201 

IdkaAm,  and  fiwbade  than  to  be  molested,  imleM  they  speared  w 
nramlisi  yet  dirt-priiice  himself  was  induced  by  abigotted  Moollah 
to  endeavour  to  convert  two  Siks»  and  to  put  tlieni  to  death  for  their 
obstinate  rejection  of  his  arguments* ;  and  the  Hindoo  Hiafrtrj^  of  the 
battleof  flamieepiitdeflcribeaa  most  inhuman  massacreof  the  unresisting  ' 
£igitive8»  andcYenof  thepriaonen}  which  he  attributes  entirely  to  the  re* 
ligious  fury  of  the  Mussulmans.  Whatevermay  be  their  conduct  in  war,, 
their  treatment  of  men  whom  they  reckon  infidels,  in  their  own  country, 
is  laudable  in  Mahomedans.  Their  hatred  to  idolators  is  well  known } 
yet  the  Hindoos  are  allowed  the  free  exercise  of  their  religion,  and 
their  temples  are  entirely  unmolested ;  though  they  are  forbidden  all 
religious  procrssioiis.  and  all  public  exposinfr  of  their  idols.  The 
Hindoos  are  held  to  be  impure,  and  no  strict  man  would  consent  to 
meat  of  their  dressing ;  but  they  are  not  treated  with  any  parti-> 
cular  contempt  or  hardship  :  they  are  employed  in  situations  of  trust 
and  emoiuaient,  and  those  who  reside  in  Afghaunistaun,  appear  as 
much  at  their  ease  as  most  of  the  other  inh^itants  f.  The  beet 
proof  of  the  toleration  practised  by  the  Atghauns,  is  the  good  report 
of  the  Siiis  who  iiave  travelled  among  them.    The  Siks  are  accua- 


♦  TIic  A%haun  vs^m  t  ild  the  story,  expressed  a  pmpor  "cn^eoftliecnid^of  UlbpiOp 
ceeding,  and  mentioned  tUe  fimmew  of  the  Siks  with  applause. 

f  I  do  not  know  whether  the  greater  part  of  the  A^auns  would  scruple  to  eat  fiiod 
prqTflrcd  by  a  Hindoo.  From  the  conduct  of  the  great  Doorauncc  Lord,  Ahmctl  Khaun 
Noor/ye  iu  the  following  instance,  one  would  think  they  would  not ;  but  1  must  cunfeas 

iIm  PmiM  irii0  told  me  the  itaiy,  Mcmcd  to 
In  a  strong  light :  it  I.*  also  to  be  rcxpeinbered,  that  Ahmet!  Khaun  affects  to  keep  up  the 
genuine  manners  of  the  A%hauiU|  and  to  deapiae  all  doodem  refinements.  He  waii  one 
day  riding  out  near  Pteshiwer,  niA  KeAnrpet  Klifliitt»  s  FnniMi  ttbUBauai :  they  ali^ted 
at*  village  not  &r  from  thed^,  and  while  they  were  Mated  dkOM^a  Hindoo  fagro^httlMtt. 
a  large  plate  of  curds,  wliicli  It  may  he  supposed  was  not  di-lnd  out  with  tlie  neatness  ihjit 
would  be  seen  in  a  nobleman's  palace.  Ahmed  Khaun,  liowever,  began  on  it  with  a  good 
appetite,  and  when  the  Pentan  pointed  oat  dwt  die  cqrds  were  diitf,  and  "were  b^dda* 
impure,  as  being  made  by  a  Hindoo^  he  only  answered,  Hindoo  che  sug  uat  kdi  Nidji* 
"baushed?"  "  \Mmt  sort  of  dog  is  a  Hindoo,  tlint  he  shodd  pntcad  to  b«  impure?* 
and  went  on  with  his  mess  till  he  had  emptieil  tlie  platter. 


Digitized  by  Google 


£02  CONDUCT  TO  HINDOOa 

tomed  in  tli«i^  iown  eonntiy  to  treii  the  MaMalniaai  ai  jiiieiion,iiid 
would  thetefine  be  pirtioilialjr  iensible  of  my  inaak  or  eontempt 
from  people  of  thit  permuuion )  yet  tJiey  always  ipeak  well  of  the 
uMge  they  feoetre^  and  one  Sik  Goldsmith  in  particular  (idio  waa  e 
▼eiy  inteUigent  man,  and  had  travelled  over  great  part  of  Aj^^uunu* 
ataun,  Persia,  KhotaBsan,  and  Tartary),  always  spoke  of  the  Wndnqai 
and  hospitality  he  received  m  the  former  eoiintfy,  which  he  eQn«> 
treated  with  the  contempt  with  which  he  was  treated  by  the  Pernans* 
who  would  not  allow  him  to  draw  water,  for  fear  of  polluting  the 
weU,  or  to  walk  in  the  streets  during  rain,  lest  he  should  splash  some 
Mahomedan',  and  thus  render  him  impure.  Hie  Uabeks  used  him  welL 
It  must  however  be  admitted,  that  the  Hindoos  are  obliged  to  pay  a  light 
tax,  from  which  Mussulmans  are  exempt,  that  they  are  considered  as  an 
inferiorrac^thattheyareparticttlarly  exposed  tothe  tyranny  of  theMool* 
lahs.  That  tyranny  must,  however,  be  exercised  under  colour  of  law,  and 
the  following  case^  which  took  place  in  the  Berdooraunee  country  (where 
ihe  people  are  a  thoumind  timefl  more  btgotted  and  intolerant  than  in 
any  other  part  of  Afghaunistaiin),  will  shew  the  means  made  use  of  on 
those  occasions.    A  Moollah,  having  been  crofssed  in  some  love  ad- 
venture by  a  Hindoo,  gave  information  to  the  Cauzce  that  his  enemy 
had  embraced  Tslaum,  and  had  relapsed  into  idn]nfrv.    The  Cauzee, 
ailer  examining  witnesses  (who  swore  to  the  Hindoo's  conversioTi, 
and  to  his  having  repeated  the  Maliomedan  creed),  ordered  the  pri- 
soner to  ho  circumcised  against  his  will.    Thv  sentence  reiiiiii  rd  to 
be  executed  by  tlie  civil  ma^ish  ate,  and  the  Douraunee  governor  of 
Peshawcr  could  not  he  |ii  f'\  ailed  on  to  rarry  it  into  effect.    On  tJlis 
the  Mooilali  assenibled  t>ome  others  ot  his  order,  and  by  degrees  was 
joined  by  some  tliousand  Moolialis  (w  ho  sw  arm  about  Peshawer) ;  he 
marched  to  the  principal  mosque,  stopped  the  usual  call  to  prayers, 
and  suspended  all  the  ceremonies  of  religion,  as  if  the  country  were 
under  an  interdict,  till  at  last  the  governor  was  compelled  to  give 
way,  and  (after  fruitless  attempts  to  malfe  the  witnesses  contradict 
themselves),  he  ordered  the  Hindoo  to  lie  circuiiiciscd.     The  opera- 
tion was  perloimed  with  much  harshness,  and  tlie  new  convert  im- 


Digitizeo  by  LiOO^lc 


GOKPUCT  TO  CHRISTIANS. 


908 


tditiily  iad  to  Lihcw^  wtoe  he  retained  toliii  IbtiiMr  &Ml  Ik 
18  prabflble  tlurf*  junoc^  the  BordDorautieet*  any  MnniwImMi  wooM 
ninii  e  wyeriontj  orer  e  Hindioo  ef  et^ualiiak}  itleait  Iioimbi* 
bar  A  Bmdooiwiiee  cuBeUdiiver  in  my  aerviee,  who  hed  seme  die- 
pake  with  a  Hindoo,  and  fan  to  my  tentf  eocdeinuu^  with  cnrecy 
appewtmnt  of  ampriae  and  mdignatioa,  Juadce !  Juatioe !  Hem  la 
«  »  HaadDD  lenlliig  e  Mmaafaoaen  in  the  voy  nidafc  of  the  eemp 

■  In  ^  Weitf  however,  a  Hoaaalman  haa  no  such  adranti^;  and 
Hz.  Durie  rdbtea,  that  he  haa  aean  many  diapntea  between  WiwAM^a 
and  Mnatmlmana  in  Cludahar»  in  winch  the  .Hnidooa  were  quite  aa 
Yioknt  as  their  o|iponent8»  wiihont  ^mng  the  leaat  odfenee  to' any  of 
other  Mahometans. 
I  must  own  that  I  am  somewhat  at  a  loss  respecting  the  tre^miM 
of  ^Ti^tie?**'  There  is  no  doubt  they  enjoy  a  free  toleration 
dffDughoofc  the  kingdom^  but  Mr.  Foster  (whose  authority  is  not  to  foe 
diluted),  represents  the  usage  he  received  while  in  the  character  of  n 
rhritrienj  to  have  been  conlemptuoas  and  degrading.  My  own  ex- 
fieinnee  wendd  lead  me  to  a  very  different  conclusion ;  but,  Gmm  the 
situation  in  which  I  was  placed,  it  was  not  likely  that  I  should  meet 
witli  any  slight.  T  have,  however,  had  many  opportunities  of  hearing 
of  the  treatment  ot  Christians  from  a  native  of  Constantinople,  who 
professed  the  (^atholic  relicfion  ;  and,  as  he  had  resided  from  ten  to 
twenty  years  in  the  country,  he  could  scarcely  be  supposed  to  bo  ill 
informed.  He  sometimes  complained  of  the  Atgliauns  in  other 
respects  ;  but  alwavs  said,  that  thev  had  not  the  'Smallest  aversion  to 
a  Ciiristian.  He  look  care  never  to  attack  the  ^lahoinedan  doctrines, 
imle^i?;  he  was  well  a^jisured  of  the  free  sentiments  of  his  company  j  but, 
ill  all  respects  uik  onnectt d  with  religion,  his  conduct,  and  the  treat- 
ment he  received  were  those  ot  a  tbreign  Mussulman.  I  have  had 
opportunities  of  witnessing  the  tidelity  of  his  Mahomedan  servants, 
to  whom  lie  sometimes  entrusted  secrets  which  would  have  cost  him 
his  lite,  lie  was  always  treated  with  respect  hy  men  ot'  all  ranks; 
and,  among  others,  by  the  Iviug's  Imaun,  the  bead  of  the  Mussulman 
religion  in  Caubul.    Wliat  proves  the  geueral  toleration  is,  that  he 

D  o  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


204  CON0UCT  TO  CHKlsmANa 

very  obncodoiu  to  the  Ynme  Mmiater  for  his  altachmMit  tor 
Mokhtiutr  Oodoula  (on  wfaoae  rain  the  other  had  Tisen)*  and  was  for 
Bome  time  in  a  state  of  confinement  within  the  Bulla  Hiasanr  on  that 
aooomit ;  yet  his  religion  nerer  was  thought  of  as  a  pretence  for  in- 
jnring  him.  There  is  a  Catholic  priest  of  Greek  descent  at  Caubnl, 
who  seems  to  be  well  treated*  as  he  is  mentioned  with  respect  in  » 
letter  from  tiie  Vimer  to  me ;  and  I  hare  seen  an  Armenian  soldiart* 
who*  though  very  debauched  and  oiien  intoxicated,  seemed  to  be  ex- 
actly on  a  footing  with  the  Persians,  with  whom  he  served.  But  the 
bast  evidence  on  this  head  is  that  of  Mr.  Durie,  who  travelled 
through  the  Afghaun  country  as  Hir  west  as  Candahar,  in  the  disguisa 
of  a  JBdahominedan ;  and»  though  his  real  religion  was  often  suspected^* 
and  several  times  discovered,  he  never  observed  any  change  in  the 
bdiaviour  of  the  people^  I  refer  to  his  Journal  for  particulars  * ;  but 
I  cannot  refirun  horn  inaertuig  two  passages,  the  first  of  which  I  took 
down  from  his  own  month,  and  the  second  was  contained  in  the 
papers  he  wrote  before  I  had  conxcrscd  with  liim.  Both  relate  to 
the  siibi(x^  of  toleration  :  but  the  first  jilso  gives  a  striking  picture  of 
the  impression,  made  by  the  mixture  of  hospitality  and  rspacil^t  so 
remarkable  in  the  Afghanns. 

**  One  day  some  people  at  Caiidabnr.  asked  whether  I  was  a  Svmnee 
"  or  a  Sheah  ?  and,  T  said,  1  was  ol  the  religion  of  Shunisee  Tubreer 
•*  see,  who  was  a  kind  of  a  free  thinker.  But,  onf>  said,  we  know  you 
•*  are  neither  a  Sunnee  nor  a  Sheeah,  but  a  1  crnigee,  (a  Frank) ;  and 

many  people  know  that  as  well  as  us,  but  do  not  like  to  mention  it, 
•*  because  it  might  be  of  annoyance  to  mc.  They  are  a  kind  ptoplft. 
**  If  they  thought  I  wat.  rich,  they  would  not  treat  me  ill,  ilu  \  woitltl 
**  only  take  my  riches;  and,  if  I  woidd  not  give  them,  tlirv  uould 

make  me."  The  following  is  extracted  verbatiui  from  Mr.  J  )urii  's 
written  paper :    "  They  imagine  their  religion  to  be  the  hesi,  and 

most  tmOf  consequently  they  consider  all  others  to  be  misled  or 


*  See  Append  B. 

I 


pigilizeo  by  LiOOgle 


CONDUCT  TO  CHRISTIANS.  ^ 

emmKlOM)  hoping  on  aoeount  of  the  superior  truth  ^bemalF,  to  van- 
f*  qukh  til  in  die  auL   Being  Sonnee  Muhomedani  (in  /cpnfonnily 

widithelWlny  «ndTirtin»  and  Anbi*  and  hoildtng  tbe-Pdniaof 
f  a«  nided)i  thejr  nftam  fiom  woth.  degraes  of  animoaity  aa  mij^ 
^  urge  th«a  to  their  own  destmcdon  or  extiipatkm.  That  they  hold 
M  didridigion  to  be  the  beat  ia  undoubtedlj  not  thebfindt»tfae^  being 

MeAj  initiated  to  imi^ne  so.  Howmr,  tlie  a|firit  of  toleratkm, 
^  amiog  to  philanthiopy,  doea  not  a  little  actuate  than*  (though  at 

fimt  thej  mlglit  with  to  Mahomedanlge  all  mm)f  Ibr  many  of  tbmn 
«  ne  iMrtatnly.fiee^  liberal,  and  toiatating.'*  * 


*  Mr.  Duriv  wa»  a  iwtive  ui'  Ueiigal,  tlie  wn  of  an  Kiigli«hiaau,  by  an  Lidiau  motlier. 
Ite  had  been  employed  as  s  compounder  of  mediciiKS,  -in  diflferent  tf^MDMoin;  Ixit,  nmm 

yean  he  was  adzed  with  a  great  desire  of  traTelling,  and  (after  wandering  some  time  in 
India),  he  croiMd  the  iiidu%  witboot  a  ^urthing  in  his  poawsaion ;  and  travelled  through 
ihe  A%luHiii  oonntrj  in  lihe  duuraeter  of  «  Maliomedan,  with  the  intention  of  proceeding 
to  Bagdad.    He  went  by  Caubul  to  OmmUmt,  resided  some  IMNttlM  in  each  of  tlioee 

cities,  and  at  leiifjth  returned  by  the  wmp  ronte  to  Tneiin.  He  came  to  Pooiu!  in  iHi  a, 
aud  pre«2Uttxl  hiuiself  at  my  door  in  rugs,  und  witlt  little  about  him  that  promiaed  iiiucii  m- 
foramdon.  I  had,  by  this  thnei  flmahnl  my  collecttans,  and  made  up  uxy  mind  on  mmt 
•^n^ijnrt^  rrlnting  to  thr  Xfrvliuins.  But  I  had  not  eeen  the  wost  of  the  country:  nnd, 
though  I  had  received  dilatled  accpunts  of  the  whole  of  A^jhaunistaun  from  natives  of 
dut  kingdom,  y  et  their  notion*  were  likely  to  diffinr  frcnn  mine.  It  was  probable,  that  they 
m^^t  OQMider  that  as  refined,  which  I  should  have  thought  rude ;  and  I  was  in  want  of 
some  to  wliit  fi  T  m'li'bt  refer  their  pictures.    A  man,  who  Imd  seen  Atghaiinistunn, 

with  liie  uotiuiis  ut  an  iutgUshman}  v*ua  therdure  a  great  actjuiiiitioii,  and  one  wliicii  i 
■CMvdy  hoped  to  htm  obtained. 

Witli  all  Mr.  Foster's  merit,  his  account  did  not  answer  my  piirpo  r.  I  To  travelled 
with  caravans  during  the  ni^t ;  saw  little  of  the  country  he  passed  through ;  and  had  no 
cominunirarion  with  the  inhabitants,  except  in  towns ;  and,  mm  therv,  faia  interoourae  waa 
restrained  fay  the  alarm  so  natural  to  a  meat  who  has  entered  on  an  untried  iiilwaitlin  The 
aame  unca^ine*-!  mny,  pcrlmps,  have  given  n  colour  to  the  objects  whirli  ho  -mw;  and  his 
views  must  uodoul)t  have  been  oilected  by  the  hardsliips  ut  the  mode  ui  traveitmg  he  un- 
dertook, to  which,  ftoin  hia  rank  in  Itfe^  he  ooidd  have  faaoi  bat  little  accustomed. 

ISfr.  Diirio,  on  the  other  hand,  had  lic-n  i!sr>d  yovrrtv;  •.w.d.  a  lie  ti-  ivt  llfd  'flaurely 
and  almost  aione^  and  lodged  everywhere  with  the  people  of  the  country,  he  could  acanie 
Ulof  knofwing  ^eir  real  character  and  sitaatian.  As  soon  as  I  lad  diacovered  hii  story, 
and  before  I  had  any  conversation  with  him  on  liis  travels,  I  requeatad  him  to  conunit  his 
af1vfnt'!rf>^  nnd  opinions  on  the  Afghann  country  to  writing.  It  gave  me  real  satisfaction 
to  hnd  tiicm  entirely  coincide  with  my^own ;  and,  I  cannot  but  consider  the  agreement 

to 


Digitized  by  Google 


206 


CONDUCT  TO  SHEEAHS. 


Hie  flbeeahs  we  mora  discountenance  dMUt  any  otfaor  fdigidnt 
■act  i  jefcf  all  the  numerous  Persians  in  the  country  are  Sheeahs,  wai, 
many  of  them  bold  high  offices  in  the  state  and  housdiokL  Xlieir  re- 
ligion allows,  and  evm  «iQoins  them  to  dissemUe^  when  in  heBetk 
INT  infidel  oountries ;  and,  oonsequentljt  they  are  put  to  no  incoove- 
Bience  by  the  restrictions  impoaed  on  Cfaem.  Hioae  restrictiooa  pre- 
vent  their  praying  in  the  attitude  peculiar  to  their  sect.  Their -cuiaiiig 
the  three  firat  caliphi,  and  their  exhibiting  puhlw  prooaaaiona,  and 
odier  representi^ions,  during  tl^Mohunem;  but  de  net  obl%e  them 
to  renounce  their  faith,  or  to  aubmit  to  any  inconvenience  or  d(Bga4^ 
tion.  The  Sheeaha»  however,  (perhaps  because  they  are  the  depressed 
party),  are  far  more  bigotted  than  the  Sunnees,  and  never  scruple  to 
attack  the  opposite  sect  when  they  think  they  have  favourable  or 
neutral  hearers.  From  a  storv  of  some  Christian  ambassador,  under 
the  fifth  Calif,  who  declared  tor  the  so^is  of  A!i.  and  suffered  martyr- 
dom tor  his  zeal,  they  have  a  notion  tluit  all  Christiiius  are  convinced, 
by  the  force  of  natural  reason,  oi  the  justicse  of  Ali's  claims.  T  have 
often  be^n  asked,  with  ^rcat  earnestness,  to  give  my  real  sentiments 
on  the  case  ;  and,  it  was  only  by  saying  that  1  was  not  a  Moollah,  and 
could  not  pretend  to  give  an  opinion  on  such  subjects,  that  1  evaded 
so  embarrassing  a  question.  I  had  a  good  opportimity  of  seeing  the 
spirit  of  toleration,  or  at  least  of  forbearance,  of  the  A^haun  ^vem- 


wkh  Boch  diftfcsit  viewi,  u  s  itnmg  oooflmuUion  oftlie  accuracy  afholh.  I  aftermurdb 

made  liim  write  out  his  journey  in  detail,  and  took  down  information  on  other  topics, 
which  he  gave  on  being  questioned.  Hitt  education  must  have  been  that  of  the  lower 
orderofhidf  casta  in  India;  and  he  spoke  Ei^^lishilL  But  he  had  read  several  of  our  bat 
dwHOi)  nd,  Iboiii^hklHifni^  wMinooiiTect,h«w  MrfkiMttocspiMM  hbthoi^^ito 
fullv  and  clearly,  and  even  on  aomr  occitsioiis  witli  a  good  deal  of  vigour  and  eloquence. 
Though  he  never  shewed  the  least  incoherency  iii  his  discourse,  and  though  be  was  poas wised 
of  natural  talents  very  surprisii^  in  Ids  atuadon,  he  wm  pewrdMleaB  sutgect  to  paitU 
naganntof  Utnndrntandiiig,  the  strongest  symptmcf  nUdi  was  his  impalkiiife  of  any 
long  continuance  in  one  place.  I  ofPcrrd  hirr.  t  ;;-/.  nyonr  to  -tny  with  me  asaderk;  but, 
though  he  was  actually  in  a  state  ot  beggary,  he  refused  the  u&r  ami  t^et  off  to  Bombay 
t»eaAmA  in  the  fint  Arab  ship,  which  Aonid «0tod hhfc  m  oppwttmii^  cf  Mseon^Ii&hiug 


Uigitizeo  by  LiOOgle 


ACCQUNT  OF  THE  SOOFEES. 


ttenli  jDcMMqaoioeafaiiilfltekeofaoniei^myi^^  Itkcii** 
tonuury  in  Indii^  wbm  the  Smmees  are  not  liTict  to  emery  about 
lti|^ly  OTuunsntod  faitn  {in  comnMmoniidoii  of  tbs  dMlh  of  thft 
of  All),  dming  the  fint  ten  days  of  the  Moluirrem ;  aod,  these  pro* 
oetnons  are  vary  cvbrnndaui  in  Ajjj^nniHtomi,  both  ai  bekmging  to 
the  Shooih  wowhip,  and  oa  being  kbbtRNu.   I  had,  in 
fttbiddeo  the  Mnawlmani  with  the'embaaty  to  carry  out  their  bien. 
Tbey  miaundentood  the  order,  and  went  out  in  procession  with  flaga» 
and  all  other  gymbols  used  on  (he  occaaion)  except  the  biers.  This  fla- 
grant affront  to  the  rel^;^  of  the  country,  excited  much  surprise,  but 
no  opposition,  till-the  next  weekly  assembly  of  the  Ulima  took  place 
at  Court  ^  when,  one  of  the  MooUahs,  harangued  for  a  long  time  on 
the  occaaion,  and  endeavoured  to  persuade  the  King  that  the  Siunee 
religion  was  in  danger.    The  King*  however,  replied,  that  we  were 
honoured  guests,  and  that  our  practice  ahould  never  be  interfered  with. 
The  behaviour  of  the  Sika  on  the  occurrence  of  a  similar  circumstance, 
in  the  camp  of  the  envoy  to  Lahore,  during  the  very  same  month, 
formed  a  striking  contrast  to  the  moderation  of  the  Afghauns.  With- 
out a  word  of  explanation  to  the  Envoy,  a  numerous  band  of  fanatics 
attacked  his  camp ;  and,  thougli  they  were  soon  repulsed  by  the 
escort,   and  afterwards  repressed  by  the  chief  of  tlie  Siks,  they 
wounded  an  ofH<  er  and  some  men,  and  lost  several  of  their  own  body 
in  the  course  of  their  outrageous  attempt, 

Aiiotht  r  sect  in  Caiibiil  is  that  of  ilir  Soot'ces,  who  ought,  perhaps, 
to  be  coiisidei  (  I  I  as  a  (  hi^ss  of  philosopbi  i  s.  l  ather  than  of  reiigionist3. 
As  far  as  I  can  understand  their  mysttM  ious  <l<^ctriue,  their  leading 
tenet  i^enis  to  be,  that  the  whole  of  the  animated,  and  inanimate 
creation  is  an  illusion  ;  and,  that  nothing  exists  except  the  Supreme 
Being,  which  presents  itself  under  an  infinity  of  shapes  to  the  soul  of 
man,  itself  a  portion  of  the  divine  essence.  The  coriteinpiation  of 
this  th)ctrine  raises  the  Soofees  to  the  utmost  pitch  of  enthusiasm, 
Tliey  admire  God  in  every  thing;  and,  by  frequent  nteditation  on  liis 
attributes,  and  by  tracing  him  through  all  his  forms,  they  imagine 
that  they  attain  to  an  ineffitble  love  for  the  Deity,  and  even  to  an 


Digitized  by  Google 


^  SOOFEES. 

entire  itaioa  with  his  subttaoee.   AM  A  neoeBsexy  oonieiiaMioe  of  thk 

theory,  they  consider  the  peculiar  tenets  of  every  religion  as  supers 
flnities,  and  discard  all  rites  and  religious  worship,  regarding  it  as  li 
matter  of  little  importance  in  what  manner  the  thooglits  m  turned 
to  God,*  provided  they  rest  at  last  in  contemplation  cm  his  goodness 
and  greatness.  This  sect  is  persecuted  in  Persia,  and  though  not 
discountenanced  by  the  government  in  Caubul,  is  held  in  great  aver- 
sion by  the  Moollahs,  who  accuse  its  followers  ot"  Atheism,  and  often 
endeavour  to  entrap  tliem  into  some  doctrines  which  are  liable  to 
punishment  by  the  Maliomedaii  law;  but  these  attempt >i  are  seldom 
successful  J  one  obstacle  to  Uieir  accomplishment,  that  many  of 
the  Soofees  are  sincere  Malionnnediins,  notwithstanding  the  inconsis- 
tency of  the  two  doctrines.  I  have  heard  a  mfm  ex]iatiate  with  rap- 
ture on  the  beauty  of  the  Soofee  system,  and  on  the  enlarged  and 
liberal  views  of  humaii  actions  to  which  it  leads  ;  wliu  lias  soon  after, 
in  the  same  company,  stick  ltd  tl>r  every  tenet  of  Isluum,  and  rejected 
v\  11  li  horror  the  idea  of  douhi  nig  the  eternity  of  hell  fire  :  when  tlie 
(lithculty  of  reconciling  thi.^  doctrine  with  the  belief  that  nothing 
existed,  but  C^od  was  pointed  out ;  he  said  that  the  system  of  the 
Soofees  was  certainly  true,  but  that  the  eternity  of  hell  was  proved  by 
the  word  of  God  himself. 

The  sect,  however,  is  gaining  ground,  particularly  among  tiie  higher 
orders,  and  such  of  die  Moollahs  as  apply  themselves  to  general 
literature  and  its  obscure  sublimity,  is  admirably  suited  to  the  taste 
of  that  dass.  Hie  love  of  mystery,  indeed,  wbidi  ia  so  reniazldble 
among  them,  induces  tiiem  to  ftrm  the  highest  notions  of  mrj  thing 
that  is  concealed*  and  has  even  occasioned  a  lively  curionty  about 
free  maisoiuy.  I  have  often  been  questioned  reganiing  it,  and  have 
heard  the  opiniottB  which  have  been  formed  of  its  nature.  All  that 
Is  known  of  it  was  communicated  by  a  obtain  Dervise,  who  traveled 
into  European  oountriesj  and  who  gave  this  account  of  his  initlatioin 
in  4he  mysteiy.  He  was  dirbcted  to  enter  a  particular  building,  and 
after  passing  throu^  winding' passages,  4nd  crossing  several  courtly 


Digitized  by  Google 


LIBERTINE  SECT  OF  MOOLLAH  ZUHKEE.  209 

be  nfldifld  an  iptttment  where  «iglik  penm  wcw^aeeted.  tlliegr 
MtiniH-tH  twupoited  and  discndered  by  thmr  own  nflectbiM,  «aiid 
tbeir  ooontenaiioeft  bene  the  tnaiks  o£  impintKML  Hie  Dervue'tikace 
ioimod  miwtfrfile  Akig%  apdacquirod  moie  knowledge  od  themoflt 
nibliine  uelijecia  from  a  momeDt's  intercourse  with  thow'aageiy  dun 
eould  ha^  been  gained  by  yean  of  kborious  study. 
-  Aoother  sect,  which  is  aometimes  confounded  with  the  Soolboa>  :ia 
one  which  bears  the  name  of  Moollah  Zukkee,  who  was  its  great 
patron  in  Gaubul.  Its  followers  hold,  that  all  the  prophets  were  im- 
postors, and  all  revelation  an  invention.  They  seem  very  doubtful  of 
the  truth  of  a  future  stntc.  and  even  of  the  bein^  of  a  God.  Their 
tenets  appnar  to  be  vcrv  ancit  iit.  and  are  prcrisfly  those  of  the  old 
•  Persian  poet  Kheioom,  whose  works  exhibit  such  specimens  of  im- 
piety, as  probably  never  were  equalled  in  any  other  language. 
Kheioom  dwells  particularly  on  the  existence  of  evil,  and  taxes  the 
Supieiiiu  Being  with  the  iuLruiiuction  of  it,  in  terms  which  can 
scarcely  be  believed.  The  Soofees  have  uuaccountably  prised  tins 
writer  into  their  service,  they  explain  away  some  of  his  blasphemies 
by  forced  interpretadona,  and  others  they  represent  aa  iimooeiit  frae^ 
doma  and  feproacfaea,  aedi  aa  -e  Um/t  may  pour  out  i^^ainat  hia  be- 
loved. The  ftkUoweia  of  Moollah  Zokkee  are  said  to  take  the  fidl 
advHita0e  of  iheir  feleaaefiom  tbeftar  of  heU,  and  the  awe  of « 
SopieBie  Bemgf  and  to  be  the  moat  diaaelute  -and  unprincipled  pnifli- 
gatea  In  the  Mngdonu  Thi&a  opiniona,  nevertheleaa,  are  chariahed 
in  aeeret,  and  ace  aaid  to  be  veiy  pievalent  among  the  licentioaa 
nobleaof  the  court  of  Shauh  Miahmood. 

The  Rouahnmeea  aect  made  e  greek  noiae  among  the  Afghauns  in 
the  nzteenth  century ;  bat  it  is  now  ehnost  cKtinot  It  wea  ftunded 
in  the  reign  of  the  'Emperor  Acbar,  by  Bauyazei  d  Ansauree,  who 
wntB  called  by  his  enemies  the  Peeree  Taureek  (or  Apostle  of  Dark* 
ness),  in  derision  of  the  title  of  Peeree  Roushen  (or  Apostle  of 
ii^t),  which  he  had  himself  assumed.  He  held  the  same  tenet.«? 
widi  the  Soofees,  but  aa  he  added  a  belief  in  the  traasmigratiofi  oH 

K  S 


Digitized  by  Google 


flO  10USHUM££A  SECT. 

■wb,  it  k  pialMid*  lie  derived  bii  creed  from  die  Yogeei*  a  sect  of 
Ifindoo  phOowiplMniy  whoidd  tome  of  the  dogmas  of  the  r^gkn  in 
wfaidi  they  were  educated,  to  those  of  the  SoaSae  sohool*  Od  tliifli 
however,  he  ingciiAed  some  doctrines  of  his  own,  the  moil  -remark- 
able of  wluch  were,  thi^  the  mo^  complete  manifestations  of  the 
Dvnmty  were  made  in  the  persons  of  holy  men,  and  particularly  in 
his  own  ;  and  that  all  men  who  did  not  join  his  sect,  were  to  be  con- 
sidered as  deatl,  and  that  their  goods,  in  consequence,  fell  to  the  lot 
of  his  partizans,  as  the  only  survivors:  the^^c  self-created  heir^  were 
entitled  to  seize  on  their  inheritan<re  when  (lu  y  pleased,  without  any 
regard  to  the  dead  proprietors,  who  might  affect  to  be  alive  in 
spile  of  the  Peere's  decision. 

jBauyazeed  was*  a  man  of  great  genius,  and  lus  religion  spread  ra- 
pidly among  the  lierdoorauneesi  till  he  wa«  able  to  aiisemble  armies, 
and  to  eettar  on  «  ee§ahr  conteii  with  the  govermneot:  he  was 
henmtm  efc  length  defeated  by  the  voyel  tioopa,  and  died  of  frtigue 
andmitation.  Hie  aons  attempted  to  aupport  hie  aeet,  m  whidi  thej. 
weeelong  enoeenful*  but  moat  of.  them  were  out  off ;  and  two  black 
iDciEB  in  the  Indus  ave  pointedoutae  the  tnuufixmed  bodies  of  Jflial- 
loodeen  and  Kemaloodeen»  the  sons  of  tlie  FeereTauredt,  who  were 
duown  into  the  river  by  command  of  Aukhoond  J>erweiclk  llMee 
socks  are  still  called  Jellalleea  and  Kemanleea,  and  being  ritaaated 
near  the  whir^poois  nuuie  by  the  junction  of  the  riiver  Caubul,  thsgr 
furnish  a  figure  to  the  orthodox,  who  say  that  it  is  natonJ  that  boots 
dMMild  be  dashed  to  pieces  against  the  bodies  of  those  heretics,  who 
had  already  caused  the  shipwreck  of  so  many  souls.  The  great 
opponent  of  the  Peeree  Tsnireek  wns  Aukhoond  Derwezeh,  a  Saujik 
of  Ikwnere,  who  now  ilie  greatest  of  all  the  saints  of  Afghauni- 
staun.  He  ha«  composed  many  voluminous  works,  u  hii  h  enjoy  an 
extensive  reputation  among  his  countrymen:  but  judging  from  what 
I  have  seen  of  them,  the  Peere  raureek  would  lonjj  have  remaineti 
unoonfuted,  d  the  argumentti  of  Aukhoond  Derwezeh  had  npt  been 
supported  by  the  arms  of  the  Mogul  emperors. 


Digitized  by  Google 


EFFECT  OF  REUGION  ON  THE  PEOPLE. 


Then  are  doubdms  mmy  odwr  aecto  ama^  the  A^^mms  the 
BMBM  cf  uliicli  have  ^teaped  my  otwcfwrtkii,  or  are  not  prwt  to 
vy  mcBMiiy ;  hat  the  nation  is  still  exempt  from  the  iaftianeg  ci 
dieir  They  are  all  strict  Soonnee  Mahomedaiw,  and  at 

they  are  occupied  about  their  own  &ith  and  observances,  without  in* 
terfering  with  other  people,  their  religious  spirit  is  far  from  being  un- 
pleasin*?,  even  in  fo11f>wers  of  Tslam.  From  their  ronvprsation,  one 
would  think  the  whole  }ieo}ile,  from  the  King  to  the  lowest  peasant, 
was  alway  s  occupied  in  holy  reflections:  scarce  a  sentence  is  utter(*d 
without  MMiie  allusion  to  the  Deity,  and  the  slightest  ocrurrenre  jji  u- 
duces  a  pious  ejaculation.  For  example,  they  never  ak  ot  any 
fiiture  event,  however  certain,  without  adding  "  Inshauiia,  '  (please 
God.)  They  even  apply  this  phnae  to  past  time,  and  will  aoswor 
A  quartkn  aboBtdiBbr  age,  "  Flowe  God,  I'«iftity<4Kre  jmn  M,^- 
Mtay  people  have  ahnrfi  a  fosary  hanging  raaad  their  wriiti  mad 
gintoteMtlMirbeada  wlwnewiiiBroiiapaiMe  in 
they  are  suppoaed  to  npeat  tho  name  of  God  iriwii  erer  the^  dnp  m 
kaad»  faufe  tlief  oAen  go  on  wliilo  tbiqr  Mte  Kitaniiiig  rttwrtitdy  to 

ahrayt  twoazing,  and  their  oatiu  iio  vttetod  wkh  aa  nnieb  aokmnity 
aa  if  they  were  befine  the  gnnreat  tribunal.  I  swear  by  God  and 
faj  hia  pia|ihet**  May  I  go  an  infidel  out  of  this  world,  if  it  ii 
^  not  true."  JMaj  ny  wife  be  three  tunea  divorced,  if  I  He/'  One 
«£  their  moat  solemn  oaths  is  by  the  n«me  of  God  (Allah),  three 
times  rep^ited  in  three  different  forms,  «  WuUah,  Billah,  Tillah." 
It  raav  be  well  to  mention  here  a  custom  they  have  m  common  with 
ail  Mussulmans',  which  they  call  imposing  an  oath  ("  Kusm  Daudun"). 
Tliia  is  a  species  of  at^uiatkin,  by  which  the  person  to  whom  the 


*  Mml  of  tUls  acconnt  otiSm  BowlmMMh  nrt  b  alMlnalsd  froas  an  otesDnt  emay 
of  ]>r.  L0pdflB'S&idisttdiTalaiiie«ftlie  AmtklUwHdi^ 

X  X  is 


Digrtized  by  Google 


oadiitf  Mdtad,  w  nqipofed  to- be  faoimdi  irtMth^ 
Hum  m  man  will  tctt  Mif^er,  "  It  is  an  oath  by  th<  K<  raun,  if  ever 
«  joa  iteveal  what  I  have  told  jwi."   *<  It  k  an  oath  by  Jeiua  ChxiBt, 
<*  the  aoul  of  Godf  that  jan  giant  my  request.**^ 

I  do  not  know  that  people  ofteo  do  thinga  disagreeable  to  them 
ndien  thin  OOigilied ;  but  it  is  a  common  apolop^^^  for  consenting;  to 
any  improper  request,  to  say  I  abould  never  h»ve  dtme  it,if  he  had 
**  not  iniposofl  an  oath  on  me." 

The  Alghauns  never  enter  on  any  undertaking  without  saving  the 
Fauteheh ;  a  custom,  1  believe,  peculiar  to  themselves.  The  Faii- 
teheh  is  the  opening  verse  of  the  Koraun,  and  is  often  used  as  a 
prayer  bv  all  the  Mussulmans.  * 

One  person  may  say  it  aloud,  and  all  the  rest  say.  Amen.  They 
hold  up  their  liands  before  ihem,  with  the  pahns  upward^  during  the 
pmyer^  and  stroke  their  &oe  and  beaida  i^ien  it  la  condnded.  Thia 
eeMOKmy  is  g<Hie  through  on  all  impoitaBt  occiaaione»  on  beginning  a 
*joiiniejjr»  onioondiiding  an  agreeoisit,  on  maniagetf  and  m  ahott  on  • 
the^oomnieiioeaient  of  moat  acta  in  li& 

No  people  .can  be  more  regular'  in  poforming  thehr  devotmM*- 
Their  ptayeri  bcgpnfaefine  day,  and  are  rapeated-five  times ;  the  last 
of  v^dilaUa  a  little  after  the  doseof  the  evening  twilight '  -The  hoor 
of  pfmyer  is  always  announced  by  the  Mweeiina  (from  the  tops  of  llie 
minaielSb  or  from  some  other  high  place)*  fay  the  shoot  of  Allaho 
Akbar,  God  is  •moat  great,"  which  is  repeated  till  it  may  be  sup- 
posed to  have  reached  the  of  all  the  faithiul.  It  is  a  solemn  and 
pleasing  sound.  When  it  is  heard,  the  people  repair  to  the  moaqneSy 
but  those  who  are  otherwise  occupied,  do  not  suffer  that  interruption. 
A  man  who  hears  the  call  in  company,  remarks  it,  and  withdraws  to 
pray  i  but  whea  I  was  in  omipaBy,  some  persona  always  continued  to 


*  Mm  be  to  Ood,  the        of  aU  cKBtura,  the  Mom  Mttdfid,  dw 
day  of  jll4gmM>li    That  do  wc  worship,  of  tliee  do  we  beg  iiinitimcii.  direct  as  in  dM 
right  way,  in  the  way  oF  those  to  whom  thou  host  hocii  gDicion'^ :  T)ot  of  those* aipjnil  * 
whom  thou  art  inceoaed,  nor  of  Uioee  who  go  astray.    (Sales  Koruuii,  page  i.) 


Digitized  by  Google 


FAST&   PILGRIMAGE.  gi9 

sit  with  me ;  the  rest  fettred  to  Uiother  ptrt  cf  the  room,  spread  out 
their  girdles  on  tibe  groiiiidt  btffak  without  any  ablution,  and  said  their 
pr»yen'  witbout  nprding  migb;  be  observing  them :  when  all 
was  donet  tliej  relumed  to  the  company  immediately,  nnd  jomed  in 
the  conversation  as  before.  Every  Mits<iulman  fiices  to  Mecca  when 
he  prays,  and  the  better  cla.sse.s  carry  ii  compass  (particularly  when 
they  are  tra\  i  lliiiL' )-  which  has  one  hnr  pointing  north  and  ^onth,  and 
another,  vvhich  lia^,  u  pigeon  at  the  enil,  and  wltif  h  poiiiLs  to  Lite  direc- 
tion in  wliich  Mecca  is  situated,  from  the  <  f)uutrv  where  it  is  made. 
Tlie  first  part  of  the  prayer  is  pcilbmud  suinding,  after  wIulIi  ihe 
devotee ^cats  himself  on  his  heels,  in  tlie  usual  Persian  manner,  and 
continues  his  devotions  ia  Uiis  attitude,  often  bending  forward  &o  as 
to  touch  the  ground  with  his  forehead.  R^ular  performsnce  of 
(Hnyer  k  not  onlj  enjoined  by  the'  religion,  but  m  IniMt  pacts  of  the 
Afjj^mih  eonatiy*  it  is  inferoed  by  the  munidpel  Uw,  end  tfiere  is  • 
vegnlsroffioer^  csUedtheMoobtesilH  wlw>piiuudM  tfaeomi^^  it, 
oir'the  bimrfi  ci  my  other  religioas  precept,  llie'&st  of  tlie  "Bam" 
ira  is  cnoifiHced  in  the  saiiuB  maaM 
jpseyepiaaniaofiomdrinking'waiter,oreyepsi^^ 
simrise  and  snnsety  it  is  felt  as  a  real  harddiipb  Foceignen*  howeter, 
an  not  mdtoatnd  on  this  account  The  pilgrimage  to  Mecca  is  in- 
cnmboit  on  every  Mossulman  once  inliis  life.  It  is  perfcnrmed  by 
many  of-  the  A%haun8.  Tbk  conunoniBSt  route  is  by  Sind»  where  the 
pilgrims  embark  for  ^Iuf?cat  or  Busora,  and  travel  by  land  to  Mecca. 
Those  of  the  north-east  go  down  the  Indus  by  water,  and  their  holy 
design  secures  them  respect,  even  from  the  most  predatory  tribes. 
Most  of  the  pilgrims  support  themselves  by  alms  during  their  jonr- 
ney  ;  and  at  Mecca  tliev  are  maintained  by  a  foundation  instituted  by 
Almied  Shauii,  wlio  ordered  a  mos(|uo  and  some  sort  of  a  caravansera 
to  be  erected  at  that  city  for  the  use  oi  Ins  uouiitrymen.  When  there 
are  few  Afpfhauns,  (he  surphis  of  this  cliarity  is  distributed  among  the 
Arabs,  wiio  are  iheretore  little  pleased  with  the  influx  of  Ai^mun  pil- 
grims. They  take  every  opportunity  of  plaguing  theR  intivldpers, 
psiticularly  by  representing  them  as  Sbeesfas,  because  they  generally 


Si4  OBSEIIVAX0B.0r  RXUOIOfN. 

use  the  lanpriiafre  of"  Persin.  All  the  At<i;haiiii  pilo;rims  speak  with 
horror  of  the  Ijarhansm  and  rapacity  of  the  Hcdcujiu  Arabs,  and  say 
that  the  most  (iesperate  man  of  the  most  predatoiy  A%haun  tribe»  is 
but  a  child  among  them. 

The  iVLihainmedaii  religion  requires  that  everv  man  slioiild  ^i\e  a 
portion  of  iiis  income  in  charitj.  All  presents  U>  hol^  men,  and  even 
the  regular  stipends  of  the  Moollahs  are  included  under  this  head, 
besides  alms  to  beggars.  In  places  distaiit  ftom  tmna,  wbiu»  tlwi* 
mn  no  beggars,  they  mkoa  money  spent  in  hoipitaUty,  as  duiily ; 
wdt  in  iMi  iMdetjpnU^doOtlhiej  limply  fulfil  die  iiQiincCioBi  of  thair 
idigion.  IXce  are  ibtbiddflny  M  aw  aU  g«n«  of  chiliM  pi^^ 
.money.  This  pmnhibWon  is  nol  etriGdy  iManded  to;  but  Ilia  Al^ 
^launa  are  little  givoi  to  gambling  Wine  la  faMiim  to  bo  lbriiidda» 
and  ia  in  Act  onlj  dzank  by-tlie  rich ;  bot»  an  intoKioMin^ 
itHigt  thoQ|^  o^pially  unlanfrful*  is  used  by  tbe  dabauGbod  in  nKMt 
parts  of  the  country.  The  people^  however,  are  among  the  soberaat 
tbat  I  hare  heard  of;  and  very  Su  surpass  the  Indians,  both  Hindoo 
and  Mahommedan,  in  that  particular.  Men,  reeling  drank  about  the 
atreet^  such  as  one  often  aeea  in  this  &amin  oity  (Fooiia)^  vonld  be 
a  prodigy  in  Afghaunistaun. 

The  officr  of  thr  Moohtesib,  whose  duty  it  U  to  superintend  the 
pubhc  morals,  is  very  invidious;  and  he  is  often  accused  of  taking 
bribes  to  let  off  the  orulltv,  and  even  of  levy  ing  coiUrihutions  by  inti- 
midating the  innocent.  His  power  extends  to  inflicting  forty  blows, 
with  a  broati  leather  htrap,  (made  on  a  pattern  prescribed  either  in  the 
Koraun  or  the  traditions),  and  to  exposing  oflRsnders  to  publit  shame, 
by  sending  them  round  the  town  on  an  ass  or  a  camel,  ¥.dth  their  ikces 
to  the  tail  I  often  saw  the  Moohtesib  of  Peshawer,  who,  though 
ahem  dm.oidinaiy  nnl^  alwa^  ifove  hk  thong  in  his  gutlle,  as  a 
maA  of  offioet  he  reemed  a  modeinle  and  aeosible  man  i  but  ho 
waa  vmy  genenn  J  in  qpoken  o£ 

IheMboBahB,-  and  aU  the  TOligioae>  evw  if  thaj  hsfe  no  ofleei» 
are  fold  of  pnaduBg  lip  an  anstftie  liie^  aiid  of  diMovt^^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


POWER  AND  niFLUENCS  OF  THE  MOOLLAHS.  215 

innoceDt  pleasure  *.  In  some  pwrtsof  the  couijrtiy»  tbe  M*>nl%%p 
break  lutes  and  fiddles,  wherever  they  find  them.  Drmfna, '^^^impflttt 
hautboyf .  and  flutes  are  exempted  fi"oni  this  proscription,  as  being 
manly  and  warlike ;  but  all  other  music  is  reckoned  effeminate,  and 
inoottsisteut  with  the  character  of  a  true  Mussulman.  This  austerity, 
howe\er,  is  little  practised  h\'  1  ho  people.  The  Moollahs  are  gene- 
rally restrained  to  censurin<:  tlie  luore  important  breaches  of  religion 
and  morality  ;  and,  in  many  part«,  they  have  no  power  at  all. 

The  Moollahs  are  very  numerous,  and  are  found  in  every  rank, 
firom  the  chief  courtiers  and  ministers  to  the  lowest  class  in  the  poorest 
and  wildest  tribes.  They  are  most  numerous  in  propoiLiou  Lo  the 
body  of  the  people  about  towns.  When  mentioned  as  a  body,  they 
ve  woally  GEiUed  the  UUm*  (or  learned)* 

Tbiy  are  generally  active,  end  umpmtMj  aide  neot  mncb  nk* 
ladindto  llie  inliBfeeti  of  tlieir  own  body^  and  canfid  to  mauilam  its 
tiBiidniicy*  Thgy  ane  mpoKMiion  of  the  greateit  part  of  the  leanb- 
iag  of  tlio  eoontiy.  Tli«  odinoaijon  of  the  yontln  the  poKtioe  iof 
the  Imt^  and  the  admmiatiaitkHi  of  juidoe  m  aU  p«ta  of  tbe  oonntay* 
QOBplolelj  nndeir  lihe  sojal  aniihcmty,  ase  entudly  ilitnultod  to  them  i 
and  tlime  adnmAagea^'  tqgetlHr  irith  tfaeiaapeet  whieh  thak  aupanor 
knowfedge  commands  among  an  ignaTwit  and  intpecititioiis  people^ 
enable  the  Moollahs  in  some  circumstaaoea  to  exercise  an  aInioat'uii» 
limited  power  over  individiials>  and  even  over  bodies  of  meo';  to 
dioak  and  controul  the  governors  and  other  civil  officers ;  and  ebnieib 
tiities,  to  intimidate  and  endanger  the  King  himself.  This  power  is 
employed  to  punish  practices  contrary  to  the  Mahomm^an  law,  when 
they  occur  amon*;  its  orthodox  professors  i  to  repress  She^dis,  and 
other  iutidcls  ;  and,  at  least  aa  often,  to  revenge  the  wrongs  or  for- 
ward the  inteBeats  of  iadividuab  of  the  reUgiowi  order.  The  inilueuce 
•  -         '  ■  ...  .  -  '-: 

•  Ahmed  Mecr  Waup?-,  of  M-hom  a  full  account  Is  given  In  ihv  historj',  obtained  by 

this  ^rrictnrsK,  very  greut  popoUrity  vrith  tbe  bulk  of  tlie  A%baunty  vhidi  be  oaed  to  de> 
throoc  jSbault  MahuuwiL  I  •  ^  -  ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


f  19        POWEE  AND  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  MOOLLAHa 

of  the  Moollahs  is  oflen  more  beDeficially  exerted  in  lecondliog 
qoMnebt  in  parts  of  the  country  where  there  are  no  other  means  of 
preserving  the  pubUc  peace.  Troops  of  these  holy  personages  often 
come  with  their  flowing  robes  into  the  midst  ot"  two  oolooasieK,  drawn 
out  tor  battle.  They  hold  cut  the  Koraun,  repeat  Arabic  pravers, 
exhort  the  people  to  remember  their  God,  and  their  common  reliLnon  ; 
and,  seldom  if  ever,  fail  to  disperse  them  4br  the  time»  if  they  do  not 
bring  about  a  permanent  re(  (uii  tliation. 

The  Mooilaiis  are  pariieulurly  powerful  about  Peshawer,  and 
through  all  the  Berdooraunee  couiiiry.  In  tlie  city  of  Peshawer,  Uie 
King's  authork>  keeps  them  in  some  restraint,  and  obliges  them  to 
jseek  redress  for  private  injuries  firom  the  civil  power,  or  to  mttt.an 
opportunity  of  fiwtening  on  their  enemy  some  diaz]ge  of  her&y  .<xe 
infiddfty*  which  may  expose  him  to  the  bigotry  ci  the  people  oar 
to  the  legal  persecutioii  of  the  Gsiuy ;  but»  in  the  iemote  parts  of 
dwt  oouotryt  sn  injury  or  an  insuk  to  a  MooUah  would  itself  be.sitf> 
ficient  to  zMSe  a  tnmiik.  On  those  iiocasions,  the  MooUshs  send 
round  to  their  brethren  to  assemble^  sospend  the  public  woiEshi|H  and 
the  ceremonies  of  borial,  prononnce  their  antagonists  infidab»  .and 
fohnallyeKcommunicate  and  curse  them.  If  this  fiuk  in  fineing  their 
enemies  to  submit,  they  parade  the  country  with  the  green  stsndsid 
of  the  prophet,  beating  drumSy  and  proclaiming  the  Selaut  (or  wamoy 
of  the  Mnssufanans).  They  announce,  that  all  who  &U  in  their  CHise 
will  be  martyrs,  and  that  all  who  fiul  to  join  them  are  excommmii- 
cated.  By  these  means,  they  soon  assemble  a  mob  (or  as  they  call  it 
themselvo;^,  an  armv)  ;  and,  as  the  Aff^hann^  are  more  afraid  of  their 
anathemas  than  ilu  ir  arms,  they  ^cnfrallv  bring  their  adversaries  to 
their  terms,  which  include  the  right  to  jilunder  and  bum  thehiQUS^of 
the  chief  ofi'eniiiTs,  and  to  impose  a  fiiu^  on  their  aljcUors. 

Stories  are  told  ol  the  walls  of  towns  tailmg  down  at  the  shout  of 
an  army  of  Moolluhs  ;  and  swords  are  blunted,  and  balls  turned  aside 
when  aimed  at  the  life  of  these  holy  personages.  Yet.  a  stand  wtiii 
once  made  against  them,  even  near  F("«5hawer,  when  the  Haukun  of 
Hushtnugger,  resisted  an  aiiuy  of  tiiem  who  came  to  enforce  an 

tl 


Digitized  by  Google 


POWER  AND  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  MOOLLAH&  217 

xmawn  ooiitnct»  and  beat  them  off  with  Iom,  to  tiie  great  joy  of  tber 
neighbonihood.   Thoag|i>tieet6d  with  great  respect  m  thia  p«t  of 
the  oountry*  I  bdieve  they  are  more  feared  than  loved.   In  the 
woatt  their  power  is  nmch  more  limited,  and  their  character  much 
mere  reapeotaUe.  The^  aire^  m  oonaeqitefioe,  generaUy  popular, 
paortaSsnlaily  in  (he  ooimtiy :  liiit»  evan  there»  they  are  complahied  of 
fat  the  vioea  of  their  otder,-  and  fer  theb  intniaive  tad  inmtiable  de- 
manda  on  the  hnapitalSty  of  the  inhabitanta*«   Even  in  dieWeat, 
their  power  has  aometimes  been  felt  in  the  townH,  paiticQlaily  dairing 
the  reign  of  Timoor  Shauli,  whose  Prime  Minister  was  a  Moollah.' 
At  that  time,  they  carried  tiieir  insolence  to  such  a  pitch  at  Candahar, 
that  a  band  of  them  attacked  Kefauyet  Khaun,  (a  Sheah  nobteman  of 
Persian  descent,  who  had  held  some  of  the  hi^est  offices  in  the  state)i 
and  rushed  into  liis  haram,  insisting  on  a  present,  and  protesting 
against  the  injustice  of  his  eating  rich  pilaws,  while  they  had  only 
dry  bread.    It  was  with  difficulty,  and  by  the  Kinf^'s  interposition 
alone,  that  the  tumult  was  appeased.    Tlieir  peculiar  vices  are  h^-po- 
crisy,  bigotry,  and  avari'^e.    Their  lives  are  sanctimonimis  in  pul)lic, 
but  .some  of  tliem  practise  all  ^oiU  oi  lie  (  n(  i< lusness  that  can  be  en- 
joyed willuuit  scaTulal  ;  and  many  are  notorious  for  the  practice  of 
usury.    Lending  money  on  interest  is  expressly  prohibited  by  the 
Koraim  ;  and  few  decent  Mussulmans  openlv  infringe  a  prohibition 
which  iL  is  so  easy  to  evade.  Most  men  content  themselves  with  lend- 
il^  their  money  to  merchants,  stipulating  for  a  share  of  the  profit 
derived  from  the  use  of  it,  or  with  placing  it  in  the  hnda*  of  haadcersi 
who  pvofem  to  employ  it  in  ooaimeroe»  and  to  aecure  the  owner  » 
certain  gain ;  bat»  many  Mooibha  lend  aivDwedly  on  compound  inte- 
zeat  and  with  good  aecority,  by  which  they  nniltiply  their  wealth  to 
an  incredible  extent*  and  have  got  posaeaaionof  k  conaidetable  ahare 


*  It  u  curious  to  oh^fTVf  the  similarity  of  mnnner'  conntrics  in  the  same  «t«j»e  of 
civilizatioii,  Uiough  tur  removed  Iruxu  eacii  oUier  boili  iu  place  and  liuie.  Chaucer't- 
gfliBpimiiii  tdt,  tBotOj  AtaaSm      iniportuiii^  cf  dw  awwdfeiai  MooMJm,  and  A* 

?  F 


I 


Digitized  by  Google 


.    MANN£tU$  OF  THE  MOOLLAH& 

of  the  Lmded  properly  of  the  Ungdovii.  Bwt,M  all  do  not  piactue 
wury*  it  may  excita  some  curioaty  to  know  how  ao  nnmerooa  •  body 
can  bcmrinteined 

Besides  those  who  have  ecclesiastical  offices,  or  pensiona  from  the 
ccown  (who  will  be  mentioned  in  another  phwe)i  and  the  more  nume>- 
rooa  daaa  of  village  Imaims,  who  receive  &  certain  ahare  of  the 
produce  of  the  crops  andflocka  in  their  districts,  maay  luwe  gianta 
of  land  from  the  King  and  from  heads  of  villages  ;  and  some  have 
received  legacies  of  land  from  individiml?!.  Some  subsist  by  teaching 
and  practising  the  law  ;  others  trach  scIiooIb,  or  are  tutors  t(»  t!ie  sons 
of  ricli  men;  some  preach,  and  are  paid  by  their  congregations  j 
some  live  hv  the  charitable  allowances  grante  il  by  the  crown,  and  by 
viilapcs  to  shulents,  or  by  tlie  alms  and  hospitality  of  ]k'c)[)Ic.  through 
whose  country  they  travel  ;  and  others,  follow  trac{(  ov  tarniing,  or 
live  on  their  own  means,  and  pursue  their  studies  and  amusements 
at  leisure. 

The  character  of  a  Moollah  is  conferred  by  an  assembly  of  members 
of  that  order  on  peramiB,  libo  heve  gone  throuj^  the  proper  course  of 
Btndy,  and  paaaed  Ihe  requiaite  esaminotion.  The  admiaaion  of  a 
candidate  ia  attended  with  a  pKBcribedftnn;  the  chief  pert  of  which  . 
ia  inveating  him  with  the  turban  of  a  Moollaht  which  ia  bound  rannd 
hia  head  by  the  prindpel  peraon  in  the  aaaembly* 

The  Moollaha  are  diatinguiahed  'by  a  partionlar  dieaa,  eonaiating  of 
a  hoge  hioae  gown  of  white  or  Uadc  cotton,  and  a  vecy  large  white 
tniban  of  a  peculiar  shape. 

There  are  no  corporate  bodies  of  MooUaha  aa  there  are  of  monka 
in  £arope»  nor  ia  the  whole  order  under  the  command  of  any  chief, 
or  anbject  to  any  particular  discipline,  likethe  dei^  in  England.  All, 
catcq>t  those  who  hold  oihcea  under  the  crown,  are  entirely  indepemdU 
ent ;  and,  the  co-operation  among  them  is  only  produced  by  a  sense 
of  common  interest.  They  all  marry,  and  live  in  other  respects  like 
laynM'Ti.  1  do  not  know  that  tliey  have  any  peculiar  manners,  except 
an  aticctation  of  strictness.  Some  of  them  affect  great  gravity,  and 
othera  take  pleasure  in  frequenting  all  companies,  and  meddling  in  all 


Digitized  by  Google 


MAKNERS  OF  THE  MOOLLAHS. 


affiurs.  One  of  thew  may  oflen  be  seen,  wiQi  a  large  titrbui.  Mid  a 
Wue  liMidkeTchier,  a  couple  of  yank  long,  over  his  shoulder,  parad. 
ing  the  streets  at  the  head  of  a  dozen  of  his  diadplca,  with  a  long 
staff  in  his  hand,  and  a  large  law  book  under  hb  armj  or  sitting  in  the 
houses  of  the  rich,  hfjranL'ninfr  the  company,  enfordng  his  doctrines 
with  his  tore  hnger,  and  shaking  his  wide  sleeve,  or  amusinp;  the  mas* 
ter  of  the  house  with  his  jokes  and  stories,  and  handin<>;  rouiul  his 
enrinuous  snutf-box  amon^  the  rest  of  the  party,  Moollahs  of  this 
sort  are  reckoned  very  pleasant  companions  ;  thev  are  i^renf  froquen- 
ters  of  .Teergas,  where  indeed  their  knowledge  gives  the  wliole  order 
much  weight  in  civil  matters. 

One  would  expect  that  the  Moollahs  would  be  great  enemies  to 
people  of  other  religions,  or  at  least  would  shun  their  society  (as  I 
beHeve  diey  do  in  PefsU),  but  this  is  by  no  means  the  case  :  1  have 
had  a  gnalilMBiy  acqnaiittuces  among  the  Moollahs,  and  found  some 
of  tlwm  ynf  ^teUigent  and  i^reeaUe.  I  was  portjoaiailj  woK  ao^ 
quainted  wfthtwo  MooBaha,  who  were  the  sons  of  the  Khaunee  Oo> 
loom  (or  loid  of  the  kamed),  one  of  the  greatest  of  die  Ulima  of  Ids 
dme$  and  I  teid  them  die  best  mlbrmed  and  most  liberal  men  I 
evermet,  eidMr  In  A^bMttistann  or  in  Indii^ 

Itb  not  easy  tosi^  wbedier  theMoollahaaiv^Qa  thewliole^aose- 
fiil  body,  orodienris&  Tbcrf  ate  of  eminent  ntditjr  in  moatpaits  of 
the  eonntry,  from  their  effect  in  moderathig  the  Tiolenoe  of  a»  imgo- 
veraed  people,  by  the  morality  which  they  inculcate^  and  from  the 
tendency  of  their  habits  to  keep  up  the  little  science  and  literature 
niddkis  known  :  I  beiiere  the  existence  of  their  order  is  beneficial  in 
the  present  situation  of  the  A%hauns;  but  it  is  more  than  probable 
that  it  obstructs  the  transition  to  a  better  state  of  things,  and  it  is  cer- 
tain that  neither  they  nor  their  religion  are  at  all  adapted  to  a  high 
stage  of  civili'/ation,  though  well  suited  to  the  rude  Arabs,  for  whom 
that  religion  was  first  invented. 

Besides  the  regular  clergy,  there  are  many  persons  who  are  revered 
for  their  own  sanctity,  or  that  of  their  ancestors.  Among  the  latter, 
the  most  Ikmous  are  the  Sijud»,  or  descendants  of  Mahomet ;  and  the 

F  F  2 


DERV1SE3,  SAINTS,  AND  OTHEB  HOLY  MEN. 


^nner  we  called  by  the  difibrent  naineB  of  Derweahea  (Denrises)» 
J^iheera*  Ac  dther  aibitrarilyt  ot  fmia  some  little  dilferenoe  in  theif 
obaervfuices ;  onie  aet  called  Kulunden  (Calenders),  for  instanoe«  ate 
remarkable  for  going  almost  naked ;  otliers  wander  from  plaice  to 
place,  and  visit  all  resorts  of  pilgrims;  while  aome  live  abrt^niona 
and  religious  lives  in  the  midst  of  towna,  and  aome  retire  to  practise 
their  austerities  io  aolilary  j^aces.  These  ascetics  have  been  esteemed 
in  Af^liaunistaun  in  all  ages,  and  half  the  histories  of  that  country  are 
filled  with  the  legends  of  the  numerous  male  and  female  saints  whom 
it  has  produced.  The  places  where  sudi  devotees  are  interred,  or 
which  have  been  distinguished  by  remarkable  actions  of  their  lives, 
are  still  cons  n  U  red  as  sacred,  and  each  of  the  most  celebrated  is  a  safe 
asvlum  even  Irojn  revenue  for  bltKxi.  The  reverence  in  which  these 
sanctuaries  are  held,  is  shewn  by  the  practice  of  the  Eusotizyesj  tlie 
most  lawless  of  all  the  tribes,  w I lere  a  clan  going  out  to  battle,  places 
its  woiuen  in  one  ol  them)  and  relies  on  their  security  in  case  of  a 
defeat. 

Many  such  saints  are  now  flourishing,  and  ilie  ignorance  of  their 
countrymen  ascribes  to  them  the  gift  of  prophetic  dreams  and  visions, 
and  the  power  of  working  miracles.  Even  the  higher  claaeeS'  htm 
fiulih  in  their  pife£ctionBy  and  the  King  often  eonsolta  them  on  the 
moat  momentous  affidrs  of  his  government. 

'  Some-  of  these  must  hare  engaged  in  Tolwitary  impostnie**  but 
the  three  most  eminent  at  Pesbawer,  whenlwaa  thete^  disaivowed  all 
pietenaions  to  supematoral  powers.  Hiey  wete  treated  with  the 
hii^est  respect,  even  the  Kingrefiisiiig  to  be  seated  befiive  tfaerti  tiH 
he  waa  pressied;  but  they  did  not  seem  to  solicit  these  honour^  end 
they  discussed  the  conduct  of  government^  and  reprehended  its  vices 


•  I  have  ill  my  possession  a  book  of  iiiirnclf^  wrought  by  tbe  fauums  saint  t)f  Clium- 
kunnec,  the  spirituat  director  of  Ahmed  Shauh.  It  contains  accounts  of  many  miracles 
pcrfourmed  within  these  My  years.  It  was  given  me  by  the  son  c£  the  saint,  and  as  it 
int  written  in  his  life  tiiBi^  an^  atteiled  hf  tauf  it  Ui  adiote^  H  ii  dllkidt  Io  acqiilt 
Un  tS  find  vt  frlMliooiL 


Digitized  by  Google 


ALCHYMY  AND  MAGIC 


nsottlolbr  maint«ining  thdrUgk  veputatioD)  wm  gtett  aiulerity  of 
Mb  ;  th^  are  flddom'TCiy  learned,  and  the  two  emineDt  ntnts  that  I 
saw,  were  6ree  from  every  kind  of  afl^talion.aii|i  grimace,  and  onlj 
4irtingwiahed  &om  other  people  by  the  tupmm  mildneeB  of  their 

manners.* 

The  belief  in  these  false  saints  is  not  the  only  superstition  of  the 
Afghauns :  manv  instances  of  their  credulity  appear  in  my  journal, 
but  I  may  mention  Mnue  here,  which  X  have  not  noticed  in  tiuit 
place. 

'  AW  thr  At'^rlKiuns  i)rlit  ve  in  aiehymy  and  magic,  in  which  wtsthey 
think  tlie  Indians  great  adepts.  The  King's  Iniaum  was  continually 
in  pursuit  of  the  phil<M!opher's  stone;  and  when  I  was  at  Peahawer,  he 
was  diligently  engaged  in  seardi  of  it,  a;^isted  by  an  Indian  Miusul- 
man  who  had  ktely  retmned  from  Mecca.  Many  invectives  are 
leveBed  et  ddmt  in  the  Sjotaim,  jet  the  Ikaanm  apent  part  of  every 
dsjr  in  superintending  it,  wasted  agood.deal  ofimoiMgr  on  tfae  pier 
paratioosi  and  trealwl  his  eoacjjwfar  with  the  utmoat  oonfidenee'  and 
atteDtioii* 

Anativeof  Feshawerof  aboot  sixty  yean  'oid,  who  is  now  in  my 
scmoe^  6D  in  love  sane  tiine  ago.with  agiil  of  Foonat  and  he  was 
diaoowvd  within  t|pi»  week  by  some  of  his  ooontiyniens  closeted  wUh 


'*  Haujee  Mcean,  one  of  die  gtwrteit  saints  nt  Peshawer,  sent  to  me  to  beg  Aat  I 
would  tell  him  what  severities  were  prncdaed  by  tlie  g(Klly  in  Europe;  his  mf^nirp  was 
unluckily  entrusted  to  a  Persian  who  attended  the  mission  on  the  King's  part,  and  who 
finom  hit  religion,  oonld  have  no  great  reverence  fiw  devotees  of  the  Soonnee  persua^ 
sion.  Accordingly,  when  I  told  him  that  our  clergy  peifermed  no  austerities,  but  thought 
they  recommended  them  sol  vp5i  to  Go<I  by  leading  a  virtuous  and  religious  life:  he 
begged  me  aot  to  disappoint  the  holy  nuui,  but  to  favour  him  with  a  few  penances  in 
which  he  ra^t  imddge  hia  teaL  I  then  md  Aat  there  mm  other  paru  of  Eorope 
where  the  devout  exposed  t1ipm«(  !\ (  <  to  'jrcnt  stttflFering«^ .  rriu!  nirntionedall  I  could  recol- 
lect of  hair  bhirts  and  tlagellatiuii.  The  Persian  thanked  me  with  a  mischievouii  smile,  said 
1w  WM  am  die  Huu^  ^mM  be  MUfljIy  obliged  to  and  took  hi*  Icsve^  cndently 
IploMed  «^  the  aanMOMm  he  bad  pnenNd  fer  bk  enplog^ 


V 


Digrtized  by  Google 


GHOSTS. 


an  IndiiD*  and  performing  a  variety  of  incwtatioiMi  lor  the  tnupoie-of 

fascinating  the  affectima  of  his  miatreia»  - 

Near  Candahar  is  a  cam  called  the  cave  of  Junuhaedf  to  the  end 
of  which  it  is  impoaaible  to  penatnto*  apparently  on  account  of  a 
torrent  whidi  obstructs  the  paange}  but  tkH  A%hMiii»  ralate^  thai 

after  advancing  a  certain  distance,  one  hears  the  roar  of  winds  and  the 
rushing  of  waters,  and  that  all  progress  is  soon  stopt  by  a  wheel 
armed  with  swords,  which  is  whirled  round  wit!?  such  force  an <1  velo- 
city as  threatens  to  annihilate  every  thin^  that  approaches  it.  Some 
bold  adventurers,  however,  have  overcome  these  obstacles,  and  reached 
a  most  enchanting  garden  in  the  bowds  of  the  earth.  Thev  di  scribe 
the  verdure  of  this  delicious  region,  its  bowers,  woods,  fliul  lawns; 
its  transparent  streams,  and  its  flowers  ol  a  ilu>usaiid  biillianL  hues,  as 
far  surpassing  anv  scene  that  the  human  imagination  can  figure; 
while  the  exquisite  iiuit.s,  ihe  perfumed  breeze:5,  aaici  Uie  ravishing 
music  which  fior  ever  resounds,  are  equal  to  the  warmest  pictures  of 
the  Mahommedan  paradise. 

Hie  ^fjjf^mmm  .bdieve  cadi  of  the  nmnesoiu  mUtmbsi  m  the 
moimtaina  and  desarts  of  thdr  ooimtiy  to  be  inhabited  by  a  kndljr 
demODt  whom  they  call  the  GhooUee  Beeabaun  (the  Goule  or  ^imt 
of  the  waile)  $  they  represent  fahn  as  a  gigantic  and  frightful  spedMb 
who  devoma  way  pasaangv  whom  diance  may  hdog  within  his 
haunts.  It  is  to  Ihb  spirit  that  th^  ascribe  liie  illutton  by  whldi 
traveUera  are  often  led  to  believe  that  they  see  sheets  of  water  in  the 
midst  of  the  desait,  and  they  figure  him  watching  near*  to  sciae  the 
unhappy  wanderer  who  may  be  misled  by  his  aitifice»  and  tear  him 
to  pieces.  * 

They  haveall  a  great  reverenoe  for  burial  grounds,  which  they  some- 
times call  by  the  poetical  name  of  cities  of  the  silent,  and  which  they 
people  with  the  ghosts  of  the  departed,  who  sit  each  at  the  head  of 


*  Ynok.  diis  popular  superstilkHO,  they  often  iUuttmte  an  scoount  of  the  vildness  of  anj 
sequestered  tiib%  by  Mjing  that  tfasgr  «n  Glkook*  Bahnm  (wildwtlie  d«BMns  cf  tfc* 


uiyiiizeo  by  LiOOglc 


DIVINATION. 


hit  iftm  gn/n,  asvMUb  tO'moct»l  ejnetf  md  e^foj  the  odoufs  of  the 
gniands  iiliidii«  fanng  oil  and  of  die  moenae  wluch  is 

bonied  by  thmr  surviving  relations*  Tbey  believe  in  nmay  other 
IdndB  of  genii  and  spirits  ;  but  I  do  not  think  I  hove  ever  heard  of 
the  apparition  of  the  i^ioeta  of  the  dead  The  glorified  spirits  of  the 
four  first  Caliphs,  however,  were  seen  clothed  with  fire,  on  ahillom 
Caubul,  during  the  battle  between  the  Sheeahs  and  Soonnees. 

They  believe  in  dreanu,  in  which  a  sufficient  latiti^  of  interpre- 
tation is  allowed,  to  admit  of  their  ^sy  application  to  any  event.  A 
man  of  some  conseqiieTice  told  me,  that  r^t  one  time  while  he  was  flving 
from  the  persecution  of  Waffadar  Klian  (then  Grand  V^izier),  he 
dreamed  tliat  he  saw  the  Viaier  dressed  entirely  in  black,  with  a 
melancholy  countenance,  and  with  his  hand.s  shrivelled,  and  so  weak 
that  ht^  attempted  in  viun  to  untie  his  own  t^irdle.  Sixjii  after  thef 
dreamer  woke,  a  man  broke  in  on  a  private  interview  between  him 
and  another  great  man,  witlk  intelligence  that  the  Vizier  was  deposed 
and  taken  prisoner. 

They  also  pry  into  fiiturity  by  astrological  and  gcomantic  calcuhi- 
tions,  and  by  all  sorts  of  diviiifltloil  end  sortilege.  Their  commonest 
method  of  divination,  is  by  eotaiTiining  tUe  merin  kk  the  blade  bone  of 
a  she^,  held  up  totlvB  light,  which,  though  practised  by  people  of  edx^ 
alAaa,  ii  no  liefel«r  cdeukited  to  work  m  the  inM^netaon,  or  dude 
the  nndBfrtindingtthMi  our  own  diaooveiy  cf  fiitnie  erentsfiom.oo^ 
fee  grounds.  Thej  tiao  form  -pressgea  fiom  drawing  lots*  horn  the 
position  ^mnuA  bj  nnom  poured  cnelctalj  oat  of  «  quiw,  end 
above  all,  by  tiffff^**»™g  their  nMsries,  while  they  think  of  the  design 
iriiich  they  pvcjeot*  snd  judging  its  ftronieUe  or  nnfimirsUe  resndt, 
a*  tliennttber  of  tlie  head  they  happen  to  toudutamaout  tobeodd 
or  even,  in  canntlng  firotn  the  top  of  the  string.  I  remember  a  ooo- 
venation  irfudi  I  had  (immediately  before  Shauh  Shooja's  great 
itoiggle  agunst  his  competitor  in  1809)  with  one  of  that  Frittce*B 
Pernan  ministers,  who  told  me  that  he  had  now  good  reason  to  rdy 
with  certainty  on  his  master's  success.  I  listened  with  attention,  ex- 
pedang  to  bear  of  a  conespondoice  with  some  of  the  great  lords  of 


224 


80RTE8  VIRGILIANA 


the  other  iptettyf  wad  I  was  a  good  deal  surprised  to  find  the  mitriiter** 

confidence  arose  entirely  from  the  result  of  some  augury  firom  the 
position  of  arrows.  The  minister  observed  my  disappointment,  and 
proceeded  to  remove  it,  by  assuring  me  that  he  had  as  little  fiuth  - 

as  I  had  in  the  vulgar  metli<Hls  of  divination,  but  that  this  par- 
ticului  mode  was  oae  recommeoded  by  the  prophet,  and  never 

known  to  fail. 

The  Atghauns  (though  as  great  diviners  in  other  respects)  do  not 
think  these  appeals  to  Providence  so  necessary  bel'ore  tbev  com- 
mence any  undei lakiag,  and  make  a  merit  of  their  Towukkul  Ixh 
Khooda,  or  reliance  upon  God.  They  not  unfrequently  begin  a 
journey  by  a  short  prayer,  which  commences,  "  I  place  rov  reliance 
**  on  Almighty  God,"  &c.  &c  It  is  common  witli  them  to  encou- 
rage a  man  to  embark  in  a  difficolt  adrentore,  by  saying  Towuk- 
«  kill  be  Khooda  Khoona  booiow,**  *'  Vuk  your  trust  in  God,  and 
«  go  on." 

Hie  most  elegant  means  employed  to  prognosticate  liituie  events, 
is  one  which  answers  to  our  Sortes  Viigilianss.  It  is  perfiirined  bgr 
opening  a  book  at  random,  and  applying  the  fint  vene  tliat  meets  the 
eye,  to  the  snlgect  of  the  inquiry:  th^  best  book  for  the  purpose  is 
the  Korann,  and  the  trial  ought  tobe  pteoeded  by  finting  and  prayer, 
which  indeed  ate  necessary  in  all  attempts  at  dhinayon:  othcrbooki 
aie^  however,  employed,  and  the  poems  of  Haufia  ine  perhaps  as  much 
used  as  the  Koraun.  The  following  happy  ooinddcnce  oocuned  to  a 
person  at  Lahore,  who  consulted  Haufiz  at  the  beginning  the 
troubles  produced  by  the  deposition  of  Shauh  Zemaun,  which  ended, 
after  three  years  of  confusion,  in  the  elevation  of  Shauh  Sbooja,  Hia 
object  was  to  ascertain  which  of  the'  sons  of  Timour  Shauh  would, 
obtain  tlie  throne  in  the  end,  and  the  verse  that  met  his  ejre  was  die 
fijUowing: 

**  Sdber  iukutiice  ghee  bum  resecd  uiuzh  dch  bcgooiti, 
f*  JUk  Down  Shanbi  Skkotjau  lut  mye  dilcer  be  nooah." 

to 


Digitizeo  by  Googlc 


S0BTE8  VmOHJANiE. 


S85 


**  At  the  (liiwn  a  voice  firom  the  invisible  world  brought  these  giad  tidinga  to  my  ear. 
« It  ii  die  ni^  of  SliMdi  Shoc^  %  drink  wiM  ind  be  ImU 

The  A^hmww  believe  in  the  power  of  tiJiiimaiMs  in  the  poaaibility  ^ 
of  eoquiring  a  oontiotil  over  genii  and  diBmoDs,  and  hareniunberleM 
other  aopentitioiu ;  but  I  Have  already  given  a  sufficient  Bpecimen 
of  Ihmt  nature. 


! 

•  Shenh  Shoojau  means  a  brave  king  in  Persiaiit  in  which  saue  it  seems  to  be  used  bgr 


Digitized  by  Google 


(    226    )  ' 

♦ 

CHAP.  VL 

BOiPtTAUTT.— 'PKEDATOBT  HABITS,  &C 

/^NE  of  the  most  remarkable  characteristics  of  tlie  Afghauns,  is 
their  hospitality.  The  practice  of  this  virtue  is  so  mucli  a 
iMtiftiMil  point  of  honour,  that  tliar  reproach  to  inheritable  man, 
is  that  he  has  no  Pooahtoonwuliee,  (nothing  of  the  customs  of  die 
A)%^nni8).  All  peraons  mdisczuninately  are  entitled  to  profit  by 
this  piacCice;  and  a  man,  who  travelled  over  the  ^ole  oountiy 
ivithout  money,  would  neirer  be  in  want  of  a  mealr  unless  peihaps  in 
towns.  Itistheg^reatestofaffirontstoanA4;|ia«ntoGaiTyoffhisguest; 
but  his  indignation  is  never  directed  against  the  guest  who  quits  him, 
but  the  p^son  who  invites  him  away*  AH  thedetula  of  the  practkse 
of  hospitality  will  appear  in  the  particular  account  of  the  tribes ;  but 
I  idiall  here  mention  some  customs  connected  with  that  principle. 

The  most  remarkable  is  a  custom  peculiar  to  this  people  and  called 
Nannawantee,  (from  two  Pushtoo  words, meaning  *<  I  have  come  in"). 
A  person,  who  has  a  &vour  to  adk,  goes  to  the  house  or  tent  of  the 
man  on  whom  it  depends,  and  refuses  to  sit  on  his  carpet,  or  partake 
of  his  hospitality,  till  he  shall  grant  the  boon  required.  The  honour 
of  the  party  thus  solicited  will  incur  a  stain  if  he  does  not  grant  the 
favour  askrd  of  him  ;  nnd,  so  far  is  the  practice  carrieil,  that  a  man 
over-matched  by  his  enemies,  will  sometimes  go  inmnawautee  to  the 
.house  of  another  man,  and  entreat  him  to  tal<o  nyi  his<|uarrel ;  which 
the  other  is  obliged  to  do,  unless  he  is  utterlv  unable  to  mierfere 
with  effect,  or  unless  some  circumstance  render  his  mterference 
obviously  improper.  * 


•  Tt  appoured  to  rae  at  first  that  tht-ro  wns  gome  rcscmblnncr  b,mvf-cn  nannnw  nyfee  and 
the  wdl  known  Indian  custcm  of  Dbunuu    They  are,  however,  entirely  unlike.  In 


1 


Digrtized  by  Google 


HOOPmUTV.      :  :  227 

A  stiU  ftntnger  appeal  is  made  when  a  woman  sends  her  veiLto  «ii 
^%haun,  and  implores  his  assistance  for  heraelf  or  h^  ftxhily.  Jt 
was  by  this  expedient  that  Timour  Shauh*s  queen  prevailed  on  Sirir 
^auz  Khaun,  (the  father  of  the  present  Grand  Vizier),  to  afford  his 
pssistance  in  the  elevation  of  Sliauh  Zemaun  to  the  throne)  suievtsotq 
phieily  brourrht  about  by  his  intiuciu  i\  '  . 

This  last  custom  is  not  connot  t  i  d  with  the  laws  of  hospitality  ;  but 
it  is  those  laws  alone  which  proti  ct  everv  individual  who  has  entered 
the  house  ot  an  Atghaun.  A  nmn  s  l)itterest  enemy  is  sale,  wliilc  he. 
Is  under  his  roof;  and  a  stranger,  who  has  come  into  an  Atghaun's 
house  or  tent,  is  under  the  protection  of  the  master  as  long  as  he 
9tays  in  the  villa^je.  From  this  principle,  arises  the  obligation  of 
protecting  and  delendiug  a  fugitive,  whatever  may  be  his  crime  ;  aud 
hence  the  fretjuency  of  elopements  with  women  from  one  Oulooss 
|«  another,  and  of  the  refuge  found  by  murderers  in  a  similar  flight 

The  protection,  which  the  rights  of  hospitality  confer,  does  not, 
iKmever,  extend  beyond  the  lands  of  the  viUaget  or  at  moflt,  of  the 
tiibe;  and,  there  ve  undoubted  tertimonies  of  AJ|^Miuns,  of  predatory 
tribes  entegrtaining  a  ti«reiUer»  and.  disnuaring  him  with  presents,  and 
jet  robbing  htm  when  they  met  him  agam,  after  he  mi  out  of  their 
pioteotion*  * 

It  seems  astonishing  to  an  Eoropeanf  -  that  the  redpioeal  good 
offices,  which  must  pass  between  the  host  and  the  gnest^  should  not 


^hurna,  both  parties  fast;  and  it  is  hvmgor  ivfiicfi  cnfhrcc,  n  ronTfjlinnrc  ^vitli  theilemaad. 
Jn  Kunmtwautee^  oo  th«  conttarjr,  there  is  no  restraint  on  either  party's  eating,  and  the 
Ibreeof  die  pnctioe  bewi  on  Ae  honour  done  of  Ihe  penon  to  whom  it  bcBfected.  '  It  it 
.aomeChitig  like  the  castom  of  the  Romaiu,  by  which  a  suppliant  enlmd  •  house,  and 
IHftti.'d  liimselfin  silence,  with  his  head  veiled,  on  the  heart li.  Thr  custom  of  thr-  GrrfV^s 
resembles  that  now  alluded  to ;  and  the  bdiaviour  ot  Ul^-i>&e»«  to  Circ^  when  he  ro- 
to  partdw  of  her  binqiMl^  tin  aihe baa  diaendianted  Ui  iHends,  (Od.  K.  verse  375, 
&c)  is  exactly  in  the  spirit  of  amiiawaiitcr.  • 
•  A  mo«t  remarkable  instance  of  this  spirit  has  l>oen  mentioned,  in  ( 
of  two  gentlemen  of  the  Mia«ion,  who  went  to  Deranbund. 

G  G  2  .  .  . 


M  H08PITAX.TIY  JlVD  EAFAGITr: 

•oon  form  a'  connection  sufficiently  strong  to  preirent  tiieir  injuring 
mch  other  after  the  rights  of  hospitality  have  ceased ;  and,  in  fact, 
there  h  no  point  in  the  Af^aun  charact  er  of  which  it  is  more  difficult 
to  get  a  dear  idea,  than  the  mixture  of  sympathy  and  indifference,  of 
generosity  and  rapacity,  which  is  ob^crvfif^lr-  in  fhrir  conduct  to 
strangers.  In  parts  of  the  country  where  the  government  is  weak, 
they  seem  to  think  it  a  matter  of  course  to  rob  a  stranger,  while  in 
all  other  respects  they  treat  him  with  kindness  and  civility.  So 
much  more  do  thev  attend  to  grantiti^  favours  than  to  respecting 
rights,  that  the  same  Af'Miaun  who  would  plunder  a  traveller  of  his 
cloak,  li' he  had  one,  v  oald  give  him  a  cloak  if  he  had  none.  If  these 
inconsistencies  only  appeared  in  their  own  country,  their  behaviour 
might  be  owing  to  their  natural  love  of  gain  ;  and  their  point  of  ho- 
nour, with  respect  to  guests.  But,  \io\v  are  we  to  explain  the  suuie 
conduct,  when  their  meeting  in  a  foreign  country  gives  tlic  stranger 
no  claims  on  their  hospitality  ?  All  the  authentic  accounts  I  have  of 
the  treatment  of  atcsngers  by  Atghauns,  either  m  liheiv  own  country 
or  ebeipfaere,  give  ma  nii|»eui<m  of  phihaidiropj  and  poiiteneflB, 
^niien  dbere  was  no  temptatkm  to  cleptrt'fiNim  those  princ^les.  But* 
Inhere  theie  was  any  ukUicement  to  plunder  the  stranger,  and 
sometimeB  when  mndi  was  to  be  gained  by  dec^ving  him«  there  was 
no  great  appearance  of  justice  and  good  fiuth.  Hie  traldi  is,  those 
viitues  are  not  neoessaiy  oonoomitants  of  general  kindness^  norougjit 
we  to  infer  the  want  of  the  one  from  the  absouse  of  the  other.  Jus- 
tke  and  good  fidth,  cannot  peihflps  subsist,  unless  they  are  supported 
hy  laws  and  goremment  $  while  the  veiy  drcumstance  of  the  pobHe's 
leaving  men  to  themselves,  obliges  individuals  to  assist  andtodepen4 
on  each  other*  It  is  probably  to  this  last  cause,  that  we  are  to  aftti>' 
bote  the  siqieriority  of  most  Asiatics  in  the  minor  points  of  general 
humanity  over  Englishmen  of  the  same  rank  in  life^  to  whom  they 
are  &r  inferior  in  all  other  good  qualities. 

Th6  frequency  with  which  travellers  are  plundered,  iqypears  to 
originate  in  the  defects  of  the  Pooshtoonwullee.  That  law  relies  on 
the  eiertioDs  of  the  ii^ured  person,  his  relations,  and  his  tribes  for 


Uigitizeo  by  LiOOgle 


-RAPINE. 


229 


otenring  him  joilioei  iad,  as  s  rtwiger  Int  nsitliar  fobtiflni  not 
tnbe»iM>proviai0n'i8iiiBdB  for  liu  wearily    In  ptoof  of  diis  pnipo- 

sition,  it  may  be  observed,  that  tlie>A%^uns  do  not  in  ganenl 
plander  the  lands  of  their  nei^iboiin>  or  rob  individualsy  who  reside 
in  thdr  part  of  the  eumilry,  and  that  it  is  only  tfsreUers  who  are 
H^le  to  this  oppression.  This  habit  of  rapine  prevails  in  vetj 
difibrent  cbgrees,  at  difierent  times,  and  in  different  parts  of  the 
toaatry.  The  King^s  government  protects  people  of  all  deacriptioM 
alike,  as  far  as  its  power  extends ;  and,  in  conaequenoe^  when  the 
government  is  established,  a  man  runs  little  risk,  except  among  the 
tribes,  wliose  situation  enables  them  to  set  the  King  at  defiance* 
During  civil  wars,  on  the  rontrary,  the  whole  kiTiirdom  is  let  loose  ; 
and  a  traveller  may  be  plundered  with  as  much  impunity  within  sight 
of  Caubul  as  in  ihe  mouniaiii.s  of  the  Vizeerees.  The  habit  of  cood 
order,  however,  prevents  the  inhabitants  of  the  parts  of  the  country 
which  are  usually  settled,  from  runumg  into  tlit.se  excesses,  and  it  is 
probably  only  the  worst  individualii  among  them  who  betake  them* 
selves  to  habitual  rapine.  *  ■ 

The  tifbes  most  addicted  to  rapine  in  the  West,  are  iht  Atdbndtsje 
IvnuKdi  of  the  Do(»aaneeB»  and  those  of  the  Noorzyes,  idio  hdiahit 
the  desart  eountiy  on  die  borden  of  Penia  and  Bdonhistan,  and  Aat 
part  of  the  Toikfaee  bianch  of  the  Ghiljiesr  which  oGoupies  »  poition 
of  die  Paiopsmisan  mountains.  Tlie  hn^  of  the  lest-  na^tA  be 
passed  with  tolerable  safety,  unless  in  times  of  great  oon&aion  ;'-biit 
the  long  diaocders  of  the  government  are  p^i^  akeiing  th^  dw- 
TBcter  in  this  respect  for  the  worse.  Hie  pastoral  tribes  in  the  West 
ere  said  to  be  more  gnea  both  to  robbery  and  theft,  than  those  who 
live  by  agriculture  All  the  tribes  of  the  range  of  Solimann,  eap^ 
dally  the  Khyberees  and  the  Viateerees,  are  notorious  plunderers,  and 
rob  under  the  express  direction  or  sanction  of  their  internal  govern- 
ment. The  othor  Eastern  Afghauns  are  all  disposed  to  plunder 
when  they  dare.  When  quite  free  from  all  apprehension  of  th  e  roya 
power,  they  openly  rob  on  the  highway.  When  their  security  is  not 
ao  gieatt  they  levy  excnbitaat  customs,  or  b^  in  a  manner  that  is  not 


Digrtized  by  Google 


SaO  SAFEGUARDa 

to-be  ■efivedf  Mid  steal  when  they  due  not  rob ;  but,  fot  $,  pomidef^ 
dbJe  exteot  roimd  the  towns,  »  trvvdler  it  tolenljlj  safe  under  the 
protectioii  of  the  royal  anthoritj. 

It  18  pQMible,  in  all  tribes,  ezoept  the  Khybeceet,  tDobtamsaecaie 
passage  through  their  territories  by  a  prerious  agreeaaent  with  the 
MeA,  who,  for  a  small  present,  wUl  liiniish  an  esoort,  under  whose 
protection  a  stranger  may  travel  with  perfect  safety.  A  single  man  is 
asnflBdeat  esoott  in  most  tribes  $  but  where  the  internal  government 
Is  vay  weaik,  4xe  where  there  is  much  fear  of  tiie0,  it  is  usual  to  ghre 
a  psitj  proportioned  to  the  quantity  of  property  to  he  defended.  It 
is  remaritable  that  these  arrangements  are  mo«t  eAbctualwith  the 
tribes  who,  having  least  connection  with  the  Kio^  have  usually  most 
predatory  habits*  In  those  tribes  it  seems  to  be  thought  that  the 
Oolooss  having  no  relations  with  a  stranger,  is  at  liberty  to  attack 
him,  and  that  such  an  attack  is  to  be  considered  as  honourable  war*, 
but  that  when  they  have  promised  protection,  they  are  bound  in  good 
faith  to  afford  it :  the  people  of  the  subject  tribes,  on  the  other  hand^ 
are  well  aware  of  the  guilt  of"  robbery,  and  when  any  of  them  are 
depraved  enough  to  practise  it,  little  sense  of  honour  is  to  be  ex.- 

pectrd  ot  lliem. 

In  all  cases,  it  must  be  observed,  to  the  honour  of  the  Afn^hauns, 
th:if  their  robberies  are  never  aggravated  bv  murder :  a  ni;in  ii\a\  be 
killed  in  defending  his  property,  but  he  wiU  not  be  put  to  death  atler 
he  has  ceased  to  resist. 

I  say  iioihing  of  the  plunder  oi  whole  caravans  by  the  leaders  of 
parties  during  civil  wars.  This  is  acknowledged  to  be  an  expedient 
only  justified  by  necessity,  ar^d  a  promise  of  rq[»ayment  in  better  times 
is  always  held  out  to  the  ^uiierers.  • 


Book  L  diipi  5* 


Digitizeo  by  LiOO^K 


(   281  ) 


CHAP,  m 

MANNXBS)  COfTOMS,  AND  OHAKACTER  OP  THE  APGUAUNS. 

THE  manner  of  life  of  the  A%hauns  is  by  no  means  uniform 
throughout  the  country,  and  for  varieties  I  must  again  refer  to 
thr  detailed  accounts  of  the  tribes,  but  T  shall  adlicre  to  my  plan  of 
)ni  iitioning  in  this  place  all  that  is  common  to  the  whole.  One  great 
cause  of  flivprsity  it  is  nec  essary  to  mention  even  here.  This  is  the 
division  ot  the  nation  into  inhal)ilanls  of  tents  and  of  houses.  Those 
who  live  in  tents  are  chieiiy  to  be  loimd  in  the  West,  where  tliey  pro* 
bably  amount  to  one  half  of  the  populat  ion  ;  but  as  all  over  the  East 
the  people  live  in  houses,  the  proportion  of  that  last  class  must  greatly 
preponderate  in  the  nation.  It  is  probable  that  the  number  of  those  in 
tents  has  diminished,  and  I  am  oi  opinion  tiiat  it  is  still  diminishing* 
The  facility  with  whicii  tribes  clianged  their  residence  in  former  times, 
appears  to  countenance  the  belief»  that  most  of  them  were  shepherds^ 
and  lired  m  tonto;  thougii  it  cannot  be  denied  that  great  emigrar* 
^onsof  agrienkuiftl  tribes  hsre  also  taken  plaoe. 

The  nMMremflnt  of  the  Eniofrjpca  from  t£e  frontiers  of  PeraaBro*' 
per  to'tboae  mS  Indk  is  xebted  in  another  pUce.  The  other  tribes 
voond  Pedunrer  are  alao  tnwed  from  the  east  of  KhcMcassami  of  their 
present  seats :  at  a  stiU  later  period,  the  Ghiljies  moved  from  a  great 
part  of  dieir  lands,  at  the  command  of  Nsndir  Sliaub,  and  made 
room  for  a  portion  of  the  Doomtmees.  This,  however,  was  a  com- 
pulsoij  lemovalf  enfiwoed  faj  a  powerfid  oonqueror,  end  no  Tokm^ 
iaty  emigfilionis  knoimto  have  oocorred  within  a  centuiy  i  a  pmol^ 
as  it  appears  to  me^  that  the  people  hare  betaken  themselves  to  agri* 
cohnfi^  A  pwnnt  which  naturdl/  attadies  fliemsdves  to  the'soiL  It 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


88S 


PA8T0IUL  tIFE. 


is  not,  perhaps,  so  evident  that  this  disposition  is  still  increasing,  but 
we  find  numbers  of  people,  who,  though  tliey  still  live  in  tents,  yet 
arc  employed  in  husbandrv,  and  never  move  from  their  fields  ;  and 
this  seems  very  obviously  to  be  a  stage  in  their  progress  from  raovitrg 
with  the  seasons,  and  cultivating  a  spot  ot"  ground  at  their  sumiiu  r 
station,  to  building  houses  for  permanent  residence.  A  recent  exam- 
ple is  found  in  the  Stooreeaunees,  of  a  tribe  which  has  abandoned 
pasturage  for  tillage,  but  on  the  other  hand,  there  do  not  want 
examples  ol'  people  who  have  exchauged  a  fixed  iur  a  wandering 
life. 

One  of  the  most  judidous  of  inodera  travellers  has  observed,  that 
Uiou^h  habit  may  render  «  wandering  life  agi<ieable,  yet  there  are 
only  two  cauaeB  which  can  oxigbiidfy  have  mdoisad  mai  io  adopt  it. 

Itt  The  bfldnem  of -the  aoil  of  theb  coontiy,  whidi  oblige  them 
to  wander  fkt  in  aeaich  of  Bubdstenoe ;  and,  2d.  The  opendoo  of 
die  bad  government  vaadet  whidi  they  live»  oompdling  them  to  elude 
its  opprefldon  by  a  fieqaent  diange  of  abode*.  I  muat  donfina  dw 
example  of  die  A%haiin8  doea  not  lead  me  to  agree  with  tlua  theorjr. 
Among  the  A^^ans,  a  postofnd  life  appeara  to  me  to  be  die  moat 
popular,  men.enter  on  It  with  pleasure,  and  abandon  It  with  legBeti 
and  it'ia  to  habit  diiefly  that  we  are  to  attribnte  the  raronev  of  ax- 
amplea  of  tribes  relinquishing  their  fields*  to  betake  themselves  .to 
pasturage.  Beddes  exempdon  from  the  cf^ressien  of  the  nijyil 
government  (an  exemption  bj  no  means  pecnliar  to  shepherd  tiribea), 
the  pastoral  life  has  many  advantages  to  recommend  it.  It  is  easy* 
careless,  and  secure,  supplying  plenty  without  demanding  labour,  unit- 
ing the  advantagea  of  Tarioos  climates,  and  afibrding  a  relief  fiKun  the  - 


*  Voyage  par  Voln^,  chap.  xxiiL  sect.  3.  I  cannot  mention  this  w^Uer  witliout  o&exiag 
my  dender  tribule  of  appknietoUB  merit*.  Among  many  odm  tdcota,  he  poeseMetiB 
•  remarkable  il^TM^  duit  of  pointiiig  oot  what  is  peculiar  to  the  ttflUIMn  and  insdtutiona 
♦>f  t^t  Ea<it,  by  comparing  and  contrasting  tliem  with  thoae  of  Europe:  #0  far  does 
he  excel  all  other  writera  in  this  respect,  that  if  one  wuh«ft  thortHigbly  to  uaUeratand 
odkr  tXMcilem  in  Uahmmdm  comitvks,  it  m  necmwiy  Io  haw  nad  IMnqr  fint 


Digitizeo  by  Google 


HOUSES  AMtf  nXRinTOllE  OV  THS  COMMON  PEOPLE.  233 

ligllfliMiBM  of  idleBess,  in  frequent  change  of  scene,  and  in  the 
never-&iling  resource  of  field  sports.    The  shepherds  are  also  in  a 
great  measure  emancipated,  even  from  the  controul  of  their  internal 
governTnent,  b%  tlieir  dispersion  for  the  greater  part  of  the  year.  A 
few  families  close  h  connected  by  blood,  and  en|(n  ing  an  extont  of 
coimtrv  far  beyond  their  wants,  need  no  magistrate  to  preserve  their 
peat  o,  and  aUboui^h  the  state  of  a  Ireeman  under  the  limited  authori- 
ties of  an  Oolooss,  may  be  independent,  it  cannot  be  compared  with 
that  ot  u  society  alike  exempt  from  the  restraint  of  government,  and 
the  disorders  of  anarchy.    The  principal  motive  I  can  discover  for 
the  Teliiiquishuient  of  so  enviable  a  way  of  life,  is  the  same  which 
M.  Volney  has  assigned  for  its  adoption :  the  difficulty  ul  procuring 
subsistence.    This  difficulty  must  be  experienced  in  a  mudi  greater 
d^ree  by  a  ^ven  number  of  sh^herds,  than  by  an  equ^  number  of 
Imibndiiiaiy  sud  acooidingly  it  is  onfy  while  the  population- is  veiy 
^Oflifined,  IB  pMpoftioii  to  the  oomtijf  thet  %  pBslonl.  hfe  cm  be 
igrecibift,  IheincraHehbthof  jueD  andfloclu  -flocm  ooc^^ 
pntei  about  the  right  to  pasture  on  particator  tnusta»  andeodi'dbip* 
hflvd  finding  hii  limits  narrowed  mMt  mada  exUmdt  i»  oaBi|»elled 
«dd.to  fais'iBieana  of  support  by  tiUi^  e  change  by  whidi  tm  msni 
bnadeloiBaintaihinovenMndiantan  mflescmi^  ivaae 
§kt  fiom  denying  dut  there  are  countries,  the  unfitness  of  whkh  for 
agricakme^  obliges  the  inhabHaots  toadfaa^topastun^  j  or  that  the 
badness  of  a  govcmment  may  drive  people  into  this  mode  of  life  i  but 
I  contend  that  there  are  other  indueements  arising  from  the  n^nre  of 
that  life  itself,  and  I  object  to  die  extension  of  a  theoiy  which  it 
tme  of  Syria,  to  all  wandering  tribes. 

The  tents  of  shqpherds  will  be  described  hereafter,  aa  ¥riU  the 
vwioas  sorts  of  houses  in  use  in  Afghanniataun.  The  commonest 
house  by  far  is  buylt  of  unbumed  brick,  one  story  high,  and  roofed 
either  with  a  terrace  supported  by  beams,  or  with  low  cupolas  of  tha 
same  material  as  the  walls.   As  tablet  and  chairs  are  un]aiowa«  there 

H  H 


Diglized  by  Google 


^     WAV  OF  FA8S1N6  TUCKr 

Is  little'  or  no  funiiture,  exc^  a  coarse  wooUen  carp^.  and  tomi^ 
pieces  of  felt  *  to  sit  on. 

Tlie  licrilooraunees,  indeed,  sit  on  low  beds,  wiili  bottoms  of 
leather  or  of  cord,  and  the  people  in  towns  have  often  hrruid  benches 
raised  round  the  room  (which  they  call  sopha  or  buleh),  hut  the 
general  praetice  is  to  <5it  on  the  ground.  When  men  are  at  their  ease# 
they  sit  cross  ieggc<i,  or  put  their  legs  into  any  attitude  that  is 
agreeable  to  them  ;  but  when  there  is  the  least  ceremony,  they  sit 
In  a  more  formal  position,  which  b  assumed  by  the  person's  kneeling^ 
and  thfln  dnkiiig  bade  on  hu  lieela>  ao  that  hu  legs  are  tucked  under 
lBiii«  and  eompletdj  concealed  by  the  ddrts  of  bis  tunic.  Thu  wbj 
pi  fitting  is  intolerable  to  au  Eonipean^  but  tbe  joints  of  Asistics  are 
BO  supple^  thst  ahbougli  tbdr  legs  aie  pressed  qnite  flat  on  tba 
ground^  ytk  they  remain  in  lliis  posture  wHfaont  inoonvenienee  |br 
ivboledajs. 

Tlieir  oiidinaij  employment*  wben  seated.  Is  conyeisutioii,  wbA 
every  noir  and  then  a  odleeBun  is  passed  round  for  smoking^  simL 
ifte^  a  wbiff  or  two,  Is  smt  away.  Hie  common  cutteeann  in  AjPr 
ghauilistaim  is  made  of  eSrtihen  wate,  and  shaped  like  a  very  bttiad 
bottle  with  a  wide  neck.  People  in  -  better  circumstances  haYe.lbenr. 
of  various  shapes,  made  of  glass,  or  more  frequently  of  pewter»'otlMl» 
ttented  with  flowers,  &c  in  brass.  Tliis  is  filled  with  water,  and  twd 
Ornamented  wooden  pipes  are  intiodnoed  into  it,  one  of  them  is  per- 
pendicular, and  has  at  the  top  a  cup  containing  tobacco  and  charcoal: 
the  other  ri^.the  month-piece  from  which  the  smoke  is  mhalecU  afict 


•  As  I  shall  have  ficqiMnt  doeHion  to  mehtraD  Am  wrt  afMt,  it  i»m  be  amfwloit 

to  (lescrilx-  it  ouci-  for  nil.  It  is  niaJe  of  wrxil  (generally  of  tlmt  wliicli  Is  shorn  off  the 
cMplfit,  carpets,  and  other  wooUen  mann&ctum).  It  is  made  hj  the  women,  who  wet  the 
i^tlpl,  and  theo  worit  it  np,  rolling  it  ow  and  kneading  it  with  their  lMad%  tQl  it  aamimea 
•  consistency :  it  is  then  spredd  iMt  to  the  .size  required,  and  when  finished,  is  from  a 
qoartfr  to  half  an  inch  Jhick,  and  is  soft  and  pliant:  that  worn  by  the  people  is  much 
thimer.  The  QommoD  colours  are  gr^  and  black,  but  thoee  used  ia  the  houces  of  the 
lidi^  fdiidi  «M  cf  a  dowtasnin^  an  of  a  U^ht  brawn,  oimiiMntod  wittpMsliarpsttenM 


Digrtized  by  Google 


RECEPTION  OF  A  VISITOR, 


puiny  through  the  water,  by  which  ft  is  oooled  and  deared  of  e^nfe 
oily  particles  which  would  otherwise  accompany  it.  All  the  FniiiDt 
jne  this  pipe  at  short  intervals  thxou^oiit  the  day.  They  are  much 
man  particular  about  the  el^ance  of  tfaeir  culleeMiiis  than  the 

ghauns,  and  the  latter,  to  ridicule  the  importance  attached  to  them 
by  the  Persians,  tell  a  story  of  some  men  of  that  nation,  who,  on  be- 
ing asked  at  the  end  of  a  long  journey,  whether  it  had  been  a  pleasant 
one,  replied,  that  the  only  serious  inconvenience  they  experienced, 
wa<;  from  the  want  of  a  culleeaun,  there  being  only  eleven  itmrtng  the 
twelve  peisuus  wiio  composed  the  party. 

The  Afgliauns  are  by  no  means  so  much  addicted  to  smoking : 
many  people  never  use  tobacco  in  that  form,  and  in  the  country  there 
is  often  no  culleeaun  in  a  village,  except  a  \  tay  large  one  which  is 
kept  for  the  use  of  tlie  whole  at  the  public  apartment.  The  Afghauns 
indemnify  themaelves  for  their  moderation  in  this  respect  by  the  use 
of  mnS^  to  which  tbqr  we  all  much  Mkiedi  Thdr  snuff  is  a  dry 
wkd  fine  pomier  like  Scotch  anu^  and  it  is  not  Icept  in  flat  hoxm  lil^ 
oiin»  but  ID  nnind  or  oval  ooeit  ibrmed  of  the  shell  of  ik  finit  (which 
ihejr  can  ,Bslangfroon»  and  the  Indiana  BaO)»  and  which  is  imported 
m  gi«at  quantities  fiom  Hindoostan  fi»r  this  purpose.  Thesf^  boxes 
h«ve  no  lids>  but  theie  is  a  small  hole  at  the  top  £nr  pounng  oat  the 

mCBdL    Thuy  ««a  atmtismm  emed  owrwr  with  «««yiwifri»  wnAmanAip. 

When  a  visitor  comes  in*  he  salutes  the  party  by  saying  Awsnlainn 
Alaikoom*  "  Peace  be  unto  you,**  to  which  thej  answer,  O  Alaik 
dsaslaiimj  And  unto  thee  be  peace."  The  master  of  the  house 
.^befi  rises,  takes  the  stranger's  hand  between  his  own,  and  addresses 
him,  "  Bhu  Bai^gblee,  Hurcul  Rausheh,**  &c»  You  are  wdemne,  may 
**you  often  come,"  &c  The  stranger  replies,  **.Shupukheiree," 
"  May  you  prosper."  The  master  of  the  house  then  points  out  a  seat 
to  his  gupst,  and  when  they  are  seated,  inquires  after  his  health,  and 
enters  on  i  on\ e[ iitition.  These  cereniotiios  are  always  performed 
even  by  the  poorest  Afghauns,  but  w  hun  they  are  over,  no  people 
iure  iesft  oer^onious )  a  certain  degree  of  gravity  generally  prevails, 

B  H  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


*  S86  '  FEASTS.   TALES  AND  SONQS. 

but  it  never  excludes  iiree  and  cheerful  ocmveBMitloBt  and  isttmiatiiiiCi 
inolEeiii  m  iqmn  by  a  hearty  laugh.  *  ■ 

Hiey  are  a  sociable  peofile:  Beudes  the  large  entertainiiients 
wbicit  are  given  on  marriages  similar  oocamons,  they  have  parties 
of  five  or  six  to  dine  with  them,  as  often  as  they  can  afford  to  kill  a 
sheep.  The  giiests  are  received  with  the  ceremonies  I  have  described, 
and  when  ail  have  arrivefl.  the  master  of  the  house  or  some  of 
his  family  sen'es  every  out'  with  water  to  wash  his  hands,  and  then 
brlnj?s  I'n  dinner.  It  ^?f  iu'r;illv  consists  of  hoilofl  mutton,  and  the 
broth  in  winch  the  nit  at  i-,  boiled,  wit}i  no  addition  but  salt,  and 
honx'limes  pepper.  I  his  soup,  which  they  t^euerallv  ent  with  bread 
soalscd  in  it,  is  said  to  be  very  palatable.  Their  fli  ink  is  butter  miik 
or  sherbet.  In  some  places,  they  drmk  ;i  li(|iior,  made  from  sheep's 
milk,  which  has  an  enlivening,  if  not  ait  iiiLoxicatiug  quality.  During 
dinner,  the  master  recommends  his  dishes,  presses  the  guests  to  eat, 
and  tells  them  not  to  spare,  for  diere  is  plenty.  They  nay  a  grace 
before  and  after  dinner ;  and*  when  aU  la  d(nie»  the  gu^ta  Uess  the 
master  «f  the  house.  After  dinner,  they  att  and  smoke,  or  htm  a 
eirde-to  tell  talea  and  sbig.  The  dd  men  are  the  grert  atoiy  teUen* 
.  Hieir  tales  are  of  Kmgs  and  "^^sden,  of  genii  and  ham ;  bat,'  pfifr- 
cipally  of  love  and  war.  They  are  often  mixed  with  songa  and  vobmi 
and  alwaja  end  in  a  moral*  Thef  delig^  in  -IfaeK  talea  and  Bdagu 
AH  ait  in  ailencie  while  a  tale  ia  tdfing$  and*  when  it  ia  donoy  there 
ia  a'general  ay  of  •*  Ai  Shawash  !**  f  their  wittl  eKpression  of  adB»> 
,  ration.  Their  songs  are  mostly  about  love ;  bat  they  have  nwm  woiii 
billadst  oelebrating  the  wars  of  their  tribe^  and  the  espknta  of  iadU 
▼idual  ehiela.  As  soon  aa  a  chief  of  any  name  dies,  songs  are  made 
in  honoor  of  his  memoiy.   Besides  these  aoDgs,  aome  men  recite 


*  Mr.  Dnrie  aays  of  llie  Weatern  A%hMuu,  "  Tbey  are  ft  ■obo'  people^  utd  do  not 
laugh  mndi}  haikbu^  taDc'a  good  dca],  and  8eem  fiunilMr  amongit  dmiiMlvct.  At  timck 
tfiey  nre  am  merrv  fts  mv  ]^<x»plo  in  the  world." 

-(■  All,  well  done !"  PerhajM  the  originai  word*  are  "  Ai  fha^h  ktaitth,"  A)i,  be  a 
King!  •  At inai hidcMes  m  oil  tinat. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


AMUSEMENTa  '  SfT 


odfli,  or  other  paMagoB.fimn  the  poets ;  and  others  pUy  the  fluted  the 
mb&ub,  (a  sort  of  lute  or  guitar)*  tlie  camaonbhdi  nd  sarinddi,  (twv 

of  fiddles),  or  the  soanmin,  wbaeh  is  a  species  of  hautboy.  Tlie 
singers  mmaUj  accompany  their  voice  with  the  rnbatib  or  the  fiddle. 
Their  tong*  are  often  made  bj  the  husbandmen  and  ahcphewb ; 
oitener  by  professed  Shauyers,  (a  sort  of  minstrel,  between  a  poet  and 
a  ballad-siiiger) ;  aad»  aomelimee  by  authota  of  repotatiooi*  of  peat  or 
present  thnea. 

The  &voarite  amusement  of  all  the  Afghauns  is  the  chace,  which 

is  followed  in  various  modes  accordinj?  to  the  nature  of  the  country, 
and  the  game  to  be  pursued.  Lar<j;r  nai  tic*s  often  assemble  on  horse- 
back or  on  foot,  and  form  a  crescent,  which  sweeps  the  country  for  a 
gt&tl  extent,  and  is  sure  to  rouse  whatever  game  is  in  tlieir  range. 
They  manaije  so  as  to  drive  it  into  a  vallev  or  some  other  convenient 
place ;  when  they  close  in,  fall  on  it  with  their  dogs  and  guns,  and 
otten  kill  one  or  two  lumdred  hoa(l  of  game  in  a  day.  Still  more 
frequently,  a  few  men  go  out  together  witli  tiieir  greyhounds  and 
their  guns  to  course  hare8»  foxes,  and  deer,  or  shoot  any  game  that 
may  &U  in  their  way. 

-  .In  aeweptfto  of  the  coimliy,  tfaej  take  hares,  or  pesdiaps  rabWts» 
mOk  ftMs.  Hiey  shoot  deer  isith  stalking  buDodu  and  eamels* 
tnuaed  to  walk  between  them  and  the  gaa»e>  so  as  to  conceal-  the 
hunter.  In  winter,  thejr  track  wolves^  and  other  wild  animala,  in  the 
snoir,  and  shoot  them  in  their  densL  Jn  some  plaoeB»  tfaejr  dig  ahofo 
in  the  ground  near  a  qning*  and  conceal  thenuelvea  there^  to  ahoot 
the  d«er  and  other  soimak  that  eonae.aini|^  to  drink.  Ih^alaogQ 
oat  at  night  to  shoot  hjasnas*  which  issue  fiwn  their  dena  at  tiiat  time 
and  i»pwl  about  hi  the  dark  for  their  pr^.  The^r  never  shoot  biid^ 
flying  i  hot-  fire  with  small  shot  at  them,  as  they  are  sitting  or  running 
on  the  groimd.  The;  have  no*  haiyldnj^  except  in  the  East ;  but 
thej  0&ea  ride-down  portri^es  in  a  wfj  whid&  is  much  easier  of 
execution  than  one  would  imagine.  Two  or  more  horsemen  put  up  a 
partridge,  which  makes  a  short  Bight  and  sits  down  ;  a  horseman  then 
puts  it.up  again.,  ^"he  hun^^  leUere  one  another*  so  astto  allow  the 


288  SPORT&  DANCES.  GAMES. 

Urd  ao  rest,  till  it  beoomei  too  muok  tiled  to  flj,  when  tlMj  ride  it 
orer  is  it  runs,  or  knock  it  down  with  rtidc*. 

Tliou|^  liMw*™g  be  a  very  popular  amuaemait  ihroii^ioat  €he 
ivliole  kingdom,  it  is  most  pract  ised  by  the  Western  Afghauns  ;  among 
whom  also  the  songs  and  tfdes  befivre  described  are  fiMmd  in  most 
perfection,  and  to  whom  the  amusements  I  am  about  to  mention  are 
in  a  great  measure  confined.   Races  are  not  uncommon,  especialij 
at  marriages*   Hie  bridegroom  |^yes  a  camel  to  be  run  for  i  twenty 
or  thirty  horses  start,  and  they  run  for  ten  m  twdve  miles  over  the 
best  ground  they  can  find.    They  have  also  private  matdiei ;  but  no 
plates  given  by  the  King,  as  is  usual  in  Persia.    It  is  a  common 
amusement  with  the  heft  or  sort  to  tilt  with  their  lances,  in  the  rest, 
at  a  wooden  peg,  stuck  in  the  ;ir(m!Kl,  which  they  endeavour  to  knock 
over,  or  to  jiick       on  the  point  of  tlieir  spears.    They  also  practise 
their  carbnies  and  niatciilocks  on  horseback;  and,  all  ranks  tire  at 
marks,  with  guns,  or  with  bows  and  arrows.    On  these  occasions, 
there  are  often  from  tin  to  twenty  ol'  a  side,  sometimes  men  of  dit' 
ferent  villages,  or  dilibrent  quarters  of  the  same.    ITiey  bhoot  for 
some  stake  ;  commonly  for  a  ilinner,  but  never  lur  any  large  sum  ol 
monev.    Their  amusements  at  home  are  also  very  numerous,  though 
cm-iU  are  unknown,  and  dice  liardly  ever  used.    The  great  delight  of 
ail  the  Western  Afghauns,  is  to  dance  the  Attum  or  Ghoomboor. 
From  ten  to  twenty  men  or  women  stand  up  in  a  drde,  (in  summer,  be- 
£>re  their  houses  and  tents,  and  in  winter,'round  a  fire) ;  a  person  standi 
within  the  drde,  to  sing,  and  play  on  some  instrument.  Hie  dancers 
go  throng  a  number  of  attitudes  and  figures ;  shonting,  clapping 
ibmx  hands,  and  snapping  their  fingers.   Eveiy  now  and  then  they 
join  hands,  and  move  dow  or  fiut,  aoeoidiog  to  the  musics  all  joining 
in  ciiorua.   When  I  was  diewed  this,  a  lo?e  song  was  sung  to  .an 
extremdj  pretty  tune^  tcij  simple,  and  not  unlike  a  Seottidi  air. 

Most  of  theb  games  appear  to  ns  mj  diildish,  and  can  scarodjit 
be  leoondledio  their  long  beatds,  and  grave  bdiavioar.  JMarbleaare 
pkyed  by  ffomk  up  men,  throu^  all  the  Aighaun  'Country  and 
Penu»  wad,  I  .believe^  m  1>irkgr«  ▲  gwae  verygmially  pk^mli ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


'  t  ••  ■..-.» 


.4' 


Digrtized  by  Google 


DRESS  or  THE  UE^ 


ig  <Hie  iaJIed  Kkomjft  by  the  Boomineei,  aafl  Chiiwiiee  ty  Tto- 
Jikfl.  A  nun  ttket  hb  left  IboC  m  his  ri^^'  hand,  and  hop*  about  on 
one  tegt  aideavouring  to  ovenet  his  adveriaiy,  who  advances  in  thm 
aame  way.  This  is  played  by  several  o£  a  aide*  and  ia  move  oompU* 
cated  tlian  I  hanre  made  it,  but  still  a  strange  game  for  grown  up  men* 
Prisoners*  base,  quoits,  (played  with  circular  flat  stonea) ;  and  a  game^ 
like  hunt  the  slipper,  (played  with  a  cap)»  are  also  very  commcHit  as 
are  wrestlii^  and  other  trials  of  strength  and  skill.  Fighting-quails* 
cocks,  dogs,  rams,  and  even  camels,  are  also  much  admired.  I  have 
seen  camels  matchetl;  nnd,  during  their  rutting  senson,  they  fight 
with  great  furv.  When  the  battle  ends,  the  speriutors  had  neod  to 
clear  the  .  for  the  beaten  camel,  who  runs  oti  at  lus  utmost  '^ix.  ed, 
antl  is  otten  pursued  by  the  Victor  to  a  tlistanre  from  tlie  tic  Id  of 
battle.  All  these  games  are  played  tor  some  stakr  ;  somotiiuei*  for 
money  ;  6oni<  times  the  \\  intu  i  takes  the  beaten  cock,  ram,  or  camely 
but  the  general  stake  is  a  dinner. 

The  dress  of  the  men  varies  ;  bui,  tliat  now  used  in  the  West,  ap- 
pears to  mc  to  be  the  original  dress  of  the  whole  nation.  It  consists 
of  a  pair  of  loose  trowsers  of  dark  coloured  cotton ;  a  large  shirt  *, 
like  a  waggonette  fioc]i»  but  widi  wider  sleeves,  and  only  reaching  a 
little  below  the  knee ;  a  lowcap^  (shaped  like  a  Hulan'a  cap),  tli» 
iidee'of  wbich  are  of  black  silk  or  sirtin,  and  the  top  of  gold  brocade^ 
or  of  somelnig^teoloiiied  dodi;  and  a  pair  of  half  booisy' of  brown 
leather,  laoed  or  buttoned  up  to  the  calf:  over  this,  for  a  great  part- 
of  die.  jear^  ia  thrown  a  large  doak  of  well  tanned  aheefMkin,  witb 
die  wool  inside^  or  of  soft  and  pliant  grey  fyt.  This  garment  ia  worn 
loose  over  the  shoulders,  wHh  die  sleeves  hanging  ddwn,  and  readies 
to  tiie  andes  f*  In  the  cities  and  more  dviUsed parts  of  idiecountiy, 
the  diess  geneially  worn  resembles  that  of  Ftersia  }'and»  sJong  the 
eestem  holders  of  A%hanniBtaun»  it  in  some  respects  iqppfoecfaesthit' 
eflndia.  .. 


*  Tbcjr  call  tbi»  shirt  Cameew,  whidi,  I  believe,  is  alao  the  Arabic  tor  a  shirt.  The 
Uffian  ii  c«niMiB,'aiid  flw  IVaidi,  diemue;  but,  at  it  «m  not  tiS  afkcr  tlie  Oundtib  . 
dHS  thic  garment  was  irom  IB  Euop^  the  tem  jMMt  bmiB^fiMiloil  in  die  £sat 

tSssflMalL 


Digrtized  by  Google 


240 


HORSES  AND  THEIR  FURNITURE. 


The  women  wear  a  shirt  like  that  of  the  men,  but  much  longer. 
It  is  made  of  finer  materials,  and  generally  coloured  or  embroidered 
with  flowers  in  silk :  in  the  West,  it  is  often  entirelj  of  silk.  Thef 
wear  coloured  trowsers,  tighter  than  those  of  the  men;  and  ha;ve  a 
gmall  cape  of  bri^  coloured  silk,  embroidered-  With  gold  thread« 
which  scarcely  comes  down  to  the  forehead  or  the  ears ;  and  a  large 
riieefe»  either  plain  or  printed,  which  they  throw  over  their  heads,  and 
with  which  they  hide  their  faces  when  a  stranr^cr  approaches.  In  the 
West  the  women  often  tic  a  blnrk  handkerchief  round  their  heads 
over  their  caps.  They  divide  tiie  hair  over  their  hces,  and  plait  it 
into  two  locks,  which  fasten  at  the  back  of  their  heads. 

Their  ornaments  are  strings  of  Venetian  iie(|uiiis,  worn  round  their 
heads,  and  chains  of  gold  or  silver,  wiiich  are  hooked  up  over  the 
forehead,  pass  round  the  hciid,  and  end  in  two  large  balls,  which 
hang  down  near  the  ears.  Ear-rings  and  rings  on  the  fingers,  are 
also  worn,  a^.  arc  pendants  in  the  middle  cartilage  of  the  iiosi-,  which 
was  formerly  the  custom  in  Persia,  and  still  is  in  India  ami  Arabia. 
Such  is  the  dress  of  the  married  women,  tlie  unmarried  are  diiitm- 
guished  by  wearing  white  trowsera*  and  by  having  their  hair  loose. 

The  conveyances  of  Aighaumiftaim  ue  so  different  from  our  own, 
thifc  it  it  neoasnrj  to  aaj.a  lew  yntda  regnduig  them :  those  uaed  in 
coinmerbe  and  agriculturoi  will  be  menfiQOffd-cbeiwhitek  I  here  apok 
of  thoae  employ^  by  tisveDen.  There  are  no  whed-canii^ei  ia  the 
eonntry  (or  m  any  part  of  Persia),  and  palankattia,  are  not  Med: 
the  eommon  way  of  trarelling  for  both  aesest  is  en  ho^hebacfc.  The 
oidinaiy  ]MH!e  is  a  vjeiyloiigwalk,  tiduch  caim 
of  fire  or  alx  mileB  an  hour.  Gmrieia  and  people  going  long  jour- 
ncjm  trot;  but  that  u  not  a  eoninum  paoe  for  traTettei%  and  it  is 
reckoned  •  proof,  of  levity  in  a  man  of  the  npper  chsaet  to  gaDop^ 
unless  on  some  oocaiionthat  fciilly  raquiiea  speed.  NbmanthinlES 
of  trottmg  or  galloping  when  he  is  riding  ibt  pkasun^  or  goiiiig  ftoni 
one  house  to  anodier.  * 


•  Sw  Plate  lU. 


Digitized  by  Google 


.)  nil     ri".:\-"  rnn. 


.  .:  .r'"  I  '»  n..'.iu  .»-  t  *.r...' '.  I  .I  ••1. 
!  •. •••M  '.-:  !:v  col:>-  red  or  c'lilMolilc  ud 


•  fl 


> 


'•.    tliTutl  Willi  'JoUl  ll,ri;i"l. 
■'.  '••  «^«r  tiic  •jars  :  -vui  a  lur;^' 
..-I  ..V  »  \ :;  ■  i'.  .  'i-i 

•  '"  •.  ..- t*u **'.c«*s,  iiiiri  (.'.»:?  it. 


■;    •  •     .    ..•  k.h;  .it.««.  v«»;n  ,-'»u»ui  ;'».''r 

\  .        '  :  'i  u'c  Jum'ImmI      ov.-j  tV.H 

■  •.    •     «  .  .  :    '  !  ...>  '..f^;.»  1.;'!:..    ^!  .••■) 

:  •»  are  poii-i    is  ir.  middle  cartila;?*?  cl  tlu'  :i»»se,  v. hic?i 

ru«-l-.:     i;i  IV:  :a.  a!id  ^til!  is  in  Ip(Mii  nr.w  Arr.bia. 


•Iv  !'l 


••■    r.',  :;  • 

4 


■  (Of  tfl-  ... 
v  pace  is  n  VL  . 


t 


■»  — 


1|- 


'  »  iis.vii:^;  ii.irl";  f  ioo.sj. 
-  w-o  ditlcreut  ii«;in  oui  c«iTi, 

.  I  .  ••;.fi r  i.  -ti  • 
..  •  n  •  Hiico!-ea.ri:'«»?s  iii  t^ie 
'I  r.iij»n!;«  "lis,  an^  ret  us%<d  : 

.  .:  ir-.  .IV  n  ;>a.-e  1-..  t.ivv!U'r.-».  n.i:J  it 
»  liuit  .••.-:i:v  r«  Q;i:rea  speed.    No  man  thiDkb 

•*i  •  »:-lionf  f.jr  plfusure,  OF  gO'Hg  tK»ni 


<■] 


Google 


^K 


Diglized  by  Google 


HORSES  AND  THEIB  FURMETURE. 


.  There  are  two  sorts  of  furniture  for  horses,  the  Persian  and  the 
Uzbek;  ef  which  the  latter  is  most  used.  The  Persian  biidle  .is. a 
moKk  of  snaffle,  which  instead  of  cheeks,  has  two  (or  Jmit)  iao^ 
passed  thiou^  holes  in  the  ends  of  the  snaffle,  to  receive  the  reiiMk 
The  sna6ie  itself  has  sometimes  sharp  points  to  prick  the  horse^s 
mrnith  when  he  pulls.  Hits  bridle  is  adorned  with  silver  chains  and 
Other  ornaments.  The  saddle  sits  near  the  horse's  back,  but  rises 
TOiich  both  before  and  behind,  so  as  to  give  the  rider  a  siiorig  seat; 
but  the  peaks  ai  e  generally  so  close,  as  to  make  it  extremely  uncom- 
fortable to  those  who  arc  not  used  to  it.  The  peak  in  front  is  the 
highest  of  the  two,  and  is  composed  oi  painted  wood,  gold  and  silver 
curiously  embossed,  or  gold  enamelled,  according  to  the  circum- 
.stances  of  the  owner.  The  Uzbek  snaffle  is  exactly  like  our  own, 
except  that  the  cheeks  are  larger  in  proportion.  The  head-stall  is 
ornamented  with  a  few  gold  or  stiver  studs  at  the  joiningst  and  there 
it  oHtiNBfc  like  a  fkrarw  looe  ef  tli^  ane  nafteml  in  ths. angjb 
btilgoia  Ae  iio»4MBid  and  the  chBok  bwnL  Hiexeji  no  band  §aom 
UmAtOmaL  Tin  rant  baUi  of  Iba  U«bek.  and  Bmn  bridle 
tMROir,  and  very  meA,  Tliey  an  aade  of  good  bnnm  Inrtbo^ 
id  aoBMtiBiWi  but  nmlff  of  gnm  du^jvem  loathoR  lintingalai 
HO  not  nrach  irani,  when  tfaej  wte,  ibey  ane  ray  Ixxme  ihey  drada 
Ukm  oar  nwurthigdUwi  but  do  not  hh  oo  the  leini,  being-  fiatened  io 
tlie  chtefa  of  tfaef  bit  Tlw  tig^rt  4««ndiiig  martngde^  wil&  iilik^ 
tlw  Bitivcf  of  iftdio  tfe  dbwn  tktir  hotses*  hcadi^  and  croitp  tbeif 
iction,  is  not  known,  lliere  is  also  a  fatoast  band*  with  a  kige  silver 
or  gold  kncib  in  fronts  shaped  like  tho  cupola  of  a  mosque,  and  they 
generally  uae  cnipp^s.  The  whole,  particularly  the  Uabok  btidk^  ia 
vary  handsome,  and  shows  a  horse  off  even  better  than  our  own.  Hid 
Uibek  saddle  is  raised  hi^  above  the  hone's  back,  by  the  shape  of 
tihe  tree.  It  is  much  larger  and  more  commodious  than  the  Persian* 
and  not  sohi^  either  behind  or  before  The  peak  in  front  is  divided 
and  turns  down,  so  as  to  form  two  curls  like  Ionic  volutes.  Neither 
of  thf*Rp  saddles  is  stuffed  below,  both  aro  ]ilacetl  on  two  or  tbrw  thic^ 
hlaoketa  or  lelts*  and  |ied  on  by  a  girth  which  passes  through  two 


242 


XITTBtS: 


fadles  m  ^  lower  part  of  the  tree.  The  Persian  saddle^  indeed,  is 
•ftcD'  modi^  a  tie^  like  those  of  Hussars.  People  who  cany  pistolf 
livre  hokteiib  and  dMMe  who  do  not)  have  two  bags  in  place  of.than^ . 
fi)t  fsanrying  a  spare  horse  shoe,  or  any  other  little  thin^  they  mnfe 
Tliese  tags  have  a  large  flap  of  embroidered  cloth,  and  with  common 
horf?eTnen,  of  carjieting,  whicli  looks  rery  well.  Tlie  poor  hare  the 
omnments  T  }i;n  e  described,  made  of  tinned  iron,  instead  of  gold  or 
siK  I  T.  riieri'  are  different  kinds  of  stirrups  ;  the  comniouest  is  like 
our  own,  except  that  the  ends  of  the  arch  are  prolonged  beyond  the 
bar  on  which  the  foot  rests }  another,  not  uncommon,  has  a  flat  plate 
oS  iron  nine  inches  long,  and  four  or  five  broad,  for  the  foot  to  rest 
on  instead  of  a  bar.  Their  housings  are  confined  to  one  piece,  which 
reaches  from  the  satldle  ahuutit  to  the  horse's  tail,  and  hangs  down  a 
good  way  on  tiach  side.  Tlie  coiiuaoji  people  have  it  of  coaise 
black  cloth,  wrought  all  over  with  worsted  of  different  coluurs,  or  of 
the  skin  of  a  leopard,  or  other  wild  beast,  but  the  great  have  theui 
o£  velvet,^  with  the  ridieat  ainfaioideiy»  and  sometimes  of  «doth  of 
gold,  ormflourited  ivith  jewels,  and  with  pearl  ficinge.  Hie  g^sat  alaa 
lava  ike  )Mnnmeb.of  .^ieir  saddles  aet  with  jewels,  end  have  aO  tfacir 
tnppinga  adorned  with  gold  aad  pfccioiis  stones,  but  .thb  jbiob  otaif 
man  of  pomp:  m  ardioary  times  they  aie  very  plain.  '  Boraaa  Ml 
always  led  by  mounted  gnMmi%  not  by  men  on  ibot  as  in  Indiis  end 
wbm  tlie  matodismomits  at  a;  'strange  houses  'the  gneom  mounls 
hbhoiBOtiU  he  has  finished  his  visits  this  they  dunk  geod  lor  tbv 
hpim 

.  WoiMnofl»ntrsivdinciM|jawas{tfae80ftoflianiper  already 
tkmed), «  &w  of  die  King*s  90  on'etophaiits,  and  others  in  a'hind<if 

litter.  .'/' 
,  Viog  himself  has  been  known  to  travel  on  an  elephant,  ani 

more  ftse^iently  in  a  kind  of  litter,  called  in  India  a  Nalkee^  wfaidi 
is  bonte  on  men's  shoulders  by  pohte  which  pass  beneath  the  bottonv 
'fbiaU  peoulieriD^e  King,  but  some  km  of  the  nobles  ane  ^titled 
tJp  ride  in  a  ocsnreyante  called  a  Jaumpann,  which  b  hke  a  «hort 
hmkefii^  with.  «■  evched  top,  jslwiig  on  three  pole*  (lifee  whet  ja.4ittM 

9t 


I 

Digitized  by  Google  ! 


* 

sToBjan  In  India)*  and  caniedliig^  over  die  aheaUen  ef  liwlMasnli 
IlMRtamalao  liMJe  iaeoiiveniM  Utten  in  use  in  the^Eeit;  fi)r.adi 
paopla  Hieae  areail  canied  faj  raen»  Ibeiiefe  bf  Jffindobtf  dmnglk 
tkair  Icsig  beenla  and  aheep-ddn  c]i^  ghnethem  an  '^ppaaiendevMy 
diiendt  fioaa  the  Hmdoot  of  India. 

The  baggage  o£.tnv«]]0n  is  carried  on  cameUor  moW  The  cat» 
monest  of  the  Sat  sort  are  those  used  in  Lidia,  which  though  aliv^Ft 
oalled  ■■■"^fl"j  are  the  dromedary  of  natural  hiatoriaDs.  Miiles  aa^ 
the  beat  carriage^  aa  thagr  will  naaaij  knap  <ip  with  a  horse  at  his  inl] 
walk}  but  theyiara  eoqpcnsife^  andaie^  tfaaieibie»  ^oJy  naed (Ff  tba 
ridi. 

There  are  no  posts  in  A^ffaatmistaun.  Hie  Kii^aenda  liia  dla^ 
patches  by  mounted  couriers,  called  Chuppers,  who  make  sufprisiiig 

Joumies,  and  who  are  supplied  with  fresh  horses  by  the  chi^ 

the  places  where  they  happen  to  require  them.  It  is  astonishing  what 
exertions  these  men  will  go  through,  without  any  preparation  but 
that  of  wrapping  cloths  round  their  bodies  and  1imb<^,  as  tight  as 
pfMsibie,  to  diminish  the  .sorctn'ss  ol'  ihcir  muscles  in  i}\c  course  of  a 
fatiguing  jinirnev.  The  Kiiii^'s  Clui|)|)ci"s  ilo  not  carry  letters  for 
other  people;  the v  are  indeed  rather  a  superior  class  oi  men,  and 
are  often  ciitrusteti  with  important  messages  ;  other  people,  however, 
hire  Chiip[>crs  wlien  thev  want  them,  and  great  men  keep  them  in 
their  cunsLant  employ.  The  bulk  of  the  people  send  their  lettere  by 
t'ossids  (or  foot-messengers),  who  travel  at  a  great  rate,  and  oHen 
reach  Caubui  trom  Fesltawer,  two  hundred  aiid  ten  miles,  in  Ibuf 
days. 

Hiere  are  slaves  in  Ai^l>atmirtann>  as  in  all  Mussulman  countries, 
and  I  abdl  noiir  gtwe  a  dwrt  account  of  ^tmr  situation. 
'  Bjr  &r  lihe  graater  part  are  home^bom,  but  some  supplies  are  xe^ 
aeifed  'fiom  fbreign  oountriei.  Abjssiniana  end  Negroes  ave  soiMh 
ttmea  beonj^  horn  Arabia  i  the  Bdodies  sell  Persians  and  other 
people  whom  they  sesw  in  ^leir  ibrays ;  and  a  good  many  Gaofiia 
nee  putcheaad  Aom  their  own  natiuit  or  made  ^lisoneta  faj  the 
jofiTei  i»  dieb  border.  IVa^  Atrntm,  ia  teonl^lnstsneedrUie. 

1  I  S 


I 


g4A  SLAvm 

Jkf^jimmaBmaymgvMiibmBf  apaiciaee  idudi thflf  liold -&  dtelUt 
lioa.  The  Gnoflr  oq^dvea  an  faenQy  11^^ 
■qa^bt  after  cm-  anseoaBt  of  the  remaikabla  beauty  of  thdbr  mAknu 
Tl»  odMr  dam  we  ganemUj  aaaployed  in  nienial  adkaa,  lail,  in  tlie 
oonntiyf  and  particularly  among  the  Dooraimoo  teman*  they  aro 
aliD  greatly  used  in  agriculture.  They  are  not,  however,  lequiead  to 
supplj  the  {kbce  of  eattle,  as  in  our  ooloniea,  but  do  the  same  woiic  as 
the  fteonen.  Their  treatment  in  other. .  veapects  is  aiiiljd^  to  thia 
practice ;  they  eat  with  their  masters,  when  in  the  lower  waUcs  of 
life,  and  are  clad  in  the  same  manner ;  they  are  allowed  to  have  pro* 
perty,  and  their  masters  make  them  presents,  hu\  v,  ives  for  tliem, 
Tbey  marry  the  dai lighters  of  other  slaves,  and  tho  onTicr  of  the  girl 
is  entitled  to  hei-  jirice  j  but  I  am  told  lUdi  In-  generally  gives  it  up 
to  her  father,  or  bestows  it  on  the  girl  herself;  I  suppose  this  must 
be  the  price  of  a  wife,  which  paid  on  the  part  of  a  husband,  a[\d 
does  not  impair  the  masiei's  li^rhts  over  his  slave;  for  I  camiot  sup^ 
pose  that  die  owner  would  roi\serit  to  lose  her  services,  without  being 
paid  for  her,  particularly  a6  marriage  vvoukl  utcreafie  her  value^  sinoe 
her  owner  would  be  entitled  to  her  offspring. 

h'-i  can  see  no  signs  of  the  condition  of  the  slaves  employed  in  agri- 
adinre  hpproviiig  totO'viUaiii^  They,  for  the  moat  part,  lire  in 
.  AeimiaiWa  hmet  but  even  .when  the  &ld  on  MA  lh^  imA 
ia'ao  diatknty  ea  to  requite  their  having  a  hut  or  ,»tsiit  thaie»  they  aM 
noi  al'att  attached  to  theaoi),  and  eie  noved  .fion  field  to  field  ai 
oooaaita  vei]iiiiea|  tfaej  ire  not,  indeed,.in  anffident  munbaia  to  aUow 
of  thdr  bdng  attadhicd  to  particidar  qpota.  lliey  hanre  no  shaie  in 
the  prodhioeof  Iheif  Ubowt  eodara  la^t  to  #oik  by  the  attention  of 
tdie  owner  alonc^  or  of  some  fieeman  intanated  in  the  work  The^ 
■w  aeUom  beaten*  Grown  up  slaves  belonging  topeople  in  mdde- 
late-  circumstaucei)  consider  themselves  aa  pert  of.  diefinnQ^,  nd 
peteeive  tha^  they  muat  laboor  in  order  to  enable  their  master  tb 
anppoit  them,  as  well  as  to  maintain  himaelf  Female  'Slil^ea  are 
kept  us  concubines,  are  maids  to  the  miataaiabf  the  houie^  or  in  peoi 
fiaiuIkftaeMatbe^.inher  dwroafin  UAoiB^     v...  ^.r  ...t 


Digrtized  by  Google  : 

I 


FORM  AND  APF£ARAMC£  OF.  THE  PEOPLE. 


V  AnuMig  di^  UiMnft  ilie  natter  -often'  agrees  to  eafranddwhii 
due,  iHieA<  lie  ean  pay  a  certain  em ;  'or  ptomiaei  to  do  to«  if  -  bit 
vitt  Bwre  wcit  fev  a  certain  number  ofyeaM.-  "Die  mi^gpatnite-ettr 
ineei:lilieae«oga0Bniente.  Hie  i^^wuni  and  P«Hnui^  on  the.inN 
tnsy*  tliink.it-A  di^gnwe  to  lelcaao  a  al«ve-fiar  money;  but  dwy  ofteii 
give  them  dttfir  liberty  for  good  aervice,  or  emancipate  them  on  tiwir 
deatb-bedsr  I  hove  heard  of  a  great  Khaun  who  thought  be^Wtit 
dyrag,  wad  desired  aB  his  akfea  who: bad  any  dislike  to  his  son,  to 
come  and  receive  firom  him  a  paper*  aettiDg  them  6ee  m  ^tlcgal 
ianoM*  .  Tbe^A^haiiriH  have  always  a  gueaft  famrar  at  malaiig  people 
dbrea;  tikey  rerile  the  Uabdcs  for  this  practioe;  and  tpffy  to  tbem 
vidi  ffnt/t'  the  q>peUation  of  - Audam'  farodij  or  aaUen  of 

men.  .  ,  . . 

An  author,  by  no  means  partial  to  the  A^hauns,  bears  testimony 
to  this  way  of  thinking  among  them  ;  but  as  the  bulk  of  their  slaves 
are  descended  from  captives  taken  in  their  early  campai^^'ns  against 
the  Hindoos,  I  suspect  that  their  barbarous  relifjion  encoiiiai,rps  them 
to  practise  towards  idolaters  the  very  crime  which  they  80  much  abhor 
-  wiien  the  sufferer  is  a  true  Ijelierer.  * 

The  Afghaun  wonieu  ate  de.scnbed  as  huge  (compared  to  those  oi 
Uidia),  and  very  fair  and  handsome.  • 

Tlie  men  are  all  of  a  robust  make,  and  are  generaUy  lean,  though 
bouy  and  muscular.  They  have  high  noses,  high  cheek  bones,  and 
long  taces.    Their  hair  and  beards  are  generaUy  black,  sometimes 


*  like  Mkiiring  passage  fhim  Ren Knirindd,  b  dMt  a&sM  «*Le 
*•  tnitaaaent  qu'Ua  (kti  ^Vg\-uns)  font  a  ceux  qui  d«f«iMHient  leor  captifk  par  le  droit  de  la 

guerrr  n ri  rien  de  la  barlurie  de  la  plupart  des  autrcs  nations  dc  I'orient.  Ds  regards 
**  ooninie  une  inhumanity  atroce,  et  dont  Us  ont  bonreur,  Tusage  de  ceux  qa'iles  trmdenr 
ftpdttr  Mdaiia.  JlMttiasirndfribw  feat  Mrm  par  cnt<naaantr»<|wdm;kta» 

«  m&Bie  ds,Iai|r  «rri|ndcib  h*  mitent  avec  bontt  e£  «n  ont  du  soin ;  iU  ne  miuiquem 
"jamais  pour  peu  en  soient  contents,  de  leiir  r<!ndrc  la  lilx?rtt'  au  bout  d'uii  certain 

**  tetns :  antant  diiierau  des  autres  peoples  de  1' Asw  a  cet  c^ard  qui'la  le  soot  du  cote  do- 

,  jpfcarf»%KI»»<«»y '^y^^^^.J^         Wi>  !^  ^7--       .  :      .  r 


846 


EASTEEN  AND  WESTERN  AFaHAUN& 


bKvwii,  aod  ravdj  ncL  Tlieir  hitr  is  flhrajw  oome  and  itaoag:  Aejr 
-diave  the  middle  part  of  the  liead,  but  iraw  the  rest  of  thdr  famr. 
The  tribes  near  towns  weir  it  short,  but  the  rest  have  long  snd  Uvge 
locks  hanging  down  on  each  side  of  the  head.  They  wear  feng  and 
thick  beards.  Their  countenance  has  an  expression  of  wianKaess  and 
ddiberatioit»  united  to  an  air  of  simpUcity,  not:  aDied  to  wvMkness. 
The  eastern  Afghauns  have  the  national '  features  most  ttnmify 
marked }  though  they  have  least  of  the  expression  above  alluded  to. 
The  lineaments  of  the  western  tribes  are  less  distinct,  and  exhibit  a 
mudi  greater  variety  of  countenan(»»  some  of  them  having  blunt 
features,  entirely  diffierent  from  those  I  Imve  described ;  their  hi^ 
cheek  bones,  however,  never  leave  them.  The  western  A^g^isnns  SBPfi 
larger  and  stouter  than  those  of  the  east,  and  some  Dooraunees  and 
Ghiljies  are  of  surprising  strength  and  stature;  but  genot^lUjr  apeak 
ing,  the  Afghauns  arc  not  so  tall  as  the  English. 

The  eastern  Afghauns  }in%  e  generally  dark  complexions,  approach- 
infT  to  that  of  the  Hindoostauneps ;  while  those  of  the  west  are  olive, 
with  a  hcakh\  colour  mid  appearance  ;  hut  among  them,  as  among 
the  eastern  Afijciiauiis,  men  as  swarthv  ns  Indian'*,  and  others  as  fair 
as  Europeans,  are  to  be  met  ^iVith  in  the  same  neighix)urhood  ;  the 
fair  are  by  much  the  most  common  in  the  westt  and  the  dark  in  the 
east. 

Besides  this  difference,  which  is  created  hy  climate,  the  eastern 
and  western  Afgliauns  are  distingiiished  by  other  peculiarities,  which 
appear  in  general  to  arise  from  the  different  quarters  from  which  the 
two  divisions  have  acquired  their  manners. 

Those  of  the  west  have  derived  their  dviliaation  inm  the  Penians» 
and  those  of  the  east  from  the  fodians,  and  each  resemUea  fai  dxess 
and  manners  the  people  widi  which  it  is  thus  oonnecteds  while  the 
inhabitants  of  the  central  part  of  the  south,  equally  renotefiom  both 
of  the  great  empires  to  wUcb  I  have  a]hided»  and  at  a  distance  firom 
great  roads,  ^pear  to  have  retained  the  original  habits  of  their  own 
nirtjoB*  FVom  the  superior  extent  of  the  coontiy  mhihiiiid  hy  die 
westeni  tribes^  snd  ftoim  the  supitsuiac^  whidi  two  of  dioso  tribes 


Digitized  by  Google 


3iAMN£R& 

hmtfhM  iBflbrent  tiaaw  iB«ntiAied  €wgy..Ae  wfcoli»  .ilia  Benniidirftd^ 

tta»K%  and  language  4actdedly  psevail  in  the  mAm^  mid  «r9  in§^ 
aised  even  ia  those  parts  where  the  Indian  customt  have  acqiiir^ 
^ost  foioe^'  It  is  to  be  obMrved#  that  every  diing  bconrowed  firom  the 
Persians  and  IndiaQSy  is  prmrrcd  m  it  was  at  the  time  when  fifit 
adopted,  and  consequently  varies  considerably  from  the  actual  pnp» 
doe  of  both  countries  in  these  day^  The  Indian  dress  ani  caaloma 
are  those  of  Shauh  Jehaun^s  days;  and  the  Persian,  those  of  tht 
time  of  Naudir  Shauh.  Though  the  latter  perioti  is  by  much  the 
shortest,  (he  i^reat  chancre  \Yhich  has  ta^^en  j)lace  in  PfflTBiaj  TnivlfifMi  the 
contrast  more  striking  than  in  tlie  other  case.  * 

The  manners  of  the  Afghauns  are  frank  and  open,  i  iiough  manly 
«id  independent,  they  arc  entirely  free  from  Uiat  affectation  of  mili- 
tary pride  and  ferocity,  wliich  is  so  conspicuous  in  their  descendants 
ihePitansof  India.  VVtien  tbeir  address  i.s  l^ad,  it  isnistic,  hut  never 
•fierce  or  insolent :  the  Indian  Pitans  seem  to  have  cojiied  the-  peculiar 
jnanners  of  the  Eusofzyes,  to  whom  a  haughty  and  unoguiit  carriage 
is  iiaturaL  About  towns  the  A%hauns  are  in  some  degree  polished* 
and  shew  respect  to  superiors,  but  hi  many  parts  of  the  country  they 
are  plain,  and. make  little  »lial:nirti<m  of  lanks;  they  all,  howevei^ 
jdiew  ^BBBt  lewwBoee  'fiw  'Old  agfr 
•  Tbm^Jibt  A^^mund  hem  ih^ekaefdmmaoa 
eimufetf  in  oomparing  die  behsfidiv  nf  Aaiaftici  witfiiliit  ef  Enro^ 

yeapBj  jset  itianotiiiiOQveo&cmto  findtha&badifiili-adeftciiffa^ 

•  ♦ 


I    *  Tten  fli^not     m  gwrtcr  wfabdt*  tea  to  nip|KM»'  fliat  tmtn  utAam  -Mmt 

<juaige  their  fashions.  Our  present  dress  is  at  leoiit  as  Ilki-  that  of  Charles  the  Second's 
reign,  as  the  prcst  nt  dress  of  the  Persians  is  to  that  worn  when  Chnrdin  travelled. 
,Np  less  a  change  ,has  iakpn  phcp  in  India:  the  jokes  of  the  young  courtiers  .o(  Selly 
joa  4im  old  fcJiioiiHl  drew  jmd  nsiiiisni  of  Nizain  Ool  MpoUt,  had  «Acti  ^h»t 
•  figure  in  history :  and  as  the  <ire-s  of  the  Mogul  noblemen  at  Delly,  ami  in  the 
Jhcfiap,  must  hav^  be^  the  s(un^  ei|{ht^  or  nin^  jrears  ago»  and  .are  now  .qititf 
difliii«n^  it  ja  ^ridoit  <«ie;or  oAar  Jmiik  iiava  dbaup^  ^.if  nof  botiu,  TS^.iQith 
EuTf^t^  Jatf^dlm  pman  J^^,  ^umgat  m  a'dipa  .to&nfy  difticat  ftaf 

iheit  own.  .    «  -   j         ■     ,     • .  '  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


fl^  CHAMAUFWSL 

I  have  never  witnessed  in  any  other  Asiatic.  Except  on  formal  oc- 
casions, thev  use  a  good  deal  of  j^eslure,  hut  it  is  always  oi  a  «jrave 
kind,  such  as  stretching  out  the  ann,  and  bending  forward  the  bodr- 
Thev  have,  perhaps,  more  of  this  kind  of  action  than  the  Persians, 
though  not  near  so  lively  a  pef^le;  but  thejr  no  means  equal  the 
geflticulaLiun  of  the  IndiiUis.  *•  »  .  -    •  ' 

They  are  also  free  from  that  puerility  which  is,  perhaps,  the  distin- 
guishing cliaracteristic  of  the  last-mentioned  people.  I  found  their 
conversation  and  their  inqunics,  though  not  enlarged,  always  ratioiiiil, 
and  they  did  not  seem  much  delighted  with  thc^  baubles  which 
generally  form  the  most  acceptable  pi'esents  in  Indik 

The  A%liauns  are  aocused  by  the  Penini  of  igiioiMn^aid  Iw^ 
teian ;  stupidity  is  indaid  the  ptantbuX  lepnMwh  of  •til  Kbram 
mm.  Hiey  cBrtaajy  Imto  ndtlwr  tba  iriknrmmt  MKtlhBtMtty 
ofthek  waafeom  imffabtmt,wDdlUrilmMA^^mi^ 
tanaga  nitioiW)  undoubtedly  numm  thmr  viewa*  add,  ca  aoaie  gabr 
jeetey  ooiAiaGts  theb  uudentandmgt ;  but  fimn  thett  state  of  iDctet^ 
in  wliicfa  every  warn-  is  obliged  to  pioteet  his  awn^ngPits,  snd-iriieiB 
he  is,  at  the  same  tine^  of  someimportsDoe  to  the.  cDmpwrnity,  thoir 
fiMaMesi-mnrtfaeegeoddeilesettedmidinipiovad;  sndaeoosdini^ 
the  bulk  of  the  ]»eop1e  are  remaricable  fisr^piodaice,  <geod  amse,  and 
ehservelion.  They  have  also  a  digree  of  curiosity  which  is  a  relief  to 
e  parson  habituated  to  the  apathy  of  the  IiuUaiis.  The^  alefcys 
sheiied  a  desire  to  be  inlnraied  aboot  the  itate  of  oomilzies  efc  t 
distance  from  their  own»  and  some  were  very  anxious  to  ini> 
prove  themselves  by  acquiring  a  Inowle^ge  of  our  adences.    I  gave 

• shoit  of  the  Cuiaanican  avatem  (which  waa  nohliahed  in 


*  I  msy  be  aBotrad^  in  comparijig  them  with  a  ferdgn  niiUoii,  to  speak  of  the 
Uulrftant*  of  this  vatt  ea|Mre  as  one  people;  bat  it  moat  not  be  forgotten  that  there 
it  •  great  divernty  among  the  Indians  themselves:  thus  the  tall  and  wpII  mm\e  Hin- 
dottaunee  qpeaka  extreme^  alow,  and,  though  he  uses  a  good  deal  of  gesture,  does  not 
aHHwaih  to  ^'vidhaee  of  aedon  employed  by  the  oaall,  fabc^  sad  ddhcUed  iidiilfaf> 
tant  of  tlie  Comatic  who  speaks  on  the  most  trifling  sufa|)ect  with  a  dtffm  Sf  volohility 
and  ttgenum  to  which  no  OBcaaon  conUl  ntam  an  ]ini||^iihnMNi. 


Digitized  by  Google 


GHAILAOTUL 


Persian  by  Dr.  Hunter),  to  a  Moollah  who  aooompanied  me  to  Cal« 

cutta,  and  two  years  after  his  return  I  received  a  list  of  queries  ad- 
dre«?sed  to  the  Newtoiiianaun  English  (Enghsh  Newtonians),  requir- 
ing' an  explication  of  some  parts  0^  the  system  wliicii  had  ftmhflTiMfld 
the  learned  at  Pe«hawer.  ♦ 

Wliile  in  Calcutta,  I  carried  a  great  many  Afghauns,  of  all  ranks, 
from  Moollahs  to  grooms,  to  the  arsenal,  to  visit  ships,  and  to 
some  other  sights  which  were  nvw  to  them,  and  it  was  extremely 
pka:si)ii:''  to  see  the  interest  they  took  In  every  thing,  and  the  gratifi- 
oition  they  received.  One  of  tlu-  MuoUaiis,  however,  wa'^  fjreatly 
disappointed  in  not  tindjiig  the  wheel  us€?d  for  boriiiji^  c  jinnoa  lunied 
by  steam,  as  he  had  read  in  the  travels  of  ei  za  Aboo  Taulib,  was 
the  case  in  England.  I  have  often  seen  nalis  cs  oi  India  at  spectacles 
of  the  same  nature,  ami  though  they  always  were  polite  enough  to 
express  much  admiration,  they  did  it  with  a  calmness  that  showed 
how  little  they  were  interested,  while  the  questions  which  they  some- 
times asked,  wece  of  anoih  a  mtuse  as  to  lecre  no  doubt  that  their 
only  object  wis  to  keep  up  cammadon,  f 

•  All  oommimieitum  with  the  Afghanm  is.  rendend  agneaUe,  by 
tli0  dq^adflioe  wUch  can  be  placed  OA  what  tiiey  say.  Thoa^lhef 
tie  &r  belund  Emopeana  in  madtj,  and  woukl  seldom  scruple  to 
deceive  bolh  in  fttetfrmfinti  sad  praoiina*  if  llieir  own  iHtveatweve 
to  be  promotod-bf  tiieb  iSelumesty,  yet  they  hanre  not  that  indilfte« 
ence  to  tnOif  and  that  afyle  of  habitiial  and  gntoitoiiB  ftlsehood 
which  aitoniafaea  an  European  in  natives  of  Indie  and  Beisis:  a  mm 
of  the  fint  notion  seems  incapable  of  observing  sny  thing  eoenntlefy» 
and  one  of  iSbe  second4»f  deacribing  it  trnly ;  bnt  unlem  some 
Set  can  be  diacoveted  to  TOiaioad'  the  obaetver,  or  some  mofetvisk  is 


•  My  own  ignorance  of  the  subject,  nnd  flic  difficulty  of  finding  n  person  here, 
who  is  botli  a  Persian  scholar  and  a  jnsthematidani  has  hitherto  preveuuxl  iuj_  teflj' 
ktg  Id  this  paper. 

t  Us  Pmfaw  are  too  aeoie  nd  iBtdi%ent  to  hnre  any  of  Ai»  ■■uMiliillljV  iMt 
lih^  sse  too  M  of  diamdm  to  bs  ymj  esrisni  sbooft  olbci  nalkini. 


Digitized  by  Google 


apparent  for  mifirepresenting  the. truth,  one  may  genmdly  rely  on  the 
Afghaum  both  far  ttvnctnen'aiid  fidelity. 

JLll  the  AfghaniM  are  remarlcably  hardy  and.aotm  From  die  iiji^ 
twe  of.  dieir.  oountry,  they  are  exposed  to  the  neoesuty  of  enduring 
oold  and  heat,  and  accustomed  to  the  ezertion  of  clhnfauig  mountainat 
making  long  jouniiea  on  foot  and  on  horsebadfi  and  swimmmg  luoad 
and  rapid  torrents.  Nor  u.this  confined  to.the  ]0iner,orden»  'oc  to 
men.ln  the  vigour  .of  youth.  As  diere  is  no. easier  ooDveyance  m  the 
country  than  a  horsey  all. ranks  .acqoire  these  habita:  so  that  old 
Meeraas  (or  secretaries))  who  seem  .kanUy.able.to  .sit  on  horaehackt 
will  ride. at  .a good  pace  jnp.aod  down  the  steepest. and  .rau^jbest 
passes^  bf  akmg  the  edge  of  precqpioesi  where  one  is  almoat^afinid  to 
walk.  .Ahnost  all  of  them.ane,  hosrerer,  impatient  of  hotdimatos; 
aad»  when  on  campaignB  in  India,  the  approach  .of  summer  used  to 
dun  .their  armi^  by  desertions,  even  in  the  vigoiouB  reign.of  Ahmed 
Shauh.  This  is  the  more  mrprising,  when  .  it  is  resnembeeed  how. 
much  of  the  Afghaun  country  is  in  a  hot  dimate. 

They  are  industrious  and  laborioas,  when  pursuing  any  object  of 
business  or  pleasure.  No  people  are  more  diligent  in  hmthandryj  and 
many  of  them  are  indefirtigabie  in  the  chaoe;  but.  when  not  so  ex- 
cited, th^  are  indolent. 

Hie  love  of  gain  seems  to  be  their  .ruling  passion ;  most^of  the 
Dooramiee  chi^  prefer  hoarding  their  great  but.useless.tveaaHies, 
to.  the  .power,  reputation,  and  esteem,  which  the  circumstances  of  the 
times  would  enable  .them  to  command  by  a  moderate  liberality.  The 
influence  of  money  on  the  whole  nation,  is  spoken  of  by  those  who 
know  them  best,  as  boundle.ss,  and  it  is  not  denied  by  themselves. 

Their  love  of  independence  ha.s  already  been  noticed  a55  influencing 
their  p-c^  ernment,  it  appears  in  some  shape  in  most  of  their  opinion.^ 
aiul  transactions.  Their  hi<;hcsf  praise,  in  speaking  ot  a  well  governed 
country,  is,  that  "  every  man  eata  the  produce  of  his  own  field,"  and 
that    nobody  has  any  concern  with  his  nei^bour."  * 


*  Khood  mcdoMiniiul,  Uiood  medthoorund.   KuMbMi  Inwee  f^uirns  aedaufiA- 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


character:  251 

This  love  of  pcnonial  iod^Mtadflnce  is,  hamrnvrfTtPf  i«mola  fiNm 
*  MlfiihTiniiii  The  nature  of  tbeir  aocicij^  wbere  power  oDosista  in  this 
mimber  of  a  mui's  rebrtioott  prodnoes  «  Tery  rtubii^  attachment  be- 
tween moOBben  of  the  same  fianiil^*  and  thore*  »  no  A%hBim  who 
would  not  shew  his  deration  to  his  clan,  if  he  saw  it  en^iged  in  any 
contest.  I  must  except  from  what  I  say  <^  fiunily  attachment,  the 
rivalry  which  the  electioBB  of  chidb  occasion  in  the  head  families,  the 
force  of  blood  is  never  much  felt  among  kings ;  and  the  dbie&bip  of  a 
little  tribe  is  as  elevated  a  station  in  the  eyes'  of  those  who'  contend 
for  it  as  a  crown  amoiifr  ^n?at  princes.  This  docs  not  indeed  happen 
among  brothers,  ljut  it  is  so  remarkable  in  more  distant  relations,  thaf 
Turi>oor,  which  literally  means  a  cousin,  is  now  the  common  word  m 
Pushtoo  for  a  rival.  I  have  nlreadv  shewn  how  their  clannish  spirit 
diminishes  their  genc  i  al  patriotism,  but  they  all  take  a  lively  interest 
in  the  Nung  du  FoosJitauneh,  or  honour  of  the  Afghaun  name ;  and 
they  are  extremely  attaclied  <o  the  country  that  n;ave  them  birth,  and 
to  the  scenes  of  their  early  pleasures.  A  native  of  the  wild  valle  y  of 
Spei*::^  norlli-cast  of  Ghuzriee,  who  was  obliged  to  fly  liis  country 
for  some  offence,  was  vurc  giving  me  an  acccnnit  (if  his  travels,  he 
concluded  by  enumerating  the  countries  he  had  \  islttd,  and  by  com- 
paring them  with  his  own  :  "  I  have  seen  all  rt  ibia,  and  India,  Geor- 
**  gia,  Tartary,  and  Belochestauu,  but  i  have  seen  no  such  place  as 
**  Speiga  in  all  my  travels." 

They  are  all  very  proud  of  their  descent  j  a  great  part  of  their 
histories  is  taken  up  by  genealogies :  they  will  liaidly  acknowlc^^  • 
nmi  ibr  an  Afghaun,  who  cannot  mako  lua'pfbofii  by  going  back  «x 
or' seven  generaticMis ;  «id  even  in  dieir'  ordiniry  oaiivenMiion»  Iht^ 
often  atop  to  enmunte  the  fonftthon  of  any  penon  who  bappm 
to  be  fflOBfticaed.  * 


*  I  Nnenbtr'il  ilrilBiig  iattsnce  of  this  in  a  Doolutkhnil,  whom  I  wUmiI  lb  aMem^ 
gate  about  Tiik  in  Damaun,  the  chief  town  of  his  trilx';  he  began  bis  ?inswcr,  **  Tnk  is 
"  the  dty  of  Surwur,  the  ton  of  Kuttaul  Khaun,  the  son  of  fcJcJeem  Khaun,  the  sou  of 
«MBcr8oalcnDiKIwni,  ^  Ma  ef  fihaah  Anhnn  Khiflii;  Hi*  mi  of  MAoRWid  2ii 
•'maim  Khaon,  Hmmii  of  ZufFer  Khaim,  the  son  of  Khaun  ZcaMn^  vlut  JiMid  in  d|« 
**        of  Mumgm^  the  <iApriog  of  Timour  the  Limt." 

K  K  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


£52 


CHARACTEB. 


Ibejr  «ra  aJI  kind  to  their  Immediate  dependents,  of  whateTer  na- 
tion or  religion,  but  the  cam  is  different  with  people  who  are  under 
their  authority,  without  being  personally  connected  with  them.  The 

countries  which  are  completely  subdued,  as  Cashmcpr  and  the  pro- 
vinces on  the  Imhis,  suffer  mudi  from  tfif  r;ipnritv  of  individuals, 
and  if  they  do  not  often  undergo  the  extremes  of  tyrainiv.  it  onh 
because  wanton  cruelty  and  insol^ice  are  no  part  of  the  A%haun 
character. 

Their  independence  and  pretensions  to  (Mnialitv  make  fheni  view 
the  elevation  of  their  neighbours  with  jealuuNV,  ami  conuimnicates  a 
deep  tintre  of  envy  to  their  disposition.  Tlie  idea  tliat  thev  are 
neglected  und  passed  over,  while  their  equal?*  are  atteiuled  to,  will 
lead  them  to  renounce  a  frieudship  oi'  long  standing,  or  a  party  to 
which  they  have  been  zealously  attached.  Unless,  however,  they 
meet  with  particular  wrongs  or  insults,  they  are  said  to  be  fidthibl  in 
fikndtiiip  onoe  ftnned,  md  mindiiil  of  fimiun>-if  not  eAced  by 
•nbieqtient  slights.  I  cm  anawer  for  tfaie  peculiaiily  in  tlieir  chareo* 
ter,  thit  the^  will  do  any  tlung  tbat  ia  wanted  of  them  with  much 
more  Mel,  if  a  present  is  made  to  them  in  advance^  thn  if  it  ii  witb* 
hdd  in  the  hope  of  quickening  them  by  expectancy. 
'  Itma^  befoioiocp  htm  their  cwtoms,  which  moke  private  levei^ 
a  duty,  tbat  th^  wiU  kmg  retain  tiie  lemembiaaoe  of  iiguriea  i  but 
this  ia  tme  only  such  serious  injuries  as  thcg^  are  bound-in  honour 
to  retaliate ;  in  tMn  of  less  ooosequenee^  they  are  neither  iirilable 
nor  impJaoble. 

I  know  no  people  in  Asia  who  .have  Jfewer  vices,  or  are  lesa  volup- 
tnous  or  debauched;  but  thia  ia  most  remarkable  in  the  west :  the 
people  of  towns  are  acquiring  a  taste  for  debauchery,  end  those  in 
the  north-east  of  the  country,  are  alreao^  fiur  from  bong  pure.  The 

A%hauns  themselves  complain  of  the  corruption  of  manners,  and  of 
the  dedine  of  sincerity  and  good  faith,  and  say  that  dieir  nation  is 
assimilating  to  the  Persians.  Their  sentiments  and  conduct  towards 
tliat  nation,  greatly  resemble  those  which  we  discovered  some  years 
igo  towards  the  French.   Their  national  antipathy,  and  a  stioiig 


Digrtized  by  Google 


CHABACTEB. 


S58 


tenia  of  their  aim  8uperiotit)r»  do  not  prarent-tlieir  imitating  Fenian 
niiiinen»  while  they  dedaimi^faiiiat  thepractioe>  as  deprsnng  Uieir 
own.  They  are  fuUj  senatble  of  the  advantage  which  Ferti*  has  over 
diBBi  at  prawLPt,  fiam  the  ooaqpandve  union  and  vigour  of  her  coun- 
dla*  and  they  icgavd  the  increase  of  her  power  with  same  d^;ree  of 
iqpprehension,  which  is  diminished  by  their  inattention  to  the  foture* 
and  by  their  confidence  in  themselves.  To  sum  up  the  character  of 
the  A^hauns  in  a  few  words}  their  vices  are  revenge,  envy,  avarice* 
rapacity,  and  obstinacy  ;  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  fond  of  liberty, 
£uthfiil  to  their  fri^da,  kind  to  their  dependantSy  hospitable,  brave, 
hardy,  thigal,  laborious,  and  prudent ;  and  they  are  less  dif^poscd  than 
the  natkms  in  their  ne^bourhood  to  fakehnod,  inirigue*  and  deceit. 


{    254  ) 


CHAP.  Via 

OP  THl  INHABITAKTS  OP  TOWNS. 


I HAVE  hitlierto  contined  myself  to  those  points  of  character  or 
niuiijiers  which  apply  to  the  whole,  or  iiciiily  the  whole,  of  the 
Atghaiin  nation.    I  shall  now  proceed  to  tic.scribe  the  peculiaxities  of 
the  different  classes  of  which  it  is  composed.    Enough  has  been  said, 
for  the  present,  ol'  the  difference  betwaen  the  eattem  and  western 
A^iamiB ;  aome  particular  orders  of  men  hsTe  also  beai  incsidentally 
described ;  and  tl^  pastoral  and  agricultural  chases  will  be  ^oken  of 
in  great  detafl  hereafter.   Tlie  first  description  of  people  whom  I 
have  now  to  examine,  aie*  theieifoie>  the  inhdbitanta  of  towns;  and  here 
one  is  struck  with  the  circwmatance,  that  the  greater  part  of  this  branch 
of  the  popnlation  is  not  composed  of  Aigftanns.  ItmajseemstiaD^to 
a  person  in  £aiope»  that  thie  towna  should  not  be  inhabited  bjr  the 
nuMrtera  of  the  country,  yet  such  was  the  case  in  England  after  the 
Nonnan  inrasbut  and  such  it  still  is  In  Uabek,  Tartaiy,  and  m  aome 
meaaune  in  Fersk  $  and  probaUy  the  reason  has  in  all  caaes  been  the 
same;  the  ruling  nation  has  though  it  degrading  to  pumue  the  trades 
.which  assemble  men  in  towns,  and  none  have  revded  there  but  great 
men  and  their  retainers,  who  are  drawn  thither  by  the  court;  ao> 
ooldingly,  the  only  A%hauns  who  reside  in  towns,  are  great  men  and 
their  followers,  soldiers,  Moollabs,  a  few  who  Ibllow  commerce  (a  pur- 
suit not  despised  among  this  people),  and  wma  of  the  pooiest  of  the 
nation,  who  worit  as  labourers.    No  Alghaun  ever  keeps  a  shop^  or 
exercises  any  handicraft  trade.    The  greater  part  of  the  people  em- 
ployed in  these  occupations,  are  Taujiks,  a  nation  who  are  intermixed 
wUh  the  A%hauns  in  great  numbers,  throughout  all  the  western  part 


Digrtized  by  Googl 


BANKERS. 

tt  tbeur  Qoimtiy,  and  who  are  imiiid  erm  in  the  eMt|  wheiei  how* 
Vflr>  ^  tradei  alliidad  tis  toe  xnoce  fieqiiodj  aeieiBed  Hj  Hiiid- 
.keeB,  .a  people  of  Indian  origin,  -who  are  aoattered  over  that  .part  of 
A%hauni8taun/ as  the  Taijika^aie  in  the  west  Theae  iiationi^  atid 
the  others  which  contribute  to  &e  populadon  of  A%|iaun  towns,  will 
be  oonaidered  as  distinct  raoas^  after  I  bave  descrflbed  the  Afghauna  ( 
at  preieiiA  I  .hanre  only  to  ^peak  of  the  place  they  oeciipy  as  citizena 
of  thoae  towns.  In  this  point  of  view,  we  find  them  divided  into 
bankers,  merdiants,  artisans,  and  labourers. 

The  prohibition  in  the  Koraun  against  Mussulmans  taking  intereat, 
makes  most  of  the  business  of  banking  fall  into  the  hands  of  Hindoos, 
whose  warv  and  penurious  habits  snit  them  atlniirably  for  the  trade. 
They  derive  their  profits  Iroin  leiniin;^  monpv,  whirh  they  do  at  an 
enormous  interest,  by  nrfjnciat  inL^  bills  of  exchange,  and  by  transac- 
tions i  riiuieeled  with  tlie  Jluetuaiions  of  the  exchange  in  the  place 
wheie  they  reside.  They  also  mix  tra<le  and  agency  witli  their  regu- 
lar banking  business.  Aiioilier  source  of  profit  arises  from  advancing 
money  to  government  for  bills  on  tl  ic  revemie  of  {mn  iiiccs,  and  this 
hazardous  speculation  is  lecunnnendc'd  by  a  premium,  always  large, 
and  increasing  with  the  risk  of  non-payment.  Some  of  the  bankers 
are  very  rich,  but  there  arc  numberless  little  shops  set  up  with  very 
small  capitals,  which  practise  the  same  trade  as  the  great  ones,  aniong 
the  poor  people  of  their  particular  neighbourhood. 

When  I  waa  at  .IMiawer,^e  bankera  tfaonght  it  necessary  to 
oenoeal  their  wedtfa ;  and  one,  who  took  up  my  bills,  ftt*  the  purpose 
of  TODiituig  his  property  to  India,  would  only  make  his  payments  in 
the  .iu|^  irfien  he  dug  up  hia  money,  .and  paid  it  to  my  treasurer 
with  the  utmost  secrecy.  But  these  precautions  were  not  taken  from 
any  present  danger  so  much  as  wi^  a  view  to  futurity,  as  Feshewer 
was  on  the  ere  of  a  revolntion, .  wliidi  had  already  commenced  in  the 
West.  At  that  very  time,  'the  bankers  had  great  confidence  in  the 
government  of ,  Shaidi  Shujan,  and  kwked'with  terror  to  the  prospect 
of  its  snbvendon.  Nb  exactidna  weie  ever  made  on  them,  notwith- 
standing .the  ,Kui|fa  uigoit  wants  {  and,  in  aQ  transactions  with' 

II 


Digrtized  by  Google 


MERCHANTS. 

gOVORHBentt  they  seemed  to  have  no  fears  from  the  King  or  iht 
Frime  Minister,  but  only  from  their  inferior  agents,  ^^^len  any 
ordinary  courtier  was  employed  to  iK^rrotiate  a  loan  with  them,  they 
said  he  was  likely  to  im])ose  on  oi  ()|)|)ress  them  for  his  own  profit ; 
but,  when  tlie  afiair  was  committed  Ui  a  man  of  a  respectable  cha- 
racter, who  would  communicate  fairly  bt  (\m en  them  and  the  govern- 
ment, they  met  with  very  equitable  treatment.  The  opposite  party 
levied  contributions  and  extorted  luont^v  by  all  means,  but  tliey  were 
then  struggling  to  overturn  the  government  ;  and,  though  their  habits 
are  very  irregular,  it  is  |irobable  that  the  secure  posstaisiou  of  the 
kingdom  has  now  improved  their  char^ter  in  this  respect  The 
bankers  must  derive  much  security  firom  the  great  Dooramu  es  putting 
money  into  their  hands  to  be  employed  to  the  best  ach  antage ;  a 
practice,  which  identifies  the  interestii  of  the  bankers  uiul  the  nobility. 
Needy  nobles,  also  afford  their  protection  to  bankers,  and  treat  iliera 
with  great  attention,  in  the  hope  of  being  able  to  borrow  money  from 
them  i  and,  like  all  otjier  cImoct  <^  induatmus  people,  they  derive 
beiefit  from  the  obvioiui  mterert  y^iiA  tJie  £ng  htm  ib  protecting 
them  againrt  inditiduails  of  Jus  o#n  natuMi. 

The  merdumtfl  are  genenUj  Tai\jiks,  Penianiy  or  A^^muMi 
Hufug^  oommeroe  is  by  no  meeiis  hwlEed  down  on  in  lliig  oountryt 
though  the  merahauta  are  generally  ledumed  among  the  iqpfW 
rlmiipii  of  (he  society,  and  though  several  Khanns  of  iolcfior  nmkt 
even  among  the  Dooraunees^  are  mercfaaatss  yet»  there  are  none  of 
those  htfge  fortunes  and  estenaiTe  concenis' among  them,  wfajdi  am 
seen  in  Persia  and  India.  Hie  long  dvil  wars  have  occasioned  * 
gieat  decline  of  oonimerce,  by  icndfliing  the  roads  imsalhk  and 
ing  whole  caravans  to  be  plundeied  bjoneoEotherof  thecontoidinif 
parties.  Otherwise  the  situation  of  Canbul,  between  India,  Petsiap 
Tartary*  and  Bclochestaun,  together  with  the  possession  of  Casfameer, 
would  not  fiul  to  give  itgreat  advantages. .  . 

The  merchants  ave  sU  sober,  frugal*  unassumii^;  people ;  and»  from 
the  joumies  to  tattaffk  countries  which  ^iMif'miie  tn  the.oouiaeof 
Ihllr  conoeRis,  thti;y  aie  move  polnhed  mid  than  mesfc 


Digitized  by  Gopgle 


SHOPKEEPERS  AND  ARTISANS.  tS^ 

olber.  diSMjiijilioiii  of  iimd*  Ukuey  live  oowfyitAlyi  but  nent  o<|eiH 
tatiouflf.  ModDa  JiAr  SeeBteanee^  '  whoie  -finroiir  with  fibanh 
Shocgan  put  him  on  a  level  wHh  the  miniaten'of  ttate>'  always;  dfOBiod 
like  an  otdinaiy  merdiant;  was  w/vet  attended  by  more  than,  one 
servant ;  and  a  man*  who  curried  his  ciil]eeaun»  and  never  would 
allow  himself  to  be  addiessed  with  any  of  the  titles  which  are  giveii 
to  people  of  oonaei|aenoe.  It  is  a  proof  how  much  the  Afghanns  are 
esempt  from  the  pigadices  of  India  in  lespect  to  tmde^  that  no  man 
of  any  rank  would  scruple  to  sell  a  horse»  a  sword,  or  any  similar 
.  article,  which  he  hiqppened  not  to  lequtte;  although  regular  trade 
would,  of  ooume^  be  reckoned  a  very  unbecommg  employment  for  the 
great. 

Tlio  remaining  in!ia1>itants  are  shopkeepers  and  artificers.  They 
are  divided  into  liiirty-two  trad^*,  each  of  which  has  its  own  Ctulkhoda 
or  chief,  who  manages  all  transactions  belween  the  trade  and  the 
government.  There  are  no  r^ilar  taxes  on  this  class  of  townsmen, 
though  tliey  are  oi  course  affected  by  the  duties  collected  on  all 
articles  iiaported  into  the  towns.  They  are,  however,  liable  to  exac- 
.  tioiih  more  distressing  than  regular  taxation.  Tlie  principal  of  these 
is  the  obligation  to  furnish  shops  for  the  Oordoo  fiazaur  or  camp 
market.  Whenever  the  King  marches  from  any  ciLj  in  liis  dominions, 
an  order  is  issued  to  the  Cudkhodas  to  furnish  a  aho]^  of  each  txade, 


•  The  number  is  confined  to  tlvirty-two  by  including  several  trades  in  one  clnss.  As  it 
will  wrve  to  give  some  idea  of  the  state  of  ciTilization,  I  «hall  maitioti  aome  of  the  trades 
«Uch  seaodiy  exist,  taken  floin  s Ifatcf  wweaty^tt  trader  wMch  «t»wiwdHai  of  OmImI 
(Grom  wimn  I  had  the  list)  could  remember.  Jewellers,  gold  and  silver  smiths  booksellers* 
bookbinders,  stationers,  makers  of  kullumdauns,  (a  sort  of  ink-stand  and  pen-case^  of 
wiilch,  every  man  who  can  write  has  one],  seal-engravers,  sellers  of  armour,  sellers  of 
shields,  (these  t^hioids  are  of  bufTnlciea  or  rttooewsi't  Udn)*  gumBUba,  gwofckcatlen* 
poliN^if  rs  of  stfvl,  8eilci"s  of  bows  and  nrrow,  sclltT^  of  jrla-w  ornnmcnts  for  women,  three 
descriptions  of  shoe-makers,  boot-makers,  button-makers,  silk-thread  sellers,  gold-wire  and 
IPiUnIJimmI  fcller^  idUlMi^  fiuiier^  to6k»,  wtmp^aMent  uAmeoaiAtth 

dru^istji,  porfunjers,  skllors  of  sherbet  and  of  fiijlodcli,  conffctiontrsi,  embroiderers,  and 
people^  whose  busine^  it  is  to  sew  ornaments  on  clothes  of  all  de»cri{^Ds,  firom  jewels  to 
tftn^n,   I  omit  all  people  who  adl  tlw  naofiMrifls  of  lift^  ai  butctoi^  bakeii^  BMrMffi^ 

I.  I. 


Diglized  by  Google 


2^  OPPRESSION. 

* 

to'  teeompany  die  Court  to  the  n«Kt  grat  town,  where  tlie^«re  d»» 
dhng^  •  The  vtifloen  raflfer  moit  fay  thk  jregiihtimi,  as  they  am 
not  ft&A  by  the  in»k;  but  «re  considered  as  8<nnraDts«ixf  the  King, 
and  only  entitled  to  their  ps^.  This  |wy  u  not  issued  regularly,  and 
thepeofde  aiegtseniiy  given  a  sum  of  money  when  they  are  dismissed 
in  lieii  of  all  payments.  I  do  not  knoir  whether  the  mim  fixed  by 
the  Court  is  an  equitable  compensadon  ft>r  the  labour  imposed ;  but, 
the  amount  which  reaches  the  artifii^r,  after  passing  through  the 
hands  of  the  courtiers,  and  of  the  head  of  the  trade,  is  very  inade- 
quate to  the  expence  and  inconvenience  he  has  been  exposed  to. 
The  other  shopkeepers  Tnav,  perhaps,  receive  inadequate  pi  ici  s  for 
their  goods  ;  hut,  from  the  nature  of"  their  transactions,  the  payments 
made  to  them  cannot  be  so  arbitrary  as  those  to  the  artificers.  This 
.inconvenience  tall^  on  a  small  number  of  the  towns  people,  as  the 
regular  oordoo  liazaur  is  only  intended  to  supply  the  royal  household. 
There  are  many  other  shops  which  accompany  the  camp,  to  supply 
(lie  Sii  dars  and  the  soldiers ;  and,  tio  great  is  the  distinction  between 
thij,  clasis  and  those  attached  to  the  household,  that  the  latter  endea- 
vour to  avoid  the  duty  hy  bribes  to  the  persons  whose  business  it  is 
to  pvoTide  them  r  whUe  the  others  go  voluntarily,  and  consider  the 
^ploymentnsTery  profitah^  'No  oidinaiy  towna  are  obliged  to 
snpply  ooedoo  banauta  (  and  tUa  oppfeaaion  fidb  only  on'tle  citiea  of 
Heraut)  Candahar,  Caubul,  and  Pesbawer.  It  can  acaioely  happen 
to  either  oftener  than  once  a  year,  or  bist  longer  than  three  weeka 
or  a  month  j  but  the  shopkeepers  ore  always  liable  to  suflhr  while  the 
Kmg  is  in  their  town,  by  being  obliged  to  fiuniah  aitidea  to  bia 
pnnrejora  at  their  own  price.  In  troubled  times,  oontributiona  are 
levied  on  towns  to  8iq;»ply' the  armies  of  the  oompetitom^  Thqrare 
generally  levied  in  artkies  of  oonaumptioii,  but  compositioiis  in  money 
are  also  received, 

Perhapa  the  greatest  oppression  the  townamen  suffer,  arises  from 
the  strictness  of  the  police.  It  has  been  mentioned,  that  a  branch  of 
this  department  is  in  the  hands  of  the  clergy,  and  that  it  watches  over 
jfap  miniiti*t  breach  of  the  rules  of  fdigion  and  nioi|Jity«  Xheooo^ 


Digrtized  by  Google 


annniioiis  of  the  day; 


ftequences  are  extremely  harassing  from  the  pretexrs  afforded  for 
extorting  money  ;  arid  this  evil  is  increased  by  the  ajipointTiipnts  In 
the  jx)Hce  being  fanned.  The  Govemmeiit  can  gain  nothing  bv  these 
exactions,  since  the  whulc  amount  paid  to  the  treasury,  on  account  of 
fines  and  petty  confiscations  in  the  populous  city  of  Vc.^hawer,  is  only 
1500  n^iees,  (equal  to  150/.)  per  annum.  The  profit  to  the  farmers 
of  the  offioM  of  police  mmt}  of  cour8e»  be  much  greater  dian  this ; 
yet  it  pfolnbljbeiBn  no  propoKtion  to  tiw  witioiiiiid  anxiety  ivliidi 
h  oocMions  <o  the  people.  In  other  leipeota*  the  police  m  good  $ 
and  there  are  few  crimeB  or  dJatiiibanoes.  The  office  of  pdice  go 
the  Bountb  frequent^  in  the  night ;  and  eveiy  qmiter  has  gates* 
which  an  cloaed  at  a  ootain  hour,  ao  that  robberies  are-ncM  to  int^ 
powible.  The  people  are  not  alloivred  to  go  about  the  streets  that 
part-of  the  iii|^  during  which  the  Kn^'a  bond  ocadcs  to  pli^.  "It 
ceases  between  eleven  and  twehre.  at  nij^  and  does  not  leeoAmeaeg  ' 
tin.d^-bi«afc;  andf  as  it  is  heard  over  eray  part  of  the  td#n,  itjgiVe* 
sufficient  intimatian  .of  the  time  when  oommunication  is  allowed  <^ 
forbidd^  H  any  man  is  obl^^  to  go  afabnt  in  these  forbidden 
hours,  he  is  liable  to  be  taken  up»  unless  he  esnies  a  light  io  sheir 
Ihat  he  has  no  secret  design. 

It  may  not  be  amiss  to  mention  in  this  place  the  way  in  which  the 
day  b  divided  in  Afghaunistaun.  The  day  begins  at  SeAr,  which  is  a 
little  before  the  commencement  of  the  morning  twilight,  and  which 
is  enjoined  as  the  hour  of  the  first  prayers.  Tlic  next  mnrkod  period 
is  Aft  and  Boanrnnd,  or  sun-rise,  after  which  is  Chamhty  or  luiicheon 
time,  about  eleven  o  clock.  Neemrnoz  (or  noon)  is  the  f^hort  period 
bcLween  Cliausht  and  AuuUee  Pcsltcm  (or  Zohr),  an  hour  [irescribed 
for  prayers,  and  marked  by  the  first  inclination  of  t lie  shadt)\v  towards 
the  east.  The  next  time  is  about  four  in  the  afternoon,  when  a  man*8 
shadow  is  as  long  as  himself ;  this  is  called  Aukhiree  PcKheen,  next  is 
AtTy  or  Decger,  an  hour  of  prayer  about  five.  S/iavm  is  another  time 
for  prayer  soon  after  sun-set.  Khooftun  is  the  last  prayer,  at  the  end 
of  twilight ;  and  Tvblee  Sehum  (the  third  drum)  is  the  last  time  the 
King's  band  pkys  (about  half-past  eleven).  These  are  die  terme  em- 

L  L  S 


§B0:         MEALS  OF  THE'COini<»l  PCXIPLB  3K  TOWN& 


ployed  to  mark  time,  instea<i  of  the  hours  of  the  dayV  which  are  nev&t 
mentioned  in  common  discourse.  The  day  is,  liowever,  divided  into» 
twenty-four  hours,  which  are  counted  firom  six  in  the  momhlg  to  tt3& 
in  the  evening,  and  then  begin  again. 

The  year  b  dhridad  into  ibur  weuoaa  m  in  Europe,  4soinmflneing 
fiom  ihe  tenul  equinoXs  "wbea  spring  is  conridered  to  he^n.  Thd 
Mahomedan  lunar  months  are  most  oommonly  used,  but  as  they  do 
BGi  suit  the  seasoiis,  the  signs  of  the  mdiec  tie  very  ofted  adopted^ 
and  m  the  east  the  Hindoo  months  are  better  knount  than  the  Mar 
homedan* 

To  return  to  the  inhalnbtots  of  towns,  the  common  peqple  rise  afc 
Mr,  and  rqpair  to  the  mosque  to  pray;  Hfter  piayers,  they  goior 
tiicir  shops,  which  are  always  disdnct  from  their  houses.  In  the  west, 
they  take  a  light  break&st  after  prayers,  which  some  do  also  in  the 
east.  At  eleven,  they  eat  their  luncheon  of  bread«  Vegetables,  oirds,' 
and  flesh  when  they  can  afford  it  In  summer  thej  deqp  for  a  txMipIe 
of  hours  after  their  luncheon ;  those  who  hare  apprentices  to  take 
care  of  their  shops,  take  their  -  lancheon  and  nap  at  home,  which 
others  do  at  their  shops.  We  are  apt  to  consider  this  habit  as  a  great 
jiroof  of  the  laziness  of  the  people  in  hot  climates;  hut  it  is  to  be 
remembered  that  they  do  not  rjn  to  rv^t  till  ten  or  eleven,  and  in  sum- 
mer (tlie  only  season  when  they  isleejj  m  the  day)i  they  rise  at  half- 
past  three,  wincli  does  not  make  their  whole  sleep,  including  that 
taken  in  the  day,  more  than  ec^uai  to  what  the  most  moderate  enjoy 
iu  Jb]ngland. 

Tlie  great  meal  ui  all  lunkh  is  called  Shawnee^  and  is  taken  aft«r 
the  last  prayers.  They  all  bathe,  generally  twice  a-weuk,  bnt  always 
on  Friday.  At  Peshawer  they  often  merely  wash  in  the  open,  air, 
but  in  the  towns  of  die  cold  country,  they  always  use  th«  Hummaum, 
or  hot  bath.  These  baths  have  been  often  described.  They  oontam 
three  rooms  heated  to  difl^rent  temperatures,  and  in  the  hottest  the 
bather  is  scnibbed  by  the  men  of  the  bath,  till  every  partide  of  dirt 
«r  scurf  is  cleared  off  his  skitti  Ilbe  entnnce  money  is  less  than  » 
penny,  and  all  the  operationa  of  the  balh,  uidndingahaving,  burning 


Digrtized  by  Google 


WOOD,  WITH  THE  BRiaBI  OF  SOME  AETICLE&  M 

tiie  hair  off  the  body,  aiid  dying  the  beard,  only  cost  one  hundred 
dinars  (three  pence  hal^enny)  ;  an  Abas&y  (less  than  one  shilling)  Is 
IBdconed  liberal  payment  finm  a  rich  maxL  The  baths  are  appro- 
priated to  llie  women  Ibr  aonne  bonis  every  day,  and  during  ihal; 
time  no  man  is  allowed  to  approach  them. 

.  The  feod  of  the  cominon  pec^  is  leavened  bxead,  rice,  flesh,  ve^ , 
gatafales^  sometimes  dhees^  and  always  Sjoot  or  Koroot  *.  Rovio^ie 
aie  dieap^  and  the  people  denre  a  great  ^nxmy  fiom  the  pvodiglniiit 
abondance  of  firait  At  Canfanlt  grapes  are  dear  whoi  they  seQ  Sor 
mora  than  a  findiing  afKmnd;  pomegianates  ace  Utile  mora  than  m 
Ini^pemiy  a  ponnd;  apples  adl  at  two  hundred  pomds  Ibr  a'ropee 
{£1 : 4 : 4)  ^  two  saHs  of  sptiooCs  are  equally  diesp*  and  the  dener 
sorts  are  less  than  a  hal^pomy  a  pound;  peaches  are  deaier,>biit 
qoindes  snd  phnns  are  as  chesp,  and  makms  much  cheaper ;  grapee 
often  bear  scaroe'  any  price,  and  the  coarse  sort,  which  is  exported' 
with  so  much  care  to  India>  is  sometimes  given  to  cattle.  Nuts  of  all 
kinds  are  very  cheap,  ai^  walnuts,  with  whidi  the  hUls  north  of 
Canbui  are  covered,  sell  at  two  thousand  tor  a  rupee.  The  price  of 
TfgHtablp"  is  also  extremely  low;  The  smalla^  piece  of  coppec 
money,  much  less  than  a  halfpenny,  purchases  ten  pounds  of  spmagei 
twoity-five  of  cabbage,  and  of  carrots,  turnips,  pumkins,  or  cucum- 
bers. Coriander  seeds,  turmeric  and  ginger  also  sell  extremely 
cheap.  Ice,  or  rather  snow,  is  to  be  had  in  Caubul,  during  the  sum- 
mer, for  a  mere  trifle.  It  is  dearer  at  Caiidali;ir,  but  still  within  the 
reach  of  the  poorest  people.  A  favourite  i'vod  at  that  season  is  ftilo- 
deh,  a  jelly  strained  from  boiled  wheat,  and  eaten  witli  the  L  X|>ress^ 
juice  of  fruits  and  ice,  to  which  cream  also  is  sometimes  added.  In 
xvinter,  living  is,  of  course,  more  expensive,  and  this  is  particularly 
felt  in  the  city  of  Caubul,  where  provisions  become  dearer  j  it  is 


*  Koomt  »  iMde  of  dried  enrdt  pwod  into  hard  lumpa.  It  u  wraped  doim 

and  mixed  with  miik,  fiml  in  thi«  state  the  Afghauns  of  all  r:ink><  nrc  very  fond  of 
it,  but  it  is  sour,  and  to  me  very  uopalataMc.  It  is  called  "  Kowout,"  in  Tartaiy, 
Mid  «  Kftishk,"  in  Mtu 


Digitized  by  Google 


M  AMU8BMSNT8. 

■BreiMiy,  to  fawe  tfeorea  both  in  th«  hotMMii  and  the  ab0p«»  and  wanli 
dolluBg  fe.ahMlniidjrequiied;  MidL-  indnd  is  the  aeviaiifyaf.tlie 
diBMle^  tfaak.nuqr  of  the  poQnslpca(i]e.«i%Ei4etoliie«Mt«nd* 

The  people  have  a  great  jnatry  jnoMments*  Ae  moat  aowidenbiiB 
^wfaidiaaaefiiniheirpaanoiifiArifte  8m1*  (a^ojincDt 

oC  projects) ;  every  Friday,  all  shops  are  diiit»  and  evoj  man  edaMi 

from  the  bath,  dressed  in  his  best  doAea>  and  joins  rinr  nf  thn  pfcitina 
vfaiidh  are  always  made  for  thia  dsf,  to  aanie  hill  or  gasdeii  near  iStm 
town ;  a  little  aubscription  procmrea  an  ample  supply  of  provi  iiiWj 
aari^meats,  and  Fulodeh ;  and  for  a  Mnall  sum  paid  at  the  garden;^ 
each  man  has  the  liberty  to  eat  as  much  fruit  as  he  pleases.  Thej 
go  out  in  the  mtTrning,  and  eat  their  kfnch(*on  at  the  garden,  and 
spend  the  dav  in  walining  about,  eating  fruit  off  the  trees,  smoking, 
playing  at  backgammon  and  otl^r  games,  and  Hsieninir  to  tlic  singing 
and  playing  of  musicians,  hired  by  a  trifling  subscription.  Tlie  peo- 
ple of  Caubul  erven  go  on  parties  to  tiie  rich  valleys  of  the  Cohdau- 
mim,  as  far  a.s  thirty  miles  from  the  city;  these  expeditions  take 
several  days,  but  are  repaid  bv  the  beauty  of  the  place,  the  innumer* 
able  gardens,  and  the  extreme  cheapness  of  fruit  and  provisions.  In 
Peshawer,  the  great  resort  is  to  the  banks  of  the  Budina  rivulet,  and 
there  the  climate  enables  them  to  keep  up  this  practice  all  the  year ; 
but  at  Caubul  it  in  changed  in  winter  into  parties  to  himt  wolves,  ot 
to  ahfwt  lU:  marks. 

The  peofde  of  Caubul,  thou^  very  religious,  and  by  no  mmmw* 
Issed  m  tlnlf  iiMinlB,  are  woodefffhU^  ftndf  ef  ail  aortref  winiiMirtat. 
and  lecraafiien's  tbejr  have  often  ainging  and  pUying  in  tfaeir  homatt 
apdr  diclig^  in  tilgking  t^uuib  or  cocki,  and  in  aU  toiti  of  gHnaa  aod 
apofta. 

I  have  now  deacribed  tibe  li&  of  the  labonring  peopie»  and  I  ahall 
add  an  account  of  the  life  of  an  elder* 


*  ComiptKl  from  th«  PeniaD  or  Atabk  wanl  Sag, 


Digrtized  by  Google  . 

I 


LIFE  OF' A  BAK£B. 


988 


'Wmk' M.IMiB'mm'M  dnUar,  he  spent  a  gent 'deal  aPldi 
iSmt  hoam  (tC  tkTmtfkhAm  winy hMl made  wnto money,  and 
tttiMd  Mar  baaiBM'  The  ftHeiriiig  la  Ids  aeebntat  of  the  fife  wlueli 
tkta  iniii  led* 

MK  Duiiek  uaed  to  go  to  tliesbakH^s  bouie  eaify  in  the  morning ; 
idid  general^  ibaiid  hun  sitthig  wiA  a  ldnd^of  Mocnah,  who  lived  ia 
Ihe  houK'wHh  hmk  Ihe  morning  devotiena  did  not  ooeami  anj 
iBlemiplkn>  aa  die  baher>  addom  prayed*  .and' the  'MeoOah  nerer. 
3ha  letter  had  fetmhan  the  woiM,  rind  did  not  bbwrvefixima,  {Ivmif 
dnde  he  wria«  Soofee).  Their  bceakftifc  waa  btead  and  soiip»  wtUeh 
waa  aometimes  made  at  home,  and  sometimes  'locdned  from  a  ioop 
Aop.  Mr.  Dune  sekbm  breakfi»ted  wiUi  ihamf  and  aeldom  met 
atningeiA  there  at  that  hour.  When  breakfast  waa  orea>  thej  retired  . 
talo  a  QOnrUTard  behmd  the  houses  where  thc^  weie  soon  joined  by  a 
number  of  visitora.  They  sat  on  carpets^  and  smoaked  tobacco.  The 
Moollah  sometimes  smoaked  the  intoxieating  drug  called  Chirs,  of 
which  some  of  the  visitors  occa«onally  partook ;  but  most  of  them 
preferred  plain  tobacco.  Tliey  also  used  to  eat  firuit  and  drink  Sher- 
but  occasionallv,  in  the  course  of  the  day.  The  company  tisod  to 
converse  soberlv  and  pleasantly  ;  but,  m  the  visitors  were  gi  iierally 
Afghauns,  the  (omeniation  was  often  in  Fushttw,  which  Mr,  Dm  ie 
did  not  understand.  They  iised  also  to  pkv  a  name  of  the  nature  ol 
back-gammon,  and  to  wrestle,  and  pertbrm  tlif  nthK  tic  exercises  used 
in  their  counti  v,  as  in  India  and  Persia.  It  xvoiihi  take  a  great  deal 
ot  time  Lo  dciici  ibe  those  exercises,  or  the  uiuumcrable  postures  which 
wreisilers  are  taught  to  aasume.  Some  of  the  principal  exercises,  I 
may,  however,  notice.  In  one  of  them,  the  performer  places  himself 
on  his  hands  and  toes,  with  his  anus  stifi*,  and  his  body  horizontal, 
at  a  distance  from  the  ground.  He  then  throws  his  body  forward^ 
and  at  the  same  thne  bends  hia anna;  ao  diat  hb  chesl  and  iMSf 
afanost  Bweep  the  grouadL  When  hit^'hodf  ia  aa  ftr-lhrown  tmmd 
aBpossibk^  he  dranmi  k  hadk  to  iiie  ntmortr  stiai|^tena  hn  aKme» 
is  prepafed  to  xepeat  Ihe  motiim.  A  person  mmsed  to'thia  ekeedni 
«>qMnotpeffo^ktepthneswHhoqthiteniilwkwi 


Digitized  by  Google 


'  GAMES. 

vtrength  iLconfers  ^rhen  often  used,  that  oat  Enj^iah  officer  was  .abb 
to  'go  thioi^  it  aix  Imndred  timos  withoiit  stopping,  uid  this  op^ 
fatioD  he  repeated  twice  •  dsj*  Anod^r  exercise  is  whirling  a  heavy 
dub  round  the  head,  in  amj  that  requirea  the  exertion  of  the  whole 
body.  It  it  either  done  with  one  immense  club  h^  iu  both  haiidi» 
or  with  one  amaller  club  in  each  hand.  A  thiid  ^ercise  is  to  draw  a 
very  strong  bow,  which  has  a  heavy  iron  (^ain,  instead  of  a  string. 
It  is  first  drawn  with  the  right  hand,  like  a  common  bow,  then  thrown 
over  to  the  ri^ht,  and  drawn  with  the  left  hand,  and  afterwards  pulled 
down  violentl\  witli  both  liands  till  the  head  and  shoulders  appear 
between  the  bow  and  the  i  li  iin.  This  last  exercise  only  operates  <m 
the  arms  and  chest,  but  tlx  others  strain  every  muiscic  hi  the  frame. 
There  are  many  other  t  Nercises,  intended  to  strenj^hen  the  whole 
or  particular  parts  of  tiie  bodv,  which  a  judicious  umter  applies 
according  to  t  he  defects  of  his  pupil's  formation. 

The  degree  to  which  tliese  exercises  bring  out  the  muscles  and 
increase  the  strength,  h  not  to  be  believed.  Though  fatiguing  for  the 
first  few  days,  they  afterwards  occasion  a  plcuiurable  feeling,  and  a 
sensation  of  lightness  and  alacrity  which  lasts  the  whole  day,  and  I  never 
aaw  a  man  who  had  performed  them  long,  without  a  large  cheat,  fine 
Umbft  and  awelling  muscles.  They  are  one  of  the  best  inv^tiooa 
which.  Eumpe  oould  borrow  fiom  the  East  j  and,  in  Sui,  they  bear  a 
atrong  reaemblanoe  to  the  gymnastic  exerciMa  of  ancient  Gieeoeb 

Hie  day  paaaed  aa  deacribed  tiU  after  dark,  by  whidi  time  tin 
joompany  had  takfiD  their  leave ;  and  the  baker  had  a  good  dinner  of 
pilaw'  and  other  Fenian  didiea.  Mx,  Dnrie  did  not  often  dine  with 
hinit  nor  waa  there  ever  company  $  but  there  afaraya  sat  down  a  par^ 
of  four,  which  waa  made  up  by  the  MooiUah,  a  yonng  nqihew  of  the 
hafcerV  and  an  old  msa,  on  crutches,  adio  waa  related  to  him.  After 
dinner^  nobody  come  in  but  nci|^iboun$  and  these  were  geDerally 
Ma.  Durie,  and  two  petly  Doorsnnee  Khswna,  who  were  not  in  the 
army,  but  had  lands  and  houses,  and  liTed  on  the  rent  of  them.  They 
both  hept  horsest  and  Uved  in  a  very  respectable  way.  They  weif 
pcf&ctly  good  nptured,  and  well  bred»  and  always  behaved  with  great 

10 


Digitized  by  Gopgld 


OQNDraON  or  THE  ifrHABlTANTS,  S65 

cmfity^  tD  Jfr.  DifanU  ThtM  g^ailBiiin,'Md lin^MOfdvof  ihe']iaiise> 
Med  tO'ixttlrBfHi  ik  «]]gpiMi  «)d  ivkr^  b4fiA  Mei^fimiL^  Bebsun 
poei«»  'Md^dealiolL'  illr.  Dum  lOxnt  Ibdia  and  the  Eorofieatiu  Ule^ 
wre  {Mfctionkily  delisted  with  some  Ea^ish  son^  which  he  Mn^» 
Mkl  frfbrwards  eo^pdained  in  Pereiaoa.  (The  whole  piuty  tisied  to  sing 
in  turn  till  hAd  at  ni^  *  «  with  great  glee;"  and  "  when  they  bad 
music*  tfaey  oaed'to  Btog  lqyrtigr  exoelleot.wjil the  baker^  in  pari 
ticular,  seemed  quite  tmuported  when  he  was  singing.  One  of  the 
Khnnn**  also  played  very  well  on  the  rubaub.  Such  are  the  emplojr- 
metais  of  kUe  pec^le  within  doors.  They  also  go  out  to  sit  in  shops, 
and  hear  the  news  ;  to  talk  to  their  friends  in  the  market-place ;  to 
hear  tales  and  ballads  in  the  ^eets ;  or  to  the  gardens  of  Fakeenip 
which,  instead  of  being  places  where  great  austerity  is  practised,  are 
the  resort  of  all  idle  people,  and  particularly  of  those  who  smoke 
intoxicating  drugs.  They  also  go  out  in  parties  "  to  gardens,  where 
there  are  many  treos  and  rivulets  for  pastime ;"  a  pleasure,  of  which 
IVIr.  Diirie  speaks  in  very  hif^h  terms.  To  this,  it  maybe  added,  that 
persons  in  easy  circumstanceii,  olten  dritik  wine  in  the  evening,  and 
have  people  to  dance,  sing,  and  exhibit  teats  ot  strength  or  dexterity. 
The  dancing  is  commonly  performed  by  boys.  Female  dancers  are 
not  micommon  in  Peshawer,  but  very  much  so  to  the  west 

The  conunou  people  in  the  Afghaun  towns  wear  the  dress,  and 
retain  the  customs  of  the  country  to  which  they  happen  to  belong  ; 
and,  in  consequence,  the  streets  exhibit  a  curious  spectacle  in  the 
assemblage  of  people  from  the  different  tribes  and  nations  of  the 
empire,  each  distinguished  by  the  peculiar  dress  and  manners  of  his 
race.  Notwithstanding  this  circuinstance,  and  the  diversity  of  habits, 
language,  and  religion,  which  must  be  found  iji  such  a  society,  they 
all  seem  to  mix  well,  and  to  live  in  perfect  harmuuy  with  each  other. 
The  only  exception  to  this,  is  the  enmity  between  the  Sheaiis  and 
Sooimeea  of  Ganiiiilt  and  evea  thc^  associate  and  intermarry  with 
eacii  oAciK 


*  Tbe  wocda  between  comnuM  ai»  Mr.  Dnziak 
M  If 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONDITION  OF  THE  INHABITANTS. 


•  Viam  iSi  ihA  T  have  Men -or  hfittd,  and'paitieiikiiy  tttm  the'iMK 
cottulf  of  Mtt  Dinieb  I  dioiild  not  sihudobo  die  anidkioii  of  tlie  wwJo 
in  towiU'tobe.iitilia|ip^.  BbtlliebaibiitiixnwoiildBeilnaaM  to» 
Sng^dimin;' andf  the'eMe'tfaey^cqjoy,  intuk.be  atftribuled-to  tfa« 
piMtiisil  philoMipkyf  'which  idl  moD'acquive  in  mBflur  cucumfimdcij 
amA  vHuA  MtAm  tfaem  to  .  bov '  the  erila  ho  ^hkk  'thej 
liaUtDited»'«itfamit  feflectkni'on  the  pMt  or  fnn  ftrthe  fultito^ 


Diglized  by  Google 


♦ 


CHAP.  DL  . 

OF  THb'gBBAT. 

«        ■  ,  <  ' 

THE  only  class  of  inhabitants  that  remains  to  be  described  is 
composed  of  the  great;  under  which  denoniinalion,  I  include 
all  the  Dooraunee  chiefs,  and  the  hMds  of  the  trIlKs,  with  tiie  princi- 
pal persons  who  follow  them  to  Court,  and  ail  the  Persians  and 
Taujiks  who  hold  offices  about  the  Kin^.  The  first  classes  of  these 
iK^leSf  occasionnlb-  reside  at  their  castles ;  but  that  is  only  when  thiey 
are  af  \  ariancewith  the  King,  or  during  short  periods,  when  the 
Court  i^:  in  the  neif^^hbonrhooJ  ;  and  they  can  make  expeditions  to 
their  own  castles  to  avoid  the  heat  ol  summer,  or  to  enjoy  the  amuse- 
ments of  hunting.  Their  permanent  residence  is  always  with  the 
Court. 

Their  honses  arc  on  tlie  plan  of  those  which  I  have  seen  at  Pes- 
hawer  *;  but,  their  resificnce  at  that  city  being  only  temporary,  they 
are  not  so  magniticeiiL  there,  as  in  other  parts  of  the  country. 

Iliev  are  all  enclosed  by  high  walls,  and  contain  (besides  stables, 
lodgings  for  servants,  &c)  three  or  four  different  courts,  gcnci  ally 
laid  out  in  gardens,  with  ponds  and  fountains.  One  side  of  each 
court  is  occupied  by  a  building,  comprising  ^  arious  small  apartments 
in  two  or  three  stories,  and  some  large  hails,  which  occupy  the  mid- 
dle of  the  building,  tor  its  whole  height.  The  halls  are  supported  by 
tall  wooden  pillarb,  and  Mooribli  arches,  carved,  ornamented,  ami 
painted  ixke  the  rest  of  the  lialL  The  upper  rooms  open  oo  the  haik. 


MM  9 


Digitized  by  Google 


168  HOUSES  AND  FURNlTURfi  OF  THE  GREAT. 

by  galleries  whidi-nm  along  half  way  up  the  wall,  and  are  Mt  off' 
with  piUan  and  srdies.  The  hallst  being  only  separated  by  piDan 
and  aaahea  of  open  wood-wDik»  can  ahmy*  be  thrown  into  one^-  bjr 
lemoving  the  aadies.  The  back  of  the  innermost  one  is  a  solid  wall» 
in  which  is  the  fire-place.  T^e  upper  p&rt  of  this  wall  is  ornamented 
mOi  &]se  arcfaest  which  look  like  a  continuation  of  the  gaUeries,  and 
which,  as  well  as  the  real  aiches»  are  filled  up  on  great  occaskns  widk 
paintings  in  oi]«  looking  glasses.  Mid  other  ornaments.  There  are 
nnallear  rooms  along  the  other  sides  d£  the  court  yards ;  and  amoog 
lih€Ba'lB»itmii»rtib]eq«rtiniants  fiir  the  setirgum  iaf  Ik^.tbfgtfiryi 
tftehoude,'  onli  ofrivhidi  st  least  ii  HU/^  op  widi  fftm.mnikmh  lor 
oldwpealiher;:'  These  ase  fin  phm  In  many  of  (Oiese-diftMi'SfiBtt^ 
Inenls.  The  walls  and  piUmaie  oraamcntedximlh  flDwe».l».?arieiis 
peMiarii%  painted  in  distemper,  or .  in  oil*  «n  a^wUle  g|h>itndieo«|^Md 
of  •  aost  of 'whilis  wash,  mhsed  with  sUning  pastides^  vhMhc  is  odltfd 
teai.Gi],.w  sihr^'aacth.^  The  doors  are  ofjarrad.  wxiod^.'  and-  i« 
wintnr  ue  otweM  with  flnrtaitas  .of 'v^^inet,  cnliniideted:  Mt^  iiid 
farooadfei  hi  idl  Ae  -iooins,  rat  a  hci^t  vAlch  is  easily  within  leMhi 
are  sfcclnd  ieeessas  in  the  walls,'  wtdA  a»  punted  very  richly,  and 
by  a  stxange  depnmtf  of  taste^  are  thought  to  be  embelliahed  by 
^ass  isottlB  ef  ^faiions  lioloared  picJdea  and  11ie:poor 
«da6  hare  these*  n»es8^< which  th^  amameiit  with  China  cups,  and 
in  which  tliey  atom  their  fruits  for  wsMter  ooosumption ;  the  curtakis 
in  thek  Inuseri  are  of  quiltecl  cliiiitE,^p£  of  canvas  paintiad  with  birds, 
faciist^  flowers,  ftCi  in  oiL  The  pictures  in  the  houses  of  the. rich 
are  mostly,  if  not  euttieiy,  doolB  In  Persia ;  the  figures  am  old  fieniiil 
£li^  and  warriors,  young  men  wid  women  drinking  together,  or 
scenes  firom  some  of  ^le  feiaian  poems.  The  principal  omamoits  of 
the  rooms  of  the  great  atfe  carpets  and  felts,  which  sexve.liiani  in 
place  of  all  other  furniture.  Persian  carpets  are  too  well  knowniB 
Europe,  to  require  any  descri{)tion,  but  there  is  a  kind  made  near 
Heraut,  which  excels  all  others  I  ever  saw ;  they  are  made  of  wool, 
but  so  fine  and  glossy,  and  dyed  with  such  brilliant  colours,  that,  they 
appear  to  be  of  «lk :  carpets  of  highly  wroiight  shawl  are  also  used 


Digitized  by  Google: 


0B£^  AND  Om«Ji£KTS.  OF  THE  M£R 

Ittfc  IliiifiM^^f  nagmioenee  amt  If^ieiy  tm^  item  tha 


ftitBibv  dtti^gioi;  ipreiHidoie  to  Hie  wfdl,  aU  lomid 
iIm  Mm  AiMpfe  wluM'die  flntrtnce  i«»  viudi  in  the  heUt  is  ahroji 
at  1MB  -end.  Thef  «ce-  Inowiuih  grey,  widi  {nttmit  of  flowtn*  in 
draicalfluny  that  it' the  Uif  cf  the  mom  ia  bnader-tluBi  tke  odien, 
fflikh  aire  about  dueee  feet  aad  e.lial(  gt  font  feat  tnoed.  On  tiie 
upper  M- aie  ameOer  isaipeti  of  edkttioidertd  aOI^  or  vdhret.  with 
flnhiona  of  Ae  tamiTx  Sw  diiidfigBi^f^  TiailtiHfc 

The  Haieni  (or  aeaaglio)  ie  ahragFe*  in  die  imuvmoat  ooi^t   it  haa 
e  aapeiiite  entmice,  Iwt  .eommnnie^  by.  a  piivete  peaai^  with  tbe 
apartuenta  whew  conpaay  aee  leccivedt 
'  lliepdacea  owait  OanhnlocCandaheraieyB^ 
t^tibeaeijf  Peiiiai  and  certainly  none  of  them  woidd  bear  a  nuft» 
manC'a  jbenaparison  with  a  highly  finmiriied'  hooae  in  'fai^and: 
'  The.dieaa  of  the  great  is  on  the  Ferstan^aedel  $  it  oonaists  of  a  shiit 
of  Kuttaun  (a  kind  ^  linen  of  a^  wide  textoiey  the  best  of  which  is 
hnported  ftom  AlepiKS  and  tbe  oominoii  ^rt  from  Persia)!  a  pair  of 
wide-  ailken  trowseta  j.  en  under  tunic  of  fine  MasuUpetani  diint% 
with  some  smaQ  pettem,  whkh  iiaadiea  beknr  the  middle  of  the  caU^ 
end  eompletely  covers  the  thighs  and  upper  part  of  the  leg,  and  whidi 
is  fastened  close  to  the  body  with  strings ;  an  upper  tunic  of  the  same 
kind,  but  of  different  materials ;  a  shawl  girdle,  aad  an  A%haun  cap, 
with  a  shawl  loosely  twisted  round  it,  in  the  form  oi  a  turbans  to  tbii 
must  be  added,  white  cotton  or  shawl  stockings,  and  Persian  shoes ; 
and  a  large  mantle  thrown  over  the  sboulderB,    There  are  rows  of 
buttons  and   loops  down   the  breast  of  the  tunic,  and  at  the 
aleeveB9  and  one  kind  of  .mantle,  has  a  row  of  immenae  angar  loaf 


MwJhh  Jdftc  vi  BmHam  had  a  dimr]  cwpet  of  great  wbrn,  inlih  wepmttt  pieon 

tar  ntting  on,  which  was  bespoke  for  Shauh  Mahmood,  and  which  wac  bouglit  §»  m 
quarter  of  its  price  after  that  prince  wa«  dethroned.  Moollah  Jaffer  asked  jfTcoco 
ftr  it,  vfaich  he  aakl  was  tat  below  its  vafaie :  h«  intaided  to  .try  to  sell  it  tA  the 
cauli  of  Benia  snd.BiHNia,  md  iS  Im  fiOIed,  'tocnftilvpandidl  itin  piaon  la 
die  T^triuu 


870 


DSSSS  AND  ORNAMENTS  OF  THE  MEH 


bufctoM,  wttb  ocwwpoBdiiig  loopsi  thenfiper  tmictt  gmndlj'fnada 
of  Bome  oortlj  but  plain  material:  a  ituff  called  Ooniiiilct  made  cf 
fiamd'i  htkf  and  geneiallj  of amne  ahade of  browiit  ia  oamBaon;  aa 
IB' doth  o£  fltvong  dark  odoured  oDttaib  fialiii»  alunrU  and/Penun 
liroGMie  arc  also  worn ;  ami  for  fiiU  dress,  they  have  very  magnificent 
timiGS  <^  doth  of  gold.  The  shawl  round  the  waiitr  is  of  a  lund  sel* 
dom  seen  either  in  India  or  in  England,  it  is  long  and  narrow  (about 
a  fisot  and  a  half  broad),  and  is  wrought  all  over.  As  the  price  oC 
shawla.dqiends  on  the  ^pHntity  of  work  in  them»  it  is  of  course  verjF 
expensive;  a  good  one  can  scarcely'  be  purchased  under  j^l^O.  of 
£200,  The  shawl  round  the.  head,  is  the  kind  worn  by  ladiet  in 
Ellwand,  and  by  all  rich  people  in  India.  The  shawls  worn  for  tunica 
are  made  for  the  purpose,  and  sold  in  pieces ;  they  are  covered  with 
small  flowers  on  a  coloured  ground.  The  mantle  is  of  the  same  kind 
of  shawl,  with  very  large  flowers,  such  as  are  seen  on  the  borders  of 
Indian  sliawls.  It  is  also  made  of  all  the  other  materials  already  men- 
tioned, which  vary  with  the  season  :  in  summer  a  single  robe  of  ]\gh% 
silk  is  enough,  and  in  winter  the  mantle  is  often  lined  and  trinime4 
with  expensive  furs.  When  thev  travel,  tliey  generally  wear  broad 
cloth,  and  then  they  are  always  in  boots,  which  are  of  the  same  kind 
through  all  ranks,  viz.  high,  with  a  peak  and  tassel  in  front  of  the 
knee,  made  of  very  strong  brown  leather,  witli  imnow  heels  shod 
wirli  uon.  The  rich,  however,  sometimes  i^ve  Uiem  of  green  or 
black  shagreen  li  atli<  r.  '  '  • 

•  It  was  formui  ly  a  regulation,  th^  no  no})leman  should  appear  at 
Court,  unless  in  cloth  of  gold.  That  ibrm  is  now  dispensed  with  ; 
but  every  niau  must  be  in  bouts,  and  wear  a  sword ;  and  thoi>ti  on 
whom  tlic  King  has  conferred  the  privilege,  must  wear  au  ornament 
of  jewels  on  the  right  side  of  the  turban,  surmounted  by  a  high  plume 
of  the  feathers  of  a  kind  of  Egret.  This  bird  is  found  only  in  Cash- 
meer :  ai\d  the  feathers  are  carefully  collected  for  the  King,  who 
bestows  them  on  his  iioUes,  The  gnly  other  ornaments  they  wear, 
either  of  gold  or  Jewels,  are  about  their  swocds,  daggers,  and  plstolsi 
Hie  sword  is  of  the  Persian  ftknn^  wbidi  is  woro'aU  orer  tbe  west. 

«  *■ 

10 


Digitized  by  Google 


.    DRESS  AND  ORNAMENTS  OF  THE  M£N.  271 

llie  'lult  ntmMM  ''mn:'0w^,  eoDeej^'tliat'it'Iiw  no  gmrd  lbir  <he 
fingefs :  tibe  blade  is  namnrer*  and  more  eorred  than  <Nna«  Indian 
^tod.  iv  die  moai  lulled  Ibc  tlivniateritl  $  bi^ 
in  flenia  and  in'STiaa.  Tbed^j^boilfln  the]bn|^A%|hann]a^^ 
irikidi  Uas  a  blade  abboftltwo  feet  ldn|^  and  move  than  tiro  indieb 
btood  at,tbe  bot^mit  and  giwing  naoower.tin  it  comes  to  a  point. 
It  haa  Ml  edge  OB  one  side;  wad  the  back  ia  Tery  thick  to  give  it 
strengtli  and  weight'  The  handle  is  just  lai^  enough  for  the  han4  i 
.  and  has  no  guard,  except  what  is  formed  by  the  blade  projecting  over 
the  hand.  When  iheatlKd,  the  whole  sinks  into  the  scabbard,  and 
only  abcMit' an  iiich  of  the  handle  is  seen.  The  Persian  short  dagger, 
with  a  very  thick  handle,  is  also  common ;  but  the  handsomest  kind  . 
Vh  I  believe,  derived  from  the  Turks.  One  of  this  description  fonned 
'part  of  the  dress  of  honour  conferred  on  me  bj  the  Kiogt  and  ia  pfO» 
bably  now  in  the  Persian  office  at  Calcutta.  U  was  about  fourteen 
inches  long :  the  sheath  .and  handle  Wese.both  round*  tigering  to  ft 
point,  where  there  was  some  sort  of  ornament :  the  pepper  part  was 
pet  with  jewels  in  rings,  and  the  top  was  almost  covered  by  a  bad 
ruby,  set  with  diamonds.  Nothing  could  be  more  elegant  than  the 
outside ;  but,  when  drawn,  a  knife  was  produced,  which,  though  of 
fine  steel,  was  exactly  of  the  shape  of  a  small  carv  ing  knife.  The 
■great  men  have  swonls,  daggers,  belts,  &c.  richly  embellish^  with 
jewels  for  great  occasions  ;  but  tliose  they  usually  wear  are  plain,  and 
it  is  not  always  tho  best  sword  that  is  most  horned.  A  sword,  sent 
by  the  King  of  (  aulnd  to  the  Governor  General,  which  liad  belonfrcd 
to  TiivnL'rlane,  and  atlerwards  to  a  succession  of  the  Suftaveea  (or 
Sophis)  of  Persia,  and  which  was  taken  by  the  Afghamis  at  Isphahaun, 
had  no  ornament,  except  some  gold  about  the  hilt,  and  an  cmbosiied 
sheathing  of  the  same  material,  extending  about  six  or  seven  inches 
up  the  scabbard.  (ir(  at  men  someiinie^j  wear  a  pistol  in  their  girdle, 
but  more  commonly  have  them  in  their  holsters.  Those  made  in 
Daughestaun  (to  the  east  of  Georgia)  are  most  prized  ;  but  Ihave  seen 
imitations  of  them  made  in  f  ashmeer^  which  could  not  be  distin- 


Digitized  by  Google 


272 


HOUSEHOLD  mrwErarvE  or  tbb  gbbat. 


gniflbed  from  die  ongiiialk  Ail  makB  go  tttnimed*'  ODeept  §t  Courts' 

or  on  a  jouniiey* 

Tbe  kdies  wear  the  Penum  dress,  aad,  of  course,  have  an  endlesa 
vtantty^  of  dothes  and  onumwEits.  The  most  remsrlnble  parts  of  tlieiv 
dress  Bre  thdr  pantaloons  of  stiff  vdvet,  or  highly  wrought  shawl,  or 
of  silk ;  and  their  jackets,  of  velvet,  brocade,  &c  which  niudl  resemble 
those  worn  by  our  dragoons.  They  have  three  rows  of  buttons*, 
joined  by  broad  lace  ornamented  with  «)loured  flowers  wrought  into 
it.  The  back  part  of  the  sleeve  comes  down  beyond  the  fin  rrnrs,  and 
is  worn  doubled  back,  so  as  to  shew  thv  lining  of  tissue  or  iM  cn  ade. 

The  ceremonies  of  the  great  are  on  the  same  model  as  those  oi'  the 
common  people.  The  place  of  honour  is  in  the  corner  of  the  room, 
at  the  end  opposite  the  entrance.  The  master  sits  there,  ii^ng  the 
entrance,  and  with  his  side  to  the  (garden  or  court-yard.  A  row  of 
servants  is  drawn  up  immediately  below  him  (in  the  Court) ;  and, 
from  the  usual  lieight  of  the  hall  above  the  ground,  their  heads  are 
not  high  enough  to  admit  of  their  seeing  the  compiuiy  inside.  If  the 
owner  of  the  house  is  visited  by  a  superior,  he  advances  to  meet  hiin, 
but  only  rises  in  his  })lace  to  receive  an  equal :  to  an  inferior,  he 
merely  rises  on  his  knees.  It  is  a  mark  of  great  attentioii  in  the  mas^ 
ter  to  place  a  guest  in  his  own  st  at  ;  and  iljc  nearer  to  him,  the  more 
honourable  the  post.  The  great  uiaintain  liouseholds  on  the  plan  of 
the  King's.  They  have  porters,  called  Caupehees  *,  who  stand  at  die 
outer  gate,  with  long  staves  in  their  hands.  A  visitor  is  received  here 
by  one  or  two  Ishikaghaussees  f,  who  conduct  him  through  the  first 
court.  At  the  next  door  are  other  porters,  with  ivory-headed  staves  \ 
and  he  is  there  received  by  officers,  M/ho  lead  lam  liirough  different 
courts,  always  Hie  Mine  ibniii»  till  tlie  Arsbegoe  proeuCB  Inm  1» 
die  greBt  tiiin»  and  points  eol  the  proper  place  ftr  hiln  to  t^e  Ik 
9ttt»-  Afier'this,  thcve  ate'  no  ttioie  ftviiM>'  ted  no  ibilienit  oB'COIH 


•  From  tlie  Turkish  word,  for  a  gate. 

t  A  Turkish  word*  mesoing  '*  Matter  of  the  Door." 


Digrtized  by  Googb 


HOUSEHOLD  AMD  atOIMUB  OP  IHE  GREAT. 

vtrsfi^oni  but  what  must  be  uii|Med  in  mcMt'coBDtriet,  by  the  par* 
ticukr  temper  of  the  great  man,  andtlie  degree  of  d^endence  of  the 
Tisitor.    The  manners  of  the  great  are  mild  and  iphua^  Mld^  «t-  the 

same  time,  dignified  and  manly.  The  officers  I  have  mentMMtd  m 
dressed  like  [gentlemen  of  the  country,  and  their  appearance  improves 
as  thtMr  statiiiii  is  nearei-  tiic  reception  room  ;  hut,  the  other  attends 
ants  are  tar  trom  showy :  and  the  great  ill  Caubul,  seem  w  be  averse 
to  parade,  and  to  pique  themselves-  more  on  the  order  and  silence  of 
their  attendants,  than  on  their  mniiber  or  the  splendour  of  their 
appearance.  In  like  manner,  when  they  go  out,  their  followers  are 
by  no  means  numerous  ;  but  are  marshalled  wah  greui  legidaritv,  and 
march  in  silence  and  irood  (^rder.  In  India,  the  cominfj  of  a  great 
man  may  be  known  wiiiie  he  is  a  mile  off,  by  the  siiouiing  of  his 
attendants,  the  blowing  of  trumpets,  and  beating  of  drums ;  and, 
though  iiis  retinue  is  very  picturesque,  from  tlie  number  of  men  on 
tbot  and  horseback  who  compose  it,  the  rapidity  and  confusion  <yf  th^r 
movements,  the  lively  ooloura  of  tfcteir  dieaaes*  the  shining  of  their 
arms,  and  the  gUtlerof  diestalidmEdacf  idothof  gold  i^id^ 
with  them  i  yet,  iioditag  can  give  »lfl8i  Iddi  o£  diadpUne  and 
In  Otabul,  on  tfaecoatraty,  a  nobleman  udunts  liia  liprae»  «nd  ti 
Alighted,  and  ahnoat  in  the  room,  ht&te  ywL  hAfe  notice  of  liii 
approodi. 

The  aeiranla  in  A^jliainuetaun  are  lemarkafale  fof  activity  and 
ildelity.  They  do-  eveiy  sort  of  iroik  with  cfaeeifalne88|  attend  their 
master  momited  and  wdl  armed  when  he  troika*  And  -Arfe  ^ften 
truited  widk  his  moat  important  8ei»el&  Their  maalen  aend  diem 
with  the  mpit  ooofi'dential  meaaagea,  without  taking  anj  ipiecaiitabn» 
but  that'of  providing  for  their  being  beilieved  by  the  person  to  wiioai 
they  ne  sent.  For  thia  purpose,  the  master  givea  his  ring,  or  some 
other  article  which  is  generally  about  his  own  person,  or  else  instnsbis 
the  servant  to  allude  to  some  indiffercsit  matter,  th^  is  only  known 
to  his  master  and  the  person  to  whom  the  ineisage  is  to  be  delivered. 
For  eiample,  a  servant  begins  bis  Jnessag^,  with  saying:     If  you 


274 


.  LIFE  OF  THE  ORSAT. 


and  wj  master  were  sitting  bj  yourselves  in  such  a  garden,  and  he 
told  jou  that  he  had  counted  thirty-four  different  kinds  of  flowers 
within  a  few  yard<;  in  the  hills  of  Caubul*  that  is  to  be  a  aigu  to  you 
4hat  what  I  say  is  from  liim." 

The  servants  are  ied  in  the  hon^^c,  and  clothed  at  their  master's 
expense,  besides  wliich  thcv  get  tlieir  wages  once  a  quarter.  They 
are  oiteii  soldiers,  in  the  Dusteh»  or  regiment»  which  their  master 
comiiiaiiLls. 

The  iile  of  the  great  naturally  differs  from  that  which  I  have  attri- 
buted to  the  common  people.    They  do  not  get  up  till  sun-rise,  when 
they  pray  and  read  the  Koraiui,  and  religious  books,  for  an  hour  or 
thereabouts.    They  then  have  a  breakfast  of  bread,  butter,  honey, 
eggs,  and  cheese :  after  this  they  repair  to  court,  where  the  o£Bofln 
of  tlie  hoaMbaid  ]iave  MaemUed  iit »  madb.  eadier  hour.  Tb^ 
UMtn  «t  the  pdaice  tOl  CSkemki,  wad  during  that  period  they  sit  in  the 
apHttaients  allotted  to  their  leaqpeotive  ovdeiSt  tmmot  bqinneas,  le- 
iseiTe'petitioneEBy  aiid  do  a  great  pert  of  their  official  duty:  thoae  who 
tee 'most  emi^byed,  have  their  luncfaeoii  broi^t  to  them  at  the 
palace^  and  xemain  thore  till  the  cort  breaks  up  for  the  day;  but  the 
ijeneiaUtjr  gohome  to  this  meal*  and  in  summer  take  their  usual  nap 
efter  it.   Whan  they  awake^  they  perform  their  devotions^  and"  read  a 
little,  then  receive  visitors,  and  dispatch  such  business  as  .could  not 
be  done  at  the  pahKse^  tiU  De^gur,  nhen  they  again  repair  to  court 
■At  dark  they  return  home,  and  amuse  themselves  till  a  late  hour, 
when  they  dine,  and  afterwards  many  drink  win^  when  they  have 
private  parties.    At  their  great  entertainments,  of  course,  nothing  of 
this  kind  is  thought  of,  but  unless  on  such  occasions,  they  have  <mly 
intimate  friends  at  dinner,  Chausht  being  the  meal  to  which  they 
usually  ask  strangers.    It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  all  the  great 
drink  winej  on  the  contrary,  the  hulk  of  the  Dooraiinee  Sirdars  ab- 
stain from  it,  and  all  try  to  reconcile  tlie  prnctice  with  decency  ;  but 
as  their  debauches  are  always  carried  on  in  company,  this  seldom  can 
be  done.    It  may  be  supposed  that  all  ^Toat  men  have  not  their  time 
fto  hilly  occupied  as  those  I  h^ve  described ;  they  do  not,  however, 


Digrtized  by  Googl( 


LIFE  OF  THE  GREAT.  275 

WMit  ways  of  filling  it  up  agreMbtyy  for  though  their  lives  are  more 
austere  than  thote  of  the  oomBioii  people^  thej  delight  in  hunting  and 
hawking,  and  hayemany  resouroea  m  reading  or  hearing  books  read 
to  than  :  it  ia.evieii  a  profession  to  read,  and  the  Shauh  Naumeh,  the- 
great  heroic  poem  at  Ferdausi,  has  a  large  class  of  roaders)  called 
Shauhnaumeh  Klioons,  whose  bosbiess  it  is  to  read  it,  or  recite  thq 
fine  passages  with  proper  emphasis  and  action.  Thooe  who  are  not 
disposed  to  literature,  have  Persian  and  Pushtoo  singers,  and  play  at 
chess,  backgammon,  or  cards.  The  two  first  games  are  nearly  the 
same  ours,  but  the  tliird.  whic-h  is  more  rare,  is  played,  as  in  India, 
with  round  cards,  ami  (liffi  is  in  ?nanv  respects  from  what  we  play. 
They  also  have  ^iiT  dcas  near  the  u>u  n,  wliere  they  retire  with  a  few 
friends,  and  where  tliey  sometimes  give  large  parties.  On  the  whole, 
iiowever,  their  style  ot^  living  is  very  inferior  to  that  of  the  nobles  of 
Persia,  and  does  not  correspond  with«  the  v»at  fortuneii  wliidi  some 
of  them  are  said  to  possess. 

AIJ  that  I  know  ot  their  entertainments  may  be  comnmuicatcd  by- 
a  description  of  one  which  was  given  to  the  British  mission  at  Pcsha- 
wer,  by  Me^  Abool  Hussun  Khaun,  the  Mdimaundaur  of  the  em« 
batay.  We  were  first  introdiioed  into  a  ]ai]ge  oourt,  in  the  centre  of 
which  was  a  pond,  surrounded  by  many  rows  of  small  lamps,  the  li^it 
ef  which  was  reflected  firom  the  wsAeft  where  other  lamps  flcwted  en. 
boards ;  many  torches  were  also  stuck  up  round  the  ooort,  and.  all- 
together  gave  a  light  as  strong  as  that  of  day,  *and  showed  the  ph»a 
fiOed  with  attendants  and  spectatota. 

We  entered  thzoii|^  a  Yufjtk  gat^  on  each  side  of  whkh  were  some 
btaOdin^  and  over  all  an  opien  gallery.  Opposite  ,  to  ua  were  the 
painted  pillars  and  arches  of  a  hall,  and  on  each  side  were  buildings* 
the  lower  part  of  which  only  contained  Otoe  or  two  doors,  but  whidb 
I  bdieye  had  windows  in  the  upper  story.  We  were  received  in  the 
hall  opposite  the  gateway^  which  opened  on  the  court,  and  partook  of 
the  illumination.  We  entered*  as  is  usual*  by  a  door  at  the  lower  end 
of  the  room,  and  took  our  seats  at  the  top.  The  floor  was  covered, 
with  nfifih  and  besntifial  carpet;  along  three  sides  of  the  room  wetv 

H  N  i  ■ 


976 


AN  £NT£BTA1NM£NT  AT  FESHAWER. 


Ms  OQfvtrad  vich  doCh  of  gold,  ibrdie  gneita  toal  on:  thoteatllie 
vpper'OMl  were  partieulaily  ihigpififleBt,  bang  vdret  of  fiift  bfrig|itegt 
eohmnt  licfalj  embioiidevtli  with'  goid*  The  doom  weie  biaig  with 
curtaini  .of  4lQlii  of  gold*  or  of  hiigUj  ombioidered  aSki^  and  tho' 
galkries  Mtond  the  ufipet  parts  of  the  'room  were  dioted  wHh  FefHtn 
pietoreur  vound  wfakh  appealed  a  piollisiaii  of  gold  dodr  and'  eoU 
heoideiy.  Among  other  thingm  I  obaerved  with  lome  auipii^  e 
lacge  pieoe  of  nlvcir  doth,  id  'which  the  sun  rising  over  s  lion  (the 
royal  endgQ  of  Persia),  was  wrought  in  gold.  There  were  hiiiRin 
in  diflfetcoi  porta  irf'the  roomy  and  we  were  astonished  to  observe  two 
of  dimensions  wup^sdot  to  any  of  those  which  we  Iiad  brought  with 
so  mudi  difficulty  over  mountiuns  and  deauts,  to  give  the  King  an 
idea  of  IZngtiA  manufactures.  Those  in  the  room,  we  understood, 
had  all  oorae  orerland  £rom  Europe,  through  Persia  or  Tartaiy.  Along 
the  middle  of  the  room  was  a  row  of  lights :  thick  candles,  surrounded 
with  wreathes  of  flowers  in  coloured  wax,  were  piacetl  alternately  with 
artificial  trees,  in  u!iirh  the  lights  were  (lis{)o.setl  among  leaves, 
flowers,  grape>.  a?ul  t)ilier  fruits,  represeiited  in  wax  in  ihvlr  iintural 
colours.     Oi}  llu  and  velvet,  with  wliich  the  upper  part  of  the 

room  was  spread,  were  placed,  with  more  civilitv'  than  good  taste, 
a  row  of  plain  chairs  for  our  accommodation  ;  and  soon  after  we  were 
seated,  trays  of  sweetmeats  were  handed  round,  boon  alter  a  dance 
of  women  begaji,  and  fire-works  were  let  off  in  the  court ;  and  our 
attempts  at  conversation,  amidst  the  din  of  the  instmnients,  the  shouts 
of  a  dozen  male  and  lemale  singers,  and  the  noise  ol  the  fire-works, 
were  disagreeable  and  interrupted.  Tea  was  served  ruurid,  in  China 
oips,  without  aeam,  very  sweet,  and  rendered  most  disagreeable  by 
an  tafuaion  €»f  aniae  seed.  When  dinner  waa  announced,  the  dancing 
eeaaed»:and  our  entcftamer  (who  waa  a  Sheeah)  ftund  aome  pretence 
to  withdiBW*.   We  aat  down  on  the  ground  to  dmner,  whidi  wu 


*  The  Sheeahs  (in  Qtubul  at  lout)  are  very  strict  in  eating  with  none  but  Mussul- 
mB^  IB  nUdl  ihtj  form  a  contraat  to  the  Soonneet.  Colonel  FnuikUn  makes  the 
MM  Mnnk  of  the  Soonees  in  Pcnbi  aMi  it  U  probable  ifaat  'dM  leipt  'mmumoOi 
and  moat  penecoted  of  tke  aecta,  it  matt  acrnpukm  in  cadi  coontxy. 


Digitized  by  Coogic 


AN  ENTERTAmifENT  AT  FBSHAWER.  ^ 

placed  before  us  on  tngrt  with  wrapped  up  ia  ynhke  doth,  oon. 
oealed  by  brocade  covers  with  gold  fringes. 

The  dishes,  according  to  the  Persian  fashion,  were  dyed  of  all 
colours,  and  ornamented  with  a  profusion  of  gold  and  silver  leaf. 
Thcv  were  served  in  Chuaa  dishes,  and  consistetl  of  all  kinds  of 
roasted,  boiled,  and  baked  meat,  pilaws  and  ragouts,  witfi  many  things 
which  it  would  be  difHc  ult  to  describe.  We  were  attended  by  well 
dressed  servants,  mostly  i'erstans,  who  are  reckonetl  the  best  servantSf 
and  whom  the  Alghauns  employ  as  .  (  x  ks.  laaitres  d'liotel,  &c.  as  we 
do  Frenc  [linen.  In  the  midst  of  so  much  magnificence,  and  really  so 
miicli  neatness  and  arrangement,  it  was  curious  to  see  the  servants 
snuffing  the  candles  into  a  ttii  cup  with  a.  pair  of  scissars,  and  uiliers 
jointing  the  meat  with  a  large  penknife,  and  then  tearing  it  to  pieces, 
and  laying  it  on  our  plates  with  their  hands.  It  is  however  but  just 
to  aay,  that  this  was  no^  done  till  they  had  washed,  their  hands^  and 
twkfld  their  deem  ap  .J»  their  elbowv.-  The  ^dinner  waa  ooldf  and 
eoiiaeqaently  not  much  raiiafaed ;  amd.the  unlibnn  danring,  and  iodifi 
ftraot  fiie-worics,  which  huted  without  intenniadon  till  two 'in  .  the 
momiiii^  daaBnrclnit  little  pwliei 

The  flntestaimnent  on  the  whole  waa  rather  aplendid  tliaii  i^ajree- 
aUe^  {pnrticnlarly.aa  aome  honia  of  the  time  were  apeut  in  a  p^vaie 
apartment*  diaramwiig  the  oeranonial  of  our  leoepdon  lyf  the  jKing) } 
hot  onc^  which  we  soon  after  received  at  a  garden,  waa  &t  more  to 
our  taate;  and  I  shall  add  a  deacription  of  it  to  shew  the  nature  of 
this  sort  of  party  among  the  great.  It  was  given  in  the  gai^den,  whidi 
ia  called  after  Timour  Shauh,  who  laid  it  out.  It  ^as  a  vecy  exten- 
nve  aquare,  enclosed  by  brick  walls,  and  4ivided  -by  two  veiy  broad 
svenues  of  ahemate  cypresses  and  planes,  croitSig  eadi  other  at  right 
angles  in  the  middle  of  the  square.  The  open  space  in  the  centre  of 
each  avenue  was  filled  with  a  very  long  and  broad  bed  of  poppies,  on  - 
each  side  of  which  was  a  walk  between  borders  of  flowers.  In  the 
four  squares,  into  whit  ii  tlio  avenues  divided  the  garden,  were  in- 
Munierablc  fig,  iieach,  [)lunu  apple,  pear,  pomegranate,  quince,  and 
muibeny  tse&h  in  iuii  blossom :  here  and  there  was  scattered  a  hi|^ 


Diglized  by  Google 


278 


ENTERTAOniENT.  * 


pepul  tree.    In  sonic  j>lace8,  the  ground  belov/  (he  trees  was  sowed 
with  beans,  whicli  were  then  in  flower.    The  appearance  of  the  gar- 
den, scttiiu' aside  the  recollections  of  FiUrope  which  it  excited,  was 
really  delightful.    The  scents,  which  sometimes  came  on  the  wind» 
were  enchanting,  and  tiie  whole  was  completed  hy  the  singing  ot  (he 
birds,  whose  not  es  we  thought  we  recognized ;  and  every  one  was 
anxious  to  attribute  them  to  some  of  those  which  he  had  most  ad- 
mired in  ^England.    Tcjits  had  been  pitched  in  the  garden  ;  aud  one 
in  particular  had  a  very  pleasing  effect,  iu  ihe  midst  of  the  whole,  at 
the  place  where  the  avenues  cross  each  other.    The  roof  of  it  was. 
green  and  red,  and  the  walls  were  of  open  work,  so  as  to  admit  the 
air,  without  permitting  those  in  the  tent  to  be  seen  from .  without 
The  interstices  were  to  ehaped,  and  the  ooloiin  of  the  aolid  puts  to 
diipoBed*  as  to  make  the  whole  Tery        and  dc^gnt.   After  a  long 
waiky  we  sat  down  under  a  tree,  listened  to  the  birds,  and  talked  with 
the  son  of  our  Mehmanndaur  about  our  country  and  Caobul*  of  which 
he  gKre  an  enchanting  account :  that  city,  and  ita  100^000  gardens^' 
were  indeed  a  common  topic  of  praise  and  admiration.   When  we 
went  to  the  tent,  we  found  our  Mehmaondanr,  aooompanied  bj.tbe. 
King's  Imaum  and  some  other  Moolhhs.   The  Imaum,  who  was  a 
plain,  open,  talkative  pleasant  man,  expatiated  on  the  beairties  of. 
Caubid,  which,  he  said,  we  must  se^  and  launched  out  tu  piaiaes  of. 
the  A%^auns  and  their  country.    On  this,  or  some  other  occasion,  he' 
was  Teiy  inquisitive  about  the  reason  of  our  cropping  and  docking 
our  horses  ;  laughed  heartily  at  the  practice ;  and  said,  if  ever  he  had 
a  vicious  hors^  he  would  send  him  to  us  to  be  made  an  example  o£' 
After  some  time,  these  gandemen  went  away,  and  left  us  to  take 
some  relief  from  the  fatigue  we  suffered  in  sitting  cross-legged,  which, 
though  entreated  to  sit  at  our  ease,  we  always  continued  to  do,  as  we- 
knew  how  nidc  any  other  posture  would  be  thought.    After,  some- 
time our  Chausht  or  luncheon  was  brought  in.    Basons  and  ewem* 
were  handed  round  to  wash  our  hands.     After  which,  they  spread  a 
large  tiowered  chintz  table-doth,  ornamented  with  Persian  ^  rrsos  on 
the  bounty  of,  God,  and  other  motto^  such  as  were  il^oi^t  lit  Im  a:. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ENTERTAINMENT. 


tafaJfi-dbtiL  Trmj^  covered  with  while  cdicoe^  wm  tfafln  pot  dawii» 
;flnd  Ihe  calico^  when  unfdided,  was  ipfcad  over  our  lmeei.  -Eidh 

tmy  contained  fifteeo  or  inoce  dishes,  aancers,  and  cups,  large  and 
small,  in  whidi  were  two  large  pilaws,  several  little  dressed  dishes, 
•relbhes,  pickles,  and  preseri  es.  A  bowl  of  sheriiet  was  in  the 
middle  of  each  tray.  Besides  these,  there  were  dishes  of  the  Doomba 
lamb,  dressed  plainly ;  but  full  of  juice,  and  much  improved  by  the 
flavour  of  the  sauce  and  stuffing.  There  were  also  flat  cakes  o 
loave!ied  bread  to  sene  for  plates,  besides  the  bread  for  eating. 
Wiien  we  had  done  eating,  which  we  did  most  heartily,  warm  water 
was  handed  round  for  washing,  the  dishes  and  table-cloths  w^e 
removed,  and  our  culleeauns  were  brought  in.  As  soon  as  this  was 
done,  three  dancing  girls  were  introduced  to  amuse  us  with  their 
singing  and  dancing,  Thev  were  iucomparably  superior  to  those  of 
India  in  face,  figure,  und  peiiurmauce.  Their  dress,  though  not  so 
Tich  as  is  usual  ui  iluidostan,  was  in  much  better  taste.  They  wore 
caps  of  gold  and  silver  stuffs.  Their  hair  was  plaited  in  a  very  be- 
'  coming  manner  ;  and  little  curls  were  allowed  to  hang  down  round 
•their  ibrebeads  and  cheeks,  with  a  wery  -j^ntty  effect.  They  had 
peffecdy  white  teeth,  red  lips,  and  dear  complexions,  set  off  by  little 
artificial  molea  like  patchea.  Hieir  complexions,  however,  were  perhi^ 
indebted  to  art|  aa  rouge  is  very  oommon  among  the  ladies  of  CauboL 
Their  ^^■"'^"g  had  a  great  deal  of  action.  Hie  girl  acarcelf*  ever 
'atanda  while  she  sings,  (aa  thoae  in  India  do) ;  but  maheB  fixward* 
daspa  her  lumd8»  aometunea  ainlta  on  her  and  duowa  heraelf 

into  other  attitndea  exjweBstre  of  the  passraoB,.  which  are  the  anhject 
of  her  aoa|(  $  and  all  this  adion,  though  violent,  is  periectlj  graced. 
Bdhind*  stand  a  nmnber  of  well-dressed  fiddlers,  drummers,  and 
beaters  of  cymbals,  with  long  beards,  and  an  «r  of  gravity  little  suited 
to  their  profiassion.  All  these  disturb  the  concert,  by  showting-out 
their  appkuaea  of  the  dancers,  or  joining  in  the  song  with  all  the 
powers  of  thdr  voice.  The  Moollahs,  it  appeared,  could  not  properly 
be  present  at  this  exhibition;  and  I  was  soon  called  to  join  the 
'   Jmaum,  wfao^  with  the  Mehmaundanr  (also  an  ofllcer  of  high  rank), 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


200  ENTERTAINMENT. 

■  ■a 

]ud  beeD  amandmaofid  to  negotiste  whii  me.  We  nt  down  od  » 
caipetf  .  under  «  phimtree^  and  had  >  long  convenation«  whkli  tlin 
Lnannif  who  bad  no  graatfimdnefo  for  buainessi- often  interrvpted  by 
qu^oiks  and  apeochcs  to  Mr.  Richard  Stmchoj*  the  fieeietan  to  the 
Mission  y  such  as  Strachey,  let  me  lode  at  your  seda  }**  -<*  What  the 
denoe  u  this  figure  Have  yon  got  auch  a  thing  as  a  Stpoy  ffttt 
about  you?"  At  ki*  oor- business  iraa  ended,  and  after  some  jokes 
en  the  dxess  of-  our  respective  natioiis,  we  took  aneUier  walk  in  the 
garden,  and  then  went  home.  * 

This  garden  is  close  to  the  baila  hissaur,  but  is  divided  from  it  by  a 
public  road.  The  King  often  retire  thither  ;  and  sometimes  carries 
some  of  the  ladies  of  his  seraglio  along  with  him.  On  these  occasions, 
a  number  of  officers,  called  Koorkehop*;,  are  stntioiied  on  ail  the 
roads  which  lead  to  that  already  meiitioiud.  td  |u  event  anv  one  ap- 
proat  iiing  while  the  Harani  is  passing,  it  only  remains  to  say  a  tew 
words  concerning  the  character  of  the  great,  wliich  terminate  my 
observations  on  that  class.  '        '  ' 

In  examining  the  conduct  of  tlie  Alglumn  Chiefs,  as  followers  of 
the  Court,  we  certainly  take  their  character  in  the  most  unfa\  ourable 
point  of  view.  In  their  behaviour  to  their  tribes,  respect  for  public 
opinion  makes  them  sober,  decent,  tolerably  just,  and  always  kind  and 
conciliating ;  but,  at  Court,  they  csnnot  bnt  Imlnbe  the  oovraption  of 
the  atmosphere  in  which  they  live ;  and,  even  in  speaking  of  the 
Afghaim  eonrtieia,  we  voaj  nfely  pronounce  that  they  are  the  weiat 
part  of  the  nation.   If  die  Persians  be  thrown  into  the  saile^  the 


•  All  thr  in(  n  nf  the  guard  and  retinue  of  the  mission,  who  hud  attfiidetl  tnc  to  the 
gardeOi  were  admitted  to  view  it  between  oitr  wolka^  and  were  entertained  while  we  were 
stoarlundMOB.  TlitidxtiiKof  Enropem  and  ibiatw  dre^ 
between  tLe  aKMUft  md  MBie  of  the  %araa  dial  were  mtmag  vp  and  down  it,  amused  tu 
aU.  Among  others,  we  descried  my  groom,  who  was  stnittijig  about  one  of  the  l&rge 
walluf,  witii  Im  Imidn  in  hia  pockets,  apparuitly  recollecting  the  most  knowii^  of  his  Loo- 
dcmMniivlmliftwaiaoMrtedfayaPanMi,ina  lii^  dnn  capi,  anda  taoktbatNachetl 
to  his  heels.  This  couple  conversed  for  s»)nic  Unie  by  ^\^n>y ;  ami  soon  got  so  well  ao- 
qnainti-dj  thatthqf  ahook  haad^  and  walked  offann  in  arm  into  oocof  thewaallar  aUajPf 


Digrtized  by  Google 


MUDOUD  KHAUN.  SBT 

erimei  nd  oonoplions  of  the  court  would  wea^  down  those  of  all 
die  fleet  of  the  population.    As  fiu-  as  mj  opportunities  of  clbmimF- 
tion  went,  I  muit  own  I  found  the  Dooraunee  Sirdars  sincere  and. 
direct^  and  had  every  reason  to  believe  them  high  minded*  and  as 
honourable  at  least  as  any  other  nobility  in  Asia ;  bat  tlie  rest  of  the 
people  about  the  government  were  very  generally  mean,  false,  and 
rapacious.    Even  the  Sirdars-,  when  in  power,  matle  money  by  the 
most  disgraceful  extortion  ;  nunib*  i  s  of  them  had  deserted  from  one 
party  to  another,  with  shameless  perfidy  j  and  none,  ho\M  \  l  r  nttacHcd 
to  the  causL'  in  which  he  was  ent]^a«;ed,  was  at  all  inclineti  lo  make 
pecuniai  V  sacririces  to  promote  its  interest.     Much  jealousy  and  dij*- 
cord  also  prevailed  among  the  most  powerful  Sirdars,  imd  in;iiiy  open 
or  secret  acta  of  enmity  were  put  in  practice  by  them  against  each 
other;  but  on  the  whole,  their  character  was  greatly  superior  to  that 
of  the  other  classes  about  the  King.    Every  day  furnished  some  ext 
ample  of  the  bold  intrigues,  open  falsehoods,  and  daring  forgeries  of 
the  Peruana ;  and  no  experience  in  India  could  prepare  a  foreigner 
for      inqpodenoe  and  beggarly  importunkf  of  oMMt  of  tiie  liywer 
dBoen  of  the  state.   Even  this  genenl  foct,  however,  was  not  witkt- 
Mit  esceptuMlfl ;  and  if  the  beat  of  tlie  eourtiera  were  not  quite  ^ 
cnipt  from  the  Tusea  imputed  to  dieir  order»  tliei^  were  aome  mm  of 
deeent  cbaneter  even  among  the  Feniaas* 

Die  dumcter  of  the  A^^bunm  chieft  wiU  be  in  a  greit  measure 
mftUed  in  die  historical  sketch  annexed  to  diia  aooount,  and  in 
variioaspaita  of  mjjouiitdl}  hut  an  aecoont  of  thoae  wiio  were  at  tii9 
oomt  of  Shauh  Shi^au»  when  I  was  there,  may  serve  to  give  a  general 
idea  of  tlieb  dispoaition  and  manners.  The  chief  was  Ahiam  Khauiw 
of  whom  enough  has  aheady  been  said. 

The  next  man  was  Muddud  Khaun,  the  chief  of  the  Iskhanki^fei{» 
yAkoae  grand&ther  distinguished  hims^f  greatly  in  the  Persian  warSf 
and  is  said  to  hare  wounded  Naudir  Shauh  in  battle ;  his  fiUher  was 
one  of  the  greatest  and  most  warlike  of  the  Dooraunee  Sirdars,  and 
Muddiid  JOiann  himself  was  possessed  of  great  weahh^  and  was  eso 


:  AXJXm  KHAUN. 


fvemdy  smpoeted.  manners,  dress,  and  behaviour  were  alwi^ 
spoken  of  w  particulfurly  decent  and  dignified,  though  he  lived  in  no 
kind  of  splendour.  He  was  said  to  be  a  man  of  talents,  and  of  a  good 
education  ;  but  it  gives  no  great  idea  of  his  capacity,  that  his  studies 
were  chieflv  in  physic  and  astrolnnry  ;  the  first  of  which  wm  recom- 
mended by  his  weakly  constitution,  and  the  second  by  ilw  unsealed 
times  in  wliich  lie  lived;  he  was,  however,  very  popular,  and  had  a 
great  reputation  for  his  knowledge  of  the  art  of  commanding,  for  his 
skill  and  courage  in  war.  and  for  every  thing  but  liberality.  His 
character  for  faith  was  so  ^ood,  that  even  in  the  troubU-d  times  he 
had  witiiessed,  he  had  never  been  required  to  take  an  oath ;  and 
although  it  could  not  be  concealed  that  he  had  given  up  the  city  of 
Heraut,  with  which  he  was  entrusted  by  Shauh  Zemauii,  to  that 
prince's  rival,  yet  from  the  account  he  himself  gave  of  the  transac- 
tioDy  it  appeared  that  he  was  driven  to  it  by  the  suspicions  and  de* 
ngna  of  a  bod  of  Shauh  Zemaun*s,  to  whom  the  nonunalgovenuneni 
of  Heraut  belonged. 

Hie  bek  <^  die  order  waa  Goolittaim  Vhum  the  chief*  of  lib* 
Atdiiki^ea,  io  wlKMe-inerita  the  whole  ooontry  hm  teattmooj.  He 
mm  brave  end  amoere*  petUBt  bt  iiiTeati^ilaoii,  indafctigahie  in 
cKeeuluig  jasdoe^  and  never  was  ooeuaed  of  leoeiving  a  prannL  Ha 
was  absent  at  his  government  of  Canbnl  aO  the  tone  I  was  at  Bedia* 
)var» 

Gfanflbor  Khaim  was  a  man  of  maldi  and  colueqiiaooe>.  but  dead* 

tote  of  firmness  and  capacity.  He  had  deserted  from  Mahmood  to 
8httjan»  for  which  he  suffered  death  on  the  field  of  battlfi  Bt.Neenil% 
about  a  month  after  I  saw  him. 

Auzim  Kbaun  held  the  office  of  Nussiikhchee  Baoahoe^  aoiiTBriiig 
to  that  of  our  Earl  Mazahal  in  old  times.  He  was  by  no  OMflDa.  defi- 
cient in  abilities,  but  moce  remarkable  for  his  steadiness  and  honour ; 
Shauh  Mahmood  having  ordered  him  to  put  Wafladaur  Khaun,  and 
other  Suddozyes  to  death,  contrary  to  a  custom  which  is  almost  sacred 
among  the  Dooraunaes,  he  infused  to  ob^ }-  Mahmood  at  fint  waa 


Digitized  by  Googl( 


XHMED  KHAUN  NOORZVi::.  289 

^iraged  at  his  contuma(sjr«  and  ordered  the  gaudB  to  ftSi  cb  liim'witli 
tbe  bott  ends  of  their  matchlocks ;  but  aotwithstanding  the  €XaA 
treatnreiit  he  noeived*  and  Mahmodd's  threats  that  he  should  be  put 
to  death  if  he  did  not  obey,  he  persevered  in  his  reftisal*  and  in  time 
obtained  Mahmood'a  oonfideno^  by  his  firm  adhaence  ta  hia 
principles. 

Meer  Hotuk  Khaun,  nephew  to  the  fkmous  Sirdar  Jehaun  Khaun 
(the  flTcatest  of  Ahmed  Shauh's  generals),  was  the  chief  of  the  intel*. 
ligence  department.  He  was  a  good  scholar,  and  an  excellent  Persiao 
poet,  but  as  his  learning  lay  in  poetry,  history,  and  other  branches 
of  elegant  literature,  instead  of  law,  he  derived  no  respect  from  hh 
acqu  iron  Hilts.  He  was  a  quiet  timid  man,  not  at  all  diiposed  to 
tyranny,  but  accessible  to  corruption. 

By  far  the  most  remarkable  oi  the  eliiefs  of  that  time,  was  Ahmed 
Khaun  Noorzye,  the  head  of  the  great  tribe  of  Noorzye,  and  one  of 
the  few  remaining  soldiers  of  Ahmed  Shauli.  He  was  a  man  of 
prodigious  strength  and  stature ;  thougli  considerably  upwards  of 
seventy^  and  rather  corpulent,  lie  l>ore  the  marks  of  his  former 
vigoui,  and  was  still  a  very  liaud.sunie  num.  He  had  a  fair  com- 
plexion, with  a  high  hooked  nose,  a  stern  coimtenance,  hairy 
cheeks,  and  a  long  beard ;  hia  manner  was  very  plain,  with  an  affec- 
tation of  roughnesa  and  tinmiiStyt  which  he  prided  himself  on  le- 
taining.  He  atts,  hoircnrer»  no  pattem  of  ancient  ftith;  he  had 
tiinee  daeeriad  his  party  on  thie  field  of  battle^  and  waa  in  cotie^iKind- 
eoee  villi  the  enemy  at  the  timewhen  I  saw  him.  ICs  dimuj  fiwidt 
homsfvmf  defeated  ita  oan  object,  and  he  was  diatmeted  by  both  par* 
tiea,  withoot  erer  having  gained  by  .deceiving  either.  He  had  Held 
the  hi|jheat  commandiriii  the  rtate^  aadhad  eerved  with  lepntation  in 
KboBMiann;  he  had»  howera,  been  beaten  by  the  Uabeka  kt  Bulkh* 
and  by  the  Ta^pooieea  in  Smda  lit  is  remailEaUeLthat  hb  defeat  on  - 
the  Iaat.oceaiion»  waa  owing  to  his  attempdog  to  practiae  the  Uriiek 
mode  of  WBr»  which  had  been  so  sucoessfidly  enqdoy^  i^punat  lum- 
ael£  Hewas,  hoiwcrat^e  man  of  great  personal  counga  and  fiittn^ 
bntlsevafickMis.'eveo  among  A^^unm  Siidan.   His*conacionsnest  ef 

o  o  9 


m  AHMED  KHAUN  HOOBZyK 

treachery  during  the  time  1  was  at  Poshawcr,  niatic  liim  ]oud  in  liis 
£eal  for  Shaiih  Shuja's  cause;  and  to  draw  off  tlir  pubhe  attention 
from  his  own  proceedings,  he  affected  great  alann  from  the  EngUsh, 
and  harangued  against  foreigners  and  their  arts  on  oc  casioiis.  His 
stratagems  were,  however,  unsuccessful :  his  correspondence  was  dis- 
covered, and  he  was  a^aiu  thrown  into  prison  aljout  the  time  I  left 
Peahaw^er.  Tlie  success  of  Mahmood's  party  procured  him  his 
liberty  for  a  time,  but  his  own  ill  conduct,  or  his  bad  character,  ex- 
posed him  again  to  suspicion,  and  he  ended  his  days  in  a  prison. 
£ven  when  I  saw  him,  he  had  jiut  ■ii0bred  a  long  imprisonmeiit,  baft 
th6  Klng^  in  his  distiest*  had  rdeased  hhn,  and  endeavoaxed  to  lis- 
gain  his  attadunent  He  had  been  restoied  to  his  tank*  and  had  ie> 
odved  great  honoon  firom  the  King ;  but  as  he  was  afiaid  of  being 
telied  on  to  oofntribate  to  the  support  of  the  goirenment*  he  aUbcted 
extKme  poverty*  I  ibund  him  in  a  house  which  had  gone  to  .ruin 
'during  Ilia  long  ctnifinenient ;  it  was  at  some  distance  fiom  the  town* 
'and  the  hall  where'he  leoeiTed  us^  opened  on  a  neglected  gudni 
part  of  the  roof  had  fidknin*  andthewaUsy  whidi  seemed  to  have 
been  well  finished,  thou^  plain,  bore  evident  maths  of  decay }  4hne 
was  no  carpet,  nor  even  ielts  to  sit  on. 

W«  fimnd  the  Khaun  seated,  with  four  or  five  other  p***""*-  He 
was  dressed  in  th^  usual  manner,  and  very  pkin :  He  rose,  and  onne 
forward  to  meet  me ;  and,  on  my  holding  oat  my  hands  to  rec^ve 
him  in  the  Ptnisn  &shion,  he  declared  in  a  rough  voice  that  he  was  for 
no  Persian  professions,  and  said  something  of  A%baun  siDoedtjr  and 
true  friendship  :  He  then  seized  me  by  tlie  arms  with  a  rude  gripe, 
and  pressed  me  with  great  vehemence  to  his  breast.  We  then  sat 
down,  and  the  Kliaun,  after  inquiring  about  my  health,  and  paying 
the  usual  compliments,  begar«  to  declaim  against  the  Persians  and 
Persian  refinements ;  praised  iiis  own  Ooloos,  which  he  said  was 
l(X),UOU  strong;  and  talked  of  the  devotion  of  the  Dooraunees  to  the 
Kins'  and  royal  family,  and  of  the  im  possibility  oi  supplanting  it. 
The  meaning  ot  this  harangue  appeared  lo  be,  to  make  a  shew  of  his 
attachment  to  the  King  on  so  public  au  occasion  {  and,  also  to  prove 

It 


Digrtized  by  Google 


IfBGOTIATIONS  WITH  PERSIAN  MINISTERS,  ^ 


lot  pstaotimi,  by  impraMing  me  •mfh  an  idea  of  the  fruitlesmoM  df 
any  design  on  the  Doonumee  state.  I  made  such  replies  as  wem 
iikely  to  convince  him  and  the  bywrtanders  of  the  vanity  of  his  appre-r 
iiensions,  without  appearing  to  apply  what  he  wd  to  myself.  Not- 
iivithstanding  his  affected  roughn^s,  lus  behaviour,  and  his  ordinaij 
conversation,  during  my  visit,  were  perfectly  polite  and  attentive, 
lie  sent  me  a  present  next  day,  as  is  usual  ;  and,  as  he  was  unable 
to  return  my  v!«?it,  T  sent  him  a  present,  without  waiting  for  that 
cotenuiny:  He  sent  a  polite  message  of  thanks;  and  was  highly 
pleiised  with  a  pair  of  spectacles,  with  which  he  said  he  iihould  be 
able  to  read  the  Korniin  bettor  ll»;in  with  those  ot"  his  own  country; 
but  he  returned  a  peii-kaile  witii  iviany  blades,  begging  me  to  give 
him  a  larger  one  instead.  And  I  learned  from  a  by-stander,  that 
when  he  first  saw  it,  lie  had  said  "  what  am  I  to  do  with  this  tliiriff 
like  a  scorpion  ?  1  wiijh  the  Envoy  would  give  me  a  knife,  thai  umim 
could  make  some  use  of."  When  this  was  related  to  me,  it  intro- 
duced many  stories  from  my  visitors  about  Ahmed  Khaun's  manners. 
All  said  that  he  would  eat  three  sheep's  heads  for  breakfast,  and  the 
greater  part  of  a  sheep  for  dinner.  On  another  occasion,  when  Ahmed 
■Khaun's  maiuaecs  were  talked  of  among  two  or  three  people  whom  I 
knew  well»  I  luppeiked  to  mentioii  the  land  of  sahite  lie  .had  ^ven 
me^  wliich  aflbsded  great  etrfsertaiamflnt  to  Ae  company.  Bat  jaisxt 
-dayt  the.stoiy  came  to  Ahmed  Khami's  ears ;  and  be  tfiought  it  ne» 
ieciiy  to  aendgfcfmal  apology,  explaining  that  the  kindof  embnoe 
lie  had  given  me'wM  leallj  in  the  old'  A^ann  fittluon»  and  waa  Jiiy 
constant  practice  with  peo|ile  tm  whom  he  had  a  tefftd* 

I  eannoi  give  a  better  Idea  of  the  Dooiraunee  JSifdais;  or  oontarast 
•them  more  with  ihe  PenianB,  than  by  lehting  a  part  of  my  owm 
.transactiona  with' them  both.  '  At  atime  when  Shauh  Mabmood  waa 
admaneuig  fnm  the  wertt  Sbauh  Sbi^jau*8  aimy«  wbidi  bad  been . col- 
lected at  a  great  CTpenae,  was  defeated  and  dispersed  by  the  rebdb 
4n  Caahmeer,  And  he  was  entirely  destitute  of  the  meana  of  raiaing 
Aiother  ^  the  defenoe  ^  .his  throne.  In  these  circumstanjBes,  it 
^vas  of  the  utmost  importanoe  to  him  to  obtain  pecmipiy  assiataiwe 


Digitized  by  Google 


^  KfiGOTIATIONS  WITH  PERSIA-R  HDlUrrEBa 


from  us  ;  but  our  policy  preventer!  our  taking  part  in  the  civil  wars  of 
the  country,  and  our  public  declarations  to  tli;it  pffcct  did  not  leave  us 
at  liberty  to  do  so,  consistently  with  good  taith,  even  if  we  had  been 
so  inclined.  The  ministers,  v-!io  were  employed  to  persuade  me 
to  deprtrt  from  this  line  ol  conduct ,  w  ere  two  1^  rsians  and  a  Moollah  ; 
but  otlier  persons  of  the  same  lU  st  i  i|ition  were  employed  to  influence 
me  in  the  shape  of  ordinary  visitors  .md  disinterested  friends.  I 
frequently  tound  some  of  these  in  ni}  liall  when  I  rose;  and,  although 
the  necessity  of  retiring  to  Chausht  procured  me  a  respite  of  some 
hours  during  the  day,  the  ministers  were  often  with  me  till  two 
hours  after  midnight.  There  was  no  argument  or  .solicitation  which 
they  did  not  employ  -.  They  even  endeavoured  to  persuade  me  tliat 
our  Indian  possessions  would  be  in  danger  if  we  refused  so  reasonable 
a  request ;  but,  even  lAigf  never  insinuated  tluit  I  should  be  exposed 
(o  any  pecwmel  risk.  The  ntnuMt  of  their  thieats,  (and  thoie  eeiw 
tabdj  were  embarnming),  oonsisfced  m  aaramccB  that  the  ^leen 
wvMiId  tend  her  vetl  to  me;  and  that*  when  Akram  Khann  letomed 
from  Gaahmeer,  he  would  certainly  come  nunnawaotee  to  mj  honaa 
Bnt  dieae'lban  were  dispelled  on  Akiam  Kfaamn'i  anhraL  At  my 
interviews  with  him',  the  same  solgeot  was  renewed;  but  all  hBaptn^ 
timity»  and  even 

direct  tetms,  schemes  of  mntoal benefit!  whidi»  while  they  provided 
ibr  the  Sng  of  Caubal*s  wants,  imdoubtedly  ippeared  to  1^  to  olfer 
great  md  immediate  advantage  to  the  British ;  andt  wliich  shewed 
entire  confidence  in  onr  sincerity  aikd  good  fiuth.  Whenitwasobnoos 

that  these  plans  were  not  acceptable,  they  were  instantly  dropL 

The  King's  difficulties,  however,  ccmtinued  to  increase.  Gaubid 
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  i  and  his  S|iproach  was  dai]^e9q>eeU 
edat  Pesbawer.  The  King  tried  all  means  of  raising  money.  His 
jewds  were  offisred  for  sale  at  less  than  half  their  vahiOi  bnt  nobody 
dared  to  venture  on  a  purchase,  of  which  the  opposite  party  would 
have  denied  the  validity.  In  all  his  distreRses,  the  King  never  re- 
sorted to  violence.  He  was  at  one  time  advised  to  seise  a  lai^  sum 
of  money,  which  some  merchants  were  osirying  hnia  Canhul  to  Caah* 


Digitized  by  Google 


AND  WITH  DOORAUNEf:  Sl^BARa  287 

ineef  «i  •  comiPflneiiJ il|wni]«tioii.  He  wM.iiofr]y  pmmMjtQ.tt^  , 
their  momsy,  and  to  ^ve  them  jcwvlt  in  pmna  fyt-  tbptf/raebL  Tkt 
Boyvl'Canzy  had  given  his  fetwjiij.dMilaripg.tfie  legfflili^Qf.the  itf:tioli; 
but,  on  reflection,  the  King  detenniiied  to  piaii^Eaatf  hi>  veputat|oii^ 

and  r^ected  the  expedient.    In  this  season  of  necessity,  recour^ievife 
again  had  to  me ;  and,  as  the  Persian*  had  exhausted  all  their  art% 
I  wm  invited  to  a  Council  of  the  Dooraunee  Siidatik    The  Benifniii 
did  not  fail  to  take  advantage  of  this  dfcbnwrtance.    They  lamenteji 
the  rudeness  and  barbarism  of  the  Afghauna ;  ppintedout  to  what 
a  difference  I  should  find  in  treating  with  milittury  savi^ea*  andL 
polished  people  like  Uiemselves;  but  told  me  to  be  of  good  courage, 
for  tliat  a  little  compliance  would  set  all  ri^ht.  Tliey  even  insinuated 
tiiat  it  would  be  dignified  to  make  a  voluntary  offer  through  them, 
rather  tiian  be  intimidated  by  the  violence  of  the  Dooraunees,  After 
all  this,  i  went  to  the  Pnlare  to  the  Coujicil,  accompanied  by  Mr. 
Straehev  and  iv.  o  oilier  gentlemen.    We  were  led,  by  a  private  way, 
into  a  very  comfortable  room,  close  to  the  presence  chamber.  On 
our  way,  we  passed  through  an  antichamber,  where  some  of  tlie  prin- 
cipal Secretaries  and  Ministers  were  transacting  their  business.  Wheq 
we  had  taken  our  seats  some  of  our  ac(juaintanc(  s  came  in  for  a  few 
minutes,  and  we  were  thcu  lefl  to  ourselves,  to  admire  the  rich  and 
beautiful  landscape  on  which  the  windows  of  our  room  opened. 
The  curtain,  which  covered  the  principal  door,  was  soon  gently 
raised,  and  several  persons  in  darkdreMeseiiteted  in  profound  silence^ 
end  without  any  basda   They*  did  not  at  fiiit  attract  much  notice  j 
but,'  on  looking  at  them,  I  perceived  Huddnd  Khaim  i  and^  as  I  tose 
to  receive  binifl  leoc^gniaed  Akram  Kbaun,  AlMned  Khaun  Noorzy^ 
end  the  four  other  great  Dooraunee  Sirdars.   They  were  all  m  their 
«ouTt  dresses,  with  the  red  boots  on,  which  are  required  wh^  'they 
appear  before  the  Kiog;  but  all  quite  plain  in  their  attire.  Th^tooik 
their  seats  opposite  to  us,  with  Ahmed  Khaun,  the  eldest  of  the 
number,  at  thdr  head.  Thej  immediately  entered  on  general  oonver- 
fatioo,  ii^^rapened  with  many  civil  and  fiiendly  spocchoi}  butthey 
showed  anestraofdinary  lebictaiice  toopen  the  business  «i#the  meetingi 


MODE  OF  TRAVELUNCf. 


and  often  pressed  each  other  in  Pushtoo  to  begin,  befbfe  wayoM  eodld 
,  be  found  to  undertake  it.  At  leDgth  they  began  at  a  great  distanee^ 
talked  of  their  confidence  in  us,  and  thtnr  wish  to  consult  with 
and  at  last  delicately  hinted  at  their  own  wants :  in  reply  to  which, 
I  spoke  with  respect  and  interest  of  their  nation,  and  assured  them  of 
our  sincere  wishes  for  its  proaperity,  but  pointed  out  in  plain  terms, 
the  objections  which  existed  to  our  taking  part  in  ihoii  {i<inie8tic 
quarrels,  and  remarked  the  advantage  which  an  ami )i I  ious  and  de- 
signing state  might  derive  from  an  opposite  line  of  condiK  t  .  Ahmed 
Khaun  (whose  arrangements  with  the  enemy  must  now  have  been 
completf  tl)  could  not  let  slip  this  opportunity  of  showing  his  Zealand 
his  A%hauii  bluntness,  and  lie  began  a  pressing  and  even  a  sarcastic 
speech,  but  he  w;is  immediately  silenced  by  the  rest,  who  changed 
the  subject  at  once,  lamented  the  disorders  of  the  kingdom,  which 
prevented  our  having  been  received  with  all  the  honours  that  were 
due,  and  our  enjoying  the  pleasures  which  their  country  afforded ;  and 
dus  ccmvautiaa  hded  till  we  btoke  up.  -  Afier  thiB  I  wai  no  ku^gar 
impoitiiiied  by  any  body^  but  I  peraeiTed  no  ^liiniimfjffq  In  the  atleii* 
tion  or  hoepitality  of  tiie  oouit  ^ 


•  It  may  be  iiit<*n?sUng  to  know  how  an  Euroi)ean  traveller  would  succeed  in  this 
country,  and  the  following  is  my  opinion  on  the  subject.  In  most  parts  of  the  Afghana 
oooDtry,  a  poor  stranger  would  be  receired  with  kindneaa  and  hospitality,  hut  a  wealthy 
ttsvdler,  that  vcntnrad  widioat  proper  CMorti,  into  any  put  oat  of  the  imnMiThliii  wapti^ 

intendancc  of  the  King,  might  !nv  hh  account  with  Vising  plundered.  In  rotintrirs  under 
the  King>  he  would  be  tt&  from  open  pluiKier,  but  even  in  the  capital,  he  niigltt  be 
flxpOMd  to  the  cartortkn  and  opptwioni  of  die  ottom  of  gofonmaiL  Hii  mSatt  «qr 
would  be  to  travel  as  a  nwrciiairt  with  a  caravan ;  b«t  the  example  of  Mr.  Footer,  ute 
neither  wanted  enterprise  nor  curiosity,  and  who  was  well  aoquaint4:Ki  with  a  Inrifnin^ 
^token  over  the  whole  country,  will  show  how  little  pleasure  could  be  <krive(l  trom  that 
node  of  travdlHiig.  The  chiiracter  of  an  ambasaador  alone  could  ghre  a  ridi  mmagtt 
A  confuifiit  hf>j>f»  of  safKy:  and  even  hi-  cnirity  would  probably  depend  on  the  disposi- 
tion  of  llie  iiiUividuals  at  the  head  ol  the  goTcniBiaitt  £]^)erictioe  has  shewn  that  ii| 
Am  ««gn  of  Shanli  Shtgm,  and  the  adiiuiiMtntSan  of  Aknm  JChaon,  a  ftragn  nuniiler 
would  be  treated  not  only  witli  good  bith,  but  with  delicacy;  but  whether  the  privilegt^ 
of  a  public  guest  would  protix  t  a  similar  agent  from  the  Ixjld  and  iinprittciplad  obkfc  <|f 
|he  opposUe  party,  remains  to  be  proved,  and  appears  to  me  very  doubtlui. 


Digrtized  by  Googl 


EUROPEANS  IN  AFGHAUN.  289 

Europp(in»  who  settle  in  the  country,  seem  to  be  safe  enough.  The  Constantinapolitan 
iriiom  I  have  mentioaed,  made  and  lost  a  oonnderable  fiartime  by  commerce  in  the 
A^^bMin  ooontry ;  bat  u  lie  udtt  ih*  ViUeir't  ppotecdon  sBdie  time  he  was  ridi,  be 
is  scarodj  a  firir  eiuniple.  Pa^  Frtnoe  eppean  not  to  be  mobitod;  and  an  En^Ui 
deserter  who  gave  him^i  If  up  to  me  nt  Moultaun,  gave  rt  fnvonrnWe  account  of  his  treat- 
ment. He  used  ev&n  to  be  invited  to  dimm  with  the  Doorauuee  chie&  at  Dera  Ghauzee 
Khann,  wfaershebad  beenentpbyed.  The  IMBan  Ifahaamiedsns,  wbosometimea  came 
to  ifcat  pnt  of  the  country,  used  to  give  Iilni  trouble,  by  telling  the  A%hauns  that  they 
were  making  a  companion  of  an  indSkiel  «^  would  not  scruple  to  eat  a  hog;  but  the 
Aighauns  said  they  saw  no  harm  in  his  behaviour,  and  did  not  seem  to  care  for  his  reli- 
gkm.  For  similar  good  oflfees  of  the  Indians,  see  Mr.  Durie's  Journal :  they  do  not 
arisi  from  ill  will,  but  from  file  HIiMloo^i^iidioe  of  cert,  vitfa  vfakh  the  Mmwihney  i* 
India  are  dee^y  infected. 

I  kuoir  of  no  cAer  Eurapeane  hi  <he  eountry :  a  single  inWibitwit'  <if  Ae  RliMien 
empire  may  now  and  then  eomie  down  irith  •  oermea  ^Qte  «  mn  of  Astraohan  vihma  t 
met  at  Moultaun),  but  none  rt'»i<!e  in  the  country.  It  ceems  to  be  believed  iu  Europe, 
that  the  Russians  have  a  iactory  and  some  influt^ce  in  Bulkh;  but  there  is  certainly  no 

fcanieiinn  Ibr  Ae  notloBi  I  ondd  hear  of  w  ertriMWimcnt  of  Aabt  oeenr  tftaB 
Orenburg  (to  the  MtA  of  flw  CoigieB  8«k)b  cKMpt  theiv  oanqoBrta  fm  Aa  MrttH 

west  of  Persia. 

Befiwe  I  quit  this  subject,  I  may  mention  tiie  Europeans  whom  I  have  heard  of 
ae  havb^-  visited  A^haunistaun  in  modem  times.  Besides;  Ifr.  IVxter,  a  French  gen> 
tleman,  named  M.  Massy,  went  from  India  to  Europe  by  tliiit  route.  A  German  Officer 
who  aftenrards  had  a  command  in  the  service  of  the  Indian  Bt^guni  SuomK)^  was  for 
loma  tunfe  wi  ^annjof  Tiaour  Shsuh.  Another  Cnropean  dlied  at  Bolkh  aooae  yean 
ifgo,  on  his  wi^  from  India  to  Europe.  He  was  dei^cribed  to  be  a  man  of  a  melan- 
cholv  turn,  but  mild  and  wp]|  informed;  he  was  called  Yar  Fatizil  (an  Arabic  name  of 
liu  own  inventioa»  probably  intended  to  mean  the  friend  of  learning}.  While  I  was  in 
Ae  Ckiifaid  doninioUf'aTeiy  mldUgnt  Frnehi^ 

the  name  of  Jean  Thomas,  and  who  had  latterfy  been  i^trongly  suspected  of  heiag  a  gpf^ 
ceciqped  from  India,  and  pa&sed  through  part  of  the  A%haun  dominions.  He  managed 
his  journey  with  great  courage  and  address,  and  eluded  all  the  attempts  which  were  made 
to  ^prebend  him.  Two  Froichmen  also  were  rtated,  in  letters  from  Heraut,  to  have 
arrived  nt  thnt  city,  not  long  after  I  left  the  country.  Conwdering  ho^v  loug  the  French 
had  a  uunaiuu  at  Teheraun,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they  have  good  information  re- 
specting dweeoottBtriea;  hot  thenetnre  of  their  govemment  predndei  all  hope  that  they 
f^ghiedievorid  their  information,  which  must  be  eo  anfimNBeafala  to  die  hopes  of  dioia 
wlifi  count  on  penetrating  to  India  by  that  route. 

1  have  heard  of  no  other  Europeans  in  the  A^^iaun  dominioQf  beyond  the  Indita^ 
fart  llHPe  I  hna  BMnlionaiL 


(   290  ) 


CHAP.  X. 

TBADZ  OF  CAUBUl.. 

TN  an  inland  country*  desdtote  of  navigable  riverit  and  not  suited 
to  ivfafided  carnages,  oonuneioe  must  of  couise  be  carried  en  hj 
beaata  of  burthen  $  of  these^  ounels  are  found  to  be  the  b^  as 
horn  their  strength,  as  thdr  pati^oe  of  thirst,  and  the  ease 
with  which  they  are  fed  on  any  kind  of  bush,  and  almost  on  any  Idnd 
of  vegetable.  The  tribes  whose  country  enables  them  to  maintahi 
camels,  or  rather  restrains  them  to  that  description  of  stock,  therefore 
naturally  turn  their  attention  to  commerce,  and  often  combine  it  with 
the  migrations  which  they  undertake  in  quest  of  forage  for  their 
h^rds,  and  of  an  agreeable  climt^  for  themselves.  When  the  lands 
of  these  tribes,  as  la  generally  the  case,  neither  furnish  any  produce 
of  their  own  nor  afibrd  a  market  for  that  of  other  countries,  the 
owners  of  camels  are  cliiefly  employed  in  carrying  the  commodities 
of  one  ricli  country  to  he  sold  in  another,  ^^^en  thev  have  a  little 
rapitnl,  they  do  this  on  their  own  account,  accompanying  their  mer- 
chandise, and  selling  it  tlicmselves ;  but  those  whose  onh  wealth  con- 
sists in  a  few  camels,  are  nnabie  to  engage  in  thin  tiMilic,  and  content 
themselves  with  hiring  out  their  camels  to  the  merchants  of  the 
richer  tribes,  and  of  the  cities,  who  either  accompany  their  merchan- 
dise themselves  to  tlie  place  of  its  destination,  or  send  ii  under  ser- 
vants (whose  duty  answers  to  that  of  supercargoes),  according  to  their 
own  wealth  and  habitsof  life.  Some  of  these  merchants  alsokeep  camels 
of  their  own,  which  they  feed  in  the  wastes  near  the  towns  where 
they  reside;  and  some  professed  carriers  also  keep  camels  in  the  same 
manner,  which  they  hire  out.  Camels  hired  from  a  particular  tribe, 
usually  make  their  journey  in  company  with  the  tribe  to  which  they 


Digitized  by  Copgle 


llclodgi  ind  thote  whidi  belolig  to'inatelMnte-or  indiykhial  canjam 
wbm  tmrdliiig  in  the.direotkm  df  dne  of  tb^w  migrations,  genenUy 
attttdi.dianietMto  aome  tribe  for  safety,  and  this  .other  admtages 
pif  Qompanj*  1 

The  trade  to  pUwes  out  of  fhehanotB  of  the.  wandering  tribes^,  ia 
cenied'.on  entuelj  on.  animiib  belonging  to.ibe.nieichanta.an40v- 
iieKB;of  the  eities>  which  aie  there  formed  into  oanvan^  asfd^in  liiia 
nunmcr  all,  forogn. trade  ia  carried  on.*  . > 

'  .  .Iheimanner  m.  whidi  thoae  are  oolidiicted. which  travel  with  wwi- 
deringtribei^  w^U.bebeit  Uhiatiated  bj  the  ezanqpile  of;a  tfSi^,  whjdi 
h  aoppmpanied  bj  few  camebthot  ita. own,,  and  that  of  oiie  wjbtich-ia 
gDoogqpaaiied.faj  many  b^ongjng  to  other  penona.  Half  the  M&eta^ 
kli^l  meve  aimiliUy  fipom  Damaun  to  ShD^  andth^ 
Uiey^fiejaoooinpanied  by  their  wives  and  families,  and  are  eommfiided 
by  some  of  their  own  hereditary  chiefe*.  aasisted  and  supported  by 
Chelwashtees  *  i  and  all  ooramapd.  and  control  ia  ui-.the.aaine.handia 
in  which  it  would  be,  if  they  were  in  their  own  territoiy,  Anystranr 
gara.  that  join  thenit  are  obliged  to  submit  to  the  cnatonia.of  the 
Mc^eankhail.  %  ">  i ) 

With  the  Bauboors,  on  the  other  hand,  the  bulk  of  the  caravan; is 
composed  of  people  not  belon^ng  to  the  tribe;  and  even  the  Baur 
boors  who  belong  to  it,  are  not  accompanied  by  their  families,  but 
merely  travel  as  merchants.  A  Mushir  f  o^*  the  Bauboors  always 
goes  with  the  caravan,  and  is  invested  with  nearly  the  same  authority 
which  the  Khaun  has  at  home,  but  his  power  oiilv  extends  to  his  own 
tribe,  and  it  is  at  the  discretion  of  the  rest  to  obey  him  or  not.  In 
general,  llie  whole  elect  him  Caufila  BausheeJ,  which  fjives  him 
authoriiy  o\er  them  all;  he  cbcK)ses  eighty  men  to  assist  him,  impos- 
itig  li  fine  on  an  v  who  refiise.  He  keeps  the  peace,  settles  disputes, 
appoints  and  posts  guards  and  escorts*  fixes,  on  the  places  of  encamp- 


*  A  lort  of  dktator  aaawtiaic*  appnintod  in.  tiha  MpdUicMi  tribal. 

f  Hie  hereditary  chief  of  a  diyision  of  the  tribe, 
t  A  TkttUdb  t«nB  fifnii^iii^  HomI  of  a  Caravan. 

F  P  8 


£82  CARAVAira 

mMt,  leCtkft  dus  eiutomt  with  the  tribes  through  whose  kndl  h«  li 
to  ptiBA,  cdlMtt  tfa6  iiMilfiy  teqoited  to  pty 
CO  the  tflbe  to  vribioh  k  b  doe.  Bat,  when  the  liwhir  of  Ae  Brb- 
boon  u  not  dected  to  'this  office,  eveiy  man  maneges  Ibr  hiauclf, 
(Mid  aD  n  diaorde^  and  oonfiisioti. 

The  toodft  flKMn  Demaim  to  nhorasMam,  which  are  tiwdM  firjr 
(hes^  tribes,  «te  Hie  most  dhttMlniging  Imagitiable.  On  the  w«jr  to 
Canbnl,  the  road,  fer  a  dittanoe,  lies  thxongh  ckwi  defiles,  end 
natiow/ atony  vdleyi,  amoAg  bate  moontains.  Somedmea  it  runs 
Ideng  ffaelteds  of  tonvtfts,  and«  et  ochen,  leads  <net  hi^  and  catagggr 

ijeases.  Thet  ahmgliieGomul  withhitfaebedof  a  ^m;  an^^ 
IfMb'stfeattt  riaes)  the  caravan  is  obliged  tO  Seek  shelter  ih  some  nook 
between  It  iud  the  hills,  and  thero  to  lemain  till  the  witter  Idkt 
l^ese  Kiada  attr  e)sD  inliMtM  by  Shemunees,  and  stall  mofe.by 

Vizeerees,  who  oome  fiom  the  nearest  part  of  their  own  oouatiy  to 
jplund^  the  Oarovamt.  The  taravftn  to  Candahar,  after  passing  the 
mountains,  joumies  over  waste  plains,  divided  by  rocky  ridges,  and 
ha  some  places  by  mountains.  During  the  whole  march,  it  is  obliged 
to  carrv  provisions,  and  often  water,  {thai  on  the-  road  bcin?  salt,  or 
lbf»Tc  boin  j  nonn  at  all).  Shrubs,  which  tceti  ihe  t-amc  Is  and  serve 
for  tiiel,  are  the  only  nsefid  produce  of  those  countries.  Small  vil- 
lages are  met  with  rarely  on  this  long  march ;  but,  at  some  seasons, 
tamps  of  wandering  shepherds  are  more  frequent. 

While  passing  the  country  intcsU-il  by  the  predatoj  >  tribes,  they 
ttiarch  in  great  order,  with  parties  at  proper  stations  tor  covering 
their  line  of  march.  Even  when  haltetl,  a  party  of  horse  are  alway* 
tnounted,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  carrying  off  camels  that  are 
foraging.  iV  Iffrge  proportion  of  the  caravan  keeps  watch  at  night. 
In  the  rest  of  their  journey,  thej  observe  little  precauUtHi  in  the 
maMil,  and  sleep  secure  at  night  In  narrow  peases,  the  chieft  fyi 
the  Older  of  passing,  and  sometimes  send  parts  of  the  caravan  by 
other  roads.  Their  marches  are  about  ei^  or  ten  ,miles  a  day ; 
and,  when  tli^  leadi  their  destination,  those  who  haye  aooompaniiBd 
tile  caravan  disperse,  and  tiie  people  of  the  tribe  aepd  Mt  /their 


Digrtized  by  Google 


CABAVAK& 


fimt^  tff  pMtiye^  and  nuniin  ilwiwiidyco  it  mm  in  Ihefar  canpii  ui 
Am  noidil  of  a  wdnft  and  pleadng  oo«itiy>  wliifii  atjsjn  a  ttmf^ 
rate  dimato.  They  do  not  coatimie  to  duft  about  Kka  tii<  ahgyiwri^ 
whoM  nioda  of  maidung  a&d  gnenllialN^ 
ilicMe  I  have  beea  dcecribing.  One 

mm  dnpafcched  to  the  cities  to  sell  the  goods  tbak  they  kate  faaon^ 
sp,  and  to  provide  othan  fiv  their  retaa.  Many  niMcinola  of  ether 
tribes  flttichthenuidvea  to  one  of  these  carayans.  Hiey  pe^  a  rupee 
and  a  ^puatter  fiar  every  camel  load,  to  defray  the  expcnces  of  the 
guards,  and  the  same  sum  is  levied  fiom  the  members  of  the  tribe  te 
which  the  caravan  belongs. 

The  arrangement  of  the  caravans,  which  go  to  India  and  Pepsia, 
resemble  those  I  have  mentioned ;  but  the  camels  are  hired  from 
carriers  about  towns,  and  the  whole  is  under  a  Caufila  Baushee, 
fleeted  by  the  people  ot  the  caravan.  This  (ttfucr,  however,  is  more 
common  with  the  Tanjilcs  and  citizens  timii  with  the  Aj^haunSy 
often  march  together  without  any  chief  or  any  regulation. 

These  caravans  generally  march  in  the  niglit.  They  do  nut  encamp 
in  the  country  at  the  end  of  their  joumies  like  those  of  the  tribes, 
but  put  up  in  caravanserais  in  the  to^Mis,  Tiiese  are  large  squares, 
surtoiuided  by  apartments,  nn<i  liavuig  a  mosque,  and  often  a  wurm 
bath  in  the  centre,  and  a  couimon  gate-way.  They  are  under  tiie 
charge  of  persons,  who  let  out  the  apartments-  to  tlie  merdbanta  at  a 
veiy  loiV  mte.  A  common  mercha^it  generally  bins  tno  measa,  in 
wUdi  be  deporifeshis  merduHidaa  andlodgae  binuel^  Mting*  coofc; 
ing,  and  sleeping  at  the  pbuMi  They  ad9l  their -own  gBoda»  eitber  b  ^ 
wbokwale  or  retafly  witfiopt  the  intervention  of  beofcew.  .TbeeeiKitHie 
io  ToofUsteun  are  all  on  hones  or  .poneys,  probably  en.  accoant  ci 
Hw  .Tay  mouafennom  loadSf  iHndi  lie  in  one  poit  over  the  anowy 
ridge- o^Huidoo'Cooah.  lliose  wbidi  go  to  GbineM  Tooridstean,' 
iet  o^  fiom  Gbrimieer  and  Peshawers  Caiibid  it  the  great  mart  ef 
•mdepmaiant  Tooddatann.  Candahar  and  Herant»  §at  Peraia,  l!he 
Indian  Inde  is  more  divided ;  that  of  tbe  Fonjaiipb,  and  the  north  of 
Hbidoiten,  comes  to  Peibawer.  Unit  iriiidi  croases  the  desert  fiom 


2^  TRADK 

Jypon  and  die  countries  ttUl  fiflcthar:  MUftlit  coam  to  flbakupaKi 
Balwiralpoor,  ami  MoultflMn  s-.«nd,  that  nHnch  b  carried  an  faj  leav 

comes  to  Koratchcc,  and  thence  to  Shekarpoor  and  Candahar.  : 
The  principal  foreign  d'ade  of  the  kingdom  of  Caubul  is  with  ImUi^ 
^«raia»  and  Toorkiataun.  (Independent  and C^hinese).  Some  triflinf^ 
comrtieroe  is  kept  up  with  CoufiBriatium.  A  sort  of  cloth,  made  of 
shawl  wool,  called  Ussul  Toos,  is  imported  from  Tibet;  and  the  porta 
of  Sind  keep  up  some  intercourse  with  Arabia.  .  > 

The  trade  with  liindostan  is  by  £u  the  most  oonaidenfale^  tlypygli 
it  has  declined  of  late  vears. 

The  exports  to  India  are  principallv  horse';  ami  poiievs,  furs,  shawls* 
Mooltaun  chintz,  madder,  assa  toetida,  tobacco,  almonds,  Pistacliio 
nuts,  walnuts,  hazel  nut^  and  fruits.  The  fnn'ts  arc  ^uiierally  dried, 
(as  dried  plums,  and  apricots,  raisins,  and  kishmishes),  but  a  large 
quantity  is  also  fresh.  In  that  case,  it  is  puUed  before  it  is  quite 
ripe,  and  caretully  jxicked  witli  cotton  m  woodeu  box^  The  fniits 
exjx>rted  in  this  manner  are  apples,  pt-ais,  aiul  coarse  grapes.  Vo- 
megranates  require  no  packing,  and  no  uLhei  Iruil  will  stand  the 
journey :  even  these,  lose  most  of  their  flavour.  The  principal  ex- 
port is  that  of  shawls,  which  are  worn  by  every  man  in  India  who 
cm  a£R>id  to  buy  them,  and  which  are  made  in  no  place  but  Cash^ 

^le  tmporta  from  Indie  en  ooene  cotton  cbllia,  (worn  by  die 
common  people  of  the  whole  kipgiloint  aa  weU  by  thoaeof  Tooiw 
Idataun),  mnduM,  and  oUhcr  fine.inainifiictone«>  lome  aoite  of.  aOken 
doth  and  brocade^  indigo  (in  great  quantities),  iraiy,  chalky  ^^fm^mi 
wax,  tin,  landal  wood,  and  afanoat  the  angar  which,  ia  naed  in  the 
oottntiy.  Some  little  brood  doth  ia  alao  imported ;  hot  moat,  oomea 
bjthe  wayof  BoUianie:  Muak,  oonJ,  drn^  and  adme  other'trifliiig 
aitideiBf  are  alao  impcHrted<  A  very  greet  branch  of  the  ladien  im% 
porta  ore  the  qwces  of  all  1dnda,.whidi  axe.canied  finm  Bonbaj,  ind. 
other  places  on  the  Malabar  coast,  to  Koratdiee  or  other  ports  in  - 
Sind,  .and  :thenoe  .fay  lend  to  Canbiil  aiyl  Omdahar*  :  Afanoat  all  th^ 

•  .  r 

22  «  ,  .    •  t 


Digitized  by  Google 


TBADE.  ggS 

iifim  and  itt  the  tponitoj  eome  lij  ibis  diaiind,  ag  do  noit  of  tfaie 

Gowikt.   Hones  are  alio  e&poiCed  hj  tliu  raufte. 

:  .The  exports  to  indepflndent  Tobrkutena,  connst  chiefly  of  ortiides 

previously  im|M>rted  from  India,  or  made  in  the  LDdian|iiioviiioiBe-of 
CaubuL  White  doth  of  all  kinds,  shawls,  Indian  tnifaaaty  Moidtauii 
'dbintSy  and  indigo,  are  the  chief  of  than.  t  : 

■i  .  Hie.  principal  of  the  imports  are  horses,  gold,  and  silver.  The  laU 
tBtp  oonsiat  of  tillas  (the  gold  coin  of  Bokhara),  Dutch  ducats,  Vene- 
tian sequins,  and  yamboos  (or  ingots  of  silv^  irom  ChioA).  Coehinaalt. 
broad  cloth,  purpet,  and  tinsel,  together  with  cast  iron  pots,  cutl^, 
and  other  hard  ware,  are  imported  from  Bokhara  ;  to  which  place 
they  are  brought  from  Russia,  either  by  land  from  Orenburg  across 
the  detiart,  or  by  sea  from  Astrachan  to  Anil,  or  Ming  Kishlauk  in 
Orgunge.  NeefUes,  looking  glasses,  Russian  leather,  tin  bends, 
^qpe^ades,  and  some  osIh  i  tritliag  European  articles,  are  also  brought 
hj  the  same  route.  Oormuk,  a  fine  cloth  made  of  camel's  wool,  a 
quantity  oi  cotton,  and  some  lamb  skins,  are  iin)ioi  U'il  liom  the  Bok- 
hara (  c  iuiitry  itsell'}  as  are  a  &w  of  the  two-humped  camels  hrom  the 
Kuzzauk  c  ountry.  '  ^ 

-  To  Persia,  are  exported  shawls,  nnd  shawl  goods,  indigo,  carpets 
of  Heraut,  Moultaun  chintz,  Indian  biocmkb,  muslins,  and  other  cot- 
ton cloths.  ■  The  shawls  exported  to  Persia  are  of  a  pattern  entirely 
^iifierimt  fiom  thoae  aeen  in  India  or  Eng^d.  Hiey  were  aniYin^ 
aally  wotn  till  lately*  when  the  King  of  Ferue  fixbade  the  uae  of 
ttm»*widi  eview  to  encourage  the  mamriartageB  of  his  own  country. 

Thb  imports  are' raw  silkof  Gheekim  and  Resht,  silken  rtuA  nude 
at  Vcitd  and  Kaahann ;  a  sort  of  strong  cotton  manufiuture  of  various 
cbtoiirs,  called  Kuddiik,  (the  best  of  whidi  is  made  at  Isphahaun), 
and  silken 'handkerchiefti  worn  by  the  women.  These  manufiiptuies 
ase  ua^-in  lugs  quantities  by  all  nuduh;  -  Embroidered  satin,  velvety 
and  TetmuL  brbcade^  are^  of  coarse^  bonfined  to  the  great.  GMn  and 
bullioD  are  also  among  the  imports ;  but  the  moat  remariEaUe'  is  ln- 
dian  'ehitota,'  whidi  is  nUaniifiKAiired  at  Masulipatam,  on  the  coast  of 
BoiaMiaridel,  and  comes  by.sea  to  Basfaeer*  in  the  Peisian  Gidph*'  It 


p 


996  TRADE. 

Mi'tltaenoe  carried  by  kod  to  the-A^lwiiii  eoanfeiy,  iribM  ii  U  ntiy 
much  used. 

The  exports  to  Cliinesc  Tonrkaitattii  az^  nearly  the  same  as  those 
to  Bokhaura.  The  imports  an  woollens  of  a  particular  kind,  fa»infft 
mSkt  and  satin»  tea,  ,  (in  amall  boxes  of  thin  leacU  china,  porcelun,  raw 
silk,  cochineal,  crystal,  gold  dust,  golden  ingots,  and  yamboos  of 

sil%'er,  with  the  Chinese  stamp.  Tlie  trade  with  Cauferistaun,  need 
scarcely  be  moutionefl.  If  consists  of  wine,  vinegar,  clieese,  and 
clarified  butter,  which  aif  l)artered  on  the  frontier  ibr  Indian  and 
Caubui  cloth,  salt,  cowTies,  pewter,  and  tin.  Some  slaves  are  ])ro- 
cured  from  the  Cauiers  in  tlic  same  nxajuicr.  Slaves  ace  also  imported 
£rom  Arabia,  Abyssinia,  &c.  to  the  ports-  in  Sind. 

It  is  obvious,  that  in  a  kingdom  so  di\  i-rsitied,  a  fftio<l  deal  of  inter- 
nal trade  must  pre\nil.  The  principal  articles  carried  i'vom  the 
western  provinces  to  those  in  the  east,  are  woollens,  fiirs,  ni;ulder, 
cheese*  cooroot,  and  some  manuikctures ;  sudii  as  Heraut  carpels, 
and  the  finer  articles  of  dress  or  equipment  for  the  great.  From  the 
East  «re  carried  the  iMugeesy  silk,  and  chmtze  of  MooUaim ;  the 
mixed  silk  and  cotton  doths  of  BabawalpofMr ;  together  with  Indigo^ 
end,  perhaps,  tome  eotttin.  .I|«m  b  eiq^ortod  fiem  iJm  mounlauMMis 

mi^ff^  wlii^  is  distinginshwi  fbc producing  that  mineNl;  aUum  and 
miifkaott  &om  GsUa  Bbnig^s  hoises» fiom  Bulkh i  end  oDooft  nuts.ind 
dates  from  Belochestiauni  '  - 

IbeharMtnde^  leqwzesafeirirov^  Agreet 
jnumber  of  liatses  aie  ttinually  sold  in  lihe  nottk  of  huSak  under  the 
naiiieof  Guibul  horses,  and  in  the  west,  ander  that  of  Gandahar 
hones;  but  almost  the  whole  of  tibese  eoihe  from  TcMMrkistaun.  .  No 
heiMS  are  bred  at  Caubui,  except  by  men  of  property  for  their  own 
use,  nor  are  the  horses  bred  about  Candahar  exported.  Some  c£  the 
fine  horses  of  the  -neighbourhood  of  Heraut  are  coun- 
tries, but  few  or  none  to  Iiylie.  A  good  many  horses  are  exported 
from  Belochestaun,  as  are  some  of  the  fine  breed  found  on  both  sides 
of  the  Indus,  to  the  north  of  the  sslt  range.'  fiut»  by  &r  the  greatest 


Digrtlzed  by  Google 

i 


braeding  oonnby  m  the  GmM  domliiMMUi  k  Bolkh ;  anditiifiom 
thai  pravinoe^  and  the  Toorkmun  ooqntiy  lower  dawn  the  Oxns,  that 
the  bnik  of  those  exported  are  bnm^iL  There  are  two  Borta  of 
hones  moat  dealt  m:  one,  ntfaer  amaU,  but  very  atoot,  capable  of 
mndi  wDili:,  nd  che^ ;  the  fither,  mudi  laiger,  and  more  vahied  on 
that  aooonnt,  thou^  not  near  ao  aemoeahle^  except  lor  war>  whfife^, 
owmg  to  the  Aiiatic  mode  of  ^itnig,  aiie  ia  of  inqKWtMioe.  Hie 
fenner»  tfaon^  of  duee  aovta^  are  geneniOly  comprehended  m  ihe 
nameof  Toorkeeor  Usbekee,  and  are  fared  in  Bnlkh,  andthepnnrincea 
j>efe:BoMMiBrn.;.':.^l!lie:qthBr  ia  caUed.ToDitaBmiw»  and  la'tMlIjr  bvet 
bf  tlM  TMdnoima  en  bolfa  baaka  of  the  kavv  (hm.  The  gmt 
marts  atp  BeUkfaiid  BoUpfaia.'  HoiaeB  sdl  tbera  at  fi»m  £i:  to  flOi 
ht  a  'Eooifcee,  and  fioea  90L  to  100/.  for  a  ToeAaaatee,  The  mti^ 
ehoBta'gMaendlj  buy  them  cheap,  and.  iii  bad  order,  and  &tten  thcih 
in  the  pasture  of  Caubul.  The  most  famous  place  U  the  Niibb 
J^idaiin,  west  of  Guibol,  where  a  horse  in  the  atoatemiwimpd  Matie 
can  be  brought  into  condition  in  forty  days,  at  an  expanse  of  five  er 
six  abUtinga*  Ibe^  fiiat  soil  thena  iiitb  tiefbil,  eod  tbm 
lurome.  ■         *  V''.-  1 

Idaiqr  Jaonto  are  sold  in  the  country*  and  great  numbte  meA  to 
be  skit  on  to  Iddin.  The  internal  sale  ia*  increasing;  matiy  of  the 
farmers  buying  horses  now,  that  formerly  never  thought  of  doing  s6i 
but  the  exportation  to  India  has  greatly  fallen  off.  Wherever  the 
British  dominion  extends,  large  armies  of  horse  are  chantrpd  for 
small  onfs  of  infantry:  and  there  the  gentlemen  prefer  jVraba.  The 
native  arinios  also  have  diniinishod,  as  the  circle  of  their  deprndationH 
has  been  circnTn5?rribo(l ;  and  li'  the  Company's  breeding  studs  are 
succesainlf  the  txade  between  India  and  Toorkiataun  will  be  amuhit 
iated.  <: 

'  'S 

...  ■    ■  .  • 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  «•  ) 


CHAE  XL 

f 

HUSBANDBY  OF  CAUBUL. 

THERE  aM'  five  classes  of  cultivators  in  AfghauniBtaun :  1st, 
Proprietors,  who  cultivate :  thor  own  land ;  2di  Tenants,  wfad 
hire  it  for  a  went  ia  moaey,  or  lor  a  fixed  proportion  of  the  produce; 
Sd,  Buzgurs,  who  are  the  same  as  the  Metayers  in  France ;  4th, 
Hired  labourers ;  ud  Stb,  Villaina,  who  cultivate  their  lord'a  lands 
.without  wages. 

The  estates  of  the  proprietors  are,  of  course,  various  in  their  ex- 
tent, ljut  on  the  whole,  the  land  is  more  equally  divided  in  A^faauni- 
staun  than  in  most  other  countries.  There  n re  a  great  number  of 
small  proprietors,  who  cultivate  their  laiuls  t  lu  uiselves,  assisted  by 
their  families,  and  sometimes  by  hired  htbourers  and  Buzgurs.  The 
reason  of  the  equal  liiv  isiou  of  property  will  be  easily  perceived,  by 
adverting  to  the  nature  of  the  goverameiitiof  tribes.  That  distnbu- 
.  tion  seems  to  have  been  Liieneral  in  former  tim^,  and  to  have  been 
disturbed  by  various  causes.  Ilxtraviiijancc  or  misfortune  compel 
many  to  sell  their  lands ;  tpiarrels,  or  a  desire  lor  cliange,  induce 
others  to  part  with  them,  that  they  may  quit  the  neighbourhood  in 
which  they  live,  and  the  divimm  of  .every  man's  estate  among '  all 
his' SOBS,  which  it  enjoined  by  the  Mahommedan:  ]aw,  '  socta  'nDdBn 
eadi  lot  too  unaUto  nuuntaiii  its  proprietor,  who  ooniequeatly  aidiit 
g^ves  it  up  to  one  of  his  bradien,  or  tdla  it  Ptawhwicffii  are  fimnd 
among  those  who  here  been  enricbed  by  the  Ktng^s  aervice^  by  wart 
and  by  succesafbl  agriculture  or  commerce.  Much  has  likewise  been 
brouglht  under  eoltivation  by  individuab  or  sodeties*  who  have  taken 
meaauKs  to  ptoeure  water  for  tnigaCion,  on  which  so  mncfa  depeodi 


Digrtized  by  Google 


LABOURERS.  Ml 

'  '  ' 

is.  A^^wnnirtaun,  tDd  tlw  kDd  thus  nMatAf.  beeoiiiei4li«ipiWit» 
^paapttty  of  the  adveotorM-  -FmaU^i  aome  lunr^  ftwcifmi  ipcMfc. 
l^tB  ifiNictly  from  the  crown. 

Uw.inte  of  ]tfi4  in  Caubul  it  tlited.bj  Mr.  Bbnthej  to.bd  Aav 
nine  to  twelve  yon.  purchase. 

Hie.miinber  of  tenanta,  in  the  common  acceptadon^of  the  word**.. 
is:iiot  great  in  this  country ;  and  of  those  who  do  not  rest  bnd,  a 
gpeal  portion  jne  middlemen,  who  let  it  . out  i^pin  to  Bnzgurs.  The. 
commonest  term  fbr  a  lease,  is  one  or  two  jean  $  thelongest  period  is- 
five.    The  rent  varies  greatly ;  in  the  bairen  oonntry  of  the  Stooree- 
aunees,  it  is  only  on^-tentkof  the  produce;  while  in  the  plain  of 
Bajour,  it  is  said  to  be  from  oBfrthifd  to  one-half ;.  and  in  the  ooon^ 
try  round  Caubul  two-thirds. 

All  the  tenants  above  mentioned,  pnv  a  rent  for  the  use  of  the 
land,  and  are  of  no  charge  to  the  landlord  ;  l)ut  where  the  land  is 
cultivated  by  Buyrgnrs,  the  landlord  gcnorally  provides  the  whole  o( 
the  seed,  cattle,  and  implements  of  husbandry,  the  Bu2gur  supplying 
nothing  but  the  labour.  In  some  cases,  however,  the  Bnzgnr  has  a 
share  m  the  exj)enfie  I  lirive  mentioned,  nnd  in  others,  supytlies  ever}' 
thing  but  the  seed.  The  share  of  the  Biizgur  is  not  hxed ;  I  have 
heard  oi  cases  where  he  received  no  more  than  one-tenth,  and  of. 
others  \sherc  he  was  entitled  to  one-balf, 

L.ibourers  in  luisli;aidrv  are  principal) v  employed  and  paid  by  the 
Buzgurs :  they  are  paid  by  the  season,  which  lasts  for  nine  months, 
beginning  from  the  vernal  equinox.  Tliey  are  fed,  and  in  many 
places  clothed  during  all  this  period  by  their  enipioyers,  and  they 
receive  besides  a  quantity  of  grain,  and  a  sum  of  money  which  varies 
from  two  and  a  half*  Maunds  Khaunee  and  one  rupee  to  ten 
Maiinds  and  two  rupees ;  when  paid  in  money,  the  <xnnmoneil  nte 
ieema  fe  be  tfauCy  rupees,  besideo  food  ad  dotliing.   In  towna,  the 


•  TIm  MM  JOnaatt  iisteqt  4^  psaodk 
t  About  two  ahiUiqgi  and  Sonefw, 

4  4S 


Digitized  by  Google 


HARVESTS' OF  Al^OUAUNISTAUN. 

eombqiipaj  of  •'kbtfuRr  ik^imailiiiiidraddiiiM  {tkotk 'Sampnad 
!ial^enny)'fl>i^yy  with  itoiL  .  'In>€«id8liair  k  moonti  io  iStuee  (Bim- 
hees  and  twelve  denaun*  wbkh  »  between  n^penee  haUpenny  mj^ 
flvrnpcnoe: .  Tb  ihew^fh^'ieal  itandmife'ef  tfaia  pm^f  H  iameomiry 
to  state,  that  at  Gaubol  a  Shaiihee  will  bv^  five  poouda  of  wiMntflMiiv 
aiid  m  tfae  coimtly-pcriiBp8-half'4»  mudi  agaok  '  At  Mhcwer,  the 
pride  of  eiieat  floor-  Ws  (eM  to  die  Britidi  Mmiob)  as  low  aa 
a0?eiiiy«aiK  poynda  far.tlie>nipi9e(  ao  that  tfae  condttion  .<if  Ihif  daai. 
of  Incn  moat  be'Tely  aopericrtothaftof  theaikiie  daaa  i&h!idia»  e^fen 
If  the  dsflfyanoe  of  ditiiele  be  allowed  £>r.  .. 

The  ooDdaioh  oT  Ae  TtllHhewiU'be  ftltjr 

the  'Ema&fBKi  and  ddier  tiibea'«lhflna> vUlaiiiage  prevails.  . 

There  arc  two  harvests  in  the  year  in  mOfli  parts  of  AfghaunistaiBb 
Ofie  of  these  is  sown  in  the  end  of  autumn,  and  reaped  in  summ^. 
It  consists  of  wheat»berkty*f  Addus  (£rvum  ]fln8)^«ad  Nnkliod  (eioflr 
Arietiaum),  mth-aoRie  pews  and  bean&  ' 

:  The  other  is  sawn  "m  Ihe  end  of  spring,  and  leiqped  in  autumn.  It 
ecNMists  of  rice,  ArjEunf  (Panicum  Italicum,  or  Millet),  Gall  (Pani- 
emn  Miliacum),  Jowauree  (Holcus  Soi^huin),  Bajreh  (Htrfeua  Sjpia^^t 
tus)>  Indian  corn  and  Maush  $  (Fhaseolus  Mungo). 
..  Tlie  former  han  est,  whidi  is  called  the  BehisiureH  or  spring  hai«^ 
vest,  is  by  far  the  most  important  in  alJ  the  west  of  Atghaunistaun ; 
diat  is,  in  the  countries  went  of  the  Solimaimee  range.  In  the  east, 
the  other  har\  est,  whicli  is  calletl  the  1' uiizeh  |: ,  or  Tcemiauee  har- 
vest, ;  may  perhaps  be  the  most  considerable  on  the  whole }  but  this, 


t  "  *  Tkece  are  called  in  India  Musoor  mid  Chuniuu 
.  t  CtlkA  In  Imiui  C3«d»  and  Cut^inee. 

1  Called  in  India  Mbong.,  .  Tbe  gl«n  odkd  Ooid  in  Indim  k  «bo  indwded  mte 

nils  namc^ 

^  From  the  Feiaian  word  Bdumr,  «  ^Nnqg."    In  InHi^  'a  i«         ^  JUriibfe 

harvest. 

I  Mi  SMMit  ««.4UI«i  dw  ka(  «id  TMfnMb  wrtMn;  this  crap  i«  calkd 
Kkmf  in  India. 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 


.     GRAINS  USED  1  OR  FOOD.  aOt 

}itmBiUUM9}ti^hmp^lmA  mcip6mK  b'fi^oMr,!  Smoorai 
tiM  eamatry  of  tbei^iper  Moiiiimd%  that  «f-  tfae  Ownhlrtmil,  Chucli 
«id  Ltk (an ttmiMMt  the  Indus),  and Mockalwaid  (in  DnABi]ii}i  tfaii 
moit  inqptfrtnt  harvest  is  that  which  14  roiipod  in  samnier  $  and  itf  dl 
those  countries  wheat  is  the  dbief  grain  sown.  In  Peshawer^tlieBku^puii 
mid  Jai^ee  countries,  Damaun  and  Ksaalrhsil,  the  harvests  are  aaarlj 
equal ;  but  in  the  i:est  of  the  eastern  coinitiMB»  that  which  is  reaped 
m  witimro  is  most  important.  In  the  couutiy  of  the  Kharotees,  theid 
is  but  «ne  harvest  in  the  year,  which  b  sown  at  the  end  c£  one 
autumn,  and  reaped  at  the  beginning  of  another  ;  and  this  magT-dk* 
most  be  said  of  Kuttawauz,  and  of  some  high  countries  in  that  neigU-; 
bourhood  ;  but  the  Hazaureh  country,  and  in  general  all  the  coldesli 
parts  of  A%bannistaun.  and  tlie  neighbourmpi;  kingdoms^  SOW  thflis 
Qulv  harvest  m  s]M-iiii.%  and  reap  it  in  the  end  of  niitniYin. 

There  is  another  t-ovi  of  riiltivation,  to  wliiih  great  importance  is 
attached  in  Afghaunistaun,  and  which  is  always  counted  for  a  distinct 
liar\  L«t,  under  the  name  of  paulaiz.  It  comprehends  musk  meloits, 
wattT  melons,  tlic  scL-nted  melon,  willed  dustumbo,  and  varioiis  sort:^ 
of  cucumber!*,  pumpkins,  and  gourds.  It  is  most  abundant  about 
towns.    Its  produce  is  every  where  grown  in  open  fields  like  grain. 

The  i.orta  of  corn,  wliicli  lia\c  been  cnumeraLcd,  are  used  in  xery 
different  proportions,  mid  are  applied  to  various  purposes.  Wheat 
is  the  food  of  the  people  in  the  greatest  part  of  the  countty.  Barley 
is  commonly  given  to  horses  ;  nukhod,  whidiiis  Ased'ftar  that  purpose 
in  India,  being  only  cultivated  in  snudl  quaotitifla  filr'  ailbnn^  pur-f 
poses,  as  is  Jthe  caae  with  moat  of  ifae  otksr  lindf  of  pulim.  -^Aiaoit 
and  gsii  aid  pnaohmed  fir  Jihsail .  Indiaa  coato  is.nsed  fer  Ihtiaamii 
purpose  at  Feshawer  and  the  nci^bouifaood ;  hot,,  in  dss  5iesti'  it  is 
only  plantad  in  gaidens,  snd  -tlie!  heads  aie  nahtedf  and  eaten -now 
and  then  as  a  lunzy.  Bsjieh  tsibnndiisgieatjjttantiticsmDataavn^ 
and  it  is  the  prindpal  grain,  of  the  menntainaua  tEatot-  soulhi  n£  :the 
eonntries  of. the  Hnngwslif  and  Khnttok.  Neltfaar  it'novJawilniBe'ji 
w<di'onUivi|tedhitheweitof  A^hMHdstaun,.  tli9«|^  the  lst*fr^  Ji 
(hfedunf  grain  ef  .BoUiaiinL  Bice  ia:ifydnd:.lD  nmsl  .partd 


Digrtized  by  Google 


4QS  GARDEN  6TUFF&   SUGAB  CANE.  PLANT& 

lyi^'j  I  hat  in  vtry  unequal  ipiantities  and  qualities:  it  is.iiiMt 
abundant  in  Swaut,  and  Ijert.about  Pediawer.  It  is  almost  the  aalfy 
itoA,Q£.  the  people  of  Cashmeer.    Wild  o«U  are  iaaad.  at  Peshawer^ 

wno'wliare  ctdtivated. 

The  garden  fllu£&  of  the  country  are  curatay  tnniqpSi  beet  root, 
lettuce,  oniooif  gvlicy  ftnnel»  9gg  plant,  apinage^  .and  greens  of  all 
lands,  cabbages,  and  cauliflowers :  there  are  also  many  of  the  Indian 
v^etables.  Turnips  are  cultivated  in  great  abundance  in  some  parta 
o£  the  country,  and  are  used  to  feed  the  cattle.  It  is  not  improbable, 
that  the  same  observation  mny  be  true  of  carrots  :  In  the  Punjaub,  at 
least,  horses  are  often  fed  \\  itii  this  vegetable,  which  is  very  whole-! 
some  tor  them.  Giii<^er  ami  turmeric  arc  grown  m  the  eastern  coun-^ 
tries,  particularly  in  Bunnt)o.  The  same  may  be  said  of  sugar  cane, 
but  the  cultivation  of  it  is  c  otifined  to  rich  plains.  Most  of  the  sugar 
in  Aighaunislaun  is  brouglit  trom  India. 

,  Cotton  is,  with  a  few  exceptions,  confined  to  tlie  hot  climates,  and 
moat  of  the  cloth  of  that  material  used  in  the  West,  is  imported  ready 
nooven  from  India. 

.The  Paiina  Chnsti,  or  castor  tii!  jilaiil,  is  roinnion  over  the  whole 
country,  under  the  name  of  liuduujeer.  I  iinaginc  it  iurnishes  most 
of  the  oil  of  the  country,  though  sesanium,  mustard,  and  perhaps  some 
other  oil  plants,  are.yery  abundant  Madder  abounds  over  all  the 
Wait..  It  ia  onlj  faand  in  cold  climates,  and  most  of  India:  ia  aup? 
plied  from  Afghaiuufltmn* ,  It  k  aown  in  annimer,  on  land  ^wMch  hat 
bevi  carefiilly  prepaied  and  manuved.  Its  Icaifwaie  cot  mnally 
fer  die  cattle;  but.  the  loot,  (whidi  fonuahea  the  dye),  knot  tafca. 
up  till  the  third.year.  . 

-  The aaaa teida pbat  ia immd  wUd  in. Hie  hiJla  ip  mmj parta ti 

the  West.  •  It,  leqaiiea  no  attention,  fautthet  whicli  ia  neceataiylbf 

estiaeting-tfae  gmn.   h  la  .a  loir  boafa,  with  long  lesfea,  .winch  are 

fenenUy  eat  off  near  the  bottom  of  the  atenn :  A  niULJ^nidn  fiom 

lihe  part  entj  and  gfaduattjr  hmdena  like  opifem.   Itia  iipoi]ed.fa7flB> 

pbiiin  to  Hw  aun..  .lhe,A%hanna,  therafine^  take  can  tQ;die]ter.|t» . 

II 


Dig'itized  by  Googb 


ARTIFICIAL  GRASSEij.   SYixlEM  Oi  FARMING.  aog 

pikMiiig'iwo-iiifeiitOiies  over  it,  in  sudi*  u  .tMQiier  that  they  suppocft 
olher.    Vast  quantities  of  this  drug  are  exported  to  India,  where 
it  IB  a  £ivoiiiite  ingredient  in  the  cookery  iioth' of  Hindooa  .and  Ma*- 
hommedana.   Tobiooo  is  produced  in  moat'  pests  of  the  country. 

Amdng  the  most  inqpoitant  productions  of  the  husbandij  e£  tbe 
West  are  Lucerne,  and  a  sort  of  trefoil,  called  Shuflut.  Laioerne  is 
teyed  BaBihkay  .in  Persian,  and  Spusta,  in  Pushtoo.  It  is  generally 
town  in  autumn,  and  allowed  to  lie  thrmigbout  the  winter  under  the 
anow ;  ibut,  in  some  places,  it  is  sown  in  spring.  It  takes  three 
months  to  attain  perfection  ;  after  which,  it  may  be  cut  onre  a  fort- 
ciiiht  for  three  monlhs  or  more,  provided  it  be  walcred  alter  each 
cutting.  The  ]>lant  lasts  in  (general  iive  \ears;  but  i  have  heard  ot' 
its  remaiuing  lor  ton  and  eve  n  titteen  yeans.  It  requires  a  great  deal 
of  "manure.  Shuftui  is  oliener  sown  in  spring  than  in  autumn.  It  is 
ready  to  be  cut  in  less  than  two  montl\s,  and  the  operation  may  be 
repeated  once  or  twice.  It  never  lasts  longer  than  tiiree  years,  and  sel- 
dom longer  than  one.  Both  these  gra&.ses  are  given  green  to  the  cattle, 
and  also  storetl  for  liay  :  more  is  consumed  green  than  is  made  into 
hay.  Besides  tiie  natural  grasses  and  the  two  artiticial  ojiei>  just  men- 
tioned, there  are  other  kinds  of  &MMer  in  Afghaunistaun.  Arzuu  and 
gall,  as  well  as  jowauree,  arc  often  sown  tor  the  sake  of  the  straw^ 
which  is  very  nourishing,  and  which,  wlien  dried,  will  last  all  tb^ 
winter.  It  is  also  common  to  cut  down  the  greooi  wliest -  aiid  hukpf 
before  the  ear  is  fimned  fir  hafBee  and  odier  cattlei  end  t]u8  piaofekB 
4a  thou^  to  be  -laot  only  aefe  fast  burfoiel.  It  ia  .often  repesied 
^ieranl  tiineB  with  bedey ;  biit»  if  iqipljed  noie  tiMa  ooDe  lo^-wliarf; 
it  ii  diought  to  injme  ^  cropw  It  .ie  elao  nraal  to  torn  cattle sin^ 
tke  eolnmnFaown  gndii>  to  eet  doim  the  plBiita,HriiiGli  hawe  apmnjg 
vpbefine  winter* 

I1iap?n  noir  ennmerated  aU  the  prodacta  of  hmlMndiy  in  A(yiiiiBi 
iateunrOfiiidchlhMmfennatkiti;  bnty.k'ia^eHtaini  tbal  l-nnilt 
baTe'made'Omiaaionay-'end'it  k-by  no'sieena  improbeUc  tbat'I'ma^ 
hare -^neeikofced  'aome  vesy  eoaDBUU  oljaoU  of.  cultivation.  Ji jafaall 
new-endeavour'  to  eiplain  dm  fyatani'  of  CmtoDigtArfLpyMA.  dwjcaofe 

i 
I 

i 
I 


Digrtized  by  Google 


r 


ive>raifled  }' bob  the  great  importancB  nf  water  to  tmcoess  in  tillage^ 
renders  it  neoeuny  that  I  should  fint'  eq>laiEi  how  thai  is  obtained  - 
-  Tlie  moat  genaral  mode  of  irrigation  is  from  streams ;  the  walet 
of  which  is  sometimes  merely  turned,  npon  the  fields,  but  oftener  is 
cahriedto  them  by  HtUecanala.  It  is  divcnrted  into  thoae;ehBii«eU 
hr^  dams,  which,  in  small  rivuletB,  enws  the  bed^  and  vtuimwpt  sway 
in  the  season  when  the  water  rises.  In  larger  rivers,  a  partial  em* 
bankment  is  made  on  one  side,  whicli  extends' for  a  certain  distance 
into  the  current,  and  whieJi,  tltough  it  does  not  entirelv  interrupt  the 
struani,  yet  forces  a  part  of  it  'mio  the  canal.  From  the  canal,  .smaller 
water  courses  are  drawn  off  to  the  fiolrls,  w  hich  are  bounded  by  little 
bankn  raised  on  purpose  to  retain  tlie  water. 

The  riL'Kt  contrivance  for  obtxdning  water  is  the  sort  of  conduit, 
whu  li  is  called  a  eauraiz  or  cnhreez.  T(  is  kno\m  bv  the  same  name 
in  Persia;  but  is  I  here  inosl  iietjueniiv  called  a  Kaunaut.  it  is  thus 
made  :  The  sjk>i  where  the  water  is  to  issue,  must  always  be  at  the 
foot  of  a  slope  extending  to  a  liill  ;  and  the  ^rouiicl  must  be  examined 
to  ascertain  whether  there  are  sprino^R,  and  in  what  direction  they  lie. 
When  tbe  spot  is  fixed,  a  very  sliallow  well  is  sunk,  and  another  of 
greater  depth  is  made  at  some  distance  up  the  slope^  A  succession 
of  wells  is  made  in  tliis  manner,  and  connected  by  a  subterraneous 
passage  iioui  well  to  well.  The  wells  increase  in  depth  us  the  ground 
ascends  ;  but  are  so  managed,  that  the  passage  which  connects  them 
has  a  declivity  towards  the  plain..  Manjr  springs  are  discovered  during 
this  process,  but  the  workman  stops  them  up,  that  they  maiy  not  in- 
temipt  his  opcntka%  iiiitil  he  iMurfinUie^  the  lait  wdJ,  when  be 
epnate  ipiings ;  aiidihe  iietv  iiiihMtbin^g|hllie*clMimel»c]bea 
Ike  ireUe  to  tfae  height  of  it&eoiiiiai^  and  ia  pgndoqfeftontlisloivHt 
into  •  water  coune^  whidi  oondiiGta  it  over  the  fiaUk-  Wlian  the 
eanais'lii ence completed,  die  nails aie^f -no findicriia^  ame^to 
aOovnaili  Id  deaeeiid  occaakmally  todeat  «itlkn  .fllilnneL.  Ihe 
^iataiire  hefewam  the  wells  vmnm  fiom  tspfjwtdato  ope  hiMld|pd».  U 
i»ilMaUy  afaentfiftjr.  .  Hie  dhnaoaiaw  of  the  abnoel  aiegMMBa^ 
m  MMiliaii 'are  necessary  to  alhnr  *^  irH*  to  wnri^  but  aoaiOjaN 


Digitized  by  Google 


OTH£ft .  MOjmS  OF.  UUUeAnON.  aoig 

moA'htg^'  I  hM  hmtd.  t£  •  Cmarmz  near  Subsewaur  m  Persian 
KhotMUnn*  dnon^  ^irfiidi' s  lioneiiiiii  B^it  ride  with  hu  lance 
cfnr  lua'dMUar.  -Ilia  imudMr  Df/weflt,  and,  dDMquentlj,  th^ 
kngthof  thACbnais,  depend  oil  the  anan^ 
the  chein  U  ^enenUy  cchtiliucd,  dtfaier  tfll  iraier  enough  hae  been 
obtamed,  or  tiDtfae  froUabeoosDe  aodeqiy  aa  toiindOTitinooiiveBieBt 
lo  'paoioaed.  I  hm  heaid  of  iratioiiB  lengths*  &om  two  auka'  to 
Aiitf-mKt  bnt  labeUd  anppoae  the  nanal  length  uto  imder  thekiweit 
ef  ihoae'ineasnna.  t 
\  It  maj  be  anppoaed  that  the  ezpeaae  of  io  lahoriona.  a  Aructnae 
noit  be  giieai,  but  the  rich  are  ftnd  of  laying  oat  Amt  nuMiej  tm 
Aoae  means  of  bringing  waatelaad  into  odtrrttion,  and  it  is  bj  no 
akeinis  untiommpn  for  the  poor  to  asiodate  to'make'K  Caoraiat  and 
to  divide  the  land  whieh  it. iiiigates,  among,  tftvn.  .  !  ' 

Cauraizes  m'  v^  comman  in  aU  the  west  ol^'the  cdttntry*' and 
their  nninbers  are  on  the  increase.  I  know  but  of  one  on  the  eait  of 
die  mgeof  Solimaun,  which  is  at  Tuttore  in  Damaun.  Tliey  ana 
in  use  over  all  Persia,  as  they  have  been  in  Tooricistaiui,  but  the^-ve 
now  neglected  in  the  latter  coontiy.  Bven  their  nanle  is  linknonni 
in  India. 

Tliese  are  the  only  important  modes  of  artificial  irrigation.  Wells 
and  ponds  are  Hcarrelv  used,  except  to  drink  trom,  and  there  are  not 
manv  instanc  t  s  ot  those  reservoirs  so  common  in  the  south  of  India, 
where  a  grt^at  body  of  water  is  collected  by  an  embankment  thrown 
across  a  valley.  A  famous  one  at  Ghuznee  will  liereatler  be  meri- 
tioiied,  and  there  are  some  of  great  magmiudi/  in  the  Paropanaisan 
mountains,  but  they  are  not  general  throughout  the  country. 

At  Peshawer,  and  for  a  ojnsiderable  space  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  Indus,  during  the  whole  of  its  course,  the  Pubinn  wheel  is  used 
for  raising  water ;  in  most  places  from  wells,  but  at  Peshawer  from 
rivers,  on  the  banks  of  which  the  machinery  is  erected. 
' ,  'A  portion  of  the  land  is  iiot  watered  by  artificial  means ;  many 
ipeto  aaiongthehfflB'in  variicw  ports  of  >the  kingdom,  anderen'sbaae 
of  the  richert  pails  of  tfaepiains;  depend  entirtilj  on  the  wmt  iMffi 


Digrtized  by  Google 


806 


PE0CE8S  OF  CULTIVATION. 


fidli  Oil  ^eb  nnfim:  iillicr  pate  m  bo  aitoaled,  fioiii  their 

•  bMio^.'bi'  im  flie'lMUiki  d  »  nm,  tlitt  tUiey  Me  ahi«pi  moiil  okn^ 
lei^  cahmtipiL  Hiata  lind»  we  called  |jiiliB»or  KhobaMBinbeh,  and, 
irididie  cKOCfiliiin.ef  some  tracts  in  tte  eMt^neoonipwakivaelj' 
dnolSves'tibey  aie  probably  inAfwr  to  tbeini|prted  land*  in  OKtenI^ 
aBdaM.aartBUilj  io  Uiimportance. 

•  I  tm  by  no  means  qiiaUfied  to  describe-  tke  kbole  pfoeeia  of  oulti- 
fation  among  the  A^^uns.  I  shall,  howofnr*  give  some  paitioiikn 
respecting  the  culture  of  wheat,  which  is  the  great  grain  of  tha  oomw 
try.  The  land  is  always  watered  before  it  is  ploughed,  in  every 
ntiiation  where  water  can  be  obtained.  It  is  ploughed  deeper  than 
is  usual  ill  India,  aud  with  a  he:n  icr  ]i1otiph,  but  still  one  pair  of  oxen 
»rR  found  quite  sufficient  for  the  labour.  The  drill  plough  whicli  is 
used  in  India,  is  not  known,  and  ail  the  sowing  is  broad-cast.  The 
place  of  a  harrow  is  supplied  by  a  plank,  which  is  dra<j;f,'etl  over  the 
field;  a  man  stands  on  it  to  guide  the  cattle,  and  Increase  the  eiSiedt 
of  the  harrow  by  iiiii  weight.  Alter  thia  operatioii,  some  fanners  give 
another  water,  but  most  leave  it  till  the  grain  has  risen  to  a  consi- 
derable height,  when  tlu-y  turn  in  cattle  to  eal  it  down  ;  after  which 
they  water  it  aijain,  and  some  give  another  water  in  w  inter  j  but  in 
tfiost  parta  ol  tlie  country  it  is  either  covered  b>  the  snow  throughout 
that  season,  or  sufiiciently  moistened  by  the  winter  rain.  The  rains 
in  spring  are  material  to  the  wheat,  but  do  not  aup^sede  the  necea* 
maty  of  iiffigitfam  |  one.walcr  at-Ieaat  nniife  be  gyvm  in  the  couiae  of 
the  aeaA>n  I 'bat  some  water  tbfeetinMB«nioniii  till  the  oorabijg^ 
to  npmi^  U  may  be  mmacked  in  patan^  that  the  apring-soMm  bar* 
vest  feqidfes  nrndi'mote  wetar'tlian  th«t  of  ^rfncb  I  nn-niyv  jftpelring, 
Xne  cnp  is  reaped  with  the  licUek*  which  indeed  is  jthe  oiily  inthru- 
UMnt'Uied  ler^cntting  down  grass,  end  all  kinds  of  gram. .  .Ibe  nse 
of  Iche  iUl  is  iinlmowh  lor  separating  the  giain  fiom  the  atimr }  it  it 
Hther  troddetf  out  by  oxen,  or  ioioed  oiit.hf  e  fnine  of  wood  fiOed 
with  brancbest  oh  which  e  men  aits^  end  ia  dunged  ofer  the  elimv  by 
csAtie.  Hut  seoBS  to  be  6ic  wsy  in  ftnia  ebo.  It  n  winaowodf 
by  beiiq;  thrown  tqE»  to  die  wind  with  nleigBdM^  l¥)MBcle««l» 


Digrtized  by  Googl 


WATXE*MILLa  gfg 

(ftegrfcok  fauMHiBiUy  kept  m  large  Mokd  hMOpek  (like  gabions), 
UphlA  ao  mipgrted  ty  woodBii  ftBt»  idA  ^IwtBwd  wMi  nmcL  it  ii 
aisd  bepi  iB  wilmifcMiiliaiTCwoii^  mad  »  cpi— bdiwdeA  iwyu 
Tin  BoowmieaB  oABb  haipiH  id  iNrna ;  'Sd  i*  ikmaM  it  it  ■torad 
ift 'large  gmwrieb  • 

It  Ugmnid  Into  wSXik,  ^wntSNtuSk,  or  lundUuSk. 

Ik  wiAd^Bin  i»  aot  geiMnllj  vMd,  «ko0pc  fai  lihe  wwtt  wtoe  * 
■taadjr  wind  ein  be  relied  on  BattaatmaiikM  iii'tli»  ymttAl&mL. 
Hie  rnnur  of  old  winlbmak  am  te  hm  mm  m  -6x  east  as  CkaM  m4 

• 

niiiMniMj  l^it  they  are  certainly  not  coniam  m  those  countriea  ti 
ftmeekt  one  niinad  windrmill  ia  m  eiistence  even  en  the  borders  ai 
DamaoBf  where  the  use  of  such  a  machuie  is  no«r  never  thou^t  e£' 
Nothing  on  be  ima^^dmore  di£^ent  from  our  wind-mill  than  th* 
mxti  in  question ;  I  have  examined  a  model  of  one,  but  have  not  « 
sufficiently  distinct  recollection  of  it  to  enable  me  to  deMH&eitfiiUjr* 
The  sails  nre  enclosed  within  the  building,  in  which  theie  is  an  open* 
ing  to  admit  the  wind.  They  are  square  or  oblong  in  shape,  are 
placed  upright,  and  move  oa  a  vertical  axis:  When  in  motion,  each 
in  succession  is  brought  to  the  openinfj  so  as  to  receive  tlic  wind, 
which  presses  against  eacli,  as  the  water  iloes  against  the  doat^board 
of  a  water-mill.  The  mill-stone  is  immediately  below  the  saiia*. 
which  move  it  without  the  intervention  of  machinerv. 

The  water-mills  are  also  exceedingly  different  trom  any  that  I  havo 
,  seen,  tliough  1  understand  a  similar  kmd  is  used  in  the  Shetland  isles. 
The  wheel  is  horizontal,  and  the  feathers  are  disposed  obliquely,  so 
a.s  Lo  resemble  the  wheel  of  a  smokc-jack.  It  is  witliin  the  mill,  and 
immediately  below  the  mill-stone,  whicli  turns  on  the  same  spindle 
with  the  wheel.  The  water  is  introduced  into  the  mill  by  a  trough, 
jM>  fli  to  fiU  en  the  wlieeL  lliewheelitfldf  ianetaifl  leobDect  right, 
moie  than  four  feet  in  diameter.  Thia  aoft  of  mill  b  ttsed  all  over 
A%|^uHUUitaun»  Penia»  and  Toofklataun.  It  ia  ako  uaed  in  the 
noriih  c£  lodiaf  nnder  the  Sifeeniiggqr  hi]la>  lmt»  in  genflnl»'  no 
wHer-miUa  are  known  in  lindia*  wheie  all  grain  is  groond  wilih  the 
hnid. 

EES 


Digrtized  by  Google 


/  llM.liaoir]iun  ii:iited  I17  die^pHt  of  jKspditMp  ^  liro  III 
tcoCB,  and  alio  .in.  the  rudest  part* 'of  liwooiiiitfy;  tt  is  Bbt^ljtini 
flit>ibiiiid  fkbneB,  the  uppenmoat  of  wlaA  nato  on  a  pirot  foM  m 
dwiowaa^'  and  ia.tiiiii«d  bjr  arnkko  pagt  irfuoh  iaftataned  mit 
Ibr  a  handle.  Excqpt  where  haiul^uUa  are  iiaed,  a  miliar  haa  a 
tmet  tnde^  and-ia  paid  bj  a  ahm  of  the  oocn  whk^ 
;  I  .can  ^7  little  about  tbe  aneoeaaian  of  aa|M'ai£pted  h^liie 
hnabandman  of  A^fmipaitHmm^  '•  it  seems  to  be  only  in  the  very 
poorest  .parts'of  the  .oonntiy- that  land  is  allowed  to  Ue  '  fiiUoir  ftr  a 
year.  It  ia  more  frequent  to  cultivate  the  autumn  harveit  one  year, 
and  the  spriiig  one  the  next»-  but  in  Home  plabaa  where  manure  is  ia 
pleutgTt  both  are  niied  in  one  year.  Tlx-  man  tire  used  is  composed 
ef  dm^  and  straw  collected  in  dunghills,  of  ashes,  the  mud  of  old 
walls,  and  various  other  substanoea.  Hie  dung  of  camels  is  carefully 
aroided, .  from  a  notion  that  it  iinpr^gnateB  the  land  with  saltpetia 
Lima  and  maEle  seem  both  to  be  unknown.' 

-  Horses  are'  employed  to  drew  the  plough  in  Tooridstaun,  and  in 
the  Eimauk  country,  but  in  no  other  part  of  A^unmistaun,  nor  in 
Persia  nor  in  India.  That  task  is  generally  perform^  by  oxen,  but  in 
Shoraubuk  and  in  Seweestaun,  it  is  done  by  camels  (which  animal  is 
also  used  in  the  kingdom  of  Cokaun  or  Terghauna,  and  in  the  Indian 
Desart),  and  asses  are  employed  in  gome  parts  of  Af^dinnni«?taun. 
Grain,  manure,  Sic.  are  generally  carried  about  the  farm  by  asses  or 
bullocks,  and  sometimes  by  camels;  cartsy  as  has  been  oHuetvedf  do 
not  t  exist  in  the  country.  !•«  ,.<:' 


Digitized  by  Gopgl 


(   309  ] 

#  1 


CHAP.  XIL 

TAUJJKSi  MINDKEES,  AND  OTHER  INHABITANTS  OF  AFGUAUXISTAUN. 

IT  hae  been  obienred,  that  there  is  scarcely  any  piirt  of  Afghaun- 
^istann  in'ipliieh  the  whole  population  is  Afghaun,  and  that  the 
mixture  is  con^poaed  of  Taujika  in  the  West,  and  of  Hindkees  in  the 
East.  I  now  proceed  to  give  an  account  of  those  classes,  and  of  the 
other  tribes  and  nations  that  are  to  be  met  with  in  A^haunistaun.  * 
■  The  situation  in  which  we  find  the  Taiijiks  is  calculated  to  excite 
a  degree  of  curiosity,  whicli  my  information  is  ill  calculatetl  to  rpmovf. 
The  Tftujiks  are  not  utiiled  into  one  body,  liko  mostt  other  nations,  or 
confined  to  one  country,  but  are  sratlcrcd  uruoniiect cd  throng;h  a 
great  part  of  Afii a,  Tlu  v  ar(>  mixotl  witli  the  Uzbeks  tlirough  the 
greator  part  ot  their  dominions,  in  the  same  manner  as  with  the  Ai- 
ghauns.  The  fixed  inhabitants  of  Peroia  are  called  Taujiks,  in  con- 
tradistinction to  their  Tartar  invaders  ;  and  abo  to  the  moving  tribes, 
who  8eem  to  have  been  orignialiy  Persian.  They  are  found  even  in 
Chinese  Toorkistaun  ;  and  they  possess  independent  governments,  in 
the  mouiitanioub  countries  6f  Kurrategeen,  Durwauz,  Wukkeekha, 
and  Budukhshaun.  Except  in  those  strong  countries,  and  in  a  few 
sequestered  placeti,  which  will  be  mentioned  hereafter,  they  are  never 


*  *  Bniber  «iiiiiiMi«t«i  the  tribei  wludi  inhalMfed  GMriia]  in  Ui  day.   In  tke  pbui 

were  Toorks,  Eimauks,  aiid  Arabs.  In  the  towns,  and  in  some  villages,  Taujiks,  Pua- 
hauecs,  and  Fnraunchchs.  In  the  hills  were  Hazaurehs,  Togderrees,  A%haunB,  and 
Caufers.  The  hmgaages,  sjx>ken  among  these  tribes,  were  Arabic,  Peraiaii,  Toorkec^ 
Moilj^iooIlM^  IBndM^  Aj^haiuicf^  FtathMieeii  PlinmudMi^  Chdnree,  Bnmiluc^  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


310  TATOnra^ 

found  foimed  into  separate  societies,  but  mixed  with  the  ruling  i 
of  the  country  they  inhabit;  and,  generally  wearing  the  dress,  and 
practising  moat  of  the  customs  of  that  nation.    In  Fenia*  the  plains 

of  Afghaunistaim,  and  the  Uzbek  country,  they  appear  to  have  been 
settled  before  the-  ariivaL  of  the  nationa  which  aze  now  predominant 
in  those  countries. 

The  name  of  Taujik  Is  railier  loosely  used.  It  is  sometimes  ap- 
plied to  all  perstins  niixeil  witii  the  Toorks  or  Afghauns,  who  are  not 
sprung  from  those  stocks,  or  rather  whose  race  is  unknown  ;  hut  it  is 
with  more  pro|)riftv  coiihjied  to  those  iiilKiliilaiil  s  of'ccmntries  where 
Toorkhee  and  Pushtoo  are  hpuken,  wliose  vernacular  language  is  Per- 
sian. Tlie  names  ot  'i  aiijik  and  Puisccwaun  are  indeed  used  indts^ 
criminately  both  in  Atgiiaunistaun  and  Toorkistaun.  * 

Various  accounts  of  the  word  Taujik  have  been  given  ;  but  the  best 
seems  to  be  that  which  derives  it  from  Tausik  or  Taujik,  the  name 
applied  to  the  Arabi*  m  ail  Pelilevee  writings.  This  agrees  with  tlie 
interpretation  given  in  many  Persian  dictionaries,  which  state  Taujik 
to  mean  a  dejicendant  of  Arabs,  born  in  Persia,  or  any  other  foreign 
country  f.  This  ttcoount  is  consistent  with  the  conjectnres  one  would 
be  led  to,  regarding  die  T«gikt»  fiom  a  odntidelatkm  df  their  present 
rt«te»«iidoftlieluafeoi7ofthecomitrieftwllerethc()rclUefl7d^  -hk 
th^  ixmne  of  the  fint  century,  after  tlie  flig^  o£  Mdienunedi  Beam 
Meooiy  theivliole  of  Pcnia  and  the  Uabek  coontry  Invaded  and 
vedueed  bgr  the  Ai«b%  who  compelled  tiie  inbabitaiits  to  i^dopt  tkeir 


•  Tlie  Afghauns  also  call  the  Taujiks  Degg«'ins  or  Dchkauns,  and  the  IV.beducall 
tiuau  8erds  or  Serfs ;  but  these  names  are  oonudercd  as  r^unoachfiiL  Our  Lravdiert  «aD 
tliOM  bk  Tooridftami,  OwUumn^ 

f  See  the  Persian  dictionary,  called  die  Barhaun  Kataa,  in  verbo  Taujik ;  and  that 
called  Farhang  i  Ihrahim  Shahi,  quot*^  liv  Doctor  Lcj'den,  in  his  account  of  the  Roas- 
hcma  Sect  (Aitiatic  iUaearchei*.)  I  am  aware  tiiat  other  books  give  coutradictoiy  expia* 
natiana  of  Aw  word  t  bat  nme  mmu  eatided  to  equal  cradit  nidi  tlie  one  I  have  adopted, 
supported  as  it  ia  by  the  Pehlevee  word  above  mentioned,  which  means  an  Arab,  and  by* 
the  Persian  word  Taozee,  which  has  tlic  same  meaning.  My  authori^  for  the  Pehiov(>^ 
word  is  MooUa  Ferooz,  a  Guebre  priest,  well  known  in  the  west  of  India,  for  his  iuldiu. 


Digitized  by  Googl 


-  I 


9k   '  -  Digitized  by  Google 


I 


:   • »  •  \ 


It  . 

.  ..  .  ■  '  »  '  f 

K  o»*  T.. "        '  •• 

V .  •   f • ' nijinrK-^t.  which  slato  Tati'riK 
•'  '  I  lAtHf  ot  any  i-\\v*r  [.',  '>'. 

ft* 

-  wilt  f  ♦uov  cliio^FV  »lwt  Tii 

•  ♦ 

'    '•  \  -o.*  .*» »  t^cii.  in  ••-;»  *  Jy\ 
>  t\  ^yuiA  the  hibabitantii  to  ailo|)t  Vijr 


■t  t;  1-^  :i         .ic  0(MiM':i      •$  reproodiful.    Ot;r  t}AVf:.m 

.•J:.-*-'-         .1   .,.11        Jt.v.        -rfl  (••■'  .    .  - 

ted  to  Lima!  cmMt  u  «  tine  I  tiii%t  >  I  '>)'4t<, 
Ini\«  ot- :\t:ou.tJ,  whkh  -.ficuia  tin  Arj/i. ,  sy 
.  .T  •    ':»»n.»  H'ti'-., ■«;•♦■/•'•  •   •  .!••■♦ 

•   >  f.**.'!*!!  tit  »L.?  »;c*t  "t  '   *'    fo?  Y\*  iO«  • 


«      •  ■ 


'    Digitized  by  Gopgl 


Digitized  by  Google 


TAxaaa: 


Sli 


religion,  and  along  wit  li  it  a  portion  oi  their  manners  and  language. 
Aighaimistauii  was  attacked  at  the  same  time ;  but  the  success  of  the 
invaders  is  known  to  have  been  less  complete.  They  succeeded  in 
conquering  the  plains ;  but  the  mountains  held  out,  and  repelled  the 
approaches  <^  Mahommedanism  for  near  three  centuries.  Tlie  three 
Gountriefl  under  diecuasioii  formed  parts  of  the  Persian  empire,  and 
a«  koguagea  ui  libe  trfuhitMitg  were  probably  all  derived  from  the 
ndent  Poimii  itock.'  When-  ihoie'  inbiiliitaute'ireBe ■  subdued  and 
oonverted  by  the  Arabs,  tfaej  formed  the  modeni  Fenian,  by  a  idix- 
ture  of  their 'former  language  .with  thet  of  their  ead^'it 
is  piobeble,  tiiat  is  time:^  tmro.  netioiis  were  .blooded  into  obib^ 
who  were  the  enoMtOBB  of  Ifie  present  Tetgiks.  Ttut  focts  which'  tfe 
leoocdedof  A%biunisleunt  suit  well  with  thi^  supposition ; 'for  in.  th» 
next  etoomitB  which  we  heve  of  thet  ooontiyiiAer  the' Arab  hmi^ioar' 
we  find  the  Taijiks  m  posscisbn  of  the  pbins,  and  the -A%hinuii»' 
(whom  we  haffe  every  reason  to  eqntider  ae  the  Aboa^piies),  m  Ihe 
mountahis.  Tlie  A%hamiB  hare  sin^'desbended  and  eon«]nefed  ihe 
plains*  and- hffife  redoced  the  Taigika  into  E  state  of  cntiie  ^^ependi^ 
ancy,  except  in  one  or  two  strong  ooontries,  where  Uiese  hufe  wpe 
fwshlad  to  maint.atn  a  certain  degree  of  independence.  The  same 
miztoae  of  Persauia  and  Arabs  fonned'  the  Taujiks  of  Toorkistaun; 
who  retained  possession  of  that  oountry  till  the  invasion  of  the  Tar-^ 
tatS)  when  thoiw  of  the  plains  were  mnquered  and  reduced  to  their 
present  state  of  vassalage  while  the  T^ika  in  the  hills  maintahied 
their  mdependeooe,-  and  fonned  the  aeparate  states  .of  Budukshamir 
Derwauz,&c 

The  Taujiks  are  every  where  remarkable  for  their  use  of  fixed  habi*- 
tations,  and  their  disposition  to  agriculture,  and  other  settled  employ- 
ments. Thev  still  retain  some  share  of  the  land  in  the  west  of 
Afghaunistaun,  of  which  tliey  appear  once  to  have  been  wle  pro- 
pri(^for<i  ;  hut  the  most  of  them  have  lost  theii  jirojierty,  iO^d.liveaa 
tenants  ur  scrvajits  in  luisbandry  under  A%liaun  masters. 

Tlieir  property  is  stiii  iial)k'  to  be  encroached  on  by  the  powerful 
men  of  the  tribe  in  the  lands  ol  which  they  live,  though  their  danger 


31S  TAUJUMl 

ill  diit  ffelpNMft  h  dhniniAqd  the  p^aleiii«iiof  tlift-Gofiaiiiiiatt, 
and'tli^  are  nerer  exposed  to  Uie  more  iiitolefab]e.en]e  of  pcnonal 

inuiiilt  or  oppreflrida*  '  t   f   • 

"  The  Taujiks»  who'  inlAbit  the.  landeof  A^^iaimtzibei^  .either  live  as 
Hnmsejraiu  to ithoee.  tribe*,  or  in  separate.  viUageB. of.  their  owik 
Their  sStuation  in  theibrmer  cue  bee  been  fiiUy  eitplftined. . 
'  In  the  other  liase^  the  afii^ 

hooddt  eftected  the  peoplerwith  some  regpurd.  to  a  hereditary  ttnc^ 
and  •ul:ijeet,to  the  Khig^fl  appravaL'  > 
^'i  The  Cudkfaooda  haa  no  power*  bnt  what  he  derives  fioin  the.Kiiig^ 
and  that  whidi  he-pataenet  ia  diiefly  ooimaeted  witlithe  eriflecfcioii  of 
the  vevenue  and  the  calUiig  out  of  the  militia.  He  haa  >wei^  cnoa|^ 
to  detenftine  trifling  disputea}  but  all  of  impoftanoe  are  referred  to 
the 'governor  of  the  province  or  to  theneaieat  .Cansy..  Hie  Tai^jaki 
are  all  peaceable  and  obedient  to  the  government  .  Beddea  the  em» 
ploymieni  of  agriOulture,  they  occupy  thoae  manu&otores  and  trades 
which  aie  renounced  by  the  A^g^iauns.  '  Thi^  are  a  mild,,  sober,  iiip' 
dustrious  people.  They  have  assimilated,  in  most  respects,  to  the 
A%haun8 ;  but  they  have  more  of  the  ^K)d.  qualities  of  that  nation 
than  of  Its  defects.  Tlicy  are  of  an  unniilitar}'  turn,  though  their  cha- 
racter tif;  soldiers  has  risen  of  .late>  and  is  still  riung»  The^  are.  all 
zealom  Soonnees. 

■  As  their  situation  iucapHc  itates  them  both  from  flight  and  resist- 
ance, they  are  the  first  on  whom  oppression  foils;  and,  consequently, 
they  are  ill  satisfied  with  the  present  state  of  the  kinj^dom,  and  com- 
plain much  of  the  distractions  in  the  government ;  l)iit,  when  tlie  coun- 
try is  settled,  they  are  \vt  11  proU  tted,  and,  on  the  whole,  they  are 
pari  ial  to  the  Doorauiiee  monarchy.  They  are  on  very  good  terms 
with  the  Atghauns,  who,  though  they  regard  tliem  as  inferiors,  do  not 
treat  them  with  arrogance  or  contempt,  but  intermarry  with  them, 
and  associate  with  them  on  equal  terms.  -  - 

They  pay  more  revenue  than  the  Afghauns,  and  they  contribute  in 
a  respectable  proportion  both  to  the  army  and  the  nulitii^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


COHISTAUN££& 


818 


Hie  Taigiki  are  most  numvoiii  iboHt  totak  TSm^  eoukpoab  Htm 
principal  part  of  the  popubituai  rtand  CndMl*  Cam3ltibm  Gknmtat 

Herant,  and  Buikh  ;  while,  in  wild  parts  of  the  country,  as  in  that  of 
the  Hasaurehs,  and  those  of  the  •ontheni  Ghiyiesand  Cmken,  limn 
b  scarcely  a  Taujik  to  be  fiNtnd. 

I  haye  hitfaorto  been  speaking  of  those  intemixed  with  the  Af- 
f^mam.  Those  who  live  in  diadnct  eocietiea  are  all  in  retired  and 
luaiUBiiiblu  parte  of  the  country ;  and  they  differ  from  the  test  in 
many  other  particulars.  The  first  of  those,  which  I  am  to  mention^ 
is  the  dass  who  are  called  Cohistaunees,  and  who  inhabit  the  Cohi- 
staun  of  Caubul.  This  country  is  surmounted  on  the  north  and  east 
bv  the  snowy  ridges  of  Hindoo  Coosh,  and  its  sourhcm  projection. 
On  t ho  west,  it  comprehends  part  of  the  Paropainisim  rairii^e,  and  la 
bounded  l)v  the  country  of  the  Hazaurehs :  on  the  south,  it  yinks  into 
the  Cohdautriiin,  already  described.  The  Coiiistaun  in  composed  of 
three  long  valleys,  Nijrow,  Pimjsheer,  and  Ghorebund,  into  which 
open  innumerable  narrow  and  rocky  jjlens,  whence  many  little  streams 
issue,  and  uniting  in  the  principal  valiies,  Ibnn  the  rivers  that  bear 
their  names.  These  streams  are  crossed  bv  wooden  bridges ;  and 
their  banks  arc  naturally  the  be.st  cultivated  puiL  of  the  country.  They 
bear  but  a  tiaiail  proportion  to  the  mountains,  which  are  high,  steep* 
and  covered  with  firs.  The  cultivated  parts  yield  wheat,  and  some 
other  gruns  ;  and,  what  is  surprising  in  so  elevated  and  cold  a  n^on, 
they  produce  tobacco*  and  even  ootton.  But  the  groat  sobsiftBiio*  of 
the  people  ia  dmi^  fiom  tfaar.rametoot  and  fliteiutvie  pkntetions 
of  innlbeny  Izeea.  TliofiiittofdiiBtmiBdriodiDllio'siiBtaifed'tfaeii 
grduiid  into  fldnrt  of  wbidi  faead  k  niade.  If  we  judge  ittfm  the 
appeaianoe  of  tlie  Gobutannees*  Uie  food  ii  wboleioiiie^  and,  by  a 
eakiiieftioo  of  Mr.  Imne's,  ii  can  support  a  &r  greater  ntimber  of 
people  in  a  given  space  liiaD  'ooiild  be  mamtwiied  by  tiUi^  *  Thaaijtk 
llie  population  be  a  good  deal  scattered,  it  ia  ooDaidera|>lek  and  its 
■undien  aiegenenUj  stated  to  amoimt  to  4(MXX>fiun3iefer  One  pert 
eftheCohistaiiD'ia  tobeeBEcqptedfiN»iliiiadeacf%^  Ebalittle 

s  s 


Digitized  by  Google 


314  COHISTAUNEES. 

pitch  of  tlniMt.  called  Reg  Rowaun,  or  moving  sand,  iriudi  is  the 
acme  of  some  romantic  talei  alluded  to  by-  Aboolf-uzl. 
The  Cohiataim  does  not  contain  many  cattle..  The  wild  animali  . 

must  be  numerous.  The  lioo  b  taid  to  be  among  theip,  and  the  wolf 
and  leopard  certainly  are  common.  Many  falcons  are  ^fixmd  in  the 
Cohistaiin,  which  is  said  also  to  abound  in  nightingales. 

Tlif  strength  of  this  country,  gives  to  its  inhabitants  a  character 
very  different  from  that  of  the  Taujiks,  whom  I  have  already  describ-. 
ed.  Tliey  are  almost  independent  ot  tin  King,  and  kept  in  imperfect 
subjection  by  their  own  chiefs,  lu  their  personal  character,  they  are 
bold,  violent,  and  imruly  ;  and  so  much  givtMi  to  war,  that  they  reckon 
it  a  disgrace  for  a  man  to  die  in  his  betl.  They  are  excellent  inikutry, 
particularly  auiung  lulls  j  but  their  courage  is  generally  wasted  in 
internal  dissensions.  They  have  seldom  disputes  between  tribes  or 
villages,  but  many  quaireb  4Uid  assassinations  among  individuals. 
Diainitea  between  villages,  when  Ihej^  do  h^pen,  are  more  .aeriom  in 
^bebt  oonaeqisoiceB  than  daewfaere»  ainceit  is  almoiC.aa  eaaf  to  ftil  a 
phntatkm  of  mnibeny.treea  ai  to  reap  afield  of  com*  and  the  '^nmy 
la  fiurmotfedlflknilC  to  repair. 

Thearms  of  the  Gohirtauneea  are  generally  a  caifouwb  with  afim? 
lock*  ft,p^6l»  and  a  aho^  sharp  dagger.  Some  have  abort  pilees,  and 
a  few  bows  and  shielda.  >  •-  .  ':  .  ' 

Jhehr.  dress  is  a  .dose  jad[0t,  and  trowseis  of  coanoiblack  woolkn 
elotbt  apau<^'sfaortha](lioots»  and  a  smsilL  silken  eapw  ■ 

They  are  all  Soonnees,  and  beas  more  than  ordhuucy  hatred  to  the 
Fmans  and  .to  all  other  Sheeahs. 

Th^'are  under  different  Khauns,  of  whom  the  prindqpal  is  Khaujeh 
IQianjee  ;  and  these  chiefs,  though  they  rmnt*.  oontrottl  thdc  do-, 
mestic  feuds,  are  able  to  direct  their  foreign  operalionsv  partioolarly 
when  assisted  by  any  religious  prejudice.  The  chie&  Jceep.up  some 
little  military  establishment  of  their  own  ;  but  every  man  hi  the  coun- 
try is  n  s()1dier.  Th(  v  pny  some  revenue,  and  furnish  some  troops  to 
the  King  j  but,  in  genejrai,  it  requires  great  conciliation  and  manage^ 

fl 


Digrtized  by  Google 


BUB£UK££&  FOOBMOOLEE&  315 

BiBBt  to  obtein  $ioy  thu^  fioni  tliBiHi*  Thejf  hcvo^  Immvww*  been 
ktoly  sUBdned.  J^'  old  eDmtyU>  Sbnih  Maldiiood  led-lluni-to 
oAr  a  nioifrdelcniiiiiedoppocttMn  tol^  tlie^^tei'siip- 
ported  his  brother  Frinoe  AHmwi  and  aftenranb  oontiniwd  the-ooo- 
teit  under'a  ^isepmphet,  who'started  up  to  head  them.  'The  irav 
WW  \otagt  al»tinate,  an  d  o  ft  >  1 1  u  n  fa voiinUe  to  the  King's  troops,  but 
the  eaagy  of  the  Vizier  Fatteb  Khaun  pieraiied  in  the  endU  and 
diejr  are  now  submissive.  *  ' 

ITie  next  class  of  Taujiks  are  the  Bumikees,  who  inhabit  Logur 
and  part  of  fioot-Khauk.  Xhou(^  mixed  with  the  Ghiljees,  they 
differ  from  the  other  Taiijiks,  in  as  much  as  they  form  a  tribe  under 
chiefs-  of  their  own,  and  have  a  high  reputation  as  soldiers.  Tliev 
have  separate  lands  and  castles  of  their  own,  fttrnish  a  good  many 
troops  to  government,  closely  resemble  tlic  Afghauns  in  their  man- 
ners, and  are  more  respected  than  anv  other  Taiyiks.  Their  numbers 
are  now  about  eight  thousand  families. 

All  traditions  agree  that  they  were  introduced  into  their  present 
seats  by  Sooliaun  Malauuod  about  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh 
century,  and  that  their  lands  were  once  extensive  ;  but  their  origin 
is  uncertain ;  they  pretend  to  be  sprung  from  the  Arabs,  but  oth^ 
say  they  are  descended  firom 'the  Kuids  or  CoardB, 

Tlie  Foonnoolee6»  or  Femlooleei)  are  a  diViBum  of  Taiyiks,  about 
equal  in  numbers  to  the  Bumikees.  The  bulk  of  them  inhabit  Ooiv 
l^oon  in  dke  midst  of  the  Khatotee  countiyy  and  carry  on  a  bittef 
and  onoeaabig  war  widi  that  tribe:  the  rest  Uve  to  die  ira4t*of 
CanbuL  Ihey  are  diiefly  onployed  in  trade  and  huriiandry,  but 
furnish  some  soldiers  to  the  Kin^  to  whom  they  also  pay  revenue,  f 


•  I  have  heard  of  a  people  calleil  Piishyc,  or  Pnshaucc,  xniong  the  Cohistaunec<5, 
And  I  n^reC  Uwt  1  did  not  investigate  their  hijttory,  &a  I  have  since  foiuid  them 
waldantd  hf  Bnibsr,  as  q)eaking  a  peeoliar  language. 

1 1  am  greatly  |XT]ilesed  with  thtnr  oHgin,  dioagli  the  Mynrcc  to  which  tin-  refer  it, 
in  not  one  that  iiiiL'lit  l>e  wrpwtcd  to  hr  obscure.  Tliey  are  said  to  be  de;>(eiuie<l  from 
the  JUuiUv|}ea,  who  ore  well  known  to  have  given  a  dynasty  of  kings  to  iadisj  but 

8  S  2 


Diglized  by  Qoogle 


$16 


SIBDEHEES.  HINDKEES. 


The  GSadAeea  are  a  small  tribe  wbo  lire  at  Siidflh  ionth-eagt  of 
Ghiumee.  The  inhabiitaiits  of  Seestaun  may  all  be  counted  Taiyik^ 
and  that  cla«  u  in  tlicr  north  of  the  Belodie  ^oonnbrjf^  bat 

those  divioooa  need  not  be  mentioned  here.  They  are,  however, 
mduded  in  an  estimatie  formerly  made  of  the  numbers  of  the  Taujiks 
in  the  King  of  Canbul's  dominioiis,  which  were  conjectured  to  be 
1^00,000. 

Tlie  Hindkees,  though  much  more  numerous  than  the  Taujiks, 
require  Je^-s  rm  juion,  as  they  are  all  of  Indian  descent,  and  retain  the 
well  known  ;i|ipearance  and  manners  of  their  original  country ;  to- 

ther  with  a  mixture  of  those  which  have  been  attributed  to  the 
Eaatem  Afghaims*.  Thev  are  Avorse  treated  than  the  Taujiks,  and 
by  no  means  bear  so  respectable  a  character.  The  provinces  on  the 
eastern  bajik  of  the  Indus,  arc  generally  peopled  by  a  class  of  Hind- 
kees  called  Juts,  w  lio  also  coiiiposethe  Mussulman  prasaniry  of  the 
Punjaub,  form  the  principal  population  of  Sind,  and  are  found  mixed 
with  Beloches  ^cnighout  all  the  south-west  of  B^ochestan,  and  in 
Mnkelwiiiid.  In  BeiocheBlan  diey  ara  called  Jagdalla>  ■»  wdl  as  Juts, 
ind  the  tribe  of  tbeni  wllkli  inhabit*  lioa,  ii  called  by  the  names  of 
Jokhna  and^oomiee.  The  great  extent  througli  which  the  Juts  are 
acatteied,  excites  the  lame  ctmoaiiiy  with  the  atoi^  of  the  IWijiks, 
whoae  situation  la  veiy  similar  to-that  of  the  Jii|s.  ^ 

Another  dass  of  Hindkees  called  Awiunsy  live  on  llie  banks  of  the 
Indus,  about  Odla-bau^  and  the  a^oining  parts  of  the  Pkinjaiib. 

The  Pttraunchehs,  another  dass  of  Hindkees,  seeni  to  have  been 


regarding  whom  every  thing  else  is  uncertain.  Fcrishta  asserts  them  to  Ix-  a  tribe  of 
A%haiin8 ;  and  1  have  heard  from  other  sources,  tliat  they  are  the  inhabitants  ot'  a 
dty  called  KhaUiidi,  or  Khiillvg,  iHiidi  come  place  on  tlie  Oxni^  ud  oAeca  to  die 

north-west  of  Candahar,  while  otliers  deny  the  cxistcnct-  of  thi«  city  altogediai^  and 

■ay  that  the  Khullujees  nre  a  religious  sect,  not  iKxuliar  to  any  nation. 

•  Plate  (V.)  shews  the  appearance  ot  a  Uindkcc  ul'  Peshawer  in  hia  winter  dress, 
howner,  happens  to  ifpraadi  man  nearly  to  that  of  the  west,  than  is  ^te 
lAwnuitenatw  fot  a  IfindkiMt 


Digrtized  by  Google 


Digrtized  by  Google 


HlNDOOa 


81? 


.  eonndtnd  at  a  Mpnate  people  in  Btebei^s  tima :  tlMjjr  an  mm  otfy 
nmaikable  ht  bcnig  gnat  OBiian,  and  oondndcns  of  caisfaiia. 

T!he;flinilVofii  are  nmneraitt  found  Fealiamr  and  m  Btj/aatf  and 
■omedassesof  tfaam  are  fbandm  the  rmititrj  of  thnPiniinftyftj  mdiH^hra- 
tribes  in  the  nortb-eart  af  the  Afghaun  country.  Their  hmguaga  ia 
a  kind  of  Hindostaimee,  resembling  the  dialect  of  the  Punjaub. 

Hie  Hindoos  ou^it^  perhaps,  to  be  enumerated  with  this  class. 
They  are  .to  be  found  over  the  whole  kingdom  of  .Caubul*.  In 
towns  they  are  in  considerable  numbers  as  broken,  mexchanta*  ban- 
kers, goldsmiths,  sellers  of  grain,  &c.  There  is  scarce  a  vUlage  in 
the  country  without  a  family  or  two.  who  exercise  the  above  trades, 
and  act  a*?  accountants,  monev  t haii<j;ers,  &c.  They  spread  into  the 
north  of  Persia,  but  in  small  nuniiu  is.  owing  to  the  bad  treatment 
tlicy  receive.  They  are  encouraged  iu  Bokhaura,  uid  other  towns  ia 
Tartary. 

They  are  all,  or  almost  all,  of  the  military  class  of  Koiietrce,  but 
it  must  not  be  supposed  that  they  are,  therefore,  soldiers  ;  on  the 
conliary,  the  idea  of  a  Hindoo  soldier  would  be  thought  ludicrous  in 
Caubul.  They  retain  tlie  Hiiidoo  leatures,  and  some  of  thein  liave 
nearly  the  Hindostaunee  dress ;  but  most  allow  their  beards  to  grow, 
and  wear  a  dress  n^ly  r^embling  that  of  the  oo«intiy«  -  They  have 
got  rid  of  manj  of  their  ffindoo  prejudices,  so  Hut  they  do  not 
scruple  to  eat  bread  baked  at  a  oonunon  oven  s  still  leea  do  tfaej 
attend  to  therule^  which  enjoins  bathing  after  bemg  poUoted  hy 
the  touch  of  a  Mnaswlman,  an  injunction  never  intended  finr  cold 
.  riKmatas.  hk  most  respectSt  indecdi  th^  mix  weU  with  the  Muaiul- 
mans,  though  tfaeur  tunidil^*  tbehr  craft,  aUd  their  parsimony,  eipoae 


*  They  are,  indeed,  to  be  found  as  far  west  as  Astrachan,  and  they  are  niuneroiM  in 
Arabia;  while  on  the  eaat,  they  extend  as  &Lr  as  Pcldn,  where  they  are  said  to  have  a 
tMiplik  Thiir  rdigioo  has  spread  cfea  beyond  these  liinits.   Thewondaipof  BooA, 

umk-r  the  name  of  Fo,  i;*  known  to  be  very  general  throughout  China;  mid  in  the  go<!s 
of  the  CalBWicin,  «■  rq>rc«e&ted  by  Dr.  Oaxife,  m  at  once  ttcogum  the  idioU  of  the 


Digrtized  by  Google 


318 


DEOOAUN& 


them  to  ridicida  Thsj  are  often  employed  about  tlie  court,  in 
offioet  connected  with  money  or  accomrta ;  the  doty  of  stevraxd  aad 

treasurer  about  every  greet  'man»  is  eKeraaed  eidier  by  a  Hindob  or 
a  Feraian.   There  ham  even  been  Hindoo  governors  of  proiruioeib 

and  at  this  moment  the  great  government  of  Feshawer  has  bean  pnt 
into  the  hands  of  a  penNm  of  that  leUgUm.   The  people^  bewever, 
view  the  appdintment  with  more  surprise  than  approbation,  and  the . 
government  must  be  strong  to  be  able  t  o  support  such  an  agent. 

I  have  mentioned  the  degree  of  toleration  which  the  Hindoos 
meet  with,  and  have  only  to  add,  that  many  of  them  are  in  verj' 
good  circumstances,  and  thnf  thcv  possess  the  best  houses  in  every 
town,  it' we  except  tlie  jialiices  ol  theaiiobilitv. 

The  Hindoos  represent  Uiemseh  es  to  l>e  rnii^rants  from  India,  wlio 
settled  in  Afgiiaunistaun  at  no  very  remote  period,  and  theur  t»toxy 
appears  to  be  well  founded.  * 

The  tribe,  or  rather  the  nation  ot  the  D^jgauns,  wlutli  s(  ems  to 
have  once  been  spread  over  most  of  the  north-east  of  Afglmuuistaun, 
is  now  confined  to  the  valley  of  Coonner,  and  some  parts  of  the 
neighbouring  country  of  Luglnnaun.    '  ,  ' 

It  is  iu  Coonner  alone  Liial  they  still  ioim  a  separate  people ;  they 
are  there  under  a  diief,  who  is  sometimes  called  the  Synd,  and  some- 


*  There  are,  however,  some  tnoei  of  an  aacfaat  noe  of  idoUrtm  in  A%hB«nwtMB, 
such  are  the  colossal  idols  of  Baomecaun,  and  the  numerous  little  statu^f  whu-rh  nrt-  orrn- 
aionally  dug  up  in  the  ootmtry  of  the  Eimauks.  Some  places  have  abo  Hindoo  l<^end» 
ttHttAtA  to  dtenny  but  none  trt  of  vndNibtitd  tnti(|iiiiy.  ^Rw  Oonfcnltjfi  'vhsra  tfK  ttnh 
rtamni  at  PctliMMr  vtands,  was  a  place  of  Hindoo  worship  in  Bauber's  tine.  Tbane  b 
a  cave  of  vast  extent  nenr  Auksorai,  north  of  CaubuK  which  the  Hindoo<<  sny  wns  the 
scene  of  the  Tapasya,  or  ascetic  devotion  o{  Gnrug,  a  Bnunin  who  belonged  to  the 
hooMhold  of  X^duia,  and  wfaidb  Csptain  Willbnl  tuppom  to  bs  the  cm  «f  Vn- 
inctheus,  or  rafter  die  cafe  iHudiAeOncfa  irMi  Alesw^  Aiink 

Researches. 

The  Mahonunedan  historians  speak  oi  Kajas  of  C«ubul  in  ancient  tines,  but  this 
limMa noddn^  ftrdie  Mme  mitm  ctffad  die  Hiadoes  OaelfM)  end  MabommcdMW 
are  not  accurate  in  thdmiecr  dw  mM' Ra^  at  w  ifacnni  faj  TIppiM^e  edttag  die-Kiqg 
of  England. 


Digitized  by  Google 


SHCLMAUMSES.  SWAXTTKBS.  319 

* 

times  the  King  of  Coonner.  The  country  is  small  and  not  strong, 
Hor  are  the  inhabitants  warlike  •,  yet  the  Svnd,  by  his  own  prudence^ 
mv}  probably  by  the  respe(  t  paid  to  his  ono;in,  maintains  a  consider- 
able de<?ree  of  consequence,  lie  pays  some  revenue,  and  iiimishea 
one  hundred  and  fifty  horses  to  the  King. 

The  Deggauns  speak  the  lanf?uan;e  whicli  is  mentioned  under  the 
name  of  Lughuiaunee  in  the  (  <iniiii  tiiarit^  of  Rauber,  the  Avenee 
Akberee,  aad  other  places.  1  lia\  c  a  vucabularv  of  the  language, 
which  seems  to  be  composed  of  Shanscrit  and  modern  Persian,  with 
some  words  of  Pushtoo,  and  a  very  large  mixture  of  some  unknown 
loot.* 

■Hie  graaker  part  of  the  murda,  hofwrer,  «ie  SluniKrit,  from 
whhh  we  maef  conclude,  iStM  the  Deggaum  ne  of  Induui  ^origin, 
though  thqr  are  distinct  firom-  the  Hindkees}  caie  mnat  alio.be 
taken  not  to  eonfeund  them  with  the  Tanjika,  whom  .the  A%hanna 
awiietimea  call  Deggaun,  by  corruption  fimn  Dehkaun,  a  hnahand* 
man* 

/The  Smimauneea-  fonDoAj  mhatnted  Shuhnaun,  on- the  hanha  of 
Iha  KamaxL  Tbof  afterwaids  moved  to  Teen»  and  in  the  .  end  of 
the  fifteenth  century,  they  were  m  Hsahtnngger.  from  .which  ihcj 
were  expelled  by  the  £uao£iyeB.  The  old  Ai|||iaan  wntera  reckon 
them  Deggaims,  but  they  appear  to  have  used  thiaword.-kioael^. 
There  are  atill.a  lew  Shulmauneea  in  the  Euaofiye  -ooantij,  who 
have  some  remains  of  a  peculiar  language. 

The  Swautees,  who  are  also  sometimes  called  D^gauns,  appear  to 
be  of  Indian  origin.  They  formerly  possessed  a  kingdom  extending 
from  the  western  branch  of  the  Hydaspes,  to  near  .lellallabad.  They 
were  f^i^fid IT rtllv  confined  to  narrower  limits  by  the  Aftrhauu  tribes; 
and  8waut  and  Boonair^  their  last  seats,  were  reduced  by  the  £usoi- 


*  I  iMve  to  obMrte^  Atl  I  knmr  nMhing  of  Slumsctit,  bat  made  ny  oonpul. 
flOD.iHdi  -dM  Mp  of  two  Montta  Pundit*.  It  is  possible  that  the  words  which  M^nied 
tomAtobciiHVtoaiMwdniMiitDngM^  aif  iMliniliar  to  *  bcttw  onoital  Mbolv. 


Diglized  by  Google 


TBSinrsa  KinDaiA&vcHcs. 

yes  in  thtaidQf  the  fifteoBtti  caitigy*  Hkj  we  ttill  my  iMnM» 
rous  in  those  cotintries. 

The  Teeryes  who  live  in  the  Shainwaree  country,  are  a  small  tribei 
only  remarkable  from  tlieir  npmlring  a  lengui^  A'^atftift  ^kuq  thoM 
of  their  neighbours. 

1  have  not  been  able  to  procure  n  ^)cv\mcn  of  it,  or  uiy  iulbrinar 
tion  thai  call  lead  to  a  conjecture  regartliii^'  iis  origin. 

The  Kuzzilbaushes  are  members  of  tliai  (olony  of  Toorks  which 
now  predominates  in  Persia.  1  call  them  liy  this  name  (which  is 
usually  given  them  at  Caubul),  in  preference  to  tiiat  oi  FersiaOf 
whicli  might  lead  to  imstakef?. 

Tfif  ICuzzilbauches  geneiaiiy  inliabit  towns,  except  about  Heraut, 
where  they  are  also  to  be  found  in  the  villages.  There  are  said  tu  be 
ten  or  twelve  thousand  of  them  in  the  town  of  Caubul,  who  settled 
tlM«e-m  the  times  of  Nandir  and  Ahimed»  and  who  are  «till  in  mmy 
mpefata-'a  people  cQtiidy  dbtinct  firaia.thMeaioatMlUien*  Thgf 
speak  Penkn,  and  among  themBdves  Tooricee.  They.aie  all  yidaal 
fiheeahit  and  their  aeil  is  kept  up  by  thek  neoeeaitj  of  a  certain  de- 
gree «f  oonocalmant*  and  by  4Imu  leljgiouB  animdlidfla  with  the 
Sooonae^  among  whom  thqr  Uv& 

Tkb  KaniUMiKiies  in  A^^nutaun  ■  partake  of  th«  .dmicter  of 
Uieir  countiymah  in  Fma}  they  sie  lively,  ingmiioua*  and.  even  ale> 
gnit  and  icfined;  but  false,  designings  and  and;  "lapmaoiiib  bvit 
profuse,  voluptuouSf  and  fond  of  ahow^  at  once  insolent  and  servikb 
destitute  of  dl  modefatidn  in  prosperityt  and  of  all  pride  in  adver- 
otj}  brave  atpne  time  and  cowardly  at  another,  but  always  fond  of  - 
gloiy ;  fiill  of  pr^dioe^  but  sfRscting  to  be  Ubaval  and  ^ilightened ; 
admirable  for  a  more  aoqiiaintanoe  (if  one  can  bear  with  thdr  vanity)* 
but  dangerous  for  a  close  connection.  * 

The  Kuazilbanchefl  at  Heraut  follow  all  trades  and  pnrraits ;  the 


*  I  sjpeak  from  what  I  hsm  Men  of  tiie  KusUbauflfaes  of  Ctiubvdt  and  of  a  good 
many  PariaBi  Kbonk  I  bswe  knnm  in  Indh.  Hie  dwrniliv  hatn^Wt  it  Aif 
applicable  to  the  inhabitanta  «f  4w  town*  ;  the  country  p«0|^  IM  aofc  m  batfi  m4 
the  Ettan^  or  •bcphcid  ti9M%  aiv  ■*«****»*Ttg  Wk»  dM  A%liiiin> 


Digitized  by  Google 


KUZZILBAUSHE&  .  tSt 

Mfc  m  mofdj  mUkni  maurne  merdwnlii,.  tad  Hbtammn'^hm 
of  thednt;  wtAmmy  m  twdewtten  oidaiamiDli;  the  UmlolV  <m 
bodiet  of  aimed  meftiWlioiiMendl^  framcdtf 

•  .lidiit^oCdieaeciitoHe^  aOT  and  cdur  tafimor  ttiiikitei» 

aie  KuitflMumlics,  and  almost  evoy  moB  of  lank  baa  a-Meena!*}  a 
Nacir  f,  and  perhaps  a  Dewirtm  '  of  this  deMriptioii  of  people 
Mort  of  the  Ku^*a  Peeshkhedmuta^'  and  other  servants  famnediiftefy 
abioiit  his  person^  are  alao  Kwaailbumfeeai  Some  of  these  are  persona 
of  high  rank  and  office^  and  aome  of  tiie  military  chiefe  of  the  JSm^ 
zilbabshea  asp  afaDnwn. of  consequence,  though  always  subordinate  to 
tbe  ;X)ooraunee  officon.  Some  of  the  Kuzailbaiiabeai  partUtularly 
tiMMe  m  tiie  GbobHnii».or  Kioff a  Guards,  have  aitetes,'  and  eved 
castles,  granted  by  the  crown,  or  purchased ;  but,  except  about  Hei 
raut,  thej  generally  live  |n  tmhiBt  and  let  out  their  lands  to.  .A%hann 
or  Taiijik  tenants. 

Besides  the  seven  Terehs,  or  tribes,  into  which  all  the  Kiizzil- 
bau&hes  are  divided,  those  of  Caubul  ha\e  other  |Kciili;n  (h\  isioiis, 
as  the  Chendawuls,  or  Jewaunsheers  (the  hrst  of  which  names  me  ans 
the  vanguard,  and  I  be  second  is  a  title),  Moraud  Khaunees,  so  called 
from  the  Doorauiicc  lord  wiio  hrst  commanded  them,  &c.  &c  * 

Besides  the  Taujiks,  who  are  the  oriijinal  inhabitants  of  tlie  coun- 
try, the  tribes  descended  from  tlie  Indian  stock,  and  KuEzilbaushes 
sprunc:  from  the  Tartar  conquerors  of  Persia,  there  are  other  nations 
found  111  small  portions  in  the  country  inhabited  by  the  Atghauiis. 
It  would  excite  great  surprise  to  find  a  colony  of  Frendi  or  Spaniards 
settled  in  a  town  or  country  in  Great  Britain,  and  remaining  distinct 
fiem  the ,  people  the  country,  after  the  liqpBe  of  fevenl' centuries, 
tmt  thia  b  by  no  meana  an  uncommon  thing  In '.AataJ  Thewandai»- 
inghdiilaaf  a  great  pact  of  dm  iKi{raladon  'fi0BiMaiiaea  the  wkdle  to 
the  Idea  of  emlgfatkm.  It'  is  also  ficqmntiy  die  policy  of  tbe  iuiatic 


*  A  tsevcteiy.         f  A  msitcr  of  die  iMusdioU.  ,  lAftewwd.'. 

T  T 


Digitized  by  Google 


with  idia'tdeir  of  dbftaining  r  imhirtiiwn  .wlonyf  of  bb  rttodied  «6t> 
dieiy  in-A  fiowired  part  of  ooM^^iMiditeicfie^Mtfly'to  to 
die  itiength  of  »  T^bdUoos  dan  or  nad^  Tbeae  ave  the  caii«»=of 
thBMtiodocfipb  of  cikia^fSixtafmu'mmai^ 
m  k^'dislind;  from  the  ratfrofvihe  fahaBtrimij  h^llie  fejihm  iif 
l^iAplI  intoitribea.- :  The  emigrants  catmot  jj^ijaoiEaadmbsion'iiitD 
4lis-tribea.of  the  coentry,  and  single  men  aro  under  |^cieat>  disadvan* 
tages  from.iMUit  of  natural  allies ;  they  tlieorefere  rmu^Ek  muted  lor 
Uie  advantage*  of  qotttnal-fneDdBh^.i^  i 

The  moat  numerous  of  this  dam  av&ihe  Arabs,  \dio  have  -probably 
emigrated  from  J^enian  filKRWaawi*-  Ifony  Arab  tribes  are  still  to 
be  feiind  in  great  mmibers  and  powei"  in  that  country,  where  the^ 
have  probably  been  settled  since  the  first  period  of  the  Mahomroe* 
dan  conquest,  or  at  lea:^  si nc^  .the  tune  fdiaii<*the  Arab,  dynasty- of 
Samaunee  ruled  in  Bokhaura. 

The  nnmber  in  Af«:liaimi8taun  may  be  about  two  thousand  families, 
some  of  whom  form  part  of  the  garrison  of  the  Balla  Hissaur  at 
CaTibiil,  and  the  rest  reside  at  JeUallabad,  between  Caubul  and 
Peshawer.  These  last  are  imder  a  chief  of  their  own,  who  is  of  such 
consideration,  that  the  daughter  ot  one  of  his  ancestors  was  the  wife 
of  Ahmed  Shauh,  and  the  mother  of  TvriK lo I  .  They  hare  lost  their 
original  languai^c,  but  tiiey  still  live  in  one  society,  and  are  all  settled 
and  engaged  in  tillage.  .  •- 

There  are  a  considerable  number  of  Moguls  and  Chaghatyes,  and 
M.hw  hundred  families  eadi  of  like  Iblloiring  nati<ma»*»* 
-  Leageea,  fiom-Momit-Cancaaiia  bd^vreen  the  Bbek'Seaend  the 
Gaapiai'6ea»  hfoni^  finm  their  couatiy  by  Nandir  Aoobf  and  mam 
aetded  about  Foixth. 

>  Modkfem  and  Redim^  two  tribea  of  Cooida  Saom  Cooedeatmn 
idle  ancient  Cavdudiia)»  betweao  ihm  Cenun  ami  Tuddah  en^rea.  f 


*  ^  John  Malcolm,  while  in  Curdutaun,  obtained  «a  account  of  the 
tMi  nnrtiom  llw  cn^gwliaii  «tm  pstt  ct  diem  to  Gnibd,  but  I  do'  not  kBoir  As 


Digitized  by  Google 


ABaCENUNft.  CALHUKa 

Araienians,  a  j)e<>plc  to  be  found  in  almost  every  part  of  the  east, 
where  there  is  a  prospect  of  gain. 

Abyssiniaiis  (who  have  been  bought  as  slaves,  ami  w  ho  now  fonn 
puit  uf  the  King's  guards)  aad  Calmucks,  here  cuilcd  l\ullimauks, 
who  are  also  the  King's  guards,  aud  who  seem  to  bear  a  strong 
resemblance  to  the  people  of  the  same  tribe  in  Russia.  Mr.  Kerr 
Fofter's  picture  of  a  Cdmuck.ia  his  Travels,  ifi  a  good  caricature 
of  one  oif  tboae  In  GtubuL  They  were  brought  from  Biilkh  bj 
Tymoor  Sbttili»  and  it  is  but  lately  that  the  nativea  of  Aj^iawni- 
ataun  have  become  femiliariaed  to  their  Inoad  ftoea,  tfadr.  loi^ 
namm  eyest  and  extreme  bbdmeaa  of  their  rikin.  It  ia  a  mat- 
ter of  tome  anrpriae^  that  Uie  Cafamicik8»  ivho  are  in  general  inhahir 
tanta  of  the  north  of  Aaia»  ahould  have  immd  their  way  to  Gaubul, 
but  they  are  fimnd  in  conaideiable  numbers  in  the  kingdom  of 
Bokhanr*!  and  their  erratic  habits  account  Soie  their  fiirther  ad- 
vance. 

In  this  list  I  take  no  account  of  the  Beloches,  Eimauks,  and 
Hazaurehsb- «h6  *lue  ih^gica^  ilnmben  throughout  the  wesi, 'Ot  df 
the  SeestaunaaS)  Kermaimeea»  JMeivee8»  and  |raople  of  other  towns 
and  pi>oi[iBoea  of  -  Peraii^-  who  ave'iettled  la^  cemidertihle  nunUiers  ;in» 
different  parts  of  the  country.  The  few  European  TuikB».Jew8>  men. 
^  Badukahaun»  Cashghar,  &c.  deservieaot£uther  nbtice,  nor  do  the 
more  nmnerooa  Uabek  tiaveUets^  who  ooMe  tpr|xader'<v^  study  atl 
j^eshawer.  •  .i- .•••vi;f:-^  v...)/".-! 

•  »         '•',>'  ».''••..} 

mm  «e  fitBMlttif  of  tiik  jnofniMnt.  'Some  «f  -die  old  men  aoiong  tbc  Reekaa  tuw 
«ridiiffltoi|MdfctlwC(bdidkki«sa^   '  •  i      >.  ..u 

.    ■'  •      •      »..    .        '.«.*.    ...'»«',  '  '   .'  . 

'      .  :  -     •      »•     ,   i 


T  «  S 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 


BOOK  III. 

PARTICULAR  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  AFGHAUN  TRIBESL 


CHAP.  I. 

£AST££N  TEIBES.  TU£  B£U1JUU]IAUN££S. 

I NOW  proceed  to  a  particular  description  of  the  tribei»«iiMiiig  whidi 
so  great  a  diversity  will  be  obsenredf  thai  it  is  necessary  to  remind 
the  reader,  that  they  aie  all  of  the  aame  fMe^  apeak  the  same  langniiigiv 

and  form  one  nation. 

Ail  the  preceding  account  applies  to  every  tribe,  tmle<?s  where  it 
has  b^D  limited  at  the  time,  or  where  it  ia  ooDtradicted  ia  the 
lowing  description. 

I  shall  begin  with  an  account  of  lb.'  I^Litlouraunees,  and  among 
them  of  the  tribe  of  Eusolzve.  Tiiouiili  tlie  EusofTives  afford  an 
uiitkvourable  spt  t  imen  of  the  character  and  manners  of  il  u  Aighauns, 
yet  they  display  main  of  the  peculiarities  of  their  nation  in  more 
perfection  tlian  miy  other  tribe.  WTien  the  whole  of  their  liistitu- 
tions  have  been  explained,  those  of  the  other  Berdooraunees  may  be 
shewn  aa  modifications  of  the  same  system,  and  those  of  the  southern 
and  waatem  trib^  may  be  rendered  intelligible*  by  comparing  them 
wiUi  ifaia  itandaid. 


Digitized  by  Google 

 J 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  BERDOORAUNEES.  ^ 

Hie  tribes  ^AaA  inluibit  iSob*  Ii0fth*«a8teni  p«rt  of  the  Aj^ifrnm 
country,  endbsed  between  the  range  of  EBndoo  Cooth,  the  Indus^JJi^ 
Salt  Ruige*  and  the  Range  of  SqUiiuhiii*  a«e  o6inprehended  in  the 
general  name  of  Berdooraiineeiy  fint  ||wen  to  them  by  Ahmed 
^hauh.  They  consist  of  the  Eusofzyes,  Otmaim  Khail,  TurooUiuneesi 
fiiybereea,  the  tribea  of  the  plain  of  Paahewwi  andrtboae  of  Buih 
gush  and  Khiittuk. 

Bfl^Mre  I  df^ribe  each  of  theae  tribes,  I  shall  notice  the  principal 
points  iA  which  they  differ  from  all  the  other  A%hauns. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned,  that  the  eastern  Afghauns  appear 
to  have  received  their  civilization  from  India,  and  this  observation 
applies  particularly  to  the  Berdooraunees.  I'^roni  the  early  peri<>d  at 
which  the  Kin":?'  of  Ghiiznce  aud  Caubul  obtained  possession  of  Hin- 
dostan^  the  nortli-eustern  part  of  Afghaunisfaun  has  been  always  the 
thoroughfiire  between  those  empires ;  and  tiie  inhabitiints  have  imi- 
tated the  manners  of  the  country  where  the  arts  of  lite  were  probably 
most  advanced,  and  which  was,  besides,  in  general  the  residence  of 
the  sovereign  and  his  t  ouit.  These  habits  were  probably  earliest  in» 
troduced  into  the  citie'^,  aiul  the  tribes  upon  the  great  roads,  but  they 
have  proved  riiost  peruianeut  in  the  more  retired  parts  of  the  country; 
the  oLliers  still  continued  to  be  most  frccpiented,  aller  the  connccliun 
with  India  was  destroyed,  and  the  presence  of  the  Dooraunee  court 
aitd  'araAj'faiM  intntdnoed  e  diapoaitioii  to  ddopt  the. language  and 
maixnera  of  KhomsMNiiL  On^be  whole,  howev^,  the -nuiimen  of 
India,  mixed  wiftli  thoae  pecnyar<  to  the  A%haun8,  still  pierail 
amongst  all' the  BeidoQrimnwii 

*  The  BflMloonnuieea'afe  dtTided  Into  numezDUB.Uttle  aodetiea.'  Aa 
they  areZall  t^ooltuzil,  ihcj  ire  crowded  into  a  leas  space  then  coold 
he  AQcupied  bj  anpr  of  the  .tribea»  whidi  eie  in  part,  or  entird^  paa» 
^ondt  end  ea  |]|^  oontinue  to  inttoiiBej  'eedi  trflie  finda  itaelf  nioee 
and  mora  stnileBed 'ereiy  di^srlienoe  eriae  diapufos  and  battica 
about  land  and  water,  and'oonatant  'jealouiy  of  Ae^^ibonnng  tribes 
.Tlie  eflecta  of  »'cmiirtded  poj^uktiQn  aote  alao  obiervabieinindividuab. 
^very  men  la  oblig^  to      oonatuit  attention  to  the  .nieana:neoeli» 


Digitized  by  Google 


826 


GOONDEES. 


Miry  Iot  his  own  subsistence)  «Dd  has  iiibtle  MigHidto  llie  conTenience 
OT-tbe  il|^ls  his  neig^iboun*  .  In  oooiequence,  we  find  the  Ber* 
doorauiiees  brave,  but  qpUHrmbome ;  active,  iadiialiioin».'aD<l  acute, 
but  selfish,  contentious,  and  cUshonert;-  Tbay  me  more  bigotted 
inic^rMit  than  the  other  A%haan8,  and  moi^  under  the  influence  of 
their  MoolKdis.  Th^  are  also  more  vicious  and  debauched,  and 
some  among  them  are,  in  all  respects,  the  worst  of  the  Afghauns. 

These  characteristics  are  variously  modified,  according  totlie  ^ituay- 
tions  of  the  ditiertnt  n  ibes.  Thev  are  less  strongly  marked  among 
the  scattered  inhabitants  ot  the  mountains,  than  among  those  of  the 
plains  and  vallevs.  The  liree  tribes  are  most  turbulent ;  those  nnder 
a  ]  » <>\v  cr^ul  chief  most  litigious.  The  i^t  neral  custom  of  the  Aighauns 
also  modifies  the  practice  of  the  Bei  doi>raune^.  This  custom,  for 
example,  makes  them  hospitable,  though  their  own  situation  has 
made  them  selfish  ;  but  their  hospitality  by  no  means  equals  that  of 
the  western  tribes.        ■        •  • 

\  The  custom  of  joining  in  associations  for  mutual  defence,  obtains 
amoDg  ail  the  Berdooraunees,  except  the  £uso&yes.  It  evidently 
QcigiiiBfces  in  the  eontumal'stilfe- whidi  prevafls  among  them  j  why 
Ihe  Enso%es,  who  appear  to  feqtdfe  it  the  ttUMti  tkoM  be 'without 
it^leonftMmyadUTunabiletoexpbtii;  but  thefiwt  iaoonoboiated  by 
all  the  infiHrmation  I  posaen  on  Ifce  subject. 
'  Hiese  cenfederadea  have  aome  leiembiaBce  to  the  -SodaJitfii  of -the 
&3E0O  timea.  IndividnalB  ettter  mte  engagciineiica  4o  suppoit'eadi 
other,  'et&m  in  apedfic  enteipriaes,  or  in  all  caaea  that  niay  wrna 
These  allianoes  are  called  Goondees,  and  they  may  inclada  ^mf 
number'  of  petaont.-  The  oonnection  bietween  two  penona  ki  the 
same  Goondee,  is  rechcmed  stTonger  than  that  of  Mood '  lliey  aat 
bound  to  give  all  they  have,  and  eiren  their  liirea  ^  eadi  otherl 
•A  Goondee  between  two  chieft,  is  not  dissolved  even  by'ii  warhe^ 
tween  their  tribes ;  they  may  join  ii)  the  battle*  but  «a  soon  aa%be 
eontest  is  over,  their  fi-iendship  is  renewed. 

.  Goondeaa  also  take  place  between  tribes.  The  whole  of  Uie  Ber- 
dooaanneea^  esee^  the  EmoSij9B,  Olmtmi^hti^Ttuctibmubiif 


Digitized  by  Google 


DESCEIPTION  OFllMK  B£RDOQB.AiJN££  COUNTRY.  ^ 


Bwttnfcii^  wfateiStameriiir  imUad  Into  Mro  gniifeioiiiedraMiln»'4diati^ 
guished  by  Ihajomdm  oE  GuM  and'Smai),  aadwiBBe  bovnd  to  uitkt 

ymom  cousBOtottt  nev<cr  now  £ngMgBa>iii:att9  wtr.* ; 
.;'llie:iBeidnariiiin«ea;p(wwM'llie  Julb  lad  ^c^^  linderiHtiidoo 
Ckibilit  nd:  Hkmb  cowiwliift  vAJi-As  nn^  Witn«in»  tog^iluif 
inUi  the  pUiitt-  lof  ,'Bqoiir  dnd*  BahsivcB.?  ••TlHi'xiiiga  ffindoo 
43briiii^  f  it;  wffl.  .be>«femiinlimTd,  iB  covered  with  peipetoal  mow ;  the 
kflbbeneatli  haive.tlwre  .nimmits,  but  thdr  sides  are  dothed  wkh 
woods  of  fiis,  oaks,  wahiuts»  wild  olives,  and  many  other  trees ;  aod 
alill  lower,  it  haa  been  observed  that  all  the  fruitB  «nd  flowers  of 
sofie  grow  wild  Hie  fbceats  on  the  nibimtams  am  faH. of.wild  btMti^ 
of  which  tigers*  leopards^  vokvmt-  .bears,  and  hyenas,  are  the  most  re* 
miarkable.  The  Caufirs  occupy  the  highest  <^  the  habitable  hills,  and 
those  who  are  near  the  'A%hauns,  have  been  ooQverted  to  the  Ma- 
hommcdan  religion,  and  ^aV  tribtite  to  the  nearest  tribe.  The  lowef 
hill'^  are  frequentetl  by  Hiiuloo  subjects  of  the  Atghauns,  who  feed 
large  herds  of  butialotM  and  rfocks  of  goats.  The  lowest  hills  are 
however,  in  some  vs»en,  inhabited  and  cultivated  bv  the  A%haun8 
themselves.  The  sides  of  the  valle}^,  wiien  culHvatpfl,  bear  wheat 
and  barley,  whicb  depend  entirely  on  the  rain  ;  but  the  bottoms  are 
in  ignit  ed  from  the  streams  by  which  they  arc  always  divided,  and 
yield  all  the  productions  of  the  plains.  ITiese  are  wheat,  rice.  Indian 
com,  barley,  pidse,  sugar  cane,  tobacco,  and  cotton  ;  but  these  are  by 
no  means  every  where  in  equal  quantities.  Wlieat,  maize,  and  rice, 
are  nearly  equal  m  Peshawer,  while  the  fornix  pr^ionderat^  m  Ba- 
jour,  and  the  latter  in  Swaut,  '  - 

The  commonest  animals  are  oxen,  which  are  every  where  used  for 
tillage  and  ui  Most  parts  for  carrying  burdens.  Asses  and  mules  are 
ilao  employed  in  carnage,  but  they,  as  vdl. »  hpsiw,  ae'uneoiimicm 
in  the  tdle^  of  ' Hindoo.  Coosh  }  .andinm'diaBp  mte  nre  in-Bi|gour, 
Upper  Svmnt*  and  Boonne.  '      ^  .i  -.  .  ';  • 

'Ille  dimato  varies  fiomtliat.a£-lfe  moif7*iiioiiiitaina.  to  dad  ot 


aaa        •     -    valley  of  swaut.  •    ; .  . 

die  bot  plain  of  Bailunrar.  Mbtt  ■even  <if  the  bdnUlila  mouaMnii 
have  enovr  <m  tfadr  tops,  fiom'  finir-  to  fa  moniha  in  the  year.'  Of 
ihe  vaUeya*  Upper  Swaut  haa  a  deliglitfal  dimaCe^  never  hotter  than 
the  dog-days  in  Eiigbuiid«  and  never  .very  odd.  Lower  Swaiit»*beu^ 
confined  hy  hiUa,  is  hotter  than  Beahawer,  aa  ia  Bijoiir  in  iunimer» 
Ibrthe-aame  xeason  i  hot  in  winter  ita  elevation  makea  it  aomewliat 
colder,  and  mow  liea  fiir  three  or  finir  dsya  every  year.-  ' ,  ^.  *: 
.;  The  £oao&yes  ave  a  very  numerooB  tribes  divided  .into  many  little 
oommonili^  chiefly  imder  democratic  oonstitniiona.  Th^  poDocM 
the  e^atendve  coontiy  between  the  OtmaiinUiaU  mountains  and  the 
Lidus*'  Hindoo  Coosh,  and  t)ie  river  of-  Caubul,  oon^sed  of  the 
northern  part  of  the  phun  of  Feahawer,  and  the  valleya  of  Pkoycoia) 
Swaut,  and  BoonerOi  Tfaey.alao  poaaeaa  Dnnntoar»  ontheeaatem 
aide  of  the  Indus. 

The  Eusofzre  part  of  the  plain  of  Feshawer  extends  along  the 
banks  of  the  Indus,  and  the  river  of  Caubul,  firom  Torbela  to  Husht- 
nu^er.  The  bretulth  of  it,  between  the  moiintaini?  on  its  north  and 
the  rivcT^,  varies  from  two  miles  to  ten.  It  is  all  very  rich,  but  less 
so  in  the  centre  than  at  either  (  xtiemity.  Immetliately  to  the  north 
of  this  plain  is  a  Lliairt  ot  mountains,  beyond  which  is  a  broad  vallev 
called  Chumla.  < Mending  from  T/iwer  Swaut  to  the  InduSj  and 
bounded  on  ilie  north  by  the  mountains  oi  Ikjoncic. 

The  vallev  of  Swaut  opens  on  the  plain  above  meiUUMn d  ;  it  is 
divided  tlirough  its  wlioU  i  xt^  nt  by  the  river  Lundye,  which  at  first 
runs  south-wesl  iVoai  liie  mountains  to  'i  ootookaun  Mutkunee,  where 
the  river  of  Pun jcora  joins  it  from  the  north-west.  From  this  point, 
its  course  is  southerly.  The  valley  of  the  i  .undye,  down  to  its  junc- 
tion with  the  river  of  Punjcora,  is  called  Upper  Swaut ;  and  below 
the  .jonetioii  it  is  called  Lower  Swant.  The  upper  part  of  Punjcom 
It  moancainons,  and  thinly  peopled^  but  the  lower  part'of;the  valley, 
andgetacvally  speaking,  all  to  the  south  of  the  is  ridi  and  highly 
cultivated.  Deer,  the  residence  of  the  diici^  is  m  the  upper  pai^ 
jnd  contains  about  five  hundred  bouses. 


Digitized  by  Google 


fiOQN£B£.  SS9 

'  VppmBma^k%/n3kiytbani  aixty  nuUm  kn^  andtaoi  too^ 
iiiteen  liRMid.  Tlie  kfvel  ground  en  both  rides  of  the  ma  !•  ei- 

tnmely  fertile 

LopwarChnatliMabiMMtlll  Uiie  advukt^^  of  Upper  fiiraat»  wkix 
tbe  additMn  of  modi  gntfter  fotilitj.  It.uoqiial  inkngth  tothe 
etlmv  Iml  fasowfer  $  md  it  m/bend.  by  the  mum  riv«r»  die  ooune  of 
^MdkwiadB  mate,  wadh  warn  6e9WmULeti>  imgjuJ&im. 
'  Lower  Swant  b  bogMy  pooled*  nd  1^  cUef  place  Allehdnnd,  ii 
ft  'considenible  tonm.  Swintu  divided  fiom  Booneie  by- eteepbSb, 
tlmdjr  fc»i>">>Stoii  by  Bnbeai»  an  mbenaidenble  tribe  of 

BooMo  Is  a  mgged  ooontiyf  oomposed  of  a  nmnbar  of  litdeTtl- 
leys^  an  opening  on  the  river  Burrindoo^  wfaidi  runs  thvongh  the 
ewtie  of  Booner^  and  enters  the  Indus  near  Derbend^  about  twentj 
miles  above  Toibda.  The  banks  of  the  Burrindoo  are  tolerably  ftr- 
tile,  and  produce  rice ;  but  they  are  not  above  a  mile  broed ;  some 
of  the  wider  valleys  also  produce  the  better  sorts  of  com,  but  the 
general  pcoduoe  is  a  small  grain  called  Ghuoosht  by  the  Ai^^uns, 
and  Cungmmee  bj  the  Hindostaunees  *.  It  all  depends  on  rain,  and 
miM^  o£it  h  grown  on  the  slopes  of  the  hills,  which  are  formed  into 
terraces  one  above  another,  and  toe  odtivated  with  the  hoe.  The 
hiUs  which  bound  Boonere  on  the  north-west,  fill  up  the  ^aoe  b^ 
tween  that  valley,  Hindoo  Coosh,  and  the  Indus. 

The  Judoon'^  en^t  of  the  Indus,  possess  Drumtore,  or  Durntour,  a 
narrow  vallo\  alono-  the  rivulet  of  Door,  which  runs  south-west,  and 
fiills  into  the  Indus  near  Torbela.  The  country  seems  to  resemble 
Juower  Swaut,  tliough  it  probably  is  not  so  fertile. 

The  mouTitaina  are  high,  and  on  one  side  at  least,  produce  oaks, 
pines,  Avalnuts,  wild  olives,  and  other  hill  trees ;  but  none  of  the 
European  fruits  or  flowers  are  found  here,  and  every  tiling  begins  to 
have  some  resemblance  to  the  produce  of  India.    The  trees  uu  the 


o  o 


Digitized  by  Google 


330  HISTORY  Oh  THE  KUSOFZYES. 

filiuii  ne£Bw,  Hie  oountiy  is  well  inhabited,  and  ooiitaina  aone  very 

pt^olous  villages. 

Hie  Eiuao&>y&i  have  possessed  these  countri^  for  upwards  of  three 
lumdred.yean  J  and  though  moat  of  thein  have  heard  that  their  ori> 
gok  ia  from  the  west,  few  possess  any  knowledge  of  the  orig^ial  leil-, 
dence  and  former  fortunes  of  their  tribe.  The  Allowing  aeooimt  k. 
abstracted  from  a  histcwry  of  the  Eusofzyes,  written  in  a  mixture  of 
Pushtoo  and  Persian,  in  the  year  1184  of  the  Hejira  (A.  D.  1771). 
The  orit>;inaI  historv  is  of  considerable  leiifrth,  and  though  mixed  \"rith 
sucli  fables  as  the  superstitious  and  romantic  notions  of  the  country 
suggest,  it  has  a  consistency  and  an  appearance  of  trutli  mikI  i  \;u  t- 
ness,  which  would  entitle  it  to  credit,  even  if  it  were  not  corroborated 
by  the  Emperor  Banhcr,  who  is  one  of  the  prim  i pal  nctors  in  the 
e^  ents  which  it  describes,  and  is  besides  one  of  the  most  correct  his- 
torians in  Asia. 

The  original  seats  of  the  Eusoliyes  were  about  Garra  and  Noshky>. 
the  last  of  wliirh  places  at  least  is  on  the  borders  of  the  Dushtee 
IxK>i,  or  Great  Salt  Desart.  and  now  held  by  the  Beloches  under. 
Kelauti  Nusseer ;  their  numbers  at  that  time  muyt  have  been  very 
inferior  to  what  tlu  v  are  now,  a.s  they  only  formed  a  branch  of  tiic 
tribe  of  Khukkye  ;  ilie  other  branches  of  which  were  the  Guggeeaa- 
nees,  the  Turcolaunees,  and  the  Mahommedzyes.  They  were  ex- 
pelled fiant  G«na  .and  Koahky,  about  the  end  of  the  thirteenth,  or 
Bcj^ning  of  the  fimrteenth  century  .the  QiriBti«n.«a»  and  aoiBn, 
after  settled  in  the  neighbomfaood  of  OrobuL  BeAn  tli^  had.beta 
long  there,  they  aflbfded  their  pvoteption  to  Meetn  Uluj^  l^eg,  the 
son  of  Meena  .^boosaidt  of  the  home  of  .Timour*  and  were  very  in-, 
■trumental  in  raising  him  to  the  throne. of  Ganbtil*  .irhi€fa.had  hetoj 
heett  held,  by  hia  anoeatora,  hut  whidi  probably.  Waa  -loat  .in  eooae-; 
qaence  of  the  c«Jftmitieg  whieh  beftl  the. home  of  Thnour,  on  the 
death  of  Meersa  Abooaaid*.    Ulugh  "Beg,  on  hia  first  aecscaaion, 


*  See  lyHerbciot,  articic  ALxm  Said. 


Digitized  by  Google 


EMIGRATION  FROM  KHOBASSAUN.  aSl 

tiMted  Uie  Enfldkyn  wHli  the  gnitett  dtitiiictioii ;  he  wm,  Indeed, 
^dependeot  on  Uieir  ttostence'  fi>r  tbe  support  of  bu  thione  ';  but  the 
tinhiileiit  uklepeiklfliioe'af  the  Eosofzyes  was  not'  suited' to  an  iiiti- 
'mate  ooiilMiction  with  a  sovereign,  and  their  insolence  increasing  with 
^idr  {nosperily,  they  insulted  Ulugh  B^*b  authority,  plundered  his 
Tillages,  and 'enren  fflled  his  capital  with  tumult  and  confiision.  Ulugh 
B^,  whose  power  was  now  strengthened  by  the  accession  of  many 
Mogulsy  who  flocked  to  his  standard,  resolved  to  rid  himself  of  his 
trauUesome  allies;  he  began  by  fomenting  dissensions  between  the 
Euao&yes  and  Guggeeaune^  (for  the  Kliukkyes  had  now  broken  into 
indqpeident  clans),  and  soon  after  attacked  them  at  the  head  of  that 
tribe  and  his  owm  army.  He  was  defeated  at  first ;  but  having  cut 
off  all  the  chiefs  of  the  tribe  at  a  banquet,  durinf]^  an  insidious  peace 
which  he  had  the  art  to  conchide  with  tiiem,  he  pknidered  the  Eu* 
sofzves  ot"  all  their  possessions,  and  drove  them  out  of  Caubii!.  The 
Eii^oizvt!),  reduced  to  extreme  distress,  took  the  wi^  to  the  neigh- 
bourliood  <»f  Peshawer.  *  '  '  "  • 

•  'That  country  was  then  in  a  very  different  state  from  that  in  which 
it  is  at  pre«ieat.  The  tribes  who  now  possess  it,  were  then  in  Khoi^ 
rassaun,  and  the  plain  of  Peshawer,  with  several  ot  the  neighbouring 
countries,  were  possessed  by  u  ibtjs  which  have  since  either  entirely 
disappeureii,  or  have  changed  their  seats.  TiUghmaun  was  in  the 
hands  of  the  Turkoohuniees,  who  are  now  in  Ikijuur ;  the  tribes  of 
Khyber  and  the  Bungushes,  had  alrt-atiy  t>LCupied  their  present  lands, 
but  all  the  lower  part  of  the  valley  of  the  Caubul,  all  the  plain  of  Pesh- 
awer, with  part  of  Bajour,  Chuch,  Huzaiireh,  aiid  the  countries  east 
of  ibetn,  as  iar  as  the  Hydaspes,  belonged  to  the  A%haun-tr3)e  of 
JDilemik,  which  is  bow'  almost  extiipatod.  -  The  ooimtiy  betwe^ 
tfae-Dflaawuks  and  the  ringe  of  Hindoo  Coosh,-  on  both  sides  of  the 
IiiduBt  £bnned  the  knigdom  of  Swant*  whjdi  was  inhabited '  bjra  dis« 
linci  iurtioii)  and  ruled  by  Sultann  Oveiss,  whose  ancestors  had  lomg^ 
reigned  over  that  oountiy.  / 

On  the'&st  arrival  of  the  Eoso&yes*  thej  threw  themselves  on  the 
genAoHtj '  of- tfie  CSIaawiH  who  assigned  them  theDoisuheb  for 

vv2 


MANNERS  IN  FORMER  DAYS. 


didr  residenoe^  but  m  fireth  bodies  arrived,  they  ftnmd  tfaeb  laadt 
io6  c«iifiiw)d,  andt  as  thdr  atrong^  ineraoaed,  they  umwtd  on  the 
DQamik  part  of  Bajoar»  and  ang^^ged  m  a  war  with  that  tribes  m 
winch  ihey  deprived  them  of  aU  their  poaaeaaiona  north  of  the  Gnbol 
fiver*  Ihey.alao  expcJled  Suteaim  Oveiaa  fiom  hia  {wrmer  poawaaioBa, 
and  finrced  him  to  retire  to  the  Caufir  tonntiy,  whov  beibinided  a 
new  monaichjt  which  waa  enjoyed  far  aome  genemriona  by  hia 
acendants. 

During  these  wars,  Ulugh  Beg  hacl  died,  and  the  kingdom  of  Cau- 
bul  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  famoua  Emperor  Bauber,  adio 
waa  then  rising  into  notice.  He  several  times  attacked  the  Euaofi^ieii 
bat  made  no  great  impression  on  them,  as  they  always  found  a  seeoore 
retreat  among  their  hills.  At  last,  Bauber  made  peace  with  them, 
and  acMnired  them  in  his  interests,  by  marrying  a  daughter  of  their 
Khaun.  Bauber  himself  describes  these  campaigns  in  his  Commeo- 
taries,  and  confirms  the  story  of  his  marriage. 

Tlip  operations  of  which  I  have  given  a  summary,  nccup\  the 
greater  pavt  of  a  pretty  large  volume  in  the  Afghaun  history  ;  l)ut  the 
details  would  not  repay  the  room  they  would  occupy,  and  T  can  ex- 
hibit in  a  few  words  the  little  light  they  throw  on  the  maimers  and 
character  of  the  Eusofiiyes. 

The  whole  tribe  was  under  one  Khaun  during  thesr  conquests,  and 
his  power  seems  to  have  been  much  greater  than  what  the  nuHlem 
Khauns  enjov.  The  people,  however,  seem  still  to  have  been  turbu- 
lent ami  unruly  ;  their  first  quarrel  with  the  ( iiirr^c  eaunees  origmated 
in  an  el*>jicment  with  the  aifianced  bride  ui  a  dnciOf  that  tribe,  and 
was  pursued  by  the  Guggeeaunees  with  the  same  implacable  spirit 
which  such  an  outra<re  would  excite  at  this  day.  The  customs  of 
Naunawautee,  and  of  respect  to  guests,  seem  to  have  existed  then  ss 
at  present,  and  to  have  been  sometimes  infringed,  as  they  are  ^dSL 
One  anecdote  may  be  mentioned,  wfaidi  Aoim  the  mannen  of  the 
times  in  a  strong  light. 

After  a  great  hattJe  between  the  Eoaofiiyes  and  Pjlaaanksj  MnUik 
Ahmedf  the  chief  of  Hie  £aao&jes,  was  deputed  to  Hie  Dlbanka  ta 


Digitized  by  Google 


MANNEiiS  IN  FOKMER  DATS.  ^ 

sneforpcMfe  On  hii  ttrival  among  tlut  . tribe,  they  resolyedt»8ac^ 
tfice  him  to  their  resentment  for  the  loss  of  their  rehutions,  who  had 
fidlen  IB  the  battfe;  hot  Jdullik  Afamed'a  aEtbation,  and  perhaps  the 
beauty  of  his  person,  excited  the  compMaon  of  the  wife  of  the 
Dilazauk  chi^,  who  informed  him  of  his  danger,  and  concealed  hin 
tin  the  indigiMitiQii  of  her  clansmeii  had  subsided ;  they  then  re- 
pented of  a  resoliition  so  much  at  variance  with  the  respect  which  the 
J^haun  customs  exact  towards  a  guest  and  suppliant ;  and  when 
MuUik  Ahmed  discovered  himself,  they  received  him  with  distinc- 
tion, and  prepared  an  entertainment  in  honour  of  him.  Tlie  bard 
who  sung  to  them  while  thev  were  seated  at  tlie  feast,  appears  to 
have  been  less  generous  than  the  vest,  for,  as  he  simg  the  wars  and 
victories  of  the  tribe,  he  introdutecl  tlie  suhject  of  the  late  battle,  and 
in  some  extemporary  verses,  urged  the  chiefs  to  put  to  death  their 
enemy,  who  was  in  their  power.  This  advice  was  now  thought 
so  base,  that  thov  rose  in  indignation,  and  stoned  the  hard  out  ol  the 
assenibly.  Mullik  Aliiiied  was  allowed  fo  return  to  his  lube,  where 
beiiiL':  asked  his  opinion  of  the  Dilaeauks,  lie  declared  the  bard  was 
the  only  wise  man  among  them.  ' 

In  tiieir  behaviour  to  other  tribes  or  nations,  they  appear  to  have 
united  the  ferocity  and  craft  of  sa;  ages,  with  the  moderation  of  a 
more  advanced  stage  of  civiiization.  iliey  i^re  stated  to  have  given 
quarter  to  Alghauns  taicen  in  battle,  through  respect  to  their  origin  j 
from  whence  it  may  be  inferred,  tliat  they  gave  none  to  Swatttee'pri* 
aoners}  jret  they  tieated  the  inhabitarita  <i>f  the  cooqntned  coontriea 
wbih  nuUfaieH^  andtiiij  aaem  to  hm  finnly  adhtted  tar.l3i*riiitaun 
of  mirer  engaging  in  mose  tlun  one  WW  at' e  tima 

WhoBT  lihe^.  bed  compieted  their  conqiieati,  they  prooeeded^  to 
divide  the  oountrieft  they  had  acqpared.  They  assigned  Huahtouggnr 
to  the  MahommedxycBy  who  had  amved  from  Khoraaaann  about  that 
period ;  and  in  their '  poaaeiaion  it  atill  lenlaiiiB.  '  llie  Giigigeeaiineea 
alao  had  been  cKpeDed  from  the  nei^^ilioiizhood  of  Gauhul  by  the 
Emperor  Bnber,  end  had  been  leoondkd  to  the  Enaofisyevt  who 
aUotted  to  them  the  VtrnMb^  which  they  atiU  bdd,  end  pert  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


334  DIVISION  OF  LANDS. 

Baujour,  item  which  they  have  since  been  expelled.  All  the  xeei  of 
the  country  remained  to  the  Eusofzyes,  who,  however,  engaged  to 
provide  for  certain  in&sif»  tcibes  j  the  piincipel  emong  these,  were 
the  Otmeimkheil,  to  whom  they  assigned  their  preeent  tenitory  ia 
tlie  mountains  east  of  Bejour.  Punjcora,  which  s^m»t]ien  tO'ha?e 
been  part  of  Bajour,  remained  to  the  EuHofzyes,  and  the  rest  wm 
some  years  afterwards  occupied  bv  its  present  possessors  the 
Turkolauneesy  or  TuiJ&aunees,  who  probably  took  it  izom  the  Deg- 
gauns. 

.  The  interior  division  of  the  lands  among;  the  subordinate  brandies 
of  the  tribe  of  Eusofzye,  and  among  the  individual  members  ot  those 
branches,  is  not  recorded:  it  may,  however,  be  easily  ascertained 
trom  the  present  state  of  property  in  the  Eusofzve  country,  and  it 
will  be  found  to  involve  some  verv  singular  nistiLuLioiih.  The  tribe 
of  Eusofzye  is  divided  into  two  great  branches,  Eusof  and  Muntler, 
the  first  of  which  acquired  Swaut,  Funjcora,  and  Booiieic,  and  the 
latter  the  ])lain  north  of  the  Caubul  river,  with  the  valley  <>(  Chunila. 
The  Eusot  are  again  divided  into  three  separate,  and  auw  independent 
clans,  the  Accozyes,  Moollez)  es,  and  Lawczyes,  of  whom  the  turiiiei 
obtained  Swaut  and  i'luijcora,  and  tlic  two  latter  Boonere.  The  com- 
plete property  of  the  soil  was  vested  in  eadi  clan,  and  the  Swaufees 
who  remained,  rare  redbced  to  the  condHioa  of  villains,  or,  as  the 
Enao&yescalltbeni  FakeecB*.  Tliia  is  tlte  state  in-whidi  things  ai^ 
at  this  dsjr.  .  '       i  .  i 

•■■  "Eadi  of  these  dans  divided  its  leads  among  its  Khails  f,  at  a  geoe- 
laTmeeling  of  .the  daiii  and  this  anaogement  wai  repeated*  tfaraii||^ 
out  all  the  subordinate  divisions.  ■  Each*  of  the  Khaila  leoeived '  its 
lands  in  perpetuity ;  but  s  di£Eeient  aKrangement  wai  adopted  widib 


*  Thii  phrase  is  used  among  the  Uzbeks  for  the  peasantry.  It  is  used  here  for 
the  subjects  of  the  tribe,  who,  in  other  parts  of  tlie  Afgfamin  oountiy,  are.  called 
Ryots.    In  Persian  they  arc  termed  Eel  Ryots.  '  * 

f  Fokr  an  explanation  of  the  divisions  of  an  Afghaun  trib^  see  the  Note  and  Table 
kk  pig*  i6«k 


Digitized  by  Google 


SINGUUm  INTERCHANGE  OF  885 

hM  sThe  Jands  ofeach of Ito'dmuoDs  fme  dlottdl  cnfy^fst a  oor^ 
tiin  iiinnber.«f  jciii,  and  -weie  to  he  chaoged  at  the  end  off  tli«t 
period  fiw  those  of  loiiie  otfaevy  .so  tbat-eadi  mii^  diara«qiia]ljr.m* 
tliie.iertilitj  or  sUiilil^  of  the:aoil.   Thuaiieadi  iiidi|ieiid«nt  dmnon 
ofilie  Khwaooaya  iieCaiiu.die.lnd  amigiied.  to  it  at  theorignial-.dii^ 
tributkn}  bat  the  mUMnoas  inteiduiige  :tlietr  Iamb*  in  a  manaor 
wluch  I  flhaU  endeavour  to  illustrate  fay  die.exaiiiple  of  the  Nmkpetki* 
bail,  a  divMtOD  of  the  Khail  of  Khauaoaaye*  •  md  clan  of  ,Aoco^^ 
which  is  now  an  independent  Oolooss,  divided  into  aix  dbuks.   •.  -  : 
:  Xl»<laada  of  .  the  NailqMeUiail  aie  divided  into  two  parts,  equal  in 
extent,  but,  of  ooiine»  not  esacdy  equal  in  ieitility  i  1h»  Oolooss  w- 
also  divided  into  two  parts,  which  draw  lots  every  ten  years,  for  die 
choice  of  land.    If  the  lot  falls  on  the  hali^  which  is  already  .  poa« 
8essed.<^  the  best  jhaie»  it.ietains  its  pOBwriiiinii ;  but  if  it  falls  on 
the  other  hali^  an  immediato  escfaange  takes  place.    The  two  half 
Ooloosses  meet  every  ten  years  to  draw  lots,  at  a  village  which  lies 
on  the  borders  of  the  two  shares  of  lands.    Vast  numbers  of  people 
attend  to  witness  the  ceremony ;  but  as  the  exultation  of  the  victors, 
anci  the  anfTfr  of  tlie  vanquished  party,  would  produce  tumults  in  smch 
an  assemblvi  the  Mulliks  put  off  drawing:'  the  lots  on  various  ]>ie- 
tences,   till  the  jieople  get  impatient,   and  relum  to  tiitir  homes. 
Wile II  \]\v  ciowil  is  dispersed,  the  c  liief  of  the  whole  Naikpeekhail 
draws  tiie  lots,  and  announces  tiie  ifsult,  which  is  received  in  the 
victorious  part  \  w  it.li  public  distributions  ot  charit\  ,  hrino;  of  mHteli- 
locks,  and  all  other  marks  of  rejoicing.    The  change  of  lands  is  ac- 
complished without  much  trouble  or  confusion ;  each  clan  of  one 
half  Oolooss  is  paired  with  a  clan  of  the  other,  and  the  two  thus 
paired,  cross  over  into  eacli  othi'i  s  lands.  . -    •  r 

When  the  lot  has  deterniiued  that  diij  half  Ooloosses  are  to  retain- 
their  ibrmer  lands,  the  tlu'ee  clans  ofeach  cast  lots  among  themselves 
tor  a  new  distribution  of  their  share,  which  is  divided  into  three 
portions.  ;.••':■» 
On  the  two  last  occasions,  when  lota  were  drawn  among  the  Naifc- . 
peekhail,  thehalf  which  had  the  wont  diaie  was  Bncoetafiil  each  tune, 

II 


i 

$86  WAISHL-  j 

and,  in  consequence,  there  have  been  two  oomplete  interdiangei  of 
luid  within  the  last  fourteen  years.    It  is  impossible  not  to  snppote 
that  the  uncertain  tenure  on  which  the  lands  are  held  under  this  in-  .  | 
stitution,  must  be  a  great  bar  to  improvement ;  but,  in  spite  of  this  j 
obstacle,  the  Eusofzvc  country  is  cultivated  with  (^rcat  industry  and 
success,  and  the  villages,  water-courses,  and  other  immoveable  pro- 
perty, are  as  good  as  in  most  parts  of  Afgliaunistaim.    It  might  also 
be  expected,  that  there  would  he  a  civil  war  in  the  Oolooss,  hs  often 
-    as  tlie  land  was  to  be  exchanged;  and,  in  fact,  at  the  expiratioii  of 
the  last  term  but  one,  the  half  of  the  Naikpeekhail  wliicli  was  in  pos- 
session of  the  best  lands,  refused  to  subaiiL  Lo  the  usual  custom  of  ; 
drawing  lots.    The  Mulliks  of  the  other  half  complained  loudly  of  1 
this  injustice,  and  called  on  all  the  other  Accozyes  to  preveaL  the 
sul)\  eision  of  the  ancient  custom  of  the  tribe;  so  many  Ooloosses  : 
declared  in  ilieir  favour,  that  their  opponents  were  forced  to  give  way, 
and  to  draw  lots  as  usual. 

This  custom  is  called  Waish.  It  prevails  through  tlie  whote  of  tlio 
£aio&yes,  and  also  among  the  MahommedsTM.  Tbe  period  iat 
iduch  tha  Unds  aie  to  be  nteined»  homevm,  ym§  iSbmffMjnt,  la 
BooDO^  fye  instanoe^  the  Waiah  ia  petftcmed  anmuUtf »  Among 
the  Jodoooiy  a  bianch  of  the  Eosoizyes,  iadrndnala-  mtncfanga 
among  themselves,  bat  ihere  is  no  Waidi  emong  dan.  ■  With  the 
OtmaunkhaQ,  on  the  oontraijtthe  whole  tribe  cast  lota  every  twenty 
yean.  Among  ihe  Gnndefapoon  m  Damaim,  abo»  the  hmda  iie 
divided  into  tix  aharaa,  ooneapondh^  to  the  mimber  of  dana  in  dw 
tiib^  and  all  the  dana  dravr  lola  6r  the  aider  in  tdiidi  thsf  aie  to 
diooae  Iheb  diarea.  The  paiiod  at  wMdi  this  cermonj  ia  to  be 
lenewed,  is  not  fixed  permanently  as  anuHig  tlie  Eoaofiiyeas  bat  while 
one  Waish  is  takiiig  place,  it  ia  delennined  in  die  coundl  of  the 
tribe»  vrtien  the  rwj^t  is  to  hqppen  ;  the  term  is  generally  fiom  three 
to  five  yean.  What  is  most  surprising  is,  that  all  tbeae  tranaafHona 
take  place  among  the  lawleaa  Gundehpoony  without  qpianeb  or 


Digitized  by  Google 


ANARCHY  OP  THE  EUSOFZYES: 


337 


NoM  ef  die  eastern  Afghauns  but  thoae  already  mentioned,  sod 
tiro  or  three  dans  oi'  the  Oorookzyes,  have  this  custom.  There  are 
some  traces  of  its  having  prevailed  among  some  tribes  in  Khoras- 
saun,  but  the  only  renininin^r  instance  of  its  existenre  that  has 
reached  me,  is  among  the  Baraiclics,  where  villap'e  sometimes  dravr^  ^ 
lots  with  villager  or  man  with  man,  but  without  uny  Watsh  amoug 
dans.  * 

^^' hat  \im  already  been  said,  will  have  prepared  the  rejider  for  (lie 
utmost  weakness  of  the  goverunient,  if  not  for  the  absence  of  all 
government.  A  sense  of  independence,  carried  bevomi  tin  boimds 
w  Jiich  are  essential  to  order,  is  characteristic  of  all  the  Atghamis  j  but 
nio.sL  of  their  governmt  iits  are  despotisms,  ^hen  compared  with  that 
of  the  Eusofzyes,  The  slender  tie  wlacli  holds  t/ieir  societies  together, 
is  deriv^  from  community  of  blood,  and  subordination  to  the  repre- 
sentative of  a  common  .ancesttMT.  Their  government  is  patriardial, 
but  its  e£Eocm  ave  vciy  ^fifent  fiom  ihoie  nMA  have  been  attri- 
bafeed  to  tliat  form  of  aaraeignty.  Tbe  bead  of  tbe  KhaaiDinrfca  iii 
Ofl  dtmmdiii^  of  tbe  eldnt  mb  of  their  fionimon  aneeator,  but  die 
htt  appeanmoeof  hia  poarer  waa  in  Nabdir  Shauh'a  reign,  wben  all 
die£iaM6yeaiiiiitedtora0iafetbBtooiuiii8for.  The  head  of  the  NaJk^ 
peaUbail  demeahla  aatfaoaty  from  the  aenkeaouica  Hk'powcvado 
not  leqiiire  a  loi|g  enimicntioii  (  he  coaunanda  in  war,  mi^eet  to  the 
venibitkMiB  of  a  oonndl  of  the  MnUika,  who  in  thair  turn  are  influ* 


*  This  cu»tora  i»  stated  bj  VoIn«y  to  be  stUl  practised  in  Corsicn.  It  ^pean  b; 
die  fallowing  ol)MrTatioiii  of  Tadttta,  to  bave  jurerailed  among  the  aadentCterraaiia;  but 
tvhether  it  was  only  illdiffidual*  that  miMd,  or  vliale  Rocicties,  dqiends  on  the  read* 
ing  of  a  dispulotl  pasgap'-.  S^n  pro  numero  cukonim  ab  tinivenis  per  "  vla's"  oc- 
cupantur,  qui>s>  max  inter  ^ctuiuliitn  dignationcm  paitiuntur:  &eilitatcm  portiendi 
cwiiyowiui  vp&UK  pnaatant.  An  a  {K-ranioa  mutant  Oermania  xxfu  If  we  remi  <*|icr 
viboa  <Moa|Mntiir,'*  aa  is  recum  mended  by  mai^  of  the  commentatons  tuul  as  the  seme 
uems  to  require,  we  shall  have  pretty  nearly  the  mode  €if  diistributloij  ivlia  li  I  bare 
d^cribed,  Cc«ar  al«o  has  the  following  passage: — Neque  qui8<|u<uii  ugn  modum 
cert  am  aut  fines  proprids  habet,  «ed  magbttatiu  ac  prindpet  in  annas  singuloe  genii- 
bus  cognationibosqae  homtnum,  qui  una  coierunt,  quautnai  tSt  Ct  t/uo  looo  vinntt  ail 
■Itfiwuwt        aHine  moo  pent  siio  transire  cogmni, 

X  X 


Digitized  by  Google 


GOVERNMENT  OF  A  £USOFZY£  OOLOObS. 


in|e^fiv«l  in  diqmlvi  bctwiMi  tupo  claiii»  but  Ins  nuoHs  m-«ISDO«UMiiP 
dalmgihm  dtfcmM^  d^poidi  nom  i>i|  -«^giiiluoto..tlin  ,Vm 
iMtthoi^t  -aiidjiti^ontbeMfptieeof  the  diyutanti  thin  cn'eitliflb 
Meed  the  whf^  of  his  authdritj  ariM  firoiBliis  penHnd/mi^il,  md 
tliat  it  deriTed  from  his  faiith  and  -lib  ^iod  renHiMt  ^  twlliMiiio  ]Mb* 
lie  tevemiet  and  neither  more  wealth,  more  immediate  clansmen,  nor 
more  hind  aeryaati  than  the  hdad  of  an^  other  dan.-  The  heads  of 
clans  have  not  much  more  powa* ;  the^  are,  hodrerer,  reterred  to  in 
duputes  between  individuals,  particularly  if  they  live  in  difierent  yHU 
lages;  for  each  dim,  instead  of  being  asseny^bd  tnone  phK%  is  seat* 
tered  through  different  villages,  which  it  shares  with  members  other 
dans,  oil,  however,  living  in  distinct  quarters,  and  under  separate 
chiofs.  None  of  nil  theie  chielB  have mithoritj  equal  te  that:  of  a 
constable  in  l^Jigland. 

It  is  lianllv  nocessary  to  say  that  the  Eusotzyes  sot  ihv  Kin^  at 
defiam  c  ;  thev  lioast  ol'  their  ijulepentlcnce  of  him,  htuI  scarceK'  con- 
sider the  tribes  uutier  lus  jmivernnienl  as  Afehauns.  A  iimious  saint 
among  the  ^moizyent  \>  said  to  have  left  Ins  ttibo  a  blessing  and  a 
curse,  **  ITiat  thev  should  alwavs  be  free,  but  that  they  should  never 
be  united."  Considering^  the  Alghaun  notion  of  freedom,  he  did  not 
hazard  much  by  the  last  pari  of  his  prediction. 

I  shall  illustrate  the  above  observations  by  an  account  of  the  pro- 
ceedings of  a  part  of  the  Ghalleekhail,  one  of  the  clans  of  the  Naik- 
pcekhail. 

The  part  of  the  Ghalleekhail  which  I  am  to  speak  of,  inhabits  at 
present  the  village  of  Galoche,  which  is  diajned  by  poftiooa  of  three 
other  dnis.  Eadi  dan  livea  aeperately  onder  its  own  duef  (who  ia 
caHled  Muahir,  and  who  is  tubordinate  to  the  MuUik  of  his  own  dan], 
and  these  quarters  of  the  viUi^aie  called  Gundya.  .AH  thexektione 
of  each  Cnmfy  sore  to  its  own  dan*  and  it  does  not  aeem  mom  etm » 
nected  with  the  other  Cnndies  in  the  same  vilh^  than  if  they  Gved 
In  dififasept  parts  of  the  oountiy.  The  Mushir  of  eadi  Condy  nuui^' 
tahis  a  public  apartment,  wfaM  all  eonndls  am held|-hec»  ahie  idm 


Digitized  by  Google 


ACCOUKT  OF  ▲  PABTICULAa  J'EUfi. 


jnfliitt,  flid  truiiilt  aU  pobUc  hniinfifij  ^fgiffa^f^  iritfK  'dwnanbiK 
ii|:th6QteCBiu|ia».  fbch  an  Minmlily  of JiadoriMtt'iiMlerhiB  into 
one  spots  cannot  take  place  wiftfaout  frequent  cofmilfliona.*  -."Aoeae^ 
ingl^*  toatoe  a^^y  peeMi  wkfaoat  a  qjoancel-:  if  ttMite  is  a  'dupule 
alniil-iwler  lor  cidlDTalaq^  or  the  boundaries  *ofl  a  fiflld>  Msds  af* 
dcawtti  and  wounds  inflictedt  wliidt  •leads*  to  yesiB  of -aimeiy  and 
ilsiigfSi  m^il  <Mul  ill  swwMMiinll<in  Eadiinjiiiy  pmklnoes^fierii'ieid^ 
lioBt  and  hnnoiBi  ansa  ambnscadei^  gtffifhf  n  tfae  wiHwiffy  mnrdfTt  of 
mm  in  tlieir  konsesi  and  aU  kinds  of  muigidtmf  oonfahiii»  and 
sttU» 

'  A»  .tkese  finds  aoonnnilatef'  theme  ia  scarce  a  man  of  any  ccmse* 
^HQOioe  iiho  h  net  upeo  the  ^miitili  tat  Ins  life.  In  every  village  are 
seen  ven-al^ajfi  in  armoury  to  seeuie  tlieni  from  the  dedgns  of  dieit 
secret  enendei^  and  ptfasts  snnonnded  hy  hisod  soldiers,  to  the  nma^ 
ber  of  ten  or  twebci  and  sometimes  of  fifty  or  otie  hiindred.  * 

I  have  lutherto  been  speaking  of  quarrels  iMtireen  '«liffiMMii<.  OisMJ 
which  one  would  think  -  would  .noite  the  membn  of  aaoh  more 
strongly  among  tlaunsrifusi  No  such  efibet^  however,  appears.  Even 
within  the  claos  there  is  nothing  like  peace  or  concord ;  the  slightest 
occasion  gives  rise  to  a  dispute,  which  soon  turns  into  an  affray.  The 
Mullik^  or  cliief  of  the  Cimdy  interposes,  remonstrates,  sootheff, 
threatens,  and  intreats ;  but  his  instances  are  often  disregarcicd,  and 
the  quarrel  continues*  till  ODO  party  teeid  himseli  the  weake^  and 
leaves  the  village. 

An  account  of  a  particular  quarrel,  wliich  I  sliall  relate  almost  in 


*  Anwar  Kbnii^  die  MuUik  of  tfie  QhaMiwl,  ahoft  sleeps  in  hh  Hoqjra,  or 

public  npnrtmenf,  nwny  from  hh  women,  snrroiiixled  by  his  male  relations ;  his  ser- 
vants all  sleep  round,  except  tour  or  five,  w1k>  keep  WBteb;  aU  have  their  arms  ready 
hf  Hmo,  and  if  OM  of  tbem  goen  beyond  Ae  AndiBld  cf  iko  lyatif,  W  awe 

be  guided  by  four  or  five  armed  men.    I  have  been  told  by  Mosirrib  Khaun  (the  nephew 

of  Anwur  Khnim,  a  lad  about  l■iL''•t»'<•T^  years  old),  that  he  has  seen  several  attacks 
oo  this  apartment  by  one  of  the  (Jundies  of  the  tame  village^  but  they  failed  froiu 

Hw  ateaiMi  of  Hi*  d«lnd«i^ 

X  Z  S 


340  AOOOUNT  OF  A  PARTICULAR  FEUD. 

4fae  wards  of  Ifoilcrib  Khnm,  will  dww  the  nature  of  the  feudi 
end  TeconcflMrtiom  among  the  EuaoftyeS}  the  weaimeas  of  the  duaAb 
end  tlie  tmlNilance  of  the  danamenf  better  dian  any  general  lemaifa 
•I  can  oiflfer. 

Moautib*&  father  bade  diapotewidi  a  men  named  Siiundam,  about 
die  boondariea  of  their  landa :  high  words  paat>  and  in  the  end  M(K 
■tnrib*s  fidiQP  was  wounded.  Anwur  Kbaun*  his  brodier,  and  nude 
to'Mc»irrib»  is  the  head  of  all  the  GhaHedchai],  jet  he  hadjio  means 

of  redress  beyond  those  possessed  by  any  Other  individual.  A  Jeerga 
was  heid  on  the  occasioot  which  does  not  seem  to  have  had  much 
effect.  A  few  days  afterwards,  when  Anwur  Khaun  went  to  the 
Hoojra,  accompanied  by  Mozirrib,  then  only  »ii\teen,  and  ten  or 
twelve  his  relations,  some  well  armed,  and  others  having  only  their 
swords,  they  found  Sinindauz  there,  with  twenty  of  his  friends  in  full 
wmour.  This  did  not  deter  Anwur  Khaun  from  reproaching  him  with 
his  behaviour  ;  his  attack  broupjht  on  the  usual  consequences,  a  des- 
perate affray  took  place,  in  wliicli  Mozirrib  received  a  severe  cut  ou 
his  head,  and  An\vur  Kliaun  was  covered  with  wounds;  mfmy  of  his 
rehitions  were  also  wouiuk  d,  A  son  of  Sirumlauz,  and  another  of 
his  partisans  wer  •  kilKd.  As  Anwur  Kliaun  hafl  killed  the  hvst 
man,  he  was  consuitTed  to  be  ui  the  wrong,  and  was  obliged  to  flv 
with  all  his  family.  At  last  he  was  wearied  with  his  exile,  and  sul>- 
mitted  to  Siruiulaijz,  givii)*i,  han  his  sister  and  his  niece  (a  sister  of 
Mozirrib's).  Sirundauz  behaved  with  courtesy  ;  he  said  he  considered 
Anwur's  sister  as  his  own,  and  restored  her  to  lier  relat  ions ;  but  he 
kept  the  other  without  manyii^  her  (for  the  Naikpeekhail  never 
many  a  woman  given  in^  price  of  blood)}  and  from  that  day  Mozirrib 
saw  his  aster  no  more.  The  pursuit  of  Uood  Inid  indeed  beai  pul 
an  end  to»  but  no  intercourse  took  place  among  the  ihmilies;  Stron- 
daux  and  Anwur  never  meet  when  they  ou  avoid  it»  and  when  they 
do,  the^  torn  their  heads  siway.  Mbeirrib*  in  answer  to  a  qnestion> 
what  he  would  do^  if  he  met  Sirundaua  alone,  replied,  that  he  would 
instantly  attack  him,  (hat  he  might  antidpote  the  assault  whkli  Sbni^ 
dans  would  assuredly  make  on  himl.   Sudi  fiiiy  after  •  leooneOistiott 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


WARS  BETWEEN  OOL0088E&  ^41 

vodd  be  Uamad  even  anioiig  the  NwlrpnokhBil,  but  Mtjs  MoBinflb^ 

Sodkuthelife.cftliegneterpeit  of  llie  EiiMi%«B.  WheKs  die 
chief  is  powefful,  lewer  disotden  oociir,  md  the  NaikpeeldMO  it 
wnong  the  wont^  if  not  the  veiy  ivwtt,  of  the  democntic  chulkf ; 
but  similar  eooomitt  are  given  qf  nunj  olher  daaa,  and  in  moit  paita 
of  the  ooontrjrf  the  inhaMtantaUre  iapeipetiial  ftar,  Uhe  asvi^gea»  and 
plough  and  aour  with  thair  matddoeka  and  dwir  tiiaida  abowttheir 
fienons. 

It  migbt  be  expected  that  the  dangeii  of  this  state  of  mnAy, 
•  would  fofce  the  weak  to  throw  themsdyeson  the  protectioii  of  othen 
who  were  stronger  than  themselves,  and  that  by  these  means,  these 
would  be  little  real  independence  left  among  the  people.  It  is  pro- 
bable that  Kaussim  Khaun,  and  such  other  chiefs  (if  such  there  be)» 
as  have  estsblinlied  their  authority  over  their  tribes,  may  have  de- 
rived some  si:qpport  from  this  principle,  buU  among  the  Naikpeekhail 
and  other,  dgnociatic  Ook»o8ses»  I  cm  discover  no  tnee  of  such  a 
system. 

The  horrors  of  these  domestic  feuds  are  sometimes  aggravated  by 
a  war  with  another  Oolooss,  Many  causes  occnsion  these  wars,  but 
the  commonest  are  the  seduction  of  a  woman  of  one  Oolooss  by  a 
man  ot  another,  or  a  man's  eloping  with  n  crirl  of  his  own  Oolooss, 
and  seeking  protection  from  another.  This  [uotection  is  never  re- 
fused, and  i(  sornctimes  produces  long  and  bluotly  wars.  I  shall  show 
their  nature,  as  usual,  by  the  example  of  the  Naikpet  khaiL 

The  w  ife  of  a  Fakeer  of  the  Naikpeekhail  eloped  into  the  lands  of 
the  l^auboozves.  The  Fakeer  followed  with  some  of  his  relations  to 
kill  his  wife  ;  and  as  he  was  lurking  about  tor  this  purpose  in  the 
night,  he  was  set  upnn  aad  killed  with  one  of  his  relations,  by  the 
person  who  liad  cai  i  ied  off  the  girl,  and  some  of  hia  new  proiectwSi 
When  the  news  reached  the  NayiLpeekhail*  their  Khaun  sent »  dnhup 
mer  to  summon  theMuUiks  of  tlM.iht  dins*  sad  easnidted' with  them 
<m  the  propriety  of  awar. '  Thi  JMidliks  iatuniedtP  their  ohRia»  and 


att  WAR  B£TW££N  OOLOQSSm 

tlbee  ditifh  the  vholi&'Ooloaw  MMibisd-m  4niis»  and  marched  on 
the  same  night  to  an  •^bankment  ilrliMii  turned  part  of  the  rivw  of 
Swaut  into  tbe  liudfl  of  the  BaubooB^cifk'  They  brdfie  dowA  tlia 
bankment,  and  em^ed  a  redoubt  to'pnra&t.  its  being  rebuflt^ 

The  Baubooqrea»  who  saw  the  water  cut  off  (rom.  their  cultivation, 
immediately  assembled,  aiid  marched  against  the  ledouftit.  The 
Nailqpeekhail  were  six  thousand,  and  the  BauboQgyes  much  more 
niimerons.  Both  sides  had  some  Iiorse.  and  some  hundred  Jailumees 
(championa  dirtangwiahed  by  a  ianUetie  dr«M»  and  bound  to  <oai|iiir 
or  die). 

The  rest  were  a  mob,  some  in  thick  quilted  jackets,  some  in  plate 
armour,  some  in  coats  of  mail,  and  others  m  leathern  cuirasnes ;  all 
armed  either  with  bows  or  matchlocJu,  and  with  swotdM,  ahielda>  ki9g 
Af^haun  knlven,  and  iron  sjx  ar  s. 

Whfii  the  aiiiiics  came  in  sight,  they  at  first  fiveil  on  each  other; 
afterwards  tlie  Jailumees  turned  out,  and  engaged  with  liie  sword; 
at  lajit  the  nmia  bodies  came  into  close  combat.  Tiie  brave  men  on 
each  side  w  ere  mixed  together,  and  foiicjht  hand  to  hand ;  the 
cowards,  a\  lio  were  by  much  the  greater  number,  hung  back  on  both 
sides,  but  joiiicd  iii  die  general  climiour;  every  man  shouted  and 
reviled  his  adversaries  with  as  loud  a  xoim  as  he  could.  Even  lite 
women  of  the  Fakeers  {far  those  of  the  Euso&yes  could  not  appear 
in  public)  stood  behind,  the  line*  beating  drums,  and  distributing  wa- 
ter to  veftedi  tlie  wovjr.  At  ]«t  both  lidai  wtn  edmiiled,  and  le- 
tiied  to  tbcii  liomei< 

Niunbenonboihiite  wareUUedaiidiraii^^  .it  it^aa^  says  my 
injEbniiaiit, » ticniflndm 
went  to  Pinbwrar  to  the  King. 

It  leds  however,  to  no  importwit  ieitdt«  the  ndoubt  nanained*  the 
hnida  ottfaa  Biwbooi^M       nnnod  ftr  imnt  of  witei  tJbo  war  < 
tiasodfbr  tbzee  jmok  aun^  other  OoIoohh  j<uiMd 


Digitized  by  Google 


DESPOTISM  OF  KAUSSDI  KHAUK  OF  DEER.  $^ 

die.  lillob  •coonirjr  1^  to  ibe  mflnwtMiii  wim :  anfanOed.  .  At  htib 
wttxf.  ^ni— — »*  of'  ■entnl  OolodMS.  iotsnioMd.  .  Mid  in^H^iitBd  -a 
peao&  .... 

Feir  ptfMim  an  tUkm  m  tibtne  ^im ;  thM  m  tdken,  are 
ittbft  dMpiM4  of  .'tliii  QiipCan»  who  Iteep-  thieiii  iv  iSmho,  wpA 
mike  Hm  UMBidt  Hhm  fidcbr  trnt  alwi^s  nlcM  Hum  i«:kfel 
wiliiaiit  lantonL 

The  polkioil  state  of  afanost  «lie  iriwle  ef.llii  ^ataStym,  iv.ilwim 
bj  what  t  haveeaadef  cne  Oolooss.  SMiie>  however,  are  un^&c  m 
more  aristocratic  government  In  those  cases,  Uie  ridiet  ori  abilities 
of  the  Khaun  give  him  a  weight  which  he  does  not  pdssess  aoienff 
the  NaikpeekhaiL  I  am  not,  however,  acquainted  with  any  instance 
of  consideiahle  power  of  the  Khaun  in  any.  oi  the  Snadkym  weat  of 
the  Indus,  except  in  Punjcora.  The  Judoons^  a  nnmenHis  branch  of 
the  Euao&yes,  who  live  east  of  the  Indus,  alkyw  great  power  to  tfaes 
diieis,  and,  in  consequence,  are  exempt  from  die  itzife  and  hloodihed 
whidi  prevails  among  the  othrr  Eusofzyes.  ' 

Bv  far  the  most  powerful  Kliuun  amonj]^  the  Eusofzyes,  is  Knussim 
Khaun  of  Deer  in  Punjcora,  chief  of  the  Mulloezvps.  T  have  not 
the  means  of  giving  the  particulars  of  tlie  pdlicy  by  which  he  at- 
tained his  power.  It  is,  however,  certain  that  he  possessed  eonsider- 
ai)!e  tieasiires.  and  acquired  large  estates  by  jjurchase,  or  usurpatioon 
on  his  e)wn  relaiioiis.  He  next  set  himself  to  put  down  private  re- 
venge, and  its  coacoiiiii;int  dis<»iiiers.  He  drove  Boahy  oflfenders  out 
of  the  tribe,  and  appropriated  their  lands  to  liiniself.  He  connected 
himseli  with  sicigUbuuring  ciiiets,  and  encouraged  and  assisted  them 
in  gtrengihemng  their  fwwer  in  their  Ooloosses.  He  also  reduced 
many  of  the  nearest  Cautir^,  and  exacted  a  tvibote  for  himself  $  and, 
by  means  of  these  revenues,  and  the  produce  of  his  estate^  ^  ed^ 
tertained  men  in  his  own  pay,  ted  aoquMMiie  dMirinre^lnftlenBe  liv 
the  tribe.  His  greatest  exploit*  mAihit  whidlimtnbaled  jnioit  td 
raise  his  reputation  imdetMDgte  hie  InfliMD^ 
which  he  andertook  agOMt  iherBtikmk  <tfi«Me  dl^lliefibiBitKlUe^dHig- 
doma  of  SmUbtar.  Krapsiiii  Mhakm^  aAnr^iwmMnlBis  gree»'di0>* 


344  CONDITION  OF  THE  FAKEERS  OR  VILLAINS 

<M]lie8  in  |iiMin|j;  'otiit  thr  mamy  iiiountaiiit»  took  die  capitdlt  and»  1 
bdieve^  dediraDed the  pfinoe;  bo*  he «Ud  not-  ettempt  to  liatBiii  tin 

country. 

The  whole  of  his  Ooiooaa  are  now  completelj  at  hk  devotion.  He 
can  iniprbon,  inflict  ooipofeel  punishment,  a&d  even  put  to  death.* 
He  has  edaipated  domertic  feuds,  and  has  establiahed  a  good  polioef 
so  that  his  government  is  far  from  being  unpopidar  even  among  hii 
£uaofiEye  subjects.  All  the  Fakeers  in  Punjcora  now  belong  to  bioi> 
and  pity  him  a  tax,  but  he  derives  no  revenue  from  his  clan. 

Kaussim  Khaun  has  shewn  a  disposition  fo  encroach  on  some  of 
the  democratic  laisotz\es  in  his  nei^lil>oui hood,  hut  ns  vet  without 
success.  On  tiiese  occasioas»  it  seems  to  have  beeu,his  plan  to  form 
a  party  within  the  tribe. 

It  is  impossible  to  enumerate  all  the  httle  republics  ol  ibc  l^u- 
sot/ves.  I  have  got  the  names  of  at  leust  tliirtv  of  fliem,  all  as  little 
connected  with  each  other  as  the  Naikpeekhail  are  w  ith  their  neigh- 
bours; but  it  is  probable  the  number  of  indepcndeiu  comnnniiiies  is 
still  more  considerable.  The  whole  numbers  oi'  the  Kusof/ves  are 
reckoned  by  the  Atghamis  at  900,000 ;  but  on  a  calculation  of  the 
extent  and  fertility  of  their  country,  I  should  be  inclined  to  conjec- 
ture that  their  numbers,  including  all  their  Fakeers  and  dependantSt 
did  not  exceed  700,000  souls. 

The  Faksen  are  mach  man  numeroua  than  the  Euso^yes.  The 
greatest  part  of 'them  aie  Swauteea,  who  wnamed  in  their  cooitiy 
after  it  wae  eonqneied*  »  oonaldenhle  muoiber  ot  DeggMuiSi  ■oaie 
Hmdkewi,  (who  hsre  been  driven  bj  fianine  to  tmnig^mt^  ham*  the 
Poii^ub,)  a  few  ■Cadimeereea  end  Hindooa»  (clanei  which  ero  led 
mlo  all  ooautries  bj  the  denie  of  geaiit)  end  aome  memben  cf 
JJjfmau  tribea  (who  have  Bugnted  into  the  EnaeAgfe  ooontij  m 
circmuHiioea  iMfh  have'depaded  them.to  the  nnk  of  Fakeen)» 
fbnndiefeiitof  thetbodj.  Moat  of  the  Fafcem  work  m  bnabandiy, 
and  many  feed  heidi  of  bufialoea  on  tihe  mowttamt.  - 

llie.Fekeen  h0ve  no  landt  they  are  not- oiMd«ed  M  mentea 
the  oominoinraallil^  nor  aflcwpeA  to>'  be  pment  nt  Jen^m.  Mifmy 


'   Digitized  by  Google 


'  OONDITIGN  jW  THK  FAXEERS  OR  VILLAINS.  345 

Fakeer  is  subject  to  die  penai  on  whoM  land  Jbe  residet,  wlio  it 
called  his  Khawund,  or  master.  He  pays  a  tax  to  his  iiiaitcf»  and  is 
also  obliged  to  work  for  him  gratis,  like  the  villains  id  Europe.  The 
master  can  also  beat,  or  evea  kill  his  Fakeer»  ^rithout  bdi^  ji]iiefH 

tioncd  for  it  On  the  other  hand,  the  Fakeer  is  sure  of  zealous  pro- 
tection from  his  mastor,  who  wouici  enter  into  the  most  desperate 
.quarrel  latlier  than  suttbr  another  persou  to  injure  his  Fakeer.  The 
Fakeer  is  at  liberty  to  pursue  any  trade,  to  work  as  a  labourer  for  his 
own  profit,  and  even  to  rent  lund  a  Buzgur  or  Metaver  ;  his  mas- 
ter having  no  demand  on  lum  hut  lor  his  estahhstied  tiix,  some  fixed 
dues,  which  will  be  mentioned  hereailer,  and  a  share  ot  his  labour. 
The  treatment  the  Fakeers  receive  from  their  masters,  is  gem  rallv 
mild.  The  master  is  deterred  from  aeveiity,  by  the  disgrace  which 
attaclie.s  to  oppression,  arul  still  more  by  the  right  of  the  Fakeer  to 
jremove  to  the  laacis  oi'  another  Eusoizvu ,  a  right  which  he  can  al- 
ways exercise,  as  tliere  is  a  great  competition  for  Fakecrs,  and  many 
men  will  always  be  found  ready  to  receive  and  protect  one  who  is 
disposed^  to  change  hb  master.  The  number  of  indqieadent  copp 
munities  is  also  a  proteti;km  to  theFakeers;  as  ona  of  them  who 
had  received  any  mortal  injury  (as  the  tunider  of  hia  idatM%  or  dbe 
■ednctldii  of  his  wife),  could  ze?enge  himaeif  bj  the  death  of  hia  op- 
|ifCiMr»  and  then  aeoure  hunaelf  by  flying  inio  tfie  ooantiyof  another 
Ooloofa. 

The  nunten  hanre  not  the  power  of  estoituig  money  fioan  dieir 
.Faheeia.  Ihcj  levy  finea:OB  theaetdement  of  .a  new  Fakeer  bi.their 
.hoidat  and  on.  the  morrii^  of  thev  Fakeen»  and  alao  aa  a  pvnuhp 
.ment-fer  mutdera  and.  other  crimea;  but.  the  amount,  like  that  of  the 
tax,  ia  fixed  hy  cnitom,  and  it  would  be  ledconed  grosa  oppreaaum 
to  levy.moie  than  waa.  due^ '  The  Fakeera  have  their  quarrela  and 
.iSbrnt  Hff?ftdthfiU  aa  w^U  aa  the  Eusofzyes,  hut  in.  a  far  less  degree. 
Ihey  are  nideed  an  hnmUe  and  unwarlifce  people,  and  aeldom  cany 
«ina,  thm^  they  are  not  forbidd^  to  do  so.  Their  houses  are 
.l^aacraDy  worse,  and  their  dreea  ia  plainer  than  that  of  the  A%hauns. 
Ihey  aie  all  ficiiiflal».md.aften  amaia  eoaiiderabie  auma  by  the  profits 

T.T  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


CUflfTOM  S  LEVIED  FT  OaiL0Ofi8B& 


«f  <kair  labour,  particolflriy'iiiiflii  tiMgr  «e  artimuy  tqd  faj  tiie 
cniinf  of  their  herds. 

Besidflstke  Fakeeni -employed  in  husbandry,  ihtte^mt  vijmy  ^tko 
tmsfk  as  maaeiM,  weaven,  dyers,  &c.  the  Afghattns  ne^er  praotilii^ 
•tay  1^  these  crafts.  Hie  situi^ion  of  some  of  these  h  ndenmen  is  pe- 
culiar. The  blacksmiths,  carpenters,  and  barbers,  together  with  the 
drununerB,  are  attached  to  particular  Cnndies,  have  a  share  of  land, 
and  work  gfratis  for  the  Cundv,  which  thev  follow  when  it  chancres  its 
residence.  All  the  others  remain  tixetl,  and  are  pnirl  hv  individiiais  ; 
even  the  rnfif^tcr  of  an  artiza?i  is  ohligcd  to  pay  liiin  tor  liin  work. 
Aighauns  who  come  from  distant  tribes,  and  wiiose  connectiotis  are 
not  known  arnonu  the  Eusofzyes,  are  ohli{?ed  to  settle  as  Fakeeis  ; 
but  Eusofzyes,  who  move  from  one  Oolooss  to  another.  ytHrticularly 
if  they  have  not  been  obliged  by  poverty  to  sell  their  lands,  are  re- 
ceived as  equals,  and  a  portion  of  land  is  ai>>si^iu d  to  them  on  con- 
dition of  serving  in  war,  like  tlie  members  of  the  Oolooss.  They  are 
not,  however,  consultetl  on  public  aiiaiib,  but  are  under  the  jjroU'o- 
tion  of  some  individual  who  looks  after  their  interests.  Some  of  the 
Deggauns,  who  are  reckoned  a  manial  people,  are  also  allowed  to 
serve  with  Eusofzyc  Ooloosses,  and  their  assistance  is  repaid  by  grants 
of  lands,  where  they  live  together,  under  chie&  of  their  own. 

Tbeatftte.of  tlie  Faikeers  is  not  exactly  the  aame  in  all  dans ;  -in  flonie 
Hiey  are  exenqii  from  paying  a  tax ;  and  the  amount  of  it,  and  ofllife 
'finM,  vmry  in  othfiocs. 

Mbiie  I  qiik  the  genefal  conoenw  of  thie  Ooloow>  I  h«ve  to  ob- 
iwrrc,  that  most  tribes  levy  tidatoma  on  goods,  that  enter  or  paaB 
Ihniiig^  their  oountiy.  The  produce  aometimea  goea  to  tlio  Oo- 
looaaea^  but  oftener  to  the  dikf. 

Hieir  trade  out  of  their-  omi  Kmita,  -ia  not  oonaideiaibie.  Thity 
export  gnun  to  Fadumr*  and  import  aome  of  the*finer  mamActami, 
bat  thoae  in  eidinaty  uae  are-made  nt-Jioine.  '  ' 

What  I  have  aaid  of  their  government,  haa  ahready  thream  aome 
ligst  on  the  numners  of  the  Eoaofryea;  iHiat  remains,  alndi  be  added 
'to  a  aligjht  aooount  of  their  emtoma  and  babiia  af  USfi, 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


HOUSES^  DBXM8,  AND  MAMNBBS  QE  IH&  KUSOFZYE& 

Hie  liooifr  in  Ifae  Eno%e  country,  have  gflMn%  4ilW  tmi^ 
xooA.  Tli^  oonsiit  of  two  iDoaui  Mid  m  cpen  pMch*.  TW  kuMff 
WMtt  hiioiiga  totha  wuBMte  f  <kftaitwoo«iBiiMilibr  the  niiD  49  rit 
In*  nd  raoiptioii  of  viriUm^  fant  in  hot  msflllMv  the  poNb  li 

need  for  theie  purpoMs.  They  sit  en  low  beds*  inede  of  loeihcr 
eCvetdied  ovef  e  woodsn  fieitie$  five  btr  ifai  ef  wfaiidii  witii  ■ome 
^pdlte  to  deep  oader,  eoiae  ettkhai  nd  woodei  wi<iali»  |«d  tome 
.tmiiki  §01  rWhoB,  cdaflpoee  thie  whole  fiimfture  of  e  houMk  Tli^ 
hi^eahrsys  two  metis  e-de^)  which  eeaettle  of  bleed* 

fniUb  end  e  eoit  of  coide  s  end  e  Hmniir  eomiMMed  of  faisBed*  mdeeb 
end  dCte  vi^getebleti  wifih  m  eddkion  of  mot,  hot  vmy  mnfy^  lu 

etnoen* 

The  otduMfy  dress  of  .liie  men  is  •  cotton  tudc,  made  to  fit  the 
bodf  down  to  the  waiffc,  end  then  loose  end  fiill  down  to  below  the 
kneeej  it  is  cither  dmUlaek  or  i^ed  grey  the  bn-k  of  thn 
poiTicgranate  tveOi  Tliejr  ebo  way  a  large*  loose^  white  turban*  n 
peir  of  ootton  trowseifi  end  a  pair  of  sandels ;  but  their  dress  is  not 
complete  without  a  Loongee  *,  which  hangi  over  the  AaukLetf  end 
veaches  below  the  middle,  both  before  and  beldnd.  it  Is  eotnetUMi 
used  for  a  cloak,  and  sometimes  for  a  girdle.  They  have  dwa^  e 
better  suit  of  clothes  for  Fridays  and  great  occasions.  The  tunic  ii 
then  made  kmgar  and  fuller  below,  and  is  puckered  up  about  the 
waist  in  numerous  plaits.  The  rest  of  the  holidejr  okthes  eze  ef 
coloured  silk,  except  the  turban. 

The  women  wcnr  a  p^own  rinse  over  the  breast,  and  very  wide  be» 
low.  They  wear  many  goki  an(i  silver  omaments,  like  those  iif?ed  in 
India.  Neither  ^ex  wear  the  long  shirt  which  is  so  coniinori  among 
the  other  At^-^liaims.  The  women  of  the  Eusofzyes  are  caieluily  con- 
cealed, ami  never  leave  their  hoiisrs  without  putting  on  the  cloak 
called  a  Boorka,  which  covers  them  from  head  to  foot    The  women 


*  AJbtf^lnadlMdiisf  «f  Um  aft  and  oottoaaiiad 

Y  T  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHABACTER  OF  THE  EUSOFZna  . 


do  not  woric  oaft  d  doon  i  ihofe  d  die  poofstt  hmd  bring  ib  mtery 

but  they  always  do  lo  bj 

vfllages  ai<e  baUt  in  ■tracto»  but  widioat  any  partunlir  ngmd^ 
to  dfder.  Hmj^  »e»  b<Mi«¥er,  veiy  neat  and  dflan»  and  hmre  many 
miilbeny  Ireaaj  and  othar  fruit  treei  planted  np  and  down  tbem. 
Eveiy  bouse  bai  a  little  gaiden  and  a  few  Tuiea. 

Moat  cftbe  Uboor  being  done  by  tbe  FakeeiSi  none  bo^ 
Eniofirfes  aie  obliged  td'work;  tbe  otbera  aometinioa  take  a  ibare  in 
the  laboora  of  Ibeir  dwii.fiddi^  but  it  ia  rather  fix  excRise^  and  to  we£ 
an  example^  than  to  work  in  eameat  llie^^  howew,  loperintsnd 
the  ddtiTatian,  atad  diiect  the  opantioni  of  their  Fakeans  and  lund 
Iflbonren*  When  not  ao  engngedi  tbsy  go  to  the  Hoqpi^  «heM|  in 
winter,  diey  spend  the  greater  part  of  the  day,  in  conversing  and 
iinokiiig  rJond  a  fire.  CuUeeauns  are  kapt  there  ibr  pnblie  use,  as 
few  pebple^amoke'  at  home.  They  have  sometimes  boys,  and  somen 
timea  wbrneui  to  danee^  and  aing  ballada  and  other  aoi^  The  £u^ 
aofi^res  themselves  seldom  ring,  and  never  play  at  any  of  those  active 
games  iidiich  delig^  the  simple  inhabitants  of  Khftfassssnk  Thisir 
only  amusements  are  firing  at  marks  with  bows  and  arrows,  or matdK 
lodu,  and  eketrcising  themselves  in  the  use  of  the  sword; 

Living  among  a  conquered  people,  like  Spartans  among  Helots, 
and  enjoying  entire  independence  on  all  around,  every  Eusofzye  is 
■filled  with  the  idea  of  his  own  dignity  and  importance.  Tlicir  pride 
appears  in  tlie  seclusion  of  their  women,  in  the  gravity  of  their  nuin- 
ners,  and  in  the  hitjh  terms  in  which  they  speak  of  themsi  h  es  and 
their  tribe,  not  aliowin|i  e\en  the  Dooraunees  to  be  their  e(jii;ils. 
Tlieir  independence  and  eentmuai  quarrels  make  tl^m  suspicious 
and  irritable,  render  their  manners  repulsive,  and  takes  away  the 
openness  and  plainness  which  pleases  so  much  in  the  other  Afghauns. 
They  are  generally  iiout  men,  but  their  form  and  complexion  ad- 
mits of  mucli  variety.  In  those  whose  appearance  is  most  cha- 
racteristic of  their  tribe,  one  is  struck  with  their  fair  complexions, 
grey  eyes,  and  red  beards,  by  the  military  affectation  of  their  car- 
riage, aud  by  their  haughty  and  insolent  demeanour.    They  are 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHARACTER  OF  TH£  £USOFZY£S.  3^ 

nil  tmnre  tad  hoopitable^  though  &r  infenor  m  Uui  qaility  to  the 
weitetn'tribea.  TImj  iie»  iMnrerar*  libcnl  fm  ttiriif  om  rTwmwii 
y  >  mm  fa  fgdaegd  to  pgmlji,  io  aitbheiniable  tohii«.ftkfaQi]ter» 
«r  to  b0  oUiged  to  sdl  hb  1ni4»  hfl  is  obiflvved  to  M  mto  lim  qpi^ 
finn  iramilfid-  piidei  andf  t£  he  fa  not  toon  leHerady  qdts  hfa  tribes 
ind  goes  on  »  pOgiink^  toMBoca»  orMUout  to  tijr  hfa  ftirtiiiie id 
Indfa}  but  if  he  be  a  brave  end  rfeqpectable  Maah-  hfa  mnte  are  no 
sooner  known*  than  a  subscriptkn  fa  nude  ibr  lum,  and  he  fa  placed 
in  a  situatioii  which  allows  him  to  remain  at  home  wtthouk  shame. 
Anodier  mode  of  obtainhig  relief  is  practised,  hot  is  rare,  because  it 
fa  ccmsidered  as  degndingi  It  is  brought  about  by  the  distressed 
person  going  round  the  viUages  in  hfa  neighbourhood,  and  stopping 
ooteide  of  each,  and  waving  his  Loongeew  Hie  signal  fa  immediate 
understood,  and  never  fiuls  to  produce  a  contribution. 

The  Euaofeyes  of  the  upper  countri^  are  remarkably  sober,  and 
free  from  vices,  but  those  of  the  plains  are  notorious  for  every  sort 
of  debauchery ;  vices  which  are  not  to  be  named,  nrc  practLscd  uni- 
versally with  the  most  disgusting  publicity}  and  gambliii::,  and  the 
intoxication  which  is  produced  by  opium,  bang,  and  other  druf^s,  are 
carried  to  the  utmost  exce?;s.  Nevertheless,  these  very  tribes  are  re- 
markable tor  their  religious  zeal  and  intolerance,  for  their  attention 
to  all  tho  forms  of  devotion,  and  for  the  profound  respect  which  they 
bear  tor  MooUhIis.  Tlie  tyranny  of  these  priests  is  there  carried  to 
an  intolerable  pitch.  They  connive  at  the  notorious  vices  of  the 
people,  in  wliich  indeed  they  share  themselves,  but  they  abstain  from 
going  to  the  most  innocent  meetings  at  the  Hooji  as,  as  inconsistent 
with  the  sanctity  of  their  character  j  and  they  punish  an  omission  of 
the  stated  pravprs,  or  a  breach,  of  the  established  fasts  by  pubhc  ex- 
'  posure  on  mi  and  by  severe  corporal  punishment. 
.  Very  different  is  their  condition  in  the  mountains,  and  particularly 
in  Upper  Swaut  Hiey  are  fiur  moce  leally  respectable  there  than  in 
the  plains ;  hot  as  th^  am  thnid  and  nnwadiliei  th^  aie  hM  m 
Hoonteiiipt,  and  treated  Uttle  better  than  Fafceen*  Eran  leaduig  fa 
'^looked  down  on  there  as  an  nnmaidy  accomplishment.  Some  men 


Digitized  by  Google 


a50 


TURCX>LAUNEE& 


of  tlM  Kaikpe^MHl  finuNl  ii  Uoolldi  coppag  Oie  B1Mmiii»  mi  not 

tril  US  ttiiwirr  fioote  dcxnie  finm  God»  and  here  ydit  ve  maidi^  theni 
ydinid£"  The^OitfEuMi&jesDflhevilli^UaiDeAtfae 
ffpliined  tiiQ^  utd  made  them  own  Uiey  had  been  incon- 

admte;  audi  k  the  impeitanoe  attached  to  the  Uii  of  a  BiooUah 
among  llie  NailipeeldMiL  * 


*  The  nomben  of  the  Euiofzyes  that  are  to  be  met  with  in  India,  recal  attentifio 
to  the  Al^^uuin  emigrations,  wliich  I  have  omitted  in  Uie  proper  place.  Tlie  frequency 
wtdi  iMA  they  emigratek  aeema  inoooiirtant  with  tlu»  love  of  their  country,  which  I  ham 
ascribed  to  them;  but  (lie  snme  thing  takes  place  among  the  Hi>+i!nndern,  whose  ?r>rnl 
attachments  are  known  to  be  ^  strong.  Th«  caute  k  the  some  iii  boOi  caaesi  the  absence 
of  tradoi  among  the  Highlander*,  and  thedugraoe  of  engaging  in  them  WOO^g  dw 
A^faaims,  r«ider  land  abKoUueiy  necessary  to  the  support  of  each  individual,  and  lAo 
ever  is  without  hint!,  tm!«t  (|Nit  thp  cotinTry  In  tin- woi  of  At^jhniini'Jtmirii  where  mar- 
riages are  iate^  t*¥i  laud  plenty,  emi^ruUoa  is  rare ;  but  liie  ea:>L  iius  poured  out  a  COB- 
tinB,^  ^  iliwMtuiwrs^  far  a  period     ffreat  dnwrtion.  Hieae  have  ahmji  tafcn 

die  direction  of  India-  The  greater  part  of  that  cnnntry  vas  many  centuries  In  the  pos- 
!>^sion  of  A%faaun  dynasties,  and,  even  after  their  fall,  the  Mogni  armica  were  akwuyn 
recruited  t>y  foreigners  iu  preference  to  nativek  These  cwiae*  filbd  bdia  with  colonies 
of  Ae  Jcwfwidatiti  of  A^unuu*  who  an  vow  called  Pataxu*  and  who  are  tbund  in  all 
parts  of  Hindostan  and  the  Decean,  somctiTiie's  niixod  w  ith  tho  rr^t  of  tl?r  inhabitants, 
and  sometimes  collected  nnder  chiefr  of  their  own,  like  the  Nabobs  of  Furrukabad  and 
Ikpaul,  Comoule  and  CNiddoppib  Jim  gr«atat  colony  is  iSut  §ifmitd  diiefly  by 
Ewoficyea,  at  no  very  remote  period*  I  allude  to  the  settlement  of  the  Rohillas,  whoi» 
war?  w-itVt  hj  have  rendered  their  nnmo  so  wrll  Ichohti  in  li^rigland.  An  account  f»f  their 
establishment  may  be  found  in  Hamilton  s  Koiuiia  Aighauns,  aixl  of  their  downlaii  in  the 

chiefs  were  the  lords  of  the  soil,  and  the  other  Afghauns  their  tenants,  and  generally 
their  >ir>1dif  rs ;  but  there,  and  every  where,  the  common  A%haaii»  ahoiwed  an  indepen- 
dence, and  the  ohi£ft  a  spirh  itf  oonsfliatioi^  peodfar  to  UmUImMil  llMtntN^ioM 
Mid  iffitn^mif  of  thit  Eusoficye  colonists,  render  them  imiMiNiIar  among  the  EngUA 
gendemeii ;  who,  on  the  other  }innd,  are  disliked  by  the  Rohillas  for  t)if^  n^^^iit^ce  thef 
gave  to  the  Kabob  Vizier,  in  conquering  their  country;  but  all  admit  that  the  RohiHlt 
arethebvwMttMidimwelwMcwer  ooatBidadSrilb  kilA  TiMir  UadBmi  to  ddr 
Hindoo  sabjoell  CtfUWt  be  denied ;  and  the  state  of  improvement  to  which  they  bad 
brought  their  country,  excited  the  admiration  of  our  troops,  and  h»M  hefn  disiilsfyf-*!  with 
enthusiastic  eloqiuence  by  Burke.  Hie  coldest. phrases  express  thai  "  it  was  cuiuvated 
.ik»»8«dn»wldiMit«Be  neglected  qpot  in  it.**  Ibm  tiam  lkl»$mng^mmttmi^, 
of  die  BritUi  ptofiuM  It  oouiati  €f  yant  fUn%  covend  widi  field*  of  oan,  m 


4 


Digitized  by  Google 


1  UEC01AL.M±Ji&  ggl 

Btj/smt  iahomniMdiQaihe  west  by  the  southern  projedion  of  Wm- 
a>o  JCooeh,  <>ftd  the  eMt..by  tfap  biUs  of  the  QHnimkhatl.  Tbtee 
mges  idso  dole  it  on  the  north,  so  a3  to  leave  hut  a  iianow  Apening 
into  JPtai|)oora  ;  on  the  south  it  has  the  hills  of  the  Upper  Mdmuidfl. 
ft  i0  an  nndwkrjng  phuBf  ebout  twenty>five  miles  long  fi'om  east  to 
WMtt  and  twelve  from  north  to  aouth.  Several  long  and  wide  valleya 
nm  down  to  it  from  the  snmamdiiig  mountains,  which  in  other 
places  are  inaccessible,  not  move  from  their  steepneoM  .than  from  the 
thick  woods ''with  which  they  are  covcfed.  The  plain  resembles  thftt 
of  Feshawer,  which  it  equals  in  fertility ;  wheat  is  the  chief  produoe* 
It  is  divided  by  a  stream  which  rises  in  the  southern  projection,  re- 
oeives  a  brook  from  each  of  the  valleys,  and,  after  joining  the 
Daiinishkool,  in  the  country  ot  the  Upper  Momunds,  falls  into  the 
river  of  Swaut  ahove  Hnshtnugger.  Tlie  two  chief  towns,  Bajour 
and  Xaw;igj  e,  contain  each  about  one  thousand  houses.  The  plain 
is  connectetl  with  PuTi  jt  orn  by  a  long  valley  which  jiscends  to  the 
latter  district;  it  is  caiied  Berawul  ;  part  of  it  is  well  cultivnted.  but 
the  rest  is  occupied  hv  a  deep  ioiest  of  various  trees,  anion^r  vviiich 
are  the  oak,  ami  jierlKips  the  cedar  The  forest  Hbouiul^i  in  wild 
beasts,  and  is  in  most  parts  so  thick,  as  to  exclude  ihe  i»un,  and  al- 
most to  keep  off  the  rain.  Berawul  is  distinguished  iirom  the  rest  of 
Bajour,  by  its  having  a  separate  chief.  '  • 

Bi^our  belongs  to  the  Afghaun  tribe  of  Turcolaunee,  or  Turkau> 


orchards  of  Mangoe  treeH,  and  filled  mth  pc^almn  toims  and  flouriBhiqg  villi^ee.  l^e 
Bmnlfym  fmti  rfdit  Isffgeit  and  fiiMSl  in  India;,  sad  an  i^^reesUe  Uttle  tof^i 

call«l  Nugcrnn;  wherp  I  was  encamped  for  Rome  weeks,  contains  at  lou«t  ~  inli  ili:- 
tanta,  aUbough  it  u  in  no  map,  and  is  scarcely  heard  of  bqrond  the.  limits  of  Uoiiilcund. 
•ElwTCi^dnesof  the  MMMbit  at  Rampoor,  tln|bapa«i'«f  ;v]ikfc,|ilase  jtifl  jrspsiHb 

dmeof  the  Berdooraunets.    Pushtoo  is  the  principal  langui^'-attl  one  ifW^bi;!]^ 

■qaare  before  the  Nabob's  palace,  fair,  stron'?,  sin*)  }intM)«:omo  vonn!?  mm.  sittiiirir  or 
lounging  on  beds*  with  that  air  of  idleness  aud  iadepeMdeuce  which  distingiuiihei>  the 
BiiiuiBiyee. 

*  It  u  caiied  BiUuudzye,  and  i»  aaid  to  be  a  very  lofty  tree,  -  like  a  fir,  but  with  red 


Digitized  by  Google 


2^2  MANNERS  AND  CHARACTER. 

nee,  but  it  alio  cootoins  otlier  inhabitants ;  the  upper  hOk  being  in- 
babited  by  converted  Caufin,  the  lower  by  Hindkees,  and  the  pleiir 
bj  a  mixture  of  all  tribes  and  nations,  confounded  under  the  common 
mme  of  Koadbatweei*  The  number  of  the  Turcolaunees  amount  to 
tm  or  twdve  thousand  families,  and  those  of  the  other  inhabitanti 
may  be  guessed  at  thirty  thousand  souls. 

The  Turcolaunees  are  under  the  government  of  a  diief^  called  faj 
the  peculiar  name  of  Bauz,  who  has  great  power  over  hb  tribe.  The 
Caufirs  ]iay  him  tribute,  the  Hindkees  pay  him  a  tax,  and  the  Road- 
baurees  rent  their  land  of  him  for  a  fifth  of  its  produce.  This  givep 
him  a  revenue  of  one  humlred  thousand  rupees,  by  whirh  he  is  en- 
abled to  keep  up  some  huiuh  c d  horse,  and  a  considerable  body  of 
foot,  of  whom  he  furnishes  tive  hundred  to  the  roval  army.  He  ad- 
ministers justice  in  his  tribe,  with  power  to  banisli,  beat,  or  bind. 
He,  however,  seldom  interposes,  unless  the  public  peace  is  di8turbed» 
and  he  seldom  calls  a  Jeerrifa. 

This  absolute  governinent,  and  the  want  of  Fakeers,  make  tiie 
character  of  tlie  TurcoJ  buncos  a  contrast  to  that  of  the  Eusofzyes, 
whom  they  resemble  in  Llieii  food,  lodging,  and  habits  of  life, 
Though  brave,  they  are  industrious,  but  cheeriul  and  ibnd  of  amuse* 
ment  The  often  meet  to  converse,  sing,  and  play  on  the  guitar } 
and  they  have  even  some  of  the  active  games  of  Ehorassaun.  The 
hw  I  have  seai,  seemed  to  bear  acme  resemblance  to  ih6  Mussul- 
aMma  of  India*  fkntlciilarly  of  the  Deckin :  like  them  they  were  tM 
aad  obaeqiiiouay  butboeatfulj  and  lively,  but  hnrried  and  oonfoied; 
13ie  lliem  also  they  qpoketnuch,  and  nsed  a  great  deaLof  gestoieb 
Ihenr  dieas  is  tiie  A%heim  cmeen,  and  a  little  cqp  of  wrought  ailk. 
Tliey  frequently  nxvade  the  Caufica '£»r  pimider»  and  to  cany  off 
dvrmi  the  Caufiia letaliate^  ttui  only  by  ambuaeadea  and  auipiue^ 
bemj^'too  weak  for  epen'  war. 

At  -preaeut  the  .  Tiiroohnmeea  are  bvdken.  into  two  diTiaioiia,  in 
oonaeqaence  of  the  govemment'a  being  diapoted  between  .the  two 
wphewi  of  the  J»te.QM. 


Digitized  by  Google  ' 

1 


I 


OTMAUNKHAIL.  353 

'  Hie  hills  of  the  Otmaimldiail  leparate  Swaut  from  Bajoiir.  Th^ 
are  divided  from  the  lower  rai^^  of  Hindoo  Coo«ht  to  whidi  thejr 
evidently  iMki^  fay  the  valley  of  Punjcora.  They  ten  .  of  oonsider- 
able  but  unequal  he^g^itli*  The  snow  lies  for  five  or  ox  months  on 
the  hi^est.  Their  northern  face,  though  steep,  has  a  gradual  ascent, 
but  the  southern  face  is  abrupt  and  precipitous ;  cattle  often  faU 
from  the  cliffs,  and  are  dashed  to  pieces.  Thf*  northern  side  is  par- 
tially cleared,  and  cultivated.  Almost  tht^  wliole  of  the  cultivation  is 
carried  on  on  terraces  rising  above  each  other  on  the  slopes  of  the 
mountains. 

Besides  these  hills,  the  Otmaiinkliail  have  a  slip  of  level  country 
on  the  skirts  of  Bajour,  and  two  long  but  narrow  valleys  which  open 
into  Lowi  r  Swaut. 

.  The  Otniaiinkhails  come  abroad  so  little,  that  I  never  saw  one  at 
Peshawcr,  and  have  met  but  one  siuce  I  was  there.  Thev  are  on 
bad  terms  with  their  neighbours,  who  have  given  them  the  character 
of  a  barbarous  and  lawless  horde ;  they  describe  them  as  tali,  stout, 
and  Mr,  but  my  that  they  often  go  naked  from  the  waist  upwnrds, 
that  iilie  women  laboiir  like  Uie  men,  and'lliat  creiy  thing  among 
Aem  ihewa  the  abmnee  of  ciyilifitmn  . 

Bnt  the  OtoiamiHiall  wiiom  I  htpre  aean,  wm  hhnaelf  a  mild  and 
intelligent  mntf  and  gave.the  felkming  account  of  hk  tnbew 
i-  They  hare  a.  Kfaann,  who  poamwoo  great  power*  and  puniahea 
hlaodihed  bj  heavy  fmea,  and  bj  awanling  eompenrntaon  to  the  ie' 
latwmt  of  the  flcitwtfg'l- 

Thejf  have  fiecpient  ^^pMncla  amony  tlMHi*wVfft'>  bot  not  so  many 
w  'l3bmEntelkymi  and  ihay  are  at  war  with  the  T^rcolauneai. 


*  I  huTC  never  sH-tii  these  terraceii  m  the  Otmaunkhail  country,  but  li  they  rt»eiuble 
those  I  have  seen  in  die  country  under  Sreenuggnr,  no  mode  of  cultivnlka  can  be  inw- 
ginpd  that  requires  greater  industry,  and  makes  le??  rr-tvrn'^.  In  that  country,  walls  are 
made  along  the  aide*  of  the  hills,  and  filled  with  soil  from  the  lower  piut  of  the  hill ;  the 
wfJUt  are  from  three  to  ten  feet  high,  and  tlie  terraoee  ^boat  fire  yarda  broad.  Hkewalli 
it9  aoon  concealed  by  grass  and  other  vegetation,  and  as  tfa^  arc  never  tUta^b^f  hvt 
<[BBgltttli»bMdiittttoilirfweof  thcliaU,  thee<fcst  . 

a  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


UPPER  MOMUNDa 


'Their  iImw  i«.  iijiie  that  of  Bajour,  and  in  their  CQStoms*  with  re- 
•pact  to  women  tfaey^do  not  differ  nu>ch  firom  their  neighbours.  Thej 
are  a  sober  people,  and  have  none  of  the  vices  of  the  Eusofi^Tetk 
They  live  in  small  tillages  of  *from  ten  to  sixteen  terraced  honieik 

On  the  whole,  they  are  probably  less  civilized  than  their  joeig^boiirs, 
and  the  strength  of  their  own .  cmrntry  may  ten^pt  them  to  phmdov 

OS  it  secures  them  impunity. 

They  are  never  reckon^  at  less  tlian  ten  thousand  famihes,  a 
great  number,  considerinn;  the  nature  of  their  country,  but  rendered 
more  reasonable  by  the  circun^stance  of  their  having  no4idier  sk^ 

jects  or  Jb  akeerb. 

The  hills  of  Otnmunkhail  turn  to  the  westward  wheu  tliey  ap« 
proach  the  Caubul  river,  aiid  stretch  in  that  direction  nearly  to  the 
riv«:  of  Kauslikar,  where  they  are  joined  by  other  brandies  from  the 
southern  projection  of  Hindoo  Coosh.  All  tliis  part  of  the  hills  be- 
longs to  tlie  Upper  ^lomunds,  who  also  possess  the  plain  between 
their  hills  and  the  Caubul  river,  and  part  of  the  nearest  hills  and 
plain  on  the  southern  side  of  the  same  stream.  The  southern  part 
of.lheir,  country  ia  .mdiided  m  Khyber,  and  iar  .tlus  ieaion»  the 
Uppv  Mommids  are  often  comitod  among  the  Khybeveei*  < 
!•'  ThA  hilla  are  generaUj  lsw«  but  stony  and  rugged.  8aam  ooLj  lies 
on  lhmL.*&a  ftvr.dajnh  flioapt  em  Gaufaiql  Sufc  (»  U]|  mnr 
the  nortli  bank  of  iheii?er).  lliej  are  bare^  eioflpt  in  tome  jplaoesi 
«riiefe  diflj  have  thickets  isnd  sostteied  bushes  of.diiBMit  kimi% 
and  (in  some  hollows)  the  ususl  momitain  tiees.  Ms&j  parts  of 
tHam  are  uniwlmi^jtf^^ 

The  wastes  ate  cbyeied  with  a  buah  called  Mnrria»  which  is  like 
the  top  of  a  palm  tree*  but  is  no  hi|^ier  than  a  man. 

The  climate  is  cold  for  four  months;  but  the  heat  of  summer  is 
jgctreme.  The  sumoon  is  often  ^rtaU  and  tihe  blasts  from  Mnir  Gob 
(one  of  the  hills  south  of  the  river),  are  the  dread  of  all-tiatveUflfs 
in  the  hot  season. 

;  The  Currapa  £^mss  which  leads  from  Peshawer  to  JeUailabad,  is  in 
the  Momund  icpirotij  i  it  is  sometimes  traveUedy  but  as  it  abounda  in  < 


Digitized  by  Google 


EMPLOYMENT  OF  THE  POFUUkTlON. 


nigged  aaodnts  and  defiles,  and  as  the  Gaubul  river,  there  stony  and 
irapid,  mutt  be  often  croaaed,  the  aouthem  load  thioaig^  Skyber,  i» 
generally  prefiaRed,- 

The  niimbeni  of  the  Upper  Momunda  are  awd  to  be  ten-dioinaad 
ftmiliea ;  a  populatioii  in  which  I  chi  acsrcely  bdiev^  aa  many  parta 
of  iibe  MUa  are  uninhabited,  and  otheia  diinly  peopled,  while  the  po* 
^alatkm  of  die  plaina  ia  probafalj  oompoaed  in  jpait  of  Hindkeds. ' . 

ThB  goremment  ia  di^uhur.  The  direct  power  of  Ihe  Kbaiin  ia 
anall,  exoqpt  in  militaiy  cgqiedmuuii»  but  hia  influence  with;  the 
MnDiha  'ia'great»  and  their  anihority  ia  atrang  in  their  dana.  Tbe 
Khmm  tiiBea  no  ahere  in  the  admiidatnrtion  of  juatice*  iiielfiill&a 
aettle'diapntea  by  mcana  of  Jeeigaa.  The  Khaim  dertrea  no  tercBue 
fiom  the  tribe,  and  haa  no  greater  share  in  the  Momund  coanbjr  dm 
any  other  individual ;  but  he  hblda  some  landa  of  the  King,  andie- 
.  eahrea  a penaion  besides;  in  retain,  he  is  answerable  for  the  safety 
of  travellers  in  the  Currapa  Vnu,  and  fumiahea  from  three  to  five 
hundred  horse  for  the  royal  army.  Travellers  would  be  plundered 
lAo  attempted  to  go  through  the  Momund  countiy  alane^  'bol  • 
aingle  Momund  will  pass  a  whole  caravan. 

Their  dress  and  ibod  are  like  thoae  of  Baioor,  but  their  dweUin^ 
are  hovels  made  of  mats. 

They  live  in  very  small  hamlets,  and  the  shepherds  are  scnttrred 
o^  er  the  hills  in  single  cottaf?es,  winch  are  only  inhabited  in  suniiner. 
Dieir  hirge  villages,  Laulpoora,  Katimeh,  and  Goshtpli.  contain  only 
texracetl  houses,  and  are  consider;)} )le  places.  Tiie  two  last  are 
Willed.  They  are  inhabited  by  chiets  and  their  retainers  (who  are 
not  generally  Momunds),  and  by  Hindkees. 

Most  of  the  country  people  are  employ eil  iu  agriculture,  and  some 
in  feeding  flocks  on  the  uninhabited  parts  of  the  hills.  In  winter, 
-these  emplo^Tjicnts  are  suspended,  and  they  fill  up  their  time  at 
home,  with  making  inaLs,  saiululs,  &c,  fecm  the  leaves  of  the  dwarf 
palm.  They  export  their  mats  to  Peshawer,  uud  al»io  carry  grain  to 
diedarge  villages,  receiving  returns  in  salt,  cotton  cloth,  coarse  silks, 
inft  flonie  other  articles. 

z  z  9 


Digitized  by  Google 


356 


KHYBEREESL 


Two  KhiOs  of  the  Upper  Momundi  Uve  in  black  tents,  keep 
aunelfly  taod  move  in  spring  with  their  flodu  to  (he  'upper  put  of  (he' 
Heehnund  in  Khofeasaun.  Ttteae  are  the  onfy  nknring  hordfit 
among  the  Berdooranneei. 

The  Klijberees  live  aanang  the  iieads  of  the  nnmeroua  branchea 
which  issoe  from  the  northern  and  eaatern  ftcea  'of  Bpeengliur^  er 
Su&id  GohJ  Ibej  derive  thdr  name  from-  the  valky  or  paaa  of 
Khyfaer,  which  extends  on  the  fi^  of  the  CSiabul  river*  between 
Fediawer  and  JdhiUabad*  and  fimna  the  notthem  border  of  their 
poaaceaioni  thejr  are  bounded  on  the  weat  by  the  uninhabitable  smn- 
mita  of  Sufiud  Cah ;  on  the  south,  they  have  the  Bungnah  oomrtiy* 
and  on  die  north-ea^t  the  plain  of  Peshawer ;  but  on  the  aouth  coat 
they  extend  ahx^  the  Range  of  S4"«  nearly  (o  the  Indus. 

Hie  country  is  very  diversified.  The  upper  part  is  litoated  on 
the  steep  side  of  a  lofty  ni6untain>  and  the  lower'  amcHig  bare  and 
rugged  hills,  and  rich  but  narrow  vallgra. 

The  climate  varies  from  great  cold  to  excessive  heat  In  general  it 
is  cool,  but  the  lower  valleys  arc  hot,  from  the  stagnation  of  the  air 
occasioned  by  the  mountains  which  siirround  them,  and  the  low  bare 
hills  are  there,  a.s  every  where,  intolerably  hot  in  summer. 

The  Khyberees  consist  of  three  indt  |h  ndeiit  tribes,  exclusive  of 
the  Upper  Momunds.  These  arc  tlu  Atu  i  cK  t  s,  Shainwaurees,  and 
Oorookzyes.  Altogether  ilicy  ■,ivv  about  120,000  souls.  The  Shain- 
waurees are  the  least  immerous,  but  they  are  the  best  people  of  the 
three,  and  most  subject  to  the  King's  authority.  The  others  are 
secured  from  subju^raf  ion  bv  the  strength  of  their  country;  but  the 
importance  of  the  Kiij,ber  });iss  (the  great  communication  between 
Peshavvci  and  Caubul),  rentiers  it  necessary  for  the  Iviiig  to  have 
some  control  over  their  proceedings.  They  accordingly  receive  great 
pensions,  on  condition  of  answering  for  the  quiet  of  the  road ;  but 
auch'  ara  Iheir  habits  of  rapine,  thi^  thqr  can  never  be  tntiidy're- 
atramed  ilrein  plundering  passengers and  liliai  lfaeve:  ut  any  confix 
aiofi  in  the  atate,  it  is  impoaaihle  to  paaa  ifardng^'their  coinCry.  '  The 
Khyber  paaa  ia  about  twenty-£ve  mileB  long,  over  ateep  ridg^  tfid 

to 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPEARANCE,  MANNERS.  AND  CHARACTER.  557 

dttongh  wy  nainm  dcfilei.  The  nMd  is'  oAm  aloi^  the  bedi  of 

torrents,  and  18  eoctmaely  dangMWiB  in  the  event  of  nddm  &]]s  of 
rain  itt  the  bills.    In  quiet  tunes,  the  Khyberees  have  itetioiis  in 

different  parts  of  the  pass^  to  collect  an  authorised  toll  on  passengers, 
but  in  timfle  of  trouble,  thej  are  all  on  the  alert  If  a  single  traveller 
endeavours  to  make  his  way  threi^gb*  the  noise  of  his  horse's  feet 
sounds  up  the  long  narrow  valleys,  and  soon  brings  the  Khybeiees  in 

troops  from  the  hills  and  rMvines  ;  but  if  they  expect  a  caravan,  th^ 
assemble  in  hundreds  on  the  sirlr  of  a  hill,  and  sit  patiently*  with 
their  muttlWock;^  in  their  iiunds,  watcliiiin^  its  approfich. 

The  Khyberees  are  lean,  but  muscular  mt  n,  whh  long  gaunt  faces, 
high  noses  and  cheek-bones,  and  black  complexions.  They  wear, 
in  winter  at  least,  dark-blue  turbaus,  and  long  dark4}iue  tunics,  sit- 
ting close  to  the  bmly,  but  reaching  to  the  middle  of  the  leg.  They 
wear  n&ai  sandals  of  straw,  or  the  leaf  of  the  dwarf  palm  ;  carry 
matchlocks,  with  a  wooden  fork  attached  to  the  barrel  lor  a  r^t, 
swoidis,  and  shfirt  spears  j  and  have  altogether  an  appearance  more 
strange  aud  uncouth  than  any  other  Atghauns  1  ever  saw. 

In  their  valleys  they  have  terraced  houses,  but  in  the  mountains, 
which  diey  chiefly  inhabit  m  summer,  they  haye  movealiile 
huts  of  mat,  like  thxwe  of  the  Upper  Momunds.  They  come  down 
into  the  law  hOk  in  winter,  where  tfaej  chiefly  live  m  caves  cut 
out  of  the  endiy  pwt  of  the  hills*  They  sre  extremely  impatiant  of 
hfitrtt 

Hiejr  are  exeeQcBt  marksmen,  and  are  ledconed  good  hill  soldien, 
tibouglh  of  no  great  account  in  the  plain.  They  are  often  employed 
in  this  sort  of  waxfiu:e»  as  &r  ^em  their  oountiy  as  Kbte  Kaungm  In 
the  eastern  atramily  of  the  Fm^anb.  They  aiC!»  hiywever,  more  di»> 
poaed  to^ondv  than  war,  and  will  fill  on  the  baggage  of  the  army 
diey  bdkMig  to,  if  they  find  it  unguarded.  It  was  thus- they  behaved 
to  Shah  Shujah  in  the  heat  of  die  battle  of  Eahpaun,  and  fay  these 
means  lost  him  the  day.  .  • 

,  ;On  the  wholes  they  are  the  graatest  xobban  among  the  A%hauns, 
and  I  imagine  have  no  faith  or  sense  of  honour,  for  I  never  heard  of 


558  TBIBIS  OP  PESHAWBB. 

any  body  hiiiqg  an  escort  of  Ehjfanaes  to  Moiirehis  passage  thnmgh 
their  countxyj  a  step  which  aiwagfa  eoiOMa  •  tnveUor'a mfiBtj  in  the 

lands  of  any  other  tribe.  ^ 

Tbe  plain  of  Feshawer,  which  Hesi  immediately  to  the  south  of  the 
Ikisoizyes,  is  nearly  circular,  and  about  thirty-five  miles  in  diameter. 
It  Is  surrounded  by  mountains  on  all  sideS)  except  the  east,  where  a 
narrow  slip  of  barren  coLinti  j  runs  along  the  banks  of  the  CaubiJ 
river  to  the  Indus.  Tliis  slip  is  about  fifteen  milt  s  hroad,  aiul  litjs 
between  the  mountains  of  Boonere,  and  the  Ran^'e  oi  latitude  34", 
which  bounds  the  plmn  of  i^esliawer  on  the  south  ;  on  the  south-west 
of  the  plain  are  the  hiUs  of  the  Kiijberees,  round  the  lof^v  peak  of 
Suffkid  Cob  ;  on  the  west  are  the  hills  of  the  Otmauiikliuil  iuid  the 
Upper  jN'Jomunds,  over  which  are  seen  far  higher  mountains. 

The  soil  of  the  plain  is  a  rich  black  mould.  The  surface  is  wavy, 
but  the  whole  plain  lies  scmudi  lower  than  the  surrounding  countries) 
that  the  water  feadbflft  ilmoat  jevery  part  of  -  it,  and  secures  it  a  per- 
petual Teidiii«b.  ThiB  abundaiioct  of  watar  it  even  aomeliiaaB-Aik-aa 
an  inoonvenience  in  the  lower  paita  of  tlie  plain,  and  partioularly  in 
the  town,  part  of  wluch  ia  flooded  in  the  ^)ring  raini. 

Tbe.iblJowing  aie  generally  called  the  tribes  of  PesbAwar : 

Hie  Mafaommedajea* 
-  Giiggieeaaneea* 
Mehm^dfl. 
Khnlleela,  and 
Dawoodxyear 

The  M^ommetkyes  and  Guggeeaunees  live  on  the  Eosofzye  side 
of  the  Caubul  river;  their  settlement  has  already  bean  related.  Th^ 
manners  resemble  those  of  the  Eusofzyes ;  but  thej  are  in  obedience 
to  the  King,  and  under  strict  subjection  to  their  owh  chiefs.  The 
chief  place  of  the  Mahommedzyes  is  Hushtnuggur,  which  may 
either  be  considered  as  one  veiy  huge  town^  or  aa  eigjht  oonftigooua 
Tillages,  .  . 


Digitized  by  Googic 


DR£S£^  MAMtOiiUB^  AliD  CHAEACTEa.  iM 

Guggeenneat  it  fiwthouwmd'fiiiBwii.  " 
HM'tJntevdien  fim.tlid''GlioiKieTir  (ShoraeddniL  Xb&at  tki 
middle  of  the'  fifteenth  naaturj,  the^  w«»  iMtded  to  Hieifeit  i|f 
Giinmnn;  aloiig  the  river  Tliimiks  and  in  teibei'sitinie  (ebeiit  A.  H» 
915),  tHe  Mefamendt  «t  leert  ieem  to  hivve  been  to  the  Mmth  of 
Gtimee,  Tlief 'ippeer  at  that  penbd  «o-h«ve-  been  peitlj,  if  not 
entinly  peatdieL 

They  descended  to  Peahwfer  in  the  reign  of  Canmreim 
Bnbar»  end'witlilheeMistaneeof  'dut'prinoey  drove  thelXhuHmks 
nacbas  the  Indnsrof  tfait  'niuneroas  and'  pbwerM  trib^  there  are 
IMnrenlytVfo'or  three  villages,  tothe^weat  «f  the  Indus.  Them 
are,  however,  some  tfaouaand  DUaaanka  0D1  the  Indian  aide  of  the 
iiver*  '  ■  •  ..  .  » 

From  their  leaidence  in  an  •open  plain,  these  tribea  moat  a}w8ys 
have  been  in  complete  dependence  on  the  King.  Ihey  aaret  indeedf 
the  itiost  ndgeet  of  the  Afghaun  tribes,  and  are,  in  consequence,  ex- 
posed to  iJ)p|niaaaioii,  which  they  bear  with  a  good  deal  of  impatience. 
The  chief  injury  which  they  sufier,  is  from  the  troops  foraging^  in 
their  fields' while  the  King  is  at  Peshawer.  They  have  twice  rebelled, 
and  are  said  to  have  had  a  design  of  expelling  the  King^s  governor, 
and  imitntinn;  the  independeiice- of  the  £iuoizye8,  which  they  ccr* 
tainlv  admire  and  env^'. 

The  chiefs  of  the  tribes  are  here  called  the  .Urbaubs  ;  their  powers 
vary  in  i\w  ditit  rent  tribes  ;  they  are  greatest  among  the  Mehmends. 
Tritiing  disputeb  tween  individuals  are  ^t  ttU  d  hy  the  chief,  or  by  a 
Jeerga,  but  all  important  causes  are  investigated  bv  the  ('auzy,  or 
the  Sirdar  oi  lho  city.  In  general  there  is  great  tranquillity  in  Pesha- 
war, but  in  suinuier,  when  the  Kin^^  and  his  troops  are  absent,  strong 
sign;>  of  the  turbulence  of  the  Berdooraunees  break  out,  and  tribes 
oiieii  fight  iibout  water  for  their  fields.  * 

The  houses,  food,  and  habits  of  life  of  the  tribes  of  Peshawer,  re- 
aemble  those  of  the  Eusofzyes.  The  dress  has  ako  some  reseni-' 
bhmcci^  being  a  mixtore  of  that  of  the-  Iniyena  ivfth  that  of  thd' 


KHUTTUR& 


A%liiaiM.  In  winUr  they^  gmeaXij  .mn.daAMnB  oo«to.of  qnOted 
cotton,  whidiare  duown  aade  m '.summer  advanoet*  .wbm  a 
htga  Jmimm  Aiti,  and  a  white  of.b]]ietiiKbvi»  .ibnndmdmM«£ 
the  gfMter  number  of  the  people.  .A  Loongee^eitlier  twisted  round 
the  walat,  or  worn  over  the  shouldert  is  always  part  of  the  atdiei 
Tboui^  not  destitute  of  the  Berdooraunee  spirit  of  contrntian,  tiuir 
manners  are  generally  mild*  oUigin^  and  inoffensh  c.  Their  minds' 
are  extremely  at^ive  and  acute^  and  they  are  less  simfde^  and  mom 
'given  to  firaud  and  chicane,  than  most  of  the  Afghauns. 

I  have  already  mentioned  that  Peshawer  is  the  fitvomite  winter  re- 
treat of  the  Kings  of  Caubul.  Shauh  Shujau  was  particularly  fond 
of  this  place  and  its  inhabitants,  wbo  repaid  his  partiality  by  a  stroQg 
and  steady  attachment 

The  division  of  Momunds  which  re?^ides  in  the  })lain,  is  reckoned 
to  amount  to  tweKo  thousand  tiunilies.  It  has  no  connection  except 
in  blood  with  the  l^pjn  i  .^hlmunds.  The  Xhulleels  are  six  thousand 
families,  and  the  Daw(K)dzYes  ten  thousand.  Flie  rest  of  the  inhabi- 
tat)ts  of  tlie  plain  are  Hindkees.  The  whole  population  must  exceed 
300,000  souls.  '  '  ' 

The  slip  ot  barren  coimtrv  lictween  the  Indus  and  the  plain  of 
Peshawer,  is  divided  between  the  Khuttuks  and  Eusofzyes.  The 
former  have  the  country  south  of  the  river  of  Caubul,  which  is 
generally  rocky  or  stony,  but  if*  not  without  sonie  smooth  and  green 
meadows,  particularly  towards  the  river,  where  there  are  some  beau- 
tiful spots  shaded  with  tamarisk  aad  the  Indian  tree  called  Seessoo. 
The  country  bebomes  roomier  as  one  approaches  the  Indus.  The 
villages  are  few  but  large.  Hie  chief  place  is  Aoom,  a  large  town 
with  a  neat  mosque,  anda  handsome  Baear  built  of  steoe^  d. 
'  Hie  Khwttnka  occupy  a  considerable,  esfient  of  ooontiy,  their  hmds 
akielch  from  ihe  Caubul  river  to  the  Salt  range*  a  distanee  ojp  about 
aeventy  milea.  13ie  breadth  is  about  tfahaty-fim  miles.  Their  gene- 
nl  boundary  on  the.  east  is  the  Indus ;  duowid^  a  brancfa  of  thempoa- 
sfaaea  the  town  and-toritorf  of  Muhknd  on  the  Indian  aide;  on  the 
weat  thc^  have  the  tribea  of  Pediaweiv  ^  Ehybereea  of  the  Baaige 


■ 


Digitized  by  Google 


MOUNTAUIS  IN  THE  SOUTH. 


mt 


of  84*,  Mid  tfafc  lionfflMliai  s  an  the  south  they  have  Bunnoo,  and  the 
Lohaonea  of  Tknmann.  Thej  are  in  two  divisionsy  vrimh  are  quite 
dbrtinct,  tbofi^  llio  diM  an  oooiii^ 

Tbo  Khnttnlka  are  probabty  oveMiilod  hj  tiie  A^mduii  hIki 
radcoii  tb0  aoitlicsRi  divSaioii  at  tan  tlioiBind,  and  tiio  ao»tttihmi  at 
iwutean  'liiodHBid  ftmiliai;  The  Uiauna  in- both  dtririons  haw 
great  power  amt  their  dam,  hut  the  mMthom  diviaiaii  it  as  amcb 
•nbfeot  to  fihe  King,  as  the  tiihas  of  Mhaiaer  i  ivhile  the  aooliheni 
Khann,  secwied  by  hia  nKwmtams,  maintains  a  greater  dycc  of  m» 
dependenoeb 

.  The  people  of  the  northern  dan  are  praised  for  Aeir  hOBcky -and 
their  oidevly  oondnct  th^  are  taUj  frtdl-iooldng,  and  ftiier  tfaai^ 
any  of  the  tribea  of  Mhawer,  but  m  tfieir  dress  and  manners  iSHej 
hm  a  gieat  reaembknoe  to  the  people  of  India. 

The  eomttiy  of  the  soutiheHi- Khnttwhs - h  various,  but  tilimomi 
tainous;  the  southern  part  is  the  most  so.  It  consists  of  stony,' faaneii 
aountahiSy  aepeiiitod  by  deep  and,  abrupt  valleys,  and  Is  thiidy 'm- 
habited'by  Ae  predatory  dans  of  'Bsnrik  and  Smighur.  It  is  impose 
sible  to  imi^^ncr  any  thing  moie  idicary  than  this  part  of  the  country 
nothing  is  seen  but  rude  and  bare  mountsinSt  confusedly  heaped  to- 
gether, nothing  heard  bat  the  salt  torrents  that  rush  demn  the  val- 
leys. The  scene  is  not  rendered  less  forlorn  by  the  straw  hovels 
winch  are  scattered  by  twos  and  threes  on  the  summits  of  the  moun^ 
tmnB,"ttDd  even  these  are  met  with  but'onc^  'dr' twice  in  a  space  of 
twenty  miles.  The  savage  inhabitant  eidier  fly  from  the  travelles^ 
Of  hovrer  on  the  mountains,  watching  opportunitieB  to  attack  him. 
The  sight,  however,  is  sometimes  cheered  by  a  patdi  of  com  on  the 
fiMse  of  a  hill,  or  by  a  green  valley  discovered  far  off  from  a  height : 
the  rtarrow  valleys,  though  rough  and  disfnal,  arc  romantic  ;  and  the 
banks  of  the  torrents  are  sometimes  mulpred  pleasing  by  a  chimp  of 
wild  olives.  Further  uorth,  the  countr\  is  sfill  crossed  by  ranges  of 
high,  steep,  and  rocky  mountains  ;  but  among  them  are  spaciou^;  ai^fl 
well  cultivated  plains.  The  principal  of  these  are  Maulgeen,  Lsuiobee, 

3  a        '  ■-■.'-*.. 


Digitized  by  Google 


3eSi  BAURlKa 

■nd.TBeree^  wluoli  lail  ^fim  u  the  rendenee  of  the  Kfaaiiik  .Thfl^ 
{obdnoe  wbeat  and  Bttjim 

They  export  a  gieat  ded  of  fod&-«alt»  dug  fiom  the  fiUt.nqgo^ 
prindpeUj  in  the  neigyioiiriiood  of  Feevee.  '  - 
'  None  of  our  party  jwv  the  Bauiiki^  OMC^ 
we  sny  cominimication  with.them»  but  what  anrae  from  their  .attactt 
on  our  strag^bfB.'  We>' however,  learned,  that  thoM|^- they  were 
EhuUuks,  they  wefe  independent  on  both  Khauna,'  and  lired  in  a 
state  of  aparchy.  '  

The  Khuttuks  immediately  to  the  north  of  the  Bauriks,  were  dark 
men,  dressed  like  some  of  the  people  in  Hindaatan»  but  ruder  in. 
their. manlDexa.   In  their  interocnme  witb  ns,  they  wete  nuld  and 
offensive,  and  such,  I  hear,  is  their  general  character.        •  '  '  .   . , 

The  clan  of  Bungush  has  the  hills  of  the  Khyberees  on  the  north» . 
the  Kliiittulcs  on  the  cast  and  soitth-eaat,  oome  of  the  Viieereea  on 
the  sontli,  and  the  Toorees  on  the  west. 

•  Tlieir  counti;.  c  onsists  of  a  long  vaHev  widening  into  a  plain  about 
twelve  miles  in  tiiarneter.  The  valley  is  called  Upper,  and  the  plain 
^wer  Bungusli.  The  plain  is  fertile  and  well  watered ;  the  uncul- 
tivated parts  are  covered  with  dwarf  palm,  but  there  are  few  trees, 
^cept  in  some  pleasing  ganlens  alx)ut  Cohaut,'the  residence  of  the 
chief.  Tliis  has  been  a  neat  little  town,  but  has  been  reduced  by  ilie 
distractions  in  the  tribe,  to  the  size  of  a  considerable  village.  Upper 
Bungush  is  wvW  watt  red,  and  productive  in  the  bottoms^  but  the  hills 
are  steep  and  rugged.  '  "  ^  '• 

.Both  the  Khuttuk  and  Bungush  countries  have  great  variety  of 
climate.  Some  parts  of  the  hills  are  covered  with  snow,  as  lale  ;is 
March,  while  others  are  saircely  whitened  in  the  depth  of  winter ; 
and  some  are  never  visited  by  snow.  In  general,  the  hills  and  vallics 
are  colder  as  they  are  nearer  the  Solimauny  mountains.  The 
plains,  though,  colder  than  Pediawer/'have  seldotti,  if  ever>  fidlaof 
ano^. 

.  The  people^'liower  ^Bungush,  are  very  obedieiKt  to  dieijr  Khaun 
and  to  the  Ki^  fhose  of  Upper  Bunguth  lew  ao. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ESAUKHAOS.  S6S 

They  have  something  of  the  appearance  of  the  tribes  of  PeduNPer^ 
bofc  diess  like  Khjberees.  The  fiunilj  of  Brngmh^  which  has  mads 
w»  great  a  figure  in  India^  and  fieosn  wfaiclft.ara  sprung  the  Naboba  of 
Fumikabad,  is  descended  Gtom.  ft  poMant  of  Upper  Bunguah. 
-  .West  of  Upper  Bungush,  aiellie.Toofeab  Inhabiting  a  condnua- 
tion  of  the  same  vallagr.  .  The  coantrjr  nd  produce  are,  of  course, 
much  the  same.  The  people  are  independent  on  the.  King,  and* 
what  is  surprising  among  Aighmins,  thegr.aie  i  muty  of  the 

Uppeir  Bungush  also  belong  to  this  sect.  : , 

Farther  up  the  same  valley,  which  continues  to  stretch  west  neady 
parallel  to  the  Koorrum,  are  the  Jaujees,  the  inveterate  enemiea.  of 
the  Toorees.  Their  valley  runs  up  the  steep  side  of  the  range  of 
Solimaun,  and  is  narrower,  poorer,  and  colder  than  that  of  tlie  Toorees. 
Tlie  sides  ot  ihc  vallov  are  covered  witli  pines  ;  the  chief  animals  are 
goats.  The  inliahitants  live  iniitjuscs  iialt"  sunk  in  the  frround,  wear 
Afghniiii  shirts  of  blanket,  and  bum  tires  day  and  night  iov  thv  greater 
^>art  of  the  year.  One  road  from  the  Indus  to  Caubul  runs  up  this 
long  valley,  and  atter  passing  the  Jaujee  coiuitry,  issues  through  a 
defile  in  the  highest  ridge  of  the  Solimauny  range*  into  the  high 
countries  north-east  of  (ihuznee, 

Neither  the  Jaujees  !n>r  Toorees  are  included  aiuong  the  iierdoo- 
raunees,  and  the  ibliowing  tribes  are  generally  reckoned  amongst 
those  .of  Daiuaun  ;  they  differ,  however,  iinom  tliosc  tribes  in  so  many 
points,  that  it  will  l>e  more  convenient  to  mention  them  here. 

These  are  the  Esaukhail,  ihe  Sheotaks,  the  Bunnossees,  the  people 
of  Dower,  and  the  Kliostees;  the  three  first  lie  to  the  soutli  of  the 
Khuttuk  country  ;  and  the  others  to  tiie  south  of  the  Toorees  i  ihey 
have  Damaun  on  the  south.  . ' 

,  The  country  of  the  Esaukhail  Wretches  along  the  bank  of  the  In- 
dus, for  upwards  of  thirty  miles.  It  is  about  twelve  miles  broad,  and 
is  bounded  by  high  hills  on  the  other  three  ndea.  It  ia  a  \ery  fertile, 
.well  watered,  populous,  and  highly  cnltnrebBd.ooiiAtfj.  The  wafcsr- 
^XHurses  we  so  .nuinereiis,  and  ao  hiraed  end  deep,  as  greatly  to.ob- 
itcuct  the  loedi.  The  vilh^es.^.tfaioUyplHitediaiid]!^ 

3  A  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


very  large :  most  a£  the  hoiues  are  dioU^ied.  Snne  IsagB  iBlai^ 
QD  ilie  Indus  bdoDg  akb  to  itit  FsmikhHil ;  many  of  them  arb  un- 
der iaiUiiration,  and  the  rest  Bte  deanng  and  MpiDnm^   Tbe  o^ief 

produce  of  the  whole  country  la  nhett.  '  .  .  ; 

-  1^  JBsaukhail  disregard  the  royal  authority,  and  lunre  Uttle  ^ 
wmBBuamL  wUhin  th^nselves.  They  plunder  weak.tnnreH0i^flnii  ateii 
itam  tiipose  who  are  too  strong  to  be  plundered. 

Beyond  the  hUls  on  the  west  of  the  Ksaukhail,  lies  a  plain,  culti- 
vated by  a  tribe  called  Sheotuk^  raspeding  which  I  have  no  in&ciiuip 
tbn. 

Farther  wost,  nnd  hiLHiei-  up  is  liiinnoo,  a  very  extensive 
watered  by  the  Koorriim,  tliil  of  villages,  and  covered  with  coru 
fields.  It  is  hot  in  summer,  but  in  winter  it  has  ice  that  will  bear  a 
man.  It  produces  rice,  wheat,  barley,  and  Indian  poroy  in  abundance, 
and  sugar  cane,  tobarc*.),  turmeric,  gniger,  and  a  few  esculent  vege- 
tables ;  there-are  no  iVmts  but  melons,  mulberries,  c  itions,  k  nions, 
and  limes,  nieliills  are  bare,  or  onlv  covered  witli  hushes  j  on  the 
plains  are  very  large  tamarisk  trees,  and  some  ol'  the  Lhorny  bushes 
common  in  India.  Among  the  wild  aumials  are  wild  boars,  wild 
sheep,  and  the  animal  called  Pauzen  in  Persia ;  but  the  most  extra* 
ordinary  are  the  wild  dogs,  wl)ich  exactly  resemble  tame  cmes,  and 
go  in  packs  of  four  or  five  couple. 

'  The  people  are  of  various  clans,  not  connected  by  blood,  and  with- 
out any  common  government  They  live  in  per])etual  contraition. 
They  pay  some  regard  to  the  Kintr's  auth<  >rit\ ,  and  a  great  rodd  passes 
through  their  country  j  but  uavellti »  lia\  e  often  a  great  deal  of 
trouble,  from  the  importunities  of  the  people  of  every  village,  which 
it  b  not  quite  safe  to  reject.  -  ■  •  \  ^"  * 

Above  BimnoOy  and  divided  from  it  by  hills,  is  the  long  Irat  narrow 
.fliley  of  Doirar,  which  sli^tches  up  to  the  country  of  the  Jadrauni^ 
en  tbe  ridge  of  the  Solmumny  mountaiiis.  It  is  a  populous  country, 
ihU  of  walled  villages,  always  at  mr-wifli  each  other.  Theve  can  be 
little  or  no  govemment^  auoe  e  poratM  peffon  een  aeieethe'cfafl^ 
idfim  V»  weak  oDo,  tod  leD  them  fiiT'dsFee.  Thqr  aW'Tiinniliiili 


Digitized  by  Google 


TUNNEES  IN  DRUGGYE.   VIZEEREES.  ^ 

for  their  diigiistiiig  vices,  and  indeed  there  ia  notJiing  to  piaiae  in 
their  maimen.  Those  of  Bunnoo  are  not  niMsh  better,  and  the 
MooUahs,  as  usual  in  mch  oountriet*  h«ve  greet  power,  whidi  they 

do  not  fail  to  abuse. 

To  the  north  of  Dower,  between  it  «n(l  the  Koormnif  lies  Khoflif 
•  email  country,  peopled  like  Dower  and  Bunnoo,  by  niei^  Rmell 
dans  of  various  descent.  It  lies  as  high  as  Dower,  but  ia  aepanted 
firom  it  by  hilU.  It  is  in  obedience  to  the  King,  and  is  governed  bj 
one  of  its  own  chiefs,  who  acts  as  deputy  to  the  King's  Sirdar.; 
nevertheless  it  is  torn  by  internal  dissensions.  The  whole  vall^  is 
divided  into  two  factions,  called  the  Tor  Goondee,  and  Speen  Goon- 
dee  (i.  e.  the  black  and  white  leagues),  which  are  perpetueliy  at  wa^ 
about  the  rpiarrels  ot"  one  or  other  of  their  member*!. 

East  of  Khost  is  Drugye,  a  small  rountrv  irilKiluted  by  a  tribe 
called  Tiinnee,  of  which  I  know  nothing  but  the  name. 

Till'  hilLs  wliicli  .surround  tlie  foiy  last  countries^  are  inhabited  bjr 
the  inountaia  tribe  of  V  iaeeree^- -      '    •     <         -  '   • ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


{   9G6  ) 


CHAP,  a 

•  -  • 

•  » 

lASTinr  TUBES  — CONTINUED. 

DAMAUN  in  its  most  extended  sense,  comprehends  all  the 
country  belweeti  tlie  Salt  range,  the  Solimauny  mountains,  the 
Indus,  and  Sungur  in  Upper  Sind.  I  have  ahready.  dispotied  oi  the 
part  of  it  which  lies  to  the  north  of  the  Koorrum  and  Gombela,  and 
now  prot^ed  to  the  remainder.  This  may  be  di\  ided  into  three 
parts.  The  plain  of  the  Indus,  generally  inhabited  1)\  liduclies,  and 
called  Muckelwaud  *  ;  the  country  of  the  Murwuls  j  and  the  plains 
and  low  hills  (about  the  roots  of  the  mountains)  which  (xtmtitute 
Damaun  proper. 

Muckelwaud  extends  along  the  Indus  for  about  one  hundred  and 
twenty  miles.  Its  mean  breadth  s  irom  twenty-five  to  thirty  miles. 
h.  is  ftpkinof  hard  smiocidi  day,  quite  flat,  bare  of  grass,  but  sprinkled 
witli  bmbeB  about  a  fbot  high,  and  still  mofe  tliinlj  seattered  with 
■epaiata  tamafaaB  of  tamariAi  and  of  the  thorny  shrub  caOed  m  india 
Kured;  with  here  and  there  a  tree  of  the  sort  called  Jant,  from  fif- 
teen to  twenty  feet  high-  The  soil,  when  much  trodden  on,  turns 
hifto  a  very  minute  whitiih  duat  It  seems  to  be  composed  of  the 
slime  of  the  liver,  which  in  smnmerinundatea  this  oountiyfbragEeal 
exteiit;attfae  same  tune  the  moimtain  streams,  swdkd  by  the  md^ 
anow,  pour  down  and  cover  all  the  flats  with  water.  It  ia  soldom  ▼cry 
deap,  but  it  seema.  to  He  long  fiom  the  appearance  of  the  ground* 


*  TIJh  it  •  Bdodi*  «r  HindkM  Mn^  Utile  med,  and  vtktmm  lo 


Digitized  by  Google 


J 

TBiBE  OF  MITEWUT.  ^ 

«ldsbfalik»tfh«ki*tlieiMtt^  it  itftlliirholee, 

and  marked  with  fshaimelii  by-  the  water  in  all.  paitih  'and  -berir  Ilia 
iWBT  dieae  beeome  ciinridanUa,nfnnaa* 

*•  Ihe'bankt  <if  tihe-innar  are  oovvred.with  thick  jungki  of  low  timi^ 
lidi^  aomrtamaa  mi»fld'with.long  graas>  and  lometimea  with  thonay 
bnahei:  rabiMlniding  in  wild  boan>  hog-deer^  and  all  aoits  of  game 
Bound  ihe.-nUi^  are  oAan  large  wboda  of  datoib  the  only  .tall  tneni 
onthe.plain.  When  dwEeiaciiltivalaon*.^  rich;  but  by  iar  tiie 
graatcr  part  of  the  pbnn  b  waMe^mrii^tothelhinne«of  the  popo- 
UiioBf  and  Uto.'faadneM  of  the  goveniment.  Tlie  aouthcm  part  of 
the  plain!  haa  moat,  jungle';  the  iMMCth  it  aandj*  GaoHcls  of  the  aama 
Isnd'wiih  thoMof  Iiidi%  are  fared.hew.in  great  nuBBben. 

The  principal  town»  Dera  Innad  Khannt  ia  the  leaidamce  qf  the 
govamor,  a  Beloche  appomted  by  Mahomed  Kbaan»  the  Xin^s  'go- 
reiTior  'of  ihkpnyvinoe^'and  Sya. 

Tlie  people  are  Juts  and  Belodhes,  dark  in  oomplaxion,  and  lean 
and  OBcagre'  in  form ;  their  ordinary  dress  in  siuilmer  ia  of  fhwh 
coloured  cotton;  and  in  winter  grayish'  or  atrqMd  great  coats  of  coaurae 
woollen  doth,  and  quilted  silk  c^m.  They  are  pefftctly  ftutwHaaiTe 
and  djedknt  to  the  King  ukd  his  r^Are»entative. 
- '  The  country  o£the  Murwuts  is  composed  of  sandy  i^d  arid  plaina» 
divided  by  rangea  of  hills.  It  depends:  antiraly  on  rain  for  caitiff- 
tion,  aiKl  in  many  parts  the  inhabitaois  ate- even  obliged  to  carry  wi^ 
ter  for  several  miles  to  supply  their  familiesl. 

Half  the  Murwuts  are  Hxcd  and  employed  in  agiicuHure.  The 
rest  wander  about  with  their  herds  of  camels  ;  living  chiefly  in  tem- 
porary huts  of  branches  of  trees,  with  a  wall  of  thorns,  and  a  roof  of 
straw;  some  few  have  black  tents  of  the  worst  description.  They  are 
tall,  fair  men,  and  wear  a  jkui  oi  loose  trowsers,  something  th^JQWo 
over  their  shoulders,  and  a  haadkerchiel  tied  round  theii  headjs. 

Tlicir  fount I  V  is  about  thirty-five  milrs  sijuaio,  sf retelling  trom 
Bunnoo  to  MuckeKvand.  and  froni  ncEir  the  f<.)ot  of  the  bolimauny 
mountains  to  the  short  range  ot  liiJls  \".  iucli  separates  Largee  from 
the  Indus.   It  is*  however,,  thinly  people    In  the  narrow  .slip  be^ 

It 


Digitized  by  Google 


36g  COUNTRY  OF  -mE  MEEAUNKHAIL. 

imem  the  ihoit  range  of  liiUs  juife  mentiomd  mSi  the  hiAn,  five  the 
iMDiiO  tribe  of  Khywoie. 

Bamann  proper,  whidi  liea  to'the.aboth  hi  iikt  Murwiilii  mad  ai^ 
tMids  along  the  fooi  of -die  Solimsmiy  nHwnrttiffWy  then  iiihahitiiMl  hy 
Viaeagflca,  8iieai«imeea»  and  j^mnnneea,  ia  cqnal  Jaigdi  with 
MnekdwaadU  but  of -fariooa  breadth^  froet  aighl  ^  ^  mflea  to 
ihifty'md  tipwanla  It  »  mliabited  Jbgr  ibe  DDwlnlUiail  and  Qm^ 
dehpobra,  theHieiMiiildiai],  Bnbooia,  and^fltbgreeaunaoa,  iikidi  tfib«^ 
witb- tbe  exception  of  tiie  Chmdekpoor,  ane-  induded'ia  llie  yaiai 
Wameof  'LdMumee.  Hie  EMokhai),-  Jfuiwutat  and  Kh^raaoraa  akn 
are  comprehended  mder  this  denominatioi^  Immediately  to  die 
aouth  of  theMuiwota*  are  the  Gundafapoora  and' DBRiiiitidiaai»  of 
which  the  former  are  moat  easterly.  ..  .» 

Their  country  is  )  ike  Muckelwaud,  but  better  aidtinitedf  'paKticiH 
iarly  that  of  the  Dowlutkhail,  which  in  ordinary  ye^teniplogra  «U 
Ae  water  of  the  Qomul  in  its  cultivation.  The  Gundehpoors  lucre 
several  large  villages,  of  which  the  chief  are  Colauchee,  Tidnniimk 
ttid  Lowee.    Tuck  is  the  chief  town  of  the  Dowlutkhail. 

Weet  of  the  Dowlutkhail  are  the  Tuttores,  Meeaunees,  Bitneea* 
and  some  other  small  tribes  subject  to  the  Dowlutkhail ;  th^  coun«i 
try  resembles  that  just  described,  but  ia  more  and,  and  wocae  cold- 
vated,  and  towards  the  west  it  is  hilly. 

Tlte  <ivvdt  road  to  Caubul  runs  pjist  Tuck.  It  follows  tlic  course 
of  the  Gomul  tbi  a  considerable  diatance*  and  ia  4aalied  tiom  one 
pass  in  it,  The  Hoad  of  (Tfuilarie. 

To  the  south  of  tlie  Dowlutkhail,  are  the  Meeaunkliail,  who^ 
country  is  a  little  less  flat  than  those  X  have  been  djescribiii^  aod^ 
whose  r1iitf]jl  are  is  Deraubund.  .  •  •- 

The  chief  road  from  Candahar  issues  from  the  hiiis  at  Zirkunnee 
near  Deraubund.  It  goes  by  Zawa,  Uirough  a  mountainous  and  diffi^ 
cult  country. 

To  the  south  of  the  Meeaunkhaii,  is  the  country  oi  the  Bimboors, 
resembling  that  just  described.  The  valley  of  Deheneh  opt  ns  on  it 
firom.  the  rai^  of  Solimaun,  aod  pours  out  a  stream  which  wataia 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


^//.  '  ^/^f^//f^///  a/      f/ /////// //^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


I  .   .         ,.»...    P  •    •!>  • 


'    '  ....    '..  ;  >'  .  , 

m.  ^ 

..•    I.    .     'i\     .  jr.-.  !   ■   •'         .'if  ••  ■•■  r  ■  ^ 


  1-  ■        *  •  •         >  .,        ..  ♦ 

»  • 

.....  .  t      J-  .    •  !  •   •  -•       .  ' 

<-r  rivi*  i<        It  tin*  tfani.  fti  llia*. '  f  I'l  tla  rsfHii*' 

*    *  ,  -  -p.,  #1  I   ^  •  • 

9 

• '.,    "     'ii  ?«•«.':     i'.-.*        •  .' • .         t;.      .?  - 

•  ■  "  i      • ,  J'  •         ..»..'«  .1 

'J  V 


COMSBeAi;  CHARACTER  OF  THB  lUBU  OF  ll&M^  369 

the  Gultivadon ;  one  road  to  Khorsasaun  passes  thiKNif^  tins  fiOt^ 

but  it  is  not  so  much  frequented  as  that  of  Gholarie. 

To  the  south  the  Bauboois  have  the  ooiu^ry  pf  the  &dorcenpwn» 
part  of  which  is  in  the  plain  of  Dainaim,  and  like  that  of  the  Bau- 
boors,  biit  rougher  towards  the  south,  and  far  more  dry  and  unfertile. 
The  pest  consists  of  the  low  range  of  grey  sandstone,  which  runs 
parallel  to  the  range  of  Solimauo,  with  part  of  the  mountains  and 
unproductive  coil  n(  I }  beyond  it.  The  chief  town  of  the  Bauboors  is 
Choudvva.  nnd  that  of  the  Stooreoaunees,  Oormuk. 

The  pnniucc  of  all  these  coujitries  is  the  same  as  that  ot  India j 
Bajra,  Joarrv,  and  wheat,  are  the  commonest  <frains.  Mj^nv  droine- 
darii^  are  bred  liere,  or  at  least  bv  the  tribes  whose  icsidcm  e  is  partly 
in  Damaun.  They  are  much  darker  in  colour  than  tlie  common 
camel,  have  shorter  and  stronger  limbs,  and  are  far  better  calculated 
for  work  aiin)n;^  hills.  The  grass  of  many  parts  of  Damanii  is  (  n eel- 
lent  and  abundant,  ami  aLtractii  many  of  the  pastoral  tribes  duruig  the 
winter  season.  The  cliinate  is  then  cool  and  agreeable,  but  the  heat 
of  summer  is  extreme.     *'••'  . 

The  pecidiarities  common  to  the  tribes  of  Damaun  will  be  best 
shewn  by  comparing  them  with  the  other  division  of  the  eastern 
Afghauns.  They  difi^  £rom  the  Berdoorauneen  in  appearance,  being 
large  bony  men,  often  fiur,  and  ahrajs  wenrin^  long  iiau:  and  beards. 
Tbeij  bcTiikM  of  tbe  look  of  IndlaDS  than  the  otfattiy  though  their 
•nmmer  dieit  is  nevly  the  moe  m  that  olt  Indk.  IntteMl  ol'tlie 
.  long  wide  ahirt  and  cap  of  tlue  Afghauns,  tliey  wear  a  doaedran  of 
iriiite  qotton*  tied  acaroaa  the  bneat*  and  leadiiiig  a  little  baloir  the 
knee ;  even  in  winter  they  wear  taibana,  but  they  afe  ektramely 
koge  and  loose,  whOe  those  of  the  Indians  are  rbUedeldse  round  tbair 
head»  in  e  fc|;alar  slMpe  that  has  litde  grace  or  tieganoa  At  Aal 
season,  they  aba  wear  brown  and  grey  woollen  great  coats,  and  poe- 
tcena.  Ilieir  houses^  fiiod,  and  habits  of  life  resemble  those  of  the 
Berdooiannees,  but  tibiey  live  more  on  fleah,  cioot,  and  odier  pioduce 
of  their  flodo,  and  th^  hsnre  less  feim  than  matey  of  the  olhen, 
plajing  at  all  games*  and  allowing  their  women  to  appear  in  public 

8  a 


070     TEMPORARY  IfAOIflTRACT  OF  THE  CHBLWASHTfcC 


widioot  tbe  l€Mt  restniiit.  Ji^y  of  them  are  paatonUt  .ifid-tliiiott 
all  are  merchaB^  or  icanien.  Part  of  every  tribe  -  goea  upl  vwf 
^ik^  to  Khorassann ;  firom  this  and  other  reasons,  they  have  a'gveater 
mixture  of  the  manners  of  that  country  than  the  Berdooraunees } 

though  they  retain  strong  marks  of  their  original  connection  with 
Hindostan.  They  are  generally  simple  and  honest,  less  litigious  than 
tiietiil)cs  with  which  I  am  comparing  them,  less  bigoted  and  in- 
tolerant, and  less  addicted  to  every  kind  of  vice  and, debauchery. 

Being  still  more  remote  from  the  seat  of  the  royal  aiilhdiity,  they 
are  under  little  control  from  the  government ;  and  some  of  them 
seem,  till  witlnn  tin  s(~  tilty  years*  to  have  lived  in  as  nuich  anarchy 
as  the  KiKsotives.  l^ut  this  has  been  correcte<l  in  the  greater  part 
of  them  bv  the  election  of  temporary  magistrates,  invested  with  suf- 
ficient powers  to  preserve  the  public  peace,  but  prcvt;nted  by  the 
short  duration  of  their  office  from  appl)  ing  it  to  any  purpose  incon- 
sistent with  the  freedom  of  the  tribe.  Tliis  magistracy  is,  iudeetl,  the 
featiue  in  the  tribes  of  Damaun  which  most  distinguishes  them  Irom 
the  other  A%hauns.  It  prevails  among  all  these  tribes  except  two, 
and  also  in  the  neighbouring  mountain-tribe  o£  S3keerauDee.  It  is 
aiho  in  me  among  the  Ghiyiea  of  Kiitte«raii%  and  the  Kaners,  but 
among  no  other  people  of  whom  I  hasre  information. 

llieae  magistratea  are  in  aome  tribes  eUcted  by  the  MnUika*  in 
others  b/the  heads  of  ftmiliea.  They  are  chosen  fat  their  personal 
qualities^ 'the  number  of  their  relations,  and  their  general  wei|^  in 
the.  tribes  and  are  anned  with  power  to  maintain  order,  and  to  punish 
the  breadi  of  it  by  fines*  end  in  some  tribes,  even  by  corporal  punish- 
ment. ,  They  are  selected  fiom  eadi  Ehul  in  fixed  proportions,  whidi 
were  at  first  deugned  lo  make  up  the  number  of  ibity  (whence  these' 
cffieeia  are  called  Chelwaahtees*),  and  they  are  under  the  anthdrit^ 
of  one  chief,  called  the  Ifeer  of  the  C3ielwa8htees»47ho  is  elected  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  rest.   The  duty  of  the  Meer  of  the  Chel-  ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


SUBSBKmSML  OF  THE  DOWLDTKHAIL.  971 

-washtees,  is  to  enforce  the  lawful  orden  of  the  Khaim,  and  to  settle 
d\spaten  by  his  awn  wathimty,  md  puaidi  diaordefs  ef^en  in  the 
perscm  of  .the  Elnim  liiiiMel£  Hie  whole  tribe:  is  always  ready  to 
support  hhn*  to  iridch  they  bind  rthenuelyeB  by  an^oath*  whad  the 
f-fc^^aiinteflii  ave  ilsttitOm  it  la  mi  oHce  of  wwiffin  noweri  and^  Mmunm 
:denble  profitt  as  all  the  fines  levied  by  the  GheLwaahtees  are  divided 
among  themselves.  The  {lower  of  the  Meer  is  not  so  absohite  over 
jthe  odier  Chdwaahtecsy  as  to  enable  him  to  gratiiy  his  own  leveDgOf 
or  .puTsue  his  own  .inlenst  at  the  expenoe  of  any  of  the  menibeiB.of 
the  tribe*.  His  oflbe  is  genendly  anniukl»  bat  soUnetimes  he  is  only 
dected  to  preside. over  a  mardiy.or  to  command  in  a  war,  and  hk 
.power  ends  with  the  oocaaioa  which  gave  rise  to  it.  It  is  sometimes 
allowed  to  expire^  paiticalarly  in  tunes  of  great  tranquOUty  $  but  the 
disosdeia»  which  immediatdy  oMnmenoe  i^ain,  soon  make  the  tribe 
regret  it,  and  .determine  them  to  leatoie 'it 

I  This  m^istra«7:does  not  eiJat  in  tribes  where  the  Khaun-bas 

power  enough  to  restrain  the  turbulence  of  the-  people.  It  is  evi» 
dently  intended  to  remedy  the  bad  efeots  of  the  weakness*  of  the 
iiereditary  cliie&,  and  is  the  first  step  fiom  a  patriarchal  government 
to  a  lepdbhc  in  its  usual  fiffm.  ■ 

Damaun  also  furnish^  an  example  of  the  transition  from  a  patr^ 
archal  government  to  a  mUitary  despotism }  but  as  this  change  is  not 
so  easy  and  natural  as  the  other,  and  as  it  was  partly  effected  by  ex^ 
temal  causes,  it  will  require  to  be  explained  at  greater  length. 

The  Dowlutkhail  had  formerly  a  hereditary  Khaun,  who  seems  to 
have  been  held  in  ereat  veneration  by  the  tribe.  By  degrees,  how- 
ever, hij  authority  grew  weak,  and  the  government  lell  first  into  the 
hands  of  the  Miilliks,  and  atter%vards  of  the  people.  The  Dowlut- 
khail were  now  in  the  same  state  of  anarchy  that  1  have  described 


•  *  Onp  tribCb  dw  Meemnkhail,  hna  four  Meera,  all  of  equal  power,  but  the  ituxmve- 
■MBC*  of  diis  tnsngcmcol  U  Knnetunes  felt  from  their  dmemioOKf  which  ith  naoflMaiy 
to  remedy  by  an  astemUy  of  the  MnlUk%  «bo  dcdde  the  dupiile^  and  fiacthe  Meer  wlio 
is  moK^  in  the  «xon«. 

S  a  8 


^  ..USUBPATiON  OF  KITTTAUL  KHAUK 

amoiig  "die  £iiio%tet.-'  Th^ind  iio  Clkelwiulifesdi,  iodaU  hgn&f 
tny  ratfaencHy  bomjplflldy  'dHragndfid.  lliejr  .were^  hmievcr, 
obliged  to  nominate'  somfa  pcnon  to  maai^  thdr  .attin  inA  the ' 
King's  Siidtstf  and,  altiioiigli  this  person  bad  little  powier,  he  had 
move  than  any  other  iffdividiial»  and  was  called  the  Khann. '  He  irm 
cfaoMn'OOt  <if  all  -  tiie-fiuniliea  of  the  tribe-  indisorinunately,  font  the 
chokse'  aometfanei  fell  on  the  deaoendants  of  the  andent  IDiainifc 
Una  was  the  caae/abom  the  bcginntng  of  the  last  genemtioa,  when 
Kuttaid  Khann  held  the  ofBce^and  to  much  Ingratiated  hhnadf  vidi 
Mnddiid  Khann,  then'Siidar  of  Damsun,  that  he  fiinned  the'dea^jB 
of  nieking  himaelf  master  of  the  tribe^  by  means  of  that  chief 'a  aaait^ 
tanee.  He  at  6rst  assldnbualy  ooiirted  popularity,  and  penueded  tfa^ 
Dowluikhail  to  engage  in  the  lediictibn  'of  aome  little  tribes  in  their 
ncnghboiufaood. 

He  W98  entrnated  with  the  command,  and  thus  olHalncxl  a  pretext 
for  raising  troops,  which  the  contributions  of  the  Dowhitkhail,  and 
his  eaactions  from  the  conquered  tribes,  gave  him  the  means  of  main^^ 
tainm^.  By  these  means  he  collected  about  three  hundred  Beloches 
and  Sindees,  and  proceeded  to  build  a  after  which  he  thought 
himself  secure,  assumed  the  right  to  levy  a  r^penoe  fibm  the  pvdilic 
Ryots,  and  began  to  tjTannize  over  his  own  tribe. 

The  tribe  was  at  first  struck  with  dismay,  and  submitted  to  his  op- 
pression, till  at  length  he  oponlv  assum^f!  tlic  character  of  a  sove- 
rcitrn,  and  ordered  the  people  to  pay  their  duty  at  his  ctmrt  every 
morniTi£f.  Two  of  the  Mulliks,  to  whom  he  first  proposed  thib  ho-  . 
mage,  refusing  to  comply,  Kuttaul  told  them,  that  if  they  did  not 
attend  in  the  conrse  of  two  mornings,  their  heads  should  be  hung  up 
over  their  own  dcxjrs  by  the  third. 

TTie  Miilliks  withdrew,  and  ha-^tily  assembling  the  tribe  and  the 
Ryots,  pointed  out  Kuttaul's  designs,  and  engaged  them  in  a  conspi- 
racy against  him,  which  was  confirmed  by  solemn  oaths.  Next 
morning  the  whole  assembled  in  arms,  and  besieged  Kuttaul  in  Ins 
fort.  After  a  siege  of  three  day:.,  m  which  many  people  were  killed, 
the  water  in  the  fort  wud  exiiausted,  and  the  garrison  wa»  obliged  to 


Digitized  by  Google 

i 


USURPATION  OF  SURWUR  KHADH  873 

enusBite  it}  and  KuttMii£Mq»ed  on  hocadbacky  aeoompnied  by  tome 
tniat^  attendants  on  . fix)t.  Hu  fliglitwaa  aoon  duMDovavady  hia  cn^^ 
fliiea  aet4iff  in  aO  difectkms  to  puiaiie  him*  and  mffA  of  Cbem  took 
tbe  load  by  wbkh  fiottaul  waa  flying.  Hia  attendanta  veie  aoon 
4ttigoed»  and  one  man  alone  lenuined  wiili.him.  Knttanl  (sbjb  one 
of  my  infiinnanAa)'at  tbia  tune  wore  e  lobeiHiich  waa  gmt  hka  by 
a  Debiac^'  and  by  tlie  TOtue  of  irbadi  be  bad  obtained  bag  pnajnit 
gwatneaa;  m  (be  precipitation  of  big  fiigbt«'  tbis  robe  fell  iS,  and 
tnuaediately  bu  femaimng  attendant  becmiiB  bone^  and  bigged.'bei> 
bind$  iMDon  after  bii  punuera  appeared;  KattaoFs  courage  bad  kft 
faim  widi  bia  zobe,  and  be.  bad  zeooime  to  bmnble  entraatieaAr 
mete^ ;  some  of  hia  pmsuen  anawered»  that  tbey  were  awom,  and 
elibeis  that  be  bad  never  shewn  mercy  to  them,  and  at  Ust  one  of 
them  ran  bim  thioi^i  with  a  spear.  Kuttaul's  fiunily  were  all  seized. 
Gool  KhauD,  one  of  the  principal  conspiitrtxoa,  waa  put  at  the  head  of 
the  tribe,  and  thus  was  baffled  the  first  attempt  at  the  aobreqnon  of 
the  liberties  of  the  DowlutkbaiL  u*^  ." 

Surwur  Khamu  the  eldest  <son  of  Kuttaul,  was  at  this  time  only 
sixteen,  but  he  was  well  educated,  and  endowed  with  great  natural 
e^iacity  i  by  the  assistance  of  his  mother,  he  effected  his  escape  from 
pnscoi,  and,  by  a  train  of  reasoning  which  could  only  have  occurred 
to  an  Afghaun,  he  was  led  to  go  straight  to  Zuffer,  the  brother  of 
Gool  Khaun,  and  throw  himself  on  his  protection.  He  reached  this 
chief's  lioiise  withf)ut  discovery-,  and  Zntfer,  in  the  tnie  spirit  of 
Atghaiiii  honour,  immediately  resolved  to  protect  him,  even  at  the 
risk  of  his  brother's  destruction.  Ho  accordinglv  fled  with  him  to 
the  Murwiit  country,  and  soon  after  began  to  intrigue  at  Caubul  for 
assistam  (•  from  the  court.  Their  intrigues  were  scxm  successful,  and 
Abilooieheeni  Ivliaun  *  was  sent  witii  ibur  thousand  men,  to  restore 
Surwur  to  hia  father's  office.  '  '       ;  • 


*  The  tame  who  wa»  afterward*  (ieckred  i^ng  by  the  Ghiljies. 


374 


U8UEPATION  OF  SUKWUR  KHAUN. 


In  the  mean  time*  Gool  Khaim  had  bflgim  to  be  he^^ 
his  magistracy.  The  tribe  had  tiitned  into  a  turbulent  demdcia^, 
over  vhich  he  eKordaed  a  feeble  and  precaribm,  jet  mvidkNia  audio- 
riQr;  a  sedition  had  biokeSn  out  about  the  property  left  bj'Knttau], 
which  Gobi  Ehaun  wished  to  appropriate  to  himselC  Tfaue  Dowlnt- 
khail  began  to  nnirmur  at  his  govemment'i  and  csie.of  them  hauA 
drawn  his  swoid  oa  him,  and  asked^  if  .he  thought  they  had  killed 
Kuttaitltb  msike  him  thdr  master?  He  was,  therdbrey  eqmillj  terri- 
fied at  the  prospect  of  Surwur*s  success*  and  at  the  continuance  of  the. 
democracy;  and  listened  with  pleasure  to  an  overture  which  Surwur 
made  to  him,  and  which  seemed  to  present  the  ottty  sale  retreat  from 
his  perilous  situation.  Accordingly,  when  Surwur  approached,  Gool 
Khaun's  management,  supported  k>y  the  terror  of  the  royal  arms,  .dii»- 
posed  the  Dowlutkhaai  to  submit,  and,  Surwur  taking  a  solemn,  oath 
to  forget  past  iiyuries,  thej  oameoted  to  receive  him  as  their 'diie£ 
This  appearance  of  forgiv^ess  was  kept  up  till  all  the  leading  men 
had  been  got  together,  when  eighteen  of  them  were  seized  and  put 
to  death.  Gool  Khaun  was  sjiaied,  but  on  .  a  subsequent  quarrel, 
SurwuT  put  him  also  to  death. 

His  government  was  now  established,  all  those  that  could  ojipose 
him,  h;\(\  been  m&dc  away  with,  and  noliody  in  the  tribe  had  the 
courage  to  rebel.  He  continued  to  stren^'^tliLn  liiniseli,  and  to  put 
the  murderers  of  his  fatlior  to  death  as  they  ieli  into  his  hands,  till 
twelve  years  ago.  when  ail  his  enemies  were  extirpated,  and  his 
power  was  at  its  lu  i^ht.  Since  then  he  has  governed  with  great 
justice  and  moderation  ;  his  sleaJy  and  impartial  administration  is 
popular  among  the  Ryots,  but  odious  to  the  JJowlutkhail,  whose  in- 
dependence it  restrains. 

Surwur  now  maintains  about  five  hundred  soldiers  in  his  own  pav, 
all  the  customs  and  the  revenue  derived  from  the  Ryots  are  Ins,  but 
he  takes  nothing  from  the  Dowlutkhail. 

Like  Haussim  Khaiim  of  Deer,  he  cannot  rest  without  reducing 
^  firee  tribes  amund  vBoda  his  dominion.    His  chief  designs  have 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


GUNDliHPOORS.  375 

beeo  agftaut  the.  Gundehpoon,  who  we  hk  neemt  B^gbbonrs. 
Thej  tee  little  lees  nmneroiM  dian  the  Doirhitkhei1»  with  all  their 
Rjote,  but  Surwur  can  always  impede  iheir  opcnaooa*  bybribipg 
some  of  their  Afulliks ;  and  even  when  they  eng^  heaitify  in  a  ww» 
there  is  a  great  difference  betw^n  viOagerB*  under  the  temporacy 
authority  of  a  CIk  1  w  ashtee,  and  the  troopa  of  an  established  govern- 
ment  like.Stirwur  Khaun's. 

The  general  jealousy  of  Surwur's  desilpia  however,  induces  the  Mee- 
aunkhail  and  Bauben*  usually  the  bitter  demies  of  the  Gundehpoors^ 
to  unite  with  thm  in  their  struggles  against  that  ambitious  chie^  and 
these  means  have  hitherto  been  sufficient  to  keep  bis  power  frithin 
due  bounds. 

The  Dowlutkhall,  with  all  their  Byots  and  conquered  tribes  amount 
|x>.eight  thousand  families. 

The  Gundehpoors  have  a  hereditary  Kliaim,  and  hereditary  i\Inl- 
liks,  hut  their  power  is  very  slight,  and  the  tribe  lead  a  lawless  life, 
phuidering  strangers,  stealing  from  the  Hocks  of  the  wandering  tribes 
whicli  come  into  their  neighbourhood!,  and  continually  quarrelling 
among  themselves.  Their  weapons  on  these  (x^easions  are  sticks  of 
wild  olive ;  so  that  murders  are  rare,  but  when  one  happens,  it  en- 
tails a  dcaiilv  tf.Hid  on  the  familv,  as  is  usual  auioiig  the  Afghauns. 
Their  public  aifairs  are  conducted  by  an  aiiseinbly  of  all  the  heads  of 
families  in  the  tribe,  those  who  cannot  attend,  sending  some  of  their 
Ikmily  to  represeuL  them.  "    •    '  '  - 

WTien  they  have  a  war  with  Surwui,  all  disputes  are  laid  aside,  a 
Chelwaditee  is  named,  who  sends  a  drummer  round  each  village  to 
proclaim  the  time  and  place  where  the  tribe  is  to  assemble  in  aims, 
and  any  man  that  AOs  to  attend,  is  fined. 

Ihe  Gundehpoors  are  great  merchants,  fifty  or  dsty  go  every  year 
to  Khorassaumi  and  fi>ur  times  as  many  to'India;*  but  this  cucum* 
stance  has  little  effbct  in  dviliang  them>  and  they  have  a  degree  of 
rudeness  and  brutality  in  their  i^ipearanoe  and  mamMn»  .which  I 
never  saw  in  any  other  tribe. 


Digitized  by  Google 


MEEAUNKHAtL. 


.  .;The  Meeaunkiiailaie  about  three  thmiifiwl  Amilieg,  of  which  num- 
ber a  fouith-  is  oomposed  of  Bukfateteurees.  Of  this  tribe,  which  is 
nid  to  htBtre  oome  originally  firom  llie  banks  of  the-TigriB,  and  which 
it  very  numerous  in  the  south-west  of  Persia,  there  are  about  aevtti 
or  flight  hundred  families  at  Dcranbimd,  and  about  ^e  hundred  at 
Mingha.  Those  at  Deraubund  are  completely  inoofporated  with  the 
Meeaimkhail.  Tliey  have  a  share  in  their  councils,  giuns,  and  lometi 
and  are  almost  identiiied  with  the  tribe.  The  others  are  connected 
with  them,  atid,  though  not  united  with  the  Meeamilduult  therf  send 
succours  to  that  tribe  in  its  wars  in  Damaun. 

■  The  Khaun  of  the  Meeaimkhail  has  httle  power,  he  has  an  eightli 
of  all  customs  collected  at  Deraubund,  but  no  share  in  the  collections 
from  the  Ryof  s.  Public  affiiirs  arc  managed  by  a  number  of  Mulliks, 
who  take  care  lo  c  niMilt  the  mterest  n?id  disposition  of  their  Kbaiisi 
but  do  not  refer  to  tiiem  on  every  question  that  arises. 

The  Khaun  has  lately  been  endeavouring  to  imitate  Sui-wur,  but 
with  little  success  ;  he  too  entertained  some  i5<  lot  lu  s.  built  a  fort, 
and  began  to  encroach  on  his  tribe;  but  he  was  oj)iH)seil  bj  the  JNIul- 
liks,  his  power  was  circumscribed,  and,  by  the  last  accounts,  some 
farther  attempt  of  his,  led  the  tribe  to  besiege  him  in  his  fort  j  and  he 
may,  perhaps,  ere  now,  lia\  i-  shared  the  fate  of  Kuttaul. 

■  One  half  of  tlie  Meeaunkhail  move  every  ^ring  to  Khoriissaun. 
No  entire  Khail  moves*  but  half  of  each  ;  the  Mulliks  do  not  often 
move,  but  send  a  member  of  their  &mily  to  command  the  mo\  ing 
divisioD  of  the  EhaiL  Hi^  hme  aiUb  Qi^waehtees  of  their  own, 
ivfao  have  no  moAonty  aaamg  Hui  aeltled  people,  except  in  time  of 
irv,  whm  the  GhohmMhfeaea  of -bodi  deicriptioiis  hanre  a  ooncttrrait 
jmiadictioii. 

'  ■  Hie  monDg  Meeaonkbails,  when  in  DamanDf  encamp  in  ^neig^ 
bomhood  of  0ei«Bbiniil»  and  tend  the  cameia  to  fted  on  the  ■hrnbby 
plain  of  Muckelwaud.  They  pay  a  small  mub  on  eadi  camel  to  Ma- 

Their  method  of  dirtributing  the  eroofamientB  and  dnitiett  of  tlM  ' 


Digitized  by  GoogI< 


BAUBOORa  STOOfi££AUN££S. 


irib^MMdag  its  iiMiiibm  deierrai  to  be  Mided,  m  ibe  ttnie  is  pnw 
bibfy  obMTvedby  aO  the  tvibetf  of  Dmbmiii. 
.  The  tribe  ib  divided  into  fottr  pert>»  one  ef  idiidi »  Bn>ht<wmiwicf# 
end  thfee  MeeeunUuuL .  The  oiiilomt«  tSb&t  dedvoluig  the  1Shmm'<i 
Atnt  wte  divided  into  Ibar  pntiy  end  eedi  divisioa  of  the  tribe  geti 
e  «bar^  ivfaidi  ii  ifterwefds  distribmed  among  iiie  anbdivbionst  bnfi 
'  M  &e  nvmber  of  penNms  in  eech  of  Aom  is  liot  the  seme^  the  divi- 
Qon  is  metpnlL  Hie  fevcnue  is  asagsBod  in  ihe  aame  manner^  atHi 
eight  Chdwaahtees  are  taken  fiom  each  dhriaioii. 

Hie  BMibooia  am  a  dviliiedirilie^  mndi  addicted  to  mefchandifee^- 
and  on  the  whole,  the  richert  end  most  flourisiiti^  of  tiie  tribes  ef 
Dameon  *•  Their  Khaun  has  oinsiderable  power,  and  th^  are'tecf< 
koned  among  the  quietest  and  most  honest  of  the  A%haun  tribes. 
Th^  late  chief  was  raised  by  Timour  Shauh  to  the  high  office  of 
Ameen  ool  Moolk,  and  eigayed  •  large  share  of  tlie  confidenoe  of  . 
tiiat  monarch.  It  is  rare  to  see  a  man  of  any  tribe  but  the  Dodnm^ 
nees  eleinUsd  to  such  a  station* 

The  Bauboors  of  the  plain  are  about  four  thousand  families. 

A  large  division  of  the  Bauboors  lives  in  Sehra,  beyond  the  tnoun- 
tains  of  Solimaun.  It  is  contiguous  to  the  country  of  the  Sheerau- 
nees-,  w  iih  whom  those  Bauboors  are  much  GCHmected»  and  whom  they 
resenii)]£'  in  their  manners  and  customs.  ' 

Tlic  Stooreeaunees  were,  till  lately,  all  pastoral.  Their  foinitrv, 
iniieed,  afforded  little  i t  iii] it;it i  )n  to  agriculture.  Thev  coiujiu  red  it 
not  ago  troiii  the  Belrtehes  of  Damaun,  and  useti  to  make  it  their 
winter  station,  and  move  their  camps  and  flocks  iu  summer  to  tlie 
lands  of  the  Moosfflakhail  Caukers.  These  migrations  were  rendered 
incoHveuient  or  impracticable,  by  a  quarrel  which  the  Stooreeaunees 
had  sjhout  twenty-five  years  ago,  with  a  clan  of  Caukers,  Uirough 
whose  lands  they  were  obliged  to  pass.    HaU'  the  tribe  on  this  sold 


There  are  wnw  paiMm  tuiiung  them  wbo  have  Imituiies  of  j£'jo,ooo,  an  immense 
m  for  ihiS  coyntrjr,  yet  th«ir  property  U  quiM-MMfk'  '  .  ^ 

8  C 


Digijized  by  Google 


ffj^  ,     STOORE&AUNSjEa  ' 

to  keep  up  its  ancient  cimIoiq*  but  wta  mnni  o(liii|iened  to.  unitate  fflie 
jHid/a^  «)flMl..4iflpiitw-  betwemt^  new  mtkn  aid  tho  old* 
tbe  whole  tribe  beonne  agnBokiiral,  except  tiKk.danit  wludi  itiU  ad» 
liere  to  a  pa8tofiil,]i^  and  movd  their  little  caiiip8.iiiipni!^to.  8paiC4 
on  the  south  wcsteiT|.«kirt»  of  Soloiliaib*«  thvoiie» 
..  Manj  of  the  ^tooweduneo^  hamver»  aie.  fltOl  merchants  and  * 
carriers,  a  life  i^pma^og  to  that  of  a  ^raoidenxig  shepherd* 
Tbdir  carriage  is  nwMlly.  On  bullocks  and  assoiu  -.Thair  niimlieti 
ire  about  four  thousand  funilies.  Their  government  agrees 
vcactly  witk  the  model  of  an  Afghaun  aristocracy.  The  Cauzy,  how- 
ever, is  so  important  an  office*  that  complaints  are  made  to  hiia 
directly,  in  the  absence  of  th6  Kliaun.  The  Cauzy  is  appointed  by 
the  Khaun,  and  the  Moollah  of  each  village  by  the  Mooshir.  The 
son  of  the  last  incumbeot  ia  preferredt  U,  he  is  fin  ibr  th«  employ- 
ment. 

The  condition  of  the  Ryots  is  nearly  the  same  in  all  these  tribes. 
They  are  generally  Juts  and  Beloches,  with  some  Hindoos.  They 
have  no  land,  and  they  are  under  the  person  on  wfiose  estate  they  live,  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  Fakcers  of  the  Kusolkyes.  In  Damaun,  how- 
ever, they  cannot  pass  from  one  man  to  another,  without  their  mas* 
ter*s  consent,  which  is  generally  obtainexi  by  a  present,  either  from 
the  Ryot,  or  from  the  person  who  wishes  to  receive  hun,  Tliey  can, 
howe^'er,  quit  tlie  tribe  to  which  they  belong,  whenever  they  pleajie* 
Suru'ur  alone  endeavours  to  prevent  his  livols  from  leaving  hiui. 

The  whole  of  Damaun  is  subject  to  the  King,  but  his  audioritv  is 
loosely  exercised,  and  he  seems  quite  indifferent  to  every  thing  but 
his  revenue.  The  tribes  are  bound  to  furnish  him  with  a  body  of 
honef  for  which  be  generally  takes  a  commutation  in  money.  He 
aboleviep  the  Jeeseea*  or  tax  on  Wa^wn,  thiou^out  TKiinaMi^ 
Hie  tribes  of  Damaun  seem  attached  to  the  Kbg^  ai  long  as  he  doea 
not  niteifete  with  them*  but  tbqr  hwk  with  hotroar  on  the  prospect 
of  being  bron|^t  under  his  government,  and  diimgii^  their  jweani 
ndependenoe  ibr  snhmiaaion  to  a  inaater.  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


FAMOUS  TBIBB8  OF  SOOR  AND  LODL  •  S79 

An  attempt  ww  onoe  mide  by  Mahommed  Khann,  to  lednoe  the 
MeeMinkhail,  and  he  took  many  of  their  Tillagesy  and  fecoed  their 
Khann  to  fly.  The  fogitive  Khium  went  to  his  inveterate  enemiei 
th&GundelqNKin ;  and,  although  the  tribes  hare  many  wars  among 
ihemselvesy  and  are  all  jealous  of  Snrwur,  the  whole*  including  the 
Murwnta  and  Bsankhallj  rose  on  this  occasion  as  one  man,  made  Sur- 
wur  their  diiel^  and  did  not  desist,  tin  they  had  compelled  JMbhomed 
y^fc^Tf*  to  tdtModon  his  design. 

Theie  wte  still  to  be  ibund  in  Bamaun,  some  ftmilies  of  the  tribes 
of  Sofliee  0d  libdi,  to  the  fint  of  which  bekngad  the  djfiitttycf 
CMiom^  0ne-tini»theim0st  powerfbl  mJUiss*  theseoon4  fivna  long 
than gnse Kingi to Hindostaaii*  '      i.-  •  v 

'  BeM(ke  ihe  tribes  I  have  mentioned,  all  Damaun  and  Mdckelwaxidf 
ace  fified  in  winter  with  camps  of  Sofimamikhails*  Kharotees,  'Saman 
sers,  and  other  wwnderiqg  tribes,  who  ocMue  there  to  avoid  the  ri  <i(>nT 
ef.  their  native  climates.    Those  who  have  caoieH 'move  mto  Moo- 

•  *       f    '  I 

..J  - 

|.  •  •  .It '<.<»  < 
•  .... 


kelwand,  but  those  with  sheep  leknain  in  Dnnaiuk 


S  c  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  -  •  '(   880   )  r 


CHAP.  IIL 

MOUNTAIN  TUBES. 

I AM  now  to  speak  oS.  the  tribes  which  inhabit  the  range  of  Soli'* 
mmi ;  and  as  I  propose  to  begin  from  the  ioath,  I  oi^^  finfe 
to  describe  the  ^nurrees  (who  inhabit  that  part  of  the  mountaine 
iriikh  it  to  the  weit  of  the  ^NxxneeeimeoB),  but  as  that  tribe  doielj 
Mtembles  the  Sheeraunees,  I  shidl  proceed  to  describe  the  latter,  re- 
flecting whom  I  am  better  in^Mmied.  I  onist,  however,  notice,  thai 
the  Zmurreea  are  aflowed  to  be  exempt  from  the  habits  of  npiae  for 
which  the  Sheeraunees  are  so  renunkaUa 

The  Sheeraunees  inhabit  the  mounttdns  north  of  those  of  the 
Zmurrees.  Their  country  overloc^  that  of  the  Bauboors  and  Mee- 
aunkhails,  and  they  have  the  Vueerees  on  the  north ;  their  westem 
boundary  will  be  mentioned  hereafter. 

Great  part  of  this  country  is  occupied  by  the  lofty  mountain  of 
Tukliti  Solimaun,  and  the  hills  which  surround  its  base.  Many  parts 
of  it  are  nearly  inaccessible;  one  of  the  roads  is  in  some'  plact  s  rut 
out  of  the  steep  face  of  the  hill,  and  in  others  supported  by  beams 
inserted  in  the  rock,  and  with  all  this  labour,  is  still  impracticable 
for  loaded  bullocks. 

The  population  is  Roaften d  in  villages  of  from  twenty  to  forty 
houses,  through  the  valleys  and  the  lower  parts  of  the  mountains. 
TTiey  cut  out  the  sites  of  their  liouses  in  the  slopes  of  the  hills,  so 
that  on  three  sides,  the  earth  forms  the  lower  part  of  the  wall.  Each 
cottage  contains  but  one  room,  and  has  only  one  entrance,  wliich  is 
closed  at  night  with  a  branch  of  a  thorny  tree.  Even  in  winter  they 
have  notliing  to  shut  out  the  cuid  j  but  sleep  on  black  carpets,  round 


Digitized  by  Google 


SUEKBAUNlia  'JSHI 

':llie;fiie^  waupt  vip  ia  thor  sheep-skin  doaka.  TlMW'ftMrti^fimiiih 
tben  with  pkntj  of  firo-wood,  and  thdr  haom  wevl^bted  fntb 

»bgMidieaof  »  pwtiniliir  sort  of  fir  which  borna  like  »  UttdL 

The.  SheariiiBeCB  un  genenlly  of  middling  stature,  thin,  bi|t  itoiit, 

.Im^,  «ndacliv8»  Theyhvfebold  fBStnces,  grey  eye8,high  dbiodiboM 

«d  ihflir  genenl  appeMifie  wwiUL  and  uanlj.   The  dnm  q(  <Jmb 

ShMiaiiiiees  oonsirta  of  aoome  blflckUai^ 
nuddle^  and  anoHier.thnmii  over  <iiar  ihonkinra.  They  wear  aandab* 
ike  aolea  of  wliieh  are-made  of  buUock'a  ludM»  mdely  prepared  fagr 
afeeeping  in  tlie  adies  of  the  tamariak  traai  and  their  droM  ia  oon^ 
pleted  bj  a  hw  yards  of  iriiite  eetton  cbth  lobaelj  tmfcad  voviid 

-llieir  hwdff  The  drew  of  tbe  rlchoit  ia  Bot  mdh  finer-UiaD  ^h<*- 

'Tbe  cfaiaf  is  than^  magnHkwIty  hecanae  -  he  drawaa-  in  Mnoltaifi 

•fldka 

Tlieir  lunal  fiiod  is  braad  made  of  Indian  com,  faotter»  itnd  kma^ 
Tliifl  hat,  however,  ia  a  hmaj  aeUom  engeyed  Imt  hj  those  wlip 
keep  aheep^  Wheaten  bread  b  only  produoed  on  ftstivab.  Hie 
•OedipiincipeDyeaM  ismntteo.  Tbaj  nevar  IdU  bea^  bitt  nhflii  a 
tefloiik  happens  to  die,  they  cat  its  throat  with  the  usual  Mahommo- 
•dan  oetenMNiies,  and  eat  it  withont  tcnqile>  ihoa^  the  flesh  of  aav 
mals  that  die  of  disease,  be  strictly  prohibited  by  the  Koraun. 
'  Th^  eat  wild  olives  fresh  fW>m  the  tree,  and  dried  oUve%  wliii^i 
-they  are  obiliged  to  boil.  They  also  eat  wild  pomegranates,  (though 
they  are  very  sour  and  harsh,)  the  seed  of  the  Julghoozeh  piq^.and 
several  sorts  of  hehies  which  grow  wild  in  their  mountains. 

The  Sheeraunees  marry  late.  They  differ  firqm  the  other  A%hauns 
in  this  reject,  that  the  father  of  the  bride  gives  a  dowry,  mstead  of 
•arieehring  e  prioe  &x  his  daaigbter.  The  women  only  work  at  damee- 
tic  employments,  and  at  reifmig  the  harvest. 

Money  is  very  scaioe  among  them,  their  trade  beiog  prindpfUly 
^rried  on  by  barter. 

They  have  no  domestic  ser\'ants  nor  slaves,  and  no  artificers  ;  about 
a  dojsen of  Hindoos  keep  shops,  and  sell  grain,  clot! i,  treacle,  tobacro, 
fkudfied  butter,  and  a  few  of  the  coarsest  manufacture  o^'  tjix^  .jpi^in^ 

tl 


Digitized  by  Google 


068       PECULIAR  GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  SHEERAUNEES. 

'tnd  «  ttnali  ii(imb«r  of  Mtflen  inm  Ikmmmp  piaotb^-tlK  tnim  'df 

The  pniidpalraiqplojnMiittif  1^  ShoowuneBi  n  ^rioflfemib'iriMdl 
h'cuiM  (m  ia  tlie  Mme  plMM  unds  ibB  hills  ^ddiice 

gnm  inthbuiinlwriag^  hpt  «il«iie  sed.fif  .lhar'lttidkM  iif^tfaa 

me«Biir  diimi-thMMMi  iooM  ihft  faiil'itMigiia.  /Hm  tt.n«  m 
in  i]ie4tibe'ballliii  chhT (anddieMoQlUifl)  wtwdaaiJiot'kbonr..-  - 

They  have  two  litfviMi^  one  of  «faioh'eaiiilite.ctf  ied'iieei"]kifiBi 
^Dorii,  Moong,  and  tobabeow'  b  'u'sdvu  in  wnniriBiv  and  reaped  hi 
autiimh ;  when  it  is  off  the  gtcmA,  Ihey  taw  wlwat  and  bailqr,ifhich 
is  cut  in  the  hcgnming  of  nmineT. 

Their  common  itock  consists  of  hullocks»  but  there  aie  tone  shep> 
heida  whti»'live  aoakerad  m  maU  hamlets  over  the  wnnmits  of  the 
mountains,  and  some  even  in  tenti.  Their  bullocka  aie  vaj  amiU, 
•ahfteya  hlack»  and  without  huanpi.  Tliey  have  a  few  goal%  ai^  some 
asseS)  biit  no  miiles,  buffideet»*  or  caoMli.  Tbm9  mm^  w^'fwimty 
horses  in  the  whole  ooontfj;  • 

■  The  d^ef  of  the  Sheeraunees  is  called  iheNeeka  (which  in  Push- 
too means  the  grandfather).  He  has  very  great  authority  in  hm 
tribe,*  which  is  partly  derived  from  his  being  the  efaosen:  head  of  the 
oki^t  family,  and  partly  from  the  belief  of  the  Sheeramites^  that  he 
18  under  the  immediate  guidance  and  protection  of  Providence.  He 
'has  alarfte  estate,  and  consequentiv  fmploys  many  people  in  husban- 
dty,  but  he  has  ni)  domosnc  8ervaiit>.  He  rccpive*;  n  Inmb  annually 
from  everv  mnn  in  the  tribe  who  has  sheep,  and  :i  calt  trom  those 
who  have  mnu\  rattle.  No  force  is  employed  to  reahze  this  tax,  but 
it  is  rea(lil\  p  nitL  from  the  conviction  of  tiie  people  that  some  gr^  ' 
misforti  u  [  tlu  death  of  a  child  for  inrtawre)  will  fall  oa  &nry  po^ 
son  wh<i  rckises  to  pav. 

Thovi^'h  men  oth'ti  rrdrt'ss  tlieir  owD  injuries  bv  mere  Ibrce,  yet  tlie 
Neeka  is  the  only  regular  dispenser  of  justice.  He  hears  the  parties, 
and  after  sayinji  a  prayer,  decides  the  cause  by  the  inspiration  of  the 
Divinity.  His  order  is  alwa;^s  obeyed  from  the  dread  of  supernatural 
punishment,  : :  .    .     •  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


PREDATOBT  CHARACnft  Or  THE  SHfiERAlWEEa  38.^ 

■  fjhiinniiinirn  have  also  Cbelwashtees,  but  they  leab  intended 
nther  to  supply  the  place  of  the  Neeka  in  distaafc  pnis»  than  to 
itrangthen  bis  power.  They  are  appointed  by  the  Neeka,  uid-Mt 
under  his  orders.    The  Sheeraunees  have  little  internal  dissension. 

There  is  a  Moollah  in  every  village,  who  receives  a  tythe  oi'  the 
produce  of  its  lands  nnd  flocks.  The  simjilicity  of  the  Sheeraunees 
isahewn  in  aRtron^i;  \i<A\t  bv  one  of  the  i  unctions  of  this  priest,  winch 
ia  to  sew  the  shrouds  tor  thi- dead.  great  many  of  the  Slieerau- 
nees  learn  to  read  tiic  Korauii,  though  uoue  but  Aloollaiis  learn  to 
tead  Pushtoo,  and  none  rersian.  Thev  are  very  punctual  in  their 
prayers,  but  apparently  feel  little  real  dt  votion.  * 

The  Sheeraiinees  are  at  war  with  all  the  tribes  that  pnm  through 
their  country  in  tlieir  annual  uiigratioas.  They  may,  indeed,  be  said 
t6  be  at  svar  with  all  the  world,  since  they  plunder  every  traveller  that 
comes  witliin  their  re^h  ;  and  besides,  make  incursions  into  parts  of 
Damaun,  with  the  inhabitants  of  whicli  they  have  no  quarrel.  "While 
I  was  in  their  neiglibourhood,  they  stopped  the  body  i>t  a  Dooraunee 
of  rank,  which  vva.s  guing  through  their  coimtry  to  be  buried  at  Can- 
dahar,  and  detained  it  till  a  ransom  had  been  paid  ibr  it. 

All,  however,  agree  that  their  fiuth  is  unblemished,  and  that  a 
tntteller  who  hires  an  escort  of  Sheevaunees,  may  pass  tfarooi^  tbeb 
coHBtry  in  peiftitt  security.  • 

Ilia  Neelu  oonmumcb  in  their  wkbb,  mtd  hthm-my  expedition, 
•E  the  iiDopB  paM  nndsr  lie  tnzlaa,  whidi  is  siretdied  eat  ibr  the 
purpose  by  the  Keeka  and  a  MooUah.  Tliia  they  think  teenrea  them 
from  wwBdsnddendi;  «ul  thc^teU  sMes  of  pn»a  who  hsve 
kMt  ibtir  lifiea  fiam  ne^^eoting  or  diadHnIng  this  cennibiiy.  l&eir 
•ma  ve  e  flMti^lock  and  a  sabne* 


*  I  hsve  aeen  a  Sheeraonee  performing  bis  XaniAuz,  idbOe  same  people  in  the  tame  ' 
company  were  talking  of  hunting;  the  size  of  deer  happened  to  be  mentioned,  and  the 
Sheenumce,  in  the  midst  of  his  pro^traiioiiH,  colled  out  that  the  deer  in  his  country  were 
M  hrgp  M  little  buDodu,  and  dicn  went  on  whh  hit  de«otka». 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sg4  ViZEEaEES.        '  . 

'  Amongthehillstothe  west  of  the  range  of  Solimaun,  areGosa,  inhal)^ 
ted  by  theMoossakhaiiCaiikflny  wbieh  lies  west  of  the  Zmurrees ;  Bttut^ 
«  high  barren  plain  among  momitaiiUt  inhabited  fay  tke  hill  Bauboom  | 
and  still  &ither  npidi  are  SpaBtt»  Mid  the  country^  the  finppeep 
and  HmreeiMiu]  tribes ;  on  the  weit  of  all  these  countriei,'  eie  hiUi 
which  aeperate  them  from  Zhobe. 

SpustR  is  s  wavy  plain  covered  with  wild  olives.  It  is  hi(^  cold» 
and  barren,  and  is  inhabited  in  siunmer  by  the  Muxhails,  a  pastofal 
tribe»  who  more  in  winter  into  Damaun.  Tliey  live  entirely  in  tent% 
and  have  ^mt  mtnners  of  the  other  shepherd  trites.  Thou^  poatf 
they  carry  on  some  little  trade ;  their  stock  is  sheep,  goats,  asses,  and 
a  few  oxen,  used  only  for  ouniagew  Their  Khaim  is  powerful,  though 
under  the  Neeka  of  the  Sheeraunees,  and  their  Moollahs  have 
authority  enough  to  punish  offences  against  the  Maliomedan  ritual. 
The  tribes  of  Hurreepaul  and  Kuppeep,  resemble  the  Sheeraunees, 
of  \vhit:h  tribe  they  are  branches;  and  tlieir  residence  IB  in  thfi  hills 
and  valleys  at  the  western  base»  of  Tukhti  Solimaun. 

The  extensive  countrv  ot  the  \  izccrecs  lies  to  the  nortli  ot  that  of 
the  Sheeraunees,  and  stretcJies  u}>  to  the  northward  for  one  huucirc^d 
miles,  till  it  reaches  Sufaid  Coli  ;  I  lie  low  hills  which  separate  t lie 
little  countries  about  Khost  and  Bunnoo,  have  been  mpnti«ine<i  as 
belongin«»;  to  the  Vizeerees,  but,  from  the  paralU^l  ot  Simt/a  lu  near 
the  source  of  the  Koorrum,  they  share  the  mountains  with  the  Jar 
draims,  the  latter  having  the  west  lace  of  the  rang^  and  the  Vizee- 
rees the  east. 

The  greater  part  of  their  country  consists  of  mountains  covered 
with  pine  forests,  but  containing  some  cleared  and  cult  i\  ai  wl  spoti» 
The  lower  hills  are  liare,  or  oiiiy  covered  with  bu.shcs  ami  low  trees. 

The  Vizeeree  country  is  little  visited,  except  by  passengers,  who 
shun  the  inhabitants  as  much  as  they  can  ;  and  I  have  found  it  im- 
'  poasible  to  meet  with  a  Vizeeree  out  of  his  own  country.  The  fol- 
lowing account  is  derived  from  travellers :  it  is  superficial,  and  nugr 
belncoirect 


Digitized  by  Google 


MANNERS  AND  HABITS  OF  THE  VIZEEKEE&  ^85 

Hie  l^neroes  Iwre  no  goDonl  govemiiient;  they  ase  in  Mttle  fo* 
dfltfcB,  .BomB  under  powetftl  Khiinniii  and  otliera  under  »  deoM^* 
cnucy ;  tlief  are  all  ifimariwhle  £at  their  peaceable  oondnct  among 
tlieinflel?e8»  and  banre  neldwr  .wan  between  dana,  nor  much  private 
diaaenaion.  Thoufj^  Ihesy  m  noCocioua  plundereni  the  amalleat 
eaoort  aeeurea  »  tzsvdler  .an  hioapllaUe  zeceptian  thiougfa  the  i^nle 
tribe.  Hfcey  are  particularly  lemarkablte  far  their  attada. on  the  ca»» 
vana,  and  migEBtoiy  tribea  to  the  weat  of  tlie  piMW  of  Gfacdabeab  Ne 
eaooita  aire  ever  granted,  or  applied  far  there;  the  oaiatvan  ia  wdft 
gnaidedf  and  able  to  deter  attadca,  or  to  ^fjbit  ita  wwy  tliroii^  No 
quarter  ia  given  to  men  in  theae  wan }  it  ia  aaid  that  the  Viieeraea 
would  even  kill  a  male  duld  tliat  fall  into  their  hands ;  bat  they 
never  molest  women,  and  if  one  <tS  tliat  aex  wanders  from  her  eai»- 
*  van,  they  treat  her  with  lundoeaa,  and  send  guides  to  escort  her  to 
her  tribe.  Even  a  man  would  meft  with  the  sune  treatment,  if  .he 
oould  make  his  way  into  the  house  of  a  Vizeeree ;  the  master  would 
then  be  obliged  to  treat  him  with  all  the  attention  and  good  will 
which  is  due  to  a  guest.  The  Vizcerces  who  are  fixed,  live  in  small 
hamlets  of  thatched  and  terraced  houses ;  in  some  places  (about 
Kaiin^oorrum  for  example),  they  live  in  caves  cut  out  of  the  rocks. 
Some  of  these  rise  above  each  other  in  three  stories,  and  others  are 
so  high  as  easily  to  admit  a  camel.  But  most  of  the  tribe  live  in 
black  tents,  or  moveable  hovels  of  mats,  or  temporary  straw  Imts; 
these  go  up  to  the  hifjli  mountains  in  spring,  and  stay  there  till  ttie 
cold  and  snow  drives  ihem  back  to  the  low  and  warm  hills.  Their 
principal  stock  is  ryoats ;  they  also  breed  many  small  but  serviceable 
horses ;  and,  what  \^ould  not  be  expected  in  such  a  country,  they^are 
fand  of  horsemansiiip. 

The  Vizeerees  arc  said  Lo  be  uU  and  muscular,  of  iair  complexions 
and  high  features.  Their  whole  dress  is  a  high  conical  black  cap,  a 
loose  great  coat  of  black  blanket,  fastened  round  the  waiat  with :»  " 
girdle  of  the  same  material,  and  sandala  of  atraw  rope,  oruntanned 
ieaiiier.  From  this  attire,  and  from.the.descriptiona  which  aregivell 
of  their  shaggy  hair  and  beaids,  .and  tlieir  hatiy  Umba,  tbeur  appeal^ 

S  n 


Digitized  by  Google 


JADRAUKS. 


me  miry  be  concieived*  to-  be  wild  and  toMt,  Thm  arms  an 
gaMnDy  ma>  Afghadh'  knife  and  a'ahieldt  and  every  man  caaniei  a 
fiftfAMiiA^  at  the  use  of  m^ildl  tbqy  are  very  expert.  Hi^  oim 
oomtiy  aAnds  materiah  fer  these  arma;  it  aboanda  in  inm  oic^ 
wfaiah  the  Viseeraes  work  up  into  anns>  and  export  to  the  pkina. 
Their  are  hangh^t  and  their  vmoes  knd*  diatlnrt»  and  oom-  • 

mending  I  'but  they  are  gentle  and  good  tempered  in  (heir  interooone 
with  their  gneate,  and  with  each  other.  Siudi  ia  their  veracilj»  that 
if  there  is  a  dispute  about  a  stray  goat,  and  one  partjr  willsay  it  is 
hia>  and  oonfem  his  assertioii  by  stroaking  his  beavd*  the  odier  in- 
atantly  givea  it  up,  without  suspicion  of  fraud. 

Their  amusements  are  listening  to  songs  (for  they  never  deign  to 
sing  themselves),  and  dancing  a  sort  of  i^rirluc  dance,  in  which  they 
go  tfarou^  some  warlike  attitudes,  and  leap  about  flourialiing  their 
awotds. 

The  food  of  the  Vizeerees  is  the  flesh  of  sheep,  oxen,  or 
which  they  eat  half  raw,  with  czoot  and  unleayened  bread  of  the  wont 
description. 

The  women  are  not  required  to  labour,  lliey  wear  a  long;  thick 
shift  of  red  cotton,  with  sandals  like  the  men,  and  have  as  many  gold 
and  silver  ornaments  as  their  husbands  can  afford.  A  most  ext  raor- 
dinary custom  is  said  to  prevail  anK>ng  them,  which  gives  tlie  women 
the  choice  of  their  husbands.  II'  a  woman  is  pleased  with  a  man, 
she  sends  the  drummer  of  the  camp  io  pin  a  handkerchief  on  his  cap, 
wIlIi  a  ]iin  which  she  has  used  to  fasten  her  hair.  The  (huiiiirier 
watches  his  ojipoi  t  unity,  and  does  this  in  public,  naming  the  woman, 
and  the  man  iii^  i  in  mediately  obliged  to  marry  her,  if  he  can  pay  her 
price  to  her  father. 

The  Jadrauns  have  the  \  izeciccb  on  the  east,  the  ivliarotee.^,  and 
the  country  dependent  on  Ghuznee  on  the  west,  and  the  Jaujees  on 
tiie  north.  Their  dress  and  manners  are  said  to  be  like  those  of  the 
Vkeereeb  Towards  the  Kborrum,  they  cultivate  some  of  the  in> 
firior  sorts  of  gram,  but  towaids  the  Kfaamtees,  they  winder  with 
their  goato,  throu|^  the  tiikk  pine  fimsfc^  and  aie  (aa  •  Klittotea 


Digitized  by  Google 


DUMTAUNEES  OF  WAUNER 


887 


obsen'ed  of  them),  in  appearfknce  and  habits  of  life,  more  like  moun- 
tain bears  than  men.  They  are  not  an  extensive  tribe,  and  their 
oountzy  is  nenx  Tuited  faj  trweDen.  They  ham  win  with  tbe 
Kharotees,  and  plunder  travellers  on  the  road  from  Caubul  Uirough 
Bungush,  new  the  pan  of  Peiwsur.  I  need  acaice  say  that  they  aie 
never  to  be  met  wi^  out  of  their  hQla. 

The  ooontcies  along  the  western  nde  of  l^ikhti  So1hnaun»  which 
aooompeny  those  which  I  h«ve  been  describing*  in  tiieir  progress  to- 
waids  the  mnth,  do  not  call  Son  any  particular  nodoe.  To  the  north 
of  the  Huncepsnl  is  the  countiy  near  the  jonction  of  the  Gomul  and 
aiobe^  sometimes  pastured  on  by  wandering  Gauhers.  North  of  it 
is  Wannehf  a  low  pUin  situated  on  tiie  hills  that  slope  down  to  the 
vidky  of  tbe.Gomii].  It  is  an  open  tract,  inhabited  by  s  small  tiifie 
called  Bumtanny,  and  much  frequented  m  summer  by  shepherds  of 
the  Splimaun  Ehail  and  Kharotee  tribes ;  some  of  tlie  tribes  depen- 
dent on  the  Dowlutkhail,  also  drive  up  their  flocka  to  Waun^  in 
winter.  N<»rth  of  Wamieh  is  Oorghoon,  the  country  of  the  Per* 
moollees ;  and  then  a  tract  belonging  to  KhaioteeS)  snd  other  clans 
of  Ghi^pesi  of  all  which  I  shall  hereafter  have  oocasioii  to  speak  at 
laiget 


Snd 


(    388  ) 


CHAP.  IV. 

WEBTEBM  AfGHAUNS,  DOO&AUXKES,  CITY  OF  CANOAiUAllt  TEEJBBMS  AMD- 

BABAICHSS. 

'npHE  countries  hitherto  described,  consist  of  flat  and  low-ljSiig 
plains,  or  of  strongly  marked  ranges  of  mountains.  The 
plains  arc  hot  and  fertile,  generally  ]H>pu)ous,  and  almost  all  in- 
habited by  fixed  residents.  The  mountains  are  high  and  rugged, 
the  tops  covered  with  forests,  and  llic  sides  pierced  bv  deep  valleys: 
inhabited  by  tribes  separated  from  each  other,  and  only  known  to 
the  rest  of  the  world  by  their  assaults  on  strangers  who  penetrate  td 
their  haunts,  or  by  their  incursions  into  the  neighbouring  plains. 
Those  which  we  arc  now  to  review,  have  an  op]iositc  character. 
They  are  mostly  high  and  bleak  downs,  intersperseii  witli  moderate 
hills,  in  some  places  desart,  and  in  others  ill-cultivated ;  bare,  open, 
better  fitted  for  pastura^  than  for  the  plough  ;  and  much  inlinliited 
by  shepherds  in  moveable  camps.  The  characters  of  the  hiiJ\  and 
plain  countries  run  into  each  other ;  nor  is  there  any  more  marked 
Ime  of  separation  between  the  chaxacten  of  their  inhabitants.  Both 
axe  nmple,  honest,  and  peaceable;  and  diougli  there  ia  a  dttferenoe 
in  the  degree  in  whidi  thoae  qualitiea  are  pooncoaed  bj  difeent 
tribeai  there  axe  none  who  wouU  be  remarkable  among  Asiatic  ne* 
tiona  ibr  the  want  of  them.  Ibe  western  tribes,  especially  those  of 
KhoraflBaim,  understand  Persian  much  more  generally  than  the 
Eastern  onea  do  ]ffindostaune^  and  thdr  dreasj  arms,  and  habi- 
tations, while  they  retain  th«r  national  peculiarities,  i^roach  to 
thoae  of  Feiaia.  The  character  of  the  people,  however,  ia  essentially 
diflbrent  fiom  that  of  fhe  Peruana ;  and  peifaapa  the  diffarenee  is 


Digitized  by  GoogI 


GENERAL  DESCRIPTION. 


880 


jwnrR  rtriking  than  that  he-ttmm  thp>  wMtom  A^iuiimi  the  IndilttM; 
tboqgh  that  abo  u  great  Scattered  orer  an  estebuve  eoaattf,  the 
WaatflfD  AigbaniM  are  too  distant  ham  each  other  to  acquire  either 
the  vices  or  the  habits,  of  strife  which  belong  to  a  cxowded  pc^ndadoii : 
each  horde  dxtVM  its  flock  over  Ha  CKteiittTe  lands,  or  the  wider 
faingB  of  unappropriated  pBBtme;  mlhaiA  a  rival  and  often  without  a 
ncigywur.  In  the  same  manner,  each  society  of  tlie  fixed  inhabi- 
tants cultivates  the  banks  of  a  river,  or  the  ground  commanded  by  a 
Cahreez,  at  a  distance  firom  all  other  agricultural  people ;  and  indivi- 
duals of  those  societies  are  prevented  from  quarrelling  about  their 
lliaiesy  bj  the  abimdance  of  waste  land,  and  the  facility  with  which 
the  surplus  of  their  population  can  be  provided  for  in  pasturage. 
This  thinness  of  the  population,  while  it  retards  the  progeesa  of  the 
arts  of  lite,  is  doubtless  equally  effectual  in  checking  the  increase  of 
the  vices  wliich  abound  in  populous  countries  ;  and  accordinglv  we 
■find  among  the  Western  Afghauns,  a  sort  of  primith  e  simplicity, 
which  reminds  us  ratljer  of  the  scriptural  accounts  o{  the  early  ages, 
than  of  any  thing  wliicli  lias  been  observed  bv  motK  i  tis  in  nations 
where  society  is  still  in  its  infancy.  In  s<nne  parts  of  this  tract  the 
character  nf  the  ])eople  seems  to  have  undergone  some  change,  in 
consequence  of  tiie  impii'ssion  made  on  the  governments  of  their 
tribes  by  the  neighbourhootl  of  the  munaichy.  Among  the  Ghiljies 
and  Dooraunees,  the  hereditary  chiefs  of  the  tribes  have  suci  essively 
tbuiided  great  kingdoms,  of  which  the  latter  is  known  stUl  to  subsist. 
Among  the  Dooraunees,  the  heads  of  clans  also  form  the  nobility, 
who  enjoy  the  great  offices  of  the  court,  the  state^  and  the  army ;  and 
they  appear  in  the  doable  character  of  patriarchal  dbiefr,  and  of 
wealthy  and  powerihl  noblemen,  deriring  oonunand  and  influence 
fiiom  the  Kingfs  authority,  and  firom  thar  own  riches'  and  magnifi* 
canoe*  In  this  atuatiMii,  many  of  the  republican  insdtutions  of  the 
tribes  disappear,  but  other  orcumstaaces  oontribote  to  preserve  the 
imptmance  of  the  daasmen,  and  to  prevent  their  sinking  into  entire 
depfndfftce  on  their  lord.  A  degree  of  order  and  tranquillity  i8.se^ 
onedf  si^flrior  to  what  is  ever  attahted  m  the  democmtic  trfbess  jt 

It 


Digitized  by  Google 


S90 


PASTORAL  TRIBES. 


tlie  9tn»  time  th^  dl  the  peculiar  virtues  of  those  txSba  wee  pi» 
8^ed ;  and  on  the  whole,  die  effect  of  this  kind  <^  govemm^  oe 
the.  people  who  live  under  it,  appean  to  be  mere  ftvonnble  then  any 
eae.we  sluJl  have  to  consider. 

Tliough  the  kingdom  has  passed  away  from  the  Ghi^ies,  it  hag 
still  left  it«  traces,  and  the  efibct  of  the  ilbnner  hi^  stations  of  dM 
Ehauns  b  still  observable  among  them ;  it  is  not,  however,  sufficient 
to  prevent  anarchy ;  and  a  popular  government  seems  gradually  to  be 
forming,  which  will  take  the  place  of  the  old  aristocracy  in  maintaiup 
ing  the  public  tninfmillity. 

The  principal  iieature  in  which  the  Western  Atghauns  clitler  Irora 
the  Eastern,  is  tbrmofl  hy  the  niitnerous  pastoral  tribei^.  These, 
though  they  have  all  some  co]iini<;ii  points  of  resemblance,  such  as 
their  living  in  tents,  and  moving  with  tlie  seasons,  differ  among  them- 
selves in  other  particulars  which  will  appear  in  the  details.  The 
difference  ])rincipally  relates  to  the  distance  between  their  summer 
and  winter  stations,  and  to  the  degree  in  which  they  oomb^e  agri- 
culture with  pasturage. 

The  suminLi  station  is  called  Eiiauk,  anil  ihc  winter  sialioii  Kish^ 
laukf  two  words  which  both  the  Afghauns  and  Persians  have  borrowed 
from  the  Tartars.  The  tents  almost  universally  used  among  the 
A%hauns  are  of  a  kind  of  black  blanket,  or  rather  of  coarse  black 
camlet  sucli  as  is  used  for  the  same  purpose  in  the  greater  part  of 
Persia.  It  is  caUed  ISathdee  in  the  A%haim  language,  SmM^auim 
in  Perrian*  and  Karraooee  in  Turkish:  both  c£  these  laat  phrasfli 
mean  **  black  tents"  the  teem  generatty  given  to  themby  Emupesnib 

The  tents  of  the  tribes  that  move  little  are  always  hoger  and  better 
than  those  of  the  very  migratory  people. 

The  latter  have  often  fine  tents  which  they  leaive  at  the  statioiis 
wheie  the  climate  is  most  severe*  eanying  h^idm  ones  on  thdr  jouw 
neys  to  the  plaoes  wfaese  dielter  is  less  required. 

It  must  not  be  inferred  that  all  the  Western  A^^iauns  are  abep- 
herds:  on  the  oontnryy  aldieai^  die  space  i^veni  up  to  pestme  mey 
be  mndi  racne  CKtensive  than  that  cmj^oyed  in  agricnltmei  yet  the 


4 


Digitized  by  Google 


DOOKAUK££& 


S91 


amnber  of  cteeoa  ■adviHageiB  mmt,  I  ■howlAliniighw;  congdaHjbty 
ocedd  tliiit  of  the  wanderiDg  hfltddi* 

Mhij  putt  of  die  ooiiii(ay»  psrticalarfy  round  the  dtiOyim  m 
Itig^jciiltmtodMaDypaBtofdieiroilii;  in  lemotv  diitrida  mmiio 
wdl  csuHivated  tracts  are  to  be  met  with*  and  even  the  mort  deserted 
BCl^XiiiB  afibrd  occasional  marks  of  the  indoirtiy  dTthe  hudMndatfiL-  - 

In  treating  of  this  country,  I  shall  begin  at  the  west  (where  the 
ywrtflst  conlraat  will  be  found  to  what  has  been  already  mentioned) 
and  proceed  eaatward  till,  as  I  approach  the  division  fonnedy  de< 
acribedy  aome  tnoes  will  appear  of  the  manners  alieadj  known  to  the 
reader  as  peculiar  to  the  eastern  Aigbanna.  In  pursuance  of  thia 
phm,  I  shall  begin  with  the  Doonninees  and  their  southern  neigh'- 
hours  the  Baraiches  and  Tereens ;  and  then  stretch  east  with  the 
Ghiljies,  till  I  reach  the  valley  of  the  Caubul  river  and  the  mountains 
of  Solimaun.  The  Caukers,  whose  lands  extend  from  those  of  the 
Tereens  to  the  mountains  just  mentioned,  will  end  all  the  part  of  my 
account  which  is  connected  with  fifeoL'rnpIn-  ;  ;ind  the  pastoral  and 
unsettled  thbe  of  Nausser  will  conclude  the  deschptioa  of  the 
A%hauiis. 

The  length  of  the  country  of  the  Dooraunees  may  he  loosely  said 
to  be  400  miles,  and  except  in  the  north-w^  the  general  breadth  is 
from  120  to  140  miles. 

It  is  bounded  on  the  north  by  the  Paropamisan  mountains,  ialiii- 
bited  by  the  Eiiuauks  and  llazaurch.s  j  on  the  west  it  has  a  sandy 
dejiai  t  of  various  breadth,  beyond  whicli  are  the  Persian  dominions : 
on  the  south' west  it  has  Seestaun  and  a  deiait  wfaidi  aepaiaitta  it' 
from  TModuataim  t  Hs  southern  boundary  is  ftimed-  by  flhcnauiiuk 
and  die  hflJa  of  Khaujeh  Anuami,  wluch'SeparateitfiomtlieTereena 
and  Gaaiken  i  and  on  the  east  it  iias  no  naitaral  boimdary,  but  joins 
la  the  lands  of  tiie  6hi|^  $  into  wliidi  tlie  valley  of  Urgheasaunt 
part  of  tiie  Dooiaunee  territoij,  mns  iat  a  o6nsidend>)e  extent.  The 
number  of  sqoaie  miles  in  thie  Dooiaunee  ooontiy  is  inobably  aupe- 
rior  to  that  in  Eng^nd}  but  it  includes  acme  laige  spaces  of  desatt, 
and  the  ^^ft*^^  country  is  ]Riobably  little  superior  to  Scotland  in 


S9S  MERIDIAN  OF  CANDAHAR. 

4 

extent,  MoA  inftrior  in  popuktMML  The  popuhtion  is  liy  no  mawii 
evenly  spreadt  nor  is  the*  ftce  of  the  countij  thjou|^  all  its  estent 
the  same.  Thep«rtwhidi]iesi«eitoflon^tiide63eaat  (•  ili^  not 
exceeding  seventy  or  nules  in  faveadth)*  is  situated  between 
tbe  sandj  desart  aheadj  described  and  the  Ftaopamisaa  momitaini^ 
andpactakesof  the  nature  of  both  of  those  tracts.  Ingenefal  it  con^ 
sista  of  arid  and  uncultivated  pkuns*  crossed  by  ranges  of  hills  lumiing 
westwvd  ham  the  Paropamisan  mountains  into  Penian  Khonasaan  i 
but)  thongh  its  general  appearance  be  waste  and  barren,  most  paits 
of  it  supply  water  and  forage  to  the  pastoral  hordes  that  fiequent  it, 
and  it  is  not  destitute  of  many  well-watered  and  pleasant  valleys,  and 
some  fertile  plains  surrounded  by  mountains.  In  those  tracts  are 
many  villages,  but  the  only  town  in  this  part  of  the  country  is  Furrah, 
on  the  river  of  that  name,  which  was  once  a  place  of  j^rreat  extent, 
and  is  still  a  considerable  walled  towTi.  This  appears  to  be  the 
antient  Parra,  by  which  name  indeed  the  A%hauns  still  distin- 
guish it. 

The  Houthern  part  of  the  tract  I  have  been  d^cribing,  is  by  no 
means  so  mountainous  as  the  northern,  and  it  seems  not  improbft!>le 
that  it  may  oiice  have  been  a  fertile  r^ion,  and  may  have  been 
encroaclu  d  on  by  the  desart  like  the  contiguous  country  of  Seestaun, 
This  opiniuii  Ls  supported  no  less  by  the  magnificent  ruins  whitli  :ire 
still  to  be  seen,  thaii  by  the  recorded  accounts  of  the  fertility  and 
extent  of  Seestaun,  to  which  the  tract  in  question  i&  biud  to  have 
belonged.  * 

From  longitude  6S  east,  .e  tract  of  very  considerable  extent 
stretcfaea  eastward  ior  upwards  of  two  hundred  miles  to  the 
of  Qmdahar.   Its  genend  breadth  is  near  100  miles.   Its  boundaries 
are  ill  defined,  for,  on  the  north,  the  hills  sometimes  run  into  the 
phun,  .  and  the  southern  parts  of  the  inhabited-  country  are  not  easily 


*  Seestaun  is  said  to  have  contained  1 20,000  ploughs.  For  an  awmmt  «£  die  nUM 
■en  bijr  Ctftmu  Cbiutia^  lee  Mr.  Kimieu^*  Owgttfbf  at  Pntila.  . 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


MERIDIAN  OF  CANDAHAft. 


4iac2iq{iiiiM  fiNjm  the  denrt  in  mhaA,  th^f  barte.  .  Th»  vlult 
Mmft  approadiet  to  ih»  mtaie  of  a  demt  The  fonthBrn  paiti  m» 
•ndj,  md  tiia  notthem  cammt  of  hard  emth*  miiiwi  ■omgtimieiwith 
fDcte  hud- ofwwkh  loir  hllki  bntattisaqnaUy  iiii|«odiidlvo.^ 
ft  traa  it  to  be  fiMilid  m  die  wliolo  ccgion,  lint  the  plains  ve  .wared 
widk  km  biiihet ;  of  - which  the  prim^pal  are  llioae  called-  jons  aiid 
iaMath.hy^  A^^l^luaMi  «idt«Pp]owtt  btuheB.fEom  which: kali  is 
pitodBDed.  YetthfadiicoigagingjtK)deialy  iw:iBeap(i  ,dearitiito  <rf 
kihabifaiita.  The  banks  of  the  Fucrah  RMid»  the'  Ehwuh  foodt  and 
other  str^xoB,  are  well  cultivotedf'jfebd  piodDee  wheat,  barley,  pulsar 
aMd  abnndanee  of  exeelknt  melons.  "Ena  at  •  distanoB  6Bom  lim 
8treaiiM»  aonse  petcfaea  of  coltivation  are  wetered  by  raeana  of 
Cahreezes,  and  acairce  any  part  of  the  country,  especially  <^  the 
■OKth*  k  ao  badaa  not  to  affivdherbage  and  water  in  the  Cool  aeaaoB 
to  nmnerous  campe  of  Dooraunees  who  diive  their  flocks  in  summet. 
nto  Saeahbund,  the  countiy  of  the  Tymunees.  There  are  villaget 
among  the  cultivated  lands,  but  none  of  them  are  large,  and  certainly 
the  mass  of  the  inhabitants  are  scattered  over  the  face  of  the  country 
in  tents.  Some  parts  of  Uiis  country  also,  appear  to  have  lost  a  jrrcat 
deal  of  their  fertilit\'.  The  south  POTtcrn  part  of  it  cfjiitain.s  the 
brooks  of  Dohree  and  Cudduii)  e,  which  within  the  last  century  were 
considerable  streams  thioughoiit  the  year,  but  which  are  now  dij 
eiCcept  in  spring. 

The  banks  of  the  Helmmid,  though  within  the  tract  of  wliich  I 
have  described  the  limits,  must  be  entirely  excepted  from  all  the 
above  obaervations.  That  river,  even  after  it  has  left  the  hills,  con- 
tinues to  be  accompMiied  on  each  side  by  a  stripe  til  icrlile  and 
cultivated  land,  the  southern  part  of  which  forms  the  singular  country 
of  Gurmseer.  This  district  occupies  a  hollow  stretching  along  both, 
banks  of  the  Helmnnd  fieen  the  neighbomhood  .of  Gizishk  to 
SoGstann*  It  aeaiea  in  awtiawit  lamea  to  faaife  bean. an  arfenaife'tepp*. 
toxy,  and  to  he?e  bean  nded  brf.aa  Indflf^eodent  prince }  but  itianiMr- 
confined  in. gaufel  to  aqnanteEofB  nife  on  each8id»of  the  ritery 

edl  ilewUe  bieadlfa  lie  wbere  exceeda:  tiro  Diite 

a  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


COUKTRY  ROUND  CAia)AHAR. 

9mAf  dauattexlM^&irmmydayBymmey.  The  Gunnaeer  itsdf  k 
SHHiC,  and  sometimes  ersn  mszsby ;  many  psits  of  it  tie  cnltinrted 
BOd  aBM  plentaftil  raturns  to  Hie  hmbudmsn.  '  In  those  spots,  «i» 
oMtles  wad  -Ibftified  villages,  but  the  ^^reater  part  is  cormd  widi 
herbage,  mshos  sod  tsmsrish  boshes,  among  which  are  meny  campt 
of  ^Tiepherds. 

To  the  northward  of  the  desait  tract  last  described  Is  a  hiUy  teffoa 
dependent  on  the  Ptupopamisan  nnge.  It  difos  greatly  horn  the 
countrira  we  have  hitherto  been  considerini^  bttng  formed  of  rang^ 
of  hills  including  fertile  plains.  The  hills  arc  covered  with  woods  of 
the  shnee  tree,  the  wild  almond,  wild  fig,  wild  pomegranate,  the  ori- 
ental plane  and  the  walnut  tree.  The  plains  are  rich,  are  well 
watered  by  calirecsc-.  and  spriiifrs.  and  produce  abundance  of  wheat, 
barlev,  and  rice,  together  wit!)  madder  and  the  artiticial  grasses.  The 
wild  trees  of  the  plains  are  tamarisk  and  mulberry,  and  a  few  willows 
and  poplars,  but  the  numerous  orchards  are  conijioscd  of  all  the 
fruit  trees  of  Europe.  Many  pastoral  camps  are  ali,o  ibund  in  thb 
tract,  probably  in  the  hilly  parts  of  it  j  and  though  it  contains  many 
good  villages,  yet  a  great  proportion  even  of  the  agricultural  inhabi- 
tants live  in  black  tents.  The  climate  is  :il\v;i\  s  temperate,  but  in 
winter  the  northern  pails  suffer  from  cold.  Zeiueendawer,  tiie  most 
westerly  part  of  this  division  of  the  country,  deserves  particular  men- 
tion on  account  of  its  fertility.  It  is  joined  on  the  north-west  by 
8eeabimd,  a  momtainous  tegum  aboonding  in  oool  and  grassy  Tal- 
Hes»  whidiy  Ihoagli  it  bdongs  to  the  lymunee  Eimauk,  leqinres  to 
be  mendoned  here^  as  aflbrding  a  aummcr  retreat  to  so  iaige  a 
paopottion  of  the  Dooraonee  shephegda. 

llieooimtiynMmd  Candahair  is  level,  naturally  of  tolsndble  fertilii^, 
'  irrigated  both  liywateMNuaea  fiom  the  riven  and  by  cafareeaes*  and 
nostindnstrioudyeuHtvated.  It  in  consequence  abounds  with  grain, 
sod  its  gardens  contain  good  vegetables  and  eiceUent  ftuit  i  besides 
melons,  cucombers,  &c  which  are  cultivated  in  the  fields,  as  i»  usual 
in  Khorassaun.  Madder,  assafoetida,  spusta  (lucerne)  and  shuilal 
(a  lliild  of  dover)  are  also  ahwndanfc  The  tohaooo  of.  Candahar  ha» 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


8  great  reputation.  The  country  near  the  hills  ia  probably  the  nidat. 
fertile,  and  that  round  the  town  beat  caltiraitedi  the  ooilQtfy  to  the. 
wat  fa  mdy  at  no  great  dfatance  fitm  the  dty»  and-'liiat  ta  tha 
aoirili beooDiea dij  and impiodiictive a  nmuh.  of  Gmdahn:. 
that  to  the  eaat  is  fertile  and  much  better  coldyated  than  the  rest  of 
the  valley  of  the  Tumiik,  which  will  heieafter  be  described. 

The  principal  feature  of  die  aooth-eaat  of  the  Doormmee  country, 
which  alonoTenuuna  to  be  described,  fa  the  cfann  of  Khridh  Atnnmi* 
Ih&t  thoi^  not  ft  mountain  of  the  fint  laiik,  fa  ha^  to  bear' 

vow  Sat  three  iiioiitfas»  and  to  be:  coild  all  the  yean..  U  fa'  c&idfly 
mhidiifted  by  ahepheids  who  bdoog  to  the  Adinkf^e  den  of  Doom 
raonees.   Its  snnmiils  and  aidea  aboond  in  dinee  trees  and  »  sort 
gignlae  iTpiess,  called  by  Ihe  A^jbflUBS  obw         Judgn^  by  the: 
wiUness.  of  the  inhsbitants,  and  Hieiz  ptedatofy  habita»  one  would: 
■appose  these  hills  very  difficult  of  aoceaa  f  bu^  thouf^  atoep  on  the 
lonth  oast  side^  I  believe  they  »1ope  gradually  down  to  the  oountry  Oft 
their  nortib-west,  and  are  cultivated  in  diffisrent  places  from  near  the 
sununitto  the  foot.    The  Dooraunee  country,  in  the  direction  of 
tbfa  itnge,  begins  to  the  north-east  of  Shoraubuk,  where  it  is  sandy 
md  w^rodnctive.    Further  north  and  east,  it  has  well-watered  spots 
among  barrm  hiUs.    Of  this  nature  is  Rabaut,  a  tract,  oovCTed  with 
tamarisk,  supporting  many  flocks,  and  yielding  some  grain.  Still 
further  to  the  north-east,  the  sand  ceases  and  is  succeeded  by  a  rug- 
<jed  ;iml  stonv  country,  in  which  are  some  streams  and  some  plains  of 
tolerable  tertil it V.    The  most  remarkable  of  these  is  Mnrglia,  where 
is-  the  castle  of  Ahmed  Khaun  Noorzye,  and  which  is  watc  i  (nI  hv  the 
stream  of  Cu d don ve  ;  most  of  this  tract  is  well  adapted  to  paMhiro. 
Oil  the  southern  side  of  the  range  of  Khojeh  Amraun,  op])()site  to 
IVIurgha,  lies  Toba,  au  extensive  country,  the  west  of  whi(  li  belongs 
to  the  Achukzyes,  while  the  eastern  part,  which  extends  almost  to 
Zliobe,  belongs  to  the  Caukers.    To  the  north  of  Murgha,  lies 
Urghessaun,  so  called  liom  the  river  which  waters  it.    It  is  a  valley 
of  tolerable  fertility  between  high  hiUs.    It  is  full  of  Tamarisks,  is 
partially  cultivated,  and  contains  a  considerable  number  of  castles 

8x9 


Digitized  by  Google 


30$  mSTOBY  OF  THE  DOORAUNEE& 

bdoD^qg  to  Bnsiksye  KIuriii9»  but  bj  &r  die  grmtor  pact  flf  ike 
]iih«faitatttt«eptflonL  Iteiid8tO:tfaec«9tin  t  rtafjeiof  hOKid^ 
Mpaiate  Jt'  from  a  hi^  plauit  "fltlD.  inhalntad  I17  Doowimfiwii  iad 
wateted  hj  the  upper'oouxse  of  the  Ui^gbeMaim*  aod  bj  the  Snlch 
YesooDt-fiom  irfaich  itraim  the  cduntiy  Tteeives  its  aaiiia  -It  iindl 
Boited  to  pasture  but  little  coltivated. 

The  wild  aniiQab  of  the  Doonmiiee  coimtiy  ns  /wolvn^'  hyaenas, 
jackalls,  icaes,  htfOy  wad  many  kinds  of  deer  and'  aafeelope*  In  the 
hills  there  are  bears  and  ]eopaidfl»  andim  ibe  Gnimaeer  (on  the  Hel- 
mund)  are  manj  wild  boan  ahdgorekhars  or  wild  asses.  The  wild 
birds  are  eagles,  hMrka^'  and  some  othei'  large  birds  pi.jpttj,  .  tSftnaad 
(in  spring)*  wild  geeae^  and.  wEd  dndcs,  storks  and  cranes,  ovrls^  otemt, 
tmggfeM,  pigeons,  cupks  soosees  t»  &c.  &c  The  tanie  ani- 
mals are  camels,  buflyoes  (but  not  numerous,  and  chi^y  to  befoiind 
on  the  Heimund  and  near  Candahar),  horsfis,  mtdes,  and  asses  ;  black 
cattle,  shcpp,  and  goats,  dogs  and  cats.  The  tame  birds  are  fiiwJ% 
pigeonjs,  and  rarely,  ducks  and  gee^ro. 

Such  \s  the  country  of' the  DoorauiiL'e»s,  a  tribe  which  still  rules  the 
whoie  ot  tlu'  Algiiaun  nation,  who^r  u;o^ cniment  has  been  obeyed 
from  the  IK  ffrhbourhood  of  the  Caspian  si  ;i  lo  that  of  the  Ganges, 
and  the  effects  of  whose  power  has  been  felt  over  Persia  and  Tartary, 
and  even  at  the  remote  capital  from  \\  liich  I  write  these  pages. '[ 

The  Dooraunecs  were  formerK  cillcd  the  AbdauUes,  tili  ^Vhnied 
Shaoh,  inconsequence  of  a  drearn  ot  the  famous  saint  at  Chunikimee, 
changed  it  to  Doorauaec,  and  took  himself  the  title  of  Shauh  Dooree 
Dooraun.  I  have  been  able  to  learn  little  or  iu>Uuiig  of  their  early 
history  :  some  accounts  describe  the  mountains  of  Toba  as  tlieir  mo^ 
antient  abode :  more  numerous  traditions  repres^it  them  as  having 
deaoended  mto  the  plains  of  Khorasssmi,  fiom^die  mountains  of 


•  Thenii»Utdiiilikbkcdkd«Ucoi»l7dM  «il  fli^xaiw  by  Aa  a«)U^ 

in  Bengal. 

A  bird  of  the  iame  tfpedes  wiUi  the  last,  but  smaller. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ghore,  which  bdkng  to  tfaa  Paropamisan  groupe,  hot  lattve'iltuiMM 
tain  whether  that  tract  was  their  original  seat,  and  by  what  6mmt§ 
tkmaugadon  was  occasioned*.  The  tribe  is  divided  into  t#o 
yolt  branches,  Zeeruk  and  Funjpaw ;  but  those  di^iiqns  a]^  now:  of 
BO  Qte  whatever,  except  to  distinguish  the  descent  of  the  difianot 
dans :  that  of  Zeoruk  is  reckoned  by  fiu*  the  most  honoiiible.  From 
these  branches  spring  nine  dans,  of  whidi  £Nir  beiopg  to  Zeenik»  and 
fire  to  fmssptm. 

Zeeruk*  Punjpano  .'.■>' 

Populz^e,  Noorzye,         •  lu 

Allekkozye,  Alizye.  ^. 

Baurikzye,  Iskhauki^ye, 
Atchikzye*  Klioupraunee^  \«> 

jMaukoo.  :  .  

The  Popuizye  is  the  most  eminent  of  these  clans  as  it  ^vee  a  king 
to  all  the  Afghanns.  The  royal  iauuly  is  .sprung  from  the  little  divi- 
sion ol  Suddozye,  which  had  long  been  the  Kliaimkliail,  dr.  head 
family^ '  of  the  Populzy es,  and  indeed  of  all  the  Dooraunees.  It  is 
probable  that  the  Suddozyes  were  the  eldest  branch  of  the  Dooraunee- 
tdbe,  and  inr  odnsequence  possessed  their  si^riority  fiom  the  &nt 
faimetiion  of  the  ■oiaety  i  Hot  the  enliegt  'teit&wiijr  of  iJieir  ei^oying 
it,  M  ft  patent  fiom  ane-  of  tbe  &it  of  tfaftSnffinree  kings  ai^Hha^ 
ippointfaig  the  chkf  of  tbe  Suddoejaa  t»  the  eomnuiui  of  the.  Abdet 
tees.  Hie  fmkgfit  tliey  c^fOTed  wofegreater  then  tl^  paljBi|t.ef  « 
king  cqqU  ever  hme  bb^anied  fiomnidi«»trib&  Ttuat  petwns^wm 
aecrad,  no  letaliatioii,  ndr  pnindiitMnt  oondd  .be  inffidjed  on  eny  of 
then)*  esMpii'lij  a  mcniber  of  tkdr  own  finuly;  mot  oould  even  Hie 
bead  of  tha  AiMly»ntyt  KimMi^  jmb  wijifluf  i  tif  deadi'iqKttk  a  Sod- 
doeye.  Hiia  cinramitaiioe,  and  tbe  kingi  being  the  hnad  of  itlMin» 


Digitized  by  Google 


ATCHIXZTS& 


hm  made  the  Suddozyet  be  oomiderod  as  a  tegntte  daiu  ^tkonffk  m 

branch  of  the  Populzyes. 

Their  principal  residence  is  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sliehcr  Sufik,. 
in  the  lower  part  of  the  valley  of  the  Turnuk.    Some  also  reside  at  . 
Candahar,  and  a  considerable  colony  has  found  its  way  to  the  distant 
city  of  Mouitan,  to  which  they  have  probably  been,  driveii  by  some 
pohtical  events  in  their  tribe. 

The  rest  of  the  Populzyes  chiefly  reside  in  the  hilly  country  north 
of  Candahar.  Tliey  are  a  numerous  clan,  ^^enerally  reckoned  by  the 
most  moderate  natives  at  twelve  tliousarul  lauulios  *.  Though  some 
of  them  are  shepherds,  by  much  the  greater  number  are  cn^ged  in 
agriculture.  They  are  reckoned  the  most  civilized  of  the  Dooraunee 
dans.  The  grand  vizier  ought  always  to  be  a  member  of  the  Bau- 
mizye  division  of  them,  and  it  ia  fipom  among  the  Populzyes  that 
most  of  die  great  offioot  of  state  were  chpsen  by  Ahmed  Shah. 

The  nest  dan  to  the  Popuhy^  ivfaidi  it  fiur  eauseeda  m  nwnben^  is 
lihe  Banrikiyes.  This  great  dan  inhabits  the  oomtij  south  of  Can-  - 
dahar,  the  yalley  (tf  Urghessann*  the  hanks  of  the  Hdmiind»  and  thct 
dry  plains  whidi  that  river  divides.  Those  neat  . CandahaTf.  and  many 
of  those  in  Uq^iessaun,  and  on  the  Hdmund,  are  led  by  the  fertility 
of  iStakt  soil  to  agricalture>  and  the  indnstiy  of  otfaen  haa  even  pn>- 
duoed  cdneeses  and  oiltiTMion  in  the  midst  of  the  deflnrt;  hut  the 
greater  part  of  the  tribe  is  oompoaed  of  shepherds.  .  They  are  a 
spirited  and  warlike  dan,  and^  as  I^itteh  'Ehann  is  now  their  chieC 
they  make  a  miidi  more  oonspieqoos  figwe  than  any!  other  tribe, 
among  the  A%hauns.  At  present*  the  grand  viaier,  nd  dmost  dL 
the  great  officers  of  the  state*  are  Bauriksyes,  and  th^  owe  their, 
elevation  to  the  courage  and  attachment  of  their  clan. 

Their  numbers  ate  not  less  thati  thirty  thousand  families. 

The  Atchikzyes  were  a  branch  of  the  Baurikayes*  but  were  sept^ 
rated  by  Ahmed  Shah  to  reduce  the  formidable  numbers  of  that  dan^ 


*  T  p^irr  the  nT^mhrri;  of  the  clnns  to  Amm  Am»  vtMtAa^  lH|ITFrtMlBf^.  UMI  jBOtdfclMB 

confidence. iu  their  iiulividnAl  aocunuy* 


Digitized  by  Google 


lCAUKO€)S  ASD  KttOUOAUNEES.  ^ 

They  are  now  under  a  separate  chief,  and  entirely  unoomiected  with 
the  clan  from  which  they  spring.  They  inhabit  the  range  of  Khojell 
Amraun,  from  the  Lora  to  the  Cuddenye,  together  with  some  of  the 
■adjoining  plains,  anrl  nre  the  wildest  of  the  Doorauneea :  theit  only 
employments  are  pasturage  and  plunder. 

The  Noorzyes  arr  finally  numerous  with  the  Baurikzyes  ;  hut.  as 
thpY  are  scattered  through  the  hills  in  the  west,  and  the  desert  tract 
in  the  south,  of  the  Dooraunee  comitry,  they  by  no  means  make  so 
great  a  figure  in  the  Af'o;haun  nation.  They  are  however  a  martial 
tribe,  and  those  on  the  irontier  towards  Seestaun  find  constant  exer- 
cise for  tlieir  courage  and  enterprize  in  the  mutual  depredations  in 
which  thev  are  engaged  with  tlie  Beloche  borderers.  Almost  the 
whole  ot  them  are  shepherds,  who  spend  the  winter  in  tiie  grassy 
apots  which  are  found  in  the  barren  region  they  inhabit,  and  who 
xcitife  in  the  middle  of  sprmg  to  SeeahlNiiid. 

Hie  iUis^M  inhabit  Zemeendawer*  and  are  moatly  agricoHitiat 
TSielr  nmnbefB  are  rated  at  fifteen  tlxNuaiid  ^im^'lT^fT 

Hie  Alekkosyea  aro  only  ten  duMuaiid  finnilies.  In  their  ooufitiy 
end  habits,  tfa£y  resemble  the  dan  last  mentioiied,  fiNmi  whtdi  tiiej 
are  sei»aiated  by  tihe  HdmundL 

The  Isfchankhgyes  live  between  Zemeendawer  and  the  desart,  and 
i^eir  eountiy  abaras  the  dtanfiters  of  those  on  which  it  bordeft; 
being  hilly  mA  fertile  on  the  nordi»  and  flat  and  banen  «i  the  smiths 
Hie  people  are  employed  in  equal  munbras  on  agricidtuFe'  and 
pasturage.    Thsir  numbers  are  shout  tan  thousand  finnilies. 

The  Maukoos  and  Khougaunees  are  small  dana,  who  have  n<i 
distinct  lands,  many  live  at  Candahar,  and  some  are  mixed  with  the 
Koorsyes.  They  used  to  have  separate  chiefi^  but  none  have  been 
appointed  since  the  commem^ment  of  the  present  troubles  in  die 
state,  and  the  clans  are  likely  soon  to  be  extinguished. 

Though  the  lands  allotted  to  the  Dooraimee  clans  are  separated 
and  defined  an  above  describetl,  the  clans  bv  no  :ncrins  live  unmixed 
with  eac  h  other,  like  different  trib^;  on  the  contrai  v,  meTi  <>(  une 
dm  tieqaeatXy  acquire  lands  by  purchase  or  by  gxiuiUt  in  the  midst^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


400  THB  KTO  CMIBF. 

iOf  another ;  and  some  ooimtrlesi  as  the  Gunnseer,  and  the  oountry 
MMind  Oandahar>  ate  inhabilwd  by  alnoat  all  (ha  dans  ianmdjtpA 

ptoporUons.. 

Th^  whole  population  of  the  Dooraunee  country  may  safely  he 
estimated  at  800,000  souls.  It  may  perhaps  approach  to  a  millicm, 
but  on  such  subjects  it  is  difficult  to  speak  with  confidenre.  The 
Doorauneen  themselves  must  be  reckoned  considerably  more  than 
half.  It  is  universallv  asserted  that  Naudir  Shauh  numbered  the 
tribe,  w  hen  he  was  fixing  their  lands  atid  the  proportion  ot  men  \hey 
were  to  tbrnish,  and  found  them  to  consist  of  sixty  thousand  tanuiies  j 
but,  su]>}K)sing  such  a  census  to  have  been  made,  it  must  have  fallen 
much  under  the  real  n\imber8.  as  maiiv  persons  of  the  shepherds 
especially*  must  have  Ik  en  ()\  ei  looked.  The  Dooraunues  have  cer- 
tainly been  in  a  flouiishijig  hiiii:itit)u  since  tliat  tim^  -and  their  cir- 
cumstances have  been  very  fa\ oriible  to  the  increase  of  their  populm- 
tion  ;  so  that  the  number  ot  100,000  ikmilies  must  now  be  cousidered 
as  within  bounds,    '       '  *        •        '  •     •    •  •       .  "  ■ 

The  government  of  the  Doorauuees  diflSmti  widely  fircmi  that  of  the 
repubUcan  tribes  I  luMnB-alKady  deacribe3»-4hoiigli<it.ia  efvident  that 
it  hu  originally  been  framed  on  the  auBom  modd^  -  .  . 

'  "Shd  diflhrfiiff  Beems  chiiifly  to  ht  oooMiomd  hyttuk  amao  iinin^ 
diateommeotidiiof  the  Dooianmeei  with  the  dagyandbsnthemilitHj 
taiiaeonwhidhtli^hddttifiirlsiidi.  Hie- King  ii  die  beieditarf 
dnef  of  the'tribe^  mid  tliif  dwamrtance  deriw|iecdin' importaabe 
fiom  die  TeneratlifNi  in  iriuch  the  DooTwmoM  hold!  -the.  homo  af 
Saddosye^  He  h  alio  dieir  milifeii^  oommanilB'f'  nd  .diat  nuwe 
eflbctually  is  die  im^  in  the  odisr  tribei#  -  Wiflii  fhteo  1m_  die 
miliCaiy  aernoe  ivMdi  di^  owe  totlie  enwn  u  an  inncvation»  intio> 
ddeed  after  diey- had  eeeiqilid  thdr  Indsy  ivMoh  d^ 
or  brought  tmder  cMldvation  without  aid  fion  anj  estemal.po'wa* 
and  without  an  aclmowledgpiient  of  dependence  oa  utympmor :  bat 
the  landa  oS  the  Dooraunees  were  actually  given  to  them  oD  OonditMNi 
ef  milkaiy  secvioB^  end  the  principal  foundation  of  their  nfftt  to  die 
poMtwion  la  a  gnnt  of  the  King* '       whole  of  their  oam  eooiilrjr 


Digitized  by  Google 


» 


THE  KiHG  CHmr.  401 

had  been  oonqoeiad  by  Kauder  Sbflnh,  and  part  of  it  wm  iMtoied, 
wUb  a  large  portion  of  tliat  of  the  Ghiljies,  on  the  CKpioaa  condiiiony 
that  thej  ihoiihl  fnmiah  a  honeman  fiir  every  plou^^;  and  the  pei^ 
fimnance  of  thia  engagement  to  the  Fenian  monaxch  haa,  ever  aince 
been  ezfcted  by  the  A^liaan-dynaaly  which  haa  aocoeeded  to  hia 
ri^ita  and  pfetenaiona. 

The  oflUaaia  of  the  hofae  ibna  laiaed  aieihe  civil  mi^;iatratea  of  the 
eountzy  allcitted  to'mdntain  t]iem*»  and  thia  ayatem  ia  leoondled 
to  that  of  the  Oolooaa  government,  by  making  the  militaiy  diviaiona 
oortespond  to  thooe  of  the  tribe*  and  by  niaintaining  all  the  rdationa 


*  So  fiff  the  tjitem.  lesembles  that  adopted  by  the  emperor  tor  U*  Htmgarian  fiftiotier, 

and  thus  described  by  Mr.  Townson  :  "  This  long  tract  of  liUid  which  surrounds  Ilun- 
**  guy  on  thie  south  aod  on  the  eaat,  has  about  520,000  inhnbitantii,  the  fifth  part  of 
"  wbidk  k  nUkiay,   It  ii  ditkled  into  '&re  principal  d»iniii%  aa  thow  of  the  Bona^' 
'     of  Croatia,  of  Dalmatia,  of  Sclavonia,  and  of  I  runsylvanU ;  these  are  again  divided 
"  iino  provinccN  or  rcglinontal  districts,  and  these  into  companies.    As  this  i"  fjuirr^  a 
"  nuliLary  government,  there  are  no  civil  magistrates,  but  military  ones :  a  r«^[uuci)tal 
**  dirtriet  nay  be  oonrfdered  is  a  eovntiy,  lad  it  baa,  inrtnd  of  a  kwd  Ikntenant,  a. 
**  colonel  ;  nnd  a  district  of  a  company,  which  WOty  be  considered  as  a  processus,  instead 
"  of  a  judex  nobilium,  a  captain ;  and  so  likewise  with  the  inferior  officers,  who  supply 
**  the  places'  of  mftrior  civil  magistrates."    This  plan,  however,  was  adopted  by  the 
Bnngartan  govenUMUt  aa  a  check  to  the  oicroachmenta  of  Ihe  Turks.    Its  object  was  to 
secure  tlie  zealous  servi<c  of  a  warliko  lx)dy  particular!}^  intrrested  in  the  defence  of  the 
frontier.    That  of  tlie  iX>oraunee  government,  on  the  contrary,  was  merdy  taken,  up 
m  a  euBwnieBt  way  of  paying  part  of  Ae  army  for  genetal  MrviQe^   For  dicse  t«»^ 
pOBs,  the  government  of  Hungary  is  strict  in  providing  for  the  actual  residence  of 
every  holder  of  land:  it  also  provide*,  for  the  actual  service  of  the  holder's  son.*;,  and 
it  forbids  the  transfer  of  tlic  bnd  without  express  permission.    The  Dooraunec  govern- 
ment, oa  the  contrary,  shews  no  anxiety  on  any  of  these  heads,  which  it  leaves  to 
the  discretion  of  individuals.     Residence  is  no  object,  and  transfer  does  not  signify, 
where  all  the  populatioo  is  military,  and  where  there  is  none  of  that  discipUne  whiidb 
iaden  it »  dennlile  ts  retafai  an  M  woUkT,  The  gofcnment  by  tribea  ttnpog  dM 
DoofBonea^  oontftitatas  die  priadpal  contrast  between  them  and  the  Und-hoiden  on 
the  Hungarian  frontier,  and,  even  with  them,  the  character  of  an  <^ccr  is  not  quite 
sunk  in  tiiat  of  a  head  of  a  tribe.    The  heads  of  Dooraunee  clans  are  called  by  the 
tOUtary  tide  of  Sudur  (genenl),  wldle  Ihoae  of  the  other  tribca  hme  that  of  Khaun 
(chieftain)  :  the  former   rrfirrinr^r  to  thv  MOk  in  the  Idl^'s  anaj*  Mid  tiie^la^ 
their  hereditary  rehitiou  to  Iheir  tribe« 

S  F  ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


4M 


THE  KINO  CHIEE 


of  liiB  liflnditiiy  doeii}  thu^'ibft  heid  of  «  dan  cp«Din«t!d«  ^ 
tmdpi  "Mdk  it  fimuBhea^  and  Ae  auhiirtiniile'  offim  ^  te.Miil^ 
liin  and  Mnahiza  of  Umib  and  anbdirliioDa  niidcff  Mnu  aach  cork 

It  is  ob?ioua  Aat  thia  military  command  must  render  tins,  power  of 
the  Sirdars  greater  llian  that  of  the  chiefs  of  other  tribes,  and  theit 
antiiority  is  fiirther  strengthened  by  the  wealth  and  splendor  which 
fliej  derive  from  the  sitoatKMia  about  the  comt,  whege  att  great  cttioea 
are  in  the  hands  of  Doocaunces.  As  these  advaoti^^  oonfenrod 
by.  the  Eu^i  it  might  be  expected  th^  the  Siidaia  would  bei^ept  liy, 
them  in  a  state  of  entire  subservience  to  the  government ;  and  this  is 
rendered  the  more  natural,  as  the  people  hold  their  lands  directly  of 
the  Crown,  and  consequently  have  not  that  dependence  on  their 
chiefs  which  characterized  the  feodal  system.  The  independence  oi 
the  Sirdars  is,  however,  maintained  by  the  influence  over  their  clans, 
which  they  derive  from  their  birth,  and  from  the  patriarchal  institu- 
tions of  the  Afffhaun  tribes.  This  is  at  once  sufficient  to  estabhsh 
their  importance,  for  the  dynasty  of  Suddozyo  is  mainly  upheld  by 
the  Dooraunees,  and  the  crown  would  be  transferred  wilhout  a 
struggle  iVmu  one  member  of  it  to  another  by  a  general  combination 
of  that  tribe;  consequently  the  King  iis  in  a  great  measure  dependent 
on  the  good'nin  the  Booraunee  chiefs,  and  is  obliged  to  conciliate 
that  Older  hy.  bestowing  on  it.  a  large  portion  of  power  and  honor, 
though  in  Rality  he  viem  it  with  jealousy,  and  ia  ootrtawa%  Bt^ 
ployed  in  indiiect  attempts  to  imdermine  it  Hie  poweis  of  the 
parties  m  pretty  nearly  halancej.  In  disputed  auooeasions,  tfaecfaief 
Buy  often  kad  his  dan  to  the  candidate  for  whom  ha  is  be^ 
yet  no  DcM»amiee  dan  haa  ever  risen  against  the  fimfly  of  SudUosye 
QB  aeaouut  of  the  penenal  ii^uxieB  or  diigtiflt  of  its  Sfiidar :  on  the 
ether  hand,  though  the  Kii^  has  been  known  to  exerdae  the  pcmet 
of  nominating  men  not  descended  from  the  head  &mily  to  be  Sirdan» 
and  even  of  appointing  a  man  of  one  clan  to  be  Sirdar  of  another ; 
yet  in  these  cases  he  aeems  to  have  pushed  his  authorily  fifftherfhan 
the  Dooirnimees  wwe  iriUing  to  submit  to;  chieft»  soiypointedj  were 


Digitized  by  Google 


obeyed  with  reluctance,  and  the  dam  wiuted  imprtkiiflj  Sot «  rebels 
lion  headed  by  a  Suddozye,  to  throw  off  their  new  chie^  andfAiB 
King  who  appointed  him,  and  to  receive  their  heredStaxy  JSuttin  with 
open  arms.  The  clans  near  Candahar  probably  look  up  most  to  tlw 
IGng,  while  those  who  inhabit  remote  and  unfrequented  cduntcies 
(as  the  Noorzyes  and  the  Atchikzyes),  ;u  o  more  attached  to  their  Sir- 
dars. Even  in  those  tribes,  the  Sirdar  derives  a  ^rcai  jnirt  of  his 
power  from  the  King,  but  he  exercises  it  subject  to  less  control,  than 
the  chiefs  of  tribes  near  the  roval  residence,  and  lie  is  less  npl  to  he 
eclipsed,  or  set  aaide,  by  the  .immediate  iateFve&tioa  gi*  tke  jtov&i 
reign.  *  * 

The  effect  ol  this  conipetition  is  highly  tavourable  to  the  happiness 
of  the  people.  It  i  s  of  great  consequence  both  to  the  King  and  the 
nobles  to  obtain  popularitv  ;  and,  couiiequently,  although  part iculai 
circumstances  have  invested  the  government  of  the  Dooraimees  with 
powers  unknown  to  those  of  other  tribes,  yet  there  are  few  commu* 
ukies  where  the  wishes  and  opinions  of  the  governed  are  more  attend 
dfld.t0ii  AkAo^g  other  privileges,  they  are  exempt  from  all  paym^ 
of  tmmadt  iH^  tlwgreatt  mmxeo  of  oppioMMm  m  Amtic  Mtaoefk 
Notroopa  ttealloirad  to  lOMiad  in  their  laada,  orlindeed  iii  'ngr 
ptttof  A%bann  KlioraaaaiiiL  Tlie  oidy  riiqpe  in  wiifidi  thigr^fiiil  liit 
goyctnment,  is  in  its  d—Miiidi  fat  ihB  Mrvice  «f  liheir  fioud  eontiiii» 
gnft  of  lawifB,  and  in  its  intoepoiUian'  to  praianrafthe  public  poMi^ 
fay  lAidi  tfasy  an  ihemseihm-.the  pirind^^ 

Eaeh  ofithe  great  dans  of  the  Dooraimaos  ia  governed  bj-i  -firdnv 
clrnen  byiiieEingoiitaf  tbe  haad  finniljr*  Hie  aobdifiaiais  aie 
■nder  Khauns  appointed  out  of  their  head  &milies  by  the.fliidani 
and  the  MuUiks  and  MnshkB  of  the  still  smaller  dirisions  are,  In 
OKiat  cases,  deoted  from  the  proper  finniUes  by  the  peapl^  subject  to 
the  6itdar*8  approval ;  but  in  others,  appointed  by  the  Sirdar,  whJi 
some  regard  to  the  wishes  of  the  poo^  Wken  difieient  subdivi- 
ttons  Uve  in  one  village,  they  have  8e|MMte  quarters,  and  eadi  lives 
miderits.ownMullikor  Mu^iir;  but  none  of  the  dissensions  between 
qamtm»f .  wbldi  h«ve  been  shewn  to  rage  enuqg  the  £iiaofrjea»  eie 

8  F  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


i04 


INTERNAL  OOVERmiENT. 


ever  Ima^hk  liire>  ■ncl  ail  live  in  faanaony,  like  people  of  eat 

The  powers  of  the  various  chiefiS  among  the  Dooraunees,  thoutrh 
very  efficient  as  far  as  they  go,  are  simple,  and  the  occasion  tor  txei- 
cisin<?  them  is  liiTiitcd,  compared  to  those  of  tribes  more  independent 
on  the  Kmg.  Fhere  are  no  wars  with  other  tribes,  nor  disputes  be- 
tween clans  of  tlie  same  tribe,  in  which  the  chiefs  can  shew  their 
importance  by  directing  the  operations  of  tlioir  people;  nor  have 
their  clans  any  of  tliose  subjects  ibr  consultation  and  debate*  in  which 
the  chiefs  of  independent  tribes  display  their  policy  and  their  influ- 
ence, 'riie  general  tranquillity  is  seiured  by  the  King's  govemmeiit, 
and  the  duties  of  the  Siid<ii  s  and  Khauns  are  confined  to  the  adjusts 
ment  ot  disputes  between  individuals.  When  these  cannot  be  made 
up  by  the  mediation  of  the  elders,  they  are  brought  before  the  Je^- 
ga  by  the  Mullik,  and  its  decrees  axe,  if  necessary,  supported  fay  the 
Sinhr;'  ^T'^^^*  o£  other  quartersy  and  even  of'otfaer  ▼illages,  some* 
times  aMiat  aft  these  JeaigasJ' 

Hough  the  qpirit  of  lerenge  blood  is  no  leas  Mt  beie  than' 
Aewbm,  yet  Tetaliation  is  miicfa  repressed  by  the  atrength  of  the 
goveniment. '  The  Dootaunees»  howerer,  never  put  e  man  to  death 
lor  killing. another  m  expiation. of  a  murder  previously  eommittedt 
as'long  08  the'  muiders  on  hoth'  aides  'are  equal*'  diey  tfiink  natonl 
justice  satiafied,  though  th^  banidi  ihe  second  nnirdezer,  to  preserve 
the  quiet  of  their  own'  soiciety.  If  the  oftnded  petty  oom^ains  to' 
die  Srdar,  or  if  hears  of  a  murder  committed,  he  first  endHivoun 
to  bring  about  a  compromise,  by  offering  the  Khoon  Behau,  or  price 
of  blood ;  but  if  the  injured  party  is  inexorable^  the  Sirdar  lays  the 
aflair  before  the  King,  who  orders  the  Causy  to  try  it ;  aiid,  if  the 
eliminal  is  convicted,  gives  him  up  to  be  executed  by  the  r^tiom 
of  the  deceased.  This  last  mode  of  ac^ustment  throu^  the  Sirdar* 
is  the  most  usual  near  towns,  and  in  civilised  parts  of  the  country.' 
Private  revenge  prevails  most  in  the  camps  of  shepherds,  who  wan- 
der in  the  hills  and  desarts,  remoto  from  all  seats  of  authority  and  of 

jtisdfiei  but  even  these  disputes  seldom  gp  beyond  r^;ukr  eacoun** 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


HOUSES  AUD  FURNITURE.  405 

ten  wHk'  tticks  and  stones ;  and  IhtaaffumA  all  ilie  Doonninees, 
lik)od.b'  scsicdy  ever,  shed  in  dmuestie  qaarrek  $  it  is  looked  on  as 
flagitious  to  dzaw  on  acountiTinan }  and  a  tradition  even  exists  of  an 
o<^  imposed  on  the  peofde  of  the  tribe  bjthe  Suddoe3re8  of  ancient 
days,  wbidft  bound  them  far  erer  to  abstain  from  the  nse  of  swosds  in 
disputes  among  themselves.  -  - 

Civil  disputes  are  either  settled  by  the  elders  of  the  village,  and 
the  friends  of  the  parties,  bj  the  arbitration  of  MooUahs ;  or  by  the 
decision  of  the  nearest  Cauzy.  When  the  Sirdar  or  other  chid»  is 
absent  from  the  tribe,  his  duties  are  performed  by  a  Naib,  or  deputy f 
of  his  own  appointing,  generally  a  brother  or  a  son,  but  always  a  near 
relation.  When  the  King  is  not  in  the  Dooraunee  country,  hia  place 
is  supplied  by  the  prince  who  has  the  governmeut  of  Candahar.        . . 

I  have  mentioned  that  the  I^)oraunees  are  part]\  pnstoral,  and. 
partly  agricultural ;  this,  of  course,  makes  a  difference  in  the  habits 
and  manner  of  life  ot  tiiiierent  parts  of  the  tribe.    I  shall  first  de- 
scribe those  who  live  in  villages,  taking  my  observations  generally 
from  the  neighbuLit  IiocmI  of  ('aiuialiar.  ' 

It  is  a  common  lorm  oi  the  Dooraunee  villages,  to  liave  iuur  streets 
leading  into  a  square  in  the  centre.  There  is  sometimes  a  . pond,  and 
alwajs  some  trees  in,thx8  space,  and  it  is.  here  that  the  young  men 
oiMcoihlo  in  iSke  evening.^  lo  pursue  their  sports,  while  the  old  men 
loolt'oUf  and  tdk  over  the  exploits  of  their  yontli»  or  Ihm  pieaen* 
csies  and  ocmpations. 

The'honaes  are  constructed  of  l>ncli>  burnt  or.  unbnmty  and  Ge> . 
mented  with  mud*  mixed  with  duipt  straw.   The  vooft  are  sometimes 
terraces  laid  on  beams,  but  fin*  more  fieqnently  are  .composed  of  three 
09r  four  low  domes  of  bric^  joining  to  one;  anodwr.   An  opening  is . 
left  in  tfae'oentie  of  one.  of  the  domes,  .and  over  it  ia  achimnejr  made . 
of  tile^'to  keep  oiit  the  rain.  Una  sort  of  roof  is  recommended  by 
its  requiring  no  wood  for  rafters,  a  great  consideration  in  a  country 
where  timber  is  so  scarce..  Most  dweUing  houses  have  but  one  room* 
about  twenQr  feet  long  and' twelve  broad* 


406 


SHOP& 


.  .Then  are  tin  drthmo«t4i6iue0  fdjoi^^ 
butlfc  €Kiod^.iii-.t|ie  .ame  manner,  and  dciiigned.'  fiir  tlie  aheep  and 
eattler ftv  ^  ^7*  "tart  giain,  fitewoodf  and  hnplenmta  of  hnio 
bandiy.'  Moat  boaaea  have  a  little  court-yard  in  finnt  of  lliedoory 
idiere  ihe  fiimily  often  ait  when  the  weather  ia  hot.  The  iwnn  b 
spread  with  GuDeema*,  over  which  are  some  £altalar  attingOBt 
The  villages  are  geneialfy  aamunded  with  orchaida,  containing  ail 
the  fiuit  treea.irf'  finrope^  and  nmnd  them  are  scattered  a  itm  nud- 
heny  tiees,  poplars,  planes,  or  other  trees,  of  which  the  oonunonest 
aiB  one  called  Marandye^  and  another  tree,  with  broad  lesvea,  called 
Purra.  •  ' 

Xhe  sho|»  in  the  Dooraunee  villages  are  generally  very  few,  and 
are  never  kept  by  A%haun8.  For  instance,  in  the  village  of  ^ulledee, 
near  Candahar,  which  consists  of  about  two  hundred  houses,  there  are 
three  shops,  where  p:rain,  sugar,  and  other  eatables  are  sold  ;  one 
fruit  shop ;  and  one  shop  where  knives,  scissars,  combs,  looking 
glasses,  and  such  articles  are  to  be  had.  Tliot  c  is  a  carpenter  almost 
in  every  village,  as  well  as  a  blacksmith,  and  nomenmes  a  weaver  or 
two  ;  the  nearer  to  the  city,  the  fewer  are  the  artisans.  CioLhH  are 
made  by  the  women,  who  sometimes  abo  weave  blankets.  There  ia 
at  least  one  mosque  in  every  Dooraunee  villaf?e,  and  otiteu  more  ,  the 
Moollah  who  reads  prayers  in  it,  receives  a  portion  of  grain  trom 
every  man  in  the  village,  be^iides  wiiat  he  emm  by  teaching  children 
to  read.  '      "  ' 

In  most  villages,  and  generally  in  the  square  (where  there  is  one), 
ia  a  public  apartment,  when  all  the  men  of  the  village  assemble  to 
convuffae  apd  ff—F'i*  tfiemBalvea* 

Hie  dnef  ooeupelian  of  aU  the  viDi^^  is  agricaltnia  Hiey  tow 
their  great  harveat  (iHuch  ia  of  wheaty  barley,  and  aome  other  grains) 
in  November,  and  reap  it  early  in  Jnne,;  anolher  faamat,  chiefly  itf 


*  A  kind  of  wodOm  curpet  without       gmaialfy  with  dUlanatedM  of 

ndi  «riridind«iid  sonw otiwr colonr. 


Digitized  by  Google 


•CA$TW  OF  vxnrrs  KiuuNa 


407 


tTWffT"?*f*T>  'te.  are  alio  aown  in  Jnne^  and  tibe  aitifiiaal  gnuMt  ill  ' 
^qidwg;  all  ia  iiilgitod*. 

Xhatr  ttock  is  chiefly  bullpeks  ftr  agriculture,  of  which  eirerjr 
Aanljr  liai  thrae  or  four  pair ;  most  men  have  sheep  wiiidi  anpplj 
diem  with  muttoot  milkt  aiid  wool ;  they  bavB  also  some  oowa  finr 
vilk.  The  sheep  are  drircii  to  the  hilk  or  .wiitea  in  the  manun^ 
and  return  at  night  Some  who  are  more  given  up  to  pasturage,  gO 
outin  fummer  with  their  docks  to  the  hills,  wh^e  they  live  in  tents  | 
in  winter  they  find  abundance  of  herbage  in  the  plains.  The  beasts 
of  burden  most  u'^ed  are  asses,  but  camels  are  always  used  for  long 
Jounxey^,  and  many  are  kepi  to  be  hired  out  to  nierchants.  Horses 
and  mules  are  also  bred,  particularly  in  the  country  oi  the  Xak* 
haukzyes. 

The  better  sort  of  Dooraunees  have  their  lands  cultivateil  l)v  Buz- 
gurs,  by  hired  labourers,  or  by  slaves.  They  act  th(  mselves  as  sii|)er- 
intendants,  otteii  putting  their  liand  to  any  work  where  t1it  \  are 
"wanted,  like  middling  farmers  in  Eiiglaad.  d'lie  poorer  Doo ran nees 
are  often  Buzgius,  but  seldom  labourers,  that  employment  iailing 
chiefly  to  the  Taujiks,  or  to  the  A%haim  Humsauyeh^i. 

A  hurge  proportion  of  ith^  husbancbn^  live  in  tents»  wbid|i  are 
citber  of  bhck  blanket,  as  jfriU  be  aooiL  diNia?ibcll|,  oroftbick  Uadt 
ftit  supported  by  twigs  twiatad  tpgctber,  and  bent  av&y  ao  m  tQ.&oa 
an  aidb..  The  agriddlund  iaiojlieai  who  live  in  tmtf,  dp  not  moFe 
bcjond  their -owm  lands,  and  tfaal(  only  fiir  the  benefit  of  udean  apoi^ 
er  to  be.  near  the  pert  of  the  grounds  wbeie  the  eultivation  of  die 
aeaaoolifiiue^^caniedon.  .... 

.  -.AbiMBk  «rvj  Tillage  aurvoimda><Mr  jmna  to,thecaa^of  eKhaoB. 
Tliese  castles  are  encompassed  by  a  wall  of  no  strengtfay  andgenefally 
intended  nwne  fay  pgivaqr  than  da&iioe.  Thqr,  boverer*  have  acttne- 


*  The  iiiiow  ^  ^  <ke  tetiaD«riktM%  dMM  lltrntumOtmA  Hb»  to 


j 


Digitized  by  Google 


408  CHARACTER  OF  THE  PETTY  KHAUN& 

thM  lound  towem  at  the  oomen ;  ttid,  when.  mht^t»A  \fj  gnti 
lordfl;  they  sometimes  mount  swivels  on  the  wdls,  and  have  a  small 
gairiaon,  besides  the  relations  and  immediate  retinue  of  the  Khaan, 
whOf  in  general,  are  their  only  inhabitants.  Thej  are  buik  in  a 
square,  the  inside  of  which  is  lined  with  buildings ;  on  one  side  is 
the  great  hall,  and  other  apartments  of  the  Khaun,  on  the  otheis  are 
lodginga  for  his  relations,  his  servants,  and  dependents,  store-houses 
for  his  properly,  and  stabling  for  his  horses.  Tlic  open  space  in  the 
centre  is  usually  a  mere  bare  conrt-vrtrd.  but,  in  some  instances,  it 
Contain;^  a  little  garden.  Tlio  principal  gardens  are  always  orj  tbc 
outside  of  the  castle,  and  the  flocks,  and  lierds  of  liorses  or  camels, 
which  belonn;  to  the  Khaun,  are  kept  at  distant  pastures,  and  atten- 
ded by  servants  who  live  in  tents. 

At  one  of  the  gates  of  every  castle,  is  a  Mehniaunkiiauneh,  or 
house  of  guests,  where  travellers  are  entertained,  and  where  the  [)eo- 
ple  of  the  village  oiien  come,  to  talk  with  the  strangers,  aud  hear 

the  news.       •  •       ■  -  

•  The  Khaun't^  apartments  arc  iliniished  according  to  the  fashion  of 
the  country,  and  though,  as  may  be  expected,  the  poorer  Khauns 
live  in  great  stmplicity,  yet  the  richer  have  rooms  painted  with  vari- 
una  patterns,  and  spread  with  fine  caipeta  and  felts.  - 

The  Khamu  iSbaxutShns  (1  here  speak  of  the  ooinnion  mn  ot 
Khaima  over  the  country)  appeair  to  be  sober,  deeent;  moderate  menf 
who*  diough  very  plain,  have  still  horses  and'aervants,  and  are  au- 
perior  to  the'  oommon  Doonuineea  in  dresa  and  niailnera.*  They  are 
geneinttjr' an  induatrious  and  respectable  aet  'of  inen^  attached  to* 
agricuknre,  md  anxious  to  improve  their  lands,  treating  tbor  inh 
ftrion  with  mildness  and  good^HU,  and  rtegarded  bj  tliem  witH  re- 
spect and  esteem.  -   .  . 

■  The  title  of  Khaun  is  never  given  in  public  documents,  but  to  the 
noUes  who  hold  it  by  the  King's  patent,  but  the  courtesy  of  the 
country  gives  it  to  the  description  of  men  I  have  been  mentioning; 
as  the  title  of  Laird  (Lord)  in  Scotland  is  given  to  a  class  of  country 
gentlemen,  who,  in  their  tank  in  society,  and  their  relation  to  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


PASTORAL  I>OORAUNjE£& 


409 


munott  people^  beviiotU||^  i«Mmblnoe  to  petty  klmtnB  of 
the  Doorauiiees. 

Be&fte  I  qiiit  the  agricultural  part  of  the  Doofaukiees,  I  ou^  to 
say  something  of  the  Twgikiif  snd  other  people,  not  belonging  to 
the  tribe  whcs  iat  die  moat  put,  rende  mith  thU  cImb  of  the  oom^ 

ihunity. 

Ibe  TauiikB  bev  a  laige  ptoportUni  to  the  DooMuneoa  them** 
eehres. 

Neither  they  nor  the  Afghaun  Humsauyehs,  pay  iny  tax,  or  are 
subject  to  the  servitude  to  which  the  £u8ofzye8  have  reduced  their 

Fakeers ;  tlioy  are  not  considered  as  equals,  but  the  superiority 
claimed  by  the  l>ooraunees,  rests  ratlier  on  their  more  noble  descent^ 
and  superior  courage*  than  on  any  li^gal  advantage  they  poiocii  in 

the  society. 

Tlie  Afghani!  Hiinisaiijehs  mix  well  with  tlie  Dooraujiees,  and,  as 
they  never  come  among  them  overbiiideiied  with  property,  tiiey  are 
in  a  situation  rather  to  proht  by  their  hospitality,  than  to  sufier  by 
their  rapacity. 

The  pastoral  part  of  the  Dooraunee  population  is  chiefly  to  be 
ibmid  in  the  hiUy  tract  betireen  Hermt  end  Seestauu,  and  in  the 
weate  plains  of  the  aootli.  Tlie  people  to  die  aontfai  east  of  Candahar 
avB-elto  nittdi  employed  in  pasturage.  Tlierene  otberahiplieards  in 
tauaj  of  the  agpeakaal  pirte  of  the  eoontiyy  ae  tfaera  aie  hiiaband- 
flm  in  thoee  moat  devoted  to  pMtorek 

Hie  niorlng  tribea  nortli  of  Candahar  remain  in  the  plahis  in 
winter,  and  retire  to  the  hiUa  in  aummer;  thoae  wmtfa  of  Candahar 
find  Aiefiige  from  the  heat  in  the  hilk  of  Toba;  but  the  greateat 
emigrante  are  the  tribes  beyond  the  Hehnond,  who  almost  munrer- 
aall J  retire  to  Seeahhimd  and  Bm^a^ns,  in  the  FnopamiBan  mcmn- 
lmna»  before  tbe  middle  of  i^nng.  After  that  period,  acansean 
inhebitaBt  iatorbe  nactwith  in  tlieplaina*  This  emigration  linta  Ibv 
three  or  four  months. 

All  the  ahephank'  with  the  aKocptiqa  of  tboae  aa  the  Upper 

8  e 


Digitized  by  Google 


,410  OAMPa 

Helmimd,  live  in  Kizhdees,  or  black  tents,  which  it  lip  llMVeftn^: 

cessar}'  now  to  describe  more  particularly. 

The  Kizhdees  of  (he  common  people  are  from  twenty  to  twenty- 
five  feet  lon^r,  ten  or  twelve  feet  broad,  and  eight  or  t^ine  feet  high. 
They  are  supported  by  a  row  of  poles,  generally  three  in  number, 
and  are  pitched  like  common  u  nis,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  lowest 
part  of  the  cloth  which  fomis  tht'  roof,  is  four  or  five  leet  from  the 
ground.  This  space  is  closfd  by  a  curtain,  which  hanij;s  down  truni 
the  edge  of  the  roof,  and  u  tied  to  tent  pina  driven  imio  the  ground 
for  the  purpose.  They  are  composed  of  coarse  black  camlet,  some- 
time.s  single,  and  i^ometimes  double,  which  aflTords  excellent  shelter 
from  the  weather;  the  threads  of  the  blanket  swell  as  soon  us  they 
are  wetted,  so  that  it&  texiurey  naturally  close,  inam  becomeiii  imper- 
vious to  rain. 

The  tenta  of  KhauiM,  and  of  people  id  good  ciraumitrtMA, .  am 
a  superior  dncriptidii'to  thl%  Wng  large  enough  l».  €Ottlaiii«oiBM- 
rous  aasembly,  and  to  high,  aa:  fl«»iljr  to.  ftdnut  ft  'evndL  Many  at 
the  DDOfannees  line  iheir  tents  with  felt,  which  malcei  ainudi  ant 
«(hiidbrtflUi  jeudSBiiiDe.iii  wfoter,  wd^lie  floan  of  all  «fe  ^lead  widi 
^jOvlkeiM  flod'  &ltfti'  :lW.««il»lff  <the,ooiiimaii.peipb« 
hy'ik  oiilaSi^  into  an  apartmaiifc     Hui  mm'mA  mtidtav  ftr  the 

^Mut'ttu^  JlnMbi  tlttM^  JliA.jaoaa  and;  tenpomx  Imtf  «f  .badbit 
ftwkt  pbLteied  with  mud*  fiir  tliair  ahMp ;  asA  aona^  the  Hnn»> 
way^Ad  tImiiBahrea '  infaabtt  .ainnbt  dweUiiip.  iik-wvaHitan  KkUae 
oorti  abcmt  two  toaamiiBt  or  fttai^lpoB^ 

\  Jht  cam^  flOQdat  bf  fiom  ten  to  MjikBla;.aiM  Imiidrad ' ia  a 
4lOinbar'-««rf  ttiniiiiaUy  laige.  They  pitcii'iB  -oie  or  two  lines,  ao- 
^Wffi?™g  to  their  number,  and  the  natdreof  tfai  ^Bomid.  Tfa«  MuUik*a 
V  in  the  Jtti^kfle  of  tha  lina  .  .To  the  west  of  arery  tasnp  h  a 
ipaee  marked  out  with  stones,  which^aarvas  iar  •  iaaaqiia»  lib 
tome  distance  there  is  often  a  tent  for  guests. 
A  laifa  cnap  ia  Qillfld  a  £haii»  and  •  amaU  oato  JbaUea. . . . 


Digitized  by  Google 


.<      CBUUB  DF  TOE  PASTORAL  lilEE.  ' 


411 


|Mtiiir  iii^p»«ioaidte.isMaetW  At'tiite  aM«iMi 

A«7  dWf«lM  flodnl  i|o  «  dattme  to  pMvrtqi'atfd  eke  oot  didv 
gram  ftnge  wkk  lajr  TlBe'  kiM  oHmr-diy'feddav  Li 
4hB'0«l4  parts  of  ^  ooaiiitty,  Aisr  cAm  trMt  dmotji-iMSbelj'^  Hili 
flCMt  of  fcod,  and  10  mMh  plants  as  the  giieep  can  bibM'OD  iwibllg 
die^fliiow;  Tlii»  greater  part  of  the  «lM|llMnls  of  those  tracts,  haw- 
mnsk  tecend  into  tiie  pkina  in  winlerf  or  TeCire  into  aiidtered  vaUejrtb' 
and  feed  their  flocla  on  the  sunny  sides  of  the  hflls. 

In  spnng,  when  grass  is  plenty  in  all  places^  and  the  season  fat 
kmbing  renders  it  inoonveni^  to  drive  the  -iMu  home^ 
the  shepherds  break  up  th^  camps  and  disperse  over  the  country, 
pitching  by  twos  and  threes,  wherever  they  meet  with  an  a^eeaUe 
spot.  Many  such  spots  are  found  in  the  beginning  of  sprin<^,  evien  in 
the  \\  orst  parts  of  the  Dooraunee  country,  and  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  high  hills  especially  affords  many  dehghtfnl  retreats  in  seques- 
tered vaUeyS)  or  .in  green  meadows  on  the  borders  of  rumung 
streams.      •         ■  -   >     '  •  ;      "      *  ; 

The  delight  with  which  the  Dooraunees  dwell  oii  the  description  of 
the  happy  daja  spent  in  these  situations,  and  the  regrets  which  ar0 
excited  hy  the  rcmembrHnce  of  them,  when  in  distant  countries,  can 
only  be  believed  by  those  who  have  seen  tliem  ;  while  tlie  enthusiasm 
with  which  th^  speak  of  the  varieties  of  scenery  through  which  they 
pass,  and  of  the  bemties  and  pleasures  of  spring,  is  sudi  as  oait  em 
kaam  hmtt  fiom  «o  impoliahed  a  people  vriAaaib  smjpfiMw- 

llioiig^  Aew  tsamp*  «•  to  waaSk  and  illuatdl  •iii'  ni<4i  nliMd 
mbuAim,^  mm  not  Mqppoie  liiit  Mr  vahikStaamlS^faimiabaAt,' 
Hmj  otiier  cunpa  are  wttun  raidi,  and  'Ae  people  belonging  to 
tliam  oAan  aeet  to  Inmty'bj  chMioe  or  by  appeinttneliti  Sheep- 
AeagiagfcMtiendoidBMiiy  entcftanwiienla  aiio  bring  men  of  ilittleent 
campt  together  $  and  tJiey  ere  beoilea  often  amueed  by  the  amvel  of 
an  kineiint  tradeaman,  a  wandering  baUad-di^^y  or  a  tsaveDer  who 
awrafle  hinudf  of  their  known  hoipitality.   

This  aoit  of  li^  is  pesfaaps  seen  in  most  perfection  in  te  nunmer 

3g  S 


412  WAY  OF  LIFE  OF  THE  SHEPHERDS  OF  TOBA. 

of  Toba,  which  belongs  to  the  Atchiksyes..  That  extensive  (tirtrict 
is  diversified  and  well  ivooded.  The  giiM  is.eicdleBit  and  abundant, 
eHjd  la  mixed  with  a  profusion,  qf  flowers ;  and  the  climate  is  so  mild 
as  scarcely  to  render  shelter  necessary  either  by  niglu^  or  day.  lliia 
agreeable  country  is  covered  in  summer  with  camps  of  Dooraunees- 
and  Tereens,  who  all  livp  on  the  most  friendly  terms,  visiting  at  each, 
others  camps,  and  mnkm;i  ([  oqncnt  limiting  parties  together.  They 
often  invite  each  other  to  dinner  at  their  camps,  w  lu  i  e  the  stran^rcrs 
repair  in  tlu  ir  best  clothes,  and  are  receiveil  with  more  ceioiTioiiy, 
and  attention  than  is  usual  in  thp  more  familiar  intercoiii  so  of  iinine- 
diate  neighbours.  On  these  occasions,  conipauits  ol'  twelve  oi  fitieen 
assemble  to  dine  in  the  open  sir,  pass  the  evening  with  part  of  the 
night  in  games,  dancing,  and  songs,  and  separate  without  any  of  the 
debauchery  and  consequent  brawls  which  so  often  disturb  the  merri- 
ment oi  the  common  people  in  otlier  countries.  Their  iare  at  that 
period  is  luxurious  to  their  taste :  lamb  is  in  season,  and.cooroot 
noaust  f,  curds,  cream,  cheese,  butter^  and  eveary  thing  that  is  pro- 
chtoed  fipom  milky  are  in  ainmdanoe.  llnuithcj  pass  the  aummflr;. 
at  last  winter  ippioadiea»  snpw  begins  to  &11  on  the  tops  of  the  bilSs, 
«n4 1]^  ahephefjb  diqpene.to  diflir  distiint  coontiifls^  to.UighaaMmnj. 
tQ.Fiaheeni  to,Eabaa|»  and  to  die.boiden  of  the  desart. 

Yet  tfaas.pcacofiil  and  sodable  diqwaition  must  not  be.ima^ned  to> 
aniBKte.liiepastoial  tribes  on. aU  qepiaions:  those  wha.bhahit  the 
fionticr  tofwaids.Feraia  and  Bdoehistann,  are  fiesoe  and acdre  in  their 
border  wars.  Even  the  Atchikzyes*  whose  ooontiy  iSidie.scene.of. 
the  tranquil  and  simple,  hfe  I  have,  been  describing  are  tiie  most 
Wttdik^  tmd  by  far  the  most  predatoiy  oi  the.  X)ooraunee  tribe.  TUa. 
may  seem  inoonaiatent,  but  it  is  by  no  means  the. first  instsnoe'Of  Ihe. 
union  of  a  predatory  aod.mardal  spirit  with  the  innocanoe  of  *  ptf- 
tocal       and  even  .within  great  degree  of  sensibilitj.to.  the.chaima. 


*  Tlw  harfwiwl  curd  already  described. 

f  A  sort  of  soft  curd,  which  is  slightly  ad^  hut  niy  ^prtniMs  to  Ihs  ImUl  II  ii  cdW* 
dhye  in  Indisi  and  yourt  in  Turkey.  .  ^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


EMPLOYMENTS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 


of  romantic  scenery  and.cC  lodAl  enjoyincBi:.  All  Gieece,  in  the  ag«^ 
of  Homer,  furnished  wmpilMi:  of  the  ^^une  appomit  inconaiitenfSjr;. 
The  Scottish  border,  in  modem  times,  bore  the  same  character,  and. 
the  songs  of  its  inhabitants,  alternately  exult  in  the  pillage  and  hovoe. 
of  a  (bray,  and  breathe  the  softest  and  tcndercst  sentiments  of  love 
and  purity.  Even  the  Arcndinns  themselves,  from  whom  we  draw  all 
our  notions  of  the  gold-  ri  n'^a  oi  she|)lu  i  ds,  were  a  warlike  race,  and 
it  was  the  mutual  depredations  of  the  little  cantons  into  which  Ar- 
cadia ilividpd,  that  at  length  drove  her  shepherds  tirom  thein 
flocks  and  mountains  to  the  safety  of  walled  towns.  * 

To  return  to  the  composition  of  Dooraunee  camps,  t  ik  h  cump  is 
composed  of  men  of  one  family,  but  there,  are  in  each  a  rmmber  of 
Humsauyahs,  chiefly  Caukers  and  Ghiljies.  They  have  sometimes 
Taujiks,  and  mote  fiieqiieatly  Ehnmiks,  among  them,  who  work  as 
nnithB,  caipentero,  and  (noelayers)  buzgura.  The  eKisleiice;  ofi  tiheM 
lart  m  tfa«  eampa  majaeem  mnpriaing  |  but  all  the-nun  lug  hoidea.af 
DoftMnmeaa  cokivate  a  little  ground*  and  they  leave  ihe.ciiarge  of.  it 
to  tfaeir  huagim  while  they  are  abaent  from  their  own:  conntiyv. 
Thej  even,  cany-  on.  a  little  - husbandry  at  thdr  eiladn  or'aqmnitf 
»tationa>  but  k  does  not  leem  to  gf>  mudi  beyond  laiaing'nidbiisjani' 
a  yeiy  small  quantity  of  grain. 

TheyaQ  give  ashareof  the^increaae  <^thflir<flo(^Cotlie'personin 
whose  landb.thcy.encamp  while  out  of  their  own  countiy.'. 

Far  the  greatest  .pert  of  their  flocks  canaiat  m  sheep--  TUey'^aiiBD: 
keep  goets»  the  numbers  of  whidk  lu-c  great  or  small  in  praportkn  to. 
the  sheep,  as  the  country  is  more  or  less  hilly.    In  some  parts,  onei 
third  of  the 'flock  is  composed  of  goats,  in  others  they  only  keep  a 
few  goats  to  lead  the  sheep  in  grazii)g.    Those  near  the  desart,  and 
those  in  easy  circumstances,  have  camels  on  whidi  they  carry  their 
tents  and  baggage:  thev  sell  the  Tnale<<  and  rftain  the  females  for. 
breeding.    The  poor  use  bullocks  and  asses.    Almost  every  man  has 


*  I  }io}X^  I  shal]  not  \ye  nndcnlood  to  WpWiqit  d»  Ai|^M01tt  w  it' di '  TOOTnh^  dtit*' 
Arcadiaiu.of  Pastoral  Fbeoy. 


414 


mesa  of:TH&  DOOBAUMBBa 


•  horse,  and  a  great  number  of  them  keep  grey-houjidg.  The  men 
have  verv  little  employment  :  one  man,  or  two  at  most,  are  enou^ 
to  take  vdvc  ot  all  ihr  slieep  ot  a  €iirTi|),  and  e\  eii  tliis  is  often  done 
by  a  shopiierd  lured  from  amonj;  the  ilurasauyaiis.  Their  httle  cul- 
tivation is  carried  on  by  Buz^ms,  who  are  generally  Hiimsamahs 
alflO.  Their  busiest  time  is  in  .spring  ;  the  flocks  are  then  sent  out  to 
feed  at  night,  and  require  twice  the  usual  number  ot  shepherds  :  it  is 
then  also  that  they  have  their  lambs  to  take  care  of,  and  their  siieep 
to  shear  ;  but  tiiese  labours  are  of  uo  long  duraLion.  They  aheax  the 
sheep  again  in  the  end  of  autumn.  Dming  theh  marches*  which 
never  aceed  five,  or  uk  niila^  UiBjr  1mw»  thiir  oittle  to  load  and 
^nf9t  tad  tfadr  tents  to  pitdi;  bnt  ill  iiMioov  wtak  ii  done  hf  -^ 
womflOy  who  alio  make  their  dothea,  and  eSbea  w6m  Iheir.gulleeins, 
die  camlet  ftrtlidr  teiita»  and  Aalicai/ kind  ofiagnliidi  they  uaeiir 
eovering  boraea.  Moat  of  their  caparboota»  &c  fto.  aro  pipioliaaed  m 
the  tawna,  wliitlier  aoma  of  the  ihapherfa  nepak  oceaaiwMJIy  to  aeD 
iMrcraot  and  cbvified  batter,  «h«irtt8.aik^ 
and  he  canela.  - 

Hatfhig  detailed  the  pouita  in  which  the  inhehitenta-  of  villay a  and 
liMae  of  camps  diiter  from  eaoh  .other,  :l  fattnuAlfae  donid|ilhia  ef 
dioae  which  they  have  in  common. 

The  people  about.townai  moat  cf  thoae  in  TmagaB*  and  «H  Ihoae  of 

the  shepherds  who  are  in  easy  circumstances*  wear  e  daeaa  needy 

resembling  that  of  Persia ;  which,  though  not  very  conveinent,  is 
remarkfibly  decorous,  and  with  the  addition  of  a  beard,  gives  an 
appearance  of  gravity  and  reapectabiUty  to  thelowaat  of  the  i*^"***" 
people       See  i:*late  V  iiL 


•  It  consist*  of  a  cotton  sliirt,  over  which  is  a  tunic  sitting  cToso  to  the  body ;  with 
■kirts  reaching  halfway  down  the  1^,  which  come  qnite  round  and  citMs  each  other  in 
firouL  This  ia  called  Uie  ulkhaulik.  It  i«  generally  made  of  chintit  and  that  of  Manili- 
pttam,  which  comes  from  India  by  the  circtiitoue  channel  of  Persia,  ia  most  admired : 
OTcr  this  is  a  tunic  called  the  kubba,  shapcc^  vct\  llki  tlic  other,  and  fitber  mndr  of  n 
OfMurse  brown  wooikn  dosh,  or  of  a  very  »troDg  clotli  mode  ul  cutton,  and  caUed  knddiik. 
Ilua  upper  gaxam^kwamMkumiimhaf^  coloiir,  bat  generally  dark,  and  botde^Wi 


i^iyui^cd  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


t 


I 


1 


« 


I 


by  Google 


FOOD. 

Thti  pooiw  DocnnHiiieel*  pwtioularly  among  the  ihqphadflb  Wor 
the  wide  shirt  and  iHmlle  represented  in  Plate  (11.) 

•The  poor  only  change  their  clothet  on  Fridays,  and  often  only 
eracy  odier  Friday  ;  but  they  bathe  once  a  week  at  least,  and  their 
pmya»  nquire  them  to  wash  their  &ceB»  beai^s*  handt,  and  moh 
many  times  in  the  course  of  every  day. 

The  little  Khanns  over  the  country  wear  the  Persian  drcs^,  their 
cuhbas  or  coats  are  made  ot  silk,  sattin.  ov  a  mixture  of  silk  and  cot- 
ton called  gurmsoot-,  and  sometimes  ot  brocade  ;  and  they  all  wear 
shawl  girdles,  and  a  shawl  round  their  cap.  Their  doaks  also  are  oi' 
broad  cloth,  often  red,  or  of  silk  of  different  colours. 

The  iuoti  ot  the  rich  ia  nearly  tlie  saiue  as  that  ol  tiie  same  class  in 
Persia,  £at,  highly  spiced  pilaws,  various  kinds  of  ragouts,  and  jointi 
of  meat  stewed  in  rich  uuioea.  Moat  Europeans,  I  think,  would  rdiak 
Hut  ooekeiy>  bol  I'lunre  heard  ihe  miartnce  of  awMt  things  with  all 
■ovto  of  iaAm  in  Penia  complained  of,  and  I  mppoae  <fie  aaneob- 
jection  ^^dies  liere.  Thaia  drink  i»  dietBet»  uMA  iaviiMla'oF ymkm 
friiita«  anfl  Bosne  Idndii  of  k  are  very  pleaauit 


u  the  commonest  colour.  It  is  tied  across  the  brenst,  hut  the  strings  arc  concealed,  and 
•  row  of  covered  oik  buttons  runs  down  one  tide  of  the  troat  with  a  row  of  nilk.  ]ooi^  oo 
die  odier,  thoa^  «t  amch  too  great  a  diatance  to  bnttaii*  The  ateerea  are  doaed  wtdi 
a  long  row  of  buttoiiK  and  \oopa  which  run  up  the  hwide  of  the  arm.  They  wmr  <riia 
coloured  trowaan  «f  ailk  or  cotton,  short  stocking*  in  winter,  and  Persian  sho««,  which 
are  round  and  broad  Ht  t}>e  toes  and  narrow  towards  the  heels :  they  are  shod  with  iron 
Kke  Oerman  hoMs,  and  the  inner  part  on  which  the  lieel  rests  has  a  piece  of  wood  to  fit 
it.  covired  with  a  ihm  p\ate  of  ivnry,  in  which  aonie  BfpMtm  art  inkad  in  bladb  Tb» 
sho«a>  are  mada  of  bruwn  leather  well  taaoe4> 

Thetwaddrewiaa  oili,  abcMt  rix  indie*  liiglw  made  ofqiiOted  dik  or  duota:  dicKe 
are  two  v,-i\ys  of  maUi^  dib  ce|>^  «tie  ot  jAkh  u  wpreMPted  in  Hate  D.  and  Ae 
other  in  Plate  VIIL 

AlooiVBeoraeoMneafcawliaalwajrs  wonirainiddiewaiitasagirdle,  and  the  old  men 
CAan  twbt  another  loongee  round  their  caps  ,like  a  turban. 

Manv  p«H>jilo  of  t})c  lower  order  wear  the  nlklmulik  or  un<!fT  tunic  only,  without  the 
cubha,  and  ail  wear  u  cloak  over  tlie  rest  ut  tbcir  dress :  in  suQUiicr  it  ia  made  of  some ' 

1^  clotl^  Md  in  irinter  of  die<p>flkiB  or  fdL 


I 


1 


416  EOOIX  APPEARANCE. 

The  Saod  of  the  oommon  people  is  bread,  kooroot,  clarified  biitter» 
and  oocmionally  flesh  and  cheese.  The  shepherds,  and  the  viUagni, 
in  spring,  also  use  a  great  deal  of  curds,  cheese,  milk,  cream,  and 
butter  *.  They  also  eat  vegetables,  and  a  great  deal  of  fruit  Those 
in  camps  ()n1\  get  inek»8»  but  the  eettled  iahabitaata  have  all  oor 
beat  English  li  uits. 

The  shepherds  eat  much  more  butcher's  meat  tli;iii  the  luisbuid 
men ;  even  these  have  it  oceasionallv,  ami  no  enLeriamment  is  ever 
given  without  flesh.  Mutton  is  the  kind  inost  generalJv  eaten.  Thej 
eat  it  fresh  in  sumiiu  i .  hut  in  winter  liiev  have  a  sort  oi  sjuoke-tiried 
flesh  which  they  call  J  .uujid,  or  Lundye.  They  ahnost  universally 
boil  their  meat,  and  make  a  very  palatable  soup,  which  is  eaten  Math 
bread  at  the  begiuuing  of  their  dinner.  When  they  vary  from  this 
fA^i^lng  dish,  thej  pteir  their  meat  widi  onions,  or  lUHke  It  into 
fSUmm  Some  of  4^e  shcpheida  hnre  a  way  of  faakiiig  mutton  Uks 
that  naed  in  the  aoullMea  Ulanda»  Thi^  cut  the  meat  into  pieces, 
MMlendoseitinthealdnQfthedieciiy  wUcfathe^pittintoaholeiB 
the  earth,  and  surround  irifth  ted  hot  stoncai  Ji^st  tbos  drssscjd  ii 
said  to  be  juicy  and  well  tasted. 

I  describe  the  dress  and  food  in  so  nfiu^  detail*  because  it  la  afipli- 
GsU^  with  some  modifiostionsyto  all  the  western  A%^ianns. 

The  i^earance  of  the  Dooiaunees  is  prepossessii^i  they  are  stout 
men*  with  good  complexions,  and  fine  beards,  of  whidi  they  always 
enoouiage  the  growth,  thou^  the  young  men  clip  them  into  shape  i 
they  always  shave  a  stripe  down  the  middle  of  the  head,  and  most 
men  crop  the  remainder }  some,  however,  wear  long  curls,  and  sobm 
of  the  shepherds  allow  their  hair  to  ^row  to  its  full  les^gjih.  all  oyer 
their  heads* 


•  The  cWiijeil  butter  keeps  long  without  spoil ing.  The  cream  is  either  conuaoxi 
I  mim,  or  a  pMpanlioii  called  Kjnnsuk,  whldi  is  made  from  boiled  nflk,  and  la  aone- 

thiTir^r  1H:p  rlniitpf?  rreflJn.  The  brfad  ib  gt'nerally  leavened  aiid  baked  in  ovrn  =  ,  of  ^\hich 
there  is  one  in  every  bouae  and  tent.  They  also  eat  unleavened  bread  toasted  on  an  iron 
Ites  IOm  iilMt  i*  «Nd  fiir  oiift  ctlui  in  Seodud. 

II 


Digrtized  by  Google 


APPEARANCE.  4H 

Then  is  grent  vaiiety  of  ftttiire  iQi(N%^  tht  DDonntaMM}  ioiiie 
hufe  nrnod  plvanp  fiues*  and  some  have  tzaiU  m  no  way  itmi^y 

mairfced ;  but  nMNfe  of  them  b«ftt  laised  features,  and  hi^  diodt 
bopeb  Their  demeanour,  tliough  manljr^  ia  inodMt»  «id  tbiy  hamt 
diaoofvef  eithor  ktodty  or  vulgarity. 

mHgr  never  go  arme^  cxtept  on  jotimeyB,  idien  th^  carry  •  ftv* 
sran  sword,  and  perhaps  a  matchlock ;  shields  are  out  of  use,  and 
bows  are  only  kept  for  amiisoment,  Tlio^e  in  good  circamstanro<< 
Jiave  plate  and  chain  armour,  carbines  with  hrelocks,  pistols,  ai^d 
lances.  They  often  have  a  lopg  bayonet*  of  a  peculiar  construt^oOf 
fixed  to  their  matchlocks.  * 

Tliey  have  no  feuds  aaii)?ig  thejiiaelves,  nor  with  their  neighbours, 
^oept  ill  the  boutli-west,  mtd,  consequently,  their  only  opportunity 
of  showing; their  prowess  ia  in  national  wans,  in  which  their  reputa- 
tion has  alwaya  stood  very  high. Ihe  strongest,  and  6j  fin*  the  niosi 
f^BH«p»*  body  in  the  vqgidar  ain^f  is  mmpowd  of  idiecviitingQni'of 
this  tntib,  and  in  an  invasiiMi  of  tliar  ooantiy»  ifae  siftify  of  llio 
moosrcfay.  ivoald  dopsnd  on.  tbe  vohmtary  ootvige  of  tlio  Doo- 
nnmoest 

lliefioonttaieasMosllMiigious}  tbereisnotavOkfe^or  nonnp^ 
howtf^  smsiUf  without  a  MooUah«  and  there  jpcobably  is  aot^anuB 
(coieqit  among  the  AtshiksyflS)  whoiomits  fais|Knrffln.   Yet  Hmj 

lie.  pciifiictly  tolemnt,  even  to  Sheeahs ;  except  among  tlKMe  very 
Atdu^czyes,  whp  are  themselves  so*  indafiannt  to  the  forma  o£  reii- 
ipon.    The  MooUaha  in  the  country  are  quiet  and  inofienaive  people* 

Few  of  the  lower  order  can  read,  but  almost  all  the  Dooraunees  un- 
derstand and  spenk  Per«iian,  and  many  cati  repeat  passagea  fiom' the 
most  ceiebi  ated  poets  in  tiiat  language,  and  in  their  own. 

Their  customs  relating  to  marriage  are  nearly  the  same  as  those 
of  the  other  Aighauns.  They  usually  marry  when  the  man  is  eigh- 
teen or  twenty^  and  the  girl  from  tburteen  to  sixteen* 


•  Ser  Flali  VUt 

8  H 


L 


Digitized  by  Google 


41S 


APPEARANCE  AND  CONDITION. 


.  Hie  cmpiloyiiiAiiti  of  the  women  have  been  alluded  They  ane 
alnKMt  as  regular  as  the  men  in  their  pmym.  lliiir  huibends  trait 
them  kindly)  and  it -is  not  uncommon  Ibr-a  woman  to  have  a  great 
ascendancy  over  her  husband,  and  even  to  be  kidk»d  up  to  in  the 
family  for  her  wisdom.  A  lady  of  ihh  kind  assumed  the  ^solute 
command  of  a  caravan  with  which  Mr.  Foster  *  travelled,  and  that 
gentleman  profit pd  in  no  small  degree  bv  her  protection. 

The  men  and  women  live  and  eat  togetlicr  when  tiie  th niilv  is  by  , 
itself^  but  at  their  parties  they  are  always  separate.    Their  visitorSf 
their  s]i(>i*ts,  and  all  their  meetings  are  apart. 

Tin  men  often  assemble  in  the  monque,  the  Huojra,  or  the  Meh- 
maunkjiiiiamh,  where  they  smoke,  talie  snuiF,  and  talk  of  their  crops, 
their  flocks,  the.  little  incidents  of  their  society }  or  of  the  conduct  of 
the  great,  and  the  politiaB  of  the  kingdom.  Hnnting  end  ahoodng 
ate  alao  ftnrourite  amuaemcnta,  and  it  is  among  tlie  DoofaraieeB  and 
other  wertem  A%hanna,  that  the  games  and  sports  vHudi  hate  been 
so  fiiUy  described,  me  by  fiur  the  most  practised  and  enjoyed.  •  ThejF 
danoB  the  Attnnn  ahnost  eveiy  evening,  and  they  never  have  a  meet- 
ing without  songs  and  tales. 

,  £Vom  the  account  I  have  ffveih  the  condition  of  the  Dooraunees 
must  be  admitted  to  be  happy,  as  long  as  it  is  not  rendered  othe^ 
wise,  by  causes  fovdgn  to  the  usual  habits  of  their  lives.  The  piesait 

confosions,  one  would  think,  must  disturb  those  near  the  cities  and 

great  roads,  though  it  may  not  reach  the  inhabitants  of  retired  pnrts 
of  the  country;  but  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Dmie,  who  was  at  Ca!i(l;!fi;ir 
in  1811,  and  who  chiefly  saw  the  iu  i(:^libourhood  of  that  t  iLv,  and  the 
hi^  way  firom  it  to  (  iiulml,  leads  to  an  opposite  conclusion,  "  Tlie 
"  people  of  the  Klivks.  '  says  Mr,  Durie,  **  both  men  and  women  are 
"  very  happy,  as  far  as  1  saw,  and  in  the  (owns  too,  th^  appear  to 
"  be  very  happy,  only  when  any  kind  of  contest  takes  place  among 
"  the  diie6,  it  is  tliai  that  pknder  takes  place.**   In  &ct,  all  evi-> 


*  8s»  bis  Tnml%  ft§m  95.  97,  Jtc  voLiL 


4 

Digitized  by  Googl 


H06PITAUTY. 


419 


dai09  lopiewnti  the  Dooraaneei  inlihe  eomtxy  to  he  quite  wenve ' 
fiom  the  «Abcto  of  the  ilaniggles  among  the  ciiiefi^'aiid,  in  the  tdwnii 
it  It  ptobabia  that  the  Btonn  prodnoed  l]^  tim 
llie  heads  of  the  peafile  among'  whom  Mr.'  Done  Itvodt  and  that  it 
ivta  'onlj  lihen  a  oily  wbm  iakm  almoat     aawwJt,  that  Ihey  tattmd 
from  the  reyolnftiQaB  which  mxvoanded  tiienL 

The  hospitality  so  anupicaoaa  amongjit  all  the  Afghauns,  it  paiCi- 
oniarly  lo  with  the  Doorauneea. '  fiveiy  stzanger  is  welcome  vrhtreyeT 
he  goes.  Hie  smallest  and  pootMt  camp  has*  iia  anangemants  for 
the  reception  of  guests,  and  the  greatest  nobleman  is  not  exempted 
from  the  nooeaattj  of  providing  ^xid  and  lodgiDg  for  all  who  appzoach 
bis  castle. 

In  most  villaores,  travellers  go  to  the  inosqiic  or  Hrxjjra;  and  in 
common  times,  the  hr^t  ^lerson  they  meet  entertains  them.  In  times 
of  scarcity,  they  are  suppiied  either  by  a  subscription  from  the  in- 
iiabitaiitj»,  or,  much  more  frequently,  by  the  person  whose  turn  it  is 
to  entertain  a  guest :  bread,  kouroot,  and  clarified  butter,  are  always 
provided,  to  which  flesh  and  soup  arc  added,  if  a  sheep  lias  been 
kilkd  in  tlie  ▼iilagCb  If  an  entertainment  ia  going  on  at  any  boose 
in  the  yiUagOi  the  tmeHer  ia  iimnodictefy  inrited  to  it>  and  neeivod 
with  die  iame  attention  aa  if  he  were  a  friend  and  nei^iboar ;  aaod 
when  he  letiraa  to  leatt  he  is  provided  with  covering  by  the  penon 
who  ia  allotted  to     hu  ho*. 

Thif  hoifitalitjr  ia  not  limit^'id  to  A^^ianni^  of  even  to  JMEalioninie* 
dans;  a  Hindoo  vilio  came  into  a  Doofannee  Vill^e^  would  meet 
With  the  same  leoeptian*  although  his  religion  would  not  allow' him 
to  eat  with  his  entertiiner^  even  if  they  had  no  acroplea  in  hia  com* 

Mr.  Dune,  who  passed  through  the  country  during  a  great  scarcity, 
wail  every  where  fiad*  and  furnished  with  tobacco,  though  it  of^pn  cost 
his  entertainer  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  procure  the  Insi  ai  tit  le  tor 
him,  as  the  crop  of  it  hm\  entirely  failed  throiigiiout  the  country. 
WTien  liis  feet  were  sore  witli  walking,  they  gave  him  butter  to  rub 
th&n  witb»  and  pressed  bim  to  stay  a  day  or  two.    He  was  some- 

S  a  2 


4^ 


CHARACT£Bj 


times  obliged  to  go  round  the  camp,  and  nottn  the  i  i»lfftiillifn  of 
inhabitants  himself,  but*  tfaoi^  l|»  liM  .dfteD  Imdnmvtfr  be  ;i 
ChristiaOff  .and  all  times  musk  have  bean  a  foreigner  of  a  ver^ 
singular  appearance  and  behaviour,  he  never  met  with  a  refusal  c«"a 
taunt,  and  nobody  ever  shewed  a  disposition  to  laugh  at  the  ofidne«?s 
of  his  appearance.  Nor  did  this  proee<M?  from  duiuess  or  want  of 
obser\'ation.  for,  on  the  same  occasions,  the  very  women  used  to 
question  him  about  his  tzftTd^  and  .to  .shew  great  curioaky, about 
India  and  the  English. 

It  is  strange  that  the  next  quality  of  the  Dooraune^  I  have  to 
mention,  should  be  their  love  of  rapine,  but  of  that  dei'ect  they  are 
l«8s  guilty  tium  most  other  tribea.  Afanort.aU  the  people  I  beveooiii* 
Tenod  wkbf  ley  that  mnie  diem  plunder  the  ioed%  eicept  the 
Atduksyesy  and  aome  km  •mtfbAm  yiho  talce  adventage  of  tronUed 
timet,' to  molest  tnrvellefSj  but  some  acoonmta  of  good  eiiliioKiiy» 
CGHtiadict  tbeae  atetementa.  I  diink  it  j^nobeUe  thi*  tlie  people  of 
tihoae  pects  of  the  countiy  which  axe  ent  df  aiii^t  of  the^gomnnieB^ 
are  always  addicted  to  lobbeiy*  and  that  during  dvil  war,  the  tNun^ 
ber  of  these  raanuidfflfs  is  greatly  increased.  It  ought  also  to  be 
obaervedy  that  durbg  troubled  times  the  eserdae  of  private  revenge, 
and  aH  other  disorders,  subsist,  with  greater  dumoe  of  impunity,  and, 
therefore,  to  a  greater  extent,  than  when  the  government  ia  settled. 
In  short,  tlieir  virtues  and  vices  are  those  of  their  country,  and  they 
appear  to  have  more  of  the  £rst»  and  iewer  of  the  last,  thafi  any  other 
tribe. 

The  Dooraunees  are  distingiiisheii  from  the  other  Afgliauns  by 
their  consciousness  of  superiority,  combined  with  a  sense  of 
national  dignity,  whicli  gives  them  more  5?pirit,  < oui  ;iiTe,  and  eleva- 
tion of  dunacfeer  than  the  other  tribe.s,  at  ll»e  same  time  that  it 
nDders  th^  behaviour  more  liberal  and  humanized.  They  are  ex» 
tremely  attached  to  their  ooimtiy,  and  have  a  sort  of  feveenae  ftr 
Candahar,  which  they  aey  oontama  the  tomhs  of  their  mioeatKna;  the 
bodies  of  their  greet  men  are  csnied  thither  to  be  buried,  evenfimn 
GMhmecrand  Sind.  Th^  tiasel  little,  and  ahvays  long  to  ntoni 


« 

Digitized  by  Google 


CLAN  OF  THE  ATCUIKZYE&  421 

Hmiiti;  ikgj  never  ooaiie'  to  Indui  al  ouRliaiili  t»  aAr«ititran»  iiid 
«»»ldBai  Sa^ad  MUled  oat  of  thdr  nidve  ooanixy* .  Tht^  ii»»a 
gpei*:dal  nuns  p«pai«  wilfa  the  odur  Hibef*  th«a  one  voilld  eaipefit 
wnaog^'^fwplm  bo  jealous  of  superiort;  tbe  oppreM&iDs  di  ibA 

govmiment,  and  irregularities  of  their  troopa»  aie  often  felt  and  ex- 
idunied  against ;  but  all  acknowledge  their  natural  aupefumty,  and 
oren  lihe  tribes  in  rebellion  treat  Dooraunees  with  respect  There  is 
not  An  inhabitant  of  the  Caubul  dominions,  who  would  hesitate  be- 
tween the  Dooraunees  and  GhUjies,  or  who  does  not  look  with  dread 
to  the  chance  of  tlie  ascendancy  of  the  latter  tribe. 

Even  the  Ghiljies  themselves,  though  animated  by  the  rnrtcoiir  of 
nnsuc(  esstul  rivalry,  though  inveterate  against  the  i^overnment,  and 
though  ]  eally  subject  to  oppression,  acknowledge  the  merits  of  the 
Doorauneeh  as  individuals,  arid  place  them  above  all  the  Aighauns 
in  hospitality  aji  well  a.s  in  courage.* 

Hie  Atchiitzyes  differ  so  much  from  the  other  Dooraunees,  that  I 
have  reserved  them  for  a  separate  description.  '  ' 

They  are  by  no  means  a  numerous  tribe,  most  aoootuits  fixing  their 
mmhin  at  ^o  tliouMnd  ftmitieB.  <  in  -my  opinion  thfly-dtf  not; 
oeed  linee  diouoiiidi 

Thej  are  aD  herdainep  or  thqphenbi  and  though  they  coltivnte  « 


*  Tlie  IbOindBg  dUogoe  WW  talm  Aiwn  al^^  it  pflrt  bctivcai 

a  Ghiljic  and  me.  Ho  Iind  left  his  country  in  the  mountains  of  Solunaun,  oa  account  of 
a  murder,  and  had  joined  a  party  of  banditti,  who  Uved  in  the  south  of  Sccataul^  and 
uaed  to  plunder  the  Dooraunee  country.  I  asked  him  if  they  killed  Dooraunees  who  fell 
inSD  their  hands?  Me  said,  **  We  never  let  one  escape;  and  now.  If  I  had  an  oppaif- 
**  tunity,  I 'wouW  not  cp'^'f'  ""t^  timr  tn  drink  water .;"  nnc!  nlW  a  paTi'^f.  "  Are  wc  not 
**  enemiea?"   1  usikcd  Lim  what  sort  of  people  th«  DiM>r«uuee»  wt:re  <'  "  (Jood  people. 

HicjdKMwril,  they  are  hospitable,  they  are  not  inadlcnNig ;  yet  woiMOid  go  tmoof 
"them,  and  senrc  them,  .-ii  tlir;i    iilt,  and  then  set  fire  to  their  houses;  our  hearta 

burn  because  wp  have  lost  the  kingrlom,  and  wc  wish  to  sec  the  Dooraunees  a»  poor  as* 
"  ourselves,    lliey  say,  '  coiue  let  us  be  united ;'  you  ha?e  taken  our  kingdom,  killed 

oat  tvodiar%  Mid  led  iflngr  oar  wwMii  priMiMi%  «^ 

Other  G^iiQM^  iiliile dicgr pndwd dicir  jnMina%  aMibtfwen  ftfi  <rf  fHoiimihtiw 
Mdgidb. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


428 


ATCrnKZYEa 


little  land,  it  is  not  on  it  that  they  depend  for  subsistence.  Their 
flocks  are  kept  in  the  range  of  Kfiojeh  Amraun,  and  the  hi^h  coun- 
try of  Toba ;  and  their  herds  of  camels  in  the  sandy  tract  north-east 
of  Shoraubuk.  They  liave  also  many  horses,  so  that  you  scarcely 
ever  meet  an  Atchikzve  on  foot. 

Their  Sirdar  has  more  power  than  most  of  the  Dooraunee  chiefs ; 
but  even  that  power,  with  his  utmost  exeiUons,  is  not  sufficient  to 
check  the  predatory  spirit  of  his  tribe.  No  traveller  can  enter  their 
country  withoi^t  being  plundered,  and  they  often  make  nightly  exp&> 
cUtiona  into  the  lands  of  their  neighbours  tp  steaL  Skill  in  theft, 
and  hnlilnpiBS  In  robbery,  are  great  qualitiea  among  them,  and  a  great 
deal  of  the  convosation  of  the  young  men  turns  on  the  egplpits  of 
this  kind  which  they  have  pecfonned,  or  projected.  Their  robberies, 
however,  are  never  aggravated  by  murder. 

Their  dress  is  like  that  of  the  pastoral  Doorannees  $  but  in  winter 
they  make  theur  whole  dress,  shirts,  ttowsers,  ct^s,  and  all,  of 

They  live  almost  eatiiely  on  mutton  or  goat's  flesh,    lliey  eat 
little  grain,  and  they  have  scarce  any  black  cattle  among  them. 

They  wear  their  clothes  unchanged  for  months,  their  beards  un* 
dipped,  and  their  hair  long  and  shaggy.   They  are  very  huEge  and. 
strong  men. 

Their  manners  are  rou»;h  and  barbarous,  but  they  are  not  quarrel- 
some among  t  lu  inselves.  Their  cudo;elling  matches  are  fierce,  wiien 
they  hn\c  ihcm,  but  they  arise  in  disputes  about  prop^:^,  and  uot 
in  high  wordsi  or  offences  to  personal  pride. 

They  are  not  hospitable,  they  ha\  e  no  mosques,  and  seldom  pray, 
or  trouble  themselves  about  religion;  the  few  Moollahs  they  have, 
say  their  Namaua  at  hmnei  All  tribes  are  load  in  their  complaints 
i^^iinst  them,  and  the  Boofannees  win  hardly  acknowledge  them  ibr 
danamon* 

They  are,  however,  excdlent  soldien.  The  talents,<  courage,  and  , 
fidditj  of  iheir  late  Sirdar,  Goolistaon  Ehaon,  were  long  the  st^^mt 
of'^Shaiib  ShqauV  cause,  m  defence  of  whii;h  he  ^lost  his  fife  i  and 
his  justice  and  moderation  are  atill  gratefully  remembered  hj  the 

II 


Digitized  by  Googl 


CANDAHAK.  4^$ 

ifthabttants  of  Peahairar  and  Gaubo],  vlio  hmridf  ai  djflbnnt  tDM, 

been  under  his  government. 
The  city  of  Candahar  is  large  hkI  pc^ulom.  Uennt  and  Candafaar 

are  the  only  c  it  ies  in  the  Doorauncc  country  ;  and,  except  Furra,  pro- 
bably the  only  places  which  even  merit  the  name  of  a  town.  The 
ancient  city  is  ^cmik  Mines  said  to  have  been  founded  by  Lohrasp,  a 
rerwiaii  Knig  who  floiti  ished  in  times  of  very  remote  antiquity,  and 
to  wiiom  also  the  founding  of  Heraut  is  attributed.  It  is  lusserted 
by  others,  with  far  greater  piubability,  to  have  been  built  l>y  Secun- 
der  Zoolkurnyne,  that  by  Alexander  the  Great.  The  tradiiious 
of  the  Persians  here  agree  with  the  conjectures  of  European  geo- 
graphers, who  fix  on  this  tite  for  one  of  the  dtiea  caUed  Alexandria. 

The  ancient  <aty  atood  till^  feign  of  the  Ghiljiea,  when  Shenh 
Hooaadn  founded  a  new  city  under  die  name  of  HnaieindbedL 
Nadir  Shaidi  attempted  again  to  alter  the  adte  of  the  town,  and  boiU 
Nadirabads  at  laat  Ahmed  Shauh  founded  the  proaent  cily*,  to 
iriiidi  he  ganre  the  name  of  Ahmed  8hauhee»andthe  title  of  ufiAfw^wil 
Bdnit  or  the  nofaleat  of  dtiea ;  by  that  name  and  title  it  ia  atill 
mentioned  in  public  papers,  and  in  the  language  of  the  court  {  but 
the  old  name  of  Candahar  still  prevails  among  the  pec^le,  thou^  ii 
has  lost  its  rhyming  addition  of  Dourool  KurraTt  or  the  abode' of 
quiet  Ahmed  Shauh  himself  marked  out  the  limits  of  the  present 
cits',  and  laid  down  the  roirular  plan  which  is  still  so  remarkable  in 
its  execution  i  he  sm  i omuk  d  it  with  a  wall,  and  proposed  to  have 
added  a  ditch  ;  but  the  Ddoraunees  arc  said  to  have  objected  to  his 
-  fortifications,  and  to  have  declared  that  their  ditch  was  the  Cheracn 
of  Bistaim  (a  meadow  near  Bistaun  in  tlie  iuost  western  })art  of  Per- 
sian Kliora.'>.'»auJi).  Candahar  was  the  capital  of  tlie  Doorauoee  em- 
pire in  Ahmed  Shauh's  time,  but  Timour  changed  the  seat  of 
government  to  CauboL 

I  am  utterly  at  a  kaa  how  to  fix  the  extent  of  C^ndahai-f  or  the 


•  hi  mh  54- 


Digitized  by  Google 


CANDAHAR. 


unmber  of  inhabitants  it  contains.  I  haye  always  heard  that  Can- 
dahar  was  larger  than  Heraut ;  but  Captain  Christie,  who  resided  for 
a  month  at  Tleraut,  consider'^  the  number'^  of"  its  inhabitants  to  be 
one  hinKln  d  thousand,  a  number  which  i  caunot  reconcile  With  the 
comparisoa  I  have  heard  between  Catidahar  and  Peshawer.  * 
.  The  form  of  Candahar  is  an  oblong  square,  and  as  it  was  built,  at 
once,  on  a  fixed  piuii,  it  has  the  advantage  of  great  regularity.  Four 
long  and  broad  bazars  meet  in  the  middle  oi'  the  town,  and  at  the 
place  of  tfaeir  junction,  there  is  a  dmdar  space  of  f^M>ut  forty  ot 
fifty  yank  in  diameter,  covend  wkha  dome^  into'  vludi  all  the  finir 
staOBts  kad*  *  - 

. -This  place  ia  called  the  Chaiinoo;  it'i6  stnioiUMled.irilit  sfanps^aBd 
msty  be  coDaideied  as  the  pnUie  market-place ;  it  is  thace  that  yxo- 
dmt^&om  are  made^  and  that  the  bodies  of  crimidala  are  e^qpoaed  to 
the  mem  of  the  popidaoeb  Put  of  the  aid||oining  bMar  is  'also 
coveied  in»  as  is  usual  in  Persia,  and  in  the  west  of  .thit  A^i^fmwi 
dominions. 

The  four  bazsis  axe  eacli  about  fifty  yards  broad ;  the  sides  consist 
of  shops  of  the  name  size  and  plan,  in  front  of  which  runs  an.Wtt» 

form  veranda  for  the  whole  length  of  tlic  street.  Hiese  shops  are 
only  one  stoi  y  liigh,  and  the  lofty  houses  of  the  (<»wn  ore  seen  over 
them.  Tlicre  arc  gates  issuing  into  the  country  at  the  end  of  all 
the  bazars,  exce]it  the  northern  one,  where  8t»nda  the  iiing'.s  palace 
focing  the  Cliaur.soo. 

Its  external  appearance  is  described  as  not  veinarkable,  but  it  con- 
tains several  court§,  many  buildings,  and  a  piivate  garden.  All  the 
bazars,  except  that  leading  to  the  palace,  were  at  one  time  planted 


*  I  fed  nndigra«erlMrflstionln«myd[|Qf  Ilinvto 

frm.  than  in  my  accmtnt':  of  the  countn-;  the  Ttibabhants  of  the  cx>uiitry  aro  less  given  to 
fiiliiehood,  oQil  a  coiapaiisoa  with  neighbouring  regiooa  renders  it  eaaier  to  detect  them, 

vlwn  di^«McBipaMdtoaaggnite}  nor  is  it  totuj  tn  imrnt  li  riniMirtimf  ■  mil  nf 

the  produce  and  dwnfller  «f  •  <iuwul<y»  M  fO  — NM^  tad  iMj^rfi^  dhe  ifyi^ 
coDoe  of  a  town. 


•  Digitized  by  Googl 


CAN0AHA& 


425 


widi  traest  ad  *  mnow  canal  la  aaid  to  lane  nm  down  the  middle 
Of  each;  but  many  of  the  bees  lisve  withered,  and  if  thecaoab  ever 
oditedt  Ihiagr  «ie  noir  no  hmger  TisiUe.  Hie  city  is,  however,  ymy 
wdl  wsatereil  by  two  hagB  canals  drawn  irom  the  Urghundaobi  which 
are  croeaed  in  diffiBKUt  places  by  Utile  bridges.  From  these  canals, 
amall  water-counea  ran  to  ahnooi  eveij  street  in  the  town,  which  are  in 
some  streets  open,  and  in  some  under  groiind.  AH  the  other  streets 
nm  from  tlio  four  great  liaznrs.  Though  narrow,  they  are  all  straight, 
and  ahnost  ali  cross  eacii  otiier  at  right  angles. 

The  town  is  divided  into  many  Molvullas,  or  quarters,  each  of 
which  belongs  to  one  of  the  numerous  tubes  and  nations  wliich  form 
the  inhabitants  of  the  city.  Almost  all  the  great  Dooraunees  have 
houses  in  Candahar,  aud  Hume  of  theui  are  bald  to  be  large  and 
elegant.  ' 

There  are  many  caravanserais  and  mosques ;  but  of  the  latter,  one 
only  nearUie  palaoe,  usaid  to  be  faandsoma  The  tomb'Of  Ahmed 
Sfaanh  also  stands  near  the  palaoe;  itianot  a  large  building,  but  lias 
a  handsome  cupola,  and  ia  elegantly  painted,  gilt,  and  otherwtae  orn*- 
mented  within.  It  is  held  in  h^  ▼eneratioh'  by  the  Doorannee^ 
and  ia  an  mylum  against  all  enemieii  even  the  King  not  venturing 
to  toadi »  man  who  has  taken  rafiige  tiiere.  VHnea  any  of  tiie  great 
lofdi  are  discontented,  it  is  common  tor  them  to  give  out  that  tiutgr 
intend  to  ({uit  the  world,  and  to  spend  their  lives  in  prayer  at  the 
tomb  of  Ahmed  Shauh ;  and  certainly,  if  ever  an  Asiatic  king  de» 
served  the  gratitude  of  his  coM!)try',  it  was  Ahmed  Shauh. 

On  the  whole,  Candahar,  tiioiifrh  it  is  superior  to  most  of  the 
citif^s  in  Asia  in  its  plan,  i'^  by  no  means  magnificent.  It  is  built  for 
the  most  part  of  brick,  otten  with  no  other  cement  than  mud.  The 
Hindoos,  as  usual,  have  the  best  houses  of  the  common  people,  and 
tliey  atlhere  to  their  custoni  oi  building  them  very  iiigh.  Tlie  streets 
of  Candahar  are  veiy  crowded  from  'noon  tOl  evening,  and  all  the 
various  trades  that  have  been  described  at  Peahawer,  axe  also  earned 
on  thme,  except  that  of  water- adlers,  whidi  ia  hera  unnecessary,  as 
iihnfi  we  ifmtvtwn  vnatf  where,  fumialied  with  leathern  buckets, 

8  I 


40B  BARAICHE& 

fitted  to  hAodktf  of- wood,  or  hotn*  ibr  poople  to  draw  wBlbttmStht 

Ballad-singers  and  story-tdkfs  9te  also  numerous  in  the  bazars,  anA 
•U-aiUcles  ftam  t]ie:w«it»  are  m  much  greater  plentf.andpwffectiflrf 
<iuuii  at  Peshawer. 

Contran'  to  what  is  the  case  with  other  cities  in  A%haunistaun,  die 
greater  part  of  tlie  inhabitants  of  Candahar  are  Afghaims,  and  of 
these  \yy  far  the  greater  nimiber  are  Dooraunees.  But  tin  ir  condition 
here  bears  no  rpsf»mhlan«j  U>  lliat  of  their  lirethren  in  the  country. 
The  peculiar  institutious  of  the  A%haun  tribes  are  sii})crj«eded  by  the 
existence  of  a  strong  government,  regular  courts  of  law,  and  an 
efficient  poUce.  The  rustic  customs  of  tlie  Alghauns  are  iilso  iu  a 
great  measure  laid  aside ;  and,  in  exteriors,  the  inhabitants  of  Gui<> 
diduur  a  good  deal  resemUe  die  BBniana ;  the  reModbiaiice  ia,  hoir* 
ever,  confined  to  the  extorior,  for  their  characters  are  still  meiked 
wid&  eU.the  pecoliaritiea  of  ftliflir  neti^  The  other  mhabitanto  aie 
TMQikB,'  Einumkih.  -Hmdooe,  Perneiifl^  Rnwitinnfinij  end  Bnlnrheri 
with  e'few  XJiMa,  Aah»,  Aimeniam,  and  Jewv» 

Hiere  are  many  gardens  and  orcdiarda  round  Candahar,  and  inenj 
pieces  of  wx>r8hip,  where  die  inhabitants' make  parties  more  for  plei^ 
•ore  than  devotion.  Thmr  way  of  life  is  that  of  the  other  inhdbteanti 
.of  towns,  which  has  already  been  explained. 

Shoraubuk,  the  country  inhabited  by  the  tribe  of  Baraich,  is  situated 
betwoon  the  Doorannee  lands  on  the  north,  and  the  mountains  be- 
longing to  the  BralifTee  BelocJies  on  the  south;  the  rancc  of  Klioieh 
Amraun  (there  called  Roghauncc  and  Speentaizeh),  separates  it  iirora 
Pisheen  on  the  east ;  and  the  rrrent  sandy  desart  extends  round  all  its 
western  frontier.  T]\e  souf 1 1- western  part  is  inhabited  l)v  Hind 
Beloches,  to  whom  ivosiiky,  forty  or  fifly  miles  tirom  Jbhoraubuk, 
bek)ngs. 

It  IB  cot  by  the  rtrer  Loca,  near  which  are  some  trees  and  bushes, 
bnt  iheieitia*  bve  plain  of  hard  day,  quite.  flat».^  and  verjariA 
The  whole  coontiy  ta  about  tSxty  miles  aqnaie.  Die  mniber-of  Jn- 
habitanta  ia  tmo  tlumMnd  five  hnndred;  or  three  tliouMnid  fieniliea. 
Th^  are  di^ded  mto  four  cUns,  under  four  Khaons,  wiio  have  greet 


Digitized  by  Googl^ 

i 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PISHEEN.  427 

poww*  Thfi  Eiiig  noeiveB  fimr  fanndied  han^  fioni  die  ti9i€>  Mid 
tskes  no  finther  ooaoem  in  its  afiain. 

HiefhAve  many  camels  that  feed  on  their  numerous  and  extensive 
wastes,  are  used  to  ride  <m,  and  are  ahnost  tha  only  adunal  tued  to 

draw  the  plough. 

They  live  in  Cooddools,  or  large  arched  huts  of  wattled  tamarisk 
branches,  covered  with  hurdles  of  basket  work,  and  plaistoml  with 
clay.  The  rich,  however,  have  often  houses;  and  all  spend  ilic 
spring  in  tents  on  the  Ijorders  of  the  desart,  whicii  is  their  greatest 
pleasure.  Their  dress,  food,  and  manners,  are  like  tliose  of  the 
rudest  Dooraunees,  but  they  often  eat  camels'  flesh,  aud  eveu  horse 
flesh.    ITiey  are  a  very  simple  and  inolFensive  people.  ' 

Adjoining  to  the  Baraiclies  on  the  east,  is  Fisheen,  the  country  ol 
the  Teceeni.  That  ladbe  »  divided  into. .two  grelit' bnmches ;  the 
Tbr  (or  bWk)  TeMfli^  'and  thcr  Speen  (or.wfaite)  Toneni.  ;it  ii  lite 
Tor  TiBiieenswli»inlialiit  lUbeen.  •    -  .  .  .  -  / 

yiihecn  is  divided  ftom  iliellooEaiiiiee  comtiyioiitlie  Mibilli.  hy- 
hiDi)  other  liillt eat  itYitirfiomtfaeGMilKnoR.tlw.eait)  loidon 
■odllit  it  ii  ^Bvided  fiom  Shawl  .b^  tihe  nnge  of  TnUntoo*  whidi 
tttebdbes  east  fiom  ibe  Table  Lend  of  Kelaut  Its  fleetest  length'  ii 
about  eighty  miles  fiom  iiOftb«aat  to  ioutb-eaity  its  greatoat  bieadtfa 
about  forty  miles. 

Haheen  is  mudhi  hi^er  than  Shoraubuk.  Its  surface  is  mudi 
more  uneven,  and  it  is  much  better  cultivated.  It  also  is  divided 
by  the  Lora.  Bullocks  are  a  great  deal  more  used  to  plough  than 
camels,  though  these  are  numerous. 

Tlic  jHincipal  employment  of  the  people  is  arrriculture,  but  a  great 
propoition  r»t  tin  in  is  occupied  in  trade  between  Candaliar  and  Up- 
per Sindc,  and  iii  the  business  of  carriers. 

Their  manners  have  a  great  resemblance  to  those  of  the  Doorau- 
nees,  with  whom  they  are  dmeiy  eomieGted  both  by  descent  and 
fiienddiip^ 

Tbe  Kbami  ia  on  the  same  Ibotiiig  as  a  Dooraime  Sirdar;  but  the 

8  I  S 


428  SPEEN  TEREENS. 

ESng  Dever  interferes  with  lum,  mept  to  call  Sot  the  iervioe  p£  hii  * 

oontingeDt,  or  hia  personal  attendance  at  oanrt.  • 
The  number  of  inhabitants  of  fisheen  may  be  guessed  at  or 

ten  thousand  families. 

A  great  part  of  the  po'pulation  consists  of  Sytids,  whose  habits  and 
employments  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Tcreens.  In  common 
with  the  wholo  of  the  prophet's  family,  they  have  the  reputation, 
and,  in  consequence,  perhaps  the  merit,  of  courage  and  good  morals. 
The  Tor  Tereen^  the  Syuds,  and  some  Cauker  Humsauyehs,  are  the 
only  people  in  Pisheen. 

The  Speen  I'ereem  possess  the  long  valley  of  Zawura,  and  the 
open  plains  of  Tull  and  Chooteeallee,  countries  which  extend  fitom 
near  Fisheen  to  the  range  of  ,SolliDattn,  withm  amaich  or  two  of 
Upper  Shud.  .  They  are  separated  fimn  the  Tor  Tereens  by  a  portkm 
of  the  Canker  oountij^  but  diey  are  under  the  anthorily  of  the  com- 
mon Khaun»  who  makes  an  annual  journey  to  assapibJe  their  share 
of  the  Teresn  oontii^ent»  or  to  leodve  die  fine  which  they  generaUj 
pay  in  preference  io  personal  service.  Thar  manners  are  those  of 
the  Tor  Tereens,  greatly  mixed  with  those  of  the  Cankers*  m  the 
midst  of  whom  they  zesidei 


Digitized  by  Google 


(   429  ) 


CHAP.  V. 

Tflx  omum,  arm  of  okubnis  and  cAimoLf  wuBBUKt, 

AND  CAUnRS. 

THE  lower  part  of  the  valley  of  tho  Tiirnnlv  has  been  described 
38  belonsfinfir  to  the  Dooraun^s ;  a  ruined  brid^i-  to  the  east  of 
'Tool,  \s  liicli  IS  cidkcl  I'oolee  Sun«;ee  for  the  stone  brldj^e),  lies  be- 
tween tiieir  tenitory  and  that  of  the  (Tliiijies,  an(i  the  boundary  line 
will  not  be  very  incorrect,  if  it  be  (ir:t\vn  through  that  point,  north 
and  south,  tirom  the  Paropamisan  inountains,  to  the  hills  on  the  right 
of  the  Urghessaun.    The  north-western  boundary  may  be  said  to  be 
formed  by  the  Piux>pamisaD  moimtaina,  though  some  hilly  tracts  de- 
pendant <m  tint  range,  are  included  intiie  Ghiljie  landas  and,  on  the 
odinr  liand*  a  nanofir  tract  of  shtj  miles  long,  is  cot  out  of  tham  be- 
tween Ganbul  and  Gfansnee,  and  beknoigi  to  the  Wiuduka.   On  the 
north,  the  river  of  Fungaheer  dmdea  it  for  atnne  dirtanee  fiom  the 
Cohutann'of  Ganbol;  but  after  that  river  haa  joined  the  rnrerof 
Ceabul»  the  GhiQie  oonntiy  croiaei  it,  and  tKxnpies  bodi  banks  aa 
&r  eart  as  the  hei|^  abonre  Jellallabad,  whcae  it  meets  the  coontiy 
of  the  Berdpoiaunees.   The  vest  of  fts  eastern  frontier  is  formed  by 
the  moontains  of  Solimaun.    Its  southern  limits  are  on 
the  south-east  it  haa  Wanneh,  and  some  other  barren  tracts  about 
the  Gomul:  on  the  south-west  it  is  divided  by  hills  from  Urghessaun, 
and  in  the  intermediate  portion  of  the  southern  frontier,  the  pasture 
grounds  of  the  Ghiljies  are  sometimes  intermixed  with  those  of  the 
Caukef^,  and  sometimes  separated  from  them  hy  wastes  of  coiiHider- 
able  extent  but  as  they  are  departs  ibr  which  no  one  would  contend. 


430  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  COUNTRY. 

there  is  little  reason  to  regiei  the  unpatubility  of  mmigning  wHh  pre- 
cision the  shares  cf  the  two  tribes. 

Hie  country  comprehended  within  these  limits  is  VMrioiis.  The 
valley  of  the  Tumuk,  enclosed  between  the  Paropamisan  mountains 
on  its  north-west,  and  the  hilLs  which  run  from  Mooker  to  Kellace 
Abdoo  Rehcem  on  its  south-c;iHt,  is  a  plain  diversified  by  swells  and 
hollows  ;  its  leno;th  is  upwards  ol  sixty  mik-s.  ;ind  its  breadth  under 
twenty.  It  is  high  and  ill  watered,  and  the  la^i  defect  increases  with 
its  height)  so  that  neai  iVlookkoor,  it  is  scrarcelv  fittetl  either  for  agri- 
culture or  pasture ;  of  the  remainder,  the  central  part  on  the  river  is 
partially  cultivated ;  beyond  that,  on  each  side  is  unfertile ;  it  is 
covered  with  bushes  «lone»hM  few  QJaeeies,  mdfiwmyillsges,  and 
is  only  used  as  pasture  land  m  aaminer*  bj  tribes  who  wididnw  to 
edier  eUmates  when  the  cold  sets  in.  The  villages  which  have 
flourished  in  this  district}  sofleied  greatly  in  -the  Ghiljie  rebetUoii» 
and  are  now  in  a  state  of  decay  $  Kdaut,  the  largest  of  them,  which 
le  consideMd  as  a  town*  and  is  the  residence  of  - the  chief  of  the  den 
of  Tohheei  contains  only  two  or  three  bundled  houses.  The  hordiefa 
part  under  the  hiUsy  affinds  more  gyasi*  md  is  fiiU  of  camps  in  tlM 
aeason. 

The  tract  dependmit  on  the  Paropamisan  monntnns,  is  inhabited 
by  predatory  Tokhees,  and,  from  the  character  of  the  inhabitants, 
one  would  expect  it  to  be  rough  and  poor ;  it  seems,  accordingly,  to 
be  composed  ol  hills  destitute  of  water,  and  perhi^s  of  soil,  with 
vallevs  too  narrow  to  admit  of  much  cultivation.  The  inhahitanti 
hve  m  tents,  an<i  are  supported  by  their  flocks. 

To  the  south  of  the  range  of  hills  which  runs  from  Mookkoor  lo 
Kellace  Abdooreheem,  is  a  tract  of  country,  of  which  the  pait  to  the 
north  of  the  32d  parallel  of  latitude,  is  crossed  by  hills  enclosing 
plains,  which  in  many  places  are  watered  by  CahrecioSj  and  in  ottMcs 
support  nnmeioua  biNNles  of  shepherds.  Among  the  bat  cultivatod 
WfotB,  ere  HuUatauglit  GhoQudann,  and  ftantonyes  init  Kellaoe  Ab- 
doeiebeem  Khaun  done  deserves  particular  noiioe»  aa  being  the  capital 
of  the  dan  of  Hotukee^andthechiaf  fortofthedescendantiof  the- 


Digitized  by  Googl 


BASOM  OF  IBB  AIIBISTAlTBm  4S1 

Ghiljie  Kings.  It  is,  however,  a  place  ol'  no  strength,  and  is  sur* 
rounded  by  black  tents,  with  a  few  houses.  It  stands  in  a  small 
district  called  Ghwurra  Murgha ;  wliich  is  divided  by  hills  from  the 
valley  of  the  Urghessauji,  into  whicli  the  stream  that  pabses  Keilace 
Abdooreeheem,  Devertheless  makes  its  way. 

The  GhOjie  cmmtiy  to  the  wMStk  of  kdtode  SSf,  oonaiflti  ddsAj 
of  MBdy  plans»  and  hi^  stony  tracts*  Of  .hmea  hUls :  Uiat  is  the 
Booth  cesti  near  die  junction  of  the  Cpoodoofr  and  the  Gomult  is  of 
the  last  description ;  but  iheiei  in  the  midst  .of  - lofty  and  inaccessible 
mountainat  ta  the  little  TaHoj  of  Mammyet  where  Abdooredbeon 
Khann  (the  heed  of  the  GhlQies*  and  their  King  dining  the  rebdr 
Uoa)f  has  found  a  aeouie  retreat  from  the  real  or  imagined  resent- 
ment  of  the  Dooi-aimee  government.  It  is  inhabited  by  diqdieida  in 
tents,  but  Abdooreheem  has  founded  »  fort*  and  is  making  a  gaideds 
and,  perhaps,  introducing  agriculture. 

From  the  meridian  of  Mookoor,  to  the  hills  on  the  right  bank  of 
the  Gomul,  and  from  Ghwashta  to  Ghuznee,  is  the  bason  of  the 
Aubistaudeh,  an  open  country  of  varioxis  fertility,  and  in  different 
states  of  iropro%  i  ll  1011  (  :  the  districts  of  Mookoor,  Karrabangh,  and 
Nannee,  to  thti  west  ol  Ghuznee,  are  naturally  unfertile,  and  thinly 
inhabiteil :  the  testimony  of  the  natives  assigns  one  iiuiulrcU  and 
twenty  forts,  or  castles,  to  Mookoor,  and  one  hundred  to  Karra- 
baugh ;  and,  as  almost  every  village  in  the  Ghiljie  country  is  a  fort, 
and  none  in  this,  part  contains  motre  than  fire  o^  six,  froiiiieSf  the 
eocount  ia  piofaafaAy  conecL 

The  ooimtry  to  the  atnith  of  these  distndai,  and  thet  called  Entti^ 
muOf  irtoA  eKtends  Scoot  6hwashta»  to  within  twenty  miles  of 
Glwi«nee>  are  open*  partially  cnkiTated,  'and  waterad  by  jCaiueeie«» 
and  by  smne  bvooki  that  nm  into  the  Anbutsudeh.  The  benders  of 
that  lake  are  covered  with  low  tamarisk^  and  a  plane  tree,  a  poplar, 
or  a  wiUow,  may  be  found  here  and  there  near  a  Cahrees}  but  there 
is  no  natural  wood,  and  the  country  is  naked  and  uniform. 

Divided  from  this  tract  by  the  Gonial,  and  the  kills  on  its  tight 


Digitized  by  Google 


CITY  OF  OHUZNEE. 


bank,  are  the  woody  mountains  and  narrow  plains  of  the  Kharateef; 
but  I  shall  leave  them  lor  a  fuller  description  hereafter. 

Immediately  to  the  south  of  (ihnznee  is  the  rich  district  of  8hil- 
gur,  which,  with  tlie  country  rounti  tlie  city,  is  hii|;hly  cultivated,  and 
abounds  in  villages  and  gardens.  Though  it  has  little  natural  wood, 
many  plane  trees  and  poplars  are  planted,  for  the  sake  of  the  timber; 
the  want  of  which  article  is,  however,  felt  in  all  tliia  country,  and 
is  remedied  in  building,  by  the  use  of  the  arched  roof.  . 

CHiQtfnee  itself,  which  eight  centuries  ago  wm  the  capital  of  an 
empire,  readiing  from  the  Tigria  to  the  Ganges,  and  from  the  Jaw^ 
tea  to  die  Persian  gulf,  ia  now  reduced  to  a  town  containing  about 
fiftem  hundred  houaea,  besides  anbuiba  without  the  walls.  Hie  town 
stands  on  a  height,  at  the  foot  of  which  flows  a  pretty  large  stream. 
It  is  surrounded  by  stone  walls,  and  contains  three  baMurs  of  no  grept 
breadth,  with  high  houses  on  each  side,  and  a  covered  Chaursoo^ 
besides  seranl  dark  and  narrow  streets.  Some  few  remuns  of  the 
ancient  nrandeur  of  the  city  are  still  to  be  se^  in  its  neighbourhood! 
particularly  two  lofty  minarets,  which  stand  at  some  distance  from 
each  other,  and  are  of  different  heights,  the  least,  upwards  of  one 
hundred  feet  hi<rh.  The  tomb  of  the  great  Sultan  ^lalimood  is  also 
standing,  about  three  miles  from  the  city.  It  is  a  spacious,  but  not 
a  magnificent  building,  covered  with  a  cupola.  The  doors,  which  are 
very  large,  are  of  sandal  wood,  and  are  said  to  have  been  brought 
by  the  Sultan  as  a  trophy  from  the  famous  temple  ol'  Somnaut  in 
Guzerat,  which  he  sacked  in  his  last  expedition  to  India.  Tlie  tomb- 
stone is  of  white  marble,  on  which  are  sculptured  Arabic  verses  from 
&e  Korann,  and  at  its  head  liea  liie  plain  but  weighty  mace,  idiidi 
is  said  to  hove  been  wielded  by  the  monardi  liimael£  Itis.ofwood, 
with  a  bead  of  metal  so  heavy*  that  lew  men  can  use  it.  Tltere  aie 
also  some  ttnones,  or  durirs,  inlaid  with  Diotlier<4ifipeail,  in  thetoDh^ 
■Ufaidi  are  said  to  have  beloog^  to  Mahmood.  Tlie  tombiBtone.ia 
under  a  canopy,  and  some  Mnollaha  are  still  maiiitained,  who  iocob* 
aaqiiy  read  die  B^onmn  .aloud  over  the  fpmwHy  ■ 


Digitized  by  Googl 


^blaiLJEE  COUNTRY.  '  4^ 

These  ii^  Mn^  other  ndns  of  less  tiotei  tuaoag  which  are  4ihe 
tomhil  of  Behlole  Dauna  (01^  Bddole  the  Wise)  and  that  of  Hukeem 
SunaneeKa  poet  still  greatly  esteemed  id  Persia ;  but  nothing  remains 
to  shew  the  lAagpSfioesaot  of  Uie  palaces,  of  the  Gaznavide  kings 
(which  at  one  time  were  tlie  lesidenoe  o£  Ferdausee,  the  Homer  of 
Asia),  or  of  the  mosques,  baths,  and  caravaiiseras,  which  once  adorned 
th^  capital  of  the  East.  Of  all  the  antiquities  of  Ghuznee^  the  most 
useful  is  an  embankment  across  a  stream,  which  was  built  by  Mali- 
moofl,  and  which,  though  damn^ed  by  the  tury  of  the  (xhoree  kings 
at  the  capture  of  Ghuznee,  still  supplies  water  to  the  fiolils  and  i^ar- 
dens  round  the  town.  Tlie  immediate  environs  ot  the  city  are 
inhabited  by  Taujiks  ftiul  Hazaurehs ;  and  the  valley  whicli  ia  conti- 
guous to  them  on  the  north,  belongs  to  the  Wurduk.s  ;  but  the  country 
between  the  hills  which  bound  that  valley  on  the  ea^t,  and  the  moun^ 
talus  of  Solimaim  b  inhabited  by  the  Ghiljies.  It  is  crossed  by  several 
Mgh  rai^ges  of  UBb:  iMt  among  them  aie  finmd  the  rich  valley  of 
Ckndais  (iHiidi  cortaifia  •  tosni-  of  many  himdied  hoMes) ;  the 
pun  of  Klmnnnir,  and  tbe  ttai  mofe  0ittmm»9-^kmid  of  ZuamioA 
and  Logof.  Theee  diatricta  aw  auRoimded  withUiDa,  lmt4M:ftrtai^ 

fim,  ■  thocg^  a  hgge  pqrtkm  of  ihB  infcahitMita  ane  Tmnj/Sa  z  hogsat  ii« 
dmdadbetweeiitbe<3lii$wa«id11ie  l^gik  tribe  of  Bomikee^  faot 
.Allamoer  on  die  east  of  Logmv  wd  the  ha^  cold  iiaaen'valkj'af 
%>eiga,  which  runs  up  fifom  Lognr  towards  the  ridge  of  Mimwm, 
affbrd  pasture  to  the  flocks  of -the  C&i]|ie  dan  of  Ahmeds^  The 
Inghly  cultivated  lands  for  twenty  miles  round  CSaobid  jm  ooenpied 
4)oth  by  CMiilJiea  and  Taujiks,  but  the  numbera  and  mamiera  of  4faa 
Taujiks  prevafl,  and  the  whole  is  formed  iiilo  a  aqparate  gov^nmanft 
distinct  from  the  Ghiljies  ;  I  shall,  however,  notioeiit  intliisplaoe^  as 
it  is  situated  in  the  midst  of  the  Ghiljee  lands. 

Tlic  city  of  Caubul  is  enclosed  on  three  Bides  by  a  semicircle  of  low 
hills,  along  the  top  of  which  runs  a  weak  wall.  There  is  an  opening 
towards  the  east,  wliirh  is  enclosetl  by  a  rampart,  and  heix  the  prin- 
cipal road  enters  through  a  gste,  after  passing  a  bridge  over  Uie  river. 

.  3k 


,4d4  CHEillJEi:  001}NT9T. 

The  Balla  Hissaiir,  which  stands  on  the  part  of  the  hill  north  of  this 
entrance,  is  a  kind  of  citadel,  and  contains  the  King's  palace,  in 
-which  are  several  halls  distinguished  with  the  royal  ornaniem  of  a 
gilded  cupola.  Ihere  is  .an  upper  dtadel  uaed  a9  a  state  pnaon  &)r 
princes  of  the  bluod. 

In  the  centre  of  the  city  is  an  open  square,  whence  hme  four 
bazara  two  stories  high,  arched  over  like  those  already  mentioned. 
Most  of  the  buikluigs  of  Caubul  are  of  wood,  a  material  recommended 
by  its  power  of  resisting  the  frequent  earthquakes,  with  which  this 
place  is  visited. 

-  Cubiilt  though  not  m  eii««iinye  citj^  is  compact  and  hsnHwiinfi 
31»d6soriplioinJ  Jhmgivai  of  odwtowiis  will  m  iti  if  ,it 

iMieooUflGtcdtliat  it.isliieseBt<if  thii  <XNirtMidtiie^^wid:esBpotiiiai 
4if«tndft  3rlie  abundniee  aad  antngdiiieii^ 

lilmdjr  •  ihflme  of  praiae ,to  on  EmofMan  tm^ePflr*.  I.llia  cii^  if  « 
iiTided  hj  the  stream  which  baan  its.BSBie^iaiid  ii  siiicrowiM|M 
tknhiriy^-ett  the  north  and  west;  by  Dumerous  gardens  and  grorea 
ftiutfineds.   The  most  pleasing  spot  about  it  is  the  tomb  of  t]»  isv^ 
IMiaoc  Bauber,  whidi  is  sitnated  at  the  top  q£  m.  hill  over  the  duQr* 
SDIRHmded  by  beds  of  anemonies  and  other  flofrMa».and  oonunsnding 
A  noble  pcospect    The  town  itself,  and  the  neighbouring  meadcMn^ 
fieldn,  find  orchards,  watered  by  streams,  interspersed  with  vilhiges, 
and  encompassed  by  mountaioSf  all  contribute  to  tba  grandtwur  and 
variety  of  the  landscape. 

The  charms  of  ihe  climate  and  scenery  of  Caubul  have  been  cele- 
brated by  many  Persian  and  iiidiini  w  riicrs.  The  beauty  and  abun- 
dance of  its  flowers  are  proverbial,  and.  its  iruits  are  traobpofted  to 
the  remotest  parts  of  India.  '  ■  " 


The  four  Tuppehson  districts  immediately  dependent  on  Caubul 
(BoQtkhauk,  Logur,  Pu^maun,  and  Cohdauinaun)  are  all  fertile,  well 
nitcMd,  sad  eukiiatad  .with  0K«it  ivlAsliy.iiid  aldDL  .Fli^M»n» 


Mt.Mmw 


Digitized  by  Googl<! 

J 


GHILJIE  COUNTRY. 


4a5 


which      to  the  west  towards  the  HMtamh  otamtry,  is  least  ftrtfl^i 

and  LoguT  to  the  south,  wfaidi  contains  many  low  hills,  has  most' 
picture  land ;  but  Cohdaumun,  which  lies  north  of  the  city,  is  the 
finest  part  of  these  districts,  and  perhaps  of  the  kmgdom.  It  ]iei»-iM 
ks  name  hnplies.  on  the  skirts  of  the  moimtAin.s  whence  it  derives  an 
abuiulani  suppl)  of  water ;  and  so  numi  i  oas  at  i-  iho  iruit  trees  pro* 
duced  in  it,  that  the  valley  of  Estaulel  alone  is  rec  koiuxl  to  contain^ 
six  thousand  orchards  :  the  city  and  its  ini mediate  neighbourhood  is 
inhabited  by  a  peculiar  class  of  Taujiks  called  Exubulees,  who  arc 
remarkable  tor  their  activity  and  ingemiitys  arui  wlio  have  more  than 
once  made  themselves  of  con.sidL'iiiblti  iaiporUiiice  in  Uic  revolutions 
of  the  state.  The  number  of  the  iuhabitants  of  tlie  tomi  may  be  about 
tiight  diousuid.  .  A 
'  Ihe  vtlkQTOf  tike  iCmbul  river,  till  it  widwa  JdMlalMri,  alid«VBiBl» 
<iie^e»untiy  alwidy  deacribed  aa  inlMiwted  bythe  >iido<mwooa»  W 
longs  exdaaiT«lf'to  tbe  Ghiljies.-  it  woiild  be  todkNia*to  deecrflM 
illthe  litdeTaUeyawbichnni  up  to  Hmdoo^Coddi  end  M>  MUi 
Goby  'orto  ifiedfy  lli6>cold«iid  httt  plaine  (abo?e'aiid  iMneUli  the 
mooitenii)  trtddi  Me  diillivMed  faf  the  Ghilgiaa,  aad  the  niiggnd 
i<WHiwiitiiidBcii  are  fed  on  by  thwr  flocka;  botlhkvaiy  cttndeiilMii 
wiU  sugi^  the  divenity  of  thttebniptwd broken  i^on.  i.     .  u': 

Hie  country  of  the  Ghiljies  forms  a  parallelogram,  of  whidi  the 
length  is  about  a  hundred  and  eighty*  and  the  breadth  abeilt  eighty^ 
five  miles.  -The  animals  of  the  6b£|)ie  oounliy  iie  the  'same  aa  theiw 
of  the  Dooraunee  country. 

The  cUmato  is  rvrrv  whore  cold,  but  least  so  in  the  lower  part  of 
the  valley  of  ttie  Tm  nuk  :  ery  where  else,  the  winter  is  severer  than 
tliat  of  England,  and  the  summer  not  mucii  htitter. 

The  Ghiljies  were  in  former  times  by  far  the  most  celebrated  of 
the  Af^hauns.  In  the  beginning  of  the  last  century  this  tribe  alone 
conquered  all  Persia,  and  routed  the  armies  of  the  Ottoman  i^oite^: 


•  See  Hann!>y'-  Trrircls,  iinJ  Jones'*  Hittotre  De  Nntlir  C'liali.  'Flu*  f'lr'st  of  which 
.contain*  a  very  tiui  ami  uitoreitting  account  of  all  the  sucoeneii  and  disasters  of  the  OhiJjie* 

8  K  S 


4^  OmLHBt  COOWEWT: 

afi:er. a  hard  struggle,  the  third  Ghiljie  king  o£  Persia  was  expelled  by- 
Nadir  Shah ;  but  some  of  the  tribe  remained  indepejulf  at  in  that 
country  till  very  lately,  if  iiidccd  they  are  even  now  subdued.  They 
inhalMti  tl  Isliubeess  aad  Nermaunsheer  in  the  province  of  Kermauu. 
Sonn    ntlu  rs  still  remain  in  Persia  mixed  with  the  botly  of  the 
people.    Thu  most  liimous  that  has  appeared  since  the  dovvuiali  of 
their  own  monarchy,  was  ^Vjsaud  Khaun  Solimauu  Khail,  who  set  up 
for  King  of  Persia*  and  is  well  known  aa  the  moat  formidable  <^ 
Kfireem  Khaim*«  oompedton.   It  b  aaid,  both  by  the  Fqnpanii  aa^ 
Afghaniiaft  thit  tbeSr  laqg  alxuggle  for the  tbtone  «ided  in^ftidifiil. 
fiioidab^  aad  lint  Aland  Uved  for  .iikaay  yean  in  lafirtjai^ 
at  die  coiut  of  hia  rafioeadiil.  rival.  "Die  &Gt  .ia  .ognaiatsit  .w/Stt 
Keneem  Khaun's  character ;  and  in  a  ooontiy  where .tfaare  iaauqh  a 
deartli  of  good  frltb  and  gfuatmttkj^  tine  vowldiain  hepe  jtbat  it  k 
anlihentfe.  AjMnd  Khaun'a  aon  .now  leaidaa  in  T  jighiman.  l^aea. 
afe'«lao  many  GkUjiea  in  the  Uabec  service,  who  bear,  a  ln|^  ^fipn-i 
tation.:  they  probably  were  sent  to  Bokharaby  Nadir,  or  emigrMbed 
hi  consequence  of  the  depression  of  their  tribe.    The  manner  in 
which  they  lost  their  kingdom»  and  the  bold  rebellion  by  which  they 
lately  attempted  to  regain  it,  will  be  found  in  the  historical  part  of 
this  account.    Their  pretensions  to  the  sovereignty  are  now  laid  asidi^ 
and  the  moderation  of  tlic  Dooruuiiee  (government  has  in  same  mea- 
sure disHrnuil  the  resenttiuiu  wliich  itiey  leit  for  their  reduction; 
but  the^  stiii  tbndly  recal  the  ancient  grandeur  of  their  tribe;  and 
tlie  royalty  of  the  Shauh  Alhim  Khail,  and  tiie  iiereditary  stations 
of  their  Khnuns  are  yet  ackuowle<lged  anil  res})ected  by  them  all. 
The  character  of  die  trjibe  ia  as  various  as  the  couutry  it  inhabits; 


ia  Persia,  l^ere  js  also  a  particuiar  history  of  the  Ghiijtc  conquest,  drawn  up  from  the 
nowara  PhprKralnki^  «b»  M'in  IsphAhmariheiawt  iMtlte  emy  Mk«f  4a 

good  Jesuit,  und  the  lively  imagination  of  his  French  editor,  turn  produced  an  historical 
romance,  which,  though  nt)t  destitute  of  information,  requimi  aa  much  knowl<f1<re  to 
^istii^guish.  between  the  trutJi  aud  the  ^dselutodt  as  would  h^vi>  sufficed  far  the  pruducuoa 


Digitized  by  Google 


a  summary  view  of  the  whole,  together  villi  some  details  respecting 
the  clans  which  4iii^  mimt  horn  the  wettecn  tribes  already  described 
will  prqbably  be  0iiftcMnt to  oommiituoate  iUlliit  10  iatenethig  of, 
the  inlmiiuitkm  ivbich  I  powow.   An  enirtiiiation  of  the  cfans  kilo 
vliicli  the  Glu]t|ies  me  divided.  Md  e  fltetement  ef  the  part  of  the 
ootuiti^  vhiflh  eecfa  inhabifs  «ie  howeva  neoesMiy  to  vender  this  . 
mtdligible. 

Ibe  GluQies  are  dbided  into  the  ftmiliet  of  Tofaun  andBooihaain, 
which  hrandi  into  eii^  dana*  Tocaam  i»  the  MeA  fttuilj*  and 
ooBiiats  af.die  danaof  Hotukee  ttidTaUiee;  fiem  thefintbfwhicll 
were  sprung  the  hingi»  nad  fian  (he  lecoiid  the  Tiajen* '  of  the 

Ghiljic  dynasty. 

To  Boorhaun  belong  the  clans  of  Soliutaun  Khail,  Ali  Khali, 
Under  and  Turtukee.  It  is  imcertain  even,  with  the  Ghiljies,  to 
which  branch  we  ought  to  assign  the  renwning  clan  of  Kharotee. 
To  these  clans  may  be  added  that  of  Sheerpan,  thougb  it  is  nOta 
clan,  but  an  association  formed  out  of  the  other  eight. 

The  Hotukof  ^  were  formerly  a  nuricmus  clan,  but  they  are  how 
^educed  to  5  or  bWO  tkmilies.  They  are  cliiefly  employed  in  n<n[- 
culture  and  commerce,  yet  they  generally  live  a  great  deal  in  l^nLs, 
and  feed  many  flocks :  thev  are  mixed  with  the  Tokhees  in  the 
tract  S.  of  the  range  Mdokkoor,  in  whidi  the  castle  of  Abdoor- 
ehcem  then  chief  is  situated.  ■  '  '  . 

The  Tokhees  are  reckoned  12»000  finniliea.  Their  principal  place 
i»  Xdanta  Ghiiliie.  Beaides  the  conntrjr  which  tb^  ahace  with  the 
Hotokeea,  they  hsve  the  vaDey  of  the  TWnuk  to  themaelvea* 
They  heve  ailao'  the  hillj.ooantrf  on  the  esfge  of  the  FnppeoBiaan 
mouDtaiiM. 

Hie  TtmnskBrn  have  Moolckoor  and  the  oountry  around  iti  extend- 
hig  to  the  SL  as  far  as  the  aoQihem  hqider  of  the  Cjltiiyi^a.  Thag^ 
are  cftUed  12,000  families,  many  of  them  ne  pastoral*  and  of  those^ 
some  move  in  winter  into  the  Boofaunee  oomitij>  while  otbeia  wm- 
der  as  &r  as  Dainaun. 


Digitized  by  Google 


489  mVISIOIIB'OF  THR  TKSBR 

Tbe  Undera  are  also  Mid  to  be  12,000  famUiea.   They  cultivate 
the  rich  district  of  Shflgur  and  some  of  the  ac^oiniiDg  country, 
i  The  Kharotees  inhabit  the  h\]h  between  the-6<muil  and  the  laoge 
ofSolimatin.    They  are  about  6(X)0  fami  lies.  ' 

The  Alikhails  are  reckoned  8000  iamilies  ;  a  number  tar  too  greait, 
Rincp  tbev  have  little  land  except  the  plain  of  Zooirmool,  and  even 
there  at  e  only  half  the  population. 

The  Solimaun  Khail  is  much  more  numerous  than  any  otlur 
G^iiljieclan  :  its  nurnbnrs  are  said  to  amount  to  30 or  35,000  families. 
It  is  divided  into  four  distinct  Ooloosses,  but  may  be  taken  in  two 
parts,  the  southern  and  northeiu,  with  reference  both  to  geographical 
and  to  political  situation.  ,  * 

,  The  Kyser  Khail  and  Sumniiikye  ot  Imai^M^ye  -form  '<lie  'firsts  of 
llieflediv]riofei8{  tliey  live  to  the  &  iad  K  <tf  Ghmee^  anfl  it  u  they 
who  Zm»iikx4  with  l)ie  iJildia^  Thejr  iiMi^  be  ^  about  5dd0 
funilies  e«eh ;  'part  of  them  move  in  wibttr  to  Waimdi.  -  Thty  tak' 
very  independent  both  on  the  King  uid  dieir  own  ddeSk,  m  km  th«v» 
ncighboaTS  tihe  AlildMiiL'* 

'  •  The  nerthera  divimoa'coiinats  of  die  dttuneesjres  or  So6kUamxye», 
ml  the  Ahmedsjei :  thfli'lbniier>  whidi'aie  most  ntfmetona,  inh^Ant 

the  country  north  of  the  Winrduks,  and  are  agricultural. 

The  Alimedzyes  are  pastoral,  and  live  in  the  £.  of  Logur,  in  Altl^ 
-moor  and  Speiga,  but  drire  their  flocks  aa  fiv  £.  as  die  luDa  over 
Jellallabad. 

They  are  obedient  to  the  King,  and  did  not  evoi  take  part  in  the 

Ghiljie  rebellioii. 

The  Suhauks  arc  5000  or  6000  tamilies,  one-third  lives  in  Khur- 
war,  and  probably  bears  the  same  character  with  the  soutluni  Soli- 
maun KhailA:  the  rest  are  in  Pughmaun,  west  of  Caubui,  and 
resemble  the  other  Ghiijies  in  that  neighbourhood.  - 


•  Thrrngh  I  have  menlioncxl  the  chief  residence  of  each  cUnof  the  lOUtbeni-. 
KiutU,  it  must  be  otwcnred  that  they  are  a  good  deal  oiixed. 


Digitized  by  Goo^l 


OOVERKMENT  OF  THE  TRIBE. 


Hie  ShflMpsws  (6000  ftmilies)  are  mixed  with  the  Tairjik0*i]i  flie 
Cohdammi)  and  along  the  northern  bonk  of  the  Caubul  river,  aa  tit 

as  the  eastern  border  of  the  Ghiljies.  They  are  said  to  be  the  super- 
flnnn<4  population  of  the  other  claoa  whidi  emigrated  fponi  Candtthir 
long  lirlorc  tlie  rest  oi  ilie  tribe. 

Tlic  Ghiijies  of  the  west,  as  far  nearly  as  to  tin  moridian  of  Ghuss- 
nee,  l>ear  a  close  resemblance  to  the  D<j()raunees.  This  rej^etnhlance 
diminishes  as  we  go  eastward.  The  Hotnki  t's  and  Tokhces,  in  (iress, 
manners,  and  customs,  and  in  even'  thuig  which  is  not  connected 
with  their  mode  of  government,  exactly  resemble  the  neighbouring 
Dooraimees.  The  Turrukees,  though  more  similar  to  the  Doorau- 
umb  dwi  to  muf  «di«r  laribe,  mix  aomething  of  the  manners  of  the 
«Mleni  Ghiljies  i  and  diia  moit  in  tho  aoi^em  part  of  Tamtfcee 
mmtry.  llie  Uikkn  nMOibke  the  eaatem  cbais  In  efery  dung  liut 
iJmr  gownunent*  ■ 

■■<  .The  OMtem  Ghiiglei  diflSer  wiAAy  from  tlie  Dooraimeea,  add  will 
-leqiiife  a  aapinte  dlacuaribii*  Hiqr  oi'eD  difliMr  among  themadveii 
llHMeaiRMBd  Canbid  bearing  biit  a  iflligbt  MaemUaiioe  to  thdaemtli^ 
south,  butrthdie  ate  some  points  in  which  the  whole  tribe  diflEbn  flom 
the  Dooraunees,  and  which  I  shall  state  befoio  I  proceed  to  the  par- 
tial diversities  I  have  bcsea  alluding  to. 

The  internal  government  of  the  Ghiljies  is  oitir^y  different  ii-om 
tint  of  the  Dooraunees.  The  chiefs  of  the  former  have  now  lost  the 
authority  which  thov  possessed  under  tin  ir  own  vnvnl  government. 
There  is  great  reason  to  doubt  whether  liiat  autlioi  ity  ever  was  so 
extensive,  as  that  which  has  been  introduced  among  the  Dooraunees 
on  the  Persian  model.  It  is  more  probable  that  the  power  even  of 
the  King  of  the  Ghiljies*  was  small  in  his  own  country,  and  that  the 
tumultuiu  V  roil  sent  of  the  people  to  support  hia  measures  abroad, 
was  dictated  more  by  a  sense  of  the  interest  and  glory  of  the  tribe, 
than  by  any  del'erence  to  the  King's  commands.  Some  appearuices, 
however,  warrant  a  supposition  that  hia  power  was  sufficient  to  ditek 
mvfders  ilnd  odier  great  cHsorders.^  Whatever  the  power  of  the  King 
may  hove  been  ibfmerljr,  it  is  now  at  en  end,  and  that  of  the  aasto* 


LOOtt  OOVIRMIICMT  APPAREVT. 


cracy  has  Men  Inth  U;  «ad  though  it  has  left  atokuiMBte  nspecfe 
Itt  dike  mild*  of  Che  eonuiion  people,  yet  that  iM^^ 
mixed  wkh  feer,  tli«t  it  hes  no  eflbcfc  friMte?«r  iii  oeotnillliig  thdr 
actkne.  No  Khnin'of « tribe»  «r.HiiI]ik  of  a  viUage^  enrw  inberfsMe 
aeaniagifltniCetoseUle  adisfNit^  oratleaaliaBerioueoihes  dMgrkoep 
their  own  fiutojUes  Aid  their  inmiediate  dependento  in  ofder,  but 
the  rest  (if  the  people  to  aoooomiodaM  iheir  dU&lcQcce  ae  thej 
.caiL  This  may  be  preaumed  not  to  lui?e  been  al«ni}is.the  case; 
•caiiae  it  has  not  yet  generally  produced  the  compulsory  trial  far^  a 
leeigii  (or  assembly  of  elders)  which  subsists  among  the  Berdooran^ 
nee8»  so  long  habitilated  to  strife;  neither  has  it  exasperated  the 
tempers,  nor  embittered  the  enmitiea  of  the  Ghiljie^  as  it  has  with 
the  people  just  mc'ntit)iicd. 

The  degree  in  wiucix  this  want  of  cjoveriiment  is  felt  is  not  the 
same  (hronijhout  the  tribe;  amimg  ilio  }ie(>|)!e  round  Ghuznee  and 
Cauhui,  the  j)Ower  of  the  King  8  governor  supplies  the  place  of  in- 
ternal rep;iilation.  In  many  tribes  more  distant  from  cities,  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  one  of  the  King's  Cauzees,  or  the  deputy  of  that 
magiiilrate,  induces  one  party  to  have  recourse  to  the  Shirra,  (oir 
Mahommedan  law]  an  i^ppeal  iHiich  no  Mussulman  can  decline. 
With  the  Hotnkees,  the  Tokhees,  and  generally  with  the  Ghiljies 
on  the  great  roads^  the  authority  whidk.  the  chiefi  derive  fiom  the 
Dooraonee  govenmient*  and  perhaps  the  reapect  atiU  pud  to  their 
jfimner  zanky  enables  them  to  .prevent  general  'My^nnrfiflmii  thouf^ 
Ahey  cannot  suppress,  qoaneb  between  individnalsi  but  among  £e 
aoutheia  SoUmaun  Khail,  these  disocden  rise  to&uds  betweoi  sulv 
'^▼isions  of  a  clan»  and  e?en  to  oontests  of  sudi  eKtint  as  to  deacrve 
the  name  of  civil  wars :  yet.  even  in  the  most  unsettled  tribes,  IMb 
decision  of  an  assembly  of  MooUas-  is  sufficient  to  decide  disputes 
|d)OUtpiopevty»  and  pne  great  source  of  quarrels  is  thus  removed. 

Among  the  eastern  Ghiljies,  and  especially  among  the  SoIimMU 
Khails,  the  power  of  the  chief  is  not  considerable  enough  to  form  a 
tie  to  keep  the  clan  together,  and  they  are  broken  into  little  societies, 
(like  the  Kusoizyes)  which  ue.^uite  independent  in  ail  jFA^emal  tjua^ 

10 


Digitized  by  Googl 


EXAMPLE  OF  THE  KALimDSR  KHAIL. 


441 


•actions.  Their  connection  wit^i  the  Kincr,  however,  makes  a  difference 
between  their  situation  and  lh;it  oi  thf  Eiisofzves,  and  in  consequence 
each  chief  has  power  over  the  whole  ot  his  clan,  in  all  matters  con- 
nected with  the  furnislujig  of  troops  to  tlie  King,  or  the  payment  of 
the  royal  revenue.  This  limited  authoi  iiy  preserves  some  connection 
between  the  diifcrent  subdivisions  under  one  Kliaun,  and  often  delays 
the  breaking  up  of  a  dan,  after  it  has  i^tained  the  number  which 
iiiliiMlJy  reqiMKM  ■tyniteduaft.  It»cfaimiigliowgMit«diflhreiiGe 
the'diwnniftmcM  I  ham  been  ttating  mint  make  in  the  livies  'of  the 
Gfailfiee  and  Doomniiee%  but  lliis  will  be  mm  evident  fiom  e 
deeoiption  of  a  viUiig^  of  the  soodiem  Snlimawn  KhuL 

The  Eahmder  Ehail  live  in  Knttawans,  about  thirty-miles  to  the 
•ontfa  of  Ghuaneeb'  They  an  abnost  all  huabandme^p^  and*  abaiioe 
keep  any  ed£ie,  thoae'iMed  m  lyicnltnie  being  genefally  hiiedfixira* 
peatotal  hoidei»'  who  pais  the  spring  and  summer  in  KuttsnranaC 
Their  oooutry  is  not  ridi,  itonly  piodnoeB  grain  nhere  there  ape 
Gshteopesi'  and  yidds  but  one  harvest  in  the  year:  it  will  not  bear 
wheat  two  years  on  the  same  groundt  and  even  with  the  peoper-suc- 
oessioD  of  crops,  it  requires  manure.  The  climate  is  very'  ciAd. 
Their  village  contains  about  100  families:  some  Humsauyahs  assist 
in  the  cultivation  of  their  fields,  but  reside  in  a  village  at  some 
distance.  'Iheir  wood  ami  iron  work  is  performed  by  travelling 
artisans. 

Their  Jntul  is  their  own  property  ;  or  if  they  have  the  fiction  of  a 
lleodal  tenure  from  the  KiriL',  il  does  not  affect  their  rights,  either  in 
reality  or  in  form  :  every  man  disposes  of  his  land  :is  he  pleases,  and 
at  death  it  is  divided  amon<T  his  children.  Small  aa  it  is,  their 
village  is  an  independent  republic  it  it*  indeed  in  the  ShumnmLzye 
division  of  the  clan  of  Solimaun  Kluul,  and  the  Khaun  of  that  divi- 
sion collects  the  King*s  dues ;  but  he  interferes  in  nothing  else,  snd 
were  it  notfiv  his  employment  under  the  royal  govenmient,  aH  con- 
nection between  him  and  his  diTifion  would  long  since  hme  ceased. 
The  village  is  dhkled  mto  two  Mohulles,  or  quarters,  under  two 
diteA,  Mofvud  and  TjratuUub^  Morand  Is  the  head  of  the  wfadte 

9  L 


ICAXNEBS. 


villa^»  and  is  called  MuUick.    Their  authority  is  entirely  confined 
to  external  affairs,  and  they  never  interfere  in  the  disputes  of  the 
people*  unless  when  one  of  them  is  armed  with  the  temporary  powers 
of  a  Chdwashtee.    Quarrels  are  privately  mMle  iip 'Or  alkyMed  to 
oontiniie  till  they  become  troubleioiiie  to.tfa« oDmiiiiiiuly*  when  om 
or  both  of  the  diaputntib  art  oxpeikd  iha  viUi^Vdvil  mks  «v» 
■Bttled  ty.MoollaB.   RiUic  affiun  joe  mMiagad  hy  the  MnlUk  in 
eomwltiiMoP  with  TjfStuUub }.  but  in  may  tnuHctioo  which mig^  kid 
towir»  orothennaeterionaLja^ctthevillagey  theMuHihMwiiihlet 
th9  Men  aad  takea  tfaeir'advice.:  do  qiiettnni  of  oounw  m  put  to 
the  votei  bot-fhe  MhUiIl  gpthen  the  aeoae  of  the  nwinmhly,  ubiutvoa 
whether  their  inewt  ugleee  with.hia,  and  jndjget  how  fir  he  mi^  tdy 
on  their  wuppait  t£.  he  finds  thet  their  opinion  is  diftrinil  horn  hh 
own-   When  a  war  if  reaohred  on,  CSiciwaafateei'  are  immediate]; 
appointed,  and  the  ftnmmwufl  of  them  is  invariably  conferred  on 
Tyztullub,  who  in  ooompieiiGe  is  called  the  Merr,  n  title  which  he 
retains  at,  all  times,  as  Moraud  does  that  of  Mullik.    He  is  Ibnnally 
invested  with  his  office  by  the  Mullik,  who  binds  a  turban  round  Kb 
head  in. the  presence  of  the  whole  village,  of  which  he  immediately 
asflumes  the  control.    lie  calls  out  the  fighting  men,  poeto  centinels, 
and  makes  all  military  arrangements ;  while  he  prevents  internal 
disorder  hv  imposintr  fines  on  all  who  break  the  peace.    The  Mullik 
loses  his  iiiiporiaru  e  fiom  the  tinir  the  Chelwaslitee  is  ap{K>ink'(l:  he 
still  retains  his  superior  rank  ami  honour,  hut  he  interferes  in  nothing, 
and  would  be  as  liable  to  juinishment  as  any  other  individual,  if  he 
engaged  in  any  quarrel  or  disturbance.    The  custom  of  appointing 
Chelwashtees  prevails  all  over  Kuttawauz :  it  seems  indeed  to  be 
rendered  equally  necessary  in  all  parts  of  that  country,  by  the  feuds 
winch  subsist  between  neighbouring  villages.    I  am,  however,  in- 
clined to  think  tiiat  iliii^  state  of  things  lias  not  always^  existed,  because 
the  custom  of  fortifying  the  villages  seems  only  coming  in,  and  most 
cf  tlKMe  in  Kuttawanx  are  still  open. 

NotwidiBtandhig  their  domestic  qoanda  .and  fends  m&  odier 
tribes^  thsy  areb^  no  means  a  violent  or  initahle  people.  Tbey 


'  Digrtized  by  GoogI 


I 


I 


u\^u\^c6  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


geoaaiXy  live  in  tolerable  hannoiiy,  and  have  their  meetings  and 

amiuements  lite  the  Dooraimees,  imdisturbed  by  the  constant  alarm,  - 
and  almost  as  constant  fVnvs  of  tlie  Eusofzyes.  Thev  are  verv  hos- 
pitable, and  have  a  regular  offii  ei  whose  duty  it  is  to  receive  and 
provide  for  guests  at  the  oxjionce  ol  the  villa<?('.  Instead  of  tho  Per- 
sian cubba  of  the  1  )ooraiinr'es,  or  the  original  *  cameess  ot  the 
Afghauns,  (w}iu  li  is  here  oalv  worn  by  old  men,)  the  generality  wear 
the  Indian  tiress  oi  white  cotton,  which  has  been  described 
ai,  worn  by  the  inhabitants  of  DaniauTi,  to  whom  these  Ghiljies  bear 
some  resemblance  in  their  appearance  and  manners.  Their  dres*  is 
also  distinguished  from  that  of  the  tribes  farther  west,  by  the  use  of 
wliitiB  tpibmi  wUdh  diejr  wear  in  the  maiinef  leprasiBBteil  in  Vwb^ 
UL  They  also  wear  •  cap  like  that  of  die  Dowaunees  but  modi 
Wffiier*  ■  " 

ThtSt  anna-  are  the  same  as  tiiofe  of  llie  Dobranncea;  with  ih» 
addition  of  a  shield  of  MUde'a  Bide*  inr,  wlien  it  en  lie  pvocnied* 
oCtlie  akin  of  a  ihinooenM* 

'  Moat  meii  hare  a  «tn|ie  ahaved  in  the  middle  ef  their  hands,  like 
tfaeDoorauneea;  botthoaewhoaetnpibrproleaaedduimpionsletall 
their  liair  grow :  it  is  eostomary  with  each  of  those,  when  he  is  jiiit 
about  to  cloae  with  the  enemy,  todrophia  cap»  and  ratherto  give  up 

his  life  than  retreat  beyond  the  spot  where  it  has  fallen. 

I  have  mentioned  that  ^e  Kalunder  Khail  are  almost  all  husbttod^ 
men :  there  are,  however,  five  or  six  families  of  shepherds  among 
them,  who,  like  the  other  numerous  shepherds  of  Kuttawauz,  leave 
their  frozen  plains  durinfr  part  of  the  ve^r,  for  the  low  and  sheltered 
country  among  the  intniutains  (in  the  banks  of  the  Cxomul.  Wauneh 
in  particular,  is  a  fkvourite  retreat,  and  the  small  number  of  its 
owners,  the  JJumtaunees,  alike  prevents  their  resisting  this  invasion 
of  their  property,  and  their  suffering  liy  sucli  an  addition  to  their 
populadtMi.   It  is  generally  thouj^t  that  men  often  quit  the  life  of 


The  large  loose  shirt. 
8  L  d 


Digitized  by  Google 


shepherd  for  that  of  a  husbandman,  but  never  return  frofn  an  agri- 
cultural to  a  pastoral  life.  'J'lie  few  shepherds  of  the  Kalunder  Kliail» 
however,  furnish  an  example  to  the  contrai  \ .  The  uncle  of  a  man 
from  whom  I  had  the  story,  was  possessed  ot  land  in  Kuttawauz,  hut 
he  married  into  a  pastoral  family,  and  being  struck  with  the  pleasuren 
of  a  wandering  life,  he  laid  out  a  sum  of  money  he  had  gained  by 
some  madder  which  he  had  cultivated,  on  the  purchase  of  aheep, 
and  joined  the  moving  horde  with  which  he  was  connected.  The 
pleasures  which  seduced  huii,  must  seem  great  even  to  the  husband- 
ineU)  for  those  of  the  Kalunder  Khail,  at  least,  annually  betake 
themselTes  to  the  imitatkm  <€  m  pastoral  life.  Every  summer  they, 
pitdb  their  teato  at  fome  diatanoe  fiom  tbe  fi»t»  wliidi  ia  aa  a&tifely 
ftbandooed  that  tlie  gptea  aie lodced:  they  lemain  in  .tento  during 
the  whole  of  the  saminer,  movmg  OGGaabDaQy  within  a  moderate 
ifMoe-roiind  their  iotU  The  enjoymeata  of  this  aeaaon  .are  great/' 
(aaja  one  of  my  infiwrnanta)  **biit  its  pleaaurea  are  equalled,  if  not 
aurpaased,  by  the  idloaeas  and  repoee  of  wintw."  Besidea  the  ahcp- 
hetda  who  only  move  to  the  Gomtdf  there  axe  others  who  prolong 
their  march  to  Damaun.  These  are  joined  by  merchants  from  the 
fixed  iiAabittfnts,  and  the  whole  number  is  ooosiderible.  Such  are 
the  mann^  of  the  inhabitants  of  Kuttawauz,  and  probably  of  the 
Alizyes  of  ZooTmool,  the  Suhauks  of  Khurwaur,  and  of  all  the 
southern  Solimaim  Khail:  but  the  interposition  o£  the  village  in 
checking  disturbances  is  more  marked  in  many  divisions,  and  in  some 
they  even  compel  the  parties  to  submit  to  a  Jeirga,  or  to  quit  the 
villnm'.  In  some  clans  too,  the  form  of  government  is  more  decidedly 
republican,  and  the  sentiments  ot  t  ry  individual  must  be  taken 
before  any  measure  ot  importance  is  decide<l  on. 

This  is  the  case  among  the  Ahmedzyes  who  possess  the  east  of 
Logur,  find  all  the  southern  part  of  the  valley  of  tlie  Caubul  river  as  far 
as  JeilallnbiKl.  Yet  as  they  are  in  perfect  obedience  to  the  King,  the 
Khaun  of  the  whole  division,  who  is  the  representative  of  the  sove- 
reign, has  much  more  influence  than  among  the  southern  Sollmaun 
Khail»  and  the  whole  division,  ^ough  it  consists  of  12,000  ftmiliest 
looks  up  to  him  aa  its  head  in  all  cases. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Ghiljies  in  the  four  Tuppehs  of  Caubul.  are  a  quiet,  orderly, 
uidustrioijs  set  of  people,  entirely  obedient  to  tiie  Kinff.  and  subject 
to  the  authority  of  their  own  KhauDS.  lu  dress,  aud  in  aome  re^^dcts 
in  nuuiners,  they  resemble  tlie  citizens  of  Caubul.         •       '      ,  ' 

The  King  derives  a  uiodeiate  revenue  from  the  whole  of  the 
Ghiljies ;  buC  it  has  idmost  all  been  allotted  to  difiereut  persons,  so 
that  httle  now  oofmesiiirto  the  xojvltieasu^^  Bat.ii  gnmted  to  the 
KhAUDft  of  the  Glul)ies  ihemielfes;  ptft  (a  the  Doocaunee  GSnUr 
who  conunwids  their  contiiigent  of  troops ;  aad  m  comiderehle  poirtkrt 
w«t  anigiiedto  AbdoorcfaeenLKhiiiii;  Mid  has  not  ben  resumed  flinoe 
hk  Tebellion. 

In  their  cheracter  the  Ghsljiea  m  confrMedly  <he  aeoond  tribe  in 
Ae  Canbiil  dondnioiM.  '  Thejr  are  more  tnrbnientand  lem  dviliaed 
than  the  DoaffanneeB»  but  thej  are  a  brave  and  reapedaUe  people 
In  their  perwnB  they  are  pgpbebly  the  hurgMtyhanifaorociit,  and  &^ 

of  the  A%hauns. 

Hie  dissimilarity  of  their  country  to  that  of  ihe  tribe  they  belong 
to,  gives  the  Klinrotees  the  same  claim  to  leparate  mention  which 
has  been  allowed  to  the  Atchikzyes  among  the  Dootamiees.  Thdr 
manners  indeed  do  not  differ  so  much  from  those  of  their  brethren* 
but  their  interests  are  more  distinct,  and  they  really  form  a  oommu* 
hit)'  onlv  connected  with  the  Ghiljies  in  immo. 

The  Kharotees  inhabit  the  country  situated  to  the  east  of  Km  I 
waua,  among  the  branches  of  the  range  of  Solimaun.  Tliey  liavc 
the  principal  ridge  of  that  chain  on  the  east ;  and  a  branch  which  it 
sends  out  separates  thera  from  Gmdaiz  on  the  north;  the  Gomul  is 
their  bouiul;irv  on  the  west,  as  it  would  be  on  the  south,  but  for  the 
interposition  ot  liic:  little  territory  of  Wauueh.  The  Kharotee  country 
encloses  the  little  district  of  Oor^oon,  belonging  to  the  Poormoollees 
or  Foormoolles,  an  ind^endent  Izibe  of  Taigiks. 
.  l%e  KharoCeeaposMfs  a  ftnr'nanow  plains  and  valleys,  divided  by 
Jii|^  and  iwftWMrible  mountains^ 

Tb^.  count  finv  towns»  or  iatber  viUi^as^  sinee  Sirufiaw  the  Uugest 


Digitized  by  Google 


446         EMPLOYMENT  OF  THE  PASTORAL  KHAROTEES. 


«r  them  only  contains  500  houses.  Thej  taUKOA  io  fiOOO  or  fOOO 
fliinilies,  mott  of  whom  follow  agriculture.  '     '  , 

Tbeir  oonntiy,  tlioagh  ridier  than  .£«ttawauz,  pRydbioal  but  ime 

haivest  in  the  year,  and  is  buried  in  snow  for  three  months  evety 
winter.    They  have  bullocks  for  the  plough,  but  the  nature  of  their 

country  makes  them  prefer  goats  to  sheep  for  the  remainiiig  pari  flf 

thoir  stock,  vet  thev  have  many  rnmcls  in  the  plains. 

in  most  particulars  they  rcsiMublc  the-  soiuhern  Solirnauii  Kliail, 
but  the  whole  clan  is  united  undci-  the  coinnuiiu]  ot'  the  hereditary 
Khaun,  who  ha**  respect  and  weight,  thoiitrh  httle  or  no  power.  The 
Mulliks  of  villages  are  eqiifiUy  weak ;  but,  as  men  are  obliged  to 
Kuhmit  their  quarrels  to  a  Jeirga,  their  want  of  power  is  not  so  much 
felt.  One  fact  is  alleged  of  them  on  good  authority,  which  is  so 
much  at  variance  with  the  practice  of  the  Afghauns,  that  i  am  almost 
indined  to  doubt  its  accuracy.  It  is,  that  they  pay  more  attention  to 
weahli  and  popularity  than  to  birth,  in  the  electioa  of  a  Mullik.  I 
M-disoover  nbthing  in  tihe  sitnatfon  of  ■tlB»  Kharoleei  to  acboniit  fiv 

lllll'imiMdal  nflH^Mt  <lf  JlCMditary  superiority.  ^ . 

They  «m  n&m  at  war  wilih  tfaeir  mde  ndghboiii*  tba  Yimtgem 
and  Jadramw^-  and  abo  witli  die  Foomioolleai^  who  are  pnbaUf 
s&ndi  more  omlised  tliaii  tliemadkea.  '  In  this  last  war*  winch  wit 
ooeaakmed  by  mutual  moden,  they  gire  vo  quarter:  **  Oiir  wai^** 
aftid  a  Kharote%  **  ia  not  for  poWBr»  aor  for  ^ory,  but  fix  blood.** 

The  climate  compels  the  Kharotees  to  be  entirelj  idle  in  winter : 
even  their  fire-wood  ia  atored  befiwe  the  end  of  aatarnn*  and  their 
only  business  is  to  clear  away  the  auovr  fiom  tbeir  roofib  or  to  make 
roads  through  it  from  house  to  hooie.  Hie  poorer  Kharateeib  iHio 
cannot  afibrd  four  months  of  idleness,  are  driven  to  warmer  climates, 
and  carry  with  them  the  greatest  part  of  the  bullocks  and  camels  of 
the  tribe.  They  only  go  as  far  as  the  sottthcm  valley  of  tlie  Gomul* 
and  return  in  spring  to  their  own  country  ;  Init  upwards  of  three 
hundred  iiamilies  have  renouiu  cd  their  share  in  the  land,  and  have 
becpme  as  thorough  wanderers  as  the  Nasaees.    This  haa  taken  place 


Digitized  by  Google 


WU100JU»  447 

within  no  loi^  period  of  tliii%  Mid  some  of  the  first  sb^herdfl  are 
still  alive.  The  Kharotees  account  for  the  change  very  rationally. 
Their  fields  (they  say)  are  so  closely  hemmed  in  by  steep  mountains 
that  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  extend  their  cultivation,  nor  does 
the  deep  shade  of  the  pines  with  which  the  mountains  are  covered, 
permit  the  growth  of  any  herbage  which  might  maintain  their  tioeks. 
The  natural  increase  t^f  their  population,  therefore,  reduced  them  to 
distress.  The  lands  oi' t^iich  pt^riou  were  divuied,  according  to  the 
Mahoiniuedan  law,  among  liis  sons,  and  the  portion  which  fell  lo  the 
siuure  of  each  was  soon  too  small  to  maintain  a  man.  Many,  there* 
£ire,  jibaadoned  thflirtlaiid  to  their  tarodiers,  and  betooik  tfatawdyqi 
topMtuEige.  TheyHa^unftf  aoeoiniectiqn«ith.theftHii>y oftfa> 
EhmtABimthey  spmA  tfae  mmt&r  m  Thmtm  mad  tfae  inimAgr  nter 
Gfaimee's  hnt  theb  aeponttioii  la  too  Inemt  to  luvtt  brakan  the  ties 
idudi-lxNiiid  tliem  to  their  ebni  thefttOl  edmowledfelhoconuiiflii 
Kbeiin  of  the  Khuoteeib  and  when  thcj  pew  their  jietiTe  oountrf 
hi  their  mmatl  vugntiaoBf  their  relatioiui  aHenDble  andbrii^  ihem 
faenri^  the  seeds  of  the  Jel|^Kiowgh  piiie»  and  other  piodnce  of  .Ae 
mountaioa,  for  ndndi'tiie^hflpheidi.  make  vetimw  m  Utde  peesenta 
fiom  Bamaun.  The  menners  of  these  shepherds  exactly  reflemblo 
litume  of  the  Nassees,  which  I  shall  soon  deaeribOf  hirt  thc^  are  eran 
■iore  destitute  of  all  the  comforts  of  life.  * 

A  few  words  win  suffice  for  the  Wurduks.  I  have  mentioned  that 
they  are  bounded  on  the  west  by  the  Paropomisan  mountains,  and  on 
the  other  three  sities  by  the  Ghiljies.  Their  country  is  a  long  hollow 
between  the  hills  (v  hich  separate  them  trom  Logur  ami  Khunvar), 
and  the  Paropamisan  unniutaiiis,  the  latter  are  penetrateti  by  boiue 
deep  valleys  also  belonging  to  the  Wurduks.  The  river,  inaccurately 
named  from  from  CFhuznee.  rises  in  the  south  of  their  lands,  and  runs 
tiirougli  the  centre  for  the  whole  ot  tiic  ir  cxicnt. 

The  \\  urduks  are  ail  agricultural.    They  are  a  quiet,  sober  people, 


•  It  w  CM  «r  dm  cnyi  liUcft  b  dmrilMd  in  Ihe  fliiralh^ 


4 


Digitized  by  Google 


44S 


CAUKESa* 


perfpctly  obedient  to  the  King,  to  whom  they  pay  revenue,  and  fur- 
nish a  Jarpe  porrlon  ot  troops.  They  hnve  no  wars  with  their  neiMi- 
hours,  and  their  own  MooUahs^  or  the  King's  Cauzy  at  JL(^pir,  settle 
their  internal  disp\it(^s, 

WTiat  remains  unmentioned  of  the  country  inhabited  by  the  AT' 
^hauns,  belong  to  the  tribe  of  Cankers.  Surrounded  by  the  Beloches, 
oi  by  reinoLL'  Lubes  of  Alghauns,  it  is  nearly  inaccessible  to  enquiry  ; 
and,  tliough  1  have  obtained  particular  anxmnto  of  some  parts  of  it, 
and  have  heud  numy  Tague  idatioaa  from  tnvellfln  mpedJiig  tbe 
lanamder,  my  notboi  da.  Hie  Mibject  ate  atill  indiatinct,  and  I  muit 
fiiTCgo  the  attempts  I  have  latheito  made  at  minute  deicriptioii,  both 
with  regard  to  the  Cauken  and  their  oomitzy. 

"Hie  boondaiy  of  the  Canker  tanatxy,  on  the  noith»  ia  the  aame  aa 
the  aouthem  bonndaiy  of  the  GhiQiea:  on  the  noitb-weet  it  haa  Up> 
gjhemaun*  the  part  of  Toba  ' which  beloiigi  to  the  Atcfaifcayeat  and 
Mieen  j.ob  Ae  wert,  the  conhtacy  of  the  Belochea  i  od  the  south,- that 
of  the  Speen  Tere^ ;  and  on  the  east*  the  range  of  Solimaiin  and 
tome  of  the  little  countries  at  ita'baifl^  whidi  have  been  already  de^ 
•cribed.  The  whole  forms  a  square  of  about  a  hundred  miles. 
■  The  west  of  the  Cauker  country  is  mountMnoitt. '  Its  most  distin- 
guishing feature  appears  to  be  the  range  which  I  have  mentioned  as 
running  north  and  south  between  longitude  68'  cast,  and  longitude 
6^)  oast.  West  of  that  ranfrc.  the  iirst  ]ilace  in  the  Cauker  country, 
coming  from  ilic  aortli,  is  Setoona  Daug  (a  high,  cold,  and  barren 
plain,  suited  only  to  pasturajjc)  aiul  ihe  Cauker  part  of  Toba,  which, 
thougii  more  mountainous,  piDbahly  resembles  the  part  already  d&. 
scribed  as  belonging  to  the  Atchikzyes.  Further  srnith,  this  high 
plain  ceas^  but  there  are  mauv  vallevs  in  the  hills,  and  l  or  Alurgha, 
Burshore,  Nareen,  Togy  e,  and  iiuima,  are  particularly  conspicuous 
among  those  which  open  to  the  west.  Still  further  south,  the  hills  in 
queation  are' only  aeparated  from  the  taUe  land.crf'  Edant  by  the  oar- 
■ow  valley  of  Bolaon.  The  valley  of  Burahore  deaervea  nuxe  part^ 
Golar  mention* 

It  commeneea  at  Uie  aonroe  of  the  Loim  and  aooompamea  that  river 

10 


Digitized  by  Google 


:  *  J  ^AWU  .'440 

■ftnitty  of  Tobxn  tiie  iMigth»  and*  the  mountams  <wi  the  sbaiiL  Tllie 
upper  part  of  it  is  namm  and  filled  with  thickets,  but  the  lower  part 
is  fertile*  inhabited  bj  «n  agneoUunfl  |MOfile»  and  abounding  in  all 
liMi  |itoduce  of  Khorassaiii :  were  it  not  poasesaed  by  a  different  tribe* 
one  would  be  diaposed  to  wwiilBr  H  im  port  ^  Feaheen,  Geam  whidk 
district  it  has  no  natural  separation.  The  ralley  of  Hunna  opens  into 
Rlifiwl.  Its  head  is  near  the  Cotul  or  pass  of  rinippui,  whcPB  .the 
road  crosses  over  a  very  high  ridge  into  Zawura. 

Shawl  itself  deserves  some  notice  in  this  place,  m  it  is  inhabited  bv 
a  tribe  of  Cankers  called  Cassye  ;  but,  a.s  i(  was  ^^rantcd  by  Ahmed 
Shauii  to  Nusseer  Khaun  the  Prince  of  Beloclu  s,  tor  his  service  at 
the  siege  of  Tubbus,  it  is  no  longer  to  be  considered  as  part  of  the 
Afghaun  country.  It  resembles  Pisheen,  but  excels  it  in  fertility. 
The  Cassyes  are  under  the  Beloche  government,  but  tliey  ha¥e~A 
KhauH  of  their  own,  and  are  weU  treated  and  flouriBhing.  i£-aa^ 
oUier  T«lle>  b  open  td'  liie  wM;  iSbey  m  aeitlier  dartnigDSiiioil  iif 
tfaflir  inhaUtntSf  nor  'fbr  tlie  passage  of  iwub  thtdi^  HHBif  -bat 
cnly  iflbid  a  wmter  letiwt  to  the  €niker  dieplMnb. 

.  To  te  eNt»  Um  nMantrim  of  68^  kngltuds  Mid  -oiit  iMriiwIigi 
«rliMh  diride  Ibc  gMte  put  of      tiMt  ii^^ 
flie  wage  of  ftiBmiinn. 

One  TMige  appem  to  nm  to  die  eonth  of  Zbobe,  ind  to  dh 
flouiitry  from  Borae^  but  I  do  not  bdiofe  it  reaches  any  of  the 
branofaak'of  CbUnunm.  Another  nrns  to  the  south  of  Boree,  divides 
it  for  a  oertun  extent,  from  Zawura,  Tull,  and  Chooteeallee,  and 
foima  aottthcm  limit  of  the  Caukers.  To  the  south'  of  Zewiira,  . 
Toll,  and  Chooteeallee,  a  broad  belt  of  hills  certainly  stretdiea  across 
from  the  range  of  68  '  to  tbat  of  Solimaim.  and  forms  the  bounduj  of 
Aighannistaun  on  the  side  oi  8eeweestaun.  .  . 

I  h;isti}y  review  the  districts  included  between  these  range8« 
begiiininr,'  [rom  the  soulh,  and  stretching  north  till  I  again  meet  the 
known  countries  of  the  Ghiljies  and  Dooraunees.  But  before  I  enter 
the  mountains,  it  will  be  proper  to  mention  the  Cauker  dmi  oi  Pun- 

3  M 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


450  TULL  CHOOTEEALLEE. 

iM0^  who  inhibli  fleewee  in  the  phttm  of  fleewcqHnin i  dmiedfron 
the  reit  of  the  tribe  by  moantMni  and  Bekdm,  the  jnTctente 
enemiei  of  ibe  Ctuher  name. 

Seewee  it  entered  by  m  trwreOer  fiom  Dander,  in  the  course  of  hit 
Arrt  merdi  to  the  navthward.  It  is  »flat>d7plaiiiofhaidciiiedck  rt 
but  in  some  pbces  its  natural  defects  are  fdieved  by  streams  from  the 
hil!s.  and  round  tHe  town  of  Seewee  at  least,  is  hi^y  cultivated. 
The  fnanees  Btill  form  part  of  the  Afghaun  nationt  and  aie  mder  a 
governor  appointed  by  the  King.  It  would  be  ciarious  to  ascertain 
the  causes  which  have  sent  them  to  this  spot,  and  which  have  filled 
the  southern  provinces  of  India  with  men  of  the  Punnee  clan,  whose 
emigration  (from  tlie  ppriod  when  thw  fi^^ure  in  the  hiBtory  of  the 
Deckan)  must  have  {-.iko)  place  some  liundred  years  ago. 

Tln'  inotintains  to  tlir  tiortii  of  Seewee  are  inhnfiitctl  by  Beloches 
(as  are  the  southern  parts  oftlie  rauire  of  Solimaun),  but  in  the  hills 
to  the  south  of  Chooleealltie,  w  c  tiud  some  independent  Afnrhauns, 
principally  composed  of  the  remains  of  the  tribe  of  Lonee,  whii  li  ui 
one  period  made  a  great  figure  in  the  transactions  of  India.  1  he 
history  of  the  Dilazauks  may  throw  some  light  on  the  fortunes  of  this 
tribe,  and  it  is  mnarkable,  that  most  of  the  tribes  of  A%haan8  who 
have  andeatly  beea  distinguished  in  India,  haive  nearly  diaa|>peaKed 
fiom  iheb  native  ooimtiy.  It  is  natoial  to  conchide  tfasft  tii^  havie 
mt  merely  poai»d  Ibith  thdur.  xednmlant  popuktion  (aa  the  Em^es 
ha«e  mote  .leoently.  done  into  Bcdiilwind),  bnt  have  been  driyen  fiom 
thair  originai  seats,  and  compelled  to  enter  on  the  adrentuses  to  ^ihich 
ttagr  nwB  their  lepulatint  abroad 

Zsamia^.TiiUt  and  Chooteeallee  msj^be  oensidened'  as  one  vaUqr 
wdmaaaifU  last  into  a  plain.  Zsiinira,  the  nppet-pait  of  Hbm  wtSkifi 
comasences  near  ChiipiMK  and  to  the  noilih  east  ef  Boahiik.  It  is  st 
first  confined  between  the  mountama^  but  soon  expands  sufficieaSt^ 
to  admit  of  a  degrae  of  cukivatioii»  sod  tmsk  of  one  or  two  vary  con* 
sider^le  villages. 

TuU  is  still  wider, .  and  the  cessation  of  the  hills  which  bounded  ii 
eathe  north,  aUowa  ^  plama  of  fiorae  and  CbootaeaUee  to  woat^ 

fi    .  ■ 


u\^ui^c6  by  Google 


^OBE.  4gl 

The  nil  of  TnU  md  QMwIeedlM  qpfwan  to  -feMRiiAilietlii^'Of  Soft* 
wM»  but  tlie  dimate  ig  nuve  finrourable^  andtheciiltivirtaoii  vh  pflv» 
hiq^  mora  flBDtMulsdp 

Boree  is  frequently  comgmtedf  both  in  extent  and  fertility,  to  the 
plain  of  FeehawOT :  I  hare  no  oppostmiity  of  judging  of  the  justice 
of  the  comparison ;  but  it  may  be  preaomod  that  Boree  is  fertile  and 
well  cultivated,  as  it  is  certainly  populous,  and  inhabited  entirely  by 
husbandmen.  A  considerable  stream  runs  through  Boree  towards 
the  south-west,  and  the  land  is  wrttcrnd  bv  some,  other  brooks,  and 
bv  a  considerable  niinil)er  ot"  Cahreezes.  The  productions  of  the 
country,  and  ihe  manners  oi  the  pcojilc  arc  still  the  «iame  as  have 
been  described  in  Kboraasaun, .  though  the  dr^  begins  to  resemblQ 
that  of  India.  ' 

Between  the  hills  to  the  north  of  Boree,  and  those  on  the  68th 
line  of  longitude,  is  Hindoo  Baugh,  the  source  of  the  river  Zhobe. 
From  this  place  the  Zhobe  pursues  a  north-easterly  course,  till  it 
joins  the  Ciomul  at  Sirmaugha.  I  imagine  the  Zhobe  to  be  at  first  a 
small  brook  in  a  narrow  valley ;  it  never  becomes  a  considerable 
str^un,  but  in  m  eaily  part  of  its  course  it  dividea  an  estandre  plain 
ihomkHng  in  twattisk,  partially  eii]lifa4ed«  and  prodncing  wbei^ 
berley,  rice,  and  aome  otfaev  gininB  $  but  principally  grran  op  to  pa#n 
turage»  and  scattered  with  large  and  nmnecoua  campa  of  AepberdAi 
Some  eeeomitih  indeed,  represent  the  whole  of  thelnfaabitenta  m 
Vmag  in  tents }  while  ollien  deacribe  a  iintile  traot»  ooTeied:^itli 
eukivfltion  and  viUagea;  md dieae  appaient  oontiadidiooa  caA  'onlj 
be  feconciled,  by  sappoong  Uiem  to  applj  to  difleMOt  peita  Ihia 
wtaniivB  diitncta 

The  lamer  course  of  the  Zhobe  is  through  the  barren  mountains 
which  surroimd  the  Gomul,  and  which  are  all  connected  with  the 
irai^  of  Sqlimaun.  The  veUey  of  the  Zhobe  ki  peohebly  bounded 
on  the  north,  by  the  range  of  hiUa  which  X  coppoie  to  finm.the 
BOttthem  limit  of  Seeoona  Daugh. 

Tlie  space  included  between  the  border  of  Zhobe,  that  of  Boree, 
and  the-iii^  o£  Sc^imaQn^  alfcrds  room  ior  the  koda  of  the  Huneer 

S  M  2 


Digrtized  by  Google 


WESTERN  CAUKEKa 


lull  snd  EMte  OMifcitB. 

Hie  hills  through  all  the  Couker  countiy  are  appnpiiatadto  thfl 
numercKiis  thefdiMpdai  aadthoBe  to  the  of  the  countij,  to  often 
■Uiided  to,  o(»itain  many  villerfB  and  little  jpAakoB,  of  viliidi  some  aie 
wdl  cnltnrated,  but  most  are  occupied  fay  purtntal  campa. 

In  so  large  a  tribe  as  the  Caukers,  we  can  scarce  expect  unifomiity 
of  manners,  and  the  le«^H  ho  ns  they  are  divided  into  at  least  ten 
cJans,  many  ot  which  are  a^iain  hroken  into  numberless  intlepLiident 
•^ocietie'?  ;  and  there  is  no  eitiaent  chief  of  the  whole  tribe.  The 
Cnukers  of  Hurshoic  so  closely  resem hie  the  Tereens,  that  it  is  un- 
necessary to  make  any  turtiier  observation  concerning  them ;  but  no 
other  part  of  the  tribe  that  I  know,  In  ars  an  exact  resemblance  to 
any  of  these  which  have  been  described ;  an  accomit  of  a  district  m 
the  w^t,  and  another  of  one  in  the  east,  with  some  observations  on 
tkeilntemedHite*''GlaBi}  will,  howevec,  fflve  a  swilcicftf.  idea .  of  .their 

Cuachogjhty  M  anmowTilley.hk  tfaeweitam  &oe  of  tfwmonn* 
tMD  pf  Kond. ;  Hie  8oilJflibtile»  and'in  OMMt  ptfta  well  onll'mnlid 
b  spring,  the  ^olB.Ta]k>^.ud.die  'iMyohsiiig  U]k.nBe'  gnoi^  ad 
eofterad  with  ilowen^  and  the  mhabHaato  ara  hanfy  emftkijrad  till 
4he  end  of  aatn^nn>  in  the  .cultivatioB  of  .two  haiumlB,  ttni  In  iho 
dure  of  ^eir  ^leep  and  eattle ;  but  in  winter  a  final  of  three  months, 
and  an  occasional  fortn^ht  of  motri  oUige  ihcin  to  ^■F^'f^y  in  tha 
Vtual  idleness  of  the  season. 

'  ^'flhe  little  valley  of  Ciuichogbye  by  degrees  expands  ta  ftlMttsider-^ 
able  extent,  and  stretches  towards  the  south-west,  for  upwards  of 
thirty  miles.  The  wide  part  of  the  valley  (which  is  no  longer  called 
by  its  original  name),  contains  some  villages  of  forty  or  fifVy  houses, 
round  which  there  is  a  (tood  deal  of  cnhivation ;  but  the  greater  p^t 
q£  it  is  occupied  by  fehe[)iierds  and  tiieir  tlocks. 

All  the  inhabitants  ibrni  part  of  the  clan  of  Sunnateea,  the  pos- 
sessitms  ot  which  extend  along  the  western  frontier  of  the  Cankers, 
ifom  Zawura  to  Seeoona  Daugb<    This  large  division  is  under  one 


Digitized  by  Google 


DESTRUCTION  OF  A  BELOCHE  ABMT*  45^ 

cUef^  ivbo  enjoys  a  very  ampb  sutlwrit^  o?er  lu»  dani  or  ct'lmat 
over  di»  put- of  it  in  tlie  aeighboiirhiood  of  Goiibhoghje ;  liib  oim 
•ait  18  at:  Oorgm,  two  marchai  Bxm  that  p]aoe»  iad'  itill  noOMr  to 
dieaoiireeof  llie  Zhoiie^  Hispoiiveit  arapriiiGiiMdly  dnivad  'ftaia 
file  King*  The  gmndfatheif  of  tba  pvMent  Kliaii!i>  bdng  wdnoed  t^ 
gnat  dirtwitt  ftom  tlia  ■ggteniom  of  llie  Tae&o$t  ini  froA  t|ia 
tMMi  and  huidxNrdiiiatjon  of  his  own  dknemcai,  nwolv«d  to  appeal  to 
iUmied  Shauh,  and  presented  himself  before  him  (as  he  was  hunting 
Oil  Toba),  with  fire  on  his  haad,  th»  aymbol  of  oKtiaoie  diaCiaai 
among  some  Asiatic  nations.  * 

Tho  Siauh  instantly  listened  to  his  complaint,  issued  a  Rokkum 
commanding  obedience  to  his  orders,  and  sent  a  small  body  of  troops 
into  the  country  of  the  Tereens.  That  tribe  immediately  forbore  its 
attacks,  and  thp  Simnutees,  impressed  with  respect  for  the  royal 
Cffders,  and  peilia])s  alarmed  at  the  iieii^hboui  liood  of  the  troops,  sub- 
mitted to  the  aut  hority  of  their  Khauii,  which  iiis  successes  have  been 
abh^  t(i  maintain  unimpaired  to  this  day.  Their  power,  however,  is 
perhaps  confined  to  the  northern  part  of  their  clan  ;  ibr  Tahmas 
Kliaun.  a  subordinate  chief  in  the  south,  has  so  far  surpassed  them 
in  his  actions  and  reputation,  that  it  is  improbable  that  he  still  sub» 
mita  to  dependence  on  their  authority.  .\  .  '  '  ■  • 
-  Tlus  warlike  chief  principally  obtained  hk  H^iiaaikn  hy^lSm  soo* 
ooM  ofiaw-with:  dm^Bilocliaa,-  had  baep  aiaqMfalad.bjtiia 
bofdv  iacnnianak  liad  Umg  mibtmlmA  ^Mtwean  them  ^aaa 

tlMr  OsAmi  to  attad'that  tribe  m  a  aMumer  iriiiaii  gne  Ihs  fmptiiai* 
tioathaiippteaitttof  a  jnatioiudi^^  SixibQapndBdooheiiwm 
aaaemMed  at  6hawl  by  the  ordeit  of  Nnaaeer  Khagqi^.  the  jMnoa  cf 
the  BabtlMi}  mAM  Canhen^  aUp«Bd alrihii  aeMi  mwmm  xe> 


'*  Tfefepradiee  iiwdl  known  to  dl  who  ai^  aH|iisliiiill  Wth  tbe  ctutoms  of  Cob- 

•tsntinople,  ««  a  crrtnin  method  of  pnTcurinrr  an  andience  of  the  Grant!  S<»ipn!oT4 
The  A^Muin.  explain  it  to  impiy  that  tbe  misery  of  the  petituwer  is  as  great  as  if 
bo  wen  aclnaUy  plujiged  ia 


Digrtized  by  Google 


MANNEBSk 


tind  with  lliair  flodw  to  DoBbukb,  *  atony  plaiiiy  alwtod  on  the 

h^hest  part  of  tho  moimtiiirut  wait  of  Zawura,  dtflBcult  of  laoenl  ia 

all  places,  and  on  most  sides  surrounded  by  inaccowible  precipices. 
'JUa/t  Beloches,  aware  of  the  strength  of  this  place  on  the  side  of  Shawl, 
proceeded  up  the  valley  of  Hunna,  crossed  the  lidge  of  .loog^ 
tude,  passed  through  Zawura,  and  advanced  up  a  narrow  vallqr, 
which  afforded  the  only  practicable  route  to  Dozhukh.  Tahmas 
Khaun  allowed  them  to  advance  till  tliey  reached  the  last  steep 
ascent,  when  they  were  surrounded,  att!it  ked,  and  cut  off  ahoost  to.A 
man,  with  i  auiieb  Khaun,  their  commander. 

However  he  may  be  regarded  by  Talnnas,  the  chiel  <  >i'  the  Sunna- 
tees  exercises  great  ;uit  lu)i  it  \  over  tlie  rest  of  his  clan ;  lie  deiives  no 
regular  revenue  from  it,  but  wiieu  iie  coiuca  lu  a  village,  he  receives 
presents,  which  arc  sometimes  valuable ;  and,  a^j  he  neither  lives  in 
my  state,  nor  haa  any  hired  soldiers,  these  perquisites,  with  the  pro-* 
daeo  0^  lii>  own  Indsi  wn  ifaundttidy'safficienl  to  iMmtMn  Unii 
As  the  Sutmofceei  have  now  no  fereign  wars,  and  u  they  pay  no 
iBvnau^  and  have  not  fi»  eome  yean  been  called  on  ht  thaur.een* 
thigent  of  hoiae  by  the  King,  the  eKeKiae'of.lheir  duefs  poweAi 
u  confined  to  the  admhiiiMion  of  jufltioe. 

The  adgiMtment  of  the  leas  aerioua  diputea  ia  left  to  the  Mnilik.flf 
the  yiUage»  who  haa  here  gtcot  powers,  and  can  inflict  any  poniab- 
Btmk  abort  of  death ;  hot  u  all  bia  pfooeedingi,  be  moat,  bm  the 
aupport  of  the  eldara  of  the  vilbige ;  and  he  never  attempts  to  take 
aiiy  step  of  consequenoe^  without  the  coiu  umnoe  of  a  Jeiigai  Ihe 
MuUik  of  Cunchogfayeieoeivea  a  fixed  aUowanee  of  gnin  ftem  eveiy 
nian  in  the  village. 

-  Under  so  strong  a  government,  it  is  natural  that  there  should  be 
little  strife;  and  the  few  frays  that  take  place,  never  lead  to  the  em- 
ployment of  any  mortal  weapon.  Tliefl  and  rapine  arc  hardiv  c^cr 
known,  the  disposition  ot  the  people  is  peaceable,  and.  (to  use  die 
expression  of  a  Qiuker  to  me)  they  eiyoy  their  own,  and  are  con^ 
tent.  •      ,  ■  ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


EASrrBlM  CAUKEB& 

-Hm*  Aephoedt  mar  Cancfaoghjs  we  aartteged  ir  snail  canip»  of 
Ibnr  or  fiTO  tentii  sirarte  wideialkgr,  and  the  neighboiuing  laO* 
Jn  ■ome  iiwiiwn,  Aiey  ara  conapeUed  bj-  ftihne  of  dio  babage  to 
mutoha^hagBtemagn,  andtoaaofotoAo-eoiBitfy  of  other'tribttT) 
ninfe  in  ihair  feattarecl  Me,  a  niioie-  maaap  nt^  oontaiiia  a  aiiigk 
fiumljt  and  they  have  much  leiiiire,  no  restraint,  no  gOFemment,  aid 
yet  no  criaiMk 

The  dresB,  nunnacSf  and  cntooaa  of  Cuncboj^yo  diftp  'mi»il&' 
wpetib  fnm  those  of  the  wiMer  fiarta  of  the  Doofaunee  country ;  itnd 
they  are  said  to  be  the  same  which  obtain  throughout  all  the  wwtleru 
dans  of  the  Cankers.  I  shall  illustrate  the  state  of  tba  eastern  Cani- 
Iters,  by  a  short  account  of  Boree. 

The  extent  and  fertility  of  thi*;  plain,  and  tho  temperate  cliinate 
which  it  enjoys,  have  already  hem  noiiredj  and  ifi  a.s  I  am  informe^^ 
even  the  sheep  are  fed,  Jiot  on  «  astes,  but  on  the  fallow  lands,  culti« 
vatioQ  must  have  made  as  much  progress  as  it  can  well  attain.    '  * 

The  produce  is  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  the  western  tonntries ; 
Euiopeau  truits  are  still  commoDf  but  madder  and  clover  are  not 
grown,  and  lucerne  is  rare. 

Except  that  camcb  are  very  scarce,  the  animals  are  the  tttine  as 
ifaoas  ctfihewMt  • 
'  llie  infaabkanto  live  in  yiUagea  of  tMoed  h0uaea»  an^ 
during  the  aummer  into  Cooddotda,  pitefaed  at  e'ahotft  diaCanee  iioiii 
tiwirviUagas  the  dueft  live  mlittiee^^ 
•  Thedieaaof  Aemcn  ia  atOla  caneeaai  bat di^weariilooi^ 
tnrbanv.  iaatead  of  a  aap^  thtovr  .another  kongee  Ovier  th«ir.  aboiddm 
and  wear  pointed  dioea»  like  those  of  India :  sheepaktn  and  felt 
doaka  are  extremely  uncommon.   Theb  manners  and  amnaementa 
are  tfaoae  of  the  west 

There  are  twelve  independent  communities  in  Boree,  though  the 
people  are  all  of  one  subdivision  of  the  dan  of  Sauraun.  Each  of 
these  has  several  viUages,  which  are  under  separate  Mooshirs,  and 
apparently  unconnected  with  the  chief  ctf  the  wholes  except  wh^  all 
are  united  by  a  war. 


Digitized  by  Google 


' ^  . CAUKBRa 


• .  Tim  iiHiigW  mt  btel  il  ww  tnlamg  Ukuammtim ;  ihey  ■omedmes 
Vriftt  their  disputes  to  an  umpiret  but  oftener  to  the  arbitration  of  di^ 
iirord.  EveA  within  the  viUigeb  Ihe  Mooshk  exercifles  bat  littie 
MnO^:  he  would  call  a  Jeirga  to  settle  sdiipBte  which  haftpaidl 
iMfV-  him>  but  at  »  little  diiUnce  thmgi '«»  left  to  tdie  didr 
ix>ttise. 

The  other  divisions  of  the  Caukers  probably  resemble  those  of 
Cunchoghyfe  or  Boree,  as  the}'  arc  nearest  the  east  or  west ;  but  in 
the  central  parts  of  fhc  country,  they  are  much  ruder  than  eithf>r. 
There,  they  wear  a  short  tlfwe  jacket,  and  breeches  of  felt  in  wm((  r, 
and  in  «iuniiiiei  naked  from  the  middle  upwards.  Tliis  would  not 
ho  reckoiied  exlraordinarv  in  India,  but,  as  it  is  contrary  to  the 
notions  ui  dectjncy  entertained  by  the  Afghauns,  it  must  among 
dicm  be  regarded  as  a  proof  of  a  great  want  of  civilization. 

la  some  places,  the  Caukers  are  said  to  live  in  caves,  like  the 
Khyberees,  but  even  th^e  they  are  entirely  destitute  of  the  pre« 
datory  spirit  of  the  tabt^  which  they  raiemble  m.  th»  widencss  of 
their  hebhwdonlb  Ir  Aottpicis,  Ike  AejfiiBiaa,*^'^^  me^  matk 
anmeKNifl  then  the  hnabmdnieiit  ere  acirfAfliedl  in' lifede camps,  .M.m 
the  weit,  hut  m  Zhdbe  they  areeeid  to  ewriehln  in  eienpa*  iai;ge 
enough  to  be  described  as  towns  of  tents.  Thoe  Uie^  aie  abo  miA 
to  keep  elniott  ai  nanjr'OKfla  ae  dheep,  and^  if  ib,  they  taiiiMttuitj 
jnf^^w^  ^  mtfa^t^f^  h«r4ftw<fi  ^  .A^i^ffmiffifnm,   Oft  die  wimUi 

llw  greater  part  of  the  Gnlher  ooiinti^  ia  flBOontauioiti  and  unftftilet 
mm!  inhahitaBti  are  duplivday  rode  in  ihnt  niannetat  jgn<w 
iwl  of  die  M  of  liie  I  hot  OBipk^  peMUcb  and  1^ 


Digrtized  by  Google ; 

I 


CHAP.  VL 

TKB  NAtrSSBBS. 

ALL  the  tiibes  who  have  as  yet  been  considered,  posseij*  some 
.  comsXxy  of  ibjsai  own,  the  positiaiL  of  which  has  decided  the  order 
in  which  i^ssy  were  to  be  mentkmed}  but  tihe  Nimnw  have  no 
Ind  It  ■]]»  ud  wB^areleft  at  Uberty  to  pbca  'tiiem  wketmr  it  nuts 
omr  oninreiueno&  Tbej  ve  ftrirfy  liwrii^giiiilind  frnm  Hn.  «tlHi 
tribwHby  tiiwr  windnring  life^  to  iddch  mytobwrvitioni  dudl,  tboe* 
ibi^  b6  oonfimd* ' 

fpriiMf  w6  find  them  icettend-  in  nertift  €£  tiiiMi  finuv  or  five 
tnt%  OFttP  tfw  Tfudtot  In  tibe  oonnlriet  of  the  To1dieee*end  "ffftttiTbtms 
I^rtsr  in  liie  year,  thej  aaiembVe  m  ctmiw  of  (me  or  two  hundred  teat^ 
move  about  by  abort  stages  in  quest  of  grass  for  their  flocks ;  and  a« 
soon  as  the  antomn  begins  to  dose,  they  hold  their  coundlii  strike 
their  tent%  and  aet  off  on  their  kng  mtgrationa  to  the  warm  plahia 
of  Damaun. 

Thb  tribe  marches  through  the  hostile  country  of  the  Vizecrces, 
in  two  divisions;  and  it  is  settled  bv  the  Khnun,  and  the  Alooshir.s, 
which  is  to  march  first.  The  rendezvous  tor  each  di\  isioii  is  at  Kun- 
soor  on  the  Ciomul,  to  which  place  all  the  liordes  direct  their  march 
from  their  different  Eiiauks  in  Khorassaun.  In  the  begiiinino;  ol  this 
march,  they  pass  through  barren  wilds,  where  they  see  iiobotlv  but 
their  own  companions  j  but  as  they  approach  Kunzoor,  the  ruads  are 
choked  with  other  hordes  flocking  irom  various  and  distant  stations, 
to  the  rendezvous.  Gnat  craifusion  now  ansea  j  two  hovdei  whidi 
anat  wv,  are  often  cranded  togethv  in  on^^nanow  valley,  and 
aow  qaamib.a»  alio  opcagioiMd  by  the  in^wtiwiqB  of  difiheBBt-]iai^ 

8m 


Digitized  by  Google 


458  BATTLES  WITH' THE  VIZEERBEa 

de^  to  get  first  through  the  passes  in  the  hills.  At  last  they  join  the 
confused  mass  of  tents,  men,  aad  c«ttle»  which  are  heaped  together 

at  Kun/oor. 

The  whole  fmsemblage  aniouiiLs  to  more  than  thirtv  thousand  peo- 
ple, with  all  their  numberless  floeki>  and  iierds  of  c  aim  and  indeed 
with  all  their  pot^^e&siuns.  The  bustle  and  disorder  ol  such  a  throng 
Miav  well  be  conceived,  ■ 

ljurmg  the  day,  they  issue  forth  in  swarms  to  search  for  forage  and 
fire-wood ;  and  at  nightfall,  these  unfrequented  valleys  resound  with 
^  oomfiiMd  voieet.of  die  mnltitade^  the  bleating  aad'laving  of 
tfaeir  floclcs  and  heids*  the  bosne  roar  of'  the  esmelf  and  die  ahouia 
Mid  aongs  of  the  Nanaaeia. 

When  the  ididle  division  is  assembled^  CUwaditoeBeie  appouitedl» 
and  they  renew  their  pxogress  towaidB  Damaiin. 

Ihe  Viaeeieeiy  in  the  mean  dm^' are  peqpaiing  Ibr  their  reeeption 
wtdi  all  the  cautKRi  and  secrecy-  of  savage  war:'  th«r  dans  sie  aa- 
in  the  d^|>ths  of  the  mountains^  and  a  single*  scout,  perliaps» 
watches  on  the  brow  of  a  rock,  and  listens  in  the  sUence  of  that  deso- 
late region,  for  the  hum  of  the  approaching  crowd,  till,  at  length, 
the  Naussers  are  heard,  and  the  valleys  are  filled  with  the  stream  of 
men  and  flocks  that  pours  down  the  bed  and  banks  of  the  GomuL 
The  word  is  then  passed  round  to  the  Vizeefees,  who  liasten  to  the 
defiles  by  paths  known  only  to  themselves,  and  attack,  the  di^rderly 
crowds  or  lie  in  ambusli  to  cut  off  the  stragglers,  accordinnr  to  tlu*  re- 
missness or  vigilance  they  observe  among  then  eniMiuL-s,  Durnig  this 
time  of  danger,  which  lasts  a  week  or  ten  days,  tlie  Naussers  are  in 
ail  uijubuai  state  of"  ]>reparation  ;  the  power  of  the  Chchvashtees  sup- 
presses all  feuds,  and  arranges  the  order  of  march,  and  the  means  of 
defence ;  the  whole  division  movc»  in  a  body ;  parties  of  chosen  men 
protect' the. fipont,  the  flanha,  and  the  rear,  whDe  die  otfwT'Naunen 
dfttre.oii  die  sheep  and  camaSs,  and  hold  thonaelvee ready  t04a]»el 
any  .attack  that  may  be:  made*  by  their  enemies.  They  had  nee^ 
Indeed* 'to  be  prepared,' ftr-'die '  pradatosy  dispoaidoii  of  die  • 
ViMMas..ift  diarpeaed  .bjii  long  emBityi       thej  gjffe-no-qoif* 


Digitized  by  Google 


'    1CA1INE1E&  <-  459 

t&t  to  any  Nsusser  thit  .&Ub  into  their  hands.  .  At  length  idiejr 
neach  the  pass  of  Zirkunny,  issue  out  into  the  phuns,  and  are  spread 
over  the  whole  of  Dam  aim  from  the  frontier  of  Upper  Sind  to  the 

hills  of  the  Murwiits.  Each  horde  bus  a  particular  tract  where; it  is 
accustomed  to  encamp,  and  round  v^hich  it  ranges  aa  the  supply  of 
forage  requires.  Thev  en  cam  |)  in  t  lit  los,  within  which  they  shut  up 
their  catt  le  at  iii^liL  i  heir  lite  is  now  idle  and  unvaried,  except  when 
eniiveneti  by  huuting,  which  they  keenly  pursue,  and  whicli  is  ahnost 
their  only  active  euiployment.  The  Wduien  do  all  die  lalxjur,  pitch 
the  tents,  gather  the  wood,  bring  in  water,  and  cook  the  dinner : 
the  men  only  saunter  out  with  the  sheep  and  camels,  and  for  this 
labour  a  very  few  men  suffice.  The  rich  hire  out  their  cattle  during 
their  long  halts,  but  tl^  owner  -majkes  over  the  duty  of  accompany-^ 
ing  them  tQ  aome  poor  maOt  who  geU  a  tihinL  of  the'  luie'for  kk 
'hboixr. 

aie  nerer  concealed;  bat  the  .aame  ohastHj  and 
modesty  whieh'diatinguiak  all  rude  tribes  is 
.  IVhen  the  maw  ha»  melced  on  Solomon's  ymme^'  the  chief  of  the 
Namser  camps  sand  to  the  Khaim  of  the  wbole»  to  &c  a  time  for  e 
ooondl:  on  the  appcnnted  day  thejeUNpatrto  his  cam^  detennina 
tiieir  roote,  appoint  Chelwashtees»  and  soon  after  bnak  up  iheir 
camps,  and  commence  their  return  to  Kboraasaun. 

The  Nanssem,  as  has  been  seen,  depend  entirely  on  their  flocks 
and  herds :  the  fleeces  of  thmr  sheep  supply  the  materials  for  theti 
tents,  their  carpets,  and  the  sadcs  which  hold  their  flour :  their  pos- 
teens,  and  some  other  articles  are  made  of  sheep-skins :  the  milk  oi 
the  ewe  afibrds  the  cheese,  butter,  and  oooroot,  which  is  their  usual: 
diet,  and  its  flesh  is  their  only  luxury. 

The  produce  of  their  sheep,  and  the  hire  of  their  camels,  also 
furnish  the  means  t)f  obtaiinng  the  few  articles  they  require  from 
without  ;  and  the  cnrrin^rc  of  their  tents  and  other  property,  which  is 
so  material  to  wandcrinL,'  <>pli ,  is  entirelv  ]>erfonned  by  tlie  camels. 
Their  shee]i  and  camels  are  extremely  numerous,  and  every  part  of 
their  economy  ia  adaptfid>tO;tbe  moving.  Uie  whioh     occessfycy  to. 

3  N  2 


Digrtized  by  Google 


.460    ckviasa  of  theib  waamiQ  a  free  government. 


feed  such  a  number  of  animals  :  their  tents  are  siu.ill  aiul  Hjl;IiL  :  tlieit 
whole  property  ib  a  suit  or  two  of  clothes,  a  lew  sacks  of  iiour,  witli 
half' a.  dozen  earthen  poU,  and  one  or  two  of  brass. 

Their  dress  i.h  between  those  of  the  cast,  and  the  west ;  but  their 
loose  white  turban  seems  to  make  it  most  resemble  the  former.  < 

In  their  persons  they  are  small,  black,  and  ugly :  they  ne  buha> 
nous  m  their  .manners,  toad  rude  and  squalid  in  th^  general  i^pear* 

■ 

lliey  are,,  holrerer,  a  ranarkably  honest  and  harmless  people. 

They  an  lecbmed  . to  amount.  DD  12,000  ftnufies.  Tbeirgo«eni» 
mcnt  leaemfolea  thait  of  die  independent  tribes,  a  dNumstnesr  idncb 
at  fitist  exeitea  aome  suiprise  in  a  people  entirely  pastoral ;  but  nbasb 
is  perfwpa  to  be  aooounted  iixr  by  tbe  peeuliartey  of  thssr  sitnatieni 
The  eSbiBt of peatomJ  habita  in  inlzoducing  despotic pow,  haa'lq^g 
been  observed  by  writers  on  tbe  bistoiy  oif  human  society,  and  dwir 
opimons  have  been  strengthened  by  the  example  of  almost  aU  the 
tribes  of  ancient  Sc^thia  and  modem  Tartaiy  $  but  thia  ebeervadoOi 
and  the  reasonings  of  the  authors  who  support  it,  appear  to  be 
derived  from  the  practice  of  countries  entirely  pastoral,  inhabited  fay 
aeteral  distinct  and  indepmdent  liationA,  where  the  simultaneous 
increase  of  the  flocks  'of  diiSerent  tribes  baaipeb.eadi  to  extend  its 
limits,  and  leads  to  wars,  which  oblige  each  tribe  to  encamp  and 
march  in  a  body,  and  to  secure  the  co-operetioii  of  all  its  parts  by 
implicit  sTihmission  to  a  common  head.  These  reasons  do  not  exist 
in  ft  tribe  ji laced  in  a  kingdom  chiefly  inhabited  by  hiisbanclinr n,  nnd 
fet  diiio;  its  flocks  on  waste  laiuls  at  a  ilij>tance  from  liiose  adapted 
to  agriculture ;  and  for  this  n  ason  perhaps  it  is  that  we  find  the 
Naussers  enjoving  the  same  lil)erty  as  most  of  the  other  Afghauns. 
The  established  government,  and  the  habits  of  the  nation  secure  their 
peace,  so  that  when  stationary  they  scatter  over  an  extensive  tract, 
according  to  the  inclination  of  ^ich  individual,  and  live  almost  entirely 
free  from  the  restraint  of  govienunent,  while  the  temporary  appoiutmeot 
of  a  liaiciwashtee  ia  aofieiint  to  providefer  llie  otd^ 
mudiM   'Che  actual  sitwrtion  of  the  chief  of  tbaKanssen  afpeaa  to 


Digrtized  by  Google 


0 


CAUSES  OF  THEIR  ENJOYING  A  FREE  GOVERNMENT.  4<jl 

ta»  to  affiird  proo&  of  the  trutli  of , this  rappodtion.  Wb^  the 
people  aie  collected  into  cunpi,  they  m  governed  by  their  own  « 
Mooshirs,  without  any  reference  to  the  Khaun,  and  whoi  they  aie 
•oattered  over  the  country,  they  subsist  without  any  government  at 
all ;  but  when  a  march  is  contemplated,  they  immediately  look  to 
the  Khaun,  and  where  they  have  to  pass  an  enemy's  country,  he  is 
appointed  head  of  the  Chelwashtees,  nssuines  an  absolute  authority, 
aiuJ  l)c(()mes  an  ohject  of  respect  and  anxiety  to  all  the  tribe.  A 
proot  of  the  important  •  of  the  Khaun  (hiiing  a  march,  is  shewn  by 
the  conduct  of  the  Naussers  at  one  time  when  Jurms  Khaun.  their 
present  chief,  reiiised  to  accompany  them  in  one  of  Iheir  migrations. 
He  was  anxious  to  remain  in  Damaun  with  200  or  300  of  his  rela- 
tions, to  assist  Surwur  Khaun  against  tiie  Vizeerees  ;  but  his  resolu- 
'  tion  occasioned  great  distress  in  the  tribe,  who  declared  it  was 
impossible  to  mardi  without  their  Khaun.  So  earnest  were  their 
representations,  that  Jnffus  was  at  hat  compelled  to  abandon  hia 
Ibrmerdesi^  oul  to  aooapipain  them.  on.  their  naioh  to  Xhoriuh 

aiUL  '*••»» '■••«•.  .t.- •<  "" 

•  Hie  JDunm*  and  aU  the  Mooaliifa  9rtt..deated  fiom  llie.  lie«d 
limiilliffy  and  woidd  be-d^poatd  if  foiiiid  fer  tlieiT'offiiotfib'  -  Thp 
MoIlilL  (or  Moaahir)  settlaa  aU  di8pote>,:«nd  en  cspal;  ao:  oj^ndiir 
die  camp  wtthdot  *  Jeii]ga'!  he  ia  ailao  .dbaolotetwllli  jjB^^vdta: 
movementa'aad'  atationa  of  the  camp;  hpt.  enj- Jwr^bK  fife  p^Ofdb 
maj  go  and adviae  him  on  diathead,  tifaom;^  if.he  ia<eaotyed»thiqr 
must  abide  by  hia  dadaiaB.  *  ' 

The  Naussera  pay  a  tax  to  the  Kii^g;  whioh  iaiat  jtteacnt  allotted  to 
Abdoevebeem  Khaam,  and  thia  cir(aunatBinel:i9pearB  to  counteil«nbe 
a  pretension  which  they  often  advance  to  a  connection  by  blood  with 
the  Hotukees.  The  Hotukees  say  that  the  Nausaen  have  been  their 
Humsauyahss,  but  not  their  kindred:  some  even  r^resent  them  as 
spnmg  from  the  Bcioches ;  and  thouf^h  they  speak  Pufihtoo,  and 
gtrentjoTi.sly  maintain  their  descent,  tVom  the  AfjL^hanns,  their  te^tuiCf 
and  appearance  certainly  indicate  a  laoe  distinct  hrom  that  nation.  - 


Digrtized  by  Google 


(  ) 


BOOK  IV. 

PROVINCE& 

CHAP.  1. 

■  9 

BULKH  OE  BACTBIA,  AND  THS  U8SEKS. 

# 

T  T  A VING  coanpleted  my  acoomnt  of  Alg^iniiiirtBuii,  IdnUdeMribt 
Uie  otha  provinces  and  dependencies  of  the  kiDgdom  of  Caubid 
Jsk  tMs  description  I  shall  preserve  the  order  in  which  they  stand 
geographically,'  that  relation  being  more  penmuunt  and  more  inte- 
ffcariiifl  to  the  read^  than  their-  fluctuating  connection  with  the 
Dboiimnee  goverhment.  On  this  principle  I  shall  b^in  fixnn  the 
nnrth,  and  after  describing  Bulkh,  shall  proceed,  by  the  Eimauks 
and  Hazaurehs,  to  Herat,  from  which  I  shall  pursue  a  south-easterly 
course,  through  Seestaun  and  Belochestaun,  to  Sind,  and  thence 
return  towards  the  north  till  I  k  (Vishmcer  and  the  countries 
which  connect  that  celebrated  valley  with  .the  lands  of  the  iierdoo- 
raunee  tribes. 

T  have  before  alluded  to  the  difficulty  oi  naming  the  A^haiui  }>ro- 
viuce  in  Toorkistaun.  Nor  is  it  easier  to  determine  the  extent  of 
the  country  which  ought  to  be  comf)rehcndcd  within  its  limits.  At 
present,  the  only  actual  jiosscibiou  of  the  Afghuuus  m  Toorkistaun 
is  the  district  immediaiely  round  Bulkh ;  but  the  possessor  of  tJiat 
city  has  always  been  considered  as  the  rightiiil  master  of  its  depend- 

II 


i^iyui^cd  by  Google 


bulkh; 


tedcB ;  wfaidi  tnolodD  the  trad  hsniig  the  Om  on  tfae'iuntli,  the 
miimntains  of  Hiiidoo  Coocth  and  BnopMniaiu  on'the  mmiIIi,  Bocbkk^ 
ahanii  on  the  €ait»  and  (genenlly  8peRk]]^)  'llie  dcnrt  on  the  weit.' 
The  eztent  of  thk  tfict  may  be  nmt  two  hundied  and  fifr^  mileB  in 
lei^di  (fimn  eaat  to  w^t),  and'fiom  a  hundred  to  a  hundred  and 
tweaty  niilet  in  breadth  (irom  nordi  to  south). 

The  southern  part  of  thia  country  is  full  of  hills,  connected  with 
Hindoo  Coosh.  These  are  gesierally  stony,  but  have  many  good  and 
well  watered  valleys.  The  neighbourhood  of  the  hills  secures  a  sup- 
ply of  water  to  the  central  part  of  the  c  ountry,  which  is  plain  and 
fertile.  The  north  towards  the  Uxus  is  sundy  and  barren.  The  i^nst 
of  the  provitice,  being  near  a  mountainous  countrv,  is  Ijetter  thau  the 
west,  which  borders  on  the  desart  and  paHnkes  of  its  nature. 

The  descent  froni  t  in  at  range  of  mountains  is  very  rapid,  and 
the  lower  parts  ol  liulkli  towards  the  Oxus  are  nnich  lower  and  hotter 
than  those  parts  of  Atghauuistan  w  lncli  lie  immediately  to  the  south 
of  the  range.  The  province  of  Bulkh  is  famous  for  a  strong  and 
active  breed  of  horses,  which  are  exported  in  considerable  numbers. 

TheNvhole  pidvinoe  ia  divided  into  aeveral  districta  fiom  ▼ariona 
canaea.  Som^  tiiongh  noir  onitedy  have  fiwnmly  been  nndtf  di0^ 
leht  govenunenia  \  and  other  have  lately  ■eparated'  that  ibimetly 
were  one*  Hie  existing  divinona  are  asfoUows  (begimung.from  tbA 
weat):«-~Mehnunat  Andkhoo^  and  Bhabbeigaun;  Bulkh  Roper, 
{L  A  the  couutry  immediately  roond  die  capital)*  Khooioom,  Hus^ . 
mt  Imaum,  Koondooa,  Khoet  and  IndepuiK  Tawlihaim. 

Tlie  three  fint  cantons  are  of  amall  extent  and  little  consequence  : 
thou^  bordering  on  the  desart,  and  perhaps  deficient  in  water,  their 
adil  ia'good  and  they  mi^t  be  brought  under  cultivation,  but  they 
ere  at  preaent  chiefly  occupied  by  wandering  ahepherda  of  the  Uabek 
and  TooTcoman  nations. 

Bulkh  requires  further  notice.  The  city  which  gives  its  name  to 
the  district  is  of  tho  highest  antiquity.  It  was  known  to  the  (ireeks 
in  the  time  of  Alexander  by  the  name  of  Bactra  ;  but  it  had  been 
the  capital  of  Persia  at  a  ^.earJUer  period,  having  'been  fixed  on  aa 


Digitized  by  Google 


46i  fiULKH» 

tbe  lojnl  VMideBee  lij  >Kj  .^boows  jappoaed  be.th^  m 
t^nrndkBOtmii  Atttlie  Aantics  ateimpMuedwal&^^m 
taeiiig  the  oldeet  cky  in  the  world,  and  in  conseqoenee  distinguish  it 
bf  lie  title  of  OknooL  Bdaud,  the  motiur.  a£  Jbomrn,  Thia  mHitnl 
mMtapoht  iii  now  ledneed  to  insignificance.  Its  ruins  ttill  cover  s 
great  extent,  and  are  surhmndHi  with  a  wall,  but  only:  one  oonMr  is 
inbabited*  '  Anrt'Of  it  is  occupied  by  the  citadel,  where  the  Doo- 
jflODiiee  gorernor  rendds,  and  which  is  inhabited,  by  ft  finr«f  ibe  lojid 
tnx^s,  and  by  aoine  Hindoo  dependents. 

Tiae  country  round  the  city  is  flat,  fertile,  and  well  cultivated.  It 
is  said  to  contain  three  hundred  and  sixty  villages,  and  is  watoi  ed  hv 
ei;^htei«n  canals  diawn  from  a  celebrated  reservoir  (called  the  Bunde(> 
Ameer)  m  the  Paropaniij^an  mountains.  T  can  ghre  no  particuki 
description  of  these  canals,  but  they  must  he  considerable,  and  must 
water  much  cultivation,  as  one  of  them  uliicii  lias  been  granted  by 
the  King  to  a  suii  of  Meer  Kiilicli  Ali.  is  reckoned  to  produce  an 
«anual  revenue  of  seventy  thousand  rupees,  which  is.  nearly  nine 
thouaand  pounds  sterUng.  The  west  of  this  tract  is  covered  with  thidi 
and  deep  woods  of  feeds,  wliidi»  thoa^  ibomplMned  of  bj  the  tn- 
Tdler,  bespeak  ft  ridk  sofl  and  e  well  wmteted  ooontry.  What  I  luifo 
•aid  must  not  be  eitemied  to  ihe  nortfaeRi  pbrt  of  tfae-ooontiy  mklsr 
BuIUi,  wbidiUsaDd^aiid  baRienrasfiff  astfae'Onn.  •      •  - 

•  KhobUoonit  wfaidi  lies  south  of  Bidldw  is  miidi  more  haSfy  wad 
bonen.  Tausk  KbiptghanD,  its  capital,  is>  hannm,  e  plaoe  of  oonse- 
quenc^  and  ocntftuiB  Dear  ai^  thousand  liouses. ' 

Husntt  Biiflnn»  wmcfa  is  now  annexed  to  KtiooUoomt  u  ftpoorand 
sandy  ooontiy. 

Koondoos  is  duefly  flat,  though  the  southern  paxt  ii  cieeoyied  faj 
l^s  stretching  fiom  Hindoo  Coosh,  and  forming .  maoj  lidk  and 
beautifid  valleys  stocked  with  fruits  of  various  kinds*  .  llieplaaii  part 
of  Koondooz  is  slao  very  fyttiHa,  and  watered  by  numerous  streams 
from  Hindoo  Coosh.  The  country  round  the  town,  in  particular,  u 
odtivated  hke  a  garden,  and  is  subject  to  inundation.  The  capital 
is  ft  good  town,  and  exceeds  Tausb  Kooc^^uum  in  extent..  Kbostand 


Digrtized  by  Google 


i 


ftiii— Hill .«»  muJ)  and  mnnntohKup,  M  jgrtae.eomiriet,  «i  tU 
MrtlmftteafHiBdkio.GocMlk  HMf  aielahilritodby  Taujika,«ill 
lie  Mnr-wMDC^  lo.Kio0ndofM* 

JtaSkn*  i»  ft  iMHfMMr  and  bitty,  ooontiy  ki'.die  nofdMit  of  Balkli« 
and  kiMtiguaua  to  3fcwhikliaha«n.  It  la^  bovmiw  ftrtOe  and  wiatt 

The  ruling  tribe  of  Bulkh,  and  indeed  tbo  principal  part  of  the 
popolatKMit  belong  to  the  Uzbek  nation.  I  ihaU,  thfinfine*  ;gtf!e 
aome  account  of  that  people,  without  confining  my  obaervatiom  to 
the  part  of  it  which  inhabits  the  country  under  diaouanoii  i  to  whose 
k>cal  peculiarities  I  shall  afterwards  return. 

The  Uzbeks  fii^t  crossed  the  jAxartes  about  the  beginning  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  and  poiirinn;  on  the  possessions  of  the  descendants 
of  Tamerlane,  soon  drove  them  tirom  Bokhaura.  ivhoarizm,  and  Fer- 
ghauna,  and  npread  terror  and  dlsmav  to  the  j  einotest  partsi  of  their 
exleiideil  t-inpire.  They  now  possess,  liesidej*  Buikli,  the  kiiigdoais 
ot  Khouri^iii  (or  Orgunge),  lH>khuuia  and  Ferghauna,  and  |)t  r)i;ij>s 
some  other  Utile  countries  un  tliis.  side  of  Beloot  Taugli.  1  am  loid 
that  they  are  to  be  found  beyopd  Beloot  Tmi^  and  as  far  east  as 
Kboieo  at  leM^  \  but  of  tbia  I  cwmot  witfi  eoiifi^ce».  Th^y 
bekng  to  that  gvqat  diviooa.  of  tdie  bmnaik  raoe.whidi  ia  ..knoim  bi 
Aaia  by  the  name  of  Tgoffc«  and  idiidi»  wUli  th^  Mogida  and- JUEau* 
abooi9»  oompoae  what  we  eall  tbe  Tartar  nation.  -  Eadi  of  di- 
iFiakma  bap  Ita  icparate  kngiH^  and  tb«t  of  the.  Tooiba.  ia  ipjdety 
diffiued  tbioiiglioot  tbe  weat  of  Aaia.  The  Usbdw,  the  na^fw  of 
rhiiiffiw  Tarlaiyi  aa^  at  least  as  Ehoten*  and  peiliapa.-aa  ftr  >aa 
Kanakoormm,  the  Kuzzauks  %  and  other  tribes  beyond  the  Jipauotai^ 
most  of  the  inhabUanta  of  Eipchak  and  Crimea,  the  Toorcauns,  an^ 
tbe  zubng  netkma  of  tbe  Peiaian  and  Turkiih-empixe^  apaek  Toodcee 


*  Tlww  Kuzzaulu,  who  are  a  tribe  of  Toorlu,  mui>t  not  be  coutuuudcd  with  tlie  (Jo»- 
Mdu  of  the  Don  ftad  the  BhA  Sea,  vlioaeem  to  be&ctitionsiocietiet,  fiarmed  from 
the  ndghbooring  nations.  The  UdMk%  ^riio  Imto  iMwd  of  tfMN  kit,  all  Am  Kw* 
inlr  OfimnM  or  BmaiwfJaaMclua 

3  0 


Digrtized  by  Google 


466  BULKH. 

as  tiidr  TORMCDlar  Jitigtiage :  it  ii  to  be  ibuiid  in  ggrttewd  ivwdi 
thioiiglioiit  Rumay'  and  in  wlidle  daMes  ni  tenna  in  die  kaguafoamf 
Qnibiil  and  Htndoostan.  It  ia  tlioiiglit  to  be  ipokcn  in  moit  pnrily 
in  Ferghauna.  Ibe  ipeedi  of  IVirkey  ia  nqtorioody  coi'iuptoil  by 
the  intannizCofe  of  foreign  teims  ;  tiiat  of  Fenria  haa  alio'  ioflbrad 
from  the  great  lue  of  the  original  language  of  the  coontij  amcog  iti 
Toorkee  conquerors  ;  and  even  the  Uxbekairf'  Rolrhamn  aie  wafptmeA 
to  have  refined  and  enridied  their  tongne'at  the  expenoe  of  in 
purity. 

Nothing  can  exhibit  a  more  striking  contrast  to  the  govemmoit  of 
the  Afghauns  than  that  of  the  Uzbeks.  In  Bokhaura  and  Ferghauna 
at  least,  every  thing  is  in  the  hands  of  the  sovereign ;  there  is  no 
vestige  of  popular  government,  and  scarcely  any  trace  of  aristocracy. 
The  Uzbeks  of  those  kingdoms  are  every  where  divided  into  C)o- 
rooghs  or  tribes,  liut  that  division  has  no  relation  to  thf  i^Mu  ernraent: 
no  separate  Jurisdictions  exist  even  in  the  wandering  hordes.  There 
are  no  assemblies  of  tlie  tribe,  or  its  elders,  as  among  the  Afghauns, 
either  for  the  conduct  of  its  afikirH,  or  for  the  settlement  of  disputes 

The  country  is  ^vided  into  distrietay  iiiid»-  officers  appointed  by 
tiieiov«gre%n.  These  aie  subdiTided  into  amaUerdiitiicts,  in  iriiidi 
the'tevenue  is'  collected  and  jnstice  administered  by  inferior  cAesn. 
^bordinate  to  these  are  village  govemment^  such  as  are  found  sD 
overthe  east  $  and  here  at  length  some  ^rmptomsef  popular  huflnewee 
and  of  attention  to  birth  a|»pear  in  tiie  appointment  of  the  Anhtolranl 
Of  head  of  the  TiU^ge.  That  officer  is  named  by  the  sovenign,  at  the 
lecomnMndatioB  ef  the  richest  people  of  the  village,  and  thoi^^  their 
adeetion  is  influenced  by  the  wealth  and  abilities  of  the  candidates, 
yet  they  often  continue  the  offioe  for  a  long  time  in  one  family.  The 
power  of  the  Auksekaid  is,  however,  inconsiderable;  lie  ii^  indeedi 
rather  an  agent  empiioyed  by  the  TiUagers  then  an  officer,  on  the  part 
of  the  King. 

Besides  this  chain  of  ci\nl  officers,  and  those  wlio  have  commands 
in  the  armv,  the  only  people  of  consequence  among  the  laity  are 
those  called  Baueea,  whose  authority  and  iufiuence  is  entirely  derived 

II 


i^iyui^ud  by  Google 


BULKH.  iffj 

torn  tlieif  weJtli.  •  In  like  minner,  in^mnjt  emy  thfngdgpfpdi 
on  tbe  appoinbiMnft  of  die  govmnent*  We  find  MeengbaudieeB, 
fiwbnidmsy  Cbora^ausees  (oommanders  of*  thonimnd,  of  an  fam^ 
dvedt  sod  of  ton),-  wUdi  ahem  that  the  division  of  the  army  is  atbi* 
traryf  and  does  not  proceed  on  the  .principle. of  leaving  the  ooii> 
tingent  of  each  tribe,  clan,  <xt  fUhga,  under  its  hereditary  chie£ 

In  BoUunira,  indeed,  the  men  are  said  to  be  told  off  into  mesMa 
of  ten  each,  who  hare  a  tent,  a  boiler,  and  a  camel  between  them, 
an  arranfrement  in  %vhich  it  is  evident  that  neither  &iiuly  OCMUiec^ion 
nor  individual  irettlnin  are  a(  iili  regarded. 

The  Ulima,  or  members  of  the  church,  alone  possess  any  influ- 
enc  e  not  derived  from  the  government,  but  their  weight  id  very 
COiKsitit-rable. 

The  Uzbeks  had  probably  few  \;d.w3  or  institutions  of  their  own  at 
the  time  of  their  conversion  to  I&laum,  for  they  have  adopted  the 
provisions  of  the  Mehomedan  system  in  ite  ntnuMt  .detail,  applying 
it  to  emy  part  of  their  drril  govenuoent*  end  even  of  their  piivele 
ccMtdnct'  lliereveunejaooQectodexact^indiepropofrtiom 
in  the  Koniui>  and  one4Gnth  of  its  prodnce  is  applied  to  afana. 
Joitioe  h  adminiBtand  faj  tiie  Eaoaee  in  atiict  oonfiinnilj  to  the 
Shhrm';  mii  drinking  wine*  or  evm  amalcing  tobeooo,  is  aa  itricdy 
feibiddaB>  and  ahnost  aa  severely  ponished,  aa  fraud  or  robbery.  The 
B3ng  of  Bokhaura*8  title  a  CSommandei  of  tie  F  itliful ;  part  of  every 
day  is  Ipcnt  by  him  in  teaching  the  Mahomedan  religioOi  and  the 
giiesler  part  c£  every  ni^  in  prayers  and  -ngi^  The  same  Kng  ■ 
reads  prayers  in  his  own  mosque,  and  often  performs  the  funeral  ser- 
vice  even  for  people  of  low  rank  ;  and  Killich  Ally  Be<T^,  the  present 
ruler  of  Bulkh.  always  walks  in  the  street;  lost,  if  he  rodO}  his  feet 
might  be  hi</ber  than  the  heads  of  other  tnn^  l>elievei^. 

TIk'  ^^n-dt  tliffbreueo  between  ( he  ^o\  eriinient  of  the  Uzbeks,  and 
that  of  tlie  Atghauns,  affords  u  tield  i'>i  sjieculation  w  lueh  could 
scarcely  fail  to  be  instructive  r  my  inlbruuilion  is  too  incomplete  to 
allow  ot  my  attempting  to  accouni  tor  it,  even  il  1  were  otherwise 
qualifi^  for  such  a  task.    It  may,  hpwever,  be  observed  that  the 

8e« 


4ig  BULKU. 

immm  wUdli  have  aliadj  bisen  -aUniBd'febk  at  ooointiig  io  nncli 
fwpcr  ca  die  diicA  of  aD  Tartar  tiibeif  mint  have  opaated -to  lender 
dietJabek  peofdeflabnuMavei:  andtfae  ooly  difficolty  U  toMeartem 
hoir  their  obediehce  was  tnuaafened  fiimi  thoie  ehiafr  tatke^enenl 
gDvenunenita.  in  the  caae  of  Bofchanra  we  find  that  ^ttie  .waa  liie 
result  of  a  long  -exertion  on  the  pait  of  the  government,  which  is 
stated  to  have  iirom  ancient  tim^  practised  the  ptMcy  of  dividing  and 
mixing  the  TanoiM  tribea  under  its  authority,  and  o(  keeping  the 
g^eat  men  horn  all  employnenta  that  might  give  them  influ^ce  over 
the  people  with  whom  they  were  connected  by  birth.  It  is  probable 
some  such  policy  was  adopted  by  the  other  Uzbek  governments,  and 
several  conjectures  may  be  affiaied  as  to  the  means  thej  poaawwed  fair 
carrviiifT  it  iyito  effort. 

The  I'zhclvs  entered  their  prespiii  seats  as  eoiK juerors,  and  the 
power  which  tlieii  leader  necessaniv  enjoyed  while  they  were  an 
armv,  continued  wlien  they  again  became  a  fixed  nation.  It  is  pro- 
bable his  pe)\ver  wiis  strengthenwl  by  the  iMoullahb,  wlio  are  generally 
the  allies  oi  the  civil  government,  and  whose  aid  in  this  case  would 
be  more  than  usuaUy  powerful* :  and  finally  the  country  possessed 
bj  the  IMwika  is  g^nenllj  plain*  and  Donaequentlj  un&vamrable  tft 
the  preacrvatioD  of  the  ind^endenoe  of  email  aocietieab  The  eftet 
of  thia  laat  carcomafcanoe  in  eafcaUiahing  die  power  of  the  gmed 
government  is  great*  aa  we  may  judge  finm  the  state  of  die  Uabcks 
who  inhabit  atroog  oountnea.  The  hiUj  eoontij  of  HiasaDr»  and 
die  manhy  one  of  Shekr  Suba,  being  eqoaUj  inawaasiMe  to  the 
eavahy  of  die  King  of  BoldMaia*  have  alike  defied  his  power,  and 
mnaui  under  the  chiefs  of- the  tribea  who  inhabit  them:  bat  in 
all  those  states  the  people  are  equally  enslaved,  and  among  die  ^Hiflle 
Tooihee  race,  the  Toorkmmia  on  the  Qnis  atone  en|07  a  popnhsr 
gtfvei'iimienti 


*  Hiu  aliiaee  iridi  die  civil  govomment  tend*  also  to  increase  the  power  of  Uie 
MooUahs.    It  was  probably  in  ooiueqaetioe  of  a  f^lttWlMrthlW  oi  dlis  kind^  tfatt  tlw  ClfaDa 


i^iyui^cd  by  Google 


Digrtized  by  Google 


AM^ittJ  ^  MftV^ymn  Mttit.Jtm.  Ow^AtM.  MV 


I'll*-'  -r  *r'l'r:\  » .  ; 


«        •       •  ■ 


♦  • 


.•  :  ;iu!i  "j.^  ^''i •    ,  . 

:<      1  ..'If'  V  J*,, ;>'••■ 
illi  I.   .  .«.;•'  'Att:        '  . 

Til*  u'  tJ.'f  s  in  A  •• 
i'i,tn]-...:rt)  tit'silki':'  «  ■  • 


I.  '.. '  iw»  i-'  »»  I;:.-  •    • '  •  . 

/ 


.  -  -  »i  •%      V  i    •  'ill'  • 


Digitized  by  Google 


-  I 


0  * 


Digitized  by  Goog|! 


BULKH. 

'  The  VMkt  of  Bnlklw  yfbB  in  all  other  dwnmUmcet  wmmMci 
thote  beyond  the  (hm,  di£Eer  in  this  partieular*  th«t  they  iff  iriuiiii 
bkd  m  Ir&tt  under  {lowef&l  diie&.  Ttkt  pecnllirity  k  prabeUy 
bccMioned  by  their  being  sepecated  by  mounteine  fimn  tfae.kingdoin 
of  Caubo]*  to  which  they  belong,  and  £rou  their  bordering  on  the 
rhral  stste  of  Bokhauia ;  which  dicumetanceft  ooodHned  have  pre- 
vented any  encroachment  by  their  own  •oreragn  <Mi  the  rights  of  the 
k>cal  chie& :  the  people,  however,  are  as  subservient  as  elsewhere. 

Tlif^  T^zbcks  are  fjcnerally  short  and  stout  men.  Their  national 
features  are  broad  foreheads,  high  cheek-bones,  thin  beards  and 
•mall  eyes.  Tlieir  complexion  is  dear  and  ruddy,  their  hair  is  gene- 
rally black.  '11 1 e  beauty  of  the  Toorks  is  constantly  .spoken  of  by 
Persian  poets,  and  though  that  quality  does  not  strike  us  in  their 
a|)|)t  i  i  Liiice,  yet  they  must  be  allowed  to  possess  it,  when  eonipaicd 
witli  tlie  hideous  physiognomy  of  some  of  the  other  Tartars,  whose 
Vang  narrow  eyes  pointing  upwards,  tt^ether  with  the  blackneu  of 
theb  oomplasion,  ff^ns  them  an  appearance  icarodiy  btnnaiu 

llieir  drees  ia  a  dfadit  and  trowBen  of  cotton,  a  cpat  or  tunio  (called 
diuppaun)  of  nUken  or  wooUendotfartied  on  widi  a  girdle}  md  over 
it  a  girnn  of  wodDen'  cfoth*  poateen  >or  £e^  $  .aome  wear  in-,  winter  • 
liUle  cap  of  broad  doth*  lined  with  lur,  sittiog  doae  to  tfaehM4.*end 
others  a  pointed  silken  c^,  called  a  calpapk*  tUmaei  but  the  national 
head-dress  ia  a  large  white  turban  worn  in  genetal  o?er.  a  calpaulu 
All  wear  boots  at  all  hours  ;  the  poor. have  the  same  description  as 
that  used  in  Caubul,  but  those  in  eeny  drcun^vtances  have  a  kind 
called  rauhusee,  for  const^mt  use,  and  only  put  on  the  others  in 
winter  or  on  journeys.  The  muhusee  is  of"  tliia  and  light  shagreen 
leather,  without  heels  or  soles,  so  that  tiie  wearer  is  obliged  to  put 
on  shoes  when  he  ctih  s  out.  All  wear  bandages  round  their  legs 
instead  oi  btcKkinn^N.  :ind  every  man  has  a  kuiie  iiaiigii^  ivQiXL  hifl 
girdle,  and  a  hmt  and  steel  lor  striking  fire.* 


•  Tfir  plate  represents  t1i<'  dress  of  the  Uzbeks  near  towns.  The  fiice  ;ini!  fit/iirr  is  a 
good  likeoew  ot'  Maboauuied  Uuflsim,  a  native  of  Wuidaiuizje  near  fiokhauta,  wluwe 


Digitized  by  Ct)C)gle 


470  BULKR 

Eren  the  women  wear  boots.  The  rest  of  their  dress  is  something 
like  that  of  the  men,  but  longer ;  tliey  tie  a  silk  handkerchief  round 
their  heads,  throw  a  sheet  of  silk  or  cotton  over  all,  wear  golden  and 
silver  ornaments,  m\i\  plait  their  hair  into  a  long  queue,  which  hang^ 
down  from  thi-  middle  ot  the  head,  like  those  ot  the  Chinese. 

The  Uzbeks  breaktasL  oii  Lea  and  leavened  bread,  which,  contrary 
to  the  usual  practice  of  Asia,  they  eat  stale  and  keep  for  a  fortnight. 
Their  ft  a  is  made  by  bulling  the  leaves  :  it  is  mixed  with  millv  and 
bailer,  or  (more  frequently)  the  oil  made  from  the  fat  tailh  of  the 
Doombeb  riieep.  The  rich  alone  use  sugw:.  Hie  great  meal  is  in 
the  evening,  aiid  oooaiato  of  pikvft  or  fleah  and  broth  like  that  of  the 
AfghamiB.  Hie  lidi  of  ONune  huve  a  Tariety  of  dreascd  diahea.  The 
Utbeka  are  kntfini  to  be  fond  of  hone-flesh,  but  aa  that  fiiod  ia  es- 
peniive^  th^  are  in  geneanl  obliged  to  be  oontent  with  bee£  Hie 
wealthj  indeed  firtten  honea  Ibr  the  table  all  the  jear,  and  the  pow 
genendly  get  aome  of  the  aame  aort  of  proviaiona  during  winter.. 

The  niitii?"*^  beverageu  kimmia, an  intoxicattngliqnoriroO known 
to  be  prepared  fiom  mare*s  milk.  The  milk  ia  put  in  the  aftienioon 
into  a  aldn,  audi  aa  ia  uaed  in  India  for  holding  water,  and  is  allowed, 
to  leinain  till  within  two  or  three  hours  of  day  break,  when  it  ia 
beaten  and  rolled  about»  till  morning  at  least;  but  the  longer  Ihe 
better.  The  liquor  thus  made  is  of  a  whitish  colour  and  a  sourish 
taate:  it  is  only  to  be  had  in  plenty  during  the  two  last  months  of 
summer,  and  those  who  can  afford  it  are  generally  drunk  for  the 
greator  part  of  that  period  ;  but  kimmiz  is  not  sold,  and  those  only 
can  enjoy  it  who  have  mares  enough  to  make  it  in  the  iiouse.  Ano- 
ther intoxicating  liquor  called  bozeh  is  more  f  }iea]il\  procured,  but  it 
is  fiuf  more  strictly  forbidden :  it  is  a  ferrnenteil  liquor  made  iVenj 
different  grains,  (particularly  from  Arzun)  which  resembles  water 
gruel  in  appearance,  and  is  sour  to  the  taste.    It  is  also  known  in 


&ther  was  an  Uzbek  and  his  mother  a  Syud.  An  Uxbdt  of  pure  descent  would  perhapt 
have  hanber  fisatorea,  mi  onairiio  iahahiiwl  the  deaart,  nider  gwrmentei  ' 


i^iyui^cd  byGoogle 


BULKH. 


471 


India  nd  Alfbia.  Notwithstanding  tlw  OM  of  tlieie  la^Offt^'the 
Uzbeks  are  generally  a  sober  peoplew .  ... 
.  Fvt  of  Ihb  Usbeks  live  in  booMti  and  put  in  camps.  Tlieir 
houses,  vill^es,  and  towns,  exactly  resemble  those  of  the  Afghauns, 
but  their  tents  are  widely  difierent  The  Uzbek  tent  is  of  the  kind 
called  Kirgah,  which  appears  to  be  in  use  over  all  Tartary,  in  part  of 
Peraia,  and  even  in  part  of  China.  It  is  round,  and  formed  of  lattice 
work  of  til  in  lilt  I  IS  covered  with  black  or  grey  felts.  The  roof  \h  of 
four  .stouter  hit  lis,  Ix  nt  into  the  shape  of  a  dome,  and  held  togellier 
by  a  round  piece  of  wood  in  the  middle.  The  Khirgah  far  surjiasses 
the  black  tent  of  the  Afghauns  both  in  wuiaiih  and  shelter,  and  it  is 
scarcely  more  difficult  to  carry.  It  is  commonly  called  by  the  Toorks, 
Kan  aooe  or  black  house :  a  camp  is  called  Onool,  aud  consists  of  from 
twenty  to  fitly  tents. 

A  greaC  part  of  the  people  of  Bokhaura  reside  in  tents  and  follow 
pMturage,  to  irhadk  indeed  ihtf  was  catupdM  by  the  unpiodnotive 
dceertn  oCwlucfa  so  mncli  uf  tlioir  conntiy  is  oomposedL  Fi^a^m^ 
andicrooimti7»  whiGhissecme  ofwtar  from  the  neig^ilioiiriiood  of 
^inoiintains*  hes  ftsr  wandering  tribes.  In  Kliirarisn,  and  the  e(wn» 
..tries  between  Bokfaania  and  the  Caspian  Sea,  <lie  wandeiing  tribes 
gieatly  preponderate;  but  in.tfae  piovinoe  of.BoJkh  thejr  era  Vesy 
.inftrior  to*  die  fixed  inhabitants:  diej  bleed  sheep*  camds  and 
horses ;  and  SO  nwnerons'aie  the  latter,  that  there  is  seaiedy  Ionian 
in  Tooikestaun  so  indigent  as  to  walk  on  foot.:  enrion  beggars  jtravc^ 
on  horseback,  or  at  least  upon  camels  and  asses.   As  mi^it  be^ex* 
pected  in  Bach  a  people,  the  Usbeks  produce  swaiBis  niUf^  csfvabjt' 
and  are  renowned  for  their  exertions  in  predatory  war.    Their  arms 
are  a  long  and  heavy  lance  and  a  shield  ;  few  have  swords,  but  many 
long  knives  or  d«fro;ers.    Tliev  charge  in  a  body  with  shouts,  which 
the  Afghauns  who  have  engaged  them  describe  as  loud  and  terrific 
Hiey  form  their  armies  in  three  divisions,  so  that  they  can  rally  • 
twice;  but  the  third  repulse  is  entire  defeat.    They  make  brave sol- 
^  diers,  and  are  astonishingly  patient  of  hunger,  thirst  and  tatigue. 
The  upuuua  commonly  entertained  of  the  ferocity  and  barbarism 


Digrtized  by  Google 


472 


BULKK 


€£ tihe  Uzbeks,  appeui  to  be  unjust,  and  is  pfdbaUy  owing  partlj  to 
our  oonfoundiDg  them  with  the  Gdrnnks,  and  other  rude  Tartar 
tribes  b^w<eeii  llieiii  aod  RuanB,  and  partly  to  the  ^imwlm  through 
which  we  have  received  our  information  regarding  them.  Tfasir 
habit  of  selling  slaves  might  have  justified  the  prgudice  against  them, 
but  this  detestable  traffic  unfortunately  was  not  confined  to  the  Uz- 
beks. T!i('ir  liiws  of  war  are  certainly  most  barbarous.  Thev  give 
no  qiKirtei  to  any  enemies  but  sheealis  or  infidels,  whom  they  can 
sell  for  slaves,  and  men  are  sold  in  Hokliaura  like  cattle;  but  in  other 
respect*?,  by  all  that  I  can  learn,  botli  from  Afghaun  travellers,  and 
from  Taujikii  ot  Bulkli  and  Bokhuura,  I  have  reason  to  think  the 
Uzbeks  as  good  a  people  as  any  in  Asia. 

They  are  said  to  be  oomperadvely  sincere  and  honert.  Hiey  have 
few  quarreb  among  individualsy  andMSWoely  any  mmdeit }  ind  tboie 
m  few  oountn  ln  HheaMtywliere  «  stranger  would  be  moceit«fla 
TiMMe  who  imagine  die  Uibdbi  to  be  savage  TtfCan,  waadmmg  over 
tvild  aod  desolato  icgioiu,  will  be  aupiiaed  to  beer  tbit  <he  taty  of 
Boldiinis  ii  eqpal  in  popnktioa  to  PeAftwer,  and  oonaoquflntfyiup^i 
fior  to  my  in  En^andU  esceept  London.  Tliat  it  eontaina  nmnenoi 
eoDcgea*  whicb  mi^t  aeoonimodate  from  GO  to  600  *  students  eacfa» 
and  which  have  profeason  paid  by  the  King,  of  by  pitvate  founds- 
tiena }  that  it  abounds  in  camranBenus,  where  merchants  of  eQ  nations 
meet  with  gfetit  enflom»geni«it  j  and  that  all  religions  are  fotty 
tolerated  by  a  prince  and  people,  above  all  others  attached  to  their 
own  belief.  I  now  retum  to  the  hiatoxy  aod  pretent  state  of  the 
province  of  Bulkh. 


•  The  coUfgc  of  Kokul  Taush,  for  instance,  has  300  apartments,  in  each  of  which 
two  students  can  be  lodged.  This  account  of  the  colleges,  and  some  other  information  of 
which  I  have  availed  myself,  is  contMned  in  an  account  transmitted  by  Meer  Izzut  OoUah's 
agents  Bokhaura,  in  a  letter  dated  Afiril  1813.  I  nms\,  however,  guard  the  reader 
arrninst  imagining  that  the  colleges  are  h*  M  like  those  of  Europe.  TTi*  ,ri(  rict-s  principally 
studied  are  thecdogy  and  Mahommedan  kw,  and  in  moat  of  those  wiucb  we  Talue,  tiie 
UiMn  Mv  mt  MBHM  IBO  JV|pwwit  aMBnB%  nnr  wntufiiBi  n  pnenwa  uf  tntMUtf 
p}iyuci  III  ~  i  rom^  iqp  IB  oAw  wnintiin^  ■md  many  ftajfie  of  BoUuuua  con»  to  Pedbswcr 
Sot  education. 


Digitized  by  Google 


BOLKSL 


BfiiUfQi  the  Uabdoi  tfane  aie  miny  Tm^  in  BnlUi,  indmny 
Aitbfly  vluH  tfaoogjb  tiMy  noir  apeik  Fomaiit  an  tUSSk  dufciagiaulMd 
fiom  imifak   Some  fair  of  tlie  Aiaba^  iMwewTi  fetain  didr  hthi 

The  best  accounts  I  can  ol)tam»  awign  to  the  n^kole  of  the  oovdstrji 
to  wbidi  I  hm  applied  the  name  of  Biilkh»  «  popuhtioii  of  ana 

aailUon.  «   .       .  • . 

Bulkh  was  conquered  by  Naudir  Shauh,  and  seems  to  have  fidlen 
into  the  hands  of  Ahmed  Shauh  with  little  difficulty,  and  without 
the  necessity  of  going  against  it  in  person.  The  city  of  Bulkh,  tMid 
the  country  round  it,  were  the  only  parts  in  the  King's  immediate 
possession  ;  but  all  the  Uzbek  chieis  in  the  province,  were  in  com- 
plete subjection  to  his  authority ;  and  even  i3udukiisbauB  is  said  to 
have  paid  him  tribute.  1m  fore  the  death  of  Ahmed  Shauh,  or  early 
in  the  reign  of  his  siu  ( cssor,  the  chief  of  Koondooz  threw  off  the 
A%haua  >oke,  and  bucccssfully  resisted  three  armi^  thaf  were  sent 
against  hini,  though  the  last  was  of  considerable  strengtli,  and  com- 
manded by  Sirdauri  Jehaun  Ehaun,  the  best  general  oi  the  scho<d  of 
Alumd  Shanh.  While  Hmonr  fihanh  waa  at  BdUi  in  1188^  bafaw 
nia  campaign  against  die  King  of  BokliMi«a»  lie  oompeDed  tba  cUaf 
«f  Eoondooa  to  pay  trifaf&to»  bat  ifm  pwronted  efliMBtoallj  itdud^g 
him,  bj  the  impoftaut  mat  m  -wkaxh  he  wat  engaged.  -  After  lliia 
eampaign,  Bulkh  appean  to  hanre  bean  nc;^ectid«  -and  tohM  anl^ 
farad  many  calamitiea.  Hie  pvovince  ivaa  inrade^  aad-tlM  oapilal 
beaiegedbyShanhMoiaiid^Knigof  die  lhfaek%  and  at  one  time  tlie 
^didb  province^  ezisapt  the  city  of  Bulkh  and  Khoolloom,  was  re* 
du<^  under  the  authariiyof  AUaverdee  KhannTaue,  the  duefof  an 
independent  Uzbek  tribe,  whose  original  posseaaioo  was  Koorghami 
Tippeh,  on  tlie  northern  bank  of  the  Oxus.  Bulkh  was  defended  during 
that  period  by  the  Dooraunee  Haukim,  and  Khoolloom,  hv  Killich 
Ali  Beg,  who  was  then  beginning  to  rise  to  the  importance  he  haa 
since  attained. 

Killich  Ali  was  descended  from  the  chiefs  of  Kiioolioom,  and  held 
the  Uzbek  title  of  Atauiik  (equivalent  to  Vizi^)}  firom  the  King  of 

3  r 


Digitized  by  Google 


474  BULKH. 

GndKil ;  iMtt'tt  his  fifat  accenioii  to  his  govenimeiit»  he  ftmid  ISb 
power  veiy  cirGiiBUMSribed. '  His  tbiliti^  howeirw,  sooii  enabled  him, 
SnA  to  reduce  his  lebellious  snlgects,  and  aftemids  to  annex  the 
petty  states  of  E3iii]£«  Ghoiee»  MoMor,  Dem  Gui^  ftc.  whldk  h^, 
in  Ids  neii^ibouihoods  to  his  own  territoiy.  He  afterwanis  took  die 
principal' share  in  the  expulsion  of  Allaverdee  Tauz,  and  acquired  the 
oountiy  of  Huzmt  Imaum,  which  he  delivered  from  that  chief ;  on 
the  same  occasion,  he  gained  an  ascendancy  in  Koondooz,  which  he 
helped  to  detifer.  He  connected  himself  by  marriage  with  the 
chief,  and  has  since  managed  so  dexterously,  that  Khaul  Daud  Khaun 
of  Koondooz,  though  ht^  possesses  more  power  and  resources  thaai ' 
Killich  Ally,  is  as  much  under  his  influeTice  ns  one  of  his  own  depu- 
ties. He  next  made  use  of  his  pown  on  the  spot,  ami  of  all  his 
influence  at  court,  to  acquire  an  asei  iidancy  over  the  Httukim  of 
Buikh ;  and  as  he  had  alway  s  been  a  zealous  and  useful  servant  of 
the  crown  of  Caubul,  he  contrivwl,  by  seizing  tkvoiaable  occasions, 
to  procure  the  transfer  of  some  ol"  the  Haukim's  powers  to  himseil, 
and  even  to  obtain  the  King's  countenance,  or  connivance,  in  the 
open  leriatadce  vAdch.  he  offered  to  that  offioer.  >  At  length,  in  the 
year  1809,  Rnnoe  Abbess,  the  King*8  nephew,  who  had  eaeaped 
fitom  confinement  at  Canbul,  Bed  to  Bulkfa,  and  was  received  and 
supported  by  the  Haukim.  '  It  may  be  supposed  that  Siumh  Shnjan 
irm  readjr  moa^jti  to  issue  otdeit  to  Killidi  Ally,  to  act  apunst  a  pre* 
tender  to  the  throne ;  and,  aoocndinj^y,  Kllidi  Ally  attacked  -and 
expelled  the  Haukim ;  and  since  that  time^  he-has  had  more  ieal 
power  in  Bulkh  than  the  King.  The  Dooraunee  Haukim  cqntinves 
in  possession  of  the  city  and  its  dependencies,  but  he  is  chisAy  sop- 
ported  by  Killich  Ally;  and  all  the  rest  of  the  province^  except 
Taulikaun,  is  either  under  the  government,  or  the.infiuenoe^  of  the 

same  chief! 

The  King  derives  no  benefit  from  the  town,  the  revenues  of  which 
are  consumed  in  grants  to  learned  and  religious  men,  in  pensions  to 
persons  of  other  descriptions,  in  the  expences  of  the  Haukim,  and 

the  pay  of  the  Cuhneh  Nokur,  a  description  of  troops  petniUar  to 


Digitized  by  Google 


BULKH  475. 

this  piovmoe.  They  were  (ffigminyiniaeil  at.Cinbul  fiir  penanaA 
flervice  in  Bolkh,  whidi,  fiom  the  ykixdty  of  tlie  frontier  of  Bofc^ 
iiHm,  always  rei|iiued  %  itrong  feiwe»  Not  lew  dun  five  thffniMmA 
lunre  been  entertained  from  first  to  laat,  but  the  aernce  waa  ao'niqio- 
pillar,  that  althmigh  a  bounty  of  five  tomauns  (equal  to  £10)'  waa 
gtfea  to  recxuits,  none  but  the  lowest  ofders  would endist;  amd.even 
pf  them  so  many  have  retained  to  Ganbul,  that  the.  number  of  the 
Cohneh  Nokur  is  now  under  one  thousand  fiunilies.  They  are  paid 
by  assignments  of  land  which  descend  from  ftther  to  son  |  and  from 
the  interest  which  this  gives  them  in  the  country,  they  have  acquired 
almost  all  the  feelings  of  the  natives*  They  bear  much  the  same  re- 
lation to  the  King  Uiat  the  janissaries  ,  of  Syria  do  the  Forte ;  and  if 
Killich  Ally  Beg  were  to  rebel,  they  would  be  moris  likidy  to  adhere, 
to  him  than  to  their  own  government. 

This,  however,  is  not  an  event  very  likely  to  happen,  for  thoiij»h 
Killicli  Ally  may  be  reorder!  an  independent  prince,  he  is  never 
deficient  in  respect  to  tlie  King ;  and  as  the  only  advantage  that 
monarch  ever  derived  from  Bulkli,  was  the  protection  of  his  frontier 
from  the  Uzbeks,  he  is  probably  not  ill  pleased  to  sec  the  control  of 
it  in  the  bauds  of  a  chief,  so  able  to  maintain  its  trauc^uillity,  and  so 
willing  to  acknowledge  his  dependence. 

Th^e  are  few  princes  in  this  part  of  Asia  who  enjoy  so  extensive, 
and  so  well  merited  a  reputation  as  Killidi  Ally.  A  trnveHer  towaedi 
the  west  from  Hindnitan>  hears  the  praises  of  his  good  govemment 
from  the  G8imvans»  long  before  he  reaches  the  Indus;  and  all  meiw 
chants  who  have  passed  thn>u|^  his  country,  speak  With  equal  ap* 
plause  of  the  exemption  item  duties  which  he  aUoWs^  and  of  the 
eflbrtual  protection  he  aflbrds* 

His  army  may  consist .  of  about  twelve  thousand  hcaie,  of  whtcli 
two  thoosaod  are  in  hk  own  pay,  and  the  rest  are  fiimlshed  by  men 
who  hold  lands  of  him,  on  condition  of  militaty  service.  He  could 
also  draw  about  five  thonsand  men  fimn  Ebondoos.  Zfis  revenue, 
after  deducting  the  eqieiice  of  his  army,  may  be  estimated  at  a  lacE 
and  a  half  of  riipeea  (about  i£l9,000).   His  eldest  Mm  had  a  grant 

3  p  « 


Digrtized  by  Google 


476  BULKH. 

of  jeOOOO,  ^Mi  <lie  title  xif  Wadke;  or  Fdnee  of  fiulkh,  fiomdM 
Kii^  of- GbuboL  He  ia  the  head  of  the  Uriiek  tribeof  Bfoocetan, 
wlueh  m*^!wV»  the  princ^  put  of  the  inhebitaati'of  Khbonoom* 
The:  fiilkiiwiiig  account'  <^  his  perBon  and  mannen,'  wm  ooaunmii- 
cBtad  h^.the  Reudent  at  Deli/e  ' agents  mentioiied  in  a  note  on  a 
former  page. 

Kiliibh  Ally  Beg  is  about  sixty  yean  old ;  be  it  a  handsome  man, 
with  a  red  and  white  complexion.  He  has  a  few  grey  hairs  on  bit 
chin  for  a  beard,  small  oves,  broad  forehead,  and  Uzbek  attire.  On 
his  head  he  wears  a  cap,  and  over  it  two  turbans  twisted  up  to^ctlier. 
He  wears  an  Uzbek  shirt  and  a  gown,  over  which  is  a  girdle,  wound 
round  his  loins,  with  along  knife  stuck  in  it ;  and  over  the  whole  he 
generally  has  a  robe  of  cotton  or  other  cloth  of  some  sober  colour, 
such  as  ash-colour,  or  the  like.  He  does  not  always  wear  boots,  or 
nubus^s,  as  the  other  Uzbeks  do,  but  only  when  lie  rides ;  he  car- 
ries a  short  stick  in  his  hand,  and  takQsi  a  great  deal  of  snuiF. 

He  takes  his  seat  in  his  pubUc  apartment  every  day  about  two 
houia  after  aiiMa&  He aitacnacarpet,  widbout  pillotra  oTcoslikNU} 
hia  inthnatai,  and  thoee  to  whom  he  wiahes  to  do  hoooar,  ait  on  the 
aanieeaipet  with  hien;' taut  all  other  persons  who  come  to  him  en 
buainefle  sit  on  the  bare  ground.  Every  nian>  aa  he  enteNf  wty  Si^ 
lanm  Ahdkoom,  hefene  he  takes  his  aeat'  He  bqimca  int6  «very 
aflair  oonbeeted  with  the  administration  of  the  government  himself} 
bat  .those  which  involve  law  questions,  he  refers  to  the  Cauzee.  He  - 
does  not  put  thieves  to  death,  but  bangs  them  up  by  the  hand  on' an 
iron  pin,  fixed  in  a  wall  in  the  midst  of  the  nMurket  place.  Highway 
robbers  and  murderers  he  always  puts  to  devlh.  He  walks  on  foot 
through  the  bazars,  and  examines  them  every  market-day.  He  hat 
more  thai\  once  discovered  light  weights  and  overcharges,  by  means 
of  his  own  penetration,  and  he  has  now  made  regulations  to  pi^ 
vent  tliose  abuses  in  future. 

Kilhch  Ally  is  honest,  just,  well  disposed,  kind  to  his  subjects,  ju- 
dicious and  discriminating  in  his  treatment  of  liis  servants,  economi- 
cal in  his  expences,  vigilant  and  well  iulbrmed  in  the  affiuis  of  his 


Digitized  by  Google 


BULKIf.  477 

gorenuiMnt.  He  gprea  bread  and  brolih  to  a  hnndrad  poor  penoof 

Kbondooa  beiloogft  to  the  Usbdk  tribe  of  Knttaghun*  the  chief  of 
^riiicli  is  yhmldtHid  KhaniiT '  He  ooald  niae  iifteep  thCTitand  manit 

and  his  revenue  b  about  £3(^fi0fK 

Taulikaun  is  poas€Med  a  small  but  warlike  and  Indepepdent 
tribe  of  Uzbeks,  who  molest  the  neighbouring  countries  of  Eoon- 
dooa  and  HnHnkhnhiin,  with  their  incursions.  They  are  too  weak 
to  make  ccmqaerts,  and  too  spirited  to  submit  themselves  to  a  con- 
queror. MeimHna  Andkhoo,  Shibberghaun,  and  some  other  little 
districts,  nrv  iiui(  pendent*  most  of  them  under  J:*er(uaa  cbie&»  and 
with  Persian  inhabitants. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


) 


CHAP.  IL 

OP  THB  XniAUKS  AND  VABAUBIRS, 

THE  Eimauks  fin<\  Hazaurelt.s  have  been  stated  to  iniiabit  the 
Paropauiii^uii  inuuatains  between  Caubul  and  Heraut,  having 
the  Uzbeks  on  their  north,  and  the  Dooraunees  and  GhiljieiJ  on  their 
south.  Their  countries  have  been  stated  to  be  rugged  and  rnouu- 
tainoiu.  Bodi  muted  exlteaaiA.  more  dum  tJnree  Imndfed  miles  in 
l^gdi,  and  about  two  huiuired  miles  in  breadth. 

One  is  surprised  to  find  within  the  limits  of  Afghaunistaun,  and 
In  that  very  part  of  it  which  is  said  to  be  the  original  seat  of  the 
A^hauns,  a  pec^le  differing  enturely  from  that  nation  in  appearance 
language,  and  manners.  The  wonder  seems  at  first  removed,  when 
we  find  that  they  bear  a  resemblance  to  thdrToorkee  neighbours, 
but  points  of  difference  occur  even  there,  which  leave  us  in  more 
perplexity  than  before.  The  people  themselves  afibrd  us  no  akl  in 
removing  this  obscuri^,  for  iJiey  have  no  account  of  their  own 
origin ;  nor  does  their  language,  which  is  a  dialect  of  Persian,  afibrd 
any  due  by  which  we  might  discover  the  race  firom  which  they  are 
sprung.  Their  features,  however,  refer  them  at  once  to  the  Tartar 
stock,  and  a  tradition  declares  tbem  to  be  the  ofFsprino;  of  the  Mo- 
guls. They  are,  indeed,  It  etjucntly  called  by  the  name  of  iSIoguls 
to  this  day,  and  they  are  oiten  contomuK d  with  the  Moguls  and 
Chagatyes,  who  still  reside  in  the  neiglilx  iirhood  of"  Heraut.  They 
themselves  acknowledge  their  affinity  to  those  tribes,  as  w(  11  as  to 
the  Calniuk.s,  now  settled  in  Caubul ;  and  they  intermarry  with  both 
of  tliObe  nations.  They  do  not,  however,  understand  the  language  of 
.  Ihe  Mogiils  of  Heraut 

Aboolfiud  alleges  that  they  are  the  remaina  of  the  army  of  the 
Mogul  prince  Mwfai  Khaun*  the  grmdaoa  of  Chiiq^ieef;  and  Biii> 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  muajKSL 


her  testifiefi  that  many  of  the  Hazaurehs  spoke  the  language  of  the 
Moguls  up  to  his  time ;  but  he  occasiona  some  firesh  difficulties  by 
speakhig  of  di«  Twirtiuiiiii  Hwijuidi^  amd  abmyB  coupling  tlM 
Togdeneea  mth  the  Hasaurdis  ia  tihe  hiUs,  ^vlifle  he  asaeits'tfad 
Tftotto  and  EiiniMilni  to  hm  been  Inhiibitinta  of  the  plains  K  Ihae 
■eenis  no  raaaon  to  doubt  that  the  Einumlu  -and  Haaaiirefaa  ate  (be 
same  people  tlwugh  sepanted  ance  their  oonvenlon'  to  -Mahonir 
medaniain  by  the  different  sects  they  have  adopted ;  the  ESmauha 
being,  rigid  Soonee8»  and  the  Haianiehs  Tiolent  Sheeaha.  they  ne 
indeed  often  confiMmded)  notwithstanding  thia  marked  didtuictiony' 
nor  will  the  confusion  appear  at  all  unnatural  if  it"be  letnembered 
that  they  resemble  each  other  in  theb  Tartar  features  and  habits,  and 
in  the  despotic  diaracter  of  their  governments,  'the  ptHnts  in  which 
they  form  the  strongest  oontrast  to  the  A%haun8.  They  differ,  bow- 
ever, -firom  each  other  in  so  many  points,  that  it  will  be  expedient  to 
treat  themaeparately,  and  I  shall  b^gin  with  the  £imauks  who  inhabit 
the  western  half  of  the  mountains. 

The  country  of  the  Eimauks  is  reckoned  less  mountainous  than 
that  of  the  Hazaurehs  ;  but  even  in  it,  the  hills  present  a  steep  and 
loftv  face  towards  Heraut :  the  roads  wind  throucirh  vjilleys  and  over 
high  ridges,  and  some  of  the  forts  are  so  inaccessible  that  all  visitors 
are  obliged  to  ho  drawn  up  with  ropes  by  tlie  garrison.  Still  the 
rallies  are  culti\  ated,  and  produce  wheat,  barley,  and  millet ;  and 
almonds,  pom^ranates,  and  barberries  are  found  wild.  The  north- 
west of  the  country,  which  is  inhabited  by  the  Jutnsheedees,  is  more 
level  and  fertile,  the  hills  are  sloping  and  well  wooded,  the  valleys 
rich  and  watered  by  the  river  Margus  or  Moorghaub.  The  south  of 
the  Tymunee  lands  also  contains  wide  and  grassy  valleys.  The  whole 
of  the  mountains  aie  full  of  springs. 


•  ■  *  I  liad  it  diiiicult  lo  utxuuut  ft>r  tht:  uuiuber  of  Toorkee  words  which  are  met  with  in 
die  language  of  thoae  tribes.  Wlij,  if  di^  be  Magld%  tbanii  dMjr  ipofcen  Toorkeei 
and  why,  it Tnorkee  was  their  Ifingiiage,  should  they  havr  !o=;t  it,  redding  n*^  tht-r  tfn  on 
the  borders  of  Tuorkistauu  ?  Why  should  th^  have  adopted  the  I^enian  toogu^  whik 
'  dnbolkofUicir  iMff^haniid^boani|i«kToariM^  «ad.tiihamciaiSbittaaAVoA»ooi 


I 


480  THE  EIMAUKS. 

Hia  Zoovees  poaieM  Suhstor'or.IiteHir,  an  evfeenihre  pWiu  tmimg 
monntams  covond  with  pineB*  mbaaM  to  the  east  of  the  foad  fiom 
Furra  to  HmAr  and.  in  aome  nwaanie  diachgd  ham  the  other 

Eimauks. 

The  word  £iinftuk»  ti^Ki^  I  do  not  know  that  it  is  used  in  Tooiv 
hiitauii,  is  Uie  common  term  among  all  Tartars  of  the  north  and  east 
Cot  a  division  or  a  tribe  *.    The  nation  which  I  am  now  describing  ia 

correctly  called  the  Chahaur  Oeemauk  or  four  tribes,  and  was  in 
re&Iity  formed  into  m  many  divisionSf  although  they  have  now 
branched  out  info  a  greater  number. 

The  origami  ibur  Eimaukti  are  the  Teimunees>  Hwsft^1rphff  f ,  Tei« 
moor ies,  and  Zoorees. 

The  first  of  these  Eimauks  includes  two  other  divisions,  the  Kip- 
chaukb  and  the  Durz}  ;  and  the  second  inchides  the  Jumsheedees 
and  Feerooz^coohes*  The  Kerjes,  who  live  about  Toorbutee  Hj- 
deree,  south  of  Meshhed,  are  ako  said  to  be  Eimauks,  but  I  imcy 
inoonTectly* 

.  .  Same  of  theie  auboidJmrte  dhriridna  aie  now  mnnoRNia  aa  die 
Eimaulnfioin  whidi  tliey  sprung ;  and  aD,  like  the  original  Eimaii1w» 
hma  separate  bunds  and  indflpciidant  dueft.  The  duafi  inbdbit 
atioiig  csatle^.  aomatunea  oontaining  apadona  palaceat  where  diqr 
.maintam  little  eouits  ef  their  own*  and  aie  attended  by  splendid 
xetinnea.  Iliey.levy  taaes^on  thdr  tribea,  and  keep  troops  in  their 
own  pay,  and  mounted  on  their  own  horses.  The  administration  of 
Justice,  with  the  power  of  life  and  death,  and  all  the  rights  of  an 
abacdute  monarch,  are  in  their  hands*  Thejr  cany  on  their  govern- 
ment in  the  King's  name*  but  thej  are  never  oontzoUed  in  their 
management  <^  their  own  tribes. 


•  I  learn  from  my  friend  Sa  Jclm  MJwihn,  cbat  dMra  wm  a  Ingi  tribe  oiUtd 

EIiTiAuks  in  SjTia,  a  colony  from  which  established  itMlf  Ib  LMIMlsn»  Mid  pVOdSMd  tfw 
dyuti^  of  .Atmhefc*  to  celebrated  in  Penisii  bistoiy; 
t  iW—aottolwi—lhwaiJ  uMi  As  Us— ilii  iIibh  ■■UubiJi  vdw  viB  Im 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


'lUf  Kin:  ;.!!•■»  ;  vr  itl'j'.t^'i  i'mI   I;  I;i  '  vc-.  ..  :     -  i  .•   .     ;  i 

'i  'liir  ici.l.s  F'-"  i  •?  i  *•       «...'•  •  •  n.;.;   ..  %•'  •  *. 

•  ■  I  -l  -r  ;  1   •  !«•  ■  .  ••  *  .  •«••■•:    |>  •  I   

•»   ui:u  l'."V  k  .-•■'»'«    •«".'  r.t.i.'i.  ..       '■'•t^.        ^  ..  •■     5;  ■<. 

-.     .  •■  ' 

t*..  I'rJc 'Ni'.  t'. 'ii  '      it  p  -      '.%"■••■>:  •;      •. *  T 

!•  if  !         •.    ill  ''.;rK  •       '. .i  i--'!'.     '  ^t*  ..•  .« •     t  ,-. ;. 

«,  .     •■.  •:      !•  ••  .•  .  .<»  ^Ii  ...A.M  •   li.         •..  •.  vl  b|F 

»Ho     c.i'l.r  J*  ■*—  •  •..  '..  •  *«. -.'ii  I  .'.    I'vir  .I- ...  .  rf-pie- 
• (t  in  •  ..  :  I  •  v- j      •  .•  .  .•"  !jick 

TH..;.  f";^:di»  ti-i  9iH|||p'^ilh  lijat  'M  !•  .-        '  .  .    -•         ♦•Ill  ll  i'l  I  '\ 

•  )icis.«-i;  tsh,  aiul  tiiM  Jhft  who^  ui  •!   ••  ,     1- w 


I  I  r'i  •  .pects  noi  lria*Itirn.?d^they K.f..  •  J*.  •  A'l  '.;jr.'..  i.-i  J-.  ii 

..    J    -(jerl;  •  •  . 

»f..  J-.  .1,  'iu'.y  si  .  .  » 

A»j.'Iiai!        I  ha  ■  .  ■ 

an.'     .  .i.  \}\9.y  aCi  ••'I  ,     ..  ;  .1 

i  j'.'..  •:  '.•  I  ver  their 


■*  * 


< 


Digitized  by  Google 


•  * 


»  / 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  EIMAnK&  481 

The  Eimauks  live  almost  entbelj  in  emmpBf  which  they  call  Oard 
or  Orde  *.    Each  of  these  it  govemed  bj  a  Cudkhooda,  who  acta  . 
ander  the  orders  of  the  Kharni. 

Their  tents  are  almost  universally  of  the  kind  called  Kirgah,  which 
is  used  by  the  Tartars ;  but  the  Teimoorees,  one  of  the  Eimauks, 
prefer  the  black  tent  of  the  Af^jhaims.  All  the  Ilini;iuks  keep  many 
sheep,  and  they  rear  a  small  but  active  antl  luud_y  breed  horses,  ot 
which  many  are  exported  to  foreign  countries.  The  few  villages  in 
their  country  are  inhabited  by  Taujiks. 

An  idea  of  the  appearance  of  the  Eimauks  may  be  formed  Gttm 
the  Hate  (XI)»  wfaidi  u  a  good  likcpeao  of  m  man  of  Ihm  Tymnnoa 
tribes  bvt  I  bm  aeen  otJienveij  tallandatoiit»  and  aome  with  thidc 
baarda.'  T  Immm>  htmwA  tw  fly  afipiinf  antio  of  tha  ^'^m 
afiproacliea  to'that  of  the  Fenriaoii  though  alwagn  dittinguiahed  hf 
the  pecidiar  ftatnraa  of  tfae.TMt8r  nca.  llieb  drapa  ia  alio  rapcftr 
lented  in' ^  plated  butdMir  hoad-dfieas  ia  oftaner  a  cap  of  black 
lamboikin  than  a  tmfMOi. 

'  Their  food  is  the  some  with  that  of  the  AQ^mu?  except  that  tli0^ 
eat  horse-flesh,  and  that  the  whole  of  them  make  their  bread  of  the 
floor  0^  an  caify  aort  of  mil  called  Khunjick*  mixed  with  diafe  of 
wheat. 

In  all  respects  not  mentioned,  they  resemble  the  Ai^faaniis  in  th^ 

manners  ;  hut  the  despotic  {mvernment  makes  them  in  general  more 
quiet  and  orderly.  In  tlu  ir  wars,  where  tliey  are  released  from  this 
restraint,  they  shew  a  degree  ot  lerocity  never  heard  of  among  the 
Afj^hauns.  I  have  authentic  accounts  of  their  throwmg  their  pri.. 
sonors  from  precipices  and  shooting  them  to  death  witli  arrows  f ; 
and  on  an  occasion  at  which  a  >iooree  with  whom  1  have  coTivcr.sed 
assisted,  they  actually  drank  the  warm  blood  of  their  victims,  and 
robbed  it  oy&t  theur  hces  and  beards. 


*  Thia  k  derived  fioii  tbB  TuiJ(«h  wtd  Ooidof^  a  cnqp  «r  um^  Unpi  «Aidi 
wfuaieioxmed  horde. 
t  Tlui  greatly  rwwnblo  lib»  Mogbiil  tnatgieait  of  pftMom  vidar  dwv  MmyMwab 

8  II 


Digitized  by  Google 


48t 


TOE  EnCADXSi 


The  Eimauks  have  always  been  dependent  on  Heraut^  though  they 
.  were  immediately  Under  the  subordinate  government  of  Seeah-bund. 

The  greater  part  of  them  are  still  in  obedience  to  the  prince  at 
Heraut,  to  whom  they  furnish  troops  when  required,  aud  at.whiMe 
(sourt  they  either  attend  in  person  or  keep  a  near  relation. 

Two  Eimaiiks,  the  Teimooree  and  Hazaureli,  however,  are  now 
subject  to  Persia.  Thii»  w  as  owing  to  their  position,  whicli  is  west  of 
Heraul,  jind  within  the  iijuiis  ovennn  by  the  Persians.  Their  lands 
arc  excluded  from  the  Paropamisau  mouulaiuis,  and  consist  of  sandy 
tncb  iatmBperieA  with  bnteh  hills.  The  Teimoorees  under  KiUidi 
Khaim  hm  long  posmied  their  preaenl  oountty*  Tlifc  HflMiit«ht, 
an  Ui0.  oontnoy,'-  w&b-  only  lately  moTed^  to  their  praieiit  teatB  by 
Shauh  Mfthmeodion  aooouBt  ef  b,  qoanal  bdiivceii  theniMid  the  Tei- 
mouBMi  'The  iunilj  of  Mahommed  Khaim,  dieh*  ehief*  held  the 
title  of  B^eribcgco  fidm  Ihe  Kmgfl  of  .C^abii]>  andhe  letahift  it  under 
tfaeBmuiK.  Hie tiflie difien  fcom.the  other  FimenliB  m  hevng 
decidedly  the  features,  dress,  and  manners  of  the  Uebcks;  They  see 
pioud  of  this  rgaemblance,  and  tlieir  chief  carefbUyheqw  up  eoon- 
neetinii  wkh  the  court  of  Bokhavira.  : 

/  ^  I  hayeimentienfd  that  this  Eimauk  i»iiot-to  be  oonfoanded  with 
the  Hazaurehs  who  inhabit  the  easton  part  of  the  Paropamisui 
mountains ;  but,  although  they  are  now  separated,  the  JElimauks  and 
Hazaurehs  are  certainly  of  one  descent,  and  probably  the  Jattesdniva 
their  name  from  the  same  source  with  thi«  tribe.  * 

The  best  accoimts  1  possess  of  the  nnniH  i  s  oi  the  Eimaulcs,  ex- 
cluding those  last  mentioned,  lead  me  to  guess  tliem  at  four  hundred 
or  four  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  souls.  It  is  needles^  to  say  that 
those  accounts  are  neither  tldl  nor  exact. 

The  country  of  the  Hazaurehs  is  still  more  nigged  than  that  of  the 
fjmauks.    The  sterility  of  the  soil  and  the  severity  of  the  oUnate  are 


*  The  ISutar  anny  used  to  be  divided  into  a  certain  number  of  Hazaurdhs  or  r^- 
ment«,  and  it  possible  that  some  of  thos<^-  brHlir-s  nrigrniilly  left  to  ocCI^  port  of  • 
«oiM]aered  country,  may  have  given  nbe  to  the  uatiuu  ui'tlie  iiuzaurc'lib. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


Digitized  by  Google 


THERAZAUUHS. 


48S 


equally  imlavourabie  to  husbandry  ;  whf»t  little  jrrain  can  bo  sown  in 
the  narrow  valleys  and  reaped  beibre  the  conclusion  of  the  short  sum- 
mer, contributes  to  the  auppoit  of  the  slender  population  ;  but  the 
flesh  of  sheep,  oxen,  and  horses,  with  cheese  said  other  productions 
of  their  flocks,  are  more  important  articles  of  their  food. 

The  Hazaurehs  live  in  thutched  houses,  lialf  sunk  in  the  slopes  of 
the  hills.  The  Plate  (N"  XXL  *)  shows  the  dim  of  the  meo,  which  is 
diitiligiiUMd  hy  Uw  idkof  doth  whidi  iMj-tmA  ^NOaS:-  their  Ugt 
^tbeUabeka.'  l%e  wonm  «ew  long  finockt  of  itfVK)Oea 
hoatB'Oi  toft  dBar-flkin,  wbioh  raaoli  to>tlMir  Imete  Thdr  cap  dift 
idoftHo  diflir  head*  and « tlq[r«f  doth  haogs  dowii'fioin  it  behind  m 
&r  as  their  middleu  Both  mm  and  wonea  stiODg  iWar  laa- 
fearest  twit  arc.  bloater  and  .pfamtpar  thatt-ifaew  mi^A>Bnfa»""The 
iramen  are  oftan  hsndaoniB»  and,  what  is')BiU{irising  in  a  tribe  so 
naatlysavi^  theyhave/an  asooulBiicy  unexampled  in  the  neigb- 
boarttog  countries,  ^^e  wife  managea  che:  house,  takes  care  of  the 
property,  does  her  share  of-  the  honors,  aad  is,  very  much  ocmsulted 
in  all  her  husband  s  measures.  Women  are  never  beaten,  and  they 
have  no  conct^lment.  It  is  universally  ni^reed  that  they  are  by  no 
ra^UN  remarkable  Ibr  chaiitity,  but  1  have  heard  different  accounts  of 
their  libertinism.  In  the  nortl^-east.  which  h  the  most  civilized  part 
of  the  country,  the  wonieti  would  prostitute  themselves  -  ib^  money, 
while  their  husbands  were  out  of  the  way  ;  but  the  men,  though  not 
jealous,  would  probably  put  a  detected  iidultress  to  Jeatli.  In  other 
parts  of  the  country,  there  prevails  a  custom  called  Kooroo  Bistaun, 
by  which  the  haifaeiid  landa  his  wife'totfae  emfaiaoeB  c£  his  gueM6  f. 
ilAjt-all titneiy  if  ahosbaBd  of  that ^pazt  of  the  ommtiy  findi.'aftaiff  of 
atippen  at  his  wiie*s  door,  he  immediately  withdraws.   Both  sexes 


*  lib* good fiknMMcf'KiTCMm  «  Huaimh  tmoBJWmytatnBgf  but  lik  Ikeo  wm 
metB  cheerful  aiid  {jocKl-huinourctt. 

f  ift  Mofl^ul :  one  of  the  laws  of  the  Xasa  forbid*  adiUtery.  The  inhabitants  of 
tidaier  appfidl  Ar  Mud  iMdred  an  esnniptioiii  on  abooiupl  of  dulr  old  utMf^a  of  lending 
llMirwiffwtoihsirgMrtib     •  ' 


HAZAUREHS. 


spend  A  giMt  desl  of  thdr  time  in  sittiiig.in  the  house  round  a.  ttorn 
They  we  all  great  singers  snd  players  on  litB  geatnt,  and  many  <^ 

tFiern  are  poets.  Lovers  and  their  mistresses  sing  Terses  to  eadi 
other  of  their  own  composing,  and  men  ofteQ  sit  tot  home  iaUin|{  at 
each  other  in  extemporaneous  satire. 

Their  amusements  out  of  doors  are  liiintino;,  shoot itur  th^or,  and 
racing.  They  clear  a  spot  of  ground  for  the  last  mentioned  amuse- 
ment, and  ride  bare  backed,  the  stake  is  often  a  great  many  sheep, 
oxen,  or  suits  of  clothes.  They  also  shoot  at  marks  for  similar  wa^rs. 
TTiey  are  all  good  archers  and  good  shots  :  every  man  has  a  match- 
k)ck.  Their  other  arms  are  a  Persian  sword,  a  long  narrow  dagger 
in  a  iroedeB  aheatfa,  and  Bomathnea  a  spear. 

The  Haaaoteha  are  very  passioniite^  and  enseedingly  fidde  and 
•capridoni.  After  omiciBating  one  for  an  hour,  a  single  word  majr 
inake  him  iiy^autt  and  break  with  joa.  Setting  aside  their  hot.  t«n- . 
pers,  thej  are  a  good  people^  merry,  oonTersiblet  good  natnred*  and 
hoapitahla  Many  stones  are  told  of  their  cortreme  simpUd^.  lit 
is  enon^  to  mention  tibat  they  believe  tiie  King  of  Caobnl  to  be  as 
Ugh  as  the  tower  of  a  castle :  still,  as  they  are  Asiatiol^  they  are  not 
'  exempt  from  habits  of  fiUadiood.  Their  irritable  diipoaitian  involves 
them  in  constant  broils  among  themselves.  * 

The  Hazaurehs  generally  live  in  villages  of  from  twenty  to  two 
hundred  houses,  though  some  live  in  Tartar  tents  like  the  Eimauks. 
Each  village  is  defended  by  a  hi  j^h  tower,  capable  oi' containing  ten 
or  twelve  men,  and  hill  of  lor>|  i-holes.  t 

lliere  is  a  kettle-drum  in  each,  and  in  time  of  peace,  a  single  man 
remains  in  the  tower,  to  sound  an  alarm  ii'  necessary.    1  have  heard 


*  Hie  A%hniwtaDiiM«yi«oil«  of  tLepoww  cf ftidnarion  p<^ss€d  by  MnesftlM 

Hazaurehs,  who  rr.n  mt  mit  thr  livrr  of  any  person  on  whom  tliey  fix  their  eyes.  This 
filble  ii  very  common  in  bidia  and  Persia,  and  it  attributed  to  Tarious  tribe*.  Th«  d«- 
Idb  of  the  operation  are  given  with  grCMt  taknuuty  in  the  AycMi  AdMtM; 

t  Tilfa  boildiug  ib  called  Ottopon^  or  Ortopon^  iriii^ 
Modi* 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 


HAZAVREHB. 


ft  gathering  of  the  Hazaurehs  describeci .  one  of  thes<^  rlrnnis  was 
beat,  and  the  sound  was  taken  up,  and  repeated  troiii  lull  hill. 
The  Hazaurehs  armed  in  haste,  and  rnnhed  out,  till  at  last  n  torce  of 
two  or  three  tliounand  men  ^^as  asseinblcd  at  the  point  ul  attack. 

-Each  village  has  a  chief  called  the  Hoker,  and  one  or  two  elders 
called  by  the  Toorkiah  word  Aukstdcaid  (which,  like  Speeu  Zheereh 
m  Pushtoo,  and  Heesh  Suffeed  in  Persia,  means  UteraUy  white  beard), 
but  all  entirely  depen^nt  on  the  Sooltatin. 

The  HiranveliB  are  diTided  into  trib«»  of  which  the  DA  Zeogae^ 
Heh  Kbondee*  Jaughooree,  and  Folanda,  are  among  the  moat  oonai- 
detable,  and  each  has  its  own  Sodtami,  wfaoae  power  it  abaolutem 
his  tribe.  He  adnmusten  jnatioe»  impotieB  SsntB,  impri8on%  and  even 
puts  to  death.  Some  of  these  fiooJtamis  have  good  cattka,  fine 
clothes,  and  servants  adorned  with  gold  and  silver.  Dmj  have  ooiv- 
itant  disputes  «wwMig  tiiemsehreS}  so  that  there  is  teacAy  a  Haaai^ 
reh  tribe  which  is  not  at  war  whh  its  neighbours.  Hiey  hsve  also 
foreign  wars ;  and  sometimes  two  or  Uuee  Sookauns  mite  to  rebel 
Slgpunstthe  King:  but  they  have  never  any  solid  Or  useful  confede- 
racy. I  have  been  told  by  a  man  who  had  been  employed  to  collect 
the  revenue  under  Zeinaul  Khaun,  that  he  had  sometimes  b^n 
called  into  Ml  assembly  of  six  or  seven  of  these  chiefs,  who  would 
inform  him  that  they  were  determined  not  to  pay  the  tribute,  and 
that  he  might  go  iifHinL  his  business.  In  tlie  same  uight,  one  eiiief 
would  come  and  declare  that  he  had  no  share  m  this  contumacy ; 
next  momingt  one  or  two  more  would  come,  and  the  whole  confe- 
deracy would  dissolve.  When  it  once  came  to  blows,  they  would 
often  hold  well  tog^ber }  but  they  were  always  qndled  in  the  end. 
'Una  Zfaauml  Khaon  wis  a  Mognl  of  the  beighboorhood-  of  Heradt, 
irba  was  made  gofvemor  of  Ranmeeaun,  in  flhaob  Zemeun's  reign, 
and  who  dragged  up  a  gun  into  die  s^ngest  parts  of  the  monntainst 
md  rednoed  the  Hatanieiw  to  a  degpree  of  order  and  obedience  never 
eqaaUed.' 

In  geneial,  the  Haiaweha  were  divided  between  the  govenunent 
of  Gfaorant  and  Bauinecaiin ;  and  at  present  they  are  acaiedy  nnder 


Digitized  by  Google 


■466  HAZAUKEHS. 

* 

my  government  at  all.  They  have  wars  with  the  Himauks,  and  also 
idth  Kiliich  Ally  Khaun,  the  great  Uzbek  chief  in  Bulkh,  who  1ms 
Teduced  many  of  the  nearest  Hazaurehs  under  his  authority. 

The  Hazaurehs  are  all  enthusiastic  followers  of  Ali ;  they  hold 
the  Ato;hauns,  Eimauks,  and  Uzbeks  in  dotestsftion,  for  foUowmg'the 
opposit<^  sect^  and  they  insult,  it  they  do  not  persecute,  every  Soonnec 
who  enters  their  country.  They  even  distrust  such  oi'  their  own 
countrymen  a^s  have  been  much  among  the  A^g^uns,  suspecting 
them  of  having  been  corrupted.*  '     ■  ! 

When  this  is  considered,  it  is  not  sui  |H  i.sing  that  there  should  be 
no  Tuujiktf  settled  among  the  Hazaurehs,  and  tliat  they  should  have 
IHde  tnMle  or  inteitxMicte  with  the  Mt  cf  mankind  The  little  trade 
4bey  hsve^  ur  moM.  oa  ib^  bartir :  Migpr  and  rtlt  are  the  fcfei|^ 
comipoditiei  in-  miMt  xequcit  -  ... 
■  -Tba  abm  Mcoimt  of  the  Haauvebs  te^iiot.willioat  tm/p^mu, 

govenmunta  like  the  Afjjpianns,  par- 
tidtilariy  the  laigs  tiUie  of  Gufiee^  wMsh  »  acttkd  tomida  HMoo 
Coddh,  and  which,  peKhapa»  dlfifats  -fiKmi  the  reat  is  aome  otfier  par- 
ticidm  The  pbina  about  MooUcea,  Sanm  Bauf^  &e.  to  the  w«it 
of  Ghuznee,  are  inhabited  by.Uaeaurdu*  who  in  their  situatiaa,  and 
in  every  thing  but'theii  features,  exactly  resemble  Taujiks. 

There  are  many  Haaanrehs  in  Caubul ;  five  hundr^  ase  in  the 
King's  giuird,  the  icstvigain  their  braad  by  their  laboori  many  of 
tliem  are  muleteers. 

Tt  is  clitHcult  to  tjness  tlto  tmiuber  of  the  Hazaurehs:  tiieir  couatrj- 
is  consiilerably  more  extensi\  (  than  that  oi  the  J^imauks,  but  it  is 
less  productive,  and  worse  peopled ;  so  that  I  shoidtl  not  suppose 
they  amounted  to  more  than  firom  three  hundred  to  three  hundrud 
and  iiiiy  thousand  souls.  .'  -  ^ 


1    •  . 

•  KenemwhownpiCMntodiBFIateXIL  lOaMymwM  convwtod,  «nd  «l.Us  t«aani 

to  tVie  Huzaureh  country,  he  was  treated  wttli  the  utmost  contempt :  his  oim  nbt^TT 
called  bim    •  bo|^"  and  never  sddNMcd  him  but  with  **  SnggMii,".  O  dog.      .  ^  . 


f 


Digitized  by  Google 


IIAZAUllEHS. 


487 


I  must  not  quit  the  Hazaurehs  without  nodoing  the  celebrated 
idols  of  Baumeeaun,  which  9tand  within  their  country. 

I  hftve  only  heard  two  idob  deaciibed,  though  it  is  sometimes  said 
there  are  more:  of  these  one  represents  a  mnn,  and  one  a  woman. 
The  former  is  twenty  yards  hi^,  the  latter  twelve  or  fourteen.  The 
man  has  a  turban  on  his  head,  and  is  said  to  have  one  hand  held  up 
to  Ill's  mouth,  and  the  other  across  his  breast.  The  surrounding  hills 
are  tull  of  caves»  but  I  have  heard  of  no  %ures  or  inscriptions  which 
they  contuiu. 

The  learnetl  in  Indian  antujuities  are  ol  opmiou  tliat  these  ido\$ 
•are  o^nnected  with  the  worship  of  Buudh,  and  their  situation  strongly 
reminds  one  of  the  colossal  statues  at  the  entrance  of  the  great  tem- 
ple, supposed  to  beloug  to  the  rriigion  of  Boodli,  in  the  midst  of  the 
city  of  eavei,  whidh  is  to  be  seen  at  Canara  in  Salsette  }  but  my  in- 
ftrmetieii  on  saeh  siib|eots  does  nol  tpaXfy  mt  to  Ibiqn  any  opinion  * 
r^arding  them*  : 


(  4»  ) 

ft 


CHAP.  m. 

HERAUT. 

tTERAUT  is  included  within  the  Dooraunee  limits,  ami  ought  to 
have  been  described  with  the  lands  of  tliat  tribe,  but  &s  it  was 
always  a  distinct  government,  and  is  now  almost  an  indepetklmt 
tlate,  it  seemed  more  suitable  to  .treat  of.  it  MfMltelj. 

Heiwitt  finsnarly  called  Hcri>  it  one  of  tite  moat  amaant  and  mat 
MMmned  of  ail  flie  cities  of  the  eeat.  It  gave  ilv  name  to  en  esften- 
tm  provinoe  at  the  time  of  the  expedition  of  Alesander,  and  it  «■# 
fiv  a  long  time  the  oyital  of  the  empiret  whidi  waa  tnuiamifttod  by 
Tanedane  to  hia  aoiu.  Fkom  the  hou^e  of  Timour  it  peaaed  to  the 
Snffiweea  (or  Sofia)  of  Feiaia*  fiom  whom  it  waa  takm  bj  the  Doo- 
raunees  in  1715.  It  was  retaken  by  Naudir  Sbauh  in  1731,  and  it 
fell  into  the  hands  of  Ahmed  Shauh  in  1749^  aiDoe  ivhich  time  it  haa 
been  held  by  the  Dooraunees. 

The  deacariptions  I  have  already  gnren  of  A^j^iami  atiea,  leeve  me 
little  to  aaijr  ik  Herau^  which  perhapa  auipaaiqa  them  all  in  magniii- 
cence.  I  must,  however,  notice  the  great  mosque,  a  lofty  and  spa- 
cious buildintr,  surmounted  by  domes  and  minarets,  and  ornamented 
with  the  shimng  punted  tile*  which  ia  ao  much  uaed  in  all  Pecsiaa 
buildings. 

The  city  is  surrounded  by  a  broad  ditch,  filled  with  water  from 
ttpi  ings.    It  has  a  high  rampart  of  unburnf  brick,  the  lower  part  of 
which  is  strengthened  bv  the  earth  of  flu'  ditch  heaped  up  against  it. 
On  the  northern  side  is  the  ciLodei,  built  on  a  mound  which  over- 
looks the  town.    It  has  a  rampart  of  burnt  brick,  and  a  wet  ditch. 

tl 


i^iyui^cd  by  Google 


HERAUT.  439 

H«iiut  coven  a  great  spdoey  aad  contains  about  100,000  inliabikaxits*. 
TwoHkiiirds  <if  that  aiimber  consist  oi  Herautees,  or  anoieiit  inhabi- 
tantsi  of -^he  plada^  wbo  ive  att  Shceihs :  a  tenth  of  the  :  whole  popula- 
tibii  may  be  DoaanameoB,  and  the  rest  all  Moguls  and,  Eimauks,  with 
the  same  mixture  of  strangers  that  is  found  in  all  the  Afghaun  cities. 
The  city  stands  in  a  fertile  plain,  which  is  watered  bv  a  river  crowded 
with  villnrr^es',  and  coh  ered  with  fields  of  corn.  This  rich  landscape 
fec«!ves  ;ulilitionai  bLiiity  and  variety  from  the  mosques,  fomhs,  and 
other  editice*?.  inttrmixod  with  numerous  trees  and  tis.  with 

which  it  is  embellished,  and  hrom  the  lolty  mountains  by  which  it  is 
surrounded.    '    '  '  ■  * 

The  inhabitants  of  the  coimtrv  ioand  Heraut,  are,  for  the  most 
part,  Taujiks,  and  bear  the  character  already  attributed  to  that  re- 
spectable race.  They  are  all  Soonnecs.  Among  the  rest  of  the  in- 
habitants are  to  be  found  Afghauns,  Eimauks,  and  Beloches ;  and 
BMny  Moguls  and  Chaghatyes  still  dwdl  in  the  nei^^iboniiiood  <tf  a 
d^  i^^Mdi  waa  so  Ibngf  the  ■eafc.of  tiieir.  iiBtiofiml,  grcrtnew.  '  :  >  ' 
:  The  imrnMie^  of  HeiBnt  is  SKioiied^flt  1,000,000  nqpees*  of  Vbidi 
jMffe  than  half  k  iiUotted  to  tba '  payment' of  teoopei  or  granted  to 
noipiie'pertoiia.  -.  The  irenmbider  is  paid, into, tte  tnmsxjy  Uiit 
the4Riioiiiift  iwim  stafioed  of  tha  provinoe^  and-a 

fixed  samuMdtolie-Teiniitedjficom  Ceiibid  tUl  the.tcign.of  fibauh 
ZenMun.* '  One  great  aiphnee  mm  ihe  i&ainlteriahce.of  the  pioViniaial 
anhj. '  ^6  Gholaums^  or  troops  in  constant  pajf  at  one  time 
amounted  to  eight  thousand  men;  mid  the  contingents  of  the  £i* 
mauks  and  some  <^  the  J^Mtanneest  completed  the  force.  Almost 
th^  wbbie  of  Khorassaim  was  at  one  time  induded  in  this  provinoeu ' 
A  government  of  such  importance  was  naturally  considered  as  a 
suitable  mplojrment  for  one  of  the  King*8  aons.   It  was  held  by' 


-  *  In  the  account  which  J  wrote  of  this  city  in  1810,  1  had  greatly  under-rated  the 
oviriier  oTisUbilMm  mA  kawtritea  *»  pNMDt  ttrtmait  fimaGkyitHB  Chiliiev 
Whoss  ubsM  isllsai  Msdsd  ts  coatea  the  rest  of  mf  seoHiBt 

3  a 


490 


HURAUT. 


Tonour  Shauh  in  his  father's  life  tiniA.  &  wu,  at  a  kter  period* 
conferred  en  Shauh  Mahmood,  and  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the 
brother  of  that  monarch.  Prince  Feerooz  Oodeen,  who  haa  the  usoal 

title  of  Haiijee,  from  his  having  m&de  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.  He 
holds  a  court  of  his  own,  composed,  in  general,  of  the  youn<j^cr 
brothers  of  the  Doornunfc  imd  Cuzilbaiish  iiohlc:^  of  tlic  coun  of 
CaubuJ.  His  officers  of  slate,  and  oil  his  eslahhsliments  arc  on  the 
model  of  the  King's ;  and  as  some  of  the  Dooraunec  lords,  and 
most  of  the  Eimauk  chiefs  reside  at  Heraut»  he  enabled  to 
maintain  considerable  splendour. 

He  has  the  reputation  of  a  mild  and  respectable,  thougli  a  timid 
prince ;  but  it  i^pears  from  Captain  Christie's  accounts,  which  are 
later,  and  probably  more  correct  than  nune*  ^mt  he  fiaa  kit 
uracil  of  hia  popularity,  by  giving  htmwlf  .up  to  thecomcQi  of  n 
FiBfnaiB'iiimiafeer.  * 

•  Hie  prince  at  Heraut  always  eieraaed  an  aaduHntjr  aInKMt  nnoon- 
trdkd  by  the  King,  and  the  civfl  wan  m  the  kingdei  haiire  been 
flmNinble  to  die  independenoe  of  Rinoe  Feeioos.  He  eBdeerouis 
to  hecpaa  modi  as  poisible  out  of  die  apheie  of  these  trooUas*  nd 
I  belie?e  he  aabiowledgea  the  aorereignty  of  either  of  the  oooBpeli- 
tors  when  his  power  seems  wdl  MtaUished,  but  his.  dose  connectkm 
with  Mahmood,  who  is  hiirf  fidl  brother,  inclines  him  to  that  party; 
and  dus,  together  with  his  fear  of  Futteh  Khaun,  has  led  him  more 
than  once  to  fend  a  feroe  under  hia  son  to  oo^ipeiate  with  diafc 
party. 

The  siejre  of  Heiaut  by  the  Fersian^^  is  detailed  in  the  history. 
Feaooz  at  that  time  engaged  to  pay  a  contribution  of  50,000  Ba. 


•  C'nptoin  Christie  states  that  this  preference  of  a  Persian,  or,  as  ho  thIIs  hiiD,  a 
Mogul,  han  occa»ioncd  great  jealousy  among  the  Atghauns ;  but  thai  tiie  Prince  findi 
Aft  ftftUMT  w  vkigkiA  to  Ui  papdMi  «f  ^atortioa  Ami  Ae  ^^-^  *  iA» 

"  being  accustomctl  to  tin  frcr  and  independent  tenure  of  tlie  land,  arc  not  lOBh^f. 
«  to  aa«i«t  in  a  system  of  plunder,  £br  irhich  Uie  Mi^'if  we  jpcoverbiaL'* 

10 


Digitized  by  Google 


HEIIAUT. 


491 


(ii6|000).  He  may  perhaps  have  pnimiaed  Co  raieir  this  ptjOMnl 
■mmaUj ;  and  I  have  heard  that  a  nmi  of  money  has  smce  been 
extorted  from  him  by  the  fear  of  an  approaching  army ;  but  the 

tribute  which  the  Persians  represent  him  to  pay,  seems  fo  be  one  of 
the  fictions  with  which  that  people  fce  so  ioiui  of  indulging  their 
luitionai  vanity. 


* 


0 

3^2 


('  m  ) 


CHAP.  IV/-  '     ^    •  '  ' 

aUTAUK. 

THERE  is  no  country  to  which  an  aHmirer  of  Persian  poetry  and 
roiuaiice  will  turn  with  more  interest  than  to  Seestauii,  and 
tliere  is  none  where  his  expectations  will  meet  with  so  melancholy  a 
disi^jpointment  Nor  is  this  to  be  attributed  to  the  exaggeratiMi  of 
the  poets,  fiw  die  mmiemNii  nnna  whidi  il  adll  testifir 
Sewlaim  to  luire  been  %  fertile  country,  iUll  of  dtieB>  wUdi  in  eitent 
and  nugnifioenoe  are  weutosAy  surpassed  by  any  in  Aiie:  nor  era 
the  canaea  of  ita  dedine  leaa  appaNnt  than  die  prao6  of  its  fenner 
|HKMpenlij« 

EKoefit  on  the  north,  where  it  joina  the  aontli-weiteni  border  of 
the  Boorannee  oountiy,  the  province  it  aunoonded  1^  wide  and  dis- 
mal desarts,  whence  every  wind  brings  clouds  of  a  light  ahifting  sand» 
which  destroys  the  fertility  of  the  fields,  and  gradually  overwh^lma 
the  viUages.*  The  only  parts  whidbi  stUl  retain  their  fertility,  are 
those  on  the  banks  of  the  Helmund  and  Furra  Rood,  and  of  the  lake 
which  is  i<Mrmed  by  those  rivers.  This  celebrated  lake  is  termed  by 
our  geographers  the  sea  of  Durra  or  Zereng.  In  Persian  books,  it  is 
said  sometimes  to  be  called  the  sea  of  Loukh,  and,  by  the  people  of 
the  country,  the  sea  of  Zoor  or  of  Khaujek.  In  truth,  I  suspect  it 
has  no  name  at  all  in  the  neighbourhood,  but  h  merely  called  tlie 
Lake,  or  the  Sea.    I  have  heard  various  accounts  of  its  extent :  the 


*  Tbe  native  village  of  Moollah  iaSfit,  whom  I  have  to  oii»  mentiaQed,  baa  been 
Jtwrted  riaoalK  left  gewtami,  from  i^tmm. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


SEE8XAUN. 


bef^t  make  it  at  least  one  hundred  and  fiftjr  miles  n»ind,  th(»]^  they 
differ  about  its  shape.  The  water,  though  not  salt,  is  brackish  and 
hardly  drinkable.  In  the  centre  stands  a  single  hill,  which  is  -  called 
the  Copee  Zoor,  or  hill  of  strength,  and  sometimes  the  fort  of 
Roostum :  tradition  indeed  deciare*?  it  to  have  tun  n  n  fort  in  ancient 
times,  and  as  it  is  steep  and  lofty,  and  suircMiiideil  ])y  uater  of  great 
depth,  it  is  still  a  place  of  refuge  lor  some  of  tliu  inhabitants  of  the 
opjK>site  sliores.  I'ho  edo;e8  of  the  lake,  for  a  considerable  breadtli, 
are  choaked  wiLli  long  l  uslu^s  and  reeds,  the  shores  also  are  over- 
grown with  the  same  son  of  vegetation ;  and  being  liable  to  inunda- 
tion, are  full  of  miry  places  and  pools  of  standing  water.  These 
BiiwIiM  iad-  dnciBBlt  fiequanftod  by  Jicids/fi^'okeii,  which  are 
ftd  ^  ft  dmaaftiatk-vf  mtu  dudiicl;  from  the  dtibcr  uilMbtCaiits  of 
Seertimnt  diey  are  nid  to  be  tall  and  atout,  but  falaek and  ugly, 
iridi.kDgvfiwea  and  laige' black  leyea:-  they  go  abnoat  mihedt 
and  live  in-'hivrahi  of  reada.  Benda*  their  ecfenpatieb  ofhetdMrnea^ 
liiiy  iUb  atld  ftarl  on  lafis  aniaaig  ilia  fod^ 
•  "ibe  comliy  hnmediafedj  beyond  tfaeaa  m>da  of.  leeda  psoddbaa 
grass,  and  grain,  and  taaiaiiiksy  as  doea  the  narrow  valley  >diiioil|^ 
which  the  Helmtmd  flowiy  and  probably  the -banks  of  thie  fbim 
Rood.  The  rest  of  die  conntFy  is  almost  a  desart :  like  all  deaarta, 
it  yiekb  toemgie  for  camels,  and  here  and  tharu  it  aflforda  a  well  tat 
4he  wandering  Beloches  who  take  care  of  those  Miimals. 

The  original  inhabitants  of  Seestann  are  Taujiks,  but  they  have 
now  received  some  atiditions  from  otiiei  rountries.  Theie  ciiesaid 
to  be  two  considerable  tribes,  callctl  Sliohrukee  and  Surbundoe, 
which  have  emigrated  from  Persian  Irauk  to  Seestann,  and  in  niiich 
later  times,  a  tribe  of  Beloches  has  fixed  its  residence  in  the 
east  of  the  country.  The  Taujiks  and  the  two  first-mentioned 
tribes  exactly  resemble  the  Persians,  and  have  little  remarkable 
in  their  character.  The  Beloches  are  noer  aoonnanded  by  an  enters 
ptflahig  chialfiiitiibd/Kbann  Jehaon  Kfaaon^'  wlm  iaHhe  termridf 
canvanst  and  of  all  the  nesj^bomnng  countries.  They  fimn^ly 
Jived  in  tenta^'  and  aubaiated  by  pastuiage  and  pillage ;  but  they  have 


Digitized  by  Google 


TAVS, 


now  applied  t.Viemselves  with  industry  and  success  to  liusbandry,  taiA 
have  adoptcvi  t  he  dress  and  manners  of  the  people  <>1  Seestaun. 
■  The  noiriinal  chief  of  all  Seestaun  is  IVXulUk  Biihraun  Kjaunee, 
'who  is  de&eendied  (or  reputed  to  be  descended)  from  the  ancient 
house  of  Ky,  which  reigned  long  over  Penda,  produced  Cyrus  and 
other  great  monarchsy  and  tenninated  in.,  the  death  of  Dariu»,  aud 
the  subveEUon  of  hSk  mapia»  bgr  tlie  'GrMn  '  JAuUik  Behraun  is 
very  sokailile  of  tfas  gloiy  of  i6  lUiwtrioiiitft  dMCtot :  Iwinini  ■—iiiiiii 
the.  title  of'SSng,  and  TiMiwtdlhB,  xni  a. anMll  scales  the  Mt^M^Sum 
ql^ioyaltyrj  iMt  faia  aaiOiority  la  (ml;  lecogniMd  m  a..iiiiill  j^.tf 
SiiBilMiii»  ml-  hjanMa  fioceltiwaidcr  a  tfadnaandinflB.',  Hia  capital 
ia-caDed  JelUlalMd.  '  iLM  dooteuia  ii  ism  ibodaalid  khditelai 
'biit  the  rtiiiii  widoh  auiiiMuid  it^ifiv  *  wMt'Sxteiitv  bato wltneaato.to 
^ormel;  grandeur.  ..   :    \.  . 

The  family  have  had  a  short  gl^im  of  prosperity  at  JDO  TOejir  feifcetB 
period.  The  head  of  it,  Mullik:Mahniiiod»  raBe'iiito.|pteat  .liaties 
in  the  beginning  of  Naudir  &3iauh*s  career,  and  atiqniMd.  ptfueflaicii 
of  the  greater  part,  if  not  the  whole,  of  Khoraissaun.:  He  was  at  last 
defeated  and  put  to  death  by  Naudir  Shauh,  who  reduced  the  whole 
of  Seestaun,  and  who  appears  to  hnve  transferred  the  government  to 
a  Ijiother  or  a  cousin  of  JMahmood.  Solimann  who  was  chiei  in 
the  time  of  Ahmed  Shauh,  submitted  to  the  Dooraunees,  and  gave 
his  daughter  to  their  King.  The  Kyaun^s  have  since  paid  a 
Ught  tribute,  and  lunnshed  a  contingent  to  the  King  of  Caubul, 
but  it  has  sometimes  been  necessary  to  enforce  the  performance  of 
thflae  Acts  of  §  ubiiiiaai6ik  >  Xheore  was  a  body  bf  Seestauneob  at 
Mbswet  im  IMO^  eotmnaiidBd  by  MiiDifc  Mabmood*  »  giai|d«in'af 
the  frrnena  prince  iviioas  nanM*  be  faoaon  .  . 
:  I  hatve  not  heard  what  idbtioiiMiillik  Behraott  baava-  to  fM- 
ma^t''ga^fmamit,.>tm^^epb  ihafc  Crinoe  QHumiiM  la  nMHsned  tothia 
da«g|b»b  lheEFteriaB8raiMd»piiatfliidth«the.bBi^^ 
'JSmg>  Icatinathata»d»<pq|ectiiiie.^dttpq[^^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  ^  ) 


C»AP.  V. 

■BLOCHinAUN  AMD  LOWBft  (ONDb 

BELOCHISTAUN  •  b  bounded  on  Ifie  mxOk  by  A^haunistaim 
and  Seestaun,  and  on  tfa»  wnitii  the  IndiHi  oeatn.}  U  Jvu 
Upper  Mid  Lome  Siadon  theeaat,  and  Peak  on  ih^  iraatK .  It  ]a 
•tx  livndrad  milM  loii0»  and  time  Irandftd  and  «fifty  bnptti.  - 1^ 
UvgCitdiyiaumor  hiathat  wfaich  bdoiigi  to  Uie  Khaun  of .  Uiiati 
and  eomprehcilda  the  graafter  -pait  of  Sotwpaoitami,  and  the,  .idiote 
tdUe  land  of  Uant  lliefibnitbf  tfaeaetiacfts  idlowadd  bMt  the 
aoil  ia  gftod,  hut  fiom  the  want  of  irater>  the  greater  past  m  a  nehod 
and  unoultivatad  pJaub  'Bound  OundAira.  Dander^'aiMl  edwr  tgim 
howerer*  ia  well  waterad  and  ciilthrafted^  and  yidda  the  pgodnrtlom 
of  IndlAi  It  is  mostly  inhabited  by  Jala,  llie  table  land,  on  th9 
eontiaiy*  ia  high,  cold,  rugged,  and  haino<  -  It  afioida  only.  .4hi 
ooaiaer  produce  of  Aighaunistaun. 

.  The  people  aie  Brahooee  Beloches*  mixed  vrith  Taujik8»  there 
called  Dehvann.  The  ifonner  people  are  like  a  mder  aort  of  AS- 


•  XihB  dqtflxomiBcttOjt  betwMP  BckducUun  tani  Caubui  appears  to  reqiplrq  *  nore 
eaitended  aeoouiit  fevmer  coontiy,  bat  I  tnut  the  geography  of  that  part  of  Am 
is  alreiuly  in  better  Iiandt.'  lieni.  Pottinger  and  lAtOL  Christ  were  disputclied  in  iSbp* 
by  Sir  John  Mnlcolm,  in  rrplorf  the  Belochc  cotinf  re,  and  the  east  of  Porsin.  frnrto  nt 
tiuU  time  wbo^y  unknown  to  iuuropeaus.  They  periormad  this  eot^rmng  luul  ua^r- 
tant  journey  widi  complete  gucccss,  and  joined  Sir  Jc|lD  Mdbofan  at  MarMi^M,  almflit 
on  the  borders  of  the  Ottoman  empire.  The  hardships,  iatigucs,  iirul  a<l ventures  of  such 
•a  undertaking  may  wdl  be  inuigtned.  LieuL  Chriatic  has  since  fisUen,  galiandy  headii;^ 
the  Persians  under  his  command,  in  a  battle  with  the  Russians;  but  I  hope  the  paz<kn> 
bm«f  the  iiilwtrtiilg  jiimniiji  whiA  he  and  his  associate  perfimned  with  so  amth  ^cne> 


496  LOWER  SlitJX 

ghauna,  barbaiDUh  and  uncivilized,  but  hospitable,  hardy,  lab  >i  ions 
and  honest.  They  arc  divided  into  Khails  like  the  Afjjhaniis,  hut 
the  general  government  has  swallowed  up  the  internal  instiLutions  of 
those  societies. 

All  the  hilly  parts  of  Belochestauu  belong  to  the  Braclioocs ;  the 
plains  are  inhabited,  by  another  race  called  Rind,  of  which  numbers 
reatde  in  Seeweestaun.  •  Theie  two  races,  thou^  oofflprehcnded  un- 
der the  Gonunon  name  of  Beloche,  are  eotirdy  diatinct  in  most 
qtecte.  Tbsat  languages  dife  entircSy  fiom  each-other,  and  fiom 
att  the  neighbonnng  towns^-  Neithce  seems  to  be  coniiebtad  with 
the  Arabs,  at  has  bfiiaa  supposed.  The  last  due^  NulMer  Khnu, 
had  sutgected.  oU  BebduBtaun,  but  the  rdgping  prince^  -Malniioed 
Khatia's  possessions,  are  leduioed  bj  iebellions'to  iihe  disttnota  dbovt 
mentioned,  and  some  trifling  ones  on  the  desart  at  the  western  foot 
of  the  Table  I^nd.  His  revenoe  is  only  300,000  rupees  (dBatifi(>0)i 
but  he  maintains  ten  thousand  troops,  and  migbt,  in  case  of  necessity, 
call  out  twenty  thousand  on  foot,  on  horseback,  or^ondiOBedaries. 
He  acknowledges  the  King  of  CaubuVs  sovereignty,  payt «  qoit  rent 
for  his  dominions,  and  furnishes  eight  thousand  troops  to  the  royal 
army,  on  express  condition  that  they  are  not  to  be  employed  in  ciTil 
wars. 

Shawl,  with  Hurren  and  Daujil  (two  districts  near  Dera  Ghauzee 
Khaun),  were  granted  by  Ahmed  .Shauh  to  Nasseer  Kfiami,  in  reward 
of  his  serv  ices,  and  on  condition  of  his  permanently  supplying  one 
Uiousand  foot  to  serve  in  Cashmeer. 

I  shall  say  but  litCte  of  Sind.  I  made  lew  inquiries  resj^cting  that 
province  while  in  Iihe  Gfubul  domini<ms,  because  theie  was  a  British 
nisnon  si  its  capital }  and  I  haye  since  fimnd  that  an  aeoonui  w31 
probably  be  laid  belbve  the  public  by  a  Gentleman  *  who  has  had 
beUer  opportunities  of  knowing  it  than.  I  possess. 


*  I jfiitffliant  Pottnigeari  to  whom  i  am  indnblwl  for  some  piuticalan  reapecting  Sind. 
3omeoltHn  I  vmm  to  a  ■Mmuatyt  by  t  issfciiiml  MwcMd  <f  the  Bombay  Marine,  wbo 
MCCBipwifld  llw  flUMMB  to  find* 


Digitized  by  Google 


LOWER  SIKD.  4d7 

I  have  here  given  the  name  of  Sind  in  compliance  with  fonner 
mage*  to  the  tract  which  I  have  ebewhore  distinguished  by  the  term 
of  Tjower  Sind.  It  is  bounded  on  the  north  by  Shekarpoor  and  Ba- 
hawulpoor :  on  the  east,  by  the  Indian  desart ;  ou  the  west,  by  the 
mountains  and  hills  of  Belochistaun  ;  on  the  south-east,  by  Cutch, 
and  on  the  soulIi  bv  the  sea.  The  grand  feature  of  the  ronntry  is 
the  Tndtifl,  which  ciivides  it  into  two  parts,  of  which  thul  on  the  east 
of  the  river  appears  to  be  the  largest 

The  resemblance  of  this  country  to  Egypt,  has  often  been  ob- 
served.  One  description  might  indeed  serve  for  both.  A  smooth 
and  Grille  phin  b  bounded  on  one  side  bj  iiioiiiituiifl»  and  on  the 
odier  by  a  desart.  It  ia  divided  by  a  large  river  whidi  fimns  a  Dolta 
aa  it  approacfaet  the  -aeay  and  annually  inundatea  and  enrichea  the 
country  near  ita  banks.  Hie  climate  of  both  ia  hot  and  dry,  and 
lain  ia  of  tare  occurrence  in  either  countiy* 

Even  the  poHtical  circumstances  of  Sind  and  Egypt  have  at  prOBaot 
an  accidental  resemblance:  in  both  a  submissive  people  are  tyran*" 
nised  over  by  a  barbarous  tribe,  who,  in  both  inatances,  yield  a  re- 
luctant subnus8i<m  to  a  distant  monarch.  ;  u 
Egypt,  however,  divides  tlie  sea  which  washes  the  richest  king- 
doms of  the  east,  from  that  which  is  bordered  by  the  active  and 
vvealtiiy  ports  of  Europe  :  its  own  produce  is  also  an  object  of  demand 
in  the  latter  country;  and  hence,  in  s])ite  of  all  the  vices  of  its  govern- 
ment, it  still  presents  populous  towns,  numerous  canals,  and  plentiful 
harvests.    Sind,  which  (besidei>  the  obvious  inlLiiority  of  its  com- 
munications) is  placed  in  the  midst  of  couutrics  destitute  of  the  in- 
dnstiy  <^  JEurope*  and  difoing  little  firom  each  other  in  their  produce 
and  wants,  ia  deprived  of  all  the  stimnlns  whkh.  conuneice  can-  fae> 
Stow,   Hence  the  rich  lands  en  the  xiver  are  allvwed  to  waate  their 
fiftility  in  the  production  of  weeds  and  boshesb  while  those  inland 
ai)B  neglected*  and  left  to  their  original  aterility.  The  evils  of  this 
negleot  of  agriculture  are  heigktened  by  the  bszhaions  luxury  of  the 
diteft,  who  appropriate  vast  tracts  of  the  land  best  fitted  for  tllli^^ 
to  maintain  those  wild  betsts  and  birds  which  afibrd  them  the  ple»* 


1 


498  LOWEK  SIND. 

forei  of  the  chaoa  Yet  there  are  some  pazts  of  Stnd  to  which  these 
obMrvsdons  do  not  apptf ;  some  places  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
river,  or  its  branches,  are  cultivated,  and  the  soil  there  dii^lays  its 
natural  fecundity,  in  bringing  forth  most  of  the  productions  of  India ; 
and  the  whole  district  of  Chaudookee,  enclosed  between  the  Indus 
and  a  remarkable  branch  of  it,  is  bifrhly  c^!lti^-atcd,  and  eminently 
productive.  Thiis  branch  of  the  Lulus  runs  out  to  the  west,  and. 
after  spreading  over  a  wide  tract,  which  at  dilK  rcnt  sea.Hous.  cither 
a  marsli  or  a  lake,  it  a^rain  joins  the  main  stream  seventy  miles  be- 
low the  place  of  its  sepatalioii. 

Sind  is  a  bare  country  ;  the  few  tre^  it  prodiu  es  are  of  the  kinds 
common  in  India.  It  has  no  remarkable  animals,  but  the  number 
o£>  camek  which  em  fisd  in  it»  ii  worthy  of  ,ieiiiuk.  They  are  used 
to  di»w  water,  to  tnm  iiiilb»  ftc.  but  the  goods  of  8uid  ore  mudi 
traiuported  by  water  oyrriage*  nor  ie  that  much  employed,  Ihr  a  few 
flat  bottomed  boata  are  sndiraent  for  the  commerce  of  thur  imporer- 
iAed  cfMUitKj. 

The  capital  of  Smd  it  Hyderabad,  a  large  fortified  town,  sitmled 
onarockyhiU*  I  should  ooijeotDTe  it  to  oontam  about' e^ht^tiioai- 

sand  inhabitants. 

Tatta,  die  ancient  Pattala,  which  was  once  a  flourishing  commercial 
town,  is  now  greatly  declined,  but  atili  contaiiis  about  fifteen  thousand 

inhabitants. 

Much  of  the  population  of  tho^^e  towns  is  Hindoo;  but  the  bulk 
of  that  of  the  counirv.  is  rinii[ioseil  of  IVlahommethm^. 

At  (he  time  when  Sind  tell  under  the  A^haun  dommions,  it  was 
governed  by  a  ])rince  of  the  tribe  of  Calhora,  which  I  believe  belongs 
to  the  south  of  Persia.  Abduuhiubbce,  tlie  last  prince  of  this  race, 
disgusted  all  his  subjects  by  his  tyranny  and  bad  government,  and 
embfoiled  hhnself  partaculsriy  with  the  Talpoorees,  a  tribe  which 
finrmed  the  princip^  part  of  the  military  population  of  Mb  countiy* 
The  chiift  of  tibat  tr^  st  Icangdi  entesied  mi  a^oosph-acy  to  d^Kise 
Um  I  but  their  piietioeB  became  known  to  Abdoobrahbefik  who  put 


Digitized  by  Google 


499 


tibeni-lU  to  death.  This  act  of  violence,  accompanied,  it  is  said, 
with  treachery,  prodiiced  an  op«n  rev^M,  and  ended  in  the  expaUaD 

of  Abfloolniibhpp  trom  Sind. 

Timour  Shaiih,  after  some  itnavailing  attempts  to  restore  him,  con* 
ferred  on  him  the  government  of  Leia,  as  an  indc  rnnitv  for  Sind,  and 
formally  invested  tlie  chief  of  the  Talpoorees  with  the  government 
of  that  province.  Abdoolnubbee  repaid  the  Sha«h*s  boniiLy  by  re- 
belling in  his  new  province,  was  defeated  by  the  royal  troops,  and 
ended  his  days  in  poverty  at  Dera  Haiyie  Khaiin  in  Upper  iKnd. 
The  Talpoomes  have  remained  m  poMeaoon  of  Sind  ever  ainoe  Ids 
eKpubioo* 

At  the  time  of  the  last  miuioii  to  &adif  the  gommnent  mi  in  the 
hands  of  three  brothers,  who  had  divided  lihe  oountiy  into  three 
unequal  ahmtet,  but  who  lived  in  the  same  house,  and  transacted  all 
affairs  in  concert.  Meer  Gholaum  Ali,  the  eldest  of  these,  in  whose 
hands  the  diief  direction  of  the  state  had  been  placed,  has  since  died» 
but  a  new  settlement  has  been  effected  without  any  tumult  or  blood- 
shed. A  small  portion  of  the  province  still  remains  in  the  hands  of 
Meer  Tarra,  a  connection  or  rlrpondont  of  the  house  of  Calhora. 

The  three  chiefs  of  the  Talpoorees  are  called  tlie  Meers,  or  Amee» 
•    (commanders),  of  Sind.    They  rule  in  tlie  name  of  the  King  of 
Caubul,  and  arc  appointed  to  their  government  by  his  letters  patent; 
but  as  they  are  Sheeahs,  ami  as  they  owe  their  government  more  to 
their  own  force  than  to  their  prince's  favour,  they  are  heartily  disaf- 
fected to  tfaeDoorannee  state.   Hiey  ought  to  pay  a  reremie  <^ 
IfSOf^OOO  rupees  annually  to  the  royal  tteasuiy^  but  since  the  troo* 
falsB  in  the  kingdom  of  Caubn],  they  hxre  generally  withheld  it»  un- 
less when  in  immediate  fear  of  the  royal  armies.   Shauh  fiSngau  was 
only  aUe  to  obtain  &^  ladn  fer  the  revenue  of  the  year  before  I 
was  at  Pediawer ;  the  rest  he  aUowed  to  be  deducted  on  pretence  of 
bad  sea.sons.    Even  this  sum  was  not  paid  till  the  King  reached  the 
fiontiers  of  Sind ;  but  his  army,  including  the  Beloches  under  M^- 
mood  Khaun,  did  not  on  that  occasion  exceed  eight  thousand  men. 
J  bnagitte  that  they  are  more  submissive  to  Shauh  Mahmood. 

Sa  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


500  1X)WEH  SIND. 

The  dzesB  of  Sind  is  a  long  cotton  gown,  and  a  quQled  cap  of 
brown  cotton  doth,  ahi^>ed  like  the  crown  of  a  hat,  hot  iiamiwer4 

they  also  wear  trowsm  iuid  a  loongee. 

The  people  are  generally  of  the  middle  sizo,  thin,  though  not 
weal<.  and  blacker  than  most  of  the  people  of  India.  There  is  little 
to  praisp  in  their  character,  which  is  debased  and  degraded  bj  the 
oppression  of  their  government.  The  onlv  tlnng  that  struck  me  in 
the  Sindees  with  whom  I  have  conversed,  is  Liicir  deficiency  of  intel- 
ligence. Those  who  know  them  well,  however,  add,  that  they  have 
all  the  vices  of  an  enslaved  people. 

The  diiefs  appear  to  be  barbarians  of  the  rudest  fltanip» 
anj  of  die  baifaannia  virtaea. 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  Ml  ) 


CHAP.  VI. 

UPPER  SIND,  MOULTAN,  LYA,  &C. 

SHIKARPOOR  is  bounded  fay  the  Indus,  and  the  Beloche  ooan- 
try  on  the  east  and  west}  on  the  north  it  has  the  AlozaureeSy 
and  Sind  on  the  MUth.  The  pnyvince  is  fertile  towards  the  Lidus^ 
but  dry  and  barren  at  a  difltance  from  that  river.    The  town  is  of 

considerable  size ;  it  is  siirroundetl  by  a  mud  wall,  but  has  no  ditch. 
The  inhabitants  are  almost  all  Hindoos.    They  are  called  Shikar- 
poorer,  and  speak  a  particular  dialect  of  Hindostanee,  called  bv  their 
name.   There  are  many  weaUhy  hankers  iu  the  town,  and  a  consider- 
able traile  is  kept  up  witli  ilie  Rajpoot  country,  Sind,  Candahar,  and 
Pcshawer.    Shikarpooree  bankers  are  to  be  found  in  every  part  of 
the  Doorauuee  dominions,  and  in  all  the  towns  of  Tootkbfsun.  Hiere 
are  very  few  A^j^uuins  (not  above  two  hundred)  aettled  in  die  town 
of  Shikaipoor.  •  The  inhabitanta  of  the  eountxy  are  Jnt%  Bek)dMS|  ' 
and  »  &m  Sindeaa.  ... 
•  Hie  xeraue  paid  to  the  King»  is  tfaiee  lades  of  mpeea.  The 
ly^ilfiin  Iseeps  up  very  few  troops. 

The  lenuskaUe  fofft  of  Bukkux^  situatedon  an  island  in  the  In<hia> 
bclonirs  to  this  pBOvinoe,  but  has  a  separate  governor. 

The  Mozaurees  who  live  to  the  north  of  Shikarpoor,  are  a  tribe  of 
Beloches,  I  believe  of  the  Rind  division.  They  inhabit  a  woodv 
and  ill-cukivatod  country.  They  live  almost  in  a  state  of  anarchyj 
and  have  made  themselves  notorious  for  their  Tobberies  on  ttie  high- 
way >  tor  their  piracies  on  the  Indus,  :ind  ibx  their  predatory  incur- 
sions into  the  country  of  their  nei^bours. 


Digitized  by  Google 


502 


BAHAWALPOOR. 


Dera  Ghauzee  Khaun  lies  between  the  Indus  and  Belochestaiui)  to 
the  north  of  the  Mozaurees.  It  was  conquered  by  Ahmed  Shauh. 
Tlie  country,  I  imagine,  resembles  the  adjoining  tract  of  Muckelwaud* 

already  described,  but  is  much  better  cultivated. 

The  revenue  is  less  than  five  lacks  of  rupees.  The  jirovince  is  in 
complete  subjection  to  the  King.  Tlie  town  is  ncai  l>  a..s  large  as 
Mooltaun,  but  much  ot  it  is  in  ruins.  The  country  suiTers  much  from 
the  frequent  change  of  the  governors. 

.  The  piovinoe  of  Dem  Ismael  Kbatm  iaoompoBedof  iJbetrMCtcaiUed 
MiMifciihrnwii  The  ooaatay  and  its  {noduoe  have  already  been  de- 
scribed :  its  zeveniies,  &&  wiU  be  menfeioiied  under  Lata*  to  whkii  it 
it  at  proaont  anncaicd. 

.  I  'hsve  mantioiied  in  anothac  pfam^  that  the  nottk-weitem  ooiw 
nav  of  (the  Indian  deaait  is  cut  off  by  the  atreanu  of  tbe  Panjaub ; 
and  that  the  tract  thus  formed  is  fertile  within  reach  4>f  the  inunda- 
tion of  the  riTen>  while  the  rest  is  sandy  and  waste.  Thia  -  explaii^ 
the  character  of  the  provinces  of  Bahawulpoor,  Moultaun,  and  1  ria, 
which  are  situated  on  the  east  of  the  Indii8«  and  to  the  south  of  the 
Salt  range. 

The  territory  of  Bahawulpoor  exteiK?^  two  huntlrod  and  eighty 
miles  from  north-east  to  south-west,  and  a  imndred  and  twenty  miles 
from  noith-west  to  south-east,  at  the  broadest  points.  It  !nchi(lo<<, 
for  a  certain  distance,  both  banks  of  the  InduS}  of  the  Hydaspes,  and 
of  the  Aoesines.  The  banks  of  the  riven  are  eveij  iriMVie  vfeh.  To 
(he  west  of  the  Acesinest  the  oountiy  at  a  distance  from'them  ispoor» 
bat  to  the  <eaat  it  is  abaohitely  desart  1!1ie  principal  towna  are 
Bahawulpoor,  Afamedpoor,  Jul|a]lpoor»  Seatpoor,  and  Oosh.'  Hie 
strongest  pbce  Is  Bennnily  a  fint  thai  owes  its  strength  to  the  desart 
with  which  it  is  suiraonded.    It  was  the  oidinaiy  xesidanoe  of 

Baliavi'ul  Khaun. 

The  inhabitants  of  Bahawnlpoor  are  Jnts*  Beloches*  and  Hindoos^ 
This  is  thepopidation  of  the  neighbouring  provinces  slso^biitHindooa 

are  most  numerous  in  Bahawulpoor. 
Bahawul  Khaun  was  rather  a  tributary  prince  than  a  govan<Nr  oo 


Digitized  by  Google 


MOULTAUM. 


503 


the  part  of  the  King.  His  ancestors  gained  their  possessions  as  early 
as  Naiulir  Shauh's  time  ;  Bahawal  Khaun  him  sell  succeeded  when  an 
infant,  and  had  ruled  tor  nji'^rnrds  of  forty  years.  His  family,  which 
is  called  Dawood-[)OOter,  was  iium  Shikarpoor,  and  was  originallY  in 
ji  h>\\  .sLation,  but  now  claims  desceuL  irom  Ahbass  the  uncle  of  Ma- 
liium»t.  Daring  the  life  of  Bahawul  Khaun,  the  ffovemment  was 
niiid  and  well  ordered,  and  though  he  wai>  i>aid  to  have  collected  a 
considerable  treasure,  hia  impoaitiaiia  on  the  people  were  moderate. 

Hie  whole  revenue  wm  1,500^000  nipees*  His  anny  eiioeeded  ten 
thoPBud  men*  induding  five  bettalkww  of  mitdilock-iiieD«  who  wofe 
a  regular  dress.  He  hed  a  fiNindeiy  for  camion,  as  had  the  cliieA  of 
Bloultoun  and  Leia}  but  Bahawul  Khaun**  gone  were  on  good  caib> 
riages,  while  all  the  olihen  hi  the  Idagdoni  of  Ganbul  axe  eaooeeduigly 
ill  mounted.  He  only  paid  150,000  rupees  annualljr  to  die  King. 
Bahawiil  Khaun  has  been  dead  three  jmn,  aiMl.his.SOnaildauccessor 
is  ht  from  being  his  equal  in  prudence  and  good  nunu^gemcot^  He 
is  eaqposed  to  great  uneasiness  and  danger  £ram  the  incraaoBg  power 
«f  his  neighbours  the  Siks. 

The  greatest  lerifrfh  of  the  ])rovince  of  Moultaun  is  a  hundred  and 
ten  miles,  and  the  greatest  breadth  seventy.  The  coimtrv  near  the 
river  is  rich,  but  the  rest  is  poor  and  thinly  inhabited  :  tiie  whole  has 
sufl'ered  much  Iruui  the  incursions  of  the  Siks,  and  many  ruined  viir 
lages  are  every  where  to  be  seen. 

The  r«nrenne  coUected  is  550,000  rupees,  of  whidi  250,000  goes  to 
lite  King. 

The  force,  when  I  was  there,  was  about  two  thousand  men,  and 
about  twentjr guns ;  but  ten  ortwdro  thousand  milittaiwuld  be  called 
out  on  emeigenqr*  Nodung  oodd  be  i^oise  than  the .  goYemmcnt': 
all  sorts  of  direct  usactionB  were  i^ggnnratad  bj  vonopolies,  fapadons 
and  ungoivernable  troopii  and  every  other  Vsad  of  abuse. 

This  provinoe  has  undeigpne  many  changes^  which  do  not  aeem 
Jdt  to  be  at  an  end.  It  was  taken  from  the  great  Mogul  by  the  Per» 
sians,  and  f<dl  to  Ahmed  Shaidi  on  the  death  of  Nauilir.  It  was  for 
a  short  tima  in  the  bands  of  the  Marattas  unmediately  b^oie  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


504  LEIA. 

bfltdeof  Braiup«t>«iidinttieoovered  on  that  vict^  TheSUnhtd 
it  ibt  two  jem  at  a  later  period  :  they  have  since  made  several  attacks 
on  it,  and  at  present  are  only  induced  to  spare  it  by  the  sobniiMioiis 

of  the  Haukim,  and  by  pecuniary  paym^ts  on  his  part. 
Leia  and  Dera  Ismaei  Khaiin  are  both  under  Mahommed  Khaun 

Suddozye, 

Leia  formerly  belonged  to  the  Heioches*  I  do  not  know  when  it 
was  conquereii  by  the  Doorauuees. 

The  banks  of  the  Induii  are  rich,  but  the  Und  at  a  distance  from 
that  river  is  a  sandy  desart. 

Leia  is  the  capital  town,  but  the  residence  of  the  Nabob  is  at 
Bukhur,  a  small  but  flourishing  town  near  the  Jndas ;  or  at  Mswir 
kaiia*  a  strcmg  (oftt  in  the  most  desart  part  of  the  pocovinoe* 

Bodi  provinces  only  yiekl  five  hundred  thousand  rupees,  of  which 
three  hundred  thousand  go  to  llie  King.  Mahommed  Khaun  has 
two  battalions  of  matchlock-men,  five  thousand  good  horse,  thirty 
guns,  and  two  howitsen.  He  ia  on  friendly  terms  with  the  Sik% 
probably  because  his  oountxy  towards  th«r  frontier  is  pardcularlj 
uninviting. 

Daoira  Deen  Punnah  is  a  little  district  enclosed  within  the  lands  of 
Leia.  It  yields  a  revenue  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  lupeei^ 
and  is  granted  rent  free  to  a  Dooraunee  lord. 

Leia  is  bounded  on  the  nrMth  In  the  salt  range,  iMnond  which  is 
a  rugged  and  inountainous  country  inhabited  by  smnil  nnd  fierce 
tribes,  ol  w  hom  the  most  conspicuous  are  the  Kautirs,  an  Indian  tribe 
independent  both  on  the  King  and  the  Siks. 

To  the  north  of  those  mountains  are  the  fertile  plains  of  Chuch  and 
Haaanrdk,  inhabited  by  Indians  oonverted  to  the  Jbhommedan  rep 
figien,  and  called  Goqjeis.  Among  them  ai»  many  tuifaulent  A£- 
ghanns  of  various  tribes,  and  these  last  aie  the  masteta  of  the 
Qountiy. 

To.the  nortli  of  these  plains-is  Drumtour  (the.ooiAitEy  of  tfap  Ja> 
doons),  already  de^icribed  as  belonging  to  a  branch  of  Eust^yes, 
North  of  it  is  Tomaul*  a  woody  and  molmkainous  oomitry,  which 

It 


Digitized,  by  Google 


BUMBAS  AKD  CUKKA&  5O5 

joins  on  the  north  to  Bikhlee^  s  country  of  the  same  kmd,  but  much 
moceextensiTe^  inhabited  by  Swautees,  and  under  a  separate  governor 
appdnted  by  the  King. 
All  these  countries  stretch  along  the  Indus ;  but  our  progress  to  the 

north  is  noir  stopped  by  snowy  mountfuns. 

To  the  east  of  Pukhloe  are  the  countries  of  the  Bumbas  and  Cuk- 
kas.  Tlie  former  is  under  two  or  three  chiefs  callod  Riyas,  the  prin- 
cipal of  whom  resides  at  Mozzufierabad :  both  tribes  are  Mahonme- 
dans.  Their  countries  are  composed  of  vast  mountains,  difficult  passes, 
and  thick  forests,  Thev  are  of  importance  to  the  DoonumeeSy  as 
foiQUDg  their  only  communication  with  (Jaahmetir. 


(   506  ) 


CHAP.  VII. 

CA8RMBBB. 

'T^HE  vallev  of  Cashmeer  is  surroundeti  by  loftv  mountains,  which 
divide  it  from  Tjttle  Tibet  on  the  north,  from  Ladaiik  on  the 
east,  from  the  Puujunb  on  the  south,  and  from  Pukhlee  on  the  west. 
A  branch  of  the  Spcen  (white)  ("aufirs  approaches  Cashmeer  on  the 
north-west.  There  are  but  seven  passe??  into  the  pro\  ince :  four  are 
from  the  south,  one  from  the  west,  and  tlie  remaininn;  two  from  the 
north.  That  of  Bember  is  the  best ;  but  that  of  iVIozzn  ufFerabad  or 
Barauioolla,  Iviiig  unvards  Aighaunistaun,  is  now  most  used.  I  shall 
not  attempt  to  describe  this  celebrated  valley  after  Bernier  and  Foster; 
the  account  of  the  latter,  in  pfuticular,  canuot  be  surpassed. 

Hie  Cashmeriana  are  a  dirtinct  natioa  of  die  Hindoo  atock,  and 
difo  in  language  and  maimers  from  all  their  nei^boiirs.  Tbe  men 
are  remarkably  stout,  active^  and  indilstrioos.  Hiej  are  excessively 
addicted  to  pleasuiei  and  are  notorious  all  over  the  East  for  fidsehood 
md  cunning.  By  fiur  (ihe  greater  part  of  the  peculation  are  Mussul- 
mans. Abooliuzl  enumerates  a  succession  of  upwards  of  a  hundred  and 
fifty  Hindoo  King^  who  reigned  over  Cashmeer  before  the  year  742 
of  the  Hijra»  when  they  supplanted  by  a  Mahommedan  dynasty. 
This  last,  after  rdgning  near  tluree  hundred  years,  was  subikied 
Hoomauyoon  the  son  of  Bauber.  Cashmeer  remained  in  the  hands 
of  the  Moguls  till  the  time  of  Ahmed  Sliauh»  when  it  was  taken  by 
the  Doornunees,  who  have  since  possessed  it. 

The  Cashmerians  seem  to  have  been  rebellious  when  their  coimtrv 
was  first  occupied  by  the  Dooraunees,  but  they  are  now  completely 
ffubdued  by  the  strong  measures  of  the  government.  No  Cashmerians, 


uiLjui^'cd  by  Googl 


exoe|A  wldieni  in  the  aemoe  of  the  Mb,  «re:Bllowed  ta  wear  «niis 
widiSn  the  tky.  The  nine  fertrictum  it  not  nnpoaed  in  die  ooontiy, 
hot  the  power  of  the  native  chiefe  is  annihitotei!,  and  e.atnnig  'Ibroe 
of  A%h»ims  and  KuirilbauaheB  is  kept  up  within  the-vallej-*  whicb  is 
8ii£BMaait  to  dieck  any  disposition  to  revolt 

Hie  governor  is  invested  with  all  the  powers  of  a  King,  and. the 
administration  is  very  tyrannical.  From  the  small  number  of  passes, 
the  government  is  enaUed  to  prevent  any  persons  enteringbr  quitt  ing 
Cashmeer  vrithout  its  permission.  Its  numerous  spies  pervade  all 
ranks  of  society,  and  the  inhabitants  are  harassed  by  every  kind  of 
oppression  :  this  misEfovprnment  increase  the  depravity  of  their 
chnrrutor,  but  their  natural  gaiety  prev^ts  its  destroying  their 
hapiiincss. 

The  cit  v  ofCashincer  is  the  largest  in  the  DoDraunce  dominions. 
It  coTitHUiii  tfom  a  hundred  and  fifty  to  two  hundred  thousand  inha- 
bitants. 

The  gross  revenue  of  the  province'  is  said  to  be  4,626>300  rupees* 
which  is  nearly  equal  to  £  500,000. 

The  suni  tiue  to  the  King  deptads  on  the  contract  entered  into  by 
the  governor.  When  at  the  highest,  it  was  2,200,000  rupees,  from 
which  a  deduction  of  700,000  was  allowed  for  .the  pay  of  troops,  so 
diat  1,500,000  was  the  whole  wlucfa  reached  the  rojsl  treasnry.  Up- 
wards of  six  lades  are  assigned  in  Teools  to  the  nd|^ibouring  rajahs^ 
to  Afghaon  chiefi,  and  to  mooDahs,  dervises,  and  Hindoo  fekccre. 
Hie  rest  is  charged  to  the  real  or  alleged  expenoes  of  collection,  and 
to  the  pay  of  dvU  and  military  establishments. 

The  governor  has  constantly  at  his  disposal  ia  force  of  five  thousand 
finir  hundred  hdrs^  and  three  Humsand  two  hundred  foot 

The  A%hauna,  who  serve  in  Cssfameer,  seem  entirely  to  alter  their 
cfaamoter,  and  to  become  insolent  and  luxuriotn.  Most  of  tliem  are 
pleased  with  their  situation*  but  still  their  fondness  for  their  own 
country  prevents  the  western  Afghanns  from  remaining  long  in 
Cashmeer. 

Hie  remote  position  of  Cashmeer,  and  the  absoluti^  auliiority  en- 

8x2 


Digrtized  by  Google 


508  OAi^HMEER. 

jojed  ihs  gj&wtmt/KBi  often  indooes  tJmn  to  nbd ;  but-  noiwill^ 
staodiiig  Ilia  rtrangUi  of  the  oonntcyt  tbsf  aie  alw»js  fiuily  sabduod. 
The  Caihmeriiiu  are  of  no  account  as  soldiers,  and  the  A^^iauns  and 
Kuzzilbaushet  atre  enervated  by  the  life  they  lead,  and  probably  little 
disposed  to  act  with  vigor  against  the  King }  while  the  royal  army  is 
composed  of  poor,  adventuvout  soldiers,  who  look  forward  with  avidity 
to  the  plenty  and  the  pleasures  of  Cashmeer,  and  who  knovr  the  sti£>  . 
feringa  iSaey  must  undergo  in  case  of  a  retreat. 

The  repulse  of  Shauh  Shiija's  troops  has  been  mentioned  in  another 
place.  Cashmeer  has  since  been  retlured  hv  the  XWier  Futtch  Khaun, 
who  iTTiprudently  and  unnecessarily  tailed  in  the  assistance  oftho  Siks 
in  that  eot^cijse.  The  present  governor  is  a  brothtf  of  Jbutieh 
Khaun. 

The  most  remarkable  protiuction  of  Caslimeer  is  its  siiaw  1?-,  which 
supply  the  whole  world,  and  wliich  are  said  to  be  manuikctured  at 
sixteen  thousand  looms,  each  of  which  gives  employment  to  three 
men.  * 


•  Tlic  followinj^  is  an  extract  from  the  report  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Strnrlirv,  hIio  made 
many  enquiries  on  this  subject,  and  who  ha4  scune  shawl  sttt£Es  made  under  ht»  own  in- 
ipectioo,  of  wool  proeaiod  tUt  Umiitair.  T1i»  mawftftarers  were  pioBBCw  iMiaiigiiig  19 
the  embassy,  and  they  worked  ib  a  tCOt ;  yet  tiiey  appeared  tn  find  no  difflctdlj 

in  t>!('ir  ^"r^p1o^^^^»>!!t,     <«  A  shop  may  be  occupied  with  one  shawl,  providoil  it  be  a  re- 

markabiy  tine  one,  above  a  year,  while  other  8h<^  make  six  or  eight  in  the  course 
**  of  tint  period.  Oi  it»  hml  taiA  wmt  inM  Umia,  msi  iit  mmk  m  9  ifmm  ^ 
**  an  inch  is  completed  in  one  day,  by  thrcr  ]ir-oplc,  wliich  is  the  usnal  number  cmploj^ed 
**  at  most  of  the  shops.  Shawla  oontaiming  much  woriv  are  made  in  S€{«rate  pieces  at 
"  different  shops,  and  it  may  be  cfctemed  dmt  it  very  rarely  happens  that  die  pieces,  whai 
•*  completed ,  correspond  in  size. 

**  The  sluip^  consist  of  n  frame  work,  at  which  the  persons  employed  sit  on  a  bench : 
**  their  number  ii»  from  two  to  lour.  ()n  pUin  shawls,  two  people  alone  are  aoflojedf 
**  Mid  a  long  nanow,  hat  heuvy  dratde  k  oed;  dioie of  ^tAUb  die  pattern  la  wii»> 
**  gated,  are  worked  with  wooden  needles,  there  being  a  separate  needle  for  the  threfld 
*•  of  each  colour  ;  for  the  latter,  no  shuttle  is  required.  The  operation  of  their  manu- 
^  Suture  ib  of  court>e  slow,  proportionate  to  the  quanti^  of  work  which  their  patterns 
'  **  may  require. 

"  The  Oostaud,  nr  liead  workman,  superintend^!  while  his  jofTrne^'mfn  are  employed 
M  joeax  him  immediately  under  liis  directions.    If  they  have  any  new  iwtteru  in  handt 


u\^ui^c6  by  Google 


GASHHEEIL 

The  mountains  round  Cashmeer  are  in  many  placet  inhabited  by 

tribes  who  are  in  a  sort  of  dependence  on  the  Doorauneea.  Theix 
chiefs  have  Tecools  within  the  valley,  which  have  probably  been  given 
to  ensure  their  obedience:  they  furnish  some  troops  to  the  Haukim, 
and  pay  him  revenue  when  he  is  strong  enough  to  levy  it.  Their 
dependence  is,  however,  very  slight. 

Tiie  foUowing  are  the  only  chiefii  oi  liiis  description  of  whom  I  have 
any  account : 


•*  or  one  with  which  they  are  not  familiar,  he  descrilxs  to  tliem  the  figures,  colours,  and 
«  threads  which  they  are  to  use,  while  he  keeps  before  him  the  pattern  on  which  thej 
DoppBu  vo  Ds  <Mpioyeo»  OTwwn  npon  pi|Wf; 

"  Durii)g  llu-  operation  of  making,  the  rough  side  of  the  shawl  is  uppermoet  on  the 
"  £ramc^  ootwithfttMuUng  which,  the  Oostaud  never  ini«talt«»  ^  r^;iilari^  of  tbe  moit 
"  figured  pttttenUa 

Hw  nvgei  of  ft*  OMand  (the  mqit^SanUhiag  materials)  are  <rom  six  to 
pice  per  day ;  of  the  common  wQirbiMii»  fim  one  to  four  pioe  (a  pioe  jn  riAairwr 

**  may  be  about  thrce-hal^ence). 
<*  A  nefdiaiit^  entering  hagij  into  llie  Awl  tnd%  freqoMii^  *  mmibar  of 

**  shop-,  -^hich  he  colletts  in  a  spot  under  his  eye;  or  he  supplies  the  head  workmen 
**  witli  tbreud  which  has  been  previously  spun  by  women  and  afterwards  coloured,  and 

they  carry  on  die  nuomlMture  at'  didr  own  hoiiiei,  haviiig  previottdy  wcawJ  inrtnie- 

tions  from  the  merchant  "^""'^^'g  die  qaaHtf  of  die  goode  he  ntf  nqpdn^  diilr 
•*  colours,  patterns,  &c 

**  After  die  goods  ere  completed,  the  mHdunC  cairieR  fliem  todie  emloai-offloei  iriien 
"  each  shawl  is  ittampcd,  and  he  pays  a  certain  duty,  the  amount  of  whkh  ie  letflBd  a(V 

'cordint;  tn  the  quality  and  vfdue  of  the  piece.  Tliv  officer  of  the  government  generally 
•*  fixes  tlie  value  beyond  wlu^t  the  gooiU  are  ri'aliy  worth.  Tlie  duty  is  at  the  rate  of 
**  one-fifth  of  the  piiee. 

\f  ,-t  li  swis  are  exporter!  unwashed,  and  fresh  from  the  loom.  In  Indin,  itu  rc  is 
**  uo  market  for  unwashed  shawls,  and  at  Umritair  they  arc  better  washed  and  packed 
"  than  in  Cashmeer.   Of  thoee  sent  to  die  westward,  many  are  worn  mrwashed. 

"  Tlie  wool  of  which  the  shawls  are  made  is  imported  from  Tiljot  and  Tartan,',  in 
**  wbidx  countries  alone  the  goat  which  produces  it  is  said  to  thrive.  Hiat  which  ie 
*  broni^t  from  Bodnik  ie  nAiMied  die  beat.  Ite  pciee  m  Oadmieer  k  fiom  ton  to 
**  tmmty  noqpeee  fx  a  tnxmk  (vUdi  i»  eoHpeeed  to  he  aboat  tirdTB  ponndi)!  the  whiter 
f*  sort  is  die  dearest. 

**  It  would  perhajfM  be  difBcult  tu  determine  with  accuracy  the  quantity  of  shawls  manu> 
**  fiwtoved  ■nnnalfy}  eoppeebg^  howew,  dint  ftne of  dl  Undt  are  on  an  everage  made 

"  at  eaeh  shop  or  IcKmi  in  the  cciirvr  of  a  yeai*  die  <lllialwt  WOOhl  be  eljg|llj  thooaBUdp 
u  which  is  jpn^)ably  not  fiir  from  the  truth." 


Digitized  by  Google 


510  CASHMEER. 

On  the  north  is  a  chief,  whom  the  people  of  Cashmeer  call  the 
Raja  of  Little  Tibet  (Klioord  Tibet),  or  of  Tibet  i  Zefdauloo  wad 
Daiuo.  He  has  probably  only  a  part  of  Little  Tibet.  Azaud  Khaun 
sent  an  expedition  into  that  country*  but  I  do  not  know  whether  he 

first  reduced  it. 

I  have  not  heard  of  any  inhabitants  in  the  hi|^  moontaanB  between 

Cashmeer  and  l  .ndaiik. 

Tlu>  southern  mountains  contain  mnm  princip.ilitips,  of  which  the 
chief  seem  to  be  Kislitawaur,  Chuiulunee  or  Chinaunee,  Jummoo, 
Khussiaul  jhuI  rJun^  Akiiuroor,  Rajour,  and  Proaiich.  Tlie  cliiefs  of 
these  states  retain  tlie  old  Hindoo  t  itle  of  Raja,  though  they  and  their 
subjects  are  mostly  iVlahoiuuiedans.  Their  countries  are  thinly 
peopled,  asmi*^lii  be  expected  from  their  nature  ;  but  iur  a  mouiitaifi- 
OU8  tract,  they  are  not  ill  inhabited.  The  people  resemble  the  Cash- 
merians  in  their  language  and  manners,  but  have  a  great  mixture  of 
dioie  of  tlie  coiiiitrie>  to  the  aooth. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


(   511  ) 


BOOK  V. 

THE  BOYAL  GOVERNMENT  OF  CAUBUL. 


CHAP.  L 

or  THE  KIKG. 

most  x\.siatic  governments,  there  are  no  limits  to  the  power  of 
the  crowu  but  those  of  the  endurance  of  the  people ;  and  the 
]SjDg*s  will  is  never  opposed  imleM  by  a  general  uuurrection.  Among 
the  A%h«uii8,  hoveTer,,  the  power  of  the  Doomiiiee  arotocracy  and 
the  organiawtiop  of  die  other  tribes  afiord  pemuuieiit  menu  lor  th§ 
control  of  the  loyal  autfaoiiij»  and  ftr  the  peaoeable  maintenanoe  of 
the  privikgea  of  the  natiofi.  Buti  as  thejr  hanreno  statute  law  (except 
that  of  Mi^omet)»  and  no  public  leootda  of  the  proceedings  of  thdf 
goremment,  it  u  imposrible  Ihat  any  vegular  oaastitution  ahould  hSftve 
grown  up  among  them.  There  are,  however,  some  eatabllahed  cus^ 
toms  and  opinions  respecting  their  goremment*  nHiicfal  shall  piOGee4 
to  state 

The  crown  is  hereditary  in  that  branch  of  the  house  of  Suddbeye 
which  is  desbeaded  from  Ahmed  Shauh.  There  does  not,  however 
appear  to  be  any  rule  fixed  fi>r  its  descending  to  the  eldest  son. 
When  a  King  dies,  it  has  been  usual  for  the  great  Doorsunee  Sirdais 
present  at  the  court,  to  meet  and  consider  which  of  his  sons  is  to  suc- 
ceed.  Hiey  are  determined  by  the  will  of  the  fiitber,  and  by  the  agtf 

II 


Digrtized  by  Google 


512  .    1»0WEBS  OF  THE  KING. 


and  chanufter  of  each  of  the  prinoei  j  and  their  voice  secures  the 

possession  of  the  capital,  and  gives  a  great  advantage  to  the  prince  in 
whose  iavour  it  declares ;  but  the  practice  of  conferring  the  different 
great  governments  on  the  King's  sons  generally  leads  to  a  contest, 
which  is  decided  by  the  wealth,  abilities,  and  popularity  of  the 
rivals. 

The  whole  of  the  royal  family,  cxco]>t  those  whom  the  King  [larti- 
cularly  favours,  are  imprisoned  in  the  upper  citadel  of  C'aubul,  where 
they  are  well  treated,  but  closely  cojifined.  Those  who  remain  at 
large  are  appointed  to  the  government  of  provinces  or  the  command 
ol  ariuies,  where  the  ostensible  autlu)rity  of  a  Sialdoz  ve  is  required  to 
secure  the  obedience  of  the  great,  and  to  sanction  capital  punish- 
ments ;  they  are,  however,  in  general,  entirely  under  die  control  of 
a  d^uty  of  the  King's  appointing. 

The  King^B  title  is  Shauhee  Boorree  Doorraiin,  but  it  is  only  used 
in  treaties  and  other  public  instruments.  In  general,  he  is  merdy 
styled  Shanh  or  P^ahauh  (llie  King),  and  the  oommon  people  often 
call  Kim  by  his  name,  Mahmnod,  or  Shi^s,  without  any  addition  aft 
all.  The  court  Is  called  the  Derree  Khauneh,  which,  like  Durbar  in 
jbidi%  and  Aulee  Kaupee  (Sublime  Forte)  in  Turkey,  signifies  the 
gate,  a  form  of  oriental  adulation  which  implies  that  a  sidb^ect  oof^ 
to  intrude  no  further  into  the  palace  even  in  his  thoughts. 

Tlie  King  has  the  exclusive  privilege  of  coining,  and  his  name  is 
put  on  nil  thn  money  in  the  empire.  It  is  well  known  what  conse- 
quence till'  Asiatics  ?ittfirh  to  this  right,  and  that  they  regard  the 
possession  oi  it  iiji  the  chiei  test  ol  sovereignty.  A  similar  test  is  the 
privilege  enjoy^  by  the  King,  of  being  prayed  lor  in  the  Khootbeh 
(part  of  the  Mahommetlan  r(  ligious  service). 

He  has  the  right  of  war  .md  peace,  and  can  make  treaties  of  his 
own  authority.    Notwithstanding  the  example  of  Shawl  *,  it  seems 


But  of  dw  oomtiy  «f  ^  OnfcM,  wUdi  mm  mttmd  hf  Akmd  SMitoifat 

«f]  


Digitized  by  Google 


POWEBS  OF  THE  KING.. 

to  be  understood  that  he  tutsMk  oeds  way  part  of       tenhoty  ooqut 

pied  by  A%hauB  tribak  i 

All  appointments  are  in  his  gift ;  but,  in  many  cases,  his  choice  ia 
confined  to  peiiicular  &miHes ;  of  this  descv^itnncflrethe  chie&hipn 
of  tribes.   Some  offices  of  the  atelie^  end!  many  mea  of  tiie  King's 

household,  are  also  hereditary. 

He  has  the  entire  control  of  the  revenue,  both  in  collection  and 
expenditure.  He  cannot,  liuwever,  incieaj»e  tiie  settlement  of  the 
land  revenue,  fixed  by  Ahmed  Shauh,  which  is  very  light.  The  only 
means  he  possesses  of  incr^sing  liis  resources,  derived  from  the 
Afghauns,  are  tines,  compositions  for  military  service;  and,  in  m>h\q 
cases,  arbitrary  valuations  of  the  produce,  on  which  the  revenue  is 
essessed* 

Hieae.  eaq^ecHenta  ife  not  very  prndnctivc^  and  Hba  use'  of  tben* 
in  caaea  wliew  •the  gowanunfiut  could  vttSij  anfime  91  new  aaaaaa* 
flMnt,  aeema  a  dear  adoimrledgpiaut  that  the  pietqgative  ia'Uinitdl 
in-tiiia  raapect. 

The  King  cannot  feaume  the  granta  of  hia  ptedeoeaMn.  In  ehril 
wani»  the  gvantv'  df  one  pietandav  aae  xeannled  by  the^o^ieitf  nn ihe 
ground  of  their  not  bebg  the  acta  of  s  hnrfiil  monwdi  (  but  .^m 
thh  is  not oftan- done. 

The  customs  have  never  been- altered.  I  do  not  know  whether  the 
King  has  the  right  to  increase  them.;  he  certainly  has  the  power,  as 
his  doing  so  would  not  immediately  afiect-ai^  body  of  niena||Boqg 
enough  to  question  bis  orders. 

The  K  ing  has  the  control  of  military  levies,  and  the  cxunmand  of 
the  army. 

A  part  of  the  administration  of  justice  has  been  b hew u  to  be  left 
to  the  internal  government  of  the  tribes ;  the  other  branches  belong 
to  the  sovereign,  who  appoints  all  Cauzees  ^  and  coniirms  their  sen- 
tences in  places  wh^e  they  have  criminal  jurisdiction.  Inscaaca 
where  the'onme  ia  agrinat'the  aiatc^  the  IQi^'is  Ae  aafe  judga  .Hia 
power,  hewevttr,  deeanet»  aran  in  tbiacaae^'ffitendtoihnHfiielie 

8u. 


Digitized  by  Google 


514 


DOMESTIC  AND  FOREIGN  POLICY. 


Sbddozye  (the  King^s  tribe).  Timoiir  Shauh  put  the  grand  vizier 
to  de«th»  and  the  measure  WM  never  blamed ;  Shauh  Mahmood's 
execotibn  of  Meer  Allum  Buum .  (the  head  of  the  Noonyes)f  mm 

condemned  for  its  injustice,  not  for  its  illegality  ;  but  the  execution 
of  Wuffadar  Khaun  Suddozje  and  his  brothers,  by  the  same  prince 
is  still  universally  reprobatedt  at  contrary  to  the  fimdamental  lawa  of 

the  state. 

The  King  has  the-  direction  of  religious  affairs,  but  the  national 
religion  being  firmly  established,  he  has  little  room  for  interference. 
The  rights  whidi  the  Afghaua  nation  possess  over  the  conquered 
provinces  and  other  dependencies  of  the  state,  are  entirely,  vested  in 
the  down- 

Bendee  tlie  direct  powers  thus  poMeaaed  by  the  Ehtgf  it  ia  obviona 
he  mint  derive  mudi  ipfltience  fimn  the  exeiciie  of  them. 

Id  the  policy  of  the  Court  of  Giubol  towards  ittt'own  salgediit  the. 
inoat  ttriking  ol^jeet  is'  the  doae  connectioii  of  the  ffing.with  the' 
Doorauiieea,  end  rivaby  between  him  and  the  ariatoencj  of  tibat 
liibe.  It  IB  the  King's  poHcy  to  keep' the  Dooraimeea  in  aalQectiaii 
to'  bimaell^  wiiile  be  euka  (hem  over  the  other  Afghauns. 

For  thia  pmpoae*  be  proteota  the  Tta^iks,  and  aU  others  whose 
power  he  can  use  to  depress  the  nobles,  without  endaiigeri]^  the 
ascendancy  of  his  tnl>ei  His  policy  towards  the  Dooraonee  lords, 
the  Taujiks,  and  the  Aighaun  tribes  respectively,  resembles  that  of  a 
King  of  Scotland  towards  the  herons,  the  buigessesy  and  the  clans  of 
tlie  Highlands. 

The  King's  object  with  the  Alghauu  tribes  is,  to  get  men  fiora  the 
western,  and  money  from  the  eastern ;  with  the  prov  inces  also,  the 
practice  of  the  government  has  been  to  exact  iittle  from  those  in  the 
west,  and  use  them  for  defence  alone ;  but  to  avail  itself  of  the  r^ 
aonroea  of  the.eartem  provinces,  and  of  the  means  they  atfbided  fir 
farther,  extension  of  temtoiy. 

b  like  mamier  in  foreign  policy  the.A4^ianiia  have  aheim.  no  dfr 
aire  for  weatera  cmqpeat  llieir  yknn  townda  "Btnm  and  Tooii* 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAliACT£R  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT. 

fciirfmm-  w&e  oonfinod  to  tho  dafenf^  of  KlionMiiiiiiiii  ind  BuUdi* 
It  wHa  tiidocd*  a  doith'bcitl  iiiiiiiicfcboii'dif  Ahiiifwl  to 
flonii  imt  to  attack'  the'  Uibeint  whom  he  caUad  a  hive  withoul 
hoocj.  - 

Awflthp^'  wise  precept  is  attributed  to  him,  which  was,  to  forbear 
attieJring  the  Siks,  till  their  zeal  had  oubaided,  and  theb  manneia 
softened.  In  &ct,  the  Siks  have  become  attached  to  .agriculture,  and 
hare  entirely  lost  their  aptitude  for  the  protracted  and  desultory 
warfare,  which  enabled  them  to  withstand  the  power  of  Ahmed 
Shauh. 

The  Afghaun  government  has  always  shewm  a  good  deal  of  mode- 
ration towards  its  own  subjects,  its  dependent  states,  and  even  its 
enemies.  It  is  mild  in  punishments,  and  its  lenity  is  more  conspicu- 
ous, iVom  a  comparison  with  the  severity  of  the  Persians.  Tf  is  not 
uncommon  for  a  great  rebeiliou  to  terminato  without  a  sin^'le  execu« 
tion  ;  and  when  there  are  punishments  tor  rebellions,  thev  always 
&11  on  the  chiefs  alone.  The  Persian  practice  of  blinding  or  maim- 
ing the  aim  moil  people  is  unknown.  Ihiring  the  time  the  embassy 
was  at  Peshuwer,  there  was  but  one  execution;  it  was  that  of  a 
Shecali  dervise,  who  was  tried  on  the  accu^aLioii  oi  tiie  Alooliahs, 
and  found  guilty  of  blasphemy. 

The  Af^aun  govenmient,  however,  lihe  mort  others  in  the  east, 
ia  disgraced  by  the  peifidioua  meana  iome^ea  leaotted  to  by  its 
mmiatera  to  leiie  o^den,  and  by  the  use  of  torture.  A  temptap 
tion  to  the  fbtmer  pnctice  may  be  found  m  the  eaae  with  wfaicli  a 
crinunal  cm  elode  the  puranit  of  goverameiits  m  a  oountiy  ao  fidl  of 
^wtniaaMi  and  where  it  ia  a  pomt  of  honour  to  aaaiat  a  fogitive.  The 
vae  of  toMme  wet  learned  fiom  the  Pefaiana:  ithaa  longeadatedt 
but  it  ia  only  under  Mahnlood  that  it  ia  oonmiooly  pvactiaed.  It  ia 
dikfly  made  nae  of  to  eiloit  money,  and*  oonaeqnently,  &Ua  oftenea^ 
ed  the  rich  and  0ceat 

The  government  endeavours  to  maintain  quiet  and  prospeiity 
eniflQg  eU  the  A%faaun  tribea  {  but,  aware  of  their  having  inteieato 

8d  2  ' 


516  PRB8ENT  STATEL  ' 

distinct  irorn  its  own.  if  iloas  not  watch  over  thoir  welfare  with  that 
soficitudr  ^vl\ich  one  would  expect  from  a  King  towards  his  own  na- 
tion. The  provinces  are  fronerally  p;overned  with  tolerable  mildness 
and  equity,  in  some  cases  troni  the  weakness,  and  in  others  from  the 
wisdom  of  the  government.  The  eastern  provinces  suffer  most  from 
the  rapacity  of  the  government  and  its  agents ;  seldom  from  jua^ 
lousy  or  wanton  insolence.  Cashmeer  alone  suffers  every  sort  of 
tyranny. 

Tlie  A%haun  govemmeat  has  tittle  inlfoniurtioii  about  iieighlxN»> 
ii^  atates.  Thou^  ita  attentkn  waa  long  d&netod  lo  Iiidi%  and 
tlMigli'ita  maccbanta  ftoqucntly  Tiail  that  oouatiy,  die  grcalcat 
i^oraiioe  of  ita  atate  atiU-  anbriata.  Ths  miniatcva  know  that  tlia 
MogDi  empire  haa  dedined,  bot  have  a  very  impeiftct  knowledge  of 
tifee  numeroua  rtatea  that  have  been  erected  on  its  ndna.  They  are 
mther  better  acqiiamted  with  Peraia  and  Taitaiy»  but  even  thaie 
Cheytniat  to  the  reports  of  merchants  and  trairdlcn.  They  have 
no  newa-wliten  (aa  in  India).  £mbaaaiea  aie  race^  and  nanrer  peiw 
mancnt. 

Twelve  years  of  civil  war  have,  in  a  great  degree,  altered  the 

gnvernment  even  from  what  is  described  above.  The  King  is 
n<ns  more  than  ever  dependent  on  tho  Dooriuinee  lords,  and  is, 
in  c< >iis(  (juence,  deprived  of  ail  choice  in  the  appointment  of  his 
ministers,  and  nearly  of  all  control  over  them  in  the  exerdse  oi  thdr 
powers. 

The  armies  of  the  state  being  engaged  in  wars  among  themselv^ 
many  of  the  tribra  and  provinces  have  become  rebellious  dr  refrao> 
ttf^f  and  mtaxy  of  ihe  aoitfeea  of  revenue  aie,  therefore,  cut  off  Of 
what  cooid  etiU  be  realised,  great  part  haa  bem  given  .in  Taooeli 
to  the  principal  indbilily  j  whit  lemaina^  ia  aimoafe  eatirclj  wmgnmed 
by  the  emibtedlemeBta  -Of  goyqmora  tfnd  nriniatan*  wlikh  the  Eji^^ 
can  no  longer  correct*  leat  hia  atrictneaa  ahouU  daprlve'fahn'of  hia 

\adherenta.   

■  As -the  King  cannot  compel  the  tribes  to  aeod  the  coathigapta  of 


Pigitized  by  Google 


PRESENT  STATE. 


51*1 


men  whidi  tbej  are  bound  to  furnish^  hii  annj  is  composed  of 
soldim  who  oome  for  pay,  or  from  attachment  to  their  leaders. 
The  faflure  of  the  revome  natuiallj  diminishes  this  species  of  army ; 
and  the  troops  who  do  serve,  are  mote  at  the  disposal  of  their  oom- 
manders  than  at  the  King's. 

As  these  resources,  such  as  they  are,  are  often  divided  betweeo 
two  competitors,  it  is  easy  to  conoeiye  how  the  power  and  infiiienoe 
of  the  crown  must  have  sunk. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


(   SiB  ) 


CHAP.  IL 

ADlilNISTBATION  OF  TU£  GOV£KNM£NT. 

^  I  ^HE  genawl  administration  of  the  government  is  conducted  by 
the  King*  with  the  assistuice  of  the  visier  aurim  (Grand 

Vizier). 

Tliis  offiror  lias  the  entire  direction  of  the  revenue,  atid  the 
management  of  the  political  atfairs  ot  the  frovernment,  at  home  and 
abroad.    He  has  also  the  eoTTtrol  of  all  the  other  depart nu  nts. 

The  vizier  ought  to  be  app  ointed  from  the  eian  of  Baiunizye,  and 
from  the  family  of  Shauh  wullee  ivhaun  ;  but  this  rule  was  departed 
from  by  Shauh  Zemaun,  who  made  a  buddozj  e  *  vizier ;  and  by 
Mahmood,  who  has  bestowed  that  office  on  Futteh  Khaun 
Bflurikaye. 

Tliese  innovations  give  great  disgust,  and  used  generally  to  be 
avoided,  by  aUowing  the  office  to  remain  in  the  Bands  of  the  heredi^ 
taij  claimants,  but  transferring  tlie  greater  part  of  the  powers  to 
some  officer  more  in  the  Sng^s  confidence;  an  expedient  which 


*  The  fi  ]]ri  .nn  rr  remark  of  SSjt  John  Mdcohn  on  dut  mUfJeot,  u  ilhiitratiTO  of  the 
A%tMiin  notion  of  govemmmL 
**  The  appointoiaat  of  Reiumit  IJIUi  KliHui,  eommonly  oaDod  WdUv  Khnn,  wat 

"  ^oken  of  with  gnat  diMpprabitioii,  when  I  was  in  Penia  in  iSoOh    h  waa  conaidcred 

**  M  «  depsrtnrp  from  nil  usage;  and  tlic  ground  of  objections  were:  •  that  though  it 
**  tnt  proper  the  King  should  be  a  Siuldoitye^  and  have  his  person  held  sacred,  from  be- 
«  lem^ag  to dut  vnentad triU^  lib vadar o«gbt not  tob»  of  AeMUM  tribes  nlthe 

"  nlso  wrts  =atV  from  attack,  no  one  would  he  rc^pon^'Vilc  for  thv  ncti  >'\'  cruelty  nnt?  op- 
*'  pre&sion  that  Diij;ht  be  committed :'  othet-s  deemed  the  King  impolitic  in  appointing  a 
•*  ftiddosye  to  bt  Ui  iUm^  m  MdliODdkw  might  aspire  to  dwoMnm»<n  4*  gnwi' 


Digitized  by  Google 


/ 


Google 


/ 


lilf   


•;'.!  •  •    !  I  ..I-  •11.  .•: 


*.'.    i  i  ■  ,     •    1    i  •  i'       •  I 


I. . 


.  5 


I't:"'  I 


I.    .J     •  .  : 

I:  ..».!;  .1  il. 


.  .  •                   .  ••.  •  •  I  •  .    •    I  . 

(  ..*  .      •    i    ■       I  '      •  't  |i       ■  ^•  ' 

,  •     Jtt.}  •  •         It,'.       •,    •    •      •  I'  »• 

•  •»  • 

•■     •                       »                         •    .  •      .     '  i  . 

••1     I               •      .        •  h;  .'..*»  u 

:  imy'i  •  .V                          ■  •..,.»  ...  .".  .J    ••  •.  , 


y  Google 


Digrtized  by  Google 


I. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


■iji  Google 


1-.JJ.-  t* 


t 


J  t: 

4     •  a 


lyui^cd  by  Google 


MINISTERS  OF  THE  HOUSEHOLD.  519 

ooeanom  midi  wnfafj^mj  and'  fBodan  it  aliiuMt  imposnfale  to  know 
«iacllj<'tfae  dnt)r  or  powen  df  any  officer  of  governmenL  '■ 
,  Next  to  the  vizier  in  the  .general  admhiistratkni*  the*  pcmciiMl 
ministers  are  the  Momuhee  Bwiibee  (or  chief  secretuy)*  who  mnw- 
ges  all  the  King'^  corrcspondoioe ;  and  the  Hircarrah  Bausheey  irilo 
i«  at  the  head  ol'  the  intelligenoe  department,  and  who  has  the  com- 
mand of  all  the  Chuppers  and  Cossids  (mounted  and  foot  messen- 
gers), lender  this  heat!  may  also  be  considered  the  Nusukchce  Bau- 
shee,  w  iiose  duty  it  is  to  sn}>erintend  all  punisliments,  and  who  iH 
besides  a  kind  of  em  1  riiarischal ;  and  tlie  Zubt  Begee,  who  seizes  on 
all  property  ordered  to  be  confiscatetl  or  sequestrated.        '  • 

The  heads  of  the  revenue  and  judKual  departments,  and  the  chiefs 
of  the  army  are  among  the  greatest  officers  of  state,  but  their  fiinc- 
tiooft  will  be  more  convenieiitly  mentioaed,  when  the  branches  of  the 
adminutiatioii  with  wfaicli  Ifaey  are  connected,  are  explained^-  -  - 

The  cfficen  of  the  court  and.hooaefaold  aie  very  numenma..  llwir 
eafaUiahmcnt  is  ibnned  esaodj  on  the  modtl-  of  Naudhr  Sluuih'a. 
Each  of  the  branches  belonging  to'  it  is  distinguiihed  by  a  particukar 
dress*.  The.i^peaianee  of  the  couitis^verj  rega]ar.and:.deooiooS) 
and  nmat  Juan  been  miyiififfHit  bflfefe  diefCiTjl  win,  and  the  phn^ 
der  of  the  furniture  and  deoorataons  of  the  palaces. 

The  priadpaL  heads  of  these  departnunts  are  the  following :  the 
Meer- Akhor,  or  master  of  the  horse*  whose  employmeitt  is  hereditaiy 
in  the  head  family  of  the  Ishakzyes.  <   ■  ..       '  <  ■ 

The  office  of  Tshikaghaussee  Baushee  is  a  considerable  (nie>  hcfe- 
ditary  in  a  great  family  of  Populzyes.  The  meaning  of  the  word  in 
Turkish  is  door-keeper,  but  the  duty  is  that  ol'  master  of  ceremonies. 

The  station  of  Arz  Bef^ee  is  hereditary  in  the  family  of  Akram 
Khaun.  The  duty  is  lo  repeal  in  an  audible  \oiue  Lo  tlie  Kiniz,  any 
tiling  that  is  said  by  his  subjects  who  are  adiuitted  to  hit»  presence. 
It  is  iutended  to  correct  the  mistakes  which  people  unaccustomed  to 


•  See  Plate  XIIL  tnd  XIV. 


Digitized  by  Google 


52(1  MINISTERS  OF  THE  HOUSEHOLD. 

the  oout  migfaK  make  in  the  laxigaageioi  oeranMmjp^  and  also  to  liroid 
the  inoonvenienoes  aniiDg  from  the  gieat  dittanee'st  irhidi  titnngm 
are  kept  ftom  the  peraon  of  the  King,   "nie  offioe  m-  nnportaDt,  «• 

the  King  often  desires  the  Aizbegee  to  enquire  into  representationi 
made  throiif?h  him,  and  is  fruifWl  in  the  decision  by  his  report. 
The  Juurchee  Hawshee  and .  Jaurchees  are  cxiero  attached  to  the 

Tlie  C'luious  Baushee  presents  persons  aihuitted  to  pay  their  k  sp*3cts 
to  the  King,  dismisses  the  court,  and  conn iiunicates  the  King's  orders 
on  such  occasions,  according  to  set  forms  in  the  Toorkee  language. 

There  are  many  other  officers  who  are  at  the  heatl  of  establishments 
maintained  for  purposes  of  state,  but  none  of  any  weighi  in  the  court. 

The  Offflces  erf"  Sandbokdw  Bamhee  (keeper  of  the  waitbobe,  or 
keeper  of  the  je»eb)»  of  Hnheem  Banshee  (chief  physician),  end  the 
heeds  of  di£fannt  depattmenti  of  -lhe  honaehold  (ae  thehniting  and 
hevking  esteblMhincntai  tiie  khcfaca,  the  cmel  aad  nnde  wtibKah* 
iiieiit%  fte»)>  do  not  merk  modi  notioBi  thoiiglb«^^ 
<bj  people  of  eonaoqpience. 

The  Fbeahkhednmtadesem*  however,  to  be  mentianed}  fefthoo^ 
they  are  menial  iwvmiU  about  the  King's  person,  thej  eie  oftai  meo 
of  rank,  and  frequently  of  great  influence  with  their  nuuter. 

The  Eunuchs  have  also  •  good  deal  of  weight,  trom  their  being 
admitted  to  the  King's  presence  at  all  times*  and  being  allowed  to 
be  present  at  the  most  secret  deliberations. 

The  cxppnces  of  the  household  are  defrayed  by  particular  funds 
allotU'd  for  that  purpose,  and  nianatred  b^'  n  particular  establishment, 
of  which  tlie  King  8  private  treasurer  and  the  Mooshiif  or  auditor  of 
accounts  are  the  heads. 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  521  ) 


CHAP.  IIL 

OF  THB  raniibv  or  thz  xzngoom  into  raovxKCBs. 

TTffE  whole  kingdom  is  divided  into  twenty-seven  provinces  or 
district  ;  exclusive  of  Belochistaun,  the  chief  of  whicii  country 
is,  except  in  names  rather  a  party  in  an  unequal  aDianoe  than  a 
subject. 

^Hie  dg^iteen  mo8t  important  aie  each  govanied  by  a 
eoUecta  the  icnrenue  and  commanda  the  nilitia  $  and  a  Sudar,  who 
oommanda  the  regular  troopa,  and  whoae  dufef  it  ia  to  preierve  the 
fmblic  tranqniUitj,  and  to  enfbrae  the  authority  of  the  Haokim  and 
Cauzy:  when  the  Hawlrim  U  »  Dooiaimeei  he  uamJly  hoMatheodloe 
of  SirdM*  alao. 

The  administration  of  civil  justice  ia  conducted  by  the  Caoay. 
Under  the  Haukim  and  Sirdar,  the  revenue  and  police  are  admi- 
nistered by  the  heads  of  tribes }  and  under  them>  by  the  heads  of  the 

subdivisions  of  their  tribes. 

The  imjjortancc  of  the  heads  of  tribes  is  greater  or  less  in  pro- 
portion to  the  degree  of  subjection  in  which  the  country  ia  held : 
where  the  tribes  are  powerful,  every  thing  is  done  through  the 
heads ;  where  they  arc  weak,  as  at  Peshawer,  the  Haukim  and  Sir- 
dar send  their  orders  direct  to  the  heads  of  subdivisions ;  and  in 
Caduneer,  among  the  Tai^)iks,  and  in  the  provinces  on  the  Indu8> 
ndiere  dure  are  many  Hindnkeei^  the  WanHnM  or  Siidara  aend  disr 
effioeia  to  indhridnala,  or  employ  the  heeda  of  TiUagai  at  theb  in 

The  eighteen  provinces  where  Haukims  reside  are,  Heraut,  IVir- 

3  X 


Digitized  by  Google 


522 


DIVISIONS  OP  THE  KINGDOM. 


rah,  Candahar,  Ghuzni,  Caubul,  Baumican  and  Ghorebund,  JellaUA* 
bad,  Lughmauii,  Peshawer,  Dera  Umael  Khaun,  Dera  Ghauzi  Klif^yi^, 
Shikafpoort  Sewee,  Sind,  Caslunear,  Chuch  Hauiudkf  Lya,  and 

Mooltaim. 

In  all  these  places,  the  Haukims  are  removable  at  pleasure  ;  except 
when  tliov  contract  lor  the  revenue,  in  which  case  they  ought  to  be 
left  till  the  cud  of  the  year. 

They  are  still  removed  in  all  but  Sind  (where  tha  Kin^  .ilwavs 
selected  the  llaukim  fiom  a  particular  family,  and  where,  fsuice 
1790,  he  has  lost  all  internal  control) ;  Mooltaim  and  Lya  (where  the 
Kiiifj  lias  not  been  able  to  remove  the  governor  since  Sliauh  Alah- 
niood'h  accession) ;  and  Heraut,  which  has  been  kept  by  Prince  Ferooz 
since  Mali  mood's  expulsion. 

Tlie  other  nine  divisions  are  generally  composed  of  countries  be- 
longing to  Afghaun  tribes.  There  is  a  Dooraunee  governor  ap* 
pointed  to  each,  who  k  called  Sbdar.  He  aem  MsidBi  in  bb 
government  |  but*  once  a  year,  go^  hinnelf  or  aends  a  deputy,  with 
or  without  a  iotot  (aecordtng  to  the  necessity' of  oaing  intimidation)^ 
to  collect  the  revenue.  At  other  timeB»  the  resguladon  of  the  ooun« 
try  is  left  to  the  heads  of  tribes,  anliiect  to  some  oontrd  in  estraor- 
dfaiaiy  cases  firom'the  Stidar.  The  Srdar,  in  moat  oases,  ledoni- 
mends  the  member  of  the  head  fiunfly  whom  he  thinks  fittest^fiir  the 
chtefship  of  each  tribe  under  him.  There  are  Gniaeea  appointed  by 
the  King  in  these  divisicnis,  but  their  anthoiily,  if  supported  at  aD,  is 
enforced  by  the  h«id  of  the  tribe. 

The  governments  of  this  last  description  are  the  ibUowing :  the 
Ghiljies,  which  includes  the  A%haan'  parts  of  Lughmaun  and  Jella- 
labad  ;  the  Saufees  and  Tagou ;  Bungii^haot,  induding  the  Jaujeaa 
and  Torees ;  Damaun,  induding  the  Murwuts,  &c.  up  to  BnnnoO 
and  Dour ;  Kuddeh  Chuchaunsoor  and  Kiahkee  Gundoomee,  on  the 
borders  of  Seestaun  ;  Ghoraut  (the  Hazaurehs) ;  Leeahbund  (the 
Eimauks) ;  Tztezar,  or  Subzewar,  near  Furrah ;  Aiaurdenrdi,  and 
Pooshtee  Coh. 


i^iyui^cd  by  Google 


DIVISIONS  OF  TH£  . KINGDOM. 


52S 


Ihfi  jSidsn  aie  femovaable  it  pleannnek  but  it  seemg-usiul  to  Iceep 
didr  offices  in  particdar  fiunilies. 

Hiese  idiviBioiu,  as  including  more  t!tnscttl6d  puts  of  tiio  coontiyf 
bftve  Men  off  fiom  the  royal,  antliority,  in  a  greater  proportion  than 
those  under  the  Hsukims. 


3x2 


(  ) 


CHAP.  IV. 

TBI  UVENVS* 

THE  whole  revenue  of  the  Caubul  government,  in  settled  times, 
may  be  redoned  at  aomething  near  diiee  cracei  *  of  rupees  j 
tmt  <kf  this  upwards  oi  a  crofe  is  remilted  to  dHfoent  hslPanbdMed 
princes,  who  are  ooiiteiit  to  hold  their  leveinie  as  a  grant  of  the 
King's,  but  who  never  would  hare  oonsented  to  give  it  up  to  him. 
This  description  of  revenue  cannot  be  considered  among  the  King  of 
GHibul*s  resources. 
The  real  revenue  fiills  a  good  deal  within  two  cnnes. 
Of  this  a  great  part  (about  half)  is  aseagped  in  Teoool  (Jegeer)^ 
most  of  it  was  granted  on  condition  of  miUtaiy  service^  and  the  bene- 
fit whidi  the  King  derives  from  it  will  appear  in  the  account  of  his  ! 
army;  the  rest  is  allotted  to  maintain  the  MoolUdu  or  rdigknis  | 
officers,  or  given  in  charity  to  derviaes  and  Syuds.  j 

The  remaining  snm  was  received  by  the  King  till  the  breaking  oat 
of  the  present  troubles.  By  the  best  accounts,  it  amounted  to  upwards 
of  nine  million  of  rupees. 

Tlie  principal  source  of  the  King's  income  is  the  land  revenue, 
whicli  is  assessed  on  the  profluce  according  to  tixed  proportions, 
which  vary  with  the  imUirc  ol  tlie  kind,  and  are  different  in  different 
provinces.  Some  ol  the  A<<^hauu  nilie?,  and  of  the  remoter  provinces, 
are  not  subject  to  this  mode  c>i  assessment,  but  pay  a  fixed  sum  annu- 
ally.   The  other  sources  ol  the  revenue  are  the  town  duties  and 


A  crare  of         w  dnvt  a  BuUiiNi  of  pomMb  ^ling. 


Digrtized  by  Google 


ftEVENUB.  525 

coitoras ;  the  produce  of  the  royal  demesne ;  the  produce  of  fines 
and  forfeitures ;  the  profits  of  the  nlinU  aod  perhaps  some  other 
trifling  receipts. 

The  provisions  supplied  to  the  J\int;'s  honseliold,  iind  part  oi  his 
armv,  by  the  people  through  whose  country  he  passes,  even  when  they 
are  not  subject  to  the  payment  of  revenue*  must  also  be  reckoned 
among  the  resources  of  the  state. 

Besides  the  above,  another  less  fixed  brandh  of  revenue  is  created 
by  accepting  of  the  commutations  in  money  for  the  troops  i^bidi 
<>U£^  to  be  fiifiiiihed  by  pafdoilar  districto  aod  tribes,  cities  were 
at  dl  times  levied  from  Hsnkiiiis  on  their  appointment  to  profitable 
districts*  and  in  these  nnsettfcid  timesi  an  unavovred  profit  is  derived 
from  the  sale  of  offices. 

The  land  revenue  is  collected  by  the  head  man  of  each  village  and 
paid  in  some  cases  thro^gjh  the  head  of  his  tribes  and  in  otheia 
directlj  to  the  Haukim  or  his  i^gsnta.  The  Haukim  generally  farms 
the  revenue  of  his  province  from  government,  and  lets  out  that  of  the 
djatriots  under  him.  Once  a  year,  he  gives  in  his  accounts,  which 
pass  Ihrough  several  officers  before  they  receive  the  King*»  approba- 
tion. Tlie  expences  of  management,  the  assigpiments  tliat  have  been 
fjiven  on  the  province,  the  price  of  articles  commissioned  by  the 
King,  and  similar  charges,  are  struck  off,  and  the  balance  is  either 
sent  to  the  treasury,  or  more  fre<pn'iit  Iv,  (mlt  rs,  equal  to  its  amount, 
we  given  to  the  troops,  and  others  wiio  have  claims  on  government. 

Both  in  the  course  of  the  collections  and  of  the  pavments,  wlieii 
they  are  made  in  this  last  manner,  great  peculation  is  practised  by 
tly*  Haukim* 

The  smaller  provinces,  under  militaiy  Sirdars,  are  not  filmed. 

The  Kmg's  principal  expences  are  the  payment  of  the  army,  the 
hoosehold,  the  court  estaMishment,  and  the  dergy. 

The  expences  of  the  army  are  small  in  conqMrison  to  its  streng^ 
'from  the  nuipber  of  Tecods  appropriated  to  tgnj^t^^in  it. 

The  expences  of  the  household  are  m  some  measure  lightened  by 
the  payment  in  grain,  aheep^  and  cattle,  appropriated  to  that  branch. 


Digitized  by  Google 


526 


KfiVENDK 


Hie  pfl^r  of  the  great  civil  officers  is  small.  They  are  in  a  great 
meiunire  maintained  by  bribes  and  perquisites,  which,  althotigh  they 
have  the  most  pernicious  ofTect  on  the  resources  of  the  ^etey-do  not 
diminish  the  revenue  actually  brought  to  account. 

The  MooUahs  are  paid  hy  Tecools,  or  receive  orders  on  Haukims^ 
or  money  from  the  treasury  ;  the  expence  is  said  to  be  considerable. 

The  vviiole  expence  of  the  King  of"  Caubul,  exclusive  of  tliat  de- 
frayed by  Tecbols,  &c  was  not  much  above  half  a  crore  of  rupees  in 
quiet  years  ;  and  what  remained  of  the  revenue,  used  to  be  kept  sm  a 
fund  for  extraordinary  expences. 

The  Creasuret  of  the  crown  Imre  long  since  been  dmipetcd}  md 
the  only  Wieelth  the  King  poneasee  oonsbts  in  -a  veiy  valndile  ooUee. 
tion  of  jevrdst  which,  although  greatly  dhniniahed  dnoe  Tiinooc 
9iaiih*«  xeign,  has  in  amne  measnie  been  pr^erved  by  tiie  diflicalty 
of  finding  parchaaav  to  whom  parts  of  it  n^g^lunre  beeatnniafeiee4 
dnring  the  distreflses  of  the  govemment 


Digitized  by  Google 


(   527  ) 


CHAP.  V. 


JUSTICE  AND  PUUCE  OP  THE  KINGDOM. 


USTICE  is  administered  in  cities  b)^  the  Cauzee,  the  Mooftees, 


the  Ameeni  Mehkemeli,  ami  llie  Daroglm  of  tiic  Aduwliit. 
In  civil  smta,  tlie  Cauzy  receives  complaints  and  sends  a  summons 
by  an  officer  of  his  own  to  the  defendant  Hie  caiue  U  tried  aooord- 
ii^  to  the  mles  and  fixmis  prescribed  by  ihe  or  Mfthcmmiedaii 
Uw>  modifi&d  fay  ceitaiii  adraowledged  parts  of  the  PooahtotrnwuUe^ 
or  customary  law.  In  doubtful  cases,  the  Mooftees  give  their  law 
opinion  supported  by  quotations  from  booiks  of  authority. 

The  Gauay's  oiders  are  nev^  disobeyed;: it  being  reckoned  im- 
pious to  refuse  to  oonlbrm  to  liie  Shizra.  If  he  aluMild  be  resisted*  it 
is  the  .duty  of  the  Sirdar  to  enforce  his  decree. 

The  Ameeni  Mchkcmeh  receives  cdiaige  of  deposits. 
The  Darogha  i  Adawlut  is  supervisor  over  the  wholes  and  his  duty 
is  to  sec  that  all  proceedings  are  conformable  to  law. 

Tn  criminal  complaints,  the  rules  are  nearly  the  same,  but  the 
practice  is  different.  Criminals  aregenerallN  firsf  brou«^ht  to  tlie  Sir- 
dar, and  the  Cauzy's  sentence,  in  all  important  cases,  is  executed 
by  him  :  this  gives  the  Sirdar  a  degree  of  power,  which  is  particularly 
felt  when  he  disagrees  with  the  Caiizee. 

Where  the  King  happens  to  reside,  criminal  complaiuis  axe  made 
to  him.  In  trifling  matters,  he  refers  them  to  the  Cauzy,  or  desires 
the  Arxbegee  (the  officer  through  whom  represootations  are  made  ^ 


him)  to  settle  fheni :  serious  complaints  are  alw^s  referred  to  the 
Cauay,  and  the  King  arden  the  sentoice  to  be  executed,  after  a 
ibmal  protestation,  that  the  guilt  igif  ]t»  if  ui^^st»  U  qd  the  head  of  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


SS»  JUSTICE  AND  POLICE  OF  THE  KINODOSt 

There  are  Causees  in  all  ooiuiderable  towns  in  ihe  Cmbiil'donii- 
niona,  and  they  have  deputies  over  the  whole  countrji  except  that  of 
the  three  or  fimr  tribes  who  are  reckoned  to  be  in  open  rebellion. 

Hie  Cauzccs  no  where  interpose  unless  an  ^pUGSti<ni  is  made  to 
them:  this  happens  mpre  rarely  in  the  more  remote  pacta  of  the 
country,  where  they  are  chiefly  appealed  to  in  civil  cases.  When  a 
crime  is  not  acknowledged  by  the  accused,  it  is  always  referred  to  the 
Cauzy,  but  acknowledged  crimes  are  most  £requently  decided  <m  by 
Jirgas,  in  the  manner  already  described. 

The  usefulness  of  the  Canzees'  courts  is  in  a  great  ineu-su  re  destroyed 
by  the  corruption  which  prevails  in  them  ;  and,  in  towns  and  their 
neighbourhood,  justice  is  further  impeded  by  the  power  and  influence 
of  the  great. 

The  Cauzees  are  appointed  by  the  King,  at  the  recommendatioa 
of  the  Imaum  of  the  household. 

A  few  only  have  salaries  from  the  treasury.  There  is,  liowever^ 
in  some  plac^,  if  not  in  all,  a  small  tax  imposed  on  every  family  in 
the  district,  which  goes  entirdy  to  the  Causy.  Hiey  have  also  fees 
on  marriages ;  on  affixing  their  seab  to  deeds.;  and  peiliapa  on  the 
causes  tliev  decide. 

Hie  Mooftees  hare  a  fee  on  every  opinion  they  give  $  but  this  can^ 
not  by  itself  be  enou^  to  maintain  them. 

The  potlioe  of  towns  b  managed  under  the  Srdarby  theMeecshub^ 
the  Mohtesebf  and  the  Baio^a  of  the  Basan. 

The  Meershub  answers  to  the  Cntwal  in  Indi*.  He  has  wtfdmicn 
under  him  called  IQdiikcliees,  who  are  posted  on  diftceot  guards  in 
the  town.  In  Peshawer,  and  probabl}  in  other  towns,  there  are  many 
other  watchmen  paid  by  the  people  of  the  ward  which  they  guard. 
The  Meershub  goes  the  rounds  at  night,  and  takes  up  thieves,  dis- 
turbers of  the  peace,  and  offenders  against  morals.  Both  the  Meeiv 
shubs  and  the  Mohtesibs  are  odious  and  discreditable  offices }  and 
they  are  probably  the  source  of  much  oppression.  In  Peshawer,  at 
least,  the  Meershub  paid  an  annual  sum  for  his  office,  and  extorted 
£ees  irom  gwuing-houses$  wine-shops,  persons  whom  he  tooi^  up  on 


i^iyui^ud  by  Google 


9 


JUSTICE  Am  POLICE  OF  THE  KINGDOM.  S» 

mufkkmf  and  fiom  the  £ew  haaam  of  lD  &ine  tbat  are  tolerated 

there. 

The  Mohtesib  inflicts  the  punishments  prescribed  by  the  Mussul- 
man law,  on  persons  who  drink  wine,  or  are  guilt)'  of  simihir  irregu- 
larities :  ill  Peshawer  he  does  the  duty  of  the  Darogha  of  the  Bazars. 

There  are  Mohtesibs  who  go  circuits  twice  or  thrice  a  year  m  the 
country,  and  inspect  the  conduct  of  the  inhabitants. 

The  ISIohtesibs  in  towns  have  pay,  and  are  entitled  to  a  small  tax 
on  shops. 

Thoae  in  ibe  oounlrjr  levy  their  annual  feaa  wfaeaoii  ^eir  orculMt 
.The  Mblittaib  ia  alwqra  s  Moollah. 

Hie  Bangln  of  the  Daaati  fixea  priGea,  md  auperinlenda  weig^ 
md  iiwipea :  'under  hut  dien  ia  •  head  of  cadi  lrade»  called  Cbid^ 
Uioodahor  Beeshsufised*.  who  ia  alao  employed  in  levying  the. taaaai^ 

In  the  King^  jMhces  and  in  camps  thtse  ia  a  Cauzee  Asker»  or 
Judge  of  the  army»  and  Mnhteaib  of  Iho  amy,  who  do  the  aaMe 
duties  as  those  in  towne. 

In  the  countr}'  the  people  to  whom  the  land  belongs  are  answerable 
for  the  police.  In  cases  of"  robbery  and  the&t  if'  tlie  vh\ef  of  the 
village,  or  of  the  division  of  a  tribe,  in  whose  land.s  the  i  rini<  was 
committed,  fail  to  protiiK  e  t  liL-  thiei,  he  pays  the  value  ol  th&  propei3ty 
stolen,  and  levies  it  on  the  people  under  him.  ' 

111  dangerouii  ii;ads  that  are  much  frequented,  there  are  parties 
stationed  to  protect  travellers  i  these  are  provided  by  the  Khaua  of 
the  tribe  in  whose  lands  the  road  lies,  bitt  Me  paid  by  the  King. 

The  poUee  is  after  all  very  bad.  In  many  parts  of  the  kingdom, 
travdlera  enjoy  secorily  by  engaging  an  caooct  of  the  trUMb  cAr  l)gr 
paying  coatoma  to  ita  diief $  hut  the  King  can  do  little  to  piRoleet 
them,  esoefithy  aaiidhigtioopB  to  lavage  the  laada  of  notorkiaaly 
paedatoiy  tribeai  and  to  bring  m  die  cfaiefii  The.  fkoiifie  does  not 
interfere  in  raurden  for  nbdiataon,  except  in  towna  and  their 
vicinity. 


8  T 


Digitized  by  Google 


(   530  ) 


CHAP.  VU 

TMS  MlliITARY  SBTABLISUMEMT. 

nppIE  established  array  consists  of  Dooraunees,  GIkiUhiiiu  bliauhs, 
and   Karra  Nokur ;   there  is   also  a  sort  oi  imlitia  called 
Eeljaiiree,   which  is  called  out  on  extraordiuary  occasions ;  and 
volunteers  are  entertained  in  actual  war  under  the  denomination  of 
Dawatullub. 

The  DoorMineedaiis  sre  obliged  to  fimiahiiMriy  twdve ^noumad 
men,  m  the  eonditioD  on  which  tfaey  hold  llieir  Teooo1a»  oc  lent-fiee 
hmds,  granted  them  by  Ahmed  Shah  «nd  Kandir. '  In  addition  lo 
lhoee>  they  leoeive  three  montht  pay  in  the  year  when  on  actual 
aenrioeb  Thia  ia  a  anm  equal  to  £  10»  which,  with  -tlieir  landau  ia 
Tedconed  to  maike  theb  whole  pay  equal  to    40  per  annum. 

They  are  called  oat  by  ^  Enigma  older,  iaaned  tollie  chief  cfcadi 
dan,  end  by  him  notified  to  the  Khauna  nnder  him.  Tbty  aaaomhk 
the  men  due  by  their  several  subdivirions,  and  bdng  them  to  the 
fdeee  appointed  for  the  rendez%ous  of  tbe  anny,  where  they  ave 
mustered  and  roistered  before  the  King. 

The  men  of  each  clan  form  a  separate  corps,  called  Duateh*  ailb* 
divided  and  oommaxxled  apoording  to  deaoenft,  aa  in  the  civil  airaii0B- 
ment  of  the  claii. 

The  greater  jiart  of  the  JDooraimeea  only  «**cth1  the  liuig  defying 
military  operations. 

In  wars  carried  on  near  the  Dooraunee  country,  the  Kifl^  oould 
raise  as  mai>y  Dooraunees  as  he  could  pay. 

The  establisliment  of  the  Gholaum  Khauneh,  or  corps  of  Ghohimni 
Shauhs,  is  upwards  ol  thirteen  thousand  men. 


L^iyui^cd  by  Google 


OHOLAUMS  OR  KINOES  OUABD&  581 

•  it  wu  fint  Ibfmed  by  Aiuned  Shili»  of  1ih»  HBbbM  foreignm 
whom  he  fimnd  ertablithed  in  the  Doommee  cbuntry*  and  of  the 
trooiw  of  Nandii^s  mnj  and  other  Persiaiui  who  attached  thems^rca 
to  the  Donraimee  govenunent* 

-  He  aftenranb  recruited  them  irom  the  Taiqika  of  Canhul  and  the 
districts  romid  iL  An  arrangement  has  smce  been  made  with  thie 
dbi^  Toimd  Canbul  and  Feshawer*  for  supplying  men  from  their 
tribes  for  this  ooipa*  and  receiving  payment  by  assignments  of  land..* 

The  Ciizzilbaushes,  who  form  about  a  third  of  the  Gholaum 
Khaunch,  are  the  best  part  of  the  whole.  Though  they  have  been 
so  long  settled  in  C'aubul,  and  have  engaged  in  trades,  they  still 
retain  their  original  character  of  militarv  adventurers ;  being  good 
troops  on  service,  but  more  thoughtlebd  and  debauched  than  ev^ 
their  countrymen  in  Persia. 

-  They  are  more  faithful  than  the  Afghaims  in  civil  ward,  knowing 
that  they  may  at  some  time  be  in  the  power  of  any  prince  they 
oAmd;  and  thafc  one  party  will  be  less  exasperated  by  their  fidelity 
to  its  adranaries*  thsn  die  odier  would  be  at  their  pe^dy  m  deseri- 
hig  it. 

IheGhoianms  suHhr  more  harddiip  l^an  any  troops  in  the  army* 
They  enlist  for  pefpetoal  service^  and  th^  hare  no  means  of  obtain- 
ing  redress  of  grievance^  or  even  of  securing  thdr  regular' payment. 
If  he  could  pay  them  regularly*  the  King  could  probably  raise  double 
the  number  from  the  Taujiks  round  Caubul. 

The  Gholaums  are  cUvided  into  Dustehs,  commanded  by  officers 
named  Kooler  Aghausses.  These  officers  are  commonly  dependents 
of  fbp  King's,  and  frequently  Feshkhedmuts  (personal  attendantB)  and 
liunuchs. 

Tlie  number  of  Dustehs  is  generally  from  eight  to  ten;  Uieir 
strength  is  various. 

The  permanent  troopt*,  besides  the  Gholaums,  are  the  Shaheen- 
chees,  men  mounted  on  camels  which  carry  large  swivels.  They  are 
imkaned  at  seren  or  eight  hundred* 

Hie  King  of  Caubul  is  said  to  hare  many  guns,  but  Sbauh-Sbiy« 

8  T  8 

y 


Digitized  by  Google 


KAiUU  NOKUB. 


had  only  fiv«^  wkm  ht  took  the  field  aft  Fedunrar  in  ISOft.  Tliey 
were  muoli  wane  in  all  respects  than  en  j  I  hten  enrer  soon  among  Q» 
Bithreanniee  of  UMiia* 

The  King  has  a  guard  of  a  few  hundced  Hindoilwmee  Sepogn* 
vliidi  mounta  at  the  gate  of  the  Hanun.  They  aw  dwieed  in  imita- 
tian  of  our  6cpoya»  but  aaem  to  have  no  diactpline* 

The  in^gnUur  infimtiy*  who  ganriaon  fovta*  are  paid  from  the 
revenue  of  the  pfovinee  they  are  situated  in.  Thcce  Wflfe  OqIj  one 
hundred  and  fifty  at  most  in  the  fiart  of  Attock. 

The  troops  kept  up  by  governors  of  pvorineea,  have  been  nwO' 
tioned  (whor(>  it  could  be  ascertained)  in  tlwaoaount of. the  provinces. 
They  can  seldom  be  employed,  except  in  waia  Gamed  on  in  the  peo* 
vince  or  its  neighbourhood. 

Tfic  Karra  Nokur  arc  furnishofl  in  t'^mv  of  \\ar  l>\  the  owners  of 
land,  at  a  rate  fixed  in  former  timeii.  The  expciict  of  iliis  ser\'ice 
was  provided  for  by  a  remission  of  revenue  at  the  lirst  settlement 
The  numbers  vary ;  the  courtiers  pretend  that  a  man  is  due  lor  ^«:h 
plough  ;  and  the  tribes  near  CaubuK  perhaps  furnish  the  number  due 
on  that  principle :  the  more  powerful,  or  more  remote  tribes  snpply 
a  much  smaller  proportion,  and  some  none  at  aJL  The  Tuujiks  fur- 
nish a  greater  proportion  than  the  A%haun8.  On  the  whole,  th^ 
number  iunnshed  is  less  than  that  eidier  of  the  DDOiaoneeB  or 
Oudanma. 

Th^  are  formed  into  Duateha»  and  ooaMuanded  by  DoonNmee 
filfdan ;  piwbably  by  those  who  have  the  government  of  their  tribes. 
Each  division  has,  besidest  a  subotdhiate .  ehicT of  ita  o«m.  iribflk 
When  they  are  ordered  out,  the  MnHIha  call  vpaa  the  esmcn  of 
land  to  furnish  their  proportbn ;  and  they  have  their  choice  tn  asm 
or  pay  fiir  a  snbstitute.  The  sum  to  be  paid  fiir  a  aufaatjUalie^  depends 
on  the  expected  duration  of  the  service  and  generally  is  from  five  to 
aeven  tomans  (firom  jfilO  to  jfil4)}  from  thifcthe  liead  of  the  village 
entertains  a  horseman,  generalfyat  three  tomana}  and.  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  procuring  a  person  to  serve  from  amnng  the  pOflrev 
people  in  the  village  or  its  neighbourhood. 


Dig'itized  by  Googl 


EEUAUBES. 


The  Dooraunee  chief  often  takes  the  money  instead  of  insisting  on 
receiving  the  horseman,  and  hj  this  means  the  real  atrangth  of  lilA 
Karra  Nokur  is  generally  under  what  it  is  rated  at. 

Besides  this,  the  King  not  unusually  receives  pavment  in  money, 
instead  of  tlie  number  ol'  Karra  Nokur  required  irom  a  particular 
tribe  or  district. 

The  men  who  go  on  service,  are  obliged  to  remain  with  the  army 
till  they  are  regularly  dismissed,  without  aiiy  allowajice  horn  tlie 
King,  or  any  further  advance  horn  the  head  of  their  village.  Each 
diviikm  ia»  however,  obliged  to  give  an  flUowmco  of  gNia  to  the 
fimiliwi  of  the  horaeaien  fumiflbed  by  it  SSnce  the  decline  of  the 
monarchy,  the  King  may  have  been  obliged*  by  the  wloit  of  power 
to  oomiieL  the  Eanra  Nolcur  to  swve^  to  make  th^  some  iUovRitoe 
while  on  aeivioe ;  but  that  ia  no.  part  of  the  cwilaitiition  of  this  body 
of  .men. 

Except  a  corps  not  exceeding  two  thowMnd,  which  il.due  fton 
the  Cohiataon  of  Caubnl*  the  Karra  Nokur  are  all  bonwh  •  •  - 

The  Ee^anree  are  a  militia  raised  on  extraordinary  oim^ons.  It 
seems  to  be  understood  that  the  number  to  he  furnished,  ought  to 
be  equal  to  a  tenth  ol'  the  population,  but  \h:it  number  ;>robably 
never  has  been  raised  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  a<i milted  that 
the  King  may  call  out  a  stiil  greater  proportion,  it"  he  t) links  it  ne- 
cessary. The  persons  who  serve  in  the  Eeljaurce,  are  of  the  poorest 
classy.  They  receive  a  sum  cuiciil<iU;d  to  support  them  during  the 
time  ibr  which  their  services  are  likely  to  be  required } .  it  seldom  ex- 
ceeds five  rupees.  Thu  money  is  paid  by  the  head  of  each  village, 
end  the  ^Kpcnce  ia  defrayed  by  «  <mk  on  eU  the  iafaibiteDls  <if  die 
village  (Inftlwding  'Homs»uyiba>  or  tradenniD)i  who  do.not  poeiee* 
landt  Mbollahs»  and  other  persons  exempt  from  other  tsaei.  I 
have  heard  that  the  owners  of  land  who  payreveiroe^  are  not  obliged 
to  contrifaute  to  the  £djsm»;  and,  nt  the  lUm  Nokur  ai^  njmA 
aitiidy  at  the  espsnoe  of  this  deacription  of  mmf  the  &ot  of  €bmt 


Digitized  by  Google 


584  DAWATULLUB,  OE  VOLUmiSEB&  * 

From  the  smallness  ot"  their  pay,  it  is  found  difficult  to  get  volun- 
teers lor  ttus  service,  and  compulsion  is  almost  always  resorted  to. 
For  this  reason,  it  is  only  anionf^  the  tribes  about  great  towns,  or  on 
the  roads  made  use  of  by  armies,  that  the  Eeljanree  can  be  raised. 
As  in  most  cases  they  cannot  be  kept  long  togetlier,  or  carried  to  any 
distance  from  their  own  neighbourhood,  the  King  makes  little  use  of 
dii«  fiwoe.  Hie  Haakimft  of  provinoef  fiequentljr  Mionble  die  Ed- 
Janree^  whidi*  indeed,  is  in  geneind  ihe  onlj  detcnpUoo  of  troops 
diey  have  to  depend  on.  The  Eeljamee  of  Peshawer  hea,  however^ 
been  levend  times  odled  out  by  the  Kingi  particulsrlj  on  «Q  eoqpedi- 
tions  agunst  Cashnieer.  That  of  Caiibiil  has  aho  been  caUed  outoii 
milkary  service. 

The  numbers  of  the  Eeljauree  of  these  two  provinces  seem  to  be 
nearly  equal,  and  have  betm  of  different  amoant  from  fonr  to 
thousand  each,  according  to  the  state  of  ciioimstances.    Thej  seem 
liable  to  be  employed  on  public  woricB.  as  well  as  on  military  service  ; 
those  of  Caubul,  for  instance,  were  once  assembled  by  Timour  Shauh 

to  clear  a  canal  near  tlio  citv. 

The  Ecija\ireo  arc  ahnohi  all  infantry. 

They  receive  no  pay  wliatt  vor  from  the  King,  unless  they  should 
be  kept  above  three  months  in  the  field. 

Dawatullub  are  only  raised  i'oi  paiUciilar  expeditions. 

They  receive  five,  tomans  {£10)  when  they  enlist,  which  is  suffi- 
cient pay  for  one  csanpaign,  and  they  run  the  chance  of  the  umy's 
remaining  longer  in  the  field,  in  the  hope  of  providing  for  themsdves 
bj  plunder. 

Tliis  descriptioii  of  troops  are  always  most  numerous  in  eapeditions 
to  India.   On  sndbi  occasions  people  even  go>without  pay,  in  hopes 

of  plunder. 

In  foreign  invasions,  use  might  be  made  of  the  general  rising  of 
the  people,  called  in  the  A%haiin  country  Ooloossee.  This  sort  of 
army  has  been  described  in  speaking  of  the  tribes.  Only  those  of- 
the  tribes  nearest  the  scene  of  action  could  be  snqienr«l  toiue} 


Digitized  by  Google 


A£MS  AND  £QU1PH£NT&  ^SS 

iSbej  would  lie  imd«r  no  ragnktkiii  on  die  King's  ptgt,  and  no  good 
oodd  be  ezpeetad*  in  ngolar  «ctioafl»  fimn  ao  ungovernable  it  moliti- 
tude$  but  if  properlj  applied*  tiualund  of.finoe  ivonld  not  be  witb- 
■out  it»  advautagBB.  Lnpoitant  iltings  hm  often  taken  place  ftc 

public  objects,  not  immediately  cxNmected  with  die  tribeB  which  roaob 
Tluis,  in  the  Sbeeaii  and  Soonnee  fiagr  m  Cavbul»  all  the  neighbour- 
ing tribesi  eapeciaUy  the  ^Cohirtanneea,  came  to  the  aid  of  (heir 

religion. 

Ooloossee  troops  get  no  pay. 

The  chief  officers  of  the  army  are  called  Sirdars.  They  have  al- 
wfl\'s  hcfMi  few.  In  Shauh  Shujau's  time  there  were  only  three.  Tfiis 
permanent  miluarv  rank  must  be  distinguished  i^m  the  office  of 
Sirdar  in  each  province. 

Tliere  is  sometimes  an  officer  called  Sirdarec  Sirdaraun,  who  takes 
rank  of  all  tlie  Sirdars,  and  commands  every  army  wliore  lie  is  pre- 
sent.   Shauh  Mahmood  has  contcrretl  Uiii»  olike  on  i  utteh  K1i;luii. 

Tlie  Shaheenchee  Baushee,  or  commander  of  the  camel  artiilery, 
is  a  considerable  ofhcer.    He  must  be  a  Baurikzye. 

Almost  the  whole  of  the  regular  troopa  are  cavaliy.  The  honea 
belong  to  HbB  m<».  Bxcept  about  five  hundred  Feahkhedmutii  (per- 
aonal  servants  of  the  King's),  there  la  not  one  man  mounted  on  a 
horse  betoging  to  govenment  llie-dueft  heve  eadi  aome  Feahk- 
hedmuts*  mounted  on  hofsea  bdongmg  to  tliem*  and  equipped  at 
thefar  expenoa  These  ue  die  best  mounted  and  armed  of  the  whole 
army.   They  are  generally  Knanlbansliea. 

The  horses  are  mosdy  from  IXriiek  Tartaiy,  and  die  Toorooman 
country  along  the  Oxua.  lliey  are  generally  small,  hardy»  'and 
active^  well  used  to  the  mountainoua  country,  in  whidh  they  are  em- 
ployed, and  capable  of  making  vary  long  marches. 

The  arms  of  the  Dooraun^  are^  a  Persian  sword  and  a  match- 
lock ;  a  few  of  the  best  men  have  spears,  wliich  they  put  in  the  rest 
when  they  charge*  not  having  the  skilful  use  of  this  weapon  which  is 
oommiQii  in  India.  A  &w  aoDoong  them  have  fize-locks.   The  chiefs 


^  ARMS  AND  EQUIPMENTS. 

r 

'lUwe  gMendly  pIbMI^  m  lutrtt  «  lev  of  tbe  aniilmm  neiu  fHiiiMi 
were  formbtlj  ift  M  among HiMfef  bat  «e  mnr  dSiooptiiinBAi* 
The  DootBimees  !aev«r        as  infantiy. 

Tile  Gholmme  are  ttttied  miich  in  tlie  ame  wi^»  bni  have  mote 

firelocks  and  speari. 

The  Ghiljies  use  theaaine  anna  u  the  Ddonnmemj  with  iJie  addi- 
ti<Mi     a  small  shield. 

The  eastern  A%faaiuu  wear  Hindooetaunee  swords,  ahiehlsy  lea- 


•  The  fbUowing  tkacriptiao  uf  their  troopi  u  by  Lieutenant  Macartney  who  wai>  Jiiin- 
•df  a  oivahyoffioer.   He  u  apeakii^  of  tbe  I'()piil/yi'>. 

"  Tlu'ir  arms  •irid  rln-^s  :ir(> '111  Clinic  as  the  otJii  I  1)<j<  rnn"'^'',  <^f>r<ls  tlaf^<;t'r?i,  liattle- 

axes,  short  inatdiilucki>»  and  some  with  iodu  (hreiuckoj  not  l(»uger  than  a  carabine  bqt 
**  ^flAk  *\Kfgm  hon,  mA  tiAmlum  ht^^^  TlMyabocHfiy 
"  long  hone  pistols,  but  few  of  them  carry  speant.  Tlif  v  getnTiiIly  carry  tliclr  arms  under 
«  their  clogha,  or  great  cloak.  Hieir  drm  ia  a  {tyrahun,  or  lon^  shirt,  ovir  it  ,i  knba, 
'*  generally  ma^sor Mt  or  dritti^  vftli  %  kaanwr  famd  of  duwlMr  loongt-e,  und  uver  all 

»  «  doghti,  or  great  cloak,  which  hangs  loose  over  their  dioulders  and  reaches  mmilj 
**  to  the  anklu.  Tlu-ir  hrad  dross  is  generally  u  shawl  or  loongec  put  on  in  tlic  flirm  of  a 
**  turban  over  a  cap.  'i'hcy  wear  boots  of  the  Hussar  form  made  of  deer  skin.  They  are 
**  generally  cavalry,  and  aienonnlisd  on  naaU  hanBtmUmn  wtawHng  fautfwn,  orfewr- 

teen  and  an  inch  high,  but  retnarkubly  hardy  and  uclive,  and  perform  some  wtHulerlU 
M  kuig  marches  i  but  as  they  are  in  the  habit  of  turning  their  horses  loose  into  the  cultiva- 
**  tvlierever  they  go,  they  hare  nc«  much  trouble  after  reaching  their  ground.  They 
**  xae  aoMe  bridles.  Tbdr  saddles  are  of  wood,  very  and  the  seat  is  covered  with 
•*  velvet,  stu£M  with  cotton.  They  have  a  khogcer  {a  sort  of  pad)  made  gtrierallv  of 
<*  nummud  (feltX  under  the  saddle ;  some  of  tlie  chiefs  have  very  expmsuvc  ones.  They 
**  appear  &r  raperiortothelMnenieii  of  HindcMtiii,  bat  Iwve  not  Mgood  mnigaaMttt 
*'  of  their  liorses,  and  might  not  be  equal  to  tltein  single-handed  ;  but  thqr  must  change 
**  with  much  greater  velocity,  their  horse*  not  being  checked  by  martingales  or  bits,  and 
**  consequently  they  would  have  the  «dwiti|gB  in  «  body.  They  appear  to  understand 
*'  diarging  ill  line^  and  go  with  great  apead.   I  never  ttm  diem  ohai;ge  fat  double  liii% 

bnt  the  troops  which  met  the  embassy  as  nn  <<«roH,  marched  indivisians,  and  kept  their 
*i  regular  wheeling  distance.  I  did  not  sec  them  whocl  into  Une^  but  they  increased  and 
<*  dtmhriihwi  their  fiont,  and  bIw  iSnned  line  to  Ae  fimit,  and  lupt  Aeir  flei  date  and 
"  regular,  but  there  is  no  disci]iliiie  kept  up  among  tliem.  Tliis  party  of  course  were 
*'  piclced  men  and  boncsj  and  must  have  received  particulau-  instructions  to  march  in 
**  regular  erder  with  the  embaasy*  bet  in  general  they  appear  just  as  irregular  as  die 
**  armiea  of  Hmdostan.  Thiy  are  small  men,  but  stout  and  active.  I  have  seen  them  gt» 
**  at  speed  o  VP  r  nicf^rK!  rorkv  n^ountains,  where  if  die  hone  faeppnod  to  indkoBttwil^p 
^*  they  would  probably  be  diuiiixi  to  pieces." 

I 

i 

I 


Digrtized  by  Google 


DlSCIFUNfi  AMD  MODE  OF  WAB. 

tbtr  cwirm^ai  vutskMu,'  and  oAoi  tpelm  >  iIm  hm  cf  dw  lait 
nentioiwd  wenfioii  ii  hawmet  deidinihfr 

.Ewh  hocMBMP  CMfriai  piofiaioiM,  conwitipg  tihMitaid  Kootoot, 
(iraort  of  bnd  diMiBk)  cndft  krge  krthiont  bottle  of  wttea. 

The  in&Btry  have  generally  »  •wbrd,  a  shield,  and  » iii«tdilodc 
with  a  rest  Thoarcf  the  Cohistm  of  Caubul,  who  are  reckoned  Hie 
best  they  have,  cany  a  firelock,  a  pistol,  and  a  ahoft  ^aggBTf  bat  no 
sward:  the  Ghiljies  near  Caubul,  tlie  Khyberaesy  and  some  oditt 
tribes,  nae«  sort  of  knife  about  three  feet  long,  instead  of  a  sword. 

On  a  march  the  men  of  each  party  generally  keep  together,  bvA 
on  the  whole  they  move  with  verj'  little  order ;  though  there  are 
manv  officers  whose  duty  it  is  to  enforce  regularitv.  They  have  few 
catiip  followers  compared  to  an  Itidian  army,  and  what  they  have  are 
mostU  niounted.  The  custom  of  carrying  about  women  and  children 
on  service  is  not  practised  among  them.  They  have  light  tents  and 
little  baggage,,  carried  on  horses,  mules*  and  oamels.  A  small  basat 
accompanies  the  army. 

The  government  appears  rarely  to  take  any  trouble  about  provid- 
ing grain,  or  n^aking  preparations  of  any  sort  for  their  armies  ;  and  as 
the  habits  of  the  soldiers  adapt  themselves  to  this  system,  they  have 
less  difficulty  about  supplies  than  maie  legular  tioopa. 

The  usual  «>^«Jw  fiv  annies  are  from  twelve  to  sudden  miles. 

The  government  sometimes  gives  grain  to  the  troops,  and  on  very 
particular  occasions  it  sometimes  distributes  monqr  to  puicfaaae  pio» 
visions:  In  their  eastern  possesaioosb  the  inhabitants  of  wbich  bsnre 
scmcdiingof  the  submissive  cbarader  of  die  Indians,  ihe  a^hw> 
tzoopa  seise  on  gnon,  fevage^  firewood,  and  eveiy  thing  else  thej 
want,  widMNit  pajing  Ibr  any  thing ;  and  since  the  confbsioii  in  the 
government  these  irregularities  hsnre  seldom  or  never  been  punished | 
but  in  the  whole  of  tlie  country  west  of  the  KhjHber  pass,  thejr  are 
obliged  to  pay  for  every  artide  they  require. 

When  their  army  is  in  an  enemy's  country,  they  send  light  detad^ 
ments  to  make  incursions  (which  they  call  by  the  Turkish  name, 
Chepawid  or  Chepow)  either  against  particular  places  whkh  they 
eiMieftvoui  to  suxpiise^  or  to  plunder  the  open  country. 

3  z 


538 


CIVIL  WAHS. 


They  are  long  detained  by  sieges,  at  which,  as  might  be  supposed, 
thev  fire  very  unskilful,  and  which  are  prolonged  bv  the  nature  of 
their  armies  and  the  badness  of  iheir  artillery.  When  they  come  to 
a  general  engagement,,  their  plan  is  to  make  a  fiirions  charge  sword 
in  hand,  on  the  success  of  which  depends  tlie  fate  of  the  Imttle.  The 
Persians  appear  always  to  oppose  the  Hre  of  infantrv  to  this  charge, 
and  frequently  with  success :  this  was  the  ca&c  in  ail  2\uudir's  battles, 
and  in  the  recent  one  at  Heraut. 

The  Qonduct  of  the  Dooraunees  in  dieir  civil  wars,  givee  m  veij 
ipeBxi  idea  of  tlieir  military  chaiacter.  Timt  mam  are  vaj  smalli 
aaldgm.  exceeding  ten  tlwuflaiid  men  on  a  side*  and  these  axe  gene- 
xally  ill  paid  and  diflobiedient  Ibe  victoiy  is  decided  bftonieduera 
going  over  to  the  enemy ;  on  whidi  the  greater  part  of  the  ann j 
either  foUoira  his  example  or  takes  to  flight.  £ven  when  the  battle 
is  decided  by  die  sword*  diere  is  little  bloodshed,  and  thakis  diiefijr 
among  the  great  Khauns,  who  are  interested  in  the  result*  the  cdmR 
mon  s(^ers  shewing  much  indifference  to  the  issne^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


(   539  ) 


CHAP.  VIL 

THE  BELIOIOUB  BSTABUSmOMT. 

« 

THE  fbUowing  are  the  ^pointmenta  bdd  by  Moollalif»  bendtt 
the  hnr  offices  meationed  in  the  aeofckni  on  Jnitioe  and  BoUoe. 
The-  HooUah  Baiuhee,  who  adects  the  MooUahs  proper  to  be 
aummoned  to  the  Migliaae  Ulima,  and  is  the  channel  of 
tum  between  Ihe  MboUaha  and  the  King. 

'  The  King^a  Imaum  or  Peeahnumau^  whoieadaprayera  to  the  King* 
Hie  Inunun  Paurikaub,  who  attenda  the  Kng  oo  jonmiea  or  other 

ocxAsions,  when  his  ordinarjr  Imaum  may  be  absent. 

The  above  belong,  to  the  royal  household.  The  fbUowing  oompoae 
the  establishment  of  the  great  towns. 

The  Shekhool  Islam  :  copies  of  all  patents  for  stipends  and  pen- 
sions in  money  to  Moollahs  are  deposited  with  him,  he  receives  the 
amount  ordered  in  each  from  the  Uaukim,  and  pays  it  to  the  Moollahs 
to  whom  it  is  due. 

Tlic  Sudder  of  the  city.  He  keeps  a  register  of  all  church  lands, 
whether  granted  by  tlie  Kino;  or  lefl  by  private  persons,  and  assigns 
them  according  to  their  oi  igiiial  destination  under  the  King's  direction. 

The  Imaum  of  the  King's  mosque  reads  prayers  there  on  Fddaja, 
and  on  the  two  great  festirala  caDed  the  Beds, 
'  The  second  Imaum  of  the  King's  mosque  reads  the  Mussulman 
service  on  every  day  but  those  above  mentiiwed. 

TbeMooUahi  Khutedb :  hia  office  is  to  read  prayeia  at  the  Edgah 
widiout  the  city  on  the  Eeds. 

The  Mooderris,  or  professor  of  the  King's  moaque»  a  MooUah 
selected  for  hia  learning  to  instruct  students  at  the  royal  mosque^ 

3  <  9 


Digitized  by  Google 


540 


THE  jceumom  tsTABtTsiiMEarr. 


There  was  till  lately  a  great  office  of  Meer  Waez,  or  head  preacher, 
but  it  has  been  discontinued  since  t  herebeUion  of  the  last  incrnnbent^ 

the  famous  Svud  Alimed  Mcer  VV'aez. 

Besideii  tlu  ;lIjovc  are  the  Imattms  of  the  mosques  in  towns. 

The  Imaunis  of  towns  have  tees  on  marriages,  burials,  and  some 
other  ceremonies,  and  are  maintained  by  them  and  the  gifts  ot  their 
congregation. 

In  the  country  tlie  Imaums  have  grants  of  land  firom  the  head  man 
of  the  tribe,  or  firom  the  tribe  itself,  and  also  receive  a  tax  on  the. 
principleof  tylhts,  bat  by  no  iii«an«.anioiiiituig  to  a  tytha  of  the  ]m>- 
dndd  on*  wlikli  it  is  levied: .  all  the  «tlier  Moollahs,  w]k>  weate  fint 
mentioQed,  .have  idariet  fiomthe  Kingt  and  some  have  £eeB  betides. 

Manj  MdoUaba  mho  do  not  hold  oficea^  here  peniiolis  fionliie 
King*  or  lands  assigned  them  by  the  en)fwn«  oc.by  the  charitf  ef  indi- 
yiduak.  Lands  are  also  left  to  moaqnes,  and  an  managed  by  the 
Imanmw  belonging  to  them.  ■  * 

Students  at  the  King's,  raosqne  here  a  .  daily  aQowenoe  fiem  His 
,  JlAilpeBiy*^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX. 


AFP£NDIX  A. 

JUSTOAY  OF  THE  XIMOSOM  or  caubt  t  ,  tuom  THfi  FODVIIlATIOII  Ol  THB 

OOOaAUNKfi  MONARCHY. 

T  ITlliE  tt kam €f fhe <iay  Ustovy  of  tlie  IXn)^^  ]B|^11wb8it 
^■-^  ■oooonts*  I  can  cbtaiii,  ihef  tffen  to iMve  been  cntiiaty  indmifmlBiit 

till  the  beginning  of  tlie  sevantMttth  century,  when,  being  hard  {OeiMil  bjr 
the  Uzbeks,  they  agreed  to  pay  tribute  to  Persia,  as  the  price  of  protection. 
They  perhaps  remained  on  this  footing  till  1708,  when  the  Ghiljieswho  had 
been  subject  to  Persia,  rose  against  the  Georgian  Prince  Bagrathion,  who 
was  guveniur  of  Cantlaliar,  011  tiie  port  uf  the  last  of  the  Sophies.  At  that 
time  the  DooiauneeB  asem  mostl j  to  have  been  aettled  in  the  momttsiitt  near 
Heraott  under  the  name  of  Abdaulees,  and  to  have  been  already  I<Hig  engaged 
in  hostilitiea  with  the  Ghfljies. 

In  the  year  17 16,  the  Abdaullees,  under  AbdooUah  Khaun  Suddozye, 
invaded  the  Persian  territor}',  defeated  the  governor  of  Heraut  in  the  field, 
and  took  that  city  and  many  places  in  its  neighbourhoo'd.  Tliry  were  after- 
wards defeated  in  a  battle  with  Mahniood  Gluljie,  but  us  tiiat  Prince  soon 
after  conqfunA  Penria,  andr  m  liii  dynasty  tm  occupied,  during  liia  ahoit 
period  of  its  doaunion,  in  aettKng  hs  cqB^ncats,  and  in  wan  with  the  Gnnd 
Signior,  the  Abdaidleee  remained  for  a  long  time  unmoleited.  Not  kog 
after  their  defeat,  AbdooUah  was  depo6<»i,  and  perhaps  poisoned,  by  2ieniaun 
Khnun  (the  son  of  ITfowlut  Khaun  and  father  of  Ahmed  Shauh),  who  took 
ttif  If^ad  amontf  tin  Abdaullees,  defeated  a  Persian  army  of  double  his  num- 
ber, and  successfully  resisted  all  attempts  of  thi^  nation  on  Heraut.  So 
^   1   ■•  .  • 

*  Tfaoie  of  Hanway,  who,  from  the  exceOence  of  hit  hwtory  of  the  Afghaun  conquetUt  V  *^ 
litkd  to  UttCDtioa  when  tm^iog  of  tbemoce  otwcure  period  which,  preceded  tbote  tteaU. 


Digitized  by  Google 


542  EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  DOORAUNEES.  [Appendix. 

n^d  kdeed  WM  tbe  increase  of  the  power  of  the  Abdaullees,  that  in  the 
year  1722  they  were  able  to  besiege  Meahhed  neaily  in  the  north-western 
extremity  of  Khorassaun. 

A  series  of  revolutions  afterwards  took  place  during  whicli  the  Abdaullees, 
whose  goverument  was  at  all  times  democratic,  were  lelt  for  some  time 
entixdiy  mthout  a  leader,  their  vSun  being  inaiu^;ed  moat  probably  by  a 
Jitgk,  or  council  of  heads  of  fiunilies.  At  hnt  in  1728,  thej  were  for  the 
first  time  attacked  by  Naiidir  Shauh,  and,  after  ft  short  campaign  of  vanoua 
success,  were  reduced  to  submit  to  the  conqueror. 

They-  rebelled  at^why  under  Zoolfikaur  Khaun  (the  son  of  Zeinaun  Khaun 
and  elder  brotiier  ot'  AiimcA)  who  had  alternately  been  in  exile,  and  at  the 
head  of  the  Abdaullees,  during  the  ti  uublesi  above  mentioned.  They  invaded 
ihe  Persian  territoiyp  and  defeated  Ibrahim  (Naudir  ShauVs  brother)  in  a 
pitdiedbatUe.  were  besieging  Meahhed,  when  Nandir  moved  agaimt 

thetn  in  person,  and  drove  them  back  into  their  own  territory.  He  opened 
the  ei^e  of  Heraut  in  tJie  beginning  of  1731,  and  took  it  after  a  most  obsti- 
nate and  acti\  e  rcsistanre  of  tt-n  months,  in  which  the  Abdaullees  received 
some  assistance  from  tiie  Ciiuijics.  He  banished  the  leading  Siiddozjres  to 
Mouitan,.  and  compelled  a  large  force  of  Abdaulleeci  to  join  his  army. 

Tlie  of  Heraut  never  id)^ed  again,  but  tite  Abdanlleea  in  tihe 
oounixy  laept  up  tbe  war  for  some  time  hmger,  in  om^unctuNi  with  tfie 
Ghiljies  and  JSimauks. 

In  the  course  of  the  next  six  years  Naudir  reduced  the  Ghiljies  and  took 
Candahar.  Zoolfikaiir  Khaun  and  his  brother  Ahmed  Shauli  were  prisoners 
in  that  citv.  They  were  released  by  Naudir,  and  sent  into  Mazenderaun  in 
command  ui  a  force  of  their  own  tribe.  The  Abdaullees  having  in  tbe  mean 
ttme  dis^tingui&hed  themselves  in  his  servioe  (paiticttiady  against  the  Barte]^ 
ho  rewarded  them  with  the  lands  they,  now  hold  in  Teoofll»  fcnoviqg  them 
fiNun  the  west  of  Heraut  to  their  present  territory.  He  qipears  fiom  tlus 
time  to  have  shewn  great  attachment  to  the  Aighauna,  To  this  postttlily, 
among  other  causes,  is  attributed  his  murder  by  the  Persians  in  .Time  1747. 
On  the  day  which  succeeded  tli-it  event,  a  battle  took  place  between  the 
A%hauns  and  Uzbeks  under  Ahmed  >^liauh  on  one  side,  and  tbe  Persians 
OD  the  other.  It  is  un<%rtain  who  b^an  (ho  attack,  nor  does  the  event 
appear  to  have  decided  any  thing*. 


*  A«  til  a  iliia  I  have  geiwraUy  ioUowcd  Sir  WtUiom  JoDeK*!  tnnilation  of  the  Naudir  Naameh. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ammnz.]      FOEM  OF'AX 


mm 


'SHAUIPS  GOVCSMMENT. 


54d 


Afler  this  affair  Ahmed  Shaufi  fought  hi«  way  Uirough  tlie  greater  part  of 
Khorassaiin,  and  passing  the  tbi  utied  places  without  attacking  them,  repaired 
to  Candahar,  where  he  arrived  with  a  fi»ee  not  exceeding  two  or  thr^ 
thouHukl  hon& 

He  there  found  that  a  treeaiire  commg  fitom  bidiaftr  Nandhr  had[  just.been 

seized  by  the  Dooraunees,  and  he  immediately  claimed  it  for  himself :  some 
of  the  chiefs  at  first  hesitated  to  give  it  up  to  him,  though  liis  authoritv  as 
head  of  the  Sudduzyes  v.  n';  now  backed  hx  :i  militarv  force.  He  put  some  of 
the  most  obstinate  to  death,  and  met  wiUi  no  tiirther  opposition  in  his  tribe. 

lu  October  1747  he  was  crowned  at  Candahar:  Dooraunee»  Kuzzlebausb, 
Bdocfa^  and  HuMitnt-  ohieft  are  mentioDed  ae  aaristiag  at  the  mronatlqn. 
Ahmed  Shauh  was  then  very  ynong  s  a  contcM|iciaiy  butocian  auhca  huu 
only  twenly'three  years  of  age. 

He  spent  the  winter  in  Candahar,  settling  the  country  he  had  already 
acquired,  and  arranging  his  army  for  future  expeditions.  In  framing  his 
government  he  appears  to  have  had  the  model  of  tliat  of  Persia  before  his 
eyes.  The  forms  of  his  court,  the  great  oihcers  of  8tate,  tlie  arrangement 
of  the  annj,  and  thepretensibns  of  the  crown,  me^uetty  Ae  «anie  aa  thoae 
of  Naudir  Shaoh  $  but  the  di&renoe  m  the  sHnationa  4^  the  two  mooardia 
was  apparent  in  the  manner  in  which  Ahmed  Shauh  was  obliged  to  modify 
Naudir's  plan,  both  in  the  administration  of  his  internal  government, 
and  in  the  order  of  his  meaaorea  lor  advancing  his  power  at  home  an^ 
abroad. 

The  Persians  had  long  been  accustomed  to  entire  submission  to  a  despotic 
govenunent^  and  had  alwaya  been  attached  to  their  aovcreigns.  Tht  dynasty 
which  had  long  nded  them  waa  omtumed  by  the  A%haunss  and  in  the 
beginning  of  Naudir's  career,  Faiaia  waa.gniamng  under  a  fiireign  yoke : 
Naudir  took  on  himself  the  character  of  the  deliverer  of  his  country,  and  the 
restorer  of  its  native  kings  :  he  connected  himself  by  marriage  with  the  royal 
family  ;  and  when  he  hail  siifhciently  secured  tlie  affections  of  the  army,  and 
Che  respect  of  the  people,  he  coniined  the  lawiul  King,  and  traiuiierred  hia 
authori^  to  hin^etf.  . 

Suooeeding  to  an  eatabliahed  monaiehy,  he  mtat  witfi  no  aerionaonpoaitioii 
in  Persia,  and  was  enabled  from  the  moment  of  Mi  accemion,  to  empby  the 
whole  force  of  the  kingdom  in  foreign  conquests. 

Ahmed  Shauh,  on  the  contrary,  had  to  found  a  monarchy  over  a  warhkc 
aud  indepentlpnt  peopk',  by  no  means  attached  to  that  t'ortn  of  government  j 
those  most  accu&toincU  to  be  governed  by  a  King,  hud  only  felt  his  power  in 

II 


Digitized  by  Google 


^  ,  POLICY  OF  AHMED  SHAUH.  LArruimx. 

the  means  which  were  used  to  compel  them  to  pay  tribute  to  a  foreign  states 

and  had  ever  regarded  liim  as  a  powei  ful  enemy,  rather  than  a  magistrate  hj 
whom  thev  were  protected,  and  to  wlium  ihev  owed  loyaltv  and  attAcliment. 
They  had  never  been  united  under  a  native  Kmgj  and,  irom  the  love  of  equality 
m  CQia§fAcwm  in  tliQir  chaiMter,  tliuy  ipeie  Ithdy  to  vieir  the  <iilt>tioB  of 

Hiis  difference  of  the  sttiuition  in  which  Ahmed  Shonh  was  placed,  from 
that  of  Naudir,  made  -a  corresponding  variation  in  his  poliry.  His  first 
object  was  to  secui'e  the  atfections  of  his  own  tribe,  on  whom  he  dei)ended 
for  permauent  support,  as  well  as  for  immediate  assistance.  For  thin  pur- 
pose he  confirmed  the  Dooraunees  in  the  poasessicMi  of  theit  lands,  requiring 
no  Mcriflce  ftom  them,  but  the  attei^Mioe  of  tiieir  oontiiigeiit  of  troopg  m 
isod  Iqr  Nindir.  Hedistraniledidl&egMitafficMorhiaMir  ttatea^^ 
tibe  letdiaig  DoofaillieM,  and  established  thoM  oAoea  in  pvtiailar  families 
in  the  same  manner  in  which  he  fixed  the  crown  on  his  own ;  he  M}  the 
hereditar}'  chiefs  in  posses •< ion  of  their  privileges,  and  seldom  interi  m  rod  tn 
the  internal  government  ol  their  clans,  except  in  such  a  degree  m  was  neces* 
Bory  to  keep  up  his  army,  and  to  preserve  the  general  tranquillity ;  which  he 
ihntfi  tfibduaUy  He  took  pmnt  to  mftavt  the  advantage  Jit 

darivcd  fiwD  the  leneot  of  "die  Dtoatamieea  Sot  iht  Suddocvea  •  aWMHwh  he 
probably  regarded  many  of  that  family  with  jealousy,  aa  Ina  rivals  in  the 
attachment  of  his  tribe  ;  he  always  niaintaJned  their  privileges,  and  enforced 
the  exercise  of  the  respect  which  was  due  to  them.  Stories  are  told  of  his 
severely  pumstiing  hyuiwa  to  SuddozyeSt  even  when  offered  in  supporting  his 
own  cause.^ 

.  IViththeodiartribeai  eiocf*  the  Ohiljies,  his  plan  waato  endaaffoor  to 
ftnnatpititef  attachaBent  to  their  native  Kii^*  which  be  might  hope  to 
accowipliwh,  by  delivering  them  from  fttei^  dimiiiiflw,  and  bj  a  modmaCe 

and  gradual  introduction  of  his  own  power. 

His  moderation  towards  the  Afghauns  mav,  however,  have  been  caused  in 
part  by 'other  motives,  as  he  eitiur  felt,  or  [ncUjidt  il  tn  teel,  a  strong  attach, 
ment  to  his  nation,  and  olten  gave  as  his  reaM>n  ior  not  attacking  refractory 
trilM^  dttt  1m  waa  nnwilli^g  to  bring  any  caUmity  upon  b»  countiymen. 

For  dieoonaafidationof  hiapowarathooMik  he  laliadf  in  a  great  aaaaaore^ 
en  the  effects  of  hie  ftieign  wars.  U  tlwaa  ware  auooamAd,  liis  victories 
would  raise  his  rqputatfcwi^  and  his  conquests  would  supply  him  with  tba 
aaaana  ci  nkamtainiDaananBT.andcf  f  ^tr'**ffTfy  *^>'>  Afirhawn  rhkifi  by  ftirwiia 


,  Digitized  by  Google 


Armvau']  FOLICT  OF  AHMED  SHAUH.  545 

and  rewards:  thr  hopes  of- plunder  would  induce  many  tribes  to  join  him, 
whom  he  could  not  easily  have  compelled  to  submit :  by  carrying  the  great 
men  with  his  army,  he  would  be  able  to  prevent  their  increasing,  or  even 
thor  ittflttenoe  in  thdr  tribes ;  and  the  habits  «f  militaiy  obedi- 
«ioe  woidd  prepare  than  for  a  dteofiil  submiaston  to  his  goveinment  at 
home :  the  troops  also,  having  ibe  King  continually  before  their  eyes,  and 
witnessing  the  submission  of  their  hercditan,-  chiefs,  would  learn  to  regard 
him  as  the  heaci  of  the  nation  j  and  lie  might  hope,  as  the  event  proved,  that 
his  popular  manners,  and  the  courage,  activity,  vigilance,  asid  otlier  military 
virtues  which  he  possessed,  would  impress  all  ranks  with  respect*  and  strongly 
attach  Mri  sddins  to  his  person. 

<  Hie  state  of  the  A^haun  natioD  and  of  the  suiroanding  ]dngdoniB»  mk 

favourable  to  the  execntioA  of  this  plan,  as  promising  security  to  his  own 
dominions,  however  ill  oi^ntsed,  and  oflbring  eiveiy  diance  of  success  in 
his  attacks  on  his  neighbours. 

The  Dooraunees  had  acquired  experience  and  discipline  by  their  long  and 
active  warfare  with  the  Persians,  and  afterwards  by  the  employment  of  a 
laige  body  of  them  under  Naudtr ;  and  the  preferenoe  shewn  Hmn  by  'that 
great  commander,  had  raised  their  spirit  and  oonfidcitice;  so  that  they,' with 
reason,  considered  themselves  as  the  best  troops  in  Asia.  Their  enonies, 
the  Ghiljies,  on  the  other  hand,  had  been  broken  and  dispirited  by  a  long 
course  of  defeat  and  disaster.  The  remaining  Af|2rhatins  had  learned  by  the 
events  of  the  period  which  had  just  closed,  to  despise  the  Indians,  and  to 
hate  the  Persians }  and  were,  therefore,  more  likely,  than  at  any  tormw 
period,  to  ftvmirtiie  estaWWmient  of  a  King  of  their  own  nation: 
'  Hie  state  of  foreign  powers  was  eqnaOy  finrouraMe. '  The  wedcness  of  the 
Indian  and  Uabek  empires  had  been  exposed  and  increased  by  their  contests 
with  Naudir.  The  Bcloches  liad  also  suffered  frmn  Naudir,  and,  probably, 
retained  a  sufficient  dread  of  the  Persians,  to  be  well  disposer!  to  snfimitto  a 
moderate  suhiection  to  their  old  allies,  the  Afghauns,  rather  than  expose 
themselves  to  the  severe  government  and  rigid  exactions  of  their  other 
ndghbours.  Nusseer  Khann  (the  brothev  of -Moliulibet  Ihtf  BeloduB  diief ) 
had  been  a  hostage  wllh  Naudir,  and  qipeacs  to  hsvn  fidlen  into  the  iiands 
Ahmed  Shauh.  The  Eimauks  and  Haaauiriis  had  never  been  ftnntddblfl^ 
and  their  vicinity  to  the  capital  and  to  the  country  of  the  Dooraunees, 
prevented  all  apprdiennon  of  thor  endewnunng  to  assert  their  inde*' 
pendence. 

4  A 


Digitized  by  Google 


546  AHMED'S  FIRST  EXPEDITIOK  TO  INDIA,  CApvpmiv, 


The  iate  of'  i^ersia  was  as  yet  unsettled,  but  the  dissejiaioos  wliicb  bad 
bffokea  oat  in'  Vfondu't  fionily,  pronuml  to  disqualify  that  empire  fiom  mo- 
MngHsndgliiNiiint  and  rajbieqaeiit  experienoe  tbeve^*  tliit  liM  iMI  of 
ipenem  KhoraMMin  took  no  gnat  oonceiv  m  the  wpciBOit  of  iJm  FmiM^ 
but  were  ready  to  submit  to  the  power  which  was  most  able  to  distiM^  or 
to  protect  th«m»  and  wtuch  ma  likdy  tonae  kt»  aaqendency  vHk  tbe  graaleft 
moderation. 

Such  was  the  state  of  ai&irs  wheu  Ahmed  began  his  conquests.  He 
marched  frqm  Candahar  in  the  spring  of  1748,  nith  twelve  thpusaiul 
lcomppse4  of  Utooftmem,  BeU>e]iaa»  and  others.  Be  mod  iM)tic»4 
GHitljies,  and  uppckabed  Dowaunee  govwaon  over  tbem  on  jthe  fiigMlV  0(1 
which  ^7  now  stand.  The  goyenuir  irfuNii  Naiidir  had  left  m  Gfau? pee, 
fled  on  Ahmed's  approadi ;  but  Naiisser  Khaiin,  who  was  govemof  of  Cau- 
bul  and  Peshawer,  declared  for  the  s^rtnit  Moc:iil.  He  was,  however,  driven 
out  of  Caubul  alter  a  feeble  resistance,  aiiil  was  already  pressed  by  the 
Aighaun  thbes  of  P^awer,  when  Ahmed's  advanced  guards  arrived,  and 
Ibiiced  hna  to  cToia  the  Indna. 

Aluned*  with  imi)immiihed  cderity,  awaoi  the  Indtub  Mpd,  ei^dled  hup 
fym  Attak  anfl  Chpcb  s  lAer  whidi  he  proceeded  with  pa  aiaif.  tfnen^tf^ 
hy  the  Ai^^amaa  of  Peshawer»  to  the  invasion  of  Hindostan.  Tlie  governor 
of  Lahore,  awarp  of  bis  intention,  called  for  succours  fVoin  Delly;  but 
Ahmed  p;ave  mi  time  for  preparation.  He  advMtitnl  lapiLlly  through  the 
Punjaub,  deleaied  ilic  Indian  troops  in  sight  ot  JLaliore,  oud  entering  that 
gaty  m  triumpht  prepared  to  advance  ii|ipii  Dally,  hk  the  bmmi  time  If^  i 
homed  Shauh,  thoOTpeswof  Hindpataaj  had  seat  offapowerffal  ai|iy,  amier 
Ua  son  and  llla  vixier  Cummeroodecn  Khanni  to  oppose  the  tofajan.  fUm 
army  advanced  to  the  3uUedge,  and  took  post  in  such  a  manner  as  to  cover 
the  usual  fords.  Ahmed,  informed  of  their  position,  suddenly  advanced, 
crossed  the  Sutledge  at  a  point  higher  up  the  river,  and  leaving  the  Jiidj  ins 
in  hid  rear,  iiusteued  to  Sirliind  (wiiere  they  had  deposited  their  baggage  and 
Stores),  and  ctytmipd  itbcfcge  the  fmamy  oouM  move  to  iti  amiUMtce* 

Tim  prinoe  and  iMr  of  HiiwW»st<ii  immwtiatHy  maxehed  to  'Siifamd^  to 

attadc  A*""?*^  Shaub  1  but  losing  courage  as  they  approached,  they  gave  up 

then:  resolution,  an4  took  post  in  thB  ne^Mxwriwod  of  that  city.  Ahmed 

Shaub  attacked  them;  and  in  tbe  course  of  a  canonade  't^bich  lasted  sexeral 

days,  the  vizier       killed,  and  the  actual  command  of  xhc  ai  iny  devolved 

on  his  son  Meer  Munnoo,  who  conducted  himseii  witi;  so  nwch  skiil^ 

ta 


Digitized  by  Google 


AND  TO  KHOBAMAim 


that  tlie  Dooraunees  were  obliged  in  their  turn  to  stand  on  the  defensive,  * 
and  tinaiiy  to  retreat  with  precipitation  during  the  night. 
.  8oon«ft<rtli%  ivhoD  the  IiidiaB  Mnjrhaditt  cff  oa  its  raCnto  to  IMfy , 
IfahoaimadSliaiih  died,  and  hit  wii,fy^ 

Ubi:  Siifiliir  Jung  was  made  viziav  and  ICaw  Hunnoo  left  in  the  govern* 
'ment  of  lihe  Pui^miIi^  while  the  new  King  oontinMd  hit  madi  lo  hii- 

Otpital. 

As  «!f>on  as  this  intolljji'rnce  reached  Ahmed  Shaiih,  he  countennanded  the 
retreat  of  his  army,  and  marched  witii  liis  usual  expedition  against  Lahore. 
Meer  Muimoo»  finding  hinisdf  exposed  t»  the  Doonunee  enny*  without  the 
prospect  cf  immeAietft  ewittence  Aom  DeUj;  Mid  bdag,  periiepi,  diigiNted 
with  the  fudtoenee  ihewn  hy  hit  new  ecwwe^  toSnMnr  Jnngb 
Ahmad*  and  consented  to  hold  the  government  of  llie  Fu^Mib  in  hn  BMa% 
end  to  pay  him  tlie  rcfrnlnr  tribntp  of  that  province. 

The  affairs  of  the  Punjaub  bciu^'  thus  satisl'actorily  arranged,  Ahmed 
marched  back  to  Caudahar.  Ou  ins  way,  he  settled  the  governments  of 
Dera  Ghauzee  Khaun,  Dera  lamael  Khaun,  ^hikarpoor,  and  Muuitauiu 
It  wall  probably,  at  tliii  time  alto^  the  MNrthcni  Ai||hMBttftci  aekaiMb 
ledged  A&ned  fiir  King.  Hm  winter  at  tfaie  bMy  year  mnek  hnve  nettly  . 
ei^ired  before  Ahmed  wached  Candahar. 

In  the  spring  of  1749.  Ahmed  Shauh  awembled  an  army  (^twenty^fivethouk 
sand  men,  from  the  western  part  of  hk  dominions.  He  first  marched  ac^ainst  - 
Hemit,  which  surrendered  within  a  fbrtnigiit  after  it  was  attiicked.  He 
then  advanced  towards  Meslihed,  reducing  all  the  places  on  his  route. 
.  Shanh  Bohh  Mhcaa,  the  aon  ef  Nfliidir  Shnnh,  waa  then  in  pnwtiwimi  of 
Jieahbed.  He  came  out  to  meet  Ahmed  ihenh,  who  leceived  him  wHi 
tmp^tt,  and  left  him  in  posseasion  of  hit  city  and  tenitoiy. 

From  Meshhed  he  marched  against  Neeshapoor,  and  detat^ed  Shauh 
PuRund  Khaun  Ishaukzye  against  Muzeenaun  and  Subzwaur.  Neeshapoor 
held  out  obstinately,  and,  while  Ahmed  was  besieging  it,  hv  received  iiiteib- 
gence  oi'  the  iuUuie  of  his  attack  on  Muzeenaun,  and  ot  the  deliest  of  his  • 
deteduBtft.  Being  now  appNheiaive  of  m  attMk  ftom  willioa^  be  fe>' 
aolved  to  make  a  deqwrate  attempt  on  Neethapoor.  H«  aoeotdlni^  difeeled 
it  to  be  aaiaulted  by  eacalndt^  aad  naebeal  fliT  with  great  km.  Bdbre  he 
liad  reconaed  this  disaster,  a  strong  force  assembled  by  some  other  Khaont 
of  Khora«i«!«nn  r;tme  to  the  relief  of  Neeshapoor,  and,  while  he  was  en- 
jgi^ed  with  them,  a  vifgoroui  mUy  was  made  from  the  place*   Tbe  result  irat 

4  a2 


Digitized  by  Google 


5^  CAPTURE  OF  DELH7.  [AmNDix. 

very  imfavournble  to  him,  and  he  was  compciDfld  to  TStnift  ioillMdiatiely  tO 
JdiiBhhed,  from  whence  he  retired  to  Heraut. 

In  the  spring  oL'  1750,  Ahnieil  again  marched  agaiuht  Nceshapoor,  which 
be  now  succeed  in  taking.  It  was  probably  on  thia  oocauon  thi^  be  re- 
duced the  moftt  remote  of  tfaoae  parts  of  Khonwam  tfast  wore  permmondj. 
ittwdied  to.  his  domiiuons* 

The  Dooraanee  empire  1  believe,  never  extended  much  beyond  NeedHU 
poor  on  the  weet.    Ahmed  returned  Irom  this  expedition  to  Hemit. 

In  the  course  of  the  winter,  or  early  in  the  next  year,  1751,  Ahmed 
Shaiih  was  recalled  to  Mesliiied  by  a  reheUion  of  Meer  Alhim  Khaun,  Chief 
of  KiUiin,  wiio  liad  seized  on  the  trtjasurc  at  Metiiilied,  and  blinded  and  de*; 
throned  Sh«uh  Bokh  Meene.  Ahmed  Sfaauh  reeloied  flhanh  Bokh,  and 
ioon  after  toofcKeiunaiid  put  Heer.  Mum  to  deeth.  At  thk  time  he  ala» 
made  an  attempt  on  Astenbad»  which  wm  repelled  by  the  KudjiiB. 

In  the  enmmer  of  1752,  Ahmed  l^auh  marched  into  the  Puniaab^  and  n- 
dnced  Meer  Munnoo,  who  had  revolted  in  his  absence.  During  the  same 
campaign,  he  conquered  Caslnneor,  and  obtained  by  negociatiou  a  ^^'wn  of 
the  country  as  far  t^t  as  Sirhind,  trom  the  great  Mogul. 
•  :  After  this,  Ahmed  returned  to  Candahar,  and  appears  to  have  spent  tiie 
£nit  next  yean  in  tranquillity :  his  nephew  Lokmann  Khaun,  however,'  te- 
bellad;  and  the  GhUjies  attempted  an  insurrection  during  that  period*  but- 
botd^were  easily  quelled. 

He  probably  employed  this  interval  of  leisure  in  Brtlllim  A^jhauiUilaai^ 
and  the  countries  in  its  immediate  ueighbourliood. 

In  1756,  Meer  Muunoo,  the  governor  of  the  Punjaub,  died.  His  dcatii 
^as  folJo;nred  by  intrigues,  and  rebellions,  and  the  whole  province  fell  into 
OEtreme  ooniluion.  This  state  of  things  induced  the  coort  of  Delly  to  send 
4  hug^  4broe  undef.the  Visier  Ghausoodeen  into  the  Pto^aul^  ftr'  par- 
pose  of  annexing  it  to  the  Mogul  dominions.  T!ie  vizier  succeeded  witbout 
difficulty,  and  gave  the  government  to  Adeena  Beg,  who  had  been  tieputy  to 
Shrtnh  Niiwauz  Khaun,  and  afterwards  to  Me<  r  Mminoo ;  ;Lti(]  who  was 
di»tinguihiied  for  his  activity  and  »piht  of  iutrigui*.  This  done,  the  vizier 
Returned  to  Delly.  .     -  .  .  - 

Ahmed  Shai^  oa  hearing  of  this  aggression,  left  Oandshsr,  crossed  the 
Induib  dzofe-Adecne  out  of  the  Fnn|iMilH«and  asardied  stra^g^  to  Ddty. 
^e  tyranny  of  the  vizier,  and  the  reluctance  wtth  iriiiidi  the  eaoperor  Sttiv 
pi«te4<to.  his  oovtrql,  had  thiown  that  capitel  mto  great  ^wausoarand. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aitm&}  HAH&ATIA  WAB.  '  5|9 

ffltt«#«iii  cflfact  to  oppose  AhBMd  in  the.Md,  the  empenr  ndwutted,  and 
the  A^^ttnn  entered  DeUj*  ^riiich  raArad  aemfly  fiom  tbe  xipedtT;.  of  tin 

conqueror,  and  the  licence  of  his  troops.  After  remaining  for  some  time  at 
Delly,  Ahmed  Shauh  sent  Sirdar  Jehan  Khaun  against  the  Jauls.  The  Sir- 
dar  took  Bulhimgiir,  and  then,  advancing  by  a  rapid  march  on  Muttra,  sur- 
priscJ  the  place  during  a  Hindoo  festival.  A  promiscuous  shiughter  took 
place  on  tiic  army's  entering  tlie  town,  and  many  ot  tlte  liiuduoti  were  ailer- 
mwds  seUed  and  canned  into  daveiy.  Sirdar  Jebaa  Khaim  thin  advanced 
against  Agia»  and  was  rapnlsed  by  the  Jauts.  -  The  Doonunees  had  now 
passed  the  whole  of  the  summer  in  India,  and  as  they  were  becominig  eiu 
tremely  sickly,  Ahmed  found  it  necessary  to  retire  to  bis  own  dominions. 
During  his  stay  at  Dell> ,  he  and  hin  son  Timoor  Shanli  married  princesses  of 
the  royal  family  of  India.  Large  portions  were  gi\  en  -Mt!i  these  ladies,  and 
the  emperor  of  India  was  compelled  to  bestow  tiie  Punjuub  and  Hind  on 
Timoor  Shaiih*' 

Befofe  iUuned  Sfaanli  left  ])eUy»  he  fK?e  the  office  of  viaier  of  India  to  a 
brother  of  If  eer  Munnook  and  that  of  genecal  in  chief  to  Nujeeb  Khaun,  the 

A4^aun  chief  of  Seharunpoor,  who  had  recommended  himself  to  Ahmed  by 

joining  hiin  near  the  Sutledgc  on  his  advance  against  Delly. 

He  left  Timoor  Shaulj  to  command  flu-  provinces  on  the  east  of  the  Indus, 
under  the  guidance  of  Sirdar  Jehaun  ivliaun.  Their  force  consisted  of  a  lew 
Dooraunees  and  Persian  guaids  with  a  body  oi'  troops  raised  in  the  country. 
The  King  wintered  at  Candahar,  and  was  soon  after  engaged  in  setdh^db- 
tuibanoes  which  broke  out  in  Fecsin  and  Toorkestaim  $  bnt  of  which  I  can 
gather  no  particulars. 

He  had  scarcely  left  India,  when  Ghauzoodeen  Khaun,  who  had  fled  to 
Fnrruckabad,  then  in  possession  of  the  Marliattas,  retnnied  with  an  army  of 
tliat  nation  to  Delly,  and  laid  siege  to  the  city.  After  ounie  defence,  Nujeeb 
ICliaun  evacuated  the  place  and  retired  to  Seharunpoor.  Neaily  at  the  same 
time^veiyssfioasdiaturbancesooamencediotheF^au^  Hiey  were  ezdted 
by  Adeena  Bef^  who  had  iled  on  the  Shauh's  sfiproacli,  and  who  had  after-- 
wards  instigated  the  Siks  to  i  ehel,  and  defeated  a  division  of  the  royal  troops^ 
at  Jalinder.  He  had  also  invited  the  Mahratta  army  which  had  expelled 
Nujeeb  Khaun  from  Delly,  to  assist  in  recovering  the  Punjaub^  and  a  force  of 
that  nation  now  advanced  to  Sirhind,  ccnnmanded  by  Aagoba,  the  lather  of 
the  present  Paishwa. 

On  thii^  Tfanoor  fflumh  and  Sbdar  Jcbaan  Khann,  who  were  already 


Digitized  by  Google 


REVOLt  Of  UtiitBlSft  ttHAUN. 


pressed  by  ttie  Siks,  and  distrustful  of  their  Hindo<wtaun<»c  troop<!,  retiMl  fi 
Eminabad.    Lahore,  which  they  evacuated,  was  taken  by  the  iiiks. 

The  MahrtUtas  soon  took  Sirhind ;  and  as  they  C(M9!tinued  their  inarch  to- 
tittdt  the  ipnt»  Stfdir  JeiinilDuim  lookthsnfotiiti^  the  prince 

aftd  Ma  femnimng  troops  by  rdtinng  aenm  thalpdua.  II««Ael«dU«nlraii 
it  tbe  nlglif^  ilnkiiown  to  his  Hindoostaunee  troops,  lod  Wfth  fodi  fttd|p»< 
tikiaii,  that  his  own  family  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  by  whom  they 
were  soon  after  released.  The  Mahrattas  beins^  now  unopposed,  pushed  theit 
conquests  Beyond  the  Uydaspes,  and  »mt  a  detachment  which  todcpoesenioii 
<^Mou1tan. 

Timoor  Shauh's  flight  took  place  in  the  middle  of  1758,  and  Ahmed  Shauh 
was  preparing  to  inarch  to  lodiab  wImii  1m  waa  datajiiad  by  the  nhdluMi  of 
Nmaeer  Khann,  dnrfof  the  Bdochea. 

Hie  history  of  Belochistaun  is  remarkably  obscure  beforr  (liIs  period^  bul 
it  appears  that  Mohubbut  Khaun,  whom  Naudir  liad  fixed  in  the  govern* 
ment  *,  had  died,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  second  brother  Haujee  Khaiin. 
Tliat  chief  appears  to  have  disgusted  his  Rulijet  is  h\  Ins  tyranny,  and  ottended 
Ahmed  Siiauh  by  taking  part  iu  Lokmaun  iviiauu's  rebellion.  It  is  certain, 
thai  he  waa  depoaed  and  iaipKboned  by  nwaaa  of  Ahmed  Shauh,  and  that 
Nuiaeer  Khaun,  hit  brother,  saeoeeded  hidi  in  the  govenuaeiit.  It  n  not 
Idunra  what  mdnoed  NuMeer  Khaim  to  throw  off  hia  depandaBce  on  the 
IHMvamiee  government  1  bat  he  dechied  himaeif  indepindent  hi  liie 
year  1758. 

The  vizier  Shauh  Wullee  Khann  wa«  first  sent  r»pf:^inst  him,  and  was  de- 
feated at  a  place  in  the  neighbourhood  oi  6hawl.  Almied  then  marched  in 
person  to  Belochistaun,  where  he  ptobaUy  arrived  in  automn  or  in  the  end 
of  aammer.  He  engaged  and  defeated  Noneer  Khaun,  and  obliged  him,  to 
tvitbdrawirithhithe  walla  of  KehMit,  to  whicfa  Ahmed  laid aiage.  Itioaaid 
that  the  Dooraunee  chiefs  were  fay  no  means  dlqNfied  to  aoeonqilish-the 
entire  subjection  of  the  Beloche  prince  (in  whose  coinitry  tfiev  were  always 
secure  of  a  retreat  when  exposed  to  the  anger  of  theu-  own  King),  and  that 
the  vizier,  in  particular,  maintained  a  correspondence  with  Nusseer  and  en- 
couraged bira  to  hold  out  by  representing  the  disposition  of  the  Dooraunee 
bids,  and  pointing  oat  the  eaabairaiaBieMl  irfaieh  the  King  laeuM  aaftrfioa 


*  &w  J«Bet,  Uutdfc  de  Nadir  Cbali.    Unrre  IV<  cbap.  (S. 


Digitized  by  Goog 


* 


4i«niw]  VpiTHTii  roEPITW  TO  IWIA.  551 

the  advanced  '^ea.son.    The  siege  ot  Kelaut  lasted  forty  days,  <lni  lufi;  which 
time  the  Dooiaunee  cavalry  suiiered  severely  tiom  the  scaicity  yi  ioiiige, 

The  b^d  aspect  of  King's  «Aii»  in  IndiA,  added  to  bis  ofm  i^^^tiepoe 
ftr  a  speedy  ojpdiifi^fftha  w«r)  «^  NuiN^r  haviqiiaNlew  omrtiiceffir 

is  still  the  baaif    tllB  cop^ectioo  l^etweeo  the  King  and  the  Beloches. 

When  the  news  of  Timoor  Shauh's  retreat  had  reached  the  King,  he  hftd 
sent  a  small  army  under  Nooroodecn  Khaun  Bautnizye,  across  the  Indus. 
By  this  time  Adcena  Beg  was  dead,  and  the  whole  of  the  Funjaub  to  the 
east  of  the  Hydaspes,  wjis  ua<ier  cootroul  of  the  Mahrattas.  The  SiHs 
however,  who  h;^  Ipng  bc^  »  sect  of  mjlilimy  ianaticsk  wei%  b^nnii^  to 
ugap  to  th0  ppneiaiaii  of  temtof^,  and  tM  vac^mm  of  Jhg  Inpt 

up  9q/iap  i^mMfuenoe  by  their  nomuwl  oonnoclioii  wkh  tbp  gov«piB9pt  pf 
pdl^f  Iboggb  th9  grot  Mogul  had  no  real  authoriQr  131  ijhf  Pm^lHib* 
"SggfOffideen  advanced  with  ease  (o  the  Hydaspes,  the  tr^ct  between  that 
river  i^ndthe  Jndm  being  at  that  time  held  by  the  Kauters  Gucknrs,  .Touds, 
and  other  original  tribes  ot  the  country,  who  li  ui  embraced  tlie  Mahomedau 
religion,  and  who  were  ii^cliued  to  the  Dooraunees ;  nor  did  he  meet  with 
mucli  opposition  on  bit  mash  to  jthe  Acesines,  as  the  main  body  of  the 
]44iliiattM  noir  irijtbdm^ 
advanoe  farther  till  the  King  sboald 

Abmed  Shaob's  arrival  was  from  various  causes  delayed  till  the  wintor  of 
^759*  vbenbe  crossed  the  Indus  and  advanced  to  the  Acesines  by  the  road 
of  Jummoo.  From  that  river  he  continued  his  march  through  the  north  of 
the  Punjaub,  the  Marattas  retiring  as  he  advanced:  he  crossed  lln'  Jumna, 
near  ;:>charunpoor,  and  was  joined  at  that  city  by  .Nujeeb  Khaun  and  the 
^hillacbiefi. 

Thp  Mabralta  army*  under  Ditta  IMnil  and  Junkojae  Sindia,  wu  aft  tbat 
tiina  in  h»  naigbbouriiood}  but  it  ratreatad  at  ba  adfymoadl  and  ooBtinnil 
flkJuaisb^  took  place  between  the  paities,  till  the  Mahrattas  reached  the 
neighbourhood  of  Delly :  they  then  crossed  the  JiinUMW  and  advanced  tO 
Baudlee  near  Delly,  to  cover  that  city. 

A  severe  action  look  place  at  Baudlee,  in  winch  the  Mahrattas  were  Tijt  ;illy 
defeated  and  Dattajee  killed:  a  detachment  was  afterwards  sent  agamst  • 
MmW— *  Rmr  Helkar.  who  ma  ■dmanoidir  to  ammoft  Ibo  ICabnlio  intanala  in 
that  quariar;  and  Mothar  Row's  aimy  was  sniprisad  and  totally  daftated. 
Ahmed  Shaub  mzt  took  Deity,  and  forced  Ohawaoodean  KbMin>  vbo  bad 


Digrtlzed  by  Google 


552 


SECOND  CAPTURE  OF  DELLY. 


CAppendix. 


lately  mirdered  the  Emperor  of  India,  Allumgeer  II.  to  fly  to  the  Jaut 
country,  where  Mulhar  Row  and  the  remains  of  fhv  Mahratta  army  had 
taken  refuge.  Ahmed  Shauh  aiterwards  pursued  the  conquest  of  the  Dooab, 
and  marched  as  far  m  Aiiooj»hehr,  where  he  cantoned  for  Uie  uioii&oon,  and 
was  joined  by  the  Navaub  ^ujaOodoula,  vi^er  of  Hindostiiii. 

In'  tiie  ooune  of  this  Mason  the  Mahiattaa*  exerted  theniMhret  to  repair 
their  looes^  and  a  powerfiil  amy  of  their  nation  arrived  from  die  Decan, 
commanded  by  Wisswas  Row,  tllie  heir  apparent  of  the  empire,  and  Shed^ 
dasheo  Row,  whom  the  duastrous  issue  of  this  campaign  has  made  so  iamoui 
in  India  under  the  name  of  the  Bhow.  They  besieged  Del!y,  which  WM 
surrcndcretl,  at\er  a  s^pirited  dctlnce,  by  a  small  party  of  Dooraimees. 

The  Sliauli  wa^  at  this  time  cut  oil' by  the  Jumna  from  assisting  tiis  troops 
on  tile  rigiiL  bank  of  that  river.  The  same  cause  prevented  his  relieving 
Cooijpoava,  nxtf  imilea  nc»th  of  Defly,  vrbidi  waa  tidcen  abnoet  in  sight  of 
the  Dooraunee  army,  rurw  advanced  to  the  river ; 

perated  the  Shauh  to  nmch  that  he  reaolved  immediately  to  craaa  the  river  at 
all  ha«atdB»  and  bring  the  enemy  to  aotiML    His  passage  was  effected,  wHh 

Rome  loss ;  and  the  Mahrattas,  discouraged  by  tlic  alacrity  with  whicli  the 
King  sought  a  battle,  retire<J  to  l'anni{)ut,  where  they  soon  after  entrenched 
themselves.  With  thiw  position,  and  their  vaiit  train  of  artillery,  Uiey  were 
secure  from  any  attack ;  but  the  distresses  of  an  army  consisting  cbiefly  of 
hofai^  cooped  up  in  an  entrenched  camp»  may  be  eaaOy  ooncesvedf  and  Ih^ 
were  augmented  by  the  activity  of  the  Doorauneesp  vrlio  were  onremlttiiijf 
in  their  ezertiona  to  cnt  off  all  supplies  from  the  enemy*!  camp.  Hie 
Mahrattas,  however,  remained  in  this  state  for  three  or  four  months,  diuing 
which  time  many  partial  actions  took  place,  and  some  indirect  ovfsrtorea  of 
peace  were  made  by  them  through  Shoojaoodoula. 

The  Dooraunee  army  also  suffered  from  the  want  of  supplies ;  but  the 
patience,  vigilance,  and  activity  of  Ahmed  Shauh,  enabled  him  to  sunnount 
oBOBt  of  the  difficoities  that  he  met  with ;  and  the  confidence  whidi  the  troops 
repoaed  on  him,  and  the  temper  and  moderation  with  which  he  treated  his 


•  The  transaction*  of  tliis  pt-riod,  and  the  details  of  the  battle  of  PannJput,  arc  given  with  great 
■tpiiit  and  appearaace  of  accuracy  hj  a  contemponvy  hiatariait,  wImw  aamtive  appears  in  Ed^IuIi, 
fail»iliiifd«aliraKoftheA)ntie  R«MMcl^  TIptMaeeoint  f  litf  tmetoitleray  indtni  bat 

some  pasvagc!^'  in  it  prctcnt  so  livi  ly  a  pictwre  of.tbe  prioeipil  MtiOCI  IB  time  10608%  that  I  Onotfi* 
jrain  from  q^uoting  them  if  thii  place. 


L^iLjui^cd  by  GoogI 


Apmron.}  BATTLE  OF  PANNTPUT.  553 

Indian  tSBett  prarented  any  discontent  or  disaflbction  in  his  camp}  iHiileflit 
fuflferincrs  of'fTic  Mahrattas  were  home  with  impatience,  aB  tluj  Wtn'VBim^ 
lally  imputed  to  the  errors  ot' their  commander.  • 

At  last  a  large  convoy,  which  was  comiug  from  the  south  of  the  Dooab, 
to  the  MahrattM,  tmder  an  eaoort  of  ten  thomend  bone,  conunanded  by 
Govind  Flinditi  wm  raipciMd end  dispened  between  Delly  and  Meeiut^ 
AstKBtimmVofKhp^l  ndenotber  party,  iriiicliiifweacoitingtreaaniefn^ 
IMBjy  iMving  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  Dooraunees,  the  Mahrattas  woold 
no  longer  »ubadt  to«  protnctkn  of  the  war,  which  waa  indeed  now  beoome 
impossible,  t 

They  accordingly  marched  mit  of  their  camp  to  attack  tlie  Dooraunees, 
on  the  7th  of  January  1761.  The  Dooraunees  got  under  arms,  and  the 
battle  hegm  *  little  before  dayl.  The  details  of  thia  action  need  not  be 


•  "  From  the  day  of  their  arrival  in  thrtr  prrtcnt  camp,  Ahmed  Shauh  Doorraoee  cauwd  a  small 
*<  red  tent  to  be  pitched  for  bim,  a  com  (about  a  mik  and  a  half)  in  firaat  of  hit  camp,  and  he  came 
'  tnit  fffi)^  morning  befeic  flUMfitB  t  it  wUdi  tunc,  sftcppcffcfiids|f  UtiMmiinp  prayer,  htOKMnitol 

his  horse  and  visited  every  post  of  the  army,  accompanied  hy  hit  tan  Timr^nr  Shnch,  and  forty  or 
**  fifty  horsemen.  He  alto  rc««moitrcii  the  camp  of  the  enemy,  and  in  a  word,  saw  every  tfait^ 
«  with  hia  omcyM,  riding  uaually  forty  or  fifty  cota  everf  diy*  After  noon  he  retaned  to  iht 
«•  imal!  tent,  and  somcdoiM  dincd  llwre,  aontiaict  «t  hk  own  tents  in  the  Bimi  ndtUi  ww  Ui 
"  daily  practice. 

*•  At  nigftitiwre  was*  body  of  five  thousand  horae  advanced  atlMr  as-mmaientlf  n^jlrt  bc^ 

«  ward*  the  enemy's  camp,  where  they  remained  aU  night  under  arm*  j  other  bodies  went  the  rounds 
"  of  the  whole  encampment  (  and  Ahmed  Sliaiih  xuei  to  tay  to  the  Hindostaunee  chiefs,  "  Do  you 
"  slrcp,  I  will  take  care  that  no  harm  befals  you :"  and  to  lay  the  truth,  his  orien  were  obcyid 
*'  like  destiny,  no  man  daring  to  hcaitf  or  delay  one  aooKBt  in  cxeeoli^  tlmi. 
'  «*  Every  day  the  troops  aad  CUMW  «a  Wtfc  aJtiimt  drawn  ottt,  and  sdiltMit  tluimiMJe^  with 
"  rnatiy  slurmishes  of  horse  took  place  :  towards  the  evening  both  parties  drew  off  to  their  camps. 

This  continned  for  near  three  months :  duriog  this  time  there  were  three  very  severe  though  par* 
4*  tU  actions.  And  thus  every  day  were  the  two  annin  employed,  from  mommg  to  nine  or  tea  tl 
**  night,  till  iif  lrn;;*h  rhr  ITinf^n^tanee  chiefs  were  otit  of  all  patience,  and  entreated  thr  SJianh  To 
*<  put  an  end  to  their  fatigues,  by  coming  at  once  to  a  (kcisivc  action  ;  but  his  constant  answer  was, 
«  This  is  a  matter  of  war,  wiA  wUokyM  MS  aot  acquainted.  In  other  aflbirs  do  at  you  please, 
**  but  ksic  tins  to  as.  Military  operationa  mutt  not  be  predfitatsdi  yon  ibsll  aae  how  I  «il 
«  ■WWr      ilsir  t  and  at  a  proper  opportunity  will  bring  it  to  1  auceaafU  conchunn." 

^  M  Iq  liut  Ust  extremity,  the  Bhow  wrote  me  a  short  note  with  his  own  hand,  which  he  sent  ^y 
•at  af  lis  SHMt  confidential  terrants.    The  wocds  of  the  note  were  these. 

*•  Tbt  cap  is  now  full  to  the  brim,  and  cannot  bold  anotber  drop.   If  any  thing  can  be  done,  do 
k,  "or  else  answer  me  plainly  «t  once :  hereafter  there  wfll  be  no  time  ft»  writing  or  speaking^.'' 

X  **  The  Navab's  barearrabs  brought  word,  that  the  Mahrattas  were  coming  out  of  ihew  itoes, 
tin  aitiiwy  in  tot.  sirfiteMd^  Mbwiavclaas  Wind. 

4  ■ 


Digitized  by  Google 


554 


tnHht^d  on  here.  The  Ring's  centre  coihposed  of  the  Rohillaa,  the 
Dooraiinee  Dusteh  of  Populzye,  and  a  division  of  halt' tiie  King's  gtiards, 
wa.s  thrown  into  confusion  by  the  tire  of  the  enemy's  guns,  charged  hy  their 
hbrse,  aod  iUmoat  mttxelj  drirmiitfdwtidd^-.nQtiritfaitaiiding  the  exertions 
o£diB  inmr,  who  quitted  Us  hone'  ttnd'dcebmd  hu'roMlotiaii^  iKe  it 


.  The  reserve  was  then  hrov^it  iqpliy  til*  King ia  penoo,  and  the  Mahrattas 
tepulsed  in  their  turn :  at  the  same  time  they  were  taken  in  flank  by  the  letl 
wing  of  the  Dooraunees ;  and  the  conat-qiience  was  their  entire  defeat  and 
rout.  The  general,  the  heir  apparent  of  the  Mahratta  empire,  and  almoflt 
the  whole  of  the  army  perished  in  the  %bt  or  the  pursuit*  t 


'<  Immediately  on  hearing  this  hit  Excclknqr  went  to  the  Shauh's  tent,  and  dcaired  the  euaucfat  to 
**  w.ike  hi$  Majeiity  that  moment,  a$  he  had  some  urgent  bu*iaeM  with  him. 
"  The  Shauh  caoM  uot  dinstiy,  and  ea<|uired  what  aewa:  the  N«vab  replied*  that  there  waa  no 
time  fnr  cxplaiwtkm,  but  deafand  His  Majesty  to  mooat  hia  hone*  mi  order  die  amy  to  get  under 

"  arms.  The  Shauh  accordingly  mounted  one  of  his  hors^i,  which  wert  always  ready  saddled  at 
"  the  tent  door,  and,  in  the  dies*  he  then  had  ou,  rode  half  a  coas  in  front  of  his  camp,  ordezing 

•*  He  enquired  of  the  Navib  from  whom  he  had  hi»  intelligence  ;  and,  lir  mrntioning  my  naffll^ 
**  the^hauh  immediately  dispatched  one  on  a  pobt-camcl  to  bring  me.  After  1  had  made  my  obck* 
«  aaneck  he  asked  me  the  particaibra  of  the  news.  I  replied,  that  the  Mahrattas  had  quitted  their 
**  lines,  and  WOttU attack  his  army  as  soon  as  it  shonld  be  light.  Juit  at  this  time  tome  Dooraunee 
**  horsemen  pasiedby.  with  their  horses  loaded  with  plunder,  which  tlicy  said  they  had  taken  in  the 
**  Mahratta  camp  :  and  added,  that  the  Mahrattas  were  running  away.  The  Shauh  looked  at  me^ 
M  asked  ne  ^  '^''^  ^°  ^'^^  ■  ^  replied,  that  a  my  short  time  would  prove  the  truth  or 
M  falsehood  of  myijiKoit.   iWhjle  t.  wa  »peakiug,  the  Mahntta;^,  hating  advanced  about  ai 

"  and  a  half  firom  thfK^fc  aiAa^^ 
**  charge  of  them. 

**  Upea  hearing  this,  the  Shaali,  who  wM  sitting  upon  lus  hone,  smoking  a  Pdnan  kaUiaot  gave 
<*  it  to  his  terrant,  and  with  great  cjim hob,  said  to  the  Navab,  "  Yourscnrant'tnews  itWIJtfa^.I 
jmt,"   He  imaMdietqUy  aeot  for  the.  grand  vizier  an^  Sh«iUi.  Puasaafl  ILhanoy  ttc" 

.  *  <*  The  Navab  Shoojahoodowlah,  whose  diTiakw  was  next,  conld  not  MO  what  was  going  on, 
ai  M  ieeouot  of  the  daat,  bittiadiagdieeoaadof  atenand  horses  in  that  qmnrter  suddenly  diminidi, 
M  ha  atat  aietb  caafldoe  iate'^cni^*  I  Iband  the  grand  visier  in  an  agony  of  rage  and  despair, 
M  f^naching  his  maabrqaittipf  fain.  **Oarcomtr7iBfivo(l,  my  ftinda,'*  nidki,  «■  wUdM 
«  do  yon  fly."  '  • 

• 

'  t  It  is  not  easy  to  dctermjne  JeCiWttiy  die  force  of  each  party  on  this  occaaioa.  I  conjecture 
Ahmed  Shauh's  force  to  hare  aBKwnted  to  forty  thousand  of  his  own  subjects,  thirty  thousand 
JUWOftttVopa,  andtoillHaHadbdoDgiog  to  the  Indian  cJusfs  i  he  had  also  seven  hundred  camel 


^  Digitized  by  Google 


Amaim&l         .     FUTH  I^PBDmON  TO  INDIA. 

This  battfom  fiM  to  the  Mahnttta  fxmer ;  tbcif  imaMdilt%  ibattdOMa 
their  damgoB  on  the  north  of  Hindostan,  and  mmy  years  elapied'  beAiMl 
they  restimod  UMAr  ebMipiii^  nadtr  a  new  iMder*  iDd  with  a  n«#  tyntm- 

ot'  war. 

•  After  the  victory  o4"  Panin[>ut,  liie  whole  of  Hindostan  appeared  to  be  at 
Almied  Shiuih's  mercy.  He,  liowever,  adhered  to  the  plan  he  had  originally 
profeasedv-  Biid  dMrtented  "biamX  with  the  portion  di«t  had  ftrmeifly  been 
oedfld  to  bam,  together  with  the  pleeMire  of  betbomhig  the-  leK  tt'-l^ 
oeuntry  on  such  of  its  native  chiefs  as  had  asmted  hiln;  «ad  thtS'donek  1)0 
returned  in  the  spring  of  1 761  to  Caubul.  t 

The  wisdom  of  his  forbearance  wa**  af^prT.  nrds  very  apparent ;  for,  far 
firom  being  able  to  maintain  so  remote  a  tionuTiion,  it  was  with  ditticulty  tliat 
he  could  retain  Ills  own  province  of  the  Puiijaub,  where  tlie  Siks  now  be- 
4Mat  very  poweiiliik  The  nusoen  of  tfab  people  compelled  ban  to  Mtoiifr 
to  India  the  b^ginnfaig  of  •7tfat  when  he  .coikiplately  ncpeUed  (he  'fiikii 
from  the  plam  country ;  but  in  2763,  he  was  obliged  to  return  to  Candahaii 
andinthecouneof  aftw  jeani>theooaBtiy  waain  greater  ooafiuioii  thiui 
,  ever.  s 

The  circimistanccs  ot  tiie  King's  return  to  Candahar  in  1763,  aio  worthy 
of  notice.  He  was  at  Sirhind,  when  the  news  of  an  insurrection  at  Can* 
dihar  feached  hiu}  and»  driven  of  the  Fanjaob  beoig  afaready  swollen,  he 
lesolvedi  notwithitaiidn^  that  it  waa  mnr  the  he^pht  .of  wnmer/  to  mnttk 
by  die  rrate  between  the  left  bank  of  tfao  Sudedge  «id*the  deeMt^  tii 
MouHann,  and  from  thence  to  Ghuznee.  His  army,  composed  of  Aigbain»,> 
Uzbek*,  "Reloches,  and  other  natives  of  cold  climates,  suffered  great  hard- 
ships during  the  first  part  of  this  march  ;  and  he  lost  an  incredible  number 
of  men  from  heat,  before  he  arrived  at  Moultaun  :  nor  were  hi.s  sutferiu^ 
then  at  an  end,  for  the  wint^  had  set  in  when  \ie  reached  the  mountains  of 
Afghaunietaun*  and  many  of  his  troops  periled  item  the'  dold  ahd'iiiow/ 
Ihe  fobellkMi.  waa  oHilyiahdMdk  m  <waa  another  ndwd  Jby  Derviih  Alii  a 


OMi  3  the  onlf  creditable  account  oi  that  ibroe  I  have  mcd,  ittlial  Ir  tlwAijMk  Rnean^  vhJdi 
Bwhei t^efar.cavdrj  tcyemty  tlyMri>4  ttteir  »&a>ry  jftwa  thaippaA  llff  kid , not, Im that 
two  boadivd  fBiua 

*  Mabijce  Sindii,  wboM  troops  wen  dudplided  m  ike  Ewwffnii  nimr, 

t  About  thu  time  Ahmt  d  Sluufi  sent  an  embassy  to  China,  and  the  envoy  OQ  ijllttVnji.JMMe  iA- 
account  of  bit  embassy     1  could  not  procure  a  copy  of  thi>  curious  work     '  '  . 

'4b  S 


Digitized  by  Google 


SIXTH  AMD  LAST  EXPEDITION  TO  INDIA,  LAmwmk. 


keahh  now  began  to  decline,  and  a  SCDiftle  **ir"  cf  Int  activity  ii 

observable  from  this  time  forward.    His  complaint  was  a  cancer  in  his  face; 

it  seems  to  have  first  afflicted  him  sevprely  in  1 764,  and  it  rontiniied  to  do  sa 
till  his  death,  which  it  occasioned.  He  was,  huwevt  r,  cf)itipL41ed  to  exert 
hiiii!»eli  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  by  the  increased  power  oi  the  Sik^ 
who  seem  to  have  become  masters  of  all  the  open  country  as  far  west  as  the 
Bydaspes,  Aliaiedwtiit  in  pertoB  ^aiMt  lliem  id  1767,  and  drove  Hmoi 
%pMB  inCo  Ute  nountiiiis  j  bul  tlii*  eqieditioD*  dw  laat  he  nede  in  Induib 
WM attended  by  no  petmanent  benefit:  as  toon  at  the  Sbauh  had  quitted  the 
eoontry,  tlie  Sks  speared  in  giceter  force  than  evcft  end  before  the  end 
of  the  next  year  (1768),  they  crossed  the  Hydaspes,  and  took  the  famous 
fortress  of  Rotass  from  the  Daornunees.  The  Sfiaiih  was  about  to  exert 
himself  to  wipe  off  this  disgrace,  when  liis  attention  was  called  to  a  rebellion 
in  Kikorasaaun,  occasioned  by  Naussir  OoUaii  Meersa,  tiie  son  of  iShauh 
Bokh  Sheohi 

The  A%faaiuM  state  that  all  tlie  cfatefi  inBenia,  except  Keieem  Kbaim 
Zen4  ime  engaged  in  thia  war,  and  their  eombined  fiwoe  geve  hattla  t» 

Ahmed  Shauh's  army,  under  the  command  oTfaia  son  prince  Timoor,  in  the 
nej^bouibood  of  Meshhed.  The  battle  was  well  contested,  and  its  issue 
was  more  than  doubtful,  when  it  was  restored  by  the  valour  of  Nuaseer 
Khaun,  the  chief  of  the  Beloches,  and  ended  in  a  complcis  \  ictory:  the 
Fersiaa  army  took  refiige  with  Shauh  Kookh  Shauh,  who  lavoured  their 
Mci^pe,  and  admitted  them  into  tfeihfaed*  It  m  leduMMd  impious  to  fire. 
4NI  diet,  aacnd  diy,  which  eonteui*  the  tomb  of  the  InMunn  Rene  s  and 
Ahmed  Sbauh  wes»  therefore,  obtiged  to  employ  a  blockade  to  lednoe 
which  succeeded  ^er  several  months.  Shauh  Rokh  Shauh  gntn  Ui  dtitf^ 
ter  to  Timoor  Shauht  end  agreed  to  lufniib  »  oentiwgwit  of  tniqpi-to  mrvn 
with  Ahmed  Shauh. 

During  the  siege  of  MesJihed,  a  detachment  was  scut  to  take  Tubbus, 
which  held  out  against  the  Dooraunees.  It  was  defended  by  Alii  Mui  daun 
Khaiin,  an  Arab  chief  of  the  Zengooee  tribe.  The  detachment  was  under 
Sifder  Jeheun  Khaon.  asivm  inpeit  oompoaedef  Bolochmvndcr  Itoem 
Khaun.  It  me  oompleteljr  ancceiafid;  Alfi  Mmdaun  wm  IcBled,  mnl  Tbh- 
bns  taken. 

After  this  expedition,  Ahmed  Shauh  returned  to  Candahar,  where  hii 
heabh  oontinned  to  decline  end  pravented  hia  •'^[y^  in  any  fim^n  espe* 

10 


Digrtized  by  Google. 

j 


Afpehdijl]  death  AND  CHARACTER  OF  AHMED  SHAUH. 


m 


dition.   Itt^ipca^of  i773,]i»liftCMidaWfbrthe  hilbcrf'ToUinthe 

Atchnkzye  country,  where  the  siimmpr  is  cooler  than  at  Candahar.  Here 
his  mnkH  y  increased,  and  in  the  twinning  of  June  1773*  ha  died  at  Muxgfa% 
in  the  tittieth  year  of  his  age. 

The  ciiaracter  of  Ahmed  Shauh  i^pean  to  have  been  adfnirably  suited  to 
tlMMMioiiiii  i*iifeh]Mi»M|Jiced.  Hit  «irtMiirin  and  ^KMMB  cnilM 
Imii  toprafifc  by  th«  eeuSmitm  that  mamwA  4ha  de«th  of  Nandir,  ad  tiw 
prudonoe  and  modentioD  which  ha  aoquirad  from  his  dealings  viih.  hia  own 
nation,  were  no  lew  Moanary  to  govern  a  warlike  and  indepandent  paople^ 
than  the  bold  and  commanding  turn  of  his  natural  genius. 

Hi"^  military  courage  and  activity  spoken  of  with  admiration,  both  by 
his  own  subjects,  and  the  nations  with  wlioin  he  was  engaged  either  in  wars 
or  alliances.  He  seems  to  have  baen  aatnnlly  dispoaed  to  naidneM  and 
dffbency ;  aad»  Uwiigh  it  b  iflapoBKbla  to  acquife  Mvereign  poi««r»  and* 
paihapa  m  Aflia*  toaMnHamtt,  .wHluNiloriaMa;  y«t  tha  aMMnoiy  of  iioaa» 
tern  prinoa  ia  ttained  with  fewer  acts  of  cruelty  and  injustice. 

In  his  personal  character  he  seems  to  have  been  cheerful,  aflfable,  and 
good  naturpd.  He  maintained  considerable  dignity  on  state  occasions ; 
but  at  other  times  his  manners  were  plain  and  familiar ;  and  with  the  Doo- 
raunees,  he  kept  up  the  same  equal  and  popular  demeanour,  wliich  was 
oraal  with  tidr  KhauiM  bclbM  tfae^  MMOMd  tfa^  Hetieatad 
HooB^  and  holy  men  wHii  great  respect,  both  from  poliey  and  indinatkn* 
Heva*  hinncif  a  divine  and  an  anthor,  and  was  ahvaya  ambitiocn  of  the 
diavaeler  at  a  saint. 

His  policy  townrds  the  diflTerent  p^jrts  of  his  dominions  was,  to  rely  prin- 
cipally on  conciliitiixi  \s  itii  the  Afghauns  and  Belo^-hes  •  with  this  difference 
between  the  nations,  that  he  applied  bimseif  to  the  whole  people  in  the  first 
cas^  and  only  to  the  chief  in  die  other.  His  possessions  in  Toorkistaun  he 
iupt  under  hQflbroe}  hat  left  the  Tartar  diicft  of  the  oeuutiy  iniraaioiped» 
and  uaed  them  with  nodeiatlon.  The  Indian  yovhicea  were  kept  by  fytce 
alone;  and  in  KhoraaHnin  he  traited  to  the  aCtadinient  of  sane  chiefs,  took 
hostages  from  otfaeia»  and  was  rea^  to  earty  hit  araw  i^fMMt  any  wiw 
turbed  his  plnti*^. 

It  has  befi  ii  e  boeti  observed  that  Ahmed  did  wisely  in  choosiiii^  to  lay  the 
ioundations  oi  a.  great  empire*  rather  than  to  complete  a  small  one.  Hie 
tiounlilMindarldi  doaainioa  extended,  atluidaatl^  fiom  die  west  of  Kho^ 
MMnnta  fliiliind,  and  fton  the  Qxua  to  the  pan;  ail  of  whieh  wm  Mcnrcd 


Digitized  by  Google 


toihitti  hy  treaties,  or  by  actual  pas»e.ssiaji :  an  J  liiid  his  plans  been  pursued, 
thefe  is  uo  doubt  timt  a  government  3ut}iaeuti)t  tUjruug  io         secured  its 

of  this  great  einpire. 

. .  The  «teftclBr:<if  Ahixd'»  aiicowwt ««« iiiilaaUl^,!v^  flaheH  fiwHi  lii^ 
and  it  was  in  a  great  measure  owin^  to  tM  vpimn  of  policy  iiitliMiueed.fc^ 
Timoor,  that  the  pD#er,of  ib»  J>CMCitiiioWfiiit.lieQMne  flbrtwoMy,  aod  lni 

iinrc  (k'clinetl. 

,  Timoor  tSliaiiili  was  born  at  Meshhed  in  the  montli  of  Deceiuber  1746, 
He  was  educated  ai  hi&  iktliar'ti  court,  and  accompauied  lum  on  man^  of  his 
txptdbtioiM*  ■  • . 

Hia/utiuitioa'iiid  not  lead  him  to  adopt  the  cfainefer  lod  anniMt*  of  hk 
nmntiyaMiLi  wd  he  seoon  novel  «ran  UK  hove  boon  perfectly  familiar  «ilh 

their  language.  While  he  was  yet  a  j^outh,  he  was  stationed  in  the  Puojaub, 
and  afterwards  was  appointod  governor  of  Uorautf  where  the  ,bulk:  of  th^ 
inhabitants  are  FersiajQs. 

He  was  at  Heraut  when  Aluued  ^liauh's  ilioess  became  serious,  and  he  set 
pff  for  th«  htUii  of 'Tohete  oee  Mo  ftther  bofiim  he  died ;  and  probably  to 
vntch  over  haa  iown  4«tereftii  iriien  that  evontflhouhi  take  places  M»ehe 
foacbed  C;andehari..he  reomd  poiittve  onden  Sum.  the  flhanh  to.  letnnL  to 
his  govemmcnt,  whidi  he  was  ohUged  reluctudly  to  obey.  These  orders 
had  been  obtained  by  the  vizltr  Shauh  Wullco  Khaun,  who  had  before  this 
entered  into  u  conspiracy,  with  Sirdar  Jeliauii  Khaun  nni]  some  other  Doo- 
rauiice  cliiclsi,  to  set  aside  Timoor,  and  secure  the  crown,  on  Ahnitd'^  li^- 
cea&e,  to  Prince  SolimAn»  who  was  married  to  the  vizier's  daughter.  On 
Ahmed.  Shauh'f  deatti,  thie  Doofaunee  cfaieft  held  a  oouncil  at  Caodahar  to 
ftc.dn  hie  aiieooaMMrt  ih^  viaier  ceoommended  SolioHp,  but  another  party, 
headed;  by  AbdooUah  Kh|Bm  Aiptilzye  (who  held  the  great  offce  of  Devi^ini 
3^ee),  declared  for  Timoor.  After  long  debates,  the  coimcil  broke  up 
without  hayinp;  come  to  any  resolution  ;  and  tlie  vizier,  of  his  own  authority, 
placed  SoUoiaun  on  the  throne.  Ahdoolhih  and  hit  partiziim  withdrew,  and 
raised  their  claui»  to  support  X  unoor't>  ciami. 

When  tliis  news  reached  Timoor,  be  marched  Ibr  Cendahajr,  with  the  force 
4if  his  .government^  ,aivl  l«4h  oCthn  Doorauneei  and  Bbnub  a*  ha4  adbpfed 
hiBoauae.  Tim  irjririi  nliin  uniUnwinrril  trr  rnllrrt  hii  Brmjr.  tiiii  liiii  allimm 
was  unsuccessful,  and  he  found  he  had  no  resource  birt  in  Wlbmlwon  |  bft  ae» 
(Kwdu^y  xc^^aM  totfaecvnp  of  Tvnoor,  but  he  ma  not  aUnwed  to  lee  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


HIS  8TST£M  OF:  GOVERNMEIST. 


prflMM^  jmd  was  immediately,  taad:  did  .eondniyied'lfcD  (katli  OQ  ftxharge  of 
murder,  bnmgiit  Ikmtwtd  to  remove  fipm  the  gomnment  the  odiiun  «f 'fak 

execution.  ' 

Tbttoor  Shauh,  having  now  obtaiiJCLl  undisturbed  jM)>M/ssiiiu  of  his  father's 
Idi^dom,  gave  way  to  bis  natural  ladoience.  His  whole  palicy  was  directed 
to  Mcnie  his  iraaquillity :.  he  ni^tm  appem  to^wve  thm^  o£  aggnuidiziiig 
UiiiMlf^aideS  Ae  opcnitioniin.Wdi  he  wae  aftemaxds  eiq;aged,  wett 
iutaDded  aenljr  Ibr  the  defence  ofhis  domiiiioiM.'  A*  ht  kneir  that  a  Btnmg 
part  y  had  been  formed  agaiait  Ina^  among  the  DeowMiiieei»  and  that  theezo* 
cution  of  the  vizier  had  exasperated  that  tribe,  he  seems  ever  after  to  have 
regarded  them  with  great  distrust.  He  first  <:hpv/ed  this  in  removing  the 
seat  ot  government  from  Candahar,  in  the  midst  oi  tlie  Dooraunee  countn% 
to  Caubul,  wliich  is  inhabited  hy  Taujikii,  the  luust  cjuiet  and  submi^ve  of 
aUtiiesul^ectiiof  theA^baoninenarGhy.  His  <aiace  of  swdrten  ibewed 
the  Mme  dttpositioii.  His  diief  coumellony  during  his  irhsip  x&ga»  went 
Canzj  Byeoolhth,  a  Moollah  of  the  obaoara  clan  of  Dohrkt  .Sbaliee,  and 
LootihllU  ^haim,  a  native  of  Jaum  in  western  KhotaMMtuii.  lo  gmeial*  bs 
left  the  great  dignities  of  tl>e  state  in  the  Dooraunee  families,  on  whonl 
Ahmed  Shauh  hm\  <  nterred  them,  but,  by  instituting  new  oihces,  and  altar» 
ing  the  duti^  of  the  old  onea»  he  threw  all  the  goyeriinient  into  the  iiaods  of 
has  loim  dependwts. 

'  flh^  govermnenti'OCthe  provhMCB»'tteiironiiotlaflbto1]ietraiidf»ehNi^ 
were  bestowed  on  ben  of  Httle  freight  or  influence  |  hy  whidd  -Tbnoor  hO|>ed 

Wiecure  himself  from  rebellions,  and  obtained  fior  the  pweeni pronyt  Obedi>' 

ence  to  his  orders,  and  complete  control  over  the  revenue. 

H!<^  finnncrs  were  '.v«'l!  t  crjn)ntpd,  nnd  he  observed  a  strict  eronomy ;  by 
wiucli  means  iic  rendered  iumsclt  independent  o4"  military  expetiiuous  Ibr  tiie 
ordinary  expences  of  his  government,  and  waa  able  to  lay  up  a  treasure 
agamstaiiyiiiieapeofcd  emergency.  • 

•  He  lelairied  the  IkipTaflue»eh^  about  fattreoa^  botashehadoo.troope 
ef  their  tribe 'at  the  ca^taly  'tbejr  were  entiiely  in  his'  pdwer*  and  had  ho 
measM  of^isturlmig  his  governnlent. 

The  only  troops  whom  he  k«>pt  at  all  times  embodied*  were  bis  own  guards, 
the  Gholami  Shauhs ;  wlncli  were  'Strong  enough  to  keep  the  country  in 
order,  and  being  mostly  PeiBiaus  and  Taujiks,  were  uncoouected  with  the 
iSL%heua-dlBelh  or  people,  aid-eatinljr  develadtotbB  King.  .Thcsb  titefft 
w«ieiirailpBid»  i«OGifed'mMfa;qM]ifeBBaDOf  finmtbelCiQg^.ai^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


560  CONSPIRACY  OF  FEIZOOLAH  KHAUN.  [Appendix. 

witiiioine  privil^ei,  «f  * iifttiiM  which  tendMl  to  lepante  liMn  fran  tfaa 

rest  of  the  people. 

This  policy  succeeded  moderately  well  in  maintaining  internal  tranquillity- : 
the  provinces  immediateiy  under  the  King  rcunained  qaietf  and,  tbougii  there 
were  tomn  cauMfinaa  during  this  reign,  and  two  tdbeHioot  of  pfctendeiv  tn 
the  thrane^  llwjr  w«fe  Cfther  ditcomed  faj  the  King's  vigilme^  «r  drfbtod 
faj  Un  fbU  tnatmy  and  his  wdl  i^poiiited  guwds  (  but  tlie  nnbte  ptwincet 
gndnally  withdrew  themselves  from  the  control  of  the  court :  the  govenl 
ment  lost  its  reputation  and  influence  abroad ;  and  the  states  wliich  had  been 
obliged  to  preserve  tiieir  own  territories  by  submission  to  Ahmed  Shauh,  now 
began  to  meditate  schemes  for  aggrandiziiig  themselves  at  the  expence  of  the 
Douraunees. 

Hie  decfty  was  oot  severely  feh  in  Tbnoor  Shaufa's  time ;  but  its  oeai> 
meiieement  WW  even  tiiea  observable^  and  it  .has  advanced  bjr  lapid  alfidai 
under  the  reigns  of  his  siiooesBors. 

The  flrHt  remarkable  event  of  Timoor*s  reign  was  the  rebdUai  of  lus  rda* 
tiou  Abdoolkhaulik  Khaun,  which  probably  happened  in  1774-5.  AbdooU 
khauliV:  sncrepfled  in  assembling  a  force  ol"  Dooraunees  and  Ghiljies  superior 
in  numbers  to  tiiose  the  King  luui  embodied}  the  latter,  however,  were  dis- 
ciplined troops  under  experienced  leaders,  and  would  probably  hsnre  bean 
victoiiocH^  even  if  a  detemuned  reatstanoe  had  been  oflbred*  but  two  Mdtj 
who  were  supposed  to  have  raised  their  dans  for  Abdoolkkantik,  earned  tbssa 
straight  to  the  Kingi  and  an  unexpected  turn  of  this  kind  is  generally  decip 
nve  in  a  Dooraunee  civil  war.  Abdoolkhaulik  was  defeated,  taken,  and 
blinded,  and  the  tranquillity  of  the  Dooraunee  couTitry  was  soon  restored. 
From  this  till  1781,  though  there  were  Insurrections  (>t'\ariou«  extent  and 
conaequcuce  lu  Bulkli,  Khorassaun,  See&taun,  aud  Caahmeer,  yet  there  is  but 
one  wbick  requires  particular  nolioB. 

It  took  place  in  the  year  1779,  and  .was  undettahen  bj  the  Sshebaadda  of 
Chumkunee,  a  dervise  of  great  sanctily*  fixr  tiio  purpoae  of  murdering 
Timoor  Shauh  and  placing  his  brother  FriD<^  Seconder  on  the»throne.  The 
instrument  he  employed  was  Fcizoollah  Khalm,  a  chief  of  the  Khulleds, 
who  entered  on  this  conspiracy  as  the  means  of  revenging  his  private 
wrongs. 

ThsB  man  <^tained  the  King's  permission  to  levy  troops  for  an  attack  00 ' 
Ae  FOqanb^  and  abon  assembled  a  ooosidefabla  Munberof  Afghaan%  diU^ 
of  the  Kfaybor  tribes.  Wbea  bis  plot  was  ripe  ftrenevtioo^  he  aiaNMhii 


Digitized  by  Google 


iu-pEBDix.]       EEBELUON  OF  THE  PROVINCE  OF  SIND.  561 

tfOOpf  to  the  citadel  of  Peshawett  jftn  pratance  of  shewing  them  to  the  King : 
when  he  reached  the  citadel,  lie  put  the  guards  at  the  gntes  to  death,  and 
rushed  with  all  his  troop?  into  the  place.  Timoor  Sliauli  had  only  time  to 
retire  to  the  ujjper  story  ot Oin  oi  the  buildings  of  the  palace,  from  whence 
he  made  iiis  situation  known  tu  ius  guaids.  The  Gbolami  5iiaulis,  and  the 
£igw  DoomnKW  Hriio  ware  tim^  nmiMdntdy  MMmlklMlf  Mid  nude  ft  terrible 
dMigliter  among  FeisoQilah's  men.  FeisociUalL and  his-.mm'  were  taken  pii. 
iMNien  and  put  to  death,  after  Inmng  endured  the  torture  without  disooveriog 
iSbar  aoconqilioea.  Stroi^  fuspicion<;  afterwards  fell  on  the  Sahebzadeh,  and 
the  King  was  so  far  conxnnced  of  his  guilt  as  to  order  him  to  be  seized ; 
but  the  whole  of  the  Afgliaun  chiefs  at  court  interpouug  in  his  iavour,  no 
further  enquiry  whs  made.  •  • ' '    •    *  '       '     '  ■  ♦ 

it  is  not  ^  leart  zeinailable  divunMrtance  in.tfaii  ainguiar  attempt,  that 
very  few  of  IVsiaooOah's  troops  were  aoquaiiited  with  Ins-  design  against  the 
King,  and,  that  on  discovering  his  intention  after  they  had-  raadbed'Ballft 
Hiasaur,  HMfiy  of  them  refused  to  stand  by  him.  Among  these  was  a  nephew 
of  his  own,  whom  he  rut  down  at  the  gate  for  rcfijsing  to  enter  the  palaces 
No  distinction  was  made  between  the  innocent  and  the  guilty  in  thesUi^glittf 
which  follow  cd. 

In  178 1,  Timoor  Shauh  went  in  pei-son  to  recover  Moultaun,  which  had 
been  betrayed  by  the  govonoi:  into  the  hands  of  Ae  SIks.  He  sent  a  light 
fttoe  in  advanoei^ainst  a  Sik  armj  near  MooHwid,  which  moved  on  lij  Toiy 
nfid  merdies,  surpriBed  the  Siks,  and  totally  defeated  them.  Hie^'dly 

was  taken  after  a  siege  of  a  few  days,  and  the  garrison  was  ordered  tO"  be 
escorted  to  their  own  c.inntr\^  bnt  from  want  of  discipline  in  the  army, 
they  were  afterwards  attacked  and  j)iUaged,  and  some  of  them  murdered. 
■.  About  this  timi^  broke  out  the  rebellion  of  the  Talpoorees,  which  ended 
in  the  expulsion  of  the  governor  of  Sind.  'In  the  oouiie  of  the  -next  yea^; 
the  KuQg  sent  a  fijcoe  onder  Muddnd  Kbaun  to  tednoe  Iheinsnigenl^  whidi 
soon  overran  the  whole  province.  The  Talpooiecs  lethed  to  thm  <»%inal 
desart,  and  the  other  inhabitants  appear  to  have  fled  to  the  hills  and  jungle^ 
to  avoid  the  Dooraimec  army.  Muddud  Khaun  laid  waste  the  coinitry  with 
fire  and  sword;  ami  so  severe  were  his  ravages,  that  a  dreadful  tamiuc  fol- 
lowed his  campaign  i  and  the  province  ol  ibxnd  is  said  not  yet  to  have  recovered 
from  what  it  Btiflbred  on  that  occaikm.  At  hst,  Muddud  Khaun  returned 
to  Csndahar,  leanqg  the  deposed  governor  in  undistnzbed  possession  of  the 
province;  but  thia  quiet  was  of  short  dumtion:  the  lUpooiees  returned  as 

4  c 


Digitized  by  Google 


fifiS  WAK  WITH  THE  KINO  OF  IK>KHAUBiL  CAmvoo. 


Mott  w  Muddud  Khaun  had  nUni,  wffdn  caqNUtd  Iks  gomna^  ni 

recovered  the  whole  of  SimL 

Timoor  Shauh  allowed  a  considerable  time  to  pass  before  he  made  any 
fiirtlier  aUcmin  to  reiiucr  Sind,  and  it  was  proliaUiy  a»  late  as  1786  diat  he 
sent  auother  army  into  that  country,  commanded  by  Ahmed  Khaun  Nooizye. 
Thi«  army  was  inferior  to  the  fint  io  fince,  and  im  Cfvideotly  nnWIWI^ 
tmnmuM,  Hut  lUpoofCM  did  not  now  fly  £nm  Sbd»  Imt  riitilwd 
tmopi  — »^  novied  ^jnwt  itiim<>d  KIimitij  who  iiiiflh'Pil  hinwlf  to  Im  ltd 
into  an  ainbiMGade*  was  defeated  with  grwt  loas,  and  compelled  to  MbMift 
to  i^iikarpoor.  The  Sindees  who  had  before  sent  a  vakeel  to  Timoor  Shauh, 
now  redotibled  their  etibrts  for  an  accommodation.  Their  ^  rikpcl  appeased 
the  King  by  the  most  humble  protessions,  secured  the  ministers  by  great 
bribes,  and  at  last,  on  the  Talpoorees  agreeing  to  pay  the  fiarmer  revenue  to 
tiM  King,  a  lukkitmwM  lined  appointing  the  principal  of  tharii,  liver  I^rilah 
Alii,  to  the  government 

The  re(hiction  of  Asaud  SUkBon's  rdidlion  in  Caahmccr  took  place  dunng 
the  interval  between  the  expeditions  to  Sind  and  that  against  Bahawul  Khaun, 
in  the  beginning  of  178R,  but  nothing  of  general  importsmce  to  the  kingdom 
occurred  till  the  sunmu  r  of  that  year,  when  a  war  h\:ok<j  out  with  the  LzUek 
Tartars.  Shauh  Moraud  Bey,  King  of  Bokiiaura,  iiad  long  beeu  encroach- 
iog  on  the  Doofannee  donuidoai,  and  dnriii^  the  Kii^s  expedition  to  Bahn* 
viilpoMr»  ho  canied  his  aggreaaioni  ao  &r  at  to  obl%tt  Tfanoor  Shauh  to  takt 

Timoor  l^auh  wrote  to  Shauh  Moraud  on  thia  occasion,  is  in  many  peoplo^ 
hands  at  Caubid.  It  contains  a  distinct  statement  of  the  grounds  of  the  war« 
and  g^ves  a  clear  view  of  Shmih  Moraud's  policy  at  that  time.  It  states  *•  that 
•*  Ahmed  Shauh  had  always  been  on  friendly  terms  witli  the  state  of  Bok- 
•*  haura.  That  Timoor  had  nwintainfd  the  aame  relaticms :  that  l^wuh  Moo* 

t«od  hod  for  aomo  time  been  encroaching  on  the  Dootaonoe  oapire,  and 
«*  had  alwaifa  amatod  o  war  by  ipoedy  exptaoationa  and  hnmbb  pupftaaiaaa  i 
**  taking  care,  however,  always  to  secure  the  point  ho  had  m  view :  that  he 

had  at  last  seized  Mour  *  (or  Merve),  and  driven  away  the  Sheeah  inhabi. 
"  tants,  and  had  given  as  a  xeason,  his  wish  to  convert  them  to  the  true 
^  Jdahoromodan  fiuth :  it  nxges,  that  no  state  can  have  a  right  to  inter^aro 


Digitized  by  Google 


WiOt  WITH  THE  Kim  Of  HOKHWBJ^ 


m 


«  vidi  llie  Bubjecti  of  toother  on  account  of  their  religion  |  iOd  then  points 
'<  out  the  inconabtency  d'  Shauh  Moraud's  aeal  on  this  occaaion,  with  hty 
**  detaining  Timoor  Shauh  bv  encroachment'*  from  clearing  India  of  Hin- 
*•  doo«k  Jews,  Christians,  and  otlu'r  iiiiL>elir\ urs  ;  atn.l  wjUi  his  wars  against 
(<  the  people  ot  Shehr  SuUc,  aad  ivixojend  and  tiie  Toorciiuin^,  wiio  were  uth. 
*•  doubted  Sooonege."  Timoor  Shauh  says  "  these  nations  imve  i^^pealed  Ui 
<«  U^,  and  he  hM  1^  dcteradiied  by  ahanh  IfoModr*  ooadMl  UmmdB 

hiiiiMl^  to  take  up  their  4|iia»al:  be  tlwD  aniwmifiait  hia  iqt^Btipii  of 
«  moving  inuBediately  to  Toorkistan.  and  recpnni  Shiiifailigcaiid  tocuneto 

him  ia  paVMML  to  settle  their  difierences." 

In  the  spring  of  1789,  Timoor  Shauh  marched  from  Caubul  with  an  army 
which  his  subjects  reckon  at  a  hundred  thousand  men.  He  went  by  short 
marches,  to  allow  Ume  tar  oveituras  iVooi  ^hwh  Moraud  i  and  he  wui>  de< 
layed  for  a  short  time  by  a  march  towards  Coondooa^  after  which  he  advanced 
to  Aukeboh,  the  naanat  town  of  the  tarritocy  aeind  Igr  the  UMn.  On 
tlii%  Shanb  lfenHidcroaiedtheOziiaetKW  wtthtMO|^  dbmm  ftoai  aOi 
parts  of  hla  denmions  and  their  dependendea.  He  a^  «n  Ua  brother  Ommr 
Kooshbegee  to  Aukcheh  with  a  light  &roej  while  Alhtverdee,  Tana  of 
Kooighan  Tippeh,  cut  off  the  provisions  »nH  foragers  of  the  Dooraiinee 
army.  Some  partial  and  indecisive  actions  took  place  at  Aukcheh,  and  Shauh 
Moraud  had  met  witii  no  serious  cliLck,  when  he  perceived  that  it  wa«  for 
his  interest  to  ui^ke  peace ;  he  accordiugly  opened  a  ut^ocuitiou,  wlucU  he 
eoMdiiGledwiththeskiU^iicleMieMlbrwbidi  be  hm  cdabinlad,  mm! 
coBBplele  awMMa* 

He  vea  aware  that  'nnoor  Shauh  entered  1900  Ae  mur  with  raiofilanoih 
and  would  be  happy  to  withdraw  from  the  fatigue  and  danger  of  an  UdldB 

campaign,  if  he  could  do  so  without  losing  his  reputation.  He  therefore 
gave  him  the  credit  of  a  victorv  and  sent  the  principn)  Moolbhs  imd  rclipnns 
men  of  Bokhaura  to  huu  to  conjure  him,  by  the  Kuranii,  ami  tlu  ir  commoa 
faith,  to  spare  tiie  blood  of  the  Musauhnan*  by  yielding  10  his  supplicationa 
fir  poaeau  leeee  wm  aceeedingly  made,  and  Shauh  Monnid'a  aan  waaant 
to  l^noor'a  can^  iAuxc  he  ivaa  hauotAlty  received,  and  nunadiately  die* 
miawd.  Xhioug^  the  vhoile  traneaction*  Shauh  Moraud  iheired  tike  utnaet 
aeqteei end  submission  to  Timoor. Shanh  ^  bathe  retained  all  his  conqneilaalr 
the  pence  ;  while  the  other  failed  in  every  object  of  his  eipoditiont  BKioefit 
that  of  securing  his  remaining  dominions. 
The  winter  was  so  iar  advanced  betore  Timoor  marched  on  his  retun^ 

4  c  2  • 


56^ 


WAR  WITH  THE  KING  OF  BOKHAITRA.  CAmmm. 


that  he  was  forced  to  leave  his  artillery  in  Bulkh,  and  many  of  his  tfOOfM 
perished  from  the  cold  and  snow  in  crossing  the  Indinn  CaiirasTii.  ' 

Arsilla  KixauD,  chief  of  the  Upper  Memunds,  wlio  iiati  more  tiian  once 
distinguished  himiielf  in  Tiikioor  Shauh's  foreign  expeditiona,  had'iebdtod, 
dDrii^  the  ivar  in  TooikiBtsOk  and  had  infested  the  loadB  between  Mnwer 
end  the  caf^lal.  f 

-He  afterwafdt  gttve  lumaelf  tip  to  the  prince  irho  eommaiidcil  at  Pesha- 
wer,  and  Timoor,  without  regarding  his  voluntary  surrender,  or  the  prince's 
solicitation  for  his  pardon,  "ordered  him  to  be  delivered  to  some  of  his  trihe 
with  whom  he  bad  a  deadly  feud,  and  by  them  he  was  immediately  put  to 
death.  Tliis  circumstauce  regarded  by  the  A^hauns  m  a  great  staiu  oti 
Timooir'a 

*  In  the  qiting  of  1793,  Hmoor  Shauh  was  taken  ill  cm  a  jooniey  from 
pMhawer,  *  anil  died  at  Caubul  on  the  20th  of  May,  1795. 

•  At  the  time  of  Ttmoor  Shauh's  death  f,  nothing  was  settled  respecting  the 
succesRion  to  the  throne.  He  had  himself  named  no  heir.  Tlie  eldest  and 
most  conspicuous  of  the  prince;?  were  absent.  Hooroayoon  was  governor  of 
Candahar,  and  Mahmooii  held  the  same  office  at  Ueraut.  Prince  Abbass 
«ai 'governor  of  Beahawer,  but  had  joined  hia  father  on  hearing  of  his  iUneea* 
The  other  piinoea  weee  all  at  Canbiil,  except  FetooEthe  fiiU  brother  of  Mah> 
mood*  irfao  wm  with  that  prince  at  Heraut. 

'  Timoor  Shauh  was  no  sooner  dead  than  an  intrigue  was  set  on  foot  to 

secure  the  crown  to  Shauh  Zemann.  It  rrirrifd  on  by  Timoor  Shauh's 
favourite  queen,  who  prevailed  on  Siral'rauz  Khuun,  the  liead  of'tlie  Bawrik- 
zyes  to  join  in  her  scheme,  and  by  iiis  means  secured  the  interest  of  most  of 
the  Dooraunee  Khauns. 


*  Anilla  Kbaon^wai  it  one  tinw  compelW  to  diq>«n«  hi*  fblioww*  and  to  take  fclnge  in  the 
eeuiitry  of  tlieOtiinttB  Khail ;  nid  tlie  feDowiug  circunntance  of  hi*  i«r«ption  by  that  tribe  it  Ugbly 

characteri'itic  of  AfgKaun  mannert. 

When  Arulla  KJuun  approached  the  first  village  of  the  ^jhaaauo  Khail,  the  heads  of  the  tillage, 
aUrmed  at  the  proapect  of  drawiog  the  King's  ditpleaMnv  on  theoMchtt,  ymA  oat  to  BMet  tbe  fiigw 

tive,  and  told  him  that  tiiotr  granting  him  the  right*  of  hospitality  wuuld  involve  tlu-m  in  a  contc»t 
with  the  JLmg,  to  which  they  were  perfectly  unequal ',  and  that  they  bad  therefore  resolved  to  refuse 

while  they  were  engaged  in  conversation  with  him,  he  sent  a  part  of  his  baggage  into  the  village  by 
a  circuitous  route :  when  the  chiefs  found  that  AriiUa's  people  had  entered  their  village,  they  imme- 
diately acknowledged  that  he  was  aov  under  their  pratccdoot'TCeened  Urn  boapilaUft  and 
noncd  their  tribe  to  defiend  him. 

t  The  facts  contained  in  the  following  pages  are  entirely  drawn  from  Mr.  Alexander's  history. 


Digitized  by  Google 


'  BULKH  INVADED  BY  THE  UZBEKS. 


The  princes  of  the  royal  familj  made  an  nttempt  to  raise  Abbasa  to  the 
throne,  but,  though  they  behaved  with  much  spirit,  they  shewed  little  skill: 
their  persons  were  secured  by  a  stratagem  :  the  gates  of  the  Balla  Hissar,  or 
citadel  of  C^bul,  were  seized  by  Zemauti's  partisans }  aiid  tiuit  prince  was 
decbured  King  in  »  hatly  moetiag  of  tin  Doonmwe  cbieft.  H«  was  imined-- 
itelj  pfodaiined,  m  lugm  «m  imad  to  the  ^larda,  tbe  prinoet  w«»  Mot 
into  oonflnement  in  the  upper  fort  of  Caubul ;  andirom  lint  nioineot  Shaiili 
Zemaun  entered  quietly  on  the  administration  of  the  government. 

Menns  were  taken  for  asscmbhng  an  army  to  establish  the  authority  of  the 
new  King,  and  to  subdue  the  r^eUions  that  might  be  expected  trom  his 
brothers.  *  - 

His  greatest  apptdiemiMi  irMfirom  Hoan^oon*  wbo  wis  oertunly  «d- 
tiiled  to  the  Aroqe^  if -ptiniogemtnre  gave  a.  dainit  and  who  crnnmanded  at 
Candabar,  in  .the  heart  of  the  Dooiannee  coontiy.  Hem»  however,  un? 
popular  I  he  was  deserted  by  some  of  his  .adherents,  was  defeated  by  a  small 
force  commanded  by  prince  Shoojau  (since  King),  and  was  compelled  to  take 
refuge  in  Belochistaun.  Shauh  Zemaun  tooii  possession  of  Candabar,  and 
soon  after  received  the  submissions  of  Prince  Maiimood  (\\ho  as  1  have  men- 
tioued,  was  governor  of  Heraut),  and  then  set  olf  fqr  CaubuL 
-  As  soon  as  Shanb  Zenumn  had  Mcuied  himself  fiom  his  oompetiton  fiv 
tiie  throne,,  he  appears  to  have  detennined  on  an  invasion  of  Indian  a  meaF 
sure  to  which  he  was  stimulated  by  Merza  Ahsun  Bukht,  a  prince  of  the 
royal  family  of  Delly,  who  had  fled  to  Caubul  in  Timoor's  reign,  as  well  as 
b^  ambassadors  wiio  arrived  about  this  time  from  Ti])poo  Sooltaini,  and  who 
made  great  pecuniary  oilers  to  the  King,  ou  condition  that  he  uiiould  attack 
the  British. 

.  In  the.  month  .of  December,  1793,  Shaoh.  Zemann  marched  to  Peshawer, 
with  the  intention  of  iaomedistdjr  invading  India}  but  this  resolutton  was 

soon  ilropt,  from  the  Shauh's  conviction  that  his  own  dominions  were  not 
Rufficieatly  settled,  to  admit  of  his  embarking  in  foreign  expeditions.  Great 
confusion  had  indeed  arisen  in  the  remote  provinces  immedi;ite!v  on  the 
death  of  Timoor,  when  tiie  suspension  of  tlie  powers  of  government,  and 
tlie  prospect  of  a  disputed  succestiiou,  encouraged  ibreign  enemies,  and  in- 
dnced  ambitions  sobjecti  to  attempt  their  own  aggrandisement.  . 
■  The  most  serious  danger,  that-wfaich  threatened  him  on  the  aideof -Toor- 
Idstanoy  had,  ,however»  panod  over  by  this,  tiipe.  Sbmh  Moraud,  who  had 


Digitized  by  Google 


BBHBLLIOK  OF.FUNCSV  MAM 


been  checked  in  Ixis  plans  oi  conq  n  >i  lo  the  south  of  the  Oxus,  by  the  ex- 
ertioua  of  Timoor  Shauh,  invaded  Buikh,  muuediately  on  tlial  moaurcU'g 
death.  Mafcoaaroad  Khmt  Sa«di  If  immtuv  the  King  of  Cadbui'a  gfrnmatf 
taoSeerof  gcfafc«ctmtyaiidoeiin^im  dnem  into  an  MBlMHcadab  ^ndi 
tha  gwater  part  of  feroa^  ifiiting  to  four  €^ammd  mn,  mA  wm  tikm 
fmmmta  an  the  defeat  wludk  ouwd.  Stmuk  Moraud,  expecting  to  profit  by 
the  consternation  of  the  remaining  troops,  immediately  aH\'riTtcpd  a^ainnt  the 
capital  of"  the  province ;  but  the  garrison  siiowed  a  'spirit  which  could  scarce 
have  been  expected  in  such  circumstances.:  the  principal  Dooraunee  chiefii 
took,  the  inanagemcat  oi'  affiurs*  on  the  capture  of  dieir  govenior,  and  pre* 
pored  for  a  vigorous  defence.  The  estaaiive  and  niinouB  eSty  of  Biddi  im 
afcandooad;  but  thafiut  hdd  out  Ah-  three  or  four  raonthik  nm  wilhil  ending 
An  utauMt  exertions  the  enemy.  Avnaag  elihar  attempta  to  reduoa  the 
jiacr,  Skusah  Moraud  made  uae  of  the  savage  expedient  of  producing  Ae 
GTovernor  under  the  walls,  and  offering  to  the  garrison  the  ulterfiative  of  pro- 
cuniig  ins  liberty  by  an  immediate  cttpituhition,  or  oi  seeing  him  put  to 
deatli,  if  tb^  ret  used  to  surrender.  The  garruuu  adiikering  to  their  resoluF 
tion  to  dcftnd  the  places  Shenhlfonud'a  tbnnk- «ai  bailiaKMHify  aaecntod 
before  their  ejrea.  At  het  Sbanh  Zenann  anived  at  Canbn^  after  Jut 
ceesm  Khmaanain, and Shanh Motand,  mdioeqpnctodthnfchavDnldiaane- 
diatcly  march  to  the  relief  af  Bulkfa,  aeat  ambassadors*  offering  to  give  up 
liis  claims  on  that  pro\"ince,  on  condition  of  Shairfi  Zem;Hin's  observing  the 
treaty  formerly  concluded  with  Tinm  ii  Shanh.  Shauh  Zenwun,  wlio  was  at 
that  time  intent  on  the  invasion  oi  India,  readily  consented ;  and  peace  was 
concluded  about  the  time  of  the  Kii^s  ardval  at  Peahawer. 

The  renuuning  montha  of  1793,  and  part  of  1794,  were  occiiiijed  m  ia> 
doeuKg  Onfamaer,  whidi  had  rdkaUed  en  Timoer'i  daafla;  and  in  eetUing 
tke  Boothern  provinces^  iduther  the  King  went  in  person :  on  that  ocGaanm 
he  compelled  the  Ameers  of  Sind  to  pay  two  million  four  hundred  thousand 
rupees,  oa  account  of  the  tribute  due  from  them,  efter  vbicb  be  returned  to 
Caubul. 

He  did  not  long  remain  at  tlie  capitaJ,  for  Mahmood,  wlio  had  only  sub- 
nitlcd  frone  neoemily,  bad  nov  i^gnn  rebelled*  and  the  ^ing  Men  after 
moved  out  egamet  bin,,  at  the  head  ef  fifteen  ihenanndflain.  Tbrn^muem 
met  at  Ibe  HetaMini  tmd  a  well  contested  action  took  pbioeb  in  wbidi  Sbanh 
Zm»mt  after  namivly.  eaaping  a  defeet»  obtained  a  cmnplnto  intbatf^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


■ 


Am]tmx,2   DEFEAT  AND  SEIZUHE  OF  PRINCE  HOOMAUYOON.  567 

Almost  all  the  chicft  of  tbe  EunablcB,  and  many  Doonranees  of  vmk,  ftft 
into  his  haruls.    The^e  were  al]  pnrrioned  and  reletied:  MalUMKMl  fl«d fiOM 

tbe  field  of  battle,  nrtd  reached  Heraut  in  safety. 

The  Kinif,  afttr  bcujing  a  force  to  take  possesion  ol  Fun:ili,  returned  Id 
Caudahar,  irom  whence  he  proceeded  to  jfifsiiawer,  aud  again  began  to  col. 
feflt  tt  wmj  Ibr  ini&VMiiite  project  of  Invaddi^  Iiidii. 

cf  the  viaer  Shauh  Wnllee)  to  aettte  tlM  govemment  t£  BlfechiUMli^ 
NoaMT  Xham  died  in  the  spring  of  tfais  yMT,  1^94*  aftd  Mcoceded  by 
his  son  Meer  Mafamood :  his  daim  to  the  government  was  contested  by  Beh' 
raun  Khaun,  a  nephew  of  Nimeer*8,  who  hnA  defeated  Mahtnood,  and  mad« 
himsdf  master  of  a  large  portion  of  Beiochistaiin.  Sheer  Mnhummed's 
mission  was  attended  witli  success  :  he  defeated  Behraun,  put  ail  his  strong 
pheet  iate  Ite  famda  of  Mdmood,  aad  left  tbt  BeMift  govttniiiaM,  to  all 
wpfmtunotnttandi  biittiiat  govacnuarthadfcmhwdadiockifUehitkitt 
Mvcr  Mac*  moomnd.  Hm  tribtM  in  the  mi^wttt  of  BalMhigiMni  bid 
been  but  lately  conquered  by  Nusseer,  and  were  never  perfectly  subdued. 
They  seized  the  occasion  offered  by  these  distractions^  to  throw  off  their 
allegiance,  and  Mahmoed,  whose  spirit  and  capacity  are  very  infirinr  to  his 
father's,  has  never  been  able  to  recover  much  more  than  a  nomiiKil  sov^- 
reignty  over  them.  Meanwliile  Shauh  Zeniaun's  designs  against  India  were 
again  frustrated  by  fresh  disturbances  excited  by  iua  brother  Hoomauyoon. 
Tlus  prince  had  kmt  caOBntA  by  Nimeer  KhMm,  but  had  cActtd  Ui 
cacape,  and,  after  a  aeriet  c£  adventurea,  had  aneceeded  in  cnilfcring  an 
hvegular  army.  Fortune^  liow«ver»  toaUed  lilm  to  gain  an  unexpected  fie* 
tory,  the  result  of  which  was  the  capture  of  Candahar ;  but  Shauh  ZemaoB 
soon  returning  to  the  west,  Hoomanynon's  troopa  deaertad  bun,  inditwaa 
not  without  dirtifnUy  that  he  escaped  to  the  iidis. 

Shauh  Zciiiiiua  tiieii  returning  to  P^hawer,  Hoomauyoon  again  appeared 
at  the  head  of  a  ibrce,  but  he  was  defeated  by  the  King's  lieutenants*  and 
after  a  long  flight»  he  waa  aabed  atleia,  on  tiie  eaat  «f  tfat  Jndni^  waa 
bUndad,  andpaaaadthereitof  UaHfeinoodfawment 

Hmh  fiu-  StiMoh  Zemaun't  government  had  proceeded       reaaonahle  cott* 

duct,  and  with  great  success.    His  claim  to  the  throne  was  now  undiluted, 

and  his  anthority  established  over  all  the  country  left  by  Timoor  Shauh.  The 

King  himself  was  active  and  entcr])ri2ing,  and  his  capacity  seemed  sufficient, 

with  the  support  of  those  quahtiesi  to  have  remedied  the  mistakes  of  hia 

la 


Digrtized  by  Google 


Sn  •  CHARACTER  OF  SILVUH  ZEMAUN.         .  CAnma. 

fiithei^s  admuustration,  and  restored  thd  ■  DoorauniM  afidn  to'the  tmfai'iB 

which  they  were  left  by  Ahmed  Shauh. 

Notwithstanding  some  defects  in  his  character,  and  some  erroneous  mnxtms 
in  his  policy}  Shauh  Zemaun  would  probably  have  fulfilled  theiie  expecta- 
tion^ if  he  liad  resolved  to  govuru  ibr  liinuieli';  but  by  committing  the  whole 
of  fafls  poven  and  duties  to  an' unworthy  favourite,  he  invohwd  hiiiwdf  in  • 
ejniem  of  meeauies' whidi  ww  niinoufl'to^his  o^-fitttanea  and  to  llie  peoa^ 
perity  of  his  nation.  «  > 

The  first  object  of  his  attention  ought  to  have  been  to  secure  the  support 
of  his  own  tribe,  on  wliicli  so  much  depended  in  the  original  plan  of  the 
monarchy  t  liad  lie  succeeded  in  this  particular,  the  internal  quiet  of  his 
country  would  liave  been  at  once  secured.  In  his  Ibreign  policy,  his  first 
nhjcrt  might  tn  harr  hnrn  tn  dnftmd  ffhnT—ann  The'pover  of  Beraieima 
nowxpoBolidated  in  tiie  handa  an  active  prince^  'who  had  akeady  turned 
hia  attontion  to  the.oonquest  of  that  pro\ince ;  and  sooie  eicertioa  on  the 
pmt  of  Shauh  Zemaun  was  obvious^  requifed  to  check  hiapfagieaB }  such  « 
course  was  indeed  nece^sarc  to  the  j«nccess  even  of  his  eastern  expeditions. 
India  was  as  much  altered  as  Persia  since  the  time  of  Alnned  Shauh,  and 
nothing  was  to  be  gamed  Uiere,  but  by  long  and  unmturrupted  operations. 
There  were  no  longer  treasures  ait  DeUy  to  reward  a  mardi  to  that  city ;  and 
the  mote  demnble  ohject  of  xedudng  llie  Punjaub,  was.  not  to  be  aooam-^ 
plished  by  a'  hatty  incursion,  .  The  plan-oppoeed  by  the  Stka  to  Ahosed 
Shauh,  which  was  to  evacuate  their  countr)'  on  his  approach,  and  return 
when  his  army  was  withdrawn,  could  only  be  baflied  by  keeping  a  force  in 
the  country  Hnfficient  to  retain  possession  ;  and  that  measure  could  only  be 
accomplished,  when  the  western  frontier  was  secure. 

.  The  plan,  actually  adopted  by  Sliauh  Zemaun  was  almost  the  reverse  of 
that  which  has  been  sketched.  He  widened  the  breach  between  the  Doo- 
rauneea  and  the  court :  he  made  no  serious  efibrt  to  save  Khonssann ;  and 
his  ill-directed  and  ill-timed  attempts  at  Indian 'ooiqitesC^  tended  oolyto 
frustrate  that  favourite  object  of  his  ambition. 

The  source  of  all  his  errors  was  his  choice  of  Wuiiadar  Khaun  for  the 
office  of  vizier,  and  the  implicit  confidence  which  he  reposed,  in  that  minister. 
Wufiadar  was  a  Suddozye  who  had  gradually  gained  the  King's  confidence 
by  his  ii9|ile  and  ioafaiuatnig  manners^  and  had  need  his  ascendancy  to  ofwerw 
ijun  the  power  of  8ix«fi(niz'B3iann,  'and  all  the  -gieat  oAcets  of  the  aiilqy 
and  state;  he  seems  to  have  pctftctly  understood  the  dkpoaitaon  of  hb 


Digitized  by  Google 


AiMmv.3  XNVASION  OP  THE  FUMJAUB.  SQd 


master,  who,  though  proud  and  imperious,  was  easily  led  by  flatterers,  and 
who,  with  all  his  fondness  lor  activity  and  ej it erpri/e,  li.ul  not  patience  of 
application  sutticient  for  managing  the  details  ol  bu5iuei3&  He  was  ambitious, 
md,htaj^hty  UtlSbot^yiAioini^dbm  andjedodft  <^$uiy 

wlHi.could attempt  to  rival  him  in  pover  or  fiivouri  but  Ub  affogiiice  Mid 
rowfiHraiTft  in-oooneil  veie  equalled  by  hts  timidity  when  exposed  to  peraooii 
danger ;  a  circumstance  which  added  contempt  to  the  dislike  with  which  he 
was  otherwise  regarded.  His  elevation  and  his  subsequent  conduct  disgusted 
the  Dooraunec<,  and,  sensible  of  the  ill  will  they  bore  liiin,  he  used  every 
art  to  iniusc  jealousy  and  dissension  between  that  tribe  and  the  King.  His 
avariee  wai  not  lew  hoftful  to  the  state  than  hie  eadntion :  the  govemmeiita 
efpimiees  end  other  eflioetirare  opealy  aoUftfldipn^  udthededtee 
4iftiiai«f«oiieb  whkA  waatheconaequeDcacf  hi*emhfmtleni6nta  end  Uweee^ 
Ub  creebire^  was  severely  felt  under  a  Prince  whose  opecatioiie  were  fo 
expensive  as  Shauh  Zeniaun's,  and  who  had  ao  flhttce  of  the  Older  and 
jecouomy  which  distinguished  his  predecessor. 

The  rest  of  Shauh  Zemaun's  reigu  was  ^pcut  in  attempts  to  invade  India, 
firom  which  he  was  always  cecailed  by  the  pressure  of  the  dangers  which  he 
hedleft  unpnifidedforinthe  weat  Had.hebeco  ellowed  tobave  ponoed 
his  plan  without  intenuption,  its  original  defects  would  We  been  only  1^ 
more  conspicuous:  he  might  have  teken  Delly  fVom  the  Mahrattas,  but  the 
])lunder  would  not  have  paid  the  expences  of  his  advance,  and  if  the  invita-  , 
tion  of  the  Kohilhts,  and  the  temptation  of  seiiiing  the  wealth  of  the  vizipr 
had  led  him  on  towards  Lucknow,  he  wouid  have  been  opposed  by  the  army 
then  fonned  for  that  purpose  under  Sir  James  Craig ;  there  can  be  little 
doubts  fion  the  Doofaonee  mode  of  worn  that  he  would  have  engaged  in 
it,andstiniemtfaatthe  leedt  wouldlmve  putan  endtohispioleclsi^  Indii^ 

Shauh  Zsmautt's  first  invasion  of  the  Punjaub  was  commenced  at  the  dose 
of  the  year  1795.  He  crossed  the  Indus  by  a  bridge  of  boats  at  Attok,  and 
advanced  three  marches  to  Hussun  Abdaul,  from  which  place  he  tjetachcd  a 
large  Ibrce  under  Ahmed  Ktiaun  Sliauheenchee  Bauchee,  to  take  pos^sion 
of  Rotass.  This  detachment  succeeded  in  its  object,  aud  was  joined  by 
many  Gnckem,  Juts*  and  other  Mnswilmane  of  the  Fliojeub^  while  fbeSike 
fled  in  dismay  to  the  mountains  or  beyond  the  Hyphaais* 

Their  alann  was  however  soon  dissipated  *,  for  the  King  had  only  bean  a 
week  at  Hussun  Abdaul,  when  he  received  intelligence  of  the  invasion  of 
the  west  of  Khorassaun  by  Agha  Ma!ionied  Khaun  Kujjur,  King  of  Persia ; 
this  attack  determined  him  immediately  to.  return  to  the  d^ence  of  iua 

4  "   -  ' 


570 


KiiORASSAUN  im'ADED  BY  THE  PERSIilNa  [AppEBDa, 


dkMninions,  and  -with  such  predpitation  was  his  resolution  executed,  that  ht 
made  but  t«D  marches  from  HuMUii  AbcUml  to  PHh«w«r*t  whave  btMnmi. 
'    on  the  3d  of  January  1796. 

The  Persian  invasion  had  been  designed  tor  tiie  ct^ture  oi  Meshhed*  when 
gfMt  diaooiitieiit  ptevailMl  agaiiiit  tiw  ftmify  of  Nan^  Bhmii.  Miiriir 
Ifeetnt  «liadllcmitfaleroftlieplM8k  pctio^  >  ptoa  itWch  had  ■wwetdod 
fm  ft  fttmar  fwnmifliBj  and  fled  to  Caubul  as  the  Persiann  approached :  hia 
ftther,  Shaidl  Rokh,  was  detnned  by  hk  age  and  infirmttiea,  and  threw  hiin- 
f pif  on  the  mercy  of  the  conqueror;  but  his  submission  did  not  soften  Agha 
MHlioined,  whose  disposition,  naturally  barbarous  and  unrelenting,  was  exas. 
perated  by  the  injuries  which  htnueli'  and  lamiiy  had  si^bred  from  Naudir 
jShauh.  Sbanh  Jlokhiiw  seised  OB  eatori^g  the  Peniftacaiap,  ta^^ 
npfUMLibnukB  him  give  up  Ma  trpanireBt  wd  after  endoring  all  the  tiwienta 
which  the  emOtf  aad  mriee  of  hit  penecutorcoold  «i«gest,  the  eld  and 
hSnd  gmdson  of  Nandir  Shaadi  was  murdered  in  the  Persian  camp.  A^m 
Mahommed  then  entered  Mcshlied,  destroyed  the  tomb  of  Naudir  Shnnh, 
dnn;  up  thit  conqneror'^  bones,  and  sent  them  to  Teheraun.  It  remarkable 
that  Naiidir's  Uiiiily  should  be  massacred  and  his  grave  dishonoured  by  Per- 
naas,  after  having  be^  so  long  protected  hy  the  nation  from  whose  yoke  he 

Ae  MeaMied  hadloiig  beca  dapcndenr  an  Oanbol,  tMi  attack  gw»twrt 

•   «ai»e  both  of  indignation  and  alarm  to  Shauh  Zemaun,  and  at  first  he  aeiMi 

to  have  been  influcnrcd  by  those  feelings:  be  returned  to  Caubul  prepared 
for  WW,  and  proposed  to  the  U:^beks  to  enter  into  a  leapiie  against  the 
Persians ;  but  his  ardor  soon  cooled,  and  an  embassy  Irom  Agha  Mabom^ 
together  ^th  the  retreat  cf  that  monarch,  succeeded  in  making  him  give  up 
^dt  tefoUsieiiMhBtaif  temlari^  «id  dn]|p  all  11ioii{g|ila  itf  nvenging  the 
iMHcnitv  he  had  auflfatcd.  Aanh  Zeaiaiii^a  ■ftitf^f^f^tyn  ^  inJiaa  enedip 
tions  seconded  the  views  of  the  PerstanaoB-this  occasion,  and  no  woawr  had 
Augba  Mahomed  withdrawn,  than  he  set  out  for  Peshawer  and  prepared  to 
return  to  the  Punjaub.  He  aHsemblcd  n  force  of  thirtj'  thousand  men,  of 
whom  one  half  were  Dooi  auiices,  aiid  in  [he  end  of  November  he  be^ran  his 
march  ior  India,  aud  advanced  unopposed  to  i<ahore,  which  be  entered  0x1 
the  3d  of  January  1797. 

Hhaah  ZeaMHia's  graend  plaa  for  redndng  the  eoautrj  was  iboadedoa 
4e  ffadiea  of  Ahmed  ShaaL  He  aeaft  fiofienft  Cbcpaindi  (^gfat  pwtiie 


*  l^pmidiefineMf-ienBBribii 


Digitized  by  Google 


K£BEIX10N  OF  PRINCE  MAUMOQD. 


571 


MOfing  by  lapid  inarches)  to  attack  tha  flScs  in  their  retreats,  to  drivt  aivagr 
Aeir  oattle^  and  seize  or  destroy  their  grain :  he  reduced  such  forts  as  wan 
within  his  reach,  and  at  the  same  time  he  gave  great  encoiiragement  to  any" 
Sik  chiels  who  Would  subTnit  to  him.  His  plan  was  in  sonu'  mea«mre 
obstructed  by  the  persuasions  oi  his  bigotted  Mooliahs,  by  tlie  rapacity  of  the 
vizier,  andby  tfaaHeamaaf  tha  aoldiay}  kutimpilaof  AoieiiiifitranA 
ciiaiiiistKDoia,  ba  mada  aotne  ftogreH  in  inrtncingtha  Sikito  joiiilBa^  and 
aevandcf  diair  dne&  attendad  hk  oouftatLahova. 

The  advance  of  the  Doofaiinae  anny^,  and  the  occupation  of  Lahore,  did 
not  fail  in  creating  a  strong  «?ensation  throughout  India.  The  weaknes'?  of 
the  Mahrattas,  the  whole  of  whose  forces  were  drawn  to  the  southward  by 
their  own  disaensions}  the  feebleness  of  the  government  of  tlie  Nabob  vizier, 
and  the  dispoaitum  of  the  greater  part  of  his  subjects  to  ioaorrection  and 
ftvolt;  togeAaririthllManiialjafatttlwMUKWiiBa^^ 
ofdMirfaligion,  and  ftr  tfn  mtamtian  of  thehowa  ofTfaaav,  Mpva- 
pared 4aft  oomitfy  for »soane.of  disorder  and  anarchy,  whidi  wonld  doubt 
less  have  opened  as  soon  as  the  Shauh  had  advanced  to  Delly.  This  state  of 
aifairs  was  ear!y  perceived  by  the  powers  wh(^e  safety  was  threatened.  The 
Mahrattas  indeed  were  struck  with  dismay,  and  made  UtUe  preparation  to 
d^end  themselves,  except  by  sdicitiiig  the  aanatance  of  their  neighbours ; 
but  Hm  BritUi  gomuaank  udoftoi  man  ngomua  natntaa,  «ud  aai^  ■ 
poveffhl  army  to  Anoofdiabar  to  dcAad  the  inontiar  of  its  ally  tba  IBabilb 

Nor  were  the  pnrtizans  of  Shaidi  Zemaun  more  inactive  ;  intrigues  were 
set  on  foot  in  m;iny  parts  of  Hindostan  tor  the  purpose  of  co-operating  with 
that  pnnce's  invasion:  the  Rohiilas  had  begun  to  assemble  in  arms,  and 
every  .  Mussulman,  even  in  tba  remotest  regtoos  of  the  Deccan,  waited  in 
anaioiiie^eotatioulbr  tba  advance  of  tfiecbaiH|wan  of  Tfaaaabopaa 
audtfaasaappfahaniioaBiiiiudniNlladlvtbatiaia  bjiba  Mmu  af  flaaob 
aenwnt^s  aspeditions ;  but  the  impreasion  of  hja  advance  waa  panaaaaat. 
Some  years  elapsed  before  the  Marattas  were  relieved  from  their  expectati(m 
of  the  api>earancc  of  another  Ahmed  Shauh  ;  and  the  principal  object  of  the 
British  III  l^  St  Oil  tu  Persia  in  1799,  was  to  secure  a  three  yeara  suipenaion  of 
tiie  tiircaiuueU  attack  of  JSbauh  Zemaun. 

flbanh  Zemaua'a  letraat  in  1797  waa  occaabaed  by  iutalligaBoa  iaUob 
laadiedhiaiofa  iebaUMBinhiaoTOdoariitia^  Maoe  Mabmd,  tfaoogb 
atill  allowed  to  retain  bis  government  of  Heraut,  bad  shewn  an  mdnialkNi  to 
tabdbefoia  the  King  aat  out  far  India,  and»  dnrii^  hia  ahpaneatifaa  had  mum  > 

4d  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


SECOND  INVASION  OF  THE  PUNJAUB.  lAmtmvL 


bled  an  army  of  twenty  thousand  men,  mostly  Fenians  of  KhorasaMUi*  with 
which  he  would  probably  have  attacked  Candahar,  hadhenotbeenprareBled 
by  the  King's  speedy  return. 

Shauh  Z«;maun  marched  against  him  from  Candabar  on  the  8th  ot  .Scpteni- 
ber»  i797>  and  altliough  his  own  injudicious  arrangements  bad  nearly  exposed 
Uu  to  defeat,  yet  1i»  eActs  of  hit  inqpuMlMioa  we  coaatencted  hy  ibo 
treadwiy  of  Mahmooirt  adhenntti  Olidi  Khaon  Teimorae  aeiaed  the 
citadel  of  Heraut  in  his  name,  and  was  joined  by  the  Dooraunee  governor  of 
the  dty :  the  army  followed  the  example  of  disaffection,  and  Mahmood*  n» 
duced  to  def?pair,  fled  to  Tooshish  with  his  son  Cauinraun. 

Shauh  Zemaun  immediately  entered  Hernnt  •  t^\  n  of  Mahmood's  advisers 
were  executed  for  this  rebellion,  but  no  otiier  measures  oi  sc\crity  were 
adopted.  Tlieae  anram^encsts  occupied  Sbanli  Zenann  fiv  aoaae  tinei  but 
at  soon  as  he  had  a  mooMof  t  lefsure,  he  tamed  his  attenttoo  to  the  Puii)aiA^ 
nhere  Ma  eanae  had  with  aoiiie  revewaa  wfafle  he  iras  engaged  in  the 
west.  As  soon  as  he  had  quitted  the  country,  the  Siks  retained  fiMm  their 
hiding  place's  and  began  to  retaliate  on  the  Mussulmans  the  oppression  which 
those  of  their  own  religion  had  suffered  from  the  Dooraitnee^,  They  had 
even  cut  off  a  party  of  five  thousand  eastern  Alghauns  wiuch  had  advanced 
|o  the  Hy  da^spea  under  a  duat  ei the  King's  ^  and  the  whole  of  the  Poi^uib 
was  aa  fiur  aa  ever  6om  being  conquered,  when  the  King  set  out  on  hia  tinrd 
eqaeditioo.  Heaetofffiram  Fedumer  on  the  a5th  of  Oclobtt',  1798,  and 
advanced  without  molestation  to  Lahore.  He  peraevered  in  hia  plan  for  coo- 
ciliatinc:  the  Siks,  and  by  all  accounts  no  outrage  of  any  sort  was  ofteretl  to 
the  inhabitants  of  tlie  Punjaub  during  this  campaign.  Many  Sik.  chiefs,  and 
all  the  Mussulman  Zemeendars  attended  tiie  court,  and  before  the  King 
wiUidrew,  all  the  chie&  had  done  homage  in  person  or  through  their  agents ; 
'  tad  among  the  former  was  Runjeet  Sing,  now  king  of  the  Sfta* 

'  About  the  end  ef  179S,  the  Shanh  received  newB  of  an  invaaioii  of  Kfaonai» 
saun  by  Futteh  AH  Shauh,  King  of  Persia,  and  aet  oot  on  hia  letdni  to 
Fesbawer,  which  he  reached  on  the  30th  of  January,  1799.  His  guns  were 
lost  in  the  Hydaipei,  on  his  return,  by  a  sudden  rising  of  the  river ;  but  tfacj 
were  afterwards  ilni:  out  :ujd  rt  stored  by  Runjeet  Sing  and  Salicb  Sing. 

After  a  sliort  Rtay  at  Tesiiawcr,  Zemaun  repaired  to  Heraut,  where  he  re- 
aolved  to  qwnd  the  rait  of  the  year ;  and  he  now  appeatt  at  hut  to  have 
aei'ieurfy  turned  Ma  attention  to  the  defence  of  hia  'weatefp  doBiinioBa»  Tin 
diqioaition  m^have  been  prodooed  by  the  peeaenoe  of  hia  hrather  Mahmood 
in  the  IMan  ani^»  and  the  Aar  of  hia  reeeiving  auch  airport  finm  the 


Digitized  by  GoogI* 


AmDix  j       FUOHT  OF  HAHHOOD  TO  BQKHAtTKA. 


573 


Persians  as  should  enable  him  to  retake  Herant ;  or  at  least  to  «!^riire  fiwr 
himself  «oinc  (uIi'm  part  of  the  Dooraunec  domimons  in  Persian  Khurassaun. 
He  had  not,  however,  be^n  long  at  Ueraut,  whea  he  received  accounts  of 
theratiMlitfnittelkiyit  ShMill,  -wki  lud  fiibd  in  his  attcmpli  in  Kho^ 
riniiwin  s  tiDd  mmu  aftor  Shaoh  Zanunm  vithdreir  to  Candahnv  "tArnt  hft 
remained  during  the  printer  of  1799. 

Not  laog  after  Zemaun  had  arrived  at  Candahar,  aa  vaamuxtm&X  attenqpt 
Has  made  on  Heraut  by  Shauh  Mahmood. 

The  flight  of  tliat  prince  to  Toorshish,  on  the  taking  of  Heraut  (in  1797), 
has  already  been  mentioned }  he  soon  after  repaired  to  the  Persian  court, 
where  he  was  kindly  reoeifed. 

In  die  spring  of  the  next  year  (1798),  he  k£t  iJw  odmt  and  xeCifed  lint  to 
fTantiBniii  and  tbm  to  Twffahtw  He  fcaBakied  thtfo  tiU  ^imm^  of  1900^ 
when  he  acoon^panied  the  King  of  Persia  on  the  expedition  into  Khorassaun, 
whicli  I  have  just  mentioned.  He  remained  in  Khorassaun  after  the  King  of 
Persia  liad  retired,  and  endeavoured  to  stir  up  some  of  the  chief*;  of  that 
country  to  assist  hmi  in  tlie  attack  on  Heraut.  After  failing  in  1  oorsiiish 
and  Tubbus,  he  succeeded  in  procuring  tiie  support  of  Mehr  AlU  Khaun,  the 
ndwof  Kaiiin  andBerjend:  and  be  now  advanoad  agaiwt  Heraot  witli  tan 
thwmand  men  belonging  to  that  chjafc  He  nittt  have  marched  from  Be^«id 
vitbin  a  montli  or  two  after  Shauh  Zemaun  left  Heraut. 

At  Izfezuiir,  lie  was  encountered  by  a  force  sent  by  Prince  Kyser  from 
^eraut,  which  lie  defeated.  He  then  advanced  and  invested  Heraut:  bis 
operations  were  at  tirst  successful,  but  Wuftadar  having  managed  by  an  artful 
expedient  to  render  Mahmood  suspicious  of  a  design  on  the  part  of  Melu 
Alti  to  betnj  hini,  that  timid  prinoe  anddenly  quitted  hia  eamp  in  the  night, 
and  Mehr  Alii  nas  obliged  to  setreat  witli  pi«d|iitalion  to  hia  own  territmy, ' 
which  be  reached  afler  encountarioig  great  difficoHiea  in  the  demrt  tract  be- 
tween Heraut  and  Berjund. 

Mahmoofl  i!i  the  mean  time  continued  his  flight  into  Tartnry,  and  at  last 
reached  tlit  c  t  u  t  of  Hf>khaura,  He  there  met  with  a  friendly  and  honorable 
reception,  aud  had  remained  for  some  time  at  one  of  the  King's  palaces, 
wbm  an  agent  arrifed  fiom  Shauh  Zemaun  to  vamonatrate  with  Sbanh  Mo* 
iaud  for  granting  him  $fi  asylum,  and  to  requeit  that  the  King  of  Boichaora 
would  deliver  bim  up  to  Ua  omi  aovereign,  against  whom  be  bad  rebelled* 
The  agent  is  said  to  have  been  authorized  to  promise  a  large  pecuniarjgrati* 
fication  to  the  King  of  Bokhaura  on  Mahmood's  being  delivered  up.  It  ia 
not  quite  certain  how  these  applications  were  received :  there  can  be  litUe 

12 


Digitized  by  Google 


574 


,  ooMBniiACT  or  n  osbav  imqml:  cammm 


doubt  that  Shauh  Morand  replied  to  Zemaun's  demands  by  very  flattering 
professions.  It  is  commonly  believed  that  he  was  about  to  deliver  up  Mah- 
moodf  when  that  pxince  dedared  his  intentioD  of  making  a  pilgrimage  to 
Maoea,  tad,  by  thtu  irtwdwring  n^ffon  into  die  qucattoo'iiFIiii  Wliwiiliiin, 
arteorted  file  Ulkn.  ill  hs&raav  od  thdr  indi»e  dhudnai  Umm  to 
d^ait }  but  a  more  probable  account  ii,  that  Shanh  Moraud,  equally  un« 
wSSngtiniOmd  Shauh  Zemaun  by  harbouring  his  rival,  and  to  ^u:rifice  Us 
own  reputation  by  betraying  a  guest,  gavfe  Mahmood  n  itice  of  the  machina- 
tions tliai  \Tcie  carrying  on  against  him,  and  pi  c\  a]i(  d  on  liiin  to  remove  all 
difficulty  by  quitting  his  dominions.  On  ieaviug  Bokhaura,  iSiiauh  Mahmood 
fled  to  ^^^»i?f"^  (or  Oorgunge),  tvfaera  be  «■»  wilt  leoeivied  by  tbe  King. 
SIkmu  Obqgodge  be  a^nn  ntofoi^ 

,  DiBing  the  time  of  Mdnnood'i  weoderingB,  ea  eveat  took  piece  at  Cm* 
dahar  wfaieb  bed  a  material  etSsct  on  his  fbtore  fiwtaoce.  Six  of  tibe  princi* 

pal  Doorannee  and  Kn^^zlebaush  lords,  disguRted  with  the  power  and  in^ 
lence  of  Wutiadar  ivlimin,  luui  conspired  to  assassinate  that  minister,  to 
depose  Zeinaun,  and  place  his  brother  ^huja  on  tlic  throne.  The  conspirators 
met  often,  and  notwithtbmding  the  precautions  they  dbserved,  had  at  last 
suspicuMit^  ^Hio  bed  mmMiided  ibeiti  wilb  ipiee  irithesC 
baagelilBtopenelntetbeir  dei^B;  when  tbe  whole  ^et  twi  mwipectodly 
revealed  by  M irza  Shereef  Khaun»  tbe  deputy  of  tbe  Mooodiee  ftwiAtir,  to 
whom  the  secret  had  been  disclased  by  one  of  the  conspirators. 

The  principal  conspirators  were  iieratrauz  Khaun,  head  of  the  Baiirukja.'e*, 
Maliommed  Azeem  Khaun,  head  of  the  Alekkozyes,  and  Ameer  Arnlaue 
Kliaun,  head  ol'  the  powerful  Persian  tribe  of  Jewauu&liccr.  ,  ' 

MahomMed  Aieeoi*  tbe  moK^  dsaag&mm  t£  iBbm  munber,  was  €m  w^aiA 
An  officer  waa  Aen  aent  to  appaehend  SinfiMiea  Kbaitei  On  bfc  aMnd  it 
tbe  bouse  of  that  noblemai^  be  wia  recoiwd  by  his  son  fbttob  Kbiilii*^^ 
same  wlio  has  since  made  so  great  a  figure  in  the  Dooratmee  tfanaactMMS^ 
WiUiout  shewinsr  any  suspicion  of  his  intentions,  Futteh  Kh»im  apolo^rized  to 
the  officer  kn  lii^  riiiliei  ' .  ribsciice,  and  offered  to  c;o  and  caii  him  :  he  then 
repaired  to  Seratrau;^,  told  him  that  a  guard  was  come  to  »dze  him,  and  with 
Ibeaaeae  dednon  and  tiie  same  indifftvence  to  the  BMaae  which  faeve  abMi 
ebenwtorized  bhn,  proposed  to  aattttfawto  the  offieer,  Mate  the  goeidi^  aad 
fly  from:  Oaodabar.  SinfitaRie  r^aoied  tfaeae  vident  ootmaala^  and  attaaded 
tbe  officer  to  the  King.  AoMer  AhbMm  waa  ei  •comt  when  the  order  lor 
seizing  him  waa  iaauedlf  and  tbe  Other  coiapibitew-wen  appMheoded  «k  tiM 
own  houses.  "      '  -'i   


Digitized  by  Google 


jL_jiiiULj  sHAiniCtfWooDJOiiiBDsrftrrnHUiACM.  m 


Next  morning,  they  were  Baniinoned  befoce  the  King,  and  all  beheaded. 
A  short  time  i^r  this  executioo,  ^  Amenool  MooHc  «m1  HoakManft 
1ShmiiJMiaimytim9A»^tod$t»ki  wd  tte  Xng^s  and  1m  miaiitec^ 
tea  fion  this  cowiilfMy  wet*  tatinfy  moved.  Bat  tfie  indigiwtMi  as* 

cited  by  these  sanguinary  measures  had  in  reality  inoraaaad  their  danger,  and 
it  is  from  this  rime  thit  tht>  f^piritof  lebeUion  irihicfa  ocicaaiBaed  the  dowa&U 
xA'  Shauh  Zemaun  took  its  nse. 

In  the  spring  of  tSoo,  Futteh  Alii  Shauh  a  second  time  invaded  Khoras- 
saun.  He  was  acoompanied  by  Mahmood,  whom  he  promised  to  j^ace  on 
Ike  timme  of  CboNi*  flhanh  Zenaon  aaaiebed  to  Hanat  «a  aaon  aa  he 
heaid  of  llie  advance  of  the  Kiiig  of  Benaa:  he  wwawned  then  dming-tiie 
summer,  and  e^ly  in  autumn  he  set  off,  and  pfoceeded  with  the  greatest  paa> 
flible  expedition  to  Caubiil.  He  sent  his  army  by  the  usual  route,  and  went 
InniHelf,  with  two  or  three  thousand  choice  troops,  througli  the  Eimauk 
country,  and  the  almost  inaccessible  mountains  of  the  Hazaurehs.  He  made 
prodigious  marclies,  and,  as  the  road  he  chose  was  quite  direct,  he  reached 
the  cqiitai  in  laii  dian  a  Ibrtn^t  IWtah  AUi  Shaah  ratiied  fiaa  M*« 
waaft  at  tiie  aaaae  tiaae  that  Shenh  Zwaitii  bft  Hannt* 

Shauh  Mahmood  who  was  left  in  Khagawaun,  retired  to  Tubbus  Mdetfrnt 
<A'  maistance  from  the  Persians,  and  extremely  disgusted  with  the  condiiot 
of  their  court.  He  wf(«  still  attended  by  Akram  Khaun  Alizye,  and  two  or 
three  other  Doorauiiee  ciuets,  who  had  shared  in  all  his  fortunes  :  his  pros- 
pects never  wore  a  worse  aspect  than  at  this  time  i  when  the  arrival  of 
I^itteb  Khaim  Banrikzye  gave  a  new  directum  to  hia  ooundk^  aad  engaged 
hiaiiii  aneaiaiyiaewhidiiiMaialeiyledhimtothethtotte*  Aitteh  Khann 
had  fled  to  his  castle  of  Girishk  on  the  death  of  his  fatheff  tot  liad  beaik 
impelled  to  quit  ft,  from  his  apprehensiou  of  tlic  King's  power.  He  was 
animated  with  the  spirit  of  revenge  and  hatred  to  Shauh  J^mann  and  his 
minister ;  and  his  observation  of  the  state  of  men's  nuiids  in  tl»e  Dooraunee 
country,  wati  sufficient  to  determine  a  man  of  his  sanguine  character  to  make 
»  betd  attempt  ftoevatthMw  the  goMdunent.  Hit  adtiee  to  Mahaiood  waa 
4o  rely  no  looger  en  iottaget  aid,  hot  to  advaaee  en  Gandafaar,  and  tnaat  to 
the  Deerauneet  ftr  aupperttng  his  came.  Ihe  pn^eet  amit  hanre  hean  X6> 
ceived  with  ardour  by  the  Dooraunees,  always  disposed  to  hoM  entttfMiaaik 
and  impatient  of  exile  tnnrc  than  of  all  otlier  calamities'. 

Shauh  Mahmood  left  i  ubbus  with  no  more  than  titty  horsemen,  crossed 
the  desart  into  Seestaun,  and  advwiced  to  Jellalal^  the  capital  of  that  pro- 
vince.  He  was  received  wUh  open  arms  by  Behraum  Khaun,  the  chief  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


576 


MiaCXJMDUCT  OF  SBAUH  mUXJV*^  fAflPPWi(. 


Seestuin ;  who  gave  his  daughter  to  prince  Caumraun.  e{jin}i|)cil  Mahmood's 
frieadfl,  already-  worn  out  witii  their  ioog  march  in  the  desart*  aud  proposed 
tOMrirt Ihat prince widi the  fiuoe «f  Ins prorinise.  Hit  oflerim rejected, 
In  ponuance  of  Tlittah  KliMiii's  phn,  and  Mabmood  «Dt««ed  the  Doowiu— e 
caiutxy  vith  the  remsnu  of  hit  eduuiited  pMlgr* 

His  adviser  had  not  misjudged  tlie  disposition  of  his  countrymen :  thf 
Dooraunee^  flocked  to  Mahmood,  and  on  his  advance  to  Candahar,  he  as. 
sembled  so  preat  a  force  as  to  be  able  to  face  tlie  Meer  Akhor  *,  who  had 
been  left  in  command  of  tlie  province.  That  oflicer  encamped  under  the 
place  till  he  was  ao  much  distxeased  by  the  partial  but  fi'equ^t  fittacks  pf  the 
eoenij,  that  ht  wh  obl^ed  to  retire  within  die  trtdlSt 

Tbe  pbuw  wee  Aen  inveited  by  Mahmood,  wImm  amy  continiied  to  in* 
crease  till  the  forty-second  day  of  the  siege,  when  Ftitteh  Khaun  contrived 
to  get  himself  int  roduced,  almost  alone,  into  the  town,  and  immediately  threw 
himself  on  the  honour  of  Abdoolla,  a  powerful  chief  of  tlie  garrison.  The 
force  of  tliiii  method  of  sohcitatioii  is  explained  in  anotiier  place;  it  had 
complete  efiect  in  tiiiti  instance,  Abduoiia  dechiied  for  Mahmood,  the  Meer 
AklM|r  was  compelled  to  fly  i  and  Candahar.  opened  its  gates  to  the  lebeia. 

While  these,  things  weie  pessing;.  and.  even  after  aocounts  of  theur  oem- 
sqcoieenient  had  reached  him,  Shauh  Zemaun  was  assi<jhioiisly  eoaployed  in 
latcparations  for  another  invasion  of  Hindostan.  It  was  not  till  he  heard 
the  fail  of  Candahar,  by  which  time  he  had  arrived  at  Peshawer,  that  he  was 
ronsed  troin  tins  mfatuation.  He  then  gave  up  his  plans  on  India,  andr^ 
turned  to  Caubul. 

Hte  did  not,  however,  leave  Eeshawer  without  oonunittiqg  eeeae.^ital  ada 
of  impradeoce^ 

AbdooUah  Khaun  Alekkoaye^  die  governor  of  Cashmev,  had  oooie.  to 

court,  and  was  seized  and  tortured}  on  which  his  brother  Sydaul  Khaun 
who  was  at  Candahar,  went  over  to  Mahmpod  with  his  whole  clan  (the  A!pk- 
kozyes).  Zemaiin  next  detached  an  army  of  iiiteeu  thousand  men  against 
Cashmeer,  under  Mooilaii  Ahmed  and  Mee;'  Vise  Noorzye.  Thi&  i'orce 
whkb  nvight  have  been  so  wdl  employed  in  quelling  Mahmood's  rebellion, 
was  dispersed  before  it  reached  Casbmeor,  by  the  imprudaoee  of  its  ^onw 
mander  Moollah  Ahmed. 
Shaoh  Zemaun  left  a  coosideiiaUe  fi»oe  at  Peahaiwer,  under  his  fanilber 


Digitized  by  Google 


ApFEKonc]  Mil 


T  OF  SHAUH  ZSlCikUN. 


577 


Shujau  ool  Moolk,  and  seems  to  h:\vc  l  ail  no  Fiense  of  the  preneral  dicaffec- 
tion,  but  to  liave  reckoned  on  defeating  Mahmood  without  anv  li  t  at  exer- 
tion. When  he  readied  Caubul,  the  true  state  of  aiiaini  broke  «i  on  his 
mind,  and  hi&  security  was  succeeded  hy  the  utmost  disquiet  and  alarm. 
Awire  of  the  diaaflbctioii  of  die  Doovnmee  chie^  he  acarcdf  though  biin- 
fdf  safe  among  them;  his  guarda  were  doubted,  and  their  customary  appeeiv 
ance  at  the  court  was  changed  into  CODltant  duty  over  the  palace.  The 
King's  diitrust  of  his  own  tribe  was  farther  marked  by  his  anxious  endeiF  ' 
TOUTS  to  gain  the  Ghiljies ;  and  these  precantions,  whiJe  they  ga^'e  confidence 
to  the  disi^cted,  disgusted  many  who  were  neutral  or  well  disposed.  The 
terrors  of  the  vizier  were  still  more  couspicuouii ;  and  i'rom  Im  kuowu  timi- 
d^iitiapxobeUe  thepiokhedmedhiiiibcffa^  He 
ina  more  diflcnH  of  eeceiB  than  ever*  hit  nwiiiier  m  become  SMpkioaa 
end  diilnwled ;  end  hii  leaolttdoiia  were  heaty  and  wevering.  The  dutnitt 
wfaid)  the  Court  shewed  of  its  mm  fi»ftiioe,  soon  ^reod  to  the  peqdot  end, 
in  a  strperstitious  nation,  omeoi  were  not  wanting  to  oaafim  tfaoir  eipecte-' 
tion  of  some  great  re\'cr<:e. 

Allcr  some  vain  iRguciations,  the  King  marched  against  the  rebels  with 
thirty  thousand  men :  he  sent  on  two  parties  in  front  of  his  army,  of  which 
the  most  advaneed  m»  md»  Ahmed  Khaun  Noofr|re,  and  the  King  soon 
after  ftU  into  the  fear,  and  ever  after  remained  a  mardi  or  two  behind  the 
army ;  a  plan  jtrobaUy  suggested  by  the  ftan  of  the  minister,  iHuch  added 
to  the  alarm  of  the  troops. 

Ahmed  Khaun  had  many  insults  and  injuries  to  revenge  on  the  vizier, 
and  so  little  was  he  trusted,  that  shortly  betbre  he  got  this  inipui  t  int  com- 
mand, he  was  ttiought  to  have  been  marked  out  for  execution  by  the  imni&ter; 
yet  in  tibts  eatxeniiiy  WuAdar  Khaun  seieed  on  the  hope^  that  by  oonftrrii^ 
hononn  and  iiettertng  appointments  en  Ahmed  Khaun^  he  could  hnag  him 
over  to  his  interests.  He  was  accordingly  entrosted  with  the  command  ef 
the  vanguard ;  the  conduct  of  which  former  experience  had  shewn  ge&enflty 
to  deride  the  fidelity  or  desertion  of  the  army, 

Ahmed  Khaun  was,  however,  undetermimHl  what  line  of  conduct  to  pur- 
sue when  he  left  the  main  body  i  at  least  Futtch  iviiuuii  Uiought  he  was  so, 
and  the  steps  lie  ttwh  to  seeiire  hii  eoKipaBtioq,  thougli  perfectly  consistent 
with  the  heedk»g  violence  of  Ibttefa  Khaon's  cbaiacter»  would  be  incraii* 
blsb  if  imputed  to  any  other  pefion.  He  seized  Abdoollah  Khaon,  the 
btcthcr  ef  Ahmed  jiPiann  Noonye^  ,jnd  threw  bin  into  cloie  ooofiotmeol^ 

4b 


Digitized  by  Google 


578  SUAUH  ZEMAUN  BETRAYED.  '  '  LAfpksduL 

tbneatening  to  put  liiiii  to  inttuit  death,  if  hii  Imttbiu  did  not  come  over. 

Abdoolla  had  joined  Mahmood  in  an  important  crisis,  and  his  fidelity  was 
never  doubted  ;  but  Futti'h  Khaun  knew  Ahmed's  attachment  to  his  brother, 
and  was  very  careless  about  the  justice  of  his  measures,  it'  they  answerad 

the  end  in  view. 

U  Ahmed  Khaun  really  wavered,  this  threat  determined  him ;  for,  when 
he  met  Mehmood's  advance  «t  Sirreeasp,  he  jdned  ittrith  the  whole  body 
under  hia  oommand. 

The  mam  army  commanded  by  prince  Naussir  was  at  Aubitauoe^  not  fiur 
from  Sirreeasp,  when  news  was  received  that  the  advanced  guards  were  near 
each  other,  and  soon  after  that  they  had  engapjed ;  on  which  the  army  halted 
and  entrenched.  The  fact  o("  Ahmed's  desertiein  was  soon  after  known,  but 
produced  no  great  sensation  in  the  army.  Its  effect  was  di£R^eut  iu  the 
King's  own  little  camp,  where  every  dediion  was  hiAienoed  hy  WoAdari 
all  was  given  up  for  ka^  and  the  King  fled  whh  ^ecipitalion  towarda  Can* 
boL  It  waa  probably  the  Imowledge  of  thk  desertioairtnchliritalAeredtho 
conduct  of  the  troops  under  prince  Naunir:  tiiey  aoon  became  aomutmoDB, 
tfmt  the  prince  was  obliged  to  quit  the  army,  and  fly  towards  Caidiul ;  on 
which  the  army  fell  into  entire  disorder,  and  probably  broke  up. 

A  party  of  two  thousand  men,  under  Futteb  Khaun,  was  immediately  sent 
by  Mahmood  to  Caubui,  and  he  soon  after  marched  himseit  in  the  same 
difBGliob. 

In  the  mean  tun^  Shauh  Zemaun  pmrsued  his  fl%ht  with  the  Irtmoat  pra- 
o^tnlunu  tfll  he  reached  Ae  Shainwaree  country,  worn  out  with  hunger 
and  fiitigue.  The  vizier  now  proposed  that  the  King  should  stop  and  refietb 
at  the  ca5?tle  of  Moollah  Aushik,  a  dependent  of  his  :  the  Meer  Akhor  re- 
monstrated arrainsf  the  delay  ;  but  tinding  iiis  arguments  overruled,  he  quitted 
the  party,  ami  aiter  many  adventures  arrived  sale  at  Feijhawer.  The  King^ 
attended  by  the  vizier  and  his  two  brothers,  the  Khauni  Moollafa,  the  Shaotif 
Sauahee^  and  a  finrpurife  Mtkhednmt,  entered  Moollah  Andnk'a  cartle. 
The  Moolah  received  thcan  hoqutaUy  $  but  at  the  aame  tnne  took  moaanrm 
to  prevent  their  escape,  and  sent  off  a  memenger  to  Mfdunood,  who  was  now 
at  Caubui,  to  announce  their  seizure. 

In  tlie  mean  time,  Zemaun  discovered  that  he  was  under  restraint,  and 
tned  all  means  to  persuade  Moollah  Aushik  to  refrain  from  nrt  Adion  so  full 
of  disgrace  as  betraying  a  guest  who  was  at  once  his  King  and  his  benefactor : 
these  arguments  failing,  he  had  recourse  to  jforce,  whidi  also  proved 


Digitized  by  Google 


tiial.    He  then  gave  himseU'  up  to  hi«  £stie»  and  boffe  his  mbaequeot  calami, 
ties  with  patience  and  firmness.  *  . 

Aiisud  Kliaun,  a  bratber  Futteh  Khaun's,  was  instantly  di^iatched  to 
iMUM  Zeoiiiin,  and  aooB  after  in  oBoa  -mm  wnt  nilli  a  nugeoa  to  pot  oat 
bit  eyei.  The  awmgtw  met  Zemanp  oh  hi»'»ny  to  Caobul,  andpetfoniKd 
their  orders  by  piercing  his  eyes  with  »  Inoct.  He  WM  then  OMCried  td 
Caubul  and  conifaed  in  the  Balla  Hissanr.  : 
He  retnained  in  confinement  ail  Mahnit  od's  rei<?n,  but  tvas  released  on 
Shiija's  accession  ;  he  has  since  lived  in  comparative  ease  and  cotni'ort.  ^  Wu^ 
tadar  and  his  brothers  were  executed  soon  after  their  aetzure. 

Mabmood's  accession  was  at  first  joyfully  weloMBed  fej  ell  aaka  of  imeii. 
ViiflUar  had  di^guited  the  gMat  by  his  syitaaMlie  deprewiflri  of  their  ocdef^ 
aa  well  as  the  poq^  bj  ha  enctions  >  and  the  natioQ  Ibndfy  hoped  that  by  a 
diange  of  govanunent  they  might  recover,  if  not  the  glorious  and  pitiqieious 
career  of  Ahmed,  the  tranquiUity  whicli  they  had  enjoyed  under  his  son. 
But  the  character  ot"  Shauli  Mahmood  was  calculated  to  disappoint  all  their 
expectations  :  unprincipled,  uuloleiii,  and  timid,  he  shared  as  little  in  the 
care8  oi'  government  as  in  the  toils  and  dangers  oi'  wai'  ^  and  while  im  own 
eaie  and  n&tj  were  ipenreb  he  was  iadMfcwiit  to,the  conduct  of  hanwinMteii 
and  to  the  welftre  oif  hit  oeonle* 

The  government  of  the  state  waa  left  entirely  to  Aknm  Khann  Aliaye  and 
Futteh  Khaun  Baorikaye.  The  first  of  theie  ehiefbiins  had  all  the  charac* 
teristics  of  :i  Dt)oraMnee  nobleman.  He  was  proud,  hitrh-spirited,  and  obsti- 
nate, irugal  Ijnt  not  sordid  in  expence,  steady  in  his  attachment  to  his  party, 
and  strict  in  couiurming  to  the  uotions  of  honor  which  prevail  among  his 
conhcrymen.  F&t^  Khann  hia  dnoe  beoenM  one  of  die  moat  prominent 
chancteiB  in  die  Doofatmee  hiitoiy«  and  now  holds  the  oOoe  of  ^Amm,  attd 
enjoys  the  supreme  power  under  Aa  name  <^  his  rehidant  aovereiglu 
cepting  the  short  and  tnrinilent  paEbd  of  MahnMiod's  sneceMb  the  eerly  part 
of  his  life  was  spent  in  intrigues  and  adventures,  sometimes  supporting  a 
rebel  force  bv  p!im(ipr,  and  sometimes  living  in  jealous  and  precarious 
friendship  witii  the  Kmg.  His  character  is  such  as  such  cu  e  uni-siances 
might  be  expected  to  form.    As  iiis  misfortunes  uever  reduced  him  to  de- 


•  Dnrmjj  his  coiifmetnent  lie  secreted  the  Cohcenoor  (one  of  'lie  nojt  valuable  diamonda  in  the 
w  orld),  with  some  other  jewels,  in  the  wall  of  bis  apartment,  where  thej  were  afterwarda  fuupd  on 
ShajafsttccMioa.  ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


$eO  nUKCB  8HDM  PBOCLAHIED  JKna     .  Cteam 


pendence,  his  spirit  remains  unbroken,  and  his  activity  undiminished.  He 
n  acknoirledged  on  hands  to  b*  a  BMm.flf  talattia  ■and  coorage  i  and  by  hit 
own  adbemitai  he  is  greatly  Moved.  He  att^riiea  iiii  fillofim  bgr  the  moet 
pioftNe  VbenHtyi  and  tiie  utaMMt  laadl^  of  diaeiplineb  Aa  lie  it  anreetnioad 

by  principle,  and  accustomed  to  mdden  reverses,  he  emplojrs  the  opportunitice 
that  fortune  throws  in  his  way,  without  discretion  or  moderation,  to  enrich  his 
adherents  and  qratify  their  passions  and  his  own.  Thoup'h  excessively 
addicted  to  w  irx  ,  he  never  remits  his  vigilance  over  the  interests  of  his 
party  j  or  it  iie  dues,  ius  neglect  is  compensated  by  the  promptitude  of  his 
leeolationii  and  faia  vigor  and  dednm  m  egeenting  then*  In  hie  paieon  ha 
ie  laid  to  be  tall  and  very  handeomej  tboiq^  lalihar  tilin :  bis  mennen'  are 
genda  and  modeirt,  and  form  a  etroi^  eonmit  to  hit  oonduct*  wiiich  ie 
equally  exonptfiom  the  influence  of  shame,  fear,  and  con^M^cm. 

There  were  many  otlier  chiefs  at  the  court  of  Mahmood,  who  enjoved  n 
less  share  ol  power  derived  from  their  birtli  or  talents  ;  or  more  frequently 
from  ikvour  and  from  their  tried  attachment  to  tiie  ruling  party.  In  the 
licence  of  this  reign,  each  of  tfaeee  was  able  to  indtdge  Us  rapacity  and 
latiaia  his  private  enmitiee  without  any  reetnuat,  encoept-siich  ae  was  Imposed 
by  fte  passioas  of  his  rivals.  TbeittnMstlieentioiienasapsemdtodamoqgtlie 
soldiery,  on  whom  the  court  relied;  and  fipoDi  the  constant  distiurbanom 
which  lasted  till  Mahmood's  deposition,  his  reign  more  resembled  the  tem- 
porary success  of  a  military  advanturer  Uian  the  establishmoDt  of  a  r^^uiar 
government. 

.  Mahmood's  government  was  now  fully  established  in  the  capital,  but  the 
fiorinom  wave  as  yet  by  no  meeae  mider  bis  anlJunly 
. .  Heiant  had  been  given  vqp  to  hie  brother  Faroes^  wbo  ackaeviria^ged 
Mahmood  ior  King^  but  gowenied  Hennt  exactly  ea  if  he  bed  been  inde- 
pendent*. 

The  north-eastern  tribes  still  held  out  for  Zemann.  The  other  proWncea 
prnhab]y  \vaited  the  final  settlement  of  the  diyute  Hor  the.crowD,  without 
declaring  lor  either  party. 

The  principal  opponent  to  Mahmood  who  now  remained,  was  Prince 
fifanja  Od  MboU^  the  Ihll  bratfaer  of  Sheuh  Zamenn.  This  piince>  tben 
about  twenty  yeem  of  age^  had  been  left  at  Feshawer  with  a  small  party  of 
guards.  Sliauh  Zemaun's  BuaSfyf  and  almost  all  the  jewels  and  other  pto* 
pcrty  Ot  the  crown  had  been  committed  to  his  charge.  After  the  first  panic 
thnt  followed  his  brother's  defeat,  he  took  the  resolution  to  proclaim  himself 
Kin^  and  prepare  for  a  regular  contest  with  the  usurper.   He  accordingly 


Digitized  by  Google 


Appekdix.1        ,    •  GHILJIE  REBELLION.  581 

liiitributed  large  sums  ammig  At^ribes  round  Peshawar,  aai  loon  Mnr  fbt 

greater  part  of  the  Berdooraimees  flock  to  hi?  "Standard. 

A  considerable  alarm  appears  to  h:i\c  prevailed  at  Mahmooii's  court  in 
consequence  of  this  step  :  his  cause  had  aiready  become  uupopuiar  from  the 
general  relaxation  of  all  government^  vIliGil  Iflft  tlw  bulk  lit  tlie  tnhihitMrti 
of  Ae  countTf  «k  lilM  mercy  of  liie  oouttien  and  ike  tnUSery  $  Mid  «  plot  in 
ftvo&r  of  Shooini  tM*  diwaowgod  to  Iwvo  bean  onlered  on  by  HokfalMir 
OoddoiriK.  That  noUeinaii  mt  iMmww  wnated»  and  tbe  plot  caaw  to 
nothing, 

On  die  loth  of  September,  rSoi,  Shoqjaool  Mooik  marched  from  Peshawer 
to  attack  Caubul.  About  lialf  way  between  those  cities,  he  Ibiind  Mah- 
mood's  fwcCt  consisting  of  three  thou»aud  meu,  drawn  up  at  Eshpaun,  iu  a 
narrow  pUn  innoaiided  ivith  hills,  and  hsving  Ae  bvook  of  SoorkhnMid  in 
tboirfiwit  'fihi^badat  <hia  time  at  kait  ten  thoumid  man$  but  tbagr 
were  Berdoonmnae^' and  thoqg^  aocaalomad  to  tiie  batdei  of. their  dani^ 
thqrvere  strangers  to  djicqdine  and  to  regular  war.  Shtga'a  afma.mia^ 
however,  victorious  in  the  bcgnuiincf  of  the  bnttlo ;  hut  his  Berdooraunee 
troops,  eager  to  profit  by  the  contusion,  quitfrtl  tlicir  line  as  soon  as  they 
thought  the  victory  decided,  and  began  to  plunder  the  royal  treasures,  which 
Shuja  had  imprudently  brought  into  the  field.  Futteh  Khaun  seized  this 
opportmiity,  and  diarging  at  tbe  head  of  bis  Bamik^resb  rompletdl  tbe  eon- 

with  some  difficulty  to  the  Khyber  hills,  where  be  remained  till  afieab  oppofw 

tunity  offered  of  asserting  his  claim  to  the  throne. 

The  destruction  of  8huja'^  nrmy  was  ihr  from  restoring  the  quiet  of  the 
kingdom,  for  an  insurrection  now  l>roi\e  out  which  threatened  to  be  fatal, 
not  only  to  Mahmood's  power,  but  to  the  existence  of  the  Doorauuee  go> 
mnmnt.  TheGbfljiflibadienBiBedinpcdecttianqaiiiil^ 
of  Ahmed  Shauh,  and  were  now  to  appeeraaee  entirefy  reconciled  to  tiie 
I>ooraunecs  :  the  desc^MUnts  of  their  kings  had  been  treated  with  kindneii^ 
and  Abdooreheem,  the  representative  of  ^heir  royal  fiMnily»  eiQoyed  a  pensioQ 
from  Shauh  Zemmm,  in  addition  to  his  paternal  estates.  TThe  rest  of  the 
Ghiljies  mii;lit  still  experience  some  injustice  in  c<>mmon  witli  tin  other  tribes, 
but  nothing  doue  by  the  Doorauuccs  jihcwedany  reioaius  ot  particular  enmity 
totikm. 

Tbea«oient  iMiy  of  the  tribei  wai^  honrefer*  atiU  remeoibnKd  iiy.tbe 
Gliiljiai^  andtbeweaknen'of  theDnqnimeefovcfna^  * 
oppottaaify  of  raeoveriag  tbeir  nidc|iaidenee. 

lO 


Digitized  by  Google 


582 


DANGER  OF  THI  DOORAUNEE  MONARCHY.  [AppEfojix. 


.  The  rebellion  was  first  planned  at  Caubnl,  where  many  of.  the  Ghiljit 
chiefs  happened  to  be.  They  ofiered  the  crown  to  Abdooreheem  ;  who, 
though  h<-'  ti  ll!  lately  been  inpired  bv  the  goveninHiit,  was  alarmed  at  the 
danger  ot  an  uisurrection,  atul  accepted  tiieir  proposal  with  great  reluctance. 
The  dnaft  then  tet  off  to  prepare  their  tribes,  and  Asewitik  bdd  other 
flieetings,  at  which  lliey  iettled  the  plan  of  their  opentioitt;  -  ' 

A  Ibrce  wm  qypdnted  to  check  die  Doonu]iiee»«B  Ond»h«r»  oad  the 
rest  of  the  troops  were  destined  against  Gaobul.  .Xhhr  hNt  iMtkm  moved 
first  towards  Ghnziii :  they  took  several  small  places  in  their  way,  and  de« 
feated  the  governor  of  Ghuzni  in  the  fieU! ;  but  the  town  held  out,  and  the 
Ghiljics,  atlcr  destroying  tlic  tieids  and  orcliards  iu  the  neighbourhood,  ad* 
vanced  through  Shilgur  and  Zooxmul  into  hogar :  many  Ghiljies  joined 
them<m  tii^ir  march. 

• .  The  Doommee  government  waa  ao  little  on  ita  gnanl  agniit  theia  prepanb- 

tions,  that  it  was  not  till  the  advance  of  the  Ghiljies  to  Ghuzni,  that  the 
King  received  any  information  of  their  intention  to  rebel.  It  is  impossible 
to  dein  ihf  tile  consternation  which  this  unexpected  event  created  at  Caubul. 
Tlie  government  was  new,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  kingdom  unsettled  : 
the  few  troops  the  King  had,  were  detached  to  Pcshawer»  and  none  re- 
Binned  about  his  pecMwi,  Init  some  CHidlnm  Sbmi^  and  the  retainert  of  the 
Dooraunee  Khanm  who  were  at  court.  Tlie  defidency  in  nmnben  wm.  in 
•ome  meMure,  oempenHited  faj  the  elacril^  and  unanimity  which  4fae  cook 
mon  danger  produced ;  the  Khaons,  their  rdations,  and  even  their  neniil 
servants,  armed  and  ufTored  to  sen-c  without  pay.  Such  as  could  not  procure 
arms,  were  equipped  f  rom  the  King's  armoury  i  and  A  body  WM  thoa  formedt 
amounting  to  three  or  tour  thousand  men. 

MooJditar  OoiU>uhdi  was  released  iiom  conhoemcat  on  ilns  occasion,  and ' 
the  diitf  direction  of  the  King'B  troope  wat  eutiueted  to  htm.  TIm^  aet  ont 
fimn  Caubnl  on  the  isth*  of  Noveqpber}  and  took  the  wftj  to  'Gbwii,  boi 
aoon  learned  tliat  tlie  rebels  had  passed  that  city,  and  were  advandng  Arough 
Logur  upon  Caubul.  On  this  the  King's  troopa  allend  their  course,  and  on 
tlieir  arrivrd  ;it  Sejawund,  they  met  the  Ghiljie  army.  Tliis  body  was  at 
least  tweuiv  Uiousand  strong,  but  was  composed  almost  eiitirely  of  infantr\% 
all  ill  armed,  aud^  some  with  uo  weapon  but  a  club.  It  was  under  little  con- 
tnri,  and  entirely  devoid  of  every,  thing  Uke  order.  The  Dooraunees  drew 
up  in  Une  in  threo  diviaom.  with  dieir  eaaael  awivde  in  fiont^  and  halted  in 
this  ^orm  to  recehrd.  the  Qti^iei^  irbo  nnhed'on  in  a  cwrfbaed  mam^  r^aid- 
lemot  the  fire  that  waa  kept  upmithiai,  Whmil^f  hadpoMedllie  camd^ 


Digitized  kjy  GoogL 


I 


AraSHDix.]  SECOND  RISING  OF  THE  6HILJISS.  JQS 

gataa,        flMde  t ftnlMt  dMijge* on-  AeDoowuseliMi  Uie  divuioil  thab 
o^poied  to  their  column  gave  way,  and  the  victory  seemed  t»  be  decided 

in  favour  of  the  Ghiljies,  till  the  unbroken  part  of  the  Dooraunees  wheeling 
in  on  the  flanks  of  the  enemv,  checked  their  progress,  and  Ibrced  them  to 
attend  to  their  own  satety.  The  (Wijliii-s  tlioutrh  broken  by  this  attack, 
were  not  dispersed*  but  retreated  in  a  body  to  Killaee  Zirreen,  a  tort  ot 
their  own  in  the  biDs,  about  ttzmflMfhim  the  field  of  bali^  TheDoomii- 
nees  ftOowed  them  ftr  pvt  of  the  way,  bat  not  beiaif  able  to  make  any  ioh 
-pnaBcia  on  them»  they  gave  up  the  pvrtnit. 

The  Ohiljtet  lecehred  MinfincenMntB  in  the  night ;  and  early  next  morn- 
ing they  quitted  XUbee  Zknea,  and  marched  in  the  direction  of  Caubul, 
leaving  the  Dooraaneefi  at  some  distance  on  their  left.  They  reached  Killaee 
Shaiihet',  within  a  few  miles  of  Caubul,  in  the  course  of  the  evening,  while 
the  Dooraunees,  having  no  intelligence,  remained  halted  the  whole  of  that 
day.  Next  morning  they  learned  the  movements  of  the  Ghiljies*  and 
mardied  in  great  hatte  and  alann  tQ. -Kiyaee  Amecn  Ool  MboU^  between 
due  cneniT'a  anny  and  the  d^. 

The  Ghiljies,  who  had  hithertO'behaved  with  some  regularitjTt  now  broke 
out  into  rapine  and  violence :  they  plundered  the  villages  in  their  neighbour- 
hood during  the  night,  in  contempt  of  Abdooreheem'?  endeavours  to  restrain 
them  ;  and  in  the  morning  tliey  marched  out  to  attack  tlie  Dooraunees,  with- 
out orders,  and  ap])arei)tly  without  concert.  They  were  entirely  defeated 
with  great  slaughter ;  three  tbowand  men  are  aaad  to  have  been  kiUed  m  the 
biMie  and  pnnmt,  and  the  rest  dispened  to  their  own  diatricts.  The  Dooi- 
mmoM  tb«i  retomed  to  Caiibn],  where  they  erected  a  pynvnid  of  the  heeda 
of  the  enemy  that  had  ftHen  in  the  battle. 

Tlie  setting  in  of  the  winter  prevented  any  further  hostilities  at  that  time ; 
but,  early  in  the  spnng  of  1802,  the  Ghiljies  rose  as  suddenly  as  before,  and 
with  more  arrangenient :  almost  the  wliole  of  the  Gliiljie  clans  were  now 
engaged.    Their  iurce  is  Haid  to  liave  amuuuted  tu  lilty  tliousand  men. 

It  wee  detcmined  that  a  body  under  Abdooreheem  should  attack  Caubul 
from  the  south,  and  an  equal  body,  under  FUtteh  Khaun  Bahnkmsye*  from 
the  east}  while  aforce  of  ten  thousand  Ghi^ies  should  keep  the  Dodraonees 
employted  within  tiieir  own  boundaries.  To  each  of  these  divisions  a  Doo- 
raunee  army  was  opposed,  and  three -aetioiia  took  plao^  all  of  which  tscmi* 
nated  in  the  entire  success  of  the  Dooraunees. 

It  is  univL  J  salJy  iiaid  (and  the  existence  of  the  report,  whetiier  accurate  or 
not,  sliews  the  state  of  the  country  at  the  time),  that  these  three  battles,  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


584 


WSAKNE88  OF  THE  OOVEBKMENT.  CAmaao. 


defeat  of  the  KhyH+rees  under  Sbauh  Shuja,  and  a  viotoiy  over  the  Uzbdu 
iu  Bulkli,  tcx>k  j>iace  on  tlie  same  day  in  Marcli,  i8oa. 

After  this  struggle,  part  of  the  Kiug's  ibrce  was  detached  to  ravage  the 
Ghiljie  country,  and  iff  the  eoune  «f  Hi  opwtioiia*  it  dcfteted  a  body  of 
tentbcKUMid  GIuliiea  at  MoaUnh  SfaMidee.*,  wliicli.ivM  tbe  kit.  Hand  nude 
ligr  thftt  tribes 

. .  The  seveiitiM  of  the  government  ceased  with  tlie  campaign ;  and  after 
tranquillity  was  restored,  the  Gfailjies  eaq^ieriencedeiactly  the  aMne  tieatnMai 

as  before  their  rebellion. 

It  lias  already  been  mentioned  that  prince  Shujau  sustained  a  defeat  on  the 
same  day  witii  the  three  great  Ghiljie  battles :  that  prince  had  advanced 
^{■>n>t  Peihawer  it  the. bead  of  twelve  thmiiaiid  Kfajbeiea^  and  waaep- 
poaed  by  tbe  ngular  troopa  of  tbe  ci^s  a  battle  took  placid  in  wbick.llie 
Khybeieei  were  detaed  with  great  slaughter,  and  the  battle  happening  in 
aummer,  vait  munbeia  perished  from  heat  and  thirst  before  they  regained 
their  motintfim«.    Shniaii,  with  difficulty,  escaped  to  his  former  retreat. 

The  quiet  ot  tiie  kingduiii  was  now  entirely  restored  ;  but  the  govenimeni 
was  leit  in  a  state  oi  deplorable  weakness;  few  oi'  the  provinces  had  been 
ledneedj  the  Kbaun  of  the  Beiochei»  andmaiiyof  liie  A%hattn  tribea^M* 
^naed  to  achnowjedge  so  unsettled  a  government}  and.  as  the  treasurfwaa 
eaiply»  the  King  was  destitute  of  the  naana  of  makiiv  a  vigofoua  affiift  te 
restore  the  authority  of  the  crown. 

The  Persians  had  profited  by  the  distracted  state  of  the  monarchy,  and 
bad,  iu  one  campaiirrj,  HlinoHt  completed  the  conquest  of  Persian  Khora*» 
saun.  The  last  pbce  they  took  was  Meshhed,  in  wliich  city  Naudir  Mirza, 
and  thirty-eight  other  persons  of  Naudir  Shauh's  family,  were  taken  priso* 
tieiai  and  carried  to  Tebwaun,  where  they  wei«  all  put  to  deaUit  esocft  one 
inftot. 

<.  A  son  of  Ritteh  AUi  Shauh's  waa  stationed  at  Meshhed,  as  govemor  of 

Persian  Khorasaaun  ;  and  the  conquest  of  that  country  by  the  Persians  may 
be  dated  from  this  period,  though  Toorshish  was  not  reduced  till  1810,  and 
Kelaut  Naudiree,  1  believe,  still  holds  out.  Meslihed  was  taken  in  the  sum- 
mer of  i8o».  .  .  ■  , 
.  At  theciose  of  the  Ghiljie  war.  and  after  the  daAet  of  Shujau  Ool  Moollc» 
the  Court  Ibnnd  itself  fieed  from  all  inunediate  danger,  and  at  leisuxe  to  take 


*  tith  of  May,  ilio«. 


Digitizer 


CONQUEST  OV  PERSIAN  KHOBAMUUnr. 


585 


measures  for  reducing  the  rebellious  provinces ;  but,  as  Tnicrht  bo  expected  in 
sach  a  government,  the  return  of  safety  from  without,  wa'^  accompanied  by 
dissensions  amonij  the  chiefs  of  the  ruhng  party,  and  particularly  between 
the  two  great  Iciulers,  Akram  Kliauu  Alizye  and  Futteh  Khaun.  Tbe  latter 
im,  howem,  at  length  dispiteiwd  wih  afiifoe  towl^  tlie  loiillHnit  of  th« 
Idi^doiii.  ,Heftat|voeeedBdto  Misirar,  >riMli6  extaited  m 
tfM  town,  mi.  received  iiftf  thousand  rupees  from  the  diief  of  Geihneer: 
he  then  marched  to  the  south  through  Cohaut,  Bunnoo,  and  Damaun,  levy- 
ing the  revenue  as  he  past :  he  opent  n  long  time  in  endeavouring  to  reduce 
the  Vizeerees,  and  after  phaiderinL:  tlu  ir  lands,  he  marched,  settling  the 
country  as  he  passed*  to  Candahar,  where  he  arrived  in  tlie  summer  ot 
1803. 

Scveieel  inipwtanl  meatM  bed  takea  pboe  in  thet  qiuitar  dariag  ]m 

Shujau  Ool  Moolk  had  remained  at  Chora  in  the  Afreedee  country,  from 
the  time  of  his  defeat,  till  Futteh  Khaun's  arrival  at  Peshawer.  Hi=:  former 
adherents  still  remained  with  him,  and  still  treat rd  him  King:  but  he 
seems  himself  to  have  given  up  all  tljoughts  oi  any  luitlier  struggle,  and  to 
have  spent  almost  the  wlK>le  of  his  time  in  reading  and  conversing  with  his 
militaij  adhereiite»  and  aome  learned  men,  ^nho  had  eccompeukd  him  in  his 
retreat.  The  arrival  «f  Vuttah  Khaon  iridi  soeh  a  force  in  ftdiawer,  tea* 
dered  Ins  residence  at  Chora  uneeft^  and  he  was  compelled  to  retire  Aulfaar 
south,  and  take  refuge  among  the  mountains  of  the  Caukers,  where  he  con- 
tinned  to  wander  about,  subsisting  himself  and  his  followers  on  the  money 
which  he  oi.ca^!<'ti:iilv  obtained  by  the  sale  of  his  jewels,  and  by  the  casual 
boHpitality  of  tiie  people  whose  country  he  entered.  He  was  in  this  condi- 
tion  in  the  depth  of  the  wuter  cf  1803,  near  the  toum  of  ShaiH,  or.ZiMtta»  . 
inBeiochiataan.  HeaantMeer  AboolHainm]Diaan,aadtheZubthfl!geeihilo 
Sikavl,  to  andaavour  to  sell  some  jeirria;  hotinnidiaplacenopiudiaaarooald 
weU  be  expeeted :  on  dnir  return  they  met  the  prince,  who,  in  his  anxiety,  had 
left  his  starving  adherents,  and  rode  out  to  meet  them  and  leam  their  success. 
He  was  in  despair  when  he  found  they  had  tailed,  and  jmmediately  assembled 
his  principal  adherents,  to  consult  on  the  course  to  be  pursued,  in  this  ex~ 
liaiaity,  lha.Aihtfiegee  mentioned  that  a  large  cara«an>had  Aat  daj  entered 
Shawl,  and,  notwifhahinding  the  prino^a  rdnetano^  it «  aoen  reaohned  to 
jplander  it.  The  princa'a  troopa  acootdiii|^  aurroonded  the  town*  and  the 

4  r 


t 


Digitized  by  Google 


5S6 


0I8CX»ITSNT8  OF  THB'FBDPLI.  lAxma. 


merchants  finding  their  retreat  rut  off,  srave  up  their  property,  and  receivid 
notes  in  the  prince's  name  pronusm^i;  t<j  p.iy  tjie  value  at  a  futiirt-  time.* 
,  This  caravaa  was  wortii  more  tiiau  tliree  iacics  oi  rupees,  ami  uut  ooiy  re- 
lieved the  piinci^B  pfwenft  wiiHib  but  eiHiUed  bwiia  aannMe  tmeiwlbr  m 
•ttadc  on  CwndalMur,  ia  vhich  be  ww  to  be  Mwitoii  bjr  IfniUiii  vimm,  mm 
of  tbe  fimner  ddef  of  tbvfc  aeme.  The  attempt,  however,  ftiled  fiir  mmt 
of  concert,  and  Shuja  via  compelled  to  fctiieinUii  tbe  hiSk,  whwe  Ue  enoj 
aoon  after  dispersed. 

In  t!ie  mean  time  Mabmood's  g'overnment  was  hastening  to  decay.  Tlie 
Kiii^'i)  weaknois  audiudolence  had  drawn  universal  contempt  on  his  admini* 
sti  ation }  his  orders  were  disobeyed  with  impunky,  and  his  officers  scarce!/ 
pOBseaBed  suiBcieiit  we^t  to  iweiwtein  ordiiitty  tnmquillity  in  the  c^fteL 

Tbe  Gfaoleini  Shahi  (tbe  Kii^t  KiiMflbauih  giiecds>  wbo  jofaed  the 
violence  of  their  military  habits  to  the  natural  lioentioiiflMM  of  tbeur  oation, 
were  guilty  of  the  greatest  excesses,  nnd  raised  the  utmost  indignati(m  among 
the  inhabitants  of  Caubiil,  who  were  not  more  irritated  by  their  rapacity 
and  oppression,  than  disfrnittti  w  ith  tlieir  contenijiL  iur  decency  and  sobriety, 
and  iheir  open  proles&ion  oi  the  biieeaii  religion,  wiiicii  tiicir  prejudices  led 
them  to  lodi  on  intb  peoilier  eveisioa. 

Thete  diaotdeie*wew>nggriivet)ed,  and  the  diaoonteota  th^  orxiMieiMri  mm 
xendered  fimnidable  by  the  absence  of  Futteh  Khaun,  and  tbe  deetk  ef 
Alsnun  Khetiq»  which,  deprived  the  Kiag  of  hia  boUeet  end  anoit  poneifid 
ministers. 

li'requent  complaints  were  made  of  the  conduct  of  the  Gholams,  but  were 
disregarded  by  Maiimood,  whose  natural  ludoieuce  was  stroigthfined  by  his 
jbuduess  for  the  manners  which  disgusted  hie  nibject^  and  fay-the  Aar  ef 
cAoding  thoee  troops  wbem  he  oonakleKd  as  tlie  beak  eupfMMtef  bit  power. 
His.pertiaU^inofeesedtfae  disoootevtt  of  tbe  popdlaee^  and.  there  tuera  net 
wsntiiig  aien  of  higher  rank,  who  wete  diqpesed  to  fixnent  tiiair  .disafiectie^ 
and  to  profit  by  its  effect."?.  The  most  prominent  of  these,  at  first,  were 
Ahmed  Khann  Noor;'\  c,  and  Nawaub  Khaun  the  lame,  two  n<^ernen  of 
Aiiitied  iSiiuuh's  court,  who  aticcted  tlie  virtues  and  prejudices  of  tbe  Doo« 
raunees  of  fonoer  idmes ;  but  the  real  mover  of  all  the  tumults  which  now 
ensued,  was  Moekbtar  eoJMnlah,  aona  macalcolatod  totdbetbtoleadoa 
mdienoeeawM. 


*  Hepudimiir  of  ^bmttmhk 


Digitized  by  CoogI( 


AMnMXj      CHARikCTER  OF  MOOKHTAUB  OOfiOULAIt  S«7 

VadBtiktmtAct  moim0tn,  md  mm  contompt  fbtinMfhoitkomst 
h»conemMlkBhi0mttmaM»kn»  Hohwllmig  lKmiv!(liiApiftieiic6,1rit 
CTffliniflti  from  the  a&ot  at  vimu,  wUdi  Jie  oomideml  as  fiv-  Inrih-i^^i 
and  tt^gMWUMBl^  stnve  of  his  high  pratenriona,  were  indnoed  to  withhold 

the  hpiiours  and  confidence  which  he  had  merited  by  hi>  own  great  serv  ices. 
His  qualities  were  such  as  were  sure  to  gain  popularity  among  his  country- 
men. Hi«  bravery  was  distinguished,  and  he  possessed  all  the  military  ac- 
complishments of  hit  nfttion.  He  was  entirely  indifferent  about  money, 
9KC0ft  M  Ml  hut/WBStut  ixf  hu  ■BiMtioo }  be  IumI  tiie  litiiuwfc  oontenipt  Hv 
ponqiv  he  etao  ■ftcf  d  the  itm  aad  ttuamen  of  e  darnge,  and  this  A»* 
f^chj  in  e  man  of  faia'known  rank  and  reputation  as  a  soldier  and  a  statea- 
Buui,  seems  to  have  greatly  endeared  him  to  the  people.  Even  when  he  was 
vizier,  the  meanest  person  had  access  to  him,  either  in  his  house  or  when  he 
went  out*  as  lie  otteji  dui  iin  utended,  and  sometimes  on  fi)ot.  He  scarcely 
ever  refused  a  tavour,  and  it  he  could  not  tire  out  his  suitors  by  his  patience 
and  ee-ynfife  hia  only  resource  wA  in  ptdadtest  ot  whi^  be  niike  mart 
daabaeffercafed  toperfbflflB.  He  had  gteefc  good  aettnp  and  modentida 
towank  hit  ^Mflwrifij,  V^^'y  he  not  only  forgave  for  past  oflhnoei»  hot  aHoweS 
to  molest  him  with  impunity  when  he  had  them  in  his  powo*.  These  quali- 
ties captivated  the  generality  of  n»en,  who  did  not  so  easily  perceive  his  am- 
bition,  his  want  of  principle,  his  fondness  for  intrigue,  and  his  turn  for  art 
and  disaimulation. .  He  was  singularly  qualified  for  conducting  an  insurrec- 
tion ia  wUtSi  nl^jlon  oeold  he  broi^it  toihaie:  he  had  been  obUged  to  fly 
to  Belochiirann  on  Ihe  daeth  of  Ui  fiither  (the  viaier  flhaish  WidIee=Khatui% 
ndhad  oifloyiiA  fais  banishment  in  attidty,  so  tint  be  was  now  leckoned  one 
ef  the  most  eminent  Moollahs  in  the  A%haini  dominions.  He  was  more 
careless  in  the  forms  of  devotion  than  Dooraunees  generally  are,  but  he  had 
alwavs  affected,  Jiiui  probably  feit,  great  zeal  for  the  Soonnee  religion.  He 
was  assiduous  in  paying  court  to  men  of  karuing  and  sanctity,  and  Syud 
Ahmed,  commonly  called  the  Meer  Wae^  who  was  eminent  in  both  those 
ehenotaik  was  Ua  meat'flonfldentiallUend. 

.Thia  MapoMBiiad  graifc  aatoial'taientt^  and  byfteqiMnC  pflgfimageito 
Meccai  lond  fay  the  fMritgr  aad  even  austeri^r  ef  his  life,  had  gained  the 
highest  reputation  and  influence  in  Caubul.  His  authority  was  streiigtliened 
by  the  freedom  with  which  he  preached  acraiTr^t  the  \'ice<^  of  the  court,  the 
general  corniption  of  manners,  and  the  encouragement  which  was  openly 
given  to  Sheeahs,  agauist  wiium,  m  consistency  with  the  prejudice  of  the 
people,  he  Aafiaimed  aa  UaiphenMra  end  iniidali.  The  Meer  Vacs  bed 


V 


Digitized  i)y  Google 


M  BATTLS  BETWEEN  TtlE  8HEEAH6  AND  SOONNEE&  lAwnna. 


aireadv  made  himself  conspicuous  by  a  fornidl  complaint  to  tlie  King  ^^sunst 
the  excesi^us  uf  his  guards,  and  may  be  considereil  u&  the  avowed  head  of  the 
.nial*€OQtents  during  the  early  stages  of'  the  insurrection. 

Hm  dttOonteDls  of  Ihe  people  bid  liieii  to  a  great  height*  lAm  an  inci* 
dont  ooconed  which  g»ve  them  indteiiiMit»  end  a  ptetenee  Ar  opao  tii> 
mult.  This  was  the  execution  of  a  young  man  of  Caubulf  for  the  iniirtler 
of  a  Kuzzilbaush*  with  whom  he  had  quarrelled :  the  popuhu;e  a^cted  to 
consider  his  condt'tnuHtion  as  dictated  by  Mahniood's  partiality  to  the 
Sheealis,  and  were  marching  to  inter  him  with  the  honours  of  a  martyr,  when 
the  procession  was  iired  on  by  a  party  ot  Kuzjiiibaualies,  and  they  were 
obliged  to  ntire  with  the  corpse  to  the  hoiHB  of  the  Mecr  Wees.  Hui 
fiesb  outrage  laiaed  the  indignatioti  of  the  pnpiilaiwt  to  the  h^|heit  pi|icfa» 
■ad  takipg  advantage  of  the  abteooe  of  the  GhoUumsi  who  wete  in  attends 
ance  oo  the  King,  they  attacked  the  quarters  of  one  of  their.  dnririoM^ 
which,  after  a  short  resistance,  they  forced  and  plundered. 

The  battle  was  renewed  witli  greater  fhry  on  the  next  day :  numbers  of 
the  people  of  the  country  round  Caubui,  tiocked  in  to  a^i&t  the  Soonnef>s  ; 
and  mapy  of  the  musketeers  of  the  Coht^aun  were  led  by  a  saint  of  thexr 
eountiy  to  the  aid  of  the  iame  cauie.  Mookfataur  Oodowb.aad  other 
Dootaanee  krda  were  now  aeen  openly  exdtii^  llie  popahea  to  %bt  Ibr 
their  religion,  while  the  Heer  Waez  promised  the  joys  of  paradise  to  ti¥Me 
who  should  fall,  and  sprinkled  the  leaders  of  the  attack  with  the  waters  of. 
the  holy  fountain  of  Zemzcm  •,  which  he  liatl  himself  brought  from  Mecca. 
Both  partie'^  were,  however,  exhausted  by  the  lencrtli  of  nn  uuusually  hot 
summer's  day,  and  towards  eveuing  an  apparent  rccuiiciiiatioii  was  brought 
aboat  bjr  the  submaMioa  of  the  FaraiaiM.  Thia  tumult  took  phoe  oo  tiie  4th 
nd  5th  of  June.  Both  partiea  were  now  dennnia  of  atemporery  suspeo^ 
MOP  of  operationa :  the  King  wished  to  wait  for  Futteh  Khauiit  who  waa  on. 
hia  march  with  an  army  from  Candahar ;  and  Mokhtaur  Qodoulah,  for  prince 
Shooja,  whom  he  had  invited  to  set  up  for  King,    Mahmood's  fears,  how- 
ever, precipitated  affairs betbrr  lu'  was  prepared  for  tlu  i  riiis  ;  he  thonerht  his 
only  safety  lay  in  seizing  MokiUaur,  and  that  nobleman,  being  apprized  of 
his  design,  fled  ,fiom  Capbul  on  the.Sth  of  July,  after  instiiucting  the  Meer 
Weea.to  Minew.tfaetwnMitt  iathe.d^.  Thiawiadom^  aadthen^  of  the-, 
popubce.waa.ilezteioqdy  turned  fiom  the  jVieeahi  to  t]ie.Kb^  who  petio>. 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


589 


nized  them.  So  effectual  were  these  measures,  that  when  Mokhtnnr  returned 
with  Shooja  ool  Mooik,  on  the  1 2th  of  July,  he  found  Mahmood  besieged  in 
the  Balla  Uissaur,  whidi'-ivw  doedy  invested  by  the  populace.  Neither  he 
nor  tiM  priooet  howevtr,  entered  Gaubul  $  both  encamped  wiAooC  the  town; 
and  hiwied  thenneivee  m  ocileetiiigtgiiqpettt  oppoeeFtotteh'Kfaeun,  whonow 
dmr  hear  with  an  army  of  e^fat  or  ten  thouBand  men.  An  action  took 
place  soon  after ;  Futteh  Khaun  was  at  first  successful,  he  routed  the  part 
of  the  enemy  which  was  immediately  opposed  to  him,  and  was  advancing  to 
the  city,  when  the  desertion  of  a  great  lord  to  Shooja,  threw  the  whole  inUf 
C(mfiision:  his  own  party  then  feU  off  by  d^rees,  till  he  found  hunseh 
almoat  alone^  and  wm  eibiiged  to  pumile  ftr  his  safety  by  a  precipitato: 
itght. 

Next  morning  Shauh  Shuja  entered  Caahul  in  triumph.  Mookfataur- ' 
Oodoulah  walked  on  foot  by  the  side  of  his  horse,  and  manv  other  Doornmce 
Ameer!^  followed  in  his  train.  To  keep  up  the  impression  ot  the  triumph  of 
the  true  taitii,  the  heralds  who  preceded  the  King,  were  ordered  to  announce 
his  approach  by  the  watch-irord  of  the  Sooonee  sect  instead  of  the  Toorkee 
ftnn,  which  is  lequiied  bj  tfae^praettoe  of  the  «o«ttt. 

Ungates  of  the  Bdla  Hissanr  were  tlwown  open  on  the  Kmg'a  approach} 
and  Mahmood,  dseertadby  all  his  adherent^  eiiflered  himself  to' be  quietly 
conducted  to  the  upper  fort,  where  tfie  princes  <if  the  blood  htp  <-onfined. 
His  eyes  were  spared,  but  Shuja  has  untoriuiuitLly  had  sufficient  reason  to 
regret  tins  clemency,  of  which  he  probably  atibrded  tiie  first  example  in  his 
eonntrjr* 

This  reviolution»  thmigh  it  at  the  time  improved  the  state  4^  afiim,  wa* 

not  calculated  to  restore  the  power  of  the  crown  or  the  importance  of  tiie' 
state.  The  new  King,  though  his  good  qualities  were  amply  sufficient  to 
maintain  the  dignity  of  an  established  monarch,  was  deficient  in  the  geniaa' 
and  energy  which  were  requisite  to  restore  a  government  so  far  sunk  into 
anarchy  and  decay. 

Vnak  what  has  been  said  of  Mahmoo^a  re^  it  may  be  imagined  that  the- 
great  men  were  become  poweffU  and  mmdy,  that  the  annj  was  bnpatientof- 
discipline,  that  the  government  had  in  a  great  measure  lost  the  attachment 
of  ita  anbjecti^  and  that  both  the  remote  provinces  and  the  neighbouriiy 


Tif*irtrMi''  ^  '  ^  ^       inend*,")  ao  imii*io&  to  tlie  ioax  fint  Caliphj,  thne 


€90 


flTATE  OF  THB  KVWXK  OP  TBE  CSOWH  Ummmu, 


powers  had  changed  the  awe  with  iriridi  tfaey  were  used  to  view  the  Doo* 
nwinees,  fiH-^Wni^of  indifitoBOCBlMirfttiiig wcomen^  fkumtkoaoB^ 
•Iftiiec0  in  Shwdi  S)n^'«  ntintiim  added  to  lui'  taAmammamttB^  and  pv^ 
yentod  the  govemnocnt  recovering  its  vigor.   The  King  had  been  Sm  tmt 
years  a  fugitive  in  his  own  dominions,  during  which  time  he  had  made  heve^ 
ral  nttpmpts  to  expel  Ins  n'val.    He  bad  comequeutly  inriirred  j^pnt  oblige- 
tions  to  tlie  DtK>rauiite»  iiiul  other  chieis.    These  were  rendered  ol  tho  more 
importance  by  his  own  dii^positiou,  which  wan  susceptible  of  gratitude  and 
pamaamt  attaduiiant    Itb  Mcal  by -lllqoMilariiMHiwdah  .aDd  his  pax^ 
a  fioh  Mt  of  daimanta  on  him,  vhoae  sanieaa  he  conld  jwfc  daaj, 
and  whoia  power  ho  waa  obUged  to  respect.  The  oonwqwanot  was,  that  '^ 
the  honours  and  appointments  in  the  gift  of  the  crown  were  insufficient  to 
wward  the  Krng's  adherents,  and  he  was  obliged  to  give  away  a  larf»e  portion 
el' his  permanent  re^'eniie  in  grants  to  such  as  remained  unprovided  lor  ;  thus 
almost  the  whole  reveuuB  ol'  Pesltawer  was  settled  ou  the  Kii^rherees  as  the 
Mioai'd  of  their  attachaieiitt  and  miidi  of  the  lojral  duea  me  aliaiiai<d  ia 
other  plabea  in  &vour  of -Dooraunee  chieft.  What  foawined  of  the  rercme 
passed  throned  the  hands  of  the  vizier,  who,  aa  aoon  as  his  interests  vers 
separated  from  those  of  the  Jiio|^  applied  a  huige  portion  of  the  public  aaoney 
to  his  own  use. 

Had  the  Ki'.ig  given  his  couhilence  entirely  to  the  vizier,  manv  of  the 
iaconveniencea  which  were  aAerwards  felt  might  have  been  avoided.  It 
ininld  have  been  the  intfifestofthatniioiBter  to  laase  the  King's  pofwar:  and 
his  auceess  in  Ihe  beginning  of  Shuja's  re^  shewed  that  be  had  the  talanto 
and  influence  requistto  Ar  such  an  undertaking.  This  plan,  hoMver, 
not  tried.  Tlie  King  was  not  disposed  to  resign  his  own  power  into  the 
hands  of  his  minister  ;  and  his  old  adherents,  who  were  an-siaus  to  succeed 
to  their  shaie  oi'  power,  early  inspired  him  with  jealou&y  ot  the  vizier,  and 
induced  him  to  adopt  a  system  of  Gounteraotion  to  his  measures ;  the  want  ot 
harmony  between  tiie  King  and  his  minister  fnevented  my  vig^mms  euilhai 
i^ainat'tbeir  conunon  enemy,  and  oUiged  encb  to  htviah  the  leaenioei  ef  the 
ttate  in  aaodiiqg  partizans  to  himself. 

In  consequence  of  ^hh  weakne-^s  of  the  government,  p^  erv  nobleman  who 
waa  discontented  with  the  court,  had  it  lu  ins  power  to  raise  a  xebellion,  and 
to  shelter  hiuiijeli,  il  he  failed,  either  in  the  midst  of  his  own  tribe,  or  in 
some  part  of  the  oountry  not  easily  withhi-  rcadi  of  the  King.  Nor  was  it 
diftddt  Ibr  him  to  ptocure  a  pardon,  if  he  trished  to  be  reoondled  to  die 
courti  for  the  state  nf  thn  Yinit^  nflairn  rmdirmd  it  mnri  nnnnmaijr  fni  the 


Digitizer 


mm 


591 


support  of  his  authority  to  conciliate  friends  than  to  punish  enemies.  This 
certainty  of  impunity  gave  a  peculiar  character  to  the  rebellions  at'  this  rt  if^n, 
which  were  raised,  on  the  most  trifling  grounds,  and  conducted  with  the  ut- 
MMtWvi^*  TliBiiHghtwt  provodrtkiii  ftbon  the  court  diw>siiol>temittiBt> 
tMBkmt  At  digbM <Aitoa fioB ow of  tiw lebals teni bad:  to  ^tt^ 
ootet^orladluBitoaetup  ancwpaiigrs  aadthe>»lMilehadittomtke^||Miw 
■nee  of  a  gjame  among  children  than  of  a  civil  war. 

The  jealouKtes  brtween  the  King  and  the  vizier,  did  not,  however,  shew 
themselves  till  buuie  time  after  Shuja's  accession,  and  the  beginning  of  his 
reign  was  quiet  and  prosperous. 

TIm &vt  it6D  betook  was  to  raleno  hisbzotfaerSuuih Zemaiis  i  and.  soon, 
after,  Hoollah  Adiik,  wbo  had  betnrfed  ZfWMWn,  mu  ^tprahended*  and 
BuflEered  the  punishment  of  his  perfidy  and  iDgmtitude.  This  waa  the  ooly 
execution  that  followed  the  change  of  government.  All  the  other  raeasur«» 
of  Mokhtaur-oo-doulah's  internal  administration  were  calculated  to  conciliate, 
aud  to  efface  the  memory  of  the  civil  dissensions  which  had  so  long  pre. 
vailed.  At  the  same  time,  he  applied  himself  with  great  vigor  and  sue* 
OMt  ta  reduce  the  rebeUkui  pvovinoea^  «nd4e  bring  tfie  empire  iate  ilB  «o< 
GMnt  sletie*- 

The  flin*  espidition  was  sent  to  Candahar,  which  was  still  hdd  hy  Jhinoe 

Canmraun  and  Fntteh  Khaun.  The  place  was  taken  without  difficulty,  and 
what  was  of  greater  importance,  Futteh  Khauu  was  soon  after  persuaded  to 
make  his  submissions  to  the  new  Kiug.  An  opportunity  was  now  otlereii  of 
lecaring  the  attachment  of  this  powerful  and  active  chiei';  but  it  was  allowed 
to  eMapCb  and  honoe  ame  the  BoiafiirtiinQa  which  dntnibed  the  raat  of  Shaub 
Shoojau's  rdgii»  imd  which  drove  hioB  at  length  fiom-  hla  thnme.  Viauk 
Kkaun's  demands  from  the  court  were  moderate,  and  did  not  extend  beyond 
the  offices  held  by  his  father ;  but  t))ese  were  withheld,  owing  either  tn  the 
imprudence  of  the  King,  or  the  jealousy  of  the  vizier  ;  and  Futteh  Khaun, 
after  a  short  residence  at  the  court,  quitted  it  m  duigu3t,  and  retired  to  bia 
oaadeof  Giririik.  ■ 

The  elKcIa  of  hia  diMflhotkn  were  earitjr  aad  aevevdy  i^-  for  in  Jaanaiy, 
1804,  when 'the  King  had  assembled  an  army  of  thir^  tibooaand  men  at 
Fethi^wer,  and  was  on  the  point  of  completing  the  settlement  of  his  domi- 
nions, bv  intimidating^  the  chiefs  of  Cashmeer  and  Sind,  he  received  intelli- 
gence ot  a  rebellion  ;ii  Candahar,  which  obiiged  him  jnuiiLLiiateiy  to  relin- 
quish his  design.  Tiie  rise  and  prepress  of  this  tranaactiuu  will  serve  to 
iUmttate  what  haa  been  laidcf  the  levi^<and  inconaiitency  which  distinguisb 


Digitized  by  Google 


REBELUON  OF  PBINCEtK78SBIL 


the  late  Atjy^haun  civil  wars.    The  govenuuent  ot  Caodahar  had  been  giyieii 
puinoft.Kyser  (a  ioq  .of  ^"ih  ZfimtiiiiV Ji  .iii)d0r  tibvgiiUbnca.of  *^*»«^  ' 
■Kbaun  Noonqrc^ .  wlxNe  dflMrtian  cf  8lunih.ZeiiMMiii  bad  botn  dboed  bj  Jm 
iMl^thft  ScwniiM.Teligiaii.   Futteh  KhMmibund  mcaiMLtopwsiiade  the 

young  prince  to  tnopriioii  Ahmed  Kbaun,  and  endeavour  to  nafce  himself 
King.  Ahmed  Khaun  was  accordingly  seized,  but,  though  be  was  treated 
with  many  insults  and  severities,  and  had  been  chained  with  the  chains  of 
Ml  elephant*  in  derision  of  \m  gigantic  stature,  yet,  as  soon  as  the  prince  and 
Fatteb  KhHtti  were  pr^ared  to  move  out  agaiiut  Geubul,  they,  rdeiied  bun^ 
end  entrofted  bun  with  tiie  ddence  of  tbe  dtj. 

The  OQneequences  might  have  been  expectt^d } .  Aluned  Khaun's  son  went 
over  to  Shooja,  and  occasioned  the  defeat  of.Kyser ;  while  beJumeei^  indif. 
fcrent  who  was  Kinf^,  if  hp  coiild  bnt  be  revef\<red  on  Kyser,  gave  up  Can- 
dahar  to  C'aumrauii,  whnra  lie  uu  kcd  ironi  Fmrah  to  occupy  it.  Atter  the 
defeat  of.  Kyser's  army,  the  King  wa&  about  to  enter  once  more  oo  the 
iettlemeiit  of  his  eaalm  domiaion^  when  he  leemed  that  Kjmt  nd  FauA 
KbauD  bed  reeovered  Caadahif,  and  weie  again  aweBibling  troops.  .He 
then  xetoroed  towaidsCandabar,. which  was  evaoualed on  his  appaoech;  and 
Kyser  soon  afler  threw  himself  on  the  King's  mercy,  was  affectionately  re- 
ceived, and  was  rrinstated  in  Ilis  government.  Fntteh  Khnun,  findinj;  his 
adiemes  at  (  andahar  defeated,  repaired  to  Hcraut,  and  insinuating  himself 
into  the  contidence  of  prince  jf  eerooz,  persuaded  him  to  ameit  his  claim  to 
the  Ibnne  of  GMdniL  EMfoos  appearing  in  armSk  Shuja  sent  Kyser  at  the 
bead  of  an  army  to  opfMse  hun,  ai^  at  tbe  same  time  oAied  tanoB^  wbidi 
Feerooz,  who  was  naturally  cautious,  thought  propar  to  aocc^$  while  Atttah 
quitted  him  in  indignation,  and  again  retired  to  Girisht. 

The  whole  of  the  wc«t  being  now  settled,  the  King  and  the  vizier  set  out 
firoiu  Candahar  in  tiie  end  of"  September,  and  marching  first  to  Smd,  they 
compelled  the  chiefs  of  that  country  to  ackuow  iudgu  the  new  govenuii^t» 
and  4o  pey.Mvenleen  lacks  of  rupees }  after  wbicfa  the  Khg  moved  np  bk 
caatera  fiontier»  and  settled  all  the  provinoas  in  bis  nmta  He  leeched 
Feshawer  in  April,  1805,  and  soon  after .  reoeived  an  ambassador  from  the 
King  of  Bokhaura,  who  came  to  propose  n  renewal  of  the  alliance  concluded 
by  Zeraaiin,  and  to  negociate  the  double  marriage  of  .Shujan  to  the  daughter 
of  the  King  of  Bokhaura,  and  of  that  King  to  a  princess  of  Caubul.  The 
ambassador  was  favourably  received,  but  as  it  is  contrary  to  the  Dooraunee 
onstom  to  give  Ibeir  dautg^tem  in  marriage  to  foreigners,  the  part  of  the  pro; 

10 


Digitized  by  Google 


AwBNDix.]  FUTTEH  KHAON  SUaaOK*  593 

pmal  respecting  the  King  of  Bokhaum's  nMliMgs^  wwcivill^dedilied:  tiMi 
of  Shuja  was  nevertliele<^s  agreed  to. 

During  all  this  time  Kyser  coaiiuued  to  serve  the  King  with  zeal  and 
fideli^  in  the  government  of  Candahar  i  he  had  even  oomtrived  to  seize 
WtMk  KhMio,  Mid  had  nearly  been  perwndnd  to  gratify  the  nvvngn  of  hit 
Iktfaer  Shmh  Zeniaiin»  liy  puttiQg,  him  to  desthj  bat  Fkittdi  Khnuo,  hming 
{H-evailed  on  tiie  prince  to  visit  him  privately  in  prison,  so  far  won  on  him  hy 
his  insinuating  manners,  his  allusions  to  former  services,  and  his  promises  of 
liituro  nttiirhment,  that  Kyser  not  only  set  him  free,  but  resumed  his  old 
connection  with  him,  and  began  once  more  to  aspire  to  the  throne.  Futteh 
Khaun,  on  his  release,  repaired  to  Girishk,  where  be  began  preparations  ibr 
^mtandedentcrprinBs  fautonhit2«lntntoGsiiddMr,hefiHuid  Kyierunder 
the  iaflnenlDe  of  Khqjeh  Mahomed  Khaun,  another  greet  nebkouui,  whohed 
disnaded  him  from  fawderign  of  rebelling.   On  this,  Ritteh  Khaun,  equally 
incensed  at  the  der;ingement  of  his  plans,  and  at  the  preference  of  another's 
advice  to  his,  openly  renounced  all  coiiiiLrtion  with  Kyser,  and  engaged  to 
deliver  up  Candaiitar  to  Cuumrauu,  whom  iie  nivited  to  occupy  it.  Caumraun, 
wlio  was  at  this  time  at  FUrrah,  immediately  assembled  a  body  of  troops,  and 
edvanoed  to  Bedgeoh,  a  ftw  milet  fiom  Cendahar,  and  Kyaar  was  about  to 
^nit  the  cHy,  when  a  scene  ensued,  whidi  is  soavoety  eredtbie  even  to  pecb 
sons  acquainted  with  the  eccentridtj  of  Fttttdl  Khauu's  diaracter,  and  the 
sudden  changes  of  afl'airs  so  common  among  Dooraunees.    On  the  night 
belbre  Kyser's  flight,  he  desired  to  have  a  parting  interview  with  Putteh 
Khaun  j  and  this  meeting  took  place  by  torch  light,  on  an  open  terrace  in 
the  maifcet-place,  which,  with  the  sunonndiDg  streets,  was  filled  with  horse- 
men leady  for  a-  nuuch.  The  conftience  began  widi  mntnal  leproadies  1 
but  the  piinee  gfadnalty  snAeoing  his  tone,  lemmded  SVitteh  Kbnm  of  hit 
having  saved  hk  life,  and  bosoqg^  him  not  to  repay  his  benefits  by  driving 
him  into  exile.    Futteh  Khaun  then  rornpitvdated  his  designs  in  favour  of 
Kysrr,  nnd  complained  oftlie  neglect  with  which  his  advice  wn^  treated  :  on 
tliis  Kyser  assured  him  that  lie  was  ready  for  ever  aller  to  toliow  ijis  counsels 
implicitly,  and  strengthened  his  assertions  by  such  solemn  oaths,  tliat  Futteh 
S3iaini  was  shaken,  and  at  last  Mmt«mM\  ||jg  fmentment,  and  swcfe  to  sup. 
port  the  priooe  in  all  oaitiismitiaB.  Next  moniing  the  prince  and  Fttttoh 
moved  out.  together  to  oppose  Canmmun.  Fkitldi  Khaun  advtaced  with  bis 
OMm  division,  and  calling  out  to  Caumraun,  acquainted  him  with  the  change' 
in  his  senthnents.  mid  iiidnivoured  to  persuade  him  to  retire,  ('juimrann 
was  at  tust  afttomshed  at  this  revolution,  but  he  resumed  his  courage,  and 

4  o  ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


5W  EXPEDITION  TO  REDUCE  CASHMEER.  CAppemdix. 

answered  iii  terms  of  defiance ;  on  whkh  Futteh  Khmin.  without  waiting  for 
the  other  troops,  charged  the  Prince  sword  in  hand ;  and  such  was  the  effect 
of  ihk  unexpected  attack,  that  Caumraun's  troops  brdce,  and  ke  bimseii' 
with  difficulty  effected  his  escape  to  Furrah. 

Rittdi  Khaun's  plan  of  placing  Kyser  on  the  throne  wm  turn  wfmmtA, 
ap|Mi«iilfywidithat  Friooe'BlUUoeiiciiff^^  ImtitscsMoftioiiifwattfiilly 
ddagred  by  Khojeh  Mahommed»  who  left  no  means  of  eperediig  on  the  pe»> 
lions,  the  prudence,  and  even  oa  the  aupentitioD  of  Ae  campntan,  vw 
practised  to  defeat  the  scheme. 

Meanwhile  tlie  King  had  prepared  an  expedition  at  Pe?<hawer  for  the  pur- 
pose  of  I  f  ilucintr  Crishmeer,  the  only  province  that  reiuanied  in  rebellion. 
Abdoola  Khaun,  tiic  governor^  had  fomented  the  troubles  at  Candahar  with 
Hw  view  of  diveftiag  the  attack  on  Umedf,  and  though  diaft  draenaaii 
ftom  at  aa  end,  Abdocdla  wai  Mved  fat  the  preeent  by  the  dwBeneiona  wfaiGh 
prevailed  among  Shuja's  own  courtien.   The  inunutions  of  Akxam  Kbaaa 
induced  the  King  to  refuse  the  command  <^  the  imj  to  the  viaer,  and  evnn 
to  talk  of  assuming  it  himself.    On  this  the  vizier  discouraged  the  expedition 
altogether,  and  found  means  to  put  off  the  march  of  the  troopn  till  a  subse- 
quent period,  wlien  the  King's  views  were  more  accommodated  to  his  own. 
This  opportunity  ofl^red  at  Caubul,  and  the  vizier  was  about  to  commence 
hn  match*  iriien  Akiam  Khaua  prevailed  on  ^  King  to  call  on  him  to  pay 
a  anm  of  money  aa  the  oondition  on  which  he  ihonld  have  the  •ooannand. 
The  King  accordingly  re<)uired  diree  laca  of  rupees ;  but  about  this  time  the 
vizier  lost  his  &vourite  daughter,  and  was  so  much  affected,  that  he  dedared 
he  was  resolved  never  to  quit  her  grave,  or  to  take  any  further  concern  in 
worldly  affairs.    Hie  King  was  now  reduced  to  solicit  him  to  resume  \\\^ 
office  and  carry  on  the  war  against  Cashmeer.    He  consented  with  real 
or  aiBumed  rductance,  and  the  daim  for  money  was  no  longer  mentioned. 

At  teiigth  he  set  out  on  has  maidi  with  aa  amy  of  ten  tbouaiad  men* 
The  ibst  opposition  he  encountered  was  at  Ifoaoflbiabad,  wfaeie  he  Ibraid 
the  h%|i  and  sodtjr  bank  of  a  rapid  branch  of  the  Hydaqw%  occupied  by  the 
Cashmerian  army:  he  nevertlicless  effected  a.  passage  in  four  divisions,  and 
drove  the  enemy  from  their  ground.  One  of  his  nwn  sons  was  wounded  in 
this  engagement.  The  rest  of  the  road  to  Cashmi  i  r  was  throiigli  tteep  and 
barren  mountains,  and  often  along  tiie  iiace  ui  precipicea.  Tiie  vizier^s  ad- 
vance was  consequently  slow,  and  his  previsions  began  to  M  bun  loaf 
bcfixe  be  reached  the  valley*  The  visser,  bgwever*  enconaaged  bis  mm  by 
Aaiiiig  their  suftripgs  %  be  gsvn  op  bis  own  slotn  to  the  saldiSB%  and  ia  mid 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


Jirrmx,}         EXPEDITION  TO  REDUCE  CAS9M££B.  g^S 

to  twiyg  sidfarad  tiw  fztmttiljM  Ipungw  bilbn  Ibo  wm  able  'to  piocave  m> 
Jisf  f<Hr  liMi  Miny.  So  fi^ert  wis  the  Mnm.a£lm  twops,  that  whm  lie  came 

to  a  defile  beyond  which  the  enemy's  army  was  encamped^  he  was  not  able 
to  hold  out  till  he  tried  the  chance  of  a  battle,  which  mit^lit  have  removed  all 
his  embarfa&smeotjs.  He  therefore  began  to  treat  with  Ahilooiiah  Khann : 
he  told  him  his  difficulties  without  reserve  ^  and  AbdooUa,  unwilling  to  drive 
Uai  todoqiwntioD,  liBtenad  to  tbe  tannt  which  nan  dStnA,  aad  i^j|tMd  to 
Mipply  him  with  pnmamis.  Mqhhtoiir  pniloiiged  a  ddimve  napotiation  tilt 
he  had  secured  some  further  advantages  which  he  had  in  view*  he  Ihanllinw 
off  the  mask  and  tuwUlities        immediately  renewed. 

The  armies,  however,  were  still  separated  by  the  Hydaspes.  At  last  Ab- 
doollah  threw  a  bi  ulijL  ovcc  tile  river  in  the  night,  and  crossing  it  without 
delay,  appeared  op  the  vizier's  rear  when  he  was  entirely  unprepared  to 
oppose  him }  tfaegreaier  part  of  hit  tfjoopa  weve  out  Enraging,  aod  he  could 
not  oallect  above  »  hundnd  hoMe  when  he  ihatnioifed  out  agaii^ 
By  dcgtee^  howevar,  l^  idmla  may  was  aumhhrf,  and  na^  adfiacing 
with  .the  viiier  at  its  head,  when  a  party  which  he  had  aent  in  fitrnt  fUl  bade 
on  them  in  the  greatest  confusion.  They  had  been  routed  in  consequence 
of  the  cowardice  of  the  vizier's  son  Atta  Mahomnied,  who  fied  without  strik- 
ing a  blow,  and  was  toUowed  by  his  disheartened  troops.  This  example  had 
nearly  ruined  the  army,  but  its  courage  was  restored  by  the  firmness  of  the 
viaier,  who  reoaivad  the  broken  troops  with  great  aeraittly,  attributed  Ua 
Mpn'a  Hight  to  a  concerted  Aint^  and  advaooed  with  incKaied  xapidi^*  aa  if 
to  take  advantage  of  the  succew  of  bu  atratagem.  This  onset  had  a  very 
di&reot  issue  from  the  former ;  for,  after  an  obstinate  conflict,  in  wliich  the 
vizier's  courage  was  conspicuous,  the  Cnshmeer  nrmy  was  routed  and  driven 
back  on  the  river.  The  bridge  was  chuuked  by  the  crowds  of  fugitives : 
great  part  oi  the  army,  among  which  was  AbdooUa  hLiiauu,  were  forced 
to  aiiiffi>  and  nanj  waie  ant  to  pieces  by  the  victon  or  drowned  in  the 
river* 

Abdoolla  Khaun  now  took  veiuge  in  his  eoH,  wfaaie  be  had  made  av«i7 
fiiaperation  for  a  long  siege ;  and  the  Kiqg's  troopa  were  prevented  fajr  tiw 
season  and  by  the  fatigues  which  they  had- onlferad  fiom  atteaaptipg  aaj  ope- 
ration during  the  rest  of  the  winter. 

Early  in  spring,  the  fort  was  attacked,  and  had  held  out  for  two  months 
when  AbdoG^  Khaun  died.  He  waa  a  nu«  of  good  talenta  and  great 
courage.  He  ja  atiU  apoken  of  with  aftction  by  the  Cashmerian^  and  bgr 
IheDvMfaviiaaa  who  haaaaamdinidQrhinb  Ha  ia  oonuneodad  Jbr  hia- kwa 

441  S. 


Digitized  by  Google 


596 


ATTACK  OK  HERAUT. 


of  justice  and  his  skill  in  administering  it ;  for  his  liberality,  his  affable  man- 
ners, and  liis  princely  magnificence.  He  \vm  also  a  Great  encom  as^tir  of 
l^uning  and  poetry.  Perhap.H  no  Dooraunec  has  leil  a  ciiiuactei  so  geoe- 
fall  J  admired. 

-  Xhelto  was  defended  for  two  moallis  after  his  doalh^ 
on  condition  that  Abdoolteh  Khaun's  hasSfy  and  the  diie&  in  the  Ibitdiottkl 
be  allowed  to  reside  unmolested  either  at  Qnibul  or  Peshawer.    These  terms 
were  strictly  observedt  and  Cashmcer  was  now  oompleteljr  reduced  under 

King's  authority. 

The  vizier  remained  in  Caahmcer  lor  some  months  ai'ter  the  reduction  of 
the  province  :  but  it  is  now  necessary  to  turn  to  Uie  events  which  took  place 
in  the  west  during  the  period  of  this  kmg  campaign. 

The  reconciliation  between  F^itteh  Khann  and  Kyaer  was  cf  no  loqg  dnia- 
tton :  Khojeh  Mahommed  retained  his  ascendancy ;  and  Futteh  Khann 
retired  to  Girishk,  and  onoe  more  renewed  his  intrigues  with  Caunuaun. 

It  might  have  been  expected  that  this  Prince  would  have  been  slow  to 
embark  in  any  cnterprize  with  a  pcr^jon  who  had  so  lately  deceived  him  j 
but  Cainnraun,  brought  up  amidst  re\  okitions,  and  accustomed  to  put  eveiy 
thing  to  hazard,  had  no  hesitation  in  entering  on  the  projeotheld  OOt  to  hini. 
He  jomed  Futtdi  Khaun,  and,  as  they  advanced  towards  Osndahar*  thegr 
were  met  by  part  of  die  garrison,  while  Kyaer  fled  .into  tfae'coontiy  of  the 
Belochcs,  where  he  waited  for  reinforcements  from  the  King. 

Tlie  King  was  at  Pcshawcr  when  the  tiew<  of  this  misfortune  reached  him. 
He  sent  without  delay  to  recall  the  vizier  from  Cashmeer;  but  that  minister 
was  unable  or  unwilling  to  join  him,  and  he  was  obliged  to  command  in 
person  against  tlie  rebels. 

'  Before  he  reached  Candahar,  his  troops  had  been  agahi  deAafed  by  Cami- 
raun,  whowasidnlbrcedlijabodf  ofsixthonaandm«nfiwnH«M^undet 
the  tottnand  of  Mullik  Gsinstm  l^e  son  of  Priiice  Feemos. 

That  force  was,  however,  soon  recalled  to  Ueraut  bjr  an  attack  of  the 

Persians ;  Canmrann  fled,  the  King  entered  Candahar  1ine||ipaaed«  and 
Futteh  Khaun  was  soon  after  pi  cvuiled  on  to  join  him. 

The  attack  of  the  Persians  which  recalled  Mullik  Caub-im,  liad  been 
brought  on  by  an  ofi^sive  operation  of  Feerooz  Oodeeus,  ai)d  iiad  bceu 
forsome  time  Hireatened;  yet  ao  secure  was  FBeiOQc»  that  he  sent  hii  beat 
troops  to  the  assiatanoe'cf 'Caumraun/  and  made  -no  pr^mrations  fiyr  his  own 
defence  till  the  Persians  were  assembled  in  great; Ibice  within  a  short- distance 
of  his  city.   Ue  then  found- his  force  confined- to*fleven  fauodied  Doaravnecs 

11    ■  • 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


Amm>n.3    DISSENTION  BETWEEN  THE  KING  AND  VIZIEIL  Sffl 


tod  two  thoosand  "BmUsa  guards,  but  hems  loai  joined  by  five  or  six  tliOQ» 
sand  Eimauks,  who  were  raised  to  great  enthusiasBi  against  thr  Persians 
and  Sheeahs,  by  the  exhortations  of  Soofee  Islaum,  an  Uzbek  M  oollah,  wbo 
had  long:  resided  at  Heraut,  where  he  enjoyed  great  wealth  and  honour. 

With  this  army  Feerooz  marched  out  to  engage  the  Peruauas,  who  were 
superior  in  numbers,  as  well  ai^  in  the  chfliacter  of  tibeir  tioopst  imteid  qf 
ddfending  the  passage  of  the  Pooleemadaun  (Ocbm)t  he  jajadicioud^jr  left 
,  that  river  Mi  his  reaf;  ndnoaooperlMttthiiemiyCTOMed,  than  tte  PawMWt 
sent  a  body  of  excellent  infiuitiy  to  occupy  liie  doty  bridge.  Nevertheless 
the  seven  hundred  Doorannees  charged  the  enemy  with  the  utmost  impetu- 
osity: they  broke  through  the  fir'?t  line  of  the  Persians,  which  was  composed 
of  infantry,  and  threw  the  centre  of  the  cavalry,  who  formed  the  second 
Vaiet  into  great  oonfiitkm }  but  being  greatly  out-nnmbtRd,  they  wve  soon 
surroonded,  and  cot  off  ahnoat  to  a  man.  The  Kmauka  broke  as  eoon  as 
tiie  Dooraunees  were  sunonnded;  and  Feeroos  fled  without  making  my 
exertion.  The  slaughter  was  great:  Soo&e  Islaum  fell  fighting  gallantly 
at  the  head  of  a  b:tntl  composed  of  his  own  retainers,  ami  of  rrlifrioiis  enthu- 
siasts who  accompanie(i  him  as  volunteers.  His  body  tell  into  ilu-  liauds  of 
the  Persians,  who  burned  it  with  every  circumstance  ot  ludigmty.  The 
*  fugitives  And  little  better;  manj'  were  drowned  in  tiie'Odhns  and  Veeioo* 
hmiselfeaeaped  with  great  difficidt^,  after  losing  his  horse.        ^  - 

The  Persians  immediatdj  prepared  to  lay  siege  to  Hcraut)  hot  MsdHk 
Canssim  -vas  now  on  his  return;  the  Eimauks  and  Dooraunees  had  tine 
to  as-^emble ;  and  t^f  Persians  proposed  terms  to  Feerooz,  which  that  cau- 
tious Prince  ;«•«  r;itefl.  They  were  that  he  should  pay  50,000  rupees,  and 
give  his  son  as  a  iio^tage  for  the  discharge  of  the  sum,  and  that  he  abmild 
give  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  the  Penrian  PMnce  at  M eririwd.:  the  -two 
lirst  attidee  were  iUMlled,  but  the  third  was  disngnM. 

This  sncoesa  of  the  Peisiana  at  int  excited  a  strong  swiatien  ammg  the 
DoonmneeSf  and  the  King  at  one  time  intended  to  have- moved  to  Heraut 
in  person  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  the  Afghaun  name ;  but  the  internal 
Stat  r  >t  the  kii]>gdom  at  this  time  was  l^-no  means  such  as  to  allow  oi  ibreign 
enterprises.  - 

The  chief  obstacle  anae  fiom  the  increased  disunion  between  the  King 
•and  tiie  Viiier,  whidi  vMm  now  ffq>idly  tending  to  aq  open  rupture.  WlwU 
ever  jeakrasy  tlie  King'aii|^  have  eoteftained  of  the-.viiiit'si'poiRrer»  he-had 

hitherto  been  led  to  respect  him  by  a  sense  of  dependence  his  influence 
andabilities}  IniI he  had  noar  been  left  to queit   swious.  ichelhqa  without 


Digitizeci  by  Google 


5QS  :     DEFEAT  AND  DEATH  OF  THE  VIZIER.  CAp««i>nt,. 

the  advice  or  assistaoce  of  his  mimBtet:  the  success  he  had  met  with,  enooik 
rae^d  him  to  place  greater  reliance  on  his  own  resources,  and  at  laattooppote 
the  M/iei 's  wishes,  and  to  treat  liis  advice  with  contempt. 

The  vmer's  disafTection  augmented  m  proportion  a&  im  luduence  declined; 
awi'it  llM  .bMD  iUflpected  that  h>  WM  the  authogof  aliattenyt  which  took 
fbob  at  .tUt  tittc^  fe6  nbe  AMmm,  one  of  Ibe  conliaed  nioeeii  to  the 
throne.  The  jdan  fkiiied»  hat  mn  aot'irilihout  serious  camequeaeei^  u 
^  ah  mood  effected  his  escape  during  the  confusion  which  it  occasioned. 

Nut  long  after,  the  \azier  arrived  from  Cashmeer:  he  found  the  King 
resolved  to  proceed  to  Sind,  a  step  from  which  he  used  all  his  influence  to 
dissuade  him  i  and  iiavmg  now  ascertained  tiiat  lus  power  over  his  master 
was  gone,  h«  retolvcdtokwiiDtiiM  inptadi|gaakoTO«ompliABtprlQ^ 
ihetimme*  He aeooidii^ iialtod «l Cbtdnil,  and 
nection  with  Prints  Kyser,  whom  he  persuaded  to  enter  into  fait  dangtt. 

In  the  mean  tinuillie  King  proceeded  to  Sind,  and  entered  into  an  arrange- 
ment with  the  governors,  which  gave  so  mucfi  offence  to  thoir  determined 
enemy,  Futteti  Khaun,  tliat  he  took  the  eariiest  u|)puriunit^  of  lyiitting  the 
army,  with  the  three  thousand  troops  under  his  command. 

During  these  traiuactions,  and  probably  before  Futteh  Khaun's  flight,  the 
King  received  iMeU^gence  that  the  insiirhMl  firadetned  Miee  Kjaw  King 
at  Cenbul;  and  not  long  after,  he  Icemed  Aat  the  dty  of  Mbawer  bad 
fillra  into  the  hands  of  tiie  i^ls.  He  naolved  to  direct  his  first  operatione 
against  that  city,  and  he' "Succeeded  in  recovering  it  by  tlie  end  of  February. 

About  the  same  tune  the  vizier  and  Kyser  arrived  in  the  neighbourhood, 
with  a  force  amouniuig  to  twelve  tiiousaud  men ;  and,  aiier  a  truitless  nego- 
tiatioQ,  the  parties  engaged  on  the  3d  of  Mirdh^iS^oS. 

Hie  n^ai  troops  woe  broken  at  the  first  omet*  and  die  Kii^  himself  wm 
about  to  quit  the  ficU^  wlien  tlie  virier,  oerried  on  by  fail  nataml  ooon^ 
and  by  the  neer  prospect  of  success,  imprudently  charged  him  at  the  head  of 
a  handful  nf  men.  The  Khauns  about  the  King  made  a  desperate  resistance, 
and  the  vizier  was  shot  in  the  struggle.  The  King's  troop<;  i-aiiied  on  Uwft 
event,  and  the  &te  of  the  battle  was  soon  turned  in  their  lavour. 

Hie  King  entered  Bndiawer  in  triumph,  die  viaier's  head  was  borne  behind 
bimonaapear. 

lUa  vielHy  entirdy  leeloved  the  Kii^t  a&irs  in  BeAawer)  but  Oulv 
meer  'atm  held  out  Icir  tlie  viiier's  party,  undic  bii  son  Atta  Ifahommed 

Khaun ;  and  the  King  wai^  prevented  undertaking  any  thing  in  that  province 
by  the  more  i^geut  difficulties  wltich  subeitted  in  Cauhul  and  Candvhar* 


Digitizer  ^jQOgle 


Appendix.]       DEFEAT  OF  MAHMOOD  AND  FUTTEH  KHAUN. 

The  M«er  Waei  who  had  remained  at  Caubul  while  the  vizier  marched 
for  Peshawpr,  nn  sooner  heard  of  the  defeat  and  death  of  his  friend,  tlian  he 
«et  all  the  imprisoned  Princes  at  liberty,  and  prepared  for  a  vigorous  deience 
of  the  capitaL  He  was  obliged  to  desert  the  city  on  the  King's  approach, 
but  he  fetired  wiA  Kyser  into  the  strong  country  of  the  Cohirtaun,  where 
he  contimied  fyt  aome  time  to  i^sist  the  ttoops.vlucb  were  emt  against  him. 
At  length  Kyaer  was  persuaded  to  come  in»  and  was  fiedly  patdofied,  and 
the  King  marched  against  Mahraood,  who  had  been  joined  by  Futteh 
Khaun  and  had  taVeii  CaTKbhar.  The  rivals  met  on  the  east  of  that  ci^t 
Mahmood  was  dt  t  e  iit  d  and  Laudahar  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  victor. 

The  King  was  now  about  to  move  towards  Sind,  but  being  anticipated  by 
•  payment  fions  that  province,  be  set  out  fi»r  Peshawer*  which  place  ha 
icadiad  on  ^  lodi  of  Jvmtj  1809. 

'  llie  CanlMl  aimioii  arrived  at  Pediawer  MOD  ate 
«v«t*  an  related  in  lihe  niffativtt  of  its  peooeedfa^ 

.  ■  I  c, 


Digitized  by  Google 


(  600  ) 


.  APPENDIX  3. 

XB.  DiniB'f  IMBMTIVB. 

« TNth«OTeiiiiigacmdattiiertdiittM«faiiMim  vludiluMiagood 
1,  deal  of  Peaun  venes  iascribed  ad  about  it,— procaeded  thence  to 

Atuck,  situated  a  little  way  off  from  it  <m  the  top  of  pretty  bi^  wonBtainy 
below  which  the  river  flows  down  with  great  rapidity  and  noise,  —  not 
being  permitted  to  jret  in  by  the  gate,  I  went  to  the  village  on  the  left, 
hand  side,  where  upwartls  of  twenty  Pvtans  werr  'icatetl  on  cots  (couches) 
in  the  chokee  (guard-room),  having  a  Hag  tixcd  j  they  bad  two  or  tliree 
ciil]ee«iiM»  and  were  moJcing  tobacco  and  talking.   Having  auliaaed,  I 
went  and  sat*  and  smoked  also*  They  enquiring  whence  I  came^  I  told 
them  from  Bengal,  and  was  going  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Bagdad  Sliurreef,- 
and  Mecca  Mobaruck.     On  being  told  that  I  had  been  in  the  English 
service,  one  of  them  well  dressed  with  a  gown  and  a  good  redish  coloured 
turban,  laiketl  cull^u^Iy  about  the  battle  of  Kampore;  saj'ing',  the  Eng- 
lish not  having  fired,  tiiey  were  cut  oii'  to  a  great  amount,  but  when  only 
^  fyw  mmained,  they  began  to  fire,  upon  iriiich  the  Bolullas  wero  driven  - 
faidc^  killed*  and  their  countries  enttrdj  takra.    About  candle>I^^ 
almost  all  of  them  got  out  with  thetr  oots  upon  the  open  plain  $  about  eight 
one  of  them  observing  I  was  hungry,  got  me  some  bread,  asking  why  I 
had  not  mentioned  it  in.  time^  and  he  would  have  got  me  some  stuff  with 


*  I  hiTe  before  manned  (p^aof)  Uiat  Mc  Dune  wrote  a  namtm  of  faw  jonrae^,  and  Uutlalao 
adwdbim  qiieitieM^udtook«N«««fUf  icpHea.  'flw  IblkmbgnlM  narrative^      the  pM  wUn 

in*trif.l  ciiTTima*  is  in  hii  own  language,  except  thz\  I  lia  .i-  altered  the  grammar,  anJ  sometime*  the 
words,  where  the  aeoK  was  obicured  by  the  mittakM  which  Mr.  ]>arie  nude  in  consequence  of  the 
htmrwith  wfaidi  this  was  coasposed.  I  bavc  mat,  hMtcicr,  attend  mcb  b  this  way,      the  part 

tw-tw^rn  cfimm^i  miy  bp  r?ckot>ed  eotifclj  Mr.  Durie's  own.  Tht-  part":  irh-rr  Mr.  Durie  is  mcn- 
tiooed  u  the  Uurd  pcrgon  are  either  abstracted  from  Jus  narrative,  or  ukcu  from  mj  notes  abofe 

«lhMlO|  CTB> there ttx, psrie*» hify ii fepwiUy ftwrwii 


Digitizer  oogle 


601 


my  bread.  In  the  mortiing  crossed  the  river,  having;  much  trouUft  to 
cross,  owing  to  the  great  rapidly  of"  the  riverJ* 

Mr.  Dniie  dun  peooflidad  in  fym  da^  jonm^  io  Failuiwer,  piddng  np 
qcoiiidiMl  oom|MnioQt  (on'the  MMdIi  flopping  to  mibke  in  thbv^^ 
tlumigiit  and  gettingfeod,  •omttmiM  fibm  tfaie  villagers,  and  •ometimaafitam 
other  travaUen;  At '  Peshawer  the  people  complained  of  the  depredations 
of  the  Dooraunees  and  of  the  King's  followers.  Mr.  Ehirie  had  hitherto  tra- 
velled without  any  money,  but  at  Peshawer  a  barber  aud  some  others  col- 
lected some  a)pper  money  lor  him,  and  he  set  oti  with  a  caravan  for  Cauhul. 
**  The  next  day  got  aema  of  my  money  taken  slily  from  mo  by  aome  boya 

who  cmte  aiboot  me  dap|nng  me  on  tlie  ahouldef  iviiila  I  was  nBoknag.** 
On  the  aame  day  «  boy  belongiiig  to  aome  Doomunee  was  robbed  by  tbrn 
villagers,  and  the  Dooraunees  contented  themaelvea  with  causing  restitution 
to  be  made.  He  proceeded  throngh  the  Khyber  valley,  the  caravan  beii^ 
often  stopped  and  harrassed  for  fees  by  the  Kliyberees.  "  One  evening  the 
«  caravan  waj>  stopped  by  an  old  Aighaun  with  a  small  stick  in  his  hand ; 

bttQgvoMdt  I  ventuy  to  him,  and  eaailed  inyidf  to  lake  fak stick;  he 
**  pelted  me  Jiaid  with  stones,  and  0|wajJs  of  thirty  came  not  finom  the 
**  aun-ounding  mountains.    I  got  ofl^  however }  they  let  us  proceed  after 

some  disputation.  Hie  route  went  all  the  way  to  Lallpora  on  the  river  up 
«*  and  dowTi.    Had  much  conversation  with  several  of  the  caravan  concem- 

inff  Europeans   and  U)v  embassy;  they  praising  them  very  niucli,  i^nd 

holding  them  to  be  in  every  respect  very  wise,  iutelligeut,  aud  equitable." 
He  irasnow  turned  o«rt  of  tfrn^anvan^  not  being- nUe  to  pfty  his  ftcsi  hut 
he  jomed-  some  pilgriras  «iu>  treated  him  kindly  and  gsvn  him  bread  and 
ftiiit-  They  also  picked  ft  Persi  u  i  fdlow-traveller,  "  who  was  very  ettte^ 
**  taining  in  his  discourse  and  in  chaunting  of  odes."  In  this  way  he  went 
on  to  Caubul,  which  lip  rcarhed  in  fourteen  days  from  Peshawer;  most  of  his 
fellow-travellers  tooit  him  ior  -a.  person  of  Uzbek  descent.  They  once  found 
out  he  was  not  circumcised,  and  one  of  the  pilgrims  o&red  to  perform  that 
eeremooyfiw  fauDy  if  hecfaoae.  Mr.  Dnrie  declined,  sad  said  he  would  get 
itdone  atCanbuL  <*  There  ianolMHrftrnGhtiitumintimtownai  noriHiea 
**  yon' are  on  the  road  after  you  get  to  a  Khyk^  hot  while  yott  are  tmrdliqg^ 
-  some  ignorant  people  might  treat  you  ill." 

On  entprinp-  (Caubul  be  went  to  a  place  beloneintr  to  some  Fakeers,  and 
helped  onL'  ni  tliem  to  draw  water  till  the  others  told  him  to  stop,  as  he  was 
tired.  "  The  head  Fakeer  called  in  the  evening,  and  the  young  man  called 
•*  Auihnkfllmh,  earned  me  to  a  person  irfw  gavn  men  toaC  SWmth^the 

4  H 


60ft 


MR.  BURIEPS  NAlllkATim 


«*  Fahe»*>  attn^  the  King's  palace,  widi  thvM  minarato  ivith  gilt  tops, 

«  a  pretty  epadous  hall  with  sevenl  oolmniiB.  Thmm  are  in  the  BellMur^ 

**  which  is  situated  on  hiily  grouiid,  and  has  a  wall  commimiartang  fima  Ihii 
**  side  to  the  other,  which  leads  across  to  the  shore  Bazar  of  the  towD» 

♦«  where  bakers,  cooks,  soup-sellers,  frtiit,  green,  or  tFalooda  sellers.  Hindoo 
"  shopkeepers,  and  fine  shoe  and  boot  sellers  reside.  Toward  the  west  from 
<'  these  Bazars  arc  pa.'isages  leading  to  very  high  Hindoo  houses,  having 
<«  nnidi  wood  wor^  and  to  other  aquare  places,  having  joined  apartawnti  tii# 
ttorieifa^  ^merchaiits  to  reaort  to*  Fram.the  Lahorae  gate»  one  load 
**  leada  to  these  Shore  Bancv(the  shops  having  ailifieers  of  different  danoau* 
*'  nations  much  the  same  as  at  Peshour)  to  Bala  cboak,  where  the  greater 
"  Hindoo  and  Mahonird;!!!  cloth  merchants  dwell  in  joined  shops,  on  both 
"  sides,  with  a  covered  root :  havinir  iione  tli rough  these,  we  get  to  a  square, 
**  where  there  are  many  two  story  ingli  buiidiags }  in  tiie  lower  ro<Mns  of  them 
<*'be  aiiaficeia  and  adlm  of  diflhrant  kinda^ 

"  paasagea  to  other  ba«n  and  ihopa*  Going  to  tihtf  hann,  pawm^gew  and 
**  otfacTii  observing  mis  to  he  a  travellar,  gave  me  pioe  (copper  tstonney),  oe 
'*  bread,  so  that  I  got  enough  of  broad,  aoup»  fire,  fruit,  and  falooda,  which 

last  consists  of  cream,  syrup,  aiul  siunv  ;  of  most  cool  and  pleasant  taste. 
*«  One  day  I  went  up  to  the  top  ot  an  i  ii  innous  high  mountain,  to  an  enter. 
**  twnment  given  aud  exliibited  by  Fakcersj  great  numbers  of  the  people  went. 

«*.lh«  coada  leading  to  these  iwoutttaina  laere  very  excellent,  having  here  and 
^  there  very  fine  idaoea  to  sitr  consequently  people  aat  here  and  therap  dta- 
**  conning  and  viewing  the  town  below,  having  ft  very  greet  number  of  fine 
**  gardens,  the  houses  being  neatly  and  cleanly  plastered  with  nuul,  two  ot 
«•  three  stories  high;  but  the  Hindoo  houses,  are  much  mnre  high;  and  greadjr 
consisting  of  wood  work.  Around,  within  tin  imimui  i  abie  mountains,  in 
**  Uie  pleasant  vales,  arc  Kiiias  ol  muderuLe  size,  iniiabireii  by  the  AlgbauDS. 
«  Li  the  to«4^  inhabitmts  are  of  dtiftrent  kinds  i  the  proper  inhaUtaait  ik 
**  white  enoof^the  eUmefaehiig  extremely  odd  $  die  A%buins  below  Gauhel 
*'  are  black,  awarthy,  ycUow,  or  whitish ;  hnt  hefoodt  proceeding  towards  Can- 
•<  dahar^  they  are  all  fairer,  but  by  no  means  white  :  from  Caubul  towards 
*•  Bulkh,  white;  and  from  Candahar  toward  Heraiit,  white  ;  and  towards She- 
*•  carpore,  Deyra,  &c.  swarthy.  They  arc  all  Malioniedans,  but  the  stuff  and 
"  grain  shops,  also  the  greatest  part  of  the  cloth  siiops,  are  held  by  Hindoos. 


'*''lWiiMMiigffMiaite'Nrfdtaetflr  Mm^  f  Hat  Mbtc^  r*f*  ^f/- 


Digitizer 


AftMwj  iffR.  durhv  narrative, 

«  On  the  south  and  west  side  of  the  town  is  a  river  not  deep,  In  w!m<A  direc- 
**  lion  a  very  narrair  river  rushes  along,  near  Caubul,  between  vast  mountains, 
**  the  passage  between  on  both  aidee  most  OMgnfficently  adomed  wilib  large  and 
**8Dallfiuittie«<ifillaarti»«ndfleM8of  green.  AtdjitaiieeeerentuMedTefy 
*(  good  nets  of  Killas.  Avsed  the  time,  twenty  days,  vety  agreeably  at  the 
*'  Fakeer's  place,  where  people  of  differetit  deuominatfonfs  constantly  attended, 
smoking  chiirse  or  tobacco,  conformably  to  their  respective  desires,  and  dis- 
*•  coursed  agreeably  on  various  subjects ;  often  concerning  tiie  Europeans, 
4*  whom  they  reckon  as  very  intelligent,  and  very  odminble  and  good  in  their 
**  niMinenb  though  in  many  respeots  la  nided.  A  biker  came  ftom  Indta»  wbo 
<•  had  been  in  the  English  employ,  but,  aa  he  B«td|  heviogoiee  been  l^ealen; 
"  he  had  left,  and  wns  going  to  Bagdad  :  he  asserted  ther^  befiira  the  com- 
♦«  pany,  which  was  pretty  numerous,  that  he  had  heard  many  "Dooraune^  and 
**  other  Moguls  declare  that  the  Kuropeans  were  m  good  Mussnlmatms  as 
**  themselves,  but  he  reckoned  tiicm,  and  he  would  have  all  others  to  reckon 
«*.them,  ashilidela.*' 

If  any  penooi  uied  to  oome  and  smoke  «t  the  Fakea,  and  Mr.  Dnrie  wed 
to  a&  mid  talk  with  them  :  some  diaoa)V«fed  that  he  was  not  a  Mmsnhnan, 
but  did  not  mdeM  him  on  that  account.  In  towns  they  often  suspected  him 
of  being  a  spy,  and  •^ome  respectable  jieople  told  him  not  to  give  infonnatkm 
about  their  place,  when  lie  went  back  to  iiis  own  country. 

**  The  head  Fakeer  requested  of  me  to  tany  at  his  place  throughout  the 
•*  ooU,aadheiraiddgetmenpooBteaiiand,odierdothes)  hoirever,  I  left  the 
*•  plaoe  without  giving  previous  notice^  and  arriving  at  tiie  gate  which  led  to 
•*  Candahar,  got  some  tobeooo,andgoingout,  saw  smno  tents  of  some  reqiectaUe 
*♦  travellers,  who  were  proceeding  on  a  pilgrimage.  As  they  were  to  tarry  a 
**  i'cv,'  days,  I  went  off ;  an  Atghaun  accompanied  me  to  Killa  Cazee,  request- 

ing  1  woidd  pray  for  him  on  my  arrival  at  Bagdatl.  On  reaching  Killa  Cazee, 
**  he  sent  me  ttotne  bread,  and  I  went  in  the  dark  to  a  uiossque ;  a  Mooilah  who 
«•  waa  there,  gave  me  some  bread  and  butter-miUc 

"ThenextdayintheeveoingairivedatMoydan,  went np  toe  Kille*,  or 
-  M  raised  ground,  saw  several  Ai^^unins  seated,  called  for  a  culleeeon,  thef 
"  produced  it.  One  of  them  being  sick,  requested  I  would  prescribe  some- 
«♦  tiling  ibr  him.  I  told  him  I  could  not,  as  I  was  ignorant  of  the  names  of 
**  roedicipes  in  the  country.  When  candle-light  took  place,  went  to  a  mosque. 


t  A  fort  or  csMf. 

4u  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


604 


MB.  DURIF8  NABRAITVEi  CAmnu. 


-  *•  where  they  were  eii^;(i^i  1  m  prayer.  Huving  done,  there  was  rite  and 
*•  butter-milk  in  wooden  bowls,  with  wooden qMxms  brought;  tiiey  ^ve  tKime 
«•  to  me,  also  to  some  other  tnvdkre  who  had  airived  tbnw*  •  The  neifc  day 
«■  hcAce  twdm^  •rnvadst  ft  place  wberal  aitw  two  or  three  Doonnmen  with 
**  their  hofies*  Th^  geve  me  to  aoaoke,  and  d^biuaded  mefiom  going  ako^ 
«*  leTdig^  the  AQ^ibimh  vef7.»ncked  *,  and  would  cut  toy  heiA  ofl^  or 
*•  carry  me  to  slaverj'  even  for  nothing.  A  Fakecr  goifi«r  <»n  cnttches,  happened 
**  to  come  there,  with  intension  of  going  to  Bagdad  ami  M(  c:  n,  with  two  lads. 

I  told  thrill  I  ^^  I .  L':oiiig  also;  tliey  were  glad,  and  desired  nie  to  toilow 
**  them  -y  tiiL-re  wa^is  auollier  sick  man  with  them,  going  to  a  village  not  &r  q£ 
<«  We  proceeded  together  to  siet  of  KiUe^errived^diciist  becaine  derk^endl 
<•  with  aoiiMLdilllcul^obtMMd  breed  eadfka  The  oat  day  e  maa  eene  up 
**  to  ta^  and  oompeDed  the  jomgeet  of  the  two  lads  (by  whose  deter  he  had 
**  been  sent)  to  return  to  town  along  with  him.  Proceeding  about  evenings 
*'  the  sick  man  left  us,  arrived  at  a  set  of'  KiJhiM  helonging  to  Viirduck  Af- 
**  ghauns.  Alighted  im  i  r  a  sliade  of  iiewlv  phuited  trees.  The  lame  Fnkeer 
**  accompanietl  by  ttie  young  man,  went  mtu  three  or  tour  iuii^  and  with 
**  vefy  toneioue  ctSb,  demanded  hned»  wUeh  he  ploatilldfy  cbtaiiied.  He 
•*  ifaDted  tdbeooob  end  seYend  of  tfaeoi  x-ynv  lisd  Bonei  he  ipolBe 
•<foi|gU]r  enough  to  tbem.  ThoncstdaytarriedthmeaDdcrthediadeofthe 
**  tree*.  At  twelve  in  the  evening,  the  lame  Fakeer  Tinted  the  Kiflea  ^ridi 
**  sonorous  calls,  and  got  plenty.    The  next  day  in  our  way,  the  cullecaun  we 

had,  happened  to  hp  h;  f)ke,  through  good  hick  it  was  the  lame  Fakeer's  lault; 
**  on  arrival  at  another  »et  of  Kilias,  lie  loudly  asked  ibr  a  cuileeaun,  which 
**  they  could  not  give,  and  he  spoke  roughly  to  them,  and  was  getdng  ready 
.'■toleevefheBBtWhenaonieGiviltydeairedhinitoiint  al^^  andheahoold 

have  meet  aod  breed.  Intfae  evening  a  laige  bowl  of  veiy  good  aoiqp,  with 
**  two  pieces  of  bread,  and  two  pieces  of  meat  for  each  of  us,  was  produced. 
**  The  next  day  arrived  at  another  set  of  Kilias,  the  Fakeer  forced  them  with 
••his  noise  to  t'ive  In'm  a  cuileeaun,  fohacco,  and  hre:id.  The  next  day  at 
«•  some  Kilias,  ^  iiue  iVIoollahs  came  up  to  n-^,  and  talked  on  various  religious 
•*  subjects,  and  tlirough  mud)  request  oblauied  of  the  young  man  a  small 
**  Fefsian  book  on  prayer,  giving  some  copper  money  and  some  Hour  fir  it 
*•  At  vi^  ileepiqg  in  a  moaque,  acme  eimed  men  ooaung^  their  noiae 
*•  made  ua  get  iip^  and .  we  dilj  left  it,  and  went  ainij  to  another  noa^  * 


*  Thtm  we  tbe  predatory  Ghiiiiw  Met>t>t>t»«d  jMge  44s. 


Digitized  by  Google 


MR.  DUlIErB  KABEATIVB. 


"  Tlie  next  day,  being  sickly  and  my  feet  sore,  1  was  not  able  to  keep  up 
**  witii  the  other  two  with  the  cuUeeaim  in  my  Iiand.  The  hune  I*akuer  got 
•*  vexed,  end  taking  the  culleeMU  fiooi  ngr  heads*  they  went  off  quiddy  ^  I 
*»  iwpton  >  Utile,  eiidlwiholdiiig>apeM  round  soom,  Iventmaiidl^dtfim,- 
**  being  effected  with  an  tatuk  ef  the  fever ;  about  derit,  •  Doommee  on 
**  horseback,  with  a  foot  man,  came  up,  and  seeing  me^  made  enquiries,  and 
**  wished  to  carry  me  on  Ins  horse  if  I  could  not  walk.  I  told  them  I  was  not 
"  able  tr.  f?()  any  how;  they  told  me  there  was  a  iiiAintain  on  the  top  oi  the 
*'  mountum  tiiere,  aud  gave  lue  iialf  a  piece  of  very  thick  bread  which  1  cuuld 
**  not  then  eat.  In  the  morning  I  went  iq»  to  the  fiKiiitain  aod  eat  and  dniiik: 
<*  aoetber  Afghaun  eoonng,  I  geve  him  paft  of  tlie  bleed  end  mnt  to  llie 
<*  Bousa,  thence  to  Gimee  to  the  IUBBer*a  fikee,  whidi  was  entboat  die* 
**  wall,  and  below,  and  had  a  pretty  wide  stveam  Howinig  acrosa.  I  went  into 
M  the  town  to  the  bazar,  the  roads  being  qtiitc  narrow  aud  close  ;  got  some 

money,  bought  bread  aud  soup  and  tobacco,  and  returned  to  the  fakea. 
•«  The  laTue  Fakeei"  and  the  young  man  tliought  proper  to  return,  and  I  got 
««  ac4u<uiited  with  a  Uindoostaunee  jbakeer  going  on  a  pilgniuu^e,  who  said  he 
<«  was  nibbed  of  aeme  monqr  and  a  Uanket :  he  bduived  very  ItimOy  to  au^' 
•*  and  two  dagrs  after,  h&leftifae  town  and  went  affwith  a  eavavto,  buti  eoidd: 
•>  not,  nj  &et  being  quite  cut  and  bruised,  The  Fakeer  of  die  ftkea  wnt  ar 
"  tall  old  man  of  Htodostan,  who  had  visited  many  parts  of  Tartary  or  Tui]cig>' 
**  taim,  and  had  been  near  Chinn,  ntul  had  lived  \  cry  long  at  Ouznee    he  wasr 

a  kind  and  civil  man  ;  many  came  to  his  fakea  to  smoke  rhurse  or  tolincco. 
"  The  Hindoos  iiavc  very  hi^h  houses  of  .wood  work,  several  oi  them  werC 

kind  to  me,  giving  me  three  or  fiiur  pioe  each$  one  of  them,  a  pair  of  shoes 

and  ajadut  of  ooloazed  cotton.  It  ia  a  amell  welled  town,  aboat  the  midsT 
••ofwfaieh  is  a  covered  ban  I  stq^opwardt  of  seven  daj%  and  proceed*' 

in^  went  to  Nanee  in  the  eveuingn  TbegrtaUced  of  aftast^  and  I  went  tor 
**  it  at  dark.  It  was  given  in  the  open  air;  there  were  upwards  of  thirty" 
*•  people  :  the  master  sent  round  when  diiuier  was  ready,  an<i  all  ;i<^sombled  t 
**  they  had  a  large  fire  where  they  warmed  themselves  and  d.nit  t  d  the  attun  r 
**  afterwards  ihc)  sal  duwu  to  diiuier.  Wheu  i  came,  they  said  u  lew  worcis, 
■**  and  spoke  jovially  to  me<to  sit  down  apkl  eati  a  man. went  round  flrst  witir 
«•  a  baton  and  ewer  to  wash  their  handsi  thejr  then  said  biimiilah  and 
"began. 

The  dinner  begun  with  soup  in  wooden  bowls;  they  broke  their  bread 
«•  into  it,  and  when  it  wns  -innkcd,  pat  it  with  their  hands.    There  were  also" 
wooden  spoooa,  but  not  one  to  each  man.   The  soup  was  very  ggod,  there 


606 


,    MR.  DURIE^S  NABRATIVBr 


«  were  spices  in  it.  There  was  a  bowl  for  every  two  or  three ;  meat  was 
**  given  <Hit  into  the  luuidt  of  the  guartit  who  put  it  on  Aair  lifwd.  They 
Meat  hetrtily,  eveiy numhadMmudiMliecoaldeaL  After  ealni|^  tbqr 
"  all  bleMed  the  master  and  wished  him  ■upoaw.   I  did  thenme*  Tlda  vai 

'*  ail  the  dinner ;  afler  dinner  they  smoked :  after  this,  some  went  away,  and 
«'  some  staved.  I  went  away  :  the  party  began  at  nine  at  iii^'-ht  and  broke  tip 
**  about  eleven  :  tlie  light  was  given  In  the  fire.  The  women  dined  in  the 
"  tents."  Mr.  Duiie  was  at  other  leasts,  which  were  much  the  same,  except 
tiiat  iu  ^lue  places  they  had  wooden  platters  for  their  m«iit  some  went 
away,  and  otiien  mt  late  tallung ;  sooMauog. 

Tlie  Dozt  day  (aajs  Mr.  Done),  I  went  to  Giinliaiigv  thenee  to  Obap 
*'  bat  eiriving  at  night,  the  Killas  I  got  to  were  broken  and  fallen  down.  I 
«  sudfeied  much,  owinig  to  the  sharp  cold  winds  throughout  the  night.  In  the 
"  morning,  went  on,  mikI  nrrivedata  Killa  which  was  inhabited,  and  got  bread 
«•  and  smoke.  Proceeding  towards  Mookhor,  a  big  strong  young  man  attacked 
**  me  with  a  tliick  club,  and  enquired  and  searched  ine,  not  forgetting  to  see 
**  doieiy  my  shoea :  not  findhig  ought,  be  on  hti  knees  begged  pardon  with 

Iblded  brads.  I  muttered  a  blessings  went  to  MooJdior,  and  bebdd  a  cank 
*'  van  of  camels,  &c. ;  aligbted*  smoked,  md  went  to  tbe  iU]b%  which  not 
"  bemg  well  inhabited,  I  did  not  get  enough  of  breed}  luiwever,  letuming 
"  to  the  caravan,  one  of  the  women  observing,  gave  me  plenty.  The  next 
**  afternoon  they  spt  out,  I  followed;  not  being  able  to  keep  np,  went  up  to  a 
•*  set  of  Killas  upwards  of  a  mile  distant  from  the  road  :  arrived  at  tl.uk,  saw 
**  some  of  them  seated  by  a  stream,  and  told  Uieni  I  was  nut  able,  tlirough 

sickness  and  fttigue,  to  go  to  the  KiUas;  one  of  Ibem  pointed  out  the 
**  nuNqoc^  teUing  me  be  would  letdi  me  bread.  I  went  to  it  At  pest 
<*  eleven,  a  sick  man  came  to  prey ;  obsernng  me,  he  went  and  brought 
**  me  some  bread.  At  past  twelve,  the  first  mra  leooUeeted  and  brought  me 
**  half  a  piece  of  very  thick  bread,  be<rcr'r>cr  many  pardons,  and  requesting 

I  should  pray  that  his  taith  niighi  not  lail  again.  The  next  day,  stayed 
*'  there,  and  was  invited  to  a  feast  oi  meat,  soup  and  bread.  The  next  day 
**  proceeded  (  not  finding  any  Killas,  was  at  a  lom  (  mv  a  man  going,  a<>ked, 
'*.and  he  said  he  was  going  to  a  camp)  be  went  off  quick,  I  went  the  same 
**  track  and  arrived  there  in  the  dark,  and  obtained  breed,  amoke.  and  oua^ 
<*  mud  (felt)  to  ale^  in.  The  woman  who  gave  me  the  nummud,  ebierv^ 
**  ing  my  ffeet  sore,  gave  me  some  ghee  (clarified  butter)  to  anoint  them,  and 
**  advised  me  to  wait.  I  did.  A  quarrel  happened ;  one  of  the  Af?Tbni!n?<, 
<f    young  pan,  drew  his  sword }  but  he  was  checked,  and  the  quarrel  sope 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


iiR.  tnmnzfs  nabiutevk 


«•  ended.  A  dance  took  place,  the  Afghauns  in  a  circle  holding  t  nc  h  other, 
**  singing  loudly,  and  huzzaing,  bending  their  bodies,  and  clapping  their 
Iwndfl.  A  grait  fire  wis  niide  op,  I  wu  of  ooniie  nlled  jovially.  Meat, 
•«  bread,  and  map,  wm  Mrved  in  bo«l>.  The  neit  nMraing  pnoeeded^ 
M  tfti'g*'»g  m  campi*  end  two  days  after  met  with  an  old  Bdoodi  fUceer  i 
**  we  went  to  a  camp,  wbeie  they,  having  searched  iia»  inade  ns  nng,  and 

« gave  us  bread  attd  bntter-tnilk." 

Once  some  Atghauns  Liiticcd  tbe  lleioche  and  Mr.  Durie  out  of  their 
road  on  pretence  of  showing  them  a  village :  when  they  got  them  behind  the 
iulls,  they  sea»Aed  them  cuefiiUj,  and  did  not  let  them  go  till  they  famoA 
they  had  nothing  of  valoe.  The  Baloche  liad  some  iiopers,  which  therf 
returned.  <*  Another  time."  says  Mr.  Durie,  "  having  breakfasted  at  a 
**  fchaal»  W9  happoied  to  be  benighted,  and  lay  down  not  far  frotn  a  camp  ; 

being  wearied  and  dark,  we  could  not  go  to  it.    Some  of  the  Afghauns 

hiring  our  \  oices,  came  to  us  ;  two  of  them  supporting  me  there,  and  irtwe 
**  us  fire,  bread,  and  c^iuiis  to  sleep  on.  The  Fakeer  wanting  milk,  they  lailkcd 
"  a  goat  and  gave  him.  The  next  day,  arriving  at  a  water  mill,  we  got  some 
**  flour,  and  went  and  were  doadyseudiedbj  tome;  Ihapi>enedtoftllhadr» 
**  owing  to  tbe  soreness  of  my  ftet^  and  got  to  another  water  mill,  -where  X 
"  stayed  the  night. .  The  next  day  crossed  the  river,  went  to  another  mill, 
'«  \v))pre  a?!  An„'b;iiin,  who  had  been  at  Lahore  and  Dillie,  and  talked  a  little 

]  JiiuIdh  L',  behaved  kindly  to  me,  carried  nie  to  his  kh;>i!,  and  got  my 
**  iiour  baked,  and  gave  me  a  }>air  of  trowsers.  The  next  uiurnnig,  set  out } 
*■  two  or  three  days  after,  lodging  at  khaili,  arrived  at  Kdaut^  on  the  top  of  a 
<*  high  moontain,  but  ntfaied  and  depopnteted.  As  I  bad  sevend  pieciea  of  my 
*'  old  trowsers  packed  up  round  my  waist,  I  was  often  searched  :  lodging  at 
'*  the  khails,  arrived  at  Shahur  Suf!a,  which  was  destroyed  and  dep(^ulated« 
**  A  driv  nr  two  alter,  ha)ipened  to  be  bctu'ghted,  walked  all  night,  owing  to 
"  tiit;  f^liarp  cold  winds,  not  being  able  to  sleep  :  arrived  at  Gomana,  a  ruined 
**  town,  in  the  morning ;  thence  got  to  a  stream  and  lay  down }  seeing  an 
**  Afghaun,  went  along  with  him  to  a  set  of  kiUas^  met  with  gOod  treatment 
**  there,  and  got  water-melons  and  kfaatucks;  thence  to  Ondaharinthediiak 
**  of  the  evening ;  went  to  the  Chaursoo  (or  market-place),  and  afterwards  see- 
"  ing  Afzul  Malionnned,  a  baker,  an  Akhoond  Zada,  and  two  or  tliree  Fakeets^ 
"  sitting  nctir  :\  sho[)  on  the  road  over  a  fire  and  smoking,  I  snilained :  they 

asked  who  1  was,  1  said  I  was  from  llindostan  proceeding  on  pilgrimage : 
**  the  Akhoond  Zada  detiired  me  to  sit,  giving  me  a  culleeaun,  saying  Fakeers 
M  cf  Ifindortan  are  generally  respectables  They  pointed  out  a  laBall  brokeb 


Digitizeci  by  Google 


XB.  DUIUSV  KABRATIVB.  Ikamna, 

**.  mosque  to  me,  uid  1,  alter  liaviug  sat  by  the  fire  and  :>inoked,  ^^ent  there 
<*  and  slept  with  two  or  three  iUceenu.  Tlie  next  morning,  called  on  them ; 
**  they  hftd  their  tie  in  tiwhd],  which  had  a  nxmi  on  the  tide  IdamXhaan 
^ead  enother'Khaan,  with  aome  otheii^  wem  pnwnt )  we  ■aohed.  I  went 
**  to  the  CheulMlo  and  got  some  bread.  Thence  I  went  to  a  Fakeer's  fakea, 
"  where  I  saw  many  Dooraunees  and  other  Moguls  and  Afghauns  sitting  here 
"  and  there  in  the  ppncious  garden,  talking  and  smoking.  I  'smoked,  cr^>t  "ome 
««  copper. money,  cat  some  soup  and  bread  at  the  Cliaursoo,  and  returned  to 
"  the  baker's  with  tobacco.  Sat  by  the  fire  with  the  rest,  smoked,  talked,  and 
*<  went  to  rest  in  the  broken  moaque.  Some  dajni  after*  the -nephew  of  the 
*•  baker,  ahid»  by  the  baket'f  deeiie^  lent  meaainbFrtnnd  end  writing  tin^g^ 
«•  with  which  I  went  to  to  AUnond,  who  fa|id  hie  little  school  in  the  Sheciiw 
«'  poorce  street,  jnid  wa-i  a  man  of  "Bolochistaun.  He  behaved  kindly  to  me, 
*•  and  let  mp  sit  ]ii  Ins  place  and  write  odes,  &c.  :  happening  to  lay  down  one 
«  day  on  a  raised  spot,  the  ink-stand  wati  stolen,  for  which  I  iiad  to  pay  the 
**  lad  eighteen  pice  (about  nine  pence).  I  suffered  near  two  months  in  the 
«  cold)  however*  owing  to  mj  p«Miog  a  great  part  of tiie  ni^^bythe  Are  at 
•*  Ae  baker'B*  I  got  en  GomlbctaMj :  hapfKnung  one  day  to  go  to  a  aadkr,  ^ 
fc  talkuig  of  my  journey,  he  afterward  spoke  to  a  respectable  Khaun  who  was 
«•  humane,  he  gave  me  a  poofrteen,  under  which  I  slept  and  kept  myself  warm. 
««  One  night  coming  home  too  late,  some  Hindoo  dogs  fell  on  mc,  and  tore  it 
"  into  several  pieces ;  it  coat  me  several  pice  to  get  it  mended.  I  passed  tiie 
**  time  among  many  of'  the  people  here  and  there,  they  often  making  me  sing 
«  Sngliih,  wilh  wUdi  thqr  aeened  weB  pleaied. 

.<*  The  eho|»  of  the  difceat  Hindooe,  Mahooi^danmefehan^ 
«*  are  always  attended  by  A^aiins,  Dooraunees,  or  Moguls,  fire^pient  end 
**  full.  T  lirtppriK  il  one  night  to  be  at  a  Hindoo's  shop  when  it  began  to  snovr. 
•«  The  iimdoos  told  me  to  stay,  and  broiitrht  me  fire  and  bread  in  the 

night.  For  three  nights  snow  tieli  heaviJiy.  Three  or  four  days  aiiter,  the 
**  weetiber  began  dearing  up,  and  the  sun  to  ifaine.  I  then  ftond  myself  much 
•f  better.  When  the  sun  was  dooded  and  sharp  cold  winds  blowing,  I  ftond 
^  myeelf  unwell  and  uneasy,  unlees  cheered  and  weaned  by  a  fire.  At  aoon 
**  as  the  sun  be^n  to  shine,  the  peofJe,  Hindoos,  and  Mahommedans;  eveiy 
•«  Friday  went  out  to  pleasant  places  of  devotion  and  entertainment.  Also  on 
•*  other  days  to  excellent  gardens,  cooks,  bakers,  pasters,  (qu.  pastry  cooks  ?) 
**  £ruit  and  sweet  meat  sellers,  musicians,  &c.  &c  attending,  more  or  less, 
^  aceording  tocircunistwces.  I  wmtaemid  times  to  Khaujeh  Khezur,  Aba- 
« iibiid.  MidBabn  WnDee^  elllheie  beii^  very  delightful  plaoea  wd  proapectib 


Digitizer 


MK  DUBIEfS  KABRATIVB 


609 


"with  trees,  ^v;l1^rs,  lulls,  and  niouiiUius.  I  seldom  went  about  in  the  houses; 

but  six  or  sevm  times  I  saw  some  of  the  apartments  of  some  of  them,  which 
•••wme  cariaady  and  commodiou^  mda.  The  people  passed  Aeir  tune  hep. 
«•  jSfy  end  clieerfidly,  eddom  mw  Umbi  qnaifd  wHih  eagr  daBiw  cf  Mumosit/, 
Mtboufj^llM^are  quanebooieenoq^}  MvenL timet  saw  Hindooeand  Mi». 
*'  suhnans  quarrel*  also  Mussulmans  with  Mus<5ulmans ;  those  happened  to  be 
**  onlv  with  words,  some  blows  or  wrestling,  and  terminated  without  bloodshed, 
**  or  loss  of  auy  member.  Three  or  four  times  Afghaun  robbers  had  their 
«« bdlies  ripped  open,  and  were  carried  about  the  streets,  hung  on  the  necks  of 
*»ceineh,and>in«tt  wkhednmtelliBgthe  the/ 
**  were  aftmrards  hung  fiw  one  dej  in  the  Cbaunoo. 

**  One  niglitf  long  before  the  snow  had  fallen,  obsemng  the  honaea  and 
**  shops  were  somewhat  illuminated,  I  inqniretl  of  the  cause,  and  was  told 
"  Mahmood  Shah  liad  taken  l*i'5hour,  and  Slajjaool  Mulk  lied.  On  the  d;iv  of 
**  the  £ad,  after  the  Ramzauu,  Catnran  Shahzaada,  who  generally  sequestered 
•*  himMlf  w-hia  ivaDed  Killa.  went  through  the  gate  to  the  right  a£  that  called 
«  Gabulec^toaapacioaa-plahit  hardbj  the  mountain^  withatetmiieef  hon^ 
**  men,  who  galloped  about  firing  their  nuiakela ;  great  numbers  of  men  and 
"  veiled  women  having  gone  to  view  the  show.    And  at  a  place  not  far  fnMn 
*•  his  Killa,  he  ordered  two  or  tliree  feasts  of  pilaw  to  be  given  to  the  people, 
*«  to  which  1  went,  but  seeing  several  beaten,  went  off'.    Another  day  saw  his 
«{  gawai'ee  (procession);  be  was  at  the  head  of  tiiem,  wd  appeared  to  be  a  man 
**  of  good  aiae  and  mdke*  They  had  long  ensigns  and  long  speai%  and  paaied 
**  throng  the  Chaonoe^  hcvmg  oome  Ctom  an  airing  and  vUt  to  aone  pJacea 
"  sacred  or  nffffat^^g    I  three  or  four  times  beheld  amairiage  procession  of 
**  men,  boys,  womoiij  and  twirls,  on  liorse*^  and  camels,  passing  about  the  streets; 
«« the  horsemen  accompanynig,  gaiioped  about  bnrkwnrds  and  forwards,  firing 
**  th^  guns.  While  1  passed  the  nights  at  the  baker's,  or  the  broken  house, 
**  I  heard  now  and  than  ene  of  the  two  Khanw^  lAo  iufy  and  nightly  camc^ 
**  play  on  dw  Rubaab  meiodienriy,  and  in  company  with  the  beker,  abig  with 
**  great  glee ;  ako  some  Fakeers  and  othen^  came  and  aang  or  chanted  day  or 
night,  but  not  always.  I  also  heard  Hindoo  men  or  women  who  lited  there- 
**  abouts,  very  frequently  sing,  with  :i  variety  of  music,  at  nights,  and  now  and 
"  then  Maiiommedan  women  or  men  who  resided  bard  by.  When  the  Hindoos 
**  went  to  places  of  entertainment,  they  sang  with  music,  or  had  enough  of 
«*  both,  with  Huoaag,  Thajr  ham  aavml  Dhamm  Serqja  in  the  towni  to 
«  wfaiditNj  often  naortndfiir  puipeieiof  admntioni  bniinmiii  of  enlcrtwnb 


Digitized  by  Google 


810 


MS.  mnajffs  nabhativs.  - 


'«  When  the  vwtlMr  beonDB  wm,  told  Teerut  Doss,,  and  the  other  Hin. 
«(dooflb  of  myintentiooof  ictnrai^^  Thqr  tnntad  ma  to  ilqr,  alkgug  th^ 
•«  would  CDDtfibute'their  aantaiiocfto  enaUbiBC  to.do  loaeliji^gilbr  iqrielf^ 

«  but  as  I  wat  ddmnined  to  fgtLtimf,  Ithesy  gave  Jne  Mrine  pice,  also  some 

'*  Mahomedanf!,  upwards  of  a  rupee,  anr^  Thought  some  pepper,  brown  sugar, 
**  and  dried  fruit,  and  set  out  from  the  C  aiil  ulce  gate ;  1  saw  the  baker  sitting 
•*  as  I  passed,  and  be  desired  me  to  stop,  and  not  go  away,  lest  I  should  get 
f*  kHIed  or  Inurt*  Heliad  been  for  Mnie  time  out  of  employ,  bat  hed  aoBi» 
M  tbing  in  etovcr  tund  bed  lome  lelaliom  alao  doi^ 

^-maii  end  of  a  geed  dupaettion,  buteoldam  perfoimed  UurNemms  ^  tiie  Ak- 

«  hoond  Zidab,  and  the  other  Fakeers never  did}  mil  during theiiftit  nf  f hfi 
**  Ranazaun,  in  tlieir  closets  they  ><n)ok<?d." 

AfterMr.DurieleitCandahar,  lie  went  onforsix  marches,  sometimes  searched 
and  sometimes  feasted,  geooraiiy  by  the  com  mo u  people,  but  sometimes  by 
.  Ilie  MNW  and  ledim  of  Khaaw.  He  aeye  but'  little  of  tbe  coimtry,'  eanpt 
geoen^t  that  both  in  gooig  and  Mtntniii^  he  kepi  eff  the  fhaoi  niad  for 
tiie  sake  of  campa*  wbtdi  were  pitched  about  the  skirts  of  the- northern  hOQbf; 
'where  tliere  wa«!,  he  says,  a  charnuug  road,  and  a  glorious  country."  One 
dav  he  c:\me  to  a  mill,  and  was  advised  to  go  on  a  little  way  to  a  place  where 
there  were  some  petty  Khauns.  "  They  pointed  out  to  a  place,  where  were 
■*  trees,  streams,  and  meloQ-beds,  and  I  these  found  two  young  Khauiu,  tall, 
^  aloiitb  and  irall  made,  men,  and  two  Moollaht.^one  of  them  an  eU-man 

with  e  loQg  white  beatdX  ^nth  servanta  and  honea.  Tbagr  talked  dvUfy^ 
**  and  gave  me  tobacco  to  smoke.  Soup  being  rouly,  die  old  Moollah  gave 
**  me  some  meat  and  soup,  the  Kliaun  a  larfrp  piece  of  meat,  and  a  few  . 
**  minutes  after,  a  large  clean  loaf  baked  on  isui  jhjmj.  1  liey  themselves  eat 
«  no  bread  with  tlieir  soup  and  meat.  iiuMUg  eat,  drank,  and  smoked,  they 
f  auWamedi  and  wentofi  Jalso,  proceeding  in  the  dark;,  arrived  at  aMm^ 

mill}  the  owner  ^ttt  the  door  aiid  leAued  me  entrance*  chaiBpg  me  to  go 
*'tO  anoUMT  place  not' far  off;  but  I  would  not  muid,  speaking  politely  and 
**  persuasively,  and  saying  I  must  have  a  lodging}  at  last  I  ofieBad « leather 
*♦  bag  I  had,  which  he  took  and  sxiffered  me  to  tarrj  ,  but  gave  me  plenty  of 
•*  fire.  The  next  rooming  he  pointed  out  to  a  Khail ;  I  went  about  three 
tt  fjQ^  within  the  hills,,  a  lad  carried  me  to  a  large  one,  where  I  tarried  the 
«•  next  day,  alao  very  good  tMmant  of  bmed  and  bntter.niilk}  and  tobaeeo  } 

teveral  aayinjg  thejr  wonU  entertain  me  soaae  dayi,  hot  tiie  tiaoee  were 
**  hard.  Thence  in  the  dusk  arriied  at  another  Khail,  a  good  way  off.  Met 
M  with  good  txeatment.  A  6w  dijya  after,  £rom  Khail  to  Khail,  amved  in 


Digitizer 


611 


*'  the  cveninf?  at  Nance."  From  this  Mr.  Dnrie  went  on  to  Ghuznee,  on 
his  rcmd  be  met  Iuh  old  fellow  traveller,  the  lame  fakeer,  who  told  him-he 
hud  been  near  Bagdad,  and  bad  returned. 

M  Qhamt^  Jbi  Bute  TCnaioed  c^jfat  day  al  •  IUkmi^  6km,  wbm 
be  met  «*  a  Tlutar  lUuei;  whonidhebadUmlladtBaiaiifplmof  fto. 
"  sia,  Sjm,  GoottntiBople,  ArafaMi»  md  Malta,  «f  vldoh,  if  his  coaveiM* 
**  tion,  he  gave  many  proofs.  He  sppmed  to  be  a  very  good  civil  man." 
While  at  Ghuznee  he  saw  an  Atghauu,  who  had  robbed  some  travellers  of  a 
mule,  broii^t  in  by  some  Dooraunees,  with  his  hands  tied  behind  him. 
**  I  went  cm  evening,"  says  Mr.  Dnrie,  *«  to  the  governor,  who  resided  in 
<*tli«  ctedet;  when  he  came  oat  on  bonebebk^  witii  some  .hone  end  ibot 
•«  etteading ;  I  asked  him  fur  some  Msistance.  Ho  adcsd  £taax  wheaee  I  had 
**  come ;  I  said  from  India }  then  says  he,  joking,  you  ought  to  give  me  some- 
**  thing ;  however,  he  desired  me  to  wait,  and  when  he  returned,  an  attendant 
"  on  horseback  gave  me  some  copper  inonev.  T  v  ein  to  visit  the  tomb  of 
**  viooltaun  Mahmood,  which  is  a  dume-hke  edihce,  with  a  large  dour,    i  lie 

giicve  of  iihitt  inaiUe,  with  AaUe  huorfptioi^  SoepeKonimf  tie  lodged 
**  apaa  H,  and  many  contiraaUf  oome  to  ymata^  Than  ase  maoy  fine 
**  apartments,  well  and  ooiioiHly  iiMlhioned,  oonnected  widi  the  eouft-yazdof 
•*  it,  where  there  are  several  stone  images  of  tigers,  &c,** 

Leaving  Ghuznee,  he  at  last  reached  KiUai  Sliaboodeen,  "  where  were 
(«  yg|.y  £|„2  castles,  fine  streams  of  water,  and  excellent  tields  ot  green  in  the 
«*  vales  beneath  the  mountains.  Met  with  a  Khaun  having  amusket  in  his 
<*.haiid»ha  spoke  chrilly  wittaae  to  9a  to  Ganbiil  timmgh  TfOMMMr'aBd  I^shm- 
■*  der^  went  to  T^oor  in  the  evening }  met  with  good  treatments  peeoeeded 
**  along  the  narrow  river,  flowing  with  rapidity  between  the  dosing  mountains, 
♦*  on  both  sides ;  below  abundance  of  fruit  tree-?  and  fields  of  ^reen  :  in  the 
<•  dark  arrived  to  a  Killa belonging  to  an  Akhoond  (teacher  or  MooUah)  who 
**  was  kind.**  •  r    .      .  ■ 

The  ftihwring  adventme  hsfipaaMdoDhis  way  toOuibal:  <*OM-«oenjii{g 
«*aaned  at  a  kfaail,  ior  eampb  obsammdsomefmyinff  at  a  place  aneunddl 
**  wHh  atOMS  (which  they  in  the  khails  hold  as  a  mosque),  I  went  up  and  be- 
«*  gan  as  they.  They  tmrk  much  notice,  and  when  done,  the\  laiiglioci,  as  I 
"  performed  it  incorrectly.  I  made  excuses  to  the  Mooliah,  who  being  good 
«  natured,  behaved  kind,  and  asked  about  medicmes.  Two  or  three  odier 
M  times  I  peiftnaed  Hfmna,,  aad  the  people  coming  round,  laughed ;  I  told 

tfaaan  I  did  weU  eiMii«h  at  I  eonld.'' 

4i  9 


MB.  DVUTB  NARSATIV& 


At  a  place  Ciilled  Lullunder,  he  was  struck  with  tlie  beauty  and  ma^nifi- 
c^ceof  some  castles,  which  he  never  saw  e<jualled ;  but  lie  says:  "they 
*'  wen  of  ^singular  kind,  and  very  haidto  due^be,  unto  I  could  paiot  them. 
<*  flBeptatalugeiBoiqiioi  went  tootliorciilloi^  hwMiiHeJ,  wtm  ona  veiy 
•*  hi^  nountain  a  small  house,  which  they  termed  Poytukt  Zemaa  Sbaoh  (or 
«  the  dirone  of  Shauh  Zeroaun),  not  far  from  it  is  Sultan  Bauber's  small  white 
««  stone  mosqtic;  (one  day  I  went  there;  there  having  come  many  veiled  bdies, 

1  was  not  allowed  entrance  ;  one  of  them  returning  on  horse-back,  lier  horse 
**  happening  to  run  swiit,  she  tuuibled  down,  and  others  weut  up  to  her  a:$.Hist- 
•*iuioe).  On  my  aixivel  at  Giiibuli  a  lefpectalilo  mm  invited  me,  giving  me 
•*  bleed  and  pilaw.  I  dept  at  a  moaqoe  in  the  town :  indiemaniii^wentte 
M  fakea  at  tlw  Lahora  gate.  Th^  reodved  me  kindly.  Stayed  tfaeie  ni^ 
<*  wards  of  twenty  days,  sleeping  at  a  JOOMpieb  though  the  head  Fakeer  atbm 
**  desired  me  to  rest  at  the  f:ikea  ;  went  about  the  bazars  dailv  ;  at  times  saw 
*•  several  cliiets  on  excellent  horses,  having  line  coloured  garments  and  turbans, 
**  pass  by,  with  many  footmen  going  beibre.  Discoursing  at  the  fakea,  or 
**  dsewheie,  they  frequently  aaked  if  I  waa  a  spy }  one  at  the  &kea,  a  diarp 
M  amniiig  man,  discerned  that  I  waa  not  circmnciwd,  but  he  and  aenieodien^ 
**  held  tbeir  tongoea.  In  discourse  with  aoaie  of  them  thefo^  and  at  the 
**  moaquei  concerning  Feningeea  (Europeans),  it  was  remarked  that  many  am- 

toms  accorded  in  the  Alroran  anc?  Scrij^tTires,  but  that  owing  to  reason - 
*' able  circumstances,  reaiionable  inntj' :ii khis  li  id  uikeu pliice,  to  whirfi  they 

agreed,  and  gave  consent.  The  head  1  ukcei  one  evening,  not  benig  ni  die 
f  way,  I  anUamedto  the  oAeci*  and  was  goiug  oC  when  he  happened  to  come 
•*  and  called  out  I  returned,  and  tdiing  bin  I  was  goingb  he  gave  me  Ue 
«*bleiKng.    Atdaikamvt  I  Bootkhab," 

Mr.  Durie  went  on  towards  Fesliawer  with  some  little  caravans:  oooebfr 
ing  behind  the  rest,  he  met  witli  tiie  following  adventure :  "  When  going 
•*  alone,  I  met  a  young  Afghaun  having  a  matchlock,  and  a  lai  sxc  knife  ;  asked 
•*  <rf  him  how  far  Guudamuck  was,  he  saui  one  royal  uiunzii,  and  went  off*-, 
«  but  he  afterwards  holloed  efter  me  to  stMld;  I  obeyed,  he  wanted  me  to  go 

amoqg  the  mountanw,  aaying  I  was  aifiy,  a  m<gpfwn<  an  alchymiat^  or  a 
**  Persian.    I  said  I  was  an  Hindostaunee :  he  i^ck  me  hard  on  tlw 

with  the  back  of  the  knife,  and  made  many  thrusts,  till  he  drew  some  Uood, 
•*  when  he  begged  p;»rdon,  and  slieathed  his  knife."  *«  Another  day  getting 
•*  astray  from  the  inaiu  mad,  I  jji  uccedeil  through  the  niountain^;,  and  became 
•*  several  times  blocked  up  so,  that  to  extricate  mysell^  1  was  otten  obhged  to 
«•  dimb  up  and^  down  fiom  high  rooks.  Slept  therein  the  nigfat,  about  tea 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


mt  DURIV8  NARRATTVE. 


613 


«« in  the  moming  arrived  under  the  shade  of  a  mountain,  where  scveial 
*•  Afghauns  were.    They  gave  me  bread,  water,  and  smoke,  and  pointed  out 
Lundee  Khana,  situate  alott."    From  tim  he  got  to  Pe:siiawer,  aud  crossed 
the  lodw  witlMHit  any  fiurther  adventonm. 

.  The  Wmiag  ii  one  of  tim- Aoete  wUdiiracewiittMi  bgrMr.  Dmfe 
before  loonvened  witih  him.  Tbejr  contalD  his  general  opinions,  which  seem 
to  me  often  earmet,  end  aometimei  rtty  wngMkm  fiar  «  men  in  hie  ipbeve 

of  life. 

*•  Tiie  uiouiiuiiious  districts  about  Atuk,  Peshour,  Caubul,  and  Candahar, 
**  aud  beyond  Caubul  toward  Bulkh,  and  beyond  Candaiiar  toward  Ueraut, 
"  cemptehend  tlie  A%li«mnBlm» eeOed  KhenmmiB.  Hw  A<t^inn>  being 
**  dilRrait  tf9Nsa»  ImM  dillb«iitdeBominBt^^ 

**  per  aoljeclioiit  by  force  or  fortune,  they  are  at  continual  vaimnce  with  one 
**  another.  Ahmed  Shah  and  Tymoor  Shah,  being  fortunate  enough  to  keep 
**  up  apreat  army,  which  enabled  them  to  ^ubjufrate  foreign  territorie'*,  they 
"all  voluntarily  submitted  to  them,  (thougli  tluso  chiefs  had  gaiiud  power 
**  enough  to  humiiie  them  in  no  little  degree,)  as  thereby  they  acquired  advan- 
"  tageous  employment   fiowanrar*  ft  la  eviilent  that  a  fq;alar  ooavageoas 

aaaj,  havinig  proviskHM,  can  nuke  them  all  aubanit  completely.  TtaeMogd 
**  Kh^  of  Tmieriane's  race  having  had  them' in  undonbted  rabjectioii,  the 
**  surrounding  mountains  being  more  favourable  than  deterring  or  ww«w«fflit, 
**  The  Doorannees  re'^ide  r^hont  Candnhar,  though  there  be  not  many  of  them 
•*  there  now  ;  in  the  preat  nL  luiies,  their  Shulis  not  being  al)ie  to  make  foreign 
**  conquests,  the  name  of  Dooraunee  prevails  not,  many  tribes  not  sending  any 
« tribute  or  cootribation.  The  fbttowers  of  the  fihaha  and  Sirdam  are  by  no 
«meamaniXwrancDeea»  though  thajmii^  be  80  danonunalad;  tbejraieAnd 
«■  of  committing  depredations  in  thdr  own  letiiUaie%  aa  tiiejr  have  not  good 
*•  luck  enough  in  these  times  to  carr>*  the  terror  of  their  sword  to  Aiei^ 
•*  domains.  The  doitrininn  of  Ahmed  Shnh  and  Tymoor  Shah,  had  been 
**  extensive,  iti  ^^  hK■llthey  cuulil  Ijave  prospered  well,  buttliey  think  of  nought 
**  but  conquernig,  they  look  not  for  the  acquisition  oi'  riches,  oi'  wliich  thej 

are  Infloitelj  denroaa^  bjr  the  fjbdanfyuMM  aria  of  hidastry,  they  .mat  k 
•■bjtfaeanuteoftheaabre;  bnl^  ho«ef«r,thei«iiaUowanowt»benMdefor 

tba  lami^they  being  pent  up  and  endoaed  in  the  anidat  of  surrounding  hiUt 
**  and  mountains,  having  all  around  many  and  inveterate  powerful  antagonists, 
**  who  have  often  subdued  tliem  ;  their  territory  havinp^  been  held  as  a  pro- 
**  vince:  they  also  have  extended  ificu  arms  to  distant  i:t)untnes.  They  iraa- 

gine  their  religion  to  be  tiie  btsl  aud  must  true,  consequently,  they  consider 


i 


Digitized  by  Google 


014  MIt  SXmOSrs  NASBATIVB.  Uaumo. 

**  all  otiiers  as  misled,  or  erroueous,  hoping,  ou  account  of  the  superior  truth 
**  tbanof.  to  moquUl  all  m  the  m^.   Though  they  fight  cm  mother,  being 
"SooniieeMahoiinnml—  (ui  ooaftnnQr  inth  tlieltehi»Mid  TvtMi,  and 
•*  Arabs,  balding  the  Fermos  es  misled),  they  refrain  from  such  decrees  of 
**  animosity  as  might  ur^e  thetn  to  their  own  destruction  or  extirpation.  That 
"  tli»-^y  hold  their  rolif^ion  to  hp  the  best,  is  undoubtedly  "ot  their  fault,  they 
"  being  strictly  initiated  to  imagine  so:  however,  the  spirit  ot  toleration,  owing 
**  to  philantliropy,  does  not  a  little  actuiite  them,  tliough  at  hrst  they  might 
^.wiik  to  MaliaiiidMdaBiM  ell  men}  Ibr  neny  of  them  an  certainly  free, 
"Itbetalieiidtolecatiqgk  TbelikMni  &o.  ff  Hindottaii,  ivl^ 
^  QOiiiitriei»di»  not  6il  in  their  endeavvNin  to  make  them  bdieroftlae  and  ti^ 
**  credible  representaUons,  and  they  are  weak  enough  to  give  a  good  deal  of 
credit  to  them.    They  hold  the  people  of  Bengal  as  perfect  tnagicians,  and 
"  the  Europeans  (whom  tiicy  rtu  k  on  as  w  i^q,  inteUigent,  and  equitable)  as  per- 
**  feci  chemiats,  well  versed  m  the  art  ol  making  gold.  As- 1  told  them  often 
«*  I  came  ftodi  Bengal,  they  tWMiMedand  quertiooed  me  much,  imagining  that 
^  I  muit  necemiilj  be  acqudntod  wkHkt  muxy  andk  atti )  benefer,  npeatmg 
•*  the  Mahnmfidaa  creed,  inr  cnliaa,  though  my  clothes  were  tom,  sod  they 
**  often  took  flto  to  be  something  of  the  misled,  as  I  poi^med  not  Namaniv 
"  &c.  yet  thev  were  Rutisficd  with  respect  to  my  being  a  Mahomedan,  not  prc- 
«<-suming  to  trouble  or  interrogate  beyond  moderation.    Hindoo  or  Mnhom- 
■*  medan  travellers  pass  saiely  through  their  countries,  receiving  victuals  from 
<<tii«ai  1iiifctl«y  caDiwtpamat  dliritiiai^tiui^vd         as  there  exists  ~ 
«  BO  diiri|ilitie  or.iegtilanty  of  gnmmenit  aaaoog  -Hmj  often  de> 

«<  dared  Aat  when  the  govennnent  had  eadsled  th»^  pvople  m%lit 

«•  iHve  carried  gold  openly,  without  ap{neheodoa  or  danger,  through  the 
•«  routes  of  the  cities.  The  government  now  is  in  the  Afghaunee  hnrtds,  they 
.    "  litin^  all  A%hauns  of  different  trihe«,  the  Dooraune«{  being  the  m<^ 
•  **  powertui^  upon  emergencies  of  goodlucit,  the  otiiers  wilhngly  attend,  being 
"ao  diflwmhwtnd,  ftr  men  of  die  different  tribea  attimding  the  victorious 
it  ahab^  or  Surdaia,  aie  80  called,  tliey  beingaU  Soonnee  A%|iatt^ 
^lann.  Avefygnntpertof  thepeopleof  tlie  eitieg,  being  jhopAeaper^ 
"  artificen^  and  ench  hke,  are  not  Afghauns,  but  spring  ftt>m  other  originabi 
"  At  Peshour  a  va-^t  nmiibLM  oi  Mahomedtos  talk  a  kind  of  Himlostaiinee 
•*  l;iiii^uan;c,  and  dress,  t^c.  diderently  from  the  A^hauns,  tlioni:!!  tIu'v  c;pne- 
**  rally  understand  more  or  leas  of  Pushtoo.    The  greatest  part  ot  tiie  shops 
wehddby  Hindoo^abo  there  are  many  Sheeah  orgeieewnm  dotli  merchants. 


Digitized  by  Google 


**  &c.  And  maoy  o£  ikan,  called  CuzzUbau^i,  atteailitig  on  the  Shaha  cod 
•*  chidf  Sirdaur .  '  •  .  .  ♦  .     *-.>.'  r-       ,       .  :  .  .  • .. 

"  Theie  oountriet  are  Ikddiiunr  by  dSBbnaA  A^ifimaA.  9uian,  at  vaiiiM 
**lrilii  iMcbothMvwitb^jur^aot  at  fint  favomed  by  faiiunetoiiuiiado  or 
**  conquer ;  if  they  were,  they  would  voluntarily  and  joyfyiUfjMmd.  OH  tfttt 
••fortunate  leader.  They  often  talk  of  the  English  conquering  tit  om,  and 
••  many  of  them  declare  they  will ;  many  saying  that  they  would  rather 
**  have  tlie  Seeks  or  Mahraiias  invade  them  with  half  a  dozen  lacks,  tliau 
«<  the  Engluh  with  three  or  four  ihamaod.  The  dominkm  «f  XSumisaii* 
**  which  is  inhabited  by  diffi»reiit  tribes  of  AQ^uuins,  more  or  less  strongs  aO 
"  of  them  being  Soonnees*  talking  Pushtoo^  and  in  their  various  mannexa 
*•  agreeing,  has  been  often  held  by  other  more  powerful  eni|nres  as  a  pro^•ince ; 
*•  but  of  their  tribes  none  appear  to  be  manifestly  so  powerful,  as  indepen* 
*•  dently  to  hold  tlie  reiit  in  complete  subjection.  And  when  fortune  favours, 
**  they  unanimously,  without  being  compulsively  called  forth,  yield  their  respec* 
*'d«easM8taiicesiD  ooK^Mration  with  the  fortunate  tribe.  Bat  in  thes^  days 
•'  they  have  not  any  unanimity*-  not  any  kind  of  r^golar  army,  nor  ougjit  of 
**  governmental  regularity,  nor  of  natiorad  indnstiy  or  azertioo,  so  as  to  be 
••  accounted  ;t  re<^pectable  nation ;  in  their  own  dominion,  nevertheless*  in 
••  their  respective  clans,  they  are  verj'  well,  happy,  and  regular. 

« 1  hey  iiave  no  regular  armies  wliatever,  being  all  in  no  good  order,  and  they 
<*  are  not  able  to  make  use  of  the  gun.  The  routes  to  Csubul  and  Candahar, 
-  being  without  defence  robberies  and  oppfessioaB  are  eommitledby  all  sorts 
•(  and  ranks,  though  the  nioaiitatns  about  the  road  maybe  rendered  inaceessip 
«•  sible.  The  black  tents  are  set  in  order,  this  way  or  that*  but  near  OOe 
•*  another,  in  general  conformably  to  the  ground. 

*•  Tlieir  flour  or  grain,  &c.  is  kept  in  bags  or  packs.  They  have  some 
*•  articles  and  conveniences.  They  all  have  iioo,  and  stone  plates  to  place 
•*  their  bread  on  tor  baking  and  ovras  also.  They  genersily  eat  bread  and 
"  rice  with  butter-milkt  milk,  and  meat*soup  at  times,  having  many  dumbas 
**  md  goats.  Itieir  women  cook,  bake,  bring  water,  &c  They  keep  and 
•*  bring  their  water  in  leather  bags.  They  appeared  well  clothed  and  happy. 
••  They  are  hospitable  to  strangers.  They  like  tobacco,  but  they  had  very 
*•  little  of  it  when  I  went }  they  only  take  one  strung  whitT  each,  sitting 
*■  around*  If  the  time  and  aeaaom  be  good,  having  plenty,  they  delight  in 
M  maniftatiiig  tiheir  hoqntalt^.  Their  being  «>  legolarity,  ct  course  no  one 
**  can  pass  nAly  with  any  tidd^g  valuable  without  bmag  guaided.  They  am 


Digitizeci  by  GoOgle 


MR.  DUBUfg  MABBATim  tJamna. 

**  regular  in  their  iSuniauz.  In  the  cities,  one  might  pass  long  without  Nu- 
**  mauz  i  but  in  their  Uuflib  <w  ttth.  khnia^  or  Uidc  leuli^  or  ldnas»  one 
**  cHiiiot  abide  my  time  irillioat  bong  queetioiied.'' 

■  Of  tbe  lenudning  two  ohecto^  one  contains  Mr*  IHirie's  travels  through  the 
Punjaub,  and  the  <rtlier  an  account  ci  his  journey  to  Candahar  in  less  detail 
than  what  has  boen  eivon  :  one  or  two  obiemttoiM  fiom  this  iheet  baveb 
bowever,  been  quoted  in  my  text. 


Digitized  by  Google 


i   6"  ) 


ACCOUMT  OF  lOMB  MBIOBSOinUNO  COIRmXBt. 

^T^HOUGH  they  arc  not  included  in  the  King  of  Caubul's  dominions,  I 

make  no  npoiogy  for  giving  an  account  of  the  Caufir^,  or  for  stutincr  ihv 
tew  iact.s  I  know  about  Budukshaun  and  JsLauslikaur,  countries  of  whicii  the 
names  alone  are  known  in  Europe. 

,  The  followiug  |)a&i»age  is  quoted  in  Rennd'i  Memoir  of  a  Map  of  Hin- 
diwrtiffl- 

.  **  There  is  a  oertaiii  tribe  at  thie  dey  uiiilntuig  modern  Bijore  (Bajour), 
or  iit  least  there  not  long  ago^  who  pretend  to  he  the  descendants  of 
M  certain  persons  belonging  to  ihat  conqueror's  (Alexander's)  army,  who  they 
say,  were  letl  tliere  as  he  passed  through  the  country.  Both  Abool  Fuzl 
*f  imd  Soc^uu  Rae  report  tliis  tradition  without  material  variation.  The  latter, 
M  indeed,  adds  that  tiieae  Europeana  (^f  we  jnnj  qril  fhfm  ao^  oontiiuwd  to 
"  ^eaenre  that  aacendanqr  over  tfaev  nei^fabonn  y^oA  their  anceatoia  maj 
^<.be|8Dppqsed  to  have  possessed  '«Hbiieii  tiiey  first  settled  here*"  (KiApati^V 
IdSS.  quoted  in  Rennell's  Memoir,  page  i6?,  Ed.  1704). 

It  may  easily  be  supposed  ibat  this  account  excited  great  attention  during 
;die  journey  of  the  mission  to  Caubu^  and  tb^t  we  were  not  long  at  Peshawer 
bdiire  wo  bcigan  to  enquire  after  our  Ma<:ffdniiian  ncigJibourB.  We  were 
400B  oU^pdto  givs  iq|»  an  opmioo,  derived  from  AIk>oI  Ibd,  that  theee  qolo- 
nists  weie  a  Inm^i  of  the  Busoizyes ;  but  we  learned  that  the  Caufirs,  ape(^ 
pie  in  the  mountains  north  of  Bajour,  had  many  points  of  character  in  com- 
mon with  the  Greeks.  Tliey  were  celebrated  for  their  heauty  and  their 
European  complexion,  worshipped  idols,  drank  wine  in  silver  cups  or  vases, 
used  chairs  and  tables,  and  spoke  a  langu^e  unknown  to  their  neighbourly. 
^  it  ym  not  eaejr  to  gratify  ^  cniioaitjr  these  descnptkma  evit«^  Ibr 
ahhou^  I  vfAj  determined  to  aend  a  penop  to  make  enquiriea  on  13»  apo^ 
'it  aeemed  impossible  to  prevail  on  any  one  ^copeify  qoalifoc^  to  engage  in  a 
loumcgr  into  the  coontiy  of  a  people  amozi^  vbom  there  was  no  action  ao 

4« 


Digitized  by  Google 


61S 


GAUFnUBTAON. 


hommnlile  m  ibe  innrder  of  •  Momiliinn.  At  lengdi  the  aAnntam  wu  • 
undertaken  by  MboOah  Ki^edi  (a  bioUier  of  MooUah  Bebnaniiid  tkmif 

mentioned),  a  person  admirably  fitted  for  the  task  by  his  telenli  end 
curiosity.  He  left  Peshawer  in  the  middle  of  May,  and  penetrated  into 
the  country  of  the  Caufirs  by  the  way  of  Punjcora.  The  mi!isioii  set  out  for 
India  about  a  month  ailerward^y  at  wbicli  time  uo  news  had  beeu  received  of 
him :  as  long  as  we  continued  in  the  Aigbaun  dominions,  we  entertained 
strong  hopes  of  hit  return;  but  wben  the  seoood  month  had  ehpeed,  and  we 
had  half  ciOMed  the  FkinjaulH  we  began  to  be  unea^  about  htm,  anid  Im 
brother  who  had  aocomiiiiiied' me  so  far,  returned  to  make  enquiries  con> 
cernmg  Km,  under  a  perstiaston  that  he  had  been  murdered  by  the  Caufirs. 
I  had  no  tidings  of  him  from  this  tinu  tili  I  had  been  for  some  months  at 
Pelly,  and  I  bad  given  up  all  h(jpcs  ot  ever  i^eeiog  ium,  wiicn  he  unexpec- 
tedly aimed  in  Camp,  having  undertdcen  Ibis  long  joumejfiom  1m  eunt 
~  eountiy  rather  dum  dinppoint  onr  expectaciane.  He  bad  been  as  €ttm 
^.miuImA^  a  TiU^  within  three  stages  of  Budukhsbaun,  had  made  hinuelf 
master  of  every  thing  relating  to  the  Caufirs,  had  completed  a  voodndaiy  of 
tlieir  language,  and  brought  full  answers  to  a  lorn  h'it  of  queries  with  which 
he  had  been  furnished  at  his  departure.  The  iollowmg  account  is  <^Tef?y 
abstracted  from  his  report,  which  was  translated  Ifr.  Irvine ;  but  as  I  had 
(^jpoftonitieB  of  obtainii^  fiirther  hrfbrmstioa  during  the  VMMfu  abitiiiaft; 
I  have  made  use  of  it  to  dieclc  and  to  illustrate  his  account. 

The  piiac^al  sources  from  which  this  additional  information  was  derived, 
were,  a  young  Caufir  whom  I  bad  opportiinit!P<?  of  interrogating  ;  n  Hindoo 
clerk  of  Mr.  Irvine,  who  had  ^nsitcd  the  country  of  tlif  Caufirs  ;  the  Syud  of 
Coonner's  agent,  who  li\  ed  ou  tlieir  border }  and  an  Eusofzye,  who  bad  been 
engaged  in  a  military  expedition  into  Aeit  emmtrjr.  The  geography  is  taken 
as  oMial  from  Uentenant  Macaitn^. 

The  country  of  the  Gaufirs  occopies  a  great  part  of  the  range  of  Hindoo 
Cooeb,  and  a  portion  of  Tlflf>ot  Taugh.  It  is  bounded  on  tlie  nortii^east  1^ 
Kaushkaur,  on  the  north  by  Budukhsbaun,  and  on  the  north-west  by  Koon- 
dooz  iu  Bulkh.  On.the  west  it  has  Inderaub  and  Kbost,  also  in  Bulkh,  and 
the  Cobistaun  of  Caubul ;  and  on  the  east  it  extends  for  a  great  distance 
towards  tfie  norfli  ofCaihmeer,  wfaeie  its  boundary  is  not  distiaetfy  known. 
-  Tlie  whole  of  tliis  Alpine  oountty  is  eomposed  of  miwy  mouBtafnik  deep 
pine  fiwestB,  and  small  but  fertile  valleys,  which  produce  large  quantities  of 
grapes  wild  and  cultivated,  and  feed  flocks  of  sheep  and  herds  of  cattle, 
whfle  the  hilb  are  covered  with  goats.   Qnun  is  inferior,  boUi  in  impoKtanoe 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


AatmBuOk'}  CAUFIBJ8TAUK.  619 


I^M  conunon  kiods  «ra  wheat  aad  inilleL  TIm  Mads  are 
only 'fit  for  nwn  on  fbok,  aad  sre  oftea  ooMed  hj  rivers  and  tonenUb  whuA 
are  paased  by  means  of  wooden  bridges,  or  of  swinging  bridges  made  on 

ropes  of  withy  or  some  other  pliant  tree.  All  the  A-illairfs  that  I  have  heard 
described  are  built  on  tiie  slopes  ol  hills,  so  Uial  the  ju«.»t  ot  one  house  formn 
the  street  ieadiug  to  the  one  above  it ;  and  this  in  i<>ud  tu  be  the  coustaat 
ynctke  ot  <lie  country.  The  venejs  «wt  be  well  peopled  thai  of  tlie 
C2aunNi«e trifae>  atkest,  ooaiaiaed ton  vil]^;ei^  aad dw chwf piao^  Gau» 
daidit  ctmaiflted  of  five  famidned  lioiiNa* 

The  people  have  no  general  name  for  tlieir  nation.  Each  tribe  has  its 
peculiar  name,  for  they  are  si!  divided  into  tribes,  thouph  not  accordinj?  to 
genealogy,  but  to  geographical  position^  each  valley  being  held  by  a  separate 
tribe.  The  Mussulmans  confound  them  all  under  the  name  of  Caofir  or 
lBida|»  and  call  tbeir  conntiy  QHififten.  Hiey  abo  call  one  diviricm  cT 
tkMn  Seeapodi  (Uaek  vested)  or  Tor  Gaafin  (Uadr  infideb),  and  another 
S^>een  Caufirs  (white  infidA).  BoA  epithets  are  taken  from  their  dress,  for 
the  whole  of  the  Caufirs  are  remarkable  for  the  fairness  and  beauty  of  their 
conipk  xinn,  but  those  of  the  largest  division  wear  a  sort  of  vest  of  black  goat- 
alum,  while  the  other  dresses  iii  white  cotton.  * 

'  There  are  several  languages  among  the  CJaufirs*  but  they  have  all  many 
irards  in  cotasnuNH  and  ell  have  a  neer  ceanectioii  with  fhe  Shamcrit*  They 
have  all  one  peadiarity,  which  is,  that  they  ooBBt  by  scores  inifaind  of  hiOK 
drad%  »ad  that  their  thousand  (which  they  call  by  the  Persian  and  PusfatiOO 
nanie)  consists  ol'  four  hiuKlred  or  twenty  score.  All  these  observations 
apply  also  to  the  Lughmaunee  or  Deggaunee  ku^guage^  which  saenu  to  be  a 


*  Tbe  fdlowiag  are  the  naam  of  tome  of  tbeir  tnbet.  The  fint  act  were  givea  t^tht ' 
Caufir  of  Ta okooee,  tbe  wooad  got  by  MooUak  Nqnb  tt  Ct1'—friT\  sad  Iks  tkW  bf  SI 

Roy  at  Kuttaun  and  on  the  bordert  of  Bajnur. 

I.  Traiguma,  Gtmccr,  KaKanr,  Bainigtdlee,  Chainziah,  Diiiidtn»  WiBk  WsI 
Cooahteea,  Dhaing,  and  Waqeoi,  otikd  Piiaitla  bj  tbe  IfoHdaaMk 

s.  Caumojee,  Kintojee  (wboae  diirf  town  n  MundienMbee),  MoanAyyul,  QntoSe  (hdF  of 

whom  are  toward  ;  B'.;1iikh»haun  and  l)a!f  tn^viriJ--  L .n;f.in.iiijri ,  Pi^ro'jufe  (\K],o-,r  ijapltJ  in  Ki»h. 
tokee),  Tewnee,  Foonnoa,  Uchkoog,  Uouhce,  Suoiujo,  Koolumee  Rooae  Turkuma  (to  wbm 
tdaiig  Kt— r  fiOiihliwS  NMta.  Ch<imga«  Wawa^  KhooBBM,  I>i  i  iriih,  Bmk,  eai.  Ite, 

I  mu*t  obaeire  tbst  nnr  of  Moollah  Nujccb'*  lirt  it  Pnihs,   which  is  stated  to  live  toward* 
Caubul,  and  which  1  tloubt  nut  is  the  origiu  of  tbe  Pushawee*  mentioned  by  Bauber,  and 
fcuad  in  the  Cohistaan  of  Caubul. 

$.^W«Hc  Daiwvaee,  Oiwbea^  KiittMr»  FaadMt,  FlwiKin  Cirosaiu  fiMsc^  TwhssHi 

4«a 


Digitized  by  Google 


090 


CAUFtRISTAim. 


Cautir  dialect,  and  gives  reason  to  suppose  the  Lughmannec^  and  iH'ggauns* 
to  be  Caufirs,  converted  to  the  Maliommedau  rel^on.  1  imagine  the  inha- 
faitaiito  of  the  CohutHm  of  Gubul  to  Iwre  tiie  MHoe  origin,  paxda^aAf-m 
the  nunc  of  Colusttiinee  is  that  t^ipUed  to  alt  the  late^  oooverled  Ckiifirtb 

This  derivation  of  their  laogbege  aeeowfital  to  the  descent  of  the  Gauftn 
from  the  Greeks,  and  their  traditions  do  not  furnish  us  with  any  distimrt 
account  of  their  origin.  Tlie  most  general  luid  the  only  credible  story  is 
that  tliey  wertf  expelled  by  tl»e  Mussulmans  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Cau- 
daliar,  and  made  several  migrations  firom  place  to  place,  before  tbcy  reach^ 
tiieir  pieaeiit  abode.  They  aUege  that  ^tuey  coooated  of  fiwr'trflMs  oUled 
Camooe^  Hikr,  fiSJar,  and  Ganxge^  of  whidi  the  thiee  fimner  emfataceil  tho 
Mahomedan  Religion,  but  the  fturth  retaoied  its  andent  ftilli»  and  qoltMd 
its  nntive  country.' 

Their  religion  docs  not  respinble  any  other  with  which  I  am  acquainted. 
They  believe  in  one  God,  whom  ttie  Cautirs  of  Caumdaish  call  Imra,  and 
those  of.  Tsokooee  Dagun;  but  they  also  worship  munennis  idols,  n^uch 
they  say  represent  great  naeo  of  ianaa  dayii-  who  intefoade  *with'  God  'in 
favour  of  their  worshtppen* 

These  id^b  are  of  stone  or  wooi^  and  always  represent  men  or  woaisi^ 
sometimes  mounted  and  sometimes  on  foot.  Moollali  Nujeeb  h:\d  oppor- 
tunity of  learning  the  arts  which  obtain  an  entrance  to  the  C  autir  I'  intlieon. 
In  the  puUic  apartment  of  the  village  of  Caumdaish,  was  a  high  wooden  pit* 
iat  OD  wbidi  sat  a  figure,  with  s  spear  m  one  hand  abd  a  staff  in  Ae  o&nr* 
.Tins  idol  rapresented  the  &ther  of  one  of  the  great  men  of  the  vOiag^  who 
had  erected  it  himself  in  his  life>time,  hating  purchased  the  privilege  by 
giving  several  feasts  to  the  whde  village  ;  nor  was  this  the  only  instance  of 
men  deified  for  such  reasons,  and  wdrshipped  as  much  as  any  other  of  the 
gods.  The  Canfiri  appear  indeed  to  attach  the  utmost  importance  to  the 
virtues  of  libcrahty  and  hospitality.  It  is  they  which  procure  the  easiest 
admipsioQ  to  their  paradiic^  which  they  call  Buny  Le  Boda»  and  the  o^o- 
aito  vices  are  the  most  cettsfai  gddes  to  Bony  Duggnr  Boola,  or  heU. 
' .  TWs.ftdiity  of  deification  must  render  the  number  of  the  gods  very  great, 
but  many  mnst  be  confined  to  their  own  tribe,  since  it  cannot  be  expected 
that  tliose  will  worship  them  who  have  never  partaken  of  their  entertainments. 
Accordingly,  the  gods  of  Camndaisli  seem  to  be  quite  difierent  from  tiiose 
of  Tsohooee,'  though  there  is  one  common  to  both,  and  there  may  probably 
he  more. who  may  have  been  deified  boAre  the  sepaialioB  ,of 'fhe  CSuiir 
tribca.  'The  dnef  goda^  or  heroca^  of  Csnmdaish  ar^  lat^  Bngeedv  who  is 


Digitized  by  GoOgI< 


CAUFI&ISTAUM. 


•god-of  the  waters,  ad,  Maunee,  who  expeDad  Yooah,  or  the  evil  principle* 
from  the  world.  3d,  Murrur.  4th,  Umim.  5tli,  Pursoo.  6th,  Geesh. 
7th,  Seven  brothers  of  the  name  of  Paradik,  who  had  golden  bodies,  and 
were  created  from  a  golden  tree.  8th,  Purron,  seven  golden  brothers  of  the 
same  kind.  9th,  Kooniye,  whoui  Moollah  Nujeeb  calls  the  wife  ui'  Adam, 
iftth,  THf—iiiwm,  «ile  of  Geesh.  iitii,  Doolne.  latli,  Surijoo.  And 
lijib.  Niditee. 

Those  of  the  Taookooee*  are  Maunde»  peduiiw  Maune,  before  mentioned. 
Maraist,  Murrasooree,  and  Indeijee,  who  may  perhaps  be  the  Hindoo  god 
Inder,  or  Indra,  with  the  Indian  title  of  Jee  annexed  to  his  name.  Dhun- 
put  Roy  (Mr.  Irvine's  Hindoo)  was  indeed  positive  in  stating  that  the  Cau- 
£ir  idols  represented  the  Hindoo  god  Seddasbeo,  and  always  bore  a  trident» 
which  is  the  ayiiibQl  of  that  god.  Ho  also  nid  that  they  called  some  of  their 
gods  Shee  Mahadeo,  and  that  they  used  the  nine  words  as  a  sahilatmn  to 
each  other :  but  these  circumstances  are  inconsistent  with  other  accounla^ 
and  n*'  Dhunput  Roy  himself  admitted  that  the  Caufirs  ate  beef,  it  seems 
improbable  that  they  bear  so  close  a  resemblance  to  the  Hindoos.  All  ac- 
counts also  represent  them  as  sprinkling  their  idols  with  blood,  uiid  even 
widi  lihe  blood  of  cow^,  which  cannot  be  reoonctled  to  the  Hindoo  religion  ^ 
and'^all  repreient  fire  as  lequisite  at  everjr  rdigious  ceremony. 

Moollah  Nujeeb  was  present  on  an  occasion  of  this  kind  at  Catundaish  j  it 
was  a  sacrifice  to  Imra,  and  was  celebrated  at  a  particular  place  near  the  vil- 
lage where  there  was  a  stone  post,  whfrh  apj^ean;,  by  the  MooUah's  descrip- 
,tion,  to  have  borne  some  resemblance  to  tiie  lliudiX)  emblem  of  Mahadeo  : 
a  fire  was  kindled  before  it,  through  whidi  flour,  butter,  and  water,  were 
thrown  on-the  stone;  at  l^igth  an  animal  was  sacrified,  and  the  blood  tinown 
thioui^  the  fire  on  the  stone;  part  of  the  flesh  was  biixned,  and  part  eaten 
by  the  assistants,  who  were  numerous,  and  who  accompaided  the  priest  in 
various  prayers  and  de\'out  gesticulations.  One  of  the  prayers  was  for  the 
.extirpation  of  the  Mussulmans  *.   The  worship  of'  idols  is  pecibnned  nearly 


*  Some  may  be  lutcreated  hj  the  following  details  of  the  ceremony.    The  wood  UKd  in  the  Hcri> 

fice,  which  MoolUi  Nujeeb  cdbKdiKtofkiianedKMOBOofiwTho^  aeoocdiagto 
Dhttnput  Rvf. 

^  **  Then  k  m  itoiie  wt  upright  aboot  Ibar  ftet  1i%b,  iml  bi  bmddi  about  tbat  of  s  itaol  nm. 

Thit  is  the  Imrtan,  or  holy  «;tor.c,  and  bt-hind  it  to  th?  north  if  a  wall."  This  is  all  the  temple. 
•Tb«  atiMie  rcfinaent*  Cod.  Thcjr  uy  *'  this  sfaods  for  him,  but  we  know  not  bit  ihape."  To  the 
■o«Ui«f  tbttaitaobMBiafiK  of  Kandior,  a^CMof  jAiewbidiiltbram  wgnMtpwpoi^ 


'  est   .  CAOimffAUK,  Cihnmu 

in  the  same  way.   Time  «re  Bonwtimeo  in  the  q>eo  sir,  and  eomrti'mei  ia 
iMNMt  odied  Jbar  UsuMb  Thoogli  fira  (niidB  of  bcudiM  sf  a  ptrtaeitlMr  * 
tMe)     aecMuy  ftr  all  itligMia  isereiiioilia«»  7«t  ifal^  Mem  to  ham  no 
'    {Mirticalar  veneration  for  that  element  and  kMp  iq»  no  etomal  fire. 

They  ha^'e  licreditary  priests,  but  thcr  have  no  great  influence.  They 
have  also  persons  who  can  procure  an  inspiration  of"  some  superior  being,  by 
holding  their  heads  over  the  smolce  oi  a  sacritice,  but  these  are  held  in  no 


to  gW*  a  grm  deal  of  Mnoke.  A  penon  whote  proper  tasm  w  iCafe^  aad  title  Ot^  MMit 
befeic  tlw  fire,  and  brliiiid  hun  tlte  wortbippcn  to  a  row.  Finlf  water  it  brought  him,  witb  which 
he  washes  his  hands,  jr.d  taking  some  to  hia  right  band,  throws  k  three  time*  through  the  imoke  or 
flame  on  Uie  Imrtao,  saying  every  time  Sooch,  that  is,  pore  ;  then  he  throws  a  handful  of  water  oo  tht 
■afifice,  usually  a  gMl  or  o»iv»  aad  aajn  8«oek.  Tfaea  taUng  mbis  water,  aad  iff  tif^g  aoae 
weeds  (neanifig,  •<  do  tliott  aowpt  thr  Mctifwel**  Ike),  fie  pout*  it  into tke left  «ir  of  Aeaaeiififlc 

wliiih  8t»nd«  on  hi»  ri^'lif  fMoolluh  N'ljet-Vi  -  >  •■.  '  ,•  n  -acrifirrS,  otic-  to  God,  and  one  to  an  ido!.) 
If  the  autntal  now  turn  up  it«  bead  to  hcavci<,  it  i»  scckoned  a  sign  of  acceptance,  aad  gives  great 
■Miilaction  ;  aftcrwaids  ia  the  right  car,  and  a  third  time  un  the  fort- head,  aad  a  fourth  oo  its  back. 
En  -h  titre  Sooch  is  oncp  said.  Ni«t  dirowing  in  some  fuc!,  he  takes  a  handful  of  dry  wheat  flour, 
and  throws  it  through  tlie  6re  on  the  Attae  \  and  this  flour  they  reckon  a  part  of  God ;  and  again 
he  throws  both  bmdt  fuB  of  Ghee  ra/s  the  fire  j  this  also  is  a  portion  of  God.  Thi-y  do  not  ia 
rirhtr  of  Hum  tMnmmmm  ny  Sooch*  b«t  sow  tke  priaat  says  wttJk  a  ked  toice,  Ke !  and  after 

be  say  He  Uotidit  that  is,  accept !  Tina  thef  accompany  mAtm 
w  it!i  a  gesture.  They  put  their  pahns  ftpandtd  on  the  outhidc  i>f  their  knees,  and  a«  they  raise 
them  in  an  extended  potitioo,  say.  He  Umuck  i  Tbe  priest  uow  kiUs  the  goat  witJi  a  loofep  aid 
wwaitin  ■  bodi  \mi»m  iWlibodk  aDowta  Stda  to  drap  loto  tbe  in,  tnd  tbrowatha  wwiiada 
through  the  fire  on  the  Imrtan  (or  idol,  in  case  of  an  idol),  and  again  three  "  He  Umuch]'* 
The  liead  is  now  twisted  off  (to  the  left),  aad  thrown  into  the  fire,  but  no  "  He  unuich !"  Wine 
lithcnbroagfatlBabBwl,  wdthe  fviwt  duapptaf  a  iMla  fate  dko  fc^  ttwwatlw  tit  tbwi^  it^ 
(tbe  gltoe  too  was  thrown  out  of  a  bowl),  and  r^rt-c  Hr  T^miich  I  The  priest  now  prays  Go^ 
**  Ward  off  the  fever  from  u*  I  tncreauK  onr  stores  I  kill  ttir  Mu»>u1mans  !  aft«r  death  admit  u»  to 
Bw0eb6ola  i  or  paradise and  tlim  He  UBOCb  m  said.  Thit  priest  now  bring*  Jbrward  and 
pAwas  bclstc  hitnsrlf  a  Pasha,  or  person  pos<««sed  by  a  spirit,  who  after  stietchiag  forward  his  head 
iato  the  smoke,  and  shaking  it  in  it,  tarns  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and  prays  as  before ;  the  pncti  aitd 
worshippers  three  time*  aay  budly  He  Unrach  I  Next  each  man  puts  the  fingers  of  each  hand  to- 
gether to  hk  mouth  and  kisses  them,  next  tohitq^Hi  and  lastly  to  his  head(  then  all  retire,  and  sit 
arte  dmni  hi  mm  plM*.  They  now  put  the  Mood  «f  the  vfetian,  with  a  Bttk  water,  on  the  fin^ 
and  after  it  l.at  simmered  a  little,  put  in  the  flesh,  which  is  soon  taken  out  half  raw  and  eaten.  Bat 
if  the  victim  be  a  cow,  it  ia  divided,  and  each  man  carries  Ins  ow*  homu  The  friett  gets  a^addi 
share  iabmhcMcs.  Doriaf  the  aeri  they  sip  some  wine,  niied  wHh  a  deri  of  water,  end  fandAed 
by  the  person  who  gwn  \\t  victim.  The  bones  are  plu'.  'junn.  Tl.i  circumstances  ir.  \\x  ?..ine 
when  ilic  s-icrifite  is  before  an  idoi,  but  the  aolj  one  of  this  sort  seen  by  MooUah  Nujeeb,  was  to 
Koomy,  aa  idol  some  distsoce  to  the  South  of  the  riHage^oo  thogbl  of  dBbuIt  aeeeM^  flisy  fw 
tented  themselves  with  throwing  these  things  towards  it.  They  had  no  Kibia,  and  ilieir  idott  Csce 
always  indtSercntly,  but  MooUah  Nujeeb  cannot  now  srfaether  in  all  the  Umrtaas  and  Umr- 
nnss,  tbe  worahl^ncn  last  10  tte  sfli^  A  COW  i»  rinMk  eae  hbv  with  w  lit  «a  the  fHdNwk 
of  vfakbitdM. 


Digitized  by  CoogI 


eAjawmmtjaoL 


particular  reveranoe.  Ihmy  detest  fiih,  but  kuM  no  oliMr  vam^l  'mpvat, 
•Kting  alfln  b«eC«MiMeii»  taM^s  icib,  aad  anjr  thing  daa  tliigr  ctn  gpt 
TlioaiilithesrIiMn  wBoMkm  onaU  dayi  ^riwn  tiwjr  plcMp,  yil  ihtffB 

certain  fixed  festivals,  wfaidi  prevail  ni— (gifae  Caumojes  of  CwiWijhMlfcy  WBd 
which  MooHali  Niijeeb  thinks  may  be  general.    Some  of  these  are  remark- 
able, bt!t  nmic  resembles  any  festival  that  I  am  aoqnainted  with,  except  one, 
at  which  the  Caulirb  throw  (ufies  at  each  other,  a»  the  Hindoos  do  a  sort  ot' 
powder  duriog  the  Uooly. 

Tlw  ftttmda  am  «Aen  «ooMB|Mnii«a iriili  mwmiBet,  and  ihv^vptli  » 
ftMt$  tttonetlieiio^liglittoMteiif  nantof  pincb  md CH17  then  bafinp 
coe  of  the  idal%  where  they  tluow  Umb  doim  and  aUnv  M 
'  another  the  wt)men  hide  themselves  without  the  ^nllage,  and  the  men  search 
for  them  ;  when  found,  the  women  defend  tJiemselves  with  switches,  but 
are  finally  earned  off  by  the  men.  Some  said  that  any  wuuiau  who  came  to 
bond  was  carried  4)ff  by  may  mao,  but  MooUah  Nujeeb,  irom  luodesty,  did 
iBot  queation  tbam  «n  ti»a  auhject 

^Bieirntiiereeieinonieaaaa  Iwa  rnnmatBtl  nMnajyon.  AttheWithef 
n  A3d|t  it  is  earned  with  its  mother  to  a  house  built  for  the  purpose  without 
the  village  ;  they  remain  there  for  twenty-four  days,  durinc^  wliich  time  tlie 
mother  is  rcrk-nnefl  imptrre ;  and  there  is  a  simiiar  hoiise  t'ov  other  women  to 
inhabit  during  certam  periods,  when  the  Cautirs  reckon  them  impure.  At 
the  expiration  of  the  twenty-four  days,  both  nutther  and  child  are  bathed, 
andeaniadhMk  irididancfa«andanMietothe  vOl^  Whan  the  child  la 
«•  be  named,  kia  held  at  ila  aaoihci^a  bfeast^  while  the  natnea  efiteanoaatiMi 
we  repealed  to  it,  and  they  give  it  the  nanoe,  at  which  it  hi|giaa  to  suck.  * 

The  age  of  marriage  is  from  twenty  to  tliirty  for  the  men,  and  fifteen  or 
sixteen  for  the  women.  The  cereinoiu  l;egins  bv  the  intended  bridegroom 
sending  some  tine  clothes  of  cotton  ornamented  witii  wofbied  (tiie  manufac- 
ture of  the  A%haun  country),  with  some  ornaments  to  the  proposed  bnde. 
HealieaendathanwftBrialaftrnftaattethegM'aftthatand  har  aiblkM» 
liMt«igfat  k  i|iantln  ftaaling^  and  on  the  nnil,  the  |0W  a 
avho  ia  draned  in  the  ineiy  he  hea  givan  to  her.  Tbe  Atfaar  adda  *  aSk 


*  The  coouBon  names  at  Canrodaiah  were  CbutKUoo,  Deemoo,  Han«r  Metrnk,  BoaUe,  aad 
Budeti.  The  name*  of  ceruin  men  at  Tiokooee  were  GorrumbaiM,  Auur,  Dooruuat  PramJieoIla, 
GcBMcrak,  Kootokt,  Oodoor,  Knmmer,  and  Zore.  Thoae  of  uriiis  wnmm  wcr  Mifwifcifg  J»- 
UtOw, Mwlte Ptami Jtaakt, Zom ftwHwfcB, Malkeg,  andilluM  ThsBMarfarMW 
jtXMttsMrwm'MIisii^Oivai^aadJIaawr*  wdsf  ww.w-wa  Iniawi 


CIAUFIRI&TAUII. 


handkerchief  and  some  other  ornaments  and  articles  of  dress  for  the  bride, 
i^d  gives  a  coir,  mod  perhaps  »  dmre  to'  the.bfidcgrooni.  The  girl  is  tbcn 
KmI  out  iritli  ft  faidctt  on  hsr  back  doutiitui^  'fiiiits  and  wahuito  pnpmd 

ynA  hau^f  and  (if  the  family  can  afford  it),  ft  silver  cup.  In  this  manner 
she  proceed^  to  her  husband*s  lioiise,  the  whole  village  attending,  dancing 
and  siugiug-  Some  days  afterwards,  thp  father  receives  the  pric^  of  his 
daughter,  which  is  said  sometimes  to  amuunt  to  twenty  cows.  The  priests 
have  no  share  in  the  ceremony.  The  women  do  all  the  drudgery  of  die 
family.  Dhunpat  Baiy  states  that  tb^  even  till  the  land.  Foljganj  ia 
aliowed.  Tliere  is  no  conoealment  of  iponaeo.  Adnlteiyisnot  thoqghtmiicii 
of,  though  there  is  a poiualunent  for  it.  , 
Besides  their  wives,  the  rich  Canfii  have  male  and  female  slaves.  These 
are  all  Caufirs  (tor  they  take  no  prisoners  in  their  wars  with  Mussulmans). 
Some  of  them  are  laikeu  in  battle  from  tribes  with  which  they  are  at  war,  aud 
etkeis  stolen  ftom  those  with  whom  they  are  at  peace,  but  the  greater  part 
ace  people  of  their  own  tribes  it  beuog  quite,  oommon  fyt  poweffiil  men  tp* 
seize  on  the  duUran  of -wesk  oiies  and  neW  them  to  the  Mussuboans  or  keep 
ibem  for  their  own  use  :  a  person  wlio  loses  his  relations  is  soon  made  a 
slave.  The  slaves  who  are  retained  in  the  tribe,  however,  are  not  ill  tised, 
though  not  exactly  on  a  looUufi  with  the  tre^  people  pf  the  tamiiy  they 
belong  to.  '     .  ', 

V  The  Ibaerab  of  the  Caiifin  difibr  mndi  from  tboee  of  odier  nalaooi^ 
^K^ben  a  person  dle^  he  is  dressed  in  bos  best  dothes  and  extended  en  abed 
on  whidi  his  arms  are  laid  by  bis  side.  Thu  is  oenmd  sboot  by  some  of  bi^ 
rdations,  while  the  rest  sing  and  dance  round  it^  the  men  'performing  a 
sham-fipht,  but  the  women  lamenting:  from  time  to  time  the  body  is  set 
down,  aud  the  women  we^  over  it.  At  length  it  is  siiut  up  in  a  coffin  and 
'deposited  in  the  open  air  under  the  shade  of  treei^  or  in  sooae  oUier  suitable 
<eitiiati(ita.  Every  fimeial  oondudes  with  an  entertainmmri;  ftnd  onee  ft  yesr 
»  ftast  is  given  in  memory  of  tte'deoeeied,  and  some  Ibod  is  eaqMieedAr-iiis 
manes,  which  are  invoked  to  come  and  partake.  It  has  been  mentioned  that 
some  attain  to  the  rjmk  of  gods  after  their  death  ;  there  is  another  way  of 
securing  postimmous  reputation,  by  the  erection  of  a  gate  near  the  way  side. 
It  is  but  a  simple  structure,  consisting  of  four  beams  and  a  i'ew  yank  of 
-masoniy,  and  is  of  no  use)  but  it  is  called  after  the  name  «f  the  ftunder, 
and  the  e^(^ent  of  thb  honour  must  be  purdiased  fay  many  ftmts  to  the 
inUsge*  A.  strange  account  is  given  by  Dhunput  Roy  of  their  ceramemes  of 
,^ondolenoe:  ftpetion  who  vishs  another  thai  has  lost  a  xehrtieq,  throwt  hie 

la 


Digitized  by  GoOgle 


I 


cap  on  the  ground  when  he  enters  the  house,  then  draws  his  dagger,  and 
weMag  the  heads  of  the  afflicted  twraon,  mekee  hSm  rae  and  jdn  Utn  in 
dancing  for  some  time  about  the  room. 

I  can  give  but  little  accoant  of  the  government  of  the  Caufirs.   It  il  Itiu 

certain  whether  tliere  are  any  acknowledged  magistrates  ;  if  there  are,  they 
have  very  little  power,  every  thing  being  done  by  consultations  among  the 
rich  men.  They  seem  to  practise  retaliation  like  the  AfghauuH,  and  I  know 
of  no  other  administration  of  justice.  They  have  no  titles  of  their  own,  but 
they  have  bonowed  that  of  Khaun  from  the  Afghauna  Ibr  Hietr  ridi  men. 
nidr  proper^  chiefly  oonnats  in  cattle  and  davei  j  •  rich  nan  at  Camndaiah 
had  about  eight  bundled  goats,  near  three  hundred  oxen,  and  ftmSiet 
of  slaves. 

The  v,ho)e  dress  of  the  common  people  among  tlie  Leaposhe  Caufirs,  is 
composed  of  four  goat-skinn,  two  of  which  form  a  ve&t,  and  two  a  kind  of 
petticoat.  The  skins  have  long  hair  on  the  outside.  The  upper  ones  do  not 
cover  the  arms.  The  whole  is  ftatened  on  -witii  ft  leatiier  bdL  They  gd 
bare  beaded*  unless  they  have  killed  a  Mussulman  |  and  shave  their  beadii 
except  for  a  long  tuft  on  the  crown  and  perhaps  two  curls  over  the  ear& 
They  also  pluck  out  the  hair  from  their  upper  lip^  cheeks^  and  neck;,  but  wear 
beards  four  or  five  inches  long. 

Those  in  good  circumstances  and  those  near  the  Afghauns  wear  a  shirt 
beneath  tb«r  vest*  and  in  sunutter  the  diirt  Ibtma  the  whole  of  llidr  dteaii 
as  it  always  does  witii  the  wonwD.  Thi  great  do  not  wter  goat>akini^  but 
ooCfeon  cloth  or  black  hair  ctoth.  Some  also  wear  the  sort  of  white  blanket 
woven  in  tlie  neiglibouring  country  of  Kaushkaur.  Urn  blankets  are  pat  on 
like  Highland  plaids,  come  down  to  near  the  knee,  and  are  fastened  with  a 
belt.  They  also  wear  cotton  trowsers,  which»  as  well  as  their  shirts*  are 
worked  aU  over  iRlfalki#eis  in  red  and  UackininlBdL  fte  trdWten  ar6  slit 
at  the  bottom,  so  as  to  make  »  soit  of  fiiDge^  ■  Ibey  ab»  #fiar  worsted 
stockings,  or  perhaps  worsted  fllleta  ralled  round  tbab  Iq^ ;  andthe*arfioif 
wear  half-boots  of  white  goat^Idn.  ■ 

The  dress  of  the  women  differs  little  from  that  of  the  men,  but  they  have 
their  hnir  phiti-d  and  lasieiied  on  the  top  of  their  head,  and  over  it  a  small 
cap,  round  wluch  is  a  little  turban.  They  have  also  silver  ornaments  and 
many  cowry  abeUs.  The  virgms  wear  e  red  fillet  round  their  heads. 

Soth  sexes  have  ear-rings,  rings  round  the  neck,  and  bracelets,  which  are 
sometimes  of  silver,  but  often er  of  pewter  or  brass.  Hheaeareleft  odf  duiittg 
nounuiig}  and  Uritk  the  men  they  are  sssumed,  with  much  oefemoiij  and 

4l 


Digitized  by  Google 


686 


CAOTIEISTAUM. 


(Anuoub 


expcnm  ftuting,  ate  the  age  of  uiMiliood.  Ilie  hoooniy  dist&iotkMis  & 
the  dM  of  the  olen  iriU  b«  mantMnfid  heiMte. 

The  houses  of  the  Cauiirs  are  often  of  wood,  and  they  have  generally  cel- 
lars where  they  keep  their  cheeses,  clarified  butter,  wine,  and  vinegar.  In 
every  house  there  is  a  wooden  bencfi  rixed  to  the  wall  with  a  low  back  to  it. 
There  are  alan  stooJs  shaped  like  drums,  but  smaller  in  the  middle  thau  at 
the.flitdfl^  and  taUes  of  ^  nme  Mut,  but  larger.  Hie  Gaufirs,  partly  Seom 
their  dn»  and  partly  fitm  habit,  cannot  ait  like  the  other  AaiatioB  j  and  if 
iRMPoed  to  sit  down  on  the  ground,  stretch  out  their  lep  like  European!.  Thef 
have  also  bedsmadeof  wood  and  tboogB  of  neat's  leather-:  the  stools  ane  made 
of  wicker  work. 

Their  food  is  chiefly  Hieese,  butter,  and  iiiiik,  with  bread  or  a  sort  ot  suet 
pudding.  1  iiey  also  eat  llesh  (which  they  like  irnli  raw) }  and  the  iruits  they 
hevf,  inlnuts,  grapes,  apples,  almonds,  and  a  sort  of  indiflbnmt  apiioot  thiA 
groVra  wild.  They  wash  their  hands  before  eatings  and  generally  begin  by 
iome  kind  of  grace.  They  all,  of  both  sexes,  drink  wine  to  great  excess : 
they  have  three  kinds,  red,  white,  and  dark  coloured,  besides  a  sort  of  the 
consistence  of  a  jelly,  and  very  strong.  They  drink  wit>e,  both  pure  and 
diluted,  out  of  large  silver  cupn,  wliich  axe  the  most  preuous  of  their 
possearions. '  They  drink  during  their  meals,  and  are  elevatodt  but  not  made 
quarrebom^  by  this  .indulgence.  They  are  exceedingly  hotfiitables  the 
people  of  a  vill^  come  out  to  meet  a  etnmger,  take  his  baggage  fh>m  those 
who  are  carrying  it,  and  conduct  him  with  many  welcomes  into  their  village^ 
When  there,  he  must  visit  every  person  of  note,  and  at  each  house  he  is 
pres-sed  to  eat  and  drink.  The  Cautirs  nave  a  great  deal  of  idle  time  ;  they 
hunt  a  little,  but  not  so  much  as  the  Afghaun^  :  their  iavounte  amujicmeut  is 
dancing.  Their  dances  are  generally  rapid,  and  they  uaemauy  gesticidatiOQab 
faishur  ihftr  dumlden.  tht^Vftf  thor  h«>*<^*-  muI  flmnyStMiig  rimir  t** «»i^-»w— 
AH  sexes  and  ages  dance.  Tliey  sometimes  form  a  circle  of  men  and  women 
alternately,  who  move  round  the  musicians  for  some  time  With  joil^d  handle 
then  all  spnng  tonvard  and  mix  together  in  a  dance. 

They  dance  with  great  vehemence,  and  beat  the  ground  witli  muclt  force. 
Their  oniy  instmments  ate  « tabwand  pipe*  but  the  dancers  often  accom- 
pany them  with  the  voice*  Tlieir  music  is  generally  quid^  but  varied  and 
wild. 

One  of  their  characteristic  features  is  their  constant  war  with  the  Mussul> 

mans,  whom  they  hold  in  detestation.  The  Mussulmans  indeed  frequently 
invade  their  territories  in  small  parties  to  cany  ott' slaves^  and  once  or  twice 


Digitizer 


-  CAUFUUaTAim. 


687 


have  undertaken  more  important  expeditions  agaioat  them.   About  thirty 
jeM  ago^  liiere  ym  a  gMMnl  cnwide  (if  I  imy  be  «]bw«d  tiie  expression) 
igaimfc  them.  The  JOumii  of  BuduUiibiuii,  one  lit  leaafc  «f  die  •fi^ 
KandilGMilV  the  ftmdabah  of  Cooner,  the  Beoaof  Bajour»  and  several  Euso^ 

zye  Khauns,  confcderntpd  on  this  occasion,  and  met  in  the  heart  of"  the  Cau* 
fir  country;  but  notwithstanding  this  success,  tliey  were  unable  to  keep  their 
ground,  and  were  forced  to  evacuate  the  couutry,  ailer  suffering  considerable 
losses.  The  arms  of  the  Caufirs  are  a  bow  about  four  feet  and  a  half  long, 
irith  e  leather  atriag*  andUgfatanonsof  raeda  nith  baibed  heada»  which  thef 
waMtiiiua  poiion.  They  wear  alao  a  dagger  of  a  peculiar  ahape  <m  tiie  t^jh^ 
nde,  and  a  sharp  knife  on  the  left,  with  which  ihejr  generally  carry  a  flint 
and  some  bark  of  a  particular  kind,  which  makes  excellent  tinder.  They  have 
also  begun  to  learn  the  use  of  fire  anus  and  sworda  .&om  their  Afghaun 
neighb<)urs.  ■ 

Hiey  sometimes  go  openly  to  attack  their  enemies,  but  their  commonest 
mode  is  by  aarpnnls  and  ambmhwi,  and  they  expoae  Aemadvea  te  Ae  mom 
miifiirtiiiieB  by  neglecting  to  keep  watdi  by  mfjjtiL  They  often  undertake 
imMte  and  diiBctdt  expeditioQi^  for  which  they  are  well  suited,  being  natU' 
laUj  light  and  active :  when  pursiKd,  they  unbend  their  bow,  uu!  using  it  as 
■A  Tenpins'  pole,  make  55wrprising  bounds  from  rock  to  rock.  MooUali  Nujeeb 
saw  tile  men  of  Caumdaish  march  out  ap^ainst  another  tribe.  The  rich  wore 
their  best  clothes,  and  some  put  on  black  fillets  ornamented  with  cowry 
shells,  one  Ibr  every  Mnawilman  whom  the  wearer  had  killed.  They  sung  a 
war-eongaa  they  marched  awa^>  in  which  were  ^  wovda  deria  ki,  Ckent  hi, 
Mdiradk,  and  he  learned  that  when  they  had  succeeded  in  eeming  on  an 
enemy  unprepared,  they  set  19  a  hmd  whiatlev  and  amg  a  vmg,  of  which  the 
chonif?  is  Uahro  00  Ushro :  on  such  occasions  they  put  every  soul  to  death. 
But  their  chief  glory  is  to  slay  the  Mussulmans  :  a  young  Caufir  is  deprived 
of  various  privil^s  till  he  has  performed  this  exploit,  and  numerous  distmc 
tions  are  contrived  to  atimolate  him  to  repeat  it  aa  often  as  may  be  in  his 
power.    Tn  diA  aalemn  dmcaa  on       fariiwl  af  WumtiiiiMuit,  — fh  tM«  iff^Tt 

a  MMtt  <tf  tiirban  in  which  ia  aluck  a  Imig  Aether  Ibr  every  Muanhnan  he  haa 
killed :  the  number  of  bcOa  he  wears  round  his  waistx>n  that  occasion  is  regiK 
lated  by  the  same  rritenon,  and  it  is  not  allowed  to  a  Caufir  who  haa  not 
killed  hi';  m;ui  to  flourish  his  axe  above  his  head  in  the  dance.  Those  who 
L  slaiu  iVlussulmans  are  visited  and  coDgratulated  by  their  acqnaintances, 
and  liave  ailerwards  a  right  to  wear  a  little  red  wooUen  cap  (ui  latiier  a  kind 
of  4iocfcade)  tied  on  the  faead^  and  thoae  w^  have  kifl«d  oiany  may  erect  a 

4Xr  a 


Mt  BUDDKHBHAUlf.  rAnms. 

high  pole  before  Uieir  doors,  in  wluch  axe  iiuiei  to  receive  a  pm  for  every 
MuMulntio  th«  omwr  haa  killed,  and  a  nag  fat  every  ona  lia  Ini  voaiuled. 
WKJi  mdi  floooangement  to  Idll  tham,  it  k  not  likaly  tiw  Crailn  mmld 
often  maka  Mussulmans  prinmait;  audi  caaas  have  happened  M^ian  Aa 

Caufin  were  defending  their  own  village,  and  they  then  made  a  feaat  niA 
great  triumph,  and  put  the  unfortunata  priaooer  to  death  in  much  forai)  or 
perhaps  sacrificed  turn  to  their  idols. 

They»  however,  soinetiuies  have  peace  or  U  uce  with  Mussulmans.  Their 
way  of  atriking  a  league  it  aa  atnnge  aa  their  mode  <£  war.  Tiwy  k3l  a 
goat  and  draia  the  haart*  bite  off  hal^  and  give  tiie  feat  to  tiie  Hoiaulauaii 
the  parties  then  gently  bite  eadi  about  tiie  lagion  of  the  baact,  and  ^ 
treaty  is  concluded. 

Though  exasperated  to  such  fiiry  by  the  persecutions  of  the  Mahomedans, 
the  Caufirs  are  in  general  a  harmless,  affectionate,  and  kind-hearted  peupie. 
Though  passionate  they  are  easily  appeased :  they  are  merry,  playiUI,  fond 
of  laughter,  and  altogetiier  of  a  aociable  and  jojona  disposition.  Even  to 
MuMulmani,  they  are  bind  when  they  admit  them  aa  guaat%  and  tbongb 
Hoollab'  Nujeeb  was  once  obliged  to  be  kept  by  the  other  GMifiiib  out  «f 
the  way  of  a  drunken  man  of  their  nation,  he  was  never  threatened  or 
affironted  oa  account  of  hia  reiigioa  by  aoy  man  in  possesaaon  of  hia 
&culties. 

Budukhshaun*  though  an  extensive  country,  seems  to  be  but  one  great 
vtSkf  nmning  up  fiom  tibe  province  of  Bulkh  to  Bekxit  T^uigb  behl^en 
die  bighiaiidt  oonneoted  with  the  Funere  and  the  lange  of  Hindoo  Cooab. 
The  nearest  parts  of  Hmdoo  Oooah  and  Beloot  Taugh  are  inhabited  by 

Caufirs,  whose  tcrritorj'  conse<juent!y  bounds  Biuliikhshann  on  the  south 
and  east,  dividing  it  from  tlie  Alghauns,  and  tlic  Cobis  of  Kaiishkaur;  on 
the  west  are  the  independent  Uzbeks  of  Koondooz,  Taulikaun  and  Ui^aur, 
and  on  the  north,  the  Kir^uzaaa  of  Fkmeie  and  the  Taujiks  of  Shoaghnaun* 
Derwans  and  Wnkheeba. 

Ulieae  countries  are  exceediiifi^y  nMmntainoua»  and  are  bounded  co  Ae 
north  by  a  sinMlar  country  called  Kurrategeen  also  inhabited  by  Taujiks, 
and  extending  to  Kokun  or  Ferghauna.  The  King  of  Derwnuz  dainis 
descent  irom  Alexander  the  Great,  and  his  pretensions  are  admitted  by  all 
his  neighbours. 

The  Oxua  riaes  in  the  north«east  of  Budukhshaun,  flows  wiAhi  its 
nortliem  border^  and  afterwarda  aqparataa  it  from  Hiasaur.  The  interior  of 
Biidukihann  ia  watered  by  the.Eoodia,  wbidi  joina  the  Oeob,  It  is  a 


Digitizer 


AmMUEj  KAUSHKAUB.  em 

comidarabb  skretn*  over  vHiSA  tlwre  ak*  levanl  woodtn  luridgmfc  «•. 
seldom  ficdaUe  m  low  as  Fjoabad.  The  part  of  Beloot  Taugfr  withia 

Budukhshsun  produces,  iron,  salt,  and  wlphur,  as  well  as  abundance  of 

lapis  lazuli ;  but  the  celebrated  mines  of  rubies,  which  occasion  Buduk- 
shann  to  he  so  often  alluded  to  by  tiie  Persian  poets,  are  situated  in  the 
lower  lulls  near  tlie  Oxus.  They  ve  not  now  wrought.  The  plain  country 
and  valli^  are  fertile,  though  not  extensive. 

'  The  inbalutaiita  an  Tau^ilEB,  and  are  called  BuduUuheaB  $  but  towarda 
tbe.weat  are  many  campa  cf  wandering  Udieka.  The  capital  is  Fyzabad,  a 
considerable  town  on  the  Koocha.  The  preaent  chief  is  Sultaun  Mahommei^ 

who  I  In  11  eve  is  absolute.  His  revenue  is  said  to  be  six  lacks  of  ni]>ees 
(about  ii?6o,ooo),  and  his  force  from  seven  thousand  to  ten  thousand  men, 
mostly  matchlockmen,  a  service  in  which  the  Buduksliees  greatly  excell. 
They  are  oocaatonally  banaMed  by  irruptioni  of  tlM  IM»da  of  Taolikaiiii, 
and  llieir  borden  auflRer  from  the  depredations  of  the  Caufira;  but  it  is  long 
since  tfaejr  have  been-  diatuibed  by  any  great  war.  Fyzabad  was  taken,  and 
the  whole  country  nominally  subdued  by  the  Vizier  Shauh  Wullee  Khaun 
in  Ahmed  Shauh's  time,  but  he  probably  felt  himself  unable  to  retain  pos- 
session, for  he  coiiiented  himself  with  taking  some  relicks,  and  evacuated 
the  couutry.  Among  the  relicks  was  tlie  shirt  oi'  Mahomet,  which  in  the 
neighbouring  coimtriea  was  thought  as  great  a  prize  as  the  itatuea  taken 
&om  Italy  by  the  Frendi  were  in  Europe: 

The  (XMintiyof  Kaushkaur  must  be  carefulty distinguished  from  Cashgar  near 
Yarktind  inChincscToorkistaun.  I  liave  endeavoured  to  mark  the  difference  by 
retaining  the  spelling  of  our  majis  for  the  first  place,  and  gi\  ing  that  which 
is  commonest  in  Aighauniiitaun  for  the  other ;  though  in  fact  I  have  heard 
both  called  indiacrimiiwtelyi  Kauahkaur,  Kaushghur  and  Kaushgaur.  The 
resnnUance  of  the  names  led  us  into  great  mutalces  idaen  we  first  arrived 
at  Peshawer.  We  bouglit  tea,  which  we  were  told  was  brought  by  caravans 
from  Kaushkaur  (Cashgar),  and  the  first  people  whom  we  asked  respecting 
the  distance,  told  ns  we  inijrht  easily  go  to  Kaushkaur,  and  return  within 
a  fortnight.  In  time,  however,  we  obtained  more  precise  inl<  imiation.  We 
ibund  that  the  nearest  Kaushkaur  was  aa  extensive,  but  mountainous  and  . 
tU  iDhabited  country,  lying  to  the  west  of  Budntahaim,  fiom  which  it  was 
divided  by  Beloot  Tfnq^;  faanii^  litdeTibeton  the  east,  the  Fimereonthe 
north,  and  the  ridge  of  Hhidoo  CooBh(wfaicli  aeparatca  it  fiom  tlieEuioQsea) 
on  the  south. 

Tbe  Gountiy  is  high  and  <x)ld*  The  inhabitants  live  chiefly  in  tent^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


KA17BHKAn& 


though  there  are  some  towns.  They  belong  to  a  nation  called  Gobi  j 
die  origin  of  which  I  know  notlung,  but  what  is  suggested  by  the  resem* 
bhnceof  flieir  itaiiietothat  of  an  eztaunv^  Thq^ 
are  at  pmcnt  MahonmMdani,  and  are  under  Jiflfei<Bit  petty  detp<>liaiM,  to 
the  number*  I  understand,  of  four.  That  to  the  west  is  called  Chitrau^ 
and  has  been  sometimes  invaded  from  Budukhshaun,  though  defended  by 
Beloot  Tatigh  and  the  river  <>t  Kauslikunr.  Towards  the  Eusofyzes  fs 
Droutih,  which  was  taken  bv  the  Algliauub  ot  Funjcora.  Another  of  t}u>se 
princqtalitiei  n  MasUK>ch,  but  tlie  whole  is  little  known,  especially  to>s  aids 
file  north  and  eaat  Mr.  Macartney  nwntioiM  a  road  ftom  Fkiii|boim  along 
Hie  bocden  of  Katiahkaiir,  rumdng  up  the  valley  of  the  river  of  tbat'name^ 
and  practicable  fbr  camels.  Hiia  diminishes  the  wonder  of  Kaussim  Khana^ 
passage  of  the  perpetual  snow  on  Hindoo  Cooah,  wincb  haa  been  aMntioned 
in  the  account  of  the  EutoQrases* 


Digitized  by  Google 


* 

{  m  ) 


APPENDIX  D. 

SmUCT  VBOM  LBIfTBirAlIT  MACAttTMBT'S  XBMOUU 

I AM  well  sware  of  my  inability  to  perform  a  task  of  the  present  kind,  but 
At  tiie  paitkniUtr  vrish  of  Mr.  Elphinstonc,  I  have  attempted  it,  though 
1  much  fear  it  will  be  found  very  imperfect ;  and  from  tlie  short  stay  ol"  the 
embassy  at  Peshour,  and  my  time  being  chiefly  employed  in  obtaining  routes 
and  protracting  them  on  the  spot,  the  general  accounts  of  countries  are  not 
so  full  as  I  could  have  wiibei. 


COHSnUCTipN  OB  THS  HAP. 

In  the  construction  of  the  map,  particular  atLeiiiiuii  was  paid  to  obtain  t  he 
correct  ]  stance  of  some  grand  points,  from  wiiich  more  distant  oiiea  were 
afterwards  tu  be  settled ;  thii  WM  done  by  various  iDUtet  iet  off  from  point* 
fixed  by  obsemtum  in  the  route  of  the  Cabul  embenjr*  and  the  space  ooiv 
Tfkhiti  lime  great  an^^es  has  been  filled  up  as  much  as  posiQile  by 
cnW»  TXWrtftt,  whidi  gives  the  great  bends  of  the  road,  and  of  course  the 
position  of  these  points  more  correct  than  by  setting  oft"  the  gross  distance. 

The  windings  of  the  road  cannot  be  laid  down  with  any  degree  of  cer- 
tainty from  the  direction  given  "by  the  natives ;  I  have  therefore  ^tended 
chiefly  to  cross  routes  fbniiiiig  great  angles,  to  itaui  Hietrtie  bearings  of  the 
roads. 

The  fint  gnmd  point  I  thought  necessary  to  fix  was  Bukhur,  situated  on 
an  island  fimned  by  the  river  Indus,  in  latitude  27°  30'  north,  and  longitude 
69*  aof  east.  The  points  from  which  I  fixed  the  position  of  this  were  Beeka- 
neer,  Buhawulpoor,  and  Mooltan.  Tliis  was  done  by  taking  the  mean  of 
several  routes  t  rom  each  of  these  places.  The  distances  were  set  ofiT  in  cosa, 
which  I  found  to  be  ainOe  andahalf  each,  by  the  ran  of  the  perambulstor 
ftom  Bee  ^^nmtw  to  Mooltan*  The  distance  of  Buhawulpoor  from  MooHan 


Digitized  by  Google 


coNsmucnoN  of  the  map. 


is  said  to  be  torty  coss,  and  the  perambul^or  makes  it  sixty-one  miJes.  I 
have,  therefore,  allowed  one  mile  fpur  furlongs  to  each  com  in  the  routes 
firom  these  places  to  Bukhur,  and  deducted  one  in  ten  fiir  winding,  agreeaUe 
to  the  nature  of  tlie  covmtiy. 

The  fecond  gmnd  point  I  fi^ai  was  Oibul  (  I  have  good  reasons  for  placing 
this  a  very  little  north  of  Pcshour,  first  from  the  bearings  with  the  theodolite 
from  Pe-'*hoitr  of  Sutfeid  Koh,  which  is  situated  three  coss,  or  four  miles  and 
a  half,  south  of  Nimla,  on  the  high  road  from  Peshour  to  Cabul,  and  more 
than  half  way }  it  appears  that  this  village  cannot  be  to  the  north  of  Peshour, 
SulBud  Koh  bearing  from  south-vest  86*  to  88*  30^.  Thia  tinm  Nunfai 
ibotttdne  westof  Feshoor;  ihuafiw  I  think  llieie  can  bene  doiAtregMdiqg 
the  direction  of  the  road,  and  for  the  remailkder  I  have  three  routes  from 
Khugulwala,  two  from  Dcra  Ismaeel  Khan,  two  from  Kohat,  and  many  from 
Peshour,  all  of  which  meet  at  Cabul  and  tbnn  great  angles  :  all  these  point-s 
from  which  routes  were  taken  being  fixed  by  observation,  together  with 
the  bearings  oi'  Sufikid  Koii,  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  Cabul  is  near  the 
truth. 

I  heve  allowed  one  mfle  aix  fiirlraga  to  eadi  ooie  from  ell  tineeplaoei,  ex* 

ccpt  Peshour,  where  they  are  found  to  be  one  mile  fiwr  liiiioi^  or  Kioffn 
CO8B ;  but  from  Dera  to  Kohat  I  found  the  coss  in  general  one  mile  six  fur- 
longs, and  sometimes  a  little  more.  This  last  excess  I  h^ve  allowed  for 
whiding,  and  have  set  oft' Uie  full  distance  of  one  mile  and  MX  linlrm^s,  tliough 
the  country  is  hilly  ^  and  notwithstanding  this,  it  only  tiirows  Cabui  ibur 
niflei  north  of  Peshour ;  had  I  deducted  niore  for  windini^  it  would  have 
hrou^  Cabul  still  fiirther  south.  In  the  printed  nuqw,  Cabul  ia  put  norths 
^est  of  Peshour,  but  it  is  evident  the  mistake  has  arisen  in  placing  Peshour 
above  a  degree  too  far  to  the  southward.  Its  latitude  is  34"  9'  30''.  The 
COS*  from  Peshour  to  Cabul  i>  one  mile  four  furlongs,  being  King's  co<?!«. 
Tlie  tlistance  from  Peshour  to  Attock,  in  King's  coss,  is  thirty,  and  by  tiie 
jperambulator  il  was  ibrty 'five  miles  one  fiu-long.  From  this  I  have  calculated 
the  distaace  from  Peshour  to  Csbul,  and  have  allowed  one  in  e%ht  fiir 
wnidin^  in  oonseqiHence  of  die  loed  bong  throu^  a  'ntf  hiUj  Uountiy  eD 
tiie  way.  These  are  my  chief  reaswis  for  placing  Cabul  as  I  harei  and  sup* 
posing  it  to  be  correct,  I  take  it  as  a  point  from  wHdi  I  mean  to  aettle  the 
position  of  Kaud-dtar. 

The  third  point  is  Kandahar.  Tlii<  I  !ia\e  fixed  from  the  followina; route'! ; 
four  from  Bukhur,  wUxcii  i  have  iijced,  and  take  lur  grauted  is  rigiit  >  two 

fiooi  Decs  Ofaasee  Khan,  wtiich  Ilixed I17 ccom routca  from  Buhawulpoor, 


Digitized  by  Google 


Anmaaul  COK»ntUCnON  OP  THE  ICAP. 


999 


Mooltan,  and  Ooch  ;  the  distances  being  short  md  the  ancrles  great,  it  must 
be  nearly  right }  one  due  west  from  Dera  Isgaaeel  Kiuu  by  the  Gholeree 
pass,  leavipg  QfaiaMfr to  right ;  lixihMii  Qilittl*  .tad  Mo  fipom.  the  tea 
from  KiiffarJifirfmiMird  vui  KiBate  NweBr  JShnj  fjuifti^  Mtdtrnm,'  .  .. 

The  distance  from  Cabul  to  Kandahar  is  iet  off  at  a  idfle  and  a  hdf -to  oadi 
eoi^  being  the  King's  road,  and  the  coes  has  been  found  »  aifle  and  ft  Inlf 
each.  The  others  I  have  calculated  by  the  rate  of  marching,  not  knowing 
the  exact  length  of  the  cos«  in  these  couiitnLs  ;  and  having  calculah  d  the 
rate  oi  marching  through  various  kinds  oi  country,  1  consider  it  a  more  cor- 
i«<AiiKNlevheie  the  ]«qgUi  of  tilt  COM  iiiiot  known*  tim  I  l»Sro 

fimnd  candt  mwch  at  the  following  ntei,  tii0  niilflo  tad  irhalf  per  bo«»-fbr 
twelve  and  thirteen  hours  over  the  sandy  de^rt ;  they  beat  the  elephiiQl*: 
we  had  one  hour's  halt,  in  fifteen  and  sixteen  miles  ;  they  march  at  the  rate 
of  two  miles  five  furlongs  per  hour  over  sandy  deJiarts ;  and  when  the  road 
was  hard,  and  even  iJiey  have  gone  two  miles  seven  tiirlongs,  and  lor  eight 
or  ten  miles,  three  mil^  per  hour,  loaded.  From  these  observations  1  iiave 
oaleulatod  the  nuvdi  of  ceiwwne,'  aUoning  fer  halt*  end  the  nadice  of  the 
eountiy.  The  aee-ooMt  I  hsve  taken  firam  « ]irinted  niqi^  inppqd^ 
correct.  Thia  I  conceived  to  be  ne<»enfy  in  fixing  some  distant  pointi^  fat 
it  could  not  be  suppoied  that  1  could  lay  down  the  windiqgi  of  the  eoeit 
from  information. 

The  fourth  grand  ponit  is  Bulkh,  the  position  oi  which  is  well  calculated 
for  fixing  the  following  points,  viz.  Herat,  Bokhara,  and  Budukshaun.  Bulkh 
it  eittiated  two  mardiea  ftom  die  left  benk  of  the  Ammoo  4t  Oxat^  on  Urn 
great  road  from  Peihonr,  Cabal»  and  yandahar«  to  Bofchew.  IhvwagiMft 
naoj  excellent  routes  to  it  from  the  ebofve  plaoet,  and  the  most  of  them 
agree  ;  those  wliicb  I  had  reason  to  suppose  incorrect,  I  rejected,  'hu\  from 
having  so  many  which  agree  in  the  places  and  distances,  and  the  points  tbrm- 
ing  great  angles,  besides  numerous  cr<m  routes  to  coxrect  the  distance  in  the 
great  curves  of  the  lohd,  t  ffkl  great  confidenee  in  placing  BuUch  as  I 

I  ihall  take  dusaiapoaiitfiron  vhidi  I  Acan  to  settle  thepoiitkm  of  HewL 
Kandidiar  ehallbethe  second  poiaL  Frain  the  great  distance  of  Herait,andfitMn^ 

the  Hiizara  country,  which  is  generally  avoided  by  travellers,  being  on  the 
direct  road  tirom  Cabul  to  it,  the  road  takes  a  great  curve,  and  I  have  found 
more  difEbul^  in  placing  it  thau  any  of  the  points  hitherto  iaid  down.  The 
lontes,  hoiwerer,  of  Zemnn  Shah  aiid  JIfahinood  Shah  fawn.Heiat  to  Cibu^ 
tfaEoqgh  the  HiBttdi  eooBtiy  in  a  direet  luie  (the  ftiiM 

4M  . 


4m 


OOHSntUCnON  of  the  if  AP.  [Amm 


in  eleven  and  the  latter  in  thirtpen  days),  have  been  of  great  service,  with  the 
routes  from  Kandahar  and  Buikii,  in  fixing  its  position.  Had  it  not  been  for 
dMM  rotttaii  I'dMuldhmve  placed  Herat  modi  Anther  weat,  and  given  a  leal 
mm  to  the  foad  fimn  Kandahar.  I  have  allowed  a'diatanceof  Ibor  faandRid 
and  eighteen  mOes  ftom  Herat  to  Cabnl  in  a  direct  line,  which  I  conceive  to 
be  a  fiill  allowance ;  this  gives,  in  a  direct  line,  thirty-eight  miles  a  day,  which 
Zomatm  Shah  must  have  marclied  ;  and  the  country  being  excessively  moun- 
tainous all  the  way,  I  cannot  allow  less  than  one  in  seven  for  winding,  which 
gives  a  diiitauce  oi'  forty-four  miles  he  must  have  marched  each  day }  this 
diitanoe  for  a  body  of  botae  and  mulei,  fbr  eleven  days  togetiier,  I  think  it 
ftUjrauiBeient.  It  lypeeie  from  the  loirteB  firom  Kandahar  to  Herat  thirt  the 
road  has  a  very  great  bend.  There  are  three  I0ad>;,  one  by  fVimhi  wliich  ie 
west  of  Kandahar  and  south  of  Herat.  The  second  by  Dilaram  and  Gnrra- 
nee,  which  is  the  centre  road,  and  has  also  a  considerable  curve.  The  third 
is  called  the  Sirhud  road,  and  is  the  most  direct  one,  but  it  passes  through  a 
hilly  country  of  the  Tymunees  and  other  Ymalca»  and  is  sddom  travdled. 
All  the  distenceeghren  in  tfaeee  rentes  make  itneoeaeurT'to  give  a  great'cnive 
to  llie  road  in  order  that  the  fidl  diitanee  nuiy  be  given,  and  that  'Herat  may 
be  by  this  means  brought  to  a  reasonable  distance  in  a  direct  line  from 
Cabul,  for  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  Zrmann  Shsih  and  Mahmood  Shah's 
having  perform p(!  the'^e  marches,  it  haMiig  b«.  mi  In  ird  from  so  many  quarters, 
and  all  agreeing  within  a  day.  In  the  routes  trom  Kandahar  to  Herat,  via 
Furrah,  it  appears  that  the  sun  rose  towards  the  traveller's  back  and  set  in 
fiont  as  fiur  as  IWcah ;  and  firom  that-it  rose  to  Ins  ri^  and  set  to  the  left* 
The  same  appears  in  tihe  rmtes  by  Gnrrance,  and  the  dfistance  given  from 
Cabul  and  Bulkh  agreeing  to  this  curv^  I  tliink  Herat  is  near  tJie  trntil. 
Had  I  not  placed  Furrah  at  the  angle,  the  following  routes  would  have 
thrown  out  Musheed  soiitJi-west  instead  of  north-west  of  Herat ;  the  routes 
£rom  l<urraii  to  Ghain  and  Toon,  trom  Ghain  to  Musheed,  fixun  Ghain  to 
Deh  fteis,  from  Brii  Esea  to  Jellakbsd  and  Kandahar,  and  from  Mushud 
to  Herat  The  roed  also  from  tihe  sea-ooest  from  ChoodMur  to  Herat  pesses 
through  Furrah.  There  can  be  Uttle  doubt  of  Chooahar  being  soutib  of 
Herat,  and  as  the  road  leads  by  Fkinah,  it  is  another  proof  that  Rirrah  is 
nearly  south  of  Herat,  and  consequently  the  road  has  a  great  c  urve.  Had 
I  thrown  Herat  further  north,  aiid  given  a  less  curve  to  the  road  in  order  to 
bring  it  nearer  Cabul,  it  would  have  brought  it  too  near  Bokiura  and  Buikh, 
whioh  are  fixed  from  other  points.  I M  petftdiy  satisfiedt  from  these  and 
many  other  dreumstances,.  that  I  'eve  got  Hemt  eoirect  I  shall  noiir  take 

II 


Digitizer 


CONflTRUCTION  OF  THE  MAP. 


635 


it  as  a  point  from  whirh  T  mean  to  fix  the  position  of  Bokhara,  as  it  forms  a 
great  angle  witli  tlmt  and  Bulkh.    The  country,  however,  between  Herat  and 
Bokhara  being  ibr  the  most  part  a  desart,  aad  seldom  travelled,  excepting  by 
CtBkgf  1  haw  only  two  routaa^  iriikdv  however,  agree  i  and  from  the  vwj 
gfMt  wigte  it  fiMmn  wuh  BuDdi,  I  bnw  every  feaaon  to  tuiipoae  it'  oofteet 
The  routes  also  from  Bokhara  to  Kukun  and  round  by  BudukllieDt  eliOMrfrt 
in  correcting  its  position.    The  routes  from  Bulkh  are  numerous,  and  most 
of  thera  agree.    From  Bokhara  and  Bulkh  I  have  settled  the  position  of 
Samarcand.    The  position  of  Kokun  I  have  fixed  from  Bokhara,  Bulkh,  aad 
Budukahan,  which  form  great  angici> ;  aad  iiavmg  mauy  cross  routes  within 
tfa«M  gr««t  angles,  I  feel  giett  ciMmim  in  placiiig  it  ei  it  as.  Synbed  ai 
another  grand  point  of  gnat  consequence  in  the  oomtnactioDof  the  map^  and 
should  have  been  mentioned  before  Kokuai*  as  it  is  a  point  from  iHuc^  I  have 
fixed  Kokun.    I  have  been  enabled  from  the  following  routes  to  fix  this 
point  with  great  exactness,  vh.  Bnlkh,  Cabul,  and  Peshour,  besides  nuinerous 
cross  roiiii  3  to  correct  the  wiiiiiiiiu'^.    Fyzabad  is  the  capital  of  Budukshan. 
It  is  situated  on  the  Kokchanver,  latitude  36°  10',  and  longitude  69^  16  cast* 
I  must  now  fix  the  positiop  cf  Oshmeer,  whadi  I  have  haen  enabled  to  do 
with  the  greatest  oarreetnese  1^  the  ftUowiaig  footesi  all  ef  which  agrees 
Vtt.  Peshour,  Fyzabad,  Jelum,  and  R<^as  (of  which  I  have  the  bearings)^ 
Vizeerabad,  and  Loodeanna,  which  places  are  fixed  by  observation.  From 
this  point,  Fyzahad  and  Huzrutimam,  1  have  placed  Kashgrhnr  and  Yarkund. 
These  routes  lorm  very  great  angles,  and  I  have  everj'  reason  to  suppose 
these  places  are  placed  correctly. .  This  great  angle  has  been  leas  filled  up  with 
erase  routes  than  anj  of  the  others  hiAartomenlaoned}  bat  dds  is  aooMintad 
Jfar  fay  the  greater  part  of  the  eonntiy  being  deaolstSi   The  whole  of  the 
Ponjah  I  conceive  to  be  nearly  as  correct  as  if  it  had  been  surveyed,  for 
having  marched  al!  round  it  and  crossed  the  places  from  so  many  points 
fixed  by  observations  in  our  march,  I  think  there  can  be  but  \  cry  I  ttli  error 
in  their  positions.    Keech  I  have  fixed  by  routes  from  Kandahar,  5hikar> 
poor,  cr  BaUmr  Jdlalabad  in  Sasstan,  and  aloqg  die  eea>oaaat  fiom 

From  this  point  and  three  others  I  have  fixed  the  position  of  Khubees,  viz. 
Deh  Soollum  a  hundred  and  sixty-eiglit  miles,  from  Kykul  two  hundred  and 
fifty,  and  from  Toon  three  hundred  and  fifteen  :  from  Keech  it  is  ten  days 
journey  for  a  Colfclla  at  twelve  hours  a  day,  with  camels  :  all  these  roads  are 
across  the  great  salt  desart.  The  distance  being  so  great,  and  scarcely  a 
phoa  oocmn^g  on  the  way,  I  did  not  think  It  worth  addu^  anedier  sheet 

4M  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


.  6B8  FACE  OF  IVIE  CODNTBT.  ZAnmnau 

to  the  map  for  these  alone.  Khubees,  by  these,  fa]h  in  latitude  30"  40',  tuxd 
longitu4?  58°  iB'.   Kinnan  is  three  clays'  journey  beyond  11,  west. 

KM  Nu86er  lOun  n  anodiK  pdnt  iHiidt  I  plaMd  fiooB  Ifae  fbUoniBg 
woleii  vis.  KmmMmmv  Bakkfaur,  Den  Ghwae  Khao,  aod  KarmimihaMt. 
I  bftve  been  able  to  fix  manj  nearer  points  from  bearings  of  snowy  moun- 
tains. Tbeae  are  the  chief  points  from  which  the  has  been  formed,  and 
all  these  points  have  undergone  further  corrections,  when  it  was  found,  by 
cross  routes  within  these  angles,  that  the  road  took  some  great  mrve.  All 
these  rough  copies  being  made  on  the  spot,  I,  ol  course,  could  liiid  out  any 
efxomtiy  the  BoinerDiie  oev  rautov  and  melee  Ae  neceanty  cortectioai  I17 
ehtaimiiig  further  iaftrapatieii  fion  diflhrent  people  xtguSpg  Ihe-doidilM 
peiti»  00  tihe  spot and  I'eopceive  it  next  to  an  tmpoMibilitjr  to  make  oat  e 
map  from  merely  writing  routes,  and  m^lecting  to  protract  them  as  fhcj  ate 
obtained.  Had  I  adopted  this  plan  in  order  to  get  more  extensive  infoaroaa- 
tion,  I  could  not  have  placed  that  dcpendance  in  its  correctness  wliich  I  now 
do )  for  there  are  but  few  places  in  tiic  map  wiiich  have  not  been  several 
times  eiaaed,  in  consequence  x>f  aoDie  short  nmte  coming  acroei^  winch,  of 
•coufM^  oocraeted  tlieir  poritUn.  A  gieet  advantage  In  this  mode  ii».thattiie 
raotee  fbiiaailig  the  greatest  angles  to  the  great  <mes  ab«ady  set  o^  eie.  hn» 
mediately  seen,  and  may  be  particularly  inquired  for,  which  could  not  be 
done  afterwards  on  protmrting  the  routes,  or  the  nece^ar^^  corrections  made. 
Yon  can  very  soon  discover  whether  a  man  is  telling  the  truth  or  not,  after 
having  some  grand  points  to  work  from,  hxed  by  numerous  routes  wiiich 
agree  in  dtittncff  and  plaoefti  I  have  Ibund  this  the  only  pfaai  Ibr  getting  at 
the  tnidu  There  an  many  points  yet  unfinished  fbi  want  of  ctom  routes^ 
wtSA  fluy  nqiure  fiuther  ooneotion,  and  iifaich  I  still  hope  to  be  able 
todo. 


FACE  OF  THE  COUNTRY. 

I.  THE  HINDOO  KO08B,  Oil  OIIEAT  SNOWY  RIDOS. 

I  HAVE  found  greats  difficulty  in  obtaining  the  proper  names  of  great 
laagea  o£  hills  and  riv^  than  any  other  point  whatever :  but  as  ibis  range 
•ppeaia  to  be  nu»e  oommonly  Imown  to  the  north-westt  by  the  name  of  Bin* 


Digitizeci  by  Google 


THE  HINDOO  KOOSH  RTOGE. 


doo  Koosh,  I  shall  call  it  so,  though,  in  fact.  It  is  the  particular  name  for 
one  snowy  peak  ot  the  ridge ;  but  with  a  little  explanation,  they  will  know 
any  part  of  the  ridge  by  this  name,  from  the  north  ot  Ca&hnieer  to  tlie  hiU 
itself  a  distance  of  four  hundred  and  Jlbrty  gt^graphical  mUeft.  This  ridge 
Im  aa  aavt  and  wwt  diraetipa  fiv  Hbh  diateno^  and  sppmn  to  viiid  in  €bm 
latitaiib  of  35*  nortfai  vindiqg  fiom  34*  30^  to  35*.  The  iu%e  afiiMan  to 
dacMMt  in  he^;fat  'to  waatwwd  of  this  peal^  and  the  snowy  ridge  nwf 
be  said  to  terminate  a  little  beyond  this  point,  or  west  of  it,  for  it  appears 
by  the  routes  from  Kaudaliar  to  Bulkh,  which  pass  thi^  point  about  fifty 
miles  to  the  west,  that  the  snowy  ridge  is  uo^  crossed,  but  hills  bearing  snow 
tor  four  raontlis  in  the  year,  are  crossed  about  this  latitude.  This  is  cer- 
tainly a  oontinuatioa  of  the  fridge,  but  they  appear  to  deoneie  in  het^^t  m 
tbejr  travel  west  towards  HeFant*  and  even  en  to  Mnshnd,  with^  however*  a 
short  intesiuption  about  Heiaut.  Tbmy  do  not  go  to  the  northward,  for  the 
routes  from  F>'zabad  by  Bulkh  to  Heraut,  must  cross  them  if  they  did ;  and 
if  tfiev  went  to  the  southward,  the  routes  from  Caubul  via  Kandahar,  must 
cross  tiiem.  I,  therefore,  conclude  the  snowy  ridge  terminates  about  the 
above  point }  but  an  inferior  ridge  cootiniieB  oo  in  the  same  direction,  and 
my  or  nay  not  be  conaidnred  the  same  ii4gie»  I  took  tht  distance  of  some 
of  the  aasat  jNunaaAable  peaks  in  the  ridge  by  ciaas  heanngi^  with  the  tho». 
dolitet  aiiAfiamd,  at  the  distaiucnof  one  hundred  miles,  thea]l|iai«it  altitude 
of  some  was  1*"  30',  which  gives  a  perpendicular  height  of  -20,49'!;  feet ;  but, 
of  course,  this  could  not  ptmtively  be  depended  on  for  so  ^muli  an  angle  and  • 
so  great  a^distance.  The  most  trifling  error,  whicii  iniglit  iiot  i^pear  in  the 
oorreetiiB  flf  the  instnnMBt,  would  hen  niake  a  great  dilftrenee.  Itwii,'  ' 
howevcri  so  oorrect*  that  I  have  taken  the  sun's  aHihMte,  and  the  latitude 
came  out  withiii  2'  of  the  latito^  taken  with  thie  seottant ;  and  the  distonee  ^  ^  *  ■ 
maybe  depmded  on,  for  I  bade  base.  Sue  loaaured  of  ftt^-flse  mfle% 
which  ^vc  a  good  angle. 

From  C'a-'hineer  to  Hindoo  Koosh,  all  the  rivers  which  rise  north  of  this  '  • 
ridge  liave  a  uortii-wc&t  course,  with  the  exception  of  the  Indus,  or  Sind,  and 
Kammahi  (these  being  forced  to  the  iondiwsid  bf  other  high  ridges,  wfaida 
run  at  right  angleo  to  the  great  onei}  and  all  thefivanwhidi  nsesontii  of 
them  hnro  a  soutlieriy  course.  Hiv  is  ^  strongest  proof  I  can  give  of  its 
being  a  very  high  ridge,  and  it  was  perfectly  white  in  the  month  of  June, 
when  tiie  thermometer  was  at  Peshour  at  fhnt  time  i  is"  and  113'.  The 
same  thermometer  was  26"  4',  fhrther  south,  ni  the  months  of  December  and 
January,  at  Mooltan,  in  latitude  30*  14^  jo**.  This  great  ndge  fiom  the  poioi 


Digitized  byGoogle 


TUB  VAMER  RIDOE. 


I  commenced  at  north-east  of  Cashmeer,  has  a  south-east  course  running 
along  tiie  heads  of  the  rivers  of  tlie  Pimjaub,  passing  to  tiie  north  of  Kot 
Kangra,  Bilaspoor,  and  Siveuugur,  cnmog  tfac  liMtda  of  the  Jimoift  aad 
-Gn^}  after  whicfa  tiieir  coune  ia  Mmthefly.  This  ridge  is  perfectly  void 
nf  verdura  tomndt  thoranimiiitib  but  their  base  n  well  wooded;  their  eodi^ 
mite  appeer  exoeMdvidy  rogged*  hawing  many  high  and  very  remarkablepeaks, 
but  unfortunately  we  marched  from  Peshour  at  a  time  when  they  were  not 
visible,  otherwi-^e  the  exact  wimlinj^  of  tlie  ridge  irom  Julaiabad  to  &ea- 
nuggur.  might  have  been  got  by  crosa  bearings. 

IL  m  r  Aim  niMK. 

Taoom  this  ridge  u  inferior  in  height  to  the  last,  die  land  on  which  it 
runs,  appears  to  me  much  higher,  for  in  travelling  to  the  north  from  the 
Hindoo  Koosh  ridge,  the  ascent  appears  to  be  very  considerable,  and  as  a 
prooi  of  it,  all  the  rivers  which  have  their  source  in  tliis  ridge,  have  a 
■outheriy  course  tiU  they  aieet  the  high  hud  of  Hindoo  Koosh,  after  which 
thqr  ran  weat  and  weBfeauirth.«est  after  joining  the  Qxni.  Hue  river  meela 
the  high  lands  of  Hindoo  Koosh  north-east  of  Bnlkh  at  Huzmtinieani*  one 
dq^  iKMlJi  of  the  hills  where  the  £U1  from  them  towards  the  iKMrth  appean 
to  terminate ;  and  this  may  be  considered  the  h)wp'?t  part  between  the  two 
ridge'?^  but  as  the  rivers  which  issue  from  the  Pamer  ridge,  have  a  southern 
course  ol  from  two  to  three  degrees,  and  tiiose  from  Hindoo  Ko<^  one 
from  one  to  one-half  degree,  and  both  being  equally  rapid,  I  think  it  is  a 
•mng  proof  that  tho  land  ef  Buner  ia  ooorideraUjr  higher  than  thet  of 
Hindoo  Kooah)  butaatfaehiUa  which  nin  north  of  this  high  kudfiomaboot 
weit-north-west  to  east^oth-eaat  (aa  appears  by  the  joofeea  whidi  cioia  theai 
at  different  distant  point*),  are  only  one  day's  jdurney  across,  and  the  Hin- 
doo Komh  ridge  in  many  places  two  days;  tlie  latter  one  may  be  ron'^idercd 
the  greatest,  though  the  ridge  on  which  they  run  is  mlienor.  Tiiih  ruii^t?, 
like  the  Hindoo  Koosh,  has  unfortunately  no  general  name  by  which  they 
«aa  be  tnoed  and  known  at  dilfaentifialantpointiib  hvt  fidm  the  finowhig 
tnutea  cnwdng  a  hi^  ri4ge  one  daf'a  journey  aeieasb  and  ooveeed  with 
anow  Ar  Ihe  greater  part  of  the  year,  and  at  the  di&rent  points  the  nvtn 
runnins;  north  and  south  from  them,  I  can  have  no  doubt  of  its  being  one 
rid^e  inmi  Aksoo,  south-ca'^t  of  Khoojund  to  near  Leh  or  Luddaclc,  where 

I  have  lost  them.   The  routes  whidi  cross  them  neariy  in  the  same  pntiUkl 


Digitized  by  Google 


AwxNDix.]  THE  HUlHJKflSAN.  BIDGB.  639 

of  kittttick,  and  the  direction  in  whiVh  they  are  said  to  nin,  are  as  follows: 
from  Diitu-az,  on  the  bank*?  of  tl»e  Oxus,  to  Koknn  ;  tVom  Peshour  to  Yar- 
kund  they  are  crossed  m  two  routes,  aud  from  Yarkuud  to  Caahmeer  via 
Leb,  or  Luddack,  thej  are  agaia  cxoiaed,  taA  tbm  ^  lioaiidaiy  bctiveen 
Tadnud  and  litlfo  Tibet. 

UL  THB  BOSOXaBAW  BUMSS. 

This  ridge  nms  from  north  north-east  to  soutli  .south-west,  between  the 
Hindoo  Koosh  and  Pamer  ridges,  it  separates  the  Oxus  irom  the  Kama,  or 
Kamgar  river,  tiDd  pnewnls  the  htter  fiom  joining  the  Ibimer,  whidi  it 
wooUoClMnrise  do^  andnimfWim  theJngh  called  AknIi* 

tikhar,  the  adbrce  «f  the  Oku^  louth  south-west  ■Imig  the  light  bank  of  the 
Stamina  river,  (forming  the  boundary  of  Budukshan  cast,)  through  Kafiristan 
to  the  Hindoo  Koosh  ridge  north  of  Jelialabad,  on  the  road  from  I^shoiirto 
Caubul ;  aiui  were  it  not  for  the  \'alley  between  ^»ihaid  Koh,  south-west  of 
Jelialabad,  and  the  Hindoo  Koosh  ridge  north,  this  might  be  considered  as 
one  ridge  crossing  the  Hindoo  Kooah  ridge  at  right  angles  ^  but  the  distance 
acvoas  being  twelve  or  fimfteen  ooi«,  it  naj  or  va§j  not  be  coiMidered  aa  the 
lame  ndge*  I  ahaU  give,  it  aaparatoly  ni  die  aooeimt  of  tte  Sotinm  ri^!^ 
which  joins  Sufaid  Koh  inuk  die  aouAb  and  the  Teera  faiDa  at  right  ang^ea. 
The  Builiikshan  ridge  appears,  from  all  accoimts,  to  be  a  verv  considerable 
one,  and  covered  for  the  greater  part  of  tlie  year  with  snow.  The  hill  of 
Poo!»litikhur  is  covered  witli  snow  all  the  year  Uirough,  aud  is  said  to  be  forty 
spears  in  depth,  under  which  is  the  source  of  the  Oxus.  This  ridge  contains 
nuii^  valuable  tninea  of  iflver,  hfm  lanili,  Iro0,-.aod  antiBuiay.  The  mby 
minea  are  nearer  the  Oxus,  at  aome  distance  from  the  ridge*  There  are 
nmneroua  streams  issue  from  it,  and  join  the  Oxus  and  Kamma.  In  the 
routes  along  the  lefl  bank  of  the  Oxus,  it  i^ipean  that  in  eadi  day's  jotimej 
from  two  to  three  «trp;ims  are  crossed  cominer  from  this  ridge,  from  fifteen 
to  thirty  and  forty  yarJ.s  broad,  knt'c  and  iihlLUi'  ducp.  The  whole  of  tlie 
country  between  Uie  Hindoo  Koosh  aud  Pamer  ndges,  appears  to  be  groupes 
of  hills;  bntitiBeaqrtotrBceaoiweoiuidenUe.raiiges,fioBa«faicfaii^^ 
ones  shoot  oat  at  ri§^  anf^ea,  and  iom  tiwae  gronpei  and  narxov  valley 
The  faiDs  are  wen  wooded,  andthe  lowjooea  along  their  baae  an  well, stoeksd 
fpitii,  fruit  trees  of  various  kindl.   The  .country  also  to  the  south  of  the: 

Hindoe  Koosh  ri4geiaoanplete9iaa|Ma  of  hilK  inmAy  ars«v«atgr.nukv; 

•  » . . 


Digitized  by  Google 


•MO  •  Tag  aotttjnim  bhwr  cAnnacK. 


fwiibvallq^of  fionagaiMiiattotnioMd  lim  rich  and  wdl 

■fflilftviitftdty"  "ppfrfwjiit^  ^pinBtitMs  of  firmli^  ffttipttf  9pKidot^^  sud  jwwmpMntefc 
Hmm  gRN^pes  dtcmw*  in  height  m  thigr  go  •ontih,  and  «t  tli9  ytiOtj  of 
f^Bslioiirtli^  art  verjraoull,  not  above  teven  or  eig^hundrod  6etii^|h. 

*  % 

4 

IV*  THE  TEEB4  OE  KHTBER  RANOK. 

This  fange  oommeooea  a  Httle  bdoir  fha  fiict  of  Attodc  fiom  the  t^ght 
hiiik  of  the  river  IndiiOp  on  the  opposite  side  fimn  the  Act*  and  mot  hi  • 
westoly  direction  till  it  meets  the.  SolioMtt  Tldge*  SDUtfa  of  Snfilid  Kob^ 

separatmr?  the  vallies  of  Koliat  and  Peshour,  and  increases  in  height  as 
it  approaches  the  Soliman  ridge  and  Sufaid  Koh.  It  appears  to  me  that  this 
ridge  crosses  the  SoUman  ridge,  and  continues  with  a  more  southerly  course 
tOiGfaisnee.  I^om  .this  ridge-^sexe  are  groupeSnmoecth  and  aoath  between 
It  and  thfeiliDdoo  Koosh  ridgenerth,  croaaiqg  the  great  tead  (ati^ai«fes) 
fiom  Psehour  to  Kaobul,  and  fbrming  the  western  boondaiy  of  the  vaUsy 
of  Fsdlour  at  Jfumrood.  Aral  this  point  they  increi»e  in  hs^|^  as  ihey  go 
wf'^t,  and  four  distinct  ranges  may  be  seen  from  Peshour,  one  rising  above 
the  other.  From  this  it  wonkl  appear  that  the  further  rati^^e  must  be  a 
yery  considerable  height  i  indeed  the  dtffitrfaire  of  climate  proves  it^  for  two 
or  thsee  maichea  fiom  FMiear»  the  donate  ■  fxnl  .and  pleaaviif  when  tiie 
heat  is  intolendble  at  Pesihawcr.  The  Teen  and  Khjbor  hilis  aw  eomed 
nith  olife  tiecs^  bnt  are  veiy  ragged,  and  hot  ftv  roads  thraan^  tiMOk 
|»ssable  for  horsemen.  To  die  westward  they  produce  iron  of  an  f»i?i|Mwrti 
quality.  I  have  heard  th?it  the  <iak  hills  of  Kanahagh  take  a  com  iq»  .te 
near  their  junctton  with  the  Soohman  ridge. 

V.  m  aooLDuir  mnom, 

,  ,  .  ■.  -         ■  •  . 

'.  Tne  rsi^  is  of  very  great  extent,  and  nuts  oouffy  mwth  md  south.  It 
may  be  9a?d  to  begin  at  Sufaid  Koh,  and,  running  south,  till  it  meet«i  the 
Teera  hiils  ii  ortli  o\  Pewar :  it  then  runs  south-south-ea-st  by  Kaneegooretn 
to  Tukhte  Sooiiman,  trom  which  pomt  they  decrease  in  height  oonsiderahly, 
having  no  snoiw  sooth  of  ihb  point  is  the  nidofjaatasiy,  IhelUdithadan 
altitude  of  !•  30^  fiMS  Deem  Ismeel  Khan,  dislnit  aistf  miio%  which  ghwa 
npeipendicuhg  iwijgliitof  twehw  thowsend  ejg^  liiunlieil  andthiri^iaMeftet* 


Digitized  by  Google 


itenm      ■  THK  0OOLIMAN  BII>e&    i:;  |MJ 

From  this  point  Hbftk  coufae  ii  tooAtdj  to  tiw  Jilitudi  nf  Mti«J*^, 
diqr  wen  not  vinlik  to  4lie  wulh  of  wert  fimn  Mooltaam.  It  i^ipeait  ftan 
the  routn.dMt  Uwy  take  a  deep  cum.in  Jbm»r  4w  luper  nt  thit  point,  and 
at  Shicarpoor  are  not  in  sight ;  but  it  appear*?  by  the  rentes  down  the  Indus 
through  the  country  of  the  Talpoorees,  that  (!)ey  attain  take  a  curve  towards 
the  river,  and  tJiey  are  to  the  right  on  the  road  to  Xatta,  from  tweuty  to 
thirty  coss  all  the  way;  but  being  unable  to  procwe.  routes  to  the  south* 
imxd  t£  ShicBipoor.thnmgh  .thMgLm.ft  weHnlf  dinctwn,  H  mm  laaplMriUf 
to  liz.tlMBi  irilh  aay.deigrM  of  oertaiiMy*  hovMif  oofy.-tlie  klSmotfilt^n 
estimated  dntance,  which  maj  bo  out  for  ten  oofls.  These  hiUs  to  the 
north  are  covered  with  olive  trees.  They  are  steep  and  rugged,  and  the 
passes  throntrh  thpm  are  difficult about  Kaneegoorm  thev  produiGe.-^HOi^ 
titles  of  a  most  excellent  kind  of  iron,  which  makes  good  sworda. 
'  jSevend  inferior  luaadiM  fimftom  tlMO»  OM^  to  the  Indiu.^ 
Toemii4ge.  Tho  finfcoiio  south  of  Ow Toon lulliklfaoidfc ingc^  irU^ 
rrowfn  tfae  indot  at  Kamdbah,  and  runs  on  to  Jelhlpoof  on  tfio  tttttln  of  Ifao 
Jelum.  This  ridge  k  nitich  inferior  in  height  to  any  yet  mentioned,  but 
the  roads  leading  through  them  are  nigged  and  difficult.  The  whole  of  the 
country  between  this  ridge  and  the  Tecra  one,  is  groupes  of  hills  forming 
some  rich ,  and  iertUe  valley  a.  They  are  however  few.  The  general  direo 
tkm  of  the  low  ridgot  me  fiiom  nortb-mt  So*  to  sontb  «mI  8o»  ;  other 
lidgM  nm^noftli  end  wonn^.camufig.  these  a4geB  neer.  the  Mw»  ^jhegr 
ippcemil  eqael  in  height  to  the  salt  ridge.  They  are  formed  in  deep  flToppw 
steep  and  nigged.  The  salt  produced  in  this  ridge  is  as  clear  oiyita], 
and  so  h  ird  that  tliey  make  plates  of  it  to  eat  off.  Quantities  of  it  is  sent 
to  CasluiRLr,  and  down  the  Indus  from  Karabah.  The  next  range  that 
comes  Iroui  the  iiooiiman  ndge  is  trom  t)ie  north  of  KanneegooriB,  and  rui^s 
in  «B  easteoBtli spot  direokioii.to  Puamelbi  this  nvge  .is  inftrios  to  the 
sdt  nngob  and  BMjIie  eight  or  nine  hundred  ftet.hjgh.  Tho  loqda  liuoa^k 
itOMftvenddiffioult.  llie  part  n^  PuanialU  is  bare,  and  envsiM  a 
sandy  substance,  the  southern  side  almost  perpendicular,  and  in  climbing 
up,  large  flakDBB  OQo^  off  in  U^ifid  hold  of  the  dH^-,  and  it  i|  ntii^ 
dangerous. 


4n 


Digitized  by  Google 


e4Si    OB0UPE8  OF  HnxiS'BXTEin>IMO  WBSTWABS^  CAmnnu 


«Miiits  <KP  msuM  watamnM  Wkurwiaat  iboh  tbb  ■ooLTifAif  mam 

'  '  '   '  '       DOWV  TOWABD8  fSB  imviib 

Thfrf  are  two  separate  ranges  ol' hilh  run  [  araliel  to  tfa  threat  range 
east  of  tiiem,  extending  in  some  places  to  wjtlun  ten  and  twelve  cofs  of  the 
right'tMOik  of  the  Indus.  Those  aeftr  the  river  i^pear  to  be  finmed  of  « 
iandy  siibitaiioe*  •  the' tame  as  the  'PuoniaUa  hilli,  peiftctly  faete.  The 
valleyi,  however,  hetween  these  ranges  are  rich,  end  nhabitad  by  HheewneM, 
Oosturanees,  and  Baburs,  who  plunder  travellers ;  and  in  oomeqiMttoe  ftw- 
routes  have  been  got  through  them  in  a  we-^terly  direction. 

The  second  low  range,  which  is  about  midway,  betweeii  tlie  great  and 
smail  range  appeared  to  be  well  wooded,  ciiiefly  witii  tiie  ulive  tree.  These 
taw  ridges  accompany  the  great  one  in 'ell  its  windings.  Th^  even^ 
dHfianea  nf  the  gnat  one  wu  fbnnd,  bjr  orow  faearinga  of  diflbfcnt  poinli,  to 
be  sixty  miles  frmn  the  banki  of  the  Indna.  The  valleyi  I  have  been 
informed  are  of  a  %'cry  considerable  breadtll}  and  thOfO  axe  aovexal  qwiogt 
run  irom  the  hills  UMd  in  cultivation.  '  .  ' 

fli;6inwa  OP  Baxt  bxtbrdimo  irssrwABb  moM  tan  aoWJifiir  kdm. 

.    .,  '  •  .   -    ,      .  ... 

Tan  wh(de  of  the  western  aide  of  this  ridge  finm  the  great  road,  whidft 
leads  from  Peshour  to  Cabul,  down  to  the  latitude  of  Kilati  Nuseer  Khan, 
is'one'Obniplete  gronpc  of  hills,  extending  in  ntost  places  from  two  and  a 
half  to  three  d^rees  of  longitude.  Tlie  most  considerable  appear  to  be 
those  to  Uie  northward,  extending  through  the  country  of  the  Vuzeerees 
Itfnd  SooKniaa^  IChela  to  Gfaianee^  aind  aootkeriy  to'the  Oliokrae  pna.  Ken 
tlii*  ihojr  a^petr  Co  dohreaae  M  hellght  a»  they  go  ^onUiedy  tlumigli  tbe 
country  of  Uib  -Kidnitfl*'  though  they  still  appear  to  nbin  a  oohaideraUe 
height;  for  many  very  considerable  kotuls  (steep  passes)  are  passed  to  the 
southward ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  trace  any  regular  range.  Those  which 
run  through  the  Kakur  country,  extend  ai^  Ikr  as  the  great  road  leading  Irom 
Kandahar  to  Shicarpoor  w^t,  and  beyond  them  is  the  commencement  of  a 
great  desert  Krom  Ohimee  north  they  itretch  to  near  Kandajiar,  decreaaiiig 
in  hdght  as  they  go  westward.  SVom  Shuhersuffii  they  take  a  curve  to  the 
southward,  and  join  the  Kaloir  hxHi^.  whidi  you  have  to  the  left,  and  on  the 


Digitizer 


AifunaO  OROUPES  OF  HIU«8  SXTEMDCNO  W£8TWAB3^  8Ec  ^ 


road  in  some  pluces  irom  Kaudahar  to  Kil&ti  Nu^eer  Khaa  i  but  near  the 
flMid  they  are  low. 

I  meotioD  thae  u|Mntd J,  tiMwgb  t]icynqrb«iBAtojmiiili«luIbMt 
of  Cabul  and  the  Huzaras  (for  there  is  onljr  the  plain  of  Mydan,  and  ft 
narrow  valley,  from  that  to  Kandahar  along  the  King's  high  road  by  Ghizoee 
that  <^pparates  them) ;  but  as  the  hilla  north  and  south  decrease  in  size  as 
tliey  approach  this  road,  they  may  be  considered  as  separate,  for  in  the 
whole  of  din  rood  it  does  not  appear  that  any  ridge  is  crossed.  I  diaU 
tlierefiifo  go  on  with  the  Hunn  hilii  north  of  this  road  anA  west  of  Cobul, 
but  ihall.fiiit  mentioii  more  porticnloriiy  iho  high  land  of  Ghisnee^  whkh 
oppantojoi!i.the:Teera  hills  cnmiDg  the  Soolimanee  ones  nearly  at  a  right 
antrle.  Ghiznee  is  said  to  be  colder  than  Cabul,  thougl>  there  does  nut 
appear  to  be  any  particularly  high  hills  round  it ;  but  it  must  evidently  be 
placed  on  higher  land  than  Cabul,  for  it  appears  that  a  stream  runs  from 
.(^haoiee  north  by  Logur  and  Mydau,  ai^d  jouia  .the  Cidbol  and  Fktojdieer 
men.  Hie  IWimk  mer  cisas  westooutfa^weat  of  GUdmoo,  and  has  •  wwt 
and  south-west  ooiuw.  The  Koorm  rises  east  of  Ohisnee*  and  runs  east- 
BOuth<east  southerly  to  the  Indus.  The  Gomul  rises  south-east  of  it,  and 
runs  south-east.  Thus  it  appears,  that  all  the  rivers  which  rise  round 
Ghiznee  run  direct  from  it,  which  is  a  strong  proof  it  is  situated  on  very 
liigh  laud.  The  high  laud  ot  Gniznee  appears  to.  run  by  the  weht  of  Logur 
in.  e  curve  to  the  Teei»  hiUa.aiMl  Softid  Soh.  it  appears  alsoi  thit-ii^ 
passing  the,va]lqr,.ah»qg  which  the  gwet  rand  fion  CUbol  to  Kundalpf  lwdt 
io  the  north-west  of  Ghimaeb  fou  i^gaia  meet  with  very  hi|^  koiH- whi<4l 
stretches  to  the  north-west  mountain  west  of  Cabul.  It  appears  from  all 
account'',  that  the  whole  of  the  country  to  the  right  of  the  road  from  CabuJ 
to  Herat  west,  and  extending  to  the  Hindoo  Koosh  ridge  nortii,  a  distance  of 
three.hundred  and  sixty  miles  west,  and  from  two  to.three  degrees  nort}i  aad 
soulli,  is  one  conplete  groupe  ol  hiUs^  which  are  jn:geiieral  very  hi£^  aipdl 
the  whole  qinoe  acaicely  pawable  Sat  e^horaeDieii,  and  in  ment  places  not  a^ 
all.  The  .hills  are  well  wooded  and  have  numecoos  springs  mnmng  from 
them.  The  few  valUgfs  thefo  tre  qipear  rich,  end  pvodnce  quantities  iqf 
fruits  ot  all  kipHff^ 


4n  2 


644  HILLS  EAST  OF  THE  INDOa 


Thb  whole  of  this  country  which  caiteoda  £rom  the  Ghoor  Bund  along  the 
Punjsheer  river  Twhich  furnishes  the  greatest  body  of  water,  and  is  joined  by 
the  Cabul  river),  and  along  t!ie«e  joint  streams  Iiaving  the  Hindoo  Koosh 
ridge  to  the  northward,  tar  as  the  valley  of  Peshfnir,  h  om  complete  ^ 
grotqpe  of  hills  which  increase  in  height  as  they  run  iioiu  die  Cabui  river  to 
join  tiie  tbove  ridge.  The  jbilk  are  hi^  and  rugged,  but  appear  to  be  wtfl 
ivoodid,  and  the  clinMtie  .b  flold.  TIM7  fondih  mny  sprinp  «d  jMini 
vhidi'rimeontb  Mid  Join  Aete  join  afterwards  caHed  Ae  Kam^ 

^01  a  village  at  dbat  name  at  the  junctkm  of  it  with  the  above  streaau. 
There  are  some  narrow  valleys  which  are  inhabited  by  Tajiks,  The  few 
there  are,  are  rich,  and  prodnce  qnnntities  of  Iruits,  chiefly  grapt^,  aprirots, 
and  pomegranates,  but  the  couuuy  does  not  appear  ^racticabie  in  general 
ior  hones. 


BAMflaiov  SLLt  BAtx  oar  TBB  nmiB. 

Ths  country  from  tiie  salt  range  which  crosses  from  Karabagh  to  Jelialpoor 
on  the  Jehim,  in  an  easterly  direction  to  the  northward,  is  hilly  (particularly 
that  part  north  of  the  great  road  iioui  Alloc k  to  ttie  town  of  Jeium,  seven 
0088  ftoB  Mamwh  OB  the  left  hoakof  the  iwer),  eHending  up  to  Oaib. 
'nieer  in^deep  groupes,  and  ipowaawg  in'ha^  aa  they  gor  north.  They  an 
so  difficult,  that  no  tisvdier  goes  the  direct  ioa4  tt><3ai1iinen/lwt  geoeniDf 
takes  the  circuitous  route  of  Salih  Ke  Surai,  where  the  great  road  from 
Attock  to  Cashmeer  joins.  Even  this  road  is  excessively  dtfRcult,  particularly 
as  you  get  near  Cashmeer,  having  only  room  tor  one  hof^eman,  with  per- 
pendicular rocks  on  eadi  side.  There  are  &ev{^  small  but  rugged  ndge^ 
'  widk  d^Bfeult  pum,  tnh  Ihiab'thein  to.ifah  aonlli-^eei  down  the  Doab,  some 
of  them  joining  the  Salt  range.  We  had  an  opportunity  of  itting  tfacae 
laogea^  and  die  nature  of  the  paaaea  through  tbeni.  The  we  paaMd 
after  leaving  Attock,  near  three  miles  and  a  quarter  south-easl^  thirty  of 
Kalake  Surai,  through  which  a  good  road  has  been  cut  by  Shah  Jelum,  and 
paved  with  large  broad  flat  stones,  a  grvat  pnrt  ni'  it  in  perfect  order.  The 
range  is  low,  but  steep  and  rocky.    The  range  runs  iiram  at  north-east  75"  to 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


AgrmoLl  HILLS  SA8T  OP  THE.  ISDUE*  045 

south -east  80°.    TWs  point  appears  about  the  lowest.    To  tlic  east  and  north 
they  increase  in  height,  and  appear  steep  and  ru^ed ;  tliey  joiu  tlie  setioud 
range  of  hUls  south  o£  HmginaJbdal,  and  fiwn-  tiwnce  ran  mtgt  iawnda 
Nihil.  Th^  are  covered  ivith  s  loir  Imaty  jan^e.   I  weut  up  those  to 
the  east  of  the  Tpm,  and  found  them  very  rod^  and  difficult,  and  this  ap. 
poaied  the  eaaicat  point   Hie  irholo  ni  the  covabj  between  the  ranges,  is 
excessively  uneven,  witli  rising  ground,  in  many  places  much  cnt  by  torrent 
coui-ties,  and  quantities  of  jungle,  and  deep  ravines  ;  in  most  places  the  soil 
sandy,  and  a  quantity  oi  luutie  iitones  o\ex  the  surlace.    Tliere  are  some  rich 
plains,  which  produce  grain  in  great  abondanoe^  - but  even  they  ate  mndi 
out  in  aaxiy  places  by  tonent  oouraei  finm  tlut  hillB.; 
•  He  eecond  kange  waa  flie  Nedrliflb,  tsieoty^ve  ntileB  north  north*«att 
t£  Jellalpore  Ghat,  on  the  Jelum.    The  pass  through  this  range  was  very 
ffifficnll,  and  abov  e  five  miles  througli,  it  winding  along  the  bed  of  a  nullah, 
or  tnrrtnit  course,  with  high  peq>cndicnlar  rocks  in  many  places  on  each  side 
close  j  a  fort  on  the  south  side  ol'  the  pass  built  by  Outum  Sing,  about  halt' 
w^.tittough,,  cinnmanda     and  datiea  aeBcaUectad  fioaa  mtrdhaiitB^  "{ThSl 
paaa  ia  bjr  natom  Teiy  atfoag^  and  m^itiie  easily  guarcMt  and.FsmtoUkit 
ii  «  better  road  than  tha  '^i^s  one^  which  leads  direct  ftcni  JELctasgur  to 
Ravilpindee.    Fourteen  miles  south  south-east  of  this  pass,  we  passed  the 
sontli'West  point  of  the  Tilla  hills,  which  run  to  Rotasgtir.    The  rotid  round 
their  puiut  wm  along  the  bi  il  oi  a  torrent  with  high  and  rugged  banks,  and 
broken  ground  to  the  right,  wliich  extends  to  the  Salt  ridge,  distant  six  or 
seven  milea.  After  passing  the  TUla  hills,  a  deep  groupe  of  lower  hilli»  equil 
to  the  Salt  fidge»  commences*  and  ^dends  to  tiie  banks  of  the  Jelum,  having 
them  at  the  distance  of  one  mile  and  a  half  to  the  left  of  the  lOad.    A  mile 
above  Jelalpore  Ghat,  the  Salt  ridge  meets  the  one  in  a  curve,  and  the  road 
leads  out  of  the  valley  between  them  down  a  steep  and  nigged  bank  to  the 
Ghat,  the  latter  jjart  being  along  the  bed  of  a  torrent*  which  carries  off  the 
water  from  the  valley  we  Itave  just  left. 

AH  these  fangea  join  the  de^  groupe  of  hilla  to  the  north-east^  bat  none 
often  cross  tiie  Jduaa.bdvwthe.toiwn  of  Jdum.  Hie  deqi  groupes 
do,  however,  cross  there,  and  nin  on  by  Bimber,  Jomboo  Nurpoor,  and 
down  by  the-  soutli  of  Bil^ispoor,  crossing  the  Jumna  at  Fyzabad,  and  the 
Ganges  at  Hurdwar.  The  whole  course  from  Jelum,  is  as  near  sOuth-east  as 
possible.  They  increase  in  heigivi  gradually  to  the  snowy  ridge  north,  and 
i^ipear  to  form  regular  ranges  nmoii^  parallel  to  each  other  (  but  they  ar^ 
in^fiMt*  deep  groupes  inoiwidng  ia  hei^  m  they  rim  nocth-eHtM    '.j'' ' 


Digitizeci  by  Google 


(Me  THB  RIVEE  AUmJ,  OB  OXDa  C^ffom 


TAsu  LAMP  <nr  urns  tdit  amd  m  hum  mtmmiwi  Mintni>«siT  m 

TABBDMl*. 

It  appears  that  after  five  days' jonmey  north-east  of  Cashmepr,  an  evident 
ascent  commences,  which  is  very  great  tor  three  or  four  days'  journey,  after 
which  it  is  less  on  to  Leh.  The  ascent  continues  even  on  to  the.  great  ridge 
'  jvliicfa  MfMntei  Tibet  horn  Yaricund,  m  appean  by  die  ooone  of  the  ttream. 
wincii  comet  fion  that  pdot  >  lliis  rUge  n  the  one  I  lunre  bdbre  men* 
tioned,  as  having  been  passed  at  several  distant  points,  and  ansiten  to  tbo 
Pamer  ridge.  The  road  from  Leh  leads  along  it  for  twelve  days*  journey 
on  the  road  to  Yarkufjil,  nnd  is  crosspd  fifteen  days*  journey  from  T.ph,  at 
which  place  the  ahove  stream  is  lett,  and  has  probably  a  more  diiitunt  source. 
Tlte  country  to  the  left  was  also  very  mountainous,  but  perfectly  desolate, 
and  on  diia  aooount  but  fitde  mm»  infiirmatioii  baa  been  obtained  regarding 
die  natme  of  it.  lb  appeaa»  however,  fiom  a  nmte  fiom  Dear,  poMOg  Aaoi 
weat  to  ^8t,  through  the  southern  part  of  this  country,  that  the  whole  road 
was  excessively  moi!nt;!itTmis.  and  I, think  there  can  be  little  doidit  of  the 
rest  being  of"  the  same  nature. 

I  shall  now  endeavour  to  give  an  account  of  the  rivers;  any  hdls  which  1 
may  have  omitted  in  this  general  account,  will  come  In  in  the  separate 
aooounta  of  each  oonntiy. 


RIVEAS. 

t  ■ 

L  TBI  Bivmt  AMifu,  OE  ozua. 

This  river,  from  its  source  to  the  country  of  Durwaz,  is  better  known  by 
the  name  Punj  than  Ammu.  It  Iisl^  its  source  from  tiie  high  lands  of  Fwi^. 
lit  iasueafiom  a  jMfTow  valley  tiro  or  duree  bimdred  yarda  broed  in  Wukhan^ 
the  aouthem  faonndaiy  of  Funar.  .  llm  nllay  la,  incloaad  411  tiuM  ndaa  faf 
dw  h^  snowy  nuvntain  called  Pooahtikhnr,  to  the  aoodv  eaat,  and  weat 

IX 


Digitized  by  Google 


AMPnmnc.1 


Ttis  mvcB  ammd;  or  oxusl 


047 


The  stream  is  seen  coming  from  under  the  ice,  which  is  stated  to  be  at  least 
forty  spears  in  depth.    The  spring  ita^  couid  not  be  seen  in  consequence  of 
the  great  maw  of  wa  ftnnodow ii,  bat  tlMm-cn-be  no  doubt  of  tbe  ^ring's 
bcmg  on  tibis  bill  under  the  ioe^  ftr  it  does  niol  appear  that  ^heie  -ivBB^aaj 
open  'Or  bceak  in  any  of  ^  three  sidm  maitioned,  by  which  it  oould'conie 
from  a  more  distant  point.    I,  therefore,  conclude  that  this  is  the' true  bead 
of  the  Ox  us;  at  all  events,  the  greatest  body  of  water,  thoupli  there  are 
otiiers  which  may  have  a  more  distant  source.    It  is  carried  nortii  in  this 
narrow  valley  ibr  tive  ams  i  at  four  cosh  it  is  twenty  yards  broad,  and  breast 
deep}  and  on  leaving  the  vaUeft  ' after  hnriqg  been  joined  by  many  other 
flpriogi  fieas  tibe  fame  hOl,  it  k  fifty  yanh^  and  mid^  deep,  itie  Slnber,  Or 
Adum-Koosh,  jbini  it  five  coss  abo^'e  the-  junotiaiij  %as  niddle  deep,  and 
sixty  yards  broad,  so  that  the  Punj,  or  Ammu,  was  nearly  equal  to  it  at  the 
distance  of  five  cfws  from  its  source,  and  having  twenty  coss  further  to  run 
beture  its  jiiucuuu  with  the  Shibcr,  it  must  have  attained  a  very  considerable 
size,  particularly  as  it  appears  tiiat  seven  or  eight  streams  frooi  knee  to  inidp 
die  deoj^  and  ftom  ten  to  thirty  yardi^broad,  joined  it  in  this  diittanoe  froih 
tbe  left  bank.  'I  think' there  can  be  no  doubt  of  its'  being  mtuh  larger  than 
Hie  S6iber  at  tlieir  junction»  and  It  appears  wdl  aacOrtained  tibat  the  Ammu 
bears  tlie  name  Punj  for  a  considerable  distance  from  its  source.    The  place 
has  been  seen  by  two  people,  who  gave  the  same  accounts,  and  I  have  h^ard 
it  from  several  who  did  not  see  it,  but  Imd  heard  that  it  rose  iu  the  valley  of 
Wuklian,  or  Irom  the  high  snowy  mountain  of  Pooslitikhur.    I  have  routes 
nbjcfa  run  east  and  west  of  this  point  to  Yarimnd*  in  a  northeEly  di^ieGtion»' 
and  meet  to  the  north  of  this  pdhit,  loaWng  it  wtHun  the  aii^e.-  If  tins 
stream  had  a  more  dartant  soiiroe,  one  of  these  two  lOUtss  iBOSt  have  clossod 
it,  which  it  does  not  appear  they  did. 

'J'ht'  roar!  to  the  lett  or  wc^t,  crossed  the  Shibrr  five  coss  from  Kila  Shah- 
jehan,  which  was  the  only  siieatu  ol  any  consequence  crossed  up  to  the 
junction  of  the  two  roads.  The  road  to  the  right  or  east  passed  PooahtikhUr 
about  fiiri^edss  to  the  right,  leaving  i<  to  tbe'left.  Hie  voad  a|lpeain  tolead 
along  tiie  Kasbgar  river  or  Kaaunn  to  this  point*  and  nothing  but  HfPidets^ 
were  crossed  up  to  the  junction  of  the  western  road,  which  left  Pobsbtikhllt 
to  the  right.    It  is  evident  from  this  that  tha  Ptani  ^"""^  '1*^  ONSSad 

had  it  a  more  distant  source. 

.1  shall  here  leave  its  source  and  follow  it  in  a  soutti-south-west  direction 
for  a  hundred  and  twenty  miles,  where  it  meets  a  high  ridge  of  mbuntaiiiB 
Tuaning'firem  waabjbofd^warit  t6  HMt'innth  Htt  j  flNHU  thb  poitat  it  triM  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


west-north-west  course  along  the  uorrli  suit;  oi  this  ridge  throucrli  tlie  coun- 
tries of  Sho(^naw,  Durwaz,  and  Kurategeen,  where  it  tiudji  vent  through 
tbis  ndlB».  and  pmm  tfaraiigbitte  di»Mlilli«aid»  fiita#wg.aaoiilii«ly  taum 
tiU  it  meete  the  high  knd  which  oitauki  fiNNB  the  HiadQ<»  Koarii  .m%«iil 
HumitiaMin:  Thus  ftr,  a  dittmce  c£  wuen  1hmitn»lmaindnakt»  it  it 
confined  bulWBCP  hills  and  is  joined     immmeraUe  streams,  from  two  tH 
four  of  which  are  crossod  in  each  c^mv'?  ]oumc}^  along  its  \ci\  hank,  from  ten 
to  thirty  yards  hroail  ami  knee  and  middh^  deep,  besides  two  very  considcT- 
aUe  rivers,  viz.  the  Soorkhab  or  Kurategeen  river,  and  the  kokciia  or 
Budukshan  river.   I  have  unfortunately  no  routes  fnan  Durwax  alo^  its 
tight  bank  tD  KiIa  Shahjehai^  nd  eoBaeqiMndjr  hvve  not  bean  ahk  to  aaoaf^ 
tam  tho  ttraama  wfakh  it  aanat  leoaife  finn  liio  .noithwaid  in  Ihiasdiatanfla. 
Thajf  must  be  more  considerable  than  those  fittAn  tlie  southward  or  the  hif^ 
ridge  of  Budukshan,  as  the  high  land  of  Bamer,  which  gives  rise  to  so  many 
great  rivecs^  running  from  west  to  m^t,  is  to  the  northward  of  this  ipace.  I 
itnag-ine  many  more  streams  must  joui  it,  but  luiNt  bcvn  unavoidabiy  left  out 
for  want  ut  lurther  information*   From  Uuzrutnuam  lU  course  is  westHiorth- 
wast}  northaily  to  BoldMi«»  ai  dietaaee  of  two  fanndfod  and  fifyadlaa|,il 
tqpfieafa  to  be  ixced  aff  in  tiiis  ^rectum-  for  aooM  diataooe  bjr  the  hig|i  land 
cf  Hindoo  Koodi.  which  extendi  north  of  the  ridge  •  cuuidenliie  dtrtanot^ 
and  runs  over  a  flat  country,  aandf  and  little  better  than  a  denrt.    I  have  a 
route  from  this  point  to  Oorgimg,  aJontr  its  banks,  which  gives  a  distance  of 
four  hundred  miles,  over  a  desart  for  ;it  lonst  tbree  hundred  miles,  with  only 
a  few  habitations  of  hoi^  breedera  along  the  banks  in  d liferent  places.  There 
i^pears  to  he  a  forest  in  from  the  left  hank  the  greater  part  of  the  way,  and 
iMvdlen  are  obhged  to  carry  proviwina  for  eight  or  tan  dagp  eta  tame.-  At 
Ooignng,  my  infonnant  left  die  faanka  ef  the  Qina  after  i  ieaiii||  it  en  iok 
Oorgung  is  on  a  branch  of  the  Oxus,  situated  eighteoai  from  the  bmbi  cKan* 
nel.    From  this  he  travelled  to  the  north-north-west,  passing  the  towns  of 
Toorbut,  Sugger.  and  Lulughan,  on  to  the  city  of  Kheeva,  situated  on  the 
banks  of  a  large  river  called  the  Neil  urn,  nearly  as  larsre  as  the  Oxus,  and 
which  joins  a  large  lake  some  days  journey  turther  on.    This  1  take  to  be  the 
kkeefArab.  The  Oxna,  I  hat»  bean  jufetmed,  ilaii  winuiia  itaatf  into  it^ 
Dot  or  tna  i  nafe  fwwaiacn  mt  ncue  lunvniaaon*  i  neve  uuiy  enexoute 
•bog  the  Qxm,  and  wooU  not  vantiue  to  put  it  dMnw-haeiag  ao  cAmn  to 
oorrobnate  it,  or  cross  routes  to  correct  the  diieetion.    Haviqg.tiaced  the 
Oxus  nine  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  from  it'i  source  to  New  Oorgonge,  I  shall 
give  A  sketch  of  the  pnocipal  rivers  which  M  into  it  £int^  the-Sbibei^  or 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


THE  BIVER  AKSDBRAL 


Adiiin  Koosh.  This  river  has  not  been  traced  nhove  the  point  where  it  was 
crossed,  iive  cobs  iirom  iu  juuction.  It  was  at  tiiat  point  sixty  yards,  middlo 
deep,  but  so  rapid,  tlwfeftw  mea  oould  find  it ;  my  infimntot  layB  he  cimiBd 
ttonaoov,  «4ijdiiilJieooaiiiioaiiiode^  aodtl^  and 
keep  Oieir  ftet  modi  better  than  a  honei  he  sajs  a  hone  oould  not  staiid 
the  current.  Hie  oowB  iiied  for  this  puipoee  wefe^eKyitrooij^  aad  had  long 

bushy  tails. 

Second,  the  Soorkhab  or  KniatLj^Len.  Tliis  river  rises  in  the  Pamer  ridge, 
and  afler  a  course  of  a  hundred  and  eighty  miles,  empties  itself  into  the 
Oxusthir^mileBibovethejuiiclioaof  theKduhaoQttoj^  Hns 
river  leceivee  ineaftCreaim  in  itt  coune^  besides  the  Sidfedcaii  and  Wukhee> 
ha  rivers.  It  runs  through  the  country  of  Kurategee^  ind  ten  coss  abovo 
its  junction  wnth  the  Oxus  it  is  not  fordable,  being  crossed  on  mussuks  or 
leather  bags:  at  this  point  it  is  called  by  a  different  informant  the  Kuratigeen 
river,  but  I  imagine  its  proper  name  is  the  ISoorkhab.  Xta  course  is  through 
a  very  iiiuuutaiuous  country. 

IBB  xoKCBA  on  WaOXSMUX  BlVnB. 

This  river  rises  in  the  Budukhshan  ridge  south-east  of  the  capital,  Vv/.n- 
bad,  fbrty-tbur  miles.  At  ten  miles  east  of  the  town,  it  receives  two  streams 
equal  to  itself,  and  they  pass  close  to  the  towu  ia  one  stream.  There  ia  a 
bridge  acroM  the  river  at  the  town.  It  is  very  rapid  and.  not  ftnhdile  s  its 
oouxse  is  a  hundred  and  thirty  miiae  In  a  west^iocth-weot  dhwetkm^  and  it 
joini  die  Oxus  shove  the  ^  illagc  of  Kliajogliar  with  sudi  force  that  its  atieat 
crosses  to  the  opposite  bank  oi'  the  Oxus.  It  passes  through  a  hilly  country 
for  the  greater  part  <i£  its  oourae»  and  recetves  several  streams  fiom  the 
northward. 


rat  axasnaAi. 

•  This  is  formed  by  the  Ghoree,  Bungee,  and  Furkhar,  which  join  five'  Cdm 
north-west  of  Koondoo?  ;  the  joint  streams;  of  tlie  Bungee  and  Furkhar  pass- 
ing to  the  east  of  the  town,  and  the  Gorah-  to  tlie  west.  These  rivers  are 
formed  by  numerous  other  streams.  The  Ghoree  rises  from  three  different 
fainte  in  the  Hindoo  Kopsh  ridge,  aU  of  whidi  join  aliove  the  village  of  Kai^ 

40 


Digitizeci  by  Google 


gah :  from  their  source  to  Koondooz  is  a  hundred  uiiies,  where  the  uame  is 
iMt  Jn-tfaiAroif tbir AknornL  From-  Koomdoogtoi  tiie  jimction  <he  Ow 
11  ibrty  iiul«k  HwiHioie  ooune  it  noriiierlj,  nd  thajr  i«n  biloiir  Huianiti* 

mam.  about  eight  or  ten  coss.  The  Tui  khar  rises  in  the  Iiigh  land  •patli  ift 
Fyzabad,  or  the  hiUs  which  separate  Budukhshan  irom  the  Kafirs ;  and  the 
Buiigee,  which  is  equal  to  it,  rises  in  Durra  Turring.  They  join  ten  coss 
below  Talikan.  Their  courj»e  is  equal  to  that  of  the  Ghorce,  which  tliey  join 
as  before  meotioQed.  After  the  junction  oi  all  tiiede  rivers,  tlie  stream  mu»t 
be  a  wry  ttooridanifale^onet  h  w  nol  ftxdable,  but  all  theie  txrtn  Mpanlelj 
are.  Their  ooune  is  thieqgh  a  moonteiiious  countfy*  bol  eontaiiriaig  many 
eicesnvely  rich  and  ftrtSe  vaUeyit  pnoducing  all  kinds  of  fruit  in  die  greatesl 
abundance :  from  the  accounts  I  have  got  of  thia  part  of  the  oodntij,  the 
valkgn  appear  to  be  a  oomplete  gacden. 

TBB  HUHiAE  OE  sjimnBur  rnn. 

This  river  risee  in  a  bi|^  ridge  of  mountains  which  rum  fiom  tfie  BHner 
lidge  south,  and  s^aniles  Bokhara  from  Kuretageen,  east  and  west.  Its 

course  is  south -sowth-west,  runniiifr  thron?li  the  Kuretageen  country  and 
Uisiiar  Ibr  sixty  miles ;  it  joins  the  ivuratali  river  above  Regur  ami  below 
Uimr  Bala.  The  Kurratak  rises  in  Uie  same  hills,  and  has  a  souUi-east 
comae  to  die  jtmctxnb  Vnm  fids  seme  osU  the  joint  streams  the  HIssar* 
hnt  X  itUnk  improper^,  fiir.the  joint  streams  «hoiiId  retain  the  name  of  the 
largest  river,  which  is  the  Kafir  Nihan ;  and  from  a  route  H^hkh  crosam  H  a 
little  abo\'e  its  junction  with  the  Oxus,  It  is  called  by  this  name.  FVom  Hisar 
to  XinnooSf  above  which  they  join  the  Oauu*  is  seventy  miiea. 

TBB  TimUVSRAlf. 

'  Tbim  river  has  its  source  in  the  same  mountains  as  the  rivers  last  mentioned* 
but  on  the  western  or  opposite  side  to  them.  A  great  branch  of  this  river 
formerly  ran  past  the  town  of  Sheeraz  twenty-four  miles  north  of  Samarlv and, 
but  tor  many  years  the  whole  has  run  past  Samarkand  north  of  it  three  coss 
in  a  w^terly  directiou,  and  aince  tliat  time  tlie  town  of  Sheeraz  has  been 
dmnlahi  i  this  plads  of  cobkm  caanot  be  miat^vii  fu  Ibe  famous  SheeraB  it 
Hhe  .soiitii  oC  FeAia.  This  tmr  has  a  mndi  les^  eaucse  tfann  any  yet 


Digitizer  oogle 


<>iiiwiH  ]  THE  BIFER'fllHR.'  SSI 

mentioned  as  falling  into  the  Oxus,  but  nothing  like  so  great  a  body  of 
water,  being  fordaUe  all  ovw,  woeptiiig  wlmi  ^  mow  nielte.  Tarn  its 
long  ooune  over  a  sandy  oountiy,  the  gveater  part  of  it  is  soaked  beftra 
it  veacfaea  Bolclu«»  aod  att  this  pmnt  tibtere  is  scarceljF  stream  sft  alL  '  It 
fidi  into  the  Oxus  two  marches  west  of  Bolchan  after  a  westeooth-WHt 
ooune  cf  two  hundred  and  qgh^  miles.  » 


Rubs  in  lAe  Huzara  hiUs  noftii  of  the  otmtinoafeion  of  the  Hindoe  Koosb 
fidge,  and  south  of  Mymuna :  it  is  carried  west,  confined  between  hills  for 
seventy  miles,  when  it  passes  to  the  north,  quitting  the  hills  and  parsing 
over  a  desert  country  for  about  two  huudied  miles,  joins  the  Oxns  three 
marches  west  of  Bokhara.  This*  howev£r,  is  only  heard  by  uiy  luiurtnant, 
and  may  be  wrong.  It  i^pcara,  howevei^  very  probable,  fiir.  it  is  crossed 
two  matches  from  the  left  bank  of  the  Oxus  on  the  road  fiom  Bokhantn  " 
Herat  via  Mour,  and  it  is  probable  that  it  joins  the  Oxus  not  ftrfiom 'this 
point,  which  is  also  stated  to  be  the  case  by  the  man  who  gave  this  route.  ' 

The  course  of  fliis  river  from  its  source  is  two  hundred  and  seventy  miles. 
Its  hreailth  in  the  cold  seasou  15  irom  fifty  to  seventy  yards,  auud  two  feet 
and  a  iiail  deep. 

m  uvea  sia& 

I  HAVX  been  informed  that  this  river  join?  the  Oxtis  abont  one  hundred 
C03S  west-north-west  of  Bokhara^  but  this  cannot  by  any  means  be  depended 
on  i  and  very  little  information  lias  been  obtained  regarding  the  course  of 
tinsixver.  ItsceoiieMtotheaoirtiiofiiest,  itbemigcnswedbytiie  Bussfam 
caiamuis  noKtii-iiorth.west  of  Bokhan  Inar  or  five  days'  journey,  mid  the 
distance  would  give  it  about  tiiat  coarse,  ftom  Kokun  I  have  got  ftor  d«^ 
march  along  its  left  bank  from  Khoojund  to  Kokuo.  It  is  said  to  be  larger 
here  than  the  Indus,  tind  ^-mailer  ^lan  the  Oxus.  A  stream  joins  it  near 
Kokun,  which  rises  soutli  in  the  Pamer  ridge,  and  nina  north  .seventy  miles 
to  its  junctiou.  At  Kokuu  it  divides  into  two  branches,  and  passes  the  town 
eastsndwest 

4  o  ft 


Digitizeci  by  Google 


65S 


TmrmvER'  8na>  ob  indu&  cAubmi. 


'  rwB  lovxa  sino  or  insus. 

I  AM  uury  to  my  liut  Httie  infiuiiiBtion  hit  been  obtaiiied  regarding 
aouioe  of  tfda  river,  tiKMii^  toine  great  bmndies  have  been  tnoed  for  •  vciy 
GomidenUe  dMtiiioe»  but  not  to  dietf  aoitroe.  It  *ppBtn  dirie  are  two 
great  braoches  join  at  the  town  of  Dras,  eight  days  march  of  a  coflDa,  noftb* 

nortli-cast  of  Cashmcer.  Tlie  left  of  these  branches  was  seventy  yards 
broad  a  Httic  above  the  junction,  and  excessively  ra])id  ;  a  wooden  bridge 
was  thrown  across  it  at  this  point,  it  came  from  the  north  of  east,  and  run 
off  west  aiter  being  joined  by  the  Leh  or  Luddakh  branch :  and  my  infinrm* 
ant  aaya  be  beard  it  joined  the  Abba  Seen  at  BoUaL  Una  I  take  to  lie 
Mullai  on  the  Indns  above  Attoc^  of  triudi  I  have  had  odier  aoooonts.  and 
he  alio  heard  thatit  was  three  mondis'  journey  to  the  head  of  tUa  fafandi: 
but  this  cannot  be  depended  on,  and  it  is  the  only  information  I  have  got 
regarding  this  branch,  and  it  certainly  appears  to  be  the  main  one.  Other 
accounts  agree  that  Dras  is  eight  days  journey  for  a  caffilla  uorth-nortli-ea&t 
of  Caahmeer,  but  they  differ  in  some  degree  r^^rding  the  junction.  A 
Gaihnieerian  inAnned  mo  that  theae  branchea  joined  two  mardiea  abote 
Dkaai  and  that  at  cr  htkm  Draa  it  divided  into  two  biancfaeib  l3m  Icaaar  one 
funnbig  aouth  to  Caahmeer,  and  the  greater  one  he  knew  nodnqg  abooi; 
but  that  it  was  called  the  great  Sinde,  and  tlia  one  which  joina  tiie  Beduata 
at  Cashmeer  the  little  Sind.  lliis  hnter  account  rijipears  to  me  very  correct, 
and  as  a  fiirther  proof  I  have  a  route  from  Deer  in  Punjcora  north-west  of 
Pealiour,  which  takes  a  curve  iirom  east-north-east  to  south-east  to  Cashmeer, 
by  whidi  it  appears  that  the  Sind  was  crossed  seven  days'  joiumey  before  they 
inived  at  Cadunter,  and  tfati  point  nniat  havte  been  nartii*w«8t  Hus  agre^ 
%tl]k  tibe  oUier  acoounta,  md  woold  thhuw  KiOtt  die  point  at  wlneh  tiie  Sind 
'wu  crossed  north-west  of  Gaaiimeer,  about  oIm  hundred  miles  west-south^ 
west  of  Dras,  which  agrees  with  the  first  aooonnts  of  these  joint  streams 
running  ftff  west  from  Dras.  In  the  firet  account  it  does  not  say  that  a 
branch  bi  ealvs  off  from  the  great  one,  but  this  might  be  easily  omitted,  and 
it  appears  irom  other  accounts  that  a  river  comes  from  the  northward  into 
Oniuneer^  ilnd  ia  ealled  the  Lar  by  some  from  its  passing  through  a  district 
«f  that  name  in  thjs  valley  of  Caahmeer,  but  ita  proper  inme  ia  the  litde 
JUnd^  which  Mr.  EoiBlcr  .alad  mentioDa.  Hie  Luddakh  branch  baa  beaft 
traced  to  a  great  distance  to  the  south-east.  This  branch  is  also  joined  by 
another  fiom  the  nortJuwea^  along  %hich  the  road  to  Yarinuid  leada  fiir 

It 


Digitized  by  Google 


4 


•AwnrmzO  HIS  RtVBB  BIND  OR  INDDR  %gj^ 

fifteen  days'  journey,  m  has  been  beibre-mentioued.  These  marches  I  hav< 
reckooed  at  eleven  and  twelve  miles  a  day,  m  it  ia  through  a  hiUy  countiy, 
and  the  caflUlah  gcnaiiBy  ttrived  at  tiwir  gwaad  of  ancampm^ 
or  twelve  o^doek,  and  marched  after  nm  rise }  itHaiaboMaledtebea^ven 
or  eight  ooai  a  day.  They  crossed  the  Fanwr  xidge  to  the  rjgbt,  and  tib^ 
left  this  stream,  which  I  have  heard  came  firom  a  lake  in  Pamer,  and  from 
its  direction  being  south-east  by  east,  \  imagine  it  comes  from  the  lake  of 
Swick  Kol,  U.S  the  direction  of  its  course  aud  accounts  agree  to  this  lake. 
This  however  is  only  a  suppositiou  oi  mine. 

Hie  Leh  bfanch  hai  been  traced  mneh  fivther,  and  ib  larger  than  the 
taoftb'lreat  brandi*  but  smaller  than  the  DMa  or  left  branch.  It  iq^ieart 
that  fircm  Leh  to  Rodadc,  a  place  whence  wod  »  bmii^  to  Caahmeer  fiv  ■ 

shawls,  the  road  is  along  this  branch  twenty-five  dq^  journey  for 
the  merchants  who  bring  tlie  wool  j  but  as  it  is  brought  on  sheep,  and  as  the 
country  is  hilly,  I  cannot  allo'v  more  than  ten  miles  each  day  (two  hundred 
and  rilty  xniles) ;  four  hundred  miles  to  tlie  fort  of  Attock,  and  seven 
hundred  to  the  sea,  total  <me  thousand  three  hundred  and  fif^  mUes. 
The  Indm  is  coafined  between  high  moantains  to  Tocbela,  finr^  inilfla  . 
«bove  the  fort  of  Attock  eAst-oarfeb-east,  where  it  entets  the  Tsllej  of 
Chuch,  spreading  and  jforming  innnmerable  islands  to  the  fort  of  Attock, 
where  it  again  enters  between  the  hills,  and  is  at  the  fort  only  two  hundred 
and  sixty  yards  broad,  but  deep  and  rapid.  It  rises  to  the  top  of  a  bastion 
at  the  edge  of  the  water,  which  appears  to  be  thirty  five  or  forty  feet  high, 
but  does  not  spread  above  hfly  yards  more.  It  enters  a  plain  five  miles 
■•bmlk  of  Afttod^  and  is  ag^  oonftaed  betanen  hflb  at  NQab^  ten  mika 
sooth  of  Attock,  and  comtniaestowhid  uoiMg  de«p  groupes  on  to  Bhnabali, 
•latitude  33*  /  where  it  enteia  the  ridi  vallejr  of  the  Ew  Khels  in  fiftar 
great  branches,  and  is  not  again  interrupted  in  its  cowse  bj  bifls.  Erooa 
this  point  to  Mittenda  Kat,  where  it  is  joined  by  the  five  river'^  of  the 
Punjab  in  one  stream,  here  called  the  Puninnd,  its  course  i>  m  arlv  ^ontii, 
and  from  that  to  the  sea  it  may  be  souLh-souUi-weal,  parsing  through  tlie. 
country  oi  Sind.  We  crossed  the  liidus  at  Kaheeree  Gliat,  latitude  31°  28' 
4rtiere  tb6  breadth  of  the  Ghat  at  two  points  was  iboiid  to  be  one  thousand 
«Qd  ten  ind  nuie  bundled  and  ihnS  jards*  on  the  5th  *of  Jannaty 
At  thia  season  it  must  he  at  the  verjr .lowest.  The  dqidi  of  the  dee)^  part 
of  the  channel,  which  was  not  one  hundred  yards,  was  twelve  feet;  an 
elqihant  ten  teet  and  a  half  high«  had  not  one  handled  yards  to  swini,  bnt 


Digitized  by  Google 


654 


THE  BIVEE  «IMD  dU  INDUa 


the  maia  chiinnel  here  was  cousiderahly  reduoeil  by  several  large  biancbest 
wiiicli  had  ac|>argtwl  fi*om  it,  and  nn  panlkl  to  it,  ooa  ftwa  iti  H^budc 
^MMfor^UUe  cnLjinafbw.placei^  hnaaglNMCi  at  naany  of  tha  Ok«bi»  and 
lis  fcyeatfth  «raa  two  hmldsed  yard*}  we  fibrdod  at  a  ptece  thratf  ftet  and  a 
half  daqpk  «id  five  hundred  yards  broad  du^twaUyi  amrtfaar  oooaiderafala 
branch,  fifty  yards  broad  and  three  feet  deep,  was  crossed  before  we  came  to 
die  lefl  bank  of  the  main  channel,  besides  two  other  int*  i  m  i  branches.  The 
banks  of  the  Indus  are  very  low,  thai  i&,  tlie  luuci-  baukii  seldom  exceed  six 
feet,  and  generally  four  and  five,  but  in  the  rainy  aeason  it  q)reads  in  many 
pkoeifiom  ten  to  twelve  COM.  It  eiqpcan  evident^  thatdMnaiachaiiiMl 
fbfnerly  nmiiirtherto  the  eastward  hf  aeveu  miles,  and  the  Lya  Nullah  at 
present  occupies  its  former  bed ;  for  the  high  banks  at  Mahom^ragin,  and 
Kuror  or  Laleesan,  and  all  along  the  loft  of  this  Nullah  at  sooie  distanec^ 
has  every  appearance  of  it. 

The  flat  country  and  iiJands,  which  are  overflowed  ai  the  h<>\  season,  are 
excessively  rich  black  clay,  well  cultivatt^d  lu  many  piaceii,  aud  otiiers  ai-e 
ovnpigraini  with  high  grass  jungle.  Xbe  labouran  iuwe  Umptontj  hnii 
ereetedp  atid  cuHinite  the  kad.  The  bed  of  the  Indus  is  sand,  with  a 
small  quantity  of  mud,  and  its  wnter  appears  to  resemble  that  of  the  Ganges* 
There  are  many  quick  sands,  and  the  islands  are  for  the  most  part  oovMed 
witli  long  jhow  jungle.  For  fifty  coss  above  Mittendakot,  where  it  receives 
the  rivers  of  the  Punjab,  it  run*  nfarly  parallel  to  them,  and  at  Ooch, 
which  is  ibrty  coss  up,  the  distance  across  is  not  above  ten  milc^  Thu>  space 
is  one  complete  sheet  of  water  in  the  months  of  July  and  August,  and  the 
villages  are  only  temporary,  with  a  &m  exceptiattk  The  wlMiln  coontry  to 
Hjdsiahad  throogh  Sind  appeoia  to  be  Ae  sauc^  but  thens  a|i|Nan  to  be  a 
qilantity  of  ridt  land  uncultivated,  and  over-grown  with  jhow  and  grass 
jungle.  It  appears  by  the  routes  along  its  left  bank  to  Hyderabad,  that 
there  are  many  considerable  tovs-ns  and  numerous  villages,  and  in  many 
places  canals  carried  to  them  from  the  river.  It  is  rather  (ulii  that  there 
should  be  scarcely  any  trade  cairied  on  between  the  aorthero  countries  nud 
flhidii'  Ihem  is  a  fitlle between  Modftsii,  Bnhawdpocv and Sbid.  Idnll 
now  endeavour  to  give  an  aocount  «f  the  rivers  whidi  fill  into  the  Luha. 
The.greii  bnachM  to  the  notthwaid  of  riithmnrr  have  been  meotioBeiiL 
and  I  shall  pass  on  to  the  Abba  Seen. 


Digitized  by  Google 


AwMimu]  TBS  ABBA  SBE!t.  ^gg 


TBB  ABBA  ttBir. 

* 

Therk  appears  to  be  a  dillerence  of  opinion  regarding  this  name  ;  some 
tliink  the  great  branch  which  1  have  mentioned  as  coming  Irom  Dras,  is 
called  the  Abba  ^eu,  but  1  have  heard  otherwise,  and  have  routes  from 
Feshour  Mid  Auock  to  the  source  of  what  I  have  heard  called  the  Abba 
Seen,  which  may,  however,  be  wrong,  but  I  h«ve  no  prooft.  to  the  oontraiy, 
end  what  iolbrautMni  I  Have  got,  I  shall  itateu  The  ixmte  ftom  Peahonr  to 
this  point,  is  along  the  Swrul  i  iver,  which  had  its  aovrce  from  the  same  hillB, 
The  hill  from  which  tlie  Abba  Seen  issues,  is  called  Son  Chukesur,  the  bear* 
iiiL'  of  which  from  Fc?hour  was  north-east  34^  30'.  Tiiis  spring  i*;  cnlled  at 
tiie  place  Sire  Abba  vSceu  ;  the  hill  is  one  of  the  Hiudoo  JsLoosih  snowy  ridge, 
and  its  altitude  was  1°  30*,  and  by  the  cross  routes  from  Peshour  »nd  Attodc 
4»  it^  wfaich  ibtsaa  a  good  angle,  and  i^prcea  with  the  bearings  it  was.  one 
hundred  nuhe'  dtatriot  The  route  from  Attodk  leads  aloi|g  the  right  beak 
of  the  Indus,  by  Mullai,  to  llus  point}  it  appears  that  the  river  is  not  ftedfr 
ble  at  Mullai,  that  boats  or  rafts  are  used ;  it  is  four  short  stages  from  tltis  ' 
to  the  head  of  the  Abba  Seen.  The  first  stage  it  is  Ibrdable,  which  t  n- 
viuces  me  that  M>me  considerable  stream  must  have  joined  from  the  left  bauii 
<m  this  march  from  MuUai,  and  I  hare  not  the  least  doobt  of  its  being  tiie 
Dkas  brandit  bntaij  infbtiaaat  oevot  tnvveUed  iqp  the-left  banl^  and  eoold 
not  say;  but  from  the  riverfs  decreasing  ao  nnich  in  tiuaatage^  Itiiink  die 
above  branch  must  have  joioed  the  AUba  Seen  a^Mttle  above  Mullai.  I  have 
many  routes  tnki  ;  f  rom  the  same  man  who  gave  these  which  I  have  afterwards 
;ii:)rrhed,  and  in  the  accounts  and  distances  T  tVnmd  him  perliectly  correct } 
and  1  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  his  iiiiunuatioa  on  this  point  is  cor- 
rect slsoi.  The  Sheesha  river  rises  on  the  north  side  of  this  hill^  nuis  west, 
and  joins  the  Kama.  The  htUs  and  -vaUcya  about  this  point  produce  geld 
dnat  ^  he  did  not  tiBvd  fiirther  nortii. 


'  TU£  KAMA  iUV£B.  « 

I  vonvD  it  impossible  to  obtain  the  true  name  of  thia  river,  and  I  think 
this  cannot  be  its  proper  name^  ibr  it  is  merdy  cadied  so  from  «  village  of 
that  vene  at  the  pasnt  it  reoeives  or  joins  die  JoinA  streams  diPaagkegt, 


.Digitizeci  by  Google 


^  THE  KAMA  BIVEB.  [AOTsms. 

Ghoeibiuidt  md  Caubul*  a  diort  way  firom  Jalalibad,  on  tibe  iwd  fiom 
BBdwur  to  CMibuL  To  die  north  it  is  ctlled  the  Kaai^(ar  mcr,  on  eecouiit 

of  its  passing  through  that  country ;  when  it  reaches  the  valley  of  Peshour, 
it  breaks  off  into  three  great  branches,  whicli  join  again.  Each  of  these 
branches  has  a  separate  name,  and  it  does  not  retain  one  name  for  four 
marches  togettier.  The  greatest  and  must  distant  branch  rmcs  in  the  iiigh 
lands  of  Pamer,  not  far  from  Pooshtikhur,  the  source  of  the  Oxus,  and,  afler 
a  coiixiK  of  three  hundred  and  eighty  milefl«  joins  die  fodus  dbiee  mfles  above 
the  fort  of  Attock. 

In  its  oonrse  it  receives  several  very  considerable  rivers,  viz.  the  Pung- 
sheer  and  Ghoorbund,  wliich  join  below  Chareekar,  nortli  of  Cabul.  These 
joint  streams  receive  tlie  (_';ihrd  aad  Logur  streams  a  httle  iiirtlier  down,  nnti 
run  parallel  to  the  road  from  Cabul  to  Peshour,  noith  of  it.  At  the  village 
of  Kama  these  joint  streams  meet  the  above  branch  coming  from  the  north. 
Itom  dttt  to  the  valley  of  Feehoiir,  the  joint  streams  are  better  known  by  Ae 
name  of  Kama  Aan  any  oHier.  On  entering  the  valley  of  Peeboor  at  liadv 
nee^  it  breaks  off  into  three  great  branches,  w  hidi  join  twelve  miles  farther 
down  at  Dobnndee,  the  most  northern  or  left  branch,  receiving  the  Swad 
and  Punjc-ora  in  one  !?tream  two  coss  above  Knshnngger,  five  from  Dobundee, 
and  tilteen  miles  noith-eiuit  ot  Pesi>our.  I  saw  all  tiiese  streams  in  one  be- 
hm  Dobundee  ;  they  appeared  about  three  hundred  yai  ds  broad,  and  sailed 
deqi  boots  at  the  Ghat.  I  went  to  Ae  centre  one  of  these  bfancfaeo  »mh 
of  Feshour.  The  flnt  one  was  up  to  the  saddle-akirta,  fear  feet  bnoad,  and 
strong  bottom,  in  most  places  veiy  rapid,  my  hone  oould  scarcely  keep  h» 
feet;  hut  tfiis  was  in  the  beginnintr  of  M:iv,  when  «onie  of  the  snow  water 
had  come  down.  The  second  branch  i  atl(  iiii>tt  1,  l  ut  could  not  lord,  but 
there  are  fords,  and  in  the  cold  season  it  is  tbrdable  all  over  one  place, 
tgriiere  it  is  confined  between  hiOs.  The  Punjsheer  and  Ghoorbood  are  very 
eonsiderable  streams.  The  Ghoorbnnd  rises  with  the  Hindoo  Kooah  peak 
north  of  fiameean,  and  the  Ptanjihetf  fifty  coss  east  of  H,  from  the  same 
hiUs.  Their  course  to  thdr  jondUHi  ivith  the  Kama  is  one  hundred  end 
eighty  miles. 

The  Cabid  stream,  which  is  only  eight  or  ten  yards  broad,  rises  in  the 
snowy  hiU  called  Kohibaba  west  of  Cabul ;  it  joins  to  the  Ghiznee  and  Lo- 
gur streams  east  of  Oshul,  but  the  most  of  its  water  is  expended  in  the  cuL 
tivathm  round  Gsbul  and  Mydan. 

The  Swad  and  Punjooia  river  rise  in  the  same  ridge^  and  are  called  by  the 
cuuuUries  thiouj^  which  th^  pass*  'Qwir  ooune  is  nearly  eqna4  one  com- 


Digitized  by  Google 


AnsRHX.}  THE  SWAN  BIVER.  657 

ing  ftom  nofdi-aut,  and  tbe  other  from  iMrUiiiiMit  The  name  of  Funjconi 
« lost  in  that  of  Swoad  at  Tulkan  Matkunnee,  below  wliich  they  unite  and 
pass  to  the  south  by  the  west  of  Kushnuggur,  at  the  distance  oi"  two  coss, 
and  join  the  left  branch  of  the  Kama,  as  before  mentioned.  Their  course  is 
about  ninety  miles  to  this  point. 

TMk  QscB  mni* 

This  is  a  very  small  river,  and  does  not  desen  c  the  name.  It  is  two  feet 
deep,  thirty  yards  broad,  a  c!e:tr  stream,  with  a  strong  bottom*  and  high 
ru^ed  banks.  It  rises  ea^t  nurtli-exist  of  Kiianpoor,  twenty-fives  miles  in  the 
hilb  which  run  up  to  Moorofleimbid.  It  ntns  eigh^  mile*  weti  mm^wcs^ 
and  joins  the  Indoi  two  com  abwra  Nilab.  It  ia  jouwd  wnr  Hwain  Abdal 
by  the  jdnt  livuleta  of  Huaun  Abdal  and  Sab  flawn^*  tnd  Wah. 


TBS  SWAM  aiVXB 

Ricaa  in  the  aame  hiUa  moie  to  (lie  eaatwttd,  but  I  htm  not  faeanl  die 
exact  point.  Its  ooune  is  about  mie  handfed  and  thirty  nulaa  to  where  it 
jonns  tiie  Indus  eight  coss  below  Mukkud.   Its  stream  tt  amell  in  the  cold 

season,  not  more  than  a  foot  of  water,  but  m  the  rainy  season  it  h  broad  and 
excessively  rapid.  When  it  ris^  to  tour  and  four  feet  and  a  half  high,  it  is 
not  possible  to  cross  it ;  but  it  rises  and  falls  tiuddenly.  We  crossed  it  where 
it  was  about  three  or  three  ftet  and  a  half  deep*  and  tbea  several  camds 
were  carried  down.  Its  bed  k  sand  widi  •  ftw  stonas  in  the  stream  $  it  baa 
many  qmck-sanda^  and  its  banks  are  steep  and  m^^d,  with  many  deep 
latvinee  Actending  in  many  parts  in  from  its  banks.  After  we  had  crossed  it, 
it  rose  more,  and  was  not  fordable  for  three  days  ;  tliis  is  the  case  with  most 
of  the  rivers  in  thi':  Doab,  and  some  \  havf  M  cn  i  ist?'  seven  or  eijrht  feet  in 
less  than  hall  an  hour,  from  luivmg  no  water  at  ail,  merely  turreut  courses. 


nXOOBMBlVlB 

Rises  twelve  mile-^  south-west  of  Hiiryoob  east  north-east  of  Giiiznee, 
and  after  an  east  aoutii-east  covrse  oi  one  hundred  and  fifteen  miles,  joins 

4  p 


Digitizeci  by  Google 


ess  7H£  UYJ>ASP£&  CAmmn 

the  JxOm  three  mUes  eait  Mmtb-eait  of  Kagul  Wdb.  The  bad  of  tUi 
nmr  h  braad  at  the  point  we  crossed  it,  three  furlongs  and  aquartef  (  trntthe 
stream  was  small,  not  more  th-m  one  foot  water;  its  bed  was  'iandv,  and  had 
some  quirk-sands.  The  descent  ut  u  bed  was  very  considerable,  and  when 
the  siiuw  luelta,  it  must  be  very  rapid.  There  are  several  canals  brought 
fiom  it  into  the  Eenkhel  valley,  wbidk  hai  reduced  iti  uxe  at  this  point.  It 
ig  joined  by  the  Gombeda  at  Lukkee ;  firom  tiiis  to  tbe  tea  I  have  not  heard 
of  any  rivcra  joining  the  Indus  on  the  ijgllt  bank,  from  the  westward,  nor 
on  t  he  left  bank,  with  the  exception  of  the  rivers  of  the  Punjaub,  which  join 
it  at  Mittanda  Kote,  in  one  stream  called  the  Punjnud.  Xbeaaxiven  I  shall 
give  separa^  accounts  ol^  b^pnning  £rom  the  west. 

tn  mmi^  mor,     vrnmsA  (flmaana). 

This  is  the  second  largest  of  the  Punjab  rivers.  We  eroiaed  it  in  July, 
but  it  had  not  attained  its  f(i\\  height ;  I  was  told  it  rose  seven  or  eight  feet 
higher  in  August.  It  measured  from  edge  to  edge  of  water,  one  mile,  one 
furlong,  tiiu-ty-tive  perches.  The  soundings,  in  crossing  the  de^  part  ot 
the  I'Hff***^  wliich  did  not  fiusecd  two  hundred*  or  two  hundred  aadfifly 
jaxdBt  wave  as  fiiUow^  in  ftet^  9^  lo*  11,  la,  13, 14*  14*  ij*  i>t  xi»  10. 

The  deep  part  was  towardi  tha  left  bank }  ita  bc^tom  sand,  with  a  small 
quantity  of  mud.  There  arc  many  islands  and  sand-banks  formed  in  its 
centre,  and  it  contains  merely  quick-sands  ;  its  left  bauk  is  particularly  low, 
and  it  must,  at  its  greatest  viae,  overflow  tour  or  five  miles  of  tbe  low  countrjr 
oa  its  left  bank.  , 

ItiimintiieaoiidMaBfeoofner  of  ihefiUegr  of  Gad^  iatbemcailad 
the  YidustB^andpaaaeatfaiough  twohdkeseaitand  wert  of  thetownof  Carii- 
aaaec*  h  h  joined  six  coss  below  the  town  hj  the  little  Sind :  it  is  joined  bgr 
many  small  rivodets  in  its  course  through  the  \-aIlcy  and  hills,  which  it  enters 
at  Baramoola ;  and  two  coss  below  Moozuferabad  it  receives  the  Kishuu- 
gunga  from  the  northward.  Its  course,  thus  &i,  i&  nearly  west,  i'lom  this 
it  takes  a  great  carve  to  the  louth,  and  near  Jehim  it  is  little  known ;  the 
country  being  to  escesdvdy  mountainous,  few  travellers  ever  past  that  way. 
Hk  Jdunit  in  itt  course  through  the  bOli^  ia  very  rapid,  and  from  one  to  two 
hundred  yards  broad.  I  have  only  one  route  from  Jelum  to  Moozufferabad, 
along  its  r!«Tht  bank,  and  some  of  the  places  appear  to  be  misplaced  in  the 
oommenoemeat,  which  1  had  an  opportuniQr  of  correcting  ior  thirty  cott^ 


Digitizer 


TIi£  GHDNAll 


but  the  same  being  probably  the  «IM  in  iM  temiining  pilt  uf  tlw  route,  I 
liaveaot|Nititd0OTW  tiMNiilh  tiia  dHtaiioeagi^  Tte  wiMtb  rani  it  tMsd 
to  b«  MSiaBely  practicable  ftr  *  man  on  fix>t»  being  through  hills  all  tlie  m^i 
The  Jelum  is  not  fonUitle  at'  any  seaaon,  Aougfa  in  many  places  nearly  so,  ai 
men  and  horses  cross  with  ease,  ha:%'injT  only  fifteen  or  twenty  yards  to  swim. 
After  a  course  of  four  hundred  and  fifty  iii]le>,  it  joins  the  Chunab  at  Trim- 
moo  (ihat,  ten  coss  below  Jbung  and  tilty  above  Moultan,  in  whicli  it  loses 
itaiwatt..  Hmn  jmnt  itrawH^  oaUed  Chnmb or CboolMt  racohie.liM 
RatfiM  tweotyuax.  oom  lover  dom,  n«er  IkzOihab  end-Alune^oor  fiwa  the 
caelward,  and  pass  four  miles  and  e  half  north  of  Moultan,  retaining  llie 
iHHDe  of  Chunab  to  within  four  caat  of  Ooch,  where  th^  are  joined  at  Shee- 
neebukree  by  the  Crharra  or  joint  8tr«nns  of  the  Beyah,  or  Beas,  nnd  Sutley, 
fifly-eight  coss  bclms  Moultan,  and  thirty-two  below  liuhawuipoor.  ¥iom  ihis 
point  to  Mitteuda  Kut,  where  they  fail  into  the  Indus,  ibrty-foui'  cotts,  tiiese 
live  ettttune  inonotalw  uptheiMM^PiB^nid.  The  Indos  end  Pn^ibid 
raaneailf  peraUeltoeediollierfivtlwdiitaioei  tiie  dietaaiDe  ecraei  finm 
Ooch  bong  only  seven  coss,  ten  miles  and  a  haUl  Tbe  wlmle  of  tbii  qpaoe 
is  one  complete  sheet  of  water  in  the  rains  and  hot  season,  and  appears  as  one 
river.  This  might  possibly  give  rise  to  the  mistake  in  the  maps  formerly 
published,  in  making  tlie  Garra  join  the  Indus  instead  of  the  Cliunab  or  jomt 
streams  of  the  Chunab,  Jelum,  and  Ravee.  For  the  waters  of  them  and 
the  Indus  meet  fir  aotne  diataooe  above  the  juoctkmof  tfieGfaaneh  with 

tilBHit  ... 

The  greatest  breadth  of  llie  Doab,  between  the  Jebm  and  IndtB»  appears 

to  be  at  the  point  we  cmosed  it  ;  from  Attock  to  Jel!n!porc  Ghat,  on  tlie  Je- 
lum, a  hundred  and  tburteen  miles  horizontal  di  tancL' ;  and  trom  Moultan  at 
iiaj  Ghat  to  Udoo  Kot  (seventeen  miles  from  tiic  Indus),  was  thirty-three 
milefl.  Tile  norlliem  part  of  tint  Doab,  from  33°  up,  is  hilly ;  and  to  tiie 
•outhwafd  b  a  deaavtf  with  the  eicepciaii  of  »  ftw  inflee  IB  fiiom  ^ 
tiw  1X901%  which  ie  ovndown  and  nch* , 


THE  CHUMAB  (ACESIiras) 


leHiabigeetof  tbePkugabmni  itimaiarad  ottte  Wbmnbad  GImI^ 
OB  the  311k  flfJuljr,  one  mile,  .tkioeflixloqgi^  and  twen^peraho^  fiooiedlgi 
to  edge  of  mfter,  and  the  oonndii^  wtn  tfie  Mme  aa  the  Jeium,  fourteeft 
ftok  tlM  greataeW  but  tbe  enmnt  was  more  npid  hj  a  knot  and  a  iHlf  |  the 

4P  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


000  THB  CHUNAa  U^mnu. 

Jdum  «  few,  and  Cbanab  fivi^     flf«  Tii  tlwt  Htj  ttrnmi,  ia 

cfamiMl  doM  not  exceed  two  hundred  and  fifty  ur  diree  hundred  jnds:  tb« 
■eeond  cfaannelt  wfaidi  ms  much  the  broadest^  I  am  told  is  dry  in  the  eoU 

weather.  There  are  many  islands  and  sand-banks  formed  towards  its  centre, 
and  the  measurement  was  taken  between  two  of  these,  as  at  the  Jelum,  The 
size  of  these  rivers  may  be  easily  calculated  for  the  cold  s^ion,  for  the  joint 
streams  of  the  Jelum,  Chunab,  Bavee,  at  Raj  Ghat  near  Moultau,  was  five 
htmdred  yards,  and  the  greatest  depth  seventeen  Act;  bnt  tUa  was  only  fbt 
one  throw,  and  the  average  may  be  eight,  or  eight  feet  and  a  hal^  fi>r  fiom 
this  it  shelved  to  nothing :  allow  two  hundred  and  thirty  jards  for  the  Jeloo^ 
by  eight  feet,  and  two  hundred  and  seventy  for  the  Chimab,  by  eight  feet  f 
and  the  remaining  part  by  five  hundred  for  the  Ravee,  for  I  do  not  allow  the 
HaA-ee  to  be  more  Umu  four  feet  deep,  and  a  little  more  Uiau  a  huadred  yards 
broad  ^  this  may  be  about  their  average  size  in  the  middle  of  December,  the 
time  we  oomed  their  joint  alnam^  ^reeaUe  to  tiheif  breadth  and  daplfa  m 
tiM  raina.  I  allow  fcy  tiiia  calcniatkm  that  these  liveia  mmt  haiae  mm  three 
and  a  half  or  four  feet,  leaving  ten  Vt  ten  feet  and  a  half  far  the  centra  af 
their  channels  for  the  cold  season,  which  I  think  may  be  pretty  near  the 
mark.  1  have  not  heard  of  any  ford  on  this  river  below  the  hills  ;  but  like 
the  Jehim,  it  is  easily  crossed  at  the  pomts  where  it»  banks  arc  low  and  its 
bed  broad,  Uiere  being  only  a  short  distance  to  swim  in  the  centre.  I  iiave 
beard  of  tbo  joint  atreanw  of  the  Jelom,  Chimab^  and  Raifw  being  ibrded  by 
scamdbdktwthe  jmictionof  the  Ravecb  but  if  dui  be  Ae  case  it  must  bavo 
wpnad  at  this  point  considerably.  The  banks  of  the  Chunab  above  are  Iow» 
but  well  wooded,  as  is  the  Jelum  ;  but  the  timbers  are  small,  and  the  wood 
used  in  building  and  making  boats  is  floated  from  the  hills  seventy  aud  eighty 
coss  higher  up,  where  it  is  in  great  abundance.  The  horizontal  distance  from 
JeDalpoor  Ghat  to  Vizeerabad  Ghat,  acmm  tim  Doab,  is  forty-four  miles. 
Hie  oountty  cxoessivi^  low,  and  soil  ricb,  dually  pasture. 

The  following  is  a  list  of  boats  and  ghala  up  and  dowo  the  Jdmn  and 
<}hunab  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  Ghats  we  passed.  On  the  Jelam  HuUp 
gla  four  boat.s,  Jelum  twenty,  Scgonia  ten,  Russoolpoor  and  Dadopoor  five, 
Jeiialpoor  and  vicinity  twenty-five,  Pmdi  Dadun  Klum  and  vicinity  forty, 
Ahmedabad  and  Bhera  twenty,  total  a  liuudred  and  iwenty-four  j  in  the 
diatanoe  of  s«fanly-live  or  eighty  nubs  on  the  Chunsib  above  yiaaandiad  and 
at  it,  Viaeenbad  twelve^  Sodmthiae^  Deena  M6ii|a  two^  Marsf  Kakot  two, 
Noushara  three,  Koolow  al  tw«^  Jmda  Bdiadoorpoor  fiv^  Kbolasake  Cfannee 
t#o^  Kaone  Km  Chock  four,  Aknoon  seven,  total  distance  up  thirty  am, 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  BAVEE. 


661 


lbrtjr4ivo  boBta ;  down  fiom  ViienlNid,  Baanft  Khan  tw<s  SuUooiEe  twcv 

Ramnugger  twenty-one,  Morad  four,  Wannuke  tmOt.  Menbdeea  bod  Mmb* 
deeabad  two,  Bhuttee  Kachuch  Jellalpoor  four,  Khadirabad  Gliat  six,  total 
eighty-four,  in  the  distance  of  fifty-five  coss.  The  course  of  the  Chuiiab, 
from  the  snowy  mountains  to  which  it  has  been  traced  to  Mitten  Kakot,  iive 
hundred  aod  ibrty  miles. 

Is  the  least  hy  far  of  all  the  Punjab  rivers  ;  its  measurement  from  edge  to 
edge  of  writer  wa«  on! v  five  hundred  and  thirteen  yards,  1 2th  of  August, 
when  it  siiuuid  ime  uttuiaed  its  full  height :  its  chamiei  is  very  narrow.  1 
liad  only  two  throws  of  tfie  l««d  in  pMsing  it,  twelve  ftet  The  bottom  has 
a  good  dsal  of  taoA,  much  more  than  any  of  the  other  nven^  OQe>lifth  mejr 
be  mud,  the  remainder  sand.  The  deep  channel  could  not  have  exceeded  in 
bread  til  thirty  or  forty  yards,  the  remainder  was  fiom  three  to  five  feet,  atid 
two  or  three  tiirows  eight  or  nine  feet :  in  thf  cohl  season  it  is  fordable  all 
over,  not  above  tour  feet  deep.  There  are  many  quick-sands,  and  its  banks 
are  low  and  well  wooded.  There  are  but  few  boats  on  this  river,  but  those 
there  M%  are  good,  and  much  the  same  as  are  nsed  on  the  Jumnju  The 
Indus,  Mam,  and  Onmah  have  the  same  kind  of  boeti^  which  erass  fiom  ten 
to  twelve  horses. 

The  distance  from  Vizcerabad  Ghat  to  Meannee  Ghat  on  the  Ravee,  fitly- 
five  miles  horizontal  distance.  This  Doab  is  rich  and  flat,  but  hit^'her  land 
tlian  the  last,  and  the  soil  not  so  very  rich.  The  course  of  the  Ravee  is  very 
oonsiderabliv  bat  I  am  not  quite  certain  of  its  haviiig  the  Ml  coofse  I  have 
givmittoitsjanctioninditheChanahk  cf  fbur  Irandred  and  fifteen  miles  i 
it  appears,  however,  by  a  route  from  Casbmeer,  through  Kishtwnr,  that  after 
crossing  the  high  ridge  into  Kishtwar,  the  road  leads  all  the  way  from  this 
point  along  the  banks  of  a  stream,  tlie  name  of  which  was  unfortunately  not 
known  to  my  informant,  and  it  appears  that  he  had  it  on  his  right  to  within 
tiiree  inarclies  oi'  Noorpoor,  where  he  croiUied  it  and  leil  it  running  o&'  to  his 
left:  in  his  last  nnypch  to  Nompoor  ftooi  Bnssntd,  he  crossed  tfie  Ravee^ 
wbkik  he  said  was  thereabout  the  sine  of  the  stream  he  left  three  mardiea 
back.  It  appears  more  than  probable  that  thi<?  stream  was  the  Ravee,  but 
he  did  not  know  it  as  such  at  the  point  he  left  ;  as  lie  left  it  to  his  left,  it 
must  have  either  g<Hie  to  the  B^as  or  fiavee*  but  I  think  the  latter  is  ahnosfr 


THE  BEYAH,  OR  BEYA& 


LAmunux. 


OMtiin,  and  that  it  has  taken  a  curve  in  the  hills-ftir  thiM  fmo  nnidbM  and 

oome  round  to  the  right  to  the  point  at  which  he  crossed  it,  ftr  Im  agni  it 
ran  from  his  left  to  ritxht,  which  would  agree,  and  I  have  m  ronseqiience 
given  it  this  cur^'e  atid  made  it  the  Ravee,  or  at  all  events  its  most  distant 
branch*  This  route  also  proves  to  me  that  the  Ciiuoab  does  not  oome  &ota 
die  nortliwwd  of  the  mmy  ridge,  beeauw  tliw  route  mint  heve  ciMnd  it  tf 
it  did,  but  dm  it  nsppoang  the  only  route  1  heve  got  by  diii  roed  to  be 
correct,  which  not  of  course  be  the  case ;  and  without  a  seeond  to  oor* 
roborate  this,  I  would  not  consider  this  as  certain,  though  1  have  every  rea- 
son to  suppose  this  route  correct,  for  it  agrees  with  others  fxoia  Nooipoor 
downward*  ' 


Tm9  river  measured,  at  Bhirowal  Ghat,  seven  hundred  and  forty  yards. 
Its  ngtit  bank  is  very  iiigh,  and  its  current  very  rapid.  The  day  we  reached 
it,  it  was  at  its  greatest  height,  and  so  ra|iid  that  the  boats  could  not  make 
the  kft  benk*  Some  woe  cHiied  down  six  or  aeren  coas  in  attempting  it } 
^  however,  mi  the  neit  dey.  ItisfiMdahle  in  mottpleeM  iadkeooldfM. 
•on,  but  its  bed  contains  many  qiuckraaiMlib-Wid  at  thia  aaeian  theae  are  muay 
islands  and  taad  beds fonrod  towards itscetttre.  Thne  aae  tir«ity4ive  IxMts 
at  this  Ghat  and  its  vicinity,  but  they  are  verv  bad  for  the  rainy  season. 
They  are  made  ol'ilat  planks,  more  like  ratts  tiiaii  boats,  with  a  plank  of  onr 
ibot  all  round,  and  do  not  draw  six  inches  ,  water  when  filled.  There  is  but 
litUe  weed  along  the  banks  of  this  river  what  there  is  it  malL  Itjttnatfae 
Sntlnj  eighteen  cobs  below  Bfajvoowal  neat  the  viUiffe  of  Hurake^  not  ibr 
fioa  Feroozpoor ;  after  their  junction  the  joint  streams  are  called  Beas,  and 
afterwards  called  Ghara,  but  from  wliat  point  T  know  not.  It  is  callpd  the 
Gharrah  at  Gordeean  Ghat  near  i'akputiun,  a  hundred  coss  above  Biitia\v  u!- 
poor.  They  join  the  Chuuab  above  C^h,  as  has  been  mentioned,  tlurty-two 
con  bekyw  Bobawulpoor,  and  fifty-eight  fiem  Moidtan.  The  Beyas  and 
SuUuj  are  nearly  the  aaase  si«^  but  the  Beyaa  ia  xadier  the  laiyciC*  Xlidlr 
couiacb  Umh  is  nearly  the  same  fixHn  die  snowy  ridg%  «  ]iuiidred  and  ilfty 
attlaa  to  their  junction,  and  two  hundred  and  sixty  more  to  thdr  jnnction 
with  the  Chunab  or  joint  streams  of  the  Jelum,  Chunab,  and  Ravee.  Wood 
is  to  be  got  in  abuntlance  tioiu  the  hills  not  fas  disiant  .  The  Begas  Guuga 
and  Baa  Gunga  ixom  the  Beyaa,  the  ibrmer  pas&mg  Kot  kaagra  to  the  siNxthF 


Digitized  by  Google 


» 


Amm,l  THE  USGHinOliUI  BIVER.  OBBi 

ward  and  the  latter  to  the  noftlimd  in  a  TOterly  directMm  near  and  joining 
at  Hureepoor,  bdow  the  fort  one  match.  The  Ban  Gunga  separates  into  two  ' 
bfandia  near  the  fort,  and  a  branch  pairing  on  eadi  ride  of    tibqr  fimn  an 
iaiand  and  jwi  inunediatety  hdknrit* 

THE  RIVERS  OF  KHORAAAN. 

THB  Mmmm  on  RKLsmiD. 

Tht<5  river  is  the  greatest  of  the  Khorasan  rivers:  it  rises  west  ol"  Cabul 
ill  the  lull  called  Kohi  Baba.  Its  course  is  south-west  throug|i  the  Ua^ara 
country,  and  passing  to  Hie  aouthward,  it  cioflsea  the  gieat  roada  from 
y«iiJA«r  to  Hirat  at  GteeriiTr,  a  distance  of  tiro  hmdred  and  siz^  milea. 
Hm  whole  dUstance  to  within  two  marches  of  this  is  through  very  high  and 
difficult  hills.  From  this  to  where  it  falls  into  the  lake  of  Seestan  is  one 
hundred  miles,  total  three  hundred  and  sixty  miles.  In  the  hot  season, 
when  the  snow  meiis,  it  is  a  very  large  river,  and  it  it  a  common  practice 
with  the  people  oi  Greesbk  to  try  to  shoot  anowB  aciOBB  or.riing  atooes,  but 
it  is  not  to  be  done.  In  the  cold  weather  it  «  neaily  faraiit  decp^  e^ial  to 
tiM  Kanuw  riverat  AlBoaa.  Thsre  are  two  hoala  atthe.Gfeeahk  Ohat,  bet 
it  ia  fordable  for  the  greatest  part  of  the  year ;  it  receives  oonaideraUe 
itreania  in  its  course.  It  is  joined  fourteen  miles  above  Grceshk  by  a  stream 
^hose  roufse  is  eighty  miles,  wiiich  rises  to  the  south  of  the  Huzara  country 
at  Sealibund.  It  also  receives  the  Urghundab  five  coss  below  Greesbk,  and 
part  of  the  Turnuk,  it  is  also  joued  by  the  Khaahrood  at  Kolmidieen 
fiirtiier  down. 

THE  UKOHUKDAB  anTSE         >  ■ 

.     i'      '      ■  ■'  .: 

in  tiie  Husam  hiBs  about  eighty  miles  north-east  by  north  of  -  Kai^ 

dahar,  passes  within  five  coss  of  the  town  to  the  north  and  west  of  it,  and 
joins  the  Hirmund  five  coss  below  Crree^hk  on  its  left:  bank,  after  a  course  of 
one  hundred  and  fifty  miles.  In  tde  ajld  scasou  this  river  is  two  ;ii:tl  a  half 
or  three  feet  deep  and  fiily  yards  broad,  but  in  the  hot  weather,  when  the 
snow  melts  in  the  hUia  it  is  not  ibidaUie  Ibr  daee  attonth^  being  eioearive^ 
tafidt  sand  at  this  season  above  one  hundred  and  fifly  yards  broad. 

II 


I 

Digitizeci  by  Google 


664 


THE  FURRAHROO 
THX  XBABREOOD. 


CAfseniuz. 


This  river  rises  at  6akkir  about  ninety  miles  south-east  by  south  of  Hint, 
and  after  ft  course  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  joins  the  Hirmnnd  «t 
Komiheen  on  its  i%bt  bKnk.  It  is  lai^  tluui  the  Ui^^undab  and  niaOer 
than  the  Hmnund  s  its  depth  in  the  ccdd  season  is  up  to  a  man'i  hip  (tliree 
6et)  and  6%  or  sixty  yards  broad :  it  is  not  ibrdable  when  the  snow  melts, 
is  crossed  on  mussuks  or  leather  bags,  and  smdl  rafts  made  of  wood  and 
reeds.  Its  breadth  in  the  hot  season  is  from  one  hundred  and  fifty  to  one 
hundred  and  aeventy-tive  yards,  and  very  rapid ;  it  also  crosses  the  great 
load  fiom  Kandahar  to  Hiiat  near  Dilaram. 


THE  TUKNUK. 


Tms  is  a  small  stream,  rises  at  Mookr,  and  afler  a  west-soutli-west  course 
of  two  hundred  milea»  joina  the  Uighundab  near  Doaba ;  in  the  cold  aeaaon^ 
lunrever,  its  water  runs  into  a  long  lake  near  Ddn  (MiollaniaD^  called  die 
Doreeb  vhich  has  been  taken  for  a  river.  When  the  Tumuk  nsss  the 
superfluous  water  runs  to  the  Urghundab ;  in  the  cold  icaion  it  is  knee  deqi^ 
and  it  seldom  rises  above  a  man's  middle. 


TB£  FUBRAHHOOD 

Is  larger  than  any  of  these  rivers  excepting  tlie  Hirmund.  It  is  in  tlie 
oold  season  above  •  man's  and  fiom  fifty  to  axty  yarda  broad;  in  the 
hot  weather  it  is  crossed  on  mussuks  and  rsAi  of  wood  and  reeds.  It »  at 

this  season  very  rapid ;  it  rises  south  of  Pursee,  and  is  joined  above  Fknah 
and  below  Guranee  by  the  Jizeea  Rood.  It  falls  into  the  lake  of  Seestan  at 
the  north-west  angle,  after  a  course  of  two  hundred  miles.  It  appears 
wonderiul  that  this  lake  should  receive  so  many  rivers  without  any  apparent 
vsnt  fiir  the  water:  and  tt  is  slated  not  to  be  alcove  tlurly  or  thir^<4lve  coss 
•Gross  at  the  broadest  part. 


I 


Digitized  by  GoOgle 


Afpbndix.^ 


THE  FOOUMALAN  OR  HIRAT  RIVER. 


665 


TBB  PO0IillCAI«Air  OK  KOkt  BIVXK. 

This  river  n'se*i  near  Oba  (east  of  Hirat)  in  the  Ymak  countr}-,  and 
receives  three  or  four  streams  before  it  reaches  Hirat.  It  is  a  small  river  in 
the  cold  seasou,  but  rises  to  a  cousiderable  size  wheu  tlie  snow  melts.  The 
gmter  part  of  ka  tnter  is  expended  in  the  ykanaty  of  Hint  on  tbe  cul> 
tfvation;  two  or  tfaiee  cuiab  are  cut  firam  it»  and  paaa  through  tiie  town. 
There  is  a  bridga  acrcMs  it  three  cofls  south,  of  tha  town.  .  It  appears  fion  » 
route  from  Mour  to  Musbud,  that  a  river  was  crossed  half-way,  running 
from  left  to  right,  called  the  Tejun,  and  the  routes  from  Hirat  to  Mushud 
po  along  its' banks  by  the  north  road  as  far  as  Kafir  Kila,  w  liere  it  is  lell 
running  to  the  north  or  righL  This  can  be  no  other  than  the  one  which  is  • 
ctooMd  in  tiie  odier  route  half-way  between  Hour  and  Mushud }  but  where 
it  runs  to  after  that,  I  know  not.  I  think  Arrownnith's  map  lias  it  perfbctlj 
correcL  Ifr.  Foister's  route  seems  to  have  led  Kennel  into  an  error,  in 
making  it  run  aoudl  into  the  lake  of  Seestan ;  but  this  rivulet  which  Mr. 
Forster  crofls<'d,  running  south,  does  not  appear  to  be  tJic  Hirat  river,  but 
a  small  stream  which  conies  irom  the  hills,  which  separate  the  north  and 
south  roads  to  Mushud,  and  must  be  lost  to  the  southwaid,  tor  it  appears  by 
several  aoeounts  that  no  stream  is  crossed  fiom  Fuivah  Co  Qhain  ud  Toooi 
or  from  JeUabbad  to  Nih,  exciting  theRirrah  Rood;  bnt  if  the  Hirat  rlvtt 
.  ran  into  the  lake  cf  Seestai^  it  must  have  be^  cmased  in  both  these  nmtes  *« 


*  I  omit  Mr.  Micartney's  acoooiit  of  die  aknrt*t  ow  of  dwH  m  fitlly  deteribcd h  ny  mmtm^ 

and  the  other  in  Mr.  Kiniiier'a  Geography  of  Persia.  The  account  of  the  dcsaris  is  followed  by 
deKriptiont  of  tbe  diiocDt  kingdonu  and  proviocea  repiipaeiiud  in  tlx  map,  which  are  tddom  pnreljr 
geographical,  and  wlndi  Bccd  Mt  l&mfeR  be  nveMtd. 


4q 


Digitized  by  Google 


« 


(   666  ) 


APPENDIX  E. 

ft 

PUSBTOO  irOCASULAET. 

'^I^HE  words  are  here  Rpcit  according  to  Dr.  Gilchrist's  method ;  Q  stands  for  a  gat-> 
^    hirni  K.  ;)it'  rest  has  been  explainer!  in  tlio  Preface.    Th<-  first  oolunu  OOntUH 
Ftuiitoo  wordi>  lu  the  Westesn  dialect  and  the  sticond  in  the  Eastern. 


God  Khods 

I  leaven  Asman 

Father  Plar 

Mother  Miff 

Son  Zo£ 

Daughter  L58r 

Brother  "Wror 

l^ter  Klnr 

HoBbtiid  '  Merii  SnkhCoiiii  L  6  lliMtcf* 

Wife  Oumt  Khin 

^Ittdoi  Pcghlu 

*Jkf  Zunky  Hnlak 
Girl  Uaj 

CUld  As  above  fixr  a  iiiale»  and  tat  ft 

femalo  Jhiky,  Oockiitae  b  tl» 

general  name  fiar  both. 

Man  Meru 

Peoiilt  Snv^  or  KlwiKc| 

Head  ■  8cr  (like  ser  in  Mrraiit) 

Countenanee  Mukh 

Nose  Puzu  Pozii 

Ngatttl  Spuihiiiito  Six^iue 

JSft  Stmjgee^  or  Lenin 

Eye-brow  WftJIroodzSfie  WfMte 

£ye-jaahet  Bani,  (tliis  is  a  very  peculiar 

nasal  tiy  wiili  laome  mixture  ot 

•n  r.) 


Digitized  by  Google 


b 


Ammau}  .    PUSHTOO  VOCABULARY.  667 

BHQQUSR.  yxiLOettaS  FUUTMNK  I  UIHIIII  IHIHIHIIMI 

Ear  Ghwuzh  Ohwi^ 

SbvebMd  'WodnPBly  Wncbwofy 

Hur  VeditD  Wcikhta 

Cheek  Bllgh^vur,  or  Ohoonibar  AnongM 

Mouth  Kh66lu 

Throat  Huluk,  outside  Ghara  Muiy 

Tooth  Obtth  GhaUt 

Tongue  Zuba  Zheba 

Beard  Zht-cni  Gf^ra 

N«ck  Tsut,  or  Mugh^  Tsut  ' ,  . 

Slioulder  Odni  Oga 

.  Wbaw  Tningly  Tmagal 

Hmd  La.^  (the  whole  anD)»  the  lund 

alone  MuQgol 

Fuiger  Gwutu 

Nafl  N88lc 

Bolly  Nnt  On 

Back  Sba 

Foot  PBhu  Khpu 

Knee  Zungoon 

Fledi   '  Ohwiulni  Oliwddie  • 

Bone  Hudttoky 

Blood  Veenee 

Heart  Ziru 

Milk  SbSdc^  or  FlMe  PMe,  or  flbondu 

Hearilig  Urvedn  Uoredu,  to  bear 

Sight  Leedu  Katu»  to  tee 

Taiiie  Khwimd  ' 
Smell  (the  MBN  of)  BooW 

Tooeh  KatD 

Vole©  5^'"Rh  Ghng^ 

Oy  Chcghu,  or  Nare 

)laiaa  Awan*  S^fkm^ub 

Hmrlmg  Name  not  etaily  MMertiuMd 

Speech  Wyl 

Sleqp  Khob 

Love  MwiiHII 

Pain  Khwndi,  or  Dturd  Khoo^  or  Donl    Khwodi  k 

only  pain  fixmi «  womd. 

TranUe.  KJnipagee  Zuheeregee 

4  Q.2 


Digitizeci  by  Google 


m 


PUSHTOO  VOCABULARY. 

WESTSKM  FU8MXOO.  KAOTUUT  YVSOXOO, 


Man 


Labour 

Forae 

Koovin  • 

Fkiwcr 

Zoor,'  / 

Marnafrc 

Kaveen 

Wedduig 

Wada,  or  Wra 

life 

Qodwr 

opint  (or  muiaj 

UrwaJi»  m  {VNtXU} 

Death 

Mtrrg 

,Coid 

Saru,  Yuklt 

*Cii«fa 

Kinliii,-«rDMni 

Ban 

Gaty.  llttal  iNdl  fer  s  gndt 

Golcew 

Sun 

Nmur 

Moon 
8i«r 

Spozhmy 

Rqr 

Not  ea«U  J  ascertained,  Brekhno, 

n  fl;!*-!);  T  it nibu,  aflame;  Put 

wuailiu,  a  Mxark. 

Wind 

Bad 

Wluiliriiid 

JfOOffDUOKy 

Tempeik 

freely' 

Rain 

Baraii 

Hail 

Guly' 

Bredmn  - 

Waora 

loe 

Yokh 

Dqr 

Rwudz 

K^t 
Monmur 

Shpu 
Suba 

Summer 

Madttm:  , 

Doby 

Psurly 

Muny . 

Zomy 

Tmt 

Kal 

Tfane 

Wnqt 

Euth 

Mzuku 

^tfcr  - ' 

0I»  . 

8m 

Derea 

B«Ml 

r 

KiiUta,  or  Daers 


Zmuku 


Digitized  by  Google 


PUSHTOO  VOCABULAKT. 


KNaUOL 


WESTERN  PtTJ 


Rivulet 

Sbelu,  or  Kiiwur 

Ware 

CIh|ni 

Saud 

Shoga 

Dust 

Doftree 

Mud 

Khutu 

Ohur 

Cout 

Oharq 

Buiiig  fptmoA 

VaUey 

Dura 

Vapoor 

Luru 

Km 
Heat 

Or 

OiunMe 

Depth 

Hcirrht 

Lwur 

Breadth 

Piim  wale 

OobMa  (Ooahd,  long) 

Hole 

SoQiy 

Dildi 

Qmndnk 

Stone 

Kane 

Gold 

S5&reZer, 

Red  Gold 

Sbeem  Zer,  While  Gold  (nr  m 

not) 

Salt 

Forest 

Xongiil 

Herb 

Wadm 

TVae 

Wmm 

A  ^"fc" 

MwNdqr 

T  cffum 

Sheerwalee 

One 

Yu" 

^1  wo 

Dwu 

Dn 
TWnr 

Fov 

.  Fbv 

Pinza 

SBx 

Spuzb 

Seven 

Owtt 

UtQ 

Hub 

Ten 

Lw 

Eleven 

I  ■ 


Oochot 
(Plun  brood) 
OogoodWdbe 


Wukhu 


Digitized  by  Google 


«70 

One  bandied 

One  I 
Fir.t 
Second 
Third 
Fourdi 


I 

Thou 

she,  it 

We 

You 

Thry 

Above 

Below 

Before 

Behind 

Upon  ■ 


PUBHTOO  VOCABDLARTt 

WESTERN  PLi«H1'UU. 

Sd(nitoita) 

Awwul 
Doyuni 
Ureuiu 


Zn 

Hu^u 
Moodiu 

Tase 

Hiighndce 
Portu 

Wraiide 

W'roostii  OOIWH^ 
Pur,  or  Pu,  witJj  Baiult-,  or  I)u 

Pasu  affixed,  Pu  Lai  Bimdc 

on  ttMtood 


Of 

Du 

From 

Lu 

By 

Du  Lu  (lit.  of  firom) 

Tliit 

Deor  Dugha 

That 

Himhn 

If 

Kn 

Unless 

Km  nu  (if  not) 

Yet 

Turosce  (used  tor  but,  bare) 

Stffl 

TuiMee 

Though 

Kut«a 

But 

Wule 

WUhottt 

Be 

And 

O 

Sbwe 

Chn(M) 

Since 

(in  time).    See  Hl^ghn  Wnqts 

Notvvitli'-tanding 

Bawuj(xxlee 

Nevertheless 

Tu  Hugha  Pore 

Except 

Belu 

Pu  hngfas  Sabiib 

Therefciie 

ditto,  ditto 

TlMn 

Hugha  Wnq^ 

u  i 


Digitized  by  Google 


PUSHTOO  VOCABULARY. 


671 


wEsmir 


1  ncrv 

1 — 1  i^^Vr^A     ^  n  A 

rtu|^nu  /jUB 

In 

WuD 

Aim 

TkmMnlk 

X  ariHuni 

jrore 

About 

Gnird>lXriinL  Chantf 

TWi  Pban 

\i  iii'n 

IZllc 

Under 

T  A  rift  A 

]^'^ 

Very 

TVm* 

fvuveC|  onaviiii 

XMiUMsr 

A  W106 

jLVwH  BJa  or  uwu  wwn 

Hooin 

Alotte 

YuWHZ0 

lib 

No 

Who 

Xwifri  •WCTv  A^V^W 

f  >  1 1  t.t  L 

ABC 

Chen 

When 

Knk 

To  be 

Tolwm 

Lunil 

Iwill 

Not  to  be  had  aenaratfi  will 

dob  Zu  Wokmmit) 

I  IMV 

Zu  Sliumn 

Iwiah 

2m  Ghwarum 

To  walk 

Tlu 

To  Tun 

Zgbakhtn 

To  ride 

Soorc  du 

To  stand 

Woodredn 

To&U 

Lwodu 

To  lie  down 

MMIaitn 

Purke 


an(aiB»d) 


Ciiirta 


Frewdba 


Digitized  by  Google 


672  PUSHT(X>  VOCABULARY.  CAjpenwx. 

nMum.  •  w%9amH  fuhrooi.  utnnii  tmmoo. 


To  eat 

Khwaru 

To  drink 

on 

To  fiirht 

A  honie 

A55 

A  cow 

Ghwft 

AbiiR 

woe 

■ 

A  cock 

Chirg 

A  hdi 

A  titrpr 

juoozurm 

A  slieep 

AfniMMih  /a  rWwMffcli^\ 

nurc  ^acmiDOD  wuoep) 

A  bird 

A  fi^H 

A  nMnduBir 

A  /^OftlAI 

An  aIatA— 

Aboat 

Berv 

Anil 

An  oar 

Chiipa 

jx  MUlur 

'wgjj  iimfmiiB 

A  coEniiuuMlcr 

oS  a 

• 

A    BaI  n  IMP 

An  nffiMM* 

inAKiucn  iuncJCiUi6uj 

JBBIIr 

flUK 

nouinii 

ACKDIDD 

OIL-  Al  ltr9B 

i>^fB  '^^B'K'^KVwjB  A^A  wWIIQCV 

Joruslit 

A  iwocd 

Toena 

Akom 

Miikoo 

Amr 

TJmi 

Aahoe 

Kupy 

Punne  - 

Abed 

Knt 

Ahowe 

KIkknmIii,  Kor  • 

A  door 

Derwazu,  War 

Aini) 

Mwkhtnhilu 

Mdkh 

Digitizeci  by  Google 


Aimmix. j  PUSHTOO  TOCABULART.  ^79 


Dubuly 

A.  nme 

(Large)  dumi  (mul}  Gboongr 

An  island 

Juzocru 

Jvicc 

onDle  1  iRO  DlaiuJ  UOrMUUl 

tioraja  (ino  fffBH) 

W  best 

Hay 

Mda 

Mlnda 

Arrack 

Shrab 

Optiun 

Turiak 

Bang 

Uuiut 

A  tayior 

Kbynt 

VII- 

A  carpenter 

Dnroozgur 

A  wiitli 

Jrush,  AJunglur 

A  labourer  in 

bus-  Sehgan 

■  » 
iMoaiy 

lioa  uum 

Afoek 

Loc  DubiMr  (a  mtfgi  moBuf 

A  cave 

Otiar 

A  shadow 

Sore 

Far 

Lore 

Near 

Nizde 

MBma 

niTiinr 

da  Cbuogy"  (beside  the  tree) 

Ira  ni^gte  Kmn 

iruFr  jronr 

lomi 

SiciMr 

r  leiu 

K  ur 

Root 

iSekli 

Bread 

Mury 
JHncn 

Body 

KM 

unom 

rlugy 

Vf  lUtQ 

opetn 

Tor 

Red 

Sra  or  floor 

Greon 

Zcrghoon 

Yellow 

Zhir 

Blue 
Brawn 

Sheen 
Gods 

Iron 

Ospunu 

Lead 

S(x>rp,  Seeka 

Tin 

Qulue 

Strac^ 

Ftaidy,  Prudy 

4a 


Digitizeo  ^oogle 


074  PUSRim  VOCABULARY.  jA  


Frind 

Yir 

To  buy 

Pccrodu,  Raaewo 

To  sell 

Khursuwul 

To  borrow 

For  Akhistul 

TOMBd 

For  Wiwbrwul 

Anger 

Quhr,  Ghosu 

•  4 

Pity 

7iru  Swy  (heart-burning) 

Ridb 
Poor 

BflTCBgt 

DtMirujadar*  Doulutmund 

Skwftrt  N«it-anind 

Keeno,  Bc^gbns  (dbe  qodilj) 

Budlu  (the  act) 

Forgivenecs 

Bukh»hun%  Bukhuna 

Hunger 

Lwuzhu 

Loga  . 

lUnt 

Tundn 

Abmidk 

SImkh 

A  leaf 

Ptintf 

A  flower 

Gwui 

Ewdi 

KhvnwK^  BIiQWM 

(groond-khak) 

Hard 

Kluk,  Srilcht 

Soa 

Poat  or  Pacteb 

QnA 

Zir 

Skm 

Wrs  Xnr 

So 

Weaknesi 

KunnouM 

Strength 

Zor 

■ 

To  moTe 

Kbwumlu 

TofMl 

Pate  Kedu 

Tofly 

Aloowatu 

To  swim 

LaDibowuhnl 

To  sink 

Doobedu 

• 

TowtA 

Kitit  (to  look  kg) 

To  find 

Miiidu 

To  heal 

JorawTil 

iO  Kill 

Obwuzblu 

Wiidom 
Power 

HoottweaNs 
Qoodnil 

Hookl^iDMW 

GoodoeM 

KlMgnni 

Creation 

Pydash 

Providence 

Tugdeer 

Temple 

Digitized  by  Google 


Appendix. j  PUSHTOO  VOCAiiULAEY.  fffg 

EMoufB.  wMimr  tonraoot  MUfotaar  tonnoow 


Sacrifice 

Hiij,  Zenrat 

Govenmunt 

Hakimee 

King 

Shah,  Badshah 

WW  11  ■*r.^>ty  JlhjM 

(prime  minbtfr) 

Genctrd 

SMbr 

Judge 

Qazee 

Law 

Shum 

Biglift 

Hug 

Jiwtio* 

In«rf 

Punishment 

Theft 

Ghuiu 

Murder 
BcbeUkn 

Chwuzhlu,  Qutui 

War 

Jung 

Peace 

Honesty 

Deeuint 

Humanity 

^1   II  ill 

OUCIilOD 

Charity 

SnUiMtob 

Avarice 

Tiiiiiii 

Ziloice  tob 

M«kee 

Vi« 

Bndee 

Undantuding 

Piihm,  Podn 

WiD 

Murzee 

Certaintjf 

Yckeenee 

DoubC, 

fihok 

Assent, 

MudO,  Qnboal  Awnl 

Bawttr 

Digitizeci  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitizeci  by  Google 


I 

Digitized  by  Google 


TMB  NBW  YORK  PUBUC  UBRAKY 
MVBUNCB  OBFAKTMBNT 

^rUit  book  lii  under  nil  c-i  r  cu  iii  1 1  ji  ii  t- c4  fcft 

 1 

! 

I 

1 

1 

r 

% 

— _i 

» 

• 

■ 

 P 

a 
•J 

(•f  I*  IB 

\ 


Digitized  by  Go 


