THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 
OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 


-- 


. 


'"' 


PRINCESS   ELIZABETH   CZARTORYSKA. 
(Motlur  of  Prince  Adam.) 


etJ  Muii.iturt. 


M  E  M  O  I  K  S 


OF 


PRINCE    ADAM 

CZARTORYSKI 


AND    HIS 


iwth    Vtewfor  I. 


WITH 


DOCUMENTS   RELATIVE   TO   THE   PRINCE'S   NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  PITT, 
FOX,    AND    BROUGHAM,    AND  AN    ACCOUNT  OF    HIS    CONVERSA- 
TIONS WITH    LORD   PALMERSTON    AND   OTHER    ENGLISH 
STATESMEN      IN      LONDON      IN       1832 


EDITED    BY 

ADAM     GIELGUD 


TWO    VOLUMES 

WITH    PORTRAITS 


VOL.    II 


SECOND  EDITION 


REMINGTON     &     CO.,     PUBLISHERS 

HENRIETTA  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN 
1888 

ALL    RIGHTS    RESERVED 


[An  Alphabetical  Index  to  this  work  will  be  found  at  end  of 
this   Volume.] 

Collect 

Library 

DK 
435.5 


M-\  ^ 

Contents 


OHAPTER  I 

1804-5 


PRINCE     CZARTORYSKI    APPOINTED    FOREIGN    MINISTER. THE     RUSSIAN 

AMBASSADORS. PETER  THE  GREAT'S  FOREIGN  POLICY. PROPOSALS 

AS  TO  THE  EMANCIPATION  OF  SUBJECT  NATIONALITIES. SYSTEM  OF 

GENERAL  EUROPEAN  POLICY  .  I 


CHAPTER  II 

EXECUTION    OF    THE    DUC    D'ENGHIEN. — RUPTURE  WITH    FRANCE. THE 

ENGLISH  AND  AUSTRIAN  AMBASSADORS. — UNIVERSAL  OPPOSITION  TO 
NAPOLEON     .........  1 


CHAPTER  III 

«  1804-5 

NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  AN  ALLIANCE  BETWEEN  RUSSIA  AND  ENGLAND          35 

1142109 


iv  CONTEXTS 

CHAPTER  IV 

1804 

SKCRET  INSTRUCTIONS  FROM  THE  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA  TO  M.  DE 
NOVOSILTZOFF  ........  41 

CHAPTER  V 

1804 

MEMORANDUM  DRAWN  UP  BY  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI  IN  1804,  SHOWING 
THE  RUSSIAN  PLAN  FOR  THE  RE-ARRANGEMENT  OF  EUROPE  IN  THE 
EVENT  OF  THE  COMBINATION  WHICH  WAS  THEN  BEING  PROJECTED 
AGAINST  NAPOLEON  PROVING  SUCCESSFUL  .  ,  .  .  52 

CHAPTER  VI 

1804-5 

LETTERS  RELATIVE  TO  THE  RUSSIAN  NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  ENGLAND  AND 
AUSTRIA  .........  56 

CHAPTER  VII 

/ 

1805 

REPORT  FROM  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF,  GIVING  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE 
RESULT  OF  HIS  NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  MR  PITT  .  59 

CHAPTER  VIII 

1805 

EXTRACTS  FROM  LETTERS  ADDRESSED  TO  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 
BY  COUNT  VORONTZOFF,  THE  RUSSIAN  AMBASSADOR  IN  LONDON, 
RELATIVE  TO  THE  FURTHER  PHASES  OF  THE  NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  AX 
ALLIANCE  WITH  RUSSIA. — REFUSAL  OF  ENGLAND  TO  EVACUATE 
MALTA  OR  ALTER  THE  MARITIME  CODE  ....  69 


CONTENTS  v 

CHAPTER  IX 

1805 

INTERVIKW    BETWEEN    THE    RUSSIAN    ENVOYS    AND    MR  PITT  (SEPTEMBER 
1805)  AS  TO  THE  QUESTION  OF  GIVING  UP  HANOVER  TO  PRUSSIA     79 

CHAPTER  X 

1805 

CONTINUATION    AND    CONCLUSION    OF    THE   MEMOIRS. — GENERAL    VIEW 

OF  THE  POLICY    OF    ALEXANDER  I  TOWARDS    NAPOLEON. REMARKS 

ON  THIERS'  HISTORY  OF    THE  CONSULATE  AND    THE    EMPIRE. THE 

ABBE  PIATTOLI. BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  ...  85 

CHAPTER  XI 

1806 

RUSSIA  AND   PRUSSIA  AFTER  THE  BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  112 


CHAPTER  XII 

1806 

DISAGREEMENT    BETWEEN    THE    CZAR    AND    PRINCE    CZARTORYSKI  AS    TO 

THE    POLICY    OF    RUSSIA    BEFORE    THE     BATTLE    OF    AUSTERLITZ. 

NEGOTIATIONS    WITH    ENGLAND. THH    LATTER   PROPOSES   TO    GIVE 

HOLLAND  TO  PRUSSIA  AS  AN  EQUIVALENT  FOR  HANOVER     .  122 


CHAPTER  XIII 
1806 

NEGOTIATIONS    WITH    MR    FOX.  —  CORRESPONDENCE     BETWEEN     HIM    AND 

PRINCE    CZARTORYSKI. MR    FOX'S    PROPOSAL    TO    ATTACK  PRUSSIA 

132 


CONTENTS 
CHAPTER  XIV 

1806 


RESIGNATION  BY  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI  OF  THE  POSITION  OF 
MINISTER  OF  FOREIGN  AFFAIRS  IN  RUSSIA. — RETROSPECT  OF  HIS 
POLICY  IN  THIS  CAPACITY. — HIS  OPPOSITION  TO  AN  ALLIANCE  WITH 
FRANCE  AT  THE  EXPENSE  OF  ENGLAND  .  .  .  .  152 


CHAPTER      V 

1806 

PROPOSAL  OF  PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  FOR  A  RECONSTRUCTION  OF  POLAND. 

— REPLY   OF    THE  EMPEROR   ALEXANDER. ADVANCE  OF  NAPOLEON 

INTO  POLAND 165 


CHAPTER  XVI 

1806 

PROPOSED    PEACE    BETWEEN    RUSSIA   AND   NAPOLEON          .  .  174 

CHAPTER  XVII 

1809-10 

CONVERSATIONS  WITH    ALEXANDER  I  ON  POLISH    AFFAIRS. HIS  OPINION 

OF  THE  CHARACTER  OF  NAPOLEON. HIS  PLANS  FORA  RECONSTRUC- 
TION OF  POLAND IpO 

CHAPTER  XVIII 

1810 
I 

FRIENDSHIP    versus    PATRIOTISM      .....  205 


CONTENTS  vii 

CHAPTER  XIX 

1810-12 

FURTHER     CORRESPONDENCE      BETWEEN      ALEXANDER      I     AND      PRINCE 

CZARTORYSKI. THE      FORMER     PROPOSES      TO      RESTORE      POLAND. 

— DIFFICULTIES.-— LIST    OF    TROOPS    AT    ALEXANDER'S    DISPOSAL. — 

NAPOLEON    STRIVES  TO    PROVOKE  A    RUPTURE. PRELIMINARIES  OF 

HIS  CAMPAIGN    IN    RUSSIA.— NEGOTIATIONS    AFTER  THE    CAMPAIGN. 
— PERSECUTION  OF  THE  POLES  IN   LITHUANIA  .  .  213 

CHAPTER  XX 

1813 

LETTERS    FROM    GENERAL    SIR    ROBERT    WILSON  .  .  .  240 

CHAPTER  XXI 

1813-14 

THE   BIERNACKI  MISSION   TO  LONDON. CHASED  BY   A  FRENCH  MAN- 
OF-WAR. LORD    CASTLEREAGH. CANNING. BROUGHAM.— LEIGH 

HUNT. — 'THE  TIMES.' — TOM  MOORE. — SIR  SAMUEL  ROMILLY       247 

CHAPTER  XXII 

1814-15 

THE    VIENNA    CONGRESS  .......  283 

CHAPTER  XXIII 
1815 

LETTERS  FROM  JEREMY  BENTHAM  .      .      .      .      .      .      289 

CHAPTER  XXIV 

1815-22 

THE     POLISH     CONSTITUTION. PROMISE    AND    PERFORMANCE. RUSSIAN 

ATROCITIES.— REVOLUTION       .  .  .  .  ,  .  302 


viii  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  XXV 

1831-2 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  IN  LONDON.  —  LADY  HOLLAND.  —  THE  PRINCESS 
DINO-TALLEYRAND.  -  THE  PRINCESS  LIEVEN.  -  CONVERSATIONS 
WITH  LEADING  STATESMEN.  --  TALLEYRAND.  -  PALMERSTON.  -  GREY. 
—  BROUGHAM.  —  ENGLISH  REPRESENTATIONS  AT  ST  PETERSBURG.  — 
PRUSSIA  ADVOCATES  THE  ANNIHILATION  OF  POLAND.  -  PALMER- 
STON ON  POLAND  AND  IRELAND.  --  THE  LONDON  PRESS.  -  RUSSIA 
SUPPRESSES  THE  POLISH  UNIVERSITY  AND  SCHOOLS.  -  PROPOSAL  TO 
EQUIP  POLISH  CRUISERS  IN  THE  BLACK  SEA.  -  THE  LITERARY 
ASSOCIATION  OP  THE  FRIENDS  OF  POLAND.  —  THE  POLISH  QUESTION 
IN  PARLIAMENT  ........  316 

CHAPTER  XXVI 
1834 

TALLEYRAND  AND  PALMERSTON.  —  CONVERSATION  WITH  BROUGHAM.  - 
LORD  DURHAM  ........ 


CHAPTER  XXVII 

1839 

CONVERSATION  WITH  LORD  PALMERSTON.  -  CIRCASSIA.  -  PROPOSAL  TO 
SEND  THE  BRITISH  FLEET  INTO  THE  BLACK  SEA.  -  RUSSIAN  DESIGNS 
ON  INDIA.  -  PERSIA.  -  AFGHANISTAN.  -  PALMERSTON's  OPINION  OF 
METTERNICH.  —  TURKEY  AND  RUSSIA  ....  339 

CHAPTER  XXVIII 

LETTER    FROM    THE    DUKE    OF   SUSSEX     .....  345 

CHAPTER  XXIX 

1853-5 

POLISH  MEDAL  TO  LORD  PALMERSTON.  -  PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  AND 
NAPOLEON  III.  —  THE  CRIMEAN  WAR  ....  348 

CHAPTER  XXX 
1855-61 

LAST    DAYS  ........  c 


of  prince  Jltiam  (Ezartorgski 


CHAPTER  I 

1804-5 

PRINCE     CZARTORYSKI    APPOINTED    FOREIGN    MINISTER. THE     RUSSIAN 

AMBASSADORS. PETER  THE  GREAT'S  FOREIGN  POLICY. PROPOSALS 

AS  TO  THE  EMANCIPATION  OF  SUBJECT  NATIONALITIES. SYSTEM  OE 

GENERAL  EUROPEAN  POLICY. 

I  NOW  come  to  one  of  the  most  important  epochs  of 
my  life.  Taking  advantage  of  the  Chancellor's  wish 
for  temporary  retirement,  the  Emperor  took  steps  to 
make  it  virtually  permanent,  being  desirous  of  giving 
over  to  me  the  complete  direction  of  the  department 
of  Foreign  Affairs.  This  was  one  of  his  hobbies,  and 
he  did  not  rest  until  he  had  satisfied  it.  The  Chan- 
cellor had  announced  that  his  health  obliged  him  to 
take  some  rest.  It  was  necessary  to  replace  him,  and 
I  asked  him  whom  he  would  like  to  be  his  successor, 
'  You,  of  course,'  he  said;  'that  would  be  in  the  regular 
order  of  things,  and  could  not  be  otherwise.'  I  have 
already  said  that  this  was  also  the  positive  and  pressing 
wish  of  the  Emperor.  What  could  I  do  ?  Was  I  to 
accept  so  difficult  and  dangerous  a  post  ?  Should  I 

VOL.  II.  A 


2          MEMOIRS  OF  I'ltlNCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

not  rather  give  up  everything  and   retire  ?     But  to 
retire  at  such  a  moment  would  have  been  to  prove 
that  I  did  not  feel  equal  to  the  difficulties  of  the  task 
offered  to  me.    By  remaining  assistant  to  the  Minister 
I  had  not  gained  anything,  and  if  I  became  Minister 
I   should    not   be    more    exposed    to    suspicion    and 
calumny  than  before.     But  what  most  contributed  to 
tranquill ise   my  conscience   was  the   thought  that  I 
might   inaugurate   a   system  of  policy  which,   being 
based  on  equitable  principles,  might  ultimately  have 
a  good  influence  on  the  destinies  of  Poland.     I  fore- 
saw a   rupture    with    France ;    the    establishment   of 
intimate  relations   between  that  power   and   Russia, 
which  the  Russians  accused  me  of  projecting,  was  far 
from  my  thoughts,  for  it  was  evident  to  me  that  any 
understanding  between  the  two  empires  could  only  be 
fatal  to  Polish  interests.    Moreover,  I  was  pressed  on 
all   sides  to   accept   the    Ministerial   portfolio.      The 
Emperor  would  not  listen  to  any  objection,  and  the 
young  men  who  were  my  colleagues  did  not  want  our 
relations  to  be  broken  off  by  my  retreat.     Even  the 
old  Chancellor  urged  me  to  accept  the  post.     He  left 
it  firmly  persuaded  that  he   would  come   back,  but 
before  the  end  of  the  year  the  state  of  his  health,  and 
perhaps  the  charms  of  a  quiet  life,  made  him  change 
his  views ;  he  wrote  to  me  that  he  had   decided  to 
quit  the  active  service,  but  that  he  would  not  yet  ask 
to  be  pensioned,  as  he  feared  to  abandon  me  to  the 
intrigues  to  which  his  absence  would  expose  me.     On 
leaving  the  capital  he  told  me  that  when   he  came 
back   he   would    keep    open    house,   as    was   fitting 


APPOINTED  FOREIGN  MINISTER  3 

for  a  Chancellor,  although  hitherto  he  had  never 
invited  any  of  the  members  of  the  diplomatic  body. 
In  leaving  me  in  his  place  he  was  sure  that  he  would 
be  heartily  received  on  his  return,  and  he  supported 
me  with  all  the  influence  he  possessed  in  the  Govern- 
ment offices  and  in  the  Senate ;  he  had  none  over  the 
general  public.  He  promised  me  to  write  often  and 
give  me  his  advice.  We  entered  into  a  very  volumin- 
ous correspondence,  which  touched  me  much  on 
account  of  the  friendship  it  showed,  but  which  I  soon 
could  not  follow  or  even  read  with  attention,  as  my 
whole  time  was  absorbed  in  public  business. 

I  accepted  the  post  of  Foreign  Minister,  and  the 
Emperor  was  as  glad  as  a  child ;  but  the  young 
Russian  party  did  not  conceal  its  anger  and  excite- 
ment. Even  the  Empress  thought  that  I  had  some 
malevolent  intention,  or  at  least  that  I  was  wanting 
in  delicacy  towards  the  Emperor  in  accepting  so  con- 
fidential an  appointment  in  the  teeth  of  the  general 
opinion  (so  at  least  she  thought)  and  in  spite  of  the  con- 
viction that  I  would  thereby  deprive  the  Emperor  of 
the  affection  of  his  people.  She  now  absolutely  ignored 
me ;  this  lasted  more  than  a  year,  and  did  not  cease 
until  after  Austerlitz.  It  will  be  seen  that  I  had 
powerful  adversaries ;  but  having  made  my  decision, 
I  did  not  flinch,  and  only  thought  how  to  acquit 
myself  of  my  task  in  the  best  possible  way. 

It  so  happened  that  just  at  the  time  when  I  was 
appointed  Foreign  Minister  several  important  Russian 
diplomatists  were  at  St  Petersburg.  I  have  already 
alluded  to  Count  Markoff,  who,  when  the  Chancellor 


4          MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

retired,  was  more  determined  than  ever  to  quit  the 
diplomatic  career.  He  went  to  the  estate  Catherine 
had  given  him,  and  worried  his  neighbours  with  in- 
terminable actions  at  law.  I  made  it  my  duty,  so 
long  as  he  remained  at  St  Petersburg,  to  consult  him 
on  current  affairs  and  on  the  difficulties  which  were 
occurring  between  Russia  and  France ;  he  gave  his 
advice  with  an  air  of  cold  and  disdainful  superiority, 
and  I  think  left  with  a  conviction  that  the  policy  of 
the  Empire  would  be  thrown  into  confusion.  He  had 
a  very  small  opinion  of  Alexander,  but  was  always 
ready  to  obey  his  slightest  wish. 

Count  Razumovsky,  who  had  come  on  short  leave 
from  Vienna,  said  to  me  in  a  half-contemptuous  tone : 
'  So  it  is  you  who  are  going  to  direct  us  ? '  *  So  it 
seems/  I  replied.  When  he  returned  to  his  post  he 
only  addressed  despatches  to  me  on  current  affairs, 
and  reserved  more  secret  and  important  subjects  for 
the  reports  addressed  by  him  direct  to  the  Emperor. 
This  manoeuvre  was  not  successful.  Alexander  was 
offended  at  the  Minister  whom  he  had  selected  being 
so  treated ;  he  held  that  no  one  should  have  less 
confidence  in  any  public  functionary  than  he  had 
himself,  and  ordered  that  all  communications  should 
pass  through  me.  Count  Razumovsky  then  entered 
into  a  private  correspondence  with  me  in  which  he 
concealed  nothing,  and  similar  relations  were  estab- 
lished between  me  and  Count  Simon  Vorontzoff,  the 
Ambassador  in  London.  Yorontzoff  was  frank  and 
loyal,  but  his  opinions  on  men  and  things  were  too 
absolute,  not  admitting  those  shades  between  good 


THE  RUSSIAN  AMBASSADORS  5 

and  evil  which  it  is  only  just  to  recognise.  He  had 
unlimited  confidence  in  the  judgment  of  his  brother 
the  Chancellor,  and  adopted  the  favourable  opinions 
he  had  formed  of  me.  His  correspondence  shows  the 
interest  he  took  in  defending  me  against  slanderous 
accusations,  and  in  maintaining  me  in  the  functions 
which  I  performed  at  the  Emperor's  wish  and  that  of 
the  Chancellor.  I  am  paying  a  debt  of  gratitude  in 
here  recognising  the  numerous  and  persistent  marks 
of  affection  he  showed  me,  though  I  cannot  approve 
his  political  views  or  conduct.  His  faults  were  a 
consequence  of  his  simplicity  of  character,  which 
prompted  him  to  an  unreserved  admiration  of 
England,  the  only  country  which  at  that  time  pos- 
sessed liberal  institutions.  Count  Simon  was  deeply 
attached  to  Mr  Pitt  and  some  of  his  colleagues,  and 
had  an  almost  unlimited  admiration  for  them.  This 
prevented  him  from  impartially  watching  the  march 
of  events  and  perceiving  the  true  interests  either  of 
Russia  or  even  of  Europe  in  the  general  scope  of  his 
policy.  The  same  fault  was  to  be  found  with  the 
Russian  Ambassadors  at  Vienna  and  Berlin,  except 
that  neither  Count  Razumovsky  nor  M.  Alopeus 
redeemed  their  defects  by  the  good  qualities  of  Count 
Simon  Vorontzoff.  The  intimate  relations  of  Count 
Razumovsky  with  various  prominent  personages  at 
Vienna,  and  the  servility  shown  by  Alopeus  to  the 
leading  statesmen  at  Berlin,  were  the  cause  of  many 
inaccuracies  in  the  reports  they  used  to  send  me. 
Their  only  desire  was  to  be  on  good  terms  with  the 
Governments  to  which  they  were  accredited,  and  they 


6          MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

often  nullified  the  effect  of  our  communications  by 
attenuating  them  at  their  pleasure.  To  prevent  such 
abuses  in  future,  the  Emperor  sent  M.  de  Wintzin- 
gerode  to  Berlin.  He  was  not  disposed  to  be  very 
friendly  to  Prussia,  and  was  determined  not  to  con- 
ceal anything  as  to  the  military  resources  of  that 
Power  or  the  uncertain  policy  of  its  statesmen.  His 
reports  gave  little  hope  of  there  being  anything  to  be 
expected  from  the  co-operation  of  Prussia  in  the 
event  of  a  rupture  with  France. 

Another  special  envoy,  M.  de  Novosiltzoff,  was 
sent  to  London,  as  it  was  impossible  to  rely  entirely 
on  the  reports  of  Count  Simon  Vorontzoff.  This 
appointment  was  approved  by  the  Chancellor  and  was 
consequently  satisfactory  to  his  brother.  When  he 
was  last  in  Russia,  the  Ambassador  had  entered  into 
a  closer  acquaintance  with  Novosiltzoff,  and  highly 
appreciated  his  intelligence  and  his  political  principles. 
NovosiltzofF  had,  moreover,  been  ordered  to  pass 
through  Berlin,  in  order  to  sound  the  feeling  of  that 
Court  before  proceeding  with  the  same  object  to 
London  ;  he  was  also,  if  circumstances  should  render 
it  desirable,  to  go  to  Paris  to  propose  the  most  favour- 
able conditions  for  the  maintenance  of  peace. 

After  Count  Markoffs  retirement,  the  principal 
personages  of  Russian  diplomacy  were  Count  Razu- 
movsky  and  Count  Simon  Vorontzoff;  and  the 
Chancellor's  favourable  opinion  of  me  contributed 
greatly  to  smooth  down  difficulties  which  might  have 
been  raised  by  Ambassadors  who  were  more  experi- 
enced than  myself.  My  Ministry  was  in  some  degree 


FOREIGN  POLICY  OF  PETER  THE  GREAT  7 

a  continuation  of  the  preceding  one,  though  it  was 
difficult  to  maintain  the  passive  system  of  peace  and 
tranquillity  that  had  been  adopted  by  Kotchoubey  and 
pursued  with  more  self-assurance  and  dignity  by  the 
Chancellor.  A  country  accustomed  to  the  continual 
successes  of  Catherine  or  the  escapades  of  Paul  could 
not  be  satisfied  with  a  subordinate  and  insignificant  part, 
even  if  it  was  thereby  assured  uninterrupted  internal 
prosperity.  Moreover,  the  foreign  policy  of  a  great 
State  should  in  my  opinion  not  be  passive  or  lethargic, 
without  any  interest  for  the  general  good ;  this 
narrow  way  of  looking  at  politics,  this  imperturbable 
gaze  which  soon  becomes  spiritless  because  it  is  always 
fixed  upon  one's  self,  cannot  be  consistent  with  the 
feeling  of  power  and  the  desire  of  achieving  distinction 
by  noble  deeds.  Such  a  system  defeats  its  own  object, 
for,  by  producing  an  incapacity  to  rise  to  larger  and 
more  generous  considerations,  it  creates  improvidence 
and  timidity,  and  leaves  free  scope  to  the  ambitions 
of  others.  This  had  certainly  not  been  the  spirit  of 
Russian  policy  in  former  days.  No  State,  except 
ancient  Rome,  ever  had  a  vaster,  a  more  active,  or  a 
more  persevering  policy,  though  we  must  admit  that 
it  always  disregarded  the  principles  of  justice  and 
right. 

The  Czars  of  Moscow  had  had  the  instinct  of 
conquest  since  the  reign  of  Ivan  the  Cruel ;  they 
employed  artifice  and  violence  by  turns,  and  succeeded 
with  rare  ability  in  augmenting  their  territories  at 
the  expense  of  their  neighbours.  It  \vas  under  Peter 
the  Great,  however,  that  Russian  policy  first  assumed 


8          MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

that  decided  and  stable  character  which  it  has  main- 
tained to  this  day.  All  the  objects  which  Russia 
unceasingly  pursues  with  indefatigable  perseverance — 
amounting  to  nothing  less  than  the  subjugation  of  the 
greater  part  of  Europe  and  Asia — were  clearly  con- 
ceived and  designated  to  his  successors  by  Peter  the 
Great.  He  gave  the  first  fatal  blows  to  Sweden  and 
Poland ;  he  began  the  struggle  with  Persia  and 
Turkey ;  he  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  Greeks 
and  Slavs,  and  created  a  European  army  and  navy. 
The  impulse  which  his  iron  will  gave  to  the  nation 
still  continues,  and  by  an  extraordinary  concourse  of 
circumstances,  Russia  has  come  alarmingly  near  to 
the  attainment  of  his  objects  without  Europe  having 
succeeded  in  stopping  her.  Internal  difficulties  may 
from  time  to  time  have  retarded  her  advance,  but  the 
spirit  of  Peter  still  hovers  over  his  empire,  and  his 
pitiless  ambition  lies  at  the  bottom  of  every  Russian 
heart. 

There  was,  however,  a  time  when  Peter's  policy 
was  forgotten  and  suspended ;  this  was  at  the  begin- 
ning of  Alexander's  reign.  Young,  candid,  inoffensive, 
thinking  only  of  philanthropy  and  liberalism,  passion- 
ately desirous  of  doing  good,  but  often  incapable  of 
distinguishing  it  from  evil,  he  had  seen  with  equal 
aversion  the  wars  of  Catherine  and  the  despotic  follies 
of  Paul,  and  when  he  ascended  the  throne  he  cast 
aside  all  the  ideas  of  avidity,  astuteness,  and  grasping 
ambition  which  were  the  soul  of  the  old  Russian 
policy.  Peter's  vast  projects  were  ignored  for  a  time, 
and  Alexander  devoted  himself  entirely  to  internal 


THE  PRINCE'S  FOREIGN  POLICY  9 

reforms,  with  the  serious  intention  of  making  his 
Russian  and  other  subjects  as  happy  as  they  could  be 
in  their  present  condition.  Later  on  he  was  carried 
away,  almost  against  his  will,  into  the  natural  current 
of  Russian  policy  ;  but  at  first  he  held  entirely  aloof 
from  it,  and  this  is  the  reason  why  he  was  not  really 
popular  in  Russia.  His  character  differed  both  in  its 
good  and  its  bad  qualities  from  that  of  his  people,  and 
he  was  far  from  happy  when  he  was  in  the  midst  of 
them. 

After  being  placed  at  the  head  of  affairs,  I  felt 
like  a  soldier  who,  being  thrown  by  chance  and 
friendship  into  the  ranks  of  a  foreign  army,  fights 
zealously  from  a  feeling  of  honour  and  in  order  not  to 
abandon  his  master  and  friend.  Alexander's  un- 
bounded confidence  made  me  feel  it  my  duty  to  do  my 
best  to  serve  him,  and  to  add  lustre  to  his  policy  so 
long  as  I  had  the  direction  of  it.  Moreover,  I  firmly 
believed  that  it  might  be  possible  for  me  to  reconcile 
the  tendencies  of  the  Russian  nation  with  the 
generous  ideas  of  its  ruler,  and  to  make  use  of  the 
Russian  craving  for  glory  and  supremacy  for  the 
general  benefit  of  mankind.  The  object  was  a  great 
but  a  remote  one,  to  be  pursued  consistently  and  with 
perseverance,  and  to  be  executed  with  patience  and 
skill.  I  thought  it  was  worthy  of  the  national  pride 
of  the  Russian  people.  I  would  have  wished  Alex- 
ander to  become  a  sort  of  arbiter  of  peace  for  the 
civilised  world,  to  be  the  protector  of  the  weak  and 
the  oppressed,  and  that  his  reign  should  inaugurate  a 
new  era  of  justice  and  right  in  European  politics. 


io        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

This  idea  quite  absorbed  me,  and  I  endeavoured 
to  reduce  it  to  a  practical  form.  I  drew  up  a  scheme 
of  policy  which  I  sent  in  the  form  of  a  circular  to  all 
the  Russian  representatives  at  Foreign  Courts.  This 
circular,  which  was  intended  to  inaugurate  the  new 
system,  and  was  based  on  the  principles  which  I 
afterwards  developed  in  my  '  Essay  on  Diplomacy,'* 
prescribed  a  line  of  conduct  characterised  by  modera- 
tion, justice,  loyalty,  and  impartial  dignity.  My 
efforts  in  this  direction,  however,  were  fruitless,  owing 
to  the  innumerable  difficulties  I  encountered  and  the 
rapid  march  of  events  which  brought  about  my  fall. 
But,  so  long  as  I  remained  in  office,  I  did  my  utmost 
to  direct  the  course  of  Russian  policy  in  accordance 
with  the  above  principles,  although  not  so  completely 
as  I  should  have  wished.  One  is  often  compelled  by 
circumstances  to  modify  one's  ideas,  and  to  make 
painful  concessions  which  sometimes  frustrate  plans 
long  elaborated  and  cherished. 

My  system  was  just  the  one  to  delight  Alexander 
in  the  mood  in  which  he  then  was.  It  gave  free 
scope  to  the  imagination  and  to  all  kinds  of  combina- 
tions without  requiring  immediate  decision  or  action. 
He  was  the  only  man  in  his  Empire  capable  of  under- 
standing my  aims  and  adopting  my  principles  through 
conviction,  and  even  as  a  matter  of  conscience.  At 
the  same  time,  he  only  entered  into  my  ideas  super- 
ficially ;  being  satisfied  with  the  general  principles 
and  the  phrases  in  which  they  were  expressed,  he  did 

*  '  Essai  sur  la  Diplomatic,  Manuscrit  d'un  Philhellene,  publi(5  par  M.  Toulouzan.' 
Paris  and  Marseilles,  1830. 


THE  PRINCES  FOREIGN  POLICY  n 

not  think  of  going  more  deeply  into  them  or  appreci- 
ating either  the  duties  which  the  system  imposed 
upon  him  or  the  difficulties  which  would  necessarily 
impede  its  realisation.  My  colleagues,  who  seemed 
to  share  my  opinions  on  many  points,  listened  with 
approval  to  the  details  of  my  system  of  policy,  which 
comprised  the  emancipation  of  the  Greeks  and  the 
Slavs.  So  long  as  the  only  matter  in  question  was 
the  supremacy  of  Russia  in  Europe  and  the  increase 
of  her  power,  those  who  listened  to  me  were  on  my 
side  ;  but  when  I  passed  to  the  objects  and  obligations 
which  should  be  the  consequence  of  such  supremacy, 
to  the  rights  of  others,  and  the  principles  of  justice 
which  should  check  ambition,  I  observed  that  my 
audience  grew  cold  and  constrained. 

My  system,  through  its  fundamental  principle  of 
repairing  all  acts  of  injustice,  naturally  led  to  the 
gradual  restoration  of  Poland.  But  I  did  not  pro- 
nounce the  name  of  my  country,  not  wishing  to  raise 
all  at  once  the  difficulties  which  a  course  so  opposed 
to  all  preconceived  ideas  was  sure  to  encounter.  I 
spoke  only  of  the  progressive  emancipation  of  the 
nations  which  had  been  unjustly  deprived  of  their 
political  existence,  and  I  named  the  Greeks  and  Slavs 
as  those  whose  restoration  to  independence  would  be 
most  in  conformity  with  the  wishes  and  the  opinions 
of  the  Russians.  It  was  tacitly  understood  between 
the  Emperor  and  myself  that  the  principle  was  to  be 
held  equally  applicable  to  Poland,  but  that  for  the 
present  no  mention  should  be  made  of  that  country. 
I  felt  the  propriety  and  necessity  of  this.  No  Russian 


it        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

was  ever  on  his  own  initiative  or  of  his  own  will 
favourable  to  Poland ;  and  I  afterwards  became  con- 
vinced that  there  is  no  exception  to  this  rule. 

One  day,  when  in  an  intimate  conversation  with 
my  colleagues  we  spoke  of  the  vicissitudes  through 
which  Poland  had  passed,  Novosiltzoff  told  us  that 
when  he  was  travelling  in  that  country  at  the  time  of 
the  Kosciuszko  Revolution,  he  wras  stopped  by  some 
peasants  who  asked  for  his  passport.  It  was  in 
German,  and  none  of  them  could  read  it,  so  they  sent 
to  a  German  who  lived  in  the  neighbourhood.  When 
the  latter  arrived,  Novosiltzoff,  who  spoke  German, 
begged  him  to  interfere  in  his  behalf,  upon  which  the 
German  assured  the  peasants  that  there  would  be  no 
harm  in  letting  Novosiltzoff  pass,  and  he  was  then 
allowed  to  proceed  to  the  army  of  the  Prince  of 
Nassau,  who  was  besieging  Warsaw.  I  strongly 
expressed  my  disapprobation  of  the  German's  conduct, 
which  greatly  astonished  my  colleagues,  as  they 
thought  any  step  would  have  been  justifiable  to  save 
Novosiltzoff.  This  showed  how  different  were  our 
respective  points  of  view ;  and  similar  incidents  often 
happened  in  the  course  of  our  relations.  I  had  no 
reason  to  conceal  my  thoughts,  and  no  one  was 
better  informed  of  them  than  the  Emperor  himself. 

Although  the  new  system  of  policy  was  often 
criticised  on  account  of  its  vagueness  and  utopianism, 
it  soon  had  serious  and  practical  results.  It  was 
impossible  to  take  a  prominent  part  in  European 
affairs,  to  come  forward  as  a  judicial  and  moderating 
influence,  to  prevent  violence,  injustice  and  aggression, 


THE  PRINCE'S  FOREIGN  POLICY  13 

without  coming  into  contact  with  France  at  every 
step.  She  would  have  been  a  dangerous  rival  if  she 
had  wished  to  play  the  same  beneficent  part ;  but  being 
led  by  the  unlimited  ambition  of  Napoleon,  she  sought 
to  do  the  very  contrary  of  what  we  wished.  A 
collision  sooner  or  later  was  inevitable. 

Napoleon  could  not  suffer  any  rivals  in  the  career 
upon  which  he  had  entered.  All  the  attempts  which 
were  made  to  act  on  an  equal  footing  with  him  failed. 
His  ally  had  either  to  carry,  out  his  plans  or  become 
his  enemy.  Scarcely  had  my  system  of  policy  been 
decided  upon  than  by  a  sort  of  instinct  our  relations 
with  the  First  Consul  became  colder,  and  the  com- 
munications on  both  sides  clearly  showed  by  their 
tone  that  neither  was  disposed  to  make  concessions  to 
the  other. 


CHAPTER  II 

EXECUTION  OP  THE  DUC  D'fiNGHIEN. — RUPTURE  WITH  FRANCE. — THE 
ENGLISH  AND  AUSTRIAN  AMBASSADORS. — UNIVERSAL  OPPOSITION  TO 
NAPOLEON. 

MATTERS  had  now  arrived  at  such  a  point  between 
Russia  and  France  that  any  incident  might  have 
brought  about  a  rupture  between  the  two  Govern- 
ments ;  and  this  could  not  long  be  deferred  under  the 
system  pursued  by  Napoleon.  The  origin  of  the 
rupture  was  in  this  case  of  a  special  kind,  as  no 
material  interest  was  involved  :  it  was  simply  a  ques- 
tion of  justice  and  right. 

The  seizure  of  the  Due  d'Enghien,*  by  a  French 
detachment  in  an  independent  country  with  which 
France  was  at  peace,  and  his  trial  and  execution  which 
immediately  followed,  produced  a  general  feeling  of 
stupor  and  indignation  which  those  who  did  not 
witness  it  could  not  easily  realise.  The  Emperor 
Alexander  and  his  family  were  most  strongly  im- 
pressed by  it,  and  did  not  hesitate  loudly  to  proclaim 
their  horror  and  detestation  of  the  deed.  The  news 
came  on  a  Saturday ;  on  the  following  day  the  whole 

*  The  Duke  was  seized  by  the  orders  of  Napoleon  on  the  15th  March  1804,  a 
Ettenheim,  in  Baden.  He  was  taken  to  Vincennes,  where  he  arrived  on  the  20th, 
tried  by  a  military  commission,  and  executed  the  same  night. 


EXECUTION  OF  THE  DUG  PENG  HIE N  15 

of  the  Court  went  into  mourning,  and  the  Emperor 
and  Empresses,  as  they  passed  after  mass  through  the 
room  in  which  the  diplomatic  body  were  in  attendance, 
took  no  notice  whatever  of  the  French  Ambassador, 
though  they  spoke  to  various  persons  who  were  next 
to  him.     It  was  indeed  impossible  for  a  Power  which 
proposed   to    carry    out   the    policy    adopted    by   the 
Russian  sovereign  to  be  indifferent  to  such  a  violation 
of  justice  and  international  law.     I  drew  up  a  note  on 
the  subject  which   made  some   noise  at  the  time  ;    it 
was  sent  to  the  French  Ministry  by  M.  d'Oubril,  the 
Russian  Charge  d' Affaires    in    Paris.       In  this  note 
Russia  loudly  protested  against  a  deed  which  seemed 
to  show  entire  forgetfulness  of  the  most  sacred  laws. 
She   demanded   a  satisfactory  explanation — which  it 
was  evidently  impossible  to  give.      The  reply   soon 
came  :    it  was  harsh   and  insulting.      Talleyrand,  at 
that   time   Minister     of    Foreign    Affairs,    reminded 
Russia  that  when   Paul  was  assassinated,  France  did 
not  consider  herself  justified  in  demanding  an  explana- 
tion.    In  handing  me  this  despatch  General  Hedou- 
ville  gave  me  a  letter  which   was  intended  to   soften 
the  bitterness  of  its  language.     Talleyrand  instructed 
the  Ambassador  to  address  himself  to  me  especially. 
He  said  that  Napoleon  had  confidence  in  my  character 
and  intelligence,  and  felfc  certain  that  I  would  use  my 
influence  to    prevent  the   two    countries   from    being 
exposed  to  break   a   harmony    which    was   not   only 
useful  to  themselves  but  necessary  for  the  welfare  of 
Europe.     These  coquetries  did  not  of  course  produce 
any  effect  upon  me  ;  I  regarded  them  as  almost  offen- 


1 6        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

sive  ;  and  I  drily  replied  that  all  the  papers  would  be 
laid  before  the  Emperor,  that  I  had  nothing  to  say 
until  I  knew  his  wishes,  but  that  it  seemed  to  me 
evident  that  a  very  different  reply  would  have  had 
to  be  given  if  France  had  rea.lly  wished  to  maintain 
the  friendly  relations  between  the  two  countries. 

There  could  no  longer  be  any  doubt  as  to  the 
course  the  Emperor  should  take  ;  indeed  all  was 
foreseen  at  the  time  the  first  note  was  sent  to  Paris. 
I  was  instructed  to  draw  up  a  memorandum,  stating 
the  question  and  proposing  the  means  of  dealing  with 
it.  The  matter  was  so  urgent,  in  view  of  the  conduct 
of  the  French  Government,  that  I  had  to  work  all 
at  this  document. 


[The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  memorandum 
here  referred  to  :— 

Aprils,  1804. 

The  incursion  which  the  French  have  ventured  to 
make  upon  German  territory  in  order  to  seize  the  Due 
d'Enghien  and  take  him  into  France  for  immediate 
execution,  is  an  event  which  shows  what  is  to  be 
expected  from  a  Government  which  does  not  recognise 
any  check  upon  its  acts  of  violence,  and  which  treads 
under  foot  the  most  sacred  principles.  His  Majesty, 
indignant  at  so  flagrant  a  violation  of  the  most  binding 
principles  of  equity  and  international  law,  is  reluctant 
to  maintain  any  further  relations  with  a  Government 
which  is  not  restrained  by  any  sense  of  duty,  and 
which,  being  stained  by  an  atrocious  crime,  can  only 
now  be  regarded  as  a  band  of  brigands.  This  act  on 


PROPOSED  RUPTURE  WITH  FRANCE  17 

the  part  of  Buonaparte  should  bring  down  upon 
France  a  cry  of  revenge  and  condemnation  from  all 
the  European  States  and  be  the  signal  for  a  general 
opposition  to  him  ;  but  if  the  other  Powers,  struck 
with  terror  and  deprived  of  energy,  keep  a  humiliating 
silence  at  sucn  a  moment,  would  it  be  right  for  Russia 
to  follow  their  example  ?  Is  it  not  for  her,  on  the 
contrary,  to  lead  the  way  in  taking  steps  to  save 
Europe  from  the  ruin  with  which  she  is  threatened  ? 
His  Imperial  Majesty,  being  moved  by  these  con- 
siderations and  by  a  feeling  of  what  is  due  to  his 
dignity,  thinks  it  necessary  to  order  the  Court  to  go 
into  mourning  for  the  death  of  the  Due  d'Enghien, 
and  proposes  loudly  to  proclaim  his  indignation  at 
Buonaparte's  iniquitous  proceedings.  His  Majesty  is 
the  less  disposed  to  pursue  any  other  line  of  conduct 
seeing  that  the  outrage  which  has  been  committed 
upon  the  whole  family  of  European  States,  and  upon 
humanity  itself,  has  taken  place  on  the  territory  of  a 
Prince  nearly  related  to  the  Emperor,  and  thus  affects 
him  doubly.  Our  august  master,  considering  that  in 
future  it  will  be  not  only  useless,  but  dishonouring,  to 
continue  in  relation  with  a  Government  which  has  so 
little  respect  either  for  justice  or  for  common  pro- 
priety, is  inclined  to  send  back  the  French  embassy 
and  at  the  same  time  to  recall  the  Russian  embassy 
from  Paris. 

The  Emperor  is  firmly  convinced  that  it  would 
not  be  in  accordance  either  with  his  personal  dignity 
or  with  the  honour  of  his  Empire  to  remain  passive 
after  the  event  which  has  occurred  ;  but  he  does  not 

VOL.  II.  B 


1 8         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

conceal  from  himself  the  partial  and  temporary  incon- 
veniences which  might  result  from  the  decision  which 
he  thinks  it  necessary  to  take.  His  Majesty  wishes 
to  have  the  benefit  of  the  wisdom  of  others  in  so 
important  a  matter,  and  he  has  accordingly  assembled 
the  members  of  his  Council  and  diplomatists  of  known 
experience  and  ability  for  this  purpose.  He  has 
ordered  me  succinctly  to  lay  before  them  the  state  of 
the  question  and  the  decision  he  is  disposed  to  take, 
with  the  reasons  which  have  led  him  to  it,  in  order  to 
show  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  which  might 
result  to  the  welfare  of  the  world  in  general  and  of 
Russia  in  particular. 

Since  the  re-establishment  of  the  relations  between 
Russia  and  France  it  would  be  difficult  to  point  to 
any  real  advantage  which  has  resulted  from  it  to 
Russia.  The  French  Government  has  not  kept  the 
solemn  engagements  into  which  it  had  entered  with 
us,  and  our  representations  on  the  subject  in  favour 
of  princes  in  whom  the  Emperor  is  interested  have 
had  no  eifect.  On  the  contrary,  the  First  Consul 
seems  lately  to  have  made  it  his  task  to  cause  Russia 
incessant  annoyance  by  unreasonable  demands  and 
proceedings,  notwithstanding  the  firmness  with  which 
his  Majesty  has  opposed  them.  This  brief  sketch  of 
the  conduct  of  France  towards  Russia  shows  that  we 
would  not  lose  much  by  suspending  all  relations  with 
her  for  the  present.  Such  a  course,  besides  being  in 
accordance  with  the  Emperor's  sense  of  dignity  and 
his  outraged  feelings  of  justice,  also  presents  some 
purely  political  advantages.  It  is  to  be  expected  that 


PROPOSED  RUPTURE  WITH  FRANCE  19 

an  energetic  step  of  this  kind  on  the  part  of  Russia  at 
the  present  moment  would  be  likely  more  than  any- 
thing else  to  stimulate  a  general  combination  among  the 
European  States,  to  limit  Buonaparte's  ambition  and 
violence.     One  may  hope  that  the  Courts  of  Vienna 
and  Berlin  would  then  also  be  led  to  take  decisive 
action.     These  two  Governments,  the  latter  especially, 
acting   from    different   motives,  but   both   chiefly  in- 
fluenced by  the    terror   with  which    France    inspires 
them,  could  not  hitherto    be    persuaded   to  abandon 
their  attitude  of  passive  submission,  notwithstanding 
the   offers  and  the    very  strong   representations    his 
Imperial    Majesty    has    addressed    to    them.       The 
Emperor,  in  taking  the  initiative  of  declaring  himself 
in  a  manner  which  would  leave  no  doubt  as  to   his 
views  and  system  of  policy,  would  be  in  a  position  to 
address    these    two    Courts    in    even    more    pressing 
language  than  before — to  which  the  presence  of  his 
armies  on  the  frontier  would  add  weight — and  would 
be  able  to  ask  for  categorical  replies  as  to  the  conduct 
they  would  pursue.     Judging  by  appearances  and  the 
information  in  our  possession,  the  Cabinets  in  ques- 
tion, if  they  were  thus  obliged  to  come  to  a  decision, 
would  elect  to  join  Russia  ;  and  it  would  perhaps  be 
impossible  to  induce  them  to  do  so  in  any  other  case. 
The  same    might  almost  be  said  of  Turkey,  which 
seems  full  of  confidence  and  good-will  towards  us,  and 
quite  alive  to  the  dangers  she  has  to  fear  from  France. 
Assuming,    however,    that    Russia,    after    having 
come   to   a   rupture    with   the    French   Government, 
should  remain  alone  without  an  ally  on  the  Continent, 


ao        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

what  would  she  risk  by  such  a  course  ?  To  suspend 
diplomatic  relations  is  not  to  make  war,  and  France 
cannot  directly  attack  us.  To  reach  us  she  would 
have  to  invade  other  States  which  would  then  be 
forced  tox  defend  themselves  and  give  us  an  oppor- 
tunity of  coming  to  their  assistance.  This  could  only 
increase  the  influence  of  Russia ;  an  illustration  of 
which  is  furnished  by  the  part  she  played  during  the 
French  Revolution,  when,  without  being  precisely  at 
war,  the  relations  between  the  two  Powers  were  sus- 
pended. We  should  thus  be  freed  from  the  em- 
barrassments caused  by  our  connection  with  France, 
and  also  from  the  presence  of  the  numerous  French 
agents  spread  all  over  the  country. 

Further,  his  Imperial  Majesty  may  be  sure  to  find 
in  England,  if  necessary,  a  safe  ally,  always  ready  to 
join  him. 

Thus  the  advantages  of  the  course  proposed  by 
his  Majesty  appear  evident.  Its  disadvantages  have 
also  not  escaped  his  attention,  and  they  will  now  be 
here  indicated. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  as  soon  as  the  French 
Government  is  informed  that  Russia  has  decided  to 
break  off  her  relations  with  France,  its  first  step  will 
be  to  avenge  itself  on  all  the  States  that  are  protected 
and  maintained  by  his  Majesty.  The  kingdom  of 
Naples  will  be  its  first  victim  in  the  south.  Once  the 
French  are  masters  of  that  country,  our  troops  at 
Corfu  would  be  in  danger  so  long  as  the  reinforce- 
ments ordered  by  his  Majesty  (which  cannot  arrive  for 
some  months  to  come)  do  not  reach  them.  In  the 


PROPOSED  RUPTURE  WITH  FRANCE  21 

north  it  is  possible  that  the  French  would  attack 
Denmark,  which,  though  inclined  to  make  a  vigorous 
resistance  and  certain  to  be  promptly  relieved  by  his 
Imperial  Majesty,  is  not  prepared  for  so  sudden  an 
aggression. 

If  the  seizure  of  the  Due  d'Enghien  had  taken  place 
three  months  later,  Russia  would  have  been  in  a  much 
better  position  to  act.  The  views  of  Austria  and 
Prussia  would  then  have  been  clearer  and  more  decisive, 
Denmark  would  have  been  ready,  and  our  troops  in 
the  Ionian  islands,  having  been  reinforced,  would  have 
been  in  a  position  to  secure  Greece  and  relieve  Naples 
by  means  of  an  understanding  with  England.  Buona- 
parte's difficulties  would  also  have  been  increased ; 
and  we  should  perhaps  have  done  him  a  service  by 
furnishing  him  with  a  pretext  for  giving  up  his  plans 
of  a  Continental  war  which  his  Imperial  Majesty, 
desirous  of  sparing  the  blood  of  his  subjects,  would 
not  have  wished  to  break  out  except  under  the  most 
favourable  circumstances  and  after  having  exhausted 
the  means  which  might  have  been  furnished  by  a 
negotiation  at  Paris  of  all  the  European  Powers. 

However  well-founded  the  above  considerations 
may  be,  the  event  which  has  just  occurred  obliges  us 
to  disregard  them,  or  at  least  only  to  treat  them  as 
accessory.  His  Majesty  cannot  pass  unnoticed  the 
atrocious  proceeding  of  the  First  Consul  without  a  lo'ss 
of  dignity,  and  without  showing  Europe,  France,  and 
Buonaparte  himself,  that  the  latter  may  do  anything 
with  the  certainty  that  no  one  will  oppose  him. 

It  would  seem  at  first  sight  that  a  means  miofht 


22        MEMOIRS  OF  PR1XCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

be  devised  of  attaining  the  object  in  a  different  way. 
Without  concealing  its  just  indignation,  the  Russian 
Court  might,  instead  of  coming  to  an  immediate 
rupture  with  Buonaparte,  confine  itself  to  going  into 
mourning  for  the  Due  d'Enghien,  declaring  in  Paris 
that  the  Emperor  could  not  see  with  indifference  the 
violation  of  German  territory — especially  of  the  do- 
minions of  the  Elector  of  Baden,  from  which  the  Due 
d'Eno-hien  had  been  draped  to  his  death — and  asking 

o  oo  o 

to  be  informed  whether  the  French  Government  did 
not  disavow  a  deed  so  iniquitous  and  so  much  opposed 
to  international  law.  This  would  lead  to  explanations 
which  might  take  some  two  months  longer,  and  give 
Russia  time  to  complete  her  preparations  in  the  North 
and  South  of  Europe.  The  French  Government  would 
doubtless  not  submit  to  the  humiliation  of  acknow- 
ledging its  misdeed,  which  would  be  almost  as 
damaging  to  it  as  the  misdeed  itself,  and  a  rupture 
would  be  the  necessary  consequence  ;  but  we  should 
have  gained  time.  Against  this  plan  it  is  to  be  re- 
marked that  directly  it  became  known  in  Paris  that 
mourning  for  the  Due  d'Enghien  had  been  ordered  at 
St  Petersburg,  and  especially  that  M.  d'Oubril  was 
making  a  communication  on  the  subject,  the  tenour  of 
which  could  not  be  otherwise  than  very  disagreeable, 
the  First  Consul  would  be  the  first  to  act  by  sending 
back  our  embassy  from  Paris  and  recalling  his  from 
St  Petersburg.  He  would  thus  show  that  he  dares 
to  affront  Russia  and  does  not  fear  her  power ;  in  a 
word,  a  considerable  part  of  the  advantages  which 
would  result  from  the  action  of  Russia  on  this  occa- 


PROPOSED  RUPTURE  WITH  FRANCE  23 

sion  would  be  lost  if  Buonaparte  were  given  the 
opportunity  of  forestalling  us  by  a  decision  similar  to 
that  proposed  by  his  Majesty,  and  thereby  setting  us 
at  defiance  in  the  eyes  of  Russia  and  of  Europe. 

The  original  idea,  therefore,  seems  preferable. 
The  first  step  is  to  put  the  Court  into  mourning ; 
then  we  should  recall  our  embassy  from  Paris,  retain- 
ing the  French  one  here  until  the  Russian  Charge 
d'Aifaires  leaves  France.  Above  all,  two  couriers 
should  be  sent  to  Naples  and  Copenhagen  to  warn 
the  Governments  in  those  towns  of  the  decision  of 
his  Majesty  and  its  probable  consequences  so  far  as 
France  was  concerned.  As  to  Corfu,  orders  should 
be  sent  to  the  troops  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness 
against  any  sudden  attack,  and  pending  the  arrival 
of  the  reinforcements,  to  raise  a  corps  of  Albanians 
so  as  to  strengthen  our  forces  as  much  as  possible. 
The  details  of  the  measures  to  be  ultimately  taken 
cannot  be  entered  into  here,  and  must  form  the  sub- 
ject of  a  separate  memorandum. 

In  the  official  despatch  which  our  Charge  d'Aifaires 
would  present  to  the  French  Government  on  leaving 
Paris,  its  conduct  relative  to  the  German  Empire  and 
the  Kings  of  Naples  and  Sardinia,  in  violation  of  the 
most  formal  engagements,  should  be  forcibly  com- 
mented upon.  It  might  be  thought  that  a  last  effort 
should  on  this  occasion  be  made  in  favour  of  the  princes 
who  will  immediately  after  be  abandoned  by  Buona- 
parte, and  as  a  proof  of  the  interest  his  Majesty  takes 
in  them,  that  it  should  be  proposed  to  him  as  the  only 
acceptable  satisfaction,  and  as  an  indispensable  con- 


24        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

dition  for  the  maintenance  of  the  relations  between 
Russia  and  France,  that  the  compensation  promised 
to  the  King  of  Sardinia  should  be  at  once  paid  him, 
and  that  the  kingdom  of  Naples  and  all  the  countries 
forming  part  of  the  Empire  of  Germany  should  be 
immediately  evacuated,  with  a  solemn  engagement 
not  to  send  French  troops  to  them  again.  Such  a 
proposal,  however,  would  be  useless,  and  would  per- 
haps only  embitter  the  hostility  of  the  First  Consul 
towards  the  princes  in  question.  A  refusal  would  be 
certain,  and  should  be  avoided.  Moreover,  such  a 
proposal  would  not  be  in  accordance  with  the  idea  of 
his  Majesty  to  break  off  relations  with  a  Government 
which  no  longer  deserves  to  be  called  one,  and  with 
whom  any  further  connection  would  be  dishonouring. 
The  more  the  Emperor's  moderation  and  his  generous 
and  disinterested  principles  are  known,  the  greater 
will  be  the  impression  made  by  his  decision  on  the 
French  nation  and  the  whole  of  Europe.  If,  however, 
the  French  Government  should  really  so  much  wish 
to  maintain  its  relations  with  Russia  as  to  be  disposed 
to  accept  the  above  conditions,  it  would  propose  them 
itself,  and  his  Majesty  could  then,  if  he  thought 
proper,  consider  the  proposal. 

Having  thus  endeavoured  briefly  to  state  both 
the  beneficial  and  the  injurious  consequences  which 
might  flow  from  the  decision  his  Majesty  believes 
it  to  be  his  duty  to  take,  and  to  show  the  difficulties 
which  would  arise  in  executing  it,  I  have  to  add  that 
the  Emperor  wishes  those  whom  he  has  to-day  as- 
sembled to  state  their  opinion,  according  to  the  data 


PROPOSED  RUPTURE  WITH  FRANCE  25 

I  have  set  forth  (which  I  am  prepared  to  complete  if 
they  do  not  appear  sufficient),  on  the  best  means  of 
action  under  present  circumstances,  and  especially  as 
to  whether  reasons  of  State  or  of  prudence  would 
render  it  necessary  to  suspend  a  decision  rendered 
imperative  by  the  Emperor's  sentiments  and  his  feel- 
ing of  dignity.  Their  opinion  is  also  desired  on  the 
following  points  : — 

(1)  Whether  it  will  be   right,  after  the  announce- 
ment of  the   Court  mourning,  at   once  to  take  final 
steps  for  a  rupture,  or  to  endeavour  to  gain  time  by 
negotiation. 

(2)  If  the    latter,  in   what  sense  the  negotiations 
should  be  opened. 

(3)  How    far  consideration  is    due    to  the  princes 
whose  only  hope  is  in  the  Emperor's  protection. 

(4)  What  steps  should  in  any  case  be  taken  to  pro- 
vide  as   much   as    possible    for   the   safety   of  these 
princes,  and  especially  of  the  King  of  Naples,  who  is 
in  the  greatest  danger. 

(5)  What  steps  should  be  taken  generally  in  order 
not  to  lose  any  of  the  advantages  which  should  be 
obtained  from  the    Emperor's   decision  in  a  manner 
both  honourable  and  glorious  to  himself,  and  to  remedy 
the  inconveniences  which  might  be  connected  with  it. 

Having  thus  carried  out  his  Majesty's  orders,  it 
only  remains  to  me  to  point  out  the  importance  of 
keeping  absolute  secrecy  as  to  the  object  of  the  dis- 
cussion which  is  about  to  take  place,  as  both  the 
Russian  Embassy  and  the  princes,  whom  we  wish  to 
expose  to  the  least  possible  risk,  would  be  in  great 


26        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

danger  if  the  matter  should  transpire.  His  Imperial 
Majesty  feels  perfectly  safe  on  this  point,  knowing 
thoroughly  the  high  character  and  the  zeal  for  the 
service  of  those  whom  he  has  assembled.] 

The  somewhat  crude  language  of  this  memorandum 
was  owing  to  the  haste  with  which  it  was  drawn 
up,  there  being  no  time  to  moderate  the  violence  of 
some  of  the  expressions  in  it.  After  reading  it,  the 
Emperor  called  a  Council  and  invited  each  of  its 
members  freely  to  state  his  opinion,  as  he  wished  the 
question  to  be  thoroughly  considered.  The  discussion, 
however,  was  not  a  very  animated  one.  The  majority 
of  the  Ministers  took  no  interest  in  foreign  politics, 
and  thinking  they  knew  what  was  the  Emperor's 
wish,  they  had  neither  the  capacity  nor  the  inclination 
to  oppose  it.  Kotchoubey  was  the  only  member  of 
the  Council  who  gave  a  reason  for  his  vote.  He  said, 
and  every  one  felt  the  truth  of  his  statement,  that  to 
break  off  relations  with  France  was  not  in  any  way 
dangerous  to  Russia,  as  France  could  not  reach  her, 
while  such  a  step  would  spare  .Russia  many  embarrass- 
ments which  are  inevitable  when  one  deals  with  a 
government  which  claims  to  be  the  sole  dominating 
power  in  Europe.  Count  Romantzoff,  then  Minister 
of  Commerce,  and  afterwards  Foreign  Minister  and 
Chancellor,  raised  some  objections,  as  he  had  a  lean- 
ing for  Napoleon  and  an  aversion  to  England.  He 
was  a  diplomatist  of  the  school  of  Catherine,  and  his 
absolutist  theories  converted  Alexander  some  years 
later  to  the  doctrines  and  tendencies  of  the  old 


PROPOSED  RUPTURE   WITH  FRANCE  27 

Russian  policy.  He  admitted  that  after  what  had 
occurred  it  would  be  difficult  to  abstain  from  taking 

o 

some  steps  to  prove  to  the  world  that  Russia  would 
not  submit  to  an  affront  on  the  part  of  France,  or 
allow  her  to  have  the  last  word  ;  but  he  thought  it 
would  have  been  better  not  to  place  one's  self  in  such 
a  position.  While  recognising  that  considerations  of 
honour  and  respect  for  international  law  should  have 
due  weight,  he  thought  that  material  interests  should 
also  be  considered,  and  that  in  announcing  an  irrevoc- 
able decision  it  was  necessary  to  be  certain  of  the 
advantages  and  support  on  which  one  could  rely. 
Russia  was  free  at  any  moment  to  cast  her  power  on 
either  side ;  her  decision  should,  however,  bo  based 
not  on  abstract  principles,  but  on  considerations  of 
advantage  and  security.  He  asked  whether  the 
consequences  of  the  step  Russia  was  about  to  take 
had  been  duly  weighed,  whether  we  were  clear  as  to 
the  results  we  wished  to  achieve,  and  whether  we  had 
any  security  for  the  advantages  which  were  expected 
to  accrue  or  against  the  dangers  wThich  might 
arise. 

I  answered  that  the  proposed  course  did  not  in- 
volve any  danger  to  the  Empire  ;  that  its  object  was 
to  satisfy  a  sentiment  of  honour  and  equity,  without 
any  idea  of  obtaining  advantages  which  we  did  not 
want ;  that  the  Emperor  was  satisfied  to  fulfil  with 
dignity  and  honour  a  duty  to  the  rest  of  Europe,  and 
that  his  position  left  him  ample  time  to  consider  what 
more  should  be  done  if  the  interests  and  the  security  of 
his  Empire  should  require  it.  This  ended  the  dis- 


28        MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

cussion ;  the  Emperor  approved  the  memorandum, 
and  ordered  its  proposals  to  be  carried  into  effect. 

I  then  sent  for  M.  de  Rayneval,  the  French  Charge 
d'Affaires  (the  Ambassador  having  gone  on  leave),  and 
handed  him  a  note  explaining  the  motives  of  the 
Emperor's  decision,  together  with  passports  for  his 
immediate  departure.  He  received  my  communica- 
tions very  calmly,  without  making  any  remark,  which 
indeed  would  in  the  circumstances  have  been  super- 
fluous. It  was  only  right,  at  a  moment  when  he  was 
about  to  leave  St  Petersburg  with  the  whole  embassy, 
to  remove  as  much  as  possible  any  difficulties  or 
disagreeables  attending  so  sudden  a  departure,  and  I 
accordingly  helped  him  as  much  as  I  could  in  this 
respect.  Both  General  Hedouville  and  M.  de 
Rayneval  afterwards  thanked  me  for  the  services  I 
had  rendered  them.  The  facts  of  the  case  were  not 
correctly  described  by  contemporary  historians.  The 
nature  of  the  relations  then  established  between 
France  and  Russia  was  unprecedented.  The  motive 
of  the  rupture  was  quite  a  novel  one  in  the  annals  of 
diplomacy,  for  it  was  not  a  Russian  prince  that  had 
been  executed,  and  the  Cabinet  of  St  Petersburg  had 

O 

no  direct  grievance  of  its  own.  The  sole  cause  of  the 
rupture  was  the  violation  of  international  law.  The 
result  produced  a  state  of  things  which  was  not  war, 
and  the  subjects  of  the  two  States  were  not  threatened 
by  the  dangers  produced  by  war  ;  it  was  simply  an 
announcement  that  we  could  not  remain  in  relation 
with  a  Power  which  had  no  respect  for  the  most 
elementary  principles  of  justice.  The  case  was  like 


RUPTURE  WITH  FRANCE  29 

that  of  a  man  whose  society  we  drop  because  his  con- 
duct is  opposed  to  our  principles,  though  not  such  as 
to  justify  our  sending  him  a  challenge. 

None  of  the  other  Powers  followed  the  example  of 
Russia  ;  but  it  must  be  admitted  that  she  was  at  that 
time  in  an  exceptionally  favourable  position.  She 
alone  of  the  Continental  Powers  had  managed  to  pre- 
serve her  dignity  and  her  independence.  Unassailable 
by  Napoleon  now  he  had  no  navy,  she  threatened  him 
by  her  disdainful  calm,  like  the  stationary  cloud  which 
is  believed  to  be  loaded  with  storm  and  thunder. 
Russia  should  have  maintained  this  imposing  attitude 
as  long  as  possible ;  applications  for  support  and 
expressions  of  esteem  and  deference  came  to  her  from 
all  sides.  She  should  not  have  abandoned  this  unique 
position  unless  it  were  proved  that  her  interest  and 
those  of  the  other  powers  required  her  to  enter  into 
action  ;  but  things  turned  out  otherwise. 

[The  following  communications  on  this  subject 
were  addressed  by  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  to  the 
Chancellor  :— 

To  COUNT  VORONTZOFF. 

ST  PETERSBURG,  May  7,  1804. 

I  see  with  real  pain  from  your  last  letters,  Mon- 
sieur le  Comte,  that  you  were  not  quite  satisfied  with 
what  has  been  done  in  the  matter  of  the  Due 
d'Enghien,  but  I  am  none  the  less  grateful  to  you  for 
the  frankness  with  which  you  have  expressed  your 
views.  You  do  riot  say  anything  as  to  the  two  notes 


3o        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

presented  at  Paris  and  at  Ratisbon  ;*  yet  in  them  we 
only  lay  stress  on  the  violation  of  neutral  territory, 
which  is  in  accordance  with  your  views.  If  your 
Excellency  had  seen  the  way  in  which  the  matter  is 
considered  here,  and  the  sensation  it  has  produced, 
you  would  have  been  convinced  that  even  if  I  had 
thought  the  sort  of  pressure  which  had  been  put  upon 
the  Cabinet  should  have  been  resisted,  I  should  not 
have  been  strong  enough  to  do  so,  and  that  only  a 
man  of  your  weight  and  consideration  could  have  had 
any  chance  of  succeeding.  No  one  could  have  wished 
for  your  opinion  more  than  myself,  but  I  assure  you 
that  the  matter  did  not  brook  delay  ;  if  anything  was 
to  be  done,  it  had  to  be  done  at  once. 

I  now  come  to  the  negotiations  with  Austria. 
The  Emperor  received  your  letter  with  gratitude, 
together  with  }*our  observations  which  I  communi- 
cated to  him.  The  decisions  which  have  been  arrived 
at  are,  in  principle,  in  conformity  with  your  Excel- 
lency's opinion,  and  I  flatter  myself  that  the  modifica- 
tions I  have  introduced  will  meet  with  your  approval. 
To  make  things  safer  I  had  a  conference  here  with 
Count  Stadion  to  discuss  with  him  the  draft  of  the 
autograph  letter  which  was  to  be  sent  to  Vienna.  He 
raised  difficulties  on  every  word  that  was  at  all  pre- 
cise in  its  meaning,  and  I  accordingly  had  to  limit 
myself  to  vague  and  general  expressions  in  which  he 
concurred.  Judging  by  the  Ambassador's  talk  and 
the  policy  of  his  Court,  the  Emperor  thought,  as  it 

*  This  was  the  note  addressed  by  Russia  on  the  7th  May  1804  to  the  German 
Diet  at  Ratisbon,  protesting  against  Napoleon's  conduct. 


LETTERS  TO  COUNT  A.   VORONTZOFF  31 

seems  to  me  with  reason,  that  it  would  be  better  not 
to  settle  anything  for  the  present  as  to  the  renewal  of 
the  Russo-Austrian  Alliance,  but  to  make  it  depend 
on  Austria's  conduct,  and  the  way  in  which  she  may 
enter  into  the  execution  of  more  precise  stipulations 
should  such  be  found  necessary.  .  .  . 

The  Emperor  will  leave  shortly  for  Revel ;  he 
will  only  be  away  ten  days,  as  he  does  not  wish  to  be 
absent  from  Sfc  Petersburg  until  he  knows  what  turn 
things  are  taking.  I  am  going  with  him,  and  M.  de 
Tatischeff  has  kindly  undertaken  to  look  after  the 
letters  and  receive  the  Ministers  as  he  did  when  I  was 
away  last  year.  Hedouville  complains  bitterly  of  the 
way  in  which  he  is  being  treated  in  Russian  society. 
This  is  very  wrong,  and  I  wish  I  could  prevent  it. 
He  has  just  asked  in  the  name  of  his  Government  for 
a  private  audience  of  the  Emperor,  but  it  will  be 
refused.* 

To    COUNT   VORONTZOFF. 

ST  PETERSBURG,  May  29,  1804. 

I  write  to-day,  Monsieur  le  Comte,  not  to  answer 
your  letters,  for  which  I  am  infinitely  grateful,  nor  to 
render  you  an  account  of  my  correspondence  since  my 
last  letter  and  his  Majesty's  return,  but  only  to  send 
you  the  replies  we  have  received  from  Paris  and 
d'Oubril's  reports  as  to  what  passed  there.  These 
despatches  are  being  copied,  and  in  order  not  to  delay 
the  departure  of  the  messenger  I  have  only  time  to 

*  He  left  St  Petersburg  and  ceased  to  be  French  Ambassador  there  on  the  7th 
of  June  1804. 


32         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

tell  your  Excellency  that  the  Emperor's  personal 
opinion  is  that  at  this  moment  he  cannot  with  pro- 
priety continue  his  relations  with  France,  unless  she 
consents  to  fulfil  her  engagements  with  us  relative  to 
Naples,  the  King  of  Sardinia,  and  Germany  ;  and 
that  after  the  insulting  note*  which  had  been  received 
from  Paris,  he  can  only  sacrifice  his  just  resentment  in 
so  far  as  not  to  cause  injury  to  his  allies.  If  we 
succeeded  in  bringing  about  the  evacuation  of  the 
kingdom  of  Naples,  in  obtaining  an  indemnity  for  the 
King  of  Sardinia,  and  in  liberating  Hanover,  the 
Emperor's  dignity  will  be  intact,  and  he  will  have 
done  much  good  to  his  friends  and  to  Europe ;  if 
France  does  not  yield  on  these  points,  d'Oubril  should 
I  think  leave  Paris,  and  Russia  should  decline  to 
recognise  the  newly  proclaimed  Emperor  on  any 
other  terms.  Meanwhile  we  will  do  our  utmost  also 
to  persuade  Vienna,  Berlin,  and  even  Constantinople 
to  refuse  the  recognition  without  obtaining  some 
return. 

Such,  in  brief,  are  our  ideas  here.  But  his  Majesty 
desires  above  all  to  have  your  Excellency's  opinion 
on  the  subject.  There  are  some  difficulties  which 
might  impede  the  execution  of  the  plan.  Supposing, 
which  is  most  probable,  that  all  our  demands  are  not 
refused,  and  that  France  consents  to  evacuate  Naples, 
it  will  be  necessary  to  negotiate  as  to  the  indemnity 
to  the  Kin«:  of  Sardinia  and  even  the  evacuation  of 

o 

Hanover,  besides  guaranteeing  the  neutrality  of  those 
countries.  For  this  a  Charge"  d' Affaires  would  not  be 

*  See  page  15. 


LETTERS  TO  COUNT  A.   VORONTZOFF  33 

sufficient ;  and  M.  de  Tatischeff  has  had  the  good  idea 
of  sending  in  that  case  M.  Stackelberg  to  Paris  with 
full  powers  to  treat,  but  without  any  diplomatic  office. 
Another  question  is  the  way  in  which  we  are  to 
deal  with  various  points  of  the  French  reply.  A  very 
delicate  one  is  the  allusion  to  the  death  of  Paul,  while 
in  our  despatches  we  spoke,  not  of  the  Due  d'Enghien's 
execution,  but  only  of  his  seizure  on  neutral  territory. 
This  is  characteristic  of  Buonaparte's  maliciousness. 
Are  we  to  take  up  this  point  ?  And  if  so,  how  ?  Can 
we  pass  it  over  in  silence,  seeing  that  our  Court  has 
never  admitted  that  Paul  died  a  violent  death,  as  is 
shown  by  the  manifesto  of  the  present  Emperor? 
Moreover,  Talleyrand's  argument  is  as  false  as  it  is 
insulting,  and  they  wish  to  reproduce  it  in  the  note 
which  they  will  send  to  the  Diet.  On  all  these  points 
the  Emperor  wishes  for  your  ideas  and  advice. 
Tchourakoff  will  be  with  you  again  in  three  days,  and 
I  beg  your  Excellency  to  send  him  to  me  as  soon  after 
as  possible,  with  your  remarks  on  the  principal  points 
and  in  general  as  to  the  line  of  conduct  you  think 
should  be  adopted  ;  we  will  do  our  best  as  to  the 
details.  The  interruption  of  all  relations  seems  to  me 
inevitable,  and  cannot  do  us  any  harm  ;  war  will  per- 
haps follow,  but  that  depends  upon  the  turn  things 
will  take.  Meanwhile  I  can  announce  to  you  that  the 
King  of  Prussia  has  signed  a  declaration*  almost 
similar  to  ours  ;  it  is  in  our  hands,  and  it  secures  the 
rest  of  Northern  Europe.  He  has  at  the  same  time, 
however,  promised  the  French  not  to  allow  Russian 

«  Dated  May  24,  1804. 
VOL.    II  C 


34        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

troops  to  pass  through  his  territory  to  attack  them. 
All  that  relates  to  this  matter  will  at  once  be  sent 
you. 

Hedouville  has  asked  for  leave  on  account  of  his 
health,  and  will  leave  Rayneval  as  Charge  d'  Affaires. 
D'Oubril's  messenger  had  not  arrived,  but  after 
waiting  a  few  days  we  could  not  keep  Hedouville  any 
longer,  as  he  himself  came  several  times  to  get  his 
passport.  He  had  no  message  to  deliver  when  he 
went,  and  maintained  an  absolute  silence  as  to  the 
affairs  of  the  day.  I  send  you  the  note  I  gave  him 
with  his  passports. 

Vernegues  has  been  given  up  and  Cassini  has  left 
Rome.  The  Pope's  Ambassador  will  be  sent  back; 
this  decision  seems  to  me  indispensable,  but  I  do  not 
quite  know  what  is  the  form  in  which  it  should  be 
notified  to  him. 

I  should  like  to  do  everything  for  the  best,  but  often 
I  confess  that  I  fear  I  do  not  acquit  myself  of  my  task 
as  well  as  I  should.  The  details  you  have  kindly 
given  me  of  your  return  here  have  given  me  great 
pleasure,  and  I  feel  very  strongly  this  proof  of  your 
confidence.  It  is  with  real  joy  I  shall  see  you  here 
again  ;  and  I  am  always  grateful  for  the  advice  your 
frankness  and  your  friendship  dictate  to  me.  Pray 
excuse  my  bad  writing  and  believe  in  my  respect  and 
sincere  attachment. 

P.S. — The  news  from  Georgia  are  good.  The 
Czar  of  Imeritia  has  submitted,  and  has  taken  the 
oath  of  allegiance.] 


CHAPTER  III 

1804-5 

NEGOTIATIONS  FOB  AN  ALLIANCE  BETWEEN  RUSSIA  AND  ENGLAND. 

AFTER  the  diplomatic  rupture  consequent  upon  the 
execution  of  the  Due  d'Enghien,  it  became  indispens- 
able to  come  to  an  understanding  with  the  only 
Power  except  Russia  which  thought  herself  strong 
enough  to  contend  with  France — to  ascertain  as 
thoroughly  as  possible  what  were  her  inclinations  and 
designs,  the  principles  of  her  policy,  and  those  which 
she  could  be  led  to  adopt  in  certain  contingencies.  It 
would  have  been  a  great  advantage  to  obtain  the  con- 
currence in  our  views  of  so  powerful  and  influential  a 
State  as  England  and  to  strive  with  her  for  the  same 
objects;  but  for  this  it  was  necessary  not  only  to 
make  sure  of  her  present  inclinations,  but  to  weigh 
well  the  possibilities  of  the  future  after  the  death  of 
George  III  and  the  fall  of  the  Pitt  Ministry.  We 
had  to  make  England  understand  that  the  wish  to 
fight  Napoleon  was  not  in  itself  sufficient  to  establish 
an  indissoluble  bond  between  her  Government  and  that 
of  St  Petersburg,  and  that  such  a  bond,  to  be  per- 


36         MEMOIRS  Of  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYKKI 

manerit,  must  be  based  not  on  a  common  feeling  of 
revenge,  but  on  the  most  elevated  principles  of  justice 
and  philanthropy.* 

This  was  a  delicate  and  difficult  mission.  It  was 
confided  to  Novosiltzoff,  who,  as  a  member  of  the 
Ministry  and  of  the  Secret  Council,  was  fully 
acquainted  with  all  our  opinions  and  plans.  As  has 
been  already  stated,  he  made  numerous  acquaintances 
during  his  stay  in  England,  and  he  had  not  only 
obtained  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  language,  but  had 
studied  the  social  organisation  and  the  resources  of 
the  country.  He  was  also  on  intimate  terms  with  the 
Ambassador,  whose  personal  feelings  had  to  be  consi- 
dered ;  and  he  thus  seemed  in  every  respect  fitted  for 
the  task  entrusted  to  him.  On  leaving  he  was  fur- 
nished with  two  sets  of  instructions,  one  official  and 
the  other  secret ;  in  the  latter  I  endeavoured  to 
explain  to  him  all  the  points  we  wished  to  gain,  or  as 
to  which  it  would  be  proper  to  sound  the  views  of  the 
British  Government.  I  also  gave  him  a  letter  to  Mr 
Fox,  who  at  that  time  had  the  entire  confidence  of  the 
Prince  of  Wales  and  the  men  of  his  party.  Novosilt- 
zofF  found  Mr  Pitt  not  disposed  to  accept  all  our  pro- 
posals, and  the  Ambassador,  Count  Simon  Vorontzoff, 
in  his  admiration  of  the  narrow  policy  of  the  British 
Cabinet,  constantly  opposed  the  modifications  we 
wished  to  introduce.  Owing  to  the  difficulties  thus 
raised,  or  to  other  reasons,  Novosiltzoff  did  not  exe- 

*  This  was  the  first  time  that  any  Power  proposed  a  settlement  of  European 
differences  by  international  arbitration.  The  idea  was  originated  by  Prince  Adam 
Czartoryski,  and  worked  out  by  him  with  the  assistance  of  the  Abbe  Piattoli  (see 
pages  92  to  94.). 


PROPOSED  ALLIANCE  WITH  ENGLAND  37 

cute  the  mission  to  our  satisfaction.  It  required 
much  prudence  and  reserve,  but  also  great  firmness  in 
following  instructions  ;  while  he  only  hinted  at  the 
conditions  to  which  we  attached  the  greatest  import- 
ance, did  not  mention  the  name  of  Poland,  and  did  not 
allude  to  the  precarious  state  of  Europe  as  a  result  of 
iniquities  which  demanded  redress.  There  were  also 
some  points  as  to  which  he  was  instructed  not  to 
make  any  compromise  without  first  referring  to  his 
Government.  One  of  these  was  the  demand  that 
England  should  evacuate  Malta,  as  she  had  bound 
herself  to  do.  This  question  had  been  the  subject  of 
a  debate  in  Parliament,  during  which  Lord  Nelson 
held  that  by  evacuating  Malta  England  would  not 
expose  herself  to  any  serious  inconvenience.  Be  this 
as  it  may,  the  haughty  refusal  of  England  gave  us  the 
right  to  withdraw  from  the  negotiation  at  the  begin- 
ning ;  our  dignified  attitude  would  have  been  a  proof 
of  our  sincere  desire  for  justice  and  the  prosperity  of 
Europe,  and  must  have  made  a  great  impression  on 
England  herself,  by  showing  her  that  our  just  recla- 
mations should  not  be  disregarded.  Moreover,  it 
would  have  given  Novosiltzoff  facilities  for  negotiating 
in  Paris.  Instead  of  doin<?  this  he  hurried  back  to  St 

~ 

Petersburg,  leaving  matters  to  be  directed  by  England 
at  her  pleasure. 

[A  preliminary  Treaty  between  Russia  and 
England  was,  however,  concluded  on  the  llth  of 
April  1805.  It  stipulated  that  the  contracting  parties 
should  endeavour  to  form  a  general  league  of  the 
European  Powers  against  Napoleon,  and  to  collect  a 


38        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

force  of  500,000  men  for  the  liberation  of  Europe 
from  his  yoke.  The  objects  of  the  league  were  to  be 
the  evacuation  by  the  French  troops  of  Hanover 
and  other  parts  of  Northern  Germany  and  of  Italy ; 
the  independence  of  Holland  and  Switzerland  ;  the 
restoration  of  the  King  of  Sardinia  in  Piedmont; 
and  in  general  the  establishment  of  a  state  of  things 
in  Europe  calculated  to  prevent  future  aggressions. 
The  secret  instructions  to  M.  de  Novosiltzoff,  and 
other  diplomatic  papers  relative  to  the  Anglo-Russian 
negotiations  of  this  period,  will  be  found  in  the 
following  chapters.  As  to  the  question  of  the  pos- 
session of  Malta  by  England,  it  is  not  referred  to  in 
the  Treaty,  and  was  not  raised  by  Russia  until 
after  it  was  signed.  Some  curious  information  on 
this  subject  will  be  found  in  the  letters  from  Count 
Vorontzoff  in  Chapter  VIII  (pp.  69  to  77), -in  Lord 
Stanhope's  Life  of  Pitt,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  333,  and  in 
an  interesting  collection  of  despatches  edited  by  Mr 
Oscar  Browning  under  the  title  of  '  England  and 
Napoleon  in  1803,'  which  has-been  published  by  the 
Royal  Historical  Society. 

Lord  Nelson's  remarks  on  the  article  of  the  Treaty 
of  Amiens,  which  bound  England  to  evacuate  Malta, 
were  made  during  a  debate  in  the  House  of  Lords  on 
the  Preliminaries  of  Peace  with  France  on  the  3rd 
of  November  1801.  They  were  as  follows  (Parliam. 
Hist.  1801): — 'To  speak  next  of  Malta:  when  the 
noble  earl  (Earl  St  .Vincent,  First  Lord  of  the 
Admiralty)  sent  him  down,  the  Mediterranean  was  in 
the  hands  of  the  French,  and  on  his  return  from  the 


LOUD  NELSON  AND  MALTA  39 

battle  of  Aboukir,  he  thought  it  his  first  object  to 
blockade  it ;  because  he  deemed  it  an  invaluable  piece 
of  service  to  rescue  it  from  the  hands  of  the  French. 
In  any  other  point  of  view,  Malta  was  of  no  sort  of 
consequence  to  this  country.  It  was  true  it  contained 
a  most  extensive  and  commodious  harbour,  with  a 
strong  fortification,  which  would  at  least  require  7000 
soldiers  to  man  the  works.  By  the  preliminaries, 
Malta  was  to  be  put  into  the  possession  of  a  third 
Power,  and  he  repeated  that  in  any  hands  but  those 
of  the  French  it  became  immaterial  to  us/ 

The  Russian  emissary  in  the  Anglo-Russian  nego- 
tiations of  1804-5,  M.  de  Novosiltzoff,  afterwards 
became  notorious  in  Poland  as  the  persecutor  of 
the  Polish  children  in  the  Universit}7  and  the 
Schools  of  Lithuania.  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski, 
in  a  letter  addressed  to  his  friend,  Mr  Fox  Strang- 
ways,  Under  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs, 
on  the  18th  of  July  1836,  thus  speaks  of  him: 
'  The  papers  here  announce  the  approaching  arrival 
at  Brussels  of  M.  de  Novosiltzoff,  President  of  the 
Council  of  the  Empire.  Do  you  know  him  personally  ? 
You  are  aware  that  he  played  an  odious  part  in  the 
history  of  the  misfortunes  of  Poland,  and  that  he  is 
regarded  by  my  countrymen  as  the  most  implacable 
and  despicable  enemy  our  country  has  ever  had.  I 
should  not  be  surprised  if  some  Poles  gave  him  a  bad 
reception  should  they  meet  him  ;  the  sight  of  him  would 
make  them  furious  by  recalling  all  the  evil  he  has  done. 
It  is  said  that  he  is  going  to  the  Hague,  and  thence  to 
London.  This  unexpected  journey  of  a  personage 


40        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

who  has  become  eminent  in  Russia  is  probably  not 
without  a  political  object.  Perhaps  he  is  instructed  to 
study  the  policy  of  England  on  the  spot,  and  find  out 
what  you  have  decided  to  do  in  the  East — to  endea- 
vour to  calm  you  and  delude  you.  He  will  speak  to 
you  of  the  old  friendship  between  the  two  countries. 
Perhaps  he  will  hold  out  to  you  a  proposal  of  arrange- 
ment and  an  amnesty  for  the  Poles.  His  language 
will  be  most  conciliatory  ;  he  will  profess  the  most 
liberal  opinions,  and  his  mission,  if  he  has  a  formal 
one,  will  be  a  mission  of  peace,  of  concord,  of  forget- 
fulness  of  all  offence,  and  of  the  harmony  and  reci- 
procal confidence  of  past  times.  Be  on  your  guard. 
There  will  not  be  a  word  of  truth  in  all  this.  He  is  a 
man  without  faith  or  principles,  but  very  clever  and 
astute,  and  with  much  knowledge.  He  has  been 
several  times  in  England,  both  as  a  traveller  and  on  a 
mission  to  Mr  Pitt.'] 

[The  secret  instructions  given  by  the  Emperor 
Alexander  to  JY.  de  Novosiltzojf,  and  other  documents 
relating  to  the  negotiations  ivith  England  in  1804-5, 
are  in  Chapters  IV  to  IX.  The  concluding  portion  of 
the  Memoirs  forms  Chapter  X.~\ 


CHAPTER  IV 


1804 


SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS  PROM  THE    EMPEROR   OF    RUSSIA  TO    M.    DE 
NOVOSILTZOFF. 

COMPLETE  as  is  the  confidence  which  I  place  in  the 
zeal  and  experience  of  rny  Ambassador  at  the  Court 
of  London,  the  nature  and  importance  of  the  circum- 
stances of  the  moment,  which  may  become  decisive 
for  the  tranquillity  of  Russia  and  the  fate  of  Europe, 
require  the  presence  in  England  at  this  juncture  of  a 
rnari  who,  while  having  long  enjoyed  my  unlimited 
confidence,  has  been  in  a  position  to  become  thoroughly 
acquainted  with  my  opinions  and  views,  and  would  be 
thereby  enabled  both  to  inform  me  clearly  and  pre- 
cisely how  far  the  Court  of  London  is  inclined  to 
share  them,  and  to  direct  in  accordance  with  my 
wishes  any  negotiations  which  might  have  to  be 
undertaken. 

I  could  not  make  a  better  selection  for  so  grave 
and  delicate  a  mission  than  by  entrusting  it  to  you, 
as  you  fulfil  all  the  conditions  necessary  for  carrying 
it  out.  I  accordingly  furnish  you  with  these  secret 


42         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

instructions,  which  are  to  serve  as  a  complement  and 
a  commentary  to  those  received  by  my  Ambassador, 
and  will  guide  you  in  preventing  any  arrangement 
between  Russia  and  England  not  based  on  principles, 
or  likely  to  lead  to  results,  contrary  to  my  just 
wishes. 

A  combination  of  the  resources  and  forces  of 
Russia  and  Great  Britain  would  no  doubt  constitute  a 
vast  mass  of  power,  and  might  promise  the  most  satis- 
factory results.  But  I  would  not  wish  to  contribute 
to  it  unless  I  have  the  assurance  that  it  will  be 
employed  for  a  really  useful  and  beneficent  object. 
I  have  already  explained  myself  on  the  subject  in  my 
rescript  to  Count  Vorontzoff  of  which  you  are  the 
bearer.  But  several  essential  points  could  only  be 
alluded  to  in  general  terms  in  that  document ;  and  it 
will  be  for  you  to  take  to  England  further  explana- 
tions and  developments  in  regard  to  them. 

The  most  powerful  weapon  hitherto  used  by  the 
French,  and  still  threatening  the  other  European 
States,  is  the  general  opinion  which  France  has 
managed  to  promulgate,  that  her  cause  is  the  cause 
of  national  liberty  and  prosperity.  It  would  be 
shameful  to  humanity  that  so  noble  a  cause  should  be 
regarded  as  the  monopoly  of  a  Government  which 
does  not  in  any  respect  deserve  to  be  the  defender  of 
it ;  it  would  be  dangerous  for  all  the  Powers  any 
longer  to  leave  to  France  the  great  advantage  of 
seeming  to  occupy  such  a  position.  The  good  of 
humanity,  the  true  interest  of  the  lawful  authorities, 
and  the  success  of  the  enterprise  contemplated  by  the 


SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS  TO  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF    43 

two  Powers,  demand  that  they  should  deprive  France 
of  this  formidable  weapon. 

Such  is  the  first  object  .as  to  which  I  desire  to 
come  to  an  understanding,  if  possible,  with  the 
British  Government,  and  you  will  point  out  that  it 
must  be  an  absolute  condition  of  an  intimate  and 
cordial  union  between  Russia  and  England.  Being 
repugnant  to  any  reaction,  I  would  wish  the  two 
Governments  to  agree  that  far  from  attempting  to 
re-establish  old  abuses  in  the  countries  which  will 
have  to  be  emancipated  from  the  yoke  of  Buonaparte, 
they  should,  on  the  contrary,  be  assured  of  liberties 
founded  on  a  solid  basis.  This  is  the  principle  which, 
in  my  idea,  should  guide  the  conduct  of  the  two 
Powers,  and  their  proclamations  should  always  be  in 
accordance  with  it.  . 

As,  before  thinking  of  the  liberation  of  France, 
we  should  have  to  deliver  the  countries  which  she 
oppresses,  the  first  thing  to  be  considered  would  be 
how  to  regulate  their  future  position.  The  King  of 
Sardinia,  with  regard  to  whom  Russia  and  England 
have  contracted  engagements,  could  not  be  omitted  in 
the  arrangement  of  the  affairs  of  Italy,  and  he  would 
be  perhaps  the  first  to  give  us  a  useful  example.  The 
safety  of  Europe  requires  not  only  that  he  should  be 
restored  to  the  throne,  but  that  his  share  of  the 
territories  to  be  recovered  from  France  should  be  as 
large  as  possible.  At  the  same  time  the  two  Powers, 
while  restorino-  him  to  the  throne  and  increasing  his 

o  o 

dominions,  would  be  fully  justified  in  jointly  urging 
him  to  give  his  people  a  free  and  wise  constitution. 


44        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

He  will  no  doubt  himself  perceive  that  his  own  in- 
terest will  require  him  to  proclaim  a  promise  to  this 
effect  and  keep  it.  It  is  only  by  so  doing  that  this 
prince  would  be  able  personally  to  be  useful  to  the 
common  cause. 

The  political  existence  of  Switzerland  is  also  of 
essential  interest  to  the  safety  of  Europe.  It  is  neces- 
sary as  much  as  possible  to  give  that  country  a  defen- 
sible frontier  and  strengthen  it  in  its  position  with 
regard  to  other  Powers.  I  think  it  should  be  given  a 
Government,  based  on  local  requirements  and  the 
wishes  of  the  people,  which,  without  falling  into  the 
errors  of  the  old  system,  should  be  strong  enough  to 
take  advantage  of  the  resources  of  the  country  and 
make  its  neutrality  respected. 

The  same  principle  should  guide  our  policy  with 
regard  to  Holland,  where  the  national  character  and 
wishes  should  be  impartially  considered  in  deciding 
upon  the  form  of  government  which  should  be  sup- 
ported. If  the  restoration  of  a  hereditary  Stadtholder, 
with  a  suitably  limited  amount  of  power,  should  be 
found  necessary,  Russia  and  England  might  come  to 
an  understanding  as  to  the  selection  of  the  family  on 
which  this  dignity  is  to  be  conferred — either  •  some 
German  Prince  who  would  have  a  right  to  our 

o 

advocacy  and  on  whom  we  could  rely,  or  some 
member  of  the  reigning  family  of  Prussia  or  Denmark, 
so  as  to  gain  a  claim  to  the  alliance  of  one  of  these 
Powers ;  or  it  might  be  made  a  compensation  for  con- 
cessions made  by  other  States.  .  .  .  As  regards  Ger- 
many, its  present  position  is  certainly  not  compatible 


SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS  TO  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF    45 

either  with  the  welfare  of  the  German  nation  or  of 
Europe  generally.  Should  we  allow  part  of  Germany 
to  be  absorbed  by  the  two  Powers  which  have  long 
coveted  it,  and  at  most  form  a  third  great  State  in  the 
midst  of  Germany  ?  Such  a  measure  would  involve 
so  much  injustice  towards  the  princes  of  the  Empire 
who  would  have  to  be  dispossessed  that  it  can  hardly 
be  thought  of.  Could  one  succeed  in  establishing  a 
more  intimate  union,  a  sort  of  more  concentrated 
Federal  Government  among  the  various  States  which 
compose  the  German  Empire,  and  if  so  would  it  not 
be  desirable  to  exclude  from  it  the  Prussian  and 
Austrian  monarchies,  whose  too  unequal  forces  destroy 
all  balance  and  patriotism  ?  This  will  have  to  be 
maturely  considered  if  the  future  organisation  of 
Germany  should  have  to  be  dealt  with.* 

I  now  come  to  the  line  of  conduct  which  I  am 
convinced  it  would  be  indispensable  to  pursue  with 
regard  to  France.  After  having  by  our  successes 
abroad,  and  by  the  just  and  liberal  principles  pro- 
fessed by  us,  inspired  general  respect  and  confidence, 
we  should  declare  to  the  French  nation  that  our  efforts 
are  directed  not  against  her,  but  only  against  her 
Government,  which  is  as  tyrannical  for  France  as  for 
the  rest  of  Europe ;  that  our  only  object  is  to 
deliver  from  its  yoke  the  countries  which  it  oppresses, 
and  that  we  now  address  ourselves  to  the  French 
nation  not  to  preach  revolt  and  disobedience  to  law, 
but  to  urge  all  parties  in  France  to  trust  the  allied 

*  The  same  views  as  to  Germany  are  expressed,  almost  in  the  same  language, 
in  some  notes  made  by  Mr  Pitt  in  1803  (see  Lord  Stanhope's  Life  of  Pitt,  Vol.  Ill, 
p.  269). 


46         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Powers,  whose  only  desire  is  to  emancipate  France 
from  the  despotism  under  which  she  is  suffering  and 
to  make  her  free  to  chose  any  government  she  may 
herself  prefer. 

Assuming  that,  for  the  good  of  Europe  and  of 
France,  it  is  necessary  that  the  constitution  there 
should  be  monarchical,  any  proposal  to  that  effect 
would  have  to  be  made  by  the  nation  itself :  one 
might  endeavour  to  suggest  it,  but  any  intention  to 
that  effect  should  not  be  declared  too  soon. 

The  Cabinets  of  St  Petersburg  and  St  James's  will 
have  to  come  to  an  understanding  on  all  these  points, 
and  also  as  to  the  individual  and  family  who  might 
be  called  upon  to  reign  in  France — if  the  Bourbons, 
which  of  them,  and  what  conditions  he  should  be 
called  upon  to  subscribe  to.  the  most  essential  of 
which  would  be  that  he  should  submit  to  the  constitu- 
tion which  would  be  adopted  by  the  nation.  I  look 
upon  the  choice  of  a  king  as  a  secondary  matter,  and 
I  will  not  for  my  part  attach  any  importance  to  it 
except  in  so  far  as  it  might  impede  or  facilitate  our 
operations. 

This  is  not  the  place  or  the  moment  to  trace  the 
different  forms  of  government  which  should  be  estab- 
lished in  these  various  countries.  I  leave  you  entire 
freedom  to  treat  with  the  English  Minister  on  this 
important  subject.  The  principles  should  undoubt- 
edly everywhere  be  the  same,  and  it  will  be  above  all 
things  necessary  to  agree  as  to  that  point.  Every- 
where public  institutions  should  be  founded  on  the 
sacred  rights  of  humanity,  and  so  as  to  produce  the 


SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS  TO  M.  DE  XOVOSILTZOFF     47 

order  which  is  their  necessary  consequence  ;  every- 
where they  should  be  based  on  the  same  spirit  of 
wisdom  and  benevolence.  But  the  application  of  the 
same  principles  may  vary  according  to  locality,  and 
the  two  Powers,  in  order  to  come  to  an  understanding 
on  this  subject,  will  take  steps  to  obtain  on  the  spot 
just,  impartial,  and  detailed  information  on  which  they 
can  rely.  It  is  in  strictly  following  such  a  line  of 
conduct,  in  tearing  oft'  the  masks  worn  by  govern- 
ments which  for  their  private  objects  alternately  have 
recourse  to  despotism  and  to  anarchy,  carefully  separ- 
ating their  interests  from  those  of  the  people  over 
whom  they  tyrannise,  that  we  may  hope  for  the  sin- 
cere assistance  of  the  latter,  and  produce  a  general 
enthusiasm  for  the  good  cause  whose  results  would  be 
incalculable. 

The  adoption  of  the  course  above  indicated  in  in- 
timate concert  with  England  would  not  only  be  the  true 
and  perhaps  the  only  means  of  restricting  French  power 
within  its  just  limits,  but  would  also  contribute  to  fix 
the  future  peace  of  Europe  on  a  solid  and  permanent 
basis.  The  object  would  be,  first,  to  attach  nations  to 
their  Governments,  by  making  it  only  possible  for  the 
latter  to  act  for  the  benefit  of  their  subjects  ;  and 
secondly,  to  fix  the  relations  of  the  various  States 
towards  each  other  on  more  precise  rules,  which 
would  be  so  drawn  up  as  to  make  it  the  interest  of 
each  State  to  respect  them.  .  .  .  When  peace  is 
made,  a  new  treaty  should  be  drawn  up  as  a  basis  for 
the  reciprocal  relations  of  the  European  States.  Such 
a  treaty  might  secure  the  privileges  of  neutrality,  bind 


48        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  Powers  who  take  part  in  it  never  to  begin  a  war 
until  after  exhausting  every  means  of  mediation  by  a 
third  Power,  and  lay  down  a  sort  of  new  code  of 
international  law  which,  being  sanctioned  by  the 
greater  part  of  the  European  States,  would,  if  violated 
by  any  one  of  them,  bind  the  others  to  turn  against  the 
offender  and  make  good  the  evil  he  has  committed.  .  . 
Should  the  two  Governments  agree  in  the  line  of 
policy  thus  sketched  out,  they  will  easily  come  to  an 
understanding  as  to  the  conduct  they  should  pursue 
with  regard  to  the  other  Powers  who  would  be  made 
to  join  in  the  struggle.  The  fear  of  losing  the 
support  of  Russia  and  the  subsidies  of  England  will 
decide  Austria  to  follow  our  impulse  in  the  war  which 
she  is  already  inclined  to  begin  as  our  ally.  As  to 
Prussia,  it  will  be  difficult  to  induce  her  willingly  to 
enter  a  combination  against  France.  Her  engagements 
towards  Russia  are  known  to  you,  and  it  will  be  for 
consideration  whether  it  would  not  be  better  to  force 
her  to  take  a  side  either  with  or  against  us  than  that 
she  should  remain  neutral.  Russia  especially  can  put 
great  pressure  upon  her,  and  the  Berlin  Cabinet,  by 
the  double  engagement  it  has  taken  not  to  allow  either 
Russian  or  French  troops  to  pass  through  its  territory, 
might  find  itself  in  the  difficult  position  it  wished  to 
avoid.  But  whoever  may  be  our  allies,  the  English 
Ministry,  if  it  adopts  our  ideas,  will  feel  the  necessity 
of  not  allowing  any  other  power  completely  to  pene- 
trate our  views,  and  of  only  directing  our  allies  towards 
the  proposed  object  by  such  means  as  we  may  possess 
of  acting  upon  them. 


SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS  TO  M.  DE  30VOSILTZOFF     49 

The  Ottoman  Empire  is  another  country  whose 
fate  will  have  an  influence  on  that  of  the  rest  of 
Europe.  The  most  intimate  concert  is  necessary 
between  Russia  and  England  with  regard  to  the  line 
of  conduct  which  should  be  adopted  towards  Turkey. 
It  cannot  be  disputed  that  her  weakness,  the  anarchy 
of  her  administration,  and  the  growing  discontent  of 
her  Christian  subjects,  are  all  elements  which  stimu- 
late speculative  ambitions  and  are  diametrically  op- 
posed to  the  principles  which  we  hold  are  the  only 
ones  that  can  bring  about  a  stable  condition  of  tran- 

o 

quillity   in    Europe.     It    will   doubtless   be  desirable 
to     arrive    at    some    arrangement    with    regard    to 
Turkey  which  shall  be  in  conformity  with  the  good 
of  humanity  and  the  precepts  of  sound  policy  ;  but  it 
cannot  at  present  be  foreseen  how  far  this  could  be 
done.     The  two  Powers  will  not  be  wanting  in  loyalty 
even  to  an  essentially  tyrannical  government ;  and  this 
would  be  the  chief  obstacle.      But  if  the  Porte  joined 
France    (for  one   can    never    be    quite    sure    of    the 
sincerity  of  its  professions) — if  a  war  and  its  results 
rendered  the  further  existence  of  the  Turkish  Empire 
in  Europe  impossible — the  two  Powers  would  regulate 
among  themselves  the  future  fate  of  the  parties  con- 
cerned.    So  long  as  the  Turkish  Government  can  be 
preserved  in  Europe,  it  will  be  necessary  not  to  lose 
its   confidence ;    but   in   any  case    the    considerations 
hereinafter  stated  should  not  be  lost  sight  of  in  our 
relations  with  it,  and  should  be    maturely  weighed, 
especially  before  deciding  as  to  the  renewal  of  the 
treaty  of  alliance  which  the  Porte  proposes  to  Russia 

VOL.  II.  D 


50        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  England.     In  consenting  to  the  proposal,  it  will 
be  necessary  at  least  to  secure,   if  possible,   a  more 
happy  existence  to  the   Christian  populations  which 
are  suffering  under  the  domination  of  the  Porte,  and 
by  that  very  means  to  render  such  domination  less 
precarious ;  and  since  we  should  do  so  much  to  pre- 
serve the  Turkish  Empire,  it  would  be  desirable  also 
to  foresee  the   advantage  we   could   derive  from  its 
government,  weak  as  it  is,  to  paralyse  the  opposition 
of  France,  to  which  Power  a  rupture  with  the  Porte 
might  be  injurious  in  several   respects.     My  ambas- 
sador in   London,   following   the  instructions  in  this 
sense  which  he  has  received,  has   doubtless  already 
entered  upon  a  discussion  on  this  important  matter 
with  the  British  Ministry.     It  will  necessarily  form 
part  of  the  general  arrangement  here  sketched  out, 
and  you  will  take  care  that  it  shall  be  suitably  com- 
bined with  the  rest  of  the  plan  to  be  adopted. 

A  further  point  to  be  considered  is  the  obligation 
which  would  fall  upon  the  two  Powers  after  so  costly 
a  struggle  to  obtain  some  advantages  for  themselves 
to  compensate  them  for  their  expenditure  and  to  show 
to  the  people  that  their  own  national  interests  have 
not  been  forgotten.  Russia  especially  will  have  the 
right  to  demand  that  if  her  neighbours,  such  as 
Austria,  Prussia,  and  Sweden,  obtain  advantages 
which  it  will  be  necessary  to  promise  them  in  order 
to  induce  them  to  act,  she  should  have  equivalent 
ones.  The  peace  of  Europe  could  only  be  preserved 
by  means  of  a  league,  formed  under  the  auspices  of 
Russia  and  England,  which  would  be  joined  by  all  the 


SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS  TO  M.  DE  NOYOSILTZOFF     51 

second  class  States  and  by  all  those  who  really  wish 
to  remain  at  peace.  In  order  that  such  a  league 
should  effectually  resist  the  disturbers  of  peace  and 
be  firmly  established,  it  is  necessary  that  the  two  pro- 
tecting Powers  should  maintain  a  certain  degree  of 
preponderance  in  the  affairs  of  Europe,  for  they  are 
the  only  ones  which  by  their  position  are  always  in- 
terested in  order  and  justice  being  maintained,  and 
which,  by  their  union,  would  be  able  to  maintain  it. 

Among  the  important  points  of  which  you  will 
have  to  treat  with  the  English  Government  the  most 
difficult  will  be  that  of  making  it  feel  the  propriety 
and  necessity,  at  a  moment  when  it  would  re-establish 
order  and  justice  in  Europe  in  concert  with  Russia, 
also  to  consent  to  make  some  change  in  its  maritime 
code — the  only  matter  as  to  which  the  British  Cabinet 
is  not  free  from  reproach,  and  which  enables  its 
enemies  to  injure  it  by  exasperating  the  neutral 
Powers.  Some  concessions  on  this  point,  not  of  a 
character  to  do  any  real  damage  to  the  commerce  of 
England  or  to  her  preponderance  on  the  sea,  would 
destroy  the  fears  and  the  mistrust  of  the  neutral 
States  and  sincerely  attach  them  to  Great  Britain.  .  .  . 

ST  PETERSBURG, 
September    11,    1804. 

Signed  : — ALEXANDER. 
Countersigned  : — PRINCE  A.  CZARTORYSKI. 


CHAPTER  V 

1804 


MEMORANDUM  DRAWN  UP  BY  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI  IN  1804,  SHOWING 
THE  RUSSIAN  PLAN  FOR  THE  RE-ARRANGEMENT  OF  EUROPE  IN  THE 
EVENT  OF  THE  COMBINATION  WHICH  WAS  THEN  BEING  PROJECTED 
AGAINST  NAPOLEON  PROVING  SUCCESSFUL. 


AUSTRIA  will  obtain  Bavaria  and  such  frontier  in 
Swabia  and  Franconia  as  may  suit  her. ;  also  the  Tyrol 
and  a  new  frontier  on  the  side  of  Venetia  and 
Dalmatia. 

The  Archduke  Charles  and  the  late  Grand-Duke 
of  Tuscany  will  obtain  principalities  in  Germany  and 
Italy.  Venetia  would  suit  one  of  them. 

Piedmont  will  be  returned  to  the  King  of  Sardinia 
with  Genoa  and  part  of  Lombardy.  This  will  form 
an  intermediary  and  respectable  Power  which  it  is  the 
interest  of  Russia  to  consolidate  as  much  as  possible  ; 
the  same  interest  exists  as  regards  the  kingdom  of  the 
two  Sicilies,  which  will  be  returned  to  its  legitimate 
sovereign. 

Prussia  will  obtain  in  North  Germany  the  States 
of  the  Grand-Duchy  of  Berg,  the  Duchy  of  Mecklen- 
burg, Fulda,  Anspach,  etc.  Sweden  will  obtain  a  new 


PROPOSED  RE-ARRANCEMENT  OF  EUROPE        53 

principality  in  Germany,  according  to  her  wish  and 
convenience. 

France  will  retain  as  a  frontier  the  Alps  and  the 
Rhine  up  to  a  point  to  be  specified. 

Holland  will  again  become  a  Republic,  with  a 
hereditary  Stadtholder,  and  with  part  of  the  Austrian 
Netherlands  returned  to  her.  The  independence  of 
Switzerland  will  be  guaranteed. 

All  the  German  States  which  will  not  be  absorbed 
by  Austria  and  Prussia  will  form  the  German  Empire, 
a  country  intermediary  between  France,  Austria, 
and  Prussia,  to  be  federated  with  Switzerland  and 
Holland. 

The  Emperor  of  Russia,  taking  the  title  of  King 
of  Poland,  will  have  all  the  territories  that  belonged 
to  Poland  before  the  first  partition,  together  with  the 
country  called  the  Kingdom  of  Prussia,  so  that  his 
new  frontier  would  extend  from  Dantzig  to  the  sources 
of  the  Vistula,  and  thence  along  the  Carpathians  as 
far  as  the  source  of  the  Dniester. 

NOTE  BY  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

The  compensations  above  granted  to  Austria  and 
Prussia  are  sufficient  to  compensate  those  Powers  for 
the  cessions  they  would  make  to  Russia.  Nearly  the 
whole  of  Germany  can  at  this  moment  be  made  the 
subject  of  negotiations,  in  view  of  the  conduct  of  her 
princes,  which  does  not  give  them  any  claim  to  con- 
sideration. Italy  also  will,  if  necessary,  serve  to 
satisfy  Austria  ;  but  it  would  better  suit  the  Court 
of  Vienna  to  seek  compensation  in  Germany,  the 


54        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

southern  territories  of  which  interest  us  less  than  any 
other  part  of  Europe,  and  where,  moreover,  a  sort  of 
balance  would  always  be  kept  up  by  the  jealousy  of 
France  and  Prussia. 

As  to  Prussia,  she  might,  if  such  a  course  should 
be  absolutely  necessary  and  England  consented  to  it, 
be  also  offered  the  Kingdom  of  Holland. 

It  is  desirable,  however,  for  the  general  good  that 
the  proposals  made  above  should  if  possible  be 
adhered  to.  If  they  were  adopted,  we  should  have 
after  the  peace  five  great  Powers  in  Europe  :  Russia, 
England,  France,  Austria,  and  Prussia.  Of  these, 
Russia  and  England,  having  the  same  interests  and 
views,  would  probably  remain  united ;  the  three 
others  could  hardly  make  an  alliance  to  disturb  the 
equilibrium  that  would  thus  be  established,  but  their 
policy  would  have  to  be  watched  and  controlled. 

Further,  there  would  be  three  considerable  masses 
of  intermediary  counterpoises,  each  of  which  would 
have  its  own  particular  federation,  namely,  Spain  and 
Portugal,  Italy,  and  Germany  proper.  These  three 
masses  would  have  the  greatest  interest  in  attaching 
themselves  to  Russia  and  England,  and  sustaining 
their  influence,  as  it  would  also  be  the  interest  of 
those  two  Powers  to  defend  and  strengthen  them. 
In  such  a  European  arrangement  Russia  would  thus 
have  a  marked  preponderance,  which  would  be  the 
more  assured  as  France  and  England  would  then  be 
rivals  for  her  friendship. 

I  have  not  mentioned  Turkey,  which  it  would 
perhaps  be  best,  after  re-establishing  her  rights  under 


PROPOSED  RE-ARRANGEMENT  OF  EUROPE        55 

old  treaties,  to  leave  for  the  moment  in  her  present 
condition,  except  as  regards  the  proposed  change  in 
Servia,  the  reunion  of  Cattaro  to  Montenegro,  and 
the  Ionian  Republic.  If  the  question  should  ever 
arise  of  definitively  settling  the  fate  of  the  Ottoman 
Empire  in  Europe,  the  Powers  which  it  would  be 
necessary  to  satisfy  should  only  obtain  stations  and 
rectifications  of  territory  that  might  be  suitable  to 
them,  but  the  mass  of  the  Turkish  territories  in 
Europe  should  be  divided  into  separate  States, 
governed  locally,  and  bound  to  each  other  by  a 
federation,  upon  which  Russia  would  be  able  to 
secure  to  herself  a  decisive  and  lawful  influence  by 
means  of  the  title  of  Emperor  or  Protector  of  the 
Slavs  of  the  East  which  would  be  accorded  to  his 
Imperial  Majesty.  In  any  case  this  influence  would 
be  established  by  the  part  the  Russians  will  have 
taken  in  the  liberation  of  these  territories,  by  identity 
of  religion  and  origin,  and  by  a  wise  policy  and  a 
skilful  selection  of  posts  to  be  occupied  by  our  troops. 
If  the  consent  of  Austria  should  be  necessary, 
she  might  be  given  Croatia,  part  of  Bosnia  and 
Wallachia,  Belgrade,  Ragusa,  etc.  Russia  would 
have  Moldavia,  Cattaro,  Corfu,  and  above  all  Con- 
stantinople and  the  Dardanelles,  together  with  the 
neighbouring  ports  which  would  make  us  masters  of 
the  Straits.  France  and  England  could  be  offered 
some  islands  in  the  Archipelago  or  establishments  in 
Asia  or  Africa. 


CHAPTER  VI 

1804-5 

LETTERS  RELATIVE  TO  THE  RUSSIAN    NEGOTIATIONS  WITH    ENGLAND  AND 

AUSTRIA. 

FROM  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI  TO  THE  CHANCELLOR 
COUNT  VORONTZOFF. 

Sth  November,  1804. 

I  HASTEN  to  inform  your  Excellency  that  the  concert* 
with  the  Court  of  Vienna  was  signed  two  days  ago, 
and  that  the  Russian  arid  Austrian  couriers  bearing 
this  news  left  yesterday  evening.  The  drift  of  this 
instrument  is  already  known  to  you  ;  the  eventuality 
of  an  attack  on  the  kingdom  of  Naples  is  provided  for 
in  it.  The  Austrian  Ambassador  insisted  that  a 
clause  should  be  added  to  the  effect  that  such  an 
attack  shall  not  be  provoked  by  his  Sicilian  Majesty, 
and,  in  order  to  avoid  any  misunderstanding,  we  have 
endeavoured  to  state  as  precisely  as  possible  in  a 
separate  article  what  is  to  be  meant  by  the  word 
'  provocation.'  The  point  relative  to  the  Court  of 
Berlin  is  inserted  in  a  separate  and  secret  article,  and 

*  This  was  a  secret  Convention  pledging  the  two  Empires  to  united  action 
against  France,  with  a  view  to  preventing  any  encroachments  by  that  power  on 
Germany,  Turkey,  or  Naples. 


NEGOTIATIONS   WITH  ENGLAND  AND  AUSTRIA     57 

the  Convention  concludes  by  Austria  promising  reci- 
procity to  Russia  in  the  event  of  her  being  attacked 
by  Prussia.  The  Austrian  Ambassador  had  no  in- 
structions as  to  this,  but  he  signed  the  article  sub  spe 
rati. 

The  article  on  the  subsidies  is  the  one  that  gave 
us  most  trouble.  Austria  asks  two  millions  for  the 
preliminary  preparations  and  four  millions  a  year. 
We  had  to  promise  our  good  offices  with  England  in 
this  respect,  although  we  felt  that  the  demand  was 
exorbitant ;  but  we  did  so  only  on  the  understanding 
that  if  the  Court  of  London  should  not  supply  the 
whole  of  that  sum,  the  stipulations  of  the  concert 
were  to  remain  none  the  less  valid.  This  indispens- 
able condition  was  not  signed  by  the  Austrian  Am- 
bassador, as  his  instructions  did  not  justify  him  in 
doing  so.  The  matter  was  arranged  subject  to 
further  declarations.  Notwithstanding  this,  we 
thought  it  best  to  sign,  as  we  thought  it  would  be 
difficult  for  the  Court  of  Vienna  to  refuse  its  ratifica- 
tion, which  we  must  wait  for  before  we  can  regard  the 
matter  as  definitively  settled.  I  forgot  to  say,  with 
regard  to  the  number  of  troops,  that  Austria  is  to 
give  235,000  men  and  we  115,000,  which  makes 
350,000  in  all 

The  worthy  Admiral  Warren*  has  just  left,  full  of 
gratitude  for  the  friendship  which  has  been  shown 
him  here  and  the  kindness  of  the  Emperor.  The  new 
Ambassador,  Lord  G.  L.  Gower,  whom  as  yet  I  have 
only  twice  seen  in  my  house,  seems  to  me  thoroughly 

*  Sir  John  Warren,  British  Ambassador  at  the  Russian  Court. 


58        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

conversant  with  the  matters  with  which  he  will  have 
to  deal.  The  Court  of  London  is  not  quite  satisfied 
with  us,  but  I  hope  it  will  gradually  become  so,  and  I 
do  not  despair  of  matters  taking  a  good  turn.  They 
complain  in  London  of  the  mystery  in  which  we 
shroud  our  negotiations  with  Austria.  At  Vienna 
they  are  very  glad  of  it,  and  if  the  matter  had  not 
been  kept  an  impenetrable  secret,  the  pusillanimous 
Austrian  Cabinet  would  not  have  gone  so  far  with  us 
as  it  has  done.  .  .  . 

2nd  December,  1804. 

The  Court  of  Vienna  wishes  to  make  advances  to 
Berlin  to  try  to  draw  Prussia  into  a  concert  with  us, 
but  I  have  little  hope  of  success  in  this  direction. 
Prussia  wishes  to  preserve  her  neutrality  with  regard 
to  France  as  well  as  with  regard  to  ourselves  ;  that  is 
I  think  her  system,  which  at  the  moment  of  rupture 
might  become  very  embarrassing.  Altogether  the 
problem  of  how  to  deal  with  Prussia  is  not  an  easy 
one. 

We  are  now  drawing  up  instructions  for  Italinsky 
relative  to  a  new  treaty  of  alliance  with  the  Porte 
which  will  I  think  appease  the  alarms  of  Mr  Pitt. 
So  long  ago  as  1790  his  system  was  based  on  the 
greatest  jealousy  of  any  new  acquisition  on  the  part 
of  Russia. 


CHAPTER  VII 

1805 


REPORT    FROM    M.    DE    NOVOSILTZOFF,    GIVING    AN    ACCOUNT    OF    THE 
RESULT    OF    HIS    NEGOTIATIONS    WITH    MR    PITT. 


I  HAVE  had  preliminary  conversations,  first  with  Lord 
Harrowby,  and  afterwards,  on  two  different  occasions, 
with  Mr  Pitt,  on  the  principles  which,  in  the  present 
state  of  Europe,  any  coalition  which  it  might  be  pos- 
sible to  form  would  have  to  follow  in  order  to  have 
any  reasonable  prospect  of  establishing  the  balance  of 
power,  bringing  back  France  into  her  old  limits,  and 
placing  the  general  tranquillity  of  Europe  on  a  solid 
and  stable  basis.  These  conversations  have  shown  me 
that  the  opinions  of  the  British  Ministry  entirely 
coincide  with  the  intentions  of  his  Majesty  the 
Emperor,  as  regards  the  points  which  I  had  the 
opportunity  of  touching  upon.  Thus  Mr  Pitt,  in  a 
rapid  statement  of  his  point  of  view,  said  he  was 
firmly  persuaded  that  it  was  necessary  to  tear  away 
from  the  French  Government  the  mask  with  which 
it  was  always  seeking  to  hide  its  offences  against 
humanity  in  general  and  the  independence  of  nations 
in  particular,  and  that  for  this  purpose  no  means 


60        MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

should  be  neglected  of  undeceiving  those  sovereigns 
(if  any)  who,  notwithstanding  the  experience  of  so 
many  public  misfortunes,  still  persist  in  not  seeing 
that  the  great  extension  and  enormous  power  which 
France  has  acquired,  coupled  with  the  unbridled 
ambition  of  Buonaparte,  threaten  Europe  with  total 
ruin. 

Havinw  seen  how  much  the  ideas  of  the  British 

o 

Ministry  with  regard  to  public  affairs  approximate  to 
those  of  his  Majesty  the  Emperor,  I  thought  it  my 
duty,  in  my  conference  with  Mr  Pitt,  to  enter  into 
the  greatest  detail,  and  take  up  the  various  matters  in 
their  proper  order.  I  began  by  saying  that  it  gave 
me  very  great  pleasure  to  see  from  all  that  Mr  Pitt 
had  said  that  the  benevolent  views  of  his  Imperial 
Majesty  were  so  much  in  accordance  with  those  of  the 
British  Cabinet ;  and  that  all  the  remaining  subjects 
which  I  had  to  bring  forward  were,  properly  speaking, 
only  a  development  of  the  same  principles.  Never- 
theless, as  the  matter  of  which  we  were  treating  was 
in  itself  of  such  great  importance  that  it  cannot  be 
dealt  with  too  precisely,  I  requested  him  to  permit 
me  to  resume  my  statement  of  it  from  the  beginning, 
and  to  take  up  in  their  natural  order  all  the  various 
points  which  relate  to  it,  so  as  the  more  easily  to 
distinguish  the  principles  as  to  which  we  are  agreed 
from  the  subordinate  matters  which  will  have  to  be 
discussed  and  regulated  afterwards. 

Mr  Pitt  found  that  what  I  had  said  was  perfectly 
just,  and  I  accordingly  entered  upon  my  statement. 
I  began  by  pointing  out  that  what  we  had  to  agree 


REPORT  FROM  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF  61 

about  turned  naturally  on  two  principal  points  :  one 
comprised  the  objects  which  the  two  nations  would 
propose  to  attain  by  the  convention  which  they  would 
draw  up ;  the  other  the  means  best  calculated  to 
ensure  as  complete  a  success  as  possible.  There  can 
be  no  doubt,  I  said,  that  the  objects  in  question,  taken 
collectively,  should  be  reduced  to  a  single  one  only — 
that  of  restoring  the  equilibrium  of  Europe  and 
establishing  its  safety  and  tranquillity  on  more  solid 
bases  ;  but  as  this  object  involves  a  great  number  of 
ideas,  I  thought  it  best,  for  the  sake  of  order  arid  pre- 
cision, to  divide  it  into  three  distinct  parts,  which 
might  be  regarded  as  so  many  periods  through  which 
a  coalition  formed  between  Russia  and  Great  Britain 
would  have  successively  to  pass  in  order  to  arrive  at 
the  ultimate  object  proposed. 

The  first  object,  in  the  opinion  of  his  Imperial 
Majesty,  is  to  bring  back  France  into  its  ancient 
limits,  or  such  other  ones  as  might  appear  most 
suitable  to  the  general  tranquillity  of  Europe.  The 
second  is  to  place  natural  barriers  to  the  ambition  of 
Buonaparte,  so  as  to  prevent  France  from  further 
aggressions  in  future  ;  and  the  third  is  to  consolidate 
the  order  of  things  which  would  be  established  by  an 
intimate  and  perpetual  alliance  between  Russia  and 
Great  Britain,  and  by  a  compact  between  those 
Powers,  the  countries  which  they  would  liberate  from 
the  yoke  of  France,  and  any  other  States  which  might 
be  disposed  to  join  them  for  the  maintenance  of  a 
condition  of  affairs  indispensable  for  the  balance  of 
power. 


62        MEMOIRS  OF  PRIME  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Mr  Pitt  said  that  this  view  was  entirely  in  con- 
formity with  his  own  ;  and  then  I  proceeded  to  the 
means  which  his  Imperial  Majesty  thought  would  be 
best  calculated  to  attain  the  three  objects  above 
stated. 

With  regard  to  the  first,  I  remarked  that  the 
means  for  attaining  it  might  be  stated  as  follows  : — 

1.  The  employment  of  as  large  a  force  as  possible 
against  the  common  enemy. 

2.  The  employment  of  it  in  the  most  advantageous 
manner. 

3.  The  reduction  of  the  enemy's  strength  to  the 
utmost  possible  extent. 

His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  Russia  being  practi- 
cally unable  to  make  effectual  war  upon  France  with- 
out the  assistance  of  some  of  the  great  Continental 
Powers,  it  is  evident  that  in  order  to  bring  against  the 
enemy  a  force  in  proportion  to  the  greatness  of  the 
enterprise,  the  two  Powers,  once  they  agree  by  a  con- 
vention as  to  the  principles  on  which  they  are  to  act, 
would  turn  all  their  attention  to  the  task  of  binding 

O 

Austria  and  Prussia,  or,  if  it  should  be  impossible  to 
do  this  as  regards  both,  at  least  one  of  these  Powers, 
to  form  a  coalition  (which  the  Ottoman  Porte, 
Sweden,  and  perhaps  Denmark,  would  probably  join) 
with  Russia  and  Great  Britain  against  the  extension 
of  France  and  the  barbarous  conduct  of  Buonaparte. 

The  condltio  sine  qua  non  of  this  coalition  would 
be  that  none  of  the  members  of  it  should  in  any  case 
be  able  to  make  a  separate  peace  on  its  own  account. 
Great  Britain  would  on  her  side  engage  to  grant  to 


REPORT  FROM  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF  63 

these  Powers  such  subsidies  as  the  urgency  of  the  case 
might  render  indispensable,  to  furnish  transport  ships, 
and  to  employ  her  own  land  forces  in  as  great  numbers 
as  possible  on  every  occasion  where  such  assistance  on 
her  part  might  be  useful  to  the  common  cause. 

In  this  way  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  forces 
which  might  be  used  against  France  would  be  more 
than  sufficient ;  the  only  question  would  be  how  to 
employ  them  in  the  most  efficacious  manner.  In 
order  to  do  this,  I  said,  it  is  necessary  that  the  two 
Cabinets  should  agree  as  to  the  points  of  attack,  the 
best  plan  of  military  operations  to  be  adopted,  and 
the  means  to  be  employed  for  preserving  among  the 
combined  armies  a  unity  of  aim  and  the  greatest 
possible  harmony  in  all  the  operations  they  might 
undertake.  I  added,  in  order  to  avoid  any  digression 
from  my  principal  subject,  that  I  would  not  fail  after- 
wards to  communicate  to  Mr  Pitt  all  I  knew  of  his 
Imperial  Majesty's  ideas  on  this  matter. 

I  next  passed  to  the  means  of  reducing  the 
enemy's  strength.  These,  I  said,  would  chiefly  con- 
sist in  the  liberation  of  Holland,  Switzerland,  and 
Italy  from  their  enslavement  to  France,  and  in  the 
endeavour  to  employ  them  for  their  own  defence  as 
part  of  the  coalition.  I  remarked  at  the  same  time 
that  no  means  should  be  neglected  which  might  pre- 
pare them  for  this  purpose  as  soon  as  the  coalition 
should  begin  to  be  formed.  It  was  above  all  things 

O  O 

necessary  to  gain  their  confidence  by  not  leaving 
them  any  doubt  that  the  two  Powers  which  would  be 
at  the  head  of  the  coalition  would  not  be  actuated  by 


64        MEMOIRS  OP  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

personal  views,  and  would  only  strive  to  recover  and 
consolidate  their  political  independence ;  that  all  the 
fortresses  which  would  surrender  to  the  armies  of  the 
coalition  would  be  taken  in  the  name  of  the  nation  to 
which  they  belong,  and  would  be  restored  to  it  when 
it  obtains  a  settled  government  after  joining  the 
coalition. 

If  the  language  and  conduct  of  Russia  and 
England  are  always  in  accord  with  these  principles, 
they  would  not  only  produce  the  desired  effect,  but  in 
all  probability  would  prepare  France  herself  for 
salutary  changes  in  her  government  and  render  the 
task  of  the  coalition  much  less  difficult  in  other 
respects. 

Mr  Pitt  answered  that  he  entirely  agreed  to  all 
I  had  said,  and  that  he  only  wished  to  point  out  that 
no  means  should  be  neglected  of  bringing  Prussia 
into  the  coalition.  He  suggested  various  inducements 
which  might  be  held  out  to  her  with  this  object,  and 
he  also  spoke  of  indemnities  which  might  be  promised 
to  Austria.  It  seemed  to  me,  however,  that  there 
were  several  other  matters  to  be  settled  first,  and  I 
merely  said  that  the  principle  which  his  Imperial 
Majesty  thought  should  be  followed  in  any  overtures 
that  might  be  made  was  to  offer  only  what  could  not 
be  refused  ;  by  so  doing  we  should  avoid  the  mistake 
which  had  been  made  recently,  when  all  the  efforts 
that  were  made  were  attributed  solely  to  a  wish  of 
profiting  by  a  general  dismemberment.  I  added, 
however,  that  it  was  not  very  likely  that  we  should 
be  able  entirely  to  avoid  making  some  offers ;  his 


REPORT  FROM  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF  65 

Majesty  had  some  ideas  on  the  subject  which  would 
be  communicated  to  him  hereafter  by  our  Ambassador. 

As  to  the  subsidies,  Mr  Pitt  said  that  England 
would  go  as  far  as  would  be  within  the  limits  of  possi- 
bility. 'We  will  give  £5,000,000,  perhaps  a  little  more  ; 
and  this  is  all  we  can  do,  for  if  we  wished  to  go  further, 
besides  the  want  of  means,  there  would  be  the  addi- 
tional objection  that  our  trade  with  the  countries 
which  would  be  subsidised  would  not  admit  of  our 
sending  them  a  larger  sum.  We  will,  however,  fix 
the  1st  of  January  as  the  date  on  which  the  subsidies 
will  begin  ;  this  would  be  three  or  four  months  before 
the  troops  can  be  sent  into  the  field.  The  sum  thus 
obtained  would  be  pretty  considerable,  and  might 
serve  to  cover  part  of  the  expense  of  preparations.' 

I  next  represented  to  Mr  Pitt  that  with  regard  to 
the  second  object — the  imposition  of  natural  barriers 
to  the  ambition  of  Buonaparte  which  would  both  keep 
France  within  her  boundaries  and  prevent  her  future 
aggrandisement — his  Majesty  thinks  the  most  trust- 
worthy means,  and  the  only  one  on  which  we  could 
rely,  would  be  to  surround  France  with  States  which 
would  be  strong  enough  at  least  not  to  fear  the  first 
blows  of  an  invasion,  and  which  would  thus  be 
capable  to  a  certain  degree  of  making  their  independ- 
ence respected.  Starting  from  this  principle,  it  is 
most  necessary  that  at  the  close  of  a  successful  war 
the  condition  of  Holland,  Switzerland  and  Italy 
should  be  considerably  improved,  and  their  strength 
increased  by  suitable  augmentations  of  territory. 
The  old  Germanic  Confederation,  divided  into  so 

VOL.    II.  E 


66         MKMOIIfS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

many  little  States  which  have  almost  ceased  to  have 
any  connection  with  each  other,  is  in  striking  contrast 
to  the  object  with  which  it  was  formed,  and  should 
also  e no-age  the  serious  attention  of  the  two  Courts. 

O     O 

His  Imperial  Majesty's  ideas  on  this  subject  would, 
I  added,  be  stated  to  Mr  Pitt  by  our  Ambassador, 
to  whom  I  had  been  charged  to  communicate  them  ; 
and  having  no  personal  predilections,  he  would  gladly 
receive  any  proposals  that  might  be  made  to  him  by 
the  British  Cabinet.  Being  firmly  persuaded  that 
nothing  can  give  more  energy  to  a  nation,  and  render 
it  more  respected  abroad,  than  a  good  Government 
founded  on  just  and  equitable  principles  which  attach 
people  to  their  country  and  to  its  lawful  authorities, 
his  Majesty  would  wish  to  come  to  an  understanding 
with  the  British  Cabinet  as  to  the  form  of  Govern- 
ment to  be  introduced  and  encouraged  in  the  countries 
which  would  recover  their  independence. 

Finalty,  in  order  to  attain  the  third  object — that 
of  consolidating  the  new  state  of  things  by  the  bene- 

i/ 

ficial  influence  which  would  be   exercised    throuo-h   a 

o 

permanent  alliance  between  Russia  and  England,  an 
alliance  which  nothing  could  dissolve  but  a  total 
change  of  system  and  principles  on  either  side — his 
Majesty  thinks  that  the  means  of  achieving  this 
object  would  spontaneously  present  themselves  as 
soon  as  an  agreement  is  arrived  at  on  the  question  of 
principle.  The  arrangements  above  indicated  would 
be  based  on  the  interests  and  the  security  of  the  nations 
which  would  be  liberated  ;  and  nothing  would  then 
remain  but  to  fix  on  clear  and  precise  principles  the 


REPORT  FROM  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF  67 

prescriptions  of  international  law  and  ascertain  how 
far  they  can  be  made  predominant  over  the  special 
laws  of  each  State. 

Mr  Pitt  listened  to  my  statement  with  much 
attention,  and  when  I  had  ended,  he  said  :  '  The  prin- 
ciples on  which  his  Imperial  Majesty  wishes  to  make 
a  convention  with  Great  Britain  and  to  act  against 
the  usurpations  of  France  are  in  all  respects  as  an- 
alogous to  the  sentiments  of  his  Britannic  Majesty 
and  of  his  Ministry  as  it  is  possible  to  desire,  and  they 
are  at  the  same  time  so  well  adapted  to  the  tendencies 
of  the  nation,  and  so  much  in  conformity  with  the 
character  and  opinions  of  the  individuals  who  compose 
it,  that  the  Government  could  only  maintain  its  popu- 
larity by  literally  following  them.  Moreover,  the 
interests  of  England— the  Sinking  Fund,  the  National 
Debt,  our  trade,  and  the  progress  of  our  industry — all 
demand  that  in  the  policy  we  are  to  follow  we  should 
not  neglect  any  measures  which  might  bring  about 
and  solidly  establish  a  general  peace.  The  British 
Cabinet  has  always  been  so  intimately  penetrated  with 
these  sentiments  that  it  has  never  ceased,  either  dur- 
ing war  or  peace,  loudly  to  profess  them  and  to  give 
proofs  of  its  disinterestedness  by  every  sacrifice  it  has 
been  capable  of  making. 

Supplementary  Memorandum  handed  to  Mr  Pitt  as 
a  development  of  the  ideas  expressed  by  him. 

The  Cabinets  of  St  Petersburg  and  St  James's  will 
agree  as  to  the  above  points  and  come  to  an  under- 
standing as  to  the  individual  and  the  family  which 


68        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

should  be  called  upon  to  reign  in  France.  If  the 
Bourbons,  which  of  them,  and  at  what  moment  he 
should  be  informed  of  his  selection  ;  what  line  of 
action  he  is  to  be  required  to  adopt,  and  to  what 
conditions  ho  is  to  subscribe,  the  most  essential  one 
being  that  of  submission  to  the  constitution  that 

o 

might  be  adopted. 

This  selection  is  regarded  by  his1  Majesty  the 
Emperor  as  a  secondary  matter,  and  he  would  not,  so 
far  as  he  is  concerned,  attach  any  importance  to  it 
except  in  so  far  as  it  might  impede  or  facilitate 
operations. 

Mr  Pit£  is  of  opinion  that  these  points  can  only 
be  determined  upon  as  events  occur. 

(A  confidential  note  in  accordance  with  the  above 
agreement  was  presented  by  Mr  Pitt  to  the  Russian 
Ambassador  on  the  19th  of  January,  1805.  The 
text  of  this  note  will  be  found  in  Alison's  History  of 
Europe,  vol.  vi,  p.  667). 


CHAPTER   VIII 

1805 

EXTRACTS  FROM  LETTERS  ADDRESSED  TO  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 
BY  COUNT  VORONTZOFF,  THE  RUSSIAN  AMBASSADOR  IN  LONDON, 
RELATIVE  TO  THE  FURTHER  PHASES  OF  THE  NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  AN 
ALLIANCE  WITH  RUSSIA. ^-REFUSAL  OF  ENGLAND  TO  EVACUATE 
MALTA  OR  ALTER  THE  MARITIME  CODE. 

LONDON,  ^th  January  (1805). 

I  SAW  Mr  Pitt  this  morning  with  M.  de  Novo- 
siltzoff'.  He  told  us  that  Buonaparte's  letter,*  and 
the  answer  here  given  to  it,  oblige  him  somewhat  to 
change  the  plan  which  had  been  as  good  as  agreed 
upon  between  us.  It  is  necessary,  he  said,  both  in 
England  and  abroad  to  prove  that  what  we  desire  is 
a  sure  and  stable  peace  for  the  future  independence 
and  security  of  Europe.  This  being  the  case,  pro- 

*  Proposing  peace  with  England.  This  proposal  was  thus  referred  to  in  George 
Ill's  speech  from  the  throne  on  the  15th  of  Jaauary,  1805  : 

'  I  have  received  pacific  overtures  from  the  chief  of  the  French  Government,  and 
have  in  consequence  expressed  my  earnest  desire  to  embrace  the  first  opportunity  of 
restoring  the  blessings  of  peace,  on  such  grounds  as  may  be  consistent  with  the 
permanent  interest  and  safety  of  my  dominions  ;  but  these  objects  are  closely  con- 
nected with  the  general  peace  of  Europe.  I  have,  therefore,  not  thought  it  right  to 
enter  into  any  more  particular  explanation  without  previous  communication  with 
those  Powers  on  the  Continent  with  whom  I  am  engaged  in  confidential  intercourse 
and  connection  with  a  view  to  that  important  object,  and  especially  the  Emperor  of 
Russia,  who  has  given  the  strongest  proofs  of  the  wise  and  dignified  sentiments 
with  which  he  is  animated,  and  of  the  warm  interest  which  he  takes  in  the  safety 
and  independence  of  Europe. ' 


70        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

posals  must  be  made  to  Buonaparte  that  he  should 
give  up  part  of  his  possessions  and  abandon  his  inter- 
ference in  the  affairs  of  the  neighbouring  Govern- 
ments. No  one,  Mr  Pitt  added,  is  better  qualified  to 
make  such  proposals  than  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  who 
is  neither  a  neighbour  nor  an  enemy  of  France,  and 
who  only  desires  to  obtain  a  permanent  peace  for 
Europe  ;  the  proposals  should  be  clear,  precise,  and 
categorical,  and  made  so  as  to  exclude  all  negotiation, 
and  to  be  either  accepted  or  rejected.  If  Buonaparte 
accepts  them,  he  should  be  required  to  evacuate,  within 
a  brief  specified  period,  the  territories  he  has  no  right 
to  possess ;  if  he  rejects  them,  hostilities  should  be 
begun  at  once.  We  should,  he  concluded,  in  order  to 
be  prepared  for  the  latter  contingency,  work  without 
intermission,  and  have  everything  ready  for  crossing 
the  frontier. 

LONDON,  -fa  January  1805. 

After  many  delays  I  am  at  length  able  to  send 
this  by  courier.  The  weight  of  business  which  falls 
upon  Mr  Pitt  from  all  sides,  and  the  quite  recent 
entrance  of  Lord  Mulgrave  into  the  Cabinet,*  are  the 
chief  cause  of  these  delays.  Buonaparte's  proposal 
of  peace  has  also  partly  contributed  to  them.  It  is 
not  possible  for  an  English  Ministry  to  reject  an  offer 
of  peace  without  a  motive  ;  the  country  would  not 
allow  it  to  continue  the  war  at  its  pleasure.  The 
Government  must  therefore  show  that  it  desires  an 
honourable  peace  and  one  that  would  ensure  the 

*  As  Foreign  Secretary. 


TROOPS  FOR  THE  COALITION  71 

safety  of  Europe.  If  Buonaparte  rejects  their  con- 
ditions, the  nation  will  support  the  Ministry  in  a 
continuance  of  the  war. 

You  will  see  from  my  official  letter,  and  especially 
from  the  draft  Treaty  which  accompanies  it,  that 
there  is  a  talk  of  from  four  to  five  hundred  thousand 
men  for  acting  against  France.  This  arises  from  the 
usual  practice  in  time  of  war ;  the  enemy  exaggerates 
the  number  of  his  troops,  and  one's  allies  even  surpass 
this  exaggeration ;  and  as  some  surprise  is  felt  at  the 
little  result  which  has  been  attained,  it  is  thought 
that  the  number  of  troops  must  be  increased.  It  is  a 
known  fact  that  during  the  terrible  campaign  at  the 
be<rinnin£  of  the  last  war,  when  Prussia  received 

o  o 

subsidies  from  England  for  a  great  army  which  was  to 
take  the  offensive,  she  never  had  half  of  the  effective 
troops  for  which  she  was  paid.  Instead  of  having 
80,000  men,  she  had  less  than  40,000,  and  she  wasted 
them  during  the  whole  campaign  in  besieging 
Mayence,  which  could  have  been  taken  by  30,000 
men  in  less  than  six  weeks  if  the  King  of  Prussia  had 
acted  honestly.  Austria,  too,  during  the  first  two 
campaigns,  never  had  more  than  40,000  men  in  Italy, 
and  during  the  last  campaign  60,000,  while  the  Vienna 
Cabinet  alleged  that  60,000  were  engaged  in  the  first 
campaigns  and  100,000  in  the  subsequent  ones.  The 
same  happened  in  Swabia,  in  Switzerland,  and  on  the 
Upper  Rhine.  This  is  the  reason  of  'the  obstinacy 
with  which  the  Government  here  insists  on  armies 
being  employed  in  such  great  numbers,  though  they 
will  find  it  difficult  to  obtain  subsistence. 


7*        ME.UOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

I  must  here  tell  you  that  all  you  will  find  in  the 
official  despatches  of  the  English  Ministry  as  to 
arran<rinir  indemnities  for  Prussia  and  placing  inde- 

o      o  i  o 

pendent  Powers  between  Holland  and  France  and  on 
the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine  are  not  really  matters  to 
which  importance  is  attached  here.  Mr  Pitt  has 
often  told  me,  and  repeated  to  me  yesterday,  that 
these  expedients  are  proposed  because  no  better  ones 
have  been  found,  but  that  if  any  plan  more  likely  to 
be  effective  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  France  in  her 
ancient  limits  could  be  devised,  the  British  Cabinet 
would  gladly  accept  it,  as  it  desired  nothing  more  than 
the  peace  of  Europe  and  the  maintenance  of  a  perma- 
nent friendship  with  Russia. 

LONDON,  26  January  (N.S.)  1805. 

Russia  and  England  should,  and  can,  save  Europe. 
England  ardently  wishes  it,  and  will  do  her  utmost  to 
co-operate  with  Russia  in  this  holy  work  ;  it  only 
depends  therefore  upon  the  latter  to  employ  the 
means  with  which  England  has  decided  to  furnish  her. 
The  King,  Mr  Pitt,  all  that  is  great  and  enlightened 
in  the  country,  and,  which  is  more  important,  the 
whole  nation  (for  this  is  the  only  country  in  the  world 
where  the  people  are  not  treated  like  a  flock  of  sheep) 
desire  a  permanent  alliance  with  Russia.  ... 

Lord  G.  L.  Gower,  in  a  cipher  despatch  dated  the 
12th  or  13th  October  (O.S.)  says  that  Count  Stadion,* 
after  having  received  despatches  from  his  Court,  had 
stated  to  him  that  the  Emperor,  his  master,  had  so 

*  The  Austrian  Ambassador  at  St  Petersburg. 


AUSTRIA  JOINS  THE  COALITION  73 

long  hesitated  as  to  the  course  he  should  adopt  in 
present  circumstances,  because  for  two  years  he  had 
seen  an  intimate  alliance  between  Russia,  Prussia,  and 
France,  the  result  of  which  was  that  these  three 
Powers  disposed  of  everything  in  Germany  in  a 
manner  prejudicial  to  the  power  and  even  the  security 
of  Russia  ;  but  that  now  Russia  prefers  to  follow 
another  system  more  in  conformity  with  the  welfare 
of  Europe,  being  calculated  to  restore  to  it  the  inde- 
pendence of  which  France  has  deprived  it,  the 
Emperor,  his  master,  no  longer  doubted  the  good-will 
of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  and  was  resolved  to  second 
his  views,  provided  he  be  supported  by  Russian  troops 
and  English  money.*  This  despatch,  which  Lord 
Mulgrave  showed  me,  and  which  Mr  Pitt  afterwards 
showed  our  friend, t  has  given  us  all  great  pleasure. 
Here  they  are  ready  to  do  everything. 

LONDON,  -£-§-  April  1805. 

I  am  sending  by  to-day's  courier  a  despatch  to  M. 
de  Novosiltzoff  announcing  that  the  Court  here 
acquiesces  in  the  proposals  he  is  to  make  to  the 
Corsican,  whom  he  will  find  in  Italy.  ...  I  take  this 
opportunity  of  repeating  that  I  intend  to  leave  this 
country  next  spring.  Matters  are  tending  towards  a 
coalition  or  a  peace,  and  this  should  be  settled  before 
the  winter,  after  which  my  stay  here  will  almost  cease 
to  be  necessary.  If  they  send  in  my  place  a  man  of 
frank  and  straightforward  character,  not  given  to 

*  The  preliminary  Convention  for  an  alliance  between  Austria  and  Russia  against 
France  was  signed  on  the  25th  October  1804. 

t  M.  de  Xovosiltzoff. 


74        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

compliments,  ho  will  gain  the  confidence  of  the  King, 
of  the  Ministry,  and  of  English  society  in  general. 
An  intriguer  and  a  flatterer  would  only  inspire  con- 
tempt. 

LONDON,  Wth  May  1805. 
(Written  in  sympathetic  ink). 

I  am  sorry  to  see  our  people  do  not  understand  the 
constitution  of  this  country,  which  is  very  different 
from  its  theory,  as  stated  in  the  works  of  Blackstone 
and  his  abbreviator  Delolme.  It  rests  with  the  nation 
to  decide  as  to  any  point  which  it  may  deem  absolutely 
necessary,  and  no  administration,  however  strong, 
would  dare  to  go  against  that  decision  :  if  it  did,  it 
would  be  overthrown,  prosecuted,  and  punished,  and 
what  it  had  arranged  against  the  public  wish  would  be 
disavowed  and  annulled.  Such  a  question  is  that  of 
the  restoration  of  Malta,  the  possession  of  which 
entails  much  expense  on  England,  but  which  she  feels 
it  indispensable  to  keep  at  any  cost,  in  order  that  the 
Mediterranean  should  not  become  a  lake  belonging  to 
France,  who  would  be  mistress  of  all  its  shores,  and 
thus  be  placed  in  a  position  to  attack  Sicily,  the 
Ionian  Islands,  the  Morea,  Crete,  and  above  all  Egypt, 
whose  possession  by  the  French  troops  would  induce 
them  before  long  to  attack  the  British  possessions  in 
India.  If  Lord  G.  L.  Gowcr  had  agreed  to  the 
evacuation  of  Malta  and  the  new  maritime  code  which 
is  again  brought  forward  by  our  Government,  his  action 
would  certainly  not  have  been  ratified  here.  He  would 
have  been  recalled  with  disgrace,  perhaps  prosecuted, 


REFUSAL  OF  ENGLAND  TO  EVACUATE  MALTA      75 

arid  would  have  lost  all  his  reputation.  .  .  .  You  tell 
me  that  if  England  will  not  yield  Russia  will  not 
ratify  the  Convention.  That  being  so,  I  can  only 
regard  the  negotiations  as  broken  off.  The  Continent 
will  be  enslaved,  and  this  country  will  either  make 
peace  before  Christmas  and  keep  Malta,  or  will  con- 
tinue a  defensive  war  which  will  cost  it  little  money 
and  which  will  preserve  the  rock  which  is  the  cause  of 
all  the  existing  difficulties. 

LONDON,  T"F  May  1805. 

.  .  .  The  English  nation  is  quite  decided  not  to 
give  up  Malta.  I  have  been  here  twenty  years  ;  I 
have  done  my  best  to  make  myself  acquainted  with 
the  country,  the  Government,  and  the  national  char- 
acter, and  when  I  say  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  the 
Government  to  make  this  cession,  I  express  not  only 
the  feeling  of  the  Ministry  and  the  most  respectable 
members  of  the  opposition,  such  as  Earl  Spencer  and 
Lord  Granville,  but  also  the  unanimous  sentiment  of 
all  the  most  estimable  and  independent  persons  that 
influence  public  opinion.  ...  I  may  be  blamed  for 
not  having  in  my  official  reports  stated  that  England 
would  never  consent  to  the  evacuation  of  Malta,  but  I 
could  not  anticipate  that  such  a  demand  would  be 
made  by  our  Government,  as  the  matter  was  never 
mentioned  to  me,  and  in  the  conferences  which  M.  de 
Novosiltzoff  had  with  Mr  Pitt,  both  alone  and  in  my 
presence,  there  was  no  question  of  England  abandon- 
ing Malta.  .  .  .  The  proposed  new  code  of  maritime 
law  is  equally  out  of  the  question,  and  Lord  Harrowby 


76        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

assured  me  that  if  Lord  G.  L.  Gower  had  yielded  on 
these  two  points  he  would  have  been  recalled,  and 
never  again  employed  in  the  diplomatic  service. 
The  Government  here  would  have  preferred  that  he 
should  have  altogether  refused  to  accept  the  note 
you  addressed  to  him  on  the  subject  of  the  maritime 
code,  and  that  he  should  have  replied  to  you  verbally 
that  Great  Britain  simply  adheres  to  her  practice 
durino-  the  last  two  centuries  in  this  matter,  which  is 

O 

in  accordance  with  her  treaties  with  Russia,  Sweden, 
Denmark,  and  Holland.  The  result  of  accepting  the 
Russian  proposal,  added  Lord  Harrowby,  would  be  to 
give  France  facilities  for  maintaining  and  augmenting 
her  naval  forces  to  the  detriment  of  England  ;  and 
this  is  a  further  reason  why  England  will  never  accept 
it  at  any  cost.  France  may  obtain  supplies  for  her 
navy  from  other  countries  in  time  of  peace,  but 
England  will  never  allow  her  to  obtain  them  in  time 

O 

of  war. 

I  have  done  all  that  was  humanly  possible  to  miti- 
gate the  bad  impression  produced  by  my  communica- 
tion on  the  King,  Mr  Pitt,  and  Lord  Harrowby,  who, 
though  still  too  unwell  to  take  an  active  post  in  the 
administration,  assists  at  the  Cabinet  Councils,  where 
he  possesses  the  influence  given  him  by  his  great 
talents  and  the  extreme  deference  paid  to  his  advice 
by  Mr  Pitt.  I  begin  to  hope  that  some  means  may 
be  found  of  avoiding  a  rupture  of  the  negotiations, 
which  during  the  first  four  days  was  almost  decided 
upon.  I  endeavoured  to  gain  time  by  persuading 
them  not  to  send  an  unfavourable  answer  at  once,  and 


REFUSAL  OF  ENGLAND  TO  EVACUATE  MALTA      77 

meanwhile  I  have  had  several  conferences  with  Lord 
Mulgrave  and  Lord  Harrowby.  The  latter  seemed 
somewhat  shaken  on  my  pointing  out  that  if  the  pro- 
posed alliance,  between  Russia  and  England  should 
fail  by  the  absolute  rejection  of  the  Emperor's 
demands,  the  result  would  be  the  enslavement  of  the 
Continent.  He  said  he  would  think  about  the 
matter  further,  but  added  that  he  had  never  seen  his 
friend  Mr  Pitt,  with  whom  he  has  been  on  intimate 
terms  for  more  than  twenty  years,  so  deeply  grieved 
as  he  was  at  the  difference  between  the  two  Courts  ; 
but  he  was  unshakeable,  and  he  never  shrank  from 
any  danger  when  he  saw  it  was  necessary  to  incur  it 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  honour  and  the  interests 
of  his  country.  As  to  the  King,  I  have  employed 
the  services  of  Count  Minister,  in  whom  his  Majesty 
has  the  greatest  confidence.  He  undertook  the  task 
with  zeal,  and  spoke  to  the  King  some  days  ago  in 
order  to  prevent  a  rupture  between  the  two  countries, 
and  with  some  success,  but  as  I  knew  the  Ministry 
would  have  to  be  at  the  fetes  at  Windsor,  and  the 
King,  who  is  incessantly  occupied  with  public  business, 
would  be  sure  to  have  private  conferences  with  Mr 
Pitt  and  Lord  Harrowby  at  which  the  question  of  the 
provisional  treaty  made  at  St  Petersburg  would 
probably  be  finally  settled,  I  begged  Count  Minister 
to  let  me  know  how  things  are  going  on.  Last 
night  I  received  a  note  from  him  by  express  which 
gives  me  some  hope.  I  shall  probably  see  Lord 
Mulgrave  to-morrow  or  the  day  after,  when  I  will 
have  the  reply  of  the  Government.  .  .  . 


78         MEMOIRS  OF  I'RINCE  ADAM  CZARTORY8KI 

p.S. — Jf  May. — The  gleam  of  hope  that  some  com- 
promise might  be  arrived  at  here  to  satisfy  our 
Government  has  disappeared.  I  learn  that  Mr  Pitt 
has  looked  for  one  in  vain,  and  that  in  order  not  to  be 
disavowed  and  blamed  by  the  nation  he  will  be 
obliged  to  give  up  the  co-operation  of  the  Continental 
Powers,  as  our  Court  has  peremptorily  declared  that 
it  will  not  ratify  the  Treaty  unless  this  country  will 
abandon  Malta.  They  have  begun  to  prepare  a  long 
reply,  which  will  be  in  great  detail.  I  do  not  think  it 
will  be  handed  to  me  before  five  or  six  days  hence. 

[The  Treaty  of  the  llth  of  April,  1805,  was  not 
ratified,  owing  to  the  difference  between  Russia  and 
England  as  to  Malta  and  the  maritime  code,  until  the 
month  of  July  following,  and  the  Russian  Govern- 
ment only  consented  to  ratify  it  after  placing  on 
record  its  opinion  that  the  restoration  of  Malta  and 
the  alteration  of  the  maritime  code  would  be  in  con- 
formity with  '  the  principles  of  equity  and  justice,'  and 
would  be  'the  most  efficacious  means  of  securing  the 
success  of  the  cause.'  (Despatch  from  Lord  G.  L. 
Gower  to  Lord  Mulgrave  of  the  21st  July  1805,  and 
note  from  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  of  the  same  date, 
both  in  the  Record  Office.)]. 


CHAPTER  IX 

1805 

INTERVIEW    BETWEEN    THE    RUSSIAN    ENVOYS    AND    MR  PITT  (SEPTEMBER 
180n)  AS  TO  THE  QUESTION  OF  GIVING  UP  HANOVER  TO  PRUSSIA. 

THE  negotiations  for  bringing  to  a  practical  issue  the 
convention  of  the  llth  of  April  having  been  procras- 
tinated through  the  refusal  of  England  to  give  up 
Malta  and  alter  the  maritime  code,  Alexander,  who 
had  meanwhile  begun  to  disregard  the  advice  of  his 
Ministers,  and  to  take  the  government  of  Russia  into 
his  own  hands,  entered  with  Austria  into  a  campaign 
against  France,  and  made  overtures  to  Prussia  with  a 
view  to  drawing  her  into  the  alliance.  Prussia  asked 
as  the  price  of  her  co-operation  that  England  should 
give  up  Hanover  to  her  and  provide  her  and  her 
German  allies  with  subsidies  to  enable  them  to  carry 
on  the  war.  Another  special  envoy,  M.  d'Oubril,  was 
then  sent  by  the  Russian  Government  to  London. 
The  following  extracts  from  a  letter  from  Count 
VorontzofF  describe  the  interview  which  took  place 
with  Mr  Pitt  on  this  occasion  : — 

LONDON,  -i-£  September  1805. 

I   am   very  grateful  to  you  for    having   sent  M. 
d'Oubril  to  me.     He  has  given  me  explanations  as  to 


8o         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  papers  of  which  he  is  the  bearer,  and  which  have 
caused  me  inexpressible  astonishment.  But  the  thing 
is  done,  and  nothing  remains  but  to  bow  to  the  decrees 
of  Providence,  which  seems  still  to  protect  the  Corsican. 
I  feared  the  Berlin  interview,  and  my  presentiment  is 
verified.  All  the  weapons  of  intrigue  and  sycophancy 
must  have  been  employed  against  weakness  and 
irresolution.  I  know  too  well  your  judgment  and 
your  elevation  of  mind  to  doubt  for  an  instant  that 
you  have  used  all  your  efforts  to  prevent  the  evil  that 
has  been  done,  and  I  pity  you  very  sincerely  at  not 
having  been  able  to  prevent  it.  As  your  private 
letter  did  not  contain  anything  that  I  could  not 
communicate  to  Mr  Pitt,  and  it  referred  me  for 
further  explanations  to  M.  d'Oubril,  I  sent  it  to  Mr 
Pitt  with  a  request  that  he  should  return  it  to  me, 
and  that  he  should  defer  his  opinion  on  the  papers  I 
would  communicate  to  him  the  same  morning  until 
after  hearing  the  explanations  which  M.  d'Oubril  and 
myself  would  give  him  on  all  the  points  which  might 
seem  new  to  him.  He  returned  me  your  letter  with 
thanks,  assuring  me  that  it  had  not  been  communicated 
to  anybody,  and  that  he  would  be  very  glad  to  see  M. 
d'Oubril.  Though  prepared  to  receive  a  disagreeable 
communication,  and  accustomed  to  master  his  counten- 
ance, one  could  see  his  emotion  on  reading  the 
documents  I  gave  him,  which  he  handed  to  Lord 
Mulgrave  after  he  had  finished  them.  The  proposal 
that  the  King  should  exchange  a  patrimony  which  his 
ancestors  had  enjoyed  for  more  than  a  thousand  years 
struck  him  deeply.  He  told  me  that,  knowing  his 


THE  RUSSIAN  ENVOYS  AND  MR  PITT  81 

Majesty's  attachment  for  his  German  subjects  and  his 
inflexible  character,  he  would  break  off  everything  if 
such  a  proposal  were  made  to  him  ;  and  what  is 
worse,  being  old,  infirm,  and  extremely  sensitive,  it 
might  even  place  his  life  in  danger.  M.  d'Oubril  and 
myself  then  pointed  out  that  matters  had  arrived  at 
such  a  point  that  everything  must  be  done  to  avoid 
so  perilous  a  contingency  as  Prussia  remaining  in- 
active, or  even  turning  to  the  side  of  France,  after 
the  disasters  suffered  by  the  Austrian  army  through 
the  folly  or  the  treason  of  Mack  ;*  that  it  was  therefore 
necessary  to  bring  her  over  to  our  side  at  any  cost 
during  the  period  of  four  weeks  given  to  Buonaparte 
to  arrive  at  a  decision  ;  and  that  the  demands  on 
which  Prussia  insists  should  not  be  flatly  rejected. 
Mr  Pitt  replied  that  though  England  would  also  have 
reason  to  complain  of  the  other  articles  of  the  pro- 
posed Convention,  she  will  not  object  to  them.  '  All 
the  subsidies  that  Prussia  asks  for  herself,  for  Saxony, 
for  Hesse,  and  for  the  Duke  of  Brunswick  will  be 
given  ;  we  shall  be  delighted  to  agree  to  any  other 
indemnity  that  Prussia  may  wish  to  have,  but  as  for 
the  exchange  of  Hanover,  no  Minister  would  be 
imprudent  enough  to  make  such  a  proposal  to  the 
King,  and  great  care  will  be  taken  always  to  conceal 
it  from  him.'  He  added  that  in  all  these  proposals  of 
peace  that  are  being  made  to  Buonaparte  there  is  a  sort 
of  affectation  not  to  speak  of  England,  as  if  the  Powers 

*  The  Austrians  under  Mack,  after  occupying  the  line  of  the  Iller  from  Ulm  to 
Memmingen,  were  outmanoeuvred  by  Napoleon,  who  gained  a  position  on  the  Danube 
in  the  Austrian  rear,  upon  which  Mack  surrendered  at  Ulm  and  the  Austrian  army 
was  broken  up. 

VOL.  II.  F 


8a         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

wanted  to  make  him  believe  that  they  did  not  trouble 
themselves  about  her.  This  did  not  produce  much  effect 
upon  the  Ministry,  as  England  does  not  fear  France, 
but  wishes  to  liberate  the  Continent ;  but  it  will  pro- 
duce a  bad  effect  in  the  country  if  Buonaparte  publishes 
the  proposals  which  have  been  made  to  him  at  the  very 
time  when  Parliament  has  to  be  asked  for  enormous 
subsidies  for  Powers  which  ostentatiously  affect  com- 
plete indifference  as  regards  England.  I  endeavoured 
to  account  for  this  omission  by  the  urgent  need  of 
bringing  over  Prussia  to  the  alliance,  and  d'Oubril 
justly  remarked  that  if  there  had  been  any  question 
of  inserting  a  provision  as  to  the  interests  of  England, 
the  limit  of  four  weeks  would  not  have  been  sufficient, 
as  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  write  to  London 
and  wait  for  an  answer,  which  would  depend  on 
favourable  winds,  and  might  not  come  for  months. 
This  would  have  been  playing  into  the  hands  of 
^Prussia,  who  wishes  to  gain  time  and  put  off  as  long 
as  possible  her  final  decision.  Mr  Pitt  afterwards 
admitted  to  me  that  this  explanation  was  a  valid  one, 
but  he  added  that  it  could  not  be  produced  in  Parlia- 
ment. He  further  objected  to  the  passage  in  our 
official  despatch  in  which  occurs  the  following  phrase: 
'  Moreover,  the  extraordinary  defeats  suffered  by  the 
Austrian  armies  might  have  given  them  a  right  to 
regard  themselves  as  freed  from  this  obligation,'  i.e., 
that  of  not  making  peace  except  in  concert  with  an 
ally.  He  remarked  that  if,  instead  of  gaining  a 
signal  victory  and  depriving  the  enemy  of  nineteen 
ships  of  the  line,  the  English  fleet  had  been  beaten 


THE  RUSSIAN  ENVOYS  AND  MR  PITT  83 

at  the  battle  of  Trafalgar,  and  England  had  then 
negotiated  a  separate  peace,  thinking  herself  freed 
from  all  engagements  to  the  allies  with  whom  she  has 
treaties  stipulating  that  peace  should  not  be  made 
except  by  common  agreement,  would  such  a  course 
have  been  thought  right  at  St  Petersburg  and 
Vienna  ?  As  to  this  point  we  fell  back  on  the 
necessity  of  pleasing  Prussia,  in  order  to  draw  her 
into  the  war,  as  we  were  persuaded  that  Buonaparte 
would  reject  the  conditions  of  peace,  and  the  Court  of 
Berlin  would  then  be  forced  to  show  its  hand.  We 
added  that  the  crudity  of  the  expressions  to  which  he 
objected  was  to  be  excused  by  the  extraordinary 
urgency  of  the  case,  as  the  Emperor  was  only  a  few 
days  at  Berlin  and  Potsdam,  during  which  there  was 
a  constant  struggle  with  the  Prussian  Minister,  so 
that  there  was  really  no  time  to  weigh  words.  After 
we  had  left  Mr  Pitt,  M.  d'Oubril  suggested  to  me 
that  I  should  soften  some  of  the  expressions  in 
our  official  despatch  which  had  shocked  Mr  Pitt,  and 
I  accordingly  went  back  to  him  to  ask  whether  he 
would  agree  to  this  being  done.  He  replied  that  this 
would  make  his  task  much  easier  with  his  colleagues 

o 

in  the  Cabinet.  At  length  everything  was  pretty 
well  accepted  here,  though  with  evident  repugnance, 
except  the  exchange  of  the  electorate,  as  to  which  Mr 
Pitt  spoke  to  me  very  strongly  on  various  occasions 
in  several  conversations  which  I  had  with  him.  He 
repeated  to  me  that  such  a  proposal  might  either  kill 
the  King  or  drive  him  mad,  and  that  after  losing  a 
sovereign  so  much  esteemed  and  cherished,  the  country 


84         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

would  no  longer  consent  to  bear  the  enormous  sacri- 
fices of  money  it  was  making  for  continental  wars.  To 
provoke  so  fatal  a  crisis  as  the  death  or  insanity  of  the 
Kino-  would  therefore  be  most  ruinous  to  the  interests 

o 

of  Europe. 

I  conjure  you  to  weigh  well  the  considerations 
above  stated,  and  I  hope  I  shall  be  spared  the  pain  of 
presenting1  the  memorandum  which  is  being  prepared 
at  Berlin  and  which  will  be  rejected  here.  The  weak- 
ness with  which  the  Emperor  has,  in  order  to  please 
Prussia,  lent  himself  to  a  communication  so  offensive 
to  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  and  so  contrary  even  to 
the  true  interests  of  Russia,  will  be  even  more  felt 
here  when  his  Ambassador  presents  a  detailed  memor- 
andum on  the  subject. 

(Subsequently  a  despatch,  dated  ^^°^r  1805,  a 
copy  of  which  is  in  the  Record  Office,  was  addressed  to 
Count  Vorontzoff  by  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski,  urging 
that  the  cession  of  Hanover  to  Prussia  was  a  conditio 
sine  qud  non  of  obtaining  the  Prussian  alliance  ;  but 
England  persisted  in  her  refusal  to  consent  to  the 
cession.  The  result  was  that  Prussia  remained 
neutral  during  the  war,  and  afterwards  obtained 
Hanover  from  Napoleon  as  a  bribe  for  her  alliance.) 


CHAPTER  X 

1805 

CONTINUATION     AND     CONCLUSION     OF     THE    MEMOIRS. GENERAL    VIEW 

OF  THE  POLICY    OF    ALEXANDER  I  TOWARDS    NAPOLEON. REMARKS 

ON  THIERS'  HISTORY  OF    THE  CONSULATE  AND    THE    EMPIRE. THE 

ABB6  PIATTOLI. BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ. 

IN  order  to  understand  the  political  movements  of 
that  time  and  the  animosity  with  which  all  Europe 
wished  to  fight  Napoleon,  notwithstanding  the  defeats 
he  had  inflicted  upon  her,  it  is  necessary  to  recollect 
what  was  the  state  of  public  opinion  in  Europe. 
Those  who  had  become  enthusiastic  at  the  outbreak 
of  the  French  Revolution  had  looked  upon  Buona- 
parte as  the  hero  of  liberalism  ;  he  seemed  to  them 
destined  by  Providence  to  make  the  cause  of  justice 
triumph  and  to  remove  by  great  actions  and  immense 
successes  the  innumerable  obstacles  presented  by  facts 
to  the  wishes  of  oppressed  nations.  When  they  saw 
that  Napoleon  did  not  fulfil  their  expectations  their 
enthusiasm  diminished.  The  French  Republic  and 
the  Directory  had  no  doubt  acted  culpably  and  fool- 
ishly, but  though  they  were  deceived  as  to  the  means, 
they  remained  faithful  to  the  end ;  they  had  done  the 
greatest  harm  to  the  cause  of  freedom,  but  had  not 


86        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

deserted  it.  They  might  in  course  of  time  have 
learnt  the  right  means  of  doing  justice  and  emancipat- 
ing nations ;  but  no  such  illusions  were  possible  when 
Napoleon  became  the  ruler  of  France.  Each  of  his 
words  and  actions  showed  that  he  would  act  only  by 
the  force  of  bayonets  and  of  numbers.  By  ceasing  to 
be  the  champion  of  justice  and  the  hope  of  oppressed 
peoples,  he  lost  one  of  the  strongest  elements  of  the 
power  of  the  French  Republic,  and  descended  to  the 
class  of  ambitious  tyrants,  with  immense  talents  it  is 
true,  but  with  motives  as  mean  as  theirs.  This  made 
other  Powers  attack  him  without  scruple,  as  a  scourge 
of  humanity ;  and  the  general  opinion  of  Europe  on 
this  subject  spread  to  Russia,  thereby  drawing  the 
Cabinet  of  St  Petersburg  into  a  course  of  policy  in 
which  it  lost  sight  of  the  part  Russia  was  really  called 
upon  to  play. 

The  peace  of  Amiens,  which  had  been  hailed  with 
equal  enthusiasm  on  both  sides  of  the  channel,  had 
been  broken  by  an  act  which  Napoleon  resisted  with 
his  usual  violence,  but  in  which  he  had  right  on  his 
side.  He  demanded  the  immediate  evacuation  of 
Malta,  which  England  had  only  occupied  on  the 
express  condition  that  she  should  withdraw  from  it 
when  peace  was  concluded.  It  had  been  agreed  on 
all  sides  that  the  future  destiny  of  this  island  was  to 
be  regulated  by  the  Powers  in  concert.  England 
haughtily  refused  to  execute  this  clause  of  the  treaty, 
and  the  war  was  at  once  resumed.  At  this  time 
Lord  G.  L.  Gower,*  the  British  Ambassador  appointed 

*  Father  of  the  present  Lord  Granville. 


CONCLUSION  OF  THE  MEMOIRS  87 

by  the  new  Ministry,  arrived  at  St  Petersburg.  He  was 
then  a  young  man,  but  he  had  much  natural  prudence, 
and  an  instinct  of  propriety  which  manifested  itself  in 
every  word  he  uttered,  and  in  the  manner  in  which  he 
did  business.  He  showed  me  entire  confidence,  and 
even  sincere  friendship.  He  was  accompanied  by  Sir 
Charles  Stewart,  who  had  already  had  an  opportunity 
of  acquiring  diplomatic  skill  in  various  embassies 
where  he  occupied  the  post  of  secretary.  These  two 
personages  were  afterwards  well  known  in  Paris, 
where  they  repeatedly  succeeded  each  other.  Lord 
G.  L.  Gower,  who  afterwards  became  Earl  Granville, 
allied  himself  with  the  Whigs,  while  Sir  Charles 
Stewart,  who  became  Lord  Stewart,*  remained  with 
the  Tory  party.  Lord  G.  L.  Gower  arrived  in 
Russia  with  important  despatches  intended  to  draw 
the  Emperor  into  an  alliance  and  active  military  co- 
operation against  France.  The  Austrian  Govern- 
ment, whose  leading  Minister  was  at  that  time  M.  de 

o 

Cobentzel,  at  the  same  time  sent  another  ambassador, 
Count  Stadion,  to  sound  the  real  intentions  of  Russia. 
The  English  representative  spoke  with  as  much  deci- 
sion as  the  Austrian  one  did  with  timidity  and  reti- 
cence. The  latter  was  in  constant  alarm  lest  he 
should  compromise  himself  by  his  proceedings  being 
known  too  soon  in  London,  and  we  had  for  some  time 
to  conceal  them  from  the  English  Government, 
thereby  incurring  its  reproaches,  of  which  Count 
Simon  Vorontzoff  made  himself  perhaps  too  devoted 
an  organ. 

*  Afterwards  Marquis  of  Londonderry. 


88        MEMOIRS  OF  PJRIJtCH  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

In  descending  into  the  arena  Napoleon  had  cast 
aside  everything  that  could  have  led  people  to  believe 
that  he  had  a  high  and  generous  mission.  He  was  a 
Hercules  abandoning  his  task  of  succouring  the 
oppressed  and  thinking  only  how  to  employ  his 
strength  in  order  to  subjugate  the  world  for  his 
own  advantage.  His  sole  idea  was  to  re-establish 
absolute  power  everywhere,  with  its  old  forms  and  the 
greater  part  of  its  inconveniences.  So  long  as  he 
governed,  his  ambition  and  injustice  eclipsed  those  of 
all  other  enemies  of  mankind ;  he  seemed  like  a 
sinister  and  devouring  flame  rising  above  all  Europe. 
In  every  country  men  who  valued  their  national 
dignity,  who  were  brave  and  high-principled,  were 
unanimous  in  their  opposition  to  him.  He  had  no 
supporters  anywhere  except  among  those  in  whom 
fear  was  the  strongest  motive.  As  soon  as  this  feeling 
began  to  subside,  there  was  but  one  voice  of  opposition 
to  the  man  who,  after  having  made  himself  an 
ordinary  despot,  had  everywhere  wished  to  impose 
his  yoke  on  the  other  European  sovereigns. 

The  policy  of  Russia  from  the  beginning  of  the 
reign  of  Alexander  could,  after  what  I  have  said  of 
his  opinions,  only  be  one  of  conciliation  between 
parties  and  Powers  whose  policy  bore  the  character 
of  mutual  exasperation.  It  was  with  this  object  that 
the  Emperor  had  allowed  himself  to  be  drawn  by 
Prussia  into  taking  part  in  the  complicated  question 
of  indemnities  in  Germany.  The  parties  interested 
in  this  matter  showed  a  partiality  and  a  disposition  to 
give  and  accept  bribes  which  did  them  little  honour, 


POLICY  OF  ALEXANDER  I  TOWARDS  NAPOLEON    89 

and  were  not  at  all  in  accordance  with  the  Emperor's 
pure  intentions.  While  supporting  the  claims  of 
princes  who  were  related  to  him,  and  somewhat  too 
partial  to  Prussia,  his  sole  object  was  to  rescue 
Germany  with  as  little  injustice  as  possible  from  the 
confusion  into  which  she  had  been  thrown  by  the 
Revolution  and  the  French  wars. 

The  spirit  which  at  that  time  animated  the  Russian 
Cabinet  rendered  it  eminently  suited  to  speak  to 
inflamed  Europe  in  terms  of  peace  and  conciliation. 
The  character  of  the  sovereign  and  of  his  Ministers, 
which  always  has  an  influence  on  policy,  must  have 
added  weight  to  the  conduct  which  was  then  adopted 
by  the  Cabinet  of  St  Petersburg,  and  its  words  would 
doubtless  have  been  received  with  general  readiness 
and  confidence. 

After  the  retirement  of  Count  Panin,  whose 
principles  and  manner  might  have  inspired  foreigners 
with  distrust,  Count  Kotchoubey,  who  succeeded  him, 
and  especially  the  Chancellor  Count  Vorontzoff,  pos- 
sessed in  a  high  degree  the  qualities  necessary  for 
ensuring  their  acceptance  as  mediators  by  the  parties 
most  hostile  to  each  other.  The  Chancellor  sincerely 
wished  to  remove  difficulties,  to  tranquillise  animosities, 
and  to  do  justice  while  hearing  both  sides.  His  lan- 
guage was  always  calm,  conciliatory,  and  dignified, 
never  showing  irritation  at  the  obstacles  he  met 
with. 

On  each  of  the  occasions  which  divided  Europe  and 
constantly  fomented  war,  Russia  had  repeated  the 
offer  of  her  mediation ;  it  was  never,  however,  sin- 


90        MEMOIRS  ObJ  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ccrely  considered  and  was  always  rejected,  especially 
by  France. 

The  history  of  the  Consulate  and  the  Empire  is 
the  history  of  Europe  up  to  the  end  of  the  reign  of 
Napoleon.  This  work,  which  may  be  called  immense, 
inspires  an  interest  which  is  always  sustained  by  the 
ability  of  the  narrative ;  it  is  full  of  details  calculated 
to  interest  and  instruct  the  reader,  who  is  lost  in  admira- 
tion before  so  much  practical  and  profound  information 
in  the  various  branches  of  administration  and  policy. 
M.  Thiers,  in  beginning  his  magnificent  work,  is 
enamoured  of  his  hero,  but  this  does  not  prevent  him 
from  being  afterwards  impartial  and  even  severe 
towards  him.  He  strives  to  be  always  unbiassed,  and 
generally  is  so ;  but  I  may  be  permitted  to  point 
out  that  in  some  cases  he  has  not  done  all  that  is  de- 
manded by  a  quality  so  important  in  a  historian. 

The  somewhat  disdainful  way  in  which  he  speaks 
of  the  young  men  by  whom  the  Emperor  of  Russia 
was  surrounded  does  not  seem  to  me  quite  just ;  these 
men  were  not  all  so  very  young.  Count  Kotchoubey, 
M.  de  Novosiltzoff,  and  the  new  Ministers,  were  of  an 
age  sufficient  to  protect  them  against  such  an  epithet. 
In  any  case  the  assemblage  of  these  men  round  the 
Emperor  had  the  great  merit  of  withdrawing  Russia 
from  a  fatal  groove.  Disorder  and  corruption  were 
succeeded  by  a  regular  and  orderly  regime,  and  the 
Empire  could  place  itself  on  an  equal  footing  with  the 
other  disciplined  countries  of  Europe.  As  for  foreign 
policy,  the  idea  of  making  Russian  ambition  serve  an 
honourable  and  just  object  does  not  seem  to  me  to 


THIERS'  HISTORY  OF  THE  CONSULATE  91 

deserve  the  somewhat  severe  criticism  which  M. 
Thiers  has  applied  to  it.  Napoleon  was,  I  think, 
greatest  during  his  consulate ;  a  great  administrator, 
great  by  the  means  he  employed  for  the  restoration 
of  finance  in  France,  great  by  his  victories  and  his 
policy,  which  tended  towards  peace.  But  even  then 
he  allowed  himself  to  be  led  into  committing  acts  of 
useless  severity  and  cruelty.  He  seems  to  me  less 
great  when  I  see  him  seduced  by  Imperial  dignity, 
occupied  with  ceremonials,  titles,  and  ancient  etiquette, 
and  with  a  crown  on  his  head.  All  that  looks  like 
vanity  diminishes  true  greatness.  But  the  author  of 
the  'History  of  the  Consulate,'  by  the  complaisant 
eloquence  of  his  descriptions,  proves  that  this  did  not 
lessen  his  admiration.  Yet  he  perceives  that  Napoleon, 
once  started  on  this  course,  will  no  longer  deviate 
from  it,  and  will  be  fatally  drawn  to  the  last  goal  of 
an  unlimited  vanity  and  ambition. 

I  ask  which  of  these  two  policies  was  the  more 
conscientious,  the  more  nioral,  the  wiser  ?  Was  it  the 
one  which  was  inspired  by  the  mad  longing  for  uni- 
versal empire,  or  the  one  which  took  its  origin  in  the 
dream — if  it  should  be  so  thought — of  peace  and 
justice  ? 

By  dint  of  victories,  Napoleon  had  raised  up  a 
new  order  of  things ;  but  its  short  duration  and  its 
total  destruction  have  proved  that  its  first  idea  was 
not  more  practical  than  other  projects  of  his  which 
M.  Thiers  calls  chimerical  dreams.  The  latter  had 
at  least  the  excuse  of  noble  and  ardent  aspirations, 
while  the  plans  of  the  conqueror  were  only  a  result 


92         MEMOIRS  Or  PRISCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

of  passion  and  personal  interest  carried  to  the  highest 
point. 

M.  Thiers  was  acquainted  with  the  part  played  by 
the  Abbd  Piattoli  in  the  negotiations  which  were 
opened  at  this  period.  He  acknowledges  that  the 
Abbe  was  a  man  of  some  merit,  but  he  does  not  seern 
to  me  to  have  rendered  him  complete  justice. 

The  Abbe  Piattoli  was  invited  to  come  to  Poland 
by  the  Princess  Lubomirska,  my  aunt ;  she  charged 
him  with  the  education  of  Prince  Henry  Lubomirski, 
whom  she  had  adopted.  During  my  first  visit  to 
Paris  in  1776  and  1777,  having  entered  into  relations 
with  Prince  Henry,  I  naturally  found  myself  under 
the  influence  of  the  Abbe  Piattoli — an  influence  which 
could  only  produce  a  very  salutary  effect.  The  Abbe, 
like  so  many  others  who  bear  this  title,  was  a  layman. 
He  was  a  very  learned  man,  had  successively  devoted 
himself  to  various  branches  of  science,  and  wrote  with 
great  facility.  He  also  had  a  warm  heart,  and  was 
capable  of  self-devotion.  M.  Thiers  does  not  seem 
quite  to  understand  that  people  may  devote  them- 
selves to  an  idea  which  has  taken  possession  of  their 
souls,  only  from  a  feeling  of  generosity.  This  is 
what  happened  to  the  Abbe  Piattoli.  No  sooner 
was  he  in  a  position  to  understand  the  condition  of 
Poland  and  her  mode  of  government,  than  he  con- 
ceived the  idea  of  working  at  her  deliverance,  and 
persisted  in  doing  so  as  long  as  he  could  hope  that 
the  idea  might  be  realised. 

The  state  of  my  country,  before  all  the  convulsions 
through  which  it  has  passed  since,  was  very  different 


THE  ABB£  PIATTOLI  93 

from  what  it  is  now.  It  was  .a  dead  calm  after  the 
storm.  The  recollections  of  the  Confederation  of  Bar* 
no  doubt  existed  in  the  nation  ;  there  was  an  anti- 
Russian  party,  but  it  was  weak,  and  its  efforts  were 
powerless  to  produce  any  resistance  to  the  arbitrary 
acts  of  the  Russian  Embassy.  The  most  famous 
names  in  the  country,  those  which  were  pronounced 
with  the  greatest  respect,  had  distinguished  them- 
selves during  the  Confederation  of  Bar.  I  wrote  a 
memorandum  on  this  subject  from  the  dictation  of  the 
Abbe  Piattoli.  It  was  sent  by  a  safe  hand  to  my 
parents,  whose  opinions  were  known  to  me,  to  Marshal 
Ignatius  Potocki,  and  to  General  Rzewuski,  both  of 
whom  were  sons-in-law  of  the  Princess  Lubomirska. 
It  was  hoped  that  this  document  would  exercise  a 
salutary  influence  and  bring  about  some  practical 
results.  I  recollect  having  passed  a  whole  night  in 
copying  it,  and  it  was  very  well  received.  Piattoli 
now  became  a  steadfast  adherent  of  the  Poles  and 
their  cause.  He  continued  to  occupy  himself  with 
the  education  of  Prince  Henry,  and  accompanied  the 
Princess  Lubomirska  to  England,  Vienna,  and  Galicia. 
When  he  came  to  Warsaw  during  the  Great  Diet  he 
was  appointed  Secretary  to  King  Stanislas,  after 
the  latter,  having  thrown  off  the  Russian  yoke,  had 
joined  the  national  party.  He  contributed  by  his 
influence  and  his  councils  to  maintain  the  King  in  the 
new  course  which  he  had  sincerely  adopted.  Later 
on,  when  this  unfortunate  sovereign,  yielding  to  the 
advice  of  the  Chancellor  Chreptowicz,  his  Foreign 

*  See  note  to  page  31,  vol.  I. 


94         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKl 

Minister,  submitted  to  the  fatal  decisions  of  the  Con- 
federation of  Targowitza,  the  Abbe"  Piattoli  resigned  a 
post  in  which  he  no  longer  had  any  hope  of  doing  good. 

Piattoli  had  much  imagination,  and  this  afforded 
him  the  means  of  getting  out  of  difficulties,  but  he 
always  showed  remarkable  disinterestedness  and  good 
sense.  After  the  fall  of  Poland,  he  found  a  refuge  in 
the  house  of  the  Duchess  of  Courland,  who  had  known 
him  at  Warsaw.  This  was  at  the  time  when  she  had 
returned  to  claim  from  the  Great  Diet  her  rights  over 
Courland.  Her  patriotic  Polish  sentiments  were  very 
strong,  and  she  never  abandoned  them.  The  affairs 
of  Courland  took  her  to  St  Petersburg,  and  Piattoli 
accompanied  her  there.  We  met  again  with  mutual 
pleasure  ;  he  did  not  forget  our  former  relations,  and 
sought  to  renew  them,  while  I  was  delighted  to  have 
the  opportunity  of  using  so  trustworthy  and  able  an 
instrument.  A  mere  indication  of  the  chief  points  of 
a  negotiation  or  of  a  political  system  was  sufficient  to 
enable  him  to  develop  all  its  consequences.  He 
generally  did  this  in  too  much  detail,  but  he  readily 
abridged  or  modified  his  statements  in  accordance  with 
the  remarks  that  were  made  to  him. 

M.  Thiers  had  seen  the  first  draft  of  a  statement 
of  this  kind  made  after  some  conversations  we  had  had 
together  as  to  our  plans  and  the  best  means  of  exe- 
cuting them.  To  form  a  judgment  on  so  incomplete  a 
piece  of  work,  written  on  the  spur  of  the  moment, 
would  be  more  than  severe ;  it  would  be  unjust,  and 
this  no  doubt  was  far  from  M.  Thiers'  intention.  I 
certainly  was  not  under  any  illusion  as  to  the  numerous 


MALTA  AND  GIBRALTAR  95 

difficulties  which  would  arise,  some  of  which  were 
insurmountable.  The  possession  of  Gibraltar  by  the 
English  was  not  based  on  any  principle  of  justice;  on 
the  contrary,  it  was  a  violation  of  international  law. 
By  giving  it  up  England  would  have  been  able  to 
detach  Spain  from  France  and  bring  her  over  to  the 
general  interests  of  Europe.  Count  Strogonoff,  in 
proceeding  to  his  post  at  Madrid,  was  to  pass  through 
London  and  to  touch  on  this  question  with  all  possible 
reserve  and  with  the  consideration  due  to  British 
susceptibilities.  This  was,  so  to  say,  an  endeavour  to 
begin  a  reform  in  the  policy  of  the  English  Cabinet— 
an  endeavour  which  did  not  produce  any  satisfactory 
results. 

The  plan  was  rejected  as  a  whole,  but  it  contained 
the  points  which  reproduced  themselves  on  every 
occasion  when  there  was  a  question  of  reconstituting 
the  map  of  Europe.  They  were  repeatedly  brought 
forward  either  by  Germany,  the  Netherlands,  or 
Italy,  and  they  had  occupied  Carnot  when  he  was  a 
member  of  the  Directory.  It  was,  in  fact,  in  the 
nature  of  things  that  they  should  come  to  the  front 
on  various  occasions. 

The  proposals  of  Russia  were  of  a  nature  to 
satisfy  France  ;  but  the  cold  reception  which  they 
encountered  in  England,  and  especially  the  peremp- 
tory refusal  to  evacuate  Malta,  gave  Russia  sufficient 
reason  for  withdrawing  from  the  coalition.  If  this 
resolution  had  been  firmly  adhered  to,  it  would  have 
given  the  negotiations  a  different  character,  and  would 
have  produced  different  results. 


96        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

The  tendency  of  public  opinion  in  Europe  also 
manifested  itself  in  Russia,  and  carried  along  with  it 
the  Emperor  and  his  Privy  Council.  To  oppose  it 
would  have  been  regarded  as  showing  an  inclination 
to  yield  to  French  promptings.  Austria  was  already 
arming;  she  insisted  on  the  adoption  of  a  general 
plan  of  military  operations  with  the  object  of  guaran- 
teeing her  against  the  danger  of  foreign  invasion.  It 
was  necessary  to  think  of  preparing  such  a  plan  in 
case  hostilities  should  become  inevitable.  This  was 
done  at  St  Petersburg  with  Austria  on  one  side  and 
England  on  the  other ;  the  latter  was  to  furnish  the 
necessary  funds  for  arming  Europe.  The  negotiations 
lasted  for  some  time,  and  presented  great  difficulties  ; 
the  exigencies  of  Austria  seemed  excessive  to  the 
English  negotiators.  At  length,  however,  by  means 
of  reciprocal  concessions,  an  agreement  was  arrived 
at.  Part  of  the  subsidies  was  received  for  Prussia, 
whom  we  incessantly  spurred  on  and  kept  informed  of 
our  movements  by  more  and  more  urgent  despatches. 
I  must  admit  that  the  improbability  of  Prussia  enter- 
ing into  the  concert  of  the  Powers  was  not  what  I 
most  regretted.  I  did  not  neglect  any  argument 
calculated  to  persuade  her,  but  I  foresaw  with  satis- 
faction the  necessity  of  disregarding  her  interests  in 
the  event  of  a  refusal,  for  in  that  case  Poland  would 
have  been  proclaimed  a  kingdom  under  the  sceptre  of 
Alexander.  He  would  have  been  received  with 
enthusiasm,  for  at  that  time  this  was  the  only  possible 
way  of  resuscitating  Poland,  which  even  France  had 
forgotten.  Meanwhile  Napoleon,  as  if  he  wished  to 


COALITION  AGAINST  NAPOLEON  97 

remove  all  possibility  of  a  peaceful  solution,  had  had 
himself  crowned  King  of  Italy,*  without  any  reserve 
as  to  the  rights  of  succession.  By  seizing  the  Genoese 
Republic,  threatening  Naples,  and  not  leaving  any 
prospect  to  the  House  of  Savoy,  he  increased  the 
general  reprobation  and  also  deprived  Russia  of  all 
hope  of  obtaining  the  conditions  which  she  had  made 
it  a  point  of  honour  not  to  abandon. 

The  only  course  now  open  was  to  prepare  the 
means  for  a  struggle  which  seemed  inevitable.  The 
great  difficulty  consisted  in  arriving  at  an  arrange- 
ment by  which  England  should  agree  to  furnish 
subsidies  of  the  amount  demanded  by  Austria.  This 
was  not  an  easy  matter ;  yet,  thanks  to  our  inter- 
vention, an  agreement  was  arrived  at.  £3,000,000 
were  granted  to  the  Court  of  Vienna,  and  a  like 
sum  was  appropriated  for  overcoming  the  hesitations 
of  Prussia.  The  military  part  of  the  arrangement 
was  executed  without  delay.  An  army  composed  of 
Russian  and  Swedish  troops  assembled  in  the  island 
of  Rtigen  and  at  Stralsund  ;  the  Russian  troops  were 
commanded  by  General  Tolstoi.  Another  Russian 
army  corps,  assembled  at  Corfu,  was  to  set  sail  for 
Naples.  An  army  under  the  orders  of  General 
Kutusoff  moved  towards  the  Austrian  frontier  in 
order  to  be  available  to  assist  General  Mack,  who  was 
concentrating  his  forces  at  Ulm.  Finally,  General 
Michelsen  advanced  towards  the  Prussian  frontier  in 
order  to  put  an  end  to  the  uncertainties  of  the  Berlin 
Cabinet.  All  these  various  movements  took  place  in 

*  On  the  £6th  May,  1805. 
VOL.  II.  G 


98        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

accordance  with  a  plan  proposed  by  Austria  and  dis- 
cussed between  the  two  Powers.  It  seemed  to  meet 
the  exigencies  of  the  situation  ;  if  it  failed,  it  would  be 
through  the  fault  of  the  Austrian s.  Should  Prussia 

O 

not  consent  to  join  us,  we  were  to  go  on  without  her. 

The  time  had  come  for  the  Emperor  Alexander  to 
approach  the  theatre  of  events.  But  as  the  hour  of 
action  drew  near  I  perceived  that  his  resolutions  grew 
weaker.  We  started,  however,  and  during  our  journey 
M.  Alopeus'  couriers  brought  us  reports  of  the 
anxiety  produced  in  Berlin,  both  upon  the  King  and 
his  generals,  by  the  Russian  advance.  Alexander 
decided  to  stop  at  Pulawy,  at  the  house  of  my  parents, 
to  whom  he  wished  to  pay  a  visit. 

The  plan  of  forcing  a  passage  through  Prussia  was 
not  yet  abandoned,  and  the  Emperor  also  persisted 
in  his  idea  of  declaring  himself  King  of  Poland.  I 
wrote  to  Count  Razumovsky  to  prepare  the  Court  of 
Vienna  for  this  idea.  Austria  did  not  show  any 
opposition  to  it,  but  she  laid  down  as  a  condition  that 
the  old  frontier  of  Galicia  should  be  maintained. 

Lord  G.  L.  Gower,  on  his  return  from  a  trip  to 
England,  met  us  on  our  journey  and  informed  us  that 
if  we  had  to  force  a  passage  through  Prussia,  England 
would  pay  Russia  the  subsidy  originally  intended  for 
the  King  of  Prussia.  He  also  said  that  if  Poland 
were  to  be  restored,  England  would  give  her  consent. 

I  left  Brzesc  so  as  to  arrive  at  Pulawy  four 
and  twenty  hours  after  the  Emperor.  I  found  every 
one  in  agitation,  and  making  preparations  for  the 
Emperor's  reception.  Major  Orlowski  was  specially 


VISIT  TO  PULA  WY  99 

charged  with  the  preparations,  and  entered  into  com- 
munication with  the  Austrian  authorities  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Pulawy.  Besides  the  Emperor  and 
his  suite,  we  were  expecting  the  arrival  of  two 
army  corps,  those  of  General  Michelsen  and  General 
Buxhoewden.  Prince  Poniatowski  was  warned  of 
the  Emperor's  plan  relative  to  the  restoration  of 
Poland  ;  he  was  to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  the 
movement  and  give  it  a  national  character.  Immedi- 
ately after  my  arrival  at  Pulawy,  Polish  agents  went 
to  Warsaw  to  announce  the  arrival  of  the  Emperor, 
who  was  received  by  my  parents  on  the  following  day. 
He  spoke  to  them  kind  and  friendly  words,  by  which 
they  were  deeply  touched.  He  seemed  glad  to  find 
himself  in  a  softer  climate,  and  among  people  who 
were  sincerely  devoted  to  him.  My  mother,  my 
sister,  and  my  brother,  tried  to  make  the  fortnight 
he  passed  at  Pulawy  as  agreeable  to  him  as  possible. 

Meanwhile  the  Emperor's  resolution  to  force  a 
passage  through  Prussia  had  been  greatly  shaken, 
and  he  sent  Prince  Dolgorouky,*  who  was  glad  to 
undertake  a  mission  which  seemed  to  be  fatal  to  my 
hopes,  to  the  King  of  Prussia  to  ask  for  an  interview. 
It  was  just  at  this  time  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon, 
who  had  not  as  much  consideration  as  Alexander  for 
circumstances  which  he  regarded  as  of  little  import- 
ance, forced  a  passage  through  a  Prussian  province 
which  was  an  obstacle  to  the  execution  of  his  plans. 

*  '  A  young  officer,  full  of  presumption  and  ambition,  an  enemy  of  the  coterie  of 
clever  young  men  who  were  governing  the  Empire.  He  sought  to  persuade  the 
Emperor  that  these  young  men  were  betraying  Eussia  in  the  interest  of  Poland. 
(Thiers'  History  of  the  Consulate  and  the  Empire,  Book  xxii.)  See  also  Vol.  I  of  the 
present  work,  p.  331. 


ioo      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

The  King  of  Prussia,  offended  at  this  conduct,  gave  a 
free  passage  to  the  Russian  troops,  and  Prince 
Dolgorouky,  triumphant,  came  to  ask  the  Emperor 
to  go  to  Berlin  to  come  to  an  arrangement  with  the 
King  as  to  the  ulterior  measures.  This  resolution 
for  the  moment  dissipated  the  hope  of  a  restoration  of 
Poland;  but  although  the  project  was  foiled,  it  proved 
to  Napoleon  that  Poland  had  not  ceased  to  exist,  and 
that  it  was  necessary  to  occupy  himself  with  her 
future  destiny — a  necessity  which  he  seemed  to  have 
forgotten  since  the  Treaty  of  Luneville  and  since  the 
Imperial  dignity  had  absorbed  all  his  attention.  The 
Emperor  left  Pulawy  promising  to  return.  We 
passed  through  Warsaw  without  stopping  except  at 
Vilanov,  whose  proprietor  offered  us  a  breakfast. 
Prince  Poniatowski  was  there,  with  various  other 
persons,  who  accompanied  the  Emperor  on  horseback 
up  to  a  few  leagues  from  Warsaw.  They  went  back 
saddened  at  the  disappearance  of  the  first  gleam  of 
hope  for  the  country. 

In  passing  through  Posen  we  met  my  eldest  sister, 
who  was  returning  to  Pulawy  with  her  two  wards. 
The  Emperor  paid  her  a  visit,  and  was  amiable  as 
usual.  She  afterwards  told  me  that  she  was  struck 
by  the  beauty  of  his  features.  He  was  indeed  very 
attractive,  and  his  charm  of  manner  at  once  won  the 
attachment  of  all  with  whom  he  came  in  contact. 

Alexander  was  evidently  much  relieved  on  learning 
that  the  King  of  Prussia  had  given  his  consent  to  the 
passage  of  the  Russian  army.  We  arrived  at  Berlin,* 


On  the  25th  of  October. 


BA  TTLE  OF  A  USTERLITZ  i  o  i 

and  our  reception  was  most  brilliant.  The  Queen 
used  all  her  fascinations  to  make  the  Emperor's  stay 
at  Berlin  agreeable  to  him  and  to  remove  the  diffi- 
culties raised  by  M.  de  Haugwitz.  Another  Minister, 
M.  de  Hardenberg,  whose  influence  increased,  as 
matters  began  to  take  their  present  turn,  and  who  was 
moreover  supported  by  the  Queen,  succeeded  in  bring- 
ing the  negotiations  to  a  successful  result.  The 
Treaty  of  Potsdam  was  signed  on  the  3rd  of 
November  1805.  The  union  of  the  two  princes  was 
confirmed  by  an  oath  of  eternal  friendship  taken  on 
the  tomb  of  Frederick  the  Great.  A  month  was 
allowed  to  Prussia  for  her  war  preparations,  and  the 
day,  even  the  hour,  of  the  commencement  of  hostilities 
was  fixed  in  case  the  proposals  to  be  presented  by 
Haugwitz  should  not  be  accepted.  Meanwhile,  the 
Archduke  Anthony  came  with  the  most  disastrous 
news  as  to  the  progress  of  Napoleon.  The  Emperor 
and  his  suite  hastily  left  Berlin  to  meet  the  Emperor 
Francis,  who  was  proceeding  to  the  army  corps  com- 
manded by  General  Kutusoff.  The  latter,  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  plan  sent  him  from  Vienna,  had 
entered  Austrian  Silesia  through  Galicia. 

It  would  be  superfluous  to  recapitulate  here  the 
events  which  are  so  admirably  described  by  the  author 
of  the  '  History  of  the  Consulate  and  the  Empire.'  I 
will  only  cite  some  facts  which  could  not  have  come  to 
M.  Thiers'  knowledge,  and  I  will  add  an  opinion  which 
does  not  in  all  respects  coincide  with  his.  I  will  not 
do  this  without  a  certain  feeling  of  regret.  M.  Thiers 
has  treated  me  with  an  indulgence,  I  might  almost  say 


102       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

with  a  preference,  which  has  deeply  touched  me,  and 
I  wish  here  to  express  my  gratitude  to  him. 

From  Berlin  the  Emperor  proceeded  to  Weimar, 
where  he  wished  to  pay  his  sister  a  visit.  The  old 
Grand-Duke  still  lived  ;  though  of  advanced  age,  he 
was  full  of  life  and  strength.  He  was  an  excellent 
horseman,  and  in  former  years  had  ridden  the  whole 
distance  between  Carlsbad  and  Weimar.  He  seemed 
desirous  of  reviving  the  memory  of  his  ancestor,  who 
had  distinguished  himself  in  the  Thirty  Years'  War. 

We  were  received  with  marks  of  true  affection,  and 
after  making  the  acquaintance  of  several  illustrious 
writers  who  were  assembled  at  the  Court  of  Weimar — 
such  as  Goethe,  Schelling,  Herder,  and  Wieland — we 
continued  our  journey.  Alexander  was  anxious  to 
arrive  at  Olmiitz,  where  the  Emperor  Francis  was 
waiting  for  him.  This  much  tried  and  threatened 
prince  strove  to  console  his  allies  by  telling  them  that 
it  was  not  the  first  time  that  such  disasters  had 
befallen  him. 

The  few  days  we  passed  at  Olmiitz  were  employed 
in  coming  to  an  understanding  as  to  the  operations  we 
were  to  undertake.  Colonel  Weirother,  who  was  to 
act  as  chief  of  the  general  staff,  had  already  passed 
some  time  at  Pulawy,  and  had  obtained  much  influence 
over  Alexander's  mind.  He  was  an  officer  of  great 
bravery  and  military  knowledge,  but,  like  General 
Mack,  he  trusted  too  much  in  his  combinations,  which 
were  often  complicated,  and  did  not  admit  that  they 
might  be  foiled  by  the  skill  of  the  enemy.  His 
presence  at  Olmiitz  and  that  of  Dolgorouky,  whose 


BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  103 

impetuous  ardour  acted  on  the  Emperor's  mind,  con- 
tributed not  a  little  to  reassure  and  animate  him.  Just 
at  this  moment  arrived  the  Count  de  Cobentzel.* 
He  spoke  some  imprudent  words  as  to  its  being 
necessary  for  sovereigns  to  place  themselves  at  the 
head  of  armies  in  times  of  difficulty.  The  Emperor 
thought  these  words  were  meant  as  advice,  perhaps  as 
a  reproach.  He  did  not  pay  any  attention  to  our 
remonstrances,  and  would  not  believe  what  we  con- 
tinually repeated  to  him — that  his  presence  would 
prevent  General  Kutusoff  from  exercising  any  real 
authority  over  the  movements  of  the  army.  This  was 
especially  to  be  feared  in  view  of  the  General's 
timorous  character  and  courtier-like  habits. 

The  Emperor  accordingly  proceeded  to  the  field, 
while  I  was  retained  a  few  hours  at  Olmtitz  on 
business.  When  I  had  got  through  my  work  I 
started  also.  A  few  leagues  from  Olmiitz  I  found 
the  Emperor  Francis  and  his  suite  breakfasting  on 
the  grass.  He  invited  me  to  join  them,  but  I 
refused,  as  I  was  anxious  to  see  Alexander.  After 
proceeding  four  leagues  further,  I  arrived  at  Wischau, 
which  was  occupied  by  Russian  troops  ;  they  had  just 
obtained  a  slight  advantage  over  a  French  detachment 
which  left  some  prisoners  behind  in  its  retreat.  The 
Emperor  had  gone  to  the  front,  and  there  was  much 
rejoicing  at  head-quarters.  The  question  now  was 
what  steps  to  take  in  face  of  the  French  army. 
Napoleon  had  advanced  as  far  as  Brlinn,  and  his  out- 
posts were  extended  on  a  line  parallel  to  ours.  I 

*  At  that  time  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  Austrian  Empire. 


io4      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

found  the  Emperor  Alexander  almost  at  the  outposts, 
very  satisfied  at  the  success  obtained  at  Wischau,  and 
surrounded  by  young  officers. 

They  were  discussing  whether  a  movement  should 
be  made  to  the  left  so  as  to  bring  the  army  in  touch 
with  that  of  the  Archdukes  Charles  and  John,  who 
had  repulsed  Prince  Eugene  in  Italy,  or  whether  it 
would  be  more  advantageous  to  move  to  the  right  so 
as  to  join  the  Prussians  who  were,  at  a  moment  pre- 
viously determined  upon,  to  advance  and  take  part  in 
the  operations  of  the  combined  armies.  The  former 
alternative  was  adopted,  thanks  mainly  to  the  influ- 
ence of  Weirother  and  other  Austrian  officers. 

The  best  course  would  have  been  to  abstain  from 
any  offensive  movement,  as  such  a  movement  would 
be  likely  to  expose  the  army  to  danger.  Time  should 
have  been  given  to  the  Archdukes  to  arrive,  and  it 
was  above  all  necessary  to  wait  till  Prussia  should 
declare  herself  and  move  her  army,  which  was  eager 
to  fight. 

It  was  not  probable  that  Napoleon  would  leave 
Briinn  and  place  himself  at  a  distance  from  his  re- 
serves and  his  supplies ;  but  even  if  he  had  made 
such  a  mistake,  the  Russian  army  should  have 
declined  to  accept  battle,  and  should  have  re- 
tired to  meet  the  supports  which  were  coming  up. 
It  was  here  that  the  Emperor  Alexander  and  his 
advisers  were  in  fault.  They  imagined  that  Napoleon 
was  in  a  dangerous  position,  and  that  he  was  on  the 
point  of  retreating.  The  French  outposts  had  an 
appearance  of  hesitation  and  timidity  which  nourished 


BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  105 

these  illusions,  and  reports  came  at  every  moment 
from  our  outposts  announcing  an  imminent  movement 
of  the  French  army  to  the  rear.  Alexander  forgot 
the  extreme  importance  of  the  moment,  and  thought 
only  of  not  allowing  so  good  an  opportunity  to  escape 
of  destroying  the  French  army,  and  dealing  Napoleon 
a  decisive  and  fatal  blow. 

During  our  flank  movement  we  perceived,  on  the 
heights  which  concealed  from  us  the  French  position, 
officers  who  came  up  one  after  the  other  to  observe 
our  march.  Our  movements  were  carried  out  in  an 
orderly  manner  and  placed  the  army  in  the  position 
it  was  wished  to  take  up.  We  were  now  so  situated 
that  we  should  have  had  no  difficulty  in  approaching 
the  Archdukes,  in  case — which  did  not  seem  probable 
—Napoleon  should  wish  to  follow  us. 

On  the  1st  of  December,  the  day  when  Count 
Haugwitz  arrived  in  Napoleon's  camp  with  the  ulti- 
matum which,  in  the  event  of  its  rejection,  was  imme- 
diately to  be  followed  by  the  co-operation  of  Prussia, 
the  Emperor  of  Russia  had  since  the  morning  received 
letters  from  Prince  Dolgorouky,  loading  him  with 
praises  for  having,  as  the  Prince  said,  increased  by  his 
presence  and  his  brilliant  valour  the  courage  of  his 
troops. 

Everything  in  the  French  army  seemed  to  announce 
a  resolution  to  attempt  a  retreat.  It  was  therefore 
decided  to  advance,  in  order  to  take  advantage  of  this 
disposition  of  the  enemy.  Although  it  was  not 
expected  that  they  would  resist,  the  precaution  was 
taken  to  fix  the  line  of  march  of  each  army  corps. 


106      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Colonel  Weirother  was  entrusted  with  this  task  ;  he 
thoroughly  knew  the  ground,  which  he  had  several 
times  gone  over  and  even  measured.  I  did  not  take 
part  in  the  military  council  assembled  to  carry  out 
this  decision,  as  it  was  entirely  opposed  to  my 
opinions.  I  do  not  know  whether  General  Kutusoff 
was  admitted  to  it ;  but  his  advice  was  certainly  not 
listened  to. 

The  instructions  which  were  to  direct  the  move- 
ments of  each  General  did  not,  I  think,  reach  them  till 
the  morning  of  the  2nd  of  December.  On  the  even- 
ing of  the  1st  it  was  cold  and  foggy,  and  the  Emperor, 
surrounded  by  those  who  were  more  especially  attached 
to  his  person,  proceeded  at  a  foot  pace  in  the  direction 
where  the  movements  were  to  begin  on  the  follow- 
ing morning.  We  met  a  detachment  of  Croatian 
Grenzers  ;*  they  struck  up  one  of  their  sad  national 
songs.  This  song,  combined  with  the  temperature 
and  the  fog,  produced  a  melancholy  impression,  and 
some  one  remarked  that  the  following  day  was  a 
Monday,  a  day  regarded  as  unlucky  in  Russia.  As 
the  Emperor  was  passing  over  a  grassy  mound  his  horse 
slipped  and  fell,  and  he  was  thrown  out  of  the  saddle. 
Although  the  accident  was  not  serious,  it  was  re- 
garded by  some  people  as  a  bad  omen. 

At  daybreak  on  the  following  day,  about  seven 
o'clock,  the  Emperor,  surrounded  by  his  friends, 
proceeded  to  the  place  which  had  in  the  general  plan 
been  fixed  as  the  centre  of  operations.  The  united 
armies  were  composed  of  the  corps  of  Buxhoewden, 

h  Soldiers  raised  in  the  Croatian  province  known  as  'the  Military  Frontier.' 


BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  107 

the  vanguard  commanded  by  Prince  Bagration,  the 
Guards  corps  under  Miloradovitch,  a  reserve  force 
which  should  have  remained  under  the  direct  orders 
of  General  Kutusoff,  and  an  Austrian  corps  under 
the  command  of  Prince  John  of  Liechtenstein,  which 
was  to  take  part  in  the  battle  should  it  come  to  fighting. 

When  we  had  arrived  at  this  point,  I  looked  round 
in  every  direction  and  saw  a  vast  plain.  A  column  of 
Austrian  infantry  which  seemed  to  me  rather  loose  in 
formation  came  to  arrange  itself  in  order  of  battle. 
Anxiety  was  impressed  on  the  faces  of  the  Austrian 
General,  the  officers,  and  even  the  soldiers.  The 
artillery  officers  alone  did  not  give  way  to  the  general 
depression,  and  expressed  absolute  confidence  in  the 
effect  of  their  guns.  Our  wings  did  not  seem  to  be  in 
any  way  secured  ;  on  the  right  were  to  be  seen  the 
Guards,  who,  following  the  plan  traced  out  to  them, 
were  to  move  off  to  a  greater  distance,  which  would 
render  it  difficult  to  render  any  assistance  on  that  side, 
while  on  our  left  it  was  impossible. 

The  outposts  had  from  the  early  morning  attacked 
the  French  at  various  points  without  gaining  any 
advantage.  Suddenly  we  perceived  some  French 
columns  advancing  rapidly  and  pushing  back  the 
corps  opposed  to  them.  When  I  saw  the  promptitude' 
of  the  French  troops,  it  seemed  to  me  to  augur  ill  for 
the  result  of  the  day ;  the  Emperor  also  was  struck 
by  the  rapidity  of  this  movement,  which  caused  a  real 
panic  in  the  Austrian  ranks.  It  is  to  be  observed 
that  there  was  no  cavalry  at  this  important  point, 
which  should  have  been  the  centre  of  operations. 


io8      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

A  moment  later  there  was  an  outcry  for  the 
Emperor's  safety ;  everyone  turned  his  horse  and 
galloped  off.  I  did  the  same  as  the  others,  and 
reached  a  height  from  which  I  could  see  what  was 
passing  on  the  side  of  the  Russian  Guards  corps,  to 
which  was  attached  nearly  the  whole  of  the  cavalry. 
I  saw  very  distinctly  several  charges  executed  in 
succession  by  the  two  lines  of  the  enemy's  cavalry, 
each  of  which  took  the  offensive  in  turn,  and  was 
then  withdrawn,  passing  some  enclosures  which 
seemed  to  embarrass  their  movements.  These  charges, 
which  were  frequently  repeated,  kept  me  for  some 
time  on  the  hill.  A  moment  later,  as  I  was  advanc- 
ing towards  the  scene  of  action  on  the  right,  between 
the  Guards  corps  and  the  French,  I  met  Prince 
Schwarzenberg.  I  urged  him  to  restore  order  in  the 
detachments  near  him,  and  to  stop  their  retrograde 
movement.  He  seemed  at  first  inclined  to  yield  to 
my  representations,  but  directly  afterwards  he  told 
me  he  feared  to  interfere  with  plans  which  were 
already  in  full  execution.  Having  met  almost  at  the 
same  moment  a  large  battery  of  Russian  artillery, 
which  its  commander,  utterly  disconcerted,  was  lead- 
ing in  an  opposite  direction  to  that  of  the  battle  field, 
'I  forced  him  to  turn  back  and  help  the  columns  which 
were  fighting  in  front.  By  a  fortunate  accident  I 
constantly  met  the  Emperor  at  the  different  points 
which  he  visited  in  succession  :  he  often  sent  me  for- 
ward to  see  what  was  passing,  and  sometimes  I  was 
left  completely  alone. 

It  was  necessary  to  prepare  for  retreat,  and  the 


BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  109 

Emperor  proceeded  to  a  point  opposite  Austerlitz, 
which  was  still  occupied  by  the  corps  of  Bagration, 
now  the  rear  guard  of  the  army.  He  was  met  there 
by  his  aides-de-camp — General  Lieven,  General  Milo- 
radovitch,  and  Prince  Michael  Dolgorouky,  the 
younger  brother  of  Prince  Peter  and  much  wiser 
than  he.  He  had  been  shot  in  the  thigh,  which  did 
not  prevent  him  from  remaining  on  the  field.  I  also 
saw  the  unfortunate  Weirother,  who  had  wandered 
from  point  to  point  and  by  bravely  exposing  his  life 
strove  to  remedy  the  evil  of  which  he  had  been  one  of 
the  chief  causes.  He  was  tired  out  and  in  despair, 
and  hastened  away  without  making  any  attempt  to 
excuse  himself.  Those  of  the  officers  who  had  been 
fortunate  enough  to  make  some  prisoners  presented 
them  to  the  Emperor  with  many  protestations  of 
devotion,  constantly  repeating  that  they  were  ready 
to  shed  their  blood  for  the  glory  and  the  safety  of  the 
Empire. 

I  do  not  know  what  had  become  of  our  friends, 
but  none  of  them  were  present  at  this  meeting.  Being 
separated  by  the  confusion  which  was  everywhere 
prevalent,  they  did  not  succeed  in  finding  the  Emperor, 
and  I  think  they  lost  all  their  baggage.  While  we 
were  standing  round  the  Emperor,  General  Milorado- 
vitch  apostrophised  me  in  somewhat  singular  fashion, 
saying,  '  How  is  it  you  are  so  calm  ? '  At  the  same 
time  he  indicated  to  me  by  a  look  the  aide-de-camp 
General  Lieven,  whose  countenance  showed  great 
anxiety  and  profound  depression. 

It  was   necessary  at   once   to  take    measures  for 


no      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

sending  orders  to  Bagration,  who  was  quite  alone  in 
face  of  the  victorious  columns  of  Napoleon ;  for  it 
was  to  be  feared  that  disorder  might  also  spread  into 
his  army  corps.  General  Wintzingerode  was  directed 
to  take  orders  to  Bagration  to  retire  into  Austerlitz 
and  maintain  himself  there  as  long  as  he  could  with- 
out exposing  himself  to  a  disaster. 

Soon  after  we  heard  the  cheers  of  the  French 
soldiers  ;  they  announced  the  arrival  of  Napoleon  in 
the  midst  of  his  troops.  It  was  growing  dark ;  the 
generals  left  us  to  return  to  their  respective  posts,  and 
the  Emperor,  to  ensure  his  safety,  was  obliged  to  take 
the  road  to  Holitsch.  Having  advanced  to  see  what 
was  passing  on  our  left,  I  met  General  Buxhoewden 
and  his  columns  completely  routed.  The  poor  General 
had  lost  his  hat,  and  his  clothes  were  in  disorder ; 
when  he  perceived  me  at  a  distance  he  cried,  '  They 
have  abandoned  me  !  They  have  sacrificed  me  ! '  He 
continued  his  retreat,  and  I  hastened  to  join  the 
Emperor. 

Night  came  on,  and  we  proceeded  at  a  foot  pace 
on  the  road  that  leads  to  Holitsch.  The  Emperor 
was  extremely  depressed  ;  the  violent  emotion  he  had 
experienced  aifected  his  health,  and  I  was  the  only 
one  to  bring  him  some  relief.  We  thus  passed  two 
days  and  three  nights  before  arriving  at  Holitsch. 
As  we  went  through  the  villages  we  heard  nothing 
but  the  confused  exclamations  of  people  who  seek 
forgetfulness  of  their  reverses  in  drink.  The  inhabi- 
tants suffered,  and  scenes  of  disorder  were  everywhere 
around  us.  After  some  hours  we  arrived  at  a  village 

o 


BA  TTLE  OF  A  USTERLITZ  1 1 1 

somewhat  larger  than  the  others,  and  found  a  bed- 
room for  the  Emperor.  We  had  a  little  rest,  but  our 
horses  were  kept  ready  in  case  of  pursuit.  Indeed  if 
some  French  squadrons  had  been  sent  after  us  to  com- 
plete our  defeat,  I  do  not  know  what  would  have 
happened.  There  were  no  regiments  nor  army  corps 
left  in  the  combined  armies ;  there  were  only  disorderly 
bands  of  marauders  increasing  the  general  desolation 
of  the  scene. 

I  should  have  liked  to  bring  the  two  Emperors 
together  so  as  to  ensure  the  safety  of  both,  but  I  did 
not  succeed.  The  Emperor  Francis  went  off  in  a 
different  direction,  but  he  charged  me  from  time  to 
time  to  communicate  to  Alexander  some  words  of 
consolation.  These  were  always  the  same,  assuring 
us  that  he  had  already  experienced  similar  disasters, 
and  that  although  the  blow  fell  mainly  upon  himself, 
he  was  far  from  losing  hope. 


[The  Memoirs  of  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  here 
come  to  an  end.  He  was  dictating  them  during  his 
last  illness,  and  death  interrupted  his  work ;  but  he 
left  behind  him  a  mass  of  letters,  diaries,  and  other 
documents  relating  to  subsequent  periods  of  his  career, 
a  selection  from  which  will  be  found  in  the  following 
chapters.] 


CHAPTER  XI 

1806 

RUSSIA  AND  PRUSSIA  AFTER  THE  BATTLE  OP  AUSTERLITZ. 

THE  battle  of  Austerlitz  was  fought  on  the  2nd  of 
December  1805.  On  the  26th  of  that  month,  Napo- 
leon signed  a  treaty  of  peace  with  Austria  at  Presburg, 
and  meanwhile  Alexander  and  his  Ministers  were  con- 
sulting as  to  the  best  means  of  retrieving  the  humilia- 
tion that  had  been  inflicted  on  the  Russian  Court.  On 
the  17th  of  January,  1806,  the  following  memorandum 
on  the  situation  was  presented  by  Prince  Adam  Czar- 
toryski  to  the  Czar  : — 

'The  fate  of  the  European  Continent  is  for  the 
present  in  the  hands  of  three  Powers — Russia,  France, 
and  Prussia.  The  relations  which  will  be  established 
between  them- -the  system  of  policy  which  each  will 
follow — the  moderation,  avidity,  energy,  or  weakness, 
which  will  inspire  its  views  and  measures — will 
either  bring  about  the  enslavement  of  the  smaller 
States,  or  secure  to  Europe  at  least  a  period  of  calm 
and  tranquillity,  if  not  of  permanent  independence 
and  happiness. 


'  As  I  propose  more  especially  to  treat  in  this 
memorandum  of  the  political  relations  of  Russia  with 
Prussia,  I  shall  only  speak  of  France  in  so  far  as  she 
has  an  influence  on  those  relations.  I  will  first  ex- 
amine the  principal  features  of  the  policy  of  each  of 
the  three  Powers. 

'  Russia  does  not  wish  to  acquire  anything  for  her- 
self, but  she  is  not  willing,  and  she  ought  not,  to  lose 
the  place  and  character  which  a  century  of  glorious 
achievements  has  assigned  her.  Satisfied  with  her 
advantages,  her  only  ambition  has  been  to  preserve 
the  weak  against  the  attacks  of  the  strong ;  her 
weapons  have  been  appeals  to  right  and  justice,  and 
she  has  only  used  force  when  those  weapons  have 
proved  ineffectual.  When  the  employment  of  force 
has  also  not  been  successful,  the  general  confidence  of 
mankind  has  been  her  reward,  or  has  at  least  made 
her  forget  her  temporary  reverses. 

*  Between  France  and  Russia,  which,  when  Europe 
was  in  its  normal  condition,  could  hardly  come  in 
contact  with  each  other,  is  Prussia :  timid  by  system 
and  by  the  necessity  of  economising  her  resources,  she 
can  do  nothing  alone  either  against  Russia  or  against 
France.  If  these  two  Powers  were  equal  in  influence 
and  in  activity,  Prussia  would  be  entirely  justified  in 
keeping  on  good  terms  with  both  of  them.  But  one 
is  constantly  encroaching  on  its  neighbours,  while  the 
other  seeks  only  to  protect  them  against  such  encroach- 
ment ;  and  it  is  therefore  both  the  duty  and  the 
interest  of  Prussia  to  join  Russia  in  forming  a  barrier 
against  France.  This  task  devolves  upon  Prussia  as 

VOL.  II.  H 


Ti4       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

i 

a  first-class  State.  Russia,  on  the  other  hand,  should 
not  neglect  anything  that  could  enable  Prussia  to  play 
such  a  part  with  success,  unless  it  were  evident  that 
either  from  necessity  or  under  the  influence  of 
private  interests,  Prussia  would  refuse  to  undertake 
the  task,  in  which  case  Russia  would  have  to  seek 
other  combinations  to  protect  the  weaker  Powers  and 
herself  against  attack.  .  .  . 

'  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  during  the  recent 
war  Russia  in  vain  exhausted  all  her  means  of  per- 
suasion to  induce  Prussia  to  take  part  in  it.  The 
latter  Power  drew  a  line  of  demarcation  which  im- 
peded the  operations  of  the  belligerents,  and  while 
affecting  to  be  neutral,  was  really  the  ally  of  France, 
receiving  as  her  reward  the  great  advantages  she  has 
derived  from  the  partition  of  Germany. 

'  When,  after  the  treaties  of  Luneville  and  Amiens, 
Buonaparte  began  to  make  in  the  midst  of  peace 
conquests  more  important  than  those  which  he  had 
achieved  during  the  war — when  by  his  arbitrary 
conduct  he  violated  the  rights  of  nations  and  the 
integrity  of  neutral  States — Prussia  was  the  first  to 
guarantee  him  in  the  possession  of  the  territories  he 
had  seized,  to  pardon,  excuse,  and  justify  his  aggres- 
sions. .  .  .  When  the  danger  became  greater, 
and  Russia  strove  to  bring  about  a  combination  of 
the  Powers  to  oppose  Buonaparte's  rapid  progress, 
Prussia  was  invited  to  take  part  in  it,  but  she  always 
declined,  at  the  same  time  making  great  professions 
of  impartiality  and  of  attachment  to  the  Emperor's 
person.  Our  wishes,  she  said,  are  for  the  success  of 


AFTER  THE  BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  115 

Russia's  plans,  but  we  have  adopted  a  system  of  rigid 
neutrality,  and  moreover  we  are  without  resources, 
and  to  make  preparations  would  place  us  in  the 
greatest  danger.  So  determined  was  the  King  of 
Prussia  to  reject  Russia's  proposals,  that  he  punished 
General  Zastrow  for  having  communicated  them  to 
him.  To  put  further  pressure  upon  Prussia,  Russian 
troops  were  sent  to  her  frontier ;  but  the  only  re- 
sult was  that  Prussia  protested  against  being  thus 
threatened,  and  placed  her  army  on  a  war  footing. 
The  Russian  troops  then  withdrew ;  and  this  conde- 
scension was  only  followed  by  new  disasters.  While 
the  negotiations  were  going  on,  the  French  defeated 
the  Austrians  and  entered  Prussian  territory,  arriving 
as  far  as  Olmiitz  before  the  Russians  could  come  to 
the  assistance  of  their  allies.  This  violation  of 
Prussian  territory  on  the  part  of  France  seemed  at 
first  to  change  Prussia's  attitude  towards  that  Power, 
but  she  never  became  an  effective  member  of  the 
coalition.  She  imposed  the  most  onerous  conditions 
on  her  acceptance  of  the  Russian  proposals,  and 
although  Russia  was  ready  to  accept  them,  the  King 
was  evidently  unwilling  to  come  to  an  understanding 
with  us  as  to  a  plan  of  campaign,  and  his  Government 
conducted  the  negotiations  in  such  a  dilatory  manner 
that  no  practical  result  was  arrived  at. 

'  Prussia  might  in  this  have  been  influenced  by  her 
jealousy  of  Austria,  her  rival ;  but  after  Austria  was 
beaten  by  Buonaparte  and  forced  to  sue  for  peace, 
the  conduct  of  the  Berlin  Cabinet  towards  Russia 
was  the  same,  though  the  Emperor  offered  it  all  the 


u6       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

forces  at  his   disposal  if  it  would  join  him  against 
France. 

'The  King  of  Prussia  could  at  that  time  have 
brought  an  army  of  299,000  men  into  the  field,  as  will 
be  seen  from  the  following  table  : 

Prussian  troops,  not  including  reser\7e  battalions,  193,000  men 

Saxon          „  „  15,000  „ 

Hessian       „  „  16,000  „ 

Hesse-Darmstadt  troops  „  8,000  „ 

Brunswick                 „  „  3,000  „ 

English  and  Hanoverian  troops,  „  24,000  „ 

Russian  40,000 


Total  of  troops  under  the  immediate  orders 

of  the  King  of  Prussia,  299,000  men 

'  This  enumeration  was  made  by  Baron  Hardenberg 
after  the  battle  of  Austerlitz. 

'  Russia  acted  entirely  in  the  spirit  indicated  at  the 
beginning  of  this  memorandum.  She  had  a  right  to 
hope  for  a  close  union  and  perfect  confidence  and 
concert  in  the  resolutions  which  were  to  be  arrived  at 
by  mutual  agreement,  and  expected  no  other  reward 
for  her  cordiality. 

'  But  from  that  moment  there  was  an  end  of  all 
frank  intercourse,  and  only  the  appearances  of  friend- 
ship were  retained.  Prussia  made  an  arrangement 
with  France,  not  only  without  consulting  Russia,  but 
even  without  communicating  to  her  the  engagements 
into  which  she  had  entered.  The  Cabinet  of  Berlin 
received  from  Buonaparte  the  price  of  its  complaisance. 
Whether  through  weakness  or  through  fear,  the  King 


AFTER  THE  BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  117 

appears  to  have  agreed  to  all  that  his  counsellors 
wished;  the  only  point  he  bore  in  mind  was  that  the 
retreat  of  the  Russians  was  the  probable  condition  of 
the  acquisition  by  Prussia  of  a  country  belonging  to 
the  Emperor  of  Russia's  ally.*  Thus  Prussia,  while 
reserving  to  herself  up  to  the  last  moment  the  power 
of  employing  the  forces  of  the  allies,  only  took  advan- 
tage of  their  being  in  the  field  to  make  an  arrange- 
ment with  France  for  her  own  benefit  and  to  their 
detriment.  Such  conduct,  pursued  with  such  uniform- 
ity and  perseverance,  could  only  be  the  result  of 
unavowed  motives,  which  often  constitute  the  secret 
springs  of  the  policy  of  States  and  are  to  be  inferred 
from  their  geographical  position  and  the  nature  and 
degree  of  their  resources. 

'  The  power  of  Prussia  is  factitious  ;•  created  by 
genius,  it  can  only  be  sustained  by  a  policy  of  greed 
and  deception.  In  constantly  adding  to  her  territories 
she  has  absorbed  into  herself  heterogeneous  elements, 
and  she  keeps  up  an  army  quite  out  of  proportion  to 
her  revenue  and  her  population.  To  consolidate  and 
extend  her  resources  is  the  principal  object  of  her 
policy  ;  every  other  consideration,  except  that  of  fear, 
is  subordinate  to  it.  She  consequently  seeks  her 
advantage  everywhere,  and  interferes  for  this  purpose 
in  every  European  question  ;  but  knowing  her  weak- 
ness, she  always  avoids  proceeding  to  extremes.  She 
withdraws  directly  a  question  has  to  be  dealt  with  by 
the  sword,  because  she  ^has  not  sufficient  means  in 

*  Hanover,  then  belonging  to  England,  was  ceded  to  Prussia  by  France  by  the 
Treaty  of  December  15,  1805. 


1 1 8      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTOR YSK1 

herself  to  carry  on  a  war.  This  want  of  power,  com- 
bined with  the  wish  to  play  a  part  and  the  necessity 
of  keeping  it  up,  leads  Prussian  policy  into  combina- 
tions which  are  essentially  opposed  to  the  interests  of 
Europe  and  to  any  great  or  generous  views  with 
regard  to  Russia.  The  latter  Power  seeks  to  protect 
and  strengthen  the  smaller  States,  while  France 
successfully  pursues  her  system  of  aggression  and 
destruction  ;  and  so  long  as  this  is  the  case  Prussian 
policy  will  take  the  side  of  France  against  Russia. 
Though  Buonaparte's  ambition  and  greed  are  insati- 
able, Prussia  will  firmly  believe,  perhaps  not  without 
reason,  that  by  assisting  France  she  can  only  gain, 
while  by  opposing  her  she  will  be  destroyed  like  her 
neighbours. 

'  In  striving  to  strengthen  her  dominions,  Prussia 
takes  care  to  extend  her  influence  as  much  as  possible. 
She  wishes  not  only  to  be  paramount  in  the  north  of 
Germany,  but  also  to  remove  all  foreign  influence  from 
it,  especially  that  of  Russia  ;  and  with  this  object 
she  seeks  every  means  of  preventing  and  paralysing 
all  developments  of  Russian  influence  in  that  quarter. 
Moreover,  she  is  and  always  will  be  the  rival  of 
Austria  in  German  affairs,  while  our  policy  is  to 
support  Austria  in  Germany  in  order  that  she  should 
not  interfere  with  us  in  Turkey.  France,  on  the 
other  hand,  will  always  be  the  natural  ally  of  Prussia 
against  Austria.  Nor  has  Prussia  so  much  to  fear 
from  France  as  from  Russia.  We  wish  to  be  masters 
of  the  Niemen  and  the  Vistula  ;  these  rivers  are  so 
necessary  to  our  trade,  and  so  close  at  hand,  that  our 


AFTER  THE  BATTLE  OF  AUSTERL1TZ  119 

attention  has  frequently  been  directed  to  them,  and 
they  must  become  ours  sooner  or  later.  Prussia 
knows  and  fears  this  ;  she  will  always  endeavour  to 
diminish  our  weight  and  our  resources  in  Europe,  in 
whatever  direction  we  may  attempt  to  extend  them, 
but  especially  if  we  turn  our  eyes  to  Austrian  Galicia, 
for  if  we  possessed  that  country  we  could  at  any 
moment  send  troops  into  the  very  centre  of  the 
Prussian  Monarchy.  Prussia  is  the  open  rival  of 
Austria,  and  does  not  conceal  her  jealousy  and  distrust 
of  her  ;  but  in  secret  she  dislikes  us  perhaps  even 
more,  now  that  crippled  Austria  inspires  her  with  less 
fear.  .  .  .  All  these  reflections  lead  to  the  conclusion 
that  not  only  will  Prussia  never  be  the  sincere  ally  of 
Russia,  but  that  she  will  rather  secretly  incline  to 
France,  and  ultimately  perhaps  revive  the  old  coalition 
between  France,  Prussia,  and  Turkey. 

'  But  though  there  is  so  little  hope  of  sincerely 
attaching  Prussia  to  Russia,  it  is  none  the  less  true 
that  the  union  of  these  Powers  can  alone  at  this 
moment  save  Europe,  and  that  nothing  could  be  more 
injurious  than  an  intimate  rapprochement  between 
Buonaparte  and  Prussia.  The  more  the  inclination 
of  the  latter  to  join  France  becomes  manifest,  the 
more  should  we  strive  to  prevent  such  a  tendency 
from  becoming  too  predominant  at  Berlin,  and  take 
advantage,  with  the  support  of  a  powerful  party  in 
the  Ministry  and  at  Court,  of  every  circumstance 
favourable  to  our  interests  in  order  to  diminish  its 
influence.  .  .  .  At  the  same  time  we  should  be  most 
careful  not  to  be  led  into  taking  mistaken  steps.  It 


1 20      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  A  DA  M  CZA  R  TOR  YSKI 

would  be  most  useful  to  bind  Prussia  by  some  precise 
engagement,  and  every  means  should  be  taken  to 
attain  this  object.  Berlin  should  become  one  of  the 
chief  pivots  of  Russian  policy ;  our  agents  there 
should  make  themselves  acquainted  with  every  detail 
of  the  views  and  relations  of  the  Prussian  Court,  so 
as  to  be  capable  of  deciding  on  every  proposal  that 
might  be  made  to  them.  In  no  case  should  they  be 
authorised  to  confirm  or  guarantee  the  advantages 
Prussia  might  gain  from  her  complaisance  to  France  ; 
on  the  contrary,  they  should  be  instructed  to  show 
Prussia  that  Russia  cannot  tolerate  a  system  entirely 
opposed  to  her  views,  and  inspire  her  with  a  fear  of 
Russia  almost,  if  not  quite,  as  great  as  that  of  Buona- 
parte. .  .  .  They  should  endeavour  to  point  out  to 
the  King  of  Prussia  that  his  interests  coincide  with 
those  of  Europe  generally,  and  withdraw  him  from 
the  influence  of  the  members  of  his  Cabinet,  who  are 
devoted  to  France  either  by  principle  or  through 
corruption. 

'  The  chief  object  of  our  negotiations  at  Berlin 
should  be  to  make  Prussia  enter  into  defensive 
engagements,  which  would  not  be  limited  to  the 
north  of  Germany,  and  which  would  especially  include 
the  preservation  of  the  Ottoman  Empire.  These 
should,  if  possible,  be  accompanied  by  a  guarantee 
of  the  order  of  things  which  would  be  established  by 
a  treaty  of  peace  between  France  and  Russia,  and 
also  between  France  and  England,  specifying  among 
the  territories  to  be  guaranteed  those  of  Turkey.  A 
plan  of  military  action  should  also  be  drawn  up  between 


A  FTER  THE  BA  TTLE  OF  A  USTERLITZ     1 2 1 

Russia   and   Prussia,  for   the  eventuality  of   France 
attacking  one  of  the  guaranteed  territories.  .  . 

'  It  is  possible  that  Napoleon's  violent  character 
may  produce  a  renewal  of  the  war  in  North  Germany; 
in  that  case  we  should  support  Prussia  with  all  the 
forces  at  our  command,  and  we  should  at  once  give 
her  an  assurance  to  that  effect.  If  the  King  sincerely 
wishes  to  join  Russia  and  act  as  a  buffer  to  Europe, 
facts  will  soon  prove  his  sincerity.  .  .  .  But  I  must 
repeat  to  your  Majesty  that  it  is  necessary  to  guard 
against  too  many  concessions  to  the  Berlin  Court. 
The  past  has  proved  that  Russia  has  nothing  to  gain 
from  them.  .  .  By  trusting  Prussia  and  blindly 
following  her  suggestions,  Russia  will  run  a  great 
risk  of  disaster.  Such  suggestions  can  only  be  in  the 
Prussian  interest,  which  is  nearly  always  opposed  to 
that  of  Russia  and  of  Europe ;  and  by  yielding  to 
them  we  can  only  be  led  into  taking  steps  which  would 
deprive  us  of  the  respect  of  the  world,  and  of  the 
attachment  and  confidence  of  our  true  allies.  Mean- 
while Prussia  would  continue  to  enlarge  her  territory, 
and  become  a  formidable  Power,  even  to  Russia  her- 
self. .  .  A  war  with  Prussia  is  an  event  which 
circumstances  must  bring  about  sooner  or  later,  and 
we  should  at  once  make  our  preparations  for  waging 
it  with  success.' 


CHAPTER  XII 

1806 


DISAGREEMENT    BETWEEN    THE    CZAR    AND    PRINCE    CZARTORYSKI  AS    TO 

THE    POLICY    OF    RUSSIA    BEFORE    THE     BATTLE    OF    AUSTERLITZ. 

NEGOTIATIONS    WITH    ENGLAND. THE    LATTER    PROPOSES   TO    GIVE 

HOLLAND  TO  PRUSSIA  AS  AN  EQUIVALENT  FOR  HANOVER. 


IT  will  have  been  seen  from  the  last  part  of  Prince 
Czartoryski's  Memoirs  (chapter  x)  that  the  Emperor 
Alexander,  who  since  the  Memel  interview*  had  always 
been  strongly  inclined  to  an  alliance  with  Prussia, 
notwithstanding  her  treacherous  policy,  was  on  this 
and  other  points  at  issue  with  his  Foreign  Minister 
during  the  momentous  year  which  closed  with  the 
battle  of  Austerlitz.  Prince  Czartoryski,  in  a  private 
letter  and  memorandum  addressed  by  him  to  the 
Emperor  in  April  1806,  gives  the  following  details  on 
this  subject  and  on  the  negotiations  with  England 
during  that  period  :— 

'  Your  Imperial  Majesty  will  appreciate  my  motives 
in  attaching  to  the  enclosed  memorandum  on  the 
policy  of  your  Cabinet.  .  .  .  some  remarks 

See  Vol.  I,  pages  281  and  282. 


DISAGREEMENT  WITH  THE  CZAR  123 

addressed  solely  to  yourself,  and  stating  the  whole 
truth  without  concealment  or  palliation.  Sovereigns 
are  so  inseparable  from  the  States  which  they  govern 
that  in  speaking  of  their  vicissitudes  it  is  impossible 
to  avoid  dwelling  on  their  personal  conduct ;  which 
indeed  often  determines  the  success  or  the  decline  of 
Empires. 

'  Few  reproaches  have  been  made  to  the  Russian 
Cabinet  with  so  little  justice  as  that  of  having 
allowed  itself  to  be  carried  away  by  exaggerated  ideas 
of  self-sacrifice  to  the  general  good  of  Europe.  Those 
who  made  such  a  reproach  forgot  that  not  only  the 
reputation  but  the  safety  of  Russia  depended  on  the 
general  good  ;  and  they  were  not  aware  of  all  the  con- 
versations with  your  Majesty  during  the  past  two 
years,  in  which  ideas  were  repeatedly  brought  forward 
as  to  the  combinations  which  might  be  advantageous 
to  Russia — such  as  the  possession  of  Moldavia  and 
Wallachia,  the  Vistula  as  a  frontier,  the  reunion  of  the 
Slavonic  and  Greek  populations,  etc. — as  acquisitions 
of  territory  and  securities  for  her  trade.  These  ideas 
were  always  rejected  by  your  Majesty,  and  it  would 
consequently  have  been  difficult  to  entertain  the  plan 
of  a  partition  of  Europe  with  Napoleon. 

'  But  events  were  showing  that  the  need  of  ex- 
tending our  influence  and  our  territory  might  become 
more  and  more  urgent  either  in  order  to  maintain 
Russia  in  the  place  she  ought  to  occupy  or  to  estab- 
lish a  real  and  durable  peace.  It  seemed,  therefore, 
that  the  only  course  to  be  followed  was  one  based  on 
the  purest  and  most  disinterested  sentiments.  But  I 


I24      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

perceived,  perhaps  too  late  and  with  great  pain,  that 
your  Majesty  had  no  deep  or  decided  conviction  as  to 
the  subjects  which  engaged  the  attention  of  our 
Cabinet.  The  consequence  was  that  after  a  plan  of 
action  of  which  you  had  approved  had  been  partly 
carried  out,  you  continually  changed  your  mind,  and 
we  were  obliged  to  reconsider  the  whole  question  as 
if  no  agreement  had  been  arrived  at. 

1  When  the  news  of  the  death  of  the  Due  d'Enghien 
came  to  St  Petersburg,  your  Majesty  will  remember 
that  though  the  despatches  I  prepared  on  the  subject 
were  very  strongly  worded,  they  were  not  intended 
to  be  made  public,  and  that  it  was  your  Majesty  alone 
that  gave  the  impulse  for  further  action.  This 
energy  gave  me  hope,  for  it  seemed  likely  to  develop 
in  your  Majesty  that  decided  conviction  which  until 
then  had  not  sufficiently  shown  itself  in  your  actions.* 
War  now  seemed  to  me  inevitable,  but  you  thought 
otherwise.  You  thought  up  to  the  last  moment  that 
Austria  would  not  dare  to  fight,  and  that  this  would 
serve  as  an  excuse  to  Russia  also  to  hold  aloof.  The 
consequence  was  that  though  the  steps  taken  by  the 
Cabinet  by  the  express  orders  of  your  Majesty  pointed 
directly  to  war,  no  preparations  for  war  could  be  made 
in  the  interior  of  the  Empire.  .  .  .  Your  Majesty  did 

h  '  Prince  Czartoryski  was  the  principal  author  of  the  system  of  European 
arbitration  which  had  led  Russia  to  take  up  arms  against  France.  This  system, 
which  was  used  by  Russian  statesmen  as  a  mask  for  their  national  ambition,  was  in 
Prince  Czartoryski  prompted  by  a  sincere  and  frankly  conceived  idea.  .  .  .  He 
addressed  to  the  young  Emperor,  formerly  his  friend,  and  now  again  becoming  his 
master,  noble  and  respectful  remonstrances  which  would  do  honour  to  a  Minister  in 
a  free  country,  and  are  far  more  creditable  in  a  country  where  resistance  to  the 
sovereign  is  an  act  of  rare  devotion  and  remains  unknown  to  the  public.'  (Thiers* 
History  of  the  Consulate  and  the  Empire,  Book  x.xiv.) 


DISAGREEMENT  WITH  THE  CZAR  125 

not  think  proper  to  order  a  sufficient  levy  of  recruits, 
though  the  necessity  of  such  a  measure  was  repeatedly 
pointed  out  to  you.  This  indecision  was  most  in- 
jurious and  dangerous,  as  was  strikingly  shown  in  our 
conduct  towards  Prussia.  The  proposal  to  send 
Russian  troops  to  act  for  Austria  and  against  Prussia 
had  been  entirely  approved  by  the  most  eminent  per- 
sonages in  Europe.  It  was  this  that  decided  the 
Archduke  Charles  to  declare  himself  for  war,  as  he 
considered  it  a  proof  that  Russia  wished  to  make  war 
in  earnest.  Pitt  and  Fox  also  agreed.  "  If  hostilities 
take  place  with  Prussia,"  said  the  latter,  "  they  should 
be  pushed  on  vigorously  and  without  regard  to  other 
considerations." 

'  It  is  true  that  your  Majesty  afterwards  told  us 
that  you  had  all  along  intended  to  regulate  your 
conduct  by  the  great  probability  that  the  King  of 
Prussia  would  finally  decide  to  join  us.  But  who 
could  answer  for  this  ?  The  disastrous  result  of  our 
operations  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  Memel  interview, 
which  I  look  upon  as  one  of  the  most  unfortunate 
events  that  have  ever  happened  for  the  interests  of 
Russia,  both  through  its  immediate  consequences  and 
those  which  have  followed  upon  it  since  and  will  in 
the  future.  The  intimate  friendship  established 
at  that  interview,  after  a  few  days'  acquaintance, 
between  your  Majesty  and  the  King  caused  you  to 
look  upon  Prussia  not  as  a  political  State,  but  as  an 
individual  dear  to  you.  This  personal  connection 
with  the  sovereign  of  a  State  whose  interests  are 
mostly  opposed  to  those  of  Russia  continually  hamp- 


126      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ered  the  action  of  our  Cabinet,  and  finally  prevented 
the  adoption  of  vigorous  and  decisive  measures  at  the 
beginning  of  the  campaign.  In  my  opinion  the 
suspension  of  the  order  to  march  the  Russian  troops 
into  Prussia,  and  your  Majesty's  departure  for  the 
army,  were  the  chief  causes  of  all  the  misfortunes  that 
have  happened  to  us.  I  strove  in  vain  to  represent 
to  you  all  the  inconveniences  which  would  result  from 
your  presence  with  the  army,  and  my  forebodings  have 
unfortunately  all  been  realised.  Your  presence  trans- 
ferred the  responsibility  of  the  generals  to  yourself, 
and  you  had  neither  the  experience  nor  the  know- 
ledge necessary  for  taking  the  command.  Meanwhile 
the  order  to  send  the  troops  into  Prussia  still 
remained  suspended  ;  yet  each  day  of  delay  was  a  day 
lost  for  Russia  and  Europe,  and  gained  for  Buonaparte. 
He  advanced  and  we  remained  stationary. 

'  Moreover,  since  your  Majesty's  departure  from 
Pulawy  your  opinions  and  sentiments  underwent  a 
notorious  change  which  necessarily  exercised  great 
influence  on  our  operations.  You  sent  away  those  in 
whom  you  had  previously  trusted,  and  although  I 
accompanied  you  in  your  journey  to  Berlin,  you 
rejected  all  my  proposals  and  showed  by  your  state- 
ments that  your  views  and  system  of  action  had 
entirely  changed.  .  .  .  The  inference  which  was 
drawn  from  all  this  at  Berlin  was  that  your  Majesty's 
policy  was  different  from  that  of  your  Cabinet ;  this 
naturally  encouraged  the  duplicity  of  the  Prussian 
Government,  and  influenced  the  stipulations  of  the 


DISAGREEMENT    WITH  THE  CZAR  127 

unfortunate  Treaty  of  Potsdam,*  at  the  foot  of  which 
I  shall  always  regret  that  circumstances  compelled  me 
to  place  my  name. 

'  If  you  had  listened  to  the  advice  we  were  con- 
stantly giving  you,  at  first  not  to  go  to  the  army, 
and  afterwards  not  to  remain  with  it,  but  to  ask  the 
King  of  Prussia  for  an  interview  in  order  to  move 
him  to  decisive  action,  the  battle  of  Austerlitz  would 
not  have  been  fought  and  lost,  or,  if  lost,  would  not 
have  had  the  results  which  followed  upon  it.t  General 
Kutusoff,  left  to  himself,  would  have  avoided  a  battle 
until  the  Prussians  should  have  joined  his  army.  This 
would  have  obviously  been  the  right  course.  Buona- 
parte's interest  was  not  to  lose  time  ;  ours  was  to  gain 
it.  He  had  every  reason  to  risk  a  decisive  battle  and 
we  to  avoid  one.  Your  Majesty  will  recollect  that  I 
repeatedly  spoke  to  you  in  this  sense,  advising  that 
the  enemy  should  be  harassed  by  partial  combats  and 
that  the  bulk  of  our  army  should  march  into  Hungary 
to  effect  a  junction  with  the  Archduke.  And  if  your 
Majesty  had  not  been  on  the  battlefield,  you  would  have 
been  able  to  issue  your  orders  calmly  and  without 
precipitation.  How  could  you  do  this  in  the  midst  of 
the  confusion  at  Holitsch,  where  you  were  surrounded 
by  people  who  loudly  accused  the  Austrians  of  treach- 
ery and  declared  that  the  Russian  army  was  absolutely 
incapable  of  fighting  any  longer  ? 

*  Signed  on  the  3rd  of  November  1805. 

t  'The  young  Emperor  refused  to  listen  to  any  more  advice,  as  he  thought 
himself  more  clever  than  his  advisers.  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski — honest,  grave, 
ardent  under  a  cold  exterior,  who  had  become  the  inconvenient  censor  of  the  weak- 
ness and  instability  of  his  master — maintained  an  opinion  which  must  have 
completely  alienated  him.  He  thought  the  Emperor's  place  was  not  with  the  army.' 
Thiers'  History  of  the  Consulate  and  the  Empire,  Book  xxxiii. 


i28       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

'  In  the  midst  of  this  agitation  and  clamour  it  was 
impossible  to  say  anything  in  favour  of  Austria  or  of 
the  interests  of  Europe.  People  declared  that  your 
Majesty  had  done  enough  for  others  and  that  you 
must  now  think  of  yourself — as  if  your  glory  and 
your  safety  had  nothing  in  common  with  the  fall  of 
Austria  and  your  other  allies.  You  thought  fit  to 
reply  to  me  in  this  sense  when  I  ventured  to  speak  in 
favour  of  the  King  of  Naples ;  and  you  told  the 
Emperor  Francis  that  he  could  not  reckon  any  longer 
upon  your  army.  I  was  so  deeply  penetrated,  how- 
ever, with  the  great  evil  of  such  a  complete  abandon- 
ment of  the  cause  which  we  had  embraced  that  I  took 
it  upon  myself  to  write  to  Berlin  in  another  sense 
without  being  authorised  to  do  so  by  your  Majesty. 
But  this  step  could  have  no  result,  since  your  Majesty 
thought  it  necessary  to  say  to  the  Prussian  Minister 
here  that  you  would  leave  Prussia  at  liberty  to  come 
to  an  arrangement  with  France.  .  .  .' 

In  the  memorandum  which  accompanied  Prince 
Czartoryski's  letter  he  remarks,  referring  to  the 
preliminaries  of  the  battle  of  Austerlitz  : — 

'Prussia  was  a  chief  element  in  the  plan  that  was 
about  to  be  executed.  It  had  been  decided  that  she 
was  to  be  brought  into  the  coalition  at  any  cost,  and 
it  was  in  every  respect  the  interest  of  Russia  especially 
to  do  so,  as  in  sending  a  considerable  force  beyond 
her  frontiers  she  could  not  leave  behind  her  so 
suspicious  a  neighbour  as  Prussia.  If  the  Court  of 
Berlin  had  yielded,  the  success  of  the  plan  as  a  whole 


DISAGREEMENT  AS  TO  THE  POLICY  OF  RUSSIA    129 

could  not  have  been  doubtful.     If  it  had  resisted,  and 
our  armies  had  been  sent  forward  on  the  day  agreed 
upon,  they  would  have  found  the  Prussians  on  a  peace 
footing,  and  in  no  way  prepared  to  receive   us.   ... 
Our  true  policy  was  to  make  war  upon  Prussia :  that 
would  have  been  the  safest,  perhaps  the  only,  means 
of  success  in  our  great  undertaking.  .  .  .     The  opera- 
tion   against   Prussia   was   put    off  till   the   16th   of 
September,  by   which   date  it   was    calculated    that 
Kutusoffs  army  would  cover  Bohemia  and  threaten 
Silesia,  while  the  other  armies  entered  southern  and 
ducal  Prussia ;  and  by  that  date  the  Prussians  had 
had  time  to  make  preparations.     But  even  then  the 
Court  of  Berlin  admitted  that  its  troops  would  evacu- 
ate the  districts  up  to  the  Vistula.     We  might  at 
least  have  taken  possession  of  those  districts,  and  if 
we  had  gone  further,  our  success  would  not  have  been 
doubtful.     The  Prussians  may  be  good  soldiers,  but 
they  are  easier  for  the  Russians   to   beat  than    the 
French.     Moreover,  we  should  have  fought  them  in 
a    country    entirely   devoted   to    our   interests.     The 
enthusiasm  among  the  Poles  was  general ;  all  Poland 
was   ready   to   rise   en    masse,   and   asked   that   the 
sovereign  of  Russia  should  add  to  his  titles  that  of 
King   of    Poland.     None   of   our   allies    could   have 
objected  to  such  a  course,  as  they  had  all  sanctioned 
the  plan   of  marching  into  Prussia.     England,   who 
until  then  had,  in  accordance  with  her  old  principles 
of  policy,  been  jealous  of  our  exercising  a  preponder- 
ant  influence  over  Prussia,  now  declared  war   upon 
her,  destroying  her  trade  in  the  North  Sea  while  we 

VOL.    II.  T 


i3o       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

did  the  same  in  the  Baltic ;  she  even  went  so  far  as 
to  give  us,  for  the  purpose  of  acting  against  Prussia, 
all  the  subsidies  she  had  offered  to  that  Power  for 
action  against  France.  .  .  . 

We  lost  all  these  advantages  by  our  vacillation  ; 
our  armies  stopped  on  the  Prussian  frontier,  and  the 
violation  of  Prussian  territory  by  the  French  *  made 
Prussia  more   disposed   to  join   the    coalition.     The 
original  plan  of  invading  her  territory  was  now  aban- 
doned, and  your  Majesty's  Ministry  did  their  best  to 
bring  her  over  by  conciliation,  as  she  was  no  longer  to 
be  made  to  yield  by  terror.  .  .   Russia  has  been  re- 
proached  for   using   her   good    offices  in   London  to 
negotiate  the  cession  of  Hanover  to  Prussia,  f     But 
as  to  this  point,  we  may  appeal  to  people  who  were 
then  at  Berlin  and  were  aware  of  the  negotiations,  as 
difficult  as  they  were  disagreeable,  which  led  to  the 
Treaty  of  Potsdam.  .  .  .     Anyhow,  we  succeeded  in 
making  England  understand  the  urgent  motives  which 
had  led  us  to  yield  to  the  wishes  of  the  Berlin  Cabinet. 
She  agreed  not  to  break  off  the  negotiations,  to  sign 
the  treaty  for  the  subsidies,  and  to  assist  in  obtaining 
some  other  acquisition  for  Prussia — even   to   assure 
her  the  possession  of  Holland.     Russia   reserved  to 
herself  equivalent  acquisitions.  .  .  . 

Nothing  was  yet  lost ;  General  Mack's  defeat  had 
even  established  the  preponderance  of  Russia  over 
Austria  to  such  a  degree  that  people  looked  upon 
your  Majesty  as  the  future  saviour  of  the  Austrian 

*  See  page  99. 
t  See  Chapter  IX. 


Monarchy.  .  .  But  the  next  four  weeks  were  wasted 
in  mutual  complaints,  and  ended  in  the  battle  of 
Austerlitz,  in  a  feeling  of  extreme  exasperation  be- 
tween Russia  and  Austria,  in  the  retreat  of  the 
Russian  army  from  Moravia,  and  in  the  abandonment 
of  Europe  to  her  fate. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

1806 


NEGOTIATIONS    WITH    MR    FOX. — CORRESPONDENCE    BETWEEN    HIM    AND 
PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. MR  FOX's  PROPOSAL  TO  ATTACK  PRUSSIA. 


SHORTLY  after  the  appointment  of  Mr  Fox  as  Foreign 
Minister  in  the  administration  of  '  all  the  talents/ 
formed  by  Lord  Grenville  after  the  death  of  Pitt, 
the  following  correspondence  took  place  between  Mr 
Fox  and  Prince  Czartoryski  :— 

From   Mr  Fox 

DOWNING  STREET, 
17 th   March    1806. 

Relying  on  the  confidence  with  which  your 
Excellency  was  so  good  as  to  honour  me  last  year 
as  a  private  individual,  I  think  I  have  almost  a  right 
to  ask  for  a  continuance  of  your  kindness  in  the 
situation  in  which  I  am  now  placed.  I  would  not, 
however,  have  done  this,  notwithstanding  all  the  value 
I  attach  to  the  honour  of  your  friendship,  if  I  did  not 
entirely  adhere  to  the  opinion  I  expressed  to  M.  de 
Novosiltzoff  that  a  full  and  reciprocal  confidence  be- 
tween the  two  Courts  is  absolutely  necessary  both  for 


133 

the  good  of  them  both  and  for  that  of  the  whole  of 
Europe.  I  was  unfortunately  not  able  to  approve  the 
plan  of  last  year,  and  I  did  not  conceal  my  opinion  on 
the  subject.  Would  to  God  that  the  last  words  I  said 
to  M.  de  Novosiltzoff  in  the  presence  of  the  Prince  of 
Wales — whatever  you  do,  take  your  time,  piano,  piano 
— had  made  more  impression !  I  beg  you  not  to 
think,  Monsieur  le  Prince,  that  I  remind  your  Excel- 
lency of  all  this  in  order  to  boast  of  my  foresight.  If 
I  look  back  on  the  past,  it  is  only  to  obtain  more 
instruction  as  to  the  future.  A  proposal  of  peace 
such  as  I  wished  to  be  made  when  I  had  the  honour 
of  writing  to  your  Excellency  a  year  ago*  would  per- 
haps be  out  of  place  in  present  circumstances.  Russia 
has  taken  too  prominent  a  part  in  the  war  now  to 
assume  the  office  of  a  mediator.  But  since  Buona- 
parte's last  speech  to  his  legislative  assembly  there  are 
many  people  who  think  he  will  send  us  some  proposal 
at  least  tending  to  a  negotiation.f  Might  I  venture 
to  ask  your  Excellency  what  would  be  your  opinion  as 
to  the  course  to  be  adopted  in  such  a  case  ?  The  first 
answer  would  necessarily  depend  on  the  nature  of  the 
overtures  to  be  made  to  us.  They  might  be  made  in 
such  a  way  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  reject  them 
without  discussion  ;  but  let  us  suppose  they  will  be  too 
plausible  for  us  to  do  this.  In  that  case  it  seems  to 
me  that  it  would  be  well  in  the  first  instance  to  accept 
the  overtures,  at  the  same  time  declaring  that  it  will 

*  This  letter  cannot  be  traced  in  the  Czartoryski  Archives. 

t  The  letters  which  passed  between  Talleyrand  and  Fox  on  this  subject  were  laid 
befoie  Parliament  in  1806.  They  are  published  in  Lord  Russell's  Memorials  and  Cor- 
retpondence  of  Charles  James  Fox. 


134 

be  necessary  that  his  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  Russia 
should  take  part  both  in  the  treaty  and  in  the  negotia- 
tions which  may  lead  to  it.  I  have  not  at  this 
moment  any  reason  to  believe  that  any  overtures  what- 
ever will  be  made  to  us :  I  speak  only  in  accordance 
with  the  ideas  of  those  who  attach  more  weight  to 
Buonaparte's  language  than  it  seems  to  me  to  deserve. 
Your  Excellency  will  see  that  I  speak  to  you  frankly. 
If  you  will  equally  show  confidence  in  me  I  will  not 
misuse  it. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  contingency — unfor- 
tunately the  most  probable  one — that  the  war  will 
continue  even  without  matters  coining  to  a  negotia- 
tion. I  must  begin  by  saying  to  your  Excellency 
plainly  that  I  have  in  no  way  altered  my  old  opinions, 
that  offensive  alliances  are  not  at  all  to  my  taste,  and 
that  as  they  exist,  our  best  course  would  now  be  to 
give  them  as  far  as  possible  a  defensive  character.  A 
good  opportunity  now  seems  to  present  itself  for 
attaining  this  object,  and  at  the  same  time  showing 
that  we  are  resolved  to  oppose  injustice  and  aggres- 
sion. The  King  of  Prussia  has  seized  the  electorate 
of  Hanover ;  his  pretext  is  that  he  wishes  to  protect 
it  by  his  troops,  and  under  this  pretext  he  deprives 
the  King  and  the  Regency  even  of  the  civil  govern- 
ment of  the  country.  He  asserts  that  his  occupation 
of  the  electorate  is  only  to  last  until  a  peace  shall 
settle  its  fate,  but  he  has  not  distinctly  stated  that  he 
will  then  restore  it  to  the  Elector.  We  have  made 
representations  to  him  on  this  subject,  and  Lord  G. 
L.  Gower  has  been  instructed  to  communicate  them 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FOX  135 

to  your  Excellency.  If  the  powerful  support  of  your 
Court  could  induce  Prussia  to  act  nobly  on  this 
occasion,  infinite  good  would  be  the  result.  In  the 
first  place,  we  would  show  Europe  that  the  King  of 
England  still  preserves  his  influence  in  Continental 
affairs,  which  is  a  great  point,  and  further,  that  he 
employs  this  influence  not  to  attack  others,  but  to 
defend  himself. 

The  King  of  Prussia  has  given  up  Anspach  and 
Bayreuth ;  he  should  not  be  helped  nor  even  en- 
couraged to  retake  them,  but  he  should  be  made  to 
abandon  the  odious  system  of  compensating  himself 
with  the  property  of  others.  In  the  event  of  Buona- 
parte retaliating  on  Prussia  for  such  an  honourable 
policy  by  making  war  upon  her — which  I  do  not 
think  probable — she  will  have  to  be  defended  with  all 
the  forces  at  our  disposal.  Your  Excellency  has  much 
more  means  than  I  have  of  conjecturing  what  the  con- 
duct of  Austria  would  be  under  such  circumstances. 
I  am  inclined  to  think  that  she  would  at  least  do 
no  harm,  if  she  is  not  able  to  do  any  good.  It 
might  perhaps  be  said  that  even  with  your  support  we 
would  not  be  able  to  persuade  his  Prussian  Majesty 
to  abandon  an  object  which  it  is  reported  that  he  has 
long-  coveted.  But  we  would  at  least  have  shown 

o 

him  that  he  can  never  hope  to  have  quiet  and  legiti- 
mate possession  of  it ;  and  so  far  as  our  interests  are 
concerned,  we  would  remain  in  precisely  the  same 
situation  as  that  which  we  now  occupy.  Moreover, 
I  think  one  should  in  any  case  avoid  the  appearance 
of  wishing  to  lay  down  the  law  to  the  King  of 


136      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Prussia,  or  of  provoking  him  to  war  against  France. 
Let  him  temporise  as  much  as  he  thinks  proper  ;  I 
would  be  the  first  to  advise  him  to  do  so ;  but  let  him 
not  attack  any  other  State,  whether  strong  or  weak. 

As  to  Austria,  I  am  very  glad  to  hear  that  public 
opinion  thinks  the  friendship  which  has  so  long 
existed  between  her  and  Russia  has  not  been  altered 
as  much  as  people  thought  some  months  ago.  A  - 
friendly  understanding,  and  if  possible  a  perfect  har- 
mony, between  all  the  countries  which  are  not 
dependent  upon  France  is  to  be  desired  more  than 
ever.  Even  with  regard  to  those  which  are  more  or 
less  under  her  subjection  it  would  I  think  be  necessary 
to  avoid  every  kind  of  offence  and  not  to  show  any  feel- 
ing of  revenge.  Opportunities  might,  for  what  we 
know,  arise  in  the  course  of  time  which  two  Cabinets 
united  as  ours  are,  might  by  judicious  conduct  employ 
to  advantage.  The  existing  state  of  affairs,  if  we  look 
to  the  present  or  the  future,  is  truly  disheartening. 
It  cannot  be  remedied  by  a  coup  de  main  :  a  wise  and 
consistent  course  of  conduct  can  alone  enable  us  to  do 
so.  If  we  cannot  reduce  the  enormous  power  of 
France,  it  will  always  be  something  to  stop  its 
progress. 

I  have  thus  entirely  opened  my  heart  to  you,  mon 
Prince.  Let  us  seek  to  work  together  for  the  good  of 
our  respective  countries  and  for  that  of  all  Europe. 
The  more  the  two  Courts  and  their  Ministers  under- 
stand each  other,  the  better  for  our  common  cause. 

Your  Excellency  will  of  course  understand  that  this 
letter,  like  the  others  which  have  passed  between  us, 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FOX  137 

is  of  a  confidential  nature,  to  be  placed  under  the  eyes 
of  the  Emperor  or  not,  as  your  Excellency  may  think 
proper.  Neither  Lord  G.  L.  Gower,  in  whom  I  have 
the  greatest  confidence,  nor  anyone  else,  knows  the 
contents  of  it. 

Accept,  Monsieur  le  Prince,  etc. 

(Signed)     C.  J.  Fox. 

Answer  from  Prince  Czartoryski. 

Your  Excellency  has  anticipated  me  by  the  letter 
you  were  good  enough  to  write  to  me  on  the  17th  of 
March,  as  I  was  about  to  address  one  to  you  to 
express  my  joy  and  my  congratulations  on  your 
entrance  into  the  Ministry,  and  to  ask  for  a  continu- 
ance of  your  confidence.  I  now  hasten  to  convey  to 
you  the  expression  of  these  feelings,  and  to  add  my 
sincere  thanks  for  the  frank  and  friendly  manner  in 
which  your  Excellency  has  expressed  yourself  in 
your  letter.  Pray  believe  me  when  I  say  that 
personally  I  attach  very  great  value  to  the  friendly 
and  confidential  relations  which  you  are  good  enough 
to  encourage  me  to  maintain,  and  that  no  one  can  be 
more  convinced  than  myself  of  the  reciprocal  advan- 
tage, I  may  say  the  necessity,  of  an  intimate  union 
and  an  invariable  concert  between  our  two  Courts.  It 
is  to  England  and  to  Russia  that  the  remains  of 
Europe  will  cling,  and  their  only  hope  of  salvation  is 
in  the  union  of  these  Powers. 

I  know  too  well  your  Excellency's  views  not  to 
be  certain  that  you  have  seen  with  much  pain  that 


1 38       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

your  forebodings  as  to  the  undertaking  of  the  allied 
Courts  should  have  been  so  completely  realised.  But 
you  are  at  the  same  time  too  just  not  to  agree  that 
there  was  not  after  all  any  positive  reason  for  suppos- 
ing that  our  efforts  would  have  such  disastrous  results. 

o 

It  was  not  the  plan  that  was  in  fault.  Its  failure 
was  due  to  circumstances  which  the  Russian  Cabinet 
had  not  the  means  either  to  foresee  or  to  prevent. 

But  it  is  useless  to  look  back  upon  the  past  except 
for  drawing  useful  lessons  from  it  ;  what  should 
occupy  us  is  the  present  and  the  future.  I  will 
respond  to  your  Excellency's  frankness  by  also 
opening  to  you  my  mind  on  the  subject.  The  com- 
munications which  Count  Vorontzoff  lately  made  to 
you  have  partly  done  this  already.  We  have  ex- 
plained our  views  with  the  greatest  confidence  and 
detail,  and  the  British  Government  must  have  been 
satisfied  with  the  principles  which  we  developed. 
Several  of  the  matters  referred  to  in  the  first  despatch 
rather  required  to  be  discussed  confidentially  and  in 
much  detail  than  to  be  treated  officially,  and  as  to  this 
the  two  Cabinets  will  have  to  come  to  an  under- 
standing hereafter.  The  despatches  which  Count 
Strogonoff  *  will  receive  to-day  will  furnish  him  with 
new  and  very  ample  communications  for  your  Excel- 
ency ;  you  will  see  that  we  do  not  wish  to  conceal 
from  you  any  of  our  thoughts,  and  that  our  invariable 
principle  is  to  do  everything  in  common  and  in 
concert  with  England. 

The  aspect  of  affairs  is  indeed  disheartening,  and 

The  special  envoy  sent  to  London  to  negotiate  with  Mr  Fox. 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FOX  139 

I  entirely  agree  with  your  Excellency  that  the 
defensive  principle  should  preferably  be  adopted  in 
the  transactions  and  the  conduct  of  the  European 
States.  It  is  the  principle  held  by  the  Powers  which 
are  opposed  to  the  subversion  of  Europe,  and  never 
was  there  a  more  offensive  policy  than  that  of  Buona- 
parte. Yet  although  a  union  for  purposes  of  defence 
is  always  in  principle  the  most  useful  one,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  when  the  time  for  action  arrives  it  is 
indispensable,  or  at  least  more  advantageous,  to  take 
the  offensive  if  possible. 

It  may  be  that  the  circumstances  of  the  moment 
and  the  nature  of  the  elements  with  which  it  would 
be  necessary  to  act  are  such  that  although  a  different 
policy  would  be  more  suitable,  one  is  forced  for  the 
present  to  maintain  a  passive  attitude  on  the  Conti- 
nent, and  to  avoid  provoking  new  difficulties  which 
might  give  rise  to  new  disasters.  If  such  be  the  case 
— as  your  Excellency  seems  inclined  to  suppose — 
peace  with  France  is  only  the  more  necessary,  and  it 
becomes  the  only  course  open  to  us.  I  confess  that 
even  if  it  were  only  a  patched-up  peace  to  last  but  a 
short  time — if  it  were  only  a  truce  which  would  give 
us  but  a  precarious  and  temporary  security — it  would 
still  be  better  for  the  Continent  than  the  present  state 
of  things,  and  it  becomes  clear  that  circumstances 
oblige  us  to  see  the  danger  increase  and  come  nearer 
to  us  without  our  being  able  to  prevent  or  meet  it. 
On  our  side  it  may  be  said  that  peace  is  a  necessity  to 
us ;  we  can  neither  reach  the  enemy  nor  do  him  any 
serious  harm  ;  it  would  therefore  be  better,  as  it 


1 40      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

seems  to  me,  to  bind  him  by  some  arrangement  so  as 
to  arrest  his  advance  if  only  for  a  short  time,  and 
make  him  believe  and  declare  that  he  is  also  at  peace 
with  us.  I  must  here  remark  that  an  attack  on  the 
part  of  the  Turks,  if  we  leave  them  the  choice  of  the 
time  when  it  is  to  be  made,  might  also  be  inconvenient. 
It  would  begin  on  our  frontiers,  and  at  a  time  when 
the  Turks  would  have  completed  their  armaments,  and 
the  French  been  enabled  to  prepare  all  the  means 
they  could  employ  in  favour  of  Turkey  and  against 
us.  These  various  considerations  lead  me  strongly  to 
desire  that  the  overtures  which  have  been  made  by 
Your  Excellency  to  M.  de  Talleyrand  should  produce 
some  satisfactory  result.  Russia  would  certainly  have 
awaited  the  consequence  of  these  overtures,  if  the 
affair  of  Cattaro*  and  the  dangers  which  threaten 
Austria  had  not  obliged  us  to  hasten  a  direct  discus- 
sion with  Buonaparte,  as  the  only  means  of  escape 
from  the  embarrassing  position  in  which  we  find 
ourselves,  between  the  necessity  of  giving  up  to  the 
French  an  important  post — the  stepping-stone,  so  to 
say,  from  which  they  could  easily  proceed  to  the 
execution  of  their  designs  on  Turkey — and  the  fear 
of  exposing  unhappy  Austria  to  the  resentment  of 
Buonaparte  and  to  complete  ruin. 

The  explanations  which  I  am  giving  here  to 
Lord  G.  L.  Gower  on  this  subject,  and  those  which 
Count  Strogonoff  is  instructed  to  develop  to  your 
Excellency,  will,  I  trust,  be  of  a  kind  to  satisfy  you, 

*  After  the  battle  of  Austerlitz  the  Russian  troops  occupied  Cattaro,  in  order  to 
prevent  its  being  taken  by  the  French,  to  whom  it  had  been  ceded  by  the  Treaty  of 
Presburg. 


141 

and  will  prove  to  you  that  the  fundamental  maxim  of 
our  policy  continues  to  be  not  to  separate  ourselves 
from  England  and  to  pay  the  greatest  attention  to 
her  wishes  and  her  advice. 

It  is  not  impossible  that  Buonaparte,  after  con- 
vincing himself  that  he  cannot  succeed  in  bringing 
either  of  us  to  an  isolated  negotiation,  will  at  length 
agree  to  treat  with  the  two  Powers  in  concert.  This 
would  be  a  great  point  gained.  Moreover,  whatever 
might  be  the  necessity  and  urgency  for  Europe  of 
peace  with  France,  it  would  not  I  think  be  inoppor- 
tune to  come  to  an  early  understanding  as  to  the 
measures  to  be  taken,  if  the  continuation  of  the 
war  should  become  inevitable  ;  for  it  must  be  anti- 
cipated that  the  more  Buonaparte  will  perceive 
the  great  need  of  peace  on  the  Continent,  the  less 
inclined  will  he  be  to  accept  reasonable  conditions. 
Any  overtures  you  may  eventually  make  in  this 
respect  would  be  eagerly  received  here,  and  would 
be  treated  with  the  greatest  possible  considera- 
tion. 

As  regards  Prussia,  I  do  not  lose  the  hope  that 
the  just  and  energetic  conduct  *  of  the  British  Cabinet 
with  regard  to  her,  will  have  a  salutary  influence  on 
her  policy.  The  more  considerable  the  losses  of 
Prussian  trade  will  be,  the  more  the  general  outcry  of 
the  Prussian  people,  who  already  lift  up  their  voices 
against  the  action  of  their  Government,  will  become 

o 

threatening,  the  less  will  Prussia  be  in  a  position  to 

*  i.e.,  the  blockade  of  the  Prussian  seaports,  and  the  capture  by  the  British 
fleet  of  Prussian  merchant  ships,  after  Prussia  had  seized  Hanover  and  closed  the 
Elbe  and  the  Weser  to  British  trade. 


I42      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

continue  her  present  policy.  She  will  have  to  abandon 
it  in  some  way  or  other.  Our  measures  with  regard 
to  her  are  fundamentally  in  accordance  with  your 
wishes ;  but  our  relations  with  her,  and  our  situation 
generally,  are  not  the  same.  We  flatter  ourselves 
that  we  may  yet  be  able  to  withdraw  Prussia  from 
the  shameful  dependence  to  which  she  has  submitted 
herself ;  the  present  moment  of  crisis,  and  the 
extreme  embarrassment  in  which  she  is  plunged,  are 
perhaps  even  propitious  for  such  an  endeavour.  This 
is  the  sole  reason  why  we  do  not  think  we  ought 
entirely  to  reject  the  explanations  and  protests  which 
she  is  incessantly  sending  us,  and  we  wish  meanwhile 
to  stop  her  at  least  in  the  design  which  she  might 
have  formed — if  she  had  had  nothing  to  care  for  or  to 
expect  from  us — of  abandoning  herself  more  and  more 
entirely  to  the  will  of  Buonaparte  and  the  execution 
of  the  plans  he  is  meditating. 

I  do  not  know  if  your  Excellency  will  agree  to  all 
the  opinions  I  have  expressed,  but  I  flatter  myself 
that  you  will  at  any  rate  be  satisfied  with  my  extreme 
frankness  and  unreserved  confidence. 

I  have  thought  it  right  to  show  the  Emperor  the 
letter  you  have  done  me  the  honour  of  writing  to  me. 
His  Imperial  Majesty  has  expressly  charged  me  to 
express  to  you,  sir,  how  charmed  he  is  at  the  wisdom 
and  though tfuln ess  of  your  views.  He  desires  that 
his  Cabinet  should  remain  in  intimate  harmony  with 
that  of  his  Britannic  Majesty,  and  your  entrance  into 
the  Ministry  has  caused  him  much  satisfaction.  This 
disposition  on  his  Majesty's  part  can  only  add  to  all 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FOX  143 

the  motives  of  State  which  sincerely  bind  the  Court 
of  St  Petersburg  to  that  of  London. 

Count  StrogonofF  will  have  the  honour  of  handing 
this  letter  to  your  Excellency,  and  I  take  the  oppor- 
tunity of  particularly  recommending  him  to  you.  I 
beg  you  to  show  him  entire  confidence  (which  you 
may  do  without  the  slightest  fear) ;  he  will  deserve  it 
by  the  frankness  and  cordiality  with  which  he  will 
make  his  communications  to  you,  and  I  flatter  myself 
that  at  my  request  your  Excellency  will  not  on  your 
part  fail  to  encourage  him  in  this  conduct  by  acting 
towards  him  in  a  similar  manner. 

Your  Excellency  will  not  take  it  ill  that  I  have 
shown  your  letter  to  Lord  G.  L.  Gower.  I  did  not 
think  any  harm  could  result  from  my  doing  so,  and  as 
he  handed  me  your  letter  himself  I  could  hardly  have 
done  otherwise  in  view  of  the  intimate  friendship 
which  exists  between  us.  It  is  with  pain  that  we  hear 
he  wished  to  leave  his  post ;  I  should  infinitely  regret 
it,  and  I  will  confess  to  your  Excellency  that  I  would 
much  desire  that  Lord  G.  L.  Gower  should  remain 
with  us  for  some  time  longer,  especially  during  the 
difficult  circumstances  of  the  present  juncture.  Your 
Excellency  will  pardon  me  if  in  this  wholly  private 
and  confidential  letter  I  have  thought  I  might  be 
permitted  not  to  conceal  this  wish  from  you. 

If  M.  d'Oubril  should  go  so  far  as  Paris,  it  is 
very  possible  that  circumstances  may  cause  him  to  go 
on  to  London,  perhaps  with  some  mission  from  the 
French  Government.  Should  this  be  the  case,  I 
recommend  him  beforehand  to  your  Excellency's  kind- 


144       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ness.  Lord  G.  L.  Gower  will  have  given  you  good 
accounts  of  the  selection  of  M.  d'Oubril ;  he  is  a  safe 
man,  on  whose  prudence  and  principles  the  two  allied 
Courts  may  wholly  rely.*  This  leads  me  to  request 
your  Excellency  to  speak  of  him  in  the  same  terms  to 
the  English  Plenipotentiary  who  may  proceed  to 
France,  and  to  instruct  him  to  have  confidence  in  him. 

P.S.  of  the  13th  of  May  1806.  My  letter  to  your 
Excellency  was  written  long  ago,  but  the  despatch  of 
the  courier  who  was  to  take  it  was  put  off  from  day  to 
day.  In  the  meantime  we  have  received  despatches 
from  London  which  inform  us  of  the  issue  of  your 
pourparlers  with  France.  I  open  my  letter  to  add 
this  postscript,  as  I  cannot  avoid  expressing  to  your 
Excellency  how  satisfied  and  enchanted  we  are  here 
at  the  wisdom,  the  loyalty,  and  the  energy  which  your 
Government  has  shown  on  this  occasion.  The  good 
faith  and  the  constant  interest  of  which  it  gives  proof 
to  Russia  demand  entire  reciprocity  on  her  part.  I 
will  not  here  multiply  assurances  and  protestations  on 
this  subject,  for  between  us  they  seem  to  me  entirely 
superfluous.  Moreover,  the  communications  which 
you  will  receive,  several  of  which  are  much  in  arrear, 
can  only  refer  to  the  state  of  affairs  anterior  to  the 
present  moment.  I  am  glad  to  look  upon  the  present 
relations  between  the  two  countries  (and  surely  your 
Excellency  will  agree  with  me  on  this  point)  as  those 
of  two  parts  of  the  same  body.  There  is  no  difference 

*  This  estimate  of  M.  d'Oubril's  character  was  unfortunately  not  borne  out  by 
his  subsequent  conduct  in  Paris  (see  Count  Vorontzoff  s  letter  of  the  7 19  October, 
1806,  page  163). 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FOX  145 

in  our  objects,  in  our  principles,  in  our  intentions  ;  and 
our  discussions  can  only  turn  on  the  most  proper  mode 
and  the  most  suitable  means  of  realising  our  common 
wishes  according  to  circumstances. — Receive,  etc. 

(Signed)     A.  CZARTORYSKI. 

Count  Strogonoff,  the  Russian  special  envoy, 
arrived  in  London  in  March  1806,  and  Count  Voront- 
zoff,  the  Russian  Ambassador,  in  a  letter  to  Prince 
Adam  Czartoryski  dated  the  l~  March,  thus  describes 
his  impressions  of  the  interview  which  took  place 
between  the  two  Russian  diplomatists  and  Mr  Fox  : — 

'  I  will  add  to  my  official  reports,  for  your  personal 
information  alone,  that  Fox  wishes  for  peace  at  any 
price,  and  that  he  would  abandon  all  his  allies  to  ob- 
tain it,  but  that  he  will  not  succeed,  as  the  nation  is 
too  strongly  opposed  to  a  shameful  peace,  and  Buona- 
parte, flushed  with  victory,  will  not  offer  him  any 
other,  especially  as  he  knows  Fox's  immoderate  desire 
to  end  the  war.  Lord  Grenville  and  the  British 
nation  will  oppose  him,  for  they  wish  for  a  peace  that 
shall  be  honourable  and  arranged  in  concert  with  us. 
Moreover,  the  great  majority  of  people  here  are  con- 
vinced that  England  will  run  less  risk  in  continuing  a 
purely  naval  war  than  in  making  peace  with  the 
Corsican,  in  whose  good  faith  nobody  trusts.  The 
Cabinet  would  not,  however,  be  overthrown  if  it  made 
peace  together  with  us. 

You  will  see  from  my  official  despatches  that  Fox 
has  the  strange  idea  of  our  troops  quitting  Sicily  in 
order  to  leave  the  English  alone  to  defend  it.  He 

VOL.  n.  K 


146      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

could  not  support  this  proposal  by  any  valid  reason, 
and  this  confirmed  my  belief  that  with  all  his  intel- 
lectual vivacity,  which  in  his  parliamentary  speeches 
even  rises  to  genius,  he  is  not  a  man  of  judgment, 
and  still  less  a  statesman ;  that  he  is  merely  a  party 
leader  of  great  astuteness  and  a  master  of  intrigue, 
and  that  he  will  never  shine  in  the  Ministry  as  he  did 
in  the  Opposition.' 

Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  gives  further  particulars 
as  to  Mr  Fox's  Foreign  Policy  at  this  period  in  the 
following  extracts  from  a  memorandum  presented  by 
him  to  the  Emperor  in  his  capacity  of  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs  : — 

Memorandum  of  the  3Qth  May  1806. 

In  the  communications  made  to  us  by  the  Cabinet 
of  St  James's  we  are  urged  to  bring  the  important 
questions  pending  between  us  to  a  definitive  issue. 

The  British  Ministry  at  one  time  thought  there 
might  be  a  means  of  opening  negotiations  with 
France.  It  took  part  in  a  correspondence  started  by 
Buonaparte  himself;  but  the  only  preliminary  point 
on  which  the  Cabinet  of  London  was  bound  to  insist 
— that  of  not  arriving  at  any  definite  conclusion 
except  in  concert  with  Russia — has  just  been  rejected 
by  the  French  Government.  England  now  considers 
the  negotiation  broken  off;  she  has  arrived  at  the 
conclusion  that  Buonaparte  evidently  does  not  wish 
for  peace,  and  that  therefore  she  must  make  up  her 
mind  to  war.  At  the  same  time  England  has  been 
grievously  insulted  by  the  inexcusable  conduct  of 


MR  FOX'S  FOREIGN  POLICY  147 

Prussia  towards  her,  who  has  violated  on  this  occasion 
all  the  obligations  that  were  imposed  upon  her  by  the 
dictates  of  ordinary  morality  and  by  international  law. 
The  British  Government  has  been  obliged  to  take  the 
most  energetic  measures  against  Prussia,  and  it  must 
be  admitted  that  it  neither  could  nor  should  have 
done  otherwise  in  reply  to  so  direct  an  attack  upon  the 
interests  and  dignity  of  the  King  of  England  and  so 
manifest  a  violation  of  international  law.* 

Strong  in  her  rights  against  France  and  Prussia, 
and  in  her  consciousness  of  the  frank  and  loyal  policy 
she  has  pursued  towards  Russia,  England  thinks 
herself  entitled  to  regard  us  as  an  ally  on  whose 
co-operation  she  can  reckon  with  perfect  security. 
She  rightly  thinks  that  very  energetic  measures  can 
alone  bring  about  such  a  peace  as  is  to  be  desired ; 
her  Government  shows  the  necessity  of  striking  a 
great  blow  on  the  Continent  in  order  to  restore  the 
balance  of  Europe,  and  proposes  that,  as  a  matter 
both  of  convenience  and  of  justice,  this  blow  should  be 
directed  against  Prussia. 

To  secure  the  success  of  such  an  undertaking,  the 
British  Government  thinks  it  will  be  necessary  to 
follow  Buonaparte's  plan,  namely,  the  assemblage  of 
considerable  forces  on  a  single  point,  so  as  to  obtain  a 
decisive  result. 

England  recognises  the  inconveniences  of  our 
position  between  Turkey  and  Prussia,  and  asks  what 
is  the  probability  of  our  not  being  at  war  with  those 
two  Powers  directly  she  attacks  one  of  them.  The 

*  The  annexation  by  Prussia  of  Hanover. 


148 

British  Cabinet  thinks  we  might  direct  our  efforts 
against  either,  and,  in  the  event  of  our  doing  so,  hopes 
we  will  push  our  conquests  as  far  as  possible,  and 
offers  us  assistance  and  subsidies.  But  it  would 
prefer  that  we  should  attack  Prussia,  so  that  she 
might  suffer  exemplary  punishment  for  the  duplicity 
she  has  shown  during  recent  events.  The  example  of 
a  sovereign  increasing  his  power  and  territory  by  a 
policy  of  servility  towards  France  would  encourage 
the  other  Powers  and  dissipate  the  hope  of  any  States 
besides  Russia  and  England  uniting  against  Buona- 
parte. 

At  the  same  time  the  British  Government  still 
sincerely  desires  peace,  and  it  would  prefer  a  policy  of 
conciliation  to  one  of  war,  if  by  such  means  the 
desired  object  could  be  attained.  Mr  Fox  even 
suggests  a  separate  negotiation  with  France,  Russia 
and  England,  each  negotiating  on  its  own  account,  but 

O  '  O  O  ' 

first  coming  to  an  understanding  as  to  the  essential 
conditions  which  are  to  be  sought  or  rejected.  Fore- 
seeing that  Russia,  before  stating  any  opinion  on  this 
suggestion,  would  desire  to  reconcile  Prussia  with 
England,  Mr  Fox  states  the  conditions  on  which  such 
a  reconciliation  might  be  brought  about,  namely,  a 
raising  of  the  blockade  and  a  satisfactory  arrangement 
as  to  Hanover. 

Let  us  now  consider  our  present  position  and  the 
probable  consequences  of  Russia  deciding  to  maintain 
the  passive  position,  midway  between  peace  and  war, 
in  which  she  now  stands. 

The  humiliation  of  Austria,  the  blind  submission 


MR  FOX'S  FOREIGN  POLICY  149 

of  Prussia  to  Buonaparte's  will,  the  occupation  of  the 
greater  part  of  Germany  by  French  troops,  and  the 
invasion  of  the  whole  of  Italy,  are  not  the  only  results 
of  importance  to  us  which  have  followed  from  the 
last  campaign.  Turkey,  over  whom  our  safety  re- 
quires us  to  maintain  exclusive  influence,  not  only 
strives  to  withdraw  herself  from  it,  but  already  begins 
to  defy  us.  M.  d'ltalinsky*  reports  that  the  Porte 
has  requested  that  the  Dardanelles  should  be  closed 
to  Russian  war  vessels  and  transports,  that  Turkey 
permits  flagrant  outrages  upon  persons  under  our 
protection,  and  that  she  will  not  refuse  a  passage  to  a 
French  army  through  the  Herzegovina  and  Monte- 
negro if  Buonaparte  should  desire  it. 

Russia  is  thus  in  a  critical  position  ;  but  it  will 
become  even  more  so  if  she  persists  in  maintaining  a 
system  of  inaction.  If  England  finds  that  we  absol- 
utely decline  to  join  her  either  in  a  war  or  in  arrange- 
ments for  peace,  she  will  find  our  alliance  rather  a 
burthen  than  an  advantage,  and  will  seek  other  means 
of  attaining  the  objects  of  her  policy.  Turkey  would 
then  entirely  emancipate  herself  from  our  influence ; 
Sweden  would  become  indifferent,  if  not  hostile  ;  and 
the  rest  of  Europe,  not  seeing  any  hope  of  Russian 
support,  would  have  no  alternative  but  to  attach  herself 
to  Buonaparte's  chariot.  In  that  case  the  latter  will 
certainly  not  be  idle.  The  Polish  provinces  have  long 
attracted  his  craving  for  glory  and  activity,  and 
already  he  is  spreading  a  report  that  the  Princess  of 
Saxony  is  to  marry  some  member  of  the  Buonaparte 

*  The  Russian  Ambassador  at  Constantinople. 


150      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

family  who  will  become  King  of  Poland.  Another  of 
his  objects  is  the  regeneration  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  ; 
and  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  notwithstanding  her 
present  decrepitude,  Turkey  could  cause  us  great 
difficulties  if  Buonaparte  should  make  himself  master 
of  all  her  resources  and  direct  them  against  Russia. 

It  would  appear  from  the  above  considerations 
that  the  principal  and  essential  thing  for  the  safety  of 
Russia  is  to  maintain,  and  even  to  draw  tighter,  the 
bonds  which  unite  her  to  England.  Russia  is  perhaps 
more  interested  even  than  England  in  not  abandoning 
an  intimate  alliance  which  is  now  more  necessary  than 
ever  to  save  the  remains  of  independence  in  Europe. 
What  would  tend  above  all  to  make  such  an  alliance 
desirable  to  your  Majesty  is  the  composition  of  the 
present  English  Ministry  and  the  principles  by  which 
it  is  actuated.  It  shows  in  its  policy  as  much 
moderation  and  wisdom  as  energy  and  loyalty.  The 
conduct  of  England  with  regard  to  neutral  commerce 
displays  both  the  prudence  arid  the  liberality  of  her 
Government ;  and  the  loyalty  it  showed  to  Russia 
when  France  offered  England  an  advantageous  peace 
demands  entire  reciprocity  on  our  part. 

Being  deeply  convinced  of  the  truth  of  these 
remarks,  and  considering  the  fatal  results  which  would 
follow  from  the  ties  which  unite  us  to  Great  Britain 
being  loosened  or  broken,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  express 
the  opinion  that  the  honour  of  Russia,  her  dearest 
interests,  and  her  safety,  imperiously  require  her  not 
to  separate  her  cause  from  that  of  England. 


JtUSSIA,  ENGLAND,  AND  PJtUSSIA  151 

[Although,  in  consequence  of  the  annexation  by 
Prussia  of  Hanover  and  the  closing  of  the  Elbe  and 
Weser  to  British  trade,  Mr  Fox  retaliated  by 
blockading  her  harbours  and  seizing  her  merchant 
ships,  neither  England  nor  Russia  sent  any  troops 
against  her.  Meanwhile  the  aggressive  policy  of 
Napoleon  and  the  excesses  of  his  soldiers  caused  an 
explosion  of  patriotic  indignation  in  Prussia  which 
her  King  found  it  impossible  to  resist.  The  Prussian 
Government  demanded  that  the  French  troops  should 
be  recalled,  and  after  some  angry  discussion  Napoleon 
attacked  the  Prussian  army  and  completely  destroyed 
it  at  Jena  (14th  October  1806).] 


CHAPTEK  XIV 

1806 


RESIGNATION    BY    PRINCE     ADAM    CZARTORYSKI     OF     THE     POSITION     OF 

MINISTER    OF    FOREIGN    AFFAIRS    IN    RUSSIA. RETROSPECT    OF  HIS 

POLICY  IN  THIS  CAPACITY. — HIS  OPPOSITION  TO  AN  ALLIANCE  WITH 
FRANCE  AT  THE  EXPENSE  OF  ENGLAND. 


ON  the  17th  of  June,  1806,  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski, 
after  repeatedly  requesting  the  Emperor  Alexander 
to  relieve  him  of  the  duties  of  Foreign  Minister, 
finally  retired  from  that  post.  He  had,  as  will  be 
seen  from  the  following  letter,  ample  reason  to  justify 
him  in  taking  this  step,  but  the  chief  cause  of  his 
having  done  so  was  one  that  he  could  hardly  state  in 
precise  terms  to  the  Emperor.  He  had  only  accepted 
his  position  in  the  Ministry  because  he  believed  that 
by  so  doing  he  might  be  of  service  to  Poland.  Alex- 
ander's persistence  in  seeking  the  alliance  of  Prussia 
convinced  him  that  this  belief  was  a  delusive  one,  and 
his  sole  motive  for  remaining  in  the  Russian  Ministry 
thus  ceased  to  exist.  Moreover,  the  hopes  of  the 
Poles  had  been  raised  by  the  approach  of  Napoleon  ; 
if  France  were  to  make  war  again  upon  Russia,  which 
seemed  more  than  probable,  Napoleon  would  doubtless 


RESIGNATION  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI    153 

strive  to  secure  the  support  of  the  Poles  by  promising 
to  restore  their  independence,  and  in  that  case  it  would 
be  impossible  for  Prince  Adam  to  continue  to  direct 
the  foreign  policy  of  a  State  with  which  his  country- 
men might  be  at  war. 

Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  to  the  Emperor. 

22nd  of  March  1806. 

It  is  not  with  the  object  of  exaggerating  to  your 
Imperial  Majesty  the  dangers  which  threaten  your 
Empire,  or  of  uselessly  alarming  you  as  to  its  position, 
that  I  have  prepared  the  memorandum  which  I  now 
submit  to  your  consideration.  It  has  been  dictated  by 
sincere  zeal,  and  after  mature  reflection.  I  have 
thought  it  indispensable  to  point  out  to  your  Majesty 
some  of  the  dangers  by  which  you  are  surrounded  and 
which  you  do  not  seem  to  perceive.  Russia  is  really 
in  a  very  critical  position.  Her  difficulties  and  yours, 
Sire,  may  increase  in  a  degree  which  I  cannot  contem- 
plate without  fear.  I  therefore  think  there  is  not  a 
moment  to  be  lost  in  proposing  to  your  Majesty  the 
only  measure  which  can  render  possible  all  the  others 
which  must  be  necessitated  by  circumstances — a 
measure  not  sufficient  to  secure  the  safety  of  the 
State,  but  without  which  it  would  become  too  pre- 
carious, if  not  quite  unattainable. 

Until  the  late  war  began  there  was  a  certain  de- 
gree of  uniformity  in  the  action  of  the  Government, 
for  your  Majesty  showed  some  confidence  in  the  per- 
sons with  whom  you  consulted,  and  usually  discussed 
affairs  before  deciding  upon  them.  Even  then,  how- 


154      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ever,  the  necessity  of  introducing  more  unity  among 
the  various  departments  of  Government  constantly 
made  itself  felt.  The  disasters  we  have  experienced 
must  be  partly  attributed  to  the  fact  that  such  unity 
was  not  sufficiently  established,  and  that  afterwards  it 
was  totally  destroyed  at  the  moment  when  it  became 
more  necessary  than  ever  to  preserve  it.  ... 

Your  Majesty  will  permit  me  here  to  observe  that 
I  have  been  greatly  surprised  to  see  that  you  assume 
the  sole  responsibility  not  only  of  every  measure,  but 
of  every  detail  in  its  execution ;  while  the  object  of 
the  establishment  of  your  Ministry  was  to  guarantee 
you  against  such  responsibility.  You  possessed  the 
means  of  calling  any  of  your  Ministers  to  account  for 
any  failure  of  Government  policy ;  but  the  fault  of  such 
failure  must  now  fall  upon  you,  as  you  wish  to  do  every- 
thing alone,  both  in  military  and  in  civil  matters.  .  .  . 
If  the  passive  policy  of  your  Government  should  bring 
war  into  your  frontiers — a  by  no  means  impossible 
case — I  could  not  answer  for  the  conduct  of  the  Poles; 
I  would  even  fear  the  effect  that  such  an  example 
might  produce  on  the  Russians.  Already  the  latter 
see  with  pain  that  the  glory  of  the  State  is  diminished 
and  its  pride  humiliated.  If  our  frontiers  are  crossed 
by  the  enemy,  the  fault  will  be  thrown  on  your 
Imperial  Majesty,  and  the  talk  on  this  subject  in 
the  two  capitals  is  not  reassuring.  .  .  .  But 
if  you  do  not  attach  any  belief  or  value  to  the 
opinions  which  I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  expressing, 
nothing  will  remain  to  me  but  to  retire  with  the  satis- 
faction of  having  done  my  duty.  In  that  case  your 


HIS  RESIGNATION  155 

Imperial  Majesty  will  recognize  the  justice  of  my 
request  that  I  should  be  allowed  to  quit  my  post  at 
once.  I  will  not  remind  you  of  all  that  has  passed 
since  my  return  here,*  how  little  attention  you  have 
paid  to  my  proposals  ;  .  .  .  and  you  are  too  con- 
siderate to  wish  to  impose  upon  me  any  longer  the 
painful  obligation — I  may  say  the  martyrdom — of 
participating  in  an  order  of  things  and  executing 
measures  which  in  my  opinion  are  directly  opposed 
to  the  good  of  the  Empire  and  your  own. 

Your  Majesty  thinks  the  system  into  which  you 
have  been  led  by  your  Cabinet  is  the  source  of  all  the 
disasters  we  have  experienced.  I  could  not  conceal 
from  you,  on  the  other  hand,  that  I  am  convinced 
that  the  true  reason  of  our  disasters  is  that  you 
have  not  followed  that  system  with  frankness 
and  decision  ;  that  you  have  departed  from  the  plan 
that  was  agreed  upon ;  and  that  you  have  withheld 
your  confidence  during  its  execution  from  those  with 
whom  it  was  formed,  so  that  there  was  neither  unity 
nor  sequence  in  what  has  been  done  since.  My 
opinion  is  that  the  principles  which  until  then  had 
regulated  the  conduct  of  the  Russian  Cabinet,  should 
continue  to  direct  it ;  that  they  are  the  only  ones 
which  it  can  properly  adopt ;  and  that  the  greatest 
energy  and  activity  can  alone  rescue  Russia  from  the 
difficult  position  in  which  she  is  placed.  Your  Im- 
perial Majesty  appears  to  be  of  quite  a  different 
opinion  :  you  look  upon  the  principles  which  have 
guided  our  action  as  noxious  and  dangerous,  and  you 

*  After  the  battle  of  Austerlitz. 


i56       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

seem  especially  to  avoid  any  measure  which  would 
be  consequent  upon  them.  Whichever  view  may  be 
correct,  it  is  equally  necessary  either  that  you  should 
require  me  to  retire,  or  that  I  should  ask  permission 
to  do  so. 

Such  are  my  reasons  for  begging  of  your  Imperial 
Majesty  to  allow  me  to  retire.  They  are  strengthened 
by  the  peculiar  circumstances  in  which  I  am  placed.  .  . 
Your  Majesty  will  recollect  that  I  was  far  from  desir- 
ing my  present  post,  and  that  I  even  long  declined  to 
accept  it,  foreseeing  the  unpleasantnesses  I  should 
have  to  suffer  as  a  Pole.  Since  then,  almost  from  the 
time  when  I  took  up  the  duties  of  my  office,  I  have 
not  ceased  to  look  forward  to  the  moment  when  you 
would  permit  me  to  resign  it  into  your  hands.  .  .  . — 
I  am,  etc.  (Signed)  A.  CZARTORYSKI. 

In  a  memorandum  addressed  to  the  Emperor  on 
his  retirement  from  office,  Prince  Adam  thus  describes 
the  policy  of  Russia  towards  England  and  the  other 
Powers  during  the  time  that  he  was  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs  : — 

' .  .  .  The  new  English  Ministry*  not  having  made 
any  statement  to  us  of  its  policy,  this  silence  inspired 
us  with  some  anxiety,  notwithstanding  the  confidence 
we  felt  in  the  British  Government.  We  had  learnt 
that  Mr  Fox  had  made  some  overtures  to  M.  de 
Talleyrand  through  the  Prussian  Minister  Jacoby, 
and  that  negotiations  had  consequently  taken  place 
between  England  and  France,  which  the  British 

*  The  Grenville  Ministry,  formed  in  January,  1806,  after  the  death  of  Mr  Pitt. 


RETROSPECT  OF  HIS  FOREIGN  POLICY         157 

Cabinet  had  not  communicated  to  us.  This  afforded 
us  a  reason  for  also  entering  into  pourparlers  with 
the  Cabinet  of  the  Tuileries  in  order  not  to  remain 
isolated,  or  at  least  to  place  us  in  a  position  to  do 
everything  that  the  interests  of  the  State  might 
require. 

'  Meanwhile  the  British  Cabinet  informed  us  that 
Mr  Fox  had  proposed  to  M.  de  Talleyrand  a  pro- 
visional arrangement  between  England  and  France, 
subject  to  the  consent  of  Russia,  such  arrangement 
to  be  null  arid  void  in  the  event  of  Russia  refusing  to 
acquiesce  in  it.  Mr  Fox  at  the  same  time  invited  us 
to  take  part  in  the  negotiations,  and  we  had  reason 
to  believe  that  he  wished  to  make  peace  at  any  price. 
'  Although  it  is  certain  that  a  war  would  be  the 
only  means  of  breaking  the  yoke  which  was  oppressing 
a  great  part  of  Europe,  yet,  if  through  the  weakness 
of  some  Powers,  the  ill-will  of  others,  and  the  pusil- 
lanimity of  all,  there  was  no  means  of  making  a 
vigorous  resistance  to  France,  it  was  desirable  that  a 
state  of  hostilities  which  was  only  of  advantage  to 
Napoleon  should  cease. 

'  Such  wras  the  view  we  expressed  in  London ;  and 
Austria  and  Prussia  equally  desired  peace.  But  it 
had  yet  to  be  ascertained  whether  peace  was  possible ; 
if  not,  we  should  at  least  acquire  the  conviction  that 
the  only  cause  to  be  adopted  was  to  enter  on  a  vigorous 
and  combined  war.  M.  d'Oubril  was  accordingly  sent 
to  Vienna  and  Paris  to  sound  the  views  of  the  French 
Government,  and  Lord  G.  L.  Gower  was  fully  in- 
formed as  to  this  mission.  .  .  . 


158       MEMOIRS  OF  r RINGS  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

(  Shortly  after  M.  d'Oubril's  departure,  an  essential 
change  occurred  in  the  situation.  From  the  moment 

^ 

that  the  British  Cabinet  became  certain  of  the 
treachery  of  Prussia,  a  new  turn  was  given  to  the 
opinions  and  views  of  the  English  Ministry,  which 
now  showed  us  the  greatest  confidence.  France 
having  repeatedly  refused  to  treat  with  England  and 
Russia  together,  the  Cabinet  of  St  James's  at  once 

O  ' 

broke  off  the  negotiations,  and  declared  that  it  would 
not  resume  them  except  in  concert  with  its  ally.  It 
showed  throughout  equal  loyalty  and  moderation. 

'  Having  declared  war  against  Prussia,  England 
represented  that  it  was  necessary  for  the  allies  to 
strike  a  decisive  blow  on  the  Continent,  so  as  to 
produce  a  strong  impression  of  their  energy  and 
power,  and  thereby  encourage  the  States  under 
Buonaparte's  influence,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
render  him  more  moderate  in  his  pretensions.  In 
laying  this  plan  before  us,  the  British  Ministry 
declared  itself  ready  to  enter  into  any  other  projects 
we  might  form  either  in  the  west  or  the  south,  and  to 
support  them  with  all  the  means  at  England's  dis- 
posal. 

'  Though  for  various  reasons  your  Majesty  did  not 
think  fit  to  accept  the  English  proposals,*  you  were 
deeply  touched  by  this  noble  and  loyal  conduct,  and 
you  gave  strict  orders  that  no  arrangement  should  be 
concluded  with  France  except  in  concert  with  the 
British  Cabinet.  .  .  . 

'  Having   now   arrived   at  the  period    when    the 

*  Ail  allusion  to  one  of  the  causes  of  Prince  Czartoryski's  resignation. 


RETROSPECT  OF  J/1S  FOREIGN  POLICY         159 

Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  has  passed  into  other 
hands,  I  may  be  permitted,  Sire,  to  submit  to  your 
Majesty  a  rapid  survey  of  the  system  which  has  been 
followed  under  my  direction,  of  its  results,  and  of  the 
state  of  affairs  in  Europe  at  the  moment  of  my 
retirement. 

;  Since  the  rupture  of  the  Peace  of  Amiens,  Russia 
has  had  constantly  to  protest  against  the  violation  of 
treaties  by  the  ruler  of  France,  notwithstanding  the 
most  precise  stipulations.  She  has  constantly  been 
threatened  by  the  gigantic  increase  of  a  new  Empire, 
which,  by  destroying  and  subjecting  its  neighbours, 
necessarily  tended  to  fall  with  all  its  weight  upon. 
Russia,  as  the  only  Power  capable  of  struggling  with 
France  for  the  Empire  of  the  world.  .  .  .  There 
was  but  one  mode  of  resisting  Napoleon  with  any 
chance  of  success,  namely,  the  creation  of  a  system  of 
general  alliances.  No  European  Power  was  capable  of 
facing  Napoleon  alone  ;  it  was  therefore  necessary  that 
all  the  greater  Powers  should  unite  to  defend  the 
existence  of  each  of  them.  Russia  especially  was 
bound  to  support  her  neighbours  in  order  to  prevent 
their  falling  a  prey  to  the  conqueror,  and  affording 
him  additional  resources  which  he  could  use  against 
her.  This  system,  worthy  of  a  great  Empire,  and 
conformable  not  only  with  its  own  interests  and  those 
of  its  allies,  but  with  the  good  of  humanity,  was 
created  by  Russia. 

'  During  the  last  two  years  Russia  and  her  allies 
have  four  times  made  overtures  of  peace  to  Napoleon, 
and  on  each  occasion  the  shameful  conditions  which  he 


160      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARWRYSKI 

imposed  arid  the  outrageous  pretensions  which  he  put 
forward  rendered  peace  impossible. 

'  Events  which  could  hardly  have  been  expected* 
have  profoundly  shaken  the  system,  but  have  not  de- 
stroyed it.  Mutual  confidence  and  the  wish  to  bring 
together  the  threads  of  an  indispensable  union  of 
which  your  Imperial  Majesty  would  be  the  soul  and 
the  centre  remained ;  the  allies  who  were  neither 
restrained  by  fear  nor  debased  by  discouragement  con- 
tinued their  intimate  relations  with  us. 

'At  the  moment  when  your  Imperial  Majesty 
deigned  to  permit  me  to  transfer  to  other  hands  the  Min- 
istry of  Foreign  Affairs,  the  situation  was  as  follows  : 

'  The  successes  of  France  over  your  Majesty's 
allies,  however  alarming  their  consequences  may 
appear,  only  added  new  ruins  to  those  of  other  States 
without  adding  any  solidity  to  the  fabric  of  the 
French  Empire.  A  greater  number  of  dismembered 
countries  and  humiliated  nations  increased  the  general 
confusion ;  Napoleon's  power  was  increased,  but  not 
made  any  more  secure. 

'  Austria  was  silently  reorganising  her  forces,  and 
was  still  turning  her  eyes  to  Russia.  She  gave  us 
marks  of  confidence  which  we  hastened  to  accept  and 
cultivated  with  the  object  of  renewing  our  old  relations 
and  securing  her  aid  in  case  of  need. 

'  Prussia,  notwithstanding  her  disgraceful  conces- 
sions to  France,  had  not  entirely  bound  herself  to  her, 
and  sought  by  very  secret  and  confidential  negotia- 
tions with  us  to  repair  the  faults  of  her  policy. 

*  A  further  allusion  to  the  disagreement  between  Alexander  and  Prince  Czartoryski. 


RETROSPECT  OF  HIS  FOREIGN  POLICY         161 

'  Sweden,  always  faithful  to  her  elevated  and 
generous  sentiments,  defied  the  threats  of  the  Berlin 
Cabinet  and  remained  steadfast  to  her  alliance  with 
Russia  and  England. 

'  The  Porte,  though  led  astray  by  the  fatal  sug- 
gestions of  French  agents,  disguised  its  malevolent 
designs,  and  did  not  dare  entirely  to  break  the  bonds 
which  united  it  to  Russia. 

'  Finally,  England — the  only  Power  which  by  her 
dominion  over  the  seas  can  in  combination  with  us 
still  justify  the  hope  of  a  possible  equilibrium  in 
Europe — always  faithful  to  our  alliance,  always  frank 
in  her  transactions  with  us  and  strict  in  fulfilling 
them,  showed  herself  ready  to  second  us  everywhere, 
and  was  actually  doing  so  most  effectually  in  the 
Mediterranean  and  on  the  Adriatic.' 

Sir  A.  Alison  (Hist,  of  Europe,  vol.  vii.  p.  155) 
suggests  that  Prince  Czartoryski's  retirement  was 
caused  by  the  Prince  having  been  in  favour  of  making 
an  alliance  with  France  at  the  expense  of  England, 
while  his  successor  '  supported  the  English  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  French  alliance.'  There  is  no  foundation 
whatever  for  this  suggestion.  As  will  be  seen  from 
the  papers  here  published,  Prince  Czartoryski  was 
throughout  a  devoted  adherent  of  the  alliance  with 
England  and  an  uncompromising  adversary  of  Napo- 
leon. Moreover,  when  M.  d'Oubril  signed  the  treaty 
of  alliance  with  France  (July  20),  Prince  Czartoryski 
had  already  ceased  to  be  Foreign  Minister ;  and  that 
he  and  his  political  friends  strongly  disapproved  of  M. 
d'Oubril's  conduct  is  shown  by  the  following  extracts 

VOL.  II.  L 


1 62       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

from    letters   addressed     to   the     Prince     by    Count 
Vorontzoff,  the  Russian  Ambassador  in  London  :— 

'SOUTHAMPTON,  H  July,  1806. 

'What  I  feared,  and  yet  hoped  would  not  happen, 
has  come  to  pass.  I  have  just  learnt,  to  my  great 
grief,  that  you  have  resigned  your  post,  my  dear 
Prince.  I  pity  the  Emperor  and  my  country,  and  I 
cannot  conceive  how  he  could  have  been  induced  to 
accept  your  resignation. 

I  congratulate  our  mutual  friends  M.  de  Novosilt- 
zoff  and  Count  Kotchoubey  on  not  having  wished  to 
separate  from  you.  It  is  easy  for  those  who  know  you 
as  I  do  to  understand  that  your  resignation  has  been 
the  consequence  of  a  complete  change  in  our  political 
system,  and  that  this  change  was  opposed  to  your 
principles  and  views  and  to  your  high  spirit.  Your 
resignation  does  you  honour  ;  I  am  proud  to  have 
such  a  friend.  .  .  . ' 

'  SOUTHAMPTON,  5th  August  (N.S.)  1806. 
'  I  cannot  blame  you  ;  on  the  contrary,  I  can  only 
approve  your  noble  conduct  on  this  occasion.  Your 
counsels,  which  tended  only  to  the  glory  and  the  good 
of  the  State,  were  not  followed.  The  Government 
had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  intriguers,  and  you 
refused  to  soil  your  honourable  name  b}^  lending  it  to 
their  shameful  transactions.  It  is  only  through 
d'Oubril's  knowledge  that  your  resignation  was  im- 
minent and  inevitable  that  he  was  able  to  cast  eternal 
shame  on  Russia. 


HIS  OPPOSITION  TO  AN  ALLIANCE  WITH  FRANCE  163 

'  WALCOT,  TV  October  1806. 

'  Mr  Battye  has  sent  me  here  your  letter  of  the 
25th  of  August,  which  you  gave  him  for  me.  The 
reasons  you  give  for  your  resignation  had  been 
already  anticipated  by  me,  as  I  felt  certain  that  a  man 
of  your  judgment  and  character  could  not  consent  to 
carry  out  a  policy  contrary  to  his  opinions  and  based 
on  cowardly  principles  which  could  only  bring  danger 
and  dishonour  to  the  State  and  the  sovereign  who 
dictated  them. 

'  I  am  now  staying  at  Lord  Powis's  estate  in 
Shropshire,  and  Count  StrogonofF  came  the  day 
before  yesterday  to  bid  me  good-bye.  I  showed  him 
your  letter,  and  he  handed  me  the  one  he  had 
received  from  you.  The  contents  of  these  two  letters 
prove  to  me  that  I  had  rightly  guessed  the  motives 
of  d'Oubril's  infamous  conduct.  He  knew  that  you 
were  no  longer  in  office  ;  that  Baron  Budberg,  like  all 
Livonians,  was  attached  to  Prussia,  whose  interest  is 
to  keep  Hanover  and  obtain  other  advantages  from 
France,  to  promote  dissensions  between  Russia  and 
England,  and  to  reconcile  Russia  with  the  Corsican, 

O  ' 

and  that  the  Emperor  is  weak,  pusillanimous,  and  also 
attached  to  Prussia.  If  he  succeeded,  he  would  be 
decorated  and  rewarded  both  by  Alexander  and 
Napoleon ;  if  he  failed,  Budberg  would  see  that  he 
escaped  punishment.  I  did  not  however  guess  that 
the  Emperor  had  given  instructions  to  a  subordinate 
behind  the  back  of  the  Minister  who  was  his  chief, 
and  that  the  subordinate,  though  selected  and  pro- 


164      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

tected  by  the  Minister,  concealed  from  him  the 
instructions  he  had  received.  This  passes  belief,  and 
would  in  itself  have  been  a  sufficient  justification  for 
your  resignation. 

I  can  assure  you  positively  that  the  King  of 
England  and  his  Ministry  know  and  appreciate  you, 
and  that  Fox  alone  is  doubtless  very  glad  to  see  your 
withdrawal  from  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs. 
Lord  G.  L.  Gower  speaks  of  you  with  the  greatest 
respect,  esteem  and  attachment.' 

[See  also  Thiers'  History  of  the  Consulate  and  the 
Empire,  Book  xxiv  :  '  M.  d'Oubril  was  strengthened 
in  his  idea  of  signing  a  treaty  of  peace  with  France 
by  the  fact  that  there  had  been  a  change  in  the 
Russian  Ministry  while  he  was  on  his  way  to  Paris. 
Prince  Czartoryski  and  his  friends  having  wished  to 
enter  into  more  intimate  engagements  with  England, 
not  necessarily  in  order  to  continue  the  war,  but  to  be 
in  a  more  advantageous  position  to  treat  with  France, 
Alexander,  fatigued  by  their  remonstrances,  and  fear- 
ing to  be  too  closely  bound  to  the  British  Cabinet, 
had  at  length  accepted  their  resignations,  which  had 
been  frequently  submitted  to  him,  and  had  replaced 
Prince  Czartoryski  by  Baron  Budberg.  The  Baron 
was  formerly  the  Emperor's  tutor  and  a  friend  of  the 
Empress  Dowager,  and  had  neither  strength  nor 
inclination  to  resist  his  master.'*] 

*  The  above  views  are  further  confirmed  by  a  letter  in  the  Record  Office 
addressed  by  Mr  Stuart,  then  Charge"  d'Affaires  at  St  Petersburg,  to  Lord  Grenville 
on  the  20th  of  August  180(5,  in  which  Mr  Stuart  says  that  he  assured  Prince  Czar- 
toryski '  that  the  high  opinion  his  upright  and  honourable  frankness  had  inspired  in 
England  would  remain  unsullied,  and  that  although  the  real  state  of  the  case  could 
not  hitherto  be  perfectly  known,  his  character  was  not  implicated  by  the  slightest 
suspicion  to  his  disadvantage  on  the  part  of  his  Majesty's  Ministers.' 


CHAPTER  XV 

1806 

PROPOSAL  OP  PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  FOR  A  RECONSTRUCTION  OP  POLAND. 

— REPLY   OF    THE  EMPEROR   ALEXANDER. ADVANCE  OF  NAPOLEON 

INTO  POLAND. 

THOUGH  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  had  ceased  to  be 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  he  remained  for  many 
years  after  one  of  the  most  esteemed  and  valued  of  the 
Emperor  Alexander's  counsellors,  and  there  are 
numerous  memoranda  on  both  internal  and  external 
Russian  policy  in  the  Czartoryski  archives  which  were 
prepared  for  the  Emperor  by  the  Prince  after  his 
resignation.  Among  these  is  the  following  paper, 
dated  the  5th  of  December  1806,  'On  the  necessity  of 
restoring  Poland  to  forestall  Buonaparte  :' 

'  In  the  struggle  which  is  to  decide*  on  the  fate  of 
Russia  and  of  Europe,  Poland  has  at  this  juncture  of 
affairs  become  a  principal  object  of  consideration  with 
the  two  Empires  which  are  about  to  come  into 
immediate  collision  with  each  other ;  but  she  is  looked 
upon  by  each  of  them  in  an  entirely  different  manner. 
For  the  French  she  is  a  source  of  safety,  an  object 

*  It  will  be  observed    that  this  memorandum  was  written  after  Napoleon's 
victory  at  Jena. 


166       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

which  animates  their  courage  and  strengthens  their 
perseverance  ;  it  is  in  Poland  that  Buonaparte  sees 
his  standpoint  for  fighting  Russia  and  penetrating 
within  her  old  frontiers.  Though  moving  away  from 
his  centre  of  operations,  Poland  would  furnish  to  his 
fertile  genius  and  indefatigable  activity  the  same 
resources  as  France — a  population  easily  exercised  in 
the  profession  of  arms,  brave  and  experienced  officers, 
money,  provisions,  and  an  attachment  to  the  existence, 
the  honour,  and  the  liberties  of  their  country  so  deep 
that  it  will  move  them  to  the  highest  efforts.  For 
Russia,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Poles  are  a  motive  of 
continual  anxieties  and  suspicions  ;  they  have  fre- 
quently been  used  by  Buonaparte  as  a  bugbear  to  the 
partitioning  Powers.  Though  Poland  affords  all  the 
resources  capable  of  supporting  the  war  and  power- 
fully contributing  to  the  defence  of  the  throne,  the 
Russian  Government  fears  to  make  use  of  the  Poles 
lest  they  should  turn  against  it.  ...  Under  these 
circumstances  Poland  diminishes  the  power  of  Russia 
in  the  same  proportion  as  she  augments  that  of 
France. 

'  It  is  obviously  desirable,  in  the  Russian  interest, 
to  reverse  this  state  of  things  ;  and  to  obtain  such  a 
result  there  is  only  one  way  :  to  proclaim  Poland  as  a 
kingdom,  the  Emperor  declaring  himself  King  on 
behalf  of  himself  and  his  successors  for  ever. 

'  The  advantages  of  such  a  step — equally  magnani- 
mous and  politic — would  be  incalculable.  The  general 
enthusiasm  it  would  excite  in  all  the  Poles,  the 
gratitude  which  would  rally  all  Polish  hearts  and 


PROPOSAL  TO  RECONSTRUCT  POLAND  167 

arms  round  the  throne,  would  entirely  change  Russia's 
situation  and  that  of  her  enemies.  Instead  of  seeing 
her  provinces  exposed  to  Buonaparte's  seductions,  she 
would  be  able  to  raise  their  inhabitants  against  him ; 
and  Russia,  instead  of  having  an  immense  frontier 
exposed  to  the  colossal  Empire  of  France,  would,  by 
re-establishing  Poland,  create  an  outpost  behind  which 
she  would  remain  intact  with  all  her  forces  at  her 
command.  Moreover,  every  cause  of  anxiety  for 
Russia  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  Poles,  and  every 
motive  for  speculating  on  such  conduct  on  the  part  of 
her  enemies,  would  be  for  ever  removed — an  inappre- 
ciable advantage  for  the  internal  happiness,  tranquillity, 
and  power  of  the  Empire. 

'  If  Poland  is  declared  a  separate  State,  with  the 
Emperor  as  King,  Buonaparte's  difficulties  in  invading 
Russia  will  be  immeasurably  increased  ;  .  .  .  .  and 
should  he  succeed  in  overcoming  them,  he  will  have 
to  pursue  our  armies  into  the  interior  of  Russia,  as 
they  have  very  wisely  been  ordered  to  retire  until 
they  are  sure  of  victory.  He  would  then  find  himself 
cut  off  by  the  hostile  Poles  in  his  rear,  and  his  defeat 
under  such  circumstances  would  mean  nothing  short 
of  the  absolute  surrender  of  himself  and  his  army.  .  .  . 

'  It  may  be  objected  that  to  declare  Poland  a 
Kingdom  would  be  to  separate  from  the  Empire  one 
of  its  integral  parts ;  but  this  separation  would  only 
be  apparent.  The  crown  of  Poland  would  be  irrevo- 
cably attached  to  the  throne  of  Russia ;  and  the 
Empire  would  at  the  same  time  gain  the  remainder  of 
Poland.  Imperious  circumstances  have  forced  Russia 


1 68      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

to  commit  the  great  political  fault  of  allowing  Poland 
to  be  partitioned  instead  of  entirely  possessing  it. 
This  fault  has,  to  a  great  extent,  been  the  cause 
of  the  misfortunes  which  have  since  overwhelmed 
Europe ;  should  it  not  now  be  made  good  ? 

'  No  doubt,  in  order  to  produce  the  desired  effect  of 
inflaming  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Poles,  it  would  be 
necessary  to  give  them  a  government  in  conformity 
with  their  wishes  and  their  ancient  laws.  .  .  .  But 
these  benefits  would  render  the  bond  between  the 
Empire  and  the  Polish  nation  stronger  and  more 
indissoluble.  The  more  a  nation  is  governed  in 
accordance  with  its  wishes,  its  character,  and  its 
habits,  the  more  devoted  it  is  to  its  rulers.  The 
kingdom  of  Hungary,  notwithstanding  its  special 
liberties  and  prerogatives,  has  for  centuries  been  an 
example  of  fidelity  and  one  of  the  firmest  supports  of 
Austria.  Maria  Theresa  was  saved  by  the  Hungarians. 
The  King  of  France  was  all-powerful  in  the  provinces 
which  had  preserved  their  estates  and  privileges,  and 
it  was  Brittany,  Poitou,  and  Anjou  which  have  up  to 
the  last  moment  been  the  defenders  of  the  throne,  of 
religion,  and  of  the  nobility. 

'  A  further  objection  might  be  raised  on  the  score 
that  by  reuniting  Poland  under  her  sceptre  Russia 
would  be  despoiling  her  ally  the  King  of  Prussia. 
But  the  master  of  the  Prussian  monarchy  is  now 
Buonaparte  ;  he  exercises  all  the  rights  of  a  conqueror 
there,  and  is  advancing  towards  Prussia's  frontier  pro- 
vinces, which  he  proposes  to  disturb  by  a  revolution 
that  will  threaten  ours.  The  question  at  issue,  there- 


169 

fore,  is  not  the  seizure  of  the  property  of  an  ally,  but 
the  forestalling  of  an  active,  inexorable,  and  aggressive 
enemy ;  the  depriving  him  of  a  booty  which  if  he 
obtains  would  cause  a  terrible  conflagration  in  the 
Empire.  This  would  indeed  be  the  only  means  of 
saving  Russia's  ally ;  for  otherwise  she  will  perhaps 
not  be  able  to  continue  the  struggle  and  obtain  some 
compensation  for  the  House  of  Brandenburg  in  forcing 
the  enemy  to  agree  to  an  equitable  peace. 

1  As  to  Austria,  such  an  arrangement  could  not,  of 
course,  be  made  without  frank  and  loyal  negotiations 
with  the  Court  of  Vienna.  But  the  basis  of  the 
arrangement  is  too  just,  and  the  House  of  Austria 
would  be  too  sensible  of  the  dangers  it  incurs,  not  to 
promise  a  speedy  and  successful  result  of  these 
negotiations. 

'  The  only  question  which  remains  to  be  solved  is 
whether,  supposing  the  proclamation  of  Poland  as  a 
separate  State  is  decided  upon,  Russia  should  act  at 
once  or  wait  until  Napoleon  makes  overtures  to  the 
Poles.  The  first  course  would  appear  the  preferable 
one.  As  soon  as  Russia  enters  into  the  fitting  ex- 
planations with  the  Court  of  Vienna  and  the  pre- 
liminary steps  are  taken  in  Poland  to  secure  that  the 
project  shall  be  fully  carried  into  effect,  nothing 
should  delay  its  immediate  execution.  On  the  con- 
trary, the  matter  is  urgent,  and  the  slightest  delay 
might  weaken  or  destroy  the  results  of  this  important 
operation.  All  the  advantages  of  taking  the  initiative 
would  be  on  Russia's  side,  and  she  would  not  have  to 
combat  the  pride  of  a  violent  and  self-willed  man  who 


170      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

has  not  hitherto  known  what  it  is  to  withdraw  from 
a  course  of  action  after  publicly  proclaiming  that  he 
has  decided  to  adopt  it. 

'  The  preliminary  steps  to  be  taken  would  be  the 
issue  of  proclamations  by  the  Russian  generals,  cir- 
cular letters  to  influential  personages  in  the  country, 
and  instructions  to  governors  and  commanding  officers, 

O  O 

to  show  a  friendly  attitude  to  the  Poles,  to  ensure 
discipline  in  the  troops,  and  to  levy  recruits  ;  and  the 
despatch  of  intelligent  and  zealous  agents  to  the 
Polish  provinces.  The  King  of  Prussia  would  be 
informed  in  the  most  considerate  manner  of  the 
reasons  and  the  necessity  for  the  proposed  measure, 
and  would  be  given  the  hope  of  compensation  as  soon 
as  the  events  of  the  war  should  permit,  and  prepara- 
tions would  be  made  immediately  for  the  reorganisa- 
tion of  the  new  kingdom  and  for  reconciling  the 
inalienable  rights  of  the  sovereign  with  the  institutions 
and  customs  most  congenial  to  the  Polish  nation,  a 
considerable  part  of  which  they  have  retained  under 
the  paternal  Government  of  his  Majesty  the  Emperor.' 

The  following  was  the  Emperor's  reply  to  the 
above  memorandum  and  other  similar  proposals  which 
were  made  to  him  by  Prince  Adam  in  conversation  : — 

The  Emperor  to  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski 

(Written  in  pencil  and  without  date). 

I  have  received  the  paper  you  have  thought  fit  to 
address  to  me.  You  wish  for  a  discussion,  and  I  am 
ready  to  grant  it ;  but  I  cannot  help  telling  you  that 


REPLY  OF  THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER          171 

I  think  it  will  be  useless,  as  our  fundamental  princi- 
ples are  so  diametrically  opposed  to  each  other. 
After  pointing  out  the  critical  position  in  which 
Russia  is  placed  and  the  evils  she  has  to  fear,  the  only 
means  you  propose  for  meeting  the  danger  may  be 
reduced  to  two  : 

1.  That  I  should  declare  myself  King  of  Poland. 

2.  That   my   Ministers   of  War  and    of  Foreign 
Affairs  should  be  changed. 

The  discussion  of  the  first  of  these  points  would  be 
too  long,  but  I  am  ready  to  state  my  views  and  the 
reasons  which  guide  my  conduct.  As  to  the  second 
point,  I  am  satisfied  with  the  services  which  the 
Ministers  in  question  render  me.  Who  is  this  perfect 
Minister  of  whom  everyone  would  approve  ?  Is  it 
General  Suchtelen  ?  I  tell  you  plainly  that  I  do  not 
look  upon  him  as  possessing  the  qualities  required  of 
a  War  Minister,  and  that  of  the  two  I  do  not  hesitate 
for  a  moment  to  give  the  preference  to  General 
Viasnitinoff.  Nor  do  I  see  anyone  for  the  Foreign 
Department.  Would  it  be  a  Panin  or  a  Markoff? 
I  must  esteem  those  with  whom  I  work ;  it  is  only 
on  this  condition  that  I  can  give  them  my  confidence. 
Clamour  troubles  me  but  little  ;  it  is  generally  nothing 
more  than  the  effect  of  party  spirit.  Are  not  you 
yourself  an  example  of  this  ?  Have  you  not  been 
exposed  to  the  criticism  and  animosity  of  the  whole 
nation  ?  I  must  also  remark  that  it  would  have  been 
better  if  the  Committee*  had  not  employed  a  stranger 

*  The  'Secret  Council,'  to  which  Prince  Czartoryski  still  belonged.      See  Vol 
I.,  p.  257. 


1 72       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

to  copy  such  a  paper  as  the  one  I  am  answering.  In 
order  to  bring  us  together  again  it  will  first  be 
necessary  for  us  to  agree  that,  whatever  may  be  said 
in  the  Committee,  our  individual  and  mutual  relations 
shall  remain  intact,  and  that  we  should  follow  the 
example  of  English  Members  of  Parliament,  who,  after 
saying  the  most  bitter  things  to  each  other  in  the 
House  in  the  heat  of  debate,  are  excellent  friends 
when  the  debate  is  over. — Ever  yours, 

ALEXANDER. 


Tlie  Emperor  to  Prince  Czartoryski. 

(Without  date). 

I  was  far  from  intending  to  give  you  pain.  As 
I  was  speaking  of  such  important  matters,  I  was 
obliged  to  do  so  in  accordance  with  my  conviction, 
and  I  expressed  myself  accordingly.  In  the  conclud- 
ing part  of  your  memorandum  you  offer  to  hand  me 
a  detailed  and  general  plan  of  the  measures  to  be 
taken  in  succession  to  those  which  you  propose.  If 
you  like,  we  can  meet  in  committee  to-morrow,  after 
dinner  at  six  o'clock.  We  will  make  the  plan  to- 
gether, and  then  discuss  it. — Ever  yours, 

ALEXANDER. 

[Prince  Czartoryski's  proposal  was  not  accepted, 
and  the  result  was  that  when  Napoleon  entered 
Warsaw  (at  that  time  belonging  to  Prussia),  on  the 
18th  of  December,  1806,  he  was  received  by  the 


ADVANCE  OF  NAPOLEON  INTO  POLAND         173 

Poles  with  enthusiasm.  Deputations  came  to  him 
from  all  parts  of  Poland,  a  provisional  Government 
was  established,  and  volunteers  presented  themselves 
in  great  numbers  to  be  enrolled  in  the  French 
army.] 


CHAPTER  XVI 

1S06 

PROPOSED    PEACE    BETWEEN    RUSSIA    AND    NAPOLEOX. 

ON  the  21st  December  1806,  Prince  Czartoryski, 
who  was  still  a  member  of  the  Imperial  Council, 
addressed  the  following  Letter  and  Memorandum  to 
the  Emperor  Alexander  proposing  that  he  should 
treat  for  peace  with  Napoleon  : 

'  Novosiltzoff  and  myself  have  of  late  several 
times  had  the  opportunity  of  expressing  to  your 
Majesty  our  conviction  that  it  is  necessary  to 
endeavour  without  delay  to  treat  for  peace  with 
Buonaparte  before  our  army  can  be  attacked.  I 
think  we  cannot  at  this  moment  give  your  Majesty 
a  more  real  proof  of  our  attachment,  than  to  continue 
to  press  this  advice  upon  you. 

'  Having  heard  that  Lesseps  was  about  to  leave,  I 
can  no  longer  hesitate  to  lay  before  your  Majesty 
the  annexed  memorandum  which  had  been  prepared 
on  the  subject. 

'  You  will  consider,  Sire,  the  bad  effect  which 
would  be  produced  by  overtures  of  peace  made  only 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  175 

after  a  defeat,  while  at  this  moment,  even  if  we 
gained  some  victories,  such  overtures  could  in  no 
way  be  prejudicial  to  us.  I  would  suggest  that  your 
Imperial  Majesty  should  have  the  memorandum, 
which  we  take  the  liberty  of  presenting  to  you, 
discussed  in  your  Cabinet  Council.  It  would  be 
only  right  that  you  should  not  take  the  sole  responsi- 
bility for  a  step  which  might  have  decisive  con- 
sequences.' 

MEMORANDUM  ON  THE  NECESSITY  OF  OPENING  NEGO- 
TIATIONS OF  PEACE  WITH  NAPOLEON. 

Present  State  of  Affairs. 

Hardly  a  month  has  passed,  and  the  disasters 
of  Prussia,  following  each  other  with  unexampled 
rapidity,  have  completely  destroyed  her.  A  consider- 
able portion  of  Prussian  Poland  has  been  invaJod, 
Warsaw  is  occupied  by  the  French  troops,  large 
levies  have  been  organised,  and  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Polish  provinces  are  fired  with  the  hope  of 
recovering  their  independence  as  a  nation — a  hope 
stimulated  by  Napoleon's  numerous  proclamations. 

The  Hanseatic  towns,  Mecklenburg,  and  Hoi- 
stein,  have  been  involved  in  the  ruin  of  the  German 
Empire  ;  Stralsund  has  been  invested. 

It  is  with  all  the  forces  and  united  resources  of 
the  French  Empire,  of  Germany,  and  of  Prussia,  that 
Napoleon  is  approaching  our  frontiers. 

While  our  enemy,  as  active  as  he  is  fortunate,  is 


i;6       ME. MOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

making  such  terrible  progress,  we  have  only  managed 
to  reunite  the    various    corps    which    compose   our 
great  western  army,  and  are  only  beginning  the  pre-  ' 
parations  for   the  arming  of  the  militia  which  have 
been  ordered  by  your  Imperial  Majesty. 

Notwithstanding  the  immense  resources  of  this 
Empire,  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  for 
the  present  we  have  only  one  army  to  oppose  to  the 
victorious  armies  of  Buonaparte ;  that  our  recruits 
cannot  be  ready  to  fight  till  next  spring  ;  that  our 
militia  levies  will  come  in  slowly,  and  that  time  will 
be  necessary  to  enable  them  to  furnish  corps  capable 
of  coming  into  line  with  the  regular  army  and 
supplying  our  losses  ;  further,  that  useful  as  they  may 
be  in  combining  the  operations  of  a  partisan  war  with 
those  of  a  powerful  regular  army,  they  might  be 
equally  injurious,  should  that  army  be  routed,  by 
increasing  the  confusion  and  danger. 

Under  these  circumstances  every  faithful  subject 
of  your  Imperial  Majesty — every  good  Russian — 
must  be  struck  by  the  sad  truth  that  the  Russian 
Empire  is  nearly  in  the  same  situation  as  Prussia  was 
last  October.*  All  the  regular  troops  we  can  dispose 
of  are  on  the  frontier.  If  these  are  beaten,  an  immense 
extent  of  country  will  be  at  the  mercy  of  the  French 
conqueror,  and  the  elements  of  insurrection  which  he 
has  doubtless  spread  in  our  western  provinces  lead 
one  to  fear  that  a  lost  battle  would  have  incalculable 
consequences. 

*  Before  the  battle  of  Jena. 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  177 

Necessity  of  Peace. 

In  presence  of  this  alarming  picture  of  the  situa- 
tion the  want  of  peace  becomes  a  universal  sentiment, 
and  should  unite  all  hopes,  wishes,  and  parties. 

The  enlightened  politician  and  the  determined 
soldier  will  both  agree  to  ask  themselves  why  pacific 
overtures  should  not  be  attempted  rather  than  to  per- 
sist in  a  struggle  whose  danger  is  imminent  and 
directly  menaces  this  Empire. 

Objection. 

How  can  we  forget  the  maxims  of  energy,  perse- 
verance, and  loyalty,  which  are  the  foundations  of  true 
greatness  and  a  sure  policy,  and  which  have  always 
guided  the  Russian  Cabinet  ?  Did  we  not  on  this 
principle  refuse  to  ratify  the  Treaty  of  the  -gV  July  ?  * 
Would  not  an  offer  of  peace  compromise  the  national 
glory  and  show  that  we  feel  our  weakness  ? 

Reply. 

Energy  and  perseverance  have  their  limits,  beyond 
which  they  become  obstinacy  or  rashness.  They 
should  aim  only  at  objects  which  are  attainable,  and 
whose  pursuit  is  not  accompanied  by  dangers  out  of 
all  proportion  to  the  advantages  to  be  secured.  These 
great  qualities  do  not  only  manifest  themselves  in 
military  operations  ;  the  latter  have  to  be  skilfully 
combined  with  political  measures. 

*  The  Treaty  of  Peace  signet!  by  M.  d'Oubril  at  Paris.     See  page  161. 
VOL.  II.  M 


178      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Difference  of  Circumstances. 

The  circumstances  which  have  drawn  Russia  into 
this  war,  and  which  have  made  its  prolongation  indis- 
pensable, were  essentially  different  from  the  present 
state  of  things. 

Former  Circumstances. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  1801  Russia  was  at 
peace  with  the  French  Government,  whose  friendship 
she  cultivated. 

The  insults  and  provocations  of  all  kinds,  and 
violations  of  the  most  solemn  treaties,  which  were 
perpetrated  by  the  Cabinet  of  the  Tuileries,  forced 
your  Imperial  Majesty  at  first  to  complain,  and  then 
to  make  alliances  to  support  common  rights  and  share 
common  dangers.  The  war  which  followed,  becoming 
every  day  more  fatal,  also  became  every  day  more 
necessary. 

Yet  the  enemy  was  far  from  having  attained  the 
point  to  which  his  astonishing  successes  have  since 
brought  him.  Europe  still  afforded  considerable 
means  of  opposing  the  overflow  of  his  ambition. 

Sacred  engagements  and  those  political  considera- 
tions which  constitute  so  essential  a  portion  of  the 
power  of  a  State,  did  not  permit  Russia  to  abandon 
her  allies  or  to  sacrifice  their  hopes  to  her  particular 
advantage. 

The  Cabinet  of  your  Imperial  Majesty  was  then 
obliged  to  develop  all  its  forces  to  prevent  or  avert  the 
fall  of  the  neighbouring  States,  which  served  her  as  a 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  179 

barrier  against  the  colossal  Empire  of  Buonaparte,  or 
through  which  it  still  had  means  of  making  a 
diversion. 

So  long  as  these  motives  and  views  existed,  it  was 
impossible  to  advise  a  peace  which,  owing  to  the  com- 
plication of  interests  and  the  sacrifices  that  would  be 
demanded  by  an  enemy  intoxicated  with  success,  could 
only  be  a  shameful  one  and  could  in  no  case  reassure 
us  as  to  the  future. 


Present  Circumstances. 

Now  that  by  a  succession  of  reverses,  to  which  there 
is  no  parallel  in  history,  all  the  countries  that  Russia 
has  endeavoured  to  save  are  reduced  to  timid  inaction, 
or  have  altogether  disappeared  from  the  ranks  of  the 
European  States,  there  is  no  longer  any  question  of 
protecting  States  on  our  borders  ;  our  borders  them- 
selves require  to  be  protected.  Our  Empire  is  about 
to  engage  in  a  direct  conflict  with  the  French  Empire, 
for  the  defence,  not  only  of  our  integrity,  but,  if  we 
may  venture  to  say  so,  of  our  existence. 

The  war,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  has  changed 
its  nature.  The  supreme  interest  of  the  State — the 
salvation  of  the  Empire — must  become  the  sole  object 
of  our  policy  at  this  new  epoch  of  a  struggle  equally 
memorable  and  unfortunate  for  so  many  beaten 
nations. 

Without  ceasing  to  watch  over  the  general  good  of 
Europe — without  losing  sight  of  the  feeble  hopes  of 
our  crushed  allies — the  indefeasible  law  of  our  own 


i8o      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

preservation  is  the  only  one  that  should  guide  us  ;  all 
other  duties  and  interests  must  give  way  to  it. 

Our  policy  thereby  becomes  independent,  and  if  a 
tolerable  peace,  affording  some  elements  of  safety, 
could  be  concluded,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  our 
entering  into  negotiations ;  on  the  contrary,  every 
consideration  should  induce  us  to  do  so. 

Even  the  safety  of  our  allies  makes  such  a  course 
imperative ;  for  if  by  a  sentiment  of  false  delicacy,  by 
false  principles  of  loyalty,  or  by  personal  feelings,  we 
exposed  ourselves  to  perish  in  order  to  save  them,  our 
fall  would  not  alleviate  their  misfortune,  but  aggra- 
vate it  by  depriving  them  of  the  most  distant  hope  of 
preserving  what  remains  to  them,  or  of  some  day 
repairing  their  disasters. 

It  is  therefore  evident  that  the  changes  which 
have  occurred  in  our  political  relations,  and  in  the 
situation  of  Europe,  call  upon  us  to  seek  peace  as 
urgently  as  the  position  of  affairs  before  the  ruin  of 
the  Germanic  Empire  and  the  destruction  of  Prussia 
deterred  us  from  doing  so. 

We  should  treat  for  peace  without  losing  time. 

If  the  necessity  of  this  measure  is  agreed  upon,  it 
must  equally  be  admitted  that  the  negotiations  should 
be  opened  as  soon  as  possible,  and  that  there  is  not  a 
moment  to  be  lost. 

It  is  an  incontestable  principle  in  politics  that 
peace  should  be  offered  at  a  time  when  one  is  in  a 
position  to  insist  upon  it,  or  at  least  to  accept  it  with 
dignity. 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  j8i 

Our  armies  are  intact ;  the  enemy  is  no  doubt 
aware  of  the  formation  of  our  reserves  and  the  numer- 
ous levy  of  our  militia.  Soon  he  will  hear  of  the 
patriotic  offers  which  will  be  brought  to  the  foot  of 
the  throne  by  all  parts  of  the  Empire  ;  he  will  also  be 
informed  of  our  successes  against  the  Persians,  and 
the  advantageous  positions  we  have  just  occupied  on 
the  Dniester  and  the  Danube.  He  is  certainly  not 
ignorant  of  the  obstacles  to  his  advance — the  distance, 
the  climate,  the  season  of  the  year — in  a  war  which 
would  be  equally  long  and  dangerous.  His  first 
interest,  therefore,  will  be  again  to  astonish  Europe 
by  the  rapidity  of  his  combined  movements,  and  to 
strike  a  decisive  blow.  He  will  hasten,  therefore, 
directly  he  is  able  to  do  so,  to  fall  on  our  great  army 
with  all  the  weight  of  his  troops  in  order  to  force  a 
battle  ;  and  our  wise  intention  of  evading  one  might 
perhaps  yield  to  the  vivacity  of  his  pursuit,  or  to  the 
thought  of  the  pain  it  would  give  our  generals  to 
abandon  the  field  to  the  enemy. 

Such  a  situation  cannot  last  long.  Now  or  never 
is  the  time  to  talk  of  peace,  if  we  do  not  want  to  wait 
till  we  are  forced  to  beg  for  it  after  a  reverse.  Arid 
what  peace  could  we  hope  for  from  a  conqueror,  whose 
pride  would  be  swelled  by  his  victory  over  the  best 
troops  in  the  world,  and  who  would  increase  his 
claims  and  his  demand  for  revenge  according  to  the 
greatness  of  the  vanquished  ? 

Let  us  suppose — for  it  is  prudent  to  anticipate 
the  worst  in  our  calculations — that  our  great  army 
is  dispersed,  and  our  Western  provinces  are  agitated 


1 82       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

by  the  hope  of  recovering  their  independence,  or  by 
the  grant  of  liberty  to  the  peasants.  Shall  we  allow 
the  conflagration  to  spread  in  these  rich  territories  ? 
Can  we  foresee  where  it  would  stop  ?  Would  we  con- 
sent to  the  humiliation  of  offering  territorial  cessions 
to  the  conqueror  ?  And  if  so,  within  what  limits  ;  or 
would  we  be  entirely  at  his  mercy  ? 

These  considerations,  improbable  as  the  supposi- 
tion on  which  they  are  based  may  be,  show  that  we 
ought  to  attempt  to  prevent  such  terrible  extremities 
by  concluding  peace.  The  occasion  naturally  presents 
itself  now  that  the  war  is  assuming  a  new  character. 
Before  it  begins  between  these  two  great  nations, 
whose  collision  would  shake  the  Continent,  is  it  not 
natural  that  an  effort  should  be  made,  even  if  only  in 
the  interests  of  humanity,  to  stop  it  ? 

Moreover,  Buonaparte  himself,  in  his  address  to 
the  Senate,  has  declared  that  he  is  ready  to  make 
peace  with  Russia  and  England,  and  even  with 
Prussia.  Even  more  ;  he  declares  that  the  system  of 
making  separate  peaces,  hitherto  followed  by  the 
French  Cabinet,  has  only  produced  delusive  truces 
and  given  rise  to  new  coalitions,  and  that  he  will  now 
only  consent  to  a  general  peace  with  all  the  Powers 
concerned.  He  has  thus,  so  to  say,  taken  the  first 
step,  and  it  is  for  us  to  take  the  second,  if  we  do  riot 
wish  to  leave  him  the  advantage  he  is  always  claim- 
ing, of  having  professed  peaceful  sentiments  in  the 
midst  of  his  success  and  yet  never  having  been 
listened  to. 

This  new  phase  in  the  policy  of  France,  however 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  183 

insidious  may  be  its  motive,  offers  Russia  a  plausible 
pretext  for  proposing  to  open  the  negotiations,  and 
our  Cabinet  may  take  it  the  more  frankly,  as  the 
other  belligerents  are  equally  concerned  in  it. 


On  what  basis  can  we,  treat  f 

The  point  here  to  be  considered  is  on  what  basis 
we  can  expect  to  get  peace. 

We  must  not  forget  that  peace  is,  as  has  been 
shown  above,  absolutely  necessary  to  us  ;  that  in 
present  circumstances  the  sole  object  of  the  negotia- 
tions should  be  the  safety  of  the  Empire,  isolated  as 
it  is  at  present  from  all  that  it  had  to  preserve  abroad; 
that  all  interests  not  affecting  that  object,  or  only 
indirectly  affecting  it,  have  become  subordinate  to  it ; 
and  that  we  must  be  satisfied  even  with  a  tolerable 
peace,  provided  it  offers  elements  of  security  to 
Russia. 

All  else  that  we  could  hope  for  as  regards  our- 
selves and  our  allies — whether  in  augmenting  our 
preparations  and  our  efforts,  or  in  gaining  some 
advantages,  or  through  the  support  of  other  Powers, 
or  the  skill  of  diplomatists,  will  always  be  an  object 
of  our  wishes  and  even  of  our  action,  but  we  should 
not  consider  it  essential  to  realise  such  hopes,  or 
regard  their  non-fulfilment  as  an  insurmountable 

o 

obstacle  to  peace.  We  need  be  the  less  obstinate  on 
this  point,'  that  as  our  enemy  is  ready  to  accept 
negotiation  in  common  for  a  general  pacification,  our 
allies,  especially  England  and  Prussia,  will  each  look 


184      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

after  their  own  interests,  and  we  shall  relatively  have 
greater  latitude  in  working  for  ours. 

The  Treaty  of  A  July  last*  not  to  be  revived. 

Acting  on  the  principle  above  indicated,  it  is 
unnecessary  to  observe  that  the  Treaty  of  ^  July  last 
cannot  be  revived  either  by  Russia  or  by  France  ;  for, 
on  the  one  hand,  the  evacuation  of  Germany  by  the 
French,  as  stipulated  in  that  Treaty,  can  no  longer  be 
hoped  for  after  the  late  immense  conquests  and  aggres- 
sions of  Buonaparte,  and  on  the  other,  we  now  have 
what  we  did  not  have  then — compensations  to 
demand  for  the  district  which  our  safety  compelled 
us  to  occupy  in  Turkey. 

Bases  of  the  Negotiation. 

1.  The  greatest  facilities  would  be  given  as  to  the 
arrangements  Napoleon    might  be  disposed  to    make 
either  with  England  or  Prussia   or  with   any  other 
Power  as  to  the  countries  he  has  occupied  since  the 
renewal  of  the  war. 

The  true  and  permanent  interests  of  Russia  are 
in  no  way  opposed  to  the  creation  of  new  States  of  a 
moderate  size  near  our  frontiers,  even  if  the  enemy 
were  to  retain  them  under  his  protection. 

2.  We  should,  however,  demand  as  a  conditio  sine 
qua  non  that  the  French  armies  evacuate  within  a 
brief    period    the    countries   in    question,    and   retire 
beyond  the  Weser,  or  at  least  behind  the  Elbe,  so  that 

»  This  is  the  Treaty   signed  by  M.  d'Oubril,  in  Paris,  but  not  ratified  by  his 
Government.     See  page  161. 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  185 

their  passing  beyond  those  limits  without  our  con- 
currence should  be  regarded  as  equivalent  to  a  declar- 
ation of  war. 

3.  Russia  would  restore  all  the  fortresses  and  the 
territory  she  may  occupy  at  the  date  of  the  treaty ; 
she  would  consent  not  to  keep  Cattaro  and  even,  if 
absolutely  necessary,  to  evacuate  the  Seven  Islands,  on 
the  express  condition,  however,  that 

4.  France  shall  not  keep  that  portion  of  Dalmatia 
which  formerly  belonged  to  Venice,  and  Cattaro  at 
least   shall    not   in   any    case    be    placed    under   her 
rule. 

As  the  integrity  and  independence  of  the 
Ottoman  Empire  are  of  as  great  interest  to  Russia  as 
to  France,  and  the  two  Powers  equally  wish  to 
guarantee  it,  it  will  only  be  just  that  there  should  be 
perfect  reciprocity  in  this  respect.  Whatever  guar- 
antee the  Cabinet  of  the  Tuileries  may  require  from 
Russia  on  the  north,  the  Cabinet  of  St  Petersburg 
will  have  a  right  to  demand  a  similar  guarantee  in 
the  south.  The  Porte  has  itself  every  interest  in 
seconding  us  in  this  demand,  and  Austria  and  Eng- 
land will  be  called  upon  to  take  part  in  the  arrange- 
ment. 

5.  The  crown  of  Sicily  would  be  retained  in  the 
possession  of  King  Ferdinand.     If  Buonaparte  were 
to  demand  that  the  title  of  King  of  the  two  Sicilies 
should  be  recognized  in  favour  of  Joseph  his  brother, 
one  might  grant  it  without  any  territorial  or  sovereign 
rights.     Although  this  matter  might  seem  of  indirect 
importance  to  Russia,  it  affects  her  safety  and  pros- 


i86       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

perity  too  greatly  not  to  form  an  essential  object  of 
the  negotiations. 

G.  The  kingdom  of  Sardinia  will  be  maintained  and 
guaranteed  by  all  the  Powers  which  have  treaties  with 
the  King. 

7.  If  England  can  make  peace  on  the  basis  indi- 
cated by  Buonaparte  in  his  address  to  the  Senate,  i.e., 
the  retention  of  Malta,  the  island  of  Ceylon,  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope,  and  her  conquests  in  Mysore,  Russia 
will  accede  to  such  an  arrangement,  without,  however, 
interfering  with  regard  to  any  difficulties  which  might 
ultimately  be  raised  with  regard  to  the  negotiations 
between  France  and  England. 

o 

8.  If  Sweden    should  accede  to   this    peace,   the 
two  contracting  Powers  will   guarantee  her  present 
possessions. 

9.  Indemnities  could  be  afforded  for  the  King  of 
Sicily  or  Sardinia  by  the  bay  of  Cattaro,  the  Seven 
Islands,  or  the  part  of  Dalmatia  which  formerly  be- 
longed to  Venice,  should  it  be  given  up.     Dalmatia 
might  also  be  used  for   making  useful  exchanges  of 
territory  with  Austria. 

10.  The  happy  idea  of  destroying   the   Barbary 
States   having   been  formerly  suggested    by   Buona- 
parte, would  probably  be  now  accepted  by  him,  and 
these    States   would    also  afford  a  means  of  making 
arrangements    whose    results    would    be    of    general 
interest. 

Similar  negotiations  will  at  once  be  opened  in 
Austria,  at  Constantinople,  in  England,  and  at  the 
other  Courts,  with  a  view  to  obtaining  their  concur- 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  187 

rence  or  intervention  as  regards  the  objects  of  the  pro- 
posed treaty. 

[After  the  so-called  *  Polish  Campaign/  during  the 
winter  of  1806-7,  Napoleon  made  peace  with  Russia 
at  Tilsit  (July  7,  1807).  Although  Prince  Czar- 
toryski  had  ceased  to  be  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs 
at  St  Petersburg,  he  was  present  at  the  negotiations, 
and  still  exercised  considerable  influence  over  Alex- 
ander's mind,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  letter 
from  the  British  Ambassador,  Lord  Granville 
Leveson  Gower,  urging  him  to  use  his  good  offices 
with  the  Emperor  to  prevent  his  concluding  a  one- 
sided peace  with  Napoleon  :— 

Mon  Prince, 

La  confiance  que  vous  m'avez  toujours 
temoignee,  et  la  conversation  confidentielle  que  nous 
avons  eue  a  Tilsitt,  m'a  fait  esperer  que  vous  ne  le 
trouverez  pas  indiscret  de  ma  part  de  m'addresser  & 
Votre  Excellence  sur  les  bruits  qui  courent  dans  ce 
moment  au  sujet  de  1'armistice,  et  les  negociations  de 
paix  qui  la  suivront.  Les  raisonnements  sur  la  ne'ces- 
site  d'arre'ter  par  la  voie  des  negociations  les  armees 
Frangaises  sont  trop  bien  fondes  pour  que  je  puisse  en 
disputer  la  validite,  mais  il  me  semble  que  de  consentir 
a  une  paix  separee  apres  toutes  les  declarations  qu'a 
fait  1'Empereur  a  cet  egard,  sera  en  efFet  avouer  que 
la  Russie  se  trouve  au  bout  de  ses  moyens,  et  les 
ites  facheuses  qui  en  resulteront  sont  incalculables. 
Ce  n'est  pas  1'Angleterre  qui  en  souffrira  le  plus  ;  pour 
obtenir  une  paix  generale  solide  et  equitable  je  suis 


1 88       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

persuad^  que  la  cour  de  Londres  fera  de  grands 
sacrifices — et  c'est  bien  Finteret  de  toutes  les  puissances 
qu'on  ne  fasse  pas  la  paix  sans  son  corisenteinent. 
Tout  ce  qui  tend  a  relacher  les  liens  qui  unissent  la 
Russie  et  1'Angleterre  doit  etre  nuisible  aux  deux 
Empires,  et  si  jamais  la  France  trouve  le  moyen  de 
separer  ces  deux  cours,  e'en  est  fait  de  Findependance 
de  1'Europe.  Je  suis  persuade  que  votre  influence, 
quoique  le  portefeuille  ne  se  trouve  plus  dans  vos 
mains,  peut  beaucoup  faire  dans  ce  moment  si  critique  ; 
usez-en  pour  le  bien  general,  je  vous  conjure. 
Pardonnez,  mon  Prince,  la  franchise  avec  laquelle  je 
vous  ai  ecrit,  et  sera-ce  trop  abuser  de  votre  bonte  de 
vous  prier  de  me  repondre  avec  confiance  ?  J'y  ai 
des  droits,  parceque  personne  ne  vous  est  plus  attache. 
Avec  tous  les  sentiments  que  je  vous  ai  voues,  je 
suis  votre  devoue  serviteur,  G.  L.  GOWKR. 

A  MEMEL,  ce  23  Juin  1807. 

One  of  the  chief  articles  of  the  Treaty  of  Tilsit 
was  the  creation  of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  under  the 
rule  of  the  King  of  Saxony,  out  of  the  Polish  pro- 
vinces annexed  by  Prussia  in  the  various  partitions. 
This  event  produced  some  characteristic  manifesta- 
tions of  Polish  patriotism.  Several  persons  gave 
up  the  whole  of  their  property  for  the  mainten- 
ance of  the  Polish  army  ;  others  raised  and  equipped 
entire  regiments  at  their  own  expense.  Six  regiments 
—one  of  artillery,  two  of  cavalry,  and  three  of 
infantry — were  raised  and  placed  on  a  war  footing 
entirely  by  four  individuals  in  a  few  weeks.  Those 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  189 

who  were  less  rich  supplied  battalions,  companies  or 
smaller  bodies  of  men.  As  the  country  was  nearly 
ruined  by  the  stagnation  of  trade  and  the  constant 
passage  of  troops,  those  who  thus  came  forward  to 
increase  the  national  forces  had  to  sell  their  family 
plate,  jewels,  and  even  wedding-rings.] 


CHAPTER  XVII 

1809-10 


CONVERSATIONS  WITH    ALEXANDER  I  ON  POLISH    AFFAIRS. HIS  OPINION 

OF  THE  CHARACTER  OF  NAPOLEON. HIS  PLANS  FOR  A  RECONSTRUC- 
TION OF  POLAND. 


THE  creation  of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw  by  Napoleon, 
and  the  augmentation  of  its  territory  by  part  of 
Galicia  after  the  war  between  France  and  Austria  in 
1809,  in  which  the  Polish  troops  greatly  distinguished 
themselves,  had  gradually  restored  in  some  degree  to 
the  Polish  provinces  south  of  the  Vistula  the  powers 
of  an  independent  State,  though  its  sovereign,  the 
King  of  Saxony,  was  practically  the  vassal  of  Napo- 
leon. Under  these  circumstances  Prince  Adam 
Czartoryski  gradually  withdrew  from  the  Imperial 
Council*  at  St  Petersburg,  and  retained  only  the  post 
of  Curator  of  the  University  of  Wilna,  which  had  been 
conferred  upon  him  by  the  Emperor  Alexander 
together  with  the  portfolio  of  Foreign  Affairs.  This 
post  gave  him  extensive  powers  over  the  educational 
establishments  in  Lithuania,  which  he  completely 

*  The  date  of  his  last  communication  to  the  Council  (on  Russian  Finance)  is  the 
29th  of  January,  1810. 


CONVERSATIONS  ON  POLISH  AFFAIRS  191 

reorganised  and  developed  in  a  national  sense.  He 
did  not,  however,  lose  sight  of  his  favourite  idea  of 
reconstructing  Poland  as  a  separate  kingdom  under 
the  sceptre  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia  ;  and  the  follow- 
ing are  notes,  written  by  himself  at  the  time,  of  his 
conversations  with  Alexander  on  this  subject  in 
1809-10  : 

12th  November,  1809. 

.  .  .  Referring  to  Napoleon's  letter  to  the  Em- 
peror and  M.  de  Champagny's  despatch  on  Poland,  I 
said  that  I  could  only  be  pained  at  the  knowledge  that 
the  Emperor  is  now  made  the  chief  enemy  and  perse- 
cutor of  the  Polish  nation  and  name  ;  that  it  was  only 
to  please  him  that  Poland  had  been  abandoned  and 
deprived  of  all  hope  ;  and  that  he  carried  his  animosity 
so  far  as  even  to  wish  the  name  of  Poland  to  be 
effaced  from  history. 

The  Emperor  at  first  defended  himself  against  this 
charge.  He  said  that  his  personal  sentiments  had  not 
changed,  that  they  had  long  been  known  to  me,  that 
he  was  bound  by  the  duties  of  his  position,  and  that 
every  Russian  Emperor  would  have  done  the  same.  I 
answered  that  I  could  not  on  this  point  separate  the  Em- 
peror's personal  inclinations  from  his  political  opinions  ; 
that  he  had  himself  recognised  that  the  restoration  of 
Poland  could  be  accomplished  not  only  without  injur- 
ing the  interests  of  Russia,  but  on  the  contrary,  to  her 
great  advantage,  by  uniting  the  two  crowns  on  his 
Majesty's  head.  The  Emperor  replied  that  all  this 
might  be  true,  but  that  the  thing  was  not  practicable, 


192       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  that  it  was  therefore  necessary  to  adopt  another 
line  of  conduct.  I  at  once  rejoined  that  I  could  not 
understand  this  reasoning.  If  a  certain  policy  was 
desirable  in  itself,  it  should  not  be  adopted  at  one 
moment  and  dropped  the  next :  if  opportunities  had 
been  neglected  or  had  not  presented  themselves,  the 
proper  course  was  to  wait  for  new  ones  and  in  the 
meantime  to  prepare  the  ground,  instead  of  alienating 
the  nation  by  measures  of  undeserved  rigour.  Upon 
this  the  Emperor  cast  down  his  eyes  and  said  :  '  If  at 
least  one  could  expect  some  return  on  the  part  of  the 
Poles ! ' 

I  replied  that  I  could  not  see  what  he  had  done  to 
gain  the  affection  of  the  Poles  :  '  Could  anything  be 
more  revolting  than  the  conduct  of  the  three  Powers 
with  regard  to  Poland  ?  And  is  it  surprising  that 
the  idea  of  seeing  their  country  restored  should  fill  the 
Poles  with  enthusiasm  and  bring  them  together  ?  It 
is  thought  that  the  peace  will  diminish  this  enthusiasm. 
I  think  otherwise,  and  the  airs  of  triumph  with  which 
the  papers  here  proclaim  that  the  Poles  have  been 
deprived  of  all  hope  seem  to  me  rather  of  a  nature  to 
serve  Napoleon  than  to  do  him  harm,  as  they  will  cast 
all  the  odium  of  his  conduct  on  your  Majesty.  No 
one  will  now  doubt  that  it  was  at  the  instance  of  your 
Majesty,  and  in  order  not  to  have  war  with  Russia, 
that  Napoleon  yielded  on  a  point  which  he  would 
otherwise  never  have  abandoned,  and  this  can  only 
embitter  the  Poles  against  you.  .  .  .' 

The  Emperor  replied  that  I  knew  his  sentiments 
as  to  the  partition  of  Poland,  and  that  he  still  thought 


CONVERSATIONS  ON  POLISH  AFFAIRS  193 

that  all  the  evils  from  which  Europe  is  now  suffering 
date  from  that  event.  It  could  not,  however,  now  be 
remedied.  He  did  not  see  any  means  of  executing 
the  plan  he  had  formerly  contemplated  with  regard  to 
Poland  ;  all  that  was  possible  was  to  grant  a  separate 
organisation  to  the  provinces  now  under  his  rule,  but 
even  that  would  require  much  consideration,  and 
would  meet  with  much  opposition  in  Russia.  I  said 
that  knowing  his  liberal  sentiments,  which  had  been 
the  origin  of  the  connection  with  which  he  had 
honoured  me,  the  only  difficulty  I  could  perceive 
would  be  the  possibility  of  Napoleon  opposing  the 
scheme  ;  and  that  this  made  me  anxious  to  know 
whether  in  the  numerous  conversations  he  had  had 
with  Napoleon  he  (the  Emperor  Alexander)  had  ever 
touched  upon  the  subject.  The  Emperor  replied 
rather  vaguely  that  the  matter  had  recently  been  in 
question  during  the  Austrian  war.  Here  he  stopped 
short,  and  added  that  Napoleon  would  never  consent 
to  such  a  thing,  as  his  sole  idea  was  always  to  influence 
the  Poles  and  use  them  as  his  tools. 

I  then  remarked  that  the  grant  of  a  separate  con- 
stitution to  the  Polish  provinces  now  belonging  to 
Russia  would  probably  meet  with  more  opposition  in 
the  Empire  than  the  idea  of  uniting  the  whole  of 
Poland  to  it.  This  I  felt  convinced  was  necessary  for 
the  security  of  Russia ;  but  I  feared  that  when  Russia 
would  recognise  that  such  is  the  case,  it  would  be  too 

o 

late.  The  Emperor  said  that  if  he  went  to  war  with 
France  it  would  certainly  be  advisable  that  he  should 
declare  himself  King  of  Poland  in  order  to  gain  over 

VOL.  II.  N 


194       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  Poles  to  his  side.  I  answered  that  it  would  then 
be  too  late;  and  seeing  that  the  conversation  had  lasted 
too  long,  I  did  not  wish  to  carry  it  any  further. 

December  26,  1809. 

I  had  written  to  the  Emperor  to  ask  him  for  a  short 
interview,  and  in  doing  so  I  specially  mentioned  my 
wish  to  speak  to  him  about  the  continuation  of  my 
leave,  which  was  about  to  expire.  Some  days  later, 
after  a  dinner  at  my  mother's,  the  Emperor  came  to 
me  and  asked  me  to  go  to  him  on  the  following  day, 
as  he  wished  to  speak  to  me.  I  inferred  from  this 
that  he  wished  to  speak  about  the  contemplated 
changes  in  the  organisation  of  the  Council  which  were 
just  then  the  talk  of  the  town.  Not  knowing  what 
the  Emperor's  plan  was  or  what  he  might  propose  to 
me,  I  was  a  little  anxious,  for  it  is  always  disagreeable 
to  listen  to  a  sovereign's  proposals  when  one  has 
every  reason  to  decline  them. 

Next  day  I  went  to  the  palace,  and  after  waiting 
for  some  time,  I  was  admitted  to  the  Emperor's 
presence.  He  first  asked  me  what  I  wanted.  I 
mentioned  various  private  matters  to  him,  and  then 
begged  him  to  allow  my  leave  to  be  prolonged.  He 
said  he  thought  I  had  intended  to  stop  longer  at  St 
Petersburg,  and  that  he  had  consequently  believed  it 
might  have  suited  me  to  have  more  active  employ- 
ment. He  then  informed  me  that  the  Council  svas  to 
assume  a  new  shape,  with  more  extensive  functions 
and  an  organisation  for  the  formation  of  which  that 
of  similar  institutions  in  France  and  England  had  been 


CONVERSATIONS  ON  POLISH  AFFAIRS  195 

taken  as  an  example  ;  that  he  had  divided  the  Council 
into  four  sections — War,  Home  Affairs,  Finance, 
Justice  and  Law — and  that  a  place  had  been  assigned 
to  me  in  the  fourth  section.  There  was  also  to  be  a 
further  discussion  by  the  general  body  of  the  Council 
of  the  matters  that  had  been  dealt  with  in  the 
sections  ;  but  it  was  for  the  latter  that  good  workers 
would  be  most  required.  I  replied  that  I  was  ex- 
tremely honoured  by  the  confidence  his  Majesty  was 
good  enough  to  place  in  me,  but  that  my  reasons  for 
soliciting  a  prolongation  of  my  leave  were  already 
known  to  him — the  advanced  age  of  my  parents,  from 
whom  I  had  been  long  separated  ;  the  care  of  my 
health,  with  which  the  climate  of  St  Petersburg  did 
not  at  all  agree  ;  and  the  habits  and  tastes  which  I 
had  contracted  during  my  prolonged  absence  from 
active  service.  The  Emperor  said  he  had  no  idea  of 
disturbing  my  arrangements,  adding  that  he  had 
expected  I  should  leave  him,  but  had  thought  I 
would  postpone  my  departure  till  the  summer.  I  re- 
plied that  I  intended  before  the  summer  to  pass  some 
time  at  Wilna,  where  my  presence  was  necessary  in 
order  to  arrange  the  affairs  of  the  university.  .  .  . 

The  Emperor  then  told  me  that  all  the  severe 
measures  which  had  been  taken  with  regard  to  the 
Poles  would  be  revoked,  that  a  decision  to  this  effect 
had  been  arrived  at,  but  that  it  would  not  be  published 
for  some  weeks  to  come.  He  added  that  the  motives 
which  had  impelled  him  to  take  these  measures  had 
ceased  to  exist,  and  that  now  he  had  reason  to  be 
tranquil  as  regards  Poland.  I  thanked  him,  and 


196       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

asked  what  were  the  reasons  for  his  tranquillity ;  was 
it  only  the  passage  in  M.  de  Montalivet's  speech,*  or 
was  there  any  other  reason,  such  as  an  engagement 
no  longer  to  contemplate  the  restoration  of  Poland? 
I  knew  from  the  conversations  which  I  had  had  with 
the  Chancellor,  that  there  was  some  question  of  this 
between  the  two  Cabinets,  and  I  remarked  to  the 
Emperor  that  in  that  case  he  would  himself  be  obliged 
to  enter  into  a  similar  engagement,  and  would  thus 
tie  his  hands.  The  Emperor  made  an  evasive  reply, 
merely  saying  that  there  was  no  question  of  what  I 
was  thinking  about. 

He  then  asked  me  as  to  the  public  feeling  in 
Poland.  '  Events,'  I  said,  '  have  revived  the  senti- 
ments of  fifteen  years  ago.  The  hope  of  the  restora- 
tion of  Poland  seemed  for  a  while  to  the  Poles  less 
possible ;  but  now  it  is  as  if  a  half-cicatrised  wound 
were  accidentally  reopened.  It  is  thought  that  their 
hopes  might  have  been  diminished  in  consequence  of 
the  last  peace  with  Austria,  and  certain  letters  and 
despatches  from  Napoleon  which  have  been  made 
public.  Be  this  as  it  may,  public  feeling  is  neverthe- 
less at  the  same  stage  as  it  was  fifteen  years  ago. 
Moreover,  there  is  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  which  has 

*  The  following  was  the  passage  here  referred  to.  It  occurs  in  the  '  statement 
of  the  situation  of  the  Empire,'  presented  by  M.  de  Montalivet  to  the  French  legisla- 
tive body  on  the  1st  of  December,  180J) : 

'  The  Duchy  of  Warsaw  has  been  augmented  by  part  of  Galicia.  It  would  have 
been  easy  for  the  Emperor  to  join  the  whole  of  Galicia  to  this  State  ;  but  he  did  not 
wish  to  do  anything  which  might  have  caused  anxiety  to  his  ally,  the  Emperor  of 
Russia.  Nearly  the  whole  of  the  Galicia  of  the  old  partition  has  remained  in  the 
power  of  Austria.  His  Majesty  has  never  had  in  view  the  restoration  of  Poland. 
What  he  has  done  for  the  new  Galicia  was  prompted  less  by  policy  than  by  honour  ; 
he  could  not  abandon  to  the  vengeance  of  an  implacable  prince  a  population  which 
had  displayed  so  much  ardour  in  the  cause  of  France. ' 


CONVERSATIONS  ON  POLISH  AFFAIRS  197 

been  considerably  augmented  by  the  late  war  arid 
which  helps  to  strengthen  and  maintain  the  patriotic 
sentiment.  It  is  a  sort  of  phantom  of  ancient  Poland 
which  produces  an  infallible  effect  on  all  who  regard 
that  country  as  their  real  fatherland.  It  is  as  if,  after 
you  had  lost  a  dear  friend,  his  shade  should  come  to 
assure  you  that  he  will  soon  be  restored  to  you  in 
person. 

'  Your  Majesty  must  not  be  astonished  at  senti- 
ments which  I  hold  in  common  with  all  Poles.  I  do 
not  speak  to  you  as  a  sovereign  :  I  beg  you  to  lay 
aside  that  character  and  only  to  keep  that  which  was 
the  first  cause  of  my  attachment  to  you.  .  .  .  Your 
Majesty  will  remember  that  when  I  returned  from 
Italy  I  had  not  the  least  idea  of  entering  your  service. 
When  you  wished  to  employ  me,  I  repeatedly  declined, 
and  my  chief  reason  was  that  being  a  Pole,  my  posi- 
tion might  become  delicate  and  difficult.  I  foresaw 
that  circumstances  might  arise  in  which  the  interests 
of  my  country  might  be  opposed  to  the  duties  of  my 
office.  Your  Majesty  replied  that  there  was  at  that 
time  no  reason  to  anticipate  such  a  thing,  but  that  if 
there  should  be  at  some  future  period  I  would  be  at 
liberty  to  act  as  I  thought  proper.  I  must  now  say 
that  the  general  impression  produced  on  all  my 
countrymen  by  circumstances,  and  by  the  existence  of 
the  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  has  also  produced  its  effect 
upon  me.  I  cannot  help  taking  the  strongest  interest 
in  my  country. 

'  In  my  opinion  a  man  who  is  not  attached  to  his 
country  is  despicable.  To  disown  one's  religion,  ones' 


iy8       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

parents,  one's  country,  is  in  my  eyes  equally  odious. 
These  are  feelings  with  which  I  was  born,  which  educa- 
tion has  strengthened,  and  which  in  me  will  never 
change.  Moreover,  my  brother,  my  sisters,  and  all  my 
family  are  in  Poland,  and  I  will  confess  to  your  Majesty 
that  this  is  one  of  the  reasons  which  make  me  wish  not 
to  mix  myself  up  with  any  affairs  here.  It  is  not  enough 
for  me  to  be  clear,  straightforward,  and  sincere  in  my 
actions  ;  I  also  wish  to  be  so  in  my  sentiments  and  my 
thoughts.  I  am  therefore  glad  to  have  been  able  to 
open  my  mind  completely  to  your  Majesty,  and  to 
explain  myself  to  you  without  any  reserve.  My  first 
object  is  to  preserve  my  own  esteem  ;  my  second  is  to 
preserve  that  of  people  whom  I  am  accustomed  to  love 
and  respect.  Should  at  any  time  your  Majesty  think 
fit  to  confiscate  my  property  and  order  me  to  be  shot, 
I  will  bear  my  fate  with  equanimity  if  you  will  do  me 
the  justice  to  think  that  I  was  an  honest  man  who 
always  spoke  the  truth  and  never  deceived  you.' 

The  Emperor  seemed  satisfied,  and  said  that  he 
had  never  misunderstood  me,  and  that  the  way  I  had 
explained  myself  to  him  did  me  credit.  For  a  moment 
he  was  absorbed  in  thought ;  then,  as  if  suddenly 
rousing  himself,  he  said  :  '  There  is  no  other  means  of 
arranging  all  this  than  our  old  plan  of  giving  a  consti- 
tution and  a  separate  existence  to  the  kingdom  of 
Poland  by  attaching  the  title  to  the  Russian  crown.' 
'  We  must  wait,'  he  continued,  '  until  Austria  commits 
some  blunder  (fasse  une  bdtise)  and  provokes  a  new 
rupture  with  France ;  then  we  may  find  means  to 
come  to  an  understanding  with  Napoleon,  and  give 


HIS  OPINION  OF  THE  CHARACTER  OF  NAPOLEON  199 

compensation  to  the  King  of  Saxony.'  He  added 
that  in  the  meantime  it  would  have  been  well  to  pro- 
ceed in  this  sense  with  the  provinces  now  belonging 
to  the  Empire,  and  to  take  the  title  of  Grand-Duke 
of  Lithuania ;  but  that  in  presence  of  so  skilful  an 
antagonist  as  Napoleon,  he  had  feared  to  awaken  his 
suspicions  and  lead  him  to  anticipate  Russia  by  pro- 
claiming the  independence  of  Poland  himself. 

.  .  .  As  to  this  matter  having  ever  been  discussed 
in  the  Emperor's  frequent  conversations  with  Napo- 
leon— a  subject  regarding  which  he  had  hitherto 
always  avoided  to  give  me  any  precise  answer — 
Alexander  stated  positively  that  no  mention  had 
been  made  of  it  between  the  two  Emperors.  At 
Tilsit  Napoleon  had  spoken  with  much  levity  about 
Poland  and  the  Poles,  and  at  Erfurth  there  was  too 
much  to  do  for  them  to  touch  upon  that  subject.  I 
expressed  my  regret  that  his  Majesty  had  not  taken 
an  opportunity  of  sounding  Napoleon  on  the  matter, 
and  I  added  that  notwithstanding  the  despatches  and 
speeches  of  his  Ministers,  Napoleon  had  succeeded  in 
spreading  among  the  Poles  a  conviction  that  he  not 
only  had  the  interests  of  Poland  at  heart,  but  that  he 
had  a  feeling  of  special  affection  for  her.  .  . 

His  Majesty  replied  that  Napoleon  was  a  man  who 
would  not  scruple  to  use  any  means  whatever  so  long 
as  he  attained  his  object.  As  I  had  for  some  time 
heard  various  rumours  in  the  society  of  St  Petersburg 
as  to  Napoleon's  fits  of  epilepsy  and  his  being 
threatened  with  mental  derangement,  I  asked  the 
Emperor  whether  there  was  any  truth  in  these 


200      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSK1 

reports.  '  Napoleon  will  never  go  mad,'  he  answered  ; 
'  the  thing  is  impossible,  and  those  who  believe  it  do 
not  know  him.  He  is  a  man  who  in  the  midst  of  the 
greatest  troubles  keeps  his  head  cool ;  all  his  fits  of 
passion  are  only  meant  to  intimidate,  and  are  often 
the  fruit  of  calculation.  He  does  nothing  without 
thoroughly  considering  and  foreseeing  the  conse- 
quences of  his  acts.  .  .  One  of  his  favourite  sayings 
is  that  nothing  should  be  undertaken  without  a  plan. 
In  his  opinion  there  is  no  difficulty  that  cannot  be 
overcome  if  you  find  the  right  mode  of  proceeding. 
Once  that  is  found,  the  rest  is  easy ;  while  if  the 
simplest  matter  possible  is  undertaken  without  find- 
ing the  method  of  doing  it,  all  is  spoilt  and  no  result 
is  obtained.  His  health  is  excellent ;  no  one  can 
bear  fatigue  and  hard  work  better  than  he  does  ;  but 
he  requires  eight  hours'  sleep  a  day,  though  he  does 
not  keep  regular  hours.  He  is  not  eloquent  either  in 
speech  or  in  writing ;  I  have  heard  him  dictate  letters 
in  an  abrupt  and  unconnected  style.'  .  .  . 

I  remarked  in  the  course  of  this  conversation  that 
the  Emperor  still  retained  a  sort  of  partiality  for  me, 
but  that  he  had  no  very  strong  desire  to  keep  me.  .  .  . 
As  for  Napoleon,  it  is  clear  that  Alexander  under- 
stands him  thoroughly ;  that  Napoleon  has  preserved 
a  marked  influence  over  his  mind  ;  and  that  he  greatly 
fears  him. 

5th  April  1810. 

About  three  weeks  ago  the  Emperor,  whom  I  had 
not  seen  for  some  time,  suddenly  sent  for  me.  After 


PLANS  FOR  A  RECONSTRUCTION  OF  POLAND     201 

talking  about  private  matters  and  the  grant  of  an 
amnesty  to  those  inhabitants  of  the  Polish  provinces 
of  Russia  who  had  joined  their  countrymen  of  the 
Grand-Duchy  of  Warsaw  in  the  war  against  Austria, 
the  Emperor  mentioned  that  he  had  a  plan  of  uniting 
the  eight  Polish  provinces  under  a  separate  adminis- 
tration, and  asked  my  opinion  on  the  subject.  I 
requested  to  be  given  time  for  reflection.  The  problem 
was  a  difficult  one.  How  could  I  give  the  Emperor 
any  hope  that  the  means  to  be  adopted  for  producing 
a  reconciliation  between  him  and  the  Poles  would  be 
efficacious  ?  And  as  regards  my  country,  might  not 
the  result  be  a  civil  war  ?  Yet  I  thought  it  best  to 
reply,  partly  as  a  matter  of  courtesy,  partly  because 
the  future  was  so  uncertain  that  I  considered  it 
undesirable  entirely  to  break  a  thread  which  under 
different  circumstances  might  become  valuable. 

After  a  few  weeks  I  came  back  to  the  Emperor 
and  read  to  him  a  memorandum  in  which  I  stated  my 
views.  .  .  .  The  Emperor  interrupted  me  at  the 
beginning  with  the  remark  that  it  was  not  only  for 
the  eventuality  of  a  war,  but  to  gain  the  affection  of 
the  Poles  in  any  case,  that  he  thought  of  doing  some- 
thing for  them.  He  then  listened  without  saying  a 
word,  but  with  much  attention.  It  was  only  when  I 
stated  that  the  most  suitable  time  for  doing  some- 
thing in  favour  of  Poland  was  past,  that  he  again 
interrupted  me.  '  In  writing  that,'  he  said,  '  you 
were  no  doubt  thinking  of  the  year  1805  and  my  stay 
at  Pulawy.*  I  now  see  myself  that  that  was  a 

*  See  page  99. 


202       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

favourable  moment — perhaps  a  unique  one.  We 
could  then  have  done  easily  what  can  only  be  done 
now  with  great  trouble  ;  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten 
that  we  would  have  had  the  whole  of  the  Prussian 
army  against  us.' 

I  answered  that  another  very  favourable  oppor- 
tunity occurred  at  the  time  of  the  last  war  with 
Austria,  during  which  Russia  could  easily  have 
demanded  the  restoration  of  Poland.  '  That  would 
have  brought  about  the  total  ruin  of  Austria,'  was 
the  Emperor's  reply.  '  Any  how,'  I  rejoined,  '  the 
course  which  was  followed  was  the  worst,  for  it  did 
riot  save  Austria,  whom  it  threw  into  the  arms  of 
France ;  it  annoyed  Napoleon ;  and  it  was  of  no 
material  advantage  to  Russia.' 

When  I  had  finished  reading,  I  apologised  for  not 
having  arrived  at  any  definite  conclusion  ;  I  could  not 
say  more,  as  I  was  imperfectly  informed  of  what  was 
going  on,  and  I  did  not  know  what  was  the  predomi- 
nant feeling  in  the  Polish  provinces.  '  Bah!'  said  the 
Emperor,  '  it  is  not  difficult  to  know  what  people 
think  in  the  provinces  and  in  the  Grand -Duchy.  The 
Poles  would  follow  the  devil  himself  if  he  would  lead 
them  to  the  restoration  of  their  country.  But  I  am 
satisfied  at  what  you  have  written  ;  it  will  help  me  to 
reflect  on  a  subject  which  has  so  long  occupied  my 
attention.  I  have  sought  all  kinds  of  means  of  realis- 
ing my  wishes,  but  have  not  arrived  at  any  satisfactory 
solution.  The  greatest  difficulty  is  .to  find  an  indem- 
nification for  the  King  of  Saxony ;  this  could  only  be 
done  by  still  further  dismembering  that  unfortunate 
King  of  Prussia.' 


PLANS  FOR  A  RECONSTRUCTION  OF  POLAND     203 

I  remarked  that  the  greatest  difficulty  was  to 
obtain  the  consent  of  France,  and  that  if  this  were 
obtained  the  rest  would  be  easy.  The  Emperor 
agreed,  saying  that  Napoleon's  interest  was  not  to 
change  the  present  state  of  things,  as  he  cared  much 
less  for  the  good  of  Poland  than  to  use  her  as  a  tool 
in  the  event  of  his  making  war  upon  Russia.  He  at 
the  same  time  admitted  that  it  was  natural  that  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Grand-Duchy  of  Warsaw,  in  view 
of  the  respective  forces  of  the  two  Powers,  the  talent 
and  experience  of  the  Polish  generals  and  armies, 
and  Napoleon's  great  chances  of  victory  in  any  war, 
should  not  be  inclined  to  throw  themselves  into  the 
arms  of  Russia  at  the  risk  of  losing  the  fruits  of  the 

o 

efforts  they  had  made  for  so  many  years.  This  was 
entirely  my  view  of  the  case  ;  and  the  Emperor  then 
told  me  some  of  his  ideas  for  bringing  about  a  restora- 
tion of  Poland. 

One  of  these  was  to  enter  on  a  sham  war  with  the 
Grand-Duchy,  so  that  by  a  preconcerted  arrangement 
the  Russian  troops  might  occupy  positions  in  which 
they  would  be  joined  by  the  Polish  troops,  and  then 
fight  the  French  together.  Such  a  plan  was  obviously 
chimerical ;  its  difficulties  were  palpable,  and  it  in- 
volved a  war  against  Napoleon  with  very  uncertain 
chances  of  success. 

Another  plan  was  to  form  a  kingdom  of  Poland  out 
of  the  Duchy  and  Galicia,  and  to  allow  the  inhabitants 
of  the  Polish  provinces  of  Russia  to  serve  in  the  new 
kingdom  as  if  it  were  their  own  country.  This  idea 
surprised  me  ;  but  the  Emperor  explained  that  the 


204      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Poles,  being  thus  satisfied,  would  have  no  reason  to 
oppose  Russia  ;  that  there  would  then  be  no  longer  any 
cause  of  dissension  between  Russia  and  France ;  and 
that  the  evil  would  thus  be  got  rid  of  by  amputation 
instead  of  by  cure.  The  Emperor's  tone  in  saying 
this  led  me  to  believe  that  the  idea  might  have  been 
suggested  to  him  by  the  French  Ambassador,  that  it 
had  been  discussed  between  them,  and  that  he  might 
be  disposed  to  adopt  it  as  a  convenient  method  of 
avoiding  war  with  France. 

The  Emperor  concluded  by  saying  that  he  would 
consider  all  these  ideas,  and  that  he  wished  me  also 
to  seek  a  clue  to  the  object  he  had  in  view.  I  replied 
that  I  was  far  from  desiring  to  damp  his  Majesty's 
good  intentions,  but  that  so  far  as  I  could  see  there 
was  nothing  to  be  done  immediately  beyond  taking 
the  measures  I  proposed  in  my  memorandum.  I 
added  that  I  thought  the  present  year  would  not  come 
to  an  end  without  producing  events  more  serious  and 
decisive  than  any  that  we  had  yet  seen.  The 
Emperor,  interrupting  me,  said  in  an  impressive 
tone  that  he  thought  it  would  not  be  this  year,  as 
Napoleon  was  entirely  occupied  with  his  marriage  ;  but 
that  he  expected  there  would  be  a  crisis  next  year. 
*  We  are  now  in  April,'  he  continued  ;  '  it  will  be  nine 
months  hence.'*  While  saying  these  words,  and 
indeed  throughout  the  conversation,  the  Emperor 
had  a  severe  and  fixed  look,  which  reminded  me  of 
his  haggard  gaze  after  Austerlitz. 

*  Napoleon's  Campaign  in  Russia  did  not  begin  till  more  than  two  years  after- 
wards (June  22,  1812). 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

1810 

FRIENDSHIP    verSUS    PATRIOTISM 

ALEXANDER,  notwithstanding  his  promises,  did  nothing 
for  Poland,  and  Prince  Czartoryski  then  deter- 
mined to  take  no  further  part  in  Russian  affairs, 
and  to  devote  himself  exclusively  to  his  own  country. 
This  decision  was  only  arrived  at  after  a  hard 
mental  struggle,  which  he  thus  describes  in  a  paper 
dated  the  20th  of  June  1810  : — 

In  the  difficult  circumstances  in  which  I  am  placed, 
and  which  are  exposed  on  all  sides  to  misunderstanding 
and  misjudgment,  I  owe  a  sincere  account  of  my 
actions  to  those  who  take  an  interest  in  me,  in  order 
to  spare  them  as  much  as  I  can  the  pain  of  finding 
themselves  deceived  in  their  opinion  of  me.  Seeing 
me  as  I  am,  their  judgment  may  console  me  for  the 
injustice  of  the  majority,  from  which  I  shall  perhaps 
not  escape. 

I  seem  continually  to  hear  two  voices  which  ring 
with  equal  force  in  my  ears.  One  speaks  as  follows  : — 

'  Your   position  is,   no  doubt,    extremely  difficult, 


206       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

but  your  difficulties  themselves  trace  out  for  you  the 
course  you  should  follow.  .  .  You  have  played  a  part 
in  Russia  which  for  a  time  made  you  a  prominent 
figure  on  the  theatre  of  European  politics.  In  doing 
so  you  acquired  general  esteem,  and  when  you  resigned 
office  your  withdrawal  was  regretted  by  the  Govern- 
ments and  nations  which  were  suffering  under  the 
devastating  system  of  Napoleon.  After  your  resig- 
nation, you  maintained  the  opinions  you  had  advocated 
when  in  office,  and  Cabinets  and  patriots  still  looked 
up  to  you  as  one  of  those  by  whom  Europe  could  be 
saved. 

'  Will  you  now  discard  the  principles  you  have 
proclaimed,  attach  yourself  to  the  chariot  of  the 
tyrant,  and  become  the  tool  of  his  projects,  which  in 
your  opinion  are  fatal  to  the  happiness  both  of  present 
and  future  generations  ? 

'  You  owe  nothing  to  Russia  or  to  the  Emperor 
whom  you  have  served  well  as  long  as  you  could. 
But  do  you  owe  nothing  to  yourself  and  to  Europe  ? 
And  to  what  would  you  sacrifice  such  grave  considera- 
tions and  precious  advantages  ?  Not  to  the  evident 
good  of  your  country,  but  to  vague  hopes  and  dreams. 
.  .  .  Can  you  believe  that  Buonaparte  sincerely  wishes 
for  the  good  of  any  country  ?  All  he  wants  is  to  make 
your  countrymen  his  tools,  and  he  will  be  ready  to 
abandon  them  directly  his  interest  requires  him  to 
do  so. 

'  Would  it  be  right  for  you  to  participate  in  such 
projects  ?  Your  country  has  nothing  to  reproach  you 
with  ;  you  have  been  useful  to  your  countrymen  while 


FRIENDSHIP  VERSUS  PATRIOTISM  207 

you  were  in  office ;  you  have  done  your  utmost  to 
restore  Poland.  Under  present  circumstances  it  is 
difficult,  if  not  impossible,  for  you  to  take  an  active 
part  in  Russian  affairs ;  but  on  the  other  hand  you 
should  at  least  not  mix  yourself  up  with  what  is  going 
on  in  your  country.  You  should  hold  aloof,  and 
remain  neutral  and  passive  as  long  as  the  present 
storm  lasts.' 

While  I  listen  to  these  reasons  and  feel  their  force, 
the  other  voice  says  to  me  : — 

'  It  is  true  that  your  position  is  different  from  that 
of  the  other  Poles.  They  feel  it,  and  they  give 
you  full  credit  for  the  conduct  you  have  pursued 
hitherto. 

'  But  your  duties  are  changed.  You  passed  under 
the  rule  of  Russia  together  with  the  rest  of  your 
country.  Circumstances  placed  you  in  the  service  of 
Russia,  not  as  a  Russian,  but  because  you  were  a  Pole. 
You  belonged  to  Russia  because  Poland  was  destroyed; 
the  cause  having  ceased,  the  effect  as  regards  yourself 
should  cease  also.  ...  It  was  solely  your  personal 
relations  with  the  Emperor  that  led  }'ou  to  enter  his 
service,  notwithstanding  the  strong  reasons  to  the  con- 
trary which  you  repeatedly  urged  to  him.  When  he 
insisted  upon  your  compliance,  though  still  a  Pole  at 
heart,  you  honestly  and  zealously  laboured  in  the 
interest  of  Russia.  .  .  .  There  was  an  interval  when 
all  hope  of  restoring  Poland  had  disappeared.  Directly 
it  revived,  you  strove  to  make  the  possibility  of  the 
restoration  of  Poland  serve  to  glorify  the  Emperor, 
and  to  unite  by  the  bonds  of  a  common  advantage  the 


2o8      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

two  interests  which  were  most  dear  to  you.  But  your 
counsels  were  not  heard ;  your  plans  were  not  followed. 
The  interests  you  wished  to  unite  again  parted  from 
each  other,  and  you  retired  in  time  to  avoid  a  situation 
where  you  must  have  been  guilty  either  on  one  side 
or  the  other.  These  interests  have  grown  more  and 
more  divergent  and  will  become  entirely  opposed  to 
each  other.  You  should  leave  a  service  and  a  State 
essentially  hostile  to  your  country,  and  bent  on  crush- 
ing out  its  existence  and  that  of  your  countrymen. 
Nor  is  this  all.  A  moment  will  come  when  you  will 
have  to  take  an  active  part — when  Poland  is  declared 
independent  and  will  be  in  arms  to  maintain  her 
existence.  This  will  probably  be  when  France  is 
at  war  with  Russia,  and  every  Pole  who  then  holds 
aloof  will  be  looked  upon  by  his  countrymen  with 
contempt. 

'  When  people  say  Buonaparte  should  not  be  sup- 
ported by  the  Poles  because  of  his  unjust  and 
oppressive  conduct  towards  other  nations,  they  forget 
that  there  is  not  a  single  act  of  iniquity  committed 
by  Napoleon  of  which  the  Powers  which  partitioned 
Poland  did  not  themselves  set  the  example.  It  is 
not  for  them  to  become  the  champions  of  principles 
which  they  have  trodden  under  foot.  ...  A  charac- 
teristic trait  of  the,  Polish  nation  is  to  love  one's 
country  above  everything,  and  to  be  ready  to 
sacrifice  everything  to  recover  it.  Will  you  be 
more  sensitive  to  what  happens  on  the  Tagus  and 
the  Adige  than  on  the  Vistula — be  indignant  at 
the  acts  of  injustice  committed  with  regard  to  other 


FRIENDSHIP  VERSUS  PATRIOTISM  209 

nations,    and    indifferent    to  those    inflicted    on    your 
own  ?  .  .  . 

'  Buonaparte  has  never  done  any  harm  to  Poland  ; 
he  alone  has  held  out  his  hand  to  her  and  has  done 
all  he  could  for  her.  The  Poles  condemn  his  policy 
as  other  nations  do  ;  they  pity  the  Spaniards,  and  are 
ashamed  to  be  obliged  to  fight  against  them  ;  but  no 
nation  can  be  expected  to  commit  suicide  in  order  that 
other  nations  may  be  benefited.  The  Poles  regret 
the  necessity  of  their  being  attached  to  Napoleon's 
fortunes,  but  they  cannot  refuse  benefits  at  his  hands 
which  are  not  offered  them  by  any  one  else.  They 
have  done  everything  to  prove  their  ardent  wish  to 
owe  their  national  existence  to  the  Emperor  Alex- 
ander ;  but  he  has  rejected  all  their  overtures.  On 
one  side  they  find  interest,  support,  and  hope  ;  on  the 
other,  animosity,  persecution,  and  discouragement. 
The  dearest  interests  of  Poland,  supported  solely  by 
France,  have  by  the  present  conduct  of  the  Cabinet 
of  St  Petersburg  become  diametrically  opposed  to 
those  of  Russia.  Poland  is  ready  to  do  the  will  of 
any  Power  that  will  help  her.  Buonaparte  alone 
has  hitherto  done  so,  and  she  hopes  through  his 
assistance  to  recover  her  name  and  her  existence  as  a 
nation.  If  she  is  wise,  circumstances  may  perhaps 
enable  her  to  come  successfully  out  of  the  general 
cataclysm  which  is  approaching,  and  she  may  by  her 
efforts  prove  to  the  Russian  Government  and  nation 
that  it  would  be  useful  to  bring  her  over  to  their  side, 
and  to  unite  the  two  nations  by  bonds  of  mutual 
advantage  and  interest. 

VOL.  II.  O 


210      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

'  As  to  your  position  in  the  matter,  it  is  quite 
clear.  You  have  loyally  served  the  Emperor,  and 
you  have  always  told  him  the  truth  :  he  knows 
better  than  anyone  your  sentiments  with  regard  to 
Poland.  You  owe  him  a  certain  amount  of  con- 
sideration, which  cannot,  however,  outweigh  your 
duties  to  your  country.  The  policy  you  proclaimed 
as  a  Russian  Minister  was  in  accordance  with  your 
duty  and  the  state  of  Europe  at  the  time.  There 
was  then  a  hope  that  resistance  to  Napoleon  would  be 
efficacious,  and  it  was  certainly  right  that  Russia 
should  attempt  it.  Circumstances  are  now  entirely 
different,  and  as  a  Pole  you  can  no  longer  advocate 
the  same  policy  as  when  you  were  Minister  of 
Russia,  and  Russia  had  not  made  a  treaty  of  peace 
with  France.  Your  principles,  however,  have  always 
been  the  same ;  your  period  of  office  in  Russia  was 
merely  an  episode  in  your  career. 

'  In  Poland  you  cannot  play  a  passive  part.  No 
family  has  more  distinguished  itself  by  its  attachment 
to  the  country  than  yours,  and  though  still  young, 
you  have  already  fought  for  Poland,*  and  your  words 
as  well  as  your  deeds  have  been  those  of  a  patriot. 
Your  countrymen  have  full  confidence  in  you,  and  you 
cannot  refuse  them  your  assistance  without  dishonour. 

'  There  is  no  question  of  your  becoming  a  satellite 
of  Buonaparte ;  no  one  wishes  you  to  do  so.  Nor  is 
it  necessary  for  you  to  decide  too  soon  or  without 
sufficient  reflection.  But  you  will  have  to  come  for- 
ward at  the  moment  when  the  fate  of  Poland  will 

*  At  the  battle  of  Granno,  in  1792  (see  Vol.  I.  page  53). 


FRIENDSHIP  VERSUS  PATRIOTISM  211 

hang  in  the  balance,  when  there  will  be  no  doubt  as 
to  the  motives  of  those  who  declare  themselves,  or 
excuse  for  those  who  will  withdraw  at  a  time  when 
your  country  will  make  decisive  efforts  to  recover  its 
existence. 

'  Will  your  relations  of  friendship  with  the  Emperor 
excuse  you  ?  Those  relations  have  almost  ceased  ; 
and  your  duty  to  your  country  is  superior  to  any  claims 
of  friendship.  Moreover,  if  you  have  sacrificed  that 
friendship  for  the  interests  of  a  country  which  has 
been  the  cause  of  the  ruin  of  Poland,  how  could  you 
do  less  for  your  own  country  ? ' 

Such  are  the  two  voices  that  speak  to  me  one 
after  the  other,  and  the  same  arguments  have  been 
expressed  to  me  with  even  more  force  by  persons 
who  are  dear  to  me  and  whom  I  respect.  Being 
thus  placed  between  two  such  opposite  opinions,  I 
ought  to  decide  for  myself  which  I  should  follow  : 
but  I  confess  that  I  cannot  yet  clearly  see  any 
way  of  escape  from  the  labyrinth  in  which  I  am 
enclosed. 

My  reason  does  not  lead  me  to  any  result,  for 
the  arguments  on  both  sides  seem  to  me  to  have  equal 
weight.  But  at  the  bottom  of  my  heart  the  feelings 
and  motives  which  speak  for  my  country  are  para- 
mount, and  I  would  be  happy  were  I  able  to  follow 
them  without  constraint.  I  was  born  with  these 
feelings ;  my  education  developed  them ;  they  are 
deeply  graven  in  my  heart.  I  think  no  one  loves  his 
country  with  more  passion  than  I  do.  To  keep  the 
esteem  of  my  countrymen  and  to  do  good  to  my 


212       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYbKl 

country  is  the  only  glory  that  would  give  me  pleasure  ; 
and  if  her  misfortunes  continue  and  my  reputation 
perishes  with  her  existence,  I  shall  at  least  have  the 
consolation  of  knowing  that  I  have  never  acted  from 
any  motive  that  is  not  just  and  honourable. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

1810-12 

FURTHER     CORRESPONDENCE     BETWEEN     ALEXANDER     I    AND      PRINCE 

CZARTORYSKI. THE      FORMER     PROPOSES     TO      RESTORE      POLAND. 

— DIFFICULTIES. LIST    OF    TROOPS    AT    ALEXANDER'S    DISPOSAL. 

NAPOLEON    STRIVES  TO    PROVOKE  A    RUPTURE. PRELIMINARIES  OF 

HIS  CAMPAIGN    IN    RUSSIA. NEGOTIATIONS    AFTER  THE    CAMPAIGN. 

— PERSECUTION  OF  THE  POLES  IN   LITHUANIA. 

AFTER  Prince  Czartoryski  had  returned  to  Poland  he 
devoted  himself  entirely  to  his  educational  work  as 
Curator  of  the  University  of  Wilna ;  but  finding  that 
a  Commission  under  a  Russian  Governor  had  been 
appointed  to  report  on  one  of  the  colleges  in  his  dis- 
trict and  decide  as  to  the  future  organisation  of  the 
college,  he  sent  his  resignation  to  the  Emperor  in  a 
letter  dated  the  H  November,  1810.  The  following 
correspondence  then  took  place  between  Alexander 
and  the  Prince  : — 

THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER  TO  PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. 

ST  PETERSBURG, 
25th  December,  1810. 
MY  DEAR  FRIEND, — I  have  received  your  letter,  and 


MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

I  will  not  conceal  from  you  that  it  has  given  me 
much  pain.  You  wish  to  break  the  only  public  con- 
nection which  exists  between  us,  and  after  an  intimate 
friendship  of  more  than  fifteen  years,  which  nothing 
has  been  able  to  alter,  we  are  to  become  strangers  to 
each  other,  if  not  by  our  sentiments,  at  least  in  our 
public  relations.  This  is  a  thought  which  it  is  painful 
to  me  to  dwell  upon,  the  more  so  as  I  believed  the 
moment  had  arrived  when  our  intimate  relations 
might  be  developed  to  their  fullest  extent.  .  .  .  As  to 
that  unfortunate  affair  of  the  college,  I  had  not  the 
slightest  wish  to  cause  you  pain,  and  I  did  not  intend 
to  do  anything  after  receiving  the  report  of  the  Com- 
mission without  first  consulting  you.  .  .  . 

But  there  is  a  more  important  subject  which 
requires  immediate  consideration.  It  seems  to  me 
that  the  time  has  arrived  to  prove  to  the  Poles  that 
Russia  is  not  their  enemy,  but  their  true  and  natural 
friend ;  that  although  Russia  is  represented  to  them 
as  the  sole  obstacle  to  the  restoration  of  Poland,  it  is 
not  improbable  that  Russia  will  be  the  Power  to  bring 
about  that  event.  .  .  .  This  has  always  been  my 
favourite  idea ;  circumstances  have  twice  compelled 
me  to  postpone  its  realisation,  but  it  has  none  the  less 
remained  in  my  mind.  There  has  never  been  a  more 
propitious  moment  for  realising  it  than  the  present ; 
but  before  going  any  further  I  should  like  you  to 
answer  categorically  and  in  the  greatest  detail  the 
questions  I  must  put  to  you  before  proceeding  to  the 
execution  of  my  plan. 

1.  Have  you  sufficient  data  as  to  the  feelinsf  of 

«/  •          o 


ALEXANDER  PROPOSES  TO  RESTORE  POLAND  215 

the  inhabitants  of  the   Duchy   of  Warsaw ;    and   if 
so — 

2.  Have  you  a  well-founded  belief  that  they  would 
seize  with  avidity  any  offer  giving  them  the  certainty 
(not  probability,  but  certainty]  of  their  regeneration  ? 

3.  Would  they  accept  it  from  whatever  quarter  it 
might  come,  and  would  they  join  any  Power,  without 
distinction,  that  would  espouse  their  interests  sincerely 
and  with    attachment  ?     It  is    self-evident   that   the 
proclamation  of  their  restoration  would  have  to  pre- 
cede any  decision  on  their  part,  and  would  have  to  be 
such  as  to  prove  the  sincerity  of  the  conduct  which 
would  be  adopted  with  regard  to  them. 

4.  Have  you,  on  the  other  hand,  reason  to  suppose 
that  various  parties  exist  in  the  country,  and  that 
consequently — 

5.  One  cannot  reckon  on  a  unanimous  resolution 
eagerly  to  take  the  opportunity  of  the  first  offer  made 
for  the  regeneration  of  Poland  ? 

6.  What  are  these   parties  ?     Are   they  equal  in 
importance,  and  who  are  the  individuals  that  may  be 
regarded  as  their  leaders  ? 

7.  Do    these    parties  also   exist   in   the  army,   or 
should  it  be  regarded  as  more  united  in  opinion  and 
feeling  ? 

8.  Who   is    the    officer   that    has    the    greatest 
influence  upon  opinion  in  the  army  ? 

These  are  the  most  important  questions  I  have  to 
put  to  you  at  present.  Directly  I  get  your  answers, 
I  will  give  you  further  information  as  to  my  plans.  .  . 

I  must  beg  you  to  keep  the  contents  of  this  letter 


216       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

absolutely  secret.  I  rely  on  your  prudence,  and  I 
feel  certain  you  will  take  care  not  to  mar  a  work  to 
which  your  country  would  owe  its  regeneration, 
Europe  its  deliverance,  and  you  personally  the  glory 
and  the  pleasure  of  having  co-operated  in  it,  and 
having  thereby  proved  that  your  conduct  has  through- 
out been  consistent,  and  that  those  of  your  country- 
men who  relied  upon  you  in  the  past  have  been 
justified  in  their  expectations.  If  you  second  me,  and 
lead  me  to  hope  that  the  Poles,  and  especially  the 
Polish  army,  are  practically  unanimous  in  desiring 
the  restoration  of  Poland  from  whatever  quarter  it 
may  come,  success,  with  the  help  of  God,  will  not  be 
doubtful,  for  it  is  based  not  on  a  hope  of  counter- 
balancing the  genius  of  Napoleon,  but  solely  on  the 
diminution  of  his  forces  through  the  secession  of  the 
Duchy  of  Warsaw,  and  the  general  exasperation  of 
the  whole  of  Germany  against  him.  I  annex  a  short 
table  of  the  auxiliary  forces  which  would  be  at  the 
disposal  of  each  side. 

This  is  what  I  had  to  say ;  consider  it  calmly. 
Such  a  moment  presents  itself  only  once ;  any  other 
combination  will  only  bring  about  a  war  to  the  death 
between  Russia  and  France,  with  your  country  as  the 
battlefield.  The  support  on  which  the  Poles  can  rely 
is  limited  to  the  person  of  Napoleon,  who  cannot  live 
for  ever.  Should  he  disappear  from  the  scene,  the 
consequences  to  Poland  would  be  disastrous  ;  while  if 
by  joining  Russia  and  the  other  Powers  which  would 
certainly  follow  her,  the  moral  strength  of  France 
should  be  overthrown,  and  Europe  delivered  from  her 


LIST  OF  TROOPS  AT  ALEXANDERS  DISPOSAL    217 

yoke,  the  existence  of  your  country  would  be  estab- 
lished with  unshakeable  solidity.  .  .  . 

I  await  your  answer  with  the  greatest  impatience, 
and  am  always  yours,  heart  and  soul. 

My   best   remembrances   to    your    parents,    your 
sisters,  and  }Tour  brother. 

(Signed)     ALEXANDER. 

Note  on  the  Forces  which  might  be  opposed  to 
each  other. 

On  one  side — 

100,000  Kussians 
50,000  Poles 
50,000  Prussians 
30,000  Danes 

Total  230,000  men,  who  might  at  once  be  rein- 
forced by  100,000  more  Russians. 

On  the  other  side — 

60,000  French  (it  is  stated  there  are  only 
46,000  in  Germany,  but  I 
add  those  who  might  be 
drawn  from  Holland  and 
the  interior  of  France). 

30,000  Saxons 

30,000  Bavarians 

20,000  Wiirtembergers 

15,000  Westphalians  and  other  German 
troops 


Total  155,000  men. 


218       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

It  is  more  than  probable,  however,  that  the 
example  set  by  the  Poles  will  be  followed  by  the 
Germans,  and  then  there  will  only  remain  the  60,000 
French.  And  if  Austria,  in  return  for  the  advantages 
we  shall  offer  her,  should  also  enter  the  field  against 
France,  this  will  add  200,000  men  to  our  side  against 
Napoleon. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  TO  THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER. 

1%  January  1811. 

SIRE, — Your  Imperial  Majesty  will  easily  imagine 
with  what  attention  and  extreme  interest  I  have  read 
your  letter  of  the  25th  of  December.  .  .  .  Allow  me 
to  express  to  you  my  deep  gratitude  for  your 
benevolent  intentions  regarding  my  country,  the 
favourable  recollection  you  have  retained  of  her  in 
your  political  combinations,  and  the  special  proof  of 
confidence  which  you  are  good  enough  to  give  me  on 
this  occasion,  and  which  I  will  endeavour  to  deserve 
by  carrying  out  your  instructions  with  all  the  zeal  and 
prudence  at  my  command.  ...  I  will  at  once  reply 
to  your  questions ;  but  my  replies,  as  you  will  have 
foreseen,  can  only  be  of  a  preliminary  kind. 

So  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  observe  the  public 
feeling  in  this  country,  I  see  a  unanimity  of  intentions 
and  objects  both  in  the  army  and  among  the  in- 
habitants of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw.  Their  sole  wish 
and  object  is  the  restoration  of  Poland — the  reunion 
of  all  its  parts  into  a  single  national  body,  under  a 
national  and  constitutional  regime.  The  differences 
of  opinion  which  are  observable  as  to  the  amount  of 


FURTHER  CORRESPONDENCE  219 

confidence  to  be  placed  in  generals  and  other  promi- 
nent personages,  and  as  to  their  talents  and  patriotism, 
cannot  properly  come  under  the  designation  of  party 
feeling,  and  these  differences  would  either  disappear  or 
have  a  quite  subordinate  influence  if  the  higher 
interests  of  the  country  were  at  stake.  Unanimity, 
therefore  exists  ;  but  it  would  be  necessary  to  convince 
everybody  that  the  salvation  of  the  country  and  the 
realisation  of  greater  and  more  solid  advantages 
demand  a  total  change  of  policy  and  the  abandon- 
ment of  the  only  supporter  that  the  Duchy  has  as  yet 
possessed. 

The  certainty  of  the  regeneration  of  Poland  would, 
as  it  seems  to  me,  be  received  with  gratitude  and 

'  o 

eagerness  from  anyone  that  could  offer  it,  provided 
that  the  manner  in  which  it  should  be  offered  and 
brought  about  inspired  more  confidence  and  greater 
guarantees  of  success  than  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Duchy  believe  themselves  to  possess  through  their 
union  with  France.  The  great  difficulty  in  the 
execution  of  your  Majesty's  plan  would  be  at  once 
to  produce  such  a  conviction  in  the  minds  of  the 
Government,  the  army,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Duchy. 

This,  indeed,  is  the  gist  of  the  whole  question. 
However  just  the  grievances  of  the  Poles  against 
Napoleon  may  be,  he  has  yet  persuaded  them  that  it 
was  not  want  of  good-will,  but  absolute  want  of  power, 
which  prevented  him  from  carrying  the  work  of  their 
regeneration  any  farther,  .  .  .  and  that  at  the  first 
rupture  with  Russia^  Poland  would  be  restored.  To 


220      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

this  feeling  is  added  gratitude  for  what  Napoleon  has 
already  done,  and  repugnance  at  the  idea  of  turning 
against  him,  just  a,t  the  moment  when  he  most 
reckoned  upon  its  co-operation,  the  new  Polish  State 
which  he  has  created.  To  all  these  considerations 
must  be  added  the  fact  that  the  French  and  the  Poles 
are  brothers  in  arms,  and  the  idea  that  while  the 
French  are  the  friends  of  Poland,  the  Russians  are 
her  bitter  enemies — an  idea  which  has  been  consider- 
ably strengthened  by  the  events  of  the  late  war. 

A  further  difficulty  is  created  by  the  fact  that 
there  are  20,000  Polish  troops  in  Spain,  whom  their 
friends  and  relatives  in  Poland  would  fear  to  sacrifice 
to  the  vengeance  of  Napoleon.  Moreover,  in  the 
expectation  of  a  war  with  Russia,  many  Poles  have 
sent  their  children  to  be  educated  in  Paris,  as  being 
at  present  the  safest  place  in  Europe ;  and  these 
would  be  so  many  hostages  in  Napoleon's  hands. 
Finally,  Napoleon  has  hitherto  been  so  uniformly 
successful,  even  in  the  most  dangerous  undertakings, 
that  people  think  he  will  always  conquer  in  the  end, 
however  much  appearances  may  be  against  him.  .  .  . 

In  order  to  meet  these  objections  it  would  be 
necessary  to  make  the  Poles  some  offer  so  distinctly 
advantageous  to  their  country  as  to  overcome  all  per- 
sonal considerations.  They  must  be  treated  with 
magnanimity,  for  with  all  their  faults  they  have  the 
qualities  which  appeal  to  the  heart  and  the  imagination. 
The  three  following  points  would  for  such  a  purpose 
be  indispensable:  (1)  The  restoration  of  the  con- 
stitution of  the  3rd  of  May  1791,  which  is  graven  in 


FURTHER  CORRESPONDENCE  221 

ineffaceable  characters  on  all  Polish  hearts ;  (2)  The 
reunion  of  the  whole  of  Poland  under  one  sceptre, 
thereby  putting  an  end  to  a  state  of  things  which 
separates  members  of  the  same  family  from  their 
relations  and  estates  merely  because  they  are  under  a 
different  government ;  (3)  The  re-establishment  of 
outlets  for  trade,  the  closing  of  which  has  impoverished 
the  country  ;  and  (4)  A  reasonable  prospect  of  success 
in  a  war  with  Napoleon.  .  .  .  As  to  this  last  point,  I 
can  hardly  believe  that  Napoleon  could  not  get  more 
than  15,000  men  in  Holland  and  France  to  come  to 
the  support  of  the  16,000  he  has  in  North  Germany. 
What  has  become  of  the  new  levy  of  150,000  recruits  ? 
.  .  .  And  are  you  quite  sure  that  you  would  have 
100,000  men  at  your  disposal  at  the  beginning  of  the 
war?  I  have  so  often  seen  in  Russia  100,000  men 
on  paper  represented  only  by  65,000  effectives.  It 
would  also  be  well  to  state  precisely  whether  by  the 
Power  which  will  offer  to  restore  Poland  you  mean 
Russia. 

I  have  answered  as  well  as  I  can  your  principal 
questions.  As  to  the  most  influential  man  in  the 
army,  he  is  undoubtedly  Prince  Poniatowski,  the 
Commander-in-Chief  and  Minister  of  War,  whose  per- 
sonal character  secures  him  an  influence  over  his 
subordinates  greater  than  that  of  any  other  chief. 

In  a  few  days  I  will  go  to  Warsaw  and  sound  the 
opinions  of  the  leading  personages  there.  ...  I  regret 
your  Majesty  has  not  stated  more  precisely  what  you 
propose  to  do,  and  what  you  expect  of  the  Poles,  so 
that  there  should  be  no  misunderstanding  on  either 


222       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

side.  This  alone  could  furnish  sufficient  arguments  to 
influence  the  decision  of  those  who  will  have  to  choose 
between  the  two  alternatives.  I  forgot  to  ask  if  when 
developing  this  plan  you  do  not  intend  to  make  an 
effort  to  bring  about  a  general  peace  and  gain  your 
ends  without  war.  I  cannot  tell  you,  Sire,  with  what 
hopes  and  fears  I  am  continually  agitated.  What 
happiness  it  would  be  to  labour  for  the  deliverance  of 
so  many  suffering  nations,  for  the  restoration  of  my 
country,  and  for  your  Majesty's  glory  !  What  happi- 
ness to  see  those  different  interests  combined  which 
fate  seemed  always  to  oppose  to  each  other  !  But  often 
I  fancy  that  this  is  too  magnificent  a  dream  ever 
to  be  realised,  and  that  the  genius  of  evil,  which  seems 
always  to  be  on  the  watch  to  break  up  combinations 
too  fortunate  for  mankind,  will  also  succeed  in  destroy- 
ing this  one.  I  am,  with  the  profoundest  respect,  &c. 

THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER  TO  PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. 

ST  PETERSBURG, 
3 1  st   January    1811. 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND, — I  received  your  interesting 
letter  of  the  a<r  January  on  the  evening  of  the  day 
before  yesterday,  and  I  hasten  at  once  to  answer  it. 

The  difficulties  which  it  points  out  are  very  great, 
I  admit ;  but  as  I  had  foreseen  most  of  them,  and  the 
results  are  of  such  supreme  importance,  the  worst 
course  to  follow  would  be  to  stop  half-way.  .  .  . 

I  will  begin  by  replying  to  the  chief  points  in  your 
letter— 

(1)    The   Power  to  which   I    referred   as   willing 


FURTHER  CORRESPONDENCE  223 

to    take    in    hand    the    regeneration    of    Poland    is 
Russia. 

(2)  By  such  regeneration  I  mean  the  reunion  of 
everything  that  formerly  constituted  Poland,  including 
the  Russian  provinces  (except  White  Russia),  so  as  to 
make  the  rivers  Dvina,  Beresina,  and   Dnieper   the 
frontiers. 

(3)  The     government     officials,     the     established 
authorities,  and  the  army,  should  be  entirely  of  the 
Polish  nationality. 

(4)  As  I  do  not  well  remember  the  constitution  of 
the  3rd  of  May,  I  cannot  decide  anything  until  I  see 
it,  and  I  shall  be.  obliged  if  you  will  send  it  me.     In 
any  case  a  liberal  constitution  will  be  offered,  such  as 
to  satisfy  the  wishes  of  the  inhabitants. 

(5)  In  order  to  convince  them  of  the  sincerity  of 
my   offer,   the   proclamations    of    the    restoration    of 
Poland  must   precede    everything  else,  and  it   is  by 
them  that  the  execution  of  the  plan  is  to  commence. 

(6)  But  the  conditions  sine  qud  non  on  which  I 
offer  this  are — 

1st  That  the  kingdom  of  Poland  shall  for  ever 
be  united  to  Russia,  wrhose  Emperor  shall  in  future 
bear  the  title  of  Emperor  of  Russia  and  King  of 
Poland. 

2nd.  That  a  formal  and  positive  assurance  shall  be 
given  of  a  unanimity  of  disposition  and  feeling  in 
favour  of  such  a  result  among  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Duchy,  to  t)e  guaranteed  by  the  signature  of  the 
most  prominent  persons  among  them. 

I    will    now    endeavour   to   diminish   your    fears 


224      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

as  to  the  insufficiency  of  the  military  means  at  my 
disposal. 

The  army  which  is  to  support  and  fight  by  the 
side  of  the  Poles  is  completely  organised,  and  is  com- 
posed of  eight  divisions  of  infantry,  each  comprising 
10,000  men,  and  of  four  divisions  of  cavalry,  each  of 
4,000  horses.  This  makes  a  total  of  96,000  men,  to 
which  should  be  added  fifteen  Cossack  regiments  of 
7,500  horse — 106,500  in  all.  Non-combatants  are 
not  included. 

This  army  will  be  supported  by  another  of  eleven 
divisions  of  infantry,  a  division  of  grenadiers,  the 
Guards'  division,  four  divisions  of  cavalry,  and  seven- 
teen Cossack  regiments — total,  134,000  men. 

Finally,  a  third  army,  composed  of  reserve  squad- 
rons and  battalions,  supplies  44,000  combatants, 
reinforced  by  80,000  recruits,  all  clothed  and  trained 
for  some  months  in  the  depots. 

The  army  of  Moldavia  might  in  case  of  necessity 
also  detach  some  divisions,  without  on  that  account 
being  unable  to  maintain  its  defensive  position,  and 
the  armies  of  Finland  and  Georgia,  together  with  the 
corps  in  the  Crimea,  would  remain  entirely  intact. 

Two  initial  difficulties  present  themselves  : 

1st.  The  reunion  of  Galicia  would  create  a  difficulty 
as  regards  Austria.  It  is  most  necessary  to  treat  her 
with  consideration  and  avoid  offending  her  in  any 
respect.  I  have  therefore  decided  to  offer  her  Wal- 
lachia  and  Moldavia  as  far  as  the  Sereth  in  exchange 

o 

for  Galicia.     But  it  would  be  indispensable  to  post- 
pone the  reunion   of  Galicia  until  Austria  gives  her 


FURTHER  CORRESPONDENCE  225 

consent,  so  as  to  prove  that  we  have  no  views  that 
might  be  prejudicial  to  her. 

The  Kingdom  of  Poland  would,  therefore,  in  the 
first  instance  be  formed  of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw  and 
the  Russian  provinces. 

2nd.  The  compensation  to  be  given  to  the  King  of 
Saxony*  presents  a  second  difficulty  which  I  find  it  not 
so  easy  to  overcome.  But  I  do  not  consider  that  I 
shall  be  bound  to  do  so  unless  he  comes  over  to  my  side. 

Having  thus  stated  the  facts,  I  will  enter  upon  a 
discussion  of  the  subject  generally. 

It  is  beyond  doubt  that  Napoleon  is  striving  to 
provoke  Russia  to  a  rupture  with  him,  hoping  that  I 
will  make  the  mistake  of  being  the  aggressor.  This 
would  be  a  great  blunder  in  present  circumstances,  and 
I  am  determined  not  to  make  it.  But  if  the  Poles 
were  willing  to  join  me,  that  would  put  an  entirely 
new  face  on  the  matter.  Being  reinforced  by  the 
50,000  men  who  constitute  their  army,  by  the  50,000 
Prussians  who  could  then  also  join  me  without  risk, 
and  by  the  moral  revolution  which  would  be  the 
infallible  result  in  Europe,  I  could  advance  to  the 
Oder  without  striking  a  blow. 

I  agree  with  you  that  a  proposal  of  peace  might 
in  that  case  be  properly  made.  If  it  is  not  accepted, 
and  war  becomes  inevitable,  let  us  consider  impartially 
the  alternatives  which  are  open  to  the  Poles  and  the 
probable  results  of  each  of  them. 

First  alternative,  that  of  the  Poles  remaining  on 
the  side  of  France  and  co-operating  with  her. 

This  may  be  subdivided  into  two  cases : 

*  The  King  of  Saxony  was  Grand-Duke  of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw. 
VOL.    II.  P 


226       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

1st.  Russia  having  decided  not  to  take  the  offen- 
sive, it  is  possible  that  Napoleon  will  not  do  so  either, 
at  least  so  long  as  the  affairs  of  Spain  occupy  him  and 
the  great  mass  of  his  troops  are  engaged  there.  In 
that  case  matters  will  remain  as  they  are,  and  the 
regeneration  of  Poland  will  consequently  be  postponed 
to  a  more  distant  and  very  uncertain  period. 

2nd.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  Napoleon  should 
attack  Russia,  and  at  the  same  time  proclaim  the 
regeneration  of  Poland,  his  proclamation  could  only 
have  effect  in  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  for  it  would  be 
necessary  to  deprive  Russia  of  her  Polish  provinces  by 
force  of  arms.  Meanwhile  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw  and 
the  Polish  provinces  would  become  the  theatre  of  war 
and  of  all  possible  devastation.  It  may  thus  be 
asserted  with  certainty  that  after  such  a  war,  what- 
ever might  be  its  result,  Poland  would  be  only  a  vast 
desert,  and  its  inhabitants  the  greatest  sufferers  by 
the  war. 

Such  is  the  probable  result  of  the  restoration  of 
Poland  being  proclaimed  by  France. 

Second  alternative,  that  of  the  Poles  joining 
Russia  and  co-operating  with  her. 

The  infallible  results  of  this  would  be— 

1st.  That  the  regeneration  of  Poland,  instead  of 
being  postponed,  would  precede  any  other  event. 

2?ic?,  That  this  regeneration  would  comprise  the 
Duchy  of  Warsaw  and  the  Russian  provinces,  with  a 
tolerably  certain  hope  of  its  being  extended  to  Galicia. 

3rd,  That  the  theatre  of  war,  instead  of  being  in 

7  O 

the   heart   of  Poland,   would    be   transferred   to  the 
Oder. 


FURTHER  CORRESl'ONDENCE  227 

Such  are  the  infallible  results,  while  the  probable 
ones  might  be  : 

1st,  A  complete  revolution  of  opinion  in  Europe. 

2nd,  A  very, marked  diminution  in  the  forces  of 
Napoleon,  increasing  the  chances  of  success ;  for 
Napoleon  would  find  it  very  difficult  to  withdraw  his 
forces  from  Spain,  being  engaged  with  a  nation  bitterly 
hostile  to  him,  and  having  300,000  combatants  in  the 
field,  which  would  not  be  satisfied  with  his  'retreat, 
but  would  take  advantage  of  the  new  war  Napoleon 
would  have  on  his  hands  to  invade  France. 

3rd,  The  deliverance  of  Europe  from  the  yoke 
which  oppresses  her. 

4th,  The  employment  for  the  defence  of  Poland, 
as  a  kingdom  annexed  to  a  strong  Empire,  of  the 
forces  of  that  Empire. 

5th,  The  revival  of  trade  and  prosperity,  a  liberal 
constitution,  and  a  public  revenue  based  on  the  real 
wants  of  the  country,  and  not,  as  now,  applied  solely 
for  the  maintenance  of  a  too  large  army  destined  to 
serve  the  ambitious  plans  of  Napoleon. 

Even  the  fears  that  you  express  as  to  the  fate  of 
the  20,000  Poles  in  Napoleon's  service  do  not  seem  to 
me  well  founded,  for  the  worst  that  could  happen  to 
them  would  be  that  for  a  time  they  would  be  regarded 
as  prisoners  of  war  .... 

To  resume  :  so  long  as  I  cannot  be  sure  of  the 
co-operation  of  the  Poles  I  am  decided  not  to  begin  a 
war  with  France.  If  such  co-operation  is  to  take 
place,  I  must  receive  indubitable  assurances  and  proofs 
of  it ;  it  is  only  then  that  I  shall  be  able  to  act  in  the 
manner  above  stated.  In  that  case  you  must  send 


228       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

me  all  the  necessary  papers,  such  as  proclamations, 
the  constitution,  and  other  indispensable  documents. 
....  Our  correspondence  is  an  absolute  secret,  and 
even  the  Chancellor  knows  nothing  of  it,  though  I 
have  often  discussed  the  question  with  him.  As  to 
my  military  preparations,  I  have  given  them  a 
defensive  character,  .  .  .  and  have  sent  a  letter  to 
Napoleon  explaining  that  I  am  obliged  to  take  precau- 
tionary measures,  but  that  I  am  determined  to  adhere 

V 

to  my  system  of  policy,  and  will  certainly  not  take 
the  offensive.  I  must  confess,  however,  that  as 
rumours  are  being  spread  at  St  Petersburg  that  I  am 
about  to  assume  the  title  of  King  of  Poland,  I 
endeavour  to  put  an  end  to  them  by  declaring  that 
the  thing  is  impossible  and  cannot  occur.  Such 
rumours  are  at  present  rather  injurious  than  useful, 
though  they  prove  that  the  plan  would  be  highly 
approved  by  the  Russians. 

I  must  also  warn  you  that  I  know  from  a  good 
source  that  you  are  being  watched  by  the  French 
Minister  of  Police.  You  must  therefore  double  your 
precautions.  .  .  . 

I  shall  expect  your  answer  with  impatience. 
Yours  for  life,  heart  and  soul. 

Pray  remember  me  most  kindly  to  your  parents, 
your  brother,  and  your  sisters. 

THE  EMPEROR  TO  PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. 

ST  PETERSBURG,  1st  April,  1812. 

I  do  not  know,  dear  friend,  whether  you  have 
guessed  the  cause  of  my  silence. 


FURTHER  CORRESPONDENCE  229 

Your  previous  letters  had  left  me  too  little  hope 
of  success  to  authorise  me  to  act,  and  I  could  not 
reasonably  do  so  without  some  probability  of  success. 
I  have  therefore,  been  obliged  to  resign  myself  to 
waiting  for  events,  and  not  provoking,  by  any  step  on 
my  part,  a  struggle  whose  importance  and  danger  I 
thoroughly  appreciate,  though  I  do  not  believe  I 
shall  be  able  to  avoid  it.  I  also  had  certain  informa- 
tion that  you  wrere  being  watched  :  and  in  order  not 
to  expose  you  to  the  least  danger,  I  thought  it  best  to 
allow  a  considerable  time  to  elapse  before  resuming 
our  correspondence.  .  .  Finally,  our  projects  have 
acquired  a  publicity  which  could  only  be  very  prejudi- 
cial to  them,  so  much  so,  that  they  were  talked  about 
at  Dresden  and  in  Paris.  .  .  . 

A  rupture  with  France  seems  inevitable.  The 
object  of  Napoleon  is  to  destroy,  or  at  least  to 
humiliate,  the  last  Power  in  Europe  which  remains 
independent  of  him.  and  in  order  to  attain  this  object, 
he  puts  forward  pretensions  which  are  inadmissible 
and  incompatible  with  the  honour  of  Russia. 

He  wishes  all  our  trade  with  neutrals  to  be 
stopped ;  .but  this  is  the  only  trade  which  is  left 
to  us. 

He  also  asks  that,  while  deprived  of  every  means 
of  exporting  our  own  productions,  we  should  not 
raise  any  obstacle  to  the  importation  of  French 
articles  of  luxury,  which  we  have  prohibited,  not 
being  rich  enough  to  pay  for  them. 

As  I  shall  never  be  able  to  consent  to  such 
proposals,  it  is  probable  that  war  will  follow,*  not- 

*  It  did,  in  the  month  of  June  following. 


230      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

withstanding  all  that  Russia  had  done  to  avoid  it. 
Blood  will  flow,  and  poor  humanity  will  again  be 
sacrificed  to  the  insatiable  ambition  of  a  man  who 
seerns  to  have  been  created  as  its  scourge.  You  are 
too  enlightened  not  to  see  how  any  liberal  ideas  with 
regard  to  your  country  are  in  his  eyes  out  of  the 
question.  Napoleon  has  had  confidential  conversa- 
tions on  this  subject  with  the  envoys  of  Austria  and 
Prussia,  and  the  tone  in  which  he  has  spoken  to  them, 
shows  in  its  true  light  both  his  character  and  his 
indifference  towards  your  countrymen,  whom  he  looks 
upon  only  as  the  instruments  of  his  hatred  of  Russia. 

This  war,  which  seems  inevitable,  frees  me  from 
all  obligation  to  consider  the  interests  of  France,  and 
leaves  me  unshackled  in  working  out  my  favourite 
idea  of  regenerating  your  country. 

All  that  remains  to  be  done,  therefore,  is  to  decide 
upon  the  most  advantageous  course  to  be  followed  for 
securing  the  success  of  our  plans ;  and  in  order  that 
you  may  be  better  able  to  form  a  judgment  upon  them 
I  think  it  useful  to  give  you  some  indications  as  to  the 
military  operations  I  propose  to  undertake. 

Although  it  is  not  impossible  that  wre  may  push  on 
with  our  forces  to  the  Vistula,  and  even  cross  it  so  as 
to  enter  Warsaw,  it  is  more  prudent  not  to  reckon  on 
the  resources  and  the  prestige  we  should  acquire  from 
the  possession  of  that  city.  We  must  therefore  make 
the  provinces  the  centre  of  our  action. 

Several  very  important  questions  will  have  to  be 
settled  in  this  connection. 

Which  is  the  most  suitable  moment  for  declaring 
the  regeneration  of  Poland?  Is  it  directly  the  rupture 


NAPOLEON  STRIVES  TO  PROVOKE  A  RUPTURE    231 

takes  place,  or  after  our  troops  will  have  gained 
some  marked  advantages  ?  If  the  latter,  would  it  be 
useful  for  the  success  of  our  plans  to  organise  the 
Grand-Duchy  of  Lithuania  as  a  preliminary  measure 
and  give  it  one  of  the  two  constitutions  of  which  I 
send  you  drafts,  or  should  the  grant  of  a  constitution 
be  postponed  until  the  whole  of  Poland  is  restored  ? 

It  is  on  these  vital  questions  that  I  invite  your 
candid  opinion,  and  I  would  also  wish  you  to  state 
which  of  the  constitutions  you  think  preferable. 

I  will  not  here  discuss  the  chances  of  Russia  in  the 
coming  struggle.  I  will  only  remind  you  of  the  im- 
mense extent  of  territory  which  the  Russian  armies 
have  behind  them  and  into  which  they  can  retire,  while 
Napoleon's  difficulties  would  increase  the  further  he 
proceeds  from  his  resources.  Once  the  war  begins  we 
are  resolved  not  to  lay  down  our  arms.  Our  military 
resources  are  very  great,  and  the  public  feeling  is 
excellent — altogether  different  from  that  boastful 
spirit  which  you  witnessed  during  the  two  preceding 
wars.  .  .  .  People  think  reverses  are  quite  possible, 
but  for  all  that  they  are  resolved  to  maintain  the 
honour  uf  the  Empire  at  any  cost. 

If  under  these  circumstances  the  Poles  should 
join  them,  the  effect  would  be  immense,  and  the 
Germans,  forced  by  Napoleon  to  fight  on  his  side, 
would  certainly  follow  the  example  of  the  Poles. 

Sweden  has  concluded  an  offensive  and  defensive 
alliance  with  us.  The  Crown  Prince  has  a  burning 
desire  to  become  the  antagonist  of  Napoleon,  against 
whom  he  has  an  old  personal  grudge,  and  following 
in  the  footsteps  of  Gustavus  Adolphus,  he  only  wishes 


232       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

to  be  useful   to  a  cause  which  is  that   of  oppressed 
Europe. 

Your  idea  of  Napoleon  consenting  to  a  restoration 
of  Poland,  by  placing  her  under  the  rule  of  a  King 
who  is  also  Emperor  of  Russia,  is  a  chimerical  one. 
He  will  never  agree  to  a  measure  so  advantageous 
to  Russia,  especially  at  a  moment  when  he  thinks 
only  of  destroying  her.  He  will  never  attribute  to 
complaisance  on  the  part  of  Russia  her  inaction  when 
he  invaded  Prussia,  for  it  was  impossible  for  us  to 
interfere,  in  view  of  the  absolute  want  of  energy  on 
the  part  of  the  King  of  Prussia,  who  thought  only  of 
saving  Berlin  and  his  palace. 

Adieu,  my  dear  friend,  Providence  alone  knows 
what  will  be  the  issue  of  the  great  events  which  are 
preparing.  It  would  have  been  a  great  pleasure  to 
me  to  see  you  again,  if  only  for  a  short  time,  at  so 
interesting  a  crisis,  at  Wilna,  for  which  town  I  shall 
leave  in  three  days  ;  but  I  dare  not  propose  this  to 
you,  knowing  the  danger  to  which  it  would  expose 
you.  Be  guided  in  all  this  only  by  your  prudence, 
and  believe  me,  etc. 

[The  further  development  of  the  plans  referred  to 
in  the  above  correspondence  was  interrupted  by  the 
Russian  Campaign  of  1812.  On  the  26th  of  June  in 
that  year,  immediately  after  Napoleon  had  crossed  the 
Niemen,  the  Polish  diet  assembled  at  Warsaw  under 
the  presidency  of  Prince  Adam  Casimir  Czartoryski, 
Prince  Adam's  father,  and  proclaimed  the  restoration 
of  the  whole  of  ancient  Poland  as  an  independent 
State.  All  the  Poles  in  the  Russian  service  were 
called  upon  to  leave  it,  and  Prince  Adam,  who  still 


NEGOTIATIONS  AFTER  THE  CAMPAIGN         233 

held  a  post  under  the  Russian  government  as  Cura- 
tor of  the  University  of  Wilna,  repeatedly  urged 
the  Emperor  to  accept  the  resignation  which  the  Prince 
had  already  tendered  on  several  previous  occasions. 
Alexander  took  no  notice  of  these  letters,  and  directly 
the  campaign  was  over  the  correspondence  between 
him  and  the  Prince  as  to  the  plan  of  a  reconstruction 
of  Poland  was  resumed.] 

LETTER   FROM    PRINCE    ADAM  CZARTORYSKI   TO  THE 
EMPEROR  ALEXANDER. 

if  December  1812. 

.  .  .  The  events  of  the  war  having  taken  a  turn 
which  seems  to  be  decisive,  I  fear  no  one  will  now 
plead  to  your  Imperial  Majesty  for  the  interests 
of  my  country,  and  I  have  accordingly  sent  Mr  K. 
with  the  accompanying  papers,  in  the  hope  that  they 
may  convince  you. 

I  have  no  hope  in  the  Continental  Powers;  they  will 
strive  to  divert  you  from  an  idea  which  will  be  offen- 
sive to  them,  and  which  is  too  noble  for  their  Cabinets 
to  understand.  What  reassures  me  is  that  England, 
in  view  of  her  clear  interest,  and  of  the  opinions  of  the 
Prince  Regent,  cannot  fail  to  appreciate  the  plan.  ,  .  . 

If  your  Imperial  Majesty,  at  the  moment  when 
the  Polish  nation  is  expecting  the  vengeance  of  a 
conqueror,  will  hold  out  your  hand  and  offer  it  that 
which  for  her  was  the  object  of  the  war,  the  effect 
would  be  magical. 

If  you  would  adopt  the  idea  relative  to  the  Grand 
Duke  Michael,*  I  would  take  it  upon  myself  to  get 

*  The  Grand-Dukes  Constantino  and  Michael  were  the  Emperor's  brothers. 


234      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

everything  signed  without  delay.  I  think  it  my  duty 
not  to  conceal  from  your  Majesty  that  a  cause  of  in- 
cessant anxiety  and  terror  to  the  Poles  is  the  Grand- 
Duke  Constantine,  who  is  your  heir-apparent ;  and 
this  is  the  reason  why  they  would  prefer  another 
branch.  A  King  of  Poland  with  300,000  men  under 
his  orders  would  be  able  at  any  time  to  destroy  what 
his  predecessor  may  have  established.  It  is  this 
which  makes  the  Poles  so  desirous  of  obtaining  a 
regular  constitution,  though  even  that  could  not  guar- 
antee them  against  acts  of  arbitrary  violence.  But 
whatever  arrangement  you  may  prefer  on  the  basis  I 
have  submitted  to  you,  I  do  not  think  I  am  saying 
too  much  when  I  assure  you  that  it  would  be  settled 
to  your  entire  satisfaction. 

THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER  TO  PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI 

LEYPOUNY,  13th  January  1813. 

I  received  your  interesting  letter  of  the  15th  of 
December  1812,  with  its  enclosures,  two  days  ago  .  .  . 
and  to-day  I  have  also  received  a  document  signed 
'  The  Minister  of  the  Interior,  Mostowski/  and  ad- 
dressed to  me.  I  do  not  lose  a  moment  in  answering 
you,  and  this  letter  will  also  serve  as  an  answer  to  M. 
Mostowski. 

The  proposals  in  these  papers,  and  the  personal 
sentiments  with  regard  to  myself  expressed  in  them, 
have  touched  me  very  deeply.  The  successes  by 
which  Providence  has  wished  to  bless  my  eiforts  and 
my  perseverance  have  in  no  way  changed  either  my 
sentiments  or  my  intentions  with  regard  to  Poland. 
Your  countrymen  may  therefore  abandon  any  fears 


ALEXANDER  AND  THE  POLES  235 

they  may  feel :  vengeance  is  a  sentiment  unknown  to 
me,  and  my  greatest  pleasure  is  to  return  good  for 
evil.  The  strictest  orders  have  been  given  to  my 
generals  to  treat  the  Poles  as  friends  and  brothers. 

To  speak  candidly,  in  order  to  realise  my  favourite 
ideas  as  to  Poland  I  shall  have  to  overcome  some 
difficulties,  notwithstanding  the  brilliancy  of  my 
present  position. 

In  the  first  place,  opinion  in  Russia  would  be 
against  them.  The  sacking  by  the  Polish  troops  of 
Smolensk  and  Moscow,  and  the  devastation  of  the 
whole  country,  has  revived  old  hatreds. 

Next,  if  I  were  at  this  moment  to  publish  my 
intentions  with  regard  to  Poland,  the  result  would 
be  to  throw  Austria  and  Prussia  entirely  into  the 
arms  of  France ;  while  it  is  essential  to  prevent 
such  a  result,  especially  as  those  Powers  already 
show  themselves  very  disposed  to  join  me. 

These  difficulties  will  be  conquered  with  a  little 
wisdom  and  prudence.  But  for  this  it  is  necessary 
that  you  should  second  me,  by  justifying  in  the  eyes 
of  the  Russians  the  predilection  which  I  am  known  to 
feel  for  the  Poles  and  their  ideas.  Trust  me,  my 
character,  and  my  principles,  and  your  hopes  will  not 
be  deceived.  As  military  events  develop  themselves, 
you  will  see  how  dear  the  interests  of  your  country 
are  to  me,  and  how  faithful  I  am  to  my  old  ideas. 
As  to  the  form,  you  know  I  have  always  preferred 
liberal  ones. 

But  I  must  plainly  tell  you  that  the  idea  of  my 
brother  Michael  cannot  be  admitted.  Do  not  forget 
that  Lithuania,  Podolia,  and  Volhynia  are  hitherto 


236      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYXKI 

regarded  as  Russian  provinces,  and  that  no  possible 
reasoning  could  persuade  Russia  to  see  them  under 
the  rule  of  another  sovereign  than  the  one  that  rules 
Russia.  The  name  under  which  they  would  continue 
to  form  part  of  Russia  is  a  difficulty  that  would  be 
more  easily  overcome. 

Pray  communicate  this  letter  to  the  persons 
whose  co-operation  you  think  necessary,  and  urge 
your  countrymen  to  show  good-will  to  Russia  and  the 
Russians,  so  as  to  wipe  out  the  recollections  of  the 
campaign,  and  thereby  facilitate  my  task.  On  my 
part,  in  order  to  give  the  Poles  a  proof  of  the 
sincerity  of  my  intentions,  I  have  given  orders  to  my 
army  not  to  occupy  Warsaw ;  but  for  this  it  is 
necessary  that  no  foreign  troops  should  remain  there, 
and  Polish  ones  least  of  all,  so  as  to  deprive  us  of  the 
anxiety  of  leaving  a  foreign  garrison  behind  us.  Pray 
urge  the  members  of  the  confederation  and  the 
Government  on  my  part,  to  remain  quietly  at 
Warsaw,  and  promise  them  that  they  will  not  regret 
their  doing  so. 

As  to  the  military  operations,  besides  the  armies 
now  in  the  field,  each  regiment  of  the  whole  army  has 
already  in  the  rear  a  reserve  of  1000  men  per  regiment 
of  infantry  and  two  squadrons  per  regiment  of  cavalry, 
completely  equipped  and  mounted,  and  is  also  pro- 
vided with  reserve  companies  of  artillery,  to  enter  the 
ranks  of  the  active  army  in  the  spring.  Besides  these 
reserves  a  levy  of  180,000  men  is  at  this  moment 
taking  place,  which  will  serve  to  reconstitute  the 
reserves  of  the  regiments  as  soon  as  they  are  incor- 
porated in  the  active  army.  Moreover,  all  the  militia, 


ALEXANDER  AND  THE  POLEH  237 

foot,  horse,  and  artillery,  are  on  the  march  under 
Count  Peter  Tolstoi  to  form  a  corps  of  observation  in 
Volhynia.  The  energy  of  the  nation  is  beyond  praise, 
and  I  am  decided  to  push  on  the  war  not  only  during 
this  winter,  but  until  a  general  peace  is  established 
in  a  manner  suitable  to  the  security  of  Russia  and  of 
Europe.  .  .  . 

(Signed)     ALEXANDER. 

KRASNOPOL, 
3rd  January  1813. 

P.S.  It  has  taken  me  two  days  to  write  this 
letter,  as  my  time  was  taken  up  with  the  affairs  of  the 
army  and  other  business. 

As  my  letter  bears  a  certain  official  character,  I 
cannot  allow  it  to  go,  my  dear  friend,  without  adding 
a  friendly  word  for  you.  Success  has  not  changed  me 
either  in  my  ideas  on  your  country  or  in  my  principles 
generally,  and  you  will  always  find  me  such  as  you  have 
known  me.  Say  many  things  from  me  to  your  parents 
and  your  sisters. 

If,  as  a  result  of  all  these  events,  I  should  be  able 
to  stay  for  a  moment  with  your  family  this  would  give 
me  immense  pleasure.  Yours  heart  and  soul. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  TO  THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER. 

WARSAW, 

23rd  April  (±th  May)  1813. 

Sire, — .  .  .  In  returning  from  Kalisz,  I  met  Prince 
Anthony  Radziwill  at  Nieborow.  He  gave  me  some 
details  which  it  is  well  for  your  Imperial  Majesty  to 
know.  The  King  of  Prussia  is  not  at  all  opposed  to 


238       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  existence  of  Poland.  He  feels  the  necessity  of 
satisfying  the  wishes  of  the  Polish  nation,  and  con- 
siders them  just  and  reasonable.  He  was  astonished 
at  your  Majesty  not  having  as  yet  done  anything 
definite  for  the  Poles,  and  complained  that  whenever 
he  wanted  to  touch  upon  the  subject  you  seemed  much 
embarrassed  and  talked  about  something  else.  He 
asked  Prince  Anthony  to  go  to  Warsaw  to  sound  public 
opinion  and  confer  with  me.  From  all  this  it  would 
seem  that  the  King  of  Prussia  would  agree  to  any 
measure  your  Majesty  might  think  fit  to  take  in  this 
sense.  .  .  .  There  are,  in  fact,  no  difficulties  in  the 
way  of  your  undertaking  so  far  as  the  King  of  Prussia 
is  concerned ;  on  the  contrary,  he  will  himself  con- 
tribute in  a  large  degree  to  remove  those  presented 
by  the  Russian  army,  whose  opinion  will  always  be 
preponderant  at  St  Petersburg.  ...  I  know  that 
the  Russian  officers  here  mostly  speak  in  this  sense 
either  by  conviction  or  in  order  to  flatter  the  inhabi- 
tants. 

I  hear  with  pain  that  an  order  has  been  given  at 
head-quarters  to  confiscate  the  estates  of  all  who 
serve  in  the  Polish  army.  This  order  seems  to  me 
unjust  and  without  an  object ;  people  should  not  be 
punished  for  serving  their  country  and  obeying  the 
orders  of  their  sovereign,  recognised  as  such  by  your 
Majesty.  .  .  I  confess  that  it  gives  me  much  sorrow 
to  see  measures  so  inconsistent  with  the  policy  of 
generous  equity  which  you  have  adopted — the  noblest 
and  the  most  useful,  even  if  only  looked  upon  as  a 
matter  of  interest. 


PERSECUTION  OF  THE  POLES  IN  LITHUANIA    239 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  TO  THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER. 

WARSAW,  27th  April  1813. 

.  .  .  Those  who  know  your  Imperial  Majesty 
cannot  admit  the  slightest  suspicion  of  the  loyalty  of 
your  sentiments  or  fear  that  you  do  not  intend  to 
fulfil  the  hopes  you  are  holding  out  to  the  Poles  ;  .  .  . 
yet  those  who  have  to  carry  out  your  policy  are  doing 
their  utmost  to  defeat  it. 

The  five  Governments  of  Lithuania,  instead  of 
enjoying  the  benefits  you  wish  to  grant  them,  are 
suffering  under  an  aduiinistration  more  unjust  and 
arbitrary  than  any  of  those  that  have  preceded  it. 
No  one's  property,  life,  or  honour  is  safe.  Any  official 
prompted  by  a  desire  of  revenge  or  greed  of  gain  may 
ruin  the  most  innocent  citizen  and  the  whole  of  his 
family — .  .  .  in  a  word,  the  Government  and  the 
authorities,  instead  of  protecting  the  inhabitants 
placed  under  their  care,  seem  to  think  it  their  duty 
to  persecute  and  plunder  them.  You  have  no  idea, 
Sire,  of  the  evil  that  is  being  done  in  your  name,  for 
if  you  had  you  would  put  a  stop  to  it.  .  .  The 
inhabitants  are  in  despair,  and  though  hitherto  they 
have  been  quiet,  they  may  be  driven  to  insurrection, 
not  by  a  hope  of  success,  but  because  they  think  it 
better  to  perish  than  to  remain  in  their  present 
condition. 


LETTERS    FROM    GENERAL    SIR    ROBERT    WIL«O\. 

AMONG  the  English  friends  of  Prince  Czartoryski  was 
General  Sir  Robert  Wilson.  This  officer  had  fought 
under  Wellington  at  Talavera,  was  afterwards  Military 
Attache  to  the  allied  armies  in  Poland,  and  was  tried 
for  conniving  at  the  escape  of  Count  Lavalette,  who 
had  been  condemned  to  death  as  an  accomplice  of 
Napoleon.  When  Sir  Robert  Wilson  was  asked  at 
whose  instigation  he  had  assisted  Lavalette,  he 
replied  :  '  I  was  born  and  educated  in  a  country  in 
which  the  social  virtues  are  considered  as  public 
virtues,  and  I  have  not  trained  my  memory  to  a 
breach  of  friendship  and  confidence.'  * 

The  following  are  some  of  his  more  characteristic 
letters  to  Prince  Czartoryski  : 

'  RUSSOPOL, 
'  January  ^,  1813. 

'  MY  DEAR  PRINCE — I  received  your  letter  with  a 
transport  of  pleasure.     Your  absence  had  always  been 

*  Diary  of  Henry  Crabb  Robinson,  vol.  ii.  p.  G.  Sir  Robert  Wilson  was  Member 
of  Parliament  for  Southwark  from  1818  to  1831,  and  then  re-entered  the  army,  ending 
his  career  as  Governor  and  Coinmander-in-Chief  of  Gibraltar. 


LETTERS  FROM  GENERAL  SIR  ROBERT  WILSON    241 

a  matter  of  deep  regret  to  me,  and  your  vacancy  in 
the  circle  could  never  be  supplied.  To  hear  from  you, 
to  know  that  I  was  preserved  in  your  esteem,  was  a 
high  gratification,  but  I  became  prouder  when  I  found 
that  you  still  considered  me  as  a  champion  true  to  that 
most  interesting  cause,  the  re-establishment  and 
happiness  of  your  brave  nation.  I  participate  in  all 
your  feelings,  and  am  in  accord  with  all  your  senti- 
ments. Your  friend  will  tell  you  what  I  have  done, 
and  I  pledge  myself  to  you  that  everything  which  can 
be  attempted  to  promote  the  object  shall  be  put  in 
execution  with  a  zeal  as  ardent  as  your  own.  It  is  a 
matter  in  which,  as  an  Englishman,  I  feel  so  much 
interest  that  I  would  sustain  the  plea  with  every 
personal  sacrifice  if  it  would  tend  to  the  desired 
accomplishment. 

'  There  are  many  potent  reasons  why  delay  will 
prove  detrimental  to  Russia  (I  cannot  be  more  ex- 
plicit on  that  subject,  but  you  will  discover  my 
allusion,  having  so  well  judged  of  the  past  and  specu- 
lated on  the  probable  future),  if  fatal  prejudices  refuse 
the  only  security  that  offers  for  advantages  obtained. 
The  Emperor's  firmness,  the  patriotism  of  the  nation, 
and  the  courage  of  the  army,  cannot  be  too  highly 
estimated  or  applauded,  but  Buonaparte's  errors  and 
the  climate  have  assuredly  brought  his  misfortunes  to 
the  degree  that  they  have  reached.  If  Buonaparte 
had  been  opposed  by  a  chief  who  had  only  common 
military  skill  or  energy  he  would  indeed  have  perished 
altogether  ;  but  as  that,  or  rather  those  opportunities 
were  lost,  as  the  favours  of  the  good  genius  of  the 
world  were  scorned  at  Maloslavitz,  Krasnow,  and  the 

VOL.  II.  Q 


242       ^fE^tOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYxKI 

Beresina,  Russia  must  not  trifle  with  her  interests. 
Half  measures — timid  policy — will  prove  her  ruin. 
It  is  for  the  Council  of  the  Empire  to  repair  in  some 
degree  the  mischief  which  an  inadequate  direction  of 
the  military  powers  has  occasioned,  for  I  consider  the 
escape  of  Buonaparte,  even  with  his  wreck,  a  serious 
mischief  that  may  cost  her  dear,  and  which  certainly 
entails  great  inconveniences.  I  use  mild  terms- 
milder  perhaps  than  I  should  if  we  conversed  together. 
I  long  to  see  you,  and  certainly  I  will.  I  have  very 
much  to  say  to  you  on  a  variety  of  subjects,  but  if  it 
was  only  for  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  half-an-hour, 
I  would  go  several  hundred  versts.  .  . 

'  England  has  been  a  little  uneasy,  and  I  do  not 
think  the  Government  quite  settled.  Lord  Wellesley 
and  Lord  Grey  must,  in  my  opinion  be  brought  into 
office.  All  will  then  be  well,  and  you  will  have  firm 
friends.  Pars  pro  toto.  We  only  want  to  see  the 
operation  performed  by  others  than  Buonaparte. 
That  Corsican  never  will  attain  the  object  so  as  to 
receive  our  countenance,  and  I  think  the  Poles  them- 
selves must  be  sensible  that  he  takes  no  real  interest 
in  their  welfare — that  he  considers  Poland  but  as  a 
stepping-stone  to  his  ambition.  His  is  such  pro- 
tection as  vultures  give  to  lambs,  covering  and 
devouring.  .  .  . 

'  I  am  obliged  for  a  few  days  to  be  at  the  Imperial 
head-quarters,  but  in  general  I  rove  about  as  usual, 
and  I  have  not  been  behind  at  the  most  interesting 
turns  of  the  chase.  ...  I  have  escaped  sauf-  et  sain. 
My  nose  only  has  been  in  danger,  but  it  was  in  very 
serious  danger.  For  once  in  my  life  I  shrank  from 


LETTERS  FROM  GENERAL  SIR  ROBERT  WILSON  243 

Glory's  pursuit,  or  rather  lamented  I  had  been  wooing 
a  phantom  who  seemed  resolved  to  wring  off  the  noses 
of  his  votaries.  Mine  were  only  fears  ;  but  how  many 
thousand  poor  wretches  have  suffered  all  the  mutila- 
ting horrors  of  the  angry  climate.  This  campaign  has 
certainly  cost  both  armies  very  near  half  a  million  of 
men,  and  I  calculate  that  more  than  100,000  have 
perished  with  misery  more  terrible  than  any  one  heard 
except  the  Roman  crucifixions  of  the  Jews.  I  have 
seen  sights  of  woe  and  could  tales  unfold — but,  like 
Hamlet,  I  am  forbid. 

'  Adieu,  my  very  dear  Prince.  Keep  me  in  your 
kind  remembrance  and  believe  me  your  gratefully 
attached  friend,  servant,  and  colleague, 

1  ROBT.  WILSON.' 

'  KALISCH, 

1  February  27,  1813. 

'  I  have  only  this  day,  my  ever  dear  Prince, 
received  your  letter  from  Dubnow.  I  am  afraid  your 
messenger  will  depart  before  I  can  communicate  the 
result  of  some  conversations  that  I  expect  on  this 
interesting  subject,  which  should  engage  every  states- 
man's, of  every  country's,  serious  attention,  and  every 
honest  man's  affections. 

'  1  have  never  been  unfaithful  to  the  sacred 
pledges.  Co-operation  in  such  a  cause  has  ever  been 
considered  by  me  as  a  self-approving  act,  teeming 
with  more  joy  and. dignity  of  pride  than  all  the 
distinctions  which  were  conferred  on  those  who 
originally  resisted  the  appeals  which  your  country 
made  to  justice  and  to  honour. 


244       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

'  Poland  has  proved  that  the  maxim  is  not  infal- 
lible which  recommends  division  to  assure  conquest. 
The  spirit  of  independence  has  been  unconquerable, 
although  its  efforts  have  not  been  undeviating.  .  . 

'  Head-quarters  is  not  so  cheerful  as  heretofore  in 
our  happy  time.  There  are  many  good  fellows  in  the 
army,  but  circumstances  have  been  unfavourable  to 
former  good  fellowship  which  prevailed  anywhere  and 
everywhere.  The  campaign  has  been  one  of  great 
rudeness:  toil  and  endurance  with  few  social  pleasures. 
The  tone  was  ab  origine  discordant.  Your  return 
would,  however,  rally  gaiety  and  concord.  God 
grant  it  !  Ever  yours,  with  affectionate  attachment, 

<RoBT.  WILSON.' 

'  September  8,  1813. 

'  MY  DEAR  FRIEND, — You  must  not  suppose  me 
forgetful  of  you  or  of  my  engagements.  There  is  no 
Lethe  so  potent  as  to  erase  these  duties  and  affections 
from  my  remembrance.  There  is  no  centrifugal  force 
so  strong  as  to  withdraw  me  from  our  united  base. 
The  distraction  of  affairs,  the  difficulty  of  communi- 
cation, and  the  desire  of  seeing  a  person  long  expected, 
but  who  has  arrived,  prevented  me  from  writing  since 
I  left  Prague. 

'  I  have  now  to  urge  your  seizure  of  the  earliest 
opportunity  to  make  a  journey  to  this  part  of  the 
world.  Approach  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  and  as 
soon  as  possible  see  Lord  Aberdeen,  our  Ambassador 
to  him.  All  is  arranged  for  your  visit,  and  he  eagerly 
expects  you.  You  will  find  him  all  you  wish.  I  lost 
no  time  in  introducing  the  subject  to  his  notice. 


LETTERS  FROM  GENERAL  SIR  ROBERT  WILSON    245 

He  saw  the  moral  and  political  advantages  as  I 
do,  and  on  this  and  every  other  matter  he  will  pursue 
the  honestum  as  the  most  useful  course  of  proceeding. 

*  Lord  A.  comes  so  fully  aware  of  your  value  that 
he  longs  to  make  your  acquaintance  and  converse  on 
various  matters.  His  society  will  not  be  indifferent 
to  you.  Come  you  must,  and  speedily,  if  you  seek  to 
found  your  fame  on  the  foundation  of  patriotism.  I 
have  also  procured  high  friends  in  other  quarters.  In 
good  truth,  I  have  devoted  all  my  best  efforts  to  the 
subject  since  we  parted,  and  with  very  gratifying 
success.  Corne,  and  we  shall  triumph.  If  you  come 
not,  not  only  much  but  all  may  be  lost.  You  will  of 
course  make  a  suitable  pretext  for  this  journey,  and 
excite  neither  jealousy  nor  suspicion.  As  soon  as  I 
hear  you  are  within  tangible  reach,  I  will  go  to  you, 
as  in  all  probability  I  shall  be  transferred  to  the 
Austrian  Embassy,  [where]  I  can  act  more  independ- 
ently. .  .  . 

'  We  have  had  short  but  severe  service.  The 
worst  spectacle  which  I  beheld  was  the  savage  blow 
by  which  destiny  struck  down  Moreau  and  so  many 
national  hopes.  .  . 

'  I  do  not  enter  into  military  or  political  details. 
All  I  can  say  is  comprised  in  the  statement  of  my 
belief  that  the  events  since  the  17th  of  August*  have 
increased  the  desire  of  peace  in  pacificators,  disposed 
belligerents  to  negotiation,  and  that  to  the  prejudice 
of  war's  amateurs  peace  will  be  made  before  the 
winter. 

'  Come,  come,  come,  without  loss  of  time.     As  an 

*  The  date  on  which  Austria  joined  the  coalition  against  France. 


?46       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYHKI 

inducement  I  will  not  be  angry  if  you  pass  byLandeck 
and  remain  there  forty-eight  hours. 

'  Your  ever  affectionate  friend, 

'R  WILSON.' 

'  We  were  on  march  to  assist  Blilcher,  but  Bte's 
return  to  Dresden  recalls  us.' 


CHAPTER  XXI 

1813-14 


THE   BIERNACKI  MISSION   TO  LONDON. — CHASED  BY   A  FRENCH  MAN- 
OF-WAR. — LORD    CASTLEREAGH. CANNING. BROUGHAM. LEIGH 

HUNT. — 'THE  TIMES.' — TOM  MOORE. — SIR  SAMUEL  ROMILLY. 


THE  policy  of  Austria  towards  Poland  did  riot  realise 
Sir  Robert  Wilson's  sanguine  anticipations,  and  the 
hostility  shown  to  the  Poles  by  the  Russian  authori- 
ties, notwithstanding  the  friendly  professions  of  their 
Imperial  master,  made  it  improbable  that  Alexander 
would  be  alone  able  to  carry  out  the  restoration  of 
Poland.  As  there  was  a  talk  of  a  Congress  being 
assembled  at  which  the  Polish  and  other  questions 
would  be  dealt  with  by  the  Powers  collectively, 
Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  sent  his  secretary,  Biernacki, 
to  London  to  sound  the  Government  as  to  its  inten- 
tions with  regard  to  Poland  and  to  bring  the  Polish 
question  generally  before  the  British  public.  During 
his  stay  in  England  M.  Biernacki  kept  a  diary  which, 
though  unfortunately  incomplete,  gives  some  curious 
details  as  to  the  leading  men  in  the  political  and 
literary  circles  of  London  at  that  period. 

He  left  Pulawy  on  the   12th  of  September  1813, 
and  Warsaw  on  the   17th.     Travelling  was  slow  and 


248       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTQRYSK1 

difficult,  owing  to  the  inundations  and  the  crowds  of 
Russian  soldiers  on  both  banks  of  the  Vistula,  who 
behaved  as  if  they  were  the  masters  of  the  country. 
On  the  20th  he  arrived  at  Konigsberg,  where  he 
observed  that  the  lower  classes  still  spoke  Polish, 
though  the  province  had  so  long  been  in  the  hands  of 
Prussia.  He  asked  some  educated  Prussians  the 
reason  of  this,  and  they  answered,  with  some  surprise 
at  his  putting  such  a  question,  that  Polish  is  the 
national  language  of  the  people,  and  that  '  you  cannot 
make  a  whole  nation  speak  a  foreign  language.' 

On  the  22nd  he  reached  Pillau,  and  embarked  on 
board  the  '  Commonwealth,'  Captain  Hesketh,  for 
Carlscrona,  in  Sweden,  where  he  arrived  on  the  28th 
after  a  very  rough  passage.  From  this  place  he 
drove  for  four  days  and  five  nights  to  Gothenburg, 
which  he  calls  *  the  newest,  cleanest,  and  most  regu- 
larly built  city  in  Europe.'  He  remarked  that  '  the 
more  wealthy  merchants,  chiefly  Englishmen,  had 
beautiful  country  houses  in  the  vicinity  of  the  town, 
with  magnificent  gardens  and  well-kept  farm  buildings.' 

He  left  Gothenburg  on  the  6th  of  October  in  her 
Majesty's  Packet  '  Lark,'  Captain  Sherlock  com- 
mander. Among  his  companions  were  an  Irishman, 
*  elegant,  bon  vivant,  and  a  little  feather  brained,'  '  a 
romantic  and  polite  Scotchman,'  and  '  a  well-known 
character  who  is  convinced  that  he  is  John  of  Gaunt, 
Duke  of  Lancaster.  He  amused  us  greatly,  and 
reminded  me  of  Swift's  saying  that  out  of  every 
hundred  of  his  countrymen  five  are  mad.'  The 
'  Lark'  was  a  vessel  of  16  guns  :  there  was  plenty  of 
amusement  on  board,  and  the  cuisine  was  excellent. 


THE  ME  RE  AC  KI  MISSION  249 

One  day  at  noon  M.  Biernacki  went  down  into  the 
cabin  to  dress  for  dinner,  when  as  he  was  shaving  he 
heard  cries  of 'clear  for  action !'  This,  however,  did  not 
disturb  him,  as  he  thought  they  were  merely  rejoicing 
at  having  caught  a  turbot  or  some  other  fish  ;  but  soon 
after  the  captain  called  out  to  him,  '  D —  your  razors  ! 
It's  no  time  for  shaving.  The  French  are  corning  ! ' 
M.  Biernacki  then  hurried  on  his  clothes  and  went  on 
deck,  where  he  found  everything  ready  for  action  arid 
was  ordered  to  take  charge  of  a  gun.  The  French 
ship,  which  was  much  larger  than  the  '  Lark,'  ad- 
vanced straight  upon  her,  but  seeing  her  guns  and 
crew,  sheered  off.  '  I  was  very  glad  to  see  this/  he 
says,  '  and  especially  so  when  I  was  told  that  the 
'  Lark,'  being  a  packet-boat,  was  forbidden  to  pursue 
an  enemy — which  under  the  circumstances  seemed  to 
me  a  very  sensible  rule.' 

M.  Biernacki  arrived  at  Harwich  on  the  16th  of 
October.  '  I  have  often  heard  and  read,'  he  says, 
'  that  directly  you  set  foot  on  English  soil  you 
breathe  more  freely.  My  own  impressions  carried 
me  even  further :  not  only  are  one's  physical  move- 
ments more  free,  but  the  first  few  days  of  one's  stay 
in  England  have  an  even  greater  influence  on  the 
mind.  It  is  a  feeling  like  that  of  gratified  ambition  ; 
you  imagine  yourself  to  be  in  a  more  dignified  posi- 
tion than  you  were  before  you  landed,  and  are 
prompted  to  regulate  your  conduct  accordingly.  .  .  . 
At  St  Petersburg,  on  the  other  hand,  the  visitor 
breathes  with  difficulty,  neglects  himself  and  his 
duties,  and  becomes  less  orderly  and  courteous  than 
usual.' 


25o      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

In  London,  M.  Biernacki  put  up  at  the  '  Spread 
Eagle,'  Gracechurch  Street,  and  he  thus  describes  his 
first  impressions  of  the  city  :  *  Thousands  of  people 
from  all  parts  of  the  world,  of  various  complexions 
and  costumes ;  thousands  of  carriages,  carts,  and 
cattle ;  the  horns  blown  on  the  coaches,  of  which 
2000  leave  and  arrive  in  London  daily ;  the  trumpets 
of  the  newsboys,  the  bells  of  the  postmen  ;  the  street 
bands,  the  constant  fights  between  thieves  and  their 
victims,  and  the  crowds  of  beggars,  make  one  deaf 
and  produce  a  confusion  of  mind  which  lasts  for 
several  days,  until  one  gets  accustomed  to  this  inces- 
sant turmoil.'  On  the  third  day  after  his  arrival, 
M.  Biernacki  obtained  an  appointment  with  Lord 
Castlereagh  at  six  in  the  afternoon  in  Downing  Street. 
The  interview  lasted  till  a  quarter  to  eight.  He 
found  Lord  Castlereagh  cold  but  frank  in  manner, 
speaking  with  much  deliberation,  full  of  preconceived 
notions  to  which  he  obstinately  adhered,  and  imper- 
fectly informed  as  to  Polish  affairs.  He  did  not  ex- 
press himself  with  facility  either  in  Englishor  in  French. 

After  M.  Biernacki  had  fully  developed  the  plan 
of  a  reconstruction  of  Poland,  Lord  Castlereagh 
objected  that  if  Poland  were  restored  the  old  anarchy 
would  probably  be  revived,  upon  which  M.  Biernacki 
reminded  him  of  the  Constitution  of  the  3rd  of  May 
and  the  sittings  of  the  diet  of  1788-92,  in  which, 
notwithstanding  the  excitement  produced  by  the 
French  revolution,  the  debates  were  conducted  with 
as  much  order  and  regularity  as  in  the  English 
Parliament,  which  the  Polish  Deputies  took  for  their 
example.  •  To  this  Lord  Castlereagh  made  no  reply, 


LORD  CASTLEKEAGH  251 

but  he  said  that  it  would  be  ungenerous  on  the  part 
of  his  Government  to  encourage  the  Poles  by  empty 
promises  to  indulge  in  hopes  or  attempt  enterprises 
whose  object  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  England  to 
promote.  '  England,'  he  added  with  much  emphasis, 
'  is,  in  fact,  so  placed  that  she,  must  scrupulously  avoid 
everything  that  could  give  rise  to  distrust  either 
between  her  and  her  allies  or  between  any  two 
Powers  on  the  Continent  belonging  to  the  alliance. 
It  cannot  be  assumed  that  any  of  the  partitioning 
Powers  will  consent  to  return  the  provinces  they  have 
taken  from  Poland,  and  I  cannot  think  it  possible 
to  effect  the  restoration  of  Poland  by  mere  negotia- 
tion ;  the  only  means  of  doing  so  is  by  the  sword. 
If  the  Poles  rose  in  arms  for  this  purpose,  England 
might,  under  other  circumstances  than  the  present, 
effectually  assist  them.  But  recent  experience  does 
not  incline  me  to  wish  for  such  an  event,  as  the  result 
would  not  be  worth  the  bloodshed  and  material  ruin 
which  such  a  struggle  would  involve.  In  my  opinion 
the  Poles  should  now  submit  to  Russia  and  endeavour 
to  gain  her  favour.  England  is  prevented  by  treaties 
with  her  allies,  and  by  her  duties  to  the  English 
people — which  must  always  be  the  first  consideration 
— from  mixing  herself  up  in  such  a  matter ;  there 
might,  however,  be  means  of  bringing  the  Polish 
question  before  the  British  public.'  He  then  pledged 
M.  Biernacki  to  secrecy,  and  the  latter  asked  for  a 
similar  promise  as  to  his  mission,  explaining  that 
Prince  Czartoryski  had  purposely  sent  to  London  so 
obscure  an  individual  as  himself  in  order  to  prevent 
inconvenient  reports  or  disclosures. 


252       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

M.  Biernacki  next  called  upon  Mr  Canning, 
though  from  what  '  he  had  heard  of  his  character 
and  political  position,'  he  felt  convinced  '  that  not  the 
slightest  assistance  was  to  be  expected  of  him.'  '  Mr 
Canning,'  he  says,  '  has  much  wit,  but  does  not 
possess  the  ability  which  in  England  is  necessary  for 
dealing  successfully  with  public  affairs.  He  writes 
stanzas,  elegies,  and  epigrams,  and  this  rather  does 
him  harm  with  the  serious  public.  The  general 
opinion  is  that  though  he  is  the  most  fluent  and 
attractive  speaker  in  the  House,  he  wants  staying 
power  ;  that  he  has  excellent  ideas,  but  not  sufficient 
industry  or  perseverance  to  carry  them  out.  .  .  The 
affair  which  led  to  his  duel  with  Lord  Castlereaofh, 

O       * 

and  in  which  Mr  Canning  played  so  shameful  a  part, 
has,  though  it  took  place  eight  years  ago,  not  been 
forgotten  by  the  British  public,  and  has  left  an 
indelible  stigma  on  his  character.  But  what  injures 
him  most  in  public  opinion  as  a  politician,  is  his 
unscrupulous  ambition  ;  there  is  a  general  feeling  that 
he  would  even  plunge  the  country  into  war,  if  by  so 
doing  he  could  please  the  Court  and  re-enter  the 
Cabinet.'  The  following  letter  addressed  by  him  to 
M.  Biernacki  after  their  first  interview,  shows  that 
Mr  Canning's  French,  like  Lord  Castlereagh's,  was 
far  from  perfect : 

'  Oserois-je  vous  prier,  Monsieur,  de  vouloir  bien 
prendre  la  peine  de  me  venir  voir  ou  demain,  ou 
1'apres  demain  entre  midi  et  une  heure. 

'  Je  suis  bien  fache  de  vous  donner  cette  peine-la-. 
Mais  je  suis  au  lit,  et  fort  incommode  d'une  grosse 
rhume.  Neanmoins,  si  vous  prefereriez  de  revenir  ici 


CANNING  253 

aujourdhui  meme  entre  une  et  deux  heures,  je  serois 
pr6t  de  vous  recevoir. 

'  Aies    la   bonte    de    m'indiquer   le  jour  qui  vous 
conviendra.' 

The  impression  derived  by  M.  Biernacki  from  his  in- 
terviews with  Mr  Canning  was  that  he  was  'more  polite 
than  is  the  case  with  Englishmen  generally.     He  was 
eager  for  an  opportunity  of  attacking  the  Ministry, 
and  seemed  better  informed  than  Lord  Castlereagh  as 
to  the  affairs  of  Poland.     He  told  me  that  since  1791, 
when    the    Opposition    loudly  advocated    the    Polish 
cause,  Polish  affairs  had  ceased  to  occupy  the  atten- 
tion   of  the    British    Government   and    public.       He 
expressed  interest  in  our  cause,  but  this  was  evidently 
not  so  much  on  account  of  the  thing  itself  as  of  his 
own  political  objects,  and  he    asked  me   with  much 
curiosity  about  the  people  with  whom  I  had  talked 
and  the  views  they  had  expressed.  .  .  .   He  warned 
me  against  asking  the  Opposition  to  take  up  the  cause 
of  Poland.     The  Opposition,  he  said,  is  not  only  quite 
insignificant,  but  is  despised  on  account  of  its  impo- 
tence, as  the  Ministry  defeats  by  means  of  its  majority 
everything  that  the  Opposition  proposes.     He  did  not 
think  the   Ministry  could  take    up    the   question  in 
Parliament,  as  they  wanted   money  for  subsidies  to 
Austria,  Prussia,  and  Russia.     It  was  true  that  there 
was  a  great  deal  of  talk  in  Parliament  on  behalf  of 
Poland  in  the  time  of  Pitt ;  but  this  was  not  prompted 
by  any  partiality  to   the    Poles   or  any  feeling  that 
their   independence    was    necessary  for    the   good    of 
Europe  ;  Poland   was   simply  made    a    stalking-horse 
for  attacks  on  the  Ministry.     It  was  unfortunate  for 


254      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  Poles  that  the  Powers  which  partitioned  them 
were  England's  allies  against  Napoleon  ;  this  was  the 
reason  of  her  silence  in  presence  of  the  iniquities  com- 
mitted by  those  Powers  in  Poland.  Moreover,  those 
who  advocated  the  Polish  cause  were  also  supporters 
of  the  French  Revolution  ;  and  this  had  led  to  a  general 
belief  in  England  that  the  Poles  are  people  of  the 
same  type  as  the  French  Jacobins.  Under  these  cir- 
cumstances the  ground  was  not  very  favourable  in 
England  for  a  movement  on  behalf  of  Poland  ;  and  he 
would  advise  that  urgent  representations  should  be 
made  to  the  Ministry,  which  has  its  hands  free  with 
regard  to  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  and  even  if  there 
should  be  any  secret  conventions  on  the  matter, 
England  might  yet  wish  for  and  advise  an  alteration 
of  them.' 

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  last  communication 
to  M.  Biernacki  from  Mr  Canning,  who  on  this 
occasion  wrote  in  English  : — 

'  HlNCKLEY, 

1  December  3,    1813. 

'  SIR, — I  have  received  the  honour  of  your  letter 
of  the  27th,  and  have  forwarded  that  which  came 
in  it  to  Lord  Granville  Leveson  Gower. 

'  I  am  very  much  concerned  to  hear  of  your  indis- 
position ;  and  particularly  so,  that  it  prevented  me 
from  having  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  again  before  I 
left  town. 

'  Any  interest  that  I  might  take  in  the  subject  on 
which  you  addressed  yourself  to  me  would,  I  am  afraid, 
be  of  little  avail,  if  you  find  nothing  but  indifference 
in  other  quarters. 


CANNING  255 

'  I  am  not  without  apprehension  that  you  may  have 
misunderstood  something  which  passed  between  us 
respecting  Lord  Grenville.  I  expressed,  what  I  feel, 
the  highest  respect  for  his  Lordship's  character  and 
abilities  ;  and  gave  it  as  my  decided  opinion  that  any- 
thing which  he  might  say  on  behalf  of  your  country 
would  carry  the  greatest  weight,  and  would  be  alto- 
gether free  from  any  danger  of  misrepresentation. 
But  I  by  no  means  intended  to  lead  you  to  imagine 
that  /  could  take  the  liberty  of  introducing  you,  or  of 
stating  the  object  of  your  mission  to  this  country,  to 
Lord  Grenville.  Although  much  acquainted  with 
him  some  years  ago,  we  are  not  now  in  those  habits  of 
intimacy  either  publick  or  private,  which  would  at  all 
warrant  my  taking  such  a  step ;  and,  I  confess,  I 
should  also  feel  myself  restrained  not  only  with  regard 
to  Lord  Grenville,  but  to  anyone  else,  by  certain 
expressions  in  Prince  Czartoryski's  letter  to  me,  recom- 
mending a  perfect  silence  on  the  subject  of  its  con  tents. 

'  If  you  think  it  right  to  address  yourself  to  Lord 
Grenville,  and  should  find  it  necessary  to  refer  his 
Lordship  to  me,  merely  for  the  fact  of  your  having 
brought  me  a  letter  from  the  Prince  Czartoryski, 
strongly  recommending  you  to  rny  good  offices,  I  can 
have  no  difficulty  in  giving  a  satisfactory  answer  to 
such  a  reference ;  but  I  should  not  think  myself 
justified  in  originating  such  a  communication,  or  in 
entering  with  any  other  person  into  a  correspondence 
on  the  object  of  your  mission.  Prince  Czartoryski 
does  not,  in  his  letter  to  me,  make  any  exception 
whatever  to  his  general  recommendation  of  secrecy. 

'  I    have   not   had    the    opportunity    of    learnino- 


256       ZfEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

whether  Prince  Czartoryski  mentions  your  business 
here  to  Lord  Granville  Leveson  Gower — or  whether 
the  letter  to  him  be  merely,  as  you  suppose,  a  letter 
of  introduction.  I  shall  probably  see  Lord  Granville 
Leveson  Gower  in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks.  In  the 
meantime  I  have  not  said  anything  to  him  of  the 
nature  of  your  business  ;  nor  shall  I,  unless  I  should 
find  him  informed  of  it. 

'  If  there  is  anything  in  which  I  can  be  of  service 
to  you,  a  letter  addressed  to  me  at  Gloucester  Lodge 
will  always  be  duly  forwarded  to  me.  I  am,  with 
great  truth,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  faithful 
servant,  GEO.  CANNING.' 

'  To  M.  BIERNACKI,  at  Mr  DODD'S,  No.  12 
Aldersgate  Street.' 


M.  Biernacki's  next  interview  was  with  Brougham, 
whom  he  was  instructed  to  sound  as  to  the  best  means 
of  bringing  the  Polish  question  before  the  British 
public  through  the  press.  '  How  am  I  to  describe,' 
he  says,  '  this  noble  mind — what  am  I  to  say  of  him 
whose  character,  talents,  eloquence,  and  knowledge, 
are  celebrated  in  the  whole  of  England,  whose  house 
is  full  of  testimonials  from  towns  and  countries,  and 
from  families  which  he  has  saved  ?  .  .  .  I  have 
observed  that  in  other  countries,  and  especially  in 
Germany,  a  legal  training  narrows  the  mind.  Here 
it  has  an  opposite  effect.  As  was  formerly  to  some 
extent  the  case  in  Rome,  the  teaching  of  law  is  in 
England  necessarily  connected  with  that  of  the  theory 

O  */  •' 

and  practice  of  legislation,  and  is  illustrated  by  fre- 


BROUGHAM  257 

quent  discussions  both  in  Parliament  and  in  the  Law 
Courts  on  the  objects  for  which  laws  were  enacted. 
The  learning  and  practice  of  the  law  evidently  tends 
to  make  English  judges  and  barristers  large-minded, 
thoughtful,  high-principled,  and  merciful.  .  .  .  Mr 
Brougham  is  cold  and  gra\7e  in  manner,  but  it  is 
impossible  not  to  perceive  that  he  has  a  fertile 
imagination  which  he  has  thoroughly  under  control, 
and  with  the  help  of  which  he  gains  some  of  his 
greatest  successes.  He  is  fond  of  pictures  and  music, 
is  an  accomplished  connaisseur,  and  speaks  French 
better  than  is  generally  the  case  with  Englishmen. 

'  Directly  I  broached  the  subject  of  Poland  he 
assured  me  that  he  had  long  taken  an  interest  in  that 
country,  that  he  had  the  best  opinion  of  it,  that  when 
a  young  man  he  had  often  thought  of  plans  for  its 
reconstruction,  and  that  he  was  ready  to  do  every- 
thing in  his  power  to  bring  about  such  a  result. 

'  I  then  mentioned  to  him  the  idea  of  appealing  to 
public  opinion  on  behalf  of  Poland  through  the 
English  press.  He  promised  me  all  possible  assist- 
ance, asked  for  maps  and  books  about  Poland,  and 
wrote  down  a  series  of  questions  as  to  religion  in 
Poland,  the  national  desire  for  independence,  the 
results  of  the  partition,  the  state  of  parties,  etc., 
which  I  took  home  to  answer  in  full.  .  r~:  .••.  He 
read  my  answers  carefully,  and  we  then  agreed  that 
the  first  thing  to  be  done  was  to  write  a  short  appeal* 
to  the  English  nation  fully  stating  all  the  facts  as  to 

*  This  pamphlet,  the  manuscript  of  which,  in  Brougham's  handwriting,  is  in 
the  Czartoryski  Archives,  was  published  in  1814,  under  the  title  of  An  Appeal  to  the 
Allies  and  the  English  Ration  on  behalf  of  Poland.  London,  J.  Harding,  St  James's 
Street,  8vo.  pp.  66. 

VOL.    II.  R 


258       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Poland,  of  which  they  are  at  present  profoundly 
ignorant.  He  promised  to  do  this  as  speedily  as 
possible.  The  next  step  would  be  to  enlist  the 
interest  and  sympathy  of  prominent  journalists,  poets, 
and  other  writers  on  behalf  of  Poland,  so  as  to  induce 
them  to  write  in  her  favour ;  also  to  interest  the 
Quakers,  and  the  Irish  Catholic  party  under  the  leader- 
ship of  Mr  Grattan — a  very  powerful  party  which  is 
increasing  in  strength,  has  great  influence,  and  will 
readily  assist  us.  Another  party  which  it  would  be 
very  useful  to  enlist  in  the  cause  is  that  of  Mr 
Wilberforce,  which  comprises  many  eminent  politicians, 
such  as  Mr  Vansittart,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer. 

'  As  it  would  be  impossible  at  present  to  obtain 
anything  from  the  Ministry,  which  has  its  hands  tied 
by  the  allies  of  England  and  matters  of  internal 
policy,  and  it  would  not  be  expedient  to  help  the 
opposition  to  make  Poland  the  occasion  for  a  party 
attack  on  the  Government,  we  decided  to  try  the 
Burke  party,  which  is  not  connected  either  with  the 
Government  or  the  Opposition,  and  has  some  of  the 
ablest  and  most  honest  men  in  the  House  among  its 
members,  who  are  generally  esteemed  both  in  Parlia- 
ment and  in  the  country.  At  their  head  is  the  Right 
Hon.  W.  Elliot,  formerly  Secretary  of  State,*  to 
whom  Burke  dedicated  his  works. 

'  As  public  discussion  is  most  in  fashion  here,  and 
it  is  very  difficult  to  keep  things  secret,  even  in  the 
Cabinet,  we  arranged  that  Mr  Brougham  should 
conduct  the  negotiations,  I  remaining  in  the  back- 
ground until  it  should  become  absolutely  necessary 

*  Mr  Elliot  was  not  a  Secretary  of  State,  but  Chief  Secretary  for  Ireland  in  1806. 


BROUGHAM  259 

for  me  to  treat  with  such  members  of  the  party  as 
might  be  most  relied  upon.  Among  these  are  Sir 
Samuel  Romilly,  a  great  favourite  with  the  public, 
known  as  "  the  champion  of  British  freedom  and  law  ;  " 
Sir  Alexander  Baring,  a  merchant  prince  who  has 
made  himself  very  popular  by  his  patriotism,  his 
talents,  and  his  philanthropy  ;  and  the  young  Marquis 
of  Lansdowne,  a  man  of  great  ability  and  weight  in 
the  House,  with  such  a  reputation  for  prudence  that 
people  say  of  him  that  "he  was  born  in  1780,  in  the 
thirtieth  year  of  his  age." 

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  Right  Hon.  W. 
Elliot's  reply  to  the  letter  written  to  him  by  Mr 
Brougham  after  the  conversation  described  above  : 

'WELLS,  26th  December  1813. 

'  MY  DEAR  SIR, — Owing  to  an  accident,  I  did  not 
receive  your  letter  of  the  18th  inst.  so  soon  as  it  ought 
to  have  reached  me,  which  circumstance  is  the  occasion 
of  the  lateness  of  my  acknowledgment  of  it. 

'  No  one,  I  assure  you,  can  contemplate  with  more 
abhorrence  than  I  do  the  various  spoliations  which 
Poland  has  undergone,  and  there  is  no  one  who  could 
derive  more  joy  and  satisfaction  from  beholding  her 
resume  her  due  station  amongst  the  nations  of  Europe. 
At  the  same  time  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  disguise 
from  myself  the  many  difficulties  which  stand  in  the 
way  of  the  accomplishment  of  such  a  restoration.  It 
obviously  cannot  be  obtained  without  the  concurrence 
of  Austria  and  Russia  (I  may  add  Prussia),  and  it  is 
but  fair  towards  our  Government  to  say,  that  even  if 


260      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

they  were  to  take  up  the  cause  with  all  the  zeal  and 
authority  by  which  they  could  support  it,  their  inter- 
position could  go  little  beyond  exhortation,  and  means 
very  inadequate,  I  fear,  to  bring  about  an  object  that 
must  be  attended  with  considerable  sacrifices  on  the 
part  of  these  Powers. 

'  With  regard  to  the  course  suggested  by  the 
gentleman  who  has  made  to  you  the  communication 
you  mention,  I  confess  it  appears  to  me  perfectly  hope- 
less. If  I  understand  it  right,  it  is  that  the  affairs  of 
Poland  should  in  some  form  or  other  be  brought  under 
the  view  of  Parliament  without  his  having  made  any 
previous  disclosure  to  the  Government  on  the  subject 
of  his  mission.  Now  I  feel  the  clearest  conviction 
that  this  mode  of  agitating  the  matter  could  produce 
no  beneficial  results  whatever  ;  and  that  on  the  con- 
trary much  censure  would  be  cast  (I  think  not  wholly 
without  reason)  on  the  introduction  of  a  topic  which 
had  been  withheld  from  the  knowledge  of  the  Ministers 
of  the  Crown,  although  materially  affecting  the  in- 
terests of  his  Majesty's  allies,  and  of  peculiar  delicacy 
at  the  present  conjuncture  because  hazarding  the  har- 
mony and  cordiality  amongst  them  necessary  to  the 
continuance  of  that  success  which  has  of  late  accom- 
panied their  arms.  In  truth,  too,  almost  under  any 
circumstances,  I  should  place  little  reliance  on  the 
efficacy  of  the  exertions  of  a  few  individuals  in  Parlia- 
ment in  a  cause  which,  to  ensure  it  any  chance  of 
success,  would  require  all  the  weight  that  the  com- 
bined efforts  of  all  the  political  parties  in  the  country 
could  afford  it.  Such  a  plan  of  proceeding  would,  at 
least  as  it  strikes  me,  be  attended  with  no  solid  utility, 


BROUGHAM  261 

and  it  might  (and  this  is  an  idea  at  which  I  shudder) 
by  exciting  delusive  expectations  and  even  premature 
movements  in  Poland,  involve  that  unfortunate  coun- 
try in  still  more  grievous  calamities  than  those  which 
she  has  already  incurred.  These  considerations  will,  I 
acknowledge,  render  me  very  reluctant  to  share  in  the 
management  of  the  case  ;  and  though  I  am  unapprized 
of  the  details  of  the  extent  of  the  views  entertained,  I 
am  anxious  to  give  you  immediately  these  my  first  and 
hasty  impressions  (for  I  am  writing  under  the  fear  of 
losing  the  post)  in  order  that  the  person  who  is 
charged  with  the  mission  may  not  be  prevented  from 
availing  himself  of  any  other  means  that  may  present 
themselves  to  him  for  the  furtherance  of  the  business 
committed  to  his  care. 

'  Of  course  I  shall  strictly  observe  your  injunction 
of  secrecy.  On  my  way  to  London  it  is  probable  I 
may  call  at  Milton,  in  which  event  (I  conclude  from 
the  tenor  of  your  letter)  I  may  show  it  to  Lord  Fitz- 
william  and  Lord  Milton,  unless  I  have  an  intimation 
from  you  of  your  wish  to  the  contrary. 

'  It  was  my  intention  to  have  been  by  this  time  on 
my  road,  but  I  have  been  detained  by  the  illness  of 
my  servant,  who  is  not  yet  able  to  travel,  and  I  there- 
fore propose  to  remain  here  for  about  a  fortnight 
longer. 

'  I  have  only  a  moment  left  to  add,  that  I  am 
always — most  faithfully  yours, 

'W.  ELLIOT. 
'  H.  BROUGHAM,  ESQ. 
'  King's  Bench  Walk,  Temple,  London.' 


262       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Describing  a  visit  to  Madame  de  Stael,  M.  Bier- 
nacki  says : 

'  Madame  de  Stael  is  immensely  popular  at  the 
British  Court  and  among  the  public.  Her  sentimen- 
talism,  her  enthusiasm,  her  singular  opinions  as  to 
morals  and  politics,  have  in  no  way  prevented  her 
from  gaining  the  highest  consideration  among  all 
classes  ;  it  was  enough  that  as  an  enemy  of  Napoleon 
she  had  been  banished  from  the  Continent  and  had 
taken  refuge  in  England.  Her  extraordinary  elo- 
quence and  readiness  in  debate  inspire  universal  ad- 
miration, and  the  highest  personages  in  the  country 
seek  her  acquaintance.  Her  influence  is,  in  fact,  so 
great  that,  in  spite  of  her  many  indiscretions  and  her 
advocacy  of  Russia,  I  decided  to  seek  her  assistance. 
.  .  .  She  spoke,  at  a  soiree  given  by  her,  with  the 
greatest  enthusiasm  about  Poland  and  loudly  praised 
the  Poles,  and  her  remarks  were  most  strongly 
supported  by  Sir  Samuel  Roinilly  and  Mr  Dumont, 
the  editor  of  Bentham.  We  shall  see  if  she  will  write 
in  the  same  sense ;  but  her  soirees  are  so  largely 
attended  that  even  in  conversation  she  might  help  us.' 
M.  Biernacki  wrote  her  a  long  letter,  urging  her  to 
advocate  the  cause  of  Poland,  to  which  he  received 
the  following  reply : 

'  Je  n'ai  jamais  cesse'  de  m'interesser  a  la  Pologne, 
et  la  noble  perseverance  de  ses  malheureux  citoyens 
est  respectable  et  touchante — mais  qu'esperer  pour 
elle  en  ce  moment !  Si  la  personne  qui  m'a  fait 
1'honneur  de  m'ecrire  une  si  belle  lettre  veut  me  voir, 
je  la  recevrai  dans  le  secret  le  plus  absolu,  mais  ce 
sera  seulement  pour  lui  exprimer  1'admiration  que 


BROUGHAM  263 

m'inspire  un  sentiment  national  si  courageusenienfc 
conserve,  si  courageusement  exprime'  par  les  actions 
et  les  paroles, 

'  A.  L.  G.  DE  STAKL-HOLSTEIN,  n6e  NECKER.' 

Brougham*  was  very  indignant  at  this  smoothly 
worded  refusal,  and  drafted  the  following  characteristic 
rejoinder,  which,  however,  M.  Biernacki  did  not  send 
to  Madame  de  Stael,  as  he  thought  it  was  too 
polemical  to  be  addressed  to  a  woman ;  upon  which 
Brougham  drily  observed  :  *  Perhaps  you  are  right ; 
it  would  be  best  simply  to  tell  her  she  knows  nothing 
about  the  matter  ' — 

'  Je  dois  vous  avouer  tres-franchement  que  votre 
reponse  (signee  pour  comble  d'inconsequence  du  nom 
de  Necker),  m'a  donne  une  affliction  sensible.  Est-il 
possible  que,  toute  clairvoyante  que  vous  etes,  vous 
puissiez  ne  pas  sentir  que  c'est  precisement  dans  ce 
moment  qu'il  y  aye  quelque  chose  a  esperer  pour  la 
Pologne  ?  Y  a-t-il  la  moindre  probabilite  que  dans 
1'avenir  elle  verra  un  moment  plus  favorable  ?  Dites- 
le  done,  avec  la  franchise  que  je  vous  crois  propre, 
proclamez  que  notre  etat  est  pour  jamais  desesperd. 
Mais  je  vous  supplie  de  ne  pas  voiler  1'insouciance 
pour  tout  ce  qui  n'est  pas  Suedois,  ou  Russe,  ou 
Allemand — 1'indifference  pour  tous  les  maux  qui  ne 

*  He  thus  states  his  opinion  of  Madame  de  Stael  in  a  letter  to  Earl  Grey,  dated 
December  16, 1813,  and  published  in  Brougham's  autobiography  (Vol.  II.,  p.  98) :  '  This 
brings  me  to  the  said  gentlewoman,  Madame  de  Stael,  whom  I  really  think  you  all 
overrate.  Her  book  seems  terribly  vague  and  general  and  inaccurate.  She  certainly 
follows  old  Lord  Lansdowne's  advice  in  avoiding  details  "  as  the  more  dignified  line." 
Besides,  her  presumption  is  intolerable,  and  on  all  subjects,  on  many  of  which  she 
can  know  nothing — as,  for  instance,  the  German  metaphysics,  except  so  far  as  she 
may  have  rubbed  some  of  them  off  Schlegel.  I  never  have  seen  her,  and  shun  her 
as  I  would  an  evil  of  some  kind,  having  heard  her  talked  of  as  a  grand  bore,  aud 
being  sickened  by  the  concurring  accounts  of  her  fulsome  flattery  of  the  Prince, 
Ministers,  etc.,  etc.,  and  her  profligate  changes  of  principle.  In  women  such  things 
signify  little  ;  but  she  must  (as  Talleyrand  said)  be  considered  a  man.' 


264       MEMOIRS  OF  PRIME  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

viennent  pas  de  Bonaparte — sous  le  pretexte  (pretexte 
qui  ne  manquera  jamais  quand  vous  auriez  vecu,  et 
1'admiratiori  de  1'Europe,  encore  une*  demi-siecle)  que 
ce  n'est  pas  encore  "  le  moment." 

1  Je  ne  vous  cacherai  point  que  j'attribue  ce  que 
vous  in'avez  dit  bien  plus  4  la  legerete  d'un  grand 
genie,  qu'k  la  froideur  d'un  courtisan.  Les  lignes 
dont  il  est  question  ne  vous  seroient  pas  echappees  si 
vous  eussiez  un  peu  reflechi  sur  les  interets  graves  et 
touchants  que  vous  etes  dans  le  cas  si  puissament  de 
servir.  Si  vous  auriez  senti  aussi  vivernent  que  je 
le  sache  combien  vous  pourriez  influer  sur  le  bonheur 
de  quelques  millions  en  adoucissant  leur  sort,  meme 
quand  il  ne  serait  plus  question  de  1'independance, 
j'ose  vous  croire  incapable  de  vous  refuser  d  vous- 
meme  un  plaisir  si  vraiment  inexprimable,  pour  toutes 
les  tentations  soit  de  Fespoir  soit  de  la  crainte  que  les 
cours  dans  leurs  alternations  de  faiblesse  et  de  cruaute 
puissent  offrir.  Encore  reflechissez — vous  le  devez  a 
vous-merne,  au  nom  que  vous  avez  tant  illustre,  a  celui 
que  vous  heritez  du  meilleur  des  hommes.' 

As  will  be  seen  from  the  following  letters,t 
Brougham  assisted  M.  Biernacki  to  enter  into  com- 
munication with  some  of  the  London  newspapers:— 

(Postmark  of  January  27,  1814). 

*JEUDT. 

'  MONSIEUR, — Je  crois  que  vous  ferez  bien  de  faire 
passer  une  note  a 

'  Mons.   Scott  (1'editeur  du  Champion)  Catherine 

*  Sic  in  oriy. 

t  These  are  exact  copies  from  the  originals  in  the  Czartoryski  Archives.     It  will 
be  seen  that  Brougham's  French,  though  fluent,  was  far  from  correct  or  elegant. 


BROUGJrAM  265 

Street,  Strand,  Champion  Office,  pour  le  prier  de  faire 
attention  au  sujet  de  la  Pologne  dans  son  nume'ro  de 
Dimancbe. 

'  Vous  pouvez  1'envoyer  tout  de  suite  par  la  petite 
poste,  en  anonyme,  mais  comme  Polonois. — Je  suis 
toujours  Votre  fidele  ami,  H.  B. 

'  M.  BIERNACKI,  Mr  DODD'S,  22  Aldersgate  Street.' 

'  VENDREDI. 

'  MONSIEUR, — Ayez  la  bonte  de  faire  parvenir  une 
note  a  Mr  Perry,*  le  rehvoyant  tres-respectueusement 
a  la  brochure  pour  les  principes  et  les  faits  qui  doivent 
servir  de  bases  pour  la  discussion.  Vous  pouvez  lui 
envoyer  une  exemplaire  en  meme  temps,  et  lui 
marquer  que  rien  de  plus  vrai  que  les  details  qu'elle 
renferme,  mais  que  par  menagement  (a  ce  qu'il  paroit) 
pour  les  allies,  surtout  la  Kussie,  ces  details  sont  bien 
au-dessous  de  la  verite  !  Aussi  vous  direz  que  les 
horreurs  pratiquees  depuis  la  deraiere  invasion  exce- 
dent  meme  celles  des  anciens  partages,  et  qu'apres 
qu'il  aura  entame  la  discussion  vous  lui  indiquerez  des 
autres  anecdotes.  En  attendant  vous  pouvez  marquer 
que  probablement  on  va  voir  quelqu'unes  des  predic- 
tions remplies  que  la  brochure  a  donnees,  et  notam- 
ment  sur  la  Russie,  en  le  renvoyant  aux  pages  ou  Ton 
fait  mention  de  la  Suede  et  la  Norvege.  Vous  ferez 
bien  de  lui  indiquer  aussi  les  pages  qui  renferment 
les  details  des  confiscations  et  des  malheureux  resultats 
des  partages  a  cause  des  changements  de  frontiere, 
en  lui  temoignant  que  tous  cas  details  sont  de  toute 
verite. 

*  Editor  of  the  Morning  Chronicle. 


266       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

'  Si  vous  envoyez  une  lettre  dressee  sur  ce  plan  de 
bonne  heure,  rien  ne  1'empechera  de  discuter  le  sujet 
domain  matin.  Je  suis  toujours,  etc.,  H.  B. 

'  Je  serai  chez  moi  entre  3  et  4  heures,  mais  vous 
devez  envoyer  votre  lettre  tout  de  suite.' 

Among  the  journalists  of  the  day  with  whom  M. 
Biernacki  corresponded  was  Leigh  Hunt,  who  was 
at  the  time  still  confined  in  Horsemonger  Lane 
gaol  on  account  of  his  libel  on  the  Prince  Regent. 
M.  Biernacki  describes  him  as  '  a  young  man  full 
of  talent  and  learning,  romantic  and  ardent.  His 
paper  is  one  of  the  most  popular  in  England  ;  it  has  a 
sale  of  8000  copies  a  day,  which,  according  to  the  usual 
calculation  in  such  cases,  would  mean  that  it  is  read 
by  40,000  people.'  The  following  is  a  copy  of  Leigh 
Hunt's  article  on  Poland  in  the  Examiner  of  January 
30,  1814,  which  also  contains  some  remarkable  ex- 
tracts from  Brougham's  pamphlet.: — 


'  The  allies  are  now  supposed,  and  with  great  appearance  of  proba- 
bility, to  be  advancing  to  a  point  at  which  they  will  not  only  be 
able  to  secure  present  peace  for  Europe,  but  to  act  upon  an  im- 
proved scale  the  part  which  has  hitherto  been  performed  by  the 
enemy,  and  settle  the  destinies  of  nations  in  their  turn. 

For  this  change  in  their  prospects  and  power  they  are  eminently 
indebted,  as  they  themselves  acknowledge,  to  the  popular  opinion 
that  has  gone  with  them  ;  and  it  is  desirable,  on  every  account,  that 
they  should  preserve  this  best  of  friends  and  strongest  of  coadjutors 
by  fulfilling  in  their  prosperity  what  they  undertook  to  perform 
when  the  strife  was  doubtful.  Their  enemy  has  found  to  his  cost, 
that  opinion  in  these  times  is  not  what  it  was  even  fifty  years  back, 
and  that  it  cannot  be  put  on  and  off  at  pleasure,  without  risking 
something  worse  than  a  chill. 

'  People's  eyes,  therefore,  are  fixed  with  no  small  anxiety  on  the 
diplomatic  proceedings  of  the  allies,  and  the  more  so,  from   some 


LEIGH  HUNT  ON  POLAND  267 

appearances  of  contradiction  that  have  lately  been  witnessed  in 
their  military  declarations.  For  our  part,  though  we  are  among 
the  most  anxious,  we  confess  we  think  little  of  these  appearances. 
If  the  allies  crossed  the  Rhine  after  their  professions  of  moderation, 
and  after  their  hint  about  not  interfering  with  the  natural  bound- 
aries of  France,  Buonaparte,  by  his  own  statement,  seems  to  have 
attempted  trifling  with  them  on  the  subject  of  peace,  and  it  would 
have  been  mere  weakness  on  their  part  to  lose  more  of  their  time. 

'  The  proceeding  does  not  compromise  the  sincerity  of  their  pro- 
fessions ; — it  is  at  a  peace  the  latter  will  be  brought  to  the  test. 
Again,  there  may  be  a  difference  of  temper  in  the  proclamations  of 
the  Austrian  and  Prussian  Generals,  without  gainsaying  the  general 
spirit  of  the  confederacy.  If  the  Prussian  has  something  of  a 
vindictive  tone,  and  taunts  the  French  Emperor  with  some  of  his 
former  boastings,  he  may  be  supposed  to  construe  the  natural  feel- 
ings of  his  master,  and  to  speak  the  language  of  his  irritated  country- 
men, without  involving  the  cooler  feelings  of  ultimate  negotiation. 
The  Austrian  Emperor  has  suffered  less  than  the  King  of  Prussia, 
and  is  besides  connected  with  Buonaparte,  so  that  his  servant  speaks 
in  a  more  considerate  manner.  As  to  the  Cossacks,  of  whom  such  a 
ridiculous  noise  has  been  made,  it  is  well  known  that  they  enjoy  a 
sort  of  mongrel  independence,  and  that  whatever  antics  they  play 
are  to  be  traced  to  themselves  and  not  to  the  Russian  Commanders  : 
— their  flags,  therefore,  with  Paris  on  the  one  side  and  Moscow  on 
the  other,  have  as  little  to  do  with  the  temper  of  the  allied  sovereigns, 
as  their  beards  and  their  brutality.  If  Napoleon  had  not  played 
the  part  of  a  brother  barbarian,  he  ought  to  have  taken  shame  to 
himself  for  enabling  such  a  tribe  to  come  down  and  play  the  raw- 
head-and-bloody-bones  among  the  people  of  Europe. 

'  It  is  not  the  sort  of  tone  then  that  may  be  adopted  here  and 
there  which  is  to  settle  our  opinion  of  the  allies  and  their  principles  ; 
but  the  sincerity  they  shall  exhibit,  when  they  come  to  conclude 
matters  with  Buonaparte,  in  acting  up  to  their  professions  of 
universal  justice,  and  in  securing  us  all  for  the  future,  as  far  as 
they  possibly  can,  against  the  irregular  impulse  of  this  or  that  man's 
ambition. 

'To  this  end,  it  will  not  be  enough  that  they  shall  compel 
sacrifices  from  Buonaparte ;  they  must  make  sacrifices  themselves ; 
they  must  take  away  from  him  one  of  the  most  pernicious  arms  of 
his  power  against  them, — the  power  of  recrimination  ;  and  prove  to 
all  the  world  that  they  have  not  been  trifling  with  that  awful  force, 
those  myriads  of  human  beings,  who  have  been  lighting  in  their 
cause. 


268       MEMOIRS  OF  1'RINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

'  These  sacrifices  are  luckily  not  many,  or  of  great  moment,  especi- 
ally after  the  more  humiliating  ones  which  the  allies  have  borne  in 
their  adversity.  They  only  consist  in  doing  that  justice  to  their 
neighbours,  for  which  they  have  been  calling  upon  Buonaparte  on 
their  own  account.  Austria  has  said,  for  instance,  "Do  not  attempt 
to  force  Germans  to  be  Frenchmen  : — it  is  a  vain  as  well  as  inhuman 
effort :  "  Russia  has  said,  "  Do  not  insult  all  ruy  native  feelings  : — do 
not  come  where  you  are  not  wanted,  and  lord  it  over  my  territory  :  " 
Prussia  has  said,  "  Do  not  take  from  me  my  strength  and  my  spirit, 
do  not  garrison  my  fortresses,  plunder  my  villages,  and  leave  me 
only  the  shadow  of  an  existence.'1  Now  there  is  a  voice  which  says 
all  this  and  more  to  these  very  Powers, — to  Austria,  to  Russia,  and  to 
Prussia  : — it  is  the  voice  of  Poland — a  voice  crying  from  the  ground, 
— the  voice  of  a  country  declared  no  longer  in  existence  ! — Here  let 
the  proof  of  sincerity  be  given  ;  here  let  a  proof  be  given,  that  the 
allied  Princes  have  been  taught  lasting  as  well  as  momentary  success, 
and  that  the  men  of  the  old  school  are  prepared  to  give  up  these 
vices  in  themselves,  which  they  have  justly  united  to  put  down  in 
the  man  of  the  new. 

'  This  is  a  most  important  subject,  and  involves,  with  regard  to 
the  allies,  or  at  least  to  their  principles,  the  very  same  question  that 
is  now  agitating  against  Buonaparte.  We  have  never  lost  sight  of 
it ;  but  we  confess  that  we  should  have  waited  a  little  before  we 
urged  it  again,  had  it  not  been  for  a  publication  that  has  lately 
appeared  entitled, — "  An  Appeal  to  the  Allies  and  the  English  Nation 
in  behalf  of  Poland."  It  may  be  thought  invidious  by  some  persons 
to  interrupt  the  allies  at  present  by  any  representations,  calculated 
to  fall  in  with  French  misrepresentation ;  and  such  a  pamphlet  may 
appear  to  them  a  little  like  casting  a  stone  into  the  mouth  of  our 
advancing  friends  ;  but  a  direct  charge  to  this  effect  would  only 
prove  to  us  that  such  persons  were  afraid  to  meet  their  subject,  and 
considered  the  allies  as  afraid  also  ;  and  it  is  perhaps  better  upon  the 
whole  to  make  the  representation,  however  unpalatable  for  the 
moment,  while  the  gratitude  of  the  allies  to  popular  feeling  is  yet 
warm,  the  policy  of  doing  right  yet  fresh  in  their  eyes,  and  their 
temptations  to  do  wrong  not  yet  excited  by  the  final  grasp  of  success. 

'  The  author  of  the  pamphlet  is  evidently  a  true  observer,  who 
sees  things  in  the  gross  as  well  as  detail, — in  their  universal  as  well 
as  their  particular  application.  For  a  writer  who  can  take  so  large 
a  view  as  he  does  of  the  subject  and  its  principle,  we  might  be 
inclined  to  think  that  he  takes  rather  too  much  pains  to  answer 
petty,  Cabinet  objections,  and  questions  of  interest ;  but  as  politics 
go,  and  as  questions  of  interest,  by  a  proper  reasoning,  amount  at 


EXTRACTS  FROM  BROUGHAM'S  PAMPHLET      269 

last  to  the  same  thing  as  questions  of  principle,  it  may  have  been  as 
well  to  show  himself  prepared  at  all  points.  What  we  like  less,  is 
an  insidious  way  of  occasionally  putting  his  own  apprehensions  of  the 
allies  into  the  mouth  of  their  enemies, —  a  kind  of  deprecating  by 
proxy,  and  of  imagining  what  other  people  might  say  of  them,  only 
to  express  his  conviction  that  no  such  terrible  want  of  principle  can 
take  place.  It  would  have  been  better,  we  think,  in  a  pamphlet  on 
such  a  subject,  to  state  at  once  what  his  own  opinion  of  the  allies 
would  be,  should  they  turn  traitors  to  their  profession, — and  to 
state  it  too  in  the  very  broadest  terms.  If  in  the  end  they  deserve 
it,  he  saves  himself  the  pretence  of  a  conviction  to  the  contrary  ; 
and  if  not,  they  can  be  the  less  offended  with  the  plain  speaking. 
But  even  the  opportunities  of  humour  which  this  underhand  mode 
gives  a  writer,  (and  the  one  before  us  handles  a  pleasantry  very 
easily),  cannot  compensate,  we  think,  for  the  opportunities  it  gives 
to  meaner  understandings  of  doubting  his  good  intention  in  general. 
Of  this  there  cannot  be  the  remotest  suspicion.  The  writer  may 
have  his  apprehensions  with  regard  to  the  ultimate  conduct  of  the 
allies,  and  we  know  some  very  excellent  men  who  more  than  agree 
with  him  on  that  point ;  but  whoever  he  is,  he  is  one  that  sees  as 
clearly  as  any  man  the  union  of  sound  principle  with  policy,  and 
who,  notwithstanding  his  legal  mode  of  occasionally  putting  his 
apprehensions,  succeeds  in  convincing  his  reader  that  he  feels  as  well 
as  sees.  The  apostrophe  to  the  "ill-fated  Poniatowski"  (p.  46) 
evinces  cordiality  of  heart  as  well  as  justness  of  thinking. — But  we 
are  detaining  the  reader  from  a  few  extracts  which  it  is  our  inten- 
tion to  give  him,  and  which  we  shall  give  without  any  of  these 
comments  which  the  rest  of  the  publication  itself  will  abundantly 
supply. 

'  After  stating  that  the  subject  of  Poland  need  not  be  so  painful 
to  the  allied  Princes  as  some  people  may  insinuate,  since  it  was  their 
immediate  predecessors,  not  themselves,  that  made  the  partition,  the 
author  proceeds  in  a  very  successful  manner  to  vindicate  the  Poles 
for  having  sided  of  late  with  the  French,  by  putting  a  very  strong 
and  striking  case,  in  which  he  supposes  England  to  be  lorded  over 
by  the  latter,  and  suddenly  visited  by  a  Russian  army,  of  which  she 
takes  advantage  to  try  and  shake  off  her  yoke.  He  then  enters  into 
the  subject  historically,  showing  that  "  the  great  relaxation  of  public 
principles  may  be  distinctly  ascribed  to  the  partition,"  and  the  Poles 
themselves,  at  the  moment  of  their  national  annihilation,  were 
removing  the  last  flimsy  pretext  for  the  outrage  by  forming  a  new 
and  free  constitution.  His  next  step  is  to  prove,  that  the  partition 
is  not  a  thing  gone  by, — the  discussion  of  which  is  no  longer  a 


270       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

matter  of  connection  with  present  events  ;  and  as  this  may  appear 
to  some  persons  important  to  settle,  and  is  settled  by  him  very 
completely,  we  shall  make  a  good  long  extract  on  the  subject. 

1  "  I  question  if  the  time  be  even  yet  come,  when  the  miserable 
catastrophe  can  be  adequately  deplored  that  paralysed  all  those 
noble  efforts,  and  blighted  the  fair  prospect  unfolded  by  them  to  the 
eyes  of  every  friend  of  liberty.  But  one  part  of  the  calamity,  that 
which  pressed  the  most  sorely  upon  the  interests  of  the  European 
community,  will  perhaps  never  be  more  deeply  felt  than  at  the 
present  hour.  I  speak  of  the  peculiar  moment  chosen  by  the  con- 
federate courts.  The  new  constitution  was  enveloped  in  a  cloud  of 
foreign  soldiery — the  patriots  were  scattered  abroad — the  rudiments 
of  the  national  army  were  dissipated — the  country  was  overwhelmed, 
parcelled  out,  confiscated,  jobbed,  turned  into  money — blackened 
with  garrisons,  prisons,  gibbets,  cemeteries,  and  the  desolate  abodes 
of  men  who  had  perished  for  freedom — its  separate  existence  finally 
destroyed — its  name  blotted  out  from  the  map,  and  forbidden  to 
be  any  more  uttered,  as  if  it  had  been  guilty  of  all  the  crimes 
whereof  it  had  been  the  scene  and  the  victim — but  why  enumerate 
particulars  ?  Do  they  not  all  fall  short  of  the  deed  itself  ? — The 
partition  of  Poland  was  completed  AFTER  the  French  Revolution 
had  awakened  slumbering  royalty  ;  had  taught  the  force  of  France 
to  burst  through  its  ancient  bounds  ;  and  had  made  national  inde- 
pendence tremble  in  every  corner  of  Europe. 

' "  This  is  the  fact  upon  which,  at  the  present  moment,  it 
imports  us  well  to  meditate.  There  is  no  getting  over  it.  If  Poland 
had  been  left  as  she  was  when  those  great  changes  began  which  the 
allies  are  now  occupied  in  undoing,  she  would  still  have  been  one  of 
the  greatest  Powers  on  the  Continent.  She  was  seized  when  even 
the  pretences  of  1772  no  longer  existed — when  she  was  a  safe, 
orderly,  and  peaceable  neighbour.  But  above  all  she  was  seized  in 
1793  and  1794,  at  the  very  time  when  France  was  seizing  Savoy, 
Belgium,  and  Holland.  This  is  the  matter  which  now  presses  itself 
upon  our  attention.  We  are  recurring  to  sound  and  ancient 
principles.  We  are  treading  back  our  steps  in  order  to  get  out 
of  the  slough  in  which  we  have  been  since  the  French  Revolution, 
and  to  regain  the  eminence  of  a  pure  morality.  We  are  endeavour- 
ing to  undo  as  much  as  possible  the  recent  changes  of  dominion,  and 
to  place  the  affairs  of  Europe  on  their  former  ground,  with  all  the 
benefits  of  past  experience.  With  what  pretensions  of  consistency 
— by  what  powers  of  face,  marvellous  even  in  this  unblushing  age, 
can  we  meet  either  the  enemy  or  the  Polander,  if  the  only  change 
on  which  we  are  obstinately  silent  is  one  of  the  most  momentous 


EXTRACTS  FROM  BROUGHAM'S  PAMPHLET      271 

and  least  justifiable,  and  which  our  conscience  tells  us  was  effected  in 
the  very  same  month  with  the  conquest  of  the  Netherlands,  ad- 
mitted 011  every  hand  to  be  the  fittest  subject  of  restoration1? 

'  "  A  pernicious  but  very  flimsy  heresy  has  been  propagated  on 
this  question  by  some  foreign  politicians,  the  soundness  of  whose 
principles  in  other  respects  renders  their  mistakes  the  more  danger- 
ous.    It  has  been  said  that  the  partition  of  Poland  is  now  a  mere 
matter  of  history,  and  that  while  the  lapse  of  time  exempts  it  from 
being  again  brought  into  discussion,  the  sanction  of  various  treaties 
stops  the  parties  to  them  from  questioning  it.     This  doctrine  is  so 
full  of  manifest  absurdity,  and  so  easily  refuted  by  the  whole  system 
of  those  who  adopt  it,  that  one  can  scarcely  imagine  it  to  proceed 
from   anything   but  a  misplaced  delicacy  towards  the  partitioning 
Powers,  and  a  determination  to  scare  the  enemy  with  big  words  and 
terms  of  law,  from  flinging  at  us  a  very  favourite  sarcasm  in  return 
for  the  many  attacks  of  this  kind  to  which  we  expose  him.     I  would 
fain  remind  the  very  respectable  persons  to  whom  I  am  alluding,  of 
the  period  at  which  they  first  treated  this  topic  ;    it  was  imme- 
diately after  the  Treaty  of  Luneville,  in  1801,  not  seven  years  after 
the   final  partition,  the  greatest    in   extent    and  the   worst  in  all 
respects,  except  that  it  was  not  the  earliest.     Yet  the  advocates  of 
this   motley  doctrine  of  a  seven  years'  limitation   of  anti-Jacobin 
crimes,  were  the  loudest  against  offences  committed  by  France  eight 
and  nine  years  before  the  date  of  their  invectives.     Happily  for 
Europe  the  same  enlightened  persons  retain  their  influence  over  the 
popular  opinions  at  the  present  day,  and  to  it  perhaps,  next  to  ilie 
headlong  rashness  of  the  enemy  and  the  temperate  firmness  of  the 
allied  chiefs,  we  owe  the  late  successes.     I  hope  their  voice  will  be 
heard  in  the  negotiations,  and  in  the  further  prosecution  of  the 
war,  should  just  terms  be  refused  by  France — I  am  sure  they  will 
spurn    at    the   idea  of  considering   the    French    conquests    in    the 
Revolution  war  as  sacred ;  and  yet  nearly  twice  seven  years  have 
elapsed  since  a  treaty  confirmed  them  ;  so  that  both  their  doctrine 
of  limitation  and  of  estoppel  by  treaties,  is  much  more  applicable  to 
these  than  to  the  last  Polish  partition.     England  too  and  France,  I 
should  think,  may  be  reckoned  something  in  a  question  of  this  sort, 
and  they  never  by  any  treaty  recognised  directly  or  indirectly  the 
dismemberment.     Yet  England  as  well  as  the  allies  themselves,  by 
solemn  treaties,  recognised  those  French  usurpations  and  new  states 
created  in  the  Revolution  war,  which  all  good  men  now  hope  to  see 
restored  to  their  ancient  possessors.     Even  the  Spanish  usurpation 
was  recognised  by  all    the   allies  in   succession,   except  England." 
pp.  22-25. 


272       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

'  The  author  then  proceeds  to  exhibit  the  miserable  state  of 
Poland  after  its  partition,  to  calculate  the  little  advantages  the 
partitioners  have  derived  from  their  respective  acquisitions  of 
territory,  and  to  enumerate  the  frequent  and  striking  disadvantages 
they  have  experienced  from  the  natural  hatred  of  the  Poles,  in  a 
military  point  of  view.  The  rest  of  the  pamphlet  is  chiefly  occupied 
in  answering  objections  on  the  score  of  Russian  ascendency.  We 
shall  make  our  other  extract  on  the  use  which  Bonaparte  has  made 
of  the  Poles,  as  it  brings  the  matter  down  to  the  time  before  us,  and 
refer  our  readers  for  the  rest  of  the  question  to  what  will  amply 
repay  their  attention  in  the  publication  itself  :— • 

'  "  The  exact  number  of  men  drawn  by  the  enemy  from  this  quarter 
it  is  neither  very  easy,  nor  very  material  to  ascertain.  Since  1806, 
when  he  first  held  out  hopes  of  restoring  Poland,  those  numbers 
have  greatly  increased  ;  and  in  the  campaign  of  1812,  they  did  not 
fall  short  of  100,000.  The  insecurity  of  the  tenure  by  which  the 
country  is  held,  may  be  seen  from  the  events  of  the  two  Polish 
campaigns.  Immediately  after  the  battle  of  Jena,  the  Prussian 
troops  were  compelled  to  withdraw  from  Poland,  as  precipitately  as 
the  French  have  lately  done  from  Holland.  No  exertion  was  too 
great  for  the  country  during  that  winter,  notwithstanding  the  very 
imperfect  degree  in  which  its  wishes  were  met.  Bonaparte,  in 
nattering  them  with  the  hopes  of  independence,  had  imposed  one 
very  harsh  condition,  that  the  code  Napoleon  should  be  established. 
Even  on  such  terms,  as  if  only  anxious  for  existence,  and  careless  of 
the  kind  of  being  they  should  have,  they  accepted  the  offer.  Let 
us  recollect  that  Emperors  and  Kings  have  in  like  manner  received 
their  crowns,  fettered  by  conditions  that  almost  enslaved  them  to 
their  subjects  or  electors.  So  the  Poles  capitulated  for  national 
existence,  upon  terms  which  could  hardly  be  said  to  leave  them  a 
separate  people.  But  they  amply  performed  their  part  of  the  con- 
tract. The  enthusiasm  excited  by  the  mere  semblance  of  restoration 
was  universal.  Many  persons  sacrificed  nearly  their  whole  fortunes 
to  the  State.  Entire  regiments  of  between  two  and  three  thousand 
men  each,  were  raised  and  fully  equipped  by  individuals  in  a  few 
weeks.  Others  furnished  single  battalions,  or  companies,  or  only  a 
few  men,  according  to  their  means ;  and  all  this — not  from  the 
superabundance  of  their  wealth,  not  by  the  sale  of  their  plate  and 
jewels  only  ;  but  by  selling  or  pledging  their  estates,  and  part- 
ing with  everything  that  could  raise  a  farthing,  down  to  the  mar- 
riage rings  of  village  dames,  or  the  single  silver  spoon  of  a  poor 
country  curate.  The  peace  of  Tilsit  closed  the  campaign  which  had 
been  so  materially  influenced  by  the  exertions  of  Poland ;  and  upon 


EXTRACTS  FROM  BROUGHAM'S  PAMPHLET      273 

the  first  breaking  out  of  the  war  two  years  afterwards,  she  evinced 
her  sense  of  the  benefits,  unsubstantial  as  they  were,  which  that 
treaty  had  conferred.  The  same  extraordinary  efforts  were  renewed, 
and  the  army  of  the  Duchy  rapidly  over-ran  the  Polish  provinces  of 
Austria,  where  they  met  with  allies  in  every  corner.  Indeed  similar 
exertions  were  made  in  those  districts  themselves,  and  they  were 
rewarded  by  the  incorporation  of  their  better  half  with  the  Duchy, 
at  the  peace  of  Vienna. — In  1812,  a  new  attempt  was  made  to  soothe 
the  Poles  with  the  hope  of  real  independence,  although  the  alliance 
of  France  with  Austria  rendered  it  extremely  difficult.  The  charm 
was  again  found  all  powerful ;  the  people  flocked  from  every  quarter 
to  join  the  invading  army,  and  expended  their  utmost  means  to  supply 
it.  I  question  if  an  equal  amount  of  contribution  was  ever  raised 
upon  the  same  extent  of  a  country  merely  agricultural ;  and  when 
we  reflect  that  it  had  been  exhausted  by  half  a  century  of  misfortune, 
the  exertion  seems  scarcely  credible.  Besides  the  fixed  war  revenue 
of  about  live  millions  sterling,  it  furnished  as  much  more  in  provi- 
sions and  stores  to  the  army  on  its  passage,  with  a  further  sum  of  one 
million  and  a  half  in  money.  Such  efforts,  and  the  subsequent 
exhaustion  of  the  country  in  1813,  may  have  drained  it  of  wealth  ; 
but  the  people  remain ;  iron  is  their  gold  ;  and  if  the  allies  prefer 
the  neighbourhood  of  an  unconquerable  and  friendly  nation,  to  an 
uneasy  rule  over  hostile  subjects,  they  have  only  to  speak  the  word. 
Let  but  the  sound  be  heard  which  can  really  awaken  Polish  independ- 
ence,— name  to  them  the  Constitution  of  the  third  of  May,  and 
every  plain  will  be  alive  with  horse — every  thicket  of  their  forests 
gleam  with  spears.  All  that  Napoleon  could  do  by  offers,  insignifi- 
cant had  they  been  sincere,  will  be  forgotten  in  the  exertions  which 
a  substantial  restoration  would  call  forth.  So  impregnable  a 
bulwark  never  was  raised  against  invasion,  as  Russia  would  present 
to  all  the  rest  of  Europe,  while  Prussia  and  Austria  would  no  longer 
touch  upon  that  too  powerful  neighbour,  and  in  a  quarter  where 
their  security  has  been  the  most  precarious."  pp.  47-50.* 

'We  shall  take  a  hasty  farewell  of  this  work  by  going  somewhat 
farther  than  its  author  in  our  anticipations  of  what  will  be  the 
consequences,  should  the  allied  monarchs  not  perform  what  is 

*  '  The  eulogium  of  Mr  Burke  on  the  Polish  Constitution  of  the  third  of  May, 
is  unbounded.  It  concludes  with  this  passage  : — -"Happy  people,  if  they  know  how 
to  proceed  as  they  have  begun  !  Happy  Prince,  worthy  to  begin  with  splendour  or 
to  close  with  glory  a  race  of  patriots  and  of  Kings.  ...  To  finish  all — this  great  good, 
as  in  the  instant  it  is,  contains  in  it  the  seeds  of  all  future  improvement,  and  may 
be  considered  as  in  a  regular  progress,  because  founded  on  similar  principles,  towards 
the  stable  excellence  of  a  British  Constitution." — Appeal  from  the  new  to  the  old 
Whigs. — The  passage  in  the  former  part  of  these  reflections  was  printed,  before  I 
recollected  the  testimony  of  this  great  authority.'  (Note  by  Leigh  Hunt). 

VOL.  II.  S 


274      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

expected  of  them.  In  our  opinion,  they  will  not  only  be  insecure 
from  future  attacks  of  the  enemy,  and  from  the  intrigues  which 
harass  monarchs  in  general,  but  all  that  has  happened  in  Europe  for 
the  last  thirty  years  will  not  save  them  and  their  subjects  from  the 
danger  of  fresh  revolutions  ;  for  if  the  times  at  present  differ  in  any 
one  feature  from  what  they  were  eighty  or  a  hundred  years  back,  it 
is  in  the  direct  rank  that  understanding  has  taken  in  society,  in  the 
universal  circulation  of  intelligence  and  good  sense,  and  in  the 
consequent  and  most  formidable  addition  which  has  been  made  to 
the  power,  and  conscious  power  too,  of  public  opinion.  The  people 
have  looked  at  their  sovereigns,  and  the  sovereigns,  it  is  hoped,  have 
now  looked  at  their  people,  with  eyes  of  mutual  understanding.  It 
is  the  interest  of  both  to  let  this  understanding  be  a  good  one.' 


After  seeing  this  article  M.  Biernacki  wrote 
Leigh  Hunt  a  letter  of  thanks,  which  the  latter  thus 
acknowledged  in  the  Examiner  of  February  6, 
1814: 

'  The  letter  written  in  French  has  been  received, 
and  has  given  the  editor  one  of  those  enjoyments 
which  he  prizes  almost  above  every  other,  and  which 
will  always  be  a  sufficient  reward  to  him  for  what 
little  he  may  be  able  to  do  in  a  good  cause.' 

The  Polish  cause  was  also  warmly  taken  up  by 
Mr  Perry  in  the  Morning  Chronicle  and  Dr  Stoddart 
in  the  Times,  which,  according  to  M.  Biernacki,  was 
'  the  only  paper  the  Prince  Regent  allowed  his 
daughter  to  read  ; '  but  Brougham  did  not  succeed  in 
getting  any  leading  politicians  except  Earl  Grey  to 
advocate  it  in  Parliament,  though  Sir  Samuel  Romilly, 
Wilberforce,  Lord  Lansdowne,  Lord  Holland,  and 
Cobbett,  'le  franc,  le  sauvage,  le  farouche,'  expressed 
the  greatest  sympathy  for  it. 

M.  Biernacki,  who,  like  most  educated  Poles  of 
that  time,  was  fond  of  quoting  Latin,  sent  to  some  of 


TOM  MOORE  275 

his  correspondents  the  following  passage  from  Livy 
as  a  prophetic  description  of  England's  political 
mission  :— Esse  gentem  in  terris  quae  sua  irnpensa  ac 
periculo  bella  gerat  pro  libertate  aliorum,  maria 
trajiciat,  ne  quod  toto  orbe  terrarum  injustum  im- 
perium  sit,  ubique  jus,  fas,  lex  potentissima  sint ; — 
they  did  not,  however,  accept  the  suggestion. 

'  Englishmen,'  says  M*  Biernacki,  '  only  do  one 
thing  at  a  time.  Just  now  they  think  only  of  the  war 
with  France.  .  .  .  It  is  impossible  to  see  the 
Ministers  :  they  fear  the  fate  of  Percival  (his  successor 
especially),  and  are  overwhelmed  with  work ;  two 
messengers  go  to  the  Continent  every  day.  More- 
over, there  is  a  split  in  the  Cabinet.  One  party 
wishes  to  make  peace  at  once  on  the  French  terms  ; 
the  other  wishes  to  carry  on  the  war  in  order  to 
obtain  further  compensation  for  the  sacrifices  England 
has  made.  The  Prince  Recent  favours  the  latter 

O 

party,  as  he  has  made  up  his  mind  to  bring  back  the 
Bourbons.'  The  only  Englishman,  in  fact,  who 
thoroughly  identified  himself  with  the  Polish  cause 
at  that  period  was  Brougham  ;  and  he  threw  himself 
into  the  work  heart  and  soul. 

As  stated  at  the  beginning  of  this  Chapter,  M. 
Biernacki's  diary  is  incomplete  ;  but  it  is  accompanied 
by  a  collection  of  letters  (besides  those  printed  above), 
of  which  the  following  may  be  worth  reproducing  here  : 

From  Tom  Moore. 

MAYFIELD  COTTAGE,  ASHBOURNE, 

Thursday,  Feby.  3rd. 
SIR, — I  believe  I  have  to  thank  you  for  a  very 


276      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

able  pamphlet,  '  An  Appeal  to  the  Allies,'  which  I 
have  just  received  under  a  blank  cover.  It  had  already 
been  sent  to  me  by  a  friend  from  town,  but  I  am  glad 
you  have  given  me  an  opportunity  of  expressing  my 
opinion  of  the  book  through  a  channel  by  which  it 
has  a  chance  of  reaching  the  author  himself;  as  I 
know  that  honest,  sincere  praise,  even  from  so  humble 
an  individual  as  myself,  is  one  of  the  rewards  that 
such  interesting  labours  look  for.  I  have  seldom  seen 
anything  better  meant  or  better  executed. 
Your  very  obliged  st. 

THOMAS  MOORE. 
To  Mr  HARDING, 
Bookseller,  St  James's. 

From  Brougham  to  Mr  Vansittart,  Chancellor  of  the 

Exchequer. 

TEMPLE,  Keby.  21,  1814. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  am  infinitely  unwilling  to  give  you 
the  interruption  of  reading  a  letter  in  the  midst  of 
your  manifold  occupations  at  this  singular  juncture. 
Yet  I  cannot  refrain  from  expressing  my  obligations 
to  you  for  the  patience  with  which  you  listened  to  my 
Polish  friend.  His  situation  is  one  of  extreme 
delicacy — but  as  he  is  one  of  the  most  sincere  and 
devoted  patriots,  so  is  he  likewise  a  person  of  excellent 
sense  and  discretion  in  conduct.  I  am  intimately 
acquainted  with  everything  relating  to  him  and  his 
connections,  and  I  can  give  you  a  most  positive 
assurance  of  his  being  trustworthy. 

He  is  very  anxious  lest  he  should  have  failed  to 
convey  his  meaning  with  distinctness,  and  has  begged 


BROUGHAM  277 

me  to  repeat  several  things  for  him  ;  but  I  am  quite 
sure  his  fears  are  groundless,  and  I  shall  confine 
myself  to  a  single  remark — viz.,  on  the  extreme  im- 
portance of  any,  even  the  smallest,  interest  being  shown 
with  respect  to  the  unfortunate  country  in  question. 
Its  possessors  (especially  Alexander)  look  to  England 
a  vast  deal  more  than  they  will  always  acknowledge 
when  they  are  treating  with  you.  They  regard  the 
publick  opinion  here  almost  as  much  as  our  own  Govern- 
ment does,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  fact  that  they  are 
influenced  by  it  in  the  same  way,  though  certainly  they 
are  not  very  mindful  of  the  publick  opinion  among  their 
own  subjects.  How  much  more,  then,  do  they  con- 
sider any  expression  of  opinion  or  feeling  on  the  part 
of  our  Government !  It  is  very  certain  that  the  mere 
exhibition  of  some  little  interest  (however  little  and 
however  privately)  in  favour  of  the  Poles,  could  it  be 
made  at  the  present  time,  would  have  great,  immedi- 
ate, and  very  practical  effects  on  the  happiness  of 
many  millions  of  people.  I  suspect  the  Emperor 
Alexander  at  least  desires  nothing  more  in  that 
quarter  than  the  authority  of  our  Government  to  back 
him  with  his  allies  on  the  one  hand,  and  his  nobles  on 
the  other,  to  adopt  a  more  paternal  system. 

But  all  these  things  (as  well  as  the  larger  view  of 
the  subject)  are  undoubtedly  familiar  to  you.  I  would 
therefore  only  further  suggest  that  there  are  one  or 
two  topics  on  which  you  will  derive  some  most  curious 
and  interesting  particulars  from  the  Polish  gentleman. 
The  commercial  resources,  yet  unexplained,  of  his 
country  I  pass  over  as  an  obvious  point.  But  he  is 
possessed  of  some  extremely  singular  circumstances 


278       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

respecting  Buonaparte  and  his  proceedings  both  in 
Poland  and  elsewhere,  and  if  you  remember  to  put 
him  on  the  subject  (especially  of  Buonaparte's  con- 
ferences after  his  return  from  Moscow)  and  he  should 
not  be  afraid  of  indicating  the  sources  of  his  informa- 
tion, his  account  of  it  will  greatly  interest  you. 

I  again  beg  your  excuse  for  the  interruption,  and 
wishing  you  all  manner  of  success  in  your  present 
undertakings  (which  a  person  retired  from  politicks 
may  very  conscientiously  do  at  this  time),  I  remain, 
yours  faithfully  and  sincerely,  H.  B. 

A  single  word  addressed  to  me  containing  the  time 
you  desire  to  see  him,  and  without  giving  you  the 
trouble  of  writing  a  note,  will  at  any  moment  bring 
him  to  you. 

Brougham  to  M.  Biernacki. 

LANCASTER,  ce  7me  Mars  1814. 

MONSIEUR, — Je  n'ai  fini  mon  voyage  que  ce  matin 
et  vous  voyez  que  je  profite  de  la  premiere  occasion 
qui  se  m'est  presentee  pour  ecrire  la  lettre  au  P. — 
Je  1'ai  envoyee  ouverte  afin  que  vous  puissiez  la  lire 
avant  de  la  cacheter. 

Le  jour  meme  de  mon  depart  j'ai  addresse  une 
lettre  au  Marquis  de  Lansdowne,  en  le  renvoyant  a  M. 
Baring  et  MM.  Romilly  et  Elliot  pour  les  details. 
Je  1'ai  remis  entre  les  mains  de  M.  Baring,  qui  ne 
tardera  pas  (a)  vous  presenter  au  Marquis.  Ce  que 
je  lui  ai  dit  doit  1'interesser  autant  qu'il  est  possible 
dans  la  bonne  cause.  Apres  Favoir  vu  (si  §a  vous 
convient  a  vous  et  a  M.  B.)  vous  devez  croire  que  la 


BROUGHAM  279 

semence  est  semde,  et  que  Ton  a  fait  tout  ce  qu'il 
vous  a  etc  permis  de  faire  dans  les  circonstances 
actuelles.  Je  suis  intimement  persuade  que  nous  ne 
ferons  que  du  trial  en  entamant  des  autres  communica- 
tions dans  ce  moment. 

J'espere  que  votre  sante*  est  re'tablie,  et  que  vous 
etes  content  de  M.  Tegart.  Je  me  suis  accusd  bien  de 
fois  de  votre  maladie.  Je  crains  que  je  ne  vous  ai  fait 
trop  travailler.  Le  repos  et  la  maladie  me  sont  presqu' 
inconnus,  et  j'avois  du  menager  votre  sante'  un  peu 
plus  que  je  ne  soigne  la  mienne.  Faites  moi  le  plaisir 
de  ni'ecrire,  et  de  me  marquer  votre  retablissement. 

J'avais  oublie  de  vous  prier  de  m'ecrire  de  la 
Hollande  tout  ce  que  vous  aurez  a  rernarquer,  et  de 
me  faire  venir  de  vos  nouvelles  regulierement.  Apres 
avoir  quitte  la  Hollande,  vous  pouvez  addresser  vos 
lettres  a  Mons.  Van  H.  a  la  Have,  en  le  priant  de  me 
les  faire  passer.  Encore  une  chose — n'oubliez  pas  les 
moyens  d'entretenir  les  liaisons  entre  les  deux  pays,  par 
les  voyages  dont  nous  avons  cause — et  les  avantages 
que  procurera  a  vos  grands  une  education  Anglaise. 

Adieu.  Portez-vous  bien,  et  croyez  que  je  suis 
toujours,  etc.  H.  B. 

YORK,  ce  24  Mars  1814. 

MONSIEUR, — Je  viens  de  recevoir  votre  derniere 
lettre,  ayant  il  y  a  deux  jours  re§u  celle  qui  m'avoit 
suivi  de  Brougham  ou  (par  contretems)  on  1'avoit 
envoyee. 

Je  vous  rernets  la  conclusion  de  la  lettre  de  M. 
von  H.  qui  regarde  la  Pologne,  selon  votre  desire,* 

*  Sic  in  oriff. 


aSo      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

aussi  ai-je  ajoute"  un  extrait  de  celle  que  je  viens  de 
recevoir  de  M.  Van  Grendown  sur  ce  rneme  sujet.  Je 
me  confie  entierement  a  votre  discretion  (qui  m'est  si 
bien  connue)  que  ces  extraits  ne  parviennent  &  personne 
excepter*  le  P.,  et  que  vous  me  le  fassiez  parvenir 
quand  vous  en  aurez  1'occasion. 

J'avais  oublie  de  vous  niarquer  une  circonstance 
touchant  la  discussion  des  affaires  Polonoises  k  Liver- 
pool. Les  essais  qui  y  paraissent  dans  les  journaux 
de  mon  parti  viennent  (a  ce  qu'on  me  dit)  des  personnes 
tout  k  fait  inconnues  des  chefs  du  dit  parti,  fa 
prouve  au  moins  que  la  discussion  commence  a  prendre. 
J'en  ai  vu  des  autres  preuves. 

J'ai  engag^  M.  Jeffrey  a  ecrire  quelque  chose 
pour  vous  dans  son  numero  qui  doit  paraitre  &  la  fin 
d'Avril.t  La  publication  du  dernier  numero  a  eu  lieu 
ici,  et  a  Edinbourg  depuis  la  quinzaine. 

Je  crois  que  vous  faites  bien  de  partir  le  plutot 
possible.  Tout  est  prepare  ici.  La  semence  est 
semee,  et  je  serai  toujours  sur  le  qui  vive  pour  en 
recueillir  les  fruits.  Avant  la  discussion  des  negotia- 
tions il  n'y  aura  rien  d'interessant  dans  le  parle- 
ment. 

N'oubliez  pas  de  me  donner  de  vos  nouvelles,  avec 
tous  les  renseignements  que  vous  pourrez  de  terns  en 
terns.  H.  B. 

LONDRES,  ce  27  Avril  1814. 

MONSIEUR. — Ne  sachant  pas  exactement  si  vous 
vous  trouvez  encore  a  la  Haye,  je  n'entrerai  pas  dans 
les  details  de  notre  sujet. 

*  Sic  in  orig. 
t  The  articles  appeared  in  the  Edinburgh  Iteriew  of  September  1814. 


BROUGHAM  281 

Mais  je  crois  que  vous  serez  bien  aise  d'apprendre 
que  Lord  Grey  (sans  la  moindre  communication  avec 
moi)  a  entame'  ]a  discussion  sur  la  Pologne  dans  la 
Chambre  Haute  il  y  a  dix  jours.  La  mention  qu'il  en 
a  faite  a  ete  tres-bien  recue  et  applaudie  de  tout  cote. 
II  Fa  fait  d'une  maniere  tres-imposante  et  avec  beau- 
coup  d'adresse  et  de  menagement  pour  FEmpereur  de 
Russie.  Comme  je  vis  dans  la  societe  de  Lord  G. 
presque  journellement,  et  que  je  jouis  de  son  amitie'  et 
de  sa  confiance  dans  toutes  les  affaires  publiques,  je 
suis  persuade  qu'il  me  soup9onne  d'avoir  commence  la 
discussion  du  sujet,  et  que  j'ai  quelque  raison  pour  ne 
pas  1'avoir  entame  avec  lui,  car  il  ne  m'a  jamais  dit  un 
mot  la-dessus. 

Dans  la  societe  je  vois  assez  claireuient  que 
1'interet  va  toujours  en  accroissant,  et  que  nous 
pourrons  esperer  quelque  bon  resultat.  Je  ne  vais 
presque  jamais  dans  les  cercles  sans  entendre  prononcer 
le  nom  de  la  Pologne,  et  toujours  dans  le  meilleur  sens. 

ficrivez-moi,  et  croyez  que  je  suis  toujours,  etc., 

H.  BROUGHAM. 

Par  une  betise  impardonnable  quelques-uns  des 
journaux,  en  publiant  le  discours  de  Lord  G.,  ont  mis 
'  Courland  '  au  lieu  de  '  Poland.'  Us  1'ont  corrige  apres. 

Les  Quakers  etc.,  dans  leur  journal  ( The  Philan- 
thropist) ont  bien  rempli  leur  devoir  vis  a  vis  de  notre 
cause. 

FROM  SIR  SAMUEL  ROMILLY  TO  M.  BIERNACKI. 

RUSSELL  SQUARE, 

Mar.  22,  1814. 
SIR, — I  return  you  many  thanks  for  a  sight  of  the 


282       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

enclosed  papers,  which  I  have  read  with  very  great 
interest.  No  person  can  be  more  sensible  than  I  am 
of  the  wrongs  which  Poland  has  suffered,  or  more  con- 
vinced of  the  bad  policy  as  well  as  the  injustice  of  the 
conduct  of  all  the  States  of  Europe  towards  her. — I 
remain,  Sir,  with  great  respect,  Your  most  obedient 
and  faithful  servant, 

SAML.  ROMILLY. 


CHAPTER  XXII 

1814-15 

THE    VIENNA    CONGRESS. 

WHILE  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  was  endeavouring 
through  his  secretary  to  obtain  the  support  for  his 
country  of  public  opinion  in  England,  the  allies  pur- 
sued their  campaign  against  Napoleon  with  undi- 
minished  success.  The  crushing  defeat  of  Leipzig 
(October  18,  1813)  was  rapidly  followed  by  the  inva- 
sion of  France,  the  occupation  of  Paris  by  the  allied 
troops  (March  31,  1814)  and  the  abdication  of  Napo- 
leon at  Fontainebleau  (April  4,  1814).  The  Emperor 
Alexander,  who  had  granted  an  amnesty  to  all  the 
Poles  who  had  fought  against  him  under  Napoleon 
in  the  campaign  of  1812,  now  reverted  to  his  former 
plan  of  reconstructing  Poland  as  a  separate  State  under 
his  sceptre,  and  invited  his  old  friend  and  counsellor 
to  assist  him  in  executing  it.  Alexander  was  accom- 
panied by  Prince  Adam  in  his  visit  to  London  before 
the  Vienna  Congress,  and  in  a  despatch  preserved  in 
the  Record  Office,  dated  'Paris,  May  23,  1814,' 
General  Cathcart,  then  British  Ambassador  to  the 
Russian  Court,  informs  Lord  Castlereagh  that  '  the 
Emperor  has  been  pleased  this  day  to  add  the  name 


284       MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

of  Prince  Adam  Czartorisky  (sic)  to  the  list  of  persons 
who  are  to  attend  him  to  London.' 

When  the  Congress  met  at  Vienna  in  October 
1814,  Poland  was  the  first  object  of  its  deliberations, 
and  Prince  Adam  played  so  prominent  a  part  in  them 
that  Lord  Castlereagh  wrote  to  Lord  Liverpool  that 
the  Prince,  '  although  not  in  any  official  situation, 
appears  now  the  actual  Russian  Minister,  at  least  on 
Polish  and  Saxon  questions.'*  The  chief  objections  to 
the  Emperor's  proposal  to  restore  Poland  were, 
strange  to  say,  not  made  by  Austria  and  Prussia, 
whose  Polish  possessions  would  under  that  proposal 
have  been  united  to  the  new  Polish  kingdom,  but  by 
Lord  Castlereagh,  on  the  plea  that  the  creation  of 
such  a  kingdom  under  the  sceptre  of  the  Emperor  of 
Russia  would  make  Russia  too  strong.  He  would 
readily  consent  to  the  restoration  of  Poland  as  an 
independent  State  with  a  sovereign  of  her  own  ;  but 
knowing  that  this  was  too  great  a  sacrifice  to  be 
expected  of  Russia,  he  insisted  on  the  maintenance  of 
the  partition.! 

*  Despatch  of  the  24th  December,  1814  (in  the  Record  Office).  In  another 
despatch,  dated  the  5th  November,  1814,  Lord  Castlereagh  says :  'The  day  but  one 
after  the  return  of  the  sovereigns  from  Buda,  the  enclosed  communication  was 
delivered  to  me  by  an  aide-de-camp  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia.  It  was  prepared 
during  his  Imperial  Majesty's  absence  by  Prince  Czartoryski,  the  memorandum  being 
written  in  concert  with  him  by  M.  Anstetem,  a  Conseiller  d'Etat  in  the  bureau.  I 
have  reason  to  believe  that  Count  Nesselrode  was  not  consulted.  The  Emperor  has 
latterly,  ou  the  question  of  Poland,  ceased  to  act  through  his  regular  servants.  It  is 
unfortunately  his  habit  to  be  his  own  Minister,  and  to  select  as  the  instrument  of  his 
immediate  purpose,  the  person  who  may  happen  to  fall  in  most  with  his  views.  This 
has  been  particularly  the  case  on  the  present  question,  all  the  Russians,  I  believe 
without  an  exception,  being  adverse  to  his  projects,  considering  them  both  as 
dangerous  to  himself  and  injurious  to  his  allies.' 

t  'Up  to  the  period  of  the  Congress  of  Vienna,  no  British  statesman  had  ever  set 
his  hand  to  an  instrument  acknowledging,  as  valid  acts,  the  two  partitions  of 
Poland.  Had  the  British  Plenipotentiary  founded  his  objections  upon  this  principle 
— had  he  positively  refused  to  commit  his  Government  to  any  such  acknowledgment, 
and  had  he  insisted  on  the  erection  of  an  independent  Polish  State,  he  would,  to  use 
his  own  words,  have  been  applauded  by  the  whole  of  Europe,  whilst  Austria  and 


TEE  VIENNA  CONGRESS  285 

An  angry  correspondence  followed  between  the 
British  Plenipotentiary  and  the  Emperor,  and  at 
length  the  attitude  of  the  latter  and  his  Prussian 
ally  (who  hoped  to  get  Saxony  as  a  compensation 
for  the  loss  of  his  Polish  possessions)  became  so 
threatening  that  England,  France,  and  Austria,  by  a 
secret  treaty  signed  on  the  3rd  of  January  1815, 
entered  into  a  defensive  alliance  binding  themselves 
each  to  bring,  if  necessary,  150,000  men  into  the  field. 

Prussia  would  not  only  not  have  opposed  it,  but,  on  the  contrary,  would  have 
acquiesced  in  it  with  pleasure. 

'  Backed  by  such  powerful  support,  as  well  as  by  the  voice  of  public  opinion 
throughout  Europe,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  he  might  have  been  successful : 
but  the  moment  he  gave  up  this  principle,  and  told  the  Emperor  that  he  was  not 
indisposed  to  witness,  even  with  satisfaction,  that  his  Imperial  Majesty  should 
receive  a  liberal  and  important  aggrandizement  on  his  Polish  frontier,  and  that  it 
was  to  the  degree  and  the  mode  to  which  he  alone  objected,  he  threw  away  the  only 
weapon  which  he  could  successfully  wield.  The  greater  point  was  attainable,  but 
the  abandonment  of  the  greater  was  fatal  to  the  attainment  of  the  less.  There  was 
—there  could  be — no  answer  to  the  following  argument  of  the  Emperor  as  to  the 
share  of  the  spoil,  considered  as  a  matter  of  spoil,  to  which  he  was  entitled  :  "  Mais 
lorsque  1'Autriche  et  la  Prusse  ont  contribue,  comme  alliees  de  la  France,  a  depouiller 
la  Russie  de  la  plus  grande  partie  des  provinces  Polonaises ;  quand  la  Russie  a  et& 
obligee  de  les  reconquerir ;  lorsque  la  conquete  du  Duche  de  Varsovie  devient 
aujourd'hui  une  compensation  pour  d'enormes  sacrifices  :  il  s'agit  effectivement  d'un 
nouveau  partage,  et  dans  ce  cas,  les  stipulations  qui  ont  accompagne  celui  de  1797 
n'existent  plus." 

'  Had  Lord  Castlereagh  denounced  the  original,  as  well  as  the  proposed,  partage, 
instead  of  making  appeals  ad  misericordiam,  his  remonstrances  might  have  been 
effectual.  But  it  was  of  no  avail  to  tell  the  Emperor  that  he  was  exacting  from  his 
neighbours  and  allies  an  arrangement  incompatible  with  their  political  independence, 
and  that  the  demand  by  Russia  to  retain  so  large  a  share  of  Poland  as  that  to  which 
the  Emperor  laid  claim,  was  a  source  of  consternation  and  alarm  to  Austria  and 
Prussia  and  of  general  terror  throughout  all  the  States  of  Europe. 

'  His  Imperial  Majesty's  Austrian  and  Prussian  allies  had  no  claim  upon  his  for- 
bearance, and  it  was  impossible  to  defeat  the  Emperor's  claims  when,  on  the  principle 
on  which  they  were  made,  no  one  could  deny  their  justice. 

'  The  partition  being  admitted,  the  degree  and  the  mode  could  only  be  decided  by 
the  will  of  that  party  whose  claims  were  the  strongest,  and  whose  power  was 
adequate  to  support  the  claims.  The  result  was,  that  Great  Britain  accepted  the 
partition  as  a  fait  accompli,  and  that  Russia  obtained  almost  all  that  she  asked  for. 

'Mr  Cook,  a  man  of  considerable  ability  and  firmness,  who  was  Under-Secretary 
in  the  Foreign  Office,  and  who  accompanied  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Vienna,  endeavoured 
in  vain  to  rouse  his  chief  to  an  uncompromising  condemnation  of  the  two  partitions. 
He  urged  him  to  fling  the  treaties  on  the  table  of  Congress,  and  to  declare  that 
nothing  should  induce  Great  Britain  to  acknowledge  the  validity  of  those  acts.  He 
urged  in  vain  ;  but  he  set  the  seal  on  the  sincerity  of  his  own  opinions,  by  resigning 
at  once  his  post  of  Under-Secretary  of  State.  He  was  succeeded  in  Vienna  by  Mr 
Planta.'  ("  George  Canning  and  his  Times,"  by  Augustus  Granville  Stapleton,  p.  354.) 


286       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSK1 

Ultimately,  however,  concessions  were  made  on  both 
sides,  and  the  result  was  that  by  the  Treaty  of 
Vienna  (signed  on  the  25th  of  February  1815)  Posen 
was  given  to  Prussia,  and  Galicia  (except  Cracow, 
which  was  to  be  a  free  town)  to  Austria,  and  the 
remainder  of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw  was  made  a 
kingdom  '  irrevocably  attached  by  its  Constitution  '  to 
the  Russian  Empire,  and  with  the  Czar  as  its  King. 
It  was  also  stipulated  that  '  all  parts  of  ancient 
Poland,  as  it  existed  before  the  year  1772,'  should 
enjoy  the  right  of  free  navigation  and  trade,  and  that 
all  its  inhabitants,  whether  subjects  of  Russia, 
Austria,  or  Prussia,  shall  obtain  '  a  representation ' 
and  '  institutions  which  shall  ensure  the  preservation 
of  their  nationality.'  Thus  did  Europe,  while  stipu- 
lating for  the  preservation  of  the  Polish  nationality 
over  the  whole  of  ancient  Poland,  give  the  sanction  of 
public  law  to  a  partition  which  Prince  Talleyrand 
described  as  '  the  prelude,  in  part  perhaps  the  cause, 
and  even  to  a  certain  extent  the  excuse,  of  the 
disorders  to  which  Europe  had  been  a  prey.'* 

Lord  Castlereagh's  despatches  on  the  subject  will 
be  found  in  the  '  Correspondence  relating  to  the 
negotiations  of  the  years  1814  and  1815  respecting 
Poland'  which  was  presented  to  Parliament  in  1863. 
The  following  extracts  from  memoranda  drawn  up  at 

*  '  De  toutes  les  questions  qui  devaient  etre  traitees  au  Congres,  le  Roi  aurait 
considere  commela  premiere,  la  plus  grande,la  plus  eminemment  Europeenne,  comme 
hors  de  comparaison  avec  toute  autre,  celle  de  Pologne,  s'il  lui  cut  6te"  possible 
d'espe"rer  autant  qu'il  le  de'sirait,  qu'un  peuple  si  digne  de  1'interet  de  tous  les  autres 
par  son  anciennete",  sa  valeur,  les  services  qu'il  rendit  autre  fois  a  1'Europe,  et  par  son 
infortune,  put  etre  rcndu  a  son  antique  et  complete  inde"pendance.  Le  partage  qui 
la  raya  du  nombre  des  nations  fut  le  prelude,  en  partie  la  cause,  et  peut-etre  jusqu'a 
un  certain  point  l'excuse,'des  bouleversements  auxquels  1'Europe  a  et£  eii  proie.'  (Note 
to  Prince  Metternicb,  dated  19th  December  1814). 


THE  VIENNA  CONGRESS  287 

the  time  by   Prince   Czartoryski    show  some   of  the 
arguments  on  the  Russian  side  of  the  question  :— 

'  Hitherto  experience  has  always  proved  that 
people  who  are  unhappy  and  dissatisfied  are  usually 
restless,  and  that  the  surest  way  of  keeping  people 
quiet  is  to  make  them  contented.  There  is  no  reason 
to  believe  that  such  a  universal  and  infallible  means  of 
pacification  would  not  succeed  with  the  Poles,  who 
have  certainly  shown  themselves  very  active  and 
stirring ;  but  all  their  energy  has  been  directed  to  a 
single  object,  that  of  recovering  their  name,  their 
Government,  and  their  nationality.  It  is  difficult  to 
understand  why  people  should  when  speaking  of  the 
Poles  call  that  "  levity  "  which  in  speaking  of  other 
nations  they  call  "  patriotism  and  perseverance."  Such 
a  misuse  of  words  may  lead  to  false  conclusions,  and 
there  is  not  the  slightest  probability  that  the  Poles, 
after  obtaining  the  essence  of  their  demands,  should 
only  become  the  more  turbulent  and  disorderly.  His 
Imperial  Majesty  is  convinced,  after  many  years' 
experience,  that  all  classes  in  Poland  have  the  same 
wish,  and  he  has  had  a  new  proof  of  this  in  the 
addresses  which  have  been  sent  him  from  all  parts  of 
the  Duchy  of  Warsaw.  .  .  . 

'  His  Majesty,  after  much  consideration,  has 
arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  plan  he  proposes 
would  be  the  best  in  the  interest  of  Europe  generally. 
By  it  he  would  keep  acquisitions  which  he  cannot  give 
up,  but  he  would  so  organise  his  possessions  as  to 
secure  peace  to  his  neighbours  and  to  Europe. 

'  Suppose  the  name  of  the  kingdom  of  Poland  is  re- 
stored, and  part  of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw  is  reunited  to 


288      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Russia.  This  could  not  in  any  sense  be  dangerous  to 
Austria  or  Prussia,  for  the  Emperor  would  guarantee 
to  them  the  possession  of  their  parts  of  Poland,  and 
the  slightest  attempt  to  recover  them  would  be 
opposed  by  Austria,  Prussia,  France,  and  England, 
leaving  Russia  entirely  isolated.  .  .  It  is  not  a  little 
more  or  less  territory  or  fortresses  that  constitutes 
the  balance  of  power  ;  it  is  the  parity  of  interests 
which  produces  combinations  in  the  hour  of  danger 
that  are  far  more  formidable  and  effective  than  mere 
arrangements  of  frontier.' 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

1815 

LETTERS  FROM  JEREMY  BENTHAM. 

SIR  JOHN  BOWRING,  in  his  Memoirs  of  Jeremy  Bentham 
(vol  x,  page  478,  of  the  collected  works)  says  that 
'  Bentharn's  hopes  of  being  allowed  to  prepare  a  code 
for  Russia  were  at  this  time  (1815)  strongly  excited. 
His  name  and  writings  were  very  popular  in  that 
country.  He  had  himself  some — his  brother,  who  had 
been  so  long  in  the  Russian  service,  many — influential 
friends  at  the  Court  of  the  Czar.  Dumont  had  lived 
long  at  St  Petersburg,  and  his  reputation  and  his 
labours  were  so  associated  with  those  of  his  master, 
that  strong  expectations  were  indulged  that  authority 
to  prepare  a  Code  would  be  communicated  to  him. 
The  Emperor  Alexander,  who  was  fond  of  being  con- 
sidered the  patron  and  protector  of  literary  and  learned 
men,  sent  to  Bentham  a  diamond  ring,  which  Bentham 
returned  to  the  Imperial  donor,  with  the  seal  of  the 
box  that  contained  it  unbroken.  His  conduct  has 
been  deemed  ungracious,  but  without  reason.  He 
cared  nothing  about  diamond  rings  ;  but  he  desired  to 
legislate  for  the  good  of  the  Russian  people.  The 
Emperor  would  have  had  him  communicate  his 

VOL.  II,  T 


290      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

observations — or  rather  reply  to  the  questionings  of  a 
commission  appointed  to  revise  the  Russian  Codes. 
But  Bentham  knew  that  commission  to  be  wholly 
incompetent  to  the  work  ;  and  its  President,  upon 
whom  everything  depended,  was  peculiarly  unfitted 
for  his  task,  so  that  Bentham  refused  to  take  any 
share  in  a  drama  of  feebleness  and  insincerity.' 

The  following  letters  were  addressed  by  Bentham 
to  the  Czar  and  Prince  Czartoryski  on  this  subject : — 

To  the  Emperor  of  all  the  Russias. 

SIRE, — The  object  of  this  address  is  to  submit  to 
your  Imperial  Majesty  an  offer  relative  to  the  depart- 
ment of  legislation. 

My  years  are  sixty-six.  Without  commission 
from  any  government,  not  much  fewer  than  fifty  of 
them  have  been  occupied  in  that  field.  My  ambition 
is  to  employ  the  remainder  of  them,  as  far  as  can  be 
done  in  this  country,  in  labouring  towards  the  im- 
provement of  the  state  of  that  branch  of  government 
in  your  Majesty's  vast  Empire. 

In  the  year  1802,  a  work  extracted,  as  therein 
mentioned,  from  my  papers,  was  by  Mr  Dumont  of 
Geneva,  published  at  Paris  in  nine  vols.  8vo.,  under 
the  title  of  '  Traite"  de  Legislation  Civile  et  Penale,'  etc. 

In  the  year  1805  a  translation  of  it  into  the 
Russian  language  was  published  at  St  Petersburg, 
(by  order,  if  I  am  rightly  informed,  of  your  Majesty's 
Government). 

Since  the  publication  of  that  work  Europe  has 
seen  two  extensive  bodies  of  law  promulgated  within 
its  limits  :  one  by  the  French  Emperor,  the  other  by 


LETTERS  FROM  JEREMY  BE  NT II AM  291 

the  King  of  Bavaria.  These  two  are  the  only  bodies 
of  law  of  any  such  considerable  extent  that  have  made 
their  appearance  within  the  last  half-century.  Of  the 
one  promulgated  by  the  French  Emperor,  a  complete 
penal  code  formed  a  part.  In  the  preface  to  that 
authoritative  work,  my  unauthoritative  one  is  men- 
tioned with  honour :  among  the  dead  Montesquieu, 
Beccaria,  and  Blackstone;  among  living  names  (unless 
it  be  for  some  matter  of  fact)  none  but  mine.  In  the 
Bavarian  code  drawn  up  by  Mr  Bexon,  much  more 
particular  as  well  as  copious  mention  is  made  of  that 
work  of  mine,  much  more  eulogy  bestowed  upon  it. 

In  France  under  the  immediate  rod  of  Napoleon, 
in  Bavaria  under  the  influence  of  Napoleon,  the  gen- 
erosity displayed  by  the  notice  thus  taken  of  the 
work  of  a  living  Englishman  could  not  but  call  forth 
my  admiration. 

Approbation  is  one  thing ;  adoption  is  another. 
With  mine  before  them,  both  these  modern  works 
took  for  their  basis  the  jurisprudence  of  ancient  Rome. 
Russia  at  any  rate  needs  not  any  such  incumbrance. 

In  the  texture  of  the  human  frame,  some  fibres 
there  are  which  are  the  same  in  all  places  and  at  all 
times,  others  which  vary  with  the  place  and  with  the 
time.  For  those  last  it  has  been  among  my  constant 
and  pointedly  manifested  cares  to  look  out  and  provide. 

Of  the  particularities  of  Russia  I  am  not  altogether 
without  experience.  Two  of  the  most  observant  years 
of  my  life  were  passed  within  her  limits. 

Codes  upon  the  French  pattern  are  already  in  full 
view.  Speak  the  word,  Sire, — Russia  shall  produce  a 
pattern  of  her  own,  and  then  let  Europe  judge. 


292      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

To  Russia,  it  is  true,  I  am  a  foreigner,  yet  to  this 
purpose  scarcely  more  so  than  a  Courlander,  a  Livo- 
nian,  or  a  Finlander.  In  point  of  local  knowledge  to 
place  me  on  a  level  with  a  native  of  Russia — to  me 
as  to  them — information  in  various  shapes  could  not 
but  be  necessary.  Any  such  assistance  no  person 
could  ever  be  more  ready  to  supply  than  I  should  be 
solicitous  to  receive  and  profit  by  it. 

In  my  above  mentioned  work  a  sample  of  a  penal 
code  is  exhibited.  In  the  first  place  what  I  should 
humbly  propose  is,  to  do  what  remains  to  be  done  for 
the  completion  of  it.  For  this  purpose  not  many 
months  would,  I  hope,  be  necessary. 

Sovereign  and  father — in  this  double  character  it  is 
on  all  occasions  your  Majesty's  wish  and  delight  to 
show  yourself  to  your  people.  In  this  same  character, 
even  on  the  rough  and  thorny  ground  of  penal  law — in 
this  same  happily  compounded  character,  addressing 
them  through  my  pen,  your  Majesty  would  still  show 
yourself  the  sovereign  by  his  commands,  the  father  by 
his  instructions ;  the  sovereign  not  more  intent  on 
establishing  the  necessary  obligations,  than  the  father 
on  rendering  the  necessity  manifest,  manifest  to  all 
men,  and  at  every  step  he  takes  thus  justifying  him- 
self in  their  sight. 

Reasons. — Yet  it  is  by  reasons  that  a  task  at  once 
so  salutary  and  so  arduous  can  be  accomplished  :— 
reasons  connected  and  that  by  an  indiscontinued  chain 
of  references,  on  the  one  hand  with  the  general 
principles  from  which  they  have  been  deduced,  on  the 
other  hand,  with  the  several  clauses  and  ivords  in  the 
text  of  the  law,  for  the  justification,  and  at  the  same 


LETTERS  FROM  JEREMY  BENTHAM  293 

time  for  the  elucidation  of  which  they  have  been 
respectively  framed.  An  accompaniment  of  this 
kind  would  form  one  of  the  peculiarities  of  my 
Code :  a  sample  is  given  in  my  above  mentioned 
treatise. 

This  sample  was  a  challenge  to  legislators  :  the 
well-intentioned  but  strictly  shackled  Frenchmen 
shrunk  from  it.  How  acutely  sensible  they  were  of 
the  usefulness  of  such  an  accompaniment,  how  they 
wished  and  how  they  feared  to  expose  their  works  to 
so  searching  a  test — how  they  tasked  themselves  to 
produce  a  sort  of  substitute  test — (I  mean  a  mass  of 
vague  generalities  left  floating  in  the  air,  and  destitute 
of  all  application  to  particulars) — how  sadly  inadequate 
is  that  substitute — what  excuse  is  given  for  the  defici- 
ency, and  how  lame  is  that  excuse — all  this  may  be 
seen  in  their  respective  works. 

All  comprehensiveness,  conciseness,  uniformity,  and 
simplicity—  qualities  the  union  of  which  is  at  once  so 
desirable  and  so  difficult — such,  as  far  as  concerns  the 
choice  of  words,  are  the  qualities  for  which  the  nature 
of  the  work  seems  to  present  a  demand.  To  infuse 
them  into  it,  each  in  the  highest  degree  which  the 
necessary  regard  to  the  rest  admits  of,  would,  on  this 
as  on  all  similar  occasions  it  has  been,  be  to  my  mind 
an  object  of  unremitting  .solicitude.  With  what 
promise  of  success,  let  the  above  mentioned  sample 
speak.  Whoever  sees  that  one  part,  sees  to  all  such 
purposes  the  whole. 

In  the  midst  of  war,  and  without  interruption  to 
the  successes  or  to  the  evils  of  war,  a  line  or  two  from 
your  Majesty's  hand  would  suffice  to  give  commence- 


294      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ment  to  the  work,  to  this  the  greatest  of  all  the  works 
of  peace. 

As  to  remuneration,  the  honour  of  the  proposed 
employ,  joined  to  such  satisfaction  as  would  be  in- 
separable from  that  honour,  compose  the  only  reward 
which  my  situation  renders  necessary — the  only  one 
which  my  way  of  thinking  would  allow  me  to  accept. 

With  all  the  respect  of  which  the  nature  of  this 
address  conveys  so  much  fuller  an  assurance  than  can 
be  conveyed  by  any  customary  form  of  words,  my 
endeavour  would  be  to  approve  myself,  Sire,  your 
Imperial  Majesty's  ever  faithful  servant, 

(Signed)     JEREMY  BENTHAM. 

To  Prince  Czartoryski. 

Q  itccn  quare  Place,  Westminster, 

2lst  June  1815. 

DEAR  SIR, — For  one  thing  I  must  begin  with 
casting  myself  upon  the  Emperor's  forgiveness  as  well 
as  yours  ;  that  is  the  enormous  length  of  time  (upwards 
of  a  month),  that  has  intervened  between  my  receiving 
of  the  two  letters,  and  the  despatching  of  these  my 
answers.  Another  thing  for  which,  likewise,  I  must 
beg  your  indulgence,  is — the  rough  state  in  which  I 
am  reduced  to  send  a  copy  of  mine  to  the  Emperor, 
for  your  use. 

Both  trespasses  have  their  source  in  an  engage- 
ment under  which  the  letter  found  me  :  viz.  that  of 
drawing  up  for  this  country,  for  the  use  of  a  voluntary 
association,  a  plan  of  National  Education,  in  relation 
to  which  I  may  perhaps  take  the  liberty  of  troubling 
you  with  a  few  words  before  the  close  of  the  present 


LETTERS  FROM  JEREMY  BE  NT II  AM  295 

letter ;  or  at  any  rate  by  the  next  messenger :  the 
whole  business  was  in  danger  of  being  put  a  stop  to 
for  an  indefinite  length  of  time  had  I  not  devoted  my- 
self exclusively  to  it.  As  to  your  copy  (I  mean  of  my 
letter  to  the  Emperor)  I  hope  you  will  find  it  legible,  as 
consistently  with  my  engagements,  time  could  not  be 
found  for  the  copying  and  revisal  of  another  fair  one. 

As  to  the  original,  you,  as  well  as  he,  will  (I  fear) 
be  sadly  annoyed  by  it,  were  it  only  for  the  length  of 
it.  It  was,  however,  absolutely  necessary  I  should 
speak  out,  and  I  saw  no  hope  of  being  able  so  to  do,  to 
any  purpose,  in  any  lesser  compass.  I  hear  it  said  every- 
where that  he  is  a  good-natured  man :  by  what  you 
will  find  me  saying  to  him,  that  quality  will  be  put  to 
the  test.  From  me,  if  he  has  patience  enough,  he 
may  thus  read,  what  from  a  man  in  any  other 
situation,  it  is  not  in  the  nature  of  things  that  he 
should  either  read  or  hear. 

A  bandage  on  his  eyes — leading  strings  on  his 
shoulders — on  this  part  of  the  field  of  Government, 
such  has  hitherto  been  his  costume.  My  aim  is  to 
rid  him  of  those  appendages  :  is  it  possible  he  should 
forgive  me  ?  Forgive  me  or  not,  that  is  not  the  point: 
that  he  should  suffer  himself  to  be  rid  of  them,  that  is 
the  one  thing  needful. 

I  hope  this  will  not  draw  you  into  a  scrape ;  a 
scrape  on  your  part  so  perfectly  undeserved :  for  no 
such  thing  as  a  tale  out  of  school  have  I  ever  had  from 
you. 

If,  by  any  thing  I  have  said,  an  end  should  be  put, 
not  only  to  that  correspondence,  but  to  another  which 
is  so  truly  flattering  to  me,  I  shall  be  truly  sorry  ;  but 


296       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

it  was  necessary  to  run  the  risk,  for  I  think  you  will 
agree  with  me  that  whether  ivith  it  anything  be  done 
or  no,  without  it  nothing  was  at  any  rate  to  be  done. 

The  letter  addressed  to  his  Majesty,  I  put  into  a 
separate  packet.  I  avoid  purposely  any  such  attempt 
as  that  of  making  it  pass  through  your  hands.  In 
relation  to  an  official  person  there  so  frequentty 
alluded  to,  it  was  absolutely  necessary  I  should  speak 
without  reserve  :  and  there  seemed  neither  use  nor 
necessity  for  your  being  involved  in  such  business. 

Even  if  it  should  be  in  the  constitutional  part  of 
the  field  of  law  that  my  labours,  such  as  they  are, 
should  be  desired  by  you  (though  for  reasons  already 
given,  that  is  the  part  in  relation  to  which  my  hopes 
of  being  of  use  are  least  sanguine)  I  repeat  my  promise 
to  put  them  under  your  command : 

I.  Because  I  do  not  absolutely  despair  of  being 
able  to  do  some  good — here  a  little  and  there  a  little 

—even  in  relation  to  that  branch. 

II.  Because  (as  I  say  to  the  Emperor)  that  is  the 
branch  which  I  imagine  you  had  more  particularly  in 
view.     But  my  expectations  are  much  more  extensive, 
as  well  as  sanguine,  in  relation  to  the  Penal  and  Civil 
branches  :  including,  in  both  cases  (though  so  far  as 
concerns  the  organisation  of  the    Judicial  Establish- 
ment  it   belongs   to   the    constitutional    branch)   the 
system  of  Procedure. — Why  ? — Because  in  the   Civil 
branch  there  will  be  a  good  deal  of  matter,  and  in  the 
Penal  a  good  deal  more  applicable,  with  little  or  no 
difference,  under  any  form  of  Government.     So  far, 
therefore,    I    could    myself  propose   matter,    with    a 
tolerable  expectation  of  its  being  received,  and  thence 


297 

with  a  proportionable  degree  of  facility  and  alacrity  : 
whereas  in  regard  to  constitutional  law,  in  which  is 
included  iheform  of  Government,  it  would  be  folly  for 
me  to  pretend  to  originate  anything  considerable. — 
What  is  the  monarch  willing  to  leave  or  to  concede  to 
you  nobles  and  the  great  body  of  the  people,  taken 
together  ?  What  are  the  monarch  and  you  nobles, 
taken  together,  willing  to  leave  or  to  concede  to  the 
great  body  of  the  people  ?  What  are  the  people  at 
present  in  a  condition  to  receive,  if  the  powers,  on 
which  it  depends,  were  willing  to  concede  it  to  them  ? 
What  more,  within  a  moderate  space  of  time,  may 
they  be  expected  to  come  of  themselves  to  be  in,  or  to 
be  capable  of  being  put  into  a  condition  to  receive, — 
and  by  what  means  ?  All  this,  if  known  to  anybody, 
is  known  to  you: — not  a  particle  of  it  to  rue. 

When,  near  the  close  of  the  reign  of  poor  King 
Stanislaus,  a  constitutional  code  for  Poland  was  drawn 
up,  Bukati  *  (I  think  it  was  he  that  was  then  resident 
here)  sent  me  a  copy  of  it.  What  is  become  of  it  I  do 
not  exactly  know.  But  what  I  remember  is — that 
people  in  general  were  here  much  pleased  with  it:  my- 
self among  the  rest,  as  far  as  I  had  looked  at  it ;  which 
Avas  very  slightly  ;  for  being  deeply  embarked  in  other 
pursuits  at  the  time,  nothing  called  upon  me  to  sus- 
pend them  for  any  such  purpose  as  the  study  of  it. 

On  the  present  occasion,  that  paper,  is  it  intended 
to  form  the  basis  ?  Here  would  be  a  field  for  experi- 
menting in :  and  to  a  monarch  with  the  whole  Russian 
Empire  under  such  entire  command,  what  possible 

any  such  experiment  ? 

See  Vol.  I.,  p.  160. 


298       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Under  the  Great  Turk  was  not  Ragusa  even  a  Re- 
public ?  In  such  a  case  more  real  efficiency  than  what 
he  would  lose  in  the  shape  of  coercive  power,  the 
Autocrat  of  Russia  would  gain  in  the  shape  of  gentle 
influence  :  loss,  were  there  any,  would  be  all  of  it  to 
the  successor, — who,  not  having  been  the  author  of 
the  boon,  would  not  be  a  sharer  in  the  gratitude  : — 
But,  even  by  him,  he  being  used  to  the  comparatively 
new  state  of  things,  the  loss,  if  there  were  any.  would 
not  be  felt. 

It  is  now  about  forty  years  since  I  began  to  lift  up 
my  prayers  for  Poland.  The  most  intimate  friend  I 
had  was  John  Lind,  privy  counsellor  to  the  King,  and 
under  his  Majesty,  original  institutor,  as  well  as 
director,  of  a  school  for  400  cadets  at  Warsaw,  and 
Governor  of  Prince  Stanislaus,  nephew  to  the  poor 
king,  whose  business  at  our  Court  he  did  for  a  number 
of  years,  writing  a  letter  from  London  every  other  post 
day  ;  Bukati  being  all  the  while  the  resident  kept  for 
show,  because  our  King  would  not  see  in  that  character 
one  of  his  own  subjects. 

Lind's  first  appearance  at  Warsaw  was  in  that  of 
reader  of  English  to  your  father  or  your  uncle,  I  forget 
which  it  was.     Oh,  how  he  used  to  talk  and  talk  of 
Poland !     And  how  he  used  to  curse  the  Fredericks- 
great  as  they  were — not  to  mention  other  persons. 

Being  of  all  countries  and  of  no  party,  I  have  just 
sent  off  to  Paris  a  large  packet  of  printed  copies  of  a 
part  of  the  educational  scheme  to  leading  men  there, 
Bourbonnites,  Napoleonites,  and  Republicans  promis- 
cuously,— some  of  them  old  friends  of  mine. 

If  you  follow   the   camp,  perhaps  you  may  make 


LETTERS  FROM  JEREMY  BE  NT II AM  299 

prize  of  them  :  yet  I  should  be  sorry  you  should  ;  were 
it  only  because  while  you  are  at  Paris,  you  would 
not  be  at  Warsaw ;  and  whether  you  are  so  or  no,  I 
am  of  the  number — and  that  I  believe  not  a  small 
one — of  those  who  are  impatient  for  your  being  there. 

Well,  but  about  this  education  scheme:  were  it  only 
to  account  for  the  delay,  a  few  words  I  find  I  must 
trouble  you  with  about  it  even  here  : — 

An  experiment  of  it  is  about  to  be  made  in  a  part 
of  that  garden  of  mine  which  you  saw.  It  has  for  its 
object  the  applying  to  the  higher  branches  of  learning, 
and  the  higher  as  well  as  middling  ranks  of  the  com- 
munity, that  new  system  of  instruction,  of  the  success 
of  which  you  can  not  but  be  more  or  less  apprized. 

Brougham,  Sir  James  Macintosh — and  if  I  can 
persuade  him  to  lend  his  name — for  that  is  all  he  can 
have  time  to  lend — Romilly,  will  be  at  the  head  of  it. 
For  the  details  of  the  management  there  will  be  some 
very  efficient  men,  with  whose  names  you  can  scarcely 
be  acquainted.  For  reasons  not  worth  troubling  you 
with,  my  fixed  determination  has  been  from  the  very 
first,  not  to  be  of  the  number.  In  the  Executive 
department  of  it,  I  accordingly  bear  no  part :  but  of 
the  Legislative  the  initiation  has  fallen  entirely  to  rny 
share.  My  labours  in  that  field  had  (I  believe)  already 
commenced,  when  I  had  the  honour  of  receiving  you  : 
and,  for  want  of  their  being  completed,  the  business 
was  at  a  stand,  and  by  a  few  days  more  of  delay,  the 
season  might  have  been  lost — (I  mean  the  time  when 
the  expected  contributors  are  in  town) — and  the  exe- 
cution of  the  plan  deferred  for  a  whole  twelvemonth ; 
and  thereby  perhaps  finally  defeated. 


3oo      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

It  is  now  in  such  advance,  that  everything  which 
it  is  necessary  to  publish  in  the  first  instance,  is  either 
already  in  print  or  in  the  printers'  hands.  A  copy 
or  two  will,  I  trust,  be  brought  to  you  by  the  next 
messenger.  On  this  field,  at  any  rate,  in  doing  what 
I  have  done,  I  consider  myself  as  being  at  work  not 
less  for  Russia  and  Poland,  than  for  London.  For  the 
elementary  branches,  as  taught  upon  the  Bell  and 
Lancaster  system,  Paris  is  already  provided  with  a 
schoolmaster  from  hence.  The  son  of  a  Protestant 
clergyman — Martin,  I  think,  is  his  name — was  in 
Louis  XVIII's  time  sent  from  the  south  of  France  to 
a  Lancasterian  school  for  the  express  purpose  of 
learning  the  method,  and  is  now  at  Paris ;  and  (I 
understand)  much  caressed  there. 

His  business  there  is  to  form  Instructors.  The 
salary  offered  to  him  was  £200  :  for  such  a  station,  a 
very  considerable  salary  at  Paris.  No,  (says  he)  that 
would  be  too  much.  Success  or  failure  depends  upon 
the  degree  of  economy.  Such  a  sum  (naming  it, 
perhaps  a  quarter  as  much)  is  all  that  you  need  give. 
By  this  the  price  will  be  set  to  those  who  succeed  me. 
If  in  my  instance,  in  consideration  of  my  being  the 
first  institutor,  you  see  any  claim  to  extraordinary 
remuneration,  let  that  come  by  and  by,  when  by 
experience  you  see  what  I  have  done.  Just  the 
same  thing  might  the  Emperor  do  for  Petersburg 
and  Warsaw.  The  expense — I  mean  the  necessary 
expense — would  be  next  to  nothing ;  and  if  this  can 
not  succeed  with  you,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  think  what 
else  can. 

For  this  purpose  you  will  see  how  necessary  it  has 


LETTERS  FROM  JEREMY  BEN  THAN  301 

been  for  me  to  take  a  fresh  peep  into  every  nook  and 
cranny  of  the  whole  field  of  art  and  science  :  my  busi- 
ness having  been  to  apply  the  new  method  of  instruc- 
tion to  every  part  of  that  field  that  is  deemed  capable 
of  receiving  it.  My  endeavour  has  been  to  reduce  the 
whole  sketch  into  as  narrow  a  compass  as  possible  : 
and  the  narrower  the  com  pass  the  greater  the  quantity 
of  time  which  it  has  cost  me.  Locke's  Essay  (so  he 
tells  us  himself  in  his  preface)  is  too  long — Why  ? 
'  Because '  (says  he)  '  I  had  not  time  to  make  it 
shorter.' 

If  upon  the  field  of  codification,  it  be  in  my  power 
to  throw  any  light,  you  see  the  terms  upon  which  it 
is  in  the  power  of  your  Alexander  to  have  it  ?  Ex- 
actly those  upon  which  God  Almighty  had  His  :  a 
couple  of  words  the  whole  of  the  expense. 

I  hope  the  Emperor  will  not  be  angry  with  me  for 
returning  his  ring  ;  if  it  had  been  a  brass  or  a  glass 
one,  I  would  have  kept  it.  If  he  will  send  the  value 
of  it,  and  no  more,  to  my  masters  and  employers,  as 
above,  for  their  school,  I  as  well  as  they  will  be  all 
gratitude.  But  of  this  in  that  ensuing  letter  with 
which  this  threatens  you.  Believe  me  ever,  with 
the  truest  respect,  dear  sir,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

JEREMY  BENTHAM. 

PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI. 


CHAPTER  XXIV 

1815-22 

THE     POLISH     CONSTITUTION. — PROMISE    AND    PERFORMANCE. — RUSSIAN 
ATROCITIES.—  REVOLUTION. 

AFTER  the  negotiations  at  Vienna,  the  Emperor 
Alexander  issued  a  proclamation  to  the  Poles,  dated 
-|4  May  1815,  stating  the  chief  points  of  the  Constitu- 
tion which  was  to  be  granted  to  the  new  kingdom  of 
Poland  in  conformity  with  the  treaty.  A  provisional 
government  was  formed  at  Warsaw,  with  Prince 
Adam  Czartoryski  as  its  head,  and  the  following  letter 
was  addressed  to  him  by  Alexander  on  the  same  date 
as  that  of  the  proclamation  : — 

VIENNA,  if  May  1815. 

During  the  time  you  have  passed  here  with  me. 
you  have  had  an  opportunity  of  knowing  my  inten- 
tions as  to  the  institutions  which  it  is  my  will  to 
establish  in  Poland,  and  the  improvements  I  desire  to 
introduce  in  that  country.  You  will  take  care  never 
to  lose  sight  of  them  in  the  deliberations  of  the 
Council,  and  to  draw  the  full  attention  of  your 
colleagues  to  them,  in  order  that  the  action  of  the 
Government  and  the  reforms  which  it  is  bound  to 


THE  POLISH  CONSTITUTION  303 

carry  out  may  be  in  accordance  with  my  views.  You 
will  not  fail,  if  necessary,  to  take  the  initiative  in  this 
respect,  so  as  to  hasten  the  progress  of  your  task  and 
bring  forward  bills  in  conformity  with  the  system 
which  has  been  adopted. 

As  you  are  equally  acquainted  with  my  ideas  as 
to  the  spirit  in  which  I  wish  the  selection  of  the 
various  officials  to  be  made,  you  will  not  fail  to 
see  that  this  is  done  in  accordance  with  them.  In  a 
country  which  has  so  long  been  tossed  about  by 
disturbances  and  revolutions,  it  is  of  the  highest 
importance  that  a  uniform  arid  well  combined  course 
should  be  pursued.  This  is  what  I  wanted  to  recall 
to  your  mind  once  more  by  this  letter,  which  I  allow 
you  even  to  show,  so  as  to  add  confirmation  to  what 
you  will  have  to  say  in  order  to  carry  out  my 
intentions.  ALEXANDER. 

The  new  Constitution,  which  was  promulgated  on 
the  if  November,  1815,  established  a  Parliament  of 
two  Houses,  which  was  to  meet  every  two  years,  a 
responsible  Ministry,  and  liberty  of  the  press,  and  it 
stipulated  that  all  the  officials  should  be  Poles,  and 
that  Polish  should  be  the  official  language.  It  will 
be  seen,  however,  from  the  following  letters  addressed 
to  the  Emperor  by  Prince  Czartoryski,  that,  owing 
mainly  to  the  arbitrary  proceedings  of  the  Grand- 
Duke  Constantine,  the  military  governor  of  the 
country,  this  Constitution  gradually  became  a  dead 
letter  : 

'1815. 

'  As  the  bases  of  the  Constitution  provide  for  a 


304      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Ministry  of  War  among  the  branches  of  the  adminis- 
tration which,  reunited  under  the  same  central  control, 
make  up  the  whole  body  of  government,  we  think  it 
our  duty  to  seek  the  decision  of  your  Imperial  and 
Royal  Majesty  on  the  subject. 

'  The  presence  of  the  Grand-Duke  Constantine  in 
this  country,  and  the  special  powers  with  which  he  is 
invested,  have  precluded  all  relations  between  the 
provisional  government  and  the  military  administra- 
tion, which  is  placed  under  a  separate  committee. 
This  total  separation  between  the  civil  and  military 
administrations  gives  rise  to  the  gravest  difficulties. 
It  has  made  it  impossible  for  the  Government  to 
present  to  your  Majesty  a  general  report  on  the 
situation  and  the  probable  requirements  of  the  State, 
as  the  army  constitutes  one  of  its  principal  elements. 
So  long  as  the  most  considerable  and  expensive  part 
of  the  administration  remains  entirely  independent 
and  isolated  it  cannot  be  subject  to  any  control,  and 
the  expenditure  of  the  country  cannot  be  restricted  in 
proportion  to  its  resources. 

'  The  Government,  being  constantly  brought  to  a 
standstill  in  every  measure  which  has  any  bearing 
whatever  on  military  affairs,  often  finds  itself  obliged 
to  give  up  useful  reforms  whose  execution  is  only 
possible  with  the  regular  and  zealous  co-operation  of 
the  military  administration. 

*  The  savings  we  have  endeavoured  to  introduce  in 
the  whole  expenditure  of  the  country,  and  especially 
in  the  civil  administration,  by  reducing  to  the  lowest 
possible  point  the  number  and  salaries  of  the  officials, 
will  not  produce  any  effect,  and  cannot  be  maintained, 


PROMISE  AND  PERFORMANCE  305 

if  the  same  spirit  of  rigid  economy  is  not  applied  to 
the  administration  of  the  army,  and  if  a  certain  pro- 
portion is  not  established  between  military  and  civil 
emoluments. 

'  Moreover,  the  administration  of  the  army  touches 
at  so  many  points  on  the  civil  administration  that 
they  can  neither  be  properly  organised  nor  governed 
except  on  a  uniform  system. 

'  The  above  considerations,  the  certainty  that  the 
Polish  army  will  immediately  have  to  be  paid  out  of 
the  treasury  of  the  Kingdom,  and  the  fact  that  its 
revenues  will  not  be  sufficient  for  that  purpose,  have 
decided  the  provisional  government  to  submit  to  your 
Imperial  and  Royal  Majesty  whether  you  will  not 
think  fit  to  order  the  creation  of  a  Ministry  of  War 
to  take  the  place  of  the  military  committee,  and  to  be 
organised  on  the  same  principle  as  the  two  other 
Ministries.  The  first  duty  of  this  Ministry  would  be 
to  present  a  plan  for  its  internal  organisation,  and  the 
Government,  subject  to  your  Majesty's  approval, 
reserves  to  itself  the  duty  of  afterwards  submitting  to 
you  its  observations  on  the  plan  in  question  and  the 
savings  which  might  be  introduced  in  the  establish- 
ment of  the  army.' 

'  WARSAW,  June  1815. 

1 .  .  .  The  general  impression  at  the  promulgation 
of  the  new  Constitution  has  been  as  favourable  as 
could  be  desired  ....  Its  principles  have  attached 
the  people  to  your  Majesty,  and  after  the  long  period 
of  waiting,  and  the  conduct  of  the  Grand-Duke,  the 
grant  of  the  Constitution  was  necessary  to  produce 

VOL.  II.  U 


306       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

such  a  result.  The  change  in  the  Polish  arms  and 
the  interference  of  the  Russians  with  the  Government 
have  caused  some  pain,  but  the  bases  of  the  Constitu- 
tion have  made  the  people  forget  everything.' 

'WARSAW,  i£  July,  1815. 

*  The  organisation  of  the  Ministries  of  the  Interior 
and  of  Finance,  and  of  the  Courts  of  Justice,  is  about 
to  be  completed ;  the  result  will  be  a  pretty  consider- 
able saving.  Our  first  care  was  not  to  stop  the  course 
of  government ;  the  second  is  to  introduce  without 
delay  all  possible  order  and  economy  from  the  begin- 
ning. ...  I  do  not  doubt  that  the  result  would  be 
most  satisfactory  if  it  were  not  for  the  existence  of  an 
independent  military  authority  with  which  the 
Government  is  not  in  a  condition  to  struggle.  I 
would  not  have  ventured  to  touch  on  this  delicate 
point  if  the  urgency  of  the  case  did  not  oblige  me  to 
do  so.  ... 

'  His  Highness  the  Grand-Duke  is  not  to  be  moved 
by  any  zeal  or  submission.  He  seems  to  have  taken 
a  dislike  to  the  country  which  is  increasing  in  alarming 
progression,  and  is  the  subject  of  his  daily  conversa- 
tion. Neither  the  army,  the  nation,  nor  individuals 
find  any  favour  in  his  eyes.  The  Constitution 
especially  is  made  by  him  a  subject  of  incessant 
sarcasm  ;  everything  that  is  matter  of  law  or  regula- 
tion he  scorns  and  covers  with  ridicule,  and  unhappily 
his  words  have  already  been  followed  by  deeds.  He 
does  not  even  adhere  to  the  military  laws  which  he 
has  himself  confirmed.  He  insists  upon  introducing 
flogging  in  the  army,  and  he  ordered  some  men  to  be 


PROMISE  AND  PERFORMANCE  307 

flogged  yesterday  without  paying  any  attention  to 
the  unanimous  representations  of  the  committee. 
Desertion  is  increasing,  and  will  become  general,  and 
most  of  the  officers  are  about  to  resign. 

'  It  looks  as  if  a  plan  had  been  formed  for  rendering 
your  Majesty's  benefits  illusory  and  making  your 
scheme  fail  from  the  beginning.  In  that  case  the 
Grand-Duke  is,  without  knowing  it,  the  blind  tool  of 
certain  persons  in  his  confidence  who  encourage  his 
sombre  and  passionate  temper.  I  fear  the  most 
lamentable  results  if  he  should  remain  here.' 


July  1815. 

'  The  position  of  the  Government  of  your  Imperial 
and  Royal  Majesty  in  this  country  has  for  some  time 
become  extremely  painful  and  difficult,  and  I  feel  it 
my  duty  to  bring  to  your  knowledge  details  of  which 
I  would  have  wished  never  to  be  obliged  to  speak. 

'  His  Highness  the  Grand-Duke  has  several  times 
intimated  to  the  Government  that  civil  officials, 
magistrates,  mayors,  etc.,  should  be  brought  before 
him,  and  the  other  day  he  placed  the  President  of  the 
town  of  Warsaw  under  arrest.  Some  days  ago,  too, 
his  Highness  issued  a  decree  by  means  of  which  he 
will  have  the  power  of  trying  any  citizen  by  court- 
martial. 

'  The  provisional  government  cannot  but  recognise 
that  such  proceedings  are  contrary  to  the  rules  estab- 
lished in  all  countries  for  the  public  peace  and  security, 
and  that  they  are  especially  indirect  opposition  to  the 
Constitution  which  your  Majesty  has  just  granted  to 
the  country.  .  .  Under  these  circumstances  all  the 


3o8      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

members  of  the  Government  are  unanimously  of 
opinion  that  the  above  facts  should  be  laid  before  you 
with  a  view  to  your  Majesty  placing  your  Govern- 
ment in  a  position  to  carry  out  your  will.' 

'  WARSAW,  ^«  January  1816. 

' .  .  .  Your  Imperial  Majesty  are  alone  capable  of 
maintaining  the  edifice  you  have  raised.  If  you 
abandon  it  from  the  beginning  to  the  attacks  of  those 
who  are  hostile  to  it,  it  must  fall  to  pieces.  What  else 
can  be  the  fate  of  a  Constitution  granted  by  you  with 
so  much  solemnity  and  violated  almost  immediately 
after  it  was  proclaimed  ?  If  we  obtain  the  support 
which  we  have  a  right  to  ask  of  your  Majesty,  all  will 
go  well.  I  have  observed  with  joy  that  so  far  as  the 
Poles  are  concerned,  more  importance  is  attached  to 
measures  than  to  individuals.  Our  institutions, 
though  as  yet  in  the  process  of  formation,  are  sufficient 
to  wTork  the  Government  machine,  and  since  the 
establishment  of  Constitutional  Government  perfect 
harmony  exists  among  all  the  Ministers.  .  .  .  Your 
Majesty's  Lieutenant  Governor,*  however,  though 
zealous,  persevering,  and  enlightened,  seems  to  con- 
sider that  every  wish  expressed  by  the  Grand-Duke 
Constantino  must  be  regarded  as  that  of  your  Majesty. 
He  is  ready  to  violate  the  Constitution  at  any  moment 
if  his  Highness  should  require  him  to  do  so,  and  he 
has  even  plainly  expressed  himself  to  the  Council  in 
this  sense.  .  .  .  Such  a  degree  of  submission  in  the 
highest  official  of  the  realm  would  make  your  Consti- 

*  General  Zajonczek,  a  veteran  who  had  lost  both  his  legs  in  the  Napoleonic 
wars. 


PROMISE  AND  PERFORMANCE  309 

tution  a  farce.  If  you  will  inform  him  that  you  wish 
to  respect  your  own  work  and  cause  it  to  be  respected, 
and  that  his  duties  to  his  sovereign  and  his  country 
may  be  combined  with,  but  should  never  be  subordi- 
nated to,  his  obligations  to  the  Grand-Duke,  he  will  no 
doubt  carry  out  your  will.  This,  however,  is  an 
essential  condition  of  preventing  the  ruin  of  the 
country.  .  .  You,  Sire,  are  our  destiny ;  our  only 
resources  and  hopes  are  bound  up  with  your  Majesty, 
and  you  alone  can  give  permanent  solidity  to  the 
institutions  which  you  have  created.' 

'  17th  April  1816. 

'  Suicides  have  for  some  time  been  very  frequent  in 
the  Polish  army.  The  annexed  letter,  the  original  of 
which  is  in  the  Grand-Duke's  hands,  shows  the  cause 
of  most  of  these  unhappy  occurrences.  Its  writer 
was  a  distinguished  officer,  aide-de-camp  to  General 
Krasinski,  and  a  great  favourite  in  Polish  society. 
His  example  was  followed  by  a  sub-officer  who  killed 
himself  because,  as  is  stated,  he  could  not  survive  the 
shame  of  the  disgraceful  punishments  inflicted  upon 
himself  and  his  colleagues.  It  is  absolutely  necessary 
that  the  army  should  be  given  a  code  of  laws  and 
regulations.  At  present  it  is  administered  solely  by 
caprice.  It  suffers  not  from  too  much  severity,  but 
from  constant  humiliations  and  acts  of  arbitrary 
power.' 

(Enclosure.] 

1  MY  DEAR  SISTER,  ...  I  can  no  longer  bear  what 
I  see  daily — my  brothers-in-arms  and  my  fellow- 


310      MEMOIR8  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

citizens  dishonoured,  the  glory  of  our  fathers  trodden 
under  foot,  the  laws  of  the  best  of  sovereigns  violated. 
I  leave  my  poor  country  helplessly  delivered  up  to 
the  caprices  of  one  man. 

'  How  often  have  I  nearly  become  an  assassin ! 
What  a  blow  that  would  have  been  for  you,  dear 
sister  !  I  wished  to  sacrifice  myself  in  order  to  free 
us  from  these  shameful  chains,  but  feeling  that  the 
result  might  not  realise  my  hopes,  I  prefer  to  deprive 
myself  of  an  existence  which  might  become  fatal  to 
my  country.  ...  I  know  that  I  shall  be  accused  of 
weakness ;  I  would  have  done  this  deed  long  ago  if 
our  holy  religion  and  my  attachment  for  you  had  not 
prevented  me.  But  being  now  quite  convinced  that  I 
can  no  longer  be  of  use  to  my  country,  I  and  several 
of  my  friends  have  determined  to  leave  this  world.  .  . 

'  Give  my  sword  to  your  son.  Let  him  wear  it,  as 
I  did,  for  his  country  and  his  friends.' 

*  SIENIAWA,  21st  August  1821. 

'  I  feel  it  my  duty  to  submit  to  your  Imperial  and 
Royal  Majesty  some  observations  on  the  present 
condition  of  Poland.  I  do  not  often  trouble  you  with 
letters,  and  I  beg  to  be  permitted  on  this  occasion  to 
write  to  you  at  greater  length  than  usual.  I  have 
given  a  heading  to  each  paragraph,  so  that  your 
Majesty  need  only  read  those  which  may  seem  to 
you  most  worthy  of  attention. 

'  State  of  Public  Feeling. — People's  minds  are  in  a 
state  of  extreme  uncertainty  and  total  discouragement. 
Everything  seems  unsettled  ;  every  institution  is  in 
danger,  and  the  most  lamentable  changes  of  system 


PROMISE  AND  PERFORMANCE  311 

are  expected.  Nothing  can  be  more  pernicious  than 
such  a  state  of  affairs,  which  stifles  noble  aspirations 
and  leads  weak  people  to  look  only  after  their  own 
interests,  in  the,  belief  that  public  considerations  are 
disregarded  by  their  Government. 

'  Causes  of  Alarm. — It  is  feared,  from  certain 
phrases  which  have  been  uttered  by  those  who  are 
supposed  to  be  the  confidential  interpreters  of  your 
views,  that  you  regard  the  Constitution  as  impractic- 
able, useless,  and  involving  too  much  expenditure, 
that  the  independence  of  Courts  of  Justice  is  to  cease, 
that  public  education  is  to  be  restricted,  that  the  diets 
are  inconvenient  obstacles  which  should  be  abolished, 
and  that  the  Kingdom  is  to  be  governed  like  the  other 
Polish  dominions  of  the  Empire.  I  do  not  know  how 
much  truth  there  may  be  in  these  discouraging 
rumours,  but  it  is  asserted  that  your  opinions  have  of 
late  undergone  a  complete  change,  and  are  totally 
opposed  to  those  you  held  before.  I  can  hardly 
believe  this,  and  I  appeal  with  confidence  against 
those  who  wish  to  injure  my  country  and  its  Constitu- 
tion to  principles  and  traits  of  character  which  should 
be  above  all  passing  circumstances. 

'  Expense  of  the  Army. — It  would  be  unjust  to  make 
a  nation  suffer  for  faults  which  it  has  not  committed. 
You  have  been  led,  Sire,  by  motives  whose  force  I  am 
far  from  disputing,  to  decide  that  the  expense  of  the 
Polish  army  shall  not  be  diminished.  But  it  is  a  fact 
that  this  expense  is  greater  than  the  Kingdom  of 
Poland  within  its  present  limits  is  capable  of  bearing, 
and  that  it  is  relatively  greater,  than  that  borne  for 
similar  objects  by  various  independent  kingdoms,  such 


3i2      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

as  Sweden,  Saxony,  Wiirtemberg,  and  Piedmont, 
where,  with  greater  resources,  the  military  system  is 
less  costly. 

1  Limits  of  the  Kingdom. — When  the  fate  of  this 
country  was  decided  your  Majesty  will  remember  that 
you  magnanimously  promised  to  reunite  all  the  Polish 
provinces  under  your  sceptre  and  under  a  national 
regime.  You  yourself  thought  the  regeneration  of 
Poland  should  be  carried  out  on  a  more  extended 
scale  ;  the  present  Kingdom,  smaller  by  a  third  than 
the  Duchy  whose  place  it  occupies,  was  in  your  eyes 
to  be  a  merely  provisional  creation.  Reasons  of 
prudence  have  led  your  Majesty  to  suspend  the  execu- 
tion of  this  promise  ;  but  would  it  not  be  obviously 
unjust  to  punish  the  Kingdom  for  the  restricted  limits 
imposed  upon  it,  the  extension  of  which  the  nation 
would  make  the  greatest  sacrifices  to  procure  ? 

'  The  Constitution. — The  Constitution  granted  by 
your  Majesty  has  been  subjected  to  much  unjust 
criticism.  It  cannot  be  made  responsible  for  the  ill- 
directed  or  superfluous  expenditure  of  the  administra- 
tion, for  this  expenditure  has  occurred  because  the 
Constitution  was  not  sufficiently  obeyed.  The  army 
is  too  large,  the  taxes  are  levied  with  extreme  rigour, 
justice  would  be  impartial  if  it  were  not  influenced  by 
persons  above  the  law,  and  the  system  of  police  is  some- 
times inquisitorial  and  vexatious.  The  Constitution 
prevents  nothing  that  is  necessary ;  unfortunately 
it  does  not  prevent  that  which  is  superfluous  and 
injurious  to  the  state.  The  introduction  of  measures 
of  the  latter  class  depends  entirely  on  your  Majesty's 
will,  and  the  Diet  should  not  be  blamed  for  rendering 


RUSSIAN  ATROCITIES  313 

it  difficult  to  introduce  them.  It  is  one  of  the 
advantages  of  Constitutional  Government  that  it 
tends  to  stability  ;  the  rejection  of  a  bill  simply  leaves 
things  as  they  are.' 

The  above  letter  was,  as  will  be  seen  from  its  date, 
written  shortly  after  the  formation  of  the  Holy 
Alliance,  the  Congresses  of  Troppau  and  Laybach, 
and  the  revolutionary  movements  at  Naples,  in  Spain, 
and  in  Piedmont.  Alexander  now  gradually  aban- 
doned his  liberal  tendencies  and  gave  up  Poland 
entirely  to  the  cruel  and  arbitrary  rule  of  his  brother 
Constantine.  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski,  seeing  that 
any  further  intervention  with  the  Emperor  on  behalf 
of  Poland  was  hopeless,  ceased  all  further  correspond- 
ence with  him  on  the  subject,  and  in  1823  he  gave  up 
his  post  of  curator  of  the  Wilna  University,  which  he 
had  held  for  twenty  years,  the  atrocious  persecution 
of  the  students  by  the  Russian  authorities  rendering 
it  impossible  for  him  any  longer  usefully  to  conduct 
the  affairs  of  the  University,  which  had  under  his  care 
risen  to  the  position  of  the  first  educational  institution 
in  the  Empire. 

In  1825  Alexander  I  died  and  was  succeeded  by 
Nicholas.  Among  the  persons  arrested  in  connection 
with  the  outbreak  at  St  Petersburg  which  preceded 
Nicholas's  accession  were  several  Poles,  who  were 
brought  up  for  trial  before  the  Senate  at  Warsaw. 
Prince  Adam,  who  was  then  in  Italy, hurried  to  Warsaw 
to  take  part  in  this  trial  as  a  member  of  the  Senate. 
After  a  careful  inquiry,  which  lasted  more  than  a  year, 
it  was  found  that  the  accused  had  not  taken  any  part 


3i4       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

whatever  in  the  rebellion,  and  had  merely  protested 
in  a  legal  manner  against  the  repeated  violations  of 
the  Constitution.  Prince  Adam,  as  the  father,  so  to 
say,  of  the  Constitution  and  the  chief  adviser  of  the 
late  Emperor  in  all  matters  relating  to  Poland,  was 
naturally  called  upon  to  take  a  prominent  part  in  the 
deliberations  of  the  Senate  on  this  matter,  and  his 
view  of  the  innocence  of  the  accused  was  accepted  by 
the  whole  of  the  Senate  with  the  exception  of  one 
member.  The  verdict  was  reversed  by  the  Emperor, 
who  ordered  the  Senators  to  be  retained  at  Warsaw 
under  the  surveillance  of  the  military  authorities, 
and  the  accused  to  be  taken  to  St  Petersburg  and 
imprisoned  in  the  casemates  of  the  fortress. 

This  outrageous  measure  was  the  beginning  of  the 
events  which  led  to  the  Polish  insurrection  of  1830. 
The  savage  cruelties  of  the  Grand-Duke  Constan- 
tine,  and  the  endless  violations  of  the  Constitution 
and  deportations  of  distinguished  citizens,  are  well 
known,  and  need  not  be  recapitulated  here.  The 
Poles  had  for  years  been  subjected  to  indignities 
which  no  high-spirited  nation,  with  a  patriotic  and 
warlike  army,  could  long  tolerate.  Revolutions  were 
breaking  out  in  France,  Belgium,  and  Germany; 
Nicholas  had  ordered  the  Russian  and  Polish  armies 
to  march  against  the  insurgents  in  those  countries ; 
and  the  Poles  could  no  longer  delay  the  outbreak 
which  had  for  some  time  been  in  preparation.  The 
whole  nation — not  only  in  the  Kingdom  of  Poland, 
but  in  Lithuania,  Volhynia,  Podolia,  and  the  Ukraine 
—rose  against  its  oppressors.  Constantine  left  the 
country  with  the  Russian  troops,  the  Polish  throne 


REVOLUTION  315 

was  declared  vacant,  and  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski 
was  unanimously  elected  President  of  the  National 
Government.  A  Russian  army  invaded  Poland  in 
February  1831,  but  it  was  repeatedly  defeated  by  the 
Poles,  though  they  were  inferior  in  numbers..  The 
Russians,  reinforced  by  20,000  grenadiers,  were  again 
beaten  in  the  vicinity  of  Warsaw,  and  were  forced 
to  retire  to  Lublin  for  winter  quarters.  In  April  the 
Poles  gained  further  victories,  and  the  Russian  army, 
dispersed  in  a  marshy  country,  was  almost  annihilated, 
but  new  Russian  troops  constantly  poured  in  from 
all  parts  of  the  Empire,  while  the  forces  at  the 
disposal  of  the  Poles  were  limited  and  they  had  great 
difficulty  in  procuring  provisions  and  ammunition  in 
consequence  of  Austria  and  Prussia  having  closed 
their  frontiers  to  them.  By  degrees  the  Russian 
army  retrieved  its  defeats  ;  on  the  7th  of  Septem- 
ber, 1831,  Warsaw  was  taken,  after  a  sanguinary 
battle  in  which  the  Russians  lost  one-fourth  of  their 
troops,  and  the  remains  of  the  Polish  army,  including 
Prince  Adam  Czartoryski,  who  had  fought  in  its 
ranks,  were  driven  into  Austria  and  Prussia. 


CHAPTER  XXV 

1831-2 

PRINCE    CZARTORYSKI     IN     LONDON. — LADY    HOLLAND. — THE     PRINCESS 

DINO-TALLEYRAND.  THE      PRINCESS      LIEVEN. CONVERSATIONS 

WITH  LEADING  STATESMEN. TALLEYRAND. PALMERSTON. GREY. 

— BROUGHAM.  —  ENGLISH    REPRESENTATIONS  AT  ST  PETERSBURG. 

PRUSSIA    ADVOCATES     THE    ANNIHILATION    OF    POLAND. PALMER- 
STON   ON    POLAND    AND    IRELAND. THE    LONDON     PRESS. RUSSIA 

SUPPRESSES  THE  POLISH  UNIVERSITY  AND  SCHOOLS. PROPOSAL    TO 

EQUIP     POLISH     CRUISERS     IN     THE     BLACK      SEA. THE     LITERARY 

ASSOCIATION  OF  THE  FRIENDS  OF    POLAND. THE  POLISH  QUESTION 

IN  PARLIAMENT. 

AFTER  the  collapse  of  the  Polish  Revolution  of  1830-1 
Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  proceeded  to  London,  where 
he  arrived  on  the  22nd  of  December  1831.  The 
revolution  which  had  just  taken  place  in  France  made 
Paris  an  unsuitable  starting-point  for  a  European 
intervention  in  Poland,  as  the  other  Powers  on  the 
Continent  looked  upon  the  new  French  Government 
with  suspicion  as  representing  the  aggressive  and 
revolutionary  tendencies  of  the  year  1792,  which  it 
was  hoped  had  been  finally  crushed  by  the  coalition  of 
1815.  In  London,  however,  a  Liberal  Cabinet  had 
come  into  power  almost  simultaneously  with  the  out- 
break of  the  Polish  Revolution.  This  seemed  a  good 
omen  for  the  Polish  cause,  and  the  more  sanguine  of 
the  Poles  already  looked  forward  to  an  Anglo-French 


PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  IN  LONDON  317 

coalition  in  their  behalf  and  in  that  of  the  other 
oppressed  nationalities.  But  as  usual  Ministers  in 
office  held  very  different  language  from  that  which 
they  had  used  in  opposition.  The  envoys  in  London  of 
the  Polish  national  Government,  Marquis  Wielopolski 
and  Count  Walewski  (afterwards  Minister  under 
Napoleon  III),  reported  that  the  Liberal  Government, 
alarmed  at  the  excitement  in  France  and  the  cries  of 
revenge  for  Waterloo,  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  policy  of  England  should  be  'not  to  weaken 
Russia,  as  Europe  might  soon  again  require  her  services 
in  the  cause  of  order/  and  to  prevent  Poland,  whom 
it  regarded  as  the  natural  ally  of  France,  from  becom- 
ing 'a  French  province  on  the  Vistula.'*  The  Reform 
Bill  and  the  Belgian  Question,  too,  absorbed  the 
attention  of  the  Government  and  rendered  it  indisposed 
to  take  up  so  delicate  and  dangerous  a  question  as 
that  of  Poland.  Accordingly,  although  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Polish  Revolution  the  British  Cabinet  had 
represented  at  St  Petersburg  that  England,  as  a  party 
to  the  Treaty  of  Vienna,  could  not  consent  to  any 
violation  of  its  provisions,  it  afterwards  rejected  the 
proposal  of  the  French  Government  of  July  for  a 
combined  intervention  with  the  object  of  stopping 
further  bloodshed  in  Poland. 

'  London,'  says  M.  de  Gadon  in  his  manuscript 
account  of  the  Polish  mission,  '  was  at  that  time  the 
head-quarters  of  European  diplomacy,  as  the  Confer- 
ence on  the  Belgian  question,  which  presented  many 
difficulties  and  dangers,  was  being  held  there.  The 

*  Despatch  of  the  19th  March  1831,  from  Marquis  Wielopolski  to  the  Polish 
mission  in  Paris,  and  of  the  59th  March  and  8th  April  1831,  from  Count  Walewski 
to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  Warsaw  (MSS.  in  the  Polish  Library  in  Paris;. 


3i8       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

chief  men  of  mark  in  the  political  world  were  Earl 
Grey  and  Lords  Palmerston,  Brougham,  Holland, 
Melbourne,  Lansdowne,  and  Althorp,  while  among 
the  diplomatists  at  the  Belgian  Conference  were 
Talleyrand,  Lieven,  and  Esterhazy.  The  feminine 
influence  in  politics,  which  at  that  time  was  not 
inconsiderable,  was  represented  by  Lady  Holland,  the 
Princess  Dino-Talleyrand,  and  the  Princess  Lieven. 
The  first  of  these,  still  bearing  the  traces  of  great 
beauty — proud,  witty,  and  imposing  'as  a  Czarina- 
assembled  at  her  famous  receptions  at  Holland  House 
all  that  was  most  brilliant  by  position,  merit,  or  talent. 
The  Princess  Dino,  daughter  of  the  last  Duchess  of 
Courland  and  wife  of  the  nephew  *  of  Prince  Talley- 
rand, had  lived  with  the  Prince  for  many  years,  and 
was  his  constant  companion.  She  had  great  influence 
over  him,  and  used  to  preside  at  the  magnificent  re- 
ceptions in  the  French  Embassy  while  Talleyrand  was 
Ambassador.  The  rooms  of  the  Embassy  at  Hanover 
Square  were  fitted  up  with  all  the  splendour  of  the  great 
French  aristocratic  salons  of  the  eighteenth  century ; 
the  cuisine  was  perfection  ;  and  the  inexhaustible  wit 
of  the  host,  notwithstanding  his  seventy-eight  years, 
and  the  amiability  of  the  hostess,  made  these  recep- 
tions the  most  brilliant  and  the  most  sought  after  in 
London.  Even  the  Court  was  so  anxious  to  please 

*  When  Prince  Talleyrand,  at  that  time  Napoleon's  Foreign  Minister,  sought  a  wife 
for  his  nephew,  '  Napoleon  appropriated  all  the  heiresses  of  France  for  his  aides-de- 
camp,' and  the  Prince  accordingly  arranged,  through  the  intervention  of  Alexander 
I,  a  marriage  for  his  nephew  with  the  youngest  daughter  of  the  widow  of  the  last  Duke 
of  Courland,  who  was  the  friend  of  King  Stanislaus  Augustus  and  many  other  Poles. 
The  marriage  took  place  in  1808,  and  Talleyrand  afterwards  gave  up  to  his  nephew 
the  title  of  Prince  Dino.  The  latter  was,  however,  so  addicted  to  riotous  living 
that  his  wife  obtained  a  divorce  from  him  and  took  up  her  residence  with  Talleyrand. 


THE  PRINCESS  LIEVEN  31  y 

Talleyrand,  that  the  Princess  Dino,  although  not  his 
wife,  was  admitted,  in  contravention  of  all  the  rules 
of  etiquette,  to  the  position  and  privileges  of  an 
Ambassadress.* , 

'  As  for  the  Princess  Lieven,  the  wife  of  the 
Russian  Ambassador,  everyone  has  heard  of  this 
consummate  type  of  a  Russian  political  agent  in 
petticoats. t  The  poet  Niemcewicz,  who  was  at  that 
time  Polish  envoy  in  London,  and  who  did  not  spare 
people  whom  he  did  not  like,  expressed  surprise  that 
this  '  old  and  ugly  woman,  with  a  red  nose,  should 
possess  such  influence  and  make  everybody  submit  to 
her  decrees  ; '  but  this  is  explained  by  her  rare  intel- 
lectual qualities,  her  dialectic  skill,  and  her  extra- 
ordinary pliancy  in  social  intercourse.  She  had  been 
in  London  for  eighteen  years,  and  having  in  this  long 
period  made  many  friends  and  acquaintances,  she  was 
not  only  an  agreeable  companion  but  a  political  force. 
More  than  once  she  influenced  not  only  the  decisions 
but  the  fate  of  Cabinets,  even  in  England.  The  most 

7  O 

distinguished  English  statesmen — Lords  Liverpool, 
Castlereagh,  and  Aberdeen,  the  Duke  of  Wellington, 
Canning,  Peel,  and  Lord  Harrowby — were  her  con- 
fidential friends,  and  although  by  disposition  and 
training  she  was  an  ultra-Tory,  this  did  not  prevent 
her  from  being  on  the  best  terms  with  Liberal 

*  One  of  Talleyrand's  greatest  admirers  and  pupils  in  the  art  of  diplomacy  was 
Lord  Palir.erston,  and  a  comic  paper  published  a  caricature  representing  them  walk- 
ing together,  with  the  inscription,  '  the  lame  leading  the  blind  '  (an  allusion  to  the 
fact  that  one  of  Talleyrand's  feet  was  deformed). 

t  The  Princess  Lieven,  a  descendant  of  the  Esthonian  family  of  von  Benkendorff, 
was  the  sister  of  General  Alexander  von  Benkendorff,  the  confidant  of  the  Emperor 
Nicholas,  and  the  creator  of  that  mysterious  and  all-powerful  institution,  the  Secret 
Police;  known  in  Russia  by  the  modest  appellation  of  'the  third  section  of  the 
Imperial  Chancellery '. 


32o      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Ministers,  "  for  the  advantage  and  glory  of  the  policy 
of  the  Czar."  The  only  prominent  statesman  with 
whom  she  could  never  agree  was  Palmerston ;  she 
used  to  call  him  "  un  tres-petit  esprit,  lourd,  obstind," 
and  she  cordially  detested  him.  He,  on  the  other 
hand,  used  to  say  that  he  had  been  in  a  Tory  Cabinet, 
and  knew  what  her  services  cost.  Of  Earl  Grev  it 

v 

was  reported  that  every  morning  before  he  got  out 
of  bed  he  used  to  write  her  a  note  on  paper  scented 
with  musk,  in  which  he  mingled  gallantry  with 
politics. 

1  Being  a  zealous  servant  arid  admirer  of  the  Czar, 
Madame  Lieven  showed  bitter  hostility  to  the  Poles 
and  their  cause.  She  would  not  allow  any  Polish  sym- 
pathies to  be  expressed  in  her  presence,  and  she  carried 
her  animosity  so  far  that  when  one  of  the  secretaries 
of  the  French  Embassy  said  something  in  favour  of 
the  Polish  revolution,  she  went  to  Talleyrand  and 
insisted  on  his  dismissing  the  culprit  from  his  post.' 

Such  was  the  position  of  affairs  in  London  when 
Prince  Adam  Czartoryski,  eager  as  ever  to  serve  the 
cause  of  his  unhappy  country,  came  to  advocate  it 
before  the  members  of  the  Government  and  the  conti- 
nental statesmen  who  had  assembled  from  all  parts  of 
Europe  for  the  Belgian  Conference.  He  was  received 
in  London  by  the  poet  Niemcewicz,  who  still  remained 
there  after  the  close  of  his  functions  as  envoy  of  the 
Polish  National  Government.  His  venerable  appear- 
ance, his  perfect  knowledge  of  the  English  language 
and  English  customs,  and  his  reputation  as  a  com- 
panion of  Kosciuszko,*  had  made  him  generally  liked 

*  He  was  Kosciuszko's  aide-de-camp,  and  afterwards  accompanied  him  to  the 
United  States,  where  they  remained  together  for  several  years. 


THE  PRINCESS  DINO-TALLEYRAND  321 

and  respected.  Niemcewicz  was  too  plain-spoken  and 
hot-tempered,  however,  for  a  diplomatist :  '  Palmer- 
ston,'  he  says  in  his  Memoirs,  '  found  me  too  hot,  and  I 
found  him  colder  than  ice.'  But  his  unflagging 
industry  and  perseverance  made  up  for  this  defect, 
and  Prince  Adam,  in  his  life  of  Niemcewicz,*  says 
that '  perhaps  he  never  showed  more  boundless  attach- 
ment to  his  country  than  in  this  last  and  difficult 
public  service.  .  .  Notwithstanding  his  age  and 
growing  infirmities,  he  thinks  of  everything,  and  I 
saw  him  day  and  night  working  solely  for  his 
country's  cause.' 

After  narrowly  escaping  capture  by  the  Russian 
army  at  Cracow,  Prince  Adam  had  travelled  with  a 
passport  given  him  by  Metternich  in  the  name  of 
'  George  Hoffman.'  This  was  a  necessary  precaution, 
considering  the  power  at  that  time  exercised  by 
Russia  throughout  the  German  States.  '  He  arrived,' 
says  Niemcewicz  in  his  Memoirs, '  without  a  servant, 
deprived  of  all  property,  and  his  whole  luggage  re- 
presented by  a  small  trunk.  .  .  What  a  freak  of 
fortune !  I  well  recollect  when  I  was  his  father's 
aide-de-camp  fifty  years  ago,  and  when  during  an 
inspection  of  the  Lithuanian  army  the  tents  of  his 
suite  were  carried  by  300  horses  and  fourteen  camels. 
His  son  is  now  destitute  ;  but  he  feels  the  misfortunes 
of  his  country  more  than  his  own.' 

Prince  Adam's  first  visit  was  to  the  French 
Embassy.  The  Princess  Dino  was  an  old  acquaintance 
of  his,  and  in  1808  the  Abbe  Piattoli,  who  was  a  friend 
both  of  the  Prince  and  of  the  Duchess  of  Coburcr 

O  ' 

*  Published  at  Berlin  and  Posen  in  1860. 
VOL.  II.  X 


322       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

had  endeavoured  to  arrange  a  marriage  between 
him  and  the  Duchess's  youngest  daughter.  Although 
nothing  came  of  this  project,  the  young  Duchess,  even 
after  her  marriage,  remained  on  the  most  friendly 
terms  with  Prince  Adam,  and  Talleyrand  had  also  for 
many  years  been  well  acquainted  with  him.  In  1807 
the  French  Minister  was  opposed  to  the  Poles,  say- 
ing:  'avec  les  Polonais  on  ne  fait  que  du  desordre;' 
but  he  afterwards  changed  his  opinion  on  this  and 
other  subjects,  and  showed  some  favour  to  Poland  at 
the  Vienna  Congress.  So  much,  indeed,  was  he 
regarded  as  hostile  to  Russia  that  when  he  was 
appointed  French  Ambassador  in  London,  the  Emperor 
Nicholas  is  said  by  M.  Louis  Blanc*  to  have  con- 
sidered this  appointment  '  as  a  sort  of  declaration  of 
war ; '  and  Count  Walewski  described  him  as  '  one  of 
those  who  were  least  indifferent  to  the  Polish  cause.' 

Talleyrand  and  the  Princess  Dino  received  Prince 
Adam  in  the  most  friendly  manner,  and  repeatedly 
urged  him  to  take  up  his  residence  in  their  chateau  of 
Valei^ay.  Talleyrand  added  that  in  view  of  the 
general  desire  for  peace,  the  only  means  of  raising  the 
Polish  question  would  be  to  appeal  to  the  Treaty  of 
Vienna,  which,  he  thought,  all  the  Cabinets  would 
insist  on  maintaining.  Prince  Czartoryski  would,  he 
said,  be  especially  qualified  to  carry  on  the  negotia- 
tions on  this  subject,  as  he  had  acted  during  the  Vienna 
Congress  as  a  sort  of  mediator  between  the  Poles  and 
the  Emperor  Alexander. 

The  Christmas  of  1831  was  a  melancholy  one  for 

*  Htstoire  de  Dix  Ans,  vol.  ii,  p.  101.  Guizot,  however,  says  that  Talleyrand's 
Polish  sympathies  were  purely  historical,  and  that  he  was  then  entirely  absorbed  with 
the  Belgian  question  (Hist.  vol.  ii,  p.  229). 


PALMERSTON  323 

Poles  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  and  Prince  Czartoryski 
and  his  few  Polish  friends  in  London  spent  it  in  sad 
reminiscences  of  the  terrible  struggle  through  which 
their  country  had  passed.  Most  of  the  Prince's 
English  friends  and  acquaintances  were  out  of  town, 
but  on  the  29th  of  December  he  obtained  an  interview 
with  Lord  Palmerston,  then  Secretary  of  State  for 
Foreign  Affairs,  which  he  thus  describes  in  a  letter 
written  by  him  shortly  after : 

'  Lord  Palmerston  struck  me  as  a  man  of  very  cold 
temperament,  who,  having  made  up  his  mind  on  the 
Polish  question,  only  thought  of  rebutting  our  argu- 
ments on  the  other  side.  I  began  by  saying  that 
although  England  had  not  given  the  Poles  any  help, 
they  owe  her  gratitude  for  her  good  wishes.  To  this 
Palmerston  rejoined  that  if  the  fate  of  the  Poles  had 
depended  on  his  personal  wishes  and  those  of  English- 
men generally,  their  struggle  for  independence  would 
not  have  had  such  an  unfortunate  result ;  but  that 
circumstances  and  treaties  often  prevent  States  from 
following  their  most  just  impulses.  I  here  remarked 
that  if  treaties  prevented  the  Powers  from  interfering 
in  behalf  of  Poland,  they  should  at  least  see  that  the 
treaties  are  carried  out.  The  Emperor  Nicholas  had 
appealed  to  the  Treaty  of  Vienna  during  the  progress 
of  the  Revolution,  and  he  could  not  repudiate  the 
Treaty  now  that  the  Revolution  was  over.  .  .  .  We 
Poles  have  nothing  to  ask  for  or  to  expect  from  him, 
and  we  only  refer  to  the  Treaty  of  Vienna  as  a  means 
of  diminishing  our  sufferings.  The  maintenance  of 
the  treaties  which  relate  to  Poland  is  a  matter  which 
specially  concerns  the  Powers  that  signed  those 


324      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

treaties.  Lord  Palmerston  made  no  reply  to  this 
remark,  but  said  that  it  is  a  principle  among  States 
not  to  interfere  between  a  Government  and  its  subjects 
except  in  cases  where  a  State  has  a  direct  interest  in 
so  interfering,  or  is  distinctly  authorised  to  do  so  by 
treaty.  The  stipulations  of  the  Treaty  of  Vienna 
with  regard  to  Poland  were  not  clear,  and  might  be 
variously  interpreted.  "  It  provides,  for  instance,  that 
the  kingdom  of  Poland  is  to  be  united  to  Russia  by 
its  Constitution,  but  it  does  not  say  what  the  Constitu- 
tion is  to  be,  or  that  the  Emperor  is  not  to  have  the 
power  to  alter  it.  The  Powers  are  not  therefore 
bound  to  resist  any  modifications  the  Czar  might  deem 
fit  to  introduce  in  the  Constitution  ;  and  Austria  and 
Prussia,  which  are  the  Powers  most  interested  in  the 
question,  concur  in  this  view.  ..."  I  answered  that  it 
was  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  article  about 
Poland  is  not  clear  and  precise,  seeing  that  it  was 
hastily  put  together,  after  much  opposition,  at  the 
moment  when  the  news  arrived  of  the  return  of 
Napoleon  from  the  island  of  Elba,  and  those  who 
drew  it  up,  even  on  the  Russian  side,  did  not  agree 
with  the  Emperor  Alexander  on  the  matter.  It  was 
evident,  however,  that  the  word  '  Constitution '  was 
not  inserted  in  the  Treaty  as  an  expression  without 
any  real  meaning.  By  that  word  was  meant  the 
Constitution  which  Alexander  had  designed  for 
Poland,  and  in  using  it  Alexander  spoke  in  the  name 
of  his  successors,  and  bound  himself  never  to  alter  it. 
Moreover,  all  the  members  of  the  Congress  had 

•  o 

specially    expressed   a  wish   to    maintain   the   Polish 
nationality,    and    any    change    of    the     Constitution 


GREY  325 

tending  to  weaken  that  nationality  must  be  opposed 
to  the  spirit  of  the  Treaty.  As  to  the  allegation  of 
Austria  and  Prussia  that  a  separate  Polish  State  under 
the  Russian  sceptre  does  not  afford  more  security  to 
its  neighbours  than  a  Poland  annexed  to  Russia  as 
part  of  the  Empire,  it  was  thoroughly  understood  by 
the  Congress  that  although  a  contented  Poland  would 
increase  the  Czar's  defensive  forces,  a  Poland  with  a 
Constitution  and  a  separate  army  of  its  own  would 
diminish  the  force  of  Russia  for  purposes  of  aggression. 
Lord  Palmerston  seemed  to  admit  the  justice  of  these 
remarks,  and  after  some  questions  as  to  the  Poles  in 
Austria  ...  he  looked  at  his  watch,  and  as  we  took 
our  leave  he  told  me  that  whenever  I  should  wish  to 
see  him  I  would  find  him  at  the  office  every  afternoon/ 
On  the  following  day  Prince  Czartoryski  saw  Earl 
Grey.  He  said  that  the  Ministry  would  be  glad  to 
interpret  the  Treaty  of  Vienna  as  much  as  possible  in 
favour  of  Poland,  but  that  in  his  opinion  this  must 
depend  on  Austria  and  Prussia,  who  were  directly 
interested.  The  Treaty  would  be  maintained,  but  the 
question  was  how  it  was  to  be  interpreted.  Prince 
Lieven,  Earl  Grey  added,  had  communicated  to  him  a 
memorandum  in  which  Austria  holds  that  the  Treaty 
does  not  demand  adherence  to  the  Constitution,  that 
the  Powers  cannot  prevent  Nicholas  from  altering  it  at 
his  pleasure,  and  that  no  more  can  be  required  than 
that  the  Kingdom  of  Poland  should  have  a  provincial 
diet  like  Posen  and  Galicia.  '  Prince  Lieven,'  Lord 
Grey  continued,  '  was  not  at  all  satisfied  with  my 
answer.  I  told  him  that  we  could  not  accept  this 
interpretation  of  the  Treaty  of  Vienna,  and  that  in 


326       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

our  opinion  the  Constitution  should  be  maintained  in 
the  shape  in  which  it  was  granted.  But  what  can  we 
do  when  Austria  and  Prussia  are  of  a  different  opinion  ? 
If  those  two  Powers,  the  neighbours  of  Russia,  are 
not  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  limiting  Russian 
power  by  maintaining  the  concessions  made  to  the 
Poles,  how  can  we  insist  on  their  being  maintained  ? ' 
Prince  Czartoryski  having  here  remarked  that  the 
Poles  did  not  look  to  their  oppressors  Austria  and 
Prussia,  but  to  England  and  France,  to  decide  their 
fate,  Earl  Grey  continued  :  '  Ah,  but  things  in  France 
are  so  unsettled.  The  preservation  of  peace  depends 
there  upon  a  single  man,  M.  Perier.  If  he  falls,  God 
knows  what  will  happen.  But  I  will  do  my  best  to 
maintain  the  Anglo-French  Alliance,  for  I  agree  with 
you  that  it  is  necessary  for  the  good  of  the  two 
countries  and  of  the  whole  of  Europe.'  This  con- 
versation produced  a  bad  impression  on  the  Prince. 
'  The  Ministry,'  he  says,  '  does  not  seem  to  feel  strong, 
or  to  be  conscious  that  it  stands  at  the  head  of  a  great 
nation  capable  of  exercising  a  powerful  influence  on 
the  destinies  of  Europe.  All  this  leaves  a  free  field 
to  our  enemies  in  the  north.'  The  two  friends  dined 
together  next  day  at  Earl  Grey's  house  at  East 
Sheen,  and  after  dinner  the  latter  admitted  that 
England's  policy  had  been  '  too  timid  with  regard  to 
Poland  '  and  that  •'  England  and  France  had  not  been 
sufficiently  conscious  of  the  means  at  their  command.'* 
The  high  social  position  of  Prince  Adam  Czar- 
toryski, the  prominent  part  which  he  had  taken  in  the 

*  See  also  a  letter  from  Earl  Grey  to  Brougham  in  Brougham's  Autobiography, 
vol.  Hi.,  p.  164. 


BROUGHAM  327 

Polish  Revolution,  and  the  savage  ukases  issued 
against  him  by  the  Emperor  Nicholas,  made  him  a 
remarkable  and  interesting  figure  in  London  society, 
where  he  was  received  with  an  esteem  almost  amount- 
ing to  veneration.  This  feeling  was  not  confined  to 
aristocratic  circles,  where  he  was  personally  known ; 
it  also  spread  to  the  middle  classes,  and  on  the  2nd  of 
January  1832,  the  'Literary  Union  '  club  gave  him  a 
dinner,  at  which  the  poet  Campbell  made  an  enthusi- 
astic speech.  The  Prince's  popularity  was  still  further 
increased  when  it  became  known  that  Prince  Lieven, 
the  Russian  Ambassador,  had  complained  to  Lord 
Palmerston  of  Earl  Grey's  having  invited  '  the 
President  of  the  rebel  government '  to  his  house,  and 
that  the  Princess  had  at  the  same  time  addressed  a 
letter  full  of  bitter  reproaches  to  Earl  Grey. 

Some  days  later  the  Prince  had  an  interview  with 
Brougham,   who   had  now   risen   to    the    position    of 

» 

Lord  Chancellor,  and  whose  official  position  and 
advancing  years  had  greatly  calmed  the  fervid  enthu- 
siasm with  which  he  had  taken  up  the  cause  of  the 
Poles  eighteen  years  before  (see  Chapter  XXI). 
'  Your  Highness  will  understand,'  he  said,  '  the 
difference  between  the  feelings  of  a  private  individual 
and  the  duties  of  a  Minister.  The  opinions  of  Lord 
Grey  and  myself  as  to  Poland  are  well  known  to  you  ; 
but  we  were  obliged  to  adapt  our  policy  to  the  condi- 
tion of  England,  who  was  absolutely  incapable  (sic)  of 
making  war.'  '  But,'  said  the  Prince,  '  why  did  you 
refuse  to  join  France  in  diplomatic  representations  at 
St  Petersburg  ? '  '  Such  a  step,'  answered  Brougham, 
'  would  have  been  of  doubtful  efficacy.  .  .  .  The  fate 


328      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

of  Poland  will  always  interest  us,  but  unfortunately 
the  Polish  cause  is  opposed  to  the  wishes  of  all  the 
other  Powers.  They  all  want  peace,  while  to  take  up 
the  cause  of  Poland  means  war.' 

Though  discouraged,  Prince  Adam  did  not  lose 
heart,  but  prepared  a  memorandum,  entering  fully 
into  the  rights  of  Poland  under  the  Treaty  of  Vienna. 

•/ 

After  showing  it  to  Talleyrand,  who  highly  approved 
it,  he  handed  it  to  Palmerston.  The  latter  said  he 
would  do  all  he  could  for  the  Poles,  but  that  nothing 
could  have  been  done  by  England  during  the  Revolu- 
tion, as  the  proclamation  of  the  deposition  of  Nicholas 
by  the  Poles  had  deprived  her  of  the  only  ground  on 
which  she  could  interfere  in  their  behalf.  .  .  '  Now 
that  the  struggle  is  over,  however,'  he  added,  '  we 
have  forwarded  our  representations  and  remarks  as  to 
the  maintenance  of  the  Treaty  of  Vienna.  We  re- 
cognise that  Russia  has  not  fulfilled  it,  for  she  has 
done  nothing  in  the  provinces,  and  after  granting  a 
Constitution  to  the  kingdom,  has  violated  its  pro- 
visions. We  adhere  firmly  to  this  view,  although 
Austria  and  Prussia  dissent  from  it.  We  hold  that 
the  Constitution  granted  by  the  Emperor  Alexander 
should  be  maintained,  and  can  only  be  altered  by  the 
Diet ;  also  that  the  Polish  provinces  of  Russia  should 
have  a  representative  assembly  and  a  provincial 
administration.' 

The  Russian  answer  to  the  representations  referred 
to  by  Lord  Palmerston  came  at  the  end  of  January. 
It  was  very  courteous  in  tone,  but  it  decisively 
rejected  the  English  view  of  the  Treaty,  pointing  out 
that  Russia  had  a  majority  in  her  favour  of  three  to 


PRUSSIA  SUGGESTS  ANNIHILATION  OF  POLAND     329 

two,  as  Russia,  Austria,  and  Prussia  were  on  one  side 
arid  only  England  and  France  on  the  other.  '  Russia 
is  quite  wrong,'  said  Palmerston  to  Prince  Adam, 
'  but  how  can  we  force  her  to  accept  our  view  ?  We 
cannot  send  an  array  to  Poland,  and  the  burning  of 
the  Russian  fleet  would  be  about  as  effectual  as  the 
burning  of  Moscow.'  The  Ministry  did  not,  however, 
even  attempt  to  pursue  the  subject  diplomatically. 
France  was  beginning  to  strive  for  the  favour  of  the 
Emperor  Nicholas,  and  England,  wishing  above  all 
things  for  the  settlement  of  the  Belgian  question, 
also  found  it  her  interest  to  remain  on  good  terms 
with  him.  Under  these  circumstances  it  was  not 
surprising  that  not  only  Russia  but  Prussia  repudiated 
their  obligations  towards  Europe.  Ancillon,  the 
Prussian  Foreign  Minister,  cynically  advocated  the 
complete  annihilation  of  Poland  '  so  as  to  have  done 
with  her  once  for  all,'  *  and  when  the  British  Ambas- 
sador at  Berlin  appealed  to  the  Treaty  of  Vienna,  he 
sharply  replied  that  '  every  one  can  do  as  he  likes  in 
his  own  house.'  f  In  Austria,  too,  Metternich, 
terrified  at  the  re-appearance  of  the  revolutionary 
spectre  in  France  and  Germany,  although  he  had 
admitted  that  '  he  would  rather  have  a  friendly  and 
peaceful  Poland  for  a  neighbour  than  an  aggressive 
Russia,'  £  began  to  talk  of  a  renewal  of  the  Holy 
Alliance,  and  of  the  two  evils — Russia  and  revolution 
—preferred  the  former  as  the  least. 

Although  it  has  often  been  shown  that  the  cases 

*  Conversation  with  General  Flahaut,  the  French  Ambassador,  reported  by 
Count  Walewski  in  a  letter  preserved  in  the  Polish  Library  in  Paris. 

t  Letter  from  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski,  dated  the  24th  of  January,  1832. 

t  Despatch  of  the  25th  September,  1830  (Memoirs  of  Prince  Metternich,  vol.  v. 
P-  77). 


330      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

of  Poland  and  Ireland  bear  no  resemblance  to  each 
other,  it  is  still  the  constant  practice  of  Russian 
writers  and  their  sympathisers  in  the  English  press 
to  compare  them.  Earl  Grey,  in  a  conversation  with 
Prince  Czartoryski  on  the  8th  of  March,  1832,  told 
the  Prince  that  this  comparison  had  been  used  as  a 
tu  quoque  argument  by  the  Russian  Ambassador. 
'  The  Czar/  he  said, '  will  not  allow  anyone  to  interfere 
in  the  affairs  of  Poland.'  '  Le  Prince  et  la  Princesse 
de  Lieven  ont  repete  plusieurs  fois  que  1'Empereur  ne 
permettra  jamais  que  d'autres  puissances  se  melent 
dans  les  affaires  de  la  Pologne,  de  meme  que  FAng- 
leterre  ne  permettrait  pas  qu'on  se  mele  des  affaires 
de  Flrlande.  .  .  .'  Lord  Palmerston,  referring  to  this 
remark  two  days  later,  said  to  the  Prince  :  '  There  is 
not  the  smallest  similarity  between  the  two  cases. 
Ireland  has  belonged  to  us  for  centuries  ;  it  speaks  the 
same  language  as  England  and  is  the  same  nation. '- 
'  Moreover,'  observed  the  Prince  '  the  union  of  England 
and  Ireland  was  not  the  result  of  a  European  Treaty.' 
In  the  conversation  above  referred  to  Earl  Grey 
added  some  interesting  particulars  on  Continental  and 
English  politics.  '  Russia,'  he  said,  '  is  backed  up  by 
Austria  and  Prussia,  and  we  cannot  rely  on  France ; 
her  position  is  too  unsettled.  .  .  As  for  England, 
public  opinion  is  certainly  interested  in  Poland ;  but 
it  is  much  more  interested  in  various  internal  questions, 
and  in  the  maintenance  of  peace.  Moreover,  we  have 
other  questions  pending  with  Russia,  which  demand 
mutual  concessions.  .  .  .  We  have  financial  diffi- 
culties, but  if  public  opinion  were  in  favour  of  war, 
means  would  be  found  of  raising  the  necessary 


PARTY  FEELING  IN  ENGLAND  331 

funds.  What  most  troubles  us  is  the  uncertain  state 
of  Europe.  Some  want  to  maintain  everything 
by  force,  others  to  upset  everything  by  force.  .  .  . 
Party  feeling,  too,  runs  very  high  here.  Wellington  is 
opposed  to  all  liberal  plans,  and  force  is  his  only  policy  ; 
this  pleases  the  other  Cabinets.  He  thinks  he  will 
yet  return  to  office  ;  he  had  never  been  beaten  before, 
and  will  not  believe  that  he  is  beaten  now.  I  did  not 
seek  office  ;  my  advanced  age  did  not  allow  me  to  do 
so.  The  King  himself  called  upon  me  to  form  a 
Cabinet,  as  the  Duke  after  his  declaration  could  riot 
remain  in  office.'  In  reporting  this  conversation  the 
Prince  adds  that  Earl  Grey  asked  him  several  times 
if  he  had  seen  Lord  Palrnerston,  '  as  if  he  feared  to  say 
anything  which  might  not  be  in  accordance  with 
Palmerston's  views,'  and  that  he  'looked  very 
anxious.' 

The  priceless  collections  of  Pulawy,  the  relics  of 
his  fortune  that  had  survived  the  confiscations  of 
Nicholas,  and  his  duties  to  his  family,  now  urgently 
claimed  Prince  Adam's  attention,  but  the  interests  of 
his  country  were  in  his  eyes  paramount  over  all 
private  considerations,  and  he  stuck  manfully  to  his 
post  so  long  as  a  spark  of  hope  remained.  In  a  letter 
written  about  this  time  to  one  of  his  friends  he  says  : 
'  I  am  glad,  at  any  rate,  that  I  have,  though  in  a 
somewhat  violent  and  expensive  way,  liberated  myself 
from  the  chains  that  bound  me.  I  will  certainly  not 
resume  them  even  at  the  price  of  my  whole  fortune. 
.  .  .  Every  Pole  should  all  his  life  be  prepared  for 
oppression  or  exile.  You  have  experienced  it  already. 
My  turn  has  come,  at  too  advanced  an  age  it  is  true, 


332       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

but  I  feel  strong  enough  to  bear  it  even  with  good 
humour.' 

All  through  his  long  life  his  proudest  boast  was 
that  he  was  the  servant  of  his  country ;  while  he 
was  Foreign  Minister  of  Russia  he  did  not  draw  the 
salary  of  the  appointment,  and  repeatedly  refused  the 
decorations  and  other  dignities  which  the  Emperor 
Alexander  pressed  upon  him.  In  one  of  his  speeches 
to  the  Polish  Historical  Society  he  said  he  would  like 
to  add  to  the  family  motto  of  the  Czartoryskis — 
'  Come  what  may ' — that  of  the  Black  Prince,  '  Ich 
dien.' 

Although  it  was  evident  that  neither  England  nor 
France  would  do  anything  for  Poland,  Prince  Adam  was 
anxious  at  least  to  bring  into  prominence  the  fact  that 
international  engagements  had  been  broken,  and  that  a 
wrong  had  been  done  which,  if  not  protested  against, 
might  be  given  the  appearance  of  a  lawful  proceeding, 
and  be  accepted  as  such  by  public  opinion.  The  state 
of  the  Continent,  too,  was  then  so  unsettled  that  a 
conflict  might  at  any  moment  arise  in  which  the 
Polish  question,  if  kept  alive  before  Europe,  might 
play  a  prominent  part.  The  Prince  accordingly  did  his 
utmost  to  keep  both  the  Government  and  the  public 
fully  informed  as  to  the  position  of  affairs  in  Poland. 
The  whole  of  the  London  press — notably  the  Times,  the 
Morning  Herald,  and  the  Morning  Chronicle — advo- 
cated the  Polish  cause,  and  the  Foreign  Office  readily 
accepted  the  information  communicated  by  the  Prince 
on  the  subject,  especially  as  Lord  Heytesbury,  in  his 
despatches  from  St  Petersburg,  was  completely  silent 
as  to  the  persecutions  and  cruelties  of  the  Russian 


THE  LONDON  PRESS  333 

Government  in  Poland,  the  destruction  of  the  national 
collections,*  and  the  suppression  of  the  university  and 
schools.      '  These,'  said  Lord  Pahnerston  to  the  Prince 
'  are  the  results  of  animosity  after  a  sanguinary  war.' 
'  But,'  observed  the  latter,   '  victory  should  produce 
leniency.'     *  True,'  Palmerston  rejoined,  '  in   civilised 
countries ;  in  half-savage  ones  victory  only  produces 
increased  severities.'     Among  the    documents   which 
reached    the    Foreign    Office    in   this   way  were   two 
letters  from  a  Pole  named  Borowski,  who  was  taken 
in  his  childhood  to  South  America,  fought  there  for 
the  independence  of  the  Spanish  republics,  and  after- 
wards went  to  Arabia.      Here  he  heard  the  news  of 
the   Polish  Revolution,   upon  which  he  at  once  pro- 
ceeded to  Persia,  where  he  was  well  received  by  the 
heir-apparent  Abbas  Mirza  and  attempted  to  induce 
him  to  take   active   steps  against   Russia.     His  last 
plan  of  helping  his  country  was  to  equip  two  cruisers 
on  the  Black  Sea  for  the  capture  of  Russian  ships, 
and  he  asked  that  letters  of  marque  should  be  granted 
by  England  for  this  purpose. 

With  a  view  to  spreading  information  as  to  Polish 
affairs,  Prince  Czartoryski,  assisted  by  several  English 
political  writers,  founded  a  monthly  Magazine, 
'  Polonia,'  afterwards  expanded  into  the  '  British  and 
Foreign  Review,'  containing  articles  on  Polish  history 
and  other  subjects  connected  with  that  country.  He 
also  collected  for  the  use  of  English  writers  a  number 
of  historical  works  about  Poland,  some  of  which  had 

*  The  total  number  of  books  (most  of  which  have  been  destroyed)  taken  by 
the  Kussians  from  the  great  Polish  libraries  is  about  700,000.  Of  these  17,000 
belonged  to  the  Radzivill  Library,  400,000  to  the  famous  Zaluski  Library,  200,000  to 
the  University  of  Warsaw,  30,000  to  the  Society  of  the  Friends  of  Science,  20,000  to 
the  University  of  Wilna,  and  15,000  to  the  Czartoryski  Library  at  Pulawy. 


334       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

already  been  sent  to  London  in  1814  by  his  secretary 
Biernacki,  and  he  presented  some  of  the  latest  works 
published  in  various  countries  on  Polish  affairs  to  the 
British  Museum  Library.  On  the  25th  of  November, 
1832,  'The  Literary  Association  of  the  Friends  of 
Poland,'  a  society  which  has  ever  since  continued  to 
be  the  head-quarters  of  all  English  action  on  behalf  of 
the  Poles,  was  founded.  A  'Polish  Committee'  for 
the  relief  of  Polish  refugees  had  already  been  formed 
by  Messrs  Bach,  Hunter  Gordon,  Arthur  White,  and 
Kirwan,  but,  thanks  to  the  influence  and  efforts  of 
Prince  Czartoryski,  the  scope  and  importance  of  this 
committee  was  considerably  enlarged,  and  it  became 
the  association  above  described,  which  consisted 
entirely  of  Englishmen.  Its  first  President  was  the 
poet  Campbell,  and  among  his  most  distinguished 
successors  were  Lord  Dudley  Stuart — the  most 
devoted,  zealous,  and  indefatigable  of  the  English 
friends  of  Poland — and  Lords  Harrowby,  Houghton, 
and  Lytton.  The  Association  took  up  its  quarters 
at  No.  10  Duke  Street,  St  James's,  where  Oliver 
Cromwell  and  Milton  once  lived  ;  and  there  it  still 
remains,  relieving  out  of  its  scanty  funds  the  helpless 
survivors  of  the  Polish  Revolutions  of  the  last  sixty 
years. 

Another  matter  to  which  the  Prince  devoted 
much  attention  was  the  introduction  of  the  Polish 
question  in  Parliament.  Neither  the  adherents  of 
the  Ministry  nor  the  members  of  the  Opposition  were 
inclined  to  take  such  a  course,  the  former  because 
they  feared  it  would  embarrass  the  Government,  and 
the  latter  because  they  looked  upon  the  Poles  as 


THE  POLISH  QUESTION  IX  PARLIAMENT        335 

revolutionists.  At  length  Mr  Cutlar  Fergusson,  M.P., 
an  independent  member  with  a  good  position  in  the 
House  and  considerable  talent  as  a  speaker,  consented, 
after  consulting  Lord  Palmerston  and  Sir  James 
Mackintosh,  to  undertake  the  task.  As  his  motion 
would  necessarily  have  to  be  based  on  the  Treaty  of 
Vienna,  he  had  to  be  supplied  with  as  much  informa- 
tion as  possible  on  the  subject ;  unfortunately  the 
Prince  no  longer  had  his  papers  relating  to  the  Vienna 
Congress,  including  despatches  from  Pozzo  di  Borgo, 
Stein,  and  Castlereagh,  as  they  had  been  taken  out  of 
his  wife's  carriage  by  the  Austrian  customs'  authorities. 
Ample  material,  was,  however,  collected  by  the  Prince 
and  his  untiring  companion  and  friend  Niemcewicz 
for  the  proposed  debate,  but  the  Belgian  Question 
and  the  Reform  Bill  prevented  its  coming  on  so  soon 
as  was  hoped,  and  finding  that  for  the  present  there 
was  nothing  to  be  done,  and  that  his  slender  resources 
were  being  exhausted  by  the  expense  of  living  in 
London,  the  Prince  left  in  March,  1832,  for  Clifton, 
where  he  could  live  more  cheaply  and  have  more  quiet 
for  his  political  and  literary  work.  He  also  wanted 
to  become  more  closely  acquainted  with  rural  life  in 
England,  that  being  the  country  which  he  liked 
better  than  any  other,  and  where  he  hoped  ultimately 
to  settle  with  his  family.  He  returned  to  London  at 
the  end  of  March  for  the  Polish  debate  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  which  took  place  on  the  18th  of  April. 
In  June  the  Prince's  family*  also  came  to  London, 

*  The  Prince  married  on  the  25th  of  September  1817,  the  Princess  Anna, 
daughter  of  Prince  Alexander  Sapieha-Kodenski.  He  had  three  children  :  Prince 
Witold,  who  died  on  the  14th  of  November  18G5,  Princess  Isa,  and  Prince  Ladislas, 
tue  present  head  of  the  family. 


336       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

but  the  English  climate  acted  so  injuriously  on  his 
wife's  health  that  he  was  obliged  to  give  up  his 
plan  of  settling  in  England,  and  at  the  end  of 
August  he  took  up  his  residence  in  Paris.  During 
the  interval  two  more  interesting  debates  on  Poland 
occurred  in  the  House  of  Commons.  The  first 
was  on  the  28th  of  June ;  the  subject  was  again 
introduced  by  Mr  Cutlar  Fergusson,  who  was  seconded 
by  Lord  Sandon  (afterwards  the  Earl  of  Harrowby). 
As  on  the  previous  occasion,  the  condemnation  of 
Kussia's  proceedings  in  Poland  was  unanimous.  Lord 
Morpeth  spoke  of  '  the  immortal  memory  of  the  land 
that  first  resisted  the  torrent  of  Mahommedan  inva- 
sion and  secured  the  liberties  and  the  religion  of 
Europe,'  and  O'Connell  even  went  so  far  as  to  call  the 
Emperor  Nicholas  '  a  miscreant.'  This  elicited  an 
expression  of  regret  from  Lord  Palmerston  at  the  use 
of  such  language  in  the  House,  upon  which  Mr 
Beaumont  declared  he  was  delighted  at  the  appella- 
tion which  had  been  given  to  the  Emperor,  and 
entirely  concurred  in  it ;  and  Mr  Hume  said  he  would 
not  only  call  the  Emperor  a  miscreant,  but  a  monster 
in  human  form.  But  nothing  was  to  be  done  by 
denunciation,  however  eloquent.  Poland  was  in  the 
iron  grasp  of  three  of  the  strongest  States  in  Europe, 
and  England  had  no  power  to  help  her. 


CHAPTER  XXVI 

1834 

TALLEYRAND    AND    PALMERSTON. CONVERSATION    WITH     BROUGHAM. 

LORD  DURHAM. 

THERE  is  a  curious  note  in  Prince  Czartoryski's  diary, 
dated  the  12th  November  1834,  on  the  relations 
between  Talleyrand  and  Lord  Palrnerston.  'Talley- 
rand,' he  says,  '  formerly  in  strict  friendship  with 
Palmerston,  has  now  had  a  little  quarrel  with  him 
because,  when  the  latter  complained  that  France  did 
not  respond  to  the  overtures  of  England  in  the  Eastern 
question,  Talleyrand  replied  that  France  was  only 
following  the  example  of  England  when  she  was  asked 
to  act  with  France  on  behalf  of  Poland  during  the 
Revolution  of  1831.'  In  a  subsequent  conversation 
with  Lord  Brougham  (14th  December  1834)  the  latter 
said  of  Talleyrand— '  I  think  he  does  not  just  now  know 
what  he  is  talking  about.  Imaginez  qu'il  m'a  parle  de 
la  necessite  de  rassembler  un  Congres  Europeen  qui 
aurait  pour  but  de  garantir  les  institutions  existantes, 
et  pour  calmer  les  esprits,  et  qu'a  ce  Congres  la  France 
et  1'Angleterre  declareraient  qu'ils  mettraient  des 
limites  a  la  licence  de  la  presse.  C'est  de  la  demence.' 
During  the  same  conversation  Brougham  said  that 

VOL.  II.  Y 


338      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  reason  why  the  English  Government  had  refused 
to  join  in  a  demonstration  in  favour  of  Poland  in  1832 
together  with  France,  and  with  the  concurrence  of 

O  ' 

Austria,  was  that  it  would  have  been  necessary  to 
arm,  and  the  Ministry  was  uncertain  of  its  existence 
in  consequence  of  the  Reform  bill.  He  called  Thiers 
'  un  petit  litterateur,'  and  said  that  even  Lord  Durham 
had  not  been  able  to  say  a  word  at  St  Petersburg. 
Prince  Czartoryski  here  remarked  that  Lord  Durham 
had  told  him  he  had  spoken  very  strongly  on  the 
subject  of  Poland  at  St  Petersburg.  '  Oui  bien/ 
answered  Brougham,  'a  M.  de  Nesselrode ;  niais  a 
1'Empereur  lui-me'me  il  n'a  pas  ose  dire  un  seul  mot, 
parcequ'il  lui  ferait  la  cour  pour  obtenir  un  cordon. 
C'est  Fhomme  le  plus  vain,  le  plus  aristocrate,  qui 
existe.  II  a  tourmente  pendant  dix-huit  mois  Lord 
Grey  parcequ'il  ne  1'a  pas  fait  de  suite  comte.  II  a 
ete  contre  Lord  Grey  pendant  le  Ministere  Canning, 
qui  1'a  fait  entrer  a  la  chambre  des  pairs.  Ce  qui  a 
6te  mal  calcule,  parceque  dans  la  chambre  des  com- 
munes il  avait  quelque  influence,  au  lieu  que  dans  la 
chambre  haute  il  ri'en  a  aucune.  C'est  mon  ami,  et 
cependant  je  ne  puis  m'empdcher  de  le  dire.  On  a 
voulu  nous  brouiller,  je  n'ai  rien  dit  de  ce  que  in'on  a 
attribue;  ce  sont  les  journaux  qui  ont  fait  ce  pate.' 
He  afterwards  proposed  to  the  Prince  to  go  to  Italy 
with  him.  '  If  you  do/  he  added,  '  people  will  say  we 
are  plotting  for  Poland,  and  I  shall  be  delighted.' 


CHAPTER  XXVII 

1839 

CONVERSATION     WITH     LORD    PALMERSTON. CIRCASSIA.— PROPOSAL     TO 

SEND  THE  BRITISH  FLEET  INTO  THE  BLACK  SEA.— RUSSIAN  DESIGNS 

ON    INDIA. PERSIA. AFGHANISTAN. PALMERSTON'S    OPINION    OP 

METTERNICH. — TURKEY  AND  RUSSIA. 

ON  the  13th  of  February  and  the  10th  of  March  1839 
Prince  Czartoryski  had  conversations  with  Lord 
Palmerston  on  English  Foreign  Policy  generally,  and 
about  Circassia,  which  had  been  invaded  and  nearly 
conquered,  after  a  heroic  resistance,  by  the  Russian 
troops.  The  following  is  the  Prince's  report  of  these 
conversations : — 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — You  have  lost  Persia  ;  you 
are  engaged  in  a  costly  war  in  India ;  Turkey  is 
vacillating,  and  Circassia  will  fall  if  she  does  not 
obtain  help.  Why  not  send  a  British  fleet  into  the 
Black  Sea,  or  even  only  before  Constantinople  ?  This 
would  produce  a  great  effect  upon  the  entire  East  and 
restore  your  influence  with  the  Porte. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — The  war  in  India  is  not  very 
expensive,  and  Russia  has  been  obliged  to  give  up  her- 
plans  as  to  Herat.     Persia,  it  is  true,  is  lost  to  us  for 
the    moment,   but   the    movement   at    Candahar  and 
Cabul,    and    the    restoration    of    the    old    legitimate 


340      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

sovereign  in  these  united  Kingdoms,  will  secure  the 
independence  of  Afghanistan  and  serve  as  a  barrier 
against  Persia  and  Russia.  A  British  fleet  cannot 

o 

under  the  Treaty  of  1809  enter  the  Dardanelles 
without  the  permission  of  the  Sultan,  and  I  am  not  at 
all  sure  he  would  give  it.  And  what  would  the  fleet 

do  once  it  had  £ot  there  ?     It  would  have  either  to 

* 
blockade  the    coast   of  Circassia — which    belongs  to 

Russia,  or  at  least  was  ceded  to  her  by  the  Treaty  of 
Adrianople,  which  has  been  recognised  by  England— 
or  it  would  have  to  attack  the  Russian  fleet,  harbours, 
and  arsenals.  In  either  case  this  would  be  war. 
Now  the  English  nation  is  able  to  make  war,  but  it 
will  only  do  so  where  its  own  interests  are  concerned. 
We  are  a  simple  and  practical  nation,  a  commercial 
nation  ;  we  do  not  go  in  for  chivalrous  enterprises  or 
fight  for  others  as  the  French  do.  Even  supposing, 
as  you  seem  to  think,  that  Russia  would  not  make 
war  upon  us  if  our  fleet  were  to  appear  in  the  Black 
Sea,  she  would  bitterly  complain  of  our  conduct,  and 
we  would  have  to  explain  it  to  Parliament,  which 
would  certainly  not  be  satisfied  with  our  arguments. 
We  have  a  strong  majority  against  us  in  the  House 
of  Lords  ;  in  the  House  of  Commons  we  have  an 
uncertain  majority  of  thirty  votes,  which  we  would 
lose,  and  then  we  would  be  driven  from  office. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — You  might  act  without 
compromising  yourselves  officially.  In  Russia  every- 
thing is  done  by  the  Government ;  in  England  much 
is  left  to  the  initiative  of  individuals  acting  in  a 
private  capacity.  You  might  help  the  Circassians  by 
private  effort  without  open  Government  intervention. 


CIRCASSIA  341 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — Possibly  ;  but  we  have  no 
secret  funds  which  we  could  employ  for  such  a  purpose. 
Besides,  it  would  soon  be  known ;  nothing  can  long 
remain  a  secret  in  our  country. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — But  then  you  are  not  on 
equal  terms  with  Russia.  She  does  not  scruple  to  use 
every  possible  means  of  injuring  you. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — That  is  an  advantage  enjoyed 
by  despotic  States.  Free  States  have  other  advan- 
tages. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — By  leaving  Russia  to  act 
as  she  pleases  you  expose  to  the  greatest  dangers  the 
independence  of  the  Asiatic  States,  and  your  own 
dominions  in  India. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — True  ;  but  John  Bull  will  not 
go  to  war  to  save  Circassia. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — It  is  not  only  the  fate  of 
Circassia  that  is  in  question.  You  are  losing  all  your 
influence  over  the  Sultan  ;  already  he  has  accepted 
the  demands  of  Russia  as  to  Walla chia,  and  if  you 
continue  your  policy  of  non-intervention  he  may 
abandon  you  altogether. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — I  do  not  believe  it.  Our 
influence  is  like  the  tide,  which,  though  it  advances 
and  then  recedes,  yet  steadily  gains  ground. 
Mehemet  Ali  is  an  animal  that  Russia  is  fattening 
before  she  sacrifices  him.  .  .  .  Russia  is  unfortu- 
nately surrounded  by  weak  neighbours  like  Turkey 
and  Sweden,  and  by  others  attached  to  her  either 
by  an  alliance  of  fear  (Austria)  or  an  alliance  of 
relationship  (Prussia). 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — So  long  as  Poland  remains 


342       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

divided  between  the  three  Northern  Powers,  you 
cannot  rely  upon  Austria. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — No  doubt ;  but  how  are  we 
to  induce  her  to  change  her  policy  ?  Prince  Metter- 
nich  is  undoubtedly  a  man  of  great  talent,  but  he  is 
timid  and  prejudiced;  he  fears  revolution  more  than 
anything  else.  He  is  accustomed  to  the  admiration 
and  incense  of  his  coterie,  who  are  offended  if  he  is 
only  praised  in  ordinary  language.  He  cannot  be 
persuaded  that  anything  he  thinks  or  does  is  not  right. 
Besides,  if  there  were  an  independent  Poland,  do  you 
think  Bohemia  and  Hungary  would  not  claim  inde- 
pendence too  ?  Poland  would  no  doubt  want  a  repre- 
sentative Government,  which  implies  a  parliament, 
freedom  of  speech,  and  a  free  press.  The  very  idea 
of  these  institutions  would  make  Metternich's  hair 
stand  on  end,  he  is  so  accustomed  to  be  adored  with- 
out the  slightest  opposition  in  his  drawing-room.  He 
said  once  that  he  would  rather  be  a  convict  than  a 
Minister  in  a  free  country.  I  do  not  think  he  would 
ever  consent  to  the  restoration  of  Poland  unless  there 
were  a  war,  in  which  case  Austria  might  find  the 
Poles  useful  for  defence  or  aggression. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — The  new  French  Ministry 
is  strongly  inclined  to  go  hand-iii-hand  with  England ; 
and  this  would  add  weight  to  your  representations  at 
Vienna. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — It  would  no  doubt  facilitate 
our  action,  but  France  must  first  reassure  Austria  as 
to  Italy.  She  must  be  disabused  of  the  idea  that  we 
are  revolutionists,  and  she  must  be  able  to  rely  upon 
our  support  in  the  event  of  a  war  with  Russia  ;  biit 


TURKEY  AND  RUSSIA  343 

she  does  not  trust  us.  I  know  that  many  people 
whose  opinions  I  respect  are  in  favour  of  sending  our 
fleet  into  the  Black  Sea,  but  I  have  fully  considered 
the  matter  and  I,  do  not  see  how  such  a  course  would 
be  either  desirable  or  practicable.  .  .  .  Besides,  it 
would  be  a  bad  plan  to  try  to  secure  the  Sultan's  inde- 
pendence by  forcing  his  hand. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — You  have  often  done  such  a 
thing,  as  at  Naples  and  Copenhagen. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — At  Constantinople,  more  than 
anywhere  else,  good  can  be  done  and  evil  prevented 
by  an  increase  of 'moral  influence.  Our  influence,  joined 
to  that  of  France  and  Austria,  would  produce  an  effect 
upon  Russia  which  might  be  attained  without  a  war. 
She  will  not  be  allowed  to  make  any  more  victims. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — Yes,  but  how  about  those 
she  has  made  already  ?  Your  policy  ought  to  satisfy 
Russia  entirely  if  she  is  reasonable.  She  has  taken  so 
much  that  she  can  wish  for  little  more.  She  is  allowed 
to  tear  up  and  devour  at  her  leisure  all  she  has 
unjustly  appropriated,  and  the  sufferings  of  her  victims 
are  not  even  recognised. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — I  know  that  fresh  horrors  have 
been  perpetrated  in  Poland  of  which  people  have  no 
idea  ;  but  this  can  only  be  remedied  by  a  war.  Yet 
who  knows  ?  If  we  could  only  [inspire  Austria  with 
full  confidence  in  us  and  detach  her  from  Russia,  I  am 
convinced  that  her  moral  influence  might  have  a  good 
effect  on  the  fate  of  Poland. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — The  Opposition  seems  very 
warlike,  and  it  would  probably  support  you  in  a  war- 
like policy. 


344       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — Yes,  they  want  us  to  augment 
the  army  and  the  fleet ;  but  when  the  money  will  have 
to  be  found  they  will  oppose  every  new  tax  and  leave 
us  in  the  lurch.  These  are  the  usual  tactics  of 
the  party,  and  we  are  not  going  to  be  duped  by 
them. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII 

LETTER    FROM    THE    DUKE    OP    SUSSEX. 

ONE  of  the  most  ardent  supporters  and  patrons  of  the 
Literary  Association  of  the  Friends  of  Poland  was 
H.R.H.  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  who  used  to  say  that 
he  once  wore  the  Polish  crown,  as  that  of  the  latest 
Polish  King,  Stanislas  Augustus,  was  put  on  his 
head  by  the  guardian  of  the  crown  jewels  at  Berlin 
when  he  visited  that  city.  The  following  letter  is  in 
reply  to  one  from  Prince  Czartoryski  thanking  him 
for  a  speech  he  made  at  a  meeting  of  the  Associ- 
ation :— 

MON  CHER  PRINCE, — Une  multiplicite  d'occupa- 
tions  auxquelles  j'ai  du  faire  attention  m'a  empeche  de 
repondre  plus  tot  a  votre  aimable  lettre.  Aujourd'hui, 
me  trouvant  plus  en  liberte,  je  m'empresse  de  vous 
remercier  pour  toutes  les  expressions  obligeantes  que 
vous  avez  bien  voulu  me  marquer  au  sujet  de  notre 
reunion  en  faveur  de  la  cause  de  la  Pologne,  a 
quelle  occasion  j'ai  eu  la  satisfaction  de  presider. 

Mes  opinions  en  faveur  d'une  liberte  reelle  et 
constitution  elle  ay  ant  pour  base  et  guide  des  lois 
sages,  explicites,  et  definitives,  sont  trop  connues  pour 


346       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

quej'aie  besoin  de  vous  les  exposer  ici,  encore  inoins 
de  les  repeter  dans  cette  occasion.  Ce  sont  des 
principes  que  j'ai  adopted  apres  une  reflexion  la  plus 
serieuse  ainsi  que  d'apres  une  longue  experience. 
C'est  une  matiere  de  conscience  la  plus  sacre'e  pour 
inoi,  la  considerant  comme  forniant  partie  de  ma 
religion.  Je  n'ai  done  fait  que  remplir  mon  devoir  en 
elevant  ma  voix  contre  des  actes  que  je  crois  injustes 
et  contraires  aux  lois  divines  et  humaines. 

Dans  un  gouvernement  constitutionnel  comme 
celui  de  1'Angleterre,  oil  les  ministres  sont  respons- 
ables  a  la  nation  pour  les  conseils  qu'ils  soumettent 
a  leur  maitre,  le  Koi  ria  jamais  tort,  mais  dans  un 
gouvernement  despotique  le  souverain  ne  jouit  pas 
d'un  pareil  avantage  ;  chaque  acte  de  l'exe*cutive 
est  attribue  a  sa  personne,  comme  emanant  de  sa 
volonte  immediate,  sans  qu'on  reflechit  qu'il  peut  y 
avoir  ete  pousse  par  des  factions  qui  dirigent  souvent 
les  affaires  de  1'Etat  en  secret,  ou  que  dans  certaines 
occasions  sa  raison  peut  etre  ou  avoir  ete  surprise 
par  la  misrepresentation  de  quelque  ministre  ainsi 
que  de  quelque  autre  individu  qui  est  irresponsable, 
puisque  la  loi  ignore  son  existence,  et  qui  n'a  en  vue 
que  ses  propres  interests  en  flattant  Fambition  du  Prince 
saris  consulter  aussi  peu  le  bien  dtre  de  sa  patrie  que 
le  bonheur  general  du  genre  humain. 

Si  mes  remonstrances  pouvaient  parvenir  aux 
oreillesde  rAutocrate,cornme  les  opinions  desinteresse'es 
ainsi  que  comme  les  expressions  d'un  cosmopolite  qui 
ne  cherche  que  le  bonheur  de  son  voisin  et  qui  travaille 
incessarnment  pour  etablir  une  harmonic  universelle 
dans  ce  bas  monde,  et  qu'elles  puissent  lui  faire  peur 


LETTER  FHOM  THE  DUKE  OF  SUSSEX          347 

pour  quelques  moments,  je  m'estimerai  bien  heureux  !  !  ! 
Ce  n'est  pas  seuletnent  par  des  conquetes  qu'un 
souverain  se  rend  cdlebre,  ou  qu'il  gagne  1'admiration 
du  monde,  encore  moins  se  fait-il  aimer  par  de  tels 
procedds,  mais  c'est  par  des  actes  de  justice  et  de 
bienveillance  qu'il  contribue  au  bonheur,  a  la  securite, 
a  la  tranquillity  de  ses  sujets.  C'est  en  reprimant  les 
vues  d'ambition  et  d'accroissement  dans  les  autres,  en 
maintenant  la  paix.  en  encourageant  les  arts  et  les 
sciences,  ainsi  qu'une  bonne  intelligence  entre  les 
nations  voisines  et  la  sienne,  qu'il  acquiert  1'estime  des 
hommes  sages,  justes,  et  loyaux,  et  qu'il  laisse  son  nom 
etsa  renommee  com  me  un  heritage  ainsi  qu'un  souvenir 
precieux  a  la  posterite.  Voila  mes  idees,  mon  cher 
Prince,  que  je  vous  communique  franchement,  vous 
priant  en  merne  temps  d'etre  1'interprete  de  mes  senti- 
ments cormus  aupres  de  ces  Messieurs  qui  avec  vous 
sont  a  la  tete  des  differents  bureaux  pour  conduire  les 
interets  des  Polonais  et  qui  se  sont  unis  a  vous  pour 
m'adresser  une  lettre  a  laquelle  je  mets  le  plus  haut 
prix,  la  regardant  comme  un  temoignage  public  et 
precieux  de  leur  approbation  de  ces  principes  que  je 
me  fais,  et  que  je  me  ferai  toujours,  une  gloire  de 
professor  et  de  plaider  dans  toutes  les  occasions,  quand 
ils  pourront  produire  du  bien.— 

Agreez,  mon  cher  Prince,  les  assurances  de  mon 
sincere  estirne  et  de  ma  haute  consideration,  aussi  de 
mon  amitie,  avec  lesquelles  j'ai  le  plaisir  de  me  dire 

Yotre  devoue  et  sincere  ami, 

(signed)     FREDERIC,  DUC  DE  SUSSEX. 

Au  PALAIS  DE  KENSINGTON, 
ce  16  de  Juillet,  1839. 


CHAPTER  XXIX 

1853-5 

POLISH      MEDAL     TO      LORD     PALMERSTON. PRINCE     CZARTORYSKI    AND 

NAPOLEON  III. THE  CRIMEAN  WAR. 

ALTHOUGH  Lord  Palinerston  did  not  conceal  from 
Prince  Czartoryski  his  conviction  that  in  the  state  of 
affairs  which  then  prevailed  on  the  Continent  nothing 
could  be  done  for  Poland,  the  noble  character  of  the 
Prince,  his  devoted  patriotism,  and  his  wide  knowledge 
and  experience  of  European  politics,  made  him  a 
welcome  visitor  at  the  Foreign  Office,  and  Lord  Palmer- 
ston  repeatedly  took  occasion  to  express  his  admiration 
and  sympathy  for  the  Polish  nation  and  its  venerable 
chief.  After  the  last  spark  of  Polish  independence 
had  been  extinguished  by  the  absorption  of  the 
Republic  of  Cracow  into  the  Austrian  State,  not- 
withstanding the  protests  of  England  and  France— 
which  as  usual  remained  fruitless  in  presence  of  the 
alliance  of  the  three  spoilers  of  Poland — Lord  Palmer- 
ston  made  some  appreciative  remarks  in  a  speech  at 
the  Mansion  House  on  the  devotion  of  Lord  Dudley 
Stuart  to  the  Polish  cause,  arid  a  deputation  from  the 
Polish  Historical  Society  took  the  opportunity  of 
presenting  him,  in  recognition  of  his  sympathy  for  the 


PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  AND  NAPOLEON  III     349 

Poles,  with  a  medal  of  Prince  Czartoryski,  on  which 
was  the  inscription :  '  H.  T.  P.  Vice  Comiti  Palmerston 
quia  memor  exstat  fandi  atque  nefandi.  Societas 
Historica  Polona  grata  offert.' 

In  1853,  when  the  Prince  came  to  London  to  sound 
the  disposition  of  the  Ministry  in  view  of  the  crisis  in 
the  East,  he  records  in  his  diary  (June  27)  that  he 
found  Lord  Aberdeen  '  abaissd  ;  il  a  Fair  de  succomber 
sous  le  poids  de  la.responsabiliteV  A  few  days  after 
he  saw  Lord  Clarendon,  Palmerston  and  Disraeli.  The 
former  gave  him  an  impression  of '  indecision — desir  de 
conserver  la  paix.'  His  description  of  Palmerston  is 
'  visage  de  bois,  regard  impassible,  bouche  close,  pas 
un  mot  de  reponse  a  tous  mes  arguments,'  and  of 
Disraeli,  '  excellent  pour  la  bonne  cause  ;  nous  causons 
en  parfaite  amitie  sur  la  Pologne.'  Lord  Malmesbury 
called  upon  him  and  expressed  '  excellentes  intentions.' 

In  Paris  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  was  one  of 
Napoleon  Ill's  most  trusted  counsellors,  and  he  sent 
numerous  memoranda  to  the  Emperor  on  the  conduct 
of  the  Russian  campaign  which,  though  the  Prince  was 
then  eighty -three  years  of  age,  entered  minutely  into 
every  detail  and  showed  an  extraordinary  power  of  re- 
membering past  events  and  adapting^the  knowledge 
derived  from  them  to  existing  circumstances.  He 
was  a  warm  advocate  of  an  Anglo-French  alliance, 
and  in  a  memorandum*  addressed  to  the  French 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  on  the  10th  of  February 
1853,  he  pointed  out  that  such  an  alliance  would  be 
the  only  means  of  preventing  the  encroachments  of 

*  The  drafts  of  t'ae  memoranda  and  notes  drawn  up  on  this  occasion  are  in  the 
Prince's  own  handwriting. 


350       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORY&KI 

Russia  in  the  East.  '  The  conduct  of  Russia  and 
Austria  towards  Turkey,'  says  this  document,  '  re- 
sembles in  all  respects  that  pursued  by  those  Powers 
with  regard  to  Poland,  and  undoubtedly  tends  to  a 
similar  result.  Turkey  and  the  peoples  forming  that 
country  can  only  be  saved  by  the  simultaneous  and 
united  action  of  France  and  England.  They  alone, 
acting  with  the  same  object,  can  neutralise  the 
deleterious  influence  and  the  immense  weight  of  the 
two  former  Powers.  .  .  .  Such  an  alliance,  though 
evidently  necessary  for  the  good  of  Europe,  yet 
presents  many  difficulties.  Under  the  Restoration 
the  French  Government  was  alienated  from  England 
and  sympathised  with  Russia.  The  policy  of  Louis 
Philippe,  though  more  friendly  to  England,  was  too 
vacillating  and  timorous  to  inspire  British  statesmen 
with  confidence  ;  and  the  recent  talk  of  French  officers 
about  an  invasion  of  England  has  naturally  increased 
the  distrust  towards  France  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Channel.  The  subordinate  British  agents  in  the  East, 
on  the  other  hand,  show  an  extreme  jealousy  of  their 
French  colleagues,  and  instead  of  acting  hand  in  hand 

o          '  o 

with  them  in  matters  where  the  two  countries  have  a 
common  interest,  they  often  foil  them  at  the  risk  of 
injuring  the  interests  of  their  own  country.  The 
struggle  which  has  begun  between  the  Protestant 
propaganda  and  Roman  Catholicism  in  the  East  may 
add  to  these  difficulties.  Yet  they  must  be  overcome 
in  view  of  the  supreme  interest  of  justice,  of  the 
common  good,  of  the  security  of  all  Europe,  and  of 
the  dignity  of  the  two  Powers  which  are  its  true 
guardians.  A  sincere,  decided,  and  persevering  line 


THE  CRIMEAN  WAR  351 

of  conduct  will  remove  many  obstacles,  and  if  frank 
communications  and  friendly  overtures  do  not  prove 
sufficient,  France  should  prove  her  sincerity  by  at 
once  offering  to  act  in  concert  with  England  in  any 
warlike  step  she  might  propose  to  take.  Russia  and 
Austria  should  not  be  allowed  any  longer  to  pose  as 
the  protectors  of  the  Christian  subjects  of  the  Porte. 
It  should  be  pointed  out  to  the  Sultan  that  if  in  his 
relations  with  his  Christian  subjects  he  acts  at  the 
dictation  of  his  two  enemies,  he  will  only  humiliate 
himself  in  the  eyes  of  the  peoples  under  his  rule, 
while  if  he  listens  to  the  counsels  of  his  allies,  he  will 
gain  both  in  security  and  in  strength.  To  put  a  stop 
to  the  abuses  of  the  Turks  with  regard  to  the 

o 

Christians  would  be  to  render  a  signal  service  to  the 
Ottoman  Empire  and  furnish  it  with  the  most  efficacious 
guarantee  against  its  early  dissolution.' 

In  a  further  note,  dated  the  28th  of  March  1854 
(the  date  of  the  declaration  of  war  against  Russia), 
Prince  Czartoryski  gave  some  valuable  hints  ao  to 
the  best  means  of  carrying  on  a  war  against  Russia 
by  England  and  France.  ( Russia/  he  says,  '  is 
defended  on  the  west  by  the  two  German  Powers,  and 
cannot  be  reached  from  that  side  so  long  as  their 
neutrality  is  maintained  and  respected.  But  her 
frontier  may  be  attacked  at  other  points  with  advan- 
tage. The  first  of  these  is  the  Crimea  and  the 
adjacent  territories.  The  second  is  the  Lower  Danube 
and  the  Polish  Ukraine  on  the  borders  of  the  Black 
Sea.  The  third  is  the  coast  of  Lithuania  on  the  Baltic. 
These  three  points,  if  attacked  simultaneously,  would 
all  have  the  advantage  of  being  in  territories  inhabited 


352       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

by  populations  which  wish  to  throw  off  the  Russian 
yoke.  It  would  first  be  necessary  to  conquer  the 
Crimea  and  Sebastopol,  which  would  entail  the 
destruction  of  the  enemy's  fleet ;  next,  and  if  possible 
at  the  same  time,  to  occupy  with  an  expeditionary 
force  the  country  between  Batoum  and  Anaklea.  The 
Russian  part  of  the  coast,  being  undefended  on  the 
side  of  the  sea,  could  be  easily  captured  in  a  few 
hours.  The  country  is  surrounded  by  mountains 
which  cannot  be  crossed  by  an  army  with  artillery,  so 
that  the  expeditionary  corps,  being  master  of  the  sea, 
would  be  perfectly  safe,  and  would  be  able,  together 
with  the  Turkish  troops  in  Armenia,  to  march  on 
Tiflis  by  way  of  Kutais  and  Gori.  The  people  of  the 
Caucasus,  who  would  be  supplied  with  arms  and 
ammunition,  would  rise  en  masse  from  the  Caspian  to 
the  Black  Sea ;  while  the  Georgians  and  Imeritians, 
who  also  are  far  from  satisfied  with  the  methods  of 
Russian  Government,  would  ask  to  be  allowed  to  con- 
stitute a  separate  State  as  formerly.  As  the  Russian 
army  in  these  districts  contains  a  great  many  Poles,  it 
would  be  desirable  to  attract  them  to  the  armies  of 
the  allies  by  displaying  the  Polish  flag.  At  the  second 
point  of  attack — the  Lower  Danube  and  the  Polish 
Ukraine — the  allied  armies  would  find  themselves  in 
a  country  rich  in  grain  and  with  a  numerous  and 
friendly  population  and  large  towns.  The  Cossack 
legion,*  if  raised  to  10,000  men,  with  a  corresponding 
proportion  of  infantry  and  artillery,  would  here 
render  important  services.  The  people  would  regard 
them  as  their  brothers  and  co-religionists,  and  would  join 

*  Formed  of  Poles  who  had  taken  service  with  the  Sultan. 


THE  CRIMEAN  WAR  353 

them  under  the  national  (Polish)  standard.  Finally, 
while  the  English  and  French  fleets  would  threaten 
Riga,  Revel,  and  Cronstadt,  thereby  forcing  Russia 
to  keep  a  large  force  at  those  places,  an  expeditionary 
corps  landed  in  Lithuania  would  produce  most  decisive 
results,  for  it  would  penetrate  into  the  very  heart,  so 
to  say,  of  European  Russia.  It  will  be  for  experienced 
naval  officers  to  determine  at  which  point  of  the  coast 
of  Lithuania,  or  the  adjoining  coast  of  Courland,  the 
landing  could  most  easily  be  effected.  The  corps 
should  consist  of  from  30,000  to  40,000  men.  It 
would  find  itself  in  a  wooded  country  surrounded  by 
marshes  and  lakes,  well  suited  to  a  guerilla  war,  and 
lying  across  the  chief  line  of  communication  between 
the  capital  and  the  western  frontier.  This  country  is  in- 
habited by  a  Roman  Catholic  people  who  are  thoroughly 
Polish  in  sentiment,  and  would  at  once  join  the 
national  standard.  The  combined  force,  after  securing 
its  communications  with  the  sea,  could  then  either 
assist  the  fleet  in  an  attack  upon  Riga,  or  march  upon 
Wilna,  supplying  the  people  with  arms,  destroying 
the  military  magazines  of  the  Russians,  and  cutting 
off  the  Russian  forces  in  the  north  from  those  in  the 
west  and  south.' 

Prince  Czartoryski's  scheme,  it  will  be  seen,  aimed 
at  striking  Russia  where  she  is"  most  vulnerable — in 
Poland.  But  the  allies,  fearing  to  raise  Austria  and 
Prussia  against  them,  only  adopted  that  part  of  it 
which  relates  to  the  Crimea  and  the  Baltic.  More- 
over— as  was  said  by  Lord  Palmerston  to  General 
Zamoyski  when  the  latter  proposed  that  the  Polish 
legion,  which  formed  part  of  the  Turkish  Contingent 

VOL.  n.  z 


354       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

during  the  war,  and  was  paid  by  England,  should  be 
allowed  to  carry  the  Polish  flag — the  allies  did  not 
wish  '  to  make  an  enemy  of  Russia.'  It  was  not 
to  be  a  war  '  h,  outrance,'  but  a  mere  trial  of  strength; 
Russia  was  not  to  be  crippled,  but  only  to  be  forced  to 
abandon  (for  a  time)  her  designs  on  Turkey  and  the 
Black  Sea.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is  not  sur- 
prising, though  surprise  has  been  expressed  on  the 
subject  by  some  English  writers,  that  the  Poles 
should  during  the  war  have  maintained  a  passive 
attitude.  There  were  100,000  Russian  troops  in 
their  country ;  the  Poles  were  without  arms  or  war 
material  of  any  kind  ;  and  they  were  not  willing  to 
be  massacred  pour  les  beaux  yeux  of  England  and 
France.  The  following  passages  from  a  letter  ad- 
dressed by  Prince  Czartoryski  to  his  countrymen  on 
the  26th  of  August  1854,  throw  an  interesting  light 
on  the  views  of  the  leading  Poles  at  this  period  :— 

'  It   has    been   said    that    you    have    everywhere 
entered   into  a  conspiracy  of  calmness  and  wisdom. 
Let   us  strive   to  justify  this    charge.     Receive  ad- 
vances  and    offers    from    whatever    side    they   may 
come,    but    before    taking    action    insist    upon    sub- 
stantial guarantees  for  your  future.     Such  guarantees 
would  be  afforded  by  the  creation  of  a  Polish  force 
under  Polish  leaders,  to  serve  as  a  nucleus  for  an  army 
to  be  formed  out  of  those  whose  ranks  are  filled  by  our 
countrymen  ;  by  the  recognition  of  independent  Polish 
authorities ;  and  by  a  declaration  on  the  part  of  the 
Powers,    or   any  one    of  them    with  the   consent   of 
its  allies,  that  Poland  has  a  right  to  an  independent 
existence.  .  .  .  We  have  been  too  often  deceived  by 


THE  CRIMEAN  WAR  355 

promises,  and  been  made  the  victims  of  our  too  adven- 
turous and  trusting  spirit.  My  advice  and  that  of  all 
the  sincere  friends  of  Poland  is  that  you  should  keep 
quiet  and  wait  events.  This  is  not,  as  some  suppose, 
a  proof  of  apathy,  but  of  wisdom  and  prudence  ;  of  the 
strength  of  a  nation  which  knows  how  to  restrain  it- 
self, and  which  will  only  show  the  more  energy  when 
the  time  of  action  arrives.' 

What  his  own  course  would  be  in  such  an  event  he 
had  already  stated  in  an  address  to  the  Polish  Histori- 
cal Society.  '  When,'  he  said,  '  the  decisive  moment 
comes,  I  will  go  with  my  sons  where  duty  calls  me, 
and  will  not  hesitate  to  give  up  to  my  country,  which 
I  have  served  all  my  life,  the  last  remnants  of  my 
strength  and  my  abilities.' 


CHAPTER  XXIX 

1855-Gl 


LAST   DAYS 


THE  following  are  extracts  from  letters  sent  by  the 
Prince  to  London  durin    the  Crimean  War  :  — 


'  16th  MM/  1854. 

'  Sweden  is  ready  for  everything,  and  wishes  to 
act  with  considerable  forces.  She  asks  and  offers  to 
join  the  allies.  What  folly  if  they  refuse  !  Clarendon 
knows  all  about  it,  and  I  hear  would  like  to  accept. 
The  negotiation  is  being  conducted  through  his 
brother  Charles  Villiers.  Here  (in  Paris)  all  is  for 
peace.  Persigny  now  declares  that  the  naval  superi- 
ority of  the  Powers  is  sufficient.' 

'19th  May  1854. 

1  The  allies  can  only  expect  a  fruitful  result  from 
the  war  in  the  alliance  of  Sweden,  who  is  ready  and 
willing  to  act  at  once,  and  of  Poland,  who  only  waits 
to  be  called  upon  and  armed.  These  are  the  only 
real  allies  of  the  Western  Powers.  The  Roumanians 
also  should  not  be  neglected.  ...  If  peace  is  impos- 
sible, can  the  Powers  refuse  the  overtures  of  Sweden, 


LAST  DAYS  357 

who  would  probably  be  followed  by  Austria  ?  I 
cannot  believe  that  the  British  Cabinet  would  neglect 
such  an  opportunity  or  not  use  every  means  at  its 
disposal  to  induce  Prance  also  to  take  advantage  of  it.' 

«  ISth  December  1854. 

'  If  the  Polish  question  should  be  raised  by  the 
war,  and  Austria  be  unwilling  to  mix  up  Galicia  in  it, 
Russian  Poland  alone  would  rise  if  it  were  declared 
independent,  and  this  would  be  a  decisive  force  on  the 
side  of  the  allies.  Galicia  and  Posen  will  remain 
quiet ;  for  that  I  will  vouch.' 

'  2,0th  December  1854. 

'  On  nous  reprochait  jadis  que  nous  etions  prompts 
a  nous  jeter  en  avant  de  toutes  les  aventures ;  a 
present  nous  somnies  plus  reflechis,  moins  audacieux, 
moins  irnprudents,  et  on  nous  reproche  aussi.  Je 
crois  que  nous  avons  raison  d'etre  sages  et  de  demander 
des  garanties,  avant  d'offrir  un  devouement  sans  bornes. 
Telle  est  1'opinion  positive  du  pays,  et  telle  est  celle  de 
1'emigration,  avec  les  modifications  que  sa  position 
comporte.' 

'23rd  April  1855. 

'  Lord  Stratford  est  un  terrible  homme ;  son 
ambassade  et  les  grandes  affaires  qui  lui  ont  passe  par 
les  mains,  et  les  evenements,  qui  ne  furent  pas 
toujours  heureux,  Font  rendu  je  crois  encore  plus 
nerveux,  plus  irascible  et  difficile  a  vivre,  qu'il  ne 
1'etait  naturellement.' 


358       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Prince   Adam    Czartoryski's    long  life   was    now 
drawing  to  a  close.     The  Treaty  of  Paris,  which  closed 
the  Crimean    War,   was  a    great   disappointment   to 
him  ;  but  he  did  not  abandon  all  hope.     At  the  time, 
says  M.  de  Mazade  in  his  introduction  to  the  French 
edition  of  the  Memoirs,  when  the  negotiations  of  the 
Paris  Congress  were  still  going  on,  the  Prince  was 
preparing  a  fresh  memorandum  on  the  Polish  ques- 
tion, when  a  friend  informed  him  that  the  bases  of 
the  Treaty  had  been  agreed  upon,  and  that  Poland 
was   not   mentioned    in   it.      An  expression   of  pain 
passed    across   his   face;    he   stopped   writing   for   a 
moment,  but   soon  proceeded    with   his    manuscript, 
saying :  *  It  will  do  for  another   time.'      The  acces- 
sion of  Alexander  II,   notwithstanding   his  brusque 
speech   to   the    Polish    nobles — '  Point    de   reveries ! 
tout  ce  que  inon  pere  a  fait  est  bien  fait,' — seemed 
to   offer   some    prospect    of   a   change   of  system   in 
Poland,*  and  after  the  conclusion  of  the  Treaty  of 
Paris,  Prince  Adam  drew  up  an  elaborate  paper,  fully 
describing  the  rights  and  grievances  of  his  country, 
for  the  use  of  M.  de  Morny,  the  French  Ambassador 
at  the  Russian  Court,  on  his  proceeding  to  Moscow  to 
take  part  in  the  ceremony  of  the  coronation.     During 
the  first  few  years   of  his  reign,  the  new  Emperor 
seemed  almost  as  well  disposed  to  the  Poles  as  his 
uncle,    Alexander    I,    had   been.     But,  like    him,  he 
admired  liberty  in  theory  and  abhorred  it  in  practice. 
He  gave  the  Poles  some  liberal  and  national  institu- 
tions, and  persecuted  them  directly  they  made  use  of 

*  In  M.»y  18S3,  Prin33  Orloff  told  Lonl  Clarendon  that  the  Emperor  was  well 
disposed  towards  the  Poles,  but  would  do  nothing  if  any  of  the  Powers  should 
nterfere.  (M.S.  Diary  of  Prince  Czartoryski. ) 


LAST  DAYS  359 

their  newly  acquired  liberties.  The  result  was  the 
national  movement  of  1861-2,*  in  which  the  Poles 
opposed  a  passive  resistance  to  the  oppressive  measures 
of  the  Government,  until  the  Wielopolski  decree  for 
drafting  the  youth  of  the  country  into  the  Russian 
army  drove  them  into  insurrection.  Prince  Czar- 
toryski  admired  and  praised  the  movement,  but  did 
not  live  to  see  its  sanguinary  consequence.  In  a  letter 
written  to  Count  Andrew  Zamoyski  in  his  own  hand, 
at  the  age  of  ninety-one,  a  few  months  before  his 
death,  he  says  (20  March  1861) : — 

v  For  the  last  fortnight  we  have  been  full  of  anxiety, 
emotion,  admiration,  and  inexpressible  joy,  as  if  we 
had  been  present  during  those  days  with  you  in 
Warsaw.  One  may  well  say  that  God  has  manifested 
a  great  deed  in  you.  In  one  day  he  has  raised  the 
nation  to  such  a  height  of  moral  power  as  no  other 
nation  has  ever  reached  ;  it  can  only  be  compared  to  the 
inspiration  of  the  first  Christians,  who  conquered  the 
world  armad  only  with  the  palm  of  martyrdom.  God 
forbid  that  you  should  descend  from  that  position  ;  for 
if  Poland  remains  there,  she  will  attain  her  great  object. 

*  It  is  known  that  after  the  Crimean  War  Austria  began  to  show  herself  favour- 
able to  the  Poles.  This  change  of  policy  became  more  evident  during  the  insurrec- 
tion of  1863,  and  the  Poles  in  Austria  now  have  free  institutions  and  a  national 
self-government  which  make  them  the  envy  of  their  countrymen  in  Russia  and 
Prussia.  The  following  extract  from  a  letter  addressed  to  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski 
on  the  15th  of  May  1860,  by  a  personage  holding  a  high  position  at  Vienna,  may  be 
quoted  in  this  connection  :  — 

'  On  m'a  indique"  comme  candidat  propose  (pour  le  trone  de  la  Pologne)  le  second 
fils  de  la  Reine  d'Angleterre.  On  envisage  ce  choix  comme  un  moyen  pour  calmer 
les  inquietudes  jalouses  de  la  Grande  Bretagne.  Le  Cabinet  d'ici  ne  voit  pas  d'un 
mauvais  osil  cette  question.  II  lui  sera  meme  favorable  du  jour  ou  il  saura  ce  qui  iui 
reviendra  en  echange  pour  la  Galicie.  Le  besoin  d'un  interm  Miaire  entre  I'Autric'.ie 
et  la  Russie  se  fait  sentir  tous  les  jours  davantage.  L'Empereur  F.  J.  (Fran9ois 
Joseph)  reconnait  toute  1'infamie  clu  partage  de  la  Pologne  et  toutes  les  difficulte's 
qu'il  a  amenees  a  1'Autriche .  II  s'est  exprim^  plusieurs  f ois  tres-clairement  a  ce  su  jet. 
Ces  jours-ci  cette  question  sera  portee  au  Conseil  des  Ministres  afin  de  formuler  lea 
instructions  a  donner  au  re'pre'seutant  de  la  cour  de  Vienne  a  Saint-Petersbourg.' 


360      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

'  So  long  as  the  news  which  arrived  here  only 
spoke  of  street  disturbances  and  broken  windows,  the 
Emperor  said  this  ought  to  stop,  as  the  'movement  was 
an  untimely  one  and  would  injure  the  cause  instead  of 
helping  it.  But  now,  after  the  important  events 
which  have  occurred  at  Warsaw,  showing  how  strong 
•is  the  national  spirit,  he  thinks  otherwise.  The 
Western  Powers,  at  first  not  believing  the  news,  and 
then  astonished  at  them,  cannot  as  yet  understand 
what  is  going  on  and  fear  that  the  only  result  will  be 
an  exacerbation  of  Russian  severity.  No  one  thinks 
of  giving  us  any  official  help ;  do  not  therefore  in  any 
way  reckon  upon  it;  but  be  convinced  that  if  you 
adhere  to  your  present  line  of  conduct,  public 
opinion  in  Europe  will  be  on  your  side  and  will  insist 
on  a  more  moderate  policy  on  the  part  of  Russia. 
The  present  friendly  understanding  between  that 
Power  and  France,  has  enabled  Napoleon  III  already 
to  make  confidential  representations  on  the  subject  at 
St  Petersburg. 

1  In  conclusion  I  must  again  urge  you  not  to 
descend  from  the  position  which  is  your  strength  and 
moral  support.  Let  all  good  citizens  unite  to 
strengthen  the  conviction  among  our  countrymen 
that  if  they  allow  themselves  to  be  drawn  into  an 
armed  struggle,  they  will  only  bring  upon  their 
country  fruitless  defeats,  while  by  an  unarmed  resist- 
ance to  unjustifiable  and  wicked  oppression,  they  will 
avert  it  and  gain  a  moral  victory.' 

In   the    same   spirit   th.3    Prince    addressed    his 

countrymen  in  a  speech  made  on  the  3rd  of  May,  1861. 

'  Do    not    descend,'    he    said,    '  from    the    elevation 


LAST  DAYS  361 

where  nations  and  sovereigns  must  respect  you.  By 
firmly  remaining  there  you  will  be  safer  and  more 
certain  in  seeing  your  goal  and  continually  approaching 
it.  Though  racked  by  bitter  suffering,  though  driven 
to  despair  by  treason  and  violence,  resist  the  tempta- 
tion to  fight  your  oppressors  by  meaner  weapons. 
You  shine  above  them  by  your  virtue  and  goodness  : 
these  are  the  indomitable  forces  of  Poland,  and  in 
them  lie  her  hopes  for  the  future.' 

He  died  at  Montfermeil,  near  Meaux,  on  the  15th 
of  November  1861.  Like  his  great  contemporary 
Pitt — Prime  Minister  of  England  when  he  was 
Foreign  Minister  of  Russia — Prince  Adam's  last 
words  were  of  his  country.  Pitt,  with  the  sudden 
despair  of  baffled  genius,  lamented  the  misfortunes 
which  he  thought  were  about  to  fall  on  England ; 
Czartoryski's  tender  and  hopeful  spirit  pictured  to 
him  a  new  Poland  rising  chastened  and  invigorated 
by  her  long  martyrdom.  There  was  as  little  ground 
for  despondency  in  the  one  case  as  for  hope  in  the 
other.  The  disappointment  of  Austerlitz  was  soon 
brilliantly  retrieved  by  the  British  victories  in  the 
Peninsula  and  at  Waterloo ;  the  hopes  raised  by  the 
noble  self-sacrifice  of  the  Polish  nation  perished  in 
the  midst  of  blood  and  ruin. 


THE  END 


ALPHABETICAL    INDEX 


Aberdeen,  Lord,  ii,  244-45,  319,  349 

Acton,  Chevalier,  i,  217,  218,  219 

Albany,  Countess  of,  i,  208,  209 

Alexander,  Grand-Duke,  afterwards  Em- 
peror, i,  70,  104,  109,  110,  113-19,  123- 
32, 136,  137,  Ifil,  162,  167-69, 196,  222, 
223,  227,  231,  235,  236,  245-47,  252-56, 
272-75,  279,  281,  282,  290-94,  296-99, 
304-9,  314-18,  322-36 ;  ii,  1-6,  8-12,  26- 
28,  30-32,  60-70,  77,  79,  83,  84,  88,  96, 
98-112,  115,  122,  134,  142,  150-61,  163, 
170,  173-205,  210-40,  247-77,  285-96, 
301-13,  324,  332 

Alexander  II,  ii,  358 

Alexandra,  Grand-Duchess,  i,  133,  215 

Alison,  Sir  A.,  ii,  161 

Alfieri,  i,  208 

Alopeus,  M.,  ii,  5,  98 

Althorp,  Lord,  ii,  318 

Amelie,  Princess,  afterwards  Queen  of 
France,  i,  219 

Ancillon,  M.,  ii,  329 

Ankwicz,  Castellan,  i,  31 

Anna,  Grand-Duchess,  i,  101 

Archetti,  Bishop,  i,  28 

Aremberg,  Duke  of,  i,  68 

Augustus  II,  King  of  Poland,  i,  1 

Augustus  III,  King  of  Poland,  i,  2,  6-8 


B 


Bach,  M.,  ii,  334 

Baden,  Margravine  of,  i,  263-65,  327 
Bagration,  Prince,  ii,  107,  109,  110 
Bariatynski,  Prince,  i,  143 


Baring,  Sir  Alexander,  ii,  259,  278 
Beaumont,  Mr,  ii,  336 
Beklescheff,  General,  i,  249,  250,  301 
Bennigsen,    General,   i,    239,    240,    242, 

246,  248 
Benoit,  M.,  i,  8 
Bentham,  Jeremy,  ii,  290-301 
Bezborodko,  Count,  i,  77,  134,  145,  194, 

258,  310 

Biernacki,  M.,  ii,  247-84,  334 
Biron,  Duke  of  Courland,  i,  7,  8 
Bliicher,  General,  ii,  247 
Borozdin,  General,  i,  220 
Braganza,  Duke  of,  i,  2 
Branicki,  Hetman,  i,  18 

General,  i,  84 

Brougham,  Lord,  ii,  257-84, 302, 318,  327 

337,  338 

Briihl,  Count,  i,  6,  19 
Budberg,  Baron,  i,  98,  132 ;  ii,  163,  164 
Bukaty,  M.,  Polish  Minister  in  England, 

i,  160 ;  ii,  297,  298 
Buonaparte  (see  Napoleon  I) 
Burke,  ii,  260,  275 
Buxhoewden,  General,  ii,  99,  106,  110 


Campbell,  ii,  327 

Canning,  ii,  252-56,  319 

Caroline,  Queen  of  Naples,  i,  219,  254 

Castlereagh,  Lord,  ii,  250-52,  283-90, 319, 

335 

Cathcart,  General,  ii,  283 
Catherine,  Empress,  i,  5-8,  11,  53,  56,  59, 

64-69,  77,  79,  84-88,  90-94,  96-98,  105, 

107, 115,  134,  135,  137 


364 


INDEX 


Champagny,  M.  de,  ii,  191 

Charles,  Arch-Duke,  ii,  104,  105,  125 

Charles  of  Saxony,  Prince,  i,  1 

Charolais,  Prince  of,  i,  2 

Choiseul-Gouffier,  Count,  i,  62 

Clarendon,  Lord,  ii,  349,  356,  358 

Clotilda,  Queen  of  Sardinia,  i,  206 

Cobbett,  ii,  274 

Cobentzel,  Count,  i,  62,  89,  107 ;  ii,  87, 

103 

Consalvi,  Cardinal,  i,  214 
Constantino,  Grand-Duke,  i,  96,  98,  99, 

101,  104,  116,  125,  175,  200,  201,  234, 

273 ;  ii,  303  9,  314 
Cook,  Mr,  ii,  285 
Cosway,  Mrs,  i,  201 
Currie,  Dr,  i,  50 
Czartoryski,  Prince  Adam  Casimir,  i,  6, 

14,  15 ;  ii,  233 

Prince  Alexander,  i,  1 

Prince  Augustus,  i,  1,  2,  14,  18 

Prince  Constantino,  i,  49 

Prince  John,  i,  1 

Prince  Michael,  i,  1,  14,  18,  20 

Czartoryska,   Princess  Elizabeth,   i,  15, 

39,  49,  50 

Princess  Marie  (Princess  of  "Wttr- 

temberg),  i,  14,  15,  22,  38,  200 

Princess  Teresa,  i,  22,  24 


D 


Denhoff,  Madame,  i,  2 
Disraeli,  Mr,  ii,  349 
Dolgoroukoff,  Princess,  i,  62 
Dolgorouky,  Prince  Michael,  ii,  109 

Prince  Peter,  i,  331,   332 ;    ii,  99, 

100,  102,  105,  109 
Dombrowski,  General,  i,  274 
Dumont,  M.,  ii,  262,  289,  290 
Durham,  Lord,  ii,  338 
Duroc,  i,  270,  272,  273 
Dzierzanin,  Senator,  i,  301 


Edinburgh  Review,  ii,  282 

Elizabeth,  Empress,  i,  85,  124,  327,  331 

Grand-Duchess,  i,  89 

Elliot,  Hon.  W.,  ii,  258-61,  278 

England,  i,  50,  53,  55,  170,  202,  225, 
233,  271,  319,  320 ;  ii,  20,  15,  37,  38, 
41-51,  54,  55,  57,  59,  84,  86,  97,  98, 
135,  141,  142,  145-51,  101, 164,  183-88, 
190-93,  250-57 

Enghien,  Duke  of,  ii,  14,  16,  21,  22,  29, 
33,  35,  124 

Erdody,  Count,  i,  171 

Esterhazy,  Count  V.,  i,  89 

Count,  ii,  318 


Eugene,  Prince,  ii,  104 
Euler,  i,  307 


Ferdinand,  King  of  Naples,  i,  219 

Fergusson,  Mr  Cutlar,  ii,  335,  330 

Fitzwilliam,  Lord,  ii,  263 

Fleming,  Count,  i,  1 

Fox,  i,  51,  53 ;  ii,  36,  125,  132-151,  156, 

157,  164 
Francis  I  of  Austria,  i,  53,  215  ;  ii,  101-3, 

111 
Frederick  the  Great,  i,  5,  7,  8,  11,  14, 

38-41 
Frederick  William  III,  i,  279,  281 ;  ii,  98, 

100,  115,  116,  125,  127,  134,  135,  232, 

237 


Galitzin,  Prince  Alexander,  i,  179,  180 

-  Princess,  i,  62,  70 
Gatchina,  i,  184 

George  III,  ii,  36,  69,  76,  77,  80-4,  164 
Gibraltar,  ii,  95 
Goethe,  i,  46,  47 
Goltz,  Count,  i,  318 
Golowin,  Madame,  i,  63 
Gordon,  Hunter,  Mr,  ii,  334 
Gorski,  James,  i,  59,  73,  82,  87,  95, 173 
Gower,  Lord  G.  L.,  ii,  57,  72,  74,  76,  78, 

86,  87,  98, 134, 137,  140, 143, 144, 157, 

164,  173,  254,  256,  257 
Granville,  Lord,  ii,  75 
Grattan,  Mr,  ii,  258 
Grenville,  Lord,  ii,  145,  164,  255 '56 
Grey,  Earl,  ii,  243,  264,  274,  281,  318, 

320,  325-27,  330,  331,  338 
Guildford,  Lady,  i,  200,  259 
Gustavus  IV  of  Sweden,  i,  133, 135-38 


H 


Hanover,  ii,  38,  79-84,  130, 134, 141, 147, 

148,  151,  163 

Hardenberg,  M.  de,  ii,  101,  116 
Harrowby,  Lord,  ii.,  59,  75-7,  319,  334 
Haugwitz,  M.  de,  ii,  101,  105 
Hedouville.  General,  i,  319,  320 ;  ii,  15, 

28,  31,  34 

Heytesbury,  Lord,  ii,  332 
Holland,  Lord,  ii,  274,  318 

—  Lady,  ii,  318 
Holstein,  Duke  of,  i,  2 
Houghton,  Lord,  ii,  334 
Hume,  Mr,  ii,  336 
Hunt,  Leigh,  ii,  261-74 


INDEX 


365 


Italinsky,  M.,  i,  218,  219;  ii,  58 
Ivan  VI,  i,  147,183 


J 


Jacoby,  M.,  ii,  156- 
Jeffrey,  ii.,  280 
John,  Archduke,  ii,  104,  105 
Joseph  II  of  Austria,  i,  14 
Joseph,  Archduke,  i,  215,  216 


K 


Keyserling,  Count,  i,  6 

Kirwan,  Mr,  ii,  334 

Klinger,  General,  i,  308 

Kollontay,  Abbe",  i,  276 

Kochanowski,  John,  i,  311 

Kosciuszko,  i,  14,  31,  53,  56,  68,  81,  147, 

148,  150,  275  ;  ii,  320 
Kotchoubey,  Count,  i,  258,  259,  261,  267, 

276,  279,  282,  284,  299,  300 ;  ii,  26,  89, 

90,  162 

Kourakin,  Prince,  i,  71,  228,  234 
Krasinski,  Count,  i,  30 
Kutayschoff,  i,  184,  186,  190,  195,  225, 

234,  281 
Kutusoff,  General,  ii,  97,  101,  103,  106, 

107,  127 


Laharpe,  M.  de,  i,  111,  128,  129,  130, 

262-4,  273 

Langeron,  M.  de,  i,  255 
Lansdowne,  Marquis  of,  ii,  269,  274,  278, 

318 

Lapoukin,  Princess,  i,  186 
Lavalette,  Count,  ii,  242 
Leopold,  Archduke,  i.  47 
Lesseps,  M.  de,  ii,  174 
Levaschoff,  General,  i,  194,  217,  224,  225 
Liechtenstein,  Prince  John  of,  ii,  107^ 
Lieven,  General,  ii,  109 

Prince,  ii,  318,  325,  327,  330 

Princess,  ii,  318-20,  330 

Ligne,  Prince  de,  i,  14,  66 

Lind,  John,  ii,  298 

Litta,  Count,  i,  189 

Liverpool,  Lord,  ii,  286,  319 

Louis  Philippe,  ii,  350 

Lubomirski,  Prince,  i,  1,  30,  33,   74,  80 

82 
Lubomirska/Princess,  i,  19, 28, 199 ;  ii,  92 

93 


,ucchesini,  M.  de,  i,  111,  128,  129,  130, 
262-4,  273 
>ytton,  Lord,  ii,  334 


M 


Macintosh,  Sir  J.,  ii,  302,  335 
Mack,  General,  ii,  81,  97,  102 
Malta,  i,  188,  270 ;  ii,  37,  39,  74,  75-9, 

86,95 

Maisonneuve,  M.  de,  i,  189,  190 
Malmesbury,  Lord,  ii,  349 
Mansfield,  Lord,  i,  14,  50 
Marie,  Grand-Duchess,  i,  87, 124 
Markoff,  Count,  i,  134-36,  295,  334-36; 

ii,  3,  6,  171 
Martin,  Mr,  ii,  300 
Massalski,  Bishop,  i,  29,  30 
Mehemet  Ali,  ii,  341 
Melbourne,  Lord,  ii,  318 
Memel  Interview,   i,  281,  282;  ii,  122, 

125 

Metternich,  Prince,  ii,  329,  342 
Michael,  Grand-Duke,  ii,  233,  235 
Michelsen,  General,  ii,  97,  99 
Miloradovitch,  General,  ii,  107,  109 
Milton,  Lord,  ii,  263 
Minto,  Lord,  i,  202 
Mirza,  Abbas,  ii,  333 
Mniszek,  Count,  i,  151,  152 
Montalivet,  M.  de,  ii,  196 
Moore,  Tom,  ii,  277,  278 
Morny,  M.  de,  ii,  358 
Morpeth,  Lord,  ii,  336 
Mouravieff,  M.  de,  i,  132,~,309 
Mulgrave,  Lord,  ii,  70,  73,  78,  80 
Murat,  i,  225 


N 


Napoleon  I,  i,  205, 206, 225,  270,  272,  273, 
329,  331,  335,  336 ;  ii,  13-15,  17,  21-23, 
29,  33,  69-71,  81-3,  85-96,  99-101, 
114-16,  118-21,  123,  126,  127,  133-35, 
139-42,  146-52,  157,  159,  160,  161, 163, 
166-6!),  173, 174-76, 182,  184-87, 190-92, 
198-200, 209,  210, 216-21, 225  42,  268-75, 
285,  294,  349 

Napoleon  III,  ii,  349,  360 

Narishkin,  Leo,  i,  63,  87,  285 

Nelidoff,  Mdlle,  i,  174,  185-87 

Nelson,  i,  249,  271 ;  ii,  37 

Nesselrode,  Baron,  ii,  338 

Nicholas,  Emperor,  i,  124 ;  ii,  313,  314, 
322,  323,  327-29,  336,  338 

Niemcewicz,  J.  U.,  i,  35,  49,  81,  140; 
ii,  319,  320,  321,  335 

Novosiltzoff,  M.  de,  i,  163,  164,  166, 
168-70,  258,  261,  281,  284,  289,  290, 
302,  309,  315,  324 ;  ii,  6,  12,  36,  37-39, 
41-51,  C9,  73,  75,  90,  132,  133,  162,  174 


366 


INDEX 


O'Connell,  ii,  336 
Oginski  family,  i,  4 
Ogonowski,  Abbe,  i,  29,  30 
Orloff,  Count  Alexis,  i,  143 
Orloff,  Prince,  ii,  358 
Osterman,  Count,  i,  78,  79 
Oubril,  M.  d',  ii,  13,  22,  32,  34,  79,  80-3, 
143,  144,  157,  158,  161-64 


Pahlen,  Count,   i,   220-31,   234-39,  242, 

246,  248-50,  253 
Palmerston,  Lord,  ii,  321,  323-25,  327, 

328-31,  333,  335-37,  339-44,  348,  349, 

353 
Panin,  Count,  i,  210,  228-31,  267,  268, 

273,  334  ;  ii,  89,  171 
Paoli,  General,  i,  201 
Paul,  Grand-Duke,  afterwards  Emperor, 

i,  38,  65,  66,  87,  88,  120,   121,   136, 

139-47,  150-55,  159,  174,  181,  186,  187, 

189,  193,  195,  217,  222,  232-35,  240, 

241,  270-72 
Peel,  ii,  319 
Peter  the  Great,  ii,  7,  8 
Ptkier,  M.,  ii,  326 
Perry,  Mr,  ii,  266,  274 
Persigny,  General,  ii,  356 
Piattoli,  Abbe,  ii,  36,  92-4,  321 
Pitt,  i,  191,  192,  288 ;  ii,  5,  36,  38,  45, 

58-60,  62-4,  65-70,  73,  75-84, 125,  361 
Pius  VI,  i,  214 
Planta,  Mr,  ii,  285 
Poniatowski,    Stanislas  Augustus,  i,   5, 

6,  8,  9,  10,  14,  40,  57,  70, 151, 152, 159, 

175,  177  ;  ii,  93,  291,  298 

—  Prince,  ii,  99,  100 
Potemkiu,  Prince,  i,  131 
Potocki,  family,  i,  5 

Count  Severin,  i,  308,  323,  325,  326 

—  Marshal,  i,  81,  145,  149 ;  ii,  93 
Potocka,  Madame  P.,  i,  73 

Madame  S.,  i,  26 

Powis,  Lord,  ii,  163 

Pozzo  di  Borgo,  i,  201,  202 ;  ii,  335 

Prince  Regent,  ii,  234,  267,  274,  275 

Protasoff,  Count,  i,  132 

Prussia,  Queen  Louise  of,  i,  281,  282 ;  ii, 

101 

Pulaski,  Joseph,  i,  13,  31 
Pulawy,  i,  38,  42-5,   170-73;  ii,  98-100, 

248,  331 


Radziwill  family,  i,  5 

-  Prince  Anthony,  ii,  237 

Princess,  i,  27 

Eayneval,  M.  de,  ii,  28,  34 


Razumovski,  Count  Andrew,  i,  254 ; 

4,  5,  6,  98 

—  Prince,  i,  200 
Razumovska,  Princess,  i,  200 
Repnin,  Count,  i,  11-13,  57,  92,  186 
Romantzoff ,  Marshal,  i,  77,  310 ;  ii,  26 
Romilly,  Sir  Samuel,  ii,  259,  262,  274, 

278.  282,  302 

Rosenkampf,  Baron,  i,  303,  304 
Rostopchin,  Count,  i,  120,  170,  185,  234 
Rozniecki,  M.,  i,  226 
Rzewuski,  Marshal,  i,  209,  210,  226 ;  ii, 

93 


Sacken,  Count,  i,  132 
Saldern,  Count,  i,  13 
Salm,  Princess  of,  i,  282 
Samoiloff,  Count,  i,  79,  80 
Sandon,  Lord,  ii,  336 
Sanguszko,  Princesses,  i,  25-27 
Sapieha,  Prince,  i,  35 

—  Princess,  i,  26,  27 

Sardinia,  King  of,  i,  205,  206,  211;  ii, 

32,  38,  43,  52 
Sauvan,  Count,  i,  317 
Saxe-Coburg,  Duchess  of,  i,  97,  98 
Schakoffskoy,  Princess,  i,  68 
Schouvaloff,  Count,  i,  85 

—  Countess,  i,  70 
Schwarzenberg,  Prince,  ii,  108 
Sivers,  M.  de,  i,  182 
Soltyk,  Bishop,  i,  30,  31 

Soltykoff,  Field  Marshal,  i,  76, 130,  131, 

137 
Souvaroff,  General,  i,  31,  73,  191,  192, 

205,  216 

Spencer,  Earl,  ii,  75 
Stanislas  Augustus,  King  of  Poland,  see 

Poniatowski 

Stadion,  Count,  ii,  30,  72,  87 
Stael,  Madame  de,  ii,  262-64 
Stedingk,  Count,  i,  316,  321 
Stein,  Baron,  ii,  335 
Stewart,  Sir  Charles,  ii,  87 
Stoddart,  Dr,  ii,  274 
Strangways,  Mr  Fox,  ii,  39 
Stratford  de  Redcliffe,  Lord,  ii,  357 
Strogonoff,  Count  (the  elder),  i,  63.  107, 

163,  165,  284-86,  289 

Count  Paul,  i,  165-8,  258,  261,  284, 

302,  315,  323,  324  j  ii,  95,  138, 140, 143, 
145,  163 

Stuart,  Lord  Dudley,  ii,  334,  348 

Mr,  ii,  164 

Sudermania,  Duke  of,  i,  133 
Sussex,  Duke  of,  ii,  345-47 


Talleyrand,   Prince,  i,  283;  ii,  15.   33, 

156,  157,  290,  318,  320,  322,  328 
Princess  Dino,  ii,  318,  319,  321 


INDEX 


367 


Tauentzien,  M.  de,  i,  318 
Tarnowski  family,  i,  33 
Thiers,  M.,  ii,  90-5,  101,  164,  338 
Tbugut,  Baron,  i,  203 
Tolstoi,  Count,  i,  79,  281 

—  General,  ii,  97 
Tyszkiewicz,  Countess,  i,  26 


Vansittart,  Mr,  ii,  259,  278 
Vasilief,  Count,  299,  300 
Villiers,  Mr  Charles,  ii,  350 
Volkonski,  Prince  (the  elder),  i,  13 

Prince  Peter,  i,  178, 179 

Vorontzoff,  Count  Alexander,  i,  286-90, 

293,  299,  305,  311,  314,  316,  332,  333, 

ii,  1-3,  5,  29-34 
Count  Simon,  i,  287,  289,  290 ;  ii 

4-6,  36,  09-79,  87,  89,  145,  162 


W 

"Wales,  Prince  of,  ii,  36,  133 
"Walewski,  Count,  ii,  317 
"Warren,  Sir  John,  i,  319 


Weimar,  Grand-Duke  of,  ii,  102 
Weirother,  Colonel,  ii,  102,  104,  106, 109 
Wellington,  Duke  of,  ii,  242,  243,  319, 

331 

Whit  worth,  Lord,  i,  154,  329,  331 
White,  Arthur,  Mr,  ii,  334 
Wieland,  i,  46 

Wielopolski,  Marquis,  ii,  317 
Wilberforce,  Mr,  ii,  258,  274 
Williams,  Sir  J.  Hanbury,  i,  5 
Wilson,  General  Sir  Kobert,  ii,  240-7 
Wintzingerode,  Baron,  i,  175,  332  ;  ii,  6 

—  General,  ii,  110 
Witt,  General,  i,  37 
Wolkonski,  see  Volkonski 
Wiirtomberg,  Prince  Louis  of,  i,  14,  38, 

40,  52,  318 
Wyndham,  Mr,  i,  207 


Zamoyski,  General,  ii,  353,  359 

family,  i,  4 

Zastrow,  General,  ii,  115 
Zavadovsky,  Count,  i,  310 

Zuboff,  Nicholas,  i,  144,  241,  245,  248 

Plato,  i,  71-7,  80,  88,  89,  96,  105, 

131,  138, 139,  145,  235-39,  248,  295 

Valerian,  i,  72,  73,  108,  172,  2351 

237,  244,  251,  252 


UNIVERSITY  OF  GAJ.IFOP*^  LIBPABV   Tor    <Nr     T  , 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FAC  LIT 


Library 

DK 

435.5 
C99A2E 
1888 
v.2 


