

Five Styles of Counterfactual Argumentation
1. Idiographic

Several authors use counterfactuals to explore “possibility-hood”—whether
history had to unfold as it did. For instance, Breslauer (Chapter 3) explores
the several junctures in the history of the Soviet Union that have sparked the
most intense counterfactual debate within the expert community: Was the
Bolshevik revolution inevitable given the Russian defeat in World War 1?
‘Was Stalinism inevitable given the vanguard-party legacy of Leninism? Was
Gorbachevism inevitable given the repressive stagnation of Brezhnevism?
And was the disintegration of the Soviet Union inevitable given the liberal
reforms of Gorbachevism? Khong (Chapter 4) attempts to assess whether
any conceivable British prime minister would have adopted a policy of ap-
peasement toward Nazi Germany, at least up to March 1939, Herrmann and
Fischerkeller (Chapter 6) examine several counterfactual controversies in
which the positions taken by policy makers on “what would have hap-
pened?” shaped American policy toward Iran during the Cold War. Lebow
and Stein (Chapter 5) construct an exhaustive inventory of the counterfactual
beliefs that apparently guided American and Soviet policy during the Cuban
missile crisis—the crisis during which, it is often asserted, the world “came
closer” than ever before or since to nuclear war.

These diverse applications all use counterfactuals to focus on “concei
able” causes that could have easily redirected the path-dependent logic of
events (cf. Hawthom 1991; Chapter 2, Fearon). In cach case, the investiga-
tors want to know what was historically possible or impossible within
‘circumscribed period of time and set of relations among political entities. To
make this determination, they draw upon combinations of: (a) in-depth case-
ic knowledge of the key players, their beliefs and motives, and the
political-economic constraints under which they worked; and (b) general
knowledge (nomothetic propositions) concerning cause-effect relations in
human behavior and political-economic systems. Moreover, our case-study
authors seem to agree that counterfactual speculation should be constrained
by some form of “minimal-rewrite-of-history” rule that instructs us to avoid
counterfactuals that require “undoing” many events—counterfactuals that,
for instance, ask us to imagine a democratic Soviet Union at the end of
World War II or Soviet possession of strategic nuclear superiority at the time

