6 P. E. TETLOCK AND A. BELKIN

Normative Issues in Evaluating Counterfactual Claims

Our contributors generally agree that counterfactual reasoning is unavoidable
in any field in which researchers want to draw cause-effect conclusions but
cannot perform controlled experiments in which they randomly assign “sub-
Jects” to treatment conditions that differ only in the presence or absence of
the hypothesized cause. Try though we do to control statistically for con-
founding variables in large-N multivariate studies or to find matching cases
in comparative designs or to search for the signature of hypothesized causes
in process-tracing studies, the potential causes are simply too numerous and
too interrelated in world politics to permit complete escape from counterfac-
tual inference. Researchers must ultimately justify claims that a given cause
produced a given effect by invoking counterfactual arguments about what
would have happened in some hypothetical world in which the postulated
‘cause took on some value different from the one it assumed in the actual
world (Fogel 1964; Fearon 1991),

The consensus among our contributors, however, begins to unravel be-
yond this point. They emphasize distinctive, albeit largely complementary,
functions of counterfactual reasoning. ‘The arguments they present have per-
suaded us to adopt a stance of epistemic pluralism that acknowledges the
variety of ways in which counterfactual arguments can prove enlightening
and the need for different standards in judging counterfactuals that serve
different scholarly goals. We organize these distinct styles of counterfactual
argumentation into five ideal types:

1. Idiographic case-study counterfactuals that highlight points of indeterminacy
at particular junctures in history (reminding us of how things could easily have
worked out differently and of how difficult it is to apply abstract hypothetico-
deductive laws to concrete cases);

2. Nomothetic counterfactuals that apply well-defined theoretical or empirical
generalizations to well-defined antecedent conditions (reminding us that determin-
istic laws may have been at work that were invisible (o the original historical
actors as well as to contemporary scholars who insist on a radically idiographic
focus on the particular);

3. Joint idiographic-nomothetic counterfactuals that combine the historian’s in-
terest in what was possible in particular cases with the theorists interest in identi-
fying lawful regularities across cases, thereby producing theory-informed history;

4. Computer-simulation counterfactuals that reveal hitherto latent logical con-
tradictions and gaps in formal theoretical arguments by rerunning “history” in
artificial worlds that “capture” key functional properties of the actual world;

5. Mental-simularion counterfactuals that reveal hitherto latent psychological
contradictions and gaps in belief systems by encouraging people to imagine possi-

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS 7

ble worlds in which causes they supposed irrelevant seem to make a difference, or
possible worlds in which causes they supposed consequential seem to be irrele-
vant,