

In the absence of definite news from France , some colonial officers hoped that war had not broken out despite all evidence to the contrary.[132] The British eagerly contributed to this wishful thinking and insisted that war had not begun even as they blockaded Cap and seized passing ships.[133] Uncertain as to the status of hostilities in Europe , Rochambeau did little aside from telling the officers commanding each port to prepare for a long, hopeless blockade.[134] He even sent wine, vegetables, and fruit, to Capt. John Loring as he blockaded Cap.[135] Latouche-Tréville’s leadership was no more forceful. He tried to gather what military vessels he had in Cap, but his health deteriorated so much that he soon had to leave the colony and naval forces were left in the hands of a fairly minor officer, Capt. Henri Barré.[136]

Such cautious leadership was in stark contrast with England ‘s aggressive posture. The Admiralty ordered Duckworth to seize all French ships in Saint-Domingue; by the time the orders reached Duckworth, he had already anticipated them.[137] Prizes fell into British hands like ripe fruit. They included the frigate La Créole, taken after a short, inglorious fight near Port-au-Prince , the corvette Mignonne, the brigs Lordy, Aiguille, and Vigilant, and the cutters Amitié and Terreur.[138] The frigate Embuscade, her commander unaware that a war was on, was taken on her way back to France .[139] In a two-week period in June-July 1803, the British captured 45 civilian and military vessels.[140] In addition to the windfall in prize money, the easy victories could not have come at a better time for the British. Duckworth, who had repeatedly complained to the Admiralty that he needed more small units, selected the best French prizes and incorporated them in his fleet.[141]

The navy’s strategic outlook in Saint-Domingue was bleak given the departure of most of the vaisseaux, but military authorities worsened the situation by continuing to interfere with naval affairs. It would have made sense to allow naval units to leave for France before the British blockade tightened, but army officers refused to let ships go, apparently because they needed them as transports to carry the fortune they had made in Saint-Domingue in the likely event of an evacuation.[142] The enseigne Dubuisson, one of the few captains to bring his ship safely back to France , was even accused by Rochambeau of desertion and cowardice.[143]

Such orders cost the French navy dearly. Capt. Pierre Quérangal of the 74-gun Duquesne asked to leave Cap as soon as he heard of British hostilities on 21 June 1803. Rochambeau refused, so the vaisseau was trapped with the rest of the Cap squadron when the British set up their blockade on 1 July.[144] When an evening storm on 24 July forced the British squadron away, the Duquesne, the Duguay Trouin, and the frigate Guerrière, cut their cables and left the port (it is unclear whether they had Rochambeau’s approval), but a change of weather left them facing head winds while the British returned. The Duguay Trouin and the Guerrière were quick and skillful enough to evade the pursuit, but the poorly manned Duquesne was captured after a one-day chase.[145] Pierre Mausin, one of the 23 cabin boys onboard the Duquesne, performed the only heroic act in the otherwise pointless loss of a fine vaisseau. As soon as the prize was brought into Jamaica , he dove overboard and escaped through the shark-infested waters of Port Royal .[146]