

As a heavy surf breaks high on the beach, the country boats are employed on all occasions where 
communication with the shore is requisite. The boats belonging to ships in the roads frequently proceed 



MADRAS. 


5 


to the back of the surf, where they anchor on the outside of it, and wait for the boats from the beach to 
carry on shore their passengers, &c. It frequently happens, when the weather is unsettled, with a heavy 
swell rolling in, that the surf is so high as to make it dangerous for any of the country boats to pass to 
or from the shore; when this is the case, a flag is displayed at the beach-house, which stands near the 
landing place, to caution all persons on board ships against landing, which should be carefully attended to; 
for numerous lives have been lost at different times through the temerity of Europeans proceeding to pass 
through the surf, in defiance of the admonitory signal 

The road is open to all winds, except those from the land, and there is generally a heavy swell 
tumbling in from the sea, making ships roll and labour excessively. Large ships generally moor in nine 
fathoms, with the flagstaff W. N. W. about two miles from the shore. 

From the beginning of October to the end of December, is considered the most dangerous season to 
remain in Madras roads, or at any other ports on the Coast of Coromandel, being subject to hurricanes ; 
but if a ship, kept in good condition for putting to sea on the first appearance of a gale, takes ad¬ 
vantage of the N_ W. wind, which at the commencement of a hurricane blows off the land for three or 
four hours, there is but little danger to be apprehended; yet many ships, by neglecting to put to sea, 
have been lost, and their crews perished, 

Madras was the first independent station acquired by the English in India. They first obtained 
permission to trade in 1640, and to erect a fort, to which they gave the name of Fort St. George, and it 
was rendered subordinate to Bantam. In 1671 a phirmaund was obtained from the King of Golcondah, 
granting new privileges on payment of an annual rent of 1,200 pagodas. 

In 1683, the East India Company, in consequence of the loss of Bantam, constituted Madras a 
Presidency, from which period it became the principal seat of their trade on the Coast of Coromandel. In 
1686 the Company obtained permission to erect a mint. In 1687 it was erected by charter into a Cor¬ 
poration, consisting of a Mayor and ten Aldermen. At this period the population of Fort St. George, 
and the villages within the Company’s bounds, was reported to amount to 300,000 souls. 

At the commencement of the war with France, in 1744, Madras was raised to a degree of opulence 
and reputation that rendered it inferior to none of the European settlements in India, excepting Goa and 
Batavia; but the fortifications were in a bad state, and the garrison very deficient, not exceeding 200 
Europeans fit for duty. In this situation it was attacked by the French, under M. de la Bourdonnais, who 
began to bombard the town on the 7th of August, which they continued till the 10th, when deputies were sent 
to the French camp to ascertain what terms would be granted, and if it was possible to procure the ransom 
of the town; they were honourably treated by M. de la Bourdonnais, who entered into a consultation with 
them, and offered the following conditions. That the town should be delivered up, and all the English 
remain prisoners of war; that the articles of the capitulation being settled, those of the ransom should be 
regulated amicably; that the garrison should be conducted to Fort St. David, and the seamen to Cuddalore. 
These articles were accepted and signed, upon which the French took possession of the town. The ma¬ 
gazines, warehouses, and other places were delivered over to the French Officers and Commissaries, and 
the English soldiers and seamen were carried on board the French ships in the roads, while the Governor 
and Council settled the price of the ransom with the French Commodore, at 11 lacs of pagodas, or 
J?440,000 sterling, besides a valuable present to the Commodore, who was willing to evacuate his conquest 
upon these terms, and leave the English in full possession of their Presidency. 