

The French Government at Pondicherry at first ratified the treaty of ransom; but on the 20th of 
September they declared it null and void, so that Commodore De la Bourdonnais was obliged to revoke 
the treaty; the consequence was, that the British Governor and Council on the 13th of November 
were carried to Pondicherry, while the rest of the inhabitants were ordered to quit Madras, upon 
which they dispersed to different places, and left the French in possession of all their effects. The 

B 2 



4 


MADRAS. 


promise of a ransom was the principal inducement that prevailed on the Governor to make so speedy t% 
surrender; and if the French had not perfidiously broke the engagement* the price of the ransom would 
have been a favourable circumstance to the East India Company : for the French obtained a booty of silver* 
woollens* copper* iron* lead* and other articles* to the value of 4?73,000; in plate, furniture, mint neces¬ 
saries* and other small articles 4? 12,000; 1,600 bales of piece-goods* 7*000 bags of saltpetre* and 800 
candies of redwood* valued at o£?72,800, besides the Princess Mary East Indiaman* and several other vessels 
in the roads. The delay that occurred in consequence of this breach of treaty, kept the French fleet in 
Madras roads longer than they otherwise intended to have staid, and on the 2d of October came on 
a hurricane, which in the course of a few hours destroyed almost the whole of their ships, and in which 
twenty other vessels then in the roads were lost, and most of their crews perished. This event prevented 
any further attempts on the English possessions by the French from Pondicherry. Madras was restored 
at the peace of Aix la Chapelie. 

The French* while in possession, had made several improvements and additions to the slight works 
they found, which nevertheless rendered the fort little capable of long resistance against the regular ap¬ 
proaches of an European enemy* nor did they give any extension to the internal area* which did not exceed 
15 acres of ground. Nevertheless* the English let the place remain, in the state they received it in from 
the French, in 1751', until the beginning, of the year 1756; when the expectation of another war with that 
nation, and the reports of the great preparations making in France against India, dictated the necessity 
of rendering it completely defensible. Accordingly all the coolies* labourers* and tank diggers which the 
country could supply, were from this time constantly employed on the fortifications; their daily number 
generally amounted to 4000* men* women, and children, who continued on the works until driven away 
by the approach of the French, in December* 175S. 

An addition had been projected in 1743* by the engineer, Mr. Smith* which included as much ground 
as the former area of the fort. The ditch which marked its limits, was .then dug, and faced with brick* 
and supplied with water by a communication with the northern river, which at that time ran along the 
foot of the ancient wall to the west; but on account of the expence, nothing was then raised above the 
surface, and the naked ditch remained when De la Bourdonnais came before the town, neither an ob¬ 
struction or advantage to his attack. It was in the same condition in 1756, when the new works were 
resolved on; and the plan of Mr. Smith having been approved by Mr. Robins, the fortifications on this 
side were raised in conformity to that projection. To join the new rampart with the old bastion to the 
S. W. and to gain the ground in the new area which was occupied by the river, its bed was filled up, 
beginning from the S. W. bastion, with earth dug from the edge of the rising ground of the Black Town, 
to the N. W. which the excavation removed forty yards farther from the works; but only two thirds of the 
bed of the river under the old wall had been choked. The river, stopped in its former elnumel, was 
directed in another, which environed the west and part of the south face of the new works, washing in, 
some places the foot of the glacis, until it rejoined its former bed at the head of the spit of sand. The 
old wall of the western side still remained as a retrenchment to capitulate on, in case the outward should 
be carried. The new, extension on this side comprised three large bastions and their outworks. The 
southern of these three bastions communicated with the old bastion, which stood before on the S.W. angle, 
by the curtain raised across the former channel of the river; and this curtain increased the south face of 
the fort from 130 to 210 yards; nevertheless the works on this side were much less defensible than those 
to the west and north; but the surface of water, and quagmire in the river before it* rendered this front 
inaccessible, excepting by the labours of a much greater army than the present attack. The ground 
on the north of the tort gave the besieger much more advantage than on the other sides, and this face 
was therefore strengthened in proportion. The two former bastions and rampart, as improved and left by 
the French, were suffered to remain ; but the ditch and glacis which they had dug and raised, were the 