

The Black Town is to the northward of the fort, separated by a spacious esplanade; it is near four 
miles in circumference., and surrounded with fortifications sufficiently strong to resist the attempts of ca¬ 
valry to surprise and plunder it. Since the irruption of Hyder Ally in 1780, they have been considerably 
strengthened. This town is the residence of the Gentoo, Moorish, Armenian, and Portuguese merchants, 
and of those Europeans who do not hold situations under the Government. The Custom House, and the 
houses of some of the merchants at Black Town are large and elegant buildings; these with the pagodas 
and temples have a grand appearance from the sea. 

To the southward of the fort stands the country residence of the Governor, and a short distance to 
the southward of that, is Chepauk, the palace of the Nabob of Arcot. The surrounding country is called 
the Choultry Plain, and is covered with the houses and gardens of the Europeans, most of them large and 
beautiful; and from the superior quality of the chunam, or mortar, used in their erection, have an appear¬ 
ance of being built with marble. 

The Choultry Plain commences about a mile and a quarter S.W. of Fort St. George, from which it 
is separated by two rivers. The one, called the River of Triplicane, winding from the west, gains the sea 
about 1000 yards to the south of the glacis. The other coming from the N. W. passes the western side of 
the Black Town, the extremity of which is high ground, which the river rounds, and continues to the 
east, until within 100 yards of the sea, where it washes the foot of the glacis, and then turning to the 
south, continues parallel with the beach, until it joins the mouth and bar of the River of Triplicane® 
From the turning of the river at the high ground, a canal striking to the southward communicates with 
the River of Triplicane. The low ground, included by the channels of the two rivers and canal, is 
called the Island, which is near two miles in circumference. About 1200 yards from the strand of 
the sea is a long bridge, leading from the island over the Triplicane River, to a road which continues 
south to the town of St. Thome. Another bridge over the canal, leads to the west, and amongst 
others to a village called Egmore, from which this bridge takes its name. Coming from the south or 
west, these two bridges afford the only convenient access to the Fort or White Town, excepting an¬ 
other along the strand of the sea, when the bar of the Triplicane River is choked with sand. All 
the ground between the St. Thome Road and the sea is filled with villages and enclosures; and so 
is that on the left, for half a mile towards the Choultry Plain, from which a road and several smaller 
passages lead through them to the St. Thome Road. 

The Choultry Plain extends two miles to the westward of the enclosures which bound the 
St Thome road, and terminates on the other side at a large body of water called the Meliapour tank, 
behind which runs, with deep windings, the Triplicane River. The road from the mount passes two 
miles and a half under the mound of the tank, and at its issue into the Choultry Plain is a kind of defile, 
formed by the mound on one side, and buildings with brick enclosures on the other. 