


Azores, their Number 


n^\V»AiV^ , VVVV%WVVV^VV\V%^VVVV%VVwVVl^Vfc^WVvVWVfc^VVI(VVV\VVWVVVVVVI^VVVVVV , V%VV 


565 to the Knd* 




ORIENTAL COMMERCE. 




CHAPTER XIX. 

Madras. 


Description — Coins — Weights — Measures—Commerce of Madras—Commerce with London—European Articles 
suitable to the Madras Market—Commerce with Denmark — France — Hamburgh — Leghorn — -Lisbon — 
Madeira — Cadiz—Statement of Commerce with Foreign Europe—Commerce with the United Stales of 
America—Commerce with the Coast of Malabar—Northern Parts of Guzzerat-—Surat and adjacent Villages 
— Bombay—Northern Circars—Northern Division oj'the Carnatic—Fort St. George—Southern Division 
of the Carnatic — Tanjore—Tinnevclly and Ramnad — Canara — Cochin—Bengal—Ceylon—Coast of Su - 
matra—Statement of Commerce, with British Asia—Commerce with the Arabian Gulf—Persian Gulf— 
Cutch and Scindy—Goa and the Coast of Concan—Mahraita Dominions— Travancore—Tranqucbar— 
Pegu Pulo Pmang, and the Eastward Malacca — Batavia — Manilla — China—Various Places — Slate* 
ment of Commerce with Foreign Asia, Sec.—Statement ofCornmn'ce to all Parts of the World—Price 
Current of European and Asiatic Commodities—List of Merchants—Established Rates of Commission- 
Vessels belonging to Madras — Company's Imports from England — Company's Exports to England—Reca¬ 
pitulation of Imports and Exports — Company's Revenues and Disbursements — Assets—Government Securi¬ 
ties — Company's Army—Pay and Allowances — Civil Service—Extracts from Acts of Parliament relative 
thereto—Standing Orders for Salutes in the Garrison—Regulations relative to the Transmission of Letters 
overland—Provisions and Refreshments—Articles procurable at Madras — Diamonds—Piece Goods, 


MADRAS, 

Or Port St. George, the principal settlement of the English on the Coast of Coromandel, and to 
which all the others are subordinate, is in latitude 13° 4' North, and longitude S0° 22 East. It is the seat 
of a Governor and Council, subject to the controul of the Governor General. 

Madras is divided into two parts, the Fort, or White Town, and the Black Town. The Fort stands 
close to the seaside, and is one of the best in the possession of the British nation; and although not of so 
regular a design as Fort William in Calcutta, yet from the greater facility of relieving it by sea, and the 
natural advantage of the ground, it may on the whole be deemed at least equal to it. 

In. the middle of the fort stands the old or original fortress, which was erected op the first arrival of 
the English here; it is about 100 yards square, surrounded with battlements, having four bastions and two 

Von. II. B ' 



•>) 


MADRAS. 


gates 5 one to the westward, where the main guard is kept, the other to the eastward facing the sea. This 
building is now converted into the offices of Government, and the town residences of many of the Com¬ 
pany’s civil servants. To the southward stands the church, a spacious and neat building, at the back of 
which is the residence of the Governor. To the northward of the old fort stands the exchange, recently 
built, which is a magnificent building; on the top is a lighthouse, erected with the sanction of Government, 
in December 1796, which is of essential service to ships coming into the roads in the night. The light is 
90 feet above the level of the sea at high water; it may be seen from the decks of the Company’s ships 
above 17 miles, and from their mastheads near 26 miles. There are many large and handsome houses 
within the fort, but the Company’s servants and merchants generally reside in the country; they repair to 
the fort in the morning for the transaction of business, and return home in the afternoon. 