



MADRAS. 


5 


one filled up, and the other removed further out to admit better works. In the front of the X. W. 
bastion was raised another, capable of mounting 2S guns; each of the faces was 100 yards in length, and 
a battalion might be drawn up on its rampart, although a large vacancy was left in the gorge, or back part, 
to increase the interval towards the former bastion behind, which this was intended to cover; it was from 
its superior strength called the royal bastion. A demi-bastion corresponding with the royal, was raised 
before the old N. E. bastion, which stood on the beach of the sea, which however the demi-bastion did not 
entirely envelope ; for its right hand, or east face, extending in a line parallel to the sea, adjoined to the 
shoulder angle of the northern face of the old bastion, leaving this face free to fire forward, but confining 
the extent of ground it commanded, to the same width as the space between the east face of the demi- 
bastion and the sea; to the westward the old bastion had two guns dear of the demi-bastion, which sup¬ 
plied the defence on this side by four guns in the flank, and seven in the northern face. The two new 
bastions communicated with each other by a broad fausse-bray, that passed along the foot of the old rampart 
and bastions; this fausse-bray w T as defended by a stout parapet, seven feet high, which adjoined to the flanks 
of the new bastions. The ditch on this front was dry, because the ground here was seven feet higher than 
the level of the canal, which supplied the ditches to the west and south; but a cuvette, or trench, seven feet 
deep, and 25 broad, was dug the whole length of the ditch, which before the fausse-bray was ISO feet 
wide, and before the bastions 90. The covered way of this front was broad and well-pallisaded, and 
contained between the two bastions a large ravelin capable of holding IS guns, nine in each face. The glacis 
was excellent, and little was wanting to complete the defence on this side, excepting mines, which the 
want of time and bricklayers had not allowed. The western face had likewise its covered way pallisaded, 
and glacis, and contained three ravelins, of which that in the middle was the largest. The eastern face 
extended along the beach of the sea within 20 yards of the surf;,but ships could not approach near enough 
to batter it with any effect, and no guns could be brought to bear upon it by land. Before the sea-gate, 
which stands in the middle of the curtain, was a battery of 13 guns;' 50 yards on the right of this battery was 
a platform of old standing, with 14 guns to return salutes, which had hitherto been left without a parapet; 
the original curtain, although nothing more than a brick wall four feet thick, had never been strengthened; 
but a ditch six feet deep, and ten wide, had lately been dug before it, and a ditch with palisades was intended 
to have been carried round the battery and the platform, but had wbt been executed at either. The only 
danger on this side was from a sudden assault of surprise, which'could rarely come by boats landing un¬ 
awares across the surf: but always, and with ease, by a body of men passing on the edge of it by either 
of the bastions at the extremity, to prevent which, a row of anchors, backed by palisades and a trench, 
were extended from the neck of each bastion quite into the surf. No buildings excepting sheds had been 
raised in the new ground taken in to the westward; and in those of the old, the bomb-proof lodgements 
were not sufficient for the security of the garrison. 