

On the 12th of December, 1753, the last of the troops stationed in the different outposts, arrived in the 
fort, and completed the force with which Madras was to sustain the siege. The whole of the European 
military, including officei ; s, with 64 topasses, and S9 caffres, incorporated in the companies, amounted 
to 1758 men; the sepoys were 2,220; the European inhabitants, not military, were 150 men, and they 
were appropriated, without distinction, to serve out stores and provisions to the garrison. The native 
boatmen, who alone could ply across;the surf, had been retained by special encouragements, and their huts, 
with their massoolahs or boats, extended under the wall next the sea, where it was supposed not a shot 
was likely to fall. ■ . • 

The Council of the Presidency, by an unanimous vote, committed the ^defence of the siege to the 
Governor, Mr. Pigot, recommending him to consult Colonel Lawrence on all occasions, and on extraordi¬ 
nary emergencies to assemble a Council of the superior officers of the garrison. 

The siege was raised the 17th of February, 1759, after the enemy’s fire had continued forty-two dayr. 
Their retreat was so sudden as to prevent their destroying the Black Town, or taking away all them sick: 



MADRAS. 


0 

they took with them greater part of the stores* but, lost and left, behind them 52 pieces of caution* and 
150 barrels of good, and the same quantity of bad powder. 

The fort fired during the siege 26,554 rounds from them cannon, 7,502 shells from the mortars, and 
threw 1990 hand-grenades; the musketry expended 200,000 cartridges. In these services were used 1768 
barrels of gunpowder; 30 pieces of cannon and fire mortars had been dismounted on the works. As many 
of the enemy’s cannon-balls were gathered in the works, or about the defences of the fort, or found in 
wells and tanks in the Black Town, as the garrison had expended. The enemy threw 8,000 shells of all 
sorts, of which by far the greatest number were directed against, the buildings, all of which lay together 
in half the area within the walls in the old town to the eastward, and scarce a house remained that was 
not open to the heavens. During the siege 13 officers weie killed, 2 died, 14 wounded, and 4 taken 
prisoners, in all 33. Of European troops 198 were killed, 52 died in the hospitals, 20 deserted, 122 were 
taken prisoners, and 167 wounded, in all 579. Of the sepoys and lascars 114 were killed, including 
officers, 232 wounded, and 440 deserted. 

The loss of men sustained by the French army, has never been ascertained. Their force at the com¬ 
mencement of the siege was 3,500 Europeans, 2,000 sepoys, and 2,000 cavalry. 

Thus ended a siege, the most strenuous and regular that had ever been carried oil in India, 

The Government of Fort St. George, and the possessions on the Coasts of Coromandel and Orixa f 
are vested in a Governor and three Counsellors; vacancies therein are to be supplied by the Court of 
Directors, the members of Council being taken from the senior merchants, of twelve years’* residence in India 
If the Court of Directors neglect to fill such stations within two months after the notification of their 
Vacancy, the King may appoint thereto, (and such only to be recalled by the King), The Court of Directors 
may make provisional appointments, but-no salary is to be paid till the parties are in the actual possession 
of the office; and if a vacancy of Governor occurs when no provisional successor is on the spot, the 
Counsellor next in rank is to succeed, till a successor arrives, or a person on the spot is appointed. During 
this interval if the Council should be reduced to one member only, besides the acting Governor, he may call 
a senior merchant to act as a temporary Counsellor till the arrival of a Governor, or afresh appointment be 
made: the salaries are only to be paid for the periods the offices are held, although no provisional successor 
be on the spot. The Commander in Chief is not to succeed as Governor unless specially appointed so to do. 
If a vacancy occurs in the Council, and no provisional Counsellor be present, the Governor and Council 
may appoint a Counsellor from the senior merchants. If the Governor and Commander in Chief are 
different persons, the latter may be appointed by the Directors the second in Council. The Commander 
in Chief of India, not being the Governor General, is to have a seat in Council when at Fort St. George. 
The local Commander in Chief is to have a seat also while the Commander in Chief of India may be pre¬ 
sent, but not to have a vote. 