

When in Council, to proceed in the first place to matters proposed by the Governor; and on any 
question of the Counsellors, the Governor may twice adjourn the discussion for forty-eight hours. All pro¬ 
ceedings to be stated as made by the Governor and Council, and signed by the Chief Secretary. 

If the Governor differs in opinion with the Council, after they shall have stated their opinions in writ¬ 
ing, he may direct such measures thereon as he may see fit, on his own responsibility, so that such measures 
could have been legally effected with the consent of the Council; but these powers are not to be exercised by 
Governors succeeding in consequence of death, &e. except provisionally appointed, or confirmed by the 
Directors. While Governors are acting previous to confirmation, all questions are to be decided by a 
plurality of voices, the Governor having the casting vote; but in no case to act against the opinion of the 
Council in judicial matters, or in regulations for the good order of civil government, &c. nor by his own 
authority to impose any tax,;&c. When the Governor General may be at Fort St. George, the powers of the 
Governor there are to be suspended (except in judicial proceedings) from the proclamation of the Governor 



MADRAS. 


7 


General's arrival, to the proclamation to the contrary, or until his departure 5 the powers of Government 
during this period are to be vested In the Governor General, the Governor sitting and acting as a 
Member of Council. 

The Governor and Council are to obey the orders of the Governor General, &c. except they may be 
repugnant to the orders of the Court of Directors; the Governor General, &c. finally deciding as to the 
application of those orders. The Governor and Council cannot declare wax', &c. but in consequence of 
orders from Bengal, or from the Court of Directors, and are to make all treaties (if possible) subject to the 
ratification of the Governor General, &c. and are also to inform the Supreme Government of all things 
material to be communicated, and also of such as may be required of them. 

A Supreme Court of Judicature is established at Madras, consisting of a Chief Justice and three other 
Judges, who are to be Barristers of not less than five years standing, to be named by the King. The sa¬ 
lary of the Chief Justice is £6000 per annum, and each of the other Judges £5000 per annum (in lieu 
of all fees), to be paid at the exchange of Ss. per pagoda, to commence, when appointments take place in 
England, on the day of embarkation; and when in India, on the entering on the duties of the office. After 
seven years" service in India, if the Judges of the Supreme Court return to Europe, the King may direct to 
be paid out of the Territorial Revenues, to the Chief Justice not moi’e than <£4,600, and to each of the 
other Judges not more than <£4,200 per annum, so that no allowances be made exceeding together the 
salary of a Puisne Judge. The salaries of the Judges to cease on their quitting India. 