

Goods attempted to be conveyed away from the Custom-house without a permit, or goods differing 
from those specified in the permit, attempted to be carried away under such permit, shall be charged with 
double duty; or in the event of its being proved to the Board of Revenue that the goods were attempted 
to he carried away, with an intention of defrauding the Revenue, such goods shall be liable to confiscation. 

Beetle, tobacco, ganjah, bang, and goodauek, smuggled, or attempted to be smuggled, shall be liable 
to seizure, and to confiscation, or to double duty, as may be determined by the Board of Revenue on a 
consideration of the case. 

The duty on liquors, or other articles of merchandise imported, which shall be stated to be sour or 
damaged, shall be levied at the rates prescribed, on the amount of the sales by public auction at the 
Custom-house; provided the importer shall consent to the sale of such liquors, or other articles of mer¬ 
chandise, otherwise on the value computed at the tariff prices. 




MADRAS. 


All- pkce-goods imported for sale, shall be stamped by the Collector of Customs with the Com¬ 
pany's mark; piece-goods offered for sale, or found without such stamp, shall be liable to confiscation. 

Piece-goods imported in bales packed, and screwed for re-exportation, shall not be opened for the 
purpose of being stamped, as prescribed by the foregoing section, provided that a correct statement 
of the contents of each bale be presented to the Collector of Customs, and the truth of such state¬ 
ment be sworn to before a magistrate by the owner, if on the spot, or by the parties to whom such 
goods are consigned. When such statement shall have been presented and authenticated, as above 
prescribed, the import duties shall be levied at the established rates. 

Persons who, having entered and passed bales for re-exportation, may afterwards wish to sell such goods 
by retail, shall apply to the Collector of Customs to chop each piece. The Collector of Customs, on such 
application,,, shall stamp such goods free of charge. 

The following articles shall be exempt from the payment of duty:— 

I. Goods, the property of the Honourable Company, on the production of a certificate to that effect. 

II. Copper purchased at the Company's sales at any of the other Presidencies in India, if sold on the 
condition of being exempt from the payment of duty. 

III. Sugar, the manufacture of the Company's territories, subject to the Presidency of Eort St. 
George, on the production of a satisfactory certificate to that effect. 

IV. Arrack and rum, the manufacture of Bengal. 

V. Treasure, bullion,, jewels, and precious stones.. 

VI. Horses. 

VII. Gi'ain imported from Bengal. 

The Collector shall nevertheless register the amount of such goods imported free of duty. 

The Head Assistant to the Collector of the Customs shall supply gunny bags for the landing of grain 
imported in bulk, and shall charge for the use of such bags, at the rate of two fanams for every twenty-five 
bags of grain imported. 