

The Commander, or Supercargo, of every vessel importing, shall deliver In his manifest;at the office 
of the Collector of Customs; and in cases in which the Collector or his Deputy shall consider it to be ne- 
cessary, he shall annex the following form of an affidavit to the manifest, which shall be sworn to before 
a Justice of the Peace. 

« Commander of the ship maketh oath and saith, that the annexed’manifest, to the j 

best of his knowledge and belief, contains a true and just account of all goods and merchandise imported' 
on the said ship, into Madras Roads, on his account, or on account of the owners; and that*the sums 
written opposite to the articles, are the true and just prime cost” 

When the above forms shall have been observed, permits shall be granted to land the goods, under.* 
the signature of the Collector of Customs,, or of his Deputy. 



54 


MADRAS. 


No articles shall be shipped or landed without a permit granted as above described. 

Any merchandise landed, or attempted to be landed, before the manifests shall have been regularly 
entered at the office of the Collector of Customs, and a permit obtained; and all goods or merchandise 
landed, or attempted to be landed, that may not have been inserted in the manifest, shall be charged with 
double duty ; or in the event of its being proved to the satisfaction of the Board of Revenue, that the goods 
were attempted to be landed with a view of defrauding the Customs, they shall be liable to confiscation. 

All goods (except such as may be shipped or landed on account of the Honourable Company) shall 
be shipped or landed at the ghaut opposite to the Custom-house. Goods or packages shipped from, or landed 
at any other place, shall be charged with double duty. 

All officers of Government having orders to ship or, land goods, stores, or other articles, the property 
of the Honourable Company, shall apply to the Collector of Customs for a permit to land or ship such 
goods, stores, or other articles, and shall furnish to the Collector an invoice of the whole of the articles 
which may be shipped or landed under such permit. 

All goods (except belonging to the Company) on being landed, shall be immediately brought to the 
Custom-house; and when required to be passed, a written application in the following form shall be made 
for that purpose to the Collector of Customs. Applications made in any other form will not be attended to- 

To the Collector of Customs « 

Please to permit the under-mentioned goods to pass the Custom-house on account of 

Sir, 

Madras , 1S1 Your obedient Servant, 


Date. 

No. and 
nature of 
packages. 

Name of 
Vessel. 

Under what 
Colours. 

Whence | 
imported. J 

Sorts of 
Goods. 

Quantity 
of Goods. 

Rates. Total Value. 



. 




N, B. These are to be left blank, and filled up 
from the public tariff. 


If the duty on the goods specified in the application, shall have been paid, or satisfactory security given 
for the payment, the Collector of Customs, or his Deputy, shall subjoin his permit to “ weigh,” or “ exa¬ 
mine,” or if no duty shall be chargeable, to cc pass” such goods. 