

Goods attempted to be shipped without a regular permit on British or American vessels, or on vessels 
belonging to native inhabitants of the British territories, or to subjects of the native powers of Asia, shall 
be charged with an export duty of 6 per cent, on the value computed at the tariff prices. 

Goods attempted to be shipped on foreign vessels (American vessels excepted) without a regular 
permit, or goods differing from those specified in the permit, attempted to be carried away, or to be shipped, 
under such permit, shall be charged with duty at the rate of eight per cent.; or in the event of its being 
proved to the satisfaction of the Board of Revenue, that the goods were so attempted to be shipped, with a 
view of defrauding the revenue, such goods shall be liable to confiscation. 

Whenever goods shall be stopped, on the ground of their being liable to confiscation, the Collector 
of Customs shall submit the case, without delay, to the Board of Revenue for their decision. 

The Board of Revenue are empowered, in cases in which they may see reason to do so, to impose a 
fine on parties offending against this regulation in lieu of confiscating the goods of such parties so offending, 
in the manner prescribed. 

The Collector of Customs is empowered to levy a commission of five per cent, on the amount of the 
duty collected on goods imported or exported, and upon the amount of duty computed on goods imported 
or exported, free of duty, on the same principles as if the goods were liable to the payment of such duty; 
and in cases in which goods shall become liable to be charged with additional duty, the Collector is 
empowered to levy a commission on the amount of such additional duty. 

The amount of the commission shall be divided between the Collector and his Deputy in the propor¬ 
tion of three-fifths to the Collector, and two-fifths to the Deputy Collector. 

VOL. II. I ' 




58 


MADRAS. 


The following articles are declared to be exempt, both from the payment of duty and of commission*. 

I. Treasure imported or exported. 

II. Horses imported or exported. 

III. Goods the property of the Honourable Company. 

No individuals shall be exempted from the payment of duties established by this regulation, unless by 
a special order from the Governor in Council. 

The Collector of Customs shall require from Commanders of all vessels exporting, previously to grant¬ 
ing port-clearances, true and complete manifests of the cargoes of such vessels;, and if he considers it to 
be necessary, shall require such Commanders to make oath to the truth of such manifests. 

Port-clearances shall be granted to the Commanders of all vessels clearing out from the port of Madras, 
provided the Commanders shall have furnished the manifests required by the foregoing section, and 
produce the certificate of the Boat-Paymaster that all charges in that department have been paid. 

The Collector of Customs is empowered to charge for his own benefit, 

P. F. P. 