

The exemption from the payment of duty shall in like manner be extended to private baggage arriv¬ 
ing from any port in India; but the exemption must in such cases be understood to be strictly confined to 
articles bond fide, private baggage. Goods imported in the piece, such as long-cloth, muslin, &c. and all 
articles not of the description of private baggage, shall be charged with duty at the established rate. 

The importation of the following articles is prohibited; and such articles imported without authority, 
shall, on proof thereof, be confiscated. 

I. Articles comprised by law in the exclusive trade of the Honourable Company. 

II. Articles the importation of which is prohibited by Act of Parliament. 

III. Military stores of all descriptions. 

Goods transshipped in the roads, shall be charged with the same rate of duty which such goods would 
have been liable to, if imported. 

Application for permits for transshipping goods, shall be made to the Collector of Customs in the fol 
lowing form: applications made in any other form shall not be attended to. 

To the Collector of Customs . 

Please permit the under-mentioned goods to be transshipped on account of 

Si it, 

Madras, 181 Your obedient Servant, 


The permit for transshipping goods, signed by the Collector of Customs, shall be sufficient authority to 
the Master Attendant for supplying boats to transship such goods. 

Goods transshipped without permission first obtained from the Collector of Customs, or shipped, or 
attempted to be shipped upon any other vessels than that for which they may have been passed, shall be 
charged with double duty; or in the event of its being proved to the satisfaction of the Board of Revenue, 
that the goods were so transshipped, or shipped on another vessel than that specified in the permit, such 
goods shall be liable to confiscation. 


From 
Date. what 
Vessel. 


[ Colours. 


On what 
From to be 
whence, trans¬ 
shipped. 


Under 

what 

Colours. 


W hither 
bound. 


No. and 

nature of Sorts. Quantity Rates. 
Packages 



MADRAS, 


EXPORT DUTIES. 

All goods intended for exportation, shall be regularly entered at the Custom-house, and application 
shall be made in the following form, for permission to ship such goods. 

To the Collector of Customs . 

Please to permit to be exported the under-mentioned goods on account of 
Madras, 181 . Sir, your obedient Servant, 


Date, 

1 

No. and ! 
Nature of 
Packages. | 

Name of 
Vessel. 

Under what 
Colours. 

Whither 

bound. 

: 

Sorts of 
Goods. 

Rates of Ma¬ 
nufacture or 
Produce. 

Quantity of 
Goods. 

Rates, 


j 

i 






These to be filled up 
from the tariff. 


Applications not conformable to the above form, shall not be attended-to. 

Goods exported on foreign vessels (American vessels excepted) shall be charged with an export duty 
on the value of such goods, computed at the tariff prices, at the rate of 2 per cent. 

Goods exported on British or American vessels, or on vessels belonging to native inhabitants of the 
British territories in India, or to subjects of native powers of Asia, shall be exempt from the payment of 
duty; such goods shall nevertheless be registered by the Collector of Customs, and their value computed 
at the tariff prices. 