

As much delay and inconvenience have been experienced from vessels anchoring at too great a dis¬ 
tance, any vessel that may anchor farther from the shore than in eight fathoms water, will not be entitled 
to boats for any other purpose than water and provisions, unless on the approach of bad weather, when it 
might be considered unsafe to anchor nearer to the shore, and in such case double boat-hire to be charged. 
No greater number of boats to be allotted to any ship than she is able to keep constantly employed, of 
which the Master-Attendant is to be the judge. 

No goods or property whatever to be landed or shipped after six o’clock P. M.; and in case of any 
deviation from this regulation, the risk and responsibility to be on the proprietor. 

RATES OF BOAT-HIRE. 

The following are the established rates of boat-hire to be charged in future, 

For each trip to vessels in the Smith Rnad-™—In fanams. 

For ditto™^-™—in the North Road^x—- - - 10 ditto. 

All double trips to be charged as such, and transshipping to be at the rate of a trip in the North 
Roads, and the Boat-Paymaster to charge double hire to such as lay at too great a distance from shore. 

For every boat employed on a Sunday, an additional charge to the above of 7 fanams. 

Persons transshipping goods in the roads, to be charged with the hire of the boat to and from the 
beach, in addition to the rate above mentioned, which is defrayed by the employer of the boat. 

For stores transported by sea from the Marine-yard to the Beach-house, &c. the same rate of hire to 
be paid as for a boat employed in the South Roads. 

Boats receiving or delivering articles at the back of the surfs, are to be charged full boat-hire. 

For shipping and landing to and from the King's ships, when lying in more than eight fathoms water, 
double boat-hire is to be charged. 



60 


MADRAS. 


Boats going from any part to the north of the southernmost line of buildings, nearest to the North 
Esplanade, to vessels lying to the southward of the N. E. angle of the fort, that is, when such vessel lies 
from tins last situation to the southward of the fort., in the same manner of bearing, the boats are to be 
paid the hire of one trip and a half for each trip; likewise from the beach-house to vessels lying to the 
S. E. angle of the fort, a trip and a quarter for each trip. 

Vessels only lying to the north of the southernmost line of buildings nearest to the North Esplanade, 
are to be considered as lying in the North Road. Vessels also lying to the southward of this line, are to 
be considered as lying in the South Road, and subject to the hire of the latter situation. 

Vessels in the North Road, with an exception to those commanded by Europeans, and of whatever de¬ 
scription lying without seven fathoms, are to be charged the hire of one North Road trip and a half for each 
trip; likewise when lying in 7f fathoms water, the hire of two North Road trips, which latter is about 
equal to the hire with which vessels are charged in the South Road, when lying in this last depth of water. 