

It will be the particular duty of Magistrates, Collectors, and other local authorities, where fo¬ 
reigners may reside, to explain to such persons this part of the regulation, and to see that the order is 
strictly enforced. 

All passports, of whatever description, are in future to be translated into the Malabar, Hindoo, and 
Hindoostany languages. 

Such parts of the existing passport regulations, as are not affected by the above rules, are to remain 
in full force. 

Fort St. George, August 22, 1807. 



MADRAS, 


65 


GOVERNMENT PASSPORT ADVERTISEMENTS, 

Par. 1 . Notice is hereby given that all foreigners, of whatever description, residing at this place, are 
required, within the period of fifteen days from this date, to deliver to the Superintendent of Madras 
Police, a report of their names, place of residence, occupation, and period of arrived at Madras, specifying 
also the place from whence they may have last come. 

Par. 2. It is intended that this order shall extend to all French subjects, whether from Europe or 
bom in India, as well as to all other subjects of any foreign state; and any person failing to comply with 
this notification, will, on discovery, be liable to be placed under personal restraint. 

Par. 3. All foreigners who may arrive at this Presidency, are in future to report their names, design¬ 
ation, and place from whence they last came, within twenty-four hours after their arrival, at the Police 
Office, mentioning likewise their intended place of residence while at Madras. 

Fori St . George , April 2, 1807. 

The Honourable the Governor in Council has resolved that the following advertisement be published 
for general information; and all persons whom it may concern, are hereby enjoined to pay strict attention 
to the orders therein contained. 

Notice is hereby given that all Europeans, English as well as Foreigners, not in His Majesty's or 
Honourable Company's service, residing at this place, are required within the period of fifteen days from 
this date, to deliver at the Madras Police Office, a report of their names, country, place of residence, occu¬ 
pation, period of arrival, specifying also the place from whence they may have last come, &c. 

The above description of persons who may hereafter arrive at this Presidency, either by sea or land, 
are likewise directed to report their names, designation, occupation, &c. as above, within twenty-four hours 
after their arrival at the Madras Police Office; mentioning likewise their intended place of residence while 
at Madras. --- 

The above description of persons at present residing at any of the out-stations, or elsewhere, under the 
authority of the Government of Fort St. George, or who may hei'eafter arrive, shall without delay forward 
a report in a prescribed form through the channel of the nearest Magistrate, Collector, or other local 
authority, to the Madras Police Office. 

It is further directed, that on the departure of any of the above description of persons from their place 
of residence, to such place as they may proceed to, either from the Presidency, or from any of the out- 
stations, whether by sea or land, they shall by themselves, and through the channel of the nearest Magi¬ 
strate, Collector, or other local authority, at all times report to the Madras Police Office. 