

V. That the Secretary of Government in the public department shall keep a general register of all 
travellers, and passports granted, to enable him to correct which, all public officers, authorized to grant or 
receive passports, shall transmit to him monthly a copy of their register of passports granted and re¬ 
ceived during the month, and shall be held responsible for the application of the exact number of blank 
passports with which they have respectively been furnished by the Secretary. 

VI. That passports to military persons shall be granted by military officers exclusively, and to all 

other persons by civil officers exclusively; but in cases of urgency, a military officer, in the absence of the 
civil authority, and a civil officer in the absence of the military authority, may pass a traveller to the next 
post or station, by endorsing his passport with the words “ Pass to /' noting the date, 

entering in his register the particulars of the passport, in the same manner as if he had granted a new one; 
and entering the word u endorsed*” in the column of remarks. 

VII. Any traveller stating that he has lost his passport, shall invariably be detained, until a duplicate 
shall have been obtained. 

VIII. Public officers having received a passport authorizing them to travel post on the public service, 
shall not be compelled to wait for the exchange of their passports, nor be subjected to any part of these 
regulations which, involve delay. 

IX. All public officers authorized to grant or receive passports, shall report to the Secretary of 
Government any irregularity or deviation from the established rules which may come under their observa¬ 
tion, together with all remarks regarding the conduct and apparent views of travellers, which may appear 
proper and necessary to be communicated for the purposes of further enquiry. And all public officers 
authorized to issue passports, are also empowered, on sufficient information of incorrect conduct or impro¬ 
per views, to refuse a fresh passport for the continuance of a journey already commenced, (reporting the 
detention to the Secretary of Government, by the post of the day), or even to restrain until further orders 
the person of the traveller, if such a measure shall in their judgment appear to be necessary. 

X. For the convenience of official arrangement, all letters relating to passports shall be superscribed: 
u Passport service.” 

ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS'. 

Notice is hereby given, that from and after the 1st day of July next, no European person, of what¬ 
ever rank, description, or country, will be permitted to travel through the Company’s dominions subject to 
this Presidency, unless he shall be regularly furnished with passports for that purpose. 

The only exception which the Right Honourable the Governor General in Council has been pleased 
to make to the foregoing resolution, is in favour of officers commanding parties of His Majesty's or the 
Honourable Company's troops. 

All persons about to travel, are accordingly required to take out a passport from the Collector of the 
district in which they may reside, or in places where there may be no Collector, from the commanding officer 
of the nearest garrison; which certificate or passport shall be produced to the next Collector or commanding; 
officer, who are authorized to cancel it, if necessary, and to issue a fresh passport. 