

The following table of rates is established towards defraying the charges of it. 

Ships or vessels^--50 tons and under 

Dittos—50 to 100 tons-v. 

Ditto---—-100 to 200 ditto 

lOitto^200 to 300 ditto 

Dittos-~~-~wv- 300 to 400 ditto 

Ditto---- 400 to 500 ditto 

Ditto^^v— --— 500 to 600 ditto 

Dittos.™—- 600 to 700 ditto 

Ditto-- 700 to 800 ditto 

Ditto_ 800 to 900 ditto 

- —„—— 900 and upwards . 

No vessels to pay for the lights more than twice during the year. 


4 

{ ditto. 

vl ditto. 

vl4 ditto, 
ditto, 
ditto, 
ditto. 

\VVV1tWV\WWWV\ViVKV\3 "7* ditto. 

~4 ditto. 


*4| ditto. 
>5 ditto. 


SALVAGE OF ANCHORS. 

The following regulations are established in regard to anchors when received. 

That the anchors when received, be delivered as directed to the Boat-Paymaster. 

That they remain exposed to public view six months, to give the owners a fair opportunity of iden¬ 
tifying their property; and further to facilitate this object, that one pagoda per cwt. be allowed to the divers 
and catamaran people for each anchoi', if brought on shore with its stock and remaining part of the cable; 
but that half a pagoda only per cwt. be allowed if brought on shore without the stock and remaining part 
of the cable, or if otherwise defaced. 

That the Boat-Paymaster keep a register of all anchors reported to him to be lost, particularizing 
the day of the report, with the date of recovery, and all expences to which the owner is liable. 

That such register be opened at the Boat-Paymaster’s office for general inspection. 

The usual salvage to be allowed to the Master-Attendant on all such anchors as maybe returned to* 
the owners. • 

The Master-Attendant to be answerable for the full value of the anchor, provided its owner can satisfy 
the Board of Trade that the buoy had been cut off, or any other fraud committed by the divers, catama¬ 
ran men, or any person subordinate to the Master-Attendant’s office. 

For every anchor returned to its owner, the Master-Attendant is to pay out of his salvage one pagoda 
per cwt. to be divided equally amongst the divers and catamaran people. 

For every unclaimed anchor found in the road, the Honourable Company to pay the usual hire to the 
divers and catamaran people.. 


RATES OF COOLEY-HXRE. 


A bandy drawn by four bullocks*. 
Ditto by two ditto** 

A cooley load 


8 fanams- 
4 ditto. 

1 ditto. 



fi2 


MADRAS. 


HIRE OF FALANQUIN BEARERS. 


-.Pagodas 




A set of bearers on field service, each per month 
Head bearer dittos 

A set of bearers at the Presidency, each ditto 

Head bearer, ditto w——, --- 

A set of bearers at the Presidency, batta on travelling days only, each 


per day,* 




2 0 0 
2 11 20 

1 33 00 

2 0 0 

0 1 0 


N. B. Two pagodas a month being exclusively a field pay, is understood to be in lieu of batta and 
all other demands; and bearers at the Presidency are entitled to demand no higher pay than one pagoda 
and three-quarters per month. 


WAGES USUALLY ALLOWED TO SERVANTS. 