

Palanquin rent——,,—per month 4 40 pagodas, 
j Ditto bearers as above. 

Kittisol boy month 3 0 pagodas. 

Conycoplys —,,,,„each 5 0 ditto* 

Second dubash or servant 10 pagodas for the time. 

Two peons to watch any goods that may be left on the beach, each two pagodas per month. 


Cook 

Pantryman, 

2 Watermen, 
Necessary-man,, 
2 Peons 


,per month 5 pagodas. 

8 ditto. 

4 ditto. 
„each 2 ditto. 
,each 5 ditto. 


PASSPORT REGULATIONS. 

The Right Honourable the Governor in Council having reason to be satisfied of the total inefficiency 
of the present practice of regulating passports, either to prevent the passage of unauthorized travellers, to 
trace the route and the pretensions of those of doubtful character, or to ensure the free progress of those 
who are duly authorized, has been pleased to establish the following orders for the regulation and controul 
of all passports granted under the Presidency of Port St. George. 

I. That from and after the first of June next, the Secretary of Government in the public depart¬ 
ment shall be charged with the general controul and direction of all passports granted within the territories 
of Fort St. George. 

II. That passports of the prescribed form, capable of being recognised by natives as well as 
Europeans, in sewed books, with a cheque margin for the insertion of the name of the person, and number 
and date of the passport, (for the purpose of preventing forgeries by comparison when returned), shall be 
issued by the Secretary of Government to all persons who shall be authorized to grant them, viz. To 
the Resident in Mysore, and to all Collectors for their respective districts, with an exception of seaports 
where there is a Commercial Resident, who will always regulate the passports of the port where he resides; 
to the Town Major of Fort St. George, for military persons belonging to that garrison; to the Adjutant- 
General of the Army, for all other military persons leaving the Presidency; and to such officers command¬ 
ing military stations, as shall be authorized to grant passports. These stations shall be determined in the 
first instance, and from time to time when any changes of stations may occur, by the Secretary of 
Government, in communication with the Adjutant-General of the Army. The Secretary of Govern¬ 
ment will himself regulate the receipts and issue at the Presidency of all passports to persons not 
military. 



MADRAS, 


63- 


III. That all persons authorized to grant passports, shall keep a register in a prescribed form, blank 
books of which will be likewise transmitted of all passports received, and another of all pass¬ 
ports issued. 

IV. That all travellers, on arriving at a station, shall deliver their passport to the proper officer, 
who shall register its receipt in the same manner as on granting one; and if the bearer proceeds farther, 
shall issue a new passport in exchange, noting on the old one the date of its receipt, and at the end of 
each month sending by the post all passports received, to the person by whom they appear to have 
been granted. 