

Vessels commanded by Europeans, and lying in the Noi'th Road, to be charged as has been usual, the 
hire of vessels that lie in the South Road. 

CHARGES FOR BALLAST. 

Each load of ballast is to consist of 120 baskets of sand. The baskets to be compared with a muster 
basket at the Master Attendant’s, and a seal or chop affixed to each, and no other made use of. The 
prices are as follow, vis. 

For every boat load of ballast delivered in the South Road____4 fanams. 

For dittos—.—---in the North Road----3 ditto. 

over and above the rate of boat hire already notified. 

EXPENCES OF WATERING. 

Each boat load of water to consist of two tons, or four butts, sent off full. The water to be of the 
best quality. The price of each boat load of water to be 55 fanams 40 cash. 

The great distance that vessels now lay from the place of watering, by their removal opposite to the 
new Custom-house, will render it necessary for their moving opposite the watering-place to receive this 
article, which will not be sent on board in any other situation in or near the roads, unless they are in 
absolute distress for it, in which case to pay an additional half trip of 7 fanams 30 cash, for vessels 
commanded by Europeans; and 4 fanams 75 cash, for vessels commanded by natives, for each trip. 

For every water cask not sent back by the returni ng boat, the Owner or Master to pay the Muster 
Attendant a fine, at the rate of four fanams each day it may be detained on board any vessel; and for 
every water or liquor butt not landed before the delivery of the port clearance, the Owner or Master to 
pay the Master Attendant eight pagodas, and for every puncheon or gang cask four pagodas. 

In order to obviate complaints respecting the unnecessary detention of boats alongside of vessels and 
of their being imperfectly manned, &c. a printed paper will be lodged at the Sea-Customer’s office, to be 
delivered to every commander upon bis taking out the certificate granted, on swearing to his manifest, as 
prescribed by the regulations for levying customs: the above-mentioned printed paper to be sent on board 
previously to the landing or receiving of the cargo, for the purpose of being filled up and signed by the 
officer commanding on board. When the vessels shall be ready for departure, the said paper is to be deli¬ 
vered to the Sea-Customer, who is directed not to grant a port-clearance until the above be complied with,; 
the paper to be forwarded immediately by the Sea-Customer, to the Secretary to the Board of Trade! 
No boat to be detained alongside any vessel more than an hour, or to be entitled to double hire, and all 
responsibility to be on the commander or commanding officer of such vessel. 



MADRAS. 


61 


LIGHTHOUSE DUES. 


In the year 1796 a lighthouse was erected on the Exchange in Fort St. George, which is of essen¬ 
tial service to ships coming into the roads in the night; it is 90 feet above the level of the sea at high 
water, and may be seen from the mast-head of an East Indiaman above eight leagues. 