



MADRAS. 


CM 


And European persons of all descriptions are hereby warned that whoever shall be found travelling 
without a passport, will be taken up, and confined until a report of his case can be made to the Presidency, 

Notice is hereby farther given, that a reward of ten pagodas will be paid to any person who shall take 
up and bring into the nearest garrison, any European deserter or vagrant of any description. 

By order of the Right Honourable the Governor General in Council. 

Fort St. George , May 25, 1799. 

In addition to the Government advertisement published on the 25th May, 1799, prohibiting Euro¬ 
peans of every description from passing through the Company's dominions subject to this Presidency, with¬ 
out a regular passport—The Right Honourable the Governor in Council is hereby to give notice that from 
and after the 1st day of June next ensuing, any Europeans, of whatever rank, description, or country, who 
shall be discovered passing through the territories under this Presidency, beyond fifteen miles from Fort 
St. George, without being furnished with a regular passport, will be taken up, and confined until the plea¬ 
sure of Government shall be known. 

2d. The only exception which the Right Honourable the Governor in Council has been pleased to 
make to the foregoing Resolution, is in favour of officers commanding parties of His Majesty's, or the 
Honourable Company's troops. 

3d. For the more strict execution of this order, notice is hereby further given, that a reward of ten 
pagodas will be paid to any person who shall take up and bring into the nearest garrison, any European 
deserter, or vagrant, of any description. 

4th. The following are the officers by whom passports will be issued on application. 

By the Public Secretary to the Government, to persons not military. 

The Town Major, to military persons belonging to the garrison of Fort St. George. 

The Adjutant General of the Army, to all other military persons leaving the Presidency, 

The Residents at Hydrabad, Poonali, Mysore, and Travancore; the several Collectors of Revenue; 
the Commercial Residents residing at seaports, and officers commanding military stations. 

Published by order of the Right Honourable the Governor in Council. 

Fort St. George , May 15, 1803. 

The Right Honourable the Governor in Council has been pleased to adopt the following modifications 
in the regulations which have been established with regard to the issue of passports. 

It is directed that in future, all foreigners who arrive at Madras, do deliver their passports at the 
Police Office in person, and that no passports be issued to foreigners, except at the Police Office. AH fo¬ 
reigners residing at any of the out-stations, or elsewhere, under the authority of the Government of Fort 
St. George, or who may hereafter arrive, shall without delay report, through the channel of the nearest 
Magistrate, Collector, or other local authority, their place of residence, occupation, period of arrival, and 
from whence they have last come, to the Police Office at Madras; and any person failing to comply 
■with this notification, will on discovery be placed under personal restraint. 