

That the amount of assets as above, was at the same period------- 9,183,682 

The assets at this Presidency exceed the debts--—^-—-- i?2,124,003 

The Company are possessed of property to a considerable amount at this Presidency, which, from not 
being considered as immediately available, is not inserted in the above account. This property consists of 
plate, household furniture, guns on the ramparts, arms, and some descriptions of military stores. Buildings 
might also be mentioned; but the cost of them is supposed to have been included in the charges. These 
several articles, with the doubtful debts of the Company, are carried into an account termed dead stock * 
In many respects the articles so described are nevertheless to be considered as real property; and insofar 
as they have not been included in the charges, in like manner with the buildings and fortifications, can 
only have been procured by the advance of funds, either in England or India. 

.. By the Company’s annual accounts drawn up to March, 1810, it appears that the sum expended 
on buildings and fortifications for the acquisition and maintenance of their possessions, and the estimated 
value of other articles of dead stock at this Presidency, is as follows: 

Buildings and fortifications^^—____ m £7,840,682 

Plate, furniture, plantations, farms, vessels, stores, &c~_______ 447,798 

Forming a total of 


£?2,288,48Q 





MADRAS, 


73 


GOVERNMENT SECURITIES 

Are issued on paper negotiable to order, and transferable by simple endorsement, 

8 per Cent. Decennial Loan of 1799-1800. 

The interest payable annually in money, or by bills at 8s. per pagoda, and fifteen months after date. 

The principal of this loan is payable in ten years from the dates of subscription, or optionally with 
Government in eleven or twelve years, either in money at Madras, or by bills on the Honourable Court of 
Directors, at eight shillings per pagoda, and fifteen months after date; the Court in this case having the op¬ 
tion to postpone the payment for two years further, they allowing interest thereon at five per cent, per 
annum, payable half yearly. 

8 per Cent. Loan 

advertised on the 5th May, 1809, and closed 11th September, 1S09. 

Promissory notes issued, interest payable half-yearly, viz. on the 1st May and 1st November, from 
year to year. Rills for the interest, provided it amounts to the sum of cP50 sterling at the least, may be 
obtained on the Court of Directors, at the exchange of 8s. 6d. per Star pagoda, payable six months after 
sight. The principal of this loan payable in cash at Eort St. George. 

The outstanding 10 and 8 per cent, securities of this Government were received in subscription to this 
loan at par, and subscriptions in cash at a discount of four per cent. 

The holders of the promissory notes in this loan are at liberty to exchange those securities for a cer¬ 
tificate entitling them to the promissory notes of the Bengal Government, of the same tenor in every respect, 
at the exchange of 360 Arcot rupees per 100 Star pagodas. 