


are to be procured in thl bazar. 

Mangoes. 

Oranges. 

Pine-apples. 


Pomegranates. 

Plantains of various sorts. 
Pumplenoses. 


The fish to be purchased in the bazar, are of the following kinds, 


and most of them are excellent 


Pomfeets, black and white. Cockup. 

Soles. Whitings, 

Prawns- Oysters. 


Mullet. 
Seer fish. 
Crabs. 


and a variety of other fish, which are little known to Europeans, or used by them. 

The water here is very excellent; the watering place is about one mile and a half from the Fort, and 
ships are supplied by country boats at the rates before specified. Wood is rather scarce, and conse¬ 
quently dear. 



MADRAS. 


79 


l ' < 
a..*- 


Articles procurable at Madras, with Directions how to chuse them* 

DIAMOND. 

This gem has the greatest degree of transparency, is the hardest, most beautiful, and brilliant of all 
the precious stones, and has been known from the remotest ages. Diamonds are found only in the East 
Indies and in Brazil, and are distinguished by jewellers into oriental and occidental; the finest and 
hardest being always termed oriental, whether they are produced in the East Indies, or not. * 

Diamonds, when in their rough state, are either in the form of roundish pebbles, with shining surfaces, 
or of octoedral crystals; but though they generally appear in the latter form, yet their crystals are often 
irregular; they are lamellated, consisting of very thin plates, like those of talc, but very closely united, 
the direction of which must be ascertained by the lapidaries before they can work them properly. They are 
usually covered with a thin crust which renders them semi-transparent; but when this is removed, they are 
transparent. 

The principal diamond mines in India are that of Raolconda in the Carnatic; that of Gani r or Cou- 
lour, also in the Carnatic; that of Somelpour, or Goual, in Bengal; and that of Succadanain the Island of 
Borneo. 

These gems are generally imported from Madras in their rough state, in small parcels called bulses, 
neatly secured in muslin, and sealed by the merchant, and are generally sold in Europe by the*'invoice, 
that is, are bought before they are opened, it being always found they contain the value for which they 
were sold in India, and the purchaser gives the importer such an advance on the invoice as the state of the 
market warrants. The bulses contain stones of various shapes and sizes. 

The chief things to be observed in purchasing rough diamonds are, 1st. The colour. 2d. The clean¬ 
ness. 3d. The shape. 

I. Colour. —The colour should be perfectly crystalline, resembling a drop of clear spring water, in 
the middle of which you will perceive a strong light playing with a great deal of spirit. If the coat be 
smooth and bright,, with a little tincture of green in it, it is not the worse, and seldom proves bad; but if 
there is a mixture of yellow with green, then beware of it—it is a soft greasy stone, and will prove bad. 

If the stone has a rough coat, that you can hardly see through it, and the coat be white, and look as 
if it were rough by art, and clear of flaws or veins, and no blemish cast in the body of the stone (which, 
may be discovered by holding it against the light), the stone will prove good. 