

From Mootapilly to Point Divy is about twenty leagues ; in this space the coast is low and woody,- 
having several towns on it, the principal of which are Nizampatam and Pettapollee: the latter may be 
known by a grove of palmyra trees near it, and is in latitude about 15° SO' North, 

NORTHERN CIRCARS.. 

That portion of the British dominions on the Coromandel Coast commonly called the Northern 
Cirears, from its relative situation to Fort St. George, is a narrow slip of maritime country, extending frorm 
15° 30' to 20 0 North latitude, and from 79° to 85° East longitude. The sea bounds it to the east in a 1 
direct N. E. course along a coast 470 miles in length, from Mootapilly, near its southern extremity, to 
the town of Maloud in Orixa, on the borders of the Chilka Lake, its northern extremity. 

The grand divisions of’ the whole territory are naturally and properly five, being so many portions of 
its length, principally marked by rivers running across from the hills on the west to the* sea; but besides 
these, a sixth district has been formed from the maritime border of the four Southerly Cirears, to serve as 
an appendage to, and secure the salt made, or customs collected at the ports of Nizampatam, on a 
southern outlet of the Eistna, and of Mausulipatam on one of its northern branches, as well as at their 
respective dependencies along the coast 

I. Guntoor, or Moortezanagur, the most southerly province, is of a circular form; the river Eistna 
forms the northern boundary of the Circar, and separates it from the province of Mustaphanagur. The 
boundaries to the west and south are the districts of Palnaud and Ongole; and on the east, Nizampatam" 
with its dependencies, intervene every where between it and the sea, excepting a narrow communication: 
with the small port of Mootapilly.. 

II. Co-ndapilly, or Mustaphanagur. 

III. Ellore. These are adjacent to each other, as well as to the Circar just described, in a N.E. direc-* 
lion, and. occupy the whole space lying between the Eistna, and the districts of Mausulipatam towards the* 
sea; and the River Godavery describes the limits of Ellore northerly. 

IV. Rajahmundry, towards the south, is separated from Ellore in its greatest breadth by the 
Godavery. This river,, after receiving many lesser ones, from its source among the Balagaut mountains* 
near Bombay, and running an easterly course about TOO miles, divides itself into two great'branches, 35 
miles from the sea, within which is formed the Island of Nagur, a triangular space comprehending only* 
500 square miles, but of greater value in proportion to its extent, than perhaps any other spot in the east 
The small river of Settiaveram running into the sea, describes its northern boundary with Chieacole.. 

V. Mausulipatam. This district forms the least of the grand divisions'of the Cirears. Nizampatam, 
formerly a separate jurisdiction on the south of the Eistna, extending along a coast of sixty miles from 
Point Divy, near the great mouth of that river to Mootapilly south, and about five in breadth on a medium 
to the territory of Guntoor, constitutes the southern portion of this division; and from the same headland, 
including the Island of Divy to Narsipore, on the southern arm of the Godavery, and from thence to Inge- 
ram on its northern branch, just beyond the point formed by, and deriving its name from, this river, lie 
several pergunnahs detached from Condapillv, and some smaller seaports scattered on the. shores of Ellore' 