

It often happens that a stone shall appear of a reddish hue, on the outward coat, not unlike the colour 
of rusty iron; yet by looking through it against the light, you may observe the heart of the stone to be 
white (and if there be any black spots or flaws, or veins in it, they may be discovered by a true eye,, 
although the coat of the stone be opaque), and such stones are generally good and clear;. 

If a diamond appears of a greenish bright coat, resembling a piece of green glass,, inclining to Black,, 
it generally proves hard, and seldom bad; such stones have been known to have been of the first water,, 
and seldom w T orse than the second; but if any tincture of yellow seem to be mixed with it, you. may de¬ 
pend upon its being a very bad stone. 

All stones of a milky coat, whether the coat be bright or dully, if never so little inclining to a blueish 
cast, are naturally soft, and in danger of being flawed in the cutting;. and though they should have the good 
fortune to escape, yet they will prove dead and milky,, and turn, to no account. 

All diamonds of cinnamon colour are dubious; but if of a- bright coat, mixed: with a' little green,, 
then they are certainly bad, and are accounted amongst the worst of colours. 

You will meet with a great many diamonds of a rough cinnamon coloured coat, opaque: this sort is* 
generally very hard, and when cut, contains a great deal of life and* spirit;, but the colour is very uncertain*, 
it is sometimes white, sometimes brown, and sometimes a very fine yellow* 



80 


DIAMONDS, * 


II. Cleanness.— Concerning the fouls and other imperfections that take from the value of the dia¬ 
mond, we must observe, all diaphanous stones are originally fluids, and spirituous distillations failing into 
proper cells of the earth, where they lie till they are ripened, and receive the hardness we generally find 
them of. Every drop forms an entire stone, contained in its proper bed, without coats. While this 
petrific juice, or the matter which grows in the stone, is in its original tender nature, it is liable to all the 
accidents we find in it, and by which it is so often damaged; for if some little particle of sand or earth fall 
into the tender matter, it is locked up in it, and becomes a foul, black spot; and as this is bigger or less, 
so it diminishes the value of the stone. 

Flaws are occasioned by some accident, shake, or violence which the stone received whilst in its bed, 
or in digging it out, and this frequently occasions an open crack in the stone, sometimes from the outside to 
the centre, and sometimes in the body of the stone, which does not extend to the outside; but tin’s is much 
the worst, and will require great judgment to know how far it does extend. It takes half from the value. 

Holes are formed on the outside of the rough diamond, and must be occasioned by some hard particle 
of sand falling into the tender substance of the stones, which not being heavy enough to sink into the 
middle, remains on the outside thereof, like a black spot, and being picked off, leaves a round hole. 