



86 


NORTHERN CIRCARS. 


and Rajahmundry, which together compose the northern subdivision, and extend along a coast of 105 
miles, within 45 miles of the River Settiaveram, and boundary of Chicacole. Both these portions united, 
are immediately dependent on Mausulipatam, which is the capital of these districts,, 

VI. Chicacole, the most northerly, and last in order of the grand divisions, is also subdivided into 
two districts: of which one, deriving its name from that province, is dependent on Vizagapatam; the other, 
called Ichapoor, is placed under Ganjam. The former lies between the rivers of Settiaveram on the south, 
and of Poondy on the north. From the cross hills approaching the sea near these extremities, it forms a 
kind of semicircular territory; of which the diameter along the coast extends 180 miles, and its greatest 
dimensions in land about one third of the same distance. The latter subdivision of this province is of a 
triangular figure, stretching its longest side about 80 miles on the shore from Poondy to Maloud, the 
southern frontier of Cuttack. 

The Circars, being well watered by the numerous rivers, abound in grain, and may be considered 
the granary of the Carnatic during the N. monsoon, in like manner as Tanjore is reckoned during 
the S. W. monsoon. They produce also bay-salt, tobacco, (the latter from the vicinity of Mausulipatam, 
known every where for superior excellence), and abundance of teak timber of the best sort, and largest 
sizes. The cocoa and palmyra form the principal materials for building the unwieldy vessels for the 
coasting trade, called domes, of various burthens from 60 to 100 tons each. The diamond mines of 
Guntoor and Condapilly in this province are not considered of any great importance. 

In regard to manufactures, the staple produce of the country worked from cotton, is of two different 
sorts and fineness; plain long-cloth, so valuable at foreign markets, is chiefly wrought in the island of 
Nagur and its vicinity. It forms the groundwork of the best printed calicoes in Europe, and of those 
inimitably painted ones, called palempores, in the districts of Mausulipatam. The coarser plain cloths 
made to the north and south of the Godavery, or coloured with the Chaya root, which grows in most 
perfection in the sands overflowed annually by the Kistna, are equally articles in demand abroad, or for 
interior consumption ; but the muslins of Chicacole, the beautiful woollen carpets of Ellore, and silks of 
Ichapoor, wrought from the raw materials imported from Bengal and China, are rather objects of curiosity, 
and meriting encouragement, than considerable in quantity or benefit. But the facility, convenience, 
and cheapness with which ships of war, or of burthen, not exceeding 500 tons, have been, and might 
in greater number be, constructed in the ports of Coringa and Narsipore, two of the principal branches of 
the Godavery, are considerations of the utmost importance to a maritime state; nor should the extensive 
branch of ship-building now in use, though with so much imperfection, and improvidence, in supplying 
50,000 tons in smaller craft for the coasting trade, be forgotten, in stating the useful arts which form the 
local proprietary interests of the country. 