

The next and greatest difficulty will be to avoid beamy stones, and this requires more skill and practice 
than any thing yet spoken of; yet time and opportunity will enable you to discover them. Indeed a great 
many stones are a little beamy in the roundest (by which is meant the edges); but it is not so very material, 
though it diminishes the life of the diamond. By beamy stones, are meant such as look fair to the eye, ami 
yet are so full of veins to the centre, that no art or labour can polish them. These veins run through se¬ 
veral parts of the stone, and sometimes through all; and when they appear on the outside, they shew 
themselves like protuberant excrescences, from whence run innumerable small veins, obliquely crossing 
one another, and shooting into the body of the stone. The stone itself will have a bright and shining 
coat, and the veins will look like very small pieces of polished steel rising upon the surface of the stone. 
This sort of stone will bear no polishing, and is scarcely worth a rupee per mangalin. Sometimes the 
knot of the veins will be in the centre; the fibres will shoot outward, and the small ends terminate in 
the coat of the diamond. This is more difficult to discover, and must be examined by a nice eye; yet 
you may be able here and there to observe a small protuberance, like the point of a needle lifting up 
a part of the coat of the stone: and though by a great deal of labour it should be polished, it will be 
a great charge, and scarcely pay for the cutting, and therefore it is to be esteemed as little better than the 
former. But if you are not very careful, they will throw one of these stones into a parcel, and oftentimes 
the largest. 

III. Shape. —This consists of three articles—stones in four points, stones in two points, and flat stones. 

Stones in four points consist in four equilateral triangles at top, and the same at bottom, being a perfect 
steragon*. this is the most complete shape, and makes the best brilliants, and when sawed in four points, 
the best rose diamonds, which are esteemed more than others, whether shaped thus, or rough. 

Stones in two points are when four of the triangular planes are broader than the other four. This 
will make a thinner brilliant, lose more in the cutting, and will not retain so much life, For roses it 
must be sawed through two points, and it will make fine roses, but not so lively as the former. 

Stones in the flat, are when the points are so depressed and confined, that you only see the traces 
where Nature would have polished them, had they not been confined; and therefore they are irregular and 
distorted. In cutting these stones, they do not regard the points, but make the flat way either roses or 
brilliants. These stones may be split rough in these shapes; they lose more in cutting than the others. 

All Indian-cut stones are called lasks or lasques: they are in general ill-shaped, or irregular in their 
form; their substance or depth is ilhproportioned; some have more of the stone’s substance at top than at 
bottom; the table, or face, is seldom in the centre of the stone; sometimes it is of an extravagant breadth. 