

The French obtained possession of Mausulipatam about 1750. It was besieged by the English in 1759, 
invested on the 7th of March, and the approaches carried on till the 6th of April, when the town was 
bombarded, and many houses destroyed. Above 400 barrels of powder were expended, with shot and 
shells in proportion, when it was resolved to storm, which toot place on the ‘7th; the English gained 
bastion after bastion, until they approached the gateway, and cut off the communication of the French 
from their detached ravelin. No quarter was given, and a terrible carnage ensued, until the French 
quitted their arms, and repaired to the arsenal. The whole garrison were made prisoners, consisting of 



YAN AON— POINT GORDEWARE— CORINGA. 


8& 

four hundred Europeans, and about two thousand native troops. In consequence of this success, the 
Soubah of the Decan on the 14th of May made the English a free gift of the circle of Mausulipatam 
with certain districts belonging thereto, of which they have ever since retained possession. 

About 11 leagues E. by N. from Mausulipatam is Narsipore, a place of but little trade. 

YANAON 

Is situated at the confluence of the River Coringa with one of the principal branches of the Goda- 
very river. The mouth of the latter is obstructed by sandbanks, and therefore cannot be entered without 
the assistance of an experienced pilot. The river is deep within the bar, and is navigable to a considerable 
distance, though little frequented by vessels; and is very broad and rapid at the town ef Yanaon. This 
town, with the territory belonging to it, and a small island situated to the southward, forms a space about four 
miles square, and contains a population of about 6,000 persons. Here the French had a factory and a 
regular establishment, and it was the principal mart of their commerce in this part of the country. It 
contained six rich commercial houses, exclusive of the Resident. Here they made their contracts for white 
piece-goods. The sum laid out by them wa& estimated to amount, one year with another, to 20,00,000 rupees, 
Yanaon surrendered to the English in 1794. 

POINT GORDEWARE, 

Or Godavery, in latitude 16° 48'' North, and longitude 82° 17' East, is a low narrow sandbank, 
several miles in extent, which is considered the point. Within which, about six miles W. by N. is an 
opening of one of the branches of Godavery River, commonly called Coringa River, on whic h stand 
the town and English factory of 

CORINGA. 

Coringa Bay is between the above point and Jaggernautporam, whose river's mouth lies about ten miles, 
N. W. by N. from the point; the usual anchorage for country vessels is J aggernautporam N. N. W. and the 
bar of Coringa S. W. by S.; on the bar there are thirteen or fourteen feet water. When over it* 
the leading mark up the river is, a small clump of trees about 120 yards from the starboard shore, kept 
a-head till you open the river on the starboard side. The town of Coringa is situated on the southern 
bank of the river. Large ships anchor in five fathoms, Jaggernautporam bearing N. W. by W., and Coringa 
flagstaff S. S. W. Up the river is the town of Ingeram, where the Company has a Chief, and where 
large quantities of piece-goods are manufactured. 