

BANKIBAZAR. 

About three miles higher up the river, on its eastern bank, is a small village, where the East India 
Company of Ostend had formerly a factory; it was taken from them by the Moors about 1748, previous 
to which they had abandoned the trade of Bengal. 

CHANDERNAGORE 

Is situated on the western bank of the river, about four miles above the latter place; it formerly be¬ 
longed to the French. The territory attached to it extends about two miles along the banks of the river, 
and about 1| mile inland. The fort, which is now in ruins, is nearly at an equal distance between the 
north and south extremity of the territory, and about thirty yards from the river; it is a square of about 
130 yards with four bastions. The town is of considerable extent, and much trade used to be carried on 
here. Chandernagore was taken possession of by the English at the breaking out of the war in 1793. 

CHINSURAH 

Is also on the western bank of the river. This was the principal place belonging to the Dutch in 
Bengal. The town is built along the river, in an irregular manner, and many of the houses are large 
and handsome: on the land side it is closed by barrier gates. Here is a handsome church. The Dutch 
fqrt, which bears the name of Fort Gustavus, is constructed in a large open space, about, 500 feet from 
the river; it is an oblong square, the longest sides about 660 feet long, the shortest about half that length. 
It was built in 1656: the walls are of stone, about fifteen feet high, but in a ruinous condition. There are 
three gates; one towards the river, one on the land side to the north, and the other to the south. The 
warehouses and residence of the Chief are within the fort. A battery of 21 guns is on the river-side, for 
the purpose of firing salutes. The Dutch carried on a considerable commerce from Chinsurah in piece- 
goods, opium, and other articles for the eastern and for the Europe markets. 

HUGHLEY, 

Or Hoogley, is about two miles above Chinsurah. The town extends near three miles along the 
banks of the river. At its northern extremity is a fort, now in ruins. The English, soon after their arrival 
in India, established a factory here; but the Resident being subjected to various impositions and hardships in 
conducting their trade, the factory withdrew to Calcutta in 1689. 

BANDEL 

Is a native village of considerable extent, about three miles to the northward of Hughley. The 
Portuguese keep a small establishment here; but the trade carried on, is very trifling. 





CHAPTER XXI. 


Calcutta. 


Description—Coins— Weights ayid Measures—Commerce of Bengal—Commerce of Bengal with London* — Euro- 
pea?i Articles suitable to the Bengal Market—Remarks thereon—Commerce of all Parts of British India 
with London—Commerce of Bengal with Denmark—Commerce of Bengal with Hamburgh—Commerce of 
Bengal with Lisbon—Commerce of Bengal with Madeira—•Commerce of Bengal with Cadiz—Commerce of 
Bengal with Foreign Europe—Commerce of all Parts of British India with Foreign Europe—Commerce 
of Bengal with the United States of America—Commerce of all Parts of British India with the United 
States of America—Remarks thereon—Commerce of Bengal with the Coast of Malabar—Commerce of 
Bengal with the Coast of Coromandel—Commerce of Bengal with the Island of Ceylon—Commerce of Bengal 
with the Coast of Sumatra—Commerce of Bengal with British Asia—Commerce of the Presidencies with 
British Asia—Commerce of Bengal with the Arabian and Persian Gulfs—Commerce of Bengal with Pegu. 
—Commerce of Bengal with Pulo Pinang and Places to the Eastward—Commerce of Bengal with Malacca 
—Commerce of Bengal with Batavia—Commerce of Bengal with Manilla—Commerce of Bengal with China : 
“Commerce of Bengal with various Places—Commerce of Bengal with Foreign Asia—Commerce of all 
Parts of British India with Foreign Asia—Commerce of Bengal with all Parts of the World—Commerce of 
British India with all Parts — Price Current of European and. Asiatic Commodities — Import and Export 
Duties — Custom-hmise Regulations —Regulations for sending Presents to Europe—Pilotage mid Port Charges 
*—Merchants resident at Calcutta—Established Rates of Commission—Merchant Vessels belonging to 
Calcutta—Shipbuilding—Insurance Companies—Company s Imports into Be?igalfrom Europe — Company's 
Exports from Bengal to Europe—Recapitulation of Imports and Exports at Bengal—Company's Imports 
into all Parts of British India — Company's Exports from all Parts of British India—Recapitulation of Im¬ 
ports and Exports to and from all Parts of British India — Company's Revenues and Disbursements at Bengal 
— Company's Assets at Bengal—Government Securities at Bengal — Company's Revenues and Disbursements 
in all Parts of British India — Company's Assets in all Parts of British India—Bengal Army—Pay and 
Allowances—Total of Company's Army in all Parts of India—Civil Service — Allowances * fyc.—Provisions 
and Refreshments—Articles procurable at Bengal — Annotta—Arrow Root—Borax—Castor Oil—Chillies 
—Cochineal — Ghee — Ginger — Hides — Horns — Indigo — Lacs, of Kinds — Munjeet — Myrabolans—Oil of 
Roses — Opium — Piece-goods — Rice — Rum — Safflower — Saltpetre -— Silk, raw — Skins— Spikenard — 
Storax — Sugar — Sugar-candy — Talc.—TamarindsTerra Japonica, 