


CALCUTTA 

Is the principal settlement belonging to the English in the East Indies* and the residence of the 
Governor-General* to which all their other settlements are subordinate; it is situated on the eastern bank 
of the river, in latitude 22° 33' North* and longitude 88° 28 East. 

Vox,. IL O 



100 


CALCUTTA, 


If any Member of Council become incapable of acting, or be absent, and the Governor-General should 
require the advice of a full Council on any urgency, he may call provisional successors; or if none such be on 
the spot, Senior Merchants to the Council. Persons so called, not to be paid any salary, nor to be deprived 
of any office on account thereof The King may remove any servants of the Company; a duplicate of the 
instrument for such removal, being transmitted to the Chairman, or Deputy Chairman, within eight days 
after being signed by his Majesty. The Directors may also remove their servants, &c. except in the case of 
appointments made by the King, in consequence of the Court of Directors not appointing. Departure 
from India, or arrival in Europe of Governor-General, &c. deemed l'esignation of office; but during resi¬ 
dence in India, resignation must be notified under hand and seal. Salary, &c. to cease on the respective 
days such acts take place. If the Presidency is quitted, except on the known actual service of the Com¬ 
pany, salary, &c. not to be paid during such absence; and if parties quitting, do not return, the salary, 
&c. to cease on the day the Presidency was left. 

When Council assembled, to proceed in the first place to matters proposed by the Governor-General; 
and on any question of the Counsellors, the Governor-General may twice adjourn the discussion for forty- 
eight hours. All proceedings of Council to be expressed as made by the Governor-General in Council, and 
to be signed by the Chief Secretary. 

The Governor-General and Council tn supprWorM tli* ntlicr Presidencies; the latter to obey their 
orders, except they may be repugnant to the orders of the Directors, acquainting the Governor-General, &c. with 
their orders, stating the dates of the last dispatches from the Directors; the subordinate governments also 
informing the Governor-General in Council of the receipt of such dispatches as they may deem contrary to 
the orders of the Governor-General, &c. who is finally to decide. The Governor-General, &c. not to 
commence hostilities against native powers, nor to enter into treaty for those purposes, but by the authority 
of the Court of Directors, except in cases where hostilities have been commenced, or preparations for that 
purpose made. Subordinate governments not to declare war, &c. but in consequence of orders from the 
Governor-General, &c. or the Court of Directors; and to make all treaties (if possible) subject to the rati¬ 
fication of the Governor-General, See. also to inform the Governor-General in Council of all things material 
to be communicated, or that may be required of them. 