

The English first began to trade here about 1640. The Company’s factory-house is a large building, 
and as irregularly constructed both without and within as can be conceived. The prospect from the top 
is beautiful. The French had a factory at a small village three miles to the eastward of the town. The 
Dutch had a factory near the English one, between which are two lofty pyramids, erected to the memory 
of two Dutch ladies. There is a Portuguese church, and a number of Portuguese and Armenian inhabitants. 

By treaty with the Rajah of Berar, dated the 17th of December,1803, the Province of Cuttack, including 
the port and district of Balasore, was ceded to the Company in perpetual sovereignty. This province con¬ 
nects the territory of Bengal with the Northern Circars, and is of the utmost importance,, independently 
of its commercial and financial value. The revenue of Cuttack is stated at 17,00,000 rupees. 

A considerable trade is carried on here by small country vessels, in rice, doll, and other gjfein, 
tobacco, wax, oil, and various piece-goods manufactured in the neighbourhoods 

Boats from the Maidive Islands arrive in fleets of twenty or thirty, in the months of June and 
July, bringing with them the produce of their islands, consisting of coir, cocoa-nuts, cowries, salt fish, 
tortoise-shell, &c. and return in December, laden with 

Broad cloth. Hardware. Silk goods. 

Coarse cottons. Looking-glasses. Sugar. 

Cutlery. Rice. Tobacco 

and other commodities, the produce of Europe, India, and China. 

At Balasore, pilots are always ready to carry the shipping up the Hughley River. It sometimes hap* 
pens that ships arriving in Balasore Roads, have to anchor, and send a boat on shore for a pilot; but a boat 
should not attempt to pass over the bar but at the last quarter flood, as in the first quarter the sea breaks 
very high on it. In the fine season the pilot vessels are generally met with as soon as Point Paimiras is r 
doubled. Each nation has its own; nor is it proper to use them promiscuously, but give the preference to 
those of your own nation. So many serious accidents have happened to commanders who have trusted to 
strange pilots, that the greatest caution is required in the choice of them* 



PirLEY—BENGAL—RIVERS GANGES and BURRAMPOOTEIt. 


§4 


PIPLEY 

Is about six leagues E. by N. from tlie entrance of Balasore river. It is situated on the banks of a river, 
and is known by a pagoda to the westward, and a thicket of trees very near it. Pipley was once the mart 
of this country; but the waters washing away a great part of the town, at the same time that a dan¬ 
gerous bar was formed at the mouth of the river, the merchants removed to Balasore. 

BENGAL. 

The province of Bengal commences at Pipley River; it is intersected with two rivers, the Ganges 
and Burrampooter: they derive their sources from the mountains of Thibet, from whence they proceed in 
opposite directions, the Ganges seeking the plains of Hindostau by the west, and the Burrampooter by 
the east. The Ganges, after wandering about 800 miles through these mountainous regions from Hurd war, 
in latitude 30° North, gushes through an opening in the mountains, and flows, during the remainder of 
its course, to the sea, which is about 1350 miles. In its course through the plains it receives eleven rivers, 
some of which are equal to the Rhine, and none smaller than the Thames, besides as many others of 
lesser note. The Ganges is, as may be supposed, very unequal in point of width, varying from three-quarters 
to 3 miles. About 500 miles from the sea, the channel is 30 feet deep, when at its lowest; and it continues 
this depth to the sea, where the sudden expansion of the stream deprives it of the force necessary to sweep 
away the banks of sand and mud thrown across it by the strong southerly winds; so that the principal 
branch of the Ganges cannot be entered by large vessels. About 300 miles from the sea, reckoning the 
windings of the river, commences the bead of the Delta of the Ganges: the two westernmost branches, 
named the Cossimbuzar and Jellingliy rivers, unite, and form what is afterwards named the Hughley, or 
Hoogley River, which is the port of Calcutta, and the only branch of the Ganges that is navigable by 
large ships: this branch has a much deeper outlet to the sea than the principal branch. 