

Coringa Bay and River are capable of being of infinite service to the King’s, Company’s, and country 
ships, being the only place on the west coast of the Bay of Bengal, where a vessel above two hundred tons 
can be refitted, or stop her leaks during the S. W. monsoon. Tt is always during that monsoon so smooth 
in this bay, that a Vessel may venture to take a large heel for that purpose, and if occasion required, could 
heave down. There are always a great number of caulkers and carpenters employed here all the year 
round, repairing and building country vessels. In case of necessity, several hundred of these artificers 
could be procured along the coast; there are also timber and several stores to be got. Wood and water 
are obtained with convenience and facility; and fresh provisions of all kinds, were it an established port, 
could be procured in great quantity. There are also a great number of decked country boats, called domes, 
which would be of infinite service to a squadron putting in here to refit. To all these advantages, add 
the vicinity of Coringa Bay to Pegu River, for the supply of large teak timber of all sorts, and other 
naval stores, not being more than ten days’ sail from it in either monsoon; also the port of Rhio in the 
south part of the Straits of Malacca, from whence poon masts and spars are brought, with several other 
useful articles, which are obtained there, and likewise sent to the dock-yard at Bombay. ,• 

Vol. II. * N' 



90 


JAGGERNAUTPORAM— VIZAGAPATAM —BIMLIPATAM. 


JAGGERNAUTPORAM 

Is in latitude 16° 56' North, about seven miles to the northward of Coringa. This town is also called* 
Cocanara. It is in a deep bay, and is known by a white fort, having a flagstaff. The anchorage is in 5£ 
fathoms, the flagstaff N. W. about two miles from, the shore. About a mile to the eastward of the town 
is a river with a bar, navigable by boats at low water. You may land in the ship’s boat, keeping the fort 
open with the mouth of the river, which , you enter, and which goes a long way above the town. Ships 
and vessels are well built here, and cheap. A snow 65 feet keel, and 24 feet beam, carrying 9,000 
Bengal maunds, costs from 4,000 to 5,000 rupees. Wood, water, and stock are obtained easily, and very 
reasonably; ten fine fowls for a rupee, and other articles in proportion. 

VIZAGAPATAM 

Is situated in latitude 17° 43' North, and longitude 83° 26'East. A river coming from the north, 
and turning short eastward to the sea, forms an arm of land, a mile and a half in length, and 600 yards 
in breadth. Nearly in the middle of this ground stands the fort, which is in a bad state. The town is about 
300 yards to the northward of the fort, and there is a small village to the southward. The harbour is 
capable of admitting vessels of 300 tons. 

Vizagapatam is distinguished by the headland called the Dolphin’s Nose, which rises on the S..W. point 
of the road, but is better known by a high mountain plainly seen seven or eight leagues inland; whereas 
the Dolphin's Nose is obscured by the high land at the back of it. The road has been recently surveyed by 
order of the Madras Government, and the following extract published for general information 