

The safest and most convenient birth for large ships to anchor, is in nine fathoms; however the road¬ 
stead may be considered perfectly safe to begin north, in six, seven, and nine fathoms, where the serjeant’s 
house, and the southern extremity of the huts, north of the* flagstaff, are in one; and south, where the 
house and Dolphin’s Nose bear West; the bottom being all over this tract perfectly clear of rocks up 
to the beach, and to the foot of the hill. 

On the bar at the entrance of the river, there are eight or ten feet water, and sometimes more in the 
N. E. monsoon; but the sands are liable to shift. The surf is very considerable on the ebb tide; and as- 
European boats are obliged to be used, for want of country boats, they should keep close to the DolphinV 
Nose, otherwise they run a risk of being upset, especially if the tide is ebbing. 

The English settled a factory at Vizagapatam in 1668, and in the following year it was surprised 
by the forces of the Mogul, the Chief and four factors killed, and the. Company’s stock and effects 
plundered: it was however soon afterwards re-established. In 1709 the factory was again engaged in 
war with the Nabob of Chicacole. The Chief of the factory Trad borrowed money from the Nabob, on 
the common seal; but he dying, the succeeding Chief refused the Nabob payment: whereupon he applied 
to Port St. George for redress, but not meeting with such speedy relief as he expected, he had recourse 
to arms; the Company, however, by compromising the matter, brought the war to a conclusion., 

la 1757, the French, under M. Bussy, took Vizagapatam; all the Europeans, whether troops or 
inhabitants, became prisoners of war, but the Sepoys and natives were permitted to go where they pleased. 
The property of individuals was respected, but that of the Company seized. It was soon after retaken. 

Large quantities of piece-goods are manufactured in this district, and the natives are very expert in 
works of ivory, similar to those manufactured at Canton, but inferior in workmanship. 

' ' BIMLIPATAM 

Is situated about five leagues from Vizagapatam, in latitude 17° 53 North. The Dutch had formerly 
a factory here, for supplying themselves with piece-goods from the neighbouring villages.. The anchorage 



GANJAM—MANNICKPATAM—JAGGERNAUT PAGODAS, fee. 91, 

for shipping in the S. W. monsoon is abreast the river and village ; and a little farther to the northward* 
in the other monsoon. Between Bimlipatam and Ganjam are the rivers of Chleacole and Calingapafcam, 
places of but little trade, and seldom frequented. 

GANJAM 

Is situated in latitude 19° 22' North, and longitude 85° 10' East. The fort, which Is small, but compact, 
stands on the southern side of a river, which is of considerable size. This place is much frequented, parti¬ 
cularly by coasting vessels, carrying on a considerable trade, many of which can enter the river. Ships 
anchor abreast the fort, or river’s entrance, in eight or nine fathoms, about two miles off shore. ■ 