

MANNICKPATAM, 

In latitude 19° 40' North, is about 11 leagues to the northward of Ganjam, and is situated on a branch 
of the Chilka Lake. Here is a small mud fort, but not strong. It is known by a small pagoda, encom¬ 
passed with houses and other buildings, having near them some large trees. Grain is scarce here. 

JAGGERNAUT PAGODAS 

Are the most celebrated pagodas in India; the largest is in latitude 19° 48' North, and longitude 
85° 52' East. Here is a large town, about two leagues from the sea-side, which is seen far off by the height 
of its buildings. At a distance the pagodas appear like a large ship under sail; but on approaching, there are 
three pagodas very near each other, the S. W. one exceeding high and round, with a spike and a large 
ball at top. The second, which almost joins the first, appears less round at the top; it has also a spike and 
ball, as has likewise the third, which is the least, and round, like the first. These three pagodas, which 
seem joined together, form a high and broad building. They are enclosed in a square wall made of enor¬ 
mous black stones; each side of the wall is 100 fathoms in extent, having four gates facing the four points 
of the compass. Besides these, there are many small ones, and numerous buildings for the reception of 
pilgrims, of which 100,000 are said annually to visit this venerated place, and are entertained here. 

BLACK PAGODA __ __ 

Is about five leagues E.N.E. from Jaggernaut, and at a distance resembles (like the former) a ship 
under sail; about a league to the westward of it, is another small pagoda, standing, like this, on even 
reddish ground, without trees. This circumstance is sufficient to distinguish the Black Pagoda from that' 
of Jaggernaut. About five leagues'E.N.E. from the Black Pagoda is the principal branch of the River 
Gonga, called also Cuttack, from a long town of that name situated at some distance inland. 

POINT PALMIRAS 

Is in latitude 20° 44' North, and longitude 87° 6 East. The Point is low, and covered with palm 
trees, having on each side of it a small river; that on the south side is navigable by small vessels. Ships 
seldom see the point in passing, unless in very dear weather, as there are several shoals near it, running 
a considerable distance into the sea, which render it unsafe approaching within four leagues. 

About five miles N. W. of the Point is Kannaka River, which'is wide at its entrance, and navigable for 
vessels drawing twelve or thirteen feet water, but it is necessary to employ a pilot. It is much frequented 
by the coasting vessels belonging to the natives, who cany rice and various articles of trade from hence to 
Madras and other parts of the coast, during the favourable monsoon. 

Six leagues N. N. W. of the latter is Churinga River, situated in a bay affording good anchorage in 
the S.W. monsoon; but, being out of the track of ships bound to Bengal, is seldom visited. . 




92 


COMMERCE OF THE COAST OF COROMANDEL, 


The following is a statement of the merchandise and. treasure imported into the Coast of Coromandel 
from Bengal, Bombay, and Surat, in the years 1802 to 1806 inclusive; likewise of the merchandise and 
treasure exported from the Coast of Coromandel to Bengal, Bombay, and Surat during the same period, 
together with a list of the articles of which the imports and exports consisted in 1805. 