

That part of the Delta bordering on the sea, is composed of a labyrinth of rivers and creeks, all of 
which are salt, except those that immediately communicate with the principal arm of the Ganges. This 
tract is known bytheJnatne of:; the Sunderbunds, and is. completely enveloped in woods, and infested with 
tigers. Here salt, in quantities equal to the whole consum ption of Bengal and its dependencies, is made, and 
transported with great facility; and here also is found an inexhaustible store of timber for boat-building. 
The breadth of the lower part of the Delta is upwards of 180 miles, to which, if we add that of the two 
branches of the river that bound it, we shall have about 200 for the distance which the Ganges expands 
its branches at its junction with tijie sea. There are two distinct passages through the Sunderbunds, one 
named the Southern or Sunclerbund Passage; the other, the Baligpt passage. The first is* the farthest about, 
and leads through the deepest and widest rivers; it opens into the Calcutta liver, through Channel Creek, 
about 65 miles below the town. The Baligot Passage opens into a lake on the east side of Calcutta, from 
whence, some years since, a small canal was cut, to join the lake with the river. 

The bore, (which is known to be a sudden and abrupt influx of the tide into a river or narrow strait), 
prevails in the principal branches of the Ganges, and in the Megna; but the Hughley River is more subject 
to them than the others. In the Hughley, or Calcutta River, the bore commences at Hughley Point (the 
place where the river first contracts itself), and is preceptible above Hughley Town; and so quick is its 
motion, that it hardly employs four hours in travelling from one to the other, although the distance is 
nearly 70 miles. At Calcutta it sometimes occasions an instantaneous rise of five"feet; and both here and in 
every part of its track, the boats on its approach immediately quit the shore, and make for safety to the 
middle of the river. 



KEDGEREE—DIAMOND HARBOUR—EULTA. 


95 


Burrampooter and Megna are names belonging to the same river in different parts of its course. The 
Megna falls into the Burrampooter, and though a much smaller river, communicates its name to the other 
during the rest of its course to the sea. The Burrampooter, for a distance of 400 miles through 
Bengal, bears a resemblance to the Ganges, except that during the last 60 miles, before its junction with 
the Ganges, it forms a stream, which is regularly from four to five miles wide, and but for its freshness,might 
pass for an arm of the sea. In the channels between the islands in the mouth of the Megna, the height 
of the bore is said to exceed 12 feet, and is so terrific in its appearance, and dangerous in its conse¬ 
quences, that no boat will venture to pass at spring tide. 

KEDGEREE 

Is a small village on the western bank of the river, where the ships of war frequenting this river,, 
usually anchor. There is an European resident, who has the care of the post-office, and who supplies ships 
with provisions and other necessaries. The Resident's house stands on a rising ground; the village Is 
small, but the land around it flat and low, and the situation considered unhealthy during the months of 
July, August, and September, when the periodical rains take place, and the heats are excessive. 