

Refreshments of all kinds are in abundance here, and very cheap. Fowls and ducks, two rupees per 
dozen; geese, three rupees per dozen; pine-apples, plantains, limes, shaddocks, &e. all extremely reasonable: 

DIAMOND HARBOUR 

Is situated on the eastern, bank of the riveiv Here the Company’s regular ships usually remain to 
unload their outward, and the greater part of their homeward-bound cargoes; the remainder is taken 
in lower down the river, in Sagor Roads. The Company have mooring chains laid down, and ware¬ 
houses, or bankshalh, for the reception of ships’ stores, rigging, &c.; and a regular market is held, where all 
sorts of provisions and refreshments are to be procured in abun fiance, and cheap. 

A short distance above this anchorage; the bed of the river turns to the left; and a little further 
is the mouth, of a large river,, improperly called the Old Ganges, but its true name is the Roopnarain. 
The place where it unites with theHughley, is the most dangerous part of the navigation of the river; and on 
the point made by the confluence of these rivers, a fort was recently built, called Fort Mornington, in order 
to command the river, and to be able to prevent any vessels from coming up it; but it. has been since 
abandoned, in consequence of the unhealthiness of the climate.. 

FULTA 

Is situated* a short distance higher up on the right side of the river; it was formerly a Dutch pos¬ 
session, and in the prosperous days of that Company, their ships usually lay here. 

The establishment on shore consisted of two houses; one of which, the inn, is built partly of bricks,, 
and the other, the residence of the Commandant, was constructed of mats and. bamboos. The village, how- - 
ever, is considerable, and has a bazar well supplied w T ith provisions, vegetables, fruits, &c. There is gene¬ 
rally an European residing here, who undertakes -to- supply the homeward-bound East Indiamen with, 
sheep, poultry, and other stock at reasonable prices.. 

Fulta is remarkable for being the retreat of a part of the English factory when it escaped'from Cal¬ 
cutta, on its being taken by Surajah Dowlah in 1756. 

Reserving Calcutta for a separate chapter, the settlements higher up the river are now enumerated.. 



BABNAGORE— SEBHAMPORE— BANKIBAZ All,, be. 




BARNAGORE 

Is a small village on the eastern bank of the river, about five miles from Calcutta; the Dutch had 
formerly a small factory here subordinate to Chinsurah. Various kinds of piece-goods are manufactured, 
particularly a coarse kind of blue handkerchiefs; and Surat piece-goods are imitated here, but they are 
generally of a thin and open texture* 

SERHAMPORE. 

This town is situated on the western bank of the river, about five miles from Barnagorc. The Danes 
had an establishment here for the purchasing piece-goods, indigo, and other Bengal produce. The town 
extends about two miles in length, but its breadth is inconsiderable, and has no fortifications, only a bat¬ 
tery for saluting. Serhampore, when in possession of the Danes, was a place of refuge for numbers of 
people from Calcutta, to evade their creditors. Nearly opposite on the other bank of the river, are the 
cantonments of Barraekpore. 