

The Governor-General signifying his intention to be absent from Council, the senior member present 
at the Board to preside, with the powers of Governor-General, while the Council is assembled. Acts of such 
Council not valid, without the signature of the Governor-General, if he shall be at the Presidency, and not 
indisposed; but if the Governor-General shall refuse to sign such acts of Council, the Members who do 
sign, and himself mutually to* exchange in writing their opinions; the Governor-General to be subject ulti¬ 
mately to the same responsibility which attaches to his dissent from proposed measures when present in 
Council, by the 33d Geo. III. chap. 52. The Governor-General not hereby prevented from appointing a 
Vice President during absence from his Government. 

The Governor-General in Council' to take order for the transportation of persons (other than natives) 
convicted of certain crimes to the eastern coast of New South Wales. 

The Court of Directors may appoint the Commander in Chief at Bengal to be a Member of Council, 
and to rank next the Governor-General, although the chief command of the forces in India maybe vested 
in such Governor-General; but in case of a vacancy in the office of Governor-General, such Commander 
in Chief not to succeed thereto (except provisionally appointed so to do) ; but the vacancy to be filled up 
by the Counsellor next in rank to the Commander in Chief. 

The Governor-General and Council not amenable to the Supreme Court for acts done in their public 
capacity,- nor for their rules and regulations in revenue matters; persons impleaded for acts done by their 
order, the production of such order to be their discharge. Governor-General, &c. and persons acting under 
their orders, subject nevertheless to process, &e. in any competent Court in the kingdom: Parties aggrieved 
by orders of Governor-General, &c. on making oath of the same in the Supreme Court, and giving bond to 
complain in Great Britain before a competent Court, the Supreme Court to compel production of those* 
orders, &c. and to examine witnesses, which examination is to Be taken as evidence in any of the Courts 
in Westminster. No suit to be carried on against the Governor-General, &c. in Great Britain (the High 
Court of Parliament excepted), unless commenced within five years after the commission of the offence, or* 
five years after the arrival of the parties in* England.- 

The Govemor-GeneraFs salary to be <£25,000, and each* of the Counsellors £10,000 per annum,, to* 
take place from the day of embarkation of such as may be appointed in England, and of such as may be* 
in India, upon the taking the office upon them,- in lieu of all emoluments whatever.. 

In 1773 an Act passed, authorizing His Majesty to. erect a Supreme Court of Judicature at Port Wil¬ 
liam, in. Bengal, to consist of a Chief Justice, and three other Judges, who-are to be Barristers of not less: 
than five years standing, to be named by the Eng.. The Supreme Court to appoint officers, and. to fix 
their salaries, with the approbation of the Governor in Council; to form rules of practice; to be a Courts 