

VOL. II. P 



106 


CALCUTTA. 


as lie was established Soubah of these provinces, he would immediately perform these articles”—Some 
of the principal men were united in this confederacy, who agreed that Jaffier Ally Cawn should succeed 
to the Soubahship, as he was a man of the first rank, and greatly esteemed by all ranks of people. 

The English troops took the field on the 18th of June, and on the 22d they were met by Surajah 
Dowlah, at the head of a numerous army, near Plassey, where Colonel Clive obtained a complete victory, 
with but little loss. He then placed Jaffier Ally Cawn on the throne, who had the usual homage paid 
him by all ranks of people, as Soubah of the provinces of Bengal, Bahar, and Orixa. Surajah Dowlah was 
goon afterwards taken prisoner, and privately put to death. The news of the battle of Plassey arrived at 
Calcutta on the 25th of June, when the purport of the treaties was made publicly known, and a vessel 
dispatched with the welcome tidings to England. 

The new Soubah, among other acts of gratitude shewn to his brave allies, made a present to the 
English troops and sailors, by whose valour he had acquired his dignity, of 60,00,000 rupees, or <£750,000, 
and the sums stipulated by the treaty for other services, amounted to £ 1,875,000 sterling, for the East 
India Company and inhabitants, besides £337,500 for the native inhabitants of Calcutta; so that the whole 
amount was £2,962,500, and Colonel Clive was honoured with the dignity of an Omrah, with a grant of 
about £27,000 sterling per annum. 

Thus in about a fortnight a complete revolution was accomplished in a great and populous state, whereby 
the French were entirely driven out of Bengal and all its dependencies, and immense profit and advantage 
derived by the East India Company, who aequired.great power and influence in^tha. country, and obtained 
large districts, which produced a clear revenue of near £600,000 per annum to them. 

1759. About the beginning of August, the President and Council of Calcutta received intelligence that 
a powerful armament was equipping at Batavia, and intended against Bengal. Lord Clive acquainted the 
Soubah therewith, who sent peremptory orders to Chinsurah, forbidding the admission of any troops or 
vessels into the country; but it afterwards appeared that the Soubah wanted to shake off his dependence 
upon the English, and to throw himself into the arms of the Dutch, with whom he had entered into a 
secret negotiation so early as in 1758. The Dutch fleet, consisting of seven ships, of which four were of 
36 guns, arrived in the river in November, and were attacked and defeated by three English East Indiamen, 
the Calcutta, Duke of Dorset, and Hardwicke; whereupon the Dutch Government at Chinsurah concluded 
articles of accommodation with the English. 

1760. The affairs of the Soubah, and those of the English Company, having taken an unfavourable 
turn, which was imputed to the bad conduct of the Soubah, the President presented a memorial to Jaffier 
Ally Cawn, containing a statement of the grievances and oppressions suffered under his government,, and 
recommended that he should appoint Meer Cossim, his brother-in-law, as coadjutor to it, to which he 
declared his willingness to accede, on condition that his life and honour should be saved, and a sufficient 
'allowance secured to him for his maintenance; whereupon Meer Cossim was seated on the throne, and 
received the usual congratulations, and the old Nabob took up his residence at Calcutta, where he was 
properly protected, and treated with every mark of respect. 