

1698. The Nabob granted a nishan for a settlement of the Company’s rights, and for the towns of 
Chutanuttee, Govindpore, and Calcutta. Bengal was from this period considered a Presidency. The 
Council was to consist of five members; the President to fill up vacancies, subject to the approbation of 
the Court; the rule of promotion to be by seniority, and none of the servants to be dismissed, but by an 
prder of the Court. Orders were sent from England to increase the fortifications, and render this seat of 
trade secure, not only against native powers, but against European rivals; and in compliment to His Ma¬ 
jesty, the fort was to ho dfinonunatecFFort William. In 1701, the Company ordered that the fort should 
be made a regular pentagon, defended by bastions., and fortified in the strongest possible manner. 

1702. At the union of the two East India Companies, the English had the following factories in 
Bengal dependent on the Presidency at Fort William; viz. Fort William, Chutanuttee, Balasore, Cos- 
simbuzar, Dacca, Hughley, Malda, Rajahmahl, and Patna. * 

* 

1707. Aurengzebe, the Great Mogul, died the 10th of February, 1707, after a reign of upwards of 
fifty years. He was the most able monarch that ever reigned over Hindostan. From the period of his 
death may be dated the commencement of those troubles which dismembered the empire, and paved the 
way for the present extensive controul of the East India Company over the Provinces of Bengal, &c. 

1715. In this year the Company sent a deputation to Delhi, accompanied with presents of curious clock- - 
work, glass-ware, toys, woollens, silks, &e. to the value of <£30,000, to solicit redress for past, and security 
against future oppressions on the part of the Mogul’s officers. Their petition was presented to the Mogul in 
January, 1716, and contained, on behalf of the Presidency of Calcutta, after representing all the impositions. 



104 


CALCUTTA, 


of the Nabob of Bengal, the following requests:—That the impositions should be obviated by positive orders 
that all persons, whether Europeans or natives, who might be indebted or accountable to the Company, 
should be delivered up to the Presidency at Calcutta on the first demand; that the officers of the mint at 
Muxadavad should at all times, when required, allow three days in the week for the coinage of the 
Company's money; and that a passport, or chistucl fc, signed by the President at Calcutta, should exempt the 
goods it specified, from being visited, or stopped, by the officers of the Bengal Government, on any pretence 
whatsoever. And, in order to maintain these excellent privileges, if granted, it was requested, “ That the 
English might purchase the lordships of 37 towns, with the same immunities as had permitted them to 
purchase Calcutta, Chutanuttee, and Govindpore. After considerable delay, 34 patents, including the 
different subjects of the petition, were issued in the Mogul's name, and signed with his seal. The Ambas¬ 
sadors having accomplished their mission, took leave of the Emperor in July, 1717, and returned to the 
Presidency. 