



CALCUTTA. 


102 

of Record, and of Oy er and Terminer, and of gaol delivery for the towns of Calcutta, factory of'Fort 
William, and subordinate factories. Its jurisdiction to extend to all British subjects in Bengal, Bahar t 
and Orixa, under the protection of the Company, in all cases civil, criminal, ecclesiastical, or admiralty ; 
except in regard to the Governor-General in Council, unless for treason and felony. The Governor- 
General, Council, and Judges not to be subject to arrest Appeals from this Court may be made to the King 
in Council. The Mayor’s Court at Calcutta to be suppressed, and the records, &c. to be delivered over to 
the Supreme Court. ‘ The salary of the Chief Justice to be £8, 000, and each of the Judges <£>6,000 
per annum, to commence when parties appointed are in England, on embarkation, and when parties 
appointed are in India, on taking upon them the execution of the office. Restricted from taking 
presents, &c. 

By the 37th Geo. III. chap. 142, His Majesty may appoint pensions out uf the revenues of India, to 
Judges retiring after seven years’ residence in India:—To the Chief Justice, a pension of not more than 
<£?2,000 per annum, and to each of the other Judges not more than <£>1,500 per annum, so that a grant is not 
made for a sum exceeding that now paid to a Puisne Judge. If the Recorder of Madras or Bombay should 
die, and no successor appointed by His Majesty be on the spot, the junior Puisne Judge of the Supreme 
Court to proceed to fill the office of Recorder, till a successor arrives; to receive the salary of Recorder 
while so acting, and liis office in the Supreme Court not to be vacated thereby. 

By the 39th and 40th Geo. III. chap. 79, the salaries of the Judges to cease on their quitting 
India. The junior Puisne Judge only to proceed to Bombay, to act as Recorder, in case of the Supreme 
Court at Madras, erected by this act, not being full. When British subjects die intestate, and on citation 
neither next of kin nor creditors appear, the registrar of the Ecclesiastical Court (this Court is vested with 
ecclesiastical powers), to have lettei's of administration granted him to collect the assets of the deceased, 
and to pay them into Court; but if next of kin, or creditors, on return of citation, be absent in Europe, 
and shall, on returning to India, establish their claims, the letters to be recalled, and granted them. Judges 
may make rules, &c. for extending to insolvent debtors the relief granted by the 32d Geo. II. 

1633. The English visited Bengal. The President of the Company’s factory at Surat obtained a 
phirmaund from the Mogul, dated 2d February, for liberty of trade in the Province of Bengal, without 
any other restriction than that the English ships were to resort to the port of Pipley. A factory was 
soon after fixed at Hughley. 

1652. The factors in Bengal obtained a phirmaund for free trade, without payment of customs; and 
in 1662 factories were settled at Balasore, Cossiinbuzar, and Patna. 