

The Company at this period confined themselves entirely to the trade between England and India, 
and relinquished to their agents that carried on from port to port in India. The superior skill of the 
English in navigation, induced all classes of merchants in the province of Bengal to freight most of the 
goods which they exported to foreign markets, on the shipping belonging to the colony, which in ten years 
after the embassy, amounted to 10,000 tons, by which many private fortunes were acquired, without 
injuring the Company's trade, or subjecting their property to disputes with Government; and the people of 
all denominations in Calcutta, enjoyed a degree of independence and freedom unknown to all the other 
inhabitants of Bengal, who were subject to the oppressions of the Nabob. 

1718. The Mogul issued patents annexing the provinces of Bahar and Orixa to that of Bengal. 

„ 1742. The Mahrattas having invaded Bengal, the native inhabitants of Calcutta requested and 

obtained permission to dig a ditch, at their own expence, round the Company's bounds, which extended 
about seven miles, and which from the occasion was called the Mahratta ditch. 

1750. In this year Surajah Dowlah succeeded to the Nabobsliip of the provinces of Bengal, Bahar, and 
Orixa. The English at Calcutta having incurred his displeasure, he declared war against them, took their 
fort at Cossimbuzar, and marched against Calcutta, which he invested on the 15th of June, the description of 
which at this period was as follows: 

The fprt of Calcutta, called Fort William, was situated near the river, and nearly half way between 
the northern and soutIieni“'extremities of the Company*’* territories. Its sides to the east and west 
extended 210 yards, the southern side 130, and the northern 100. It had fourtrastiow, mounting each ten 
guns; the curtains were only four feet thick, and terraces, which were the roofs of chambers, formed the 
tops of the ramparts; and windows belonging to these chambers, were in several places opened in the 
curtains. The gateway on the eastern side projected, and mounted five guns, three in front, and one on 
each flank towards the bastions. Under the western face, and on the brink of the river, was a line of heavy 
cannon mounted in embrasures of solid masonry; and this work was joined to the two western bastions by 
two slender walls, in each of which was a gate of pallisadoes. In the year 1747, warehouses had been 
built contiguous to the southern curtain, and, projecting on the outside between the two bastions, rendered 
them useless to one another: however the terraces of these warehouses were strong enough to bear the 
firing of three pounders, which were mounted in barbett over a slight parapet. 

The houses of the English inhabitants occupied the ground 600 yards towards the east, and half a 
mile to the north and south of the fort; but lay scattered in spacious and separate inclosures, and several 
of them overlooked the fort, as did the English Church, which stood opposite to the N. E. bastion. Under, 
these disadvantages the fort was deemed so little capable of defence, that it was resolved to oppose the 
enemy in the principal streets and avenues. .. ' *>■ 