

The Governor-General may issue warrants for securing and proceeding against suspected persons, and 
may also seize ships, &c. with the persons of those engaged in illicit trade, and send them to England. 

If the Governor-General differs in opinion with the Council after they shall have stated their opinions 
in writing, he may direct such measures thereon as he may see fit, on his own responsibility, so that such mea¬ 
sures could have been legally effected with the consent of the Council. These powers not to be exercised by 
Governors-General succeeding in consequence of death, &c. except provisionally appointed, or confirmed 
by the Directors. While Governors-General are acting previous to confirmation, all questions to be decided 
by plurality of voices, the Governor-General having the casting vote; but the Governor-General in no case 
to act against the opinion of the Council in judicial matters, or in regulations for the good order of civil 
government, &c. nor by his own authority to impose any tax, &c. 

When the Governor-General may be at either of the other Presidencies, the powers of the Governors 
there to be suspended (except in judicial proceedings) from the proclamation of the arrival to that of the 
departure of the Governor-General, or till his departure; during such period the powers of government to 
be vested in him, the respective Governors sitting and acting as Members of Council; and when absent 
from Bengal, the Governor-General may appoint a Member of Council, Vice President and Deputy Go¬ 
vernor of Fort William, such Deputy to exercise only similar powers to those of the Governor of Madras* 
&c. The Govenaor-GeneraPs orders to the other Presidencies, or officers acting under them, to be obeyed 
as though issued by the Governor-General in Council, he taking the responsibility upon himself, and giving 



CALCUTTA. 


101 


fh6 Respective Presidencies copies of such orders, and also transmitting them to the Court of Directors* 
The Directors, with the approbation of the Board of Commissioners, may suspend the exercise of the inde¬ 
pendent authority of the Governor-General, whenever they see fit, such suspension to take place from the 
receipt of the orders to that effect, and may also revive such powers again. 

The Governor-General, &c. demanding or receiving presents, gifts, &c. wilfully neglecting or disobeying 
the orders of the Court of Directors, and the making of corrupt bargains, deemed misdemeanours in law, 
amenable to Courts* in India and in England; and for acts committed in the territories of native Princes, and 
against them and their subjects, the same as though committed within the British territories. No action 
against the Governor-General, &c. to be stayed or compounded before a final judgment, except with the 
consent of the Board of Commissioners; and after any sentence pronounced, the judgment not to be com¬ 
pounded, nor persons suspended or dismissed by such sentences, to be restored. 

The Governor-General, &c. not to be concerned in trade, except on account of the Company. May 
appoint covenanted servants, or other British subjects, to act as Justices of the Peace and Coroners. 