

The new Soubah ceded a large tract of land to the Company, and granted them considerable 
immunities in trade. He soon after removed the seat of his Government to Mongheer, which he began 
to fortify with the utmost expedition. In 1762 he began everywhere to subject the English traders to 
the payment of certain duties throughout his dominions, and required that their disputes, if beyond the 
‘limits of their own jurisdiction, should be decided by his magistrates. However the Governor, 
Mr. Vansittart, had a conference with the Soubah, at Mongheer, when a temporary redress was agreed 
upon, and the Governor returned to Calcutta; but in January, 1763, the Nabob began to exact duties at 



CALCUTTA, 


10? 


Dacca and other English factories, which gave the English great alarm, and obliged them to oppose 
the Nabob they had so recently raised to the throne. The English commenced hostilities by taking Patna, 
from whence they were immediately driven by the Nabob’s army. They soon after defeated him in the 
field, and pursued him to his capital, Mongheer, of which they obtained possession on the 11th of October, 
and on the 6th of November they reduced Patna, the last place of strength belonging to him. Meer Cossim 
took refuge with Sujah Dowlah, Nabob of Oude, and Vizier to the Mogul, who determined to assist him 
in attempting to recover Bengal; and an immense army was collected, which was defeated by the English 
on the 22d of October, 1764, at Buxar, with very great loss; soon after which, the Mogul, Shah Allum,. 
visited the English camp, and threw himself under their protection. 

1765. Lord Clive was appointed Commander in Chief, President, and Governor of Bengal, with 
full powers. On his arrival, his l ordship concluded a treaty with the Mogul and Sujah Dowlah. By 
this treaty the Mogul constituted the East India Company his perpetual Duans of the Bengal provinces, 
for which they were to pay him 26,00,000 rupees yearly. The Company engaged themselves to pay 
to the Nabob of Bengal, for the expences of the civil government, and for the support of his dignity, 
53,00,000 rupees yearly: the remainder of the revenues of Bengal were allotted to the Company, for 
their expences in supporting armies to protect the country. By this treaty the Company became in 
possession of a clear yearly revenue, exempt from all charges, expences, and deductions whatever, 
amounting to £1,700,000 a year. Thus the East India Company acquired the sovereignty of a 
territory equal in extent to the most flourishing kingdom in Europe. 

Since the above period, the Company’s territories have been considerably extended, and their revenues 
much increased, in consequence of various conquests made in the wars in which they have been engaged. 

1777. From papers laid before Parliament, it appears that the revenues and disbursements at this 
Presidency from the years, 1761 to 1777, were as follow: 

5 years, May 1761 to April 1766 Revenues £4,320,000 Charges £4,10S,000 