

1668. The establishment of pilots for the navigation of the river took place in this year. 

1678. A nishan, or grant, was obtained for privileges of trade in the provinces bordering on the 
Ganges; and in 1681 Bengal was constituted a distinct agency from Fort St. George. 

1684. The Company’s trade having experienced much interruption from the native Governors, the 
Court sent out instructions to commence hostilities against the Mogul, with the object of obtaining pos¬ 
session of Chittagong. By an unforeseen incident hostilities were brought on in a premature and unex¬ 
pected manner. On the 28th of October, 1686, the English soldiers quarrelled with those of the Nabob. 
An action took place, in which the Nabob’s troops were defeated with great loss; a battery of eleven 
guns taken and spiked, the town of Hughley cannonaded by the fleet, and 500 houses burnt The 
Governor solicited a cessation of arms, which was granted. They offered to restore the privileges of 
trade; but the Agent and Council, considering that Hughley was an open town, retired on the 20th of 
December, 1686, to Chutanuttee, or Calcutta, from its being a safer situation during any negotiations 




CALCUTTA. 


103 


with the Nabob, or Mogul, and a treaty was agreed upon that a grant of land should be given to build 
a fort, liberty to erect a mint, and freedom of trade. 

1687. The Nabob appeared suddenly before Hughley with his army in February. On this infrac¬ 
tion of the armistice, the English stormed and took the Fort of Tanna, and plundered every thing be¬ 
tween that place and Ingelee, of which they took possession without resistance, and in which they fortified 
themselves; they subsequently burnt Balasore, and destroyed above forty sail of the Mogul’s ships. In 
the month of September, the Nabob granted permission for their return to Hughley, and to enjoy their 
ancient privileges; but the war being resumed, the Company’s property at Calcutta was embarked on the 
8th of November, 1688, and proceeded to Balasore, and from thence to Madras. 

1690. The Mogul’s government appearing more conciliatory, and an invitation having been received 
to resettle the factories in Bengal, Mr. Charnock proceeded from Madras, was favourably received on his 
arrival, and obtained a phirmaund, dated the 27th of April, in the 33d year of Aurungzebe’s reign, the pre¬ 
amble to which specified, that the Mogul, having pardoned all offences, had granted liberty of tirade to the 
English in Bengal without interruption; but explained, that this permission must be understood as allowing 
former privileges only, without exacting any fine from them. 

1696. The Rajahs on the western side of the Hughley having taken up arms, and made considerable 
progress before the Mogul’s forces could be assembled in sufficient force to oppose them, the European set¬ 
tlements declared in favour of the Nabob, and requested his permission to put their factories in a state of 
defence. He ordered them in general terms to defend themselves; whereupon they with great diligence 
raised walls with bastions round their factories ; the Hutch at Hughley, the French at Ghandernagore, and 
the English at Calcutta. Such was the origin of the three European forts in the province of Bengal, and 
they were the first which the Mogul Government suffered foreigners to build in any part of the empire, 