



CALCUTTA. 


105 


Though the Nabob threatened to drive the English entirely out of his dominions, yet he proposed an 
accommodation, provided they would pay him his duty on the trade for 15 years, defray the expences 
of his army, and deliver up the Indian merchants who were in the fort. This being refused, a siege 
commenced, and the place was taken on the 20th of June, through the treachery of the guard who had charge 
of one of the gates. The Nabob promised, on the word of a soldier, that no harm should be done to the 
English; nevertheless they were shut up in a prison so small, that out of 146, all perished in the course of 
the night, except 22, for want of air. 

On intelligence of this disaster reaching Madras, a considerable force under Colonel Clive, was 
embarked on board Admiral Watson's squadron, who arrived in Bengal river, at Fulta, on the 15th of 
December, and on the 2d of January they recaptured Fort William, and on the 11th they took and destroyed 
the town of Hughley. An action afterwards took place, in which the Nabob's troops were routed with 
great slaughter. These successes made Surajah Dowlah very solicitous to conclude a peace, which was 
ratified on the 9th of February, 1757, by which he agreed to restore the Company's factories, and all 
their monies, goods, and effects, and to permit them to fortify Calcutta as they thought proper. Liberty 
was given to coin their own imports of gold and silver, and all merchandise passing with their passports, 
exempted from tax, fee, or imposition. He permitted them to take possession of the villages of which the 
grant had been obtained from the Emperor in 1717, and confirmed all the privileges which had been 
conceded to them by former Emperors since their arrival in the province. 

This treaty was ratifiprl on oath, but no confident could be placed in the Nabob, who soon dis¬ 
regarded the treaty, and renewed his preparations for war, assisted by the French at Chandernagore; France 
being at this period at war with Great Britain. The English forces invested and took that settlement on 
March 24£h. These operations, which were concerted with judgment, and executed with spirit, established 
the military character of the English in India. The Nabob was humbled, but continued averse to comply 
with the stipulations of the treaty. His violent and tyrannic temper having discontented his courtiers, a 
conspiracy, headed by Jaffier Ally Cawn, was entered into among them, to divest him of the government. 
The English Council judged it advisable to join Jaffier Ally Cawn with their troops, as such a step seemed 
the most effectual way of establishing peace in the country, and settling the English on a good and 
permanent foundation. For this purpose a treaty was entered into between Jaffier Ally Cawn, Admiral 
Watson, Colonel Clive, Governor Drake, and the Committee, which consisted of twelve articles. 

By this treaty “ The Nabob agreed to, and admitted of the agreement and treaty made with 
Surajah Dowlah, that the enemies of the English should be his enemies, whether Europeans or others. 
That whatever goods or factories belonged to the French in Bengal, Bahar, and Orixa, should be delivered 
to the English, and the French never permitted to have factories or settlements any more in these 
provinces.—That to indemnify the Company for their losses by the capture of Calcutta,, and the charge# 
they had been at to repossess the factories, he would give 10,000,000 rupees* or £1,250,000; that to 
indemnify the English inhabitants, who suffered by the capture of Calcutta* he would give 50,00,000 
rupees, or £"625,000 sterling; that to indemnify the losses suffered by Gentoos* Moormen, and others, he 
would give 20,00,000 rupees, or £250,000 sterling; and that to the inhabitants, the Armenian Peots of 
Calcutta, who suffered by the capture, he would give 7,00,000 rupees, or <£87,500 sterling:—the division, of 
all these donations was to be left to the Admiral, the Colonel, and the Committee.—That he would give 
up entirely to the Company the Mahratta ditch all round Calcutta, and 600 yards all round about the ditch. 
‘.—•That the lands to the southward of Calcutta, as low as Culpee, should be under the government of 
the English Company, but the rents should be paid into the Mogul’s treasury.—That whenever Jaffier 
Ally Cawn sent for the assistance of the English troops, their pay and charges should be disbursed by 
him.—That from Hughley, downwards, he would build no new forts near the river.^And that as soon 