

The commerce of this Presidency is arranged under the following heads, viz. 

I. To and from London (exclusive of the East India Company’s trade) comprehending the invest- ~ 
ments of the commanders and officers of the Company’s ships; the goods shipped by individuals on the 
tonnage allowed by the Act of 33 Geo. III. chap. 52; and the cargoes of such country ships as have been 
permitted to proceed from Bengal to England, and return laden with European commodities. 

II. To and from other parts of Europe, under the denomination of Foreign Europe, comprising 
Denmark, Hamburgh, Lisbon, Madeira, Cadiz, &c. 

III. To and from the United States of America. 

IV. To and from British Asia, which comprehended, in 1S01, the under-mentioned places; and, not- - 
withstanding the acquisitions which have since taken place, is continued under the same arrangement. . 

1. Coast of Malabar, which includes the whole of the western side of the Peninsula. 

2. Coast of Coromandel, which includes the whole of the eastern coast. 

3. Island of Ceylon. 

4. Coast of Sumatra. 

V. That to and from the under-mentioned places, comprehended in 1801, under the head of Foreign 
Asia: and though some of the places have since been added to the British possessions, the same arrange- - 
ment is continued. 


1. Arabian and Persian Gulfs.. 

2. Pegu. 

3. Pinang, and places to the eastward. 

4. Malacca, 


5. Batavia. . 

6. Manilla. 

7. China. 

8. Various places. 


Under the head of various places, are comprehended the Maidive and Laccadive Islands, Mosambique, . 
and other ports on the East Coast of Africa, New South Wales, Cape of Good Hope, Saint Helena, &c. . 

The whole of the commerce from port to port in India, commonly called the country trade, is in the 
hands of individuals, the East India Company never interfering; and from the various statements, it will 
be seen, that there is no place of commercial note from the eastward of the Cape of Good Hope, to which 
a trade is not driven by the British or native merchants resident in the Company’s territories, except Japan, 
to which country the East India Company, in the infancy of their establishment, made several unsuccessful 
attempts to establish a trade. For a long period, all European nations, except the Dutch, have been 
forbidden visiting Japan; notwithstanding which, a ship has recently been sent from Calcutta, but was- . 
unable to obtain permission to trade. 

The accounts are made up in Sicca Rupees at all the Presidencies; and as the entries of both imports. •- 
and exports are required to be verified on oath, the following statements may be considered accurate... 



112 


CALCUTTA. 


COMMERCE WITH LONDON. 

The following is a statement of the merchandise and treasure imported into Bengal from London, 
exclusive of the East India Company's, in the years 1802 to 1806 inclusive ; likewise of the merchandise 
and treasure exported from Bengal to London during the same period; together with a list of the articles 
of which the imports and exports consisted in 1805. 