

In the disposal of an investment by private contract, the following circumstances must be considered:— 
the loss on such articles as maybe rejected; the loss on the exchange by taking the current rupee at 2s. 3d.; 
the mode of calculating the duties at the custom-house, which, instead of being levied on the value, at the 
rate of 2s. 6d. per Sicca rupee, ten Sicca rupees are reckoned to the pound sterling, by which an advance 
of 25 per cent, is added to the established duties; and the loss by the discount on the purchaser's bills, 
which on an average have from four to six months to run, and which discount is never less than one 
per cent, per month, if of short dates; hut if long to run, If per cent, per month, exclusive of the great 
risk the importers run, by taking bills at such long dates. 

The charges on the import of investments from England, must generally be regulated by the pro¬ 
portion of bulky and perishable articles. The freight of the one, and the loss or damage on the other, are 
the prominent charges; they may with justice be estimated at 30 per cent, on an investment of exten¬ 
sive general assortment: the shopkeepers importing on their own account and risk, consider them to amount 
to near 40 per cent, including the commission charged in London. 

Freight, as there are usually many bulky articles, is estimated at «—5 per cent. 

Premium of insurance, being generally shipped on Company's extra ships^v 7 ditto 

Convoy duty in England, on the prime cosLx™.—^-- 4 ditto 

Commission in London on the gross amount of the invoices —--- 5 ditto 

Wastage on some articles, and damage on others, estimated at__~ 2f ditto 

Import duties at Calcutta, according to the present mode of levying them 9 ditto 
Expences of boat-hire, coolies, servants' wages, &e. estimated at 'VtVIi'VX^Wk^X 2j ditto 


Forming a total of, 


35 per cent. 


The commanders and officers of the Company's regular ships may be considered exempt from the 
charge of freight, 1 per cent, of the premium of insurance, and a part of the commission of 5 per cent. 

IV. The importer may sell his goods at the established outcries, or auction rooms. 

The principal objection to this mode of sale is, that they are in general conducted by persons having 
also retail shops, so that they may be both buyers and sellers. Whoever has witnessed the rapidity with 
which goods are disposed of at the outcries, readily discovers how this mode of sale has become so favourite 
and profitable to the shopkeepers and proprietors of auction rooms, instead of purchasing by private con¬ 
tract, as formerly. By their combining both a retail shop and an auction room, and enjoying the benefits 
above stated, they will now rarely give by private contract to the importers of British goods, such an ad¬ 
vance as can indemnify, far less adequately compensate them for the charges, damages, risks, &c. which 
attend their adventures. 

On the renewal of the Charter in 1793, the private traders, both in London and India, embarked 
largely in the importation of European goods into India; but from various losses arising from the imports 
exceeding the demand, (more particularly in those years in which many Indian built ships were permitted 
to proceed to England, and return with cargoes), and the difficulty of obtaining any remittance exempt 
from loss and risk, they have in general declined it; it has therefore reverted back to the old mode of 
supply, by the private trade of the Company's officers. 