

Thus the fluctuating, precarious, and perishable state of the Bengal markets, and those of India in 
general, is certainly eventually favourable to the consumption of the investments of the commanders, 
officers, and private traders, whether sold or not; for if the inhabitants do not consume, the climate soon 
does: hence it must constantly want a fresh supply ; but care must be taken not to overstock the market 
at once. 

The modes of disposing of European goods imported into Bengal are four, viz. 

I. The importer may open a godown, or shop, for the purpose of retailing them to the inhabitants. 

The disadvantages attending this mode, from high rent, wages of shopmen and sircars, trouble in 

retailing, collecting payment, and loss on the final close of the concern, are so great, that it seldom does or 
can answer the importer s purpose, unless he has an extensive acquaintance in the settlement. 

II. They may be exposed for private sale, on commission, at an European warehouse. 

The disadvantages of selling by private sale on commission, at the warehouse of an European shop¬ 
keeper, are great, both from the usual charge of ten per cent, commission on the amount of the sales, and 
likewise from the latter having almost invariably a counter interest to the sales of the importer, by having 
goods of the same species for sale on his own account, or a prospect of selling them by auction. 

III. The importer may sell to the shopkeeper by private contract, on exhibiting his invoices, at so 
much per cent, advance, or discount on the prime cost, in full of all charges; the investments to be 
delivered in good and merchantable condition, in the opinion of the purchaser, otherwise to be liable to 
rejection. The current rupee to be taken at the exchange of 2s. 3d. each, which enhances the value of the 
Sicca rupee, commonly considered at 2s. 6d., to 2s. 7jd. each, a loss of near 5 per cent, on the exchange; 
and bills to be taken at 3, 6, and 9, months, or 6, 9, and 12 months from the period of the filial delivery 
of the goods, as the parties may agree. 

This models preferable to any other, provided the markets are in any degree favourable ; but there 
is this disadvantage attending it, the importer is placed almost entirely at the mercy of the purchaser: 
the latter may have agreed in the outset to take the whole of an investment, in order to get the goods he 
really wanted, and hence an anxiety to reject those he does not really want, if in the least injured. By 
doing so, he in general obtains them at his own prices; or if he keeps an auction room, which most of the 
European shopkeepers now do, he gets the rejected goods to sell by that mode, and which is generally 
part of the contract; he has therefore not only an opportunity of purchasing them at his own price, but has 
likewise a commission on the amount of sales for so doing. This readily accounts for the quantities of 

R 2 



124 


CALCUTTA. 


goods rejected when sold by private contract, the loss on which absorbs the greater part, if not the whole 
of the expected profit of the contract when first entered into. 