

China goods (tea excepted), coffee, sago, and rattans. 

The same duty on galangal and kullinjan, taken at a fixed valuation of 8 rupees per maund. 

X. 10 per cent ad valorem, on the importation by sea only of wines, European goods, and tea. 

XI. 5 per cent ad valorem, on the importation generally of furs, cow-tails, and cowries; and 2f per 
cent, on the importation of the same articles from Nepaul. 

XII. 10 per cent, on the importation by sea of spices, viz. pimento, cloves, mace, nutmegs, cassia, 
malabathrum leaf, or tauzpaut. 

21 per cent, on the importation of the same articles from Nepaul. 

The same duty on copper or brass, wrought or unwrought, at a valuation of 20 rupees per maund. 

XIII. 10 per cent, on the inland importation generally of unwrought copper and brass, at 
a valuation of 20 rupees per maund. 

XIV. 10 per cent, ad valorem, on the importation by sea of iron, steel, and manufactured iron and 
steel; and the same duty on importation by land generally; and 2} per cent on the importation from 
Nepaul of those articles, taken at a fixed valuation of 7 rupees per maund. 

XV. 10 per cent, ad valorem -on the importation from Europe or America, and 30 per cent, on the 
importation from foreign territories in Asia, of gin, brandy, rum, and arrack. 

XVI. Relates to the duties on salt, the traffic in which is confined exclusively to the natives. 

XVII. Two rupees each on the importation or transit of matchlocks, one rupee each on swords, and 
lour annas each on shields. 

XVIII. 7f per cent, ad valorem, on the importation and transit generally, and 2f per cent, on the 
imjH>rtation from the Vizier's and Nepaul territories, of cotton piece-goods, silk piece-goods, and goods 
partly of silk and partly of cotton, embroidered goods and brocades, thread, tape, and fringes. 

XIX. 5 per cent, ad valorem, on the transit or exportation of country woollens, viz, looys and 
blankets, the manufacture of the Company's territories; and 21 per cent, on them importation from Nepaul. 



160 


CALCUTTA. 


XX. per cent, ad valorem, oh tlie transit or exportation of the following goods, the produce of 
the country, or on their importation by sea. 

Dying drugs, viz. allah, morinda, cochineal, cossum flower, madder, loadh, and toond dower. 
Woods used in dying, viz. sapan-wood, and sandal ahmer, or red sandal-wood. 

Fragrant woods, viz. white or yellow sandal-wood, ugger, or aloe-wood, and tuggur. 

XXT. 7 y per cent, ad valorem, on the transit or exportation of the following gums and drugs, the 
produce of the country, and 10 per cent, on their importation by sea, viz. 


Camphire. 

0 her ay t a. 
Colombo root. 
Soonamooky leaf. 


Copal, or karoba. 
Galbanum. 

Gum Arabic. 
Senna. 


Spikenard. 

Mastic. 

Ilurrab. 

Storax. 


Buhera. 
Own! a. 
Myrrh. 


XXII. 5 per cent, on the importation, exportation, or transit of indigo, taken at a fixed valuation 
of 100 rupees per factory maund, and an additional duty of 2 \ per cent, on the exportation by sea of in¬ 
digo, the produce of the Vizier's dominions. 