

Oil and oil seeds. Aromatic seeds. Hookahs & snakes. Pipe staves. 

The same duty on the under-mentioned articles, at a fixed valuation, viz. 


Cutch^___8 rupees per factory maund. 

Cocoa-nuts^_- 20 ditto per thousand. 

Stick and shell-lac^ 10 ditto per md. of 80 Sic. wt. 
Soap ___ S ditto per maund. 


Raw silk filature^— 7 rupees per seer of SO Sic. wt. 
Bengal wound silk^ 6 ditto per ditto 

Tush a---— 5 annas per ditto 

Chassiun -8 ditto per ditto 

Beetle-nut™™__5 rupees per factory maund. 


Long pepper—^— 12 rupees per factory maund. 
Piplamul™™™™ 12 ditto per ditto 

Dry ginger- 4 ditto per ditto 

Saltpetre ™™™™ 4 ditto per maund. 

Elephants'’ teetlu— 110 ditto per ditto 


III. 10 per cent, ad valorem, on the importation, exportation, or transit of the following goods 


Assafoetlda. 
Saul timber. 
Sissoo ditto. 
Jarrool ditto. 


j Soondry timber, 
j Yellow ochre, 
i Vermilion. 

I, Indian red. 


Minium. 
Prussian blue. 
Peoree. 
Yerdigrease. 


1 Arsenic, 
j Sulphur. 
Alum* 
Coral. 


The same duty on the under-mentioned articles, at a fixed valuation, viz. 

Wax™~—----45 rupees per factory md. Saffron —35 rupees per seer. 

Wax candles^--—— 70 dittoper ditto Clumam ™™ 40 ditto per mi of SO Cal. Sic. wt. 

Pepper, black & white 11 ditto per ditto to be levied at Calcutta and Dacca only. 

IV. On the importation, exportation, or transit of cotton and wool, 12 annas per md.of 96 Cal. Sic. wt. 

V. 5 per cent, ad valorem, on the importation, exportation, or transit, generally, of borax and tincal, 
and 21 per cent, on the importation from Nepaul of the same articles. 



CALCUTTA. 


159 


VI. per cent, ad valorem, on the importation, exportation, or transit, generally, of the following 
goods, and 2§ per cent on the importation from Nepaul of the same articles, vis. 

Ottar and other es- | Ambergris. j Benjamin. ! Rose-water, 

sential oils. Civet. Frankincense, Keerah-water. 

Perfumed oils. Musk. Putcha paut. 

VII. 10 per cent, ad valorem, on the importation of pig lead, sheet lead, small shot, and tobacco, 
imported into Cuttack, (to be levied at Balasore only). The same dutv upon quicksilver, taken at a fixed 
valuation of four rupees per seer; and tin and tutenague at 20 rupees per maund. The same duty upon 
an advance of 50 per cent, on the invoice valuation of shawls. 

VIII. 5 per cent, ad valorem, on the importation by sea of the following articles ; 

European woollens. 

All canvas, except such as is manufactured in the country, or of country materials. 

Cordage and other marine stores, except sunn hemp, or materials for cordage, of country growth. 

Rosin and turpentine. 

Cowries imported at Calcutta, Chittagong, or Balasore only. 

The same duty on coir, the produce of Ceylon or the Maldives, at 9 rupees per factory maund. 

IX. 71 per cent, ad valorem, on the importation by sea only of the following articles:— 

Mahogany and all other sorts of wood used in cabinet ware. 

Beads, malas, or rosaries. 

Carriages, (the duty on which-is to be levied under rules especially enacted for Calcutta). 