

XXIII. b per cent, ad valorem, on the exportation by sea only, of tallow, tallow candles, and 
hog's lard; salted provisions and pursers stores. 

XXIV. A drawback of L Z\ per cent, is allowed on the exportation by sea, of the following articles:— 


Long pepper. 
Piplamul. 

Dry ginger. 
Aniseeds. 
Cardamums. 
Coriander seeds. 
Cummin seeds. 
Adjuan seeds 
Camphire. 
Cherayta. 
Colombo root. 


Copal, or karoba. 
Galbanum. 

Gum Arabic. 
Spikenard. 

Mastic. 

Hurrah. 

Buhera. 

Ownla. 

Myrrh. 

Soonamookey leaf. 
Senna. 


Storax. 

Stick-lac. 
Lalu-Joorv-lac. 
Shell-lac. 

Cake-I ae. 
Seed-lac. 

Attah. 

Awl, or morinda. 
Cochineal. 
Cossum flower. 
Dye flower. 


Iliirsinghar flower. 
Loadh, 

Munject, or madder. 
Toond (lower. 
Sapan-wood, 

Bed sandal-wood. 
White ditto 
Yellow ditto 
Ugger,or aloe-wood. 
Tuggur. 


The same drawback is allowed on the exportation to Europe or America, of sugar, jaggery, goor, 
and syrup. 

XXV. A drawback of 5 per cent, is allowed on the exportation by sea, of such cotton piece-goods, 
silk piece-goods, goods made partly of silk and partly of cotton, and all such silk as shall have previously 
paid a duty of 7 1 per cent. 

XXVI. An additional duty of 21 per cent, is charged on the re-exportation by sea, of all foreign 
articles, which have paid an import or transit duty, not exceeding 2f per cent. 

The goods specified above, after having paid the prescribed duties once, are not liable to any further 
impost, save such additional duties as they may be particularly subject to, on their exportation by sea. 
All goods not specified above, are liable to a duty of 5 per cent, on importation or exportation by sea, 
with the exception of the following, viz. 

Imports. —Teak timber, horses, bullion, coin, precious stones and pearls, goomootoo, and other 
articles (coir excepted), used for the manufacture of cordage. 

Exports. —Grain of all sorts, precious stones and pearls, opium purchased at the Company's sales, 
carriages, palanquins, and spirits distilled after the European manner in the provinces under this Presi¬ 
dency, to an amount not exceeding 1000 gallons. 



CALCUTTA, 


16t 


The prices of those articles, on which the duties are levied ad valorem, are specified in books of rates 
which are kept for public inspection at the different custom-houses, &e. If any article is omitted in the 
book of rates, its value is taken at an advance of 20 per cent, on the prime cost, as proved by the invoice, 
or otherwise to the satisfaction of the Collector. Damaged goods are rated at their actual value. 

In the enumeration of articles subject to duty, the maund, where not otherwise specified, is always 
taken at 80 Calcutta Sicca weight per seer. 

Any attempt to pass a larger quantity of goods than is specified in the application to the Collector, or 
subsequently to pass a larger quantity than is described in the rowannah, or pass, subjects the whole of 
the goods to confiscation. An attempt to pass goods of superior value to those specified in the pass, sub¬ 
jects them to double duties. 