

The goods for which tonnage may have been required, being assorted into cargoes,.and allotted to the 
different ships of the season, the parties will be advised thereof; and on the requisition of the sub-export 
warehouse-keeper, they must send their respective goods for shipment to the export-warehouse, accompanied 
by manifests in duplicate, with a certificate from the Collector of the Customs subjoined to each manifest, 
stating that the duties have been paid. 

The rate of homeward freight is fixed at £ per ton for regular ships, and £ for extra ships. 

Individuals are at liberty either to pay the freight of their goods in Bengal, or to give security for its 
payment in Great Britain. It is required, however, that their applications for tonnage should specify their 
intentions on this head and in the event of their chusing to pay the freight in Great Britain, they should', 
be accompanied by a declaration from the person tendered as security, signifying his assent to the same. 

The expence of transporting goods to the ships from Calcutta, must be defrayed by the shippers. 

Applications for tonnage, made by agents on behalf of their constituents, must be accompanied by 
their authority for requiring, the same; 

The following is an extract from a general letter from the Court of Directors, dated 31st August, 1804.. 

Par. 92. u The owners of several of the extra ships which were taken up for the purpose of 
bringing home the goods of individuals from India, having expressed great dissatisfaction at the hardship 
to which they have been exposed, in consequence of the bad package of the bales of privilege goods im¬ 
ported on their respective ships; we directed our warehouse-keepers to report for our information, whether 
the goods in question occupied a greater space than the generality of consignments on the CompanyV 
account and as it appears, by their reply to our application, that the owners of the above ships have been 
considerable sufferers from the preceding circumstance, we feel it necessary,.from motives of justice both- 
to the Company and the owners of the above class of extra ships, to direet that, immediately, on the 
receipt of this letter, you give public notice that the shippers of the privilege goods will be required to 
pack their consignments equally well as those of a similar description imported on the Company’s account,, 
and that, in the event of their neglecting to comply with these instructions, the freight will be calculated, 
according to the actual measurement of the goods, and not, as has hitherto been customary, according to* 
the number of pieces.'” 



166 


CALCUTTA* 


Par. 93. “And with a view the more effectually to enforce these instructions, it is our further directions 
that the export warehouse-keeper be directed to insert in the account tonnage the exact measurement of 
those bales which may appear to him, on a general inspection, to be negligently packed, in order that they 
may be charged with freight according to the plan above described,” 