

Fort William , July 9,1810. Published by order of the Board of Trade. 

Complaints having been made to the Board of Trade, of the inconvenience result ing from the great 
variety which hitherto has prevailed in the sizes of the indigo chests passed through the Honourable 
Company’s export warehouse for consignment in Europe, and it being desirable, for the purpose of pro¬ 
moting good stowage of the indigo in the ship on which it may be laden, lessening the risk of breakage, 
and damage of so valuable an article, and facilitating the calculations of tonnage of the indigo, that as 
much uniformity as may he practicable, may be in future observed in the size of the chests; the following 
dimensions, which approach nearer to the general average size of the indigo chests usually delivered, than any 
other which could be fixed upon, are recommended to be observed by all persons manufacturing indigo in 
the present season:—three feet long, two feet broad, one foot deep, eight inches solid, and ten feet contents. 
Five chests of the above dimensions are equal to one ton. 

Fort William> July 9, 1810. Published by ordpr of the Board of Trade. 


EXILES FOE SENDING PRESENTS TO EUROPE. 


Application for permission to send the articles arc made to the Board of Trade, through their Secretary, 
with a declaration that they are not intended for trade. 

To the application is annexed a certificate from the Collector of Government Customs, signifying that 
the Government Customs have been duly adjusted, or that nothing (if such be the case) is due; for this 
purpose applications should previously be addressed to the Custom Master, requesting him to receive the 
duties leviable on such articles, agreeably to the existing rules for his guidance on the exportation of 
merchandise. 

In order to prevent abuses from the present indulgence, or inconvenience to the public service, the 
Board reserve to themselves a, power of refusing the permission requested, and their refusal is to be con¬ 
clusive upon the parties, without any reason being assigned. The Board also reserve to themselves a power 
of refusing the permission for the particular ship that may be desired, and of granting it for some other, 
if the party chusc to accept it for such other ship. 

As every article (Madeira wine excepted) must be put up to auction at the Company’s sales, the 
owner will, notwithstanding the declaration, be at liberty to let any article go to the last bidder, if he shall 
think the price bid unreasonable, or that the bidder has been actuated by unworthy motives in bidding for it. 

Articles intended for presents allowed to be sent home to a value not exceeding 3,000 rupees. 

All applications are to be made conformably to forms prescribed; but, in order to prevent inconvenience 
on this account, a number of printed forms are kept at the Secretary’s office, which individuals may have 
on paying such moderate price as will reimburse the charge of printing. 

The following are the fees payable at the Secretary’s office, on the registry of each package: : 