

Free rowannahs, entitling the goods to pass without question, are granted by the collectors at Cal¬ 
cutta, Chittagong, and Balasore, on such articles as are exclusively imported by sea, on payment of a 
duty of | per cent, on the value, and a fee to the Collector of 1 rupee per mile. 

Goods found in transit, unaccompanied by a rowannah, are chargeable with double duties; and in the 
event of the owner refusing or omitting payment, such part of them as may be deemed equivalent to the 
duties, is seized, and after three months sold, and the balance of the proceeds of the sale is paid to the 
owners, the duties and custom-house charges being first deducted. Any attempt clandestinely to pass 
goods within the limits of any of the chokies, unaccompanied by a rowannah, or without having paid the 
duties, is punished by confiscation of the whole. 

The transportation of all arms and military stores, without a pass from Government, is strictly pro* 
hibited; the importation of opium, the produce or manufacture of any foreign country, is also prohibited. 

IMPORT REGULATIONS. 

All goods landed, or attempted to be landed, at any other place than the Custom-house, are liable to 
confiscation. A manifest of the cargo of every vessel entering the port, must be delivered in on oath. 

In landing the cargoes, each boat shall be accompanied by a note, specifying the quantity and quality 
of the goods addressed to the Collector, who shall write an order on the note, to weigh, or examine, or 
pass them. 

Goods not manifested, are liable so confiscation; or if the goods are laden on freight, the Master or 
supracargo is liable to a penalty not exceeding the value of them. In case of a refusal to pay this penalty, 
the Board of Revenue may prohibit the landing of any more goods, and may withhold a port-clearance 
and pilot from the vessel. 

Previous to landing a cargo, security must be given for payment of the duties, either by a deposit of 
goods, or of Company's paper; and in default of payment at the expiration of three months, the said de¬ 
posit becomes forfeited. 

The original invoices of all goods imported must be produced at the Custom-house, and the duties 
adjusted according to their amount. In the event of no invoice being produced, or of the Collector seeing 
cause to suspect that the invoice does not exhibit the true prime cost, the duties are to be settled on the 
Calcutta prices. 

British ships importing at the foreign settlements, pay the same duties as if imported at Calcutta. 

Duties on Coromandel goods are levied on an advance of 15 per cent, on the invoice prices, and on 
China goods on an advance of 30 per cent. 

The duties on all spirits imported by sea in casks (Batavia arrack excepted) are calculated on a fixed 
valuation of <£30 per pipe, A deduction of 10 per cent, is allowed for leakage, provided the Collector is 
Vol. II. Y 



162 


CALCUTTA. 


satisfied that the casks have not been filled up. Otherwise, the casks arc to be gauged, and the duty levied 
on the actual quantity. 