

No claim for return of duty, on goods stated not to have been shipped, is admitted, after the depar- . 
ture of the vessel from Saugor. 

Opium for exportation must be accompanied by a certificate, stating it to have been purchased at 
the Company’s sales; and any attempt to pass opium not so purchased, or not corresponding with the cer¬ 
tificate, is punished by confiscation. 

After a vessel has obtained her clearance, if any goods are received on board, unaccompanied by a 
certificate of the duties having been paid, the pilot is authorized to detain the vessel, and the goods are 
liable to confiscation. All goods, moreover, seized in an attempt to ship them in a clandestine manner, 
are also liable to confiscation. 


Y 2 



164 


CALCUTTA 


Goods transshipped without permission from the Collector, or shipped on a different vessel from that 
for which they may be passed, are subject to double duty. 

No arms or military stores can be exported, without permission of the Governor-General in Council. 

In no case either of imports or exports, can any objection to the rate of assessment be received, alter 
the duties have been paid. 

The following are the rules relative to Chittagong, Balasore, and Hnghley. 

In the valuation of imports, the Collectors at Chittagong and Balasore are guided by the same rules 
as are enacted for Calcutta, in as far as these may be applicable. In the valuation of exports, the 
market price of the goods at the ports from which they are exported, is taken as the standard. 

The regulations w r ith respect to the drawbacks which are laid down for Calcutta, are also applicable 
to Chittagong and Balasore. 

Goods imported by sea into any of the foreign settlements on the Hnghley, are liable, on exportation 
to the interior, to pay to the Collector at Hnghley the same duties as are charged on goods imported into 
Calcutta on a foreign bottom. In like manner, goods brought to the foreign settlements from the interior, 
are liable to the same duties as are charged on the exportation of such goods from Calcutta on a 
foreign bottom. 

TOWN DUTIES. 

Town duties are levied on the articles, and at the rates hereafter specified, on the importation of such 
articles for sale, store, or consumption into the cities of Calcutta, Hughley, Patna, &c. viz. 

I. 2} per cent, on cleaned rice, wheat, and barley, taken at a fixed valuation of 1 Sicca rupee per 
maund of 80 Calcutta Sicca weight to the seer; and paddy at 8 annas per maund. The duty to be paid 
either in money or kind (mb. 1 seer per maund) at the option of the merchant, unless where it is levied 
by a public officer of Government, to whom it is paid in money only. 

N.B. The collection of this duty on grain was afterwards suspended by a proclamation of Government. 

II. 5 per cent, ad valorem on dholl, grain, and boote; oil and oil seeds; sugar, jaggery, and 
lasses, beetle-nut and turmeric. 

III. 10 per cent, ad valorem on ghee and tobacco. 

IV. 5 per cent, ad valorem, on importation into Calcutta only, of charcoal and fire-wood". 