

V. Relates to the duties on various kinds of salt not purchased at the Company’s sales. No articles 
are to be subject to town duties, on their transit through any of the towns specified. 

The town duties are let in farm, and collected by officers of the Collectors of the land revenue. 

In the assessment of the town duties, the several articles are valued at their current prices, according 
to a book of rates prepared by the Collector. 

Any attempt to import clandestinely articles liable to the town duties, without paying the same, is 
punished by a fine equal to the amount of the duties withheld: the fine to be levied by distraint, if not 
immediately discharged. 

v Any farmer, collector, &c. attempting to levy a town duty on articles not declared liable thereto, is 
subject to a fine equal to thrice the duty collected, besides such costs and damages as may be farther 
awarded. The illegal detention of articles not liable to town duty, although no duty be actually levied, 
is also punishable by a fine not exceeding 500 rupees, besides such costs and damages as may be awarded. 

Calcutta special Rules .—The town duties of Calcutta are collected by the Collector of Customs, and 
are levied on the several articles above described, whether imported into the city, or its suburbs. 

The duties must be paid on the several articles as they pass the chokies, or sufficient security must be 
given-for their payment within fifteen days. 



CALCUTTA. 


165 


Goods intended for transit or shipment, and therefore not liable to the town duties, are conveyed to 
the Custom-house wharf by a peon, who does not quit the boat until the goods are shipped or passed. 

All boats passing the town with goods on board, must be examined; and in the event of their 

attempting to pass, after being required by the officer to stop, the goods are liable to confiscation. 

Should any person dispute the payment of the town duties, the Collector is at liberty to detain such 
part of the goods as may be equivalent to the same, and after fifteen days, to put them up to sale, as in the 
case of a refusal to pay the Government customs. 

Every attempt to convey clandestinely into the city or suburbs, articles subject to the town duties, 
is punishable by confiscation.. 

REGULATIONS RESPECTING SHIPPING GOODS IN PRIVATE TRADE TO EUROPE, 

All persons intending to export goods from Bengal to Great Britain, are required to notify the same 
in writing to the Secretary of the Board of Trade, specifying the sorts and quantities of goods intended for 
shipment, the quantity of tonnage which they will occupy, and the time or times at which they will be 

ready for shipment, and in what proportions. Some specific day or days must be fixed for the time of 

shipment, within the period prescribed by Government, after which period no goods will be received. 

In the event of the goods not being ready for shipment by the time specified, or of the whole tonnage 
applied for not being occupied, the freight becomes forfeited ; and the payment of this forfeiture will inva¬ 
riably be enforced, unless the most satisfactory reasons shall be assigned for the tonnage not being filled up t 