



176 


CALCUTTA. 


the prospect of future supply, that this country will, in all probability, experience a fatal want of great 
oak-timber, and become dependent on oilier powers for the means of supporting her navy, if care be not 
taken to provide a supply in future, by the improvement and better management of the royal forests, 
and to reduce the consumption of it by the utmost care and frugality in the expenditure.” 

This statement, with other circumstances, induced the East India Company to have recourse to some 
external aid for a supply of shipping for their commerce. Fortunately their own possessions in the East fur¬ 
nished them with the necessary supply. They accordingly took into their regular service several ships calcu¬ 
lated for the China trade, and others as extra ships. They built on their own account two ships in India, 
one of 1200, the other of 800 tons ; and gave permission for two large ships of 1200 tons to be built there 
on the bottoms of two of their regular ships; and with a view of ascertaining the capability of Fulo Pinang 
of furnishing ships of burthen for war or commerce, they ordered a frigate to be built there, and adver¬ 
tised for tenders for building a ship of 1200 tons for their China trade, which has since been completed. 

The departure of the Company from the old established system of supplying the shipping for their 
Indian and China trade, though it militated against the interests of numerous classes in London, was 
sanctioned by the late Lord Melville, who, in his speech in the House of Commons, upon the subject of 
employing Indian-built shipping in the cnmmprrp between that country and England, on June 12, 1801, 
says—« Cfi The slapping of this country (England) he was ervtain would not he injured by the measure 
proposed. It was not against, the Navigation Act, as that allowed every country to import into 
Great Britain its own produce in its own shipping. Why then should this privilege be withheld from 
India? Was it because it was a province of our mighty empire, and that whatever increases its prosperity, 
serves to add to, and fortify our own? He was so far from feeling any jealousy with respect to the ad¬ 
mission of India ships into our ports, that he still hoped to see our dockyards filled with ships of war 
built in that country. Since our commerce had increased beyond tiie means of carrying it on, he, for one, 
could not see the policy of diminishing those means. He had thought long and deliberately upon this sub¬ 
ject, and was now rivetted to the opinions which he expressed. 1 ’ 

The following account of the cost and outfit of a new ship of 800 tons and 1200 tons respectively, 
for India and China, in the years 1796 and 1810, will shew the increased price of all articles connected 
with shipping during that period. 



Ship of 800 tons. 

ARTICLES OP OUTFIT. 

1796. 

1810. 


£ 

£ 

Building, with interest of money advanced to 
builders __-_ 

14,77 6 
1,864 

22,390 

3,122 

Amount of Coppering -- ———.—^ 