

The first attempts, except those already mentioned, were made in the Sunderbunds, at Chittagong, 
ml Sylhet But the vessels then built at these places being hastily runup on the spur of the occasion, 
composed of green timber and bad materials, and unskilfully constructed, fell quickly to decay, and for 
many years created a strong prejudice against Bengal ships. Ship-building is now almost entirely confined to 
Calcutta, where ships are at present built of all burdens, equal, in point of construction, workmanship, and 
durability, to any class of merchant ships in Europe, and superior to most. The progress and extent of 
this very important manufacture will be seen from the following account of vessels built in Bengal from 
the commencement of the year 1781 to 1802. 

38 ships and 39 snows built at Calcutta, and on the River Hughley, whose tonnage was 24,580 tons. 

18 ditto-54 dittos-— Chittagong, Sylhet, Baclcergunge, and other places—x.. 14,500 ditto. 

Forming a total of 39,080 tons, the value of which, when equipped for sea, is estimated at 51,04,000 
Sicca rupees. The direct advantages which Bengal has derived from the introduction of ship-building, 
may be estimated from a consideration only of the builders' profits and the workmen's wages; these 
amount to about two-fifths of the whole value, which on the above, is 20,41,600 Sicca rupees. 

The decrease of English oak has been long a subject of very serious consideration to the British 
. legislature, and many expedients have been suggested to guard the nation against the alarming con¬ 
sequences that would attend a scarcity of this essential article, on which the commerce and strength of 
Great Britain so materially depend. In 1771 a Committee was appointed to consider the state of the 
timber fit for the supply of His Majesty's navy; and in their report made to the House of Commons, May 6, 
1771, they state, “ That there was a great scarcity of timber for ship-building in England; and that for 
the better supply of timber and plank for the use of the navy, it had been found necessary to apply to 



CALCUTTA. 


175 


foreign countries; that the timber chiefly imported, was of a large, scantling, compass timber for knees, 
and other purposes; and that, from the information they have received, they are of opinion that there 
is not a sufficient quantity of timber in England to be purchased at any price; that the cause of the 
scarcity is occasioned partly by building such a large number of East India ships, partly by the general 
increase of shipping, and in a considerable degree by the augmentation of the King’s ships, in their 
number, their size, and their scantlings; that there has been a great increase of shipping in general, 
but the increase has particularly been in the East India Company’s ships, which from 30 sail, their 
number 30 years ago, are now 90 sail; one of which ships of 800 tons would take the same scantling as 
a ship of war of 50 or 60 guns; that within these twenty years, the East India Company have greatly 
increased the tonnage of their ships, for that in 1751 they were limited to 600 tons; in 1758 there was 
a regulation that the ships they would employ, should be 106 feet keel, and 33 feet broad; and by 
another regulation in 1770, their ships are to be 110 feet keel, and 35 or 36 feet broad, and that all the 
planking of their bottoms should be four inch; that by the latest contracts they run from 800 to 
1000 tons, which interfere with ships of war from 50 to 74 guns; which is become so alarming, that it makes 
the Navy Board uneasy, and apprehensive that the difficulty of getting timber will be still greater; that in 
consequence of this increase in the size of the Ea&LIndia, <diip& y the price of timber is principally affected 
at Deptford, Woolwich, and Chatham, the East India ships being built in that neighbourhood.” 