

Philip and John Da Cruz. Laurence Picachy. Mark and A. Lackersteen. 

The native bankers, agents, and merchants are very numerous, the principal of whom are 
Gopauf Doss Monohur Doss. Gopaul Doss Mootichund. Jewim Doss and Monoololl. 

Lallah Auggur Shen. Mootichund Ghonnissaum. Odykurn Brijobhookun Doss. 

Nimdram Bydenaut. Davy Doss Baulmokund, Hadjee Hyder Hadjee Ahmud. 

BrijoobidlubDoss GoculDoss Benny Persaud Bindabund, Aga Mahomed Nazam Ally Khan,. 

Ilamshaw Ramnarain. Takoor Doss Govind Doss. Shaik Golaum Hussain. 

LTrjoonjee Natlyee. MotoraDossBirjoramunDoss Meer Mahomed Mady. 

Hurry kissen Doss. Incharam. Meer Mahomed Sadick. 

Exclusive of the above, there are various Jew, Greek, and others merchants resident at this Presidency. 

A Bank was established in Bengal, and incorporated by charter on the 2d of January, 1809. The capital 
stock amounts to 50,000 rupees, and is divided into 500 shares of 10,000 rupees eachof which shares 100 
belong to Government, and 400 to individuals. All persons in the service of the Company, and the 
Judges in the several Courts, as well as others, may hold shares in the Bank, The affairs are managed by 
nine directors, of whom three are nominated by the Government, and six by the Proprietors. The Bank 
is prohibited from engaging in trade, or any kind of agency, and the business is confined as far as possible, 
to discounting negotiable private securities, keeping cash accounts, receiving deposits, and circulating cash 
notes; and they are at liberty to receive in deposit, and for safe custody, bullion, treasure, jewels, plate > 
and other articles of value, not liable to spoil or waste, on such terms as they may deem reasonable. 



CALCUTTA, 


in 


RATES OF COMMISSION, AGENCY, See. 


The following are tlie general rates of agency, commission, and godown rent, agreed upon at 
meeting of merchants and agents of Calcutta, held on the 9th of October, 1809. 


COMMISSION. 

I. On all sales, purchases, or shipments, except as follow 

Bullion, which shall be liable to a commission ofU^x —\ per cent. 

Diamonds, and other precious stones, ditto -——™—xx 2 ditto. 

Indigo, piece-goods, silk, opium, cochineal, spices, coral, 
jewellery, copper, ships, vessels, houses or lands, where 
no advance on them has been made 2j ditto. 

Goods consigned, and afterwards withdrawn, or sent to outcry, if 
no advance on them has been made, only half commission. 

II. On giving orders for the provision of goods —x-—x- - -xxxxxxxxxxvxxxx 

III. On guaranteeing bills, bonds, or other engagements x--— 

IV. On the management of estates for others x--------— 

V. On procuring freight 

VI. On making insurances, or writing orders for insurance -x — x^x — ——* 

VII. On settling losses, partial or general-xx---™x--— 

VIII. On effecting remittances, or purchasing, selling, or negotiating bills of exchange 

IX. On the recovery of money by law or arbitration ------x-- 

X. On collecting house-rent----—__________x 

XI. On attending the delivery of contract goods____—xxxxxxxx 