Helen —--- 

360 

Chittagong — 

Johannes Sarkies and Co. 

Hunter vvvVvivvvi.vvtAvxvwv'vV'vv 

300 

J a V a xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 

Campbells and Plook. 

John ]Paimer mvwxwwvwwwv 

860 

C alcutta-x-xx—__- 

Hugh Atkins Reid. 

J essy—-- x-xx— 

380 

P GgUxx xxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx 

Matthew Smith. 

Lady Barlowxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 

AKA 

Pe gUxXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 

Allan MPA skill. 

Matilda w^.w^wv^^w^%vwvw 

TCt-H/ 

ftnn 

C alcuttaxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 

Hoo-iip Davidson, and Co 

Mornington —- —xxxxxx 

ouu 

800 

C alcutta— xxxxxxxxxxx 

Fairlie, Fergusson, and Co. 

Marchioness Wellesley xx— 

530 

C alcuttaxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 

David Hunter. 

Mentor---— 

500 

P egUxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 

Fairlie, Fergusson, and Co. 

Marian-x-- 

350 

C alcu ttaxxxxxxxxxx_ 

Alexander and Co. 

Providence wwvk'vwkwiA.-vwn 

1 620 

C alcuttaxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 

Hugh Atkins Reid. 

Portsea xxxxxx —-x— x—xx 

320 

C alcuttaxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 

Hogue, Davidson, and Co. 

Resource 

ADO 

C alcuttaxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 

Fairlie Feroiisson and Co 

Sir William Burroughs^— 

TVU 

600 

Calcutta-— xxxxx 

jl . x Vrfi. q uoauii^ auu. Vju* 

Shaik Gullum Plossain. 

Trowbridge- xx-xxxxx— 

800 

Calcuttaxxxx-- 

Fairlie, Fergusson, and Co. 

V enus —xx—xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx—x ".-v, 

[ 350 

Chittagong —x—— 

Palmer and Co. 


exclusive of numerous vessels under 300 tons each, forming in the whole 77 vessels^ of 16327 tons.; of 
which several have proceeded to Europe. 



174 


CALCUTTA 


Bengal was formerly under the necessity of prosecuting her maritime trade on ships built in foreign 
ports. Before these provinces fell under the dominion of Great Britain, the natives never attempted 
marine expeditions; and prior to 17SO, no effort was made by Europeans to construct ships in Bengal for 
the purpose of commerce. Two small snows, the Minerva and Amazon, were indeed built at Calcutta 
for the Company previous to this period; but it does not appear that this example operated as an incentive 
to others. The country trade of Bengal was then supplied with shipping from the ports of Surat, Bombay. 
Dumaim, Pegu, and by occasional purchases of Foreign Europe ships; and if any considerable repairs 
were wanted, the ships were obliged to proceed to those ports to have them effected. The late Colonel 
Watson was the first person who ever built a ship offeree or burthen in the River Hughley. In the year 
1781 he launched the Nonsuch, of about 500 tons burthen, capable of mounting 82 guns, and constructed 
both for war and commerce. This ship is now in existence, and is a proof not only of good workman¬ 
ship, but of the durability of her materials, as she is still reckoned in the first class of country ships, 
and occasionally employed as a cruizer for the protection of trade, by the Bengal Government. 

A very calamitous event gave rise to ship-building in Bengal—the famine produced in the Carnatic 
by Hyder Ally's invasion in 1780. The extraordinary and pressing demand thereby created for tonnage, 
for the transportation of grain, and supplies of troops and stores to the British settlements on the Coast of 
Coromandel, raised the price of freight to such an enormous height, as roused the attention of almost every 
person in the remotest degree connected with commerce, to share in this profitable traffic. Ships not being 
procurable from other quarters in any proportion to the demand, individuals then began to turn their 
attention to the construction of ships in Bengal; arid this noble and useful art has been ever since pursued 
with so much vigour, that instead of depending on other countries, as formerly, for the means of conveying 
her produce to foreign ports, Bengal now supplies not only shipping lor her own commerce, but for 
sale to foreigners; and ship-building has become a very considerable branch of home manufactures. 