

There remained in the Company’s warehouses unsold, at the end of 1 SOS-9™™ 1,004,291 

There was lost by capture or shipwreck during the same period---- —335,893 

The above amount includes .the consignments to Bencoolen and Pulo Pinang.™ 458,307 

-- . 10,702,559 


Balance to be accounted foi% 


£2, 131,931 




182 


CALCUTTA. 


There is great difficulty in making up a correct statement, from the impracticability of ascertaining 
with precision the final disposal of military and marine stores, which have formed a very material part of 
the exports of the East India Company to India. On the arrival of the consignments from England, the 
cargoes of the ships are distributed to the departments to which they respectively belong; the goods for 
pse and sale to the commercial, and the stores to the military or marine departments. An account of the 
sums received at the different Presidencies for sales of import goods and stores has been annually presented 
to Parliament. In this account is comprised with the sales, the expenditure of the stores, in so far as the 
amount of such expenditure has been included in the charges at the several Presidencies. A portion of the 
stores, consisting of guns for the garrison, and arms and accoutrements, fails into the dead stock, and a 
portion falls into the quick stock; but from being blended with the stores purchased in the country, and not 
distinguished in the accounts, it is not practicable to make the separation which is desirable, otherwise 
than by some general estimate. With respect to stores expended upon service, great allowance should be 
made for the deficiency of accurate statements, when the political state of India, and the extensive warfare 
within the period in contemplation are considered. 

It appears that the value of stores at the different Presidencies, commonly called quick stock, was 
increased, since the year 1792-3 to 1808-9, X’951,519; what proportion of these stores is European, cannot 
be ascertained; assuming two-thirds to be of this description, gives ^634,346 accordingly. The short 
deliveries, and damages, which are chargeable to the owners of the ships on which the consignments are 
made, are deducted from the freight on settling the ships'* accounts in England, subject to an additional 
charge of* 30 per cent, on the invoice amount, agreeably to the terms of the charter parties. This may be 
estimated at 5 per cent, which, on the amount of goods shipped, is £ 041,725; these two sums deducted 
from the above balance, leaves i?885,800 still unaccounted for. Of this a considerable part would certainly 
be found in the dead stock, and some in the consignments made to Bencoolen and Prince of Wales's Island; 
and a large allowance should be made for damage and waste of the large stock of goods on hand : but the 
remainder must be left to conjecture, and is supposed to have been expended on service without being 
distinctly accounted for, or consigned from one Presidency to another, and not included in the amount sold. 