

6. To invest the interest accruing on paper deposited, on receiving instructions to that effect. 

7. To indorse over notes deposited, as attorney for the owner, on receiving authority from him so to 
do, to such person as he may direct; or to sell the same, and pay over the amount, provided that the whole of 



CALCUTTA 


19$ 

each note be payable in one sum and to one person. The proceeds of paper so sold, cannot, however, be 
reinvested; and the fees due under these regulations, will be deducted before the amount is paid. 

8. In the event of Government granting a remittance of the principal, to remit the same by bills on 
the Court of Directors, on receiving instructions from the proprietor of the paper to that effect. 

Any person depositing Government securities under the above regulations, shall at all times be at 
liberty to withdraw the same, on payment of such fees as may be due. 

In all cases where the public officers above mentioned may be authorized to invest money in Govern¬ 
ment securities, they will invest as nearly as possible the whole amount, but are in no cases to exceed it. 
Such fractional sums as may remain above the amount invested, will be payable on demand at the treasury, 
to the order of the proprietor. 

The responsibility of the Company is strictly confined to the cases above specified, and to transactions con¬ 
ducted according to the prescribed forms which are kept at the different Presidencies, and at the India House. 

The following are the established rates of commission to be paid to the Accountant-General and Sub- 
Treasurer, on the several transactions above specified, viz. 

I. On the receipt, remittance, or investment, J per cent, on the whole transaction. No commission, 
however, is chargeable on remittance to England of the interest on the notes of any loan prior to the 31st 
of December, 1810. 

II. On the remittance of the principal, (should that hereafter be granted), four annas per mill. 

III. On receiving any sum under 10,000 rupees in deposit, a fee of five rupees; if above, ten rupees. 

IV. On transferring securities to a new loan, on receiving payment of the same, and then subscribing 
the amount to a new loan, one rupee per mill. 

V. On receiving remittances by bills, and subscribing the amount to a loan, £ per cent. 

VI. On receiving the same, and investing it in Government securities by purchase, { per cent. 

VII. On the sale of notes, and payment of the amount to order, f per cent. 

VIII. On indorsing notes for any sum under 10,000 rupees, when the sale is not effected by the 
Accountant-General and Sub-Treasurer, a fee of five rupees; if above 10,000 rupees, ten rupees. 

The above fees or commissions are to be deducted from the first interest which may be received after 
such fees or commission shall have become due; and in the event of such deduction being then omitted, 
it cannot afterwards be made. 

Government reserves to itself the liberty of withdrawing the authority granted by the above 
regulations to the Accountant-General and Sub-Treasurer, on giving two years’* notice to that effect; in 
which case, how r ever, any Government securities which may have been deposited, shall be kept in safe 
custody at the treasury, until claimed by the proprietor. 