

Treasury Fees. —A fee of one rupee is paid on the renewal of all Government promissory notes, 
when such renewal becomes necessary, in consequence of there being no longer room to execute receipts 
for interest. On the renewal of promissory notes at the application of the proprietor, under any other 
circumstances than those stated in the foregoing clause— 

Note not exceeding 1,000 rupees 1 rupee Note not exceeding 4,000 rupees4 rupees 

Ditto--2,000 ditto-—— 2 ditto Ditto exceeding^— 5,000 ditto-— 5 ditto 

Ditto __.___8,000 ditto -- 3 ditto 

On the subdivision of any of the public securities, a fee of five rupees is levied on each note taken out 

by the party applying for the subdivision. 

No fee whatever is levied on the consolidation of such securities. 

For each bill of exchange drawn on a provincial treasury, a fee is levied in proportion to the 
amount, according to the same rates as are established above, for the assessment of fees on renewal of 
promissory notes. 

Regulations authorizing the Officers of Government to officiate as Agents in the Management of the 

Gover?i?7ient Securities . 

By a proclamation of Government, dated December 31, 1810, the Accountant-General and Sub- 
Treasurer are authorized to act, under the responsibility of the Company, as agents of the public creditors 
of Government, for the purposes hereinafter specified, viz. 

1. To receive charge of, and grant receipt for, any loan obligation, on application from the proprietor. 

2. To receive the interest as it becomes due on such obligations, and, according to the instructions 
of the proprietor, either to remit the amount to England, in bills on the Court of Directors, (if the interest 
shall be payable in such bills), to remit it by drafts on the Treasurers of Fort St. George or Bombay, on the 
collectors at any of the stations subordinate to this Presidency, or on the resident at Delhi or Lucknow,, 
according to the current rates of exchange; or to pay the same in cash at the Presidency fo any person 
whom the proprietor may appoint. Persons having more than one note in deposit, may give separate 
instructions regarding the interest on each note; but. the whole of the interest on each note must be 
received in the same manner, and at the same time. When the proprietor may wish to make any change 
in his instructions, he is required to notify the same one month before the interest falls due. 

3. In the event of the principal becoming payable, to receive the same, and, according to instructions 
of the proprietor, to pay the amount to such person as he may appoint, or to reinvest the same in any other 
loan which may be open, or in the purchase of other Government securities at the market price.* 

4. To subscribe the notes deposited to any loans into which it may be receivable* on the proprietor’s 
instructing them to that effect, even though such notes may not be in a course of payment. 

5. To receive remittances of any sums, not less than 1,000 rupees, in Government bills payable at the 
treasury, and to invest the amount in other securities, according to the instructions of the proprietor. 