

Notes of this loan, for any sum not less than 10,000 rupees, may be deposited, on application, in the 
hands of the Sub-Treasurer at either of the three Presidencies; and the interest accruing on the same, 
will be remitted by bills on the Court of Directors, agreeably to the instructions of the persons making 
the deposit. 

First Six perCent. Loan. —Opened the 31st of August, 1810, and closed the 31st ofDecember following; 
notes issued bearing date January 1st, 1811. Interest at the rate of 6 per cent, per annum, payable on the 1st 
of January and 1st of July. The other conditions of the loan correspond with those of the foregoing, except 
that the interest may be received in bills on the Court of Directors, if it amount only to £4.5 sterling. 
The Government are not at liberty to pay off the principal without a previous notice of sixty days, to be 
given by advertisement; and notes to a smaller amount than 12,000 rupees, cannot be deposited in the hands 
of the Sub-Treasurer. 

Subscriptions were received at par, in the 8 per cent, obligations of the Bengal Government; the certi¬ 
ficates of the preceding 8 per cent, loan, and the 6 per cent, treasury notes of this Government, provided 
such securities had not been advertised for payment; also in the 8 per cent, obligations of the other Pre¬ 
sidencies, at those Presidencies respectively, according to the rates of exchange already mentioned ; and at 
Bombay only in cash, at par, or at the rate of 108 Bombay rupees for 100 Sicca rupees. 

Second Six .per Cent. Loan. —Opened on the 31st of December, 1810, and continued open; notes 
issued, bearing date June 30th, 1811. Interest payable on the 30th of June, and 31st ofDecember. The 
conditions of this loan differ from those of the preceding only in the bills for interest on the Court 
of Directors being payable twelve months after date ; in the certificates issued from the treasury, bearing 
8 per cent, interest, until the 30th of June; and in the notes not being received by the Sub-Treasurer, in 
deposit, except under certain regulations, hereafter detailed in Section VI. 

All 8 per cent Government securities, and also the certificates of the first 6 per cent loan, are received 
in subscription to this loan, on the same terms as to the loan preceding; but no such securities will be 
received in subscription after the 30th of April. Subscriptions are also received at Fort William and Fort 
St. George, in cash, or Bengal treasury notes, at a premium of 2 per cent, and at Bombay in cash, at par. 

Treasury Notes.— Treasury notes, bearing interest at the rate of 4* per cent, per annum, and payable 
in twelve months, or sooner, at the option of Government, have been issued since August 31st, 1810. 



CALCUTTA. 


189 


Government Bills op Exchange. —Since the 26th of December, 1S10* all accepted bills of exchange 
drawn on the Governor-General in Council, are discounted on application at the treasury, at the rate of 
4 per cent per annum. 

Sinking Fund. —The operations of this fund are suspended so long as the Government securities 
continue to bear a premium. At other times the sinking fund committee meet at the Accountant-General's 
office every Monday and Thursday, and receive sealed tenders for the sale of such securities. A sum of 
200,000 rupees was formerly appropriated to the purposes of this fund monthly. 