



200 


CALCUTTA, 


change to be in the individuals who exercised it* The constitution and character which this Indian army 
has acquired, have been the subject of just admiration. These have been owing essentially to the happy 
mixture of bravery and generosity, of firmness and kindness, exercised towards the Sepoys by their Euro*, 
pean officers. The superior lights and energy of the European character have directed the powers, and 
conciliated the prejudices of the native troops; but it was because the officers knew the people and their 
prejudices well. These officers had been trained up among them from an early age; the nature, the 
usages, and the language of the natives, were become familiar to them; and the natives, remarkably the 
creatures of habit, in return, from being accustomed, became attached to them. Without such knowledge, 
however, on the part of the officers, they might every day have revolted the minds of so peculiar a race, 
and have alienated them from our service and Government. 

cc An Indian military education from an early age is essential to the formation of a good Sepoy officer, 
and gradual rise in the service by seniority is no less indispensable. In this way, the Indian army has been 
constituted and rendered eminently efficient; and all measures tending to change or weaken the constituent 
parts of this fabric, are to be deprecated. When, excepting a few regiments of Euporean artillery and 
infantry, the whole military force of British India was composed of Sepoy corps, the officers of that army, 
of course, possessed entire the emoluments and advantages which the service afforded. The introduction 
of European troops from His Majesty’s army into India altex'ed this state of things. Young officers of no 
Indian experience, who had obtained their commissions by purchase, took rank of men of long and tried 
service; the King's officers were thought to come in, also, for too large a share of employments and 
advantages. To redress the complaints which the Company’s officers made of supercessions and partialities, 
and to give them a better share of the benefits of the service, was the leading object of Lord Cornwallis’s 
Military Plan of 1794, and with him a principal motive for proposing to transfer the Indian army to the 
King, no other practicable means having then occurred to him. But the object was in substance attained 
by the Military Regulations of 1796, passed in concert with Ilis Majesty’s Government, without that 
tranfer, of which his Lordship did not revive the idea on his last return to India, those regulations having 
given increased rank and retiring pay to the officers of the Company’s army. The causes of complaint, 
however, did not entirely cease. To avoid the collision of authorities, the Company had adopted the usage 
of appointing the Commander-In-Chief of the King's troops, also their Commander-in-Chief; and one 
consequence of this has been, that the Company’s officers, resident from early youth in India, possessing 
little influence in England, unknown to officers of high rank in His Majesty’s service, have thought them¬ 
selves treated with less favour and distinction than younger officers of that service recently arrived, but 
better patronized. There have been instances of this sort, which the Court, with the sanction of your 
Board, have interposed to repress; but as long as the British force in India is made up of two armies, so 
differently constituted, with so large a portion of King’s officers, the whole commanded by Generals of 
His Majesty’s service, there will, probably, be real or apprehended ground for the like complaints. They 
do not arise because one army has the honour to belong to His Majesty, and the other serves the Company, 
but because the constitution of the two armies is radically different, and must continue so, whether the 
armies are under one head or two. The Indian army cannot be maintained without officers attached to it 
from an early age, and rising by seniority. Frequent changes of King’s regiments serving in India, and 
the consequent frequent arrival of young men, promoted in them by purchase, cannot be avoided: the 
former class will be, comparatively unknown to the King’s commanders; the latter will have among them 
the connections of those commanders, or of men of influence in England. It is not difficult to see, there¬ 
fore, to which side the exercise of military patronage will lean; and to prevent causes of complaint, and 
to keep the balance even, must be an important object in the Government of India. It does not seem the 
way to effect this, to put the Indian army wholly in the power of the Commander-In-Chief. It is of the 