

The following are extracts from the laws relative to mutiny, desertion, &c. in the Company’s service.—* 
Officers or soldiers in the Company’s service, and receiving their pay at their settlements in India or at 
St. Helena, who shall mutiny, desert, or inlist in another regiment, be found sleeping on duty, desert 
their post, correspond with the enemy, or strike their superior officer, or disobey him, to suffer death, or 
such other punishment as a court martial shall inflict. 27 Geo. II. cap. 9, sect. 1. 

In addition to mutiny, desertion, and other crimes stated in Section 1, courts martial may inflict 
corporal punishment for immoralities, misbehaviour, or neglect of duty. No officer or soldier liable to be 
•tried a second time by the same or another court martial for the same offence; and no sentence, after 
being signed by the President of the court martial, liable to be revised more than once. Sect. 4 to 7. 

No general court martial in any of the Company's settlements in India to consist of less than nine 
commissioned officers. The President not to be the Commander-in-Chief, nor the Governor ofthe garrison 
where the offence shall be tried, neither to be under the degree of a Captain. In the island of St. Helena, 
the number not to be less than five commissioned officers, with the same exceptions respecting the Presi¬ 
dent, who is not to be under the degree of a Lieutenant. Such courts martial to have authority to admi¬ 
nister oaths, and to proceed as His Majesty may, from time to time, order and direct. Sentence of death 
not to be passed unless two-thirds of the officers present concur therein. Trials and proceedings only to 
take place between the hours of eight in the morning and three in the afternoon, except where immediate 
example is necessary. Sect. 5.—Judge Advocate to transmit original proceedings of courts martial to the 
Commander-in-Chief of His Majesty’s forces, if the court be appointed by him, or to the Governors, &c. 
in India or St. Helena, if the court be appointed by them. Sect. 6. 



CALCUTTA. 


20 : 


CIVIL SERVICE. 

The civil servants of the Company are denominated writers, factors, junior merchants, and senio) 
merchants. The nature, magnitude, and importance of the service are thus stated by the Marquis Wellesley 
in his Minute in Council at Fort William, dated August IS, 1800. 

“ To dispense justice to millions of people of various languages, manners, usages, and religions—tc 
administer a vast and complicated system of revenue throughout districts equal in extent to some of tin 
most considerable kingdoms in Europe—to maintain civil order in one of the most populous and litigious 
regions in the world—these are the duties of the larger proportion of the civil servants of the Company 
The senior merchants, composing the five courts of circuit and appeal under the Presidency of Bengal, 
exercise in each of those courts a jurisdiction of greater local extent, applicable to a larger population 
and occupied in the determination of causes infinitely more intricate and numerous than that of any o: 
the regularly constituted courts of justice in any part of Europe. The senior or junior merchants em¬ 
ployed in the several magistracies and zillah courts, the writers or factors filling the stations of registrar* 
and assistants to the several courts and magistrates, exercise, in different degrees, functions of a nature 
either purely judicial, or intimately connected with the administration of the police, and with the maim 
tenance of the peace and good order of them respective districts. The pleadings in the several courts, and 
all important judicial transactions, are conducted in the native languages. The law which the Company’s 
judges are bound to administer throughout the country, is not the law of England, but that law to which 
the natives had long been accustomed under their former Sovereigns, tempered and mitigated by the volu¬ 
minous regulations of the Governors-General in Couneil, as well as by the general spirit of the British 
Constitution. These observations are sufficient to prove that no more arduous or complicated duties of 
magistracy exist in the world; no qualifications more various or comprehensive, can be imagined than those 
which are required from every British subject who enters the seat of judgment within the limits of the 
Company’s empire in India. 