

The alteration which took place in the formation and system of the Company’s army in 1796, is de¬ 
tailed at length at Bombay. So material a change could not be effected but with considerable expence. This*, 
with the circumstance of the whdle period having been one continual scene of war, or preparation, for it,.. 



198 


CALCUTTA. 


either European or Indian, in some instances, as the necessary means of defence, led to the raising of new regi¬ 
ments; and in others levies were required to supply the place of troops employed on expeditions against the 
enemy's possessions. The combined effect of the whole produced an addition of the King's regiments, and 
an increase in the establishment of the Company's army to the extent already stated Ceylon, Malacca, and 
the eastward islands were conquered; an expedition was prepared upon a large scale to proceed against 
Manilla, but was ultimately abandoned; the expedition to Egypt, and the capture of the French and 
Dutch settlements upon the Peninsula, occasioned large expenees; but the most material addition upon the 
Continent of India, was occasioned by the concert which'existed between the French, Zemaun Shall, and 
Tippoo Sultaun, from whence arose the apprehension of invasion by Zemaun Shah on the N. W. frontier 
of Bengal, and the war with Tippoo, which ended in 1799. The necessary consequence of these circum¬ 
stances was an increase of the armies of Bengal and Madras, and an enhancement of the military charges 
of all the Presidencies, by the addition of field-allowances and expenees. 

The following is an account of the sums which have been paid by the Government to the East India 
Company, in part of their claims, for advances and supplies made at the several Presidencies in India for 
the expeditions fitted out by them against the enemy's possessions in India, the eastern islands, &c» 
including .interest. 

Intended expedition against the Mauritius, in 1794w^_ —«£225,701 

Expenees incurred at the capture of the Cape of Good Hope 63,993 

Intended expedition against Manilla—^—----- 528,437 

Vessels, stores, &c. supplied His Majesty's ships in India 267,036 

Expenees incurred on account of Danish captures in 1801-2 —^36,569 
Expedition to Eigypt 2, i 68,o5 K 

Charges incurred by the capture of Ceylon, &c. admitted in fulL^^— w - 1,4-66,074 

Ceylon charges, only half of which was allowed--^—— — 1,205,656 

Capture of the Eastern Islands, half of the expenees allowed-- 1,321,859 

Expenees incurred in sending men and supplies to Trinidad 28,690 

Expenees in India of prisoners taken at sea, estimated at ■vw>»\\vv>v\v.v\vw\vv» 300,000 

<£8,212,372 


The Company consider they have still claims upon the Government on the account of expeditions, &c. 
to a very considerable amount, exclusive of the extra expenees incurred in the military department by the 
augmentation of the King's troops sent to India, which the change in the political situation of India by the 
late war there, and the possibility of new commotions have required, and which the contingency even of a 
land invasion of India may render necessary upon a large scale. The Company have incurred a very heavy 
charge on account of these troops, and they consider they have an equitable claim on Government, not 
only for the new and excessive expence to which they have been subjected, but for the whole number of the 
King's troops exceeding the parliamentary limit, which have been sent out since the commencement of the 
foreign expeditions from India, which began in 1797; and all the subsequent military operations in which 
those troops assisted, have either immediately served national purposes against the French, as in the war 
of Mysore, or have been carried on under the controul of His Majesty's Government. The confidence of 
the Company in the liberality of Government, and their promptitude to embark in the public service, 
without exact stipulations for the repayment of their disbursements, doubtless entitle them to the set¬ 
tlement of their claim upon Government for the various expenditures made on account of the 
public in the East Indies. Under this head, the Company have made out an account, shewing 