

“ To the administration of the revenue many of the preceding observations will apply with equal force, 
The merchants, factors, and writers, employed in this department, also are bound by law to abjure the 
mercantile denomination appropriated to their respectlve classes ln the Company’s service. In addition 
to the ordinary judicial and executive functions of the judges, magistrates, and collectors, the judges and 
magistrates occasionally act in the capacity of Governors of their respective districts, employing the mili¬ 
tary, and exercising other extensive powers. The judges, magistrates, and collectors are also respectively 
required by law to propose, from time to time, to the Governors-General in Council such amendments of the 
existing laws, or such new laws as may appear to them to be necessary to the welfare and good govern¬ 
ment of their respective districts. In this view the civil servants employed in the departments of judica^ 
ture and revenue, constitute a species of subordinate legislative council to the Governor-General in Council, 
and also a channel of communication, by which the Government ought to be enabled, at all times, to ascer¬ 
tain the wants and wishes of the people. The remarks applied to these two main branches of the civil 
service, namely, those of judicature and revenue, are at least equally forcible in their application to those 
branches which may be described under the general terms of the political and financial department, 
comprehending the offices of Chief Secretary, the various stations in the Secretary’s office, in the Treasury, 
and in the office of Accountant-General, together with all the public officers employed in conducting the 
current business at the seat of government. To these must he added the diplomatic branch, including the 
several residencies at the courts of our dependant and tributary Princes, or of other native powers of 
India. 

“ The civil servants of the East India Company are not only the agents of a commercial concern, but 

D d 2 ■ 



204 


CALCUTTA. 


the ministers and officers of a powerful Sovereign, They are required to discharge the functions of 
magistrates, judges, ambassadors, and governors of provinces, in all the complicated and extensive rela¬ 
tions of those, sacred trusts and exalted stations, and under peculiar circumstances,, which greatly enhance 
the solemnity of every public obligation, and aggravate the difficulty of every public charge. Their 
duties are those of statesmen in every other part of the world, with no other characteristic differences 
than the obstacles opposed by an unfavourable climate, a foreign language, the peculiar usages and laws 
of India, and the manners of the inhabitants.” 

The following is a comparative abstract of the civil establishments at the three Presidencies in India 
in 1808. It is impossible to state the number of Europeans and Natives employed at Madras, as the ac¬ 
counts received from that Presidency do not afford the means of so doing. 