

There are many other vegetable substances used by the natives for cordage, &e. such as murgha, 
kantala, merty-paut, coir, and gumatty; but the principal, and those by far in the greater use, are sunn 
and paut: these are cultivated at Comercolly, Chittagong, Jungypore, &c. 

At Comercolly there are two species of sunn ; the best is called phool, the other boggy: the former 
grows about four feet high, and produces the strongest, whitest, and most durable kind of sunn ; the other 
grows about seven feet high, but its produce is darker coloured, and not so strong as the pliool-sunn. 

In Chittagong very little hemp is raised; except for the purpose of preparing bang. 

In Jungypore there are four species of plants cultivated, which produce different kinds of raw materials, 
fit for cordage and other uses. The first is called by the natives ghore-sunn, and approaches very near to 
the hemp-plant. The article next in quality to the ghore-sunn is the paut; but as it does not grow to the 
height of above four feet, and shoots out many lateral branches, which render the fibres very difficult to be 
separated from the wooddy parts, it is not a profitable article to the landholder: it is in general found near 
the houses of the inhabitants, the leaves and tender shoots being used as an article of food. The third 
plant producing a species of hemp, is called by the natives cooch-murden-paut. The fourth description of 
plant, is called amleeah-paut, and this is in the most general use throughout the country for coarse cordage, 
and other purposes which do not require the fine twine produced from the gborewsimn. 

• The cultivation of this important plant in our colonies has not only at all times met with encourage¬ 
ment from the Government, but also of late years from the East India Company in Bengal, where 
extensive experiments have been made in the culture of hemp and flax on their account; and it is 
probable that in the course of a few years, hemp from India, under the fostering care of the Company, 
will become a new branch of trade, in a similar manner as raw silk and indigo have already. 

Many laws have been made, and bounties given, to encourage the growth of hemp and flax in the 
British plantations in America, and at home; all of which have had but little effect, more particularly at 
home, where the quantity of hemp raised, is stated not to exceed 300 tons per annum; the land-owners 
and farmers being prejudiced against the raising it, from the notion that it impoverishes the soiL 



HEMP. 


The following statement of the quantities of hemp and flax imported into Great Britain in 
the years 17S6 to 1803 inclusive, will shew the immense national advantages which would be derived 
from growing our own hemp and flax, or by a proper encouragement in the culture of it in the East 
Indies, so as to render us independent of those nations on whom the country at present depend for a 
regular supply. 


Years. 

1786 ... 

1787 ... 

1788 ... 

1789 ... 