

The salaries of all the Writers on this establishment are to be regulated by this rule from the 1st of 
May next. 

Published by order of the Governor-General in Council , April 13, 1795. 

The following is an extract from a general letter from the Court of Directors, dated July 3, 1795. 

cc The following is the rule to be observed in the several cases stated in the paragraphs, for such persons 
as may be appointed Writers by us in any season, who are at the time of such appointment residing in 
India. Their period of actual service in India is to commence from the time of arrival at the Presidency, 
to which he may be nominated, of the first Writer from Europe, of the same season; and with respect 
to the Writers appointed in Europe, their period of actual service in India is to commence from the time 
of their arrival at the Presidency, at which they are to serve.” 

The following is an extract from the resolutions of the Governor-General in Council, May 5, 1809. 

“ The Governor-General in Council, adverting to the resolutions of Government of the 13th of April, 
1795, which determined that the allowance to be drawn by the Junior Servants during the first two years of 
their residence in India, shall be fixed at. 300 Sicca rupees per month, observes that, under this resolution, 
the students who remain in College during that time, are placed oyi a superior footing to those who, by 
their merit and exertions,, have qualified themselves to enter upon the public service at an earlier pexiod, 
since the former receive not only the same salary of 300 rupees per month, but are accommodated with 
apartments in the buildings, or draw an allowance of 80 rupees per month for house-rent. 

“ The Governor-General in Council, being of opinion that it would be both unjust and inexpedient 
that the Junior Servants should suffer any disadvantage in point of income, from circumstances which are 
highly creditable to them, it is judged proper that the resolutions of the 13th of April, 1795, he rescinded; and 
that the Junior Servants of the Company, on leaving College, be permitted to draw the allowances of the 
office to which they may be appointed, provided that, during the three first years of their local residence, 
those allowances do not exceed the sum of 400 rupees per month, to which, they are restricted by Act 
of Parliament.” 

Travelling Charges. —The following document is extracted from the Calcutta Gazette of the 2Stli 
of August, 17S8: 

“ As difficulties and delays have unavoidably occurred in auditing bills for travelling charges by the 
present table of rates, which comprehends only a certain number of stations, and appears to be other¬ 
wise imperfect, the Governor-General in Council has been pleased to resolve and order— 

“ I. That the present table of rates shall be done away, from the end of this month. 

“ II. That two proportionable rates, per mile, for all travelling charges, whether by land or water, 
shall be established in its stead, the one applicable to all residents, collectors, agents, judges of adawluts, 
and commissioners; the other to all assistants, registrars of adawluts, and surgeons. 