

To officers above the rank of Assistants, who may be deputed to officiate as Residents or Agents, in 
cases where any addition to the salaries of their own offices may be judged necessary, 500 Sicca Rupees 
per month. 

u To assistants officiating at other stations for residents, or agents, or superintendent of the salt cho¬ 
kies, 12 Sicca rupees per day. 

“ To assistants deputed to other stations to officiate as assistants, 6 Sicca rupees per day. 

“ In the preceding cases, travelling charges at the established rates will be allowed to the party, to 
and from the station to which he may be deputed. 

C£ To assistants deputed to the subordinate aurungs dependent on their own factory, 12 Sicca rupees 
per day, to include all travelling expences/' 



ANNOTTA—ARROW ROOT—BORAX, 


207 


List of Articles procurable at Bengal , with Directions how to ckuse them • 

ANNOTTA 

Is a dry hard paste, prepared from the seeds of a plant common in the East and West Indies; the 
best is from the latter part, and is a dry hard compact substance, brownish on the outside, and of a beau¬ 
tiful red colour within. It is generally imported in lumps wrapped up in leaves. It has occasionally been 
brought from Bengal, the best specimens of which have been nearly equal to the West India kind. In 
1795 a quantity averaged 3s. per lb. the best sold for 6s. 6d. Spanish annotta usually fetches from 6s. to 
7s. per lb. The following are the only quantities imported and sold in the years 1804 to 1808 inclusive. 
In March sale, 1804, 1571bs* sold for £ 9. September sale 1805, 5541bs. sold for £65. 

The permanent duty on annotta is 25s. per cwt. and the temporary or war duty 8s. 4d. per cwt. 

ARROW ROOT 

Is prepared from a root resembling the galangal, common in the East and West Indies. It is ob¬ 
tained by the following process:—the roots, when a year old, are dug up, washed in water, and beaten in 
deep wooden mortars to a pulp ; it is then put into a tub of clean water, well washed, and the fibrous 
part thrown away. The milky liquor, being passed through a sieve or coarse cloth, is suffered to settle, 
and the clear water is drawn off; at the bottom of the vessel is a white mass, which is again mixed with 
clean water, and drained; lastly, the mass is dried in the sun, and is pure starch. It has occasionally been 
imported from Bengal; but the prices it has fetched at the Company’s sales, have not been such as to encou¬ 
rage a perseverance in the importation of it. 


BORAX 

Is dug up in a crytallized state from the bottom of certain lakes in Thibet, and is of two sorts, viz. 

Rough Borax, or Tincal, is in a very impure condition, consisting partly of six sided crystals, but 
chiefly of smaller irregular ones, of a white or green colour, joined together in one lump by a fetid, greasy 
substance, mixed with sand, stones, and other impurities. Tincal should be chosen in the cleanest and 
brightest solid pieces, resembling white sugar candy, greasy to the touch, and of a strong rank smell. 