

“ III. That two Sicca rupees and two annas per mile shall be allowed to the former, and one rupee 
one anna to the latter.” 



206 


CALCUTTA. 


Deputation Allowance. —Deputation allowance is granted at the rate of twelve Sicca rupees per 
diem to a registrar, assistant, &c. when deputed to act at a distance from their own station, to any capa¬ 
city. A certificate must be furnished of the date on which they took charge, as allowance is not to commence 
till that period; and also a certificate on their delivering over charge (the allowance ceasing on that day), 
which must be furnished to the civil auditor, accompanied by the first and last bills when sent for audit. 

The following resolutions were passed in the Revenue and Judicial Department, April 6, 1810. 

“ The rule established by which persons in the junior branch of the service are permitted to draw an 
extra allowance of twelve rupees per day, when employed on deputation, appears to Government to require 
revision and modification. The following scale lias been accordingly adopted for the payment of extra 
allowances to the different classes of officers in the Revenue and Judicial Department: 

Zillah Judges, deputed to officiate as Judges of Appeal and Circiut^^^JjOO Rupees per month. 

Collectors, deputed to officiate as Zillah Judges and Magistrates ~—^>^500 ditto. 

Registrars, deputed to officiate as Zillah Judges and Magistrates, inclu¬ 
ding compensation for commission on suits, fees, —^^500 ditto. 

Registrars, deputed to officiate as Collectors, including ditto 12 ditto per day. 

Assistants, deputed to officiate as registrars, exclusive of fees on the de¬ 
cision of suits w—---6 ditto. 

Assistants, whether in the Revenue or Judicial Department, who may be 

deputed to officiate at any other than their fixed stations-**^—6 ditto. 

cc The Vice President in Council at the same time resolves, that whenever registrars, or assistants to 
the magistrates, or collectors, may be employed on actual duty in the interior of any district, they shall 
be permitted to draw the full deputation allowance of 12 rupees per day. 

“ Exclusively of the officers above specified, others are occasionally deputed on temporary duty from 
the Board of Revenue, Board of Commissioners, and other public establishments. In those cases Govern¬ 
ment will decide on the temporary allowances such officers shall draw in consequence of the deputation ” 

« April 24, 1810.—The Vice President in Council, adverting to the resolutions of Government in the 
Judicial Department, under April 6th, 1810, is of opinion, that corresponding rules should be adopted in 
the Commercial Department, for determining the extra allowances to be drawn by the public servants 
while employed on deputation. 

46 Ordered, That the following allowances be granted, to take effect from the 1st of May next, in all 
cases to which this may be applicable. 

“ To servants out of employ, who may be deputed to officiate as commercial residents, or salt and 
opium agents, the sum of 1000 Sicca rupees per month, when they may not be entitled to draw a propor¬ 
tion of the commission. 