

COCHINEAL 

Is an insect which lives upon different species of the opuntia, and is imported in large quantities from 
South America, in the form of little grains of am irregular figure, of a deep reddish purple colour, and 
covered more or less with a whitish down.. They are light, and easily rubbed to powder between the fingers. 
On one side they are roundish and wrinkled; the other is flat. 

The attention of the East India Company has been for many years directed to the production of this 
insect; but hitherto with little success. What has been brought from India has been very small, not very 
abundant in colouring matter, and very inferior to any brought from New Spain. It is used only in 
dying coarse goods; and what has been imported, has sold from 3s. to-5s. per lb.; the price of the best 
Spanish cochineal varying from 28s. to 40s. per lb. 

Cochineal is an article in general demand at Bombay, and occasionally at China: for the former 
market the large black grain is preferred, as free from the grey or silvery appearance as possible. In pur¬ 
chasing this commodity, care should be taken that the dark colour has not been occasioned by art: this 
may he discovered by its smell, which is unpleasant, whereas genuine cochineal is quite free from smell. 



GHEE—GINGER-HEMP, 


209 


From papers laid before the House of Commons, it appears that the average' quantity consumed in 
Great Britain, from 1776 to 1800, was 171,169 lbs. per annum, which was considered to be equal to one 
fourth of the whole quantity imported into Europe from South America. 

The permanent duty on East India cochineal is 6d. per lb. and the temporary or war duty 2d. per lb. 
On cochineal dust the former is Ifd. and the latter fd. per lb. 

GHEE 

Is the butter made from the milk of buffaloes, and clarified; it is an article of very considerable com¬ 
merce in various parts of India, and generally conveyed in duppers, or bottles made of hide, resembling 
vrhat is called a carboy; it will keep sweet a considerable time. The duppers contain from 10 to 40 gal¬ 
lons each. The price varies according to the quality and demand, generally from 6 to 8 seers for a rupee 
in some parts of Bengal. 

GINGER 

Is the root of a reed-like plant growing spontaneously in the East and West Indies, and China; it is in 
knotty, branched, flattish pieces; when freed from the outer bark, of a pale colour, and fibrous texture. It is 
imported in considerable quantities from Bengal, and should be chosen in large roots, new, not easily 
broken, of a light brownish green colour, resinous within, and of a hot, pungent, aromatic taste. That 
which is small, dark coloured, soft, or very fibrous, should be rejected. It is sometimes imported green 
from the East Indies. 

The following are the quantities of ginger imported and sold at the East India Company’s sales, in 
the years 1804 to 1808 inclusive, with the sale amount, and average price per cwt. 


Years. 

| March Sale. 

| September Sale. 

