

The culture and manufacture of indigo have been known and practised in India from time immemorial. 
The ancients were acquainted with this dye, under the name of Indicum; and Europe was for many ages 
supplied by India previous to the discovery of America. Towards the close of the sixteenth century it was 
not known in England what plant’produced indigo. In Hackluyfs Remembrances to Master S. in 1582, 
he was instructed “ to know if the Anile that eoloureth blue, be a natural commodity of those parts (Turkey), 
and if it were-compounded of an herb, to send‘the seed or root, with the order of sowing, &c. that it might 
become a- natural commodity in the- realms, as woad was, that the high price of foreign woad might be 
brought down.” In the early period of the English trade with the East Indies, indigo from Agra formed 
the most extensive and profitable branch of the Company’s imports ; and in 1620 Mr. Munn states the 
importation to be 200,000lbs. which cost Is. 2d. per lb. and sold in England at 5s. per lb. Gerarde, who 
wrote in 1597, is wholly silent about indigo, and so is Johnson, in 1632 ; but Parkinson a who wrote in 1640, 
treats largely of it; he calls it “Indico, or Indian woade,” and gives the form of the leaf; he then describes 



m 


INDIGO. 


It, first, from Francis Ximenes in De Laet's Description of America; and, secondly, from Finch’s Account in 
Purchas’s Pilgrims. Even in 1688 Mr. Ray states, it was not agreed among botanists what plant it was 
from which indigo was made* 

The Company’s trade in indigo was carried on for more than a century with considerable success; but 
it was relinquished to favour the introduction of the commodity from the British West Indies, where 
the cultivation had been taken up, and carried to great perfection both in Barbadoes and Jaraaica: but the 
legislature having laid a tax of 3s. 6d. per lb. on it about 1745, the West Indian planters dropped the 
cultivation of it entirely. It was afterwards cultivated in Carolina with such considerable success, that 
in 1747, 200,000lbs. weight of it was shipped for England, and sold very well. At this period, except what 
was imported from the East Indies, and the small quantities from America, France supplied from her 
West India Islands the greatest part of Europe with it, and England and Ireland were estimated to pay to 
France about £"200,000 annually for this commodity. It was also raised in East Florida of so good a qua¬ 
lity, that some sold as high as Ss. 9d. per lb. The acquisition of India, and the separation of America 
from the mother country, having changed the relative situations which those countries bore to Great 
Britain, led, in a great degree, to the revival of the indigo trade with India. In 1799 the East India 
Company entered into a contract with an enterprising individual then resident at Calcutta, at very 
encouraging prices, which led others to embark in the cultivation, from whom the Company also made 
purchases. In the support of this commodity, the Company are stated to have lost on the sale of their 
purchases, <£80,000. Having thus fostered and protected this article of Indian produce, and brought it into 
a state of maturity, the Company agreed to leave it in the hands of their servants in India, and those who 
lived under their protection, to serve as a safe and legal channel for remitting their fortunes to England, 
When the Company ceased purchasing, the planters felt themselves void of resources for continuing their 
exertions; upon which the Company again stood forward, and afforded them assistance in the way of loan, 
having the security of their produce for the payment of the sales in London, to the extent of £884,734 in 
the course of a few years. With this aid they persevered in their exertions, and their labours have 
eventually been crowned with success. The article of indigo now bears a distinguished rank in the list 
of Asiatic produce, and may be considered the staple commodity of the private trade from India. 