

Horns manufactured -----——percent. 51 5 0~_17 1 8 

Ditto unmanufactured, not otherwise enumerated or described ^per cent. 20 0 O^w^. 6 13 4 



INDIGO. 


213 


INDIGO is a dye prepared from the leaves and small branches of a plant termed the indigo plant, of 
which there are many varieties, the most remarkable of which is the Tinctoria, a native of Asia, Africa, and 
America, from which the dye is made. The root of this plant is three or four lines thick, and more than 
a.foot long, of a faint smell, something like parsley; from which issues a single stem nearly of the same 
thickness,- about two feet high, straight, hard, almost woody, covered with a bark slightly split, of a grey 
ash colour towards the bottom, green in the middle, reddish at the extremity, and without the appearance 
of pith inside. The leaves are ranged in pairs round the stalk, of an oval form, smooth, soft to the 
touch, "furrowed above, of a deep green on the under side,, and connected with a very short penduncle. 
From about one-third of the stem to the extremity there are ears that are loaded with very small 
flowers, from 12 to 1-5* but destitute of smell. The pestil, which is in the middle of each flower, changes 
into a pod, in which the seeds are enclosed. 

This plant requires a good soil, well tilled, and not too dry; the seed, which, as to figure and colour, 
resembles gunpowder, is sown in the broad east during the latter months of the hot season, or at the com¬ 
mencement of the rains. Continual attention is required to eradicate the weeds; and with no further 
labour, the early plant is ready for cutting in the beginning of August, and the fields arriving successively 
at maturity, supply the- works until the commencement of October. 

When the plant has been cut, it is placed in layers in a large wooden vessel, and covered with water. 
It soon ferments, the water becomes opaque, and assumes a green colour. When the fermentation has 
continued long enough, which is judged of by the paleness of the leaves, and which requires from 6 to 24 
hours, according to the temperature of the air, and the state of the plant, the liquid is drawn off into large 
flat vessels, where it is constantly agitated till the blue floculi begin to make their appearance;—fresh water 
is now poured in, which causes the blue flakes to precipitate. The yellow liquid is then drawn off, and the 
sediment, when the water is sufficiently drained from it, is formed into small cakes, and dried in the shade. 

The indigo imported from India is classed by the trade under the following denominations: East 
India, blue, purple, violet, and copper. The chief signs of good indigo are its lightness, and feeling dry 
between the fingers ; its swimming in water if thrown upon burning coals, its emitting a violet coloured 
smoke, and leaving but little ashes behind. In chusing Indigo, the large regular formed cakes should be 
preferred, of a fine rich blue colour, externally free from the white adhesive mould, and of a clean neat 
shape, as it is much depreciated in consequence of an irregular shape in the cakes, and the incrustation of 
white mould; when broken, it. should be of a bright purple cast, of a close and compact texture, free 
from white specks or sand, and when rubbed with the nail, should have a beautiful shining copper-like 
appearance ; it should swim in water, and when burnt by the candle, it should fly like dust. That which is 
heavy, dull coloured, and porous, should be rejected; likewise the small and broken pieces, which, though 
equally good in quality with regular formed cakes, do not obtain an equal price. 