

1699. The English, aided by the example and exertions of the numerous refugees which came from 
France, on the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, in 1685, had made so much progress in the manu¬ 
factures of cotton and silk, as to supersede the necessity of India goods of similar kinds. It unfortunately 
happened that at this period the Company's Charter had become forfeited, and that great numbers of 
persons had embarked in the India trade, the consequence of which was a depreciation of all kinds of Euro¬ 
pean goods abroad, and an enhancement of the prices of India goods at home. The prodigious glut and 
unreasonable cheapness of India goods w r ere ruinous not only to the importers, but to the English manu¬ 
facturers, whose goods were rejected for the wrought silks, mixed stuffs, and figured calicoes of India, 
Persia, and China. In 1700 the legislature, with a view of relieving the general distress, passed an Act 
for the encouragement of the manufactures, which enacted M that from and after the 29th day of 
September, 1701, all wrought silks, Bengals, and stuffs mixed with silk or herba, of the manufacture 
of Persia, China, or the East Indies; and all calicoes, painted, dyed, printed, or stained there, which are or 
shall be imported into this kingdom, shall not be worn or otherwise used in Great Britain; and all goods 
imported after that day, shall be warehoused, and exported again.” An Act was also passed, declaring 
“ that by muslins the several species following are meant, vur. awbroaks, abdaties, betellees plain, striped 
pandavarts, rowallew, golconda, oringall, junays; and, also, doreas, cossaes, plain and flowered tanjebs, 
plain and flowered jamdammes, mullmulls, plain and flowered jecolsies, mamolwhiates, plain and flowered 
neckcloths, rehing, salloes, comervilles, seerbands, nightrails, aprons, tirindames, calico lawns, and all 
other thin calicoes, commonly called muslins; and that by painted, dyed, and stained calicoes are meant 
not only all calicoes painted, dyed, or stained, after the weaving thereof, but all such whereof the yarn 
or other materials were painted, dyed, or stained before the making of such calicoes.*” 

1721. Notwithstanding the law which prohibited the use of printed India calicoes in Great Britain, 
they had become so universal as to be a great detriment and obstruction to the home manufactures. This 
had occasioned several tumults of weavers, and it was found necessary to redress the grievance. An 
Act was therefore passed, which states in the preamble— u Whereas it is most evident that the wearing 
and using of printed, painted, stained, and dyed calicoes in apparel, household stuff, furniture, and 
otherwise, does manifestly tend to the great detriment of the woollen and silk manufactures of the king¬ 
dom;” and enacts that no person shall wear any calicoes of the above description, under the penalty of 
£5. No mercer, draper, &c. shall sell, utter, or expose to sale, any printed, painted, dyed, or stained 
calico, or any bed, cushion, window-curtain, &c. made of it, unless for exportation, under the penalty of 
£20. No such calico to be used in any bed, chair, &c. under the penalty of £20. The like penalty 
for wearing or using in apparel or household stuff, any stuff made of, or mixed with, cotton printed, 
painted, dyed, or stained, except muslins, &e. but not to extend to calicoes dyed all blue. 