


RISE AND PROGRESS 

OP THE 

COMMERCE IN PIECE-GOODS FROM THE EAST INDIES. 

The articles imported into England under the denomination of piece-goods, are calicoes and muslins 
of every description. They are manufactured in various parts of India, more particularly in Bengal and the 
adjacent provinces, of singular beauty and endless variety, and have from time immemorial formed the 
grand staple commodity of India. They were in great estimation amongst the ancients; and from the 
commencement of the trade between Europe and India by the way of the Cape of Good Hope, formed a 
material part of the imports from that country: but of late years, from the rise and excellence of similar 
manufactures in Europe, more particularly in Great Britain, and from the general impoverishment which 
wars and revolutions have brought upon the Continent of Europe, the consumption of the fine fabrics of 
India has greatly decreased, and it is not probable that it will ever be restored to its former standard. 

At the time of Alexander's invasion of India, upwards of 2,000 years ago, the dress of the natives 
is described as being chiefly calico, pure white, or adorned with figures. A. D. 73, Pliny seemed 
so well informed of the trade and manufactures of India, that he remarks the superior excellence of the 
Bengal muslins; and, in enumerating the imports from Egypt and Arabia at that period, he mentions 
“ muslins and Indian calicoes, and other cotton goods of a variety of kinds.” 



230 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE TRADE IN PIECE-GOODS. 


Calicoes formed a very considerable part of the Portuguese imports into Europe in the early period 
of their trade. Among the numerous articles of which the cargo of the C arrack, taken by the English 
in 1592, consisted* were “ book calicoes, calico lawns, broad white calicoes, fine starched calicoes, coarse 
white calicoes, and brown broad calicoes; there were also canopies and coarse diaper towels, quilts, and 
calico carpets, like those of Turkey.' 5 ’ Soon after the English began to trade to India, and piece-goods 
formed a part of their cargoes homeward in 1615, it appears, from Sir Dudley Digges’s pamphlet, that 
large quantities of calicoes were exported from England to foreign parts; and, in 1628, Mr. Munn esti¬ 
mates the annual importation of calicoes to be 50,000 pieces; that they cost on an average 7s. per piece 
in India, and sold in London at 20s. per piece; he also mentions that, in his time, the Turks sent 
.£600,000 a year from Mocha for calicoes, drugs, sugar, rice, &c. The East India Company, in 1625, 
in answer to some objections which were started against the India trade, say that, instead of paying 
£*500,000 annually to Holland and France for linens, lawns, and cambrics, half the consumption of those 
articles is now superseded by the use of India calicoes, and foreigners now pay us money for the cloths 
they formerly received in payment for those goods. 

In 1631, in a proclamation for restraining the encroachments of the private traders upon the Com¬ 
pany, we find painted calicoes among the articles permitted to be imported by the officers of their ships. 
In 1655, the Protector having laid the trade open, the competition in India advanced the price of all 
commodities there; and, in a treatise entitled cc Britannia Languens,” it is stated “ that during the 
years 1653 to 1656, when the East India trade was laid open, they afforded the India commodities so 
cheap, that they supplied more parts of Europe, and even Amsterdam itself therewith, than ever they 
did after.” So large was the stock of piece-goods of inferior qualities in England, that, on the renewal 
of the Company’s Charter in 1657, they sent orders to India to remit only one quarter of the quantity 
usually shipped, and stated there was sufficient of that sort of goods for the consumption of several 
years. 