

1750. Though the legislature was anxious to encourage the cotton manufactures, and had passed 
several laws prohibiting the use of such foreign goods as interfered with them; yet It does not appear that 



»m RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE TRADE IN PIECE-GOODS. 

they had made much progress. At this period the goods manufactured were strong and coarse compared 
with those of the present day; and little or no thread finer than from sixteen to twenty hanks in the pounds 
each hank measuring 840 yards, was then spun; and one person could with difficulty produce a pound 
of thread, by close and diligent application, the whole day. The goods were subject to great inequalities. 
As the demand for cotton goods increased, various contrivances were thought of for expediting this part 
of the manufacture; but without producing any very material or lasting advantage till about 1767, when 
a weaver, of the name of Hargrave, constructed a machine, called a jenny, by which one person can 
spin 100 hanks in a day, each hank 840 yards. In the following year Arkwright brought forward a 
new mode of spinning. Other improvements were made by different mechanics and manufacturers, which 
led to the present great extent and unexampled prosperity of the cotton manufactures of Great Britain. 
At this period it was stated that the whole cotton trade of Great Britain did not return £200,000 to the 
country for the raw material, combined with the labour of the people. 

1772. Various attempts had been made previous to this period to manufacture calicoes, but without 
success. The improvements that rapidly followed the introduction of machine spinning, soon remedied 
the former defects; and in 1773 some attempts, made at Derby by Sir Richard Arkwright and his 
partners, proved successful; yet, after a large quantity was made, it was discovered they were subject to 
double the duty, viz. fid. per yard on cottons manufactured in the old way, with linen warp; and when 
printed, were prohibited. The manufacturers therefore asked relief of the legislature, winch, after great 
opposition, they at length obtained, and thus laid the foundation of a branch of manufacture which has 
since become one of the most important in the kingdom. 

The manufacture of calicoes was begun in Lancashire also about the same period. The goods made 
here, before the introduction of calicoes, were of cotton woof, but linen warp of Hamburgh, or Irish 
yarn, but chiefly of the latter. These goods, which were the calicoes of that day, were manufactured 
as early as 1727, at which lime all the cotton goods were made in the same way. 

1781. To the same improvements in spinning which gave birth to the manufacture of calicoes, the 
country is indebted for that of muslin. For this elegant article of dress all Europe were long tributary to 
India, where the manufacture has, through the long lapse of ages, arrived at the greatest perfection. 
The manufacture of muslins was attempted at Paisley as early as 1700; a few looms were employed, but 
this trade was soon - annihilated by the introduction of the goods of India. Eighty years afterwards a 
more successful rivalship commenced: British muslins were first successfully introduced in 1781, but 
were carried to no great extent till 1785, since which their progress has been rapid beyond all example. 
In 1787 it was computed that not less than 500,000 pieces of muslins, including shawls and handkerchiefs, 
were annually made in Great Britain. 