



ROSES, OIL OF—RUM. 


237 


The amount of grain exported from the three Presidencies in 1805, principally rice, was - 

Sicca Rupees 24,60,716 


Fort Saint George and its dependencies 
Bombay and Surat 




38,11,500 

13,15,401 


England is supplied with rice from America. Mr. Dalrymple states that it is the result of a small 
bag of paddy, given as a present from Mr. Dubois, Treasurer of the East India Company, to a Carolina trader. 


ROSES, OIL OF. 

This valuable perfume is prepared in India, Persia, and Turkey. The quantity to be obtained from 
roses being very precarious and uncertain, various ways have been thought of to augment the quantity at 
the expence of the quality. It is often adulterated with the oil of sandal-wood; this imposition, however, 
cannot be concealed; the essential oil of sandal will not congeal in common* cold, and its smell cannot be 
kept under, but will predominate in spite of every art. They have likewise the art of mixing this oil with 
spermaceti, more particularly that imported from Turkey. The best mode of discovering this fraud, is by 
spirits of wine: this will dissolve the oil, and leave the spermaceti in lumps, which, if heated, will form one 
solid mass. In the genuine oil, when congealed, the crystals will be found short and uniform, not more 
in one part than another; for if they are of different lengths, the oil may be considered as adulterated. It 
is said that the colour of the attar is no criterion of its goodness, it being sometimes of a fine emerald green, 
of a bright yellow, and of a reddish hue, from the same ground, and from the same process, only from rose* 
obtained on different days. The real oil, or attar, congeals with a slight cold; it floats in water, and dis¬ 
solves in highly rectified spirits of wine. It* is seldom imported from India for sale, but consider¬ 
able quantities are brought from Turkey, the price of which varies from £3 to £A per ounce. 

The permanent duty on this oil is £51 5s. per cent, and the temporary or war duty £17 Is. 8d. 
making in the whole £68 6s. 8d. per cent. 

RUM*. 

Large quantities of this spirit are manufactured at Bengal, some of which, when it has attained a 
proper .age, is not inferior to the Jamaica rum, and it has this advantage—it is made of better mate¬ 
rials. When new, it costs from ten annas to one rupee per gallon; as it increases in age,* the prices ad¬ 
vances in proportion. That rum which is of a brownish transparent colour, of a smooth, oily, grateful 
taste, of a strong body, and a good consistence, is best; that which is of a clear limped colour, and liGt 
pungent taste, is new, and should be rejected. It is stated that 10,000,000 gallons of spirits, rum, arrack, 
&c. are annually manufactured in Bengal. In 1805 the quantity exported was valued at 1,3S,153 
Sicca Rupees. 

The following is an account 1 of the average quantity of rum imported into Great Britain from the 
West India -Colonies in the under-mentioned periods, -the average quantity exported, and what was retained 
for home consumption. 