

1670. Sir Josiah Child, in speaking of the benefits and advantages accruing to England from its 
East India trade, says, that it supplies the kingdom, for its consumption, with pepper, calicoes, and useful 
drugs, to the value of £150,000 per annum; that it supplies materials for carrying on the trade with 
Turkey, viz. pepper, cowries, calicoes, and painted stuffs. In 1677 the annual importation of calicoes 
was £160,000; and in 1680 Mr. Pollexfen asserted that C{ we at that time consumed to the value of 
£300,000 yearly, in those East India manufactured goods, including printed and painted calicoes for 
clothes, beds, hangings, &c” 

The period of the first introduction of the cotton manufacture into Great Britain is not clearly ascer¬ 
tained, and there are few authentic documents of earlier date than the middle of the seventeenth century, 
before which period it is probable that the manufacture of cotton was too inconsiderable to deserve much 
notice. 

Cotton wool was imported into England long before we have any mention of any goods being manu¬ 
factured; for Hackluyt, in 1430, mentions it being brought by the Genoese. From this early importation 
of the raw material, and acquainted as the English must have been, in some degree, with the cotton 
cloths of the East and other countries, and furnished with the material for their fabrication, no doubt 
some attempts were made to imitate them, though it does not appear that the manufacture had made any 
progress till the beginning of the seventeenth century. In 1621, in one of the sumptuary laws of 
Scotland, it is enacted, “ that servants shall have no silk on their clothes, except buttons and garters; 
and shall wear only cloth, fustians, and canvas, of Scotch manufacture” This prohibition seems to 
imply a very advanced state of the manufacture of these articles in Scotland. 

The first authentic document concerning the cotton manufacture is contained in a work entitled 
u Treasure of Traffic,” published in 1641, It states “ that Manchester buys cotton-wool in London, that 



. RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE TRADE IN PIECE-GOODS. , £31 

comes from Cyprus and Smyrna, and works the same into fustians, vermilions, and dimities, which they 
return to London, where they are sold.” 

1675. About this time the fashion of wearing India muslin had become pretty general, and they in 
a great measure supplanted the French cambrics, lawns, and other flaxen fabrics of Flanders and 
Germany. The trade carried on with India gave rise, about the same time, to the printing India calicoes 
in England, in imitation of the painted chintz of India. This branch of trade soon rose to such a height 
as to render, in a great degree, unnecessary the importation of those goods from India. The Company, 
with a view of encouraging it, reduced their importation of piece-goods. In consequence of which 
resolution, and the loss of three homeward-bound ships in 1690, there was so great a deficiency of calicoes, 
that complaints were made that the Company did not import a sufficient quantity for the use of the 
country. 