

Bengal raw sUk is divided into two classes; that reeled according to the old method, commonly 
called country-wound, and that reeled according to the new or Italian method. The places where the 
former is manufactured, are Comercolly, Jungypore, Rungpore, and Bauleah; and those where the latter 
is prepared, are Comercolly, Malda, Radnagore, Jungypore, Rungpore, Bauleah, Cossimbuzar, and 
Gonatea: these are also distinguished by the manufacturers’ names, as Beecher, Erushard, Collinson, &c.; 
and in England their respective marks of excellence are shewn by the letter A. B. C. D. &c. 

In the choice of Bengal raw silk, particular attention should be paid to the brightness and clearness 
of the colour, whether white or yellow, the evenness of the thread, and the size. The best silk has inva¬ 
riably a gloss or brightness on its surface. The foulness of silk is easily discovered by looking along the 
skein: when turned obliquely from the light, the inferior silks are very unequal, and have many knits, and 
coarse stuff sticking to the thread; but the moss or head of the silk often appears fair to the eye when 
much coarseness is concealed under it. The size of the thread, provided the silk is good, is of no mate¬ 
rial consequence as to its value; if it is bad, the finer the thread is, the worse it will work. The thread 
should be equal, strong, round, and very clean; it should be in a medium with regard to fineness, for the 

112 



244 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE SILK TRADE. 


finest is not the easiest to manufacture to advantage. Particular care must be taken that the silk is perfectly 
dry when packed up, or it will be subject to mildew, or become discoloured. The filatures which now 
produce the best, are Comercolly, Gonatea, and Rungpore; there is also good silk from Jungypore and 
Cossimbuzar. Of the country-wound silk, the Jungypore, Rungpore, and Bauleah skeins are most esteemed. 
The regular demand among the manufacturers is for good silk; and they seem to be less solicitous about 
prices, than a steady, constant, and uniform supply. 

There are two other kinds of worms which produce silk in Bengal, viz. the Tusseh and Arrindy worms: 
the former are found in such abundance over many parts of Bengal, and the adjoining provinces, as to have 
afforded to the natives, from time immemorial, a considerable supply of a most durable, coarse, dark- 
coloured silk, commonly called Tusseh silk, which is woven into a kind of cloth called Tusseh dooties, 
much worn by Bramins, and other sects of Hindoos. This substance would, no doubt, be highly useful to 
the inhabitants of many parts of America, and the south of Europe, where a cheap, light, cool, durable 
dress, such as this silk makes, is much wanted. This species cannot be domesticated. 

The Arrindy silkworm is peculiar to the interior parts of Bengal, in the districts of Dinagepore and 
Rungpore, where the natives rear and breed it in a domestic state, as they do the silkworm. The food of 
this kind consists entirely of the leaves of the common Ricinus or Palma Christi plant, which the natives of 
these districts call Arrindy, and is abundantly reared over every part of India, on account of the oil obtained 
from the seed. Feeding these caterpillars with these leaves, will therefore make it doubly valuable where 
they know how to spin and manufacture the silk. Their cocoons are remarkably soft, and white or 
yellowish; and the filament so exceedingly delicate, as to render it impracticable to wind off the silk : it is 
therefore spun like cotton. The yam thus manufactured, is wove into a coarse kind of white cloth, of a 
seemingly loose texture, but of incredible durability. Its uses are for clothing for both men and women; 
and it will wear constantly ten, fifteen, or twenty years.. The merchants also use it for packing fine cloths, 
silks, or shawls. It must, however, be always washed in cold water; if put into boiling water, it makes it 
tear like old rotten cloth. 