

The silkworm is a species of caterpillar, of which there are several varieties, and, like all others of 
the same class, undergoes a variety of changes. It is produced from a yellowish coloured egg, about the 
size of a small pinhead, which has been laid by a kind of greyish coloured moth. These eggs are hatched 
by putting them into the sun for a few days. When the animal is first protruded from the egg, it is a small 
active black worm; when it has attained its full growth, it is from l£ to 1| inch long, and about half an 
inch in circumference, of a milky or pearl colour. The body is divided into seven rings, to each of 
which are joined two very short feet; it then begins forming the cocoon by winding the silk, which it 
draws from its bowels round itself into an oblong roundish ball. During this operation it gradually loses 
the appearance of a worm; its length is much contracted, and its thickness augmented. By the time the 
web is finished, it is found to be transformed into an oblong round ball, covered with a smooth shelly skin, 
and appears to be dead. In this state it remains for several days, entirely motionless in the heart of 
the cocoon; after which it bursts, like an egg hatching, and from that comes forth a heavy dull-looking 
moth with wings, but these wings it never uses for flying ; it only crawls slowly about in the place where 
it had been hatched. This creature forces its way through the silk covering which the worm had woven, 
and goes immediately in quest of its mate; after which the female lays the eggs, which on an average may 
amount to about 200, and both male and female die in a very short time. 

In Bengal the largest and best cocoons are preserved for the grain, and kept in bags suspended to the 
roof of the hut of the peasant. When the insect is ready to burst its prison, a few balls are placed in a 
large basket, on one shelf of a frame provided for the nurture of the worm. The frame in common use 
consists of 16 shelves, placed in a shed upon vessels filled with water, by way of precaution against ants. 
After the moths quit their covering, attendance is required to move the males as soon as their functions 
have been performed, and the females when they have produced their eggs. The basket is carefully covered 
with a cloth, and in a fortnight the worm quits the egg. They are first fed with mulberry leaves, 
, chopped very fine; as they advance in their growth, they are dispersed into more baskets on the several 
Shelves of the frame, and are supplied with leaves cut into larger pieces, and latterly with whole leaves 
until the period when the insect quits its food. As soon as it recommences eating, branches of mulberry- 
trees are thrown on with the leaves upon them, and the insects eat with eagerness, and soon fill the baskets 
on the whole number of shelves: they arrive at their full size in a little more than a month from their 
birth, and, changing their skins for the last time, are disposed to begiu their cones. They are now 