


The Company made out a statement of the saltpetre so supplied to Government, 
that in the years 1793-4 to 1809 inclusive, 

The quantity supplied was 495,040 cwt. and the prime costv 
The duty paid thereon was ■ 

The freight thereon was, 

The charges thereon were 
Forming a total of prime cost and charges of~ 

The amount received from the Board of Ordnance for the same was . 

And the net loss thereon (deducting a profit in 1794-5) was 



SILK, RAW. 


2iS 


removed to baskets, divided into spiral compartments, where they spin their webs, and cover themselves with 
/silk. When the cocoon is completed, a few are set apart for propagation, and the rest are exposed to the 
heat of the sun, for the purpose of killing the chrysalis. 

The peasants sell the cocoons to the filatures, or winding houses, most of whom are in the employ of 
the Company. From the rejected balls they wind the silk by the following process:—The cocoons must be 
allowed to cool after exposure to the sun. The excretions of the worms are collected from the feeding 
baskets, and thrown into a hole dug for that purpose. The balls of silk are put into the hole, which is 
carefully covered up. In two days they are taken out, and boiled in an earthen vessel, and the silk is wound 
off by a hand-reel or by the common one, both of which are simple, and do not differ materially from the 
machine used for that purpose in Europe. From the fur picked off the cocoons, and from those which are 
perforated, coarse silk is spun, which is used for making carpets and other purposes. 

The following is the mode of propagating the mulberry-tree in Bengal. The waste land is opened 
with the spade in the month of April; good soil is brought, and enough is thrown on to raise it one cubit. 
The ground is well broken with the plough, and levelled with an implement which in form resembles a 
ladder, but which supplies the place of a harrow. The mulberry is planted in October; the slips are 
cut a span long, thrown into a hole, covered from the sun, and are continually watered until at the 
end of a fortnight they begin to vegetate. They are then transplanted into the field, in holes distant 
a span from each other, and nearly one span deep; four or five cuttings are placed obliquely in each hole, 
which is then filled up, so as to cover the slips with a finger of earth closely pressed down. As soon as 
the plants appear, in December or January, the field is weeded. In April, when they are grown to the 
height of a cubit, they are topped, so as to leave a stem one hand high; otherwise it is thought that the 
leaves would be bitter and hard, and that the worms would refuse them. A hand-hoeing is now given * 
and a fortnight afterwards the leaves are ready for use. The plant is then cut down a little above the root, 
and the silkworms are fed with the leaves; the field is weeded, if necessary, and another crop is obtained 
in June, and a third in July; but the leaves of this last crop only are gathered without cutting the stem, 
because that operation at so late a season would, it is apprehended, injure the plant. The field is again 
weeded, and a fourth crop is ready in September; after gathering it, the ground is ploughed several times, 
and levelled with the implement above mentioned. In November a Iiand-hoeing assists vegetation, and 
accelerates the best crop, which is cut in December; this is followed by a hand-hoeing and weeding, and is 
succeeded by another crop in March. The same course recommences, and the field, if sufficiently at¬ 
tended and cultivated, will continue to be productive during many years. 