

; RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE SILK TRADE. 

Silk does not appear to have been known to Homer, who flourished 907 B. C. nor even to Herodotus,, 
who died 413 B. C. though he himself, and the Greeks of his age, had much intercourse with the Egypt¬ 
ians, Phoenicians, and Persians, opulent and luxurious nations, but who perhaps had not obtained any 
knowledge of it in his time. Aristotle, who flourished about 350 B. C. though the most ancient natu¬ 
ralist extant, gives the best account of the silkworm to be found in antiquity. He describes it a horned 
worm, which he calls bombyx, and says that it passes through several transformations in the course of six 
months, and that bombykia is produced from it. He adds it was decomposed, respun, and rewove. 
Dionysius, the Geographer, whom Augustus had sent to compile an account of the oriental regions, A.D. 14, 
informed the people of Europe, that precious garments were manufactured by the Seres, from threads finer 
than those of the spider which they combed from flowers. This precious manufacture found its way to 
Rome, where it was sold at a most enormous price, so that the use of it was restricted to a few women 
of the greatest fortunes. What its price was on its first appearance, we are not informed; but it must 
have been extremely high: for even in the latter part of the third century, the Emperor Aurelian, when his 
wife begged of him to let her have but one single gown of purple silk, refused it, saying he could not buy 
it at the price of gold. And we find by the Rhodian naval laws, preserved in the 11th book of the Digests, 
that unmixed silk goods, when shipwrecked, if they were saved free from wet, were to pay a salvage of 
10 per cent, as being equal to gold in value. 



RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE SILK TRADE. 


A D* 527. Silk had now come into general use among the Romans; and, notwithstanding the very 
high price of it, it was sought after with astonishing eagerness by the inhabitants of Constantinople. The 
manufacture of silk goods from raw silk imported from the east, had long been carried on in the ancient 
Phoenician cities of Tyre and Berytus, whence the western world used to be supplied. But the enhanced 
prices the manufacturers were obliged to pay to the Persians, in whose hands the trade in raw silk was 
at that period, made it impossible for them to furnish their goods at the former prices, especially in 
the Roman territories, where they were subject to a duty of 10 per cent. The Emperor Justinian, how¬ 
ever, ordered that silk should be sold at the rate of eight pieces of gold per lb. (twelve ounces avoirdu¬ 
pois), on penalty of the forfeiture of the whole property of the offender. Justinian endeavoured, by 
means of his ally, the Christian Prince of Abyssinia, to wrest some portion of the silk-trade from the 
Persians. In this attempt he failed; but he obtained, in some measure, the object he had in view, in an 
extraordinary and unexpected manner. Two Persian Monks, inspired by religious zeal, or curiosity, had 
penetrated into the country of the Seres, and lived in it long enough to make themselves masters of the whole 
process of the silk manufacture. On their return to the westward, instead of communicating the knowledge 
to their own countrymen, they proceeded to Constantinople, and imparted to the Emperor the secret, hitherto 
so well preserved by the Seres, that silk was produced by a species of worm, the eggs of which might be 
transported with safety, and propagated in his dominions. By the promise of a great reward, they were 
engaged to return, whence they actually brought off a quantity of the silk worms* 1 eggs concealed in a hollow 
cane, and conveyed them safely to Constantinople, A. D. 552. The eggs were hatched in the proper season 
by the warmth of a dunghill; and the worms produced from them were fed with the leaves of the mul¬ 
berry-tree, spun their silk, and propagated their race, under the care of the Monks, who also taught the 
Romans the whole mystery of the manufacture. The important insects, so happily produced, were the 
progenitors of all the silkworms in Europe and the western parts of Asia; and a cane-full of the eggs of 
an oriental insect became the means of establishing a manufacture, which luxury and fashion rendered im¬ 
portant, and of saving immense sums of money to Europe. 