

A. D. 947. Ebn Haukul, an Arabian traveller, states that the countries adjacent to the Caspian Sea 
produced great quantities of silk, whereof that of Mem in Khorasan, was most esteemed, the eggs of 
the silkworms being carried from thence to other places. 

At the time of the Crusades, 1096 to 1186, we find that scarfs and mantles of silk, velvet, and 
satin were in use amongst the nobility who had embarked in those religious wars; and in 1130, all the 
attendants at the coronation dinner of Roger, King of Sicily, were dressed in silk. 

1146. Greece, or rather the Roman empire in Europe, even in its degenerate state, continued to 
excel ail the rest of Europe in the quality and variety of its manufactures, and in the ingenuity of its 
workmen and artists. That country alone, of all the Christian countries of Europe, possessed the valu¬ 
able stock of silkworms which had been transported from the remotest extremities of the East about 
500 years before; and the Greeks were the only Christians of Europe who still manufactured those costly 
articles of luxury fabricated from the spoils of the silkworm. But now the time was arrived when that 
manufacture was to be more widely dispersed. Roger the Norman, King of Sicily, invaded Greece, and 
carried off the wealth of Athens, Thebes, and Corinth; he also captured a great number of silk-weavers, 
whom he brought from those cities, and settled in Palermo, his capital city. By the King’s order the. 
Grecian prisoners taught his Sicilian subjects to raise and feed silkworms, and to weave all the varieties 
of silk stuffs; and so well did they profit by their instructions, that the silk fabrics of Sicily, about" 
twenty years after the establishment of the manufacture, are described as excelling in a variety of pat¬ 
terns and colours, some with gold intermixed, and adorned with figures or pictures, and others embellished 
with pearls. 



RISE AND PROGRESS OF' THE SILK TRADE. 


*£46' 

Though all the Christian part of Europe, except Greece, had been ignorant till now of the art of 
managing the silkworm, and the produce of its industry, the Saracens had before this time obtained the 
knowledge of the various operations of the silk manufacture, and spread it over all their wide extended 
dominions. Lisbon and Almeria, two Saracen cities of Spain, were particularly famous for their silk goods; 
and the Islands of Majorca and Ivica paid their tributes to the King of Arragon in silks of Almeria. By 
these means was the important manufacture of silk laid open to the ingenuity of the western nations. 

The importation of silk into England must have been considerable at this period. In 1242 we are 
told that the streets of London were covered or shaded with silk, for the reception of Richard, the King‘d 
brother, on his return from the Holy Land: and in 1251, on the marriage of Alexander III. King of 
Scotland, to Margaret, the daughter of Henry III. King of England, 1000 English Knights are said to 
have appeared in robes of silk; and at the coronation of King Edward, in 1274, there was a prodigious 
display of silks and gold stuffs. 