

1700. The great cheapness of Indian silks occasioned the wear of them to become almost universal 
throughout England; to remedy which, an Act was passed for encouraging the home manufactures, which 
enacted, “ that from Michaelmas, 1701, all wrought silks, Bengals, and stuffs mixed with silk or herba, 
of the manufacture of Persia, China, or the East Indies, should be locked up in warehouses till re-exported; 

Vol, IL K k 



250 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE SILK TRADE. 


so that none of the said goods should be worn or used, in either apparel or furniture, in England, on forfeiture 
thereof, and also of £200 penalty on the person having or selling any of them. 11 and 12 Will. III. chap. 10, 

1701. Upon the rupture with France, it was enacted by the 1st Anne, chap. 37, that during the war, 
Italian silk might be brought from any place whatever, except France and Spain; and as a further protec¬ 
tion to the throwsters of this country, a prohibition was laid on the importation of trams, and all 
thrown silks coarser than third Bolognas, as also on all thrown silks of Persia, India, and China, on pain 
of forfeiture.. 

That the policy by which these restrictions and exceptions were dictated, may be sufficiently under¬ 
stood, it may be proper to remark that at the period of passing these Acts, and for many years after¬ 
wards, the throwsters in England, from the insufficiency of the machinery then in use, were not com¬ 
petent to furnish the weavers with any other description of silk than singles and trams for the woof; the 
organzine for the warp was altogether supplied from Italy, where the art of throwing it was long kept a 
most profound secret. Thus, in extending protection to the former, it became equally necessary to make 
a provision in favour of the latter. 

1713. It was stated in Parliament, in the debate upon the Treaty of Utrecht, which took place in 
this year, that the silk manufactures of this kingdom had been brought to such great perfection, that about 
300,000 persons were maintained by them. For the carrying on these, we bought great quantities of silk 
from Turkey and Italy, by which the people in those countries came to take off great quantities of our 
manufactures ; so that our demand for silk had opened markets for our woollen goods, which must abso¬ 
lutely have failed, if our manufacture of silk at home should have been lost. 

The great importance of the silk manufactures at this time eminently appeared from a petition to 
Parliament by the Weavers’ Company, of London. They therein set forth that, by the encourage¬ 
ment of the Crown, and of divers Acts of Parliament, the silk manufacture had come to be above 
twenty times as great as it was in the year 1664; and that all sorts of black and coloured silks, 
gold and silver stuffs, and ribbons, were then made in England as good as in France. That black silk 
for hoods and scarfs, not made above twenty-five years before, had amounted annually to above 
J?300,000 worth for several years, which before were imported from France; and which increase of the 
silk manufacture had caused an increase of our exportation of woollen goods, &c. This petition was 
levelled against the eighth and ninth articles of the Commercial Treaty with France, the ratification of 
which, proposed by Parliament, would, in place of our silk manufacture, have introduced an inundation 
of French silks, ribbands, embroideries, &rc. to the great injury of the manufacturers, who during the 
two last wars had done great damage to the French by imitating and even excelling them in many of 
their best silk manufactures, wherewith they had before supplied almost all the rest of Europe. 