

1685. The revocation of the Edict of Nantz occasioned vast numbers of ingenious artists to sacrifice 
their property, tear themselves from their dearest friends and connexions, and subject themselves to ba¬ 
nishment from their native land. Upwards of 50,000 of them came to England, and brought with them 
many useful arts in which they were perfectly skilled, particularly designing, weaving, and other businesses 
appendant to the manufacture of silk, which they established at Spitalfields, in London. To them England 
is said to be indebted for the silks called a-la-modes, lutestrings, brocades, satins, paduaspys, &c. 

From this period the silk manufacture began to flourish in England. The various produce of it being 
reduced in price, it became the general fashion for all, except the .lowest orders of the community. It ap¬ 
pears that at this period great quantities of French silk goods were brought into England; and it was esti¬ 
mated that in the three years, 1686-7 and 8, there were imported lutestrings and a-la-modes to the value of 
£212,500, and of other silk fabrics, £500,000 per annum. 

1690. It being found that large quantities of silk were sent from various parts into Italy, to ht 
thrown, from whence it was imported into England, in direct contradiction to the spirit of the Navigation 
Act, which declares that no goods of foreign growth, production, or manufacture shall be imported but 
hi British ships, to be laden direct from the places where such goods are grown, produced, or manufactured; 
an Act passed, in which it was specified that, for the better supporting the art of throwing of silk in this 
realm, and the poor therein employed, the throwing of silk should not be considered as a manufacture within 
the meaning of the Navigation Act; and for the further encouragement and protection of this branch, 
thrown silk was prohibited to be imported from all parts, except Italy, Sicily, or Naples, and from 
thence only in vessels navigated according to law. 

1692. This year the French refugees in England, having formed a successful project for making 
lustring, commonly called lutestring, and a-la-mode silks, articles in great demand, and for which large 
sums had been paid to France yearly, they obtained a patent for the sole privilege of making those silks, 
which they soon brought to great perfection, and thus contributed to the improvement of the English silk 
manufacture in general. By an Act of the 8th and 9th of King William, chap. 86, it appears that the Royal 
Lustring Company had then brought this manufacture to the greatest perfection; in consequence of winch, 
foreign lustrings and a-la-modes were entirely prohibited. 

1697. The trade with India being at this time carried on by two rival Companies, there was such an 
excessive importation of the various kinds of East India and China wrought silks, and the prices were so 
reduced, as to occasion great loss to the importers; and it interfered so much with the home manufactures 
of silks, as to occasion great discontent among the manufacturers throughout England, more particularly in 
London, where they became very outrageous, and carried their violence so far, as to attempt to seize the 
treasure at the East India House, and had almost succeeded in it; but were in the end reduced to order. 