

1730. The English silk goods were in great favour abroad, as appears by Keyslar*s Travels, who 
says, “ In Italy itself the silks of English manufacture are most esteemed, and bear a greater price than 
those of Italy; so that at Naples, when a tradesman would highly recommend his silk stockings, &c. he. 
protests they are right English.” 

1741. The Russia Company obtained a new charter, authorizing them to import silks from Persia by 
way of Russia. This scheme was for some time successfully practised; and considerable quantities of raw 
silk, and other Persian produce, were imported in this way: but the distracted state of that country soon 
compelled them to abandon the trade. 

1749. The duties on raw silk imported from China, were now reduced to the same duty as Indian 
raw silk; and, with a view to encourage the growth of silk in America, a law was passed admitting it to 
be imported, duty free, if properly certified to be the growth and produce of the British colonies. 

The following accounts of the quantities of raw silk imported, and from what parts, with the remarks 
thereon, are principally extracted from the reports made by the East India Company at various periods 
on the subject of the silk trade. 

1750. The silk imported into Great Britain in this year, and from whence, was as follows: 


Flanders ~lbs. 1,407 

Spain and Portugal 2,564 

8traifcS VWV%WIV.-V\\.'VVW.'V%^\...WV11.W\'VVI1,V\VV 14,89 i 


Italy _____ lbs. 36,301 

East India (including China) ~—__ 43,876 

Turkey ^—~.v——^ *.132,894 


forming a total of 231,939 lbs. by which it appears that the imports from Turkey were more than one-half, 
from the East Indies and China less than one-fifth, and from Italy less than one-sixth. 

1764. The silk-throwsters, and others in the silk trade, presented a memorial to the Lords of. 
Trade, stating that the quantity of raw silk imported was not sufficient to answer the demands of the trade., 
In order that the manufactures might not suffer for the want of materials, the Parliament took off the old. 
duties paid upon the importation of raw silk, and laid a new duty of Is. 3d. per lb. of 24 oz. on raw silk, 
and Is. 9d. per lb. on thrown silk, to be paid on importation, without any drawback on exportation, except 

Ik 2 




252 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE SILK TRADE. 


to Ireland; and in the following year, foreign manufactured silk stockings, silk mits, and silk gloves 
were prohibited to be imported after the 24th of June, 1765; and the prohibition of the importation of 
ribbands, laces, and girdles of silk, enacted by Henry VII. was now enforced by a heavier penalty. The 
importation and sale of foreign made silks and velvets were afterwards totally prohibited, excepting those 
imported from India, and silk tiffanies from Italy, 

1765, From 1751 to 1765 the silk imported from Bengal rose, on an average, to about 80,340 
small pounds of 16 ounces each, per annum; and no doubt but the quantities from other parts increased 
in an equal, if not a superior, degree of proportion* 