

When the Company obtained possession of the Bengal provinces, it was judged expedient to extend 
their commercial concerns, with a view of realizing the surplus revenues of India. The article of raw silk 
appeared the most eligible for the interests of that country; first, as affording the means for extending 
cultivation; and, secondly, by creating additional employment for the natives. In 1766 there was an import 
of 195,637 small lbs.; and, on an average of the five succeeding years, from 1767 to 1771, it increased to 
327,630 small lbs. per annum. But as the quality of the article was of the kind at present known by the 
technical term of Bengal wound, or silk reeled in the rude and artless manner immemorially practised by 
the natives of that country, it was suited but to a few articles of home manufacture, the principal con¬ 
sumption being in sewing silk, buttons, twist, and other articles of haberdashery, of comparatively limited 
demand. The market, by these increased imports, became so overcharged as to cause a reduction 
in the price; the silk which in 1765 sold at 27s. per great lb. sold in 1771-2 at 18s. 6d. per great lb. 
notwithstanding the sales in these periods fell short of the imports by 171,807 lbs. 

Experience having thus shewn that the article had been pushed to its utmost extremity without 
effecting the desired end, a plan was next suggested for introducing into Bengal the mode of winding 
practised in the filatures, or winding-houses of Italy and other parts of the Continent; which, if carried 
into execution, might create an opening for a still further consumption, by its becoming a substitute for 
some of the silks of Italy, Turkey, and Spain, to divers of the manufacturing branches of which, in 
its then state, it was not applicable. This plan, on being maturely considered, was deemed sufficiently 
eligible, and the needful measures were taken for carrying it into effect. 

Although the first consignment of filature-wound silk reached England in 1772, yet it was not till 
1775 that the new mode could be considered as in full operation. In the intermediate period much time 
was unavoidably taken up in erecting buildings, fitting up furnaces, reels, &c. and in instructing the natives, 
who are most scrupulously averse to innovations of every kind; to which, above all, may be added, that 
the country was recovering but slowly from the calamitous effects of a most dreadful famine, which swept 
off millions of the lower class of inhabitants, and occasioned a considerable defalcation in every species of its 
productions. From these causes the imports of silk from Bengal, from 1772 to 1775, the filature included, 
as will appear from the tables of silk imported, were so circumscribed as not to exceed, on an average, 
187,494 small lbs. by which the price came round to about 24s. per great lb., which in general may b<a 
considered as about its fair level. 

The new mode of winding being now sufficiently established, and the country recovered from its en¬ 
feebled state, the meditated competition took place, and was pursued with such energy and effect, as poli¬ 
tically to answer the most sanguine expectations, although the issue commercially, from a variety of con¬ 
curring circumstances, was unfortunate in the extreme. From 1776 to 1785 the imports from Bengal ap¬ 
pear to have been, on an average, 560,283 small lbs. while those from Italy, Turkey, &c. did not exceed 
282,304 lbs. During this period the raw silk was provided by contract, and by which the Company sus¬ 
tained a loss of <£884,744, as will appear by the following account. 