

1629. From the regular supply of raw silk, which was now received from India, amounting to near 
J?100,0G0 per annum, and the demand for silk goods in London, the silk manufacture was much extended, 
and had become so considerable, that the silk-throwsters of the city, and within four miles of it, were 
incorporated under the name of the Master, Wardens, &c. of Silk-Throwsters; who were empowered 
to take apprentices, make bye-laws, and establish other regulations for the benefit of their trade. 

1630. The following proclamation partly shews the state of the silk manufacture in England at this 
period:— u That the trade of silk within this realm, by the importation thereof raw from foreign parts, 
and throwing, dying, and working the same into manufactures here at home, is much increased within a. 
few years past. But a fraud in the dying thereof being lately discovered, by adding to the weight of the 
silk in the dye beyond a just proportion, by a false and deceitful mixture in the ingredients used in dying, 
whereby also the silk is weakened and corrupt, and the colour made worse; wherefore we strictly com¬ 
mand that no silk-dyer do hereafter use any slip, alder bark, filings of iron, or other deceitful matter. 



"248 


RISE xlND PROGRESS OF THE SILK TRADE. 


in dying silk, either black or coloured. That no silk shall be dyed of any other black than Spanish black, 
and not of the dye called London black, or light weight. Neither shall they dye any silk before the gum 
te fairly boiled off from the silk being rawwith a variety of minor regulations relative to dying. 

1655. The silk manufacture of England had now become a national object of much importance, 
as it was stipulated, by the 5th article of the Treaty of Westminster, that “ the subjects of England might 
freely bring to France, and sell therein all sorts of silks and woollen stuffs of their own fabrication. 11 

1694. From the time of the conquest it had been a complaint that the inhabitants of England had 
ever given a preference to the production of other climes. This ridiculous prejudice had in the 17th cen¬ 
tury extended so far, that a company of slight silk manufacturers were in this year considerable sufferers 
by this unfounded idea, the futility of which they undertook to evince by having a parcel of a-la-modes, of 
their own fabrication, sold by the permission of Government, as condemned silks of the manufacture of 
France, together with a parcel which were really of that country; and it will appear by the following 
account, that the English silks sold for considerably more than the French silks. 

An Account of a Sale of French Silks , by Inch of Candle, the 17th of February, 1695-6. 

“ On Monday, the 17th of February, 1695-6, will be sold by the candle, at the Custom-house, London, 
the several parcels of French silks following, which have been seized, and condemned according to law, and 
are to be seen at the King's warehouses in the Custom-house, the 14th and 15th instant, from two to four 
in the afternoon. 