

<c Lot 1st, five pieces narrow a-la-modes, at 5s. 2d. per ell, to advance Id. each bidding. 11 

Then follow five more lots of the same. 

<c Lot 7th, 5 pieces broad a-la-modes, at 6s. 2d. per ell, to advance Id. each bidding. 11 

Then follow four more lots of the same. 

These eleven lots, containing fifty-one pieces of a-la-modes of English fabric, are followed in the cata¬ 
logue by six lots of a-la-modes that were of French manufacture; and it appears that the bidders, while 
they were ignorant of the matter, preferred the English so much to the French silks, that they actually 
gave nine-pence per yard more for the former than the latter. It appears that all the pieces, foreign and 
domestic, that were opposed to each other, were of equal weight, width, and quality. 

At this time, as appears by a report of a Committee of the House of Commons, to whom the petition 
of the Royal Lutestring Company was referred, and who also were empowered to consider a great number 
of papers, writings, and letters relating to the silk smuggling trade, that a considerable combination existed 
against the silk trade of this kingdom, and that a great number of persons, many of whom were after¬ 
wards impeached, were concerned in the introduction of foreign silks, and conveying wool from hence, to 
the detriment and disadvantage of the English manufactures. 

1680. The Turkey or Levant Company began to complain about this period of the East India 
Company, on account of the great quantities of silk they Imported by way of the Cape of Good Hope, 
which had formerly been imported solely from Turkey. They made a formal complaint to the King on the 
subject, in which they stated their exports to amount to i?500,000, consisting principally of woollen manu¬ 
factures and other English wares; in return for which, they imported raw silks, galls, drugs, cotton, &c. all 
.of which being manufactured in the kingdom, afforded bread and employment to the poor. On the other 
hand, they stated the East India Company exported much bullion, with an inconsiderable quantity of cloth; 
‘in return for which, they Imported a deceitful kind of raw silk, which was an inevitable destruction to the 
.Turkey trade. It was also stated at this period, that the Company had sent to India throwsters, 
weavers, and dyers, and had set up a manufacture of silk, which, by instructing the Indians in these 
manufactures, and by importing them, so made, tended to impoverish the working people in England* 



RISE AND PROGRESS OP THE SILK TRADE. 


248 

The East India Company’s reply was to the following effect:— a That with respect to the Turkey 
Company's objections to the importation of raw silk, it is essential to the good of the kingdom that since 
their importation of it, the silk manufactures have increased from one to four. With respect to the quality 
of the India, raw silk, it is the same as with all other commodities, some good, some bad, and some indif¬ 
ferent. With respect to the sending to India throwsters, weavers, and dyers, the whole is a mistake, 
excepting only as to one or two dyers usually sent to Bengal, and to no other part of India; and this for 
the nation's as well as the Company’s advantage, especially as to plain black silks, generally exported again.'’ 
This defence was deemed satisfactory, and the complaints of the Turkey Company were dismissed. 