

1719. By the enterprising talents of a spirited individual, the art of throwing organzine was intro¬ 
duced into England. Mr. Lombe, a merchant of London, of a mechanical turn, having succeeded in 
obtaining admission to the mills in Piedmont, he secretly drew a plan of them, and established a set of 
mills on a similar construction at Derby. As a reward for his exertions, George I. granted him the exclu¬ 
sive privilege of working organzine for a term of 14 years. The discovery was held to be an object of 
such national importance, that at the end of the period, the legislature granted his brother. Sir Thomas 
Lombe, who had succeeded to the possession of the mills, the sum of £ 14,000, on condition that they 
should be laid open, and that models of the machinery should be deposited in the Tower of London for public 
inspection. Similar mills were in consequence set up in various parts of the country; but owing to the 
difficulties that were experienced in procuring silk of the proper quality for throwring, (the King of Sar¬ 
dinia having prohibited the exportation of it in its raw state), and to the manufacturers having subsequently 
found nearly full employment in the increased demand for singles and trams, which yield a better profit, 



RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE SILK TRADE. 


251 


the quantities that have been worked into organzine, have hitherto borne no proportion lo the imparts 
from Italy, from whence, as has already been shewn, the principal supply is derived. 

By the book of rates, established by the 12th of Charles II. chap. 4, raw silk is valued, for duty, at 
10s. per lb. of 24 oz. and thrown silk at 16s. 8d. per lb. of 16 oz.; and the like rates of valuation were 
preserved in all the subsequent impositions till 1765, when, by the 5th Geo. III. chap. 29, an alteration 
took place, the object of which was to encourage the importation of raw silk in preference to 
thrown, by reducing the duty upon raw silk from Is. lid. -? u - to Is. .2d per lb.; at the same time, to make 
up for the defalcation which the revenue would sustain by the reduction, a further duty of 6d. per lb. was 
laid upon thrown silk. Under this regulation the duties, reducing the pounds to equal weights, were on 
raw silk lOd. per lb. and on thrown silk 4s. 5d. 4i per. lb. 

1722. The silk manufacture being brought to great perfection in all its branches, so as to equal the 
finest fabrics of any foreign nation, the British legislature now judged it proper to enact new encou¬ 
ragements to so noble a manufacture, by an Act of 3d Geo. I. chap. 15, for encouraging the silk manu¬ 
factures of the kingdom, and for promoting its exportation to foreign parts, by granting the following 
bounties thereon for three years : 

For ribbands and stuffs of silk only, per each average pound 3 0 

Silks, and ribbands of silk, mixed with gold and silver, ditto — -—— 0 4 0 

Silk stockings, gloves, fringes, laces, stitching and sewing silk, ditto— -0 10 


with correspondent allowances on stuffs of silk and grogram, silk and worsted, &c. This bounty was 
founded on the consideration of the raw materials paying a large duty on importation. 