



RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE SILK TRADE. 24? 

letter of bis own composition to be sent to the Lord Lieutenant of every county, in which he held forth the 
example of France, as affording ground to hope for equal success; “ for neither A says he, “ is the climate of 
this Isle so far distant or different in condition from that country, especially the hither parts thereof, but that 
it is to be hoped that those things which by industry prosper there, may by the like industry used here, 
have like success.” He likewise observes that, from the experience of many private persons who had 
bred silkworms for their pleasure, nothing had appeared to cause a doubt that they might he nourished and 
maintained in England, if provision was made for planting of mulberry-trees; and for this purpose the 
persons to whom the letter was directed, were required at the quarter session, or some other public meet¬ 
ing, to persuade those of ability, to buy, and distribute in the country, the number of ten thousand 
mulberry-plants, which were to be delivered in London at the rate of three farthings a plant. These 
plants, or perhaps a few reared by the individuals whom the King mentions as having bred silkworms for 
their pleasure, were the first mulberry-trees planted in England. 

The King also caused printed instructions to be published for planting and propagating the mulberry- 
trees, and for breeding and feeding the worms; and though at first many persons were probably averse to 
such a new undertaking, yet by the continuance of the royal sanction and support, and the consideration of 
the great advantages reaped by other European nations from their silk manufactures, the people in the 
course of a few years became very earnest for the propagation of the silkworms, and of the white mul¬ 
berry-tree for feeding them. 

1621. Previous to the commencement of the trade between England and the East Indies, England 
was dependent on Turkey for the silk consumed in her manufactures. Raw silk was therefore considered as 
the article of most consequence, and great exertions were made, and expence incurred, in forming establish¬ 
ments in Persia, with a view of securing a certain and regular supply from thence for the use of the manu¬ 
factures in England. Mr. Munn states the importation to be 107,140 lbs. which cost in India 7s. per lb. 
and that the selling price in England was 20s. He also states that many hundreds of people were con¬ 
stantly employed in winding, twisting, and weaving silk in London. 

About this time the manufacture of raw silk into broad silk goods commenced; for which purpose 
Mr. Eurlamach, a merchant, by the direction of the King, brought over silk-throwsters, silk-dyers, and 
broad-weavers. 

1629. King Charles I. granted to Lord Aston the keeping of the garden, mulberry-trees, and silk¬ 
worms near St. James’s; this was probably upon the spot since called the Mulberry Garden, beyond the 
south-west gate of St. James’s park, towards Chelsea. The young mulberry-trees, even for many years 
after this period, were all raised from seed brought from warmer climates. But little success attended this 
"undertaking, which soon declined. 