

1321. Marino Sanuto, a Venetian traveller, states that silk is produced in considerable quantities 
in Apulia, Romania, Sicily, Crete, and Cyprus, and the quantity might be increased. 

1454. At this period the silk manufactures of England were confined merely to ribbands, laces, and 
other trifling articles of haberdashery. The silk women of London complained to Parliament this year 
that the Lombards, and other foreigners, seeking to deprive women of their honest employments, imported 
the articles made by them, instead of bringing uwwrought silk, as formerly. To prevent which, it was 
enacted by the 33d Henry VI. cap. 5, that during the live ensuing years no person whatever should import 
any wrought silk, twined ribbands or chains, girdles, or any other article interfering with the manufac¬ 
tures of the silk-women, except girdles of Genoa. This Act was afterwards prolonged. 

1481. The Act prohibiting the importation of several kinds of silk goods being no longer in force, 
such an inundation of corses, ribbands, laces, call silk, and Coleyn silk poured into the country, that all 
the English makers of such goods were thrown idle. The Parliament, in consideration of their distress, 
prohibited the importation of all such goods for four years. 22d Edward IV. cap. 3. 

1504. An Act, 19 Henry VII. cap. 21, for the advancement of the smaller silk manufactures in 
England, prohibited the importation of any manner of silk, wrought either by itself, or with any other 
stuff, in ribbands, laces, girdles, corses, and corses of tissues or points, upon pain of forfeiture of the same. 
It was, on the other hand, made lawful for all persons, as well foreigners as English, to import all other 
kinds of silks, as well wrought as raw and unwrought; by which it appears that at this time there wag 
no broad manufacture of silk made in England. 

1520. About this period the French laid the foundation for the establishment of the silk manufac¬ 
tures at Lyons, and other places in the southern part of France. They obtained workmen from Milan, and 
made great progress, supplying many parts of Europe with silk goods; yet it was long after this time 
when France acquired the method of rearing silkworms. 

1558. At this period some Persian silk was imported through Russia, by the Russia Company; but 
the project of obtaining a regular supply by this mode of conveyance was soon afterwards dropped. 

1572. The persecutions of the Protestants in France during a series of years drove several of the 
silk workmen to England; and many who had the good fortune to escape the massacre of St. Bartholomew, 
which took place in this year, found an asylum in London, where they were kindly received, and protected 
by Queen Elizabeth, which favour they largely and gratefully repaid by their Industry and ingenuity, and 
many citizens and others were instructed by them in the art of weaving silks, &c. 

1608. Henry IV. King of France considerably extended the manufacture of silk, and procured 
workmen from Flanders to conduct a manufacture of tapestry. The success which attended his exertions, 
excited in King Jam£s I. a laudable zeal for the propagation of silk in England. He caused a circular 