

The era of the commencement of the cotton fabrics upon an enlarged scale may be dated about 
the year 1787; and although, since that time, it will be seen that the imports of silk from Bengal 
have fallen considerably short of what they were in former periods, it will also be found that they have 
been more than equal to what the market has required. The issue of the sales is an infallible test for 
ascertaining the quantum of demand. It appears that in the five years, 

Commencing 1783, and ending 1787, the Company sold ~~—2,437,384 small lbs. 

And in the subsequent five years, viz. from 1788 to 1792, only v>,wwv* 1,693,784 ditto 

a quantity less by one-third; and the trade was at so low an ebb, that though the average quantity of 
Bengal silk sold, was 338,757 small lbs. It was stated that no reduction of price would add a single ounce 
to the consumption. With respect to the imports from China, it will be seen that the quantities sold in the 
last five years were, on an average, 220,5§6Amall lbs. 



to 4 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE SILK TRADE. 


1793. The French Revolution gave a severe check to commerce. Its influence was felt not • 
only in England, but in every market upon the Continent. A general alarm prevailed; mercantile transac¬ 
tions were in a great degree suspended, and manufactures in general were nearly at a stand. The silk 
trade participated largely in this scene of distress, and experienced a more than ordinary depression. Great 
numbers of weavers were out of employ; the buyers were loaded with a heavy stock of silk upon hand; the 
East India Company had a large quantity in their warehouses unsold; and the imports in the approaching 
season were expected to be considerable. Under these circumstances a memorial was presented to the 
Company by the trade, requesting that the September sale of 1793 might be altogether dispensed with. 
The Company’s exigencies were too pressing to admit of this request being complied with; but, with 
a view of affording the buyers every relief within their power, it was agreed to postpone the sale for 
four months. At the end of that period no favourable change having taken place, the Company, from 
their increasing difficulties, found themselves under the unavoidable necessity of forcing the market. A 
sale was made, and the silk actually disposed of; but at such reduced rates, that the loss upon the quantity 
sold on February 25, 1794, was <£47,746. 

With a view of guarding against future losses, and of enabling Bengal to avail herself of the advantages 
she was found in a capacity to derive from the increased produce of raw silk, the Company proposed the 
measure of causing the surplus quantity of silk beyond what the markets could take in its raw state, to 
be thrown into organzine in England, for the purpose of its being brought into use as a substitute for part of 
the thrown silk imported from Italy; and upon consulting some intelligent persons in the silk line, there 
seemed good reason to conclude that it would be found sufficiently adapted to the warp of ribbands. An 
experiment was therefore made; and although the issue was in every respect encouraging and satisfactory, 
and the legality of the Company’s proceedings were strongly combated by those interested in the imports from 
Italy, yet there were many persons in the trade decidedly hostile to the undertaking, and who confi¬ 
dently pronounced it was impossible it could ever be brought to answer. Among the various objections 
that were urged, it was asserted, in a memorial from the silk merchants addressed to the Lords of Trade, 
€C that as Bengal raw silk had, in the general opinion, attained its utmost possible state of perfection, it 
could only, when worked into organzine, be used in a few articles of the silk manufacture; that in most 
others, from its irremediable deficiency of staple, it could not be substituted for Italian organzine; and 
that the attempt to introduce it into a more general consumption, would produce the greatest discontents 
and tumults among the journeymen weavers, particularly of Spitalfields, who universally reprobated Bengal 
organzine. 1 '’ The object was, however, too important, and the prospect too flattering, to be hastily aban¬ 
doned. Further trials were made, and in proportion as the article became more known, and the views 
of the Company were better understood, much of the prejudice that had been excited against the measure, 
subsided. 