

The quantities of thrown silk, imported into England in the under-mentioned periods, appear to have 
been as follow, of which at least nine-tenths have been from Italy: 

In the 10 years ^1776 to 1785 inclusive, on an average, per annum 392,918 small lbs. 

In the 5 years —— 1786 to 1790 —--ditto —~391,746 ditto 

In the 2 years —^ 1791 to 1792 —— ditto —____ 453,535 ditto 

The silk, when thrown, is used for the warp in the manufacture of ribbands and broad goods, in 

each branch of which the consumption is considered nearly equal. 

In 1796 the reputation of the article was so far established, that a great number of the most emi¬ 
nent houses in the various branches of silk manufacture presented to the Court of Directors a memorial, 
dated London, February 5, 1795, of which the following is a copy: 



RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE SILK TRADE. 


25 5 


u We, the undersigned silk-manufacturers, understanding from the reports published by the East 
India Company, that the Bengal provinces are capable of furnishing a more abundant supply of raw silk 
than hitherto, are of opinion, if due attention is paid, in the first instance, to reel the same of proper sizes, 
that, after making a due provision for singles, trams, and sewing silks, the surplus, by being thrown into 
organzine in this country, can be successfully brought into use in our respective manufactories to a very 
considerable extent, in lieu of part of the thrown silk at present supplied from Italy. Considering, there¬ 
fore, the measure now carrying on by the East India Company as highly laudable, and meriting every 
degree of support, we trust they will persevere in the same with firmness, being well convinced that 
it cannot fail of proving highly beneficial to the national interests. 

a First, by giving to a country which makes part of the British dominions, the advantages derivable 
from the production of a commodity which forms the basis of one of the most important of the national 
manufactures. 

“ Secondly, by creating employment at home for a numerous class of our poor, particularly women 
and children, in the throwing of it into organzine. 

4£ Lastly, by affording a large and more certain supply to the manufacturers in general, it may have 
a tendency to lower the prices of the raw material, and in future to shelter the silk market from the alarm¬ 
ing fluctuations that have repeatedly taken place, and probably increase greatly the general consumption 
of the silk-manufacturers. 11 

Thus pointedly called upon by the principal consumers, the weight of whose testimony was sufficient 
to silence all doubts with regard to the propriety of the measure, the Company sent directions to the 
Bengal Government, to extend their consignments to 4000 bales per annum. Instructions were also for¬ 
warded, requiring them to pay the most unremitting attention to the quality; means were also suggested 
for remedying existing defects, and samples were transmitted for their guidance in regard to sizes: in con¬ 
sequence of which, the quality has in general been in a progressive state of improvement, and in some 
instances has arrived at such a degree of excellence, as to rival the most perfect productions of Italy. 