

Tiger skins, ditto .%v\v\vivv\'iiwvvwv>vt\'\\\\\>vvvvv,%%v\\\wv\i.\ each 0 6 0 <w\%v> 0 2 0 
Skins and furs, or pieces of skins and furs, raw or undressed, 
not being before enumerated, or. otherwise charged with 

duty--~—-—— -^percent. 37 10 0 10 0 

Ditto, ditto, tanned, tawed, or in any way dressed, not being 

before enumerated, or otherwise charged with duty, ditto 90 0 0 0 0 

SPIKENARD, 

Or Nardus Indica, as brought to Europe, is a congeries of small, tough, reddish brown fibres, form¬ 
ing a bunch about the size of a finger; it is moderately warm and pungent, accompanied with a flavour 
not disagreeable. It is described as growing in wild and uncultivated countries, and is the common grass 
which covers the surface of it, growing in large tufts close to each other, very rank, and in general from 
three to four feet long. The whole plant has a strong aromatic odour; but both the smell and the virtues 
reside principally in the husky roots, or lower parts of the stalks, which in chewing have a bitter, warm, 
pungent taste, accompanied with some degree of that kind of glow in the mouth which eardamums occa¬ 
sion. Chuse such as are dry, of a yellowish red, or cinnamon colour, fresh, with long fibres, and a sweet 
scent. Those which are moist, and without fibres, should be rejected. It is seldom imported into England* 
10 cwt. of spikenard are allowed to a ton. The permanent duty is Is. 9d. per lb. and the temporary 
or war duty, 7d. making in the whole 2s. 4d. per lb. 



STORAX—SUGAR, 


262 


STORAX. 

Solid storax is the odoriferous resin of a tree of a middling size, bearing a filbert like fruit, growing 
common in various parts of India. Two sorts of this resin are distinguished: storax in the tear, and 
common storax in larger masses. The former is very rarely in separate tears; but generally in masses, 
composed of whitish and pale reddish brown tears, or having an uniform reddish yellow, or brownish 
appearance, being unctuous and soft like wax, and free from visible impurities. This is preferred to 
the common storax in large masses, which are lighter, and less compact than the preceding, and having 
a large admixture of woody matter, like saw-dust. Although the impurities of this kind of storax render 
it less valuable than the other, it is not less useful, nor its medical qualities, when purified, less potent: 
this is done by softening it with boiling water, and pressing out the impurities between warm iron 
plates; a process that is unnecessary with the former kind. Storax should be chosen of a reddish 
browm, rather sottish, and unctuous to the touch, yet brittle and friable, and of a pleasant sweet smell. 

This article is in little demand, and seldom imported from India. The permanent duty on storax 
in the tear is 5s. 3d. per lb. and the war duty Is. 9d. making in the whole 7s. per lb. and on liquid storax 
9d. per lb. permanent, and 3d. per lb. war duty, making in the whole Is. per lb. 

SUGAR. 

A solid, sweet substance, obtained from the sugar-cane, which is common in the East and West 
Indies, China, South America, and various other places; or, according to chemists, an essential salt, ca¬ 
pable of crystallization. It is of a sweet and agreeable flavour, and is contained in a greater or less degree 
in almost every species of vegetable, but most abundant in the sugar-cane. The expressed juice of the 
cane is clarified, and boiled down to a thick consistence; it is then removed from the fire, and the sac¬ 
charine part concretes into brown coloured masses, and is the sugar in its raw state, as we see it. 