

L 1 2 



260 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE SILK TRADE. 


subject to fluctuation, as the seasons shall prove favourable, or otherwise, to its production. It appears 
that the manufacturers are less solicitous about prices than a steady, constant, and uniform supply; and 
they offer, in support of these sentiments, strong and decisive arguments: they allege that when the pi'ice 
of the raw material is low, the public receive the benefit in the reduction that is made on the price of the 
fabrics; and when the prices are once brought down, it is with difficulty, under a change of circumstances, 
they can be again advanced. 

The legislature have upon all occasions shewn a more than common solicitude to promote and extend 
the silk trade, as a great national object. It has been shielded by the prohibition of such manufactures 
as interfered with it; it has been cherished by bounties; it has, in short, been encouraged by the adoption of 
every measure that experience could suggest for its advancement and improvement. And the emigration 
of the manufacturers, and the exportation of the machinery used in every branch of' the manufacture, has 
been guarded against by the following statutes; 

5th Geo. I. chap. 27. tc If any subject, being such artificer or manufacturer, shall go into any country 
out of His Majesty’s dominions, to exercise or teach any of the said manufactures to foreigners; or if any 
subject shall be in any such foreign country, and shall not return in six months after warning given him 
by the Ambassador, Minister, or Consul, or person authorized by him, or by the Secretary of State, and 
thenceforth continually inhabit within this realm, he shall be incapable of any legacy, or of being executor 
or administrator, or taking any lands by descent, devise, or purchase, and shall forfeit his lands gnd goods, 
and be deemed an alien, and out of the King’s protection.” 

And by the 23d Geo. II. chap. 13. “ If any person shall contract with, or endeavour to seduce any 

artificer in the manufactories of Great Britain, to go into any foreign service, not belonging to the Crown of 
Great Britain, he shall, for every such person, forfeit £50 0, and be imprisoned in the common gaol twelve 
months, and until the fine be paid; and for the second, or any subsequent offence, he shall forfeit £1000, 
and be imprisoned two years, and until payment. 

By the 23d Geo. II. chap. 13. cc If any person shall put on board any vessel, not bound directly to some 
of the British dominions, any tools or utensils, or part thereof, proper for the woollen or silk manufacto¬ 
ries, he shall forfeit for the same two hundred pounds.” 

There are many other statutes to the same effect, and in several of them a penalty of cF20G upon 
Captains of ships, and others, who shall assist in this clandestine traffic, or knowingly convey any tools, 
implements, models, &c. of any art or manufacture, out of the kingdom. 

By the 14th Geo. III. chap. 71. “ If these tools, implements, &c. are on board a ship belonging to 