

At this period the sugar trade of Europe was beginning to be deranged, and soon after, a most ex¬ 
traordinary and unlooked-for convulsion took place; the most productive of all the West India Islands, 
St. Domingo, began to be ravaged by civil commotions, and most of its principal plantations were de¬ 
stroyed. This calamity did not affect France only—its influence was also felt in Great Britain; the 
Several Continental markets that were furnished by France, and even France herself, looked towards Great 
Britain for a supply. This created a vast foreign trade, from which circumstance the price of sugar was 
at such an exorbitant rate of cost, as to be seriously felt by the lower and middle orders of the community. 
Raw sugar from the West Indies, of the lowest description of quality, was at 81s. per cwt. which is equal 
to nine-pence per lb. at the first hand. The East India Company, from these considerations, as well as 
from having been publicly called upon to lend their assistance towards effecting a reduction of the price 
of sugar, gave every encouragement to the importation of it from the East Indies; and the vigorous 
efforts they made to relieve the public necessity, increased the cultivation of the sugar-cane in India to an 
amazing degr.:e, and secured to the Bengal provinces a participation in this important article of trade. 

The Legislature also, with a view of guarding against the excessive exportation of this necessary of life, 
passed a law, regulating it somewhat upon the same principles with those on which the exportation of corn 
is regulated. The Clerk of the Grocers'* Company is required to obtain an account of the quantities and 
prices of sugar sold in London every week from the importers (who are directed to give in the same upon 
oath), and to publish the average price of the week in the London Gazette; and also to publish in the 
months of February, June, and October, an average of the prices during the preceding six weeks. It was 
enacted that if the average price of Muscovado sugar in July, 1792, should exceed 60s. or in October* 
1792, should exceed 55s. or thereafter should exceed 50s. per cwt. exclusive of duties, the drawback allowed 
upon the exportation of refined sugar should be discontinued, till lower prices should again render the 
allowance of them expedient. 

In ISO? a Committee of the House of Commons was appointed to consider the state of the West 
India trade, and to ascertain how far the use of sugar in the distilleries would relieve the depression under 
which it at that period laboured. The following extract from their report will shew the enormous expences 
attendant on the present system of cultivation in the West Indies:— 

cc The price of sugar has greatly diminished since the year 1799. The average price of 1S00 w r as 65s. 
of 1807, 34s. per cwt. both exclusive of duty. In consequence of that depreciation, and of the increased 
expence attendant on the cultivation of the article, the situation of the sugar planter has been rapidly de¬ 
clining, till at length the value of the produce is on an average barely equal to the charges of production, 
leaving no rent for the land, and no interest for the large capital employed in it. 