

Hugo Faleandus, an author who wrote about the time of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, 
speaks of sugar being in his time produced in great quantities in Sicily. It appears to have been used 
in two states; one when the juice was boiled down to the consistence of honey, and another when it was 
boiled farther, so as to form a solid body of sugar. 

The Spaniards carried the cultivation and manufacture of the sugar-cane to the Canary Islands in the 
15th century; but prior to this period the Portuguese, about 1420, carried it from Sicily to Madeira 
and to St. Thomas’s Islands In 1506, according to Herrera, the cane was carried from the Canary Islands 
to Hispaniola, or St. Domingo, where sugar.was extracted from it The Dutch first established sugar- 
works in the Brazils in 15S0; but on being expelled from -thence by the Portuguese, they in 1655 
carried the art of planting the cane, and making sugar in a proper way, to the West Indies. Sugar was 
made at Barbadoes by the English in 1643; but when Ligon arrived there in 1647, it was of so inferior 
a kind, as to be hardly worth sending to.England. Previous to his departure in 1650, it had improved 
considerably, but was not equal to that manufactured in Brazil. In 1643 the English began to 
make sugar at St. Christopher’s, and. the French soon, after. In 1648. the latter, made it at Guadaloupe. 
The English did. not make it at Jamaica till 1664; on the reduction of that Island by them, the Spaniards 
had only thr^e small plantations on it. Since that period it has spread over most of the West India 
Islands. 

It has been assei ted that-the sugar-cane is not a native of America, but that it migrated through the 
Europeans from Sicily to Madeira and the Canary Islands, and afterwards to the West Indies, and to 
Mexico, Peru, and Brazil. On the discovery of the western hemisphere, however, the sugar-cane was 
found upon the Continent, and in some of the islands-; but the art of making sugar it is said was never 
practised by the natives of South America. The sugar-cane was found growing near the mouth of the 
Mississippi when the Europeans first visited that part of America. Hennepin, who was there in 1580, 
says that the banks of that river were full of canes. Ximenes, 'Hernandez, and Piso all affirm that the 
sugar grew spontaneously near the Rio de la Plata. Jean de Lery, who visited Rio de Janeiro in 1556, 

- f ates he found that every where near that river abundance of-sugar-canes; and, according to Labat, the 
first settlers in St. Christopher's, Martinique, and Guadaloupe found the cane wild in different parts of 
those islands. America therefore appears to have possessed the plant, but had not found out the art of 
cultivating it, and manufacturing it into sugar, till visited by Europeans. 

The success that attended the labours of the first British planters was such as amply rewarded them for 



RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE TRADE IN SUGAR* 


265 


i&eir perseverance and industry. In 1670, SirJosiah Child says, “ We have already beat their Musco- 
vado and Paneal sugars quite out of England, and their whites we have brought down in all these parts 
ot Europe, in prices from £7 and £S per cwt. to £2 10s. and £3, and we have also much lessened their 
quantities; for whereas formerly their Brazil fleets brought 100 to 120,000 chests of sugar, they are 
now reduced to about 30,000 chests since the great increase of Barbadoes.” By thus underselling the 
Portuguese, they soon laid the foundation of a flourishing trade, which at first was open to all nations; 
but upon the restoration of King Charles II. the Legislature observing the detriment that accrued 
to this country from such open trade, it was by the several acts of navigation restricted to British 
subjects. In consequence of these restrictions, the ports of London and Bristol soon after became the 
grand magazine ot sugar for the supply of all the north and middle parts of Europe; and this export 
trade the English enjoyed, to the great benefit both of the nation and its colonies, until the French, in 
their turn, so greatly improved their sugar islands, as to be able to undersell us in most parts of Europe. 