

The sugar-cane is a smooth jointed reed, of a shining greenish colour, which, as the plant approaches 
to maturity, changes by degrees to a yellowish one. The sizes of the c^nes vary much, according to the 
soil, season, and circumstances; the usual height is from four to seven feet, the thickness of a middling 
sized cane, about an inch, the largest three or four inches, and the small ones not more than half an inch. 
The distance of the knots are no less various than the height; in some not above two inches, in others 
nine or ten; those canes which have the knots farthest apart, are esteemed the best. 

The saccharine juice is contained in a spongy pith which the inside of the cane is filled with. The 
pith of the smooth part of the cane is soft, and of a whitish colour; that of the joints harder, more com¬ 
pact, and darker coloured. The first is by much the more juicy; but the juice of the latter is sweetest, and 
seems to be most perfectly elaborated. 

The maturity, or degree of perfection, of the cane is not to be judged of from its age or size alone* 
but chiefly from the quality of the juice. If this has a rich, glutinous, sweet taste, and if at the same time 
the cane be weighty, and of a good yellow colour; if the skin is smooth, dry, and easily breaks, the pith 
of a grey colour, or inclining a little to brown, the plant, in these circumstances, may be said to be in its 
utmost perfection, and will yield a very fine sugar, in large quantities, and with very little trouble. 

As the sugar-cane is the principal production of the West Indies, and the great source of their riches— 
as it is so important in a commercial point of view, from the employment which it gives to seamen, and the 
wealth which it opens for merchants—and, besides, as it is now become a necessary of life, it may be justly 
esteemed one of the most valuable plants in the world* The quantity consumed in Europe alone, is esti- 



RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE TRADE IN SUGAR. 


263 


mated at nine millions sterling; and tlie demand would probably be greater, if it could be sold at a reduced 
price. Since, then, sugar is reckoned so valuable a commodity, it must be an'object of desire to all persons 
of curiosity and research, to obtain some general knowledge of the rise and progress of the trade. 

RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE TRADE IN SUGAR, 

The use of sugar is of very high antiquity; the “ sweet cane" 1 is mentioned in several places of 
scripture as an article of merchandise, and is always spoken of as coming from a far country. 

The conquests of Alexander seem to have opened the discovery of it to the western parts of the 
world. Nearchus, his Admiral, 325 R. C. found the sugar-cane in the East Indies, as appears from his 
account of it quoted by Strabo. It is not, however, clear, from what he says, that any art was used in 
bringing the juice of the cane to the consistence of sugar. Theophrastus, who lived not long after, seems 
to have had some knowledge of sugar, at least of the cane from which it is prepared. In enumerating 
the different kinds of honey, he mentions one that is found in reeds, which must have been meant of 
some of those kinds which produce sugar. Eratosthenes, 223 R. C. also is quoted by Strabo as speaking 
of the roots of large reeds found in India, which were sweet to the taste, both when raw and when boiled. 
The next author, in point of time, that makes mention of sugar, is Yarro, 63 B. C. who, in a fragment 
quoted by Isidorus, evidently alludes to this substance. He describes it as a fluid pressed out from reeds 
of a large size, which was sweeter than honey. Dioscorides, 35 B. C. speaking of the different kinds of 
honey, says that “ there is a kind of it in a concrete state, called saccharon, which is found in reeds in India 
and Arabia Felix. C{ This, 11 he adds, u has the appearance of salt, and, like that, is brittle when chewed. 15 
Galen appears to have been well acquainted with sugar, which he describes as a kind of honey, called 
sacehar, that came from India and Arabia Felix, concreted in reeds. If the third book of Galen 
u Upon Medicines that may be easily procured, 11 be genuine, there is reason to think that sugar was not’ 
at that period a scarce article, as it is frequently prescribed. 