

Lucan, A. D. 65, alludes to sugar in his third book, where he speaks of the sweet juices expressed 
from reeds, which were drank by the people of India. Pliny, A. D. 77, was better acquainted with this sub¬ 
stance, which he cads by the name of saccharon, and says that it was brought from Arabia and India, but 
the best from the latter country. He describes it as a kind of honey obtained from reeds of a white 
colour, resembling gum, and brittle when pressed by the teeth, and found in pieces of the size of a hazel¬ 
nut. Arrian, A. D. 145, in his cc Periplus of the Red Sea, 11 speaks of the honey from reeds, called sacchar, 
a$ one of the articles of the trade between Hither India and the ports in the Red Sea. .Elian, A. D. 145, 
in his Natural History, speaks of a kind of honey, which was pressed from reeds that grew among the 
Prasii, a people that lived near the Ganges. Alexander Aphrodisseus, A. D. 212, appears to have been 
acquainted with sugar, which was in his time regarded as an Indian production. Pie says u that" what 
the Indians call sugar, was a concretion of honey in reeds, resembling grains of salt of a white colour, and 
brittle. 11 Achmet, a writer, who, according to some, lived about the year S30, speaks familiarly of sugar 
as common in his time. 

It does not appear that any of the above-mentioned writers knew the method of preparing sugar, by 
boiling down the juice of the reeds to a consistence. The next mention of sugar is by the historians of 
the Crusades; one of the authors, in 1100, says, that the Crusaders found in Syria certain reeds called 
cannameles, of which it was reported a kind of wild honey was made, but does not say that he saw any so 
manufactured. Another author, in 1108, says, about the same period, The Crusaders found sweet- 
honeyed reeds in great quantity, in the meadows about Tripoli, in Syria, which reeds were called sucra ;* 
these they sucked, and were much pleased with the sweet taste of them, with which they could scarcely 



IHSE AND PROGRESS OF THE TRADE IN SUGAR. 


*81 

be satisfied. This plant is cultivated with great labour of the husbandmen every year. At the time of 
harvest they bruise it, when ripe, in mortars, and set by the strained juice in vessels till it is concreted in 
the form of snow, or of white salt” The same author, in another place, mentions eleven camels laden 
with sugar having been taken by the Crusaders; so that it must have been made in considerable quantity. 
Vitriaco mentions, in 1124, that •'•in Syria reeds grow that are full-of honey, by which he understands 
a sweet juice, which, by the pressure of a screw-engine, and concreted by fire, becomes sugar. 1 ’ This 
appears the first account of the employment of heat or fire in the making of sugar. About the same 
period sugar is stated as being made in the neighbourhood of Tyre, and sent from thence to the farthest 
parts of the world. -Marco Paulo, who travelled into the East about 1250, found sugar in abun¬ 
dance in Bengal. Sanutus, who flourished in 1306, mentions that, in the countries subject to the Sultan, 
sugar was produced in large quantities; and that it was likewise made in Cyprus, Rhodes, Amorea, 
Sicily, and other places belonging to the Christians. When sugar was first introduced into England, it is 
difficult to ascertain ; but the art of refining it must at this period have been known. At this time, as it 
appears by the accounts of the Chamberlain of Scotland, in 1329, loaves of sugar were sold in Scotland 
at above an ounce of standard silver by the pound. 