

The inhabitants of Aracan are commonly called Mugs; and previous to the Company acquiring pos¬ 
session of Chittagong, they frequently plundered the coast, and carried off numbers of the inhabitants 
into slavery; and for some time after the cession of the province, the Company found it necessary to 
keep up a considerable force for its protection. Of late years they have been more peaceably inclined. 

In 1783 the Birmans invaded Aracan, and after a faint resistance from the natives, took the town 
and fort, in which they found considerable booty. Among it was an enormous piece of ordnance, composed 
of bars of iron beaten into form; it measured 30 feetyn length, 2b feet in circumference at the mouth, and 10 



280 


* ABAC AN. 


inches in the calibre. This, with some brass images, much valued by the natives, were conveyed to the 
Birman capital with great pomp and parade. IVlanv of the inhabitants of Aracan, pi efei ring flight to sei- 
vitude, took refuge in the hill s on the borders of Chittagong, and formed themselves into bands of robbers. 
The surrender of the islands of Cheduba and Ramree followed the conquest of Aracan. 

COINS. 

There was a mint at Aracan, where silver rupees were coined. An Aracan rupee is equal to 12 annas 
duss massa, or in Aracan to three kahawons, each kahawon 10 puns of cowries. 

COMMERCE. 

The trade of Aracan even before its subjection to the Birmans was inconsiderable, as will appear from 
the following account of the articles suitable to the market, which is extracted from Dalrymple s Oriental 
Repertory. Since that period it has not been frequented. 

« I enclose a list of what things will do, and the quantity. It is a very troublesome place, but the 
gains are very great. The sum of money is so small that you invest, that at the most you can invest 
in five or six months, will be 6 or 8,000 rupees, unless there has not been a vessel there for two or three 
years, in which case you will be able to invest as much more. The port-charges will be 12 or 1400 ru¬ 
pees; what I mean, are the duties on import and export. If there be a great call for wax in Calcutta, I 
would advise you to carry as much ready money as you can, for then you will get away the sooner, and 
will not be troubled to sell your goods at retail; for there is not a man there that can take 500 rupees of 
things at once without trust, and that you must never do, not even the great men; for by trusting them, 
I have been detained two or three months for my money. You may venture to trust the Rajah, as you 
can cut off so much of his duties. Do not let your invoice of these things exceed 4000 rupees; let the 
rest be in ready cash. As your rupees that you carry there will be all new coined by the Rajah, it will be 
best to carry Arcot rupees, as they weigh the same as Sicca rupees; at least the difference is only 2 per 
cent: by this you will save 7 or 8 per cent, on 6 or 7000 rupees. This is all that I can think at present 
will be of any service. 