



271 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE TRADE IN SUGAR/ 

Such appears to have been the state of the sugar-trade in India in 1776; and it is a circumstance to 
be lamented that so laudable an undertaking for restoring this declining branch of commerce should have 
failed of success, as, no doubt, such failure operated very much to discourage others from embarking in 
similar pursuits. Between 1776 and 1790 there is no reason to conclude that this trade underwent any* 
very material alteration; as in some observations addressed to the Governor-General by Mr. Rebb, then 
an active and intelligent Member of the Bengal Board of Trade (now one of the East India Directors), 
on the subject of extending the export of Bengal productions, in a letter under date July 9, 1790, he 
speaks of it as follows: 

The material articles of export from Bengal are rice, sugar, raw silk, and silk piece-goods. Some 
of these articles are peculiar to Bengal; others are carried from other countries to Madras and Bombay, 
and rival those of Bengal. Among the articles thus rivalled, sugar is the most valuable; it is of so much 
importance, that the extending the export of it is of sufficient weight in itself to merit consideration. The 
Bombay market is supplied with sugar from China, Manilla, and Batavia, as well as from Bengal; all 
that can be purchased at Batavia by the Bombay merchants is eagerly bought; the vending or procuring 
a cargo of sugar is even considered a sort of favour conferred by the officers of the Dutch Government 
on the Bombay merchant. The Mahrattas, the great consumers of the sugar imported into Bombay, are 
said, however, to give a preference to Bengal sugar, if it be of the same or nearly the same price.” 

The plan by which Mr. Bebb proposed to effect an enlarged export of Bengal produce, w'as by 
taking off the duties levied on its importation into the other settlements. This he observes would give 
them a decided advantage over their rivals at those markets ; and as the price would thereby be rendered 
much easier, it was reasonable to suppose that this would lead to an increased consumption. 

In a letter to the Governor-General from the late A. Lambert, Esq. in September, 1790, accom¬ 
panying samples of sugar and sugar-candy made from common Burdwan jaggery, he states, 

<€ The first was clayed sugar, the produce of jaggery after once boiling, and produced from 4 to 10; 
that is, 100 maunds of jaggery yielded 40 maunds of sugar and 471- maunds of molasses, losing one-eighth, 
of the original material in the process. 

“ The second was loaf-sugar made of the same material twice boiled, which yields of this sugar a 
proportion of If to 10, viz. 100 maunds of jaggery make 15 maunds of loaf-sugar, and leave 65 maunds 
of molasses, losing in the process of refining, one-fifth, or 20 maunds. 

66 The third is sugar-candy made also from jaggery after three boilings, and is obtained in the propor¬ 
tion of 1 to 10, leaving a residuum of seven-tenths, and losing two-tenths in the process; 100 maunds of 
jaggery giving 10 maunds of this sugar-candy, and 70 maunds of molasses, with a loss of 20 maunds in 
the refining. These specimens shew that the crude jaggery, as furnished by the Ryots in almost every 
part of Bengal, is capable of producing sugar and sugar-candy fully equal in quality to what is made in 
Europe, China, or Batavia.” 