

The King of Aracan afterwards seized on the country; and in order to make head against the Mogul, 
lie took into his service a vast body of fugitive Portuguese, who for various crimes had fled from Goa, 
Cochin, and other Portuguese settlements in India. He bestowed on them lands in Chittagong, and granted 
them permission to act as they pleased, in consequence of which, they were guilty of every wickedness, 
and numbers of them turned pirates; they seized on some of the islands at the entrance of the Ganges, and 
took many of the commercial vessels belonging to the subjects of the Mogul. Aurungzebe, determined to 
extirpate these banditti, and to recover Chittagong from the King of Aracan, directed the Governor 
of Bengal to head the forces destined for the expedition. He first expelled those who had taken possession 
of the islands; then attempted to win over the Portuguese who remained at Chittagong, and succeeded in 
his design. The King of Aracan discovered their intended defection, and resolved to put them all to 
death. Being apprized of their danger, they all at once shipped themselves for Bengal, and joined the 
Mogul; part of them entered into his army, and served in the expedition. The fleet arrived on the 
coast, defeated that of Aracan, laid siege to the capital of Chittagong, took it, changed its name to 
Islamabad, and reannexed it to the province of Bengal. It came into the possession of the English at the 
acquisition of the Dewannee, and still continues so. 


ARACAN. 

The Coast of Aracan stretches S. S. E. from the Naff, a broad and deep river, which is the boundary 
that divides it from the territories of the East India Company, as far as the Island of Cheduba. The prin¬ 
cipal place of trade is Aracan, situated a considerable distance up a large and navigable liver, which is 
scarcely paralleled in the East, of which Mosque Point, in latitude about 20° 15' North, forms the north¬ 
ern side of the entrance. The fort consists of three squares, one within the other, each square sur¬ 
rounded with walls built of brick and stone. The two inner walls are about 14 feet high ; the outer wall 
about 12 feet; the thickness of each about S feet. The fort has no ditch, nor any outworks to prevent the 
approach of an enemy. The river near the fort is narrow ; large boats can come up to it; the banks are 
cultivated. There are a considerable number of cannon lying between the fort walls; only five or six of 
them are mounted on carriages, and those carriages are almost unserviceable. There are also a few brass 
cannon. All the others are thought to be so much damaged by exposure to the weather, as to be useless. 
Under different bamboo and straw sheds in the fort are kept a great many cannon balls of different sizes, 
a large quantity of gunpowder in earthen pots, and some matchlocks; the Rajah has also a few English 
muskets. The residence of the Rajah is built with bamboos and straw. Very few persons besides his 
family live in the fort; the land round it is level and cultivated, having a few houses scattered about. 