

At this time very excellent rum was made in Bengal; and it appears that, during the war, Bengal 
amply supplied the fleet and army with spirits, when they could be procured from no other part of India. 

The duties on the importation of Bengal sugar into the other British possessions in India being done 
away, together with the anxious desire of many resident merchants to raise its quality, and reduce its 
price to such a standard as to make it an object of profitable export, gave great encouragement to the 
cultivators; and the quality of it was so much improved, that in 1791 it had become a staple with foreigners, 
and an export trade to Flanders and America was rising very fast. In November, 1790, the market 
was so well supplied, that the Company purchased 200 tons without difficulty, though there were at the 
same time seven foreign ships in the river loading w T ith it. This demand, though unlooked for, had no visible 
effect upon the price; and it appeared that even at this period any quantity might have been procured. 

The increasing consumption of sugar in Great Britain, owing, in a great measure, to the reduction of 



212 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE TRADE IN SUGAR, 

the price of tea by the Commutation Act, and the increased demand for it abroad, in consequence of the 
deficiency of the French importation from St. Domingo, raised the price far above what it ever had been 
known since the extensive cultivation of it in the West Indies had brought it into general use. The ad¬ 
vance in this necessary of life occasioned much clamour, and the public looked towards the East Indies for 
relief. In consequence of a requisition for that purpose, a Court of Proprietors of East India Stock met 
on the 15th of March, 1792, and passed several resolutions on the subject, the principal of which were:— 
« That it appears to this Court that the present enormous price of sugar is owing to the annual im¬ 
portation of that article being very unequal to the increased consumption in Great Britain, and the demand 
for exportation.—That the East India Company, having been called upon by the public to assist them, 
have taken the subject into their most serious consideration, and are of opinion that they can speedily 
and permanently supply a considerable quantity of sugar for the relief of Great Britain, provided they 
are placed on the same footing with respect to duties and drawbacks as the West India planters.—• 
That the present high duty of £37 16s. 3d. per cent on East India sugars, while the West India 
pay only 15s. per cwt. was purely accidental, and not fixed with any prohibitory view; sugar not having 
ranked among the Company's imports at the time of establishing the present tariff, as it was not even 
named, and can only now be received under the head of manufactured goods non-enumerated, at 
£37 16s. 3d. per cent, ad valorem.—That if the importation of East India sugar is not allowed (the 
present duty operating as a prohibition), the sugar trade, and the carrying trade attached to it, must ine¬ 
vitably be driven into the hands of foreigners, who have already sent, and are still sending, ships from 
various ports of Europe and America to India, to purchase that article.—That the Court be requested 
to lay these resolutions before the Lords of the Treasury, and to take such other steps as to them shall 
appear necessary, to obtain an equalization of duty." 