

In 1752 the English were offered a settlement here by the Prince upon the following terms: That the 
Company should supply 100 pieces of cannon, 3 eovids and 1 span long, 4 of 5 covids and 1 span, 100 
muskets, 1000 catties of gunpowder, and a like quantity of shot; that 50 men should be kept there for his 
defence at the Company's charge, so long as the settlement was continued; and that the succours necessary 
at any time for the preservation of his country, should also be transported at their expence; besides which, 
he was to have an annual present, though the value of that present was not specified. (>n these considerations 
the following privileges were offered:—The Company to have the refusal of all the tm in his country, and 
private merchants only to have what the Company did not chuse to purchase. They were alknved to pur¬ 
chase as much grain as their ships might require. They were allowed leave to build vessels, and to cut the 
timber necessary for this purpose, as well as for lading their ships; and on these conditions it was stipu¬ 
lated that all their ships should be free from paying customs, or making presents. These terms, how¬ 
ever, were not accepted, though the country is stated to produce tin and rice in great abundance, likewise 
some cardamums and gold. It abounds, as well as the neighbouring countries, with excellent timber. 

In 1760 Tavay was taken by the Birmans. In 1790 the Governor delivered it up to the Siamese, 
from whom it was soon after retaken, after an obstinate resistance, in which they lost 3000 mem 
Vol. II. P p 



goo 


MERGUI—TENASSERIM. 


MERGUI 

Is situated on the principal branch of the Tenasserim river, in latitude 12° 12' North, and longitude 
08° 24' East. Large ships anchor in the roads, with a small island called Mandramacan, which forms the 
S. W. side of the river’s entrance, bearing south, distant 3 or 4 miles. The town of Mergui is about six 
miles up the river; vessels of moderate size, by taking pilots, can go over the bar into the river, and anchor 
opposite the town, in 5 fathoms water. 

Mergui, at the close of the seventeenth century, was much frequented by Europeans. The French had 
a settlement here, which has been long since abandoned. The English resided here in 1687; but, in con¬ 
sequence of an order from Madras, they were obliged to leave the country, but not till many persons were 
murdered, in consequence of some misunderstanding with the Siamese. Previous to that period they were 
much esteemed; the offices of Shabundar at Mergui and Tenasserim, and Admiral of the King’s navy, were 
held by Englishmen. They had a fort here, which is now in ruins. The river was formerly navigable 
a considerable distance farther up, where the Portuguese had a factory; but at present the communication is 
only open for boats, and whether the navigation has been ruined by accident, or intentionally, is not known. 

In 1760 Mergui was taken by the Birmans, after a short resistance, in whose possession it still is. 