


GARNETS 

Are met with at Pegu,^and other parts of the East Indies; they are of various sizes, from an inch in 
diameter to the size of a pin’s head, and in roundish or oblong pieces, apparently polished. They should 
be chosen as large as possible, free from specks, flaws, and other impurities, and the colour of the juice of 
a ripe mulberry. The drill holes should he small, and not broken or flawed round. They are occasion- 
ally imported in large rough pieces, undrilled. 

The permanent duty on cut garnets is 17s. 6d. and the temporary or war duty 5s. lOd, per lb. 
on uncut garnets the former is 6s. and the latter 2s. per lb. ^ 

RUBIES 

Axe produced in Pegu, and occasionally some very excellent ones may be procured: they are of four 
kinds, viz, ruby, spindle ruby, balass ruby, and rubycelle. 



MARTABAN—TAVAY. 


£89 

The ruby is a transparent gem, of a beautiful reddish colour, not like that of vermilion, but of blood, 
or cochineal. They are generally found very small, about the size of a large pin's head, of a roundish or 
Oval form, but are met with of one and two carats, and sometimes much larger. They should be chosen 
of a lively fine colour; the deeper the red, the larger the stone, and the clearer it is, without flaws or 
terns, the more it is esteemed. The pale and veiny stones should be rejected. 

The spinelle ruby is nearly of the same colour as the true ruby, but has not its beauty and splendour. 

The balass ruby is more of the colour of crimson, and when well polished, is a handsome stone. 

The rubycelle is red, with a cast of yellow in it, and is the least valuable of the kind. 

According to Dutens, a perfect ruby, if it weighs more than three carats and a half, is of greater value 
than a diamond of the same weight, such stones being remarkably scarce: a stone of one carat, and perfect, 
he estimates to be worth ten guineas; two carats forty guineas, and three carats one hundred and fifty guineas. 

The permanent duty on rubies is 10 percent, and the temporary or war duty £3 6s, 8d, making in 
the whole i?13 6s. 8d. per cent. 

MARTABAN. 

This town is situated on the north side of a river, in latitude 16° 28’ North, about 20 leagues to the 
eastward of Rangoon river. A large island, called Buga, fronts the entrance of the river, the proper 
channel into which is to the eastward of the island, between it and the main land, having a bar at the 
entrance; the distance from which to the town of Martaban is about seven leagues. 

Martaban was formerly a place of considerable trade, and was once the capital of an independent 
kingdom, but was attacked and taken by the King of Ava, who reduced the place to ashes, and sunk large 
vessels with stones at the mouth of the port, so that at present only small ships can enter. It still retains 
its potteries, and manufactures large jars, some of which will contain two hogsheads. 

TAVAY. 

Tavay Point, on which stands a pagoda, is in latitude 13° 33' North, and longitude 9S° 6' East, and 
forms the western side of the entrance of Tavay river. The river runs in a northerly direction, and about 
eight leagues up are the fort and town of Tavay, seldom visited by Europeans. Inside the point there is 
good anchorage for large ships, and in time of wai it is much frequented by French privateers, being conve¬ 
nient for wooding and watering. Water is procured at a small brook, a short distance to the northward 
of the point. 