

Petroleum, properly so called, is in consistence next to naptha, but grosser and thicker; of a reddish 
or brown colour, but so light as to swim in spirits of wine; it is inflammable, of a bitter taste, and its 
smell strong and penetrating. 

Asphaltum, or mineral pitch, is already described in Yol. I. page 103. 

In the neighbourhood of Rangoon are many petroleum wells. The following is extracted from an 
account of them by Captain Hiram Cox, formerly Resident at Rangoon. 

a At this particular place there are 180 wells, and four or five miles to the N. E 340 more. In making 
a well, the hill is cut down, so as to form a square table of 14 or 20 feet, for the crown of the well; and 
from this table a road is formed, by scraping away an inclined plane for the drawers to descend, in raising 
the excavated earth from the well, and subsequently the oil. The shaft is sunk of a square form, and lined, 
as the miner proceeds, with squares of cassia wood staves; these staves are about six feet long, six inches 
broad, and two thick, are rudely jointed, and pinned at right angles to each other, forming a square frame, 
about 41 feet in the clear for the uppermost ones, but more contracted below. The property of the wells 
is in the owners of the soil: one family will, perhaps, possess four or five, seldom more, but the gene¬ 
rality have less. They are sunk and wrought for the proprietors. The cost of sinking a new well is 2000 
ticals of flowered silver, or about 2,500 Sicca rupees; and the annual average net profit, 1000 ticals. 

u The contract price with the miners for sinking a well, is as follows:—For the first 40 cubits of 19 inches, 
they have 40 ticals; for the next 40 cubits, 300 ticals; and beyond these 80 cubits, to the oil, they have 
from 30 to 50 ticals per cubit, according to the depth, taking the mean rate of ticals per cubit, and 100 
cubits as the general depth at which they come to the oil: the remaining 20 cubits will cost 800 ticals, or the 
whole of the miners 1 wages for sinking the shaft, 1,140 ticals. A well of 100 cubits will require 950 cassia 
staves, which, at five ticals per 100, will cost 47£ ticals. Porterage and workmanship in fitting them may 
amount to 100 ticals more. The levelling of the hill for. the crown of the well, and making the draw-road, 
&c. according to the common rate of labour in the country, will cost about 200 ticals more; the remainder 
is expended in provisions for the workmen, expences of propitiatory sacrifices, &e. 

“ The oil is drawn pure from the wells, in the liquid state as used, without variation; but in the cold 
season it congeals in the open air, and always loses something in its fluidity; the temperature of the wells 
preserving it in a liquid state fit to be drawn. The oil is of a dingy green, and odorous; it is used for 
lamps, and boiled with a little dammer, for painting the timbers of houses, and the bottoms of boats, &a 
which it preserves from vermin. Its medicinal properties, known to the natives, is as a lotion in cutaneous 
eruptions, and as an embrocation in bruises and rheumatic affections. 