


Steel --— 

Hartall, China 
Sindure 
Singerrys 
Painted cullemcurrys .. 
Read 
Isinglass 
Cowries 
Coral. 


China cups in the Moors taste~ 
China dishes, dittos 
Music, 

Opium. 

King 

Raw silk^ 


^40 maunds 
~25 ditto. 

3 ditto. 

1 ditto. 

1 ditto. 

.40 pieces. 

5 or 6 maunds 
5 seers, large pieces, such as are put in windows. 

400 rupees worth, Maidive sort, if you can get them. 
1000 rupees worth, large and good; the long sort will do. 


Muga silk 


1000 
200 
1 seer. 

5 to 10 seers 
1 maund. 

I ditto. 

4 ditto. 


If salt is cheap in Calcutta, take in about 300 maunds, by way of ballast.” 


Aracan produces large quantities of rice, of which 15 seers may generally be procured for two puns 
of cowries, equal to 12 maunds for a duss massa rupee. A few elephants** teeth, some wax, wood oil, and 
several kinds of coarse piece-goods are the principal exports of the country. 

Plenty of elephants, buffaloes, hogs, goats, and deer are to be met with; likewise geese, ducks, and 
fowls; and of vegetables, nearly the same kinds as are produced in Bengal. 





CHEDUBA—NEGRAIS. 


2-81 


CHEDUBA, 

This island extends nearly N.W. and S.E. about 7 leagues, and is situated between the latitudes of 
18° 36' and 18° 50' North; it is about twenty miles from the coast, and there is a safe passage between the 
island and the main. The town is situated on the eastern side of the island, in longitude 93° 40 East, up 
a small river, into which it is difficult for boats to get at falling tide, on account of a number of mud banks 
which lie off its entrance, more than If mile from the shore. The river is narrow and winding, but deep 
enough, after passing the flats, for large boats at all times of the tide. The landing-place is near a small 
wooden bridge, about two miles up on the right hand side of the river, where there is a bazar, well sup¬ 
plied with poultry, hogs, goats, vegetables, and fruits in abundance, at reasonable prices, and of excellent 
quality. Shipping may fill water here in their own boats at half ebb, though it may be procured more 
expeditiously, but at a greater expence, by application to the Chief, to employ the boats of the country. 
Permission must be obtained from him previous .to procuring any supplies. The sale of cattle is restricted, 
not only by the Government of Pegu, under whose dominion the island is, but also by the tenets of their 
religion ; and so rigidly do the natives adhere to them, that it is impossible to procure a bullock at any 
price, though the island abounds with them. The anchorage for large ships is, the mouth of the river 
W. 15° S. and the town pagoda W. 19° S. in 4f fathoms. 

The inhabitants appear friendly; but small vessels frequenting the island, should be upon their guard. 
Large quantities of rice are grown upon the island, and sent to various parts of the Pegu dominions. The 
Island of Ramree, to the S. E. of Cheduha, also produces large quantities of rice. These islands used to 
be occasionally visited by French privateers, for the purpose of refreshment and refitting. 