

The Coast of Ava extends in a southerly direction from near Cheduba to Cape Negrais, forming 
several bays destitute of shelter for ships, and having several small islands and dangers in its vicinity. 

NEGRAIS. 

Cape Negrais, the south-westernmost land of the Coast of Ava, is in latitude 16° 2' North, and lon¬ 
gitude 94° 13' East; but the southernmost extremity of that coast is generally called Pagoda Point, from 
a pagoda standing upon it, and is in latitude 15° 58 North. This point forms the western side of Ava 
River, called also Persaim and Bassein River, and Point Porean the eastern side. The island of Negrais 
is situated in the entrance of the river about four or five miles inside of Pagoda Point. The liver is navigable 
a great way inland. There are two channels into it, one on each side of the island. 

The Island of Negrais was taken possession of by the English, and a survey was made of it in 1687, 
when the Government of Madras established a settlement on it: little benefit, however, seems to have been 
derived from the acquisition, as it was soon after abandoned. 

In the year 1751, the English again took possession of Negrais, and established a factory, which they 
fortified, but neglected. In 1757 the Birman Emperor ceded to the East India Company the island in 
perpetuity; but in consequence of the war in India, the Madras Government could not afford the neces¬ 
sary supplies for the effectual support of the settlement: it was therefore deemed expedient to withdraw 
the settlers, which was done in May, 1759, leaving a few persons to take care of the teak timber and mate¬ 
rials for ship-building, and to preserve the right of possession, in case it should be determined at any future 
period to re-establish the settlement. These were cut off by the Birmans on the 6th of October, 1759, since 
which period no attempt has been made to establish a factory. 

The English had also a factory at Persaim, a town on the east side of the river, about 20 miles 
from its entrance, which consisted of a few storehouses erected near the river, for the purpose of facilitating 
Yol.IL 0o 



284 


RANGOON. 


Rice is sold by a measure called tayndaung, or basket; the weight is 16 vis, about 56 lbs. The ave¬ 
rage price of rice at Rangoon is about 4 or 5 baskets for a tical. 

The measures of length are the paulgaut, or inch, 18 of which compose the taim, or cubit. The saun- 
daung, or royal cubit, is equal to 22 inches, but varies according to the will of the King. 

The dha, or bamboo, consists of 7 royal cubits; 1000 dhas make one daiii, or Birman league, equal 
to 2 English miles, and 2 furlongs; the league is also subdivided into tenths. 

The Birmans keep their accounts in decimals, after the manner of the Chinese. 

COMMERCE. 

The commerce carried on here is to a very inconsiderable extent, the demand for foreign articles 
being trifling, the whole amount of imports not exceeding 12,00,000 rupees. Piece-goods form the most 
material part of the imports from India, and are generally of common kinds of British commodities. 
Broad cloth of two colours, one side red, the other green or blue, is in great request, being used for 
mantles in the cold season. 