

It of late years has been much frequented by French cruisers and privateers, to procure provisions 
and refreshments. There are many Mahometan merchants, and natives of India, who carry on the 
remaining trade of the place, which under a better government would be much increased. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

The principal is the tical, or tual, equal to about half a Spanish dollar. The China pecul is in 
common use, and by it most articles of merchandise are bought and sold. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

The articles principally in demand, and which are imported from several parts of India, are iron, 
Madras piece-goods, salt, tobacco, &c. Their principal exports are tin, elephants’ teeth, and rice. This 
latter article may be purchased here at the rate of 12 pagodas a garce, equal to 8256 lbs. avoirdupois; the 
common price on the Coromandel Coast is generally above 30, and sometimes even 80 pagodas a garce. 
For salt, which is seldom higher than 3 pagodas a garce, they give in return 3 of rice for 1 of salt. 
A bundle of tobacco, which will cost about a pagoda on the Malabar Coast, will sometimes sell for 10 or 12 
at Mergui; and chintz, and other fine painted goods, will, if the market be not overstocked, find immediate 
Tent. There is abundance of fine timber, and many carpenters here. 

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

The oxen here are good, but, from religious motives, are difficult to be procured. Other articles are 
plentiful, and cheap; for instance, 20 fowls may be bought for a tical. Fish are very fine, abundant, and 
cheap. Fire-wood and water are easily procured. 

TENASSERIM 

Is situated about 30 miles up the river, on the South side, and is a place of considerable trade. The 
whole of this coast from Martaban formed a part of the dominions of the King of Siam; but after con¬ 
tinued wars between that nation and the Birmans, the latter power obtained possession, and by treaty in 
1793, the Siamese ceded to the Birmans the ^maritime towns, and the entire possession of the coast of 



JUNKCEYLON. 


291 


Tenasserim, with the two important posts of Mergui and Tavay—acquisitions of great moment, when 
considered either in a political or commercial light. 

The narrow part of the continent, which separates the Bay of Bengal from the Gulf of Siam, is some¬ 
times called the Isthmus of Kraw. The whole extent of coast, from Tavay to Junkceylon, is generally 
tailed the Coast of Tenasserim, having several bays and harbours seldom visited by Europeans. 

JUNKCEYLON. 

This island is divided from the continent by a narrow isthmus of sand, about a mile in length, and 
half a mile in breadth, and is covered at high water; it shuts up, on the north part, an excellent harbour, 
called Popra, where a vessel drawing 20 feet water may get in on the springs, over a mud bar. The island 
extends from the latitude of 8° 9' to 7° 46' North, and is about 24 miles long, and 10 broad. 

The place where ships generally anchor, is in a good road, well sheltered behind a small island, joined 
to the main at low water, in latitude 8° 10' North. On the main, opposite to this island, is a creek, that 
leads to a village called Terowa, consisting of about SO houses, built of timber, and covered with palm- 
leaves. Here resides the Viceroy, or Governor, from the Court of Pegu. On the S.W. side of the island is 
Another good harbour, where vessels occasionally stop. 