

Great Andaman is about 43 leagues long from North to South, and its breadth varies from 6 to 10 
leagues. About 5 leagues from the northern extreme of the island, on the east side, is Port Cornwallis, in 
latitude 13' J 20 North, and longitude 92' 51' East, a very good bay and harbour, so named from Admiral 
Cornwallis, who was anxious to make it a naval station; but the untractable and ferocious disposition of 
the natives prevented its being brought to a settlement. The dwellings of the natives are the most 
wretched hovels imaginable; three or four posts stuck in the ground, and fastened together at the top in 
the form of a cone, over which a kind of thatch is formed with the branches and leaves- of trees. The na¬ 
tives are cunning, crafty, and revengeful, and the least civilized of any perhaps in the world. 

These islands are covered with wood fit for building and many other purposes; the most common 
are the poon, dammer, oil, ebony, soondry, and bindy: many of them afford timbers and planks fit for 
the construction of ships, and others might answer for masts. A tree grows here to an enormous size, one 
having been found to measure 30 feet in circumference, producing a very rich dye, that might be of use 
in manufacture. 

Port Cornwallis abounds in a great variety of fish—mullets, soles, pomfrets, rock fish, skait, gurnets, 
sable, cockup, seer fish, snappers, &e. likewise prawns, shrimps, and cray fish. 

Little Andaman is situated about 30 miles to the southward of the former; is 28 miles long and 17 
broad, but does not afford any harbour, though tolerable anchorage may be had near its coast; it is there¬ 
fore never frequented. 

The wild appearance of these islands, and the well-known disposition of the natives, have been the 
causes which have deterred navigators from visiting them; and they have justly dreaded a shipwreck on 
them, more than foundering on the ocean: for though it is highly probable that in the course of time many 
vessels have been wrecked upon their coasts, an instance does not occur of any of the crews being saved,, 
*»r a single person returning to give an account of such a disaster. 



NICOBAR ISLANDS. 


293 


This cluster of islands extends N. N. W. to S. S. E. near 60 leagues, and contains seven principal 
islands, with eleven or twelve smaller ones. The northernmost bears from the Little Andaman S. 27° E. 
29 leagues, and is called 

Car Nicobar. It is about six miles long and five broad, very low and level, and appears at a distance 
as if entirely covered with trees; the island has good soundings every where, free from danger. It is very 
populous, and the inhabitants are a quiet, honest, and inoffensive people; their houses are generally 
built upon the beach, in villages of 15 or 20 each, and each house contains a family of 20 persons or 
upwards. These habitations are raised upon wooden pillars, about 10 feet from the ground: they are 
round, and having no windows, look like bee-hives covered with thatch; the entry is by a trap-door below, 
where the family mount by a ladder, which is drawn up at night. The timber on the island is of many 
sorts, in great plenty, and some of it remarkably large, affording excellent materials for building or 
repairing ships. 