

Prince of Wales’s Island is separated from the Malay Peninsula by a narrow' strait about two miles 
broad, which forms the harbour, and affords excellent anchorage for the largest ships; there is also 
an inner harbour* where ships may receive every kind of repair that can be performed, without going into 
dock. 

Fort Cornwallis is built on the N. E. point of the island, and is in latitude 5° 24*' North, and longitude 
100° 21 East; it was originally badly constructed, and large sums have been spent upon it without com¬ 
pleting it. On the west face there never has been any rampart; there is no parapet except on the four 
bastions at the angles; the ditch is narrow* and fordable in every part. The fort is incapable of defence; 
Vol. II. Q q 



298 


PRINCE OF WALES’S ISLAND. 


from its size, construction, and situation, a 74 gun ship could anchor within pistol shot, and from their tops 
drive away the men from their guns. No fort of any strength can be erected on the site of the present 
one, without destroying one half the town in order to form a glacis. In the fort are barracks for the mili¬ 
tary, the arsenal, magazine, and military storehouses. The sea has of late years made encroachments on 
the north face of the fort, and along the esplanade, and for upwards of a mile in that direction. 

The town, called George Town by the English, and Panjang Panaique by the Malays, is of con¬ 
siderable extent; it is bounded on the north and east by the sea, on*the south by a small river, and on the 
west by the high road. The streets, which cross each other at right angles, are spacious and airy; but 
having been at first merely lined out, without being either raised or drained, were frequently impassable 
after hard rain. This inconvenience has been removed, as the principal streets are now properly raised and 
drained, and the town has in consequence improved much in appearance and cleanliness. There is a large 
pier for landing and shipping goods, to which fresh water is conducted by pipes. 

Since the island has become the seat of Government, considerable alterations have taken place in every 
department. A Government house, a church, a jail, and several substantial bridges have been built; the 
fortifications have been improved and strengthened, and the public roads repaired and widened. 

Pulo Pinang was originally granted to the East India Company by the King of Queda, at the request 
of Captain Francis Light of the Country service, who had married his daughter. The Bengal Government 
seeing the island so peculiarly adapted as a mercantile station for vessels from all the Malay ports, the Mo¬ 
luccas, Borneo, Celebes, and the Phillipplne Islands, did not hesitate to accept the King of Queda’s grant; 
conceiving that, by an establishment properly secured, the Bengal trade with that of China would be con¬ 
nected, and from the conduct of the Dutch, it became necessary to have a port where the Country ships 
might meet the Eastern merchants, as well for the promotion of that valuable commerce, as to afford a 
windward station of refreshment and repair to the King’s, the Company’s, and the country ships. A small 
detachment was accordingly sent from Calcutta, under the command of Captain Light, who took posses¬ 
sion of the island, in the name of His Majesty, and for the use of the East India Company, on the 12th 
of August, 1786, and immediately commenced clearing the country, and began the construction of a small 
fort for the protection of the detachment against any attempts of the Malay powers, who might be insti¬ 
gated by the Dutch at Malacca, or induced by the fickleness of their own disposition, to cut them off. 
Captain Light was authorized to receive such colonists as he might judge expedient; to allot such a por¬ 
tion of land to each family as circumstances would admit; and, as an encouragement to trade, the port was 
made free to all nations. 