

At the commencement of the N. E. monsoon, the natives sail in large canoes to Car Nicobar to trade; 
and for cloth, iron, tobacco, and some other articles, which they obtain from Europeans, they give in ex¬ 
change the produce of their own island, consisting of cocoa-nuts, oil, canoes, bird’s-nests, tortoise-shell, 
ambergris. See. With respect to the latter article, which are sometimes met with here, the natives have 
learned a mode of adulterating it; therefore it is seldom to be met with genuine. Bird’s-nests are found 
among the rocks, and a great variety of beautiful shells are to be met with on the shore. Money being of 
no use here, the country ships purchase cocoa-nuts, four for a leaf of tobacco, and 100 for a yard of blue 
calico, and a bottle of cocoa-nut oil for four leaves of tobacco. 

PROVISIONS antj REFRESHMENTS. 

Hogs, fowls, and fruit are plentiful; the sea abounds with excellent fish, and the islands are much 
frequented by turtle. Water is procured from wells at Carmorta, and fire-wood may be got with the 
greatest ease on any of the islands. 

The Great and Little Sambelong are but little known; they are, however, said to be very populous. 
All the islands, except the Quoin, and some of the smaller ones are inhabited. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 


Malay Peninsula. 


Coast of Queda—'Purlis — Queda — Corns, Weights, and Measures—-Imports and Exports — Duties—Provisions 
and Refreshments—Qualla Moorha—Pry River—Pulo Pinang, or Prince of Wales's Island; Description, 
— Coins, Weights, and Measures—Articles of Import from Europe — Company's Imports from Europe 
—Commerce with the British Settlements in India—Articles of Import from the Eastward—Articles of Ex- 
port and their Prices—Import and Export Duties — Company's Revenues and Disbursements—Provisions and 
Refreshments—Articles procurable at Prince of Wales s Island—Agal Agal—Argus Feathers — Balachong —- 
Bean of St. Ignatius—Beech de Mer — Benjamin—Birds' Nests — Blackwood—Cajeputa Oil—Camphire— 
Camphire Oil — Canes—Clove Bark — Copper — Cossumba — Dammer — Ejoo—Gold Dust—Gutta Gambir— 
Kemo Shells—Lignum Aloes■—Mis soy Bark — Rattans — Sago — Tin— I Vax —. Wood Oil—Per a—Safangore 
Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports—Provisions and Refreshments — Malacca; Descrip¬ 
tion — Coins, Weights, and Aleasures—Imports and Exports—Provismis and Refreshments — Johore — Bin- 
tang — Coins, Weights, arid Measures—Imports and Exports — Pahang—Coins and Weights—Imports and 
Exports — Duties—Pachanga River—Coins and Weights—Imports and Exports — Tringano — Corns, 
Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports — Duties—Provisions and Refreshments—Redang Islands — 
Patany—Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports—Calantan River — Ligore, 


THE coast between Junkceylon and Queda is fronted by numerous islands of various sizes, and in¬ 
side most of tbe groups, and between them, there are passages for small vessels, but large ships generally 
sail outside. The country of Queda extends from the River Trang, in 7° 30' North, to that of Carian in 
5° 10" North; its length is about 150 miles, and its breadth from 20 to 35 miles. From Trang to Purlis 
the coast is sheltered by many islands and sandbanks navigable for small vessels only; the entire country 
is exceedingly well watered, and fertile. Twenty-three rivers, all navigable for proas, and many of them 
for larger vessels, empty themselves into the sea; the principal of which is 