

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

The cocoa-nuts produced on these islands are reckoned the finest in this part of India. Most of the 
country ships that are bound to Pegu from either of the coasts of India, stop here, in order to procure a 
cargo of cocoa-nuts, in exchange for which they take the following articles, viz . 

Cloth of different colours, hatchets, and hanger blades, which they use to cut the nuts down with: 
tobacco and arrack they are fond of, but expect these as presents. They have no money of their own, nor 
will they allow any value to those of other countries, further than as they may happen to fancy them for 
ornaments; however, they are good judges of gold and silver, and it is no easy matter to impose baser 
metals on them as such. They purchase a much larger quantity of cloth than is consumed upon their own 
island, which is intended for the Chowry market, a small island to the southward of theirs, to which a large 
fleet of their boats sails every year, about the month of November, to exchange cloth for cowries. The 
village is on the N. E, side of Chowry, abreast of which you may anchor in 20 fathoms, sandy ground. 

This island, being very fertile, produces abundance of fruits—oranges, lemons, citrons, bananas, and 
pine-apples; the only animals are hogs, which are plentiful, remarkably fat, being fed on cocoa-nuts; they 
have likewise fowls, pigeons, several kinds of wild fowls, excellent yams, and sweet potatoes. 

To the southward of Car Nicobar are three small islands—Terressa, Bembocka, and Katchull, which 
are seldom visited by Europeans. About five miles to the eastward of Katchull is 

Noncowry Harbour, one of the best harbours in the East Indies, formed by the islands of Carmorta 
and Noncowry; it is of very easy access, and will hold 40 sail of large ships, in the greatest security* 
sheltered from all winds, about half a mile from the shore, with the additional advantage of two entrances*, 
that may serve for going in and out in both monsoons. 

Carmorta. —This island, to the northward of the harbour, is about 16 miles long, and in no place 
above 5 wide; the principal part is on the west side of it, at the foot of a high mountain; the island is 
almost covered with trees, among which are 3 or 4 sorts of poon, very fit for masts, and for building.. 
Sugar-canes grow here without cultivation; and it produces the finest yams in India, besides several excel¬ 
lent kinds of fruits. Water is got in wells; but in the dry season it is rather scarce, owing to the small 
number of wells sunk by the natives. 

Noncowry, which gives its name to the harbour, is about four miles long on each side, being of a 
triangular form, and separated from Carmorta by a narrow channel; it affords the same fruits as Carmorta*. 
but is more covered with wood. 



m 


NICOBAR ISLANDS. 


In 175 6 the Danish East India Company erected a house on this island, to serve as a factory. It 
stands on the northernmost point within the harbour, where they had a serjeant and three or four soldier's 
and two cannon, which composed the whole of their establishment; it was soon after evacuated. In 1768 
it was re-established; but at present there remain only three or four missionaries, with a view of making 
proselytes of the natives: they collect cocoa-nut oil, some shells, and other natural curiosities, which they 
send annually to their brethren at Tranquebar. 