

In a very short space of time numerous adventurers flocked to the settlement, some with the intention 
of remaining, others merely with a view of traffic. These finding a ready sale for their goods, and meeting 
with the merchandise they required in return, the commerce of the port rapidly increased. A town, called 
George Town, was marked out, and within the year there vrere upwards of sixty Chinese families living in 
it, besides great numbers of Malays, Buggesses, and other Eastern traders. The settlements continued in 
a progressive state of improvement, both in regard to its population and cultivation. 

In the year 1797 there were 6937 inhabitants on the island, exclusive of Europeans and the garrison; 
and in 1801 they had increased to 10,310. Previous to ISOS, the government of the island had been 
considered merely as of a temporary nature. It had long been the intention of the Company to establish a 
regular system of administration for the island, but from various causes it was not formed. Although 
from the spirit of British rule, even when imperfectly administered, industry, enterprise, and improvement 
appeared to a great extent on the island, and its population, produce, and commerce were very respectable, 
yet the growth of the colony had in many ways been impeded by the want of regular government and laws; 
and as the inhabitants had become more numerous, that want had been more felt and complained of. 



PRINCE OF WALES'S ISLAND. 


299 


In 1805 the Court of Directors, having taken into their consideration the position of the island, its 
fertility, its harbour, its produce of large timber, its contiguity to Pegu, which contains the most abundant 
teak forests in Asia, and which had long pointed it out as an acquisition of very great importance in a 
commercial and political view, being placed in a most favourable situation for an emporium, of commerce 
in the Eastern seas, and for becoming a commanding station for the rendezvous, refitting, and supply of 
that portion of His Majesty's Navy required for the protection of the Company's possessions arid affairs 
in the Eastern parts of Asia, had resolved to new model the government, and to place the island under 
the same form of government as the Company's other settlements in India enjoyed; when the Board of Ad¬ 
miralty laid before them a plan for the building and repairing His Majesty's ships, which gave a new and high 
degree of importance to the subject, and rendered the projected reform in the government absolutely indis¬ 
pensable. Accordingly the island was formed into a regular government, w 7 ith the following establishments 
and appointments, and the salaries and allowances annexed thereto, viz . 


Per Annum. 

Governor and Treasurer —™—Dollars 32,000 

Ditto for rent, till a house was built—_ 4,000 

Second in Council, warehouse-keeper and 

paymaster-™——- —^18,000 

Third in Council, superintendent of marine, 

naval, and military storekeeper__ 18,000 

Fourth in Council and Commandant —-IS,000 