

In 1785 the Birmans made an attempt to take Junkceylon; they invaded it with an army of 8000 
men, and immediately on their arrival attacked the fort, which is situated on the east side of the island, 
and were successful, notwithstanding a spirited resistance from the Siamese Governor, who afterwards 
withdrew into the interior of the island. The Birmans found here a valuable booty; but their triumph 
was of short duration. The Siamese Governor rallied his forces, and became in his turn the assailant with 
so good an effect, that the Birmans thought fit to retire to their shipping, which they did not accomplish 
without a heavy loss. They have since succeeded in obtaining possession of the island. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

All kinds of Indian coin pass current here, but the preference is given to Spanish dollars. They have 
not the small cash in circulation as at Acheen and other places. They have certain pieces of tin, shaped 
like the under half of a cone, called poot, which are used on the island as money, weighing about three 
pounds; these are also their weights. 

4 poots j 1 vis 

10 vis { make J 1 capin 

8 capins J (_ 1 bahar 

which is equal to 6| Bengal factory maunds. The China pecul is in use here, by which tin is generally 
sold, the price varying from 12 to 16 Spanish dollars per pecul. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

A considerable trade used formerly to be carried on here; but in consequence of orders from the Go¬ 
vernment, the use of opium is forbidden to the natives, and a heavy duty laid on the exportation of tin. 
The trade has much declined. It is occasionally visited by country ships, which bring the following articles: 

Coarse cutlery. Looking glasses. Steel, in faggots. 

China ware. Opium. Tobacco. 

Iron, in bars. Piece-goods. Woollens. 

P p 2 



%92 


ANDAMAN ISLANDS. 


The Malay and Buggess proas, previous to the establishment at Pulo Pinang, used to come here to 
exchange their produce, which consisted of Buggess cambays, Java painted cloths and handkerchiefs, 
China gongs, brass utensils, the blue and white coarse cloths, called kangan, &c. with the country vessels 
for opium, giving in exchange the tin they procured here for their own imparts. 

The principal export is tin, of which article upwards of 500 tons used annually to be exported; a few 
elephants 1 teeth are occasionally to be met with, 


DUTIES. 

This was formerly a free port, hut latterly a heavy duty has been laid'on tin; yet if a ship sells her 
cargo to the Governor, she is understood to be exempt from duty both on imports and exports. 

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

Bullocks and buffaloes, wild hogs, and deer are to be had; they have common poultry, but not in 
abundance. Rice, and various vegetables, with several kinds of tropical fruits, are to be procured. The 
water is good, and got with little difficulty. 

ANDAMAN ISLANDS. 

This group comprehends the Great and Little Andaman, and the small islands in the vicinity; they 
are situated on the eastern side of the Bay of Bengal, about three degrees from the Coast of Tenasserim. 