

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Spanish dollars are the principal coin. All goods are weighed by the China dotchin, or wooden steel¬ 
yards; but English scales and weights are in common use. The bahar is 424 lbs. avoirdupois. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports. —Opium and Spanisli dollars form the principal part of the cargoes of the country ships. 
For the latter you are certain of procuring goods, if any are to be had; and frequently a few chests of opium 
will bring a good price. The Chinese junks import coarse China-ware in considerable quantities, thin irons, 
pans, gongs, white and blue cloths, and other articles suitable to the Malay market. 

Exports. —The chief produce of Queda is tin; but beech de mer, bees wax, birds’-nests, eautch or 
terra Japonlca, dammer, fish-maws, rice, rattans, and shark’s-fins, are to be procured in their way to 
China. These compose the return cargo of the Chinese junk, and of the few country ships which visit 
this place. 



QUALLA MO ORB A—PRY RIVER—PRINCE OF WALES’S ISLAND. 


297 


DUTIES. 

The duties here are 2J per cent, and the most reasonable of any port on the Malay Coast* or to the 
eastward* and fewer impositions; but presents are necessary to the King and principal men. 

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

Bullocks* with poultry of various kinds, fruits, and vegetables, are in abundance. Very good water 
is procured from the river* at an inconsiderable expence. 

QUALLA MOORBA 

Is about 18 miles to the southward of Qaeda; it is a large river* deep and rapid; the water here is 
always fresh to the sea; the heavy surge, which breaks upon this shore during the S. W. monsoon* has, by 
opposing the current from the river* formed a dangerous sandbank, extending three miles out to sea* and 
on which there is only one fathom water. This river is* however, convenient, on account of its situation 
with the tin mines. The annual produce here is about 1000 peculs; this small quantity is not, however* 
owing to the scarcity of ore* but to the want of hands* and to the few people employed* being badly paid. 

PRY RIVER 

Is abreast the north point of Pulo Pinang; it has a mud bar, with 12 or 13 feet water on it in spring 
tides. In 1790 the King of Queda constructed a fort, and assembled a number of forces and proas for an 
attack upon Pulo Pinang. The English landed there, took the fort by assault, and destroyed most of the 
vessels. In 1S00, a district of land on the banks of this river, 18 miles in length, and 3 in breadth* was 
ceded by the King of Queda to the East India Company in perpetuity* for which they agreed to pay him 
10,000 dollars per annum. The town, which is situated at the entrance of the river, was previously a 
receptacle for vagrants of every description; but a number of people having resorted thither, it is expected 
that many beneficial consequences will aiise from the acquisition. 

PRINCE OF WALES’S ISLAND. 

This island, called by the Malays Pulo Pinang, extends from latitude 5° 16 to 5° 30' North; it is of an 
irregular f: ur-sided figure, the north side being the longest, and the south the shortest; it is near 5 leagues 
in length, and 7 or S miles in breadth. The N.W. end of the island is high uneven land; and excepting the 
south part, and the eastern side, where the town is built, and where there is a considerable tract of low 
land cultivated contiguous to the sea, the rest of the island is all high, and covered with trees. About five 
miles west from the fort stands a mountain, on which signals are displayed for ships approaching the 
island; it is 2,170 feet above the sea. 