

PURLIS. 

This river is deep and narrow, at the entrance of which is a small sandy island, on which stands a 
fishing village, protected by a few pieces of cannon: the bar of the river is very long, with only ten feet 
water upon it at spring tides; the town is situated 4 or 5 miles from this entrance, in a valley encompassed 
with steep hills. The old King of Queda in his latter days chose this place for Ids residence, which occa- 



S06 


QUEDA* 


gioned many people to resort here; but since bis death It has sunk into its former obscurity. Pulo Ladda and 
several other islands lie to the westward of this port, about 5 leagues. The Great Ladda is inhabited by a 
race of Malays, who are in general great thieves, and commit frequent acts of piracy. There is exceeding 
good anchorage on the eastern side of them, of sufficient capacity for the largest fleet, with a plentiful supply 
of wood and water at hand. On the S, W. side is a harbour, where the French refitted and masted, after 
mi engagement with Commodore Barnet in 1745. 

QUEDA, 

The principal seaport, is called Qualla Batrang, and is in latitude 6° North. The river is navigable for 
vessels of 300 tons, but its entrance is choked up by a mud bank, 2§ miles in length, with about 12 feet 
water in spring tides. Large ships anchor about 4 miles off, in 5 or 6 fathoms, the entrance of the river 
bearing E. N. E. and a mountain called the Elephant N. E. At the mouth of the river is a small brick for¬ 
tress, with a few guns; the greater part of the fort is in ruins, so that the spring tides flow into it. The 
river is about 300 yards wide; both shores are muddy, and have swampy plains covered with jungle. Seven 
miles up the river is AHestar, where the King resides; all vessels that pass the bar, can go to Allestar: the 
river is narrow, but deep. The King’s residence is in a small brick fort; the inhabitants near him are com¬ 
posed of Chulias, Chinese, and Malays. This place was plundered and burnt by the Buggesses in 1770; 
since which it has continued in a very poor state. 

Queda contains about 300 houses, inhabited by Chinese, Chulias, and Malays. It was formerly a 
place of considerable trade; but since the establishment at Pulo Pinang, the Malay proas have carried the 
greater part of their trade there, for the European and country ships bound to China. 

The following account of the mode of transacting business is extracted from Elmore’s Directory. 

u When going on shore, you land on the east side of the river, and the Captain Chinaman will report 
your arrival to the Shabundar, who will introduce you to the King. Yo.u must not neglect to carry a 
present with you, according to the quantity of goods you expect to sell, which will be but small, Queda 
being constantly well supplied from Pulo Pinang, However, your present should be genteel; and do not 
forget the Captain Chinaman and Shabundar, as they can be of great service to you, and inform you of 
all the customs, as well as the markets, and whether any thing is likely to be done. The King, like most 
other Malay Princes, engrosses almost the whole foreign trade of the port, excepting that of an annual 
Chinese junk, which used to come here regularly, that pays a certain sum only as duty, and then has leave 
to trade freely with the inhabitants.” 