

Chaplain —___ 6,400 

Secretary ——-—-—---8,000 

Assistant Secretary —-———-- 6,000 

Accountant and Auditor™-————™™ 8,000 


Per Annum. 

Assistant Accountant and Auditor — 6,000 
Sub-warehouse-keeper, and deputy paymaster 6,000 
Collector of customs, and land revenue™— 6,000 
Assistant to the superintendent and store¬ 
keeper of marine, and paymaster — 6,000 

Surgeon™-——----—10,7 20 

First assistant ditto--™——— 3,000 

Second assistant ditto——---3,000 

Ten writers, each —----— 1,440 

Master Attendant 3,600 

f Clerk and schoolmaster--—™— 900 


The whole of the persons filling the before-mentioned offices are restricted by law from trade, agency, 
and from being planters for exportation. 

To the plan of the First Lord of the Admiralty, for making the island a naval arsenal, and construct- * 
ing docks for the building and repairing of His Majesty's ships, the Company agreed to afford the utmost 
aid in their power to carry it into execution. It however appears that in 1808 His Majesty's Ministers 
were desirous of ascertaining correctly, by the construction and actual cost of one or more ships of war at 
Prince of Wales's Island, whether the system might reasonably be expected to be permanently beneficia] 
to the public service; and the Company, in that state of uncertainty as to the intentions of Government, 
being unwilling to incur any considerable expence in the construction of an arsenal or docks, until they 
were satisfied that such vrorks would really be essential to the public interest, deemed it expedient to re¬ 
duce the establishment of the island to what was considered requisite for it as an important commercial 
entrepot, and a separate Presidency, under the management of a Governor and Council. 

Since the above period, ship-building has been carried on to a considerable extent. A frigate has been 
built for His Majesty's service, a ship of 1200 tons for the service of the East India Company, besides 
several ships for the Country trade ; but for the supply of that which is most essential, namely the teak, 
recourse must be had to Pegu, from whence the expence of obtaining and transporting it is considerable. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Coins. —Accounts are kept by the Company in Spanish dollars, copangs, and pice; 10 pice making 
X copang, and 10 copangs 1 Spanish dollar. 

Q q 2 



300 


PRINCE OF WALES’S ISLAND. 


The merchants keep their accounts in Spanish dollars and cents. The current pice are coined on the 
island, being pieces of tin, nearly the size of an English penny; they have the Company’s mark on one 
side, and are flat on the other; 100 of them ought to contain catties of pure tin. 

Weights and Measures. —Weighable goods in the wholesale are chiefly sold by the China pecul; 
they are weighed with English weights, and afterwards turned into peculs and catties. 

The English yard is in common use, and piece-goods are bought and sold by the corge. 

IMPORTS. 


The European articles imported, either in 