

Tales. Mace. 


1st sort**********. capallo, or large head 
2d ditto — capallo cached, or small head 

3d ditto-baddan, or belly -- 

4th ditto **"VWWV%. cakee, or foot 


2 2 weight 

3 5 

4 2 
6 1 


Making in the whole Tales 16 0 equal to one catty. 

The whole quantity annually brought down for sale on the western side, does not exceed 50 peculs. 
The price varies according to the demand, from S to 12 dollars per catty for the head camphire; the 
others in proportion. The head should be chosen in thin white scales, about the breadth of a nail, which 
is mixed with two or three sizes smaller, the smallest much resembling sea sand in grain and colour; the 
more of the first sort, the more valuable. If the first was sold separate at China, it would be worth from 
20 to 25 tales per catty. It should be of a strong, fragrant, and penetrating smell, of a bitterish aro¬ 
matic taste, softening under the teeth, and accompanied with a sense of coolness. It is proved by putting 
it in water; if good, it will swim on the surface; if adulterated, it will sink. Particular care should be 
taken in packing it, or it will evaporate, and lose much of its weight. 

This kind of camphire is also produced on the Island of Borneo, of which about 30 peculs are 
annually exported; and it is said to be held in greater estimation by the Chinese than that of Sumatra, 
the whole of which is sent to the China market, the camphire imported into England being the produce 
of China, and is described hereafter. 


CAMPHIRE OIL. 

This valuable commodity is not manufactured, undergoes no preparation, and, though termed an oil, 
is rather a liquid and volatile resin without any oleaginous quality. It is procured in the following manner. 
The natives make a transverse incision in the tree to the depth of some inches, and then cut sloping 
downwards from above the notch, till they leave a flat horizontal superficies; this they hollow out till it 
holds about a quart: they then put into the hollow' a piece of lighted reed, and let it remain for about ten 
minutes, which acting as a stimulus, draws the fluid to that part, and, in the space of the night, the 
liquor fills the receptacle. The natives of Sumatra consider this oil a valuable domestic medicine, and it 
is much used by them in strains, swellings, and inflammations. 



CANES—CLOVE BARK—COPPER 


309 


CANES 

Are of several kinds, and are principally brought from the Straits of Malacca. The dragon a blood 
are distinguished as of two sorts, male and female: the first is perfectly round, the other not so, having a 
projection, or seam, on one side; the male canes are preferred, and should be chosen sound, taper, supple, 
and clouded, the more so the better, and of a dark brown or mahogany colour;, the middle joint must be 
36 inches long, and the top and bottom joints eight or ten inches more. Such as are light, and under 30 
inches long, should be rejected. 

Walking canes, called Jambee canes, are generally about four feet long, -with joints, or knobs, about 
six to nine inches apart; these are of little value, and seldom imported. 