

The canes called Japan, or wanghees, are procured at China; they should be chosen pliable, tough, 
round, and taper, of a good colour, and well glazed, having the knots at regular distances; those which 
are light and worm-eaten, should be rejected. 

6,000 dragon's blood canes, 3,000 walking canes, or 6,000 wanghees are allowed to a ton. 

The duties on canes and rattans of the various descriptions are as follow: 

Permanent Duty. War Duty. Total. 

Bamboos per 1000 1 8 7 2 —J?1 8 8 

Rattans (not ground rattans) — w --~— ditto 1 1 0 7 2 -- 18 8 

Reed canes ■vxvv\>v'Vvvv\vv»\vkwiAwwwwv\vxwwv\..ivwwwwv\v\ ditto 0 16 0 O i -VVV-VVWVWV 12 4 

Walking canes, or sticks, mounted, painted, inlaid, or 

otherwise ornamented or manufactured -- - per cwt. 51 5 0_~17 1 8 6S 6 8 

Wanghees, jambees, ground rattans, dragon's blood, 

and other walking canes or sticks per 1000 2 10 0 16 8 3 6 8 

CLOVE BARK, 

Or coelit-lawang, is the bark of a tree growing on Amboyna and the neighbouring islands. It is 
thin, of a greyish cast, and when upon the tree, is smooth, but when dried, it becomes rough and shrivelled; 
it is red within, and that taken from the bottom of the tree, has a strong clove smell and taste, but higher 
up it is not so strong, and is more astringent. It is dried in the sun, and must be kept in an airy place. It 
is much more esteemed than the Missov bark, though its flavour and smell sooner decay. A very excellent 
and penetrating oil is extracted from this bark, almost as fine as oil of cloves, and possessing the same 
qualities. The Dutch Company reserved to themselves the extraction of coelit-lawang oil, and prohibited 
individuals from distilling it, under a penalty of 500 rix-dollars. 

The appearance of this bark differs with the country which produces it. In the Moluccas it is 
browner than at Amboyna; the latter is also much thinner, harder, and of a more pleasant taste. 

COPPER 

Is produced in Persia, Sumatra, and Japan, From the former place it used to be imported into 
Europe, and is at present an article of trade from the Gulf of Persia to the British settlements in India. 

The copper from Sumatra is produced on and in the hills near Labuonajee. The ore produces half 
its weight In pure metal, and is sold at the rate of 20 dollars the pecul; it is formed into small pointed 
cakes; and from the state it is in when purchased, requires much preparation and expence to render it 
fit for use, or perfectly malleable and ductile. 

Japan copper is in small bars, about six Inches long, flat on one side, and convex on the other, 
weighing four or five ounces each, and packed in cases, each containing a pecul. This copper contains 



310 


COSSUMBA—DAMMER—EJOO—GOLD-DUST. 


more gold, and is finer than any other that is met with in any part of the world. The Dutch used to 
carry on a considerable trade in it, importing it from Japan into Batavia, from whence they sent it to 
several parts of India, where it was usually disposed of to considerable advantage. 