

CAJEPUTA OIL, 

The tree which furnishes this oil, is found in the Moluccas, and other islands in the Eastern seas. It is 
a medicine in great estimation amongst the Malays, and is said to be obtained by distillation. The best 
is procured at the Island of Bouro; it is generally of a greenish colour, but sometimes nearly white and 
clear, very limpid, lighter than water, of a strong volatile smell, resembling camphire and cardamums 
mixed, and a strong pungent taste, like that of the latter. It is said that if a drop of genuine cajeputa 
oil be rubbed on the temples, it will occasion a pungent pain in the eyes with a db charge of tears. That 
which is dark coloured, and not perfectly soluble in spirits of wine, should be rejected. It is sometimes 
imported as an article of trade. In the March sale, 1807, 1102 ounces sold for i?240. 

The permanent duty on cajeputa oil is Is. 6d. per ounce, and the war duty 6d. per ounce. 

CAMPHIRE NATIVE, 

Or Camphire Baroos, from the place of its growth, is a solid unctuous concrete, obtained from a 
tree growing on the northern part of the Island of Sumatra. The tree grows without cultivation in the 
woods lying near the sea-coast, and is frequently found upwards of 15 feet in circumference, and high in 
proportion. 

For carpenters’ work the wood is much esteemed, being easy to work, light, durable, and not liable 
to be injured by insects, and retaining a pleasant and agreeable smell. The leaf is small, of a roundish 
oval, the fibres running straight and parallel to each other, and terminating in a remarkably long and 
slender point. 

The camphire is found in the state in which we see it, in natural fissures or crevices of the wood, but 
does not exhibit any external appearance by which its existence can be previously ascertained; and the 
persons whose employment it is to collect it, usually cut down a number of trees before they find one that 
contains a sufficient quantity to repay their labour; it is said that not a tenth part of the number felled is 

Rr 2 



308 • 


CAMPHIRE OIL. 


productive either of camphire or camphire oil, although the latter is less rare: this scarcity tends to 
enhance the price. The tree, when cut down, is divided transversely into several blocks, and these again 
are split with wedges into small pieces, from the interstices of which the camphire, if any there be, is 
extracted. It is distinguished into three sorts: 

Head. —This is the sort which comes readily away in large flakes, almost transparent, somewhat like 
crystals of saltpetre, free from, dust, dirt, or other impurities. 

Belly consists of small flakes, mixed with that which is brownish, but transparent, something 
resembling rosin coarsely powdered, with few sticks and straws in it. 

Foot resembles dark coloured rosin, is chiefly scraped from the wood, and often mixed with it, having 
a number of shining particles in it; the more of them the better. 

The mode of separating the camphire from its impurities is by washing; it is then passed through 
sieves or screens of different sizes, in order to make the assortment, so far as it depends upon the size of 
the grains; but much of the selection is also made by hand, and particular care is taken to distinguish, 
from the more genuine kinds, that which is produced by an artificial concretion of the essential oil. The 
method usually observed in purchasing it, is to take four sieves and a catty of camphire out of each sort,, 
in the following proportions: 