1806 

105 

908 

3 

37 

108 

940 

8 14 

0 

1807 

70 

1925 

5 

29 

75 

1954 

26 0 

0 

1808 

379 

5799 

87 

1874 

466 

7673 

16 9 

9 


20 cwt. of gum Benjamin are allowed to a ton. The permanent duty is £6 12s. per ewi. and the 
temporary or war duty £l 17s. 4d. making in the whole £7 9s. 4d, per cwt. 

BIRDS' NESTS 

Are much celebrated as a peculiar luxury of the table, especially amongst the Chinese; they are 
found in caves on the sea-coast of Sumatra, more particularly towards its southern extremity, on the 
Island of Java, and on many of the Eastern islands. The bird which constructs them, resembles the 
swallow. The nests differ from each other in size, thickness, colour, and weight; their diameter is 
commonly three fingers in breadth at the top, and their perpendicular depth in the middle seldom exceeds* 
an inch. The substance of these nests is white, inclining to red, somewhat transparent; their thickness 
Is little more than that of a silver spoon, and their weight is from a quarter to half an ounce. They are 
very brittle, and have a shining gummy appearance internally, when broken, and are wrinkled, or slightly 
furrowed, on the surface. They are of three denominations, viz. 

e ‘ r ^ ie € ^ eanes t and best are almost as white as writing paper, and as transparent as isinglass* 

having only a few downy feathers hanging about them. This is the kind which suits the China market* 



BLACK-WOOD— CAJEPUTA OIL—CAMPHIRE NATIVE. 


30? 


and is the only sort which should be taken. In purchasing them, be careful that they are perfectly dry; 
if so crisp as to break, it is the better, because they then weigh light; they are frequently damped 
to make them heavy, and are then tough and pliable. They are generally packed one with another, to 
the length of 12 or 15 inches, and secured with split rattans, to prevent their breaking. Always open the 
bundles before you weigh them, or you will have a good deal of dirt amongst them. 

Belly are of a darker colour, yellowish, but clear of dirt, and may with pains be made nearly 
equal to the head, by picking out the feathers, washing the dirt off, and laying them in the dew at night; 
but if left for the sun to shine on, they grow yellower, and spoil. 

Foot are very dirty and dark coloured, having many feathers in them; this sort should be rejected, 
as they are not saleable at China. 

On the Island of Java alone about 20 peculs are annually procured, and sent to China; they are some¬ 
times brought in small quantities to Europe as presents. 

BLACK-WOOD 

Is procured in various parts of India and the Eastern islands, but the best is from the Mauritius. It 
is in logs of various sizes, sometimes 12 inches in diameter; but those trees which are about six inches, 
and long and straight, are preferred. It should be chosen free from cracks, and not worm-eaten or decayed, 
having the bark and white wood carefully cleaned off. There is a wood called milk-wood, somewhat re¬ 
sembling it on the outside, which is sometimes imported instead of it. It is striped black and white, and 
of little use; whereas black-wood is in regular demand. 