




305 


BALACHANG—BEAN OF ST. IGNATIUS, &c. 

marked with small dusky spots as big as tares on the outer, and smaller spots of white on the inner webs; 
the eleven remaining quills are dark brown, marked with round and oblong spots on both webs, and on 
the outer, near the shaft, a row of large eyes, from 12 to 15 in number, the largest an inch in diameter, 
somewhat resembling those in a peacock’s train. The tail consists of 14 feathers; the two middle are 
three feet in length, the next 18 inches, and gradually shortened to the outer ones, which are 12 inches only 
in length; the colour is dusky brown dotted with white, and the two middle have round ’white spots, 
encircled with black on the outer, and brown irregular ones surrounded with dusky on the inner web. 
The feathers used to be much esteemed in England, but at present are little regarded. 

The duty on all feathers, except those of the ostrich, are permanent £37 10s. and war duty £12 10 s. 
making in the whole £50 per cento 


BALACHANG 

Is a species of caviar, esteemed a great delicacy by the Malays, and forms an article of trade 
amongst them, and to some parts of India. To Europeans it is very offensive, particularly the black kind, 
which is the most common. The best sort, or the red balachang, is made of the spawn of shrimps, or of 
the shrimps themselves; they are, after boiling, exposed to the sun to dry, then pounded in a mortar 
with salt, moistened with a little water, and formed into cakes, which is the whole process. The black 
sort, used by the lower class, is made of small fish prepared in the same maimer. 

BEAN OF ST. IGNATIUS. 

The article so called is the small solid seed of a fruit of the gourd kind, growing in some of the 
Eastern islands, and in which the Chinese trade. The figure of this seed is irregular; it is nearly the size 
of a small nutmeg, with a musky scent when fresh, and a taste somewhat bitter. Its external colour is 
grey, but it inclines to black when stripped of the thin skin which invests it; the inside resembles a dark 
coloured jelly, but it is of as hard a consistence as horn, so that it is difficult to cut or break it. If 
grated (which is the easiest way of using it), it appears white in those places touched by the points of the 
grater, which deceives those who see it of that colour; it must be cut through the middle with a knife 
driven by a hammer or mallet, in order to view its natural colour. 

BEECH BE MER, 

Or sea-slug, is an article of trade from the Eastern islands to China, where it is considered as highly 
nourishing, and is used in soups, &e. It very much resembles the large garden-slug in appearance, but is 
considerably larger, some weighing half a pound each. It is of two kinds, the black and white; the 
black is what we commonly see, and is reputed the best; the white is larger than the black, and one parti¬ 
cular kind of it is said to be more esteemed in China. It should be chosen in large pieces, well dried, 
and care taken that the worm is not in it. 