

Large ships anchor with the church bearing E. 27° N. in 10 fathoms, about If mile from the town. 
Ships’ boats may proceed into the river at about three-quarters flood. In going in, keep the fort well 
open to the starboard, till the river is open between the fort and the houses; then steer directly in for the 
river, that being the deepest channel; the landing-place is on the larboard side, as soon as you enter the 
river, about two stones’ throw from the bridge. 

Malacca was first visited by the Portuguese, under Sequeira, in 150S, and they experienced a friendly 
reception from the King; but great jealousy arose among the commercial people of the different nations 
frequenting the place, especially the Arabs, which they so effectually instilled into the Prince, as soon to 
destroy the good understanding between him and the Portuguese, whom he did not dare attack by open 
force, but used every species of treachery to destroy. Finding his plots detected, he ordered the 
massacre of all the Europeans who were in his power. Numbers were slain, but a few were kept as hos¬ 
tages, to prevent the revenge of the Admiral. Albuquerque, who was then the Portuguese Governor- 



318 


MALACCA. 


General, taking advantage of this quarrel, sailed from Goa in 1511, and appearing before the port of 
Malacca, demanded the release of his countrymen. This demand was at first refused; but after some 
hostilities, the King was so terrified as to send the surviving Portuguese, and offered to make peace with 
them upon their own terms. Those prescribed by Albuquerque were very high; he demanded leave to 
build a fort where he thought fit; reparation of all damages done to the Portuguese; and a sum of money 
equivalent to the expence of the expedition. The King absolutely refused to yield to them; whereupon 
hostilities recommenced on both sides, which ended in Albuquerque's attacking the city by sea and land 
with great fury. After an obstinate resistance, it was taken by storm, given to the pillage of the troops, 
and the plunder was very considerable. The Portuguese immediately erected a strong fort, and put a 
good garrison into it: in a very short time it became famous all over India and Europe, and from its 
situation, commanded the trade of the neighbouring countries. 

The Kings of Acheen made repeated attempts to expel the Portuguese from Malacca, the principal of 
which were in 1537, in 1567, in 1615, and in 1628; and notwithstanding the resources of the Acheenese 
were prodigious at those periods, yet the Portuguese were successful in repelling their attacks. 

In 1605 the Dutch attacked and destroyed a fleet of Portuguese vessels, consisting of 34 sail in the 
roads, and made an attempt upon the place, but were repulsed. In 1640 the Dutch, knowing the import¬ 
ance of the place, and the vast advantages accruing to the Portuguese from the possession of it, fitted 
out a large fleet from Batavia with a great body of land forces, and at the same time concluded an alliance 
with the King of Joliore, who invested the place by land, while the Dutch blocked it up by sea. The 
Governor is accused of treachery, and to have been bribed into a surrender; but it is certain that he did 
not give the place up till after a gallant defence of six months against a very superior force. 