

Upon your arrival, your first visit is to the Shabundar, who will introduce you to the Rajah. The next 
day you bring your musters on shore; and having made your bargain to sell, you will stipulate likewise 
for your returns. Should there be any Buggess proas in the river, avoid making any private bargains with 
them, as the King does not allow any to trade with them or the Chinese; he monopolizes all this trade, 
and if he finds it out, which he is certain of doing by his informers, he will ever after give a preference in 
trade to any body else than you. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Spanish dollars are in general use, but imaginary dollars are dealt for here, which are computed by 
weight in the following manner:—8 tompongs of tin of S catties weight, are 1 dollar; 30 dollars, or 240 
catties, are 1 bahar. The Malacca bahar of 300 catties is sometimes used for selling; it is therefore 
necessary in bargains to mention what bahar you agree for, and insist upon having your tin weighed by 
your own weights, as.their dotchln is generally short of the weight you ought to receive. 

The bahar here is 3 China peculs, or 400 lbs. avoirdupois. 



MALACCA. 


31'1 


IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 


Imports.-—B y the country ships from India, and by proas from Pulo Pinang, are brought 


Coarse cutlery. 
Cotton. 
China-ware. 
Copper goods. 


Gunpowder. 
Glass-ware. 
Gold thread. 
Iron in bars. 


Lead. 

Looking-glasses. 

Opium. 

Piece-goods. 


Swivel suns. 

Steel. 

Tobacco. 

W oollens. 


The Buggess proas import many articles of Eastern produce, taking in return Spanish dollars and the 
above-mentioned goods. 

Exports. —The produce of the country, and -what is brought from the neighbouring ports, is taken 
away by the country ships, or sent in then* own proas to Pulo Pinang, and consists of 


Beech de mer. 
Beetle-nut. 
Cloves. 
Camphire. 


Catch. 

Canes. 

Dragon's blood. 
Dammer. 


Elephants' teeth. 
Gold-dust. 
Nutmegs. 
Pepper. 


Rattans. 

Sago. 

Tortoise-shell. 

Tin. 


In the choice of tin the preference here should be given to the smaller pieces, as the slabs are fre¬ 
quently adulterated with dross, stones, and iron shot. If you take gold in return for your goods, it 
should be examined by a touchadar, and have the King's chop on it, to prevent adulteration. 


DUTIES. 


Two dollars per bahar, that is about 2 in 30, are the customs here, and the presents are many, 
though not so valuable as at Acheen; and you will find it much to your interest to be on good terms 
with the Shabundar and the weigh-master. 

MALACCA. 

This city, which gives its name to the straits formed by the Malay Peninsula and the Island of 
Sumatra, is situated at the head of a small bay, in latitude 2° 12' North, and longitude 102° 10 East, and 
has a very neat and beautiful appearance from the sea. The city is large; many of the houses are of 
stone and well built; and several of the streets are spacious and handsome. The fort is on the south side of 
a small river, over which is a bridge of several arches. The church stands upon a hill, and being always 
kept white, is conspicuous at a great distance. 