

20 cwt. of wax are allowed to a ton. The duties on the various kinds are as follow: 

Bees wax, unmanufactured —^—per cwt £2 2s. permanent, and £0 14s. war duty. 

Ditto, white or manufactured ^ —v^ditto 3 18 ditto__^_1 6 ditto. 

Wax candles -.—>—ditto 8 8 dittos—^ 2 16 ditto. 

WOOD OIL. 

This oil is produced on Sumatra, and is used for preserving timber from the white ants, and when 
boiled with dammer, for covering the bottoms of ships and boats. It is procured in the same maimer as 
camphire oil, by making a transverse incision into the tree to the depth of some inches, and then cutting 
a slope down from the notch, till they leave a flat superficies. This they hollow out to a capacity to receive 
about a quart; they then put into the hollow a bit of lighted reed, and let it remain for about ten minutes, 
which acting as a stimulus, draws the fluid to that part. In the space of a night, the liquor fills the 
receptacle prepared for it, and the tree continues to yield a lesser quantity for three successive nights, when 
the fire must be again applied; but on a few repetitions it is exhausted. 



316 


PERA—SALANGORE. 


PERA. 

From the S. W. end of Prince of Wales's Island, Pulo Binding bears S. S. E. distant about 60 miles. 
This island and the Sambelongs lie at the entrance of Pera River, which is in latitude about 3° 50 North. 
The ebb tide runs strong near the mouth of the river, where it narrows 3 especially after rain; it will 
admit of a vessel drawing 12 or 14 feet water, but the bar requires attention, being hard sand. There is 
but one dangerous shoal in the river. In other respects it is navigable with safety, having a continued 
muddy bottom up to the place where the Butch had a factory, which they relinquished. The town of Pera* 
where the King resides, is about fifty miles from the sea. There is little trade here. The Butch formerly con¬ 
tracted with the King for all the tin at 10 Spanish dollars a pecul; but much of it was smuggled to Pulo 
Pinang, by the rivers that empty themselves into the sea to the northward of Pera. 

Cattle and poultry are not so cheap here as at Queda. Oysters are to be had in quantities near the 
river’s mouth, and great plenty of excellent fish. Good water may be procured at a w r atering-place 
near the ruins of the Butch fort, on the east side of Pulo Binding. 

SALANGORE. 

The kingdom of Salangore extends from the river Pima in 3° 35' North, to Ginting River, to the 
eastward of Tanjong Tuan, in latitude 2° 10' North. There are several rivers which are navigable for 
vessels; the only one frequented by Europeans is Salangore river, in 3° 20' North, and longitude 101° 18 East. 
The town where the King resides, is situated a short distance up the river, to which small ships occa¬ 
sionally proceed. You are perfectly safe in this port while in the river, and it is the only one upon the 
Malay Coast, except Tringano, where you are free from apprehensions for your life and property. But 
lying in the roads, it will be necessary to be on the alert, and ready to repel any attack made by the strag¬ 
gling proas that are always about, and ready to take advantage of any inattention: you should not, there¬ 
fore, suffer any proas to come near after dark. It never has been known that any accident happened in the 
river of Salangore by a ship being cut off, as the Rajah finds it his interest to establish a good name to 
the port. Coming into the river, steer for the look-out house, keeping it rather on the larboard bow, 
and the river's mouth fairly open. It is said that the Butch have sunk large stones across the entrance of 
the river, which should be guarded against. The fishing stakes may be run between, observing to keep 
clear of those to wdiich nets are attached, as you may do the fishermen an injury, which they will not easily 
forget. You anchor off the Shabundar's house, which is on the right hand side of the river as you go in. 