

The gold In Sumatra is found mostly in the central parts of the Island, it being seldom observed to 
the southward of Limun, a branch of the Jambee river, nor to the northward of Annalaboo. Padang, on 
the western side of the island, is the principal mart for it. The metal brought down is of two sorts. The 
first is distinguished by the terms amas supayang, andamas sungei-abu, usually called rock-gold, consisting 
of pieces of rock, or quartz, more or less intermixed with veins of gold, generally of a fine quality, 
running through it in all directions, and forming beautiful masses, which, being admired by Europeans, 
are sometimes sold at the same price as if. solid metal. The mines yielding this sort are commonly situ¬ 
ated at the foot of a mountain, and the shafts are driven horizontally to the extent of from S to 20 
fathoms. The other sort is, on the contrary, found in the state of smooth solid lumps, in shape like gravel, 
and of various sizes, sometimes weighing upwards of nine ounces; this sort is also termed amas lichin, or 
smooth gold. This form of gravel is the most common in which gold is discovered. Gold-dust, or amas 
urei, is collected either in the channels of brooks running over ground rich in the metal, in standing pools 
of water occasioned by heavy rains, or in a number of holes dug in a situation to which a small rapid 
stream can be directed. 

A considerable part of the produce (perhaps one half) never comes into the hands of Europeans, but 
is conveyed to the eastern side of the island. It is stated that there have been annually received, on public 
and private account, 12,000 ounces at Padang alone; at Annalaboo 2,000; at Natal 800; and at Moco 
Moco 600; making in the whole 15,400 ounces per annum. When brought to the Company's settle¬ 
ments, it was formerly purchased at the rate of 18 Spanish dollars per tale, or about £3 5s. per ounce, 
but latterly it has risen to £3 ISs, per ounce. 

Before the gold is weighed for sale, in order to cleanse it from impurities and heterogeneous mixtures, 
whether natural or fraudulent (such as filings of copper or of iron), a skilful person is employed, who, by 
the sharpness of his eye, and long practice, Is able to effect this to a surprising degree of nicety. The 
dust is spread out on a kind of wooden platter, and the base particles are touched out from the mass, and 
put aside one by one with an instrument, if such it may be termed, made of cotton cloth rolled up to a 
point. If the honesty of these gold-cleaners can be depended upon, their dexterity Is almost infallible; 
and, as some check upon the former, it is usual to pour the contents of each parcel, when thus cleansed, 
into a vessel of aqua-fortis, which puts their accuracy to the test. The parcels, or bulses, in which the 
gold is packed up, are formed of the integument that covers the heart of the buffalo; this has the appear¬ 
ance of a bladder, but is both tougher and more pliable. In those parts of the country where the traffic 
in the article is considerable, it is generally employed as currency instead of coin. Every man carries small 
scales about him, and purchases are made with it so low as to the weight of a grain or two of pacldv. 