

KEMO SHELLS 

Are the shells of a very large species of cockle, common on the shores of many of the Eastern islands, 
and are sometimes upwards of 3 feet in diameter, and weighing from 2 to 4 cwt. per pair. They are occa¬ 
sionally brought home as curiosities, and are much esteemed. They should be chosen of the largest size, 
the internal part perfectly white, and free from cracks and decay. 

LIGNUM ALOES, 

Agallochum, or calambac, is the wood of a tree growing in some parts of the Malay Peninsula, 
Cochin China, Siam, &c. It is described as resembling an olive, and the wood, being so much esteemed 
among the Asiatics, is carefully watched. The trunk is of three colours, and distinguished by different 
names in commerce, viz, 

I. Eagle Woon Is that immediately under the bark, and is black, compact, and heavy, somewhat 
resembling ebony, and is called by the Portuguese, pao d’aquila, or eagle wood, and sinks in water. 



MISSOY BARK—RATTANS. 


313 


II. Is a light veiny wood, of a yellowish brown colour, somewhat like rotten wood, and when burnt, 
affords a pleasant smell, and does not sink in water. This is the kind commonly known in Europe; it is 
harder, drier, more like dust in the mouth, and weaker in all its qualities than the real calambac, or heart 
of the tree; the nearer it approaches to that, the better. 

III. Calambac is the heart, or centre part of the tree, and is the wood so much esteemed in all 
parts of India, It should be chosen of a shining yellow colour, and well veined externally, but more in¬ 
clined to white within, and of a highly resinous quality; it should have an agreeable fragrant smell, and a 
bitter aromatic taste, and be of a sufficient softness to receive an impression from the teeth or nails. The 
true calambac is generally in flat bits; and its goodness is tried by putting a small piece into the fire; if it 
seems to melt like wax, and emit an agreeable fragrance while burning (which should continue till it is 
wholly consumed), the wood is considered of a good quality. 

This wood is never brought to Europe, being of little value. 

MISSOY BARK 

This bark is generally brought from the Aroo Islands and New Guinea; it is almost flat, of an ob¬ 
scure yellow colour, covered with a greyish outer bark, of a sweet smell and taste, mixed with the flavour 
of cinnamon. It is never imported into Europe. 

RATTANS 

Are produced in various parts of Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula, and several of the Eastern islands, 
and great quantities are annually carried to China, which is the principal market for them. For cane-work, 
they should be chosen long, of a bright pale yellow colour, well glazed, and of a small size, not brittle, or 
subject to break. They are purchased by the bundle, which ought to contain 100 rattans, neatly tied in 
the middle, and the ends bent together. In China they are sold by the pecul, which contains from 9 to 12 
bundles of rattans: it is therefore necessary to examine into the average weight of the bundles, as they 
are frequently considerably reduced in size. Such as are black or dark coloured, that snap short, or the 
glazing flies off on being bent, should be rejected. They are occasionally imported from India, and when 
used as dunnage, are generally allowed to pass free of freight. 