

The Dutch retained possession of it till the breaking out of the war with Great Britain, to whom it 
was surrendered on the 17th of August, 1795, since which period the establishment of Pulo Pinang, 
having superseded the necessity of maintaining it, as it was possessed of no natural advantages, either in 
point of product, trade, or harbour, the Company came to the resolution in 1805, of withdrawing the 
garrison and stores from Malacca and its dependencies; and, previous to the abandonment of the place, 
the fortifications and public works of all descriptions were completely demolished, so as to render it of 
the least possible value to the enemy, in case it should ever again come into his possession. Many of 
the inhabitants, with their families and effects, repaired to Prince of Wales's Island, and established 
themselves under the Company's protection. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Coins. —They have no particular coins of their own; some few Dutch schillings and stivers are to 
be seen; the rest are gold, as coupangs, ducats, &c.; but all contracts for goods, bought or sold, are 
made in Dutch dollars. 

Accounts are kept in rix-dollars, schillings, stivers, and doits, which are thus divided, 

1 stiver 
1 schilling 
1 rix-dollar 

All Indian coins are current here. The following are the rates at which they usually pass: 

Bombay rupee -- 5 schillings Japan coup an g-———-80 schillings 

Madras rupee --.-—— -4 ditto Duccatoon______ 13 ditto 

Spanish ditto English crown 10 ditto 


4 doits ^ 

6 stivers ( make 
8 schillings \ 



JOHORE. 


319 


Weights and Measures. —All goods are weighed here by the dotchin, for which 1 per cent, is paid 
to the Captain of the Chinese, who is dotchin keeper. 


16 tales 
100 catties 
3 peculs 


GREAT WEIGHTS. 


make 


1 catty 
1 pecul 
1 bahar 


16 miams 
20 buncals 


GOLD WEIGHTS. 

^ 1 buncal 
2 1 catty 


make 


which is equal to troy, 29 oz. 16 dwts. 


Grain Measure. —1 ganton is equal to 6 Dutch lbs.; 10 gantons 1 measure; 50 measures 1 last; 
800 gantons 1 quoyane. 40 China peculs are 1 quoyane, and 1 pecul is 125 Malacca lbs. 

Long Measure.— The covid is two-thirds of a Dutch Ell, about ISf English Inches, 


IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

The East India Company's ships, and the Country ships from India bound to China, used to call here for 
refreshments and to purchase goods; but the settlement atPuloPinanghas effectually superseded the necessity 
of their continuing to do so, as they find, upon their arrival at the latter place, goods more certainly provided, 
and in larger quantities. Notwithstanding which, a number of articles are occasionally to be bought at lower 
prices than at Pulo Pinang. The China price current will be a guide in making purchases at both places; 
and it will not be worth the risk and trouble if the goods will not yield 15 or 20 per cent. 

The gold-dust met with here is first examined by the officers of the Company, and then made up 
into small packets in Chinese paper, bound round with a thread, and impressed with Malay characters. 
Each packet contains a catty, and is worth from 460 to 500 dollars. The packets when sold are never 
opened, but are taken on the seller's report; and no instance is known of any fraud ever having been 
practised on such occasions. 