

TIN. 


This metal is found in most parts of the Malay Peninsula, on Sumatra, and Banca; it is an article 
in which a considerable trade is carried on with China and various parts, and used to form part of the 
imports of the Dutch India Company into Holland. The best tin is said to come from Banca, the mines on 
which island are stated to yield 1500 tons per annum; it is generally made into slabs or ingots of dif¬ 
ferent sizes, from 20 to 60lbs. each; in some parts of the Malay Coast it is cast into the shape of birds, 
and is frequently in very small pieces. In purchasing tin, only the large slabs should be chosen, if it can 
be so managed; but if obliged to take the small, particular care is requisite both in receiving and deliver¬ 
ing it from the ship, or the sailors will steal it to sell for spirits. 


In 1789 the East India Company, with a view of benefiting the mines in Cornwall, came to a reso¬ 
lution of sending tin from England to China, and to the different settlements in India; since which pe- 
nod there have been sold, principally in China, 16,650 tons, the sale amount of which was ^1,399,200 
giving an annual average of 756 tons, and an average price of £84, per ton. The quantity of tin annually 
imported into Canton, is stated to be about 1800 tons. , 


The Dutch Company have had a treaty with the Chief, or Sultan, of the Island of Banca, by which 
the latter is bound to deliver to them the whole of the tin produced in his territories, at the price of 27 
florins per 100 Dutch pounds, which are equal to about £47 10s. per ton avoirdupois; but tills treaty being 



WAX— WOOD OIL. 


315 


compulsatory on tlie part of the Dutch, was evaded whenever it was in the power of the native Chief to 
obtain surreptitious sales at a higher price, which he was in the habit of doing with the English country ships, 
who generally anchored off Mintow, his principal town, on their way to China, where they purchased tin 
at about 18 Spanish dollars per pecul, which are equal to £67 10s. per ton. The Dutch Company obtained 
about 1000 tons annually at the treaty price of £47 10s. per ton, part of which they sent to Europe (on 
an average of seven years, 1785 to 1791, 165 tons per annum); the remainder they sold at China, and va¬ 
rious parts of India. 

The price of tin in London, in 1750, was nearly £74 10s. per ton, about which price it continued, 
with some fluctuations, until 1789, the date of the agreement between the East India Company and the 
proprietors of the mines in Cornwall. In consequence of that arrangement, the price of tin has risen to 
£100, £120, and <£150, and even as high as £171. In March, 1812, a quantity of prize Asiatic tin 
produced at the Company’s sales £187 per ton, while the price of British tin was £133 per ton. 

The permanent duty upon tin imported into Great Britain is £3 9s. per cwt. and the temporary or 
war duty £1 3s. making in all £4 12s. per cwt. 


WAX 

Is a commodity of great importance in the Eastern islands, from whence it is exported in considerable 
quantities to China, and other parts, in large oblong cakes. It is divided into head, belly, and foot. The 
head is of a bright yellow colour, free from dirt and impurities; the belly is darker coloured and veiny; 
and the foot is of an ash-colour, soft and foul. Wax should be chosen somewhat brittle, of a pleasant 
yellow colour, an agreeable smell and taste, that does not adhere to the teeth when chewed, and burns en¬ 
tirely away. That which is dark-coloured and foul should be rejected; and care should be taken that the 
inside of the cakes are equal to the outside. It is occasionally imported in. small quantities from Bengal; 
but the heavy freight prevents its being profitable, otherwise Bengal could supply the wants of Great 
Britain. The official value of bees wax imported into Great Britain in the years 1807, 8, and 9, was on an 
average £39,984 per annum. 