

Borneo produces immense quantities of gold; it is procured at Sambass, Momparva, Pontiana, 
Borneo Town, and Banjar Massin. It is stated, from very good authority, that 200 peculs of gold-dust 
are annually procured by the Chinese, Dutch, and English, chiefly by the Chinese, from the places visited , 
by their junks. 

At Banjar Massin gold-dust is divided Into head, belly, and foot. The head is also called Molucca 
gold; It is sometimes in grains as large as bay-salt, of a very irregular shape, free from any artificial 
alloy, and conies up in fineness to about 22 carats. The price varies from 22 to 23 Spanish dollars per 
buncal of two Spanish dollars weight. The second sort, or belly, is in smaller grains, like sand or brass 
filings, the price varying from 21 to 22 Spanish dollars per buncal. The foot nearly resembles the 
belly to outward appearance, but is often found mixed with iron dust, or something much resembling it. 
The natives clear it by the help of a loadstone which attracts many of the particles: but it is never 



312 


GUTTA GAMBIR —KEMO SHELLS— LIGNUM ALOES, 


quite clean, therefore too much circumspection cannot be used in purchasing it. The price of this sort varies 
from IS to 20 Spanish dollars per buncal. At Banjar Massin they esteem the highest coloured gold the 
best, provided it be without alloy, which it always is when in dust; the lighter coloured or inferior gold is 
called am as mooda, or young gold. 

Gold-dust is sometimes adulterated with brass filings. To discover this fraud, pour a little aqua-fortis 
upon it, which will immediately receive from the base metal a blue tincture. There are several other 
modes by which this abuse may be discovered; if the gold-dust be spread thin upon a piece of paper, and 
moistened with any volatile alkaline spirit, as that of hartshorn, or sal ammoniac, the spirit will in a few 
minutes dissolve so much of the copper as to stain the paper blue; stale urine has a like effect in an inferior 
degree, and a solution of crude sal ammoniac applied in the same manner, produces a greenish stain. 

In some of the places where gold-dust is procured, it is not permitted to make these trials; in that case 
it is usual to obtain the Rajah’s stamp upon it, who takes care it is of good quality. At Malacca all gold- 
dust used formerly to be examined by an officer belonging to the Dutch East India Company, and 
then made up into small packets, each containing a catty, bound round with thread, and impressed with a 
seal bearing Malay characters. These packets, when sold, were never opened, but taken on the sellers’ 
report; and no instance is known of any fraud having been practised on such occasions. 

GUTTA GAMBIR 

Is a juice extracted from the leaves of a plant of the same name, growing on Sumatra, inspissated by 
decoction, strained, suffered to cool and harden, and then cut into cakes of different sizes, or formed into 
balls. The chief places of manufacture are Siak, Malacca, and Rhio on Bintang. It is used by the 
Malays with the leaves of beetle, in the same manner as cutch in other parts of India; for this 
purpose the finest and whitest is selected; the red, being stronger tasted and rank, is exported to Batavia 
and China, for the purposes of tanning and dying. Gambir, when first tasted, impresses on the palate a strong 
sensation of bitterness and astringency, but it leaves a sweetish taste, which remains a long time. 
The price of this drug at Pulo Pinang varies from 4 to 8 Spanish dollars per pecul. The finest and 
whitest kind is formed into little round cakes or lozenges. It is sold by tale at 3\ dollars per laxa of 10,000, 
and one laxa weighs about 40 catties. This article is frequently adulterated with sago powder, but it 
may be detected by solution in water, 