

The exports, which are the produce of the neighbouring ports and islands, are as follow: 

Beech de mer ——~~ 8 to 12 dollars per pecul Campfire —--—10 to 12 dollars per catty 

Beetle-nut—--~~ 4 to 5 ditto Gutta Gambir 6 to 7 dollars per pecul 

Birds’ nests 1st sort—18 to 20 ditto per catty Pepp_ 9 to 12 ditto 

Ditto 2d-to 12 ditto Rattans ditto per 100 bundles 

Ditto 3d ^ 4 to 6 ditto to 15 dollars per pecul 

Large spars for masts are procured here of an excellent quality. Gold-dust is occasionally to be met 
with, the price varying according to its purity. There are no duties levied on imports or exports; but 
some presents are necessary to the Sultan, and the principal men about his person. 

PAHANG. 

Tliis town is 12 miles up a river, the entrance of which is in latitude about 3° 45' N. The 
river has an island at its mouth, which makes two channels into it; the northern one has 4f fathoms at 
high water, and the channel is about 150 yards broad; just within the bar is excellent anchorage in six 
fathoms. The river is a mile broad, but so full of shoals as to be only navigable for small vessels up to 
the town, the houses of which are built of timber and bamboos, surrounded with trees. It is under an 
independent Rajah, or King, who was once desirous of having the English settle here, but it was not 
considered worth attention. 

COINS AND WEIGHTS. 

The Spanish dollar is the current coin, and the Chinese pecul the weight in common use, and by 
which all goods are bought and sold. 



PACKANGA RIVER—TRXNGANO, 


321 


IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports.— This was formerly a place of considerable trade. Vessels from radons parts of India, 
Bantam, Batavia, Japan, and China used to visit here; at present the trade is principally carried on in 
their own proas, which import the following articles of European and Indian produce: 

Cutlery. Gold thread. Looking-glasses. Steel. 

Gunpowder. Iron. Piece-goods. Tobacco. 

Glass-ware. Lead. Swivel-guns. Woollens. 

These they again carry to the Eastern islands, where they receive in return 

Beech de mer. Elephants’ teeth. Nutmegs. Sago. 

Cloves. Mace. Rattans. Tortoise-shell. 


Exports. —The river abounds with gold-dust, which forms the principal article of trade; it is said 
that 8 cwt. have been exported in a season. Of pepper 300 tons are annually exported; but if there was 
a vent for it, it might be produced to the extent of 3000 tons. The prices of exports are as follow: 


Beech de mer~~~~^~>~15 to 18 dollars per peeuh 

Beetle-nut—--3 to 4 ditto. 

Elephants’ teeth according to their size. 


Pepper ~v~*^~12 to 14 Spanish dollars per pecuL 
Sago^-v^~v^,~I-| to 2 ditto. 

Tin to 18 ditto. 


The gold is the best on the Peninsula, from 20 to 24 dollars per buncal, or the weight of 2 dollars. 

The King being the principal merchant, you make your agreement to be exempt from all duties; 
but presents are necessary to him, and to the principal people about him. 


PACKANGA RIVER. 

The north point of this river is a bluff head land, in latitude 4° 50' North. The town was formerly 
a place of some note, but fell to decay, being dependent on Rhio, the place where most of the eastern 
trade was carried, till it came into the hands of the Dutch; it has now returned under the subjection 
of its native Prince, and has regained, in a small degree, its commerce. This river is very conveniently 
situated for trade, being deep enough at its mouth to admit vessels of 100 tons burthen. 