

The Company always considered that to have the full command of the Straits of Malacca, it was 
very desirable that they should occupy Acheen, as from this port the French were, during the two last 
wars, enabled to refit and supply their ships, and speedily to resume their depredations in the Bay of 
Bengal. The importance of this subject has been recognised at different times. In 1781 the Supreme 
Government was directed to endeavour to acquire a settlement there; which design was attempted in 1782, 
and again in 1784, without any other success than the admission of a commercial residency, which was 
withdrawn in 1785. Prince of Wales's Island had not then been acquired; and for a time it seems to have 



ACHEEN. 


3fS 

been thought that, in obtaining that settlement, all had been done that was requisite for the national in¬ 
terests in those seas; but the Government of that island appears to have seen the value of a connexion with 
the King of Acheen, for in 1798 the Governor submitted to the Supreme Government propositions for a 
treaty with the King. The object of this treaty on the part of the King having been thought objection¬ 
able, the propositions were declined; but there is reason to believe that he is now disposed to give the 
Company a more important footing in his territories, and they seem to entertain a highly favourable 
opinion of the expediency of obtaining a footing at Acheen. The King has since that period expressed 
a desire to be supplied with two armed cruisers. The Bengal Government, however, declined giving 
their consent to the adoption of any measures which had a tendency to implicate them in the local policy 
of any native Government, which might involve them in distant petty hostilities, to the great injury of 
the commerce carried on between Bengal and the Coast of Sumatra. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Coins.— Spanish dollars, pagodas, rupees, and other foreign coins pass current here. They have a 
small gold coin called a manna, which serves to pay servants and other small expences, but is of very 
base metal, and difficult to pass; also a small lead cash, of which you get from 800 to 1000 for a mace. 

Accounts are kept in tales, mace, copangs, and cash. 

Gold Weights are the copang, may am, mace, tale, buncal, and catty, and are thus divided: 


4 copangs 


1 mace. 

5 mace 

make 

1 mayam. 

16 mayams 

1 tale. 

5 tales 


1 buncal. 

20 buncals 


1 catty. 


The true standard of a buncal is 80 mace, though the merchants alter it at their pleasure, making it 
heavier or lighter; but in proportion as the buncal is altered, so must the catty be: from this cause the 
catty varies from 265 to 280 pagodas. 

1 Acheen catty of gold-dust, weighing 280 pagodas, is worth at Madras from 300 to 310 pagodas. 

Great Weights are the buncal, catty, and bahar, and are thus divided: 

oz. dwt. grs. lbs, oz. dr. 

20 buncals \ make f 1 catty, which is, troy weight 30 17 12 avoirdupois 2 1 13 
200 catties i 11 bahar ^wlitto —^501 lbs. 5oz. lOdwts. 422 15 0 