


PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 


Sheep and bullocks are scarce here; but there are buffaloes, hogs, poultry, and fish in plenty, and 
in general very cheap. Here are the finest yams of any produced in India, and a great variety of fruits, 
amongst the rest mangosteens and pine-apples in abundance; of the latter 20 or 30 may sometimes be pur¬ 
chased for a Spanish dollar. Water is brought off in bulk, for which you pay one dollar a butt; but it is 
sometimes brackish. 


JOHORE, 

The town of Johore is about 20 miles from the entrance of the river, of which the bluff land, called 
Johore Hill, forms the southern side. There are two entrances into the river. It was formerly a place of 
considerable importance. In 1511, on the Portuguese conquering Malacca, the Sultan and principal inha¬ 
bitants tied, and founded the City of Johore. In 160S it was taken by the Portuguese, and destroyed. In the 
following year the Malays built another town higher up the river, which they called Batusubar, and to which 
the Dutch contributed, out of the plunder they obtained from the Portuguese on the Peninsula. 

In 1613 the town was taken by the Eng of Acheen, after a siege of 29 days, who plundered it of 
every thing moveable, and made slaves of the inhabitants. The Dutch had at this period a factory on the 
river, which was involved in the war with Acheen, and several of that nation were made prisoners. 

The surrounding country produces pepper, gold, tin, canes, sago, and elephants' teeth; but it is 
seldom visited by Europeans, the Malays bringing their produce to Pulo Pinang in their own proas. 



320 


BINT AN G—PAH AN G. 


In 1703 Captain Hamilton visited the place, and was kindly received. The King made him a present 
of the Island of Sincapore, situated near the entrance of the river; but he declined taking possession of it, 
notwithstanding its convenient situation for trade, and the surrounding country being well supplied with 
excellent timber and trees fit for masts. 

BINTANG. 

This island is situated at the entrance of the Straits of Sincapore, and is in latitude about 1° 2' North, 
and longitude 104° 30' East. Rhio, the principal town, is about five miles to the northward of the S. W. 
extreme of the island, and was formerly a place of considerable trade. The Sultan was under the con- 
troul of the Dutch; but on the capture of Malacca by the English, their influence was done away. It is 
seldom visited by European vessels; but Chinese, junks and Malay proas from the neighbouring countries 
carry on a considerable trade. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

The Spanish dollar is the principal coin. China cash pass current in small payments. All goods 
are bought and sold by the Chinese pecul and catty, and all bargains are made for Spanish dollars. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

The Chinese junks import China-ware, iron pans, nankeen cloths, fire-works, &c. From Prince of 
Wales’s Island are imported in their own proas, piece-goods of various kinds, opium, iron, steel, cutlery, 
looking-glasses, and other articles suitable to the Malay market. 