

The tin procured here is brought from Palembang or Banca, in the Malay proas. The pepper, 
which is the produce of the country, is good; but they often mix it with the Dutch sweepings from 
Palembang, which must be looked into: they will always garble it if you mention it in your contract. 



TRINGANO. 


323 


The merchants may want credit for about 20 days; more they will not expect, as you should always tell them 
you are bound to China, that they may use dispatch. If your time will admit of it, give it them; it insures 
you so much sold; and it often happens they have not the pepper brought in, or gold-dust; and if you 
refuse them credit, the merchants, among whom the King wants to take and distribute the opium go 
away, and you thereby lose the sale of 30 or 40 chests: besides, you may depend upon receiving the 
goods as they come in. You should make it a part of your agreement to have the King's seal put upon 
the gold, as he will then be in some degree answerable for its quality. 

Some years since the King of Tringano was anxious to have an English factory established here, and 
sent a proposition to that effect to the Supreme Government. If it * were thought worth while to settle in 
any part of this coast, this should be preferred, from the attention and respect paid by the Sultan, or 
King, to the English in general. 

This place is conveniently situated for any of the Company’s ships bound to China, which are 
early in the season, the commanders of which are provided with opium, cutlery, or Spanish dollars* 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

All goods are bought and sold for Spanish dollars. The coins current are petties, cossangs, and mace: 

400 petties 1 f 1 cossang 

4 cossangs L make J I mace, a small gold coin 
16 maces j [ 1 tale worth of gold-dust. 

The common weight is the pecul, which is here nearly equal to 140 lbs. avoirdupois weight. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports. —Opium and piece-goods are the principal articles. Of the former from 100 to 200 chests 
are annually disposed of. The other imports are similar to those enumerated at the principal Malay ports. 

Exports. —The following articles are to be met with, the prices varying according to the demand: 

Tin _——16 Spanish dollars per pecul Beetle-nut -- 4 Spanish dollars per pecul 

Pepper_to 16 ditto Rattans— - w ^20 ditto per 100 bundles 

Gold at 19 Spanish dollars per tale weight of If Spanish dollar, or 3S0 Spanish dollars per catty. 

DUTIES. 

The established duties are 5 per cent, but you should always agree that the King should pay the duty, 
for you cannot trade publicly with any one else; at Tringano it is always customary. However, be care¬ 
ful to mention it in your agreement, or they will endeavour to take advantage, and make you pay 
them. The presents necessary are already enumerated. 

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

Fowls may be procured here in great plenty at one Spanish dollar per dozen; and they have an ex¬ 
cellent though small breed of cattle at 4 dollars each. Fish and fruits are in abundance. 