

REDANG ISLANDS. 

These islands, which extend along the coast about 30 miles from 5° 30' North, to 6° 4' North latitude, 
belong to the Government of f Tringano, and from some of which pepper, rattans, and black-wood are 
brought for the King’s use. The inhabitants are apt to take advantage of any small vessels they can over¬ 
come. Having no convenient harbours, the islands are seldom visited by European ships. 

T t 2 



324 PATANY—CALANTAN RIVER—LIGORE. 

PATANY 

Is in latitude about 6° 50' North; the town is about six miles from the road, and was. formerly a 
place of very great trade. The English established a factory here about 1610, which took off annually 
about 10,000 dollars value of Surat and Coromandel cloths; but the trade falling off, the factory was 
withdrawn in 1623. The town is surrounded with wooden palisadoes, and has a strong fort, well 
mounted with cannon. The houses are built of timber and bamboos, and have a mean appearance. Consi¬ 
derable numbers of Chinese are settled here, who carry on a trade in their own junks with Siam, Cochin- 
China, China, and Batavia. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

The principal coin is the Spanish dollar, and all goods are weighed by the Chinese dotchin. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports. —The trade is in the hands of the Chinese, who import from Batavia the following articles: 

Cutlery. Iron. Looking-glasses. Piece-goods. 

Gunpowder. Lead. Opium. Steel. 

From China are imported, for the consumption of the resident Chinese, and for the natives, 

China-ware. Ironmongery. Silk-goods. Tea. 

Furniture. Lackered ware. Sugar&sugar candy. Wearing apparel. 

And from Siam, Cochin-China, Borneo, &c. a variety of eastern commodities. 

Exports.— These consist of the under-mentioned articles, the greater part of which are sent to China: 

Agala-wood. Blackwood. Rattans. Tin. 

Beetle-nut. Canes. Sapan-wood. Tortoise-shell. 

Beech de mer. Dragon’s blood. Skins of sorts. Wax. 

CALANTAN RIVER. 

This river is in latitude 6° 16' North, and under the Government of Tringano. The bar of the river 
is shoal, and there is a number of sandbanks inside, on which boats will ground. Ships sometimes 
touch here to procure pepper. The anchorage is with the river bearing south, about three miles distance. 
The coast from hence stretches westward into the Gulf of Siam; the principal place in which is 

LIGORE, 

About 12 leagues to the northward, between which is a low island called Papier. The anchorage 
is about two leagues from the river. About a league within the river’s mouth the Dutch had formerly 
a factory. The town stands about two miles above the factory; it is built of bamboos covered with reeds. 
There are many temples with small steeples, which at a distance appear like ships’ masts. This place is 
under the Siamese Government. There used to be a great trade carried on upon this part of the coast; 
but of late years, in consequence of the unsettled state of the country, it. has been discontinued. The 
Malay proas carry on what little trade there is between it and -Juthia, the capital of Siam. 