

All goods are bought and sold for Spanish dollars, and are weighed by the Chinese dotchin. • 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

The imports are similar to those enumerated at the neighbouring ports, but in smaller quantities. 

The produce of the place is gold-dust and rattans, most of which is carried in their own proas to 
Rhio on Bintang, as it is seldom visited by any foreign vessels. Chinese junks occasionally come here. 

TRXNGANO 

Is situated at the entrance of a river, in latitute 5° 21 North, and longitude 103° 4' East This is a 
place of considerable trade; the Rajah resides in a strong fort, and is veiy friendly to Europeans. Ships 
are in no danger of surprise from the inhabitants of Tringano. The usual anchorage is with the flag-staff 
bearing S. W. by W. the Redang Islands N. by W. distance from the mouth of the river about two miles. 
Ships occasionally salute the fort with nine guns, which is considered a great compliment by the Rajah* 
and a like number is returned. 

Yon. II. 


Tt 



322 


THING ANO. 


In November this is a lee-shore, and no ships should stay in the roads; December, January, and 
February are the blowing months, and a heavy surf rolls in from the China seas and the Gulf of Siam 0 
Commanders are sometimes detained on board ten days on account of the large surf on the bar, and 
the ship riding with three anchors a-head. 

The following account of the manners and customs Is extracted from Elmore’s Directory; 

“ On your arrival, your first visit must be to the King’s datoo or merchant, who will introduce you to 
the King, and the male part of the Royal Family. It is the custom here (as in all other eastern ports) to 
give a present at your first audience, which you must proportion according to the rank of the people. 
The King’s present should not be less than the value of 50 dollars, the Prince about 50, the Shabundar 
and agent about 50 each; these are the only presents absolutely necessary to be given at this place. It 
will be proper to visit the datoo after you have seen the Royal Family; a little attention to him may be 
of service in the course of your business, as he can give you every information relative to the markets. 
At every Malay port you will find some man who has an influence with the King; keep well with him: 
and if you find you are likely to sell a quantity of opium, promise a chest for himself when you have 
done all your business; he can assist you very much by praising your opium to all the merchants; and, as 
he attends the weighing part for the King, you have good weight, and no trouble.” 

The following remarks on the Malays were made by a gentleman long conversant with them and the 
whole trade to the eastward:— C€ Though the Malays are not possessed of many virtues, they admire them 
In Europeans, and invariably give the preference to the man who has dealt honourably with them. Endea¬ 
vour by all means to learn the language, which, with proper application, may be done in a few months. 
Your linguist and touchadar are often great knaves, which. renders it absolutely necessary for every 
man to be his own linguist. When you are dealing with them, guard yourself from passion; it is com¬ 
mon for them, when you ask 600 dollars, to offer 150; they will tell you not to be angry. Never swear; 
though you mean no harm to them, their jealous disposition makes them think otherwise, and it may be 
attended with serious consequences, particularly when expressed in anger, which Is too common a case. 
A man of this temper they will keep in constant agitation, in order to harass him, expecting by such 
means he will be glad to sell, in order to get away; but when they meet with a man who, if they offer 
one dollar, will put on a pleasant countenance, and tell them they have an undoubted right to offer what 
they please, they are gratified with his behaviour, and give him the name of a sensible man. If you take 
a touchadar, be cautious he plays you no tricks in cleaning the gold; you should therefore always carry 
a bottle of aqua-fortis, which must have a glass stopper; and likewise some magnets. If you take gold- 
dust, clear it from the sand as w T ell as possible, then put it into a glass, and drop some aqua-fortis upon .it, 
which will destroy and turn black every thing else but the gold. Let it dry, then use your magnet; it 
appears in the gold like black sand, and will all stick to the magnet; practice will soon make it familiar 
to you. Be careful of keeping aqua-fortis, as it is easily put into fermentation, and the vapour arising 
therefrom may be of the most fatal consequence, by either instant death, or the loss of your sight. Never 
keep any thing of value on shore with you, and always remember to send off your gold-dust as you 
receive it: you will then be safe; for 100 dollars are sufficient to induce a Malay to assassinate you, if he 
can with Impunity. You should likewise have a set of gold touches and stone, to try the bar-gold, which 
is done with the different touches, by rubbing them on the stone, and observing which the gold comes the 
nearest to, and value it accordingly, always taking care to cut it lengthwise and through the middle. 
Practice on board with your touches, and the different sorts of gold, will soon make it familiar to you.” 