



CHAPTER XXIV 


Sumatra. 


Acheen; Description-Coins, Weights, and Measures — Imports—Mode of conducting the Trade — Exports— 
Port Charges , Presents , 4*c .—Provisions arid Refreshments — Annalaboo—Soosoo — Sinkell; Description — 
Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports — Duties — Baroos—Imports and Exports — Provi¬ 
sions and Refreshments — Tappanooly; Description — Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports 
—Provisions and Refreshments — Natal; Description — Coins, Weights , and Measures—Imports and Ex¬ 
ports—Provisions arid Refreshments — Priaman—Ticoo Islands — Padang; Description — Coins , Weights, 
and Measures—Imports and Exports — Duties—Provisions and Refreshments—Ayer Rajah — Indrapour— 
Moco Moco—Ippoe—Cattown — Laye — Bencoolen; Description — Coins, Weights, and Measures — Euro¬ 
pean Articles suitable to the Markets on the TFesf Coast of Sumatra — Company's Imports arid Exports— 
Commerce with the British Settlements in India — Company's Revenues, Disbursements , Debts, Assets, —■ 

Duties, Port Charges, Pilotage, SfC.—Provisions and Refreshments — Saloomah — Manna — Cawoor—Croon 
— Bencoonat—Islands off the West Coast of Sumatra—Pulo Neas—Nassau Islands — Engano — Palembang; 
Description — Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports — Duties—Island of Banca—Tin 
Mines, — Jarnhee — Indraghiri — Siac; Description—Imports and Exports—Arakan River—Batoobara 

■—Pulo Varella—Pedir Coast — Telisomaway — Pedir — Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Ex¬ 
ports—Provisions and Refreshments. 


THIS island is the most western of those which may be termed the Malayan Archipelago. The 
equator divides it obliquely into almost equal parts, its general direction being N. W. and S.E.; the one 
extremity, Acheen Head, being in latitude 5° 40' North, and longitude 95° lo East, and the other in 
5° 56' South. * 

ACHEEN 

Is the only kingdom on Sumatra that ever arrived to such a degree of political consequence in the 
eyes of Europeans, as to occasion its transactions becoming the subject of general history. Its situation 
occupies the N. W. extreme of the island; its extent inland reaches no farther than about fifty miles to 
the S, E. Along the northern and eastern coast its territory was considered in 1778, to reach near to 
Batoobara, including Pedir, Samerlangan, Passe, &c. On the western coast it formerly boasted a domi¬ 
nion as far down as Indrapour, and possessed complete jurisdiction at Ticoo. It now extends no farther 
than Baroos, and even there, or at the intermediate ports, although the Acheenese power is predominant, 
and its merchants''enjoy the trade, the royal power seems to be little more than nominal. 



326 


■ ACHEEN. 


The town of Acheen is situated near the N. W. extreme of the island* hi latitude 5° 36 North* and 
longitude 95° 26' East* on the banks of a river* which falls into the sea by several branches* separating the 
low country into islands, and this low plain is partly inundated during the rainy season. The principal 
entrance of the river has a bar, which a boat can hardly pass at low water; but vessels from 20 to 30 tons 
burthen may enter the river at high water, and proceed about half way to the town, where they occa¬ 
sionally heave down, and repair. The common anchorage in the roads is in S, 9, to 10 fathoms, with 
the entrance of the river bearing about S. E. distant two or three miles. 