

The town is situated on a plain in a wide valley, formed like an amphitheatre by lofty ranges of hills. 
It is said to be extremely populous, containing eight thousand houses, built of bamboos and rough timbers, 
standing distinct from each other, and mostly raised on piles some feet above the ground, in order to guard 
against the effects of inundation. The appearance of the place, and nature of the buildings, differ little 
from those of the generality of Malay bazars, excepting that its superior wealth has occasioned the erection 
of a greater number of public edifices, chiefly mosques, but without the smallest pretension to magnificence. 
The country above the town is highly cultivated, and abounds with small villages, and groups of three or 
four houses, with small white mosques interspersed. The King’s palace is a very rude and uncouth piece 
of architecture, designed to resist the attacks of internal enemies, and surrounded for that purpose with 
a moat and strong walls, but without any regular plan, or view to the modern system of defence. Near the 
gate of the palace are several pieces of brass ordnance of an extraordinary size, of which some are Portu¬ 
guese; but two in particular of English make attract curiosity. They were sent by King James I. to 
the reigning monarch of Acheen, and have still the founder’s name and the date legible upon them. The 
diameter of the bore of one is 18 inches, of the other 22 or 24; their strength, however, does not appear 
to be in proportion to the calibre, nor do they seem in other respects to be of adequate dimensions. The 
main street in the town is raised a little, and covered with sand and gravel; but no where else are the 
streets raised, and even this is sometimes overflowed by the swelling of the river, from sudden and heavy 
rains on the hills behind the town, in which case they make use of canoes. 

The King of Acheen, as is usual with the Princes in this part of the world, is the chief merchant of 
his capital, and endeavours to be, to the utmost of his power, the monopolizer of its trade; but this he 
cannot always effect, and the attempt has been the cause of frequent rebellions. His revenue arises chiefly 
from import and export duties, and is estimated at about <£3000 a year: he has also an acknowledgment 
of rice from the land in general, and has, besides, ‘ the rents of royal domains, which are trifling. 

Acheen was first visited by the English June 5, 1602. Sir James Lancaster, who commanded the 
fleet, was received with ceremony and respect. The Queen of England’s letter was conveyed to Court with 
great pomp, and the General, after delivering his presents, declared the purport of his coming was to esta¬ 
blish peace and amit}^ between Ms Royal Mistress, and the great and mighty King of Acheen. Two of 
' Nobles, one of whom was the Chief Priest, w T ere appointed to settle the terms of a commercial treaty 
with the General, which was accordingly drawn up and executed in an explicit and regular manner; in 
wMch the English had the following privileges confirmed to them:—Pree entry and trade; custom free, 
whatever goods were brought in, or carried out; the liberty of making wills, and disposing of their estates, 
where, and to whom they thought fit; full security as to all bargains and payments, in both which respects 
the Acheenese should be tied to a punctual and strict observance of all the measures of justice and fair 
dealing; authority to inflict punishment on their own delinquents, without appeal to the civil magistrate 
•of the country; assurance of justice to be done in all cases of injuries from the natives, upon complaint 
made; freedom from all arrests upon goods or prizes; and liberty of conscience, and the undisturbed exer¬ 
cise 0 t eir own religion. Having thus settled this important point, and obtained part of a cargo of 
P e PP er 3 Captain Lancaster proceeded to Bantam. 