



ACHEEN. 


32? 


In 1615 Captain Eest carried letters from King James to the King of Acheen, and formed a treaty, 
by which privileges of trade, and liberty to settle a factory at Tekoo, or Ticoo, on Sumatra, were granted, 
on paying of 7 per cent, on imports and exports; in return for which, the persons and property of the 
Company's servants were to be protected, on promises being made of large presents. The King of Acheen 
by this treaty requested 6i that ten mastiff dogs and ten bitches, and a great piece of cannon that a man 
might set upright in, might be sent out to him;" but in consequence of the oppressions that the trade suf¬ 
fered, it was nearly abandoned, and in 1621 both the English and Dutch factories were expelled, but 
some individuals continued to reside on the spot. 

In 1675 the Dutch made war upon Acheen, because they would not permit them to erect a factory, 
and actually blocked up the port; but an English ship found means to run into the bay, and land a cargo 
of rice and other goods, though with the loss of the ship, which so obliged the Queen, that she declared 
all English ships free of the city, on paying about ASO sterling for a ship with three masts, as a present 
to the Queen, in lieu of all customs; that no English goods should be carried to the Custom-house, or 
surveyed in their own houses; and that all English merchants' houses were to be reckoned as sanctuaries to 
poor debtors or small offenders. 

In 1684 the English Government sent an embassy to Acheen, to obtain liberty to erect a fortification 
there; which was peremptorily refused, being contrary to the established rules of the kingdom. To have a 
factory of timber and plank, was the utmost indulgence that could be allowed; and on that footing the re¬ 
turn of the English, who had not traded there for many years, would be welcomed with great friendship. 
In 16SS the factory was re-established at Acheen; but those traders who had remained there, threw impe¬ 
diments in the way of all shipping not consigned to their management, and embezzled the cargoes of such 
as were. An asylum was also afforded beyond the reach of law, for all persons whose crimes or debts in¬ 
duced them to fly from the several European settlements. These considerations induced the Company to 
reclaim their ancient privileges, and a deputation was sent from Madras in 1695 for that purpose, with 
letters addressed to the Queen of Acheen, desiring permission to settle on the terms her predecessors had 
granted to them, which was readily complied with; and a factoiy on a limited scale was establishshed 
accordingly; but in consequence of the unsettled state of the Company's affairs, it soon declined. 

In 1702 the Government of Acheen attempted to impose certain duties on the merchandise imported 
by English traders, who had been indulged with an exemption from all port-charges, excepting the esta¬ 
blished complimentary presents upon their arrival, and receiving the chop or licence to trade. The inno¬ 
vation excited an alarm and determined opposition on the part of the masters of ships then at the place; 
and they proceeded to the very unwarrantable step of commencing hostilities, by firing upon the villages 
situated near the mouth of the river, and cutting off from the city all supplies of provisions by sea. The 
inhabitants feeling severely the effects of these violent measures, grew clamorous against the Government, 
which was soon obliged to restore the privileges for which they contended. From this period the kingdom 
of Acheen was in a constant state of anarchy and confusion; and the few traders who frequented the port, 
were in continual apprehension for the safety of themselves and property. In 1768 an arrangement was 
made with the Government relative to the duties payable by Europeans frequenting the port, and the 
presents to be made to the King and his principal officers. 