

cc The custom at Aeheen is, on your arrival, to go immediately on shore, taking all the samples of 
goods you have to sell, and enquire for the Sbabundar, or Harbour Master. Shew your samples to him, 
and agree about the prices. It is not necessary to pay your respects to the King, until you have agreed to 
sell, and are sworn. You pay no duties on any sales made to the King. On all purchases of gruff goods; 
such as brimstone, beetle-nut, rattans, benjamin, horses, and camphire, the King's duties are 6 per cent.; 
the other petty duties for the Datoo, Sbabundar, and Assay Master, amount to about four per cent. But 
whenever you purchase from., or sell to the King, be sure you agree with the Datoo (or King’s Merchant) 
to be free from all duty, or he will impose it upon you for his own emolument. - ** : 

Von. IX. U u 



330 


ACHEEN. 


tc The presents at Acheen are large. If you do business, to the King should be given 
cc 1 long shawl, 1 piece, gold end, fine muslin, 1 carboy of rose water, 1 pair of gold slippers, 1 piece 
of fine cossaes, 1 barrel of gunpowder, and 1 handsome fusee, if you have arms to sell. 

“ To the Batoo (or King's Merchant) and Shabundar your presents must be in proportion; for the 
King, professing himself to be a soldier, does not affect to be troubled with merchandise, but leaves the 
traffic to these two men, with whom you will find it your interest to be on good terms, and fee them, 
after your first present, with trifles occasionally. 

These men are.fond of parade and attention; it will be therefore necessary, whenever they pay you 
a visit on board, to salute them on their coming with three guns, and the same at their departure; indeed, 
this is expected by every man upon the Malay Coast, who holds any rank or appointment under the King, 
wherever you are. 

“ It will be absolutely necessary to have a touchadar (or assayer) to try your gold, if paid in that 
metal, and to have the King's chop or seal upon it, and beware of imposition. 

Never carry more goods on shore than you have orders for at one time; and as you sell them off, 
receive the returns, and give no credit upon any account; for if you give credit even to the Datoo, you will 
probably lose them. 

“ Houses are always ready for hire; but if your sales are made to the King, he furnishes you with a 
house gratis , till his payments are finished; after which time you must hire the same, or some other from 
the Batoo; for which you will pay one or two buncals of gold for the season, or while you stay there. 

I would advise in all cases to be particularly careful of your ship while in the roads; for the 
Acheenese are connected with the people and pirates on the Pedir Coast; and if they find you unguarded, 
will give them information, and you may thereby lose your ship. 

“ You mn no risk on shore but from fire, though it may be proper to have, besides your servants, two 
or three Sepoys or Europeans with you; and particularly if you have any quantity of goods unsold, it will 
be also necessary to keep fire-arms in your house; for the shew of being always prepared to repel, may 
be the cause of preventing an attack." 