

All sorts of tropical fruits in abundance, particularly mangosteens, rambusteens, mangoes of a supe* 
rior kind to most in India, pine-apples, oranges, limes, &e. 

The water is good, and brought off in the country boats at a moderate expence. 


ANNALABOO 

Is in latitude 4° S’ North; it is remarkable for a grove of cocoa-nut trees on a small promontory. 
The anchorage for large vessels is eight or ten miles from the mouth of the river, but for smaller ones not 
above three; the river is navigable for boats and proas, and they go up a considerable way into a plentiful 
country, abounding in cattle, rice, &rc. In the N. E. monsoon the trade is carried on in small boats, but 
in the other monsoon these are laid up, and larger ones used in their stead. 

The coins and weights are the same as at Acheen, this place being subject to it. The gold-dust 
procured is very fine, and it is said that upwards of 2000 ounces are annually collected, 

SOOSOO 

Is situated at the bottom of a bay, of which Cape Felix forms the western extremity; the town is in 
latitude 3° 41' North, and longitude 95° 59’ East. The anchorage is about 3 miles from the town, 
Cape Felix bearing W. by N. and the town N. E. by E. in IS to 20 fathoms. 

Uu 2 



332 


SINKELL. 


This place is likewise under the Acheen Government. On the hills between this place and Annalaboo, 
copper is procured; it is formed into pointed cakes, and sold for about 25 Spanish dollars per pecul: from 
the state it is purchased in, it requires much preparation to render it fit for use, or perfectly malleable and 
ductile. Rice is produced here in abundance; sometimes 30 bamboos to be had for a dollar. This place 
is much frequented by small ships that come here to procure pepper and other articles of trade; but it is 
prudent to be always guarded against the perfidy of the natives, who have been several times successful in 
assaulting and taking possession of the ships that came to trade with them. There is a small place, called 
Muckle, in latitude 3° 23' N. where the coasting traders occasionally stop. 

SINKELL. 

This river is the largest on the west coast of Sumatra. At the distance of thirty miles from the 
sea it is very broad, and deep enough for vessels of considerable burthen; but the bar is shallow and 
dangerous, having only 12 feet water at spring tides; it is navigated by proas and other small vessels. The 
town of Sinkell is forty miles up the river. The roads are in latitude 2° 10 North, and longitude 97° 38' 
East, at about two miles from the mouth of the river, bearing E. by N. 

If a ship is likely to stay here any time, it would be advisable to run in between a small island called 
South Leaga, covered with trees, and the main, where you are safe from all winds that blow. This is tlxe 
place where the Sinkellers transact all business, and perhaps you will not see a living soul for two days; 
however you must wait with patience, for the merchants come all the way from Sinkell, and probably may 
not hear of your arrival for two or three days, unless you send your boat up, which should be well manned 
and armed, with a linguist, or some person who can speak the language of the natives. About half-way 
up the river towards the town, you will see a single house belonging to the Shabundar; to this man you 
may declare your business, and he will send express to the merchants; you need not therefore proceed any 
further, but wait an answer, and conform to his directions. For a small present, which is necessary, and 
expected, he will give you information of what is most in demand, and what goods the merchants wish to 
dispose of. The merchants will speedily come on board, and upon seeing your musters, will soon settle the 
prices; you will then have boats on board daily with their exports. Be always prepared to repel an attack, 
and suffer only the principal merchants to come on board, and none with arms or offensive weapons. 