

NATAL. 

This settlement is in latitude 32" North, and longitude 9S° 57' East. The anchorage is in five 
fathoms about two miles off shore, with the flag-staff bearing E. by N. This is one of the worst roads 
on the West Coast of Sumatra, having numerous shoals in it, and often a very large sea running, and dirty 
weather, and when the wind blows hard from the westward, you cannot without great difficulty clear the 
shore. Notwithstanding which, it is a place of considerable trade, and inhabited by settlers from Acheen, 
.Rio, and many other places, which make it populous and rich. The English settlement was first esta¬ 
blished in 1752; in the year 1760 the French destroyed it, but it was soon re-established, and the 
possession secured by the treaty of Paris in 1763. The town is governed by a Malay Datoo, or chief 
magistrate, who has considerable sway; and although the Company's influence is predominant here, their 
authority is by no means so firmly established as in the pepper districts to the southward, owing to the 
number of people, their wealth, and enterprising independent spirit. The factory is raised upon a breast*? 
work thrown up by the natives, but is not strong, or capable of resistance to an European army. 



TICOO ISLANDS. 


335 


COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Spanish dollars and rupees are current; besides these are single, double, and treble fanams, the latter 
called tali, coined at Madras; 24 fanams, or tali, being equal to a Spanish dollar. English and Chinese 
weights are in common use. 

In this part of the island, where the traffic in gold is considerable, it is generally employed as cur¬ 
rency instead of coin. Every man carries small scales about him, and purchases are made with it so low 
as a grain or two of paddy weight. Various seeds are used as gold weights, but more especially two, the 
one, the well-known scarlet pea with a black spot, 24 of which make a mace, and 16 mace a tale. 
The other is a scarlet, or rather coral, bean, much larger than the former, and without a black spot. It 
is the Candareen weight of the Chinese, of which 100 make a tale. The tale differs in the northern and 
southern parts of the island; here it is only 24 dwts. 9 grs. troy; but at Padang, Bencoolen, and 
elsewhere, it is 26 dwts. 12 grs. troy. 


IMPORTS and EXPORTS, 


Imports. —From India 

are imported the following 

articles; 


Beer. 

Gunpowder. 

Muskets. 

Swivel guns. 

Brass-wire. 

Glass-ware. 

Looking-glasses. 

Steel. 

Cutlery. 

Gold thread. 

Lead. 

Salt 


Household furniture 

Opium. 

Wearing apparel 

China-ware. 

Iron, in bars. 

Patent shot. 

Wines. 


From Pula Nias, one of the principal islands lying off this part of Sumatra, are brought slaves to 
the amount annually to tins settlement of 450, and to the northern ports 150, where they are said to 
be employed by the Acheenese in the gold-mines, exclusive of those which go to Padang for the supply 
of Batavia, where the females are highly valued, and taught music and various accomplishments. In 
catching these unfortunate victims of avarice, it is supposed that not fewer than 200 are killed, and if 
the aggregate be computed at 1000, it is a prodigious number to be supplied from the population of so 
small an island. Large quantities are also received from thence. 