

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Spanish dollars are the principal currency; but accounts are kept in tales, sooccoos and' satallies, vix* 

4 satallies 1 f 1 sooccoo 

4 sooccoos t make J 1 tale 
1 tale j [ 4 Spanish dollars. 

Benjamin is brought here by the tompong or cake, which ought to weigh 20 catties, each catty 56 ounces 
avoirdupois, and for cainphire 56 ounces troy weight. 

The Chinese pecul is in common use in buying and selling most commodities. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports. —The European and Indian articles in demand here are the following : 

Cutlery. Gold thread. Lead. Steel. 

China-ware. , Iron, in flat bars. Looking glasses. Swivel gqm 

Gunpowder. Muskets. Opium. Salt. 

and piece-goods from Bengal and Madras, of similar kinds to those enumerated at Acheem 



BAROOS—TAPPANOOLY. 


333 


Exports.— The principal exports are benjamin, camphire, gold-dust, and bees wax. You are gene- 
fally paid for your goods in the two former articles, of the kinds denominated belly and foot; but for the 
head you frequently pay dollars, and it is seldom you can procure gold-dust without dollars, unless they 
are much in want of goods. In the examination of articles purchased, particular attention is necessary, as 
the natives frequently adulterate their commodities. 

DUTIES. 

No customs are levied for imports or exports, but presents are expected by the principal men to a 
considerable amount. According to your sales and purchases you must act. 

BAROOS. 

This town is situated about two leagues from the coast, on the banks of a river; and two leagues fur¬ 
ther inland are eight small villages, inhabited by Battas, who purchase the camphire and benjamin from the 
people of the mountains, extending from the southward of Sinked, to the back of Baroos. The anchorage 
is about three quarters of a mile to the southward of a small island called Pulo Carrang, in latitude 1° 57' 
North, and longitude 98® 23 East. The Dutch had formerly a factory here, but it has been long since with¬ 
drawn. The place is famous for having given name to the native camphire produced here, to distinguish it 
from that which is imported from China. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS 

Are similar to those at Sink ell. The proportion of buying camphire should be 66 J lbs. Dutch, of head, 
331 lbs. of belly, and 25 lbs. foot; making in the whole 125 Dutch pounds, which are equal to onepecul. 

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

Bullocks, poultry, and fish are to be had good and reasonable, likewise very excellent water; when 
your boat goes on shore the first time, she must lie a short distance from the shore, until they send a person 
to conduct her into the river, otherwise you may lose her. 

TAPPANOOLY. 

The celebrated bay of Tappanooly stretches into the heart of the country, and its shores are every 
where inhabited by the Batta people, "who barter their produce for the articles they stand in need of from 
abroad, but do not themselves make voyages by sea. ‘ Navigators assert that the natural advantages of 
this bay are scarcely surpassed by any other; that all the navies of the world might ride here in perfect 
security in all weathers; and that such is the complication of anchoring places within each other, that a 
large ship could be so hid in them as not to be found without a tedious search. 