

PADANG. 

This settlement was the principal one belonging to the Dutch on the West Coast of Sumatra; it is 
situated up a river in latitude 58’ South, and longitude 99° 58' East. The fort is within 40 yards of 
the river, about a mile from the sea. It is a square, with four bastions of stone, and the walls about 
nine feet high, surrounded, except to the river, with a wet ditch, four or five yards over, and about six 
feet deep. On the opposite side of the river are high mountains, which extend to the mouth of the liver, 
from whence you may see every thing in the fort, and are not above 300 yards distance. It is shoal 
water for near two miles without the river’s mouth, though there are two or three fathoms at high water, 
and about 10 feet on the bar. You go in round Padang Head; and when in the river, in a small bay, 
under the foot of the head, there is water enough for sloops and small vessels. You keep close to Padang 
Head in going in; the entrance is narrow. After passing the saluting battery, which is on the right hand 
side, you cross the river, and keep near the shore till you come to the stairs, or landing-place. 

Padang is the greatest place for trade on this coast. The English were invited to form a settlement 
here in 1649, but were prevented by the Dutch taking possession of it, which they retained till 1781, when 
a detachment of troops, on board five East Indiamen, took possession of this and all the other Dutch 
factories on the coast; but they were given up at the peace. They were again taken in 1794, and remain 
in the possession of the English. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Accounts are kept in rix-dollars and stivers; 48 stivers making 1 rix-dollar. Spanish dollars and 
most of the Indian coins pass, nearly at the same rates as at Batavia. Both Dutch and Chinese weights 
are in common use. 



AYE& RAJA—INDRAPOUR, 


837 


IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports.— Great quantities of piece-goods are annually imported here; the other articles of European 
and Indian produce are similar to those enumerated at Natal 

Exports.—G old is the principal article; but at the Butch settlements they will not permit you to try 
it; they, however, take uncommon pains to have it free from adulteration. About 3000 ounces are annually 
procured, which, with camphire, pepper, and wax, form the exports. The prices are 

Camphire, which is generally mixed Spanish dollars per catty. 

Gold, very good _____ ——IS to 22 dollars per tale. 

Pepper to 12 ditto ditto. 

Wax _to 25 ditto per pecul. 

Gum-lac, in considerable quantities, is to be met with on this part of the coast, 

DUTIES. 

Under the Dutch Government the import and export duties were 5 per cent.; but whether any altera¬ 
tion in that respect has taken place since Padang has been in our possession, is uncertain. 

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

Cattle are in great plenty, from six to eight Spanish- dollars each; ducks, one dozen for a dollar; 
fowls more; of fruits and vegetables they have abundance. The water here is very good, running from 
the rock, and is conveyed in bamboos in many places, on the starboard side, so that your boat may haul 
Under them, and fill; the largest is about 200 yards above the first. 