

Exports. —Gold-dust of a fine quality is procured here in considerable quantities. Some of the 
mines are said to lie within 10 miles of the factory; it is generally of the fineness of 22 to 23 carats. 
The price formerly was about 18 Spanish dollars per tale; but latterly it has risen to 21 dollars. The 
annual produce is stated to be from 800 to 1000 ounces; this, with camphire and wax, form the 
principal exports. 

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

Beef, vegetables, fruit, and fish are procurable at moderate prices; likewise wood and water, 

TICOO ISLANDS. 

These islands are small and woody, about If mile distant from each other, and the Innermost 
If mile from the main. The outermost Is in latitude 23' South. 

The early voyagers frequented these islands for pepper. The English and Dutch established factories 
here; but it appears they were expelled previous to 1621. At this period Beaulieu was here, and de¬ 
scribes Ticoo as “ being situated about half a league from the sea-shore, opposite to the island where the 
ships ride, where there are many houses built of reeds. The King is subject to that of Acheen* No 



336 


PRIAM AN—PAD AN G. 


trade was permitted without his chop. Surat and Mausulipatam goods sold. Rials pass current, but the 
money of Acheen does not pass among them. They sell their pepper by bahars, each 150 lbs. avoir¬ 
dupois, and the King of Acheen has 15 per cent on all that is sold; that is 7y on the pepper, and 7| on 
the dollars or goods imported to purchase it. Besides the above-mentioned impost, we paid for every 
100 bahars 25 dollars to the King of Ticoo, and some inconsiderable allowance to 10 or 12 persons more. 
Above all, one must make the Governor one’s friend, and keep a watchful eye over the Malays, who are 
apt to wet the pepper, or put sand and stones among it. 

cc Here are buffaloes, which may be purchased at four or five rials each, and plenty of rice, cattle, 
poultry, ducks, and good fruits, such as ananas, mangoes, pomegranates, oranges, lemons, &c.” 

PRIAMAN 

Is about seven leagues N. W. of Padang; the flagstaff is in latitude 40' South, off which are 
several small islands; the northernmost is the smallest, and has a well of fresh water, where the Dutch 
vessels used to supply themselves. Priaman was formerly a Dutch settlement. The river is small; a pinnace 
cannot go in till high water; you land on the right hand side. There is no fort, but a square palisadoed, 
and a ditch about 12 feet wide and 8 deep; on the east bastion are nine small guns. There is a small 
cadjan-house, where the Commandant, who is a non-commissioned officer, resides. Along shore are a 
number of huts, the residence of the natives. This place was visited by Sir James Lancaster in 1601, 
where he obtained a quantity of pepper at a more reasonable rate than at Acheen. In 1685 a factory 
was established here; but in consequence of the opposition experienced from the Dutch, and the establish¬ 
ment formed at Bencoolen, it never became of much importance. 