

AYER RAJA. 

This settlement is in latitude 1° 58' South, and likewise belonged to the Dutch. The town, which is 
about two miles up a small river, is difficult to find, it being in the woods, were it not for the flagstaff, 
which may be seen a considerable distance; bring that to bear East, and anchor about two miles from the 
shore. It is a dangerous place to anchor at, as you cannot clear the land, should it blow hard, and you 
will ride very badly. It is not prudent to send your own boat into the river, as at low water the sea 
breaks very high upon the bar. 


INDRAPOUR. 

From Indrapour point, in latitude 2° 12' South, the coast forms an extensive bay, at the bottom of 
which is a river, one of the largest in the southern part of this coast, and is capable of admitting sloops. 
An English factory was established here about 1684, but never became of any importance. 

MOCO MOCO, 

In latitude 2° 36 South, and longitude 101° 12' East, is situated at the bottom of a bay; the two 
points that form it are covered with tall trees. The fort, which is called Fort Ann, lies on the southern, 
and the settlement on the northern side of a small river, called Se Luggan, which name properly belongs 
to the place also, and that of Moco Moco to a small village higher up. The bazar consists of about 100 
houses. At the northern end is the Sultan’s, which has nothing particular to distinguish it except its 
being larger than other Malay houses. This settlement was first formed in 1717. The anchorage is 
abreast of the fort, in 10 fathoms, soft ground. Here you must not attempt going on shore in your 
own boat, but must wait till a boat comes from the shore to carry you in over the surf. 

Von. JL Xx 



388 


BENCOOLEN. 


The exports from this place are pepper and gold-dust. The annual produce of the former is about 
170 tons, and that of the latter 800 to 1000 ounces. It is sent to Bencoolen, from whence the articles 
required for their consumption and internal commerce, are imported. 

All provisions and refreshments are easily procured here, except water, which is obtained with diffi¬ 
culty, in consequence of the heavy surf and shoal water which prevent the use of your own boats; but 
the natives will bring it off, charging about If Spanish dollar per butt. 

Between Moco Moco and Bencoolen are the several places from whence the Company receive pepper, 
the principal of which are 

Ippoe, in latitude 8° 10' South, which produces annually from^^ 30 to 35 tons of pepper. 

Cattown, or Caytonen 2° 25' South, ditto 20 to 25 ditto. 

Laye 3° 40' South, ditto 100 to 120 ditto. 

And at each of which they have an European resident. The produce varies of course, as the seasons 

are more or less productive, but on an average does not exceed the above amount. 

BENCOOLEN, 

The principal English settlement on the West Coast of Sumatra, and to which all the others are 
subordinate, is in latitude 3° 48' South, and longitude 102° 28' East. Fort Marlborough and the town 
are built on Oojong Carrang, a point of land, having a level appearance, and moderately elevated. 