

The English settlement of Tappanooly is situated on a small island in the bottom of the bay on the 
N. W. shore, called Ponehang Cached, in latitude 1° 40 North, and longitude about 9S° 40' East, where 
there is a fort almost defenceless. The anchorage is with the flagstaff bearing S. by W. in seven fathoms. 
The village of Tappanooly is at the northern part of the bay, about four miles from Ponehang Cached. 
It is a common practice to moor ships by a hawser to a tree on shore. Timber for masts and yards are to 
be procured in the various creeks with great facility. Not being favourably situated with respect to the 
general track of outward and homeward bound shipping, and its distance from the principal seat of our 
India concerns, it has not been hitherto used for naval purposes; but our Government are aware of the 
danger that might arise from any other maritime power obtaining a footing in this place. 



334 


NATAL. 


This settlement was established about 1752. In 1760 it was taken by a squadron of French ships, 
under the command of the Comte d’Estaing; but it was re-established in 1763, and in 1809 it was again 
taken by the French under Commodore Hamelin. By the terms of the surrender, private property was to 
be secured; but in a few days, after the most friendly assurances had been given to the acting resident, 
with whom the French officers were living, this engagement was violated under the ill-founded pretence 
that some gold had been secreted, and every thing belonging to the English gentlemen and ladies, as well 
as to the native settlers, was plundered or destroyed by fire, with circumstances of atrocity and bruta¬ 
lity that would have disgraced the most uncivilized nations. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Spanish dollars are the current coin. Accounts are kept in dollars, sooccoos, and kepping, or copper, 
400 of which go to the dollar. Fanams are met with, 24 of which are equal to a dollar. 

Having no coins, all value is estimated among the natives by certain commodities. In trade 
they calculate by tompongs (cakes) of benjamin; in transactions among themselves, more commonly by 
buffaloes, sometimes by brass-wire, and sometimes beads are used as a medium. A galang, or ring of 
brass-wire, represents about the value of a dollar; but for small payments salt is the most in use A 
measure called a salup, weighing about 21bs. is equal to a fanam, about 2|d,; a balli, another measure, 
goes for four kepping, or three-fifths of a penny. 

English weights are used at the settlement; but the China pecul is in common use. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

The natives of the sea-coast exchange their benjamin, eamphire, and cassia, (the quantity of gold- 
dust is inconsiderable), for iron, steel, brass-wire, and salt, of which last article 100,000 bamboo measures 
are taken off in the bay. These are bartered again with the more inland inhabitants for the products 
and manufactures of the country. 

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

Most of the articles mentioned in the neighbouring places are to be had here; but the demand being 
but small, no great quantity of supplies could be obtained without a short previous notice. Water is 
procured from the main land with convenience, and is very good. 