

The best place for anchoring in Bencoolen roads is the flagstaff E. N. E. Pulo Point S. E, by S. and 
Bat Island S. W. by S. Ships sometimes run into Pulo Bay to anchor; the best place is where Sandy 
Point bears north, about half a mile from the Company’s godowns. 

Should an European ship expect to be detained long here, it would be advisable to moor in Bat 
Island bason, it being safe in all weathers; and boats are able to make a trip each day with the land and 
sea breezes, and the goods are secure in the boats, which is not the case in the roads; for sometimes the 
north-westers give so short a warning, that boats, with half loading, are obliged to put off for Pulo Bay. 
In going ashore from the ship, keep the Company’s hospital, which is to the southward, on the starboard 
bow, or right a-head, till you come near the shore* or south point of the rocks, then you will have the 
channel open, and the south breakers without you; then stand right in for the sugar-loaf, keeping nearest 
the breakers from the shore, till you have the fort on your beam; then steer in for the carrang, or landing 
place, the passage into which lies close to a bluff red point, with a grove of trees on it. 

In 16S4 the English, being expelled from Bantam, sent a deputation to Aclieen, the success of 
which is already related. It happened that at this time several Bajahs, or Chiefs of the country of 
Priaman, and other places on the West Coast of Sumatra, were at Acheen also, to solicit aid of that 
Court against the Dutch, who had made war upon, and otherwise molested them. These immediately 
applied to the deputation, expressing a strong desire that the English should settle in their respective 
districts, offering ground for a fort, and the exclusive purchase of their pepper. They consented to 
embark for Madras, -where an agreement was formed with them in the beginning of the year 1685, on 
the terms they had proposed. In consequence of this, an expedition was fitted out, with the design of 
establishing a settlement at Priaman; but a day or two before the ships sailed, an invitation to the like 
purport was received from the Chief of Bencoolen; and as it was known that a considerable proportion 
of the pepper that used to be exported from Bantam, had been collected from the neighbourhood of 
Bencoolen, it was judged advisable that Mr. Ord, who was the person entrusted with the management 
of this business, should proceed thither, particularly as at that season of the year it was the windward port. 
He arrived there on the 25th of June, 1685; and after taking possession of the country assigned to the 



BENCOOLEN. 




Company, lie sailed for the purpose of establishing the other settlements. He stopped first at Indrapour, 
where he found that the Dutch, having obtained a knowledge of the original intention of the English 
fixing at Priaman, had sent a party to occupy the situation. In the meantime it was understood m 
Europe that this place was the chief of our. establishments on the coast, and ships were accordingly con¬ 
signed thither. The same was supposed at Madras, and troops and stores were sent to reinforce it, which 
were afterwards landed at Indrapour, A settlement was then formed at Manjuta, and another attempted 
at Batang-Kapas, in 1686; but here the Dutch, assisted by a party among the natives, assaulted and drove 
out our people. Every possible opposition, as it was natural to expect, was given by these, our rivals, to 
the success of our factories. They fixed themselves in the neighbourhood of them, and endeavoured to 
obstruct the country people from carrying pepper to them, or supplying them with provisions by sea or 
land. Our interests, however, in Hie end prevailed, and Bencoolen in particular, to which the other 
places were rendered subordinate, in 1686 began to acquire some degree of vigour and respectability. In 
1689 encouragement was given to Chinese colonists to settle there, whose number has-been continually 
increasing from that time. In 1691 the Dutch felt the loss of their influence at Sillebar, and other of 
the southern countries, where they attempted to exert authority in the name of the Sultan of Bantam, 
and the produce of these places was delivered to the English. This revolution proceeded from the works 
with which about this time our factory was strengthened. In 1695 a settlement was made at Triaman, 
and two years after at Cattown and Sablat. The first, in the year 1700, was removed to Bantal. Various 
applications were made by the natives in different parts of the island, for the establishment of factories, 
particularly from Ayerbongy, to the northward; Palembang on the eastern side, and from the people* 
from the countries near Manna. A person was sent to survey these last as far as Crooe in 1715. In 
consequence of the inconvenience attending the shipping of goods from Bencoolen river, which is often 
impracticable from the surfs, a warehouse was built, in 1701, at a place then called the Cove, which 
gave the first idea of removing the settlement to the point of land which forms the Bay of Bencoolen. 
The unhealthiness of the old situation was thought to render this an expedient step; and accordingly, 
about 1714, it was in a great measure relinquished, and the foundations of Port Marlborough were laid 
on a spot two or three miles distant. Being a high plain, it was judged to possess considerable advantages; 
many of which, however, are counter-balanced by its want of the vicinity of a river, so necessary for the 
ready and plentiful supply of provisions. Some progress had been made in the erection of this fort, when 
an accident happened that had nearly destroyed the Company’s views. The natives, incensed at the ill treat¬ 
ment received from the Europeans, who were then but little versed in the knowledge of their dispositions, 
or the art of managing them by conciliating methods, rose in a body in the year 1719, and forced the 
garrison, whose ignorant fears rendered them precipitate to seek refuge on board their ships. These 
people began now to feel alarms lest the Dutch, taking advantage of the absence of the English, should 
attempt an establishment, and they soon permitted some persons from the northern factories to resettle at the 
place; and supplies arriving from Madras, things returned to their former course, and the fort was com¬ 
pleted. The Company’s affairs on this coast remained in tranquillity for a number of years. The impor¬ 
tant settlement of Natal was established in 1752, and that of Tappanooly a short time afterwards, which 
involved the English in fresh disputes with the Dutch, who set up a claim to the country in which they 
are situated. In the year 1760 the French, under Count D’Estaing, destroyed all the English settle¬ 
ments on the Coast of Sumatra; but they were soon re-established, and our possession secured by the 
treaty of Paris in 1763. Fort Marlborough, which had been hitherto a peculiar subordinate of Fort 
St. George, was now formed into an independent Presidency, and was furnished with a charter for 
erecting a Mayor’s Court, but which has never been enforced. In 1782 the magazine, in which were 409 
parrels of powdex % , was fired by lightning, and blew up, but providentially few lives were lost. 