

The policy of this Government having always encouraged foreign settlers, the city and lower parts of 
the river are in a great measure peopled with natives of China, Cochin China, Siam, Cambodia, Patany, 
Java, Celebes, Borneo, and other eastern places. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Coins. —The currency of the country, and the only money allowed to be received at the King’s trea¬ 
sury, is Spanish dollars; but there is also in general circulation a species of small base coin, called petis, 
which are cut out of plates composed of lead and tin; and, having a square hole in the middle, like the Chi¬ 
nese cash, are strung in parcels of 500 each, 16 of which are equivalent to a Spanish dollar. Accounts 
are kept in rix-dollars (a nominal coin) and stivers; the exchange between Spanish and rix-dollars being 
five of the latter for four of the former. 

Weights and Measures. —Here, as well as at all other places where the Chinese have'settled, their 
weights have become in common use. In weighing gold, the tale is considered as the tenth part of the 
catty, or equal to the weight of Spanish dollars. 

The commercial weights aregantons, baly, and copangs; 10 gantons make 1 baly, about 60 catties; 
and SO balies 1 copang; by this measure rice is also sold. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. . 

Imports. —Very few articles of European or Indian produce are disposed of at Palembang, its wants 
being supplied from Batavia. A few chests of opium and piece-goods form the principal part; the remainder 
consists of Spanish dollars, and for them only tin can be procured. 

Exports. —Tin and pepper are the staple commodities here. The former Is procured from Banca, 
and is delivered to the King at a fixed rate per pecul, and by him to the Dutch at about 15 rix-dollars 
per pecul, which, according to an oldagreement with the Sultan, and formally renewed in 1777, is to be deli¬ 
vered to the Company, and no other Europeans are to be allowed to trade or navigate within his jurisdic¬ 
tion. In order to enforce these conditions, the Dutch are permitted to maintain a fort on the river, with a 
garrison of 50 or 60 men, which cannot be exceeded without giving umbrage, and to keep their own cruisers 
to prevent smuggling. It is stated that 3,000,000 lbs. are annually supplied to the Dutch, of which the 



349 


BANC A. 


greater part is sent to China, and the remainder to Europe. On an average of seven years, the tin imported 
into Holland was 358,223 lbs.; the Company do not, however, take all that is produced, for in 1770 the 
Government at Batavia resolved Ctf not to receive more than 25,000 peculs from Palembang every year ; 1 * 
notwithstanding which, the Dutch endeavour to prevent the tin being disposed of to other nations. 

The pepper produced at Palembang is in general very foul, and considered inferior to what is brought 
from the western side of the island, and that of Malabar. The imports of pepper into Holland were, on an 
average of seven years, black, 2,994,683 lbs. and white 45,464 lbs. total 3,040,147 lbs. 