

The other articles procured here, are diamonds, canes, and rattans. Of the first, it is stated that 
about 1000 carats are annually purchased by the Dutch, and of the latter from 70 to 100,000 bundles per 
annum, which are principally sent to China. Palembang is much frequented by proas from Macassar, 
Borneo, Bally, and Java, which bring rice, salt, and some few cloths manufactured to the eastward, 
and worn by the Malays, taking in return opium and other Indian commodities. 

DUTIES. 

‘No regular trade being permitted here, presents only are necessary to the Dutch Resident, and the 
Shabundar or King’s minister, according to the business likely to be transacted. On your arrival in 
the roads, send your long boat into the river (for water), and send accounts of the ship’s arrival to the Go¬ 
vernor. The fishermen will let the natives know of your arrival; and if the Governor means to do any 
business, you will have accounts in the course of three or four days; but should he not be prepared to deal 
with you, no time should be lost in getting your boat on board, and proceeding to sea. 

BANCA. 

This island is nearly opposite the various mouths of Palembang River. The passage between it and 
Sumatra is called the Straits of Banca, and extends in an undulating course about 34 leagues. Monopint 
Hill, which answers as a guide to ships approaching the island, is in latitude 2° South, and longitude 
105° 14 East, about two leagues S. W. from which is Mintow Point, the western extremity of Banca, 
on which is a fort belonging to the Sultan, with many guns mounted. The principal town is a short dis¬ 
tance to the eastward. The best anchorage is in 10 or II fathoms, about three miles off' the town, 
Monopin Hill bearing N. 10° E. and Mintow Point N. 82° W. 

This island is famous for its tin mines; they are said to have been accidentally discovered in 1810, by 
the burning of a house. They are worked by a colony of Chinese, consisting of upwards of 20,000 persons, 
under the nominal direction of the Sultan of Palembang, but for the account and benefit of the Dutch 
Company, who have endeavoured to monopolize the trade, and the Sultan, as has been already stated, is 
under a standing contract to furnish them with the tin produced, at a fixed rate per ton; but the enter¬ 
prising spirit of private merchants finds means to elude their vigilance, and the annual export amounts to 
from forty to sixty thousand pecnls. It is the only export they possess. The island is said to produce 
gold and silver, but the Sultan will not suffer the mines to be worked. 

The Sultan and the Dutch Resident live at Palembang: with the latter some business may be trans¬ 
acted; in case he should decline trading, you must endeavour to find out the agents of the Princes of 
Banca, and thqse of the Caranga, or Prime Minister, who have always carried on an illicit trade, in oppo¬ 
sition to the Dutch and the Sultan. Some Dutch cruisers are usually stationed here, under pretence of 
protecting the Sultan, and enforcing his laws; but more with a view of preventing his trading with any 
other nation. Access, however, may be had to the Datoo at Mintow, on observing certain ceremonies, which 
the commanders of the Dutch cruisers expect from strangers. The price of tin varies from 16 to 18 Spanish 
doEars,per peeul, and is generally weighed with the Chinese dotchin, or ’steelyards. It is necessary to cut 