

X x 2 



340 


BENCOOLEN. 


The chief importance of this settlement to the Company being in a commercial point of view, and 
in this respect they had been considerable losers, from the small quantity of pepper supplied, and the 
increasing charges of the establishment in every branch, the expences exceeding the revenue upwards 
of £87,000 per annum; the Court of Directors, in 1801, came to the resolution of making very con¬ 
siderable reductions in the expenditure, and of withdrawing the subordinate Residencies in general. It 
was a matter of some doubt whether it would not be expedient to withdraw the settlements on the West 
Coast of Sumatra altogether; but some arguments of a political nature occurred, which prevented the 
adoption of that measure. This alteration rendered it necessary to provide for the covenanted servants, 
removed in consequence thereof, who were transferred to the Madras establishment; and the Act of 
42 Geo. III. cap. 29, was passed, authorizing the Company to make the settlement subordinate to Bengal, 
and to transfer the supernumerary servants to Madras. 


COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 


Accounts are kept in Spanish dollars, termed piasters. The coins current here are double and single 
fanams, rupees, and Spanish dollars: 


2 single fanams 
6 double fanams 
2 rupees 


>• make 


1 double fanam 
1 rupee 

1 Spanish dollar. 


The Spanish dollar is always valued at five shillings sterling in the accounts on the Coast of Sumatra, 
Weights.- —The Chinese pecul is in common use in the bazar; but most commodities are weighed 
with English weights. The bahar here is 560 lbs. avoirdupois. 

Measures.— The coyang dry measure is 800 bamboos, each bamboo about an English gallon. 


IMPORTS. 

From England is imported by a ship, annually destined to St. Helena, Bencoolen, and China, the 
under-mentioned articles, but to a very limited amount; the demand, in consequence of the reduction which 
has taken place in the establishment, being small. 


Anchors & grapnels. 

Confectionary. 

Iron. 

Plate. 

Ale. 

Furniture. 

Ironmongery. 

Plated ware. 

Books & pamphlets. 

Gunpowder; 

Looking-glasses. 

Porter. 

Boots and shoes. 

Groceries. 

Lead. 

Small arms. 

Brandy. 

Gold 8c silver thread. 

Lace, gold & silver. 

Shot. 

Brasiery. 

Glass-ware. 

Musical instruments 

Steel. 

Cheese. 

Hams. 

Medicines. 

Stationery. 

Cotton goods. 

Hats. 

Millinery. 

Tin-ware. 

Cards. 

Haberdashery. 

Nails. 

Toys. 

Cloths & cassimeres. 

Hardware. 

Oilman’s stores. 

Window-glass. 

Copper. 

Hosiery. 

Painter’s colours. 

Watches. 

Cutlery. 

Jewellery. 

Perfumery. 

Wines. 


European investments are generally sold by the invoice, from 20 to 60 per cent, advance, according to 
the demand, and paid for previous to the ship’s departure, in Company’s bills on Bengal, called specie 
bills, which are drawn at 30 days’ sight. Dollars in general bear a premium from 6 to 10 per cent, in 
exchange for paper. The rate of exchange varies: in 1806 it was 210 Sicca rupees per 100 Spanish dollars* 
English goods are frequently sold by auction here, the charge for which is 7 per cent 