

Between Bencoolen and the southern extreme of Sumatra, are the under-mentioned places, from whence 
the Company draw supplies of pepper, and where they used to have residents: 

200 to 250 tons. 

250 to 300 ditto. 

80 to 90 ditto. 

170 to 180 ditto. 

This produce varies of course as the seasons are more or less productive, but on an average of five 
years, ending 1800, it did not exceed the above quantity. Crooe is also celebrated for bird’s nests, which 
are gathered in considerable quantities from some caves about four miles up the river. 

There are a number of islands lying off the West Coast of Sumatra, running in the same direction, at 
about the distance of 20 leagues, the principal of which are Pulo Neas, Si Porali, Poggy or Nassau Islands," 
and Engano; they are little frequented, and of course but imperfectly known.; 


Saloomah, in latitude about 4° 12' South, the average annual produce from 


Manna, ditto 4° 25 ' ditto, 

Cawoor, ditto 4° 54' ditto, 

Crooe, ditto 5° 13' ditto. 




PULO NEAS 

Is the largest, most productive, and important of the whole range, and extends from latitude 1° 18' 
North, nearly in a S. E. direction to 28' North; its inhabitants are very numerous, and of a race very 
different from the Malays in general. The island is divided into a number of small districts under Rajahs, 
who are independent of, and at perpetual variance with each other; the ultimate object of their wars 
being to make prisoners, whom they sell for slaves, as well as all others not immediately connected with 
them, whom they can seize by stratagem. These violences are doubtless encouraged by the resort of 
native traders from Padang, Natal, and Acheen, to procure cargoes of slaves, who are also accused of 
augmenting the profits of their voyage, by occasionally surprising and carrying off whole families. 

The following is an estimate of the number of slaves annually torn from their friends and families# 
and carried to settlements, some of whom have long been in the possession of the English. 


To Natal 




To Padang, for the supply of Batavia %WV\WV»i , *'VWWV\V*V.W»\V\W»VWV%'Mi 
K illed in various encounters on the island 


450 

150 

200 

200 


making a total of 1000, which is a great number to be supplied from the population of so small an island. 

Considerable quantities of rice and paddy are annually taken hence by the traders, in exchange for 
iron, steel, beads, tobacco, and coarse piece-goods. Numbers of wild hogs are reared here, and some 
parts of the main, especially Baroos, are supplied from hence with yams, beans, and poultry. Some of 
the Rajahs are said to have amassed from 10 to 20,000 dollars each, which are kept in ingots of gold and 
silver; much of the latter consisting of small Dutch money (not of the purest coin) ipelted down, and of 
these they make an ostentatious display at weddings and other festivals. 

Vol. II. Y y 



346 


NASSAU ISLANDS—ENGAN0—PALEMBANGk 


NASSAU, or FOGGY ISLANDS. 

These two islands are called the North and South Foggy, or Nassau Islands; the north point of the 
former is in latitude 2° 32' South. They are separated from each other by a narrow strait, called Se-cockup ; 
the straits are about two miles long, and a quarter of a mile broad, and an excellent place for ships 
of any size to anchor, being perfectly secure from every wind. They are both inhabited, divided into 
small tribes, each occupying a small river, and living in one village. On the southern island are five, and 
on the northern seven villages, of which Kakap is reckoned the chief, although Labulabu is supposed to 
contain the greater number of people. Their houses are built of bamboos, and raised on posts, the under 
part of which is occupied by hogs and poultry. Sago constitutes the principal food of the inhabitants, who 
do not cultivate rice. Large red deer, hogs, and fowls are common, but they have neither buffaloes nor 
goats. They are strangers to the use of coin of any kind, and have little knowledge of metals. The iron 
bill or chopping-knife, called parang, is in much esteem amongst them; it serves as a standard for the 
value of other commodities, such as articles of provision. A metal coat button is of equal value in their 
esteem to a piece of gold or silver coin. On the northern island, near the entrance of the straits, are a few 
houses inhabited by some Malays from Fort Marlborough; they reside here for the purpose of building 
large boats, the timber and planks for which are found close at hand; the mountains being covered with 
various kinds of timber, amongst which are poon trees, of sufficient dimensions for lower masts to a first- 
rate man of war, and several sorts suitable for building ships of large burden. 