



' J AMBEE—INDRAGXRI—SIAC. 


3m 


through some of the slabs of tin, as it frequently happens that iron shot and stones are in the middle 
of them. Opium is usually brought by the country ships frequenting these Straits; but nothing will secure 
tin but Spanish dollars. There is another place for tin, called Yre Mass, at the north end of Banca; and 
you deal chiefly with the Captain Chinaman, who resides there. 

Small ships or vessels passing through the Straits of Banca, ought always to be upon their guard to 
repel any attack that may be made by the piratical proas, numbers of which lurk about the mouths of the 
rivers on the Coast of Sumatra, to surprise defenceless vessels. 

JAMBEE. 

This river is of considerable size, and at an early stage of European commerce, was of some import¬ 
ance; both the English and Dutch had factories there: the former on an island at the entrance of the river 
called Barelly, in latitude about 1° 5 South, and longitude about 104° 20' East; and the latter at some dis¬ 
tance up the liver. The town of Jamfaee is about sixty miles from the sea. In 1620 a fleet of Portuguese 
ships were twenty-two days ascending the river, in order to destroy some Dutch ships which had taken 
shelter near the town. 

The trade consists chiefly in gold-dust, pepper, rattans, and canes, but most of the gold proceeds across 
the country to the western coast, and the pepper, like that of Palembang, is not held in esteem. Sometimes, 
but rarely, a trading ship from Bengal endeavours to dispose of a few chests of opium; but the masters 
scarcely ever venture on shore, and deal with such of the Malays as come off to them at the sword’s point, 
so strong is the idea of their treacherous character. 

INDRAGXRI. 

This river is about a degree to the northward of Jambee, and is navigable a great distance; sloops 
tide it up for five or six weeks, as they assert, anchoring as the ebb begins to make. It it but little fre¬ 
quented, though the Dutch are stated to have had a factory here former!}'. 

SIAC. 

This river, which is the most considerable on the island, empties itself into the sea, nearly opposite to 
Malacca, in latitude about 1° 40' North. Opposite its entrance are several islands. A recent survey, exe¬ 
cuted by Mr. Francis Lynch, formerly a commander in the Country service, but now employed under the 
Government of Pulo Pinang, has made us more particularly acquainted with its size, advantages, and defects. 
From the place where it discharges itself into the Straits of Campar, or Bancalis, to the town of Siac, is 
about sixty-five miles, and from thence to a place called Pakanbharu, where the survey discontinues, is 
about 100 more. The width of the river is in general from about half to three quarters of a mile, and its depth 
from 7 to 15 fathoms; but on the bar at low water there are only 15 feet, and several shoals near its 
mouth; the tides about 11 feet at the town. Not far within the river is a small island, on which the Dutch 
had formerly a factory. According to the information of the natives, the river is navigable for sloops to a 
place called Panti Chermin, being eight days’ sail, with the assistance of the tide, and within half a day’s 
journey by land, of another named Patapahan, which boats also of 10 to 20 tons reach in two days. This 
is a great mart of trade with the interior, and here its merchants resort with their gold. Pakambharu, the 
limit of Mr. Lynch’s voyage, is much lower down, and the above-mentioned places are consequently not 
noticed by him. 