

engano, 

The southernmost of the large Islands fronting the West Coast of Sumatra, is large, triangular, and the 
inland country high; its southern extreme is in latitude 5° 2?' South, and longitude about 102° 17 East. 
It is very imperfectly known, all attempts to open a friendly communication with the natives having 
hitherto proved fruitless. To the eastward of it, near its southernmost point, are four small islands, which 
form an exceeding fine bay, where you have clear ground, good anchorage, and shelter from any wind 
for ships of any burthen. One of these islands is sandy, and there vessels may go in, and repair or careen 
with great facility, having four fathoms clear ground close to the shore; there is also good running water, 
plenty of fine wood for building or repairing ships, and abundance of excellent fish, yams, and cocoa-nuts. 
The island is said to be well inhabited; the houses stand singly in the plantations, are circular, about 
eight feet in diameter, raised about six feet from the ground on slender iron-wood sticks, floored with 
planks, and the roof, which is thatched with long grass, rises from the floor in a conical shape. They have 
a number of canoes, which are very neat, and in general contain six or seven men. 

There are several bays on the South Coast of Sumatra, hut they are seldom visited by Europeans, as 
they produce no articles of trade, and the natives, being very treacherous, are not to be trusted. 

PALEMBANG. 

This kingdom is of considerable importance, and its river one of the largest in the island, disem¬ 
boguing itself by various branches into the sea. Its principal entrance is in latitude about 2° 52'South, 
and longitude 104° 50' East, opposite to the city of Palembang and the Dutch Company’s factory, which 
is 14 leagues from its entrance; it is upwards of a mile in breadth, and is conveniently navigated by vessels 
drawing 14 feet water. Those of a larger description have been carried thither for military purposes (as 
m -1660, when the place was attacked and destroyed by the Dutch) ; but the operation is attended with 
considerable difficulty and danger, on account of the numerous shoals in the river, the lower parts of the 
country being flat and marshy, and overflowed during the rainy season. 



PALEMBANG. 


347 


The &ity of Palembang Is about sixty miles from the sea; it extends about eight miles along both 
banks of the river, and is mostly confined to them, and to the creeks which open into the river. The 
buildings, with the exception of the King’s palace and mosque, being all of wood and bamboos, standing 
on posts, and mostly covered with palm leaves, the appearance of the place has nothing to recommend it; 
there are also a great number of floating habitations, mostly shops, upon bamboo rafts, moored to piles, 
and which can be removed up or down the river at pleasure. Indeed, as the nature of the surrounding 
country, being overflowed in high tides, scarcely admits of roads, almost all communication is carried on 
by means of boats, which accordingly are seen moving by hundreds in every direction without intermission. 
The palace is surrounded with a high wail, and appears large, lofty, and much ornamented on the outside. 
Immediately adjoining this wall, on the lower side, is a strong square roofed battery, commanding the 
river, and below it another, on both of which many heavy cannon are mounted, and fired upon particular 
occasions. In the interval between the two batteries is a plain, at the extremity of which appears the hall 
where the Sultan gives audience in public; this is an ordinary building, and serves occasionally for a ware¬ 
house, but it is ornamented with weapons arranged along the walls. The royal mosque stands behind the 
palace, and from the style of architecture, seems to have been constructed by an European; it is an oblong 
building, with glazed windows, pilasters, and a cupola, and has a handsome appearance. 