

The water is procured from a rivulet in a small sandy bay, at the easternmost part of it, where a path 
is cut through the woods to the place where you fill, about 100 yards up, but very convenient for rolling 
the casks; but if you fill below, though at low water, it will be brackish. 

Vol. IL Z .2 



352 


CRACATOA—ANJERIE—NORTH ISLAND—BANTAM. 


CRACATOA. 

Tills Island is remarkable for its peak, and is in latitude 6° 9 South, 
its north side is a very convenient watering-place, where the Dutch ships 
mile from which there is also a Malay town, where' supplies, nearly the 
be procured. Abundance of turtle frequent the shores of this island. 

ANJERIE, 

Or Anjer village, is in latitude 6° 3 South, about two leagues to the eastward of the fourth point of' 
Java, and is not easily perceived coming from the westward, being situated, in a bay, where the houses 
are scattered amongst the cocoa-nut trees; it is nearly obscured by them, and by a chain of high hills in¬ 
land, the easternmost of which is a sharp peaked hill, called Anjerie Peak, directly over the houses. The 
common anchorage is in from 9 to 14 fathoms abreast of the village. 

Here is a small fort, consisting of a low earthen embankment, surrounded by a bamboo palisade, 
having a few small guns mounted. The Dutch kept an European serjeant and about ten men as a pro¬ 
tection to the village against the Malay pirates, and as a post to receive and convey dispatches across the 
country, when any of their own ships, or those of any other nation appeared in the Strait. Within the 
palisade is the tomb of Colonel Cathcart, who died here, on his voyage to China, as minister from England. 

The East India Company's ships frequently touch here to obtain refreshments. Buffaloes, hogs, 
poultry, and fruits are to be procured at reasonable rates; 12 to 15 fowls for a dollar, 5 or 6 large capon® 
for a dollar; buffaloes from 10 to 12 dollars each; turtle is occasionally to be had, 3 or 4 dollars each;, 
pine-apples, oranges, mangosteens, and other fruits in abundance. 

The spring from which the water is filled, is only separated by a narrow slip of land from the sea; it 
is but indifferent. Ships therefore prefer watering at North Island, where the water is excellent 

NORTH ISLAND. 

This island is dose upon the Sumatra shore, without the Strait; it is about two miles in circumference* 
in latitude 5° 37' South, and longitude about 105° 55' East. It used to be much frequented for the purposes 
of wooding and watering; but the treachery of the Malays has occasioned the loss of so many lives, that 
the preference is given to Anjerie Point. Should a ship stop here, wood should be cut from the island. The 
water is procured from the main, about 500 yards from the beach. Care should be taken that the people 
do not go far from the water-side, or they will be cut off. The Malays bring off turtle, fowls, cocoa-nuts,, 
pumpkins, yams, &c. in their proas to the ship, and sell them at reasonable prices. 