

The King of Bantam, although a vassal to the Dutch Company, is a sovereign ‘Prince, lord and 
master of life and death, and uncontrouled in his authority over his own subjects; but is restricted from 
entering into any alliances or engagements with any European or Indian power, as likewise from selling 
the productions of his territories to any other than to the Company. 

Bantam was first visited by the English under Captain Lancaster, in December, 1602, who were 
kindly received, and obtained permission to settle a factory, which became the principal place of trade, 
and was formed into a Presidency. In 1630 it was made subordinate to Surat. In 1670 it was stipulated 
by treaty, that the Company should pay annually, in lieu of all duties, 4,000 rials per annum; and that 
their ships, vessels, and junks should have, without any duties imposed on them, a free export and im¬ 
port trade, reserving only to the King the established duties on pepper; and that opium should have a 
free import, but be sold at the Custom House only, and not in the towns, or at any other place, under the 
penalty of being forfeited, provided that all military stores imported by the English should he offered for 
sale to the King exclusively. In 1677 the Resident and principal servants of the agency were massacred 
by the natives; and in 1682, the Dutch having obtained possession of Bantam by assisting the King’s 
.son in a rebellion against his father, the English were finally expelled, after having carried on a 
trade upwards of 80 years; since which period Bantam has been subordinate to Batavia. 

Zz 2 



854 


BATAVIA, 


COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 


Coins.-— The coins current are similar to those at Batavia, viz. Spanish dollars, duccatoons, rupees, 
schillings, dubbeltjees, doits, and cash; the King having no coin of his own. The cash are of different 
value, according to the quantity in the market. They keep their accounts thus: 


10 peccoes 
10 laxsans 
10 catties 
10 utas 


V make \ 
{ 


1 laxsan 
1 catty. 
1 uta. 

1 bahar. 


Each peccoo should contain 1000 cash, but they are frequently deficient; the price varies from 25 to 35 
for a Spanish dollar. 

Weights and Measures. —Pepper is sold by the timbang, which is equal to half a Chinese pecul, 
or 62f Dutch lbs.; 3 peculs are the small bahar, and 4§ peculs the great bahar. But the natives not 
being expert in weighing, a measure called a kulack is used, which contains 71 catties; but this depends 
upon the quality of the pepper, whether light or heavy. 

The weight for gold, musk, See. is the tale; the China one is only six-tenths of that of Bantam. 

The long measure is the hasta, which is 18 English Inches. 

The commerce carried on between Bantam and other parts of India and China is very trifling, the 
trade centering in Batavia, to which the pepper, and other produce of the territories of the King of 
Bantam, are sent, and from whence the foreign articles necessary for the consumption, is imported. 