

The citadel of Batavia, which forms the north boundary of the eastern division of the city, is a 
regular square fortress with four bastions, which are connected by high curtains, except on the south side. 
The walls and ramparts are built of coral rock, and are about 20 feet high. It is surrounded by a wet ditch, 
over which, on the south side, is a drawbridge; between the moat and the buildings within the fort on this 
side, there is a large esplanade. In the centre of the buildings that look towards the city, is a great gate and 
a broad passage, with warehouses on each side, leading to another esplanade on the north side, enclosed 
between the ramparts and the buildings, all of which are appropriated to the use of the Company. The 
Government House forms the left wing of the buildings, looking towards the south. Over the Castle bridge 
is a large square, planted with tamarind trees; the entrance to it from the city is over a bridge, and through 
a stately gate. On the west side of the square stands the artillery house and provision magazine, both of 
which reach behind to the river side, so that vessels are loaded and unloaded with the greatest ease. On 
the opposite side is the iron magazine, and what is termed the grass-plat, or place of execution. There 
are a number of cannon and other warlike implements ranged upon the plain. 

The city is surrounded by a wall of coral rock, and is defended by 22 bastions, provided with artillery, 
which are mostly of a square or semicircular shape, projecting beyond the curtains, which with the wall 
itself are built nearly perpendicular. There are five gates to the city: one to the east, called the Rotter¬ 
dam gate; two to the south, the New gate and Diest gate; one to the west, the Utrecht gate; and one 
on the north side, to the west of the river, called the Square gate. Near to the last-mentioned gate, and 
opposite to the Castle, is the Admiralty wharf, and not far off, the warehouses for naval stores, workshops, 
and other offices that relate to shipping; likewise the houses of the commandant and comptrollers of equip¬ 
ment. In the S. E. corner of the city is the place where the Company’s mechanics and labourers have their’ 
abode. There is a fine town-house, and several churches and other places of worship. The streets are laid 
out in straight lines, and cross each other at right angles, each street having a canal in the middle, cased with 
stone walls, which rise into a low parapet on each side: upon the whole, Batavia may rank among the 
neatest and handsomest cities in the world. The population of Batavia is estimated at about 150,000 
inhabitants; two-thirds of whom are Chinese, who principally reside in the suburbs, to the southward and 
westward of the city. The natives, Armenians, Persees, Hindoos, Arabs, and Europeans, make up the 
remainder; the latter do not exceed 1500. Few of them sleep in the town where their warehouses are, 
to which they go at six o’clock in the morning, transact business till 10 or 11, and then return to the 
country, on account of the unwholesomeness of the city. Noon is the general dinner hour, and until five 
or six in the’evening, no one is to be seen on business, which is almost wholly transacted in the morning. 