

The Dutch Company procured annually from Siac, for the use of Batavia, several rafts of spars for 
masts; and Captain Lynch having entered into an arrangement with the Rajah for the supply of Pulo 
Pinang with timber, much expence will be saved, as the mode previously adopted; of receiving supplies 
from Rangoon, was attended with a heavy charge, and much delay. 



BATOOBAREA—PULO VARELLA. 


360* 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

The commerce is chiefly .carried on by kling vessels, as they are called, from the Coast of Coromandel, 
which are supplied, generally at Pulo Pinang, with the under-mentioned articles, which, with the piece- 
goods brought from the coast, find a ready sale here: 

Brass wire. Gunpowder, Lead. Salt. 

Coarse cutlery. Iron. Muskets. Steel. 

China ware. Looking glasses. Opium. Tobacco. 

In return, they receive the under-mentioned goods, the prices varying according to the demand: 

Brimstone~~~~~~~^ 20 to 30 dollars per baliar. Gutta Gambir— according to quality. 

Camphire, head 10 to 12 ditto per catty. Gold-dust 23 to 25 dollars per buncal. 

Bezoar stones —.. according to quality. Rattans10 to 12 dollars per 100 bundles. 

1 to If dollar per pecul. 1 to If dollar per pecul. 

Elephants 1 teeth-according to size. Wax ___ 15 to 20 ditto. 

Between Siac and Diamond Point is the river Arakan, or Rakan, by far the largest in the island; it 
may be considered as an inlet of the sea, and is navigable for sloops to a great distance from the sea; 
but from the danger apprehended from the natives, it is scarcely at all known to Europeans. 

On this part of the coast are prodigious numbers of wild swine, which, when killed and salted, make 
excellent food, and form a considerable article of trade. 

BATOOBARRA 

Is situated on the banks of a river, nearly opposite the Two Brothers, in latitude about 8° 25' North, 
and is navigable by small vessels at high water; but the unfriendly disposition of the natives prevents Euro¬ 
peans frequenting it: they therefore carry their produce in their own proas to Prince of Wales’s island. 

A considerable distance up this river is found a large brick building, concerning the erection of which 
no tradition is preserved among the people. It is described as a square, or several squares, and at one corner 
is an extremely high pillar, supposed by them to have been designed for carrying a flag; images, or relievos 
of human figures are carved in the walls, which they conceive to be Chinese (perhaps Hindoo) idols. The 
bricks, of which some were brought to Tappanooly, are of a smaller size than those used by the English. 

PULO VARELLA. 

This island is in latitude 3° 47 / North, and longitude 99° 36' East, and is about twenty miles from the 
Coast of Sumatra. On the S. E. part is anchorage, where plenty of fire-wood may be got. This island 
being frequented by turtle, ships becalmed near it sometimes send their boats on shore to obtain a few of 
them; the crews ought to be guarded against the perfidy of the Batoobarra people, who frequent the island 
to look out for plunder, or to dry their nets, and who have more than once made slaves of the crews of 
boats that have landed to procure wood and water. 