

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports. —The following is a list of India goods suitable to the market on the Pedir Coast, with the 
quantity of each particular article which should form an assortment. 

Blue cloth~v~~_9 call- —corge. Negapaiam salt 50 garce. 

Dittos___ 7 and 8 ditto_100 ditto. JafFnapatam tobacco, 1st sort --„ 20 candies. 

jBlue Suckertoons, gold head 20 ditto. 2d 60 candles. 

Brown cloth__ 8 and 9 call ^—100 ditto. Iron broad bars J>00 maunds. 

White dittos.-8 and 9 ditto ~~„150 ditto. Patna opium 30 chests. 



PEDIR. 


352 


The following articles of European produce are brought here, and in general find a ready sale, viz. 

Brass wire. Gunpowder. Iron, in bars. Steel, in faggots. 

Blunderbusses. Guns, 1 to 3 cwt. Looking glasses. Swivels. 

Coarse cutlery. Gold lace. Nails, of sizes. Watches. 

Exports.— The principal articles produced here, and the neighbouring places on the coast, are 

Beetle-nut 8 to 12 loxa per buncal. Pepper 30 to 40 dollars per bahar. 

Canes according to quality. Rattans 12 mayams ditto. 

Gold dust VMVVIi'i%%VU W*/V 24 to 26 dollars per buncal. Wax, according to quality. 

From the treacherous behaviour of the Malays on this coast, it is the common custom to buy and sell 
on board the ship; but occasionally business is transacted on shore with the principal merchants, if the 
commander is acquainted with the language. No duties are levied upon either exports or imports, but 
considerable presents are necessary to the Rajah or Chief, and the principal people about him. 

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

Buffaloes and poultry are in abundance, particularly ducks and fowls, which are reasonable; likewise 
tropical fruits, similar to those at Acheen; and the sea supplies various sorts of fish. 





CHAPTER XXV. 


Java. 


Strait of Sunda—Prince's Island — Cracatoa — Anjerie—North Island — Bantam; Description—Coins, Weights , 
and Measures — Batavia; Description — Coins, Weights, and Measures—Commerce with Europe — Corn* 
merce with India—Commerce with the British Settlements—Commerce with China—Commerce with Japan 
—Commerce with the Eastern Islands—Provisions and Refreshments — Cheribon — Samarang — Japara— 
Joana — Grissec — Sourabaya—Island of Madura — Passourwang — Panaroukan — Balembouang—Rise and 
Progress of the Commerce of Holland with the East Indies—Straits to the Eastward of Java — Bally—* 
Lomboch — Alass — Sapy — Mangeray — Flores — Timor; its Extent — Coupang — Coins, Weights, and Mea - 
sures—Imports and Exports — Dhelly — Coins—Imports and Exports—Provisions and Refreshments „ 


THIS island is separated from that of Sumatra by the Strait of Sunda. The length of this channel 
on the Sumatra side, from Flat Point to Hog Point, is about twenty leagues, and on the Java side, from 
Java Head to Bantam Point, about twenty-five leagues. There are several islands in the Strait, the prin¬ 
cipal of which are Hippins, or Prince’s Island, and Cracatoa. 

PRINCE'S ISLAND. 

This island, called by the Malays Pulo Selan, is in the mouth of the Strait, about two leagues from 
Java, and six from Sumatra; its north end is in latitude about 6° 25' South, and longitude 105° 15' East; 
on its S. E. part is a peak, by which it is known. There is a bay on the S.W. side of the island, into 
which two small rivulets of fresh water empty themselves. There is a town upon it called Samadang, con¬ 
sisting of about 400 houses, divided into two parts by a small river. This island was formerly much fre¬ 
quented by the India ships of many nations, especially the English, who have of late forsaken it, and touch 
either at North Island, or Anjerie Point. Here may be got some excellent turtle, the largest for a dollar 
each; large fowls, 12 for a dollar; small deer, not larger than a rabbit, about two-pence each; larger deer, 
about the size of a sheep, half a dollar; many kinds of fish tolerably cheap; cocoa-nuts at the rate of 100 
for^a dollar, if picked; but if taken promiscuously, 130 for a dollar. Plantains, pine-apples, water melons, 
jacks, and pumpkins, besides yams and many other vegetables in plenty, and at reasonable rates. 