

The north point of Sumatra, extending from Diamond Point, its N. E. extreme, to Point Pedro, its 
N. W. extreme, is denominated the Pedir Coast. Its extent is about forty-five leagues, in which space* are 
numerous towns and villages, the principal of which are Telisomaway and Pedir. 



TELISOMAWAY—PEDIR. 


351 


TELISOMAWAY 

Is situated at the bottom of a bay to the S.E. of a point of the same name, and is known by a square 
dump of trees on its extremity, which makes it resemble an island, when first seen. The fort is situate 
near the mouth of a river, close to which are the town and bazar. The anchorage is about half a mile from 
the shore, the town bearing S.W. by W. and the Point N. 15 W. 

This is a place of some trade, and is in the hands of a Rajah, with whom all your transactions are. 
At this place ships must be constantly guarded against the natives, and not permit any of them to come on 
board, as they have cut off many European vessels in these roads, and put the crews to death. 

Between this place and Pedir are Passangan, Sambelangan, Murdoo, Ayrelaboo, and Gingham, 
places of Malay resort, the produce of which is generally carried to Pedir, or Acheen, in the country boats, 

PEDIR, 

From whence the coast takes its name, and in w r hieh the trade of all the other places west 
of Telisomaway centers, is situated up a small river, wdiich boats may enter at low water, neap tides, 
but not until a quarter flood on the springs, for then there is a considerable surf on the bar. The marks 
of anchorage are Pedir Point, which is in latitude about 5° 29' North, bearing N. W. and the entrance of 
the river, which is not very conspicuous, S. S. W. distance about two miles. 

This is a place of considerable trade; vessels from the Coromandel Coast, Bengal, and other parts of 
India frequenting here, likewise proas from the Malay Peninsula and the neighbouring places. 

Pedir w T as first visited by the Portuguese, under Sequeira, in 1509, where they found vessels from 
Pegu, Bengal, and other countries. The King, who, like other Mahometan Princes, is styled Sultan, sent 
off a deputation to them, accompanied with refreshments, excusing himself, on account of illness, from paying 
his compliments in person, but assured them that he should derive much pleasure from the friendship and 
alliance of the Portuguese, whose fame had reached his ears. Sequeira answered the message in such 
terms that, by the consent of the Sultan, a monument of them amity was erected on the shore; or more 
properly as the token of discovery and possession usually employed by the Europeans. They afterwards 
obtained permission to build a fort, but in a short time were expelled by the natives; since which period 
no European power has ever had a settlement on this coast. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Spanish dollars are the principal currency; the other coins are nearly similar to those at Acheen. 
The Pedir catty weighs 37 Spanish dollars, and the bahar is equal to 424 lbs. avoirdupois. 