

The island of Onrust is about three leagues N. W. from Batavia, and is nearly round. It rises 
six or eight feet above the surface of the sea, and is of small extent, being about 4,800 feet in circum¬ 
ference. In the centre of the island, and within the fort, consisting of four bastions and three curtains, 
stand the warehouses and other buildings, likewise a small church. The warehouses are about twelve in' 
number, and are generally full of goods of various kinds. On the north side of the island are two saw¬ 
mills ; and on the south side there is a long pier-head, on which are three large wooden cranes, erected 
for the purpose of fixing or unstepping masts. Three ships can lie here behind each other, alongside the 





UATAVTA. 


pier, in deep neater, to be repaired, or to receive or discharge their cargoes. There is another pier, a little 
more to the westward, called the Japan pier, where one more ship can lie to load or unload. There arc 
20 or more feet of water against the piers, and it rises about 5 feet once in 24 hours. All ships that 
require it, are hove down at the wharfs along the piers, and receive every necessary reparation with con¬ 
venience, safety, and dispatch. The government of this island is under the master carpenter, and his 
situation is reckoned a very profitable one. 

Edam is about three leagues N, N. E. from Batavia; it is very woody, and has abundance of large 
and ancient trees. The Company have some warehouses on this island for salt; but the chief use they 
make of it, is as a place of exile for criminals, who are employed in making cordage, and over whom a 
ship's Captain is placed as commandant. 

Cooper’s Island is about 1600 yards from Onrust, and about one-third less in size. The Company" 
have several warehouses upon it, in which coffee is chiefly laid up. There are two pier-heads, where vessels 
.may load and discharge at its south side. There are two batteries mounting 12 guns on this island. 

The Island of Purmerend is to the eastward of Onrust, and about half as large again. It is 
planted with shady trees, and in the centre is a large building, which serves for a hospital, or lazaretto, 
and is supported by voluntary contributions. 

When the Dutch first visited Java, a town stood on the site of Batavia, called Jaccatra, the King 
of which was in alliance with the English, which gave great umbrage to the Dutch. The two Companies 
came to action. For a time the latter had the superiority, and, in the year 1619, after a successful action 
at sea, compelled the Dutch to retreat to Amboyna; but they soon after returned in great force, and obliged 
the English by capitulation totally to evacuate the place. On the 26th of March, 1619, the Dutch took, 
plundered, and totally destroyed the town of Jaccatra, and built near its site the present Batavia, of 
which they continued in unmolested possession nearly two centuries. 

The English, during the long war in which they had been engaged with the Dutch, let them remain 
in possession of Java; but the French having formally annexed Holland to France, and sent out 
troops to take possession of Batavia and the other places belonging to the Dutch in the Eastern seas, an 
expedition was fitted out against Batavia from the British settlements in 1811, accompanied by Lord 
Minto, Governor-General of India, in person. The fleet anchored in the roads on the 4th of August; 
the troops were immediately landed, about 10 miles to the eastward of the city, and on the 6th the army 
w T as put in motion. On the 8th the city was taken possession of without opposition, the garrison having 
withdrawn to their fortified camp, a short distance in the country, after destroying the greater part of the 
•warehouses and public stores of every kind. This camp was taken by assault on the 25th of August, and 
on the 15th of September, General Jansens proposed terms of capitulation, which were concluded on the 
18th, by which all the possessions remaining to the enemy on the Island of Java and its dependencies 
were surrendered to the British arms; Governor-General Jansens, his staff, and the remnant of his troops 
being prisoners of war. By the terms of the capitulation, all private property was to be respected, and 
all charitable establishments, sanctioned by the Government, to have their property preserved to them; 
bat all public property of every kind, treasure, arms, ammunition, stores, provisions, as well as the objects 
of commerce, the property of the State, wherever situated within the limits of the Island of Java, or the 
settlements at the other islands depending on the Government of Java, was to be given up without reserve. 