

BANTAM. 

This city is seated at the bottom of a large bay formed by St. Nicholas or Bantam Point, which & 
in latitude 5° 52 South, and longitude 106° 2' East, and Point Pontang; there are many small islands in 
the bay, principally uninhabited. The marks for anchorage are Bantam Hill S.S.W. in six fathoms water. 

The city is situated about one mile from the sea-side, between the branches of a river, which is about 
* ISO feet over at its mouth; it is so very shallow, that at low water a common ship’s boat does not He afloat 
in it; at high water and in spring tides it is from five to seven feet deep. Though this is called Bantam 
River, it is properly only a branch of it; the river itself is divided above the town into three channels, of 
which this is the middle one; the other two run into the sea, about a league off on each side. The houses 
in the town are scattered to and fro without regularity, and round each is a plantation of cocoa-nut trees* 
the whole surrounded by a paling of split bamboo, by which each family is separated from its neighbour*. 


and longitude 105° 22' East. On 
often stop, about a quarter of a 
same as at Prince's Island, are ta 



BANTAM* 


353 

A short distance from the commencement of the city is a large square, where three streets, leading 
from different parts of the town, unite to the westward of the river. This forms the eastern, as part 
of the city does the southern boundary of the square; the royal mosque is on the north, and the King*s 
palace on the west side of it, which is built within a fortress, called the Diamond, an oblong square, 
about 840 feet in length, and nearly half as broad. It has regular bastions at the four corners, and 
several circular places of arms on the side; it mounted about 70 pieces of cannon, mostly 12 pounders. 
The bastions point N. E. S. E. S. W. and N. W. The walls are built of hard stone, and are 14 or 15 
feet high. The fort is not discernible till close to it, oii account of the numerous cocoa-nut trees, except 
the side next the square, where it is quite open. The approach to it is by a drawbridge, that is thrown 
over a moat which surrounds it; between this bridge and the gate of the fort is an esplanade, on the 
right side of which stands a large building, where the ceremony of crowning the Prince is performed. 
Gn the other side are the King’s stables and coach-houses. At the gate of the fort a Dutch guard is kept. 
The palace is about 20 paces within the gate, consisting of many dwellings connected together, and 
covering nearly the whole space of ground within the fort. In the centre appears a square building, 
which has two roofs, rising above each other to such a height that it is visible three leagues off at sea; 
it is mostly built of brick, and covered with tiles, but without any regularity in its architecture. 

On the east bank of the river, at a short distance from its mouth, is situated the Dutch fort* 
Speelwyck, which was built during the civil wars in 1682. It is a square, defended at three of its angles 
by regular bastions, and at the fourth by a demi-bastion. It is mounted with 48 pieces of cannon of 
various sizes. The north, south, and west sides are covered by a wet ditch, which lias a communication 
with the river that washes the east side; the walls are constructed of a heavy and hard stone, and are 
$bout 14 feet high. In the interior of the fort there is an open square, planted with trees in the middle, 
the sides of which are formed by several buildings, wherein part of the Company’s servants reside. The 
house of the Commander is handsome; the other buildings consist of barracks for the soldiers, ware-* 
bouses, &c. The gate is veiy near the river side, over which there is a drawbridge, and opposite to it a 
long street, where the Company’s servants reside, for whom there is no room in the fort, together with a 
few Chinese. The Dutch kept a garrison here of about 150 men, and a like force at Fort Diamond; 
but a considerable number are generally confined by sickness, this place being considered as unhealthy, 
if not more so than Batavia. 