


BATAVIA 

Was the principal settlement of the Dutch in the East Indies, and to which all others were subor¬ 
dinate. It is situated at the bottom of a large bay formed by the points Ontong, Java, and Crawang, 
and Is In latitude 6° 9' South, and longitude 106° 52' East. It is considered one of the best harbours in 
India, having a number of small islands about two or three leagues from the city, which shelter the bay 
from N. W. to N. E. the principal of which are Onrust, Edam, Cooper’s Island, and Purmerend. Large 
ships generally ride at single anchor in the roads, at about If mile.from the shore, in six fathoms, the 
dome of the principal church bearing about south; but smaller vessels approach within a mile of the shore. 

Fronting the small river, or canal, w r hich leads to the city, there is a bar, on which there are about 
three feet at low water. The channel for boats to enter, is to the eastward of the bar; and as there is at times 
a surf upon it at low ?vater, when blowing strong in the N. W. monsoon, strangers ought not then to send 
their boats to the river, as many have been overset upon the bar, and the crews devoured by alligators, 
which are here of a large size, and very numerous. 

The City of Batavia is an oblong square, the longest way facing the east and west about one mile, 
and the shortest facing the north and south, about three-quarters of a mile broad. Through the middle of 
the city, from north to south, runs the liver Jaccatra, over 'which are three bridges, one at the upper 
end of the town; another at the lower part, near the Castle; and the third about the middle, being 
thence called the middle point bridge. Two of these are built of stone; close to the middlemost there Is 
a large square redoubt, provided with some pieces of cannon, which commands the river both upwards and 
downwards, besides the city moats which run entirely round: each division, on either side of the river, has 
two canals running parallel w T ith the longest sides, and intersected at right angles by several cross canals. 
The breadth of the river within the city is about 180 feet; it runs Into the sea, past the Castle and the 
Admiralty wharf. On both sides of the mouth are long piers of wood and brick-work, about 3800 feet in 



BATAVIA* 


355 


length, taken from the moat of the city. The vessels belonging to the merchants are laid up and repaired 
between these piers, on the west side; but along the east side, the passage is kept open for the lighters, 
which go in and out of the city with the cargoes of the ships. At the outward point of the eastern pier 
there is a shed, which serves for a stable for the horses which draw the small vessels and boats up and 
down the river. Opposite to this is a horn work, called the Water Fort, built at a considerable expence. 
It is constructed of a kind of coral rock, and defended by heavy camion; within it are barracks for the 
garrison, and there is no other approach to it than along the western pier. 