

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

Bullocks, hogs, and sheep are to be procured here, with poultry, vegetables, and fruits in abundance. 

Buffaloes are very poor, and weigh SO to 100 lbs. each——^to 15 dollars. 

Hogs, which are of the China breed, and very excellent, 70 to SO lbs. each 6 to 7 ditto. 

Sheep, the flesh of which is hard, tough, and in every respect bad^— w 2f to 3 ditto. 

Goats, which are, if possible, worse than the slieep~v~~~~w~~v~v^—^ 2 to 3 ditto. 

Fowls are in general of a large size, very good, and in plenty 2 to 3 ditto per dozen. 

Ducks and geese are very cheap, but turkeys are extravagantly dear. 

Fish is amazingly plentiful, and yams are very good, at 2 rix-dollars per pecuh Of fruits they 
have the following: 

Custard apples. Limes. Oranges. Papaw apples. 

Durion. Lemons. Pomegranates. Pine-apples. 

Grapes. Mangosteens. Pumpienoses. Tamarinds. 

Guavas. Mangoes. Plantains. Water melons. 

Along the north coast of Java are many towns and villages; the principal of which are Cheribon, 
Samarang, Japara, Joana, Grissec, Sourabaya, Passourwang, and Panaroukan. 

CHERIBON. 

This town is about 35 leagues to the eastward of Batavia, and lies at the bottom of a large bay. Ships 
anchor to the N. E. of the fort, in 3v to 5 fathoms water, at about 2 leagues from the shore. Here is a 
river, having two branches, which fall into the sea a short distance from each other; the country vessels, 
drawing from 4 to 6 feet water, are obliged, in coming in or going out of the principal branch, to wait 
for high tides, the bar having only 2J feet on it at low water. 

On the right bank of the river, near the sea-side, stands the fort, which is small, and built of brick, 
surrounded with a fosse, over which is a bridge with a redoubt; the fort is of little consequence, its em¬ 
brasure parapet being but 18 inches thick. It has a few small guns mounted, which serve to salute ships 
visiting the port, and as a defence against the Malay pirates, who continually infest the vicinity. The 
town is large; the principal houses are surrounded with gardens, and have a picturesque appearance. 
There are a number of Chinese resident here, and a considerable trade is carried on in the produce of this 
part of the coast, which consists of coffee, cotton, indigo, sugar, timber, and pepper; the latter article 
formerly grew in such abundance, that in 16S0 the bahar of 375 Dutch lbs. was bought for 10 Spanish 
dollars. It yields yearly 1000 lasts of rice, and 1,000,000 lbs. of sugar; and in 1778, 1,000,000 lbs. of 
Cheribon coffee were sold in Holland at 11 stivers per lb. 

Provisions and refreshments of all kinds are in abundance, and at reasonable prices. 

SAMARANG. 

This town, which is the principal on the island next to Batavia, is at the bottom of a bay, in latitude 
6° 57' South, and longitude about 110° 34' East, and situated on the east side of a river of the same name, 
which has a bar, having on it, at low water, not more than two feet. It is strongly fortified, and has a 
small neat church. A guard-house has been recently erected. The Government house is facing the river; the 