

GRISSEC 

Is situated in latitude about 7° 10' South, nearly opposite to the S. W. end of the Island of Madura. 
Here is a small fort, having barracks for the troops stationed here, and warehouses within it. There is a 
wooden mole which runs out opposite the fort, about 600 feet in length. 



SOURABAYA—MADURA™PASSOURWANG. 


565 


The town Is small, and divided between the Javanese and Chinese. The principal street runs 
along the coast; it consists of four or five large houses, built of stone, inhabited by the Resident and 
other Europeans. The street is wide, and shaded by several rows of tall thick trees opposite the houses. 
At the end of, and behind the street are the campons of the natives and Chinese; also the grand square, in 
which are the residences of the native Chiefs. There is no water fit for drinking here, but what is fetched 
from two springs about If mile from the town, or from Sourabaya. 

SOURABAYA 

Is about three leagues from Grissec, the coast between forming a large angle. The town is situated 
on the banks of a river, about a mile from the sea, in latitude 7° 14 South, and longitude 112° 55' East. 
Ships visiting this place require pilots. The anchorage is about a mile to the northward of the river, with 
the flagstaff of the fort bearing S. 2 E. and Grissec W. 20 N. 

The fort is on the right bank of the river; it is small, and built of brick. It contains a small arsenal 
and barracks for the troops stationed here; the hospital is also on this side of the river, near which the 
Governor and all the officers reside. On the opposite bank are the principal Malay and Chinese cam¬ 
pons, to which there is a communication by two large wooden bridges. There are two moles erected at 
the mouth of the river, with* batteries to defend them. The banks are full of villages, inhabited by 
Malays and Chinese. 

The river is navigable for ships of 100 tons burthen, and much frequented by vessels from the neigh¬ 
bouring ports. There are several yards for building ships and vessels; and here the Dutch used to 
construct those they employed in the country trade, timber being abundant, and of excellent quality. 
The ships destined for the Philippine Islands and China usually touch at Sourabaya, where every refresh¬ 
ment, except good vegetables, is to be procured in abundance. Good native sailors are to be had here., 
but it must be under an engagement to bring them to Java. 

MADURA. 

This island, which extends about 20 leagues due East, is separated from Java by a narrow channel, 
called the Strait of Madura; but it is only navigated by vessels of small burthen. On the S. E. side of 
the island is the principal town, called Samanap, where refreshments of various kinds are to be procured. 
The island abounds in rice, and excellent timber for ship-building. 

The Dutch invaded and subdued this island about 1747, making slaves of a great number of the 
inhabitants. 

PASSOURWANG 

Is situated on the banks of a river navigable for several leagues up the country, at the bottom of a 
bay on Java. Here is a neat and well-constructed fort, about a mile from which there is a fine wooden 
bridge across the river. The Commandants house backs the fort on the right bank facing the bridge, and 
is a very extensive and commodious residence, with many offices. The boat yards are near the mouth of 
the river. The houses are neatly built, and the country is well cultivated. The chief produce is rice, of 
which large quantities are exported. There are but few Dutch here; the Javanese are numerous, and 
their Chief lives in considerable splendour. The -coast hereabouts Is very shoal, so that large ships 
are obliged to anchor three or four miles from the land, in latitude 7° 36' South, the entrance of the 
river bearing S.W. The banks of the river are mud, and very shallow, having many offensive dead animals 
about them, which generally occasion an intolerable smell. 