



366 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE COMMERCE, 


PANAROUKAN. 

This town is situated upon a river, which empties itself by several mouths into the sea, about 20 
miles to the westward of Cape Bandana, the N. E extreme of Java. The fort stands about three quarters 
of a mile from the sea; it is square, built with palisades and planks, mounting two or three small guns, 
and surrounded by a wide ditch full of water It has two entrances, with a good drawbridge, the prin¬ 
cipal one fronting the sea. Within is a barrack-house, the rooms of which are comfortable; here a 
serjeant and small guard are kept. Provisions are cheap, and the place abounds with fish and fruits. 

BALEMBOUANG 

Is the only place on the east coast of Java where refreshments can be procured. This was formerly 
a place of considerable trade, and the Dutch ships frequently took in part of their cargoes of pepper here; 
it has since gone to decay, and the Resident is removed to Bagnouwangie, about five leagues to the north¬ 
ward, on the banks of a river called Balembouang River. Here is a small mud fort, lined with turf, sur¬ 
rounded by a ditch full of water, over which are two drawbridges; within are three capital residences for 
the officers, besides a guard-house. This establishment is surrounded by a village of the same name, where 
numbers of Malays and Chinese reside. It is considered very unhealthy, and is the place where the con¬ 
victs from Batavia are sent to work in the pepper and coffee plantations, of which there are several, like¬ 
wise a small indigo manufactory. 

The south coast of Java does not contain any places of trade, and being seldom visited, is but little 
known. There are several bays, but the greater part of the coast is inaccessible, from the heavy surf con¬ 
stantly beating upon it. 


RISE AND PROGRESS 

OF THE 

COMMERCE OF THE DUTCH WITH THE EAST INDIES. 

Among the nations of modern Europe, the inhabitants of the United Provinces were early distin¬ 
guished for their love of trade, and their skill in nautical affairs; and the habits of industry and economy 
which they thereby acquired, animated with the noble spirit of independence which they inherited from 
their Batavian ancestors, gradually rendered them a sensible, intelligent, and enterprising people. 

Soon after the establishment of the Portuguese trade to India, the Dutch resorted to Lisbon for the 
purchase of Indian commodities, of which they became the principal carriers to the ports of Prance, the 
Netherlands, and the Baltic. In the prosecution of this traffic, they observed the vast advantages the 
Portuguese derived from their direct intercourse with India, which, together with the alluring accounts 
they received of the riches of that country, awakened a high spirit of emulation and enterprise, and they 
aspired to a participation of the commerce and wealth of the East. They, however, resolved not to inter¬ 
fere vrilh the right which the Portuguese had assumed of monopolizing the trade to India by way of the 
•Cape ol Good Hope, but to attempt to open a communication with Japan and China, by sailing round 
the north of Europe; and, dated with the hope of attaining an object so advantageous, they overlooked 
the failures which eminent English navigators had recently experienced in attempting the same passage, as 
well as the various obstacles to its discovery which the voyages of those navigators had brought to light. 
A squadron of four ships was accordingly equipped, and the command of it was given to William Barentz, 