



OF THE DUTCH WITH THE EAST INDIES. 


'36* 

an able pilot, and distinguished for his intrepidity and skill. He sailed from the Texel, June 5, 1594, 
and proceeded to the latitude of 78° North, and then, not being able to prevail upon his companions 
to continue any longer in those seas, returned to Holland September the 16th. 

1595. Though the above voyage was unsuccessful, the probability of discovering a passage appeared 
so great, that another fleet, under the command of Hemskirk and Barentz, sailed June 2, 1595; but 
this fleet, of which there were great expectations, performed little or nothing, returning to Holland in 
less than five months with an account that the savages had informed them that there was a great sea to 
the eastward of Tartary, into which they might enter. Encouraged with this report, and a reward 
offered by the Government of 25,000 florins to any person who should make the discovery, the City of 
Amsterdam fitted out two vessels under the same commanders, who sailed on the 18th of May, 1596. 
These were more unfortunate than the former; one of the ships was lost on the coast of Nova Zembla, 
and a great part of her crew perished, and Barentz amongst the number. Hemskirk and the rest returned 
In October, 1597. 

These failures convinced the Dutch that even if a north-east passage to India were practicable, the 
numerous difficulties and perils attending it, would render it of little or no utility in a commercial point 
of view. They therefore turned all their attention and activity towards acquiring a knowledge of the 
navigation round the Cape of Good Hope, in w r hlch they determined to embark. This scheme was 
encouraged and facilitated by Cornelius Houtman, who was employed in the trade which had been carried 
on between Amsterdam and Lisbon, and who had by that means the opportunity of forming an acquaint¬ 
ance with some of those intelligent mariners who conducted the Portuguese fleets to India. His inqui¬ 
sitive solicitude respecting the navigation of the Indian seas attracted the notice of the Portuguese 
Government, who had him arrested and confined. Upon this he applied to the merchants of Amsterdam, 
offering to communicate to them all the valuable facts which he had collected relative to the Indian trade, 
and the mode of conducting it, if they would redeem him from captivity, by advancing a certain sum of 
money which the Portuguese had consented to take for his ransom. This proposal was readily acceded 
to. Houtman was accordingly liberated; and on his arrival at Amsterdam, he furnished the merchants 
with such ample and detailed information regarding the East Indian commerce, that a plan for engaging 
in it was formed and adopted. 

1596. A Company of merchants wras formed for carrying on the trade; they fitted out a fleet of 
four ships, under the command of Houtman, which sailed from the Texel in February, 1596, and 
returned in August, 1597. They found the natives every where ready to trade with them. Before the 
return of this fleet, another set of merchants had associated for engaging in the Indian trade; upon which, 
to avoid animosities, they agreed to unite, and accordingly sent out a fleet of eight ships, under the 
command of James Tan Neck. A design of the same kind was set on foot in Zealand, and ships 
dispatched for India. The inhabitants of Rotterdam, excited by such examples, formed a Company 
also, and fitted out five ships, with orders to sail to the Molucca Islands by the Strait of Magellan. 