



564 


JAPARA—JOANA—GRISSEC. 


warehouses and workshops stand In a row under one roof to the S.W. of the town by the river’s side; 
they are about 300 feet long. The Chinese and Javanese towns are on the western side of the river, and 
that of the Bouginese to the eastward. A bridge is thrown across the river from the fort, leading to the 
usual residence of the Governor, which is a large and handsome building. 

The town is surrounded by a wall and ditch; there are likewise a very good hospital, a public school, 
and a small theatre. This Government is said to be one of the most lucrative In the Dutch Company’s 
possessions. The shoalness of the coast makes the road of Samarang inconvenient, both on account of the 
great distance at which large ships are obliged to lie from the shore, and of the landing in the river, which 
cannot be entered before half-flood. The anchorage is with the flagstaff bearing S. S. E. and the high land, 
of Japara N. E. by E. in five fathoms, about three miles from the shore. 

Provisions are cheap here; beef 10 doits per lb. and 6 to 8 fowls for a Spanish dollar. 

JAPARA 

Is situated about twenty-five miles N. E. of Samarang, on the banks of a small river, having a bar, on 
which are not more than three feet at low water. The fort is on the northern side, upon a small eminence; 
It is triangular, one bastion pointing to the sea, the other two to the land; and in the middle of the curtain, 
which connects these two last, is the gate. This fort is mounted with several pieces of cannon of different 
calibres; it is built of stone, and kept in good repair. On the south side of the river is the Javanese 
village, where there is a bridge thrown across to the north side, on which is the house of the Resident, 
planted with shady trees, and railed round, and is a neat and well-furnished building 

About a mile and a half above the settlement the stream turns a saw-mill, that saws annually four 
or five thousand large logs of timber into planks, which are carried to Batavia. 

JOANA 

Is situated about three miles up a river, which is the largest and most navigable along the N. E. coast 
of Java, being at the mouth, and a great way up, 20 feet deep, and about 200 feet broad. The town con¬ 
sists of two rows of houses, built along the river on its west side. On the opposite side, upon an island 
formed by the river, stands the Chinese campon. The fort is a redoubt with four demi-bastions, in which 
are the rice warehouses, the barracks for the soldiery, and some other buildings. The house of the Resi¬ 
dent is without the fort, on the east side; it is a grand and elegant building, consisting of two parts, 
opposite to each other, connected by a lofty dome full 25 feet in diameter, supported by four columns. 

The emoluments of this Residency amounted annually to 16,000 rix-dollars; they proceeded from the 
surplus weight of rice delivered by the natives to the Company, and from the collection of timber annually 
furnished to the Resident at a fixed price, which costs no more than the labour, and which is very cheap 
here, as he has only to send the people into the woods to fell the trees, and hew them into logs. The con¬ 
struction of ships likewise affords considerable gain to the Resident, as both timber and labour cost him 
little; for a Javanese master shipwright earns no more than six dtibheltjees a day, his assistants four, and 
the common labourers two. There are also profits attached to the farm of the duties, which accrue no¬ 
minally to the Chinese Captain, but in reality to the Resident. 