

1599. The Amsterdam Company, without staying for the return of the fleet they had sent out already, 
fitted out three ships more, which sailed May 4th, 1599. On the Sth of June four of the eight ships that 
went out first, arrived in the Texel; and after they were unloaded, were immediately sent back again. 
About this time a new Company of merchants at Amsterdam fitted out four vessels, which sailed in 
December, with four of the old Company’s ships. In about two years all these ships came home with 
rich cargoes, winch gave great encouragement to all concerned in this new branch of commerce. 

1600. In this year the new Company sent out two ships, which were joined by six of the old 
Company’s ships; these, with the former fleets, all returned in due time to their respective ports. In the 

Vol.IL 3 B 



368 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE COMMERCE 


course of the foregoing voyage, the Dutch had settled factories at Bantam, Acheen, and Banda; but 
experienced much difficulty in obtaining cargoes, from the intrigues and animosity of the Portuguese. 

I60L Upon this happy success more ships were sent out from Amsterdam, Zealand, and other parts. 
Among others, thirteen sailed from Amsterdam, of which four belonged to the old, and four to the new 
Company; these sailed from the Texel in April, 1601. This fleet was attacked by a Spanish fleet of 30 
sail, in the month of May, but succeeded in beating them off. Some of the Dutch ships frequenting 
Acheen, had disputes with the King of that place, which were at length compromised, in which Houtman, 
who first conducted the Dutch to India, lost his life. 

1602. While the Dutch commerce was attended with such prosperity, the affairs of the different 
Companies at home became involved in difficulties, of which that success was the primary cause. The 
desire of adventuring in the India trade which pervaded the United Provinces, and which gained strength 
at the completion of every voyage, at last produced so many rival Companies, each of them striving to 
surpass the other in diligence and activity, that the markets were glutted with Indian commodities, and 
the price of them consequently fell very considerably. This depreciation in the value of goods, which 
were procured at so great an expence, proved fatal to some of the Companies, and was severely felt by all. 
A temporary stagnation therefore took place in the trade; and the whole nation was filled with disappoint¬ 
ment, agitation, and alarm. The States-General, fearful of the consequences, exhorted the various Com¬ 
panies to unite their funds in one general stock, which was agreed to; and on the 20th of March, 1602,. 
the new Corporation entitled te The Dutch East India Company, 4 ” was formally instituted at the Hague. 
The patent commenced on the same day, and was granted for 21 years. Its conditions were, that the 
Company should possess the complete monopoly of the trade during the term specified; and that the State, 
in return for this extensive privilege, should have a share in their capital, equal to 25,000 florins, and 
likewise a duty of 3 per cent, on all their exports, except bullion. The whole stock of the new Company 
consisted of 6,600,000 guilders, about <£600,000 sterling, which was divided into the following shares: 