

From Japan the Company receive only silver and copper, the Emperor having prohibited the export¬ 
ation of gold. This trade has lately been attended with the loss of several ships. 

It is expected that the Emperor of China will permit the Company to have a free trade, in consider¬ 
ation of the services rendered, by delivering him from his formidable enemy Coxenga. 

In Coromandel the Company have an important trade in piece-goods, which they purchase at Pulicat, 
where the Governor resides; at Negapatam, a town lately taken from the Portuguese; and at Mausuli- 
patam with its dependent posts. 

In Pegu there are posts at Ava and Sirian, but the trade has been interrupted by wars. 

In Bengal the Company have factories at Hughley, Cossimbuzar, Dacca, Patna, &c. and command 
great trade in silk-goods, cotton goods, saltpetre, sugar, rice, &c. 

In Orixa some rice and other provisions are purchased for the supply of Ceylon. 

Ceylon is one of the most valuable possessions of the Company. It produces the best cinnamon, and 
elephants of a superior quality. The Company have 2500 soldiers in garrison at Colombo, Point de 
Galle, Negombo, Manar, and Jaffnapatam. 

At Tuticorin, opposite Ceylon, they have a trade in cotton goods, and a pearl fishery. 

In Malabar the Company have Cochin, Cranganore, Quilon, and Cananore, all taken from the Por¬ 
tuguese. The Samoiin of Calicut and the other Princes have contracted with the Company to sell all 
their pepper to them. At Porca the Company have succeeded to all the rights the Portuguese had there. 
The English have been warned to withdraw from this station. 

The factory at Surat has the charge of the trade of Hindostan and Guzzerat, which is very consi¬ 
derable. There are dependent posts at Amedabad and Agra. 

In Persia there is an advantageous trade, the chief seat of which is at Gombroon, with a dependent 
post at Ispahan. The Company have bound themselves to take 600 bales of silk every year from the 
King at a fixed price, which they find an unprofitable article, and therefore they endeavour to diminish 
the quantity. 

The factories at Mocha and Bussorah were given up, but the latter has lately been resumed. 

The settlement at the Cape of Good Hope is merely intended as a place of refreshment for the ships 
nn the outward and homeward voyages, and it abundantly answers that purpose. 

The Island of Mauritius was abandoned, but people have lately been sent to reoccupy it 
¥ol. II. 3 C 



376 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE COMMERCE 


In Java the province of Mataran supplies a prodigious quantity of rice. There is a factory at Japara. 

Batavia, the capital of all the settlements belonging to the Company, becomes more populous every 
year. The adjacent country produces rice, sugar, fruits, &c. 

Such were at this period the extensive and valuable territories occupied by the Dutch East India 
Company in the oriental seas. 

1665. The Dutch Government in India had hitherto evaded the delivery of Pulo Roon to the English, 
agreeably to treaty, and it was not till the 25th of March, 1665, that the cession of the island actually took 
place; but it was delivered up in so desolated a state, the whole of the spice-trees having been destroyed, 
that this station, which had been the subject of so many negotiations and treaties in Europe, and of so 
many unjustifiable evasions at Batavia, was rendered completely useless: but war taking place between 
the two powers soon after, the Dutch repossessed the island. 