

The English at this period had factories on Pulo Roon and Rosengyn, two of the Banda islands, 
which were attacked by the Dutch, but being fortified, they were repulsed. They, however, succeeded in 
capturing two of the English Company’s ships, the Swan and Defence. On the arrival of this intelligence 
in Europe, an English fleet was sent out under Sir Thomas Dale, who, on his arrival at Bantam, found 
the Dutch at war with the Javanese. The King of Bantam entered into a treaty with the English, and 
the Castle of Jacatra was taken on the 22d of January, 1619. The surrender was made to the English 
and Javanese on the following conditions:—The Dutch to be sent to the Coast of Coromandel, on condi¬ 
tion of their taking an oath not to serve against the English previous to the month of November next 
ensuing. The place was delivered up by the English to the King of Bantam, reserving their factory, and 
privileges of trade. 

1619. A Dutch fleet, under the command of Commodore Coen, arrived on the 25th of March in 
the road of Jacatra, and landed 1200 men, who took, ravaged, and destroyed the town of Jacatra, 
and kept possession of the place, by right of conquest, for the Dutch East India Company, compelling 
the King of Bantam to make a formal acknowledgment of the supremacy of the Dutch power in 
the Island of Java. Having thus established his authority over the principal part of the island, Coen 
concluded a treaty of peace with the English; and on the 12th of August, 1619, laid the foundation of the 
City of Batavia, and fixed here the seat of the Supreme Government of the Dutch possessions in India, 
which had previously been at Ambovna, and which were held under the following regulations: 

All the Company’s territories, settlements, and factories were placed under the government of a 
supreme council, which was called the “ Council of India,” composed of a President and 20 Counsellors. 
The President was the Governor and Captain-General, and, in his executive capacity, the first magistrate 
of the Government, The sole administration of public affairs was thus vested in the Governor-General 
and Council, to whose superintendence and controul the Governors and Factors of all the subordinate 



OF THE DUTCH WITH THE EAST INDIES. 


871 


factories and residencies were subject, to whom they regularly transmitted annual accounts of their 
proceedings, and to whom they were accountable for their public conduct. Regular military and naval 
establishments were formed, of which the Governor-General was the head, and possessed the absolute 
direction. These extensive powers were supported by an authority, and embellished with a splendour 
which partook of the dignity and magnificence of regal state. Rut, in the exercise of Ills authority, the 
Governor-General was overlooked by an independent Council, called “ The Council of Justice.” In this 
council was vested the judicial power, together with the distinguishing prerogative, which they derived 
from the States-General, of arraigning the Company's Government for the commission of any act incon¬ 
sistent with their allegiance to the sovereignty of their country. The Council of Justice was composed of 
a President and eight Counsellors, all Doctors of the Civil Law, and its jurisdiction extended over the 
whole of the Company’s dominions. The commercial department held the next place in the Government, 
in point of rank as well as of importance; and the Director-General, who presided at that department, 
had the special management of the details of trade. The military establishment consisted of 6000 regular 
European troops, and a well-disciplined militia, principally composed of Malays, officered by the junior 
civil servants of Government. The whole of this force was commanded by a Major-General, who resided 
at Batavia, where the main body of the regulars was consequently stationed. Each respective settlement 
had its own militia; but the fortresses by which those settlements were defended, were garrisoned exclu¬ 
sively by detachments of the regular troops. The naval power of the Company was likewise considerable; 
it consisted of about 40 ships, each mounting from 16 to 30 guns. These ships, which were employed in 
the Company’s trade, were kept in a high state of equipment, and under the command of a Commodore, 
who had been regularly trained in the service. Besides this fleet, there were 10 or 12 ships of a smaller 
description, stationed at Batavia, which were reserved exclusively for warlike operations. 