

Amsterdam was to have one half of the said capital, and 20 directors. 

Middleburgh ....——.....one fourth...........—ditto.. ....12 ditto-. 

Delft —...——.......—one sixteenth ......—ditto_....... 7 ditto. 

Rotterdam --—.....—one sixteenth ... ditto_.... .7 ditto. 

Enchuysen ........——....one sixteenth — -ditto... 7 ditto. 

Hoorn —v.—..........one sixteenth ....—..ditto ....... 7 ditto.. 

each of which places was to send out ships, and receive returns in proportion to the sums thus subscribed, 
and at each of them an East India chamber was fixed for the management of the trade. 

The new Company commenced their operations with great alacrity and uncommon expedition. A 
fleet of 14 large ships sailed in June, 1602, under the command of Admiral Warwick, which afterwards 
separated for Acheen, Bantam, the Spice Islands, kc. The appearance of this large fleet relieved the 
Dutch factors settled in the different islands, from the continual alarm in which the constant aggressions 
of the Spaniards and Portuguese kept them. In December, 1602, another fleet, consisting of 13 sail*, 
under Van Hagen, having a number of troops on board, left Holland for the Moluccas. On ffieir voyage 
out they made an unsuccessful attempt on the Portuguese settlement of Mosambique; they however 
succeeded in expelling the Portuguese from Amboyna and Tidore, and opened communications with the 
Coasts of Coromandel, Malabar, and Ceylon. 

1603. The Dutch sent a small squadron to open a communication with the Prince of Jacafcra, on 
Java. They were kindly received, and so successful in their negotiations with that Prince, as to procure 



OF THE DUTCH WITH THE EAST INDIES. 


S69 


a valuable cargo, to conclude an agreement for carrying on a regular trade, and to obtain permission to 
build a factory in the town of Jacatra. In the following year they obtained the like privileges at 
Bantam; and, with a view to prevent the English from carrying on a trade at these places, the Dutch 
represented them as a perfidious and piratical people, and used every exertion to raise jealousies, and 
foment disturbances between them and the natives. 

1604 The Dutch fitted out a large expedition from the Moluccas against Malacca; but the Portu¬ 
guese had made such preparations for a vigorous defence, that after an obstinate contest of five weeks, 
maintained with equal bravery and skill, the Dutch were obliged to raise the siege, with the loss of a 
third of their whole force. The Spaniards at Manilla, being aware of the defenceless state the islands 
under the Dutch were left in by this expedition, proceeded against Amboyna, which in three days surren¬ 
dered , and they soon made a complete conquest of the other islands. The Dutch, on their return from 
Malacca, in about two months wrested from the Spaniards the whole of their conquests. 

While the Dutch and Spaniards were thus occupied in India, a truce was agreed upon between the 
two nations in Europe, on the condition that Spain should not molest the Dutch commerce with inde¬ 
pendent and neutral nations in India, but that the Dutch should not be permitted to enter any of the 
Portuguese or Spanish ports in that country. This truce, however, was not long preserved; the Dutch 
had many temptations to break it. They had in the Indian seas 40 ships, from 600 to S00 tons each, 
equally adapted both for commerce and war. The commanders of the different squadrons therefore 
declared, that the States-General had not consulted the interests of their Indian settlements in the stipu¬ 
lations they had made with Spain; that, however beneficial the trace might be in Europe, it was preju¬ 
dicial to them; and that for these reasons thej r were resolved to recommence the Avar. 