

1655. The Governor-General in Coimcil at Batavia sent an embassy to China with magnificent pre¬ 
sents. They were at first kindly received; but their project of opening a trade was defeated by the secret 
intrigues of the Jesuits at Pekin, 

1660. The Dutch attacked Macassar on Celebes, belonging to the Portuguese, on the 7th of June; 
and though the native Prince assisted the Portuguese with his whole force, the Dutch obtained a complete 
victory, and compelled the King of Macassar to send an embassy to Batavia, and to submit to such terms 
as the Governor-General thought fit to prescribe. By these he was obliged to expel the Portuguese from 
his dominions, and to promise that he would never admit them, or any Europeans, to reside in his 
territories. He also granted the Dutch a considerable tract of land on the sea-coast of the island. 

1663, The Dutch, under Commodore Goens, attacked the Portuguese settlements on the Coast of 
Malabar. They first obtained possession of Quiion; they next invested Cannanore, of which with some 
difficulty they became masters; they then invested Cochin, which the Portuguese were constrained to sur¬ 
render. Here they received reinforcements from Batavia, and marched by land to attack Porca; but the 
Prince offering to become their tributary, he was not molested. The city of Cranganore fell into their 
hands without a blow. Thus in about a year they expelled the Portuguese from most of the places they 
held on the Coast of Malabar, and which they had enjoyed without interruption from the time of their first 
settlement in India. The Dutch prohibited the natives from trading between Cochin and Cape Comorin 
without their passes, or to supply the English with pepper, under the penalty of confiscation. 



OF THE DUTCH WITH THE EAST INDIES. 


375 


1664. The following is an account of the settlements belonging to the Company at this time, as de¬ 
scribed in a report presented to the States-General on the 22d of October, 1664. 

Amboyna, with its subordinate islands, which supply the whole 'world with spices. 

The Banda Islands, which produce nutmegs and mace. 

Pulo Boon, ceded by treaty to the English, who have not yet taken possession of it. 

Ternate, and the other Moluccas; the Spaniards having abandoned their settlements there. 

Macassar and Mauado, both near the southern extremity of the Island of Celebes. 

In the Island of Timor, a garrison; the few remaining Portuguese on the island are poor. 

In Bima, on Sumbawa, there is a little trade in rice and sapan-wood. 

In Sumatra the Company possess Jambee, PaJembang, and Indraghiri. They have a contract for all 
the pepper produced on the west coast. The factory of Acheen is given up. 

Malacca, a town lately taken from the Portuguese. Tenasserim and Junkceylon are posts dependent 
upon the Government of Malacca. 

The factory of Siam has been lately withdrawn; likewise the one at Ligore. 

At Aracan the Company purchase rice and slaves. 

Tonquin has been distressed by inundations, and a factory is to be established there. 