



OF THE DUTCH WITH THE EAST INDIES. 


373 


sums they had laid out . in building and equipping ships, military and naval stores, seamen and soldiers’ 
pay, merchandise which they exported, and other things, almost beyond the reach of calculation. Upon 
these allegations their request was complied with; and a new T charter, dated December 22, 1622, was 
granted them for the farther term of twenty-one years, to commence from the first day of the succeeding year. 

1628. About this period the Dutch discovered the large country of Carpentaria, now called New 
Holland. The western part was discovered in the same year, and named De Witt’s Land; but the southern 
coast was discovered in 1627 by Peter De Nuyts, who was afterwards sent ambassador to Japan. 

1629. Batavia was besieged by the Emperor of Java with a large army. They came before the citadel 
on the 22d of August, 1629, and in the space of a month made several assaults; but being always repulsed* 
they raised the siege on the 2d of October, after losing an- immense number of men-. 

1635. The Dutch succeeded in expeEing the Portuguese from the Island of Formosa, of which they 
retained possession till about 1661, when they were in their turn driven out by the Chinese. 

163S. . The King of Candy being at war with the Portuguese, in the month of May sent ambassadors 
to Batavia, who declared to the Governor-General and Council, in the name of their master, that the 
Portuguese, in direct violation of treaties, and without any just cause whatever, had attacked and invaded 
the heart of his dominions, and requested their assistance against the common enemy. An alliance -was 
concluded, and a fleet, with a considerable body of land forces, sailed from Batavia in February, 1639; they 
landed on Ceylon, and made themselves masters of Batecalo, Trincomalee, Negombo, and Point de Galie. 
The war lasted for a number of years with alternate success; but the Dutch ultimately succeeded in ex¬ 
pelling the Portuguese entirely from the island, having captured Jaffnapatam, their last strong hold, on the 
24th of June, 1658. 

• 1644. The Company’s charter drawing near a close, they did not fail to adduce to the States-Generai 
such arguments as they thought most likely to obtain them another; and as the Directors had many points 
to allege, such as assisting the public with money in its greatest exigencies, and supplying large quantities 
of saltpetre gratis, for making gunpowder during the war, their proposition met with attention and appro¬ 
bation. At tbe same time they were given to understand that they were not to expect a grant of their 
exclusive commerce for a new term, without advancing a considerable sum for the use of the Republic; 
which, after mature deliberation, was fixed at 1,600,060 florins, in consideration of which present, their 
charter was renewed for twenty-one years, to commence from the first day of the ensuing year. 

The following is an account of the annual returns made from India to Holland, in the years 1614 to 
1643 inclusive, specifying the number of ships, and the invoice amount of tlieir cargoes. 