

At this period the Dutch are stated to have had factories at the following places, viz. Mocha, Persia,, 
Cambay, Malabar, Ceylon, Coromandel, Golconda, Bengal, Aracan, Pegu, Acheen, Jambee, Palem- 
bang. Bantam, Cambodia, Siam, Cochin China, Tonquin, and Japan, exclusive of the entire possession 
of the Moluccas, and several factories taken from the Portuguese in the neighbouring islands. 

1612. The Portuguese at Ceylon being at Avar with the King of Candy, the latter called in the 
assistance of the Dutch. The Portuguese were afterwards defeated, and the King concluded a treaty 
with the latter power, granting them the exclusive trade in cinnamon, and permission to build a fort. 

The Dutch about this time sent an expedition against the Portuguese settlement on Timor, which, after 
along and obstinate defence, was forced to capitulate; and a treaty of alliance was concluded with the 
Chief of the island, by which the Dutch obtained the grant of a considerable portion of it. 

1614 The East India Company fitted out a fleet of six ships, under George Spilbergen, which 
sailed from the Texel om the 8th of August, passed through the Strait of Magellan, defeated the Spanish 
navy in the South Seas; and, after a short and prosperous navigation, arrived on the Coast of Java, 
having visited and supplied the Dutch settlements in the Moluccas with stores. 

The Company of distant countries and that of Magellan made the following dividends: 


In 1604 -- ——————125 per cent. In 1608—-- —per cent. 

1 605vvvv%v.%%%v\vvvvvvvti%vv < i%%%%«%vkv«v. O O ditto. 161 4f ditto. 

1607—_— _ ——10 ditto. making in all ——————————204f per cent. 

The Company, which were concerned in the equipment of the 14 ships which sailed in 1602, divided 

In 1605^ -— --— 15 per cent. In 1609———-—— 25 per cent. 

1"To ditto. 1611 50 ditto* 

1607™,-- 40 ditto. 1612—-k——————— 37 ditto. 

1 60Sm.WV»»V.WV%,*VV,VWVWV%%WVW.'* 20 ditto* 1614,^VVV*—3 ditto* 


3B2 



mo 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE COMMERCE 


The foregoing dividends, amounting in the whole to 265 per cent* and which balanced their account* 
were made by the General United East India Company, established in 1602, to whom the liquidation of 
the affairs of the former Companies was committed. 

In this year an embassy was sent to the King of Siam, who in consequence entered into an agreement 
with the Dutch, whereby permission to build a factory in that country, and other important commercial 
privileges were obtained. A small squadron was likewise dispatched to Mausulipatam, with a view of 
opening a trade with that part of the coast. The Rajah allowed them to erect an extensive warehouse, 
together with a dwelling house for a factor, in the vicinity of the town. 

1618. The Dutch did not establish themselves at Surat till several years after the English. ' They 
had not any regular trade till 1616, when letters were written to the Mogul, who granted them a 
phirmaund in 1618, containing the following articles:—That all help and friendship shall be shewn to 
the Dutch, and no more shall be exacted from them for customs than is usual at Surat.—That the mer¬ 
chants who sell and buy their goods, shall not be suffered to be molested therein.—That the presents 
which they intend for the Emperor, shall be examined at the Custom House, sealed there, and sent 
thence to His Majesty.—That no one shall be allowed to make any claim upon the effects of the Dutch 
who may die, but that they shall he left untouched to the disposition of his lawful heirs.—That no one 
shall interfere in any disputes that may arise amongst them, but that the same shall be left to the decision 
of their own Chief who is put over them.—That no one of them shall be compelled to embrace the 
Mahomedan religion by force.—That, according to ancient custom, no duties shall be exacted upon the 
provisions which they may want for their ships.—That no injustice shall be done to them, under any 
pretence whatever; and care shall likewise be taken that none be committed on their part. 