



384 


STRAITS OF BALLY—LOMBOCK—ALASS. 


houses*of public property. On the 25th of August the British troops attacked them, and obtained a 
decisive victory, the result of which was the final surrender of the Island of Java and its dependencies. 
The British dominion was in consequence formally established by proclamation, August 29, 1811. 

By the capture of the Island of Java, long the greatest boast of the ancient Government of Holland, 
which France has viewed as one of the most valuable of the territories wrested from her injured allies, 
she is left without a spot of land to the eastward of the Cape of Good Hope, on which to place that 
banner, whose influence she has long but vainly endeavoured to extend, to the injury of the British 
prosperity in the East. 

To the eastward of Java is a range of islands; between them are channels or straits, occasionally 
frequented in time of war by the East India Company's ships bound to China, and which obtain^refresh¬ 
ments at several places on the islands. The principal straits are Bally, Lombock, and Alass. 

BALLY STRAIT. 

This strait is in latitude 8° 39 South, and longitude 114° 37' East, between the island of the same 
name and the east end of Java, and is five or six leagues wide. Nearly in the middle of the strait, on the 
Coast of Java, is Balembouang Bay, already described. Ships passing through this strait, should endeavour 
to keep in mid channel, with boats out ready to tow, as the tides run very rapid, with eddies near the 
points in the narrow part. On this account Bally Strait is now little frequented, the preference being 
given to those to the eastward. 

LOMBOCK STRAIT 

Is formed by the Island of Bally to the westward, and that of Lombock to the eastward; the south 
entrance is in latitude 8° 45 South, and longitude 115° 43 East, and is known by a large island, called 
Banditti Island, to the westward of which there is no passage. Ships under the necessity of passing 
through this strait seldom find anchorage, and the tides are very rapid, with strong eddies, which are a great 
inconvenience. There is a place called Carang Assem, on the Island of Bally, where ships in want of provi¬ 
sions and refreshments may obtain a few supplies. There is also a small town on Lombock, nearly opposite. 

ALASS STRAIT. 

This strait, which is about 44 miles to the eastward of that of Lombock, is formed by that island to 
the westward, and Sumbawa to the eastward. The strait extends about 16 leagues N. N. E. and S. W. 
and is about six miles wide in the narrowest part. The south entrance is in latitude about 8° 45' South* 
and longitude 116° 38 East. 

This strait is considered the best and safest to the eastward of Java, having anchorage at the 
several towns and villages, where cattle and refreshments of all kinds may be procured in abundance, and 
from a people with whom you trade upon a safe and friendly footing, whose character is very opposite to 
the treacherous and sanguinary disposition of the other Malay tribes. The principal place visited by ships 
frequenting this strait is Bally Town, on the Island of Lombock, which is pleasantly situated about 15 
miles within the entrance of the strait, in latitude 8° 31' South, and longitude 116° 28' East. It con¬ 
tains a great number of inhabitants, of whose industry every part of the surrounding country exhibits 
the most decisive proofs. Large proas come here from Macassar, Amboyna, and other places, for rice, 
and lie upon a beach within a reef^ through which there is a passage for them even at low water. 