

Trincomalee, on Ceylon, surrendered by capitulation August 26, 1795, 

Malacca on the 17th of August, where the Constantia Indiaman was taken. 

Cochin, on the Malabar Coast, on the 26th of October, after some resistance. 

Columbo, the capital of Ceylon, with its dependencies, by capitulation February 16, 1796, 

Amboyna and its dependencies on the 16th of February, 1796. 

Banda and its dependencies on the Sth of March, 1796. 

These accumulated disasters put a stop to the Company's trade, and to the regular payment of divi¬ 
dends to the proprietors, who for several years received no payment whatever. 

1796. The Dutch Government equipped a fleet of three sail of the line and five frigates, having a 
considerable number of troops on board, with a view of recapturing the Cape of Good Hope. They arrived 
in Saldanha Bay on the 6th of August, where they surrendered, without firing a gun, to the British fleet 
under Admiral Elphinstone, on the 16th of the same month. 

1802. By the treaty of peace concluded at Amiens on the 27th of March, it was stipulated by the 
third article, that the British should restore to the Batavian Republic all the possessions and colonies 
which had been occupied, or conquered by them, during the war, with the exception of Ceylon. 

By the fifth article the Batavian Republic ceded and guaranteed, in full right of sovereignty, to His 
Britannic Majesty, all the possessions and establishments in the Island of Ceylon which belonged before 
the war to the Republic of the United Provinces, or to the East India Company. 

By the sixth article the Cape of Good Hope was to remain in full sovereignty to the Batavian Republic, 
as it was before the war. The ships of every description belonging to the different contracting powers, 
(Great Britain, France, and Spain) were to have the right to put in there, and to purchase such supplies as 
they might stand in need of, as before, without paying any other duties than those to which the ships 
of the Batavian Republic were subjected. 

1864. On the recommencement of hostilities between Great Britain and the Batavian Republic, the 
former power took possession of all the places in India belonging to the latter; but it was not till the 
annexation of Holland to France, that any steps were taken to obtain possession of the Eastern islands, or 
to attempt to counteract the influence the French would obtain, if left unmolested, at the Dutch settle¬ 
ments to the eastward. 

In October, 1809, an expedition sailed from Madras against Amboyna, which, after some resistance, 
surrendered, with its dependencies, on capitulation. The ordnance captured amounted to 233 pieces, 
mostly brass. The stores were of great value. 

On the 9th of August, 1810, Banda and its dependencies surrendered; and in September the English 
likewise obtained possession of Temate and Tidore. 

1811. An expedition upon a large scale w r as fitted out from the British settlements against Batavia, 
accompanied by Lord Minto, the Governor General of India. The troops landed on the 4th of August, 
and on the 8th the city surrendered without opposition. The French and Dutch troops composing 
the garrison, retired into the interior to an intrenched camp, having first burnt the large store- 
Vol. II. 3D 