

ft 

EXPORTS. 

Nutmegs and mace are the only articles of commerce here, the monopoly of which is in the hands of 
the Company. Sometimes a quantity may be purchased underhand; but as it is attended with considerable 
risk both to the buyer and seller, this mode is seldom resorted to. In the year 1778 a violent, hurricane 
did considerable damage to the nutmeg plantations. Previous to that period the annual produce was said 
to be upwards of 500,000 lbs. The prices formerly paid by the Dutch were, for mace. 8| stivers, and for 
sound nutmegs 1 stiver; for those worm-eaten, half as much, and for the dust of mace 4| stivers; but in ‘ 
consequence of the devastation committed by the hurricane, the prices were raised to 10 stivers for the 
mace, and 34 for the nutmegs. 


Rupees. Spanish. Dollars. 

Madeira wine vvwwwwwwcost 12f sold for 15 

Claret xxxxxxvxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 7J _xxxx 10 

Butter ----——— 10_20 

"Wheat---- 1- - — 3 to 4 

Doll 1 3 to 3 T 



NUTMEGS. 


392 


NUTMEGS are the produce of a tree, a native of several of the islands to the eastward, but which 
has in a great measure been extirpated from them all, except that of Banda. The tree is handsome 
and spreading, the bark smooth, and of a brownish grey colour; the leaves are eliptical, pointed, obliquely 
nerved, on the upper side of a brightish green, on the under whitish, and stand alternately upon foot 
stalks; they afford a most grateful aromatic scent when bruised. It does not bear fruit till its eighth or 
ninth year. When it begins to produce fruit, little yellowish buds make their appearance, out of which 
small white flowers are blown, hanging two or three together upon slender peduncles; in .the centre of the 
flower Is an oblong reddish knob, from which the fruit is produced, though jqo more than one blossom out 
of three commonly ripens to a nutmeg. The fruit is eight or nine months arriving at maturity; but blossoms 
and ripe.fruit are found at the same time upon the same tree, and the nutmegs are generally gathered three 
times In a year. The fruit appears like a small peach, both in shape and colour, only it is pointed towards 
the stalk when it is ripe; the outer coat, which is almost half an inch thick, opens, and shews the nutmeg 
in its black and shining shell, encircled by a net-work of scarlet mace; the outer coat is generally whitish, 
a little hard, and is very good preserved in sugar, or stewed. You then come to the mace, which is of a 
fine bright red colour, and under it a black shell, about as thick as that of a filbert, but very hard; it is 
opened by being first dried successively in five different drying places, made of split bamboos, upon which 
the nutmegs are laid, and placed over a slow fire, in each of which drying places they remain a week, till 
the nutmegs are heard to shake within the shell, which is then easily'brdken. The nutmegs are then sorted, 
and delivered; each sort is then separately put into baskets, and soaked three times in tubs of sea water 
and lime; they are then put into distinct closets, ’where they are left for six weeks to sweat: this is done 
that the lime, by closing the pores of X he nuts, may prevent their strength from evaporating, and likewise 
because such a prepared nutmeg is not fit for propagation. The nutmeg tree is distinguished into three sorts: 
male, or barren nutmeg; royal nutmeg, a female .producing long nuts; and the queen nutmeg, yielding 
the round* nut. The only difference between the royal, and queen nutmeg is in the fruit; that of the 
royal is thicker, longer, arid more pointed; the green shell is thicker, and is longer ripening; the green 
shell, after opening, preserves its freshness eight or nine days; the mace is more substantial, and three times 
as long as that of the queen nutmeg, and its stripes or thongs, of which there are from fifteen to seventeen 
principal ones, are of a livelier red; they are also broader, longer, and thicker, and not only embrace the 
nut through its whole length, but pass it, and cross underit, as if to hinder it from falling. The royal 
nutmeg is generally from fifteen to sixteen lines long, and thick in proportion; it remains on the tree a 
long time after the opening of the green shell, and gives birth to an insect in the shell that feeds upon it. 
The queen nutmeg produces much smaller nuts, only nine or ten lines long, not so thick by a third, and 
well marked by a longitudinal groove on one side; they are round, and the green shell is not so thick; the 
mace, which is composed of nine or ten principal stripes, grows only half down the nut, leaving it at 
liberty to escape, and plant itself. By thus detaching itself, the nut prevents the insect from destroying it; 
the green shell also, changing at the end of two or three days, soon falls, and separates .from the nut. 