

The inhabitants of this village generally hoist a Portuguese flag, having formerly had people of that 
nation amongst them; and many of them at present profess Christianity. 

There are other straits to the eastward, formed by the numerous islands which are scattered about, 
but which are seldom visited by Europeans; but the proas and other vessels trading from Celebes and other 
ports to Timor, pass through them. 

TIMOR. 

This island extends about SO leagues, In a direction E.N.E. and W.S.W* Its east end is In latitude 
8 ° 26 South, and longitude 127° T East. It is divided between the Dutch and Portuguese; the chief 
place of the former being Coupang, on the S. W. end. In latitude about 10° 9 South, and longitude 
124° 5' East; and that of the Portuguese Dhelly, on its northern side, in latitude 8 C 33 South, and 
longitude about 125° 30' East. 


3D 2 



COUPANG—DHELLY. 


3S6 


COUPANG 

Is situated at the bottom of a deep bay, which is an excellent road for shipping. The Dutch hava 
a fort here close to the water side, where all the Europeans reside; without is the village where the Chinese 
and natives reside. To the eastward of the fort is a small fresh water river, into which a long boat can 
go at high water. The Dutch expelled the Portuguese from this part of the island in about 1613, when 
they built their fort, which is called Concordia. The Governor of Coupang has authority over Rotti, 
Savu, and some other islands in these seas. 

The English have recently obtained possession of the Dutch districts on the island. 

All Dutch money pass here the same as at Batavia, and China weights are in common use. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

A ship comes annually from Batavia, bringing the necessary articles for the Europeans, and a small 
quantity of piece-goods, opium, iron, steel, kc . in return for which they take slaves, who are of a pliant 
disposition, some sandal-wood, wax, and gold-dust 

DHELLY. 

This harbour lies to the southward of an island called Cambi, and may be easily known by bringing the 
peak on that island to bear north; you are then off the entrance of the coral reefs which secure the harbour. 
You are obliged to take a pilot, who always comes off on a signal being made, and carries you in to anchor, 
with the flagstaff bearing S. 59° E. The town is large and well-inhabited, and a large trade is carried 
on with Macao by the Portuguese and Chinese, of whom numbers are resident here. 

Spanish dollars are in current use, likewise Portugal coins; and goods are bought and sold by the pecuL 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS 

Are piece-goods and many other articles from India; and from China, large quantities of China-ware, 
coarse nankeens, brass and iron utensils, &c. which are again sent off in Malay proas to other islands. 

The following articles are produced on the island, brought from the neighbouring ones; they are 
suitable to the Chinese market, and the common prices are, 

Sandal-wood ^Ist sort ^40 to 50 dollars per pecuL Birds" 4 nests ^Ist sort ~15 to 18 dollars per catty; 
Ditto ^ w ^~2d ditto-BO to 35 ditto Ditto ~~~—2d ditto^lO to 12 ditto. 