

This spice is a thin flat membraneous substance enveloping the nutmeg; of a lively reddish yellow, 
saffron-like colour, of a pleasant aromatic smell, and a warm, bitterish, pungent taste. Mace should be 
chosen fresh, tough, oleaginous, of an extremely fragrant smell, of a bright reddish yellow, the brighter 
the better; the smaller pieces are esteemed the best. The state it is in when packed, should be particularly 
attended to; if it be too dry, it will be broken, and lose much of its fragrance; if too moist, it is subject to 
decay, and breed worms. The best mode of packing is in bales, pressed down close and firm, which pre¬ 
serves its fragrance and consistence. If imported in packages of less than 300 lbs. net, it is liable to seizure. 

A production is met with on the Coast of Malabar so like mace, that at first sight it is not easy to 
be distinguished; it differs, however, in form from real mace, which appears of a leafy texture, while 
this is in thinner filaments; the colour is exactly alike, but this has not the least flavour of spiciness, and 
when chewed, has a kind of resiny taste. 

The home consumption of mace has been much diminished since the first establishment of the East India 
Company. In 1615 it was stated to be 15,000 lbs. per annum. The whole quantity sold by the Company 
in 1803—4, when the islands were in our possession, was only 24,234 lbs. and the sale value £53,356. 
The quantity retained for home consumption, in the years 1804 to 1809 inclusive, was 5400 lbs. per annum. 

8 cwt. of mace are allowed to a ton. The permanent duty is 5s. 9d. per lb. and the temporary or war 
duty Is. lid. making in the whole 7s. Sd. per lb. 

Uol. IL 3 E 



394 


AMBOYNA. 

Lantore, or Great Banda, is to the northward of Banda Neira; it has a considerable fort, which com¬ 
mands the harbour of Lantore, and is called Fort Hollandia. The situation of this fort, at first view, appears 
preferable to Banda Neira for the residence of Government, not only on account of its being the strongest 
and the most commanding situation, but from this island being the largest as well as the richest in respect 
to the produce of spices. Its unhealthiness, however, proves a sufficient objection; and numbers of houses, 
now falling to decay, shew that the experiment has been tried, and found not to answer; moreover the 
water is said to be very bad, and the smoke which descends from the volcano on Gonong Apee, is repre¬ 
sented as being particularly noxious. 

Gonong Apee is likewise to the northward of Banda Neira; it derives its name from a large volcano, 
which constantly emits smoke, and sometimes cinders and stones. On the south side of the island are two 
forts, originally intended to defend the west channel of Lantore harbour; but owing to the eruption of the 
volcano in 1778, at the period of the dreadful hurricane before alluded to, the lava flowed down in such 
quantities as to form a considerable promontory between these batteries and the channel they were intended 
to defend, so that they are now in a great degree useless. 