

Palo Way is about nine miles to the westward of Gonong Apee; here is a strong fort. It is 
esteemed the most healthy of the group, and produces nutmegs in abundance. Both the nutmegs and mace 
grown on this island, are said to be superior to those from the other islands. 

Polo Rondo, or Pulo Roon, is- about four miles further, in somewhat a more northerly direction. 
On this island the English had a factory, but were expelled from it by the Dutch about the period the 
massacre at Amboyna took place. The Dutch have not inhabited it; it is therefore become a wilderness. 

Rosengyn is about seven miles to the S. E. of Lantore; it produces nutmegs, maee, and some yams,, 
and feeds a few cattle. The convicts of Amboyna used to be kept on this island, and were compelled to- 
cultivate the land for the use of the Supreme Governments 

Pulo Pisang is about two miles N. E, from Banda Neira, and yields some fine fruits as well as nutmegs 
and mace. The other three islands are uninhabited, being little more than barren rocks. 

AMBOYNA 

Is the largest of the islands denominated the Clove Islands. It is divided into two parts, a greater 
and a less peninsula; the largest is called Hitoo, and is about twelve leagues long, and two and a half broad; 
the other, called Leyfcimoor, is about five leagues long, and one and a half broad. This is the southernmost 
part of the island, on which stand the fort and town. The islands subordinate to Amboyna, on which are 
forts and*troops, are ten in number. Ceram, which is equal in size to all the rest; Ceram Laut, Bouro, 
Amblaw, Manipa, Kelang, Bonoa, Harackau, Saparoua, and Noossa Laut; but it is in Amboyna, and 
the three last islands only, that cloves are now cultivated. 

Fort Victoria, the capital of the island, is in latitude 3° 42 South, and longitude 128° IT East. The 
hay is very deep, and formed at its entrance by Allang Point on its west side, and Noessaniva Point to 
the eastward. The best anchorage is abreast the town, and rather above the wharf, in from 20 to 35 
fathoms; moor with hawsers to the anchors which are placed at convenient distances on the shore for that 
purpose: the bank being very steep, ships are frequently driven off by neglecting this' precaution. 

The fort is situated on the right hand side of the harbour; it is newly built. The old one was so 
much damaged by an earthquake in 1755, that the Dutch thought it more eligible to build a new, than to 
repair the old one. The shape of the fort is irregular; on the land side it has three entire, and one demi- 



AMBOYNA. 


395 


bastion, which with their curtains form part of a regular heptagon; on the water-side there are two bas¬ 
tions, in the curtain between which stands the Watergate, in the same manner as the landgate opens between 
the two opposite bastions on the land-side. The curtain which runs north from the easternmost land bas¬ 
tion, is met by a similar one coming from the easternmost sea-bastion, making an obtuse angle of upwards 
of 90°, so that the line of defence of the face of the easternmost land-bastion, runs exactly upon this angle; 
and the flanks of these bastions are therefore without defence, which was a great fault in the first con¬ 
struction of the fort. From the demi-bastion on the west side a battery runs northward, and being met 
by another coming from the westernmost sea-bastion, they form together an inverted obtuse angle. The 
sea-bastions are carried up somewhat higher, and are rather larger than the others; they are covered with 
bonnets in the middle of their faces, in order to be better provided against an enfidale. A horn-work ex¬ 
tends before these bastions, and covers the curtain between them; its projecting angles command the shore 
both above and below the castle, by which a landing any where near it is rendered very difficult. 