


THE Eastern Seas contain an Immense number of islands* many of which are large and inhabited,, 
and* carry on a considerable trade with each other; but the greater part are uninhabited, and imperfectly 
known.. The principal islands frequented by Europeans are, the various Spice Islands, Celebes, Bofbc% 
the Sooloo Archipelago, and the Philippines. 



390 


BANDA ISLANDS—BANDA NEIRA. 


BANDA ISLANDS. 

This group consists of ten islands: their names are Banda Neira, Gonong Apee, Banda Lantoir, 
Pulo Ay, or Way; Pulo Rondo, or Pulo Boon; Rosengyn, Pulo Pisang, Craka, Capella, and Sonangy. 
The harbour is formed by Great Banda on the south side, Gonong Apee, and Banda Neira on the North, 
with Pulo Pisang and Capella on the western entrance. The anchorage, in latitude 4° 31' South, and 
longitude 130° East, is at the foot of Gonong Apee, or the Burning Mountain, which smokes almost 
continually, and from which proceed frequent earthquakes, whose shocks are sometimes repeated three or 
four times in a day. You moor directly off the wharf on Banda Neira, at about half a mile distance. 

BANDA NEIRA 

Is the seat of Government, and is subordinate to Amboyna. The principal fortification, called Fort 
Nassau, is situated on the south side of the island; it is a small square fort, having a wet ditch, with a horn- 
work towards the sea. In this fort the troops are quartered, and the public granaries are kept; but the 
storehouses for the nutmegs and mace are on the outside of the fort, as well as the Government-house. 
Above Fort Nassau, on an eminence, stands the Castle of Belgica, an old pentagon, with round towers at 
the angles, and a surrounding wall with small bastions, but it has no ditch; it is said to have been built 
by the Portuguese. The next fortification of any consequence is situated upon Banda Lantoir, and is 
called Fort Hollandia; it commands the western entrance into the harbour of Lantoir, but the works are 
Very slight, and quite defenceless towards the land. Besides the above forts, there are a number of 
redoubts and military posts all round these islands, for the purpose of preventing smuggling, and of pro¬ 
tecting the plantations and villages against the pirates from New Guinea, who frequently land, and carry 
off the inhabitants, and whatever else they can take by surprise, but are seldom hardy enough to attack 
where resistance may he expected. 

The Banda Islands were discovered by the Portuguese in 1511, and taken possession of. About*1603 
the Dutch expelled them. In 1608 the English obtained permission of the King to build a factory- 
house, which they did on Pulo Way. This the Dutch pulled down when the ship which brought the 
factors had returned to England. The natives of Banda, notwithstanding the numerous obstructions of 
the Dutch, assisted the English in forming a settlement again, and in a short time after made a formal 
resignation of their island to them, and the natives of Lantore did the same. In 1620 Pulo Boon and Pulo 
'Way were also added to the British dominions. These cessions were confirmed by treaty between the 
English and the Dutch; notwithstanding which, at the very conclusion of the treaty, they determined on the 
expulsion of the former. They attacked with a strong force the two latter islands, seized the factories, 
magazines, and shipping, and after stripping the factors naked, first whipped, and then loaded them with 
irons. Some idea may be formed of the trade, then in its infancy, by the quantity of spices seized here, 
being 23,000 lbs. of mace, and 150,000 lbs. of nutmegs. Cromwell in 1654 compelled tbe Dutch to re¬ 
store the Island of Pulo Boon, and to make satisfaction for the massacre at Amboyna. As to Pulo Boon, 
it was kept but a short time, being taken in 1664; from that period till the capture of these islands by the 
English in 1796, the Dutch remained in undisturbed possession. They were restored to them at the peace 
of Amiens in 1803, but have been again captured, and are still held by the English. 