

All these works -are built of bricks. The whole is encircled by a wet ditch, and is the best fortifica¬ 
tion belonging to the Dutch in India. It is not favourably situated, being commanded by two ranges of 
hills about 700 to 1200 yards distance. There are several smaller forts and batteries on the island, but of 
no farther consequence than to keep the natives in awe. 

The town of Amboyna is extremely clean, and both neatly and regularly built; the streets run at 
right angles, and the houses, on account of the frequency of earthquakes, are seldom above one story high. 
From the covert way of the fort to the town there is one esplanade of nearly 250 yards, terminated by a 
range of handsome dwelling-houses, with a double row of nutmeg-trees in front of them; in these houses 8 
the principal inhabitants reside. There are two well-built churches in the town, established by the Dutch 
Government, one for the Europeans, the other for the Malay Christians. All the other public buildings are 
in the fort, except the Stadthouse, which fronts the esplanade, and is a neat building of two stories. Just 
above the town is a garden beautifully laid out, much resembling-the Company's garden at Cape Town; 
near it is a menagerie, in which are kept, among others, some beautiful speckled deer. The houses are 
generally built of wood, but are commodious; most of them have small gardens, or large square yards 
behind them, in which there is commonly a well of good water. 

The population of Amboyna and its dependencies is very correctly ascertained. At the period it was 
taken possession of, it contained upwards of 45,000 persons, of whom not 200 were Europeans: about 
18,000 are Protestant Christians, and the remainder Mahometans, except a few Chinese. 

Amboyna was discovered by the Portuguese about lolL In 1564 they obtained possession of the 
island, which they retained till about 1607, when the Dutch made themselves masters of it and the neigh¬ 
bouring islands. At this time the English had a factory here, and were involved in frequent disputes with 
the Dutch. In 1619 a treaty was concluded between the two nations, which stipulated that the Moluccas, 
Amboyna, and the Banda Islands should be common to both; that the English should have one-third of 
the produce, and the Dutch the remainder at a fixed price; and that each should contribute to the defence 
of the islands in proportion to the benefit received. The conduct of the Dutch towards the English soon 
after the treaty took place was so tyrannical and oppressive, that in 1622 orders were sent from England 
to withdraw the factory from Amboyna, and return to Batavia. It was at this period that the Dutch 
Government at Batavia prqjected those proceedings which will ever remain in the memory of the English 
nation, and which is justly denominated “ the Massacre of Amboyna” On receiving positive accounts 
of the transaction in England, the Company made application to His Majesty to interpose his authority 
with the States-General, that redress might be obtained, and that the persons who had .been the guilty 
instruments in this disgraceful transaction, might be punished. A committee was appointed to take the 
business into consideration, who advised the King to adopt strong measures for obtaining from the Dutch 