

Ditto -—3d ditto^lS to 20 ditto Ditto ~~-3d dittos 5 to 7 ditto. 

Beech de mer^^-20 to 25 ditto Wax to 25 dollars per peculi 

Gold-dust —^in small quantities. 1 Spices are sometimes to be bought here. 

This island used formerly to produce immense quantities of sandal-wood; but of late years it Has 
been much diminished from want of care and attention: it is not so muck esteemed by the Chinese ast 
that from the Coast of Malabar. 

PROVISIONS AND' REFRESHMENTS. 

All kinds of provisions and refreshments are in abundance, both in the Dutch and Portuguese 
districts; sheep from | to 1 dollar each; other articles in proportion.. The sea abounds with fish of various 
kinds, and many curious and valuable shells are met with here. 





CHAPTER XXVI 


The Eastern Islands. 


Banda Islands; their Number—Banda Nrira; Description—Coins, Weights, and Measures — Imports—Bengal 
Piece-goods suitable to the Market — Exports — Nutmegs—Oil of Nutmegs — Mace — Lantore—GonongApee 
Pulo Wap—Palo Boon — Rosengyn—Pulo Pisang—Clove Islands; their Number — Amboyna; Description 
—Coins , Weights, and Measures—Bengal Goods suitable to the Market—European Articles — Exports— 
Custom-house Regulations—Rates of Du f y on Imports and Exports—Provisions and Refreshments— 
Haraucka — Saparoua—Noosa Laid — Cloves—Oil of Cloves — Bouro—Provisions and Refreshments—Ceram 
My sol—New Guinea—Birds of Paradise — Gilolo—Imports and Exports — Ternate; Description — Coins, 
Weights> and Measures—Imports and Exports — Duties—Provisions and Refreshments — Tidore; Descrip¬ 
tion — Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports—Provisions and Refreshments — Celebes; its 
Extent — Macassar; Description-Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports — Duties — Provi¬ 
sions and Refreshments—Bout ham — Boelecomia — Saleyer—Buggess Bay — Bouton—Gonong Tello— 
Imports and Exports—Provisions and Refreshments — Kemar — Manado—Siao — Sangir — Borneo; its 
Extent—Banjar Massin. Description — Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports—Provisions 
and Refreshments — Succadana — Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports—Duties and Presents 
—Pontiana — Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports — Manipurva — Coins, Weights, and 
Measures—Imports and Exports — Sambass — Coins,. Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports— 
Borneo Town; Description — Coins, Weights , and Measures—Imports and Exports — Balembangan — Ban- 
guey — Passier — Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports—Provisions and Refreshments— 
Cagayan Sooloor—Sooloo; Description — Coins, Weights, and Measures — Imports — Exports—Provisions 
and Refresh merits- — Basseelan—Philippine Islands — Magindanao; Description — Coins, Weights, and 
Measures—Imports and Exports — Samboangan — Luconia — Manilla; Description — Coins, Weights, and 
Measures—Commerce with the British Settlements in India—Madras Piece-goods suitable to the Manilla 
' and Acapulco Markets—Commerce with China—Commerce with South America—Rise and Progress of th 
Commerce of Spain with the East Indies . 