

Cattle may be procured here in any number for Spanish dollars, with the value of which they are well 
acquainted, as they carry on a considerable trade in the produce of the island to many of the Dutch 
settlements. Rice may be had cheap, and in plenty. Fruit, poultry, and vegetables are to be purchased 
for clasp knives, glass bottles, buttons, cotton handkerchiefs, iron hoops, &c. 





STRAITS OF SAPY—MANGER AY—FLORES—TIMOR. 


385 


SAPY STRAIT, 

This strait is formed between the east end of the Island Sumbawa and the west side of Commodo, or 
Rotten Island. The southern entrance is in latitude S° 40 South, and longitude 119° 20' East; and 
from the facility with which wood, water, and refreshments are procured, and the navigation being safe, 
it has frequently been preferred to the other straits east of Java. The principal place is Sapy Bay, on the 
Sumbawa side. 

The village or town of Sapy is built on a creek in the S. W. part of the bay, about three-quarters of a 
mile from the sea, where beef, fowls, goats, yams, sweet potatoes, and cocoa-nuts are to be obtained from the 
natives, in exchange for red and blue cotton handkerchiefs, large clasp knives, empty bottles, iron hoops, 
and muskets. Of the value of money they seem to have but little knowledge. The water procured here 
is excellent, but getting it off is attended with some difficulty; the best watering place is to the southward 
of Rees’s Bay, which is not more than 20 yards from high water mark. 

On the east end of Sumbawa, in latitude 8° 15'' South, and longitude about 118° 15' East, is Bima, 
where the Dutch have a small fort and garrison, from whence they receive sapan wood, which grows here 
in abundance, and of a superior kind. Previous to the troubles in Siam, they received their supplies from 
thence. The average quantity sold in Hollaed for the seven years, 1785 to 1791 inclusive, was 665,439 lbs. 
nearly 300 tons per annum. The Dutch send here piece-goods, opium, and other Indian produce. 

MANGERAY STRAIT 

Is formed by Commodo Island and the west end of Flores, or Mangeray; hut being full of rocks 
and small islands, it is but little known, and ought therefore to be avoided. The northern part of this 
strait is in latitude 8° 20 South, and longitude 119° 39 East. 

FLORES STRAIT 

Is bounded on the western side by the eastern part of Mangeray Island, and on the east side by the 
Islands of Solor and Adenara, or Sabraon; it extends nearly N. N. E, and S. W. There is a burning 
mountain on Flores of a considerable height. 

The principal place frequented by English ships passing through these straits, Is Larantouca village, 
oh Flores, where refreshments for two or three ships may be procured, such as goats, hogs, fowls, fruits 
of various kinds, a few buffaloes, and some turtle; and good fresh water may be procured from wells. In 
return for these articles the natives will receive gunpowder in small quantifies, musket halls, glass bottles, 
wine glasses, white linen cloth, and all sorts of coarse cutlery. They collect here small quantities of wax, 
bezoar, and ambergris, which Is sent in small proas to Timor and other places, and purchased by the 
Chinese traders. These Islands also produce sandal wood in considerable quantities. 