

VI. The unknown black Bird of Paradise. —In the year 1689 a new species was seen at Amboyna, 
carried from Mysol, only one foot in length, with a fine purple hue, a small head, and straight bill. As 
on the other Birds of Paradise, on its back, near the wings, are feathers of a purple and blue colour; 
but under the wings, and over all the belly, they are yellow coloured, as in the common sort; on the 
back of the neck they are mouse-coloured mixed with green. It is remarkable in this species that there 
are before the wings two roundish tufts of feathers, which are green edged, and may be moved at pleasure 
by the bird-like wings. Instead of tail, he has twelve or tMrteen black naked, wire-like shafts, hanging 
promiscuously like feathers. His strong legs have sharp claws; Ms head is remarkably small; the eyes 
are likewise small, and surrounded by black. 



GILOLO. 


405 


VIL The King Bird of Paradise. —This bird is about seven inches long, and somewhat larger than 
the titmouse. Its head and eyes are small, the bill straight, the eyes included in circles of black plumage; 
the crown of the head is fire coloured, the back of the neck blood coloured, the neck and breast of a 
chesnut colour, with a dark ring of the brightest emerald green. Its wings are in proportion strong, and 
the quill feathers dark, with red shining plumes, spots, and stripes. The tail is straight, short, and 
brown. Two long naked, black shafts project from the rump at least a hand's breadth beyond the tail, 
having at their extremities semilunar twisted plumage, of the most glaring green colour above, and dusky 
below- The belly is white, and green sprinkled, and on each side is a tuft of long plumage, with a broad 
margin, being on one side green, and on the other dusky. The back is blood red and brown, shining like 
silk. The legs are in size like those of the lark, having three fore toes and one back toe. This kind is 
chiefly brought from Aroo, where it is occasionally worn as an ornament by the natives. 

The permanent duty on feathers is 37 \ per cent, and the war duty 12§ per cent, on the sale value. 

GILOLO. 

This island, which is of considerable size and singular form, seems to divide the Indian Ocean, to 
the eastward, from the Great South Sea; it extends from the latitude of 3 C 10 North to 50° South. The 
western side is nearly straight. On the east side is a peninsula that points due east, and from the base of 
that another to the northward, leaving between it and the western extent of the island, a bay, ex¬ 
tremely narrow, but very deep, penetrating about half through the island; this is called Ossa Bay. The 
town of Ossa is situated in latitude 45°' North, and longitude 12S~ 22 East. The south side of the 
bay abounds with nutmegs, and has a fine watering place. Here ships may procure water and refresh¬ 
ments, and on some of the islands excellent timber for spars. 

There are several other towns in various parts of the island, vis. Maba, Patany, and Weda; but 
being seldom visited by Europeans, they are little known. This island was formerly under the controul of 
the Dutch, but is at present independent of that or any other European nation, and under the govern¬ 
ment of several independent Rajahs, or Chiefs. 