

3 F 2 



404 


BIRDS OF PARADISE. 


The natives catcli them with bird-lime and in nooses, or shoot them with blunt arrows; they then 
cut their legs off, draw the entrails, and fumigate them, and sell them at Banda for about a rix-dollar 
each; whereas at Aroo one of these birds may be bought for a spike-nail, or a piece of old iron. 

II. The small Bird of Paradise is about twenty inches long; Ms beak is lead-coloured, and 
paler at the point, the eyes small, and enclosed in black; about the neck he is green like an emerald; 
the head and back of the neck are of a dirty yellow; the back of a greyish yellow; the breast and belly 
of a dusky colour; the wings small, and chesnut-coloured. The long plumage is about a foot long, and 
paler than in the larger species, as in general the colours of tMs small bird are less bright. The two long 
feathers of the tail are constantly thrown away by the natives. This is in all respects like the greater 
sort; they follow likewise a king, or leader, who is however blacker, with a purplish cast, and finer in 
colour than the rest; though this bird is also different from the third and fourth black species. This kind 
is found only in the Papua Islands. 

III. The large black Bird of Paradise is brought without wings or legs for sale, so that of this 
species it is difficult to give an exact description. Its figure, when stuffed, is narrow and round, but 
stretched in length to the extent of four spans. The plumage on the neck, head, and belly is black and 
velvet-like, with a hue of purple and gold, which appears very strong. The bill is blackish, and one inch 
in length; on both sides are two bunches of feathers, which have the appearance of wings, although they 
are very different, the wings being cut off by the natives. The plumage is #soft, broad, similar to pea¬ 
cocks’ feathers, with a glorious gloss and greenish hue. The feathers of the tail are of unequal length; 
those next to the belly are narrow, like hair; the two uppermost are much longer, and pointed; those 
immediately under them are above a span and a half longer than the upper ones; they are stiff on both 
sides, fringed with a plumage like hair, black above, but glossy below. Birds of this kind are brought 
from no other place than New Guinea. The inhabitants carry them to Salwatty in hollow tubes of bamboo, 
and sell them for small hatchets or coarse cloth. 

IV. The smaller black Bird of Paradise. —The plumage of this sort is equal in length with that 
of the above, but thinner in body, black above, and without any remarkable gloss, not having those shining 
peacock feathers which are found on the greater species. This wants likewise the three long pointed fea¬ 
thers of the tail^ belonging to the larger black species of the Bird of Paradise. The inhabitants of the 
mountains of Mysol shoot those birds, and sell them to the people of Tidore. 

V. The white Bird of Paradise is the most rare; it is of two species, one quite white, and the 
other black and white. The first sort is very rare, and in form like the Bird of Paradise from Papua. 
The second has the forepart black, and the back part white, with twelve crooked wiry shafts, which are 
almost naked, though in some parts covered with hair. This species is very scarce, and only to be pro¬ 
cured by means of the people of Tidore, since it is found on the Papua Islands. 