


Long nutmegs 12 to 15 doll, per pecul. 

Banda ditto 

MVVMM«|«WMi\VWVMVV\% 1 dittopercatty. 
Mace 1 ditto. 

to 60 ditto per pecul. 



MY SOL—BIRDS OF PARADISE* 


MYSOL. 

This island is about 15 leagues N. E. of Ceram; it extends east and west about 14 leagues* On the 
south side* in latitude 2° 12' South* and longitude 12P East, is the Harbour of Efbe, formed by an 
island of the same name and the coast of Mysol. The village of Efbe is small* and the houses are all built 
upon posts in the water. Here is a Rajah, to whom presents are necessary* in the event of a vessel touching 
here for refreshments. Fresh water may be had on the island, or from a small liver opposite it* on Mysol. 

The N. W. point of New Guinea is about 25 leagues from Mysol. To the northward are several 
islands* the principal of which are Salwatty* Batanta, and Wavgiou. There are several harbours and 
bays which have been occasionally visited by European vessels* but not affording articles of trade* are but 
imperfectly known. 

The inhabitants of New Guinea and the neighbouring islands are called Papuans. They carry on a 
trade in their own boats with the Spice Islands, conveying their own produce* which consists of 

Ambergris. Birds of Paradise. j Pearls. f Slaves. 

Beech de mer. Missoy bark. Pearl shells. j Tortoise-shell. 

and many kinds of curious birds, which the Papuans ‘have a particular way of drying; for which they 
receive in return the under-mentioned articles: 

Beads. Brass wire. Cutlery. ’ Iron, in bars. 

China-ware. Coarse piece-goods, j Gold and silver lace. J Looking-glasses. 

BIRDS OF PARADISE. 

In this part are to be met with the various kinds of Birds of Paradise. The Portuguese first found them 
on Gilolo* the Papuan Islands* and New Guinea. Fabulous - accounts mention that this bird had no 
legs, and was constantly on the wing in the air, on which it lived; in confirmation of which, the legs of 
these birds were cut off when offered for sale: but the Papuans, who resort yearly to Banda* have unde¬ 
ceived the Dutch, and freed them from those prejudices. Another reason for cutting off the legs, is that 
the birds are found to be more easily preserved without them; besides the Moors want them without legs* in 
order to put them into their helmets as ornaments. 

These birds are valuable, and extremely well suited for an ornament of dress, both by their lightness 
and beauty; they are employed for the same purposes as the feathers of the ostrich. There are seven 
species of Birds of Paradise described by Yalentyn. 

I. The large Bird of Paradise is commonly two feet four inches in length; the head is small* 
the bill hard and long* of a pale colour. The head and back of the neck is lemon-coloured, but about its 
little eyes black; about the neck, the bird is of a bright gloss emerald green* and soft like velvet* as is the 
breast, which is black or wolf-coloured. The wings are large and chesnut; the back part of the body 
is covered with long straight narrow feathers* of a pale brown colour, similar to the plumes of the 
ostrich. These feathers are spread when the bird is on the wing, which is the cause that lie can keep 
very long in the air. On both sides of the belly are two tufts of stiff and shorter feathers* oi a golden 
yellow* and shining. From the rump proceed two long stiff shafts, which are feathered on their extre¬ 
mities.—They come always in flocks of thirty or forty, and are led by a bird which the inhabitants call 
the king* distinct from the little king bird. This leader is black with red spots, and constantly flies 
higher than the rest of the flock* which never forsake him* but settle as soon he settles—-a circumstance 
which becomes their ruin when the king lights on the ground* from whence they are not able to rise* <?Q 
account of the singular structure and disposition of their plumage, 