

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

Fresh meat for a ship’s crew is seldom to be procured; the little the garrison*have, Is brought 
from Bouro, There are no sheep, and poultry is scarce and dear; a few deer and wild hogs are in the 



4*00 


CLOVES. 


woods, but difficult to be got. Water is procured up the harbour, seven or eight miles from where the 
ships lay. The watering place is up a small inlet; it is a fine full river, running down from the rocks, 
and with hoses you can fill your butts in a very short time: it will be necessary to get the boats in and 
out as near high water as possible. You will be directed to the watering place by two houses, which are 
situated at about a musket shot on each side of it. 

Haraucka.—This island is about three miles to the eastward of Amboyna; on the west is a fort, 
with a small garrison. This place, with some part of Amboyna on the Hiloe Peninsula, is under the 
superintendence of the Resident here. 

Saparoua is about 35 miles from Amboyna; the fort is on the south side. This island and Noossa 
Laut yield an abundance of fine cloves; these, with four districts on the S.W. side of Amboyna, are 
under the Resident stationed here, and it is esteemed the most valuable appointment under the Government. 

Noossa Laut is the easternmost and smallest of the Clove Islands, and bears from Amboyna E. % N. 
about 40 miles’ distance. The fort is on the western side of the island, w T here is a small garrison. 

For the more convenient collection of the cloves, the Dutch formed several small residencies subor¬ 
dinate to the chief establishment. Under the immediate management of the Governor are a number of 
districts in the Leytimore division. Under the resident at Saparoua are four districts on the S.W. side 
of the islands Saparoua and Noossa Laut. The Island of Haraucka, and several districts opposite it on 
the Hiloe Peninsula, form one province under the superintendence of the Resident. All these districts 
abound in cloves, the cultivation of which is strictly prohibited in every other part of the island. 

CLOVES. 

The clove-tree is a native of the Molucca Islands, particularly Amboyna, where it is principally 
cultivated. It is a very handsome tree, somewhat resembling a large pear-tree; its stem is straight, and 
at the distance of five feet from the ground its branches begin; the bark is thin and smooth, and adheres 
closely to the wood. The wood is heavy and hard; the leaves stand two and two opposite; they are about 
a hand’s breadth long, and two inches broad, pointed, ribbed, and reddish on the upper side, but smooth 
and of a bright green colour on the under side; they have a very aromatic smell when bruised between 
the fingers. When a tree is nine years old, and has been well attended to, it begins to yield cloves; they 
appear in the beginning of the rainy season; they are then little dark green longish buds, and become 
perfect cloves in shape in the month of August or September; they then turn yellow, and afterwards red, 
which is the time for gathering them. If they are suffered' to remain three or four weeks longer, they 
swell, and become what are called mother cloves, which are proper for propagation or for candying, but 
not fit for drying as a spice. The cloves grow on separate stalks, but in bunches of three or more together. 
Valentyn describes four sorts; that which he calls the male clove is the sort used for drying; the female 
produces cloves of a pale colour, which are the best for extracting of oil; the king’s clove is a very scarce 
species, bearing larger and double cloves; the fourth sort is called rice cloves, which are very small, but 
likewise very rare. The clove produced upon the wild clove-tree has no kind of spiciness. At the time of 
gathering the clove, the ground is carefully swept under the trees, that none may be lost. They are gene- 
rally pulled off by long hooks, or beaten down with bamboos; large cloths are spread to receive them, and 
they are afterwards either dried by the fire or in the sun: the last mode is the best of drying them. The 
usual time of the dove crop is in October, and it lasts till December. The crop of cloves depends much 
upon the temperature of the weather in June and September; an after crop is sometimes made, but the 
time is uncertain, and it does not often happen. 