

The English established a factory here soon after their first visit to India; but from the treacherous 
character of the natives, they were soon compelled to withdraw it. In 1700 it was again established, and 
a chop obtained for trade, with liberty to build a bamboo house, but only to use small arms, not great 
guns, for its defence, for which were paid, including presents, 1300 dollars. In 1704 permission was 
obtained to erect fortifications for their protection; and numbers of Chinese and other merchants resorting 
here to trade, the settlement promised to become of some importance; but the natives suddenly attacked 
it on the 27th of June, 1707, and though they were at first beat off, the loss of the English was so great, 
that it was with difficulty the survivors escaped on board the ship, and abandoned the place, leaving behind 
them property to a considerable amount. This sudden attack was ascribed to the instigation of the 
Chinese, w T ho, jealous of the proportion of the pepper trade w T hich the English had acquired, persuaded 
the natives to expel their rivals. Since that period the Dutch have established themselves on the river, 
where they have a small palisadoed fort, with several bastions and many cannons mounted. 

The Dutch Chief occasionally trades with ships visiting the place, but it is in rather a clandestine 
manner. Should circumstances admit of touching here, you must send a boat well manned and armed up 
the river to the Dutch factory, and say you want wood, water, and provisions: if possible, hire a small proa, 
and a man to go with you as linguist; but you must be very much upon your guard how you trust him. 
You will g& a man of this description to go with you for a few dollars, provided he behaves well. Invite 
the Dutch Chief on board; in all probability he will send down a boat, and request your company on shore, 
in which case take nothing of value with you except your side-arms. Enquire if the Commandant of the 
troops and the Chief are on good terms; if they are not, you must be cautious how you talk about trade. 
Should there be any vessels from the eastward, you should visit them; they may probably have spices, 
which they will dispose of for opium and Spanish dollars. A number of Chinese reside at Tattas, who 
carry on a considerable trade with China and other places, and have a number of shops, which are well 
supplied with the various productions of the East. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, And MEASURES. 

Coins. —Spanish dollars are the current coin; a few Dutch coins from Batavia are to be met with; 
and for small change they have the Chinese cash. The following coins are also in circulation; 

Pillar dollars; these, if fui weight, pass the same as Spanish dollars. 



BANJAR MASSIN. 


415 


French crowns; there is a loss on these if taken to China* therefore they should be avoided. 

Rupees of various kinds* none of which should be carried to China. 

Duccatoons pass here at the rate of 125 Spanish dollars per 100 duccatoons; at Canton they vary* 
being sometimes as low as 122 Spanish dollars per 100 duccatoons. 