


The proas import from Sooloo, New Guinea, Gilolo, Waygiou, and the other islands, 


Agal Agal. 
Birds’ nests. 
Black-wood. 
Beech de mer. 


Birds of Paradise. 
Missoy bark. 
Nutmegs. 

Pearls. 


Pearl shells. 
Rattans. 
Sago. 
Stick-lac. 


Sandal-wood. 

Tortoise-shell. 

Wax. 


taking in return the produce of India and China, before mentioned. 


DUTIES. 


There are no duties levied on imports or exports, but presents are made to the Sultan and his prin¬ 
cipal men, according to the business done. 

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

Bullocks are to be got from Gilolo, likewise goats, but deer and wild hogs in abundance, various 
kinds of fruits, and some vegetables. The sea yields plenty of excellent fish. The Kemoo or Kima 
cockle is in abundance amongst these islands; the small ones, about the size of a man’s head, are very good, 
and will keep long alive, if whetted frequently with salt water. 

The Dutch had formerly a fort, called Fort Barneveldt, on the island of Batchian, which fronts the 
S.W, part of Gilolo, with a small garrison to keep the natives in awe, and to prevent the cultivation of 
spices. The Sultan is master of several of the neighbouring islands. 



CELEBES—MACASSAR > 


• 409 


CELEBES. 

This island is separated from Borneo by the Strait of Macassar, which is about 115 leagues long, 
and generally from 35 to 45 leagues wide, except where it is contracted by the projection of Point Kan- 
neevongan, to 17 leagues; it is much frequented by ships bound to China late in the season, though it lias 
no ports where provisions or refreshments can be readily procured. 

Celebes is of considerable extent, and of a very irregular form. The Dutch are the only Europeans 
who ever retained settlements here for any length of time. 

MACASSAR. 

On the west side of the island is this principal settlement, and to it all the others are subordinate. 
The road is one of the most beautiful In India, and is very secure, being defended by numerous small 
islands and sand-banks from almost every wind that blows; but a pilot is necessary to get into the inner 
roads. 

Fort Rotterdam is situated in latitude 5° 9' South, and longitude 119° 45' East; it was built by the 
natives with the assistance of the Portuguese, and is about 800 feet from the beach, opposite to the road, 
where a pier extends, which serves for unloading the ships, and close to which there are 15 or 16 feet water. 
The walls of the fort are high and strong, built of rock-stone; without the land-gate is a large plain, on 
the north side of which Is situated the town, where most of the Europeans reside. The streets cross each 
other at right angles, pointing to the four Cardinal points; most of them are broad, and formed of tolerably 
good houses; at the end of one of them stands the orphan-house, which is large, but in a very ruinous 
state. The Chinese all live together in one street, which is named after them. This town Is palisadoed 
all round, and is at night closed by gates, where a watch is constantly kept. Without the town, to the 
southward, there is a row of buildings, which bounds it on that side, and where likewise the house of 
the Governor stands. The Bouginess and Malay campons are not far from it; the Campon Baro, "where 
most of the natives and some Europeans live, is south of the fort; there are likewise a few brick houses 
in it. The church has been rebuilt within these few years, and is a pretty, neat, airy structure. The envi¬ 
rons of Macassar are very pleasant. It lies in an extensive plain, which reaches to the foot of a range of 
high mountains, extending 8 or 10 miles; and the plain is covered with rice fields and pasture grounds. 