

This island was visited by the Portuguese in 1521, where they found the Spaniards, who, by sailing 
round Cape Horn, had arrived here, and built a fort on the neighbouring island, Tidore. The Portuguese 
obtained permission to build a fort. For many years the two nations were quarrelling respecting these 
islands. In 1528 the King of Spain ceded his right in them to the Portuguese for 350,000 ducats. 
These islands remained at peace till the arrival of the Dutch in 1607, who, w T ith the assistance of the inha¬ 
bitants, expelled the Portuguese, and in 1638 a treaty was concluded between the King of Ternate and 
the Dutch, which has been frequently renewed; but, in order to enforce the observance, three forts, with 
sufficient garrisons, are established at different places on the island. 

The Dutch have a civil Governor and Council, besides a Shabundar and Fiscal, whose power is often 
severely felt, not only by the natives, but also by Europeans, who are prohibited trading with all other 
foreign parts than Batavia. No Chinese junk or vessel is permitted to come herefrom China; but Chinese 
junks trade to Macassar, which may be considered the vrest frontier to the Moluccas; in short, the Dutch 
contrive to make Ternate as dependent as possible on Batavia for what they want; and although the 
inhabitants of Sooloo send vessels to Ternate, no Dutch or Chinese inhabitant can obtain permission to 
send a vessel to Sooloo. 

This island was captured by the English from the Dutch in the last war, and the garrison taken into 
British pay. Trade was somewhat encouraged, though the natives are very poor, and the Chinese not 
possessed of so much property as in those settlements where trade is liberally carried on. It was given up 
to the Dutch at the Peace of Amiens. 

, COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Coins. —Accounts are kept in rix-dollars and Spanish dollars. Duecatoons and crowns pass here. 
The rate of exchange is 80 duecatoons per 100 Spanish dollars; 102 crowns per 100 Spanish dollars. 

Weights.— China weights are in common use. The bahar here is 4 cantars and 6 lbs. and each 
eantar 100 lbs* avoirdupois, which make the bahar 406 lbs. 



T1D0RE. 


40 ? 


IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 


Imports. —From India are imported the following Asiatic and European produce, but in very 
small quantities, the demand being very limited: 


Ale, 

Boots and shoes. 
Brandy. 

Cabinet ware. 
Claret. 

Copper. 

Cutlery. 

Geneva. 


Garden seeds. 
Guns and pistols. 
Gunpowder. 
Glass ware. 

Hats. 

Hosiery. 

Iron in bars. 
Ironmongery. 


Lead. 

Looking glasses. 
Madeira. 

Lace, gold. 
Nails. 

Oilman’s stores. 

Opium. 

Piece-goods. 


Poit wine. 
Sum, 

Rice. 

Ship-chandlery. 

Shot. 

Steel. 

j Stationery, 

| Watches. 


The proas from Sooloo bring beech de mer, gold-dust, Missoy bark, pearls* Sec. 

Exports. —These consist of gold-dust, tortoise-shell, wax, and a few spices, which are some tim es 
to be procured, notwithstanding the vigilance of the Dutch; the balance is paid in Spanish dollars. A few 
birds of Paradise, and shells of many kinds are to be got here. 