


DUTIES. 


During the administration of the English', the duties were similar to those at Amboyna. viz. 

On India piece-goods, imported on English ships --—6 per cent. 

On foreign ships, not American ^ 12 ditto. 

On goods manufactured in any of the Dutch possessions on Java, Macassar, Sec. w ,wi5 ditto. 

On all kinds of China merchandise 5 ditto. 

On all kinds of provisions, &c. birds’ nests, tortoise-shell, &c 5 ditto. 

Nutmegs, mace, and cloves are prohibited to be sold by individuals. 


PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS 

Of all kinds are scarce and dear. Rice is imported from Manado on Celebes. Wild hogs and deer 
are plentiful in the woods; vegetables are, however, more abundant here than at any of the islands; 
wood and water are easily procured. 


TIDORE. 

This island is situated about three leagues to the southward of Ternate, in latitude about 43 North, 
and longitude 127° 37 East. The town is on the east side of the island, near which ships anchor in 
30 fathoms. It is now under its own Prince, having been given up by the English on them captuimg it in 
the last war. It is very populous; the people are principally Mahometans, and there are said to be 
twenty-five mosques on the island. 

This island was first visited by the Spaniards, under Magellan, November 8 , 1521, who were kindly 
received, and obtained permission to build a factory. At that period doves were so plentiful, that they 
purchased them at the rate of ten yards of good red cloth, or 15 yards of a meaner kind, per bahar of cloves, 
weighing 406 lbs. After visiting the neighbouring islands, Matchian and Batchian, they returned to Europe. 




408 


TIDORE. 


In 1527 the Portuguese succeeded in driving them from the island, of which they took possession, but 
not without a considerable struggle, in which the King of Tidore sided with the Spaniards, and that of 
Ternate with the Portuguese. In 1607 the Dutch arriving in these seas, soon managed to drive out the Por¬ 
tuguese, from which time till its capture by the English, it had remained in their hands. The King possesses 
great part of the S. E. portion of Gilolo, in which are three towns, where some trade is carried on, viz. 
Patany, Maba, and Weda; he likewise claims the islands of Waygiou, Mysol, and Batanta. There is a 
great trade here with New Guinea, Gilolo, and with the northern islands, and the Chinese, who are an 
industrious people, are much interested in it. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

All goods are bought and sold for Spanish dollars, and in general by the Chinese pecul; but small 
Dutch money is in circulation, and their weights are in common use. 


IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 


Imports. —These are similar to those of the neighbouring island, Ternate, consisting of 


China-ware. 

Cloth, scarlet. 
Cutlery, coarse. 
Guns and muskets. 


Gunpowder. 
Glass-ware. 
Iron, in bars. 
Ironmongery. 


Looking-glasses. 

Lead. 

Lace, gold & silver. 
Nails. 


Piece-goods of sorts. 
Shot. 

Steel. 

Watches. 