

GONONG TELEO RIVER 

Is situated on the north side of the great Bay of Tominie, or Gonong Tello, which stretches inland 
nearly to the west side of Celebes. The town is situated about two miles up the river, in latitude 28' 
North, and about 123° East longitude. It was subject to the Dutch, who had a considerable fort on the 
river, with two small ones at its entrance; they now hoist English colours, as it was taken possession of 
in 1797. There is no Resident here. Ships can only anchor at its entrance in deep water. On the eastern 
side, just within the entrance, are two small coves, either of which a ship may haul into, and lay sheltered 
from the very strong freshes that come down the river; immense stones lie on the beach in these coves, 
which are very convenient for mooring to. The inhabitants are chiefly Mahometans, and a considerable 
trade is carried on here. The Rajah is the principal merchant. For what they have to dispose of, they 
ask double the price they will take, and what they want to purchase, they will not at first offer above 
half what is asked. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports. The articles most in demand here are opium, iron, gunpowder, piece-goods of a common 
kind, and coarse cutlery. Very few European goods answer on this part of the island. 

Exforts.—GoW is one of the principal exports; but it is necessary to be a good judge of it, as they 
will take every advantage they can, and it is only to be bought in small quantities of different merchants. 
There are four or five qualities of it; the price, in bars, from nine to eleven Spanish dollars for one 
dollar weight, and gold-dust about the same price. It is said that gold to any amount might be procured 
from Celebes. The Dutch from this place used annually to receive from 4 to 6000 ounces; the mines are 
about a degree to the westward of Gonong Tello. 

Tortoise-shell is procured here in considerable quantities at about 1$ to 2 dollars per lb. The Dutch 
s ips that frequented this place, used to earn- away many slaves, particularly bbys and girls,* it being con¬ 
sidered a cheap place to procure them at. 



KEMAR—MANADO—SANGIZL 


41S 


PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS, 

Buffaloes are In abundance, from six to nine dollars each; sheep, two or three dollars; goats, one 
dollar each; fowls are procured for knives—-large ones, four for a knife. Pice is the best article to purchase 
with, as the natives are very poor, seldom having more than one or two fowls, which may be had very 
cheap for pice. Water and wood are easily procured. 

Rice, wax, beech de mer, and a few other articles are to be met with here, and to be got reasonably, 
if paid for in Spanish dollars. 

The northern Coast of Celebes is in general high bold land. Near the northern extreme are two 
places of trade, Manado and Kemar. 

KEMAR 

Is in latitude 1° 22' North, and longitude 125° East; it is on the western side of the point, and there 
is good anchorage within ly mile of the shore. This place is easily known by the high mountains, the 
southernmost of which. Mount Chabot, is very high, and may be seen 30 leagues in clear weather. There 
is no fort here, but a serjeant and about 15 native troops. The Company’s agent resides at Manado. \ : ery 
little trade is carried on here. Opium is always in request, but is* only allowed to be sold to the Company. 
A small quantify of coarse piece-goods is sold annually. 