

A considerable trade is carried on in their own proas with Amboyna and the neighbouring islands, 
from whence they import the following articles: 

Cutlery. China-ware. Iron, in bars. S Piece-goods. 

Cloth, chiefly scarlet Gold lace. Opium. j Steel 

The articles in which they make their returns, are chiefly the under-mentioned: 

Male nutmegs ~—30 to 40 dollars per pecui. Birds'* nests, inferior ^ 4 to 6 dollars per catty. 

Mace-—-^40 to 50 ditto. Pearl shells -- 2 to 3 ditto per pecui. 

Cloves—.^^^J35 to 45 ditto. Seed pearl —-—~ S to 10 ditto per dollar wt 

Beech de mer--— 8 to 10 ditto. Tortoise-shell ~——45 to 50 ditto. 

Large quantities of sago are to be procured extremely reasonable. 

The Island of Gilolo abounds with bullocks and buffaloes, goats, deer, and wild hogs; the latter fre¬ 
quent the places where sago-trees have been felled, and feeding upon the remains, grow very fat, and make 
excellent meat. 

The islands of Temate, TIdore, Motyr, Matchian, and Batchian, adjacent to the west coast of 
Gilolo, and situated between the equator and the first degree of north latitude, were formerly considered 
as the principal, and even the only Spice Islands, the nutmeg-tree and clove-tree being diffused in these 
islands in a much greater quantity than at Amboyna, Banda, or any other island; but the Dutch wishing 



408 


TERNATE. 


to appropriate these valuable trees exclusively to themselves, forced the Sovereigns of the former islands 
to destroy the plantations of them. At their Courts they kept agents who were very busy and strict in their 
visits; and these trees were allowed to be cultivated only at Amboyna, Banda, and the other islands which 
were under the immediate dependence of the Company, and where they could exercise a continual super¬ 
intendence. This inquisition, introduced by Dutch cupidity, was singularly counteracted by birds which 
deposited the seeds of the spice-trees in the islands circumjacent to those where they were cultivated. 
This had determined the Company also to fix Residents there, whose principal mission was to make con¬ 
stant researches, in order to destroy all those which they might meet with. Often, indeed, the trees hap¬ 
pened to be sown in places so steep, that they escaped the most active efforts of the destroyers. 

TERNATD 

Is the northernmost, and though small, the largest of the former Spice Islands, and remarkable 
for its volcanoes. The Dutch have a fortress on the east side, called Fort Orange, in which they have 
a strong garrison; it is in latitude 48' North, and longitude 127° 20' East. The anchorage is near the 
shore, abreast of the town. The King resides here in great state; the Dutch pay him every external respect, 
but at the same time curb him in every commercial attempt. His dominions comprehend the greater part 
of the north end of Gilolo; likewise a great part of the N. E. quarter of Celebes, wdiere the settlements 
of Manado and Gonong Tello are situated; to him also belong the Islands of Sangir, Siao, and several of 
the small neighbouring ones. 