

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS 

Are to be had cheap, but not in any quantity without permission from the Company's Resident. 
Bullocks and hogs are good; fowls, about one dollar per dozen; rice and paddy, one dollar per bag; 
yams, onions, and some other vegetables in abundance. The water here is very excellent. 

MANADO 

Is on the western side of Cape Coff, in latitude P 30' North, and longitude 124° 4r East. Here 
is a fort, which the Dutch called Fort Amsterdam, where an English Resident is fixed, who has an officer 
and a small party of men with him. Opium and piece-goods are imported here, tor which they receive 
gold in return to the extent of 4000 ounces per annum, besides wax and many other articles. The Dutch 
kept this place and Kemar to furnish provisions for Teraate, this part of Celebes being very fruitful, and 
abounding in rice, &c. # 

SANGIR. 

This island, which is of considerable size, extending from latitude 3° 2V North, nearly in a N. N.W„ 
direction, to 3 3 46' South, is of an oblong form; it is broadest towards the north end, and tapers small 
towards the south, having several good bays. The principal town and bay are about the middle of the 
west coast, and is called Taroona, in latitude 3° 29' North, and longitude 125° 44 East. The anchorage 
is within a mile of the shore in 00 fathoms, near a small river or watering place. There is also another 
town, called Tabockang, nearly opposite on the east coast. On anchoring, the canoes come off in great 
numbers with goats, fowls, yams, cocoa-nuts, and various other fruits and vegetables, for which they pre¬ 
fer white metal buttons to any other commodity; of money they have scarcely an idea. This and the 
neighbouring islands abound with cocoa-nuts; a fathom of brass wire will purchase 100; an ordinary 
knife 300; and four knives, a ballet, or 60 lbs. of cocoa-nut oil, and other articles in proportion. Water is 
procured from the river, but must be rafted off, which requires great caution, as the tides ran very rapidly 



414 


BORNEO—BANJAR MASSIN. 


near the island. The inhabitants are numerous, and appear mild and benevolent; many of them are 
habited like Chinese, of which it is probable there is a colony on the island. 

The Island of Siao bears about S. by W. from Sangir, distant from 12 to 13 leagues. 

BORNEO. 

This island, which is reckoned one of the largest in the world, abounds with rivers and harbours, of 
which the following are the principal frequented by the English: Banjar Massin, Succadana, Pontiana, 
Momparva, Sambass, Borneo, and Passier. 


BANJAR MASSIN 


Is situated a considerable distance up a river, W'hich empties itself into the sea near Point Salatan, 
the southern extreme of Borneo, in latitude 3° 51' South. There w^as formerly a town of that name, 
about 12 English miles from the sea; but it is now removed about six miles higher up, and called Tattas. 
The river is navigable for vessels of burthen, and the branch on which Tattas stands, is called China River. 
The town consists of about 300 houses, most of them built upon floats in the river. 