

This island was discovered by the Portuguese about 1525, who obtained permission to establish them¬ 
selves, where they remained quiet till about 1660, when they were driven out by the Dutch, who hold the 
fort and surrounding district, in consequence of a treaty entered into with the native Prince. The English 
established a factory here In 1615, which they were soon under the necessity of abandoning. Numbers of 
Chinese are settled here, who carry on a considerable trade with their native country. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, axd MEASURES. 

Accounts are kept In rix-dollars and stivers. Spanish dollars are the common coin, but the 
under-mentioned also pass current at the following rates: 

Duceatoons ———————-A3 schillings, j Bombay rupees——————5 schillings. 

English crowns—————10 ditto. | Madras rupees ———-4 ditto. 

The exchange is 4 rix-dollars for 3 Spanish dollars. All bargains are made in the former, which is a 
nominal coin. They have a kind of mace, 7 of which go to a dollar. 

All merchandise is weighed by the dotchin, and then reduced to other weights. Pepper is sold by 
the ganton, of which 225 make a Banda bahar; there are 2 gantons, 20 of the smaller making one of the 
Yon. II. 36 



410 . 


MACASSAR. 


larger. The quoyan of rice is 40 great gantons, each 90 lbs. which make the quoyan 3,600 lbs.; 20 small 
gantons are equal to a China pecuL Tortoise-shell is purchased by the bahar of 200 catties, weighed by 
the dotchin. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports. —The Dutch East India Company import piece-goods, on which they charge 33£ per cent, 
advance; whatever they sell for beyond that sum, becomes the property of their servants. The other 
commodities which used to be brought by the commanders of their ships, one or two of which visited 
Macassar annually, were as follow: 

Anchors & grapnels. Guns and pistols. Looking glasses. Sugar. 

Brass wire. Gold thread. Lace* Steel, in faggots. 

Coarse cutlery. Iron in bars. Nails. Woollens. 

Gunpowder. Lead. Shot, small. Watches. 

The Dutch allow a junk to come direct from China every year, for which she pays 3000 Spanish 
dollars in duties. The articles imported by her are 

China-ware. Gongs. Nankeens. Sugar-candy. 

Canton cloth. Iron in bars. Silk piece-goods. Sweetmeats. 

Fireworks. Iron pans. Sugar. Teas. 

and a number of small articles for wearing apparel, and other uses. 

As soon as these goods are landed, every merchant, for there are several who come in the junk, ex¬ 
poses his commodities for sale in a large house, which is peculiarly adapted for the purpose. This house 
is the daily resort of the natives, so that the merchandise imported is speedily disposed of. 

Exports. —A great number of slaves are annually taken from the island to Batavia by the Dutch; 
they are not always prisoners taken in war, or criminals, but persons who have been kidnapped for the 
purpose of being sold, most of the Dutch eastern settlements being supplied from hence. About 100 
are annually purchased by the Dutch Company for their own service; the remainder of this iniquitous 
traffic is in the hands of private individuals and free inhabitants of Batavia and Macassar; these, with 
gold, of which immense quantities are procured on the island, and rice, form the whole of the productions 
exported. The following articles, which are taken by the annual junk to China, are imported into the 
settlement by proas from the surrounding countries. 