

BOOLECOMBA 

Is situated about twenty miles from Bonthain, near a small river. In the S. W. monsoon the road 
is dangerous for shipping; small vessels can, however, run into the river at high water. Near the mouth of 
the river stands the fort, called Carolina, which is small and palisadoed, having a few guns mounted: it is 
under the command of the Resident at Bonthain. The land produces large quantities of rice, which is 
sent to Amboyna and other islands. The wood procured here not being adapted to the construction of 
houses, it is imported from places more to the eastward, where it is excellent. The anchorage for large 
ships is, with the flagstaff N. N. W. in 6f or 7 fathoms, about 2f miles from the shore. 

SALEYER. 

This island, which extends about 10 leagues North and South, is separated from the south point of 
Celebes by the Strait of Saleyer. The Dutch used to keep a Resident here in a small palisadoed fort, 
called Fort Defence. It is well inhabited, and produces large quantities of grain; and much coarse blue 
and white striped cloth is manufactured from cotton grown on the island, 

BUGGESS BAY. 

This bay begins on the east side of the south point of Celebes, which forms, with the island of Saleyer, 
the Straits of that name, and stretches about 3 J to the northward into the middle of the island. The 
west side of the bay is better inhabited than the east, and has several villages belonging to the natives. 
The principal river and town are called Boni, near the bottom of the bay on the west side, in latitude 
about 3 d South. Ships from Bengal have occasionally visited this place, with a view of trading in opium 
and piece-goods, and receiving gold-dust, &e. in return; but they have generally been disappointed* 

3G2 



418 


BOUTON—GONONG TELLO RIVER 


BOUTON. 

The soutli point of ttis island Is in latitude about 5° 42' South, and longitude 122° 44/ East It k 
well inhabited. The principal town is Bouton, in latitude 5° 27' South; it is built upon an eminence, 
with a very steep declivity to the N. W. and is surrounded with thick walls, which secure the inhabitants 
from the incursions of the Malay pirates who frequent this sea. The houses are built of bamboos, and 
covered with palm-leaves. The Sultan resides in a fort built of stone; he is an ally of the Dutch, but 
shews great distrust of them. The few Dutch soldiers, who are the only inhabitants of the Company’s 
house, are not permitted to live in the place where he resides, but are obliged to remain in an inconvenient 
dwelling at some distance from the fort. 

The anchorage is with the flagstaff bearing S. 17° W. and the watering place E. N. E. three miles. 

Refreshments of various kinds are to be procured here, viz. goats, ducks, fowls, rice, and sugar, for 
which they will take coarse cutlery, hardware, he. but prefer money. The inhabitants are inclined to be 
treacherous, therefore care should be taken against them. 

The east coast of Celebes is very imperfectly known, and little frequented. The extensive peninsula 
by which this coast is formed, is fronted by islands of various sizes, and many islands are interspersed 
over the great Bays of Tolo and Tominie, or Gonong Tello. 