

Beech de mer. Cloves. Nutmegs. Sago. 

Black-wood. Cotton wool. Rattans. Tortoise-shell. 

Bezoar stones. Clove bark. Rice. Wax. 

A particular kind of cotton cloth, called Cambays, is manufactured here, and is an article in great 
demand in all Malay countries; it is red, checkered, and mixed with blue, much resembling the Tartan 
plaid; some are as fine as cambric, and sell from 8 to 10 Spanish dollars each. At Bencoolen they laid a 
heavy duty on them, as they materially interfered with the importation of piece-goods from Bengal. 

The established duties are 6 per cent, on import and exports. The Shabundar sometimes trades, if 
the commanding officer and he are upon good terms; in that case no duties are levied, but presents are 
necessary, under the plea of obtaining permission to procure supplies. 

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

The beef here is excellent, and at a reasonable price. Rice, poultry, deer, and wild hogs are in 
plenty, and fruits of various kinds. Water is generally procured from a small rivulet which runs near the 
town, but the best is from the wells, and which can be readily shipped off from the pier. Abundance of 
excellent fish are caught in the roads, and about the islands. 



BONTHAIN BAY—BOOLECOMBA—SALEYER—BUGGESS BAY, 


441 


BONTHAIN BAY 

Is situated about 30 leagues S.E. from Macassar, and may be known by a hill at the bottom of a bay 
which is in latitude about 5° 30 South, and longitude 120° 9' East, The bay is large, and ships may lie in 
perfect security in both monsoons; the soundings are good and regular, and the bottom, soft mud; the 
anchorage is with Bonthain Hill bearing North, about half a mile from the shore. In this bay there 
are several small towns, the principal of which, from whence the bay takes its name, is in the N.E. part 
of it. Here the Dutch have a small palisadoed fort, with a few’ guns mounted, standing on the south side 
of a small river, and there is water for a ship to come close to it. Most of the ships bound to the Spice 
Islands touch here, and pass between Celebes and Saleyer. 

The principal article of trade here is rice, of which large quantities are annually exported; the others 
are chiefly brought by the proas, and are similar to those enumerated at Macassar. 

Provisions and refreshments of all kinds are plentiful and at a cheap rate. The beef is excellent; rice 
may be had in any quantity, as may fowls and fruit, but wild hogs are not so plentiful. Fish may be 
caught with the seine, and turtle is occasionally to be procured. The bullocks have humps similar to the 
Indian ones; there are besides buffaloes, goats, sheep, and deer. Wood and water are to be had in great 
plenty; the former near a river, under Bonthain Hill; and the latter both from it and another river near 
the fort: if from the latter, the boats must go above the fort with the casks which are to be filled, where 
there is a good rolling way; but as the river has a bar, a loaded boat can come out only at high water. 
The arrack and sugar consumed here are imported from Batavia. 