

From Borneo Town to the northern extreme of the island are several bays and harbours; but from 
the unfriendly conduct of the natives, they are seldom visited by Europeans. To the eastward of Tanjong 
Sampanmangio, the northern extreme of Borneo, in latitude 7° 3 North, is Malloodoo Bay, which 
stretches inland a great distance to the southward, having regular soundings and good anchorage in most 
places. This part of the coast abounds with rattans, 10 or 12 feet long, of which a ship load can easily 
be obtained. It has also plenty of grain, and inland it is very populous* 

BALEMBANGAN. 

This island is about five leagues N. E. of Tanjong Sampanmangio, the north point of Borneo; its 
length is about fourteen miles, running in a N. E. and S.W. direction. It lias two harbours, called the 
N. E. and S. W.; the former is the largest, but on the south side it is swampy. At the entrance of the S.W. 
harbour is great convenience for watering. Fresh water may be conveyed into the lower deck ports of a 
first rate lying in five fathoms, by means of a hose from a rivulet close by. 

The East India Company in 1773 established a small settlement here, with a view of forming an 
emporium for eastern commodities. They obtained the cession of the island, and a considerable tract of 
land on the north part of Borneo from the King of Sooloo, under whose dominion it was. Troops and 
stores were accordingly sent from India, and numbers of Malays and Chinese began to settle here; but in 
1775 they were surprised by the Sooloos, who rushed into the place, put the sentries to death, and turned 
the guns upon the troops, principally Buggesses. The few settlers, recently reduced in number, were fain 
to make their escape to the vessels in the harbour, and proceed to sea. In 1803 it was again resettled; 
but the establishment being expensive, without any prospect of real advantage arising from it, it was soon 
withdrawn. Its situation is, however, well adapted for a commercial intercourse with all the places on the 
west coast of the China seas, and the surrounding islands. 



422 


BAKGUEY—PASSIER. 


BANGUEY. 

This island is about twenty miles long, having on the N. W. part, near the sea, a high mountain, 
called Banguey Peak, which is in latitude 7° 19' North, and longitude 117° 6 East; it is separated by a 
channel about a league broad from Balembangan. Ships in want of water, anchor about 1| mile off the 
mouth of a river, with the peak bearing N. N. E. where fresh water may be got with facility; but care 
must be taken to have the boats properly manned and armed, or they will be liable to the attacks of the 
roving and piratical Malays who frequent these islands. 

PASSIER 

Is situated a considerable distance up a river, near the bottom of a large bay on the east side of the 
island; the entrance is in latitude about l c 54' North. The anchorage is with the northern extreme of 
the land bearing N. f E. and the river's mouth West, distance about nine miles, from whence you see some 
fishermen’s huts on the north side of the river. Let your boat, well manned and armed, leave the ship at low 
water; steer in west till she is over a flat at the entrance of the river, and then steer for the houses. The 
fishermen will in all probability endeavour to prevent your going up till they try whether they can pur¬ 
chase for themselves or not. Your boat is not to pay any attention to them, but proceed on. Passier River 
contains sixteen reaches, and has five other rivers joining it. The first river you leave on your right band; 
the next three on your left; and having passed the fifth, which you leave on the right hand, you are within 
half a mile of Passier, which consists of about 300 houses, built of wood, situated on the north side of 
the river, most of them inhabited by Buggess merchants. The house, or palace, and fort of the Sultan 
is on the south side, a short distance from the river. 