

Passier was formerly a place of considerable trade. About 1772 the East India Company attempted 
to settle a factory here for the sale of opium, piece-goods, &c. and for the purchase of the many valuable 
articles brought thither by the Buggesses from Celebes, Sooloo, and other islands. This plan was only 
frustrated by a commotion amongst the natives, at which the English Commander took an alarm, and 
quitted the country, much against the wishes of the principal inhabitants, who were anxious to have the 
English settled amongst them. Since that period Passier has been seldom visited by Europeans, more 
particularly as several vessels have been cut off by the numerous pirates frequenting this coast and the 
neighbouring islands. A few Chinese are settled here, who are in possession of the principal part of the trade. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Spanish dollars are the general coin, and goods are bought and sold by the China pecul and catty. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports. —These are nearly similar to those of the other Malay ports. Prom India are brought 

Cutlery. Guns, of sizes. Lace, gold. Piece-goods. 

Cloth. Iron in bars. Muskets. Pistols. 

Carpets. Looking-glasses. Nails. Steel. 

Gunpowder. Lead. Opium. Telescopes. 

The Buggess proas import many articles from the eastward, such as spices, pearl-shells, beech de 
mer, sago, &c. which are again exported by the Chinese junks. 

Exports.— The articles procurable here, and the prices of them, are nearly similar to those at Borneo. 
You should make the natives bring the articles you wish to purchase on board, in their proas; then exa- 



CAGAYAN SOOLOO—SOOLOO, 


423 


mine them carefully; weigh them, and pay the amount. Your bringing off property in your own boat is 
a sufficient inducement to the Malays to attempt to cut her off. 

No duties are levied on imports or exports; but presents to the Sultan and his principal men, are 
necessary in proportion to the business transacted. 

PROVISIONS and REFRESHMENTS. 

Bull ks, poultry, and sheep are to be procured here, though not in great abundance. Rice is dear, 
being, in 1800, 10 Spanish dollars per pecul. They have a great variety of fruits, and fish in abundance. 

CAGAYAN SOOLOO 

Is an island of considerable size, in latitude 7° North, and longitude IIS' 36 East. Ships may anchor 
in a bay, with the westernmost part of the island W. by S. two miles. The bay is clean, and has a river at 
the bottom of it, with a bar of coral rocks, about 30 yards in width, and 10 yards over. Within and with¬ 
out it is clear sand, free from rocks, and will admit with safety vessels drawing 15 feet water. This 
island is dependent on Sooloo, the Rajah being a Datoo there, and is much frequented by proas from 
Borneo and the neighbouring islands. Supplies of poultry, fruits, and vegetables may be procured. 
Some trifling presents must be made to the Rajah, who in return sends on board some fowls and fruits. 

SOOLOO. 

The Sooloo Archipelago consists of an immense number of islands lying in a X. E. and S.W. direction, 
the principal of which is Sooloo, in latitude 6° 1 North, and longitude 121° 12' East, and to it all the 
others are subject. This island is of considerable height, extending east and w est about 10 leagues. The 
anchorage is opposite the town of Sooloo, or Soong, in 18 fathoms, the Sultans house bearing S. 26° East, 
distance about If mile. The town is of considerable size; the houses are built after the manner of the 
Malays, elevated about four feet from the ground with bamboos, of which the floors are also made. The 
Sultan appears to have but little power, every Datoo, or Chief, being Governor of his own district. 