

The duties are levied here as at Momparva, at the rate of 100 dollars per chest of opium, and 6 per 
cent, on other commodities. A few presents to the Rajah and principal men are necessary. 

BORNEO TOWN. 

This town is about ten miles up a river of the same name, bearing S.W. from Pulo Chirming, a re¬ 
markable island on the coast. One mile from the town, the river bends in a short reach, round a small 
island, in almost an opposite direction; being up with this island, which you must leave on your right, 
appears a branch of the river to the left or S.E.; keeping to the right, you approach the town, to which 
junks of 600 tons come up. The houses are built on each side of the river upon posts, and are ascended 
by staffs and ladders; those on the left side going up, extend backwards to the land, each in a narrow slip. 
The land is not steep, but shelving; every house lias therefore a kind of stage erected for connexion with 
the land. There is little intercourse from house to house by land, the chief communication being by boats. 
On the right going up, the houses extend half a mile backwards, with channels like lanes between the rows. 
The river here is almost as wide as the Thames at London Bridge, with six fathoms water in the channel; 
and here lie moored, head and stern, the Chinese junks, four or five of which come annually from Amoy, 

3 H 2 



420 


BORNEO TOWN. 


of 500 to 600 tons each Some of the houses on the right side of the water are two stories high, with 
stages or wharfs to them, for the convenience of trade. 

A considerable trade is carried on here with Amoy, and several places in China, and with the neigh¬ 
bouring islands; and timber being plentiful, and good for ship-building, the Chinese build large junks, the 
artificers and iron work for which are brought from Amoy. One of the burthen of 7000 peculs, near 
600 tons, may be built, and fitted out for about 8500 Spanish dollars. The Chinese are better able to 
carry on trade here than any other nation, from having many of their own people resident, and because 
the Malays are less jealous of them, as they know they only frequent their ports to trade, and have neither 
temptation to follow the example of Europeans in making attempts against their liberty, or force to exe¬ 
cute it, should they conceive any such design. 

The treacherous disposition of the inhabitants of this extensive island has discouraged almost every 
European from venturing to trade with them. On the N. W. coast, particularly at this place, they have 
in the river 40 or 50 large proas, which are instantly ready and filled with men, when a ship is to be 
assaulted. Therefore, unless trading in a large ship, well fitted for defence, it is not safe to remain in 
the road, and certain destruction to proceed up the river to the town. If a boat is sent on shore, the 
Rajah will offer to trade wdien the ship is brought into the river, and when the commander comes to visit 
him. Beware of complying with these requests; as a short time since, the commander of a large ship, 
with four of his officers, and part of his crew were massacred, and the ship and cargo seized. Soon after 
another ship, mounting 18 guns, anchored in the roads, and after remaining a few days, and communi¬ 
cating in her boat with the town, 28 large proas came out of the river with the intention of attacking 
her, which compelled her to leave this inhospitable place without trading. 