

The number of inhabitants on the island of Sooloo is stated to be 60,060, most of them pirates. 
They have extended their dominion over the neighbouring islands, as well as a considerable por¬ 
tion of the N. E. part of Borneo. To the eastward they are kept in some check by the Spaniards at 
Samboangan, on Magindanao; yet the vicinity of that settlement does not prevent them from sometimes 
declaring war against that nation, and disturbing the internal commerce of the Philippine Islands. Every 
precaution is therefore necessary, more particularly in small vessels, to prevent surprise, as they have very 
frequently cut off European ships calling here; they likewise cut off the settlement at Baiembangan. 

The Sooloos state that their island was formerly part of the ancient Borneo empire, founded by the 
Chinese. The people of Magindanao assert that the Sooloos were once tributary to them. It however appears 
that the island had been at war with the Spaniards before 1646, as on the 14th of April of that year, peace 
was concluded between them, at the mediation of the King of Magindanao; upon which the Spaniards 
withdrew from Sooloo, reserving to themselves the sovereignty of some of the other islands. The Sooloos 
agreed also to give, in sign of brotherhood, three vessels laden with rice yearly. The Treaty of Munster 
was concluded In Europe in 1648, by which the navigation of the Spaniards is restrained; for it states 
“ It is further agreed that the Spaniards shall maintain their navigation In the manner it at present is, 
without being able to extend It further in the East Indies.'” This Is particularly set forth by Mr. Dalrymple; 
also, that the Sooloos lately made with the Spaniards treaties of alliance, offensive and defensive, as the 
Spanish Governor declared in a letter written to the English Governor of Manilla. Mr. Dalrymple first 
made the English acquainted with the Sooloos, and then procured from them, for the East India 



424 


SOOLOO. 


Company, a great part of the north end of Borneo, and some islands near it. To that gentleman the 
English are indebted for the principal part of the information respecting this Archipelago. 

At Sooloo and the neighbouring islands is a famous pearl-fishery, which is the source of their wealth, 
and of their consequence amongst their neighbours, as being a nursery for seamen, ready to man a fleet 
of proas upon an emergency. The drudges for the pearl oyster are generally made of bamboo, very 
slight, and sunk with a stone. The large pearls are the property of the Datoos, on whose estates they 
are found. The Chinese merchants, however, often contrive to purchase from the fishermen pearls of con¬ 
siderable value. They are considered inferior to those produced on the pearl banks at Ceylon, being 
frequently discoloured, and of irregular shapes; they, however, find a ready sale to the Chinese. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

They have no coin at Sooloo, only a currency which they reckon by sanampoory, cangan, and 
cowsoong, or nankeen: the first is a term only, and the second a coarse China cotton cloth, which goes 
in payment of goods, and is reckoned equivalent to a Spanish dollar, a few of which are occasionally met 
with among them. In small payments they make use of paddy, or rice in the husk, which rises and falls 
according to the plenty or scarcity of grain. In their accounts they sometimes reckon by Spanish money, 
but commonly by the cangan and sanampoory, of which the following is the rate: 