

Numbers of Chinese are settled here, and one or two of their junks arrive annually. 

COINS and WEIGHTS. 

Coins.— Spanish dollars are the only coin in circulation in their trade with Europeans, and all bargains 
are made in this money; but accounts among themselves are kept in tale and mace. 



PONTIANA. 


417 


Weights.— AD gross goods are weighed by English weights* and then turned into China peeuls. 
Their small weights are busucks, kupangs, mace* pshaw* and tale* thus divided: 


make 


2 busucks 
4'kupangs 
, , ' *4 mace 
4 pahaws 

By these weights diamonds, gold, bezoar, and other valuable articles are weighed. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 


1 kupang* 
1 mace. 

1 pah aw. 
1 tale. 


Imports are similar to those already enumerated at Banjar Massin, but in smaller quantities. 

Exports. —This place used to be resorted to for diamonds, of which considerable quantities were to 
be got; they were not considered equal to those procured in India, being generally of a dull water. Gold, 
tin, and pepper are to be got here; if gold is taken in return for goods, you must trust to the King for 
its goodness, by having it inserted in your agreement that he is to seal it, and be answerable for its quality. 
This is the only sure way to take gold at any of the Malay ports; but if you are going to China, the 
less gold you take, the better. 

DUTIES and PRESENTS. 

There is a charge of 250 dollars for anchorage, if you sell goods to that amount; if under that sum, 
no anchorage is paid. The customs are 5 per cent, upon both goods and dollars. The presents to the 
principal people should be—the King, to the amount of 50 dollars, the Rajah about 30, and to the Sha- 
bundar, and agents 20 each. The King’s is generally given at the first audience. 


PONTIANA 

Is situated upon the principal branch of a large river, which is in latitude 0 D 13 North, and longitude 
108° 45 East. The river discharges itself into the sea by several mouths. This branch is at its entrance 
twelve feet deep, and at high water sixteen or seventeen feet, so that vessels can proceed to a factory which 
the Dutch Company settled here about 1774, and where they have built a strong fort. The passage from 
the mouth of the river to the factory requires ten or twelve hours. At the distance of seven or eight miles 
from the sea, the river divides itself into two branches, on the southernmost of which the factory stands. 
The anchorage in the road is from 3f to b\ fathoms, the river’s mouth E. S. E. off-shore about five miles. 

The principal diamond mines in the island are at some distance at the back of this place. The spots 
where they are to be found, are said to be known by certain small flints, generally of a black colour, which 
lie on the surface, and also by the yellow colour of the stony soil. The place is dug in the presence of an 
overseer; and if any stones are found above five carats, they are claimed as the property of the Sovereign. 
Besides these mines, diamonds are sometimes found in the rivers, but seldom of any size, or to any amount. 