

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

The Chinese weights are in common use, and by them all goods are bought and sold. Spanish dollars 
are the only currency between Europeans and the natives, but China cash pass current amongst themselves. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports. —These are much larger here than at any place on this coast. It is said that 500 chests of 
opium are annually consumed at Momparva and its dependencies, the price varying from 500 to 800 
Spanish dollars per chest, and sometimes much higher. Of piece-goods and other imports similar to those 
enumerated at Borneo Town, the quantity is considerable. 

Exports. —These are principally gold and pepper; sometimes you will procure tin, but not so cheap as 
in the Straits of Banca, by two or three Spanish dollars per pecuL Pepper you should get-for ten dollars 
a pecuL The gold is of an Inferior sbrfc to that obtained on the Coast of Sumatra, and to the southward of 



SAMBASS—BORNEO TOWN. 


410 


Borneo; it is called mas moodo, or young gold, and is not worth more than twenty-two dollars the tale 
of two Spanish dollars weight; but the price varies according to the demand, so that you must be guided 
by a strict enquiry, which your linguist will make if you do not understand the Malay language yourself. 

On opium a duty of 100 Spanish dollars per chest is charged; on other imports and exports 6 per cent. 
It is necessary to make a present of a piece of each sort of piece-goods you import, on being introduced to 
the King, and likewise to the Shabundar, with whom it is your interest to be on good terms. 

SAMBASS. 

This town is situated 10 leagues up the principal branch of a river, the entrance of which is in lati¬ 
tude 1° 12 North, and longitude 109° 5 East. The anchorage is with the river’s mouth bearing East, 
about two miles off shore. In trading here, more caution is necessary than at some of the other ports, 
as several vessels have been recently cut off in the roads. The Chinese who are settled here, carry on a 
great trade; several junks annually come, bringing with them their own productions, and taking in 
return the commodities procured here. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

The Chinese weights are in common use. Spanish dollars are the coin in which all bargains are made; 
but hereabouts wax is the currency of the country; it is melted, but not refined, and cast into moulds of 
an oblong shape, the breadth about two-thirds of the length, and the thickness about half the breadth^ 
having a rattan to lift them by, cast in the wax. A piece weighs a quarter of a pecul, and is valued in 
payment at about 10 mace; for smaller payments they have pieces of eight and sixteen to a pecul; and 
for smaller money, cowries are in use. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports.— Opium is the most valuable of the imports, and of this article near 500 chests are stated 
to be annually disposed of here; piece-goods and other articles in proportion. 

Exports. —Gold forms the principal part, and is generally the return made for goods. This varies 
in price from 21 to 23 Spanish dollars per buncal. Pearls are also met with occasionally here, likewise 
tortoise-shell, and a few other Malay articles. 