

The anchorage in the road is with the church E. 4 N. about half a mile from the shore. The channel 
between this point and Basselan being narrow, the Spaniards prevent Chipese junks passing this way. 

MANILLA. 

This city, which is the capital of the Philippine Islands, and the principal settlement belonging to 
the Spaniards in the East Indies, is situated in latitude 14° 36 North, and longitude 120° 52' East, in 
a large bay, on the west side of the Island of Luconia, the largest of the Archipelago. The city stands 
on the banks of a river, which is navigable for small vessels a considerable distance inland. It is about 
two miles in compass, and in length about half a mile; the shape is irregular, being narrow at both ends, and 
wide in the middle. It has six gates; the wall to the southward, next Cavite, is strengthened by several 
towers; on the angle next the land is a large bastion, called the Foundry; and beyond it another 
nearly equal to it, between which is Puerto Real, or the Royal Gate, well furnished with brass cannon 
and good outworks. Farther on is the gate of Parian, over which is a battery of cannon; and still 
farther by the rxveris side, is St. Dominic’s bastion, and then the castle, which terminates the city, washed 
on the south by the sea, and on the north and east by the river, over which there are drawbridges to enter 
at the Royal Gate and at that of Parian. The houses are generally built of wood, in consequence of the 
frequent earthquakes. The streets are broad, and there are a vast number-of public buildings, churches, 
convents, &c. Over the bridge, adjoining Parian, are the suburbs where the Chinese reside. 



MANILLA. 


429 


Small vessels generally anchor in Manilla road in five fathoms, the north bastion bearing N. 37 3 E- 
the fishing stakes at the river's mouth N. 18° E. distant about a mile; but large ships anchor at Cavite* 
where is a good harbour, well sheltered from TV. and S. W. winds. 

Cavite, the port and marine arsenal of Manilla, is about three leagues to the southward; it stands 
on a long narrow neck of land, on one side of which is the sea, and on the other the bay that forms the 
port. It is defended by the Castle of St. Philip, which is by much the best fortress in the island, being a 
regular square, with four good bastions well supplied with cannon. On the same point stands the arsenal, 
where the galleons and other vessels are built, and for which service there are from 300 to 500 people con¬ 
stantly employed. The town, which is of considerable size, is in a state of decay. There are two parishes, 
and three convents for men. The Jesuits formerly possessed a very handsome house here, which at 
present is in the hands of the Philippine Company. 

These islands were discovered in the year 1521 by Ferdinand Magellan, a Portuguese navigator, 
who had served his native country; but finding himself neglected by his Government, he left Lisbon in 
disgust, and offered his services to Charles V. then Emperor of Germany and King of Spain, whom he 
convinced of the probability of discovering a way to the Spice Islands by sailing to the westward; where¬ 
upon the command of a squadron being given him, he set sail from Seville on the 10th of August, 1519, and 
standing over to the coast of South America, proceeded southward to the latitude of 52° South, where 
he fortunately hit upon a strait, since called the Strait of Magellan, which carried him into the South 
Sea, and then steering northward, repassed the equator; after which he stretched away to the west, across 
that vast ocean, till he arrived at Guam, one of the Ladrones, on the 10th of March, 1521. He soon 
after sailed to the westward, and discovered the Philippines, which was on St. Lazarus's day; and in 
honour of that Saint, he called them the Archipelago of St Lazarus. He took possession of them in 
the name of the King of Spain; but was afterwards unfortunately killed in a skirmish with the natives 
of one of them. His people, however, arrived afterwards at the Moluccas, where they left a colony, and 
relumed to Spain by way of the Cape of Good Hope, being the first persons who ever sailed round the 
globe. The Spaniards made no attempt to subdue, or plant settlements in these islands until 1564, when 
the Viceroy of Mexico sent a fleet, and a force sufficient to make a conquest of them, which he named 
the Philippines, in honour of Philip II. then upon the throne of Spain. The first settlement made in the 
islands was in Zebu, where- the Spaniards built a fort, and from thence proceeded to the other islands. In 
1571 they founded the City of Manilla, which became the capital of the whole Archipelago. 