

Manilla was taken by the English in 1762; the fleet was under Admiral Cornish, and the land forces 
under Colonel Draper. They arrived in the bay on the 2,3d of September, where they found their visit 
was unexpected, and the Spaniards unprepared. On the morning of the 24th an ineffectual summons was 
sent to the town; the troops and stores were then landed, and the city invested. On the 4th of October 
the batteries were opened, and the following day a practicable breach was effected. On the 6th, at day¬ 
light, the storming party mounted the breach, and got possession of ail the bastions. The Governor and 
principal officers retired to the citadel, and were glad to surrender as prisoners at discretion, as that place 
was in no good posture of defence. They were admitted as prisoners of war upon their parole of honour; 
and to conciliate the affections of the natives, all the Indians were dismissed in safety. In' consequence 
of the terms dictated to the Spaniards, the port of Cavite and citadel, with several large ships, and an im¬ 
mense quantity of warlike and naval stores, were surrendered to the English. The ordnance found in 
the town and citadel of Manilla consisted of 320 pieces of brass, and 123 pieces of iron cannon; and at 
Cavite of 138 brass, and 92 pieces of iron, making in the whole 673 pieces, exclusive of mortars, how¬ 
itzers, and an abundance of other ammunition. The loss sustained by the English did not exceed 30 killed, 
and as many wounded. 1 > 



430 


MANILLA. 


The English commanders being desirous of saving so fine a city from destruction, made a proposal 
of ransoming it upon the following conditions; but several hours elapsed before the principal magistrates 
could be brought to a conference, during which interval the troops committed some excesses. 

I. The Spanish officers of every rank shall be esteemed as prisoners of war, upon their parole of 
honour, but shall have the liberty of wearing their swords. The rest of the troops of every degree and 
quality must be disarmed, and disposed of as we shall think proper. They shall be treated with humanity. 

II. All the military stores and magazines of every kind must be surrendered faithfully to our com¬ 
missaries, and nothing secreted or damaged. 

III. His Excellency the Governor must send immediate orders to the Fort of Cavite, and the other 
forts under his command, and dependent upon Manilla, to surrender to His Britannic Majesty. 

IV. The propositions contained in a paper delivered on the part of His Excellency the Governor 
and Ms Council, will be listened to, and confirmed to them, upon the payment of 4,000,000 dollars: the 
half to be paid immediately; the other half to be paid in a time to be agreed upon, and hostages and secu¬ 
rities given for that purpose. 

V. All the islands subordinate to Luconia and Manilla, its capital, and which are at present under 
the dominion of His Catholic Majesty, must be ceded to his Britannic Majesty, who must be acknowledged 
Sovereign till the fate of these islands 1 r dpridpd by a peace between the two Kings. Their religion, goods, 
liberties, properties, and commerce shall be preserved to the inhabitants of those islands who are subjects 
of Spain, in as ample a manner as they are confirmed to the inhabitants of Manilla and the Island of 
Luconia. All the Governors and military shall be allowed the honours of war, but give their parole, as 
the officers have done at Manilla and Cavite, not to serve or take up arms against His Britannic Majesty. 