



I 




MAGINDANAO. 


427 


the Spaniards, comprehending a large portion of the sea-coast; and the third is under the Illano Sultans, 
a sort of feudal Chiefs. 

The town of Magindanao, in latitude 7° 10' North, and longitude about 124° 35' East, stands about 
six miles from the bar of the River Pelangy, on the right hand going up, just where the Melampy joins 
it. The Pelangy is then about the width of the Thames at London Bridge. The Melampy is about 
half as broad; and as you go up, it strikes off to the right, whilst the Pelangy on the left retains its 
breadth for many miles. A branch of the Pelangy, called Tamantakka, discharges itself into the sea 
about three miles to the southward of the Pelangy, which has three fathoms on its bar at high water in 
spring tides, while that of the Pelangy has only two fathoms. 

The town of Magindanao, that properly goes by that name, consists at present of scarcely more than 
20 houses; they stand close to, and just above where a little creek, about 18 feet broad, called the River 
Magindanao, runs into the Pelangy. Close to the River Magindanao, and opposite the few houses making 
the town of that name, stands the town of Selangan, which may be said to make one town with the other, 
as communicating with it by several bridges over the river. It extends about one mile down the south 
side of the Pelangy, forming a decent street for one half of the distance, and containing about 200 houses. 
The fortified palace of the Sultan, and the strong wooden castles of the Datoos, take up one side of the 
river; the other is occupied by individuals. 

On the point of land where the Melampy runs into the Pelangy is a fort, called Goto Intang (Diamond 
Fort) and also a town. The fort is on the extreme point of land, in extent about six miles, nearly square, 
strongly palisadoed with round trees, 25 feet high. This fort commands both rivers, is nearly square, 
and has many cannon mounted, and a great number of brass swivel guns. 

From the gate which is on the middle of that side of the fort next the land, and which is nearly 
perpendicular to both rivers, leads a broad and straight street for the distance of above half a mile. It is 
so well raised as never to be overflowed, and is moated on both sides. At the end of this street a canal is 
cut from river to river, which bounds the town. On the side next the Pelangy dwell many Chinese 
families, mostly carpenters, arrack distillers, and millers. On that side next the Melampy live a few 
Chinese, but many Magindanao merchants and vessel builders. They build vessels of various dimensions, 
and employ them in trading from one port to the other, or in cruising among the Philippine Islands for 
slaves and plunder. 


COINS, WEIGHTS, axd MEASURES. 

The currency in most parts of the country, as in Sooloo, is the Chinese kangan, a piece of coarse 
cloth, thinly woven, 19 inches broad and six yards long; the value at Sooloo is 10 dollars for a bundle of 
25, sealed up, and at Magindanao much the same; hut here Spanish dollars are scarce. These bundles are 
called gandangs rolled up in a cylindrical form. They have also as a currency cousongs, a kind of nankeen, 
dyed black, and kompow, a strong white Chinese linen, made of flax. 