

In the bazar, or market, the immediate currency is paly; 10 gantangs, of about 4 lbs. each, make 
1 battell, and 3 battels (a cylindrical measure 13 T \- inches high, the same in diameter) about 120 lbs. are 
commonly sold for a kangan. Speaking of the value of things here and at Sooloo, they say such a horse, 
proa, &c. is worth so many slaves, the old valuation being one slave for 30 kangans. 

China cash is in use here, their price from 160 to 180 for a kangan. In making bargains, it should 
be specified whether is meant real or nominal kangan; the dealing in the nominal or imaginary kangan 
is an ideal barter. When dealing in real kangans, they must be examined, and the gandangs, or 
bundles^ of 25 pieces, are not to be trusted, as the dealers will often forge a seal, having first packed 
up damaged kangans; at this the Chinese here and at Sooloo are very expert, 

3 12 



SAMBOANGAN—MANILLA. 


428 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports. —The Spaniards at Samboangan having prevented the China junks bound from Amoy to 
Magindanao from passing, there is but little trade, as no vessels sail from India regularly for this place; and 
the little trade carried on, is principally confined to the country Chinese and a few Sooloo men, who come 
hither to purchase rice, &c. bringing with them China articles, such as are enumerated at Sooloo. 

All kinds of India piece-goods answer well here, especially ordinary long cloth, white, blue, and red; 
handkerchiefs of all kinds; chintz, principally dark grounds; Surat goods of most sorts ; and all kinds of 
European cutlery and iron. 

Exports. —The under-mentioned articles are to be procured here, though not in considerable quantities. 

Birds 1 nests. Gold-dust. Rattans. Tortoise-shell. 

Cassia. Pepper. Sago. Wax. 

and several kinds of wood. Precious stones may likewise be procured, but it requires great care to pre¬ 
vent impositions. In exchange, one pecul of wax is the usual exchange for two peculs of iron. Presents 
are necessary to the Sultan and principal men, according to the business transacted. 

SAMBOANGAN. 

The Spaniards are in possession of a considerable part of the south coast of the island, the principal 
place in which is Samboangan, in latitude 6° 43' North, and longitude 122° 14 East. Here is a strong 
fort, situated close to the sea, built of masonry, having a high wall. It is not very capacious, the church 
and many of the houses being without the walls; but the cannon of the fort commands them, and can so 
far oppose any approach that may be made that way by an enemy. There is also a plain of some extent 
towards the land. A swamp also on one side of the fort adds to its strength. The garrison consists of 
about 50 American Spaniards, a few native Spaniards, and about 100 of the natives of the Philippines. 
Their pay is about two dollars per month ; but provisions are reasonable, though not so abundant as in 
some of the neighbouring islands. The Spaniards transport convicts from Manilla to Samboangan. . 