

The returns from South America to Manilla consist of cochineal, sweetmeats, Spanish wines, milli¬ 
nery, and various European commodities, but to no very considerable amount, the principal part being 
silver, of which about 1,500,000 dollars are annually imported. 

These ships have always been an object of attention to the English in war time. Captain Cavendish 
took an outward-bound ship as she was going into the port of Acapulco, November 4, 1587. In 
December, 1709, one of the outward-bound annual ships was taken near Acapulco by Commodore Rogers; 
and on the 29th of June, 1743, an homeward-bound Manilla ship, called the Nostra Signora de Caba- 
donga, was taken by Commodore Anson; she had on board 1,313,843 dollars, and 35,682 ounces of 
virgin silver, besides cochineal and other commodities; and on the 30th of October, 1762, the Santis-, 
sima Trinidada was taken, bound from Manilla to Acapulco, reputed to be worth 3,000,000 dollars. 

RISE AND PROGRESS 

OF THE 

COMMERCE OF THE SPANIARDS WITH THE EAST INDIES. 

The discoveries made by the Portuguese soon raised the emulation of their neighbours, the Spaniards, 
who accepted the services of Christopher Columbus, a Genoese, who had made a proposition for disco¬ 
vering certain countries by sailing West from the Coast of Spain, and furnished him with the means of 
putting the design in execution; in consequence of which, he embarked on Friday, August 3d, 1492, and 
after discovering America, returned to Europe. 

Yon. II. 


3 K 



434 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE COMMERCE OF 


The King of Spain, on his return, made application to the Court of Rome, to have his title to these 
new-found countries, and such others as might be discovered, confirmed and secured. Upon this applica¬ 
tion, the Pope consented to bestow on his Catholic Majesty the sovereign dominion of the Indies, with 
supreme jurisdiction over all that hemisphere; and accordingly a bull was passed in the usual form on the 
2d of May, 1493, with all the same formalities, prerogatives, and powers that had been before granted to 
the Kings of Portugal in relation to the East Indies, Guinea, and part of Africa; and by another bull of 
the 3d of May, he granted them all the islands and continent already discovered, or that should be disco¬ 
vered, drawing a line from pole to pole, at the distance of 100 leagues to the westward of the islands of 
Azores, and those of Cape Verd; and that all that should be discovered beyond that line to the West or 
South, should appertain to the navigation and discovery of the Kings of Spain, provided it were not in the 
possession of any Christian Prince before Christmas Day; and that no person should pass over into those 
parts under penalties and censures. 

These bulls, which were intended to put an end to all disputes between the two Crowns, were so far 
from having that effect, that they heightened the animosities which were existing between them. It was at 
length agreed that commissioners should be appointed to settle the matter. After many conferences, they 
agreed on the 7th of June, 1493, that the line for settling the boundaries should be drawn 270 leagues far 
ther than that mentioned in the Pope’s bull, from the islands of Cape Verd westward; and that all beyond 
that meridian westward, should belong to Spain, and all to the eastward to Portugal; likewise, that what¬ 
soever should be discovered before the 20th day of the said month of June, within the first 250 of the 
said 370 leagues, should remain to Portugal, and -whatsoever should be discovered within the other 120 
leagues, should appertain to Spain for ever. 