

There are three royal palaces in the city; the first is on the north side towards the middle of the town, 
and consists of a large square, with several subdivisions and many buildings, adorned with a number of roofs 
according to the Chinese architecture, part of which ape gilt over. Within the walls of the palace, as well 
as without, are many large stables, in which the King’s elephants are kept. There is only one entrance 
into the palace, through which no person is admitted but on foot. The second palace is situated in the 
N.E* part of the city; it is of a square figure, but not near so large as the first, and is generally inha¬ 
bited by the elder Prince. The third palace is smaller than either of the other two, and situated in the 
west division of the city. There are a great number of temples in the city, the courts of which keep a 
regular proportion with the streets, and are full of pyramids and columns of various shapes. 

Round the city lie many suburbs, or villages, some of which consist of inhabited vessels rather than 
bouses, containing two or three families each: they remove them from time to time, and float them, par¬ 
ticularly when the waters are high, to places where fairs are kept, to sell their goods. The houses that 
stand upon firm ground, are generally built of bamboos, planks, and mats; those on the banks of the river 
stand on posts about six feet high, that the waters may freely pass under them. Each house is furnished 
with steps to come down in dry weather, and with a boat to go about when the waters are out. 

On the south side of the river, a short distance below the city, the Dutch factory and magazines stood; 
they were splendidly and conveniently built. Lower down, on the same side, were the villages of the 
Malays, Japanese, and other eastern nations. On the opposite side of the river are a number of Indian 
and Portuguese families, who have a small church. 

Siam was formerly a place of great trade. Mandelso, an intelligent traveller, gives the following 
account of it, as it was in 1639. Speaking of the city of Juthia, he says, 6C The principal commerce con¬ 
sists in stuffs brought from Surat and the Coast of Coromandel, all sorts of Chinese commodities, precious 
stones, gold, benjamin, wax, copper, lead, indigo, Calambac wood, Brazil wood, sapphires, rubies, &c. 
but, above all, deer skins, whereof they furnish the Japanese with about 50,000 every year; it likewise 
yields a great trade in rice, which they transport to all the neighbouring isles.’'—The English settled a 
factory here very soon after they visited India; but finding it expensive and unprofitable, it was withdrawn 
in 1623. It was re-established some years afterwards; but the country being involved in wars with its 
neighbours, and having seized some English property, the factors were withdrawn, and war declared 



440 


SIAM. 


against Slam in 1686. Matters were afterwards compromised; but It does not appear that the state of the 
country, or the trade, has since that period induced the Company to fix an establishment here. 