

The French in 1660 sent some missionaries to Siam, who were favourably received. Attempts 
were made to convert the King to Christianity, which failed of success. The French, however, were in 
great esteem, and a M. Faulkon was appointed Prime Minister. His ambition proved his ruin; he became 
so intoxicated with power, as to entertain a design upon the throne by deposing the King. In order to 
accomplish his design, it was necessary to call in foreign aid. He persuaded the King to send an embassy to 
France, which left Siam in 1685, and was favourably received by the reigning Monarch, Louis XIV; 
who, in compliance with the wish of the embassy, sent Jesuits, artists, military officers, and a number of 
troops, who were put in possession of Bankok, the key of the kingdom. Just as every thing was ready 
for the execution of his plot, it was discovered, Faulkon seized, and put to death, and the whole of the 
French expelled, since which period they have not been permitted to obtain a footing in the kingdom. 

For upwards of half a century past, Siam has been in a very unsettled state, arising from the wars in 
which she has been engaged, more particularly with the kingdom of Pegu. In 1759 the Birmans took 
from the Siamese the ports of Tavay,- Mergui, and Tenasserim; and in 1765 they invested the City of 
Juthia, which the King having abandoned, it surrendered on capitulation. A heavy mulct was imposed 
upon the inhabitants, the defences of the city were destroyed, and a Siamese Governor appointed, who 
took an oath of allegiance to the Birman monarchy, and engaged to pay an annual tribute; the Birmans 
then returned home. The Siamese soon drove out the enemy, and obtained possession of their capital and 
several of their sea-ports; but the Birmans were too powerful to be entirely expelled. The war continued, 
without any event of importance, till 1793, when overtures for peace were made by the Siamese; and a 
negotiation commenced, which terminated in the ratification of a treaty very favourable to the Birmans. 
By this compact the Siamese ceded the western maritime towns, as far to the southward as Mergui, including 
the entire possession of the coast of Tenasserim, with the important ports of Tavay and Mergui. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Coins. —Accounts are kept in tales, ticals, miams, fouangs, and cowries thus divided: 

800 cowries 1 fouang, called by the natives phuani. 

2 fouangs 1 m3 am, or mace. 

4 miams * ma 6 " 1 tical, or baat. 

4 ticals L1 tale, or tamluni. 

10 miams are equal to a China tale, and 5 Siam tales are always reckoned at 8 China tales. 

The coins are gold ticals, which pass for 10 silver ticals; silver ticals, miams, fouangs, and samporfs. 
The silver tical weighs 225\ grains, and is from 11 oz. 4 dwts. to 11 oz. 11 dwts. fine; thus it Is worth 
£2 5s. to £2 6s. sterling; these coins are often adulterated. Two ticals pass commonly for a Spanish dollar, 
and 21 ticals for a Dutch duccatoon. 

The fineness of gold and silver is expressed, as in China, by touches. 