

1733. In this year the King of Spain granted a charter to a body of merchants, under the name of 
“ The Royal Company of the Philippine Islands,” vesting in them, during a period of twenty years, the 
exclusive privilege of trading to both sides of Africa, and to all the countries beyond the Cape of Good 
Hope. The following are the most important articles of the charter: 

They may carry the royal colours upon their ships, which are exempted from all duties, in the same - 
manner as if they actually belonged to the Royal Navy; their officers also being on a footing of equality 
with those of the navy. 

They may export bullion without payment of duty. 

The Company are to pay at Cadiz a duty of 8 per cent, on spiceries, and 5 per cent, on all other 
species of goods imported by them. 

The capital to consist of 4000 shares of 1000 dollars each, to be subscribed at Cadiz. 

The business of the Company to be conducted by nine directors appointed by the King, each of them 
possessing twenty-five shares in the Company’s stock. 

The King subscribes for 400 shares. 

Notwithstanding the readiness with which this charter was granted, it does not appear that it was 
ever acted upon, but that the trade remained in the same channel in w T hich it had formerly been carried on. 

1764. After the failure of the scheme of prosecuting a trade with India from Spain by the Cape of 
Good Hope, there was no farther attempt made till this year, when the King’s ship, Buen Consejo, sailed 
from Cadiz, and passing round the Cape, arrived safe at Manilla, from whence she returned to Spain 
in 1766, with a valuable cargo of oriental produce. Several more voyages were made by the same 
route, the last of which was completed in 1784. 

1785. The privileges of the Royal Caraccas Company of Spain being at a close, it was thought a 
favourable opportunity of uniting the commerce of Asia and America with that of Europe. This plan 
was approved of by the King, who granted a charter, under the title of “ The Royal Company of the 
Philippines,” on the 10th of May, 1785, of which the following are the principal articles : 

The Company is established for twenty-five years, reckoning from the 1st of July, 1785. 

The capital to consist of 8,000,000 pesos sencillos (each about 3s, 4d. sterling) divided into 32,000 
shares of 250 pesos each, to which all persons of whatsoever description are admitted to subscribe. 

The King subscribes 1,000,000 dollars, exclusive of his stock in the Caraccas Company. 

The Caraccas Company to be incorporated into the Philippine Company, and all their property of 
every kind to be brought into the capital stock at a fair valuation. 

3000 shares reserved for the inhabitants of the Philippine Islands, to be subscribed for within two years, 

The shares transferrable by indorsement, and at such prices as the parties may agree for, 

3K2 



436 


RISE AND PROGRESS'OF THE COMMERCE OF 


The Company not to borrow money upon interest, but may raise an additional sum by subscription. 