


SIAM. 

At the head of the Gulf of Siam is the River Meinam, which empties itself into the sea by several 
months, forming a number of small low islands, which cannot be seen above three leagues off; but it is rather 
more elevated at the eastern branch, by which it may be known. This is the best navigable channel, although 
the bar has on it only 8 or 9 feet at low tide; there are IT or 18 feet on it at high water spring tides. The 
entrance is in latitude about 13° 30' North, and longitude 101° 15 East, and the anchorage is to the south¬ 
ward of the bar, about 3 or 4 leagues off. Ships intending to proceed up the river, ought to procure a 
pilot, A short distance within the bar, on the eastern bank, there is a fishing village and guard-house, 
where all vessels proceeding up the river, land their guns, ammunition, &c. From hence the navigation is 
safe to Bankok, and the soundings regular from 6 to 9 fathoms, mud. 

Bankok is about ten leagues from the sea; it is about 1§ mile long, and half that breadth. It is en¬ 
closed with walls on the east and south sides, which are washed by the river. At the point where the 
river divides into two branches, it is defended by a strong battery, and on the other side of the river is 
another fort, but of no considerable importance. The country hereabouts is well inhabited. 

Juthia, or Judia, the capital city and residence of the King of Siam, formerly stood on the place 
which is now called Bankok, from whence it was afterwards removed to the place where it now stands, 
being a low island about four miles in circumference. The country round is very flat, and cut through 
by many canals coming from the river, and by them divided into so many squares or islands, that the people 





SIAM. 


439 


pass from one part to another in boats. The city is surrounded with a brick wail, which on the north and 
south sides is about 25 feet high, clean, and in good condition, having numerous battlements; but the 
rest of it is lower, and much decayed. This wall is open in many places, where there are small gates 
towards the river. On the inside there are ramparts raised against it at different distances, for placing 
cannon upon them. At the lower end of the city is a large bastion, running some distance into the river, 
besides several small ones, furnished with cannon commanding the channel. To secure the city wall from 
being injured by the current, a narrow bank or quay is left, which is built upon in many places. Several 
large canals from the river run quite through the city, generally at right angles, and many smaller ones 
branch out from them. Ships may come from the river up into the town, and land their cargoes near the 
principal houses. The streets run in a straight line along the canals; some of them are tolerably large, but 
the greater part narrow, and in general very dirty; some are also overflowed at spring tides. The 
first street, on entering the city* rims westward along the wall; it contains the best houses, and is that in 
which the European factories formerly were. The middle street, which runs north, is well inhabited, and 
full of the shops of tradesmen and artificers. Numbers of Chinese and Moors reside here; their houses 
are all built of stone, very small and low, covered with flat tiles; those of the natives are in general of 
timber and bamboos, covered with palm-leaves. The many canals occasion a great number of bridges; 
those which are over the great canals are built of stone, but those over the smaller are generally constructed 
of wood. 