

The Company and their servants are prohibited from having any concern in the trade of the Acapulco 
ship; except that they may ship indigo and other produce of the islands for Acapulco, paying freight at 
the rate of 9 pesos for every quintal, and they may receive American produce in return, for which they 
shall also have freight in the ship. 

The Company are not to interfere with the interior commerce of the islands, nor in the commerce of 
the inhabitants with any part of Asia. 

The port of Manilla is declared free to all the nations of Asia and Europe, but only for the importa¬ 
tion of Asiatic merchandise; and they may take in return every article of Philippine produce, except 



THE SPANIARDS WITH THE EAST INDIES. 


437 


cotton, the exportation of which is reserved to the Company and the inhabitants of the islands; they may 
also receive foreign goods imported by the Company, and silver; the Philippine produce and foreign goods 
being exempted from duty on exportation, and the silver paying 3 per cent. 

The Asiatic goods, on being carried into the interior of Spain, to pay the same duties as Spanish mer¬ 
chandise. Tea, and other oriental merchandise may be exported from Spain by the Company, or by others, 
without paying any duty on exportation. 

The Company’s ships may sail from India or China direct for Spain, without stopping at Manilla. 

The Company may establish factories on any part of the continent of Asia. 

In order to prevent the King’s subjects from being disappointed of a proper supply of merchandise, 
which cannot easily be sent from Spain in time of war, and to open to the Company a channel for conti¬ 
nuing their commercial operations, they are authorized to send every year, during war, all kinds of mer¬ 
chandise of the Philippine Islands and Asia in general, to the value of 500,000 dollars from Manilla to 
Lima, Buenos Ayes, and other parts of South America,, for which they shall pay no duty in Manilla, and 
shall pay 13 per cent, at Lima on the cost of the Asiatic goods, but nothing on those of the Philippines; 
and they may carry back the returns in dollars, on which they shall pay a duty of 9] per cent This per¬ 
mission is to continue six months after a peace is announced at Manilla. 

The unsettled state of Europe since the above period, and the invasion of Spain by the French, hare 
prevented any steps being taken to prosecute this branch of commerce. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 


.O S © 1 

Siam, Cochin-China, and Tonquin, 


Siam—Juthia; Description-*"Coins, Weights, and Measures — Imports — Exports—Port Charges, Duties, Sfc. 
Provisions and Refreshments — Cancao — Corns, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports—Pub Oby— 
Pulo Condors — Cochin-China; its Extent, $*c.— Cambodia — Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and 
Exports — Saigong; Description—Quin-hone — Nhiatrang — Faifoe — Coins, Weights, and Measures— 
Imports — Exports—Mode of conducting the Trade — Port Charges, Sfc .— Turon — Hue, or Whey— 
Tonquin — Domea — Hean—Cachao—Coins, Weights, and Measures—Imports and Exports—Provisions 
and Refreshments — Hai-nan. 