

A statement of the Company’s affairs shall be printed every year for the satisfaction of all concerned; 

During the term of the Company’s privilege, no Spanish vessel, except those of the Royal Navy and 
the Company, shall be permitted to sail to the Philippine Islands, or any part of the East Indies; and no 
other ships than those of the Company shall be allowed to sail direct from Spain to the ports of South 
America, the Philippine Islands, or India. 

The Company’s ships may sail direct by the Cape of Good Hope, or they may call at Buenos Ayres; 
but as the principal advantage of the Company, as well as the State, consists in uniting the commerce of 
America with that of Asia, the King recommends to them to send their ships rather by Cape Horn. 

All merchandise, the produce of Spain or Spanish America, is exempted from customs, and 
foreign merchandise shipped on board the Company’s ships in Spain, shall pay 2 per cent, ad valorem. 

In order to enable the Company to obtain with facility the oriental commodities necessary for their 
trade, Manilla is declared a free port, during the term of the Charter, to all nations truly belonging to 
Asia, for the importation of their produce; and they may carry home in return either silver, European, 
American, or Philippine commodities, paying a duty of 3 per cent, on silver, 2J on foreign goods, and all 
productions of the Spanish dominions to pass free. 

The Company’s business to be conducted by a Junta of Direction, authorized by the King, and con¬ 
sisting of twelve Directors, who shall meet w r eekly for the dispatch of business. 

Many public bodies in Spain and America subscribed to the capital stock, and advanced money to 
the Company upon interest; but they never performed any thing of importance, 

1790. The King of Spain by a royal grant, dated August 15, 1789, gave permission to all Euro¬ 
pean vessels to import into Manilla every kind of Asiatic merchandise, but no European goods, and to 
receive in return the merchandise of Spain, Spanish America, and the Philippines, and any foreign goods 
imported by the Company, as well as silver. This permission was to continue three years, reckoning from 
September, 1790. 

1796. The war which took place in Europe, deranged the commerce of the Philippine Company; 
but their ships escaped capture, and generally arrived safe. The profits of their cargoes enabled the Com¬ 
pany to pay off the money they had borrowed, and to make some occasional dividends to the proprietors. 

1803. In this year King Charles IV. granted the Company a new charter, of which the following 
are the principal clauses. The terms of their privilege are extended to July 1, 1S25. 

The capital stock to consist of 12,500,000 pesos, in shares of 250 pesos each. 

The King makes up his property in the Company’s capital stock to 3,943,250 pesos. 

Foreigners may hold stock, and dispose of it, even if their Sovereigns be at war with Spain. 

Twenty shares entitle the holder to a vote, and no person can have more than one vote, but corpo¬ 
rate bodies may. 