

Cochin-China has experienced all the horrors of civil war for a series of years: The following historical 
sketch of the affairs of that distracted country is extracted from Barrow’s Voyage to Cochin-China, a 
work replete with information respecting this part of the giobe. 




446 


COCHIN-CHINA. 


« In the year 1774, in the 35th year of the reign of Caung-shung, an insurrection broke out in his 
capital, Quin-hone, or Quin-nong. This rebellion was headed by three brothers; the eldest, whose name 
was Yinyac, was a wealthy merchant, who carried on an extensive commerce with China and Japan; the 
name of the second was Long-niang, a General Officer of high rank and great command; and the third 
was a Priest. The first step they took was to get possession of the King, and to secure every part of the 
royal family who came within their reach; and all who fell into their hands, were immediately put to 
death. The City of Saigong was supposed to be favourable to the cause of the deposed Sovereign; an 
army was therefore marched against it, the walls were levelled with the ground, and 20,000 of its inha¬ 
bitants put to the sword. In their arrangements for the future government of this extensive country, it was 
determined that Yinyac should possess the two divisions of Chang and T>onai; Long-niang, that of Hue, 
bordering on Tonquin; and the youngest brother, to be High-priest of all Cochin-China. Long-niang 
had scarcely set foot in his capital, Hue, before he took occasion to quarrel with the King of Tonquin, 
who was a tributary vassal to the Emperor of China. The Bung, abandoning his army after the first 
engagement, fled to Pekin, to demand the assistance of the Emperor Kien-Long, who ordered an army 
of 100,000 men to march against the Cochin-Chinese. Long-niang, by means of his spies, was fully apprized 
of the movements of this immense army. He sent out detachments to destroy the villages, and lay waste 
the country through which it had to pass; and the Chinese army, before it had even reached the frontier of 
Tonquin, was distressed for want of provisions, and obliged to fall back. The consequence of which was 
a treaty, and Long-niang was recognised as King of Tonquin and Cochin-China, which were in future to 
be considered as tributary to the Emperor of China. 

“ At the period of the rebellion there resided at Court a French missionary, of the name of Adran, who 
called himself the Apostolic Vicar of Cochin-China. Caung-shung held him in such great consideration as to 
place under his tuition his only son and heir to the throne. Adran, the Prince, his wife, and infant son, on the 
first burst of the revolt, saw their only hope of safety was in flight. The King was already in the power of the 
rebels; but the Queen, the young Prince, with his wife and infant son, by the assistance of Adran, effected 
their escape, and arrived safe on an island near the coast, which they fortified in the best manner they 
could. Adran, having ascertained that the people of the southern provinces were still faithful to the 
interest of the lawful Prince, conceived the plan of applying to Louis XVI. of France for succours, in 
order to replace the lawful heir on the throne, on such terms as would not be objectionable to himself, and 
might eventually be highly advantageous to Prance. The King committed to his charge his eldest son, 
with whom Adran embarked for Pondicherry, and from thence to Europe, where he arrived in 1787. 
The young Prince was presented at Court, and treated with every mark of attention and respect; and the 
project of the missionary was so highly approved of, that in the course of a few months a treaty was 
drawn up and concluded between Louis XVI. and the King of Cochin-China. The principal articles of 
this treaty were as follow i 