

44 VII. In the event of His Most Christian Majesty being resolved to wage war in any part of India, 
it shall be allowed to the Commander in Chief of the French forces, to raise a levy of 14,000 men, whom 
he shall cause to be trained in the same manner as they are in France, and to be put under French discipline, 
Vm. In the event of any power whatsoever attacking the French in their Cochin-Chinese territory, 
the King shall famish 60,000 men, or more, in land forces, whom he shall clothe, victual, &c. 

Besides these articles, the treaty contained some others of inferior importance, but all of them greatly 
in favour of the French. Adran was promoted to an Episcopal See, under the title of Bishop of Cochin- 
China, and honoured with the appointment of Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to that 
Court. Matters being thus far concluded in Paris, Adran and his young charge set sail for Pondicherry 
in the Medusa frigate. He called on his passage at the Mauritius, where he found lying a ship of 50 guns, 
seven frigates, and some transports, and that the number of disposable troops was between four and five 
thousand. The ships were ordered to be equipped, and the troops to hold themselves in readiness for 
embarkation, the moment that an advice boat should arrive from Pondicherry, which he meant to dispatch 
on his arrival there, with orders to that effect. Some untoward circumstances occurred, which induced 
the Governor-General to send a fast-sailing vessel from Pondicherry to the Mauritius, with directions to 



445 


COCHIN-CHINA. 


suspend the armament until further - orders should be received from, the Court of Versailles; and the 
Revolution in the meantime breaking out in France, put a final stop to - all their ‘proceedings. 

« The unforeseen events that had put an end to the expedition, did not, however, deter the Bishop 
from the prosecution of Ms original plan.of re-establishing the lawful Sovereign of'Cochin-China, if still 
living, or the young Prince, if his father should he dead, on the throne of his ancestors. He had carried 
with him from France several officers, who'were to have held appointments in the new settlements. With 
some of these, as volunteers, the Bishop and Prince embarked in a merchant ship for Cape St. Jacques, 
where they hoped to receive intelligence of the King. Here they learned that the King had been induced 
to venture a landing in Ms dominions; that all ranks had Hocked with ardour to his standard; and that he 
had marched without interruption to Saigong, whose works of defence were immediately strengthened and 
put in good order. This favourable intelligence gave a spur to the exertions of the' Bishop and his son, 
who joined the King at Saigong in 1790, and they were followed by a vessel, which had been taken up to 
convey arms and ammunition. The greater part of the first year was occupied in fortifying Saigong, in 
recruiting and disciplining the army, and in collecting and equipping a fleet. 