

AH Chinese merchandise is in great abundance, from the number of junks which annually frequent 
the different ports; and it would be easy for an European nation established in Cochin-China, to procure 
there all the articles which they now go to China for, and purchase at a dear rate, besides being subject 
to a humiliating dependence on the Chinese. To the former advantages may be added the geographical 
position of the country with respect to the Philippine Islands, the Moluccas, Borneo, Celebes, Batavia, 
Malacca, kc. All the commerce of these different places might be at the disposal of a nation, which by 
its ports and resources must command the trade in those seas. 

3 M2 



452 


QUIN-HONE—NHIATRANG—FAIFOE. 


The Portuguese from Macao were the only people who frequented Cochin-China formerly; but the 
civil wars prevented them going there for twenty years, and it is only within these few years that they 
have resumed the intercourse, 

QUIN-HONE. 

This harbour, which is one of the best in Cochin-China, is formed on the left by a neck of sand about 
four miles long, and on the right side by steep mountains; its entrance is in latitude about 13° 45 North, 
and longitude 109° IT East. This was formerly a place of considerable trade, and all the neck of sand 
was covered with houses; its position is nearly in the middle of the kingdom, and in the neighbourhood of 
the City of Quin-hone, the capital of the country. The King of Cochin-China took this place from the 
rebels in 1792, and destroyed all their marine, consisting of five vessels of war, 90 large, and upwards of 
100 small gallies, and 337 pieces of artillery; since which period they have not been able to re-establish 
a marine of any consequence. 

NHIATRANG. 

Nhiatrang Bay is large, and well-sheltered; the anchorage is in S fathoms, with the entrance of the 
river N. W. about a mile; the river has a bar, and will only admit vessels drawing 7 or 8 feet water,' It 
communicates with the city, which is about five miles to the westward, and the capital of the province. 
The King has built a fortification in the European manner, and made it one of his arsenals. It was besieged 
In 1795 by a numerous army, who spent six months in endeavouring to take it; but on the arrival of the 
squadron, they were compelled to retreat. This place is well situated for trade, and is the grand mart for 
the commerce of this part of the coast. A considerable quantity of silk is manufactured here. 

FAIFOE % 

Is situated on the banks of a river, navigable formerly for large junks, but now only for vessels of 
about 100 tons burthen; the river communicates with Turon Bay. The junks lie about three miles from 
the town, in another river that communicates with that of Turon, where vessels of 200 tons burthen may 
enter easily. Opposite the river, about three leagues from the main, lies the island of Cham Calloa, in lati¬ 
tude 15° 54 North, on the west side of which is good anchorage; and here you ought to anchor till you 
have permission to trade, and if your vessel is small enough, to enter the river. The town of Faifoe is 
about ten miles from the sea; it was formerly very large, and a place of great trade, the houses built of 
brick, in regular well-paved streets. It was taken by the rebels, and destroyed during the civil wars, but 
is now regaining its former Importance. 