

Pulo Condors produces only sweet potatoes, small gourds, very bad water-melons, and black beans, 
all in small quantities. It produces,likewise many forest trees, some of which are fit for masts and yards 
to ships. This island lias no springs, affording only rain-water, which running down the mountains among 
the rotten leaves of trees, wherewith the ground is covered, acquires a certain tincture with an unwhole¬ 
some quality; therefore the inhabitants prefer the whitish water of the wells to the clear water from the 
mountains. Their only game consists in wild pigeons and a species of woodcock. The island abounds 
in reptiles, both troublesome and hurtful, consisting of snakes of a prodigious size and length, others 
smaller, and many of them venomous; likewise centipedes, scorpions, and a variety of insects; but the ants 
are the most troublesome of alfi getting into every thing, and spoiling whatever they enter. All these, 
with the sterility of the soil, and the unwholesomeness of the air, render Pulo Condore a wretched abode. 

In 1701 the English Company, after consulting the celebrated Captain Dampier, who had hove down 
and repaired his ship on this island, resolved to fix a factory here, and erect fortifications, for which stores 
vrere embarked; and in a short time after, a fort of brick and timber w r as erected, and an expectation 
held out by Mr. Catchpoole, the Resident, that the island would soon become a station for the China 
trade, from which the ships could be dispatched to the different ports in that empire to dispose of European 
goods, and to purchase Chinese articles, it. having been found impracticable to fix factories in a satis¬ 
factory mariner; and that China produce could be had at Pulo Condbre from the junks, at as cheap a 
rate as it could be purchased at the ports of Canton. On the 2d of March, 1705, the troops, which were 
principally Macassars, revolted, set fire to the Company's warehouses, and massacred Mr. Catchpoole and 
the greater part of the English on the island. To this treachery they were supposed to be instigated 
by the Cochin-Chinese, tbit they might get possession of the Company's treasure, estimated at 22,000 
tales. Thus ended a settlement which the East India Company had formed, on the presumption that it 
might become a market for the sale of English goods in China, and for obtaining China produce, without 
being exposed to the vexatious oppressions off the officers in the ports of that empire, to which all Euro¬ 
peans at this period were liable. : , !'■ 

COCHIN-CHINA. 

The whole extent of eoast from the Gulf of Siam to’that of Tonquin, which is commonly called the 
Coast of Cambodia, Tsiompa, and Cochin-China, are now under the latter Government, and formed into 
three divisions: the southernmost .extends from the Gulf of Siam to latitude about 12 a 0' North, and is 
called. Donai; the centre extends about three degrees to the northward, and is called Chang; the northern¬ 
most extends from thence to Tonquin, and is called Hue. There are few countries that contain so many 
excellent bays, roads, and harbours, or that are better situated for commerce, from its interior commu¬ 
nication by means of its numerous rivers.,, t t ' 