



CAMBODIA, 


449 


In 1804 the East India Company, seeing the importance of being on friendly terms with the King of 
Cochin-China, sent instructions to Canton to open a communication, and appointed one of their supra- 
cargoes to proceed thither. He found the Sovereign surrounded by Frenchmen, through whom the object 
of his mission was to be made known; and in consequence of their intrigues and misrepresentations, it 
completely failed, since which period no further attempt has been made to promote a friendly intercourse. 

The principal places on the coast are Cambodia, Saigong, Nhiatrang, Quin-hone, Turon, and Hue,. 

CAMBODIA. 


The city of Cambodia is situated about 80 leagues up a river of the same name, which disembogues 
into the sea by three principal branches. The westernmost is the proper one for large ships; its en¬ 
trance is in latitude about 9° 35 North, and 18 leagues N. by W. from Pulo Condore. The sands at the 
entrance render the navigation into the river difficult, particularly as they are liable to shift; it is there¬ 
fore prudent to anchor in 4 or 5 fathoms outside, until a pilot can be procured. 

The Portuguese were formerly in possession of the trade of Cambodia; but when it was reduced by 
the Siamese in 1717, the greater part of it was transferred to Siam. This river is said to have a communi¬ 
cation with the Meinam. In 1670 the English East India Company attempted a trade with this country, 
and sent a quantity of goods for the market; but having received information of the disorderly character of 
the people of Cambodia, it was soon relinquished. The trade is now carried on by the Chinese, and since 
the country has become subject to the kingdom of Cochin-China, it is seldom visited by Europeans. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

The only coin of the country are galls, a small piece of silver with characters on one side, of the 
value of about four-pence sterling. Spanish dollars and China cash are likewise current. The China 
pecul is the common weight in use. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 


Imports. —The Chinese junks, of which two or three come annually, import as follow: 

China-ware. Lackered ware. Sweetmeats. Tutenague. 

Dried fruits. Pepper, Silk goods. Tin. 

Few European commodities are saleable, except cutlery, hardware, and broad cloth. 


Exports. —The country abounds in elephants’ teeth, wood of various kinds, and some gold. The 
following list of the cargoes of several junks from Cambodia to Japan and Canton, -will shew the nature 
of the trade under the present government, and the principal articles of which the exports consist. 

The following is a list of the articles which composed the cargoes of three junks to Japan: 


Hare skins 
Cow hides v 
Tiger skins 
Fish skins^- 
Buck skins 
Buffaloes horns 
Hart skins 
Rhinoceros horns 
Elephants’ teeth 
Yol. II. 






92,710 in No. 
2,607 ditto. 

. 33 ditto. 
1,520 ditto. 
3,600 ditto. 
2,745 ditto. 
800 ditto. 
33 catties. 
7 peculs. 


3 M 


Cambodia nuts 
Black sugar 
White sugar. 
Sugar-candy. 
Sapan wood 
Wash 
Pepper 
Cloves 
Cossumba 