

(i I. There shall be an offensive and defensive alliance between the Kings of France and Cochin-China; 
they do hereby agree mutually to afford assistance to each other against all those who may make war 
upon either of the two contracting parties. 

“ II. To accomplish this purpose, there shall be put under the orders of the King, a squadron of 20 
French ships of war, of such size and force as shall be deemed sufficient for the demands of his service. 

u III. Five complete European regiments, and two regiments of native colonial troops, shall be em¬ 
barked without delay for Cochin-China. 

“ IV. His Majesty Louis XVI. shall engage to furnish within four months the sum of one million of 
dollars; 500,000 of which shall be in specie; the remainder in saltpetre, cannon, muskets, and other 
military stores. 



COCHIN-CHINA. 


447 


w V. From the moment the French troops shall have entered the dominions of the King of Cochin- 
China, they and their Generals, both by sea and land, shall receive their orders from the King of Cochin- 
China. To this effect the commanding officers of his Christian Majesty shall be furnished with instruc¬ 
tions to obey in all things, and in all places, the will of his new ally. 

<c On the other hand, 

I* The King ot Cochin-China, as soon as tranquillity shall be re-established in his dominions, shall 
engage to furnish for fourteen ships of the line such a quantity of stores and provisions as will enable 
them to put to sea without delay, on the requisition of the Ambassador from the King of France; and for 
the better effecting this purpose, there shall be sent out from Europe a corps of officers and petty officers 
of the marine, to be put upon a permanent establishment in Cochin-China. 

46 II* His Majesty Louis XVI. shall have resident Consuls on every part of the coast of Cochin- 
China, wherever he may think fit to place them. These Consuls shall be allowed the privilege of building, 
or causing to be built, ships, frigates, and other vessels without molestation, under any pretence from the 
Cochin-Chinese Government 

“ HI* The Ambassador of His Majesty Louis XVI. to the Court of Cochin-China shall be allowed 
to fell such timber, in any of the forests, as may be found convenient and suitable for building ships, fri¬ 
gates, or other vessels. 

u IV. The King of Cochin-China and the Council of State shall cede, in perpetuity to His Most Chris¬ 
tian Majesty, his heirs, and successors, the port and territory of Hansan (Bay of Turon and Peninsula), 
and the adjacent islands from Faifoe on the south to Hai-nan, on the north. 

a V* The King of Cochin-China engages to furnish men and materials necessary for the construction 
of forts, bridges, high roads, tanks, &c. as far as may be judged necessary for the protection and defence 
of the cessions made to his faithful ally, the King of France. 

<e VI. In case that the natives shall at any time be unwilling to remain in the ceded territory, they 
will be at liberty to leave it, and will be reimbursed the value of the property they may leave upon it. The 
civil and criminal jurisprudence shall remain unaltered; all religious opinions shall be free; the taxes shall 
be collected by the French in the usual mode of the country, and the collectors shall be appointed jointly 
by the Ambassador of France and King of Cochin-China; but the latter shall not claim any part of those 
taxes which will belong properly to His Most Christian Majesty, for the support of his territories. 