



SAIGONG. 


451 


you weigh, and proceed up, taking care to have boats ready to assist in towing, because the channel in 
several parts of the river is narrow, and the tide does not run regular through it. At some distance higher 
up, you will perceive the masts of the vessels and junks which are lying before the city, and the flagstaff 
of the place. You may anchor before the city; but the Portuguese and strangers prefer mooring below 
the city, because the King's godowns, or warehouses, are at that part, and it is near the grand China 
bazar, which is about three miles from the City of Saigong, and where strangers have a good deal of small 
trade. The King's vessels are a little higher up, opposite to the city gates, for expediting their communi¬ 
cation with the arsenal. The Chinese are principally on the opposite side of the river. The Portuguese 
generally salute when they anchor, but it is not returned; however, as the Cochin-Chinese are accustomed 
to this ceremony, every merchant vessel should conform to it, lest their silence should be construed into 
disrespect, as the Cochin-Chinese are very tenacious in this respect. 

At Saigon g you find linguists who speak the Indian Portuguese indifferently; they come very readily 
on board, and conduct you to the Mandarin, with whom strangers treat. This Mandarin obtains for you 
an audience of the King, informing you of the day. Although you are not obliged to make any presents, 
it would perhaps be imprudent not to do so, it being usual for them to receive presents from the Chinese; 
and the Portuguese who trade there, are disposed to do you all the bad offices in their power, that they 
may keep the trade in their owir hands, being jealous of any interlopers. Presents consist in general of 
articles not only curious, but useful, such as fire-arms of good workmanship, a curious watch or clock, sa¬ 
bres, or short hangers for the King; some pieces or cuts of red, green, yellow, or blue cloths, velvets, or 
rich European stuffs for the Mandarins; but you must not be too prodigal of your presents, and only give 
to those who can be of service to you. Those customary to make on your arrival are, to the King, to the 
Prince, his son, and to the Mandarin, who has the charge of strangers; the others are only to those who 
are employed by the King, such as the Chief of the Marine, Commandant of the Arsenal, Storekeeper, See. 
For them doth, large round hats, or any oiher trifles are sufficient, and these sparingly; for these men 
are very avaricious, and make no scruple to ask, through your interpreter, for what they may want, with¬ 
out any shame. You must be on your guard against the thievish disposition of the coolies and writers in 
delivering and receiving your cargo, where they will cheat you in the weights and measures with an 
effrontery and dexterity unequalled. 

The King of Cochin-China has a foundry for cannon here, this being his grand marine depot, where 
the vessels of war are built. The city suffered much during the civil wars, the fortifications having been 
demolished, and a great number of houses burnt; but it is now fast recovering. All the principal articles 
for ship-building are in great abundance, timber of every description, of excellent quality, and intelligent 
shipwrights; spars for large and small masts, dammer, oils of many sorts, very long rattans, excellent 
hemp, both for cordage and sail-cloth, and mines of iron and other metals. The southern provinces furnish 
rice, beetle-nut, and sugar in large quantities. The province of Donai produces indigo, and Cambodia. 
abounds in various woods for dying, gums of several descriptions, odoriferous woods, and oils for varnish, 
also fish and birds'nests; the middle provinces produce pepper, silk, cotton, aloes, and mines of silver, 
and those to the northward, eagle or agala-wood, tea, and gold mines. 