

In 1791 the rebel Long-niang died at Hue, leaving behind him a son about twelve years of age, to 
succeed him in the Government of Tonquin, and the northern parts of Cochin-China. The ratification of 
his title to the kingdom of Tonquin, by the Emperor of China, had been the cause of hostilities between 
the two brothers. In all their skirmishes Yinyac had been worsted, and the limits of his country reduced. 
In 1792 the King embarked with his fleet, which he had put under the direction of two French officers, 
and attacked that of Yinyac in the harbour of Quin-hone, the greater part of which they captured or de¬ 
stroyed. Yinyac did not long survive the destruction of his fleet, and his son succeeded to the government. 
Caung-shung,.in 1796, resolved to attack the capital by land; the young usurper was enabled to bring 
against him an army of 100,000 men, but the King completely routed it with a very inferior force, and 
took possession of Quin-hone, and the whole country, as far as Turon Bay, submitted to the arms of its 
lawful Sovereign. The other young usurper at Hue still kept possession of the kingdom of Tonquin, 
against which Caung-shung was preparing a formidable armament in 1800; but it does not appear, by any 
authentic accounts which have been received, that he has reconquered that country” 

Under the auspices of the Bishop, the King turned his attention to the improvement of his country. 
He established a manufactory of saltpetre, opened roads of communication between important posts and 
towns; he encouraged the cultivation of beetM and pepper, the plantations of which had been destroyed by 
the army of the usurper; built a large fleet, some of which were of European construction, and about 
twenty junks similar to those of China, and the rest gun-vessels and transports. 

In 1778 the Bengal Government gave permission to a mercantile house to send two ships laden with 
merchandise to Cochin-China, entrusting a sort of demi-diplomatic commission of a public nature to a 
gentleman connected with the firm of the house. The end of this appointment was the establishment of a 
commercial intercourse between the Company's settlements in India and Cochin-China,-and the attainment 
ofisueh privileges and advantages to British vessels as the Government might be inclined to grant .On 
their arrival at Quin-hone, the agent was introduced to Yinyac, who was now master of the province, and 
.was favourably received. After some explanation, it was settled that for vessels of three masts, 7000 quans 
should be paid (they allow 5 quans for a Spanish dollar); for those of two masts 4000, and for smaller ones 
2000 quans each. He afterwards set forth the conditions upon which English ships were to trade in his 
/dominions, and a licence for visiting any of his ports. They then proceeded to the northern part of 
Cochin-China, where they, were involved in hostilities with the rebel Government at Hue, and had a narrow 
escape of having their vessel seized, and themselves put to death. * . 