

The market-place is well supplied with all the vegetable produce of tropical climates, also large 
quantities of poultry, particularly ducks, and the harbour abounds with fish of various kinds. 


HUE, or WHEY. 

This city Is situated five leagues up a river, about 18 leagues to the KVW. of Turon harbour, in latitude 
&bout 16° 35 North; there is good anchorage off it In six fathoms. This city was formerly the residence 
of the King of Cochin-China. When the northern provinces rebelled, it became the seat of the rebel 
Government, but has again with the provinces been retaken by that King, who sometimes resides in it 
at the present time. 

The city is very extensive, being populous, and the houses straggling; several small rivers which meet here, 
make it very pleasant, and the conveyance from one part to another is mostly by water, for which purpose 
every substantial family keeps a commodious covered boat, and there are others for hire, that at any part 
may be had on call. The streets near the palace, which is a considerable distance from the beginning of 
the town, are regular, long, and very wide. The palace is fortified; it is an oblong square, the greater 
sides extending about half a mile, the lesser two-thirds of that distance. It is formed by a retaining wall, 
behind which a rampart of earth, 10 or 12 feet high. Is thrown up, with steps rising to a convenient level for 
the discharge of missile weapons; it has no embrasures, the guns being pointed through a kind of port¬ 
holes, made in the bottom of the retaining walls; the number mounted is about 60, the largest 9 pounders. 
For six or eight feet without the wall, short pointed bamboos, from six to twelve inches long, are driven 
obliquely into the ground; beyond these Is a ditch, eight feet wide, and as many deep, fenced with bam¬ 
boos growing, which is succeeded by another space with pointed ones driven in the ground, and the whole 
encompassed by a low checkered bamboo rail. The ground within the fort is divided by a number of 
brick walls meeting at right angles, and forming squares, some of which are allotted to the holding 
markets, others to granaries, quarters for the soldiers, stables for elephants, horses, &c. Hue has, however, 
suffered much during the civil wars, which have devastated the country. 

A considerable trade Is carried on here with Cancao, Saigong, and all parts of their own coasts, in 
vessels that are about 100 tons burthen, which can easily go up to the city, the river having a bar, on which 
are only two fathoms at low water. The Chinese carry on a great trade here, having sometimes 30 junks in 
the river at a time. Their imports and exports are similar to those enumerated at Faifoe. 

TONQUIN. 

The Gulf of Tonqtiin is bounded to the eastward by the Island of Hai-nan, to the northward by the 
coast of China, and to the southward by the coast of Cochin-China; it is about 35 leagues wide, having 
numerous small islands within it, two of which, in the bottom of the gulf', are marks for the two principal 
branches of Tonqtiin river. One of these mouths, or branches, is called Kokbo, and discharges itself into 
the sea near the N. W, corner of the gulf, in about 20° 6' North latitude; this branch has not above twelve 
feet water at its entrance; it is, however, frequented by the Chinese and Siamese vessels, who proceed up 
it to Hearn 
Yol. II. 