

1l tale ditto ditto 1 4 14j|“~ 

Winch is more than the China tale~v^v~~~—^— --—^ 0 0 %% 

Weights. —All goods are weighed by the Chinese dotchin. The King's weights hold out full 132 lbs. 
to a pecul; but it is necessary that every person should have a true dotchin of his owm 

Measures. —The Chinese covid and punta are in general use for measuring cloth. 

IMPORTS and EXPORTS. 

Imports. —The natives carry on little or no trade themselves by sea; it is therefore transacted by the 
Chinese and Siamese vessels, and occasionally by Europeans. The articles imported are 
Long-cloths, ordinary. ^ Caliatour wood. , ? Pepper. 

Allejars, red. Ginghams, fine and coarse. Salempores, white, ordinary. 

Betelles, white, ordinary. Guns, large and small. Saltpetre. 

Brimstone. Long-cloths, white, fine. Silver, in coin. 

Beetle-nut. Morees, white, fine. Silk, Cossimbuzar. 

Chintz, fine and coarse. Putchock. j Taffeties. 

English broad cloth and other European commodities are in little estimation; the only colours of the 
first at all regarded, are red, black, grass green, and blue. The East India Company formerly sent 
joiners’ work here to be lackered, and returned to Europe. 

For the commodities imported you receive silver or goods, according to contract; but the country 
being poor, the merchants have to wait two or three months for their returns. A new comer suffers many 
inconveniences, from their being no customs levied on goods imported. The Mandarins cause the ships 
to be rummaged^ and take what commodities they please, at their own rates, and for which there is no remedy* 

3 N 2 4 



460 


HAI-NAN. 


Exports.— The returns made to the Chinese and other traders frequenting Tonquin, are as follow: 


Aniseeds. 

Cassia. 

China-root. 

Earthen-ware. 


Galangal. 

Gold. 

Ginger. 

Lackered-ware. 


Musk. 
Paper. 
Rhubarb. 
Silk, raw. 


Silks, wrought. 
Timber, of sorts. 
Tortoise-shell. 
Worm-seeds. 


Of gold great quantities may be procured, about the same quality of China gold, from 92 to 94 touch, 
the priee varying from 11 to 13 tales of silver for 1 tale of gold. They manufacture many kinds of beau¬ 
tiful silks, pelongs, gauzes, &c. which are very cheap, and their lackered ware used to be more esteemed 
than that of Japan. For these goods it is necessary to make an advance of one-third, or a half to the 
merchants who are poor, and have no goods by them. The ships are generally obliged to wait till they 
are brought from the interior. 

No customs inwards are paid, but merchants are obliged to make considerable presents to the King 
and his Mandarins. On silks and lackered ware exported, a duty of 5 per cent, is levied. 


PROVISIONS Am REFRESHMENTS. 


Bullocks, sheep, goats, and hogs are to be procured; likewise ducks, geese, and fowls, with a variety 
of wild game; and of fruits they have plantains, melons, pine-apples, guavas, &c. The river and bay 
abound with fish, and turtle is occasionally to be met with. 


HAI-NAN. 

This island, which bounds the Gulf of Tonquin to the eastward, extends about 55 leagues in a N. E. 
and S.W. direction, and is about 25 leagues in breadth. It is subject to the Chinese Government. The 
N.W. coast is but little known to Europeans. On the south coast are several fine bays, affording 
good anchorage and shelter from the N. E. monsoon, and which have occasionally been visited by ships; 
that have met with disasters in the China seas. 