

The English settled a factory at Tonquin in 1672; but the report of their Resident on the trade shewed 
the difficulty of carrying it on with any advantage. He stated 4C that the Government was arbitrary and 
absolute; that the powers of the Mandarins were unlimited, provided they met the views of the King, and 
therefore were vexatious to the trader; that the natives were avaricious, jealous, and vindictive; hence, judging 
from the practice of the Dutch, who for a long time had traded at the place, the import of such goods 
as the King might require, must be complied with, and the sales consist of such articles as were in common 
demand; that therefore a considerable stock would be required for a participation in the trade, the profits 
from which were uncertain; that the temptation to the Company to continue this speculation, was the pro¬ 
spect of obtaining raw silk from Japan, and bringing silver, gold, and other articles in return; that the sale of 
English cloth was very uncertain, from the dress of the different ranks at Tonquin being fixed, and from 



CACHAO. 


459 


•the arbitrary power, from the King to tlie Mandarin, being such as to render it hazardous to expose goods, 
winch might tempt avarice without producing profit; on the whole, that the establishment of trade at 
Tonquin was rather to be considered as an expedient for facilitating an intercourse with Japan, than in 
itself a means of procuring imports for Europe, or sales of European produce. Notwithstanding this un¬ 
favourable report, the Company continued to persevere in the trade; but after very heavy losses, were in a 
few years obliged to withdraw the establishment. The Dutch trade was first interrupted in 1664, and their 
factories withdrawn, but settled again at the request of the King; and were continued, though not without 
many disputes between the two nations, for about forty years, when they were entirely withdrawn, and the 
trade carried on only by ships occasionally sent there. 

COINS, WEIGHTS, and MEASURES. 

Coins. —Cash are the only coins here, and are of two sorts, large and small; 600 large and 1000 small 
cash are accounted I maradoe. Accounts are kept in tales, mace, and can&areens, all of which are regu¬ 
lated by the price of the maradoes and copper cash. 

The price of silver is always variable here, on account of its rising and falling according to the quan¬ 
tity brought in; by this the Chinese make considerable advantage. Sometimes they allow 2S maradoes 
for 1 bar of silver of 10 tales weight, and at others not more than 21. All the Mexico and Pillar dollars 
imported are run into bar silver, without any distinction; these bars should weigh 10 tales each. They fre¬ 
quently put alloy into them, so that they are seldom so good as the dollar silver; though in payments you, 
are obliged to make them an allowance of 3 per cent., to make it their standard, as they call it. 

oz. dwts. grs. 

10 tales weigh, with the 3 per cent, included —1 2 6 2-£ T 