

The greatest difficulty here is (as probably you are not acquainted with their language), the trans¬ 
acting all your affairs through the means of a linguist, who is always with you, and lives in your house; 
they are generally paid 2 or 300 quans a season, besides perquisites, which it will be difficult to hinder 
them of. If on your arrival at Eaifoe, you are greatly at a loss for want of one till you go to Court, you 
will likely find somebody that may do for two or three days about the Portuguese house, who generally 
at all times of the year have people at Faifoe; if not, it will then be proper to make application to the 
governing Mandarin to send for one from Court, where the professed ones generally reside. It is a very 
material point to keep him in your interest, for on that your success greatly depends; but whoever aims 
at having an,easy and smooth successful trade with the Cochin-Chinese, must as soon as possible begin to 
learn their language, which may be easily attained. Though the Chinese characters are used to express the 
same meaning and things, yet the speech is quite different, and of a much easier and plainer expression. 

TURGN. 

Cape Turon, in latitude 16° 5 North, and longitude 108° 15 East, is the eastern extremity of the 
peninsula that forms the east side of Turon Pay; and Turon Island, in latitude 16° II' North, is close to 
the point of land that forms the N. W. side of its entrance. This is an excellent harbour, where ships are 
sheltered from all winds. At the southern part of the harbour is the mouth of the river that leads to 
Turon town, on the point of which is a watch-tower, consisting only of four very high pillars of wood, 
over which a very slight roof is laid, and a floor fixed upon cross posts into the pillars towards the upper 
ends; to this floor the watchman ascends by a long ladder, and there he can readily see through the 
harbour’s mouth any vessels to the northward, and those which are to the southward over the isthmus. 
Near the watch-tower is an office where boats and small vessels going into the harbour are stopped to 
be examined. ~ 

The town of Turon, to which, as well as the harbour, the natives give the name of Hanson, is situated 
m the western bank of the river, a few miles from its entrance; it is now little better than a village. 





HUE—TONQUIN. 


457 


t>ul it is said to have been, during the peace and prosperity of the country, a considerable place of trade, 
and some of the European nations had factories here ; but there has been no trade carried on by 
Europeans for some time past, except now and then a vessel frssa Macao stops in her way to or from 
Faifoe, with which river that of Turon is said to communicate. The ruins of some large and good houses 
are visible; but what remain are low, chiefly built of bamboos, and covered with palm-leaves or rice-straw, 
and scattered about In an irregular manner, being interspersed with trees and small gardens. The neigh¬ 
bourhood is cultivated with rice, tobacco, and sugar-canes. 