



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

China. 


South Coast of Ckina—Macao; Description—Imports and Exports—Provisions and Refreshments—Bocca 
Tigris*—Whampoa — Canton; Description — Coins, Weights, and Measures—Commerce of Canton — Secu¬ 
rity Merchants—East India Company's Establishment of Supracargoes, their Allowances, fyc. — Company's- 
Imports from England—Remarks thereon — Company's Exports to England—Factory Expences , fyc.— 
Imports from England in Private Trade of the Commanders and Officers of the Company's Skips—Exports to 
England in Private Trade—Articles imported and exported in the Company's Ships—Commerce with the 
British Settlements in India—Articles of Import and Export, and their Value—Articles imported and 
' exported in Country Ships—Commerce with Foreign Europe—Commerce with the United States of America 
—Quantities of Tea exported from Canton—Commerce with Cochin-China, Siam, 8?c.—Articles of Import 
and Export—Commerce with the Eastern Islayids—Commerce with Japan—Commerce with Russia — 
Price Current of Imports and Exports—Port Charges—Mode of measuring the Ship—Import and 
Export Duties—Pilotage—Provisions and Refreshments—-Articles procurable at Canton, with Directions 
how to chase them—Agates — Alum—Amomum Veru-m—Angustura Bark — Aniseeds, Star — Ben, or Behen 
—Blood Stones — Camphire — Carmine—Cassia Lignea—Cassia Fistula—Cassia Buds—Cassia Oil— 
Cassnmanar—China Root — China-ware — Cinnabar — Contrayerva — Copper , white — Corundum — Cubebs— 
Dragon's Blood — Galangal — Gamboge — Ginger — Ginseng — Gold—Human Hair—Hurse Skins—Indian 
Ink — Jet — Lake—Lackered Ware — Mats—Mother of Pearl Articles — Musk—Musk Seed — Nankeens — 

* Onyx — Opal—Ostrich Feathers — Plants, how to preserve — Quicksilver — Rhubarb — Sea-weed — Seeds, how to v . 

preserve — Shells — Silk, raw — Silks,wrought — Soy — Sugar-candy — Teas — Tobacco — Toys — Turmeric- 
Turquoise—Turpentine — Tutenague — Varnish — Vermilion — Ultramarine — Unicer ns' Horns — Wangheet 
f—North East Coast of China—Amoy — Chinckew—Chusan—Ningpoi — Nankin, 


THE south coast of China, from the Gulf of Tonquin to the entrance of Canton river, lias several 
bays and harbours, capable of receiving large ships; but they are not visited by Europeans, in consequence 
of their exclusion from all ports in the empire except Canton, unless in cases of distress. The principal 
place is Tienpak, in latitude 12° 22' North, and longitude 111 0 13' East, where immense quantities of salt 
are made, and several hundred junks are employed transporting it to Canton and the neighbouring places. * 
The entrance of the river of Canton is fronted by an Archipelago of islands, extending to the N. E. 
The southernmost of these is the Great Ladrone, in latitude 21° 57' North, and longitude 113° 44' East. 
The approach to this river is very safe, and there are no hidden dangers. Ships frequently push through 
the nearest convenient channel for Macao roads, without waiting for a phot to conduct them. 



462 