


3 N 



DOMEA—HEAN—CACHAO. 


455 


DOMEA, 

The principal branch of Tonquin rivej, falls into the Gulf, about 20 leagues N.E. from the former, in 
latitude 20° 50' North. It has a bar liable to shift; therefore ships that come in hither, commonly wait for 
a pilot to direct them. The pilots are fishermen, who live at a village called Batsha, near the mouth of the 
river, so situated, that they can see the ships waiting for pilots, and hear the guns that are fired to give 
notice of their arrival The mark to approach the river, is a mountain inland, called the Elephant, bearing 
about N. \\\ by W. and when a small island, called Pearl Island, on the eastern side of the road, is about 
N. N. E. three miles distant, it will be proper to anchor, and wait for a pilot. The depth of the river is 
various in different seasons, being 26 feet in the northerly monsoon, and not above 18 in the southerly 
one; it is about a mile wide at its entrance, but becomes narrower as you proceed up. About 6 or 7 
leagues up, is the town of Domea, which is a handsome place, situated close to the shore on the right hand 
side of the river; it consists of about 100 houses. The Dutch ships that trade here, usually lie before 
the town; but the English used formerly to proceed about three miles farther up, at a place where there 
are no houses, and erect bankshalls during their stay. The trade of the kingdom being carried on at Cachao, 
you proceed in country boats from this place; and it requires a sharp look-out to prevent your goods being 
plundered by the boatmen. 

MEAN 

Is about 40 miles above Domea, and 60 from the sea; it is situated on the east side of the river, and 
is a town of considerable extent. Here the Chinese merchants reside; they -were formerly settled at Cachao, 
but removed from thence by order of the Tonquinese Government, and prohibited from again returning: they, 
however, go there to buy and sell goods, but do not make it their constant residence. The French had 
formerly a factory here, and their Bishop had a neat house at the north end of the town, close to the river, 
encompassed with a high wall A little before reaching Hean, the main stream of the river divides itself 
into the two channels of Rokbo and Domea, up the former of which the Chinese and Siamese vessels come 
and anchor before Hean. The Governor of the province resides here, who gives his chop or pass to every 
vessel proceeding up or down the river. 

CACHAO, 

The capital of Tonquin, is about twenty miles from Hean, or eighty from the sea; it is situated on 
the west side of the river, is very large, but without any fortifications; many of the houses are built of 
brick, but the generality are of mud and timber, thatched with palm-leaves. The principal streets are 
wide, and mostly paved with small stones. The Kings of Tonquin made this city their constant residence, 
and there are several palaces, the principal of which is surrounded with a wall 16 or 17 feet high, and very 
thick; it is faced on both sides with brick. There are several gates to it, but the principal one faces the city. 