

Middling sort, similar to Manilla sugar ~~_3 ditto ~2 ditto -™2 ditto —S ditto ditto. 

Brown powder sugar--— - 2 ditto ditto_2 ditto ^2 ditto ditto. 

The sugar-candy is the finest in the world, and is much esteemed at China, forming a considerable 
part of the cargoes from hence to China; it is manufactured principally in this neighbourhood. 

The sugar is brought down for sale in the months of June, July, and August'; but the greatest 
quantity in the end of July, when the Chinese are busy buying it up to send to China. The Portuguese 
factor that has permission to stay, frequently buys in the latter end of August and the beginning of 
September, after the Macao ship and all the junks are gone, considerably under the prices above men¬ 
tioned. The women will sometimes be sitting in the street with small samples; but they will generally 
come to the houses of those who are considerable buyers, and after the price is agreed by the sample, 
they bring it all into your house, and there, before it is weighed, each basket is tried by a long taper 
bore, by which you easily detect any fraud. It is always in very unhandy baskets, of four or five cwt. 
each, and each parcel, which maybe from 5 to 15 baskets, of a different sort; for which reason it is 
customary to start all your sugars, and to mix well together what comes nearest in quality, and at your 
own expence repack it into more convenient parcels; the whole charges of repacking it into baskets, 
shipping, &c. do not exceed 50 cash per pecul. 

They have plenty of silk, which they manufacture into various articles for their own use; but if they 
had otherwise a demand for that commodity, they would soon bring it to as great perfection as in China. 
The price of raw silk is about 200 quans per China pecul of 1334 lbs. and wrought silks of many kinds 
are as cheap as in China. * 

Gold is to be procured m considerable quantities; it chiefly comes through the hands of the King, 
and is run into small bars or ingots of 10 tales each, which having the King’s stamp, always pass in 



FAIFOE. 


455 


China at 94 touch, for such as have not, cannot be depended on. It was formerly sold for 150 to 190 
quans per bar; but since tutenague cash has been so much used, it has risen from 200 to 220 quans per bar. 
Many other articles of export are enumerated in the cargoes of the Japan and China junks. 

The women here are the principal merchants. They are very industrious, and make no scruple to 
converse and deal with strangers; and your household affairs will never be rightly managed until under 
the care of one of them, who will be very faithful in the tedious work of counting your cash; but you 
must never take one without being well recommended. She should be a Chinaman's widow, to be 
received from her parents or friends. Take great care of tampering with your linguist, and make him. 
believe you put a great confidence in him, though you must never trust him. Learn some words of the 
language as soon as possible, that you, with your female housekeeper, may be able to transact some business 
without always troubling your linguist. 