

30 2 



46S 


CANTON. 


whom the English, having laid open the injuries received, and the sincere intent they had to establish fair 
trade and commerce, and were no way willing (but in their own defence) to oppose the China nation, pre¬ 
sented certain gifts, and dismissed him to his masters, who were the Chief Mandarins, riding about a point 
of land not far from the ships, who, being by him duly informed thereof, returned him again the same 
night with a small jouncke, and full authority to carry up such as should be appointed, to Canton, there 
to tender a petition, and to conclude further upon the manner of their future proceedings. Two of the 
English passed up the river, and the next night arrived at the city, anchoring close under the walls, in sight 
of the palace of Champin, the Admiral-General, and on the morrow, having procured a petition to be 
formally drawn up, by the means of the said Norettv, they were called ashore, and passing through a treble 
guard, and at length coming in sight of the Chiefs assembled, they were willed, according to the custom 
of the country, to kneel; when the principal holding up the petition at large, extended upon his head, 
delivered it to Noretty, to carry up to Champin; the contents whereof being so reasonable, as before specified, 
he presently consented unto, and promised his utmost assistance; blaming the treachery of the Portugals, 
whom he taxed as authors, by their slanders, of all the precedent inconveniences. They returned from 
Canton fully satisfied, and hereupon the Chinese guns were landed and delivered into their hands; their 
jounckes freely dismissed, and a seeming peace on all sides ensued.” 

This relation shews under what adverse circumstances the English were first introduced into China. 

China was again visited in 1673 by an English ship that had been refused admission into Japan. She 
arrived at Macao September the 13th, and though, from the intrigues of the Portuguese, a factory was 
not allowed to be established, the vessel was careened, and the cargo landed ; but under such restrictions, 
that trade could only be attempted through the Portuguese ; and not having any silver on board, the only 
medium the Chinese w T ould accept, the sale of the goods was partial, and their purchases inconsiderable. 
This led to a more intimate knowledge of the Chinese trade. In 1677 a factory was established at Amoy, 
and in 167S the Viceroy of Canton offered the English at Bantam permission to trade; in consequence of 
which, a vessel was dispatched with a small cargo: but the Portuguese at Macao, by bribing the Viceroy, 
succeeded in preventing their obtaining any part of the trade of the port. In 16S0 the Tartars having 
driven the Chinese from Amoy, the Company's factory was destroyed, and their servants escaped to Ton- 
quin and Bantam. For several years all Europeans were excluded from trading with China; but on the 
Tartars having succeeded in subduing the whole of the provinces, the Emperor in 1685 issued an edict, 
permitting a trade with Europeans. In 1699 two ships were sent from England to China, under the 
management of supracargoes; and in the following year the English obtained permission to trade at Chusan, 
on payment of 2 per cent, in full of all duties, and a rent of five tales per month for a house and warehouses. 
In 1702 an order arrived from the Emperor to quit the port, which was accordingly done, and the Com¬ 
pany's servants retired to Batavia. An attempt was made to re-establish the factory at Amoy in 1702, but 
without success. Ships occasionally visited this place and Chusan; but the oppressions and extortions they 
were subject to, induced the Company to relinquish the trade altogether. 