

In 1759 the Company’s resident supracargoes sent a small vessel to Tiensir, the seaport of Pekin, 
with a remonstrance to the Emperor on the grievances which the Europeans suffered; in consequence of 
which, certain Canton Hong-merchants were thereupon appointed a Cong-Hong, or Company, with whom 
only the Europeans were to transact business at Canton; and all business transacted by Europeans by 
others than this association, or Cong-Hong, became contrary to law, except with licensed shopkeepers in 
one single street, which was separated by a gate from the rest of Canton, only open to the wharf on the 
banks of the river wiiere the European factories are situated. 

At first the Hong-merchants traded jointly; for although at the time the Europeans declared that 
they would transact no business with them conjointly, yet their separate transactions were communicated 
to each other, and concluded in the Cong-Hong. In 1770, on application of the supracargoes, supported 
by a large sum of money, the Cong-Hong was abolished; how r ever, since that period the Hong-merchants, 
or members who constituted the Cong-Hong, have continued to transact business on their separate indi¬ 
vidual accounts, though they still remain a body, and assemble for purposes of a general concern, such as 
defraying the expences of presents, &c. But in course of time, by mutual consent among themselves, 
before this change took place in 1770, the members of the Cong-Hong also transacted business separately 
for their individual concern, and in this capacity became again the broker between the European and the 
country merchant, as before. laxity of regulation, other Chinese beside Hong-merchants have come 
to transact business with Europeans; but still all such transactions are, in the eye of the law, illicit and 



470 


CANTON. 


contraband; and as no goods can be shipped but by a Hong-merchant, all others trade in the name, and 
under the protection of some particular one of them, who receives a consideration on that account. 

At this period a large sum of money was owing by the Chinese to the English merchants in India, 
and other British subjects, which had been lent at various times, to the extent of 3,808,075 Spanish dol¬ 
lars. The Chinese debtors failed; in consequence of which, representations were made to the Emperor. 
He observed, that probably Europeans might not be informed of the laws of the empire, which forbid 
foreigners making any loan to his subjects; and although he cautioned them in the strongest manner to 
avoid such practices in future, he directed enquiry to be made. The result was, the debts due by two of the 
Hong-merchants being adjusted, with interest to the end of the season 1779-80, were found to amount to 
about <£400,000, one half of which was immediately lopped off, and payment of the remainder was ordered 
to be made in ten years, in equal instalments, but without interest. The funds for the payment were not 
drawn from the Hong-merchants, but from a tax laid for the purpose upon the European trade with China. 