

Immediately on a ship's arrival, two hoppo, or custom-house boats are stationed alongside, one on each 
quarter, to prevent clandestine trade; and no goods are landed, or received on board, without their per¬ 
mission; and they remain with the ship till her departure from the second bar, homeward-bound. 

CANTON. 


This city is situated on the north side of the river, in latitude 23° 7 North, and longitude 113 d IT 
East; it is defended towards the water by two high walls, having camion mounted, and two strong castles 
built on two islands in the river; on the land-side it is defended by a strong wall and three forts. The 
city wall is about five miles in circumference, and on the east side has a broad and deep ditch close to it. 
It has several gates; within side of eacli is a guard-house, and no European is permitted to enter. 

The English factories extend a considerable distance along the banks of the river fronting the city, 
at about 100 yards distance from the waters side: they consist of large and handsome houses, each having 
a flagstaff before it, on which is hoisted the 'flag of the nation to which it belongs. The English factory 
far surpasses the others, both in elegance and extent; it has a large verandah, reaching nearly down to the 
water's edge, raised on handsome pillars, paved with square marble slabs, and commanding an extensive 
view both up and down the river; adjoining to this verandah is the long room, where the Company's 
table is kept for their supra cargoes, to which the Commanders of their ships had formerly free access, but 
at present have factories of their own, and only visit the Company's by invitation. 

The streets in the suburbs are in general very narrow and confined, and paved, The principal one is deno¬ 
minated China-street; it contains nothing but shops, in which are to be met with the productions of every 
part of the globe, and the merchants are in general extremely civil and attentive. Each trade seems to have 
a particular street allotted to it; no dwelling-house is to be seen in the suburbs; all are shops, which seldom 
consist of more than two stories, the lower floor being the place where the goods are deposited for sale, and 
the rest of the house serving as a warehouse. At night they all retire inside the city. 

The river is somewhat broader than the Thames at London Bridge; and for the space of four or five 
miles opposite Canton, is an extensive wooden town of large vessels and boats, stowed so close together, 
Yon. II. 3 0 



406 


CANTON. 


that there is scarcely room for a large boat to pass. They are generally drawn up in rants, with a narrow 
passage left for vessels to pass and repass. In these vast numbers of families reside, who betake themselves 
to this mode of living. In the middle of the river, the Chinese junks which trade to the Eastern Islands, 
Batavia, &c. lie moored head and stern; some of them are of the burthen of 600 tons. 

The erew r s of the Company’s ships used to be permitted to pass three days at Canton; but in conse¬ 
quence of their misconduct, and the risks that have been incurred, the liberty is now abolished. 