

About thirty miles above Macao is Lintin, where ships of war anchor, as they are not permitted to 
proceed to Whampoa. This island is remarkable for a high peak, which is in latitude 22° 24' North. The 
principal village is on the S. W. side of the island, and the anchorage is about 1| mile from the beach* 
The watering-place is half a mile from a village at the foot of the peak, where the stream runs through 
a bamboo Into the casks; but It is of a very indifferent quality. Men of war lying here, generally receive 
their supplies of provisions from Macao. 


BOCCA TIGRIS, 

Or mouth of the Tigris, so called from the appearance of one of the islands at its entrance, which is 
between Ananhoy Fort on the east side, a small semicircular battery, nearly level with the water’s edge, 
mounted with a few guns, and the Whangtong Islands, on the principal or northernmost of which there is 
a fort with some trees, from whence a Mandarin comes off to examine your chop, and leaves one or two 
revenue officers on board, who remain till you arrive at Whampoa; and here, if necessary, twenty or thirty 
small boats are hired to tow the ship, or to be stationed on the shoals in passing up the river. Should it be 
night-time on reaching the Bocca Tigris, the ship must anchor below the fort till daylight. 

About ten miles to the northward. In latitude 22° 5o North, is the Second Bar, where the Com- 
.panys ships complete their cargoes for Europe; the bar being considered dangerous, as well as another 
spot about midway between the Second Bar and Whampoa. 



WHAMPOA—CANTON. 


465 


WHAMPOA. 

The place where the ships anchor, is in latitude 23 d 6' North, and is formed on the south side by 
Danes and French Islands, and to the northward by the eastern part of the island, on which the town of 
Whampoa is situated, which is low, and sometimes overflowed, and is called Banksliall Island, from its 
being the spot where bankshalls or storehouses are built to contain the ships* 1 stores, overhaul the rigging, 
repair casks, &c. which are under the charge of one of the junior officers. The storehouses are built of 
bamboos and mats; and on a ship leaving Whampoa, are taken down by the comprador, and a fixed sum 
charged for the materials. 

On Danes Island a portion of the ship's crews are occasionally permitted to go on shore for recreation 
on Sunday evenings, who return at a fixed hour; and for which the English ships pay 12 tales each month; 
This arrangement took place in 1754, when, in a quarrel between the English and French, a seaman was 
killed. The French keep on another island, called French Island, where they generally have their bankshalls. 

The Commanders of all European ships are allowed, as a great favour, to wear a flag in their boats, 
which prevents their being stopped at the hoppo, or custom-houses, of which there are several between 
"Whampoa and Canton; but all other boats, whether belonging to ships, or the Chinese, must have a 
chop, which is renewed at every custom-house in their way up to Canton. It has occasionally happened that 
some Commanders have abused this favour: this ought carefully to be avoided, more particularly with such 
a people as the Chinese. 