

The Portuguese first visited China in 1517, when the Viceroy of Goa sent a squadron of eight ships, 
under Ferdinand Andrada, laden with merchandise, having on board Thomas Pereira, an Am bassador 
from Emanuel, King of Portugal. On their arrival at the entrance of the river of Canton, the fleet was 
stopped, and only two permitted to pass up the river; on board of one was the Ambassador and the Com¬ 
modore. Andrada was a man of strict hpnour, so that he soon gained on the Chinese, notwithstanding 
their natural aversion to strangers. By his exactness and probity he drew them to trade, and brought 
them to have great confidence in him; but what had the greatest effect, and might have established 
the commerce of the Portuguese, to the exclusion of all other nations, was Ins giving notice, a little 
before his departure, that at such a time he meant to sail, and that if any had demands upon him or any of 
those belonging to him, they might apply, and receive satisfaction. This was an instance of probity new to 
the Chinese, but so agreeable, that they made him great professions of friendship, and assured him that they 
would willingly trade with his nation, in hopes of meeting always with the Eke usage; but so fair a pro¬ 
spect did not long continue* and.even the first had very near proved the lastvoyage of the Portuguese to 



MACAO. 


463 

China, The commanders of the ships that were left a i the month of the river, landed, and began a trade 
with the natives; but presuming on their power In India, treated the Chinese with great insolence and 
iniquity. They brought on shore several pieces of cannon, and then took what they pleased at their own 
rates, and treated with the pirates for such as they had taken prisoners, of whom they made slaves. The 
Viceroy of the province quickly assembled a great naval force, with which he surrounded the Portuguese 
squadron, and would infallibly have taken them, if a storm had not arisen, which scattered the Chinese fleet, 
and enabled the Portuguese to return to Malacca with more profit than honour. The Ambassador Pereira 
proved the victim of this misconduct; he was confined in prison, where he afterwards died. 

It was many years before the Chinese would admit the Portuguese to trade with them; but at 
length they allowed them to send some ships to the Island of Sanciam, w’here they were permitted to 
erect tents on shore for a short space of time, in which they disposed of their merchandise. At length, 
towards the close of the sixteenth century, a favourable opportunity offered, not only of restoring their 
commerce, but of procuring a permanent establishment in China. The pirates committed great ravages on 
the coast, and having acquired a large force, made themselves masters of the port of Macao, and from thence- 
not only blocked up the port of Canton, but also besieged the city. The Mandarins in this distress had 
recourse to the Portuguese, wdiose ships were then at the Island of Sanciam. They readily offered their 
assistance, and not only forced the pirates to raise the siege, but pursued them, to Macao, which they 
took, and where the Chief of the pirates was killed. The Viceroy having made a report to the Emperor 
of this extraordinary sendee, he out of gratitude published an edict, by which the Portuguese were to 
have the Island of Macao, with the power of forming a settlement, which they gladly accepted. They accord¬ 
ingly built a town, and fortified it after the European manner; but the Chinese have effectually provided 
for their own security, by not allowing them any provisions but wbat they receive through their means. 
The possession of this place has been, notwithstanding, extremely beneficial to the Portuguese; for from 
thence they carried on for very near a century a most beneficial commerce with Japan, by w hich Macao 
became one of the richest and most considerable places in their possession; but since their expulsion from 
Japan, and the interference of other European nations in the commerce with Canton, together with the 
unsettled state of Siam, Cochin-China, and Tonquin, the place has fallen to decay. 