

In 1596 the English first turned their thoughts to China, and one or two of their ships were equipped 
with a view of opening a trade. Queen Elizabeth granted letters of recommendation to the Emperor, in 
favour of Richard Adam and Thomas Bromfield, merchants and citizens of London. In these letters, 
besides recommending these merchants, and vouching for the probity of their dealings, the Queen expressed 
her desire to be informed, through them, of those institutions by which the Empire of China had become 
so celebrated for the encouragement of trade; and in return offered the fullest protection to the subjects of 
China, should they be disposed to open a trade to any of the ports in her dominions'. This expedition 
proved unfortunate, the ships having been lost on the outward-bound voyage. 

It does not appear that any further attempt was made at a trade with China, to which the Portuguese 
claimed an exclusive privilege of resorting, till 1631, when a truce, and a permission for a free trade to 
China, and all places where the Portuguese ^vere settled in India, was agreed to between the Viceroy of 
Goa and the English President at Surat. This induced many merchants, to whom King Charles I. had 
granted a licence, to fit out several ships, under the command of Captain Weddell, who thought it suffi¬ 
cient, in consequence of the agreement made at Goa, to bring letters for the Governor of Macao, in order 
to be effectually assisted in his projected intercourse with the Chinese at Canton. Their reception will 
best appear from their account of the voyage. 

The Procurador of Maccow soon repaired on board the principal ship of the English; and said, 
•that for matter of refreshing, he would provide them; but that there was a main obstacle to their trading, 
which was the non-consent of the Chineses, who he pretended held the Portuguese people in miserable sub¬ 
jection. The English determined, however, to discover the river Canton; and fitted out a barge and pin¬ 
nace, with above fifty men, which after two days came in sight of the mouth of the river, being a very 
goodly inlet, and utterly prohibited to the Portugals by the Chineses, who do not willingly admit any 
strangers to the view of It, being the passage and secure harbour for their best jounckes, both of war and 
merchandise; so that the Portugal traffic to Canton was only in small vessels, through divers narrow- 
shoaled straits, amongst many broken islands adjoining to the main. They boarded a jouncke, hoping to 
have found some aboard, that might have stood either of a pilot or interpreter; but finding neither, having 
used them with all courtesy, dismissed them, contrary to their timorous expectations. After a delay of 
several days, a small boat made towards them, and having sold some refreshing, signs were made to carer 
some of the English to Canton, and bring them to the speech of the Mandarins, which the boatmen ac¬ 
cepted of; but the next day, the pinnace being under sail, with a fair wind and tide, after having passed 
by a certain desolate castle, a fleet of about twenty sail of tall jounckes, commanded by the Admiral of 
the Sea’s deputies, passing down from Canton, encountered the English; and in courteous terms desired 
them to anchor, which accordingly they did, and presently certain of the English went aboard the Chief 
Mandarine, where were certain negroes, fugitives of the Portugals, that interpreted. 