


MACAO. 


MACAO belongs to the Portuguese, and is the only settlement possessed by Europeans within the 
limits of the Chinese empire. The town, which is in latitude 22° 10' North, and longitude 113° 32 East* 
is on the southern extreme of a large island, separated from the continent by a small arm of the sea. The 
peninsula, upon which the town stands, is connected with the remainder of the island by a long narrow nedk 
of land, not exceeding 100 yards in breadth; across it a wall has been erected, which projects into the water 
at each end, having a gate and guard-house in the centre for Chinese troops. Beyond this boundary of their 
possessions the Portuguese are seldom permitted to pass. The extent of their territory, which is completely 
under the jurisdiction of the Viceroy of Canton, although the Portuguese are permitted to retain the nomi¬ 
nal government of the town, is from N. E. to S. W. about three miles, and its breadth not quite a mile. 

Macao is a place of some extent; the houses are of stone, constructed on the European plan, but 
without exterior elegance; the streets are very narrow and irregular. The public buildings consist of 
churches, convents, and the senate-house; the latter terminates the only spacious and level street in the town. 
The Governor s house is situated on the beach, opposite the landing place, and commands a beautiful 
prospect, but is not remarkable for external appearance or interior accommodation. Contiguous to it is the 
English factory, a plain commodious building; the other factories are in the same style, and all of them 
surrounded with, gardens. The harbour does not admit vessels of burthen; large ships generally anchor 
six or seven miles off, the town bearing about W.N.W. The town is defended by several strong forts, 
mounted with heavy cannon, and garrisoned with Portuguese troops, seldom exceeding 250= in number. 
There are a Portuguese custom-house and quay on the south side of the town, where aft ships corning into 
the bay are obliged to send their boats. 

When a ship arrives among the islands, a pilot generally comes on board to carry her into Macao 
roads. Immediately she is brought to anchor, which is generally about six or seven miles from the town, 
he proceeds to Macao, to acquaint the Mandarin with what nation she belongs to. Should there he any women 
on board, application must be made to the Bishop and Synod for permission to send them on shore, as 
they will not be permitted to proceed to Whampoa in the ship. As soon as the Mandarin is satisfied 
in his enquiries, he orders off a river pilot, who seldom comes on board until the ship has lain 24 hours 
in the roads, who brings a chop, or licence, to pass the Bocca Tigris, or mouth, of Canton river, and 
carries the ship to Whampoa. 

The Chinese treat the Portuguese very cavalierly on many occasions, exacting duties sometimes in 
the port, and punishing individuals for crimes committed against the natives; and whenever resistance is 
attempted against such proceedings, the Mandarin, who commands the Chinese troops at the guard-house, 
immediately stops the supply of provisions from their market until they quietly submit. 