

In 1784 the European commerce with Canton was endangered in consequence of a Chinese having 
been killed by a gun fired from the Lady Hughes country ship, in a salute to the Hoppo on coming down 
the river. Every European was deemed responsible for this accident; all trade was stopped, and the 
foreign factories settled at Canton uniting with the English, thought it necessary to prepare for defence. 
The gunner, who had concealed himself, was at last found, and delivered up, under some indirect assu¬ 
rances of personal safety; notwithstanding which, he was immediately put to death. It appears probable 
that the supracargoes were induced, under the expectation of being able to commute the punishment for 
a sum of money, to deliver up the man, in which they were deceived. 

The commerce of Europeans with China has always been exposed to oppression and insult. In 
1792 the English Government, under the impression that these injuries were unknown to the Emperor,, 
sent an embassy to China, and Lord Macartney, formerly Governor of Madras, was selected for the mis¬ 
sion. He sailed September 26, 1792, and arrived at the mouth of the Yellow River in August, 1793. 
He was received with great politeness, and handsomely entertained by order of the Emperor ; but 
soon after the ceremony of the audience was over, and before he had an opportunity of entering upon the 
business of his mission, it w T as intimated to him that the approach of winter would be prejudicial to hi& 
health, and that orders were given to convey him and his retinue to Canton. With this intimation he 
was obliged to comply, and the object of his mission was thereby rendered unattainable. 

In 1801 the trade w T as interrupted in consequence of a seaman on board His Majesty's ship Madras 
firing on a Chinese, who he supposed was going to cut the ship’s cable; the wound afterwards proved 
mortal, and a discussion took place with the Chinese Government, who at last agreed to have the affair 
tried in the Supreme Court of Justiee of Canton, and allowed the seaman to remain in custody of his own 
commander. The Chinese lingered upwards of 40 days, the period allowed by the Chinese laws to con¬ 
stitute murder. The Court, on the man’s death, sent a message that the seaman might be punished 
according to the laws of his own country, whereupon trade resumed its usual channel. 

In 1806, in consequence of an expedition having been sent from Bengal to garrison Macao with 
British troops, the trade was stopped ; but the Chinese Government being satisfied with the return of the 
troops to India, it resumed its usual course, and has since continued without any material interruption.. 

COINS. 

Accounts are kept in tales, mace, candareens, and cash, thus divided: 10 cash 1 candareen; 10 can- 
dareens 1 mace; 10 mace 1 tale. 

There is but one kind of money made in China, which is called cash; it is of a base metal, cast, not 
coined, and very brittle; it is round, about the size of an English farthing, marked on one side with 