

MEASURES. 

The long measure in use at Canton is called the covid, or cubit; it is divided into ten punts, and is 
about 14f English inches. There are several measures answering to our foot. 

The foot of the mathematical tribunal is 147,7 dec. French lines, or 13 *~ English inches. 

The builders’ foot, called kongpti, is ™A43,1 ^—ditto __12^ ditto. 

The tailors’ and tradesmen’s foot is^^.rioO ~—ditto v 13 j ditto. 

The foot used by engineers is ^—*141,7-ditto w --—~~12 t V-q ditto. 

The li contains 180 fathoms, each of 10 feet, of the last-mentioned length, w T hieh make the li 1897 
English feet, and I92| lis measure a mean degree of the meridian nearly; but the European missionaries 
divide the degree into 200 lis, each li 1826 English feet. 



CANTON. 


4 » 


4 




COMMERCE OF CANTON. 

The external commerce of Canton is very considerable, and maybe classed under the following beads: 

I. That carried on with Great Britain; this includes the imports and exports on account of the East 
India Company, and the private trade of the commanders and officers of their ships. 

II. That carried on with the British settlements in India, in ships commonly called Country ships* 
the property of European resident merchants or natives, at the different Presidencies. 

III. That carried on with the other European powers, who, previous to the war, which commenced in 
1793, had factories at Canton, but which are at present abandoned, vis. 

France. Denmark. j Portugal. Spain. 

Holland. Ostend. ! Sweden. Leghorn. 

The trade carried on with the United States of America is blended in the Chinese accounts with that 
of all other foreigners, except the English from Europe and India. The account of their imports and 
exports is kept separate. 

IV. That carried on in their own junks or vessels to the Coasts of Siam, Cochin-China, Tonquin, 
Japan, the numerous islands to the eastward, and to Batavia. 

The commerce of Canton, immense as it is, is carried on with an astonishing regularity, and in no part 
of the world can business be transacted with so much ease and dispatch to the foreign merchant. The cargoes 
imported are all weighed on board, and the duties paid by the purchaser, who is generally one of the Hong 
or Security Merchants, expressly licensed by the Chinese Government to deal with Europeans, Their 
number is very limited, being in 1793 twelve, and in 1808 fourteen, vizi 


Puankequa. Ponqua. Manhop. Fatqua. 

Mowqua. Gnewqua. Poonequa. Eonqua. 

Puiqua. Consequa. Lyqua. 

Chunqua. Exchin. Kinqua 


With these merchants, who are mostly men of great property, and upright and liberal in their transac¬ 
tions, the supracargoes transact all the Company's concerns; they dispose of the goods imported, and pur¬ 
chase the various commodities of which the homeward cargoes consist. At the close of the season they 
are generally much indebted to the Company. In the four years, 1807 to 1810 inclusive, the balances were 



£780,150 j 1809 ____ — __—— £937,798 