

That the above goods sold at the Company’s sales in London for 

The sale amount exceeded the prime cost during that period 


»■*.> » , V\. V\v\ w.\vv%% 


W\XV\\»WVWV\VVWVW\.V 





CANTON. 


479 ~ 


IMPORTS FROM ENGLAND IN PRIVATE TRADE. 

The following articles form the investments of the Commanders and Officers of the Honourable 
Company's ships from England. 

Lead.— Considerable quantities of this article used to be imported in private trade, and sold at 5J 
to 6 Spanish dollars per pecul; but some lead-mines have been recently discovered in the province of 
Houquang, which have proved extremely productive, and from wheiice the tea country has been partly 
supplied, on more moderate terms than the English lead can be effected at from Canton. 

Skins. —Large quantities were formerly brought out; but of late years the demand has much abated. 

Sea-otter skins should be large and good, and when perfect, sell at 4 to 6 dollars each. 

Beaver skins from 36 to 40 inches by 24 to 30 inches, when perfect, from 4 to 5 dollars each. 

Rabbit skins, of large sizes, and in good order, from 25 to 30 Spanish dollars per 100. 

Seal skins, when large and good, from 100 to 120 Spanish dollars per 100. 

Ginseng. —Previous to the independence of America, large quantities used to be carried to China by 
the Commanders and Officers, and generally sold well; since that period, the market has been mostly 
supplied by the American ships: the price fluctuates much, from 40 to SO Spanish dollars per pecul. 

Smalts. —This article forms a part of almost every Commander’s investment; the best quality FFC, 
sells at 60 to 90 dollars a pecul; FC, or 2d sort, from 25 to 40 dollars per pecul. 

Prussian Blue. —This should not cost more than 5s. 6d. per lb. nor less than 3s. The price varies, 
taking one kind with the other, from 100 to 150 Spanish dollars per pecul. 

Scarlet Cuttings. —These are generally in demand, more particularly the finer sorts, and are from 
100 to 120 Spanish dollars per pecul. The Chinese have a mode of extracting the colour from them. 

Cochineal. —For this market the grey sort is equally esteemed as the large black grain. A small 
quantity will overstock the market; the price fluctuates from 400 to 1,200 dollars per pecul. 

Window Glass. —This article sometimes sold to advantage; but the Company having recently imported 
it, the price has fallen considerably. The Compam^s cost, including the package, 34| tales per chest of 
200 square feet, and they could not obtain more than 21J tales per chest. 

Camblets. —This article the Company reserve to themselves, and a heavy penalty is attached to any 
individual who may bring them out, notwithstanding which, they are sometimes illicitly imported; but the 
price obtained has seldom left a profit, more particularly when they have been brought in foreign vessels, 
which they sometimes are to the extent of 6 or 7000 pieces; they have then fallen to 20 dollars per piece. 

Clocks. —Some years ago immense quantities of clocks, and other valuable pieces of mechanism, were 
annually imported into Canton; and when they pleased the fancy of the Hoppo, or officer who measured 
the ship on her arrival, sold at a great profit, and the Security Merchants were under the necessity of 
making him a present of them. This exaction became so great an evil, that representations were sent to 
Europe, requesting that no more such valuable commodities should be sent; in consequence of which, the 
Court of Directors have prohibited any Commander or Officer from carrying out any clock, or other piece 
of mechanism, the value of which shall exceed £100. 