

The white veined Agate is most commonly known by the name of the Mocha stone. It is of a 
very firm, compact, and fine texture, though it is found in the shape of a flinty pebble stone. The sizes 
are various, from one to eight inches in diameter. The veins of this stone are very beautifully disposed 
in different figures, but generally there are many concentric irregular circles drawn round, from one to 
three points, in various places. They are commonly a little whiter than the ground, though sometimes 
they can scarcely be seen. Those of this kind are of the highest value, and contain figures of trees, 
mosses, sea-plants, and the like. This kind of agate, when perfect, is only found in India, but there are 
some of an inferior sort to be met with in Germany. 

The dull milky Agate is not so valuable as the former, though it is of a very firm texture. It is 
found in the shape of common flint stones, and from one to ten inches in diameter. It is of the colour of 
milk, or rather like that of cream, and when broken, has a smooth glossy surface. It is more opaque 
than the former, but will bear a very fine polish. This species is common in India. 

The lead coloured Agate, with black and white veins, is of a very fine, firm, and compact tex¬ 
ture, though it is found, like the former, in the shape of common flint, and of as rugged a surface. The 
colour is of a pale blueish grey, and is often without variation, though it has sometimes black and some¬ 
times white veins, which are generally towards the centre of the stone. It is very hard, and will bear a 
fine polish; it is found in India, where they make cups and boxes of it. 

The flesh coloured Agate is not so valuable as either of the former, though it has a firm compact 
texture, and is from one to ten inches in diameter. The flesh colour is very faint and almost whitish, yet 
it is never entirely wanting; sometimes it has no veins at all, and at other times it abounds in veins, spots, 
or clouds. The spots are generally very small, about the size of a pin’s head; when broken, it is very 
smooth and glossy, though it is not always of the same transparency. 

The blood coloured Agate is more beautiful than most of this class. It is always of a deep blood 
red colour, sometimes throughout, but more frequently variegated with a pale blue and brown; the blue 
always surrounds the red, and inclines to the colour of whey, but it is in no other part of the stone. The 
brown is of the colour of horn, and generally appears in irregular veins, sometimes in such plenty as to 
make the ground to the stone, and the red with its blue edges only the variegation. This stone is much 
esteemed when well marked, and is chiefly used for the tops of snuff-boxes. 

The clouded and spotted flesh coloured Agate is of a very fine close texture, though it is subject 
to flaws and cracks when the pieces are large, for which reason the lesser stones are preferred; in general 
it is but little esteemed. 

The red Agate, variegated with yellow, is of the colour of red lead, of a fine pure equal texture, with 
a smooth regular surface, and is commonly found in the shape of a pebble stone. It is from one to four 
Vol. II. " 3 S 