



ALUM— AMOMUM VERUM. 


m 

inches in diameter, and its ground is of a paler red with one that is deeper, disposed in concentric veins 
round from one to three points; but this does not appear without close examination. Besides these it has 
irregular bright yellow blotches that are never intersected by the veins, but are either within or on the 
outside thereof; and they are always extremely short, never above one sixth of an inch in length. It is 
very hard, and will bear a fine polish. 

The yellow Agate has been found from one to seven inches in diameter, in various shapes and sizes; 
but they are all of a very §rm compact texture. It is sometimes of the same colour throughout; some¬ 
times it consists of irregular veins, and at others it has a pale and almost white ground, veined and spotted 
with a strong yellow, exactly resembling that of fine yellow bees-wax. It is very hard, and capable of 
a fine polish; but the degree of transparency differs greatly, for sometimes it is as much so as the rest, 
and at others it is almost entirely opaque. It is found in India, and is used for making knife-handles. 

The pale yellow Agate, variegated with white, black, and green, is called the Leonina, from its re¬ 
semblance to a lion’s skin. It is more variegated than the rest of the stones of this kind, and has a fine 
compact close texture, though it is found in very irregular shapes, with a rugged outside. The ground is 
always of a pale yellow, but very differently disposed. It breaks with some difficulty into pieces with 
fine smooth surfaces. It is brought from India, but is not commonly known, being very scarce. 

The blackish veined brown Agate is found in pieces that have a pretty smooth surface, though of 
an irregular shape, from two to seven inches in diameter. The brown is pretty deep, and freely clouded, 
spotted, and veined with a colour that is almost black, and the veins are paler and browner than the 
other variegations. The veins are disposed in irregular concentric circles, and the innermost are generally 
broadest. It is capable of a very beautiful polish, and is commonly cut into seals, buttons, heads of canes, 
and the tops of snuff-boxes. It is frequently adorned with fictitious colours, which sink into the substance 
so much, that they appear like the natural veins of the stone, and then it is of great value. 

ALUM 

Is an article of considerable trade at China, from whence it is carried to various parts of India. It 
is generally in large lumps or pieces, clear and transparent. It is seldom imported into England, it being 
produced in these large quantities. In March sale, 1808, 41 cwt. of alum were sold at the Company's sale 
for £56. The permanent duty is 11s. per cwt. and the temporary or war duty 3s. 8d. per cwt. making in 
the whole 14s. 8d. per cwt. 

AMOMUM VERUM, 

Or true Amomum, is the fruit or seed vessel of a plant growing in Arabia, several parts of the East 
Indies, and China. It is in figure like a grape, and contains, under a membraneous covering, a number of 
small rough angular seeds, of a blackish brown colour on the outside, and whiter within. The seeds 
are lodged in three distinct cells, and those in each cell joined closely together, so that the fruit, on being 
opened, appears to contain but three seeds. Ten or twelve of these pedicles, about an inch long, stand toge¬ 
ther upon a woody stalk. The seeds are a strong grateful aromatic, of a penetrating fragrant smell, and of 
a warm pungent taste. Chuse amomum that is fresh and large, the pods being round, of a light colour, 
inclining to grey, heavy, and well filled with odoriferous grains: to have the grains neat and clean, they*- 
should be separated from the shell, which is of little value. The pods which are light, and of which the 
grains are wrinkled, are also of little worth. 