

This article, now so common in many parts of Europe, was not known to the ancients. Marco Paulo 
is the first among the moderns who mentions it. The Portuguese began to import it soon after their 
first voyage to China, but it was a considerable time before the use of it became extensive. Large quant¬ 
ities were formerly brought from China to England; but the heavy duties levied upon it, and the great 
improvements which have taken place in our own manufactures, have very much reduced the home demand 
for China ware. Connoisseurs divide China ware into six classes, viz. the trouted China, the old white, 
the Japan, the Chinese, the Chinese Japan, and the Indian; these several appellations rather denote a 
difference that strikes the eye, than a red distinction. 

I. Tkouted China, from its resemblance to the scales of a trout, seems the most ancient; it has 
two imperfections— the paste is always very brown, and the surface appears full ofcracks; these cracks are 



CHINA WARE. 


503 


foot only iii the glazing, but in the China ware itself, and therefore this sort has but a small degree of trans¬ 
parency, does not sound so well, is very brittle, and bears the fire better than any other. To hide these 
cracks, it is painted with a variety of colours; in this kind of ornament its only value consists. 

II. — The old white China. —This is very valuable, but very scarce, and little used. The paste 
of it seems to be extremely short, and fit only for small vases, figures, and other ornamental China; 
it is sold in trade for Japan, though it is certain that some very fine of the same kind is made in China. 
It is of two different hues, the one a perfect cream-colour, the other a blueish white, which makes it look 
Snore transparent, and the glazing seems to be more incorporated into this last. 

III. Japan China is not so easily distinguished, as most people imagine, from the finest sort made 
in China. It is stated that in general the glazing of the true Japan is whiter, and has less of the blueish 
cast than the porcelain of China; that the ornaments are laid on with less profusion; that the blue is 
brighter, and the patterns and flowers are not so whimsical, and more closely copied from nature; and 
some writers tell us, that the Chinese who trade to Japan, bring home some pieces of China that make 
more show than their own, but are not so solid; and that they serve to ornament their apartments, but 
that they never use them, because they will not bear the fire well: all China glazed with coloured varnish, 
whether sea-green, blueish, or purple, is said to be Chinese. All the Japan brought into Europe comes from 
the Dutch, who are the only Europeans that are suffered to come into that empire. Possibly they may 
have chosen it out of the porcelains brought there every year by the Chinese, or they may have purchased 
it at Canton: in either case the distinction between the porcelain of Japan and that of China would not 
be founded on fact, but merely on prejudice. From this opinion, it is plain that what is sold in Europe 
for Japan, is only very fine China. 