

IV. China Porcelain. —The glazing of this sort has a bluer cast than that of Japan, is more highly 
coloured, and the patterns are more whimsical; the paste is in general whiter, and more compact; the 
grain finer and closer, and the China thinner. Among the several sorts made in China, there is one that 
is very ancient; it is painted of a deep blue, a beautiful red, or a green like verdigrease, and is coarse, 
thick, and very heavy. Some of this is trouted, and the grain is often dry and brown;, that which is not 
trouted, has a clear sound, but both w v ant transparency; it is sold for old China, and the finest pieces are 
supposed to come from Japan. The essential difference between this and other China is, that it is made 
of a shorter paste, and is very hard and solid; the pieces of this China have always at the bottom, the 
marks of three or four supporters, which were put to prevent its giving way in baking. By this con¬ 
trivance the Chinese have succeeded in making very large pieces of porcelain. The China which is not 
of this sort, and which is called modern China, is of a longer paste, finer grain, higher glazed, whiter, 
and clearer; it seldom has the marks of the supporters, and its transparency has nothing glassy in it All 
that is made with this paste is easily turned, so that it is visible the workman’s hand is glided over it, as 
over a fine smooth clay; there is an infinite variety of this sort of China, both as to form, colouring, 
workmanship, and price. 

V. Chinese Japan.—So called because it unites the ornaments of the porcelain, which is thought to 
come from Japan, with those that are more in the Chinese taste. Among this kind of porcelain there is 
some that is ornamented with a very fine blue with white scrolls; the glazing of this kind is remarkable 
for being a true white enamel; whereas that of the other sorts is half transparent, for the Chinese glazing 
is never entirely so. All the above sorts of porcelain are manufactured in the province of KiamsL In 
the neighbourhood of Canton is made the kind we commonly see, and that is known by the name of 

VI. India China. —The paste of which this is manufactured, is long and yielding; but in general the 
colours, especially the blue and the red, are far inferior to what comes from Japan and the interior 



504 


CINNABAR. 


parts of China. Ail the colours except the blue stand up in lumps, and are very badly laid on. It is of 
two kinds, the best of which is denominated Nankeen China. 

The articles brought to Europe consist of table and tea services, painted jars, garden pots and stools, 
butter-cups, fruit-baskets, &c. 

The following are the usual contents of a table-service, and of long and short breakfast sets of China 
ware, and the mode in which they are counted at Canton: 

A TABLE SET OF 170 PIECES. r LONG TEA SET OF 101 PIECES. 


72 large flat plates 
Soup plates 
Small flat plates^. 

Small deep plates 
Dishes of 6 sizes, S in each, 
Eruit dishes 
Salad bowls. 