

COPPER, WHITE. 

In Du Halde’s History of China is the following account of white copper. “ The most extraordi¬ 
nary copper is called De-tong, or white copper; it is white when dug out of the mine, and still more 
white within than without. It appears, by a vast number of experiments made at Pekin, that its colour 
is owing to no mixture—on the contrary', all mixtures diminish its beauty; for, when it is rightly managed, 
it looks exactly Eke silver, and were there not a necessity of mixing a little tutenague, or some such metal 
with it, to soften it, and prevent its brittleness, it would be so much the more extraordinary, as this sort 
of copper is, perhaps, to be met wdth no where but in China, and that only in the province of Tun-nan. 1 ’ 
Notwithstanding what is here said of the colour of this copper being owing to no mixture, it is certain 
that the white copper, as imported into England, is a mixed metal; so that the ore from whence it is ex¬ 
tracted, must consist of various metallic substances. 

CORUNDUM 

Is the Indian name for the fossil called by the British lapidaries, Adamantine Spar. The first speci¬ 
mens of it came from China; its colour is grey, of different shades; the larger pieces are opaque, but the 
thin pieces and the edges are transparent; the second variety comes from India, and is considerably whiter 
than that from China, and it is this which is called corundum by the natives. The remarkable quality of 
corundum, and for which it is chiefly valued, is its extreme hardness; it scratches every substance but 
diamond, and is therefore of great value to lapidaries and seal-cutters. It is used throughout India and 
China for polishing stones, Sec. It is but little harder than the ruby, the sapphire, or oriental topaz. It is 
far superior to emery, particularly for grinding on the wheel, to which it adheres like diamond dust. 

CUBEBS 

Are the produce of a tree growing on Java and in China. The cubeb is a small dried fruit, like a 
|>epper-corn, but generally somewhat longer; it is of a greyish brown colour, and composed of a wrinkled 
external covering enclosing a single seed, blackish on the surface, and white within; it is a warm spice, of 
a pleasant aromatic smell, and of a hot, pungent taste, weaker than that of pepper, but of the same kind; 
its acrimony remains long upon the tongue. We sometimes meet with this article in an unripe state, when 
it is very small, the covering much wrinkled, and the enclosed seed of a softer kind than when ripe. 
Cubebs should be chosen large, fresh, sound, and the heaviest that can be procured. From their resemblance 
to pepper, from which its difference is a short slender stalk, it is often mixed with that article. Cubebs are 
seldom imported into England; but large quantities used to be brought by the Dutch. The average amount 
imported into Holland for seven years, 1785 to 1791, was upwards of 9,000 lbs. annually. 

16 cwt. of cubebs are allowed to a ton. The permanent duty is £2 16s. per cwt. and the temporary 
pr war duty 18s. Sd. making in the whole £3 14s. Set per cwt. 