

The proportions in the composition of the several needles are adjusted in a regular series, according 
to the carat weights before explained. The first needle consists of fine gold, or of 24 carats; the second 
of 23| carats of fine gold, and half a carat of alloy; the third of 23 carats of fine gold, and one carat of 
alloy; and so on, the gold diminishing, and the alloy increasing, by half a carat in each needle, down to the 
twentieth carat; all below this are made at differences of whole carats, half a carat being scarcely distin¬ 
guishable by the colour of the mass, when the proportion of alloy is so considerable. Some make the 
needles no lower than to twelve carats, that is, a mixture of equal parts of gold and alloy; others go as 
low as one carat, or one part of gold to twenty-three of alloy. 

Four sets of these needles are commonly directed: one in which pure silver is used for the alloy; 
another with a mixture of two parts of silver, and one of copper; the third with a mixture of two parts 
of copper to one of silver; and the fourth with equal parts of the two; to which some add a fifth set 



GOLD. 


509 


vnth copper only, an alloy which sometimes occurs, though much more rarely than the others. If needles 
so low as three or four carats can be of any use, it should seem to be only in the first set; for in the 
others the proportion of copper being large, the differences in colour of different sorts of copper itself, 
will be as great as those which result from very considerable differences in the quantity of gold. When 
the copper is nearly equal in quantity to the gold, very little can be judged by the colour of the mass. 

The colours are best examined by means of strokes drawn with the metals on a particular kind of 
stone, brought chiefly from Germany, and called from this use a touchstone; the best sort of which is of 
a deep black colour, moderately hard, and of a smooth but not polished surface- If it is too smooth, soft 
gold will not easily leave a mark upon it; and if rough, the mark proves imperfect. If very hard, the 
frequent cleaning of it from the marks, by rubbing it with tripoli, or a piece of charcoal wetted with 
water, gives the surface too great a smoothness; and if very soft, it is liable to be scratched in the cleaning. 
In want of the proper kind of stone, moderately smooth pieces of flint are the best substitutes; the more 
those approach in colour to the other, the better. 

The piece of gold to be examined, being well cleaned in some convenient part of its surface, a stroke 
is to be made with it on the stone, and another close by it, with such of the touch-needles as appear to 
come the nearest to it in colour. If the colour of both upon the stone is exactly the same, it is judged 
that the given mass is of the same fineness with the needle; if different, other needles must be tried, till 
one is found which exactly corresponds with it. To do this readily, practice only can teach. 

In making the strokes, both the given piece and the needle of comparison are to be rubbed several 
times backwards and forwards upon the stone, that the marks may be strong and full, not less than a 
quarter of an inch long, and about the eighth or a tenth of an inch broad; both marks are to be wetted 
before the examination of them, their colours being thus rendered more distinct. A stroke which has been 
drawn some days, is never to be compared with a fresh one, as the colour may have suffered an alteration 
from the air, the fine atoms left upon the touchstone being much more susceptible of such alterations than 
the metal in the mass. If the piece is supposed to be superficially heightened by art in its colour, that 
part of it which the stroke is designed to be made with, should be previously rubbed on another part of the 
stone, or rather on a rougher kind of stone than the common touchstones, that a fresh surface of the 
metal may be exposed. 