



MATS—MOTHER OF PEARL ARTICLES—MUSK, 


513 


MATS 

Of various kinds are manufactured in China, and the following sorts are occasionally brought to England. 

Rattan Floor-Mats.—The usual sizes are seven feet long by five feet bread, but the Chinese will 
make them to any dimensions. They should be chosen of a quite clean rattan, long jointed, having a 
good gloss, and free from black spots or mildew. 

Rush Floor-Mats.—These are to be met with of various sizes and colours, some of them beautiful!v 
checkered, but the generality are of a rush colour. They should be chosen clean, of a bright colour, 
and not broken or tumbled; and care should be taken that they are quite dry when packed, otherwise 
they will get mouldy, and spoil. 

Table-Mats.—These are manufactured both plain and coloured, and always packed up six in a set, 
of three different sizes; the former, being made from rattans, are to be preferred. They should be chosen 
of a fine clear bright colour, and free from loose ends; those made of grey dark rattans should be rejected, 
being of little value. The coloured mats are occasionally brought; they should be chosen well and neatly 
made, having the ends of the border perfectly secure, of an even colour, and properly dried, otherwise 
they will mildew, and spoil. 

MOTHER OF PEARL ARTICLES. 

The Chinese manufacture beads of various kinds, fish-counters, Ssc. from the mother of pearl shells in a 
far superior manner to what they can be done in Europe. Three sorts of beads are brought from China; 
one perfectly round, the second not quite round, and the other cut; they are tied up in bunches; each 
bunch ought to contain 100 strings, and each string 100 beads, but they are generally somewhat deficient 
in number. They should be chosen of an equal size, and of a beautiful pearly appearance. The fish 
counters are cut of various shapes, round, oval, and oblong, and are put up in sets, each containing 140 
pieces. They are sometimes brought as an article of trade, but the demand is very limited. 


MUSK. 

This very strong scented substance is found under the belly of a species of goat, and is brought 
from China in round thin bladders, generally about the size of a walnut, covered with short brown hairs 
well filled, and without any appearance of having been opened. The musk itself is a dry, light, friable 
substance, of a dark colour, with a purple tinge: its taste is somewhat bitter, and its smell too strong to 
be agreeable in any quantity. It is met with in grains, which feel unctuous, smooth, and soft, and are 
easily crumbled between the fingers. This drug should be chosen of a very strong scent, in the dry and 
sound natural bags of the animal, not in the factitious ones made of skins sewed together, which may be 
distinguished by the closeness and length of the hair on the latter kind of bags, these factitious ones having 
more and longer hair than the genuine, and that generally of a paler colour. A small quantity of musk 
macerated for a few days in rectified spirits of wine, imparts a deep colour, and a strong impregnation to 
the spirit. This tincture of itself discovers but little smell; but on dilution it manifests the full fragrance 
of the musk; a drop or two communicating to a quart of wine or watery liquors a rich musky scent. 
The quantity of liquor which may thus be flavoured by a certain known proportion of musk, appears to 
be the best criterion of the genuineness and goodness of this commodity. 