

Ginseng has been gathered time immemorial in Chinese Tartary. In 1709 the Emperor of China 
sent an army of 10,000 Tartars in search of this root, and to bring as much as they could find; every one 
was to give two catties of the best to the Emperor, and to sell the rest for its weight in silver, for their 
own benefit. By this means the Emperor gained 20,000 catties in one year. 

3 T 2 




508 


GOLD. 


About 1750 the French carried on a brisk trade in ginseng: they gathered large quantities, and sent 
it to France, whence it was exported to China, and generally sold to great advantage there at its first 
outset; but the price afterwards fell considerably, from the Chinese fancying the American ginseng to be 
inferior to their own. 

The permanent duty on ginseng is 10|d. per lb. and the war duty 3§d. per lb. 

GOLD. 

A considerable trade is earned on in China in gold, which they receive in dust at the various eastern 
islands, and afterwards melt into shoes or bars, which, when pure, have a depression in the middle, from 
the sinking of the metal in cooling, with a number of circular rings like those on the ball of the finger, 
but larger. 

In trading in gold, great circumspection is necessary, as many frauds are practised; the shoes are 
often gilt over with a thick coat of metal, finer than the interior part; and it often happens that lumps of 
other metals are mixed with it, generally silver. 

When the mass is much adulterated, the fraud can be discovered at sight, the middle being elevated 
instead of depressed, and the sides uneven and knobby. If it is suspected to be gilt with a thick coat 
of metal, finer than the internal part, it should be raised with a graver or chisel to some depth, so 
that the exterior coat may be broken through: cutting the piece in two is a less certain way of disco¬ 
vering this abuse, the outer coat being frequently drawn along with the chisel so as to cover the 
divided parts. 

Gold, when pure, is of a full yellow colour; it is never obscured with tarnish or rust. When alloyed 
with copper, the colour inclines to a reddish hue; silver makes it pale, and if the proportion of silver be 
as one to four*, a greenish hue is produced. 

The degree of fineness of gold, or the proportion of alloy it contains, is accounted by imaginary 
weights called carats. The whole mass is conceived to be divided into 24 parts, or carats, and so many 
twenty-fourth parts as it contains of pure gold, it is called gold of so many carats, or so many carats fine. 
Thus gold of 18 carats is a mixture of which 18 parts in 24 are pure gold, and the other 6 parts 
an inferior metal; and in like manner gold of 20 carats contain 20 parts of pure gold and 4 of alloy. 
The standard of the English gold coin is 22 carats fine, so that in a guinea there are 22 parts of pure 
gold and 2 parts of alloy. 

Those who are accustomed to the inspection of gold, variously alloyed, can judge nearly, from the 
colour of any given mass, the proportion of alloy it contains, provided the species of alloy is known. 
Different -compositions of gold with different proportions of the metals which it is commonly alloyed 
with, are formed into oblong pieces, called needles, and kept in readiness far assisting in this examination, 
as standards of comparison. 