

The metallic compositions made to resemble gold in colour, are readily known by means of a drop 
or two of aqua-fortis, which has no effect upon gold, but discharges the marks made by all its known imi¬ 
tations. That the touchstone may be able to support this trial, it becomes a necessary character of it not 
to be corrosible by acids, a character which shews it to be essentially different from the marbles, whereof 
it is by many writers reckoned a species. If gold is debased by an admixture of any considerable quantity 
of these compositions, aqua-fortis will in this case also discharge so much oft the mark as was made by the 
base metal, and leave only that of the gold, which will now appear discontinued or in specks. Silver and 
copper are in like manner eaten out from gold on the touchstone; and hence some judgment may thus be 
formed of the fineness of the metal, from the proportion of the remaining gold to the vacuities. 

It has been observed that bard gold appears on the touchstone less fine than it really is. It may be 
presumed that this difference does not proceed from the simple hardness, but from the hardness being occa¬ 
sioned by an admixture of such metallic bodies as debase the colour in a greater degree than an equal 
quantity of the common alloy. Silver and copper are the only metals usually found mixed with gold, 
whether in bullion or in coins, and the only ones whose quantity is attempted to be judged of by this 
method of trial. 

The Chinese are extremely expert in the use of the touchstone, so as to distinguish by it so small a 
difference in the fineness as half a touch. It is the only test by which they regulate the sale of their 
gold to the Europeans, and it is subject to fewer difficulties than in Europe, on account of the 



510 


GOLD. 


uniformity of their alloy, which is almost always silver; the least appearance of copper being used hi 
the alloy gives a suspicion of fraud. As an assay of the gold is rarely permitted at China, it behoves 
the European trader to be well practised in this way of examination. By carefully attending to the 
foregoing directions, and by accustoming himself to compare the colours of a good set of touch-needles,, 
having the fineness marked on each, it is presumed he will be able to avoid being imposed upon, either in 
the touch itself, or by the abuses said to be sometimes committed, of covering the bar or ingot with a 
thick coat of finer metal than the interior part, or of including masses of base metal within it. A set of 
needles may be prepared for this use with silver alloy in the series of the Chinese touches; or the Euro¬ 
pean needles may be easily accommodated to the Chinese by the following tables, which reduce English 
carats into Chinese touches, and Chinese touches into English carats, calculating 100 touch equal to 24 carats* 


ENGLISH CARATS TO CHINA TOUCHES. 


CHINA TOUCHES INTO ENGLISH CARATS. 


Carats. 

Grs 

[ Touch. Parts 

Carats. 

Grs. 

| Touch Parts 