

Toozee, or Toujee, is good 92 touch, when it has a little rising at the bottom, like a twig with 
two branches. 

Cheaujee is good 92 touch, and sometimes better. When good, it has a large bump at the bottom. 

Seongpoa.—This gold is good 93 \ touch. The face has little rough knobs in the middle; the back 
or bottom is pretty smooth. 

Seong-yeukz or Song-yeux, being a double chop, is good at 94, and sometimes 95 touch. It is 
made at Coe-Sue, near Pekin. 

Pouzee, or Seongpo, being a double chop, is about 94 touch. 

Chuzee.—This gold is generally in bars, and is good 94 touch. 

Swarhzy, or Chauzee, is esteemed the best shoe, and has a bump at the bottom, being 93 touch, 
and sometimes more. 

Ongee.—This is accounted 93, but is seldom above 90 or 91 touch. 

Too-zee.—This gold is generally something better than 92 touch. 

Cutzee is shoe gold, and called songcatt, being the Chinese word for double, or a pair, and cutzee, 
the name of gold, which joined are vulgarly called songcatt, never more than 90 touch. 

Cochin-China bars are 96 touch, wdth a chop on the inside, and called king’s gold, or sowchew, and 
when scarce, is 97 touch. 

It has been found, by numerous experiments, that the gold in China of 93 touch is of the same fine¬ 
ness as English standard gold; if so, their sycee or pure gold is not equal to English 24 carats, and some 
deduction should be made. In the purchase of gold, if you have a friend resident at Canton, you should 
consult with him, and get him to touch it for you, as, however careful you may be, the Chinese will 
deceive you if they can. 

HUMAN HAIR 

Is frequently brought from China to Europe, to make ornamental head-dresses; and It is in general 
very dark coloured. The longer and finer it is, the better, and care should be taken that it is perfectly dry 
when packed. The permanent duty is 3s. per lb. and the war duty Is. making in all 4s. per lb. 

HURSE SKINS 

Are the skins of a fish, with a hard rough coat, chiefly used in Europe to cover pocket-cases. They 
should be chosen large, well-dried, and free from holes. In the September sale, 1306, 6942 hurse-skins 
were sold for i?12Q. 

The permanent duty is 3d. each, and the temporary or war duty Id. making in the whole 4d. each. 

INDIAN INK, 

Or China Ink, is an artificial preparation, in small quadrangular cakes, generally marked with 
Chinese characters, and sometimes handsomely painted; it is said to be prepared from lamp black. It 
should be chosen to appear glossy; when broken, of a bright black, not brown, and dull; when wetted 
and rubbed on the nail, it should feel smooth, free from sand and other impurities, and have a perfumed 
agreeable smell. It should readily become diffused in water by rubbing, and the blackness remain sus¬ 
pended, and not settle to the bottom, unless it stands a considerable time. Since the year 1804 to 1808 
the following quantities only have been imported and sold: 

1805, September Sale-^^%^^^^^^.^^%4095 lbs.v».^v^^v%-w%sold for 377 
1306-WWWWVfcd.lttO 510 46 