

This tea is sometimes taken by the commanders and officers in exchange for such part of their in¬ 
vestments as cannot he disposed of by a direct sale, and has at Canton a very high flavour; but it flies 
off in the course of the voyage. The leaf is small and wiry, of a burnt smell. Not being much esteemed 
in London, it should be rejected if it possibly can, and any other tea taken instead of it. 

Congou teas form about one half of the Company’s sales, being, on an average of ten years, 1791 to 
1800, 9,564,202 lbs. per annum. The common price at Canton is about 28 tales per pecul. 

The following are a few of the numerous chops of Congou teas brought to the Canton market, with 
the number of chests usually contained in a chop, and a description of their quality, according to the tech¬ 
nical terms of the trade: 


Chests. 

Wa Chunn -v, 1139 middling, blackish leaf. 
YockChunru^ 1167 ditto, ditto. 

Cheem Chunn^ 1206 ditto, ditto. 

Uu Chunn 1194 but middling, largish leaf. 

Quong Tay~^™ 600 ditto, small blackish leaf. 
Quong 1000 ditto, rather blackish leaf. 

Quong Tack^* 1000 ditto, small blackish leaf. 
Ee Kee 1000 but middling clean. 

Ee Hop--—^ 1000 ditto, blackish leaf. 

Eee 1000 but middling. 

Eee Mee 1000 ditto. 


Chests. 

500 mid. father blackish leaf. 
600 ditto, clean blackish leaf. 
1005 ditto, strong. 

1009 ditto, blackish leaf. 

1004 ditto, largish leaf. 

1010 rather strong, blackish leaf. 
1000 flavour inclining to Pekoe* 

1000 rather blackish leaf. 

950 ditto, ditto. 

700 strong blackish leaf. 

Sing Kee 698 middling, blackish leaf 


Hock Hung 
Heeli Kee ^ 
Ee Chunn ^ 
Yoon Chunn 
King Woe 
Ka Kee~*~^ 
Quong Low 
Eee Mow 
Eee Yeck 
Kee Chunn. 


•WWW* 



III. Souchong, or Se-ow-chong, small good thing, is made from the leaves of trees three years old. 
and where the soil is very good, of older leaves; when not so good, Congou is made. Of true Souchong tea 
very little is produced; the value of it on the spot is If to 2 tales per catty. What is sold to Europeans 
for Souchong, is only the first sort of Congou; and the Congou they buy, is only the first sort of Bohea. 
Upon a hill planted with tea-trees, one only may produce leaves good enough to be called Souchong, and 
of these only the best and youngest are taken; the others make Congous of the several kinds, and Bohea. 

\ The trade in London distinguish the following species of Souchong. 

' Souchong, or what is commonly called so. This tea should be chosen crisp and dry, of a pleasant 
fragrant smell, and as free from dust as possible. When tried in water, the more reddish brown leaves, 
the better, ‘and the water of a lightish brown; it is sometimes of a high colour, and sometimes pale; but 
the tea, if good in other respects, should not be rejected, though the colour is not very high. Such as are 
broken, dusty, and foul, or that smell old and musty, should be avoided. 

Caper Souchong. —This tea takes its name from being rolled up somewhat resembling a caper. 
The leaves of this should be chosen of a fine black gloss, heavy, of a fresh good smell, taste full flavoured 
and high. On being infksed in water, it tinges it of a bright reddish brown colour. Reject that which is 
dusty and broken, and of a faint unpleasant smell. This tea is not imported by the Company, and only 
in small quantities by the commanders and officers. 