

Bohea tea is never imported by individuals; but it forms about one sixth of the whole of the Company’s 
imports, being on an average of ten years, from 1791 to 1800, 3,310,135 lbs. per annum. Being a common 
tea, it is not so carefully examined as the better sorts. The best is of a small blackish leaf, and dusty, to 
the smell somewhat resembling burnt hay; of a rough and brackish taste, and it should be crisp. Reject 
those which are yellow, or though good in appearance, smell faint and disagreeable. 

The chops or parcels of Bohea teas have no names or distinguishing characters. 

It is understood the Company have recently sent out orders to their supra-cargoes at China, that in 
future Bohea tea should not form a part of them investments. 

XL Congou, or Cong-foo, great or much care, or trouble in the making, or gathering the leaves. 
This tea is tatched twice, though some say both it and Souchong are not tatched, but only fired two or 
three times: the latter is most probable, and yet the former may be true; for as latching seems to give the 
Yol.IL - 31 



522 


TEA, 


green colour to the leaves, so we may observe something of that greenness in the leaves of Congou and 
Souchong teas. It is farther stated that the leaves of Souchong, Congou, Hyson, and fine Singlo teas are 
beat with flat sticks or bamboos, after they have been withered by the sun or air, and have acquired tough¬ 
ness enough to keep them from breaking, to force out of them a raw or harsh smell. 

The trade in London make three sorts of Congou teas, viz. Congou, Campoi Congou, and Ankay 
Congou. The following are directions for ehusing them: 

Congou is a superior kind of Bohea, larger leaf, and less dusty. It should be chosen of a fresh smell, 
the taste less strong than that of Bohea, to feel crisp, and be easily crumbled: those Congous which 
run broken and dirty, of a heated smell, and faint unpleasant taste, should be rejected. This tea does not 
yield so high a colour on infusion as Bohea; the leaves are sometimes of a greyish hue, and often black. 

Campoi Congou is a superior kind of Congou, from which it values very little in appearance, taste, 
or smell, except it is fresher and of a cleaner flavour, more resembling Souchong. 

Ankay, so called from the country that produces it, w r hich is about twenty-four days’ journey 
from Canton, is the tea-tree from the Bohea country propagated at Ankay. When gathered, the leaves 
are put into flat baskets to dry like the Bohea; they are then tatched, and afterwards rubbed with hands 
and feet to roll them, then put in the sun to dry. If this tea is intended for Europeans, it is packed 
in large baskets, and those are heated by a charcoal fire in a hot-house, as it is often practised in Canton. 
The worst sort of Ankay is not tatched, but Ankay Congou, as it is called, is cured with care ; this sort 
is generally packed in small chests; there is also Ankay Pekoe, but the smell of all these teas are much infe¬ 
rior to those of the Bohea country; however, Ankay Congou of the first sort is generally dearer at Canton 
than Bohea. This tea is often mixed with the leaves of other trees, but there are only two or three trees 
-whose leaves will answer the purpose; and they may be known when opened by hot water, as they are not 
indented as tea leaves are; otherwise, from them resemblance, it is difficult to distinguish them. 