

Padre Souchong, or Pow-chong.—This is a very superior kind of Souchong, having a finer taste, 
smell, and flavour; the leaves are larger and of a yellowish hue, not so strongly twisted; it is packed in 
papers, each containing about a quarter of a pound. This tea is scarce, and difficult to be procured 
genuine; it costs a dollar per catty at Canton, and is seldom imported except as presents, as it is not con¬ 
sidered to keep so well as the other kinds of Souchong. That which is small and broken, and that smells 
musty or disagreeable, should be rejected. 

Pekoe, or Pe-how, white first leaf, is made from the leaves of trees three years old, and from the 
tenderest of them, gathered just after they have been in bloom, when the small leaves that grow between 
the two first that have appeared, and which altogether make a sprig, are downy and white, and resemble 
young hair, or down. This tea is esteemed superior to Souchong. The quantity imported into England is 
inconsiderable. It is purchased at Canton by the Danes and Swedes for the Russia market, and has some¬ 
times sold as high as SO tales per pecul; but in consequence of their trade being put a stop to, it is to be 
bought at from 40 to 50 tales per pecul. This tea should be chosen with small white leaves, or flowers at 
the ends of the leaves; the more flower it has, the more it is esteemed. It has a peculiar flavour, and a 
smell somewhat resembling new hay; it greatly improves Souchong on being mixed with it: that which is 
old, small, broken, and with little flavour, should be rejected. 

The following are a few of the chops of Souchong teas brought to the Canton market, with the number 
of chests usually contained in a chop, and a description of their quality, according to the technical terms 
of the trade: 


Chests' 

Wapoo Lan Hung ^^^310 middling. 

Chu Kee 10 but middling. 

Quong Tay —~~~—J300 ditto. 

Ying Tay -—— -^^220 good middling. 

Lap Tay fresh and good. 

Chunn Fue 352 middling. 

Ee Kee ■%■%>•* Mwvwvk> %wvvvvv40 5 ditt O * 


Chests. 

Woe Kee ^454 middling. 

Mien Kee ~~—- —.^^553 ditto. 

Ly Kee __^„x~^40Q good middling 

Quong Woe 300 middling. 

Cliie Kee _good middling. 

Une Mee —^^ W ~2Q2 ditto. 

Preequa TVoeka wv^>w>»370 but middling, 

3X2 





524 


TEA. 


GREEN TEAS 

Are cured in the following manner. When the leaves are gathered, they are directly tatched, and then 
very much rubbed by men’s hands to roll them, after which they are spread to divide them, for the leaves in 
rolling are apt to stick together; they are then tatched very dry, and afterwards spread on tables to be 
picked: this is done by girls or women, who, according to their skill, can pick from one to four catties each 
day. Then they are tatched again, and afterwards tossed in flat baskets, to clear them from dust; they 
are then again spread upon tables, and picked, and then tatched for a fourth time, and laid in parcels, 
which parcels are again tatched by ten catties at a time, and when done, put hot into baskets for the pur¬ 
pose, where they are kept till it suits the owner to pack them in chests or tubs; before which the tea is 
again tatched, and then put hot into the chests or tubs, and pressed into them by the hand. When the 
tea is hot, it does not break, which it is apt to do when it is cold. Single tea being more dusty than 
Hyson tea, is twice tossed in baskets; Hyson only once. It appeal’s that it is necessary to tatch these teas 
whenever they contract any moisture; so that if the seller is obliged to keep his tea any time, especially 
in damp weather, he must tatch it to give it a crispness, before he can sell it. 