

SHELLS. 

The most beautiful shells we are acquainted with, come from the East Indies, China, and the Red Sea. 
Amboyna supplies the most beautiful specimens of the cabbage-shell, the ducal mantle, a great variety of 
beautiful muscles, wreathed shells, trumpet shells, and that called the -.Ethiopian crown in its greatest per¬ 
fection. The dolia are also found there in great beauty. Many elegant snails and screw-shells are also 
brought from thence, and finally the serapion and spider shells. The Maidive and Philippine Islands, 
Bengal, and the Malabar Coast abound with the most elegant of all the species of snails, and furnish many 
other kinds of shells in great abundance and perfection. China abounds in the finest specimens of porcelain 
shells, and has also a great variety of beautiful snails. Japan furnishes the thicker and larger bivalves. 
The east coast of Africa is very rich in shells; here are found a great variety of the large porcelains, many 
of them of great beauty, and all the species of nautilus, many of which are very beautiful. The Red Sea is, 
beyond all other parts of the world, abundant in shells; scarce any kind is wanting there; but what we 
principally have from thence are the purpurse, porcelain, and sea-eggs. 

In collecting shells it is most advisable, whenever it can be done, to get those which have in them the* 
living animals, because the shells are then obtained in their natural beauty, and the full glow of their 
colours; for when they have been much exposed to the sun, their colours fade, and they are liable to other 
accidents that injure them. To kill the fish, it is recommended to give them a quick dip in boiling water; 
and when they are cooled, to lay them in cold water till they are cleaned. 

Shells are subject to several imperfections, some of which are natural, and others accidental; the 



SILKS. 


5IS 

natural defects are the effect of age, or sickness in the fish. The greatest mischief happens to shells by the 
fish dying in them. The curious pretend to be always able to distinguish a shell taken up with the fish 
alive from one found on the shores; they call the first a firing, the second a dead shell; and say that the 
colours are alwavs much fainter in the dead shells. When the shells have laid long dead on the shores, 
they are subject to many injuries, of which the being eaten by sea-worms is not the least; age renders the 
finest shells livid or dead in their colours. Besides the imperfections arising from age and sickness m the 
fish, shells are subject to other deformities, such as morbid cavities, or protuberances in parts where there 
should be none. When the shell is valuable, these faults may be hid, and much added to the beauty of the 
specimen, without at all injuring it as an object of natural history. A shell that has a smooth surface, and 
a natural dull polish, need only to be rubbed with the hand, or with a piece of chamois leather, with some 
fine rotten-stone, and it will become of a perfectly bright and fine polish. 