



TEA. 


521 


of fresh shoots the following year, every one of which bears nearly as many leaves as a whole shrub. Some¬ 
times the plants are not cut down till they are ten years old. The trees are not manured, but the ground 
is kept clean, and free from weeds. The tea is not always gathered by the single leaf, but often by sprigs, 
and in general by men, though women and children gather it. It is gathered from morning till night, 
when the dew is on the leaves as well as when it is off. 

Teas are generally in parcels, denominated chops by the Chinese, consisting of from 100 to 1000 chests 
each, bearing the name of the grower, or place where grown; and they are, generally speaking, found to be 
of an equal quality throughout, although, from a variety of seasons, or some other cause, it is found fresher 
and better in one year than another. 

Teas are divided into black and green. The former are again divided as follow: 

BLACK TEAS. 

I. Bohea, or Yoo-yee, the name of the country, is in the province of Fokien, and is very hilly; not 
only the hills are planted with tea trees, but the vailies also: the former are reckoned to grow the best tea. 
On them grow Congou, Pekoe, and Souchong; in the vailies or flat parts of the country, Bohea. There are 
four or five gatherings of Bohea tea in a year, according to the demand there is for it, but three, or at 
most, four gatherings are reckoned proper ; the others only hurt the next year’s crop. Of Souchong there 
can be but one gathering, which is of the first and youngest leaves; all others make inferior tea. 

The first gathering is called tow-tchune, and is from about the middle of April to the end of May, 
and the leaves are reckoned fat and oily. The second gathering is called euri, or gee-tchune, and is from 
about the middle of June to the middle of July; these leaves are less fat, or oily. The third gathering is 
called san-tchune, and is from the beginning of August to the end of September; these leaves are scarcely 
at all fat or oily, yet they look young. 

The following is the method of curing Bohea: 

When the leaves are gathered, they are put into large flat baskets to dry, and these are put upon 
shelves or planks in the air or wind, or in the sun, if not too intense, from morning until noon, at which 
time the leaves begin to throw out a smell; then they are latched. This is done by throwing each time about 
half a catty of leaves into the tatche, which is a flat pan of cast iron, and stirring them quick with the hand 
twice, the tatche being very hot; they are then taken out, and again put into the large flat baskets, and rub¬ 
bed by men’s hands to rob them, after which they are tatched in larger quantities, and over a slower fire, 
and then put into baskets over a charcoal fire, as it is practised on some occasions in Canton. When the tea 
is fired enough, which a person of skill directs, it is spread on a table, and picked or separated from the too 
large leaves, and those that are unrolled, yellow, broken, or bad. 