

Opals are to be met with in several parts of India, and atPalembang on Sumatra; but great caution 
is requisite in purchasing, as the natives are very expert in imitating them. 

OSTRICH FEATHERS. 

The feathers of the ostrich are divided into loose silky filaments. The long white plumes of the tail 
and wings have always been highly esteemed. The feathers most admired are those which are plucked 
from the animal while alive, and are, known by this property, that the quill contains a moist substance, 
wdiilst those which are pulled after death, are dry, light, and liable to worms. 

The short feathers are most esteemed for female dresses. Those from the Cape of Good Hope are 
not considered so good as those from Barbary; they are of a better colour, but not so perfect in the flue 
or feather, and run thin and ugly. The best are of a buffish tinge; the grey and coloured are used for 
dying. The stalks of the large feathers are heavy, and the edges of the feather broken and hairy ; these 
are of little value, and should be rejected. 

Paddy-bird feathers somewhat resemble those of the ostrich, but are much finer; they are of a cream 
colour, and should be chosen with their tops not broken, the sides or flue perfect, and the stem not bent; 
the larger they are, the more esteemed. 

The permanent duty on dressed ostrich feathers is £1 15s. per lb. and the war duty 11s. Sd. per Ik 
On undressed feathers the permanent duty is 10s. and the war duty 3s. 4d. per lb. 

3 U 2 



516 


QUICKSILVER—RHUBARB, 


QUICKSILVER, 

, Or mercury, is sometimes found in the earth in a fluid form, and is then called virgin mercury. The 
principal mines are in Hungary and Spain. A quantity is also produced at China, from whence it was for¬ 
merly imported into Europe; but of late years it has been sent from Europe to China. . 

The best quicksilver is of a shining silver colour, very fluid, appearing to the eye like melted lead, or 
tin. The following are the best modes of ascertaining its goodness:—Put a little into a silver spoon over 
a gentle fire; if it is good, it will evaporate without leaving any impurity behind; but if bad and drossy, 
the spoon will remain black. When strained through a piece of leather, if good, it will leave no impuri¬ 
ties behind, and be white, running clear and beautiful. That which is of a livid colour, and does not rea¬ 
dily separate into globules, or which has the appearance of a pellicle on its surface, from dust or greasiness, 
after being strained through leather, should be rejected. 

20 cwt. of quicksilver are allowed to a ton. The permanent duty is Is. per lb. and the temporary or 
war duty 4d. making in the whole, Is. 4d. per lb. 

RHUBARB 

Is an oblong tapering root, cultivated in China, likewise in the Russian dominions in Tartary: the 
latter is called Turkey rhubarb, because it formerly came to us from Turkey, but may more properly be 
called Russian, or Tartarian rhubarb. That imported from China is in pieces of 4, 5, or 6 inches In 
length, and 3 or 4 in diameter at the top; it is of a smooth even surface, moderately heavy, but not hard; 
externally of a yellow colour, with an admixture of brown; internally variegated with lively reddish streaks, 
forming a marbled appearance when cut. The yellow is the ground colour, and the red is disposed in short 
irregular veins, much in the manner of nutmegs. The Chinese are very careful in their method of drying it. 
They take up the root only in winter, or early in the spring, before the leaves begin to appear; they cut it 
into such pieces as they think proper, and lay it on a table in a shady place, turning it once or twice a day 
for two or three days; after this they string the pieces on a cord, at a distance from each other, and 
hang them up in a shady place, that they may dry leisurely. It is by this management the rhubarb is ren¬ 
dered so firm and solid as we find it; for if it were hung up to dry at once in a warm airy place, it would 
become light and spongy. They say also, that if the root be taken up in the summer, it is not only light 
and of little value, but that it has nothing of the reddish marbling, which is one of the great characters of 
its goodness. Sometimes the root is cut down the middle, and afterwards divided into pieces of 4 or 5 
inches in length, which appear flat, and dry better than the round. For some time past flat rhubarb has 
sold considerably better than round of the same goodness. 