

It is a common opinion that the verdure on green teas is occasioned by their being dried on copper; 
but it does not appear, from experiments that have been made, that there is any foundation for it. 

The trade in London divide green teas into the following sorts: 

Singlo. —There are two gatherings of Singlo tea, the first in April and May, the second in June; 
each gathering is divided into three or more sorts. The leaves of the first are large, fine, flat, and clean; 
of tills sort there may be collected from a pecul, from 40 to 55 catties, usually 45; the second sort is 
picked next, and what then remains, is the third or worst sort. 

Singlo tea is seldom imported by individuals. It is of a flattish leaf. It should be chosen of a fresh 
strong flavour; it is of a light green colour when chewed, and on infusion, should yield a pale amber 
colour, and none of the leaves turn brown or dark coloured; it should feel crisp and brittle. That 
which is yellow, of a large loose leaf, and dusty, should be rejected. 

Twankay, or Tunkey, is a superior kind of Singlo. It grows near the Hyson country, and is 
oftener tatched and picked than the common Singlo. Twankay, like other Singlo tea, is made into two 
or three sorts; the best is sometimes sold for Hyson of an inferior growth. It should be chosen with the 
leaves well twisted or curled; it ought also to have a burnt smell, not too strong, but pleasant, and on 
infusion, yield a paler colour than Singlo. That which is yellow, and the smell inclining to that of 
sulphur, should be rejected. 

This tea is only imported by the Company, and there are no particular chops of a superior kind. 

Hyson Skin, or Bloom Tea, has its name from being compared to the skin or peel of the Hyson 
tea, a sort of cover to it, consequently not so good. It consists of the largest, unhandsome, bad coloured, 
and uncurled leaves that are picked out from the Hyson tea. 

Hyson Skin is a superior kind of green tea, of a round, knobby, brightish leaf; but great part of 
what is imported, is of an inferior quality, of a yellowish open leaf, somewhat resembling Singlo, and in 
consequence varies greatly in price. It should be chosen of a fresh smell, on infusion yield a pale yellow¬ 
ish green colour, and of a delicate taste, though somewhat of a burnt flavour: the more it approaches to 
Hyson, the more it is esteemed. 

The price of Hyson Skin at Canton varies from 25 to 30 tales per pecul. 

Superior Hyson Skin.— This is a distinction made in the tea-trade to divide the common Hyson 
Skm and the Hyson. This is said to be Hyson tea a year or more old, which, after undergoing the process 



TEA. 


525 


of latching repeatedly, is brought to market a second time; its appearance is much darker than Hvson, 
with less bloom on it. Its smell is somewhat musty, and the taste has more of that brassy flavour 
peculiar to green teas, without any of the delicate aromatic taste of good Hyson; on infusion, the water is 
darker coloured, and with less fragrance than Hyson. 