

Teas are generally allotted and arranged for sale by the East India Company, according to the 
Chinese chops, which indicate them to be of one growth: all the Hyson teas in one mark or chop being 
classed in the same bed or parcel, which thus becomes almost synonymous terms: they are then subdivided into 
lots of a certain number of chests, because it is found that the tea in each chop is always exactly the same 
kind, although it may happen to be rather fresher and better in one year than in another. The number 
of chests in a lot are usually 


Bohea 3 chests, 

Congou — - -- —.—5 ditto. 

Souchong 4 ditto. 

Single 6 ditto. 


Twankay--- 6 chests. 

Hyson Skin ----- 6 ditto. 

Hysom-*-—___ 6 ditto. 

(4unpowder^vvvvvvfc'%vvv» > v“ | fc'v% 2 or 3 ditto 



TEA. 


527 


The following are the broker’s marks on teas, and their explanation: 


M 

Musty and mouldy. 

/. 

Middling. 


Fine. 

m 

Musty. 

//. 

Good middling. 

p 

Plundered. 

l r 

Barely sweet. 

r 

Good. 

D 

Damage taken off. 

/ 

Ordinary. 

h 

Very good. 

T 

Tared chests. 




OVER ANY MARK. 



2 

Better face than the com¬ 

SL 

Singlo Leaf. 

Kb 

High burnt. 


mon run of the sort. 

f 

Flaggy. 

smo 

Smokev. 

h 

Heated. 

w 

Woody. 

a 

Signifies half a degree 

b 

Blooms. 

os 

Odd smell. 


better. 

L 

Large Leaf. 

d 

Dusty. 

sk 

Shippy. 

sm 

Small Leaf. 

U 

Little burnt. 




The brokers' charge on managing Private Trade teas at the sale is generally half per cent. 


The Company are obliged by Act of Parliament to make four sales of tea in a year, putting them 
up at certain prices, and selling to the best bidder; but if there are no buyers at the fixed prices, the. 
teas rejected, are generally put up at the following sale at no price, and sold to the highest bidder. 

The propagation of the tea-tree in Europe being very desirable, the following methods are recom¬ 
mended for preserving the seeds or plants from China to Europe. 

Care should be taken that the seeds are fresh, sound, ripe, plump, and moist internally; after being 
well dried in the sun, they may be enclosed in bees wax; or left in their capsules, they may be put into 
very close canisters of tin or tutenague. In the directions given to La Peyrouse by the French Govern¬ 
ment, it is recommended that these and other seeds be placed in alternate layers of earth or sand in tin 
boxes closed up exactly, and placed in solid cases covered with waxed cloth; the boxes to be placed in a 
part of the ship least accessible to moisture, and the most sheltered from extreme heat or cold. Seeds 
packed in absorbent paper, and surrounded by raisins or moist sugar, are kept a long time in a state fit for 
vegetation. American seeds are frequently brought over, by putting them into a box not made too close, 
upon alternate layers of moss, in such a manner as to admit the seeds to vegetate. This might be tried 
with the seeds of the tea-tree; and to succeed more certainly, some of the seeds might be sown in pots or 
boxes when the ship arrives at Saint Helena, and after passing the Tropic of Cancer, or near the latitude 
of 30° North. But the best method seems to be, to sow ripe seeds in good light earth in boxes on leaving 
Canton, covering them with wire to prevent rats and other vermin coming to them, and taking care that 
the boxes be not exposed to too much air, nor to the spray of the sea. A little fresh or rain water should 
be sprinkled over them now and then, and when the seedling plants appear, they should be kept moist, 
and out of the burning sun. If young plants can be procured in China, they may be sent over in a grow¬ 
ing state in boxes 3 feet 4 inches long, 20 inches broad, and as much deep, having a few holes bored 
through the bottom. 