

Hyson, or He-tchune, the name of the first crop of this tea. There are two gatherings of it, and 
each gathering is distinguished into two or more sorts; but as great care is taken in gathering it, 60 catties 
may be chosen from a pecul of it, when only 45 catties can be chosen from Single. 

Hyson tea should be chosen of a full sized grain, of a fine blooming appearance, very dry, and so 
crisp, that with a slight pressure it will crumble to dust: when infused in water, the leaf should open clear 
and smooth, without being broken, or appearing shrivelled, (which is one of the indications of old tea). 
It should give the water a light green tinge; the water should also have an aromatic smell, with a strong 
pungent taste. Those leaves which appear of a dead yellowish green, or give the water a similar tinge, 
or rather a brownish hue, should be rejected; likewise that -which appears highly glazed, which occasions 
it to yield a darker colour to water. 

The price of Hyson tea at Canton varies from 4S to 60 tales per pecul. 

Gunpowder is a superior kind of Hyson. This tea should be chosen round, resembling small shot, 
with a beautiful bloom upon it, which will not bear the breath; it should appear of a greenish hue, and a 
fragrant pungent taste. The chest of gunpowder, which is of the same dimensions of that of Hyson, should 
weigh from 75 to 80 catties; and the heavier it weighs, the better the tea is considered. Gunpowder 
tea is sometimes adulterated; an inferior kind of tea is dyed and glazed, to bear the appearance of the 
finest tea, but which, on infusion, is very inferior in every respect. This should be carefully avoided, like¬ 
wise that of which the leaf is open and loose, the face of a darker hue or bloom, and that has a brassy 
unpleasant taste. 

The price of Gunpowder tea at Canton is about 75 tales per pecul; the sale price from 7s. to Ss. per lb. 
the duty payable by the purchaser; the retail price to the consumer is from 15s. to 18s. per lb. 

Chulan Hyson is a peculiar kind of Hyson-leaf, having the berries of a small plant, called by the 
Chinese Chulan, mixed with it, which gives it the cowslip flavour, on which account it is sometimes called 
cowslip tea. It should be chosen of a yellowish leaf, a fragrant and perfumed smell, and when infused 
in water, of a strong cowslip flavour. This tea is seldom imported but as presents. 

Ball Tea is so called from the form into which it is made, being round, and nearly the size of a 
nutmeg, composed of the leaves of black tea, generally of the best kind, gummed together. It is 
sometimes brought to England as presents. 

Brush Tea —so called from the leaves being twisted into small cords, like packthread, about If to 
2 inches long; usually three of these are tied together at the ends by different coloured silks. These are 
made both of green and black tea, and, like the former, is only imported as presents. 

There are many different growths of Single and Hyson teas, and also some difference in the manner 
of curing them, according to the skill or fancy of the curer. This occasions difference of quality in the 
teas, as does also a good or had season; a rainy season, for instance, makes the leaves yellow, and a cold 
season nips the trees, and makes the leaves poor. The Chinese at Canton also sell all sorts of old teas for 
new, after they have prepared them for that purpose, either by tatching or firing, and mixing them with 
new teas; but these deceits may, upon strict inspection, be discovered; but where the advice of a person 
resident at Canton can be obtained, it is preferable to depending on your own judgment. The taste in 
England should be the guide; as teas, which may please the sight and palate at Canton, may, in the course 
of the voyage, lose their flavour, and be comparatively of little value. 