



526 


TEA. 


The following are a few of the chops of Hyson teas brought to the Canton market, with the number 
contained in a chop, and a description of their quality, according to the technical terms 


of chests usually 
of the trade: 

Chests. 

Tien Hung TfcV*.-■%%. tv 104 best in market. 

Hung Hung_.__—100 mid. and good mid. 

Hung Hee —--140 middling. 

Wun Hee ditto. 

Cow Mow ___168 middling and better. 


Chests. 

Cowlong __ W ~X7Q middling and better. 

Mun Kee—■_ditto. 

Khee Kee _———-110 ditto. 

Hiong Chee -265 good middling. 

Wo Hung -134 middling. 


The surface of a chest of tea often carries a superior appearance to the middle or bottom; it is there¬ 
fore necessary to have some of them turned out. In the Company’s teas about five in every 100 of the black 
teas are turned out, but in greens not so many, as the exposure to the air injures the appearance of the 
teas. Of teas purchased from the merchants who do not belong to the Hong, it is necessary to be very 
particular in examining them, as they are often falsely packed. 

The following are the tares and allowances on teas at the East India Company’s sales: 

When goods are received into the Private Trade warehouses, they are brought to sale with all possible 
dispatch. In these warehouses an even beam is never admitted; but in such cases a one pound weight is 
always added to the tare; and on all packages taring 28 lbs. or upwards, one pound super-tare is allowed. 

Upon packages weighing 28 lbs. gross, a tw r o ounce weight is placed in the scale by way of giving 
a turn in favour of the trade. One pound is also allowed for draft on goods of the above w r eight, and in 
case of an even beam, one pound is deducted; this pound is also allowed by the Customs and Excise, but 
not the tw r o ounce weight, except by the Excise, and that on tea only. 

In taring goods, the scale in which the weights are placed, is allowed to preponderate. On quarter 
chests, if on averaging those tared, they turn out even pounds, no further allowance is made, unless the 
chest weighs gross 84lbs. or upwards, in vririch case one pound is allowed for super-tare on each package; 
but if' there be a fraction, the fraction wanting is only allowed. Thus if the average tare be 22 lbs. the 
allowance is 23 lbs. and it is the same, viz, 23 lbs. if the average tare be 22f lbs. On half chests, if on 
averaging those tared, they turn out even pounds, a pound is allowed for super-tare on each package; and if 
there be a fraction, it is reckoned a pound as before: thus if the average tare be 36 lbs. the allowance is 
37 lbs. and if 36J lbs, the allowance is 38 lbs. 

On whole chests, if on averaging those tared, they turn out even pounds, 2 lbs, are allowed on each 
package for super-tare; but if there be a fraction, 1 lb. and the fraction wanting are allowed. Thus if 
the average tare be 66 lbs. the allowance is 68 lbs. and it is the same if the average tare be 66J lbs. 

The foregoing allowances on tea are also made by the Excise; but the Customs allow only the pound 
for a fraction, as before stated. 