

The Dutch East India Company were unquestionably the first who engaged in tea as an article of 
commerce; and from the beginning until near the close of the seventeenth century, the whole of the Euro¬ 
pean demand was supplied through the medium of their sales. The quantities that were imported during 
this period, are perhaps to be ascertained only by referring to the Dutch East India Company’s books. 



PRESENT STATE OF THE TEA TRADE. 


529 


It is sufficient, however, in this place to remark, that they must have been comparatively trifling. Its prin¬ 
cipal channel of expenditure was in medicine, where it failed of obtaining any considerable degree of repu¬ 
tation, owing to the discordant opinions that were held by the faculty with regard to its properties. 

In 1635 Simon Pauli publicly declared against it, in a treatise entitled 66 Comment, de Abusa Tabacea 
et These,” in which he was followed by many others, who concurred with him in opinion as to the use of 
it being attended with injurious effects. On the other hand, it was not without its advocates, by whom, it 
was highly extolled for its virtues. Thus circumstanced, it could hardly be expected that tea should make 
any rapid advahces in the public estimation. Yalentyn, a native of the Netherlands, relates that in 1670 
the use of it was unknown in his native town of Dort. About this time, he adds, Yanden Brouke and 
De Leonardis attempted to introduce the practice of drinking the infusion as a beverage, but with so little 
success, that it was publicly ridiculed, under the name of U heu wasser,” or hay water. 

About 1673 tea met with a powerful supporter in Dr. Cornelius Bontekoe. This gentleman, whose 
eminence in his profession had raised him to the situation of first physician to the Elector of Branden- 
burgh, entertained the highest opinion of its salutary qualities, and deemed it impossible to injure the 
stomach, even if as much as two or three hundred cups were taken in the day. The Dutch East India Com¬ 
pany -were so highly pleased with this work, that they voted the author a handsome pecuniary gratification. 

The sanction of so respectable an authority had its operation in relieving tea from many of the pre¬ 
judices that had been entertained against it; but the high price at.which it continued to be vended, pre¬ 
vented the consumption from being materially increased. In fact, tea has never been in very extensive 
use upon the Continent, nor would it probably have attracted the attention of foreigners, as a distinct 
object of commerce, had they not in more recent periods availed themselves of the opportunities that 
offered, of participating in the supply of this country, through the medium of a contraband trade. 

Having thus given a brief statement of the progress of tea upon the Continent, to the close of the 
seventeenth century, we next proceed to shew that, at the like period, its advances had not been more 
rapid in this country. 

The use of tea had obtained in England long before the East India Company adopted it as an article 
of trade; but when or by whom it was first introduced, cannot be ascertained with any direct certainty. 
Jonas Han way asserts that a quantity of it was first brought from Holland, in the baggage of the Lords 
Arlington and Ossory, in the year 1666, by whom it was introduced among the nobility as a novelty. Sir 
John Hawkins, in his Life of Dr. Johnson, is of opinion that Mr. Han way is not accurate on this head, and 
cites an ode of Waller to the Queen, to prove that in 16S3 it was considered as a new thing; but it is 
evident that neither of these gentlemen is correct. It has again been held by others that tea was un¬ 
known in 1660. because it is not to be found among the established articles of import, specified in the Book 
of Rates referred to in the Act of 12 Charles II. chap. 4, commonly called the “ Tonnage and Poundage 
Act ” The same observation is equally applicable to coffee and chocolate. This affords conclusive evi¬ 
dence that neither of these articles was considered at the time of sufficient importance to merit a place 
among the materials of commerce; but that they were all known, and all in previous use, is placed beyond 
the possibility of doubt, by referring to two Acts of Parliament, passed in the same year, 12'" Charles IL 
chap. 23 -and 24, the one granting to His Majesty an inland or excise duty on certain commodities therein 
named, during his life; the other in perpetuity, as a compensation in lieu of the advantages that were 
derived from the Courts of Wards and Liveries and Tenures in Capite, which had been given up. By 
each of these acts it is directed that there shall be paid by the maker thereof. 