

It is very doubtful whether there are any records in existence, either at the Custom House or the Ex¬ 
cise Office, that will shew the quantities of tea that were imported during this period, or the number of 
gallons of tea on which the excise duty was paid; but it may be reasonably concluded they must have been 
very trifling, from the high price it bore, which was from 40 to 50 shillings per pound at the first cost. 

That tea was considered a scarce and valuable article in 1664, may be gathered from the following 
entries in the Company's records; 

<fi 1664, July 1.—Ordered, that the master-attendant do go on board the ships, now arrived, and en¬ 
quire what rarities of birds, beasts, or other curiosities there are on board, fit to present to His Majesty, 
and to desire that they may not be disposed of till the Company are supplied with such as they may wish, 
on paying for the same ” And on “the 22d of August, the Governor acquainting the Court that the factors 
have in every instance failed the Company of such things as they writ for, to have presented His Majesty 



PRESENT STATE OF THE TEA TRADE. 


53 i 


with, and that His Majesty may not find himself wholly neglected by the Company, he was of opinion, 
if the Court think fit, that a silver case of oil of cinnamon, which is to be had of Mr. Thomas Winter 
for J?75, and some good thea, be provided for that end, which he hopes may be acceptable. The Court 
approved very well thereof.” 

1664, September 30, there is in the general books an entry that 

C£ Sundry accounts oweth to John Stannion, Secretary, 
u Presents.—For a case containing six China bottles, headed with silver ^£ I3 0 0 
cc More for 2 lbs. 2 oz. of thea, for His Majesty 4 5 0” 

1666, June 30. There is a similar entry of several rareti/es, chiefly the productions of China, pro¬ 
vided by the Secretary for His Majesty, among which are 

22f lbs. of thea , at 50 shillings per lb. _ ________17 6 

For the two cheefe persons that attended His Majesty, thea ___ 6 15 0 

There are also about the same period, various entries of small purchases of from 6 to 8 lbs. at a time, 
for the use of the Court of Committees, bought of the coffee-house keepers. At this period the Com¬ 
pany held no trading intercourse with China. In 1635 some persons, under the authority of a grant from 
King Charles I. (which was a manifest infringement of the Company's charter), set on foot a voyage 
thither, and actually reached Canton; but, owing to the jealousies and intrigues of the Portuguese, they 
were eventually ruined. Various attempts were also made at subsequent periods by the Company to 
carry on a trade with China, and factories were established on several of the islands which border on that 
Continent, as Tywan, Tonquin, Amoy, &c. but they were all eventually withdrawn, not answering the 
expence of their maintenance. 

1667. The East India Company's first order for importing tea was issued to their agent at Bantam, 
to send home by these ships 100 lbs. waight of the best tey that you can get.” The first importation 