

For every gallon of coffee made and 

For every gallon of chocolate, sherbet, and tea made and sold ^^ w ^^^Eightpence 
Vol.II. 3 Y 



530 


RISE, PROGRESS, AND 

To this, in the year 1670, by an Act of 22 and 23 Charles II. chap. 5, was added a further addition of 
the like sums, by which the duty on tea was increased to two shillings per gallon. 

This singular mode of taxation, so different from the modern practice, may not at present be very 
readily understood; but by adverting to a few circumstances, the needful explanation may be afforded, and 
at the same time not prove irrelevant to the subject. 

It is on all hands agreed that the introduction of coffee into this country took place prior to that of 
chocolate or tea. The difference, however, between each must, in point of time, have been so trifling, as 
scarce to admit of a distinction. It has been held by many respectable authorities, that coffee was first 
brought to England in 1652 by Mr. Edwards, a member of the , Turkey Company, and that his servant 
was the first who opened a house for publicly vending it as a drink; but it appears from the following ex¬ 
tracts from, the Life of Wood, the antiquarian, that a coffee-house had been opened at Oxford a year or two 
sooner. “ In 1651 one Jacob, a Jew, opened a coffee-house at the Angel, in the parish of St. Peter, in the 
East Oxon, and there it was, by some who delighted in noveltie, drunk. When he left Oxon, he sold it in 
Old Southampton Buildings, in Holborne, neare London, and was living there in 1671.” 

The love of novelty is a predominant feature in the British character. Coffee no sooner became 
known, than it was eagerly sought after as a fashionable beverage, and houses were opened in various parts 
of the metropolis, as also in other parts of the kingdom, for vending it as a public drink, to which quickly 
succeeded chocolate, sherbet, and tea.* The latter article was in use in 1661, as appears from the manu¬ 
script diary of Mr. Samuel Pepys, in the Pepysian Library at Cambridge, which says, “ September 25, 
1661, I sent for a cup of tea (a China drink), of which I had never drunk before, and went away.” 

These authorities are satisfactory that tea was originally drunk in the public coffee-houses in com¬ 
mon with coffee, chocolate, and sherbet. In proportion as the coffee-houses were frequented, the taverns 
became deserted^ and Government, finding a sensible diminution in the duty upon wines, judged it necessary 
that the deficiency should be made up by a tax on the liquors consumed in the coffee-houses, as also that 
those houses should be placed under a similar degree of restraint with taverns and ale-houses, by requiring 
the keepers of them to take out a licence at the Quarter Sessions, and enter into security for the due pay¬ 
ment of the excise duty. If they neglected to do this, they were liable to a penalty of £5 per month. 

The excise officers attended the coffee-houses at stated periods, and took an account of the number 
of gallons of each liquid that were made, upon which the duties were charged. This practice existed 
till 1689, when, “ it being found by experience that collecting the excise duty upon the liquors of coffee, 
tea, and chocolate was troublesome and unequal upon the retailers, and required such an attendance of 
officers, as rendered the receipt thereof very inconsiderable,” (so says the preamble to the Act, William and 
Mary, session 2, chap. 6), it was resolved to discontinue it, and in lieu thereof, to establish an additi¬ 
onal custom duty of five shillings per pound. 