


RISE, PROGRESS, 

AND 

PRESENT STATE OF THE TEA TRADE. 

Tea, which, about one hundred and fifty years ago, was scarcely known as a commodity of traffic, 
now holds the most distinguished rank in the list of Asiatic imports. It is not only the most extensive, but 
the least fluctuating branch of the East India Company's concerns; nor are the advantages that result 



52 $ 


RISE, PROGRESS, AND 


therefrom confined merely to the Company alone; the public are deeply interested therein. It benefits 
navigation, by affording constant employment, out and home, for at least 50,000 tons of shipping, and 
6000 seamen; it has been the means of opening an increased market for the vent of one of the most im¬ 
portant of our national manufactures, (woollens, to the extent oi upwards of a million sterling per annum); 
and it has at all times contributed largely in support of the public revenue. 

When the Chinese first began to use tea as a beverage, we cannot trace. The first accounts we have of 
it, are from two Arabian travellers who visited China about 850, and relate, the inhabitants had a beve¬ 
rage they called « Chah,” and that a considerable revenue was levied on its consumption; it seems, there¬ 
fore, to have been as universally in use then as at present. 

The first European writer who mentions tea, is Botero, an Italian, who published a treatise in 1590, 
in which he does not indeed mention its name, but describes it in such a manner, that it is impossible to 
mistake it. He says, “ the Chinese have a herb, out of which they press a delicate juice, which serves 
them for drink instead of wine; it also preserves their health, and frees them from those evils that the 
immoderate use of wine doth breed unto us.” In 1600 Teixera, a Spaniard, saw the dried leaves in 
Malacca, where he was informed the Chinese prepared a drink from it. 

Olearius, a German, found the custom of drinking tea prevalent among the Persians in 1633, and gave 
the following description:—“ They drink a kind of black water, prepared from a decoction of a certain 
shrubj called Cha, or Chia, which the IJsbeck Tartars import from China; the leaves are long and taper, 
measuring nearly an inch, of a black colour when dried and welked, and shrivelled like worms. 1 ’ Starkaw, 
the Russian Ambassador at the Court of the Mogul in 1639, partook of this beverage. “ I know not,” 
says he, c< whether they are the leaves of a tree or a herb; they are boiled in water, with the addition of 
some milk.” At his departure he was offered a quantity of tea as a present for the Czar; but the ambas¬ 
sador declined the compliment, as it would only encumber him with a commodity for which he had no use. 
Dufour in 1693 remarks, “that tea is in great repute in China, Japan, Tonquin, and Tartary; that, 
after making its way into India, it passed to Persia, and from thence to Turkey, in which latter place the 
use of it was not very general, as the Turks gave a decided preference to coffee.” 

The precise period at which tea was first introduced into Europe, is in some measure involved in ob¬ 
scurity. The Editors of the Encyclopaedia Britannica state, that it was first imported by the Dutch in 
1610; it is most certain that in 1611 the agents of the Dutch East India Company solicited and obtained 
a grant from the Emperor of Japan, allowing them to trade in his territories. This treaty was effected 
through the medium of letters addressed to the Emperor by Prince Maurice, then at the head of the 
Dutch Government. An interchange of presents took place, agreeable to the invariable usage among Eastern 
nations on all diplomatic occasions, and in that made by the Emperor, doubtless tea was included, as one 
of the natural productions of his country. This accounts in a satisfactory manner for the introduction of 
tea into Holland; but when it is considered that the Portuguese, immediately after the discovery of a pas¬ 
sage to India'by the way of the Cape of Good Hope, in 1497, formed extensive establishments in almost 
every part of that country—that they resided in great numbers at Japan, long before the Dutch made their 
appearance at that place—that they had a trading intercourse with China direct, and had sent an ambas¬ 
sador to Pekin as early as 1517—and, above all, that they obtained a settlement upon Macao in 1586, it is 
a fair presumption that the inhabitants of Portugal could not for more than an entire century have 
remained strangers to a commodity that was so familiar to their countrymen in every part of Asia, 