

From 1701 to 1710 inclusive, the progress appears as follows: 

In 1701 there were imported from India 66,73Slbs. 

The Company's instructions to the supracargoes of them ships are very particular as to the mode of 
package and stowage, as appear from the following paragraph: 

“ Tea is a commodity of that general use, and so nicely to be managed in its package, to preserve 
its flavour and virtue, that you cannot be too careful in putting it up. Take special care, therefore, it be 
well closed in tutenague, then wrapped up in leaves, and so put into good tubs of dry, well-seasoned 
wood, made tight and close enough to preserve it from all manner of scent, which it is very subject to im¬ 
bibe, and thereby become of no value here. But you must be sure that the wood of your tubs has no scent, 
whether sweet or unsavory, that will spoil the tea; so will camphire, musk, and all other strong scented 
commodities; wherefore no such smell must come into the ship, at least near the tea. For the like reason, 
take care the tutenague be well cured of the smell of the soldering oil before using. Bring no tea in 
small pots; it will not keep. Be sure the tea you bring be very new, and the best of its sort, remembering 
that in this and every other commodity, the worst pays as much freight as the best, and many times the 
same custom. Keep the tea in the coolest part of the ship; what is put in the hold, open the hatches in fair 
weather to give it air as often as you have opportunity. But you will see by the Captain's instructions, we 
have required that our tea be stowed between decks, abaft the after hatchway, with a bulk head, and a 
little gangway made for passage, which do you see done accordingly. It being now peace, we are resolved 
to dispense with our old order of stowing no goods between decks, when so great an advantage will 
accrue as the preserving the tea, a very considerable article in the profit and loss of that commodity." 

1702. There were imported from Holland 9 lbs. and from the East Indies 37,052 lbs. in all 37,061 lbs. 

The orders for tea becoming considerable, the Company's instructions were, to send a ship’s cargo of 
tea, exclusive of 40 tons of copper and 24 tons of coffee, and to be two-thirds Singlo tea, one-sixth Im¬ 
perial tea, and one-sixth Bohea tea. 

In 1703, by 2 and 3 Anne, chap. 9, a further duty was granted on all imports, equal to one-third of the 
new subsidy imposed in 1698, the whole of which was allowed to be drawn back on exportation. This 
was termed cc The One-third Subsidy."—By an Act of 3 and 4 Anne, chap. 4, an additional duty was im¬ 
posed of Is. per lb. on tea, imported from the place of its growth, and 2s. 6d. if from Holland, the 
whole of which to be drawn back on exportation. 

In the same session, chap. 5, an additional grant was made of double the amount of the One-third 
Subsidy, with the like drawback. This obtained the name of the 66 Two-thirds Subsidy." 



RISE, PROGRESS, AND 


531- 


In the years 1703 to 1710 inclusive, the quantities of tea imported were as follow: 