

In 1700 the English first visited Chusan, and were received in a friendly manner by the Governor; 
but they experienced great difficulty in obtaining permission to land goods, or to trade; and in the fol¬ 
lowing year an order arrived from the Emperor to quit the port, which they were compelled to do, by 
which the Company experienced a very severe loss. 

NINGPO, or Liampo River, is nine leagues to the westward of Chusan. Here the English once 
had a factory; but the oppressions their trade was subject to, compelled them to abandon it. 

NANKIN is situated on the river Kiang, in latitude about 32° 5' North, and longitude 119° East; it 
is a place of very great trade, being one of the largest cities in the Chinese empire. The river is about a mile 
wide at the city, and is navigable for vessels of considerable burthen. The articles manufactured here, are 
in. general very superior to those of the other parts of the empire, particularly China-ware, and various 
lands of silk-goods, the raw silk being of the best kind. 





CHAPTER XXIX. 


Japan. 


Island of Formosa—Patchow Islands—Liquejo Islands—-Japan Archipelago—Nangasacki; Description—Coins, 
Weights, and Measures—Commerce of the Portuguese with Japan—Attempts of the English to open a 
Trade with Japan—Commerce of the Chinese with Japan—Attempt of the Russians to open a Trade with 

Japan—Dutch Commerce with Japan—Imports and Exports—Mode of conducting the Commerce Port 

Regulations, Orders, fyc.—Prohibited Goods—Import and Export Duties. 


OPPOSITE the coast of China are many islands running in a north-easterly direction towards the 
Japanese Archipelago, the principal of which are Formosa, and two groups of small islands, the Patchow 
and the Liquejo Islands. 

FORMOSA. 

This island is about 70 leagues in length, extending nearly N.N.E. and S.S.W. The southern part 
has on it a high double-peaked mountain, discernible at 20 leagues distance in clear weather; from this the 
land slopes down, terminating in a low projecting point, called the South Cape, or S.E. point of Formosa. 
This point is situated in latitude 2P54' North, and longitude 121°S' East. About 25 leagues to the N.W. 
is’ Tywan, where the Dutch had formerly a considerable fort, from which they were expelled by the Chinese. 
The English also made some unsuccessful attempts to form an establishment here. 

PATCHOW ISLANDS. 

These are the westernmost of the two groups, being nearest to Formosa. The southernmost is in 
latitude 24° 6' North, and longitude 123° 52' East. The eastern extremity is formed by Typinsan, a large 
island, having on its north side an extensive reef, on which the Providence, Captain Broughton, was 
wrecked in 1797, in latitude 25° 6 North, and longitude 125° 11 East. These islands are tributary to 
the Great Liquejo. After the loss of the Providence, her commander and crew* were treated with great 
hospitality by the inhabitants of Typinsan, who supplied the schooner with water and refreshments, to 
carry them to Macao. 