



JAPAN. 


551 


Japanese took the most effectual means to prevent the Christian religion from being ever re-established 
in their dominions; and the Portuguese, by a proclamation in 1639, received the strictest injunctions, 
under the severest penalties, never to approach the coasts of Japan any more. 

Soon after this decree, two ships arrived at Nangasacki from Macao, when it was instantly notified 
to them, that the Emperor of Japan had totally prohibited all commerce with the Portuguese; and they 
had also a copy of the Emperors edict, which they were directed to make public at Macao, and to inform 
the inhabitants of that city, that they were the last ships that should ever be suffered to anchor in any 
port of Japan; and that if ever they came thither again, they should be treated as enemies, and put to 
death without mercy. On their return to Macao the whole city was in consternation, convinced that the 
loss of the Japan trade would prove their ruin ; to prevent which, they agreed to send a solemn embassy, 
to induce the Emperor to recall Ms edict, or so to qualify it, that they might on certain terms be per¬ 
mitted to send ships thither. 

The ship that carried the ambassadors, arrived at Nangasacki July 9th, 1640, and sent an account to 
the Japanese Government of the nature of their commission. The ship was immediately seized, and the 
ambassadors and all who belonged to them, except eight negro seamen, were imprisoned till the Empe¬ 
ror's pleasure should be known. On the return of the courier, they were summoned before the magistrates, 
who demanded what it was that could induce them, after so fair a warning had been given them, to return, 
in direct breach of the Emperor’s edict. They stated they were not come as traders, but in the characters 
of ambassadors, which had always by all nations been esteemed sacred. They were told that this excuse 
would not be admitted, and that they had incurred the penalty of the edicts when they were conducted 
back to prison. Next day the ambassadors and all their attendants, to the number of 74 persons, were 
put to death, except 13, and their property burnt. After the execution, the magistrates sent for the 
survivors; and having asked them if they had seen their ship burnt, enquired of them whether they 
would faithfully report at Macao what they were commanded by the Emperor to say in his behalf? Being 
answered in the affirmative, they proceeded thus:—“ You are then to inform your fellow-citizens, that 
henceforth the subjects of Japan will not * receive either money, merchandise, or presents from them; 
you see we have burnt the very clothes of those who were executed. Let your people use any of ours 
that fall into their hands- in the same manner; we consent to it, and desire that you will think of us no 
more than if there were not such a nation as the Japanese in the world."’—They were then shewn the heads 
of the ambassadors and the others on poles, and a large chest containing the bodies, with a long inscription 
ending with these words: cc All this is set forth as a memorial of what is past, and as an advertise¬ 
ment for the time to come. Henceforward, so long as the sun shall shine upon the earth, let not any 
Christian be so hardy as to set his foot in Japan. And be it known to all the world, that if King Philip 
in person, the God of the Christians, or the Great Xaca (one of the first deities of Japan) shall presume 
to break this ordinance, he shall pay for it with his head."’ They then gave them a small vessel, in wMch 
they proceeded to Macao. 