


4 A 2 



LIQUEJO ISLANDS—JAPAN. 


54S 


LIQUEJO ISLANDS. 

This group extends in a N. N. E. and S. S. W. direction. The south end of the largest island is in lati¬ 
tude 26° 3 North, and longitude 128° 18' East. It is of considerable size, and well-inhabited; and there 
are a number of junks which carry on a trade with Amoy and with Japan. 

The Liquejo Islands are subject to Japan, to whom they pay an annual tribute. The inhabitants* 
however, are treated in their trade like the Chinese frequenting Japan, and are compelled to trade only at 
Satzuma, and not to frequent any other port. The import and sale of their goods are also limited to a 
yearly sum of 125,000 tales, beyond which nothing should be sold; they, however, dispose of goods to 
a much larger extent, through the connivance of the Japanese directors of their trade. The goods im¬ 
ported by them into Japan, are silk and other stuffs, and various Chinese commodities brought in their own 
junks from China, some rice and other grain, pearl shells, and cow T ries. 

The empire of Japan consists of three large, and many small islands The names of the former are 
Niphon, Ximo, and Xicoco. There are five chief maritime or trading towns in the empire—Meaco* 
Jeddo, Osacca, Sakai, and Nangasacki: the four first are upon the great island Niphon, and the other 
on the S.W, extremity of the island Ximo. 


NANGASACKI, 

The sole port in the empire into which the Dutch, the only European nation suffered to trade with 
Japan, are admitted, is situated near the S.W. extreme of the island Ximo, In latitude about 32° 48' 
North, and longitude 130° 12 East. The harbour is about three miles long, and one broad; it extends 
north and south, and has a muddy bottom, where ships lay in 5 or 6 fathoms, within gun-shot of the fac¬ 
tory, and the town of Nangasacki, at the head of the harbour. 

The island of Dezima is let by the inhabitants to the Dutch Company, and is considered merely as a 
street belonging to the town: the inhabitants therefore build all the dwelling-houses, and keep them in 
repair. The island is joined to the town and main land, and at low water is separated from it only by a 
ditch; at high water it becomes an island, which has a communication with the town by means of a bridge. 
At the entrance from the bridge there is a large stone pillar, upon which hang on several tables the 
Emperor's edicts for the regulation of the Dutch trade. The size of this island is very inconsiderable, it 
being about 600 feet in length, and 120 in breadth: it is planked in on all sides, and has two gates, the one 
towards the town near the bridge, and the other towards the water-side. The latter gate is opened on such 
days only as the Dutch ships are discharging or taking in their cargoes; the other is always guarded in the 
daytime by the Japanese, and locked at night. Near it also is a guard-house, where those that go in and 
out of the town are searched. Lengthways upon this island are built, in form of a small town, the Dutch 
Company's several storehouses, their hospital, and separate houses for their servants, two stories high, of 
whldi the upper part is inhabited, and the lower used as store and lumber rooms. Between these houses 
run-two streets, which are intersected in the middle by another. Excepting the Dutch large and fire-proof 
storehouses, the houses are all built of wood and clay, covered with tiles, and having paper windows and 
floor-mats of straw. By the sea-gate is kept in readiness every kind of apparatus for the prevention of 
fire, and at the other end are a pleasure and kitchen garden, and a large summer-house. For the purpose 
of keeping a vigilant eye over the Dutch, several Japanese officers, interpreters, and guards are kept on the 
island. *1 here are watch-houses built in three corners of it, in which watch is kept during the time that 
the ships lie in the harbour. The interpreters have a large house on the island, called their College; there 