




550 


JAPAN. 


The seni are strung 100 at a time, or, as is most commonly the case, 96 on a rush. The coins in one 
of these parcels are seldom all of one sort, but generally consist of two, three, or more different kinds; in 
this case, the larger sorts are strung on first, and then follow the smaller; the number diminishing in pro¬ 
portion to the number of large pieces in the parcel, which are of greater value than the smaller. 

Weights.-- -These are the candareen, mace, tale, catty, and pecul, thus divided: 

10 candareens 1 mace. 

10 mace . ,1 tale. 

16 tales 1 catty. 

100 catties 1 pecul. 

The pecul is 125 Dutch pounds, which are equal to 133| lbs. avoirdupois. 

Measures. —The revenues of Japan are estimated by two measures of rice, the man and kokf; the 
former contains 10,000 kokfs, each 3000 bales, or bags of rice. 

The long measure is the inc, which is about 4 China cubits; and 2§ Japanese leagues are computed to 
be about 1 Dutch league. 

COMMERCE OF THE PORTUGUESE WITH JAPAN. 

Japan was first visited by the Portuguese in 1542, who were well received. In the course of a 
few years they sent several Jesuits, who converted multitudes of the natives to Christianity. In 1549 
a Japanese nobleman was baptized at Goa, who gave the Portuguese great insight into the advantages 
which they might reap in Japan, both with respect to commerce and the propagation of the Christian 
religion. The Portuguese enjoyed the most unlimited freedom, with liberty to travel over the whole 
country, to trade and to preach. Their commerce proved very lucrative, and the work of conversion made 
such a rapid progress, that many of the Princes of the empire embraced the Christian religion, which 
induced the Portuguese to come over in great numbers, marry, and settle in different parts of the 
country. In 1582 the Catholic religion was in such esteem here, that a Japanese embassy was sent to 
Rome, with letters and valuable presents. The immense profits, however* derived from the commerce soon 
filled the Portuguese with pride, and their avarice and haughtiness proved their ruin. In proportion as 
their riches and credit increased, they became insupportable to the Japanese, and were at length detested 
to such a degree, that in the year 1586 a decree was issued for the extermination of the Christians; in 
consequence of which, heavy persecutions were commenced against them, and in the year 1590 only, 
upwards of 20,000 of them were put to death. Notwithstanding all this, numbers of the Japanese daily 
became proselytes; so that in the years 1591 and 1592 not less than 12,000 were converted and baptized. 
Even the Emperor himself professed Christianity, together with his Court and army; in consequence of 
which, the Portuguese gave greater scope to their haughtiness and ambition,. and in 1596, by behaving 
with unwarrantable rudeness to a Prince of the empire, they accelerated their final ruin, giving at the same 
time a decisive blow to their lucrative commerce, as well as to the propagation of the Christian religion. 
Hence arose a new persecution against the Christians; and a conspiracy was at this time discovered, 
which the Portuguese had set on foot against the Emperor, with an intent to dethrone him. The actual 
existence of this conspiracy being fully authenticated, the Japanese Government came to the final 
determination to banish all Christians from the empire who should refuse to abjure the Catholic faith, or 
else to put them all to death without quarter. This persecution was accordingly commenced, and 
carried on without intermission for the space of 40 years, when it ended in the total eradication of the 
Christian religion, together with the final overthrow of the trade carried on by the Portuguese. The 