

The Portuguese, having become independent of Spain, made another attempt in 1646 to restore 
a good understan din g with the Japanese, and sent an ambassador, who was admitted, and an express 
sent to Court, announcing his arrival. The Emperor’s answer soon arrived, importing that the object of 
their mission could not be granted, but that they had free liberty to depart. 

In 1685 a favourable opportunity offered, which the Portuguese availed themselves of A Japanese 
vessel in a storm was driven on the coast of Macao, where the people were kindly received, and enter¬ 
tained at the public expence till they had recovered from the hardships they had endured at sea; they 
were then put on board one of the best vessels at Macao, which proceeded with them to Nangasacki On 
their arrival in the roads, they sent the J apanese on shore, and received a message from the msgistrstes, 



552 


JAPAN. 


that they were obliged to them for their kind and generous behaviour, but that for the future it would be in 
vain to endeavour to obtain any alteration in the decree against them. Since that period it does not appear 
that any attempts have been made by the Portuguese to open a communication with Japan. 

A few days after the Japanese new year’s day, the horrid ceremony is performed of trampling on 
such images as represent the cross and the Virgin Mary with the child. These images, which are made 
of cast copper, are said to be about 12 inches in length. This ceremony is performed for the purpose of 
imprinting on every one an abhorrence and hatred of the Christian doctrine, and of the Portuguese; 
The trampling is performed in such places as are found most frequented by the Christians. In the 
town of Nangasacki it continues for the space of four days, after which period the images are carried to 
the adjacent places, and at last are laid by till the following year. Every one, except the Governor and 
his train, even the smallest child, is obliged to be present at this ceremony; but that the Dutch, as some 
have insinuated, are obliged to trample on these images, is not true. At every place overseers arc 
present, who assemble the people by rotation in certain houses, calling every one by his name in due 
order, and seeing that every thing is performed. Adults walk over the images from one side to the 
other, and children in arms are put with their feet upon them. 

ATTEMPTS OF THE ENGLISH TO OPEN A TRADE WITH JAPAN. 

Japan was first visited by the English in 1610. Captain Saris, who commanded one of the East 
India Company’s ships, went to Firando, where he was favourably received. From thence he proceeded 
by land to the Emperor’s residence; and. delivering a letter and presents from King James, was not only 
graciously received, but successful in obtaining a grant for the Company, of the following important 
privileges, together with letters and presents to the King of England: 

I. We give free licence to the subjects of England, viz. Sir T. Smvthe, Governor, &c. for ever, 
safely to come to any port of our empire of Japan, with their ships and merchandises, without any 
hindrance to them or their goods; and to reside, buy, sell, and barter after their own manner with all 
nations, to stay here, or go at their pleasure. 