

When their vessels are loaded, and ready for sailing, they are conducted by a number of Japanese 
guard-ships, not only out of the harbour, but likewise a great way out to sea, in order to prevent their 
disposing to the smugglers of any of the unsold wares that they may have been obliged to carry back. 

A considerable part of the Chinese commerce is carried on with Siam, Cambodia, and Cochin-China, 

ATTEMPT OF THE RUSSIANS TO TRADE WITH JAPAN. 

The Russians recently fitted out an expedition, the principal object of which was to establish com¬ 
mercial relations between Japan and Russia, but it failed. The commander, Krusenstern, states, <c the 
Emperor of Japan caused it to be notified to the commissioners whom I earned, that his subjects traded 
only with the Dutch and Chinese. As to the Russians, he begged them to return to their own country, 
and, if they valued their lives, never to come back.” 

DUTCH COMMERCE WITH JAPAN. 

The Dutch, allured by the advantageous and profitable trade carried on by the Portuguese with 
Japan, resolved likewise to extend their navigation to these remote parts of the world, about the year 
1600. The first factory they had in Japan was built at Firando, and they had liberty of a free com¬ 
merce granted them by the Emperor, and leave to import and dispose of their goods in all parts of his 
dominions; and being about this time at war with Spain, to which country Portugal was united, they 
exerted themselves to supplant the Portuguese, and to ruin their trade. On the Portuguese being expelled, 
the Dutch gave assurances to the Emperor that they would in future supply his country with such com¬ 
modities as had been formerly imported by the Portuguese. They were soon after expelled from 
Firando, and Nangasacki declared the only port to which either the Dutch or Chinese were to be admitted. 

The Dutch trade has been subject to various changes and fatalities with regard to the commodities 
which were from time to time forbidden to be imported or exported, to the gradual restriction of their 
liberties and privileges, and to the lessening their profits. 

The first and most prosperous period of their trade was from their first settlement at Firando, till they 
were ordered to remove their factory to Nangasacki. They then sold their imports free, and without 
restraint to the best bidder, and exported annually to the amount of 6,000,000 guilders, or upwards of 
J?500,000 sterling. This brought in immense profits. The principal article of export, was silver, of 
which from 1200 to 1400 chests were annually sent to Batavia, amounting to 1,400,000 tales, or upwards 
of i?450,000 sterling. 

On the Dutch factory being fixed at Nangasacki, they were deprived at once of the privileges they 
had formerly enjoyed. The ships, on their arrival in the roads, were taken possession of by the Japanese* 
the arms and ammunition taken out and landed, and the rudder unhung. All who went on shore were 
strictly searched; the ships were unladen, and the cargoes brought on shore by the Japanese, and locked 
up in warehouses under their seals. Notwithstanding the numerous and sudden restrictions imposed upon 