

After having several times fired our cannon, in saluting the Imperial guards* and on the arrival and 
departure of the Dutch principal officers* we were obliged to commit to the care of the Japanese the 
remainder of our powdei'* as also our ball, our weapons, and the above-mentioned chest full of books. For 
this purpose were delivered in a certain quantity of powder, six barrels full of ball* six muskets* and six 
bayonets* which we made them believe were all the ammunition we had remaining. All these articles are 
put into a storehouse till the ship leaves the road, when they are faithfully restored by the Japanese. 
They have of late years had the sense to leave the rudders of our ships untouched* and the sails and cannon 
•on board. They were likewise weary of the trouble with which the fetching them back was attended* and 
which was by no means inconsiderable. 

« The Japanese having thus* as they suppose, entirely disarmed us, the next thing they take in hand 
is to muster the men, which is done every day on board, both morning and evening, when the vessel is 
discharging or taking in her lading. Each time the number of men that are gone on shore, is set down 
very accurately, as well as the number of the sick, and the number of those that remain on board. 

« On all those days, when any thing is carried on board, or taken out of the ship, the banjoses, the 
interpreters, clerks, and searchers are on board till the evening, when they all go on shore together, 
and leave the Europeans on board to themselves. On such occasions, the flag on board the ship is always 
hoisted, as well as that on the factory; and when two ships arrive here safe, business is transacted on board 
one or the other of them, by turns, every day. The ship’s long-boat and pinnace were also taken into the 
care of the Japanese, so that both the people and the merchandise are carried to and from the ship by the 
Japanese. To prevent the Dutch coming from the ship, or the Japanese from going to it, and traffieing* 
especially under covert of the night, and when no Japanese officers are on board, several large guard- 
vessels are placed round the ship, and at some distance from it; and besides this, there are several small 
boats ordered to row every hour in the night round the ship* and very near it. 



560 


JAPAN. 


<c g rea t number of labourers were ordered to attend to the discharge and loading of the boats, and 
bringing them to and from the ship, others being set as inspectors over them. The Dutch formerly took 
the liberty to punish and correct with blows these day-labourers, who were of the lowest class of people; 
but at present this procedure is absolutely, and under the severest penalties, forbidden by the Government, 
as bringing a disgrace upon the nation. 

« When an European goes to or from the ship, either with or without any baggage, an officer is 
always attending with a permit, on which his name is written, his watch marked down, &c. 

“ On those days when there is nothing done towards discharging or loading the ship, no Japanese 
officers, nor any other Japanese, come on board, neither do any of the Dutch themselves go to or from 
the ship on such days. The gate of the island also, towards the water-side, is locked at this time. Should 
an urgent occasion require any of the officers to come on board of the ship, such as the Captain or the sur¬ 
geon, which is signified by the hoisting of a flag, in such case leave must be first obtained from the Governor 
of the town; and should this be granted, still the gate towards the sea-shore is not opened, but the person 
to whom leave is granted, is conducted by interpreters and officers through a small part of the town to a 
little bridge, from which he is taken on board in a boat, after having gone through the strictest search. 
The banjoses and interpreters, who accompany him, do not, however, go on board the ship, but wait in 
their boats till he has transacted his business on board, from whence he is conducted back to the factory. 