

From that period till 1775 the Dutch commerce continued nearly upon the same footing. In that 
year the Japanese Government issued the strictest orders for the prevention of illicit commerce, which 
had always been carried on by the commanders of the Dutch ships, who were permitted to pass to and 
from the ship without being searched. This indulgence is now done away, and they are never allowed 
to go on shore without the most rigorous examination. 

It appears, from a statement drawn up in the year 1776, that in the ten years, 1766 to 1775 inclusive, 
the Dutch gained by the Japan trade, in which 19 ships had been employed, a capital of 3,562,517 florins, 
on an average 356,250 florins, about i?30,000 sterling. 

During the same period the losses at sea amounted to 707,858 florins, or upon an average of the 
cargoes of the 19 ships, rather more than 23 per cent, and the expences were as follow: 

The expences of the establishment at Nangasacki-.-10,356 florins per month. 

The expence of table-money, &c. at the factory----17,592 ditto per season. 

The presents, and expences of proceeding to Court-—54,788 ditto per ditto. 



JAPAN. 


557 


A commission is allowed to the officers of the Dutch establishment of about 15,000 florins per 
annum, of which the Chief of the factory receives one half, or 50 per cent, the next in office 20 per cent, 
the secretary 10 per cent, and four bookkeepers, each 5 per cent. 

In 1795 the Dutch Government had it in contemplation to relinquish the trade with Japan; and it 
was recommended by their servants there, that if the Japanese continued in the same vexatious and 
unreasonable manner to throw obstacles in the way of their trade, previous notice should be given to the 
Governor of Nangasacki, that the Company could not possibly go on upon the present footing; and that if 
a free trade was not granted them, they must entirely relinquish Japan. On the following year, a person 
properly qualified should be sent thither, and the ship contain, besides the necessary ballast, nothing but 
the customary presents for the Court, and provisions for the Company’s factory, with a letter addressed to 
the Emperor, representing, among other arguments, that a great change had taken place in the price of 
Indian goods, which had risen at least one half; and that owing to the very considerable importation of 
copper from Europe, that article no longer yielded such a profit as to indemnify the Company for the 
expence of shipping, and the heavy losses sustained from time to time by shipwreck, which would oblige 
them to desist from importing goods into Japan, and entirely to relinquish their factory; that they there¬ 
fore threw themselves upon the justice of His Majesty, humbly requesting him to grant them such a free 
trade as they enjoyed in the times of his illustrious ancestors, with all their ancient privileges, being on 
their part subject, in all mercantile and civil concerns, to the laws and x'egulations of the places where 
they happen to be, or where their factories may be situated. But on deliberation it was agreed, that it 
was possible it might not produce effects corresponding to the wishes and expectations of the Company, 
and that in the then state of their affairs, the annual profit arising from the trade of 200,000 florins, 
was too much to be risked; it is therefore carried on under the same restrictions as heretofore. 