

II. We grant them freedom of custom for all merchandise, as either now they have brought, or 
hereafter shall bring into our kingdom, or shall from hence transport to any foreign port. And we do 
authorize those ships that hereafter shall arrive from England, to proceed to present sale of then com¬ 
modities, without the expence or trouble of sending up to Court. 

IIL If any of their ships shall happen to be in danger of shipwreck, we do strictly enjoin our 
subjects not only to assist them, but to return such part of the ship and goods as shall be saved, to the 
Captain, merchants, or their assignees. And we do decree that they may build one or more houses for 
their own use in any part of our empire, and at their departure make sale of it. 

IV. If any of the English merchants or others shall depart this life within our dominions, the 
goods of the deceased shall remain at the disposal of the British factors. We ordain likewise that all 
delinquents be' punished by their own magistrates, and according to their own laws, without appeal to the 
civil power of the nation, which has no power over their persons or goods. 

V. We will that our subjects trading with them for any of their commodities, pay them for the 
same, according to agreement, without delay, or return the commodity so bought. 

VI. For such commodities as they now have brought, or shall hereafter bring, fitting for our service 
and proper use, we will that no arrest be made thereof, but that the price be settled with the Company’s 
factor, according as they sell to others, and immediate payment made upon delivery of the goods. 

VII. If, in discovery of other countries for trade, and return of their ships, they shall need men or 
yictuals, it is our pleasure that our subjects furnish them for their money, as their occasions shall require,, 



JAPAN. 


553 


VIII. And that without other passport, they shall and may set out upon the discovery of Yeadzo, 
or any other part in or about our empire. 

In consequence of this grant, a factory was established; but the prospect of the sale of English goods 
appeared uncertain; and it was soon found that unless the Company could open a direct trade with the 
Chinese empire, the Japan trade ought to be abandoned, as the articles suitable to the market were 
India and China manufactures, silks and raw silks, spices, drugs, sandal-wood, hides, &c, with a very 
small proportion of European commodities. 

In 1619 the Company's factory was removed to Nangasacki; but it was found so expensive and un¬ 
profitable, from their having been disappointed in their attempts to form connexions with China, and in 
their expectations of vending woollens and other British goods in exchange for silver, of which article 
the Portuguese and Dutch annually drew from Japan large quantities, that in 1623 it was withdrawn. 

In 1673 an attempt was made to revive the trade with Japan. A ship was dispatched from England, 
with letters and presents for the Emperor, which, ^after touching at Bantam for produce and instructions, 
proceeded to Nangasacki, where she arrived June 29, 1673. England was at this time at war with 
Holland. The chief factor on board intimated to the Governor of the port, that he had come to renew 
the ancient trade between Japan and England, which had been interrupted for 49 years; and was an- 
swered that, in the first place, he must deliver up his guns and ammunition till the Emperor’s pleasure 
could be known. After complying with this hazardous condition, and undergoing the strictest examina¬ 
tion respecting the causes of the interruption of the trade, (the civil wars in England and two suc¬ 
cessive wars with the Dutch), he was at last informed that no trade would .be allowed by the Emperor to 
a people so nearly allied to the Portuguese, as the King of England had been married to a Princess of 
that country; and though it was explained that this circumstance did not alter the character of the 
English nation, who were Protestants as well as the Dutch, this explanation was doubted, from the cir¬ 
cumstance of the English flag having the St. George’s Cross on it, which was considered as resembling 
the Portuguese flag. After, therefore, being permitted to remain at Nangasacki, but not to trade, till 
the monsoon changed, and the wind became favourable for his departure, though several Dutch ships had 
arrived with intelligence of the war, the guns and ammunition were redelivered, and the ship, attended by 
the Japanese boats out of the harbour, allowed to depart on the 28th of August, 1673, under assurances 
that the Dutch ships should not be permitted to follow her for two months, that she might have time to 
reach Bantam unmolested by them. 