

Another attempt was made in 1681, which proved abortive, as did a similar one in 1683. The 
Emperor was not only inflexible in his determination to have no commercial intercourse w r ith England, 
but he even prohibited the importation of British woollens by his own subjects from Bantam, and other- 
places in the South Seas. 

Notwithstanding these repeated disappointments, the Company were not totally discouraged; they 
determined to make another attempt; and in a letter to Madras on the 11th of September, 1689, they 
wrote to the following purport:—“ Being now at peace with the Dutch, and our King being their Stadt- 
holder, it may not be prudent to attempt the spice-trade; but we see no reason why, the King and Queen 
being now both Protestants, you should not make another attempt at Japan, as it can be turned into a 
China voyage, if you are disappointed. This we recommend to your consideration, in regard that the only 
reason they give for disappointing our last attempt was, that our Queen was then a Papist and a Portu¬ 
guese.” This attempt in like manner also failed. Seeing then that the Emperor was so firm in his 
resolution, not to admit the English in trading intercourse with his dominions, and the Company having 
expended upwards of £50,000 in pursuit of the object, it was at length finally abandoned. 

In 1782 a proposal was made to the East India Company for reviving their trade to Japan, by a 
Yol. II. 4 B 



554 


JAPAN. 


person who appeared to have been well acquainted with tlie nature of* the trade. He delivei ed a plan for 
that purpose, accompanied with particulars necessary for a cargo outwards, and the articles which might 
probably be received from Japan in return, of which the following is a copy:— 

u A good new ship, or one in thorough repair, of about 800 tons, 200 of which will be sufficient to 
stow the following merchandises from Europe, the price wherein is estimated at about .67000 sterling. 

Inunu Cornu Marinum. Mumia. Saffron. 

Broad cloth of different Lead and pewter. Tortoise-shell, if any of the 

colours. Quicksilver. proper quality can be had here. 

<{ One thousand pounds sterling should also be allowed for European curiosities, to make presents of 
The goods to be shipped from the Company’s settlements in India must be as follow: 


Armozeens of all colours. Ginghams. 

Bengal silks. Guinesse. 

Camphire. _ Pepper. 

Elephants’ teeth. Portyock. 


Powder sugar. 
Rattans. 
Salempores. 
Taffachelas. 


a Which cargo from Europe and India will together amount to about <£26,000 sterling. The Com-* 
pany will receive in return from Japan, to be delivered at Bengal or the Coast of Coromandel, the following 
articles:—Copper refined, 7500 peculs, each 133^ lbs. avoirdupois, and 700 peculs of camphire; this clear 
of all expences for loading and unloading, living in the country, for* ”—It was added that a regular esta¬ 
blishment was necessary, and that the success of the enterprise depended altogether on a Chief who was 
well acquainted with the customs and manners of the Japanese. 