

4 B 2 



JAPAN. 


556 

the Dutch commanders, they annually disposed of the cargoes of 6 or 7 ships to a great advantage. In 
the year 1641 they disposed of goods to the amount of 8,000,000 florins, and exported no less than 
1400 chests of silver. The exportation of copper had been prohibited in 1637; but on a petition to the 
Court, it was again granted; and they were forbid taking silver, which was a great improvement to the 
Dutch commerce, as they obtained an immense profit on the Japan copper, which they sent to their settle¬ 
ments in India; and upon silver they seldom obtained an advantage of more than 5 per cent. 

In 1672, in consequence of some offence given to the Emperor’s ministers, the Dutch commerce was 
reduced to the following conditions. The Governor of Nangasacki demanded samples and patterns of the 
goods imported, in order to shew them to the merchants; who having resolved what they intended to pur¬ 
chase, and at what price, the Governor, without permitting the Dutch to be present, agreed with the 
merchants; and if the prices offered were not satisfactory, they were permitted to export them again. 
By this mode of proceeding, the price set upon the commodities imported, was reduced every year, and 
the Dutch were necessitated rather to part with them at a small profit, than to export them again. They 
were also obliged to take the cobang, which they had hitherto taken for 60 mace, for 68 mace; what 
was gained by this mode of dealing, was stated to be assigned for the use and benefit of the town. 

The Dutch, in consequence of these grievances, forwarded a petition to the Emperor, to which 
they received a favourable answer, containing in substance that the trade should be restored to its former 
footing; notwithstanding which, the Governor of Nangasacki having represented to the Court how preju¬ 
dicial this renewal of the Dutch privileges was to the natives, it was resolved that they should have leave to 
import what goods, and to what quantity they pleased, but to be so far restrained in the sale, as not to 
exceed the sum of 800,000 tales a year, and that the goods not disposed of, should be laid up in ware¬ 
houses against the next year’s sale. The Company’s officers were also limited to 40,000 tales, which is 
divided between the residents and the commanders and officers of the ships. 

It is an ancient custom in Japan for all the nobility to go to Court once a year, to pay their 
respects to the Emperor, and to make, presents proportionable to their quality and wealth. The Dutch, 
when they came to settle in Japan, conformed themselves to this custom, as did also in their time the 
Portuguese. The Resident of the Dutch East India Company, for the time being, makes this journey, 
accompanied with a surgeon and one or two secretaries, and attended by numerous Japanese, appointed 
by the Governor of Nangasacki, to prevent their having any communication with the natives, from con¬ 
veying to them crosses, images^ relics, or any thing which bear any relation to the Christian religion, and 
more particularly to take care that none of them escape into the country, to attempt to propagate the 
Christian faith, or otherwise occasion disturbances. The 15th of the first Japanese month, which com¬ 
monly falls about tlie middle of February, has been fixed by the Emperor for the constant departure of 
the ambassador from Nangasacki. 