

That the prime cost and expences to Batavia were Florins 2,764,879 13, to which add six 

months’ interest, at 4f per cent, which is Florins 62,191 15, in the whole 2,826,271 8 0 

Leaving a net produce of--—.Florins 3,403,586 1 0 


being on an average, one year with another. Florins 340,358 12, equal to 120 per cent, on the prime cost 

Copper is the principal article on account of which the navigation to Japan is carried on. The other 
articles of export, exclusive of camphire, are as follow: 

Gold thread in rolls, which sometimes sells to great advantage among the Malays. 

Japanned cabinets, boxes, chests of drawers, &c, the very best that can be procured. 

Umbrellas, screens, and several other manufactures of rattans and canes. 

Buffalo and other horns, also hard skins of fishes, which the Japanese work very neat. 

Sowaas, an artificial metal, composed of copper, silver, and gold, much esteemed by the Malays. 
Paper, painted and coloured, for hanging rooms, and other uses; and occasionally a considerable 
quantity of the seni, or cash; and the remainder of the returns, if any, are made in Japan gold cobangs. 



JAPAN. 


559 


MODE OF CONDUCTING THE COMMERCE. 

The following account of the manner in which the commerce carried on by the Dutch is conducted* 
is extracted from Thunbei'g’s Travels* who was at Japan in 1775. 

“ On anchoring at the entrance of the harbour* all the prayer-books and Bibles belonging to the sailors 
were collected* and put into a chest* which was nailed down. This chest was afterwards left under the 
care of the Japanese* till the time of our departure, when every one received his book again. This is done 
with a view to prevent the introduction of Christian or Roman Catholic books into the country. 

a A muster-roll of the ship’s company, consisting of about 110 men and 34 slaves, was made out, 
mentioning the age of every individual, which roll was given to the Japanese. The birth-place of each 
individual was not marked in the list* as they w T ere all supposed to be Dutchmen* although many of them 
were Swedes* Danes* Germans, Portuguese* and Spaniards. According to this muster-roll, the whole 
ship’s company is mustered immediately on the arrival of the Japanese* and afterwards every morning and 
evening of such days as the ship is either discharging or taking in her cargo* and when there is any inter¬ 
course between the ship and the factory. By these precautions the Japanese are assured that no one can 
either get away without their knowledge* or remain in the factory without their leave. 

As soon as we had anchored in the harbour, and saluted the town of Nangasacki, there came im¬ 
mediately on board two Japanese superior officers (banjoses) and some subaltern officers, as also the in¬ 
terpreters and their attendants. The business of these banjoses was* during the whole time of our ship’s 
lying in the x*oad, to take care that all the wares, and the people that went on shore, or came on board, 
were strictly searched; to receive orders from the Governor of the town*, to sign all passports and papers 
which accompanied the merchandise, people, &c. 