

From the above period we have no account of any ship under English colours attempting a trade to 
Japan till 1803, when the Frederic, a country ship from Calcutta, having a cargo suitable to the market, 
touched at Nangasacki, with the view of opening a trade. This was not permitted; and the ship, after being 
allowed a few days to refresh, proceeded to the Liquejo Islands, where she was equally unfortunate, although 
it had been supposed that the inhabitants of those islands were inclined to trade with foreign ships. 


COMMERCE WITH CHINA. 


The Chinese have almost from time immemorial traded to Japan, and are the only people in Asia 
that have engaged in the trade, or that are allowed to visit the empire. Formerly they proceeded 
to Osacca harbour, although it is very dangerous, on account of rocks and shoals. The Portuguese 
shewed them the way to Nangasacki. At first the annual number of their vessels amounted to upwards 
of one hundred. The liberty which they then enjoyed, is at present greatly contracted, since they have 
been suspected by the Japanese of favouring the Catholic missionaries at China, and have made attempts 
to introduce into Japan Catholic books printed in China. They are therefore as much suspected and as 
hardly used as the Dutch. They are also shut up in a small island, and strictly searched whenever they 
go in or come out. 

When a vessel arrives from China, all the crew are brought on shore, and all charge of the vessel 
is taken from them till such time as every thing is ready for their departure; consequently, the Japanese 
unload it entirely, and afterwards bring the vessel on shore, where at low water it lies quite dry. The 
next year it is loaded with other goods. 

The Chinese are not suffered to go to the Imperial Court, which saves them considerable sums in 
presents and expences. They are allowed to trade for twice as large a sum as that granted to the Dutch; 
but as their voyages are neither so long nor so dangerous, they are obliged to contribute more largely to 
the town of Nangasacki, and therefore pay more, as far even as 60 per cent, fannagin, or flower money. 



JAPAN. 


555 


Their merchandise is sold at three different times in the year* and is brought in 70 junks. The 
first fair takes place in the spring, for the cargoes of 20 vessels; the second in the summer, for the cargoes 
of 30 vessels; and the third in autumn, for the cargoes of the remaining 20. Should any more vessels 
arrive within the year, they are obliged to return without being allowed to unload the least article. 
Although their voyages are less expensive than the Dutch, and they are not under the necessity of sending 
an ambassador to the Emperor, nor any director over their commerce, but interpreters, a guard, and 
supervisors are appointed to them, the same as the Dutch; yet, on account of the greater value per cent, 
deducted from their merchandise, their profits are less than those of the Dutch: and as they are no longer 
allowed to carry away any specie, they are obliged to purchase Japanese commodities for exportation, 
such as copper, lackered ware, &c. many of which are produced in their own country. 