

“ When the ship is nearly laden, she is conducted to Papenberg, there to remain at anchor, and 
take in the residue of her cargo, and all the merchandise and other things belonging to the officers, the 
ship’s provisions, &c. A few days after, when the ship has anchored in the harbour, the Governor points 
out the day when she is to sail, and this command must be obeyed so implicitly, that, were the wind ever 
so contrary, or even if it blew a hard gale, the ship must depart without any excuse, or the least shadow 
of opposition. Before the ship leaves the harbour, the powder, arms, and the chest of books that were 
taken out, are returned; the sick from the hospital are put on board; and whilst she is sailing out, the 
guns are fired to salute the town and the factory, and afterwards the two imperial guards at the entrance 
of the harbour," 



JAPAN, 


563 


PORT REGULATIONS, ORDERS, &c. 

The following are extracts from instructions delivered by the Japanese to the Dutch: 

I- Our imperial predecessors have ordered concerning you, Dutchmen, that you shall have leave to 
come to Nangasacki, on account of the Japan trade, every year. Therefore, as we have commanded you 
heretofore, you shall have no communication with the Portuguese. If you should have any, and we 
should come to know it, you shall be prohibited the trade to Japan. You shall import no Portuguese 
commodities on board your ships. 

II. If you intend not to be molested in your navigation and trade to Japan, you shall notify to us by 
your ships, whatever comes to your knowledge of any endeavours or attempts of the Portuguese against 
us; we likewise expect to hear from you if the Portuguese should conquer any new places or countries, or 
convert them to the Christian sect. Whatever comes to your knowledge in all countries you trade to, we 
expect that you should notify the same to our Governors at Nangasacki. 

III. You shall take no China junks bound to Japan. 

IV. In all countries you frequent with your ships, if there be any Portuguese there, you shall have 
no communication with them. If there be any countries frequented by both nations, you shall take down 
in writing the names of such countries or places, and by the Captains of the ships you send to Japan yearly, • 
deliver the same to our Governors at Nangasacki. 

V. The Liquejans being subjects of Japan, you shall take none of their ships or boats. 

The following are the regulations respecting the Island, or Street Dezima: 

I. Women of the town, but no other women, shall be suffered to go in. 

II. All persons living upon charity, and beggars, shall be excluded. 

III. Nobody shall presume with any ship or boat to come within the palisades of Dezima. Nobody 
shall presume with any ship or boat to pass under the bridge of Dezima. 

IV. No Hollander shall be permitted to come out but for weighty reasons. 

All the above-mentioned orders shall be punctually obeyed. 

The following are the orders to be observed during the Dutch sale at Dezima: 