

“ Custom-houses are not known, either in the interior of the country or on its coasts, and no customs 
are demanded on imports or exports of goods, either from strangers or natives. But that no prohi¬ 
bited goods may be smuggled into the country, so close a watch is kept, and all persons that arrive, as well 
as merchandise, are so strictly searched, that the hundred eyes of Argus might be said to be employed on 
this occasion. When any European goes ashore, he is first searched on board, and afterwards as soon as 
he comes on shore. Both these searches are very strict; so that not only travellers’ pockets are turned inside 
out, but the officers’ hands pass along their bodies and thighs. All the Japanese that go on board of ship, 
are in like manner searched, excepting only the superior order of banjoses. All articles exported or im¬ 
ported undergo a similar search, first on board the ship, and afterwards in the factory, except large chests, 
which are emptied in the factory, and are so narrowly examined, that they even sound the boards, sus¬ 
pecting them to be hollow. The beds are frequently ripped open, and the feathers turned over. Iron 
spikes are thrust into the butter-tubs and jars of sweetmeats. In the cheese a square hole is cut, in which 
part a thick-pointed wire is thrust into it towards every side. Nay, their suspicion went even so far, as to 
induce them to take an egg or two from among those we had brought from Batavia, and break them. 
The same severe conduct is observed when any goes from the factory to the ship, or into the town of 
Nangasacki, and from thence to the island of Dezima. Every one that passes, must take his watch out of 
his pocket, and shew it to the officers, who always mark it down whenever it is carried in or out. Some¬ 
times too, strangers hats are searched. Neither money nor coin must by any means be brought in by pri¬ 
vate persons; but they are laid by, and taken care of till the owner's departure. No letters to be sent to or 
from the ship sealed; and if they are, they are opened, and sometimes, as well as other manuscripts, must 
be read by the interpreters. Religious books, especially if they are adorned with cuts, are very dangerous 
to import; but the Europeans are otherwise suffered to carry in a great number of books for their own use; 
and the search was the less strict in this respect, as they looked into a few of them only. Latin, French, 
Swedish, and German books and manuscripts pass the more easily, as the interpreters do not understand 
them. Arms, it is true, are not allowed to be carried into the country; nevertheless, we are as yet suf¬ 
fered to take our swords with us. 

“ The Dutch themselves are the occasion of these over-rigorous searches, the strictness of which has 
been augmented on several different occasions, till it has arrived at its present height. Numerous artifices 



JAPAN, 


561 


have been applied to the purposes of bringing goods into the factory by stealthy and the interpreters* who 
heretofore had never been searched* used to carry contraband goods by degrees* and in small parcels* to the 
town* where they sold for ready money. To this may be added* the pride which some of the weaker- 
minded officers in the Dutch service very imprudently exhibited to the Japanese* by ill-timed contradiction* 
contemptuous behaviour, scornful looks* and laughter* which occasioned the Japanese in their turn to hate 
and despise them; a hatred which is greatly increased upon observing in how unfriendly and unmannerly 
a style they usually behave to each other* and the brutal treatment which the sailors under their command 
frequently experience from them* together with the oaths* curses, and blows with which the poor fellows 
are assailed by them; All these circumstances have induced the Japanese, from year to year, to curtail 
more and more the liberties of the Dutch merchants* and to search them more strictly than ever; so that 
now* with all their finesse and artifice* they are hardly able to throw dust in the eyes of so vigilant a 
nation as this. 