

The Chinese, for the like reason, because they are not at the expence of such long and hazardous 
voyages as the Dutch, pay also a duty of 60 per cent, on all their goods, which upon the 600,000 tales, 
the value they are permitted to sell every year, brings in a sum of 360,000 tales. Added to which, the 
rent of the Dutch factory and houses, v^hieh is 5,580 tales, and that of the Chinese factory, which is 
16,000 tales a year, forms a total of 453,580 tales, which the foreign commerce produces annually to 
the town of Nangasacki. 



CHAPTER XXX. 


Isle of France, Saint Flelena, &c. 


Islands in the Indian Ocean — Rodrigue—Isle of France; Descrip tion—Coins, Weights , and Measures — 
Imports and Exports—Provisions and Refreshments — Bourbon; Description , ($*c.— St. Helena; Descrip¬ 
tion — Coins , Weights, and Measures—Imports from England in the private Trade of the Commanders 
and Officers of the Company*s Ships — Company’s Imports from England — Company's Imports from the 
British Settlements in India and from China — Company’s Revenues, Disbursements , Assets , §*c. —Extracts 
from the Company’s Instructions relative to the Island.—Port Regulations—Provisions and Refreshments — 
Rise and Progress of the Commerce between Sweden and the East Indies—Ascension Island—Ferdinand 
Noronha—The Azores, or Western Islands — Flores — Corvo — Fayal — Pico — Tiercera— Graciosa—* 
St George's — St. Michaels — St Mary’s . 


IN tlie Indian Ocean are several islands, the principal of which are Rodrigue, called also Diego Rais; 

the Isle of France, or Mauritius; and Bourbon, or Mascarenhas. 

* 

1 RODRIGUE. 

This island extends East and West about 16 miles, and is about 7 in breadth from North to South. 
It is situated in latitude 19° 41 South, and longitude 63° 10' East. Near the middle of the island is a 
remarkable peak, that answers as a guide for the road; when it bears south, you are abreast of the 
road, which is called Mathewren Bay: it is safe when you are in, but the channel is very intricate. 
Here is a small settlement with a few guns mounted, and small vessels are employed in transporting turtle, 
with which the island abounds, to the Mauritius. Here is abundance of fish; but some of them are said 
to be poisonous. Ample supplies of wood and water may be obtained with the greatest facility. 

ISLE OF FRANCE, 

Called Mauritius by the English and Dutch, is about 100 leagues to the westward of Rodrigue. It 
is high and mountainous, and may be seen 18 leagues off in clear weather. It extends in a N. E. and S. W. 
direction, the S.W. point being in latitude 20° 27' South, and longitude 57° 16' East, and the N.E. point 
in latitude 19° S3 South, and longitude 57° 35' East. 

There are two ports or harbours, Port Louis or Port North-west, and Port Bourbon; the latter, 
being on the windward side of the island, is but little frequented, the trade wind rendering the navigation 
out of it very difficult. 



566 


ISLE OF FRANCE, 


Port North-west, the capital of this island, is situated at the bottom of a triangular bay, the entrance 
to which is very intricate. The principal town, or as it is sometimes called the Camp, is chiefly com¬ 
posed of wooden houses, which have only a ground floor, on account of the winds and heat; they are 
separated from each other, and surrounded with palisades; the streets are tolerably straight. The Govern¬ 
ment house is built entirely of stone; the place of arms and the parade are before the Governor's house, and 
the hospital is at the extreme point of the harbour. The town has no regular fortifications; but to the 
left of it, on looking towards the sea, there is an entrenchment of stone. On the same side is Fort 
Blanc, which defends the entrance; and opposite to it, on the other side, is a battery on a small island, 
called Tonneliers; and there are several other batteries mounted with heavy cannon. 