

Bread and wines fluctuate according to circumstances. Of vegetables, the following are to be met 
with: peas, beans, cabbages, and cauliflowers; and of fruits, oranges, apples, guavas, apricots, &c. 

Round the island is abundance of fish of various kinds, and from Rodrigue are brought great num¬ 
bers of turtle, which are sold at reasonable prices. 

The water is excellent, and is brought from a small river, about a league from the town, by pipes to 
a reservoir, under which boats come and fill their casks with ease and expedition. 

BOURBON. 

This island is of a round form, about 14 leagues from N. W. to S, E. and about 35 leagues from the 
Isle of France. St. Denis, the principal town on the island, is situated on its north side, in latitude 
20° 52' South, and longitude 55° 27' East. The anchorage is near the shore, and unsafe. 



SAINT HELENA. 


569 


The town of St. Denis is agreeably situated on a small plain near the sea, and contains about 150 
houses built of wood. The house of the Governor, which is large and convenient, and a few others, are 
built of stone; and the greater part of them have gardens behind them. The town is defended by 
several batteries, mounted with heavy cannon. The hanging bridge here merits particular attention; it 
is constructed to project as it were into the sea, and by its assistance goods may be embarked or disem¬ 
barked with convenience and safety in the most boisterous weather, and when it is impossible to approach 
the shore, from the violence of the waves breaking against it. 

In 1665 the French settled on Bourbon, and the population had become so considerable, as to enable 
them to form a settlement on the Mauritius in 1712, when the Dutch had abandoned it; from that 
period it increased in population and resources. In 1810 the English fitted out an expedition against 
Bourbon, to which it surrendered by capitulation on the 8th of July; the troops to be allowed the honours 
of war, to surrender themselves prisoners, and to be embarked for the Cape of Good Hope or England. 

A trade is carried on in provisions with the Isle of France, and Bourbon produces similar articles of 
export, viz. coffee, cotton, indigo, raw sugar, and cloves. The produce of corn amounts to about 
14,000,000 lbs. and the Isle of France has chiefly depended upon it. 

SAINT HELENA. 

This island is situated in the Southern Atlantic Ocean; its length is about three leagues, nearly N.E. 
and S. W., of a circular form, about 26 or 27 miles round. When first observed, it presents the appear¬ 
ance of an abrupt and rugged mountain, divested of tree, shrub, or herbage. The principal ridge in the 
centre of the island is called Diana’s Peak, and is about 2200 feet above the level of the sea; near the 
S. W. part there is a hill of a conical form, called High Peak, rather less elevated than the other. There 
is very little level ground on the island; the whole of it appears in abrupt ridges and chasms, but the 
vallies are fruitful, and clothed with continual verdure, unless in very dry seasons. 