

I. No Dutchman shall be permitted to go out without leave. 

II. Nobody shall be suffered to come into the island before the sale begins, but the ordinary officers 
and servants. 

III. No goods whatever shall be carried out of the island before the sale begins. No tent, nor any 
Spanish wines, shall be sent out of the island without special licence. 

IV. No Japanese arms, nor the pictures, or representations, or puppet figures of any military 
people, shall be brought to Dezima. Pursuant to our often repeated strict commands, no goods whatever 
shall be sold privately to the Dutch; and no goods shall be bought of them in the same private way. 

V. When the time for the departure of the Dutch ships draws near, notice shall be given to the 
Magistrates and the College of Interpreters, of what goods have been sold to the Dutch, together with a 
written list of the same, that so the sums agreed on, be paid in time, and all trouble and inconvenience 
avoided on the last days of their stay in the harbour. 

VI. The Dutch and Portuguese interpreters who frequent the island, and are licensed for so doing, 
shall not plot, nor privately converse together. 

VII. Nobody shall come to Dezima without special leave, but the Bugjo and the officers of the 
island. 

All the articles aforesaid every body is commanded duly and strictly to observe. 

4 C 2 



564 


JAPAN. 


PROHIBITED GOODS. 

The following is a list of prohibited goods, none of which the Dutch are suffered to buy, or to ex¬ 
port from the country. 

The Emperor’s coat of arms. 

All prints, pictures, goods, or stuffs, bearing the same. 

Warlike instruments. 

Pictures and representations, printed or others, of soldiers and military people. 

Ditto of any persons belonging to the Court of the ecclesiastical, or hereditary Emperor. 

Pictures or models of Japanese ships or boats. 

Maps of the empire of Japan, or any part thereof* 

Plans of towns, castles, temples, and the like. 

Puppets, or small figures, representing military men. 

Crooked knives, such as carpenters use. 

Fino Ginu. A sort of silk stuff made at Fino. 

Kaga Ginu. The like made at Kaga. These are made up in long rolls, like the silks of Tonquin. 

Isu muggi. Another sort of stuff, in long rolls, made in Japan. 

All sorts of fine silken stuffs. 

All sorts of stuffs made of hemp and cotton. 

Mats of silk. 

All sorts of scimitars, and other arms made in imitation of those imported by the Dutch. 

If any foreigner or Japanese endeavours, contrary to orders, to dispose of any contraband goods 
whatsoever, and it be discovered, notice shall be forthwith given to the proper magistrates. If any of the 
accomplices discovers himself, and turns evidence, he shall have his pardon, and moreover a reward pro¬ 
portionable to the crime. Offenders found guilty upon the evidence of their accomplices, shall be punished 
according to law. 

IMPORT and EXPORT DUTIES. 

The levying of duties or imposts on goods is nowhere observed in Japan, except at Nangasacki, and it was 
formerly moderate. It is called fannagin or flower money, and is levied for the maintenance and advantage 
of the town. The duty laid upon the goods imported by the Dutch Company, is 15 per cent, which upon 
the amount of the sales, produces 45,000 tales. The goods belonging to individuals, which are sold after, 
those of the Company, pay much more, and not less than 65 per cent, on all stuffs and goods sold by pieces, 
which upon 20,000 tales, brings in 13,000 tales. Goods sold by weight pay a duty of 70 per cent, which 
upon 20,000 tales, makes 14,000 duty. The reason given for the great difference in the duties on goods 
the property of the Dutch Company, and that of individuals, is, because private goods are brought on board 
the Company’s ships at their risk and expence, and consequently deserve less profit. 