

The powder magazine is situated on a small island, which is connected with the shore by a cause¬ 
way, nearly opposite the Government house. This causeway serves also for a quay, and it encloses a part 
of the great bason for the refitting of vessels, and near it they take in their fresh water with the greatest 
convenience. Here also is a curious machine, by which vessels are lifted out of the water, so that they 
are cleaned and repaired with the utmost expedition. 

Every vessel approaching the island, must hoist her flag, and fire two guns; if in the night, a light 
must be shewn, when a pilot comes on board, and steers the ship to the entrance of the Port. The Port 
Captain then comes on board with a boat, chains, &c. to assist the ship in entering the harbour, and moor 
it there, which he sees properly done before he returns on shore. 

Port North-west is a very convenient port, in which vessels may refresh and repair at a small expence, 
and with the greatest expedition. There are several pontoons for the purpose of careening vessels, and 
the workshops of the various artificers are so near that they may be hailed from the ship. 

This island was discovered in 1505 by the Portuguese, who called it Cerne; the Dutch afterwards 
gave it the name of Mauritius, and their ships occasionally stopped here. It was first visited by the 
English in 1613, and was at that time uninhabited. It is difficult to ascertain who were the first settlers 
of it; but it is generally supposed to be some of the pirates who infested the Indian Seas in those days. 
About 1644 the Dutch began to settle upon it; but not finding it a place of any importance to them, it 
was evacuated in 1712, on which the French, from the neighbouring island, Bourbon, formed a settle¬ 
ment, and changed its name to the Isle of France. In 1721 it was formally taken possession of in the 
name of the King of France. 

In 1730 engineers, and other persons properly qualified, were sent out to form a regular establish¬ 
ment. In 1735 M. de la Bourdonnais was appointed Governor, w T ho by his great exertion brought the 
island into importance. In 1748 the English fleet, under Boscawen, made their appearance off the 
island, with a force sufficient to reduce it; but by a council of war it was agreed that the attack, 
and the maintenance of it when taken, would not only retard, but might probably disable the arma¬ 
ment from undertaking the siege of Pondicherry, which was the principal object of the expedition; they 
therefore proceeded to the Coast of Coromandel. 

Soon after the commencement of the war with France in 1793, the English Government had it in 
contemplation to fit out an expedition from India against the Mauritius; but the unsettled state of the 
Peninsula prevented any attempts being made against it. During the whole war the French privateers 
committed great depredations on the English commerce in India. A gentleman at Madras, of eminent 
abilities, and much public spirit, took a great deal of care in compiling a statement of the captures made 
*by the enemy in the Indian Seas, from the breaking out of the war until the middle of 3804, for the 
purpose of laying it before bir Edward Pellew, who had at that time recently arrived in India, to take 
upon himself the command of the naval forces in India. The value of the captures made by the enemy 
was computed, at a moderate estimate, to have amounted in the course of 10 years to <£>2,500,000* The 