



362 


JAPAN. 


and emoluments, without being employed in any other department. Their duty and employment 
consist in being present, generally one, or sometimes two of each class, when any affairs are transacted 
between the Japanese and Dutch, whether commercial or otherwise. They interpret either viva voce or 
in writing, whenever any matter is to be laid before the Governor, the officers, or others, whether it be 
a complaint or request. They are obliged to be present at all searches, as well at those that are made on 
board ship, as at those which take place at the factory, and likewise to attend in the journey to Court. 
They were formerly allowed to go whenever they chose to the Dutchmen's apartments; but now this is 
prohibited, in order to prevent smuggling, excepting on certain occasions. They are always accompanied 
as well to the ships as to their College in the island of Dezima, by several clerks, who take an account of 
every thing that is shipped or unloaded, write permits, and perform other offices of a similar nature. 

u Kambang money, or the sums due for goods that are sold, is never paid in hard cash, as the carry¬ 
ing it out of the country is prohibited; but there is an assignment made on it, and bills are drawn 
for such a sum as will be requisite for the whole year's supply, as also for as much as will be wanted at the 
fair of the island. This kambang money is, in the common phrase of the country, very light, and less in 
value than specie, so that with the money which is thus assigned over, one is obliged to pay nearly double 
for every thing. All these kambang bills are paid at the Japanese new year only. Every man's account 
is made out before the ship sails, and is presented and accepted at the College of the interpreters, after 
which the books are closed. All that is wanted after the new year, is taken up upon credit for the whole 1 
year ensuing. 

u The 18th of February is, with the Japanese, the last day of the year. On this day all accounts 
between private persons are to be closed; and these, as well as all other debts, to be paid. Fresh credit is 
afterwards given till the month of June, when there must be a settlement again. Among the Japanese, as 
well as in China, in case of loans, very high interest is frequently paid, from 18 to 20 per cent. I was 
informed that if a man did not take care to be paid before new year's day, he had afterwards no right to 
demand payment on the new year. 

cc When the Dutch do not deal for ready money, their commerce can hardly be considered in any 
other light than that of barter. With this view, a fair is kept on the island, about a fortnight before the 
mustering of the ship, and its departure for Papenberg, a small island near the entrance of the harbour,, 
when certain merchants, with the consent of the Governor, and on pa}dng a small duty, are allowed to 
carry their merchandise thither, and expose it to sale in booths erected for that purpose. 

u The copper, the principal article of export, was brought from the interior and distant parts of the 
country, and kept in a storehouse; and as soon as the ship was in part discharged, the loading it with the 
copper commenced. This latter was weighed, and put into long w r ooden boxes, a pecul in each, in pre¬ 
sence of the Japanese officers and interpreters, and of the Dutch supraeargoes and writers, and afterwards 
conveyed by the Japanese to the bridge, in order to be put on board. On such occasions a few sailors 
always attend, to watch that the labourers do not steal it, which they will do if possible, as they can sell 
it to the Chinese, who pay them well for it. 