

In case the Company were molested in their commerce in any part of the world, they should have full 
powers from the King to obtain ample justice and satisfaction, by all convenient methods, and should be at 
liberty to oppose force by force, and to consider such disturbers as pirates and enemies; and should they be 
attacked, or suffer any injury or injustice from any other nation, in the carrying on of this commerce, the 
King, upon information thereof, would endeavour to procure them speedy and ample satisfaction, either 
by way of reprisal, or otherwise. 

All other subjects of the Crown of Sweden were expressly prohibited and forbid to engage in, or inter¬ 
fere with the trade of the Company, under pain of his Majesty’s high displeasure, and confiscation of their 
vessels and effects. 

The King promised to alter or augment these privileges upon application from the Company, in such 
manner as should be found necessary for promoting the trade to the East Indies. 

There were great expectations formed of this Company, from the care that had been taken in drawing 
up their charter; and though their capital was unlimited, such a proportion of it was immediately raised? 
as enabled the Directors to make the necessary dispositions for dispatching two .ships* 

Yp*. II. 4 32 



576 


RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE COMMERCE 


As soon as this charter was granted, the King of Sweden caused it to be notified to the States: 
General of Holland in July, 1731, that he liad erected such a Company, who were expressly restrained 
by their charter from interfering with, or disturbing the tx’ade of any Christian nation whatever in those 
parts; and that as, in the course of so long a voyage, the Swedish Company’s vessels might be obliged, by 
stress of weather, or other accidents, to take shelter in some of the ports or roads of some of the Dutch 
settlements in India, he hoped, in such case, they would receive the same testimonies of kindness and 
humanity they were accustomed to shew to other nations. The States General answered they were dis¬ 
posed to the most strict friendship with him; but as His Majesty could not be ignorant that the Company 
established by him, must be prejudicial to the interests of that long since established in Holland, he 
could not expect that they should favour this new Company, though they were ready at all times to 
afford succours to His Swedish Majesty’s subjects. 

The Directors of the Company caused two new ships to be built, one of which was called the 
Frederic, King of Sweden, and the other, in honour of the Queen, the Ulrica, very strong and complete, 
of proper force, and every way fitted for the voyage in which they were to be employed. On board one 
of them the King of Sweden sent a person as a Consul to China, to manage the Company’s affairs there. 
These ships proceeded *to Canton, where they were favourably received, and obtained cargoes for pro¬ 
ceeding to Europe. On the return of the Frederic through the Straits of Sunda, she was taken by seven 
Dutch ships sent from Batavia for the purpose, and carried into that port. 