

On your arrival at St. Helena in war time, in order to prevent surprise, or the consequences of any 
attack, you are required to attend to the directions of your senior officer for the birthing of your ship, in 
order to resist an enemy in the most effectual manner, by veering away, and thus bringing the guns of the 
whole fleet to bear, or by any other disposition which may be concerted for your defence, 

POET REGULATIONS. 

Ships touching at the island, are to have the preference of assistance in the following order: 

I. British men of war, which are to have the use of both cranes, if they require it, until they arc 
watered. 

II. Ships with Company's stores are to have one crane to themselves, and their turn at the other, 

III. English Xndiamem 

IV. English whalers. 

V. Foreign men of war. 

VI. Foreign merchant ships. 

Any commander of a British ship, who wishes to water at Lemon Valley, must first apply to the 
Town Major for permission. 

No boat is to make fast to the hawsers, or buoys, at either crane, but the boat that is under the 
crane; those waiting for their turn, must ride by their respective grapnels, or lie upon their oars, until the 
boat, then under the crane, haul out, and leave a vacancy. 

No boat is to lie close to either stairs longer than necessity absolutely requires; but to keep at a suf¬ 
ficient distance to allow other boats to approach. 

None but King's boats, or the boats of Government, are permitted to pass to the windward beyond 
the battery, at the point under Sugar-loaf, nor to board, or to have intercourse with any ship coming in, 
before such ship shall have anchored. 

No foreigner can, on any pretence whatever, be permitted to go into the country, nor land on any 
other part of the island, but James's Valley. 

None but boats belonging to British men of war are allowed to land at any other part of the island 
but James’s Valley, without permission from the Governor. 



ST. HELENA. 575 

Any slap or vessel approaching the roads with a yellow flag, is to be considered under quarantine so 
long as it shall remain hoisted. 

The commanders of ships, not in the Company's regular employ, and foreigners on their arrival in the 
port, before application for water, or any other refreshment, are first to give bond or security, in the Secre¬ 
tary's office, against taking any person from the island, or leaving any person on it, without permission 
from Government The certificate of their having signed such bond is to be delivered to the Master 
Attendant, to whom the charges for anchorage, boat-hire, &c. are to be paid. 

The commanders of all ships to give forty-eight hours' notice to the Governor before they intend to 
sail, and are not to sail after sunset in the evening, nor before sunrise in the morning; for the due obver- 
vance of which they shall give bond, if required, as before mentioned. 

No gunpowder is to be landed without previous notice being given to the Commissary of Stores and 
Master Attendant, in order that proper precautions may be adopted to prevent accidents. 