

St. Helena was discovered by the Portuguese on the 21st of May, 1501, who shortly after formed a 
small settlement. They were afterwards expelled by the Dutch, who retained possession of it till about 
1651, when they withdrew their colonists to the Cape of Good Hope. The English then took possession 
of the island. King Charles II. confirmed it to the Company by the charter of 3d of April, 1661, by 
which he empowered the Company “ to erect castles, fortifications, and forts in the Island of St. Helena, 
and to furnish them with stores and ammunition, and to engage such number of men as they should 
think fit to serve as a garrison.” Jealous of the English occupying a station which might facilitate the 
navigation to and from the East Indies, the Dutch, availing themselves of the war which broke out 
between England and Holland in 1665, made a successful attack on the island; it was soon after retaken 
from them by the English under Captain Munden. This capture gave rise to a question respecting the 
rights of the Crown and of the Company, whether the island, which was granted to the Company by 
the charter of 1661, reverted to them as a right; or whether, from having been recovered by the King's 
fleet, without the aid of the Company, it again became the property of the Crown, to be disposed of 
according to the King's pleasure? To obviate this difficulty, His Majesty, by a charter dated December 
16, 1673, regranted the island to the East India Company in perpetuity, “ to be held of the King, his 
heirs, and successors, as of the Manor of East Greenwich, in free and common socage,” reserving only 
to the King the allegiance of the inhabitants. . By this charter the King grafted to the Company all the 
ordnance, ammunition, and stores remaining on the island, and authorized them to transport to it settlers 
and recruits, and to send stores and provisions duty free; to make laws for the government of the island, 
and to punish offenders; it also empowered the Governor to exercise martial law on the island, 
and to repel invaders and unlicensed persons, and declared that the natives and settlers were to be 



ST. HELENA. 


mi 


deemed natural born subjects of England. In 1684 a mutiny broke out in the garrison, which was 
fortunately quelled; two of the ringleaders suffered death. In 1689 another and more dangerous 
insurrection broke out on the island, in which the Governor lost his life; and the mutineers, having 
plundered the town of most of its valuables, took possession of a ship in the roads, and proceeded to 
America, Soon after a conspiracy of the blacks was formed to massacre the European inhabitants, to 
seize a ship, and convey themselves to their native country: fortunately this plot was discovered in time 
to prevent its consequences. In 1783 the tranquillity of the island was again interrupted by a mutiny, 
which was quelled, and several of the ringleaders suffered death. In 1810, in consequence of some* 
alteration in the mode of victualling the garrison, they revolted from their allegiance, and were with 
difficulty reduced to order, but not till many of the principal leaders were executed. 