

At the N. E. extremity of the island there Is a pyramidical hill close to the sea, called the Sugar-loaf, 
with a signal post upon it; at the base of this hill there are three batteries, at a small distance from each 
other, called Buttermilk, and Banks’s Upper and Lower Batteries. A little to the S. W. of these Rupert’s 
Battery appears, at the bottom of a valley of the same name, w T hich is a strong stone wall and battery 
mounted with heavy cannon; and Munden’s Point divides this valley from James’s, or Chapel Valley, 
where James’s Town, the only one on the island, is situated. On Munden’s Point there is a fort of the 
same name, and several guns placed on the heights over it, which, command that side of James’s Valley. 
This valley has on the S. W. side a hill, elevated nearly 800 feet perpendicular from the sea, called 
Ladder Hill, with a heavy battery of guns upon it, that commands the S. W. entrance to the valley and 
anchorage. James’s Valley is also protected by a wall and strong line of cannon at its entrance, close to 
the sea. There is also a battery at Sandy Bay, on the south side of the island, where boats may land 
when the surf is not great; but this, and every other part where there is a possibility of landing, are 
well secured by batteries or guns placed on the heights over them ; and on the summits of the hills there 
are convenient signal posts all over the island, communicating by telegraphs with each other and with 
the castle, which add greatly to the natural strength of the island. 

When a ship is descried, a gun is fired at the signal post where she is first seen, and this is repeated 
by the other posts to the castle, which is called an alarm; if more ships appear, a gun is fired for each 
till five in number, when the signal is made for a fleet; but if more than two sail appear to be steering 
together for the island, a general alarm is beat, and every person takes possession of the post assigned 
him, and remains under arms till the Governor is made acquainted by the boats with what ships they are. 

* All ships coming in from the eastward, heave to to windward of the island, and senda boat on 
Yon.IL * 4D 



570 


ST. HELENA. 


shore with an officer, to report their nation and business, and obtain the Governor's permission for 
anchoring. The boat is generally hailed from the battery at Sugar-loaf Point; but she must proceed to 
James’s Town to give the Governor information, before the ship is permitted to pass the first battery 
at the Sugar-loaf. Ships of war. as well as merchantmen must observe this precaution, or the batteries 
will open upon them. When the boat is perceived returning, the ship makes sail for the anchorage. 

On rounding Munden's Point, the eye is relieved from the dreary aspect of the island by a view 
of the town, situated in a narrow valley, between two lofty mountains; this valley is called James’s 
Valley, opposite to which you may anchor in from 8 to 15 fathoms, with the flagstaff at the fort 
bearing S. S.E„ distance from the shore about half a mile; this is a good and convenient birth for 
watering. Upon landing, which is at a kind of jetty, constructed by Governor Brooke, and passing the 
drawbridge, the way leads between a fine line of 32 pounders and a double row of trees. The town is 
entered by an arched gateway under a rampart or terrace, forming one side of a parade, about 100 feet 
square. This parade, were it not disfigured by some mean buildings on the right, would have a hand¬ 
some appearance. On the left side are the Government-house and main guard-room; the former is 
enclosed with a wall, having the semblance of embrasures, and is called the castle: 'it contains the 
habitation of the Governor and the public officers. The church is fronting the gateway, and is a 
handsome building; on the right of which is a neat little theatre, far superior to many of the provincial 
in England. The principal street commences between the church and a small palisadoed enclosure, 
called the Company’s garden. It consists of about 30 houses, most of them neat and well-constructed. 
At the top it divides into two other streets, one to the east, leading to that side of the country; the 
other proceeding to the upper part of the valley, across a wooden bridge thrown over a small rivulet; 
in this street are the barracks, the new garden, the hospital, and a number of shops well stored with 
all sorts of European, Indian, and Chinese commodities; but the houses are in general far inferior to 
those in the lower part of the town, where the principal inhabitants reside. 