

The Company to pay to the Crown of Sweden, during the said fifteen years, 100 dalers per last for 
every ship they should employ, the ships to be measured previous to their departure from Gottenburgh; 
and 2 dalers per last in full satisfaction for town duties. 

The Company might employ, equip, and man as many vessels as they should think proper, provi$et| 



BETWEEN SWEDEN AND THE EAST INDIES. 575 

such vessels were built or bought in Sweden, and whatever else should be necessary for equipping them, 
to be had in the Swedish dominions. 

The ships to carry the Swedish flag, and be furnished with the King’s passports, and those of the 
Republic of Algiers, 

The Company to be at liberty to raise what sum they might think fit for carrying on their commerce. 

The Company might transport what ordnance or small arms they required, as also silver, coined or 
uncoined, Swedish money only excepted, and bring from the Indies what goods or manufactures they 
thought fit, without restriction. 

The vessels of the Company, when freighted and ready to sail, should not be stopped, or hindered on 
any pretence whatever, nor should they be impeded from entering the port to which they were consigned 
on their return. 

The Captains of the Company’s ships should have the like powers for maintaining discipline amongst 
their crews as the commanders of the King’s ships; and the seamen or soldiers entered on board, should not 
be liable to be pressed into the King’s service; and, on the other hand, the Company should not take into 
their service any who should have deserted that of the Crown. 

The ships being returned and entered, having the merchandise on board them, the goods should be 
duty free, except only a very small acknowledgment to be paid on removing them. 

The concerns to be managed by three Directors, natives of Sweden, or naturalized Swedes, Protes¬ 
tants, and resident in the King’s dominions, unless absent in foreign parts for the service of the Company, 
in which case the proprietors might substitute another Director at home. 

The Company might make such regulations for the management of their commerce as they should 
think proper, provided they were agreeable to this charter. 

The Company should render a faithful account to all the persons interested, as well of their profits and 
losses as of their capital; but they should not be obliged to discover the names of their subscribers, or 
the sums they subscribed; nor should they be obliged to produce, or suffer their books to be inspected, on any 
pretence whatsoever* 

In case any of the Directors should find that the rest betrayed their secrets, or were guilty of any other 
fraud or misdemeanour, such Director should be suspended, and another chosen in his room. 

The Company to employ what number of supracargoes, officers, mariners, or soldiers they should think 
fit, either Swedes or foreigners; the latter when employed, to enjoy the same privileges as if they were born 
Swedes, and upon application to the King, might become naturalized Swedes. The money employed iii 
the capital of the Company should not be liable to any stoppage, or seizure. 