

On the arrival of tlxis intelligence in Europe, His Swedish Majesty sent ordei's to his Minister at the 
Hague, to present a memorial to the States General, which was done on the 11th of August, 1733. In 
this memorial he expressed His Majesty’s surprise at the unjust and violent proceeding of the Dutch at 
Batavia, so contraxy to the friendship which their High Mightinesses had assured the King they would 
always maintain towards His Majesty and his subjects; and that, notwithstanding the harshness of the action, 
His Majesty had still so high an idea of their High Mightinesses, as not barely to believe they had given 
orders for the excesses committed on the Company’s ship, Frederic, but was also persuaded that, in case 
it was not already done, they would order, without the least delay, the said Swedish ship, her cargo, and 
equipage to be released, and also give a just, full, and proportionate satisfaction for the indignity offered 
to Sweden, as well as repair whatever loss the Swedish East India Company had sustained. The memo¬ 
rial also required their High Mightinesses instantly to send their orders that the other Swedish ship, 
the Ulrica,-might return from the East Indies freely, without impediment or injury from the subjects of 
the Republic; His Majesty being firmly resolved to protect and maintain his subjects in the enjoyment of 
the privileges granted them by his charter for establishing a trade with China. 

The States General, perceiving, by the language of this memorial, that this was likely to become an 
important affair, sent immediately to the East India Directors, to know what it was that had given occasion 
to the Regency at Batavia to act in this manner. The Directors replied, that they had sent no order relative 
to any such transaction; and as their letters made no mention of it, they hoped the consideration of the affair 
would be deferred till they had received advice concerning it from Batavia. The States General therefore 
answered the Swedish Minister, that he might assure the King, his master, that neither they nor the 
Company had ever given any orders of this kind, and that they still held the same sentiments of friend¬ 
ship and cordiality towards the Swedish nation as they had formerly possessed. The ship was soon 
after dismissed from Batavia, and returned to Sweden; since which period the Swedish East India 
Company have been suffered to carry on their trade without the least interruption, but which is solely 
confined to China. ' 


Sweden, possessing no articles of trade suitable to the Chinese taste, the East India ships touch at 
Cadiz on their outward-bound voyage, where they dispose of a few goods of Swedish manufacture, and 
take on board sufficient silver for the purchase of their homeward investments. 



BETWEEN SWEDEN AND THE EAST INDIES. 


577 


1746. In this year the Company’s charter was renewed, and the term of their exclusive trade 
prolonged to 1766. The number of ships dispatched from Sweden, from the commencement of their 
trade in 1732 to 1746, were 25, three of which were destined to India, and the remainder to China; of 
these four were lost. 