

Angra Bay is known by means of a remarkable forked hill near the sea, named Mount Brazil; the 
bay is about half a mile broad, and open to all winds from S.S.W. by the South to the East The S, W. 
sea in particular, which sets round Mount Brazil on the west side of the hay, is tremendous. The 
ground, excepting a very small part of it, is so rocky, as to make it requisite to moor with four anchors. 
Vessels may safely remain in the roads from May to September, when the winds are light, and blow from 
between West and N. W. At the commencement of winter the winds are so violent, that upon the least 
appeapnee of bad weather, it is necessary to put to sea, the coast affording no shelter. 

The city of Angra, in latitude 38° 39 North, and longitude 27° 12' West, is the metropolis of the* 
Azores, and the residence of the Governor. It is well built and peopled, and is an Episcopal See, under 
the Archbishopric of Lisbon; it has five parishes, one of which, St. Salvador, is the cathedral; four monas¬ 
teries, and four nunneries. It is surrounded wdth strong works, and has a large castle mounted with 
.heavy cannon. 



ST. MICHAEL’S—ST. MARY’S. 


m 

In this city are kept the royal magazines for naval stores, for the men of war and merchant ships* 
The maritime affairs are under an officer, called the Desembargador, who has persons under him who 
pilot ships into the bay, supply them with provisions, water, and other refreshments, which are here plen- 
tiful, and at very moderate prices. 

St. MICHAEL’S, separated from Terceira by a safe channel, about 24 leagues wide, is the longest of 
the Azores, being 10 or 11 leagues in extent East and West, and only two or three In breadth. The prin¬ 
cipal town, called Ponta del Gado, is on the south side of the island, where vessels anchor in a small bay 
near the shore ; but it affords little shelter from the storms that frequently happen in winter. The west 
point of the island is in latitude 37° 54 North, and longitude 25° 59 West. The town has a handsome 
appearance from the sea. The principal fortification is the Castle of St. Braz, which is close to the sea, at 
the western extremity of the town; it is mounted with twenty-four pieces of cannon, the greater part of 
which are in a disabled state. About three miles to the eastward are two small forts. There is a mole 
for the protection of the small craft, which might at a small expence he made capable of receiving vessels 
of a considerable draught of water. 

St Michael’s is the largest in extent in square miles of any of the Western Islands, and is the most 
productive of all kinds of grain, as well as animal and vegetable food; it may with propriety be termed the 
granary of Lisbon, as, upon a moderate computation, in a year of favourable crops, it produces grain suf¬ 
ficient for ten times the number of its inhabitants. The population has been estimated at 100,000. 

The commerce of St. Michael's with Great Britain is very extensive; from thence the Portuguese 
natives arc supplied with the various commodities suitable to their wants, which are similar to those enu¬ 
merated at Madeira: in exchange for which, about fifty or sixty vessels sail annually with fruit, to the 
extent of from 00 to 80,000 boxes of oranges and lemons. 