



FERDINAND NORONHA— AZORES. 


579 


FERDINAND NORONHA. 


This island Is situated near the Coast of Brazil, in latitude 3° 55 South, and longitude 32° 35' West; 
and in the event ot any circumstance preventing the homeward-bound East India ships from touching at 
St. Helena, their instructions from the Company are to proceed to Ferdinand Noronha. 

The island is about ten miles long and two broad, and is remarkable by a high rocky peak, called 
the Pyramid, very barren and rugged; and by its S.W. point, named the Hole in the Wall, which Is 
pierced through, and gives a free passage to the sea. The south point is distinguishable by a little rocky 
islet that appears like a statue. There are two harbours capable of receiving ships of the greatest 
burthen; one is on the north side, and the other on the north-west. The former is in every respect the 
principal both for shelter, capacity, and goodness of its bottom; but both are exposed to northerly or 
north-west winds. There are three forts which defend the harbour, built with stone, spacious, and well- 
provided with large artillery. It is subject to the Portuguese Government of Pernambuco, and is peopled 
with exiles from Brazil and Portugal. 

Cattle, sheep, poultry, and vegetables are to be procured here, but they are dear; water is rather a 
scarce article in the dry season. The well which supplies the shipping, is near the Governor’s house; but 
the landing the casks, and getting off the water, is inconvenient, on account of the surf. The wood is cut 
on a small island near the north point of the large one, called the Wooding Island; but there is much 
difficulty in getting it off. If the Portuguese would permit the cutting wood on the main island, it 
might be shipped off without much danger. 

The following are the expences incurred by one of the Company’s ships which touched here: 


Present to the Governor*^.*-v~20 dollars. 

Three pigs, each 16 dollars-48 ditto. 

Eight sheep, each 3 dollars —~24 ditto. 
Three dozen fowls --18 ditto. 


Two bullocks 40 dollars. 

Carrying down to the beach ditto. 

Expences attending the watering ^24 ditto. 
Greens and sorrel —0 ditto. 


Vessels employed in the southern whale fishery occasionally visit the island for supplies. 


AZORES; or, WESTERN ISLANDS, 

Are nine in number, viz, Flores, Corvo, Fayal, Pico, Tereeira, Graciosa, St. George, St. Michael’s, 
and St. Mary’s, exclusive of small islets or dangers contiguous to some of them. 

FLORES, the westernmost island, extends about leagues North and South; the northern extre¬ 
mity of which, called Point Delgado, is in latitude 39° 33' North, and longitude 31° 11' West. 

CORVO, separated from the north end of Flores by a safe channel about 4 leagues wide, is the 
north-westernmost of the group, its northern extremity being in latitude 39° 44' North. There is a small 
bay on its S, E. side, and a village, where stock and a few refreshments may be procured. 

FAYAL, the westernmost of the central group, is high, about three leagues in extent, of a circular 
form, and Its western extremity is in latitude 38° 34' North, and longitude 28° 52' West. On its S. E. 
side is a good bay, in which the town Is situated; the points forming the bay, which is nearly If mile deep, 
bear nearly N.E. and S. W. from each other, about two miles distance. The ground is in many parts foul; 
and when the wind blows from the southward, a heavy sea is thrown in. The common anchorage is with 
the town N. W. half a mile distant. 