

There are several English merchants settled at Fayal, who carry on a trade with the neighbouring 
islands, more particularly in wine, which, though principally produced on Pico, bears the name of Fayal 



580 


PICO—ST. GEORGE—GRACIOSA—TERCEIRA. 


wine; and in some years, from 8 to 10,000 pipes are exported, exclusive of what is retained for the con¬ 
sumption of the inhabitants. It also produces large quantities of corn; and provisions and refreshments, 
of all kinds are to be procured. 

PICO is separated by a narrow channel from Faya!. The peak from which the island takes its name, 
is situated near the S. W. part, in latitude 38° 27' North, and longitude 28° 28' West; it is a very remark¬ 
able mountain, of a circular form, and terminating on its summit in the figure of a sugar-loaf, extremely 
regular in its shape. It is 7,000 feet above the level of the sea, and in fine weather may be seen 25 leagues. 
This island has several towns well inhabited, and produces yearly from 10 to 24,000 pipes of a white wine, 
of a remarkably salubrious quality, something between Madeira and Hock: this wine has of late years been 
much improved; it becomes quite mellow in about three years, or in about eight months, if sent on a sea 
voyage. The Passado, orFayal Malmsey, is peculiar to the island. The method of making it is as follows: 
when the grapes are ripe, the choicest bunches are culled, and exposed for fifteen days on large lava stones, 
and the grapes are turned every day, so that all the watery particles are exhaled; when afterwards com¬ 
pressed, their juice is quite thick and luscious, and brandy is put in to preserve it, so that it becomes 
quite a cordial. The chief exportation of wine is to the West Indies, for the use of the British navy 
and army. As the principal part of the island of Pico belongs to the inhabitants of Fayal, all the wine is 
shipped off from the latter, and thus it is called Fayal wine. Besides cedar, and other timber, it produces 
a wood called Teixo, which is extremely hard, and when pnlished, is beautifully veined, and of a bright 
scarlet colour; it is highly esteemed, and is reserved for the use of the Portuguese Court. 

ST. GEORGE is about three leagues from Pico. There is a small road on the south side of the 
island,.and a town called Villa de Valias, where the small vessels belonging to the island lie sheltered from 
every wind. 

GRACIOSA is separated from the north end of St. George by a safe channel, about eight leagues 
wide. The principal town is Santa Cruz on the N. E. side of the island, where vessels anchor. The pro¬ 
duce of this island and St. George is sent to Terceira in small vessels built here, 

TERCEIRA.—This island is about eight leagues from the S. E. point of St. George; it is about six 
leagues in length from East to West, and of a moderate height. Its principal bays are Porto Praya on 
the N. E. and Angra on the S. E. side. 

Porto Praya Bay is the largest and best in the western islands, and is capable of receiving a fleet of 
ships at its anchorage; it is in the form of a crescent. Vessels may anchor in 16 to 20 fathoms, the town 
bearing from N.W. to N. N. W. There is a good landing-place for boats near the castle. 