Introduction

Focusing on the 1803 Anglo-Maracha Campaigns

‘While studying history as an undergraduate I came across a rather
grandiose volume of world history - the tile of which I have long since
forgotten, It was one of those ungainly texts approaching the size of a
coffe-table book. Having jst ‘discovered’ South Asian history, I quickly
denounced this pretentious tome as too elementary in its abbreviated
coverage of the subcontinent. The offending volume skipped easily from
the Mughal Empire tothe British Raj with heavily iustrated pages that
showed greater concern for continuity than content. The text contained
brief summaries of politcal events implying that the Mughals controlled
India from 1526 until 1857 and then che British apparently

imperial rulers from 1858 to 1947. Leaving aside the long history ofthe
East India Company (EIC prior to 1858, there were still fundamental
problems with this tory. modern South Asia had grown out oe seam-
Jess transition of imperial power, why had the British fought such a long
series of wars there? There were three Anglo-Bengal Wars, four Anglo-
Mysore Wats, at least three Anglo-Maratha Wars, as well as Anglo-Sikh
and Anglo-Afghan Wars, which suggested the transference of power in
‘South Asia was not analogous to passing the baton of governance in a
relay race.!

‘As my studies in South Asian history progressed at the University of
‘Toronto, I realized that I knew lite about the Maratha people that fea-
tured prominenty in the lectures of N. K. Wagle. The professor's ob-
servations on Brahmin dominance of the Maratha administrative system
helped me to realize that Westerners had largely overlooked the more sec-
ular aspects of Maratha military history. Prior to lengthy tutorials with
‘Wagle, my elementary understanding of the Marathas had not devel-
‘oped much beyond the feeble textbook descriptions that summarized the
Marathas' identity 2s the ‘Marathi-speaking Hindu people native to the
state of Maharashtra’. In the long run, that less than adequate culeural
definition proved tobe another gross generalization of humanity on a par

