xi Acknowledgements

‘South Asian military economy ofthe nineteenth century. The staff of the
NAM’s Department of Weapons arranged special viewings of relevant
military technology including both South Asian and British smallarms as
‘well as artillery. The latter ranged from EIC battalion guns to ‘visiting
pieces" such as one of the Sikh Sutlej guns. The late Peter Hayes, as de-
partment head, helped to create a departmental environment in which
‘scholarly investigation ranked equally with collecting. Michael Baldwin,
Peter's immediate successor, also made items available for my research,
while Martin J. Hinchcliffe donated hours of his personal time with re-
Bard to explaining weapons fabrication techniques that he learned for the
‘Purposes of historic conservation and restoration.

‘One individual that deserves special mention is David F. Harding, afor-
‘mer British officer who served in the 10th Princess Mary's Own Gurkha
Rifles. His unit, known as 10 GR’ prior to amalgamation into the Royal
Gurkha Rifles, was the regimental heir to the 10th Madras Native Infantry
‘who fought so courageously at the Battle of Assaye in 1803, David F.
Harding is the world’s leading authority on smallarms of the EIC and
hhis knowledge of the Company's military policies is encyclopaedic. He
に hm his willingness to share his knowledge while cn-

in a healthy intellectual exchange on the origins and history of
the Brichlnian Ary. Hoang’ fourroume study of EIC smallarms
should be considered as essential by furure historians attempting to tackle

‘the meaning and significance of Company policies related to weaponry

and its use as described in the phrase ‘discipline and drill’,

1 was very fortunate in receiving words of encouragement that sus-
tained me over the years that it took to complete this work. Field Mar-
shal John Chapple had to listen to one of my more dreadful lectures at
the NAM. Yet he urged me to struggle on with what came to be known
generically as ‘the Maratha book’. There were a number of old soldiers
who were particularly instrumental in developing the combat leadership
aspects ofthis study. I label them ‘old soldiers’ because it is an epithet
they wear with quiet, distinguished pride. Lieutenant-Colonel Patric J.
Emerson, Secretary ofthe Indian Army Association, shared the benefit of
his service with the Bombay Grenadiers but he also provided the names
md addresses of other veterans with relevant Indian Army service. Of
‘those contacts the most helpful was the ate Lieutenant-Colonel P. ML W.
Doyle MC, Chairman of the Mahratta Light Infantry Regimental Asso-
<iation, ‘Paddy’ Doyle proved a vital link in establishing the longevity of
‘Maratha military tradition and identity. His accounts of leading Maratha
traps alk helped me wo define the iference between lendership sues

faratha officership issues. Another one of the veterans was C.F. E.

‘Acknowledgements 1

‘Wilmot ofthe 9th Lancers (later known asthe 9th/12th Lancers) who saw
‘events as only a senfor non-commissioned officer (NCO) could. ‘Charlie’,
‘who passed-away as a pensioner atthe Chelsea Hospital soon afte I fn-
ished my PhD, joined the British Army at age filteen, serving as a "boy
soldier’ with the 9th in various postings across South Asia. His experi-
ences as a lancer as well as his observations on having drilled with the
‘Nizam of Hyderabad’s mounted units were very useful

Janos Marffy produced all but one of the maps for this book and his
clear and concise artwork helped to clarify the confusing detail offre and
‘movement that plagued many formerly complex battle maps ofthe 1803
‘Anglo-Maratha Campaigns, Tamzen Le Blanc provided technical sup-
port for a number of problems that occurred as material was transferred
‘berween different types of computer operating systems. Mildred Gallotin
‘Grambling, Louisiana, kept faith over the years reminding mein friendly
but firm terms that ‘tis time to finish che book’. Ron Matthews of Cran
field University was always postive and willing to discuss the finer points
of defence economics. Dr Ramayyar Subramanian helped me by hand-
carrying a number of sources from India. Fain Brock of Austin, Texas,
showed me how to juggle various professional commitments while Harry
Lucas Jr, founder of the Educational Advancement Foundation, granted
‘me time away from an important research project so I'could complete
last-minute revisions for Cambridge Press.

also wish to acknowledge the long hours of research help provided
bby my mother Esther S. Cooper. With more than thirty years of ca-
reer experience in libraries Esther was called upon numerous times in
England, India and North America, when the bibliographic trail went
cold, While my wife Syivia sufered through numerous holidays virtually
‘alone while I spent hours rewriting the notes I gathered on research trips
that masqueraded as ‘vacations’,

Tkis impossible to list all tose who gave of their time and knowledge
but by the same token it must be said that not everyone noted here may
have cooperated so fully if they had been able to visualize the finished
work, In the final analysis this creation remains truly interdisciplinary
as an exercise in cross-cultural conflict analysis; Maratha history, British
history, military history, economic history as wel as the history and phi-
osophy of science have all managed to find accommodation within this
study. Researching and writing this book proved to bea stimulating chal-
Jenge and the conclusion of the process brings not a sense of relief but
rather an odd emptiness - as if one had lost a friend. And as the result
‘of my commitment to that friendship I can truly say that I accept full
responsibility forall mistakes, errors and omissions in this book.

