x Acknowledgements

profoundly affected the way in which this ‘Maratha war story’ became
A vehicle for exploring cross-cultural conflict analysis and for that I will
always be indebted to him. A world-class library and the chance to ex
‘change ideas with distinguished imperial historian C. A. Bayly as well 25
‘numerous visting scholar such as Jon Richards, further augmented the
benefit ofthe Cambridge experience. In those days Hew Strachan was at
‘Corpus Christi College and his comments were very helpful in balanc-
ing my views on the British Army's approach to colonial warfare. Lionel
‘Carer, who at that time headed the specialized research collection at che
‘Cambridge Centre of South Asian Studies on Laundress Lane, showed
‘me great kindness by searching-out holdings that I requested.

‘While in Mumbai I benefited from the advice of Dr Sanjiv P. Desai
‘who expedited my access to primary source material in the Government
of Mahamshtras Department of Archives. Dr Aroon Tikskar long an
ardent defender of the Marathi vernacular press, took great personal na
terest in my well being when I was in Mumbai, In addition to making
sure Iwas fed a hearty Maratha home-cooked meal, he gave me access t0
his personal library containing several historic works on the 1803 Anglo-
‘Maratha Campaigns. Aroon allowed me to photocopy some rare sources
that I could not have duplicated elsewhere. C. R. Mankame of Mumbai
‘came to my aid by locating out-of-print Maratha histories published in
the dying days of the British Raj,

His Royal Highness the Maharaja of Jaipur was gracious in letting
ime spend several days interviewing Yaduendra Sahai, Director of the
‘Maharaja Sawai Mansingh I Museum, We met for Jong hours in the
abandoned cannon foundry of the Jaigarh Fort discussing casting tech-
niques and investigating the virtually intact production facilities. The
Jaigarh’s collection included nwo extremely rare artillery pieces. One
proved to have been a battalion gun used by Mahadji Sindia's scpoys
at Lalsot while the other was a laminated ‘bar gun’ with a hexagonal iron
bore sleeved in bronze; the later matching the description ofthe type used
by the Marathas ar Dethi, Agra and Laswari In Udaipur, Abdul Hakim
provided complete access to his arms factory where muskets are still
produced by hand in the traditional fashion and the techniques demon-
strated there explained much about smallarms proliferation in eighteenth-
century India, While in Udaipur I also had the benefic of examining the
historic arms collection ofthe Parhar family, owners ofthe Century Arms
Corporation.

‘The Indian National Archives in Delhi yielded some of the more ob
dee politica references in this work, but by far the greatest collection
‘of East India Company (EIC) documents rests in the British Library's

‘Acknowledgements xi

Oriental and India Office Collection (BL: OIOC) formerly known as the
India Office Library and Records (IOL). The staff of the OIOC always
took time to answer my naive questions about the evolution of their cata-
logue system, In particular {wish to chank Timothy Thomas and Anthony
Farrington who were never less than friendly when my queries sparked a
distraction from their busy activites.

Distinguished Napoleonic historian David Chandler invited me to
‘Sandhurst where we discussed military history asa discipline. Dr Chan-
<dler was correct in saying that academic pressure should not compel one
1o remove ‘the messy business of killing’ from military history because
thot is what war is all about. Elsewhere in Britain, I gleaned special-
ied information from antiquarians and Wellingtonians. Over the years
Anthony S. Bennelb a former Ministry of Defence historian and author
‘of several books and articles on Anglo-Maratha affairs, offered advice
fon Arthur Wellsley's campaigns in India. Bennell’s detailed knowl-
で dgc of Wellesley’s diplomatic record in South Asia remains unrivalled.
DrC. ML. Woolgar, archivist ofthe Wellington Collection at the Univer-
sity of Southampton’s Hartley Library, showed me a number of unique
‘Maratha items from the Collection including captured Maratha maps. 1
am gratefil to the Controller of Her Majesqy’s Stationery Offce for per-
mission to quote from Crown Copyright material among the Wellington
Papers, Anthony J. Mitchell, of Britain's Arms and Armour Society, gave
ofhis time and knowledge to help me learn about regional distinctions in
South Asian edged weapons. The recently deceased Robert Wiggington,
4 tremendous authority on the arms of Tipu Sultan, exchanged ideas on
the South Asian vs. European origin of weapons found in Mysore.

1owe a collective thanks to the staf of the National Army Museum
(NAM) in Chelsea who helped in such a great variety of ways. The NAM.
‘sa major repository for records of the British Indian Army, a marvellous
collection, Dr Alan J. Guy, Assistant Director (Administration), was the
‘man who first urged me to vist the museum and he suffered through
the reading of several early drafts of material. Dr Peter Boyden, Assis-
tant Director (Collections), went out of his way to ensure that I had
access to all the pertinent archival records and he was particularly good
bout notifying me when newly acquired material held promise. Jenny
Spencer-Smith, Head of the Department of Fine and Decorative Art,
helped to locate etchings and sketches ofthe Anglo-Maratha Campaigns—
a fascinating source of iconographic evidence. Spencer-Smith was also
responsible for suggesting the picture used on the dust jacket of this
book She recommended a depiction of former Maratha mercenary James
‘Skinner as a man who symbolized the continuity to be found within the

