8 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for I

and that enabled the ‘Honourable Company? to amass a wealth of tacti-
cally based regional knowledge as well as develop military specializations
suited to specific combat environments. Over the years the British had
also dispatched a number of the King’s troops to India and although
they were often used to spearhead assaults they were not generally as
‘knowledgeable about ‘in-country’ operations. From his seat of govern-
‘ment in Bengal the Governor-General had senior military authority and
hhe coordinated various EIC military deployments as wells operations in-
volving His Majesty's troops. The tremendous distance between London
and India meant that the Governor-General operated for months at a
‘ime without direct guidance and he often had to act on his last available
orders ora set of principles interpreted from policy guidelines.

Angl-Maratha conflict
By the second quarter ofthe eighteenth century the Marathas could be
said to have controled 75 per cent ofthe subcontinent." And with the
EIC gradually pushing the economic and political hinterlands ofits three
Presidencies ever inward, a clash was inevitable, Once the British began
to engage the Marathas militarily, the conflict proces fared sporadically
for two generations, stretching from the Battle of Aras on 18 May 1775
until the Siege of Asirghar on 7 April 1819. In fighting this series of
‘Anglo-Maratha wars the EIC in effect accelerated the disintegration of
the Maratha Confederacy that was the indigenous heir to India’s military
fortunes." Those unfamiliar with South Asian history often find ir
cult to trace the Anglo-Maratha Wars as they overlap with the Third and
Fourth Anglo-Mysore Wars in which the Marathas were British allies and
eal espectely. The sequencing of the major was ols something
like this:

+ First Anglo-Maratha War! (1775-6, 1779-82)

+ Third Anglo-Mysore War (1789-92)

+ Fourth Anglo-Mysore War (1799)

+ Anglo-Maratha Campaigns of 1803

+ Holkar (Maratha) Campaign of 1804-5

+ Maratha and Pindari War of 1817-19

‘The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns of 1803 were directed against those
Maratha leaders who opposed the Treaty of Basein,* a Subsidiary AL
liance agreement signed in desperation by the Maratha Peshua! (Prime
‘Ministet)Baji Rao Tl. For his part, the Feshwa probably saw the docu
Anca poly expedient and coset means of tempraly
obtaining British troops to protect himself a marriage of convenience

"Al Trea of Bassin, Treaty of Bessa. * Aka Peshwah,Peishwa, Pisa,

Introduction °

it you will. Ironically, the Peshwa needed protection from the leaders of
the Sindia and Holkar clans that formed part of his own broadly based

political network. The most militarily powerful Maratha clans menaced

‘Baji Rao II with their armies because the Peshwa was, in their opinion,

an ineffectual and loathsome political figure. Baf Rao II apparently saw

his own signature on the Treaty of Bassein asa ploy in a larger game of
‘control, which he believed he could win, The naively optimistic Rhaa

apparently hoped to use the Bridsh as temporary alles in 1803 to help

‘daw back political power ~ after which time these foreigners could be

dispensed with and crushed,

British imperil historians have tended to see the battles of 1803 as
springing from the unwillingness of independently minded Maratha lead
ers to peacefully acknowledge their subordinate status under the Treaty
‘of Bassein as signed by the Pesto. The formula fora British intervention
in ‘native affairs’ was not new and the Treaty of Bassein was in keeping
with the basic tenets of the Subsidiary Treaty Alliance System. A similar
treaty with the Nizam of Hyderabad had apperently been successful but
the Nizam did not have to contend with multiple princely retainers each
‘with greater military power than his own. Governor-General Richard
Wellesley’s* supporters have asked us to believe that, if the Treary of
Bassein had worked as intended for the EIC it would have seen the vari-
‘ous competing Maratha clan factions brought peacefully together under
‘a rather weak but manageable Feshwa. By signing the Treaty of Bassein,
Baji Rao II surrendered his autonomy and unknowingly gave Richard
‘Wellesley apolitical cover to meddle further in Maratha affairs. Ever since
the impeachment trial of former Governor-General Warren Hastings! the
scrutiny of Governors-General had been aimed at detecting abuses of
‘power that might suggest ‘high crimes and misdemeanours’. The Treaty
‘of Bassein was a godsend to Richard Wellesley in thet it allowed him to
‘explain his expansionist Maratha policy in terms of politcal involvement
‘on behalf of his reluctant ally the Peshaa, This could be used to help
portray the events of 1803 as a just and legal war against opponents of
the treaty as long as one accepted the premise that Peshwa Baji Rao Il
‘was the legitimate Maratha ‘ruler’. But real Maratha power lay elsewhere
and the British soon began to despise the Feshza as wel.

Governor-General Wellesey’s main Maratha enemies in 1803 were
‘Daulat Rao Sindia,' the Maharaja of Gwalior, and Raghuji Bhonsle IS of
Nagpurl6 Raghuji possessed a magnificent mounted force in 1803 and

* Ata he Ear of Mornington, Lard Mornington, the Marquess Wellesley.

! Rund not guilty bythe House of Lords in 1793.

* Aka Dowiut Row Sindia Dalat Rao Shinde, Dolat Row Scindiah, Dowlut Rap Scindhia,
aut Rao Schnde, Dowlet Row Scindea, Daulat Rao Sindhia fh 1780-d.1827)

5 Ata Raguji Bhonsle, Mabarjh of Berar, Raahof Ber, Berar Raa he Berar man’

