18 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘Asian military econémy and the Marathas found service with their former
opponents. The Nizam Shahi dynasty was the fist of the three Deccani
sultanate to emerge from the Bahmani kingdom's decline and Malik
‘Ahmad, under the more popularly known ttle of Ahmad Nizam Shab,”
based his military power directly upon the fortress of Ahmadnagar. This
massive fortification had a deceptively low profile st into the Deccani
countryside and it proved to be a most dynamic military labour spot
‘market for the Maratha chiefs who travelled there to offer various mil-
tary services. These Marathas were independent mercenary agents who
sold their skills and those of their kinsmen without the impediment of
‘nationalism or sectarian probibiion.® For his part, Ahmad set a personal
‘example in weapons dril, discipline and military learning by way of the
‘martial art that he promoted?

‘Maratha infantry were used to defend the chain of fortifications that
added backbone to the Nizam Shah's territorial claims, while more
transitory Maratha light horsemen found increased employment during
target-specific campaign seasons. The latter group of Marathes experi=
enced cyclical opportunities to renew their contractual relationship as che
“Ahmadinagar army took to the field twice a year atthe time of the erly
and the late harvests, to plunder the country near Daulatabsd in order if
possible to reduce the fort by famine’.!® Some historians would have you
‘believe that campaign seasons were rigidly applied across South Asian
culture. They envisioned a predictable world in which South Asians did
‘not campaign in the monsoon because of the rain nor at harvest time
‘owing to agricultural labour requirements. The Marathas, keen soldiers
secking to earn their pay when the opportunity presented itself, proved
willing and able to campaign at any time of the year. If there was work
to be had on campaign with the Nizam Shah, why lose the chance for
miitary or financial gain? A harvest presented a military opportunity but
‘one had to time it carefully. In an ideal world you let the enemy finish the
fieldwork, to minimize your effort and maximize your return. You had
to strike before he got the bulk ofthe grin stored in his fortress A ld
‘of stubble burned easily and left him with nothing - not even a blade of
‘grass for cattle forage, And if you had the enemy's grain, or denied him
access this fields while your camp followers harvested it, then there was
a better chance of starving him into submission.

‘The harvest season was ted to the monsoon cycle, which also provided
‘egular accesso the international military arenaas reflected inthe nay

Ne patterns that brought a variety of vessels to Maharashtra's coastline.

\ Aka Abad Dahri Nisam Shah (mign de) He caprued Datlatabd in 1999, derby
malin perf deh 508. The Ne Shh iyo Abad

Maratha military culture 19

Ships from Africa, the Persian Gulf, the Red Sea and Europe served to
‘expand opportunities to incorporate Islamic, African and European mi
itary science."! Ahmad Nizam Shah was a regional powerbroker who ar
tracted the attention ofthe larger world. By serving him the local Maratha
sardars learned more about the ever-expanding world of military science.
‘The fortresses of the Deccani sultanate, as centres of military employ-
‘ment, offered chances for Maratha soldiers of fortune to learn how the
‘great armies of the day functioned in an administrative as well as military
capacity. The Marathas stationed ar Ahmadnagar had an opportunity to
see the Portuguese military men who visited the fort openly as ‘respected
fiends of the Nizam Shah. And although the sultanate’s eventual adop-
tion of Shiism might have offended Catholic Europeans, it did lead to
increased ties with Persia and that in turn meant a chance for Maratha
soldiers to learn more about Persian military affairs. Western India was
‘growing exponentially with regard to miliary skills the volume of fire-
power and exposure tothe international arena

“Ahmadnagar was also noted forits artillery and it was not unique in that
‘regard, Increased military competition in western India had bolstered the
uest for additional firepower. The correspondence of Portuguese offi-
cials inthe frst half ofthe sixteenth century makes it apparent that they
considered South Asian artilery superior to their own.'? South Asian
‘metal smiths, with literally thousands of years of collective experience,
‘could produce quantities of metal that surpassed that of historically con-
‘temporary Europe. This was particularly evident in the production of
steel and the alloying of brass" or bronze." Centuries of casting experi-
fence was utilized to manufacture temple ornaments and religious
paraphernalia in India and these production techniques readily leant
themselves to casting artillery. The ease with which traditional In
‘craftsmen could be integrated into military production was quite nacu-
ral. Within market towns and cities, socially ranked metal workers were
offen found in proximity to local wheelwrights making parts for bu
Jock carts and both groups found employment in manufacturing artillery.
Production grew steadily under the patronage of local powerbrokers that
tended not to interfere with the free-market forces ofthe South Asian mi
itary economy.'* This free-market attitude towards military technology
flourished in an India unrestricted by state monopoly or centralized con-
trol over artillery."®

“The manufacturing of quality artillery was more than just a cottage
industry on a regional seale and the scientific aspects of South Asian

* Metallurgy speaking, view bas cannon’ regards oration, are actualy
‘bronze.

