6 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fe India

1 can only say that the 1803 Anglo-Maratha Campaigns demonstrate -
with a surprising reverse example ~ that technological innovation and
superior firepower were never the absolute guarantors of military success
in war.!?

‘Although the book that follows is in lage part an attempt to redress
the historic and cultural imbalance, itis also an examination of how
information is lost or misconstrued as it passes from one cultural setting
to another. Westerners have used a very rigid and predictable model for
South Asian conflict analysis, «biased model that has downplayed the
legacy and meaning of South Asian warfare. But part of our problem
js that we have dealt with large blocks of time in order to make analysis
casiet. Going backand studying the wars on an individual batle-by-battle
‘basis is mandatory if we are going to revise the gross generalizations that
were made about South Asian military culture and experience. I feel
there is good reason to retell the story ofthese campaigns inthe light of
‘new discoveries about the manner in which the British achieved military
victory in 1803,

‘The Maratha military challenge

‘To 』 great extent this book deals with Maratha military culture and the
‘challenge it presented to the British. However, this portion of the text is.
intended to provide the reader with some idea of how the events of 1803
fit into the larger picture of South Asian military history.

The extension of European conflict

‘The British ‘conquest of India’ came abouts the result ofa ratherlengthy
series of economic, political and military events stretching over more than
‘wo centuries from the founding of the EIC in 1600. This has caused some
historians to rethink the once popular theories of decisive battles for con-
‘ol ofthe subcontinent, which are now much more open to debate. While
‘economic rivalry was always a potential trigger for violence between com-
peting European powers in South Asi, it could at times be tempered by
shared defence concerns or adesire for the maintenance of peace between
home governments, But during the eighteenth century the South Asian
extension of European wars was facilitated by overall improvements in
France's as well as Britain's ability to organize and equip indigenous de-
{fence forces that were interchangeable with European troops in the order
‘battle. This point is crucial in trying to understand all of the Western,

le surrounding the use of so-called ‘European discipline and drill’

bby South Asian troops. By instructing South Asian soldiers in the latest

i

Teroduction 7

version of standard procedures for their armies, competing European
powers were merely ensuring a compatible level of intrchangeabiity
between their home armies and those of their colonial military forces. A
‘number of mid-cighteenth-century South Asian armies already utilized
both indigenous and European military organizational systems and South
Asians already had all the personal warrior attributes they needed prior
to this latest round of standardization aimed at European political objec-
tives. The widespread imposition of a nation-specific European theory of
military organization (ic. Britain or France) enabled Europeans to use
South Asian soldiers more effectively in terms of European colonial force
structure and its tactical deployment towards attaining European political
‘objectives in a colonial setting. These mid-eighteenth-century European
institutions did not seta historic precedent forthe introduction of either
discipline or drill in South Asian armies.

During the eighteenth century South Asian colonial armies held enor-
‘mous potential for extending the ability of England and France to wage
war in Asia,” A colonial army consumed military resources but it was still
{far more cost-effective than shipping anall-European force tothe far side
of the globe. South Asia's extreme climate had provided the Europeans
‘with an initial reason to look for indigenous allies who could prosecute
their wars more effectively, while South Asian leaders sought European
allies who might help tip the balance of power in local struggles." It was
often a mutually symbiotic relationship nurtured by the joint quest for
military advantage. And although large portions of South Asian society
had been militarized since Vedic times, the Anglo-French rivalry ofthis
period would feed directly int larger South Asian regional power strug-
Bales so that it became hard to distinguish influence from impetus and
cause from coincidence.

‘As the EIC grew, in terms of financial and military power, it became a
‘more sophisticated civil-military mechanism capable of managing British
warsin Asia. Within India there were three separate Presidencies, Bengal,
Bombay and Madras, each with its own Governer, Council and army.
‘But Bengal was the largest and wealthiest of these Presidencies and after
implementation of Pit’s India Act (1784), the Governor of Bengal be-
came the Governor-General with powers placing him above the other
Governors and providing scope for coordinating the segmented govern-
‘mental apparatus on the ground. Nonetheless, the separate Presidencies
retained theie distinctive military identities via their individual armies

The Fint Kamat War (1744-8) was apart ofthe Wit ofthe Austrian Succesion
70-8),
"Le The Second Karatak Wa (1749-54).

|
|
|
|
|

