20 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for Ini

ariillery production should not be ignored. In general, historians have
failed to consider the combined elements that would have contributed
‘© making western India an ideal historic home for the evolution of
tillery. Advanced mathematics was essential to the effective development
ofartilery and the Hindu science of numbers was augmented with con-
tributions from Arab Musiim mathematicians and then readily applied 19
bliss. In addition the calculations for alloying and estimating molten
‘metal mould volume requirements demanded precision, The coming to-
‘ether of Hindu metallurgy and mathematics with Arab as well as Persian
contributions represents the type of military science that South Asians
Were never given credit for in Western texts. As for Hindu astronomy,
Was used in the weather forecasting needed to set the dates forthe ar-
rival ofthe monsoon.'* Bronze cannon casting was best done before the
‘monsoon since barrels cast in that season were more likely to be fawed
‘which meant they would have to be melted down and recast at later
date, During the monsoon the ar’ moisture content direcly influenced
the formation of bubbles, which lodged between the moulds interior
surface and the molten metal. Bubbles of that description - which we
‘ow know to have been hydrogen - would manifest hemsehes as pited
surface faws as the metal cooled to reveal the locadon of gas tapped
between the mould and the barrel!”

‘Toa great degree simeenth-century warfare inthe Deccan escaped de-
tailed European observation, butitscems thatthe etly South Asian ead
in arly quality and volume of fiepower was sustained in the gm
sition from siege artillery to massive field artillery. The issue of how to
attain mobility for ‘great guns’ in the Deccan was resolved by creating
transportation corps with large numbers of elephants and camels that
offered tremendous advantages over horses. South Asian leaders could
«so purchase the services of thousands of menial labourers within local
labour markets. In 1546 Ibrahim Adil Shah atacked the field army of
Ahmadnagar as it lay encamped on the banks ofthe Bhima River.!® The
capture of 170 pieces of artillery with rumbrels and 250 elephants indi-
‘ates that theories of arillry-based fire superiority had already affected
‘manoeuvre warfare in the Deccan Increased firepower, or the multiplica-
tion of fore if you wil, paid dividends in the reduction ofthe number of
‘men needed with smallarms. Men with such sls were moderately expen
sive in most armies owing to their taining time and smallarms procure
‘mentcosts.'? While the Europeans could also fabricate large cannon, they
tended to use them as rather immobile siege guns Without sufiient

\brute strength or some form of mobility the European siege guns were
'go unvild a eld pieces. Forty yeas afer the bate on the Bhima,
fnetian traveller Caesar Frederick saw some of Ahmadnagars later

Maratha military culture a

‘generation of artillery, He observed that they had been cas in sectional
‘components that added to their pack mobility as they could be disman-
ded for animal transport and then reassembled for deployment; a great
advantage for campaigns in the hill country or crossing monsoon-swollen
rivers. Once again elephants were te prove an environmental asset.
Although some Western authorities have dismissed South Asian guns
fabricated in sectional rings as being later Ottoman pieces, these were
cast in India and fully operational in Ahmadnagars army when Caesar
Frederick saw them in 1586. He noted, “Though they were made in pieces
the guns worked marvelously well

Establishing a military profile
Arguably the most skilful soldier/statesman to govern Ahmadnagar was
Malik Ambar* (d. 1626). A black Habshi! slave known in some texts
as ‘the saviour of Ahmadnagar’, Malik Ambar employed large num-
bers of Marathas using bargi-gir predatory ight horse tactics (see below,
p 26), deploying them to great effect against Mughal army supply lines,
‘And it was that light horse tactical experience which later became asso-
ciated with the modus operandi of Maratha mounted uni in the Deccan.
Unfortunately this is also where some of the historic confusion begins,
as historians have tended to merge Maratha ethnic and military identity
with jus a single aspect of their military profile.

‘A clan-based group of ‘horsemen for hire’ could all be of one ethnic
roup and some Marathas served as cavalrymen, but by far the greatest
‘numbers were infantry and garrison troops. The existence of Maratha
clans serving Malik Ambar inthe first quarter ofthe seventeenth century,
and the coexistence of some predominantly mounted Maratha bands
in that period, cannot be projected forward as a safe assumption that
‘Maratha armies’ were all ethnically Maratha or that all rue Maratha
armies were mounted practitioners of bargi-gii warfare. One would not
accept the same cultural romanticism in the British army ifsomeone were
to postulate erroneously that English armies were all ethnically English
or all truly English armies were cavalry-based since the days when the
Roundheads and Cavaliers faced each other on horseback during the
English Civil War. It was true that the most powerful sadars of clans like
the Bhonsle’s and Nimbalkars were ethnic Marathes, But their ‘rank-
and-fle subordinates ~ the soldiers from other ethnic communities who
served them ~became ‘Maratha forces’ by association. Therefor, when

・A Mali Amber.
‘Ata Hubs, Hubihe; ced in Hobo Johon a8 an Abysnian er Ethiopian.

