2 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

with the sweeping woHd history tha [found offensive. And soit was that
came to read more about Maratha history.

‘Maratha military history drew my attention because it reflected the
struggle of a people who at various times posed a military challenge to
the Mughals and the British. However, I did not feel I could do justice to
‘serious study of Mughal-Maratha conflict beyond he tactical level. But
in contemplating that option [became fascinated with the way one’s own
‘culture influences the perception of armed conflict among others. Within
my studies, ‘cross-cultural confiict analysis’ came to mean an analysis
of war's dynamics as influenced by the presence of competing cultures,
“The conflicting cultures might be ethnic, macial religious, national po-
ical or any combination thereof; although for me the most challenging
case studies were those that featured confict between competing mili
tary cultures. Having acknowledged my imitations in trying to address
Hindu-Mustim strife a a cross-cultural factor in Mughal- Maratha war
fare, Taarned specifcalyy to look at he Maratha military challenge to the
British in South Asia. It appeared that Britain's military efforts in 1803
had a dual nature, There were counterinsurgency operations in disputed
areas of control, but there was a much more serious conventional war for
the cloak of the Mughal Emperor; a story often downplayed in modern
British histories for one reason or another.

By the time I went up to Cambridge to begin a PhD, I recognized
that my interest in cross-cultural conflict analysis had moved on to a
very specific question. What role does cultural conditioning and cultural
perception play in the formulation of war plans and the prosecution of
‘wat? Numerically based confit analysis, or ‘game theory’ as used in the
Pentagon's war planning, caught my attention. To me it represented the
contemporary cultural arrogance of strategic assumption and a portion
of my thesis argued that ‘game theory’ and other mathematically based
analysis systems remain less than ideal for military scenarios that feature
cross-cultural conflict. In other words, linking your military response to
assumptions about your enemy’ actions (ie. strategy and tactics) i dan-
erous if you come from a different cultural background than that of
your opponent. What seems to be your enemy's next logical move or a
‘sure thin? in his projected strategic behaviour may actually bea refiec-
tion of your own cultural conditioning. People of differing cultures do
things in different ways and that includes waging war. While there may
be similarities that make certain assumptions safe, there may also be dif-
ferences that negate the logic of planned military actions. Ifyou wage war

\ gains an opponent rom lferent clr, ci never safe co ase
‘that the ‘givens’ that govern your behaviour also govern those of your
enemy.

Introduction 3

“The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns of 1803 provide an interesting case
seudy where military victory obscured the degree to which a Western
power misread an Asian opponent. That the Britsh were the military
winners in 1803 is not disputed. Rather i isthe continuing misrepre-
sentation of their Maratha opponents and the explanation of how victory
vas attained that are contested. The events of 1803 are now two centuries
‘old the dust stirred by Britain's retreat from empire has setded and
time to question what passes forthe inherited wisdom, For me the Anglo-
Maratha Campaigns of 1803 hold a greater historical significance for two
specific reasons,

First I believe these campaigns represent the misunderstood ‘high-
water mark’ of Maratha military power.? One should notbecome atached
to the notion that the Maratha military forces of 1803 were ‘Hindu’
armies. A proto-national model would be more appropriate, A model
based on the reaization that collectively the Maratha armics of 1803 were
quite secular and not dissimilar to the armed forces of modern India in
being composed of military professionals from across the subcontinent.
“The Maratha powerbrokers ofthat era were interested in victory and their
military effort drew men from the broadest military spectrum ~ one that
included Hindus from every caste, Muslims, Sikhs and Christians. In that
respect the Maratha armies of 1803 competed directly withthe British
for the loyalty of soldiers needed for the projection of power within the
contest for Indi

Following 1803 there was no indigenous South Asian military hope of
diving the British back into the three EIC enclaves cstablished as the
Bengal, Bombay and Madras Presidencies. By 1804 Bengal and Madras
‘were joined and their territories expanded towards eventual inland link-
‘up with Bombay. The 1803 campaigns also saw the extension of Bri
‘power to Delhi and with that, the British became the ‘guardians’ ofthe
Mughal Emperor. Possession ofthe Emperor was all-important because it
‘expedited Brisin’s imperial ascendance and served a adltional political
‘cover forthe frst halfof the nineteenth century. The EIC assumed control
‘ofa crumbting Mughal infrastructure but with thei ast financial network
the British were able to selectively employ Mughal political servants and
‘officials, to solidi their own hold on South Asia, There would be many
more years of fighting but it was this imperial transition that would later
appear as a seamless handoff of power in those sweeping world-history
textbooks that allocate a chapter per civilization. 。

‘The Marathas were the last indigenous South Asian’ power that was
miliarily capable of not only haling but also rolling back the consoli-
dation process that ultimately produced the Brtsh Raj, The Anglo-Sikh
‘Wars (1845-6, 1848-9) andthe Anglo-AVghan Wars (1839-42, 1878-80,

