16 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

‘The Marathas, as active participants inthis military economy, evolved
‘military culture that was responsive to market forces. It probably began
with small Maratha warrior bands that had a societal predisposition to
‘organizational adaprability and military survival. They soon took service
in relatively cosmopolitan local armies. Upon consolidation, those local
armies proved to be the building blocks of bigger regional armies. And
in time the regional armies began to serve more than the purpose of
security forces, they became institutions of political control in one form
ot another. The South Asian military economy eventually evolved into a
‘network of subcontinental power. By 1803 dominance of that economy

‘was a prerequisite to any serious bid for political supremacy or the balance
of empire.

‘The foundations of Maratha military culture

“Maratha warrior traditions reficct an ageold Vedic inspiration. And since
the days of simple cate ads, Maratha hero stones have silently extoled
the vires of bravery, skill at arms and the judicious emplayment of ex-
treme violence, Some hero stones depict ancient bates in Maharashtra
and there are two intersting examples at Bovder and Aoi that por.
try loca for under siege? The carvings dkary show the disciplined
ranks of welhdriled noops moving in tactical linea formations, The
Akuj stone is particulaly noteworthy because it demonstrates the us of
‘combined operations wth disciplined infantry and wo types of mounted
troops. Te for’ defenders are shown as having launched an atempe to
break the seg rng tightening around them. Ther breakout force fea
tured a vanguard oflancers flanked tothe lef by tightly packed infantry,
This leading line of infantry, with shield and sword, stood shoulder:
‘o-shoulder in formation presenting a sicd-wall othe stacking siege
force. Behind the line of shields, archers were wating to unleash thelr
arrows. To thwart this effort the besieging force countered the defenders?
cavalry charge with horsemen of its own. As this was being done, the
besieging army Banked ngh using elephants in echelon to trample and
sweep the breakout force's left in an attemptto cllup the defender in-
antgline The craftsman who carved thestone chose to rezein ime the
Screaming agony ofa defending infantryman of the line, His open mouth
hauntingly depicted asa circular depression and his right leg shown in
the process of being rushed beneath an advancing elephant in ull omnde

‘The ancien hero stones prove recorded evidence of South Asin
arfare's sophistication inthe pre-European period This is the typeof
‘Ndence so ofen overlooked by Western wer who wena tore

MOK CITI,

‘Maratha military culture W

Europeans introduced military drill and discipline o India; some insisting
did not arrive until the middle of the eighteenth century. They were
‘quite willing to accept the frescoes of Rome and Greece, the friezes of
Assyria or even the stele of Mesopotamia, as proof of superior military
drill and discipline in the so-called Western world.' But the iconographic
«evidence of South Asia, and the hero stones of Maharashtra in particular,
are every bit as much proof of drill and disciplined formations.

‘The Marathas emerged militarily as a loosely knit group of clan-
oriented powerbrokers, Their alliances were based on familial as well as
economic military considerations and the transitory nature of Maratha
clan relations contributed to the search for military advantage. Maratha
clan armies grew in an atmosphere that featured a results-oriented ap-
proach to warfare established years before Europe's ‘Age of Empire’. The
cultural and physical environment of Maharashtra helped to spawn the
growth of military aliances as smaller bands of warriors sought employ-
‘ment together. In this military setting leaders could act as brokerldealers
in arranging contractual service for their bands.’ Many went beyond that
in becoming players in the greater South Asian military economy and
the fortified strongholds of Maratha clan leaders in the Decean were
used for bouts of territorial exploitation. However, their forts also pro-
vided opportunities for the Marathas to participate as specialist troops in
the large dynastic armies that came to be a regular feature of Deccani*
history during the pre-European period, The fourteenth-century rise of
the Bahmani kingdom yielded far-ranging military employment and the
widespread use of firearms meant an increase in the infantry soldier's
value in warfare as well as the building of improved fortresses. And with
the sixteenth-century demise of the Bahmanis there came greater mili-
tury competition and opportunity in the emergent form of five growing
sultanates, The two lesser sultanates were those of Imad Shahi of Berar
and the Barid Shahi dynasty of Bidar. They paled in military power com-
pared to the three major sultanates, the Nizam Shahis of Ahmadnagmr
the Adil Shahis of Bijapur and the Qutb Shahis of Golconda.6 With the
increased nucleation of power there was another corresponding increase
in militarization.

By 1485 local Maratha clans had already established a favourable rep-
utation as infantry garrison troops in the hill forts near Pune.' Word of
their ability spread asthe bitterly contested forts eventually fell to Malik
‘Ahmad, founder of the Nizam Shahi dynasty.” Enemies who fought well
were not to be wasted; good soldiers were highly valued within the South

1 Aba Dakhani meaning of er rom, the Deccan.
11974, 74 二 Aka Ahmednagar, Akmedougger, Ahmednaghar
"18°4,73 4. Aba Poonah, Poo, Punah

