10 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fr india

some tenacious infantry units in the form of battalions from Hindustan
and the Persian Gulf, But the most formidable enemy army, the one
that could march on short notice, take land, occupy it, hold it, forc-
ing the British to pay the maximum price, was the army of Daulat Rao
Sindia, The ‘regular corps’ of Sindia’s army featured sepoy battalions
that were often indistinguishabe from those of the EIC in uniform, dil
‘and ethnic origin. The third principal Maratha powerbroker of this pe-
riod was Jeswunt Rao Holkac* the Maharaja of Indore. However, Holkar
abstained from participation in the battles of 1803 ia an apparent hope
that Sindia and the Brish would fight each other ro a weakened point
that he (Holkar) might be able to exploit!”

‘The British strategy for dealing with the Marathas in 1803 depended
heavily on a cwo-prong projection of power into the interior of the
subcontinent, The main British infantry forces were divided betwee
‘Commander-in-Chief(C-in-C) General Gerard Lake's ‘Grand Army’
the northern theatre (Hindustan) and Major-General Arthur Wellesley’s
‘Army of the Deccan’ in che southern theatre. Arthur was the younger
brother of Richard Wellesley ~ Brttn's Governor-General of Inia, How-
ever, Arthur went on to gain greater European fame in the Peninsular War
and he is most often remembered for his famous victory over Napoleon
at Waterloo in 1815.!

Although this overview makes it sound as if Hindustan$ and the
Deccan! were the only campaign areas in 1803, there were three other
‘operational areas that were essential to the British war effort. Unfortu
nately there is neither time nor space in this book to do justice to these
‘ther military events, Two actions centred on securing coastal regions.
‘Colonel Murray captured Sindias port of Broach in Gujara'® on the west
coast while Raghuji Bhonsle’ maritime province of Cuttackin Orissa on
the east coast of India was taken in a pincer movement launched by
troops from Bengal and Madras! The seizure of the Maratha ports
completed the Brish effort to seal the coastline ofthe subcontinent in

+ Aa Yenrant Rao Holkar,Jawunt Rao Hallan Yesrant Rao Hoar, lawunt Rw Hehar
1 Therankstnetions and chain ofcommand m Ids wer never simple during the enod
で TEIC rule. The Bombay Presdency and Madras Presidency ia 183 each had thet
‘own CnC but Lake was supreme and held the King’s commision. He was Bams
paramount slr i nda during 180
| Arthur Wellesley became Vacount Welington in 1609, Ed of Welington in Febeuary
1812, Marquis of Welingson in August 1812, was promoted to Field Martha a 813
and received the tle Duke of Wellington in 1814. He was made Master General ofthe
‘Ondcancs in 1818 and capped his carer by becoming Prime Minister sn 1823.
nis mem simplsnc form - Land ofthe Hindus - Nenh tna.

DDakhan, Dekiun. Defined historically a3 he subcontinent’ tablelands. in rele
i Nor ate e-news be he ween eae ht

we

Introduction un

1803; military move thet paid lasting benefits in their subsequent South
Asian wars. The great Maratha naval cradition of coastal raiding, once up-
held by clans like the Angrias was history And with increased freedom
‘of movement in the shipping lanes, the British enjoyed further logistical
advantage as men and war materiel were transferred between EIC bases
‘without ear of Maratha interception. The third major action of 1803 was
the landlocked operation in Bundlekund aimed at creating a buHr zone
‘and further disconnection between Maratha forces in the interior of the
subcontinent.

‘In Wellington's shadows

“The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns of 1803 have not been well covered in
either Western or South Asian military history. Over the years a variety
of Anglo-Maratha battle narratives have emerged but they have tended
tobe polarized along the lines of culeual difference that leave us wanting
amore balanced picture. In South Asian military histories, 1803 is often
sweated as an anomaly that pales next to the Maratha miliary exploits of
the seventeenth century. As far as British military history is concerned,
the Napoleonic Wars take precedent. Most students of military history,
who have heard of the Anglo-Maratha conflict of 1803, are familiar with
the events in the southern theatre as typified by the daring exploits of
Arthur Wellesley at the Battle of Assaye, Arthur's later rise to become
principal commander in Europe end ultimately Prime Minister speaks
volumes about selective memory and the fashion in which historyis culled
for political purpose. The northern theatre under General Lake remains
underreported.

‘Assaye was destined to be remembered as the key battle in establi
{ng Arthur Wellesley’s reputation for offensive combat leadership in India.
“Technically speaking, the pursuit of Dhundia Waugh was Arthur's firstin-
dependent combat command, butit was not tobe referenced in the same
way as Assaye. A career built on counterinsurgency carried no panache in
the first quarter of the nineteenth century. Within the dominant British
military culture ofthat period reputations were built on conventional op-
erations and the warrior ideals associated with traditional Western war-
fare. Critics could not downgrade Assaye to the lowly status ofa bandit-
control programme, As a neo-classical batle, on the banks ofthe Kailna
River, Assaye was a natural candidate for epic glorification. Indeed its
similarity to Alexander the Great's defeat of Persian King Darius’ forces,
along the Pinarus River at the Barle of Issus in 333 BCE, meant that the
‘analogy was simply too tempting to resist. The historic interpretation of
the British victory at Assaye took on a life of its own. Over time, it was

