12 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

rewritten and sanitized so that it could be conveniently retroited to the
later image of Arthut, The accounts were polished to befic the Duke of
‘Wellington as Britain's pre-eminent soldier the ‘Iron Duke’.

Following Waterloo and the defeat of what was commonly acknow!-
«edged in Britain as the international Napoleonic treat, there were those
who re-tead Assaye as representing the historic continuum of Britain's in-
ternational bate against France. Certain aspects of Assaye contributed
to a very confusing picture and the presence of some key British sol-
diers in both Europe and India was taken as supporting evidence in the
theory that the Anglo-Maratha Campaigns of 1803 were the de
‘South Asian extension of the Napoleonic Wars. However, any such ar-
{gument is simply too frail to withstand investigation. Granted, Napoleon
hed diplomatic correspondence with Mysore in the 1790s." And three
French agents ~ Courson, Durhone and Dauble - were seized in the
eozs capital wearing native garb on the eve of war in 1803.2 But by
no stretch ofthe imagination could that be portrayed as seriously active
Napoleonic participation in the Marathe Campaigns of 1803. In re-
viewing the military and political accounts of Anglo-Maratha confit, it
‘would seem that the greatest impetus to the Napoleonic ‘makeover’ of

1803 occurred in the three years immediately following Waterloo. The
reatest written source guiding that process and influencing late histo-
ties was Major William Thorn’s memoir. Thorn’s work became the de
{acto oficial history of 1803 and that helped elevate his opening remarks
‘on the Napoleonic significance of the war.

‘Thorn believed that the stabiligy of Britain in the Napoleonic Wars
was based upon the ‘plains of Hindoostan’ and the consequent eman-
pation of Europe began, though mortals could not see it, in a train of
‘operations extending across India Thorn was convinced that Napoleon
considered himselfin competition with Britain forthe resources of India,
‘Thorn subscribed tothe theory that revenue-bearing lands, assigned to
French mercenaries in Maratha service, constituted a French state in
North India. He saw this as a French footing ‘in the central and most
fertile part of India, where they must be said to have ruled absolute over
the counsels of the principal states, and in particular over the descen-
<dants of the imperial house of Timur’. Or, in more contemporary words,
a French satelite state that in turn controlled the region by controling
the remnants of the Mughal Empire.

‘What was Thorn's motive for writing such a Eurocentric interpreta~
tion of events? Was he merely a Francophobic veteran? Was he secking

clevate the importance of his Indian theatre experience by leing his
Teaders know that the 1803 Maratha operations represented a serious
‘war ~a batde against a larger European threat and not some damn sepoy

naoduction 1

adventure? Or, were his introductory remarks a more markeeoriented
approach to selling books linked to Wellington, an effort in which his
‘memoir was laced with anti-French references to enhance its sales poten
tial inthe post-Waterloo world of British military history?

Regardless of his motivation or intellectual objective, Thorn’s words
did reinforce the popular belief thet the Marathas were South Asian pawns
in the hands of a European power. It was a line of reasoning which did
nothing to enlighten readers with regard to the Marathas’ military tradi-
tion or their ability ro challenge one ofthe greatest military superpowers
‘ofthe day. Thorn related the victory over the Marathas back to the central
front and he made it sound as if India’s importance was that of under-
pinning Europe. Arthur Wellesley, ss he Duke of Wellington, was the
link that brought European power full circle, from England to India to
Europe and back to England after victory over Napoleon ‘who, in his aim
at universal dominion, experienced that check in the interior of India,
‘which, by a circuitous train of eyent led to his total overthrow on the
fields of Waterloo?”

In the final quarter ofthe nineteenth century -as wide-scale European
fiatricidal warfare slipped from Britain's collective memory ~ national
interest in India and the empire experienced a rensissance.”* With the
golden age of the British Raj there came another imperial makeover
‘of Arthur Wellesley’s actions in 1803. In a review article published on
‘6 October 1887, The Times of India spoke of Assaye as ‘Wellington's great-
estvictory, which made the English masters of India’ >” During that later
Victorian era, specifically the pre-Boer War period, it was comforting for

Britons to see themselves as masters of India by virtue of their military
heroism. Indeed vireue seemed a more desirable handmaiden for military
‘endeavour during those years of ubiquitous brushfire wars in Asia and
Africa, And a particulary military form of cultural imperative fuelled the
nation’s desire to uphold heroes whose deeds could be seen as exempli-

An overview of the text

‘To understand the British victory of 1803 in terms of this cross-cultural
study tis necessary to start with a much broader analysis of Maratha mi
itary culture. The first chapter is devoted to establishing a more'accurate
‘understanding ofthe Maratha military profile from 1600 to 1800. Using
that as the foundation for continuing reassessment, the second chapter
‘moves forward on a comparative basis to look at what shaped British
military attitudes towards the Marathas prior to the 1803 campaigns.

.

|
|
|

