14 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fr In

‘The third and fourth chapters deal with the southern and northe

paigns of 1803 respectively. While the Ath chapters an anem to pull
together new research that shows there was far more to the story of 1803,
‘than most historians had previously realized. The sixth chapter reviews
the traditional explanations for British victory and ranks them according
to the evidence presented in the preceding chapters.

1 Maratha military culture

Introduction

‘This chapter employs a thematic approach that attempts to conform to
the chronology of Maratha history as closely as possible. It examines
the confusion surrounding Maratha military culture by discussing issues
such as discipline and drill the role of infantry, light horse tactics, the
misnomer of guerrilla warfare, artillery doctrine, smallarms, and the use
‘of Buropean mercenaries in Maratha armies, This section is intended to
provide the reader with information that can be compared with Western
military perceptions of the Marathas as found in chapter 2. The discourse
reveals that there were several long-term patterns in Maratha warfare
that went largely undetected with the result that we often see erroneous
historical generalizations sbout the nature of Maratha armies.

‘This book differs from others in that it depicts Maratha military cul~
‘ure as directly linked to the politcal economy of war. Central to this
chapter is the concept of the South Asian military economy. Research
revealed a dynamic and vibrant economic environment with a distinct
military orientation; a military economy that revolved around the ever-
present possibility of armed conflict. While some would argue that the
Ibe ‘military economy” is an unnecessary sub-division of the word econ-
omy, I would point to our contemporary institutionalization of defence
conomics as a formal discipline.’ Modern economic markets are char-
acterized by trade in resources, commodities, goods and services, as well
1s financial products. The historic South Asian military economy was
also identfabe by its component parts. Human resources, weapons, lor
istical services, credit instruments for military financing ~ they all had
1 relative value that was in large part determined by the dynamics of the
‘market place. It would be inappropriate to label this as an early mili-
tary industrial complex, However, it did include manufacturing facilites
‘and consumed resources on a pervasive commercial scale that bridged
many socio-economic divisions as well as geographic regions in South
Asia,

5

