人。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns andthe Contest for India,

1919) occurred after the British had achieved a military perimeter around
the majority of Hindus in india, n subcontinental terms, these later wars
‘were comparatively localized conflicts which would have had limited i
terethnic political appeal for Hindus beyond the regional strongholds of
the Sikhs and Afghans. As forthe events of 1857, whether you call them
rebellion, mutiny, or the first freedom struggle, they were of seismic pro-
portion in reshaping the already existing political end military order of
British rule, Despite the potential appeal of a Pan-South Asian resistance
in 1857-8, the British were still able to draw on vast numbers of soldiers
who continued to serve them loyally for one reason or another. The de-
parture of the British from South Asia would ultimately have to wait for
‘1 more profound shift in world order

Second, the historic misteading ofthe Maratha military challenge and
the portrayal of British victory in 1803 ~ as something inevitable or part
of a conflict process that was determined by so-called ‘Western military
superiority’ ~ serves as an example to demonstrate that cross-cultural
conflict analysis remains a particular weakness for Westerners. And 1
submit that our analytical failure has contributed to the construction of
‘dangerously ethnocentric strategic theories to support a Western version
of the world’s military history.

‘This story of the 1803 campaigns shows in a unique way that even
though the British won, it was not for those military reasons we might
‘have assumed from reading Wiliam McNeill, Paul Kennedy or Geoffrey
rer Western authors have consistently ignored the depth ofthe South
Asian historic record and arranged explanations witha cultural bis that
upholds Western military culture and its own special brand of imperial-
‘sm, We manipulated our interpretation of events to make them appear
1s logical inthe imaginary court of human history, or better yet, scentif-
«ally inevitable. Despite being culturally pressed for more serious revision
inthe 1980s, we clung to the idea that ‘Western military superiority’ was
self-evident in military victory and subsequent political ascendance. A
belief in « superior Western innovation, technology, discipline and drill
formed the cackbone of a revised theory about the European Military
Revolution: an expanded argument that saw the rise ofthe West in impe~
tial terms as having been derived from a European ‘Military Revolution’.$
However, the theory's Western fondness fora Social Darwinist approach
to the clash of military cultures is an embarrassing racial carry-over from
the nineteenth century.*

‘Chanting the culturally chauvinistic mantra ‘the military rise of the

has dulled our senses and left us ill equipped to analyse military
ures that we find foreign. Oddly enough, when foreign military cu
tures seemed technologically similar to our own, we had a tendency to

Introduction 5

derogatorily dismiss them as if they were shabby imitations of our
cherished ‘Western way of war’? Those who believe thatthe ‘rise ofthe
‘West’ was somehow inevitable asthe result ofa Military Revolution have
taken far more comfort from their uncontested theories of technologi-
cal ascendance than from theories of defence economics concerning the
clash of international systems and market dominance. However, the time
has come to question whether the historic record really leads to a rational

‘meaning its time for a ‘reality-check’ on the argument chat Western as-
ccendance was determined by supposed Western military superiority
the form of weapons, drill and doctrine,

Unfortunately the danger of culturally distorted Western military ro-
‘manticism continues to linger. We in the West tll want to believe in expla-
‘ations of superior technology, discipline and dril, because they continue
to suit our cultural and political purposes in the twenty-first century. At
tributing the rise and fall of empires to a European ‘Military Revolution’
as become something of a prerequisite to accepting the ‘Revolution in
Military Affairs’ (RMA) that emerged in the final decade of the twentieth

century Ic was as if we needed a Western military version of the past to
underpin anew ‘high-tech von of Wexem cual mperini in the

dat willing to question the basic European con-
text of the revised Military Revolution thesis.!° That has left the door
‘open for others to challenge whether there ever was such a thing sss
true Military Revolution; if indeed the phrase refers to anything other
than a round of accelerated military evolution. Any mil
of historic magnitude is constantly at war with it
nation with military evolution. Soldiers and armies are bound by theit
military traditions as well as their inherited hierarchies in the form of
political purpose and organizational behaviour ~ which may be as simple
‘and all pervasive as rank. Yet at the same time they are constantly seek-
ing evolution and innovation in strategy, tactics and especially tech-
nology, to provide the military answers for current conflicts as well as
furure wars. But being in a dual state of stagnation and evolution pre~
‘cludes them from being truly revolutionary. Not even the twentieth cen-
tury’s greatest purpose-built revolutionary armies ~ the Red Army of the
USSR and the People's Liberation Army of China - could shake the
stagnation/evolution dichotomy. They were held fast inspite of periodic
dedicated attempts to be ‘more revolutionary’ or to renew their revo-
Jutionary credentials in a technological and military context."! As for
the unrepentant cultural chauvinism of those who continue to advocate
technological determination as an explanation for Western ascendance,

