34 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

nothing more than seeking to survive as best they could by plundering as
| profession.

‘One major drawback in making use of the pindaries was that the
‘Maratha, as their employers, became too closely associated with them
in the eyes of others. This contributed to the misconception thatthe his-
toric norm for a Maratha army was that ofa pindari army. Some foreign
observers came to believe that the predatory horsemen were Maratha
‘regulars’. The confusion was complicated by the presence of other
‘Maratha light horsemen, which might include bags or silladare. In some
ceases silladars who lost their sponsors had to resort to pindari employ-
‘ment to earn a living. Few foreigners understood the subtle differences.
‘This misunderstanding over the tactical use of Maratha light horsemen
and the identity of pindaries is continuously evident in later European
reports concerning the criminal and ‘despicable behaviour’ of Maratha
horse and their perceived ‘cowardice’ in not charging British infantry
in formation.

Peshwa Baji Rao T

‘The ability of Shivaji Bhonsle to adequately divide his attention between
the civil and military sectors of his administration is probably lost to his-
tory in the sense thatthe rwo became so interowined that we cannot readily
extricate one from the other. Following the death of Shivaji in 1680, the
Marathas lacked a unified vision of te political process. This later yielded.
‘unfortunate consequences with regard tothe clear delineation of civil and
military power between the Chhatrapati, the Peshwa (Prime Minister) and
‘the Senapati (Commandersin-Chief)."” The three offices were never in-
‘ended to function as an administratively equal triumvirate but the three
segments did lend themselves to the clear division of civil and military
power. The persistent problem for subsequent Maratha leaders, however,
Was the tendency of powerful men to amalgamate both civil and military
‘powers under their own control,

Baji Rao { (1700-40) became Peshwa in 1720 and he eventually eclipsed
‘Shivaji’s grandson Chharrapati Shabu in a manner that signalled the po-
litical demise of Maratha royalty. Baji Rao was a capable administrator
‘but one could argue that his eal forte ay in being an architect of Maratha
military expansion. Baji Raos pre-emptive military move, against a brave
‘bur inexperienced young Senapari named Trimbuk Rao Dabhade, was
‘made at the Battle of Dabhoi in 1731. This showdown constituted the

| istllation ofa Maratha civil war into a single bale spacked by adis-
‘pute between the Senapari and the Peskoa over prospective campaign

+224, 794 Ala Deb,

‘Maratha military culure お

NN

ERAGE

‘Map 3 Mughal successor states c 1730, based on a map from John
Keay, A History of India (London, 2000)

territories, The major clan armies of the day were in attendance and
there were over 50,000 combatants on the battlefield. Alliances of conve-
ce were still being struck on the frst day of combat and the bargaining
stakes were high with several hundred pieces of aruilery, massed ranks of
both fintlock-armed regulars and matchlock-carrying provincial troops
jn abundance. It was, by anyone's standards, a great eighteenth-century

