a=

\

2

Tre

Map 1

Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘The Western Deccan as it would have appeared to Mughal ad-

‘ministrators, Note the extent of Shivajis coastal access. Based on I

Habib,

‘An Alas ofthe Mughal Empire Delhi, 1982, 14A)

beacon

‘Maratha military culture 和 5

‘Wellington, we find that Shivajis accomplishmentshave been made-over
or expropriated by those seeking to enhance the cultural or political ob
jectives they advocate. During the twentieth century Indian Nationalists,
‘Hindu separatists and Maharashtrian patriots all had reason to present
selective portraits of Shivajis miliary profile in history. Chhamapar
Shivaji is often referred to as the ‘warrior king’ and credited with found-
the Marathe Empire. Despite once popularly cited lineage claims that
stretch to the Rajput stronghold of Udaipur, the evidence indicates
‘mediate paternal linkage to the territories surrounding the Ahmadnagar
fortress. In fact Shivajis father Shahji was directly connected to Ahmad-
‘nagar by way ofhis service to the Nizam Shahi dynasty and the Mughals 26
‘And itis interesting to note that many of the Mughal accounts testify to
the elder Bhonsle's ability as a commander of infantry forces rather than
just bands of light horsemen,

Light horse raiding was well known in South Asian warfare as a means,
‘of exploiting logistical scenarios relating ro the replenishment of supplies.
‘Mounted ‘cattle raiding’ was common in Maharashtra in ancient times
‘and was glorified in the earliest hero stones.27 But light horse raiding was
‘known throughout recorded history in both Asia and the West. Alexander
the Great witnessed it in both the Mediterranean and Indus theatres of
war and the Romans encountered it throughout their empire 38 Men in
forts must eat and men on horses have mobility; while some tactics may
‘be more popular with a given commander or specialized unit, there was
linle new under the sun when it came to fixed positions vs, mobility
siege operations. And the Mughal records do note that it was customary
in Deccani warfare to use well-mounted horsemen for a reconnaissance
in force.” The seventeenth-century imperial records clearly state the
Mughals also used light horse tactics for logistical interdiction to ensure
that no grain found its way into rebel-held fortm. There was no Maratha
‘monopoly on this tactic and no historically contemporary claim on this
‘modus operandi when the Mughals fought the Marathas, The Mughals had
used light horse raiding extensively to plunder grain delivery convoys by
‘banjaras' in an effort to starve out Shabji Bhonsle’s allies in Daulatabed.”!

Historians continue to leave the impression that Shivajis later
‘Maratha’ army was overwhelmingly composed of light horsemen. ‘To
support their variation on the theme of a predominantly Maratha
‘mounted tradition they draw an evolutionary line of descent directly from
the previously mentioned Malik Ambar and his command of Ahmad-
nagars military forces. They speak of ‘Malik Amber's masterfil use of
"Lond ofthe Umbrella King of Kings,

" Ala Bunjars, Biniarrics (fom Dinar), Brinjaris Bunjam An tinerantsoco-thaie
np who specialized in hc wafeking of gain.

