30

‘The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

Map 2 Main roads and forts ofthe Pune region c 1660, based on a
map from Stewart Gordon, The New Cambridge History of India I. 4,
The Maratha, 1600-1818 (Cambridge Univesity Pres, 1993), p72

‘Maratha miigry culture 3

progressed for two years, which underscored the Marathas’ skill in weath-
exproofing their guns and fighting through the monsoons." As discussed
in subsequent chapters ofthis book, the monsoon myth has been slow to
dic,

In accordance with established Maratha military culture, Shivaji ex
tended the practice of hiring foreign mercenaries to his navy. By 1659
he had a ee of twenty warships, which also refutes the guerrilla la
bel, Shivaji was concerned about the potential of a Portuguese sea-borne
threat and the easiest way for him to gain insight into his rhals military
knowledge was to embrace it by hiring Portuguese personnel out oftheir
naval service. Shivaji greered the Portuguese seamen with open arms and
their numbers soon grew. Rui Leitso Viegas was trusted to such a de-
agree that he was appointed to command Shivajis fet. This alarmed the
Portuguese authorities because they were worried Shivaji would unleash
his Portuguese offcered ships against Lisbon' ally ‘the Sidi of Danda-
[Rajapur’. This triggered a series of covert negotiations and the Porruguese
‘urged Viegas to defect from Maratha service. When he ‘came in’ Viegas
‘returned with 300 Portuguese mercenary sailors who had been serving in
Shivajis navy. ‘The Portuguese were to prove just as mercenary as the
“Marathas in their attitudes towards survival in the South Asian miliary
‘environment and they oo engaged in shifting alliances out of political and
military necessity. These shared employment ethics posed no long-term
obstacle to economic opportunity and within six years the Portuguese
‘were selling ammunition and grain to Shivaji as he fought to resist an
attack by Mughal forces °°

Shivaji’ army operated along a clearly defined model of organizational
‘behaviour in which one can see a modern defence triad consisting of
infantry, cavalry and artillery. That Shivaji had attained infantry and ar-
tillery capability equal to European standards is suggested by his sys-
tematic elimination of European forts that lay along the line of march
to Surat.*! European mercenaries serving in the Mughal forces received
first-hand intelligence about the Marathas from English and Dutch sur-
vivors of Shiva’ sack of Surat in 1664. As we saw inthe rise of Ahmad-
nagar, the Marathas had already begun a prolonged phase of positional
warfare by the time they came to the attention of the Deccani sultanates
‘And Shivai’s utter dependence on conventional infantry warfare is well
documented in his treaty settlement patterns with the Mughals. The 1665
‘Treaty of Purandhar emphasizes the surrender of specified fortresses co-
inciding with territorial concessions. And if we apply the criteria of Maoist
struggle, we can see that Shivaji was negotiating not asa guerrilla or rebel
with an irregular army but rather as a conventional rival to the Mughal
‘central authority. Despite the los of twenty-three forts by Shivaji in the

