26 The Anglo-Maratha Carmpaigns and the Contest for India

‘guerilla wacfare, which was known as bargi-giri in Dakhani. Tis con-
sisted of not meeting the enemy main force in the field, but cuting off
supplies, manoeuvring forthe best position, and using superior mobil-
ity to suike vulnerable locations far from the battle sit.”™* We are then

bargin defined as meaning ‘a soldier who enlisted without a horse’, came
tobe synonymous with avoidance of pitched battle, logistical interdiction
and raiding techniques emphasizing surprise and mobili.” [fie were 2
simple linkage to military employment one might ask: why does it have
no tactical counterpart in siladar, one who “brought his own horse and
‘equipment? Noting of course that the vast majority of irregular ight
‘horsemen who crowded the military labour market had their own horses,
‘granted many acquired by plunder.

During the nineteenth century W. Irvine, then considered an author-
ity on Mughal warfare, speculated on a relationship between the equip-
‘ment holder and the bargir as ‘burden taker’, taking up the horse as
4 contractual burden of service that the rider assumed.™* However, an
alternative interpretation is offered here. A more appropriate linkage of
terminology to tactical evolution would seem to stem from an earlier in-
terpretation of the Persian term bargin which emphasized ‘a load taker’,
‘a baggage horse’. Since bargi-giri doctrine is often associated with the
raiding of supply units and the baggage tran, itis not unreasonable to
see the harassment and interdiction of logistical lines asthe taking ofthe
baggage animals (‘a baggage horse’ or other beasts of burden such as
camels or oxen ~ hi was « more basic burden to take than thet of con-
tractual service). Alternatively, the raider might caprure loads of supplies,
thereby becoming ‘a load taker’, If we juxtapose this alternative interpre=
tation with the description ofthe tactic witnessed and identified by the
Mughals, who recorded itas brian, a more broad-based but precise un-
derstanding may be derived. The profil of bargi-gii tactics that emerges
from this period may be generically labelled as that of ‘irregular light
horse’. The key elements of this doctrine hinged on mobility and speed,
‘with tactical attention being paid to reconnaissance, logistical interdiction
and diversionary attack. They avoided pitched battle unless confident of
‘numerical superiority or relief by troops of the army to which they had
become attached.

Probing patrols, when backed by large waves of horsemen, provided
the option of information gathering or limited engagement n the context
ofa reconnaissance in force. Dismounting to fight a pitched bactle was

usually encouraged, That deprived them of speed end negated the
psychological impact of surprise while sacrificing the advantages offered

‘Maratha mdimry culture 4

bby mobility. One of the reasons bargr horsemen shunned direct engage-
iment unless they possessed numerical superiority had to do with their
Jack of heavy artillery for fre support. Their light artillery usually took
the form of bana (rockets) Tactical countermeasures to thwart bargi-
sir attacks included the deployment of mobile 1 pounder and 2 pounder
artillery mounted directly on the backs of camels or elephants. The so-
called ‘camel gun’ was of great use in protecting mounted foraging par-
ties because it could keep up with horses on the gallop. Although a
1-2 pounder may not sound particularly powerful, in comparison to
standard field guns, it was greatly superior in ballistic performance to
the ounce of lead fred by many smallarms. The ‘camel gun’ was easly
capable of dropping a horse and rder ata hundred yards.”

Many twentieth-century Maratha histories portrayed Shivaji as a bn
liant ‘guervilla leader who sprang from the bosom of Maharashtra. Ac-
cording to this genre of portraiture he, along with his hardy Maratha
horsemen, ran the Mughal armics ragged. Shivai, as the great man
jp Maratha history, supposedly engraved the benchmark of Maratha
“guerrilla warfare’ upon the Deccan for Muslim and feinghi (Coreignes)
alike to see. It therefore deductively followed that all subsequent su
‘cessful Maratha military efforts must have been in that ‘guerrilla’ vein
and that any subsequent Maratha military failures could be dismissed as
deviation from his example. Or, so the story goes.

‘The linkage of Maratha warfare to the emotive phrase guerrilla tar
was firmly established during the Indian Nationalist fervour of the 19205,
and 1930s when m number of Maratha histories, both South Asian and
Western in origin, repeatedly referred to Shivaji’ traditional Maratha
‘way of war as being that of the guerrilla. In the years following Britain's
departure from India, it was more than acceptable to use the politically
‘charged term ‘guerrilla’. And the epithet was almost mandatory among
certain Hindu freedom fighters if one intended to show respect for the
historic continuity oftheir struggle. The problem was that asthe popu
larity of Shivaji edged towards deifcation it lessened the chances of an
accurate historic revision that would give him the credit he righty de-
served as Maharashtra's most versatile military leader. A simple guerrilla
label deprives Shivaji of the homage owed to him as an infantry strate-
fist and naval commander who challenged both Mughal and European
power.

Several authors of Maratha military studies, such as S, N. Sen, were
not primarily tmined as military historians and apparently used the term
‘guerrilla warfare’ because they assumed thet all hit-and-run’ tactics con-
Suted guerrilla warfare. Others knew full well they were building on
the iconography that catered to a form of saffron-clad Hindu liberation

