Ssh Rn RPE

22 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘we refer to a Maratha army inthe evolution of South Asian military his-
tory we must consider that these armies were addressed as Maratha for
the sake of identifying them in terms of categorization.” Unfortunately
the mythology of ‘pure Maratha armies is often polarized or made worse
by partisan portrayals of the Mughals a ‘alien oppressors’ or an ‘army of
‘ccupation’. In truth, the Indianization of the Mughals was well under
way by the time of Akbar (1542-1605). And given the historic date of
the arrival of Islam in the Deccan and the social integration of the five
Deceani sultanates, the word ‘oppressor is misplaced as a cultural gener-
alization inthis context. The Marathas sold their services as professional
soldiers and their potential employers’ religion presented no insurmount-
able barrier to contractual dealings.

‘Maratha sardars who changed employers repeatedly among the Deccan
sultanates, joining one side and then another, were mercenaries in the
strictest historic sense of the word in that they served various masters
fora price. As broker/dealers in the military labour market, bartering the
services of their troops, they exerted leverage via collective bargaining
to obtain the best employment terms available? Beyond wages, the ne
gotiable points of service might include percentages of enemy plunder,
‘equipment xs wells animal replacement costs and establishing who was
responsible for ammunition expenses. That Maratha serdar bargained
determinedly over such points tells us about their appreciation of de-
fence economics and what they considered to be inclusive vs. exclusive
‘costs in their approach to war asa business opportunity within the South
Asian military economy.

‘An entrepreneurial approsch made seventeenth-century Maratha mi
itary powerbrokers both competitive and effective. When they saw a
nilitary need that they could meet fora price, in effect an economic
nilitary opportunity, they responded. What do you need; soldiers, guards,
watchmen ~ offensive or defensive? You could bave any or all within the mil~
itary labour market. What kind of men? What are you tailing to pay? Do you
‘want some peon goons to break a fw villagers heads and collec a feta debs?
Pethaps you ate a serious player who needs heavily armed forces and
professional soldiers. What about infantry with good quality matchocks, are
‘they more suited to your budget? There was also a chance to broker animals
1s well as men. Do you need Deccani cavalry unit local ponies that can su
vive the drought on a handful of dried jowari [millet] a day? Arabian horses
were also available inthe port cities but they were better kept for breed-

because extended campaigns in the Deccan called for endurance.
ee military employer might have sufficient funding to hire
all army complete with regular infantry, heavy artillery and cavalry
accompanied by grasscuters to find the best fodder for good horses in

‘Maratha miliary culture 2

‘worst of times. Are you paying cash or a percentage ofthe spoils after
whe campaign? Tews lon ofr, was dl here fr hte ~ a the ght
rice,
PAS sevententh-century Manatha military entrepreneurs expanded
thei forces they were bound to acquire the specialties and services of
rnon-Maratha people. Some Maratha coastal clans were keen to exploit
the opportunity of incorporating the peripheral non-Marathas who had
pined military expertise in service to one of the many foreign powers
‘who prowicd along the western coast. Outcasts often made good soldiers
‘because foreign military employment offered them upward social mobil-
jn, status as warriors, cash snd weapons. This appears to have been true
of coastal tribals, from Bombay to Gujarat, who had been exposed to
smallarms as the result of African and Arab recruiting for local wars. The
Europeans, who eventually followed, also sought to augment their limited
military manpower. Maratha sardars soon found it profitable to recruit
so-called Topasses* from Goa and the other Portuguese colonies. Many
of these soldiers were of mixed South Asian and Portuguese heritage,
some having been raised as Christians or converted to Christianity. Their
indoctrination in contemporary European military scence, particularly
that ofthe artillery and the infantry, served to add another dimension
{o Maratha military capabilty2* The peripheral incorporation of people
living on both the physical and cultural margin of Maratha society was
an on-going process that spanned several centuries. The drawing-in of
specific social groups, tribes, clans and castes often reflected their col-
lective military occupational specialties as directly related to weapons
proficiency, tactical skils, manufacturing capabilities, or their role in fa-
cilitaing logistics. Making weapons, feeding armies, serving as soldiers
and scouts, these groups often represented some form of temporary ad~
vantage for expanding Maratha armies. Ifthe Maratha clan armies had
been exclusionary with regard to ethnicity, religion, caste or level ofsocial
integration, they would have denied themselves the competitive advan-
tage found in the diverse range of military human resources that western
India had to offer.”

‘The Shivaji legacy

‘Shivaji! Bhonsle (1627-80)' remains the most famous Maratha war-
rior in history, Like other great warrior-statesmen, such as the Duke of

* Aka Topa Tupas Tocpass. There are confcing stories avecilcd with the origin of
te

1 Als Sse, Shale, Shiva Sheree Seva.
1 Stns pe Se 1058.

