36 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

infantry batle. However, it escaped European notice because ofi loca-
tion, timing and circumstance.

‘Within the Batle of Dabhoi, two key elements can be cited as moving
Baji Rao fs doctrine out of the realm of neo-classical warfare and placing
it directly into the category of proto-modern warfare:
in integrated weapons systems approach tothe volume of fire theory;
+ the tactical field manoeuvre of advancing under covering fire that was

«called upon to utilize the above theory against enemy forces.

‘The volume of fre theory, as employed by Baji Rao I's forces, relied on
smothering enemy opposition with a blanket of projectiles the degree to
hich this aspect of Maratha doctrine differed from that ofthe Europeans
in 1731 has been virtually unexplored by military historians seeking to
‘understand linkages to later Anglo-Maratha wars such as the 1803 cam
paigns. This was a distinctly different doctrine from the standpoint of the
application and volume of integrated firepower as found in infantry war-
fare at that time, Europeans inthis period tended to use artillery for its
long-range reach orto blast holes in enemy infantry ines through which
they wanted to advance. That was the eatly European choreographing
of fire and movement that relied on artillery to prepare the way forthe
advance of infantry. In contrast, the Marathas were proponents of a more
all-encompassing approach tothe application of firepower. Baji Rao Tud-
lized smallarms and artillery firing anti-personnel rounds in a concert of
firepower designed to create a lethal envelope of fire to engulf his oppo-
nents. This Feshoa ensured that hi light and heavy artillery, as well as
his smallarms fire, were integrated to produce interlocking fields of fire.
‘Maratha artillery doctrine sought to convert entire enemy formations into
targets rather than let battles degenerate into an exaggerated series of in~
dividual combats. The epitome of this thinking was to take an enemy's
‘most valued battlefield asset - his infantry ~ and turn it into his greatest
target liabiiy

AA few large guns integrated into a Maratha unit and firing anti-
personnel rounds, such as canister or grape shot, could give a dispro-
pportionately greater capability against those enemies with relatively mod
est organic firepower." A siege gun might be used to hurl an 18 pound
cannon ball against fortress, But if you used that 18 pounder as afield
‘gun, to unleash large grape shor, it could significantly lengthen th killing
zone achieved by a 6 pounder firing smaller grape shot. By interlocking
the fields of fire, using the larger to pick up where the smaller had left
off as it were, you could blanket increasingly larger targets as you ex-

|\ tended the range to deal with enemies moving into or away from your

‘position, Long-range large-calibre field guns, in effect great guns (topha
‘thori) which the Europeans would have reserved for siege work, extended.

(rp ra

St oN a ay

‘Marathe military culure 7

the curtain of fire beyond the usual European limits of effective field en-
sgagement, while intermediate guns (jangi topha and jambur) were the
‘mainstay of defence as used with grape shot or canister rounds. While
<lose-quarters engagements also saw the use of special-purpose mortars
(gorbhandi to broadcast multiple projectiles in an arch-like patter.
References in the Maratha royal edict known as the Anapatra indi

‘cate that by the first quarter ofthe eighteenth century, the Maratha ar-
tillery had alceady settled on using pre-bagged powder charges as standard
with their cannon.” This pre-packaged approach to loading powder was
known in many lands as semi-fixed ammunition and it was a great step
forward sine itincreased loading speed and reduced the number of load-
ing accidents in comparison tothe archaic method of ledling powder into
the barrel. The higher rate of fre contributed to the Maratha gunners’
ability to advance with the infantry when required to do so. The detal-
ing of large numbers of men to each gun crew became commonplace in
Bi Rao Ts army. Once the feld guns were unlimbered they were often
far from stationary as drag ropes were used to manhandle field pieces
{forward under fire, with guns in the 3-6 pounder class, including small
howitzers, being pushed ahead withthe advancing infantry. This allowed
the Marathas to maintain fire continuity with the advancing line. Leters
preserved in the Peshtsa’s oficial recordshad noted battesin which lacars
‘had to contend with obstacles that often impeded the movement of the
suns.

‘The luxury of having more artillery pieces in the field ~ particularly
mobile large-calibre pieces — increased the Marathas’ tactical options and
contributed tothe development of their doctrine. However this should in
no way be construed as a doctrinal form of technological determination.
‘Possession of the guns did not guarantee victory and the guns themselves
did not determine their method of deployment. And it should be pointed
‘out that the European armies had access to virtuslly the same types of
smoothbore muzzle-loading artilery at that time if they had opted to use
them in this fashion. Maratha leaders like Baji Rao I determined how
they wanted to employ their arillery assets in the hope of increasing theit
‘chances for victory.

‘At Dabhoi in 1731 the Marathas and their allies used fintlocks as well
as matchlocks. Several Maratha contingents were composed of what one
right erm peripheral peoples. Maratha sardars from the Gaikwad, Bande
and Dabhade clans recruited Kolis and Bhils armed with matchiocks
‘The coastal Kolis had gained firearms and infantry warfare experience
while serving as auxiliary matchlock levies to the Portuguese and to a
lesser extent the British. But references to matchlocks seem to cause
reat confusion for those analysing South Asian infantry warfare in the

