32 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for Indi

“Treaty of Purandhar, twelve forts remained, including his sanctuary at
Rajgath? This formed part of his non-negotiable fortified core position
and Shivaji continued to exploit the resources available to hi ina bid to
remain militarily competitive with the Mughals.

Jai Singh, the Rajput general who served as Mughal Emperor
‘Aurangzeb’ C-in-C, sent a leter of protest to he Portuguese envoy to
Bijapur, Padre Gonsalo Martez. Jai Singh objected tothe Portuguese mer-
cenaries who served in Shiva’ army. Shivaji used experienced cannon
casting technicians from Goa to assist in his manufacture of weapons,
We learn from Jai Singh’sleter that ‘Shivaji had granted important posts
in the army tothe officers in charge of the manufacture of guns’ This
protest made specific reference to the Portuguese who served Shivaji’s
army as opposed to his navy. Records in Lisbon also included a proch
mation of 19 May 1668 by the Viceroy of Gos, Jono Nunes da Cunha,
‘which ordered all Portuguese nationals inthe service of ‘Delhi, Bijapur
and Shivaji armies to return to Porrugal'97 The use of a proclamation
to remove European mercenaries from Maratha service is worthy of his-
toric note. It suggested there were certain liabilities in depending heavily
on such ransicory human resources and the issue returned to haunt the
Marathas as we shall see later.

‘The price of pindar? employment
‘A great deal ofthe Marathas' military reputation stems from their employ-
ment of dzrig predatory hordes that were often retained after they
‘had paid a tax called palpar forthe right to plunder. From time to time
Shiva used pindariesin a role analogous to ‘sackmen', an advanced wave
spreading confusion before the attack of his infantry. Shivaji’ directive
regarding pindari entitlements, that they be allowed to retain plundered
‘coins of copper but not silver, suggests there was a need to specifically
regulate pindar activity. Later he issued extensive regulations to hold their
predatory actions in check because they were a liability when accompa-

‘Maratha military culrure 3

with expensive standardized uniforms and equipment. Pindari horse-

‘men reported with their mounts and weaponry, usually consisting of

ュ meer (sword), lance and a small shield. The pindaries could easily

‘number up to 10,000 men per band and when massed for large op-

‘erations figures of 50,000 were not uncommon, their wives and camp

followers often swelling the reported numbers ofthe ‘Maratha armies.5*

‘The persistent use of pindaries by Maratha military commanders also

‘explains the descriptions of so-called ‘robber bands’ reported to ac-

‘company Maratha troops. From a doctrinal standpoint, pindaries of-

ten assumed duties associated with the bargi-giri tactics of light horse

cavalry:

(1) destabilization by the nature oftheir attack, creating the general effect
of chaos, leaving their enemies frozen in a defensive posture long after
they had melted awa

(2) isolation of enemy units via harassment and interdiction of logistical
and communication lines;

G) intelligence observation and surveillance, or as a reconnsissance in
force intended to provoke an armed reaction and then report back
on the size and capability of the opposition;

(4) logistical procurement when attached to Maratha infantry moving
across enemy territory. Ranging far and wide they could carry away
enemy food and fodder, thereby helping Maratha infantry live off
enemy lands,

“The pindaries were well suited to picking off stragelers and tying down

‘outlying pickets rather than charging bodies of infantry. These tactics

heavily emphasized the physical isolation of enemy forces. The pindaries

‘were never intended to charge on-line in the same feshion as European

‘heavy cavalry. That was not their role in the Maratha order of battle. It

‘would be a waste of resources to have the lance-carrying pindares attack

infantry formations where they might be slaughtered by massed small-

‘arms’ or artillery fire. Their reluctance to squander themselves against

conventional forces would be all too evident in later bates with the

ry behaviour was greatly influenced by an

PSP

|
4

1} ying the army through the territories of alles.
|

让 British. However, pindari mili

‘As a military option they were readily avsilable on the military labour |))。。 individual dese to survive. These were not heal indoctrinated mem-

1 market and did not require a major initial investment. Many of those 9 ers ofa specific unit with a high level of élan or esprit de corps. They

| iadoriaunable orunwiging ro pay palpai were retained on the promise 1 took no oath to die for some lofty political or national cause. To a great
‘of receiving a percentage ofthe goods they plundered. It was more cost- © $ degree it was everyman for himself and if you were foolish enough to
3 ‘effective for many lesser Maratha sardars - acting in the capacity of mil- と die for someone else’s concept of honour you could not enjoy the spoils

of plunder. It wes an ethic not condoned or recognized as legitimate
by later European armies imbued with racial and nationalistic rhetoric
aA that reinforced the creed of duty, honowr, country. The pindaries were not

i trained to die en masse forthe ‘good of the cause" as their cause was often

itary broker/dealers - to hire pindari armies on commission rather than
\ to tale precious financial resources to maintain a standing infantry

* Aka pends (pnl pendana pinay.

