28 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

theology But it would be equally misleading if this work were to paint
stark picture where all those who used the term ‘guerrilla warfare’ were
cither blissfully ignorant of terminology or crafily engineering history.
‘There were, no doubt, those who simply saw meritin using a simple mi
itary analogy to explain the success of a distincly Maratha hero. It was a
time when India needed her own heroes and consideration of Nelson or
‘Wellington was nothing less than cultural treason.

‘Yet the guerrilla epithets a generalization that doesnot sit comfortably
with the historic evidence. It fails to meet either (a) the historic model
derived fom the word guerill’snineteenth-century evolution, meaning
‘small war as coined in the Peninsular War 1807-8, 1809-14,” cr (b)
the contemporary model extolled by guerrilla warfare’ greatest archi-
tects during the twentieth century.” Bargin tactics, often construed ee
guerrilla warfare, were merely one facet of the Marathe mounted tactical
‘epertoire and not limited to the Marathas, Furthermore, there is no evi-
«dence that any mejor Maratha miltary leader, including Shivaji, ever used
bargigiri tactics to the mutual exclusion of infantry and artillery in posi-
‘ional warfare. Marathi Professor Ian Raeside's use of the term ‘guerrilla
i tactics ia an extensive miliary ransiadon of later Maratha history, em

Phasized Marathi-language linkages rather than Persian-based terms such

4s borgir, But Racsides rendering did not clarify the issue in thet it

5 continued to perpetuate he association of riding tactics with a doctri-

( nal classification of guerilla warfare. He quoted DattaiiSindia as saying

‘We wil take up Puerrila tactics." The corresponding footnote stated,

“The Marathi phrase ganimi hava literally means “enemy (je. Maratha)

| trickery!” Iwas frst made famous under Shivaji who used his mountain
troops to make lightning raids on the more static Muslim forces."

‘The simultaneous existence of many types of conflict including irrcgu-
Jar or unconventional warfare in a larger struggle can be confusing. Sem
: Satkesian, who studied guerrila warfare in both a military and an acar

i demic context, made an extraordinary effort to correlate and distil the
i models of war that we could specifically identify as ‘guerilla’. ‘Despite
| the ambiguities, some characteristics are common to all these efforts:
{ the use of fore; the objective of changing the composition of govern-
i ‘ment; revolutionary goals; organisation; andthe fact that the participants
are apt to appear to be civilians and avoid conventional battle tactics."
‘Sarkesian’s notation of guerrillas appearing in civilian garb, as opposed
i to military uniform, isa rather significant and lasting form of physical
i's troops are identified in several historically contem-
accounts as being in Maratha ‘uniforms’.*
ie assembled troops of Shimajis armies were not formally indoctri-
nated with regard to a unifying political or religious ideology, Shiva

‘Maratha military culture 2

began by augmenting a series of existing hill forts, to provide « backbone
for his arhority This network of forts permitted communications and
intelligence to be disseminated in a fashion that extended control over
an increasing amount of teritory. Mounted Maratha units could pro-
vide reconnaissance or double-up as « mobile assault force to execute
“hammer-and-anvil’ strategies in conjunction with conventional infantry.
However the forts were blatant obstacles to Mughal authority and when
“Maratha raids provoked Mughal counterattacks, these bases provided a
fallback position with all the benefits of defensive fixed postions. The
strategic dilemma for the Mughals was how best to counter a multi-front
‘Maratha threat; to go on the offensive or ro increase their defensive pro-
file? Ifthey spent ther time and resources defending their own possessions
then there was no positive movement towards destroying the root prob-
Jem - hc Maratha enemy who lay safely embeded in a well-established
fortification system. By the same token, if the war was carried to the
‘Maratha hill forts it meant the potential over-extension of logistical lines
in terrain that did not lend itself to rapid re-supply or rescue. Bargi-iri
tactics were effective in that type of scenario because they compelled the
invading force to expend precious resources in order to ensure logisti-
cal security, For the Mughals a strictly defensive war left che Maratha
‘command and control infrastructure intact while an offensive war was an
operational nightmare since individual sieges could last a year or more
and re-supply lines were vulnerable to monsoon degradation as well as
hit-and-run tactics.

In time, Shivaji’s control was projected to the sea where coastal fort-
fications served as bases for his navy and allowed the completion of new
‘exterior’ logistical lines.%* Western authors have often built on the er-
roncous belie that ‘Hindu powers’ in India did not possess navies be-
cause they were supposedly afraid to cross the proverbial ‘great dark
‘waters’" This was a standard story in the construction of martial race
‘mythology and it was used as a justification for large-scale Muslim re-
cruiting during the Victorian era, But in Shivajis attack on the Sidi
‘Yakub's! fort of Danda Rajapur we have an example of a military op-
eration that defies Western stereotypes on two counts. Although the
sea protected this fortress, there was an adjacent rock island. Shivaj's
forces launched an amphibious assault and secured the island.*” Siege
‘uns were then landed and a bombardment commenced. The siege

* Later, unde the leadanhip of Khano Angria the Marathas waged soccenfol naval
‘campaign agai the Brtth。

" Aka ‘Seedy Yacoot Sidi Vahub. The Sa wereafAfican origin and ther naval bases
‘om the western cost of Inia posed ao problem or Shiva

* Aka Dunda Rapp.

