38 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for

‘ighteenth century. Many Western writers have cast a jaundiced eye on
‘matchlocks, suggesting they were intrinsically inferior to the more me-
chanically complex fintlock, However, the assumption of military superi-
ority, based on possession of a smallarm with a particular type of ignit
system, is faulty on two levels of consideration:

‘First, the outcome of armed conflict is never pre-determined by the
‘mere possession of what can only be described chronologically as the
atese technology.

* Second, saying that a weapon is of one lock system, or the other, does
‘not address ballistic-relevant issues such as velocity, range or projectile
‘energy on impact,

Both fintlocks and matchlocks inthis era reied on a black powder" charge

1o send a projectile down the barrel and through the sir. The two locks
themselves, flintlock and matchlock, were component ignition lock sys-
tems for complete firearms, as in the expression “lock, stock and bar-
rel’. As locks they could be applied to barrels that were smooth bored
(musket) or grooved (rifed) and technically speaking could be applied to
ither muzzle-loading or breech-loading weapons ~ although the former
‘were exceedingly more common,

Afindocks firing mechanism was composed of trigger assembly, cnck
(int holder), lock-plate, frizen pan assembly, several screws as well as
assorted springs of varying size, and the fint In contrast, the essential
‘matchlock had a trigger bar assembly, side plate, serpentine match holder
‘and touch pan. With fewer moving parts the matchlock could be more
‘asily repaired under field conditions with a minimum of tools and re-
placement parts; it was less likely to be rendered ineffective from broken
springs and missing screws. The matchlock’s reduced number of mov-
ing parts meant fewer areas with crucial metal-to-metal contact, thereby
reducing the amount of lubrication needed under field conditions. This
Iatter point was of particular relevance in prolonged monsoons if weapons
‘were stored improperly or not maintained regularly.

Tk was cheaper for Maratha powerbrokers to arm men with robust
‘matchlock mechanisms that offered logistical savings.** Flintlocks relied
‘on fins imported from England or Europe, although indigenous South
Asian agate could have been substituted.” However, agate was difficult
to shape and cut to size and its hardness had a tendency to damage
the fintlock and reduce the effective service life of its frizzen assembly.
Each flint had to be cut or knapped to size and was likely to lose peak
efficiency if it were not repositioned or reknapped. After as few as ten

mm
人

ミ
;
;

RE

‘Maratha milcary culture ”

rounds it might need adjustment or replacing. In some cases the adjust-

‘ment might take the form of advancing the nt in the screw-tension

jaws that held is ori propery prepared ahead of time, reversing the

rin the older to present «new striking surface forconact with the
steel. There were diferent sizes of fins for muskes, pistol and car-

‘ines, adding somewhat to the logistical concern A musket fint might

be knapped down to pistol size but a small pistol fint would be short

lived it preseed into service ina musket’ lock. In contrast, the matchlock
hada simple match-cord, which could be fashioned by hand from indige-

‘nous organic material such as cotton, hemp, or the roots ofthe banyan

9

nT terms matchlock nd Rndodk as identification names prmesof

weapons, only have comparative bearing with respect tothe method of

Dropellan-charge ignition. The matcblock introduces the ignition pro-

‘sss by means ofa burning matchrcord thats touched tothe powde in

the priming pan asthe trigger is pulled, on as was mare often the case,

the trigger bar depressed, The inock’sspring-dependent lock mecha
nism was designed to bring about the sudden contact of fint and steel,

to der perk the pining charge. Mecha complety was 0

guarantor of superiority in bringing about the end result of the ignition.

‘Toc igidon procs, once twas complete rerled in the burning ofthe

main black powder charge, which in turn generated sufcient propellant

fuses to force the projectile down the barrel and through the air The

balistic path o trajectory ofthe projectile had virrually nothing todo with

which means was used to originally git the priming charge. The mod-

ern diatribe, built on assumptions of Western’ mechanical superiority is
isticaly irrelevant.

igi osceray and it probably other considerations in any

serious matchlock vs 人 tbk ballistic performance comparison might

+The size and nature ofthe projectile: projectile composition, shape,
weight and construction, all aget fight patterns, range and wound
channel balistis iran

+ The size and typeof powder charge: the propellant-to-poietl we
rai ofthe charge, oddzation and wtmorpoeri condton, as well as
ramming pressures, all influence results 。

« The of the project the bore: how closely do the corresponding
diameters match in an effort to dtive maximum ute of the burning
propellant’ gas pressure? Was paper wadding ora cloth patch used to
obtain a gas sea? -

で sy that certain South Asian troops were armed with matchlocks re-

vealed litle about the way men fought or which drill standards they

