40 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India,

followed.” While the preceding list suggests technical factors relevant toa

‘meaningful ballistic'comparison, the larger question remains: ‘What con-

stitutes superior military performance criteria for comparing matchlocks

and findocksy

+ Is ithe rate of ir expressed as the number of rounds per minute that
can be fred by the unit on average?

+ Is itrange? If so, is it maximum range or effective engagement range?

+ Ist projectile or ‘it lethality?

* Does the weapon prove awkward for drill but superior in combo?

‘As we shall seein later chapters, a number of Maratha infantry units

featured a specific integration of forces with fintlock infantry supported

by matchlock-armed sharpshooters serving in the capacity of snipers.”

‘This overlapping of technologies is not an uncommon phenomenon to

those who study how the history and philosophy of science interacts with

military technology. Although addressing a European model, Bert S. Hall
observed:

‘Most historians of technology today do not place much credence in simple dis-
placement models of technological change. New machines or tools almost always
‘coexist with their older counterparts for a period of time, a period that may be
verylongindeed. Therefore itis the blend of technologies that shapes the context
in which th cechnologies themselves manifest themselves to he historian’ eye,
‘One must always be wary ofthe temptation to atribute everything to a single new
entity. Technology can help ro explain much, but i cannot explain everything

British military men in South Asia historically had a healthy respect
{for South Asian matchlocks, which were often judged to have superior
range and velocity over European muskets, These observations are fairly
consistent during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.” Following
British setbacks in che First Anglo-Afghan War, the extended range as
‘well as killing power of South Asian matchlocks sparked investigation and
‘changes in the types of weapons issued by the British, Colonel Anderson
of Bengals Ishapore gunpowder mills conducted extensive experiments
on EIC gunpowder and ‘native’ gunpowder. He noted that the slower
‘burning rate of South Asian powders was better suited to the longer-
barrelled matchlocks than to the shorter-barrelled European muskets.
‘This led Anderson to observe that South Asian matchlocks and European
‘muskets reached the desired level of ballistic performance with their own
respective types of powders. One might also surmise that this accounts
for some of the disparaging remarks about results when Indian-made
powders were used in European arms. Military historian David Harding's

iaustive research on smallarms of the period led him to elaborate on
‘Anderson's findings in noting:

i

Re

‘Maratha military culture au

small bore and thick bare! of traditional Indian matchlocs allowed them
tobe ted wit proportional ger powder charges, cls ote optima
‘han was posible with a European moske, without the perceived effec of ei
‘becoming unbearable. This would help account or the greater range generally
arribured othe ndin ea even when smoothbared: the muplc dociy could
be bigher, and thus the range oogFr Accuracy might well ako benef rom the
higher velociy, cus extending the cectie range.”

method of construction. His inspections revealed that physical differences
in South Asian matchlock construction lend a scientific explanation to
fin A ms a act
such matchlocks have a powder chamber in the barrel, which accom-
modates air in a manner that would facilitate the powder’s | ‘burning rate.
fiers we a
‘ner similar to a velocity-forcing cone for the propellant gasses. ‘However,
‘Harding's research supports the observation that the restricted chamber
mouth formed an ‘o-ring’, the purpose of which seems to have been to
‘keep the ball at a distance from the powder. ‘Harding's: comments on one
such barrel cut into cross-section, explain the significance of this design

principle.

ER
‘pte som i ec on ees
ES
Se ere eyed
ーー ロー
ST

ofthe actual iepower ofthe matchlock from that ciod re.
tis underdevoped Gea we ck eve tte uig South
‘Asian weapons and their corresponding powders. But modern chrono-
graphed est of historically contemporary European matchlocks revealed
them to have at least 75 per cent ofthe impact or ‘knock-down’ energy
ofthe most modern twentieth-century assault rifle at 30 metres, a range
which approximates many of the engagement distances found inthe eigh-
teenth century”

‘efor leaving the era of Bai Rao D iis appropriate to comment on
the overall impact of having such a capable military leader inthe form
ofan administratively competent prime minister. The amazing territo-
rial growth under esha Baji Rao I confirmed the Maratha’ ability to
‘project military power on something approaching a subcontinental basis.
‘And historically this could be said to have set the stage for continuing

