58 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fr India

‘counted as equal in value to combat victory in the context of war as an
‘economic opportunity. In simple language, the Marathes played to win
whenever they fought but their definition of winning was not always
the same as that found in Western military culeure. ‘There remains
an undefined historic difference in Western and South Asian military
value systems. In some cases South Asian military leaders, serving as
broker/dealers for their men inthe military labour market, ‘sold out’ but
kept thei reputations intact as responsible commanders who maintained
the most precious military commodity they had to deal with ~ the lives
‘of theit men, Their strategies and tactics emphasized cost effectiveness
in terms of resource expenditure regardless of whether those resources
‘were human, technological or environmental. Opportunity and survival
became watchwords in the businesslike world of the Maratha military
‘entrepreneur. Maratha culture embodied a realistic form of dedication
to survival within a South Asien military environment that featured a
different set of motivational factors as found in the South Asian military
economy. It did not necessarily endorse dying for a transitory politcal
cause, War was many things. It was, in essence, the physical manifesta-
tion of confit. Bu it was also a big business opportunity for those who
were a part of the South Asian military economy by birth, choice, ot
aecident.

‘Artisans and tradesmen in the weapons business, merchants selling
‘everything Fom woollen uniform cloth to grain, banjaras and beasties,
they were all willing to use war as an economic opportunity. ‘The South
Asian military economy was an equal-opportunity market plac. From the
‘Maratha sardar, or the Rajput prince, tothe lowliest of tribal burkundauze
(matchlock men), the South Asian military economy was an inclusive
societal market place of incorporation." Ir gave starus tothe ‘warriors
by birch’ and it also served to integrate and legitimize those who lived
‘on the periphery of society. For peripheral people with complementary
military and religious cultures it was more than an economic opportunity;
it was a chance for social up-grading. A lowly peasant, with s matchlock
or blade for hire, could pass himself off as a warrior when soldiers were
needed. A criminal witha horse could find ready employment asa pindari,
War represented a means of getting out ofthe bind encompassed by the
day-to-day drudgery of survival It was a chance to move up, it was @
chance to make money. Of cours it was also a risk, but it was a culturally
acceptable riskto many. They could choose tobelieve a death in battle was
symbolic ofthe larger religious struggle in daly life. The ultimate struggle
‘might find its way to being called martyrdom. And the martyrdom of the

\varrior was hailed in the religious texts of Hindus and Muslims alike ~
although one did not want to look too closely at the causes of a given

一 一 一

‘Maratha itary culture 多

confict -itwas simpler to say a warriors martyrdom could be judged 2s
an honourable death.

“The South Asian military economy bad a cultural sanction and to a
limited degree a religious sanction that appealed to many stakeholders.
‘Who was nora warrior? Rajputs, Mughals, members ofthe Khalsa, or do
you put it in religious terms of Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs? The Europeans
failed vo recognize that South Asian military culture was every bit as valid
1s their own; every bt as dedicated as their own. The Western desire to
see Indian armies as backward and locked in time was myopic to say the
least. But eighteenth-century British military Orientaliss also filed to
sce that the impetus for culeural change did not necessarily have to come
from one specific geographic direction and that military culture could
precipitate social change; not all military progress moved from west to
cast and not all politcal power rested in the hands of politicians.

“The information in this chapter has been presented to underscore the
assertion that there were tree basic points about Maratha military culture
as evident in the period from 1600-1800. |
“+ Mercenary employment was a regular feature of Maratha armiet.as it wa in

‘most major armies during that time. But in the case ofthe Marathes, their

acceptance of mercenaries extended from the lowliest rank to that of

the commander-in-chief. Cost-effective combat performance was more
important than social, religious or physical difference. European mer-
cenaries had served Shivaji and they had also deserted hint. Changing
sides was something that the Marathas, including the Bhonsles, had
also done regulary. ‘There was no shame in being on the winning side

‘because that was where the greatest profits were to be had within the

South Asian military economy.

+ Maratha armies sought and employed the compenicve advantages ofeed
by technology as well as doctrine. If given weapons system killed more
‘enemy troops or could be used as part ofa strategy to win more wars,
then it was worthy of consideration. The Marathes advocated a doctrine
of arillery-bated fire superiority long before the Europeans as can be
seen in their willingness to carry heavy artilery into the feid and use

-personnel context. The existence of sophisticated armies
‘countries (like China) that failed to evolve a similar
artillery doctrine suggests there was more to this aspect of Maratha
military evolution then just the adoption of force multiplier’ systems
to cope with numerically larger enemy armies. |
Infantry warfare was not news, or an experiment, for the Marathas in

1803. The Marathas had an infantry warfare tradition that pre-dated

Shivaji, Maratha infantry held the fortresses that served to anchor

Shivajis political and military claim to western India. His combined

