54 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘retain favour with Daulat Rao Sindia, subtly suggested that i was not in
the Maharajah’s best interests to keep regular infantry under European,
officers. Certain individuals began to pressure Daulat Rao to dismantle
de Boigne's administration and hand out its component parts as if they
were rewards. There were those who openly resented the European mer-
cenary officers controlling a powerful military others were jealous of the
riches they earned as prize money while campaigning. Daulat Rao needed
to keep the support of his kinsmen but he aso saw that de Boignes bat-
talions were his best guarantee of safety from enemies like Holkar and the
‘Nizam of Hyderabad, on for that matter, rival sardars in his own camp.
Te was apparent by now that the more ambitious members ofthe durbar
were not only willing but also able to launch a coup. Under de Boigne's
strong example, the ‘regular corps became highly supportive ofthe new
‘Maharajah. The European mercenary officers swore personal oaths of
loyalty to Daulat Rao and they became his counterpoise to those rivals
who sought to depose him. In addressing his fellow European merce-
naries, de Boigne was careful to stress exemplary behaviour and loyalty
not to Maratha service, but directly to Daulat Rao. The Savoyard wisely
counselled the European and Euro-Asian mercenaries that they served
at the Mabarajab’s pleasure, The issue for de Boigne came down to a
‘behavioural code that he summed-up as integrity and he believed it was
‘wanting in some of Daulat Raot sardars whom he perceived as too anx-
ious to carve outtheir own petty states. le He wrote co Scottish mercenary
Robert Sutherland in November 1795: "Thawe no doubt ofthese Mabrat-
‘tas Chiefs being well sasied of my administration, Interest tothe welfare
of the Prince and the good of the Service; they may learn by it what itis
to be a man of integrin."

Taliew ofpersonal respect, which he could notreadily command among
all the members ofthe durbar, Daulat Rao Sindia could parade his ‘regular
corps’. This had a tendency to give even the most adventurous sardars
cause to think twice before risking an outright power play. General de
Boigne and his fellow European mercenary officers played a historical
role analogous to the Ortoman Janissarics and other mercenary elites in
history who served in effect asthe ‘palace guard’. As alien outsiders to
the system they could not easily usurp their prince because they lacked
popular support or any shred of ethnically based clan loyalty. But the
European mercenaries had no desire to usurp Sindia. Life was good. The
frequency with which they were called out on campaign meant there was
‘ample opportunity to fatten the prize fund in which they held shares

Na they were growing richer than their counterparts in EIC service,

tainly they were much further ahead than officers in King George's
‘army when itcame to prize money and addtional earnings. But how could

‘Maratha military cultue 35

lat Rao keep favour with leading Maratha sardars and members ofthe
de reining the European led infantry batons tat eved as
his personal army? The answer was a compromise, although it merely
delayed resolving the question of who should control the army and its

es.

"On Chrismas Day 1795 de Boigne wrote again to Robert Sutherland
ho had by then been confirmed as brigade commander following Major
Gardners death. General de Boigne told Sutherland to await the posting
‘of new Maratha ‘pundits’ or civil observes serving inside the brigades
ts regulatory auditors ensuring accurate revenue collection and han-
dling. These new Maratha auditors, loyal to Sadeshau Bhau, were to be
“exchanged! forthe exstng regulatory personne! that had been previously
appointed by Lackwa Dada ~ one ofthe senior most members of Sindia's
court. This Ws ar of proposed check and balances system designed

cate competing factions in the durbar. Yet this was not necessarily a
Complemenry sem of sper, Rater, he ii deepening
rivalry in which the serious jockeying for position was well underway and
bloodshed was a real possbiiy.* From this point forward there would be
an increasingly hostile struggle as Lackwa Dada and bis cique sought to
fend off rival factions in a turf war over who should oversee the brigades
accounting procedures.

‘Sutherlin wes given explicit orders from Genera de Boigne. He was
instructed to cordially receive the Bhau's auditors, But that was only to
be done afer Lackra Dada had agreed this Sinn sanctioned politcal
‘compromise. To the Europeans it amounted to an invitation for argument
fs they had ben ordered to let some oftheir most ardent dgr rah
review the accounts. The mercenaries were in a precarious situation in
trying to second-guess which faction would prevail. Since they had al-
‘ways survived by remaining loyal to the Maharajah, the compromise over
administrative over-sight powers meant a potential crisis in confidence.
ficult to discern if either Lackwa Dada or Sadeshau Bhau would
prove ultimately loyal to Daulat Rao Sindia, What if there was a show-
down between Lackwa and ‘the Bhau’? What if Lackwa were to dig in
his heels and refuse to remove his men? In this case de Boigne thought
it best to cm on the side of caution with regard to his relationship with
Lackwa Dada. Sutherland was told, ‘You are to actin this case as Lackoo
‘Dadah shal direct you, and no further, but you shal exchange them [the
pundits] immediately and without any further instructions from me, ifhe
‘orders you 80 to dan

* Sadeaaw Bau was eventually called pon ro tak othe feH for Sdi against Hoar
‘nthe Bole of Hadespar fought outside Pune in 1802.

