50 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

As forthe econémics of weapons procurement, Mahadji saw the sense

in allowing de Boigne an increased executive role. Sindia placed five exr
isting arsenals under de Boigne’s authority to ke advantage of central-
ized management, thereby bringing greater efficiency to procurement
and delivery. In curn, de Boigne utilized Major Sangster of Scotland as
1 rotating superintendent to oversee quality control and ensure logistical
specifications. Uniformity and standardization were critical to the issue of
‘ammunition supply. The ammunition for @ 6 pounder from one foundry
had to be interchangeable with that of another. Sangster had previously
been the superintendent of a gun foundry for the Maharani of Dholpur
(Crea 1783) and was accustomed to working with South Asian techni-
cians and craftsmen, Artillery and munitions centres in Agra, Mathura,"
Delhi, Gwalior, Kalpi and Gohand began co-ordinating their production.
In accordance with stringent resource accounting procedures, Sindias
commanders had to pay for artillery ammunition out of budget alloca-
tions when it was not provided by stipulation (i.e. specific state’ campaign
purposes).

‘Artillery ammunition remained expensive at the point of consump-
tion owing to the high costs related to its delivery weight. Subcontracting,
the more labour intensive aspects of handling and production became
‘common. Hammering short chisel-cut pieces of iron bar produced small,
‘grape shot for field pieces. The irregular shape, of beaten as opposed to
‘cast grape shot, did not adversely affect ballistic performance of these
projectiles, which were intended to provide wide dispersion for more ef-
fective blanketing of the target. Labour was in great abundance and this
technique of grape shot production made economic sense. ft circum-
vented the immediate need for large numbers of metal-casting furnaces
that consumed vast amounts of high-energy fuel such as wood. Large
‘ound-shot (cannon balls), however, were cast to ensure a suitably tight
fit in the bore so as to make maximum use of the propellant gasses Bener-
‘ated by the black powder charges Many ofthese round shot were cast at
‘Gwalior owing to available iron deposits. At Agra, a powder mill was built
which utilized potassium nitrate and sulphur from Bikanir The grow-
ing South Asian military economy drew craftsmen as well as unskilled
labour alike and Sindia's arsenals often relied on pre-existing industries
to supply trained workers. Some of the manufacturing personnel had
been employed in weapons production for generations with metalwork-
ing and leatherworking castes in great demand. References to women

Na
1 Depeting on he ype of ammunition and how twas tobe used, an adonal propelant|
2s seal was ded inthe form ofa wooden base plato ao which wat held othe round
Sha by means ofr eis-cose? inn bands mallet the cht

Maratha military culture 3

‘and children also indicate these production centres were not unlike their
European counterparts in taking advantage of labour sources across
‘broad spectrum of sociery. Sindia had come to dominate the regional
military economy through his relationship with the military labour mar-
ket and the industrial sector. While his army paid cash wages to soldiers,
civilian workers found greater income-earning potential generated by his
burgeoning defence procurement contracts.

‘The new Maharajah Sindia

Jahadii Sindia the ‘old Pat’ died in 1794. Howeven in the brief pe-
riod of time following the 1793 Pune Conference, de Baignes financial
‘reforms showed a clear advantage. Revenue-producing lands set aside for
the ‘regular corps’ did not always meet the highest tax return predictions.
‘but they were far and away stronger sources of consistent funding than
those areas subjected to unregulated chauth demands. The ‘regular corps’
‘was meticulous about collecting taxes in an orderly fashion and then pro-
viding security so that other transient ‘tax collectors’ could not ride in and
‘claim additional funds. Areas without such security might be subjected
to a never-ending series of extortionate demands from whatever band of
horsemen happened to ride by. The ‘regular corps’ encouraged stabil
and became an economic facilitator in its own right. The military labour
market was thriving and that meant the further growth ofthe cash econ-
omy. Battalions well as individual soldiers became the consumers of
‘goods and services, paying for them with cash, Greater job security and
increased financial liquidity had come to an extensively militarized North
India, The bacalions became human links in the money pump needed
to sustain a functional economic recovery. After years when military in-
sasion and upheaval had stifled prosperity this represented a chance for
the regularization of the regional economy. This was the fist time the
Maratha military presence in the Doab could be seen as an adjunct to
conomic growth rather then a financial drag on the system.

In a move corresponding to EIC policy, some companies of the
‘regular corps’ were loaned-out to Maratha allies for the purposes of
re-establishing order. The ‘regular corps’ had proven very effective ar
putting down insurgencies rooted in the numerous forts of Hindustan,
But de Boigne wisely kept several companies back from these contrac-
tual deployments so that he could cope with any threat ro his own power
base. The ‘regular corps’ gained an intimate working knowledge of local
conditions in the Doab and their specialized equipment, like battalion
howitzers firing explosive or incendiary shells, gave them an advantage
in dealing with the stubborn ‘mud forts’ that dotted the map. This

