48 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

1k would be tempting to say de Boigne reformed the army as of 1793
bbut that would not be technically true either. British intelligence reports
sent to the EICs Court of Directors showed that when de
given his jaidad in 1793, he controlled only a fraction of Maha
‘A report on the status of Mahadji’s troops filed in 1794, showed the
following:

* Jivba Dada Bakshi’ detachment employed in the Marwar succession
dispute

* the army of Ambaji Ingjial performing counterinsurgency operations
in Mewar

+ the army of Gopalrao Bhau! batting Holkars army (later ordered to

Bundlekund)

+ the standby forces included: Behru Pant Tattya at Panipat, Bappu

‘Malhar at Saharanpore and Appa Khande in Hariana
* Monsieur de Boignes two brigades augmented with ‘Robilairregulars

integrated defence management and military budgeting. It reflected
ministrative evolution towards greater fiscal responsibilty featuring well-
regulted defence economics as the key to Sindia's nancial recovery.
In promoting de Boigne, Mahadji Sindia backed s professional mi

‘management specials. Ths was in keeping with Sindias appreciation of
audministrative solutions tothe pressing problems of the day. The dele-
gation of managerial authority over the battalion ofthe ‘regular corps’
showed that Mahadi trusted de Boigne’s judgement and administrative
Skil. The Savoyard triumphed in demonstrating the financial gains that
‘could be achieved by applying a stringent ‘balance sheet’ approach to
‘india’ army. Here was an individual who introduced a superior system
of defence resource management to make Sinds's army more compet-
itive with other regional military powers while maximizing revenue re-
turns and economic opportunity. Administrative reforms by de Boigne
luded making the ‘regular corps’ pay for itself and that complemented,
attempts to reform che Mughal military economy through effective gs
management." But he also applied the mercenary officer corps as an
administrative tol to increase overall revenue intake by using his brigade
officers as a trustworthy executive management body. Theis personal ac-
countabilty served to modernize economic policy through the reform

\\,j AislivaitBaxy. Aka Ambul Inge, Ambice. Aka Gopal Bhow
The Mughabsancioed right wo collet revenue (and te fom a specified act. Or,

‘venue producing lands ained in leu of salary with corsponding obligations (6
apply Sri

‘Maratha military culture 2

‘of an older inherited military revenue system that had stagnated in the
‘hands of Maratha and Mughal powerbrokers,

‘Monsieur de Boigne’s administrative reforms represented a fundamen-
tal change in the behaviour of Sindia’s army. It became a more modern
military force in terms of fiscal responsibility, becoming a value-added
facet of defence spending and not a monetary drain on society. With
effective military budgeting and finance mechanisms Sindia was freed
from reliance on the manpower allocations of sardars who often provided
unsuitable troops under terms that favoured themselves. This meant de
Beignes reforms constituted a break from what were essentially medieval
military management principles. Priorto that, many sardart had promised.
‘quality troops under existing subordinate jaidad agreements but they had
kept only a fraction of their infantry quotas ~ pocketing the pay of the
phantom troops. Other sardars, some of who received Mughal jaghis as
part of Sindias role as the Emperor’ protector, had cavalry obligations.
‘But when call-up notices went out for campaigns they subsequently sup-
plied pindares, which they had negotiated for a pittance. The pindaris,
‘any being second rate as ‘soldiers’, looted the civilian population and
there was a corresponding upsurge in reported atrocities. Some civilians
were killed and many injured infighting back against the pindarier’extor-
tionate chaush (aibute) demands,

‘The standard budgeting and resource allotment schedules, impls-
‘mented by de Boigne, brought Maratha military financing out of the dark
ages but atthe cost of disenfranchising some of the traditional Maratha
stakeholders who viewed war not as social evil but rather as an eco-
‘nomic opportunity. That became a further reason for de Boigne to use
‘mercenary officers who were not members of Sindia's durbar (court), as
they had ltde social, political or economic incentive to advocate offensive
military policies. European and mixed-race mercenaries could be loyal to
the system and to Sindia without lobbying for war as an opportunity to in-
‘tease their purse by plunder. Ironically, the efficiency of Sindias army
increased with the exclusion of certain sardars; particularly those who
Withheld support from Sindia in fvour oftheir own economic interests
r those of thei allies in the shifting alliance system that characterized
Maratha military culture and the political system of the durbar. The ac-
‘count books and ledgers of de Boigne's brigades were open for inspection
by the Maratha officials of Sindia's durbar. Under this new regime of mil-
tury accountancy South Asian financial products and credit facilities were
‘extensively integrated into the system. There was a proliferation of rev-
enue credi eranyer notes in the form of hundi (in this case, promissory
financial notes), which reduced the necessity for cash on hand, thereby
lessening the temptation of sardars to plunder internally yo

Bay ee!

