56 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India.

‘The crisis passed but the damage had been done by the worsening of
* poisonous atmosphere that was to prevail It was time for de Boigne
to put greater effort into his retirement plans and they soon took on
the appearance of an escape from Maratha service, In truth de Boigne
had applied to leave service and return to Europe before Mahadji had
died, but his deparcure for Calcutta was delayed until 1796. As long as
Mahadi Sindia was alive he had safely shielded General de Boigne from
the political battles of the durbar and in effect that action had helped to
delineate civil-military affairs. When Mahadji died itbecame evident that
there would be no long-term job security fora foreigner as C-in-C of the
‘india clan's army. General de Boigne had remained aloof from the inner
workings of the durbar and without Mahadji to shield him it was clear the
Savoyard would have to depart or risk being sucked in to the increasingly
bitter rivalries

‘The shifting alliances, that had characterized Maratha political ascen-
dancy in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, continued to be a
‘hallmark of Maratha military culeure. And with de Boigne's departure
‘came a new round of infighting, as the Maratha sardars remained di-
vided over who should replace de Boigne and have control over revenue
collection as well as the ‘regular corps’, Several members of the durbar
‘coveted the position, but Daulat Rao knew there was wisdom in selecting
‘another foreigner for the same cultural reason de Boigne had been re-
‘ined for so long. The European mercenaries were not ethnic Marathas
and as outsiders, devoid of cultural claims on power, they served a vital
role in che checks and balances over the struggle for control of the clan
md its lucrative hold on North India. But who best to take de Boignes
position? The decision came down to either Perron the Frenchman or
Hugh Sutherland from Scotland. Ulimately General Perron succeeded
jm winning the coveted position as Daulat Rao’s new C-in-C.

Perron faced a dificult position asthe sardars renewed their demands
for greater financial disclosure from the mercenary-led battalions. The
‘potential loss of foreign mercenary allegiance was beginning to grow as
‘the Europeans saw themselves pushed out of the system that they had
fought so hard to make work efficiently. When revenue returns from
brigade holdings slowed unexpectedly as the result of drought, retal
‘ory raiding from the Punjab and insurgency in Hariana, Maratha over
seers accused the European mercenaries of withholding funds. As money
dwindled to a tickle in some outlying areas, the mercenary officer corps
argued they should have the first cu ofthe funds to meet priority defence
equirements. The mercenaries believed the army's needs should come

fore those of greedy account overseers who tended to work for the en
richment of their immediate masters and not Daulat Reo. The officers

‘Maratha military culeure a

‘sought to ensure that their battalion's budgetary allocations were guar-
anteed ahead of treasury deposits, while the sardars elevated the stakes
by leveling the charge of attempted embezzlement from the treasiry.
Tp cady 1801, Dutch mercenary John Hessing admitted to his Scotish
brother-in-arms Sutherland that he would have great difficulty in に
plaining his revenue shortfalls to the Marathas. Extensive plundering, by
‘Sikh warrior bands and freelance Irish mercenary George ‘Thomas, Ls
caused great shortfalls in the income generated by several territories."
“The increasingly pedantic demands of Maratha overscers adversely im-
pacted the foreign mercenary’s morale. The pressure was building and
‘something had to give way. Meanwhile, in Calcutta, the British were ac-
tively monitoring the reverberations of discontent. They saw this as more
than just a Maratha squabble since the political stability of North India's
remaining Mughal infrastructure was at stake. If there was to be another
Anglo-Maratha ws ‘might make a great deal of military sense for the
EIC to strike while its opponents were distracted.

Conclusion

As demonstrated cartier in this chapter, the location of Maharashera and
the history of her people provided a unique set of geographical and cu に
‘ural factors that influenced Maratha military evolution. That is not to
suggest this was a historic case of geographic determination. However,
jr can be said that Maratha military culture does reflect the Marathas*
relationship with the greater South Asian military environment. The key
‘patterns of Maratha military culture were set well before European con-
tact in the so-called ‘Age of Sail’. But, owing to the nature of South
‘cultural interaction, Maratha military history cannot be physically
‘or ethnically segregated or placed in a test-tube as ‘pure Maratha’ and
studied in isolation, Maratha armies in the seventeenth and eighteenth
‘centuries were, contrary to popular belief, extremely cosmopolitan. Clan-
‘based Maratha armies featured a pragmatic approach to survival as well
as battlefield tactics and those attitudes were partially fostered by theit
reading of events in clan-oriented terms. If one branch of one family
could control one area, by occupying a strategic position such as a hill
fortin the ghats, the clan leaders were not likely to quibble about the eth
nicity of the garrison or whether ther tactics were essentially Deccani or
‘Mughal.

‘The pre-European periods of confrontation and collaboration: among
‘Maratha clans added to the competitiveness of their military culture as
they strove for dominance. Yet Europeans did not always share the same
military value system ~ a system in which survival and profit could be

