in
1
1

4 The Anglo-Marmha Campaigns and the Contest for Indi

of Panipat and the failure ofthe Marathas to institutionalize officer train

During the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries the appren-
ticeship ofyoung men in batde remained, sit had for years, in nucleated
warlord environments. The young bloods tended to gravitate towards
those sardare who were either charismatic, politically powerful or ~
perhaps more appropriately ~ natural fighters.

Inthe wake of Panipat, most ofthe Maratha leaders in North India were
reluctant to spend accumulated revenue on expensive standing armies
and huge numbers of pindaries were retained for a percentage of plun-
der But Mahadji Sindia, a wounded survivor ofthe carnage at Panipat,
saw the pindarie as a threat to the order and economic stability needed
to rebuild the military might of his clan. The death of a generation of
teacher/father figures, when combined with the Marathas' predisposition
for hiring mercenaries, may have eased the way for increasing European
officer recruitment. In keeping with Maratha military culture, Mahadji
turned to the military labour market to fill the human resource require-
‘ments ofhisinfantry™ Mahadi’sbid to construct military force capable
of withstanding further Afghan incursions led him to open the door to a
new wave of Western mercenaries veterans ofthe numerous mid-century
wars in South Asia and Europe. Initially they did not merit particular
tention in official correspondence. They were just foreign soldiers - like
0 many other mercenaries in Maratha service.

Mahadji knew that North India and in particular the Gunga-Yarnuna
Doab* held great revenue potential and upon that knowledge he built
a respectable army composed of various types of troops from different
locations. One ofits key features was a ‘regular corps’ of sepoys. As far as
cultural identification, this was an exceedingly heterogeneous army that
was in the finest Maratha tradition of equal opportunity employment
for skied warriors ~ both infantry and mounted. There were Ghosseins
from Bundlekund, Brahmins from Bihar, Muslims from Bengal, Deccani
as well as Pathan horsemen, some Europeans and also a few soldiers of
‘mixed race’ from Gos, Calcuta and Agra. Sindias military forces in
North India grew tothe point that he was the dominant employer within
the Doab’s military labour market.

However, as a Maratha, Mahadii was sil an outsider to Hindustan, If
he was to make a lasting bid for control ofthe region he needed a means
of staking his claim in a manner that yielded greater politcal legitimacy.
As his army grew more proficient his reputation also grew. Then in 1784

‘The Gongs snd Yara Rr are so pec own as Gang, Gans or Ganges

\ Retr amar nar oe raat Snes Get Ge
sale ade Weer refering othe 155 campaigns noted te Cage mane So
inny ee Dat

に の SR

“Maratha military culeure に

Mabadji received an ‘invitation’ to Delhi from Mughal Emperor Shab
‘Alam II with a proposal to ‘administer’ a greatly reduced Mughsl empire
‘sits regent.® And as longs Sindia served as the Mughal regent, whether
by official appointment or via his balance of military power, his clan could
lay claim to the control of Delhi the Doab and the Emperor. That meant
the Marathas held greater political legitimacy than the British in North
India.

The rise of de Boigne
Mahadji Sindia's ulimate power was bis military strength. Many who
have written about that strength put it all down to ‘disciplined Western
style battalions’ supposedly introduced by the Savoyard mercenary de
Boigne. However there are problems with that rather simplistic analysis,
‘There was no national standard for the formation of a Maratha army,
‘but this chapter has traced the Marathas’ historic continuity in models
‘of military orgenization, Disciplined and drilled infantry had existed in
‘Maharashira since the pre-European Hindu classical era, as testified to
‘by the earlier noted hero stones. The Marathas had known Portuguese
infantry models incorporating concepts such asthe ‘Spanish square’ since
the sixteenth century. The firearms drill of Europeans filtered into the
areas adjacent to their coastal enclaves and Topasses willing carried their
special knowledge tothe greater military labour market where it was co~
‘opted, During the period from the 1670s to 1740 the EIC’s regular troops
in Bombay were a mixed group of Europeans and Topasses, a factor
‘which ensured thatthe ‘drill’ of that Presidency’s regulars was known to
‘both Europeans and South Asians Manoeuvre warfare and the tactical
application of firepower had evolved as a common feature in Maratha
confit and Bsji Rao I used massed ranks of fintlock-ermed regulars
under South Asian officers. Battalions based on French organizational
models had served under officers like Ibrahim Khan Garde at Panipat i
1761.

If historians insist that the South Asian adoption of European-style
smallarms drill and parade square ‘discipline’ constirute military modern-
ization and/or Westernization ~ a very dubious set of indicators to sup-
‘porta tenuous conclusion - then the proof exists to make the case that
‘those characteristics were found in Maratha armies a half-century before
“Mabadii’s army came into being. And itis entirely incorrect to portray
the post-Panipat period as one in which vast numbers of Mahi 5
troops were magically transformed into ‘disciplined’ and/oc ‘Westernized!
infantry battalions by de Boigne. Furthermore, the British diplomatic
inceligence records are quite specific in noting the proliferation of

