42° The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘Maratha claims on the traditional economic heartland ofthe subconti-
‘nent ~ North India. However, the achievement was largely made possible
‘by Baji Raos personal bridging of political and military power. Unfor.
tunately, the office of the Feshua was never the same after Baji Rao I
and the Marathas' North Indian political option faltered on the borde
of Bengal. The cycle chat begun with Shivajis birth and ended with Ba}
Rao Ts death reveals the unresolved Maratha issue of civil military power
sharing in apolitical context. In Shivaji we havea warrior who was drawn
‘increasingly ito the role of political leader through the process of king
ship and with Baji Rao I we have a prime minster who engineered the
‘expansion of the Maratha state by military means, Despite strengthening
the Marathas’ military postion, Blji Rao I may have inadvertently weak

ened the political model forthe subsequent growth of the Maratha polity.
By example of his strong military hand this Pasha may have sent the sig
‘al that real political power was there for those Maratha military leaders
‘who were strong enough to take it as was made evident in his struggle
with the Sonapani Europeans did not readily grasp that Maratha military
‘culture was destined to curweigh Maratha politcal unity and when che
British eventually played their diplomatic hand it was through the office
cof the Pestsa a path that ultimately led them to a series of wars with
the Marathas.*

Mahadji Sindia and the meaning of Panipat"
In 1760.amodernized and sophisticated Afghan army under Ahmad Shah
Durrani invaded North India. The Maratha military response was a com
bined operation that culminated in disaster and the slaughter of thousands
assembled ar Panipat in 1761.! Afghan pindaries held foraging parties in
check as they surrounded and isolated the Maratha camp. Without an
‘arly and well-organized breakout in force the Marathas had no offensive
‘option as they slowly succumbed to weakness from lack of food. Maratha
‘casualties escalated under intensive artillery bombardment and eventu-
ally malnutrition, disease and desperation compelled the Marathas to
sive battle under less than favourable conditions. The result was blood-
Jerring on a scale of legendary proportion and the high casualty figures
‘reflect the organized killing of non-combatants as well as families who

1 2 16%, Aiapamaput
" Ala Amad Shuh Al, Ahmad Shah wa + he f te Asa can who ot be
20 ndpendet rule of ighnisan which el thn ting ened Dare Daan, the
‘eect tha pet ne lan name became that of the Durrani.

「 Baimates vary butts rectoned he ‘Agha am toed 6000, sug half hase
‘er Innis, Marta forces wee bled be 45,000 stg,

‘Maratha military culture i

id travelled with Maratha forces.”? Estimates of the ‘Maratha dead” at
rise ranged up to 28,000 and virtually all major clans suffered casu-
nes.90 _
oad ‘Shah's infantry were regarded as disciplined from a tactical
standpoint. They had a very unified command structure, although a case
{erate enlenon cud be ase Te Darn fee ad an
和 of camel pon sprcmened wih apecalaed medium bor
Metter Sou faa Pomrehn aly Bro
saclay egal of Aton ce’ cr fo open
over the issue of Maratha strategy. Since the Maratha. forces were largely
composed of clan-based contributions there were a great variety of troops
to be found at Panipat. They ran the gamut from ragged pindaries to se
poys who fought in the same manner as European regular infantry. Some
authors revile the Marathas as having earned their defeat by returning to
Apel ede gt of wate wth he ary bese nce
bbered by its shear volume of baggage and camp followers. This type of
analysis often degenerates along the lines of saying, if only the Marathas
‘had remained crue to their fleetfooted bargi-giri tactics . . . , with the most
convincing evidence being Marathi quotations from sardars who wanted
‘a greater emphasis put on predatory tactics.F Several twentieth-century
populas simply said the Maratha loss represented the price oft fllow-
‘ing ‘Shivaji’s system of guerrilla warfare’ or that the ‘Marathas foolishly’
experimented with ‘Western-style infantry’, an explanation lacking cred-
‘ibility given the earlier analysis in this chapter. But a dispassionate ‘non-
eect sin te Marz amy war inne-down a
its camp and starved to the point of malnourishment and weakness. When
wedi rea uy an een fen mee Beamon deghered
them handily since it had not suffered similar privations. Granted, more
aggressive light horse tactics might have aided the ‘Maratha forces logis-
tically at Panipat. But such patrolling and raiding techniques would not
Notoriety nial te tet pore by the ney dni
tion of the surrounding countryside or his well-positioned infantry and
vr The eoormou sof ein wavs t Panipat posed dul setback
cot oa ow ote Mra ply no ental
‘clan-based sardar cadre system. Many of the clans lost more than one fam-
‘ily member in the battle. The accumulated casualties among the leading.
‘clans weakened the civil administration of the  Marathas by dep ting | the
families that served the state. Since there was no. clear civil -milit ry di
sion or parallel structure at the clan level, sardar casualties had an impact
‘on the subsequent political effectiveness of the clans, The ‘second ‘reason:
‘why Maratha sardar casualties were of major importance lies in the legacy

