60 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘operations often featured several types of mounted troops operating in
conjunction with professional infantrymen. By the end of the second
‘quarter of the eighteenth century the Marathas offensive doctrine had
firmly evolved under ho Baji Rao I from neo-classical to proto
‘modern by emphasizing tactical infantry manoeuvring to take advan-
tage of Maratha leadership in the utilization of artillery.

Maratha armies had used massed infantry firing techniques for genera-

tions before de Boigne arrived on the scene. During the administration

of Baji Rao T the tactical use of both the infantry column and the line
were widespread with the latter predominating at the Battle of Dabhoi

(1731).""* In the past many authors have portrayed de Boigne’simpact on

Mahadjis forces as nothing less than a military revolution in the ‘trans-

formation’ of the ‘Maratha army’ with the introduction of ‘European

discipline and drill”. Bur those descriptions were essentially derived fom

‘nineteenth-century British military myths offered up as an explanetion

1o answer the nagging question of how the Marathas ~ a supposed nation

of “freebooters’~ could pose such a credible military challenge to what

was a historically contemporary superpower

‘Monsicur de Boigne’s real contribution to Mahadji Sindia's regime was
that he provided a means of establishing fiscal responsibility by placing the
army on a resource-accounting basis that acknowledged the economic in-
terdependence ofthe military and civil society Inthe period from 1792 to

1794 the European and mixed-race mercenaries in Sindias North Indian

«establishment became the favoured executives in a new, more effective,

‘management system. They came to represent a new level of control over

' more fully integrated civit-military economy. This civil-military inte-

‘gration of Hindustan, at that time, had three points of interdependence:

・ The infantry ofthe ‘regular corps’ served at the discretion of Maharajah
‘Sindia and it was used to uphold his rule of law. It was used to defend
not only Sindia’s territorial claims but also to underpin the Mughal
civil administration that yielded the bulk of the bureaucratic machin-
で used in governing North India. This represented the cvil~military
interdependence of law and order.

・ The greater South Asian military economy, that was one of North
India’s chief employers, met the military's physical requirements in the
{form of food, housing, ammunition, etc. This was a complex symbiotic
‘relationship extending beyond those tradesmen who simply worked in
‘weapons production. Even the simple cultivators needed the security
provided by the army and the army needed to be paid from the revenue
derived from territories made prosperous by simple cultivators. This
"Tepresented the civil-military interdependence ofthe regional economy.

‘Maratha mifcary culture a

+ Although the land revenues were assigned and fixed under civil aw it
was the military that served asthe collection agent of last resort when
landlords staged insurrections and rebellions, something they had been
prone to dosince the decline of Mughal central authority. Land revenue
wes applied to a military infrastructure, which held the ‘state’ together
when insurgency threatened i. The ‘regular corps’ under de Boigne en
sured cost-effective tax-debt recovery and, perhaps more important,
scrupulous repatriation of funds to the government upon collection.
‘This represented the civil-military interdependence of ‘state’ funding.

‘The departure of de Boigne had no impact on the military efficiency

of the ‘regular corps’ that passed intact to Perron’s control as Daulat

Rao Sindia's C-in-C. It was leary a professional force held together by

the bonds of loyalty that existed berween the mercenary officers and theit

sepoys s drawn from the military labour market. They soldiered together
prosperously in spite of the disrupting influence of Maratha clan politics.

‘And most non-Maratha soldiers in Sindias service shared the dream of

living long enough to retire with enough money olive comfortably.

‘As we shall seein the next chapter, British observers did not abways
agree on which Maratha military assets posed the greatest miliary chal-
lenge. But two key points were becoming clear. First, Daulat Rao Sindia's
military presence in the Doab and his administrative relationship with the
‘Mughal Emperor gave the Marathas a disproportionate amount of po-
kcal as well as economic clout in controlling North India. Second, the
‘regular corps’ under General Perron was counted upon to ensure Daulat
Rao Sindia’s independence and security.

