\

52 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fr India

efficiency in tax collection, counterinsurgency and revenue administra~
tion attracted a groin jealousy among some Maratha sardare. Anumbet
‘of them coveted the battalions of the ‘regular corps’ as military tools for
their own application, Others did not give a damn about the troops; they
wanted the revenue and lands that funded the battalions. A cautious de
Boigne remained out of the intrigue that grew in the durbar following
Mahadijis death. The mercenary leader had correctly surmised that he
could not risk being marginalized in the internal feuding of the durbar
where he would be ata disadvantage as an outsider. It was de Boigne’s
decision to maintain a low political profile and he decided his only chance
of retaining his lucrative appointment in service was to stick to what he
knew best ~ soldering.

‘As a defence manager with tactical experience de Boigne was a strong
believer in the meri of light infantry troops. Sindia’s light infantry were
results-oriented combat troops. They were not men groomed for the
‘pomp and ceremony of the parade ground but rather hasty tactical de-
ployment where their skirmishing syle lent itself to fire and movement
tactics or doggedly determined holding actions. Disputes over Mahadj's
succession continued to motivate de Boigne's efforts to ensure that the
light infantry as well as grenadiers were well equipped and maintained
at fighting strength. By mid-1795 his correspondence demonstrated not
only his continued dedication tothe role of light infantry in the order of
battle, but also its needs in the form of specially manufactured equip-
‘ment that had been commissioned. In writing to Second Brigade com-
‘mander Major Gardner de Boigne outlined his commitment to strength
ening the Light Infantry Battalion.!° He despatched 126 men from his
‘Dolapore Battalion’ accompanied by two South Asian officers and five
‘South Asian ‘non-commissioned officers’ (NCOs with a rank equiva-
lency of sergeant), These men were intended to bring the unit known ms
Sindias Light Infantry Battalion’ up to strength and they were equipped
with the batalion’s purpose-built ‘Light Muskets’.” Major Gardner was
instructed to make sure the Light Infantry Battalion had more than ade-
‘quate ire support, He was authorized to transfer additional artilery from
his unit to the Light Infantry as de Boigne arranged to co-ordinate delv-
«ery of newly manufactured cannon. General de Boigne wrote to Gardner,
“Having got 8 field pieces from Goualier and 9 getting ready at Palwol,
you'll soon get the number you may want.” At that time, exch of the
‘regular corps’ battalions usually had two 3 pounders which advanced
withthe infantry line; that was in addition to two 6 pounders for heavier
fire support and a howitzer which served multiple purposes in fring both
shot and shell~a total of five guns per battalion, The battalion howitzer,
‘with ins high angle of fire, often proved invaluable for dropping rounds

‘Macathe military culture 3

con indirect targets behind walls or taking out enemy troops sheltered be-
hind hills. Later, under de Boigne’s successor Perron, the light 3 pound
field guns would be phased-out in favour of additional 6 pound guns to
further increase battalion firepower. Historically contemporary British
battalions only had two guns" and the EICs army followed a parallel
track in up-grading firepower by replacing the feeble 3 pounder with the
heavier but more versatile 6 pounder.

‘Mahadii’s death had left a leadership vacuum that was temporarily
fille by the elder Maratha statesman Nana Farnavis' During this time

de Boigne strictly adhered to his policy of loyalty tothe lender as an in-
dividual. But he was also loyal to the South Asian soldiers who served
mder his command, In writing to acting brigade commander Captain
Robert Sutherland it 1795, de Boigne rationalized that it was better to
have a well-trained South Asian physician than « European as the brigade
doctor owing to the needs of the troops and perhaps more importantly
the morale of South Asian officers. In the passage thet follows we see de
Boigne viewed serving the needs of his men as an extension of his service
to the ‘old man’, a specific reference to Nana. ‘Many of the Comman-
dants and other Native officers having often expressed a wish to have
Country Physician, I have thought best to oblige them in serving the
‘old man, it may often retain officers to their duty rather than go home
when they are sick" General de Boigne made sure brigade doctors
in Sindia’s service were paid more than ‘native physicians’ in EIC ser-
vice. The Second Brigades doctor was listed as ‘Okim KievinoolaKaun’
[Hakim Khlifa-Novla Khan? and he was appointed with the salary of
Rs. 125 per month, Despite de Boigne's contributions to the welfare of
‘the troops, he continued to have enemies in the dura.

‘Mahadji Sindia’s grandnephew Daulat Rao Sindia eventually rose to
take control. Daulat Rao was not a seasoned military veteran who could
‘command the respect of old comrades. Politically he was a neophyte, cer-
tainly no match for Maratha officials who had negotiated head-to-head
with South Asian and European career diplomats. The new Maharaja
india had to be careful of those members of his durbar that supposedly
‘acted in his best interests. There were deep divisions within his court,
reflecting more than just a simple generation gap. Various social rei
gious and clan differences accentuated competing political and military
factions. Some of the more cunning members of the durbar, seeking to

* Although moder van use ofthe term ponrimplicssmalary thehisorc and miliary
‘oteat that of gun meaning aller piece or cannon.

" Ata Nana Fanavs, Nana Fada. Nana Farnavis, arguably the most lene of elder
‘Maratha stuesnenatervened in several polical fas benteen MahadjSindia death
snd Dault Rao Sidi’ consliation of power.

