46 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

regular infantry in North India and the leading officers commanding
'W. Kirkpatrick, the British Resident to Sindias cour, did not list de
BBoigne among the influential European figures in 1787.

{cis sometime since Sindhia formed, pardy on the made of our detachments at
the frontier stations, whatare called rwo camps. They consist each of six battalions
‘ofsepoys and, in point of number, a respectable train of artillery. The command
ofthese Brigades was conferzed on Meissiurs Lestineau and Vasseur,” the only
Two Europeansin Sindhia's service that ether deserve or possess his confidence.”

Disenfranchised Mughal officeholders, particularly those who aspired
‘o retake power by force, resented Mabadj’s control of the Doab, A num-
ber of them, including Rajput nobles, felt they were being victimized by
Mahadjis manipulation of both his office and the Mughal Emperor 加
‘This growing resistance to Sindia reached a crescendo with the ‘Rajput
Rebellion and the Uprising of Ismail Beg Khan’ in which Mahadji faced a
particularly determined Rajput army fielded by the Maharajah of Jaipur,
Although Sindias infantry were physically in top fighting form, their
‘morale had suffered from their pay being months in arrears, The problem
as that Mahadii’s revenue returns had been in a shambles since 1785 の
‘Mahadji had confiscated a number of jaidads! in the Doab and given them
to his Maratha sardars. But several of those followers were greedy in milk-
ing their assigned estates and pocketing the revenue, which deprived the
‘epoys of their pay on a regular basis.%® The result of this financial mis-
‘management was a humiliating military loss as Mabadji’s sepoy battalions
defected with eighty pieces of artillery at the Battle of Lalsot! in 1787.
‘The incident indicated that the overriding weakness of Sindias army was,
its financial system.”" However, this pay scandal could be viewed as hav-
ing set the stage for the rise of de Boigne as a sound administrator who
had a record of religiously paying his sepoys, even if it meant the wages
had to come out of his own pocket.

‘The issue of punctlious payment helped focus Sindia's attention on
de Boigne's performance as an officer commanding a battalion at Lalso.
‘Yet, de Boigne continued to take a secondary role to Lestineau in British
intelligence reports.” Sindia’s army, following the Lalsot defections, was
reported to have dropped to just 13,000 men by September 1787 and
‘said to be composed ‘chiefly of Maratha cavalry, with a few battalions

Pa
ered These wee terre esr ainda famison the undertning
\ eee el ri ype RC o ap ae ne
reeked tate de ar teed Amber of BCom Sexy
i 603 mc4 ands were othe perp any
1267+, 76-4. Aka Lalsont. saad “eyo

;
4

‘Maratha military culoure a

of infantry and a few guns’. Ironically, the British lost an opportunity
later that year to alter the course of history when Mahadji sought the as-
sistance of British soldiers stationed in Awadh.* He had proposed hiring
British troops but Governor-General Cornwallis decined the arrange-
‘ment despite Mahadjis wilingness to accept a binding EIC subsidiary

In October 1787 Major William Palmer replaced Captain W Kirk-
patrick as the British Resident with Sindia, This seems to have been
crucial to the later British misconception that de Boigne was the creator
‘of Sindias sepoy battalions because Palmer wrote about de Boigne as
证 he were responsible for raising the ‘regular corps’. In 1790 Palmer's
report to Governor-General Cornwallis noted 5,000 sepoys under de
Boigne and the disturbing fact that a number of British subjects were to
‘be found as officers in that particular force 9 Despite the assertion by
later Victorian-era historians that de Boigne took over in 1785, it was not
‘until the Feshwa's Pune Conference of 1793 that Mahadji set things in
‘motion to give de Boigne a greater hand in expanding the already exist-
ing ‘regular corps’. Tt was after the conference that Mahedi returned
to Hindustan and established a jaidad inthe eastern Doab for de Boigne
to use for the purposes of supporting additional regular infantry. The
‘regular corps’ was to be Mahadjis army of last resort and he guaran-
teed its loyalty with revenue returns estimated to be from Rs. 27-35
Tak.

‘Mahadji had already made several organizational changes to his army.
“These included an increase in recruiGng Rajput and Muslim infantry-
‘men, a change that was criticized by some Maratha sardars as Sindia's
North Indian army began to exhibit greater physical distinctions from
his Deccani forces. Changes in uniform were also made as his horsemen
{gave up the short breeches of the Deccani style and began to wear ‘long
‘wousers covering the hee’. As for infantry uniforms it had for decades
been a widespread South Asian military fashion to clothe sepoys in bat-
edressinspired by European uniforms. High-quality South-Asian-made
flintlocks were also commissioned for Mahadj’s troops and built in Local
production centres." Regarding additional muskets, Sindi's agents had
procured inexpensive surplus European 人 intlocks insignificant numbers
following the Third Anglo-Mysore War and rebuilt numbers of EIC mus-
kets decommissioned in Bombay." The definitive British intelligence
report on de Boigne’s forces, fled with the EICS Court of Directors in
1794, revealed de Boigne had five musket ‘stock makers’ per battalion
and regularly paid them each Rs. 7 per month.!®?

Aka Oudh. | Afabis 100,000 in oumeical terms.

