10 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes fr India

in the pursuit of Dhundia. Specifically he cultivated a professional mi
itary relationship with the Maratha cavalry leader Appa Rao.” The
‘experience was to colour Arthurs political as well as military thinking
‘with regard to the Marathas. It was an experience that confirmed the
‘Marathas = light horse impression in his mind and perhaps, in retrospect,

‘of 1800 fell short of being a successful educational experi-
fence, It left him il prepared for the reality of Maratha infantry warfare
that he later faced at Assaye in 1803, But the Dhundia Waugh campaign
did convince Wellesley that it took a certain amount of parallel structure,
‘or what we could identify in more contemporary terms as force symmetry,
‘0 defeat a pindari or light horse threat. Arthur also saw thatthe pindari
dynamic might be altered by steady employment that regularly paid cash
wages.

Preparing for war

Tn the spring of 1803 Arthur Wellesley wrote to his superiors with the
‘observation that Appah Rao had 3,000 pindaris that would cause severe
‘problems forthe British if they were released from service. Wellesley knew
full well that loyalty was a transitory thing and that today’s allies could
be tomorrow's enemies. He observed: ‘I therefore appeared to me, and
to Major Malcolm, tobe absolucely necessary that Appah Sahib should
retain them in his service. The thought of allowing Maratha pindari
allies to plunder on approval was somewhat disturbing to Wellesley. It
was true that British troops were authorized to plunder under specific
conditions such as when a fortress was captured after surrender terms had
been refused. Butto factor organized plundering into British doctrine was
something diferent. Having said that, the difference was not so great as to
preclude the British from using that option. The alternative to retaining
the pindaries via plundering rights or commission payments was to pay
them a fixed wage. However, it was not always practical to have the EIC
pay them just to keep them out of circulation. That was a practice that
could be exploited by sardas who knew how to manipulate the military
1ibour market by threatening to join the enemy. Therefor, it became
to try and have a South Asian ally absorb the cost oftheir wages.

An ally like the Peshta, already bound by the Treaty of Basscin as part
of the Subsidiary Alliance Treaty System, was ideal in that he could be
contractually obligated to share defence cost. This plan to defray pindari
hiring costs would theoretically reduce British expenditure while a the
\ ane me denn Mara menie of the dr’ evr Nir
jeneral Wellesley, therefore advises that they should be taken into pay

a the rate of twenty rupees per month each man; and he guarantees to

British perceptions and the road to war in 1803 1

Appah Sahib that the Peshwah .. shall reimburse to him the sums paid
to them. Under this engagement the Pindaries must not be allowed to
plunder." _

‘Arthur Wellesley contributed countless letters to the military message
traffic that circulated among the EICS Bengal, Bombay and Madras
armies. Arthur held the King’s commission, which meant that officers
in His Majesty's Army also had to be mindful of what the prolific Arthur
wrote. To one and all, he reiterated his true belief that the Marathas were
militarily nothing but an assemblage of ‘predatory horse’. Arthur wrote
specific doctrinal guidelines for the war of 1803 based on the atypical
Dhundia Waugh campaign. Threat perception was to influence both his
tactics and attitude. And as war with Sindia began to look inevitable
in 1803, Arthur Wellesley repeated his recommendations for the acqui-
sition of Maratha light horsemen which he perceived as those soldiers
‘most needed to fila structural gap in the EICS armies, An examination
of Arthur's correspondence in the months preceding the outbreak of war
jn 1803 indicates that he had apparently been quite successful in incorpo-

rating Maratha light horse and pindaries into bis own regional forces. By
April 1803, Wellesley already had over 6,000 Maratha light horse under
his command as well as a wide-ranging assortment of Maratha foot sol-

Jocal ‘infantry’ was all part of doing business in a South Asian military
economy made nervous by the threat of an approaching War

‘Arthur Wellesley was preparing to fight the Marathas as he understood,
them and, in doing so, he was committing the soldier's sin of preparing
to fight the last war and not the next. The Dhundia Waugh campaign
featured elements of mobile pursuit that were not representative of sus-
tained infantry warfare in which attrition takes many forms. Arthur hed
ddwelt upon the element of the chase tothe point of obsession. Apparently
Dhundia had escaped capture on one occasion by crossing a monsoon-
‘swollen river in the nick-of-time. Arthur believed Dhundia could have
been apprehended at that moment if only the British had the foresight to
bring a pontoon bridge with their column, Arthur had written to Major-
General Brathwaite, then the Commander-in-Chief of the Madras army.

Teeed the Malporb yesterday athe deepest and most rp ford hat Thane
trersen but] am pow encamped on he bank othe ret I woud be of
Crs dengan hee coun te rmy wer pied
‘Snpowtoon you spprove fhe, ould ean get some made at ering
yatam, where te) mit be ted, TFT had had ponoors onthe Mapoorb,
Dhoni could no av eseped and tt incoesable the arate they
Sou give over al he Nae amie.”

