78 ‘The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India.

3. Taking the proper steps to document precedent as wells authorza-

tion was imperative. Richard Wellesley needed to defect criticism, like
that leveled at former Governor-General Warren Hastings, for waging
an “illegal” war of aggression.” Delays in communication, ranging from
‘weeks to months also meant that the granting of sufficient power was a
sensible move. The degree of civil-miltary authority wielded by British
theatre commanders in 1803 drastically reduced the delay, which an over-
centralized command in Calcutta would have necessitated. Although it
‘proved sucessful in this case, Governor-General Richard Wellesley was
later subjected to criticism for having bestowed supreme war and peace-
‘making powers ~ in effect governmental authority ~ on his brother

Richard wrote to Arthur, ‘Iwill seize Agra, Dehi, take the person of
the Mogul under British protection, and occupy the Doaby together with
Cutack at the earliest practicable moment afer I shall have learned
that you deem hosGhiors inevitable." To a large extent Arthur was left
‘om his own to work out the issue of sensible military objectives in the
Deccan. The young Major-General had decided that his frst blow would
bbe an attack onthe fortress of Ahmadnagar.® That would help secure the
‘communication and logistics links between Bombay and Pune while pro-
viding a forward depot from which to launch operations against Maratha
‘mounted units making incursions ito either be Pesua's or Nizam’sal=
lied territories. As for destroying Sindia’s regular, that was much more
problematic sine he largest number of his batalions were in the North
protecting his greatest aster,

‘When itbeceme apparent that Daulat Rao Sindia and Raghuji Bhonsle
would not willingly fal into a subordinate line behind the Pesta under
the Treaty of Bassin, war became inevitable. Governor-General Richard
‘Wellesley outlined a very specific set of North Indian military objectives
ina despatch to Cin-C General Lake:
+ Seize all of Sindin's land in North India berween the Gunga and Yernuna

Rivers,

+ Take the Mughal Emperor out of Maratha protective custody and place
him in Brtsh protective custody,

+ Form an alliance system withthe Rajputs, and other “lesser states’ in
the area west of Delhi.

+ Occupy the territory of Bundlekund.*

‘The proposed alliance system with the Rajputs and ‘lesser stats’ ifom-

pleted, would eventually provide the British with a defensive alliance ys

tem west of Delhi that we would recognize today as a bulwark of satel

\ ite states. These would not be initiated along the immediate ines ofthe

* Aka Bundlecund, Bmdkitan

]
4

Brits perceptions and the oad to war in 1803 7

Subsidiary Treaty Alliance System that embraced the Nizam and Rezhaoa 一
that would come later. This first step, in courting the ‘country powers’ of
the region, was intended to look like a mutual defence pact aimed at pro-
tecting Rajasthan from Maratha and Sikh incursions. However, history
would prove the British tobe reluctant when it actualy came to spending
their own blood and treasure to protect their new alles.

‘The occupation of Bundlekund formed part ofa grand strategy of con-
tainment as the territory lay astride one ofthe traditional Maratha inva-
sion corridors, And although Daulat Rao Sindia’s clan had focused thei
attention on Delhi and its environs fortwo generations, the Marathas had
been known to use the Bundlekund corridor as a passageway to expedite
the flow oftheir troops towards Calcutta, which in 1803 sil carried the
scar ofa defensive fortification known asthe ‘Maratha ditch’. Any lasting
peace for the Briosh would depend on hemming in the Marathas and
that meant denying them an ability to shift troops regionally from the
southern to the northern theatre. The Decean-Hindustan-Bengal corri-
dors through Malwa and Bundlekund had to be controlled if complete
containment was to be achieved. Ifleft untouched, the Marathas could
‘exploit secondary road systems. The permanent safety of Bengal from
‘Maratha-sponsored invasion depended on being able to guarantee the
disconnection ofthe traditional invasion corridors that crss-crossed the
land,

Richard Wellesley also advised thatthe following circumstances would
require immediate attention’?
+ the removal of conventional infantry forces under Daulat Rao Sindias

Crin-C General Perron,

* possession of the Maratha-controlled forts south of the Yamuna River
50 as to facilitate a strategy of containment and control of the Doab.
‘The troops under Perron would be offered a chance to defect and ‘come
over’ to the British. But if they did not exercise that option, then the
British theatre commanders were authorized to begin search and destroy
‘operations aimed at ‘reducing’ Maratha military capability. As for Richard
Wellesley’s reference to forts on the south side ofthe Yamuna, India was
‘hostile environment forthe British in more ways than one, Climatically,
militarily and in terms of potential political adversaries, permanent con-
trol of the Doab would be problematic for the British unless they held the
area by way ofa string of forts. The forts on the south side ofthe Yamuna
River, particularly the great forts of Dethi and Agra that formed anchor
points for the Delhi~Agra axis, held more than a defensive significance.
‘As Mughal imperial fortresses, both locations had developed as admin-
istrative centres and they might fall more readily to the British 这 qibera-
tion’ ofthe Mughal Emperor was successful. Agra was also a well-known

