64 The Anglo-Marutha Campaigns and the Contest for India

“Marathas in the Deccan to the Germans in Europe - an immense empire
of subordinate principalities. Given the similarity ofthe Marathas to the
allegedly ‘warlike’ people ofthe German states, he pondered ‘was it not
then absolute madness in us to have quarrelled with such a power, even
if we dreaded no other foe at the time but isel@"S Ten years later William
Henry Tone, in an assessment that borrowed heavily from the work of
‘others, repeated the analogy in summarizing the Maratha ‘Empire’. Tone
sid, ‘It would, pethaps, be best described, by resembling it to the cir
cles of Germany, asa military republic, composed of chiefs independent
of each other's Major Rennel, another military scribe, used a variation
on the European warrior-nation comparison. He noted the Marathas
hhad become the ‘Swiss’ of India, a reference to the Swiss mercenaries,
‘alternately courted and employed by different partis’ the culoural dis-
tinction he made about the Marathas was that they ‘usually paid them-
selves instead of being paid by cheir employers’. This might have been
intended as a comment about the Maratha propensity to view war as
‘an economic opportunity but it seems, in hindsight, to have been rather
snide as Rennel was busily engaged in promoting the sale of his military
‘maps and writings to newiy arrived EIC subalterns.?

Perceptions from the Third Anglo-Mysore War

‘A oumber of military observations on the Marathes were
sparked by their activities while serving as British allies against Tipu
‘Sultan in the Third Anglo-Mysore War 1789-92. Major Dirom, who
‘was a Divisional General Staff Officer with the duty of Depury Adjutant-
General to the King’s Troops in that war, wrote the most widely known
book on the confict.* Dirom claimed to have been impressed with the
Marathas as individuals, but he elected to open his book with a negative
reference to them during the disastrous monsoon retreat of Cornwall's
army in 1791.? The Major left no doubt that he blamed the Marathas for
having failed to make their critical rendezvous with the British on an ap-
pointed day, which in his opinion necessitated the British withdrawal io
Cormwaliss men had no choice but to spike’ the heavy artillery and
bandon the mud-bogged battering train in their aborted attempt to lay
siege to Tipu Sultan's fortress of Srirangopatnam.' The Bombay army of
[Major-General Abercromby, in order to play thee partin the siege, had to
carve a fifiy-mile road system out of the gg with ‘infinite labour’. And

\ toate «wie or aa own te uc omen oer innate we
mpeg

112 + 76 +, Aka Seringaptam, Srngsputnum, Shiangpatan.

British perceptions and the road to war in 1803 6

bitter was an entirely inadequate word to describe how they felt about
the Maratha rendezvous fiasco. Abercromby’s men had been forced to
manhandlc their huge iron siege guns through the mud since monsoon
sicknesshad killed most oftheir draught cate. The troops were weakened
by a scarcity of food and the camp followers were reduced to eating the
‘putrid flesh of dead gun bullocks. Writing about Abercromby's predica-
ment Dirom noted, ‘his army, who thought they had surmounted all their
difficulties, had the mortification to find their exertions of no utility, and
had to return, worn down by sickness and fatigue, exposed to the ii
cessant rains which then deluged the western coast ofthe Peninsul
A short-lived redemption of the Marathas resulted from the arrival of
their relief force carrying grain.'? However, British gratitude was quickly
soured by the Marathas’ penchant for profit taking inthis military spot
market. The Marathas did not give the grain to their starving British al-
lies; rather they sold it cost so far beyond the market price that the
EIC's sepoys could not afford it and ‘the pay of a subaltern would scarcely
feed his horse’.'? Collectively, the British did not seem to have noticed
‘that the incident dramatically underscored the Marathas’ historic ability
‘to wage war more effectively than Europeans when it came to monsoon
campsigning.

Major Dirom's volume, published a decade before the Anglo-Maratha
Campaigns of 1803, portrayed the Maratha artillery as obsolete and im-
mobile; disparaging comments were made about the Maratha practice
‘of painting names on the guns." Dirom deemed the Maratha gun car-
rages and their construction to be ‘clumsy beyond belief." The com-
posite wood wheels were of little value in the Major’s estimation, but
‘then he may not have considered their durability in the monsoon mud.16
‘The Marathas had compensated for the quagmire condition of the roads
and their immediate lack of pioneer units by placing up to fifty bullocks
ja the harness for each gun.!7 They were also very careful about the
breed of animal selected for this type of duty. The gun bullocks speed,
strength and regional suitability to diet during monsoon conditions were
all part of Maratha military knowledge. British ‘public carriage contracts’
were notorious for providing unsuitable beasts of dubious pedigree and
‘inexperienced British officers were often duped by nefarious procure-
‘ment agents who stuck them with inappropriate breeds of bullocks that
‘were destined to perish under inclement field conditions. The British.
did not make significant progress in this aspect of logistics until they.
captured Tipu Sultan's breeding stock of bullocks in Mysore during
1799.

‘Dirom singled-out the Maratha infantry for particular repudiation, al-
though to his credit as a foreign observer, he realized that these units were

