80 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns andthe Contest for India

weapons production centre, Another major consideration was the role of

these two forts in guarding communications and logistical traffic on the

Yamuna River that flowed east towards Bengal. The river would easily

fend itself to a Britsh transportation andl communication system linking

Dethi to Calcutta. Ithad become necessary to systematically acquire forts

in the 1803 Doab campaign for three reasons:

・ ro neutralize main centres of military resistance which could not be
by-passed without creating a potential threat ro the security of Biitih
rear areas,

«fo build s contiguous logistical chain that allowed the army to move
forward from strength to strength,

« to serve as defensive strongholds in the event of strategic withdrawal
‘orto exert power when adjacent urban areas rebelled or came under
attack.

North India's Gunga-Yamuna Doab - the cradle of Hindustan ~ was the

J ynchpin forthe greatest Maratha military challenge to British expansion

in 1803. And, ascan be seen from the evidence presentedin chapter 4 this

srilitary high-water mark was entirely in keeping with infantry-dominant
patterns of Maratha military culture. india may have operated outside
the Matatha political norm as seen from Pune but his army held the
balance of political power in North India, The removal of Sindi’s ‘regular

‘orp was mandatory if Richard Wellesley was to prevail in plans to seize.

the Doab and eliminate opposition to the Treaty of Bassein. The bulk of

{infantry battalions as well as the most crucial fortresses, those that were

the backbone of Sindia's power in 1803, were in the north, The military

importance ofthe southern fonr should noc be denigrated to that of a

‘Sideshow of the war’ But it can be stated categorically thatthe strategic

importance of the Deccan was secondary to he elimination of Maratha

dliary power in North India owing to the disproportionate politcal
ts well as economic value embodied in Hindustan and the remaining

‘Many young Brish offices in Arthur Welcskys Army of the Deccan
agreed wih their opposite numbers in Sindias service ~ Pune was not ¢
place to die for in 1803. However, Arthur Wellesley vas optimistic. He
fd fought Dhundia Waugh and won, His correspondence, right up t0
the eve of bate in 1803, reflected a great confidence that this ‘nation
ff feebooters' could be brought to heel. And when the word arrived
that Daulat Rao Sindia and Raghuji Bhonsle were not wiling to stand
down and acknowledge the Pskua's signature on the Treaty of Bassin,
‘Arthur thought it was time to teach these ‘predatory horsemen’ a les-
‘on, But there were others in the British defence establishment, men ike
Lieutenant-Colonel John Ulrich Colin, who had seen Sinda's infantry

British perceptions and the road to war in 1803, a

in action and remembered that the earlier Anglo-Maratha campaigns
were not a walk-over.

‘Arthur Wellesley, inthe company of several officers including the very
‘observant Jobn Blakiston, set off to meet with Collins. The observations
“offered by the aged Colonel should have been welcomed as valuable
telligence, After all, the old soldier had just departed Daulat Rao Sindia's
court in his capacity as official British Resident. But the young British
officers accompanying Arthur Wellesley were green in terms of expe-
rience as well as manners. They laughed at Collins’ eccentricities al~
though the wizened EIC soldier had seen more than his share of killing,
having been cited for personal bravery under fire. An apparent victim
of fashion, Collins’ seemingly archaic mid-eighteenth-century uniform
was accentuated with lace and elaborate piping, which appeared hys-
terically comical to the young know it alls. The sight of that ‘costume’
combined with his South Asian entourage ~ one of whom was desig~
‘nated to carrying a parasol ~ underscored the Colonel's nickname of
‘King Collin’. For his part, Collins was respectful and courteous but
je did not suffer fools lightly. Arthur and, for that matter, his brother
the Governor-General in Bengal were too young and too ambitious in
Collins’ estimation, Nepodsm was not a pretty sight and it was all the
‘more visible in the smallness of British India. Colins had waded through
‘Arthur's numerous letters on how to fight the Marathas’ pindari armies.
‘The Colonel ricd to persuade Arthur that Sindia' army was different
and the conventional threat that it posed was very real. A single one of
‘Sindia's five brigades, when accompanied by its artillery park, packed
enough firepower to maul Wellesley’s Army of the Deccan. Upon the
conclusion of their meeting, Blakiston heard Lieutenant-Colonel Collins
address Major-General Arthur Wellesley with measured politeness ~ his
promotion still rankled the old soldier. ‘f tell you, General, as to their
‘cavalry {meaning the enemy's}, you may ride over them wherever you
‘meet them but their infantry and guns will astonish you.” The statement
haunted Blakiston who confided in his memoirs: ‘As, in riding home af-
terwards we amused ourselves the General among the rest, in cuting
jokes at the expense of “litle King Collins", we litte thought how true
his words would prove."

