2 British perceptions and the road
to war in 1803

Introduction

Having used the preceding chapter to establish the nature of Maratha
military culture, this chapter looks at British military perceptions of
the Maratha prior tothe warin 1803. The work ten proceeds to outline
British military war aims as established by the Governor-General. The
juxtaposition of historic perception and proposed actions in this chapter
‘can then be combined with the campaign descriptions in chapters 3 and
4 to give readers an idea of the differences in the theory vs. practice of
fighting the Marathas. One by-product of this chapter is a heightened
senge of the degree to which British ruling elites could mirror their coun-
terparts in South Asia. The contrasting bac ided by Richa
‘Welleseys political ambition and Ws other Arto Weleeys mil 9
single-mindedness highlights the disproportionate power of the Wellesley
family in 1803.

British perceptions of Maratha military
culture 1750-1803

‘What shaped the opinions ofthe British officers and administrators who
jp turn shaped military policy towards the Marathes? One would think a
reat number of their aides would have been influenced by the pop-
‘ular military literature ofthe day. However, the correlation isill defined.
‘Commercially published Britsh military books in that period (1750-
1800) tended to be very subjective military travelogues. The fact that
such influential figures as Robert Clive had participated in join-infantry
‘operations with Maratha allies in the 1750s was largely glossed over and
no one formally addressed the concepts of Maratha military modernity
‘or offensive capability.’ Stringer Lawrence, once viewed as the spiritual
father of the British Indian Army, extolled the virtues of the Maratha
infantry soldier but his accolades passed from acceptability to obscurity
‘ness than one generation? John Henry Grose, however, did prove to be

a

British perceptions and the road to war in 1803 63

particularly observant in writing about the Bate of Sugarloaf Rock that
took place on 20 June 1753, during the Second Karnatak War eight years
before Panipat. It fearured well ‘dug-in’ Maratha infantry forces under
Mami Rao. Their trench-works were in the traditional style of Deceani
field fortifications, such as one might have seen a century earlier in the
siege lines at Ahmadnagar or Daulatabad. The Maratha emplacements
Judcd well-excavated infantry firing positions to protect the marksmen
whose aimed fire covered the approaches to the trenches that the main
force occupied. This was at a time when published accounts of British
infantry doctrine extolled the virtues of unflinching ‘head up-right’brav-
‘ery in the face of enemy fire. And we should consider the degree to which
the average eighteenth century reader may have misinterpreted Grose’s
selective depiction of native’ tactics as being at odds with their own per
ception of British military tradition. While one was upright and forward
‘moving, the other was lowly in profile and stationary. But the key point
in any such comparison was that the examples represent the antithesis of
doctrinal comparison; one presenting the historically contemporary view
of offensive doctrine and the other exemplifying the ideal of defensive
doctrine. Whether such an unfair comparison ever took place, oF how
‘often it took place, can never be determined. The point is that even the
‘small amount of positive military press the Marathas received could have
bbeen misconstrued by those wishing to cast negative interpretation on the
Marathas military ability.

“There is no ready explanation as to why accounts of the Marathas
in the third quarter of the eighteenth century neglect to mention the
‘Maratha infantry’s proficiency in the Karnatak Wars. Their postive press
hhad quicky fallen from British notice and that may have been the result of
the Europeans passing a premature pronouncement of death on Maratha
‘military capability after the disoster at Panipat in 1761. By the time the
ist Anglo-Maratha War started in 1775, it was difcultio find objec-
tive assessments of Maratha military operations. And the British loss to
the Marathas at Telegaon* in 1779 was usually omitted from direct re
ference in subsequent military assessments of the Marathas from 1780
to 1800. Perhaps that can in part be attributed to the degree to which
the First Anglo-Maratha War went unanalysed in popular military books
of the day. The rare published reports seem to have been produced by
Parliament and the EIC.*

‘Among the few authors who touched on Maratha military culture
and society, there was a tendency to place remarks in a European con-
text. Major Innes Munro, in an account published in 1789, ikened the

Ala Tkpe

