16 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest or ind

then he had to portray che Marathas as holding India hostage inthe form
‘of the Mughal Emperor 人 1

Within the parameters of British political strategy in 1803, Shah
‘Alam II could be ‘liberated from the Maratha yoke’ but he could never
be restored as an independent ruler. There were greater gains to be had
in gcing him from Sindia and then serving as his benevolent guardian,
‘That was not only useful ia terms of credibility among subject peoples but
ithe hep a nese of conan aeemen in pe en
itcame to revenue collection and miliary service. Ifthe Gunga-Yamuna
Doab was to be acquired by the EIC, chen it was important to maintain
the continuity and facade of a Mughal presence. To push aside, over-
throw, or reject he Mughal political infrastructure was to appear deca-
dent, foreign and as an opponent of South Asian cultural sensibility as
wellas tradition. Why increase resistance and chances of non-cooperation
among existing stakeholders? The old Mughal political and economic
Srastrucrure had its deficiencies but a thinly stretched EIC, drawn further
‘out along the Gungs-Yamuna corridor, necded to assume an existing rev-
‘enue and control system to meet its needs until gradual transition could
bbe implemented. And to ensure control of the Doab it would be neces-
say forthe British to keep the Delhi-Agra axis intact once the Marathas
were removed. Since the time of the great Mughal Emperor Babur, that
axis and the lands that bordered it were known as the hey to Hindustan
in terms of the two things that counted ~ money and power. There
‘was ultimately more to be had in exercising patience when it came to
the process of watching over the demise of the Mughal power. The EIC
Would ulimately derive greater benefits in sitting by the bedside of the
Mughal Empire and waiting for this imperial entry to die a lingering,
though nonetheless decisive and seemingly natural death 人

‘Major Thorn later wrote succinctly about the importance of the Doab
campaign as seen from the vantage point of Richard Wellesley’s Bengal.
But in doing so he injected an overriding note of pathos as if to offer @
‘human distraction to counter those who still questioned the legality of
Richard Wellsley’s actions.

‘The importance of his branch ofthe war will be evident, from the objects to
‘which the particular attention and energies ofhis Excellency were applied. These
were the destruction of the power of the French party established on the banks
of the Jumna under Monsieur Perron; the extension of the British frontier, in
the possession of Agra, Delhi, and a chain of posts on the right bank of the
Jumna …. But the atention ofthe British government at his time was drawn in a
forcible manner tothe abject condition ofthe aged emperor of Hindoostan over
‘hose person and aathorig the Mabratas an he French exercied an biohie
comma

British perceptions and the rond to war in 1803, n

British war aims and military objectives in 1803

‘The decision to go to war was not taken lightly in 1803 and there was
1 prolonged period of negotiation during which it remained uncertain
‘whether Sindia and Bhonsle would stand down and acknowledge the
political euthority of the Peshaa Since it remained unclear whether
there would be peace or war, Governor-General Richard Wellesley had
to issue orders imparting dual authority. His brother Arthur was to be
given full diplomatic as well as war-making powers in order to deal more
directly with Sindia and Bhonsle over the issue of whether they would
accept the Peshwa’s leadership under the Treaty of Bassein, or goto war."
Richard was sill quite willing to negotiate but he made the alternative
‘quite clear to his brother.

It is probable that the state ofthe rivers will afford great advantages to your
‘army, and will embarrass the enemy in a considerable degree, if hostilities should
‘commence during the rainy monsoon. In this event, [direct you to use your utmost
efforts to destroy the military power of either, or of both chiefs, and especially of
Scindiah; and to avai yourself of every advantage, which circumstances may offer
to the utmost extent of the strength of your army. Itis particulary desirable that
sou should destroy Scindiahbs artilicry and all arms of European construction
and all military stores which he may possess.”

‘The Governor-General went on to tll his brother that in the event of war
he should ‘take proper measures for withdrawing the European officers’
from Sindia’s service and that Arthur was ‘at liberty to incur any expense”
for that purpose.** Richard Wellesley made it understood that, if fighting
broke out, Arthur's actions should be aimed at neutralizing Maratha mil-
itary power and bringing about the physical isolation of Maratha military
threats, The vast amount of discretionary power was made necessary by
the fact that the Deccan or southern theatre, as Arthur's sphere of oper-
ations, provided the primary trigger but not the primary objective of the
war.

Although British generals had errmordinary civil as well as military
authority in colonial theatres of war, the enormity of Arthur Wellesley’s
‘mandate seemed to exceed the boundaries ofa judicious EIC administra-
tion; allthis of course withthe blessing of elder brother Richard.” Arthur
was given sweeping powers because much ofthe territory that constituted
the ‘area of operations’ was not yet offically under British legal control
‘and nothing was ro be left to chance with regard to the waging or conchi-
sion ofthis war. It was one of those aspects ofthe conflict which suggest in
bbindsighe that the successful prosecution of colonial warfare required the
delegation of sufficient civil and military authority to those fighting the

