68 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘burden of cartridge expense placed on the British for particip
‘of ‘their? wars.” Providing troops under a higher treaty authority did not
‘mean that Maratha clan leaders would ignore the financial details of the
tion, Ifthe Marathas could save money or make money at British
‘expense, they would. They were veteran entreprencursin the South Asian
military economy and one way to increase potential campaign profits was
1o outsource ammunition requirements at an ally’ expense. This latter
point was one in a long list of complaints that tended to make printed
references tothe Marathas less than complimentary.
Apparently Dirom believed light horse units to have been the Marathes’
‘most effective contribution inthe campaign against Tipu in 1792. South
Asian light horse tactics, at that time, had no direct doctrinal parallel
in His Majesty's Cavalry or the EIC’s Native Cavalry that was formed
con European models. The Maratha mounted units successfully inter-
cepted a number of Tipu’s convoys and laid ambushes for the Mysore
horse, The Deccani Maratha horsemen were specialists in many tactics
that were unfamiliar to European horse soldiers. Their unorthodox but
effective field craft, such as setting horse snares, gave the Marathe horse-
‘men reputations that were equally eared and envied. Dirom was one of
a small but growing number of British observers‘who saw Marathe ight
one and irregular cavalry as potentially the greatest Marathe miliary
sset for incorporation into the EIC’s order of bate. As the singularly
‘most popular work on the Third Anglo-Mysore War, Dirom’s book be-
‘came standard reading for many ofthe British officers who fought inthe
Fourth Anglo-Mysore War in 1799; men ike Arthur Wellesley.

Dhundia Waugh as a cultural reference point

Despite the graphic suggestions made in a handful of later fanciful
works, Arthur Wellesley did not lead the storming of Srirangepamam in
1799. He was deprived of a frontline role in the final assault and was
relegated to the reserve trenches. Following the successful conclusion
‘of the battle, Governor-General Richard Wellesley caused great com
Gon by appointing his relatively inexperienced brother Arthur to be
“Military Governor of Srirangapetnam. During the chaos accompanying
the fall of Tipu’s fortress, a numberof criminals escaped from his prison.
‘Among the most troublesome was a man known as Dhundis Waugh who
was described extensively in British reports as a‘Marhattafreebooter’*
Dhundia evaded recapture and proceeded to terorize Mysore and the

* Ag Dheodah egk Doda ae Dns ugh, Dhonda Wah, Diondih

British perceptions and the road to warin 1803 的

southern Maratha country with a 40,000-man army. His force was com-
posed of many demobilized soldiers from Mysore and the EIC but by
far the greatest bulk of his men came from roving pindari bands. With
‘Dhundia on the loose, Arthur Wellesley, in his new position of author-
ity in Mysore, was kept busy trying to secure the Maratha-Mysore bor-
der. The Marathas, in contrast to ther role as British alles in the Third
‘Anglo-Mysore War, had remained more or less neutral in the Fourth
‘AnglorMysore War of 1799. Unforrunately this meant Arthur found it
‘necessary to violate the existing border neutrality agreement with the
Marathas several times. From July to September 1799, Wellesley chased
‘Maratha riders back over the territorial boundary to stop them from
phandering 235 Several leading Maratha horsemen, who had been allies
{en years earlier, took advantage of Dhundiw insurgency to do a lite
raiding in Mysore aswell. Their plundering was done under the explanan-
tion that it was a compensetory action for past losses to Tipu. Thi
parent propensity of both allied and enemy Maratha horsemen to engage
in plundering helped establish in Arthur Wellesley's mind a direct corre-
lation between the label ‘Maratha’ and the words ‘predatory horse’.
‘The military governorship of the Mysore territories gave Arthur
Wellesley a voice in EIC matters that was disproportionate to his mi
itary rank and experience. Arthur, a prolific leter writer, began to draft
scores of letters and memorandums on military affairs as he saw them.
He often drew together bits of collected wisdom and laid them out in
a comprehensive manner approaching that of a position paper. There
is absolutely no indication that Arthur ever tried to selectively portray
his lengthy memorandums as the work of genius, That was a task for his
later biographers, And he should be remembered positively, in those early
days, for having acknowledged the experience of many veterans who gave
him the benefit of their years of service. Ina letter to Lieutenant-Cotone!
Dalrymple, written by Arthur as he took to the field against Dhundia
in June 1800, there was an indication of respect for those who had pre-
viously served in this alien environment. Recognition was paid to the
fact that this was a different type of operation or ‘species’ of war26 This
difference probably reinforced Arthur's belief that the Maratha way of
war, as he understood it to have been expressed by Dhundia, contrasted
with that of Britain, Despite the apparent difference in military culture,
Arthur recognized that Marathe light horse units held the potential to
‘meet particular tactical shortcomings in British mounted operations.
‘The Dhundia Waugh campaign was an outstanding success for Arthur
Wellesley that culminated in a cavalry charge that killed Dhundia. And
despite it being Arthur's frst independent combat command, he had ac-
tively encouraged alliances with Maratha light horse units who joined

