66 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fr India

not composed of ethnic Marathas. Their religious as opposed to ethnic
‘entity underpins the observation that they and their officers were drawn
from a local military labour market by allied southern Maratha sardars
circa 1790.

‘The Mahratta infantry, which formed part of the retinue that attended the chiefs
atthe conference, i composed of black christians, and despicable poor wreiches
‘ofthe lowest cast, uniform in nothing bc the bad state of their musquets, none of
‘which are either clean or complete; and few are provided with either ammunition
‘or accoutrements, They are commanded by half-cast people of Poctugueze and
French extraction, who draw off the attention of spectator from the bad clothing
of ther men by the Profusion of antiquated lace bestowed on their own; and
ie there happens to be a few Europeans among the officers and men, which is
sometimes he cas, they execrate the service, and deplore thei fae

‘The Mabrattas do not appear to treat their infantry with more respect than
‘they deserve, as they cide through them without any ceremony on the march, and
‘mall occasions evidently consider them as foreigners, anda very inferior class
‘of people and troops.”

In the above passage several points are worthy of consideration with
respect to the British perception of the Marathas and the later course
of the 1803 Anglo-Maratha Campaigns. Dirom was quick to state that
these Topasses, whom he termed ‘black christians’, were foreigners’ to
the Marathas and their officers were ‘half-cast people’ of Portuguese ex
traction. This would tend to counter any attempts to generically label
all Maratha infanery as being composed of Hindu troops and Pathan
‘mercenaries. Italso negates any Hindu nationalist bid to portray this as
1 Hindu force fighting to nd the homeland of Tipu as a Muslim despot.
‘The identification of half-caste and foreign mercenary officers is di-
ecdlyin Keeping with mercenary recruitment in Maratha military culture.
[Note also that these Maratha troops were armed, as were most Maratha
infantry ofthat ere, with fintlock muskets.

‘What Dirom did not specifically establish for his readers was the or-
ganizational context of these Maratha troops. Although in fairness it is
‘ot certain that he understood what these troops represented within the
‘overall profile of Maratha infantry. These ‘despicable poor wretches! were
specific clan contributions to an alliance-generated Maratha war effort.
‘They were men sentby Maratha ‘chiefs’ such as Hari Punt and Pursheram
Bhau, experienced players within the South Asian military economy, who
knew better than to send thee personal guard or best troops. These were
expendable members of the military labour market inthe context of con-

|, tingenis sent by participating Maratha powerbrokers helping to meet
treaty agreements signed by higher Maratha political authorities. The
‘Marathas were reluctant to send their best troops to aid European alles,

British perceptions and the road to war in 1803, a

fof convenience. Who would tisk their finest mititary assets without a
sufficient reward?

‘Consistently Dirom spoke of ‘the Mahratta infantry’ or ‘the Mara
artillery’ as if they were each homogencous entities, or symmetrical mi
itary branches of service, analogous to a British Regiment of Foot or the
Royal Artillery2" Inadvertently Dirom was contributing tothe stereotyp-
ing of ll Maratha military forces. When we review the eighteenth-century
descriptions we should remember that Maratha military culture had ahis-
toric tendency to foster diferent types of military forces relative to clan
assets and prevailing conditions in the military labour market. Without
‘an opportunity to see other Maratha troops, scattered across India from
‘Tanjore to Rajasthan, Dirom could not be expected to give an accurate
assessment of all Maratha troops. Dirom was relaying a physically iso-
lated view of a motley Maratha clan contribution to the Anglo-Mysore
war effort. However, his comments passed into popular print as ifhe were
reviewing the entirety of India’s Maratha troops on parade. For all Dirom
‘knew this could have been a phantom unit brokered specifically fora par-
ticipation price ~ a troops-for-hire scam. In other words, a rag-tag group
hired on the military labour market with a fraction of the British funds
allocated to an allied sardar for troop procurement.

Dirom provided a description of the Maratha infantry’s shortcomings
in supporting Captain Little's attack on Tipu's forces at ‘Simoga’ on
29 December 1791. The Mysorian enemy was entrenched and their re-
pulse of the ill-prepared Maratha troops had a negative knock-on effect
‘with regard to the British sepoys.

Partof the Mahrarta infantry charged at imes, when they saw the enemy appeat-
ingtogive way, bue were always beatback, and recurned insuch disorder asgreadly
increased the dificulty in forming and leading ou sepoys; while the greater part
‘of thee infantry, or corps of 300 topasses, on being directed by Captain Linle to
advance, declared their unwillingness to take their share inthe action, and that
they had come out entirely unprovided with ammunition *

Several smaller Maratha clan armies were still recovering from leader-
Ship losses at Panipat thirty yeas earlier. There was nothing approaching
«national strategy for military regeneration and as indicated previously
there was no insttutionalized source of sardar training to ensure leader-
ship standards, which were apparently lacking at Simoga. Ifa clan army
was destroyed, then its ability to replace, retrain and reequip fallen in-
fantry might largely depend on disposable assets or the ability to procure
‘new funds through land revenue, borrowing or military annexation. The
lack of ammunition mentioned by Dirom may have been a logistical over-
sight, Yetit may also have been an indicator thatthe Marathas wanted the

