72 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

Tk was Arthur's belief that the Marathas could not use vast mounted
armies in the monsoon owing to problems he imagined they would have
in crossing rivers and so at that time he reasoned the Marathas were
lunable to fight effectively in the monsoon. The enemy light horse units
‘would presumably be stranded on islands created as the rivers rose and
‘turned into torrents which would isolate the Marathas in pockets of land
benwecn the rushing waters. He theorized that the British could advance
to these islands of trapped horsemen with marvellous scientific precision
using modern prefabricated pontoon technology.
‘There was ample historic evidence that the Marathas were accom
plished at crossing rivers and, for that matter bridge building. But Arthur
into his head that modern British military technology,
in the form of a pontoon tain, would prove a decisive advantage in
‘waging war against Maratha enemies. Ironically, Arthur Wellesley had
crossed the Wardha River on a Maratha military bridge in 1799 but he
had apparently taken litle notice of it. Lieutenant Lambton, who a
‘companied Wellesley on that journey, had observed how Maratha field
‘engineering made good use of fascines." Lambton recorded that they
crossed the river, ‘by means of a bridge made of Bamboos belonging to
the Camp, a very excellent contrivance. They are bound together fixed to
stakes driven into the bottom of the river, and covered with fnscines 3
Lambton noted the bridge was only three miles away from a battlefield
where the Marathas had used similar field-craft in a confrontation with
Haidar Ali in 1772. Haidar had selected an excellent postion protected
bby deep ditches designed to thwart a Maratha assault. But Maratha in-
fantry advanced under fire to fill the excavation with load after load of
fascines, Having established a bridgehead, they sent their cavalry across
toride through Haidars infantry who were exposed inside the perimeter
formed by the ditches. Lambton also remarked on the local rafis that
were made by lashing bamboo canes to large-capacity earthenware pots
(chattes).™ This method of construction took far les time than felling
wees of sufficient size and lashing them together. Lieutenant Lambton
and the young Colonel Wellesley had seen the seme sights but the two
had come away with different perceptions of the Maratha military en-
yironmen Arthur had not taken on board the fact that the Marathas
had a long history of military field engineering, Building bridges and
‘crossing rivers was never a problem for them historically and they had ex-

celled ait during their raids aimed at Bengal during the administration of
Baji Rao 1.

人
co

1

‘British perceptions and the road to war in 1803 B

rthurs British military culture was very much a pre-Victorian con-
eon that emphasized the need to find ‘scientific’ answers derived
through ‘scientific reasoning’. In this case we can detect elements. of both
ee oe
ER
ET
EC
‘ethnocentrically on the design and engineering principles of the great

rial Revolution. He wrote, in what became a series of letters on

EC
‘on the whole of the west side of India. If you send to England for them, or-
ders ought to be given to have them made very light.’ Arthur specifically
wanted copper vessels fabricated in England, That was ai modern Western
technological response to the apparently backward foreign military en-
‘vironment he faced. Boilermakers and copper sheet-metal workers were
‘on the leading edge of British technological advancement. They were the
mechanics of industrial modernization as the steam era depended upon
the boilers they made. The: ‘conquest of the environment through scientific
reasoning was indicative of a Western mentality that perceived industrial
‘output as synonymous with victory ~ the triumph of superior ‘industry in
‘an imperial setting. Later, when others failed to see his reasoning, Arthur
conceded that Indian-made pontoons would suffice.””

As we saw in chapter 1, the Marathas’ military culture was one that
looked to the immediate human and physical environment to yield tacti-
cal answers rather than to pronounce strategic judgements. The. Marathas
some means of crossing rivers. They may not have had copper Pontoons:
carried on cantilevered wagons, but then they did not need them ifhistory
of making oneself an unnecessary target’ for logistic interdiction. As war
approached in 1803, Arthur exchanged extensive correspondence about
sion with his own theory, Arthur flooded official channels with reports:
dealing with every aspect of pontoon construction, logistics and deploy-
ment. ‘I wrote the memorandum upon the subject of the bridge of boats
‘early in April, as soon as I saw a probability of a campaign in this coun-
‘try... The rivers will fill between the 14th and 20th of June, and at that

*

