74 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

time we ought to have the bridge in order to be able to carry on the war
in any style." However, there were several major flaws in his monsoon
‘strategy. Had anyone thought this through to the point of asking: what if
there should be a monsoon failure? There was also an unforeseen prob-
Jem with independent chlian entrepreneurs inthe South Asian military
‘economy. Small boats and ferries were found along many waterways and
for a price the craft and their operators could be procured. How were they
‘tobe taken out of the picture? And then there were those often-overlooked
‘questions regarding the Maratha military tradition, Ths ‘nation of preda
tory horsemen’ was, in reali, adverse collection of profesional soldiers
‘many of them being accomplished monsoon fighters and tacticians with
infuntry-relevant experience in military field engineering.

‘The view from Bengal

In reviewing Arthur Wellesley’s military observations on the Marathas,
‘one becomes aware of a regional bias in his reporting. That is not to
denigrate his experiences or cast aspersions on his wellintended words
concerning the nature of Maratha warfare. It js just that his personal
‘combat experiences prior to 1803 were drawn from the southern half of
the subcontinent, He had no first-hand experience in fighting Sindia's
‘regular corps’ or dealing with the type of fortresses that dotted the
Gunga-Yamuna Doab in the north. His limited theatre experience is im-
portant in trying to reconcile the different emphasis that existed between,

his writings and those of his brother Richard Wellesley, whose govern-
‘mental machinery was based in Bengal. As Governor-General, Richard's
focus was ied to a broader view of India's as wel as Britain's strategic
security, To great extent that meant Richard's concerns revolved around
‘Caleutta in Bengal asthe East India Company's ‘in-country’ nerve centre.
‘Without presupposing that all the BIC's rivalries were economic rivalries,
bby vireue of the fact that this was a merchant company with imperial as-
pirations let us consider why Bengal had an economic as well as political
interest in what the Marathas were doing in the Do
In 1803 the Gunga-Yamuna Doab was still sen as one of South Asia's
‘most highly coveted economic regions. It had, since Vedi times, been
the economic breadbasket of India; a cornucopia in the sense that it
was more than just a source of grain andlor cash to be extracted in the
form of taxes. The Marathas could threaten the area with the resumption
of large-scale chauth raids as had been done decades earlier during the
\gdministration of the ffog Baji Rao But by the 17903 Mahadii Sindia
Ndseentatsucherewopde poly war counerroductv inthe Dea
‘A marginal opium-poppy-growing area in Bihar, a desert entrepot in

British perceptions and the road to war in 1803 w

Rajasthan a fshing village in Konkan, could all be forced to pay chauth
“The amount of tribute money they begrudgingly handed over and the
regularity with which they could be milked varied considerably owing
to prevailing local conditions. However, the Gunga-Yamuna Doab held
‘greater potential and a faster turnaround time as a renewable revenue
resource because of the regularity and predictability with which food
crops could be grown, taxes assessed and then collected. It was known
for the cyclical dependability thathad been used to build classical empires
like thote seated at Kannaui.” The food crops, as commodities, held a
dual value to military powers like the Maratha. In times of war entire
fields of grain could be writen off aguinst tax ledgers, harvested, stored
and finally shipped by banjaras to keep vast armies in the field. Or the
crops, accepted as payment in kind, could be sold on the spot market
to provide cash that could be directly spent on military endeavour. But
there was a certain economic sense in permitting the inhabitants to grow
their crops, sell them and pay their taxes, so that those tax revenues
‘could be collected in cash from the zamindars (landlords). Why not let
those middlemen expend their energy on individual cultivator collection?
“The economic and tax-generating predictability of the region had been
historically consistent"?

Ne Maratha leader in 1803 could hope to reinvent himself as a Shivaji
figure, meaning no Maratha sardarin 1803 could rise to become a warrior
king. But then Shivaji even at the peak ofis political and military power,
‘could never lay claim to the Gunga-Yamuna Doab. The great Shivaji had
to seek political accommodation with the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb,
‘Was there not greater wealth, and arguably greater politcal power as well
48 prestige for a clan leader like Daulat Rao Sindia to be the puppet
‘master of the Mughal Emperor? As long as Sindia served as the Mughal
regent, whether by official appointment or de faco military staru his clan
‘ould lay claim tothe control of Delhi the Doab and the Emperor him-
self. That meant the Marathas held greater political legitimacy than the
British in North India. Shah Alam If was portrayed in numerous British
reports as evoking the utmost sympathy from those officers and dign-
taries who visited him. Having been blinded by the Afghans during an
eartier captivity, living a pitiful existence on a niggardly Maratha pension,
the old man allegedly had only the joys of poetry to sustain him between
the rare visits by genuine well-wishers. If Richard Wellesley wanted to
in support from London for a campaign against the Marathas in 1803,

+ 27°4, 797+; Ada Kana, Kenouge, Canouge. The seat ofa great empite under Harta
in the seventh entry
"Aka Shah Alum

1

