84 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘message to those Maratha leaders who despised the Treaty of Bassein.
{fthe Marathas would not fll into line behind their Prime Minister, the
British were poised to attack them.

For their part, some of the British officers on the march were still trying
toreconcile the political process with the military reality of their situation,
‘Was it wise to support such a weakling as Baji Rao If and would it not be
‘better to abstain from involvement in these ‘native disputes’? At the very
least one might consider staying out of the situation until the on-going
‘Sindia-Holkar rivalry had weakened one or both to the point of making.
this task easier. James Welsh proved remarkably frank in hi assessment
and admission:

‘Very much in the dark with regard to Indian politics, we had naturally concluded,
that as we came to suecour the Peishwa, his fiends would be our friends, and
his foes our ikdies opponents; but here we reckoned without our host for he
‘man we were now to attack was not Holkar who had deposed him, but Scindiahy
‘who had upheld him, and acrualy suffered adefeat near Poonah in he causel
Having never troubled my head with the inricacy of state affairs, Ihave never
learned the real cause ofthis wat?

Few British officers had yet to form a first-hand opinion ofthe Pig
«asa military ally. However, asthe days pessed on the march to Pune, more
‘of the Peshtsa’s men joined the column. To the chagrin of Wellesley and
his staff, not all ofthe Maratha horsemen under the Feshua's General
Gokale looked like gentlemen.> Some had served in the EICS native
cavalry and been discharged, but a number of others were obviously in-
dependent Maratha light horsemen accompanied by pindaries who had
ridden and plundered for various masters in the past. Gokale himself
hhad annoyed the British in 1799 by plundering on the Mysore-Maratha
frontier! Money, as is often the case, was the great fixer. And while
the arrangement with Gokale was no more extortionate than many con
tracts within the South Asian military economy, it was on a grand scale
that challenged British commitment to ‘stay the course’ If one did not
agree to seta price forthe services ofthese Maratha ight horsemen they
‘would leave the alliance and plunder the lands of anyone they chose to
including their own Feskwa.® Many increases in pay allowances were jus-
tified with the rationalization chat it was cheaper to retain these dubious
‘Maratha horsemen at an inflated price than deal with them as pindaries
if they were released from service, The threat of leaving Britsh service
became the new cash cow for Gokale and his cronies, effectively sur-

\ Passing the rewards of chawh rads. Ie made some ofthe young British

\foldiers uneasy to think that there was no visible means to distinguish

* Sindia ws. Holhar in he Bane of Hadespar fought outside Pune in 1802.

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803 85

the light horse auxiliaries of Holkar or Sindia from those of the Peshtea,
‘What did the enemy look like? What did an ally look like? How could
‘one tell the difference? John Blakiston described how the column's
military as well as civilian stragglers became prey for the Maratha pir
daries that he called the ‘Looty Horse’, noting them as ‘semi-thieves and
semi-soldiers'?

As the grand procession inched closer to Pune, the handiwork of
Holkars forces was evident from the large tracts of land that had been
burned. Famine was to prove a particular problem inthe dryness and des-
lation of Maharashtra in 1803.8 The countryside was a tinderbox and
the danger of fre was so great that Wellesley banned smoking cheroots
for fear that their careless disposal could spark a grass fire that would
liminate the meagre amounts of fodder that remained standing 9 The
British ‘Army of the Deccan’ was logistically dependent on bullocks to
carry its food supply as the lengthy column snaked its way along. But
there was so litte fodder growing that Wellesley’s men were forced to
feed those animals thatching from the roofs of deserted houses." The
soldiers’ hellish impressions of the countryside were confirmed at the
end of a day's march when they found temperatures inside their tents ss
high as 120 degrees Fahrenheit!"

‘At that time Holkars forces, under Amrut Rao, still controlled Pune
and they threatened to torch it rather than have it ocupied by the pup-
pet Pig and the British.'? That Holkar thought so little of Pune as
the Peshea's ‘capital is reflected in the fact that he had no qualms about
‘burning it to the ground. As the British column plodded on during the
third week of April 1803, intelligence reports arrived which stressed that
the destruction of Pune was not an idle threat and thatthe cost in human,
‘economic and politcal terms was too high. Cavalry were dispatched with-
‘out infantry in a dash to Pune to save it from destruction, Holkar’s forces
under Amrut Rao withdrew to avoid being drawn into a holding action,
‘which would have given Wellesley’s main infantry force time to come up.
By staginga strategic withdrawal from the region, Holkars forces avoided
dragging their leader into the war that would soon be declared. In a care~
fully orchestrated event, the Peshwa entered the city on 13 May 1803 with
Arthur Wellesley's escort.

“The cavalry dash to Pune was the stuf of romantic novels but militarily
itwas of no consequence tothe outcome ofthe war, ‘Saving’ Pune, as part
ofthe British effort to restore the Peshzo's authority in 1803, had prop
ganda value. The city’s loss would have been a politcal embarrassment 10
an interventionist guardian whose role included upholding the props of
their ally. The puppet regime's symbolic retention ofa traditional polid-
cal centre meant something to the identity of the ‘old order’, but where

