96 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fr India

inhabited in the 1803-4 census.” The district records for Ahmadnagar
reveal that between 5,000 and 6,000 people died of starvation in 1803,
‘An emergency-feeding programme, rushed into operation by Arthur
‘Wellesley at Ahmadnagar, was reckoned to have saved 5,000 souls, Many
of those refugees had flocked in from out-Iving districts. They were keen
to accept manual labour assignments in exchange for the grain that
Wellesley generously offered as payment. It was a mutually beneficial
relationship in the South Asian military economy. The Major-General
needed to strengthen the fortress and the refugees needed to eat If they
had been paid in cash they would have had litle purchasing power in
local bazaars where hyperinflation hed caused grain prices to skyrocket.
With their help Wellesley restored the damage tothe fort and then had a
lacs built around Ahmadnagar to augment the existing fortifications.
Seeing that there was little to be gained by leaving their light horse-
‘men in the area, Sindia and Bhonsle ordered their men to pull back and
regroup north of the Ajanta Pass.® From there the pindaries could be
‘put to better use in screening the movement of Maratha infantry moving
south as well as raiding Wellesley’s communications and logistical lines.
‘The arriving pindares told about their encounters with the British, Sindia
then decided to commit his infantry regulars to bate since light horse
tactics were proving increasingly ineffectual. However, with the move-
‘ment of Sindia’s regular battalions south ofthe Ajanta Pass there was no
turning back. Asearly as July 1803 Barry Close, the British Resident with
the eg at Pune, had written to Collins, the Resident with Sindia lay-
‘ng out the scenario for main force engagement. ‘I cannot but adhere to
the opinions which [have communicated to the Hon'ble Major-General
‘Wellesley, namely, that ifSindia venture to pass the Ajunta Gha he ought
tobe attacked by the combined forces under Colonel Stevenson. **

‘The march to Assaye!

‘The spirits of Wellesley's sepoys sagged as they marched further into the
interior. Their particular mission was now fully transformed into a'search
and destroy’ operation aimed at the ‘Maratha enemy’. But the only signs
of opposition were fleeting glimpses of pindaries who made life miserable
by harrying the army on the march. While Wellesley’s despatches paint a
picture of Arthur as logistical genius, Elphinstone’s letters make it clear
that by mid-September 1803 the Marathas’ pindaries were able to prey
effectively on the Major-General’s foraging parties. They even had the

\

・ Ameisnkor dope devi of eve forthe mem
120+, 7584 Aka Aj, Ast

‘The Decean Campaign of 1803 7

audacity to rob 250 of Wellesley’s Mysore horse while foraging ~ disgrac-
ing them by relieving them of theit mounts. The incident underscored
the inteligence vacuum in which the British operated. Elphinstone
‘mitted he did not know where Sindia forces were but that the pindarier
presence suggested the main enemy force could not be far away

‘The sepoys of the Madras Presidency, under Wellesley, were far from
the comfort oftheir South Indian homes. The supply of ‘Mangalore red’
and brown rice, dispatched through the Bombay Presidency, was nour-
ishing but not appetizing to those accustomed to white rice."" Steven-
son and Wellesley’s correspondence noted a particular quest for basmati
white rice. An ‘alien’ diet, a hostile environment ~ several discouragi
clements combined and morale suffered, The regimental order books rr-
vetled an increase in cases of uneuthorized absence before the Battle of
‘Assaye. The growing proximity of major confrontation apparently did
Jinde to encourage any devotion to duty, Arthur Wellesley presided over
the court martial of several Madrassi troops for desertion. Shaik Daud
of the Ist Company, Ist Battalion of the 10th Regiment Madras Native
Infantry (1/10th Madras ND), was one of those sentenced by Wellesley
to be shot.”* This most drastic of sentences was not to be ruled out de-
spite a shortage of trained men, Wellesley apparently considered it ag 8
valuable lesson in discipline to his remaining troops, one that outweighed
the value of a handful of sepoy lives. Mohamed Ishock, who served with
‘Shaik Daud, deserted berween the nights of 9 and 10 September 1803,
‘Wellesley could have sentenced Mohamed to death under the Articles
‘of War, but the General ‘et him off with a mere 1,000 lashes. It is no
wonder that the British soldiers, both Indian and European, feared their
‘commander as much asthe enemy. It was this type of motivational factor
that contributed to their amazing performance at Assaye 7

‘After Sindia and Bhonsle had united their infantry and cavalry forces
st Bhokardan* on 21 September 1803, their campsites dotted the land-
Scape as far away as Jafarabad to the east. In the meantime Arthur
‘Wellesley’s forces had linked up with Colonel Stevenson on that same
day sr Bednapur Wellesley and Stevenson had decided to maintain the
separation of ther forces and act in concert as they moved north in par-
allel fashion to effect a pincer movement designed to bring the Maratha
‘ain force to battle on 24 September. In accordance with this plan, the
yo British officers set off on the morning of 22 September with Steven-
son's detachment taking the ‘left’ while Major-General Wellesley and his
‘men took the ‘right’. Wellesley’s path, and at times it was literally that,

*20°4,75°4, Aka Bokendun. 1Ai Budnapur, Budnapoor Budnapore

