98 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

was intersected by & low belt of east-west running hills tapering off to an
undulating plain in Bhokardan District, northward 一 above his position.”

‘On 23 September Wellesley proceeded to Nalni* having putina lengthy
‘march of 21 miles that day. Some authors say that two banjaras were then
intercepted on their way to sell grain in the Maratha camp, And that
pon questioning they revealed that the combined armies of Sindia and
Bhonsle were much closer than Wellesley had thought. Other sources
hhave it that the Major-General was surprised to receive information from
his harkarrahs that the Maratha main force was camped at a location be-
lieved to be only 6 miles away. This intelligence failure may have been the
result of an inaccurate cultural reading of the greater South Asian mi
tary enwironment75 Arthur Wellesley erred in counting on the harkarrahs
‘who had travelled with him up from Srirangapatnam. It was not that they
‘were unqualified but the fact that they were from Mysore that rendered
them worse than useless for the purposes of obtaining local covert
telligence. They spoke an alien language and could not travel without
attmcting unnecessary attention. Being regionally distinct southerners
they were immediately identifiable to the Marathas, as glaringly distinct
from the local population as any Europeen It was easy for Maratha sym-
ppathizers to feed the Mysore harkarraks disinformation since they were
‘quickly spotted as Wellesley's men’. This forced him into relying on local
hharkarraks whom he did not know."®

“Twenty-four-year-old Mountstuart Elphinstone, who served Arthur ia
the triple capacity as Marathi interpreter, secretary and EIC executive
intelligence officer, provided some of the most revealing comments.””
His observations are crucial to our understanding of the tactical intelli-
sence failure in the Decean.”® Elphinstone's correspondence reveals that
he agreed with Wellesley in that both men fet they had been saddled with
an ineffective and dangerous policy in the form of the harkarrah system.”
‘The ‘native inteligencers’ brought with the army from Mysore were a
liability in the Maratha country.” To make matters worse, Elphinstone
sed some spies supplied on the recommendation of Colonel Close’s
Brahman advisors in Pune. These men filed to infiltrate the inner work-
ings of Sindias camp, being relegated to the menial work of grasscutters,
and it was feared at least one was hanged as a message to others. Elphin-
stone commented that he thought these spies were especially selected “for
their stupidity." But Elphinstone was also part of the problem when it
‘came to the failure of Arthur Wellesley’ fcld intelligence. Eiphinstone
‘had found it much easier to understand the Hindustani" language he had
1 20°4, 75+, Aka Nava, Nelae, Nabi, Nu

! Kdented by Colebrooke asthe language we have come to know as Urdu a opposed to
the modern Hind,

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803 9

originally encountered in North India during his first years in India, His
fallback or contingency language was ‘Moors’ (Persian) while Marathi
yas his weakest language, which he spoke with great difficulty in 1803.
By his own admission his study schedule called for only spending one
‘hour a day on intelligence, two hours a week on Persian and four hours a
week on Marathi; hia ‘most troublesome appointment’ was the one hour
1a week allocated to being ‘Interpreter of all tongues’. He later confessed
to Strachey:

‘knowing tht I must interpret, whether well or ill, and not having much anxiety
about my reputation as a Hindustanee T interpret quite coolly and have the wse
ofall my senses and all my language. But my stock of Hindi is really coo small.
Teannot readily understand all thac is said to me, much less say all that T ought
to express. I mean in taking 19 Mahrattas, which is my common employment, 1
‘even find a dficulry with Deckanee Mussulmans, Theit words, their song, and
er phrases aes dierent fom the Hindustani of Grit that eof
‘use to mes!

‘An exasperated Wellesley, dealing with harkarrah disinformation,
‘would later write: ‘Allow me to assure you, my dear Sir, that these hie-
carrahs are not to be believed: they never bring any intelligence that is
‘worth hearing, and when they circulate their false reports they do infinite
‘mischief to our cause. I shall be obliged to you if you will be so kind as
to desire your hircarrahs to confine their reports to yourself." Blakiston
thought it unlikely that one could get the ‘truth’ from a paid professional
source intelligence sysiem thet rewarded the delivery of information per
se! The system, once adopted, was fraught with hazard, General Stuart,
in-C of the Madras army, warned that it might be unwise to discharge
any of the harkarrahs, after the British had retained them, as they had
seen the internal workings ofthe Deccan army atthe staff level® The
‘arkarraks, a supposed intelligence asset, held the potential to become
‘an intelligence liability.

‘Although Captain Welsh was not present at the Bartle of Assaye, hav-
ing been sent to Ahmadnagar, he recorded a somewhat different version
of events leading to the ‘discovery’ of the Maratha army. He noted that
Wellesley's forces had captured two men on horseback. They revealed that
the Maratha ‘regular corps’ was camped nearby but the light horse units
accompanying them were preparing to move off. More startling was the
‘news that rather than being 12 miles off as Wellesley apparently thought,
they were only 5 miles away from him Wellesley saw an opportunity for
a pre-emptive attack that would be lost ifhe waited a day to link up with

* Gti was we at thane, athe BIC' standard ranulon dictionary and anal
に PTY

