90 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fr India

words, there was no edge’ or ‘catwalk’ inside the top of the pertal's wal
‘where you would have expected to find one. Wellesley advanced his men
in three columns of considerable size ro make athree-pronged escalade ?2
‘The centre column used their scaling ladders to gain the top ofthe 18-foot
high walls but this left chem exposed to a blistering aimed fire from the
‘Arab troops in the adjacent towers. Since there was no rampart, that
‘meant no footing or place to step onto once a British soldier had crossed
over the top of the pettah wall ~ just a straight drop down the other side
to the earth below. British troops scampered up the ladders but found
‘nowhere to alight. They began to bunch up as they reached the top of
the precipitous wall~ there was simply no clear forward objective. Welsh
recorded that Wellesley los fifteen men killed and fifty wounded as the
[British were driven back down the ladders and forced to withdraw under
fire. Five of those dead were officers and they had been killed in the first
ten minutes before their column's retreat ro safery. Wellesley’s enlisted
‘men had been wel served by officer leadership under fre but his officers
had been let down by poor intelligence.

Artillery fre support from the main fortress of Ahmadnagar directed
towards relieving those besieged in the pecah, caused a British artillery
clephant ro run amok in one of the other columns, which added to the
delay and aided the enemy's cause.» The men ofthe third column, which
included Welsh, then reasoned that the scaling ladders had to be planted
by one of the perrahs bastions as only a tower ofthat sort would provide
sufficient opportunity for the scaling partes to climb inside the walls. The
incentive to speed up the ladder was great owing to the accuracy of Arab
sharpshooters firing from the bastions. The almost comic aspects of the
incident did not escape Welsh’s observation. ‘Captain Vessey was then a
very stout heavy man; but what impediment, short of death, can arrest a
soldier at such crisis?” After some time two European companies had
gained access ro the town via the ladder up the bastion’s corner, but they
found themselves engaged in urban warfare as house-to-house fighting
censued with the defenders. A counterattack was made by a group of
‘Arab troops against the grenadiers of His Majesty's 78th Regiment but
they were repulsed and momentum shifted decisively in favour of the
British. The confused fighting in the close-quarters ofthe old town did
contribute to the friendly fre death of one British soldier as a party of
troops were trying to batter their way through a gate as theit comrades
were attempting to open it from the other side. Wellesey's casualties,
for the seizure of the petzah, were listed by Thorn as 30 killed in action

\ ana 111 sounded,» Grane DuEdifiredinsaying 28 ed and only 22
ounded but he did go to some pains to point out that 6 of the dead
‘were European officers." In other words, roughly a fifth or 20 per cent

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803 1

cof Wellesey’s kiled-in-action were officers, which did not bode well for
his ability to maintain command and control of his enlisted men in future
batdes _

‘Arthur Wellesley reconnoioed the main fortress on the evening of
9 August while some of his troops seized another minor outer works
within 400 yards of its walls” During the night a four-gun battery was
micdy assembled with the aid of Captain Johnson ofthe Engineers and
Captain Heidand of the Pioneers. The Maratha artllerymen on the fort's
wals fied illumination rounds or carcasses through the night These
projectiles continued to burn brightly after they fell to earth. They were
‘not intended as incendiaries in thi case but rather to light up the British
‘gun pits so that the Arab marksmen could snipe at the pioneers as they
jmboured to bring their batteries into service. As a precaution the British
posted additional pickets that night to thwart Maratha foot patrols prob-
ing the tnex Oe

‘John Blakiston noticed that British engineers operating in India evolved
their own field craft that did not strictly follow the accepted standard text
for arillery battery construction as evolved by Miller They expedi-
cently modified the European practices by incorporating the human and
‘geographic elements of the South Asian military environment. Blakiston,
an engineer himself, observed that the availability of human resources
in Indian war zones meant that many more labourers than usual were
‘employed in construction, with human chains being formed to convey
‘baskets of earth. This permitted some leeway in selecting the locations
{fom which construction material was obtained, based onthe relative ease
with which preferred types of sol could be extracted and conveyed. As a
esult ~or so Blakston believed ~ maximum efficiency was derived from
the engineer, asi was his expertise and not his muscles thet were taxed,
‘This efficient, hough by European standards unorthodox, utilization of
Indian ‘resources’ impressed Blakiston since it meant that an artillery
battery could be erected in as lr as one night. This was also facilitated
with the use of sandbags, previously issued as empty to the men, which
they filled in the feld for building hasty redoubts'

‘On the morning of 10 August 1803 Wellesley’ ery opened fr.
‘The British plan was to initially use aruilery to neutralize the Maratha
‘guns mounted on the wall that had been selected for breaching. Captain
‘Welsh indicated that there were approximately sixty pieces of ordnance in
total mounted along the walls and on the bastions. These ranged in size
from 12 to 52 pounders." The most noteworthy piece was the tower-
mounted Maha Lazmi,* a bronze gun that measured 22 feet in length

* Aka Mahalacni Mahaletchunes,

