86 。 The Anglo-Marathe Campaigns and the Contest for India

Were the retainers in the drama that was unfolding? To see the Pune of
1803 as the cultural, spiritual and political heart of Maharashtra is to
retrofit a vision that would warm Tilak’s hear.” But the Maratha ‘polity’
cof 1803 was very much a warlord state with fortified strongholds and
revenue sources well beyond the depleted heartland. Sindia’s standing
armies garrisoned a northern archway from Rajasthan to Awadh. That
‘meant the real war, for Britain in 1803 Indi, was far from Pune. The
‘Marathas knew that political and military value were two diferent things
in the priority ranking inherently found in pragmatic military strategy
Holkar and Sindia had claims on Pune that conflicted with those of the
Pasha, But Sindia nd Holkar retained identities and power bases outside
the city and its districts, The Pshwa was not so lucky — he was tied to
Pune and, regrettably for him, tied to the British.

‘Arthur Wellesley was compelled to make the cavalry dash to save the
‘ity 50 it could serve asthe stage for the fh performance in accor-
dance with the British script. The threatened burning of Pune and, more
symbolically, Wellesley’s bid to ‘save’ it were easily spun into a thread
that would be used to weave a rather mystical cloth, As in the European
fairy tale known as “The Emperors New Clothes, this covering was illu-
sory and the sceptics saw the Peshwa as politically naked. It was a fabric
that provided politcal cover only to those who would believe; such as
those who believed thatthe Fashwo's British escort showed commitment
to ‘restore a native situation’ that had spiraled out of control, When
Captain Welsh reached Pune, with Wellesleys force, he remarked on the
‘prosperity to be found, Welsh noted that Pune appeared ‘a place of great
‘wealth, and to concentrate all the trade of empire’. But beyond the trav-
logue observations, he had begun to question the veracity of the cover
story that he and his fellow officers had also been asked to accept as an
‘offical explanation. He said the wealth of merchandise on display in Pune
“seemed to give a flat contradiction tothe reports, which had induced the
General to make a forced march'

Far to the north, some of Maharaja Daulat Rao Sindia’s forces were
‘eported to be heading south across the Narmada River Although very
distant, some British intelligence sources judged the movement to be
4 posture that also threatened Pune. The British made ready in case
Sindia and Raghuji Bhonsle combined forces in an attack on the city.
If we look at the correspondence of political agents and senior soldiers
during May-June 1803, we see that there wasstilahope thata negotiated

NYA reference to Bal Gangathar Tiak the Martha Benin who advocated Maratha
Cultural revval atthe dwn of the twentieth crnmy
" Aka Nabad River, Narmada River

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803 87

settlement might prevail. However, negotiations did not halt the very
‘eal preparations for combat. Governor-General Richard Wellesley asked
Lieutenant-Colonel Collins, Resident at Sindia's court, to see what the
‘Maharaja's intentions were. When asked if he would offer opposition to
the Treaty of Bassein, Sindia replied that he would have to consult with
Bhonsle." This was deemed an inappropriate response. The fear vas,
that the request for consultation was a stalling tactic to buy time while
Maratha troop mobilization could be completed. The supposed proximity
‘of the Maratha forces to Pune was quickly being elevated asa reason for
1 pre-emptive British military action in the Deccan,

‘Arthur Wellesley and his army departed Pune on 4 June 1803 and
headed towards the medieval fortress of Ahmadnagar, which had figured
so prominently in Maratha military history. Sindia’s regular infantry in
the Deccan were thought to have been reduced to 10,000 or perhaps as
Tmany as 12,000. He accurately judged his holdings in the north to be
the real target of the war and had reportedly sent 4,000 to 5,000 of his
‘best troops from the Deccan, under Chevalier Dudrenec, to reinforce
his ‘Hindustan army’ that was already believed to number 16,000 to
17,000 regular infantry." Sindia and his remaining Deccani regulars were
believed to be at Burhanpur, a fort with a position that would allow them
the option of deploying against either ofthe British alles: the Nizam of
Hyderabad or the Peshtoa in Pune.'® But if the regulars were not to be
found in Ahmednagar, why di it merit target priority?

Tn many British accounts the advance is portrayed as a clever forward
deployment intended by Arthur to bring the greatest advantage if war
were to break out. To give the Major-General his due, he had become
something of a forward-planning specalistas evidenced by his drafts fora,
similar stance against Goa during the 1801 French invasion scare."” But
in truth there was more to ths plan than the input of Arthur Wellesley. The
British had been compiling an intelligence file on Ahmadnagar for months
‘and its target priority status was a foregone conclusion. Items such

ladders were ordered in advance of an anticipated escalade.
In Wellington’s Supplementary Despatches, there is a ‘Memorandum On
‘Ahmednuggur Fort’ dated June 1803 and attributed to Arthur Welles
Ie specifically mentions intelligence gained from ‘A man ofthe perth’.
‘The pettak was the walled village that lay outside the fort beyond the
‘moat.

Ahmadnagar was Sindias possession but it was not a primary offen-
sive threat to the British. Ahmadnagar held potential in British plans that
sought to guard Pune while projecting power further into the Deccan. It
‘was a logistical target that, ifseized, could serve multiple purposes in the
British strategy of containment. Firs, it was a well-fortified stronghold,

