88 The Angio-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fo India

which could be used for the storage of vast quantities of grain and war
‘material if one had the capital and supply networks to deliver such com
modities in a famine year like 1803. Second, a well-provisioned Ahmad-
nagar would lend itself readily to British efforts to defend and pacify
the Petha’s as well asthe Nizam’s territories. Asa base for counterinr
surgency operations against pindaries and light horse unit, it was ideal.
Pindaries might prey on banjara convoys headed for the fort. But they
‘were powerless to roust out an infantry garrison with defensive artillery
support. Third, it would make an excellent staging area for operations
simed at cutting the Deccani link in the historic Maratha invasion routes
leading to North India, The routes led from Pune to Ahmadnagar to
Aurungabad, from Aurungabad ro Burhanpur through Malwa to Agra,
‘At Agra they entered into the Doab where they picked-up the link to
Bengal via the old Grand Trunk Road.*? Fourth, ifthe Maratha situa-
tion became an all-out war, Ahmadnagar was a defensible position where
British field units could rest in relative comfort while they recovered from
the toll disease, climate and Marathas inflicted upon them.

Daulat Rao Sindia had wisely refrained from extensively garrisoning
Ahmadnagar with his ‘regular corps’ because they held the potential to
defeat British infantry in combat on an open battlefield. He realized Ah-
‘madnagar’s strategic strengths were not without tactical shortcomings.”
‘Sindia knew that it would be a waste to station his best ‘southern’ brigade,
under Pohlman, in a fortress where they could be cut off and starved
into submission. And Perron, as Sindia's C-in-C, was not about to send
any more troops to the Deccan while the riches of Hindustan were at
stake. Using spies in Sindia’s camp, Lieutenant-Colonel Collins was
late able to confirm to Governor-General Richard Wellesley that Sindia
‘had received intelligence ofthe design of the Hon'ble General (Arthur)
‘Wellesley to commence an immediate attack’. In the absence of a full-
time gatison from the ‘regular corps’, Ahmadnagar’s main defence force
‘was composed of 1,200 Arab mercenaries. The ethnicity of those mer-
Ccnary (oops was not in the least bit unusual in the context of the South
‘Asian military labour market. Arab mercenary troops had been a regular
feature of Deccani armies, at leas since the sixteenth century, and they
‘were sil to be found in service with the Nizam of Hyderabad as late as
1908." Arab mercenaries had a good reputation as marksmen skilled at
aimed fire using their own particular long-range matchlocks They were
also known to excel at defending fortifications. While viciously capable
on defence, those in Ahmadnagar- without supporting cavalry actingin a

Noe ‘ole featuring aggressive patrolling and logistical interdiction —
could easily be surrounded and their supply lines cut. Too much of
Ahmadnagar’s defence hed been left to the thickness of its walls rather

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803, 9

than a proactive defensive strategy using combined operations in the syle
‘of Shivaji or his father.

‘Word ofthe failed diplomatic negotiations with Sindia reached Arthur
‘Wellesley wt Walki* on 6 August 1803. The British force bad camped
there, en route to Ahmadnagar, to wait for a break in the monsoon rain,
‘which happened to be unexpectedly heavy at that dime Sindia and
Bhonsle failed to ether support the Treaty of Bassein or withdraw theit
troops from what were deemed to be sensitive areas. Some EIC officials
thought Sindia would sue for peace at the final moment. But there were
great cultural differences in threat perception. If Sindia “backed down’ it
would sead the wrong message to his old rival Holkar. And as we shall
see later in this study, appeasement of the British was detrimental tothe
balance of power within Daulat Rao Sindia’s own durbar.

‘Confident that ll his supporting troops were in place, Archur Wellesley
ordered his army's offensive deployment to commence against Sindia
on 6 August 1803.” Siege planning had been completed and Wellesley
and his force arrived at Ahmadnagar on 8 August just as a leter re
questing surrender was delivered to the forts kiladar' (commandant).
‘The proposal was refused, as was a subsequent offer of protection tothe
peuah outside the fortress, i it were to accept occupation. The 1,200
1o 1,500 Arabs in the pettah were by then supported by a body of some
3,000 ‘Marathas' according to Captain Welsh. Presumably the later were
“Maratha lighthorsemen who were noted by others as havingbeen camped
‘berween the town and the fort, but they soon dispersed.” Captain Thorn
of the 25th Dragoons, who was not in attendance owing to his pres-
ence in the northern theatre, was alone among the veterans of the war in
saying a bacalion of ‘Scindiah’s regular infantry’ were encamped with the
horsemen.”

‘Arthur Wellesley set his plan in motion with an initial atack on the
petah, It would provide ideal cover and concealment for the second stage
of operations, which would be the actual siege of the fortress itself. The
story of the brief struggle for the petah is often accompanied by aquo-
tation attributed to the previously mentioned Maratha General Gokale:
“These English are a strange people, and their General a wonderful man:
they came here in the morning, looked at the Pettah wal, walked over
it killed all dhe garison and returned to breakfast! What can withstand
them?" Bue in fact the asaule was not that simple and it got off to a
‘rather bad start. Nether field reconnaissance nor covert intelligence had
‘revealed that this particular pettah had been constructed (or some un-
known reason) without a rampart behind its exterior curtain wall. In other

+164, 74%4. Aka Walker, | Aba quar

