92 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

and delivered a 17-pound ball. Once the guns had been silenced, above
the location selected for attack, the process of weakening the walls with
sustained fre could begin, But the firing soon caused the fort's klladarto
‘request a cease-fire for negotiations. However, Arthur Wellesley refused
‘cessation of the bombardment until hostages had been delivered to the
British camp."

‘The surrender was timely asthe British were short on ammunition for
thei breaching guns and no one had worked out how to attack the fort
with scaling ladders that were too short for use inside the forts dich
‘There was also the crucially underreported problem of how to plant them
successfully in what was estimated to be ten feet of water. Wellingtonians
continuously downplay the depth and historic water capacity of the ditch,
which was obviously underestimated inthe June 1803 "Memorandum'
Sulfice to say Major-General Wellesley saved a great deal of time and
«effort by falling back on a much more traditional means of attaining
‘goal a negotiated financial secdement. Arthur was learning that virtually
everything of military value hada price in the context ofthe South Asian
military economy.

‘On 12 August 1803, the Maratha forces in Ahmadnagar capitulated to
the British and the garrison marched out. Many ofthe 1,400 troops took
plundering about 70 miles from Ahmadnagar where they were involved

{nan action about a month later at‘Kurjet Koriagoum’.** Maratha histo-

rian G. S. Sardesai wrote thatthe orginal commandant was a European

who had been bribed and defected at the commencement ofthe British
awack.*” He further stated thatthe fort's Brahmin hiladar had no choice
but to seek terms of capitulation. Jadunath Sarkar, relying on the ex
tensive Marathi-langunge records in dinhanik Leth Sangraha edited by

Khare and Khare, added some detail. ‘In Ahmadnagar fort there was

an Englishman in Sindhia's patan; he turned tmi

fort to Wellesley. The quiladar, Mathar Kulkarni of Chambhargonda,

‘made terms to save his own property.” “The two battalions in the garri-

son turned disloyal, The English seduced the arillerymen, hence there

was treachery." In an interesting postscript Sardesai wrote that the
es fag was then flown over the fort to conceal its ‘foreign con-
quest’. Regardless of which version of events one chooses to follow —

British or Maratha ~ it should be remembered that it was the petiah

tt Ahmadnagar and not the fortress proper that fell to Wellesley by

cescalade.
‘The los of war materiel in Amadnagar wasa blow to Sindia's Deccani
\ infanry units. But the fortress also held one ofSindias ‘palaces’ stocked
‘With luxury goods such as silks, satins, furs, cash, telescopes and ‘two
electrifying machines'.® The abundance of goods proved too much of «

t

“The Deccan Campaign of 1803 3

temptation for Wellesley’s troops and looting broke out. Caprain Welsh
had posted European sentries to prevent just such an occurrence but they
oo joined in the orgy of plunder. Arthur Wellesley had seen this type of
‘behaviour before when Tipu’s capital ofSrirangapatnam fell Hisless than
sympathetic but obviously biased attitude towards re-establishing control
‘was evident inthe general order (GO) he issued. ‘A troop of native cavalry
tobe sent immediately to drive all the camp followers who are down near
the fort of Ahmednuggur back into camp, and to prevent any more of
‘them from going towards the fort. The troop above ordered sto cut down
any follower who does not instanty retire to camp.” This makes it quite
clear that native troops under his command would be used to summarily,
‘execute any South Asian camp followers who disobeyed the order to
disperse. The same GO continued in a moralistic tone: ‘Major-General
‘Wellesley is convinced that there is no good soldier in this detachment
‘who would ingtinge this capitulation . . . and he will punish with the
‘utmost severity any person who may be found plundering in the fort of
Ahmednuggur 只
Wellesley then personally ordered two sepoys to be hanged in a bid
to regain control of his men and leave no doubt, regarding discipine, in
their minds.® Welsh, who as an EIC officer sympathetic to his Indian
‘comrades, noted in his work, ‘two of our Native soldiers were instantly
seized and hanged, in the only gateway, in terror; though the Euro-
peans escaped’. Major R. B, Burton's 1908 offical Intelligence Branch
account of Wellington's campaigns quotes an eye-witness to the hanging
1s saying: ‘a measure which it must be confessed created some disgust
at the moment, but which, at the outset ofthe campaign, was perhaps a
necessary example forthe sake of discipline, and a proper indication of

the British character for justice and good faith’.

“The fortress was now to serve as an EIC administrative centre as well as
1 military post. Captain J. G. Graham was appointed as the Collector of
Ahmadnagar District that held some ofthe Sindia clan’ oldest traditional
revenue-producing lands, which predated the clan's hold on the Domb.%
‘Armed revenue-collection units (sebundi) were quickly dispatched to the
dependent constituencies, which were to be considered as immediately
within the Company's jurisdiction.™” The for’ grain and foodstuffs were
highly valued owing to the soaring market prices that prevailed in the
famine districts. While some of the forts military stores were directly
incorporated into EIC inventories others were doled out to the Peshwa
and the Nizam to relieve equipment deficiencies that they suffered. Arthur
Wellesley also made sure that artillery officers fixed a ‘valuation’ on the
captured Maratha cannons so that his Deccan Army's prize fund could
be fattened.

