94 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

‘After having garrisoned Ahmadnagar with loyal troops, Arthur
‘Wellesley led his army across the Godavari River." Wellesley headed north
towards Aurangabad! while Colonel Stevenson and the Nizam’s Sub-
sidiary Force was stationed at Jafarabad! northeast ofthe city. The object
of their actions was to intercept the Maratha light horse units that had
entered the Nizam's territory.” Daulat Rao Sindia and Raghyji Bhonsle
had sent their pindaris south after penetrating the Ajanta hill range. The
‘Maratha horsemen slipped easily between Stevenson and Wellesley who,
although they had worked in tandem since the days ofthe Dhundia Waugh
campaign, had trouble coordinating their movements on anything but the
‘most rudimentary of terms. Arthur Wellesley heard criticism about this
‘division’ or splitting of hs forces for several months. Several experienced
veterans considered i a foolish risk of command and control capability
in a land notorious for poor communication as well as deficient inteli-
gence. Thomas Munro, among others, thought it imprudent to divide an
army that could conceivably become engaged and defeated on a piece-
‘meal basis. With almost prophetic timing, Wellesley’s tag-team partner
found himself scurrying ro ascertain enemy light horse postions. Having
‘been outflanked, Stevenson became tied down in fending off the preda
‘ory attacks by Sindia’s pindari foragers who sought out EIC convoys to
sustain thei rapid and light-footed thrust into the region. ?

‘Wellesley reached Aurangabad and received reports about the Maratha
‘movements to the southeast. He feared they would cross the Godavari
River, which he now realized was easly forded by any number of means
during the diminished monsoon of 1803, Once across the river the light
horsemen could make s rush towards the Nizam’s capital of Hyderabad.
In anattemptto reposition himself between the Marathas and Hyderabad,
Wellesley dashed south tothe Godavari again and hugged the north bank
ss he followed the river eastward in his advance to contact. Mountstuart
Elphinstone, a key member of Wellesley’ staff, expressed optimism in
his private letters that Hyderabad would be saved from pindarit. But he
also knew there were reports that Sindia had fresh infantry somewhere
in the Deccan.*! Was this really just as Arthur had predicted, a nation
‘of predatory horsemen who melted away under the pressure of a sus-
tained drive? Arthur Wellesley’ aggressive patroling tactics limited the
Marnthas' pindari option. The Marathas returned to a position north of
Jalnapur.' Grant Duff, who had unprecedented access to the Maratha
papers of the Bombay Presidency as well as interviews with many of

人生 nh
Pry emg ee
Rey atm Mil

‘The Decean Campaign of 1803 95

the campaign's veterans, indicated that Sindia and Bhonsle were not in
‘agreement on srategy Lacking relevant military experience against the

British at the theatre level, the two Maratha leaders seemed torn over

the type of resistance to offer There were allegations that Sindia pre-

ferred regular infantry engagement yhile Raghuji Bhonsle supposedly

favoured more ‘predatory’ mounted dperations. Ths was a perfectly log-

ical division of opinion reflecting the respective strengths ofeach Maratha

leader.

(One additional benefit to Wellesley’ southern movement was the pro-
tection of two convoys of grain and treasure sent to Ahmadnagar by
Lieutenant-General Stuart from Mudgal.“® Pindar survival depended
‘upon mobility, which often meant freedom from cumbersome convoys,
of Banjara grain merchants, When opportunities were lost to plunder
enemy convoys it meant that food and fodder had to be plundered from
the villages in the area. However, like many parts of Maharashtra, the
small villages here were often constructed with stout walls. In several
instances pindari looting hed alienated the local population and civil de-
fence had emerged as a by-product of cyclical plundering. Local resis
‘tance could wayly the rapid sweep of horsemen ifthey succumbed to the
temptation of trying to take fortified village. But if pindaries wanted to
take a sebundi-defended walled village they needed artillery. The smaller
bbands of Deccani pindaries travelled ight most of the time, with nothing.
larger than smallarms or the odd camel gun. This meant they had to skirt,
fortified villages, as it was too risky to waste time and energy on defended
hard targets. A well-directed fire from sebundi served to deter half-hearted,
‘efforts. Captain William Thorn noted the degree to which popular resis
tance had become galvanized when he wrote: ‘the spirit ofthe people was
generously roused against them, and their parties were in many places
defeated by the peons, or ireguler infantry, stationed inthe different yi に
lages for the collection of the revenue' Major John Malcolm saw the
evolution of fortified towns in a philosophical ight. He reflected on their
prevalence in a Deccani environment plagued by predatory horsemen
and commented: ‘Every evil produces its own remedy."

‘Local villagers were loath to surrender the meagre crops they had har-
vested. Years of campaigning in this area by Sindia and Holkar meant
there were no surpluses. To resist meant the possibility of mutilation
‘or death, but to surrender food supplies during the famine of 1803,
‘meant sure starvation for the entire village. The famine was so severe
that it depopulated portions of the region. In the taluk (subdivision) of
‘Nevass, in Ahmadnagar District, only 21 villages out of 180 were listed as

64, 76.

