100 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘Stevenson. Better to risk an immediate action against the unsuspecting
“Maratha infantry that o hesitate in such a manner that would allow their
light horsemen a chance to interdict Stevenson's approach and thwart any
[British union of forces. If Arthur opted to withdraw, the light horsemen
right block his line of retreat and force him to go to ground in an un-
favourable location not of his choosing. The real threat in that scenario
was not the Maratha horsemen but the danger tha it would allow time
forthe Marathas to reposition their infantry and guns. Wellesley placed
his baggage and stores in the town of Nalni and after posting a bea
fon of sepoys and 400 additional men from the native ranks to guard the
baggage, he set off to engage the Marathas.

Wellesley apparently believed that if he did not go on the offensive,
at that moment, then he risked losing the opportunity for victory and
inactivity would certainly jeopardize the safery of his force. If he went
into defensive stance in the town of Nalni, while wating for Stevenson,
the Marathas might simply withdraw northward into the Ajanta range. If,
on the other hand, Wellesley were to lead his entire force out to engage
the enemy, and try and hold them until Stevenson arrived, he risked
exposing an elongated baggage train ro the depredations of the pindarie.
Similarly, if he were to try and withdraw from the area, his rear guard
and slow-moving baggage column would fall prey to the Maratha horse
that would seek a holding action until their artillery and infantry could
bbe brought up. In that regard, Wellesley’s decision to leave the baggage
guarded was a logical move intended to increase his mobility and reduce
his target profile

‘The Marathas knew Wellesley was inthe vicinity but Marathi sources
indicate Arthur’s decision to fight came as a complete ‘surprise’.
‘Sindia’s men did not think Wellesley would attack until the following day
(24 September). Previous Maratha intelligence reports, delivered carlier
‘on the morning of 23 September, indicated Wellesley’s advancing move-
‘ments as well as Colonel Stevenson's location. The Marathas had made
* decision not to take immediate action. The Maratha high command
‘assumed that their English opponent would not attack with such small
‘numbers, which were the result of Wellesley having split his forces with
‘Stevenson, Surely the logical British move was to wait until Stevenson
and Wellesley had rejoined their forces. Only a madman would risk an
‘engagement of this magnitude with just one-half of his total available
force. The Marathas had further reasoned there was additional mere in
Waiting until Stevenson and Wellesley were reunited because then they
could be finished offin a single battle that would make the job easier. The

rathas were correct in reading the dictates of preservationist logic, but
incorrect in assessing Arthur Wellesley’s fear of failure. His name and

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803 101

reputation were probably worth more to him at that moment than his
Iie. Arthur had suffered a great loss of face among EIC personnel for a
failed night atack in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War (1799) while he was
still a colonel. He had come away from that experience a true believer
‘one mode of action when facing a South Asian opponent attack, atack,
attack, His belief in the need for immediate offensive action was Further
confirmed by his memories of the Dhundia Waugh campaign where his
‘opponent had narrowly escaped at the river and Dhundia’s death had
only been achieved with a dramatic cavalry charge. At Assaye in 1803,
we see Arthur Wellesley as the champion of an offensive battie strategy
that demanded a direct infantry assault on Sindia’s regulars and theit
‘guns; it stands in stark contrast to his later performance as the Duke of
‘Wellington at Waterloo in 1815.

‘The standard story has it chat Wellesley rode out and stopped some-
‘where about a mile south of the Kailna River to view the Maratha
encampment that stretched before him.” If one considered all the
‘Maratha light horsemen, camp followers, logistical personnel and auxil-
jary pindares, it could be said to have stretched for upwards of 6 miles.
‘But the time had come for Wellesley to deal with Sindia's regular infantry
and that portion ofthe camp was fairly compact and readily recognizable.
Bhonsle's forces were positioned nearer to the centr ofthe Marathas' ex
tended camp and they were largely superfluous to the action that was
about to unfold.” Sindias ‘regular’ or sepoy battalions had selected
‘2 camp area at the eastern extremity of the main position. They were
readily identifiable by appearance, demeanour and separation within the
‘Maratha camp line. This battle is often said to have pitted Wellesley
against ‘the entire Maratha army’, but this action focused on what was
the main force threat ~ Sindia’s sepoy battalions. They were nestled in
the fork formed by the Kailna River and the Juah River! which both ran
roughly west-to-east.

‘Wellesley and his men reached the site ofthe Maratha camp at Assaye
about one o'clock in the afternoon. The components of Wellesley's
force were listed as 1,200 European and native cavalry combined, 1,300
European infantry and artillery, as well as 2,000 sepoys, The total of
the force under Wellesey’s command, as listed by Wiliam Thorn, was
approximately 4,500 men.? Thorm account, which often passes as an
official history, states that Sndia’s regular battalions were under the com-
‘mand of two French officers, named Pohjman and Dupont!" Jadunath
Sarkar, echoing the research of many before him, listed Pohiman as a

* Ala Kai River, Kaima River Khaima Riner 。 Aka oak River, Juha River
" Appursnly hie reference to Dutch Captain john James Dupan

