118 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

‘of a disagreement jn opinion. Some of the British officers had said the

fair-skinned mercenary was French but Mounstuart Eiphinstone thought
jrmore likely he was Persian or even a Mughal mirza. Now he stumbled
‘cross the corpse again. Elphinstone’ peculiar sense of romanticism per-
‘meated his letter on the horror ofthe battlefield: ‘The Persian I mentioned
was perfect everywhere, and had his great quilted coat on; but is face had
fallen, or been eaten off, and his naked skull stared out like the bermits
‘of the wood of Joppa (in the “Castle of Otranto”)."®

“The order to establish the field hospital at Ajanta did not go out until
six days after the battle." Assessing che wounded was a gruesome affair
with iage being conducted by the superintending surgeon. His evac-
uation recommendations were based on considerations of who would
best survive the move to Ajanta field hospital and not on the criteria of
who needed more sophisticated medical care. The removal of the first
297 wounded from the battle zone did not begin until 1 October, more
than a week after the barde.!5 The hospital itself was quickly organized
with the staff surgeon’s servants being pressed into service. The pioneers
sent twenty of their men to help unload the wounded. The 1/10th end
2/12th Madras Native Infantry were each ordered to furnish a man to
serve dressing wounds. Madeira wine was to be used for medicinal pur-
poses and authorization was granted to purchase 120 botles at public
expense, Having each unit donate one tent, for every ten casualties they
sent, provided the shelter necessary to create the field hospital."

In response to emergency requests for more surgeons General Oliver
Nicolls, commanding office ofthe Bombay military forces, forwarded a
proposal tothe Bombay military board that they passed immediately. The
Bombay Presidency was short of European surgeons so a decision was
‘made to send two Indian medical practitioners of Portuguese extraction.
‘The medical board approved and sent Manuel De Cunha and Francesco
Dias. They were to be given a month's advance in pay at an established
rate of Rs. 60 per month each.'5? The feeling was expressed that even if
‘heir medical skills were not up to a European surgeon's standards, they
‘would be useful in dressing wounds given the volume of casualties and
‘he need to frequently change dressings in that climate

‘As early as May 1803 Arthur Wellesley had been formally advised that
‘any major action by European troopsin the Deccan would generate prob
tems. Alex Kennedy, staf surgeon to the Nizam’s Subsidiary Force that
served under Colonel Stevenson, hed sent a prophetic ‘Memorandum’ to
Wellesley." “The desertion of dooly Bearers, an unlooked for increase
‘of sick by keeping he feld during the Rains, or, having a number of men

\ wounded, might render the establishment of afield Hospital absolutely

necessary - Cloathing, Wine, & European medicines are indispensibly

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803 19

necessary, and if such Emergency is deemed at all probable, they ought
to be provided for before hand.’ Kennedy's warning about preparing for
the Right of dooley bearers was spot-on. The majority of Wellesley’s doo-
ley bearers, whose job it was to carry off the sick and wounded, came
from the Bombay Presidency. Those dooley bearers, who served with
European troops inthe Army of the Deccan, found their work constantly
‘exhausting. Europeans were more likely than sepoys to get sickand owing.
to the tendency of British officers to lead with European troops, their
combat casualties were proportionately greater. As the dooley bearers
began to desert in droves Arthur Wellesley wrote to the Bombay govern-
‘ment seeking a remedy to his plight. For their part, Bombay govern-
‘ment officials turned the matter over to the police with instructions to
apprehend al fugitive dooley bearers.'® But the Major-General’s prob-
Jem went from bad to worse with the desertion of 230 dooley bearers in
just two nights. This gave Bombay Presidency officials cause to question
‘Wellesley’s methods.'*" And it eventually produced an investigation of
the matter by the Bombay military board.'®?

Since there was a shortage of dooley bearers, eight bullock carts were
pressed into service from the 4th Madras Native Cavalry and the 1/10th
‘Madras Native Infantry. This was not an easy decision to make since the
heavily loaded carts, with thei lack of suspension, meant that the ride
‘over the primitive road would be bone jarring, This had been among the
‘considerations in selecting the comparatively healthy wounded to be sent
to the hospital. Some officers opposed the use of ‘wheeled carriages’ be
cause it wms felt they clogged the roads in such a way that they were a
security risk to armies on the march."® Nearly 100 other wounded men
‘were individually loaded, tied or draped across bullocks and sent to the
hospital! An influential body of eighteenth-century British army s
gons favoured smaller regimental hospitals rather than larger collective
hospitals because of the danger of infection and disease posed by higher
concentrations of sick and wounded men.'® Arthur Wellesley’s medical
staf reflected the greater professional division inherent in the question:
‘what does it mean to send a man to hospital? Some viewed it as standard
procedure while others viewed itas a death sentence.

“The medical disaster generated by Assaye seemed to drag on forever.
More than eight months after the battle wounded sepoys were just ar-
riving in Bombay from the Deccan. Some European survivors, including
‘wo men of the 19th Dragoons and forty-one disabled soldiers ofthe 74th
Regiment, were sent to Panvej in June 1804, almost nine months éfter
the battle. They were then taken by boat for admission tothe hospital in

mh お AB Fameh

