102 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India,

Hanoverian. The Marathas were reported to have had sixteen battalions
of regular infantry composed of Pohiman's 6,000-man brigade, Duponts
‘brigade of2,500 men and four battalions ~ belonging to that most capable
of female military lenders the Begum Sumru ~ which added 2,000 more
men, Welsh stated that a number of Maratha ‘orderly books’, which were
later captured on the field of batde, indicated the Maratha regulars num
bered 10,800. There were also Sindia’s iregulars and the troops of the
Maratha artillery park. Last, but not least, there were by most estimates
30,000 to 40,000 ircegular light horse and pindarierin the area stretching,
from Assaye to Bhokardan, Despite the temptation to dismiss the later
figures as exaggeration, the numbers were indeed arainable in that re~
gion and the Maratha force is usually rounded off to a figure of 50,000
‘Maratha troops of ll descriptions.% We should, however, remember that
‘troops’ is a generous description as some pindaries were mounted horse
‘minders who held ‘loot ponies’ to carry away the spoils and they were
never destined for combat as such 7
‘Arthur Wellesley briefly summarized his opening moves:

‘Although I came forin frat oftheir ight I determined wo smack thet ey a8

the defen of thei coms of infantry was most key iobx effec accordingly

‘marched round othe left Hanh covering the march ofthe nina of nny

tye cya cee tedty tea dew ed ret
fan

Sindia’s battalions were occupying what some have termed a ‘tongue of
land! or we might say a small doab tapering into an eastern terminus (>).
should have been a tactical advantage to have the Juah as the northern
camp boundary and the Kailna to the south. Looking southwards from
the Marathas’ vantage point, the left or eastern-most end of the Maratha
line seemed safe enough since it was protected by the village of Assaye.
Arthur Wellesley spotted the hamlets of Pipalgzon and Warur adjacent
to each other near the point where the rivers joined, which was off to
his right as he looked in a northerly direction. This was to the enemy's
far left as they were facing in a southerly direction watching Wellesley's
approach, Arthur supposedly reckoned there was a safe means of crossing
the river at that point owing to the closeness of Pipalgaon and Warur ro
each other, so he directed his men there.

In surveying the battlefield during the third week of September 1990, I
took note of the riverbeds, depth of water, historic postion of the village
foundations and physical evidence of high-water marks. Indeed some
buildings may have been closer to the water in that era as indicated by

* Aka Ppulgao and Wnt

“The Deccan Campaign of 1803 に)

sbandoned foundations. But as late as 1990 they still seemed perilously
‘lose to the water for such ‘rolling to fit? terrain and that testifies to
these streams not often being raging torrents in monsoon season. And
we know that 1803 was a drought year. Many secondary sources indicate
the riverbanks were too steep and this was the only place Wellesley could
hhave crossed. That is incorrect. I made it a point to walk the banks of
both rivers - above as well as below Assaye ~ entering both the Kailna
and the Juah rivers at more than one place, crossing and recrossing both
rivers by wading through water thot varied from knee to waist deep in
some holes, The banks of the Kailna certainly were generally accessible
for men and horses although if crossing with cannon the fords would be
fewer.”

Te would seem Welesley’s crossing point atthe hamlets wes quite log-
jcal for another reason, which is blatantly obvious once you actually see
the site, Wellesley’ angle of approach was critical to concealing his exact
intentions purchasing time to bring his men up and perhaps, most im
pottantly, denying the Maratha arilley a clear sight picture for aiming
purposes. He could never have survived a direct northerly drive across the
fiver head-on into Sindia’s infantry. It would expose his entire column
to Maratha artillery fire, in effect concentrating dheit target for them.
‘While a parallel linear approach from the south would necessitate cross-
ing the river on an extended front, a guaranteed disaster for coordinating
the command and control of an assault line. Moving trained men across
the parade square on-line is relatively simple buton the broken irregular
ground ofa watercourse it would mean regrouping after crossing, halting
tnd standing in formation on the enemy's side ofthe water, and waiting
while the lin reformed. The on-line crossing of watercourse was also to
be discouraged in the presence of enemy cavalry who could move through
waist deep water with ease on horseback. Even if they did not kill a man
fon the fist pass, being knocked down into the water would jeopardize
the immediate serviceability of a soldier’s musket and paper-wrapped
cartridges.

If Arthur Wellesley's force stood a chance of beating Sindias regulars
it was imperative to get across the water and onto the small doab, winding
up beside Sindias men on the same turf. Then, and only then, could
he begin tactical manoeuvring in earnest. If you walk the approach and
wade the river you can see he was doing the only thing he could ~ he
‘was placing as much concealment as possible in the Maratha line-of-

sight before advancing his force. The hamlet structures of Pipalgaon and
‘Warur, barely mud walls with thatched roofs, would offer scarcely more
than partial concealment for a force of 4,500 men. If the Marathas had
‘opened up with 24 pounder iron round shot or 5.5-inch howitzers fring

