116 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

‘with the bayonet on the Maratha line, Gilng with a renewed puirpose.
‘And, aif spent of energy and purpose, Sindias last line of resistance
melted away. Sporadic explosions continued to puncture the air for
hours as the Marathas had boobyrirapped their abandoned ammunition
tumbrels by leaving lengths of slow match burning among the pow-
der charges." Some fugitives crossed the Juah but many slipped off
to the west. Not all the Maratha infantry units present were engaged
in the heat of combat and Wellsly’s men saw numbers of survivors
form up with other non-combatants and move off in good order. The
Bish infantry, both sepoy and European, had prevailed over one ofthe
finest acillery forces of the era. As we shal seein chapters 5 and 6 there
was a particular explanation forthe collapse of Maratha resistance and
‘morale. Combined British casualties (European and native) were later
listed in oficial records as 428 killed in action, 1,138 wounded in ac-
tioa, and 18 missing in action." This meant total British casualties of
1,584 out ofa force of approximately 4,500 - whichis how one arrives
atthe conclusion that Wellestey’s victory cost him more than one-third
(25.2 per cent of his force. Maratha losses were reported as an uncon-
firmed 6,000; however, that would include casualties among their camp
followers and those Maratha wounded who were bayoneted by Wellesey's
men.

The aftermath

Wellesley's men were too exhausted from their forced 21-mile march
and three hours of intense combat to pursue the retreating Marathas. In
hindsight it was probably a prudent move since the thousands of Maratha
horse still lay beyond the field, capable of isolating anyone who advanced
to far without support. A number of the bacles eyewimess authors
were wounded, including Blakston who was hit wice during the action.
He received a graze on the wrist and was hit in the abdomen with such
force by a piece of “spent grape’ that it knocked him to the ground
and left him breathless." The 74th Regiment had been subjected to a
high concentration of anti-personnel rounds such as canister shot and
rape shot as well asthe horror of chain shot. Other members of the
unit had been cut up by Maratha horse and then ‘ridden over’ by the
19th Dragoons. Blakiston recounted the horror of seeing what Maratha
tulwears could do. Thee sharply honed blades possessed a keen cutting
«edge that dramatically contrasted the shortcomings of British swords and.
their scabbards.

* Slow match wat a fem of slow burning ue often ue for tine delayed ignition.

“The Deccan Campaign of 1803, ut

(On passing over the ground where the 74th and piquets had been engaged, the
‘carnage was deeadful, and the wounds inficted by the swords of the enemy's
cavaley were such as I could have no conception of. This was the only time 1
fever saw heads fairly cutoff. Such a thing could not be done by our cavalry
swords in their usual state; for, however good the material may be, the constant
drawing in and out ofan iron scabbard soon blunts the edge; whereas those of
the native horsemen, though seldom of such good stuff as our, by never being
dnwn except for use, ofr the purpose ofbcing cleaned, are capable of inicting
‘wound ten times the depth, particularly when applied in the drawing manner
‘usally practiced by he Indian swordsmen.

“The accumulative slaughter inflicted on the 74th Regiment resulted in
their being struck from the roster, Elphinstone reckoned they had lost
‘exactly 400 killed and wounded. "Tt ceased to be an effective unit until
replacements could be found and the walking-wounded could be nursed
‘back to health.!® Bur there had been no shortage of bloodletting on
‘ther side. Blakiston had spoken earlier of the necessity of bayoneting
the Maratha gun crews to ensure they did not rise again and evidence
indicates the Maratha wounded were dispatched in the some way to a
Jarge extent HT While in terse words Elphinstone admitted: ‘No prison-
cers were taken." The British wounded lay where they fell and were
scattered about the batlefield. Four days later officers were sill rying
to account for their men and decide whom to send to the field hospi
tal once it was established." Captain Welsh would later remark: “The
barde of Assaye had collected all the birds of prey in the country, a few
following the army, and the rest taking possession ofthe inheritance left
them, by their kindest benefactor, man, on the field of battle." Ironi
cally Sergeant Swarbruck, who gave personal testimony as to riding over
the Wounded ofthe 74th Regiment, became one ofthe wounded lft ying
‘on the battlefield. Fortunately his stay on the ground was only a day and
hhe wrote:

parties was Sent fom each Regiment 1o pick up ther kiled and wounded. Some
lay 2 and 3 days before they were taken up. I am very sorry to say I had the
misfortune to lose my right leg in the charge and my horse kiled from under
mc. And left to the mercy of the fild for 24 hours without any assistance of 2
Surgeon.

But at least Swarbruck was alive, Dead Maratha sepoys littered the
field and Elphinstone made reference to most of them being ‘stout
Bengalees’. Ten days after the battle Elphinstone rode back and noted
the Maratha dead still unburied: ‘Some of the dead are witheréd, their
features still remaining, but their faces blackened to the colour of coal,
others still swollen and blistered.’ He then came across the body of a
dead Maratha mercenary officer, which he had noted previously because

