104 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Context for India

explosive shell, there would have been no effective protection from the
hamjers mud walls, But protective cover and visual concealment, as most
infantrymen know, are two different things. And in trying to make the
best ofa bad siruation, Wellesley was cooled-headed and correct in optin
for every advantage of visual concealment he could find; anything to
“reduce his men's target profile was a good idea. Wellesley could have
‘crossed in several locations but it would have made much more tactical
sense to use the screen provided by the hamles of Warur and Pipalgaon,
‘The late Welingtonian author Jac Weller took a reasoned approach to
providing us with some idea ofhow bg target Wellesley’ force presented
before he reached the critical river crossing. ‘A cohumn of six anda half
battalions moving on a front of half companies at quarter distance with
fourteen guns would have been more than 1,000 yards long, probably
about 10 yards inanareaike this." is known, from other examples
in this bare ma well as later in this campaign, hat Wellesley’s men made
‘use of irregularities inthe ground to provide cover and concealment while
waitin

‘Wellesley by this time was a seasoned veteran of river crossings in
India there was certainly no need of a pontoon bridge here. He knew
that the natural tendency of troops about to wade into a watercourse is
to slow down as they enter the water cautiously in order to “fee” their
footing underwater. Those who follow tend to press forward faster than
their brethren can traverse the obstacle, with the result cht theres con-
siderable bunching-up. Keeping one's interval has been a concern since
the age of classical warfare and the problem was accentuated with the
introduction of artilery as clusters of men numbering in the hundreds
make pardcularl attractive ‘area targets.

‘Contemporancous Marathi sources indicated that the Maratha army
‘was not expecting combat that dy, let alone that moment, and some el-
ements were not bate ready." The long-range field and siege artillery
‘was sill imbered when ‘Wasli Sahib' attacked. Although Wellsly’s
‘harkarrahs were liability as noted, Marathisourceshave been cited which
concede an equal ntligence failure on the par of Sindia's and Bhonsks
‘men. They were caught unprepared to move the big guns while their a-
tillery bullocks were out grazing.'"? The surprise approach by Arthur
Wellesley left them able to bring only 80 to 90 of their guns into ser-
vice, with the larger cuibres remaining limbered and therfore unavail-
able for immediate response as the actack begun. This would mean that
25-33 per cent oftheir firepower, 30 to 40 of the later estimated 120

ce, were not used in the action, Jadunath Sarkars analysis also im-
ed that morale in the Maratha ranks was extremely low owing to pay
ing far in arrears and much hardship being ited by the Famine.

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803, 105

He interpreted the Marathi records as saying the Maratha troops were
‘starving’ and in such a state of mutiny that they threatened Sindia’s dean
with personal violence. Some units were apparently quite prepared to sit
‘out the battle in a form of military labour protest. Sarkar went on to say
that despite claims of Wellesley facing ‘myriads’ of Marathas, he only
directly confronted five batalions.'™ Certainly there isa discrepancy be-
‘ween the number of South Asians found in the intially detected extended
‘Maratha camp and the number of ‘enemy troops’ who actively engaged
Wellesley.

‘The Maratha gunners were not going to let Wellesley cross the Kailna
River unopposed and they opened a distant harassing fire, which was
probably intended to slow Wellesley while the Maratha infantry formed
‘up. Owing tothe distance and nature oftheir British target, situated in the
‘undulating clfis ofthe stream bank, they initially loaded iron round shot
‘or, as they are popularly known, cannon balls, which held the potential
of skipping if they grazed the ground. The object was to drop a grazing
shot right among Wellesley’s men. The Maratha artillery crews lobbed
4 few opening rounds towards the ford between the hamlets. As tuck
‘would have it, some of the first cannon shot found their mark. As one
‘annon ball gazed in, the rebound distracted the men who ducked. They
looked up to see Wellesley’s Brigade-Major Campbell knocked from his
horse by a hit in che leg. Moments later another Maratha cannon shot
scored a devastatingly hideous psychological victory. Wellesley and his
immediate staff were supervising the river crossing. The next incoming
round missed the General but it decapitated Wellesley's dragoon orderly
ashe tarred inthe streambed ofthe Kailna between the hamlets of Warur
md Pipalgaon.'™ Some ofthe English authors insist the round was from
an 18 pounder although that is not substantiated by Maratha accounts
that say theirheavy guns were still limbered. The estimation of calibre may
have been based on the magnitude of horror that the round inflicted -
‘but the skull offers litle resistance to cast iron moving at a velocity of
500 feet per second and the damage could have easily been done by a
smaller field gun. The sight of the headless dragoon haunted many: ‘the
body being left kept its seat by the vase, holsters, and other appendages
cof a cavalry saddle, it was sometime before the terrified horse could rid
himself ofthe ghastly burden’.1°5

By entering atthe eastern or narrowest end of the battlefield, Wellesley
‘was positioning himself in such a way as to funnel the Marathas towards
bis men if they should attack. It was the most confined section of the bat-
Alefield and at aright angle to the original Maratha deployment, which
was an east-to-west line parallel to the Kailna River. This meant that:
(@) he stood a slight chance of ‘rolling up’ the Maratha line from the

