114 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

down, Ifthe British got in too close to hit with cannon fire then the gun
hhad to serve as a defensible obstacle against the horsemen. Lieutenant
‘Alexander Grant, while serving as Colonel Maxwells Major of Brigade,
misjudged the speed and stopping distance of his mount. Grant went
hurting forward trying to skewer a Maratha gunner only to find his horse
tightly wedged between the muzzle and a wheel of a Maratha cannon
1s it dscharged.! Captain George Sale engaged another member of a

‘or spear ‘with
Sindias artllery-men were armed’. A second Maratha assailant climbed
‘top the gun and thrust at the mounted Sale, The result was a diagonal
‘wound across the chest as the blade was deflected by Captain Sales er
‘mum. Sergeant Strange, near ar hand, saw the action and rode to Sale's
rescue using his sabre to run through the captain’s Maratha opponent.
‘But in leaning out and extending his blade the sergeant exposed himself
to danger and another Maratha artlleryman, sheltered under the gun,
thrust a spear upward into Srang abdomen."*

‘An undetermined number ofthe Marathas were eventually driven from
the vicinity ofthe artillery line ‘wit great slaughter’ down the riverbank
and into the Juah.!™ The British cavalry splashed through the water-
course and cut their way through the Maratha fugitives who had fled the
line to seek safety on the northern side ofthe Juah, The cavalry pursued
‘many on the other side but their efforts met with mixed results, Although
they would later be credited with saving the day, they had lost consider-
able numbers themselves. Command and control had broken down badly
by the time they reached the opposite side ofthe Juah, Maxwell’ horse-
‘men came dangerously close to going too far and they risked being cut
offby the Maratha light horse thot waited jut further tothe north ofthe
riverbank." Maxwell began to callin his horsemen on the north bank
of the Juah in an attempt to regsin control.

‘Maxwell pulled his men back across to the south side ofthe juah River
tnd regrouped near Assaye. Several authors have made much of the fact
that although there were thousands of pindaries on hand they did not
charge forward to assist the Maratha infantry or Maratha cavalry. But
fone must remember this was not the manner in which pindaries fought
‘or were used and in this case they were deprived oftheir traditional role.
Pindaries excelled at harassing and interdicing convoy lines, spreading
‘confusion among armies on the march and performing general recon-
naissance. They were not known as the type of mounted troops to at
tuck well-formed infantry ~ a role more closely associated with regular
‘cavalry. Nor were the pindares ever intended for direct frontal charges
against heavily armed European cavalry carrying a sabre and a brace

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803 05

of pistols. So in this case we should not make too much of the pin-
daries meldngrofF on the periphery. The thousands of pindaries were of
‘minimal use in this type of combat scenario; they could not effectively
charge Wellesley’ cavalry or his infantry. By leaving his baggage under
heavy guard at Natni, Wellesley had wisely foreseen the pindaries’ role
in the Maratha order of battle and deprived them of suitable tactical
employment.

‘Arthur Wellesley now had to restore order in the central sector of the
battlefield where his men had been trapped in a crossfre The Maratha
gun crews at that location had committed what many of the more chival-
rous British officers considered to be an act of treachery in feigning
death, Wellesley ordered the 78th back to the Maratha artillery position
they had fought through, approaching from the west while he, leading
‘members of the 7th Madras Native Cavalry Regiment, approached from
the east. ‘The Marathas were eventually driven from the guns or bayo-
eted on the spot and resistance crumbled as Maratha stragglers made
{or their fllback position on the second line along the Juah. It was ar
‘that point that Wellesley had his horse Diomed piked from under him in
‘the struggle ro take the Maratha guns a second time." He remounted
and issued new orders. The 7th Native Cavalry were posted with the
recaptured enemy guns to prevent them from being carried off by the
‘Marathas.

‘The British infantry in mid-feld were to reform and march northward
sa single ine to meet the remaining Maratha forces who stil held their
fallback position along the Juah. Maxwell was to advance at the gallop
from the east in an attempt to break the enemy's left. But Maxwell's
approach was met witha shower of grape and canister shot which proved
‘extremely accurate. Maxwell was pierced through the body in several
places. One projectile was believed to have struck his right hand or arm
‘with such violent impact chat the limb was jerked perfectly upwards from
his body in a seemingly deliberate hand signal that those immediately
‘bchind him recognized as the command to halt. The bulk of the dragoons
that followed hot on ther heels could not stop fast enough and in this
chaos they did not charge through the Maratha line but veered parallel to
itas Maxwell fell gom his horse dcad.! What was to have been the final
‘eat British cavalry charge at Assaye degenerated into a lethal ride past
the muzzles of the Maratha artillery as the dragoons turned, leaderless,
southwards after having been raked by yet more canister shot from the
Marathas."?

‘The conclusion ofthe battle from that point was judged to have been
inty anti-climactic by British witnesses. The British infantry advanced

