|

N

120 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

Bombay.” Many of the badly wounded men were amputees and a con-
siderable number sil hed ro be fed by attendants. That was an expense
‘many could not afford on their own, far from home and drawing only a
disability wage. Asa result, Major-General Wellesley ordered that these
poor wounded men, both European and native soldiers of the Madras
Presidency, should be granted their field pay while in Bombay but, in a
‘cost-cutting move to save the Bombay Presidency the expenditure, it was
to be charged against the Madras Presidency.

‘Money was always an issue uppermost ina soldiers mind. After
‘many had joined the EIC’s army for a chance to earn increased batta or
a share in the legendary riches that supposedly followed successful cam-
uigns such as that against Tipu Sultan in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore Wat
Cf1799. But during the 1803 Maratha Campaigns the EIC’s legal ad-
visors were ofien kept busy ruling which spoils of war could be taken as
plunder and which had ro be disposed of through the process ofthe prize
fund, There was a rivalry between the Company's and the King’s troops
‘over how much prize money they would get. The Bombay Presidency's
legal advisor Mr J. M. Thriepland had to rule twice on what consti-
tuted prize vs, plunder during the invasion of Sindi’s port of Broach.'
“Plunder in that case was deemed to be the items which soldiers carried
way, while ‘prize’ money was to be composed of funds derived from the
sale of military stores and goods which were not readily transportable,
such as old or obsolete artillery. The lengthy decision was difficult and
the legal report noted that it was not uncommon in previous wars to draw
these distinctions ‘before taking to the field’. Afer the Batle of Assaye
some Europeans hed sought to withhold cattle that they had taken and
not reported, Alex McKay of the King's 78th Regiment was charged with
plundering after cate were found in his possession, Wellesley sentenced
‘McKay to 200 lashes but later he served notice that any man found guilty
cof plundering would be put to death.”

Much of the European plundering at Assaye had started innocently
as souvenir hunting, but it got out of hand. The 19th Dragoons had
been thrown into such disarray by the ferocity of the action that much
of their valued equipment laid scattered on the field of honour. Pistols
and swords were highly prized mementos and eventually an inventory
ad to be conducted among the infantry to see how many trophy seekers
‘were in possession of contraband," Several of Wellesleysinfanrymen
hheld kt plundered from their own cavalry and so they were permitted
the benefit of an amnesty during which they could turn in illicit booty
without punishment. Charges of plunder and theft may partially explain
the obsession with wils and the presence of witnesses atthe disposal of
dead officers’ effects as often found in EIC records and diaries.

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803, 12

Breaking the Deccani chain

‘Accurate and immediate tactcal-evel intelligence, as opposed to strategic
theatre-level intelligence, was a continuing problem for Arthur Wellesley.

‘The Begum Sumru's sepoy battalions, who hed accompanied Sindias
regulars to Assaye, escaped the battle unscathed and in the days that
followed there was a great deal of concern over their exact location.
‘Both Sindia and Bhonsle still had significant quantities of infantry and
horsemen of various descriptions numbering in the tens of thousands.
Four months earlier, Lieutenant-Colonel Collins - usually a wealth of
information on Maratha troops ~ had told Wellesley that Bhonsle had
ten battalions of infantry commanded by ‘Native Officers’ with thirty-
two pieces of arillery.'”? A Maratha sepoy survivor was brought in and
he confirmed that at least ten to twelve pieces of Sindia’s artillery had
‘been carried off the field at Assaye and the British feared the Marathas
‘were about to consolidate the forces who had escaped the bcte. Colonel
Stevenson's harkarrahs reported a surviving campoo had been joined by
another campoo from Burhanpur.'” That would have made sense if there
was a Maratha consolidation of forces, but then Stevenson's harkarrahs =
having dogged Sindia and Bhonsle since the day after the bate ~ reported
thatthe two Maratha leaders held a final meeting on 29 September 1803
before parting company."

‘Wellesleyhad pushed his men in high temperatures and they had proven
more than capable. But having suffered severe casualties, it was wise
to conserve effort until the next opportunity to challenge the Maratha
infantry clearly presented itself. Wellesley reckoned that the Marathas
had three military options: (a) stand and fight, (b) move offto menace the
‘Nizam’steritory, or (¢) move to cut British communication and supply
from Surat to the west. Arthur could try and second-guess Sindia and
Bhonsle but it was impossible to pursue them effectively with his army
fa weakened condition. What ifthe Marathas had split up? Casualties,
among horses and men of Wellesley's cavalry, meanthe did not have all the
‘mounted resources thought necessary for an immediate active pursuit of
Sindia and Bhonsle." The Maratha light horse and pindaritroops would

pursuit before his troops were up ro strength. There were, however, other
local targets that ried out fr his attention. Burhanpur and Asirghar were
part ofthe historic Deccani chain of forts that included Ahmadnagar.
Asirghar was now worthy of consideration as a secondary logistical
centre since Ahmadnagar had been seized earlier. india was said, by
Colonel Stevenson's hankarali to be headed towards Burhanpur with a
large campoo, fifteen guns and two howitzers, but exact troop strengths

