108 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India.

‘At the same time that Sindias sepoys formed their front line facing.
Wellesley on a north-south axis, additional Maratha infantry and guns
formed a second line, or fall-back position, running east-to-west, This
second Maratha line had its eastern-most end anchored at Assaye and
faced south so the men had their backs to the Juah river. The Marathas’
two newly formed perpendicular lines met roughly at Assaye as a ninety-
degree pivot-point, not unlike the way doors pivot or ‘swing’ on a hinge.
Wellesley, seeing the way the Marathas’ primary north-south line tr
versed the small doab, was forced to merge his wo infantry lines into one
{ong line to face the Marathas in such a way that would deny them the
opportunity of out-flanking him on the northern end of the battlefield
beside the uah River. The Madras Native Infantry (1/10th, 1/8th, 1/4th,
2/12th), so often omitted from the Eurocentric renditions of the bate,
‘were posted in the centre section of the British line. The concept was &
British line running south-to-north composed of native infantry in the
centre with European or, more specifically, Scottish troops of the 74th
and 78th Regiment on cither end.

John Blakiston’s recollections ofthe battle remain among the most ob-
jective of published British accounts. He was critical of Wellesley at times
but more importantly, from the standpoint ofa cross-cultural analysis, he
‘was unswayed by racist definitions of what constituted ‘manly’ behaviour
by the sepoys under fire. From his position in the seddle, Blakiston saw
the Madrasisepoys in the centre of the line singled out for destruction.
‘The Maratha artillery was apparently hoping to literally blow out the
centre ofthe British line so that Wellesley’s men could be easily divided
into wo isolated pockets of resistance. Blakiston witnessed the Maratha
artillery doing their best to render good men as casualties. British troop
strength had to be maintained somehow if there was to be any hope of
vier

At this time the fire ofthe enemy's atlery became, indeed, most dreadfl. In
‘the space of less than a mile, 100 guns, worked with skill and rapidity, vomited
{orth death into our feeble rans. lt cannot, then, be 2 matte of surpese if, in
‘many cases, the sepoys should have raken advantage of any irreguaritics in the
round to ohe themselves om the deadly shower, of hat eve, in om kw
instances, not all the endeavours of the officers could persua lo move
に ld persuade them te

Blakiston also recorded thatthe sepoys were using their knapsacks as a
form of protective cover during the most violent moments ofthe cannon

‘ade. ‘The Europeans usually had their packs carried for them and were

‘deprived of such cover, although he noted that even if they were avai
able, European troops may not have had the ‘ingenuity’ to do this.”

i

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803 109

“That the sepoys ofthe Madras army paid an inhuman price was evident
in Arthur Wellesley’s personal appeal in the pension claim of the Indian
officer known as ‘Burry Khan’. The soubahdar was wounded so badly
at Assaye that, seventeen months after the battle, bone splinters contin-
ued to be pulled from his shoulder. He was no youngster and Wellesley
argued that ‘he has served the Company forty years, and that he was a
soubahdar of the Ist class. He was also a man of good character, and
well connected in his corps; and five of his relations, commissioned and
‘non-commissioned officers in the battalion, were killed in the barde of
i
‘Arthur Wellesley’ infantry forces kept their position and waited help-
lessly until the British artillery could be brought across the river and
‘up on to the battlefield where it was hoped they could challenge the en-
emys guns, Ofthe sources consulted, Colonel John Grahames twentieth-
century account stands alone in saying that Wellesley’ guns stuck in the
sud approaching the river's ford. Apparently most British gun crews
jad managed to cross the watercourse and come into action, returning
fire at 400 yards, but with litte effect other than to incur the wrath of
the Maratha artery. Each second that it took the British to load and
fire thei pieces was a potential eternity as they faced not only greater
fire superiority but guns served by crews whose ranks had not yet been.
thinned by casualties. Counter-atilley fire wasa Maratha specialty and
their experienced gunners had the advantage in the number of guns,
‘amount of ammunition and number of men per gun crew. They had also
‘managed to bring some of their 9-12 pounder guns into action by then
and this gave them a decided advantage in projecile ‘throw weight’ over
the British battalion 6 pounder guns. The Maratha camp held numerous
‘umbrels of ammunition and the Maratha gunners had a wide selection
of projectiles and charges to choose from. Their Bridsh targets were
‘now well within the optimum range for what the British knew as French-
style large grape shot’. Itcould not only smash troop formations and kill
draught animals but splinter British artillery carriages and immobilize
‘Wellesley’ guns so they could not advance with his line. Elphinstone, in
‘writing about the moment, said the enemy who were advancing on us,
‘and beginning to get near us, renewed and redoubled their cannonade,
‘which had slackened. It was no longer ineffectual, for it knocked down
men, horses, and bullocks, every shot."!5
‘The Maratha salvoes compounded the confusion of trying to execute
‘manoeuvres amongst the infantry and casualties among the British gun-
ners were soaring by the miute.!"® The British guns could not easily be
moved forward or fied, owing tothe number of men and draught ani-
‘mals killed, so they were abandoned. !"7 Assaye veteran Colin Campbell

