110 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

voided blaming Wellesley, but ‘most of the gun bullocks were Killed
‘and some of the corps, I think waited too long wishing to bring for-
ward their guns’"" His statement made it apparent that command and
control of the British artillery had broken down under sustained enemy
fire. Campbell also noted that the Marathas had begun fring chain shot
ms wel. Although often associated with sea battles, the whirring sound
of chain shot seything through the air meant the Marathas were deter-
mined to hole Wellesley’s infantry line. Elphinstone observed: ‘it was
found that many of our guns could not be dragged for want of hands,
‘The General then told them to limber up, but the bullocks were killed.
He then ordered them to be left behind, which was done, but not im-
mediately, and all the dme the men were geting knocked down very
PD

‘The advance of Arthur Wellesley’ infantry was dictated by the imme-
diate need to drive the Marathes from their guns. Bu delivering sufcient
volleys of musketry to silence the guns would mean having to stand fied
in the beaten zone of Sindias artillery. An advance with the bayonet
‘on the Maratha guns was the only logical manoeuvre left to. neutralize
them and get Wellesey's men out of this kling field. It also meant that
Wellesley could try to reclaim, to a certain degree, the momentum of the
battle as the Maratha line would have to respond to his infantry’s ad-
vance in a manner which would limit the Marathas immediate options
and command decisions. In other words, by ordering his infantry forward
‘Wellesley stood some chance ofshaping the further course of battle rather
than allowing it to overwhelm him in a situation where inaction would
meah annihilation by the Maratha artillery.

‘The 78th Regiment, in the southern portion of Wellesley’ line, had a
relatively straightforward but far from easy objective lying before them.
‘They had to march across the killing zone in the hope of taking out
the southern end of the Maratha line that extended to the Kailna, In
the northern sector of the battlefield EIC Lieutenant-Colonel William
Orock was supposed to advance with the infantry pickets supported
by the 74th Regiment. With the British cannon neutralized, their gun
‘crews and draught animals now dead or incapacitated by life-threatening
‘wounds, Wellesley is reported to have told the 74th to ‘get on’ without
their supporting artillery." Owing to Wellesleys earlier order to red
ploy in an extended fashion, from two shorter lines of infantry toa single
clongated infancy line, Orock was to have angled off towards Assaye
and then to have faced half left co correct his deployment by bringing
is men into alignment with those in the southern segment ofthe British

ine. By most accounts based on Wellesley’s records, Wellesley suppos-
edly told Orrock to avoid Assaye itself, But for reasons unknown, Orrock

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803, ut

is suid to have ‘gott wrong’ and gone off on a tangent that conformed to
his earlier angle of deployment to the northern portion of the battlefield,
never turning the men half left to complete the intended straightening
‘of the line needed for @ uniform north-south linear axis of advance. In-
tentionally or not, Orrock led the pickets and the 74th directly towards
the stout-walled village of Assaye, which contained large concentrations
of artillery 28 well as Maratha iregular infantry. This meant that rather
than engaging the Marathas as a unified line, Wellesley’s infantry w
split into two main actions: (1) the advance of the 78th and the Madras
Native Infantry on the south-central half ofthe Maratha line and (2) the
‘oblique march of the 74th towards Assaye on the northern portion of the
field.

‘Wellesley’s men in the southern and central section of the field ad-
vanced at a steady pace, fired a volley and then drove through the
Maratha line, apparently having to bayonet the Maratha gunners who
fell by the wheels of their cannon.iat Some proved more agile than oh
‘ers and ducked under their guns only to lunge out with their famous
‘broad-bladed Maratha spears and ‘Rajput half-pikes' slashing at what
they could With the first line ofthe Maratha artillery penetrated, the
Madrassi troops and the kiked members of the 78th pressed forward
With the bayonet to engage the Maratha infantry who had been posted
‘behind the guns. Surprisingly the assault evoked a temporary rally among
the Marathas, but they were evenually driven off towards their fallback
position, that second perpendicular line of defence running west along
the Juah Rer fom Assaye," Bird's account seems correct in depicting
Wellesley as having ordered the 78th on his lft, as well as his Madrassi
troops inthe centre, to wheel right and march on the Marathas reforming
on their second line long the south bank of the Juah."* In completing
that marching order, however, the British troops exposed their backs to
hundreds of Maratha ‘dead! that littered the fields. Scattered among the
corpses lying by the cannon were Maratha artillerymen who had merely
pretended to be dead. After the British troops had safely passed, a num-
ber of the Maratha gunners, who were sill quite alive, jumped to their
feet and turned their cannon on the backs of the line that had passed
them, Blakiston, with an eye for technical detail, examined the guns after
‘the battle and found they had been ‘laid’ according to textbook standard
with an elevation of less than zero degrees for point-blank discharge.'®
‘The close-quarters discharge of canister shot cut many British troops
down and threatened the cohesion of the assault by breaking the line
further into small uncoordinated clumps of soldiers who could not be
controlled easily on the chaotic battlefield The ruse also gave cause
for the Maratha sepoys to halt their retreat towards the Juah line - they

