105 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India,

‘astern end if he could move out quickly enough, or more logically
@) hc Marathas would have to expose themselves in a‘change of font’ by
swinging ther ine ata ninety degree angle and redeploying ro face himin
parallel north-to-south ine. This was not simple given the length oftheir
pre-existing line running eas-to-west and the extent to which it would
have tobe condensed and reconfigured to form anew line running north-
to-south to face Wellesley. The Maratha artillery also had to reposition,
Tr was a test in precision marching for Sindia's sepoys and it left chem
dangerously exposed to Wellesley on their eastern flank as they marched
under shouldered arms toheling efi to ‘change front’.

‘There is incomplete agreement on the ‘time-line’ of the battle. Some
sources say he Marathas subjected the Bridsh co a brutal two-hour can-
nonade and others have the British making use of all available terain
to avoid presenting themselves as a mass target until the last possible
‘moment. One of the earliest modern artemprs to develop a ‘time-line’
‘approach to analysing this bate dates back to 1912 and an article by
Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel Bird io In his version of events, Bird placed
a limitation of two hours from the time Wellesley’s troops frst saw their
river-crossing objective to the point at which they were all across and
assembled on-line.

Wellesley formed up his troops into two lines of infantry and a third
line of cavalry in suppor they were arrayed in parallel fashion, the
lines stretching from the south-to-north. Mounstuart Elphinstone’slet-
ter, written the day after the battle, clearly noted thatthe Maratha advance
began as Wellesley was still positioning his men. ‘While we were form-
ing, the enemy's infantry and guns advanced on us, and their cannonade
was very destructive." Some British observers hinted that Wellsle's
judgement might have contributed to their rapidly mounting casualties,
‘Wellesley had not given the enemy credit for being able to change their
{front with so large a fore, without falling into disarray. On perceiving the
alteration in the enemy's postion, he saw that it was necessary to extend
his font ae Blakiston noted that Wellesley was forced to change his de
ployment atleast twice to avoid the enemy's tactical manoeuvring and the
rapid redeployment of their artillery that seemed to acquire and dispose
of new targets with machine-ike precsion.'® Following their change of
front the Maratha infantry, who at Wellesley’ approach had formed an

extended line east-to-west parallel to the north bank of hc Kailna, now

ranged north-to-south from Assaye towards the Kailna. The Marathas
had executed their manoeuvres with parade-ground precision, in effect

‘hemming Wellesley into the eastern end of the batlfield so that he was

.now trapped in the narrowest portion ofthe crotch formed by the fork in
the rivers,

orm, Memoir of the Wr in
[Map 5 The Bare of Assaye 23 September 1803, based on a map that appeared in Major W. Thorn, Memoir of she

