112 ‘The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes or India

faced south once again and readied their flintlocks. Wellesley’s infantry
‘were now trapped between two walls of Maratha fire- volleys of musketry
to their front and arilery fire off to their rear.

Back in the northern sector of the battlefield, the murderous fire com-
ing out of Assaye was slaughtering Orrocks pickets and the Highlanders
of the 74th. Some of these men had found their path was obstructed
by the thorny bushes known as ‘milk hedge’. The surviving pickets,
‘who had been in the vanguard, fell back to seek shelter in the advanc-
ing ranks of the Highlanders.'% Wellesley ordered Lieutenant-Colonel
“Maxwell and the 19th Dragoons to the extreme right or north end of
‘what had become his second line." It was from that vantage point,
while patiently awaiting orders for the cavalry to advance, that Dragoon
Sergeant Swarbruck witnessed the butchering of the 74th. Swarbruck
left perhaps the most brutally honest account of the carnage among the
Highlanders. The majority of first-hand accounts were usually written by
officers, which probably reflected literacy rates in the ranks. The value of
the sergeants account, aside from his NCO status, lies in its frankness
and employment of accurate terms such as ‘retreat’. All of the officers
of the 74th were rendered casualties in this action, being either killed
outright or wounded. Swarbruck wrote:

“Then our infancry was all formed they opened a severe fre of round and grape
shot. Our infantry suffered severe, he right brigade charged but was forced to
retreat for they were nearly all giled and wounded. The Brave 74th Regiment
Aisplayed their bravery to the last moment for the Reg. had only 63 men let
when they reeated, non sic] one single OfWcer but was killed and wounded
‘ying onthe plans except Maioe Swinton and he was wounded in the back, but
he retreated with what few ofthe regiment that was left. The other two regiments
sullered very severe, the enemy then charged out infantry on the retreat and
advancing in front oftheir own par,” gave No quarter to any of our wounded,
then only cuting and shooting them as they came up with them.”
“The 74th were falling back when the Merathas rushed in and cut up the
survivors. Much later there would be accusations that Sindia's mercenary
officers were guilty of ungentiemanly behaviour on the field of honour.
Wellesley wrote that some of his men ovetheard Sindia's British met~
cenaries say: ‘You understand the language better than I do: desire the
jemidar of that body of horse to go and cut up those wounded European,
soldiers."

Swarbruck’s account of Swinton being wounded in the back would
also tend to support an extremely unique eyewitness account that Was,

\ published in the Madras Courier a month later. Although the Courier was

Pack meaning attr ark,

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1603 43
am official voice for the Madras Presidency, the testimony seems to have
en expunged from later official accounts for rather obvious political
reasons.

Here out etolution was puto severe trial, the enemy in a large body of Infantry
and Cavalry charged the 74th Regiment on our right and actually cut through

them, atthe same time that a second body oftheir Cavalry retook thei guns, and
‘our own also which had been lft in the rear; dismounted, and aftr killing some

‘Officers and Men, turned and fred them upon our rear

In other words, some of Wellesley’s men were felled by their own cannon,
‘which the Maratha horsemen had seized and fired after penetrating the
British lines.

‘The cavalry detachment under Maxwell, consisting ofhis available dra-
‘goons and elements ofthe 4th aswell a Sth Madras Native Cavalry, were
‘now ordered into action by Wellesley. The survivors of Orrock’s failed ad-
vance were being hacked unceremoniously to pieces by Marathas wield-
ing razor-sharp tufwars (swords). But the approaching British horsemen
began absorbing a withering fire of grape shot from Maratha artillery
posted around the village. To effectively relieve the infantry ofthe 74th
Regiment, the Marathas had to be driven off the field and their guns along,
the walls of Assaye neutralized. Maxwell's dragoons headed directly to-
‘wards the carnage where the crumpled men of the 74th lay dead and
dying. Sergeant Swarbruck of the 19th Dragoons was among those who
‘went to their aid, unfortunately having to trample a number of the Scots
in order to drive away the last oftheir tormentors. In rather disjointed
‘but honest prose Swarbruck recalled:

(ur brave General then rode up saying now ... you must make the best of you
[sie] cavalry of we shall be done. Our gallant commander of the cavalry then
fave the word ... 3 Cheers, on the 3rd cheer we dashed forward with our brave
General with us exclsiming death or history riding over our poor wounded men
ss they lay bleeding with their wounds.

Having driven off the Marathas, the British horsemen were then able
to swing their attention to the line of guns posted around and about
Assaye.

Cavalry could be devastating against infantry but it was always a some-
‘what imprecise tool to use against artillery. Many tacticians in that era
believed that the true ‘weapon's value" of cavalry lay in the ‘shock of the
charge’, In an ideal cavalry vs. artillery scenario, enemy gunners would
break and run upon sight of horsemen closing ac the gallop. Supposedly,
the fleeing cannoneers could then be ridden down and sabred. But the
Maratha gunners at Assaye knew that their guns were their salvation. The
tick was not to lose one's nerve and run off into the open only to be cut

