124 。 The Anglo-Moratha Campaigns and the Contest fr India

But the fortress also proved to be a valuable addition to the prize fund
‘of Wellesly’s army. Stevenson reported that, in terms of specie, there
‘was only about Rs.11,000 in gold and silver coins in Asirghar. However,
there was such an abundance of other disposable prize property that
‘Stevenson was compelled to have four prize fund property ‘managers’
‘one to oversee the interests ofthe King’s troops and three forthe EICY
‘men. Aside from military store, there were many huxury goods and much
jewellery that had been liberated by Sindia's men, ‘One ornament which
was shewn to a shroff was valued at half a Lac of rupees, and a string of
pearls at 12,000 rups. Among the Jewels isan emerald ring, with Shah
‘Alum Padsha engraved on it."®

With British troops in possession of Burhanpur and Asirghar,
‘Stevenson's mission was subject to change. The ailing Colonel divided his
time between watching out for Sindia and preparing fora siege of Bhon-
sle's fortress of Gawilgarh.* He wrote to Arthur Wellesley: “My principal
objects willbe either the attack of Gyal Ghur or attacking Scindiah’s Force
and my proceeding to Nagpoor or going up the Ghaut will depend on
the understanding { may receive from you im The old Colonel's illness
‘was frustrating but so was Arthur Wellesley’s approach to coordinating.
the next combined operation. Stevenson, however, remained a gentle-
Tman and resisted any temptation to criticize the young Major-Genera’s
slowness to act. Wellesley contemplated his next move. Sindiss loss of
infantry and artillery at Assaye were combined with the loss of his logis-
tical centres at Ahmadnagar, Burhanpur and Asirghar That also meant
few places to shelter the surviving elements of his ‘regular corps’ in the
Deccan, His remaining regulars were believed tobe in disarray since the
defection of senior European mercenary officers at Burhanpur. When
‘combined, the events suggested that Sindia’s power in the Deccan was
ready diminished and chat might present an opportunity to negoti-
ate a separate peace with him ~ dividing the Sindia-Bhonsle Maratha
alliance.

While Wellesley opened negotiations with Sindias representatives,
‘Stevenson's men assumed most of the drudgery associated with routine
military patrolling. This consisted of efforts aimed at tracking Bhonsles
forces to deprive them of any opportunity to surprise the British. Raghuji
Bhonsle's diplomatic representatives remained aloof; holding out for
greater concessions, they foolishly refused to cooperate with the British
in the ritual of envoy verification. Authors are divided on whether it was
aggressive patrolling or Bhonsle’s paranoia, but the Maratha leader felt
obliged to move his camp five times in three days. For Welfesley’s cavalry

* Aka Gal Ghar.

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803, 125

there was also convoy duty to occupy one time, but by and large this
was a period of waiting to see how things would turn out. Sindias vakee!
‘was open tothe idea ofa political dialogue and he was received with great
pomp and ceremony as recorded by Welsh. The arrival ofan accredited
‘vakea from just Sindia's camp and none from Bhonsle was a point which
‘Wellesley used to justify dference in his treatment ofthe two Maratha
leaders; in effec driving a further wedge between them_9 Sindia was
ranted a peculiar form of ‘armistice’ on 23 November 1803, but Daulat
Rao did not take advantage of the opportunity. By remaining active in
the field, rather than withdrawing to a specific neutral area, Sindia gar-
nered greater distrust and suspicion With his men rested and the 74th
Regiment resored to operational strength, Arthur Wellesley turned his
attention to Raghuji Bhonsle, targeting his infantry for destruction. In
the meantime, Stevenson had completed the preparations for a future
siege at Gawilgath bur that could be put on hold. Arthur Wellesley or-
dered the Colonel forward to effect a rendezvous that would unite the
two British bare forces, The Maratha confederates moved off on 28
November, just as Colonel Stevenson's force was approaching to assist
the Major-General,

‘The Battle of Argaum*

While the British column was marching down the road on the morn-
ing of 29 November, a Maratha envoy approached. He rode up and
asked Major-General Wellesley ifhe would meet with his master Raghuji
Bhonsle ata position about ten miles ahead. Wellesley uttered an answer
without the slightest motion to rein in his horse, treating the Maratha
with deliberate indifference, The determination of Wellesley to ride on
‘must have conveyed not only determinetion but also an ominous fore
boding and the envoy’s nest question tipped his hand as to the real
reason for enquiring about a meeting with Wellesley. Captain Welsh un-
derstood Bhonsle's man to ask Wellesley if he would indeed attack the
‘Marathes if be just happened upon them; to which Wellesley replied,
“Most undoubtedly"? The British column continued on towards their
rendezvous with Colonel Stevenson's force, aso thought to be some ten
miles distant. After a long hot march they arrived at the campground
selected by the quartermaster.

‘Wellesley’s men were setdling in to their camp routine and the Major-
‘General had no original intention of engaging the Marathas that day.
However, afer climbing an old brickwork tower to reconnoitre the

+214, 7644. Aka Argan,

