126 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

countryside, Wellesley did catch a glimpse ofthe enemy in the distance 9
“Then around 2 pm, a detachment of Maratha irregular horse approached
and engaged the allied contingent of Mysore horse that were riding for-
ard ourpost duty forthe British, Instructing his men to grab ameal while
‘resting on their arms’, Wellesley and the pickets pursued the Marathas
through the thick fields or ecri They galloped through the tall grain to
find the Marathas in force. The enemy formation consisted of Bhonsle’s
infantry with mounted support apparently being provided by Sindia’s as
‘well as Bhonsle's horsemen. Raghuji Bhonsles army was reportedly un-
der the leadership of his ‘brother’, usually identified as Nana Babah or
‘Munnoo Bappoo’, Bhonsle’'s infantry were drawn up in an extended line
‘on the plain in front ofthe village of Argaumn.'®* This was to be a battle
simed at neutralizing Bhonsle’ infantry arm. They were never as pow-
erful as Sindias ‘regular corps’ but they were still a force to be reckoned
with, As it was late in the day, Wellesley once again decided to attack
rather than risk the chance of retiring before such a force.

‘The Major-General called for his infantry to be brought forward.
“The infantry had the support of their bullock-drawn battalion guns and
Wellesley’s cavalry had what under normal conditions would have been
considered thee ‘galloper guns’ - horse-drawn 6 pounders raised from
the cavalry regiments. But the tremendous loss of horses at Assaye had
resulted in the cavalry substituting bullocks forthe four horses that each
team of 6 pounder galloper guns required. Wellesley had placed the
bbullock-drawn cannon near the head of the column to provide faster
access to the artillery if needed for immediate reaction. British bullock-
‘drawn artillery always seemed to lag behind and having them lead seemed
sensible in that there would be no ‘waiting for the guns to come up" if
combat erupted unexpectedly. It was a modification tothe line-of-march
dictated by the Marathas performance at Assaye and would seem to have
been sensible. The column was surrounded on either side by the vegeta-
tion and compelled to advance along a narrow road bounded by the tall
fields of grain. The village of Sirsoni* marked the place where the road
spilled out onto the plain of Argaum.

“The British had no inkling they were actually playing into an ambush.
It seemed a straightforward advance to contact down the road since the
enemy had already been spotted. Bhonsles infantry were indeed there to
‘give bate’ but they were the bait for the opening Maratha bid to gain
the upper hand. The Maratha artillery had pre-registered their guns on

\ he wale vig of Sisoni wm he only place where Wellesley could
bring up his men and bullock-drawn arillery to gain entrance to he field

* Ala Sil.

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1603 127

by way ofthe road, The Marathas opened fire at 1,000 yardsas the British
column followed its pickets onto the plain.『 When being drawn by an-
mals, cannon were ‘limbered’ — in effect harnessed for travelling with
their ammunition tumbrels and caissons, Some larger pieces needed the
assistance of detachable road wheels. In order to fie they had to be un-
‘coupled and taken out of this arrangement or - in simple parlance 一
“unlimbered’ and then deployed. The Marathas stood a good chance of
taking out Wellesley’s guns before he could unlimber them. The incom-
ing round shot wreaked havoc among the leading artillery bullocks. The
divers could not manage the stampeding animals that bolted. The beasts
then panicked upon seeing that the source oftheir discomfort lay ahead
and they turned back through the infantry ranks with their hesty loads,
Several soldiers of the column were crushed to death by their own ar-
lery The gruesome sight of lacerated animals blindly trampling men,
‘combined with the shock of unexpectedly distant but accurate Maratha
rdilery fire, caused two battalions of sepoys to run for their lives and
seek shelter in Sirsoni."% Many of the sepoys who had been at Assaye
were teror-struck at the idea that they were in another Maratha arillery
ling zone, even though the guns were 1,000 yards away 97 The sepoy
veterans possessed something more than a vague dea about their odds for
survival, given the intensity ofthe Maratha barrage that neatly destroyed
them ar Assaye two months earlier, Welsh said they were ‘thrown into
temporary disorder’, but itis apparent that these men were panicking
and running from the field,

‘Arthur Wellesley shouted out reassurances seeking to inspire these men
‘but they continued to run, Much to the surprise of the Europeans in
attendance, Wellesey did not vent his anger on the men but ordered
ther officers to take them to shelter behind the village where they were
to regroup and then be led back onto the field.!* As the rest of the
column pushed past the bodies of the men crushed in the panic, they
{formed up in front ofthe village with Stevenson's troops further back off
to the left. It was now apparent that Bhonsle's troops were positioned
in a line with fory to fifty pieces of supporting artillery. Approximately
2,000 Arabs were posted to Bhonsles flank while 5,000 men under Beni
‘Singh formed the centre." There is conficting evidence over the ethnic
‘composition of Beni Singh's force. Welsh listed them as Ghosseins* while
‘others have generically said Rajputs, Elphinstone avoided generaliza-
tions but did mention one of Beni Singh's solders in particular was a
Brahman. The total enemy forces were estimated as high as 40,000
bat that included all ofthe pindarie, irregular horse, camp followers and

Aka Gamais

