134 。 The Anglo-Maraths Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘Maratha smallarms and arillery fre. Blakiston indicated that they were
constantly engaged in firing to keep the Marathas heads down so that
siege work could progress according to schedule, He wrote that on a par
ticularly hot day the British gun crews had to halt ther firing to let heir
brass cannons cool, thereby reducing the risk of spontaneous combustion
‘when ramming powder charges down the barrel, They feared their can-
‘non barrels were hot enough to ignite the black powder charges asthe gun
tubes absorbed both the external heat of the sun and the intense internal
heat produced from steady fring Despite delays and the continuation
ofharassing Maratha fire the northern battery was finaly completed end.
the heavy British iron guns brought into service. This is also one of the
few actions in the Decean with clear references to Wellesley’s men hay-
ing access to rifles. Ironically the incident involved a case of mistaken
identity when Captain Colebrooke called for a rifle to shoot a man at a
considerable distance. The man turned out to be Captain Dickson who
jad gone out to inspect a preliminary breach in the outermost wall ofthe
fort. Fortunately Dickson was identified before the shot was made |
‘At night the British fired grape shot into the breach every twenty min-
‘utes to keep the forts garrison from repairing the damage.” But, owing
to the degree to which the guns were pushed back from the main fort
by the perimeter walls, Stevenson's batteries could not reach the inner-
‘mostlayer of fortifications with sufficient direct fire from theie position.
Angled explosive shellfre from howitzers was of no use in trying to cre-
ate a suitable breach in the inner sanctum. The pulverizing of stonewalls
called for concentrated kinetic energy, not exploding shards of shell cas-
ing. Yet the heavy guns, firing iron round shot with tightly fited sabots,
could not draw direct aim on the innermost walls owing to protection
from the outiying secondary walls. Given the distance, balistic drop in
trajectory and number of walls that had to be penetrated, there was not
sufficient firepower to blow a series of holes from the battery straight
through into the hear of the fort Even though the Britis held the perah
{or a week from 7-15 December 1803, without direct breaching fire the
plan to gain access to the interior ofthe fort had to be modified."
Progress onthe southern side was torcuously slow owing to natura ob-
stacles. Elphinstone watched one day in fascination as a bullock team was
itched to pull a 12 pounder while an elephant was positioned behind to
ppush it. The young man was thoroughly captivated by the drums beating
the ‘Grenadiers’ March’ as sepoys toiled and he remarked that ‘the whole
‘of the scene was romantic’? Captain Welsh, among the troops tasked
‘carving out a path for the iron 12 pounders on the southern side,
‘wa less enthralled with the labour. The southerly approach necessitated
‘extremely strenuous efforts on the part of several units and the pioneers

‘The Decean Campaign of 1803 135

‘were driven to their limits in cutting pathways and creating new support
roads to facilitate the movement of iron siege guns up the treacherous
southern hills, The angle of ascent on that approach was too steep for
the ‘heavy metal’. The work details, which had to manhandle each piece,
‘experienced several injuries and casualties mounted as men strained their
‘muscles and weenched their backs levering the guns inches ata time. Thin
‘soil covering and loose footing contributed to numerous accidents. Com-
pression wounds and fractures abounded as limbs were crushed by the
‘unforgiving weight of great iron gun tubes pulled back down the slippery
slopes by gravity.

Trwasjust impossible and so the plan was changed. The iron gunson the
south side, which could not be brought up and into firing position, were
temporarily abandoned. They were pushed off the ascent path and cov-
‘ered with brush so Maratha patrols could not find them and render them
useless by spiking them.2 As Captain Welsh’s writing indicates, it must
have been obvious ro any astute military observer that the southern effort
had become merely a feint. He recorded thet ‘every man of science in our
‘camp could readily foresee that this labour was in vain, further than a5 2
diversion’. Two brass 12 pounders and two 5.5-inch howitzers would
be made to serve the purpose of a ruse, creating the sound if not the
fury of a fire support role. Problems persisted with what Elphinstone
described as an ‘ugly’ battery, saying it looked ‘more like a fold for
sheep than anything else’. They were to commence bombardment on
15 December and a small diversionary assaule party was to make a fcint
‘on the southern flank. According to Welsh i was with surprise and horror
that they began firing on the morning of the 15th only ro see their iron
round shot come rebounding back down from the heights of Gawilgarhy
nearly reaching the muzzles from which they had been discharged. The
altitude and angle of trajectory were just too much, And to make matters
‘more embarrassing the battery, built mostly of fascines, caught fre 227
Fortunately there was sufficient water to put out the blaze.

‘During the attack of 15 December the real push began on the oppo-
site side ofthe fort after Stevenson's northern batteries had succeeded in.
knocking a hole in the second wall. That allowed a body of Highlanders
inside the perimeter walls where they then hoped to plant ther ladders to
scale the next innermost wall, The trick to getting into that next defensive
zone of the inner fort was to put sufficient men over the top in a group, so
that momentum would not be lost as individual soldiers were picked off
by the defending garrison. The account in Eiphinstone’s journal mhade
it clear the undulating ground and variations in the wall construction
proved more of an obstacle than the British anticipated.” However, a
subsequent letter to his friend Strachey revealed even more. For it was

