123 The Anglo-Macatha Campaigns andthe Contest for India

were proving difficult to estimate." Apparently Sindia intended to tow
a detachment of his regulars there during the fist week of October. But
situation reports were conflicting and at times contradictory; some said
‘india had arrived at Burhanpur and, after leaving a token force as wells
some wounded, hehad pulled out. The British were unable discern how
‘many men were in the small garrison force orf this was disinformation in-
tended as an ambush lure. Colonel Stevenson was an old soldier plagued
by il health but he had a keen sense of duty and he allowed himself to
bbe used as Arthur Wellesley’s eyes and ears. Stevenson wrote ro Wellesley
that he thought the apparent late September split between Sindia and
Bhonsle was another Maratha ruse. Stevenson cautioned Wellesley that,
the Briush should not be diverted from their intention to move against
Burhanpur.!7"

Colonel Stevenson then received an intelligence report from inside
Sindia’s camp, which clarified things greatly. The lage campoo, eariier
reported as headed for Burhanpur, belonged to Begum Sumru and it
was not destined for garrison duty there afer all”® The British breathed
«collective sigh of relief because the Bsgum' troops were now no longer
accorded a high level of threat statu. Infact, the Begum was potential
strong ally, having ceased to be an ardent public supporter of Sindia's
‘cause, General Lake, working earlier with intelligence from Lieutenant-
Colonel Collins advised the government that the Begum had ‘long
‘evinced a desire tobe taken under the Protection ofthe English’ And that
ifa rupture with Sindia occurred in the Deccan, she ‘might be contrived
to enable those battalions to join General Wellesley’. Governor-General
Richard Wellesley had acknowledged Lake's report and sent it tothe Dec-
can as early as July." Confident in the knowledge tha the ‘Burhanpur
battalion’ was the Begum's and not Sindia’s, Colonel Stevenson advanced
‘and occupied Burhanpur without opposition on 15 October 1803." The
remaining small body of Sindia’s infantry at Burhanpur retreated in dis-
order towards the Nerbudda River"!

After the bloodless capture of Burhanpur, fourteen of Sindia's
European mercenaries surrendered to Colonel Stevenson. The group
as composed of nine officers, four sergeants and one matrss.®® The
senior-most officer was Captain John James Dupont of Holland. Despite
the assertions that the French dominated Sindia’s mercenary corps, this
band of men contained only one Frenchman, that being Captain Mercier.
‘The only Englishman in the group was Ensign Alexander Marrs. The
remaining twelve individuals were Portuguese." The fourteen merce-
naries, along with ‘English’ gunners John Roach and ‘George Black’,

had wandered into Stevenson’s camp on 1 September, were in に
tially listed as ‘Prisoners of War’ But Colonel Stevenson, invoking

“The Deccan Campaign of 1803, 13

Governor-General Richard Wellesle’s Proclamation of 29 August to en-
courage the defection of mercenaries in Maratha service, issued formal
orders that these men be taken into British pay.

‘The European Officers & Sergeants who have this day been received from the
‘Service of Dowlut Rao Scindiah, and al Europeans who may in furure come in
ftom the service of that Chief, or any power confederated with him, are to be
under the charge of tse Depury Adjurant General, を who will draw pay for them
agreeable to rates which wil be hereafer determined."

With Asirghar deprived of potential infantry support from Burhanpur,
‘Stevenson was encouraged and he Pressed on with plans for an assault on
the fort. His men began constructing siege batteries and followed up this
move with an attack on Asirghars pettah. Having taken that objective,
Stevenson offered terms to the fort's killadar. These were refused and
‘Stevenson threw more men into the erg that was as close as 150 yards
to the fort in some places. Stevenson was putting the majority of his faith
i ticrics and notin negotiation. There was always the chance
‘that Sindia’s infantry might return to relieve the siege and so great effort
‘was taken to make the batteries serviceable on 19 October. Ina final bid
to spare a costly assault, word was sent out that they would commence
firing the next day. Apparently there was the bass for some dialogue but
several sticking points remained, The siege batteries had only been in play
for one hour on the 20th when a white flag appeared and arrangements
‘were made forthe delivery of hostages to Stevenson in agreement with
the terms he had stipulated.

On 21 October the enemy garrison walked out with their personal
property as well as «cash bonus. In writing about the settlement Bird sid
that the garrison accepted a ‘bribe’ of Rs. 20,000 to leave, but William
‘Thorn noted the money represented the troop’s arrears in pay." The
setlement was quite in keeping with the interpretation of contractual
‘obligation within the South Asian military economy. The garrison had
not been paid and Sindia was therefore delinquent in servicing his debts
to contracting parties within the defence establishment. The garrison,
for thee part, could walk out proudly. They had not let the fortress fll
they had merely relinquished their agreement to fight when it was clear
the British would assume Sindi option of paying them. It later became
popular to refer to this process as the ‘golden key’, which was used to
unlock a fortress. t was part of a cultural continuum thatthe British did
‘not fully understand but were quite happy to take advantage of. With the
capture of Asirghar, Stevenson hed taken the last of Sindia's strongholds
in the south. Locally the fort was known to be essential for controlling
access to the central corridor that linked the Deccan to North India 時

