128 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fr India

some of Sindia's infantry who were camped well behind Bhonslcs in the
appearance of being non-combatants."

Blakiston admitted that the scpoy incident was the first time he had
‘occasion to view what he considered as Wellesley’s genius. After Major
General Wellesley had restored order among the panicked troops, he led
them to their place in the lines chat were forming and once there he
ordered them to lie down. This had a two-fold effec; it reduced their
target profile while ic immobilized them in the sense that they could not
‘run while lying down. Later he would write:

‘What do you think of neatly thre entire banalions, who behaved so admirably
in the batle of Asse, being broke and running off, when the cannonade com-
menced at Argaum, which was not to be compared co that at Assye? Luckily,
happened tobe at no great distance from them and I was able orally them and
‘e-esblish the batde, IT had not been there, Tam convinced we should have
fost the day. But asic was, so much time elapsed before I could form them again,
‘that we had not daylight enough for everything that we should certainly have
performed.**

Blakiston thought that Wellesley was quite pleased with himself that day
for Arthur commented ‘Did you ever see a battle restored like this? in
direct reference to having the sepoys lie down It should be pointed
‘out, however, thatthe British in South Asia hed known ofthe technique
for some time. Panicked troops were ordered to lie down in 1780 during
the Second Anglo-Mysore War

“The British forces remained on-line and waited for several minutes in
the hope that cher artillery could be salvaged and brought into action
to answer Raghuji’s guns. Captain Welsh’s unit lay directly between the
‘Marathas and the point of their arilrys initial impact. And for that
posting they paid substancaly: ‘in tis position, our corps being drawn up
‘xactlyin frontof the village, on which the enemy's batteries were pointed,
4s the only entrance tothe plain, severely suffered, in having Lieutenant
"Turner, two Subadars, one Jemadar and forty sepoys knocked down by
cannon shot. By 4:30 pm it was apparent thatthe British guns could
‘manage nothing but a feeble response and there was a need to advance
without them across the open field.

During this battle Colonel Stevenson, despite his ailing condition, di-
‘ected his troops from a howdah on elephant-back. Stevenson's men had
to be ordered forward at double time to close the distance and to bring
them into line with Wellsle’s infantry. Captain Welsh had trouble seeing

ata distance owing to the smoke ofthe battlefield but as they came
ly into focus it was a scene temporarily detached from reality ‘It was
ut the

1 splendid sight to see such a line advancing, as on a field-days

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803 129

Fe
Dee
a
MT
Gemma
に コ ヒコ
で mm om

‘Map 6 The Barle of Argaum 29 November 1803, based on a map by
Emery Walker

