“The Deccan Campaign of 1803 133

capability remained part of the Governor-Genera’s directive and so
Gawilgath and the troops sheltered there were both targets. The fort
played a role as a fortified sanctuary along one of the main infiltration
ouresin the transitional zone that linked the Deccan to Hindustan. Along
with Bushanpur, Asghar, Daulatabad and Ahmadnagar, it was as one of |
the Deccani chain that the British viewed as critical in abid to disconnect Hi
the north from the south, The Maratha corridor was not a single road

‘or path, but rather a series of historic access routes. Although Sindias Wa
Deccanifortshad already been taken by Wellesley’ army, in effect puting
‘a stopper into the neck of the Deccan as it funnelled north, the caprure
of Bhonsle's Gawilgath would further destroy the Marathas’ ability to
regionally shif roops with impunity. A permanent disconnection in the
‘Maratha ability to project power was essential to the British strategy of
containment. In 1803 British troops were, rightly or wrongly, judged to
be skilled at taking hill forts?" "They earned thet reputation inthe Second
‘Anglo-Mysore War and confirmed it with Popham’s capture of Mahadi
Sindia’s sanctuary at Gwalior during the First Anglo-Maratha War215
But Arthur Wellesley knew he could not afford to become reckless. This
was not tobe a rushed escalade like his effort atthe pewah of Ahmadnagat.
‘One-third of his dead in that three-hour skirmish were officers and ithad
been too costly in terms of command and control resources given that
fortress's ultimate fall by negotiation.

Unlike many of the great northern forts in Hindustan, Gawilgarh had
‘been built according to an asymmetrical blueprint to incorporate the ter
‘ain into the defensive fortifications, Biphinstone provided by far the most
scenic description ofthe fort's location, but then he often tended towards
the romantic."® An approach from the cast or west was ruled out owing
to the elevation and an inability to use conventional British siege tech
niques from those sides. ‘The southern face took advantage of a natural
scarp and lack ofa suitable approach road. The northern exposure could
be reached along an elevated saddle but the forts architects had recog-
nized that potential deficiency and so that side fearured out-lying walls
forming a layered defence works. Wellsle’s siege plan for Gawilgarh
required the opening of breaching batteries from two opposite sides of
the fort. Colonel Stevenson began trenching and pushed saps along the
northern approach that he oversaw. At night the fort cook on a mystical al
‘quality as he Marathas fired their so-called “blue lights’ that burned with i
an eerie glow. These illumination rounds aided Maratha sniping at re-

‘connaissance patrols and British work parties that laboured under cover
of darkness.”

British light brass 6 pounder field guns were brought forward and = S|
timed at the tops of the outer defence works to suppress harassing 2

‘Map 7 The Siege of Gawilgarh December 1803, basedon a map in J. W. Fortescue, 4 History ofthe British Arm, 13 vols. London,

1911-20

