130 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns andthe Contest for India

pause when the encmy’s guns ceased fring, and they advanced in font
fof them, was an awful one."®* The Maratha gunners, with the leading
British units now some sixty yards away and closing, fred grape shot. The
relatively close range discharge of grape instead of the usual canister sot,
minimized the weapons’ ballistic effect, as the heavier pieces of grape
could not fully ‘open up’ their lethal pattern at a distance so close to
the muzzle, Welsh noted that these discharges flled about ten men per
regiment.

“The Marathas then decided to charge His Majesty's 74th and the 78th
Regiments. Pethaps the Marathas hoped to inflict a signal victory i front
‘of the previously spooked Madras infantry. About 500-600 Arabs, iden-
tified by some authors as Persians, charged the Europeans and were
ut down to the last man.” The Ghosseins under Beni Singh, and
apparently “dressed like beef-eaters’, tried to turn the Madras infantry's
flank The 74th and 78th, having dispatched the Arabs, turned to
hhelp the sepoy units and with that move they thwarted the attempt to
“oll up’ their line. Bhonsle’s infantry received some encouragement from
his camel-mounted rocket troops but their desultory fre lacked effective
coordination and they soon broke off the action 0

‘Sindia's cavalry under Gopal Rao Bhau cherged the Madras 6th Native
Infancry but they were repulsed with steady musketry. The British dis-
patched their cavalry ina charge that broke the Maratha horse and set off
‘wholesale retreat. Many of the Maratha horsemen were wearing helmets
‘and traditional body armour over stuffed quilted coats that offered pro-
tection from British sword cuts. Blakiston observed thatthe prevalence of
helmets and body armour among some Maratha cavalry contributed to
3 modification in British mounted tactics. British horsemen, in pursuit,
‘used their frst sword strike to knock the helmets from thei opponents
‘and then dispatched them with a second blow or thrust to the skull?
AA group of Maratha mounted troops who escaped made it off the field
with their gallopers but thirty-eight cannon fll to the British. Bhonsle’s
infantry faired poorly in thei fight from the field. Welsh recorded that
‘upwards of 3,000 fell victim to the British cavalry who rode them down,
‘and cut them up well into the night, taking full advantage ofthe particu-
larly bright moonlight. However, Beni Singh and a sizable number of his
mcn managed to escape and they got to the fort at Gawilgarh.

‘In hindsight it can be said that the Marathas squandered ther eactical
‘opportunity to take advantage of the confusion at Sersoni. If they had

\\ ase wer cavalry for eneapment and pressed hard on wih an of
sive infantry assault before the British fine could be fully formed and the
‘union with Stevenson’stroops completed, then it mighthave been another
story. Imperial istoriansand Wellingtonians often downplay Argaum asif

‘The Decean Campaign of 1803 Bt

nothing that followed Assaye could ever live up to the ‘drums and
trumpets’ expectation of British military glory. Ironically the ability of
‘Assaye to castll else into the shade wasa historically contemporary phe-
‘nomenon. The lingering power of the Maratha artillery to inflict panic in
the ranks of the EIC’s sepoys at Argaum was not the stuff of polite con-
versation in Bengal. In speaking about Wellesley's casualties at Argaum,
James Mill quoted the Cakeg Gazene assaying: “The British loss in this
battle ifbatde it may be called, was trifling; total in killed wounded, and
‘misting, 346." The British sources tated 5,000 asthe total number of
Maratha casualties.

‘Wellesley was forging ahead and although Argaum was not as “great”
a victory inthe popular press, it had been vital in diminishing Bhonsle's
resources. In his wake Arthur left a tril of broken men who would need
tobe laid up somewhere until they stabilized, recovered, or died. Argaum
had heightened the need for trained medical men, With each new victory
came the necessity of establishing yet another field hospital equipped with
surgeons because amputations were a by-product of infantry warfare in
thatera, The Bombay Presidency was beginning to realize the magnitude
of the medical crisis. They controlled the rear-area hospitals where the
long-term wounded would ulimately be sent. Bombay authorities asked
the Major-General if he would allow some of their seconded surgeons
to return home to Bombay if he had no particular need for them. The
‘Deccan Campaign was almost over; Sindia's infantry battalions had been
pulled out or all but eliminated -only his horsemen remained a threat.2"?
‘The Major-General would now devote his full attention to Bhonsle - the
Berar Rajah, Wellesley’s next move was to track down those enemy troops
‘who had escaped Argaum and eliminate them. Even though Beni Singh's
men had been badly beaten up, Wellesley knew it would be tempting fate
to deprive his own men of what feeble medical aid he had been able to
scrounge. Arthur Wellesley would write to the Bombay government and
tell 由 cm chat ‘upon the whole I do not think I can allow these surgeons
to return to Bombay with justice to the troops under my command’???

Gawilgarh

‘As the frst week of December 1803 drew to a close, ic was obvious that
the British had attained almost total victory inthe southern theatre of op-
erations. For the moment they controlled the Deccan by holding the main
fortresses that dotted the land, while the larger fortified villages relied on
armed irregulars to stand behind the mud Walls defending them against
Pindaries. Arthur Wellesley's final objective in the southern campaign
で F 1803 was the fortress of Gawilgarh. Destroying Bhonsles miliary

