\

138 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

«system that failed to meet its obligation to pay you as promised? And
the issue of national betrayal was hardly applicable given the absence of
nationhood. Ifwe were to push the notion of ‘warriors duty” itis worth
considering that only survivors can refight their bates and ‘lve gain to
fight another day’ would seem to have been an axiom that cransformed
‘many South Asian sieges into long drawn-out business negotiations.

“The difference in warrior values, as found in these competing military
cultures, can often be detected in perceptions ofhow lives were ‘spent’ for
military objectives. In touring the aftermath of the batde for Gawilgarh

John Blakiston and a companion were drawn to a large room in the fort
filled with dead and dying Raiput women.” Their loving husbands had
slit the ladies throats and the blood-soaked room haunted Blakiston
‘memory more than the sanguinary field of Assay. It was an image that
jarred his Western sensibilities. He did not really know how to reconcile
the voluntary kiling of spouses and it seems that Blakiston wished to
isolate it ms an event separate or detached from the battle proper. Once
the option of reasonable negotiation had run out, the Rajput garrison
slaughtered their women before engaging Arthur Wellesly’s forces be-
‘cause by that point the decision was made that the fight would be to the
death ofthe lat man. Theirs was an ancient practice to keep the purity
‘of the women intact by preventing them from being dishonoured upon
falling into enemy hands. It would seem that ‘death before dishonour
in this case represented a more holistic understanding of both death and
dishonour as extended tothe South Asian familial identity ofthese Rajput
warriors. We find directly conflicting concepts of chivalry in looking at
Rajput vs. Western military culture here. The execution of wives was not
the type of loving behaviour that could be easily equated with examples
of nineteenth-century Western military culture and therefore it compli-
cated objective military analysis by foreign observers. It is all the more
interesting since the Western concept of military honour would dictate
an almost opposite code of conduct, in the sense that surrendering to

protect female honour would be preferred over risking female deaths as

‘non-combatants. To kil one’s own loved ones to prevent capture would

‘be viewaly unheard of in Western society in the early nineteenth century.

Paying ransom, surrendering all male warriors ~ these were viable alter-

natives in a Western miliaryculture where ‘death before dbonour was

‘2 motto meant for the macho world of the European soldier who spent

his life for king, country or unit pride.

By December 1803, in less than six months of campaigning, Arthur

Wellesley had delivered the Deccan. And so he was forgiven the human

\price he paid for a lesson in modern infantry warfare at Assaye. His

fear of command failure apparently motivated

to engage in offensive

“The Deccan Campaign of 1803, 39

operations that were beyond the classification of ‘doggedly determined’.
‘The concept of one-third casualties at Assaye and marching his men
repeatedly into the mouths of cannon appeared as maniacal to a South
Asian military culture that saw such behaviour as weighing the cost of
life against the bigger business opportunity that was war. By being so
drastically at cultural odds withthe prevailing South Asian system Arthur
Wellesley set himself apart as an enemy to be feared. It is quite human
to fear that which we do not understand and combat behaviour is no
exception. That is one of the elements that makes terrorism effective.
‘When people operate militarily outside of the norm or at odds with the
shared value system ofa group they are fighting, then they ~as enemies ~
pose a special threat or point of terror because they are not behaving in a
logical and predictable way, Arthur's strategic gains redeemed his tactical
indiscretions in the eyes of many Britons who shuddered to think ofthe
alternatives. Retreating under fire was not glorious. And standing still to
be cannonaded into oblivion might be glorious to some military cultures,
butt was a useless waste ifyou sought ro gain ground and win wars with
the lives you spent.

‘Although Wellesley wrestled with the differences imposed by this alien
land there were definite signs that even he was adapting to the South
Asian military economy, Arthur saw advantages in exploiting a system
in which all military assets, commodities and resources, had a market
price. The British had a huge corporate and governmental structure be-
hind them and sufficient leverage to procure a war chest with enough
money to buy out virtually all the Marathas’ military assets. The pre-war
acquisition of southern jaghirdars and the allegiance of the Peshta’s re-
tainers - men like General Gokhale - represented British knowledge and
use of the South Asian military economy. When it came to buying out
forts like Asirghar, the British strategy was made easier by the Marathas’
subcontracting of garrison duties. Without sufficient politcal, national,
‘or religious cause to stand and fight, the loyalty of many garrisons was to
survival and a work ethi that went largely unspoken inthe military labour
market. Powerbrokers bargained for and hired ~ soldiers as contracted
garrisons. Ifa better offer came along and the primary retainer was not
present to ensure the enforcement of contractual obligations, then it was
casy forthe contracted employees to change employers and in the process
deprive one of additional military assets such as the fore chat was being
nrrisoned

‘The British victory in the 1803 Deccan Campaign also signalled the
end of an era in Maratha military history. By taking Pune, then Ahmad-
nagar, Burhanpur, Asirghar and Gawilgarh, Arthur Wellesley had been
vital in disrupting a Maratha presence that stretched back in one form or

