136 ‘The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

inside the second breach near the innermost sanctuary they discovered
to their horror that there was a physical divide between their party and
the fort Ir was within the second defensive perimeter that arguably
the bloodiest fighting took place. There was confusion and panic back
atthe first breach, Some of the troops managed to get toa gate linking
the two perimeters and opened itso that the bulk of the British forces
could flood in, They were met by stiff resistance as thousands of Maratha
troops poured into the mélée. There was lite time for the British in-
fantrymen to reload after initially discharging their muskets. Much of the
fighting devolved into series of individual combats with bayonets and
edged weapons. The most ardent defenders were said by some Britons
to be those under the direction of Beni Singh, who led a forlorn hope.
‘To a man that group perished in hand-to-hand combat. Many of them
‘were run through with the 16-inch EIC bayonet, a nasty triangular spike
of tel tapering to an efficient point that lent it self to puncturing rather
than cutting an opponent. Others were simply bludgeoned to death with
EIC muskets wielded as cubs in this desperate action. No quarter wa
‘asked and none given. Elphinstone wrote tha they eventually found a way
to the inner sanctuary, but he casually mentioned ‘a prisoner was taken
‘who knew the way’ The Rajput contingent in the fort fought with
‘extreme determination but eventually the British prevailed, An undeter-
‘mined number ofthe defenders allegedly committed suicide by jumping
to their deaths from the hill fort when it was found they could not hope
to winj a historic analogy withthe death of Rajputs at Chittore would not
be out of place.

‘Wellesley had ordered no plundering but on this occasion he was appar-
endy unable or unwilling to prevent i.” Elphinstone wrote ‘All around
us, everywhere alike lay dead and dying, and on one side was an off-
cer calling out for volunteers to hang the Kiladar. I saved him by the
argument that he knew where the treasure was. There was virtually
no treasure and the hilladar escaped only to be killed in the pandemo-
ium. In fainess to the British troops who rampaged through the fort,
it should be said that it was customary for European armies during that
‘era to allow troops to plunder a fortress that offered ardent resistance
after refusing terms of surrender. Large quant

her plate and cot i
fortune. The fort yielded 52 pieces of artillery, 150 wall guns in calibres
from one-half pound to one pound and 2,000 EIC muskets in pristine
condition. Maratha losses were estimated as high as 4,000 while those
of the British were a mere 126 ‘Europeans and natives’ The fall of

les fortress of Gawilgarh proved to be the final batle of the 1803
‘Anglo- Maratha Campaigns.

‘The Deccan Campaign of 1803 137

Conclusion

In this chapter we have seen that Arthur Wellesley had to confront some
rather uncomfortable truths in the Deccan. After Assaye it was painfully
‘apparent that not all Maratha armies were composed of light horsemen
and that Sindims infantry knew both the theory and the practice of mod-
em infantry warfare. But Arthur also had to confront the truth at having.
misread more than Maratha military culture, He had misjudged rather
substantial parts of the South Asian military environment by seeking to
‘wansfer theories from one micro-environment to the subcontinent as a
whole. The failure of the monsoon rains, combined with the truth about
the Marathas ability to cross rivers, helped heighten his sense of urgency
in August and September 1803 as he rushed to hunt down and destroy
the Maratha units in the Deccan, [funchecked those remaining Maratha
oops could threaten the British Subsidiary Alliance System. An inability
to protect puppets such as the Nizam and the Peshua would be a major
‘blow to brother Richard Wellestey's plan to create manageable buffer
states. As militarily emasculated allies they were forced into dependence
‘on British organized military muscle for their protection. However, the
British had to do a credible job of protecting their allies or the whole
system ran the risk of unravelling.

Tn the Decean of 1803 we see Arthur Wellesley as having to deal with a
foreign military culeure which was at odds with his British military culture.
1do not mean ‘at odds’ in the obvious sense of an adversarial relationship
in combat, but rather that Arthur perceived several aspects of South Asian
military culture as alien to his own British military and politcal culture.
‘That he should not understand the businesslike South Asian attitude
towards negotiating military labour contracts on the field ofbattle is not at
allunuswal given the predominance ofa ‘duty, honour, country’ mentality
in his British military background. ‘Death before dishonour’ has served
as both a behavioural cliché and motto for elite Western military forces
but how does it translate across the boundaries of competing military
‘cultures? To the South Asian warriors of 1803 there mightbe no particular
dishonour involved in negotiating the surrender of a fort to the British. If
you were hilladar of « fort and your Maratha employer had not paid you
{or months, but the British were willing to negotiate an amount of money
that represented your back pay and compensation for loss of the fort 23
itaffected your future income-earning potential ~ why not consider their
‘offer? Did that reflec greed, corruption and the betrayal of one's country?
‘Not necessarily; what was greedy about wanting what was owed to you
and if you had kept faith that far in the contractual obligation of holding
the fort, where was the corruption? Did the corruption lie above you in

