ーーーー

140 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes or India,

‘another for two centuries. By temporarily removing the Marathas’ hold
‘on the Deccani fortress chain, Arthur had helped to advance his brother
Richard's strategy of containment. ‘The British were keen to close the
“Maratha corridor to North India a series of military infiltration routes
used by Maratha leaders ike Peshta BajiRao Ito menace Bengal. Arthur
had temporarily closed the valve of he pipeline long enough to allow
blocking mechanisms to be put in place. British rapid reaction forces,
‘many of which included irregular native horse units, were ordered by the
‘Governor-General to sit astride the Maratha access routes, further facil
itating the containment strategy.°* Outlying British unit commanders,
stationed along roads in the Upper Provinces, received specific orders to
‘make ready the snare intended for Maratha troops moving between the
Deccan and Hindustan theatres. The disconnection in 1803 prevented
thousands of Maratha light horsemen and pindariesfunnelling northward
toassist Sindia agninst the British in the Gunga-Yamuna Doab, Nolonger
‘were the EIC's wars being fought on territories adjacent ro her Presiden-
ics or limited to raids into the interior. Richard Wellesley had used his
‘brother Arthur to help push the conflict for control to the very centre
‘of the subcontinent. The Bengal, Bombay and Madras Presidencies had
triangulated the map of India; it was only a matter of time until their
power would be consolidated.

4 The Hindustan Campaign of 1803

Introduction

‘This chapter concerns the northern theatre of operations in 1803. It
was also known as the Hindustan Campaign, an effort overseen by the

‘Commander-in-Chief of British forces in India General Gerard Lake.”

Fortunately Lake ordered his officers to keep journals of the campaign

and this narrative would be impossible without that directive. Men like

John Pester, William Thorn, Charles Stuart and George Isaac Call eft us

‘an amazingly rich and honest collection oftheir experiences, John Pester
was a hard-drinking, hard-ighting man and nothing shocked him for
Jong. On his days off he hunted for the love ofthe chase and shooting,
‘but his sense of fairness also stemmed from what we would call ‘his love
‘ofspor’, William Thorn already a captain, was observant and very intel-
ligent but he later published with political purpose and he comes across
here as up-holding the ‘official story’. Charles Stuart was a temperate
‘and well-mannered gentleman in the atistocratic sense of the word. As
‘dedicated British officer in the EIC’s Bengal Native Cavalry, he felt @
tremendous amount of compassion for the South Asian officers and men
that served with him. On many occasions Charles Stuart did not agree
‘with Lake's decisions and Stuart saw tremendous evil in this war, As for
George Call, he too was observant and intelligent. But in the writings of
the wide-eyed Call we can also see a young man who was being steeped in
an elitist miltery culture ~ that of His Majesty’s Dragoons. We do not see
the cliché “loss of innocence’ in Call, but rather we detect the insidious
armour of racial callousness growing week by week.

This story of ‘Hindustan 1803 begins almost a year before the cam-
paign against Sindia in an effort to show the reader that the struggle for
North India was already well under way. As we shal see, all was not
well and rebellion was rife. This posed a problem for Richard Wellesley's
administration since the EIC’s accountants had urged further military

* Later known 2 Lord Lake
ut

