‘Map 9 Alighar 29 August 1803 and 4 September 1803, based on a map that appeared in Major W.Thoen, Memoir ofthe Wir in

India, 1818

“The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 159

before and only sought to survive long enough to retire with a pension.
Alighars garrison reflected the greater divisions in Sindias command
structure and now it was hopelessly further subdivided on the issue of
‘surrender. All this time the British continued ro reap a windfall of ineli-
gence as more ranking mercenary defectors came in from Sindia's units in
the Dethi region. Not all were soldiers; some were European civil admin
{strators who worked in the unique government of the Mughal-Maratha
state that had Shah Alam Il as its figurehead and Daulat Rao Sindia as
its helmsman.”*

‘The faiurc to negotiate a surrender of Alighar meant thatthe assault
would be a sanguinary affair. Lake granted no quarter to an enemy that
refused his surrender offer. Time was critical forthe British if this bare
was to be concluded before a Maratha relief force arrived. One rumour
had it that Perron was out collecting all his remaining Maratha forces for
1 timely rerum. Although there was a particular strategy for taking the
fort, ulimately luc, timing and contingency planning did more to win
the day. Rather than building extensive tench systems for a conventional
siege, Lake was determined to push an artillery piece up tothe entrance of
Alighar and ‘blow the gates’ to enable his European grenadiers a chance
onshin. That was no simple plan given the moat that protected the fort,
‘but a young Irishman named Lucan had taken advantage of the Procla~
‘mation and just ‘come in’ from Maratha service with valuable intelligence
on Alighar Prior to his arrival in the British camp, Lucan had completed
1 trip from Delhi ~ the heart of Sindias North Indian ‘empire’.”® Lucan
was able to tell Lake thet Sindia’s batalions in Delhi were to be used
in either a march on Cocl to relieve a siege of Alighar, or in ambush
against the Grand Army at locations yet Further afield. While the prox-
imig of Maratha infantry reserves was somewhat distressing, Lucan also
clarified another matter, which did provide some additional breathing
room, British intelligence believed that Sindia was ordering troops north
from the Deccan to defend Hindustan. Lucan reckoned thatthe nearest
Maratha Deccani units were still 200 miles from the Yamuna River and
therefore a pending but not an immediate threat.

‘At midnight on 1 September 1803, a violent earthquake struck. Thorn
placed its duration at an exceedingly lengthy two minutes and he noted
several buildings were destroyed.”” Stuart sad it was composed of three
sharp shocks. Pester was roused from a sound sleep and had difficulty
believing that he was not dreaming until the commotion of the camp
around him convinced him that the event was real. A number of the
old-timers assured him it was the severest quake in memory. “The mo-
tion was very like that of a boat in a moderate sea." For some of the
Mamthas' followers this ‘omen’, coupled with the loss of Coel by the

