152 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

affected unit's mounts atthe rate of one troop per regiment The recent
arrival of His Majesty's Sth Light Dragoons from the South African Cape
‘was of help but the shortage of horses meant that they were delayed in
leaving Khanpur and had to follow Lake at a later date Charles Stuart
‘would have to accompany Colonel Clarke to Anupsharh and collect more
EC cavalrymen in bid tobring the mounted arm upto strenguh, Stuart's
diary makes it clear that he saw long-term problems with a balance-sheet
approach to warfare in which potential enemies like the Marathas could
play the military labour market to their advantage every time the EIC
‘experienced a demobilization as the result of a cost-cutting drive. This
‘organizational infighting, over detaching men for galloper crews and the
Governor-General's bodyguard, exacerbated the shortages brought about
by the EIC’s corporate cost-cutting moves.

‘As August 1803 drew to. close there was uneasiness in the British camp
about keeping everything under control until the army was unleashed on
the Marathas. The British were operating at the end of thei logistical
umbilical cord and battle was near. They could not afford to alienate
{hose logistical support personnel that might go over tothe enemy. Two
of General St john' elephant attendants, a mahout and a cool, were
apprehended for plundering a ‘bunga’ who was bringing supplies into
the camp.*® A sentry had ordered them to halt their attack, but the as-
sailants pretended not to understand the order so the sentry seized them,
at bayonet point and brought them in for formal charges. Their mistake
in judgement was in thinking no one would bother to take action against
them for preying on sucha lowly member of South Asian society. Afterall,
they worked fora British general, they had jobs and status. However, they
were not being judged in the framework of South Asian society but rather
Within the context of British military culture and its legalistic structure,
‘That meant martial law as applied to an army on the march. The British
saw the attack on the unfortunate man as threatening the security of the
‘operation. What ifthe bungn’ had run to Sindia’s men and reported the
food and fodder levels of Lake's army? It was fortunate he had not and
that his assailants were caught. Orders were given to summarily hang the
General's men as a lesson to others who might jeopardize relations with
civilian support personnel who formed part of the army's greater retinue.

Rumours had persisted for several months that Sindia’s General Perron
would leave Maratha service ust ike his predecessor de Boigne had done.
Others reported Perron actively leading cavalry incursions across the
Yamuna River.” Lake had written a series of letters to ascertain

rons sentiments but apparently no answer had been forthcoming.

{ow with his army perched on Sindia’s Hindustani border, it looked as if
Lake might finally get some answers. Mr Beckett, aide-de-camp (ADC)

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803, 153

and personal secretary to General Perron, rode out on 31 August 1803
to meet the advancing British.” Pester maintains that it was a mere one
hour before hostilities were scheduled to begin that day si Beckett spoke
‘with Lake regarding the subject of Governor-General Richard Wellesley's
Proclamation made public two days earlier. General Lake gave Beckett
1 copy of the document and sent him back to his master. Lake was not
‘impressed with the defiandy slow pace that Beckert used in retracing
jis steps. Stuart reported that the old general was so ill pleased that he
dispatched his son Major Lake to ride after Beckett. He was alleged to
‘have repeated his father (the general's) threat that if Beckett did not Beta
move on then the Grand Army would reach Coel before him. With that
‘warning Beckett hurried off. Although Perron had been out on parade
with his troops earlier in the day, he rode to meet Beckett when the latter
returned with the Proclamation. As Beckett and Perron passed through
Cocl the locals reportedly hissed at them.

‘Coe! was inconsequential as a town but it was the site of Perron's
headquarters as well as one of his more opulent estates. Surprisingly it
‘was not contested, the Marathas withdrawing to the fortress of Alighar.
Nevertheless Coe! had to be secured and checked out on the off-chance
that Maratha troops had been positioned there to ambush any British
forces headed to Alighar. But to a large degree the occupation of Coe!
‘was a symbolic act. Coel was well known to a number of older British
veterans who had travelled there co meet with de Boigne when it was
hhis headquarters and personal residence, which had passed to Perron
‘when de Boigne resigned. The British main column marched past Cocl
(on theie let) as they headed towards Alighar. Their baggage as well as
bazaars were detached and sent to a safe location. John Pester was in an
ideal situation to observe the opening moves of the bate that was about
to begin, He was posted to the advanced guard, which had been ordered
to seize an enemy village on the high ground adjacent to the Maratha
camp.? The fact that a morass flanked the Maratha campsite figured
in everyone's memoirs. From his slightly elevated position, Pester saw
the precision with which Sindia’s troops broke camp and formed into
‘columns. Theit skilful use of military geography, in camping within the
protection offered by the swampy ground, was not oston Pester. Charles
Stuart observed that the recent monsoon rain had ensured the morass
was an obstacle to be reckoned with.9 General St Leger formed the
British cavalry into six columns, with the most advanced taking the high
‘ground between the opposing forces. The enemy's right was covered by
the protective artillery fire from the fortress of Alighar while the Maratha
‘mounted units had fanned out to front the extensive swamp. The left of
the Maratha line took advantage of the marsh-like irregularities in the

