156 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contet for India

Him that day. Peste’s horse, named ‘Collector’, was wounded when
shot through the neck. The heat had proven particularly troublesome
for both men and beasts!” Charles Stuart summarized the day as not
particularly meaningful with regard to the severity of battle, Rather he
viewed the real significance in terms of the impact that it would have on
‘Maratha political and logistical support. Stuart implied that the Marathas
needed a victory in the opening battle to reinforce their credibility and
‘hegemony in the region. Since the EIC was just beginning to extend
its power into the Doab it did not bode well for the Marathas to be
driven from the field. Stuart reckoned there were 12,000-15,000 enemy
irregular horse opposing them including recently arrived Sikh units from
the Punjab, The Marathas’ performance that day would give cause for
local zamindars and petty rajahs to question the wisdom of supplyin
fresh remounts to the Marathas as opposed to the EIC. It was never a
‘good idea to extend credit co losers in a war of this dimension and if you
had to live with the ‘victors’ it was unwise to be seen as a former ‘enemy’
supporter,

‘The day had ended with the British in firm possession of Coel, which
contained Perrons infantry barracks as well as his personal mansion,
Perron's chief European officers had also constructed homes there.
‘The rumour was that Perron had supposedly withdrawn towards Agra
with select members of his personal bodyguard but, before departure, he
tkR Colonel Pedron in charge of the Maratha forces at Alighar. Know
ing the fortress was well provisioned to withstand a majo siege, Lake
‘opened negotiations with Pedron who sought to hold out until the ar-
rival ofa relief force. According to Stuart and Pester, the British believed
Pedron was seriously contemplating surrendering Alighar but Sindia's
sardars would have no part of i! George Isaac Call of the 27th Light
Dragoons noted the garrison’s command structure was fractured between
the French officers under Pedron and three pacticular Maratha ordan.0
‘The sandars hed more influence over the Maratha roops than the elder
‘but newly appointed Pedron, Many of the remaining Maratha officers
were unimpressed by General Perron’s departure and talk of betrayal
by the European and Euro-Asian officers was common, During nego
tions with Alighar’s garrison, the Marathas practised their gunnery with
characteristic skill Pester, MacGregor and Shairpe had arranged to in-
spect General Perron’s captured house and garden at Cocl They rode
‘back to camp under well-zimed Maratha arillry fre. ‘Several guns were
Jaid for us and one very heavy shot was near clearing the whole of us, it
‘completely covered us with sand,"”"

Lake's patrols picked up a French officer ashe tried to escape from the
besieged garrison on 1 September 1803. The prisoner informed them

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 137

thatthe garrison had opted to stand and fight rather than accept surren-
der terms.” The ethnic backlash had become quite evident in the fat
refusal ofthe sardars to surrender and this was literally house divided.”>
Colonel Pedron, upon having decided to surrender Alighar, was driven to
the upper part of the fort where he remained isolated. Dragoon George
Call noted that they considered the story of the gerrison's di

ploy of war and did not takeit seriously despite the fat that the Governor-
Generals Proclamation had now been made public. Charles Stuart was
alone, among the diarsts, in stating that it was also on 1 September
that General Lake received a letter from General Perron asking permis-
sion to ‘come in’ with his wife, family and bodyguard. Stuart wrote that
things seemed rather confusing because Perron's reputation was one of
personal bravery, yet he had not seemed willing to show any sign of that
character trait since the war started. Cryptically, Stuart indicated that
he knew more about Perron’s surrender than he was willing to commit
to paper. Apparently Perron had been under suspicion or was ‘discov-
‘ered’ by Sindia some time earlier. There were also rumours in camp that
‘and as a result Sindia had sent agents
to take control of Perron’ jaghir. Further complicating matters, Perron
‘could not trust or cooperate with Bourquin who was suid to be his des-
ignated successor as Daulat Rao Sindia's C-in-C. In his diary, Charles
‘Stuart posed some rhetorical questions, which pondered whether Perron
‘was really dedicated to serving the Marathas,

‘The mostrationa! way of accounting forhis conduct isto suppose him unprepared
for the event and that undetermined what to do he was atthe last decided by the
‘evens which ensued. He certainly was treated by us as an enemy for his garden
House at Coel was completely plundered of is furniture and wines while this

reflects the disgrace on our Army."

‘The Maratha command structure was now divided along both its hor-
izontal and vertical axis. The Marath: clansmen were at odds with their
remaining foreign and Euro-Asian dicers. Among Sindia's European
mercenaries, the French suspected the British mercenaries would not
fight the EIC and Lake's army; while Perron and his successor Bourquin ~
a fellow Frenchman ~ were deeply suspicious of each other's motives.
‘Some ofthe English observers perceived a deeper class division between
the French. The latter theory held that Bourquin and his cronies were not
so much working-class heroes as vulgar men from the lower reaches of
French society ~ journeyman butchers, apprentice bakers, itinerant salt
sellers supposed candidates for French revolutionary indoctrination if
the story was true. They contrasted some ofthe tired old gentlemen ike
Pedron, a French officer ofthe ancien régime ~ men who had seen it all

