146 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for india

them, i obscured the fact tha simple construction techniques made the
walls dificult to breach and easy to repair. These defiant or ‘Refractory
Zamindars resorted to armed insurgency with cyclical regularity. It was
something they had done since before the establishment of Mughal au-
thority although never as part ofa coordinated resistance."

Lieutenant John Pester of the Bengal army became a veteran of
siege warfare, serving in the British trenches at Sesni" Bijighus! and
Kachaura.!"¥ Two of the ‘mud fort’, Sasni and Bijighur, belonged to
Rajah Bhagwant Singh and figured prominently in a threatened ant
British ‘Jat alliance’ with Bharatpur. Coincidentally or not, Sasni just
happened to be only a days ride from Coel Headquarters for Sindia's
CHin-C General Perron. Charles Stuart wrote in his diary, “General
Perron then at Coel was heard to say that the force we had assembled
‘was not merely for the purpose of subduing a refractory Zumeendar and
‘on our going away he observed, ifthe English imagined everything was
setled with the Mahrattas they were much mistaken.""* Counterinsur-
‘gency operations in the ‘Mud War provided an ideal opportunity to gain
intelligence on the Maratha forces and the subjugation of Sasni as well as
Bijighur provided the EIC with depots for furure use."

As for Kachaura, it foreshadowed the darker side of war that ly ahead
inthe struggle for North India. After being surrounded by the British, the
garrison had sought terms of capitulation. Lake sent a small force under
Captain Miller, the son of a Prussian general to accept its surrender.
Miller and his troops were admitted to the lower portion of Kachaura
‘butnot the upper. Supposedly, arrangements were stil being made fr the
evacuation ofthe sarda’s wives and children.'® In the morning it became
evident that Miller and his men were in the sights of the garrison who
told chem to withdraw or face death. Malers people came under fire
from Kachaura’s garrison after making an orderly retreat. Lake saw this
ms the worst violation of bargaining in good faith and sought to make an
‘example of the garrison. Pesters company and another from his battalion
‘were ordered to seize the が erg (close tothe fort's giaci and put it to
the torch - which they did. The thatched roofs and stored quantities of
animal fodder burned intensely. Kachaura’s walls were eventually holed
with artillery fire and great numbers of the defenders were bayoneted as
they sought to escape through the breach. Inside the walls, the remaining

か ASS

ed Bie, Bs
sec iat

I ee sou cer Kut Kahn Kar

Vi Lats

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 147

garrison was ‘cut up'.9 The cavalry were then employed in riding down,
those few who had got beyond the perimeter:

‘The enemy, who were exiemely numerous, were almost to a man put to

death, The ground in every direction near the fort was strewed with ther dead,

and they very dearly paid for their unaccountable conduct in turning out our

roaps ... Hardly any of the garrison escaped the carnage, which by their own

honourable cont they enero on tenses, and Which ey mos
ly merit

With the ‘Mud War’ concluded, the British troops returned to their
ccantonments. Charles Stuart recalled, ‘but scarcely had we settled our-
selves comfortably in our Bungalows when our promised tranquillicy was
disturbed by reports of an approaching Mahratta war’ 2?

General Lake's ‘Grand Army’ of Hindustan

Final preparations for war against the Marathas in the northern theatre
were made during the first week of August 1803.2 Lieutenant Pester
took his grenadiers for target practice, each man in the section fring
six rounds, Battalion exercises were conducted in the cool hours of the
‘morning and included the manoeuvres thought most likely to be used in
‘massed firing deployments.® He recorded the battalion exercises as ‘the
‘most useful and likely manoeuvres to be practised with an army’; they
hhad been designed ‘to make the men steady in their firings’. These were
preparations for large-scale regular operations. The plan was to be battle
ready for the march to Etah, which would serve as the staging area for
the assembly of Lake's Grand Army.

General Lake marched from Khanpur on 7 August 1803 with the in-
fantry under Major-General St John, The next day Colonel St Leger
followed at the head of the cavalry. It was only sensible that the infantry,
‘with its large baggnge train and camp followers, be given a head start on
the line of march. Major-General St John, an advocate of light infontry
doctrine, had recommended a reorganization of the troops in accordance
‘with the new light infantry tactics he championed. He had proposed that
ten men from each company be specially trained in marksmanship and
‘elated light infantry skill. There were ten companies in exch battalion,
‘so when needed, the specially rained men could be called forward to the
font of the battalion to form a special ‘eleventh company’. They held
potential for lank duty as well since it was believed their expertise could
be utilized to hold the enemy ata distance, According to Colonel Pearscs
study of Lake, the C-in-C approved of the arrangement asa ‘temporary
‘measure’. There were strong opponents to St John’s plan who saw it

