160 ‘The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

supposedly unbeatable Perron, was too much. There was a lingering
feeling that the unfolding political and miliary events were of cosmic
proportion,

By 3 September the British were hard at workin the garden or ‘Sahib
Bagh’ of Perron’s summer home, ‘making ready" for the assault on
‘Alighar.” They prepared the materials they would need to reinforce the
hasty redoubts chat would be built ro house the British 18 pounder siege
‘guns, which were Lake's biggest serviceable ordnance.® Although most
GRcn associated with the use of sabot-itted iron round shot against stone
fortress walls, they would be employed here with grape shot to clear
‘Maratha aruillerymen from Alighars walls. The Maratha artillery now
fired periodically into Perron's garden as they caught sight of worthwhile
targets. Pester thought the activity in the garden was intended to mis-
lead the enemy's appraisal of Brish tactics. "The pioneers employed as
yesterday, cutting materials for batteries, which we imagined to be a de-
‘ception, as it was pretty certain from Wemyss’ account that we should
attempt the place by a coup de main." There were also 12 pounder
crews assembling in the garden under the watchful eye of Shipton of the
artillery. But no one at that point seems to have realized how valuable
those guns would prove be in the coming fight. The 18 pounders were
100 heavy to move under fire but a 12 pounder, while a brute to manhan-
dle, could be forced along by burly men aided with hand-spikes. Shipton.
told Pester in confidence thatthe assault would be the next morning and
that he, meaning Shipton, had been designated ‘Captain ofthe Artilery
to lead the dangerous positioning of the guns needed to ‘blow the gates’
Standard practice was to se a 6 pounder when blowing gates, but it was
dangerous in that you had to run it upto the very door you were trying to
blow open. As ifby way of encouragement, newsletters from the Deccan
arrived that night which informed Lake's camp that Arthus Wellesley had
taken the petih at Ahmadnagar.

‘Time ran out for Colonel Pedron after five days of negotiation and
Lake decided on 4 September that there was no use delaying the assault.
‘According to Pearses Memoir ofthe Life and Military Services of Viscount
Lake, Pedron had favoured capitulating but he was prevented from doing
‘0 by his second in command, who had the old colonel arrested." The
‘Maratha forces inside Alighar knew thei time was short and they had
already begun to run a mine under the main gateway for fear that the
British would indeed risk a coup de main by wheeling up @ gun to blow
the gates in A moat or ditch, which varied from 100 to 200 feet across

ind with a depth of 30 feet, surrounded the fort. At any given time there
‘was a minimum of 10-12 feet of water in the ditch. The garrison had

almost completed work on a drawbridge and if the assault was delayed

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 161

the passage across the ditch could be cut at will by the enemy's ra
‘that single bridge.®*

Lucan, having recenuy defected from the Marathas, warned Crin-C
General Lake that the fort like meny others in india, was protected by an.
intricate series of inner gates to thwart a simple assault And that if Lake
intended to take the fort via a coup de main he would have to get his men
‘over the causeway across the ditch, chrough the main entrance and then
‘navigate a maze-like circular bastion once inside. The circular bastion was,
‘death trap with flanking loopholes where an unseen enemy could fre
‘smallarms at their leisure. Stopping for a moment o hesitating under fre
totrya phoney door could cost multiple ives Without decisive leadership
any such action was doomed to failure because men, regardless of whether
they are enlisted men or officers, will falter in the face of a withering
fire from an unseen enemy. Theoretically one should have selected an
‘officer or NCO who could motivate and inspire troops and make the
impossible an atrainable goal. The British regimental system also required
«known and trusted leader who would not retreat and bring disgrace on
the unit. A natural leader, a madman and a father figure would just about
sum up the desired characteristics. Although this action was offically led
by Colonel William Monson, the recently defected Mr Lucan ~ to the
surprise of many - would serve to guide the troops. The assault party
was composed of members of His Majesty's 76th Regiment under Major
‘McLeod, the Ist Batalion ofthe 4th Regiment of Bengal Native Infantry
(ND commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Browne, four companies of the
17th Regiment Bengal NI under Captsin Bagshaw, and ultimately the
2nd Battalion of the 4th Regiment of Bengal NI. Colonel Horsford of
the artillery had completed the two batteries of four 18 pounders ench to
provide the needed covering tnc. The British forces would carry ladders
to escalade the walls adjacent to the gates in an effort to neutralize any
remaining defenders there, while a 6 pounder was wheeled up to ‘blow
the gates’. The apparent last-minute decision to use a 6 pounder seems
to have been based on concerns for mobility on the approach to the
{innermost doors.

Inthe first half ofthe eighteenth century it was more common to se
‘petard to blow gates open but the petard had fallen out of favour and few
soldiers were trained in is use. As afild-expedient alternative means of
“lowing in’ the gates, it became common practice to use a 6 pounder
with the muzzle placed against the doors ™ The military men ofthe day
often argued about the precise technique. But the most common way
‘was to load « powder charge only, without cannonball or other projectile,
inthe cannon. Then place the muzzle of the gun directly against planks
pressed against the door so that the tremendous pressure generated by

got

