150 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

orders to hire more sebundies to guard the ferry crossings. Many of the
local sebundies had been seconded to irregular provincial battalions and
now the race was on to find more just to guard the river crossings, since
the Marathas could easily move a brigade over a river in a good night's
work, Captain Hodgson was dispatched as far as Khanpur to bring in
more sebundies in a Futile effort to seal the riverbank. From more con-
ventional intelligence sources, Pester heard that a great number of Sikhs
had joined Perron’s forces. Perron, as Sindia's C-in-C, had reportedly
sworn all ‘the Chiefs of his army’ to ‘conquer or die with him’. Further
reports came in about the strength of Daulat Rao Sindias brigades: ‘they
‘amount to nearly twenty times our number, both in troops and guns, he
is said to be confident of success. His artillery reported to be equal to any
in the world, and in that he chiefly depends for our destruction.’*

General Lake's party arrived at Etah on 23 August and found Pester
1s well as other troops from the Shikohabad cantonments waiting, Lake
Jost no time in briefing Colonel Blair, Pesters commanding officer, one
of the few field officers in the campaign to have served in the earlier
or First Anglo-Maratha War. Colonel Blair had been second in com-
‘mand of one of the corps, which formed the detachment under Goddard,
‘made famous for the daring capture of Mahadji Sindias ciffiop fortress
of Gwalior in 1780. Pester recorded: ‘Colonel Blair had distinguished
himself on many occasions and was thought to be also the frst drill of-
ficer in the service.” The men under his command would have had
some of the finest drill instruction available in the country. It is not
clear, however, to what degree Blair would have served as a repository
for ‘in-country’ knowledge or previous experience against the Marathas.
“Most units tended to modify official drill and integrate elements of field
craft or local knowledge based on weapons and tactics.” In some cases
the modifications were adopted offically, army-wide

‘The Grand Army moved on, picking up General Ware's combined
infantry and cavalry force, the so-called Fatehgarh Division," at Sikandra
Rao.! From there they pressed on and camped beside the south wall
of the fort at Bijighur along the road that led north to Alighar. News
‘came in that General Perron was preparing to confront the Grand Army
‘at Coel adjacent to the fortress of Alighar.! The ‘irregular horse’ he had
gathered were said to be the finest ‘ever seen in Hindustan’.2® And as the
British approached, Pester and his men could hear the distant cannon fire
‘of General Perron' gallopers on their daily exercise, Although Perron’s
‘mounted units could be seen at a distance, they avoided contact and

Furyphur,Faty Ghur

21-4, 18-4, Aka Sikander, Sitander Row Sicunder Rao.
127- れ 79 Aa Alghur, Ally Ghuc AH Ghur Alga.

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 151

remained aloof. There was no rush to war on the part of these Marathas.

‘An undisclosed number of British, as opposed to ‘mixed-race’ officers,
from Sindias and Holkars armies were reported by Pester to have taken
advantage of the Proclamation and ‘come in’ on 27 August, still a full
‘two days before the official announcement. The incoming officers from
‘Sindia's service confirmed that Lake's Grand Army faced its most serious
‘challenge in the ‘regular corps’ and Sindia's artillery, which supported i

“The British officers who gave us those particulars of he enemy may be
‘supposed to be well acquainted with the real state oftheir forces, as they
were the very men who had disciplined their troops and artillery, and a
few weeks since only were with them, some in command of Brigades,
‘others Majors, Captains and Subalterns ia That evening Pester and his
good friend Wemyss rode around the fort at Bijighur reflecting on their
‘experiences: ‘we went to the spot on which our batteries were erected
‘when we besieged the place last year’. Wemyss had been promoted to
serve as one of General Lake's staff officers and he kept his friend Pester
‘well informed of events atheadquarters.! Wemyss confided to Pester that
‘Lake's staff knew full well that the campaign they were about to embark
‘upon was bound to be bloody. Lake made sure his staff officers had taken
seriously the intelligence reports that the Maratha regulars were equal to
any scpoy force possessed by the EIC.

‘The sick from all the brigades were collected and deposited in Bijighur
“which had also been converted into a British grain depot for the ease of
resupplying Lake's army."® Charles Stuart along with his comrades in the
3rd Bengal NC also made use of the fort to store their cavalry carbines
since the stubby fintlocks ‘encumbered both man and horse’. Presum=
ably Stuart and his fellow horsemen preferred to use their EIC-issued
‘swords and cavalry pistols. But Stuart wrote of another larger problem in
his diary that night. Battalion strengths had previously been cut to 800
‘and yet now, on the very eve of this Maratha war, an order arrived to
expand his battalion by 100 men; Charles knew that would be difficult
to do, Obviously the Marathas drew men from the same pool of military
labour and, as noted previously, they had quickly taken up the unem-
ployed EIC troops who had been discharged earlier. Stuart griped that
‘changes in doctrine had hit the cavalry particularly hard. They lost good
riders as well as horses in the drive to form new cavalry-based galloper
‘gun crews. And it had been only a little over a year since men of the
Bengal and Madras Native Cavalry had been seconded to the Governor
General's bodyguard at arate of twenty per regiment in accordance with
‘the requirements of a ‘peace establishment’.** The Governor-General’
‘bodyguard was begrudgingly seen as having skimmed-off the best trained
‘men and a somewhat bitter Stuart recorded that it had depleted the

