142 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

Map 8. An overview ofthe 1803 Hindustan Campaign: from amap (not
to scale) by George sac Call, His Majesty's 27th Light Dragoons |

‘cutbacks. They had desperately hoped that their ledgers might show the
benefits of peace, Lake, as one of England's senior-most commanders in
the field - having fought in Europe and America ~ knew better than to li
about military preparedness and the projected cost of victory. He realized
time and money were both in short supply; his troops were simply not
ready for a war with Daulat Rao Sindia in 1802.

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 143

‘The Maratha military tradition of seeking pragmatic costrefkctive so-
tutions to military problems seemed to leave Sindia in an ideal position
jm 1802. He could easily dwarf the EIC' sepoy army in North India by
dominating the military labour market through spending his accumu-
led wealth and extending his indigenous credit lines. Failing that he
could rally hundreds of thousands of pindaries if he so decided. But that
‘made litde sense to him, as it was an option akin to opening Pandora's
‘box. Once loosed in vast numbers the pindaries would strip all the land
like locusts and that included Sindia’s personal holdings. Why risk such
‘a dangerous poticy in a land as revenue-rich as the Doab? Every time the
cost-cutting Bengal Presidency demobilized a company or even a pa-
‘toon of sepoys it meant fresh assets were there to be snapped up. As for
firepower, Perron had consolidated the improvements made in defence
procurement under de Boigne. Arillery and smallarms were stockpiled
in Sindia’s arsenals and depots. The stage was set for a monumental
showdown in Hindustan. What the British needed was some means of
saining a competitive advantage and, filing that, they needed some way
{to compromise Sindias powerful army.

‘The ‘Mud War

‘In 1802 the Bengal Presidency authorized troop reductions in a number
of EIC military unit." In his diary Lieutenant Charles Stuart of the 3rd
‘Bengal Native Cavalry” criticized the expansion ofthe EIC’s territory just
‘demobilization had swollen the Marathas' infantry ranks with British
sepoys, The fee flow of trained men to the Maratha ‘regular corps’ was
worsened by the fact that Sindia’s troops had no shortage of smallarms,
‘ammunition, or arilery. General Perron, Sindia's C-in-C, saved training
costs and mobilization time by ‘plugging in’ these valuable free agents
from the military labour market. Charles Stuart wrote critically:

‘With the increase of dominion no increase of our force had taken place; on the
‘contrary a reduction of nearly 8,000 men had considerably weakened the Army
all the branches of which, had been placed on the peace establishment. On the
‘ther hand General Perron was actively employed in adding a new Brigade ro
bis army & many of the men lately discharged from our Service flocked to his
standard, while the whole of his force was amply supplied with every military
‘equipment?

‘The troop reductions put pressure on General Lake to my and get the
best performance out of his men. Lake and Governor-General Wellesley

* Aka 3rd Naive Light Cavalry or simply the ml Bengal NC

