154 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

ground and the shelter ofan intervening hamlet. It was the enemy's left
flank, according to Captain William Thorn, which was designated by
Lake to be the focal point ofthe British attack *

In order to engage the Maratha horse, on the periphery of the swamp,
the British cavalry had to form a single column and advance to contact.*
[As the British closed on the Marathas they could clearly see Perron's
bodyguard dressed in their bright red uniforms. Stuart was able to view
Monsieur Fleury in charge of another well-dressed body of horsemen;
he was reported to be the only European on the fied for the Marathas,
which made his identification all che more easy. Thorn wrote that there
were 5,000 regular Maratha cavalry in attendance and approximately
15,000 irregular light horse. The Marathas had cleverly lured the British
cavalry vanguard around the watercourse, thereby elongating St Leger’s
formation and denying him a chance to charge on-line. Once the British
cavalry were drawn into an over-extended positon, the Marathas raked
the British horsemen with smallarms fire. Maratha skirmishers killed se¥-
«ral British horses and that spread confusion through the cavalry ranks,
‘The British cavalry drew therpistols and prepared to reurn fire but Lake
saw the danger ofthe lure and recalled the men immediately to avoid a
crap. This opening round of the battle did not speak well forthe British
cavalry since they had been forced to change formation nwice without
gmining ground or significant position in thei dalliance. Their manoeu-
‘res were well executed in terms of tactical command and control, but the
necessity of having to change formation appeared as an overall inability
to correctly ‘rea’ the enemy and the field.

Lake was a fighting general of the old order who stressed personal com-
bat leadership, a point which should not be forgotten when considering
the success of his troops. To have one’s C-in-C take an active role in
‘combat leadership ~ to lay his life on the line ~ provided tremendous in-
spiration to the average soldier. General Lake placed himself atthe head
of his cavalry that was reformed in columns of regiments. The training
lessons of Kannauj were to be put to the test. The opening salvo of the
cavalry’s gallopers was heard by all serving more than the purpose of
suppressive covering fie. That discharge signalled the commencement
of the main attack. ‘The British infantry then swept the enemy pickets
from their ephemeral posting onthe left end of the Maratha line.” They
pushed on under a continuous covering fie from the gallopers. The
Pe rev then began talent th fie bowen crowds of Maratha

lr horsemen, who had appeared on the periphery, and the pock-
fof Mara sheers whe consoled nd ached po they
fell back In later passing over the ground, Pester noted the high num-
ber of casualties which the British gallopersinficted. He attributed this

“The Hindustan Campaign of 1803, 135

to target density and he thought each round ‘did execution’ among the
concentrated enemy infantry ranks.”

"As the Maratha left was being ‘rolled-up’, Lake ordered his cavalry
vanguard into two lines and advanced with the infantry supporting in a
third and fourth line as the morass permitted.® ‘The Maratha forces fell
‘back further as the British advanced; but the Marathas had positioned
matchlock sharpshooters in the hamlet, which was by now on the British
right, Lake was determined to minimize his casualties from this aimed
fire and maintain his momentum by sending an entie battalion of sepoys
to clear the hamles; something they did in short order owing to their
‘numerical superiority. Another large body of Maratha horse then arrived.
Tewasan old-style Maratha tactical formation inthe sense thatit consisted
ofa large column of regular cavalry spearheaded by regular cavalry. The
regular cavalry, in the lead, were intended to pierce a hole in the British
formation, If it had gone according to plan, the ligt horse would then
ride through to the inside ofthe British formation cutting up opponents
ts they presented themselves. Maratha light horse often carried a variety
‘of edged weapons, which included utagrs lances, the Maratha spear and
the so-called ‘Rajput pike’ or ‘half pike’ swung in much the same manner
asabattle-axe.” But things did not goaccording tothe Maratha plan. The
British response was swift and decisive. The ‘gallopers’ swung into action.
‘nd their blanketing fire caused loss of contro in the Maratha formation,
‘which was putto fight. Lake's cavalry pursued them but Maratha artillery
covering-fie from Alighar proved a distraction. William Thorn noted that
the fie from the fort continued during the rest ofthe flanking movement
botithad ltde effect on the British advance with the majority of Maratha
rounds being aimed too high and passing over the heads ofthe British.*?
‘The sustained forward drive ofthe gallopers pushed the outlying Maratha
light horsemen back further until they abandoned the field.

“The remaining enemy infantry now fell back to the walls of Alighar’s
fortress, This was a well-orchestrated move with the for’ artillery crews
adjusting their range, loosing an effective covering barrage to deny the
British an opportunity to cut off the Maratha infantry before itpulled back
inside the for Informants and spies had been been able to get inside
Alighar as late as July 1803." The British knew from their intelligence

reports that Alighar held plentiful supplies of artillery ammunition to
feed the Maratha guns and a siege could prove costly. Lake curtailed
the day's action and withdrew back towards the town of Coel where
‘camp was pitched by 2 pm. Casualties were light for the Britis. The
‘infantry had escaped virtually unscathed while in the cavalry there was,
only one man killed and four wounded with twenty-one horses listed ns
‘casualties General Lake's son Major Lake had a horse shot from under

