144 The Anglo-Maracha Campaigns and the Contes for India

hhad been shocked tosee the disastrous outcome of an 1802 experimentin.
training men for the Bengal Native Cavalry. The concept was to have new
recruits ‘break’ and gmin their horses as part of their own introduction.
to cavalty service. Lake thought it a miserable failure and he believed
‘many of the problems stemmed from using inexperienced officers who
‘were not combat veterans. Generally speaking, the Bengal Native Cavalry
‘were poorly prepared and the Governor-General was mortified to find
the King's 29th Regiment of Light Dragoons were in a ‘nearly equal
state of inefficiency’? The only bright spot in the review of troops was
the 3rd Bengal NC Regiment and the credit went to Major Middleton.
‘The remedy for addressing this shocking state of affairs was an intensive
retraining programme. Lake's plan would serve the dual purpose of up-
grading his cavalry troops as well as preparing them for the possibility of
all-out war against the Marathas.

Lake's British and native cavalry, with the exception of large numbers,
‘of the 3ed Bengal NC, were sent to Kannauj* during the winter months
‘of 1802-3. Lake had secured Kannauj as well as some other territory in
‘the Gunga-Yamuna Doab and Rohillakund from the Nawab of Awadh in
ieu of outstanding debts.4 As territories ceded to the EIC these became
the latest in a long string of acquisicions, which the Company called
the ‘Ceded Districts’.* I was an astute move on the eve of a war with
‘Sindia because the territory bordered his and that would reduce the length
‘of furure marches and resupply routes. The training ground near the
‘Maratha frontier was ideal ‘cover’ for explaining the acrival of troops

from Khanpur and Bengal.

‘At Kannauj the horse soldiers were to study the so-called new uniform
system of cavalry movements as taught in person by Colonel (later Major-
General) William St Leger of His Majesty's 27th Light Dragoons.” The
was to transform Lake's cavalry into a well-oiled military machine,
‘one that was acclimatized and trained in a setting identical to the area
‘of operations in which it was to be deployed. Pechaps more importantly,
the men were destined to fight under combat leaders who had instructed
them, an element that must have contributed greatly to unit cohesion
‘and esprit de corps. William Thorn, who participated in the exercises,
noted: ‘nothing could exceed the celerity and exactness ofthe manoeuvres
mad with them by ths large body of cavalry’. Most of St Leger's dill
‘was to be applied to old-established tactics but these men were also being
drilled in the new doctrine of mobile firepower. St Leger had the men

\

27 4,79 +, Ata Kanai, Kanouge, Canouge chai ben the seat ofa great andpowerfal
“mie under Haha i the even em CE
| 25° 89 +. Ala Cownpore, Caunpoor, Cunpoor

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803, 5

‘tain exhaustively with the 6 pounder galloper gun, two of which were
{to be attached to each cavalry regiment. The galloper wes a horse-drawn
sgun that many cavalry officers knew as ‘flying artillery’ In time separate
‘horse artillery’ units would emerge, but this was mobile frepower raised
within the cavalry regiments. EIC officers had studied the successful use
of horse artillery by Frederick the Great during the Seven Years’ War
(0756-63)?

Horse-drawn artillery had been known in South Asia since Babur's
se of rakhale at the First Bate of Panipat in 1526. Maratha armies
hhad possessed one form or another of horse-drawn artillery throughout
the eighteenth century and even Jeswunt Rao Holkars irregular cavalry
‘used gallopers. But the smaller pindari bands that plagued the British
lacked resources and they had no answer to a 6 pounder laying down a
well-patterned curtain of canister shot. There was litle incentive for lo-
cal pindari groups to acquire artillery a it was a logistical liability and its
‘mere possession could not be explained in anything les than threatening
terms that risked challenge from the British. The 6 pounder ‘gallopers*
‘were a major breakthrough in terms of the speed and mobility of frr
power when dealing with pindares, The British could pursue a pindari
unit and engage it at ranges that were impossible to achieve with muskets.
‘The 3 pounder was too small and the 12 pounder too heavy for practi-
cal use as a galloper.!” As a force multiplier, or weapon that increased
‘one's firepower exponentially, the 6 pounder galloper was ideal against
‘a numerically superior force brandishing nothing larger than smallarms.
‘St Leger's training at Kannauj was evidence that British forces were adapt
{ng their existing form of warfare to cope with changing requirements in
the South Asian military environment. But only now was the British mil-

ery acquiring parity with the Sindia clan's fire mobility, for they had
possessed gallopers for a considerable length of time and de Boigne had
standardized their calibres and dimensions.

While most of Lake's horsemen were busily engaged at Kannauj,
‘Charles Stuart and elements ofthe 3rd Bengal NC were out in the field
supporting a number of operations that would come to be known collec-
tively asthe ‘Mud War’ !? This series of nasty sieges was directed against
the so-called ‘mud forts’ of the Doab that habitually offered resistance
to central authority. It did not matter if the central authority was the
‘Mughals, the Nawab of Awadh, or the British. The landlords who en-
‘sconced themselves in these forts were reluctant to pay their taxes, Their
‘tude’ forts were brown or dung coloured, owing to the use of simple
earthen building materials drawn from the immediate enviconment. But
‘he term ‘mud fort’ was a bit of a misnomer. Although that name sum-
‘marized the demeaning contempt in which Bengals tax authorities held

