148 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘not simply as a recurring trend, but as dangerously shortsighted from the
company commander's point of view. At that time infantry companies
were only averaging a strength of eighty to ninety men, rather than one
hundred. And the removal of ten more men when combat was immi-
nent, especially chose selected for their marksmanship and skill, robbed
‘ company of ts best men when they were needed the most.
‘Despiteallthachas been written about the supposed ‘lessons ofthe rifle”
during the American Revolution, General Lake, as a combat veteran of
‘that war, saw no substitute for strength in numbers or the orthodoxy of
the musket and bayonet against so strong an infantry as that possessed
by Sindia. Although not formally studied it would seem that Lake, like
‘Cornwallis his superior at Yorktown, actually profited by applying his
‘American War experience to India. Lake had been pounded close to
senseless by days of heavy French artillery bombardment at Yorktown
‘and defiantly replied by leading a spirited grenadier tench raid against
his enemy. There was no substitute for going on the offensive when an
infantryman’s morale sagged under the weight of siege-induced inactivity.
Lake had also seen thatthe elaborate theories of sizing cities, as a means
‘of crushing enemy resistance through urban and commercial contro, did
not work in the American Revolution; there was no reason to think they
‘would work here. To him the cities of Agra and Delhi were merely life-
support systems forthe great fortresses that lay around them. It was the
troops inside that counted. The operational objectives had to be kept
simple ~ hunt down the enemy's regular army, engage it, and destroy it.
‘The EIC apparently had to accomplish that or there could be no victory
and certainly no peace. Ifa handful of ‘mud forts’ caused so much grief,
then Sindias professional standing army could spell disaster for any plans
to bring the Doab under the EICS control
‘St Leger’ cavalry and St John’s infantry were reunited about five days

later at a spot where the Kali Nadi empties into the Gunga. It was an
area familiar to the cavalry who had trained in that yidnioy Now they
looked back fondly on those times. Life at Kannauj had been relatively
comfortable, ‘many officers had not only glass doors to their tents, but
chimneys of brick’ Several wives had accompanied their officer hus-
bands and dining was luxuriant as the evening's claret was supplemented
with bottles of shiraz and port on a regular basis. From Kannaui, Lake
and his forces worked their way west-northwest along the Grand Trunk
Road to the staging area at Etah* where they would rendezvous with
‘additional units such as Lieutenant Pester’s grenadiers.

NN one Augus 1803 John Pester wrote thatthe so-called ‘alas of-

‘Maratha service who ‘had left in consequence ofa proclamation

om,

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803, 49

declaring that al people ofthat description, born of British parentage,
‘who remained in the service of the native powers, with whom war was now
declared, would be considered as traitors to their country, and treated ac-
cordingly should the fate ofthe war throw them into our hands’. The
‘ming of Pester’s entry is interesting because it was a full ten days before
official public release of the information on 29 August, indicating that
the contents of Governor-General Richard Wellesley’s Proclamation had
been available for some time.”* The Proclamation clearly played upon
perceptions of allegiance and British nationalism in a manner intended
to transcend racial differences. While the thought of soon being labelled
1 ‘traitor’ conveyed the message that the days of the gentleman's under-
standing were rapidly drawing to a close. Things had taken a much more
serious turn,

‘The next day, 20 August, General Lake received a letter from
Lieutenant-Colonel Collin, the British Resident at Sindias court.
Collins’ note said he was making his own way towards Aurangabad, which
‘meant that peaceful negotiations had failed and that war was imminent.
‘According to William Thorn of the dragoons, it was six days later that
Lake offically received word from the Governor-General to commence
‘war against Sinda's forces unless a message ofa settlement arrived in the
‘meantime from Arthur Wellesley.” In reading the memoirs and corre-
spondence of British oficersitis apparent cha the British high command
in North India realized the serious military threat posed by the Maratha
artilery They also knew the prize status that had been affixed to it john
Pester wrote: ‘everything bade fir for a bloody campaign, as the enemy
are certainly very numerous, supported by a formidable train of alley,
‘of which we hope soon to have an opportunity of relieving them.”

Pester was a very sociable man and received intelligence from a great
<icle of friends that included ‘Mrs C’ at Mainpuri.* She was the wife
‘of Mr Cunynghame the District Collector for the Ceded Districts."
Mrs Cunynghame wrote, with apparent disregard for security, about her
hushands orders to build two bridges across the Isan River.! One bridge
‘was to be reinforced to carry the weight of the British siege train destined
to pass over it; while the other was to be dedicated strictly for troops.
River crossings were going to be important in these operations and while
smaller rivers could be bridged, if necessary, the Gunga and Yamuna
‘would have co be crossed repeatedly with boats. The boatmen, as inde~
pendent entrepreneurs in the South Asian military economy; stood to
‘make a great deal of money in this campaign. Mr Cunynghame received

27 4,78 +. Aba Mynpoorie,
! Aa Cuningham oc Cunyagham. The speling used inthe above ex was transcribed from
the allectors Latter to Henry Welle.

‘Ata Es River. [trun pale tothe Gunga and Yanuna between Kannauj and Etowah,

LO 6806

