166 “The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

John Pester, who hid been responsible for carrying the news of che
exterior gateway's fall to the C-in-C, returned with the General so chat
Lake could see for himself the frightful cost. Pester had many friends
‘among the dead and dying on the ground and the scene shocked Lake
eyen though the crusty old man had done his personal share of killing
in the trenches of Virginia, Pester remarked of Lake: ‘I never saw any-
‘one more distressed for a moment when he entered the sortie, and saw
‘officers and men heaped on one another."®” As if being accosted by a
host from his own unresolved past, a wounded grenadier approached
Lake, The man who ‘hoped his honour was well’ said he had served in
Lake's company at Yorktown twenty-two years earlier. Lake, although of-
ten noted for his gracious treatment of the wounded, invited the injured
‘man to headquarters to see what could be done for him.'®? However,
Lake's fury and desire for revenge contrasted the compassion shown to
his old comrade-in-arms. He was so enraged that he ordered the cavalry
pickets to ride out, travelling further afield than during the battle and track
down those who had escaped from the fort earlier in the day. Once the
escapees were located they were to be summarily executed. The nearby
Maratha survivors, many of whom had managed to avoid being shot or
‘drowned in the moat and now wandered the field in a dazed condition,
were also rounded up and executed. Charles Stuart’ criticism was bitter
with remorse:

‘An oficer saw a Riding Master of one of the regiment of cavalry go up t0 8 poor
lunarmed creature and strike his head off and on demanding the authority for
fo crue! an action was told the Commander-in-Chief had ordered every man to
be filled, In the moment of indignasion he might have over-looked the cruelty
‘and injustice of this order but Ios all patience when Thea such barbarity cooly
‘defended on principles of policy. The place was strong andthe garrison had every
reason to suppose that their defence would have proved successful. They behaved
ft good soldiers and faithful servants and God forbid we should be reduced sa
Tow as to have recourse to deeds of cruelty io ensure our success."

Ironically Governor-General Richard Wellesley, in later commemorat-
ing the victory, cited the British surrender proposals as prof of British
humanity.

Lieutenant Charles Stuart indicated Lake was stil inthe vicinity of
the gateway as Pedron appeared, a very tied old man dressed in a green
jacket with gold lace and epaulettes; he was brought out asa prisoner.
Lake, through an interpreter, said to Pedron ‘See here si what you have

answer peinog tte dead and wounded,! Stuart did not think

at Pedron was to blame since he had no authority over the garrison. He
had been a prisoner ofthe Marathas before the British attacked, It would
seem, with regard to the costly final stand made by the garrison, that

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 167

i was Bali Rao who acted against Pedron's wishes and urged a stalwart
defence that cost Lake's men so deatly. Although British casualty figures
‘rary greatly among auchors, ranging from 223 to 278, there is agres~
nent that the British oficer ranks did suffer in accordance with their
tradition of leadership under fire as seventeen officers were rendered 28
sugltes. き George Call said about 2,000 of the enemy were Killed, with
he only prisoners listed as Pedron and two Maratha ‘chiefs.’ Within
a dey ofthe action the sun bloated many ofthe bodies in Alighars moat.
‘Human features became distorted beyond easy recognition. Large numr
‘bers of bodies drifted on the surface and the putrefying flesh created an
Unbearable stench thot sickened all, Sart saw detachments ordered to
dig mass graves and the pioneers then drained the ditch that surrounded
the fort!

ohn Pester noted three hours of plundering were allowed afte the
victory but Charles Stuart, literally a much more sober critic of Lake,
fold 2 different story. Stuart recounted how the plundering led to an
‘ray of drinking and that lasted for three full days. ‘The amack flowed
freely and many troops were to be seen openly roaming the town wih
potdes in theirhands, Often they would stagger into the private quarters of
citizens who protested vocierously only to have s handful of coins tossed
in thei direction as a silencing gesture.'® Stuart’s observations on the
exploitation ofthe soldiers by local merchants, over the price of array
proved to be an interesting treatise on the redistribution of wealth. The
‘Marathas had collected the treasure, the British had liberated it and the
soldiers were reported to have spent almost all oft, on the hyper-infiated
prices charged by the merchants for their alcohol.

Alighar had been a vital objective for Lake and its logistical significance
tempts one to say that the victory shortened the war Among the spoils
of Alighor were large quantities of blue uniform jackets with red facings
fs well as new arms and accoutrements of the type used by Sindias
regular battalions"! Powder, shot and entre rumbrels of Spanish dollars
fell to the British, Alighar was the primary depot for Pecron’s battalions
‘and 281 pieces of artillery were captured, This included 33 brass guns
and 60 iron guns of different calbres 4 brass howitzers, 2 mortars and
182 wall pieces"? General Lake's son and Wemyss toured the fortress
with John Pester who recorded in hi diary, “The guns and tumbrils (of
French model) uncommonly inc" With the battle aver, George Call

+The rerm as wed generically bythe Disha kchol applied for dhe purposes of water
nearer Beis indian wars I specially meant the spits sled fom
Paar cd ice calleced from palm, Several Middle-Eastern vances of rach
Ar nue robe dite om a vary ofsoures; commonly with anise evouring ated,
they ca cten average upwards of 40 pr ent leah,

