180 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

scenes when the armycame to a well, No reverence for rank or discipline
‘was paid by the mobs of British troops who clambered over one another
to geta chance to drink from the few sparse wells Inthe afternoon Stuart
heard a distant cannonade but had no way of knowing of the tremendous
bate in progress. As night began to fll the officer commanding the rear
‘guard decided to spit the baggage train. Those closest to the camp were
to proceed along the road in darkness and discern theie route from the
firelight of surrounding hamlets. Stuart made it clear that if it were not
forthe light of nearby villages the men and beasts would have been lstin
the darkness, The infantry of the baggoge train's rear guard were ordered
to go back down the road they had just traveled and round up as many
stragglers as possible; then they were to establish a secure perimeter for
the night.

‘When Charles Stuart finally caught up with his unit he learned a great
deel from one ofhis friends who was a regular guest at General Lake's din-
er table. Stuarts confidential source relayed the information that Lake
‘was particularly pleased with the capture of the Maratha guns and the
‘brave steadiness that the cavalry had shown while advancing into the en-
‘emy'sfire. The Grand Army had fought exceedingly well in consideration
‘of the fact that they had been under arms for seventeen hours despite the
intense heat, According to Stuarts friend, who was on very good terms
with Lake, His Majesty's 76th Regiment was not the fist infanery unit to
attack the Maratha guns as reported. Stuart recorded that since the heat
affected the sepoys less than the Europeans, it was indeed a sepoy unit
that first reached the Maratha artillery during the final push. Stuart, very
much the English gentleman in service to a native unit, insisted that the
sepoys should have received credit for having been the frst ro assault the
‘murderous Maratha artillery. But Lake's dispatches made no mention of
his dinner-table admission.

“Historically contemporary British casualty reports listed Lake's loss as
478 alled, wounded or missing, while Duff would later state them as 585,
‘of whom fifteen were European officers.'5? Maratha losses were not ac~
tually recorded but estimated as 3,000 by Thorn. Call recorded 4,500
‘enemy casualties of a presumed enemy force totalling 24,000 incl
5,000 mounted Sikhs and 7,000 Maratha horse. Part of his calculation
was based on the reports of twelve prisoners.'* Charles Stuart's infor-
Tmantin Lake's entourage proved very helpful in trying to come to terms
‘with the realty of casualty figures. He had ridden past the Maratha ar-
lery positions as the enemy were driven from their guns towards the
He later told Stuart that many of the Maracha gunners must have
igned death for their bodies were conspicuously absent when he rode
past the same area later, There were ‘far fewer on the ground than

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803, 181

there had been before’. This is crucial in understanding how inaccurate
the body-count figures were. In actual fact the number of Maratha troops
listed as killed was not body count but a victors biased estimation based
‘on ego rather than physical evidence in the form of corpses.

‘George Call admitted that a great many of the body-count numbers,
‘were derived by sending representatives to regiments and asking the men
‘how many of the enemy they had killed."55 Call went on to explain how
‘enemy casualties for the day were calculated. He wrote, almost apologeti-
cally, thatit had been seven years since a cavalry action of that magnitude
had been fought in India and that as the result ofthe lapse, coupled with
liberal amounts of bravado, many of the men may have inflated the fig~
ures, The cavalry brigade theoretically consisted of 800 men committed.
tobacle and the men were claiming they killed three enemy soldiers each
‘on average (800 x 3 = 2,400). Call wrote that his cavalry brigade's tally
was reported through their adjutant-general Colonel Clinton as 2,400
‘Marathas. Note the fate of the wounded in Call's chart below. Consider
‘also that this cavalry tally minimized the impact of the British infantry;
particularly ifyou consider the grape shot ‘kills’ in the river to have been
inflicted by cavalry gallopers and that those ‘ridden over’ were victims of
the British horsemen as wel.

Killed by Cavalry 2,400
Killed by Infantry or Guns 700
Killed in the River by Grape shot

‘or Drowned 800
‘Badly Wounded and then ‘Ridden Over 600
‘Total Enemy Killed 4,500"

‘What is one to make of this great disparity in casualty figures? If this
‘Maratha artillery trap was so well aid why are the Maratha casualties up
to nine times greater than the attacking British? Aside from tremendous
‘exaggeration, there is avery simple answer in Charles Stuarts diary. The
British counted the women, children and other non-combatant camp
followers they killed as ‘Maratha casualties’. Stuart of course could not
hhave seen this because atthe time he was miles away trying to sort out the
problem of how to contain the baggage train. He had learned of many a
‘savage act’ from hi brother officers in the 3rd Bengal NC who had per-
sonally but unsuccessfully sought to intervene in these needless deaths.
‘Stuart's comrades were mortified atthe barbarous treatment handed out
tothe enemy by George Call's unit~ His Majesty's 27th Dragoons. Stuart
‘was outraged atthe King’s horsemen. Within the confines of his diary he
levelled charges of cruelty against them.!%? Stuart was obviously frus-
uated; the accounts of civilian slaughter by Anglo-Saxon troops of King

