172 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

recorded that it was also the location of an extensive cantonment for
Person's troops.!” ‘The Maratha regulars were quickly being deprived
of their command structure, logistical support, peripheral outposts and
‘now the cantonments where they usually sought rele from the rigours of
the field. Ie was reported that Louis Bourquin had taken Perron’ pace as
‘senior field lender of Sindias army and the new commander was under
immediate pressure to halt Lake's advance. The British received word
that Bourquin had crossed the Yamuna with siteen battalions of regular
infantry, 6,000 cavalry and a large train of ordnance. John Pester got 2
note from his companion Wemyss at dinner that night which said ic was
the opinion of all those at headquarters ‘that we should have an action
certainly tomorrow or the nextday"

‘At 2 am on 11 September Lake struck camp and by 3 am began the
‘march towards Delhi. When the lead units of his army halted at 10 am
they had marched 18 miles under a very hot sun. They emerged from a
thickpatch of jungle at atpargan" southeast of Delhi and began pitching
their tents? Lake was pleased with the army's swift progress and as 8
reward he isued a dram of liquor. Ths rather tranquil and happy camp
scene lasted about an hour before all hell broke loose." Ar that point
the cavalry pickets informed Lake that Maratha horse were approaching,
In response to this the 27th Light Dragoons and the 2nd and 3rd
Bengal NC were ordered out. Lake personally took command of his three
‘regiments of cavalry and led them on. ‘By degrees’ the Maratha horse re
tired slowly, luring the British horsemen within the range oftheir masked
batteries. General Lake senta number of his men forward to probe the
determination of the Maratha horse. Survivors spoke of the ‘elephant
ss’ being so high that it obscured any chance they might have had to
see the semicircle ofartilery that surrounded the thicket,

“The blinding yellow-orange lah and roar ofthe opening salvos shat-
tered not only the tranquility ofthe day bu the eardrums of men closest
to the guns who reeled in shocked reaction that added to the confusion,
“The accompanying pressure wave generated by the explosive muzale-
blast, which flatened the obstructing grass was immediately followed
by other, unnatural, and far more eerie auditory sensations that played
upon deafened ears. Grape shot tore and chain shot scythed through the
‘grass witha shearing sound which was followed by ether a metalic clatter
‘or muffled thuds depending on whether the individual projectiles struck
‘equipment or the flesh of men and horses. None of the diarists com-
‘mented on having consciously heard any screams until after the bate.

\\\ Shock and disorientation were hallmarks of a Maratha artery ambush,

“28 4,77 +. Aka Potpegun,Purpergung, Paper Gunge.

a PV

13

‘Map 10 The Battle of Delhi 11 September 1803, based on a map that
appeared in Major W. Thorn, Memoir ofthe War in Indio, 1818

