178 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for Ini

along the bank, riding down enemy fugitives. Eventuslly they were held
in check by Maratha artillery on the far bank around Delhi.

Lake reformed his infantry, having them whee! left ro push remaining
enemy stragglers, and those who had sought refuge inthe broken ground,
to the banks of the Yamuna River. Wiliam Thor noted that on this
‘occasion the gallopers ‘did great execution upon the fugitives’. Cal
wrote, ‘they plunged in and endeavoured to swim across; our gallopers
raked with grape some hundred and many were drowned attempting to
et across the rapid stream which represented ard river. John Pester
agreed the river appeared boing by he fie of grape kept up on those of
the enemy who had taken to the river, Iwas tral for acme, a steam
of blood and presented such a scene a at another period would freeze a
an very soul"

Teis important to note that Lieutenant Charles Stuartdid not fightin
the action onthe Dhardcri Plain ora some referred wo ithe ‘doab inthe
Jumna’, He had been detailed to serve with the baggage escort. Swart
rdmitcd that che account in his diary was brief because it represented

information gleaned trom other members of the 3rd Bengal NC who
were present. Stuart was told the unit had been lured into a thick grassy
area by their pursuit of some Maratha horsemen, As the Marat cm-
alry melted back by degrees the British cavalry pushed forward with their
tnllopers The survivors said that what happened after that took them by
complete surprise and the shock was overelming. The Maratha massed
batteries began a deadly cannonade from pottons concealed by the grass
and delivered clastic textbook arllery ambush with echnical precision.
Cn-C Lake, atthe bead ois troops en forbs infantry while ordering
his cavalry to wheel off snd withdraw slowly atthe walk. Stuarts inter
views indicated to him that this was the point at which Lake's experience
‘vas crucial to winning the bal. In ‘slow walking’ his cavalry retest,
Lake prevented a panicked fight from the feid that would have resulted
fiom a faster pace. The well-executed movement, akhough not without
severe casualties, allowed the infantry time to come forward which would
not have been otherwise possible, ‘The Maratha line was then seen ad-
vancing out of nowhere. The Maratha officers were riding slowly beside
their infanty, as opposed to riding at its lead, urging ther men on and
delivering orders of direction from the saddle. Lake was heard to shout
“Dring me the 76dh several dmes but his prized Europeans were delayed
by the fact hat several had been inthe process of bathing athe campsite
after theirearly morning marc, ® They had wo scramble or their clothes
pd it when word ofthe ambush was received.
“According to accounts given co Charles Stuart, when the Brish cav-
airy wheeled into column and the infantry passed into the interval, the

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803, rm

Marathas could not recover full command and control. They were caught
‘ut in an uneven or broken line of advance, many of thei infantry having
rushed abead thinking the British enemy wasin full retret. The Marathas
did not have time to carefully relay their guns afer rapidly pushing them
forward in pursuit of Lake's retreating cavalry, As a result, many of the
“Maratha rounds, especially the grape shot, flew over the infantry’ heads,
bbutthe trajectory was such that the rounds did great damage tothe British
‘cavalry who were behind the infantry as they advanced. General St John,
‘on the left of the British line, ted a bayonet charge into the Maratha
right that was estimated tobe their strongest point and therefore the por-
tion of the line that demanded priority. Although St John’s men broke
the Maratha line Stuarts informants commented that the Marathas fell,
‘backin a very orderly fashion until they reached the banks of the Yamuna
River.

While the battle was over for Lake and his men, Charles Stuart and
the baggage guard were still struggling miles away. The baggage train
‘had been specifically ordered not to march before the cavalry or infantry
‘because it posed the potential hazard of ying up the roads. Despite the in-
‘entional delay in their departure things began to run terribly ate forthe
baggage train that day. The ponies, camels, elephants and thousands of
bullocks were so bothered by the heat and ‘myriads of ics thet the bag-
sage train could notbe controlled. Men and beasts were strewn across an
cver-lengthening line that extended for at least 10 miles.'* The bullock-
drawn hackeries that carried grain were among the greatest impediments
to progress and the desire of the bullocks to stray off in search of water
was a constent annoyance. The lumbering beasts slowed everything
down to a ‘creeping pace’. It was fortunate that the Marathas had with-
<drawn thei light horse and pindari units to support their infantry closer
to Delhi, But Stuart’ guard remained vigilant. Most of his men had been
‘awake since well before 4 am forced to eat their breakfast in the sad-
dle, By noon the men had long since exhausted the supply of water they
carried. Upon finally reeching some small nullaks they found that the
water had become badly contaminated by the large numbers of cavalry
that had preceded them, muddying and fouling the water as they passed.
‘Stuart remarked: ‘Many died from fatigue and want of water. Several of
ficers told me they were glad for what dirty water they could get from the
nullah.”

Captain Doveton was observed collecting dirty water in bottles and
giving it to group of three Europeans who had dropped by the road.
(One of them lay on his back foaming at the mouth, which according to
‘Stuart was a common sight on that hot September day. The sepoys fared
better than the Europeans on the march, but there were several riotous

