176 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

the infantry had not even reached camp when the intial cannonade took
place and they had to race to the sound of the guns. Grenadier john
Pester’s account ofthe batle had Lake opting for the use of cold steel” —
‘meaning the bayonet ~ as the result of not being able to get the bullock-
drawn British artillery up in time. “The rapidity of our advance was so
‘reat that our Brigade guns and field pieces were obliged to drop in the
rear, and we soon found thet it was the Generals intention to close with
the bayonet.”™! Call's account had Lake's cavalrymen already beginning
to fall back before his infantry could get out of the camp area; ‘by this
time, the right wing had just reached the encampment and marched under
General Ware, directly to our support, we, retiring towards them, and.
<drawing the enemy's guns from out of the hollow and long grass, nearer
tou?

‘The Maratha infantry, seeing Lake fall back with his cavalry, presumed
that they were driving the British General from the field. So they sallied
forth from their trenches with their light artillery being pushed forward
to ensure victory. Their exhilaration soon turned to shock asthe suppos-
‘edly retreating British horsemen divided their formation in the centre,
‘wheeling left and right respectively, to reveal Lake's infantry drawn up
{nto one line followed by a second line of additional cavalry. This sec-
‘ond cavalry rank was then dispatched to the flank with their gallopers to
hold off a body of Sikh horse that Bourquin had ordered to attack on
the Bicsh right. The left hank was protected by the Ist Battalion of the
‘2nd Bengal NI Regiment, which was strengthened by four guns under
Artillery Colonel Horsfords personal direction. General Lake posted
himself at the head of his prized infantry unit, His Majesty's 76th Rg
‘ment, and acting in unison the entire British formation moved forward.

‘The infantry were being asked to advance into a deadly storm of heavy
‘metal with litle chance of survival. Once again the role of officer leader-
ship should not be underestimated. This was more than an advance by
senior officer at the head of a body of infantry. This was the personal
leadership role ofthe C-in-C. A great man willing to put his own life on
the line as he urged his men forward in a manocuvre which evoked the
spirit of parade-ground precision but under the most adverse of survival
conditions. Lake’s men demonstrated extraordinary discipline under ie,
keeping theie muskets on their shoulders until ordered into firing position
ata distance estimated to be only one hundred yards from the Maratha
line. The Maratha artillery, by way of reply to the challenge, renewed

\\ their trademark maelstrom of metal. Round, grape and chain shot were
unleashed on the steadily advancing infantry. Lieutenant Pester and

‘olonel Blaic were mounted and on the left ofthe line. As Blair conveyed
his orders to Pester, a cannon ball grazed between them plunging into

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803, 7

the roops behind them and Niling a great many ofthe grenadiers of the
14th Bengal NI. Seconds later another cannon ball grazed Pesters horse.
Bur the third incoming round was grape shot and its pattern easily took
down Pester’s mount.

As Pester recalled: ‘A grape shot passed through the housings of my
pistols, and shattered the stock of one of them, and I felt my horse stag-
ering under me; another grape had grazed his side, and lodged under
the skin; a third went through him. It entered at his near quarter and
passed out atthe other.""? Pesters horse fell mortally wounded but the
lieutenant escaped with just severe bruising. He then took the offer of
‘one of Blairs remounts and dashed forward of the line. In his anxious
bid to rally the infantry, Pester noted the left of the line falter and at full
galop rushed to offer words of encouragement. But General St John at
‘that moment gave the order to fre and, according to Pester, ‘I was ac
‘ually within twelve yards of the front rank men, at fall speed, when the
whole gave their ie By the luck of timing Pester escaped the fate of
being cut down by his own infantry. Despite the continuing barrage of
anti-personnel rounds the single long line of troops held, fred that one
volley and then charged with fixed bayonets. Pester’s account made it
sound as if it was with great energy and zeal that ‘they rushed on with
‘an ardour nothing could resist’ and closed with the bayonet. "? Dragoon
George Call may not have been watching Pesters infantry but the foot
soldiers he observed were near dropping from exhaustion. Call, noting
that they had lite energy left after being on the march since 2 am, wrote:
‘Many were so exhausted at the end of the charge they hed not strength
tobayonen

‘The Maratha line broke but as they ran the British infantry formed
into colurnns of companies allowing the entire cavalry force, both native
and European, to pass through their ranks and chase down the enemy.
‘The advance ofthe British cavalry caused the Marathas to lose cohesion
‘and panic. The cavalry pushed forward through the high grass. A number
‘of the wounded British infantry raised their hands to alert the cavalry to
their presence on the ground in the deep grass. Confusion in the thick of
‘the battle was such that their own cavalry trampled an unknown number
of the British infantry, as they lay wounded or dying. Stuarts brother
horsemen reported being urged on by the wounded shouting ‘Cut them
‘up, Cut them up! The cavalry advanced to the Maratha infantry on the
banks of the Yamuna and broke their resistance. The British gallopers
were used to rake the river with grape shot as the Marathas scrambled
into the water. Many swam across the watercourse and struggled to pull
themselves up on to a sand bar and sanctuary, only to be felled by the
sallopers trained upon them, Some cavalrymen pushed as faras two miles

