164 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for india

‘well as Lieutenant Turton of the 4th Bengal NI, were dead and Pester
‘rode back through heavy smallarms fre to inform Lake of the successful

‘breaching ofthe outer gate, but at a frightful cost.

British casualties were mounting elsewhere as well and distance from
the forts walls was no guarantee of safety. George Call watched as
‘Maratha sharpshooters continued to take their toll of British officers. He
saw their matchlock snipers kill four lieutenants outright while wound-
ing another seriously in addition to wounding a captain and a major.
Call also witnessed the damage that heavy Maratha artillery could do
to infantry formations at a distance. These men did not die alone.
‘They were felled in groups. Incoming rounds were large enough to
smash trees yet retain sufficient kinetic energy to still do lethal dam-
age. In one case, cited by Call up to seventy men became casualties
‘hile clustered beneath a large tree where they sought concealment
‘on their approach to the fort. A devastating round from one of the
Marathas’ massive 32 pounder guns hit them." Those impacted directly
were obliterated. Tree splinters pierced some, sil others were struck
down by lying smallarms and eccoutrements turned into secondary pro-
jectles. Pieces ofhuman bone and equipment radiated out, from the point
‘of impact, inflicting more casualties among the densely packed group of
‘men who had formed up tightly behind the tee to reduce their target
profile. Charles Stuart confirmed the devastating power of a 32 pounder,
‘which was ensconced ina wel-defended bastion, It was a‘pucks’ position
with breast works and loopholes so that Maratha infantry could defend
the gun crew. The scene proved uncomfortable for the British diarists_
It evoked thoughts about dehumenization and the mechanical aspects
‘of death in combat. A seemingly anonymous enemy behind the parapet
walls had killed these men.

Aghars exterior gate had been taken; however, that was just the be-
ginning of the action to seize the fort's inner tower that led from the
‘gateway to the upper fort. The closest modem analogy to this inner
roadway travelling up an inclined plain might be one of those circular
or corkscrew ramps that one finds in muliple-level automobile park-
ing garages. The bastion’ interior circular roadway had walls containing
‘Yoopholes' or apertures through which the enemy could fire in relative
safety. The Maratha infantry keprup a bristling gauntlet of smallarms fre
‘while their arillerymen positioned a stubby short-barelled carronade to
fire grape shot into the passageway. A second gate in the passageway was
forced open with difficulty and the British quickly pursued the defend-

‘as they retreated, sipping through a third gateway. All this time the
12 pounder had to be pushed and pulled up the circular rampart and
many men fell wounded or dead from the flanking smallarms fire. Often

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 165

the bronze brut slipped backward crushing feet beneath its iron-rimmed
wheels. Captain Shipton ofthe artillery was wounded inthe process and
although unwilling to give up his command ofthe piece, he could not ex-
cute his duty His bravery was beyond question butin such a wounded
stage he had become an impediment ro effective leadership under fire.

Tonically, ater filing to open a final set of inner gates that blocked the
rampway upward, Major McLeod found a way through a small wicket
door into the bastion tower and troops were summoned to follow him,
Extensive hand-to-hand combat ensued up the stars and along the para-
pets with a number of the Marathas being pushed or jumping from the
walls into the moat. The attackers found themselves in a square where
they faced Maratha infantry directed by the fort's senior Maratha sardar,
{identified by Charles Stuart as Bali Rao." This valiant Maratha officer was
reported tohave led a forlorn chargeinto British bayonets rather than face
surrender. Major McLeod then turned his attention to the forts prison
cells, He had to intervene to save the incarcerated Pedron, who was in
danger of being bayoneted behind bars by a British ‘Light Infantryman’.
McLeod offered the Frenchman quarter and in return received the old
man’s sword”

“The diaries of John Pester and Charles Stuart both indicate that revenge
was responsible for the deaths of hundreds of Maratha troops killed after
the battle, Pester was less than sympathetic in his explanation for not
taking prisoners during the actual assault of Alighar, “They were told what
they might expect if they waited the result ofthe storm Yer Pester also
realized that the orgy of killing had extended well beyond any reasonable
“Many the enery wece shot in atempting to escape by swimming the ditch after
‘we gotin, and {remarked an Artileryman to snap his piece ata man who a the
same instant dived to save himsdi The soldier cooly waited his coming up, and
shot him through the head, As the heat of he business was over, I remonstated
‘with him on putting them to death at that time, but the man declared that be had
lost some ofhis oldest comrades that morning, and hat he wished tobe revenged,
reminding me als that we had received orders to spare none.”

‘Some Maratha troops were shot in the water and some drowned, but
reaching the other side was no guarantee of escape. Many were ‘run-
through’ by George Call and bis brethren in the 27th Dragoons as they
‘emerged on the adjacent plain. Call said his unit ‘was ordered to cut-up
all who attempted to run-off. As if participant offering an explanation,
for some sort of juvenile schoolyard braw, he added that the enemy had
provoked them with insulting names

* Aka Balle Row, Ba Rao,

