162 ‘The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

the muzzle-bast of the black powder charge buckled the doors open.
‘Some wooden doors were reduced to a mass of splinters. Ifthe cannon
‘was loaded with shot i had a tendency to merely blow a hole inthe door
the size of the cannon ball, which was much too small to admit a man ot
bbe of any practical use.

‘Under cover of darkness Monson and his men approached the cause
‘way, which led tothe gates. To their surprise they found a collection of
sinyor seventy Maratha troops out ‘smoaking sic] under reein font of
the gnteway' After a brisk skirmish the Maratha, co the last man, were
killed. The enemy in the fort apparently took the opinion that his was
a filed British attack and did nothing to challenge the positon. Fearing
an alarm, the British withdrew four hundred yards back from the was of
Alighar However, wth the sounding of the morning gun the assault was
renewed. By timing their advance to coincide with a heavy barrage by
the 18 pounders, Monson’s men were able to cross the open ground
and the causeway. Pester had been appointed by General Lake to accom-
pany the storming party for the purposes of reporting on their progress.
He noted that they got 2s far asthe entrance tothe first gate before the
‘Maratha troops on the walls noticed them. Ithad been hoped that some of
‘Monson’s men could follow guards, posted outside the gate into the
fortress as they retreated. Buta fight ensued and the element of surprise
‘was lost; at that point the entire area erupted in fie. In addition to ex-
tensive smallarms fire from the wall, the storming party was hit on both
flanks by Maratha artillery fire from guns placed in half-moon batteries
on either side of the main gateway.

‘A recently constructed Maratha addition to the fort entrance offered
‘Monson the false hope of easy access. Unfortunately the entrance was
shut and to worsen matters the Marathas had trained two or three guns
to fie grape shot on it. Monson lost time and men in the effort to take
advantage of what seemed an opportunity that could not be passed up.
“Mounting British casualties forced another modification to the plan. Two
ladders were brought forward to assist in an escalade of the gate and
Major McLeod of the 76th with a number of grenadiers tied to climb
cer the top. Within seconds a bank of Maratha pikemen appeared and
‘drove the British soldiers back down their ladders. Things were look
ing prety grim but spirits rallied for a moment as the 6 pounder was
brought forward to use on the doors. Amazingly is blast had no effect
and so word was desperately sent fora 12 pounder.®® As Monson watched
helplessly and waited for the larger gun, the Marathas poured down

artillery as well as smallrms fire on his position. The shattered bod-
ids of British soldiers were now layered two to three men deep before the
gateway.

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803, 163

‘The British 18 pounders were not the only guns used in an attempt
to sweep the Marathas off Aligher's walls. George Call revealed that
the cavalry’ galloper guns were used specifically to try and neutralize
Maratha snipers” The enemy marksmen favoured their long-barrelled
rmatchlocks for accurate aimed fire. The British galloper crews, who at
tempted to ‘take them out’ in turn drew the attention of Marathe swivel
guns and light artillery posted tothe walls, A 4 pounder bal hit the horse
beside Call and the beast dropped on the spot as ifit had been poleaxed,
Pester, who was mounted in order to ride back to Lake with a situation
report, had his horse wounded twice although he himself managed to
survive unscathed. As a cavalry officer, Call also noted, in the midst of
this battle that an estimated 50,000 Maratha horse and pindaries had
fied the general vicinity along with the remainder of Perron's 700-man
‘mounted bodyguard.

‘The greatly anticipated British 12 pounder was painstakingly wheeled
forward under an intense fire, but its heavy weight caused it to crash
through a concealed mine gallery which the enemy had skilfully tunnelled
underneath the area in front of the main gate. Exploding mine galleries
filled with black powder had been the cause of numerous British casualties
during the ‘Mud War’ fortunately for Lakes men this mine collapsed
‘before it coukd be charged. With the temporary delay of the 12 pounder’s
carriage sticking in the hole caused by the rinnels collapse, the British

incurred a dramatic increase in casualties as the Marathas dropped in
fire from two heavy mortars that they had held in readiness to defend
this point. They loaded grape shot instead of explosive shell into the
preregistered mortars and the metal rained lethally down from its high
angle of trajectory, “This misfortune detained us considerably, and at
‘his time it was that we lost so many of our officers and men. Never did 1
wimness such a scene before the second gun could be hauled up; the sortie
was become a perfect slaughter-house, and it was the greatest difficulty
‘that we dragged the gun over our killed and wounded." Despite the
considerable sizeof the 12 pounder it took four to five blasts at point-
blank range to shatter the door st This process was reported to have
taken a full twenty minutes, which was excruciatingly long due to the
continuing fire from the forts walls. By now the Marathas had seized
the assault adders abandoned by the retreating grenadiers, sending their
‘own men down to engage Monson’s force in hand-to-hand combat.”?
‘The losses in his grim struggle were high and Monson himself was lucky
ta survive with a deep-slashing pike wound? The combat leadership
tole of the British officer corps was once again refected in their casualty
tates, Six British officers were killed in the Maratha counterattack at that
first gate. Four grenadier officers, the adjutant of the 76th Regiment, as

