174 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India 。

‘Although men were being literally punctured and sliced as slabs of meat,
the survivors were too preoccupied with their own fate to register imme
diate concern for their brothers; evidently there was a strange, survival-
oriented filtering-out of fellow soldiers’ anguish, a reversion to the more
basic instincts and the internal battle posed by the desire ro run vs. the
‘raining and indoctrination of staying to fight.

‘Theaccounts conjure surrealistic images: the shredding of environment
and an army, a scene soon enveloped in the white, acrid haze of gun
‘smoke which clung closely to the vegetation in the heat and humidity
of that September afternoon, Some of the survivors used the analogy
fa storm, others accepted it as ‘a rain of heavy metal’, unleashed by
the Marathas. The opening roar of Maratha guns brought the sudden
realization that this was to be an infantry battle and not the skirmish of
horse, In reflecting on the magnitude of the ambush George Isaac Call
later noted in his diary:

the guns were planted semi-circulaly, of course the shot came but to one point.
‘They were very well laid and the firing well served. The enemy must have been
cerrain of viciory, otherwise they would not have brought such large unwieldy
‘cannon and so great number into the Field, from the opposite side ofthe river,
how could they suppose inthe event ofa defeat, they could transport them tothe
river side (which was 7 miles from the scene of action) with such slow animals as
Bullocks. No doubt remains, from the force brought into the field, of both horse
‘and foot, and the well lad snare into which we were drawn, and the number of
‘Guns, 0 well arranged, that a decisive victory ove us, would be the reward for
‘thee fate osses

Lake's ‘reconnaissance in force’ had revealed a well-planned deploy
rent, which demonstrated Bourquin’s appreciation of topography. The
‘Maratha forces were said by William Thorn to be drawn up in order of
bate, with infantry having the benefit of cavalry support and artillery
cover from numerous Buns.i34 The Maratha infantry were on rising
ground with entrenched positions flanked by swamps to channel the
British into a frontal assault hrough the designated beaten zone for their
artillery. The volume of fe in this killing zone would have been impos-
sible for Lake to predict as high jungle grass screened and camouflaged
‘many of the additional guns. The site was on a small doab bounded by
the Hindan River to the east and the Yamuna River co the west; it was
also referred to as the Dharderi Plain The bate, which was about to
take place, would be referred to by some as the Bate of the Dharderi
Plain, Others called it the Battle of Patparganj but later Lake's efforts

Ne ‘would eventually become known as the Battle of Delhi,

* Aka Hindon River, Hindun River, 1 28°4,77°4, Ala Plain of Dardery.

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 15

Lake's cavalry remained the focus of the Marathas’ attention as the
result of a delay in bringing forward the infantry. A ‘great los’ in men
‘and horses was incurred during the hour which ittookto unite the infantry
‘and cavalry." Call, as one of the 27th Dragoons who had moved forward.
with Lake, found himself in the thick of the action. The young officer
wrote:

theie guns, which opened on us most warmly and being kept up in salvos, at
length forced us to retire a short distance, where we halted inline ~ this caused
their guns, which had been hidden by the high gra tobe advanced and for an
‘hou and half played on us so much, tha both men and horses were mowed
own ike grass our gallopers wee oflinle use and the numbrilaf he 27h blew
vp eaty niheacton

‘The entrenched Maratha infantry proved capable of withstanding what
feeble fre the depleted British cavalry ranks could produce. It was dur-
ing this delay that General Lake had his horse shot from under him. His
Son Major Lake, serving as the General's ADC, dismounted and gave his
horse over to his father. Major Lake took the mount of fallen trooper
and keptit until one of his own horses was brought to him. Unfortunately
‘the Major's remount was shot and killed beneath him. George Call saw!
the General's second mount, meaning the horse his son had given up, shot
from under him as well and the search began for a third horse for the
C-in-C.* Under a blazing sun, with no chance to stop and refresh,
‘men were dropping from more than Maratha fie, as they were rendered.
‘motionless on the ground by sunstroke. Major Middleton and Cornet
‘Sanguine of the 3rd Bengal NC were both listed as having died of ex-
cessive hea 5 Middleton was an excellent horse soldier as well as a
particular friend of Charles Stuart and his death was mourned for sev-
eral pages in that offcer’s diary. Remember, itwas Middleton alone who
as singled-out for praise by Lake in the 1802 review that revealed the
deficiencies in the British cavalry.

‘The combat force under Lake was thought to have numbered 4,500
‘while Maratha troop strength was listed as 19,000 of which 6,000 were
cavalry." General Lake was said to have feared a direct assault on the
Maratha trenches might yield horrendous casualties. Imperial histories,
have painted what followed as an amazing picture of Lake's infantry and
cavalry executing a carefully choreographed cavalry lure with an infantry
follow-through. The standard bare account has it that in order to draw
the enemy out onto the field, Lake ordered his cavalry to feign retreat.
As the General's horsemen slowly fell back his infantry rushed forward
screened from the Marathas by the retiring British cavalry. However,
George Calls diary hints that luck had more to do with it. The bulk of

