170 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fo India

‘As Macan's brigade of cavalry advanced they occupied the Maratha
possessions that lay in their path and deposited token members of the
force before pushing on. It was an attempt to capitalize on contiguous
territorial growth, but it was a dangerous strategy owing to the fact that
every time men were let to occupy a location it depleted the brigade. By
7 September, the effective remainder of Macan’s force reached Firozabad,
steadily tracking Fleury and the Marathas towards Agra. The Marathas
ad recrossed the Yamuna River to escape their pursuers by less than,
‘day. Macan prevented them from doubling back by seizing the mud-
walled fortification at Firozabad, which they had abandoned. Located
only twenty-four miles from Agra it had served as a Maratha depot and
when it was taken it was found to contain nine pieces of artillery, some
cattleanda considerable store ofgrain.ial Macan pressed on the following
day buthis Maratha opponents had melted away with great effec. Perhaps
they had taken shelter within the great Red Fortat Agra, Dragoon William
‘Thorn accompanied Macan’s group and he commented on seeing the Taj
‘Mahal ata distance as the brigade passed within 11 miles of Agra." The
British were not yet prepared to tackle Agra and the remains of Macan’s
detachment changed direction so that they could rendezvous with the
‘8th Regiment of Light Dragoons and three battalions of sepoys under
Colonel Clarke, Later as a reformed brigade, under the command of
Colonel Vandeleur, they rejoined Lake.

Lake's camp at Alighar
Lieutenant Pester and his friend Wemyss went out foraging with members
‘of Charles Stuart's unit, the 3rd Bengal NC." Fresh fodder was scarce
since the monsoon had failed and grasscutters needed to travel further
afield." Thee specialist talents were indispensable to the functioning of
an army in this environment. William ‘Thorn wrote that the grasscutter
athers forage, consisting of the roots of grass, which he digs up with an
iron instrument resembling a mason’s trowel. These roots, being carefully
‘washed, constitute an excellent food; and in fact no other could well be
obtained ina climate which, during the season when hot wind prevails,
so completely bare of vegetation, that not a single blade can be discerned.
above ground.” Maratha mounted units dogged the forage party but
with the judicious fring oftheir galloper the British kept the enemy fom
venturing too close. The new British doctrine of mobile firepower was
allowing a greater economy of force and operational freedom. In previous
Ne trwould have meant assigning more cavalry or slowing the foraging
party down with infantry or bullock-drawn artillery to supportitin hostile
territory. But with the assignment of a 6 pounder galloper the foraging.

“The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 m

party could move at ease around the country and it usually provided
sufficient firepower to dissuade Maratha light horsemen.

‘On 6 September, word was received thet Sindia was preparing to en-
gage Lake's army as ic crossed the Yamuna River. Sindia’s advanced units,
hhad already confiscated the boats at the ferry crossings and were reported.
to be raising batteries at the most likely fords." Reconnaissance patrols
Drought word that Sikh horsemen were to be seen in greater numbers
‘and rumour had it that the Maratha regulars were drawn up waiting for
the Grand Army."®” General Lake, after securing Alighar with a small
detachment, departed with the remainder of the army. When he halted,
on the first day of the march to Delhi, he received a letter from General
Perron requesting permission to proceed with his family, possessions and
escort to Lucknow." He had quit Sindia’s service and, much like his
predecessor de Boigne, it was his intention to take bis earnings and leave
not only Maratha service but also India. Perron was to be accompanied
by two of his trusted officers, ADC Beckett and the elusive Monsieur
Fleury, Lake quickly agreed to allow the Genera! to keep his bodyguard,
receiving ‘his opposite number’ with all the ceremony and honour ac-
corded a C-in-C. Sindia had lost one of his most experienced mercenary
leaders, inflicting an incalculable blow to command, control and com-
‘munication in his army. Worse than that, with one defection Daulat Rao
‘india los his greatest source of military and financial intelligence in the
Doab. General Lake would have the first chance to debrief Perron, but
‘eventually Governor-General Richard Wellesley’ staff would have an op-
portunity to interview the man who Sindia had entrusted with his military
assets.

‘The Grand Army continued its push towards Delhi, taking the aban-
doned fort at Khurja 50 miles northeast of Alighar. The garrison was
reported by many to have fled atthe approach of the army that had taken.
Alighar. Charles Stuart, however, suggested that the fort was virtually
hhanded over intact by the killadar who was reported to be the son of
Alighars unfortunate Colonel Pedron."2° The Maratha garrison had de-
parted without removing the great quantity of grain which was stored
there, While their withdrawal might have saved the lives of Maratha sol-
dic inthe short term, the long-term prospects for adequate supply were
being diminished by the trend towards depot abandonment in the face
of British advances, Places like Firozabad and Khurja could not hold out
‘against a force the size of Lake's, And, although no single such cache
‘of grain could supply all of Sindia’s needs, the systematic loss of de-
‘pots that formed a logistical chain was bound to hurt his future options.

Both Stuart and Call noted that Lake's army passed Sikandrabad on
10 September. Although usually described as a small mud fort, Stuart

