168 The Angio-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for india.

wondered what the bazaar people thought about the British taking Alighar
in one morning rather than the ten months that the Maratha garrison had
‘bragged it would take, Call directed his question to Ram Natrain, a shrof
‘or we might say ‘monetary agent and currency dealer’ who traveled with
the Grand Army.!™ The reply was thatthe camp followers had come to
‘expect it since the earthquake of 1 September, as it had been interpreted
‘sa sign that the British General would triumph over the Marathas.

‘The elusive Monsieur Fleury

‘Timing was everything if Lake intended to take out’ the main forts in the
Dosb before Sindias remaining officers could coordinate offensive and
defensive actions. Charles Stuartbelieved the Marathas knew the strategy
that would hurt the British most was a combination of offensive lighthorse.
raiding coupled with defensive positional warfare, In an abstract sense
‘we can see thatthe concept ifit had been properly followed, was not far
removed from what Shivaji had done when confronted with Mughal in-
‘cursions into the Deccan: mobile raiding based from a chain of fortresses
garrisoned by capable infantry. The victory at Alighar purchased neither
‘Peace nor rest for Lake's men and word arrived that on 2 September 1803,
1 group of 5,000 Maratha horse had attacked the British detachment at
Shikohabad. It was a moderate-sized outpost where Lieutenant-Colonel
Coningham’s five companies of the Ist Battalion, 11th Bengal Native
Infantry were stationed. The attack on Shikohabad was not a chance en-
counter with a pindari band, The Maratha officer commanding this bold
attack was reported to be Fleury, the same European mercenary who
had been noted on the field during the opening skirmish near Alighar
(on 31 August, Fleury’s tactical appreciation of Sindi's cavalry was
evident. After having withdrawn from Alighar he had staged a surprise
attack within forty-ight hours, selecting Shikohabad as a post deemed
‘by the Britis to be secure. Shikohabad, on the frontier of Etawalh, was
‘open country and Coningham had only one artillery piece to hold the
Maratha horse at a distance. Since the riding party contained men
from Sindia’s regular cavalry they rode with horse artillery. They put
their gellopers into action quickly, using their specialized howitzers to
fire over the walls and hit the defenders who fell back on the canton-
‘ments square. Charles Stuart noted that Coningham' singe piece of
tillery was rendered useless because its ammunition supply was destroyed
when the Maratha howitzers dropped an explosive shell on Shikohabad's

Te
te the nature of the raid, Charles Stuart spoke favounbly of
Fleury's gentlemanly behaviour in taking time to negotiate with the

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803, 169

wounded Colonel Coningham. In view of Lake's execution of prisoners
at Alighar this was quite chivalrous ~ unless Fleury was playing different
nd more politically complex game. He allowed the British to march off
‘with their single cannon as well as their smallarms.!"* Ie was extremely
thoughtful of Fleury at the very lest because the loss of a battalion gun
twas second only to the loss ofa regiment’ colours in bringing disgrace
‘ona British military unit. The fact thatthe gun’s ammunition had been
destroyed was immaterial when considering regimental honour. In agree
tment for safe passage and the right to keep their weapons, Coningham
and his troops agreed not to serve against Sindia forthe remainder of the
war. They were permitted to cross the Gunga River thereby re-entering
the EIC's formally recognized territory. Fleury did retain a hostage in
the form of Mss Wilson, wife of EIC Captain Wilson. The intepid
‘Mrs Wilson was apparently more outraged by the plundering of her
‘wardrobe than by her captivity. She took great umbrage at having scores
bof uncouth horseman delve into her baggage trunks and parade her per-
sonal clothing forall to se, John Pester sil back at Alighar, heard from
secondary reports that he had lostall the furniture and possessions which
he had stored in his bungalow at Shikohabad."* Luckily for the hard
drinking Pester, he had surmised as eatly as July 1803 that Shikohabad
‘vas to remote for safeqys sake and he had refrained from storing jarge
amounts of his European wine there.!"”

Tk was 2 am on 5 September by the time the British could dis-
patch Colonel Macan with the 3rd Cavalry Brigade (His Majesty’ 29¢h
Regiment of Dragoons and the Ist and 4th Bengal NC) to relieve the
centonment Given Feurys speed and head start, it was doubtful
Macan could catch the Maratha officer. The loss at Shikobabad was a
blow to British pride as che cantonment and market were completely
pillaged before being burnt. Yet the raid held potentially greater signif-
‘ance as a Maratha signal to local zamsndars twas clear that the British
foothold in North India was tenuous and any signs of a major Maratha
success were bound to tigger a new round of zamindarrebellions."®

“The ability of lage bodies of Maratha horse to avoid detection and
pursuit underscored the need for the British to develop a mobile or
‘ndianized doctrine, Young Cornet George Call had tried to use news of
FFleury’s success as part ofa lecture he gave to a nurnber of South Asian
troops. He stressed that the attack showed the need for the British
forces to stick together and fightin a supportive and combined fashion.
Call confided in his diary cha is young age worked against his credibility
‘san authority figure, when he spoke tothe wellseasoned EIC veterans,
“They had not only heard itall before, in contrast the young gentleman,
they had done it all before.

