一 一

190 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India,

had possed the last of the mullah-cut roads, on the outskirts of Delhi,
Stuart became aware they were being followed by Gujars. They were
attempting to make off with the hackeries that could not keep up. Prob-
Jems grew progressively worse as the column passed Tughlugabad on
its right!®° The old fort had become a nest for these plunderers who
turned Stuarts ten miles of rearguard duty into an anxious task. The
Gojars were a security threat as they murdered stragglers after having
robbed them, And we know that Gujars had threatened North Indian
‘campaigns since the time of Babur, who made a rather brief reference to
hs method of dealing with them in 1520: ‘Sayyid-Qasim Eshik-aqa was
in command ofthe rear guard. He caught some Gujars coming up on our
rear, cutoff their heads, and brought them in." Lieutenant Pesters di
ary revealed there was historic continuity in counterinsurgency tactics.
‘Small partes of infantry were sent out and they shot thirty Gujars on
24 September; on the following day a Jemadar’s patrol from the 2nd
Bengal NC ‘cut up' rwenty more. Lake's men felt no sympathy for
the Gujars who, aside from thieving, had cut the dawk and killed some
hharkarraks. The Gujars cruelly mutilated their captives by cutting off
ther right hands as well as noses. Constant vigilance was needed and
‘Charles Stuart's exasperation was evident in his comment, “The patience
of Job, would not hold out on a rear guard during a long march in &
hot climate." When the rear guard finally made it up to the camp
Faridabad* it was assumed thatthe last of the hackeries could make
in on their own since no one would dare to abscond with the supplies in
full view of an armed British camp. However, the assumption proved to
bbe quite wrong, To Stuart's chagrin three or four carts were plundered in
sight ofthe encampment as the rear guard came in. Here were a group
‘of brigands who were secking to exploit one of the biggest opportuni-
ties that the South Asian military environment could offer. One did not
need the power of Sindias battalions to steal from Lake's army, merely
am incredible amount of nerve and the luck not to get caught.

‘On 26 September George Call of the 27th Light Dragoons realized
that something very important was underway. Two Maratha taki, rep-
resenting the ‘Commandant’ of five Maratha ‘regular corps’ batalions,
ad arrived unexpectedly in camp. Ever since Lake's victory at Delhi
there were persistent stories that the General had been lucky to escape
the ambush alive because there were at least two battalions of Maratha
‘oops who opted not to fight. But those battalions had ‘come over’ fo-
owing the bate and were now in British service. As negotiations pro-

\ grsted with the vaki it became evident thes five compete batalions

EN

で で SR

1

“The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 1

had remained on the Delhi side of the Yamuna River, having never been
committed to the batte."®° How many Maratha battalions were still out
there and why had they chosen not to fight thus far? That these were
intact bawalions and not strageler or composite units was supported by
George Call's observation that their total battalion allotment of 25 pieces
of arillery (5 guns per battalion x 5 battalions = 25 guns) was also up
{for negotiation on condition of employment with Lake, This astounding
‘negotiating process was an aspect ofthe South Asian military economy
that flabbergasted many ofthe Britons. Was it audacity that ed these men
to believe they could cravel the countryside as virtual free agents in the
military labour market secking the best offer? Here was an army for hire
‘but terms could not be agreed on at that time. ‘The meeting broke off but
the negotiating would resume ar later date.

By 29 September, it had begun to rain heavily and Lake's army halted
to round up the baggage train, Delays resulted from the slowness of the
carviages and patrolling against Gujars. When the C-in-C learned how
far the baggage rain was strung out and the degree of difficulty thatthe
rear guard was experiencing, he exploded in anger. Lake issued a stern
‘ultimatum tothe officer in charge ofthe rear guard; ifthe hackeries with
the public stores were lost then the gentleman in question would be forced
‘o pay for them.!™ The rear guard got into camp at 1 am on the first day
‘of October. Theyhad been in the saddle for thirty hours and Lake's words
stil rang in their ears. Stuart commented they had been awake for forty-
«ight hours and that neither men nor animals had sufficient food because
they were in almost constant motion trying to keep up withthe progress
‘of the infantry. Yet the relentless march of Lake's army meant they had to
getup at 5.30am ~less than five hours away-for the lasteg ofthe journey
to Mathura. The extraordinarily long hours in the saddle also took theit
toll on the horses ridden by the Native Cavalry. This helps to explain
why so many more of the Native Cavalry’s horses were ‘knocked-up’
compared to those ofthe King’s Dragoons. Quite simply the horses of the
[Native Cavalry were abused by prolonged service without proper rotation
‘or care in the field. This also meant that Native Cavalry officers in the
ficld were often forced to spend more on remounts than other officers
because ofthe attrition inficted upon their mounts.

‘At Mathura on 2 October 1803, Lake's infantry rendezvoused with
Lieutenant-Colonel Vandeleur."®” A month earlier Vandeleur had gone
south with elements of the 8th Light Dragoons and a brigade of Native
Cavalry in hot pursuit of Monsieur Fleury and his Maratha horse. Their
chase through the Doab and then south of the Yamuna River was a sepa-
‘ate action ofthe war in one sense and it was very much a glimpse of the
future ‘predatory’ war that broke out against Holkar in 1804. Fleury had

