192 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

Jong since ‘come in? with Beckett and Perron, buthis horsemen had con-
‘ducted an extensive incendiary campaign and their scorched earth tactics
‘were very effective in a land that had been left parched by a deficient and
rather late monsoon. The destruction of fodder was their specific objec
tive. Ifyou could eliminate the feed needed for the British horses then
their cavalry could not pursue you without accompanying banjara convoys
which, in curn, could be preyed upon.

Colonel Vandeleur had reached Mathura two days before General
Lake, There Vandeleur had overseen the surrender of Sindias Colonel
Dudrenec and two other European mercenary officers in Maratha ser-
vice, identified as Smith and Lapenet.'™® Chevalier Dudrenec had been
sent from the Deccan with some of Sindia's regular battalions in July to
reinforce Perron in Hindustan. But like other mercenaries, induced by
the Governor-General’ Proclamation, or simply unwilling ro fight fellow
Europeans, they had left Maratha service toseeksafery and a pension with
the British. The holy city of Mathura was of great military significance to
Perron asa manufacturing centre, but he had defected already. Itwas not
‘only part of his jaghir and vital to revenue collection; it was also the site
‘of one of Sindias major cannon foundrics.i The British force appar-
‘ently encountered no resistance from the townspeople of Mathura who
seemed quite willing to receive the British troops and they traded with
them as well. This appears to have been noteworthy to Charles Stuart,
gs he could discern no particular reason why certain towns welcomed
the British and others rejected them. Less objective diarists painted the
‘owns that welcomed the British as those who were trying to ‘throw
‘oppressive yoke’, or ~ if you followed Governor-General
Wellesley’ lead ~ seek freedom ftom Perron’s‘French tate on the

Jumna'

Lake's Hindu sepoys were anxious to enter Mathura and have an oppor-
tunity to make py, performing purification rights in the Yamuna River.
‘They bad requested that the C-in-C halt for one full day to allow them
this opportunity. However, the reports of enemy personnel in the area
‘compelled Lake to keep the army on a high state of alert. Lake-was reluc-
‘tant to let entire units or large groups of men go at any one time for fear
‘of weakening his strength or giving the enemy a chance to take hostages.
‘But Lake was also conscious of the morale of his Hindu infantry. As a
result, Lake transmitted special orders to selected officers to allow small
‘numbers of Hindu sepoys to visit Mathura but they were to stick together
‘and return before nightfall. Lake's concern over the spiritual well being
of his Hindu troops remains underreported

‘While at Mathura Lake took the opportunity to personally interview
Chevalier Dudrenec. The Colonel was one of Sindia’s senior European

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803, 193

‘mercenary commanders and he willingly provided data on his men, pieces
of artillery and logistical arrangements. Dudrenec had ‘come in’ but
‘where were his battalions? The Chevalier also gave reports on Sindia's dis-
position in the Deccan and the state of revenue collection. But Dudrenec
‘was far from the only source of intelligence as several of his French staff
and British brigade officers had by now ‘come in’. Oddly enough, Stuart
spoke in mixed terms of Dudrenec who had enjoyed an excellent mili-
tary reputation as an officer in Maratha service during the dark days of
the Holkar-Sindia interclan warfare that preceded the 1803 campaign.
But Charles Stuart saw the surrender of Dudrenec and ‘several other
officers who followed his example’ as shameful in having occurred this
late in the war. Stuart perceived Chevalier Dudrenec as having kindled
some form of false hope in the hearts of his men - then smashing theit
‘confidence in a contemptuous moment of surrender. Stusrt knew thet
the British would profit not only from the intelligence but also from the
blow to the morale of the Maratha sepoys. Yet Stuart expressed a note
of scom or shame that implied that a true gentleman, if he were going
to defect, would have done so at the beginning of the war. Stuart saw
Dudrenec as waiting and starting on campaign with his loyal men, as
if he were a Judas steer, leading his men on, not only in terms of con-
fidence, but also on to their doom. ‘The ill conduct of all the French
officers, while it reflects dishonour in them, will be of great service to us
for it must have a tendency to dishearten the troops they have so shame-
fully abandoned. The Brigades [Dudrenec’s} are supposed to be near
Agr’?

‘Thanks to reports from the Maratha mercenaries who had ‘come in’,
Lake's intelligence on a strategic level was magnificent with regard to how
‘many men, guns and horses Sindia had remaining. But, as we have seen in
‘Arthur Welleley’s Deccan Campaign, that did not preclude intelligence
shortcomings on a tactical level. Dudrenec confirmed the strength and
physical disposition of the Deccani brigades that had travelled north with
him, However, Dudrenee could not give Lake their precise and imme-
diate whereabouts since his departure. Lake desperately wanted to avoid
‘another ambush. Cornet Call was sent out as part of a mounted recon-
maissance party on 4 October, and they found themselves in the suburbs of
south Agra angling fora look at the Red Fort. The tension was definitely
growing. The young dragoon realized they were now within range of the
‘Great Gun of Agra’, a monstrous piece manned by the Marathas and
firing aball measuring 23 inches in diameter." From their final position
the British party could see seven enemy battalions were encamped on
the glacis outside the fort. But it appeared by their baggage and im-
Prompnu camping arrangements that they had not been allowed to enter

