198 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘captured at Delhi, they now sought 1o employ the guns against thei for
‘mer owners. On the morning of 17 October, the grand battery's eight
18 pounders, four 12 pounders, six howitzers and six 10-inch mortars
‘opened fire withthe assistance of an additional supporting mortar bat-
tery. The guns commenced firing on the fort’s southeast bastion, which
had been selected for its apparent weakness. Secondary British arillery
fie, to cnRlad the defenders, was provided by four 12 pounders to the
left of the batery and on the right were two 12 pounders situated by the
river 27
Despite the heavy volume of suppressive fie that the British grand bat-
{ery achieved, the Maratha artillery on the fort's walls was well aimed and
still operational, Maratha gunners repeatedly demonstrated their accu-
racy with stunning results and perhaps the reinforced walls of the British
batery gave men a false sense of security. Pester, who had gone into the
British grand battery as an observer, was shocked to se ‘the enemy'sshot
very moment came into the embrasures and killed the men. One shot
carried away five men, and we were completely covered with the blood
and the brains of the poor fellows.’ However, by the end of the first
day, firing from the grand battery was pronounced as having produced
adequate results. The mortars’ explosive shells had done considerable
mischief among the garrison troops, while the 18 pounder solid round
shot had caused the red ‘sandstone’ walls of Agrat fort to come off in
‘huge flakes. The next morning the garrison sent word that they would
‘capitulate without further resistance, Between 5,000 and 6,000 Maratha
troops marched out of the great fort with their personal possessions,
Lieutenant Pester claims to have taken Sindias flag from the ramparts,
‘ared silk ground with a white snake diagonally’ and replaced it withthe
British Standard.2°
‘The vast storehouses of Agra's- great fortress fell to Lake's army.
‘Tremendous quantities of grain, weapons and war materiel were obtained
including Rs, 22 fokhs apparently earmarked for paying the Maratha
troops who were months in arrears. The prize agents amassed a fund
‘of Rs, 24 lakhs and 40,000. Grant Duff noted 162 pieces of artillery
fell to Lake that day as well. Among the more interesting pieces of booty
‘was the ‘Great Gun of Agra’. The fort had been a cannon-casting cen-
tre for decades and the mammoth piece of artillery was more than just &
showpiece it was Fully functional despite its massive size.?"' The shrof of
‘Agra reportedly offered the British a lakh of rupees for the gun so thatthe
metal could be melted down and recovered." Like many other ‘special’
th Asian guns, it was sai to have hed an alloy content of five metals.
ifcluding significant quantities ofslver and gold for ritual purity as well as
‘metallurgical qualities acknowledged in historic Indian gun-casting lore.

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 199

‘The British had intended to take the gun as a trophy by river co Calcutta
‘but the raft that was constructed could not support the weight and the
gun sank into the iver bed where it remained for some years until report-
edly being broken-up and recovered. In addition to the ‘Great Gun’ there
‘were 86 iron cannon of various descriptions and 76 brass guns including
‘carronades, howitzers, mortars and gallopers. Several guns proved to have
laminated barrels. These were like the previously noted ‘bar guns’. The
‘name was derived from the longitudinal iron bars that formed the barrels
hexagonally shaped inne bore cylinder.” The hexagonal-bore cylinders
‘were, in turn, encased within conventional-looking bronze outer-barrels
10 give the exterior appearance ofa normal cannon barrel, The Marathas
algo lft large numbers of muskets inthe Jami’ Masjid Mosque and some
were taken into service for EIC recruits whose arms hed become worn.

“The capture of the fort, known as the ‘Key to Hindustan’, had far-
reaching strategic significance for the EIC. Agra did of course hold the
‘potential of being an ideal garrison town owing to the extent of urban-
ipation, There was also the aspect of revenue collection in an area where
revenue records were well documented and sophisticated enough to al-
low reasonable annual projections to be made. But perhaps the greatest
strategic aspect of the victory was the opening of river trafic on a scale
previously unknown to the British. During the preceding century Bri
incursions into North India had been somewhat ephemeral and British
penetration of the interior tended to follow slow, predictable patterns of
‘annexation. Men, material and communications could now travel with
‘greater speed between Calcutta, the Britsh capital of India, and Delhi,
the new symbol of British political legitimacy in North India. From a
strategis’s standpoint the logistical gain was paramount. Heavy artillery,
tons of ammunition and thousands of bushels of grain could move with
‘much less effort on water. There would continue to be threats along the
riverbank, but having control ofthe river meant access to a greater hin
terland supporting the South Asian military economy.

Despite the stunning string of successful battles by Lake in the Doab
and Arthur Wellesley in the Deccan, Sindias ability to resist with «
‘regular corps’ of infantry had not yet been crushed, Intelligence sources
reported Sindia had thirteen battalions, or up to 12,000 men, and they
still had 100 pieces of artilery 2 Now there was some fear that Sindia
‘would counterattack Delhi to take back the Mughal seat of power, the
‘symbol that had formerly signified his claim on the region. Seven bat-
talions from the Deccan, formerly under Dudrenec, were thought to be

* Meaning they appeared 8 hexagonal when viewed in cross-section er looking down the
Imrie of he barrel fom the nuzle owards the vet

