196 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fr India

of resistance had to be winkled out and Lake's men suffered a number
of casualties just ss they thought they had finished their sweep of the
outlying ravines.” Sporadic fre continued but the British hed enough
‘men through the ravines to think about forming up for the next objective.
‘They hurriedly reassembled; their objective was now to neutralize, or if
possible seize, the lethal artery that the Marathas had posted outside
the fort in the well-fortfed support battery. As the British troops ad-
vanced in broken formation to consolidate their apparent gain, the area
rupted in fire. Much to the embarrassment of the British they were now
attacked by a large number of Maratha troops who had maintained their
fire discipline and lay nestled among the rocks in silence, waiting for the
British. The ambuscade was delivered with rapidity and before Lake's
forward numbers could react they again suffered numerous casualties.
Fortunately for the beleaguered advance party, Major General St John -
Lake's chief advocate of light infantry tactics ~ saw the tide of events
‘turning and hurried support to the dangerously isolated men.

‘The Maratha ambush party, having epparently delivered their volley
of smallarms fire, then appeared to break and run for the safety of the
lacs, which lay infront of te fort. The British, invigorated by what they
perceived as a positive change in their luck, dashed forward having been.
convinced that they could now capitalize on what seemed to be a reversal
of fortune for their Maratha opponents. But the attack and this feigned
retreat of the Marathas were part of a greater defensive strategy. The
British were ‘under’ the range ofthe Marathas' wall-mounted artillery and.
the elevation of the heavy guns could not be depressed to take advantage of
the closing target. However, as StJohn's relief group sprinted forward they
entered within the range ofthe finlock-firing Maratha infantry placed on
the fort's wall above the saci, Severe fighting ensued inthe vicinity ofthe
slacs and inthe defensive outworks of te fortas more British troops were
‘Pushed into the fray. According to Thorn, despite considerable casualties,
‘amounting to 228 killed or wounded, the British assault was successful in
‘capturing 26 Maratha cannon complete with field carriages, limbers and
29 ammunition carriages, while inficting 600 casualties on the defenders.
For British enlisted men and sepoys this hotly disputed area outside the
fortress proper did not seem to make much sense. Why had all these
‘guns, tumbrels and equipment been left ouside ofthe fort? Within forty-
eight hours ofthis victory, 2,500 Maratha troops, who had also remained.
‘outside the forts wall, ‘came over’ and marched into the British camp
afer brief negotiation 2?

Lake's men then began the arduous task of laying formal siege to the
inner fort. In extreme heat and under backbreaking loads they carried
supplies up the ravines. They commenced excavation ofsupport trenches.

ay
;
了

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 197

Being careful to Keep their heads down to avoid sniping, they started
construction of the British grand siege battery. Labouring in the intense
heat brought accompanying dehydration which made lfe miserable, but
annoyance and disease were also made worse by swarms of fies. The
‘Maratha gun bullocks in the fort were starving and so the garison turned
them out to fend for themselves. Pester and his friends took the liberty
of slaughtering some of the animals for fresh meat, But they got lite
pleasure from the meal owing to their dining table's location adjacent
{o the unburied dead along the trenches, men who had fallen four days
earlier. He lamented, ‘It was hardly possible to eat anything, the stench
was so terrible."

‘A secondary battery was bui three hundred and fifty yards from the
southeast side ofthe for cowards the river. The rapid sequence of events
‘compelled the Maratha garrison to begin surrender negotiations and to
‘expedite their case they used two of their European mercenary officers as
their intermediaries. This was all somewhat bizarre because the tyo
ficers, Colonel Hugh Sutherland and Colonel George William Hessing,
had been under house arrestin the fort after being ousted in a coup by
the Marathas.®* Sutherland and Hessing wrote to Lake, aftr explaining
to their subordinates-urned-captors that if Lake stormed the inner fort
and they offered armed resistance then the British General would be exas-
‘erated and ‘exterminate the whole of them. Hessing and Sutherland
‘urged the garrison to surrender their arms and abandon all treasure in
return for their freedom. Captain Salked, from Lake's army, arrived in
the fort to conduct further negotiations among the politically divided de-
fenders, Several Maratha sardars were for continuing the fight but many
of the enlisted men saw little chance ofa breakout. The truce soon broke
down and Captain Salkeld narrowly missed being killed by a cannon shot
as he returned to his lines and renewed heavy firing broke out on both
sides.

For several days there were limited exchanges of fire as sharpshooters
from the fort tried to inc as many casualties as possible on the Brit
oops constructing the grand siege battery. During the day Maratha gun-
ners on the forts walls fired grape shot sweeping the trench tops to slow
enemy progress. The labourers in the grand battery were given constant
reminders to Keep theirheads down, But night was particularly dangerous
1s Maratha trench-raiding parties crawled to the edge of the grand bat-
tery and fied in at point-blank range. Lake's artllerymen, despite such
tempting targets, maintained rigid fire control and refrained from using
anything heavier than musket 6re to drive off the nocturnal infitrators
that probed the position.2 Lake's men were well supplied with ‘heavy
‘metal’; having transported the best pieces of Maratha artillery previously

