200 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘linking up’ with three of Bourquin’s battalions who had not been com-
‘mitted to battle at Delhi in September 245 Many of Dudrenec’s sepoys had
refused to change allegiance when their commanding officer surrendered
himself to Colonel Vandeleur. There were also stragglers from Agra and
the action at Parpurganj who were still in the vicinity. These combined
Maratha groups, now in service to Sindias new C-in-C Ambaji Inglis,
had chosen not to defend the city of Agra as one might have expected. By
‘emaining to the rear of Lake's army and leaving the burden of defence to
the garrison force, they had preserved themselves for a bid to recaprure
Delhi. Ifthe Marathas hoped to retain their economic and political power
‘among the North Indian tributary states it was imperative to regain the
appearance of controling Delhi and the Emperor." General Lake also
‘realized thatthe Maratha battalions stl possessed enough arillery power
to pose a clear and present danger. He had no choice but to continue
‘campaign as a search and destroy operation specifically targeting those
‘remaining Maratha infantry troops, their cavalry escort and thei ‘very
superior arilery.27

General Lake established a large hospital at Agra. He had Sindia's
rmarble-walled durbar hall converted for that purpose 318 It was spacious
and accommodated the European and South Asian wounded as well as
‘many of those from Delhi who were sil recovering from the battle there
‘a month carlier Lake and his troops left Agra on 27 October 1803 and
began the pursuit of Sindia’s remaining battalions. Unexpectedly heavy
rain slowed Lake's progress and so he opted to leave the most cumber-
some baggage and siege guns at Fatehpur Sikri" to permit greater speed on
the march, Late on 31 October, after a day's march, the Marathas were
located ata distance judged to be within effective striking range. Lake
‘ordered all of his cavalry forces into the saddle and they set out at eleven,
‘o'clock at night to bring the Maratha battalions to battle, Lake's plan was
(ose the mobility of his cavalry troopers to close the final distance and
then attack the Marathas in a fashion intended to force them to go to
ground and defend themselves. Tis tactic was to provide time for Lake's
infanry to march up and engage the remaining Maratha battalions. The
forced night ride covered the twenty-five miles in sie hours. At sunrise
‘on the morning of | November 1803, Lake and his eight regiments of
‘cavalry found the Marathas now totaling about 9,000 regular infantry,
with 72 artilery pieces augmented by 4,000 to 5,000 cavalry.

‘The bulk of the Maratha infantry at Laswari were thought to be com
posed of battalions who had travelled up from the Deccan to defend
Whe Fevenue-rich Dosb at Sindins request. Although a numberof their

+ 274,774. Aba Fuypor Sie, Forpore Seekie |

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803, 201

nary officers had ‘gone over’ to the British, like Dudrenec at
Mathura, these men at Laswar” had opted to fight on under Ambaji
Inglia. As British reconnaissance partes at Laswari reported in, it ap-
peared as if the Maratha left flank was in confusion and the speculation
‘was that they were actually in retreat. Lake judged i appropriate to attack
‘at that poinb as he wanted to take advantage ofthe apparent chaos on the
‘Maratha left wing. The C-in-C hoped that hi infantry could come up
in time to save the day. However, the Marathas had been given suficient
notice of Lake's approach to take at least some defensive measures. The
‘Maratha right fank rested on the village of Laswari and their left on the
village of Mahalpur.' The Maratha right Bank was partially covered by a
rear was an awkward ditch described asa “deep rivulet’

ravine and to
‘or ‘deep nullah’.
An overview of Laswari

Intrying to reconstruct the Battle at Laswariitis very difficult to reconcile
the conicting frst person Brish accounts. A great deal ofthe problem
thas to do with fitting che jigsaw puzzle of personal stories and anecdotes
together. The lack of a unified perception reflects the limited vision of
individuals who were denied an overview of the tactical manoeuvring that
took place that day. Some groups of men, for example an undetermined
‘number posted with Major General St John, never left their assigned po-
sitions and therefore could only contribute views from their stationary
perspective of events. However, after having studied several accounts, 1
believe that a great deal ofthe confusion results from assumptions made
‘about the Marathas’ position as it was encountered, as opposed to what it
‘would have looked like ifthe British had arrived later in the day. Itseems
that the Marathas were caught unprepared for the rapidity of Lake's ad-
vance over the final 25 miles that had separated them on 31 October. If
the Marathas had been able to complete their preparations this battle-
ficld would have been tactically quite similar to Delhi or Argaum in using
1 lure to draw the British into a formally prepared beaten zone or point
‘where their artilery-fire was focused. Reports of initial confusion in the
“Maratha ranks and broken formations on their left suggest that Ambaji
‘was in the process of arranging his men in a form of "し ambush. In a
classic " ambush, the line extending as perpendicular to the horizon
is hidden and is the ‘surprise’ portion of the ambush intended to de-
liver unexpected flanking fire to an enemy attacking the visible lure that

+ 274, 76-4, Aba Lasers, swerm Laswary Laswaree,
! Aka Blchaulpesr, Mohaulpore, Malpoora,

