186 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns end the Contest for India,

‘The Marathas had come into the feld with more than enough artillery
ammunition to finish Lake's force. There had been 61 tumbrels laden
with ammunition but 24 were destroyed in battle and the remaining 37
captured. In addition, the cavalry found two tumbrels laden with pee-
sure, which presumably was to pay Sindia’s troops and banjaras in the
field. Normally the treasure would have been turned straight over to the
prize agents for inventorying as part of the prize fund. Butas of that mo-
‘ment, no agents had been designated. This resulted in a rather strange
meeting that came to Stuar’s attention." Several cavalry officers met
to discuss a proposal to keep the tumbrels of treasure and divide it only
‘among the cavalry since they had brought it in, It was the type of deci-
sion that could affect interservce rivalry, increasing tension between His
‘Majesty's troops and those of the EIC. The King’s troops often lorded
their royal commissions over the Company's officers. Status and moti-
‘vation featured regularly in taunts and jers and bravado took its tol on
truth, Although many of His Mjesty ofcers made derogatory remarks
about the ‘money-grabbing’ values of those who served the EIC rare
was the King’s soldier who refused a share of the prize fund. They were
willing to play up the perception of elite status, with regard to their com-
‘bat ranking, but they also thought that India ~ the country that robbed
them of their health and seemed such an alien environment to die in ~
‘owed them something. And if that something wes cash, that could be in-
‘erpreted as compensation for having to serve under such conditions. So
‘why not take the money and be done with it? Fortunately, the clandestine
meeting broke up with the horsemen having made the decision to follow
the standard procedures for the disposal of treasure through the prize
agents,

‘Chatles Stuarts diary makes it quite clear that there was a tremendous
cultural difference between the King’s mounted troops and those ofthe
EIC. But not culture in the context of British social cass. In that respect
‘Stuart outranked virtually all the Dragoons as he was the son ofa baron.
‘The difference was that of military culture, Stuart painted the King's
Dragoons as leading a softer ife on routine marches. They did not have
to ride exterior picket duty rather, they were ‘let of? with the easier job
of interior picket postings. One could argue, on the Dragoons’ behalf,
that Lake probably wanted them ‘in close’ so that they could respond at a
‘moment's notice in case there was an emergency situation that needed an
immediate reaction force well versed in the latest galloper movements.
Others no doubt believe the King's Dragoons earned the softer daily
owing For drag pt bane te General ms more Shy to w=

cm as his primary cavalry troops and therefore they were prone to
incur higher casualty rates in larger batles. They were told they were the

ン

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1805 187

‘best~ the problem was they believed it implicitly. Ie was their inculcation
asan elite force hat tninted thet military culture with an insufferable air
of superiority and that directly bred interservice rivalry. At that time the
rivalry in the cavalry may have been more clearly defined than that found
between infantry units. One finds examples in European military history
‘of the ctiquish nature of cavalry units and the elite status was occasionally
underscored with enlistment from the upper reaches of society. Butas we
can see in the case of Charles Stuart, one could find a member of the
aristocracy in the EICs Native Cavalry. That may in some small way
‘explain the underpinning of liberal racial attirudes in the EIC’s wnits at
that time. It was nota case of who was better, King's Dragoons or EIC
‘Cavalry. That was impossible to quantify on either an individual
ot ‘service’ basis. The EIC’s regiments often had more years of Indian
experience because they were constantly being called out. Yet the overall
quality of cavalry, the King’sand the Company's, was solow that Lake had
seen ft ro initiate large-scale retraining at Kannaui The rivalry remained
very real.

Five battalions of Maratha sepoys had managed to escape from the
‘battle outside Dethi and two of those had remained virtually unscathed.
Lieutenant Charles Stuart was the most honest diarist in stating that
in fact the majority of the Maratha infantry at the battle site were not
felled but rather ‘dispersed’. Although these were Sindia’s enlisted men,
1s opposed to his European or Euro-Asian mercenary officers, terms of
‘employment were offered to them under the Governor-Genera’s Procla-
ration, Stumrt reported that many of the Marathas’ sepoys had ‘now
taken service with us’. Their fate was similar to that of many of the
other Maratha military resources found on the battlefield. These enemy
infantry were not destroyed, but rather recycled and incorporated into
the EIC war machine.

‘The Battle of Delhi was a ferocious combat but it proved more po-
ltially than miliarly important in the ultimate effort to push Sindia
cout of North India, In gnining Delhi, Lake secured access ro the ageing
‘Mughal monarch in whose name Sindia controlled the Doab. The British
were about to achieve the all-important political objective of ‘freeing’
the Mughal Emperor. Lake's quartermaster, named Campbell, entered
Delhi on 14 September 1803 to make arrangements for the General to
visit the Mughal Emperor Shah Alam IL. Members of the 6th Bengal
NC had reportedly seen hundreds of Maratha wounded along the roads
and a great many had died of their wounds since the bate." While
Campbell encountered no resistance from Maratha stragglers, he did
have a problem locating sufficient boats for Lake's army to cross the
fiver 78 Maratha forces had commandeered many craft to make their

