182 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

George's cavalry shook his moral foundations. But he could not bring
formal charges against them since he was not present when the Killings
took place and the stories would be easily dismissed as hearsay evidence.
Eyewitnesses from the 3rd Bengal NC did not want to testify against
the Dragoons - interservice rivalry was bad enough between the EICS
troops and His Majesty’s solders. And this was wartime. Inviting division
‘among British troops might be construed as unpatriotic at the very least
and, in a worst-case scenario, treasonous.

Sauart ls us that a numberof the King’s Dragoons used their pistols
extensively inthe bloodletting along the riverbank. The ferociously angry
accusation of cruelty concerned the shooting of non-combatants at that
location. As was the case in most major Indian armies of that era the
‘Maratha regular army travelled with a large number of camp followers
‘and bazaar people. ‘Many attempted to make thei escape by swimming
ut whenever an unhappy wretch showed his head above the water &
dozen pistols were levelled att. An old man witha child on his shoulders
stood in the water afaid to proceed. A dragoon, untouched by remorse,
shot him and the child, I suppose, must have drowned."

‘The implication is that Stuart, as a white Anglo-Saxon officer serving
‘with the South Asian officers and men of the Native Cavalry, developed a
‘warm sense of humanity and compassion. He rode with and fought along-
side South Asians and saw them as equals. It seems that if he ever har-
‘boured racial prejudice he drew a distinction of human equality around
those who soldiered with him. Although speculative its tempting to be-
lieve that in his accusation of cruelty we see not only another aspect of
interservice rivalry, between the EIC and King's troops, but also a facet
‘of dehumanization. Ifcorrect, the assumption is that the King's Dragoons
were more racist and dhist because oftheir military culture and racial
isolation within the South Asian military environment. These exctusively
white officers of the King’s troops were a minority and would no doubt
have felt threatened by the abilities of South Asian cavalry officers who
‘could ride or shoot as wel, if not better, than any of them. Consider aso
that Charles Stuarr’s comments of cruelty were uttered in relation to the
death of a South Asian enemy civilian, This could be construed as indi-
‘ating that Stuarts care and concern was not just for his fellow soldiers
but also for non-combatants, even when they were in service tothe oppo-
‘ition, As for interservice rivalry, between the King’s and EIC' ‘native’
units, there had always been rifts. Some cases were basically economic,
in terms of how much batta one received while on campaign. Other inci-

nts of rivalry were put in terms ofthe moral and professional character

soldiers who served the EIC as a business entity rather than the army
‘of George III. The racial clement was always present in the slur that EIC

“The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 133

officers, like Stuart, prefered the companionship of ‘blacks’ to that of
soldiers of heir own race.

‘Lake's army had fought to the point of exhaustion but they had been
victorious in driving the Marathas from the field, Lake's baggage train
wasso far behind, his troops slept without cover on the battlefield. How-
ever, there were more pressing worries aa they awoke on the morning of
12 September 1803. There were so many dead littering the field that an
‘entire batalion was needed fr the burial detail since the huge numbers of
‘bodies posed a severe health threat in the intense heat, That was one of the
considerations in moving the army's campsite 2 cos from the battlefield to
Patpargunj. The dooley bearers of Lake's army were contract employees,
like those who served Arthur Wellesley’ army, and it was difficult to order
them about in the fashion you would expect of military stetcher-bearers.
"The “dooties had proven extremely reluctant to risk their lives under fire.
‘The met result was that most of the wounded had lain on the field for
‘hours in the heat before the bearers would consider going out to pick
them up. Stuart suid that the dooley bearers ‘always keep out of danger”
and he bemoaned the fact that the hospital tents were s0 far away that
many lives were lost for want of immediate aid, When the baggage troops
hhad finally arrived they had set the medical tents up at the place origi-
rally designated as the army’s campsite, # point just west ofthe Hindan
River's bank and miles from the actual engagement. That posed a large
logistical problem because it meant the wounded had to be moved back
from the battlefield travelling up to seven miles to get medical attention,
‘The unity ofthe Grand Army was lost again. The fragility ofthe arriving
‘wounded meant the hospital tents could not be moved forward to a more
advantageous location. Carrying stretcher cases for miles meant more
casualties as many men bled to death from wounds inficted by Maratha
anti-personnel rounds. It would be several days before a complete evac-
mtion could be performed, Stuart also conceded that the field was no
place for performing an operation. Huge numbers of amputations had to
be performed as limbs were pierced, mangled and left useless by canister
1s well as grape shot. There was a shortage of surgeons. The volume of
cases, the heat in the tents and the plague of fies that swarmed around
the hellacious scene overwhelmed those who were on duty.

John Pester provided a gruesome description that seemed more remi-
iscent of an abattoir than a hospital.

About thirty surgeons were absolutely covered with blood, performing operations
‘on the unfortunate soldiers who had their legs and arms shattered inthe action,
‘nd death in every shape seemed to preside in this assemblage of human mi
‘ery... Tn one corner of the tent stood a pile of legs and arms, from which the
boots and clothes of many were not yt stripped off."

