184 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘Charles Stuart wrote with pity of Cornet Crowe, a promising young of
cer, The bones in one foot were crushed by the impact of projectile. The
‘unfortunate Crowe was compelled to travel to several different aid star
tions before he could find one where his foot could be amputated. Stuart
‘knew thatthe amputation meant Crowe was ‘rendered useless asa cay-
ly office’, since he could no longer use both stirrups. Stuart hoped that
provision would be made for young Crowe on Lake's staff. It was a form
‘of military welfare that had been applied in several existing cases among,
the C-in-C’s staf. Crowe would notbe automaticaly invaded out’ since
the Grand Army was engaged in a serious campaign where al talented
‘Europeans were put to use whenever possible. He would, however, have
to find a different military occupational speciality. Although maimed, he
had survived, which was more than could be ssid for many wounded who
died of heat, haemorrhaging or shock, as they ay for hours and in some
‘eases days before the dooley bearers picked them up and took them to
the aid stations, Atleast they were better off than the Maratha wounded
abandoned on the field only to be plundered and killed by Lake's camp
followers. Lieutenant Pester came acrosstwo ofthe naked Maratha sepoys
along the riverbank still clinging to life five days after the battle. ‘We
knew them by their hair, which is never cut like our soldiers. They
were a fine soldir-ike looking cast of men; their clothes were stripped
off them [plundered], but the most friendly office of the «wo was left
‘undone ~ putting them out oftheir misery"? Despite the lack of hope
for recovery, Pester sent the two wounded men off to afield hospital.
Before leaving the feld, another task that was given priority was secur
ing the Maratha artillery that had been abandoned, There were several
very sound reasons for treating this issue with some urgency. Among the
guns captured by the British at the Battle of the Dharderi Plain were
some unique gun tubes that were laminsted in a manner thatthe British
had not seen before. According to Charles Stuart, ‘to render them more
durable chan if made of brass alone they were lined with iron or rather an
iron cylinder being first prepared it appears as ifthe brass were cast over
it which has been done so well that there is not the smallest separation
between the two metals’. Stuart also noted that several ofthe mortars and
howitzers ofa large size were fitted with a sophisticated elevating screw,
which allowed them to be used with a certain amount of interchangeabil-
ity. The tumbrels were in poor condition but the draught bullocks were
particularly fine and superior to those the British possessed, so they were
{aken to pull Lake's artillery.
Since the Grand Army was going to continue its march it was impor-
‘ant not to leave the Marathas any weapons they could salvage for reuse,
In addition there were still large forts such as Agra to tackle and one

“The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 185

could not have too many pieces of artillery for use against a fortress of
‘that dimension, But the superb Maratha artillery was also sought for its
‘prize value’, A gun in fine condition could be resold to native allies or
‘even European shipping interests at high value. One that was damaged,
even irreparably, brought rupees on the scrap market. Once articles were
disposed of, their cash value was credited to the prize fund. It was com-
‘mon in campaigns such as Lake's for everyone from the C-in-C to the
puckalles (water carriers) to draw proportional shares on the prize fund to
‘which they were entitled. A cavalry detail was formed into search teams
to locate and mark the whereabouts of Maratha cannon. The Maratha
guns had been so well hidden that their exact number and whereabouts
‘were not known for days, The search details must have eaten partic
‘larly well on that occasion for Charles Stuart tells us they were also
tasked with destroying the large number of wounded cattle which still
roamed the battlefield." John Pester told of the men in his unit who
‘were sent to retrieve other Maratha gun bullocks illegally plundered by
British soldiers and camp followers alike. ‘In the course of an hour our
Non-Commissioned, who were to collect those of our Corps, cleared
from the lines of the 2nd Regiment only one hundred and twenty-three
fine gun bullocks; they were sent to the Prize Agents to be disposed of on
‘account of the army at large."

“The official report of caprured ordnance noted that 68 artillery pieces
‘were taken from the Marathas. These guns were complete, meaning
‘mounted on fine field carriages with traces and limbers. The majority
(23) were light 4 pounders used as mobile field guns thet could be pushed
forward with the infantry when it advanced, but heavier guns included an
inch howitzer, two brass 20 pounders and five stubby 18 pounder ca
ronades the remainder being a very diverse assortment. William Thorn,
like most British officers who saw the Maratha artillery, was fascinated by
its modernity and in particular the so-called ‘French’ pattern elevating
screws." This addition allowed a number of guns to serve more than
‘one purpose. By adding an clongated elevation screw a number of cannon
‘could be used as howitzers to deliver ‘plunging fire’ at a higher angle of
majectory ‘And to the mortars and howitzers the same kind of elevating
screws are, by a simple and ingenious adjustment, made to elevate the
piece to any angle, and give either of them the double capacity of mor-
tar and howitzet"** The brass guns cast in India were primarily from
india’s foundries at Ujjain’ and Mathura. Ironically, che only guns that
‘burst were two iron pieces cast in Europe. None of the Indian cast-iron
guns suffered that fate.

+ 284, 75°4. Aba Ougin, Oujen, Ougne.

