188 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

escape towards Agra.'However, Lake's staff were encouraged that day
as Louis Bourquin, Sindias highest-ranking European field comman-
der, surrendered. Four other officers, identified by Wiliam Thorn m
Gessin, Guerinnier, Del Perron and Jean Pierre, also surrendered with
Bourquin.'”| Apparently this party had to be taken into protective cus-
tody to save them from what was termed ‘popular resentment’ and they
‘were eventually dispatched to Fatehpur en route to the Bengal Presi-
dency. Most ofthe British diarsts, who witnessed Bourquin's surrender,
tell of him speaking low French and they cast very negative picture of
him. George Call threw in the indignity chat the Frenchman had been
‘a baker and sold salt bef in Calcutta." Call also noted that Bourquin
‘was only followed by 100 enlisted men at the time of his surrender ~
supposedly indicating the extent of the Maratha defeat”? What Call
«did not know was that Bourquin had been Perron’s protégé. Although
never a renowned soldier, he had gained extensive combat experience
in the campaign Perron had waged against the army of Irish mercenary
George Thomas. As for the 100 Maratha sepoys, they were only 2 frac-
tion of the thousands who remained in service under Ambaji Ingln's
command,

Lake crossed over to Delhi by boat on 15 September followed by his
infantry. The next day the British General visited Shah Alam who re-
portedly called Lake his ‘friend and deliverer’.”* The elderly Mughal
was often described as a tragic figure. He had been a virtual puppet
of the Marathas since Mahadji Sindia became Regent in 1784 and the
Afghan adventurer Gulam Kadir had blinded the Emperor in 1788.
‘Possession’ of the Mughal Emperor became a bizarre ritual forthe pow-
ers that competed for control ofthe Doab on atthe very last its riches.
‘Although both the Marathes and the British campaigned and collected
taxes in his name, he was more than a figurehead. He was a status sym-
‘bol for those who sought to control North India, ‘Liberating’ and then
supposedly ‘caring for’ the Emperor had become one in a series of rituals
by which the contending powers tried to legitimate their bids to control
North India. While Lake exercised his charm and showed great kindness
to the Emperor-poet, the men of the Grand Army struggled to move the
tons of captured Maratha artillery across the river. In their ight from
the battlefield the Marathas had not taken time to destroy their barges or
“platform bouts on which they crossed their own troops and Artillery’."”>
‘The British now made good use of the captured Maratha barges. Like
Shah Alam II's ancestor Babur, Lake would use boats to float his ‘new

\ grllery down to Agm for siege purposes

* Aba Gollum Comdor

“The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 189

On 23 September 1803, the sume day Arthur Wellesley met the
Marathas at Assaye, Lake said good-bye to Shah Alam. Lake appointed
Licutenant-Colonel Ochterlony, deputy adjutant-general of the EICS
troops, as the official British Resident to the Mughal court at Delhi.
Lake also arranged to have an old palace residence fitted out as a more
permanent hospital and a proportion of the army's medical staff were
designated to remain for the care of the wounded who were stil in a
delicate condition. The field hospital, with its massive backlog of ampu-
tations and wounds to treat, had been forced to stay back near the bare
site for twelve days. Lake had left a battalion there t» guard it knowing
full well chat Sindia might easily exploit a target that would cause Lake
to divide his forces and double-back.° General Lake could not afford
to keep leaving great numbers of his men to garrison each of his con
quests as he had done at Alighar。 Lake's fighting strength was rumoured
to have been as little as 5,000 men on the eve of the bare at Delhi.
‘Therefore, in order to preserve his resources, he set about employing
‘a numberof the officers who had served Sindia's army. An unspecified
number of British mercenary officers, who hed ‘come in’, were recruited
to raise 2 corps of Mewati troops!” The Mewati corps along with a
battalion and four companies of native infantry were left at Delhi with
Ochterlony,

‘Agra had to be neutralized as a garrison and weapons production centre
and it was so much easier to control the Doab by controling is flanking
‘waterways. The rivers defined the territory, made it fertile and ultimately
provided the corridor by which to annexit more effectively. Lake intended
{o use a number of the captured Maratha guns for the siege of Agra’s
fortress, Those artillery pieces, along with other ‘heavy metal’, were sent
‘by boat down the Yamuna as the army marched along the west bank.'78
‘The plan was to take the ‘high road’ to Agra because it was so well
marked with commiwgr and the route carried Lake's army through the
rich territory of the Bellum Rajah! Its high degree of cultivation held
the promise of making life easier while on the march, The initial portion
‘of the march was relatively uneventful in military terms but the absence
of Maratha regulars did not guarantee tranquility. Everyone complained
about the Gujars* and the problems they caused. The Gujars had served
extensively inthe Jat armies of the region, They were well acquainted
with the manner in which armies operated and were quite inclined to use
that knowledge in the commission of theft.

‘Charles Stuart once again found himself posted to the rear guards per-
‘haps this was the price for not having trained at Kannauj. As the tail unit

* Aka Gooien.

