194 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

the Madaghur- the fart’s outer work. It was a most unusual situation and
the meaning oft was fa from clear.

By the next day Charles Stuart and the bulk ofthe army were marching
past the main part of the city of Agra. Their intention was to move against
the fortress ftom an eastern approach.'™ Stuart was aware they were
taking occasional fre from very arge-calibre guns as they passed but he
had no idea of the specific range. William Thorn tells us that, having
‘encountered virtually no resistance, Lake's deployment continued, his
cavalry having managed to surround and isolate Agra on 8 October.95
During that time a treaty with Ranjit Singh, the jat Rojah of Bharatpur,"
‘was formalized and as part of the mutual defence clause he had sent
5,000 horsemen to Agra to help tighten the British noose around the city
bby cutting Maratha logistical lines. Lake attempted to negotiate with the
‘occupants of Agra's fort but confusion reigned supreme in the Maratha
stronghold and no answer was forthcoming.

‘The British strategy for taking Agra unfolded with a peculiar chythm
that suggests the plan was modified several times to incorporate late-
‘breaking information! Intelligence was being gained from defectors of
Sindias Deccani brigades, some of whom were found wandering near
‘Agra in small groups. Brigadier-General Clarke was dispatched with his
brigade, back over the same route he had just covered, (oa position west of
‘Agra, Early explanations of his retrograde movement suggest a blocking
cor anvil force to smash any remaining Maratha troops or those who sought
to escape the assault on the fortress from the east of Agra. However, the
diaries of Stuart and Call indicate Clarke's mission was revised with a
‘much more specific target in mind. Rather than serve as an anvil for an
eastern assault or as a western mop-up detachment intended to pick up
escapees, i is clear that Clarke's men were ultimately tasked with taking
‘out a large body of Maratha infantry who were ensconced in the Jami"
‘Masiid Mosque.!"”

‘According to Charles Stuart, on the morning of 10 October, there was
tobe a British main force advance from the east with the immediate sim of
<learing Maratha light infantry units and snipers from the ravines found
along the approach to the fort. This bold thrust was supposed to coin-
‘ide with Brigadier Clarke's advance from the west and a flanking cavalry
‘movement. Those flanking horsemen were to secure the area in the vicin-
ity of the Taj Mahal, thereby cutting off an obvious escape route forthe
‘Marathas when the fortress of Agra fell!" Brigadier Clarke's brignde was
supposed to penetrate the city by dividing into two columns: one under

W personal command, the other under Colonel White. Each column

* Noto be cofesed with Ranjit Singh the Si ieader

“The Hindustan Campaign of 1803, 195

was to travel a separate route through the city, with the intention of con
verging on their target, effecting a pincer movement against the Maratha
infantry in the Jami’ Masjid Mosque tothe west ofthe fort." As the day
wore on Lake's main force tothe east saw columns of smoke rising from
the city and heard loud peals of musket fre indicating Brigadier Clarke's
‘men had run into very determined opposition. Accounts are confused
‘but it seems that the Brigadiers party got lost in the inner city and then
‘came under intense musketry from the Marathes fring from windows and
rooftops. Brigadier Clarke's second column, under Colonel White, had
‘more luck in finding their way to the target. But unexpectedly stiff resis-
tance and the danger of running out of ammunition forced Colonel White
into a holding action near the walls ofthe for. It was at that point that
the Brigadie’s column took an unacceptable numberof casualtics. They
were hopelessly trapped, so Clarke ordered a retreat. One of Brigadier
(Clarke's runners managed to find the other column, giving Colonel White
the order to retreat as well. Pesters account states that Colonel White
‘thought that it would be ‘disgraceful’ for British troops to retreat and
he refused to abandon his position as long as he had a single officer left
alive, White sent a letter under fie to Lake stating what had happened.
‘The Crin-C responded to White and ‘paid him a handsome compli-
rent in Orders, [but] ordered Brigadier Clarke to return immediately to
ccamp'.2

Back on the eastern front with Lake's main force, the ravine clearing
‘operations were hampered by the Maratha infantry’s expert utilization
of terrain, The ravines contained numerous crevices and their weather-
worn surfaces made these natural trenches much les perceptible than any
man-made example of field engineering. The presence of freshly turned
soil or the distinct unnaturalness of a man-made berm ofien draws atten
tion to newly constructed trenches. Butin the sun-bieached terrain these
natural features did not betray any glaringly obvious indication thatthe
undulating ground held anything more than a few centipedes or snakes.
‘And from these imperceptbleslis, Maratha sharpshooters proved partic-
‘ularly effective. South Asian snipers were rarely acknowledged for theit
historic ability to demoralize their enemies. But they were every bit as
‘effective as their American counterparts in bringing grief tothe British.
‘As noted earlier in this book, designated marksmen in Maratha battal-
‘ons did not commonly use the general-issue fintlock musket and most
“Maratha snipers in this battle used much more accurate long-barrelled
matchlocks.

Maratha casualties were very low in this intial round of fighting as,
Sindia's men skifully exploited the natural cover and concealment, leav-
ing Lake's men scrambling to try and locate the source of fire. Pockets

5

