214 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

his decisions against the disgrace of returning home, he came to believe
that he had two options, The first possibility was to borrow some money
‘and purchase a commission in His Majesty's Light Dragoons, The sec
‘ond option was to join the army of Daulat Rao Sindia. The latter course
‘of action was recommended by many Britons in India as a sure way to
make an exceedingly large amount of money. IFhe were willing to serve
twelve years it was reckoned he would have enough to retire to Britain
and purchase a business as well. George Carnegie learned that ‘most of
the Great Men’ in Sindia’s army were ‘French and Scotch’, As a result
itwas comparatively easy to get a recommendation to join the brigade of
Scottish Major Sutherland in Sindia’s service.

“George's lewertohis mother Susan Carnegie, in October 1799, specif-
ically notes that there was open talk of what would become of Sindia'
smercenaries,' ‘At presentit is generally believed thatour Government will

insist on Sindeah’s turning all the French and perhaps British Officers

‘out of his Service.’ George expressed the desire that the situation be re-

solved, but that did not stop him from joining. And he eventually went
0 far as to recommend this adventurous life of mercenary service to

his younger brother Thomas. The Carnegies were optimistic but not

frivolous in their consideration of political events. They did weigh the

‘dangers of joining Maratha service and ther letters explored questions

about duty and honour in the context of service and war. George noted

of the Marathas: ‘At present they are our good alles, and so long as they

continue so there can be no disgrace in serving them.’ Susan Carnegie

wrote to a nephew in Calcutta:

have a letter from George bimself some days ago, who represents the India Co,
[sic] as encouraging of ate English Oficers of character to enter the service of
‘the Country powers, their interest evidently beng to preserve Peace with he CO
‘while that ofthe French and other foreigners was to stir up dissention in hope of
sharing the Spoil?

Was there really a possibility of war with the British? Writing to his
‘mother while en route to India, Thomas noted: Ido not see that in the
Service of Sindeah a man runs any risk of being obliged to serve against
his country.” There was hope thatthe British would be allowed to resign
their commissions honourably if war between Sindia and the EIC became
inevitable. Upon arrival in India, Thomas was a guest of his mother’s old
friend, Bombay Governor Jonathan Duncan. “The Governor still is of
. opinion that Scinia's Service fs much beter than the Company's whist,
is on good Terms with them, which he has been for a long time and

Likely to bell A week later young Thomas, who was destined to die
of disease and not war wounds, made the observation, “The most of

¥

‘Coming ia? 215

Scindias Officers are British, and was anything to happen, he would lose
到 ofthem

An honourable profession

Governor-General Richard Wellesley had surrounded himself with bright
‘young men like John Malcolm.’ Yet it would be a mistake to think that

the Governor-General rejected all the wisdom and talent of age. Richard

‘could not say thatthe eccentric John Ulrich Collins was his friend. Never-

theless, Richard showed more respect for the older man’s judgement than

his brother Arthur who dismissed ‘King Collins’ as a buffoon. Richard

knew better; he had read the service records. Collins had soldiered in the

‘Bengal Infantry, making ensign in 1770 before Arthur had reached his

first birthday. Noted in despatches for his personal bravery, Collins had

also survived that very unpopular and controversial conflict known as the

Robilla War. But more importantly, he had served as military secretary to

Richard's predecessor, Governor-General Sir John Shore.! That meant
Collins had extraordinary background knowledge of not only military
‘matters and military men, but also the underlying political issues of the

day Collins didnot like Richard Wellesley -he did not have toin order to
do his job well - nevertheless he served his master admirably inthe great
‘game of intelligence. The Lieutenant-Colonel, known in the customary
zilitary fashion of abbreviation as Colonel Collins, was appointed as of-
ficial British Resident to the court of Daulat Rao Sindia in 1798. But
he was more than a passive observer. He ran one of the most effective
intelligence networks that the British had in 1803. Collins was able to
provide Richard Wellesley with information that extended to the inner
‘workings of Sindia's clan as well as his durbar. Collins’ informants ranged
from humble ‘newswriters’ to Sindia’s most senior advisors. Occasionally
Collins was fed misinformation, but such was the narure of the game and
it did not diminish his personal strengths asa covert information analyst

Collins was often astute enough to accurately weigh his sources against
‘each other to maximize the value of his ‘Marhatta reports’ to Richard
Wellesley. Collins’ analytical ability, combined with his skill at cultivating
informants, was to pay great dividends.

‘During 1801, the reports from Collins were heavily focused on the
factionalism in Sindia's camp. There were significant differences of opin-
jon among the sardart on a number of issues, which included relations
‘with Holkar, the Peshua and the British. In addition, there were serious
objections being raised over Sindias handling of Perron and the foreign

・Ala'Boy Malem’. | Aka Lond Teignmouth

il

