208 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘The ‘Report of Ordnance . . . Captured at Laswaree’ indicated 71
pieces of artillery and 64 ammunition-laden rumbrels were taken by the
British A number of additional tumbrels, as noted, had exploded on
the battlefield, indicating Maratha artillery ammunition had been plen-
iu While Maratha armies had previously carried huge guns into the
field, che artillery caprured at Laswari suggested thatthe remaining bat-
talions had fel theie resources being squeezed. Of the 71 pieces, 7 were
‘carronades, but the short-barrlled brass pieces gave nothing up in her
power since they were 18 pounders and 16 pounders and there were
also 9 howitzers. The howitzers, ranging from 8 inches to 12 inches in
‘bore diameter, were ideal as multipurpose guns. Ahhough they could be
used to lob explosive shell at high angles deep into troop formations, the
Marathas made use of them at Laswari for delivering indirect fire with
‘grape shor.2 The largest percentage of guns captured at Laswari were
6 pounder brass field cannon, which numbered 26 of the 71 pieces.
William Thorn noted that ofthe brass 6 pounders captured at Laswari, all
were castin India withthe exception of one, which was castin Holland.27
Also capcured intact were 4 Maratha galloper guns. The gallopers were
all iron and castin Europe but they were quite small, 2 were 2.5 pounders
and 2 were 1.5 pounders, not at all common for Maratha galloper crews,
which usually relied on 6 pounder brass guns or howitzers which they
cast themselves.

“The Battle of Laswari was expensive for Lake but the Maratha battal-
ions suffered more. The Marathas lost 2,000 men as prisoners of war but
the dead and the dying on the ground were ssid to number 7,002
Lake later ordered the release of the prisoners with the exception of
some forty-cight principal officers. The seventeen battalions had been
smashed beyond recognition and the Maratha commander AmbajiJnglin
was barely able ro escape.™® The entire Maratha bazaar fell nto the vic
ers hands complete with supplies, camp equipage and 1,600 bullocks.
‘Thee cumbrils fll of cash were also seized. Among the military booty
taken from the field there were 5,000 stands of smallarms and an im-
pressive 44 sets of colours.™! The colours were indicative ofthe exprit de
corps enjoyed by these Maratha troops since they were largely composed
of Sindia’s ‘Deccani Invincibles’.¥? Grant Duf writing years later ater
interviewing survivors, could not deny the tenacity with which these men
fought but he refused to give the Marathas credit per se. ‘Few if any of
thosé men were natives of Maharashtra, they were chiefly from Oude, Ro~
lcund and the Dooab, for except Sivajee’s Mawulees, and men trained
the ranks ofthe Bombay sepoys, the native Mahrattas have never made

i]

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 209

Awweek after the Bate of Laswari on 8 November 1803, Lake's army
marched away from the kiling feid that had become quite rank from
the numbcr of unburied human and animal corpses. It took almost
another week before the wounded and captured arillery were sent off
to Agra, The Grand Army had completed its immediate objective and
during December it celebrated the victory and reformed its units. The
“Mughal Emperor sent a Bila or ceremonial robe of honour to General
Lake, while the officers ‘of he British Indian army’ presented their
CHin-C with a silver service valued at £4,000. Lake's victories had
altered the balance of power in North India and several rulers entered
the mutual defence pact, which Governor-General Wellesley had advo-
cated. Much ceremony was made over the commitments ofthe Maharajah
of Jaipun the Rajah of Macherry and Ranjit Singh, the Jat Rajah of
Bharatpur, who would later side with the Maratha leader Holkar in his
1804-5 campaign agnnst the British.

Conclusion

Lake's Hindustan Campaign of 1803 represented the attainment of two
policy goals as outlined by British India's expansionist-minded Governor
General Richard Wellesley:

+ penetration and possession of the Gunge-Yamuna Doaby

+ displacement of the Sindia clans political claim on North Indi
In achieving these points it seems, at first glance, that Lake's campaign
achieved the desired military objectives and war aims of 1803 as outlined,
in Richard Wellesley’ dispatches. The Mughal Emperor Shah Alam TT
‘was safely in British hands, the Doab had been conquered and Sindia’s
standing army was eliminated. But a closer look would reveal that pos-
session of the Emperor did not constitute definitive control of the rev-
‘enue system or the complete allegiance and cooperation of subordinate
powers.

‘Owing to administrative complexity and alienation, the nuances of the
economic as wel as political system of North India were very difficult for
the British to master in 1803. The possession of Shah Alam did give the
British the appearance of being Sindias political successors in relation to
hcir guardianship of the Emperor and their claim on the Doab. But the
British, like the Marathas, were considered foreign masters by many of
‘North India'sindigenous lites. The Mughal throne had long since lost its
‘eal power but its administrative infrastructure lingered on, for now. This
‘would seem co have set the stage for a prolonged period of conversion
during which time indigenous elites, such asthe Jats and Rajputs, would

