206 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

{formation Lake ordered His Majesty's 29th Light Dragoons to prepare
to charge them.

‘While awaiting Lake orders to charge the Maratha cavalry, a number
‘of dragoons halted in a hollow behind a galloper where William Thorn
was positioned. Normally this might have seemed a safe and ogical spot
io post them while waiting to charge but it proved exceedingly dangerous,
as the result of Maratha counter-battery fire. As Thorn’s gun crew laid
‘down covering fie fr the 76th infantry, the Marathas found his range and,
proceeded to deliver round shot on his position in an attempt to knock.
‘out his 6 pounder and deprive the advancing 76th ofthe galloper's fre
support. The dragoons, partially concealed by the grass behind Thorn's
salloper, were patiently waiting for the word to attack but according to
‘Thorn, ‘the shot rolled and ploughed up the ground in every direction
‘among our ranks, with the most mischievous effect.” One round killed
the 29th Light Dragoons’ commanding officer Major Grifiths, just as
‘they were about to be commited to action. Captain Wade quickly took
the dragoons’ command and the order was given to charge. The Maratha
horse were repulsed before they could reach the Bridsh infantry.

‘As with other battle accounts ofthis war, itsoon becomes apparent that
the British placed a great emphasis on combat leadership roles among,
thei senior officers. A corresponding level of officer leadership was not
possible in Sindia's army, which had been gutted by officer defections,
British officer leadership did make for high casualty figures among the
senior ranks but it must also have spoken to the sepoys and enlisted
European ranks about the concept of human equality under fire. Colonel
TB. Vandeleur of His Majesys 8th Light Dragoons had fallen mortally
wounded and the corpulent General Ware had been decapitated by a
cannon ballin a gruesome fashion that carried his skull clean away from
his falling body. The British sepoys could plainly see ther senior lead-
crs placing their own lives on the line, This would not always be true
of infantry warfare in the twentieth century, as ‘resource management
approaches to combat leadership tended to remove men above the rank
of colonel from the assault line. These British officers at Laswari up to
and including the rank of general, were willing todo ust what they asked
their men todo rather than remain safely out of th line of fre ‘directing’
the battle. C-in-C General Lake had s horse shot from under him and
his son Major George Lake once again stopped to lend his mount. The
young Lake mounted another trooper's horse but before he could move
‘outhe fell wounded by Maratha artillery ire, cut down before his father’s

nt “This touching incident had « sympathetic effect upon the minds

‘all that witnessed it, and diffused an enthusiastic fervour among the

i

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1803 207

‘oops, who appeared to be inspired by it with more than the ordinary
portion of heroic ardour 229

“To divert Maratha smallarms fire the 29th Light Dragoons charged
the Maratha infantry, braving musket volleys and grape Shot, as they
wedged their way through two standing lines and sabred the enemy
sepoys. This pcrmined Lake to lead his infantry forward and seize
the Maratha batterics that were thei immediate objecive.™® The dra-
‘goons then wheeled left and attacked the Maratha horse that had
remained menacingly near. The Maratha horsemen tried to escape
through an opening but the rear of their main formation had its es-
cape route cut and the momentum of banle now favoured the British
Lake's infantry continued to press forward past the guns and drove
the Marathas back tovards a smal village and mosque. However,
Sindias retreating infantry were then exposed to numerous elements
of Lake's cavalry, which intersected the area choosing targets of op-
portunity and producing confusion in the Marathas line of retreat,
“The Maratha left wing did manage to fall back in reasonably good or
der contesting ‘every point inch by inch’. But Lieutenant-Colone! John
Vandeleur’s dragoons of the 2nd Cavalry Brigade broke into their col-
umn cutting many down and capturing the rest with their baggage in-
tact. Once again George Call provided the details of what followed: ‘the
cavalry now revenged themselves for their former loss by cutting them up
in great numbers ~ out of 16 Battalions, 2,000 men only were saved' 2
‘Additional numbers of Maratas were then killed by the explosion oftheir
‘own ammunition tumbrels that were hit by fre from the British cavalry's
sallopers

Lake's army lost about 800 men killed or wounded and several were
smen of rank. As already noted, Major-General Ware, infantry leader of
the right wing of the Grand Army, was Killed in the last stage of the
‘atte by Maratha cannon fre 2? The burial parties lid thirteen British
officers to rest and ‘All the surgeons ofthe line [werei ordered to the
General Hospital co assist in dressing the wounded’. Lake had two
horses shot from beneath him that day andat one point a Maratha soldier,
attempting to kill the British C-in-C, placed the muzzle of his weapon
3o cose to the General tar powder burns were left on Lake's coat?
‘Man and beast had suffered privation to make the victory possible, The
cavalry had been forced to cover 42 miles in less than rwenty-four hours
and then pressed into service from morning to evening without food or
water. Lake's infantry had suffered similarly, making forced marches of
5 miles in fortycight hours and then, after only an hour to rest, they
were thrown into a bate that was already in progress.

