210 。 Te Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

use political recognition, subordination and allegiance as bargaining chips
ina greater power play of subcontinental proportion. These bids to carve
‘out claims of autonomy from decaying political infrastructures eventually
‘came fill circle in outlastng the British Raj. And it could be said the
process did not reach a form of historical conclusion until the 1970s
when the Republic of India formally terminated the political power of all
‘princely states’

‘Although the British had ‘conquered’ the Doab it was far from paci-
fied or teritorially secure. The British had focused their military might
in such a way that it allowed them to push on with primary targets, but
in doing so they had to by-pass several areas which were now potential
points of insurgency behind their lines. The British were learning the
tactical aspects of rapid reaction in North India and that was of benefit
to their imperial control mechanism, The 1803 campaign showed that
‘overwhelming firepower was not a guarantor of victory fit was then the
Marathas would have won the war. But the Bridsh advances made in the
use of firepower mobility (ie. gallopers) were recognized almost immedi-
ately as particularly well suited to counterinsurgency in North India, An

immediate reaction capability was very useful in minimizing or con

ing insurgency before it ot out of hand. This could be seen in Macan’s
reaction following Fleury's raid on Shikohabad. Much agricultural land
‘was burned, but the driving and relentless pursuit of Maratha cavalry de-
id them opportunities to prey upon serious military or civilian targets.
If kept on the agricultural periphery of society, bands of pindaries and
marauding horsemen were a security problem but nota military threat
to the British armies who set about the serious business of eliminating
‘more conventional infantry-based threats.

Sindia's battalions had been dispersed and therefore directly removed
from Maratha service, but the majority of his sepoys had not been phys-
ically destroyed, Charles Stuart ofthe Bengal Cavalry had it right when
he indicated that Sindias battalions were not so much destroyed as they
were ‘dispersed’. More than 2,000 Maratha sepoys at Agra literally walked
into British service as many of their comrades had done before them at
Delhi. The EIC was acquiring and incorporating the human and physi-
‘al assets found within the South Asian military environment: fortresses,
‘cantonments, transport animals and soldiers. They were all coming into
the EIC’s control. Lake's 1803 Hindustan Campaign was instrumental in
smaking the EIC the dominant payer inthe South Asian military economy.
‘And with that domination, particular emphasis was placed on the EICS

iof the North Indian military labour market. The elimination of
‘india as a rival bidder forthe services ofsepoys or as an alternative em
ployer for mercenary officers as well as horsemen, meant that more men,

‘The Hindustan Campaign of 1603 aun

and in particular South Asian men, saw their profession as soldiers tied
to EIC ascendance, What many did not seem to see or realize was that
their careers would then be tied to British corporate interests. And that,
1s such, they would also be subject to the corporate practices of the EIC.
Deficit spending to win wars meant a boom in hiring cycles. Conversely,
bbudget cutting meant demobilization. As far as fixed physical assets, the
British were still learning about the intangible costs associated with their
victories over North Indian fortresses.

“The fortresses of Alighar, Delhi and Agra had come into British pos-
session but the British may have misinterpreted the manner in which
they had ‘fallen’. There has been a great tendency for Western authors
to clasify all South Asian defensive fortifications under one heading as
‘Indian forts. But there was a emendous difference in architectural de-
‘ign, physical construction techniques, intended military usage patterns
and the political purpose of construction. Shah Alams fort at Delhi had
not been contested. It was very much a political prop for the Emperor al-
though, as we shall see in the next chapter it was the scene of en unusual
siege attempt in 1803, The battle for Delhi against Bourquin had been
‘conducted miles away from the city. And so the British acquired Delhi's
fortress without direct attack. Lake's 1803 campaign did, however, in-
volve attacks on two of India’s great fortresses. Suffice to say that Alighar
‘and Agra were similar in both being large North Indian fortresses, but
they differed greatly in the context of design, construction and purpose.
However, both fell to Lake's army rather quickly.

“Many sources say that Alighar was raken by acoup de main and Agra fell
after fire was opened from a grand siege battery forcing the garrison’s sur-
‘ender. But [believe that was a superficial and incomplete analysis, which
‘may have misled Lake and othersinto thinking that ‘taking an Indian fort’
was in efect simple. Alighar’s drawbridge was under construction at the
time of the anack If it had been completed before the attack, then @
‘coup de main would have been impossible and how would the British have
coped with the great water-filled moat? But history is riddled with ‘what
ifs’. OF greater relevance to the fall of Alighar and for that matter Agra
‘was Richard Wellesley’s Proclamation of 29 August 1803. The Procla-
‘mation had led to devastating defections among officers as well as scpoys
‘but it did more than that in terms of command, contol, communication
‘and imtligence.* The successful attack through Alighar’s main gate was
‘made possible by the intelligence provided by the defector known ms
‘Mr Lucan. He not only provided General Lake with recent intelligence
fon the disposition of the Marathas’ divided forces, he also served as

* Ko by the miiery abbreviation CI

