202 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

{sthe line parallel co the horizon In this case, the eastward extending per
pendicular portion ofthe line consisted of firmly fixed artilery This ar-
tllery dominant section ofthe deployment was intended to cannonade the
British after they had crossed the rivulet ac the southeast entrance to the
battlefield a they proceeded westward to attack he Maratha infantry tne.
“The highly visible portion of Amba’ infantry lin that ran north to south,
the lure that invited Lake's attack, rested on the village of Mahalpur,
As it tamed out, the Maratha plan nearly worked. The long line of
Maratha guns stretching east towards Laswari was obscured by tll grass
and that explains a great deal of their initial effectiveness. Later, as the
battle progressed, the Marathas reformed their lines. That these move-
ments were aecomplished in the heat of battle under sustained British
fire further testifies to the proficiency and skill ofthe Maratha sepoys.

‘The opening movements

‘The Marathas had cut the embankment of a large reservoir; this action
‘inundated the roadway that Lake sought to use forthe approach of his,
‘cavalry to the battlefield. The right wing of the Maratha infantry lay in
‘an adjacent position concealed in the tall grass behind thei strong line
of artillery. Several British accounts confirm the manoeuvring of Lake's
‘cavalry around the periphery ofthe boggy roadway caused problems. The
hhorsemen swung wide of the muddy area to seck the dry ground that
‘was deemed less dangerous forthe horses and the gallopers. As the lead
unit skirted the area the Marathas had flooded, considerable clouds of
‘dust rose from the sun-baked fields. The extremely dry topsoil beside the
roadway soon filed the aias the rushed movements ofthe densely packed.
British cavalry formation threw tremendous quantities of fine, choking
dust into suspension and the cloud hung about the men, William Thorn,
‘who was with agalloper crew, suggested thatthe advance was only saved.
bby Lake's superior powers of perception as many junior officers and their
‘men were totally disoriented in the dust cloud, Lake ordered his advanced
‘cavalry guard to head towards a position he had predetermined would
rsect any possible Maratha retreat. He intended these horsemen to
hale the escape of the Maratha guns should they try and withdraw in this
confusion.
‘The inital group of British horsemen in the advancing wave contained
members of His Majesty's 29th as well as 8th Regiment of Light
\ Dragoons, The dragoons penetrated the batd area on a tangent and
ka small number of artillery pieces but they had, in actual fact,
rdden pasta large numberof the guns they were seeking to intercept.2!°

11 The Battle of Laswart 1 November 1603, based on a map that appeared in Major W. Thorn, Memoir ofthe Wri India,
dition by Emery Walker

1818, as well as a rem

Mop

