220 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

Sindia's distinguished veteran artillery commander Gunput Rao' was
another of Collins’ intelligence sources. He provided information that
Perron was urging Sindia to seek additional alliances to bolster the
Maratha position against Britsh expansion. Richard Wellesley, at that
time, was entertaining plans fora first-hand inspection trip in the Upper
Provinces and Perron was sensitive to the rapidly changing diplomatic
events, Perron was not pushing for a ‘French state’ with South Asian
diplomatic recognition, as some authors have implied. His proposals for
‘Maratha alliances with the as。 the Gatkesad of Baroda and eventually
Holkar suggest Perron had devoted considerable thought to his survival
strategy. A balance of power or external multilateral reaty system also
heid the potential of defusing the situation via an armed truce. Gen-
ml Perron had already opened a dialogue with the Sikhs on Sindia's
bbchalf Perron went so far as to mect with Sikh leader Ranjt Singh's
‘uncle to lay the groundwork for further negotiation. Perron knew well de
Boigne's advice to avoid war with the British. And Perron had no incen-
tive to seek war with them; indeed that would be counterproductive to
his mercenary game. The object was to live a very long time ~ or at least
Jong enough to retire in comfort as de Boigne had done. For his part,
Governor-General Wellesley had no objection to Perron retiring a rich
‘man. He just wanted Perron and the other French mercenaries out of
Maratha service as soon as possible. The remaining British mercenaries
‘would be easy enough to control. Perron’s position should theoretically
hhave been rendered more secure by his efforts to form a North Indian
alliance system but hs safety was increasingly jeopardized by his Maratha
rivals. Colins assessed Perron as politically aware and adept at survival,
stating the General is by no means deficient in the acts of management
and conciliation’. 36
Collins was given specific instructions to try and obtain Sindia’s agree
‘ment to enter a separate Subsidiary Alliance Treaty in January 1802.” It
‘was part of a multitrack approach by the British to divide the Marathas
up via alliance packages to pre-empt the need for an all-out war It wm
hoped that, at che very leat, the Gaikwad, the Pesta and Sindia could be
split off from Holkar, which would make victory a much more attainable
goal, Collins was warned that he should present this offer of alliance a a
‘move designed to strengthen Sindia and under no conditions should he
portray it as vital or necessary to the safety of the EIC.# The proposal
held out the supposed benefits of alliance; but not without a correspond
\ ing price. Richard Wellesley wanted to render Sindias battalions more
‘yontrollable or responsive to British overtures. Ifthe British mercenaries

* Aka Gunpat Rao, Gunpat Row.

‘Coming in’ 221

were to replace Perron then command and control of the ‘regular corps’
would be on a distincly different footing as far asthe BIC was concerned.
‘The secret instructions to Collins particulary stressed the removal ofthe
French officer cadre from Sindia's service.”

‘The Governor-General knew there was litle chance of Sindia agree-
ing to all the preconditions of the proposed Subsidiary Treaty Alliance.
Giving up Agra and Delhi were difficult demands, but relinquishing com-
‘mand of the battalions that guaranteed his safety from internal Maratha
squabbles was asking too much. Collins could not make the argument
that Sindia needed British forces for his defence; a point which did ep-
peal to lesser figures ike the Peshwa, And the feeble supposition that this
alliance ‘is for Sindia’s own good! was wearing thin. Richard Wellesley
pushed his own political agenda by writing that he saw the “Troops in
the service of Scindhia under the command of French Officers’ as the
biggest chreat that the British faced. Ironically, the Governor-General
‘was far from convinced by conspiracy theories, which alleged that Si
‘was actively participating in an alliance with Napoleon or his agents in
the then current War ofthe Second Coalition. Rather than blow with the
‘more popular winds of conspiracy, Wellesley, perhaps in seeking greater
‘credibility with London, tacked hard against the conspiracy fear in argu
ing thata well-intentioned Sindia might not be able to control the actions
of the French mercenaries if they sought to stage a coup at some furure
date and then delivered the ‘regular corps’ over to Napoleon's gents
{for political or monetary reward. (This greatly contrasted Wellsley’s
stance on Tipu Sultan who he actively portrayed in 1799 as working
‘with Napoleon.) But Wellesley’s personal doubts about Sindia were cxr
pressed in negotiating instructions forwarded to Collins through Bengal
government secretary Edmonstone. Imperial risk was embodied in the
‘concern that ‘Could it even be supposed that Scindhia possessed that
power of control over the French Officers commending Troops in his ser~
vice no considerations could require the British Government to expose
the security ofits interests ro precarious dependence upon the fluctuat-
ing views and doubtful disposition of Scindhia."® But mere supposition
‘would not sufice. Wellesley needed a solid legal argument to present to
the EIC in order to justify pushing Sindia any further on this mercenary

‘Richard Wellesley was forced to admit privately to his Bengal advisors
‘that legally he had no ‘right to the dismission’ of the French mercenaries
‘based on potential furure events and there was also the nagging fact that
Perron and is associate ‘were entertained previously to the commence-
ment ofthe War [with France|’ But timing and presentation were notto
‘beundervalued and a European peace sill had not been signed, although

