204 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘The British cavalry pressed on through the area lying in front of them,
‘covering the ground east of Mahalpur without noticing the long line of
‘guns parallel to them on their left. However, the Marathas did not have
any intention or, for that matter, any means of moving their guns at
that moment. The Marathas were using the old Mughel-era tactic of
anchored artillery. Heavy chains were strung between the gaps in the
artilery line and anchored to hackeries, carts and caissons.220 These
obstacles, combined with field-expedienc embrasure, lay behind the tal
grass waiting to thwart any British attempt to ride through the guns. The
British cavalry would be forced to jump these chain barriers and that
would greatly reduced the dragoons’ ability ro sabre Maratha gunners.
pode 0 ack hi ne Colonel aan and Boncnn fom His
jesrys 29th Light Dragoons combined with troopers ofthe 4th Bengal
NC Regiment. They charged the right of the Maratha artillery line. The
‘Maratha infantry detivered substantial musket fire from behind theit
hastily erected field-expedient fortifications. But the Maratha artillery
ld their fice until Macan's men were only 20 yards from the muzzles
of the guns.” With an evil roar the grass erupted in abst that quickly
revealed thatthe horsemen had misjudged the size and extent of theit
target. In dragoon William Thor's words: ‘a frightful discharge of grape
and double-headed shot mowed down whole divisions, as the sweeping
storm of hail levels the growing crop of grain tothe earth’ 22 The casu
lies were severe among Macan’s men but the horsemen rode through
the emplacement and reformed on the other side to ride back agai
‘Many of the Maratha gun crews had sought shelter under their artillery
pieces on the frst pass and they re-emerged to uy and turn theit guns,
load and ire. The chains must have greatly impaired ther efforts and with
で ech succeeding pass their numbers grew fewer. George Call ofthe 27h
Light Dragoons remarked: ‘Our loss of Cavalry which was made in the
first attack, was very great, owing to the enemy's well served fie of grape
and our incapabilty ofbreaking the chains. Despite a devastating fre
that included chain shot, Macan’s men rode back and forth three times
before they were ordered to withdraw under fre. Owing to the anchor
chains, a lack of bullock teams and the galling fre, the British cavalry
‘managed to bring away only two small field pieces a they retreated.

_ By noon the British infantry arrived, His Majesty's 76th Regiment and
six battalions of Bengal NI, after marching all night and into the heat
of the mid-day sun, It was judged prudent to let them rest shortly and
take refreshment before entering the battle, but a messenger arrived from
the Marathas requesting a disengagement. Grant Dufi’s history of the

Jacathas states that one ofthe Maratha officers, on seeing the approach of
British infantry, offered ro surrender his artillery if rms were granred 224

“The Hindustan Campaign of 1603 205

‘Although conditions were agreed upon, the passing of one hour’
saw no change in the Marathas’ military disposition and so the decision
‘was made to resume the battle. The British infantry formed into two
‘columns and moved between the nulah to their eft and the Maratha line
to their right. They were to ry and turn the Maratha infantrys right
flank which had changed front with precision, pivoting back in the first of
its two ninety-degree increments to form a straight line stretching from
north to south on the perimeter of Mabalpur.

“The Maratha infantry were well posted, having manhandled many of
their artillery pieces back with them. Drag ropes and handspikes were
‘used to pull the guns back to the reformed line. The Marathas should, ar
that point, have had the benefit of cavalry support, which was hovering
in the reat. But the Maratha horsemen held back waiting to see where
the British dragoons were headed, Major-General Ware's men were in
the frst British infantry column and Major-General St John’s men were
in the second infantry column. The British cavalry forces were now di-
vided. Some of the horsemen under Macan were posted to support the
infantry while another body of cavalry operated as a diversionary force
approaching the Maratha left on the opposite side ofthe batdefield. This
cavalry feint to the north (Maratha left) was made all the more credi-
ble by advancing in a leapfrog manner which allowed the gallopers ro lay
suppressive fire. One regiment's galloper crews would open fre, targeting
“Maratha artillery and distracting their attention from the British infantry
advance. Another set of British regimental galloper crews advanced past
the first crews a few hundred yards before going to ground. There they
would unlimber their gun and deploy covering fire while the frst crews
limbered-up and rode past few hundred yards to the next position where
they deployed and repeated the leapfrog process of fie and movement.

‘The British infantry tried unsuccessfully to use the tall grass to con-
eal their movements. The Marathas poured down showers of grape shot
‘rom large artillery pieces delivering high-angle fire. The 76th Regiment
in their customary vanguard role bore the brunt ofthis barrage and casu~
alties mounted quickly, Lake felt a great deal of attachment to his prized
"76th. And rather than have them linger inthe shower of grape shot he
had them move forward with the 2nd Battalion of the 12th Bengal NI
and five companies of the 16th Bengal NI, without waiting for the rest
of the column to form.2 As the men advanced things got worse. The
‘Maratha gunners dropped the elevation of their guns and loaded canister
shot packed full of musket-ball-szed projectiles. These rounds inflicted
severe casualties and to compound matters the Maratha horse formed
in an apparent bid to charge the 76th Regiment.™* In order to keep

the Maratha horse from riding through the ranks and breaking up the

