212 The Anglo-Mammtha Campaigns and the Contest fr India

personal guide for Monson’s storming party. Lucan’s knowledge of the
fort was instrumental in getting the assault party through the interior
rampway ofthe fort allowing the entrance of men tothe inner fort via the
wicket gate.

‘At Alighar and Agra, the garison’s command and control were dy
functional as the result of having been severely divided on the issues of
trust and loyalty. Both garrisons had imprisoned their European senior
officers, as we saw in the cases of Pedron at Alighar and the unfortunate
Hessing as well as Sutherland at Agra. Both garrisons suffered internal
division over the issue of what course of action to follow. Relinquishing
‘Agra forthe settlement of wages in arrears was a real option and the sir-
uation was not unlike that which Arthur Wellesley faced at Ahmadnagar
But Lake's victories at Alighar and Agra had pre-empted the necessigy
‘of prolonged sieges that could last for months and produce nothing but
‘casualties and expense. A strong case can be made thatthe condidioning
of the British in 1803 ~ meaning the British were conditioned to expect
‘rapid victory against Indian forts laid the basis for Lake's future disaster
a Bharatpur in the 1804-5 Holkar Campaign when that Jat fortress held
out and forced a humiliating British withdrawal. That reversal of Lake's
fortune in 1805 may also explain why his brillant performance in the
3103 Hindustan Campaign is often overshadowed by stories of Arthur
Wellesley in the Deccan,

5 ‘Coming in’

Introduction

“Mercenary employment practices underpinned the military labour mar-
kets that helped to drive the South Asian military economy. Although
never culturally exclusive, mercenary hiring lingered historically in South
Asia because it met corresponding military, economic and socal needs,
‘This helps to explain the ease with which the EIC a credit-tich foreign
‘commercial entity, could build three huge sepoy armies that would be-
come the foundation of later milion-man British Indian Army. Despite
‘embracing the mercenary essence of this cornerstone, British attitudes to-
‘wards Europeans in South Asian military service were rapidly changing
ac the dawn of the nineteenth century.

‘This chapter specifically concerns European mercenaries in Maratha
service but it also demonstrates some ofthe specific techniques used in
British manipulation of the South Asian military economy. When com-
ined with diplomacy, these control efforts held the promise of delivering
regional security as well as greater politcal reward on an imperial bass.
‘The story concerning the Marathas’ European and Euro-Asian merce-
‘aries has never been clearly placed against the backdrop of covert in-
telligence, financial negotiations and espionage, as found in the EICY
‘records. As this chapter develops, it also presents a tale of intrigue that
calls into question the accepted reasons for British military vitory over
the Marathas in 1803.

In search of the pagoda tree

George Carnegie, a native of Scotland, reached India in 1799 seeking
to make his forrune. A cousin had bragged about his Calcutta busi-
ness prospects but they evaporated before George arived, To his cha-
grin George Carnegie found that he could not apply for the EIC's civil
service from inside India as appointments had to be obtained before leav-
ing England. After soliciting advice from various sources and weighing

213

