218 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

In the relaxed family setting of Agra the European mercenaries in
Sindia’s service talked about their problems concerning the Maratha
sardars who tested Daulat Raos power. The mercenaries felt pressure to
follow de Boigne’s old advice about remaining loyal to Daulat Rao Singi
above all else. But times had changed. Luckwa Dada, Sargi Rao Ghatke"
sad Antal nga were ow among tos powerful members fdeinnr
ring Sindia to reduce the mercenary faction. On 20
1801 Sina presided overs priate Martha minster conference whee
his father-in-law Sargi Rao Ghatke raised serious doubts about the wis-
dom of entrusting so much power to the foreigners. Ghatke ‘strongly
‘emonstrated on the impoicy of intrustng the important fortresses’ of
‘Ajmer, Agra and Alighar to Monsieur Perron. As well as ‘the imprudence
‘of assigning to him a Jeydad' so large a proportion of his [Sindia’s]ter-
ritories' he specifically pointed out that Sindia might, at some future
period, be placed in a critical situation if it became necessary ro deprive
Pesron of command, Sindias father-in-law felt that Perron would not
willingly surrender the forts in his possession and that Sindia should wait
until things had settled down somewhat and then seek an opportunity
to retake them by force if necessary. But Delhi was a different matter.
Ghatke told the Maharajah to waste not a moment in seizing Delhi from
Perron's administrative control. He thought that Perron’s hold on Dethi
Would have a disastrous effect in exciting the jalousies of other powers ~
presumably the British. In reply to this rebuke Sindia was reported to
have said: T have the Highest confidence in the fidelity of Mr. Perron.”
In his report on the meeting, Collin confided his observation that Sargi
Rao Ghatke would lend his support to any plan that would reduce the
Power and influence of Perron. * This meant that Maratha factional-
ism, over the role of the mercenaries, was obvious in Sindia's durbar
wo full years before the hostilities of 1803. Perhaps more important
to the British intelligence community than the two-year lead were the
statements of Ghatke as one of Sindia's kinsmen. His pronouncements
‘vagested potenti wedges to further split he tenuous bonds of Sins

A suitable pretext

‘Additional intelligence began to filter through to Richard Wellesley on the
conflict emerging between Ambaji Inglia and the foreign mercenaries. In
particular, offence was said to have been taken at the degree to which

+ Aka Sharearao Ghage Sura Rao Chete

| Nott enon wat apd he enencae fm hi jd
‘battalions of regulars under his command, デラ ーー

Cg 219

Perron personally ran Daulat Rao Sindias politcal and military affairs in
‘North India, Ambaji had been one of Mahadii Sindias pillars of strength
jn the darkest days ofthe First Anglo-Maratha War. He had been present
‘when Goddard attacked Gwalior and Ambaji managed to walk out alive,
bringing with him members of Mahadjis family ~an act of heroism duly
rewarded. In those days Ambaji had no quarrel with the European mer~
‘cenaries, showing no particular animosity towards men like de Boigne.
‘Why should there be a problem? Monsieur de Boigne’s stature was not
particularly great until the 1790s with hs authorization to expand beyond
two brigades. Perron’s profile was diferent than that of de Boigne and
that rankled men like Amb
Daulat Rao Sindia did not owe a personal debt of gratitude to Ambaj
as his great uncle Mahad Sindia had done. But Daulat Rao’s ability
twas only a fraction of Mahadj’s and so Ambaji bided his time waiting
for a chance to reassert his own lost power. Within the nether world
of Sindias durbar, Ambaji found himself forming relationships of con-
venience to further his cause. This pattern became more pronounced
with increased pressure from the British to support the Peshwa and the
“Treaty of Bassein. On several occasions Ambaji vas allied with Sargi Rao
Ghatke and those periodic liaisons of convenience lasted, in one form
‘or another, until 1805, despite Ambaj’s later courtship ofthe British.”
But the price ofa transitory alliance with Ghatke was often too much for
‘Ambaji and itproduced a series of spats, And the rivalry between Ambai
and Ghatke, when mutually opposed to Daulat Rao Sindia, rarely did
‘anyone any good as the young Maharaja was more prone to sulk or be-
‘come reactionary when the veneer of manipulation became too thin to
avoid cransporency. This was not always an easy situation for the British
to read, but Collins struggled on in trying to decipher the often ambigu-
‘ous and contradictory signals from the durbar. One option contemplated
bby Collins, ina contingency plan to weaken the Marathas, was to offer
Ambai asylum in EIC territory so ss to better exploit the growing hos
tility amongst the Marathas. Collins realized there was an opportunity
to play one Maratha off aginst the other in such a fasion that it would
accentuate factionalism.

jn shoct it was sufficiently apparent from the discourse of Kharngaur Khan
although he met with no encouragement to disclose his sentiments from me, that
“Ambajee is anxious to obtain the protection of he Bridsh Government, in return
for which he would [ believe, fel no hesitation in entering into any engagements
‘which could, in reason, be expected from him; and even consent ro send his
family, ether to Britain, or Benares, there to remsin as hostages for his good
fh

・anenur Khan’ serve hn Amb and Sin

4

