i

216 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

mercenaries. A certain degree ofthe dissent was clan-related but much
as generated by personal bids for power and ranking. Ithad been com-
mon knowledge in Sindias durbar since mid-1799 that Peron as well as
Dupont were contemplating retirement.” It was widely assumed by the
British that Scotsman Hugh Sutherland would fill Perron's leadership
Tol he was looked to by many as the acting head ofthe British officers
within Sindias mercenary corps. Soldiers of fortune from Scotland were
by far the biggest component of the British contingent and Sutherland
played a pivotal role in what developed as the Scottish connection. How-
ver, the French mercenaries seemed to enjoy preferential treatment un-
der Perron and several were keen to follow him up the promotional ladder.
Information moved freely between Sindia’s mercenaries and the
British, Afterall, there was no immediate threat of an Anglo-Maratha
war in 1801 as Holkar and Sindia were stil locked in their own fn
ricidal conflict. Social as well as professional visits were commonplace
between British officers and their countrymen in Sindias service. The
liaisons were of grea use in the formation of a rather elaborate, yet at
that time stil informal, intelligence network. This ultimately developed
into a rather cellular system of operatives that complemented Collins’ ist
‘of contacts with very few overlaps in personnel. Agra became a popular
meeting place as many British visitors arrived with the publily expressed
desire of seeing the Taj Mahal. Of course the Taj was not the only impres-
piece of Mughal architecture in Agra and the great Red Fort drew
‘many visitors aswell. It was stil being repaired in places during 1801 ssi
had sustained damage in 1799. The fort's killadar had rebelled that year
tnd Perron was sent to recover it. The siege lasted fifty-eight days and the
‘garrison capitulated after a sustained bombardment that wreaked havoc
‘with the sandstone walls in one specific location that would later be of
interest to General Lake for the purposes of opening a grand battery.
In 1800, Sindia had placed the ailing veteran Colonel John Hessing in
‘command of the great fort at Agra.” The old Dutchman was an unhappy-
looking sou! but he surrounded himself with a loving extended kinship
network that was also linked to the family’s mercenary profession.
‘Among the visitors to the fort was Lord Metcalfe, ‘then a young civil-
ian and Assistant Resident at Daulat Rao Sindhias camp' il Metcalfe
‘noted, "I breakfasted by invitation with the Dutch Commandant, Colonel
了 Hessing. [found him with his son (George Hessing], who commanded
in the engagement at Oojein,* where his battalions were defeated; a
Mr, Marshall, an Englishman, and two other officers, whose names I
ot learnt."? Young Metcalfe, an obvious gourmand, devoted sev-
cri ines to describing the elaborate breakfast that Hessing had provided.

1 254,75 +. Aba Uf,

jut in the rather stereotypical fashion of the innocent abroad, Metcalfe
‘well meaning, I am certain." The cordial visits by British visitors were
‘extremely useful for relaxed intelligence ‘networking free from the cloak-
and-dagger aspects of military spying. One reason was that Agra had
Cocl had been popular in de Boigne’s day but by 1801 Agra contained
the cross-cultural legacy of a European mercenary settlement.
Agras Colonel J. Hessing was General Perron's brother-in-law, hav-

ing married a sister of Major Derridon and Madame Perron.’ john
Hessings daughter married Captain Robert Sutherland, That meant
‘that Robert Sutherland became George Hessing’s brother-in-law. Sin

5
British, Dutch and French mercenaries were related by intermarriage in
1 fashion not unlike the unions found in the intermarriages of families
within the Sindia clan. There were apparently three more significant in-
termarriages of mercenary families, two of which were by way of South
‘Asian sisters. Unfortunately our understanding of the exact extent of
intermarriage is placed in question by the fact that there are apparent
tors in Herbert Compron A ricuir Acount ofthe European Miliary
“Adenturers of Hindustan, which has been accepted for years as the stan
dard biographical source on many of the mercenaries. Compton listed
only one Sutherland, thet being Robert. But in reading Compton's
biographical sketch of Robert Sutherland it is apparent that he pro
‘duced a work that unknowingly merged the lives of Robert and Hugh
Sutherland.” Despite the resulting errors, Compton was apparently
correct when he noted that Perron, Hessing, Sutherland, Derridon,
Filoze and Bourquin were aot only linked by their mercenary service
io Sindia but also all related by marriage.'® Compton followed much
‘of the traditional British-based anti-French thetoric and painted the
intermarriage connections ms being divided on national grounds be-
‘ween Britain and France. However, chat assertion is more than suspect.
‘The Hessings were from Holland and the Sutherland correspondence
file cleatly indicates that several French officers were extremely close
confidants of Hugh Sutherland. Major L. Derridon was Hugh Suther-
Jand’s comrade in arms during the war and as late as 1806 he served as
‘Major Sutherland's business representative in Mathura"? Hugh Suther-
ands post-war correspondence indicated he was still friendly with the
‘mercenary Pedron, presumably Pedron the younger who surrendered
Rhura to Lake.”

