234 ‘The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘countrymen, The discussions with EIC personnel were encouraging but
‘would the promises of equal rank and pension provisions be honoured
‘once they ‘came over’? Maratha prize funds regularly exceeded those of
the EIC. Did one really expect compensatory pay supplements or merely
the EIC’s rank equivalent in wages? And if the mercenaries banded to-
‘ether in an act of collective bargaining, could they exert enough pres-
sure on the system to extract more money? These issues divided them
and there might not be a chance for renegotiation once a deal had been
struck. And what if peaceful solution to this tension with the Marathas
could still be found? George Carnegie was aware of the historic prece-
dent for buy-outs and he bravely played the waiting game, He saw hope
‘and merit in deferring his defection until events dictated a more definite
course of action. Carnegie later admitted that as of May 1803 there was
discussion of resigning, which was the prerequisite to accepting British
pension and employment terms.

‘The covert negotiations were kept up while Perron publicly
the line that military preparations were continuing for a possible war
against the British, Collins wrote: at this Durbar itis confidently asserted
that General Perron is extremely active and busy at Coel, in levying new
troops, and in making ther preparations with a view to Hostiltes’* For
their part the Marathas continued to try and limit the damage Collins
could do as an intelligence operative. Active steps were taken to cut his
access to basic information channels in the camp. In addition to denying
direct meetings withthe mercenaries in Sindia's service, there were moves
to halt intligence outflows from other sources, including Sindia's ene-
mics. Collins notified the Governor-General: ‘Several of Holkar’s Sardars
hhave advised him to turn my Newswriter out of his camp, and I should
not be in the least surprised were this event to happen since a more bru-
tal person, than Jeswunt Rao Holkar never, I believe, existed"! Within
Sindia'sdurbar the pressure was rapidly rising to do something about the
European mercenaries and the British troop mobilization. Ambaji Inglia
‘was putting events in motion to bring the situation to a head.

‘The diary of Charles Stuart (3rd Bengal NC) confirmed that by June
1803 it was common knowledge among British field officers that Perron
had already negotiated his safe passage through British territory.

intained

‘About tis ime too, an idea was entertained that General Perron having amassed
large fortune was anxious to quit he Mahratta Service and it was supposed
‘he would tke refuge in the Company's dominions having previously obtained

tc necessary permission. That this event was expected is beyond a doubt for
Ne Officers Commanding at Sassnee & Bidjeghur were ordered to salute him
‘should he ative at either of those places, which from thei vicinity to Coe, ic was
probable he would.®?

“Coming im 25

‘By mid-July 1803 Wellesley, acting in conjunction withthe couneil that
formed Bengal’ ‘Supreme Government, authorized British feid officers
to prepare to accept as many of Perron's defecting offices as came for
‘ward to offer theie services. While still more than a month from official
public disclosure, the large-scale process of undermining the Maratha
military machine had begun. Wellesley had generously endorsed buy-out
pay levels chat exceeded recommendations established in a preparatory
study filed by Major Frith." As ic turned out, Frith was a keen advocate
of acquiring a number of very specific Maratha irregular horse units. He
had researched buying out chose Maratha ristalahs that served as heavy
cavalry under mercenary fcs They represented a military asset that
the British needed in he Doab These were elite mounted troops as-
sociated with men lke James Skinner. They were troopers selected for
their horsemanship and skill with smallarms, Able to fight as cavalry
or mounted infantry, they used both Maratha and European drill intr-
changeably as needed inthe execution oftheir specialized tactics. Under
de Boigne such rzalahs had been issued gallopers, some of which were
45-inch howitzers. The howitzer gllopers were very effective against re-
{factory zamindart because their explosive shells could be rained down
‘over perimeter wallsas plunging fre The sellfe kiled exposed infantry
and ignited stockpiled fodder held in anticipation of long sieges. These
“irregular horse’ unis identified by Major Frith, not to be confused with
ight irregular or pindari horse, were serious players to be reckoned with

the military labour market and they had no direct equivalent in the
British order of bate prior to 1803.

“There is substantial evidence that General Lake was one of the more
ardent supporters of the plan to buy out the human resources of the
‘Maratha armies and Lake monitored North ndia closely. But despite his
‘being based in Hindustan, the northern theatre, Lake saw great merit
focusing on defections in the Deccan first. There were fewer of Sindia’s
troops in the Deccan - further away from the central front in the Doab.
Perhaps they could be detached more easily which would leave the thinly
guarded chain of fortresses in the northern Deccan vulnerable to Arthur
‘Wellesley’ troops. Many ofthe mercenaries travelling ro the Deccan from
the Doab had carried advanced word to their comrades. But the fate of
the sepoys had taken second place to officers and the guarantee of pen
sion funding had been slow to materialize. Edmonstone, in his capacity
as secretary to the Bengal Supreme Government, sent a leter in mid-
July 1803 to Colonel Close, the British Resident at Pune.** Edmonstone
informed Close that the Governor-General in Council had approved the
plan known as ‘Lake's offer system’, and it was going to be extended to
‘ther parts of India beyond the Gunga-Yamuna Doab. It was official. The

