232 The AnglorMaratha Campaigns and the Contest for india

contacted Lake in a Ips than subtle, but successful, conspiratorial bid
to seed the trail with defective official documentation. As Governor-
General, he was acutely aware ofthe issue of culpability in the Hastings
trial and so he needed to cover his tacks in what amounted to interfer-
cence in Sindia’s internal affairs. In a ‘Private’ letter to Lake, Wellesley
wrote: ‘I think it would be proper that General Perrons application to
you, with your opinion upon it, should be converted into an oficial form
in the Secret Department; in which I will also record my answer, with
the regulations proposed for the conduct of General Perron during his
journey from Coel to Calcutta.” In the quoted passage also note in par-
ticular the identification of Coel asthe starting point of Perron's ‘coming
in’ ~ a full five months before Lake's campaign began there.

‘The level of anticipation among Wellesly's intelligence men was grow-
ing. These were high stakes. If Perrons departure had Sindias blessing,
in ridding him of a point of division within his durbar, all the beter. But
the important thing was to get him out of Maratha service as C-in-C.
Many of the mercenaries were now speculating that it would pave the
‘way for Sutherland's ascendancy es C-in-C, something that had been de-
nied when de Boigne departed. British mercenaries like George Carnegie
‘hoped chat Sutherland was made C-in-C he could discourage the talkof
‘war with the EIC, thereby permitting the continuance of a lucrative mer
で enary lifestyle. Holkar was still on the periphery and there was money
to be made in waging war on him. However, the members of
dlurbar were leery of making a Briton head ofthe army when war with the
EIC looked increasingly inevitable over British demands to recognize the
political fai accompli embodied in Feshwa Baji Rao ITs agreement to the
‘Treaty of Bassein.

By the end of April 1803 the covert intelligence network showed the
strain, John Collins was placed in an awkward position as a number of his
‘more dependable intelligence sources had fallen under suspicion. Spying
had been routine but the war party in Sindia's durbar was increasingly
critical of the European presence and intelligence leaks. Collins wrote
to Richard Wellesley advising him that ‘War with the English is publicly
talked ofin the Marrattacamp at this place. This occasions some alarm to
the British subjects inthe service of Sindia. Colonel Doddernigue, Major
‘Brownrigg and Major Smith have assured me that they would have visited
‘me long ago, but forthe prohibition ofthe ministers ofthis court."

‘At that poin the negotiations with Perron ground toahalt. The reasons
forthe cessation were not tall clear at that time and Perron’s motivation

s subsequently questioned by biased imperial historians of the nine

nth century. There has been a tendency to portray the failure of Perron
10 ‘come in’ in April 1803 as an indication of his greed. Supporters of

pe yaa

)

‘Coming int 233

that theory paint Perron as not wanting to give up the chance of gain-
ing lakhs of addtional rupees in Sindivs service during a war with the
British. However, that speculation not substantiated inthe intlligence-
related files covering the period from April to September 1803. Richard
‘Wellesey’s plans contained some practical points for defection, but life
is rarely so simple and in this case it was much more complicated from
Perron’s viewpoint. His life was in danger with regard to the extent of
his covert dealings and he had to have a contingency plan to extract his
wife, family and fortune from Agra if he was discovered during the Dr
cess of moving everything to Coel. Four months was not an unreasonable
‘amount of time to make Wellesley waitin the context of Hindustan 1803,
Simple mail delivery could take weeks and it might easily be compro-
mised ina land where one’s allies aswell as employers were accomplished
spies,

Perron, in a poite style thet refutes nineteenth-century portrayals of
‘him as a less than culrured man, wrote to Lake in April 1803:

‘Thepropostions which the most noble the Governor General has been pleased to
‘make, and which your Excellency has had the kindnes of forwarding to me, are
‘evidently intended asthe means rather of facilitating and rendering agreeable my
journey through the Honourable Company's Territories than as the smallest re-
‘striction upon any desire which {could possibly form; and as Teannot hep looking
on some of the propositions as extremely flattering proofs ofthe Most Noble
the governor general's kind disposition towards me, I should most certainly show
myself unworthy of such consideration, were I in the slightest circumstances to
deviate from the wishes thar may be communicated to me during my march either
bythe gentlemen resident ar particular station o by thote whom your Excellency
‘may think proper to send agreeably tothe intentions which your Excellency has
‘done me the honour of making known to me.'*

‘on to indicate that he was experiencing more difficulty
ally expected. Perron specifically noted setbacks con-
cerning his ‘own private arrangements’. Sindia also demanded his im-
‘mediate attention and he warned Lake to cell the Governor-General that
it would be at least May before he could safely put hi escape plan into
action.

‘The Governor-General’s Proclamation would not be read in public for
nother four months but its contents had already begun to impact on
‘Sindia’s officers. The two issues that weighed most heavily on the minds
of the British mercenaries were: (1) the threat of being charged with trea~
son if a war should break out before they defected; and (2) the financial
extent of pensions and chances for further employment with the EIC.
‘The second issue was by far the most important as most British merce-
narics had already stated that they would not serve against their fellow

