224 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

who wielded the most power in the shape of the ‘regular corps’ and
teal riches in the form of land-based revenue as well as trade conces-
sions such as he salt monopoly in Rajasthan, There were several sardars
ho wished Perron dead. And that is one ofthe major reasons why the
General had cautiously delayed going to meetings of Sindia's durbar
the Deccan the preceding year; he feared a coup tat organized by ja
‘ous Maratha rivals. Perron had felt safe in the Gunga-Yamuna Doab
with never less than a brigade to cover his actions. But by the spring
‘of 1802 it was apparent Perron had to do something. If he remained
‘aloof from formal meetings for much longer there was a danger that he
could jeopardize his own credibility and that might mean his removal
or replacement by another mercenary such as Sutherland. Reluctantly,
‘not being able to delay a personal appearance any longer, Perron took
his troops off to Ujfin fora rather confrontational meeting with Sindins
ror

‘india was also in a vulnerable position with regard to his own growing
‘marginalization in the durbar. His father-in-law Sargi Rao Ghatke and
his so-called uncles were openly urging courses of action that paid lite
to no regard for Sindia’s future. James Skinnet’s memoirs make much
of Sindia trying to orchestrate an armed showdown at dinner between
Perron and a Pathan contingent. But this story does not figure to any
great degree in the records ofthe other mercenaries or Collins. Sindia
as forced into a position of having to decide between the support of his
clansmen on one hand and, on the othe, the physical protection offered
by Perron and his brigades. Collins learned of Sindia's plan to escape from
Perron's influence in a bid to establish his independence and safeguard
his well-being, The break with Perron would present the British with an
‘opportunity of sorts, Collins wrote, ‘Ihave also been told in confidence,
that whenever the disturbances inthis quarter are composed, so far as to
admit of Sindia’s repairing to Agra, itis the intention of the Maharage
to deprive the General ofthe command of those fortresses which he now
ppossess’s in Hindustan.” Pemon's fate may not have been sealed but it
‘was evident to Collins that as of April 1802 the General would be wise
to have a contingency plan if he wanted to follow in his predecessor de
Boigne's footsteps and ive long enough to enjoy retirement from Maratha
service. It was an ideal time to extend the hand of friendship to Perron
and it behoved the British ro do everything possible to expedite his safe
retirement should the opportunity present itself.

Perron had backed Sindias initial opposition to Ghatke’s bid forthe
post of Chief Director of Public Affairs. Sindia favoured AmbajiInglia for
‘the directorship and Perron, as Sindi’s servant, was supposed to swing
full support behind Ambajis candidacy. However, in trying to do so,

*Coming in’ 225

Perron alienated Colonel! Hugh Sutherland who had apparently already
promised his personal backing to Ghatkes effort to attain the extremely
powerful administrative post. The reasons for Sutherland's support of
<Ghatke’s candidacy remain obscure, but there is no evidence of a French~
British power struggle as suggested by some British imperial historians.
Collins’ reports expressed fear ofa slaughter if Perron and Sutherland
squared off in the factional dispute that was threatened. Members of
the durbar who supported Ambaj Inglia's bid for the post had to accept
Perron as their defender, even if they hated the General. His battalions
were needed to counterbalance the corresponding units Sutherland con-
trolled in support of Ghatke. The confrontation was postponed, as op-
‘posed to being resolved, when Ambaji Inglia withdrew his name owing to
the strength of influence Ghatke wielded as Daulat Rao Sindia's father-
in-law.” Collins had wimnessed firsthand the degree of division amongst
the mercenaries in Maratha service. But these differences had often,
previously centred on military or money matters as opposed to national-
ity. Their obvious points of difference were on more than one occasion
bridged by a common bond of suffering imposed by the deteriorating
civil-military relations with Sindias chief ministers. ‘The familial rela~
tionships of the European mercenaries, in this Marathe family drama,
‘were somewhat ironic given the extent of the previously mentioned inter-
‘marriages that involved the Sutherland clan and Perron.” Hugh Suther-
land had also by this time become linked to George Carnegie’s family
‘network, Hugh had feared for the welfare of his young daughter Isabella
‘whom he sent to Scodand and placed under the care of Susan Carnegie ~
the mother of the previously mentioned George Carnegie. Hugh Suther-
land had also invested £4,000 in two shares of an East Indiaman to be
captained by George Carnegie's brother james

‘George Carnegie, writing in July 1802, noted that he had been present
at Ujjain when Perron came to face the durbar. Carnegie did not like the
idea of Sutherland being subsequently transferred to command of the
‘2nd Brigade in the north ~ but Perron had his reasons. Carnegie wrote:

‘Weare sometimes alarmed by reports thatthe Company wish to get from Scindea
rich ractof Country which runs up te est bank ofthe Jumnah river from below
‘Coe! nealy to Delhi; honest John Company wants this country because ii rich
‘and wil bea vast addition to his fine estate. itis too well known this Honble
[sie] Society set no bounds to ther avarice, and altho’ unable to devour their own
loaf, they greedily grasp at that of their neighbours.”

‘The leters also important in shedding light on a different interpretation
of Perron’s character and his actions. Carnegie said: ‘The French Officers
are suspicious (without cause) of the British [mercenaries] forming

