222 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

it was in the foreseeable furure.* The Governor-General continued to see
the War of the Second Coalition as a suitable pretext to push Sindia for
dismissal of the French officers. Wellesley reasoned:

after the conclusion of a general peace in Europe, the importance therefore of
‘excluding the power and influence of France both now and hereafter from the
Government and Counsels of Scindhia s proportonatey encreased, and a the
existence ofthe War with France furnishes a just ground of argument for de~
smanding the exclusion of French subjects from the Service of Scindhia, which
‘would not exist under a different situation of afar, the early prosecution ofthat
‘measure cannot be neglected without hazarding the los of the most favourable
‘oppoetunity which can be expected to occur for is successful accomplishment.”

‘Wellesley already knew, from his intelligence sources, thatthe British
1s well asthe ‘country born’ Euro-Asian mercenaries in Sindia's service
tad been largely subverted to the EIC’s cause. Is it any wonder that
the Governor-General offered Sindia a substitution of English troops for
the French officers under Perron as part of his treaty offer? Or that he
promised not to raise any objection if Sindia wanted to appoint British
‘mercenaries to replace any French officers removed from the regular
battalions? John Collins hed to continue playing the game and let all
the options run out on Sindia's chance to bargain, But these talking points
that che Governor-General sent through secretary Edmonstone’s corre-
spondence came dangerously close to tipping off the Marathas thatthe
sell-out of the British mercenaries was in fact a foregone conclusion,
Collins was being urged to raise points that could onlybe predicated onse-
cret intelligence and on more than one occasion he had to exercise his pro-
fessional judgement on whether to risk pursuing the Governor-General’
attempt t ‘assist’ in Sindias decision-making process. Wellesley and sec-
retary Edmonstone had considered that there was also a possibility that
‘Sindia might face an explosive situation if he agreed to evict the French
officers and they refused to go or worse than that ~ what if they seized
the army by force? As a result of this wild speculation Collins was au-
thorized to use deadly force agains the French if Sindia sanctioned their
removal and they refused to go. Beyond that Richard Wellesley was will
ing to intervene directly. ‘If the movement of any body of troops should
hereafierbe necessary to aid Scindhin in securing cither the total or par
tial dismission of the French, and especially the removal of M Perron
the Lt Gow of the Ceded Provinces and the officers in Command of the
forces will be ready to afford the requisite forces atthe proper tagon

Ns as an interesting offer and one whose covert linkages were facilitated

"The Peace of Amiens, sige on 27 March 1802, brought a fourteen-month ul io he
[Napoleonic am .

ーー

“Coming in! 223

by the fact that the Lieutenant-Governor of the Ceded Provinces was
Henry Wellesley, another one of Governor-General Richard Wellesley’s
‘younger brothers.

‘The problem with Richard Wellesley’ plan was that it was too clever by
half. Wellesley was seeing Perron in Francophobic terms ofthe ‘French
threat’ to India. Sindies French offices were indeed mercenaries and
descriptions of that occupational speciality might, under some ci
‘stances, imply selling out to the highest bidder, But there was no imme-
diate danger of that among the older veterans, Perron was not a stupid
‘man nor was Chevalier Dudrenec or Monsieur Fleury. They had seen
the system reach its zenith under de Boigne and knew that the route to
prosperity as wel as retirement lay through British teritory. The hypo-
thetical scenario of their receiving a better offer from Napoleon was a
British fiction. The traditional value system of the South Asian military
‘economy had suited them perfectly well. These men were not revolution-
aries, They were Sindias military contract employees. They wanted to
work for Daula Rao as long as he did not jeopardize their lives unnec-
ssariy by engaging in war with the British. Many of the French officers
had aspirations matching their British mercenary counterparts Ifthe EIC
‘was willing to take the British mercenaries under their wing why should
the French notbe allowed that same opportunity? Even ifthe EIC did not
‘want tohire them, given the historically contemporary European political
climate there was no need to assume that they were all potentially rabid
Bonapartsts. The assumption was an insult. Why should they not also
be entitled to extend their employment contracts or atthe very least be
offered the opportunity co convert them to EIC service or simply retire
onan EIC pension? France, the Revolution and Napoleon ~ those things
were all very far away. Many ofthe French mercenaries had lived in India
for most oftheir adult lives and several had directly invested in the EIC
or held its commercial paper as a preferred investment vehicle offering,
both security and liquidity. These men had homes and extended fami-
lies spanning the country from Pondicherry to Lucknow to Agra. Several
believed their military service was just as well tied to the EIC Regard-
less of motive or intention, at least it seemed the EIC was a committed
stakeholder and would not soon leave the subcontinent.

‘Changing plans

‘There were a growing number of Maratha sardars who resented Sindia
as a weakling needing foreigners to maintain power, and hatred be-
gan to centre on Perron. ‘The C-in-C realized in 1802 that his fortune
and his personal security were in danger. He was the leading foreigner

