240 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fr India

{from Perron.’ Governor-General Wellesley did not doubt that Perron
‘was ‘coming in’ but he did think the crisis over Sutherland's and Ferrons
‘whereabouts might indicate a worsening of affairs. But in criss there is
often opportunity and Wellesley authorized Lake to grant more conces~
sions and/or cash if he thought they might win over more mercenaries,
sardars or even placate Sindia’s chief ministers whom he identified as ‘con-
federates in the context of the Maratha Confederacy. Richard Wellesley
returned Lake's communication having pencil

Tdo not know where Colonel Sutherland isto be found; ifthe Commander-in-
(Chief should know, his Excellency wil be so good as to take immediate means for
securing Mr Sutherland's assistance, In general wish the Commander-in-Chief
to understand, that shall cheerfully sanction any obligations or expense inured
for the purpose of conciiating the officers or ministers of the confederate, ~
Welles”

Acrisis in command and control

‘During the frst week of August, about the time Collins was withdrawing
fom Sindia's camp in the Deccan as British Resident, the Mabarajahs
war machine started to come apart at the seams. A tumultuous power
struggle had begun and there were three main factions pulling in dif-
ferent directions. First there were the mercenaries and sepoys who had
no intention of fighting the British. These ranged from General Perron
down to individual enlisted men, Most ofthis group were interested in
British pensions and employment. The second faction was composed
of major Maratha powerbrokers and leading sandars of Sindias durbar.
“They bad watched and waited long enough. Sindia had allowed the mer-
cenaries to build an unprecedented level of power because he needed
them to guarantee his leadership role, his revenues and some would say
his life. This second group - the Maratha sardars - was predominantly
pro-war although even amongst that majority there was no consensus of
opinion on political or military strategy. They ranged from independent
light horse advocates of predatory warfare to those who urged more
conventional united front with Holkar The third faction was a small but
determined group of renegade mercenary officers who had no intention
‘of ‘going over’ to the British. Some of this third group saw this as their
me of opportunity; a chance to rise rapidly to seniot command if the
‘Marathas would still rust them. They were men who saw that the mass
‘defections would mean the Marathas would have to fill gaps in their com-
NN mand structure from the level of platoon sergeant to brigade commander.
‘There was stil a chance, in their minds, that the Marathas might opt for

“Coming in? 241

ne of them to fill the position of C-in-C. Other members of the third
clement, with no intention of ‘coming in’ included those men wanted by
the British as deserters and outlaws. The later category included vari-
‘ous races, religions, and nationalities. It would be tempting to think they
were all criminals but that too would be an over-simpliication; times had
changed. The EIC was about to institute egal mechanisms to intervene
in what had been a relatively free-lowing military labour market, How-
‘ever, registering for a passport to cross in and out of EIC territories was
just not on as far as the renegades were concerned. It deprived them of
the freedom and anonymity needed if they were going to make a living at
‘freelancing’.

‘Many of the mercenaries, among those waiting to come over to British
service initially accepted their fate with the sense of adventure they were
Inown for. A few felt betrayed by both sides ~ seeing the war as unneces-
‘sary, And a very small number changed allegiance with a zeal that spoke
of an opportunity for revenge. This was a peculiar time when it came to
examining the transitory nature ofloyaly within military culture. Did one
remain loyal to one’s countrymen, one’s race, one's rank or to oneself?
(On 10 August 1803 Captain Becket” (Perron's ADC) wrote a letter to
‘Major RW Rotton, a friend and fellow mercenary in Sindia’s service.
‘Beckett was almost apologetic in telling his comrade thatthe disastrous
politcal situation had not been foreseen when Rotton was accepted for
service; he wrote that, in essence, no one thought the seriousness of a
fairs would last but that it had indeed escalated co the point that there
‘was no turning back.

Beckett forwarded Rottpn’s discharge and wished him uckin the hope
they would meet safely after the crisis hed passed. Then Beckett wrote
that he knew Rotton was a ioyal Briton who could not serve against
his fellow countrymen. In other words, as chief secretary and ADC to
Sindia’s C-in-C, Beckett was urging the now discharged Rotton to do
the right thing, to ‘go over’. But as we shall see in the latter portion of
this chapter, Beckett need not have worried about his friend's course of
action. As for Becket’ next move, he was at Coel, which was very close
to the body of British forces at Bidjighur. Therefore he would have to be
clever about how he extricated himself. He wes obviously under intense
scrutiny by the Marathas owing to his rank and responsibilities but he
continued helping his countrymen get out before the shooting started.
‘He and Perron would stall the war as long as they could but when it came
time to leave they would have to make a run fort.

* Aa Bectt, and in some EIC pension lis as Becket

