238 “The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

woitng game and se ifthe cash offers, to be bought out of service, might
grow higher. But the Suterlands and the Hessings had too much at
stake and they were already quite wealthy from years of service. Ochter-
fony wrote to General Lake from Blighur to up-date him on the latest
ieligence from Agra.” Sindias preparations for war were being ac-
‘celerated, ‘The harkarraks reported cannon shot of different calibres was
at Agra from Gwalior. And Sindia’s men had begun to collect ll
the avalable boats slong the Yamuna River.

Despite his closeness to Sutherland, Ochterlony was not yet willing
to divulge the extent of thir ftiendship to General Lake. There had
been a certain logic to thoughts of having Sutherland assume com-
‘mand on Perron's departure. But some members of Sindia durbar were
now actively advocating expulsion or death for the Europeans as poten-
tial traitors, In language reflecting professional detachment, Ochterlony
urged the General to proceed carefully, extending plans particularly to-
‘wards removing Hugh Sutherland from service. Ochterlony was con-
vinced Sutherland could be of special service owing to his role as de
‘act leader ofthe British mercenaries. Lake was cautious, however; he
‘was worried about Perron and realized that key informants in Maratha
service should be used to turn as many potential defectors as possible.
He thought it unusual that Perron had not writen fately but if in the
‘meantime he could als engineer the removal of Sutherland, 3s Ferrons
logical successor, there was an increased chance ofalso removing the mer
cenary officer cadre intact. That would reduce any remaining European
mercenary officers to a handful of renegades and outlaws. Ochterlony
adopted an tntud of nonchalance and told Lake he didnot really know
Suthetland well enough to judge how he would react to an offer not
merely to ‘come in’ but to betray the entre war effort by bringing over
as many officers and sepoys as possible. T have not had a sufcientintr-
‘course to pretend to appreciate his Character & tho he might be carefully
‘communicative to a powerless acquaintance I do not know how far he
might revolt at any direct offer that might seem ro imply a suspicion of
rcimg with Duplicity Treachery or a Breach of Hosptaliy.”* But
Ochtetlony also prodded Lake to make the best use of an opportuni
that had presented itself by way of Sutherland's previous letes. On in
simple terms, Lake should make any further offer sound like the gracious
acceptance of Sutherland’s previous offer to help. Ochterlony urged Lake
to write to Sutherland and edl him ‘that incase of misfortune you hope
he wil render that service to his King & country which mustbe the result

he communication’.

Within two days Ochredony wrote again to Lake regarding events
inside Agra. Ochterlony had been such a friend to the extended

に

i
を

3

“Coming in’ 239

‘Sutherland-Hessing family thache had sent them the latest editions ofthe
Caleutta Gazete and medicine for the treatment of Hessing senior who
‘was gravely ill” Ochterlony was also in personal contact with Hessings
doctor whom he used as another intelligence source. On 23 July 1803,
‘Ochterlony wrote to Lake: ‘The Old commandant of Agra is dead & I
‘hear from the Dr that there were he thinks still many men employed in
the fort." He also used the unidentified doctor to confirm details on
the fort's arilery including the number of guns, their composition and
origin. Ochtertony’s intelligence on Agra was coming almost exclusively
from the mercenary colony, and its accuracy gave him cause to doubt the
value of more traditional sources. He declared he no longer had faith in
newswriters as a source and, fearing their role in disseminating misin-
formation, he put greater emphasis on the role of the mercenaries asthe
best source of intelligence open to Lake,

‘Ochterlony’s mercenary contacts also apprised him of the fact that the
‘Marathas had tried 10 regain control ofthe brigades in he ‘regular corps?
‘by imposing a new parallel command structure. Various Maratha factions
tried to exploit the latest ciLmiirary split in the durbar that revolved
around control. Maratha sardars with civil rank in Sindia's durbar were
ing to foment unrest in the brigades aimed at the overthrow and ex-
pulsion of the European mercenaries. This had reached crisis proportion
ina revolt hat occurred as some battalions were shifted out of Hindustan
and towards the Deccen, This revolt would seem to have coincided with
the previously mentioned oath of allegiance incident that Poblman had
ignored. Ochterlony wrote to General Lake to tll him how the backlash
manifested itself ‘In each corps there is a Subedar Adjutant who has @
sort of interior management which gives them a very great influence &
it is supposed that the late Mutiny on the March to the Deccan was
secretly instigated & encouraged by them.’ Soon after this, counter-
‘marching orders were received from Sindia who feared the Doab was too
exposed.

‘Things were getting chaotic. General Lake was surprised to hear that
Perron had apparently sacked Hugh Sutherland from Sindias service.
‘This was areal problem as Lake had not heard from Perron recently and
there was massive confusion over who had dismissed Sutherland and
why - what had become of him? This information vacuum touched
off a frantic search to locate Sutherland and take advantage of his vast
‘knowledge. General Lake was concerned Perron might be reneging on
his agreement and opting to stay in Sindia’s service. Lake wrote to
‘Governor-General Wellesley, ‘Colonel Sutherland, ately dismissed fom
the command of a brigade by Perron, might be able to give much valu-
able information, and be instrumental in drawing over other officers

