228 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

market. The accuracy ofthese figures was never in doubt as Collins was
by this time negotiating direct with Perron about the cost of his army.
Collins seemed somewhat surprised at the degree of sophistication used
to retain Sindiat investment in human resources ~ namely his pension
provisions. But then Sindia and the EIC were competitors within the
South Asian military economy and the free-market forces of 1802 meant
i was in his bes interests to lock in his battalion strength through com-
petitive employment packages. Any EIC demobilization was a windfal,
Collins duly reported, ‘General Perron, with whom I live on terms of
vilo informed me, a few days ago, that Sindia had assigned lands for
the maintenance of Invalid sepoys on a plan somewhat similar to that of
the Invalid Establishment in the Honourable Company's Service."

Early ia 1802 the major reason for seeking the removal of French mer-
cenaries was the existence of a state of war between Great Britain and
France. Therefore, Richard Wellesley did not welcome news of the Peace
‘of Amiens in the sense chat it robbed him of greater immediate support
for interfering in Maratha afsirs. Collins wrote: ‘your Lordship was fully
aware thatthe continuance of the war with France afforded a just ground
of argument for demanding the exclusion of French subjects from the
service of Scindia which would not exist under a different situation of
alfaire’* For their part che Marathas were quite aware thatthe percep-
tion of a French threat had fed to a coup against the mercenary corps
in Hyderabad as the Nizam succumbed to pressure to remove Monsieur
Raymond and his associates. Maratha ‘nevsriters’ in Hyderabad had
reported the process and its memory was evoked in Sindia's durbar dur-
ing 1802. Peace or not, the Governor-General’s postion on removal of
the French mercenaries was to remain firm but Collins, lke other scep-
tics, realized that Governor-General Wellesley had been pushing the legal
interpretation of the EIC’s mandate for involvement.

Collins mindfully wrote:

{can only express my egret thatthe sudden intelligence of peace, should tend
io materially, to weaken the grounds which your Lordship furnished me with
for obtaining the most important object of my present mission, as | hurriedly
‘conceive, it solely remains for me, under existing circumstances, the endeavour
{wate contin, ht which Imig, erie he thined on the plea

Frustrated by what he saw as the loss ofthe War of the Second Coalition
23 a clever piece of cove, albeit a somewhat thin political rationaliza-
ion, Richard Wellesley needed to change his plans. Over the next six
hs he reviewed his options and thought about how best to neutralize
Sindias military strength, The effectiveness of decapitating the command

“Coming int 2

capability of Hyderabad’s sepoy battalions, by removing their European
officers, seemed well documented by the trusted John Malcolm;!* and
the lesson of buying out mercenaries was part of the historic record in
the Anglo-Mysore Wars.” But it still came as a surprise, when early in
1803 the Governor-General did an abrupt solteJace. He apparently no
longer believed there was a ‘more certain, as well as a more honourable
mode of effectually destroying this French party and its adherents’, as
hc had written to Henry Dundas five years earier It was time to start
laying the groundwork for subverting Sindia army by way of pension
and employment offers. Richard Wellesley no longer saw any dishonour
in buying out his enemy's army.

Charles Stuart's diary exemplified the criticism within British mnks
‘over the manner in which EIC sepoy demobilization had fed Sindi
‘expanding army. Some observers realized that true professional soldiers
‘would prefer service in any army as opposed to retirement and loss of
their warrior identity. Richard Wellesley now considered how to formu
late a policy that would allow all mercenary officers, as wel asthe sepoys
in Maratha service, ro exchange their rank and pension privileges for cor-
responding remuneration withthe EIC or its allies. The exact method of
formulating a policy to buy out soldiers from Maratha service remains
somewhat obscure. Like many policies it seems to have evolved in stages
and no one was abl to foresee its eventual magnitude or ultimate cost.
jkis clear that Governor-General Wellesley had asked for opinions in the
‘opening months of 1803 which set off rumours among the intelligence op-
cratves that adeal was in the works to let the mercenaries resign Maratha
service and ether retire on an EIC pension or, if they were lucky, opt for
EIC employment. A formal framework did exist by the end of June 1803
when Wellesley authorized his C-in-C General Lake to take the first steps
necessary to put this plan into action.*" But as we shal se inthe case of |
the most important ‘retiree’, the spring of 1803 was when negotiations
for defection began.

‘The basic conditions of the offer to convert pensions and employ-
‘ment contracts would later be referred to generically as ‘the terms of the
Proclamation’, a reference to the guidelines established in the formally
published document, which for obvious security reasons, was not sched
‘uled for public release until 29 August 1803 when the British field armies
‘would be in position. The Proclamation was intended to serve multiple
purposes. Not only would it weaken the Maratha war machine but it
‘would also supply the additonal necessary troops to conquer and garrison
Sindia’s northern territories. By playing the military labour market as a
‘dominant investor, the EIC under Richard Wellesley could increase the
probability ofits victory. Wellesley saw a means of siphoning sepoys from

