230 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for

‘india’ service while at the same time efiminating Sindias command and
‘control capabitty by guting his officer corps. The Governor-General was
not going to waste time pulling men out in ones and twos - he was pre-
pared to authorize new battalions. Richard Wellesley noted:

‘A considerable number of the sepoys, who were discharged from the British
rmy atthe late reduction, are sod to have entered into ML Perro’s service, and
iis supposed that if any new corps were mised in the vicinity of ther station,
‘many would return to he service and that Scindiah’s European officers might be
induced to resign the service of Scindiah by offers ofa present subsistence, and
afa furure establishment in the service of some ofthe lies, or tributaries ofthe
British Government. 2®

‘The Commander-in-Chief’s retirement

Perron had benefited from de Boigne's departure in more ways than
‘one. There was the,promotion to C-in-C, but de Boignes ftght had also
‘demonstrated to Perron thatthe British could indeed be trusted to coop
crate in any plan that weakened the Marathas. Before departing service
de Boigne was sid to have advised he remaining European mercenaries
never to seek open conflict with the British. He was also alleged to have
warned that it might be necessary to dismantle the ‘regular corps’ ~ better
to demobilize the sepoy battalions than to have them become the object
of a rivalry that precipitated war. The British appreciated de Boignes
judgement and went out oftheir way to asist in his departure, including
help withthe sale of his military assets. The Bengal government went
10 far as to ‘purchase’ the General's personal Mughal bodyguard. The
British also helped with the conversion of significant amounts of cash
into an interest-bearing EIC ‘shares’ account. By assisting de Boigne to
leave Maratha service, the British aso advanced their own cause by gnin-
ing a bounty of intligence from him. The lesson was not wasted on
Perron.

During March of 1803 Perron opened correspondence with General
Lake on the issue of quitting Maratha service and entering British terri-
tory for the purposes of leaving India, In some ways it was no surprise,
‘a we have seen, that there had been rumours of Perron's departure ever
since the tumultuous power-sharing squabbles of 1799, Richard Wellesley
dictated Lake's role in coordinating Perron's departure directly on
27 March 31 Wellesley authorized Perron to proceed to Lucknow, accom
‘panied by a body of infantry and cavalry, which would later be exchanged

British military protection, He was to receive a passport upon entry
into British territory. "The passport must describe the number and rank
‘of his suite civil and military; and copies of it must be transmitted to

“Coming in 231

the officers ofthe several stations, and to the civil magistrates ofthe dis-
trict through which he shall pass’ Perron would become a guest ofthe
British Resident at Lucknow who would be ordered ‘to treat him with ev-
‘ery mark of respect and consideration’ before his departure for Calcutta,
‘Once there the Governor-General promised: ‘I will receive him in a man-
er conformable to his wishes, and will use every means to facifitate his
voyage to Europe."*

As can be seen by the preceding reference to Perron's retinue, once
this operation to detach Sindias Cvin-C commenced it could hardly be
considered a covert movement. The eighth clause of Lake's instructions
revealed that Pemon' departure was to be accompanied by an applica-
tion to Sindia for permission to leave service. The cover story, when and
if needed, was to be that Wellesley was handling this matter in a sup-
portive fashion denoting assistance to Sindia by aiding his personnel.
‘T shall inform Scindiah of Mr. Perron’s request, and I shall state that
Thave complied with it from motives of respect for Scindiah.' We must
remember that in March 1803 many optimists believed there was sulla
‘chance to avert wat, If Perron’s departure could be tsed to pre-empt the
‘need for hostilities, then British action had to be portrayed as friendly
‘cooperation in expediting the removal of another retired mercenary from
Daulat Rao’s service. But, peace or war, this move was shrewd on the
part ofthe Governor-General, who left no doubt ofits importance in his
letter to Lake. "You will observe that I am strongly disposed to accelerate
Mr. Perron’s departure from Scindih’s service; conceiving it to be an
event which promises much advantage to our interests in Inia.”

apparent, in reading the secret correspondence generated by this
ploy, that Richard Wellesley’ patience was greater than Lake's during
‘what was to become a long and very complex period of negotiation. There
were, however, potentially great rewards to be gleaned from assisting
Perron in hisbid to leave Maratha service. Wellesley wrote to Lake: ‘I wish
‘you to afford every encouragement and facility to General Perron in his
return to Europe through our provinces.’ The matter was to be kept clas-
sified but it was also necessary to keep this channelled properly within the
EIC. Itwasa delicate covert matter but it also held tremendous potential
{or collateral politcal damage to Wellesley if it went wrong, The mem-
ties of Governor-General Warren Hastings’ involvement in the affirs
of Awadh and the subsequent gut-wrenching seven-year impeachment
process had inflicted a toll on he transparency of Wellesley's government
{in India, Itwas important that the Perron negotiations remain covert yet
‘Benerate a suficent paper trail in the Secret Department of the EIC so
185 to be of use in refuting any charges of political intrigue or inappro-
priate procedure on the part of the Governor-Genera’s office, Wellesley

