226 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for india

Cabals against thei interest; and the General, being a weak man, lends
‘an open Ear tothe false insinuations of designing interested men,

Carnegie drew a line between the French officers and Perron, insisting
Perron ‘wil soon resign the Command of the Army to Colonel Suther-
land’, The letter directly contradicts later secondary accounts such as
Compton's that have a decidedly anti-Ferron as head ofthe French clique
tone. Perron did not fail to promote his British officers as was so often
charged by imperial historians. Rather, t was that personal alliances were
allowed to prevail despite lucrative promotional offers. George Carnegie
sdmited that Perron offered to make him Major of Brigade to the Ist
Brigade. However, Carnegie put his trust in Hugh Sutherland as one
of those larger-than-life mercenary figures who seemed to have the one
‘commodity that a soldier of forrune could not live without - good luck.
‘Hugh had survived many a fay, but beyond that he was a shrewd busi-
essman who knew how to make money from this type of soldering.
George Carnegie had seen other business opportunities disappear and
that partially explains his willingness to readily integrate Sutherland into
his extended clan. He offered peace of mind to Hugh Sutherland by hav-
ing is mother Susan Camegie look ater Isabella Sutherland in Scotland;
the young gis! was to be physically safe from the turmoil in South Asia,
‘The Carnegies welcomed Sutherland's investment in the family’s ship-
ping venture, That suited Hugh because it served to diversify his invest-
‘ment portfolio, hedging his property-dominant South Asian asset tisk
with internationally traded shares specifically linked tothe EIC’s shipping
interests. This mercenary networking was not that fat removed from the
alliance systems found in Maratha military culrur, both secking to profit
from the South Asian military economy. George Carnegie wrote:'Colonel
Sutherland must be my Main Stay in the end.’ Carnegie then declined
the offer to be made Major of Brigade extended personally by Perron, in
favour of being transferred north under Sutherland. That continuation
‘of Carnegies role in Sutherland's brigade compelled him to retain his
subordinate rank of captain, An optimistic Camegie wrote: ‘When the
General retires, he will be succeeded by my friend and Country Man
Colonel Sutherland, From that hour French influence will cease, and the
British Nation may ever after depend on the most powerful Prince in
India as thei trusty friend and Ally."

From the Ujjain durdar meeting, which featured a meeting of northern
and southern brigades, Collins received detailed information on the status
of the units personally under Perron as of April 1802.4 Each brigade was

ymposed often battalions, with 716 fintlock-armed regulars ro a battal-
‘on and an extremely lean officer complement of two to three officers per
battalion ~ a possible consideration in any combat leadership analysis.

227

ing of four standard field pieces and
‘one howitzer, each with a complement of golundauze and laxcars counted
separately from the sepoys. As noted previously, this bantalion-based ar-
tillery firepower was more than double that of British battalions that had
two guns each, Maratha firepower was further augmented at the brigade
level with each brigade having its own artillery park consisting of sixteen.
large-calibre guns and a ritsalah of regular cavalry equipped with their
‘own gallopers. Perron's rssalaks were said to total 4,000 regular cavalry
‘matching the quality and description of those that the EIC had previously
purchased from de Boigne when he left Maratha service.

Perhaps of greater long-term strategic value as intelligence was the
complete pay scale of Perron's forces, which Collins obtained from the
General himself. This data could be used to calculate the cost of buying,
‘out the mercenaties and other troops in Sindias service. There were two
‘pay scales because Perron reduced the pay of troops serving in Hindustan
‘where there were far more opportunities for a Maratha sepoy to make
money in service. Prize funds alone proved a compensatory advantage
bbut shares in lucrative northern-based brigade ‘business’ activities were
also a factor.

‘What follows below is the European pay scale, also known as "Deccany

pay

‘Majors per month Rs 1800
Captains per month Rs600
Lieutenants per month Rs 300
Privates per month Rs 9

“Native officers’ in proportion to the above.
“The Deceany pay scale was reduced to so-called "Hindustanny pay’ as
follows:

Majors per month Rs1200
Captains per month Rs 400
Licutenams per month Rs 200
Privates per month Rs 7

“The Marathas remained much more egalitarian than the British in theit
attitude of equal pay for equal work in what was considered the hardship
posting - the Deccan, The stipulation was made in Sindia's army that
‘both Europeans and ‘Natives’ serving south of the Nerbuddah were to
be paid according to the Deccany scale.

‘This intelligence was of tremendous value for those who wanted to cal-
culate the projected cost ofan offensive war and weigh i against the cost
‘of purchasing these human assets in the context of the military labour

