236 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India,

covert efforts to subvért and recruit some of the finest human resources
in Maratha service had received the official stamp of approval. In point
of fact the programme was well known in the intelligence community but
in the meantime it had to remain covert for security reasons. From the
standpoint of those British personnel trying to attract and recruit defec-
‘tors, the key element of the offical word was thatthe plan now had full
‘government financial backing. That meant the mercenary recruiting drive
‘was fully bankrolled by the Honourable East India Company. There was
ohoiding back; it was time to buy as many men out ofservice as possible.
‘And those who could not be purchased with cash or pension-and-rank
conversion schemes might be turned for intelligence purposes, accepting
large amounts of cash to stay in position and relay secret information to
help the British war effort.

‘The EIC was particulary interested in immediately removing the
British, European and American mercenary officers from Maratha
service. But it was important that the mercenaries be allowed to try
and resign or extricate themselves before the policy was made public. The
British command knew that there was a more than reasonable chance that
those who could not resign or escape would face imprisonment or death
at the hands ofthe Marathas once it was known that an official welcome
policy awaited them in the British territories. The public announcement
‘ofthe Proclamation would be proof ofthe British strategy of coopting and
subverting the Maratha officer corps. Bengal was ignorant of traditional
“Maratha attitudes to mercenary service. It had to be assumed thet those
‘men - some of them loyal to the Marathas, some of them British spies
‘and all potential soldiers forthe EIC - would be placed in immediate
danger once the Proclamation became public. Edmonstone specifically
{old Close to issue the appropriately signed Proclamations only after he
had received oficial word that formal hostilities had commenced.”

jp July 1803 Sindie's Deccani officers were requested to swear an
cath, ‘that they would serve in or out of the Maratta Territory’ But
according to the young Scot named Daniel Stuart, "The officers how-
ever declined taking this oath which was not noticed particularly by
Colonel Pohiman." As we shall see there was good reason for Pohiman
to ignore the request to swear allegiance. However, few historians seem
to have examined this critical junction in evens. John Pembles analysis
ia ordered his officers to take an oath of al-
egiance requiring them to fight all Daulat Raot enemies regardless of
\putionality”? Pemble, among others, tended to view this as the water-
‘ied poin where offices suchas Skinner ame over Pemble wrote, "The
‘governor-general’s proclamation played no part in their action, since they
had not heard oft at this time. They quitted Sindia’s service because they

“Coming int 27

‘were kicked out, not because they sold themselves to the British.
once again, letusbe clea in our understanding of the events.
issued a blanket expulsion order and a very small minority of European
mercenaries risked their lives in serving him beyond 1803. The public
reading of the Proclamation and knowledge ofits content were two dif-
ferent things, As for being ‘kicked out’, few ambitious mercenaries could
afford that. To get the best employment package on offer it was essential
to resign one’s commission in Maratha service. An honourable resigna-
tion was a demonstrable sign of good conduct which was the preferred
citerion for joining one of the EIC’s armies.

Tt also became apparent during that eventful month of July 1803 that
Sindias durbar was not about to commit to any politcal agreement that
‘might be construed as a British diplomatic victory. The Treaty of Bassein
‘was not going to bind Sindia, Bhonsle or for that matter Holkar. The
British rationalized that if there was no political option to be had, then
‘war was inevitable. This triggered a deluge of secret correspondence and
covert message traffic. Lieutenant-Colonel David Ochterlony hed evolved
1s General Lake's chief personal intermediary with the British merce-
aries in Sindias service. Ochterlony’s junior officers had been regular
visitors to Coel until mid-July.” And Ochterlony was a personal friend of
‘Hugh and Robert Sutherland. That friendship also provided Ochterlony
with a chance to establish a personal relationship with Robert Suther-

jands in-laws, the Hessings,

‘Ochtetlony had visited the Sutherlands and Hessings at their homes in
‘Agra. They shared many happy moments and mutual concerns. Ochter-
Joy, like Sutherland, had chikiren as the result ofhis intimate relationship
with at least one South Asian woman. Ochterlony was worried about
the future of his Euro-Asian daughters if they stayed in the hierarchi-
cal structure of British Indian society. The European mercenaries with
South Asian spouses lived openly in the cosmopolitan setting ofthe Agra
cantonment. This atmosphere of integrated racial harmony was particu-
larly healthy for the children who were raised with a positive selFimage
and enjoyed the best aspects of both their South Asian and European
cultural identity, This integrated cultural experience was so special that
‘Ochterlony referred to it in his correspondence as the ‘Agra system’. The
uniqueness of the ‘Agra system’ was contrasted by a repressive attitude
towards interracial marriage in British controlled cities like Calcutta.”>
‘There it was customary to send interracial offspring to boarding school
‘and in some cases to keep South Asian spouses in a separate or ‘black’
part of town.

‘Ochterlony knew that it was time to get his fiends out. Some of the
‘younger British mercenaries in Maratha service could afford to play the

