254 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns andthe Contest for India.

the hers great grandson, to show that the General had no faith left in
the system. Perron wrote: “The successive teacheries of Bourquin and
Pedrony and the suspicious conduct of almost all the other officers, had
inspired the natives with such distrust of Europeans that our lives were
in hourly danger ... For myself, I only saved mine by great sacrifices of
money"

‘When Perron and Beckett arrived they brought over a great number of
‘documents pertaining to Maratha affairs. The most valuable were revenue
return records for North India. These were deposited with the British rev-
enue collector at Moradabad and then forwarded to Richard Wellesleys
office. When Wellesley and his staff saw the cache they sent immediate
‘word to Lucknow to have the British Resident there debrief the two mer
‘cenaries on the exact extent ofthe revenues generated by the lands under
Perron’s control.!!® Wellesley’s men could then put that information to
direct use in their reports to the Court of Directors. It was important
to have high revenue figures to offset the expense of the war and the
‘more revenue gain Wellesley could show, the safer he would be from ci
icism that his deficit spending was out of control. It should be noted that
Beckett is often dismissed in imperial histories as haughty and somewhat
villainous. But it would seem he earned the hatred of Lake's staf officers
for his refusal to pay what he saw as unearned homage to their military
3bili Beckett ~ although a loyal Briton ~ told Lake's staff, upon ‘coming.
in’, that they could not have beaten Sindia’s army ifthe defections had
not taken place and that on a unit-for-unit basis the Marathas’ sepoys
were better soldiers. The disparaging comments of Lake and his follow-
cershave it that Beckett was arrogant and behaved in s most ungentlemanly
‘manner, But this portrayal was the result of Beckett's audacity, or should
‘one sey bravery, in having delivered his stinging rebuke while a guest at
Lake's dinner table.

Lucan’s revenge

‘The previously mentioned mercenaries in Perron’s Garden House, in-
cluding George Carnegie, were among those who had resigned service
and ‘come in’ on 28 August 1803, the day before the Proclamation was
‘made public. Although they were entitled to the pension benefits of the
Proclamation they remained in self-imposed isolation, having opted not
toaccept Lake's additional offer to take immediate service with him in the
field against Sindi's forces. One man, who did accept Lake's offer to fight
against his former comrades, was the Irish mercenary Lucan. According,
‘10 notes in the diary of dragoon George Isaac Call, Lucan did not arrive
in Lake's camp until 4 September 1803.!") That made him a very late and

‘Coming in’ 255

yet rather timely arrival. He had not come in with any others but wan
dered into Lake's camp alone fuming after having been plundered and
abused by Bourquin. His maltreatment, at Bourquin’s hands, allegedly
came afer the Frenchman refused to accept Lucan's resignation. George
Carnegie noted of Lucan: ‘He vowed revenge and immediately offered
his seevies co the Commander in Chief"?

Lucan's desire for revenge is supported by Charles Stuart's diary. It
states that Lucan volunteered to lead a mission to intercept Bourquin
bt Lake vetoed the proposal. Lucan, however, once having been de-
nied permission to go after Bourquin, disobeyed and attempted the mis-
sion on his own - but failed to get sufficient support." At about that
time Lucan learned of Lake's advanced preparations forthe assault on
‘Alighar, Lucan volunteered to serve as a guide for Monson's storming
party, Lucan’s knowledge was deemed to have been absolutely funda
mental tothe success ofthe asault. He knew not only the specific number
of interior gates that had to be breached but, perhaps more importantly,
those inside which were false gates. As the diarists assert, the period un-
der fre in breaching the gates ‘did great execution’ and a preponderance
of the evidence shows Lucan made the difference in the success ofthis
sa coup de main, The only way for Monson's party to arrive in strength
atthe wicket door was via the direct route, which Lucan guided them
through.

‘Monson, whose reputation later suffered greatly because ofhis retreat
‘before Holkar, was wounded carly inthe assault. For much of the heavy
fighting it was Lucan who took the lead in urging the grenadiers forward.
He allegedly shouted: ‘after me there are 5 lakhs of rupees inside’. The
plundering however got out of hand with the entire British camp joining
inj not just soldiers bu camp followers and coolies as wel, Buc the storm~
ing party was so exhausted it is said they did not get their fair share of
plunder, Blanks were fied to disperse the crowd but to no effect and «wo
or three tumbels of dollars’ were given up to plunder. Men were scaling
the walls and swimming the moat to getin. The British moved a hackery
in front of the fort gate to block access but every manner of goods were
being caried away, from money, to old tents, to firearms. Charles Stuart
was sickened by the fact that British dead were lying there intermixed
with those ofthe enemy, both being crushed in the riot. That Lucan was
‘not mentioned in dispatches was an oversight pointed out ro Lake, who
said he would rectify the situation. George Call observed that Lucan’s
‘tation for meritorious sevice was actually via the Governor-General in
Council by Orders to the Commander-in-Chiet As the result of his
gallant behaviour, Lucan was granted a commission inthe 76th Regiment
of Foot."

