260 The Angle-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

indignation atthe tredcherous conduct of L. Lucan towards his old mas-
tes. Norin my opinion can the many who support him, fairly o fully clear
‘his Character."

‘Motivational factors

‘Asa former leader of Maratha sepoys, George Carnegie made two spe-
‘fic points pertaining to the performance of Sindia's ‘regular corps’ in
‘connection with the defection of the mercenary officers:

«+ Tewas expected that their resistance would crumble without leadership
and adequate payment.

«+ Their ability was beyond question and the experienced combat jeader-
ship of their veteran officers held the potential to sway the outcome of
history.

‘The Brigades thus deserted by their leaders, and without che means of subsis~

tence, were expected to disperse or become an easy pray (sic), but the obstinate

resistance made by these troops onthe 11th and 23 Sep, and Ist Inst, does them
inBait sc} honor, and shews what they might have been capable of, if supported
by those Officers, who had so often led them ro Victory”

‘The diary of George Isaac Call ofthe 29th Light Dragoons provided an-
ther piece ofthe puzale with regard to the destructive forces unleashed by
the defection ofthe Europeans and the subsequent attempt by Bourquin
to seize power. Call wrote that after the Battle of Delhi (11 September
1803) the surviving French officers, who had served in the action, sent
‘letter to Lake's HQ in which they begged ‘to throw themselves on the
‘mercy ofthe British Flag’. The French oficers were debriefed by Lake
with ADC Lieutenant Duval serving as interpreter. Bourquin admitted
they ‘brought into the field 7 cumbrils of money, by way of plunder to
their Army, in case we should have been defeated’. But during the ac-
tion it was apparent that Bourquin wes losing and 4,000 Rokilla horse,
allied to Sindies men, fled with four cash-flled tumbrels. The disinte-
‘gration ofthe ‘regular corps’ following the mercenary defections had set
off a scramble for cash and loyalty was scaree,

“The string of European defections gave the Marathas lite reason to
trust the foreign officers and those who could not evacuate soon enough
suffered accordingly, The garrison at Agra imprisoned Hugh Sutherland
land George Hessing, who became theirhostages. In the midst ofthe chaos

NN command and control were sharply divided along ethnic and professional
\ fines and to add to the mayhem the Marathas had seven battalions with
artilery outside the fort's perimeter camping on the lacis and occupying

a alg Stet

as

‘Coming ia’ 261

the town as well as mosque." The problem was they were not united in
‘motivation or purpose, Five ofthe batalions were reported to be those of
the Irish Major Brownrigg’s Sth Brigade." They had been in the Deccan
‘but were ordered north to Hindustan by Sindie for previously elaborated
reasons. They arrived too late forthe battle at Delhi and marched for
‘Agra where they were greeted with distrust. It seems that owing to the
‘vast treasure inside the fort at Agra there was considerable jealousy and
‘many of the garrison inside suspected thet these latecomers might have
already gone over to the EIC. Even if they were sincere in their im to
be loyal to cause, few of the gatison wanted ro let the recent
arrivals in because the pay forthe forts defenders was months in arrears
and ifthe defence was successful it would mean the garrison would have
to share the treasure.!"? Therefore, the Deccani battalions were kept at
‘safe distance outside but Brownrigg came into join' his fellow Europeans
1s guest ofthe garrison. Mercenary Lewis Ferdinand Smith spoke of the
vast sums of cash in Agra as having ‘caused a fermentation’ inthe minds
of the garrison." The garrison was also uneasy about what their former
commanders, who they now held hostage, were saying. Smith remarked:
"TH believe they were likewise intimidated by-the threats of Scindeas
European officers, who were prisoners in the fort: Colonel George
Hessing, Majors Sutherland, Brownrigg and Derridoven,* and Captains
Harriott, Marshall and Atkins, who were told by the garrison, that if the
money was lost, thei lives would answer for it to the British Govern-
ment." Later a serious debate erupted in Lake's army about what was
to happen to the 25 lakhs of money captured at Agra. Perron had not
‘managed to get his money out of the fortress and from Bengal he tried
to file claim to all the treasure. Ukimately EIC officials relied on the
testimony of Colonel Hessing that the funds were intended, ar least in
part, to pay troops in Sindin’s service." Later, in a footnote to his diary,
‘George Call reported that he learned that the battalions in service to the
Marathas at Delhi had only offered to defend Agra on the condition that
thie back pay was graned

‘As we saw in chapter 4, Lake's assault inficted heavy casualties on the
‘Maratha sepoys in the half-moon battery at Agra. But there were still
the better part of three battalions in and around the outerworks afer the
British were driven back from their attempt. A man identified as ‘Afzul
the Tindal’ began to speak with the defenders on Lake's behalf. After
concluding a basic agreement for their defection to the British, Afzul
asked what else they could bring over.

* Presumably hiss Desridon.

]
|
{
{
