242 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

“The European and Euro-Asian mercenaries who were waiting to defect
received word that the Maratha sardars of Sindia’s durbar were going to
take back what they saw as ther cightful and traditional Yeadership roles,
‘They were not backing down on the issue of military as well as economic
‘control and, distrusting the mercenary corps, they locked Sindia into a
position of confrontation with the British that meant one thing - total
war The course of action forthe defectng soldiers was now very clear.
“They had to get out immediately but do so in a way that guaranteed
theie physical safety while maximizing their chances for pension with
the British, Some calmly and coolly ignored Maratha mobilization orders
while moving tothe periphery of Maratha territory under the pretext of
going out to put down local uprisings that were fabricated as part of
their cover story. Others were more concerned that they live up to what
they saw as the letter of the gentleman's agreement. They wanted to go
through the formal resignation process from Maratha service so that they
‘could, presumably, take maximum advantage of the EIC's offers of pen-
sions and subsequent employment. Their military professionalism was
reflected in thei bravery. Not, as usual, bravery before the enemy on the
field of battle. Rather, bravery in staying until the discharges were author
rized and signed. A number of discharges went smoothly thanks to the
help of higher-ranking mercenaries like Beckett who took on the role of
‘out-processing as many of his comrades as possible. However, there were
those who waited for discharges that never arrived and a minority found
themselves imprisoned by Maratha sardars who saw the mercenaries as
tmaitors who had worked for the downfall of the Maratha cause. There
‘were also those who managed to get their discharges and then tried to
Bet out of Maratha territory with the money and riches they had accu-
‘mulated legally in Sindia's service. Several were plundered and released
‘with nothing to show for their years of dangerous work. Inevitably, ot
ers simply disappeared on their way towards the British lines, victims
of revenge killings or victims of highway robbery at the hands of local
criminals. This was yet another reason to consider the British offer to
“come in’ with sepoy defectors. There was no guarantee of safety but if
you could bring over a section, a company or in some cases an entire
battalion, then your chances of making it tothe British lines were much
better

‘As Sindias command structure imploded there was a series of con-
tradictory orders from the competing Maratha factions. In the absence
‘ofa comprehensive policy decision from Daulat Rao, local and regional
tardars began to take what they saw as appropriate action. In Alighar
Pedron the French commander, found himself under house arrest and.
jn Agra Sutherland and Hessing suffered a similar fae. With the British

shine

RU

243

massed on the eastern front adjacent to Cocl and Alighar there was
1 suspicion that it might be too late to save that sector. Stationed at
‘Sikandrabad* was a brigade that should have been deployed at Alighar or
‘at the very least been held in reserve to come to the relief ofthat fortress
‘when Lake attacked, Sikandrabad was southeast of Delhi on the Grand
“Trunk Road that led straight to Alighar and that proximity was to prove
‘life saver when the brigade received instructions to fall back on Delhi
rather than move forward to the eastern front where Lake waited. Amidst
the uncertainty, mercenary George Carnegie fired off a situation report
to David Ochterlony as the man most likely to have Lake's ear on the
issue of defection and its timing. Carnegie had put all his faith in Ochter~
Tony's judgement based on Hugh Sutherland's advice. Now Sutherland
‘was imprisoned in Agra and Carnegie needed to make up his mind, With-
‘out his mentor Sutherland, Carnegie pondered how best to ‘come in’. If
they left without their discharges, before Sindia’s command and control
had been sufficiently crippled, there was a danger they could be hunted
dow as deserters and shot. Carnegie briefed Ochterlony on the latest
intelligence with regard to his units position and the probebility that the
British component of the mercenary officer corps of his brigade could be
‘extracted as one group. He also added his observations on what would
‘happen to the combat performance level of Sindias ‘regular corps’ once
the majority of its officers had defected. The letter also holds particu-
lar interest because it suggests that Carnegie and Sutherland's faction of
‘mercenaries did not know that Perron and Beckett had already secured
their terms, Carnegie seems, in the absence of direct up-to-the-minute
intelligence, to have believed Perron’s cover story that he was preparing
to meet the British in batde at Coe

“There are 8 Battalions in this Brigade all commanded by Britons or the sont
‘of Britons - most of them thinking their fortunes desperate were resolved 10
try their fortunes with the General [Perron] and his Secretary (Beckett), but
have succeeded in convincing most if not all of he shame they would bring on
themselves and familie ~ and T am now confident the whole wil resign when
Tdo - but we must stick to our poss ill ll hope of accommodation is fed. 1
am confident the Brigades would fight ro the last man, but when deserted by
wo-thids oftheir officer, 1 am of opinion they will be dshearted and make a
‘poor stand, The Brigade marches toward Delhi tomorrow

‘Carnegie’ letter to Ochterlony also confirmed that key players in Sindias
Deccani brigades were ready to ‘come in’ and that the counter-marching,
towards Hindustan had begun.

“eg + Aa santana Sect be cone Sant Ra
サ

