248 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

in the evolution of the military labour market that the EIC sought to
dominate. He felt real sympathy and compassion for Daulat Rao Sindia
but there was nothing he could do once the Maharajah was locked on
the road to war Carnegie might gloat over his skill in playing the game
‘of brinkmanship, holding out for the best pension offer, but he took ab-
solutely no pride or happiness in Daulat Raos dilemma. He wrote to
hhis mother, ‘I was advised by some of my friends to resign Scindea’s
service seven months ago [May 1803], but as matters have turned out,
i is fortunate for me chat I stuck to my Post till « few days before the
‘Sword was drawn, and consequently enjoy the benefits of the Proclama-
tion, a copy of which you will seein the newspapers." Ifhe had panicked
‘and left Maratha service before the pension plan was approved or voided
his eligibility options by not obtaining a discharge, it would have been
different. But the Captain kept his nerve and was rewarded by an ou
stretched hand from General Lake. George Carnegie went on to explain
to his mother that he had left with Perron blessing and by choice ac-
cording to provisions embodied in Sindia's employment contract: ‘having
‘obtained General Perron's permission to resign the Service, a privilege all
British Subjects could claim, as on these terms we entered into Scindeas
Service’. When Carnegie crossed over to the British lines, he was sur-
prised to find the British already in possession of Coel but he was more
‘impressed by the friendly reception General Lake gave them. ‘We imme-
diately waited on the Commander in Chief who showed us the Procla-
‘mation and gave us much Credit for joining him before it had been made
public."

Captain Kenneth Bruce Stuart, who came in with Carnegie, ater filed
12 deposition in support of his pension claim and that document con-
firmed that the evaporation of Sindia's command structure had occurred
in earnest during the second week of August 1803. It would seem that
K. B, Stuart, ike many others by then, knew that war was unavoid-
able. On 10 August 1803 he tendered his resignation to C-in-C General
Perron. On 11 August, Stuart's resignation was accepted and he began
the march to Bijghur. Kenneth Stuart and his comrades set off to see
their old contact Ochterlony who had been of so much assistance in co-
ordinating their ‘coming in’. As he noted in his account to government
he was warmly greeted by Colonel Ochterlony who conveyed ‘to me Hs
Excellency the Commander in Chiefs approbation of my conduct and an
invitation to his head Quarters’. Captain Stuart and his companions were
personally debriefed by Lake and his staff. K, B. Sarrs deposition to
fhe Bengal authorities further stated, ‘I remained with the Grand Army
{our or five days, and with his excellency’s permission came down ro the
Presidency where I have just arrived."

“Coming in’ 249

“The European defectors, under the Proclamation, were paid according
to very specific criteria, The verification of cases, for civilian accounting
purposes within the EIC had to come through military channels It was
important to establish confirmation oftheir rank and identity. But later
special claims and requests for additional compensation would also bring
‘questions about how their individual cases were graded.'"! Was ta willing
defection? Was the individual turning intelligence to the British prior to
defection? What was the quality, level and/or amount of intelligence they
provided? Provision was made in the grading system to account for the
felative value or usefulness of their inteligence. Did they ‘bring over
‘sepoysand/or artillery when they came in? How and when did they receive
nowledge of the Proclamation’s date and content? This last question
was tricky for some to answer. Their reply might adversely affect their
cndidcmenras well as their legal status. In the case of European sergeants
‘and enlisted men in the boondocks, places like the northern Deccan, it
‘was often a case of being the last to know. Others knew well in advance
‘butsuid they did not know until the last minute because they thought they
right be accused of treason for not turning intelligence eatlier as some
‘of their comrades had done. The question itself was not that sinister and
‘was often merely aimed at finding out which units might stil be outside
the communication loop and therefore potential enemies. The fact chat
the Proclamation was systematically extended to cover the entire 1803
‘campaign period shows the degree to which the timescale of defection
‘was of secondary importance to the primary task of removing as many
‘men as possible from Maratha service. _

‘Captain Charles Stuart ofthe 3rd Bengal Native Cavalry, whose diary

figured so prominently in chapter 4, observed what he considered to be
‘ peculiar scene on 29 August 1803, the day the Proclamation was made
public:
Inthe course of yesterday and today many English and half caste officers of
erron's army carte in~forsome ime past thei situation ha been very precarious
and uncomfortable. On te 29h of August they sur themscves up inthe Garden
House (meaning Perons Garden House at Codl and were not altogether free
from the apprehension tha be Maratha troops when retiring might vent their
rage on om

‘Charles Stuarts diary indicated that these officers were not being held as
hhostages but rather they were isolated as self-declared non-combatants.
‘The significance of the Garden House scene can only be discerned by
comparing it to one of the letters that George Carnegie wrote to his
‘mother Susan. It represents another split or division among the merce-
‘naries that resulted when Lake propositioned them to turn against Daulat

