ns and the Contest for India

244 The Anglo-Maratha Camp:

I have a letter from Dan’ Stewart Ist Brigade dated at Adjunta Ghat the 30th

Joly - all remained quiet at that time. Twelve Batalions are on the march to

Hindostan under Dundernaick [Dudrenec} and Brownrigg~ 1 am confident the

amner and his the officers Captains Marshal, Haricor (Hartt) and Arkins,
sign, as I know all thei sentiments on that head.

‘What kind of scuaion would greet them on the British side of the
lines? There was no point i having waited to get the best pension setle-
rmentif one were going to be shot by a British sentry who did not know
that these Maratha personnel were ‘coming in’. Among Carnegie's con
cerns was the issue of whether all he British field forces Knew about the
impending defection. There were stil ten days until the Proclamation
ss read publicly, Many assumed that would be the point of no return,
‘but what if advanced elements of Lake's army started operations before
29 August? Carnegie hoped Lake's forces would follow the same proce-
dure ss used when the mercenaries were Gpped off before the offensive
in Gujarat. ‘Pray do not you think that before the blow is struck, your
government will give us notice it is customary, and was done by the
Bombay Government when they made war onthe Giqwah [Guikaad in
Guzerat

British mercenary Lewis Ferdinand Smith provided one of the beter
explanations as to the sequence of events in late August that brought
about the complete destruction of Sindias command structure at the
highest evel hat ofthe Cin-C. Ambaji Ingla had orchestrated a blood-
less coup against Perron that brought the General's word crashing down
around him. By paying a ‘tribute’ to Sindia of Rs. 25 lakhs, Ambaji pur-
chased the ile and rank of Soubha of Hindustan’ from Sindia, Having
acquired that exalted Mughal rank, Ambef surpassed Perron in civil
4s well as military rank. Smith obviously saw the move asthe setding
of old scores on more than one count: ‘by appointing Umbsjee to the
Soubah of Hindostan, Scindea delivered Perron over to his most impla-
cable enemy; he dreaded the rapid arrival of Umbsjce who would have
assuredly drained hs purse ifhe had spared his life Following Perron’s
sacking, Bourquin ‘was the frst to revolt against Perron’. The General
survived with the help of many personal bodyguards whose loyalty he
censured with liberal amounts of msh However, Perron was now in a
teal bind, His immediate retinue was loyal and many troops in outlj-
ing areas could be gathered because they had not heard of events. But
‘much of Perron's cash as well as his family were sill in Agra. He began

ae ‘make attempts to gather his family and as much money as possible

Het taken inthe Mughal rather shan Maratha content of Soubha to mean Viceroy of
Nort nai

Pee

“Coming int 245

before heading towards Coel to defect. Bourquin, seeking to exploit the
‘urn of events, convinced Perron's second brigade to mutiny. Bourquin
then wrote to several of Perron's cavalry units informing them of Ambaj's
ascendancy and offering large cash rewards for Perron’simprisonment.®*
Ik was to be a race against time for Perron to gather as much es he could
before going over. Needless to say, he was a dead man if he fll into
the hands of Ambaji or bounty hunters seeking to take up Bourquin's
offer.

Fortunately for Perron, the temptation of greater rewards intervened to
distract Bourquin. After having incited mutiny in Major Gessln's second
brignde, Bourquin had the audacity to lay siege tothe Mughal Emperors
quarters. It was a bizarre scene es relayed in Smith's account. Bourquin
declared himself for the Emperor, no doubt hoping fora coveted Mughal
rank of authority as saviour of his imperial highness. But Bourquin was
denied accesso the old sovereign apparently because Monsieur Drugeon
the killadar of Delhi, refused to recognize Bourquin's authoniy The
forces at Delhi were badly divided in terms of allegiance. Bourquin had
sought to align himself with Amabaji but he could not overcome those
still loyal to Perron who were lft fighting a holding action until they could
slip away. There was no French state on the Yamuna there was no French
‘unity, andthe scene tha followed showed there was no longer any control
‘over the European and Euro-Asian mercenaries left in Maratha service.
Bourquin was furious at Drugeon’s defiance. In retaliation for refusing
to obey his ‘orders to release’ the old Mughal, Bourquin wheeled up
his artillery and commenced siege operations against the fort at Delhi
‘The two brigades consisting of eighteen battalions with one hundred
and ten pieces of cannon were in this state of mutinous confusion and
anarchy, when Bourquin heard that General Lake, with rapid marches,
was approaching Dhailee [Deibi] .加

‘The siege ofthe fort in Delhi was halted and the guns quickly shipped
across the river to meet the British on the Dharderi Plain in what we
‘now know as the Battle of Delhi (see chapter 4). When Lieutenant Pester
centered Delhi almost three weeks later, he noted the vacant remains of
‘one of Bourquin’s six gun heavy batteries near the Emperor's quarters.
Bourquin went from laying siege to Delhi's fort to defending the city.
He had failed in his bid to secure the Emperor who might yet serve as
‘Sindia’s or Ambai’s puppet. Perhaps worse, from a tactician’s point of
view, he had allowed himself tobe distracted from preparations o defend.
Delhi against Lake's advance. There was time for litte more than s hasty
ambush, More battalions were melting off on the periphery; without their
usual officers to instil faith, lead them steadily into battle and maintain
‘sprit de corps, there was litle reason to stay. The offer to go over to the

