1256 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

“The intelligence éained by using Lucan represents one ofthe few exam
ples inthe 1803 campaigns where the British had the upper hand in imme-
diate tactcal-levl intelligence, as opposed to straegic-level intelligence.
‘The later had previously been provided by men like Collins who told
them of troop movernents and the number of guns. But at Delhi, Laswari
and Assaye, Lake and Arthur Wellesley had lacked immediate ractica
level intelligence, a deficiency that contributed to making their victories
costly, Intelligence on Alighar, gained by Lucan ‘coming over’, was vital
to quick victory as it facilitated movement through the inner fort. Lucan
and other defecting mercenaries were also able to confirm the hostile
stand-off amongst the garrison divided between Bali Rao and Pedron

"The fact chat Lucan was given a field commission in a King's unit as
‘opposed to a commission in an EIC unit, as other mercenaries were, is
‘also indicative of special treatment. It also might suggest there was more
to Mr Lucan’ story than has met the eye. The 76th was Lake's favourite
infantry unit, but he was promoted within weeks to being one of ‘Lake's
‘Staff Officers’, being clearly listed under that heading as ‘Hindostanee
Horse Paymaster’"© This role and subsequent data indicate Lucan was
fluent in South Asian languages. It seems highly unlikely, but possible,
that a former Maratha field officer would so readily be given an active
high-risk commission - let slone a King’s commission ~ unless some~
thing was known about his background. However, it may be that the type
of intelligence he revealed was deemed to be persuasive. He was obvi-
‘ously versatile, providing intelligence on existing Maratha fortifications,
troop disposition, morale, logistical and financial situations. He proved &
‘valuable ink with the defecting iregular horse units since he could speak
their languages, knew their modus operandi and was trusted by them 3s @
leader. And let us not forget that it was his infantry leadership under fie
‘as the gates were blown in at Alighar that was the most graphic display
of his wilingness not just to betray the Marathas but to sacrifice his life
if necessary to defeat them.

Lucan fought like a man possessed ofa higher calling. He led Monson's
party at Alighar in 1803 and ironically died defending Monson's retreat
‘during the 1804-5 Holkar Campaign, although the author Compton later
‘questioned Lucan's motives in implying thatthe Irishman's final charge
twas motivated by a desire to win aname for himself” With Lucan on his
staffasan office in a King's regiment, Lake could edd anew dimension to
‘European unit In hc past the EIC units had more advantage in dealing
‘with South Asian peoples, gaining local intelligence and coping with the
local environment. But several EIC units wee viewed with suspicion
as potentially dangerous sources of intelligence leaks. The acquisition
‘of Lucan allowed Lake a chance to take advantage of new options that

“Coming in’ 257

were viewed by some as more secure. The diarists make it apparent that
intelligence was readily lost via the EIC's sepoys to the camp followers
‘and from there to the enemy. The acquisition of Lucan meant that Lake
‘could execute direct orders with irregular horse units outside the EIC
‘communications circuit, which had previously allowed information to be
disseminated to the Marathas.

Weighing strategic vs, tactical intelligence

John Pester admitted thet soon after Alighar the British had learned
of Sindia's additional forces being in the vicinity of Delhi from former
Maratha officers. They warned that Brownriggs brigade was heading
north and the defectors also promised the British that this would be a
severe contest, Pester recorded: ‘We expect an action with them shordy,
and all the officers lately in Scindih’s employ assure us that they depend
entirely on the formidable tran of Artillery to defeat mi But know-
ing what is going on at the strategic theatre level, such as the shifting of
Brownriggs brigade from the Deccan to Hindustan, did nothing to in-
crease tactical intelligence at the batefeld level. It was advantageous to
know how many guns were headed north, but what lay beyond the next
hicket Both George Call and Charles Stuart made it abundantly clear
in their diaries thatthe Battle of Delhi represented an intelligence failure
for Lake's army atthe tactical level!" They laid the blame squarely on
the shoulders of one man.

Twas common practice in Lake's Grand Army of 1803, ast had been
in South Asian armies since Baburs day, to send the quartermasters in.ad~
vance ofthe army to select campsites. This often meant indinga location
within immediate marching distance that would provide the basic needs
for the army's brief stay. On the morning of 11 September 1803 Lake's
‘quartermaster-generals, Nightingale of the King’s troops and Campbell
of the EIC’s troops, had gone out ahead of the army with a small party
to reconnoitre the ground and scout probable campsites." With the
scouting party that day were the EIC’s adjutant-general Colonel Gerrard
and Captain Covell of the 27th Light Dragoons. This was of particu-
Jar significance because Colonel Gerrard in addition to being the EC's
adjunct ‘was also head of the Spy Department for the Grand

‘While riding near the Hindan River the scouting party observed small
bands of what were thought to be Maratha horsemen in the distance.
Shortly thereafter a suspicious man was stopped and questioned in the
vicinity ofthe riverbank. The men said that Bourquin had passed through
the area and crossed over the Yamuna River ahead of Lake's army. After

上

