246 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fr Inn

British was a serious option and many Maratha sepoys questioned what
‘was the best course of action, Was it worth staying in Sindias service
‘now? Or, was it better to forget one’s arrears in pay and find a leader
‘or spokesman to negotiate terms with the British? Indecision led to a
‘number of hesitant moves and the British were aware that atthe so-called
Battle of Delhi in 1803, here were a number of uncommitted Maratha
sepoy units hovering near the battleground, Some just waited to see the
‘outcome of events in the hope of throwing in heir lot with the winners.
“This was, after al, another aspect of the traditional South Asian military
labour market. Soldiering for a living was dangerous atthe best of times
and only survivors could take their pay back home.

Lake had written to Governor-General Wellesley on 25 August 1803
prior to the official release of the Proclamation. He informed Richard
that he was unable to contact Perron who inexplicably filed to answer
etters asking for s meeting in person or via a trusted confidant. Despite
his disappointment at not geting Perron to come in yet, Lake was happy
1o report, ‘some of the European Officers in the Service of Perron has
{sic} already come over, and I have no doubt that with the exception of
‘one or two individuals the whole wil. ®? Two days later, Lake received a
rather cryptic letter from Perron, It made some odd apology about not
being empowered by the Marathas, under ciy milrary distinctions, to
negotiate a setlement co the impending wat. Lake did not know at that
‘ime that Ambaji was the Soubha of Hindustan, Perron’s letter hinted that
dangerous developments had slowed his plans. But Perron was stalling for
time, stil hoping to extricate his funds from Agra, He closed the letter by
assuring the British General that he (Lake) had ‘the happiness of serving
1 Government whose character is superior to such paltry doubts and
suspicions ....2°

‘Ac that point Lake lot his temper. Not being able to read between the
lines of Perrons bid for more time, the British General fired back a reply
stating he had no reason to believe Perron was empowered to negotiate
‘on behalf of Sindia, Then in a rather blatantly unguarded moment, Lake
‘wrote several lines that held the potential to jeopardize Perron's life ifthey
fell into the wrong hands: ‘considerations of regard inclined me to submit
to your attention some propositions which concerned yourself alone, and
which would have enabled you to carry into effect the intentions you

formerly expressed of quitting this country with ease and safety’." Perron
‘was within a day's ride and messages arrived quickly so he wasted no
NE that Lake, his only remaining saviour, had compromised his
Perron replied the next day (28 August) that he would send his ADC
Captain Beckett to talk to Lake straightaway The clandestine nature
of the meeting was also underscored by specific orders that Ochterlony

“Coming ia! 247

‘was to personally see that Beckett got through the lines." As recorded in
the diaries of Call, Stuart and Pester, the meeting with Beckett did take
‘place but secrecy was such that none knew the real issues. They assumed.
Perron was negotiating asurrender of Alighar. We do know from Beckett's
‘correspondence that Perron continued to ask for more time to get his
affairs in order - he was still trying to get massive cash reserves out of

Agra.

(On the eve of the Proclamation

[About midday on 28 August 1803, a group of high-ranking mercenaries
arrived in Lake's camp at Bifghur where preparations were under way
for the advance on Alighar.™ Among those who ‘came in’ that day were
‘Captain Kenneth Bruce Stuart and Captain George Carnegie. They were
bound to attract special attention owing to their family connections,
‘Kenneth Bruce Stuart was said tobe the country-born or ‘half-ast’son of
General Robert Stuart. While George Carnegie's mother Susan was the
cousin of EIC Chairman David Scott." George Carnegie'sstepbrother
also happened tobe Lieutenant-Colonet Nicholas Carnegie ofthe Bengal
‘Arillery. Nicholas had been a cadet in 1777 with David Ochteslony
and was eventually promoted to Major-General, officer commanding the
Bengal Artllery.% Whether or not Nicholas was instrumental in strength
‘ening the relationship between his stepbrother and Ochterlony, as soldier
turned spymaster, isnot clear. Atthe very leat it would provide a familial
reference point for Ochterlony to assess loyalties. George Carnegie was
content to build the covert relationship with Ochterlony on the grounds
that it was the path recommended by his mentor Hugh Sutherland,
‘Although Ochterlony was a loyalist born in America, he was accepted
asa vibrant part of what we might term ‘the Scottish connection’ inthis
war But Ochtertony was emerging as a far more versatile ineligence
rman. He had networked with other mercenaries in Sindia’s service, as
Wwe have seen in the connections to he Hessings at Agra. Ochterlony was
Lake's most crusted personal intermediary in dealing with the mercenar-
ies defectng from Maratha service. Lake in reference to Ochterlony’s
intelligence role, wrote to the Governor-General, “He is the only man
that [have seen since I came to India that I could repose much confi-
dence in, but | fee perfectly secure of him, which you may easily imagine
from knowing how Lam siuated in regard to confidential people.”

{na later letter to his mother, Captain George Carnegie acknowledged
his personal strategy for playing the benefit system under the provisions
‘of the Proclamation. He did not seck to tke unnecessary advantage of
the EIC's situation, he was merely following the latest twists and turns

