250 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

Rao Sindia and fight their brother soldiers in Maratha service. Appeals to
patriotism were now balanced by feelings of loyalty ro one’s non-Britsh
comrades who may not have been able to voluntarily leave Sindia’s ser-
vice. George Carnegie wrote:

Tad done my duty to my country in leaving poor Dowict Row when he most
wanted my services... did nat fee! myself authorised (even in this just and nec-
essary Warl to assist personally in the destruction of an Army in which almost
every individual was known tome. In short I declined fellowing the Commander-
in-Chie, and wok lodgings a Co! til could determin (what couse to

Perron as the lynchpin

As we saw earlier, Perron willingly exposed himself to danger by person-
ally providing intelligence to John Ulrich Collin as early as 1802. But
there is also reasonable evidence that Perron did a great deal to person
ally oversee the final dismantling of Sindia’s mercenary officer corps and
ensure its delivery to the British, Unfortunately Perron’s actions have
often been misunderstood or misrepresented in British imperial history
as the selfish actions of a greed-motivated French revolutionary. Oddly
‘enough the alleged proof for the imperialist indictment revolves around
an incomplete examination of James Skinner's memoirs, Skinner being
the most famous of Sindia’s Euro-Asian mercenaries.

In the mid-nineceenth century, J. Baillie Fraser published two volumes
that were sold as the Miliary Memoir of Lt. Col. James Skinner." But
the books included a great deal of anecdotal material that Fraser added
to notes on the English translation of Skinner's original manuscript.
J. Baillie Fraser did not differentiate, for the reader, which material con-
stituted Skinner's original entries and which were his own neatly in-
serted stories, Among the latter were a few fabrications in accordance
eenth-century hero worship for political purpose. The tim-
ing was interesting given Skinner's ethnicity and the political backdrop

of pre-1857 India, The stories added to the original Skinner papecs

were often those contribured by Fraser's brother and his cronies who
kncw James Skinner in later life. The problem was compounded over
time when secondary biographical portraits of Skinner relied on Fraser's

‘Memoir as Skinner’ personal testimony. James Skinner, so long accus-

toméd to speaking South Asian languages with his men, is now believed
Ne dictated his thoughts ina transitional or regional form of Urdu.

wc handwritten copy of his diary, which survives in Britain's National
‘Army Museum, was transcribed in English by an uncertain hand appar-
ently unfamiliar with many ofthe events in Skinner's Maratha service; the

251

writer's peculiar transliteration of names and places further complicates
an accurate reconstruction. Although there is no doubt J. Baillie Fraser
hhad access to this manuscript, as evidenced by bibliographic anomalies,
1 physical comparison reveals that a great deal of Fraser's two volumes
‘was composed of filler from unverified secondary sources. But of greater
interest regarding this tome was the historiographic omission of specific
information found in the appendix ofthe original Skinner diary. Perhaps
jis sheer coincidence that certain material in the appendix did not meet
Fraser's literary or political purpose.

"The stories concerning James Skinners exit from Sindia’s service vary
in craftsmanship and construction, Many twentieth-century biographies
portray a noble and gallant Skinner unwilling to give up the Maratha
Causc unl the last possible moment. Skinner was supposedly dealt an
“unexpected blow when his loyalty was questioned by the Maratha sardar
‘Asa non-white, the British had rejected him aran early age. Thenin 1803,
‘because of his father’s Scottish ethnicity, or so the story goes, he was
considered a security risk to the Marathas. Despite the tales ofa valiant
‘Skinner soldiering on until the day of bate at Alighar, the appendix of his
“ary reveals a different story. Oddly enough, the evidence shows «gap of
almost a month from the time Skinner was cut loose from Maratha service
mdl he went over to the British. A copy of his discharge from Maratha
service confirms that Skinner had been 8 free agent since August 1803.

“This is to Certify that Capt. James Skinner entered my service in 1796 as an
Ensign & throughout his Service he Conducted himself as a good soldier and
‘excellene officer, having on Several occasions distinguished himself & was in my
fullest confidence & is now discharged for Political reasons.

‘Camp at Codl Signed C Perron.

1st August 1803, ‘Commander in Chief of
‘Maharaj Dowlut Rao
Scindeah!™*

‘Why Skinner did not go straight to Lake in the hrst week of August or
join Carnegie and Stuart later in going over is « mystery, given that his
discharge pre-dated theirs. Perhaps Skinner’s actions were influenced by
the fact that he did not get along with Sutherland; as recorded in his di
ary, It may have been that Skinner avoided Carnegie's group because he
perceived itas being composed of Sutherland's men. However, Skinner
‘ischarge, issued four weeks before the public reading ofthe Proclama-
tion, does make three points very clear.

First, leading mercenary officers were actively seeking and obtaining
theie discharges a full month before the Battle of Alighar and almost two
full months before Assaye. The implications were disastrous for Sindia

