258 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

the scouting party rejoined the Britsh forces, Captain Covell reported
to General Lake that it was his considered opinion that the army should
‘occupy a small height of land near the Hindan-Yamuna plain to give
them a better chance co observe the area. Covell then proceeded to tel
Lake about the suspicious character and his warning that Bourquin had
just passed through the area and crossed the river ahead of Lake's army.
“Apparently the C-in-C was less than plecsed and Charles Stuart's diary
rectly quoted Lake as saying, ‘Gerrard, did you heat this?” Colonel
Gerrard admitted having spoken to the same man but also confessed
that he had done nothing about it. Charles Stuart, miles from the scene
bout having benefited from his fellow oficers’ observations, recorded that
Lake and his men had no inkling that the Marathas were on the same side
ofthe Yamuna Rive as the British. Gerrard had fricd to verify the man's
story by looking for signs ofa major crossing along the riverbank and also
failed to follow up the information with secondary patrols or information
gathering.

Tk appears that it was Covel’s delayed inteligence that motivated Lake
to take tothe field wih his cavalry forces as a reconnaissance in force and
‘check out the Maratha horse thatthe scouting party had seen in he dis-
tance. Covell’s name was later listed inthe 27th Dragoon casualty reports
as dangerously wounded. He was hit during an assault on a smal village,
‘which flanked hebanichekd. Ironically twas position that he had urged
EIC deputy quartermaster-generol Captain Salkeld to occupy when they
‘had been out scouting fora campground. Later Covell’ name was listed
among the dead. Dragoon George Call was unusually blunt in saying that
(Gerrard's greatest shortcomings as head of the Spy Department were his
‘inactivity’ and bis habit of ‘offering insufficient reward’ which meant
that he seldom got good intelligence from the local population.'®! Both
Call and Stuart agree thatthe massive failure of batlfield intelligence
that day was Colonel Gerrards fault! Call went on to say that it was
this incident that led to Gerrard being immediately sacked. The
tha seems to have escaped previous imperial histories is that the posi
as head of the Spy Department for the Grand Army was then given to
Lieutenant Lean

Following the Bate of Delhi, George Call asserted that the suspicious
stranger, questioned near the riverbank, was a Maratha agentsent to plant
disinformation among Lake's men with the intention of making their
ambush complete." Supposedly the news of Bourquin having already

N crossed the Yamuna was intended to make Lake abandon caution and

\ rsh forward with his forces into the wel-lad trap anchored by the semi-

Gouar ring of Maratha artilery pieces, concealed by the tll gras and
flanked by additional batteries clustered in the small vilages nearby.

‘Coming in’ 259

‘Since Lucan had used his linguistic ability to secure his position as
paymaster of the Hindustani horse it seems logical to speculate further
that it must have been that same ability that made him a sound choice
{or the Spy Department, ajob in which he needed to be able to commu
icate with local people. Perhaps as a former Maratha officer he would
have recognized the stranger at the river. However, the great anomaly
in this reasoning or rationalization over how Lucan became head of the
Spy Department for the Grand Army is his identity as a former Maratha
officer. This was a man who had only just ‘come over’ from the Marathas
‘one week earlier. How wise was it to take an enemy soldier who had de
fected and put him in charge of a payroll? More importantly, how could
you take a sworn enemy turned defector and in one week make him head
‘of covert inteligence for your army? Did Lake believe that Lucan was
tmustworthier than most men? Did Lake have litle other choice because
of a shortage of men who could speak South Asian languages? Or might
wwe speculate that Lucan could have been a British intelligence operative
for some time prior to his defection and was therefore a ‘known quan-
tity’ as it were? By bringing Lucan not just into EIC service but placing
‘him in His Majesty's 76th, the intelligence loop was reduced in size and
complexity; and, as previously suggested, Lake's reliance on leak-prone
local personnel was further reduced. That increased Lake's command
and control factor through the process of consolidation, although ironi-
cally it negated the carefully crafted parallel structure ofthe King’s and
the Company's troops within the Grand Army As efficient as this system
modification may have been for Lake's purposes, it leaves some rather
large unanswered questions about trust vs. knowledge. Ifwe were to take
an analogous battlefield siruation, out of context from any other war, it
is inconceivable that an enemy officer would be granted an equivalent
battlefield commission in an elite unit, provided a staf officer's position
with command over troops in the field, given control of a payroll as well
as direct personal access to the C-in-C and then placed in charge of
inteligence.

‘Not everyone viewed Lacan's actions in a favourable light. Regardless
‘of motivation, some saw Lucan as criminal in having served Sindia only
to turn on him George Carnegie's mother Susan wrote about what she
considered to be Lucan’s treachery. ‘I was scandalized at the first ac-
counts of the Maharatta War -to find a Traitor recommended to notice
who deserved to be hanged ~ an insult on public morals! Would rather
have seen his name among the slain than honoured or rather dishon-
‘oured, Miss Carnegie (George’s cousin} and brother James at London
judged he would not act so "124 Well afer his mother’s blistering artack
con Lucan, George Carnegie confided his thoughts. ‘Youexpress an honest

