252 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

and the Maratha cause as a whole, This was far more than a loss of
skilled soldiers; more importantly forthe enlisted men under fire it was
the loss of their combat leaders who could not be readily replaced before
the war started. The removal did irreversible damage to the morale of
‘Maratha entisted men as wells the vital command and control capability
‘extending from the platoon to the brigade level. If one systematically
studies the bates ofthe 1803 campaigns the impact on Sindia’ offensive
‘capability is glaringly evident. Fleury’s mounted attack on Shikohabad
‘was one ofthe few offensive ations for Sindi's army. Assaye, Burhanpun
Alighar, Delhi, Agra and Laswari were all a matter of waiting for the
British to arrive, not a case of offensive strategies designed to rob the
‘enemy ofthe initiative. Even those ations that featured baiting the British
and then counterattacking (as at the Battle of Delhi) were characterized,
by a lack of Maratha infantry momentum, which highlighted leadership
deficiency. The great reliance on artillery and in particular concealed
artillery ambushes was made all the more necessary because of a lack
of offensive infantry capability - a direct reflection of he loss in officer
leadership.

Second, General Perron willingly granted the discharges atthe most
strategically critical time. In other words, Perron as Sindia's C-in-C was
‘acting to strengthen British interests, actively reducing the number of
veteran combat leaders in Maratha service, ata time when he knew the
British were about to commence military operations and were actively
‘welcoming the departure of officers from Sindias service. Perron know=
ingly and willingly facilitated Governor-General Richard Wellesley’ plans
to incapacitate the ‘regular corps’ that was the Marathas’ most lethal
‘weapon against British infantry forces, He acted to help the British while
he continued his covert efforts to ensure his own safe extraction as well
38 that of his family and fortune.

‘Third, there was no attempt to cover up the fact that the discharges
were granted for political reasons, as stated inthe fina ine ofthe Skinner
discharge. This release was issued with wording to expediendy facilitate
‘Skinner's re-employment as a mercenary in British service. These men
‘were not discharged for feilur todo their duty and ther discharges were,
‘what we would term today, honourable. The references to his good con-
duct did nothing but increase his potential value tothe British. If Perron
‘were acting to further the Maratha cause, or his own fortunes as tied to
the Marathas, he could have refused the discharges or linked them to
\lishonourable conditions thereby casting aspersions on the mercenaries"

Sey andjeopediing EIC wiliognessoeogage in ok tat might
be portrayed as spending good money on technically undesirable hu
‘man assets In granting honourable discharges to the mercenary officers

“Coming in’ 253

Perron was handing Richard Wellesley further ammunition to counter
any internal British opposition to his policy of buying out the enemy.
‘The Governor-General could say these were fine men and justify pur-
chasing their loyalty with pension and loyalty packages. And if the war
should fail to materialize, or produce a peace whereby rapprochement
‘with Sindia was necessary, Wellesley could tell the Maharajah that he
had done nothing to subvert the war effort - he had merely employed
some good men that Sindia had seen fi to discharge; nothing more than
Sindia himself had done in hiring EIC sepoys in 1802 when Bengal’s
‘budget cuts necessitated their release back into the North Indian military
Tabour market.

During the first days of September 1803, Perron’s personal horse guard
jad been within sight of Lake's outward pickets and although the troops
could be heard practice firing their gallopers, no attempt was made by
the British to engage them. It had been known by the British for over
four months that when Perron came in these men would accompany
him with the full blessing of Richard Wellesley. Perron had originally
intended to stay in place until Sindia sent out his official replacement. But
Bourquin’s bounty had proven a surprise and now it was time to make a
break, Perron went to the trouble of writing aleter to Pedron the French
‘commander in Alighar, speaking ofthe latter's uty to defend the for. But
it seems thatthe letter was one of the last pieces of Perron’s cover story.
Pedron was a captive of the Maratha officers who now held command
of Alighar。 And the letter was meant more for the perusal of Pedrons
‘Maratha captors than the old man himself, It was important to keep the
cover-up until the last possible moment: it must appear to Sindia's men
that Perron was resigning, not completing the sell-out of the army. On
5 September Perron wrote aleter to Lake that indicated that he was not
“only exasperated with the charade but ready to complete the final phase of |
his defection from Sindia’s service. The letter to Lake was not filled with
the thetorie of honour and glory; it confessed the bitterness of failure.
“The defence ofSindias lands was a ‘solemn duty” and he might sill have
considered it his duty ifit were not for ‘the treachery and ingratitude of
‘many of my European Officers’. Without naming him he pointed directly
to Bourquin: especially of some in high situations in he Army, render my
‘attempts fruitless, and my persistence on them a folly... The treachery
‘of my European Officers has now left me little influence or command
in this unhappy country." Lake's reply was brief. Perron was told to
‘come in now and to stick to the agreed route to Sasni where Colonel
Ball was waiting to receive him. Perron was further instructed to limi
his cavalry bodyguard to 400 men and to adhere to the agreed times for
ntmy. H. G. Keene relied on the memoirs of Perron, as related by

