278 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campuigns and the Contest fr India

Allowances from thé British Government’.!® The report includes let-
ters of testimony from General Lake, oficial minutes from the Bengal
government's Secret Committee and references to decisions rendered by
leading members of Richard Wellesley’s administration including John
‘Malcolm, General Lake reported that the Marathas seized Pohiman as
1 prisoner after he publicly declared to Sindia ‘that he would not act
‘against the British Government and demanded permission to retire from
the Maharaja's Service®" Pohiman was sent off to prison in Ujjain
and his possessions plundered. Despite speculation about Pohlman be-
ing Hanoverian or Hessian, his petitions and Bengals reciprocal rulings
all uphold his nationality as being that ofa “British subject’ whi
plained his entitlement to retire from Maratha service. It would seem
in signing discharges in Front absence he committed an act that che
‘Marathas construed as criminal, Pohlman knew men like Stewart could
‘not obtain Perron’s release owing tothe timing of events. So he acted on
Perron’s behalf and signed the discharges thereby focilitating the depar-
ture of the Ist Brigade’s officers. The Maratha finally released Pohiman
{rom prison in February 1804, a full cwo months after the formal terms
‘of peace with the British were concluded. However, fora period of five
‘months after that, Pohiman was not seen or heard from. But having te-
‘covered himself as a consummate mercenary and broker/dealer in the
miliary labour market, he came into EIC territory in August 1804 bring-
ing with him three batalions of former Maratha sepoys and 200 irregular
horse.

“The five-month gap, between his release from prison and his formal
entry into the EICY military service at the rank of lieutenant-colone!,
as the subject of Pohlman’s later appeal. He felt he should have come
pensation for that period, but the Company ruled against it. The legal
‘wrangling over their decision is quite revealing about the classification of
defectors and the isue of ‘special allowances’ alluded to earlier. An argu
‘ment was put forward that Pohiman deserved to be ranked within the ‘Ist
‘Class’ among those who had ‘come in’. This implied that he deserved
‘being rewarded for greater sacrifice and it was an acknowledgement that
is life was placed in danger by his actions. The Secret Committee de-
bated the issue of whether ‘Ist Class’ personnel should receive what Lake
thought they were worth or what the Bengal government calculated they
should get on a standard scale for pension/rank equivalency.

‘The argument changed to focus on pay for the period ofthe war during

\ whieh Pohiman was inarcerted, He could have his Hietenan-colones

‘pay for his EIC service starting in 1804, but he was not entitled to pay
for that unaccountable five-month period before ‘coming in’. For the
time in jail, Bengal wanted him to receive retirement pay of Rs. 300 per

"Coming 9

month rather than the field pay and allowances Lake figured was worth
Rs. 840 pcr month, To argue their case, Committee members went to
the trouble of preparing boardroom charts complete with projected an-
‘nual savings and costs to be applied if this case set a precedent for other
mercenary dims. Pohlman’s pay for the time in jail was knocked
down to Rs. 300 per month. To his credit, Pohlman served the EIC
well. He won fame during the 1804-5 Holkar Campaign bringing hi
battalions into service under Lake in the dark days following Monson’s
retreat!

Conclusion

‘Some adventurous Europeans went to India seeking their fortunes atthe
close ofthe eighteenth century. When they got there many found it was
just ‘shaking the pagoda tree’ and coins were not going to
lap. As if to make the economic misery of these would-be
‘entrepreneurs worse, the EIC worked in an exclusionary monopolistic
fashion, Unless you were already a part of the patronage system it was
dificult to break into the lucrative trade networks that the Honourable
‘Company dominated. Changing course and opting to become an admin-
istrator was not a viable alternative either. In those days you could notjoin
the EIC’s civil service in Indi, you had to be ‘sent out’ with an appoint-
iment, But there were always options and the best alternative for earn-
ing riches, as recommended by the likes of Bombay Governor Duncan,
‘was the so-called Maratha service of Daulat Rao Sindia, The traditional
‘Maratha practice of hiring various mercenaries led to the channelling of
some rather interesting foreign nationals into positions of power within
Sindia's military forces. However, beyond money and power there was
litle reason for them to maintain a lasting commitment to their postions
‘or their employer. And when push ultimately came to shove, between
Richard Wellesley and Daulat Rao Sindia those foreign nationals posed
«a security risk for Sindia.

“The most serious Maratha military threat ro Wellesley’s plans was that
‘posed by Sindias ‘regular corps’. However, it was ripe for destabiliza-
tion and subversion, It was going to be much casier forthe British to
win this struggle if they exploited a series of Maratha weak spots that
included the continued Maratha willingness to employ mercenaries a all
levels of operations from sepoy to C-in-C. The incorporation of men with
divided political, national and racial loyalties predisposed the Maratha
brigades to disruption of their command and control. It is not histor-
ically accurate to simply say The Marathas” main miliary weakness was
their use of mercenaries. Maratha military culture was broad enough to

