270 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

‘gnined, aside from a potential western buffer state, was contiguous piece
‘of property along the Yamuna River, thereby achieving their own goal of
a strategic waterway to Delhi,

‘Begum Sumru had ordered four battalions, totaling some 2,000 men
‘to march from the Deccan to Rajasthan in order that they might ‘go over
to General Lake.'® The arduous march was difficult but it proved suc-
cessful in keeping the battalions intact. While some might question her
South Asian or Indian loyalty, she was following a much older or pre-
‘national code of conduct. The Begum was an independent broker/dealer
in the greater South Asian military economy. Historically India had seen
many women warriors, from the Maratha women, who fought in tan
‘dem on horseback with their husbands as noted by famed traveller bn
Battuta, to the Nizam of Hyderabad's elite female detachment of the
‘regular corps But the Begum’s status in South Asian military cul-
ture owed nothing to her gender asa military leader it was her prestigious
ranking as a military entrepreneur that elevated her standing. She was an
‘accomplished powerbroker within the military economy. Her infantry
brigmdc gave her the credentials and the presence that meant both Sindia
and the British courted her. We do know from the memoirs of several
British officers, as well as mercenary George Thomas, that many men
sought her sexually well into her middle years. But her attractiveness to
the British in 1803 was more an issue of power politics end their bid to
control the South Asian military economy. She was a capable military
‘commander having won many battles. Yet we can see by the experiences
‘of many male mercenaries that being a successful battlefield commander
‘was no guarantee of being made a part of the British administrative pro-
cess after ‘coming in’, The Begum wasno fool and she knew the difference
between flattery and business. It was her ‘regular corps' that proved to be
the ticket to retaining power, wealth and status. That also explains why
she would not let Sindia squander her troops at Assaye. She moved her
‘men to Rajasthan as part ofthe pragmatic pattern of survival within che
South Asian military economy. Death could be honourable; but survival
with such highly sought-after assets as a regular infantry brigade was far
more profitable.

Ofkin and clan
Following the Battle of Assaye, Arthur Wellesley wrote to Collins with

\ news of captured enemy intelligence that took the form of a qum-

“yer of sheets of paper from a Maratha ‘orderly book’.'® There was a
keen interest on Wellesley’s part to find out which British mercenaries
had failed to ‘come in’. It was growing increasingly apparent that the

"Coming in! 271

officers of one brigade were not responding in the same manner to the
Governor-General’s generous offer. Had they not heard of the terms? Or
were these men renegades? The latter was a distinct possibility in Arthur
\Wellesle's mind, He had reason to hunt down some English-speaking
officers from Sindia’s service for having contravened the unspoken gen-
tdeman’s code of conduct on the battlefield at Assaye,

{have some reason to complain of Scindah’s English officers, and shall bring the
subject forward publicly as soon as I can ascertain the matter more completely.
‘My soldiers say that afer they were knocked down by cannon or grape shot,
‘they were cut and piked by the horse belonging to the campoos [brigade], which
indeed is perfectly true, and that horse was cut to pieces by the British cavalry
‘But they say besides that they heard one English oficer with a battalion soy ro
nother, Yu undertand the longuage Bem thaw Ido: dgir the emidar ofthat body
fof horse to go and cut up thove wounded European solder ‘The other did ashe was
desired, and the horse obeyed the orders they received."

‘Arthur Wellesley’s letter made it apparent that he was tracing the fate
‘of Pohiman's brigade in which the previously mentioned Captain Grant
had been said to serve as brigade major. ‘The dispatch included a lst
‘of mercenaries, drawn from the orderly book, but it was not clear at
that time which men were on the fied and which had already left ser-
vice, The paperwork was probably an earlier pay record or roster, which
‘would not include all the departures precipitated by the Proclamation.
“The Major-General noted the lst of mercenaries was ‘a matter of curios
ity’ and he wrote to Collins chat ‘I shall be glad to hear from you upon the
subject’

‘By October the Deccan contained what seemed to be an increasingly
large number of transient bands of defectors who had left service at var~
ious times. The battle lines of this war were shifting and many small
groups of defectors were uncertain where to find Wellesley or where to
report. Numerous accounts testify that they were unable to fend off the
plundering raids of local pindares. The British would be of greater help
to the former soldiers of Sindiaif here were a means of collecting them
‘more quickly. Keeping track of all the incoming personnel and process-
ing them was a bit of a headache but it was to be given priority to fur~
ther the cause of reducing Maratha power. It no longer made sense to
have one or two places for their reception. Two weeks after the Bare
of Assaye Arthur Wellesley tried to expedite the process by designating
three locations at which Maratha ‘officers and troops’ could report if
‘they ‘may be desirous of availing themselves, to the benefits held out
to them’ in the Governor-Genera’s Proclamation. These consisted of
‘Major-General Wallesleys ‘British Army” HQ, the divisional HQ at Pune
‘and the District Collector's Office in the fort at Ahmadnagar. Beyond

