266 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest or India

Arthur Wellstey’s papers. Rotton’s pivotal postion enabled him to con-
fidently circulate word of he ‘buy-out to his comrades at Burhanpur and
in the Deccan, well im advance of the Proclamation’ public disclosure
‘on 29 August 1803. The lead-time also allowed Rotton to plan his es-
‘cape route and prepare a cover story for his departure. Unfortunately,
Richard Wellesley’s men designated Lucknow as the safe station where
Rotton was to be received. Eventually, as the Governor-Genera’s plan
‘gained momentum and the benefits of the Proclamation were opened
ta all officers as well as sepoys, more reception areas were prepared,
‘especially in the Deccan, But Rotton made his escape according to his
‘earlier instructions and he endured enormous difficulty and expense in
getting up to Lucknow The Major had not only sent up-to-the-moment
military intelligence and facilitated mass defections, but he also served
asa ditectintelligence pipeline between Sindia’s urbar and the Supreme
‘Government of British India in Bengal. By correlating that information
from Ghatke’s perspective with data from Colonel Collins the intelligence
circuit was vireually complete.

“Through informal meetings, troop transfers and correspondence the
‘mercenaries had known for months that war was approaching. A of April
1803 they had been actively encouraged to leave service. They had dis-
cessed among themselves what amounted to a bail-out clause in their
‘contracts. For several years it had been customary among British mer-
cenarics joining Sindias forces to make their service contingent upon
the proviso that they would not fight against their countrymen in the
{orm ofthe EIC’s armies or His Majesty King George II's troops. Fight-
ing each other as British mercenaries in service to ‘Indian princes’ was,
however, fair game; although not to be actively encouraged. This pro-
duced some rather interesting moments forthe feringhis when Sindia and
Holkar fought each other in what amounted to the Maratha civil war of
1802.

‘The British mercenaries’ proviso may have indirecdy increased the
division between the BGGsh and a minority of French mercenaries in
1803 because it was apparent the British were to be specifically proposi-
tioned for defection under the provisions ofthe offer incorporated into the
Proclamation. Initial formulation of he document was thought to be di-
rectly ted to those individuals who had already established a preexisting
condition for leaving Maratha service. They could resign honourably and
accept conversion of their pensions and re-employment. Some of the
‘other Europeans were not initially clear on where they stood and hed
to wait and see what official offer for non-Britons was embodied in the

slamation. The final authorization for across-the-board officer pur-
‘chase in July 1803 meant many did not hear until well nto August, when

“Coming in’ 267

combat deployments had been ordered and communications were further
disrupted. This accounted for some rather cautious negotiations on the
eve of major battles. As we have seen in the dilemma faced by George
Carnegie, the uncertainty of waiting from April until August 1803 was
‘one of bai! out vs. lucrative buy out.

Tewas clear that the disintegration of the Maratha officer corps was well
under way by August 1803. But it was important to keep the pressure up
in the hopes of accelerating the process and winning over more defectors;
there was a new emphasis that same month in delivering intact sepoy
battalions, ‘The British invitation to leave Maratha service was covered
in broad terms under the Proclamation and it was hoped that che docu-
‘ment could be physically distributed well in advance to British officials
so that it might be simultaneously released across the countryside on
29 August 1803. Regrettably, late revisions and distribution problems
‘meant that many mercenaries would have to be reassured by word-of-
mouth, A month before the Battle of Assaye, John Collins wrote to Arthur
‘Wellesley thanking him for his assistance in facilitating the Proclamation
process. Collins wanted to selectively locate and extract specific merce
nary leaders in a bid to further weaken the Marathas by taking out key
men, Some were natural leaders who could serve as brokeridealers bring-
ing in entire batualions of Maratha sepoys. There were also a few men who
did not fit that description but held Collins’ interest for other specific
reasons.

Last-minute troop shifs by Sindia made it difficule to ascertain where
all these men could be physically brought in, and a few guardian shep-
herds would not be amiss in guiding those members of the flock that
‘were strung out along the Malwa and Bundlekund corridors. Special at-
tention was devoted to Captain Grant on the grounds that he was vital to
Pohiman’s Brigade (the old 1st Brigade cherished by de Boigne), which
‘was cated by the mercenaries themselves as the finest. Collins wrote to
Arthur Wellesley: *

[received your letter of the 19th instant [August], with its enclosures, yester-
‘day evening. I think i will be practicable to convey copies of the proclamation
of his Excellency the most noble the Governor General, to Major Brownrgg,
“Major Smith, and Captain Grant The fist commands a corps consisting of four
‘Batalions of Infantry. The second is atached to Colonel Dudrenecs Brigade,
and in ft commands i, he being avery active good soldier, whereas the Colon
as not a military idea. Captain Grant is Brigade Major to and in great favour
with, Colonel Pohlman, an Hanoverian. The latter commands one ofSindias best
Brigades, and would, I know, be glad of an opportunity of leaving his presen sit-
‘uation, sr kasr so he assured me, for 【 met him, in my morning rides, several
times while I was encamped atJalgong

