264 The Anglo-Marmtha Campaigns and the Contest for India

decisions regarding the war. Ambaji had begun negotiations
With the British in October 1803 about the possibility of not only de-
serting Sindia's cause but of entering a direct British alliance. After
having successfully helped ro steer the outcome of events in Bundlekund,
‘Shepherd negotiated terms under the Proclamation. Shepherd had not
only been in contact with Richard Wellesley’s men during the course of
the campaign but he had also monitored the treatment of mercenaries
‘who had defected earlier. He accomplished this by maintaining corre
spondence with the defectors Lewis and Armstrong, carefully inquiring
about what terms they had seted for. When Shepherd finally ‘came
‘over’ on 11 December 1803, he brought in his entire brigade complete
‘with gallopers."" His brigade was small with only 634 men but they
‘made up for their size in firepower, tactical repertoire and esprit de corps.
‘Sheppherd’s gift to the EIC under the Proclamation included fourteen
European mercenaries ranging in rank from sergeant to the colonel him-
self, Among the infantry, 600 men were armed with muskets and bayo-
nets while it seems at least thirty were issued matchlocks and apparently
served as designated marksmen. There were thirteen cannon listed 2s
6 pounders and they were complete with limbers, grape shot and drag
ropes, Sheppherd’s men left little to chance in the field as they served
ss a self-contained army. Mechanics, carpenters and even rope makers
‘accompanied the guns to keep them serviceable under the most adverse
conditions.H6 The willingness of the British to accept the brigade into
service in the final month of the war seems to indicate that the Proclama-
tion remained open as long as it was of service to the war effort. Advance
knowledge ofits terms had helped ease complicated covert negotiations.
In effect the Proclamation formally started in July 1803, a month before
the frst bate of the Anglo-Maratha Campaigns, and ran right up until
the final peace negotiations in December 1803,

‘The southern theatre

Earlier inthis chapter there was a reference to General Perron’s ADC
CCapain Becket having urged Major RW Rotion to do the honourable
‘go over tothe Bitsh But he was bound to have done the

right thing. As itturned out, Rotton, who served as brigade commander
forthe mercurial Sargi Rao Ghatke, was one of Richard Wellsley's most
highly prized spies in Maratha service. Like many of the British merce-
Rotton had originally joined the Marathe service out of economic
Nees He had applied unsuccessfully to Governor-General Richard
lesley in Juy 1801 for assistance in fnding placement in the EIC's

‘coming ia! 265

service. Having failed to win a position with the EIC, Rotton joined
(Ghatke’s retinue and was readily promoted owing to his military and ad
‘ministrative talents. Ghatke was Keen to build « personal army able to
‘compete with any other. Daulat Rao Sindia owed his leverage over the
<durbar to his ‘regular corps’ and Rotton’s application for Maratha service
in 1801 coincided with that competitive period when leading members
of the durbar were manoeuvring for postion. Sargi Rao had a voice in the
ddurbar as Daulat Rao's father-in-law; but with a regular brigade he also
jed real power for whatever military, political or economic purpose he
‘chose to apply it

In January 1802 Major Rotton wrote a letter requesting a personal
meeting with Richard Wellesley, which was granted. The resulting assig~
pation guaranteed that he would have a special role to play as aspy report
ing direcly to the Governor-General and his staff. Rotion was extremely
valuable to Wellesley for two reasons. He was a chief source of covert
{intelligence for what was to become the southern theatre of operations
and he had access to Ghatke's military plans as well as insight into his po-
litical decisions inside the durbar. ‘The Major was stationed at Burhanpur
in the Deccan, which made him pivotal in encouraging early defections
jn that sector The fact that Rotton had personal correspondence with
Richard Wellesley prior to Maratha service worked to his advantage in
communications with the Governor-Genera’s staff. He was to be con-
sidered a known entity in Maratha service, which helped in his vetting as
fan intelligence source. Reports on Maratha troop distribution and vul-
ermbilites quickly found their mark and little escaped his observation,
Rotton’s letters to EIC officials were written with a precise command of
the English language and his use of judicial logic, found in his ater pen-
sion review claim, was nothing short of lawyetly, Major Rotton’s appeal
fora pension eview made i explicitly clear that although his intelligence
flow was directed via Richard Wellesey’s staff it was General Lake in
particular who apprised him of the offical plan to undermine the officer
corps via the Proclamation, and Lake Was instrumental in engineering
Rotton's extraction." This was a great relief ro Rotton because he had
been planning his escape from Maratha service for what had seemed like

ages.

"The Governor-General made sure that both the civil and military sec-
‘etaries to the Bengal government knew that Rotton was an intelligence
source and that he was co be encouraged in his eforts. Rotton sent intel-
ligence directly from the Deccan to military secretary Merrick Shawe.""*
As a spy for the Governor-General he did not report to theatre com
‘mander Arthur Wellesley and that explains the absence of his reports in

