280 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

have offered command opportunites to European mercenaries since the
reign of Shivaji and it would be a historic mistake to see the European
‘mercenaries as a modern and ruinous experiment introduced by Mahadji
‘india, They were part of a historic continuum in Maratha military cu
ture, Differences in religion, caste and ethnicity had all ben suppressed
by the pragmatic Maratha approach exemplified by Shivaji. The larger
‘problem forthe Marathas was not the use of mercenaries prs but the co に
lective absence of Maratha mititary institutions for indoctrination aimed
Tr instilling a military culture of allegiance to duty. These institutions
need not have been bricks and mortar or military schools. They could
have been much more basic institutional forms of indoctrination such as
‘aclan-based Maratha regimental system building allegiance tothe clan as,
an integral part of allegiance tothe unit.!"® Maratha sepoys followed their
officers as part ofthe chain of command but beyond that they followed
4s part ofa special bonding process and ther relationship in the South
Asian military labour market. What was missing in this military culture
was the next intermediate leve of bonding, ic. that of the military middle
managers the officers and NCOs ~ tothe clan itself.

‘The South Asian military environment that shaped Maratha military
culture was geared much more towards transitory military entrepreneurs
‘who gained money, rank and power by successfully exploiting chances to
sel ther skills on the military labour market that existed within the South

‘equal on a man-for-man basis to any comparative British army unit, its

heterogeneous officer corps was lacking a cohesive employment ethic ea-

pable of passing es dedication to duty. The days ofsworn officer allegiance
to the Maharajah had dwindled with the death of Maha
veterans respected Daulat Reo the way they had Maki
empathetic figure at times but there was no binding allegiance to serve
and protect him. Men such as Carnegie wrote letters expressing remorse

a their inability to help ther ‘prince’ Daulat Rao once he committed to

war with the British.

During 1801-2 Governor-General Richard Wellesley believed he could
subvert control of Sindias battalions if Perron and other ‘French officers’
‘were removed. The War ofthe Second Coalition gave Wellesley a pretext
for attempting to extricate them by coercive means. From the standpoint
‘of legality this was a precarious ploy. John Collins and others saw obvi-
‘ous parallels with he slippery slope that had resulted in the impeachment

\ of Governor-General Warren Hastings on charges of ‘High Crimes and
eo But with the arrival of news about the Peace of Amiens,
's opportunity of ousting Perron vanished, And so he was forced

to consider other means of removing Perron in the hope that the ‘regular

aoe

Seat

Txt

"Coming i 28

corps’ would come under more easily manipulated British mercenary
leadership. What apparently happened next was that Richard Wellesley
reconsidered Perron’s position in view of intelligence reports and recom
‘mendations, There was another option. It would be more efficient and
«effective to formally adopt Perron as an intelligence source and then assist
him in retiring. He could be managed in such a way as to be of greater
‘service to Wellesley's policy objectives. The mercenary's goals remained
the same, retire rich and live long enough to enjoy it. Perron had not
reinvented himself, On the contrary, it was Richard Wellesley that had
changed his way of thinking in allowing himself to see Perron not as the
problem but as part ofthe solution.

Perron could be brought in and EIC pensions used to buy out the
other officers. But the further the plan developed the more evident it
‘became that all of Sindia’s military assets were forsale if this situation was
hhandled carefully. Although it should be said the stratagem exceeded the
wildest expectations of the British and they seemed genuinely surprised
that the Marathas would honour contractual relationships that worked
against their own interests during war. Elphinstone was amazed to see
that Sindia honoured the resignations of mercenary officers, as they were
about to face Arthur Wellesley in the Deccan.

1 cannot think how happened not to mention he great pleasure [had in hearing
‘that all dhe British subjects had come offin so honourable a manner from Sindia’s
service, Tam particule glad that Stuart is safe in person, and sound in char-
acter. The resignations ofthe British subjects, and their being accepted, showed
principle and foresight, on both sides, which make each more respectable."*

By using opportunities provided by the defecting mercenary officers,
the EIC gained increased access for the subversion of entire Maratha
sepoy battalions. They could have their service contracts directly con
verted to EIC employment. The sepoys were often personally atached
io their officers and NCOs with bonds of loyalty that had cultural, or
‘ganizational and financial explanation. Many officers were more than
mere administrators or combat leaders. In several cases these officers
had trained their men and spent years with them in the field under can-
vas developing together with them into a brigade. Unit identity was not
just limited to military identity in terms of European military culture; it
‘was also a source ofa special warrior identity within South Asian sociery.
‘And if you were good as a unit it meant you had additional leverage in
the South Asian military economy. Ifthe prince, sardar or warlord you
{ought for as a sepoy was nowhere to be found and owed you months
‘worth of back pay, then chances were you had greater loyalty to your
commanding officer - that same officer whose military knowledge and

