272 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fo India

simply receiving them, Arthur Wellesley ordered his men to ‘treat them
as friends ... and to act respecting their payment in the manner pointed
‘out in the proclamation’."® The Proclamation was extended and the
British wanted to turn as many remaining Maratha troops as possible be-
fore Sindia could withdraw them to the north ina bid to regroup. White
‘or brown, officers or enlisted men, Sindia’s or Bhonsle's~ it mattered not;
the understanding was that all personnel considered as belonging to the
‘enemy were to be welcomed in or retained by whatever suitable means
in conformity with British war aims. Theie conversion would weaken the
‘Maratha war effort and they might be needed if Holkar should intervene
at this crucial point. Barry Close, the British Resident with the Peshia
in Pune, wrote to confirm that a Marathi-language version of the Procta
imation was drawn up in the hopes of recruiting the wayward members
of the Peshtca's personal retinue who had sided with Sindia when their
‘master turned puppet by accepting so-called British protection under the
‘Treaty of Bassein.'®

‘During the second week of October John Collins replied to Arthur
\Wellestey’s inquiry about Captain Grant, It was a nervous time owing to
the lingering threat chat any outstanding or renegade officers would be
‘hanged for treason; as it curned out the threat was idle end never carried
out

‘Lam shocked and surprized at what you relate respecting the savage cruelty ofthe
English Officer in Scindiah’s Service. I thought our countrymen were incapable
of action with so much inhumanity. Buti is evident those fellows must be the
scum ofthe nation, With an exception of Grant, and Becket, I know none ofthe
English Officers whose names are inserted in the return. The former is nephew 10
‘Mr. Chales Grant, one of the director, the later is Secretary to General Perron,
‘and now attends the General I believe, You will perceive by the enclosed Gazette
that al Brush subjects bearing arms in the sevice of Scindhia ofthe Bhonsle,
‘now that these Chiefans are at open war with our Government, have incurred
the gui of High Treason, and I should hearly rejoice to see every one of them
‘executed excepting such as may be detained by Force. In this ater description
TThope Mr Grant may be included not only on account of his family, bt be-
‘cause I should be sorry to find that he had attempted Io impose on me by a
false confidence. In fact this Officer positively assured me, on the day that I left
Scindhia's camp, it was his decided intention to leave the Mahratas and repair 10
some English setlement the frst moment that favourable opportunity presented
‘sel, He also affirmed that Lieutenants Stuart, and some other Englishmen, cnr
tertained the some design, [have not the least doubt but that W. Grant received a
copy ofthe Proclamation issued by the Governor General on the 25th of August
last, as my Native agent at Buchampour informed me, by means ofa cossid
(Messenger, chat it had been delivered to him, I's possible however, that he had
ot ben able to elle his escape, an I Sincerely hope this may prove tobe te

iranian nn ee

ZN 2

“Coming int 2

Lieutenant Colonel Collins had made special efforts to make sure
‘Captain Grant understood his options under the Proclamation. He was
‘not only one of Collins’ intelligence network but nephew to one of the
few men who could bring down Richard Wellesley’s administration in
India. Captain Grants uncle ~ Charles Grant —was a leading member of,
the EICs Court of Directors but also the man destined to be Chairman
of the EIC.!9 Charles Grant led a powerful lobby among the directors
that ultimately proved instrumental in opposing the Maratha policies of
Governor-General Richard Wellesley.

‘A month after Assaye, on 23 October 1803, Arthur Wellesley wrote to
Colins:

Atr Grant and Me Stuart were notin the action ofthe 23rd September. The
later is arrived at Poonah, and say that he and Mr Grant and Mr MeCulloch,
‘quitted Scindiah's camp on he [lankin manuscript, end went to Burhampoor.
om thence Mr Stuart went to Poonah, but he doesnot say in his report what
‘became ofthe other gentleman, He says that they hed not heard ofthe Governor-
Generals proclamation of he 29th August, and regrets that they had not, as he
is convinced that many Natives would have come away with him. The motives
with these gentlemen for coming away were their eluctance to serve against
‘thee country, and th fact tha te English ofcers in Hindustan had gone to the
Beitsh settlement of which Colonel oman received intelligence from General
Perron on he 12th September. The brigades engaged were Pohimans Duponrs
and Begum Sumroo's inthe whole sixteen battalions."

‘The icter shows that Arthur Wellesly’s Deccani intelligence system
had yet to come to terms with all the information that was filtering in, As
wwe can see, this deposition stated Begum Sumrus batalions as engaged
at Assaye but we know the Begum kept them out of combat. As for Grant
and Stuart, they said they had let Sindis service for two reasons. They
‘were not going to fight agains their fellow countrymen and they had al-
ready heard that their counterparts inthe northern theatre had gone over
‘to the British setdements’. They had not heard of their specific opportu-
nities under the Proclamation to bring over as many sepoys as they could.
‘That, afterall, hd been a fry late amendment co the offer and they had
‘been engaged in extensive countermarching for months. The despatch
‘also revealed that Pohlman had received word from Perron as late as 12
‘September 1803. As we now know, Perron’s departure was complete by
‘then. There was a vital need to reach Pohlman and ensure that he under-
stood final instructions. Sindia had more to lose in Hindustan than inthe
Deccan and the degree to which he shifted troops underscores the fact
thatthe Deccan was not the primary focus of the war. During July Sind

ordered ‘the 4th and 5th Brigades under Brownrigg and Dodernaigue”
‘up to Hindustan"? Defecting mercenary Major Smith said that in the

