274 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fr india

pre-existing war plan, offered to Sindia by Perron but dectined by the
‘Maharajah, che interior of the Deccan was to be the scene of light horse
raiding and pindar action." Perron wanted to keep the ‘regular corps’
‘out of Deccan for several reasons. Pohlman's brigade had to march
under Sindia's direct orders as the blocking force in the Deccan. But
Perron’ leter reached Pohlman somewhere near Adjanta and it set off
the final chain of event for the collapse of command and control ofthe
Ist Brigade."

‘Who was this Stuart whose name kept cropping up? Why was south-
‘ern theatre commander Major-General Wellesley interested in him tothe
point where Stuart was included in despatches inquiring about Captain
Grant, the nephew of Charles Grant of the Court of Directors? This
question leads back to ‘Mr Stuart's’ deposition upon arrival ata recep-
tion station.! If we look at various lists of mercenaries such as that pro-
vided by Major Ferdinand Lewis Smith or the later EIC pension records,
the Stuart most often listed, a a captain in Sindias service, is Caprain
Kenneth Bruce Stuart who served in Hindustan and arrived in General
Lake's comp with George Carnegie.” Irwould seem that thisMr Stuart
cof the Deccan, who made his deposition at Pune, had his name tran-
scribed incorreey. He was a proud son of Scotland whose name should
have been recorded as Mr Daniel Stewart not as Mr Stuart. George
and Thomas Carnegie left three leters that indicated why concern for
“Mr Stuart’ ranked with that for Captain Grant

‘As eatly m 1801 Thomas Carnegie referred to Danie! Stewart being
‘promoted to iewtenantand noting thathe was avery good Offcer."7"
‘month before the war broke out, George Carnegie wrote to his mother,
‘Lieut D Stewart is 600 miles ftom me.’ At that time Carnegie was
writing from near Delhi when ‘Mr Stuart’ had just been posted one
month earlier tothe ‘Burhanpour Battalion’ in the Deccan, s point that
was approximately 600 miles away." Later, when George wrote about
his departure from Maratha service, he mentioned receiving news from
Daniel Stewarts brother who served inthe EIC’s army. ‘Tam very happy
to lear from Lt. Charles Stewart that Daniel has got safe to Bombay,
butafter great hardships and plundered of everything." Daniel Stewart
(MrStuart’) was another key playerin the Scotsh connection thatcross-
linked the EIC and the oficer corps of Sindias army.

Daniel Stewart was a part of Carnegies circle, the Scotsh inner
‘de if you will. The clan and extended kin networks of the mercenaries
mirrored those of the Marathas in terms of cross-cultural conflict anal

is. The Carnegie lan connections ranged from Maratha held officers
in Sutherland's brigade to the Board of Directors of the EIC. Susan
‘Carnegie served as guardian fr Isabella Sutherland in Scotand. And che

“Coming in’ 25

Sutherland were intermarried with the Hessings as well as the French
connection in the form of Perron and Derridon. Susan Carnegie, the
widowed matriarch, was the cousin of EIC Chairman David Scott as,
well as being an old friend of Bombay Governor Jonathan Duncan.!”5
Her letters brought a bounty of introductions for her sons who
openly encouraged by these powerful EIC executives to joi
army. As for networking, we must also cemember the extent of fraternal
connections andaliances. George Carnegie'sstepbrother was Lieutenant
Colonel Nicholas Carnegie of the Bengal Arillery, commanding atillery
at Fatehgarh avery help reference given Nicholas’ connection to his
‘old classmate Lieutenant Colonel Ochterlony since thei cadetship in
1777.7 These connections were of crucial importance to British intel-
ligence during the 1803 Anglo-Maratha Campaigns. Buc the linkages of
defecting personnel tothe upper echelons of EIC power were also worti-
some, Arthur Wellesley and John Collins both breathed a sigh of reliefto
find that Grant and ‘Stuart, or more appropriately Daniel Stewart, were
among the mercenaries who did not wait to see how events turned out
‘but rather left service late on 12 September 1803 after having encoun
tered difficulties in exricating themselves from a tense situation referred
to in some circles as the ‘mutiny’ ofthe 1st Brigade. They were late in
their escape but the main thing was they got out eleven days before the
bloodbath at Assye.!”" Grant would have made particularly interesting
“Maratha hostage had he stayed and refused to fight, and no doubt the
thought of disgrace co his family was a major consideration in his decision
to resign Sinda's sevice.

‘The road to Assaye

‘We know from numerous EIC reports of battles observed prior to 1803
that Sindia's mercenary officer corps, both European and South Asi
led atthe head of the formation. Their leadership style had figured largely
inaccounts ofthe bates against Holkar in 1801-2, particularly the Batle
of Hadespar. Any officer leading one of Sindias sepoy units at Assaye
as bound to have faced an extraordinarily great chance of being killed
‘or wounded, ifnot by British artillery or musketry chen by the infantry's
bayonets or the cavalry’s sabres, However, British after-action reports
stated only one of the Marathas’ European officers was found dead on
the field." Some imperial historians insist that the European officers
‘made good their escape on horseback following the fight. But given that
the number of Maratha casualties was atleast 1,200 it seemed odd that
there were not more European mercenaries killed or wounded. South
Asian leaders of rank who subsequently died of theit wounds, such as

