276 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

Jpdun Singh, were reported. Where were Sindia's European killed and
wounded? Or was the assumption of European casualties a faulty de-
duction based on Wellingtonian claims that Arthur Wellesley fought the
‘French-led’ Maratha infantry at Assaye? How many European merce-
aries were at Assaye?

In 1986 I wrote a paper about ‘Wellington and the Marathas indicat
ing that the Marathas were not a technologically backward force but an
arillery-savvy lot who made the Battle of Assaye a ‘near-run thing’ for
the furure Duke of Wellington." Like many before me, I made refer=
cence to Puhiman' performance on the field as exemplified by his ability
to quickly order Sindia's sepoys to ‘change front’. I was delinquent in my
research and accepted Pohlman’s presence despite the fact that none of
the eyewitness reports confirmed his whereabouts. William Thorn, fight-
ing alongside Lake far to the north, stated in his authoritative work that
the regular battalions were ‘under the command of two French officers,
‘named Poblman and Dupont’. I did not accept Thorn's French assertion.
from the standpoint of either ethnicity or military afliation.'® Instead,
[opted to follow John Pemble's lead in making assumptions about the
rationality of the European officers based on their names. Despite the
claim by most that Poblman was a Hanoverian, my research indicated an
archaic reference that he wasa Hessian. As it turned out, all ofthat was
speculation and I was mistaken. As the years passed I coordinated addi
tonal archival research and began to concentrate on the letters of British
‘intelligence operatives and the pension adjustment claims of retired mer-
‘cenaries, After twelve years of intermittent research it was quite appar-
‘ent that my Wellington article was incorrect with reference to Pohlman
‘and the story had to be set straight. Poblman was officially classified as
1 British subject and he was nowhere near the battlefield of Assaye on
23 September 1803.

‘The deposition of Mr Sruart’ was important in linking several sources
that shed light on the disintegration of command and control in Sindias
Ist Brigade just eleven days before the Battle of Assaye. It stated:

‘When Col, Collins left Camp, Mr. Stuart asked CoL Fohlman to give him hi
discharge, Colonel Pohiman said tat he could have his Discharge from General
Perron only. Mr. Stuart continued to press Col. Pokiman for his disctarge,
teling him thar Hostiiries might commence before he could hear from General
Perron, and that if Col. Pohlman persisted in refusing him his discharge, that
‘he was determined to go away with the best manner he could ~ at length on the

Pe jpduced to give him his discharge and

Stuart immediately quited Camp, and went ro Burhaunpore. Mr Grant
‘nd Mr, MacCullough obtained their discharge atthe same time, and went back
with Me. Stuart to Burhaunpore.*

“Coming in? 277

‘That the departure ofthe men was part ofa larger effort coordinated with
Perron is without doubt

‘When Mr, Stuart was near Adjuntee, he saw a lener from General Perron to
Colonel Pohiman in which General Perron mentioned that in consequence af the
apprehensions which were entertained of a war breaking ou his English officers
hhad taken their discharge. That be therefore wished Colonel Pohiman would send
him three French officers namely Honore, Mercer and Pein. Me, Stuart says
‘that Honore and Mercier positively refused ro go but he thinks Perrin would go
willingly. I was in consequence of this leer that Col. Pohlman was induced at
the urgent request of Mr. Stuart and the other English officers to give them their
discharge."

Pohiman was obviously present in camp on 12 September having re-
fused until that point to act independently and issue a discharge under
the resignation or bail-out provision of enlistment. Pohlman waited un
‘il he received word from Perron. Note that Pohiman did not tell his
subordinates they could not resign, rather the issue was that the autho
‘ization had to come from Perron as C-in-C in accordance with the chain
‘of command and what we also know now to be the efforts of Perron to
‘coordinate a larger plan. The testimony of ‘Mr Stuart’, as taken down by
Lieutenant-Colonel Close, went on to say that:

‘Colone! Pobman had insisted on having his discharge, and used every endeavour
{procure i from Sindiah, but tomo purpose. That though Colonel Pohiman was
‘induced 10 march, Mr Sruar knows that it was not Colonel Poblman’sinention
to fight, and that he had sent his resignation to General Perron, Mc. Stuart also
heard a eport that Colonel Poblman was not inthe action."

‘There was considerable division among the other European officers in
the Ist Brigade. The testimony had elaborated: ‘Gautier, Honore and
Mercier were very averse to the war, and would have got their discharge
iff they could. Dupont too was very anxious to go away and was in fact
for some time a prisoner in his own camp." The French officer who
‘opposed them was the man who had the most to gain from the resigna-
tions. Major Dorson was second in command and he was instrumental
in ensuring Pohiman would not be on the field at Assaye. ‘Dorson was
very inemical to the English, and he was too apprehensive of Pohiman’s
leaving camp from his unwillingness to serve against the English, that he
surrounded his tent at night with Marathas and other people to prevent
his getting away."

“The whereabouts of Pohiman during the Batle of Assaye are covered in
1 thirty-four-page file entitled ‘Rejection of a Claim preferred by Lieut.
Colonel Pohiman formerly in the Service of Dowlut Row Scindia, to
be allowed Pay for a period of 5 Months antecedent to his receipt of

