268 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns andthe Contes for India.

Collins had apparently made very good use of his morning rides, exercis-
ing his intelligence network as well as his horse. Note that Brownrigg had
already been ordered back ro Hindustan where he intended to eventually
link up with Sutherland at Agra. While the Major Smith that Collins re
{erred to was Major Ferdinand Lewis Smith whose Sketch of the Regular
Corps proved such a valuable source on Bourquin’s rebellion at Delhi and
the failed attempt to seize the Mughal Emperor.

Lieutenant Colonel Collins also wrote to Arthur Wellesley about the
developments in the northern theatre, as he understood them. ‘Colonel
‘Sutherland has already resigned the service of the Maharage."" Arthur
‘Wellesley knew who Sutherland was, having had personal correspondence
‘with Brownrigg and Sutherland dating back to 1800 when they were his
‘Maratha alles. The mercenary duo had volunteered to help Wellesley in
the campaign against the ‘feebooter’ Dhundia Waugh.'*! With Suther
Jand taken out of the running as Perron' replacement in August 1803,
there was reason to believe the entire mercenary command structure was
‘on its last legs. However, it would be a mistake to think that Collins
‘wanted all the mercenaries to defect. The old man was swayed by reports
from 1802 that George Hessing was a dreadful officer, often described
in derogatory terms, But much of that negative association can be traced
jo those who blamed Hessing for Sindias 1802 loss ar Ujjain against
Holkar Collins, dutifully keeping Arthur abreast of developments, sar-
castically noted: ‘Colonel Hessing the elder, a Dutchman who had scen
‘much service, died a short time ago. His son, a half caste also commands
‘Brigade, and as he isa wretched officer, hope he will continue where
his." John Collins was opinionated on the combat leadership abilities
‘of specific mercenary officers.

In short, with an exception of Frenchmen, I believe Pohiman, Brownrigg and
‘Smith, are the only experienced officers in the service of Scindhia. There are
‘several English gentlemen artached to the corps commanded by the two former,
who, ofcourse, would be glad to accept ofthe benefit held forth in His Excellency’s
‘proclamation. Aso the natives [am doubtful, though ts ikely [think that many
‘of them wil follow their European Officers.

European mercenaries below officer rank had more to lose if they
signed Maratha service early and missed an opportunity for a pension
‘conversion scheme or alternative employment. For some, particularly the
lowest ranks or those that had military occupational specialities that put
them at greater risk in combat (i. artillery crew), survival was their frst
and foremost thought. This was evident inthe ‘Deposition of John Rosch

ishman and George Blake Scotchman lately manning each a gun in
the service ofthe Begum’. In their statement about leaving the service of

essen

了
}
§
は

“Coming in! 269

the Begum Sumru' atthe end of August it was apparent they had to make
their decision about leaving service in something of a vacuum. Officers
‘with large incomes were jealously guarding their opportunities, there was
talk of spies everywhere and the Marathas were reportedly jailing men
for failure to serve, The lower ranks, such as Roach and Blake, did not
know whom to confide in for fear of incarceration or worse. ‘Hearing the
detachment was to march to oppose the English’, they had ‘left camp by
permission’ according to their contractual understanding of not having to
face their countrymen in combat. They claimed they did not know about
thei options under the Proclamation and suffered doubly asthe result of
‘being ‘robbed of everything’ immediately after having let the camp.”
Roach and Blake seemed unaware that their patron, Begum Sumru, was
herself negotiating with Lieutenant Colonel Ochterlony for the delivery
of their entire brigade into British hnds

‘As young lady the Begum had learned to campaign in the field with
her husband, the notorious Walter Reinhard, who was said to wear a
‘sombre’ scowl. That this Sombre Sahib became Sumru Sahi is part of
the legend. But the Begum was a willing epprentice in the art of military
‘command as wellas ashrewd diplomat, excelling where poor Walter could
never hope to compete. Perhaps the Begum was the most mercenary
‘of military entrepreneurs in that she bargained for the best individual
as well as collective defection terms.'% She went so far as to broker
1 transfer of her jaidad lands under the provision that the British lo
officially transfer her revenue-collecton rights to a new territory. The
British coveted her land to gain better hold on the Doab She accepted a
new jaided strategically located adjacent to EIC territory on the condition
that her income rights to the land be offically recognized by the British
government in Bengal. In her meetings with Ochterlony she established
a strong bargaining position. The Begum had led Sindia to believe she
‘would support him but she carefully kepr manoeuvring her battalions to
keep them out of combat at placeslike Assaye. Later, when British appeals
to her brigade commander Saleur fll on deaf ears, she wrote to him in
French and addressed a separate ‘Persian Hookumnama’ to her sepoys
indicating the deal was done and it was time to enter British service.”
For their part the Bridsh hed also driven a hard bargain. They arranged
to exchange the Begum’s jaidad on the western banks of the Yamuns
River for an alternative piece of land bordering what was to become thei
new frontier. For the British, the deal with the Begum meant recognizing
hher perpetual land ownership and revenue-collection rights, What they

・Al Ze oo Ni Begun, Begum Sarr
" ata Samro, Sommo Sumo.
