262 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

In the afternoon, the 3 Battalions which had been driven into the half moon
battery (more properly called the Madaghur), sent into the Genera, iatimating
a wish to surrender and to bring over the Battery of 32 Guns: they marched into
‘our camp a short time afer and also a party of lasears (with 200 Bullocks), who
had been brought over by the Rhetoric of one of our Tindals for which service,
je was promoted toa higher rank the nextday.”

Lake was somewhat amazed at this batefield bartering for loyalty but he
‘had begun to learn the finer points of the South Asian military economy.
‘The Proclamation had been part of a lengthy and well-executed plan
with carefully concocted wording subject to review by the EIC judicial
reptesentatives.!3® But this bartering of men and guns was nothing like
that; it jarred the old man’s sensibilities. With enough cash it seemed
Lake could hedge his military bets for success ~ if not purchase outright
victory.

Lieutenant Pesters diary entry for 14 October 1803 speaks of yet an-
other large defection at Agra that exemplified the impact of the Procla-
‘mation on the immediate military labour market.

“This evening seven Battalions ofthe enemy surrendered themselves, with hei
‘guns, rumbris, colours and ammunition to Colonel White, and marched up and
‘encamped on the left of our ine, ata distance of about one mile. The terms given
them were to employ them in our service with the same pay as they received
in Scindih’s, the officers to continue with them, with che rank they formealy
held. Colonel White, with five Companies of he 16th [Regt. Bengal NT], took
possession ofthe jamna Musjee in which they had been posted . . . Many of
the enemy who came over this day are very smart fine fellows, and soldiertke
ooking men

[Note that Pester uses the phrase ‘surrendered themselves’. But these
‘men were negotiating their employment with the EIC. These were the
‘men who just four days earlier had staunchly defended the jami Masjid
‘Mosque and disgraced Brigadier-General Clarke. Now here they were
“coming in’ to be received by their trusted opponent Colonel White. The
‘Maratha sepoys had wisely negotiated for and received permission allow-
ing their ‘officers to continue with them’. This may not have been exactly
as Richard Wellesley had planned it, but the Proclamation system worked.
It delivered not just mercenary officers from Maratha service but crack
‘battalions of sepoys that the EIC could readily employ. The defecting bat-
talions bargained in good faith within this spot market. The mercenary

\, officers had raised these battalions, led them in spirited defence against

\ Clarke's assault and now shepherded them into EIC service. There vas
‘surprising continuity as Britain became the dominant player in the South
Asian military economy.

“Coming in! 263

‘Although George Carnegie rejected the path that Lucan had mkem
jc did eventually end up in EIC service. He stayed on his EIC pension
nti the fal of Agra. Bur when he heard that Sutherland was Fee and
that Brownrigg as well as several companions had been hired into er
tice, he volunteered for active dury. Carnegie had not wanted ta ‘take
Up service’ until he knew there was no chance of having to face his old
Comrades in battle. Colonel Ochterlony, who had played such a vital
tole in bringing men in, was by then Resident at the court of Deihi and
he offered Carnegie a choice position. 4° Eventually Carnegie served
the 1808 defence of Delhi and was mentioned in dispatches for
‘courage in personally leading a party into Holkars siege bateries where
they spiked the Maratha guns before Delhi it Holkars insurgency in
1804-5 tested Richard Wellesley’s grip on Hindustan, but it never 让
walled the geographic dimension or conventional threat level of the com
bined 1803 Anglo-Maratha Campaigns. Regretably George Carnegie
died of hepatits in Delhi during 1805. But before hs death he foresaw
that peace would bring cutback in military spending, That meant there
twas 8 strong possiblity that he EIC would reverse its policies and em
Iminate the sevice of the mercenary officers that it had recruited out of
Sindia’s cervice. Carnegie’ letter humorously played on his new iden-
tity as a Red Coat’, but it also reflected the cross-cultural identity and
ponding ofa special band of British mercenaries in EIC service who were
proud to cul themselves Maracas. ‘Much, certainly depends on the lib-
CaHiy of the Company to us Mabrattss, after peace is restored, But, os
Ye have fought hard and bled in their Service (6 of our mumber killed
{ast year), they cannot decently rurn us adrift, of, (Being a Red Coat), 1
should say more propery, tothe right about."

‘Within the narrow band of books that deal with the mercenaries who
“came in there is lingering confusion over the eligibility period of the
Proclamation process. Several authorshave assumed thatthe offer ended
in October of 1803. And the issue is clouded by the status of several
men ike Bourquin who were classified as prisoner of war (POW) when
they surrendered. In Bourquin's cae, it was his renegade action against
the Mughal Emperor and resistance at the Bate of Delhi that earned
him POW status. However, the terms of the Proclamation proved ex
tremely flexible and as time passed the Governor-General realized there
‘wasmot onlya chance to subvert the Maratha ‘regular corps but, in effee,
ommandeer the entire North Indian military labour market, Colonel
JR. Sheppherd was Ambaf Inlia’s ‘Irregular Corps’ commander in
Banalekund having served that senior sordar fr seven years. Colonel
‘Sheppherd remained an intelligence operative during the worst months of
the 1803 campaigns and worked behind the scenes to try and influence

