290 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns andthe Contest for India

so that regardless of ether a sepoy had started his military career with
the EIC or with Daulat Rao Sindia, the result was an infantry soldier
‘equal to any in India,

‘Major Ferdinand し Smith - who was rated by Colonel Collins as one
‘of Sndia’s finest combat leaders - observed that one Maratha Telingn bar
talion, composed of sepoys from Awadh, was drilled in ‘the old English
exercise of 1780".4 These slight variations in drill were not of major im
portance as evidenced by the fact that cach of the EICS armies ha its
‘own drill, separate from that of His Majesty's troops. The dril exercises
and theoties of Cotonel Dundas" proved very popular and by 1792 are-
vised version of his Principles of Military Movements’ became the British
army's regulation drill book ‘The ‘Dundas reforms’ were greatly influ
‘enced by the belief that the Bridsh armys service in America during the
‘Seven Years’ War and the American War of Independence had led to an
‘overall dectine in British heavy infentry. Much to the chagrin of Britons
who advocated greater use ofthe rife, Dundas criticized what he saw as
the light infantry fad that had proliferated inthe American wars. Modern
advocates of a ‘Western victory through superior drill theory’ often for-
get that Hindock smooth-bore muskets and their theory of deployment
Were ‘old news’ by 1800. As a smallarms system the fintlock had been
in general circulation for a century. The massing of men in formation
to achieve a ballistic effect, analogous to a gigantic shotgun blast, was
greatly expedited by military drill. But which system one used to achieve
the effect was of secondary importance to those on the receiving end.
‘True, there were degrees of effectiveness and some variations may have
offered particular advantages for particular scenarios. As David Harding
has pointed out, knowing which system of ‘manoeuvres’ and ‘firings’ to
‘employ at a given time came down to the individual judgement exer
cised by officers. However, in comparing British and Maratha infantry
standards in 1803 there was insuficent overall difference in my opinr
ion to make the claim that superior drill was a serious reason for Bridsh
vietory in 1803. The military skills of sepoys in the Marathas ‘regular
‘corps were essentially identical to those of corresponding EIC battalions
‘That the Maratha experience produced sepoys of the first order is ind
cated by their interchangeabilty and batuefeld recruitment at places like
Aga.

International military trends move through armies ~ as they always
‘have - but they do not always move from west to east. During the first
‘year of America’s Civil War (1861-5) both the Union and Confederate
armies possessed elite Zouave rifle units, These American Zouaves

+ Later, General Sic David Dunas

‘The anatomy of vitory 201

modelled themselves on the original Zouaves ofthe French colonial armies. The
latter were Algerian ight infantry troops famous for their driland characteris
{gaudy uniform fearuring bright colours, baggy trousers, gates, short and open
jacket, and a turban or fez. The orginal Zouaves were also famous for their abilcy
to fire and reload the musket from the prone position.

US militia units followed them ‘down tothe detail of shaving their heads
like the North Africans'7 Were the American Zouaves imitations or
copies, as if the American commanders and troops were simple chil-
dren with nave beliefs that red pants make a rifle shoot more accurately?
‘Of course not, and what foolhardy soul would have had the audacity to
suggest to historically contemporary American military leaders that such
a ridiculous observation was valid because the latest trend originated out-
side their own cultural environment?

fwe observe military history across culturally specific divides we can
see that trends or patterns were often deemed worthwhile beceuse they
were believed to have military merit. In the case of the Zouaves it was
cspritde corps and dan, as well as a series of techniques that included the
prone firing and reloading of muzzle-londing weapons, which represented
‘potential baefield advantage. For Sindia, che battalions ofthe ‘regular
corps’ in 1803 represented a means of competing with the British on
the basis of organizational and tactical equality - symmetrical warfare.
By relying on force symmetry the Marathes minimized any advantage
in organizational structure thatthe British might have exploited to their
benefit. The training of the Maratha regulars allowed them to compete
against their opposite numbers and that is reflected inthe surprise shown
at Assaye when the Marathas ‘changed front’ not once but twice in the
face of Arthur Wellesley’s deployment. They also managed to do this at
Laswari and the depth as well s quality of their training was indicated by
the fat thatthe commands were executed despite the absence ofthe units
usual officers, Since the Proclamation process had already stripped the
battalions oftheir usual officers, such as Poblman and Smith, this suggests
the Maratha sepoys were not dependent on their European officers for
‘discipline, What the Maratha sepoys needed their officers for, on a vital
performance bass, was offensive combat leadership under fie. We must
Sot confe bun of ommand and cont wi ack f dpi nd

Superior British artillery

“The Marathas could readily armin superior firepower by concentrating
‘on production of advanced artillery systems in an era when compara-
tively modern weapons technology still reverted to knowledge of age-old

