286 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘The momentum of British victory

“This is perhaps the weakest explanation offered from the standpoint of
timing and the historic record. The Peace of Amiens was signed between
Great Britain, France, Spain and Holland, on 27 March 1802. Therefore,
proponents of this theory would have to account for an armed truce or
period of military inactivity that was in effect when Richard Wellesley
launched his Maratha War of 1803. Does peace not constitute a break
‘or interruption in momentum, ifindeed momentum existed a that time?
If one broadens the timeframe as well as the geographic scope of the
premise to that ofthe global battlefield there are stil problems with this
theory. It would be very difficult to prove, in a colonial context or for
that matter a European setting, that Britain established self-sustaining
military momentum.

Let us consider the possibility of establishing a case for the momen-
‘cum of British victory in South Asia. Arguably the greatest military threat
the British faced before the Marathas in 1803 was that from Mysore.
Richard Wellesley had certainly treated it as a priority when he arrived
in India, Tipu Sultan fell in 1799 during the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War,
the British strategic position having benefited from earlier victories. But
the slow-grinding process of the four Anglo-Mysore Wars started with the
struggle against Tipu’s father Haidar Ali in 1766 and did not end watil
the final siege of Sricangapatnam some thirty-three years later. Granted
the four Anglo-Mysore Wars only consumed a total of thirteen years out
‘of that thirty-three-year span, but the ‘on again, off again’ nature of four
‘consecutive wars suggests a glacial pace rather than the dynamic mo-
‘mentum of rapidly accumulated British victories. Certainly the defeat
‘of Colonel Bailics detachment in the Second Anglo-Mysore War was a
‘major British setback to both military operations and morale. As for the
‘Third Anglo-Mysore War 1789-92, chapter 2 of this work noted Major
Dirom's description of the horrors encountered by the British during
their monsoon retreat ~ hardly a shining example of victory’s momen-
‘um in what corresponds to the opening phase of French Revolutionary
and Napoleonic warfare 1792-1815. Or do you discount the setbacks
in the Second and Third Anglo-Mysore Wars as temporary tactical bat-
tlefield reversals irrelevant to the manner in which you count wars as
victories?

If the theory of self-sustaining military momentum were valid as an
imperial maxim, why did it not hold true in other British wars during the
Napoleonic period? Colonial combat theatres in North America during.
‘the War of 1812 suggest some rather significant shortcomings in the the-
cory, The invasion and burning of York (Toronto) in 1813 and the collapse

‘The anatomy of vitory 287

‘of the British-sponsored ‘First Nation's Confederacy’ in Canada were far
from victories. While the British had managed to march on Washington
and torch the president's house (1814), that yielded a coat of white paint
rather than a decisive military victory as the British withdrew. The crush-
ing defeat and death of Arthur Wellesley’ brother-in-law, Major-General
‘Sir Edward Pakenham, at New Orleans in January 1815 also suggests that
the generalization is totally inappropriate in a greater colonial context.
(Or, shall we remove North America from colonial juxtaposition because
it featured White vs. White conflict to s much greater degree?

‘Superior training, discipline and deill

Ever since the incursion of Alexander the Great, there have been ways
and means for South Asians to learn first hand about Western military
techniques. Once the techniques became known in South Asia, chose
that were deemed worthy ofadoption or replication invariably found some
form of assimilation. However, Western military historians have failed to
adequately acknowledge the pre-existing South Asian infantry tradition
and its bility ro learn and grow. The Vedic period abounds with stories
cxaling the virtue of missile weapons ~ the role of the bowman being
at times synonymous with the power of a god as exemplified by Indra’s
identity as a bowman. But let us not ose sight of the theoretical as well
as precedent-setting value of examples found in classical Indology. One
does not deploy bodies of men (numbering in the tens of thousands) to a
predetermined point and then release missiles or projectiles on a specific
signal without two forms of discipline and dril: that of the individual as
‘weapons’ operator and that of the group moving in unison to a desig-
inated location and responding to the command of ‘release’ as ordered.
During the early years ofthe so-called ‘Gunpowder Age’ the Islamic trade
‘connection to India served to transfer competitive models of military or-
‘ganization and training before the arrival of Europeans. As for European
‘smallarms dril。 one might find an individually more effective position in
‘which to hold a muzzleloader before priming the pan and loading a bal,
bur there was no magic or racially exclusive "Western way’. The mechan-
ical requirements and ergonomic realities of weapons’ systems dictated
1 certain degree of commonality in the behaviour of the weapons’ op-
erator. Those physical realities, when combined with natural patterns in
human movement and motor ability, also suggest that parallel indepen
dent behavioural developments were indeed possible and that this entire
“who was frst, which was best” debate is a culturally motivated military
‘canard. Western military historians have not fully explored cross-cultural
‘models that would undermine their pet theories of military superiority as

