300 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

‘South Asian troops liad little problem with a promissory agreement since
they had often served with their pay in arrears. 27 The campaigns of 1803
pid exposed the EIC to the system on a level not previously known. In
the cross-cultural context of competing military cultures and economic
stems, the British began to rely more extensively on the South Asian
‘entrepreneurial approach to warfare, Fortresses, sepoy battalions, cav-
aly units mercenary oficers, intelligence ~ all hada price ifyou knew
how to manipulate the greater markets. However, the economict-of-scale
approach as found in the EIC' hiring of thousands of pindarien sepoy
battalions and logistical military support systems in 1803 was not cost-
effective on a short-term basis; it took time forthe British to discern the
‘most cost-beneficial control mechanisms.

In learning how to use their ‘superior edi the British also learned
how to manipulate the rise and fall of the South Asian military economy.
‘This was an economic environment of tremendous dimension and liquid-
ir. The military economy generate as wel as consumed vast reenucs
“To adequately explore the ramifications of historically contemporary de-
fence economics one must think in terms of salaries, outfitting costs,
logistical expenditures and budgetary allocations for armies numbering
hundreds of thousands of people on a subcontinental basis. There were
clever strategies to be exploited in this market as well. It was common to
charge Subsidiary Treaty allies, like the Peshwa and the Nizam, inflated
rates for the upkeep of EIC troops ‘provided’ to them by the British under
‘a treaty agreement. This helped to defray EIC fixed military costs, while
treaty provisions usually stipulated that the troops could be seconded as
needed for EIC military operations as part of a less than forthright recip-
‘rocal defence clause embodied in many treaties. The supply of artillery
to alles could also be coupled with the acceptance of accompanying EIC
‘approved artillery personnel, as was the case with the Peshwa in 1803.
“They ike the arillery, were added tothe bill and setled by way of spec-
ified payments made in cash, promissory notes based on projected land
revenues, direct revenue (tax) collection, or~ in the event of default~ the
‘assignment of the land itself. This also served as another mechanism to
‘keep South Asian artillery under British contro.

Tt is hard to conceive of an economic argument that would dare
place the Marathas on an equal footing with the British as an economic
‘superpower. The EIC was, after all, one of the first publicly traded
Companies to systematically develop global markets as an integral means
of increasing shareholder value in the process of exponentially increasing
corporate wealth. Selling Bihars opium in China or Bengals saltpetre to
Portugal was profitable, but selling a chance to share in the profits did
‘more to enhance the EIC’s leverage in international money markets. [ts

‘The anatomy of victory 301

‘governmental partner in the imperial joint venture of India was the British
‘Crown, no lightweight when it came to international financial clout
in underwriting wars from Lisbon to Moscow during the Napoteonic
period.

An economic security model would be an interesting variation on the
superior credit model in examining reasons for British victory. ft might
reveal the imbalance in the degree to which the EIC and the Marathas
‘could interfere with or destabilize each others economic resources. In
‘several respects the EIC* armies had the advantage of proximity to the
‘Maratha enemy while che EIC’s ultimate headquarters in London cn
joyed the safety of distance. Maratha financial service centres in Pune,
‘Ujiain and Mathura were all within Richard Wellesley’s striking distance ~
‘even those Parsi connections to the Persian Gulf were vulnerable to
British pressure. The Marathas had no international means of menacing
the EIC. The British could play upon clan rivalriesin an economic context
and threaten competing revenue districts in a manner that the Marathas
could not hope to match. Daulat Rao Sindias holdings in Ujiain and
Gwalior could be directly invaded or reduced to ungovernable turmoil
bby backing the rival claims of other members ofthe durbar such as Ambaji
Inglia. And while the Sindias, Bhonsles and Holkars could menace the
‘hinterlands of the Bombay, Bengal and Madras Presidencies, they could.
not inflict the same economic depth of penetration ifthe British sought
reciprocal action in disrupting the Marathes' economic livelihood. The
“Marathas could not threaten the ultimate economic security ofthe British
because they did not have access to London half a world away, whereas
the economic basis of Sindia’s administration in North India remained
‘vulnerable, The European mercenaries had resisted relinguishing con-
trol oftheir economic holdings and jaidads until the last possible minute,
‘They feared unbridled asset stripping by greedy sardars would leave the
system defenceless, as sepoys would desert a leader that did not reward
them with regular pay. The jaidad as an economic building block for mi
itary funding within the South Asian military economy was too archaic to
‘compete against an internationally based crown corporation with access.
to global line of credit. Maratha revenue collection within a war zone
remained precarious, while the British could use less physically vulner-
able international capital markets to dominate the South Asian military
‘economy, purchasing victory and then imposing a form of peace that
‘would feed the process by restoring revenue collections to be ploughed
‘back into the EIC’s coffers.

“The British, without designating it as a formal objective, attained
control of the South Asian military economy in the form of weapons
production centres, military labour markets, logistical necworks and

