288 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for Inds

‘elated to discipline, drill and military technology. Where is their analy-
tis of crossbow drill training as applied to fourteenth-century European
‘companies of crossbowmen? Why have they escaped comparison to the
‘crossbow drill and discipline exercised by Han Dynasty Chinese cross-
bowmen in the first century BCE? Are you comfortable with ‘who was
fast and ‘what that means about the inevitability of political ascendance
‘ot would you prefer to think that the physical demands of a crossbow
ensure a certain amount of commonality with regard to how the weapon
js carried, loaded and its projectile released? For that matter why not con~
‘der the degree to which the Han Chinese attained a ‘revolution in mi
tary affairs’ by mass producing interchangeable part for thei crossbows
in the form of cast-bronze tigger assemblies? Asian military achievement
inthe pre-European period bas not been judged fairly by Western military
historians.

‘Once the Portuguese established direct sea-borne contact with South
‘Asia a level of operational commonality was virtually ensured es South
‘Asian and European mercenaries cross-fertilized the military knowledge
‘base. The ‘superior training, discipline and dri’ explanation does not
consider the degree to which the Portuguese played a direct bridging
ole between South Asia and Europe that pre-dates northern European
Colonial expansion in the eighteenth century. AS cited earlier, David
Harding's exhaustive research of EIC records showed that by the mid
seventeenth century Topasses were serving with the British as well as the
Portuguese and learning 由 cir respective dril procedures. The Topasses
jn turn were regular recruits in the military forces of various South Asian
powers including the Marathas, Economic considerations in the success
fal and profitable prosecution of South Asian warfare drove the search
for cost-effective competitive advantage. And in that regard he market
dynamics of the South Asian military economy worked towards common
ality and the sharing of military resources such as weapons, personnel
‘and che military intangibles we might abel as techniques and tactics. In
‘simplistic terms, if your opponent had something that seemed to offer
tr military advantage, one of the easiest ways to remain competitive =
or deny him that advantage - was to incorporate that same knowledge
or item, This worked in both directions across cultural tines, as we
can see in Arthur Wellesley’s employment of pindaries numbering in the
thousands.

jn 1803 both Sindia’s ‘regular corps’ sepoys and those ofthe EIC were
‘interchangeable with regard to discipline and drill, as demonstrated by
their immediate ability to serve either force. Sindia's sepoys had, in effect,
the same taining as the EICS sepoys; many had been in service to the

‘The anatomy of victory 229

IC before the demobilization of 1802. This reflected the ebb and flow

cofhuman resources within the South Asian military economy. The men
who made up the bulk of sepoysin the Bengal and Bombay Presidencies
in 1803 were from pre-existing and overlapping military labour mar-
kets commonly shared by the Marathas and the British. As Charles
‘Stuart testified in his diary, Sindia and Perron were heppy to employ
the EIC' sepoys when they were discharged, They could easily be slot-
ted in to fill casualty-driven vacancies in Maratha battalions. That the
‘commonality of Maratha sepoy drill was sufficiently equal ro that of
the British is reflected in General Lake's retention and immediate de~
ployment of Maratha sepoys without sending them to rear areas for
retraining. The 1803 Anglo-Msratha Campaigns demonstrate a com-
‘monality extending right down to the sharing of specific individual per-
sonnel. One could also make a case that the Maratha sepoys of Sindias
colder battalions had much more combst experience than some of the
younger EIC battalions owing to the constant use of the ‘regular corps”
in Sindi’s battles against Jeswant Rao Holkar and the countess refractory
zamindars.

In addition to Sindia hiring discharged EIC sepoys, we also must con-
sider the commonality of training, drill and discipline that resulted from
the Marathas employing British mercenaries who had been officers in
‘His Majesty's army as well as the forces of the EIC. In the eyes
‘of British military men of 1803, discipline and drill were reckoned to be
the greatest guarantors of unfltering tactical precision on the batefelds
of that era. Comments that individual sepoy units needed discipline and
iil, expressed in the language of the day, were a subjective analytical
judgement on military preparedness andlor disposition. Britons such as
Hugh Sutherland, who rose to be the second most powerful mercenary
Jeader in Sindias chain of command in 1803, had an advantageous Posi-
tion when it came to improving training and drill As a brigade comman-
der for Daulat Rao Sindia he had the power to modify and adapt various
European and South Asian models of dril to incorporate local know!-
‘edge and that special tactical combat experience known to many soldiers
as feldcraft Sutherland could take Maratha sepoys and put them through
the same training process as that experienced by British recruits. But he
was not locked into a specific or proscribed doctrine of drill like his EIC
‘counterparts, who had to conform to Bengal, Bombay or Madras regu-
lations. Since the time of Mahadji Sindia the commanders of Maratha
sepoy battalions had been given a greater degree of leeway in setting their
‘own battalion drill standards. By integrating his expertise and combat ex-
perience in India, a man like Sutherland could fine-tune the knowledge

