294 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

dominate the batlefield and increase lethality hrough projectile selection.
‘meant being a step closer to the industrialization of killing, The thought
of this tend as having been present in a society that Westerners would
prefer to label as pre-industrial is dificult for Western military historians
in particular to concede. But then cross-cultural confusion over the i
sue of Maratha artillery superiority existed in 1803 as well. Historically
contemporary observers such as Thomas Munro were ata los to underr
stand the meaning of Maratha doctrine, Munro thought thatthe fact that
more British troops were killed by artillery fire than any other cause at
‘Assaye was a poor reflection on the Marathas and he viewed cavalry as
aly chance for victory! Like many Britons, Munro believed in
the moral and military superiority of ‘cold stssF、 To his British military
‘culture and its way of thinking, Assaye underscored the Maratha mili-
tary experience as one that had filed to learn the fundamental lesson of
European-style infantry warfare as closing with the bayonet. However,
the Marathas were not crystal-ball gazing when they put their faith
more firepower, They were pragmatists who knew that if you filled the

ir with projectiles there was fess chance that your opponent could ad-
‘vance against your position successfully. With artillery, i took fewer men
to achieve a volume of fire equal to a battalion of regulars. But there
‘was another factor that underscored the Marathas’ need to use artillery
in 1803, That was the Proclamation and the subsequent loss of infantry
leadership through defections.

‘When the bulk of the Maratha infantry officers defected in 1803 they
took with them their skill and experience in leading their own units
under fire. As studies by twentieth-century authorities such as S. L. A.
“Marshall have demonstrated, infantry performance, and in particularfor
‘ward movement under fire, i critically linked to the personal and direct
example of infantry officer leadership” Those few individuals who tried
to fil the vacuum left by the defectors could issue orders tothe infantry
‘but they could not obtain peak motivational performance ~ particularly
in an offensive scenario, Men like Perron, Sutherland and Pohiman had
years of experience leading their men successfully in batd Loyalty to
them took the form of a willingness to go on the offensive and engage
the enemy. With no immediate substitute for the years of accumulated
‘ust and belief in those father sure officers who had departed, offen-
capability sufered."* One remedy for this loss was to try and use
the tremendous firepower of the artillery as a substirute for diminished
infantry capability. Battles like Delhi, Laswari and Assaye were character-
ized by an abundance of Maratha artillery firepower and limited infantry

vances. The lack of offensive Maratha infantry movement in 1803 is
further contrasted by specific examples at Delhi and Laswari where the

‘The anatomy of victory 295

‘Marathas sought to use their artillery in ambushes to neutralize British
advantage.

“The Maratha Campaigns of 1803 made it apparent to British arGHery-
men that they were understaffed and ‘outgunned’, Artillery dury was
hard, heavy work and the chances of injury from accidents were great.
‘This dangerous duty was made more so in 1803 owing to the Maratha
predilection for counter-battery fie as a means of ensuring domination
Gr the battlefield. Once they had the location and range of an enemy
gun they went out of their way to render it and the crew ‘unserviceable’.
‘The demands of the 1803 Maratha Campaigns had stripped the EIC’s
Presidencies of ther atllerymen. As casualties among artillery personnel
mounted, the shortfalls were felt from the junior tothe senior ranks. Good
‘gunners were dificult to find and to train, Varanasi and Calcutta were
0 short of gunners that invalids had to be mobilized until a new artillery
company could be raised." In September 1803 the Governor-General
teuthorized a bonus of Rs. 100 for each recruit that volunteered for the
artllery2® Lieutenant-Colonel John Horsford ~ General Lake's senior
artillery oficer in the field - knew his craft well and kept himself out of
"unnecessary interservice infighting. So it was something of a noteworthy
‘occasion when Horsford took time out from the war, while encamped at
‘Agra, to sit down and address a memorial to Lake as C-in-C. He pleaded
the case for an immediate increase in the number of field officers in the
artillery corps Artilery officer, lke their comrades the engineers, were
rightly considered men of science who needed greater training time than
ntry officers. Lake passed the document onto Richard Wellesley and,

by way of omen at Agra, acquired the Maratha artillrymen of the
“Madaghur’ as well a its thirty-two guns ~ thanks to the negotiations of
“Afeul the Tindal’

“The ultimate case against technological determination as an explant-
tion for British victory should be strengthened with the observation that
wars hed their outcome guaranteed by technological superiority, then
the Marathas should have won the warin 1803 owing to their superior ar-
tillery frepower. And itis somewhat discouraging to think that Western
military culture remains so arrogant as to believe that the outcome of
‘wars is determined by the technical quality of weapons. As we have seen
jn Arthur Wellesey’s comments on the quality of Maratha guns, there
‘was a plating inconsistency between the historic record and any mod-
fem pronouncement thatthe British had superior artillery. The theory of
“technological determination’, or in this ease the specifi belief thatthe
British had superior artilery remains a popular explanation for British

Ai Banaras, Benes

