282 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

stealth you depended on to Reep you alive in combat. An absentee patron
with cold detachment, or in a rash moment of tying to seek revenge,
might order a battalion to fight to the death. But a serving field officer,
who realized the value of his troops, was less likely to squander his men
foolishly.

For the Maratha sepoys it was an era of loyalty to one’s officer leaders
rather than an age of political indoctrination based on higher callings toa
country; that was yet to come, The concept of being ‘in service’ seemed
to fall back upon the more traditional kinship patterns common to the
military labour markets found in South Asian history. Consequently, after
offices learned of their opportunities to ‘go over’ with their men, many
sepoys saw their survival and income as tied to their oficers so they went
‘over with them in an act of trust tempered with opportunism. A mutual
symbiosis had developed as the Marathas’ mercenary officers and their
sepoys lived together in the field during years of clan conflicts, such asthe
‘Sindia-Holkar war. They hed depended upon each other for survival and
ina sense they had each other's best interests in mind. Men like Colonel
‘Sheppherd unknowingly assumed traditional roles inthe military labour
‘market that had characterized South Asia for centuries. He was a British
‘mercenary in Maratha service and many of his men were Rohillas yet
jm brokering employment for his brigade that had served Ambaji Ingia,
‘Sheppherd became another ina historic line of broker/dealers within the
‘South Asian military economy.!™

“The Wellesley administration proved extremely competitive and deficit
spending was an essential military tool in this war. As demonstrated in
the next chapter, the espionage and extent of the buy-outs from sepoy to
(Csin-C serve as the greatest explanation ofhow Sindia's powerful war ma-
chine could be defeated in less than 150 days of campaigning. Commend
and control were shattered on an army-ide basis and experienced com-
bat leadership was denied to the ‘regular corps as defections reached a
wholesale evel. Tht the British recruited entre battalions out of Maratha
service, such as those at Agra, should indicate that i is entirely inappro-
priate to talkin terms ofthe ‘destruction’ of Sindias army. The military
assets that the Sindia clan had gathered from the South Asian miliary
‘environment were being recycled and absorbed by the EIC.

‘As forthe Euro-Asian officers refered toa ‘hal-caste', a peculiarly se-
lective form of patriotism was implied in the appeals for ‘Betsh subjects’
to accept the terms of the Proclamation. It was used to court men like
James Skinner, who owed their existence tothe racially oriented gender

\\ imbalance of British colonies in that era. There had been a distinct lack
bf white women and, out on the supposed margins of civilization, these
Europeans bedded Indian women who apparently bore them marvellous

‘Coming in’ 283
ybrid offspring who proved tobe such tenacious and skilled warriors ~
atleast that was the later nineteenth-century romantic rationalization,
But with the 1803 Proclamation these sons of interracial relationships
were being forced to decide between two societies, perhaps not unlike
the Indian diaspora in Western society today. Several decided to honour
theie fathers, a decision which could be underpinned with the teachings
of a male-dominated warrior society. After all, most owed their occupa-
tional identity to their fathers. Like their fathers, they were warriors; their
‘uniforms provided a warrior-caste identification mark recognized in both
British and Indian society. Regardless of religion, they became Britain's
politically sanctioned kzharrvas. Once the terms of Richard Wellesley’s
forthcoming Proclamation were known, Skinner resigned Sindia’sservice
and eventually defected tothe EIC. I was not an act by @ member of an
indigenous elite to gain leverage in what was becoming the politically
dominant society; that is the spin of Cambridge historians who speak
of a ‘collaborationist mentality’ The decision was much more basic.
“These were soldiers - military service was their occupation as well as
their BEsnlk. The British were now the biggest and most dependable
military employers inthe land.

