\

6 — The anatomy of victory

Introduction

“The tradicional picture of British victory in 1803 is that ofa well-iled
and finely nuned military force marching with automaton precision over
the bodies oftheir brave, but nonetheless dead, opponents. The popular
‘iconography is that of the proverbial ‘thin redline’ of British infantry,
ceaselessly pressing forward through the acrid haze of gun smoke ro find
death or gory. The following passage concerning Arthur Welkskys vic-
tory at Assae, from Jac Wedlkrs book Welington in India, indicates the
extent to which nineteenth-cenrury drums-and-trumpets-siye military
history survived intact.

Every solder af he 78th was gant by Matha standards, Tele is were
swinging in unison; 由 ci weapons and bucles were polished and thes bd
feshly whitened. Nobody wh saw this magnificent regiment deliver its fst arr
sauleatAssaye ever forgo it At sry yards from the enemy guns which continued
to fire, they alte as ifon parade, presented thir muskes, fred recovered and
reloaded. Then they went on again wih their bayones gleaming

‘This book, however, has called fora revision of that imagery and the cul-
tural legacy ofthat iconography. Ido not intend to take anything from the
‘bravery ofthe men who stood before the Maratha guns as ther ranks were
thinned by merciless clusters of canister shot. Arthur Wellesley’s perfor-
‘mance under fire ranks as one of the finest displays of personal bravery
{in combat leadership to be found in British history. But I do question the
‘explanations we have received for victories in the 1803 Anglo-Maratha
‘Campaigns and what they have come to mean.

‘This chapter argues thatthe conventional understanding of how Britain
ammained victory in 1803 is incorrect. The documentation and evidence
clearly demonstrate this was not a ‘walk over’. Furthermore, victory
had more to do with espionage and growing British domination of the
South Asian military economy than with superior technology, discipline
or drill. Western explanations for victory were constructed for politi-
‘al as well as cultural reasons and they have been used to underpin

28

Besse

—

‘The anatomy of victory 285

1 cultural domination model for the ‘rise of the West’. Consciously
‘of not, Westerners have distorted South Asian military history and in
‘geting the analysis wrong we have prolonged the process of cultural
imperialism.

Explaining the British victories of 1803

“The evidence id out in chs volume and the subsequent reasoning leads
to one inescapable question: if the Marathas were old hands at infantry
‘warfare and their military was potentially powerful enough to thwart
British expansion in 1803, how or why were they defeated in two cam-
paigns that lasted less chan five months? Over the years a number of ex-
planations have been offered. Atone time it was popular among Maratha
historians to attribute defeat to deviation from the historic model set by
Shivaji. However, aa we saw in chapter 1, the understanding of Shivaj’s
military has been poor at best. The basis for his kingdom was a chain of
strong forts that lied heavily on conventional infantry for chet ultimate
defence. Shivaj’s mounted arm, composed of highly silcd horsemen of
‘varying descriptions, was used for mobile operations, reconnaissance and
the rapid projection of force to exploit enemy weaknesses. But it was his
regular infantry that gave Shivaji the ability to seize territory and hold it,
forcing the Mughals to formally acknowledge Maratha military poser.
‘The geopolitical reality of having to recognize Shivaji ar hc negotiating
table was the ultimate admission of his conventional military power. Any
explanation for Maratha defeat in 1803 as the result of deviation from
Shivai’s ‘mounted guerrilla strategy” is deficient.

‘The vast majority of popular explanations for Maratha defeat can be
summarized in four points offered by Stewart Gordon Interestingly
enough the four points tend to follow a pattern, not of Maratha weak-
nesses or failures, but rather of alleged British strengths. This one-sided
‘explanation process suggests that the historic reasoning and evidence have
been stacked towards a preferred or predetermined outcome that implies
the British were building from strength to strength.? It therefore should
‘come as no surprise that the four areas offered as ‘explanations fr victory’
tend to support cultural domination. The four common explanations
are:

+ The momentum of British victory in the Napoleonic Wars

+ Superior British training, discipline and drill

+ Superior British artillery

+ Superior British credit

“To assess the validity of these four points, let us consider them on an
individual basis.

