298 。 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for In

“The gun metal is composition of brass and iron: the cylinder smooth 2s glass,
and formed of metal ofa dissin quay: vent of solid iron, and gun made afer
the English model

“The advantages of the Asiatic ordnance are snength and lightness. In strength
equal to iron ordnance. In lightness less than bras. In prof of the later postion
‘three pounder ofthe above consistency, proved at Woolwich, weighed 2 cw,”
3qm. and 1 Ib: an English 3 pounder weighs 3 cymr being a difference in metal
(of 27 Ibs, The advantages in respect to weight are of the greatest importance:
viz, facility of movement, ight and easy exercise in he field and in Barrison and
‘having a consequent sang both in men and horses. On shipboard a reduction
‘of one-fourth to one-fifth in weight of metal must be of incalculable service.

Is notorious to ofcers who have seen much service that brass guns ae, owing
to thei fsbiliry, often rendered inthe field and in batteries totally unserviceable.
From the running and meting of the guns, increase of windage, cc. the shot is
fired without a certainty of diection or distance and hence itis evident that a
"peas train’ ofarolery can never be relied on

‘oat The necesticy of resorting to brass guns with iron cylinders fr all services
by sea and land sw recommended by Lieut-Col, Constable appears deserving the
serious attention ofthe British Government. J.

However, there would be an entire series of problems if the British set
about any large-scale replacement oftheir existing artillery pieces. Cost,
production facilities, delivery dates and ammunition supply requirements
‘were all very real worries if modernization were attempted on a grand
seale, It would be an enormous logistical problem and who would pay
the bill? Some members of the Board of Ordnance preferred not to think
bout such # massive undertaking. Perhaps it was best to consider

ternative ways to maximize the effectiveness of artillery pieces already in

service, The answer to increasing effectiveness ~ as opposed to a solution
for problems of mobility, longevity and durability ~ was to try chang-
ing the nature of ammunition. There follows an extract of a letter from
the EICS Court of Directors, dated 29 April 1808, to Lord Minto, then
Governor-General in Bengal. It refers to George Constable returning to
India as an authority on the deadly new artillery shells championed by
Henry Shrapnel (1761-1842) and destined to change the nomenclature
of wa

{In our leter ofthe 2nd of May, 1806, you were informed that we bad shipped
for your presidency a quantity of shells of a new and improved construction, for
the use of field artillery; and as we conceive that the effect of these shell would
bebeater appreciated were there an oficer on the spot experimentally acquainted
wi ther constuction, to be occasionally advised with and consulted, and who

‘also be able to instruct others in their use, we recommend to your natice

* ext =bundred weight! g¢ = quarter (2818)

Se

‘The anatomy of victory 299

‘Major Constable, belonging to the corps ofartilery on your establishment, who,
‘during his stay in England, has been employed under the orders of his Mai
‘board of ordnance, and has therefore acquired such a knowledge ofthe principles
ofthe construction ofthese shell, and ofthe improvements lately introduced into
the Royal Arsenal at Woolwich, as to render him well qualified for the purpose
fbove-mentioned. Major Constable has also evinced a laudable zeal in having
Suecessfllyinroduced ino the Royal Arsenal the Asiatic mode of casting brass
‘ordnance, and we direct that you communicate to him our approbation of his
‘conduct ia this respec.

‘We do know that Constable returned to Bengal in the Hugh Inglis having
received orders to ‘proceed to Allahabed where he pracised and exercised
the artillery corps in Colonel Shrapnels experimental shot and shells the
principles of which he had acquired ofthat judicious and scientific officer
wbikstin England’. The British had seen the undeniable merits of South
‘Asian laminated arillery systems but opted for Shrapne!’s projectiles as
a cost-effective means of upgrading the lethality of their existing artillery.

“The Marathas had embraced artilery as the result of their military
evolution and not from any perception ofa military revolution. Muzzle~
loading smooth-bore arillery was old but effective design technology. In
‘order to face large enemy armies, lay siege to fortresses and hold iso-
lated outposts, the Marathas saw a need to incorporate more cennon
as force-multplers. On a cultural basis they did not advocate artillery
predominance for reasons of technological determination. They did not
affix chauvinistic theories of scientific or cultural superiority to ther mil-
itary evolution, Maratha artillery proficiency evolved from the domestic
farms races that characterized nucleated warlord environments and the
‘Marathas? competitive position in the South Asian military economy. If
‘we are looking for reasons as to how or why the British triumphed mili-
tarly over the Marathas in 1803, we have to look to something other than
artillery superiority as an explanation. There is no credible evidence that
the British possessed artilery parity, let alone superiority, in the 1803
‘Anglo-Maratha Campaigns.

‘Superior British credit

‘Asin any other economic market place, there were some amazing oppor-
tunities within the South Asian military economy, which only presented
themselves to players who could afford to indulge in economies of scale,
"To deliver a victory British commanders were authorized to buy out mili
tary forces or hire them on credit underwritten by the EIC. The promises
‘of pay were enough to lure away entire battalions who had seen Maratha
leaders stripped oftheir capital and credibility. For their part many of the

