296 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

victory. That an Asian enemy could defy the stereotyping of Western mil-
itary culture remains «point of bitterness forthe ethnocentric. Given this
‘credibility impasse" it seems appropriate to argue the point of Maratha
technological superiority from a different position.

‘Major George Constable* was one of Britnn’s leading experts on
general-purpose fed artillery in India during the 1803 campaigns. In pre-
vious years he had seen extensive service in Bengal and Awadh. Judging
{rom his favourable interaction with South Asian gun crews, particularly
during his years of Bengal field trials and gunnery instruction, he had
developed a respect for the capabilities of South Asian gunners. George
‘Constable saw the overwhelming performance of the Maratha guns in
1803 and that inspired him to take particularly detailed notes when
he inventoried caprured Maratha guns. He realized that those Maratha
‘guns with laminated iron and brass barrels were far superior to any-

‘The anatomy of victory 297

of men required to manhandle the piece under batdefild conditions
‘where survival might depend on movement.

“The laminated barre, consisting ofan interior iron-bore cylinder with
a brass sleve cast over it, was 2 major design improvement. The inner
liner was iron and tha allowed extended barrel ife, but the supporting or
exterior barrel sleve was bras, which reduced weight. The brass sleeve
also proved sufficiently ‘las’ to minimize the potential threat posed
by barrel brideness,hailin casting laws and crystalline-like fractures
sociated with manufacturing iron cannon barrels. George Constable
‘knew that the Marathas ‘bar guns’ were of superior design and that
Britain might do well ro copy them. But he was also representative of
those dynamic EIC officers who realized that technical discourse con-
cerning design principles might not be sufficient to mocivate action back
in England. This was especially true of anything that might change pro-
ccurement or production. He effectively argued thathe should be seconded

thing Britain possessed, Often described as ‘bar guns’ owing to their
interior hexagonal bore cylinder being constructed from longitudinally
welded iron or steel bars, these specialized cannon barrels represented
advanced weapons technology possessing a key advantage over British
1 ordnance.

from the Bengal Arillery to England's Board of Ordnance to conduct
‘tals on this construction technique and assess its viability for the ptr
poses of British manufacturing. In other words, he convinced the EIC
and the ordnance establishment that this system was so superior that

Generally speaking, an iron barrel was subject to much less internal
damage or wear and tear during fring owing tothe hardness of ron com-
pared to brass. When loaded, shot resting in the bore was indirect contact
with the barrels interior. This metal-to-metal contact was the source of
significant barrel erosion during fring. The relative lifespan of an iron
barrel was also superior fr fring ‘fixed’ or ‘semi-ixed’ rounds in which
sheet metal bands fixed the projectile to a wooden sabot. The wooden
sabot, attached to the projectile asa gas-sel, was manufactured to ft the
bore of the gun fany tightly to derive maximum advantage from the gas
pressure generated by the rapidly burning black powder charge 3 The
sheet-metal bands often scored the interior of brass bores and repeated
fring shortened the brass barrels life and accuracy considerably. Many
‘gunners preferred iron barel for repeated fring. But iron barrels were a
problem for two reasons. Cast-iron barrels could become britle and hair
line fractures could worsen and ultimately lead to barrel separations and
explosions under repeated high-pressure loads. A greater problem with
iron barrels, for daily field service, was ther weight, [ron gun tubes out-
weighed brass barrels and weight was a logistical consideration of major
proportion. Weightafected the numberof guns you carried ino the field,
the size and ype of gun carriage, the numberof draught animals, the vol-

Nm of fodder required to feed the transport animals snd the number

* Later, Liewenant Colonel George Constable,

the British should try to copy it to see ifit might better meet the needs
‘of their military forces, The ‘East India Military Calendar’ described it
hus:

jam 1806 Lieut-Col. Constable obtained permission ofthe court of directors to
puthimself under the control ofthe Board of Ordnance, (the Marquis of Hastings
{hen Master-Gen.) to forge and cast ordnance on the same principe s manufac-
tured in Asia, and taken mr Allygurh, Delhi, Agra and Laswarree. From having
been a member ofa committe forthe survey ofall the eapeured guns and stores,
ce, he obetined a thorough knowledge ofthe enemy's brass orinance with iron
‘jlnders, heir nature, properties, and formation, possessing advantage and su
erioriy wer the guns of Europe. In this object he succeeded, after experiencing
Fnumerabl difficulties, but which he was enabled to surmount through the a
sistance ofthe Board of Ordoance, and under the auspices of General Sir Thomas
‘Blomfield, who furnished him with material from Woolwich. The guns were cast
by Lieut. Cal. Constable in London, put to proof, and surveyed by a committee
‘of arillery Seld-officers at Wootwich, andthe thanks ofthe Honourable Board
‘of Ordnance were conveyed to him for his erouble.””

‘The significance of the Maratha laminated guns was summarized in «
‘Description of Brass Guns with iron cylinders as manufactured in Asia
and cast in England in 1806 under the direction of Lieut-Col. George
Constable of the Regiment of Bengal Artillery, by the order of the
Honourable Board of Ordnance, the Marquis of Hastings then Master
General.”
