292 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

alloys and basic metalworking techniques. In terms of thet artlerys

modernig the Marathas benefited from the fact har eighteenth-century

European artillery science was relatively primitive and static. Muzzle-

loading smooth-bore (MLSB) artillery was based on weapons principles

that had remained vireually unchanged for almost 300 years and were

known across Europe and Asia. The Marathas faced no technological

hurdle of competition, in the form of high technology or new technol

gy to compete with or surpass the quality of British artilery Several

basic factors in MLSB artillery remained virtually unchanged until the

decline of hat weapon inthe latter haf of the nineteenth century. These

‘factors’ might be said to have included:

+ the metallurgy of construction materials

+ the fabrication techniques

«+ the physical laws governing mobility

«+ the chemical nanure of propellants

+ the design and configuration of projectiles

+ the projectiles’ Kinetic energy transfer potential and is ballistic ramifi-
cations

Claims of Western technical superiority in a major weapons production

sector that sulfered from comparative stagnation, for three centuries, re

‘main vehement but hollow.

“The capture of small casting centres with one or two furnaces and mo
to four casting pits, during the period from 1800 to 1803, deceived some
foreign observers into thinking that South Asian production capacity was
Jow.9 They did not consider thatthe variety and number of casting centres,
was far greater than in European countries. The accumulative production,
level of South Asian foundries became apparent when the five months of
‘campaigning against the Marathas in 1603 resulted in the caprure of an
«estimated 1,000 pieces ofarGlery'9 In writing to John Malcolm, Arthur
‘Wellesley let it be known chat a great number of the Maratha guns were
indeed superior to anything the British or EIC armies possessed. ‘Colonel
‘Close will have informed you of our victory on the 23rd (Assaye]. Our
loss has been very severe; but we have got more than 90 guns, 70 of which
ae the finest brass ordnance Ihave eyer scen

‘Arthur Wellesley had seen the superiority of Maratha artillery at Assaye
and almost a year after the bate he wrote a letter indicating he had re
vised his thinking on the ability of Maratha infantry and their ardlcry
in particular, His letter noted that ‘all’ the Marathas seemed to pos-
sess arillery so powerful that it rendered the holding of British positions
\in the field as untenable. A transformation had taken place. No longer
‘Arthur Wellesiey the innocent as authority, this was the voice of experi-
‘ence, having sustained more than 33 per cent casualties in the attack

‘The anatomy of victory 293

con Sindias camp at Assaye.!? He wrote the following paragraph to
Colonel Murray almost a year afer the near-run barde of 23 September
1803:

‘You must by all means avoid allowing him to attack you with his infantry. Theres
no position a which you could maintain your camp against such powerful arillry
{val the Marhatta have, Ifyou should not hear oftheir approach until they are
‘lore to you and coming to attack you, it would be beter ro secure your baggage
in any manner, end move out to attack hem Do not allow them to attack you in
‘your camp, on any accounc

Ironically the experience at Assaye and al this attention to artillery may
have left Arthur Wellesley better equipped for one of the jobs he later held
in England - Master-General of Ordnance.”

Following the Batle of Laswari, C-in-C Gerard Lake, who had been
con the receiving end of artillery in several wars, sent a secret dispatch
to Governor-General Richard Wellesley. In forty years of soldiering Lake
bad faced death many times on foreign battlefields. Not even the pound-
inghe tookat Yorktown could measure up to whathe enduredat thehands
‘of Sindia batalions. His encounter with massed batteries at Delhi and
{Laswari had made him think twice about his own mortality. South Asian
{gunners in Maratha service had reduced him to prayers for his furure

safety.

“These battalions are most uncommonly well appointed, have 9 most numerous
ameoy as well served as they possibly can be, the gunners standing to their
guns until killed by the bayonet. All he sepoys ofthe enemy behaved exceedingly
fell... T never vas in so severe a business in my life, and pray God f never
may bein such a situation again, Theie army is better appointed than ours; no
‘expense is spared whatever, and they have thee times the number of men to 8
[pun we have. Their bullock, of which they have many more than we have, are
ofa very superior sort, All dheir men knapsacks and baggage are carried upon
‘camels, by which means they ean march double the distance... These fellows
ought ike devils, or rather heroes, and had we not made a disposition for artack
ina style that we should have done against the most formidable army we could
‘have been opposed to, I verily believe, fom the postion they had taken, we might
have failed

In 1803, quick-firing breech-loading guns were less than three gen-
‘erations away.'5 The Marathas were ahead of the learning curve in
‘putting greeter tactical emphasis on artillery fring huge numbers of anti
‘personnel projectiles. Western historians are uncomfortable with the idea
fof South Asian leadership in military science but that is what Maratha
‘artillery doctrine represented. Using a greater volume of artillery fire to

* Appointed on 26 December 1818.
