310 。 The Angio-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest br India

at seeing that his disoussions with Mercer and Ahmuty had not fallen on
deaf ears,

‘Two or three days after had signed all the articles of agreement Mr Mercer
‘ceived the Proclamation of the Governor General in Council, of 29dh August
1803 and on delivering me some copies to be Sent into the Marhatta Country,
the mentioned, that ss my provision had been already seted, the Proclamation
then received would enable the Officers of my Batalion to be provided for.

Foreseeing the need for a military presence to mop u tion gen-
crated by Shamahir Hutedu Akmuty and Merce rgd edb
remain in service to Himmat. Once again Mieselbach was more valuable
right where he was. Ifthe Colonel had opted to ‘come in’ - claiming his
‘pension and immediately retiring as permitted under the Proclamation ~
the British would have lost their continuing voice of influence in local
affairs as well a a battalion that could be used to facilitate the strategy of
containment; at that time Dethi had yet tobe captured, On 16 September
1803 a British detachment under Lieutenant-Colonel Powel linked up
ith Mieselbach’s men and pressed the attack against the rebel forces of
Shamshir Bahadur who was driven from the field after what was termed
“feeble resistance’. Mieselbach had initiated, managed and delivered a

pola victory, capping achievement by inflicting ay dee
‘on the rebel faction, 四 .

Conclusion

‘This chapter has been dedicated to examining the four explanations usu-
ay ofr fr Beh victory in the 803 Anglos Ao Campi,
“They were assessed with the following findings:

(1) There is no evidence that British success in 1803 resulted from ‘the
‘omentum of Bridsh victory’; indeed the entire supposition of momen-
‘um is questionable given an overview of Britains colonial wars 1792
1815. Future historians attempting to validate the theory in the context
‘of the greater Napoleonic stmggle will have to address the issue of how
such momentum if it ever existed in a pre-1803 context, was regeined
following the 1802 Peace of Amiens.

(2) As for “superior British training, discipline and drill’ this seems
to have evolved as a nineteenth-century military variation on Social
Darwinism. Ethnocentrc twentieth-century Western military analysts
‘pe the myth alive rather than doing their intellectual duty to expose it as

racist diatnibe. Among those who profited most from sustaining it were
te advocates ofthe so-called European ‘Miltary Revolution’. They made
an unapologetically biased attempt to float technological determination

}

;

‘The anatomy of victory ay)

as a viable explanation for the macro-cycle of European economic as-
‘eendance from 1500-1800. Rather than associate economic domination
with trade-based European economic expansion in global markets and
the displacement of indigenous economies, the group felt compelled to
label the cm as the ‘rise of the West’ and place it in the context of a
military rationalization.

(@) When we come tothe theory of ‘superior British artillery’ in 1803,
ican be categorically said the British lagged behind the Marathas in
‘both the quality and quantity of artillery that they brought into the fil.
‘Beyond that, this book has also argued that the British ran a poor sec-
‘ond to the Marathas in the sophistication oftheir artillery doctrine. The
‘British military ofthat era had a very limited view of the role of artillery
‘on the batdefield, Fire mobility with the cavalrys regimental gallopers
as sd very new, although the formation of designated horse artillery
regiments was fast approaching. The British miliary establishment of
1803 was more keen on the basics of the bayonet for advancing under
fire rather than revising is thinking to see artillery as a dynamic com-
ponent for tactical initiative or strategic advantage. The correspondence
of the Board of Ordnance with the EICS Court of Directors concern-
ing George Constable's work reveals the British military establishment
was under no delusion with regard to the starus ofits weapons’ design
principles. The modern persistence of ‘technological determination’ as
an explanation for British victory is inexcusable given the documenta-
tion chat shows British military authorities of the day were quite wiling
to acknowledge the superiority of specific types of Maratha artillery as
well as its overall quality. The inability of the British to fully read the
evolutionary simplicity of che Maratha artillery or fully extrapolate
theatre-based lessons is reflected in the later rise of the powerful Sikh
artillery and its roe in Anglo-Sikh confit.

(4) The essential point concerning the superiority of British credit is
‘without contention given the global commercial network that the British
‘enjoyed inthe Maratha Campaigns of 1803. Butit remains a qualified ex-
planation for British victory in 1803 owing to the creative ways in which

economic and financial leverage were used. And the linkage of supe-
rior credit with the attainment of Richard Wellesleys military objectives
should not be reduced to an equation of more money = purchasing victory.
“The buying-out of light horse and pindar units struck both Bhonsle and
Sindia, while the purchased defection of the mercenary officer corps and
several regular battalions temporarily crippled Sindia to the point of mak-
ing his an unwinmablc war. On an immediate basis, it reduced the dura-
tion and severity of combat with the Marathas in 1803 by diminishing
the threat level of the ‘regular corps’. Taking entire battalions out of

