304 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

Prohibitions against employing unapproved European mercenary off-
cers in British India and criminal statues against pindari behaviour were
part of the efort to permanently alter the traditional South Asian mi
rmy economy so that it better served the EICS cause. tis doubsful that
the British military writers of the nineteenth century would have readily
seen the assimilation of South Asian military culture in terms of an ime
versible British victory. For them the words ‘British victory’ were defined
indecisive and absolute batefield terms such was the fiction ofimmperial
tmilitary history. Nevertheless, in using economic incentives as 8 means
‘of confit resolution and to control military behaviour ~ buying out op-
position, hiring enemy units and employing enemy officers ~ the British
were shortening the process of military conquest. They were making it
Jess sanguinary by employing non-destructive South Asian means of in-
tegration and incorporation. With all due respect to Colonel Malleson
and his study of ‘decisive batl for contol of colonial India, eal con
trol ultimately had more to do with the British triumph over the South
‘Asian military economy than the efforts of a few white men wearing red
coats.”

Having established that the issue of ‘superior credit’ is without dis-
pute, there remains the question of how it factored into the mechanics
‘of British victory in 1803. As we have seen, Maratha horsemen as well
as regular and iregular infantry were all subject to purchase via contrac
tual offer for continuation oftheir employment in EIC or allied service
(ie. Gokbale and his cavalry, the sepoys at Agra, Colonel Sheppherd'
brigade, etc.). This was in accordance with the prevailing military cu
ture and the historic functioning ofthe South Asian military economy as
1 free-market system in which military goods and services were valued or
priced through an informal competitive bid process analogous to other
‘commodities markets. However, this study has focused on the purchased
defection of mercenary oficersin Maratha service. Purchase heres taken
in the broadest possible context to include outright cash offers for ser-
vice, commutation of pension schemes and offers based on transference
‘of rank as well as continuation of command with specific units brought
‘over as part ofthe defection process The purchased defection of Sindias
mercenary officer corps had a three-fold impect that directly contributed
to Maratha defeat on the battlefield in 1803.

Firs it completely destroyed Sindias command and control capsbility
at the strategic theatre level. Perrons defection set off a chain of events
well calculated to collapse the existing system by depriving it ofthe men
it had evolved to depend upon. The process of eying to rebuild com-
snd and control in the feld during August 1803, as Lake and Wellesley
advanced, meant men were tossed together in temporary positions. There

manned

4
1

‘The anatomy of victory 305

‘was no time to build trust or familiarization with those who now assumed
leadership tiles. The loyalist sardars and European renegades, thrown
into brigade command positions left vacant by the defections, had no
time to fall back and consolidate thei forces under new junior officers
and NCOs. Communication was also adversely affected as the Marathas
scrambled to finda viable means of coordinating their defensive reaction
to British advances in a mult-front war These new men who were sup-
posed to lead had no time to establish a system of regular communication
with their counterparts in other battalions. This process of collapse had
the effec of decapitating what passed as the Maratha regular army by
depriving it of overall command and control.

‘Second, the defections robbed Sindias ‘regular corps’ ofits offensive
potential by depriving it of effective combat leadership under fir. As we
have seen, the British troops in 1803, both European and sepoy, directly
benefited from inspired combat leadership. The degree to which British
officers gave a part of themselves is reflected in their casualty rates. We
Inow from extensive combat studies in wentieth-century military staff
colleges thatthe role ofthe individual infantry leader is crucial tothe b
Uefild performance of subordinate troops. With the departure oftheir
‘usual officers, Maratha sepoy morale suffered a devastating blow. The
defections also meant fewer officers per battalion, therefore less effective
leadership ratios as calculated by the numberof enlisted men per officer.
‘The presence of unproven ersatz officers andior light horse leaders sec-
edcd enaby ofcers mean te pong of indus of unproven
to say nothing of undetermined bravery ~ in the context of com-
barn fantry leadership under fie. The later point compounded the fallin
‘morale wth a liability factor that compromised the dependability of nor-
mally steadfast battalions. Without dependable infantry Sindia's tactical
options became much more limited.

‘That partially accounts for the degree to which artillery was the main-
stay of Maratha resistance at Assaye, Delhi and Laswari. Maratha ar
silerymen found strength in their massive firepower and at Laswari the
additional comfort of the temporary shelter offered by an anchored line
of guns. Their cannon were a reassuring presence as they blew holes
in the British formations that opposed them. A gun crew, particularly
‘one that was stationary, was a team that functioned with a lesser de-
‘ree of personal leadership than infantry ofthe line. Gunners were often
‘ross-trained and could assume different duties within the team as re
quired. Given the order to load and fire at will the arillerymen pro-
‘ceeded with their uy, often continuing until bayoneted, as testified to by
Cin-C General Lake. Maratha artilery doctrine, with its volume of fire
dogmatism, could not help but prove devastating to British infantry given

