308 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest fr India

started, did so because they realy had no choice. It was not safe for them
to stay with che Marathas past 29 August 1803 as anti-foreign senti-
‘ment was rampant and operatives like Poblman, who refused to fight
in the Deccan, were incarcerated. Mieselbach, although not unique
among those mercenaries who were actively spying before 1803, had
been a well-documented source of excellent intelligence since 1801, The
Colonel was a battalion commander in Bundlekund, which was con-
sidered as strategic by the British for the purposes of containing the
Marathas’ northern access routes. And although the details of British
miiary operations in Bundlekund have been omited from this book, it
issafe to say that military requirements to annex that region were directly
reduced asthe result of Mieselbach’s actions. The Colonel was technically
tone of Ambaji Inglia's men but he had been seconded by the Marathas
and assigned with his battalion to work with the regional ruler Himmat*
Bahadur Gosavi.™ This was logical trade-offsince the Marathas needed
significant numbers of Himmat Bahadurs Ghosseins in Bundlekund as
diary and proxy troops to supplement a number of positions there,
‘which the Marathas deemed ro be vulnerable.

Colonel Miselbach soon endeared himself to Himmat Bahadur and
became his closest political advisor as well as head of is personal honour
uardL Te was quite fashionable to have foreign mercenary troops in that
‘ole - after all, Daulat Reo had Perron. Within his trusted advisory po-
sicion, Mieselbach worked closely under the Bengal government's direc-
tion, Asan intelligence operative he was much more proactive than those
rmercenaries at battalion level who were passive intelligence gatherers, ears
‘othe ground you wil Mieselbach’s immediate handler, on behalfof the
EIC, was the District Collector Mr Richard Ahmury But
remained extremely close to Richard Wellesley st
directly to Richard's brother Henry Wellesley ~ Lieutenant-Governor of
the Ceded Districts.

During 1802 Himmat Bahadur was preoccupied with the chaos in
Pune as the Holkar-Sindia war could have gone either way and Himmat
did not want to be caught out in the shifting alliances. Ahmuty applied
pressure to Mieselbach to use the distraction to get Himmat Bahadur
to agree to a Subsidiary Treaty Alliance with the Britsh Although the
bid was not successful in 1807 the arguments put forward by Mieselbach
gave Himmat Bahadur cause to listen to him as a voice of reason or
counter-pose to those sardars who advocated war. The Colonels calming
influence helped him gan increasing access to the effars of Bundlekund,

On 1 June 1803 he alerted the Brits ro a proposed coaion of Holla,

+ Aka Hinmant

sien us

ja

tinct

i

|

‘The anatomy of victory 309

Sindia and Ambaj Inga. Mieselbach’s instructions were to remain in
position and monitor the reactions of the local jeaders35 Ahmuty down-
played the chances of a coalition but urged Mieselbach to stay on top
of events ~the British were still hoping to annex the region and convert
it imo a subservient buffer state. In July 1803, as the Colonel ascer-
‘ined the felings of the local leaders in Bundlekund to British control,
‘Ahmuty held out the offer ofa direct monetary reward for Mieselbach’s
continuing efforts* He was worth far more to the British if he re-
‘mained in place rather than ‘coming in the following month under the
Proclamation.

‘The British gamble, to leave Mieselbach in place asa covert operative,
proved a masterstroke. As Sindia and Bhonsle committed to war against
the British, Himmat Bahadur granted full treary-negotiating powers to
‘Colonel Mieselbach and Haji Huddin Khan.* On 2 September 1803, the
newly sworn envoys travelled to Shahpur on the banks of the Yamuna
River to meet Richard Ahmuty and his associate Mr Mercer. Later the
Colonel admitted that he had received a counter-offer from Himmars
rival Shamshir Bahadur While camped at Culiniur en route to the
‘Yamuna River meeting, Shamshir had sent a messenger to Mieselbach,
He offered Re. | lakh and an increased jaidad ifthe Colonel would defect
to the rebel cause with his troops 37 Mieselbach's loyalty to the British
did not waver. In short order, using his pre-approved signing authority
from Himmat, he arranged a provisional treaty inviting the British to cn-
ter Bundlekund. In return for the agreement, Himmat Bahadur was to
receive a Britsh-sanctioned aigdin Bundlekund with an annul revenue
return of Rs. 20 lakhs.

‘The jaidad negotiations gave Colonel Mieselbach cause to consider
his personal duty to his men and their fate in view of the treaty sere-
‘ment. Without 由 cir own jaidad provisions they would have no income
or employment. Mieselbach felt a particular obligation to his battalion
officers who ensured his safety during the preceding months of secret
negotiations. The Colone! bargained hard for their fair treatment under
the Proclamation even though it had yet to find its way to Bundlekund.
Like other mercenaries, he had known for quite some time that a deal
was in the works. As a valuable intelligence agent he slso knew be would
be looked after - his silence would have to be purchased. However, he
‘made Mercer and Ahmuty aware that by arranging the subjugation of
Bundlekund, including his battalion's perghannas, he was acting against
hisbattalion’s best interests. The Colonel stood fast and in his subsequent
affidavit, led withthe EIC's Court of Directors, he made known his relief

+ Abs Wajehooddeen Khan Aka Shumshee, Shumshir,Shamsheer, Shamdher

