302 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contest for India

imeligence systems. These acquisitions all pointed to organizational
gains leveraged through superior financial networking. ‘The EIC pos-
sessed unparalleled access to international markets. Additional opium
‘could be sifted to Canton and bullion could be diverted from the Cl
trade en route to London. The dominant player in the South Asian mi
itary economy was now the EIC as the local representative of a
stock multinational functioning in England, the Persian Gulf South Asia,
(including Sri Lanka), China and Malaysia. The sepoys who filled the
military labour market were being funnelled into EIC armies for service
from Egypt tothe Philippines. Perhaps the EIC as a corporate entity was
‘beter suited than the British government to seeing the value of human
and material resources. This was not so much the Europeanization or for-
cign control ofthe South Asian military economy as 让 was the capitulation,
of that market to the embryonic forces of globalization. The globalization
‘of EIC business demanded additional military growth to provide physical
security and the vast dimensions ofthe EIC' Asian military commitment
‘generated additional economic growth in British logistical end financial
services. This was an expanding British network that diversified ts riskby
‘trading in many countries and economies around the world, There was
no way for the Marathas to sabotage the money pump that fed Richard
Wellesley the cash he spent creatively in his war effort.
‘The East India Company had superior access to credit and specie from
the following sources:
+ taxes and tariffs collected in India by the EIC
+ trade revenues generated within India by the EIC
+ the liquidation of goods shipped by the EIC from London
+ EIC bullion shipments diverted from China (derived from opium sales)
+ direct Loans in the form of bullion shipments from London to India
+ specie and booty captured from the Marathas
+ loans, ‘donations’ and subsidies, from native allies such as the Nawab
‘of Awadh and the Nizam of Hyderabad
+ loans and ‘subscriptions from private citizens and soldiers
‘The short-term deficit spending that made control possible, when placed
‘on ‘annual return’ ledger sheets, led to demands for the sacking of
Governor-General Richard Wellesley. With George Barlow's eventual ap-
pointment’ as Wellesley’s successor, itbecame official policy torein-in the
jpcnding. Payrlls were cut and budgets were slashed with the result chat
‘many of the Marathas’ military assets were put back on the block for the
\ highest bidder. And, irony of ironies, several of those individual assets
x

* Commas technically followed Richard Welles 8 Governor-General buthe died before
being able uly swwme We duties requied of hi in India.

‘The anatomy of victory 303

‘wound up back in the hands of Maratha sardart. However, there were
provisions and safeguards to prevent the Marathas from regaining major-
ity controling positions in the South Asian military economy. Regional
allisnces proved particularly difficult for the Marathas to rebuild, as the
EIC was a much more appealing ally from the standpoint of its overall
financial stability. The EIC was not likely to demand chauh or tribute
from its allies the way certain Maratha powerbrokers had done.

British domination ofthe military economy, following 1803, meant no
single indigenous power would be able to claim the lion's share of South
‘Asia's military resources. Regional military resistance would be possible
among the Sikhs, Afghans and even the disgruntled Peskwa would offer
1a last gasp of defiance to his subordinate status, but there would be noth

ing on a countrywide scale that one might portray as analogous (0 a
‘modern bid for national liberation. From this point forward the EIC
could, ifit chose to do so, interfere in attempts to raise standing conven-
tional armies of the sort needed to do lasting damage to British power
‘on a subcontinental basis. By the time of the Anglo-Maratha and Pindari
War (1817-19), the remaining Maratha threat had been downgraded in
threat-level status with many pindori bands being classified as criminal
insurgents, Portuguese mercenaries and a number of Euro-Asian officers
attempted to synthesize a conventional response but they could not com:
mand large-scale access to the regular infantry resources as Sindia had
‘done in 1803. Without superior credit systems or access to the greater
‘South Asian miliary economy, that the British had come to dominate, the
‘Maratha military response in 1817 became largely ineffective, One could
argue thatthe Anglo-Maratha and Pindari War of 1817-19 indicated the
EIC did not ‘get it right” in 1803 and failed to halt the need for fur-
ther battles. But evidence suggests that the Maratha military challenge of
1817 was not a threat to EIC expansion - that was largely accomplished.
Rather, the final Maratha war was a mopping-up operation designed to
‘complete the EIC’s unfinished expansion of 1803-5, which had been cut
shortby London’s budgetary worries about balancing Richard Wellesley’s
deficits against funding needed for the Napoleonic Wars. Central India
fell to the EIC as an overdue military inheritance as opposed to covered
‘economic objective. As for the later Sikh challenge to British authority, it
was conventional and reminiscent of 1803 in terms of arillery power and
infantry capability2? But British positioning in the North Indian labour
‘market and an easily defined strategy of containment meant this was ge-
‘graphically condemned to being a limited regional challenge. An inde-
pendent Punjab was conceivably possible, but by 1845-9 no indigenous
South Asian military power was going to drive the British back to what
had been the original coastal enclaves of che EIC’s three Presidencies.

