306 The Anglo-Maratha Campaigns and the Contes for India

the tactics of the day. And it can be argued that the prevailing infantry
tactics were greatly responsible for the high British officer casualty rates
1s the Maratha gun crews only had to waie for their targets tobe thrown at
them.

‘The defensive spirit of Sindia's men would have been bolstered by their
proximity to the artillery when they were defending their artillery lines.
‘Bur that would not be adequate tactical compensation for their loss of off-
‘cer leadership when they needed to go on the offensive. The infantryman
‘of that era was not trained as an independent thinker with discretionary
judgement, He was specifically trained as an automaton in order that hi
actions might be delivered in unison as part of the orchestra of fire that
was conducted and led by his officers. Without their accustomed officers,
these infantry units could not achieve peak proficiency on the attack, par-
ticularly if replacement officers did not situate themselves directly at the
head of a body of men and lead them forward. The absence of Maratha
infantry offensives in this war, or for that matter effectively controlled
‘counter-offensives at Assaye and Delhi, underscored the absence of de-
<isive combat leadership. Alighar and Agra were different in that they
represented the defence of a fortified position. But Assaye, Delhi and
aswari represented a waste of fine Maratha infantry in that their tactical
potential was denied. Without effective combat leadership, Sindia's bar-
talions were relegated to an increasingly defensive role and he ultimately
forfeited the strategic option of an offensive war,

‘Third, the defections represented an insurmountable intelligence loss.
‘The amount as well as the value of intelligence sold out tothe British was
‘beyond all calculation. How do you compensate for the oss of informa-
tion concerning the location of your troops, the quantity of food rations
you have on hand, the distribution of your ammunition? The intelligence
foss occurred on the tactical level with men like Lucan at Alighar and on
the strategic level with Perron. Many armies would not be able to sustain
the loss of their C-in-C on the eve oftheir first majorbattle ofa
and his ADC Beckett rode away rom Coel carrying political,
‘economic intelligence of the highest magnitude. Aside from knowing who
‘was Sindia’s greatest Maratha rival and how many guns the Marathas pos-
sessed, they knew which battalions were likely to follow their defecting
officers. Perron and Beckett also carried the all-important revenue data
that Richard Wellesley needed to defend himself against London's charges,
of waging an unnecessary and unaffordable war. But Perron's departure
posed a second problem beyond the turning over of brigade ledgers and
revenue accounts. There was the secondary damage to the Marathas of

ior knowing the extent of disclosure and collaboration. Who had helped
Perron and the other foreign officers? Were all the sardars who worked

“The anatomy of victory 307

‘with foreigners compromised? It was the ‘not knowing’ that triggered a
secondary flood of activity to minimize potential damage. Over-reaction
itself became an enemy as purges were conducted and mistrust spread
within Sindia’s durbar. Was Ghatke to be crusted with any new informa-
tion iRonon as his brigade commander had ‘gone over’? Was Ambaii
stepping into the breach to save Sindia by purchasing the Soubaship of
Hindustan or preparing to carve out another puppet state as Peshwa Baji
Rao II had apparently done? Had Ambaj already paved the way for his
‘own defection through the efforts of Colonel Shepherd? These were
‘eal questions for what remained of Sindias durbar. As the British reaped
their triple bounty of military, political and economic intelligence, they
‘were able to construct a blueprint to better understand the functioning
of Sindias North Indian administration and its army. By the time the
1803 campaigns drew to a close, they were in an ideal position to pick
and choose which components they wished to salvage,

‘The British had a head start on how to use thei intelligence system for
‘maximum political gain and not all their good forrune was owed to the
Proclamation’s seemingly serendipitous windfall. In engineering an intel-
Jigence system that would assist them in achieving supremacy, the British
used a number of their mercenary contacts to actively seer the course of
politcal events. One of the most fascinating examples of that power was
toe found in the case of Colonel J. F. Mieselbach* who was responsible
for handling the EIC’s buy-out of a Maratha ally for a guaranteed jaidad
yielding annual revenues of Rs, 20 lakhs. Like many of the mercenaries,
placed in the role of spy, Mieselbach later had reason to complain about
his own pension settlement when the budget-conscious administration of
‘Richard Welesley’s successor, Governor-General George Barlow, tried ro
reduce pension entitlements as a cost-cutting move. The Colonel was one
‘of the mercenaries listed in EIC ledgers as a ‘Class 1 pension claimant,
‘meaning he had not just defected under recognized terms but rather
had done something so special he was to be granted maximum finan-
ial benefits." Mieselbach’s successful appeal, to be kept on a pension at
Rs. 1,000 per month, went all the way to the EICS Court of Directors.”*
In reviewing their extensive official files, which documented and veri-
fied the Colonel's claim, the EIC acknowledged chat they had in effect
purchased Bundlekund with their financial line of credic

Governor-General Barlow was forced to admit that the Colonel had
attached himself to the BIC’s interests, ‘not only before the Proclamation
‘was promulgated but before the War with the Marhattas commenced’?
Mieselbach argued chat those mercenaries, who ‘came in’ after the war

* Aka Mieseack, Meselbeck

