328 Appendix V

1 perfectly adequate generic term to use when referring tothe historic
military employment of millions of men who have plied their trade in
times of peace and war. Within Maratha history we can broadly apply
the term mercenary to any group of independent military entrepreneurs
with no particular connotation as far as clan, caste, colour, race religion
or ethnicity,

Historically speaking, the South Asian military economy thrived on
the perception of physical security as wel as its antithesis - physical inse-
‘curity, Armies with militarily specific human resource requirements did
not always have the option of conscription and many South Asian armies
resorted to hiring from existing labour pools as found in military labour
‘markets, The contractual underpinning of mercenary employment was
mie simple. Military service for reward, or remuneration, was predi-
cated on the common understanding that military labour contracts, be
they written, verbal or implied, were lke civilian labour contracts. One
party offered a service (worl/laboutlsoldiering) and the other party uti-
lized it, o retained the option on ip in exchange for something of value.
Pethaps the straightforward nature of contractual sevice reduced sec-
tarian tendencies within South Asian military history. Aurangzeb, often
described asthe most ardent Mustim emperor of the Mughal dynasty,
showed a consistent wilingness to employ Hindu Rajput generals atthe
highest operational level of cheat command. Aurangzeb even selected
them to lead campaigns against their fellow Hindus- enemies lke Shivaji

‘The extensive use of mercenaries by the Marathas from 1600 to
1800 coincided with their politcal ascendancy but it also paralleled the
extensive employment of mercenaries in Western nations, Field
‘Marshal Lord Carver cautioned his readers thatthe national heritage of
the Britsh Army was much more short-lived than they might think. Asre-
cently as 1625 ithad sed impressment to obtain solders, but the nucleus
of Britain's army was mercenary. Veterans of French, Dutch, Swedish
and Spanish service were common in the seventeenth century and the
‘preparations for war in 1756 included a fierce debate on whether to en-
trust the fate of England to mercenaries, particularly those from Hanover
and Hesse” Mercenary units were employed by the British around the
‘world, from India to Amerie, but tei service in the American Revolu-
tionary War (circa 1776) was particularly noteworthy. We tend to forget
the degree to which Germany's eighteench-century military labour mar-
ket, as characterized by Hessian troops for hire, had enabled the British
で fight wars of a global dimension in that er." But not all German,

Tie Bet were sid to have pid 3,191,000 to Frederick Toe the we of 22,000,
Ha Ame

‘The Mamher employment of mercenaries 329

‘mercenaries were contractually bound to British employment during the
Revolution. The Prussian Baron von Steuben" drilled and disciplined
‘American troops and wrote what became known as the Continental
‘Army's offical drill book. Von Steuben was with the Americans at York
town, a batle where Gerard Lake served in the opposing British trenches
and which was made famous by Cornwallis’ surrender.

“The Marathas, being major consumers as well as ‘drivers’ ofthe South
Asian military economy from 1600 to 1800, were keen to exploit the
military and economic advantages offered by mercenaries. Chapter 1
‘made the case that Marathe military leaders were pragmatic people who
saw the sense in iting well-qualified soldiers to complete the military
tasks at hand. From the Marathas own standpoint, solders were al
‘ways needed to fil various miliary roles and the hiting of mercenaries
(Gouth Asian or European) provided potential solutions that could be
tailored to budgetary limits, In modern terminology one could try and
‘match military requirements with military occupational specialties when
looking for infantry to garrison a fort, offices to lead infantry, or cav-
ly to launch interdiction raids. Mercenary employment was another
‘means of outsourcing military labour requirements and some contractual
‘arrangements probably represented cost-effective compromises. When
volleys of smallarms fire were needed atthe Bate of Debhoi in 1731 (see
‘chapter 1), it made lite difference if Kolis produced those discharges
‘with matchlocks or Marathas with inlocks, The military effect ~ that of
«cloud of smallarms projectiles released on command - was the same.

‘The Marathas’ military needs did not remain static. Certain types of
mercenaries enjoyed popularity cycles in Maratha service at different
times in history and hiring trends could also be linked to major events.
“Take for example the combat leadership vacuum created by the Marathas’
Joss to the Afghans at Panipat in 1761. The horrendous number of deaths
among Maratha forces, in excess of25,000 individuals, created something
of a crisis in military leadership at the junior to middle-ranking officer
level. Many post-Panipat Maratha clan armies lacked an adequate num-
ber of effective and responsible officers. And the period from 1761-1800
also corresponds to the rise in the number of Northern European! and
Euro-Asian! officers in service to the Sindia and Holkar clans as well as
non-Marathas such as the Nizam of Hyderabad.

* Ala Frederick Witiam Auguscs Henry Ferdinand Steuben, born Magdeburg, Pras,
1730.
[Northern European specified here because many of these Europeans were fram Bin,
‘Germany, Holand and France.

! Miltary sevice was socily and culturally acceptable profesion for these solders of
‘rota hentage - men Ue James Shiner

