336 Glossary

‘understanding of the word baita are regional differences in how armies
were paid and compensated, particularly for their time in the field,
For example, some troops that experienced interruptions in their grain
supply while on campaign might have adjustments made in their iona
‘or so-called ‘Torage money’ to allow them to purchase supplementary
rain from local bazaars.

‘beasties: water carriers or water bearers.

‘burkundauce: Colonel Henry Yule and A. C. Burnell in their glossary of
Indian words known as Hobson-Jobson, speak of burkundauce as armed
‘retainers or policemen in service to a civil authority. In British dis-
patches from North India in 1803 the term most often refers to local
‘men armed with matchlocks. They were termed irregulas’ in compar-
ison o uniformly dressed and armed sepoy regulars. Many éurkundauze
were hired to serve in sbundi units (ice sebundi below),

‘campoo: aterm used to describe a Maratha infantry brigade of the type
associated with Mabadji Sindia and Daulat Rao Sindia. In comparison
to similar British forces in 1803, the Maratha campoos were character-
ied by a smaller officer-to-enlisted-man ratio and a greater volume of
organic firepower n the form ofthe Marathas’ more numerous artilery.

chautk: often termed Maratha ‘tribute money’ or tribute payments made
to Maratha overlords. Failure to pay chauth could be interpreted a
a failure to acknowledge the Maratha claim to control a given area.
‘This type of resistance to authority invited retaliatory raiding by the
‘Marathas as they sought to forcibly extract the tribute payment ‘owed?
to them. As a result ofthat rather extortionate alternative means of
revenue collection, chauth has also appeared in many modern glossaries
1s ‘protection money’ but that is a rather pejorative term given the
‘bureaucratic institutionalization of chauch in Maratha history.

chhata: coats of mail used as general-purpose body armour.

chara: an umbrella; however, it was used symbolically to denote or
imply kingship. The chhatra could be found in stylized form in art and
architecture as well.

(Chhatrapari: historically the Marathas reserved this term for thei highest-
ranking leader, their Lord of the Umbrella - King of Kings. It first
gained widespread notoriety as the tte associated with Shiva

«oss (aka hos): 8 unit of linear distance measurement with great regional
variation. Many British sources opt fr the standard of the Bengal Pres-
idency and assign a rough approximation of 2 miles (or 3.2 kilometres)
to the cows. However, any serious attempt to discern precise distances
from historic documents must be based on a common understanding
of which regional cos was being applied at the time of writing.

corsminar: distance (css) markers erected during the Mughal era.

?
i

Glossary 37

dowk: regularly referred to as the ‘country’ postal system — it was perhaps
‘more accurately described in 1803 as a relay system for the forwarding
of goods, information, mail and messages.

ddurbar. usually translated as court ~ asin the ‘court of a ruler’

ring 这 foreigner and used to describe Europeans who were also known
in some older accounts as ‘hat-wearing people’.

sina: this was a so-called ‘camel gun’ ~ a small-bore cannon mounted
‘on the back of a beast of burden such as a camel (aka jejala).

_gorbhandi: small cannons or more precisely mortars from which pebbles
(gar) were fred for close-range anti-personnel application, Pebbles and
stones could be gathered in the field and thet saved the trouble as well
as expense of transporting special-purpose ammunition.

{olundauze: approximately a gunner or cannoneer. The word was reported
to have been derived from a term meaning ‘ball thrower’. Artillerymen
ofthis description should not to be confused with other lower-ranking
‘members of the artilery corps such as ascars (se separate entry).

‘arkarrahs: although often translated as messenger, the term harkarrah
has changed over time and several late twentieth-century texts implied
that harkarahs were spies. The confusion comes from their service in
the field. Moving ahead of advancing armies relaying information and
intelligence, they were vital information links bur they were not spies as
we know them in the context of covert operations. Their garb and/or
badges of rank made many harkarrahs quite distinguishable while in
service to regional armies or the British. Archur Wellesley’s harkarraks
from Mysore readily stood out in the interior of Maharashtra during
1803 and consequently, as Wellsley's trusted messengers, they were
fed misinformation by the Marathas to hamper the British advance.

oeg the compartment or seating arrangement carried on the back
of an elephant. Some regal ceremonial howdaks were bejewelled and
screened, other military howdaks were armoured and defended with
rockets or light artillery. In eary sixteenth-century European accounts
‘hotdahs were sometimes described as ‘castles on the backs of elephants
and rendered as the ‘elephant and castle’ on some military emblems,

‘hundi: a written indigenous financial instrument regularly used for the
transference of money. While some translate this simply as a cheque,
there were differences in negotiable and non-negotiable hundi depend
ing on the issuer and associated financial terms.

Jagr. assigned revenue-producing lands that often became hereditary.
‘The jaghidar or holder ofthe jaghir derived social, political and military
recognition from this reward but it also carried subsequent obligations.
(One could draw a point of parallel evolution between Europe's feudal
system and the Mughals mansabdari system. The revenue generated

