Appendix V

332
would be no chance to collect the British pension offered to them
under terms of Richard Wellesley’s Proclamation. However, if they
resigned Maratha service they had several options, They could retire
from soldering altogether on their new British pension. But, if they
became proactive and ‘brought over’ other troops, or were willing

} to fight their former Maratha employers, they could volunteer for
‘combat and take an EIC army posting and enjoy additonal rewards
as well as the financial security of continuing employment. Granted
there is some irony in speaking of financial security and volunteering
for combat in the same breath - but that was the way mercenaries
viewed thei employment options in that era.

(3) Fear of egal action. British officers such as John Pester believed that
the fear of being labelled traitors influenced some oftheir mercenary
‘opponents to defect before the fighting started (see the entry dated
19 Aug. 1803 as noted in chapter 4), But the degree to which a fear
‘of hanging persuaded men is unknown. The EIC'* finest legal minds
were tasked with trying to ascertain whether or not any recalcitrant
mercenaries may have broken the law by remaining in either Sindi
‘or Bhonsle’ service. Robert Smith, the EIC Advocate General in
Bengal, went so far as to draft a treason warning.’ However, the legal
ception of treason ials was never used; lucrative Proclamation terms,
with minor exceptions, remained virtually open forall ranks and races
throughout the 1803 campaigns. The risk of trying to prosecute men
who had arguably defended the sovereign borders of ‘native powers
was probably unwise. It had not been that long since the British
government had demonstrated its willingness to turn on Governor-
General Warren Hastings for his role in what many opponents termed
‘an ‘illegal war of aggrandizement’.

(4) Fear of detection as spies. As noted elsewhere in this book, several
‘mercenaries were actively serving as British intelligence sources. If
they stayed in service and were identified as spies betraying their
terms of service, they stood a very good chance of being executed by
the Marathas. Sargi Rao Ghatke was among those Maratha leaders
in Sindia’s durbar that considered the option ofa blood purge.

(5) Fear of future incrimination, Some ofthe undecided mercenaries left
afer secing their comrades go. They felt that if they stayed and things
‘did not go well, they might be suspected as turncoats and that might

Sa en ent end we med

|

‘The Maratha’ employment of mercenaries 33

result in their incarceration, This fear was quite real in the Deccan
‘where Pohlman was seized and sent to prison in Ujjain before he had
the opportunity to formerly resign and leave Sindia’s service.

Did the Marathas sow the seeds of their own destruction in 1803 by

using European mercenaries? Well tis true that the Western European

‘mercenaries were particularly prone to changing sides during the 1803

‘Anglo-Maratha Campaigns. Their wilingness to ‘go over’ to the British

side was largely the result fa combination of national, racial, economic

‘and legal reasons outlined above. These factors were consciously em-

bodied in the Proclamation as a dedicated British stratagem to detach

‘the mercenaries as well asthe sepoy battalions from Maratha service (see

‘the Proclamation in appendix mt). Perhaps the question would be better

phrased as, ‘Did the fluid nature of the military labour market, within the

South Asian military economy, leave the Maratha armies susceptible to

subversion?”

‘What was the impact of removing the foreign mercenaries from
‘Maratha service? Did it constitute the reason the Marathas lst the bates
‘of 1803? And on a larger scale, does it explain why the Marathas lost what
amounted to any hope of controling India? This book has presented ev-
idence that the loss of strategic intelligence and tactical leadership under
fire was enough to have deprived the Marathas of any realistic expec-
tation of winning against Lake's Grand Army in Hindustan and Arthur
‘Wellesley’s Army of the Deccan. That argument can be made effectively
‘without the additional factors that included:

+ Colonel Mieselbach’s secret pact and the delivery of Bundlekund;

+ the degree to which the EIC continued to recruit during remaining
battles, such as Agra and Laswari thereby creating military labour spot
‘markets that further destabilized the remaining Maratha effort to chal-
Jenge the British militarily.

However, ido not believe that the eventual domination ofthe South Asian

rilitary economy by the British can be turned around into an argument

thatthe Maratha military system was tragically lawed by mercenary em
ployment and that the situation was aggravated by the employment of
foreigners to such an extent that it prevented the Marathas from becom
ing the dominant power in India. Speculation as ro why the Marathas
failed to atin lasting control of the subcontinent fall into a larger ‘what
if? school of history. That line of questioning would have to address
mdedying problems with Maratha clan unity and histori shifts in the
power structure of the Maratha polity. As suggested in chapter 1, the
‘equitable division of civil-military power within the Maratha polity had

