338 Glossary

by the japhir- particularly tax revenue in the 1803 period - was to be
used for the maintenance and payment ofa body of armed horsemen.
‘A jaghindar’s horsemen could then be seconded to the aid of the cen-
tral authority. Many of the Marathas so-called ‘southern Jaghirdan
‘became auxiliary cavalry under the overall command of Arthur Welles-
ley in 1803, Students ofthe 1803 period should avoid confusion of the
‘term jaghir with the term jaidad as found in numerous British primary
sources - see below.

jaidad: in previous examinations of the 1803 Anglo-Maratha Campaigns
there has been a temptation to say that aidad had the same meaning as
Jaghir. However, research for this work revealed multiple cases where
the term jaidad ~ although similar asa unit of revenue-producing land
assigned for the up-keep and supply of troops - specifically meant an
allocation of land for the revenue-based maintenance of infantry as
‘opposed to mounted troops. EIC records reveal appeals for horsemen.
from southern Maratha japhirdars and arrangements for the transfer
‘of Maratha infantry officers’ jaidads and their accompanying sepoy
brigades in Hindustan.

jambur. a ype of Maratha field gun. In atillery-specific eighteenth.
century Maratha dispatches, jamburs were associated with the use of
rape shot.

<jangi pha: taken in Maratha documents to mean intermediate-rangelsize
field artillery.

Jemadar. in 1803 a Jemadar in one of the three EIC armies (Bengal,
‘Madras, or Bombay) would have been a middle-ranking indigenous
South Asian infantry officer, withthe rank equivalency of feutenant in
1 sepoy unit.

zo: one of many terms for a South Asian matchlock - this word was
often associated with the very accurate long-barrelled matchlocks of
western India and Afghanistan,

wari: the grain commonly known in the West as millet.

‘Khalsa: used in this text to refer to the ‘Sikh warrior brotherhood of the
pure’.

hilar: a ceremonial robe of honour with significance as an indicator of
social and political recognition.

aadar the commandant of a fort.

lakh: one hundred thousand ~ most often seen in reference to valuations
‘expressed in hundreds of thousands of rupees or simply lakhs of rupee.

escer inthe armies of 1803, lascars were artillerymen tasked with man-
‘handling the artillery into position. Many were needed to man the
heavy drag ropes used to pull he guns forward.

Glossary 339

‘matros: an arilleryman who served as part ofthe gun crew subordinate to
the gunner or cannoneer. Their duties included ammunition handling,
loading and ramming as well as swabbing the barrel after firing to
prevent premature ignition when loading subsequent rounds.

rullah: a watercourse of land feature (ic. ditch or depression) associated
‘with water. Not all mulahs were water-filled and dry mullahs often lent
themselves to being used as field-expedient trenches during bates.

palki: a means of conveyance or carriage sometimes likened to a palan-
quin coach or shuttered liter.

palpai: a tax paid by pindares for the right to plunder.

perghannas: administrative districts often referred to in local calculations
of revenue value,

Peshwa: contemporary discussions of the late eighteenth- and early
nineteenth-century Maratha political system often refer to the term
hg as meaning ‘the Maratha Prime Minister’. However, this was
rot always the case and those unfamiliar with the evolution and inst-
‘utjonalization of the office are urged to use the term Prime Minister
‘with caution when discussing the period prior to Fehana Baji Rao I.

ig: the town affixed to, or adjacent to afore. In some cases the petal
had separate defensive outer works.

pindaries: irregular light horse troops who traditionally pad a fee to plun-
der, or provided their retainers with a percentage of theie booty, for
the right to plunder. Maratha powerbrokers found pindarie to be cost-
effective since they did not require regular monthly wages. Pindariet
‘were used in a variety of roles including that of reconnaissance, 1o-
sistical interdiction, screening the movement of infantry, or as sack
‘men against civilian in areas withholding chauth payments. Although
pindaries found their way into the Maratha order of bale, the pindaries
themselves often came from various ethnic and religious backgrounds.
“The pindar leader Amir Khan was a Pathan soldier of fortune.

pounder: twas customary in the era of muzzle-loading artillery to list c
‘non bore diameters in a manner that expressed calibre asa theoretical
projectile weight in pounds. As a result of this practice, the standard
3.6-inch bore diameter British battalion support gun (in 1803) be-
‘came known as the 6 pounder. The 3 pounder was a light gun, while

18 and 24 pounders were favoured by the British as siege guns to smash
fortress walls.

‘pucka: although commonly taken to mean ‘proper’, many military doc-
‘uments from 1803 use pucka to mean brick and mortar buildings
or fortifications such as those used to reinforce the western coast of
India, Inthe latter case, pucka fortifications - proper brick and mortar

