322 。 Appendix I

NOTES :
1

NAL Foreign Dept Files, Secret Series, Consultations 22 Sept. 1803 nos, 23-
p25 (page number in pencil), From Archibald Seton, Agent at Barell to
the Gov. Gen, to Neel Benjamin Edmonstone Sec. to Gov't. inthe Secret
and Political Dept at Fort Wiliam Bengal

In several cases the cover letters, telling ofthe benefits 1 be derived from the
‘government's offer, were unexplainably detached and delivered alone without
‘the Proclamation, This was the case with numerous copies sent to local North
Indian magistrates ‘by Dawk Baughies' which supposedly accounted forthe
“non-acrval’, Se NAI, Secret Index to he Foreign Dept 1803 (aka: Foreign
Dept - Secret Index 1803), p. 119 Judges and Magistrates 12 Now, 1803
os. 138, 143-8.

3. NAL, Foreign Dept Files, Secret Series, Consultations 22 Sept. 1803 nos. 23~

8, p.25 (page number in penci From Archibald Seton, Agent at Baeli to
the Gov. Gen to Neel Benjamin Edmonstone, Sec. o Ooytin the Secret and
Political Dept at Fort Wiliam Bengal

CCaleuta Gazene vol xr。 Thus. 8 Sept. 1803, no. 1019. Technically speaking,
the paper camied four such documents that day. The frst proclamation was
printed in English and intended for officers, while the second, third and fourth
‘editions (priate in English, Persian and Devanagari script respectively) were
intended for sepoys and non-commissioned officers. The fourth proclamation,
‘printed in Devanagari script, difered slightly in that N-B. Edmonstone signed
ina ‘Sec. To Govt. Sec. Po. を For. Depts

wa cud

Appendix IV:
‘Mercenary pension records

‘This chart was taken from BL: OIOC 0/6/6 Personal Records. It should
not be construed as a complete list of mercenaries in Maratha service
‘during 1803.! Rather, ir should be considered an incomplete record of
those who had a pension or settlement claim that was adjusted in 1805-7
and reviewed circa 1817. As a ‘ist of mercenaries in Maratha service’
it fails to include a great number of individuals, such as those who died
before the review, those who were ‘caprured’ as renegades or POWs, and
those who had thee service commuted tallied forces such as the Nizam
cor the Peshwa. As for being an indicator of nationality andlor race, the
list does not provide notation of race or country of origin. Comments
sbout the impossibility of accurately judging the mercenaries’ nationality
according to their surnames are included elsewhere in this book. In ac-
cordance with the quotation practice established in this book, all original
spellings were retained as copied and researchers following leads in this
document are urged to consult the main body ofthis text for notes on
anomalies in spelling (ie. Beckett vs. Becket, etc).

Aaeare
eer pm Pace reiece
eons fen perme where pens
Easta Bed (Benge) PS

Nemeemk Ri permonih Re permonh Wanted ete pit

AmeFp、 lo 四 2000. 106 Bae

‘Ue

Armen Ry Ma 一 0 28g 1806

Adis, Cat wo oS. le

Bree Raber, 300 加 ET

cone

