340 Glossary

defensive walls - were superior to those made of wood, sandbags or
carth-filed wicker baskets,

‘uckalies hose individuals who filled the large water butts or water skins
that held a military units water supply on the march.

‘ia: Hindu worship or performance of Hindu religious ceremony as in
“to make puja.

‘rakhale: carr mounted horse-drawn guns in the 1-3 pounder size range.
‘The rakhale’s use in combat can be traced as far back as Mughal
Emperor Babur’s Fist Batde of Panipat in 1526.

rissalah: most often taken to mean a large body of horse as in a rissalah
of cavalry.

rupee: the rupee remains India’s standard unit of currency. Rupees are
abbreviated as Rs. Transactions in rupees during 1803 were often listed
in EIC documents as chree-fgure citations, ie. Rs. 3 : 2: 1, which
‘would correspond to the currency units 3 rupees, 2 annas and 1 pice.
However, it isnot safe to assure that ll three-figure expressions were
‘equivalent in 1803. The value of rupecs is diffcul to establish unless
the specific type is stated, ie. Bombey, Arcot or Sonaut rupees. The
‘complexity was exacerbated by the imposition of a standard known
ms the Sicca Rupee and the book keeping of the Bengal Presidency
relied on ‘imaginary coins’ called Current Rupees, Current Annas
and Current Pice. These Bengal ‘Current’ designations were the book-
keeping standard.

sardar: readily translated as officer. When the term is used generically
to discuss Maratha military powerbrokers in this tex, it could mean
military rank or political rank. Most senior ethnic Maratha sordars in
Sindias court (durbar) would have had large entourages of armed re-
tainers ~ often kinsmen ~ suggesting some original form of military
‘underpinning for their political positions.

sebundi: so-called ‘revenue militia’. Within British-controled areas they
were usually under the command of local magistrates to aid in tax co
lection, They ranged in quality and ability from peasent rabble armed
with macchlocks o highly proficient militia regulars trained and dried
according to prevailing sepoy standards. During the mobilization of
1803 several North Indian sebundi units went through systematic up-
‘grading from sebundi to irregular infantry to regular infantry in reserve.

‘Senapar: rom he time of Shivaji to that of hs grandson Shahu the formal
‘Maratha tide for Commander-in-Chief was Senapai

pf most glossaries indicate that a of was a ‘money-changer’ or
banker’. However, that explanation is less than satisfactory in that
‘many shroff: made their living largely by charging commissions for fa-
cilitating various financial and economic transactions. They were not

Glossary 3

necessarily direct employees of a ‘bank’ or members of so-called bank-
ing clans and so the term ‘banker’ is misleading, Shroff: serving on
‘campaigns with armies were financial specialists who offered a vari-
‘ety of economic products and services. Their network and reputation
‘were often direcdy related to their effectiveness ranking. A shroff could
‘range currency conversion as in the case of Bengal rupees being con-
‘verted to a more readily useable form of local currency. And shroff
right also arrange monetary transfers by way of credit notes or hundi
that may of may not have been drawn upon banking centres in Varanasi
or Surat. In the 1803 Anglo-Maratha Campaigns shrof also advanced
credit to soldiers who could not wait for their arrears in pay to catch
‘up with them. Several British diary references indicate shrafs oaned
‘money against jewellery taken as plunder. Such sources suggest the
shroff helped individual soldiers in a manner we might liken ro that of
1 pawmbroker. Shroff were integral to the South Asian military econ-
‘omy in terms of facilitating liquidity during periods of confict

siladar: a term used to describe horsemen (often ‘irregular horse’) who
reported for dutylemployment with their own horses and weapons.
‘Employing siladar horse was an option for those powerbrokers who
sought to avoid the economic and logistical problems associated with
the central supply of horses and weapons.

‘Soubahdar. in 1803 a soubahdar in one of the three EIC armies (Bengal,
‘Madras, or Bombay) would have been an indigenous senior South
‘Asian infantry officer, with the rank equivalency of captain in a sepoy
unit.

Soubha of Hindustan: Viceroy of North Indi.

tindal: a leader of lascarsin the artillery. A tindal could be likened to
1 laxcar non-commissioned officer in being in charge of work details
in which lascars were employed (ie. preparation of defensive artillery
positions).

pasr the term first gained wide-scale use in reference to those offipring
‘who resulted from relationships between Portuguese men and South
‘Asian women. At one time these Euro-Asians represented a sizeable
portion of the population in Goa and other Portuguese colonies. Many
assumed their father’s religion and profession as soldiers with the result
that they became known as ‘black Christians’, valued in infantry and
artilery units.

topha thor: great guns as described in Maratha documents ~ taken to
‘mean large-caibre long-range field guns as well as siege guns.

er swords.

‘vail: itwas once popula to list this word as meaning ambassador. Burin
the battlefield negotiations of 1803 the term emissary is perhaps more

