334 Appendix V

bbeen a problem since the rise of Baji Rao I when the delicate balance be-
‘ween the Chhatrapati, Senapati and Feshea was permanently thrown out
of filter. Ironically, the over-concentration of cvil-military power under
ea Baii Rao I (a period free from powerful European mercenaries)
‘may have proven the subcontinental potential of Maratha military power
while dooming the Maratha polity to the cyclical infighting we associate
withthe later ge period (circa 1761-1818).

NOTES

1. Arrian: the Campaigns of Alecander, trans. De Selincourt.

2. Carver, The Seven ge ofthe Brith Arm pp. 1-3, 67.

3. NAL, Foreign Dept Files, Secret Series fr 1803, Consultations 12 Nov. 1803,
Nos. 139-41.

Glossary

Glossaries are often less than perfect tools because the meanings of words
change over time. The glossary that follows was constructed to apply to
this specific analysis of the Anglo-Maratha Campaigns of 1803. These
explanatory notes should not be taken as comprehensive dcfiniions and
readers are advised to consult reference works forthe broader historic
and geographic variations in the use of these terms.

arrack: a generic term for indigenous liquor often added to water by the
British for the purposes of purification or kiling bacteria.

‘bana: rockets, the body of which was formed by rolling sheet iron to form
ubc The rocket tubes were filled witha gunpowder-based propellant
and usually lashed ta length of bamboo thatserved asa stabilizing al.
“The Indian rocket was studied and modified by Congreve at Woolwich,
‘where he produced the first widely used British military rockets.

amjarar an itinerant socio-ethnic group who specialized in the trans-
‘portation of grain and salt. Bamjaran most often acting es independent
entrepreneur in the South Asian military economy, played vital role
in the logistical survival of armies in India as they moved food supplies
over great distances,

barg-gir: a form of light horse doctrine associated with warfare in the
Deccan and the fortress of Ahmadnagar in particular. The tactical basis,
‘of ths doctrine emphasized the avoidance of direct frontal assault or
stationary battle in which the advantages of speed, manoeuvrability
and surprise would be sacrificed. Perhaps the greatest use of barg-siri
tactic was in logistical interdiction and the physical isolation of enemy
units,

lorgir a horseman associated with the doctrine outlined above.
‘Chapter 1 suggests a rather more detailed explanation for the evo-
Tution ofthe term bargi, which is often listed as a Persian ‘loan word”
defined as meaning ‘a soldier who enlisted without a horse

‘ata: this refers to a vast assortment of special payments and field al-
Iowances found in armies such as those of the EIC Complicating our

335

