326 Appendix IV

(cont,)
em
Amount pee Prac of rece
enon termine {vce enon
ad Sed Been a rover!
Nmramt —_-Rupermonth Re permonth Whenficd tobe pad
mare4。 mm (Mat) ey ae
Seat, Si 20 280g 1805 Ce Tha
Gentes Hat ice
‘en ard 9 ce
WT
Tea
‘gona
Sahota Ham; eg。 am 39Aee 1806 Cae Ts
‘Ma

1 In Snit Sketch of the Rerlor Cops, there isa st of subscribers rang-
ing from EIC officials to British regular army officers. However, readers who
ae interested in tracing individual mercenaries should be awar that a conr
siderable number of the names located in the subscribes’ list are those of
mercenaries who ‘came over’

Appendix V:
‘The Marathas’ employment of mercenaries
in historic perspective

‘As this book is being completed during the bicentennial anniversary of
the 1803 Anglo-Maratha Campaigns, it seems appropriate to say some-
thing about the mercenary issue thet continues to haunt Maratha military

‘Currently Gurkhas from the Hindu Kingdom of Nepal can be found in
the armed forces of Great Britain and the Republic of India with signifi
ccant numbers stationed in strategic positions that include the petroleum
rich Muslim Sultanate of Brunei. In that respect it can be said that South
‘Asian mercenaries play a role in contemporary international security, al-
‘eit a comparatively minor role in the overall global military balance.
‘This dual employment of Gurkha troops by Western and Asian powers
suggests the acceptability of mercenaries continues on a cross-cultural
basis of outstanding military professionalism and proven ability.

‘The use of mercenaries has never been limited to one military culture
‘orone period of time. Mercenaries have been used in a culturally parallel
fashion by Western and Asian armies since ancient times. One only needs
to read the Campaigns of Alexander by Lucius Flavius Arrianus to see that
‘Western invasions of South Asia have been dependent upon mercenary
‘employment since the time of Alexander the Great.' Over centuries the
use of mercenaries became customary in South it di in virtually
every other great civilization. Unfortunately it was in the twentieth cen-
‘ury that the word mercenary took on a decidedly negative connotation
‘and it was often thought to be synonymous with the term ‘professional
kaller. However, that emotive phrase is somewhat absurd in that virtually
all professional soldiers who go to war and kil their country's enemies can
be termed professional killers. In this book the term mercenary is used,
in a much les judgemental historic context, as one who accepts payment
‘or reward in return for military service outside his immediate family or
under a banner thats not generally accepted as his own. This may sound
somewhat ambiguous but other traditional definitions (i.e. fighting for
ョ country other than one’s own) pose problems in an era when several
‘key nation states had yet to be defined. The word mercenary remains

327

