330 。 Appendix V

‘The Marathas increasing retention of Northern European mercenar-
{es during the second half of the eighteenth century coincides with an
increasing supply cycle. In turn, that supply cycle was tied to the South
Asian extension of Europe-based confit as outlined in the Introduction
to this book. The end of the Seven Years’ War and its afiliated South
‘Asian conflicts meant there were veteran officers to be had ~ including
those with experience leading South Asian troops under fire. Some were
French officers ofthe old order who saw no particular reason to return to
ther homeland, which was becoming increasingly divided by revolution-
ary sentiment. There were other Frenchmen who had served as soldiers,
tradesman-technicians, or merchants in service to various ‘country pow-
cm located in Mysore, Lucknow and Hyderabad, There was also a wave
‘of opportunists who fit the general description of ‘European adventur-
‘ers’ These included ship-jumping former servicemen of the working cass
‘who thought they would do better for themselves in India. They became
familiar with the stories of others who had ‘made it’, men from Armenia,
Greece and Switzerland to name but a few.

‘As for British mercenaries in Maratha service, they had similar ex-
petiences. Some were veterans of transplanted European wars; others
‘were former employees of the East India Company and the armies of the
‘Bengal, Bombay and Madras Presidencies. Many Britons retained by the
‘Marathas were trading on their military experience for lack of any other
‘equivalent economic option. Mahedi Sindia was known to pay well and
the frequency of his campaigns meant lucrative chances for plunder and
prize funds that surpassed those of the EIC’s armies, which made the
‘meagre rerurns of King George's troops look like petty change in com-
parison. But the number of British adventurers also owed something to
the peculiar recruiting policy of the EIC itself. As outlined in the let-
ters of George Carnegie (chapter 5), many Britons had travelled to India
thinking they could land lucrative positions with the EIC. To their dis-
‘may most found that one could not apply for such positions from within
India and that you had to be accepted for EIC employment in Britain
and subsequently sent out to India in possession of a posting. Having
travelled to India on speculation of employment, many found themselves
nearly destitute and willing to take service in a so-alled ‘native army in
‘order that they might atleast earn thei passage back home if not make a
fortune in service.

In speculating on reasons why the Marathas fsiled to achieve complete
= of India, some historians have focused on the issue of foreign
tio

nary employment. This would seem to be an outgrowth of ques-
‘concerning the depth of Maratha dependence on foreigners and
the degree to which they could be trusted. Much has been made of the

ate

“The Marathas' employment of mercenaries 31

fact that Europeans served Mahadii Sindia and Daulat Rao Sindia as
‘commanders (ic. de Boigne and Perron) but that was far from a historic
precedent. As we saw in chapter 1, the great Shivaji had used the ac-
complished Portuguese officer Rui Leitao Viegas as commander of the

‘Maratha navy and Portuguese sources indicate over 300 Pornuguese were

in service to the Marathas at that time. But Shivais power base may have

been more secure than that ofthe Sindia clan in the period from 1790-

1803. The examples set by de Boigne and Perron, as guardians ofthe clan

leader, suggest there were times when a European non-Maratha merce-

nary identity was advantageous. Generals de Boigne and Perron were

‘more readily trusted since there was litle incentive for them to launch a

‘coup as usurpers. Their European identity denied them political stare

sufficient to carry the durbar, which was dominated by clan politics driven

bby Maratha identity. The main difference in comparing Shivajis use of

‘European mercenaries to that of Daulat Rao Sindia seems to lic in the

‘extent to which the latter gave his mercenaries custody of strategic in-

formation sources and placed them in positions of dual economic and

military importance. Shivajis European mercenaries did not have con
trol of bis key fortress chain andlor his most prized revenue producing

Jands; they tended to be long on military skill and short on exposure

to Shivai’s most valuable strategic assets. By way of contrast, when

General Perron lft service, he rode into a warm British welcome carrying

vital military and economic inteligence that included defensive plans as

wel as revenue return figures for the Gunga-Yamuna Dosb. With intll-
agence like that Richard Wellesley could assess target priority and calibrate
the economic as well as political push needed to swing remaining enemy
allegiance tothe British side.

‘What was it that motivated so many of the European mercenaries to

leave Maratha service at such a militarily crucial time in 1803?

(1) National pride and racial kinship. Many British mercenaries did not
want to fight their fellow countrymen. Many joined the service of
Marathas like Sindia under the contractual stipulation of not having
to fight against the EIC or His Majesty's troops (see chapter 5). The
linkage to nationality aso had the potential to bridge racial barriers.
‘Some mixed-race or Euro-Asian soldiers reflected upon their father’s
British identity. Having been raised as the ‘soldier sons’ of soldiers,
‘an identity that carried the blessing of both South Asian and British
\wartior societies, it made a great deal of sense to honour the military
culture and tradition of one’s father.

(2) The chance for continuing monetary or material gains. If the
European mercenaries stayed in ‘native service’ and the Marathas
lost the war, their Maratha pensions might be worthless and there

