348 。 Nous to pages 16-19

2. See Gunther D. Soothe, ‘Hero and Satstons of Mahara’, with
powographs inthe appendix labelled Fig 7. ack on ao, Bard’ nd
“Fig. 8. Conquest of for, AM nS. Setar and Gunther D.Sonteiner
Menor Stn: a Sad of Tai Origin Signcanc and ry (hubiid
jointly by the Institute of Indian Art History, Karnatak University, Dhar-
‘wad, and South Asian Instirute, University of Heidelberg, Germany, Mainpal
Power Pres, 1982), pp 261-8.

3. TheMaharshrin sons come fom atone but sees ime periods nd
over offensive and defensive land vacate ss wel a nanl bates Some of

the mon neste tthe de seen-century Deca ed Chl

ie.

‘The Mesopotmian example was exited in paricuarby itam HL Me-

Nell, Reng Thr in Tie: Dance and Dri in Hama so (aad

‘University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995), p. 106.

have wed terGcukrhe meanns individuals hat brokered mitary

employment conracs and destin miltary goods and services, These nde

‘ida may, orimy na, have been wariorpaicipans in he subsequent

aes, Late in he 1803 pcriod Ite specie ease of rokerdeer who

were ak ofc of specifi units. This definition stands ia conta other
sucors who have sed th term jober-commande, wbich special ime
fs commander who brokers empaymen ob) fo hinself and

6 George Michel and Mack Zebrowsi, The Ne CambrideHisoryo Ini,
1s Arhictare and Ato he Decon Slants (Cambridge Unive Ps
1999);p.8. Titties more oles coincided with the Mara, Kan-
nad and Telugu counties

7. See James Cuingkame Grant Daff 4 Hisar ul Mabaso ap 73
{Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, and Green, London, 1826)

8. Appendix v contains a working definition forthe term mercenary as used in
this book.
9. Maharashira State Gazetcs, Maharashra Ahmadnagor Disviet (revised ed
tion, Bombay, 1976), p 64.
10, bid, 62
1, The greater Islamic military world incorporated military knowledge drawn,
from a tremendous cross-section ofthe ‘known’ world. In the fteenth and
snteenth centuries that meant contact ranging from the Iberian Peninsula to
‘Arica, Southwest Asia ro Central Asia, aswell as South and Southeast Asia,
By the time of official Mughal court codification in he Namat (ie. Babur's
cy doctrine as expressed in the Baburnama), we can detect the regional
origin or association of specific tactics as exemplified by such descriptive
terms as the Anatolian method or in the Rumé role. For s efrshing look at
the Baburnama a sen through a tanslation of the orginal language text, as
‘opposed to Persian, see Wheeler M. Thackston’s rendering: The Baburnama,
‘Memoirs of Babur, Prince and Emperor (OxSord University Press, 1996).
. Albuquerque, then Portugal's preeminent soldier-adventuret in India, be-
\ lieved the Indian weapons were better and deemed the ise tobe casiied
‘miliary itllgence. He sent samples of Indian-made weapons to King Dom

t

‘Notes to pages 19-20 349

‘Manoel of Portugal in 1510 to underscore his assertion of South Asian tech-
cal superior. See is eter of2 Dec. 1510in Frederick Charles Danvers,
The Portuguese in rdg Being a itary ofthe Rise and Decne of their Eastern
Enpir (1894, reprised Asian Educational Services, New Debi, 1988), vo
‘ypp.211-12, Albuquerque's frs-hand account decd contradicts Cipelas
assertion tha the Portuguese arilry ofthe period was superior to ha of
India, Carlo AL Cipolla, Guns and Sas in the Early Phas of European Er
pansion 1400-1700 (Collies, London, 1965), p 107. I 1537 the Portuguese
soldier de Cunha found indigenous bronze aswell as ron cannon tha nd
cated to him that Indian casting techniques were well in advance ofthe Euro-
pean. The iron gun tubes were noc simple wrought iron bares wit hoop
and save construction ab offen sen ip Europe. The Indians had pecected
cast ion cannon barrels that far exceeded thee Western coumterpars. See
Danwern The Prew in nd, vol hp 420, The deficiencies of iateenth-
‘century European ron ordnance ar covered in Cipolla, Guns and Sait, pp.
41-3. Most of the isues surrounding superior mltary technology inthe
‘weapons rade ofthat day were based on design diferences, basic metallurgy
で fabrication techniques that emphasized a weapons longevity.

13, By that ime Inia had been producing steel and exporting pig iro to the
Middle Es Damascus steel matket for over 1,500 years and analysis of
histori Sout Asian slagheaps reveals that ron production was not localized
bot eather carried on across the subcontinent. KN P. Rao, J. K. Muker
jee and A. K. Lab, ‘Some Observations on the structure of ancient steel
from Sout India and ts mode of production’, BZzi ofthe Hinorcal Me-
alurgy Group UK, 3, no 2 (1969), p. 12. For chemical and qualitatie
‘pectrograic nisE of ancien steel from Mysore seep 16.

14, By way of contrast in 1574 Queen Elzabeth sued an order resting the
‘numberof guns to be cast in England to only those forthe ‘use ofthe Realm,
Cipolla, Guns and Sas, p. 45.

15, Contrary tothe belief of many Western historians a expressed by McNell,
The Age of Gunposer,p 1.

16, The urgent need to nish casing before che arrial of the monsoon can
te traced in Maratha CBtarpad Shah's hier levers of April 1735, See
G.. Sadesi (e.),Selecsins from Rhaa Dafgn vl. xvn Bombay, 1931),
pp 26-7. My thanks oN. K. Wogle for tranlating these eter.

17. My chana 10 Dr] A. Chale (St johns Colege Cambridge) for his di
{gram elatng the molecular contribution of monsoon moisture to hydrogen
Dubble formation i easting also owe a special debt of thanks to Yaduen-
dra Saha (City Palace Muscum, jaipur for showing mea clvely disguised
‘observatory felting Indian astonomy and weather forecasting to cannon
‘eating, The addition ofa ckhara dome tothe observatory is architecturally
misleading tur its remains can be seen a short distance outside the igrh
Fort which has one ofthe world’s bes-preserved histori cannon-casting
faces.

18, Maharashoa Stowe Gazeter, p76.

19, Western historians, particularly those studying the Renaissance period or
those advocating miHtary revluton’, usually compare the cost of training

