344 Notes to pages 3-5

‘confusion as most British imperial historians recognize the ‘Anglo-Maratha
and Pindari War of 1817-1819" asthe Third Anglo-Maratha War. Therefore
‘should come ss no surprise that Ihave tried to specify the campaign and year,
wherever possible, rather than referring to the Fimt Second, Third, or even
Fourth, Anglo-Maratha Wars, See appendix 1 for what passes asa standard
chronology of British wars in South Asia,

2, This view contrasts those of histories which assert chat the Battle of Panipat
jp 1761 represents the Marathas highrwater mark.

3. Although not covered in this work, British victory in 1803 also meant the
seizure of Maratha ports and the furtherance of British plans for the naval
containment ofthe subcontinent.

4, Wiliam H. McNeil, The Age of Gunpowder Empires 1450-1800 (American
Historical Associaton, Washington DC, 1989) and The Purnuit of Power
Tichology, Armed Force, and Society since A.D. 1000 (University of Chicago
Press, 1982); Paul Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of Great Powen: Economic
‘Change and Miivary Conflict from 1500 to 2000 (Random House, New York,
1987); GeoBrey Parker, The Miliary Revolution: Miltary Innovation and
the Rie ofthe West, 1500-1800 (Cambridge University Press, ?nd edition
1996).

5. In 1955 Michael Roberts delivered his inaugural lecture as Professor of Mod-
rm History atthe Queen's University, Belfast. In uat lecture he argued that
changes in tactics, strategy, the scale of warfare and its impact upon soci-
ey, which had thei origin in the United Provinces and culminated in the
‘Swedish army of Gustavus Adolphus, were deserving ofthe label ‘evolution
ary’. Roberts’ idea that a military revolution occurred in che early modern
peti from 1560-1660 remained largely intact untl Geofiey Parker revised
snd relaunched the theory in 1984 (he Lees Knowles Lectures given at Trin-
ity Colege, Cambridge). That Parker's rendition propagated a more culturally
‘chauvinistc dogma can be detected from the ttle of his book, The Miliary
‘Revolution: Miliary Innovation and the Rise ofthe Wiss, 1500-1800, frst pub
lished in 1988,

6, Patker spoke of be absolute or relative superiority of Western weaponry and
‘Wester military organization over most others’. And that, ‘in large messure
“the rise ofthe West” depended upon the exercise of force, upon the fact that
the military balance berween the Europeans and thet adversaties overseas was
remdiy tidng in favour of the former; and isthe argument of thi book that
the key to the Westerners’ success in creating che frst truly global empires
between 1500 and 1750 depended upon precisely those improvements in the
ability to wage war which have been termed “the miliary revolution”. Parke,
‘The Miltary Revolucion, p. 115 and 4 respectively.

7. Imitating the western way of war involved adaptation at many levels. im
ply copying weapons picked up on the banlcfeld could never sufice it also
required the “replication” ofthe whole social and economic structure that un-
<erpinned the capacity to innovate and respond swiftly. See Geoffrey Parker,
“The Western Way of War, in Geoffey Parke (ed )) The Cambridge ermeeg

of Warfare: the Triumph ofthe West (Cambridge University Press, 1995),
7. John Lymn added: "Britsin’s decisive superiority lay in a cultural and

10.

Noes to page Ms
instaina approach o war ha ave foes could not imitate with the
{hin eae wal which they could fire ~ or manufacare~ fuss. European
tudes reward combat ran wholly counter to natve Mongol notions of
florsearcher ware, which Ceed individual prowess and mininal ease
aes. The bane cuitre of forbearance was counternstictal, s product
Stlong experience on the gunpowder atid, Once acquired, chad tobe
gh and replied hough rsndee dri Thaditons of this nd were
aly allen tothe state of South and East AiB John A. Lyn, "The
Sevencenh-Century Miltary Change: “The Western Way of Wat", and
South Asis in MacGregor Rox and Wiamon Murray (eds), The Dr
mia Mary Rior 1300-2050 (Cambege Universi Press 2001),
外
Je withthe Milary Revolution, there i dikagreament oer defining the
RMA. Many believe that RMA theory encompaies the idea that information-
buted technology wil ransform the Eure course of wae. And wihin chat
tao, mot lieve the West not only leads the RMA in weaponry and
‘card but se the guidelines fori further developmen. Perecthn the
RMA, scoring to 19 minority of wo-caled"wopian” RMA advocates wil
reduce the kelbood of war Because potential enemies wil supposedly be
“ling totart wars they cannot hopeo win For amore weapons-orened
omidrton ofthe RMA as encompassing no fever han ive Wester-based
falar evolutions, ee Murray and Kaors say "Thinking about moi
Sons were a Knox nd Maray (ds), The Da of Mary Rear
Teo 190-2050, pp. 1-14, Kaox and Murey aun aunt eeholoieal
determination and thei analysis ugmerw tha to very diferent phenomena
have Been a work ore the pst centuries “military revoltons, wich re
en by vast social and poical changes, and “reoltons in mniitary a=
wikhmihap ieGtudonshaye ected, orgh usualy wih greater
fcuig and ambiguos resus
Foran ceouot ofhow RMA thinking cero be ‘sla prof the Wert
tayo oarat he lose ofthe oveteth century, see Miche! Ignaie, ir
Tr Kno and Beyond (etropolian Books, London, 2000),
Job Plowright, ‘Revolution or Evolution? 4 Revew Arle’ Britsh Ary
Faves 90 (Dee 1988), pp A-3. jeremy Black, A Military Relation? 4
itary Chang and Ewopeon Srio 1530-1800(Mscila, London, 1991).
Ber’. Halland Key DeVeies, “The Miltary Remjaton Revit’ 7 た
olay ond Cala, 31 (1990, pp. 500-7. C. Rogers ed) The Mary
‘econ Debt: Readings onthe Br Tanormaton of Early Madera
Earp Boulder, 199) lnleasing the second edo of The Miliary ay-
leon (1990), Parker sw ho defend bis agerions by way ofa new haper
Ran a defence of The meo reolto’, pp 15-75. Nevertheless,
Europeanorened idcsm cotinaed as found in Bet S, Hal, Weapons
のど Were in Mateaw Europe’ Gunpowder, Teco and Tats Jobs
HopRi Uniersy Pres, Baltimore and London, 1997).
Foran overview ofthe miliary dichotomy in the Hiterk paiod of ransion
(UssReu Rusa) se hrob W. Kipp, "The Nature of War: Rassian Military
Forecasting and the Revolition in Miliary Airs a Cae ofthe Oracle of

