354 Notes to pages 32-36

53, Jagadish Narayan Sarkar, The Miltary Despatches of a Seventeenth Century
‘Indian General (Calcutta, 1969), p. 55. Ances Jahan Syed, Aurangacb in
‘Muntakhab-Al Lubab (Bombay, 1977), p. 220. Maracha forts surrendered
by Shivaji ro Ji Singh/Aurangzeb in the 1665 Treaty of Purandhar:

13 mm

(4 Na

15 Khuigath or Ankola

16 Marggath or Aura

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

17 Koha}
18 Besant
Tank 19 Nang
‘Thona ia Konkan 20 Kamala
9 Mab 21 Sg
10 Marana 2 Mage
1 Khiium お handle a Kondana

12 Bean

‘A.J. Syed used a different form of transliteration than Stewart Gordoo, but

spay ofthe ors sted shore can be found on Gordons map (ee map 2
apter 1)

454. One could make a strong case that as Shivaji competed with the Mughals
direc, his army began to look more and more lke that of the Mughal,
‘And those who have argued that Shivaji’ army was agurrila force composed
Feeryeowd honemen wsually avoid mentioning the eyewitness description
‘of Shivajis militar entourage asi ravelled to meet Aurangzeb It displayed
all the earmarks of classic Mughal armies including Turkish-syle headgear
for his footnen, ofcers in palit, banjamas, baggage-laden camels and an
infantry force marching behind a standard-bearing elephant. See Sarkar,
House of Shiva, pp. 4-5,

55. Pissurlencar, Pornguese-Mahrata Relation, p. 36.

56. Radhabai Balrishna, Shcgjhe Great, Part IV Shiva, he Man and His Werk
(Arya Bhanu Pres, Koblapur, 1940) . 103. np. 90 the author aserts that
European experts were sought forthe casting ofthe largest cannon,

57. Pissurlencar, Pornguase-Matratia Relations, . 36.

58. Some pindaies were ethnic Marathas and some ethnic Marathas led pin-
dari bands. However, it would be wrong to assume that all pindaries were
‘Marathas, or vice versa, 2s several ofthe leading nineteenth century Pindar
leaders and their bands proved robe of Pathan origin (e.g. Amir Khan). Many
pindari bands took refuge in Maratha territories when there were chances for
legitimate employment as auxiliaries.

59. ‘Kartoii Gujar was made by Shivaji his Senaparior Commander-in-Chiet with
the titles of Pratap Rao and sar naubat of horse" Senapati Kartoii Guhrs
“meteoric career’ was ‘cut short in arash charge on the Bijapuri army’ in
1674, Pethaps pre-empted any crisis in eivil-mitaryalfairs chat might have
‘occurred with regard tothe management of the military under so powerful a

No. tara St Se Saar, Hous of Sens 162-3

| was extremely fortunate to have worked with Profestor N. K. Wagle on
the military significance of an eyewitness account concerning the great bat-
te between Pishu Bajray 1 and Senapesi Trimbuk Rao Dabhade fought

[Notes to pages 36-39 355

‘at Dabo. I also made extensive use of Professor Wigks translation of
arillery-relevant entries from the Ajnapatra, shea Daftar and the Shahu
‘Daftar in the supporting foomotes ofthe article listed previously as Cooper
and Wagle, “Maratha Artilery’. Those primary sources revealed the ex-
tent to which Maratha state policy had evolved towards artNkry Offical
documentation, much of it in modi script painstakingly translated by Pro-
fessor Wagle to retain is peculiarly Maratha miliaree context, covered
{issues concerning cannon casting (metallurgy and mould construction),
‘weatherproofing for monsoons, ammunition procurement (ie. intercom-
munal subcontracting) as well as funding and officially regulated balistic

testing

61, Oneanic firepower refers the amount of firepower contained within a speci=
fied unit In essence the Grepower the unit normally carried witht into bare
8 opposed to secondary firepower assigned or seconded tit. For example,
British barralion guns - the wo field pieces assigned to an infantry battalion
in the eighteenth century ~ along with the massed ranks of infantry, would
‘represent the organic firepace for that battalion

62. ‘One ofthe earliest kinds of scatter projectiles was cae sho, or canister, used
‘at Constantinople in 1453. The name comes from its case, or can, usualy
‘metal, which was filled with scrap, musket balls, or slugs. Somewhat similar,
‘but wit larger ion balls and no metal case, was grape shot, so-called from the
‘rape-lke appearance ofthe clustered balls..." Albert C. Manucy, Arley
Through the Ages (Washington, 1962), pp. 68-9.

63, Reprint by P. N. Ghoshi Pune, 1960).

64, Later ‘fixed ammunition’ became quite popular with European patios. It
bad the projectile, sabot and begged powder charge all attached or fixed in
‘one unit, a concept akin to the cartridge. This was usually accomplished by
arraching he projectile and bagged powder charge on either side of a wooden
sabot

(65. See Selecions from the hog Dafa, wo. 41, letter no. 87, as ited in Cooper
‘and Wagle, ‘Maratha Artillery’

(66, [submit that overall European tends in adopting a volume of fire approach
1 artillery doctrine did not develop in earnest until the advent of breech
lading arilery and could not be said to have reached their full potential
‘unl World War One (1914-18).

67. Dighe, Pha Bajiao f and Maratha Expansion, p. 24.

68, A number of British irregular units kept their matchlocks until well into
the 1830s. See Harding, Smallarn, vl. mu pp. 460-3. The retention of
rmatchlocks by the EIC'siregular troops did not represent the pawnine of
‘of inferior weapons on secondary forces. For those iregulars responsible for
their own weapons’ replacement costs, it was a case of economic since they
‘could perform simple repairs and maintain their arms,

(69, Harding, Smallarms, vol mup 204

70. Among the best surviving examples that I have seen are the spiral bound
‘cotton match-chords of Jaipur. Match-chord material regardless of com
Position, was usually ssked in a Potassium nitrate solution to regulate the
‘burning, Harding also pointed out other types of tee bark were used as well.
See Harding, Smallarms, ol: Catalogue of Patterns P 494.

