smaller extent, as trade routes stayed more or less the same. By comparing regions which
received a smaller or larger shock, it is possible to empirically evaluate the predictions of the
infant industry argument.
    The industry examined is mechanized cotton spinning. This was one of the fastest grow-
ing and most innovative sectors in the 19th century, playing a key role in the First Industrial
Revolution and contributing 25 percent to overall TFP growth in British industry between
1780 and 1860 (Crafts, 1985). Both Hamilton and List advocated for infant industry protec-
tion for the nascent cotton industries in the US and Germany respectively (Hamilton, 1791;
List, 1856).
    A number of features of the industry in early nineteenth century France make it particu-
larly well-suited to examining the effects of infant industry protection. First, the technology,
invented and developed in Britain in the late 18th century, was initially not adopted on a
wide scale in France, a country with an initially similar cotton industry. By the beginning
of the Napoleonic Wars, the French were not competitive in mechanized cotton spinning.
    Second, the machines were cheap and depreciated fast meaning that the long-term results
cannot be driven by the gradual depletion of a one-time investment. Finally, this was the first
industry to mechanize and adopt modern, factory-based production methods. Differently to
traditional cottage industry, modern production methods are generally thought to exhibit
the types of increasing returns to scale inherent to infant industry mechanisms. This aspect
of the setting is helpful, as infant industry mechanisms may be present in mechanized cotton
spinning, but not in most other sectors in early 19th century France, as these only switched
to factory-based production methods later.
    I estimate the causal effect of temporary protection in two steps. First, I ask whether
trade protection was an important driver of the adoption of mechanized cotton-spinning tech-
nology in the short-run, during the disruption to trade. This would be the case if protection
rendered profitable previously unprofitable locations by increasing the price of competing
imported British yarn. Second, I examine effects in the long-run, after the disruption to
trade ended. If temporary protection was successful in changing the long-term profitabil-
ity of production in a given location through agglomeration economies, we would expect to
find persistence in the location of mechanized cotton-spinning activity. In addition, I exam-
ine whether adoption of frontier technology in mechanized cotton spinning led to aggregate
effects on the regional economy.
    To conduct the empirical analysis, a large amount of data was compiled from primary
sources. The main outcome variable of interest is capacity in mechanized cotton spinning. I


                                               3
