           “The principal advantage of the English cotton trade arises from our machines
        both for spinning and printing (...). It is impossible to say how soon foreign
        countries may obtain these machines, but even then, the experience we have in
        the use of them would give us such an advantage that I should not fear the
        competition.” – Joseph Smith and Robert Peel (1786)1

    A long-standing debate in economics is centered on the question of whether certain indus-
tries can become competitive in the long-run if they are given temporary trade protection.
The idea, widely known as the infant industry argument, has a long tradition in the history
of economic thought, dating back to at least Alexander Hamilton and Friedrich List.2 As-
sessing the empirical relevance of these predictions has proven difficult for two reasons. First,
infant industry protection is generally granted by the policy-maker at the country-wide level.
This implies that even if the industry becomes competitive in the long-run, it is difficult to
answer the counterfactual question of whether the industry would have become competitive
anyway. Second, in the case of a specific policy intervention, it is not possible to disentangle
the effect of the economic mechanism at work from the efficacy of implementation and the
inherent endogeneity of which industry the policy maker chooses to protect.
    The principal contribution of this paper is to estimate the causal effect of temporary
trade protection on the development of an infant industry and the economy more generally.
I present a natural experiment which replicates infant industry protection without the direct
involvement of the policy maker, making it possible to address both identification challenges.
I study the effect of temporary trade protection on the mechanized cotton-spinning industry
across regions of the French Empire during and after the Napoleonic Wars (1803-15).
    Throughout these wars, the French Empire was exposed to a regionally differential, and
arguably exogenous, shock to the cost of trading with Britain. In particular, the wars led to
a unique historical episode whereby a blockade of Britain was implemented by attempting
to stop British goods from entering Continental Europe. Ports were closed to ships carrying
British goods, and the military was active in enforcing the blockade along the coastline. In
practice however, holes in the system opened up almost immediately. Instead of achieving
the original goal of stopping trade flows between Britain and the Continent, the blockade
displaced trade to more circuitous, and hence more expensive routes. In the north of France,
effective distance between a given region and London increased markedly, as trade was
diverted either to unreliable indirect routes through German regions, or through Southern
Europe. In the southern regions of France, effective distance to London changed to a far
  1
      Quoted in Edwards (1967, p.51).
  2
      Hamilton (1791) and List (1856).


                                               2
