collected data on the number of mechanized cotton spindles (the relevant measure of phys-
ical capital) for French departments throughout the nineteenth century from handwritten
industrial surveys. For some years, these are available at the firm level. To reconstruct
trade routes in use before and during the blockade, data on ships arriving and sailing from
Britain to Continental European ports were extracted from a bi-weekly shipping newspaper,
the Lloyd’s List, over a 20 year period.
    To identify the causal effect of trade protection on mechanized spinning capacity in the
short-run, I use a difference in difference (DD) estimator with continuous treatment intensity.
This compares the size of mechanized cotton spinning capacity across regions which were
exposed to smaller or larger increases in the cost of trading with Britain (trade cost shock
for short), before and after the Napoleonic Wars. My empirical strategy is based on the well-
documented fact that trade diminishes dramatically with distance, implying that geographic
distance plays a role similar to that of artificial barriers to trade such as tariffs. Identification
relies on there being no other shock contemporaneous to, and correlated with the trade cost
shock. I show evidence in support of this assumption using a number of placebo tests and
other robustness checks.
    Trade protection had a large and statistically significant effect on the adoption of mech-
anized cotton-spinning technology. I find that areas which received a larger trade cost shock
during the Napoleonic Wars increased production capacity in mechanized cotton spinning to
a larger extent than areas which received a smaller shock. The estimated effect is large and
statistically significant. Moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the shock leads to a
predicted increase in spinning capacity which is similar in size to mean spinning capacity at
the end of the blockade.
    The second part of the empirical strategy examines the extent to which temporary trade
protection rendered locations profitable for production in the long-term. I estimate the long-
run, local average treatment effect of having a larger regional mechanized cotton spinning
industry as a result of temporary trade protection on our outcome variables of interest. For
the trade cost shock to be a valid instrument for the post-blockade location of the cotton
industry, the shock must be uncorrelated with other determinants of the outcome variables. I
build evidence in support of this assumption using placebo tests and other robustness checks.
However, as these effects are estimated for a relatively long time horizon, it is not possible
to rule out that other mechanisms may (partly) be driving the long-run results. For this
reason, I view these results as more suggestive than the short-run ones.
    I find evidence of persistence in the location of mechanized cotton spinning throughout


                                                 4
