       Temporary Protection and Technology Adoption:
          Evidence from the Napoleonic Blockade
                                            Réka Juhász∗
                                         Columbia University
                                             April 2, 2018


                                                Abstract
          This paper uses a natural experiment to estimate the causal effect of temporary
       trade protection on long-term economic development. I find that regions in the French
       Empire which became better protected from trade with the British for exogenous rea-
       sons during the Napoleonic Wars (1803-15) increased capacity in mechanized cotton
       spinning to a larger extent than regions which remained more exposed to trade. In
       the long-run, regions with exogenously higher spinning capacity had higher activity in
       mechanized cotton spinning. They also had higher value-added per capita in industry
       up to the second half of the 19th century, but not later.


JEL code: F13, F63, O14
Keywords: Infant industry, Industrialization, Technology Adoption




   ∗
     I thank my advisors Silvana Tenreyro and Steve Pischke for their continued guidance and support. My
thesis examiners, Thierry Mayer and John Van Reenen, provided extensive feedback that has improved
the paper significantly. I am grateful to Andy Bernard, Tim Besley, Esther Bøler, Francesco Caselli, Alex
Clymo, Nick Crafts, Jeremiah Dittmar, Swati Dhingra, Dave Donaldson, Knick Harley, Ethan Ilzetzki, Balázs
Muraközy, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Joel Mokyr, Michael Peters, Steve Redding, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg,
Daniel Sturm, David Weinstein and seminar participants for helpful comments and suggestions. Financial
support from STICERD and CEP is gratefully acknowledged. I thank Pierre-Philippe Combes, Guillaume
Daudin, Alan Fernihough, Ömer Özak, Peter Solar, Anna Valero, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and EURO-FRIEND
for kindly sharing data. I am grateful to Lili Szabó, Jérémy Hervelin, Gábor Szakács and Yue Yu for excellent
research assistance. Contact: rj2446@columbia.edu. The author declares that they have no relevant or
material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper.


                                                     1
