(Davis and Weinstein, 2002; Redding and Sturm, 2008; Kline and Moretti, 2014). In con-
trast to other mechanisms which the literature has explored, this paper estimates the effect
of trade protection on determining industry location and as such, informs the debate on
whether infant industry mechanisms are empirically relevant.
    The results of this paper raise the question of whether policy intervention may be welfare-
maximizing in similar settings. Even setting aside the issue of how policymakers identify
such industries, theoretically, this depends crucially on the source and size of agglomeration
economies. These are difficult to distinguish and quantify. Krugman (1987), Lucas (1988),
Matsuyama (1992) and Young (1991) model external-to-the-firm learning-by-doing, while
Krugman and Elizondo (1996) and Puga and Venables (1999) model pecuniary externalities
which arise from the interaction of internal to the firm increasing returns to scale, input-
output linkages and transport costs. Both strands predict that trade policy may affect
the long-term location of industries, though the effect on welfare is generally different. In
particular, it is generally not the case that policy intervention is optimal in the latter type
of models as Puga and Venables (1999) show. In contrast, intervention can be optimal if the
region has a latent comparative advantage in the industry, and the size of the externalities
is large in models which feature external economies of scale as discussed by Harrison and
Rodríguez-Clare (2010).3
    Data availability limits the extent to which I am able to differentiate between the two
types of agglomeration economies in the empirical analysis. However, I present historical
evidence consistent with learning-by-doing externalities. This suggestive evidence on external
economies of scale does not imply a case for infant industry protection in similar settings.
Instead, it serves to highlight the important challenges economies face to the extent that
similar mechanisms are present in developing countries today.4
    Finally, the paper contributes to the debate on why France was slow to adopt mech-
anized cotton-spinning technology (Allen, 2009; Crafts, 1995; Landes, 2003). Most closely
related to this paper’s mechanism is Crafts (1995), who argued that the historical accident of
mechanized spinning technology being invented in Britain, and not France, gave that coun-
   3
     As is well known, tariff protection is generally not the most efficient form of intervention, as a production
subsidy would not distort consumption choices. See Melitz (2005) for a discussion.
   4
     It should also be noted that even if the effect driving the results are external economies of scale, the
welfare implications are ambiguous because of the static negative welfare losses stemming from the higher
price paid by consumers of cotton yarn. This discussion also abstracts from the myriad of other (arguably
overwhelmingly negative) effects of the blockade. The goal of this paper however is not to offer a welfare
evaluation of the blockade but rather to use the setting to study the question of whether theoretical infant
industry mecahnisms are empirically relevant.



                                                        6
