(Allen, 2009). Importantly, they were fairly cheap, and they depreciated fast.7 This rules
out a slow to depreciate, large, one-time investment driving the long-term results.
    Mechanization had large effects on the cotton textile industry for a number of reasons.
First, the machines disrupted the domestic structure of the industry. The size of machines,
their complexity and reliance on inanimate power rendered production in the workers’ homes
obsolete and manufacturing activity moved into large factories. For the first time, produc-
tion was organized in large structures that required careful organization of work-flow and
management of workers (Allen, 2009) . This change was one of the most significant conse-
quences of the First Industrial Revolution, as it radically changed the method of production
from rurally organized, cottage industry characterized by small fixed capital investments,
to modern, factory based production subject to (external or internal to the firm) increasing
returns to scale (Mokyr, 2009).
    Historical evidence points to at least one source of external increasing returns to scale in
the form of learning-by-doing. Experimentation via trial and error, small improvements made
by anonymous workers and entrepreneurs, and experience acquired on the job were important
sources of productivity improvements (Mokyr, 2009). For example, Chapman (1970) finds
that most cotton mills in England had a remarkably similar structure. Chapman quotes a
contemporary, Sir William Fairbairn, on the reason for this; “The machinery of the mills was
driven by four water-wheels erected by Mr Lowe of Nottingham. His work, heavy and clumsy
as it was, had in a certain way answered the purpose, and as cotton mills were then in their
infancy, he was the only person, qualified from experience, to undertake the construction of
the gearing.” (Chapman, 1970, pp. 239-240, my emphasis). Edwards notes that when the
mule-jenny, a third generation spinning machine, “left Crompton’s [the inventor’s] hands it
was a crude device, it had to be improved, and the spinners and weavers of muslins had to
acquire their skills.” (Edwards, 1967, p.4).8
    Consistent with large improvements in productivity, the price of yarns declined signif-
icantly throughout the period as is shown in Figure A.1. The trend is most dramatic for
finer yarns, the real price of which dropped tenfold in as many years, but there was also a
decline in lower count (less fine) yarns. The large decrease in price is significant, as it helps
to explain why hand-spinners were outcompeted so quickly.
    An imbalance in spinning output and downstream weaving capacity soon made British
   7
     Allen (2009) has estimated that the original spinning jenny was priced at about seven times a spinner’s
weekly wage and it depreciated in about 10 years.
   8
     Additional quantitative evidence on external learning effects is provided by David (1970), who estimates
strong learning effects for six firms in the 19th century US cotton textile industry.



                                                     8
