cotton yarn uniquely reliant on exports markets, of which Europe was by far the most impor-
tant. Crouzet (1987) estimates that around 56-76 percent of Britain’s cotton manufactures
were exported either in the form of cloth or yarn. 44 percent of cotton cloth and a full 86
percent of cotton yarn exports were destined for the European market, and in particular,
France, Germany and Russia. This reliance on the Northern European market for cotton
yarn explains why maintaining trade with Europe in cottons was so crucially important dur-
ing the blockade, despite the risks and large increase in transport costs that were involved.


1.2       Slow adoption of mechanized spinning technology in France
Mechanization of cotton spinning in France proceeded very slowly relative to events across
the Channel. In 1790, the number of spinning jennies was estimated to be 900 in France,
while the number in Britain has been put at 18,000 (Aspin, 1964). Consistent with the lag in
technology, French machine spun yarn sold in France was at least double the price of British
machine spun yarn in Britain at the beginning of the blockade.9
    Why was adoption so slow? It is important to note that the British prohibited both the
export of spinning machinery and the emigration of engineers and skilled workers until 1843
(Saxonhouse and Wright, 2004). This put an artificial barrier on the diffusion of technology
across the Channel. It meant that while the French were able to acquire blueprints of the
machines, and with the help of some English and Irish engineers, British best practice, they
did not have wide scale access to the tacit type of knowledge that is acquired via learning-
by-doing and that would be embedded in the export of machines or workers.
    According to the historical evidence, both the state and private entrepreneurs were well
aware of the momentous changes taking place across the Channel and both made attempts to
foster technology transfer. Horn (2006) writes that “the effort pivoted on acquiring English
machines and spreading access to them as widely as possible. As is well known, the French
state concentrated on acquiring Arkwright’s water frame and the mule-jenny, both of which
were crucial to England’s competitive edge. Industrial spies (...) were commissioned to
acquire these technologies. (...) British machine builders were rewarded for coming to
France and given subsidies for each set of machine they sold. The Bourbon government paid
the wages of at least 100 foreign workers in machine building and provided large subsidies to
innovative French entrepreneurs who financed the construction of advanced textile machinery.
Before the adjudication of Arkwright’s second patent in 1785, no less than three mechanics
were building roller-spinning machines in France. Doggedly, if haphazardly, government
  9
      Figure A.2 compares prices for the full range of counts at the beginning of the blockade.


                                                       9
