try a significant first-mover advantage which made emulation for follower countries difficult.
Moreover, Crouzet (1964) has claimed that countries which received more protection from
British competition during the Continental Blockade, such as France, adopted mechanized
cotton spinning technology early in the nineteenth century. On the other hand, Heckscher
(1922) argued that these events were nothing more than the short-run “hothouse” develop-
ment of an industry subject to artificial protection. Using the data assembled for this paper,
it has been possible to test this question for the case of France by exploiting within-country
variation in trade protection.
    The paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses mechanization of cotton
spinning and its effects on France. Section 2 describes the way in which the Napoleonic
Wars drove exogenous changes in trade protection from Britain. Section 3 describes the
main sources of data, while Sections 4-5 contain the short and long-term empirical analysis,
respectively. The final section concludes.


1       The cotton industry in Britain and France
Britain’s dominance of the 19th century cotton textile industry is a widely known fact. It
may thus be somewhat surprising that as late as the mid-18th century, the cotton textile
industry in Britain and France were actually remarkably similar (Riello, 2013). In both
countries, cotton textile manufacturing was a new and small industry relative to traditional
European textiles such as wool, linen and silk.5 Moreover, the cotton industry was marginal
not only in relation to other domestic textiles, but also relative to world output, which was
dominated by Indian cotton cloth.6


1.1     Mechanization in Britain and diffusion of technology to France
A series of inventions mechanized the spinning of cotton yarn in Britain in the second half
of the 18th century. Traditionally, spinners had spun one thread at a time using a simple
wheel. Mechanization increased output per worker as machines were able to spin multiple
rovings simultaneously. The new machines diffused rapidly across the British countryside
    5
     For example, Chabert (1945) estimates the size of the industries for France in 1788, before the French
Revolution, and in 1812, towards the end of the Napoleonic Wars, as follows (in millions of francs); 1788:
Linen and hemp: 235, Wool: 225, Silk: 130.8, Cotton: no number given. 1812: Linen and hemp: 242.8,
Wool: 315.1, Silk: 107.5, Cotton: 191.6.
   6
     It has been estimated that about 3 million pounds of cotton yarn a year were spun in both Britain and
France, which compares modestly to Bengal’s 85 million pounds of yearly output (Allen, 2009).


                                                    7
