the 19th century. Having one more mechanized spindle in 1812 as a result of higher pro-
tection during the blockade increased mechanized spinning capacity by about 2-3 spindles
in 1840, and 5-6 spindles in 1887. As the industry expanded in France throughout the
19th century, the results show that regions which had a first-mover advantage as a result
of temporary protection were the ones disproportionately increasing their spinning capacity
throughout the 19th century. Moreover, the pattern of persistence is inconsistent with the
alternative mechanism of slow technology diffusion from Britain, as more southern regions
of France decreased in absolute magnitude in the long-run. I also examine the extent to
which temporary protection affected long-run development more generally through its effect
on mechanized cotton spinning. I find that increased protection from British competition
increased value added per capita in industry in 1860, through its effect on mechanized cotton
spinning, but not later.
    Since tariffs or prohibitions were imposed on cotton manufactures between Britain and
France following the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the long-term within-country results are
consistent with an infant industry mechanism at work within France. It does not necessarily
show however, that (a subset of) firms had become competitive at free trade prices. For this
reason, I also examine exports of cotton manufactures from France. Consistent with evolving
comparative advantage in cotton manufactures, I find that exports increased substantially
after the end of the Napoleonic Wars, in levels and relative to British exports of the same.
As late as 1850, other countries in Continental Europe typically had much smaller cotton
spinning industries, suggesting that adoption of the technology was far from inevitable.
    The results of the paper contribute to several strands of the literature. To the best of
my knowledge, this paper is the first to provide well-identified, reduced-form evidence of an
infant industry mechanism. To date, the literature has partially addressed the challenges to
estimating the effects of temporary trade protection by using calibrated or estimated model
parameters to simulate the counterfactual of no-protection in partial equilibrium models
(Baldwin and Krugman, 1986, 1988; Head, 1994; Irwin, 2000; Hansen et al., 2003). Without
exception, papers in this literature study cases in which the policy-maker implemented tariff
protection and as such, cannot address the inherent endogeneity of industry choice.
    More generally, the economic theory underlying the infant industry mechanism can be
seen in the context of a large class of models which predict that initial conditions are im-
portant for determining the long-run location of industries as a result of agglomeration
economies. In particular, the paper is related to a growing empirical literature which ex-
amines whether temporary shocks can permanently shift the location of economic activity


                                             5
