A.5 shows time series evidence about the uneven effects of the blockade for different parts of
the European coastline. These data confirm regional variation in the blockade found using
British export data. They also show that direct shipping to the French Empire during the
blockade was virtually non-existent. Finally, they make clear that Baltic ports were used
from 1803-1806 when the initial blockade of the Channel and the North-Sea coast was first
imposed.
    To smuggle successfully, the British needed access to stable ports directly under their
control in order to set up their merchant infrastructure. Figure 1 contains data from the
Lloyd’s List, disaggregated to the level of European ports, for a year before the disruption to
trade began (1802), and a blockade year (1809). This figure visualizes the dramatic change
in trading routes. Each circle is proportionate to the number of ships sailing between Britain
and a given port for a given year. There were four ports from where the British conducted
a large part of their smuggling during the blockade years; Helgoland and Gothenburg in
Northern-Europe, and Gibraltar and Malta in the Mediterranean. With the exception of
Gothenburg, each of these belonged to the British. They were thus stable ports where
merchants were able to stock inventory.
    In the north, both Gothenburg and Helgoland were far from ideal as smuggling centers,
as neither had direct overland access to Northern Europe. As such, they were reliant either
on decreased vigilance along the North-Sea coast (Helgoland), or on Russia and Prussia’s
shifting allegiances which determined whether ships would be allowed entry (Gothenburg).
Marzagalli (1999) describes how merchants from Britain, Holland and Hamburg relocated
their business to Gothenburg in order to organize smuggling routes. However during a
number of months in 1808, when the blockade was fully effective both along the North-
Sea and the Baltic, stocks piled up in Gothenburg as ships arriving from Sweden were
continuously denied entry (Crouzet, 1987).
    Once goods were smuggled onto the mainland from Helgoland or Gothenburg, they made
their way into the French Empire along its eastern border. Ellis writes “(...) smuggling was
more active along the inland than the maritime frontiers of the Empire. One reason for
this was the nature of the terrain (...). Another was the proximity of foreign entrepots like
Frankfrurt, Darmstadt, Mannheim, Heidelberg, Rastatt, Kehl and above all Basel. Within
the Empire itself there were many smuggling bases up along the Swiss frontier and down the
left-bank of the Rhine.” (Ellis, 1981, p. 203)
    Southern Europe proved far more permeable to the entry of British goods. Even prior
to the Spanish insurgency, with Gibraltar firmly in their possession, and significant sway


                                              15
