department.19
    In contrast, the trade cost shock is relatively small for departments in the south. These
departments were located further from Britain prior to the blockade, meaning that their
effective distance to London was initially high. Moreover, given that trade routes in the
south were disrupted to a smaller extent during the blockade, the general direction of trade
for these regions did not change. While there was an increase in effective distance as a result
of trade being diverted to land routes, this was much smaller than in the north. For example,
for Pyrenees-Orientales (prefecture Perpignan), the pre-blockade distance was 548 land-based
kilometers, while during the blockade it increased to only 689 land-based kilometers. During
the blockade, the algorithm predicts that goods destined for this department were smuggled
through Gibraltar and only made an overland journey from Barcelona.
    To what extent does this measure accurately capture the increase in trading costs between
Britain and a given department in France? One worry is that by excluding any form of
direct smuggling between Britain and France, we are introducing systematic measurement
error. While it is certainly true that some direct smuggling between Britain and France
took place during the Napoleonic Wars, historians seem to agree that this was far riskier
than indirect smuggling routes and this is also confirmed by British export data.20 The fact
that third-country ports were used is indicative of the fact that either direct smuggling was
quantitatively unimportant, or that the risks associated with it were sufficiently high that
taking more circuitous routes was at least as profitable. In either case, this implies that this
measure should do a relatively good job of capturing the change in trade costs.


3.2     Short-run outcome variables
I measure production capacity in mechanized cotton spinning both before (1803) and to-
wards the end of the blockade (1812) using prefectural reports on mechanized cotton spin-
ners. These data are available at the level of the firm for the pre-treatment period, and at
the level of the department across both periods. In 1803, many firms only reported number
of machines and not number of spindles. For these firms, I have imputed the missing ob-
servations using a predictive mean matching model.21 In addition, I observe labor employed
and the vintage of machine used. For the pre-treatment year, I also observe a rich set of
  19
     For departments closer to the east such as Seine-Maritime, the shortest route passed through Helgoland
during the blockade, while for more western departments such as Finistere, the shortest routes passed through
Gibraltar, in the south.
  20
     Appendix A.3.2.4 contains a more detailed discussion of this point.
  21
     More details on the imputation model and robustness to imputation can be found in Appendix A.3.2.1.


                                                     18
