action enabled hundreds of English style (if not always functionally equivalent) carding and
spinning machines to be put into operation in nearly every major industrial district in France
between 1786-1789.” (p. 78).
    However, it was not just the state which fostered technology diffusion. Chassagne (1991)
and Horn (2006) both emphasize that French cotton spinners played an even more important
role in the transfer of technology. In Toulouse, Francois Bernard Boyer-Fonfrede recruited
12 engineers from Britain to build a six storey, water powered spinning mill which employed
over five-hundred workers. After construction of the mill was complete, three were hired by
a firm in Aix, and another by a firm in Gironde (Chassagne, 1991, p. 244). In Amiens,
another entrepreneur, Jean-Baptiste Morgan, was similarly active in fostering technology
transfer. According to Horn, Morgan sent agents to recruit English workers; “Arriving
in yearly batches from 1788 to 1790, they provided Morgan with a detailed and precise
knowledge of English techniques, and with the mechanical expertise to construct the needed
machines and instruct workers in their use.” (Horn, 2006, p.83).
    What is striking about these accounts is the extent to which technology transfer seems
to have been reliant on British know-how. Furthermore, it also seems to be the case that
above and beyond the technological expertise required to build the mills and machinery,
French workers were also reliant on British training in acquiring best-practice techniques in
mechanized spinning and in training weavers to adapt to using the new type of yarn. Con-
sistent with British competition inhibiting French entrepreneurs from entering the industry,
mechanized spinners active in France at the time unambiguously laid the finger of blame on
British competition.10
    While technology diffusion was reliant on British know-how, according to the available
evidence, both prior to and during the blockade, machines were predominantly produced
domestically in France. Chassagne (1991) notes that three different mechanics were already
producing roller-spinning machines before 1785, one of whom produced 84 machines for a
number of different spinners. During the Napoleonic period, it seems most large firms had
their own machine builders for building and repairing the machines (Chassagne, 1991). The
emergence of specialized machinery producers was a feature that differentiated the US and
Great-Britain from other 19th century cotton textile producing regions (Saxonhouse and
Wright, 2004), though even in Britain, this subsidiary industry featuring large firms instead
  10
     AN/AFIV/1318 contains a petition from large spinners across the Empire requesting a complete ban on
English cloth, while AN/F12/533 contains a petition from the Chamber of Commerce in Rhone (prefecture
Lyon) requesting the same. Appendix A.6 contains a description of each of the primary archival sources
referenced in the paper.



                                                  10
