and potential limitations, can be found in Appendix A.3. Summary statistics are reported
in Table A.2.


3.1       Quantifying the trade cost shock
I use the Lloyd’s List to reconstruct trade routes between Britain and the Continent before
and during the Napoleonic Wars. Using this information, supplemented with historical
evidence presented in Section 2, I calculate the shortest effective distance to London for each
department in the French Empire for both the pre-blockade and blockade period. I account
for one of the most important drivers of increasing trade costs; the difference between water-
and land-borne routes, by calibrating the ratio of the two to match the fact that, during this
period, sailing from Rouen to Marseille was two-thirds of the cost of going overland (Daudin,
2010). Based on these numbers, 1 sea kilometer is equivalent to 0.15 kilometers on land.
    To quantify the shortest route prior to the onset of the Napoleonic Wars, I allow trade to
pass through any port that was in use between 1787-1814. To calculate the shortest route
between London and each department during the Napoleonic Wars, I restrict possible routes
to the ones that were in operation during the Napoleonic Wars; Helgoland, Gothenburg,
Gibraltar and Malta.18 For any department i, the algorithm then picks the least cost path.
The trade cost shock, defined as the log-change in the shortest route to London for each
department, can be seen in Figure 2, where darker shading shows a larger shock. Effective
distance to London increased from a mean of 380 land kilometers in pre-blockade years to
1,055 land kilometers in blockade years. Consistent with the geographic asymmetry in the
success of the blockade, the trade cost shock decreased in intensity as we move from the
north to the south of the French Empire.
    For departments along the English Channel, the trade cost shock is high for two reasons.
First, as they are located geographically close to Britain, their effective distance to London
prior to the blockade was small. Second, as trade routes in northern Europe were disrupted
to a larger extent than those in the south, these departments became furthest away from
London in terms of their effective distance. For example, the department Seine-Maritime
(prefecture Rouen) was situated 86 land-based kilometers from London prior to the blockade,
and became 1,282 land-based kilometers away during the blockade. This is because the
nearest smuggling port was Helgoland. From there, goods needed to make the long journey
overland from the German coastline down to Strasbourg and up north again to reach the
 18
      Appendix A.3 contains further details on the precise trading routes.



                                                      17
