British ports by the French navy was militarily infeasible.12 In contrast however, Napoleon
was increasingly successful in exerting his direct or indirect influence over most of the Con-
tinent.13 In this way, though Napoleon could not blockade British ports, he could use his
land-based power to do the next best thing, which was to attempt to stop British goods from
entering the Continent. Ports were closed to ships carrying British goods, and the military
was active in patrolling the coastline.
    To understand the disruption to trade, it is worth examining two periods separately;
the three years leading up the imposition of the Continental Blockade (1803-06), and the
the blockade (1806-13) itself. Disruption to trade along the North-Sea ports began in 1803
with the onset of the Napoleonic Wars. Neutral ports along the North-Sea (Hamburg in
particular), together with Dutch ports had been traditionally used to continue trading with
the British in times of war (Edwards, 1967). However, in a highly symbolic event, Hanover
(home to the royal dynasty to which monarchs of Great Britain belonged to) was occupied
by the French army. Britain retaliated by imposing a tight blockade of the entire North Sea
coast between the Weser and the Elbe, which was then expanded to include ports along the
French Channel and the North Sea in 1804 (Davis and Engerman, 2006). Crouzet (1987)
considers this period a prequel to the blockade in the sense that trade to Northern Europe
was forced onto land routes for the first time significantly driving up the price at which goods
entered the Continent. Discussing the effects of the North-Sea blockade on cotton textile
exporters, Edwards writes; “During 1804 and 1805, when the Elbe was blockaded, Germany’s
share of the total cotton exports to Europe dwindled to a mere three percent, while there
was a sharp jump in the trade to Denmark and Prussia.” (1967, p. 55). Merchants’ letters to
Britain were positive about the sales being made from Denmark until as late as August 1807,
noting that large quantities of cotton yarn were being smuggled successfully into France.
    Disruption to trading routes became even more severe with the onset of the Continental
Blockade. The historical events that followed the introduction of the Berlin Decree in 1806
are fairly complex and they involve much back and forth retaliation between Britain and
France, the details of which are not relevant for my purposes.14 The following points are
  12
     By 1800, the British had twice the number of warships as the French did (Davis and Engerman, 2006).
  13
     By 1806, the French Empire had expanded in size to include all regions of present-day Belgium, parts of
Holland, the entire left bank of the Rhine, regions of present-day Switzerland up to and including Geneva,
and regions in the North-West of the Italian peninsula, up to Genoa. In addition, Napoleon’s relatives were
on the thrones of the Kingdom of Holland, the Kingdom of Italy, the Kingdom of Naples and the Kingdom
of Spain. The Portuguese royal family had fled to Brazil and Napoleon’s relatives were also in power in key
German states (Connelly, 1969).
  14
     The interested reader can consult Davis and Engerman (2006).



                                                    12
