of miscellaneous tradesman and small workshops did not emerge until the 1830s (Cookson,
1994).
    Three features of the historical context discussed above are important to keep in mind
when interpreting the empirical results as evidence of an infant industry mechanism. First,
the similarity of the cotton textile industry in Britain and France prior to mechanization in
Britain is significant, as it suggests that economic fundamentals in Britain and France were
sufficiently close such that once French spinners were protected from British competition,
mechanization was rapidly adopted and became competitive in the longer-term. Put differ-
ently, it gives support to the claim that British competition was the key barrier inhibiting
French entrepreneurs from adopting the technology, as opposed to differences in economic
fundamentals. Second, the fact that French entrepreneurs were highly reliant on British
know-how for both domestic machine building and mechanized spinning points to the fact
that at pre-blockade protection levels, French spinners were unable to use the new technol-
ogy in an efficient way. Third, rapid productivity improvements and external to the firm
learning effects characterized mechanized cotton spinning. In light of the historical evidence,
it seems plausible that learning-by-doing externalities are the mechanism which gave rise to
the infant industry effect found in the empirical results, though data limitations do not allow
me to test this econometrically.


2      Variation from the Napoleonic Wars
The Continental Blockade prohibiting the entry of British goods onto the European Conti-
nent was declared in Berlin in late 1806, following the defeat of the Fourth Coalition against
France in Jena - Auerstadt. These events took place within the context of the Napoleonic
Wars (1803-1815). During this period, France fought Britain and its allies in a series of
campaigns. It is within this historical setting that the motivations and military constraints
for both Britain and France can be understood.11
    The primary aim of the blockade was to weaken Britain economically by denying her ac-
cess to important Continental European markets. As the last section has shown, Northern-
European markets were particularly important for cotton cloth and yarn. However, the stark
asymmetry of naval power between Britain and France meant that traditional blockade of
  11
    More generally, the Napoloenic blockade took place within the context of the French Revolutionary and
Napoleonic Wars (1792-1815). However, the disruption to trade that took place during the period studied
here was fundamentaly different to the French Revolutionary Wars that came before (Davis and Engerman,
2006). Appendix A.1.1 contains a detailed discussion of why this was the case.


                                                   11
