covariates for firms, which I exploit in the empirical analysis.


3.3    Long-run outcome variables
I measure outcomes in the long-run along a number of dimensions. I examine persistence
in mechanized spinning capacity using data on spindles for 1840 and 1887 compiled from
industrial firm surveys and annual statistical reports. I impute spindle data for firms with
missing spindles in 1840 using an identical predictive mean matching model to the one used
in the short-run analysis. I observe value-added in agriculture, manufacturing and services
at four points in time across the 19th and 20th century from Combes et al. (2011). Finally, to
examine exporting outcomes, I digitized product level export data for the period 1787-1828
from primary sources.


4     Short-term Empirical Strategy and Results
In this section, I first describe the evolution of mechanized cotton spinning during the
Napoleonic Wars and then turn to estimating the short-run effect of trade protection.


4.1    Mechanized spinning during the Napoleonic Wars
Figure 3 shows the variation in spinning capacity which will be used to estimate the effect of
trade protection on domestic production capacity. The figure shows the spatial distribution
of spinning capacity across the French Empire in 1803, prior to the onset of the Napoleonic
Wars, and in 1812, towards the end of the blockade.
    In 1803, a number of departments across the French Empire reported some mechanized
spinning activity. Notably, the department with the largest spinning capacity was located
in the south of the empire around Lyon (Rhone). Between 1803 and 1812, spinning capacity
in the French Empire increased by about 370 percent, from 380,000 to around 1.4 million
spindles. A look at Figure 3 reveals the extent to which growth in spinning capacity was
distributed unevenly. Particularly striking is the increase in spinning capacity along the
English Channel, where the increase in the costs of trading with Britain was the largest. By
1812, the largest spinning department in the French Empire was located along the English
Channel (Seine-Maritime). In general, more southern regions of the Empire stagnated. In
particular, south-eastern regions along the border with Spain saw outright decline in all
departments. According to reports from the prefects, many modern firms in these areas


                                              19
