in 1810 “(...) the trade from Helgoland was also destroyed, since the French emperor when-
ever peace was made with Austria again closed up entirely every means of introduction from
that island” (quoted in Edwards (1967, p. 58)).
    The reasons for asymmetry in the success of the blockade outside of the French Empire
were two-fold. First, Napoleon was inherently stronger militarily in the north, while the
British had the upper-hand in the Mediterranean. From 1803 onwards, Napoleon had made
significant territorial gains along the coast of the North-Sea, which meant that French troops
were able to directly implement the blockade almost up to the Baltic-Sea in years where
sufficient troops could be committed to stopping smuggling.
    In the Mediterranean on the other hand, the French navy was in a desperate state as
early as 1793 a result of an indiosyncratic political event which took place during the French
Revolution. As part of the internal turmoil during the French Revolution, a significant
part of the French Mediterranean fleet was destroyed (Rodger, 2005). Furthermore, as a
result a Napoleon’s misadventure in Egypt (interpreted in Britain as an attempt to reach
India), the British made control of the Mediterranean a policy of strategic importance. They
controlled a number of points of primary importance in Southern Europe, such as Gibraltar
and Malta, both of which became important smuggling centers. Furthermore, they exerted
significant influence on Portugal, a historically important ally, and also Sardinia and Sicily.
Crouzet (1987) describes how throughout the Napoleonic Wars, the British were able to
single-handedly control shipping in the Mediterranean, which he called a “British sea”.
    Second, and perhaps most catastrophically, the Spanish insurgency against French rule
which started in 1808 meant that the entire Iberian peninsula became open to trade with the
British. This gave the British a direct, overland link to the French Empire. Together with
their control of Gibraltar and shipping on the Mediterranean sea, Southern Europe became
the main outlet for British goods.


2.2       Smuggling routes
While the trade statistics are informative about regional variation, the high level of aggre-
gation does not make it possible to use them as a way to understand how trading routes
between Britain and Continental Europe changed throughout the blockade. To identify these,
I collected data from the Lloyd’s List on ship movements between Britain and Continental
Europe for the period 1787-1814.15 Using these data, I am able to measure the number of
ships sailing between Britain and each Continental European port in any given year. Figure
 15
      The data will be described in more detail in Section 3.


                                                      14
