over much of Portugal, the British had access to a direct, overland connection to France.
Edwards (1967) notes that between 1805 and 1807 (prior to the Spanish insurgency) cotton
textile goods were exported in increasing quantities to Portugal, the Straits of Gibraltar,
Malta and Sicily. The increase in shipping on the West-Mediterranean was driven almost
single-handedly by Malta. Crouzet (1987) describes in detail the key importance played by
Malta, especially for the smuggling of cotton textiles. At one point, 8.8 percent of exports
from Britain were taken into Europe via Malta. French consular reports described markets
for British yarn in Malta and Bosnia.16 With respect to the latter, the consul noted that
there was no domestic demand for yarn in Bosnia, instead it was purchased exclusively by
Viennese merchants for export. Regarding southern smuggling, there is widespread consensus
that a favored route for reaching Continental European markets was that taken via Trieste,
consistent with the existence of markets for cotton yarn in this region (Marzagalli, 1999;
Crouzet, 1987). Heckscher (1922) gives details of a smuggling route that began from Trieste
and brought goods up along the Danube into Germany and finally into France.
    Goods were smuggled into France from Spain via the Pyrenees. Archival sources in the
form of hundreds of letters between prefects in south-western departments and the gov-
ernment in Paris provide evidence on the scale of smuggling through the Southern border.
Similarly to the inland border in the east, the mountainous terrain provided smugglers with
a multitude of potential routes which made detection difficult. All border departments
reported a multitude of routes with destinations ranging from Bordeaux and Toulouse to
Paris.17
    One final piece of quantitative evidence from internal trade routes within the French
Empire confirms that with the onset of the Napoleonic Wars, the direction of trade with
Britain was reversed. Figure A.6 shows the time series for trade from Strasbourg up and
down-river along the Rhine. Coinciding with the onset of the blockade, down-river trade (in
the south-north direction) increased dramatically, while up-river trade (in the north-south
direction) remained stable.


3       Data
In this section, I give a brief overview of the most important datasets which I constructed,
and the main variables of interest. A more detailed description of all data, including sources
 16
      Archives Nationales, F12/1859.
 17
      Archives Nationales, F7/8777 and F12/8778.



                                                   16
