worth noting regarding the implementation of the blockade. First, the series of laws passed
by Britain and France had the effect of completely wiping out neutral shipping on top of
the evident damage they did to domestic shipping interests (Irwin, 2005; O’Rourke, 2006).
Second, the extent to which Napoleon could ensure successful implementation of the blockade
depended on his ability to keep areas outside of France under his control.
    To succeed, Napoleon thus relied on all Continental ports to simultaneously enforce the
blockade. This turned out to be an insurmountable challenge. Two features of the blockade
are key to my empirical strategy: (i) the blockade was, for the most part, well-enforced
along the coast of the French Empire implying that goods intended for French markets had
to enter the country via third-country ports, and; (ii) the blockade was unevenly successful
across Northern and Southern Europe meaning that the traditional north-south direction
of British trading routes were reversed, significantly driving up the costs of accessing some
areas of France. As a result, while Napoleon was able to successfully implement the blockade
along the coastline directly under his control, he could not plug in the gaps in the system
which opened up in regions not directly under his control, and he was unable to stop the
inflow of goods at the French Empire’s overland borders.


2.1    Geographic asymmetry in the success of the blockade
Trade statistics for British exports of manufactured goods and other British produce show
the stark divergence in the success of the blockade across Northern and Southern Europe
as Figure A.3 makes clear. Traditionally, Northern Europe had been the more important
market for British exports relative to the Mediterranean, with exports to the former being
about twice as high as exports to the latter. This pattern was completely reversed during the
blockade. While exports to Northern-Europe declined three-fold from peak to trough, trade
to the Mediterranean quadrupled. By 1812, exports to the Mediterranean outnumbered
exports to Northern-Europe five-to-one.
   There was a significant amount of time variation in the effectiveness of the blockade in
Northern-Europe. The British were able to smuggle into Northern Europe using two difficult
routes (via Helgoland, a tiny island off the North-Sea coast, and Gothenburg). However, this
was possible only in years where Napoleon was unable to commit sufficient troops to imple-
menting the blockade along the North-Sea coast because of fighting elsewhere. Consistent
with the British using southern trading routes in years when northern smuggling became
particularly difficult, exports to the Mediterranean dropped in 1810, when the northern
smuggling routes were open. Kirkman Finlay, a Glaswegian exporter of cottons noted that

                                             13
