understand the type of mechanism that may be driving our results. Column (4) finds that
capital-labor ratios (at the level of the department) within mechanized cotton spinning did
not change systematically with the trade cost shock. This is an important finding, as an
alternative mechanism to differential trade protection from the British could be that factor
prices changed differentially across the French Empire rendering the adoption of capital-
biased mechanized spinning technology more attractive in some places. More sophisticated
machines with a larger number of spindles substituted for relatively more labor, and thus
an uneven factor price shock across the French Empire should have altered the capital-labor
ratio at the departmental level, even within mechanized cotton spinning.
    Column (5) shows that the trade cost shock was not associated with differential quality
upgrading at the level of the department. I use information on the type of machines in
use in each department to estimate whether the trade cost shock differentially affected the
type of machines firms used. The data allow me to differentiate between two types of
machines “filatures continus” and “mull-jennys”. The former were less modern machines, with
significantly fewer spindles on average per machine, and they were mainly used for spinning
less fine yarn. To the extent that larger investments in the north during the Napoleonic Wars
also entailed upgrading into more modern and capital-intensive machinery, the long term
results which I find in the following section could be driven by a a head-start in upgrading to
higher quality machines. To the contrary, I find that the trade cost shock had no differential
effect on the proportion of newer type machines in a given department.
    I subject the results to further scrutiny by asking whether the trade cost shock had a
differential effect on industries which were less intensively traded with Britain and in which
there was no similar change in technology. These placebo tests are informative about the
extent to which the results for mechanized cotton may be driven by mechanisms other than
decreased import competition from the technological leader.
    In an influential paper, Crouzet (1964) argued that the period of the French Revolutionary
and Napoleonic Wars had a long lasting negative effect on the Atlantic and Mediterranean
seaboard as a result of France being shut out of overseas trade during this period.38 Another
concern is whether the war effort may have had a spatially differential effect. If the war
effort had a larger effect on those areas of France closer to Britain, this may confound the
coefficient of interest. For both of these identification concerns, the placebo tests are useful,
as these types of confounders should also affect other industries.
    Columns (6) and (7) show that the effect which I find for cotton spinning is not present for
 38
      Appendix A.2.4 discusses this mechanism in more detail.



                                                    29
