concern given the highly turbulent time period under investigation. I address these concerns
in two ways. First, I consider two other specific shocks contemporaneous to the trade cost
shock which could potentially account for part of the estimated effect. I consider whether a
differential shock to the imported input, raw cotton, or increased market access through the
expansion of the French Empire’s influence across Europe can account for the results. Both
of these effects may give rise to the estimated baseline effect, though through a mechanism
different to that of infant industry. I take a more general approach in the next section
by conducting placebo tests for two other textile industries (woollen spinning and leather
tanning).
    An asymmetric shock to the price of imported raw cotton is particularly problematic, as
this would arguably have a disproportionate effect on mechanized cotton spinning, meaning
that the placebo industries I examine in the next section may well be unaffected. To under-
stand the extent to which changes in the price of imported raw cotton may be driving the
results, Figure A.8 shows price data in the north and the south of the French Empire for
different varieties of raw cotton in use at the time; Levantine, Brazilian, US and from French
colonies.33
    As the figure makes clear, prices increased markedly during the Napoleonic Wars, but
the shock was fairly symmetric in the north and the south. For the case of Brazilian cotton,
where one specific variety (Pernambuco) can consistently be matched to London prices, it is
also clear that French prices increased to a greater extent than those in Britain. Given that
both British yarn and raw cotton were imported, why would shocks to these products have
a seemingly different spatial pattern?
    First, it is important to note that only part of the increase in raw cotton prices can be
attributed to the disruption to trade caused by the blockade. Part of the increase was driven
by a substantial increase in the tariffs on raw cotton, which affected all regions equally.34
Heckscher (1922, pp. 274-276) shows some evidence that prices in the empire were generally
substantially higher than in other Continental European cities, consistent with the fact that
tariffs accounted for part of the increase in French prices.
    Second, while the disruption to trade did cause trading routes to shift from sea- to land-
based ones driving up the price of raw cotton, differently to British yarn, the fundamental
  33
      I have not been able to find a data source for raw cotton prices at a regionally more disaggreagted level.
It should be noted that Napoleon experimented with growing cotton around Naples to substitute for other
sources. Heckscher (1922, p. 277) cites estimates that put this additional source at not more than 12% of
the total raw cotton in use in 1812.
   34
      Table A.21 reports tariffs for different varities of raw cotton throughout the period of interest.



                                                      25
