relationship is estimated in levels because of the large number of zeros in the data, however I
show robustness to other types of specifications.28 Effective distance to London in 1803 and
1812 is quantified using the measure described in Section 3. I report standardized coefficients
in italics and I calculate two types of standard errors; standard errors clustered at the level
of the department to account for serial correlation are reported in parentheses. I also report
standard errors clustered at a slightly higher level of aggregation, to account for spatial
correlation. To do this, I use the administrative system in place before the formation of
departments during the Revolution, the généralités.29
    The estimation strategy compares outcomes in regions of the French Empire which re-
ceived a large trade cost shock to regions which received a smaller shock before and after
the disruption to trade. Differently to a standard DD strategy, treatment intensity is con-
tinuous. Furthermore, the nature of the trade cost shock is such that all units are affected
to some extent by the disruption to trade. The latter is not problematic for identification to
the extent that the effect of interest is trade protection, and not the effect of the blockade
itself. Identification relies on there being no shocks contemporaneous to and correlated with
the trade cost shock. There are two main concerns for identification. First, some areas of
the French Empire may simply have been more conducive to the new technology. If these
variables were correlated with the trade cost shock, and they exerted a time-varying effect on
spinning capacity, my identification strategy would be undermined. Second, the differential
trade cost shock took place in the context of the Napoleonic Wars, a highly turbulent period,
raising the concern that forces besides the trade cost shock are driving the effects that I find.
In the following, I address both concerns.


4.3     Baseline results
Table 1 contains the results from estimating equation 1. The scatterplot and the baseline
linear fit is plotted on Figure A.7. The estimated effect of protection from British competition
is large and statistically significant. The point estimate of 33.47 in column (1) implies that
  28
     In particular, 39 and 36 departments reported no mechanized spindles in 1803 and 1812, respectively.
28 departments had no mechanized spinning capacity in both 1803 and 1812.
  29
     The appealing aspect of clustering at this level is that it is reasonable to expect that economic ties within
these historical regions may be stronger than across them, providing a natural way of clustering at a higher
level of aggregation. However, it should be noted that for a few robustness checks, the number of clusters at
the level of généralités falls below 30. Given that clustering with too few groups underestimates the standard
error (Bertrand et al., 2004), standard errors clustered at the level of généralités are not reported where the
number of clusters falls below 30. To keep the two types of standard errors comparable, I have not used the
wild-bootstrap method as suggested by Cameron et al. (2008). Appendix A.3.1.17 contains a more detailed
description of how departments were assigned to généralités.


                                                       22
