went bankrupt.22
    Reports from various departments paint a picture consistent with the numbers. Southern
departments unanimously complained about a collapse in demand, with some blaming com-
petition from foreign yarn.23 The situation in the northern departments could not have been
more different. A report from the Nord stated that there was not much change in activity
in linens, woolens and hemp. In contrast, they stated, trends in mechanized cotton spinning
were completely different. In this branch of the textile sector, despite the high price of raw
cotton, activity had picked up considerably, particularly during 1809 and 1810.24
    It is worth bearing in mind, that the large increase in spinning came at a time when
the economic environment was highly uncertain and a number of factors specific to the
cotton industry made any form of development surprising. Importantly, cotton did not enjoy
particularly favorable government support. This point should be taken into consideration
when thinking both about the importance of state support for the cotton industry. The
army used woolen textiles (Heckscher, 1922) and Napoleon remained highly ambivalent of
developments in the cotton industry because of its reliance on imported inputs. In fact,
cotton was the only textile to flourish in the French Empire during the Napoleonic Wars,
despite it being the only textile singularly reliant on an imported input traded via sea-routes.
Napoleon was constantly trying to find substitutes for raw cotton. He declared, “it would be
better to use only wool, flax and silk, the products of our own soil, and to proscribe cotton
forever on the Continent” (Heckscher, 1922, p. 277). In 1810, he offered a prize of one million
francs for the invention of a flax-spinning machine and placed high tariffs on imports of raw
cotton, despite the fact that prices had increased significantly during the blockade because
of the disruption to trade.


4.2     Short-run empirical strategy
I now turn to estimating the extent to which trade protection was an important driver of
the adoption of mechanized spinning technology. This would be the case if trade protection
rendered profitable previously unprofitable locations. If entrepreneurs were not competitive
at pre-blockade import prices for British yarn, and they became competitive once disruption
to trade drove up the price of British yarn sufficiently to make entry profitable, we would
  22
      Archives Nationales, F12/1570-89. For example, the report from the prefect in Gers states all modern
firms picked up in the 1806 survey had gone bankrupt, while that from the prefect of Haute-Garonne also
states that many entrepreneurs have shut down.
   23
      Archives Nationales, F12/1570-1590. Foreign yarn is blamed by the Rhone department.
   24
      Archives Nationales, F12/1581


                                                   20
