direction of trade did not change. The reason for this is that the source country for raw
cotton was not Britain. Importantly, much of the raw cotton imported to France was coming
from a southerly direction even prior to the blockade. France sourced raw cotton from the
Levant, Brazil (by way of Portugal), its colonies and the US. Given their geographic positions,
Portuguese and Levantine cotton were imported into France from a southerly direction.
Moreover, Bordeaux, located in the south of the Atlantic seaboard was far and above the
most important French port prior to the French Revolution, and as such was the main
distribution center for colonial and US raw cotton (Marzagalli, 1999).35 When the blockade
disrupted trade in raw cotton, it did so to a large extent not by changing the direction of trade
(as was the case for British yarn), but rather by forcing it from predominantly southern sea-
routes to southern land-routes which entered the French Empire from the south or through
the eastern terrestrial border.
    Figure A.9 reports quantitative evidence to support the claim that raw cotton entered
France predominantly from a southerly direction. In particular, the share of French imports
by the source region from which they are imported is shown. As can be seen, over 50% of the
imported raw cotton entered France from Southern Europe in all but one year throughout
the blockade. The Atlantic and Eastern border were also relatively important at different
points. Imports from Northern-Europe were below 20% for all years. If anything, it seems
that more southern regions had better access to raw cotton supplies both before, and in
particular, during the blockade consistent with the price evidence. Appendix A.1.3 contains
additional historical evidence that describes the particular trade routes used to import raw
cotton during the blockade.
    All else equal, the large increase in raw cotton prices negatively affected French competi-
tiveness. This may explain why some parts of the empire seemed to face tougher competition
from the British during the blockade, despite the fact that all departments were positively
affected by the trade cost shock on the import-competing side.36
    The second contemporaneous shock which could explain the results is that of France’s
increased market access throughout this period. This could happen both through the annex-
ation of territories, and through France’s ever increasing indirect influence over large parts
of continental Europe. For example, Ellis (1981, p. 20) describes the aims of the blockade
  35
     With the onset of the French Revolutionary Wars, trade was diverted to neutral ports such as Hamburg
in the north and Livorno in the south (Marzagalli, 1999).
  36
     There is a remaining concern that the quality of raw cotton which was in relatively high supply may
have affected incentives to specialize in a particular quality of spun yarn. This may have affected machine
choice as in Hanlon (2015). In the following section, I show that the trade cost shock did not lead to a
change in the type of machine used.


                                                    26
