moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the trade cost shock leads to a predicted
increase in spinning capacity per capita that is about the same size as mean spinning capacity
in 1812 across departments. To assess the relative size of the shock, moving from the 25th and
75th percentile (roughly 400 land based kilometers) is equivalent to moving a department
along the English Channel to the Spanish border. That would imply moving Bruges, in
present-day Belgium, to Toulouse, in present-day France .
    Results are robust to alternative measures of the trade cost shock and different assump-
tions about the functional form of the specification.30 In order to understand the extent
to which treatment intensity is continuous, I include a time-varying intercept for depart-
ments above median latitude, which will soak up much of the binary, north-south variation.
Consistent with continuous treatment intensity, results remain similar in magnitude and
statistically significant (Table A.3, Column (5)).31
    As the scatterplot in Figure A.7 makes clear, there is large variation in the extent to
which spinning capacity increased during this time period, raising the concern that the
effect may be driven by a small number of outliers. This is not the case. Results are robust
to winsorizing the top 10% of the observations (Table A.3, Column (8)). Identification
comes not only from regions which were large to begin with, or regions which saw the largest
increases in spinning capacity. This is also apparent from the scatterplot, which shows the
remarkable extent to which all departments that received a high trade cost shock increased
their spinning capacity.
    How did departments go about scaling up their spinning capacity? Table A.5 exam-
ines the extent to which increases in spinning capacity were driven by firm entry (extensive
margin) relative to pre-existing firms investing in more capacity (intensive margin). Exploit-
ing the fact that firm level data is available for the initial period of the Napoleonic Wars,
in particular during the North Sea blockade (1803-1806), I find that the extensive margin
accounted for the vast majority of the effect, at least during this time period. This is im-
portant, as learning-by-doing models of infant-industry implicitly assume that a financial
constraint inhibits any one entrepreneur from being able to grow sufficiently large in order
to internalize externalities. The fact that most of the increase in capacity was driven by new
firms entering the market is consistent with a mechanism where firms do not internalize the
force which will render production profitable in the long-term.
 30
      Tables A.3 - A.8 contain the results. These are discussed in detail in Appendix A.2.1
 31
      For comparison, Tables A.4 presents the results from estimating a standard, binary DD model.




                                                    23
