4.4     Robustness
To address the concern that the trade cost shock may be correlated with factors that render
particular locations more favorable for mechanized cotton spinning, I explore robustness of
the results to the addition of variables measuring natural or acquired locational advantage
(Columns (2) - (7) in Table 1). While fixed effects soak up any time-invariant confounder
correlated with effective distance to London, there is a concern that the time-varying effect of
fundamentals may be driving the results. I include variables one-by-one (Columns (2)-(6)),
and simultaneously (Column (7)). Each variable is interacted with a binary variable that
takes the value of one in the treatment period, and zero otherwise. Across all columns, the
coefficient remains similar in magnitude and statistically significant. Cheap access to power
sources such as fast-flowing streams (measured as mean streamflow in the department) and
distance to the nearest coalfield do not exert a statistically significant time-varying effect.
For the case of France this makes sense; as late as the 1840s, the median cotton spinning firm
used no steam-power and one water-powered engine according to data from Chanut et al.
(2000).32
    To control for the time-varying effect of access to large centers of urban population, I
construct the reduced form measure of market potential (Harris, 1954) widely used in the
                                 P P opc
literature. This is defined as j dist  cj
                                          , where P opc is the population of city c in 1800 and
distcj is the distance between department j and city c. Data on city populations across the
territory of the French Empire is from Nunn and Qian (2011).
    I also control for the time-varying effect of human capital in a flexible way by differ-
entiating between upper-tail knowledge and average human capital following the work of
Squicciarini and Voigtländer (2015). Access to upper-tail knowledge is defined similarly to
market potential, but I replace urban population in 1800 by the number of universities in
existence in 1802 within the territory of the French Empire using data from Valero and
Van Reenen (2016). Average human capital is measured as the proportion of men able to
sign their wedding certificates in 1786 as reported in Furet and Ozouf (1982). While the
coefficient of interest remains positive and significant, it is interesting to note that these
three “acquired” fundamentals enter with a positive sign and are statistically significant.
    A different identification concern is that other shocks, contemporaneous to and correlated
with the trade cost shock, may be (at least partly) driving the results. This is of particular
  32
    Crafts and Wolf (2014) study of the locational determinants of British cotton mills in the 1840s. The
authors find that water power had a strong positive effect on the number of cotton mill employees in a given
region, while coal had a negative albeit less robust effect. They found no or only weak evidence for other
natural locational fundamentals such as ruggedness, humidity or hardness of the water.


                                                    24
