eastern border. As such, it is not highly correlated with the trade cost shock and does not
affect the coefficient of interest in a quantitatively important way. Finally, Columns (6)-(7)
show that the results are robust to including both internal and external measures of market
potential simultaneously.


4.5    Placebo tests
The disruption to trade took place during a turbulent period of French history. The second
main concern in terms of identification is the extent to which the estimated effect is indeed
driven by differential trade protection as opposed to unobservables correlated with the trade
cost shock. The previous section considered a number of specific shocks that could have
confounded the effect of interest. To gain a better understanding of the forces driving my
results, I conducted a number of placebo tests. Furthermore, in the following section, I
will use the trade cost shock as an instrument for the post-blockade location of mechanized
cotton-spinning capacity. The results presented here also build evidence for the exclusion
restriction, which requires that the shock affects the long-term outcome variables of interest
only through its effect on spinning capacity.
    Table 3 presents these results. Columns (1) - (3) estimates the effect of the trade cost
shock on spinning capacity in the pre-treatment period between 1794-1803. In the absence
of similar data for this period, I have constructed an approximation to spindles in 1794. By
exploiting the fact that the firm level data observed in 1803 and 1806 contain the date the
firm was founded, we know which firms were already active in 1794. Using this information,
I approximate spinning capacity at the departmental level in 1794 by using spinning capacity
in 1803 for firms already active in 1794. This assumes that all growth in spinning capacity
took place on the extensive margin of firm entry and that firms did not go bankrupt, neither
of which are likely to hold. However, to the extent that results from Table A.5 for the
period 1803-06 are representative more generally, we should expect the extensive margin to
be the quantitatively more important way in which departments increased spinning capacity.
Column (1) estimates the baseline regression for the pre-treatment period. The estimated
coefficient is small and statistically significant at 5 percent. As Columns (2) and (3) show,
the effect is spurious, and seems to be driven by omitting the time-varying effect of market
potential. Inclusion of this variable decreases the point estimate on the trade cost shock
which is no longer differentiable statistically from zero.
    Columns (4) and (5) investigate the extent to which other variables of interest in mech-
anized cotton spinning were affected by the trade cost shock. This is important as it helps

                                             28
