expect to find a large effect of trade protection on adoption of mechanized cotton spinning
capacity.
    My empirical strategy is based on the well-documented fact that trade diminishes dra-
matically with distance, implying that geographic distance plays a role similar to that of
artificial barriers to trade such as tariffs.25 Geographic distance however is constant over
time, making it generally difficult to disentangle the effect of distance from other regional
characteristics fixed over time. I exploit the fact that while geographic distance between
Britain and French regions did not change during the blockade, the set of possible trading
routes did, leading to changes in effective distance between Britain and a given French re-
gion.26 I use variation in the extent to which effective distance to London changed for a
given department to estimate the short-run effect of trade protection on mechanized cotton
spinning capacity. This leads to the following specification, similar in spirit to a standard
difference-in-difference (DD) estimator;

                                      Sit = αi + δt + γlnDit + it                                       (1)

    Sit is a measure of mechanized spinning capacity in region i at time t, lnDit is the
natural logarithm of effective distance to Britain in department i at time t, αi controls for
time-invariant fixed effects at the regional level, and δt controls for the effect of aggregate
shocks over time. γ is the parameter of interest, which we expect to be positive if trade
protection from the industrial leader, Britain, is an important driver of mechanization.
    The unit of observation is the department, which I observe in 1803, prior to the Napoleonic
Wars, and in 1812, towards the end of the blockade. I observe 88 of the 109 departments
which made up the French Empire in both periods. Spinning capacity is measured as the
number of spindles per thousand inhabitants. Spindles are normalized by departmental
population to account for the fact that larger departments may increase spinning capacity
more in response to the same shock simply because of their size. In calculating per capita
variables, I use population measured in 1811 across all short-run and long-run specifications,
to avoid confounding endogenous population responses with the effects on spinning capacity.
Spindles is the standard measure of physical capital in mechanized cotton spinning.27 The
  25
     See Head and Mayer (2014) for a recent discussion on the gravity literature.
  26
     In its identification strategy, the paper builds on Frankel and Romer (1999); Feyrer (2009a,b); Pascali
(2017).
  27
     Importantly, this is not a measure of the number of machines, the productivity of which may change
over time, but rather it is the piece of equipment onto which the thread is twisted. As there is a one to one
correspondence between spindles and thread spun on a single machine, improvements in technology which
made it possible for a machine to be equipped with more spindles will be picked up by this measure.


                                                     21
