as follows; “It is suggested here that the loss of French transmarine markets and sources
of supply had some influence on Napoleon’s Blockade. If the vacuum left in the French
economy was to be filled, the key recovery seemed to lie in the resources of the Continental
mainland. New, and it appeared inevitable non-oceanic, supply lines and outlets had to be
found to give the imperial economy the stimulus for expansion, especially from 1807 onwards
when neutral trade lay in the stranglehold of belligerent Powers.”
    Table 2 explores robustness of the results to the inclusion of variables that capture chang-
ing market potential throughout the blockade. Column (1) restates the baseline effect for
comparison, while Column (2) adds the baseline measure of market potential defined in the
previous section. Column (3) explores robustness of the results to accounting for the ex-
panding French Empire, which can be thought of as increased internal market access. The
(time-varying) control for market potential is constructed to include any city that formed
part of the Empire in 1803 and 1812, respectively, thereby capturing the effect that annex-
ation had on market access. Figure A.10 shows the spatial distribution of regions annexed
between 1803-1812 and the cities they contain. Relative to Column (1), the coefficient of in-
terest is virtually unchanged, while the time varying measure of market potential is negative
and insignificant. This is unsurprising. As can be seen from Figure A.10, territories were
annexed to the French Empire in fairly equal amounts both along the northern seaboard and
in the south.
    To capture increased access to continental European markets outside of France’s expand-
ing internal market, I calculated the same measure of market potential for regions outside of
the French Empire. In particular, any city belonging to a region classified by Grab (2003, p.
17) to be a French satellite as of 1812 was included.37 I also construct a more conservative
measure that drops all of Spain. As a result of the insurgency against French rule and British
military presence, it is unlikely that French firms enjoyed easy access to Spanish markets.
Columns (4)-(5) show the estimation results when including these controls interacted with
a time dummy (one-by-one). In both cases, the coefficient of interest increases somewhat in
size and remains highly significant. The controls enter with a positive coefficient, but only
the measure excluding Spain is significantly different from zero. While there is some evidence
for increased access to third markets having a positive effect on spinning capacity, given the
distribution of French satellites, the market potential measure is largest for areas along the
  37
    This included most of Germany and Italy, all of Spain, the Illryian provinces and the Grand Duchy
of Warsaw as shown in Figure A.11. Note that the Illryian provinces were in fact annexed to the French
Empire, however as they were geographically separate from the rest of France, it seemed more reasonable to
include them in the external measure of market potential.



                                                   27
