    The previous analysis has also shown substantial evidence supporting the exclusion re-
striction. This requires trade protection to affect the outcome variables of interest only
through its effect on the size of post-blockade mechanized cotton spinning. Particularly im-
portant in building evidence for this, are the placebo tests showing no similar effect of the
trade cost shock on other industries, and the placebos which find no effect within mecha-
nized cotton spinning on capital-labor ratios (no evidence on aggregate factor price shocks)
and the quality of machines (no evidence on differential quality upgrading). According to
these results, the trade cost shock indeed seemed to work only through increasing the size
of mechanized cotton spinning sector.
    Nevertheless, as it is not possible to rule out every channel via which the trade cost
shock may effect outcomes Yit , I present both the 2SLS and the reduced form estimates
across all specifications. Even if the exclusion restriction did not hold, the reduced form
specifications would still identify the effect of trade protection on long run outcomes under
the weaker assumption that the trade cost shock is uncorrelated with other determinants of
the outcome variables of interest.
    Tables 4 - 6 reports the results from estimating the long-run effects. Across the different
tables, the sample size is different for a number of reasons, including changes in territory and
missing observations for the control variables. Relative to the short-run analysis, the sample
is reduced in size because France lost all territorial gains made throughout the period 1793-
1815. In every instance, I have chosen the largest possible sample on which to estimate the
effects of interest instead of limiting the analysis to a significantly smaller, but consistent
sample. I report two types of standard errors; Huber-White robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses, while standard errors clustered at the level of généralités are reported
in curly brackets.
    I begin by estimating persistence in the location of mechanized cotton spinning. Figure 4
visualizes the spatial distribution of spindles per thousand inhabitants across the departments
for the two time periods which I examine, 1840 and 1887. One of the most striking aspects of
the evolution of spinning capacity over time is the almost complete decline of cotton spinning
in the more southern departments. As more northern departments kept increasing their
spinning capacity throughout the 19th century, southern departments not only stagnated,
but actually shrank in absolute size.43 This is the strongest evidence against an alternative
  43
    Depending on the size of internal trade costs, a less competitive mechanized spinning sector in southern
departments may either survive or decline in the long-run according to the infant industry model. Internal
transportation costs in France were falling throughout the 19th century (Combes et al., 2011) because of
innovations such as the railroad. It is therefore plausible that less competitive regions which managed to



                                                    32
