two other industries, wool yarn (a direct substitute) and leather.39 Both products were less
intensively traded with Britain, and there was no technological change in either industry.40
For these reasons, the trade shock should not have had a significant effect on the spatial
distribution of activity, which is precisely what I find. This provides further evidence that
the mechanism driving the results is decreased import competition from the technological
leader, Britain.41


5     Long-term Empirical Strategy and Results
The previous section established that trade protection from Britain had a positive effect
on mechanized cotton spinning capacity in the short-run, while protection lasted. In this
section, I turn to examining the long-run effects of temporary trade protection. First, I
examine outcomes within France by exploiting exogenous variation in post-blockade spinning
capacity. While trading routes with Britain were restored to their post-blockade level after
the Napoleonic Wars drew to a close, tariff and non-tariff trade barriers were put in place
between the two countries (O’Rourke and Williamson, 2001). For this reason, I also examine
exporting outcomes for France as a whole to establish the extent to which a subset of firms
had become sufficiently productive to export.


5.1     Within country outcomes
An infant industry mechanism would predict that temporary trade protection renders a
location profitable for production not only in the short-term, while protection lasts, but
also in the long-term, once protection is removed.42 To test these predictions, I compare
outcomes in the 19th and 20th century in regions which had higher or lower post-blockade
  39
     It should be noted that pre-treatment data for these industries is observed in 1792 (woolen spinning)
and 1794 (leather tanning), rather than in 1803 as is the case for cotton.
  40
     Appendix A.1.2 provides additional details on these industries in support of these statements.
  41
     Appendix A.4 contains further robustness checks. In Table A.9, I show that the results are robust to
the inclusion of time-varying controls for the historical location of cotton manufacturing, the location of
downstream weaving, year of incorporation into the French Empire (proxying for both institutional change
and access to a large, internal market), conscription rates (exploring whether results are driven by a spatially
uneven negative labor supply shock unevenly pushing firms into mechanization through factor price effects)
and distance to the nearest Atlantic trading port.
  42
     Whether the industry becomes competitive in the long-run is partly a question of whether protection
lasts for a sufficiently long time. For example, in the case of a learning-by-doing externality, the size of
the initial productivity gap and the speed of learning would determine how long protection needs to last.
Whether this holds true in this setting is an empirical question.



                                                      30
