Empire up to 1815 – had a higher level of cotton spinning activity than other countries.52
The transformation which the French Empire’s cotton industry had undergone in the space
of about fifteen years does not seem to match the experience of other Continental countries
in the early 19th century.


6       Conclusion
This paper has used the natural experiment of the Napoleonic Blockade to estimate the causal
effect of temporary trade protection on the short and long-term development of an infant
industry which was key to nineteenth century development, mechanized cotton spinning.
Temporary protection had a large and positive effect on the short-run adoption of mechanized
cotton spinning technology and on the long-term location of the industry and the economy
more generally.
    How do the findings from this particular historical episode inform the broader question
of how openness to trade affects development? An interesting aspect of this episode is the
extent to which the setting seems general to the development experience of many countries
as they enter structural transformation. Differences between Britain and France were small
prior to the invention of mechanized cotton spinning, at least relative to differences between
rich and poor countries today. Seen in this light, it would seem that the extent to which
infant industry mechanisms could inhibit economies from moving into these sectors is large.
However, many of the prerequisites for the development of mechanized spinning were in
place across large areas of the French Empire, meaning that once import competition was
sufficiently low, mechanization was rapidly adopted. This point suggests that in cases where
the underlying conditions are not in place, infant industry protection can turn out to be an
extremely blunt tool.
    An additional element of the historical setting studied in this paper that is worth bear-
ing in mind when thinking about the challenges faced by developing countries today is the
restriction on exports of British machinery throughout the period of interest. A recent litera-
ture has shown that the reduction of tariffs on imported intermediate inputs has large effects
on firms’ estimated productivity and product scope (Amiti and Konings, 2007; Goldberg
et al., 2010; Halpern et al., 2015). In a world where developing countries have the ability to
import high quality inputs or capital from abroad, an important question is the extent to
which infant industry mechanisms remain relevant.
 52
      Although by 1850, Austria had similar levels to France but not Belgium.


                                                     36
