in a dynamically expanding industry, first mover advantage had very long-lasting effects in
the sense that regions which developed their cotton spinning industries early, because of
idiosyncratically high protection, were the ones which kept expanding as the industry grew.
    I assess the validity of the instrument by estimating the effect of post-blockade spinning
capacity on pre-blockade spinning capacity in Table 5. The OLS estimates (Columns (1) -
(2)) are positive and statistically significant, highlighting the endogeneity problem caused by
omitted variable bias. The estimated local average treatment effect, however, is statistically
indistinguishable from zero (Columns (3)-(4)) as are the coefficients for the reduced form
(Columns (7)-(8)). In fact, the baseline IV point estimate is 0.03. This constitutes some
support for the validity of the instrument.
    Second, I estimate the effect on aggregate departmental value added per capita in in-
dustry in order to understand the wider implications of adopting this technology. Given
the importance of cotton manufacturing for 19th century development, it is plausible that
adopting frontier technology from Britain caused positive aggregate effects for the regional
economy. Mechanized cotton spinning was one of the most innovative industries in the 19th
century. Crafts (1985) estimates that a full 25 percent of TFP growth between 1780-1860
was accounted for by cotton manufacturing alone. In France, 20 percent (15 percent) of
industrial employment was in cottons in 1840 (1860) according to data from Chanut et al.
(2000). It could also be the case, however, that if France did not have a latent comparative
advantage in mechanized cotton spinning, then specialization in this sector led to negative
effects on the adopting regional economies because of the misallocation of resources from
their most productive use.
    I observe industrial value added at four points in time; 1860, 1896, 1930 and 2000 using
data from Combes et al. (2011). I divide these variables by departmental population in 1811
to avoid confounding effects on industrial value added with endogenous population responses.
Table 6 contains the results from estimating equation 2 without additional controls and
adding lagged spinning capacity as a control.49 The OLS estimates in Columns (1) - (8)
are large, positive, statistically significant and remarkably stable for all years through 2000.
The forces which drove some departments to adopt the frontier technology in cotton spinning
in the early 19th century also led them to specialize in the highest value added industries
throughout the last two centuries. Columns (9) - (16) use only variation in post-blockade
spinning capacity caused by the uneven trade cost shock. The estimated local average
in 1887. This is despite the fact that France lost one of its largest spinning regions, Alsace, to Germany in
1871.
  49
     The first stage and reduced form are reported in Table A.11.


                                                     34
