treatment effect of having one more spindle in 1812 for industrial value added per capita is
positive and significant in 1860. The point estimate decreases in size over time and from
1896 onwards, the coefficient is longer distinguishable statistically from zero.
    The results are robust to the addition of departmental controls and to calculating indus-
trial value added per capita in terms of contemporaneous population (Tables A.12 and A.14
in Appendix A.4). I find no statistically significant effect across all years on value added
in agriculture or services (Tables A.16 and A.18 in Appendix A.4). Taking these results
together, temporary protection enabled regions to adopt and develop an industry which was
highly innovative throughout the 19th century. Not only did the specific industry develop
in the long-term, but the results point to higher aggregate industrial economic activity in
these regions, though this dissipated over time. Rather than diverting resources from their
most productive use, it seems to be the case that trade protection enabled regions in France
to enter a sector which was key to 19th century development.


5.2     Exporting outcomes
I now turn to examining exporting outcomes. The presence of tariff and non-tariff barriers
implies that the within country results are not sufficient for showing that some regions of
France had become competitive at international prices. Panels A-C in Figure A.13 show
exporting outcomes. In particular, I plot the level of exports, net exports and exports of
cotton manufactures relative to the same in Britain until 1830.50 As the figures make clear,
the French cotton industry underwent a radical transformation during the period I examine.
Prior to the Napoleonic Wars, France was a net importer of cotton manufactures. By the
end of the blockade, they had become net exporters.51 Exports increased dynamically after
the end of the Napoleonic Wars. By 1828, 7.5% of French exports were in cotton textiles.
France had not only become competitive in export markets, but according to all the available
evidence, the sector became important for the overall economy. Exports increased not only
in levels, but also relative to British exports of the same, suggesting some convergence to
Britain.
    Was the adoption of mechanized cotton spinning and the emergence of a competitive
cotton sector simply a matter of time for Continental follower countries? Figure A.14 shows
evidence to the contrary. As late as 1850, France and Belgium – both part of the French
  50
     The data do not differentiate between exports and re-exports until the 1820s. I have omitted re-exports
once they are separately entered.
  51
     It is difficult to interpret net exports for the period of the blockade, as smuggling meant that much of
the import data is presumably not reported in the official statistics.


                                                     35
