spinning capacity as a consequence of differing levels of protection.
    First, I ask whether the location of mechanized cotton spinning showed persistence over
time. Higher protection from British competition during the blockade increased mechanized
spinning capacity while differential protection lasted. To the extent that temporary protec-
tion rendered locations profitable in the long-run, we would expect to find persistence in
the location of cotton spinning. Second, I examine whether trade protection had aggregate
effects on the regional economy through its effect on mechanized cotton spinning.
    I estimate IV specifications of the following form

                                  Yit = α0 + β0t Si(1812) + ηit                            (2)


                               Si(1812) = α1 + β1 ∆ln(Di ) + ωi                            (3)

    where Yit is the departmental (i) outcome at time t (spinning capacity or industrial
value-added), Si(1812) measures the size of mechanized cotton spinning in department i in
1812 using the same measure of spindles per thousand inhabitants that was used in the
previous section. ∆ln(Di ) is the trade cost shock defined in Section 3.
    For the case of long-term outcomes, the main challenge for identification of β0t is omitted
variable bias. In particular, we expect Si(1812) to be correlated with unobservable locational
fundamentals in the error term, ηit , which also affect the outcome variables of interest. To
overcome this challenge, I propose using the trade-cost shock as an instrument for post-
blockade spinning capacity. The identifying assumption for the 2SLS estimation strategy to
render consistent estimates for β0t is that the trade cost shock is uncorrelated with the error
term ηit . To build evidence in support of the validity of the instrument, I show both robust-
ness of the results to the inclusion of measures of natural or acquired locational fundamentals
and to the inclusion of lagged spinning capacity as a control. This latter is important, as it
controls for geographic persistence in the location of mechanized spinning. A placebo test
builds additional support for the validity of the instrument. However, it should be noted
that given the long time horizon over which these effects are estimated, it is not possible
to fully rule out that the estimated effects are (partly) driven by other forces. Any shock
that affects the French economy over the long time horizon that is examined and that is
correlated with the trade cost shock would confound the effect of interest. For this reason, I
view the long term results presented in this section more as suggestive rather than conclusive
evidence on the long-run effects of temporary protection.


                                               31
