                The Marine Insurance Market for British Textile Exports         27


we need to establish the general context in which British marine insurance devel-
oped during this period.
    In eighteenth-century Britain, marine insurance was in the hands of private
individuals, above all, those who met at Lloyd’s coffee house. The first attempt to
establish a marine assurance company was made in 1716 – the Public Assurance
Office. Not surprisingly, there was great opposition from private underwriters,
as well as from others interested in entering the market. When it appeared that
the project had failed, a new scheme to create not one but two marine insur-
ance companies was accepted, to silence the voices of those complaining about
the inconvenience of having a single company monopoly.5 Thus, in 1720, two
companies were finally chartered, under the names of the London Assurance
Corporation and the Royal Exchange Assurance Corporation, considered to be
the ‘first examples of corporate marine insurers in Europe’.6
    For over 100 years, the British marine insurance market consisted of these
two companies and the private underwriters operating mainly at Lloyd’s. By law,
no other corporation could enter the market. However, in spite of having a cor-
porate monopoly, the Royal Exchange and the London Assurance had a small
share of the market. Though originally chartered to operate in marine insurance
only, after a few years the two companies were also allowed to effect both fire
and life insurance, which soon became the main part of their business. The lion’s
share of the marine insurance market remained in the hands of Lloyd’s until the
mid-nineteenth century; Lloyd’s became the foremost marine insurance cen-
tre in Europe.7 Indeed, in time, it became clear that the main beneficiary of the
1720 charter was Lloyd’s and, therefore, London. As stated by an 1810 Brit-
ish Parliamentary Committee, ‘this exclusive privilege … operates as monopoly,
not merely to the companies, but to Lloyd’s Coffee-House’.8 Yet, in other British
ports underwriters also operated. In 1802, for example, the Liverpool Under-
writers’ Association was created.9 Private underwriters also signed policies at
Bristol, Hull and Glasgow.10
    The structure of the marine insurance market, thus, remained unchanged,
despite the efforts made by the Globe Fire and Life Insurance Company from
the late eighteenth century to enter the market. Freedom to establish new com-
panies was not granted until 1824 when Nathan Rothschild’s Alliance Marine
Insurance Company was created as part of the repeal of the 1720 Act. In the same
year, another company entered the market, the Indemnity Mutual, followed by
others in subsequent years, of which the most successful were the Marine Insur-
ance Company (1836), the General Maritime (1839) and the Neptune (1839).
Many more subsequently entered the market, though without much success. By
the mid-nineteenth century, few of the new companies had survived (e.g. the
Marine Insurance Company), and the market remained highly concentrated. It
