28                    The Development of International Insurance


can safely be stated that not until the late 1850s and early 1860s did a ‘second
generation’ of successful companies appear in the marine market.11
    This, then, in brief, was the market in which British cargoes of textiles head-
ing to the Southern Cone were insured. But who effected the policies? Most of
the insurance for such exports were effected by the British-based merchants han-
dling the goods, particularly when advances on consignments were given. In the
words of the London mercantile house of Huth & Co. to their northern England
agent procuring consignments on their behalf: ‘if we have to make advances, we
must of course make ourselves the insurance’.12 Alternatively, ship-brokers were
often entrusted with effecting marine insurance for exports to South America,
for which a commission was charged to the exporter.
    The papers of Huth & Co. provide a rich source of information in this respect.
Huth & Co. were in the habit of using mainly private underwriters to effect their
insurances. Among the most frequently used were S. Boddington, R. Davis, G.
Pearce, R. Ramsay and Mr Cruikshank. Huth & Co. also used the services of the
London Assurance Corporation and the Royal Exchange Assurance Corpora-
tion and, from 1824, occasionally used the Marine Insurance and the Indemnity
Mutual Marine Assurance companies.13 In spite of having a Liverpool branch
and most shipments leaving Britain from the Mersey, cargoes were insured by
Huth at London. The standard brokerage commission charged by Huth & Co.
to their textile suppliers for effecting marine insurances was 0.5 per cent of the
invoice value of cargoes.14
    Private underwriters took risks for as little as £50 for British textile cargoes
to southern South America, which means that behind any given cargo there were
a great number of individuals. The papers of a mixed Commission, established
to investigate British claims against the government of the United Provinces of
Rio de la Plata for losses suffered during a Brazilian blockade to the River Plate
(1825–8) provide useful information in this respect.15 These claims reveal that
underwriters at Lloyd’s in groups of up to 40 different ‘names’ might insure a sin-
gle vessel, taking risks from £100 to £200 each.16 Alternatively, the insurance of
cargoes was shared, one-third taken by one of the incorporated insurance com-
panies, and two-thirds by underwriters at Lloyd’s.
    In summary, when the market was highly concentrated in the hands of under-
writers, who took little risk per ship, exporters needed to resort to a wide range
of individuals to insure their cargoes. As a consequence, networks of contacts to
guarantee the availability of as many underwriters as required were extremely
important. The higher the risks in the shipments to distant markets, such as the
Southern Cone, the lower the competition among underwriters. For exporters
to Chile and the River Plate, the marine insurance market was very restricted
and it was often difficult to obtain insurance, even for houses with the reputation
of Huth & Co. It was not unusual for the pool of their underwriters to become
