    1 THE MARINE INSURANCE MARKET FOR
   BRITISH TEXTILE EXPORTS TO THE RIVER
          PLATE AND CHILE, c. 1810–50


                             Manuel Llorca-Jaña



                                 Introduction
In the 1810s the River Plate and Chile gained independence after three centuries
of Spanish dominion. From that point, British merchants opened for the very
first time mercantile houses on the spot, marketing European manufactures in
exchange for South American produce. During the first decades following inde-
pendence, the main products imported by the new South American republics
were textiles. These comprised over 80 per cent of British exports to the River
Plate and Chile between 1815 and 1859 (see Figure 1.1).
     Despite the predominance of textiles within British exports to these emer-
gent markets, very little is known about the marketing chain of textile exports.
This chapter sheds new light on this underexplored subject, by focusing on one
aspect of this textile trade, namely, the marine insurance market in which British
textile cargoes were insured before departing for the Southern Cone.1
     This chapter relies heavily on the business correspondence of Huth & Co., a
London-based mercantile house with branches in Liverpool, Valparaiso, Tacna,
Arequipa and Lima, and which was very active in the marine insurance market.
However, this firm was just one among over 250 British merchant houses trading
with the Southern Cone during the first half of the nineteenth century. There-
fore, further evidence was also obtained from other British houses involved in
British textile exports to southern South America, namely Hodgson & Robin-
son (based in Buenos Aires), Hancock & Wylie (a Scottish house with branches
at Bahia, Buenos Aires, Pernambuco and Rio de Janeiro), Dallas & Co. (also
based in Buenos Aires) and Lupton & Co. (Leeds merchants exporting to the
River Plate). Finally, the Chilean National Archives (Valparaiso Judicial Papers)

                                      – 25 –
