30                        The Development of International Insurance


per cent on the invoice value of cargoes were frequently seen, particularly during
periods of warfare26 and winter months, though rates were more usually 2 to 4
per cent (see Figure 1.2).27
    As shown in Figure 1.2, in any given year there was a great dispersion in the
premiums charged by underwriters. This was a result of many objective but also
subjective factors. Indeed, the premium may be seen as a function, in which:
premium charged = f (packing used to protect against seawater damages;28
seaworthiness and age of the vessel;29 reputation of shippers; reputation of mas-
ter and crew; nature of cargo; destination and route of voyage, accounting in
particular for distance and the danger of seas;30 season in which the trip was
taken;31 political situation;32 reputation of the merchant taking the insurance;
sums already covered by the underwriter in same vessel). Or, as stated by a con-
temporary:
     In life assurance, premiums are the result of the highest science brought to bear on
     data most laboriously collected. The production of marine premiums is practical,
     merely empirical, and unscientific in the last degree … between the premiums of life
     and marine insurance there are real and organic differences. The event contemplated
     by every life policy is a certainty – the death of the assured. The contingent part of
     the transaction is the time for which that event may be deferred. The event insured
     against by a marine insurance … is a mere contingency, one that may never happen at
     all … Marine insurance premiums are an admixture of experience, tradition, and per-
     sonal fancy. They fluctuate with seasons and states of a barometer; they are affected
     by locality, by a storm, and by political events; by prejudice, by the character of the
     assured or broker, by competition … They are too uncertain to be tabulated, too
     unsettled even to be quoted in a price-current.33

                              Marine Insurance Policies
So far I have described the structure of the marine insurance market and given
some idea of the costs of underwriting. However, a fundamental question remains
to be answered: what sort of marine insurance policies were available? Policies
could cover total loss of goods (general averages) as well as particular averages
(e.g. seawater damage). Any policy covering both total loss and particular aver-
ages was called ‘against all risks’. A policy covering only total loss was called ‘free
from particular averages’ and was intended for goods especially susceptible to
seawater damage, e.g. corn, fruit, sugar, salt, flour, although, on account of the
great extent of seawater damage of cargoes sent to the Southern Cone, it was also
extended to textiles (at least for the Anglo–Latin American trades).34
    The exporter chose which policy to use. Fielden Brothers (merchants of
Manchester), for instance, sometimes insured against both total loss and sea-
water damage, although at other times only against total loss or did not insure
at all.35 Owens & Son, also Manchester merchants, made ‘it a rule not to insure
