                 The Marine Insurance Market for British Textile Exports          33


to mortgage the ship and possibly its contents, including cargoes, against loans
extended. All these costs were paid by the consignees once the ship arrived at her
final destination, by signing a bond of indemnity.51 The liability each consignee
bore had to be established, which was estimated according to their respective
shares of the total invoice value of cargoes. If consignees refused to pay for their
contributions, their cargoes were not unloaded.52 Under this sort of legal regime,
exporters were taking huge risks when shipping to the Southern Cone. The
higher the share of an exporter in the total value of a cargo, the higher the risk of
being liable for a great loss. In this context, the strategy of shipping regular and
small quantities of bales in as many vessels as possible seems to have been better
than chartering a whole vessel.

 Growth of British Textile Exports and the Development of Marine
                             Insurances
As can be seen in Figure 1.3, there was continuous and very high growth in the
volume of British textile exports to the River Plate and Chile between the 1810s
and the 1870s.53 This was the result of many developments taking place during
this period, including: improvements in packing of textiles (to protect against
particular averages); falling costs of production in Britain for cottons, linens,
worsteds and woollens; falling ocean freight rates; falling marine insurance rates
(see below); introduction of free trade in Britain; dramatic improvements in
communications; falling import duties on the spot; better port facilities; the dif-
ficulties faced by local craft industries; and the establishment of a more stable
political system on the spot.
    There is no space in this chapter to examine all these developments. How-
ever, as far as marine insurance is concerned, as a direct result of better packing
and shipping improvements, insurance premiums fell significantly. Figures 1.4
and 1.5 provide convincing new evidence in this respect. If during 1822–4 pre-
miums at Lloyd’s for shipments to Valparaiso were 5 per cent of the value of the
cargoes, in 1847 the rate had gone down to 1.63 per cent (see Figure 1.4).54 The
particular experience of Huth & Co. confirms this (Figure 1.5).55 The historical
literature, however, lacks any reference to this significant reduction in the cost
of insurance, a material variable explaining the development of exports to the
Southern Cone.
    Improvements in the packing of textiles, which gave protection against
damage from seawater and fresh water, were a positive development promot-
ing exports, a point previously neglected by economic historians. During the
early decades of commercial intercourse with the republics, a great deal of British
textiles arrived soaked and had to be sacrificed at very low prices in public auc-
tions. These were times when exporters packed their goods mostly in canvas or,
