32                         The Development of International Insurance


    Among policies there were other dividing lines: either to go for ‘open poli-
cies’42 or ‘valued policies’.43 In the first case, the price of the goods was not stated
and to claim from the underwriter the invoice cost of the goods was required.
In the second case, a quantity of goods was insured at a given price. To claim
from the underwriters it was only necessary to prove that the stated quantity
of goods were on board the ship, usually with a bill of lading. As explained by a
Liverpool merchant:
     When insuring thus you are at liberty to value your property at any reasonable sum
     over the cost, without affecting the validity of the policy. But if I had insured any stated
     sum … without describing the quantity or without valuing them, then this is what
     would be termed an open policy, and before I could recover I must produce an Invoice
     and Bill of Lading, and nothing over the Invoice amount could be recovered.44

Thus, merchants could insure for the actual cost of the goods or for something
more. It was very common for merchants to effect insurances to cover not only
the prime cost of goods but also freight charges, import duties and commissions.
The purpose of this strategy was to assure that the trade operation was wholly
covered. Thus, values insured were very often up to 40 per cent above the actual
invoice costs.45 Another alternative was for merchants to pay a higher premium,
part of which (e.g. four-ninths) was returned by the underwriter once notice of
goods being landed was received.46
    In contrast with particular averages, general averages affected all who had
interests in the ship or cargo. In the words of McCulloch, general average:
     comprehends all loss arising out of a voluntary sacrifice of a part of either vessel or
     cargo, made by the captain for the benefit of the whole. Thus, if a captain throw part
     of his cargo overboard, cut from an anchor and cable, or cut away his masts; the loss
     so sustained being voluntarily submitted to for the benefit of the whole, is distributed
     over the value of the whole ship and cargo, and is called ‘general average’.47

In spite of the great impact general averages had on the business of those export-
ing textiles to the Southern Cone, there are no references in the related secondary
literature, at least not to my knowledge.
    But how exactly did general averages work? If a ship was chartered in sound
condition48 but during the voyage it was damaged by causes other than those
which could be attributed to its captain (e.g. bad weather) so that it could not
continue, instead having to anchor at the closest port to undertake repairs, then
such damages were called ‘general averages’.49 Damage thus declared was the
responsibility of the consignees, not the shipowners nor the ship’s captain.
    When, more typically, captains of damaged ships had no funds to pay for
repairs, the solution was to sell part of the cargo, borrow money from merchants
at the port where the ship was to be repaired, or both.50 For this, captains had
