

* and at the fame time fecure to the Public an-equitable compenfation for 
that portion of its Military Expenditure. 


Your Committee have annexed to this Report, a Copy of the Account 
between the Public and the Company, <ontaining’a detailed Statement 
of the particular Items of which the two fums of £.- 8,461,331 and 
£. 6,960,912 are compoted. 


Your Committee cannot, in juftice to the Company, conclude this part 
of their Report, without calling the attention of the Houfe to the remon- 
frances made againft the mode adopted by the Committee appointed in 
1805 to take into confideration the Account between the Public and the 
Eaft India Company, as far as relates to the Expences incurred by the 
Capture and Maintenance of Malacca and the Moluccas, and the Main- 
tenance of Ceylon; a mode of decifion by which Claims en the part of 
the Company, to ro Jefs an amouat than £.1,972,984, have becn fet 
afide. ; 


. The.arguments by which thefe Claims were refifted and defended, and 
from which it is to be prefumed the adjuftment in queftion took place, 
will be found in the Appendix; and alfo, a Statement prepared by the 
Court of DireGors connected with the fame fubje@. 


Your Committee, under the Order of reference made to them, have 
not thought themfelves authorized to make any obfervations upon the 
principles 


App* N° 2. 


App N° 3. 


App® NP & 


Appt N*6 
App" N°7 


‘Appt Nes, 
ppt we 


8 First REPORT from the Serect ComMITTER on the 
principles on which the Committee of 1805 arranged the Claims of the 
Company. 


Your Committee have, however, thought it their duty, under all the 
circumftances of the cafe, to ftate the amount of what the Gompany 
maintain to be their juft and unfatisfied demand. 


+ 


Independently of the Claim which the Company have preferred againft 
the Public, for Expences incurred in carrying’ into execution the Orders 
which at different times have been tran{mitted to India, for Expeditions 
againft the Settlements of fuch European Powers as have been engaged 
in war with this Country, and alfo to. Egypt, Your Committee obferve, 
that in the above-mentioned Petition various circumftances (all of which 
are conneéted with that ftate of war in Europe and in India) are repre- 
fented as the caufes which have produced the prefent embarraffments in 
the Company’s affairs, and the grounds on which they pray for fuch 
relief as Parliament may think fit to grant. 


It will be evident from the examination of the feveral Accounts con- 
tained in the Appendix to this Report, which exhibit a view of the 
Company’s pecuniary concerns in England during the laft ten years, 
-when compared with the Eftimate for 1808-9, that the deficiencies of 
the-laft and prefent year have proceeded from caufes which have been ‘ 
progreffive in their operation, and that the ftate of affairs which thofe 
Accounts now exhibit, is to be traced to a combination of various cir- 
cumftahces connected with the Wars in which the Company have been 
engaged in India, as wellas with the general ftate of warfare in which a 
Jarge portion of Europe has for a. long period been involved. Your 
Committee have felected from the annual Accounts of the Company’s 
affairs at home, which have been prefented to Parliament during the laft 
ten years, a comparative Statement of Receipts and Payments in fuch 
articles as have experienced or admit of any confiderable variation in 
their amount. {t will appear from that Account, that the prefent defi- 
ciency may be afcribed principally to the following caufes : 