


ift. To the diminifhed fale of the Company’s goods ; the fum eftimated 
to be réceived from fuch fales for the year 1808-9 being £. 1,394,589 
lef than the average of the ten preceding years; £. 2,200,996 lefs than 
the average of the firft five years of that period ; and £. 588,183 lefs than 
the average of the laft five years. 


It would lead Your Committee much beyond the limits within which 
they propofe to confine this Report, if they were to enter upon the 
difcuffion of all the caufes to which the gradual decreafe in the amount 
of the Company’s fales, during the .laft ten years, may poffibly be 
afcrived. It will appear, however, from the account of fales during that 
period, that in the article of Tea, which forms a large proportion of their 
whole trade, no diminution has taken place, but that it has chiefly occurred 

nm 


Arrarrs 6¢ Tue East Inpia Company, 9 


° 

in the Imports from India, and particularly in the different defcriptions of 
Piece Goods. The increafed confumption of Cotton Stuffs manufactured 
in Britain, and the advantages derived to neutral Nations from the 
expence at which the trade to India muft neceffarily be carried on during 
war, as well as the obftruétions infeparable from that ftate of war 
which has exifted with little intermiffion fince the renewal of the Com 
pany’s Charter in 17935 are the caufes to which, ini the opinion of 
Your Committee, the diminifhed fale of Indian Imports may principally 
be attributed. 


2dly. To the increafed expence of freight and demorage of the Com: 
pany’s fhipping ; the eftimated amount of the fame for the year 1803-9, 
being £.276,251 more than the average of the tem preceding years ; 
£.276,712 more than the average of the firft five years of that period 
and £.275,790 more than the average of the laft five years, 


‘Whether the fyftern now purfued by the Company, in the defcriptien 
of veffels which they have been accuftomed to employ, is the moft agco- 
nomital to them. or the moft beneficial to the Country, or whether it is 
calculated to withftand the competition of Foreign Nations, are points 
on which Your Committee are not yet prepared to pronounce an ‘opinion; 
but which they confider to be of the higheft importance, as they affect 
not only the commercial profperity of the Company, bat the perma- 
jent intereft of the Britith Empire, in the prefervation and exclufive 
enjoyment of a valuable portion of its Trade. In eftimating this charge, 
to which the Commerce of the Company is expofed, from the rate of 
Freight, it muft be recollected that the means of defence and confequent 
fecurity which the fize and ftruéture of their thips afford to their valuable 
cargoes, and to the tranfport of troops and military ftores, mutt necef- 
farily be included in any comparifon between the prefent and any cther 
fyftem which may be fuggefted. 


galy. To the increafed amount of Bills of Exchange drawn on the 
Company in England from India and China; the eftimated amount of 
which for the year 1808-9 being £.725,408 more than the average 
of the ten preceding years ; £521,970 more than the average of the 
firft five years of that period; and £. ae 845 more than the average 
of the laft five years. 