


Your 


Appendix, 
Ne 5. 


4 Finer REPORT from the Setect ComMItTree on the 


Your Committee, finding it ftated in the Petitign from the Company, 
as one of the caufes from which the prefent embarraffment in their 
pecuniary concerns had arifen, that a large balance of Debt remained 
due to them from the Public, on account of various expences incurred 
for Expeditions to the French, Dutch, and Spanith Settlements in the 
Indian Seas, and to Egypt, have proceeded, in the firft inftance, on the 
inveftigation of the Account between the Public and the Company. 
Your Committee find, that in the Report made by a former Committee 
upon this fubjeét, on the 26th day of June 1805, and now referred to 
Your Committee, the feveral heads of Charge upon which the Claims 
preferred on behalf of the Company were founded, are arranged in the 
following manner, in three Claffes, according to the nature of the circum- 
ftances and tran{actions out of which they have refpeétively arifen. The 


Firft Clafs compofed of fuch heads of Charge as fhould fall, in the opinion 


of the Committee framing that Report, exclufively on the Public; the 
Second, of fuch as fhould be borne exclufively by the Company; and the 
Third, confifting of Charges to be divided equally between both parties. 


FIRST CLASS, chargeable to the Public. 


*¢ An Account of Expences incurred by the Eaft India Company in 
“ India and England, for the intended Expedition to the French 
“© Tflands, and for the Expedition againft and Supplies to the Cape 
“ of Good Hope.” ' 

« An Account of Expences incurred by the Eaft India Company, for 
“ the intended Expedition againft Manilla.” 

* An Account of the Expences incurred by the Eaft India Company, 
“ for the purchafe of Veffels for His Majefty’s Navy, Repairs to- 
“ King’s Ships, &c. &c.”” 


. “ An Account of the Expences incurred by the Eaft India Company, 


“ by the capture of the Danith Settlements in India, in 1801.” 
* An Account of the extraordinary Expences incurred by the Eaft 
“ India Company, by the Expedition to Egypt, over and above 
“ the charge of the Troops in India.” 
Ceylon Balance of Property, December 1for, and Remittances from 
“ India fubfequent to that date ; alfo the Expence of the capture of 
“ the faid Ifland.” 


« 


SECOND CLASS, chargeable to the Company 


« An Account of the Expences incurred by the Eaft India Company, 
*¢ in confequence of various Captures made from the French and 
“ Dutch on the Peninfula of India, including Subfiftence of 
“ Prifoners.”” 

“ An Account of the King’s Troops in India, beyond the number 
“ authorized by A@s of Parliament.” 


THIRD CLASS, to be equally divided. 


* An Account of the Expence incurred by the Capture and Main- 
“ tenance of Malacca and the Moluccas, and for the Maintenance 

* of Ceylon, deducting the profit on fpices.”” 
, THE 


Arrairs or Tue East Inpia Company. 5 


THE faid Report further ftates the determination of that Committee, 
concerning the Rates of Intereft to be allowed upon the feveral Sums 
appearing on the different fides of the Account, as follows : 