


- that extent which Parliament may think fit to grant. 


Your Committee ‘have prepared an Account of the probable Affets of 
the Company on the 1ft March 1809, in which the amount of Débt 
due to them by the Public, as the balance of their Account, is taken only 
at £- 1,500,419, inftead of £.2,460,000, which the Company claims 
and in which nothing is allowed for their property afloat, and which wih 
artive in Englaud fubfequently to that period, though a large portion of 

the 


Arrairs or Tas East. Inpia Company. ay 


the charges affecting ‘that property. will be incurred and paid duting the 
current year. Eftimating the amount in that moft unfavourable mode, 
there will remain a balance of £.2,819,587 in favour of the Company. 
If credit however is given for the value of that property, and the fum due 
by the Public is ftated at the amount claimed by the Company, the efti- 
mated balance in their favour will be £.9,050,587. 


The value of the Eaft India Houfe and Warehoufes has been ftated 
by the Company’s Surveyor, whofe evidence on that fubje@ is inferted 
in the Appendix, 


It will be apparent to the Houfe, from the examination of thofe 
Accounts, that the moft accurate Eftimates which can be formed 
’of fuch articles of Receipt and Expenditure as are comprehended in 
them, muft be liable to uncertainty; but Your Committee have no 
reafon to doubt, that every praéticable degree of caution has been ufed 
in preparing them. 


Your Committee have already ftated, that they are proceeding upon 
the detailed inveftigation of the various matters comprehended in the 
general obje@t of.their enquiry, and which embrace the whole of the 
Financial and Commercial as well as Political Concerns of the Com- 
pany. An examination into the Civil and Military Eftablifhments in 
India, will form a material branch of that enquiry; and Your Committee 
are already ftrongly impreffed with the neceffity of carrying into effect 
reduétions in the amount of thofe Eftablifhments to a very confiderable 
extent. Your Committee are happy to add, that this important fubject 

_ has alfo engaged the ferious attention of the Court of Direétors, and of 
their Governments abroad. 


App= N° 18 


App" Nig. 


Ne 2, 


APPENDIX 


Appendix, N° 1. 


CORRESPONDENCE relating to the Difcuffions betweemMr. Wirrwer and, 
Mr. Wricur, the Accountants employed'in the Examination of the Account depending 
‘between The Pustic and The East Inpra Company on the Brinciple.of Adjuftment 
of the Account. 

SIR, Whitehall, 23d April 1807, 
HE progrefs in the inveftigation-of the Account depending between The Public and The 
Eaft India Company, being interrupted ‘by a radical difference in opinion between 
‘Mr. Wright, the Accountant nominated by theCompany, and myfelf, on the interpretation of 
‘the principles laid down in the Report of the Committee; and Mr. Wright having obferved, 
that, without the fanétion of his fuperiors, he does not feel himfelf juftified in acquiefcing in any 
other mode of ftating the Account, than in conformity with the opinion he has formed; I am 
under the neceflity of requefting that you will be pleafed to fubmit the circumftances of the cafe 
to the confideration of the Right Honourable the Lords Commiffioners of His Majefty’s Trea- 
dury, and receive their inftruétions for my guidance. The origin of the difference which has 
‘occurred, and the grounds on which we have refpectively drawn our cenclufions, being diftin&ly 
sdetailed in Minutes recorded on the fubjeét, I have annexed Copies of thofe Documents, pre- 
fuming it would be the beft mode of bringing the fubject before their Lordfhips : it therefore 
‘tay be only neceffary here to fubmit, thatthe queftions for confideration are, whether it was 