


It is unqueftionably to thofe heavy drafts from India and China on 
the Company's Treafury at home, that the largeft portion of the de~ 
ficiency in their funds during the laft and prefent year muft be afcribed. 
Your Committee have been informed, that in confequence of arrange- 
ments which the Court of DireGtors have adopted, and of orders which 
they have tranfmitted to China, the amount of Bills from thence is not 


App? N14, 


App* Nes, 


Appt N°8. 
D® 13,14 


likely to increafe, and that in all probability it will fall confiderably ., 


below the average of former years. . Your Committee have not been 
enabled to form any fach expectation with regard to the dmount of 
Bills from India. Any interruption in the tranquillity of the Company’s 
territories would create increafed demands on their Treafury at home, 
which can only be effectually avoided by a furplus Revenue in India. 

261, c The 


Appt Nei3s 


App* N° 16, 


App? Neig. 


ro »—- First REPORT from the Seuect Commitren on the 


. 
The attainment of that objet, either by a reduction of Expenditure or 
by additional Revenue, or by the operation of both thof caufes, is in- 
difpemable to the maintenance of the Company’s credit and power in 
India; and to this important fubjeé&t Your Committee wae swithout delay, 
dircét its moft {erious attention. 


. Your Committee have confined themfelves in this Report to a ftate- 
ment of the principai caufes which have produced the prefent deficiency. 
There are others, however, of inferior amount, which have contributed 
to augment it. The charge of payments to Military and Marine 
Officers retired from the fervice, has been gradually increafing for feveral 
years, and amounts now to a fum much beyond the calculation which © 
was formed of it when the fyftem was firft eftablifhed. ‘ 


The addition to the Company’s bonded Debt has aifo conitributed to 
iwell the deficit, by the increafed charge for Intereft. 


- With the view of enquiring into the pratticability of Retrenchment in 
Expenditure, Your Committee have called for the detail of the articles 
comprehended under the head of “ Charges General,” which, in the 
aggregate, amounts annually to a very confiderable fum. 


As far as Your Committee have. yet inveftigated this Account, they 
have found no reafon to believe that it is capable. of any material re-, 
duétion, but they propofe to. go into a. more detailed examination of the 
particular articles of which-it confifts. And, entertaining this intention, 
they forbear at prefent laying before the Houfe any thing more thari an 
Abftra& of the Account, and of its principal fubdivifions for the laft three 
years, as it has been prepared by the Court of Direétors. 


The Company having ftated in their Petition, that they did “ not pre+ 
“* fume to requeft the interpofition of the Houfe to aid them in their 
“ prefent emergency, without at the fame time thewing their unquef- 
“ tionable ability to difcharge all their prefent Debts in England, and 
“ torepay whatever the Houfe may in its wifdom think fit to affiftthem 
“ with ;” and having fubmitted to the Houfe a Statement in that Pe- 
tition, by which it appeared that a confiderable balance would remain to 
them, after making provifion for the payment of all their Debts in 
England, but exclufive of their Indian Debt ; Your Committee felt it 
their duty carefully to inveftigate that part of the fubje¢t, and they have 
no difficulty in ftating an opinion, that there will remain Affets in this 
Country to an amount confiderably beyond what the prefent exigency of 
the Company’s affairs appears to demand, in fecurity for any advance to 