

be drawn from Chin, may not enced the = of iL £00,000 on the ift of 
March 1B0g9- + - = p65. 

No 16,—Abftra& Account of the Sums paid in “England for Charges General - ibid. 

Ne 17.—An Effgjmate of the Debts and Credits of the Eaft India Company, in England, ex- 
clafive of their Czpital Stock, as they will ftand on the 1ft March 1809 pp. 66& 67. 

Nv 18.—An Account, thewing the Amount of the Peyencnts made in England, previous to 
ft March 1808, ‘and the Amount eftimated to be paid before 1ft March 1809, 
on Account of Cargues to arrive after the latter period - = = p67. 

Ne 19,—An Eftimate of the Debts and Credits of the Eaft India Com anys in England, ex- 
clufive of their: Capital Stock, as they will ftand on rft ch 1809; together 
with an Eftimate of the Value of Goods expected to be received from India and 
China in the courfe of the Year 1809-10 - - = pp. 68 & 69, 

Ne 20.—Examination of Saimuel Pepys Cockerell Eq. Surveyor to m the Eaft India 
Company : 7B 7% 


REPORT. 


Tar SELECT COMMITTEE appointed to 
enquire into the prefent State of the Affairs of the Eaft India 
Company, and to report the fame, as it {hall appear to them, to 
the Houfe, with their Obfervations thereupon, and alfo to report 
their Proceedings from time to time to the Houfe; and to whom 
feveral Accounts and other Papers prefented to the Houfe, re- 
{peéting the Revenues and Charges, and the commercial Concerns 
of the Eaft India Company; and alfo the Petition of the United 
‘Company of Merchants of England trading to the Eaft Indies, 
were feverally referred :—Have, purfuant to the Orders of The 
‘Houfe examined the matters to them referred, and have agreed 
upon the following REPORT. 


a Bi utmoft diligence which Your Committee have been enabled to 

beftow upon a fubje@ of fuch extenfive detail, as an enquiry into 
* the prefent ftate of the Affairs of the Eaft India Company,” would 
not have been fufficient for its full inveftigation within the period which 
hhas elapfed fince their appointment, even if many of the moft neceffary 
documents, as to the State of the Company’s Affairs in India, had not 
been received fo recently as to preclude the poffibility of their being 

‘examined with that degree of accuracy, care, and attention, which the 
complicated nature, not lefs than the importance .of the fubjeét, indif- 
penfably requires : Your Committee are ftill engaged in the confideration 
of the various matters comprehended in the general object of their 
enquiry, and will from time to time fubmit their obfervations thereupon 
to the Houfe ; but in confequence of the Petition which the Company 
have prefented to the Houfe, and which has been referred to Your 
‘Committee, they have deemed it advifable, in the firft inftance, to 
advert to the Allegations of that Petition, including not only thofe 
which refer exclufively to the Balance claimed by the Company as 
owing to them by the Public, but alfo fuch as relate to the general 
State of their Affairs, and to report upon the fame, as far as the Progrefs 
which Your Committee have been enabled to make in their enquiry, 
has, in their apprehenfion, juftified the Obfervations which they now 
offer to the confideration of the Houfe. 