


“ Your Committee have thought it reafonable, that the Company's 
“ Claims, fo far as they arife from an expenditure carried on in India 
“ by Loans raifed there, fhould be made up with.the rate of Intereft 
“ paid. by the Company abroad for the Loan of the year in which the 
© expence was actually incurred; and that the Paymafter General's 
* Account fhould bear Intereft according to the rate paid by the Public 
“ for money in Europe, in the feveral years in which the demands have 
“ accrued ; credit is given on the other fide. of the Account on all pay- 
« ments hitherto made by the Public in difcharge of thefe demands, at 
“ the fame rate of Indian Intereft as that debited by the Company.” 


THE Report then ftates the opinion of the faid Committee, that, as 
far as they can judge, a balance of about £. 2,300,000 would be owing by 
the Public to the Company, according to the mode of ftating and making 
up the Account therein prefcribed, and that the fum of £.1,000,000 
might fafely be voted by the Houfe on account. But it was obferved 
in ‘the faid Report, that the Accounts on which the opinion of the faid 
Committee (in regard to the amount of what might prove due to the 
Company) had been founded, would require revifion ; and it was re- 
commended, that an Accountant fhould be nominated on the part of the 
Treafury, and another on the part of the Company, to examine and 
make up the Account according to the principles therein fpecified, pre- 
vious to the final balance being difcharged; and it was alfo ftrongly 
recommended, that frequent and early adjuftments of Accounts fhould 
take place between the Public and the Company. — 


Your Committee find, that the fum of £.1,000,000 was accordingly 
voted in that Seffion of Parliament, and paid to the Company, and that 
‘in conformity to the recommendation contained in the faid Report, Ac- 
countants were natned on the part of the Public and the Company 
refpectively, for the purpofe therein mentioned, who appear to have 
entered without delay upon the duties affigned to them. The difcuf- 
fions which took place between them on the fubje@ of thefe Accounts, 
will:be found an the Appendix. 


Your Committee find that, in the Seffion of 1806, another fum of 
f. 1,000,000 was voted and paid to the Company on account; it ap- 
pearing by a letter from Mr. Wittwer, the Accountant named by the 
Lords Commiffioners of the Treafury on the part of the Public, to 
George Harrifon, Efquire, dated on the 25th day of June 1806 (which 
fetter is referred to Your Committee) that although, for reafons therein 
particularly detailed, no final adjuftment of Accounts could at that time 
®e made between the Public and the Company, the ultimate balance due 
to the larter would be found to exceed that fum. 


» 261, . B : Your 


App Neu. 


App? N°4. 


6 First REPORT from the Serect Committee on the 


Your Committee find, that additional claims and demands have arifen 
between the Public and the Company, fubfequent to the Report of 1805, 