


“above alluded to, fome of which have accrued from a continuation to 


a later period of Accounts and heads of Charge then exiting, and 
others from different circumftances and tranfa€tions which have fince 
occurred, 


" Your Committee have applied, to thofe of the former defcription, the 
principles which they found laid down in the Report of 1805. The 
following Charges, which have grown out of new matter fince that 
Report, they have agreed, after due confideration, to include in the 
Firft Clafs, as payable by the Public : 


Expences incurred in India on account of the Chinefe Settlers at 
Trinidad. 

Expences incurred on account of the Expedition to the Cape of Good 
Hope in 1805. . 

Supplies for the Expedition againft Buenos Ayres. 


Your Committee are alfo of opinion, that the Charge of Prifoners of 
War taken at fea by His Majefty’s thips, which does not appear to 
have been particularly noticed by the Committee of 1805, ought to be 
defrayed by the Public, efpecially as the principle on which this Claim is 
founded, feems to be recognized and admitted in the A@ of 1793, 
chap. 52. fect. 127. 


Your Commitee find that a new demand has alfo been brought forward 
on the part of the Public againft the Company, for Viétualling Stores 
furnifhed for the Company's Service by the Commiffioners of Vidual- 
ling, or their Agents. 


Your Committee find, that the grofs demand of the Company on the 
Public, drawn up in conformity to what has been ftated, with Intereft 
computed to the 1ft March 1808, amounts, according to the beft judg- 
ment which Your Committee can now form, (feveral of the items of 
fach demand being ftated upon eftimate) to the fum of £. 8,461,331, 
and that the counter demand, on the part of the Public, for advances 
of Cafh upon account (including the two fums of £. 1,000,000 and 
‘£- 1,000,000, mentioned in the former part of this Report) for difburfe- 
ments by the Pay Office, and for fupplies furnithed by the Vi@ualling 
Office, with Intereft computed to the fame period, amounts to 
£.6,9683912, leaving a balance due to the Company from the Public 


of £. 1,500,419. 
In the above fam of xe 6,960,91 2. is included the fum of £ 3,082,75 5. 


‘which is the amount of the Claim of the Paymafter General on the 


Company, including Intereft to the 1ft March 1808, deduéting there- 
from the fum of £. 443,767. hereinafter mentioned. 


Your Committee cannot adduce a itronger inftance of the neceffity of 
attending to the recommendation of the Committee of 1805, as to the 
frequent 


Arratrs or Tue Easr Inpia Company, 7 


frequent adjuftment of Accounts between the Public and the Company, 
than the mere ftatement of a Claim to 0 large an amount, and which has 

~ moreover been only brought forward at a period fo recent, that it has 
been, and for a confiderable time muft. be, impoffible for the Accountants 
to examine in detail, and form an opinion on the accuracy of all the 
Charges. There is every reafon to believe, that the obje@ions which 
have already been urged on thé part of the Company to the Pay Gffice 
demands, and which are detailed in the Appendix to this Report, are in 
general well founded, efpecially as their validity has been ftrongly con- 
’ firmed by a Return which was laid before Your Committee, from the 
Oifice of the Adjutant General, of the periods during which the different 
Regiments were chargeable to the Company ; and it is very poffible, that, 
on further and more minute’ examination by the Accountants, other 
objections will be difcovered. On thefe confiderations, Your Committee 
have thought it reafonable to fufpend for further examination, fuch part 
of the Pay “Office demand as has been fpecifically objeéted to on the part 
of the Company, which amonnts to the fum of £. 443,767. In concluding 
this part of the fubjeét, Your Committee have no hefitation in fuggefting 
the expediency of repealing the Claufe in the Adt of 1793 (cap. 52, 
fec. 128.) which enaéts, that the Company fhall be chargeable with all 
the recruiting and other expences incurred in England, for Regiments in 
India {which in practice has been found fo difficult to adjuft,) and fubfti- 
tuting other provifions which might Gimplify the mode of ftating the 
Account, and confequently facilitate its frequent and early adjuftment, 