


‘COPY of a Letter from Gzorce Harrison, Efquire, to Mr. Wrrtwer, dated 
18th June 18073 with the Extract from the Minutes-of the Lords Commifioners of 
the Treafury, of the 12th June, enclofed therein, 


SIR, 

Tue Lords Commiffioners of His Majefty’s Treafury having had under their confideration 
your Letter of the 23d April 1807, praying further dire@tions relative to the examination of your 
Accounts with the Eaft India Company ;—I am commanded by their Lordfhips to tranfmit-a Copy 
‘of their Minute thereon, for yous information and guidance, 


Tam, Sir, 
‘Your moft obedient Servant, 
Treafury Chambers, (Signed) GEO, HARRISON. 
18th June 1807. 
©, N. Wittwer, Efq. 


Extrat of TREASURY MINUTE, ated rath June 1807. 


Reap Letter from Mr. Wittwer, dated 23d April laft, requefting further direCtions relative to the 
examination of the-Accounts between the Public and the Eaft India Company. 

Read alfo Report of the Committee of the Houfe of Commons on the Account between the 
Public and the Eaft India Company, and the Papers prefented to the Houle of Commons, relating 
to the faid account, ordered to be printed the 27th June laft. 

My Lords cannot entertain a doubt that the principles eftablifhed by the Committce of the 
Houte of Commons, for the adjuftment ef the claims of the Eaft India Company againft the Public 
for the Expences incurred at Ceylon and the Eaftern IMlands, were adopted with a reference to the 
accounts prefented by the Company, and then a@tually before the Committee, as printed in the 
Appendix to their Report ; and confequently, as the extra expences alone of the troops employed 
on thofe fervices are generally ftated in thefe accounts, that it could not be in the contemplation 
of the Committee, that any part of the ordinary expences thereof fhould be made a charge againit 
the Public, Upon this point My Lords conccive it to be impoiible that there fhould exift any 
difference of opinion between the refpeciive Accountants, as far as relates to the periods for 
which the accounts were aCtually before the Committee, and upon which they had to decide; nor 
are My Lords aware of any principle being laid down or any exception taken in the faid Report, 
from which it can be inferred, that it was in the contemplation of the Committee that a different 
tule and feale of adjuftment fhould be applied to the aceounts of the charge incurred at the above 
fettlements, fubfequent to the periods for which the accounts were then before them, What 
pofible ground can be affigned for any di jon from the principle adogted by the Committec, as 
far as it applies to the charges incurred for the Eaftern Iflands, My Lords are altogethe: at a iofs to 
conie@ture, as they are not apprized of any circumftance or occurrence which eccalioned any change 
whatever in the fituation of ¢ Tflands, either tdation to the Eaft India Company or to 

261, the 


38 Appendix so The-Finsr REPORT from the Serecr Cosmrrrer 


the Public, at any period between 1798 and 18013 and they art therefore éeciledly of opinion 
that the ordinary charges cannot be admitted in this part of the account. But with refpect to 
Ceyloe, My Lords are difpofed to be of opinion that it may fairly admit ofa doubt, whether the 
change made in the Government of that Hland in November 1798, and confequently in its con- 
neétion with and depeudance upon the Eaft India Company, would not wariant the application: of 
the principle ‘contended for by Mr. Wright, from that period, particularly (as it appeats that the 
Company then ceafed to have any controul over the expences’ of the [fland, and that aty {eparation 
of the orcinary from the extraordinary expenditure could only be made by eftimate and computation, 
and not from any exifting ftatement of the charges a@tually incurred. 