

My Lords theretore conceive it may be expedient, without pledging themfelves to any final 
decifion on the queftion, that the account for Ceylon, from the 1ft of November 1798 to the 
git December 1801, thould be prepared in two ways, viz. 

it. ‘The whole of the fupplies or payments on account of Ceylon by the Company to be 
charged, and one half thereof to be allowed tothe Company. 

adly., That from, the total of the above amount of fupplies or payments by the Company, there 
Should be deducted in the firft inftance, fuch a fum as, according to the belt eftimate or computa-- 
tion chat. can be made by the Accountants, the ordinary charges may have amounted to, and that 
one half of the remainder fhould be allowed to the Company. 

When the account is thus prepared, My Lords will have this part of the queftion again under 
their confideration ; and in cafe the doubts they cannot but entertain fhould not then be removed, 
and the difference between them and the Eaft India Company cannot be otherwile fatisfactorily 
adjufted, My Lords will feel it their duty to fubmit to Parliament the expediency of referring to 
another Committee the Reports made by former Committees, and a!l other documents on this 
queftion, for their final examination, decifion and report, 

‘Tranfnit Copy of the foregoing Minute to Mr. Wittwer, for his information and guidance. 


COPY of a Letter from Mr. Wirrwer to the Honourable Henry WELLESLEY, 
dated 4th November 1807; with two Inclofures, 


SIR, Whitehall, 4th November 1807. 


I Am honoured with your Letter of the gth ult. fignifying the defire of the Right Honour- 
able the Lords Commiffioners of His Majefty’s Treafury, that I fhould fuggeft the Jateft period 
at which I think it would be pratticable to wind up the Accounts with the Maft India Company, 
either by the end of this year or the beginning of the next, 

Having in my letter to Mr. Harrifon, of the 16th Sept. adverted in a general way to the dif 
ficulty of defining the period when this bufinefs can be brought to a clofe, it now remains to 
explain more particularly the caufes to which this difficulty is to be afcribed. In fo doing, I 
mutt take leave to call to your recollection, that the account itfelf is prepared by Mr. Wright, 
the officer appointed by the Eatt India Company; that my province is to examine with him the 
principles on which the account is framed, with the calculations. The objeétions which I have 
felt mylelf obliged to make to feveral of the documents from India, and in other refpeéts, have 
confiderably lengthened the difcuflion, and of courfe protracted the fettlement of the bufincls. As 
that gentleman muft naturally be belt informed, as to the means he may be furnifhed with to 
obviate my objections, as well as of the extent of the claims which may ftill be outftanding upon 
the Public, the neceflity of a reference to him, before I could comply with their Lordfhips” 
direGions, will, I truft, appear obvious. 

. have, therefore, addreffed Mr. Wright upon this fubject. Copies of my letters to him, and 
of his reply, are hereunto annexed, as the beft means of bringing to the view of My Lords the 
pfature of the obftacles in the way of winding up the account. 