

7. Butfurther, Mr. Wright obferves, that the Committee, in the claffification of the feveral 
Aheads of claim, have placed “ the Expence of the Capture and Maintenance of Malacca and the 
Moluccas, and for the Maintenance of Ceylon,” in the third clafs, to be egually divided between 
the Public and the Company. Xt feems neceflary, therefore, in ftating the whole expence, thac the 
ordinary, as well as other charges, fhould be included, It does not appear that, in any other 
manner, the expence can be faid to be equally divided. There is no “ exception of the peace 
‘eftablifhment,” mentioned by Mr. Wittwer, contained in the Committee’s Report. 

8. The principle above-mentioned appears fo equitable as fcarcely, in Mr. Wright’s opinion, to 
ailmitof doubt. How can it be faid, that two parties bear an expence equally between them, 
if from the aggregate a Proportion is firft deduéted, and charged exclufively to one of the 
parties ? 

g. Mr. Wittwer has evidently formed his ideas of the mode he has fuggefted of ftating the 
accounts, from obferving, in the difcuffions that formerly took place on the Company’s claims, 
the terms “extra expence’’ made ufe of, as well as from feeing thefe terms in the accounts; but 
in regard to the latter, he muft be fenfible that they contain other items, befides the additional al~ 
lowances to the troops, incidental to war; and, as to the former, Mr. Wright mutt repeat his 
doubt of the accuracy of the inference thence deduced, for the reafon above ftated. The terms 
“extra expence’ ate liable to different conftruétions. ‘The queftion ftill recurs, what are extra 
expences? They may fignify expences for which the revenues of the country cannot provide ; in 
which fenfe Mr. Wright has reafon to believe they were taken; during the former difcuffion rela-. 
tive to Ceylon. It is obvious, alfo, that the whole expence, whether ordinary or otherwife, of 
troops employed in defending foreign poffeffions, becomes an “ extra expence,”” when new levies 
are made to fupply the place of thofe troops, or where fuch levies are made for the exprefs purpofe 
of being fo employed. 

10, The latter obfervation is particularly applicable to the Malay Corps, mentioned above. 
‘But Mr. Wright purpofely refrains from infifting on the more general argument in fupport of his 
opinion, upon the prefent occafion, founded on the increafe made to the ordinary military eftablifh- 
ment, for the purpofe, among others, of maintaining the Dutch Pofleffions, this being a fubject 
involving confiderations of a greater extent, which can be determined only by fuperior authorities, 

m1, Mr. 


18th April 
1807. 


16 Appendix 4 The First REPORT jrom the Sevect Commirrzs 


11. Mr. Weight has before noticed the difficulties in the way’ of making out the account’ in 
the mode propofed ; and Mr. Wittwer has fully admitted thefe difficulties in bis recent obfervations, 
wherein he allows, that it mutt, in fome degree, be ftated by computation. From what is above 
remarked, Mr. Wright very much doubts the practicability of making up the accounts from May 
1796 to December 180%, upon the uniform principle mentioned; or that uniformity of ftate~ 
ment will be preferved to that period. It is evident, in any view, that neither cleariefs nor accu- 
racy of calculation can be expeéted from the means propofed, and that, after all, the account: will 
be, in part, an eftimate, and that formed on very uncertain grounds. - - 