

intended in the principle laid down by the Committee of the Houfe of Commons, 

‘That the peace, or ordinary charges of the troops employed. at Ceylon and the Eaftern Iflands, 
from the 1 May 1796 to 31ft December 1801, are to be admitted in the accounts.as a charge 
upon the Public :—if not, 

That the fupply by the Company te the Ifand of Ceylon, from rft November 1798 to 3rft 
December 1804, is to be admitted as the fum chargeable to the Public, without reference to 
the application of it. 


Tohave the honour to fubfcribe myfelf 
‘Sir, 
Your moft obedient fervant, 
THOMAS NICHOLAS WITTWER. 


MINUTES of the Proceedings of Mr. Witrwsr, Accountant on the part of the 
Public, and Mr. Wricur, Accountant on the part of the Eaft India Company. 


Mr. Wittwer obferved, that on referring to the amount of the fupplies to Ceylon between No- 
vember 1798 and December 1801, he difcovered that the whole fupply from Madras and Bengal 
during the period, with a fmall difburfement by the Military Paymafter General, was taken as the 
charge: that by the Ceylon Books the whole of the military expences were defrayed from thofe 
fupplies and from the revenues: that it is his idea, according to the principle laid down by the 
Report of the Committee; the charge of the Ifland is to be equally divided between the Company 
and the Public from May 1796 to December 1801, with the exception of the peace eftablifhment 
of the troops, which is to be borne wholly by the Company: that the Account of the demand 
upon the Public had been thus drawn up to November 1798, excluding the peace eftablifhment. 
Ic is therefore his opinion, that the ordinary or peace expence of the troops for the period in quef- 
tion; viz. from November 1798 to December #801, fhould be deducted from the amount of the 
fupplies, and that a further adjuftment fhould be made of the revenues of the Ifand for the fame 
period. 


261. D- Mr. 


16th April 
1807. 


14 Appendix to The Fissr REPORT: from the Setzct Committee 


Mr. Wright.—In reply to Mr, Wittwer’s obfervations onl the charge for Ceyton from No- 
vember 1798 to December 1801 inclufive, Mr. Wright remarks as follows: 

aft. As to the principle conceived by Mr, Wittwer to be laid down in the Report of the Com- 
mittee of the Houfe of Commons, Mr. Weight entertains fome doubts of its being intended to 
apply in the manner noticed ; He underftands it was meant that the Company fhould be reimburfed 
half their expences of Ceylon and the Dutch Iflands. 

ad, The charge for Ceylon from November 1798, accordingly confilts of the advances and 
fupplies made, there being at the time the account was firft ftated no other information on the 
fubje&; and the documents to form the account being very defective, Mr. Wright apprehends 
confiderable difficulty will occur in framing the ftatement in the mode alluded to by Mr Wittwer, 
as the ufual pay of thétroops mutt be taken by eftimate. 

- 3d. But, in proceeding to form fuch an account, credit fhould be given for the ordinary pay, 
&c, for troops raifed exprefsly for fervice at Ceylon, for inftance, the Malay Corps ; the ufual pay 
for this fhould be brought to credit, not only from’ 1798, but from its firft formation in 1796. 