

4th, The charge for Ceylon in the prefent ftate of the account, confits as above-noticed in 
the advances for or fupplies to the Ifland. The Company having no controul over the difburfe- 
ments of Ceylon fince O@ober 1798, it was not thought neceflary to make any enquiry regarding 
them; but Mr. Wriglit cari have no objection to opening the account in the way Mr, Wittwer 
mentions, in doing which due credit muft of courfe be given to the Company for a proportion of 
the revenue. In the meantime, the obfervation re{pecting additional corps may be left to the deter 
mination of fuperior authorities, 


Mr. Wittwer.—Mr. Wittwer deems it proper to offer fome further obfervations, in confe- 
quence of Mr. Wright's reply, refpeéting the ftatement of the Ceylon account from November 
1798 to December 1801. 

ft. On the principle. Mr. Wittwer admits, that the principle laid down by the Committee of 
the Houfe of Commons, on which the Company are to be reimburfed the half of their expences 
for Ceylon and the Dutch Iflands, is merely ftated ina general way, witheut diftin@lly and literally 
prefcribing the nature of the difburfement, whether for extra charge or otherwife. Buthe muft 
take leave to remark, that by inference it feems eftablifhed, that the Committee, in determining 
upon the general principle, could only have in view the mode of ftatement in the account referred 
to their confideration. by the Houfe, which account was drawn out by the Officers of the Company, 
under their own fpecial direStion, and had likewife undergone repeated inveftigation by Com 
miffioners on the'behalf of the Public, whofe Minutes on this very account, in concert with fome, 
of the Gentlemen of the Eaft India Direétion, being recorded, confirm, as he conceived, that it 
was underftood that the peace eftablifhments of the troops employed, not only on thefe fervices 
but on other fervices, for which a demand is made upon the Public, is to be borne by the Com- 
pany, and that the war and extra expences only are to become chargeable to the Public.’ On this 
principle it appears to Mr, Wittwer, that the whole of the accounts have been dawn up, and there~ 
fore he cannot confider himfelf authorized, without fuperior authority, to deviate from it. As to the 
Malay Corps, Mr. Wittwer does not difpute that it may be confidered, in fome degree, 2s an 
extra charge for a force raifed exprefsly for the fervice at Ceylon ; but as it was not fo taken in the 
orginal formation of tke account, and does not appear to have come under obfervation in any of 
the difcuffions on the fubjeét, Mr. Wittwer cannot take upon himfelf to admit this expence as a 
claim upon the Public: he therefore begs to exprefs his fatisfaction, that Mr. Wright is difpofed to 
Jeave the point to the ultimate determination of fuperior autkerities. 

‘With regard to the point which has given rife to the prefent difcuffion, viz the expence of 
Ceylon between November 1798 and December 1801. Mr. Wittwer, at the fame time he is 
not unwilling to admit there is {cope for argument, on the ground ftated by Mr. Wright, as co the 
Company pofleffing no controul over the adminiftration of the Ifland in that period, yet, under the 
<ircumftances in which he is placed, he prefumes this cannut be taken into prefent confideration 5 
and that the only courfe he can purfue is a literal and ftri&t attention to the line marked out by the 
Report of the Committee, and this Icaves no latitude but to ftate the account from May 1796 to 
December 1801 upon one uniform principle. The difficulties in the way of fo doing, are certainly 
very great, from the complete alteration in the nature and formation of the books and documents 
confequent upon the change in the mode of adminiftration of the Ifland in November 1798. 
Mr. Wittwer is aware, that from this circumftance, the extra charges can only be feparated from 
the ordinary or peace charges by computation on the refpeétive proportions of each in former. 
months ; and propofes that the account be fo made up. 