

Mr. Wittwer, however, conceives it proper to offer fome further remarks, in fupport’ of the 
conclufions he has been induced to draw, and to detail the grounds of them. It is impoffible for 
him to judge what were the intentions of the Committee, or on what principles the claflification 
of the claims was formed, further than as it may be gathered from the Report and Appendix. 
‘The third clafs, refpecting which the difference of opinion has now arifen, is “ An Account of 
“ the Expence incurred by the Capture and Maintenance of Malacca and the Moluccas, and for 
* the Maintenance of Ceylon, deduéting the Profit on Spices,” which is preferbed to be equally 
divided between the’'Company and the Public; and the Account No. 3. in the Appendix, is re- 
ferred to in the margin. 

Mr. Wittwer mutt be allowed to prefume, that the component parts of the account, thus claffed 
by the Committee, muft have been underftood by them, and that the term Extra Expences of the 
Military, diftin@ly mentioned in moft of the ycar’s ftatements, was underftood to be on the fame 
principles as in the other accounts, viz. the Charges exclufive of what would have been dif 
burfed by the Company, if the troops had remai.ed on the Peninfula, unemployed on foreign expe- 
ditions ; and not merely rhe extra expence for which the revenues of the conquered countries could 

ot 


on the Aygains or Tus East Innta Company. za 


‘not provide, as adverted to by M r, Wright.—Mr. Wittwer admits, that the Committee, in their 
Report, do not exprefsly and literally fanétion any exception as to peace éfablifoment; but he refts 
tis opinion of the intentions of the Committee folely upon the mrafs of collateral evidence to be 
-colleéted from the Report and Appendix. Whether the principle Mr. Wittwer contends for be 
founded in equity or not, is not the point in queftion. He refers to the Record, from which may 
diftin@ly be gathered, the Company have extenfive claims upon the Public; thefe claims are 
arranged under diftin& heads in feveral accounts, which accounts are ultimately brought to the 
Confideration of Parliament, and in which accounts the Company only demand reimburfement of 
extra charges, on the principle already ftated by Mr. Wittwer. Can Mr, Wittwer, therefore, be 

sauthorized to fuppofe, that the Committee of the Houfe, to whom thefe accounts were referred, 

scould intend te give the Company what they did not originally demand, or that, in dividing the 
fum claimed between the Public and the Company, the divifion was to be made otherwife than on 
sthe accounts under their confideration ?—This account, with the others, was ftated to require 
revifion; but shat, Mr. Wittwer conccives, was fimply inveftigation or examination of the 
caccount itfelf. If additions were to be made to it, or alterations in principle introduced, it is to be 

-prefumed they would have been diftinétly mentioned in the Report. 

* Finally, Mr. Wittwer cannot admit of the diftinétion mentioned by Mr. Wright, as to the in- 
terpretation of the intention of the Committee, with refpect to the term extra expence being appli~ 
cable only to claims, the whole of which are allowed. 