

12, To conclude ;—The manner in which the account fhould-:now be ftated, Mir. ‘Wright 


conceives is this : 


gat April 
1807. 


13. The whole expence of whatever kind, defrayed by the Company for Ceylon fom the. 1 
May 1796 to the 31ft October 1798, to be charged. 

14. From the aft November £798 to the 31f December 2801, the whole of the fapplies to 
or payments on account of Ceylon, by the Company, to be charged. 

15. Half of the above, according to the Report of the Committee, to be allowed to the Com- 
pany. 

16. The reafon fer tating the latter period in the way propofed, is, that from the iff. November 
1798, the Company had no controul over the expences of the [Mand ;'it would. be-obvioufly unjuft, 
therefore, to make them accountable for any proportion of difburfements made under fuch cir~ 
ccumftances, nor does Mr, Wright conceive this was intended. 

17. As to Malacca and the Moluccas, the whole of the Company’s expence, whether ordinary 
ar otherwife, to be ftated during the entire period of the accounts ; half of which to be carried to 
the credit of the Company, conformable to the rule!aid down in the Committee’s Report. 

- 18, Upon thefe principles alone, Mr. Wright conceives, the account fhould be ftated ; therefore, 
without the fanGtion of his fuperiors, he does not feel himfelf jultified in acquiefcing in any other 
mode, 


Mr. Wittwer having flated, in his Minute of the 16th inflant, the grounds on which he has been 
led to form his opinion on the principles laid down in the Report of the Committe of the Houle 
of Commons, for the fettlement of the account between the Public and the Company, in fo far 
as relates to Ceylons and Mr, Wright having, in his reply of the 18th, fated his view of the 
intention of the Committee, in the principle laid down by them, ina way direély contrary, and 
having further extended his view of the operation of the principle beyond what was fuppofed to 
be in contemplation ; the difcuffion on this point mutt neceflarily be deferred, till Mr. Wittwer 
fhall have fubmitted the whole of the proceedings to the confideration of the Lords of the Trea 
fury, as he fhould not conceive himfelf authorized to agree to fuch a radical change in the mode 
of ftatement, if even the obfervations of Mr. Wright had operated to produce any alteration in 
the fentiments of Mr, Wittwer on the fubje@, 

Under fach circumftances, what has now been remarked might fuffice, But there are fome 
points in the obfervations laft made by Mr. Wright, which Mr. Wittwer fecls himfelf bound, in 
juttice to himfclf, and in vindication of his proceedings, more diftinéily to notice, left it fhould 
be fuppofed that Mr. Wittwer, from a pertinacity in his own opinions, had been the means of 
protrating the completion of an inveftigation, which on every confideration, both regarding the 
Public and the Eaft India Company, it is defirable fhould be brought toa clofe, 

Mr. Wright, it is prefumed, muft admit, that, where principles are only laid down in the 
general manner in which they are laid down in the Report of the Committee, the interpretation 
of their intention muit be a matter of opinion only, and that therefore the difficulty of coming to 
a fatisfa&ory conclufion is great, 