

2dly. From the want of ftatements from His Majefty’s Pay Office, relative to the demands on. 
the Company for expences of the King’s Regiments ferving in India, you are aware, that thefe 
demands, as hitherto received, include only to the end of the year 1803, and the particular 
explanations of the accounts to that period, fo long ago and fo repeatedly defired, have not yet been 
furnithed. 

3dly. From want of more precife explanations regarding fome of the heads of charges againft 
the Public, contained in the laft abftra&t account, with a copy’ of which you have been furnithed ; 
viz, the expences of the lait Expedition to the Cape, thofe relative to Trinidad and Buenos 
Ayres. 

"and, laftly, From the difference of opinion which prevails, as to the conftru@tion of the prin- 
ciples intended to be laid down by the Committee of the Houfe of Commons, in their Report of 
June 1805, for tating the accounts of Ceylon and the Eaftern Iflands. From the communications 
I have been honoured with, I apprehend it is not likely that the Company will be contented to 
abide by the decifion of the Right Honourable the Lords Commiffioners of His Majefty’s Trea- 
fury, contained in their Lordfhips’ Minute of the 12th June laft, on the reference you found 
yourfelf under the neceffity of making to them upon this fubject, Until, therefore, fome accom- 
modation of this difagreement fhall take place, the final fettlement of the accounts muft be 
poftponed. 

‘Thefe are the principal obftacles which prefent themfelves to the completion of the accounts, 
at either of the periods you have mentioned; and from what is above ftated, you will readily per- 
ceive that it is entirely out of my power to offer an opinion, as to the period within which it may 
be praéticable to wind up the whole of the accounts as they now ftand, 

I have the honour to be, 
Sir, 
Your obedient humble fervant, 
(Signed) ‘Ws WRIGHT. 
T. N, Wittwer, Ef, 


so Appendix to The First REPORT from the Senxct Commirrie 


¢ 


COPY of a Letter from the Honourable Henry Wetresey to Mr. Wirrwer, 
dated 31ft December 1807; with the Extra& from the Minutes of the Lords Com- 
miffioners of the Treafury enclofed therein, 


SIR, 7 
Tue Lords Commiffioners of His Majefty’s Treafury having had under their confideration 
"your Letter of the 4th November laft, in anfwer to one from this Board, relative to the probable 
period at which it will be practicable to wind up the Accounts between the Public and the Eaft 
India Company, I am commanded by their Lordthips to tranfmit a Copy of their Minute thereon, 
for your information and guidance, 
T am, Sir, 
Your moft obedient Servant, 
Treafury Chambers, (Signed) HH, WELLESLEY. 
grit Dec. 1807.3 


“TAN, Witwer, Efqe 


Extra&t of TREASURY MINUTE, dated 14th December 1807 


Reap Letter from Mr. Wittwer, dated 4th November laft, in anfwer to one from this Board, 
relative to the probable period at which it will be praéticable to wind up the Accounts between the 
Public and the Eaft India Company, and enclofing copy of the correfpondence between him and 
Mr. Wright, the Officer appointed by the Eaft India Company to prepare the accounts. 