

By the mode above propofed, uniformity of ftatement will be preferved to the period when 
the entire adminiftration of the Iffand was aflumed by His Majetty’s Government, in December 
801, 


Mr. 


ow the Arraixs or Tur’ East Inp1a Company. | 1S 


Mr. Wright.—1. Having,’ fince the mecting of the r6ti inftant, given the moft deliberate 
and authentic confideration to the obfervations of Mr. Wittwer, exprefiive of bis ideas of the 
manner in which the account for Ceylon, from the ft November £798 to the 31{t December 
¥801, fhould be ftated, and having carefully reperufed the Report of the Committee of the Houle 
of Commons; Mr. Wright finds bimfelf under the neceffity of objecting altogether to the 
principles of framing the Ceylon Account, contended for by Mr. Wittwer. 

, ad. Mr, Wright conceives, thef principles have been adopted on a miftaken conftrudtion of 
the Committee’s Report. No mention is made in that Report of Extra Expences as toCeylon, and 
tke other Ditch ‘Iflands;,. the. only article of the Company’s claims, in which the Committee 
shave ufed the terms Extraordinary Expences, is the charge for the Expedition to Egypt. Andas to 
the inference from the mode of ftatement in the accouat before the Committee, Mr. Wright 
muft be permitted to doubt its accuracy. That the account was drawn out by the Company’s 
‘Officers is certain ; ‘but if it were formed upon the principles ftated, it is to be recoileéted, that 
the Company expected the full reimburfement of the amount; which being denied,. the account 
neceflarily, as Mr. Wright conceives, is liable to correction and alteration, as well in principle as 
an figures, under the Report of the Committee. 

«gh Mr: Wright admits, the proceeding hitherto obferved in examining the Dutch Accounts 
‘has been upon the principle now propeled, on his part, as well as on that of Mr. Wittwer; but a 

_. More attentive examination has convinced Mr. Wright of the error therein, 

4th, That the Committee referred to the account before them is net difputed. The difference 
of opinion arifes from the conftruGtion of their intentions, as tothe alteration to be made in it 
‘qn the principles they have recommended. 

5th. If the revifion, according to Mr. Wittwer’s conftrudtion, is to be proceeded on folely in 
view.to the account as tated, Mr. Wittwer has only to examine the charges made by the Com- 
pany, to fee if they are corre& or otherwife; whereas he himfelf appears to depart from this view, 
by introducing the Ceylon Books from sft November 1798, the charges in which are not in the 

account as ftated. The books were never completely, until within thefe few days, in the 
Company’s poffeffion; the receipts and charges in them were not fubjeét to the Company's 
authority. 

6. Now, if the obje€tion to admit the expence of the Malay Corps, « becaufe it was nat taken 
> an the original formation of the account,’ be valid, the fame reafon fhould, in juftice, operate to 
the exclufton of the charges in the Ceylon: Books, from November 1798; for the charges fpeci- 
fied in thofe books “ were not taken in the original, | formation of the account ;” and as to the ob- 
fervation of the charge for the Malay Corps, itis certain, that it never occurred to recollection 
at any of the difcutfions that took place. 