

And I take leave to add, that the part calling more particularly for the confideration of their 
Lordthips is the Account of the demands by the Office of His Majefty’s Paymafters General, which 
is effentially requifite before any balance can be even eftimated: and it is at the fame time to be 
obferved, that this account will be minutely examined on the part of the Company. 

On the whole, therefore, I humbly hope it will appear to their Lordthips, that the delay in the 
fettlement of this long pending account, is folely to be attributed to the various circumftances 
which have now been brought to their confideration, and that it is not in my power to yield a 
literal obedience to their commands, by defining the period when the bufinefs can be brought to a 
final clofe. ig 

Iam, Sir, 
a With due refpeat, 
Your moft obedient fervant, 
THOs NICHOs WITTWER. 
Honourable Henry Wellefley, a 


&c, Ke. 


o the AFFAIRS oF THe East Inpta Company. 19 


SIR, Whitchall, 26 O@ober 1807. 

Havine received the commands of the Right Honourable the Lords Commiffioners of His 
ajefty’s Treafury to fuggeft the lateft period at which it would be pragticable to wind up the 
Accounts depending between the Public and the Eaft India Company, either by the end of this 
year or the beginning of next, I am unable to yield obedience to them, without a reference to you 
upon the fubject, 

As it naturally falls to you to be beft acquainted with the extent of the claims of the Company 
upon the Public, and with the documents which may have been received to eftablith thofe claims, 
I thal! efteem myfelf obliged, if you will favour me wiih fuch obfervations as fhall affift me in 
replying to their Lordfhips’ dire@tions ; alfo with your opinion as to the period at which it may 
probably be practicable to wind up the whole of the accounts as they now ftand, 


lam, Sir, 
Your moft obedient fervant, 
(Signed) T.N. WITTWER. 
William Wright, Efq. 
SIR, Eaft India Houfe, 2d November 1807. 


I wave been honoured with yours of the 26th ult. ftating that you have “ received the 
« commands of the Right Honourable the Lords Commiffioners of His Majefty’s Treafury, to 
“ fuggeft the Jateft period at which it would be practicable to wind upthe Accounts depending 
«© between the Public and the Eaft India Company, either by the end of this year or the beginning 
“of next; that you are unable to yield obedience to thofe commands, without a reference to me on 
“ the fubjeét ;” defiring, therefore, * fuch obfervations from me as may affift you in replying to 
“ their Lordfhips’ dire&tions ;” and “ my opinion, as to the period within which it may probably 
“be praéticable to wind up the whole of the accaunts as they now ftand,”” 

In reply, I have to obferve, that it is not pofiible, in my opinion, to wind up the accounts 
either by the end of this year or the beginning of next, and for the following reafons: 

> aft. From the want of the-complete accounts from India of the charges of the Egyptian Expe- 
dition, as I have underftood from you, in the courfe of the examination we have been inaking, that 
you are not fatisfied with the corre€tnefs of the documents from which thofe charges have been 
tated; and I have no hefitation in acknowledging they are not fufficiently perfect to authorize 
your admiffion of them : before, therefore, this article of the Corapany’s claims can be clearly and 
explicitly ftated, it will be neceflary to wait the arrival of more particular information from 
India, . 