

My Lords are of opinion, notwithftanding the feveral difficulties ftated by Mr. Wittwer and Mr. 
‘Wright, owing to fome of the accounts not being as yet received from India, and to that of the 
Pay Office not being completely made out, that it would be very defirable to balance the Account 
between the Public and the Eaft India Company, as well as it can be done, from the materials and 
vouchers which now exift, or which may very {peedily be brought forward, and put into the 
hands of the refpeétive Accountants, up to the end of the year 1803, which My Lords con- 
ceive will include all claims on either fide, up to the clofe of the laft war: And My Lords are 
therefore pleafed to dire&t, that the Accountants, having reference to the principles laid down in 
the Reports of the Committees of the Houfe of Commons, and in the Minute of this Board of 
1ath June laft, fhould proceed to prepare fuch an account, and to ftrike the balance thereupon, fo 
that it may, if poffible, be fubmitted to their Lordfhips early in the enfuing feffion of Parliament. 

In direéting this account fo to be prepared and balanced, My Lords are of opinion, that, notwith- 
ftanding any balance which may be declared to be duc on either fide, it fhall be open to either 
party to produce fuch claims, though arifing prior to the end of the year 1803 ; and that fuch claims 
fhould be admitted, if properly fupported by proofs and vouchers to the fatistaétion of the other; 
and, in like manner, that either party may, upon what n:ay appear to him fufficient grounds (if 
furnifhed to him by any information or documents obtaincd fubfequent to the account being fo 
balanced) proceed to challenge and difallow any items therein, and claim, upon a ftatement of the 
cafe, to have fuch particular heads of charge reconfidered. And My Lords are further of opinion, 
that any fettlement of accounts that may take place between the Public and the Eaft India Com- 
pany, upon the principles, and with the exceptions hercin ftated, ought not to preclude the re- 
{pective Accountants from proceeding to examine and baance the accounts fubfequent to the 
year 1803, as expeditioufly as the nature of the refpective ciaims, and of the vouchers by which 
they may be fupported, will admit; but that this latter acccunt fhould be proceeded upon feparately, 
and kept diftinét from the former. 

Trarfmit Copy of this Minute to Mr. Wittwer, for his information and guidance, and to the 
Paymaftcr of the Forces, with directions to expedite, as much as poffible, the Account of Clai:s 
outfanding againft the Eaft India Company in his Office, up to the end of the year 2893. 


on the Arratrs or Tae East Inpra Company. 


at 


ln ETS 


Appendix, N* 2. 


Charges in Regimental Accounts objected to—Charges in Extra Payments objettionable—Difputed Dedudtion from 
Pay-Office Charges—Abftract Amount Deductions or Sufpenfions from Pay-Office Accounts, 


CHARGES iy REGIMENTAL ACOUNTS OBJECTED TO, 


NATURE and AMOUNT of the CHARGE. 