

‘That the only ground upon which the Company could claim icich was in café'they could fhew 
that moré troops had been paid in India than were actually neceflary for its defence; that this could 
not be the cafe, as noné had atually been drawn away from India, except thofefent to Egypt, which 
took place at a fubfequent period, for, as to thofe at Ceylon, they helped to fecure the Peninfula; 
and that it muft be obferved, that although the King’s troops had been increafed, the Company’s 

European troops had been decreafed in nearly the fame proportion, 

In reply it was obferved, that the argument refpecting the Company’s being bound to'fend 

, their troops on external expeditions, might be carried to an indefinite lengthy as Adminittration 
had only to give it as their opinion, that it was sora for. the fafety of India, that troops 
thould be fent from thence to the Mediterranean, or the Welt Indies, and the Company would 
be obliged to obey any orders they might think proper to. give to that effe&t; but that it could 
ss reafonably expected that any ex incurred on fuch fervices fhould be borne by thé 

ompany, : : 

Accounts were then ordered to be prepared of the numbers of King’s and Company's Europea 

eset! Tadia for the laft five years. 

Alfo, an eftimate of the expence incurred by the Company for the Egyptian Expedition. 4 
‘ ‘ Adjourned'to the 2rft Inftant. 


Eat India Houle, 21ft Januay 1803. * 


tae 
Account, N® 3. An Account of the expence of the capture of an and Malacca, conformably 


with the orders of the lait Meeting, was prefentzd and read: it was then examined and 


DUTCH CAPTURES. compared with the Account (N° 3, B.) and was propofed to be fubftituted in the room 


tiiereof. ‘The principle of the account feemed to be admittd, 
“An Account of the expence of maintaining Dutch prifoners captared at Ceylon and the Eaftert 
Tflands was then prefented. It feemed admitted that this ought to form ademand againft Governe 
ment. The Military Paymafter’s books of Fort St. George were then examined upon thele 
accounts, which wete found to be fatisfactory. ; 
An Account was then prefented of the expence of maintaining Ceylon, fince October -1798, 
when Mr. North was appointed Governor. A difcuffion enfued, when, 2fter’a variety of obferva- 
tions, it was propofed to exatnine the inffructions which were fent out to India when Mr, North 
‘was appoint -d Governor of Ceylon, and the papers which related to this'appointment, which were 
accordingly produced; a of them were read, and a colleGtion of extradts was oidered to be 
formed againft the ext Meeting. = 


Account, N° 6. 3 The Account ftating the number of King’s and Company’s European troops 


aGtuelly in india, becween 1797 and 1801, was then prefented. “Ir was agreed on the 


KING's TROOPS. pat of Mefizs. Bragge and Vauiinarg that the numbers altegether. very litde.ex- 


2 


3 ceeded 


2 on the’ Arratrs of Taz Easr Inbia Company. te 


Q 
eectled the King’sand Company's troops authorized to Be paid out of the revenues of India by the 
‘AGs of 1783.and 1791; theretore this claim was objected to altogether. 