


*That the'demanids ofthe’ “Public the ‘Contpany,:confined.to the account of the Paymalter 
:General for expences.attending King’s troops ferving’ in Indiayamountte =~ £. 1,553,600. 


“The former-demands .appear to have Pecans :Detorean the Yost EI and he month of Apri 
13803, ; 


The latter «to. bave atcsudd from-the: year 1793 te the:year: 1803, inclufive, ‘ 


Your Gommittee find, that, during. the period of a¢count above fpecified, Comiiffioners Have © 
sbeen appointed, at thece-differentstimes, onthe part ofthe Treafury and the -BattIndia Company, 
for the purpole of confidering the moft.equitable mode-of adjurfting this account, Thefe Continif- 
-fioners refpedtively made confiderable progrefs; and upon fuch balances.as. wete admitted by the 
- Commiffioners gn the part of the Treafery -as..cleatly eftablifhed, Parliament has-voted ‘money 
on account: but, pattly from the whole of the accounts not havirig been tranfnitted, home 
when thé Cominifieners fat, and partly from’ a confiderable-difference .of opinioa 8.40 the 
: principles upon which she: fetdlement dhould take,place, no final Report appears to -have been 
made by any of thefe Commifionets,-cither to the ‘Treafury.or the Court of Directors, 
Accurate Minutes having been taken of the-feveral difcuffions whicl at various times took 
place between the Gentlemen compofingthe two.latt Commiffions, on the detail of the accouitits, 
Your Committee -thought. it expedient to call fer thofe Minutes, 98-furnithing much. uleful 
information and reafoning, to affift-their judgement i in forming.a decifioa upon this complicated 
cand ¢:‘ficulefubje&ts and they bave thought it right sto annex the fame in the Appendix to this “Appendix, No, 10 
- Report. 
Your Committee, in fubmitting to-the Houfe the gefult of their examination of: thefe stecounts, 
“have endecvoured,.as far as in their power, todos lice between the Public and.the- Company, 
upon a progreiive expenditure of: feveral years. "The proportion-in avhich ‘the-charge was to 
- fall ultimately on the parties, does. not appear to-have-been afeertained with any precifion at the! 
atime, inthe orders. which.gave rife to thofe fervices, but was left to be fettled at .a.future day, 
~in the confidence chat, between fuch parties, an agjudiment on grounds of; jultice and iberality 
would be effected. . 
Your Commitee fhould asnieceflarily extend .this.Report,. were they to enter.into the detailed 
sreafoning.upon which Your Commitee’ have, after much deliberation, aligned the feveral heads of . 
charge to be borne, either feparateiy or jointly by the Public and the Company.; their decifion 
-on each kead has been influenced partly by a confideration of the precife orders iffued at. the 
time of diregting thofe fervices, partly by the. nature of the feryices themfelves, and partly bya 
Contideration ofthe proportionate fhare of advantage from, or duty to perform the fervices in 
-quettion, which appeared.to ‘Your Committee naturally to attach to the Pablic arid the Company 
-refpeCtively, according to. the beft view. they could form of their relations, duties, and interefts, 
within the fphere of thefé operations. But, whilft they have endeavoured to difp6fe of each, 
head of charge, according -to ‘a jut eftimate of its own particular character, Your Committee 
delire it to be asnderitoed, that they-have not found it pofible to adopt a ftridt uniformity of 
principle with re{pett co each head taken feparately, but have-rather aimed at fuch general arrange- 
ment upon-the whole of the account, as might beft reconcile, ont a queftion liable to confider- 
able difference of opinion, the fair claims of the parties, Your Committee have accordingly 
- thrown the feverat heads of:charge into. three claffes ; the firft, failing exctufi ively on the Public; 
othe fecond, exclufively on.the Companys and the third, falling equally spon both. 