

Hat, the expence ought be defrayed by the Public, a 
» “Thefe facts feemed to be admitted by Meflrs. Bragge and<Vanlittart, and it appeared to be 
ard opinion that the .remaining expence of this Expedition ought to form a charge againit the 
ublic, ’ 

Tt was then agreed to examine the items of the account itRIf amounting to £. 157,892, being 

merely the extra expence incurred by the Company on account of the intended Expedition:: 

| enquiry being made at what time the Expedition’ was abandoned, the (ame was, fhewn from the 
+ Sompany’s Rechts Sh ee 

Some objection was made to the mode in which the demorage of the {hips intended to be 

-employed in this Expedition was calculated; the objedtion was admitted to be founded, and the 

_account was ordered to be»corrected.. eral other obfervations were alfo made, and fome other 


_cotredtions took place. Upon the whole, ho material objection {cemed to occur, cither as to the 
.amounty items Of the account, fubject to the correétions, propoled, 
i= Pr sexaminztion of the nextearticle in this acccunt, viz. the charge for the 
by m Ex Cape of Good Hope, 4 part of the expence of which Expedition had been 
al Aimilarly. d eae orien Pe Se ncich inthe year 1797, this charge {cemed to.be 
_admitted as forming an undifpu' lim again{t the Public, in point of principle. 
ox © Oninfpeéting the particulars of the account, it was obferved on the part of Mefits, Bragge and 


ufial 


Wanfitrart, that the Compziy’s outward-bound Acet might have touched at St. Salvadore on their 


: >on the Astaizs or Tue East Jota Company. ~ -% ayy 


‘ufual voyage to China, and that therefore extra demorage ‘on this aceount ought not to.be __ Report from 
charged by the Company. Evidence was exhibitcd from the thips’ journals, to prove that this The Committce on 


could not have been the cafe, and that in the prefeat imitance, the ihips were taken there*by orders ee ae: 


from the Admiral, and the - 
‘The principles upon which-the demorage of fhips was calculated in thefe accounts was then Eaff India Company, 
abjected:to: the obje&tion was admitted, and the accounts ordered to be correéted. 26tlifune 1895. 


‘The receipt of fome gunpowder, on account of Government, was then queftioned: the receipt Appemdix, No. tor 
was found to be acknowiedged by Mr. Pringle. Some obfervations were made on the valuation - 
of fome fugar delivered from the Orpheus for the fervice of Goverment. Some other alterations 
were then ordered to be made in this account, which: was dene accordingly. Upon the whole, it 
was confidered that this article formed a jult demand again Government. 

Tc was then propofed to read the orders under which the Expedition againft Manilla Account, N° 2. 
had. been commenced, a counterpart of which orders were forwarded to india by pM = 
the Secret Committee.» Thele orders were accordingly read, bearing date the gch Be ae cea 
November 1796, and figned by Mr. Pitt, Mr. Dundas, and Mr. Eliot. wih la paeeee - 

£vidence was then’ adduced from the Company’s Records and Accounts received from India, to 
hew when, and how, the Expedition was fulpended, and that the charge made upon Government 
was only the extra expence incurred by the Company beyond what would have exiited if no fuch 