


amb : L Fick 


A4 Appendix to The: Emsr, REPORT from gheSecect ‘Committee 
c 


Appendix, N*6. 
[Being Appendix, No.19, ta the Report ordered to be printed 26th Funer805.] 
(Phe Committee on “MINUTES. of the Meetings held between the Right Honourable Charles Bragge, and 


Beaccount Nicholas Vanfittart, Efq. appointed .by-the Right Honourable the Chancellor of the 
| enters able Exchequer, and the Lords of the Treafury, on the part of “Government; and Jacob 
bee osama *Bofanquet, Eq. Deputy Chairman, and Sir Hugh Inglis, Bart, on the part of the Court of 

© Append x, Now Be ~Direétors; for the purpofe of fertling and adjufting the Accounts now,depending betweea 
c= "The Public and The Eait India Company. 


» General “Account Current was read; Melfrs. Brake, and Vanfittart divin ‘been previouily 
jot b, 


It was then ftated by the Deputy Chairman and ue tee Inglis, that the whole of the accounts 


fe = «ale ” YS eens 
‘That having’ been employed upon a former occafion eal fome, depending claims between 
tthe Eaft India Company. and the Public, in concert with the’Right honourable Thomas Steele, 


~had been lodged with them in.confequence of the Aét of the 35th of His prefent Majett 
4 Ps carey was in no way’a party, ata hnerheOrae per-cent. 5 cine ugh this 
_ money was in ¢ real property of individuals, it was istpoflible for them to confider it in,any 
. other i than as 2 public: it, and that they.therefore themf{elvcs propofed that no greater 
‘int Id be Ged ee menage ‘was actually paid by the Company upon this public 
ood at the time,.that this rate of intereft was not to extend beyond 


: 
i 
: 
a 
. 


: lent to Government, 2nd provifions and ftores fip- 

a plied for the Expedition to the Cape and Mauritius, were liquidated, and the balance of the 

} : pics due from the Company on the account above mentioned was paidinto the hands of 
_ Government. J 

On this explanation, it was obferved by _ Bragge and Vanfittart, that the difcuffion of 

; © this point might be deferred till Seeerda delineate examineds"and that for the 

‘prefent it muft be left toxdepend upon ‘a fubfequent examination ofthe fair juftice and merits of 


the cafe. - rasp 

Tt was. then propofed to read the directions fent by the Secret Committee for the 

econ 3. intended Expedi ion agai Mauritius, the Sigal atopic, figned by Mr. Pitt, 

% "ia me “ mia : ee Duds and Lord Mornington, dated rsth October 17935 was accordingly 
Bo Ane Tne c © —  Bvidence gvas then adduced from the. Company’s accounts, to prove that a part 


ie ‘of the expenceincurred bythe Company onaccount of this inrended Expedition, viz. the tums 

a “4 which had been difburfed'in this Country, had been repaid by Government in the year 1797, when 

: the laft adjuftment between.the Public and the Company todk place; and thatit was at that 

_ -time admitted,that this was an Expedition commenced entirely under the orders of His Majelty’s 

~  _Minifters, and-fuch as mole nds: bare been undertaken, by the Eaft-India Company, and 