

- Expedition had been commenced, Ip was admisted by Meffis. Bragge and Vanfittart, that this 
bedi. would not probably have been undertaken by the Company, except urder the direétions 
of His Majefty's Minifters, and that it feemed realorlable that the expence of it Should form a 
charge agajn(t Government. f Dosa ni< 
he remuneration that had been aétually paid to the Commanders of the Company’s fhizs _ 
employed on the Expedition, for I¢fles and expences incurred thereby, was then difcufled : it as 
fthewn to be well founded and reafonable. It was obferved, that as to the charges Yor demorage Oy, 
and freight, the owners of feveral of the fhips were not fitisfied with the fums allowed, and that | 
fuits at law had been commenced againft the’ Company for Jarger allowances, which fuits were 
till depenging 5 and it was ftated, that had fuch Expeditions beea undertaken by Goverament 
entirely at their own charge, the expence would many times have exceeded what was charged to 
them by the Company ; that éf India could have borne the intended draft of troops, then the Com= 
pany paid more troops than were neceffary for her defence—if {he could not bear fuch adraft 
without danger, then fhe had received “He was to receive no compenfation for this riff. ¢ 
To this it was anfwered, that;the Expedition was abandoned by Lord Hobart, then Governor of 
Madras, on this latter account, viz, a fear of leaving India too hae of troops, an intend:d rein- 
forcement of Europeans not having arrived ; ic was not however denied, bur that all thefe Expe= 
ditions would have been much more expenfive to Government if they had been undertaken under 
othercircumftances, and that it was reafonable that the extra expence of the Company really 
incurred on this account fhould be di(charged. The account was then examined, and fome altera 
tions having becn made therein, the Meeting was adjourned to the 3d inftant. 


tO als lee Eaft India Houfe, 3d January 1§03. 
Proceeding to the difcuffion. of this charge, Mefirs. Bragge and Vanfictart began Account, N° 3. 
by obferving that'on tie’part of Government, they mult object to a very.confiderable ee Ss cacro kn on 
ee of this demand, ‘That the capture of Ceylon was neceflary for the fafety of the EyLoNr es AND hate be 
daft India Company’s pofleffions, and that the Expedition againit that Ifland, as well NANCE OF PRISONEXS. 
‘as thofe againft- Malacca and the Spice Iflands, was fuch as they thought might ‘ 
teafonably have been undertaken’ by:the Company that therefore the moft which the 
Company could: claim, was the charge of Ceylon fince ait had been a King’s government, and _ 
pe a of the captures, which feemed naturally to follow the poffeffion which had been taken 4 “xz. 
ie Crown. ah ‘ Ht : 5 “i 
To this it was anfwered, that Malacca and the Spice Iflands were by no means neceflary fon 
the fafety of the Company’s pofleffions, and that thofe places, as well as Ceylon, had been captured 
in the name and for the benefit of the Crown, and under the exprefs orders of Government ; that 
the Ifland of Ceylon alone had been retained by Great Britain at the peace; and that, of courfe, 
as this had been kept by the Crown, there could exift no pretence for faying what was loft or : 
given up was the Company’s, what was retained was the Crown’s ; for chat this was, in fact, _ 
afluming different and oppofite principles to meet exifting circumftances, which feemed hardly jult . 
or reafonable ; that the | tule of diftin@ion and of equity feemed to be, either to confider 4 
all the captures to have made for the Company or for the Crown if they were, confidered * 
as made for the Company, the pofleffion of Ceylon mutt fell to the Company as a matter of 
eourfe, and they would gladly take it under fuch conditions; if they were made for the Crown, 
shat then, in keeping Ceylony this neceffarily brovght upon the Crowa the expence of all the 
er Captures, re y, 
After much difcuffion upon this fubjeGt, it was agreed to ftate an account of the expence of 
capturing Ceylon, the Spice Ifands, and Malacca, and of maintaining the Dutch prifoners taken in 
thofe polleions, or-at fea; and alfo an account of the expence of the Ifland of Ceylon, fubfequent 
to the appointment of Mr. North as Governor: it was agreed that the end of April 1796 fhould 
-be taken as the, period when the expence of the capture of Ceylon would probably ceafe, it being 
the period when part of the forces, employed in the Expedition, were returned to their refpedtive 
fettlements, and a correfponding date for the other captures. “The accounts above-mentioned were 
then ordered to. BS da tet and the farther confideration of this claim was poftponed. It .was 
agreed that a letter fhould be. written to the Admiralty, requefting an account of all the prifoners 
captured at fea by His Majefty’s-fhips-ia the.Kaft atee Se pa es 4 Be 
~ 268. f ic 