


46 Appendix 4 The Firsr REPORT jrom the-Sevect Commirrez 


Account, N° 4. The Account (N° 4.) being then laid before the parties, Meflis. Bragge and 


FXPENCE OF CAPTURES OF 


Vanfittart objected to this claim altogether: they ftated that thefe captures mult be 


FRENCH AND DU CH SETTLE- confidered as indifpenfably neceflary tor the fafety of the Company’s territories, and, 
MENTS ON THE PENINSULA, therefore, that the Company fhould bear all the expenee incurred in fuch captures, or 
“AND OF MAINTENANCE OF jn keeping pofleffion of them ; that the expence of maintaining the prifoners followed 


PRIEON ERS. 


the nature of the captures ia the firft inftance, but that the proper courfe to obtain res 
payment purfuant to the ftipulations of the treaty of peace, would be by an application to the Secre- 
tary of State for Foreign Affairs. 

n reply it was obferved, that whatever might be the determination with refpedl to the captures 
made in the Peninfula, the expence of the prifoners ought to be borne by Government; that 
the Company had no hand in making the peace; that it was poffible a relaxation on the point of 
repayment for the expence of maintaining prifoners might have produced better terms in fome 
other point favourable to the general interefts of the country 5 and that if this fhould be the cafe, 
the Eaft India Company would, in this way, be taxed for the general advantage of the Empire at 
large, which was not jut. 

That claims of this nature had always been introduced in the Company’s accounts ; that they 
Had been reported on as debts by feveral Committees of the Houfe of Commons ; and that they 
had even been fo far allowed by Government as to have been admitted as a fet-off againft the 
claims of Government, in the Act of 17933 and at leaft they ought to be allowed to this extent 
in the Participation Account, or againft the charge made on the Company for recruiting, &c, the 
King’s troops in India. 

‘Thefe arguments feemed to make no impreffion upon the Nominees of Government, 


Account, N? 5. The Account (N° 5.) being then examined, no objection occurred to this demand, 


PURCHASE OF VESSELS FOR 
THE NAVY; 


fo far as it could be fubftantiated; but it was obferved. by Meflts. Bragge and Van- 


STORES Sup. fittart, that ic would be neceflary to refer the account to the Navy ‘other public 


PLIED; REPAIRS, &. Boards for examination, which they would do accordingly. 
Account, N° 6. (N° 6.) being then laid before the parties, the charge was objeéted to altogether 


EXPENCE OF KING'S TROOPS 
IN INDIA IN EXCESS TO THE 


by Meflis. Bragge and Vanfittart: they ftated, that the Company were bound to” 
defend the Peninfula as well in war as in peace, and that they were even bound to 


NUMBER ALLOWED BY ACTS fend their troops on external expeditions, if this fhould appear to be the beft mode of 
OF PARLIAMENT. defending the Peninfula; that the A&s of 1788 and 1791, referred’ to by the Deputy 


Bs 


* Chairman aad Sir Hugh Inglis, as limiting the number of King’s troops that could be’ paid out 
of the Revenues of India, had no reference to the juftice of the cefe between the Public and the 
‘Company, fince they were only made for the purpofe of reftraining the Crown from keeping 
troops in India, or for Indian fervice, which were not acknowledged by Parliament. 