

Meffrs, Bragge and Vanfittart were of opinion, that, after an examination of the papers in 
quettion, they ‘could not recommend that the extra-expence of keeping Ceylon, between the 
period of its capture in April 1796 and January 1802, ought to be borne by Government, it ap- 
ipearing to have remained for that period under the Company's government. 

The Deputy Chairman and Sir Hugh Inglis were {till of opinion that thefe papers did in no way 
invalidate the juft claims of the Company on this account. 

The Account (N° 5.) with the remarks of the Conmmiffioners of the Navy thereon, was their 
Jaid before the parties: it was difcovered that fome items of the account had been paid by bills in 

| favour ofthe Company; it was fuggefted, that many others might be in the fame predicament, 
dnd that the accounts in general were not dated. 

The Auditor explained the caule of the miftake refpecting the bills, yf. from his not having ex~ 
‘mined the Bill Book in the Treafury at the time he made out the accounts from the India books. 
The Fort St. George books were then examined refpeSting the dates of fome of the items and 
other particulars, and fome of thefe were fatisfaStorily cleared up. 

‘The Bills.drawnin favour of the Company were then ordered to be deduéted, and the account to 

| ‘be further examined, 

A difcuffion then took place relative tothe manner in which the intereft had been charged. 
‘The Deputy Chairman and Sir Hugh Inglis ftated, that it had been made out in a way extremely 
favourable to Governments the reafon why the accounts had been pro tempore le out only 
at4per cent. was then repeated, but it was added, that in common juftice a higher rate muft be 
allowed, fince they were'ready, on the part of the Company, to prove that money had been taken 
up in India at from 8 to 12 percent. intereft to make thefe difburfements, and that although the 
expences bad been incurred at different periods during each year, no charge of intereit had been 
fhade till the end of each year it was alfo obferved, that it might be fuppofed advantageous to the 
Company to receive repayment in this country, but that the contrary was the fat, and that the 
decennial loan bad Joaded them with a rate of 10 per cent. intereft for ten years. 

To this it was obferved in anfwer, thatthe account having been prepared at the rate of 4 per 
cent, though Mefirs. Bragge and Vanfittart were not difpofed to infift upon that rate of intereft, 
yet they did not feel authorized to acquiefce in a demand now firft brought forward, which appeared 
to defcribe the rate which the Company might have been obliged to pay for money borrowed in 
Indiaas applicable to demands upon Government, which might poffidly have been adjufted from 
time to time upon much eafier terms here, wee 

3 ention 


Appendix, Now 0. 
ee 


26th June 1995. 7 


48, Appendix.vo The First REPORT jrcm t#e Serect Commirrex 


‘ 
Report from - Mention was then made of the demand upon the Company for recruiting, &c. His Majefty’s 
The Comittee on forcésin India. ‘The Deputy Chairman and Sir Hugh Inglis {aid, that the Company expeéted to 
the Account jig Pe furnithed with the particulars of this demand, but that none had ever been fent; that no doubt 
[Between the Public \ ten thefe particulars were furnifhed, it would appear that a large part of the charge could not be 
ft India Coinpany, fubftantiated, but that they were fure it was the wih of the Company to difcharge whatever fum 
ie June 1395. was juftly due, and that if no other mode of finifhing the bufinefs occurred, they would recommend 
Appendix, No. 10. to the Company to agree to pay a fair proportion of what might be afcertained to be. the real 
; expence of cloathing and recruiting the troops in the Company's employ, by comparing ong, 
‘part of the fervice with another, but that they were well aware that the charge made againit the 
Company as it at prefent ftood, muft comprehend many items totally foreign from the troops, 