


52 Appendix vo The First REPORT from tie: Serect Committee 
* 


‘The paper in queftion, entitled * Reply, &c. &c.”” was accordingly read, being as follows; ~ 
¢ Committee on 


“the Account REPLY to the Argument againft the Company’s-Claim for Reimburfement of the Expences 
between the Public of the Durch Captures, vx.5 that fach Captures were neceflary for inforing the Safety of 
anid the. pao aie, i pee AS 

Patt India Company. the Company's pofleffions,” &c. &c. &c. 
zee pea? THo5- This argument appears to be taken-up upon toolimited grounds; the difcufiion of the Com. 
Dappen™, N1D: pany’s clainy in the account fiited, ought in reafon to proceed upon much more enlarged and 
- Tiberal. principles ; for, admitting that the capture of the fettkements. in qut(lion had beew indifpen- 
fable to the fafety of the Company’s other poflefions, fill ic cannot be difputed that the bensiit 
to the Company, in this refpsct, was at the fanie time a benefit to the State; for it fezms imposible 
to confider the queftion 2s one\between two parties having. different intereits; an the cota 
vit onght,to be viewed as a queition between parties whole interctt were and ous esnot only 
reciprocal but infeparable; more efpecially under the Act of 1793, by waich the, States to par 

.- ticipate to a certain extent in the profits of the Company. " 

In this view, therefore, and in view to the large revenue derived to the State fram the Com- 
pany’s commerce, it feems no more than juft and reafonable thatthe State dhould bear, at leaft, a 
partin the expences which diminith or abforb the Comipany’s profits, ia which, the State would 
atherwile participate, more efpecially when this is occafioned, as in the profent initance, by. the 

~exprefs orders of Government creating a heavy expence io the Cosipany, 

n all the wars in India, arifing from war originating between Great Britain and other European 
Powers, and in the origin of which the Eat India Company would of courle have had no concern, 
the additional expences of the Company have been enormous both in Tadia and in Europes in 

‘the former, ftom Expeditions undertaken againft the Enemy’s pollefions, and the confequenc in- 
ereafé which’ has taken place in the military eftablifhments abroad; in the Jatter, from che high 
_ tates of freight incidental to a ftate of European warfare, demorage of fhips, and the increaled 
» ptice of exports from Europe ; ail thele are difadvantages to the Conypany in time of wary, againi 
» which nothing in the vey of counterbalance can be ftated. / 
“On the other hand, all the lofs fuftained by the State jn view to their connedtion with ghe 
: > Company, is, the fhare of the profits which would otherwife accrue to them under the Act of 
fs 1793) but this, it 1s believed, is more than made up by means of the add:tional duties impofed 
‘ on the Company's trade in time of war, by which a confiderable increafe of revenue has been 
br \ ~ derived to the State; and although it may be admitted, that, notwithitanding thefe additional 
i impolts, the trade of the Company, during the laft war, flourilaed beyond example, {till this 
circumftance produced cunfiderable advantage to the Srate in the mode above defcribed ; whereas 
the Company by no means benefited in’ proportion, becanfe, from the heavy expences of their 
ie amilitary eftablifhments, and other incidental caufes, they have been obliged to barrow money in 
India at very high rates of intereft to fupply the inveftments for Europe, which ave turnithed 
» sthe.falesat home, on which Government have reaped fo-great advantages from the dutics levied 
ahereon. 
Unlefs, therefore, the fubject under difcuffion be treated upon the broad bafis and libpral_prin- 
ciples of an inteparable conneétion between the parties, and which feems to be the fair and reafon- 
t » able ground on which it fhould ftand, particularly fince the A&t of 1793 was pafled, the relative 
Aituation in which the Company ‘will ttand in regard to Government will’ be this, /that, when 
there exift a profit from their concerns to a certain extent, the Government fhares therein 
wpe but when the reverfe is the cafe, the Company alone futtain the lofs; for Government, unlels 
» they bear part of the extra expence of in India, not only lofe nothing, but from the additional 
duties.impofed on the trade during the ae may be faid to enjoy equal advantages with thofe they 
veh would derive from a participation in profits which do noe in fact exilt. ihibers, confidering it 
5 as a partnerfhip account, that one of the parties (Government) in every fituation gains, the 
we £ other (the Company) fuftuins all lofles, when loffes accrue. 
= " This feems to be the fair and equitable view in which the queftion ought to be confidercd on 
; igeneral principles ; but ifit were to be argued as a point of colonial, proteion, ilill the Com- 
pany’s right to reimburfement appears well founded, becaufe it is prefixed that no other 
Colony belonging to the Empire would be called upon to defray expeaces of this natures if 
4 the fituation of the India Company can be compared with chat of any of the Briti~a 