


* Report from 


> 


Col : . 
“In addition to thefe general arguments, the peculiar circum@ances of the cale deférve atten- 
~~ ‘tion, Admitting that the poffefion of Ceylon: was: nec:flary for the.protection and (afety of the 
Pera 's pofleffions, war had not been declared against Hollatuls therefore, without the exprels 
© direction of Adminiftration, the Company would not have ventured to underteke an Expedition 

~ againft that tfland. . The orders for taking poffeffion of that and tie other Dutch. fetuemeuts, 

‘ direéted they thould be fo taken: and held in His Majeity’s name, not, as. abfelute captures 
from adeclared enemy, but in view to reitoring them to che Stadtaollery if he should recover 
his authority in Holland; the Adminiftration of this Country, efter this Ifland had been in pot 
feffion of the Company for a thort period, (about two years and a half) allumed, in fact, the 
government of Ceylon, by appointing a Governor; and the expences of the: fettlement. were 
thereafter not fubject to che controul or direction of the Companys from January 1802, that 
Wand was completely and exclufively made fubje& to the orders aad controul of the Crowa, 
i A dae confideration of all thefe circumftances feems to eftabiith the claim of the Company jor 
afull reimburfement of their expences on this account upon indifputable grounds; for it would 

F aruba teen liad direct the Company to me themilelves to. certain 
-expence, in acquiris pion of the Ifland under the extraordinary. {tate of affairs at the time, 
‘that they thoulddivelt them of the executive management thereof {202 afterwards, and finaily thould 
deprive them of any controul therein, by vefting the government of tas [Mand in the Crown, and 
yer 


“com the Arvarns or ‘T'ne! East Inpra ‘Company. | 53 


hh. wil. 


yet after all (hould: inf upon their bearing the charge of the Tland for all the pericd antecedent Report Hea 
0 the tranfation daft mentioned ; furely in faitnels and in juttneS the Company have a right The Committe en 
Under the circumflances to expeét the expences they Have incurred for Ceylon fhould be Be ee eae if 
repaid in full ; they giving credit, as they are willing to do, for any profits they may have derived aid Tht. ta 
from the! cinnanion fre to Europe. 2g Batt India Company, 2 

With tefpect to the capture of Malacca and the Moluccas, the fame train of reafening on 26th June 1805. 
general grounds applies equally as to Ceylon; nor can the argument of the neceflity for taking Appendix, Nox P 
thefeplaees, in view to the fafety of the Company’s other pofleffions, be ured here with any 
degree of propriety ; for it is’ certain, that without the pofitive injunctions of Government, as 
delcribed ‘above, Company would never have thought of taking peflefion of theft fettlements 5 
there cannot bea ftronger proof ef ‘this, than by adverting to the circumftaace of the former war 
againft the Duteh, a fituation of affairs differing widely from that at prefent under examination; 
at that period the Company did not think it neceffary to attempt.the capture cf thefe places, nor 
did the Government of this Country think it neceflary to direct {uch capture ; combining, there. 
fore, this’ with thecircumftances of the laft capture, as already alluded to, there feems to be no doubt 
of the validity of the Company’s claim to have their expences on this account rciayburfid in full, 
after allowing for the profits on the {pices fent from the Melucea Jfands. 