


January next. 


. Eaf-India Houfe, rrth January 1805. 
Mefiis. Loney Dundas obferved, that having gone over the proceedings of the former Mect- 
ings in 1803, they had now to flate that with regard to the Account (N°4.) containing the 
expence incurred by the Company by the intended Expedition to Mauritius, and by the Expedition 
again(t the Cape of Good Hope; and (N° 2.) the Kxpence of the intended Expedition againft 

janilla ; they concurred in the opinions then given by Melirs. Bragge and Vanlittart, that Go- 
‘vernment ought to reimburfe the Company thole expences. 

That with refpe& to (N° 3.) the expences of the capture of Ceylon, the Moluccas and Ma- 
Jacca, they had not been able to alcertain correétly upon what principle the mere charge of the 
capture of thofe places had been allowed by the gentlemen employed on the part of Government ; 
that it occurred to them, that if fuch expence was allowed, fome farther part was fairly claimable 
by the Company, but to what amount they had not yet formed an opinion ; that they were ready to 
admit, in regard to Ceylon, the poffeffion of that place might be confidered as a double benefit, 
that is, that it was productive of advantage both to Government and the Company; that its value 
to the Company was undoubtedly confiderable, as forming a material defence to their peflefions, 
‘on the Coromandel Coaft in particular, as well as to thofe fituated inthe Bay of Bengal and elfe- 

261. N wheres 


243973670 


__ Report from 

The Committee on 
the Account 

_ between the Public 

) and the 

Ealt India Company, 

‘26th June 1895. 

“Appendix, No. 10. 


a 


5° Appendix so The First REPORT from the Sezer Commirres 


where, ina more general view ; that on 'thefe confiderations, the expence of keeping that THand 
being charged to Government, appeared to them inadmiffible, and they therefore muft obje& to 
-fuch charge. 

That the fame obfervation applied in part to the Moluccas and Malacca, but that they wifhed 
‘to fec a feparate ftatement of the expences of Ceylon and of the places lat mentioned, as defired 

at the former Meeting, before they proceeded farther on the difcuffion, 

Thefe accounts were accordingly fubmitted, with a General Account Current between Govern- 
sment.and the Company, containing fundry alterations and additional charges, caleulzble with 

intereft to the 31ft ultimo, and giving credit for the profit on fpices, exhibiting an eftimated balance 
edue to the Company, upon thefe dates, of £. 4,632,009. 

The Deputy Chairman and Sir Hugh Inglis, on the part of the Company, obferved in reply to 
+the arguments urged by Mefirs. Long and Dundas, regardin Ceylon, that they bad great doubts 
.of the probability of the Company's taking pofleffion of that Tiland under the peculiar circumfances 
-of the time, had it not been for the exprefs directions of His Majefty’s Minifters, as war with 
‘Holland had not been then declared, and it was entirely under thofe directions that the Company 
shad given affiltance in the capture ; that the Adminiftration of this Country having taken the go- 