

ferving in India. 
It was agreed that Mefirs. Bragge and Vanfittart thould endeavour to procure. detailed account. 
of thefz charges, : 5 
Adjourned to the 18th Inft. and fubfequently to the 15th March, 


Eaft India Houfe, 15th March 1803. 


Oe » The Minutes of the Proceedings at the feveral Meetings hitherto held, were: read, and fome 
} No. alterations being made therein, they were then approved, * 
5 The obfervation of the Navy and Victualling Boards upon the Account (N’ 5.) were then 


read, with regard te the objections. made as to the want of vouchers on Articles 4. §. 11. 12. 14+ 
15.16, 24. and the general obfervation on the abfiraét to the fame effea&, It was remaked on the 
part of the Company, that it is not the practice of their Governments in India to fend home 
é vouchers of the nature required, thefe being kept in the different offices abroad as authorities 
o for pafling the Officers accounts; that it has been ufual in the Courts of Law here to receive the 
i general and other books of account, which are made up annually in India, and figned by the re~ 
refpective Officers or the Members of Government, as valid documents, and it was therefore hoped. 
the fame practice might be followed on the prefent occafion, 
Meflis.. Bragge and Vanfittart onthe part of Government did not objeét to this propofal. 
| With re; to the bills drawn in favour of the Company for which credit had not been given, 
b it was ftated by the Auditor that the Bills from Madras were drawn in October 1800 for advances, 
made in May 1797 end Auguft 1798, confequently the circumftance could not be known here at 
the time of making up the account, but that by an error in the addition, it_would be feen that the 
total charge elt little varied in the amount as it now ftands, after the bills drawn in favour of 
the Company were deducted. The account being accordingly referred to, it was found to beas, 
above ftated. f 
Some converfation then took place with regard to the rate of intereft charged in the accounts, 
and it was then ordered that the accounts fhould be made out again with the ncceflary alterations, 
and divided into three claffes ; the firft, to contain thofe demands which it feemed to be the opinions: 
an both fides ought to be charged to Government; the fecond, of thofe on parts of which the, 
opinions agreed and on other parts differed ; the third clafs, thofe demands which were entircly, 
abjeéted to on, the part of Government. ; 
Adjourned to the 22d Inft. and fubfequently to the 31ft Inf. 


% ; Eaft India Houfe, 31ft March 1803. * 
~The Account (N° 1.) corrected as to the demorage of fhips, &c. was prefented and examined 5, 
' and with refpect to. the fupplies from Bengals the Cape in 1801-2, amounting to £.47,566,-as 
Der tah flated in a memorandum at the foot of the account, the Deputy Chairman and Sir Hugh Inglis 
" obferved, it might be advifable to let this article remain for future confideration. Accounts 
(N° 3-1) oF the expence of the capture of the Dutch {Mlands, and (IN? 3.*) the expence of Dutch 
prifoners captured there, were alfo prefented and examined; and it was obferved by the Deputy’ 
Chairman and Sir Hugh In@lis, that the money paid by the Company in England for bills drawn, 
from Madras in favour of the Proprietor of the Swifs regiment De Meuron, amounting to 
£- 32,000. was not included in this account, but conftituted a feparate charge on Government, 
; . Tbe Account (N° 5.) with the corrections as to bills drawn in favour of the Company for 
part of the charge, and an additional charge for flores captured on French veflels taken by His. 
Majefty’s fhips in India, and paid for by the Madras Government by defire of Admiral Rainier, 
was likewile prefented and examined: it was a that extracts from this account fhould be fent 