

vernment of the Jfland out of the hands of the Company by the appointment of Mr. North in 
O&eber 1798, the Company from that period had no controul .over the expenditure there; this 
-circumftance they therefore confidered as giving the Company a particular claim upon Government 
+for-reimburfements of a confiderable part, if not the whole, of the expences. 

‘That in thé divifion now mace of the items of theaccount, the balance of property remaining 
gift December 1801, was clearly a fair charge on Government, who had then taken exclufive 
pofleflion of the fettlement; and that the whole of the property captured in 1,795-6 had been granted 
‘by His Majefty tothe captors ; the other particulars of expence appeared alio reafenably charged to 
Government, 

That-as.to the Molucca lands and Malacca, the Company would certainly not have thought 

sof attacking them, but for the orders of Adminiftration already mentioned; this they conceived 
would riot admit of a doubz; therefore the Company’s claim for reimburfement of their expences on 
this account feemed unqueltionable, efpecially as credit was given in the account now ftated for the 
profits on fpices from the Moluccas; and the ftores as well as other captured property had been. 
granted by His Mujefty to’the captors, the Company-deriving no benefit therefrom, 

Meffrs. Long and Dundas exprefled a defire to have more time to confider this article, and the 
further difcuffion thereof was in confequence poftponed. 

Proceeding to article 4th, the expence of captures on the Peninfula,.and of the maintenance of 
prifoners ta&en there, Mefirs. Long and Dundas, on the part of Government, obferved, that they 
acquiefced in the opinions of Meflrs. Bragge and Vanfittart; that the whole fhould be borag by the 
Company, as they muft neceffarily have undertaken the Expeditions in queftion, the natural defence 
of their own pofleffions being.fo materially involved therein, that the expence of .prifoners followed 
sin due and ordinary courfe the expence of capturing the fettlements; they mutt therefore eatirely 
-objeét to thisarticle of charge. 

In reply, it was obferved on the part of the Company, that admitting for a’ moment the force.of 
-the arguments:as to the mere capture of the fettlements, the expence of prifouers ought to be.con- 
fidered, and was generally conlidered, as belonging to Government, who ufually in treaties of 
peace, fettled accounts of fuch expences with the nation with which they had been at war ;. that the 
expence defrayed by the India Company on this account, on former occations, had always con- 
ftituted a demand on the Government of the Country, 2s would appear in various difcullions in 
Parliament and otherwife, and that nothing could fhew in a {tronger light the opinion entertained 

“by Adminiftration itfelf of the Company's right in this refpect, than the aliowance in the A&t of 
1793 of claims of this nature being fet-cfF againft the demands of Government on the Company, 
for the expence of fhips and ftores. 