

Thefe arguments did not, however, appear to make any impreffion upon the gentlemen employed 
con the part of Government. 

Owarticles (No. 5. and 6.) Mefirs. Long and Dundas cxpreff':d their acquiefcence in:the opinions. 
“formerly given by Mefirs, Bragge and Vanfittart. 

And rejecting the expences of the Expedition to Egypt, they obferyed, that they faw no objec- 
«tion to recommending that Government fhould defray fuch {um as it appeared had, been aétually 

incurred ‘by thé"Company on that Expedition, beyond the expence which the trooys employed 
would have incurred had they remained ftationary within the Company’s territories in India, pro- 
»vided fatisfattory accounis 6} thele extra charges were made out. BS. 

To this it was ftated in reply, that coniphete accounts had not hitherto been received, the fum 

-charged was therefore partly ettimated, but that the complete accounts might be expected from 
India in a thort time. 

‘The expence of capturing, &c. the Danifh fettlements, was then confidereds the orders from 
Adminiltration on the iubject were referred to, and the claim of the Company for reimburfement 
was not objected to. 

Some obfervations were made by the Deputy Chairman-and Sir Hugh Inglis on the rate of in- 


_sterett charged to Government, viz.4 percent. which they hoped would be confidered as extremely 


moderate; but that poliibly they might herealterice occalion to offer reafous in fupport of a 
-clasm for a higher rate. 

The charge from the Pay Office, flated on the creditor fide of the account, being mentioned, it 
was explained, that the fur credited was lefs than that charzed by the Pay Office, on a fuppofition 
athat in the latter were included expences for recruits raifed tor regiments in linha, but who w 
not fent there, and that particulars of the charges have been requefted, but hitherto noue 


furs 


on tle Arrarrs or Tus East Inpia Company. © 5 
. 
forwarded; that part of the charge, it was prefumed, was for the excefs in‘number of troops, flated _ Report from 
as an article of debit in the account. ‘The ‘Committee. o@ 
Melis. Long and Dundas defired to be furnifhed with a copy of the general Account with ieeeas eee 
Government, as now altered, which was ordered accordingly. and the 
Adjourned to Saturday the rgth Inftant, Eaft India Company, 
26th June 1805. 


Eaft India Houle, roth January 1805. “Aedes No. x0 


‘The Minutes of the Meetings held on the roth December laf, and ith Inftant, were read, 
corrected, and approved, 
Mefirs, Long and Dundas then obferved, that having gone through the Account Current laft 
drawn out, their opinions upon the feveral items therein were as follows: 
To the-r{t and 2d articles, the expences of Mauritius, and the Cape, and of Manilla, they faw 
no objection, and were of opinion they fhould be defrayed by Government. 
On the 3d article it appeared to them, that of the expences of Malacca and the Moluccas, one- 
half only fhould be borne by Government, and the fame with refpect to the expence of the capture 
of Ceylon, That the three next items, viz. balance of property remaining there gift December ~ 
1801, remittances from India not arrived there at the time, and Bills drawn from Ceylon 1802-3, “ 
they were of opinion might be admitted in full, ‘That as to the expence of prifoners, they were 
doubtful if any part thereof could be allowed to the Company.; on further confideration, however, oy 
“they were difpofed to admit of one-half of the expence being borne by Government; but, as to | 
the expence of keeping Ceylon, they mutt objeét to any part thereof being charged to Govern- 
“ment. \ - 
‘That to the 4th article; w/z. the ‘expence of the Foreign Settlements on.the Peninfula, and a 
of prifoners captured there, they muft object altogether. 
‘I'he sth article, the expence of veflels, ‘&c, they were of opinion might be admitted. re 
To the 6tharticle, ‘the expence of the King’s troops in India in excefS to the number. autho. 
rized by the A@s of Parliament, they objected. ‘ " hi 
‘That in'regard to the 8th article, the expences of the Egyptian Expedition, although they con-" 
tinued of opinion, as {tated at the laft Meeting, that the fame fhould be borne by Government, it & 
‘appeared to them that the amount of the charge was very great, efpecially if confined, as they un- 
‘derftoed it to be, to the extraordinary expence of the troops fent from India, more efpecially as on 
referring to the ftatement of the military eftablifhments acBengal, which was then before themy 
itappcared that the expence was beyond all proportion, as to the number of troops fent from India 
to Egypt, of the expence of an equal number of the military charged on-that ftatement ; they mult 
therefore oblerve; that when the accounts were received, it would be neceflary that they fhould 
undergo a ftriét examination, ik 
It was obferved in reply, that the charges of the Expedition did not confit alone of the pay 
and ellowances of the troops, that a -very confiderable proportion thereof was occafioncd by tonnage 
for the tran{portation of tholé troops, and the provifions and ftores neceflary for their fupport, as 
would appear by a ftatement then {ubmitted, which was accordingly referred to; whence it appeared 
the amount of tonnage engaged for thole purpofes was at the rate of upwards of £.600,000 per 
annum, 
Mefits. Long and Dundas then obferved, that they faw no objeétion to allowing the Company 
reimburfement of the’ expences incurred by the capture of the Danith Settlements in India, nor to 
the further intereft to the g1{t/December laft, the fame being computed upon the fums which they 
had now ftated their opinion might be admitted. A 
Having thus explained their fentiments upon the articles debited to Government, Mefirs. Long 
and Dundas produced an account received from the Pay-Olfiee, of the claim on the Company for 
expence of King’s regiments ferving in India, the amount of which was {. 1,285,009 inftead 
of £, 1,090,000, as credited by the Company, and which they fuppofed mutt be fub{titured in lieu of 
the latter; .they alfo were of opinion that intereft thereon, calculated an each year’s payment 
tothe 31ft December laft, was chargeable to the Company at the fame rate as they had charged 
Government. 
The Deputy Chairmaniand Sir Hugh Inglis obferved, that, on looking into this account, they 
found a charge madefor-regimonts ferving at Ceylon, fince shat place was takenunder manage- yee 
ment of the Crown; they muff, therefore, object to this part of the account; this objection was , 
admitted to be valid. ti 4 , 
Meflts. Long and:Dundas ftated, that on the principles which they had now explained, they did 5 
snot mean to charge the Company with the profits on fpices. 2) 
The Deputy Chairman and Sir Hugh Inglis, in reply to the foregoing, expreffed their concern taal 
at the very contiderable diminution in what they conligered the fair and equitable claims of the 
Company on Government upon the principles of the account, as it was now propofed to be ad- 
mitted by Meflrs. Long and. las; thatin particular with regard to she expences of the eapture 
of the Dutch tettlements of Ceylon, Malaccaand Moluccas, ucy had hoped the arguments they 
had offered would have made-fuch an impreffion on thofe gentlemen, 2s would have led to a much 
smore favourable refult in rezard to the Couipany’s claims; thar as to Ceylon, there. teemed to be 
no pofition more incontrovertible than this, that as Government had directed the cupture, and had 
Hfablequently taken the place eut of th Company's hands, they (the Government) thould. bear the 
whole of the expence, 2 
‘That inreply to the arguments againit the Company’s claim on. this fubje&t in. particulzr, as 
well as on the Dutch and other captures in general, they bad com feniimen)s. to 
writing, ina paper which taey detired now to iubmit to tie attens 
tieman empléyedon tee part of Government. " 