

In fome degree the general arguments adduced above on N° 2, apply to Ne 4, and 
iris to be noticed, that in’ the latter are included the expenteés of the capture, &e. 
of the Dutch ferdements of Chinfura and Cochin, which being made under the | CAPTURES ON ‘THE 
direction of Adminittration, a8 already explained in refpeée to Neg, the expence contains 
feems fairly chargeable to Government, | It fhould likewife be remembered both as to N? 3, and 
N° 4, that with the exception of ‘Pondicherry, where, in fact, very little was taken, the pri 
property’ captured at ‘all the fetdements; even t6 the ftores; “has ‘been gratited to the captors, 
without any participation being allowsdto the Company, 1 Setad 

‘That having thus ftated their reafons in fupport of what they could not but confider as the» 
‘Company’s equitable claims to “a more liberal allowance on! thelé particular paints, they defire / 
in addition thereto to obferve, that all the profits derived to the Compzny from the poffefions and! 
trade of India, aniounted merely to a dividend oiv'the capital of 630,000; per anivum's thity en? 
the other hand, Government, tothe duties ufually levied on the Company’s trade in peace, 
added to. the amount of upwards of one million annually, under the denomination of W ar Duties: 
‘Thefe, therefore, were circumitances in proof of the arguments above adduced; and on every 
conlideration of the fubjeé they felt themfelves under the neceflity of protefting again{t fo: coh=' 
fiderable a’ reduétion a8 was now propofed; in’ the amount of the Company’s' cléitis, That in 
regard to the exSence of prifoners, they muft defire to refer to and repeat the reafons already’ 
ftated in fupport of that expence being borne by Government’; and they réquefted Meifrs. Long’ 

nd Dundas would maturely reconiider the opinions they had now given on the articles of the 4, 
account objeéted to. 4 

Melits. Long and Dundas, on the part of Government, obferved on the foregoing, that, if the , 
arguments in refpeét to the participation of expence by Government were admitted, they might | 
extend farther than wéuld appear now to be ‘contended for,’ as they might be thouglit to include » 
the expences of wars begun by the Company in India, fuch'as that with Tippoo, &c.: that, under | 
alf the objections now ftated; the Company poffeffed confiderable’power, authority, and advantages: 
in India, which they would ‘very ‘unwillingly forego, and that they would bs glad to receive a Fy 
reiewal of their charter with all'thefe difadvantages : and they cannot but’confider the conceffions: 
they had now made as liberal; aud although ‘they would willingly, as defired, reconfider the whole i 
of the fubjett, ‘they were not aware that fuch’reconfideration would caufe’any alteration in the fen~ ‘ | 
timents they bad now exprefled. i writ 

The Deputy Chairman and Sir'Hugh Inglis now claimed to charge, ott the part of the Company," 
the Indian intereft which they had paid in the period included in the Accounts, the fame being” c | 
at the lowelt rate 8 perveent. per annum: they alfo requefted’ the ‘attention of Meifis. Long: |, ah 
and Dundas to fuch further obfervations * as they might find it neceffary to offer on the Accounts * SePaper anmexeds 
in gerieral, aah. tH . * 4 