

Tewas obferved on the part of the Company, that theft Aéts had a reference to the eftimated, 
arid’ndt to:the adtual ftrength which this account thewed ; and’ chat it was always calculated that 


Report’from 
The Committee on 
the Account 
between the Fublic — 
ind 1 


2 deftiency would exilt upon the eftimated force; but that, even fuppoling the argument on pat Tadis Company, 


the other fide corrécl, the Company had (ulained a prodigious and unnecellary expence, by 
having maintained'a large number" of incomplete regiments, inflcad of a finaller number of more 
Complete ones. 
* To this it was anfwered, that in war the Eaft India Company mutt take its chance for a fupply 
of effective men upon any terms that they can be procured. 

A rough fketch of the eftimated expence of the Expedition to Egypt was then prefented and 
fead: it feemed to be adniitted that the cliarges of this Exp:dition oughe to be borne by 


Government. 7 
‘ : Adjourned to the 28th Inftant, and fubfequently to the 3d February. 


3 _Eaft India Houfe, 3d February 1803. 
© "The extracts from the correfpondence, &c. relative to Mr. North’s appointment in 1798, and 
‘the plan adopted for the Government of Ceylon in 180i, being prefentcd, were read. It was 
ftated on the part of Government, thatthe terms under which the IMand was to be made a King’s 
government were fully explained in thefe proceedings, viz.—in the Jetter from Mr. Dundas of 
the 3oth December 18005 the inftruétions to Mr. North in 1801, mentioned in the correfpondence 5 
end the Court’s Orders to Madras thereon of the 22d April 1801; that it did not appear that the 
Company had objeéted to this arrangement, and that of courfe the Public could not be charged 
with the expence of keeping it prior to January 1802, the term fixed by Mr. Dundas as {tated in 
the Court’s Letter of the 22d April 18015 that thefe proceedings clearly took the cafe out of that 

general rule of equity which might otherwife have been fuppofed to attach itfelf to it. ‘ 

It was anfwered on the part of the Company, that in January 1798, when Mr. North was ap- 
:pointed Governor, Mr, Dundas made an unequivocal declaration that he faw noreafon why, upon 
apeace, if Ceylon thould be retained by Great Britain, he fhould not recommend that it fhould 
be placed under the Company’s government, and that the inftruétions to Mr. North were framed 
under this intimation; but that it would be feen that the Company had not abandoned their 
¢laim to be reimburfed for the expence of capturing and maintaining it, fince they had added to the 
inftructions a claufe to this effect, but that it-had been ftruck out by the Board of Commiffioners, 
and that of courfe the Company did not acquiefce, but were overruled in thefe inftructions. 

‘That it is true they did not remonftrate againft the orders fent to India in 1801, but that noin~ 
ference can fairly be drawn from filence'when remonftrance, it appears, would have been ineffeCtual. 
‘That heqaiition at iffue is one of natural juftice, where the act of one party cannot fairly 
be-faid to invalidate the juft claims of the other, fince, if this principle were once admitted, the 
-difeuffion could only reft not upon what one party had a right to claim, but what the other would 
confentto allow. , 