

Melis. Long and Dundas expreffed’ their inclination to give every due attention to the claim " 
ce intereft, and to fuch other obfervations as might be made on the part of the Company to’ the 4 

ecounts. vinagabvats - st 


Farther Obfervations fubmitted by the Deputy Chairman’ and Sir Hugh Inglis, as referred 
tolin the latter part of the Minutes of the lait Meeting. 
Ainge F ; 3) 
Asin the courfe of the difeuffions refpeing the debt owing by Government to the Company, Ls % 
arguments have’ been maintairied on the part of Government which involve propofitions of a Be 
very important’ and “extenfive nature, it may be’ proper co enter into fome difting&t confideration 
of them. as Skt “i ¥ 
ut. In the café of the capture of Ceylon, Government directed the Company to take pofiefion ) 
of that Ifland: at a time when this Country was not at war with the Dutch. It was conquered at 
the expence of the Compatty,, but, contrary to-all former example, inftead of being united to their 
other Indian territories, was at the end of two years made a King’s Governmetit. ap 
Afterwards, the charge’and maintenance of it with an expenfive eftablifament of Crown Officers, a 
was committed to the Coinpany, under a declaration, that no reafon appeared why, if it were retained 
on a peace, it fhould not be made over to them. 
at. : i (9) When 


rt from 


‘The Committee on 


the Account 


~ between the Public 


and the 


Eaft India Company, 


Appendix, No. 10. 
i —_—_ 


© 26th June 1805. 


54 Appendix te The First REPORT from the Secect Commitrse 


When they had held it for 62 years, at anexpence of £.1,500,000, Government again took it 
from them without reimburfing any part of their expenditure; and finally upon a peace the Ifland 
was ceded to Great Britain, the government of it was retained by the Crown, and payment of the 
heavy out-lay to which the Company had been fubjeéted by the conquelt and charge of this pol 
feflion, excepting only one-half of the expence of capture (that is, £. 168,000 out oy. 1,474,000) 
is now refufed. 

As the gentlemen who aé on the part of Government muft think that it has a right to make 
fuch refufal, they then virtually maintain this propofition, that Government may not only com- 
mand the Company to undertake any military enterpizes which it may ftate to be conneéted with 
the fecurity of their territorial poffeffions in India, but may take to itfelf conquefts acquired by 
thefe enterprizes, or refume them after they have been put into the Company’s hands, ftill leaving 
the Company burthened with the expence they have incurred in keeping them upon the eftablith- 
ments formed by Government, as well as with one half of the expence of acquiring them. 

On the part of the Company, thofe who act for them feel themfelves obliged ftrenuoully to con- 
tend, that however difpofed the Company are at all times to fubferye the meafures of Government, 
and to render their means conducive to the general interefts of the nation, there is no exifting law, 
no authority ia the Executive Government, by which the Company can be compelled to employ 
their funds in making or maintaining conquefts, which, whilft thofe conquefts are retained from 
the enemy, they are not allowed to -poflefs. On behalf of the Company it mutt alfo be urged, 
that the whole of their condu@, in refpeét to the acquifition and maintenance of Ceylon, pro- 
ceeded upon otker grounds, upon confidence in the good faith of Government, that, when they 
(the Company) were required firit to take poffeffion of the Ifland, and afterwards to manage it, 
the intention of Government was either to leave it in theirhands, or to compenfate them for their 
difburfements. The Minutes of a conference with Mr. Dundas (now Lerd Melville) in 1797) 
thew that he coupled the retention of the Ifland by the Company with their defraying the expence 
of it. Had any contrary principle been intimated by Government, or fulpected ty the Court 
of Direétors, they could rot poflibly have been warranted in fubmitting to fuch an application of: 
the funds of their conftituents; nor could they have accepted the charge of the IMlund, had they 
known that it was again to be taken from them without paying them for the expence of keeping it. 
And indeed it is manifeftly contrary to the plain principles of natural juitice, to deprive any one by 
an a@ of power of a pofleflion which he could be induced to accept, and to lay out money. upon, 
only by the expectation of keeping it, without,repaying him the clear expence to which he has been 
fubjected by it. 