


Eaft India Houfe, 
goth March 1808. 


(Errors excepted.) 


Cha’ Cartwright, 
Accountant Gen!, 


on the Arvarrs or Toe East Inota Company. 63 


Appendix, N° 12. 


Martis, 24° die Maij, 1808. 
EXAMINATION of Mr. ROBERT BROWN. 


Tama very large dealer in Eaft India cotton goods. 

Has the confumption of Eaft India cotton goods in this country.increafed or decreafed ?-—It has 
decreafed very confiderably, > 

Have Eaft {ndia cotton goods in this country increafed in their price, or decreafed ?—Some few 
fens of muflins have increafed; but {peaking generally of Eaft India cotton goods, they are 

lower, 

Do thofe articles in which the price has increafed, bear a fmall or a large proportion to the 
Eaft India Company’s fale of piece goods >—~A very {mail proportion. 

When you fay, that the prices of certain arcicles have increafed, do you mean relative to the 
late prices of thole articles, or the average piices for fome years back ?—I mean relatively to the 
late prices. 

Were thofe late prices higher or lower than the average prices?—I think I can ftate, that 
they were from 25 to 30 per-cent. lower than the average prices of fix or feven years paft. 

Has the prefent price of thofe articles, which you ftate to have increafed, rifen up to the average 
price ?—I_ think it has: {peaking generally of Eat India goods, the prefent price is confiderably 
lower chan the average of the lait fix or feven years. 

To what du you afcribe the fall of the price of Eaft India goods for the home confumption ?— 
Certainly, to che interference of the Britifh manufaCtures, 

From your knowledye of the trade, are you enabled to ftate it as a fact, that the Britith manu- 
faGtures have interfered materially with the fale of the Eaft India cotton goods?—I am able to ftate 
it as a fa& confiitent with my own knowledge, that they have interfered, fo much fo, that our 
houfe have been under the neceffity of keeping the. Britifh muflins within the laf two years to 
furnith the affortment for our own immediate conne@ions, 

‘Then your opinion is, as a perfon converfant with the trade, that the Britifh manufadtures have 
materially interfered, and are likely to continue te interfere with the fale of the Company’s cotton, 
goods for home Sontomption ?—Certainly. . 

With regard to i'aft India cotton goods for exportation, has it increafed or diminifhed in a 
confiderable degree ?-—-[t has diminifhed in a confiderable degree. 

To what eaules do you attribute that diminution >—Principally to the want ofintercourfe with the 
‘Continent, but in a material degree to the improvements made inthe Britifh manufacture of cotton 
goods, which now fupplant the india for many purpofes upon the Continent, and particularly in the 
printing manufadtorics, in which Eaft India cotton goods were formerly alone ufed. 

Are you a large exporter of cotton goods ?==[ am, but principally of India; our exportation has 
very confiderably diminifhed within thefe few years. 

}o you afcribe the diminithed fale of the Eaft India cotton goods, in any and what degree to the 
improvement of the manufactures upon the Continent?—I think that the improved {tate of the 
cotton manufactures upon the Continent has not intirely prevented the exportation from this 
country, for when the duty on the Continent was about 40 per-ccent. very large quantities were 
exported, and that it is only fince the abfolute prohibition has taken place, that the cotton manufac- 
tures of the Continent have greatly increafed. 