

2d. Itis further argued, that whatever is fit for the Company themfelves to do for the fecurity of 
their pofféffions, that Government might order them to perform or might perform#or them, and at 
their expence; therefore, the acquifition and retention of Ceylon evidently contributing to give 
additional fafety to the Britith poifeffions in India, it was for the intereft of the Company to be at 
the expence not only of the conqueft of it, but of its permanent maintenance though in the hands 
of Government, and they ought not thence to objeét to the expence of keeping it for the few years 
during which it was in their pofleffion. 

To this propofition alfo, taken in an indefinite and unqualified way, there are decifive objections. 
For it claims for Government an abfolute, independent power over the forces and finances of the 
Company, without even allowing them a voice when this power fhall be exercifed. . This would be 
a power not only to judge and determine for the Company what was fit for them to do in refpeét to 
foreign military enterprizes admitted to be connected with the fecurity of our Indian pofleffions, but 
alfo of conttruing that connection to extend to the moft diftant points, as Egypt, the Cape of Good 
Hope, Malta, the Mediterranean, or places {till more remote, and ordering Expeditions to any or all 
thefe points, the Company in the firit initance to difburfe the charges, or to be fubject to repay the 
fums which (hall be ftated to have been expended on thefe accounts by Government. Such a power 
would be contrary to the whole tenor and {pirit of the exifting laws, and, without meaning to infinuate 
that it would not be equitably exercifed, the Court of Directors can by no means acquiefce in rea- 
foning which affumes or implies it. 

3d. It is urged that all conqueits which improve the fecurity of the Indian poffeflions are fo evi- 
dently for the benefit of the Company, that it is natural and proper they fhould defray the coft of 
acquiring and retaining them. 

‘o this it may be anfwered, that for the expence of conquefts, cither abfolutely neceflary to the 
fafety of the Company’s poflefiions, or of which they exclufively reap the advantage, it may be 
allowable to concend that they alone fhould be liable; but it is obvious that fome of the conquetts 


* attempted or made in the late war, as Manilla and Mauritius, Malacca and the Moluccas, were not 


y 


atall neceflary to the fafety of the Company’s territories ; and with refpect to thefe and all the other 


“acquifitions made in the courfe of that war, particularly from European enemies, the Nation derives 


from them far more benefit than the Company; 1ft, in the general reputation and afcendency they 
give to the Britith power and influence in Europe; 2dly, in the lofs and diftrefs they occation to 
the enemies of the Country ; 3dly, in the wealth they bring into it; 4thly, in the very article of 
fecurity (in whatever degree they do attord greater fecurity) to the Indian pofleflions. To which 
may be added, sthly, as an appendage to thele national advantages, that the controul and direction 
of dian affairs there, is not with the Compaay, unlefs indeed it be argued that the fmall fhare 
of patronage left to them conttitutes power and influence; all the great wheels of the machine are 
moved b: eecatnae at home, who dire€t and coatroul the Company in all their principal opera- 
tiensin India. - 
it has been obferved, that with all the facrifices ftated to have been made by the Company, 
and under all the objections made to the mode of adjufting the Account with Government, 
now propofed oa the pact of the latter, the Company would be glad to have a renewal of 
their charter. TF 
ic 