

4th. Upon the whole, therefore, the leaft that can be concluded in favour of the Company is, 
that thofe Conquefts or Expeditions which were not atall neceflary to the fecurity of Britith-India, 
but which have been productive of advantages to the State, fhould beat the fole charge of the Go- 
yernment; fuch are the Expeditions to ‘Manilla, Mauritius, to the Cape, to Malacca, the Mo- 
luccas, and to Egypt, ; 

That thofe conquefts in which the Company as well as the Government have had a direct in- 
terelt, thould be at their joint charge ; fuch are the acquirements on the Continent of India and 
the Ifland of ‘Ceylon, fo far as the capture of it is concerned. On this head it has becn afked on 
the part of Government, would the Company extend the principle of participating in expence to 
the wars with the Indian Powers? fuch as that with Tippoo, &c. &c.—the anfwer, without in- 
fifting upon it in the prefent difcuffion, might reafonably be in the affirmative, becaufe Govern- 
ment was materially concerned in the defence and fecurity of the territories which were at ftake 
in that war, oz in the caufes from which it originated; and it may be prefumed that had Tippoo, 
allifted by the French, made fuch oppofition as eventually to threaten the fafety of India, Govern- 
ment would willingly have put this country to an expence far exceeding the whole of the Com- 
pany’s prefent claim, to fecure the Indian poffeffions, without even looking to a compenfation 
from them. 

That under this head of joint expence may alfo be placed the charge of maintaining 
prifoners, which is recognized in the 157th claule of the A& of 1793, as. a charge appertaining 
to Government. 

And thac the Company cannot be charged for the expence of keeping any places which are He 

rf. lefe 


Report from. 
The Committee on — 
the Account 


‘ 56 Appendix so The First REPORT. from the Seuzer, Commit res 


:  Repott from eft in. their hands,,and united to the Indian fyftem of Government : on which point they fet fo 
The Committee on high 2 valuey that they would have been contented to remain charged with the expeuce of main~ 
sete ccone ig ‘ining Ceylon, had they been allowed to keep it. 

‘cadliehe MONE AE even this adjuftmeat were adopted, the Company, from the high-rate at which they borrowed 
‘India Company, money for the Expeditions in queftion, the long time which they have been in advance, and the 
26th; Yune 1805- low rate of intereft charged in the eccounts as they wow ftand, would Rill remain charged with a 


| Appendix, Noor, very heavy difburfement en account of them. 


Appendix, N° 7. 


SUPPLEMENT to the Obfervations. prefented by the Court of Direétors to the 
Committee of the Houfe of Commons, on the 31ft March 1808, refpecting the 
Claims of the Company on Government. 


‘THE chief ground on which the Commiffioners on the part of Government, and the Committee 
of 1805, objected to allow the full expence incurred by the Company on account of Ceyloi, the 
Moluecas and Malacca, the firft of which fettlements was made a King’s Governaient, and the 
others in the general arrangements of the Peace of Amiens reffored to the Dutch, was, that the 