


ee 


it is to be remarked, that under every head: of Revenue the Eftimate of the year 
2793 was tramed with great caution, taking in general the aétual experience of pre- 
ceding years.as the bafis.of the calculation. Under this head, however, more par- 
ticular caution was obferved, and the {um eftimated by the Bengal -Governinent fer 
the year 1791-2, was taken as the amount expetied to be derived in future, This 
{um fell fhort of the average .of the five paft years by £.57,000. ‘The punétual 
realization and improved produce of this truly important refouree is highly creditable 
to the branch of the Government under which it was adminiftered. ‘The Efiimate 
formed in 1793 has been exceeded in each year, notwithftanding the interruptions 
which have oceafionally been experienced from the viciffitudes of feafons; in fome 

363. E years 


B Appendix, N°12, 


Appendix, N*9. 


Appendix, N° 12, 
4 (a, 


= 


| Appendis, Nu. 
tyr 


i 


RTI 


| Appendix, N* 9, 
_ Appendix, N°13. 


; Bengal Revenues. 
Us —_ 


18 Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on the 


years a fuperabundance of rain, in others drought has-occurred, either of which is 
unfavourable to the country, and of courfé to the realization of the land rents. The 
wealth and profperity of the diftriéts may be aflumed from the infpeétion of this 
column of the Statement, particularly from the year 1799, 1800. This pofition is 
further eftablifhed by the refleétion, that the colleStions haye been uniformly made 


* under the operation of the laws and regulations of the Revenue fyftem, without the 


neceffity of military interference, as fometimes praétifed in other parts of India, 


The origin of this fyftem, which, in its operation, has in thefe Provinces proved to 
be beneficial both to the interefts of the Sovereign and the fubjet, may be traced in 
a Letter from the Court of Dire€tors to the Supreme Government of Bengal, dated 
ith April 1786, alfo in the Rules pafied on the 18th September and 25th Novem- 
ber 1789, and the 10th February 1790, under which a decennial fettlement was 
made of the Revenue to be paid for the lands in Bengal, Babar and Orifla, and in 
the alterations pafied on the 23d November 1791, This fettlement commenced 
with the year 1790-1. In the year 1793 the whole of the Revenue code was 
re-enacted with modifications and amendments, and regulations were pafied ‘accord- 
ingly, when the Judicial was feparated from the Revenue adminifiration, and the 
fettlement, originally made for ten years, was declared to be permanent and unalterable 
for ever, fubjeCt to the approbation of the Court of Direftors, which approbation 
was given. 

Tt may not be neceffary in this place to enter upon the confideration of any further 
modifications of the fyftem by fubfequent regulations, as they do not appear to have 
been of a defcription to affeét the bafis of the arrangement as to the amount of the 
jumma perpetually fixed, but merely to give greater fecurity for the pun¢tual realiza- 
tion of that amount, and, of courfe, to prevent the accumulation of balances ; Regu- 
lation 7, pafied the 29th Auguft 1799, was of this defcription. 