


Your Committee do not intend to enter upon any confideration of the policy or 


the prudence of the financial arrangements of the year 1703, but merely to ftate 
{hem in iheir original form and thapeas to figures; nor is it intended, in the exa- 


inination of the progret$ of their operation from year to year, to make any remarks 
upen the various changes which will be difcoyered, further than fuch as fiall be found 
anecefiary to furnith explanations of the caufes of thofe changes. 


‘Phe nature or defeription of the Accounts is fueh as to afford, in each year, a view 
of the amount of the Revenues derived from the Voffeffions in India, and of every 
Charge incurred in the Government and defence of them, with the Intereft payable 
vipon the Debts, ‘They likewife fhew the amouut of thofe Debts, and of the effective 
property of the Eaft India Company, commonly termed the Quick Stock. 


The calculations on which the financial arrangements were made in the year 1793, 
at the commencement of the prefent Charter of the Company, have been adverted to. 
It is prefumed to be material to examine, at this time, how far thofe calculations, 
though governed by the aétual experience of patt years, and regulated by a due atten- 
tion to exifting circumftances at the time they were made, have been juftified in the 
relult; and as that examination could not be better parfued than by combinations, 
as far as praéticable in one view, of the Refources and of the Charges as then eftimated, 
and as by the a@ual Accounts of fucceeding years, Statements have been drawn up 
accordingly, which are hereunto annexed. 


*~ Thefe Statements are prepared upon two principles, viz. the one, marked No. 2, 
fhews the Revenues and Charges of India colle&tively, with the General Refult as 
eftimated inthe year 1793, and according to the‘aétual Accounts of each fucceflive year, 
from 1792-3 to 1808-9 inclufive, with the Eitimate of the year 1809-10. The Sup- 
plementary Statements, marked Nos. 3, 4, 5, thew the Revenues and Charges of the 
three Prefidencies of Bengal, Madras, and Bombay refpeétively.. The columns of 
thefe feveral Statements are in conformity with the heads or items of Revenue and 
Charge in the Accounts Jaid before Parliament. The fums are taken from thole 
Accounts, and are converted into ficrling money at the rates of exchange in ufual 
praétice, viz. at 25, the current rupee, $s. the pagoda, and 2s. 3d. the Bombay 
Tupee, > - 

By this principle or mode of ftatement an opportunity is afforded of difcovering 
the financial fituation of each of the Prefidencies, as to its proper Income and 
Expenditure, during the periods under contideration. 


As that mode of Statement, though ufeful in one point of view, does not exaéily 
atifiver the purpofe which is effential to the plan on whichitis propefed to conduct the 
prefent examination, from not fhewing at one view the Company's antient Revenues, 
diftinguitbed from the Reventies acquired by ceflion or conqueft, nor the Military 
Charges of India, ithas been thought proper to prepare Statements upow another prin- 
ciple, by which thefe ends might be obtained. ‘Lhefe Statements are added to. the 
Appendix. The General Statement, marked No. 6, fhews the Revenues and 
Charges thus diftinguifhed, and the Supplementary Statements, marked A, B, C, 
ane the Revenues and Charges under the various heads which will be hereafter 
tuted. 