


your Committee propefe, in this Report, to fubmit.to the confideration of the 
Houfe, a detailed Statement of the Ordinary Revenues and Charges of the Eaft 
India Company's ‘Tervitorial Poffeflions, and a coiparifon of the amount of thole 
Revenues.and Charges at the laft renewal of the Company's Charter in 1793, with 
préfent amount, aecording to the latett advices which have -been received from 
india, g 


On the occafion of renewing the Charter in 1793, every exertion was employed for- 
sthe difcovery of the extent of the Gompany’s refourees, both political and commercial, 
and caiculations were nade with every pra@ticable attention to accuracy, grounded “Appendix, N° 2. 
‘upon the a€tual experience of preceding years, as it regarded both Receipt and 
Expenditure. : 
‘The propriety of taking this as the peried for the commencement of an inveftigation, 
vis ftill further eftablifhed by the confidcration that the arrangement then made was 
upon the moft extenfive fcale, embracing the entire ftate of the concern beth abroad 
‘and.at home, and a line was drawn for the diftribution of the expenditure in India, 49 55 Geo, HI. 
whether-for the expences of Government or the Intereft upon the Debts. A principle Cop. 52. Sec. 107. 
was alfo eftablifhed fer the application of the furplus produce of the Reveaues, which, 
-on the calculations above adverted to, was fairly expefted to arife. : 


It was likewife prefcribed that the Court of Direétors of the Eaft India Company, 
fhould annually lay before Parliament diftin& Accounts of the Revenues and of the Geo. HI. 
Difburfements in India, with.the amount of the fales of Goods and Stores received 20353 8. 196, 
from Europe, the fiate of their Debts and Affets, together with an Account of the Pro- “"P* 
-ceeds of the Home Treafury, and of the Debts and Affets in England, 


The dire@ions of the A& before referred to have been obeyed on the part of the 
Court of DireRors as far as pratticable. ‘The Home Accounts have been uniformly 
prefented at the prefcribed period. The lofS and ‘capture of fome.of the thips from 
Bengal, containing the moft material documents from which the Statements refpe€ting 
the concern in India are prepared, has materially interfered with the regularity which 
sould likeuife have been obierved as to their prefentation in due tine; thofe of the 
year 1807-8, which fhould have been upon the ‘Lable of the Houfe in the latt Seffion, 


303. b having 


"Appendix, N° 2. 
‘and Supplements 
34,5. < 
JA Re NG. 
| lements 
ae 


Bes: 


14 Second REPORT Jrem the Selc& Committee on the 


having been omitted, with the exception of a fhort Abftraét of the Revenues and 
Charges of India for that year, and te Account of the Debts. During the prefent 
Scfiion, the whole mafs of the Accounts for the year 1807-8, properly belonging to 
the latt year, has been prefented to the Houle, and thofe of the year 1808-9 within 
the ftatutory period ; but, owing tothe lois ef the documents above adyerted to, and 
irom the non-receipt of feveral Statement: ‘rom Bengal, neither the actual Accounts 
of the Revenues and Charges of that Preti/oncy for the years 1807-8, and 1808-9, 
nor the Eftimate of 1809-10, could: be compictély fhewn in detail under the various 
dieads, according to the plan in ufual praétice, 