


It is to beremarked, that the periods of Statement and the final General Refult on 
both principles, are, of courfe, precifely the fame; and the component parts of the 
Statenients are taken from the fame Accounts, with only this difference, that in the 
‘Statement marked No. 6, with its Supplements, adjufiments have been made of the 
deveral heads of Revenue and Charge, in order to accommodate them to the principle 
‘on which it is propofed to procced on the examination of them RAY on 

efults 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, bagi 


Refults in both Statements are exclufive of the Commercial Charges not added to the 
Invoices. 


It is to be regretted that the two laft years, 1807-8 and 1808-9, and the Eftimate 
1§09-10, are necefiarily incomplete from the want of the Bengal Accounts, which has 
already been adverted to, as, from this circumftance, the feparation of the Revenues 
and Charges of the Conquered Diftriéts cannot be made as in former years; but it 
does not affeét the General Refult. : 


‘Thefe Statements, it will be obferved, apply folely to the Revenues and Charges. 
‘The Property or Effeéts, and the Debts of the Company in India, are likewife objeéts 
of confideration, Statements of thein refpectively, from 1792 to 1809, have therefore 
been prepared. 


It is firft propofed to examine the Accounts of the Revenues and Charges, as 
fewn in the Statement marked No. 6, by comparing the General Refult eftimated in 
the year 1793, with that fhewn by the a€tual Accounts of the year 1808-9, and the 
detail of the items with fuch of the later periods* of the Statement as may be moft 
fiitable to the affording the requifite- explanations of the grounds of the difference 
which will be found between the two periods. In moft inftances the comparifon will 
be made with the aétual Accounts of 1808-9. In thofe inftances where this is not 
found praéticable, the year 1806-7, being complete, will be taken as the period of 
comparifon, 


The Surplus Revenue was eftimated in the year 1793 to amount 
tol d= PSOE RSS nce dev BT O3, em 
According to the aétual Accounts of the year 1808-9, there 
was a Surplus Charge of = - - - - - - 26,042 


By which a lefS favourable Refult is exhibited in the fum of £. 1,189,619 


The difference will be found to have been entirely occafioned by the increafe of 
Charge and of Intereft on the Debts, as the fiate of the Revenues has improved in a 
moft material degree ; but it is propofed to enter upon a detailed examination of the 
whole, both Revenue and Charge, as fhewn in the Statement in which the diftine- 
tion is. miade between the Revenues pofteffed exclufively by the Company under 
their antently ela rights, and thofe acquired under fubfidy or by cefion or 
conqu 


REVENUES. 


THE firft points for confideration are the Revenues of the Company's antient 
Poffoffions, and the Revenucs of thofe obtained by ceffion or conqueft. The want of 
the Bengal Accounts, as before adyerted to, renders it neceflary to make the preient 
comparifon in thefe inftances with the year 1806-7. 