

Temporary provifions were made refpe@ling the expenfe of the repairs of forts, and of 
placing the Nabob Sandut Ally upon the throne. The political fityation of India 
requiting a’force exceeding the 13,000 men, as ftipulated, to be fiationed in Oude 
fron the year 1798-9 to 1800-1, the Receipts from the Nabob appear greater in thot 


haste This 


a8 Second REPORT from the Scle8& Coinmittee’ onthe 


Subfidies and Re. ‘This treaty continued in operation till the year 1801, when it was fupsrfeded by 

a peucetl Geis another treaty, dated the 10th November, under which diftriéts were cedediin perpe- 
Roker tual fovereignty to the Company, eftimated at a jumma or annual grof rent of Lucknow 
a4 J Sicca rupees 1,35,23,474, or £. 1,502,052. The diftriéts were to be delivered to 
| Appeneisy N° 26. the Company from the 22d September. ‘This territorial ceffion being declared to be 
in liea of the Subfidy and of all expenfes on account of defenfive engagements, no 
f demand is to be made in future upon the Vizier, either for the expenfe of the Britih 
| detachments attached to his perfon, or on any other account whatever. 4 


The financial effet of this alteration in the engagement with the Nabob of Oude 
is fhewn in the Statement from the year 1801-2, by increafed Receipt and additional 
Charge for the management of the Revenues and the Adminiftration of Juttice in the 
Ceded Diftri&ts. Antecedent to this period, the Charges ftated in the Account as 
difburfed, were merely thofe of the Refidencies at Lucknow and with Scindia. 


i 

|) Apbendis, N°27- = On the 14th of July 1802 a proclamation was iffued, declaring the intention of the 
: Government refpeéting the plan of fettlement of the landed Revenue of the Ceded 
a Difwriéts, which, after the trial of two triennial fettlements, finally extended to ten 
\ years, with increafed rents in each period, upon principles detailed in the proclamation, 
, and was eventually to lead, under certain refervations and provifions, to a permanent 
fettlement. In March 1803 a code of laws was publifhed for the internal Govern- 
ment of the diftriéts, in a number of regulations, according to the plan in prattice as 
sto the lower provinces, defining the privciples both of Revenue management and 
Judicial adminifiration. Others have been fince pafied, modifying and amending the 
former regulations as occafion required. 


The management of thefe newly Ceded Diftriéts was at firft committed to a Lieu- 
rtenant Governor and three Commiffioners, with proper Officers for the collection of 
the Revenue and the adminiftration of Juftice. In the year 1803 the offices of Lieu- 
.tenant Goyernor and of Commiffioners were abolithed, and the fuperintendance was 
committed to the Board of Revenue at the Prefidency. 


Reg. 10 & 11, Tn 1807 a temporary Commiffion was appointed, for the purpofe of an enquiry, pre- 
_ .,._ paratory to the completion of fettlements of the rents of thefe diliriéts, The Revenue 
Appendix, N° 11. Letter irom Bengal of the 7th April 1809, advifes the eftablifhment of thefe Com- * 
-miffioners asapermanent Board haying been determined upon,aud that their jurifiction 
-was to comprehend the whole of the Upper Provinces, viz. the Ceded in Oude, the 
Conquered, and the Benares Diftriét. The controul of the Board of Revenue over the 
Colleétions, and of the Board of Trade over the Cuftoms, with the exception of 
Cuttack, is transferred to the Board of Commiftioners. 