


- 


Bombay Revenues. © 
F 


Appendix, N° 21, 


Subfidies and Re+ 
| venues of Ceted 
and Conquered 


‘Conntries, 
~ 


atk 


Appendix, N° 6. B. 


726 _ Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on the 


The colleétion of the Customs in the year 1796-7 amounted to - £- 52,994 
In 1808-9 it was Sct rose o Sr 137,497 
beinganincreafeof - - - - - = = £. $4,503 


The increafe is, in part, to be attributed to the levy of additional duties at Bombay, 
and in part to the arrangement by the treaty with the Nabob of Surat. 


Farms anp Licences. 


Amount in 1796-7 - - - - = - £. 26,714 
Amount in 1808-9 - - - - <teee| aaa 85,271 
being'anincreafe‘of- = swt eK. 58,557 

——— 


This Refource is derived from reftriétions on the fale of Tobacco, Arrack, and other 
articles for confumption by the inhabitants. 

The increafe may be afcribed to the attention of Government to render it produ@ive, 
and to the arrangement under which the whole of the Revenues of Surat devolved to 
the Company. 


SUBSIDIES anv REVENUES or CEDED any CONQUERED 
COUNTRIES. 


THE next branch of thefe Accounts to which Your Committee have direéted their 
attention, is the amount realized by Receipts irom Subfidies in confequence of treaties 
with the Native Princes of India, or from the Revenues of Territories conquered by 
the Britith arms. They will be found to form a confiderable part of the Refources 
of the Company, and it has been thought proper to exhibit the detail of the whole 
of them in one difiinét view, feparate from the antient Pofleffions, although the 
management falls under the adminiftration of different Prefidencies. ‘I’his has been 
done in the Supplementary Statement marked B. 


With the exception of the Subfidy from the Rajah of Travancore, the ftipulations 
under the treaties with the feveral Native Princes in the way of Subfidy have, fince 
the year 1793, been commuted for the ceflion of diftriéts, the Revenues of which 
are received as an equivalent for the payment of the expenfe of the Company's 
forces employed for the proteétion of their dominions refpeétively. Explanations 
will be given in the examination of the detail of the Statement now adverted to. 


‘The review of this Statement will thew that the political relations ef the Company 
in India have been greatly changed and enlarged within the period under examination. 
‘The inveftigation of the Charges of the Indian Government in general is propofed to 
be taken up diftinétly in another part of this Report, and it will then appear that the 
increafed Civil Charge to be exhibited has been enhanced in a very confiderable 
degree, in confequence of ceflions obtained under fubfidiary arrangements, or of Ter- 
Titories acquired by conqueft. ‘The examination of this branch leparately has there- 
fore been thought preferable. But before entering upon the detail, it is proper to 
premife that the Charges confift folely of the expenie attending” the collcétion of ‘the 
Revenues and Adminifiration of Juftice, with the payments made to the Nabobs.or 
Princes, and their dependants ; the net amount being jared to beapplicable to the 
difcharge of fuch part of the military expenfes which may have been incurred under 
‘the engagements of the treaties, or have been produced by additional forces required 
for maintaining the conquefis. The Eftimate of 1793 was formed foon after the receipt 
-of the advices of the conclufion of the Myfore war in 1792, and the. calculations 
were made under very imperfect information of the real value of the dittri€ts olan 