

The war with Tippoo having ended early in the year 1792, it was thought a 
proper feafon for entering into treaties with the Nabob of Arcot and che Rajah of 

‘anjore, moie fuited to the abilities of their refpettive countries than thofe concluded 
with them in the 1787, which had been aéted upon to this period. The arrange- 
ment with the Nabob ef Arcot has been already fated. It was expeéted that the 


: tied propofed:to be made with the Rajah of Tanjore would have been executed at 


the fame time, in which cafe the management of the Revenues of his country, which 
had been affumed during the war, in like manner with thofe of Arcot, would alfo have 
been furrendered to him; but a variety of obftacles retarded the conclufion of the 
arrangeinent, partly from the reje€tion at firfl by the Rajah of the terms propofed, and 
partly from doubts havirig been entertained of the propriety of entrufting him, at that 
time, withthe charge and management of the public Revenue, which had beea 
‘affumed as fecurityfor the Subfidy. It was not therefore till the 12th July 1793 that 
the treafy was executed, and the.country futrendered to his management. 


The effeéts of the-above appear in the Receipts of the year 1792-3 and 1793-4, 88 
fhewn in the Statement... It will likewife appear that, though the country was durrea- 
dered to the Rajah, he did not fulfil the ftipulated engagements of the treaty, but fell 
fhort in bis-payments in the year 1794-5 to the amount of £.20,000. This failure is 
to be attributed to the complete diforder. into which the whole of the internal 
‘ment of his affairs had fallen, infomuch as to endanger the future realization ‘of eit 
the accruing demands, or of the exifting arrears of the former Subfidy. It became 
therefore neceffary for the Madras Government to avail itlelfof the powers referved by 
the treaty, ‘by affuming the management of the ‘diftri&ts afligned as fecurity for the 
fulfilment of the terms of it... The effeG of this meafure is fhewn in the Receipt of the 
year 1795-6. : : ; . 

It is not deemed neceffgry in this place to ftate in detail the depofition of the Raj 
the meafures purfued for placing the legal heir ‘upon the Mutnud. or the Coonan 
appointed to inveftigate the fate of affairs in the'¢ountry, as it is. merely propofed to 
bring to notice the leading circumftances which affe€yed the Receipt and ‘the Expendi- 
ture. It is therefore only requifite toremark that the afumed diftriéts remained under 
the management of the Company’s fervants till the year 1799. On the 25th O@ober 
of that year, the Rajah, who had been called to the fucceflion on the opinions of the 
moft refpe€table Pundits as to his legal right, entered into another treaty, in which he 
furrendered the whole of the Revenues of the country to the exclufive mana; of 
the Company, referving to himfelf the annual payment of one lac of pagodas, of 
£-40,000, and one-fifth of the net Revenues, to be computed on principles defined in the 
treaty. The Revenues derived from Tanjore continue to be realized agreeably to the .. 