

“Phe: poffetiiod of, Malabar. by, the Company after 1792, and" the conqueft of Cochie 
from the Dutch tat pleced he fituation of the Rajah upon another footing with the 
Company, ‘nothing further bas been recgived.gn the balis of the above treaty. : 


“Colrections frou THE ‘Destincts Cenzp wr tux'Guscowan Razas, 
Appendiz, N’6.B. "The political condeftion with the Guicdirar Rajah (as exhibited in the Statement) 
Appendix, Noa4, 
a ‘Tight as logitimate heir. ‘This convention ‘provided, ini the firft place, for the reim- 


num; .for.the payment: 
A.ceffion from the forr 


"till the advances’niade by the Company on account of the Rajah thould be Jiquidated. 
‘The effeét of thefe feveral arrangements is fhewn in the Statement... The Reccipts are 
Sxclufive of what has been recovered of the debt owing by the Rajah to sae 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 35. 


tho Charges are thoft of management. The Revenue and Judicial Syftems have been Subsidies and Ree. 
extended to certain parts of the Soubah or Province. coneot ‘Coded 
7 2 Countfies. > 
Tue Revenues oF THE Districts acquirep By Crssion anp Conquest ~~ 
FROM nt Mauaarras, as fhewn in the laft column of the Statement, are’ now to 
be exainined. 


Although a treaty of offenfive and defenfive alliance fubfifted between the: Peithwa 
and the Company: at the time of the formation of the Eftimate of 1793, ‘no ‘notice 
was taken of the fubfidiary ftipulations of that treaty, as they were not of a per- 
manent defcription. “his treaty was dated the 5th July 1790. I was entered into’ 
during the war with Tippoo then depending, and ftipulated for the employment of two 
hattalions of the Company's forces, the charge of which was to be defrayed by the, 
Peifhwa ; the Recéipt in 1792-3 was upon this account, and that in 1794-5 was in 
difcharge of the balance remaining due uader the treaty. The “Receipts in the: year" 
1803-4 and the fubfequent years, were in confequence of the acquirement of Territories 
from the Peifwa.under a treaty of ceflion, and from: Dowlut Row Scindia and the’ 
‘Rajah of Berar by-conqueft: ‘The ceffions by the Peithwa were made und@ the id=. . 
-ftrument denominated:the ‘Freaty of Baffein, which was concluded with ‘his Highnefs Appendix, N° 47. 
on the 31ft December #802, © 9) re Pre et yn aie 
Under this treaty the Company were engaged to: farnith a itera fe for'the 
fervice of the Peithwa, confitting of 6,000 native infantry and the ufsa ion of 
-field pieces and European artillery men, with the proper equipment of warlike ftores, 
rand ammunition, fo.be ftationed in perpetuity i his Highnefs’s dominions. ~ For.the 
payment of the expertfe of this force Territories -were'teded, producing, according ta’ 
‘the Schedule; a rental of 26 lacks of rupees ; seferving a provifion for an area 
if afterwardig found neveflary; or for additional ceffions if the Ceded DiftiGs thould 
not, ‘after'the experience of three- years, realize their ted. value. . Provifidns 
bosby apea made for mutual’ affiftance in the-event of .war,,ahd for other eit 
-cumftances. oe : A ee ante 
“On the 16th December 1803 this treaty underwént a confiderable modification; Apprendi Need. 
sand ana or fupplemental treaty was concluded, which is the bafig.on which. ~__ 
the dif ey the Peifhwa are now held. ‘Under this agreement the fabfidiary 
force was increafed by the adiition. of a regiment of natiye cavalry ;'-and fome, 
alteration was ‘made in -thé-principle: of: mutual: affiftante ia the, event. 6f. war';a, 
«change of. the ‘Territories ceded under the former treaty was alfo made. Diftridts 
fituated in the*Carnatic ‘and in Guzzerat, valued in the Schedule at 19,16,000 rupees, 
-were cominuted for' territory itv Bundlécund yalued at ‘rupees 36,16,000; but it isto. 
abe remarked that, at the tie of thé conclufion of this treaty, the Dittri@.of Bun- 
«dlecund was in @ difturbed. {tate, and the néceffity exifted for the employment of & 
“military force to eftablifh an, authority over the country; extraordinary provifion was 
— made in the above'coimputation, of the'value of the’ ‘effion to defray that- 
sexpenfe, ve om : es 
The Receipts from the Peifhwa are on Land Rents, Cuftoms and Duties, partly in 
‘Surat, and partly in the Province of Bundlecund, the former- under the” management _ 
of the Bombay Goverminent, and the latter under that 6f Bengal:, “3 tigi se 
The dittrigts ‘obtained ‘by conquet from Dowlut Row Scindiah were firttefta- Appendix, N49, 
‘blithed in the poffeffion ‘of the ‘Company by the treaty of peace dated the 30th of ' - 
December 1803 ; but'a mifimderftanding haying arifen between the parties, another. sppendix, N° 50.. 
‘treaty was entered into the 22d Novémber 1805, to which fupplemental'or declara-’~ 
tory articles were aiineyed. By this treaty the boundaries of the Conquered Diftritts” 
are defined, Thefe diftriGs are fituated in the Dooab, and to the weftward of the’ 
Jurona, and are under the managemént af the Bengal Government, to whichis to be 
cadded Broach and’ its) dependencies, whichis under the direétion of “the: Bombay. 