

It is.to be remarked that the amount of the feveral heads of Charge refpettively, as 
exhibited-in the columns of the Statement, are taken from the columns of the Accounts 
laid before Parliament, which thew-the fams sétually difburfed in the year; confe- 
quently, thofe fums ‘may not always be confidered as the aCtual. Charge appertaining 
to the year; as it occafionally happened that, in fome years, a part of the Charge 
became in arrear, and féll upoa the difburfement of the next year, by which the 
Charge of orie year appeared at alef amount, and that of another was enhanced 
in proportion. ore 


: MILITARY CHARGES. 
THE feparation of the Military Charges and thofe of Buildings aud Fortifications 


Appendix, N° 6. = 


Appendix, N°6.C. 


e Military Charges: * 
under diftin& heads or columns having been noticed, it may not be improper to offer 


fome explanation of the reafoa of making this feparation, in fo far as_refpeéts ihe 
yeah Charge, The Army,in India, though divided under the adminifiration of 
Pig Prefidencies refpeétively, is, in . aggregate, to he confidered as engaged 

. a 3 for 


Ky 


iiitrey Charges. 


98 Sccond REPORT. from, the Sete& Committee on: the 
for. the protetion of the. Empire at large. The immenf incyeafe, both in numbers-and 


tome expenfe, demands more payticular examination as to the immediate caufes of it; and 


UAppendix, N°6. 


it is conceived that this examination can beft be made by a combination, of the entire 
Mititary Charge. It is, however, to be premifed that the prefent numerical force of 
the Army cannot be fiid to have been determined merely by the extent of the 
Company's antient Poffeffions, but is governed likev-ife by fublidiary ftipulations under 
treaties with the. Natiye Princes of India, and by the increafe required in confequence 
of the additional Territories obtained by conquett. 

‘When the Eftimate was framed in the year 1793, the political ftate of India was 
very different to what it was at the later periods in the Statement. The principle on 
which the calculations in that Efiimate were made was governed by the circumftances 
of the time, having in view the eftablithment and continuance of peace. ‘The opinion 
ef the late Marquis Cornwallis was adverted to in fupport of thofe calculations, and 
tbe expenfe incurred previous to the war with ‘Tippoo Sultaun, then recently con- 
cluded, was adopted for the general rule as to the Eftimate of the future profpetts, 
On thefe feveral grounds, the Military Charges were eftimated in the year 1793 at 
thefumof - + + = © - = £.2,917,500 

Tt is found neceffary to the .comparifon with the 
Charge of the year 1808- to add the Buildings 
and Fortifications, becaufe the Military Buildings 
at Bengal in that year could not be feparated. 
Add therefore - - =) 5 =) = 117,875 


ss ; . £.33035,375 
The aétual Military Charge in 1808-9, was, in- 
_ cluding Militzry Buildings at Bengal, - £-°7,380,427 

- Add remaining Buildings and Fortifications . - — 279,364 