


/ ; ‘Suasipy rrowt tae Rasa OF Travan . . 
‘The Eftimate of 1793 did not ftate any expeGtation undet this head... According 
to the Madras Accounts, the Rajah had made-fublidiary payments to thd Company 
from fy year 1789290. . ‘The omiftion is fuppofed. to. have arifen fromy;the .circim- 


payments not baving been made under permanent engagements. 2. 
The wer with Tippoo; ‘concluded fa the year 1792, had for its firt oftentible‘catife 
the attack by that Prince on the Jines. of the Rajah of ‘Travancore, iwho was in clole 
alliance with the Company. It was therefore’ confidered as a mattef. of juftice that 
the Rajah thould, in like manner with the Nabob of Arcot and the Rajah of:Tan- 
jore, be called upor to contribute, according to his ability, his proportion towards 
the ex] ‘of the war. “The proportion was calculated at half the amount of, his 
Net Revenues.~ ‘The laft-payment, toany'amount, appears in the Statement to havé 
been made in 2792-3. A finall fum was received in 1793-4, After this:peried-the 
363. ‘ Ir -fettlement 


34 Second REPORT fran the Sele& Committee on the 


Sebfidies nde. fettlement of Accounts with the Rajah was transferred from Madras to Bombay, but, 
‘Nodes of Ceded. during the three years 1794-5 to 1796-7, nothing was received under this head. - In 
Bed Conquest . the year 1795 a permanént treaty was concluded with the Rajah, fubje@ to the rati- 
“Sunes, ficatioiv-or approval of the Court-of Direétors, in which it was ftipulated that a fub- 
“Appendix, N*.41. -fidiary force thould be furnithed by the Company for the fervice of the Rajah, con- 
, : sfifting of three battalions of Sepoys, one company -of European artillery, and two 
coinpaniés of Lafcars, for which a fum was to be paid annually,.equivalent to the 

expenfe of the fame, 


No payment was made under this ¢reaty till the year 1797-8. From 1798-9 to 

1806 the amount of this Subtidy, fixed at £.42,914, has been annually realized inthe 

ef O way of fet-offin the Accounts: with the Rajah for Pepper furnifhed by him under con- 

Appendix, N°a2- traét. It is to be remarked that in January 1805 another treaty was entered into 

with the Rajah, increafing the fubfidiary force by one compicte regiment of native 

infantry, ‘and adding to the Subfidy to the amount of £. 45,186, for the expenfe of its 

-but no payment was made on account of the additional Subfidy for nearly two years 

‘fabfequent to the conclufion of the treaty, notwithitanding the remiffion of half of it 

for. that period. In the year 1808, threngh the. intrigues of the Dewan of the Rajah, 

Pia be +ferious ditturbances occurred, and. ended. in dire€ hoitility againft the Company, which 

Appendix, N° 43. was happily fubdued ; and the Rajah is tated to, have made a confiderable payment in 
~ difcharge of the arrears of Subfidy. 


‘Sunsrpy rrosr tus Rayan or Cocarn 


“No ‘Eftimate was made of any payment.under.this head. The-onlly ‘Receipts fro 
the Rajah upow this account, were “in-the years 17y1-2-and 1792-3. 
* “The” Rajah was, previowfly’ to 1791, a tributary to Tippoo Sultaun. On 
the 6th January’ of that'year he threw ‘off his allegiance and ‘became tributary to the 
Company, and entéréd into. a treaty accordingly, fixing his yearly tribute to rife in 
shvee sour nosis fog i 1,00,060,rupees, at which it was to continue, _ 