


E | - § His Majetty’s - | 5,: 20,348 
{ Gompauys 2 4,026 


“Total Europeans - - - - 
Natives - eee 


Grand Tol + - - + 


But this explanation, although affording a plaufible reafon for the additional Cun 
4s by fartoo general. It is therefore thought neceffary to enter upon a more detailed. 

examination of this materially important branch of the expenditure, In this procels 

it is tound that the increafed expenfe now fhewn is not merely to he seed to the 

increaf of the forces _as to numbers, but is likewife to be afcribed to an alteration itt 

the conftitution or fyftem on which the Army was formed in the year 1794. . This 

alteration is manifeft on the face of the AbftraG already referred to ; but, conceiving 

it proper. that more detailed: information upon this point fhould be furnithed, copies 

of the Abftraéts of the Military Eftablifhment Books of the three Prefidencies on the 4 pendix, N@ 53; 
goth April +794, and the goth April 1807, are added to the Appendix. It is to be 54, 55, 56, 57 and” 
remarked that. the books of the year 1807 are the lateft received in a complete feries, 55 % 
‘and although the agerevate amount of. the expenfe may not exa@ily accord with the 

amount of the. Military Cl in the year 1808-9, the Abftraéts now produced will, 

it is prefumed, be ufeful in affording a general idea of the nature and numbers of the 
- different corps of which the Indian Armies ate compofed, and particularly as no 

alteration as to the number of regiments is known to have taken place: fince that 

period, except as to thofe of His Majefty. 


It is not requifite wpon: this occafion to cnter at large into the detail of the alteration 
‘in the «military (yftem which has been alluded to, or of the caufes ‘which led: to its - 
adoption ; it may fuffice {o ftate, that from the conftitution of the Army, the Officers 
were expofed to: peculiay hardthips; the increafe of Territory had, at that period, 
led to the increafe of numbers, with which neither the gradations of rank, .nor the 
proportion: of Officers, paiticularly of Ficld Officers, were in conformity. ‘Phe highelt 
rank was that of Colonel, and as promotion only took piace in_the line, the progrefs 
was fo flow as to.offord bet a diftant and difcouraging profpe& of attaining it. No 
provifion exifted for the relief of any who, from ill health or other circumftances, found 
it neceffary to vifit their native country ; nor for the retreat of thofe who, aftcr a cer- 
tain number of years of fervide, might with to retire. Thefe feveral circumftances 
- were brought to the confideration of the Court of Direfors, and of the Board of 
‘Commiffioners for the Affairs of India, who, with the affiftance of the opinions of the 
mot refpeGtable local authorities, cntered upon a very laborious examination of the 
fybjeS, and finally determined upon an entire wew-arrangement of the Army. Pied 

’ le 


"40 Second REPORT from se ScleGt Committee on the 


Mititary Charges, 


“Appendix, N°59- 