


Government. , baie ‘ 
: bay : weg. spendix, N° 513 
The part aéquired by congueft from the Rajah’ of Berar was finally furrendered SPP 
under the’ treaty of peace dated thé 17th aber 1803, it piesa the 
province of Cuttack, including the port and diftri& of Ballafore, and’ is a dependency 
under the’ Bengal Government, ; ; a 
The Receipts contain the grof Revenues of thefe feveral diftrids obtained from the 
Mahratas by tieaty or eonquett. The Charges are thofe of the management of the 


Revenues, 


96 » Second’ REPORT jrom the Séle& Committee on the 


Bablidies end Re- Revenues,.and the adminiftration of Juftice, which have been introduced upon the 
grenus of Ceded — fyfteny in I practice. They likewife include the ftipends, allowances and pén- 
and Conquered fons. paid the Royal Family at Delhi and their dependants, and to other pertons, 
Reunites. agreeably to ftipulations in the treaties with the Peifhwa and Scindia. 


“The colleftions. have, been made on {ettlements concluded from year to year. It 
. being of importance for the proper adminiftration of thefe diftrié&ts, and the more ac- 
. eurately afcertaining their real value, a local Commiffion was determined upon in the 
Appendix, N° 41, . year 1807, which, as already noticed in the Revenues of Oude, was-in the year 1809 
3 rendered permanent, and their fuperintendance extended to.the Ceded Diftriéts of 
Oude, and. to the Province of Benares. 


CHARGES. 


‘Cherges. “THE Charges of the adminiftration of the Government of India are next to be exa- 
a mined, upon the fame principle of comparifon as the. Revenues, and fuch explanations 
: sill be given: gs circumstances may appear to‘preferibe. ‘The want of the detailed 

Acconnts of the Bengal Prefidency, .as already noticed, ‘will induce the neceffity of 
occafioually,taking the year 1806-7 as the period of comparifon, upon a fimilar princi- 
ple with the Revenues. : 


“The éxpenditare confequent upon the poffeffion of the Ceded.and Conquered Diftrifts, 
in fo far as relates to the civil adminittration of them, and the ftipulated and other 
payments tothe Native Princes and their dependants, having been already inveftigated, 
it will benecefary to make an adjuftment of the amount.fo difburfed in the examina- 


top mow propofed 46 bemade, - 
‘ “Appendix, N°.” °-!Thie entire Chidiges of the Goverment of India were eftimated 
a a. “panthe peat 179 a <0 we eee £- 5,188,125 
Deduét thofe attending the Subfidies-  - + = = 25,800 


nthe Mek Amount, as effimated in 1793, will then be -  ~ 5,162,395 
.Fronithe want of the detail of certain Accounts, the compati- . 


“Coded and Conquered Diftriéts: ="? =" “2,495,367 


ste Net Amount will be = wee we a 92;788, 544 
aa SRS poker le ae tnt — 
-which exceeds the Eftimate of the year 1793 in the fam.of L- 7,626,216: 


= 


But the comparifon with this period, altisegh dn.fome-meafure preferibed by necef 
lity, froni.the want of docurients by which the | gs of the Ce and Conquered 
Daftri€s might be ttated in detail for the yéars 1867-8 and 1808-9, is not quite’ correét,_. 
nor a: fair criterion of ‘the fate of affairs at ‘the two periods, nor is it in coincidence. 
with the view given of the aggregate of the Revenues, or of the General Refults. as 
-eftimated in 1793 and by the aétual “Accofints of the, year 1$08-9.. The Charges 
-difburted inthe year’ 1806-7, were greatly enhanced from including arrears incurred 
during. the late war, and the Deficit was. im confequence very large, The Charge in 
the. year. 1808-9 is not affefted by thofe.circumftanves, and ‘the effeét of meafures of 
retrenchment adopted by the Indian Governments is beneficially experienced, 