

fis Territories, and to ceafe from the day of quitting them, with the addition of 
oue 


. Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 93 


‘one month for defiaying the neceffary Charges of preparing the detaciment for Subtdies 

In the year 1790, on the Nizam’s application for the fupply of this force, it was-Couniries,..- 7 
ordered accordingly.. The payments made es a Subfidy, in conformity with this ~~: 
treaty or agreement, continued from 1792-3 to 1797-8. - 


Tn confequence: of the political fituation of India, from ‘the defigns of Tippoo 
Sultaun in concert with the French, defentive meafures were thought neceflary, ‘The 
Nizam having expreffed a defire for an increafé of the detachnient ferving in bis do- 
‘minions, 6n the ‘1ft September 1798 a new fubfidiary treaty was entered into with Appendis, N° 39, 
him. The detachment was increafed to 6,000 Sepoys, with a due proportion of field- 
pieces manned with Europeans, and the fubfidiary payment for the fame was fixed at 
Arcot rupees 24,137,300, or £.276,240, payable in filyer of full currency in. four 
equal inftalments. A provifion was made for aflignment of Territories in the event of 
the payment falling in arrear. The effeét of this increafe appears in the Receipts of 
the years 1798-9 and 1799-1800. ” a art 
On the 12th O&tober 1800 a treaty of perpetual and general defenfive alliance was Appendix, Nt49. 
eoncluded with the Nizam, in which material alterations’ were made in the conneGticns cet 
avith his Highnefs. The force to be fupplied by the Company’ for the general defence 
and proteétion of ‘his dominions was increafed to eight battalions of Sepoys, or 8,006 
rank and file, and two regiments of cavalry, or 1,000 horfe, with their requitite 
complement of guns, European Artillery-men, Lafcars and Pioneers, fully equipped 
with warlike ftores and  anmunition, to “be ftationed in- perpetuity in his Highnefs's 
dominions, _ For the pene of this force, the Territories acquired by the Nizam 
under the treaty of Sermgapatam: of the 18th 1792, and under the treaty of 
Myfore of the 224 June 1799, ‘according to the Schedules, were ceded in perpetuity 
to the Company, and the Reveriucs of them were to be confidered as a full and 
‘complete fatisfaétion of all-demands ‘on’ account of the. fubfidiary force. Some 
changes of Territory for the accommodation of: thé. refpeStive boundaries were ftipu- 
lated for, but, according to thé Schedules to thé. treaty, the annual jumma of 
aie Cole Difitiéts may be eGitnated at Pagodas 17,58,000, or £.703,200 roe 
~ “From the yéar 1800-1 in the Statement. the effe& of this Inf attangemneet is 
exhibited. : It will appear that'thé gro& Recéipt, ‘as above eftimated, has deca fully 
realized in ‘olie year only, viz, 1807-8; it is however to be remarked that’ at the 
time the difrias were. made ‘over to the Company their internal fituation was 
vei uipromifing, and ‘the inhabitants were much 1 aiucecom Confiderable im- 
prevements have been prodaced, ‘and the hope may be entertained of the original 
-eftimated affeffinent being exceeded. |. ‘ a : 
« ‘The Charges here thewn' are for the expeace of management, and payments of 
:Penfions te of the Nizaiy’s officers. tee he mes ' 
The fyftem in getéra! pragtice for the colleion of the Reyenies“and. the admi- 
nition of Tite bee been intreduced, ‘as far as pratticable, into thele diftridts. 
. The Net Revenue is. the fam applicable to thé paytient of the expente of thi 
fablidiary force furniftied ‘under the treaty. 