

"and grounds, and the making of new roads and avenues. As to the Madras columa, 
the additional Territories acquired by the conqueft of Myfore, by the ceffion of the 
Camatic by the Nabob of Arcot, and of the diftri@s by the Nizam, having greatly 
inereafed the number of fortreffes, the neceflity. of* maintaining and keeping them in 


repaiy_ will be found to have materially added to the expenfes of this defeription : 
‘ unde: 


ip 


Duildings and 
Fortifications, 


k 


Civil, &c. Charges. 
Appendix, N°6, 


Appendix, N°6.C. 


‘Appendix, N° 61. 


44 Second REP ORT: rom the Select Committee on the 
. 

under the Madras Government. The great increafe of Charge after the year 1804-5, 
is to be afcribed to various circumftances ; the improvement and repairs of the works 
at the fortrefS of Seringapatam; the building a new mint and cuftom-houfe and a 
jail at Madras; the ere¢tion of barracks at feveral ftations for the accommodation 
‘of the increafed number of European troops; extenfive repairs of the fortifications 
of the Prefidency, which had received very confiderable damage by a ftorm in 1805; 
cand other works of different defcriptions, of which it may not be requifite, even if 
it were praticable, to give a minute detail. The increafe of Territory on the wettern 
fide of India, under the adminiftration of the Bombay Government, being far le& 
confiderable than what has come under that of Madras, the additional expen 
attending the Buildings and Fortifications is likewife les. The inereafed Charge ex-" 
hibited in the years fubfequent to 1802-3 is in fome degree to be attributed to the 
effets of a fire at the Prefidency in February 1803, by which very extenfive damage 
was produced, and, in confequence, confiderable expenfe incurred in the ereting of 
new barracks for the European regiments, and of other buildings. ‘The extention of 
the Efplanade, the compenfation to perfons whofe houfes were removed, and the 
further ftrengthening the fortifications, have added to the Charges. 


It would lead to a very extenfive detail to account minutely for the increafe under 
this head of Charge at each of the Prefidencies; but it may be proper to obferve that 
infiruGtions have been given, from time to time, to keep it within cyery practicable 
Jimit. 


CIVIL, &. CHARGES. 


THE Civil, Revenue, Judicial.and Marine Charges, as fhewn in the General State- 
ment marked No. 6, are next to be examined. ‘The total of Charges incurred under 
thefe feveral heads on account of the Company's ancient Pofleftions was eftimated in 
1793.8 oe Nae nibteimedine pai, oF began ~ 2. L.2,126,950 
_ On a comparifon with the year 1806-7, in which their amount 

Ee Ey Ries Ae At Nd 3,725,381 


=a was + 


‘an increafe is exhibited of - - - - - -  £1,598,431 


If the comparifon could have been made with the year 1808-9, a different Refult 
would have beeu fhewn, as the expenditure at Madras and Bombay in that year 
was lefS by £.277,720. 


‘The view of this Statement will thew, during the whole of the period, a. generdl 
tendency to increafed expente; and that, between 1793-4 and 1806-7, the increafe 
accumulated to £.1,312,830. This increafe would certainly have appeared lefs on a 
eomparifon with 1808-9, but it is deemed of importance to enter upon a detailed 
examination, in order to difcover, as far as praéticable, the real caufes from which 
the expenfe of the Civil Adminifiration or Government of thefe Pofeftions has been 
carried to its prefent large annual amount. It is, however, to be premifed that, in 
fome inftances, the increafed Charge will be found to be imputable to alterations of 
fyfiem under which increafed Revende has been produced; and, in others, to expen- 
five meafures which have been preferibed by the more extended political relations of 
the Company in Afia, 