

‘The increafe of numbers as to rank and file, between the year 1793-4 and the year 
1808-9, has been already adverted ta, but the confideration of the expenfe of the. 
Army on its prefent eftablithment will naturally bring into view the. ftate of it, accord-. 
ing to the Regulations paffed in the year 1796, and as it is at prefent. The principal 
regular corps will only be noticed. “ It is propofed to thew ghe general -ftate of the 
Company's Army according to thofe Regulations, and ing to the Retums 
of the year 1808. : 


1796. 1. 1808. 


- «| 6 Battalions. | .6-Battations. . 
- -| 6 Regiments. | 3 Regiments. 


8 Regiments. ‘ 16 Regiments. 
26 Regiments. 59 Regiments. 


. ‘Astiller 
European - - fintory 


‘ 


‘Cavalr, 
Native - - - hirer a SS 


° 
From which it will appear. that the. alterations in the Army were, the European 
infantry lefs by three regiments; the native cavalry more by eight regiments; - 
and the native infantry more by thirty-three regiments. : : 

‘The’ 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. . 41 


‘The annual expenfe of thefe feveral-additions to the military force is of courfe Military Charges, 
Sama aid 


greatly enhanced by the new principle of formation of the regiments in 1796, and by 
the increafed pay to the Europeans‘and Natives, which, as to the Europeans, was ftill 
further increafed by a grant in the year 1807 made to His Majefty’s foldiers in 
Europe, and generally extended to thofe of -His Majefty’s and the Coupiays fervice 
on the Indian Eftablithment. 


It may not be neceffary in this place to ftate in detail the meafures adopted by the 
Indian Governments on the receipt of the orders of 1796, or the modifications which 
were afterwards made by the Court of Direétors in the years 1798 and 1801, as no 
material alteration appears in the general principle of the arrangements, except as to 
the operations of the orders of the Court on the rule of regimental promotion; the 
increafe of the ftrength of the artillery to feven companies each battalion ; the reduétion 
of three; the European regiments, with the increafe of the numbers of the remaining 
three, and the formation of the native cavalry in regiments of greater firength by 
two troops each, with the addition of one cornet and thirty men to cach troop; upon 
which occafion two of the Madras regiments of cavalry were ordered to be reduced, 
but which was not fully carried into effeét. 


The great addition to the ftrength of the Army fince the year 1796, with the im- 
mediate caufes of it, may be confidered the chief obje€t of attention, as being the 
principal fources to which the large increafe of, the military expenditure is to be 
attributed. Adverting to the whole of the period in the Statement, or at lcaft fronr 
1795-6, it may be pronounced to have been almoft one continual fcene of war, or 
preparation for it; European or Indian. In fome inftances the neceflary meafures of 
defence led to the raifing of new regiments; in others levies were required to fupply 
the place of troops employed on expeditions undertaken againft the poffeffions of 
the enemy. The combined effe& of the whole has been fhewn to produce an addition 
of King’s regiments, and an increafe in the eftablifynent of the Company’s Army to 
the extent already ftated, oo 