

urife from this meafure, and of cOurfe an addition to the Net Revenue. 


Tt is to be remarked that the Charges include every Difburfement of the difiriét, 
Revenue, Judicial, and relating to the Mint and Cuftoms. 


Office colleGtions have uniformly exceeded the expenfes,’ and in the year 1808-9, 
i were more by £.3,110, fhewing a net difference of £.7,710, in the refult of the 
fet comparifon. 4 
" Cuancrs or THE RESIDENCY OF BENARES, 
Rs cfiimated in the year 1793 at - - mH eed - £.32,700 
F amounted in the year 1806-7 to = - - - - 140,732 
& 
- 
| 
a 


¥ Civit Cuarcts ry GENERAL, termed in the Parliamentary Accounts, N* 2. 


® “ Other Charges of the Civil Efablifiment.” They comprize the whole of the fixed 
rs and contingent expenfes of the Civil Department General which are not ftated in the 
other heads of the Account; as the pay and allowances of the Members of Government, 


ae : * the Secretary's, Accountant's, and feveral other Offices, the Durbar Charges, &c. &c. 
In confequence of the adjuftment noted under the head of Mint Charges, this head 

#f Charge is to be ftated as eftimated in the year 1793 at - -  £. 258,800 

In the year 1806-7 it amounted to ~~ = ee 575,856 

‘being an increafe of | - - - - - - - £. 317,056 

— 


This head of Difburfement is liable to be affeGed by a variety of contingercics. 
‘The Durbar Charges, from ineluding the political expenfes incurred by embaffies to 


oF 


‘Afurs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 47. 


or from the feveral Powers of Afia, muft neceffarily be ever flu@uating. On the view civil, &e. Charges, 
of this column of the Statement it will appear that, from the year 1792-3 to 1798-9, Bengal | 
with the exception of 1795-6, thefe Charges continued at an amount {6 fteady as to call Femi | 
for no particular remark. ‘The large amount in that year is to be attributed partly to Ake 


i ae 


extraordinary or temporary circumfiances : a payment to the a€ting Governor General ;, 
a remmeration ordered by the Court of Direftors to the late Acco General ; 
and the expenfe of the public Pref. After the year 1798-9 the of the 


political velations of the Company, and other circumftances, led to a large inereafe of 
expenfe on the efiablifhed Refdencies at the Courts of the Native Princes, and for 
temporary embaflies ; by which the Durbar Charges were enhanced in avery material 
degree, ‘The very large expenfe in the year 1805-6 is, in addition to. thefe circum- 
fiances, to be attributed to the Charge incurred in an atiempt to efiablith afettlement 
at Balambangan. The inftitution of a College at Calcutta in the year 1800 has like- 
wife added to the expenfes after that period. 


It appears by the Statement that after the year 1805-6 the Civil Charges were very ~ 
confiderably reduced, the Goverament General havisg made confiderable retrench- 
ments of eftablithed as well as temporary expenditure. In’ confidering the ‘excefs, 
under this head, on a comparifon with the amount at which it was eftimated in 1793, 
or what was aCtually incurred in the year 1793-4, which, upon this eccafion, may be” 
confidered as a more proper period of comparifon, the difference of the circumftances 
of the times muft not be loft fight of, and particularly the very great extenfion of the 
bufinefs of the Secretary's and other departments from the increafe of Territory. The 
extended political relations of the Company may probably keep the Durbar Charges at 
an amount exceeding that which was required in former times. This column’ is not 
filled up for the years 1807-8 and 1808-9, as the want of the detail of the Bengal 
Statements for thofe years prevented the Accounts from being drawn up, as to the va~ 
rious items, with fufficient precifion for grounding a compavifon with other years. 