


i 
| 
| 
el 


62 


Cuances or tHe Juproran Deranruent. 


‘This head comprizes the expenfes of the Supreme Court, with the law Charges of — | 
the Company; alfo the expentes of the Adminiftration of Juftice in the feveral Adawluts | 
or Native Courts of the provinces of Bengal, Bahar and Orifla; the expenfes of this 
defeription for Oude, Benares and the Conquered Difiriés, being included under thofe 
heads refpetively. ] 

At the time the Eftimate of the year 1793 was framed the judicial fyftem had not | 
deen inftituted, confequently the law expenfes and thofe of the Supreme Court of 
Judicature could alone be introduced into that Eftimate. They were included in the a 
amount taken for the Civil Charges generally, and are calculated | 
atthe fumof - - - - - - - = - £.57,600 A 

‘Their amount in the yeer 1806-7 wes .- - ms 57,052 | 


nA 


exceeding the Eftimate in the fumof -  — - be Leb 52 

This head of Charge comprizts the falaries and allowances of the Judges and the 
Officers, with the other expen{es of the Supreme Court of Judicature ; alfo the falaries 
ofthe Company's law officers, and the expenfés incurred by legal procefies ; likewife ; 
ofthe Court of Requefts, &e. ‘The expenfe under this head is {abject to fluctuation, | 
fiom being expofed to contingencies. Great attention has been paid to keep the, efta- 4 
blifhed Charge Within the narrowett limits practicable : the Eftablithment of the Supreme aa 
Court was revifed with much care in the year 1798, and confiderable reductions in | 
the expente were effeGted. ‘The expenfe in the year 1794, although there was then a ! 
vacancy of one Judge, isfiated ut £.40,982¢ in 1807 it was £.39,975 3 but the latter 
period includes the fam of £.4,070 for Penfions, which were not in the former, The 
Charge of the Court of Requefis, which in 1794 wes £.780, amounted in 1807 to 
4£.7,827; but this expenfe is merely nominal, being more than covered by the Receipts 
from fees, which were inftituted on fuits when the alterations were made in the Efta- 
blithment ofthat Court, under proclamation dated 13th March 1862. 


The part of the Charges of the Judicial Department which is incurred by the 
alminifiration of juftice in the provinces is next to be noticed. In the Accounts 
Pefonted to Parliament it is termed “ Charges of the Dewarnny and Nizanut City 
* and Zilla Adaceluts, allo of the Police Eiftablifments and Courts of Appedt. 


OS st Was 


i 


| Civil, &t. Charges, 
b> Bengal. 


: 
eee 
be N°9. A, 


48. Second REPORT jro the Selc& “Comhaittee on the 


It nas been already remarked that the Charges now under confideration apply only 
to the provinces. of Lenzal, Behar and Orifla, und the reafon has been afligned why 
no Eftimate could be made of them by the Court of Dircétors in February 1793. 


~ Tt is not propofed in this place to enicr upon any explanation of the grounds on 
nvhich alterations were made in the fyficm of the adminiftration of Juftice in. thele 
difiri@s, but merely to ftate the faét that fuch alterations were made, and to examine 
what additional expenfe has been produced by them. _ * 