' 
Jowaan 


Aer ore 


i 


Seer epee ave ee 
pepe eavevanvest 


Aftzirs of The FAST, INDIA COMPANY. 43 


In the year 17G8 the Company's artillery was increafed:in numbers, and in 1801 Military Charges. 

by the addition of two companiés to each battalion, in the whole 12 companics, and —+—L—« 
in the fame years their European regiments, confifting of fix, were reduced to three. 
‘The progreflive effet of thefe additions on ‘the amount of the Military Charges 
in each year, if it could be fhewn with accuracy, is not material to the object. im- 
mediately in view at this time, which is to account for the great increafe of expenfe 
between 1753-4, and 1808-9 ; that object will therefore be purfued in order to bring 
the examination of this branch of the Accounts to a clofe. 


It muft have appeared evident, from the remarks and explanations in the preceding 
parts of this Report, that confiderable difficulty would exift in accounting with pre- 
cifion and accuracy for the component paris of the fum of £. 3,973,590, ftated to be 
the amount of the increafe on the comparifon now made, and that it can be only done 
upon Eitimate, the calculations of which muft neceffarily be framed on the computed. 
annual expenfe of the additional regiments, and by advcrting to the aétual amount 
incurred in the year 1806-7, as fiated in the Book of Eftablithments, with refpeét to 
the other Charges, particularly thofe ofa contingent nature. It mutt be admitted that 
an Eftimate drawn upon fach principles is liable to obje@ion, but being the only mode 
by which any explanation can be at prefent obtained upon this point, itis inferted in the 
Appendix, and is prefimed to be as accurate a calculation a3. can be formed, when Appendix, Ne 60. 
every circumflance refpetting the ftate of the Accounts is taken into confideration, : 


BUILDINGS ayn FORTIFICATIONS. 


This head was eftimated in 1793 at =- 7° + = . £117,873 . ~” puildings and 
From the remarks on the Military Charges it will have been —> Fostifications. 
obferved that the view given of the expenfe of Buildings:and” : 
Fortifications in 1808-9 is incomplete, from not including that 
incurred in the Military department'at Bengal. If the adjuft- 
ment made on the examination of the Military Charges-were- 
now reforted to, the Account would ftand as follows: - ‘ 
Buildings and Fortifications in 1808-9, as per State- 
ment, - ees - . - £. 279,364 
Add for the Military part at Bengal 7 + = 45,000 


The total will then be - = + + - +s - = 324,364 


which exceeds the Etimate in 1793 in the famof + - £.206,489 
x i 


Appendix, N° 6, 


The difficulty of giving with accuracy a profpettive view of expenfes of this def 
cription is obvious, as it depends fo greatly upon contingent and catual circumftances, 
The calculation in the Eftimate was in part governed by the average of preceding 
years, and the experience of the firft feven years of the aGiual Accounts, 1792-3 to 
1797-8 inclufive, afforded fome proof of the agcuracy of it, for on the average of 
thofe years the expenfe only proved to be £:113,048, although in fome of them the 
Charge exceeded the Eftimate, On the infpeétion of thefe columns of the Statement 
it will appear that, as the ‘lerritories of the Company inereafed, the expenfe of the 
ereftion and repairs of Buildings and Fortifications increafed likewife; and here it is 
to be remarked that the Charge under this head includes, in like manner with the 
Military Charges, the entire expenditure, whether on account of the Company's 
ancient Poffefions, or of thofe acquired by ceflion or conqueft. The increafed ex- 
penfe in the Bengal column, during the feveral years’ from 1798-9 to 1803-4," is prin- 
‘cipally to be afcribed to repairs Xc. of Buildings and Fortifications in Oude, ‘a part .a>pendix, Né 26 
of which was provided for in the ftipulations of the treaty of February 1798; alfo * 
to the ereGtion of a new Government-houfe at Calcutta; to the purchafe of houfes 