


Appendix, N° 59. 


detail of this arrangement was communicated to India by letters, dated in January 


1796. The immediate effe&ts of this meafure will appear in the Statement No. 59. in 


‘the Appendix, which thews, upon a general principle, that by. this alteration in the 


Eftablithment of the feveral corps of the Army, the European infantry, before con- 
fifting of 12 battalions, was converted into fix regiments ; the native infantry, confifting 
of 13 brigades, (each brigade containing fix battalions) being in the whole 78 bat- 


‘talions, was formed into 26 regiments of two battalions each; and that reforms were 


likewife made in the other corps of the Army. By the formation of the Arm 
according to this principle the profpeé& of promotion was greatly enlarged: the 

of Major General was inftituted in the Company's fervice ; the number of Field 
Officers was increafed ; and the expe@ation of attaining the higher ranks was rendered 
more encouraging, by the eftablithment of the principle of promotion in regiments ae- 
cording to feniority, as follows : in the Evropean and native infantry to the rank of 
Lieutenant Colonel ; in the native cavalry to the rank of Captain, and afterwards in 
the line; the promotion in the artillery was continued in feniority in the whole corps, 
aceording to the praétice in His Majetty's fervice ; liberal provifion was likewife 
made for allowances to a limited number of Officers on furlough in Europe, and for 
the event of total retirement after the fervice of a certain number of years. A mo- 
dification of the rule of promotion was dire@ted by letters to India dated in June and 
July 1798, eftablithing it generally to be to the rank of Major in the refpeétive 
regiments, and afterwards by feniority in the whole corps, excepting the artillery, in 
which the promotion continued by feniority in the corps. 


It is obvious that a charge fo material could not be effeéted without confiderable 
additional expen. Attention was, as far as praCticable, paid to economy, by reducing 
cerfain allowances ; but, according to Eftimates which were prepared with es much 
accuracy as circumftances would admit of, the addition likely to be made to the 
Military Charges could not be taken at a lef amount than £ 460,000, including the 
allqwances on furlough and retirement. 


It has that the leading obje& of thefe feveral arrangements was the 
fatisfadtion o the European sinenthest Officers, and to afford ‘tet the relief which, 
on principles i aries equity, they were entitled to; but the permanent Military 
expenfes were fhortly after confiderably increafed by an attention, equally neceffary 
and juft, to the caie of the lower ranks, both European and native. As to the 
Europeans, it is to be obferved that it is an eftablifhed general principle, that in 
refpc& of pay and allowances, His Majefty’s and the Company's forees are placed 
upon. an cqual footing, In the year 1797 an increafe of pay was granted to the 
Royal Army by His No} ’s order, dated 25th May; this grant extending ‘to the 
fervice in India, the fame increafe was given to the Company's European foldiers. 
An addition was likewife made in the year 1801 to the pay of the native Officers and 
Sepoys at, Madras and Bombay ; @ confiderable additional expenfe, and.of courte an 
increafe of the Military Charges, was occafioned by thefe grants, from the period at 
which they were refpeétively carried into effeG.. 