


Referring to the total of the Military Charges in the Statement marked No. 6, it Appendix, N°6. 


will appear that they progreffively increafed in amount,’ firft, from the year. 1795-6 
to the year 1801-2 inclufive, which was almoft entirely 4 period of active we . 
Ceylon, Malacca, and the Eaftern Ifands were conquered; which, with the mainte-" 
nance of Ceylon to December 1801, and of the other conquefts till the year 1801-2, 
added ‘confiderably to the expence in each year. After that period the Military 
Charge in this inftance is included under the head of Dutch Settlements. An expe- 
dition was prepared upon a large fcale to proceed againft Manilla: though ulumately 
abandoned, it occafioned a confiderable addition to the expenfes of 1797-8. ‘Fhe 
expedition ,to Egypt fell upon the Charges from the year 1798-9 to 3801-2, and in 
a {malt degree upon 1802-3.. Upon the Peninfula the French and Dutch fettlements 
were captured immediately after the commencement of the war with tofe powers ; 
but the mo material addition to the Military expenfes upon the continent of India, 
between the yéars 1796-7 and 18: 3; was occalioned by the concert which exifted 
between the French, Zemaun Shaby and Tippoo Sultaun, from whence arofe the 
apprehenfion of ‘invafion by Zemaun Shah on the north-weit frontier of Bengal, and 
the war with Tippoo Sultaun which ended in 1799. The necetlary confequence of 
thefe circumftances was an increafe of the Armies of Bengal and Madras, and an 
enhancement of the, Military Charges of all the Prefidencies, by the addition of field 
allowances aad expenfes. 


In the year 1802-3 the Charges are fhewn to have decreafed in a con‘derable 
amount, (near a million), ‘The war with the European enemies having enced in 1801, 
and peace exifting with the Native Powers of India, expe@tations were entertained that 
the expenditure of the year would have been reduced to a peace cftablithment; in 
which cafe a decreafe of Charge would have been exhibited in a much Jarger amount ;. 
but the Charge of that year included past of the expentes of the cxpedition .to 
Egypt, and for the field Charges of the Madras Army from November 1802, pre- 
vioufly to the breaking out of the war with the Mahrattas in 1803-4, the effetts of 
which are fhewn in that and the three following years; although this war may be 
faid to have ended in December 1805, when a treaty of peace was concluded with 
Holkar. Notwithftanding the effet of the. reftoration of peace upon the continent 
of India is fhewn in the redu€tion of the Charges of 1807-8 and_ 1808-9, the amount 
in each of thefe years may be confidered as full very high compared with’ the year 

363. AD, 1802-3; 


42 Second REPORT from the Scle€t Committee on the 


Military Charges. 1802-3; but the caufe of it-is to be found for the moft part in the permanent addi- 

—~~—~--r=- tions made to the military eftablifhmebts fince that period, both of His Majetty’s 
-troops and of te Company's ; of the former feven regiments of foot, and of the latter 
twelve. regiments of native infantry and three regiments of native cavalry, the aggregate 
expente of which might be eftimated at an amount exceeding a million fterling, 