


The Marine Ghineeee 


were eftimated in 1793 at - - = - - - £274,250 
and amounted in the year 1808-9 to <a 4 34 ies K: Sek 
beinglanincrea@of “~~ 8 = 2 ga, 190 


The Eftimate of 1793 Was calculated, in this infiance likewile, on the average of 
five years: ‘This calculation was fully juftified, for ldipualienes gate 
ee firft years, 1792-3 and 1793-4, on the average of feven years, 1792-3 to 1798-9 

expenfe was only £.72,000.. The increafe of Charge in and after the year 
bce rane requires tome remark, ard more particularly as a very material part of 
addition thus made was of a permanent detcription. The Marine Extabilifiment ] 
of this Prefidency was originally inttitated, and has been maintained for fervices of col- | 
fiderable importance to the interetis of the Company, and to the commerce int gen 
on the wefiern fide of India. * It is in fa6t a {pecies of navy. ‘The merits and fervices | 
of 


_ Airs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 59 


si) 


ofthe Officers, and the extenfive benefits derived by the docks and arfenals, are well civil, &e: Charges, 


known, The immediate leading -objeéts of this Eitablithment are, 


_ it, The proteétion of the trade, which is confiderable, from’ port to port, from 
ppiratical eruizers, ‘ 


ad. The defence efthe Company's trade and poffeffions, in time of war, ‘eguing 
European enemies. 


‘3d. The tranfport of troops, &e. 
4th. For making nautical difcoveries. 
5th. For conveying packets to and from the Red Sea, &c. 


In the year 1798, the Court of Direétors entered upon a full examination of the 
fubjett of the Marine Departmentof this Prefidency, in which they took into confidera- 
tion the deficiency of the Eftablifhment upon its conftitution at that time, and for~ 
warded fuch inftruétions for its improvement in every refpeét as appeared requifite. 
‘The fituation of the Officers drew kewite their particular attention, and regulations 
were pafled refpeGting their rank, placing it in relative proportion with that of the 
Officers of the Army, which bad recently been-confiderably improved. The principle 
-of granting fuses and sheng oi retirement after preferibed periods with the 
pay ofthe refpestive ranks, was alfo inftituted, in like manner as in the military fervice. 
The whole of thefe arrangements was communicated to the Bombay Government, by 
letter dated 1ft Augutt 1798. 

From the nature of the fervice, iv time of war particularly, the annual expenfe. of 
‘this Department is fluétuating and uncertain in its amount, as will appear by the infpec- 
tion of the colaum now under examination. _. Meafiures are, however, adopted to check 
and control the expenditure, and keep it within ach limits as are confiticnt with the 


efficiency of the fervice. , 
+ ORE BOS 4 ey , r 
Ee ed < “The Revexve Cnances ¢ 
were eftimated ims1793 at) = > = £13,500 
and amounted in the year 1808-9 to ats be = 96,081 
being an increafe of - - oo - - ch aa £-82,581 


The Eftimate was, in this inftance likewife, calculated on the average expenfe of 
‘the five preceding years. It appears to have been juttified by the average of the five 
years from 1792-3 to 1796-7, which amounted to £.14,200. It is to be remarked 
that thefe Charges include the expenfe attending the colletion of the Land Revenues, 
‘the Cuftoms, and the Farms and 5. ‘The increafé in the Receipts on the two 
aft articles has been before noti and the occafion of it aferibed principally to the 