

It is, however, to be remarked that other demands which have fallen upon the 
Revenues of India remain to be examined, before it will be pfaéticable to purfue the 
invettivation of the final Refults.  ‘Fhefe demands are deferived in the column of the 
Statement as Supplies to Bencoolen, Penang, Xc. and the Intereft on the Debts. 


Thefe feveral articles cannot, in either cafe, be confidered as wholly of a political 
or of a commercial defcription, ‘although they have uniformly been brought forward 
in the Accounts from year to year as a direét demand upom the Revenues of India, 
and have very materially atfe¢ted the General Retilt of the fame. The Commercial 
Charges might have been brought under obfervation in this place) but it having Ween 
ufval to exclude them in every political confideration of the Finances, they will be 
the fubjeét of remark in another part of this Report. 


The Surpuirs TO BeNxcooLeN, PENANG, &c. were 
eftimated in the year 1793 at the fum of - - - £.50,000 


‘The a€tual Supply in the year 1808-9 was - - - 158,208 
being an increafe of Oo SURES dbs ihe ga o8) 208) 


“It has been reinarked that this head of Charge may be ¢onfidered as neither 
wholly political nor wholly commereial. ‘This remark is in part jufiified by the 


~ Charge itielf, as in fome years the advances to Bencoolen far exceeded the demand | 


for the direét expentes of the Refidency, and muft in fuch eafe have been applied to 
the purchafe of Pepper, which is the principal article of the trade of the Ifland, and 
is fuppoled to be the ground, in a commercial view at leaft, of its retention. ‘The cul- 
tivation of other Spices has alfo been introduced to a confiderable extent, and thu 
plantations are underftood to be in a flourifhing fate. 


Although Prince of Wales Ifland has not hitherto produced any material fources of 
trade except Pepper, it is a tration of great commercial as well as political importance, 
from its fituation in a convenient traét for the paiiage to and from China, and trom 


its proximity to the Continent. Yr 
The Supply to thefe fettlements, from being below their aGtial wants, appears to 
have been eftimated in the 1793 at a finall amount. ‘The difference between 


the fupply and the demand, particularly as it refpeéts Bencoolen, muft have been 
found from other fources, probably fone Burope. or amount ‘of the Supplies has 
uniformly execeded the Eiiimate of 1793, exeept the year 1793-4. ‘The average 
from 1792-3 to 1794-5 was £. 56,000; it will Le obferved that after that period, 
the expenfe in this column was carried to an amount very far exceeding both the 
original Efownate and the average now fiated. Confiderable alterations have bec 

anade 


Affairs ef The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 65 


eannot be depended uponas accurate upon the prefent oceafion, without reference to General Refult. 


a great variety of documents, and without much more extentive information tipon the 
fubjeét than Your Committee have been enabled to procure ; and it isto be remarked 
that the courfe to be purfued on fuch occation would, by neceffarily leading to a clofe 
enquiry into the commercial tranfiétions of the Company, have carried this branch of 
the examination into a more estenfive range then was originally propofed. The 
importance of the queitions which have been ftated is confiderable, and it is very 
defirable that they thould be fatista€torily folved ; but the various Accounts which will 
be wanted for that purpofe induce the neceflity of deferring this objcét of enquiry. Ir 
is however proper, upon the prefent occafion, to offer fome remarks in further expla- 
nation of the difficulties in the way of purfuing this neceflary object to a clofe. 