


Your Committee further beg to obferve that the more immediate objeét of their 
prefent examination has been merely the {tate and refiiits of the Reventies and Charges, 
or, in other words, the financial tranfuétions of a political defeription, comprizing the 
ordinary Receipt and Expenditure in India, during the periods in the Account. The 
difficulties in the way of extending-their enquiry at this time to the detail of the cx- 
traordinary Receipts and Difburfements Rave been adverted to; but it mutt be added, 
that, inafinuch as the latter cafe involves both the political and commercial concerns. of 
the Company, it is very doubtful whether, in poffeflion of every facility, it would be 
PraGticable to place the fubjeét in that view which, could-be pronounced to exhibit an 

| accurate and diftingt feparation, ofthe Refults of each refpettively. 

The importance attaching to the confideration’ of this intricate and complicated 
point is evidently great, and the attention of Your Committee has been more pat- 
ticularly drawn to it’by a Doeutnent produced on the part of the. Court of Directors. 
of the ae India Company, which, though not direétly applicable in the fixiétett oe 

363. & 


—_— 
are 


66 Second REPORT /rom the Select Comm'ttze on the 


is in many refpe€s in neat conneétion with it. This. Document, w hich is added to the 
1, Appendix, is entitled, 4n Lxpofitiow of the State of the Company's Affairs at home and 
. abroad. It isin two parts; the fidt made up to the year 1808, and the fecond is, in 
© Appendix, N°71.a. faét, a continuation of the firit for two years, and termed a Supplement. Tt contains 
oe) extenfive information refpe€ting the political and commercial concerns of the Com- 
pany, fiating the general cafes te which, in the opinion of the Court, the deterioration 
of the wflairs is to be attributed. Views aie given of the Net Produce of the Revenues 
of India from 1793-4 to 1808-9, and ef the fiate of the Debts; the profits on the 
trade are fhewn from the years 1798-g to 1809-10. A computation is made of the 
balance between the Supplies from the home treafury and the returns from India 
zind Chinayin eleven years; and feveral other Statements are added agreeably to re- 
erences made to them in the document adverted to. 


Your Comiflittee havemnot thought proper, upon the prefent oceafion, to cnter upon 
6 detailed examination of the priaciples and opinions, or of the refults of Statements 
‘Drought forward in this Document, as, in the latter cafe particularly, they are not 
quite applicable to:the plan on which it was propoféd te conduét the examination of 
‘this branch of the-concern. 

Iris therefore thought right to defer offering an opinion upon any part of it at this 
time, and the more, as, in many refpeéts, it is conceived to fall more directly within 
the Commercial branch of the concern, the details of which muft be left to future 
enquiry. ; 


Appendix; N*°7 


Tisste 1809-10. _ YOUR ‘Committee will now conclude their examination of this branch of the 
Financial Concerns of the Company hy fome obfervations on the profpeétive view of 
the Revenues:and Charges of Indiafor the year 1809-10, as thewn in the Statements 
marked Nos. 2, 3,4 & 5. In fo doing it is not propofed to enter lurgely into the 
‘dctail, which confifts for the moft part of the fame defeription of [tems as thofe in the 
-a€iual Accounts of the year 1$08-9, but merely to ftate the fubjeét in a general way, 
contrafting the actual Refult of this year with that eftimated for the next, axid offering 