

The whole of the grounds for the adoption of the new fyftem is to be found in the 
Minute of the late Marquis Cornwallis, duted 11th February 1793, and the detail of 
the feveral arrangements on the execution of it in the Bengal regulations paffed in the 
year 1793, their operation being direfted to cow ce on the 1ft May of that year. 
The modifteations and alterations which have been oecafionally made by fabfequent 
regulations, will, in fO far as they apply to expente, be adverted to as eccafion may 
require. 

Anteccdent to the year 1793 the col!c@ion of the Revenues and the adminifiration 
of Juftice were under the fuperintendence of the Revenue Department, and the 
expenfe attending them refpeétively were included under one head of Charge; viz. 
The Revenue Charge.» The a€tual expente defrayed upon thef accounts in the year 
1792-3 was £. 782,744. “Lhe general principle of the alteration of the fyftem, as 
propofed in the Minute of the Governor General, went to an entire feparation of the 
management of the Revenues and the adiminiftration of Juftice, which led to the 
creation of a new Department, termed The Judicial, the Receipts and Charges of 
which were to be ftated under a feparate and diitin@ head. It was calculated that 
the expenfe of the propofed new Efiablithment, in fo far as related to the Sudder or 
Chief, and other Adawluts or Native Courts of Juftice, would amount annually to 
the fin of £, 220,515; that reduétions would then be made upon the exifting Efta- 
dlithments of the Revenue Department to the amount of £. 173,300; fo that the 
whole increafe of expenfe-under this branch would be only £. 47,215. 


The internal Police, or the prefervation of the peace of the difiri&s, was, till 
December 1792, under the aera of the farmers and landholders, who were 
boundto keep Eftablifhments of Officers for that purpofe. By a Regulation pafled the 
7to of that month, the Police was taken under the exclufive charge of Officers ap- 
pointed by Government, and a fund eftablifhed for defraying the expente. This 
Regulation was re-enaéted on the ift May 1793, and a further Regulation was pafled 
at the fame time for raifing a fund to meet the Charge of the new Police Eftablith- 
ments, by an aflefliment termed The Police Tax. 


‘The Police is to be confidered as another branch of the new fyftem, and the expenfe 
of it forms part of the Charges. It does not appear that an exaét Eftimate was made 
of the Charges of its jdbment; but it fecms to have been confidered that the 
affeffment upon the di Sto be made to fuch an amount as fhould mect tho 
Charges. a be nti 

Tt has been obferved, he Revenue Charges of the year 1792-3, which included 
the expenfe. attending the adminifiration of Juftice, amounted to £- 782,744. Pre- 
vioufly to the examination of the Revenue and Judicial Departments after their 
feparation, it may not be improper to confider their combined amount in the firft 
year, viz. 1793-4, as it will thew how far the Eitimate, on making the feparation, was 
verified; and as that year will be now taken for the period from which the operation 
of the fy{tem financially will be inveftigated. : 