


arrangements made with the Nal b of Surat in the 1800; alfo to the levy of new * 


duties. ‘The Revenue management at Surat, and the’ ttipulated payments to the 
Nabob, are the principal caufes of the increafe now fhewn. ‘The iterations in the 
management of the Revenues of Saliette have produced a part of it. 


THE cxamination in detail of the &veral heads of Revenue and Charge being com- 
pleted, it remains to direé& the attention to the final Refults produced by the financial 
‘operations which have'been brought under review. ‘The firlt objet is to thew how far 
‘the Revenues of the Prefidencies of Bengal, Madras and Bombay, duriny the period 
which has been under examination, have been fufficient to meet the Charges imme- 
diately attendant upon the adminiftration of them, ay yn ae! 

The inveftigation of the detail ofthe items of Revenue and Charge, lias been made 
‘on Statements adjufted: and drawn out upon principles to meet the particular mode on 
which it was originally propofed to conduét it, as diftingily expluined-in.a former part’ 
-of this Report. ‘This mode, however fuitable to thé purpote tor which it was adopted, 
does not furnith the means of difcovering tlie powers of the Revenues of cach Prefi- 
dency vefpeétively to meet its Charges. It is therefore propofed:to proceed upon the 


‘examination of the Refults upon a principle by which this object may be attained. ae 


Bombay. 


Appendix, N* 3, 4, 
a. 


| Appendix, N°2. 
i Appendix, N* 6. 


60 Second REPORT from the Select Committee on the’ 


this end it is neceffary to refer to the feveral, Statements in the Appendix firft adverted 
to at the beginning of this Report, which thew both the detail and the Refults of the 
Revenues and Charges of the three Prefidencies, likewife a General Statement of the 
whole; and here the remark is to be repeated, that the Refults in it are precifely fimilar 
to the Refults in the General Account, which has been the bafis of the exautination 
already made. The General Statement, marked No. 2., is firlt to be reterred to, 
On this view it will appear that in the year 1793 Itwas ettimated that, atter paying 
the direét Charges of the Governments of the three Prefidencies, exclufive of the Supply 
to Bencoolen, &c. the Commercial Charges and the Intereft upon the Debts, a Net 


Neyenue would remain to the amount of - a - $£.1,775,500 
and that, on the fame principle, there would remain in the 
year 1808-9 a Net Revenue amounting to - - 4 2.373,831 
being anexcels of Net Revenue above the Eftimate, in this 
view, in the fum of - + ee ro -  £- 59,3831 


The view of this Statement further fuggefts the inference that, in point of faé, the 
Revenues of India were more than fuflicient to cover the immediate Charges of the 
Governinent of it upon the principles now ftated, during the whole of the period from 
1792-3 to 1808-9, with the exception of twa years only, 1805-6 and 1806-75 in 
which years the Charges of the ADauetee war, and the arrears of thofe Charges, bore 
with the greateft preflure. r 