

‘ fee: 
Dutea SerrLeMeENTs. t 

Tue Charges under this head were firt brought into the Accounts in the year 
1796-7, although the fettlements were obtained by conqueft in the year preceding. 
Other expentes in the Military Department were incurred upon this account to a very 
confiderable amount, and are principally inchided in the Military Charges of the 
Madras Prefideney from wast to 1801-2. “The Charges ftated in this column for 
‘the fame period, are chiefly the civil expenfes of Ceylon, the Eaftern Mands, and 
Malacca. = yb 

In December 1801 Ceylon ceafed to be under the Government of the Company, 
as ftated in the Remarks: upon the Receipts. The great amount of the Charge in the 
years 1802-3 to 1205-6 arifes trom an alteration in the mode of {tating the Account, 
‘by including the whole of the Military CHarge-difburfed on account of the Eaftern 
Tilands. ‘Yhete iflands having been furrendered to the Dutch in confequence of the 
peace of Amiens, and Malacca in part abandoned, the Charge in the two laft years 
is moftly on account of the Chankand Pearl Fifhery at Tutacorin. 


ee 

With refpeét to the Charges fiated in this colyinu, and to thofe which were included 
in the Military Charges, as above adverted to, it is to be obferved that an Account has 
been drawn out, comprizing not only thofe Charges refpectively, but every advance and 
difburfement made by the Eatt Iudia Company on account of the capture and main- 
tenance of thefe dettlements, the amount of which has been brought forward as’a 
claim upon the Public, in conformy with the principles on which the feveral expe- 
ditions againft them were undertaken ; and having been fubmitted to Parliament, and 

363. a: undergone 


Madras. 


Appendix, N* 63. 


Civil, &: Charges, 
, Madras, 


Bombay. 


58 Second REPORT from the Seleé Committee on the 


undergone the examination of Committees in the Seffions of 1805 and 1808,. funs | 
have been voted, on the Reports of thofe Committees, to the Eaft India Company 


on account thereof. 


————— 


BOMBAY CHARGES, 
THE Civil, Marine, and Revenue Charges of the Prefidency of Bombay, exclufive 


of the Charge of the Ceded and Conquered. Diftriéts, are now to be examined. 
In 1793 they were eftinatedat = - >  - > = £177,750 

In 1808-9 they amounted to a ihe : F e. 3795272 
being an increafe of ~ - ro * oe - ~ . £.192,522 
enee 

The Civit Caarces 

were cftimated in 1793 at - - - = = .- £+ 90,000 
and amounted in 1808-9 to - = - =  - = = 100,751 
beinganincreafeof = = = = ee = fe 6,751 

\ — 


The Eftimate of the year 1793 was calculated on the everage expenfe of the five 
preceding years. The average of the five years, 1792-3 to 1790-7, exceeded this 
Eftimate in the fum of £14,000, The expenfe in the year 1808-9 being only 
£.2,500 more than the average laft adverted to, it does not appear neceflury to enter 
largely upon explanations of the detail of the difference which has been exhibited ; 
and it may faffice to remark that this column includes the Charges of the Judicial 
Department, and of the Pofi Office and Mint, and that the inftitution of a Recorder's 
Court at the Prefidency in the. year 1798-9, the introduction of judicial arrange- 
ments, and the change of the mode of adminittration at Surat, are. generally to be 
referred to as the eaufes of the increafe which has been fliewn. It may, however, be 
proper, to obferve, refpe€ting thofe years in this célumn in which the expenses have 
very far exceeded both the averages above flewn, and the Charge of the year 1808-9, 
that it is not practicable, at the prefent time, to trace with precifion the caufes of the 
exceffes. They appear to have been various, and principally cafival and contingent. 
During the years in which the Government was er aged in hotijlities with ‘Tippoo or 
the Mabrattas, the Police corps were neceflarily increafed in confequence of the 
abfence of the military force. Much expenfe was incurred by additional political 
refidencies inthe Red Sea and Perfian Gulph, and by the employment of native 
Agents. In the year 1804-5, in which the largeft Difburfement is exhibited, a con- 
fiderable expenditure was occafioned by the reliet’ afforded to the native inhabitants, 
who were brought to cireumfiances of extreme difirefs by the prevalence of famine. 
Since that period the expenfes appear to have gradually decreafed, which is to be 
attributed to the ceflation of contingent demands, and to the excrtions of the Govern- 
ment to carry into effect meafures of yetrenchment. _ 