


‘it has been adopted. To be feleéted as an inftrument, {¢ fole purpofe 
of bringing to light the condnét of a nv fervant, is confidered an ious tafk, and 
ices to prevent 
a due invefiigation; but whatever may have been the-zexl of the perfon deputed, it has 
feldom proved 


fiould be wile and. upright, the 
agail committed AS ‘one dei 
oppreffions, they’ dread the 
tection of Government 
which cperate fo forei Cli z ‘Yanded property, there muti be 
popewer, allowed to exilt which can be & (0 the means of cppreflion, 
23s I fliould not hefitate therefore, under almoft any circumftances, to recommend the 
adopltiva of the propofition above ftated.. But as the demand upon each individual's efiate 
: x Spt’ a ae is 


“the Afiuirs of ‘The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 3 


s fixed for ten years, and [ trutt in perpetuity, the only circumfiance on which any plaufible’. 
‘argument could be founded in favour of arming thé Collegtors with thofe extraordinary 
powers, no longer exifts. Almott the whole of the Revenuetbeing raifed upon the Jand, the 
difficulty of collecting it will daily diminith, in proportion as the produce ineveafes by improve= 
mient above the amoimt of the public affefiment. The Collector will have little more to do 
than to open the regifter of the rent roll, and to demand the payments at the fixed periods, 
and to have recourie to the property of defaulters for realizing arrears. {t ig not necefiary 
fur the execution of this duty, that the Collectors fhould be either Judges or Mayifirates, 


oats Tt may be ftated againtt the propofition now under difcuffion, Fir, That when the 
leGors are deprived of their judicial powers, they wili lofe their weight and importance 
inthe eyes of the Natives, and that they will not have influence fulficient to enforce the pay- 
ment of the public Revenues. Sccondly, That the landholders will beitfmable to realize heir 
rents from their ryots and under-renlers, when liable to be cited by them at all times 
before a Court of Jutiice, and confequenltigthat they will be unable to difcharge thyg public 
Revenues. — at 3 ‘ ; 


in the 
is con- 


the landholders (and their perfons in the Jatt refort) that are Government's fecurity for the 
punctual difcllarge of the Revenue. ‘This fecurity will be had recourfe to in cafe of their 


fale of the lands or hippetty of the defaulter, or him to be confined in the pubtic jail 
his is 


7+ The fécond objeétion has as little foundation as the firft. 4 %? 


‘individuals who are influenced by a fpirit of litigiouf: 
they found that they could by that means withhold w ought ba fpeedy and 


few. People in general cannot delight in litigation; although there are, ae doubt, fone 
aes 
it fuch frauds. 


i ip; @ Court of Dezwanny 
Adawlut to be likewife continued in cach difiri@, end in the of Patna, Dacca, and 
Moorfhedabad. AU canfes of a civil nature arifing within the jurifdiction le to 
be firjt tried therein; the Judges of thefe Courts to be Magijtrates of ther Ppl 3 