


35. But tovrevert to the generul fubject. To give efficacy to the fyftem for the due admi- 
niftration of the laws and regulations, we have made ample allowances to the Judges of the 
Zillah and Provincial Courts of Appexl, fo as to put them out of the reach of temptation ; 
and itis our intention to confer thefe important offices on fervants of unimpeached chu- 
raéters, and whofe abilities particularly recommend them for holding thefe important trufts. 
As the Judges of thefe Courts will have no concern or connection with the Revenues and will 
haye no other occupation but that of dilpenting the laws and regulations; and as they will 
be bound by oath to adminifter them impartially, even when Government or its officers are a 
party, there is every reafon to expect from them a faithful and upright difcharge of their 
trufi and duty. Every motive will impel them to this: line of conduct: the Natives will foon 
acquire confidence in the protection of | aws 5 indir piney can neither injure 


others by intrigue or corruption, nor are in danger o} r aéts themlelyes, 
and thai the infects ol Tera wera lated, | mea paper fan and oppret- 
fion, which has 0 in | Ww deb princip! oe r own Government, will 
give place.to moderation and good faith. ie ei 


36. To render br ease nplete, ave refolved that a certain number of licenfed 
makes (fubject ty id ie at retin ions detailed in ih Goer Genta mate dpe: 
‘be appointed to ple: he caules of the fuitors in the feveral Courts of Jufiice, but without 
-debarring any fuitor from pleading: ins eae in perfon. The eaufes have hitherto been 
pleaded ‘by any perfous that fuitors have thought proper, to depute for that purpofe. The 
evils, abuiés, and impediments to the due adminiftration of juftice refultng from this 
practice, are pointed out inthe Goyeruor General's Minute, ~ hotepesiatment of thefe 
licenfed Advocates, the pleadings of the Courts will (oon come to be conducted with regularity 
and. dijpatch, aid pee will form a partof the efiabli ts the fuitors will no longer be 
fubjeci to the franc of the minifierial officers of the Courts. The reputation 
and emoluments of the will nd upon their exertions in favour of their clients. 

nowlede nlations which thefe Vakeels muft in a courfe of time 

fi every canfe will be fiated to the Judges, and 

I be expoled by them in the appeal to the dughes 

ir power to obtain advice refpeéting their 

their engagements wi ealyidihls 

impunity, injure them in 

tho ie nade, tnaether will” 
ocates, to command the exercite 


the offices of the Salt Comptrolier, the Preparer of Reports 
eve e i ae f pt cee other offices; the transfer of the 
ment of the Salt , and the fuperintendance of the Opium Sales, to the 
i f Trade; the refeindi ag regulations, and other meafures more 
‘or lefs connected with the leading principles of the fyfiew, and the adoption of which will 
_ be effential to the due execution of it. — "sg el a ae 
a . - 38. ie 


wio ‘APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Seleti Committee on 