


28. For a more particular detail of the eonfiitution of thefe Courts, we mutt refer you to 
the Governor General's Minute; und we fliall here only obferve, that Courts of Juftice are to 
be continued on each cvlledorthip as heretofore, which are to be denominated Zillah, or 
Difiriét Courts, and the » Ju Na ae is to have cognizance over civil cautes of all 
defcriptions that may in his, iGion, whether of the nature of thofe termed Revenue 
Caules, and hitherto tried in the [ees Cotas or of the defcription of thofe which have 
been cognizable in the Courts of Dewanny Adawlut. We have refolyed likewife that the 
Colleétors of Revenue and their Officers, and indeed all the Officers of Government, fhall be_ 
amenable to thefe Courts for aéis done in their official capacity, and that Government itlelf, 
in cafes in which it. may beva party with its fabjedis i sof property, fhall fubmit 


ts beiire the Cours of Creat 
blith two Provincial Courts of Appeal at the cities 
if cutta. Each of thete Courts to be fuperintended 
appeal to lie to in all cafes whatfuever from the decifions of the 
and the City Courts within their refpedtive jurifdidions, The appellant 


City and Colleéorfiips included in the 
« jarifdiétion of each Court. 


ai ie og 


Provincial City of Patna. 
of Al for the Coll ene Sircar Sarum, 
- Divifion of ~ -Sirear Tuhoar, 
Shahabad, 
Bh et Bahar Proper. 


Dacca, 


106 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT fvom the Scled Committeo on 


ample time to remove themfelves with their plander out of the reach of their purfuers. We 
have therefore refolved to exonerate the Landholders from the charge of the Police, and of 
courte to deprive them of all the authority which they derive under the above-mentioned 
-claufe in their engagements, and to declare that they fhall not be held refponfible for 
robberies committed on their eftates, excepting where they fhall be proved to have connived 
at the robbery, received part of the property ftolen or plundered, harboured the offenders, 
aided or refufed to give effectual afliftance to prevent their efcape, or omitted to afford every 
afliftance in their power to the officers of Government for their apprehenfion. ‘Theie 
indeed, are the only cafes in which the Landholders were ever confidered at all refponfible for 
robberies, or in which they could in juftice have been made accountable for them. . Under 
thefe arrangements the country will experience all the benefit which it at prefent derives 
from the condition annexed to the tenures of the Landholders, without being expofed to the 
.evils and ubufes to which it has been hitherto liable from the vague and indefinite re- 
Aponfibility heretotore vefted in them, at the fame time that it will derive an effeual 
-protectivn trom the eftablifhments appointed for that purpofe on the part of Government. 


4. To render this proteétion as complete as poflible, we have divided the country into 
Police Jurifdictions, and appointed the neceflary eftablifhment of officers for guarding them. 
“Thefe officers are to be fubordinate to the Magiftrate, and are to be fiationed in the centre 
-of their refpeétive jurildiétions, in order that they may be better able to protect every part of 
them, and that the eftablifhments may be as near to each other as poffible. The means taken 
to keep a ready communication between thefe efiublifhments and the feveral Magiftrates 
throtighout the country, and that they may be informed of all vagrants and fufpeéted perfons 
that may’ be lurking in their refpective juri{diétions, muft foon bring to juftice thofe who now 
ive by committing depredations upon the country, and alfo deter others from entering upon 
fo defperate a-courfe of life. You will obierve, that at the fame time that we have yetted the 
Police Officers with fullicient authority to perform the duties required of them, we have 
‘taken care that they fhall esercife this authority at their peril, by rendering them liable to 
civil or criminal profecutions for any illegal aéts done in their official capacity. 