


ajd cilics as at prefent. ~ eee Pee 2 
41. The public affe! afcertained 1 fixed, and all pauaiciat 
matters being propofed to be Courts of Jufiice, the of the Colleéior will 


414 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT from the Sele€& Committee on 


.are attached during vacancies or the abfence of the Collector. They are al! upon the fpor; 

. -the transfer, therefore, of the office of Colle¢tor, to fuch of them as may be thought ft 
Bi the fituation, wiil not be attended with the leaft difficulty or interruption to the 
collections, 1% 7 


42. With refpect to fuch of the prefent ColleGtors as may be appointed Judges of the 
Provincial Courts of Appeal, or of the Zillah Courts, whether in the diliridis in which they are 
now fiationed, or in any other part of the-country, they will only have, upon their removal, 
-to make over charge of the colleétions, and the Accounts of the fettlement and other Revenue 
Papers and Records, to the perfons appointed Collectors. The Judges of the Zillah Courts 

will perform the fume judicial duties which are now difcharged by them in their double 
-capacities of Judge and Collector. Having been employed in the conclufion of the fettle- 
ment, they maft of courfe be well acquainted with the regulations refpeting the public 
Revenue, and the rights of all the various deferiptions of Landholders and Cultivators of the 
foil, as defined and declared daring the progre!s of it, and contequently mult be weil 
-qualified to decide upon all cafes relating to itibich will come before them; and as their 
whole time will be given up to the jadicial bufinefS, and they will*have no concern what- 
ever in the collecion of the Revenue, there can be dittle doubt but that they will adminitier 
_juitice with impartialily and dilpatch. sy 

43. Third. A Court of Appeal, confifting of three Judges; to be eflublified at the cities 

Paina, Dave, and Movrjfhedabad, and in ‘cin of Lalculta, The jurifdiction Weide 
“Courts to extend over the feveral collector/hips and the cities now included in the jurifdiction 


of the Qourts of Circuit. 


“the perlons {elected to fill them fho diliingui ¢ their integrity, abilivies, and 


ue 46. The offices of Judges of thefe Cou, ts will be the firft in importance in the civil line 5 
knowledge of the mannersy hm tone 


fk d languages of the Natives; and their allowances 
Ahould be proportioned to the greatuefs of their wut, The decifions of thefe Courts will 
commund refpeét; and, at the fame time that they will give fecurity to property, and afford 
protection to the people, their weight and influeace will contribute ey to the vigour and 
ilability of our internal Government. r 
47. The Judges of thefe Courts, in their capacity of Judges of Circuit, will poffefs ‘exactly 
stke fame powers us the prefent dacs of Gircuit, with this great additional advantage, that 
they will be able to complete the jail deliv@ries in oue half the time in which they are now 
accomplified, 'Rhe fenior Ju fhould amake,the Circuit of one half the ftations within 
their jurifdtétions, whillt the ot two perform the Circuit of the remainder. In addition 