


© 2a, Ninth. The Judgesof the Zillah aad to be empowered Be pronale regulations 
throngh the Provincial Courts of Appeal’ ivifion, to. the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut. 
‘Theféfour Courts of A, pra Bs ere of propesiugsregautians to the Sudder 
Dewsnny Adawlat. In thee 1 Sader wwanny Adawlut to propofe regulations to 
the Supreme Government» ‘T Provineial Courts of Appeal to forward all regulations 
‘that may -be propofed: to them by the Judge the Zillah or-city Courts to the Sudder 
Dewanny Adawlut, although they:thould entirely difapprove of then, with their reafons for 
Such difapproval, The Sudder ’ y Adawlut likewife to forward all propofed regulations 
which they may receive from thi vincial Courts of Appeal, to the Governor General in 
Council. “A preamble to be inferted in all-regulations hereafter enacted that may affect the 
rights or property of the people, cbntaining the reafons for the enaction of them. All fuch 
regulations to-be printed, with traiflates in the Perfian and. Bengal languages. ‘The regula- 
tions pailed in cach year, and the paragraphs or fettions in every regulation, to be numbered. 
At the expiration of'every year the Aineripigiteuisats Heap prets to bind wp in a feparate 
volume the regulations paifed a a and a fuflicient number of copies to be fent 
tothe Secretary of Government to be diftributed to the different Courts.of Juttice, and the 
officers of Government whom they may concern. A number of copies to be alfo fent annually 
2 a a : 


to Bnghind: 


29. Tenth, The Office of P epic of Reports to be abolithed, and the fuperintendence of 
‘the Opiuin Sales to bevtransferred to the Board of'Trate. % 
aati: Es cet offi ‘alt Comptroller to be abatitied. The Salt ‘Department te 

laced under the Boar he Dif lidgelee and Tumlook, the offices ol 
ge, | to , anc a bald by the Sele spent of thole divifions, to 


ore. The fettlement of the lands in Hidgelee and — 
agreeably to the general'regulations. _ : 
the office of Superintendent of the Bazee Zemin — 
to be abolithed. o- >Re aes 
Revenue, and the adminiftration of Juflice in each 
, To abolijh the Mahal Adawluts or Revenue 
Revenue, and the Board of ee all 
to the mere receiving and enforcing 
has triad inthe Mahal 


26. The © 


112, APPENDIN éo fie Sesold REPORT from the Seleé Committee on 


go. Ido not hefitate to pronounce, that whilft this order exifts improvement is not to be 
hoped for; and that the regulations which we are daily framing to promote the cultivatior™ 
of the country, and to raile the value of landed property, will be fcarcely known and fill 
Jefs felt by the body of the people. Z < 


31. There is no‘lafs of men which Government fhould watch with greater jealoufy, and 
over whoin the fegulations fhould have a ftriéer control, than the Officers who are erirufied 
with the collection of the public Revenue. It is neceflary to arm them with powers to en- 
force their demand in the firlt inftance, otherwife individuals, under the pretext of difputing 