


17«Fifth. The 44th and 45th articles of the Judicial Regulations, which require a depofit 
:from two to five per cent. from the plaintiff upon the inftitation of a tuit, to be abolithed. 
“The 53rd.article of the Judicial Regulations, which allows an appeal only in caufes for a 
«certain amount, to be refcinded. An appeai-to lie to the four Provincial Courts of Appeal 
«from the devifions of the Ziilab and city Courts within. their refpeétive juri{dictions, in all 
-canles whatfoever. The-decitions ef the foar Provincial‘Courts of Appeal.to be final only 
in the following: cafes; viz. In fuits for perfonal property, where the money or the value of 
the thing claimed or decreed fhall not exceed one thouland Rupees. Jn fuits for real pro- 
perty being Malguzary (or fubjeét to the payment of Revenue to Government) where the 
annual produce thall not-exceed five handved Rupees. In faits for real pidperty being 
sLakerage (or exempt from the payment of Revenue) where the annual produce Mhall not 
exceed one hundred Rupees. An appeal to fie to the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut from all 
.decifions paied by the four Provincial Courts of Appeal regarding perfonal Brae where 
-the money or value of the thing claimed or derived thall be more thaa one thouiand Rupees, 
- and reipecting the foregoing deferiptions of real property the annual produce of which thall 
vexceed the fuims above {pecitied. — 


18,-Sixth. Native individuals to be permitted, under certain reftriétions, to profecute the 

officers. of Government, and Government alfo through the medium of its officers in the 

Courts of Juftice, for any injuries which they may fultain in their perfons or property ia 
- eppofition to the exifting regulations. 


1g. Seventh. Britith fubjects (the King’s officers employed in this country, and the civil 
sand military covenanted fervants of the Company excepted) not to be permitted to refide 
-beyond the limits.of the town of Calcutta, unlefs they fhall enter into a bond rendering 
themfelves amenable to the country Courts of Judicature in any civil aétions that may be 
dnftituted againit them by Natives.  All:Britith trbjeéts (not being King’s officers or civil or 
anilitary covenanted fervants of the Company) now refiding beyond the limits of Calcatia, 
awho thall omit or refule to exeerte the bond required, to be obliged to repair to Calcutta at 
.the expiration of:twelve months from the date of the publication of this order, but to be 
allowed to continue in the country upon their prefent footing during the above period, for the 
purpole of fettling their affuirs. . : 


-20. Eighth. A.certain number of authorized Vakeels, or Native Pleaders, to be admitted to 
i the, caufes of {uitors who do not choofe to plead for themfelyes in the different Courts 
-of Juftice, and no other perfons but thofe who may be fo authorized to be pesmilted to aét as 
‘Vakee!s in the Conrts. Ok or more of thefe authorized Vakeels in eacli Conrt to be ap- 
{pointed the Pleader for Government in all {uits i which they may be profecutors ordelendants. 