

23. For the above reafons we fhould think it impolitic to delay the declaration that you 
have empowered us to: make, the announcing of which will, we are perfunded:7be confidered 
as the commencement of the era of improvement aud profperity in tis coucts 
fhall be particularly careful that the notification is drawn np in the manner you preferibe, 
and that the terms of it may be calculated to imprefs the Landholders with the value and 
importance of the rights conferred upon them, and of your folicitude for their welfare and 
profperity. We fhall likewile, to prevent any future mifconception, exprefsly referve to 
you the right of eftablifhing and colle@ing any internal Duties that you may hereafter think 
proper to impofe; and ailo declare your determination to affels ull alienated or rent-free 
Jands that may hereatier revert to Government, or be proved, after a regular trial in a Court 
of Juflice, to a held under an invalid tenure. We thal further declare tala a claule to 
that effect has been inferted in the engagements with the Landholders) that you do not mean, 
by fixing the public demand upon the lands, to debar yourfelves trom the exercite of the 
right inherent in you as Sovereigns of the country, of making {uch regulations as you may 
occulionally think proper for the proteétion of the Ryots an infenior taidhold 3, Or other 
orders of peo concerned in the cultivation of the lands. A defire to give this notification 
the confideration that the importance of it merits, is the reafon of its not having beea 
tranlinitted to you by this difpatch. 


24. We now come to the clofe of your infiructions; “the watching over and the maturing of Par, 49 tosh 


this fyftem, maintaining under future Adminifirations the energy which has commenced it,” 
and to the other important points detailed in the paragraphs {pecified in the margin. 


25. It is with much {atisfaétion we acquaint hes that we haye endeavoured to provide 
for thele important paints, as well as for the adminiftration of the Laws and Regulations in 
general, both civil and cviminal. The arrangements which we haye adopied for this pui pole, 
are contained in the accompanying eopy of a Minute from the Governor General, recorded 
in our Proceedings of the 1ithealtimo, and we have refolved to earry them into execution 
as foon as the collections of the Bengal year are brought to a clote. Vor the reafons at 
Jarge which have induced us to adopt hele arrangements, as well as for the detail of them, 
we muftrefer you to the Minute itfelf; we flail here only {tate fome obfervations re(pediing 

‘ Ly on they are immediately eOunecied with the part of your infiructions above no- 
ticed. eles "Oy 

26, With refpedt to maturing the fvfem, it will depend ti 
palling occafionally fuch Regulations as may be contiftent wil 
declaring and defining the righis and privileges of the feyeral de! ions of Proprietors 
and Cultivators of the Lands. To enable you at ull times to form a judgment how far 
your Adminiftrations conform to theie principles, we have be) that all Regulations 
which may be in tuture enacted by your Governments regarding the above points, as well 
as every other matter affeGling the rights and property of the popes fiiall be frtimed into 