


to the gicat advantages of expediting the trials, the duty of the Circuit will be rendered caly 


488 v ey fhauld lic from thefe Courts in their ote ‘to the Sudder Dewanny 
Aduwlut, In their capacity of Judges of Cireuit, they will be fubordinate to the Nizamut 
Adawlut, agreeably to:the cxifting regulations for the department of Criminal Juftice. 


appeal fron} the decifions of the Zillah or City J udges, or the 
40. 


o Colledtors of the Revenue, | Calcutta. The great diftance renders it impoffible for 
"Government to control the condnct of the Judges and Collectors with effect, and deters 
“many fuitors, who think themfelves aggrieved, fromtleabing redrefs. The eftablifhment of 
she propoled Frome Courts Rabeat obviates this defeét; perfons who may think 
themlelves injured by the dec ‘the Zillah or City°Couris, will have an appeal to a 
snott refpectable Court almoft “2s, salle a 
the Records of ‘all the Criminal trials, as * 
the Zillah and City Courts. A gréat part of 
heir decrees; und their decilions on cafes 
Q of time,‘hnve the force of 
i the pretervation’ of the 
are {ubjeét to be removed fron one 
r to change his refidence. For thele 
id fixed place to meet with due form, I 
un 


49. At prefent there is no 


i & 


46 APPENDIN ¢éo the Second REPORT from the Sele& Comniittee on 


»partial decifions, and punifhing the litigious according to the cireumftances of the cafe; and 
-ot by iinpofing a fine upon all fuitors indiferiminately, and then allowing their caofes to’ 
vemain for years undecided. 


56. As fewer fuits will be inflituted, and thofe which may be preferred will be more expedi- 
-tioufly decided, when the time of the Judges is entirely given np to the admiuiftration of 
Jjuttice, it appears to me expedient in every point of view, to dilcontinue the exaction of this 

per centage on the amount of fuits.in future, 


57, The third regulation propofed to be repealed, appears to haye been enaéted upon a fup- 
:pofition that the Court of Appeal would not bave had time to decide upon the number of 
-petty caufes which it was apprehended would have been brought before it, had the right of 
appeal been unrefriéted, Although it appears to me neceflary to preferibe fome limitation 
to appeals in the Jatt refort to the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, Lam at the fame time of 
opinion, that the decifions of the Zillah and City Courts, in which caufes are tried in the 
firft inflance, ought not to be made final in any cafes whatioever. By the above-mentioned 
‘regulation, an appeal is not allowed from the decifion of the Zillah Courts, in caufes refpeci~ 
ing pertonal property, unlefs the value of it excceds one thoufand Sieca rupees. Mach the 
greater proportion of the fuits inftiiuted muti fall below fo confiderable a fum, and confe- 
quently the major part of the fnitors, who confift of the cultivators of theland, manuf&éturers, 
and traders, have no remedy againfi erroneous or unjutt decifions, 


58. The limitation with regard to landed property, appears to me particularly oppreflive. 
‘The decrees of the Zillah Courts refpecting the right to landed property are final, unlels 
4it pays a Revenue to Government of one thoufund Sicea rupecs per annum. — This is a 
-confiderable property, fuppofing it to be affefled at the higheft rate; and it would be found, 
that the greater part of the eftates in the country do not pay this fum: but the amount of 
«the pablic alleffnent is by no means a certain criterion for judging of the value of an_eftate. 
Lands that pay a thouland rapees per annum to Government, frequently yield much more 
sto the Proprietor. This difpropertion between the public aflefiment on an eftate, and the 
aGtual produce of it daily mutt become greater, and the inftances of it be more frequent 
snow that the talooks and finall eftates -have been feparated from the authority of the 
.Zemindars, and that the public demand upon them has been fixed. The above limitations 
afford room for the exercife of a wide and deftructive fpecies of oppreflion upon the 
shufbandmen, traders, and manufacturers, as well us upon all the lower orders of the people; 
but, by allowing an appeal from: the Zillab and City Courts in all eafes to the four Provincial 
Courts, (the Judges of which will have fullicient time to hear the number of appeals which 
smay be expected to be bronght before them) this great defect in the exitiing judicial sytem 
will be remedied, and the furts of the above very valuable orders of the comunity, however 
final may be their amount, will be tried with the fume cireumfpedtion and attention to the, 