

_ Principles of juftice as canfes of magnitude. It appears to me neceflary to declare the 
decifion of the Provincial Courts of Appeal final in the cafes propofed, as the time of the 
Sudder Dewanny Adawlut might otherwife be occapied by cautes for a finall amount 

' appealed from litigious or other motives, and the decitior appeals in the lufi refort bein 
oneuaee delayed, to the great prejudice of the faitors, and of the general adminiftration 
OF J) j . 


. + 


59. Sixth, Native individuals to be permitted, under certain refiridlions, to profecute the 
fer of Government, and Government alfo, through the medium of ils Ojficers, in the 
Courts of Jujlice, for injuries which they may fiylain in their perfous or property, in oppofition, 
tothe exiftingregalations. rie 


Lapras of a whi b s 

~ them objects of ferious inveftigation ; befides the delay which is incurred by this procedure, 
an impartial enquiry and report cannot be expedted trom Colleétors in general, if the 
jenmplent is againft themfelves, or the Gfficers dependant on them, When the report is 


defective 
‘ saat Colors will be impartial, but there 
: rin what light they pleale; i 
ieee is perhaps cenfured, or the | 
Party injured, and it affords uo fecuril 


118 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT from the Scle& Cominittee on 


Judges of the Zillah and City Courts perfonally. Their control over them fhould be only 
that of a fuperior Court empowered to revife their decrees when regularly brought before 
them in appeal, 


67. From the high authority of the Provincial Court of Appeal, and the perfonal charac- 
ters of the Judges, who, it is to be hoped, will always confilt of men diftingnithed for their 
ability and integrity, it may be expeéted that any f{pecial enquiry which they may be com- 
niiffioned by the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut to make into charges againfi the Zillah’ or City 
Judges, will be conducted with the greateft impartiality. If it Thoxld appear fkom the refult, 
that there are fufficient grounds for the charge, I would recommend, where, from the circum- 
fiances of the cafe it thall appear advifable, that a profecution be infiituted againtt the 
acculed in the Supreme Court of Judicature, and that the expenfe of the prolecution be de- 
frayed by Government. 


68, With refpeé to the Judges of the four Provincial Courts of Appeal, it is to be prefamed 
that inflances of corruption or mifconduct will be fiill more rare amongfi them; but if any. 
charges thould be preferred againft them to the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, and upon en- 
quity there fhould appear fufficient reafon to believe them well founded, the accufed thould 
be brought to Calcutta, that the enquiry may be conducted by the Sudder Dewanny Adaw- 
Jat, or Coawittonent confifting of the udges of the other Provincial Courts appointed for 
the parole, or other fpecial means be adopted, fuituble to the cireumflances of the cafe. If 
there fhould appear grounds for the eharge, I would recommend, as in the cafe of the 
Judges of the City and the Zillah Courts, that where the circumflances of the cafe fhall 
render it advifable, the accufed be profecuted in the Supreme Court of Judicature, by the 
Law Officers of Government, In this Court he will be certain of meeting with an impartial 
trial. His character will be vindicated, if the charge fhould be groundlels; and fhould he be 
found guilty, he will not only meet with the pauilhment of the law for the offence, but for- 
feit the fervice, und be rendered infamous in the eyes of his country. 