

at 0; ; 


information which this, performance contains relpedti 

ment and our own, the Pe and prefent fate Bait poe and corruption: ia the 
adminiftration of the Revenue, the rights and the characiers, of Juperigr and inferior 
occupants. of the land; fuch a colleétion, the luminous order in whic! BA iged, the vait 
application it evinces,and the good fenle which pervades it, dre all en! Htled to our refpect 
and praife, and willremain a monument of Mr. Shore's fervices to the Company, 


11; We have perufed alfo with much Pattie and inftraétion his Minute of 18th of Sep- 
tember 1789, on the Revenne Affairs and Decennial iettlement of Bahar. Thefe documents, 
bringing into viewthe moft material point relating to a permaneat affeiiment, have: enabled 
us to enter with greater intelligence into your proceedings upon that important tabject, which, 
waving the order of time, we thall now follow to its conclufion, leaving fuck quettions as in 
its progrets fprung from it, to be fpoken to-afterwards. fi 


12. We find that before the Decennial fettlement could be generally made, Mr. Lane had 
in corcefpondence with the principle of that fettlement, brought forward a Mocurrery plan for 
fome Pergunnahs in Bahur; to this plan we have particularly attended; we think that it 
went upon jaft views, and manifefted an attivity, knowledge and humanity, that reflected 
very great credit on the gentleman who propoted ir. It was an effec of the Deceanial 
fettlement in his diftriét, and a meritorious exhibition in practice of our own ideas of letting 
the lands upon a permanent aflofinent. His purfuitof a principle, right and laudable in 
itfelf, feems to have admitted into the detail of his propotals fome articles not perfectly 
according with that principle ;, but here alfo the confiderate judgment of Mr, Shore appeats 
to have fens of ufe. avs 


13. The Mocurrery plan, according to our apprehenfion, afterwards merged in the genera} 
Decennial fettlement that it was extended to, the term of ten years, ih the contingency of 
decoming ide if this was not underfood, we now give it as our opinion that tuch 
should be the footing on which the Mocurrery lands granted by Mx, Lae thou be placed; and 
deciding this, we think it unneceilary to go into a more particular view ef the plan, or the 
difenflions whieh it produced. But as it brought inte early view the principal means and 
effects of a fixed taxation, it is on that aecount, as wellas from the experiment which it fur- 
authed, and the fuceefs of that experiment, worthy of our commendation and applaute. 


14. We have deliberately confidered the inftruétions, which, after all neceflary pre- 
Jiminaries, you iflued for making the Decennial fettlement; firft, thofe of the 2oth Bay 1289, 
modified fublequently by your refolutions of September 1789, for Bahar, and next, thofe of 
February 1790, from Bengal. Regarding thefe infiraétions as forming the a@lual bafis of the 
permanent edifice we wiihed Lo erect, we have endeavoured to eGo ir fitaefs to their 
end, and their conformity to the materials you had before you, the itate and circumfiances 
‘of the country and the people. On the whole, we mult dele them t9 be, in our cpinion, 
well calculated to infpire confidence and remove abule; to and to fecure the rights 
‘of every individual, and, without impairing the authority or diminifhing the Itevenucs of 
eager te fecure to the people a progrels in profperity jnfiead of decline: we eer 
* 363. ce aes 2 