


of which decreafe however the” tag on {pirituous liquors, or Abkarry, 
feparated from the Jumma on pufpofe to be refumed, is ftated to be 


at leatt fafficient for, fo that we may fairly reckon the net Jumma of 
‘ i 196, including Sayer, being as above, fay - - = = = 917,43,327 
ani Sale wee . 2 


- ~ - - - § 41,82,881 


‘in all, fay - 2,59,26,208 


unt alfo of the Decennial feitlement,exclufive of that complex and 
Sayer abolithed, and fated in a fubfe tepact_of the fame Report to 
amount, by the accounts from the Collectors, to no lefs a fuin’ ESivea. Rupees 9,81,192. 

_ 17. We muft theréfore declare aurfelyesto be fatisfied: with this Tettlement as far as it has 
deen concluded, andavith the profpeé given us of its completion. The amount appears to 
be on the whole as much as, exclufive of the alienated lands and the Sayer, could eatily or 
certainly be, in the circumtténces of the country, levied from it; and we are happy that with 
the abolition of a tax fo widely oppreflive as the Sayer is found: toyave been, it can afford a 
permanent revenue equal to the medium of our patt receipts from it, and fuflicient, we truft, 
not only for allexigencies of Government, but for the gr: extinction of our debts abroad ; 
at ithe faine time the, growing improvement territories is provided for, and a fource 
opened, whieh, fronythe progrets of induft ‘the extenfion of commerce, may probably 
furnifh additional articles of revenue in a thape the leaft burthenfome to the country. 


18. Ibis alfo very agreeable to find thaf thd dettlement has in general been made with the 
‘Landholders, or on their behalf; we would hope that by this time it is extended “throughout 
the diftrits, all. the arrangements refpeéting it ee) i, and the whole in a train of 
encouraging performance. 5 


19. We fhall wait with impatience for the fequel of your advices on this interefting 
fubjet, and in the mean time haye given our fentiments upon the rules for the Decennial 
fetilement, and the aétual formation of it fo faras that is known to us. We proceed to.fpeak 
more partieularly to feveral queftions of importance which arofe in the courfe of that work, 
‘and upon which our decifion or opinion is required; they were involved in your proccedin, 
‘With the main fubjeét, but we have thought it more convenient to feparate them, ene firft, 
: = ‘ollowing 


the Affairs of The BAST INDIA COMPANY. > 169; 


following that fabjeét to its clofe, to given diftin confideration to the moft material of 
thofe pots which came into difcuflion in its progrets. 


20. One of the earlieft of thefe was the landed rights of the Zemindars. In former dif- 
patches we have, on different oceafions, conveyed to you our feutiments on that point, though 
we have alfo ftated that we felt the materials before us to be infufficient for forming a 
decifive opinion. On the fulleft confideration we are inclined to think, that whatever doubis 
may exift with refpeét to their original charaéter, whether as proprietors of land or Col- 
lectors of Revenue, or with refpeét to the changes which may in procefs of time have taken 
place in theirdituation, there can at leaft be little difference of opinion as to the aéual con- 
dition of the Zemindars under the Mogul government. Cuftom generally gave them 
certain fpecies of hereditary occupancy, but the Sovereign no where appears to have boun: 
himfelf by avy law or compact not to deprive them of it, and the rents to be paid by them 
remained always to be fixed by his arbitrary will and pleafure, which were conttantly 
exercifed upon this obje&. If confidered therefore as aright of property, it was very im- 
periect and very precarious, having not at all, or but in a very {mall degree, thofe qualities 
that confer independence and value upon the landed property of Europe. Though fuch be 
our ultimate view of this queftion, our originating a fyttem of fixed equitable taxation will 
fufficiently few that onr intention has not been to aé upon the high claims of Afiatic dei- 
potifis. Weare, on the contrary, for eftablithing real, permanent, valuable landed rights in 
onr provinces; for conferring that right upon the Zemindars 3) but ivis juft that the nature of 
this conceffion fhould be known, and that our fubjeéts fhould fee they receive from the’ 