

No perfonal intereft fhould Pai the Members of the Con 

of the Khalfah, to induce Zemindars to pay there rather than in the 
fore direct, that no greater commifliou be charged upon one than upon the 


39. In ordering the fettlement to be made in every practicable infte 


jar, 
we conceive that we adept the true {pirit of the goth feétion of the 1 jeorge 3d. 
Various objections may he againft a Zemindar, which will abfolute from the 
general rule in their favour, fuch as incapacity from pees fex, 01 atumacy or 
notorious profligacy of charaéter. In fuch inftances a difereet and i 
way of Guardian or Dewan, is to be preferred before any tempor or fervant of 


Government. But we know there are great difficulties in this matte that cales may 2 

occur in which the letting of lands to a Farmer is the only means of fecuring the Revenues 

of Government, and preserving the inheritauce of the Zemindar inviolate. eo 
363. S Ss g se 40. Phe 


the: Airs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY: 167 


Holders and their tenants, as in the revenue concerns belween them; and: the regulations. 
they fuggeit for coriecting abufes entitled to mention both froi the fitnels they im general: 
eppear to carry in them, us dictated by experience from the immediate feene of diforder. in 
this view they are extremely interefting, as exhibiting colleétively what we muti judge vo be: 
anauthentic and genuine pictare of the people under the influence of the ald Revenue tyitem 5 
but weeunnot at the fame time help obferving with regret, that with {0 clear a perception of 
exifting abufes, and their caules, fill fo little thould, till latcly, have bee done to remove 
them ; and we muff coniels that in other refpectgwe have been tomewhat difa, pointed. 


9. Afier having poflefled the Dewannce five-and-twenty years, after fo many fueceffive 
invettigations, fich a prodigious accumulation of records, aud the necetlarily improving 
Fie tater of our fervants with the country, we fhould have feppofed that upon fo extra> 
ordinary a call, we might have feew a move general difplay of intinzate local knowledge, imore 
reference to perfonal inveltigation refpecting the ftate, cireminftznces, produce and value of 
the dittriéts, than the reports of the Coilectors have, upon the whole, atiovded. 


10. The very cireumfiunces however of your being-unable in intiny inftances to: procure: 
any other than general and hypothetical information on thofe points, aficr fo winch. tine 
and fo many opportunities for invettigation, muft itfelf be confideved as a Grong additional 
argument in favour of'a rate of taxation fimple and ipyariable. Having made thefe general 
oblervations on your preliminary proceedings, we think itis incumbent upon ns to take pur- 
ticular notice of the comprehentive and malierly Dillertation delivered in by Mr. Shore on 
the 19th June 1789, wherein he has not only exhibitedand iq Howie @ moff material 
part of the Reports trom the Collectors of the Bengal Province. byt at us new.and ims 
portant communications from himfeif, fupplying, ip ara ipecs what they wanted ; 
delineating with great clearnefs the paft financial fyftem a1 Aiftory, rf 5, examinin, 
with candour thole points in it which have beer fabjects of covtroverfy ; inveltigaling will 
patient judgment the bett fyfiem for that countey, the diffivulties. whiel. may: attend it, the 
means of obviating them, andi in fine, propofing from the whole a (gtof regulations for earry- 
ing intoexecution-our orders: retpecting the Decergial Settlement, for ws to feeure juflice 
both to the Goyermnenr and to: the fubject, and) va eee im fatave, Uhole: ebules which 
either exift, or may be apprehended in the details of the collec neh ont ise of 