


22. The next diftinG point to which we think it neceffary to advert arifes out of the pro- 
ceedings in the Supreme Council, as well as the Board of Reyeaue, upon the fubject of 
Gunges, Hants, Bazars, inland Duties on the tranfit of commodities, and all that fails onder 
the denomination of Sayer, with the queftions that were agitated concerning the right of 
Zemindars to levy tuch impofis; the aflumption of that power into the hands of Government; 
aad finally, the entire abolition of the whole fyitem of internal duties, with the exception of 

> 5 ; sera 


170 =APPENDIN ¢ the Second REPORT Jrom the Selc& Committee en 


certain fpecified articles. We fee, not without furprife, fame of the moft intelligent of our 
fervants regarding the impofition of internal Uixes, duties or cuftoms, as a branch of the pro= 
prietary rights of Zemindars, and obterve in this inftance the danger of adopting into practice 
rigid [vtematical deductions from premiies in Uiemielves impertecily defined. Upon general 
principles, and efpecially the principles of a de!potic Government, we can conceive uothing 
more Incengruous and extraordinary than the iuhere: fluch alegiflative power in a great 
uumberol individual tubjeéts; and we find, that what is thus at variance with probability is 
contradicted in fact by immemorial ulage, which exhibits the privilege of impofing internal 
duties us exelutively belonging to the Sovereign, and fo confiantly esercifed that no Gunge, 
Adeut, or Bazar, could be eliablithed witiuut the authority of the governing power. In agree- 
ment with this practice the Company did, twenty years ago, interpofe, as their adminifiration 
have fince done, in yarious ways to regulate or abolith oppreflive citabliliments.and taxes. of 
shat nature. No right of Gove: at therefore feems to. us’ lef$ difpatable than that of; 
feparating them from the land tenures of the country, and modifyingthem at pleafuse, making 
fuitable ailowances for the rents accruing from fach as were efiabliihed under the fancétion of 
Government. We approve theretore, aud applaud the adlumption of all duties.and taxes 
Whatever, with the power of levying them from the Landholders; and having teen from the 
details in yeur proceedings the cuormous extent aud complication of the abules and opprel- 
fions cominitted under fuch names, with the greatedificulty of eradicating evils become 
inveternte, even under the immediate admiuiliration of the officers of Government, we are of 
opinion, that fince it was deemed impracticable to eftablith inftantly a proper diferimination, 
aid to-collect only what might reafouably be exacted apon certain articles of internal con- 
fumption, fince the advantage derived by the Siute was comparatively finall, and the injuries 
duflered by the trade,and the people of the country grievous, you aéted wilely, as well as 
liberally, in proceeding to the entire abolition of thofe infiruients of internal oppreflion, 


23. We think however, in correfpondence with the idea you, appear to entertain, that. this 
fhould be confidered as a fufpenfion rather than an extinétion of the financial principle of 
internal duty ; that when the whole bufinels of the Decennial fettlement is in a due. train of 
execution, and the time in other relpects fuituble, Government may review this object with 
the defign of afcertaining to what extent, in what form, and under what rules, it may fafely, 
be again made an article of Revenue without the danger of fuch abules againft the State, and . 
againit its fubjeéts, as have hitherto tublitied init. And we think likewife, that this con- 
tingency of its refumption fhould be underftood by the people, that they may the more eafily 
acquielce in fubfequent meatures to that end, 