


33. The power of depriving a man of bis hereditary property is no light concern, nor 
ought itto be tufted to the diferetion of any-fubordinate merely executive Officer. 
Belides, if the policy of all nations has circumferibed within cautions limits the transfer of 
all landed property, itis tar more necefiary to do eee Bengal, where roportion 
of the land rents has always appertained to the Sovereign, and e moft 
liberal confiruétion of a Zemindarry title, no alicnation cautt be valid unlefs it were recog- 
nized and ratified by a new grant of the Sovereign or his Viceroy. Ne 4 

"i alae, a 
| and. 


34. The forfeiture of a Zemindarry ouzhtnever tot ace without the pre 
of the fuperior Council, and we hope that, after the pofed Metllement ofa FH rf 

moderate Revenue, it will feldom or ever be neceffary to proceed to this exe We 
think it poflible nu plea thould be left for abatements and remiffions ; but we -alfo nfible. 
that cafes may occur where a Zemindar has aétually fallen in arrears from fome peculiar 
calamity of a Jocul nature, and that it may then be advifable to grant him Wepre 
relpite of a portion of bis fixed Revenue, inftead of compelling him to complete his 
engagements by money borrowed at a leavy interett, Pe ehingen 


35. We decline entering into any inftraGions of detail as to the 1s of 
payment of our Revenues or Balances. We truft to our fervants to ¢ 
coercion as are conformable to precedent and ufage, but avoiding and 
out our Provinces every {pecies of cruelty, however authorized by the 
country government. f 


i We ree Neltae 
6. Several of the Rules and Arrangements propofed by the Committee for the fettlement 
of the Bengal year 1188, and which have been continued with litt! 

ceeding years, appear to be judicious. We have alfo ly 

April 14thand May 17th 1784, and thofe of the fubfequent days, which 
ment of the Bengal year 1191, received by the Surprize Packet. | 
to fay, that we approve in gegeral of the principles laid down by the Committee of Revenue 

in their letter of the 12th April 1784, and are much to fee your ferupulous oblery- 
ance and execution ef the Orders you had received fro : Court of Direétors. Pi 


37. Your infirnétions to the Committce to afford every relief and : ce to the Ryots 
and Zemindars, confiftent with the Tee coe eat of the country, are Oe eae 
fatisfaGory to us. We are not equally conyinced of 1 priety of ers ve 
that they fhould encourage the Zemindars to pay their immed 

This indulgence, as it feems to be confidered, is liab 
diminifhes the neceifary controul of the Colleéor, enab! 
their payments, aud obliges them to flation Ageots at U 
felves in intrigues equally detrimental to their principals, wid 
and we fee no advantage in it but the faving that may accrue 
conveying the treafure from the diftricts to Caleutta. ? 


wy 
38. For thefe reafons, although we do not abfolutely prohibit 
incliued to encourage it; and if in any cafe it fhould be admitted, 
panied with adeclaration that it is not intended to carry with it a1 
regular authority, either judicial or general, of the jor or provi 
abufe which often attended the pra: ot Hazoor Jebfub, un 