

ghtened principles of a Britilk Government what they never enjoyed under the happiett 
of their own. z : 


21. The amount of prefent refources of our provinces has been another principal fubject of 
difcuflion, and it is certainly deferving of the moft attentive confideration in the contem- 
plation of a permanent fettlement. We have found two very different views of it, one given 
by Mr. James Grant in his analyfis of the Revenues of Bengal, and another by Mr. Shore in 
his valuable Minute of 18th June 1789, already quoted. We willingly take this Sppodaniy 
of repeating, that the work of Mr. Grant appears to us a curious and interefting one, 
evincing. both extraordinary difquifitory powers, and a laudable application of them to the 
affairs of the Company, whereby he has at length effected that which ought to have been 
performed at the period of our acceflion to the Dewannee ; for one of the moft proper objects 
of enquiry at that junéture certainly was, the real ability of the diftriéts, and their financial 
hiftory upon thefe tubjects. As fur as the native adminiftration is concerned, Mr. Grant’s 
able and ingenious relearches have thrown more light than all the collected informations 
that preceded them, and they may have been of confiderable ufe in enlarging and amplifying 
difgullions that were important in proceeding to a permanent fettlement. But we mutt, upon 
the fulleft confideration, difapprove entirely of the Mogul principle of taxation, the divifion of 
the actual produce between the Sovereign and the immediate cultivator of the foil, which under 
yarious modifications, has continued to be the bafis of practice unto the prefent time : we are 
convinced there are evils inherent in this mode, greatly obftruétive of national improvement 
and happinefs. We are moreover by no means fatiSfied Ulin our provinces have now 
refources equal to thofe which they poffeffed even when ceded to us; we wilh indeed, that 
we {aw no reafon to apprehend the contrary. From the beft judgment we can form, the 
natural calamities to which the country has been fubjected, joined to other circumitances, 

“have greatly altered its fiate, which at ‘prefent affords no external figns of abounding wealth, 
nor any probable fource of large eucreafe, except the alienated lands, which remain a fubject 
for inveftigation. We-do not mean to enter on that article_at pret farther than to 
obferve, that the outlines of the plan fuggefted by Lord Cornwallis, itr itis iter of 15th Augut 
1790, appear to us to be formed with great wildem and propriety, and we fhall forbear ex- 
prefling our fentiments upon it, more particularly, till we have received the plan itlelf in 
detail, In giving our opinion on the amount of the fettlement, we have been nota little. 
influenced by the conviétion that true policy requires us to, hold this remote dependant 
dominion under as moderate a taxxtion as will coufift with the ends of our Government, — 
But inany cafe, afier all the changes that thirty years nearly have produced and confirmed, 
we mu(t be of opinion that it would be vain to attempt te place things now upon the fame 
footing’ whereon they ftood at any diftant period, or to.eftablith a reform by local feratinics, 
which would be endlefs as well as odious. We fee hence no ftandard or guide for fixing our 
demand, but the experience of a feries of pati years, joined to fuch perlonal and official 
informations as are now procurable. Thee informations, upon an occafion fo fingularly inte- 
refting, we certainly conld have wilhed to have been fiill more intelligent and full than they 
appear to be ; but finding that in this way of proceeding the amount of Revenue, which, after 
due confideration of the ufuai exigencies of our Government, and of the reférve proper for 
extraordinary fervices, we had fixed in our general letter of 12th April 1786, may be ob- 
tained, we do not wifh to expofe our fubjects to the hazard of opprellive practices by re- 
quiting more. i ‘ 