


69. Seventh. Britih fubjedls (the King’s Officers employed in this country, ond the civil and 
military covenanted fervants of the Company excepted) not to be permitted to refide beyond the 
limits of the town of Calcutta, unlefs they shall enter into a bond, obliging themfelves to fubmit 
to the jurifdiétion and the decrees of the Country Courts of . Judicature in dny civil'actions 
that may be injlituted againt them by Natives. AU British fubjecis (not being King's 
Officers, or civil or military covenanted f-rvauts of the Company) now refiding beyond the limits 

Calcutta, who shall omit or refufé to execute the bond required, to be obliged to repair to 

Jaleutta at the expiration of twelve months from the date of the publication of this order, but 
to be allowed to continue in the country upon their prefeut footing, during the above period, 
Sor the purpofe of fettling their affairs. 5 

70. The neceffity for adopting this regulation has been Jong felt, and for the reafons 
aligned in the pretiminary remarks to thefe propofitions, it will become more urgent, 
as the reftriétions on the trade between this country and Grest Britain may be lefiened or 
withdrawn. Britith Merchants have a ready means of recovering their claims upon Natives 
Dy application to the Country Courts. But the latter have jode of obtaining redrets 

the former, but by a profecation in the Supreme Court of Judicature at Calcutta, 
ere are many Britifh merchants aud traders refiding in the interior parts of the country” 


fe mot 


qj nizable, efpecially as they 
will have an appeal to the Suprenre ts apace of a Court ‘of Sudden 
Dewanny Adawlut, whenever th difiati the decifions of the Zillah or 

Courts, or (in a i shapes Atall events the interefts 


City 
of the body of the people 
individuals. <8 + 
limits of Calcutta (excepting French fub- 
Courts of Judicature, confequently it is not 
e paceeicat psoyoted to be required fiom Britith 
sw Il refufe to fubmit to the jurifdiction of 
jects above 
not to be. 
Fr permitted 


amade fubfervient to the views of 


the Afuirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 159 


expectations from the plan propofed by you, and ftated in your Revenue Letter of the 
28th OGober 1783, paras. 17 and 18, of appointing a fubordinate Department for the purpofe 
of colleéting Balances only: if armed with powers to enforce collection, fuch a fyftem mutt 
unavoidably create a divided and clafhing authority prejudicial to the current Revenue, aad 
without them muft be inefficient. & ‘ 


$1. We confider the punctual fupport of the colleétions as depending more upon, and 
only to be enfured by the aétive exertions and honeft zeal uf our fervants employed in 
the Revenue Department, and the permanent fettlement of a reafonable and fair Reyenue, 
for the due payment of which the hereditary tenure of the poffeffor is the beft, and in general, 
the only neceifury tecurity. Ait 

32. But in faying this, we are far from implying an acquiefcence in the rigour of 
Mr. Stewart's propolal, “to inyeft the Superiutendant with a Rage PA! of pulting: 
“up to public fale a portion of the Zemindur’s lands, in & certain number of days (for inflance, 
“ ten) aiter failure in the payment of any Kift.” Ps : $ 