


48. Upon that fettlement, fo far as it has yet come before us, either accomplifhed or in 
profpect, we have already given our opinion; and we therefore now direct you, if uo new 
circumftance of importance has occurred to retard its natural operation, or to threaten the 
defeat of our reafonable expeéiation from it, to declare it, wherever it has been made with or 
on behalf of the Landholders, perpetual, In order to leave no room for our intentions being 
at any time mifunderfiood, we direct you to be accurate in the terms in which our determi- 
nation is announced, and you will be careful to have it tranflated and circulated in the fame 
manner as you have directed with refpect to your own code of Regulations. Having left it 
to your difcretion to decide on the meafures to be adopted relative to the wafte lands, you 
will of courfe determine whether any referve fhould be made in this declaration with a view 
to that object, and you will in a particular manner be cautious fo to exprefs yourfelves as to 
leave no ambiguity as to our right to interfere from time to time, as it may be necedlary, for 
the protection of the Ryots and fubordinate Landholders, it being our intention in the whole 
of this meafure effectually to limit our own demand, but not to depart, from our inherent 
right, as Sovereigns, of being the guardians and protectors of every clal’s of perions living 
under our Government. We are not aware that we have omitted a determination upon any 
article neceflary or important to your procedure to this ee and we fhall be happy that 
Lord Cornwallis, who has done fo much in this ardaous work, fees no reafon to deny himfelf 
the happinels of announcing a new conititution to fo many millions of the Afiatic fubjects of 
Great Britain. : ' ie 

49. There remains but one fabject to mention in this letter; that, however, is a fubject of 
the Jatt importance; he watching over, rearing and maturing of this tyflem ; maintaining 
under future Admin ns the energy which has commenced it. All the benefits hoped 
for from it tothe country and the Company, all its fucceis, muft depend upon this vigilance 
and foftering care of our Government and our fervants. No miliake could be more fatal 
than that of fappofing that it may be left to its own execution, and that all the effects it is 
indeed fitted to produce will neceflarily, and of courfe, agra it. If any conclufion is to 
be drawn from the deferiptions given of the people, it is furely this, that the powerful are 
oppreflive, and the weak fraudulent; having neither wifdom or confidence to act for diftant 
good, and being unreftrained by moral confideration, they are prone to avail themfelyes of 
prefent opportunity. Lt is true that the new fyftem reckons upon their felf-intereft, and this 
Is an excellence in it; bat it will take time to affure them that the fyftein is folid, and to 
difcover to them that their intereft_ is beft promoted by following the dictates of juftice and 
humanity. The bufinets of our Government mutt be to prevent them from violating thefe 
principles, injuring each other, and obftruéting the gradual cere of the effects 
which the new inftitation is calculated to produce. When the effects are become obvious, 
and the people are taught by fenfible demonfiration, the fyftem will then, as we have aleady 
fuggelted, be better able to ftand by itfelf. In the mean time it mutt be the duty @! our 
fervants to watch inceflantly over its progrel’s ; to fee that the Landholders oblerve punétually 
theiragreements with Government and with the Ryots; that they neither pals invented 
claims on the eve of a permanent fettlement, nor fraudulently fhift the burthen of Revenue 
by collufive transfers, nor by any other finifier practices diminith the payment of their flipu- 
lated affeffments; that they likewife uniformly give to the Ryots written fpecific agreements, 
as‘alfo receipts for all payments, and that thole agreements be on the one fide and the other 
fairly fulfilled. In this way, and in this only, can the fyftem be oper to flourith. But it 
is not enongy that complaints are redrefled when they reach the feat of authority ; man: 
injuries in the remoter parts of the diftriGs may thus be committed with impunity, It will 
be the Collector's duty to in{pect every part of the province entralied to him, to fee the fiate 
of cultivation, to enquire into the condition of the Ryots, and thus to afford opportunity for 
reprefentation, and check the propentity to abule. 