

‘Soveveign. at js d 
/ 47. Having thusexplaived our opinions on the feveral points which have arifen we con- 
“elude by flating to you, thut important and arduous as we conGder the meatire of a per- 
petual fettlement, and irreverfible us it is iv its nature, wes think ourfelves bound, from con- 
fidevatious of duty to all'the interelis which it concerns, to proceed to it. No conviétion is 
fironcer upon our minds than that infiability in the mode of aduiinitiering our Revenues has 
-had the moft prejudicial effects upon the welfare of the provinces, upon our affairs, aud the 
* character of our Government ; and of all the generated evils of unfettled principles of admi- 
nitlration, none bas been more baneful than frequent variation in the affefiment. Lt has 
reduced every thing to temporary expedient, and deftroyed ail enlarged views of improve- 
ment. Impolitic as fuch a principle muft be at all times, it is particu arly fo with refpect toa 
dependant country paying a kits annual tribute, and deprived of many of its ancient fup- 
ports, Such a country requires efpeciully the aid of a prodattive principle of management, 
and itis with folid fatisfaction that we look to the great refources which it yet has iu its un- 
cultivated though excellent lands. But thefe lands muft be opened ; and what have all the 
attempts of nearly thirly years to thisend produced? What are we to expect from {till leaving 
_foom for the principle of fluctuation which has prevailed during that period, though we may 
profefs to place fucceeding change at a remoter diftance? Long leafes with a view to the 
equal ual efiublifhment of a permanent fyttem, though recommended upon the ground 
‘of falety, we mutt think would ftill continue in a certain degree the evils of the former prac- 
tices periodical corrections in the affesiment would be in efie& of the nature of a general 
increafe, and tend to deftroy the hope of a permanent fyftem, with the confidence of exer- 
tion it is calculated to infpire. Had fueh a fyftem been adopted twenty yearsago, and fairly 
followed, it is not to be doubted that the produce, manufactures, and commerce, of the 
country, would at this time have been in a more flourithing {tate than they arc, and the 
Bea Cntr ot a uew order of things, of privileges and profperity unenjoyed before, 
Wor rifen in their character, and felt real attachment to the Government from which 
thote bleilings werederived. That Government too, inftead of being fo much occupied xs 
it 


> the Affirs of The EASTINDIA COMPANY. 175 


it has been in all time patt, by the ing ftruggle perpetually fubGifting thro the 
country for taxes and rents, would, as our Governor Geieral has already fu; 1, have 
had leilure to turn its cares to other functions of the raling power, to the internal regulation 
of the community, the eftablifhment- of wholefome laws, and the due adminiftration of them. 
The principle therefore which would have laid the foundation of this appears the only one 
fill to be adopted; it places the fecurity of the Company’s revenue on the only bafis which 
we can dileover to be a folid one, the growing pra fperity of the country; and hopelels alike 
of better lights than thofe already attained, and of an adminifiration more fitted effectually 
to eftablifh a t reform than that of which Lord Cornwallis is the head, we muft be of 
opinion, with his Lordthip, that to delay the introduction of it, fuppofing always the fir 
fiandard fettlement properly formed, would be to poltpone the commencement of the pro{- 
perity and the happinefs of the country, f 