

96%, Xx intricacy, 


¥72 APPENDIX lo the Second REPORT from the Seleét Conimittee on: 

intricacy, uncertainty and expenfe. At all events, if any arrangement can be formed upon 

ihe fubject, ibis material that it thould be clearly defined and undertteod, before announeing, 

~- ourfivul decifion refpecting the perpetuity of the prefent fettlement. Having explained to 

‘on our general fentiments, we fhall leave the application of them wholly to your diteretion 

‘on the pot; and we fhall now proceed to that great and important pointwhich is the imae- 
diate and principal objec of thele inftraions. 


og. ‘The difference of opinion which took place between Lord Cornwallis and. Mr. Shore, 
concerned, firlt, the propriety of declaring that the Decennial fettlement, if approved by the 
Courbof Directors, {ould be rendered perpetual, and then, the expediency of the meature 
itfelf, of unalterably fettling the Jumma of Lhe provinces at Une énd of the: firft ten years, or 
indeed in the peculiar ciccumfances of Bengal, of ever fixing at ail an immutable rate of 
affelfiment for it. i : . ) i 


32. We have beltowed the utmoft attention upon the cemutectt advanced'on both fides of 
Aiele queftions, which form in elect but one fubject contiting of feveral parts, all referviblé 
to the fame principles of objection and defence. # v 


93. I is a fubject of High importance, involving the mof momentous interefts of the 
Company, and of, exteufive kingdoms, for the prefent and all future tine. We cannot 
thence Sur feel folicitude in’ being called to decide upot it} but we fee that a decifion is 
nécelliry, and (hall therefore give thé refult of our mott ferious deliberation, conduGed’ with 
iin carnett defive of acting upon the juftett principles of policy, and of promoting the latting 
Welfare of our territories, and of all the interetis contested with them, 


“j4udb afiords us much: fatisfaction that this fubject has received fo ample a difcuffion in 

» Bengal, where every argementand objection can be bett felt and: fated, and frown the 

fire members of cur Government, who have {hewn themfelves poffefled of that intelligence, 

candour, integrity and publit affection, which render them. worthy of managing’{o great a 
queftions, ‘ - ; " 


45. The difference of opinion which has fublified, we find not to relate fo much to 
sen uate as to the application of tiem. That the tax which the dubjed is tu pay 
tothe State thouldnot be arbitrary, but afcertuined and fixed ; that all befides which bis, in- 
duftry can produce to him fhould, as fer as bie, be fecured to bim; and that in order to 
the profperity of acountry, property thould be rendered definite and certain ; Ahefe potitions, 
as general traths, Mr. Shore does not oppofe, but he queltions the propriety of practically 
applying them to Bengal at the prefent time, and in its peculiar fituation, “The ground of 
difciliion is thus narrowetl, not comprehending fundamental principles, but merely quefiions 
of time and/of other circumftances. It is material to us to fee thing thatican be urged 
on the fide (Mr. Shore has efpouled. As his objections are cl of a local and appro- 
by us in all their force ;\ and, as we have 