


eShore injuftice not to ackno 
at are advanced with ability, 


rom: 


c ge of our Government as to the figte and refources of the 


the relative tights of the different orders of the people, is to be improved ; 
idence is to be given to them, the mode of fixing ond collecting the rents from 
pS ee h <M ss ire the 


the Aftits'of The EASTIN DIA COMPANY, 173 


the Ryots to be fimplified; due regulations of every kind cftablifhed and enforced ; the people 
by degrees formed to. the new fyficm of certainty and fecurityy inequalities in the afletiment 
difvoyered; -and the firft. period. having thus palied in experiment, practice, and approxima- 
tion to « anent arrangement, advantage tobe tuken of all the.experience acquired in 
it for the fettlement of a fecond period, by which time prefeut doubts will probably be » 
cleared up, and the way opened for the naiuatida, of a perpetual feitement, free of the em- 
Darralfizents which now attend that queftion. y 


38. No confequences more formideble could be prefented to us from the propofed fyfiem 
than a diminution in perpetuity of the Company’s Revenue, with the fill continued tub- 
fifieuce of all or any of thofe diforders in, the mode of impofing and levying it from the great 
body of the people, which have already done fuch effential injury to. the country, and mutt 
ever prove a bar to its profperity, ; 


39. Very clear and folid arguments were requifite to repel the difference which this view 
of the fubject, from fuch an authority, hada teadeney to create, and to encourage us to per~ 
fevere in our original idea of giving a fixed conftitution to the finance and Jand tenure of the 
country. But this fatisfaction Lord Cornwallis has afforded us in his. Minutes of the 18th 
September 178a, and 3d February 1790, which we fincerely regarded as two very valuable 
records, written with enlarged and jutt views upon the foundett principles of policy, with 
perfect fairnefé, great acquaintance with the fubject, and the mof conclufive reafoning in 
favour of a permanent afieflinent. wa) 


4o. In thefe documents, the luft of which, if Mr. Shore had feen it, might probably have 
removed his doubls, as he candidiy fiyles the objettions he left on feo we find it con~ 
vincingly urged that a permasent affeflment, upon the ftale of the prefent ability of the: 
country, mutt contain in its nature a productive principle; that the pofleNion of property, nud 
the fure enjovinent of the benefits derivable from it, will awakeo end fiimulateandaliry, pro- 
mote agriculture, extend improvement, cliablith eredit, and augment the gongral wealth ond 
profperity.’ Hence arifes the belt fecurity that no permanent diminution can be expected iv 
take place, at leaft to any confiderable amount ; eccefioual deficiencies may occur tor a tine 
from the mifmanagement of particular Landbolders, but it cannot be Jnppofed that any of 
the lands will permanently Le leis produétive than at prefeut; and as we have every reaton 
to believe that the Jumma now, formed is moderate iv its tural amount, and properly dite 
tributed, the lands themfelyes will, in moft infiances, ultimately be a fufficient decwrily for 
the proportion charged upon them, With refjpeét to lofles from drou: inundtions, ane 
other cafualties, thet occur alfo in- the prefent fyfiem, and. ufvally, fall: upou the Company 
themfelves ; but it will hereafter be different, becaufe the advautages of proprietaryrights and 
fecured profits in the Landbolder will, on his part, afford meaus to fopport and incite exertivns 
to fupport them ; the deficiencies of bad featons will on the whole be more than eounter- 
balanced by the tiuits of fayourable years ; there will thus be a gradual aceumulation, whilll 
the demands of Government continue the fume; aud in every fiep of this progrellive work, 
sproperty becomes of more, value, the owner of more importance, and the fyiiem acquires 
additional firength : fuch furely, appear to be the tendency and juft confequences of an 
-equitable fixed aflelTment. Ae ah 