


the"Afhits of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. yt 


fore the claims of juftice do not interfere, it muft be extremely defirable to promote fubdiv?— 
tions of the property in the foil; and we think that you confulted both juilice and policy in 
determining to disjuin entively from the Zemindarries thofe Talooks which come under the 
defeription fpecified in the Refulutions tranfinitted in your Revenue letter of the 16th Augutt~ 
4790; 4 wile and important weafure, the offspring of the fame comprehenfive views which 
juve directed the reft of your conduét in this great concern, 


27. With a view to the confiderations here ftuted we are defirous of having before us in 
one view, an Account of the totul number of Landholders of every defeription with whom the 
fettlement has been made in each diftrict, diftributing them into different claffes according to 
the amuunt of the rent which they are to pay, and in the inftances where the lands have been 
farmed, we wilh for a fimilar {pecification. Poflibly the materials which you have tranfinitted 
may be fufficient for forming an abfiraét containing this infurmation, and. we have given 
direGtions for their being curcfully examined for that purpofe ; but on fo interefting a point 
we are anxious to obtain the mof accurate information, and we therefore direét that you will 
lofe no time in preparing and tranfiuitting to us fuch an account. 


28. We have attended to your proceedings upon another quefiion which grew out of this 
deter wination, whether fuch Talooks us were, by a (pecitic claufe in the title deeds for them, 
ftipulated to continue infeparable fiom the Zemindsrry, thould ueverthelefs come under the 
new regulation? It does not appeer to us that a claufe of that nature could in general have 
had the fandtion of the Sovereign or his Dewan; and we mutt think that wherever fact: 
fanétion was wanting, the whole tranfuction refis upon no other legal validity than what 
prefeription may give it. We thall thus not only be of opinion with the Goyernor General, 
that fuch an unauthorized claute contained in itfelf’ an irregular aflumption on the part of 
the Zemindar, but that in fact the title conveyed by him was infufficient in any other view = 
than asa mere Pottab. If prefeription, however, is fuppofed to cure this original defeat om 
one fide, it may alfo be pleaded on the other in favour of the unwarranted claufe ; and thus. 
the queftion may be regarded a8 a relative branch of that much more comprehenfive one 
refpecting lands illegally alienated. 


2g. If our views of this queftion relative to"Talooks of the defeription above tated be 

juft, that the fubitance of the tranfaction, or the grant itfeif was legal, but with the fuper- 

addition of an illegal claufe, then it remains to be contidered whether this claufe thould 

vitiate the grant which prefeription may have confirmed, or Government give up its right, 

which is difregarded in the claufe. On this point we do not feel ourfelves prepared to give 
any pofitive inftraction, and indeed whatever might be our opinion upot it, we fhould feel 
ourfelves precluded from enforcing, during the period of the Decennial Settlement, any 
meafure contrary to the decifion which you have wlrealy announced upon it. “But contider 