


24, In the mean time we truft effectual care will be taken, that Zemindars and others in 
ieftion of lands do not, by impofing on the credality or fears of the people, continue an 
exactions of this nature. We fee reafon for apprehenfion, when, after fo many and fucl 
fevere prohibitions of Government, even rendering difobedience a capital offence, the country 
thould have {warmed with illicit Chokeys or collecting ttations, an aftonithing fact! which we 
kuow not how to reconcile with due vigilance in our fervants placed over the diftriéts as well 

for the protection of the people, as the fecurity of the Revenue. = 


25. In reviewing your regulations refpecting the perfons with whom fettlements were to be 
coticluded, we oblerve that in certain intianees you have been under the necellity: ef makiogy 
ements with Farmers, but we do not find that in this inftance you have formed any deci- 
nn how thefe lands are difpofed of at the expiration of the period for which they were 
farmed, and we wait to learn your fentiments on this point. Ozr opinion at prefent is, that 
a the initances where the Landholders have at prefent been excinded, the firfi opportunity 
Would neverthelefs be taken of again giving to them or their heirs the option of being rettored 
to their lands according to the general principles now to be eltablifhed. Some: caution 
however may be neceflary, in order to avoid giving encouragement to thofe who may have 
declined entering into the agreement at prefent, in order to profit by the embarraflfment of 
Government. m : 
_ 26. Another feparate objet of attention, and which is conneéted with very important con- 
fiderations, is the queftion which arofe. with refpect to the different defcriptions of Talooks. 
We are not infenfible that, if the new {yfiem produces in procefs of time wil the efleéts which 
may reafonably be expected from it, the wafte landed tenures of which feveral of the Zemin- 
darries confit may become an object of very ferious import, under ditierent, views, to the 
Butt Government in that country ; and this in our opinion conftitntes one of the moft 
weighty realons, though not againft the confirmation of abfolute hereditary landed rights, 
et for all practicable circumipection in. proceeding to the eftablifiyhent of them, Indeed 
e facility with which annexations appear to have been made to Zemindarries, and the mag- 
nitude to which fome of thefe have tase fwelled even by the originating acts of the native, 
SreceeenE itfelf, muft be admitted to furnith fome prefumptive argument againft the notion 
firiét proprietary titles Tn thofe annexations there feems to have been always implied the 
exiftence of a delpotic principle which left every thing fubject to new ‘modification at its 
pleature ; and on this account, the circumftance which probably gave rife to thefe extentive 
polleffions made them lels av object of jeiilouty to Government. But under che Company’s 
Government the cate has sven bee different. The inrpolicy of thele extentive territorial 
pulleflions and jurifdictions, even in the loofe form in which they have hitherto been heid, bas 
not (ath unsoticed. Upon a fyliem of permanent polleffion and ftill more of fixed taxation, 
weniences of thei may be aageediy beumoreveal and ferious. , Wheneyer there~ 
: ‘ fore 