


50. The fame confequences will not follow from this practice as might have been appre~ 
hhended in the former fyftem ; the invention of numberlefs pretences incapable of invettigation, 
in order to elude the time of payment on the one band, orto enforce exaction on the other, 
under the plea of not fuffering that time to be loft. Written fpecific. agreements mut 
teduce every difpute toa fhort and fimple procefs. It is not our intention to.enumerate all 
the ways in which vigilance is to be exercifed, we mean only to inculcate the neceflity of it, 
and that it muft be univerfal. The interett of the Company, as well as of the country, will 
ablolately require this our demand from the lands ; the great and now almoft the only fource 
of Revenue is fixed; with the exception of any addition which may be made from relump- 
sions, or which may arife from pes et (if that refource {ould be found ayailable) 

363. Be it 


176 APPENDIX ¢o he Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


itis fixed for ever, a moft ferious argument (as for ftriét economy in the expenditure of what 
is limited fo) for the utmoft care on our part ; that our known refources being on the one hand 
reftrained from increafe, they may on the other be prelerved from diminution. Nothing but 
the profperity of the country can effect this, and profperity is to be hoped for only by an 
active and HerigD\ lapenntend ates in the Government, by its pervading influeuce throughout 
the diftrics, difpenfing juftice and eftablithing internal order and peace. Wee thall moft 
affuredly follow, with {trict obfervation, the practical conformity of our fervants in their feveral 
itations to thefe fentiments, and fhall not only confider pofitive unfaithfulnefs, but (where 
every thing depends upon intelligent activity) remillnefs, as a fullicient difqualification for 
employment. 


51. It is atrath of-great importance that the neglect of inftituted regulations has, more than 
the imperfeéiions of former ey been noxious to our affairs. We now eftablith the beft 
fyftem, and thence the mott Bited for execution, but for which conftant attention is requilite, 
and we with therefore that all our fervants may be confiantly awake to this truth, and confider 
theit own immediate intereft and honour, as well as thofe of the Company aud the Nation, 
involved in the profperity of the fyftem of permanent taxation, and in the ttrenuous fupport 
ae splareementy according to their refpective fituations, of ali the regulatious framed for its 

ccels, 


52. Since writing the foregoing Letter we have gone into a diftinét confideration of Lord 
Cornwallis’s Minute of 1ft December 1799, referred to.in your letter of gift January 1791, 
ropofing principles and rules for the ultimate determination of the long depending and 
important queftion refpecting the alienated Lands, The opinion we had before conceived 
from the outlines of his Lordihip’s plan is by this Minute fully confirmed ; he appears to us to 
have, with a wife and happy median, confulted both the rights of Government and the eafe of 
the people; to have made the molt perfect adjufiment between themtha t fuch a cule would 
admit 2 and we therefore give our approbation and fanétion to the final regulations he has 
propofed, 
} We are, 
Your affectionate friends, 
T. BARING. 
j J. SMITH BURGES, 
3 “ ; , JOHN ROBERTS. 
JOHN HUNTER. 
$ ~ THOS CHEAP. 
ea “We EWER. 
va) /W. BENSLEY. 
‘HUGH INGLIs. 
OHN TRAVERS. 
‘ P. LE MESORIER, 
“we ‘T. PATTLE. 
ai) 7 r S. LUSHINGTON, 
Roe URE WM MONEY. 
iy ‘ ») © JOHN TOWNSON, 
NATH. SMITH. 