

wrogahs fhall make it a rule, whenever they. receive intelligence of any murder or 
robbery having heen committed in their own or any other jurifdiéuons, to difpatch immedi- 
zie information of it to all theneighbouring Daroguhs, and alfo to Magiftrates of the adjacent 
diliri@s, unlefs they fhall have apprehended the offenders, All Landholders, Gomattahs,, 
and other head perfous of villages, are required to pay firidt, obedience to thefe orders for 

conveying: 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. — 18 


cone letters of the Darogahs, and the Magiftrates are direGed to fix up copies of 
them in the head Cutcherry of every Pergunnah throughout their refpedtive diftricts. 


Fifteenth.—A concurrent authority is vefted in the feveral Magiftrates and their Officers, 
in the cafes and under the reftrictions following; viz. The Darogahs and Police Oflicers 
dubject to the authority of one Magitirate are empowered, either under his warrant or without 
fuch warrant, to purtue robbers and murderers into the jurifdiétions of other Darogahs, 
whether fubjeét to the fume Magiftrates as themfelves or to the Magifirates of any other 
diliriGs or city. The Magitirates, Daroghas, Police Officers, Landholders, Farmers, Gomat- 
tahs of Vil 3, Cultivators of Land, and all other perfons having authority or refiding in 
the jurifdiétions into which the offenders may be PReees are required to afford every ailift- 
ance in their power to the purtuing Otficers, for the apprehention of the offenders. {t is to 
ve underftood, however, that this concurrent authority vefted in the Magiftrates and the 
Police Officers, is to extend only to cafes in which the crime with which the perfons purfucd 
may be charged, fhall have been committed within their refpective jurifdiétion, or (in the 
event of the crime having been committed in any other jurifdiction) where the offender was 
a@ually within their jurifdiétion when the charge againit him was preferred to tem. And 
it thal! not be lawful for the Magifirate or Darogah of one diftriét or jurifdiétion to iffie « 
warrant for the apprehention of any offender, being or refiding in another dittrié or jurif- 
diGion at the time of the complaint being preferred to them, for any crime or offence not 
committed within the limits of their refpective jurifdiétions ; in fach cafe the complainant 
mutt apply in the firft inftance to the Magilirate of the diflrid or the Darogah of the 
jurifdiction in which the crime fhall"have beeu committed, or in which the offender may 
refide or be found. : 


Sixteenth—Whenever the Police Officers employed under one Magiftrate fhall apprehend 
offenders in the diftrict or jurildiction of another Magiftrate, in virtue of the powers vefied 
in them by thefe Regulations, they fhall immediately deliver to the Darogah of the Police 
jurifdiGion in which the offenders may be apprehended, a lift of their names and a fiate- 
ment of the crimes wilh which they are charged, and the fuid Darogah fhall immediately 
forward fuch lift and fiatement to the Magifirate to whole authority he is fubject. 