


ae 


ae ; Appendix, No.13. 
MINUTE of the Governor General in Council; dated the 7th December 1792. 
Extract Bengal Revenue Confultations; the 7th December 1792. 
BOARD’s MINUTE. 


TOR the prevention of crimes it is neceflary, Firft, to eftablifh an efficient Police through- 
out the country, that Offenders may be unable to efcape from the hands of juttice. Secondly, 
to proyide for the speedy and impartial trial of Offenders when apprehended, 


The inftitation of the Courts of Circuit and the half-yearly Jail Deliveries, preferibed by 
the Regulations of the gd December 1790, have provided for the latter of thefe important 
objeéis. With a view to the attainment of the former, the Magifirates were required to re- 
port what local eftablifhments would be neceffary for the prefervation of the peace in their 
refpective diftriéts, and to fuggett the belt mode of raifing a fund for the fupport of them. 


The Governor General in Council now proceeds to the confideration of the Reports furnith- 
ed by Bie eines in confequence of the above inftructions, and of the iabject of the 
Police in general ‘3 f 

The rate of the Police of the gory is at prefent committed to the Magiftrates,- 
affifted by the Landholders, who, by a condition annexed to all landed tenures in this 
country, are bound to keep the peace in their refpective efiates, and, in the event of any 
zobbery being committed thereon, to produce both the offenders and the property plundered. 


The 


the Afuits of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 77 


The Police Eftablifhments allowed to the Magiftrates of the feveral difiri@s are detailed 
ain ie Regulations of the 3d December 1700. Some of the Officers compofing thefe 
eftabl Hameo ce ployed in guarding the jail; the remainder attend on the Magifirates 
for the ole of ferving Warrants on pagers charged with crimes or offences, Thele 
flender nls are no proteétion whatever to the extenfive diftriéts which they are 
Ble a to guard. Being colleGted about the perfon of the Magiftrate, except when em- 
ployed on the above fpecial duty, they afford him no means of information of what pafles in 
the interior part of this diftriét, Bands of robbers aflemble with a certainty of not being 
difcovered until they have committed their meditated ac of depredation, and the time which 
then elapfes before information of the event can be lodged before the Magifirate, affords the 
offenders ample opportunity of efcaping with their booty to diftant parts of the country. The 
late robberies committed on the public treafure pafling through Uangpare and Dinagepore, 
with numerous other infiances of a fimilar nature recorded upon the public Proceedings, are 
cafes in point, The robbers having obtained intelligence of the road by which the treafure 
was to be tranfported, aflembled from the different parts of the diftriét where they had been 
concealed, or refided, and after cutting olf the efcort, which confifted of regular troops, carried 
away the treafure, without the Magiltrate being able to trace from whence they came, or 
whither they had fled with this booty; and as the dread of incurring the vengeance of the 
Teaders.of. thele gangs invariably deters the inhabitants of the countries which age ioket 
from informing againtt them, there is no probability of any intelligence being obtained 
sefpecting Uhefe marauders until they again alarm the country by fome new aét of depre- 
dation, which, under the prefent defeciive fiate of the Police, they would certainly accomptifh 
with the fame impunity. ~ ; E Fuh Aaa AT bet i 