

Seventeenth.—The Darogahs {hall receive a commiffion of ten per cent. on the value of all 
property ftolen or plundered which they may recover. ‘ 

Eighteenth—It thall be the duty of the Darogahs to proceed in perfon, or to depute one 
or more of their Officers, to the feveral towns, Gunges, Bazars and Hauts, on maiket-days, 
to prevent any difputes or difturbances ariling between the veutiers und purchaters, or other 
pertons reforting to the markets. 


Nineteenth.—The following regulations, paffed on the 15th November 1788, are made 
general; and it fhall be the duty of the Darogahs to feize all boats uled or built in oppofition 
to them, and to apprehend and fend to the Magifirate the artificers employed in repairing 
or building fuch boats, and to report to him the names of the Landholders in whole village 
ae may have been built or repaired, that the penalties preferibed may be entoiced againtt 
them, 


1fi—All perfons, the Magiftrates of difirils excepted, are proliibited building or making 
ufe of boats of the following deferiptions: * 


Covids length, Corids breadi! 
Luekhas - - 4otono = = at to 4 
Jelkars - - goto7o  - = gh to5 * 


Panchwas of Chundpore carrying more than thirty oars. 
od.—The Magiftrates are directed to feize and confifcate all boats of the foregoing 


deicriptions which may be fouad within the limits of their re{pectiye jurifili¢tions. 

3d.—Any Zemindar or other Landholder allowing any boat of either of the deferiptions 
abeve fpecified to be built or repaired within the limits of his Zemindarry, unlels by a written 
order from the Magiftrate of the dittrid, fhall forfeit to Government the village in which 
fach boat fhall be proved to have been built or repaired, 

4th.—All carpenters, blackfmiths or other artificers, are prolibited engaging for, or 
being employed in the building or repairing of boats of the «defcriptions above-mentioned 
(unlefs by the exprets pérmillion of the Magifirate of the difiriét) under pain of being com- 
mitted to clofe imprifonment in the Firizdarry Jail for any period not longer than one 
aonth, or fuffering corporal punifiment not exceeding twenty itrokes with a rattan. 


Twentieth.—The Darogah of each jurifdiGion fhall fend a monthly Report (Selabut) in 
writing to the Magitirates, which (hail contain the names of all perfous whom he may have 
apprehended, their crimes and the date of their apprehenfion; all the date on which they 
were difpatched to the Magiftrate or releafed, either upon bail or in confeqnence of the 
parties having agreed to withdraw the complaint, in the cafes {pecified in the Gxth and 
eleventh articles ; and alfo a circumstantial detail of all ether aéts dene by him in his official 
capacity. Theie Reports are to be dilpatched on the 5th of every month, for the month 
preceding, by the public Dawks ; or if they cannot be fent by that mode of conveyance, by 

foeh 


182. APPENDIX /0 the Second REPORT from the Seleét Committee on 


fuch other as the Magiftrate may direct. Ifit thall be proved that Darogah has apprehended 
any perfon, or iffued orders or done any official aét, which fhall not be inferted and truly ftated 
in his Report, he fhall be difmilfed from his office. 