


Twenty-firfi—If the Darogah of a jurifdiction fhall commit any aés of corruptiou, ex- 

tortion, or oppreflion, or any aét not authorized by thefe Regulations, the party injured is 

_ hereby permitted to profecute him, either criminally before the Court of Circuit, or for 

damages in the Dewanny Adawlut. The Judges of the above-mentioned Courts are re- 

quired to take cognizance of all {ach profecutions or fuits as may be brought before them 

under this regulation, and to pafs fach fentence or decree thereon as may appear to them 
equitable upon 2 confideration of the cireumfiances of the cafe. 


Twenty-fecond.—The Magifirates are to fornith the Darogahs of the feveral jurifdiaions 
with a Suannd of Office, and a Tranilate of the above Regulations in the Perfian or Bengal. 
languages. ‘The Sunnud and Tranflate are to be attefted with their official feal and fignature, 


The Board now proceed to confider the mode of raifing the fund for paying the expentes 
of the Police Eftablifhment. y 


The Magifrates were called upon to flate whether it would be advifuble to raife the fum 
required for defraying the expentes of the Police Eftablifhments of their refpedtive diftritts, 
by a tax on the {hops in the principal towns, Bazars and Gunges, or by a duty on articles 
of confumption, - 

The Magiftrates, with few exceptions, concur in the expediency of adopting the firt 
of thefe modes in preference to the fecond, The grounds of this preference are obvious. 
A tax on articles of confumption would full heavieft upon the Cultivators of the Land, who are 
already alfeffed fufficiently bigh. ‘The charges neceffarily attending the collection of a duty 
or tax on commodities would perhaps be nearly equal to the fam required for the expente of 
the Police; the whole fam, therefore, to be railed would be greatly increafed by the adoption 
of this plan. Befides, the additional and unneceffary burden on the people, the extortions 
and abufes which might be practifed by the Officers appointed to colee. the duties, would 
renew all the impediments and obfiractions to the agriculture and commerce 0 


of the country, 
for the removal! of which Government have lately fubmitted to fo confiderable diminution of 
their refourees by the abolition of the Sayer. R 


_ A fall and limited tax upon the wareboufes. and fhops of the Merchants and Tradefmen 
in the principal towns, Bazars and Gunges, is not liable to any of thefe objections. The 
total amount to be paid in each place, and this difiribution of iton each thop, will be known 
and limited. The collection of the tax may be entrufied to one or more of the principal 
Merchants of the town, fo that no expente will be incurred nor abufe practifed in the 
levying of it, If the affeffment is at any time found unequal, it may be varied without 
difficulty ; the amount required to be collected will be incon le, and it will fall imme-_ 
diately upon the clafs of people who are belt able to pay it, viz. the Merchants and Traders 
who fince the late abolition of the internal duties carry on their commercial tranfuctions 
SeereS and pay no immediate tax whatfoever to the State. They are befides more im- 
mediately. interefted in the eftablifhment of an effective Police than any other order of the 