

amount of 1,000 Rupees, bimfelt in 500, and two |” ) Wy 
creditable perfons in 250 Rupees each. 


Sisth.—Any perfon having a charge to prefer againft another for murder, robbery, houle- 
breaking, thelt, or othér crime or ofience cognizable by the criminal Courts, and who thull 
not chvofe to lodge it immediately before the seaibeate of the diltriét, thal be at liberty to 
pee it in writing to the Darogah of the jurifdiétion in which the crime or offence inay 

ave been committed ; or if the ‘offender thall have removed himfelf out of that jarifdidion, 
to the Darogah of the jurifdiétion in which he may be found. Such ph rather forthwith 
caufe the party acculed to be apprehended. If the charge fhall be for murder, bouse- 
breaking, theft, or other heinous crime, the Darogab fhall fend the acculed to the Magiftrate 
under fafe cufiody, within twenty-four hours after he fhull have apprehended him. ‘If the 
charge fhall be for any crime or offence on which the Magiftrates are authorized to 
decide, the Darogah fhall require fofficient fecurity from the perfon accufed to appear on 
a fpecifie day before the Magiftrate; if he thali retule or be unable to give fuch fecurity, 
the Darogah fhall fend him ander pitpen cuftody to the Magifirate within twenty-four 
hours after he fhall have apprehended bim. When the party accufed fhal! appear before the 
Magiftrate, he hall proceed againft him in the fame manner as if he hud been apprehended 
‘ontae his own warrant, * i 


Seyenth.—The Darogahs are authorized to apprehend without a written charge, and 
without iffuing a duftuck or writ, perfons found in the aét of committing a breach of the 
peace, or againft whom a general hue and cry fhall have been raifed, or who fhall be detected 
with fiolen goods in their pofleffion, and alfo the feveral deferiptions of perfons {pecified in 
the gth article; in every other cafe the Darogahs are prohibited apprebending any perfons 
without a charge preferred again him in writing, under the feal or fignature of the 
complainant, and without iffuing a dufiuck or writ for his upprehention, under their official 
feal and fignature. i ; * 


Eighth—tThe Darogahs are in all cafes whatfoever to take fecurity from the profecutor 
and _his.witnefles to appear before the Magiftrate on a fpecific day, which fhall be the 
day whereon the party uccufed may be bound to appear, if fecurity fhall have been taken 
from him for that purpofe, or the diy on which he may be expected to arrive at the Magil- 
trale’s place of refidence, if he is to be forwarded thither under cuftody. i 


Ninth.—The Darogah, upon receiving information of any notorious. decoits or robbers 
harbouring within bis jurifdiction, (all apprehend them and forward them under fafe cuftody 
to the Magiftrate; he fhall likewife apprehend and fend to the Magiftrate all Malaches Syr 
Bejuas, or other deferiptions of vagrants or faspected perfons who ina¥ be lurking about his 
jurildiction without aay oftenfible means of fubfiltence, or who cannot give a fatistagtory ac- 
count of themfelves. 