

Second.—Landholders an ‘of land are’not in future to be confidered refponfible 
for robberies committ their refpective eftates or farms, unlels it fhall be proved that 
they connived at the robbery, received auy part of the property ftolen or pluudered, 

ured the offenders, aided or refufed to give effectual saline to ae their efeape, 
or omitted to afford every alliftance in their power to the rs of Government for their 
apprehenfion ; ineither of which cafes they will be compelled to make good the value of the 
property ftolen or plundered. 


» Third —The Magiftrates are to divide their dif- 
‘triéts, including the rent-free land, into police 
juritdi@ions. Each jurifdiction is to comprize an 
extent of county not exceeding ten cofs fquare. 
The guarding of each jurifdiction is to be com- 
mitted to a Daro, hor Superintendant, with an 
eftablifhment of Officers. The Darogahs, with their 
eftablifhment, are to be ftationed in the centre of 


country, whereby offenders may 


their refpective jurifdiGions, and the Magiftrates | their ence in any jurifdiétion the 
Scieted te itcarna totocs tbe judi rg eee 

in fuch a manner as to bring the princi s 

Bazars and Gunges in the centre of them, f ita from the 
the Police efiablifhments may ferye for the protec- | Paufbauns, Dufaads, or ydars of 


tion of thefe principal places, as well as the cir~ 


eumjacent country. 

Fourth—The Police jurifdi€tions are to be 
numbered, and to be named after the central 
pl laces at which the Daro; ‘and their eftablith- 


may be ftationed. ‘The Magiftrates are not 


4o change the names or number of the jurifdic- 
tions, or to alter the limits of them, without the 
i the Governor General in Council. 


the villages under his authority. Land- 
holders will be unable to connive at 
robberies or to harbour rol without 
being immediately d and as the 
Darogahs will have a ready communi- 
cation with each other by means of 
their Officers and the public Dawks, the 
alarm of any robbery or breach of the 
that may be comunitted will be 
immediately fpread throughout the 
neighbouring country to a great dif- 
dance; 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 179 


tance, in fo thort a fpace’ of time as to 
render the efcape of the offenders al- 
moti impracticable. By thas cutting 
off all hope of eluding the hands of 
juftice, thofe who now live by commilt- 
ting depredations on fociety maft either 
refrain from fuch mal-practices, or 
sper, fufier the punifhment due to 
their crimes; and the dread of incur- 
ring a fimilar fate will deter others from 
enlering upon the fame courle of life. 
Thefe Darogahs will alfo be extremely 
uleful in aflitting the Courts of Juftice 
‘in ferving procels, and contribute in 
a variety of ways to the prefervation of 
peace and foo order in fociety. 


Fifth.—The Magifirates to nominate the Da- By allowing an adequate falary to 
hs in the firlt infiance, and to fill up all future | the Darogahs, and feeuring them in 
vacancies. They will in confequence be held | their office whilft they conduct them- 
re(ponfible for felecting pertons duly qualified for | felves conformably to the regulations, 
the traft; but no Darogah is to be removed from | creditable pertons will be detirous of 
his office except upon proof of mifconduct to | the appointment; their characters as 
the fatisfaction of the Governor Generalin Coun- | well as their bond will be a fecurity to 
cil; and no perfon is to be appointed a Darogah | the public for their good conduct. 
without giving fecurity for bis appearance in the 