


16, It being effentially neceflary for the peace and profperity of the country that a Police 
fthould be eftablifhed without delay, and as fome tine may elapfe before the mode of raifing 
the amount affefled on each town, Gunge and Bazar, can be finally determined, the Governor 
General in Council defires that you will proceed to divide your diftri into Police jurifdictions, 
and to entertain the neceilury efiablifliments of Officers for the proteétion of them, imme= 
diately; and in the event of the colle¢tions which may be made from the different towns, 
Gunges and Bazars, within the firfi month after the Officers thal] have been entertained, 
not proving fufficient to defray their falary for that month, that you will pay the deficiency 
from your treafury, reporting the fum which you may fo difburie to the Board. 


17- You will report whether the Landholdersin your difirict have been allowed any de 
duétions on their Juoma, or ave in the receipt of any money allowances, or hold any lands, 
either free of, or at a reduced revenue, for the purpofes of keeping up Tannalidars or other 
Police Gfticers; and alfo your opinion whether the whole, or any, and what part of fuch de- 
dudtions, allowances, or produce of fuch lands, may with equity be rouge to the publie 
account, in confideration of the Landholders being now prohibited from keeping up fuch 
eilablithment, and Government having taken upon itfelf the charge of the Police. 


38. The 


186° APPENDIX -to ‘he Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


48. The Governor General in Council defires that you will proceed to carry the above at-_ 
Tangements into execution upon the receipt of this letter, gnd that you will make it an object 
oft your particular attention to complete them with the leaft poflible delay. 


“19. ‘His Lordthip in Council further defires me to inform you, that he fhall expect an early 
reportof the progrefs which you may make in carrying thele Orders into effect. 


Iam, &c. 


2 (No.1.) 
Lifi of the Police Jurifdictions, and Statement of the Efiablifhments entertained for the 
‘ ; proteétion of them, in the Colieétorthip of 


ESTABLISHMENT. 


‘Names of the Computed Extent 


TESS ane Pte Sonali ox Pemgondaba of the Ng is 
egy comprized in the Square of each a2) es 
irae Juriféigiion, Jorifdidtion, a g\3 

No, 1. Goyindpore,] ManomepAtty.| 1. | 10.] 1 


(No. 2.) 
Particulars of the Taxes levied for deftaying the Expenfes of the Police Eftablifhments in 
the Collectorfhip of 


Names of the Towns, Names of the Merchants, Explanation of the manner in which the 


Annual Amount 


Gunges or Bazarsy Taxin each Town, Basar or Gungrislevied 
iowbich  * | ihe erynny er he Taxis |_ OPS 1 by whae dfesiption of Perfons ie ie paids 
‘Taxes are levied, commit omar Asse ta reaeges and the Rates of Affefliment, 


Saves Ram. 


Bue Raye. 


REGULATIONS for the Police of the Cities of Moorfhedabad, Dacca and Patna. 
The pcre Regulations for the Police of the Colleétorfhips have no application to the 