


TIRHOOT. & 
The Magiftrate entertained ‘eftablifhments amounting to Goo Rupees per month, as 
‘ified in his Letter of the 24¢ July 1791, for the Police of three principal towns in his 
itiriét, Derbungah, Hajifpore, and Mozufferpore; be was authorized to continue thefe 
-eltablifhments until the general arrangements for the Police fhould take place. The Board 
accordingly refolve, that the Magiftrate be directed to difcontinue thee eftablithments as 
{oon as the arrangements now ordered are completed. : 


SYLHET. 

The northern frontier-of this Diftri€t being fubject to the inroads of the Coffeahs and 
-other bill people, the Magiftrate was authorized to entertain an eftablifhment of guards for 
‘the defence of it, at the expenfe of 1,000 Rupees per month, befides 2,000 Rupees per 
-annum for eight guard-boats, from the 1ft May to the gilt Oétober. The particulars of 
thi eRe are {pecified in the Magifirate’s Letter, recorded on the Proceedings 
of the 

The Colleétor recommends, in his Letter of the 14th November 1790, that 20,392 Cowns 
sof Couries, or S* R* 3,623. 3. 18. per annum,be raifed in the following manner : 


Tax on Shops, -. + 9+ Cowns 7,399 
Articles of Confumption. 


Salt goingintoJamleah - = - ~ = 8,000 
On ali Goods going and coming trom Cachar 4,000 
‘On Oranges - = = - ~ = 2,000 

; 20,303 


“The Collestorfirongly recommends the efiabli(iment of the three laft-mentioned taxes, ne 
they are colleéted-on the frontier and therefore cannot obftruct the induftry of the people. 
The Board, however, are -of opinion that it would be unadyiteable to admit even of this 
partial re-eftablifhment of the internal duties, as-it might furnifh a precedent for other 
deviations from the principles which they have laid down prohibiting the collection of them, 
The-tax on Oranges brought from the hills is further ebjéionable, as it would tend to dif- 
courage the intevcourfe between the hill people and the low country, which fhould be 
promoted as much as poilible fo long as they conduct themfélves peaceably. The tax on 
Salt is more particularly exceptionable, as contributing to prevent the exportation of an 
article of our ‘own manufacture, and in which a confi ale. -trade is carried on with the 
ealtern countries. Of the above thirteen thoufand Cowns prepofedto be railed by duties, only 
nine are recommended to be applied to the charge of the Police, the remaining four thoufand 
are recommended to be apprepriated to the paymeut of {mall Pentions, formerly defrayed from 
the Sayer; the payment of thefe Penfions has been fince provided for under the General 
Regulations. The Board accordingly refolve, that the Muagifirate be informed that the 


Poiice efablifiments which heis now directed to entertain, are to be exclufive of thofe he 
bas 


190 APPENDIX fo the Second REPORT from the SeleG: Comimittée on 


has been already authorimed 40 keep up for the proteétion of the northern frontier of his 
diliviét, and whicu wiil of courle render uny additional eitablithments in the country adjacent 