


to then aunecedarys 


The Board prefume that the payment of the Prifoners, alluded to in his Letter of the 
24ih November 1790, has been provided for by the Genera! Regulations refpedting fuch 
aliowances. » 

The Magiftrate fhould be further informed, that the expenfes of Repairs to the Roads 
cannot be provided for from the finn now direéted to be ratfed, and that the Bourd do not 
think it advilenbie ‘to authorize the eltablifliment of the duties whieli he lias propoled to levy 
oi Oranges, ou Salt going into Jomleah, and on Goods going to and coming from Canar. 


RAMGUR. 

“The Colledor, in his Letter of the 11th Pebroary 1791, fiates that all the Zemindars in 
his difiriG having got a deduétion from their Jamina cqual to the expenfe attending the 
keeping Chekeydars, Gantwars, &¢. 1 have not permitted, aay of them tobe withdrawn, 
conteguently no additional eftablifliment will be necefary on this account. ¢ 

With refpeet to Officers for fuperintending the Police, Markets, &c. he thinks it udvifeable 
that fome pertous Mould be ettablifhed at certain places fpecified in his Letter, upon the 
new roud, to induce the inhabitants to continue in them for the convenience of travellers, 
who but for this proteetion would often be fubjeét to ill weatment; and confequently defert 
the places altogether, to the great iatermiption ef the inland: trade and of paflengers in 
general, He thinks that one perfon at a flation, with an allowance of four-Rupees per 
month, would be fuficient; but at the tame time obierves, hat in conlequence of the 
extreme poverty of the pedple in that tiountainons part of the country, the aflefling any tax 
upon the few Shops that” may’ be found in Markets or Guinges, would fall heavy, and might 
lie the means of driving ‘the people from them altogether. 7 ft wom 


The Board being convinced of the jufinefs of the above reprefeutations, ‘refolve, that the 
Collector be infirocted to cobtinue the-Zemindasry Tannahs in the Bahar ditiriét as at 
prefent, and lo be careful that the Officers difeharge “a truft with diligence and fidelity. 

- That.he be allowed to flation an Officer in the feveral places on the new road mentioned 
in hig tester, with the monthlyallowance propoted to him, , 7 Ay 
“That in the Bengal portion of his diliriG he ‘carry the General Regulations of ‘this dae 
into execution. ahisaolsjsae way PRE), oad > Syyanate 
COOCH BAUAR. 

The Board direct that the Commitlioner be in!ormed that the Police Regulations are not 
to extend to the independent tesrtoieyoF the Kya of Covel, Babar = ' ; 
vay < j 1 othe angie Geta Bes io 

‘SPECIA L INSTRUCTIONS for the Police of the City of DACCA. : 

The Magiftrate of this City has fubmitted a full detail of the arrangements which he. 
confiders neceflary for the effublifiment of an efficient Police, but many of his propofitions 
are ttmpplieable to_prefent cireuiituneds, and others are iheortpnubhe with the General 
Regulations. ‘The Bout pafs the following Revolutions’ia his létiers Didi 