


Shahabad = = - = - 9575,083 — — x ahs ras 


Tirhogt. ~<a 10,46,161 — — 200 — — 
53:94,164 — — 

Midnapore - - ~ ~ - 10,45,983 _ 18 5 

Salt Diftri@s 2 - ~ - 4,76,526 — - &\ aes 
15,21,809 — — 

P°O TT euts 
Bengal - - - - = - 1,87,95,215 — — 
Bahar - - - - = = 53,904,164 — — 


Oriffa - ----- 15,21,809 — — 
es 
Grand Total 2,57512,188 ——| per Month - 


perAnnum - 


363. 


&84 APPENDIX fo the Second REPORT from the Sele@ Commnittee on 


© Oa this account it muft be obferved, that inftead of adopting the Jumma of 1198 as the 
Nandard for calculating the amount to be raifed in each diftritt, it would have been defirable 
‘tu have taken the year in which the Jumma for the decennial fettlement will be brouglit to 
its full fandard; but as thefe accounts are not yet completed, and as delaying the arrange- 
nrenis would be productive of more prejadicial confequences than can arile from any trivial 
inequalities in the quota of tax to be levied in each diftrict, the Board think it advifable to 
adopt the Jumma of the paft year as the ftandard for the regulation of it. 


The inequalities in the fums propofed to be raifed by the Magiftrates has been occafioned 
by the different principles on which the plans they have fuggetied are foanded, : 


With regard to the proportions in which the fum dirested to be raifed in each diftri& 
‘Thould be alleffed on the feveral towns, Bazars and Gunges, the Board are of opinion that it 
fhonld be regulated by the amount of the annual Sayer colleétions made therein, as flated 
ih the accounts by which the deduétions aud compenfations granted to the proprietors of the 
Gunges, upon the abolition of thofe duties, were regulated. ns 

The. Board accordingly refolye, that the Secretary be direéted to write the followin 
circular Letter to the feveral Magiftrates, inferting in the 5th Paragraph the fam ordere 
fo be ‘raifed in each diftriét for defraying the expentfe of the Police Eftablifhments, a3 
ipecitied in the laft column of the foregoing Statement. - - 


To . z: 1 Ape awit 
Magifirate of 


Sir, 
Lam diredted by the Governor General in Council to defire your attention to the fol. 


lowing Infiruétions. — . $ : 

. 2, Accompanying you will receive a copy of the Regulations which have been pafled by 
the Governor General in Council, for tne efiabiifhment of an uniform fyftem of Police 
through the country, : 

“3. You will proceed to divide your diftriét into Police jurifdi@tions, as direGted in the 
firlt article of the Regulations, aud eutertain the neceflary efiabifhments for the protection 
of them, taking cdre that the expenfe does not exceed the amouat hereafter mentioned. 


_ 4. From a confideration of the Reports furnifhed by the feveral Magiftrates, in confe« 
quence of the Orders tranfmitted to them on the goth Dasber 1799, the Governor General 
in Council has determined that the expente of the efiablifhments of Police Officers fhall be 
xaifed upon the Merchants, Traders aud Shop-keepers, refiding in the towns, Bazars and 
EN both in the Malguzarry and rent-free lands, in the manner hereatler mentioned. 
His Lordthip in Council is of opinion that this expenfe may with equity be.charged upon the 
above defcriptions of people, as from having conftant occafion to tranfport their piepcey 
from one part of the country to another, they are more iminediately interefted: in the 
efiabliiment of an efficient Police, and as by the late general ubolition of the Sayer 
Suniel they carry on their trade free of duty, and pay no immediate tax whatever to 
the State. i ‘ 