


~ §. The expenfe of the neceffary eftablifhments of Officers in your diftrict is eftimated at 
R per mouth, ‘His Lordihip in Council conceives that this fum may be raifed upon 
the Merchants, Traders and Shop-keepers, without its operating as a burthen upon them, as 
the fame deleriptions of people-in other diftriéts have voluntarily. offered to contribute a 
proportionate fum, It is uot meant, however, that the amount which you are directed to 
raife, is to be looked ujon as a voluntary contribution; on the contrary, it is (6 be coufidered 
‘asa tax impofed by the authority of Government, aud to fied accordingly. - 


_ 6 With refpedt to the affeffinent of the tax, you will firft adjuft the amount that isto be 
Jevied on each town, Gange and Bazir, and afterwards fettle the manner in whith that 
amountis to be raifed oa the Merchants, Traders and Shop-keepers, reliding the: r 


7. The fum to be affeifed on each town, Gunge and Bazar, is to be proportionate to the 
annual amount of the Sayer collections formerly levied in them, The Jumma, on which 
the deductions and compenfations have been granted to ie Landholders, on account of the 
abolition of the Sayer, is to be taken as the ttandard of their annual-colleétions, The 
Governor General in Council is of opinion that thefe colleétions form the belt criterion 
for judging the extent of the trade carried on in the feveral towns, Gunges and Bazars, and 
coniequenily of the proportion of the whole expenfe of the Police eliablifhments of 
your ditt:iét, which the Merchants, Traders and Shop-keepers, refiding in each town, Gunge 
and Bazar, ought to defray; but (hould any qualification of this rule occur to you, which 
would in youropision render the affelfinenc more equal, you will fubmitit for the confideration 
of the Board. Agreeably to the above principle, the amount to be alfefled on each town, 
Gaage and Bazar, in your dittrict, will be calculated as follows: 2s the total of the former 
annual Sayer colletions is to the total of the fum to be railed for the expenfe of the Police 
of tie whole of your Colieétorlhip, fo is the amount of the former annual Sayer collections 

of each town, Gunge and Bazar, to the fun to be now alféifed upon it. ‘ 


8. Asno colleétions of the nature of thofe now direéted to be levied, can be made from 
Hants held in open places, the Jumma of them is of courfe to be excluded from the 
calculation, 

; g. With 


.. the Mais of The EAST.INDIA COMPANY. —- 185. 


- win refpeét to the mode of levying the fum affeffed on each town, Gunge and ~ 
Bazar, upon the Merchants, Tradeys and Shop-keepers refiding therein, the Board conceive , 
that it may be raifed by a tax on their Warehoufes or Shops, aud in fome places by aflefling , 
a {pecifie fum upon the different defcriptions of Merchants, Traders and Shop-keepers. 
As however the amount to be raifed upon each town, Gunge and Bazar, will not be con- 
fiderable, and the Governor General in Council being defirous that it fhould be levied ins 
which ever of the above modes may be moft agreeable to thofe by whom it is to be paid, 
he directs that you will advife with the principal Merchants, Traders and eyep acre in 
each town, Gunge and Bazar, and adopt which ever of the above modes of raifing the 
money they may think preferable (unlefs it fhall appear to you objettional) ; and that you 
will alfo regulate, in concert with them, the rates of affeflment to be paid by the Merchants, | 
ee ad Shop-keepers, in the towns, Gunges and Bazars, in which they may refpectively 
refide. 