


31: Subfequent information, however, having refolved our doubts in this re we deemed. 
it expedient, on the grounds above adverted to, at once to abolith the tax, without tad 
amodification of it, and in purfuance of this refolution Regulation 23 of 1793 was altoge-" 
ther refeinded. nit % 


32. Weat the fame time ed the 6th Regulation of 17973 in which wé lave endea~ 
youred to coinbine the ettablilhment of an unobjectionable, and we teufi productive fource of 
Revenue, with the important object of difeouraging the inftitation of the many vexatious and 
litigious fuits which are fiill brougie before the Courts, from the facility with whieh indivi- 
duals can have accefS to’ them and the inconfiderable expence hitherto attending a judicial 
procefs, : 


33. Befides augmenting the fees on the inftitution of civil fuits and on the filing of exhi- 
bits and papers, and taxing the fees of the licented pleaders, the Regulation propofes to raife 
a Revenue by requiring certain law. deeds and documents to be written on fiampt paper. At 
prefent we have thought it advifable to limit the operation of the Regulation to original deeds 
and law papers; copies of fuch deeds and papers prepared or attelted by the Cauzies and 
other Others; the pleadings in the Civil’ Courts a dee of judicial papers furnifhed by the 
Courts, and of Revenue papers furnifhed by the Collectors and Board of Revenue; Rowan- 
nahs or pailes iffued from the department of Cuftoms; bonds and other pecuniary obliga- 
tions; and the Sunnuds of appointment of the public Pleaders and the Cauzies fiationed in 
the different diftricts. [t is our intention, however, by another Regulation, which is at prefent 
under eonfideration, to extend thevfiamps to licen{es. fale of fpirituousdiquors and 
drugs, and trivial complaints in the Fouzdarry Courts, fiith as petty affrays, alfaults.and other 
mifdemeanors punifhable by the Magiftrates without reference to the Courts of Circuit. 
‘Thefe complaints*are for’ the moft part preferred from vexatious or litigious motives, and the 
enquiry into them oceupies 2 great proportion of the time of the Magifirates without any 
adequate benefit refulting to the public. / 


4. In a financial point of view it appears to us that there is no mode of adding to the 
pabitte refources which to Ielesiabiata etpention than the fisimp dinties noweltblifheds® They 
will not encroach upon the perfonal convenience of the tubject, nor operate partially or 
unequally on property ;.and the collection of them will neither be expentive nor difficult; the 
means of evafion are at the fame time fufliciently guarded againft, and the tax will neither 
afford any opportunity for oppretiion or extortion, nor for fraud aad embezalement.on the 
part of the officers. of Goyerament,, ‘i i fee is , 

35: OF the produce of the Stamps it is impoflible to'form any eftimate; but judgin: z from 
the voluminouinefs of the proceeditigs of the Courts of Judicature, and the populati ni 
wealth of the country, and the practice which uni¥ertally prevails of having recourle to the 
Cauzy for «preparing dveds and infiraments relating to private contracts, we entertain yery 