


Eftablithment for Tannahs for the- above-mentioned Diftriéts. 


At Hooghly one Tannah, comprizing that Pergunnah, Sultanpore, Remorah, Havilly, 
Khatifatabad, Tolebpore, Nichlapore and Rungden, and other eaftern Pergunnahs of Jeflore 
in the vicinity of Coolnah; at Bazudpore one Tannah, comprizing Perguunah, Jumrah, 
Myheity, Bhulhha, Nuckeypore, Suffrazpore, &c. 


Expenfes of one Tannah. 
Tannahdar per Month Bl eb he 
A Moonflee PS eT es a x 
A Bengal Mohurrer - - - - = 


A Duffadar et Pes Tih Ih ese cas Sols 
6 Birkandauzes, to guard and .efcort prifoners 
2 Dholly Pykes for ie pS ee 
40 —- -- 
For a Boat. 
a Mangee ate 
a Galleah - 
4 Dandees 

Boat-hire  ~ 


Office Charges 


ern 
vtet 
Pek 
ttee 


‘ 
' 
' 


AES - 4-— 


- ———e 
gr a1 Tannah 150 — — 


150 — 


per Month 300 — — 


The Board accordingly dire, that the Magifirate be authorized to continue the two 
“Tannahs Bvementions, at Bazeedpore and Hooghly, for the purpofes of which he recom- 
amended the eftablifhment of them, unlefs upon the completion of the arrangements which 
she is now ordered to execute they would be found no longer neceflary. 


DACCA JELALPORE. 
The Magiftrate ftrongly recommends the continuance of the office of Ghaut Manjee, as 
avell as the tax of one Anna per Rupee on the hire of Boats, upon the ground that Gaut 
. _ Manjees 


the Affairs of ‘The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 189 


Manjees-are neceflury both for providing boats for crofling troops and for individuals 
concerned intyade. To continue this tax for the firft flated object is unnecedfary, as no 
troops ever march that route except the battalions fiationed at Dacca and Chittagong; 
a fufficient number of boats -can always -be procured at the fhortet notice to crofs thele 
final! bodies of men, and the hire of them, as itis at-prefent, fhould be paid by Goveroment. 
‘That the owners of the boats will'not objet to the difcontinuance of the: office and tax is 
apparent, aud as to the Merchants, they and in no need of an Officer of Government to 
procure boats for the tran{portation -of their goods. ‘This tax has been ordered to be 
abolifhed.by the.Board of Kevenue, in-conformity to the general Rezulations; but .as they 
-at the fame -time referred, the Magiftrates tirongly recommending the continuance of it, 
for the.orders of Government, itimay be proper for the Board to fignify their difapprobation 
-of an impofition which, without anfwering any purpofe of public utility, vefts the Gavt 
Mangee with an authority which he hasin geueral made ufe of to oppre{s the owners of 
‘boats, and mutt -confequently-have eontributed to-raile.the hire of them, to the detriment 
-of the internal trade of the country. 


The Board aecordingly refolve, that the Magiftrate be informed that the orders of the 
Board of Revenue, for the abolition of the office of Gaut Manjee-and the tax of one Anna 
per Rupee on-the price of bouts, have-been confirmed, 


TIPPERAH, 

The Magiftrate propofes to affefs only fuch Hauts as formerly yielded a revenue of upwards 
-of 300 Rupees per annum, and recommends that Huats which yielded a Jefs fum be panes 
up. The refolve, that the Magiftrate be directed to affei’s the Merchants and Traders 
in all Gunges.wnd Bazars whatever, but not to bresk up any Hauts; on the contrary, to 
encourage the .eftablifhment of them. The Board further direst, that the Magifirate be: 
ofdered, as feon as the-Police arrangements in his-difiriét are completed, to difcharge the 
Sebundy corps now-kept up in his diftrict, reporting the date from which the pay of the 
people may-be difcontinued, 