


* Cities of Moorthedabad, Dacca and Patna. 

The eftablifhments allowed for the Police of the Cities are fpecified in the Regulations of 
the 3d December 1790, and the expenfe of them is defrayed by Government. They are 
obvivully inadequate to the protection of thefe populous Cities, and confequently robberies 
and other diforders are frequeatly committed in them. ne 

The Board accordingly refolve, that the Magiftrates of thefe Cities be direéted to carry the 
following Arrangements and Infiructions into execution. Fhe 

1 i) 


488 APPENDIX fo che Second REPORT from the Seleé&t’ Committee on 


SPECIAL ORDERS sefpeing the Police of the Diftri@ 
: JESSORE. 


There are fome diftri@s in which, from filuation and lecal circumftances, robbers are more 
frequent than in any other parts of the country, and where the expente of the Police muft 
fail chiefly apon Government. The diftricts in ‘the Sunderbunds are of this defcription, ‘The 
country on each fide of the creeks and rivers being covered with forett, affords a harbour for 
deevits and robbers, who invariably infelt this navigation. Wrom the danger that confe- 
squently attends the pafling through thefe rivers and channels, which connect the Hooghly or 
Calcutta tiiver with the Barampooterand Ganges, the general commerce of the country is 
much impeded; a Police efiablihment is ftationed under a Comuillioner in the vicinity of 
“Backergunge, and alibough itis adequate to the protection of that quarter, it is too far 
diffant io prevent the depredations of robbers in the extenfive tracts of country between 
Backergunge and Calcutta. ‘This country is chiefly under the jurifdiction of the Magitirate 
-of Jefe, who obterves that from Silimabad to the eaft, to Pothhutty and Suffrazpore to the 
avettward-of the Iisamaity, fkirting the Sunderbunds upwards of 100 miles, is under his col- 
deciorfhip, and cowprizes about fiity diftinct efiates. The Girdwards have chiefly been em- 
ployed in thete difiriéts, which from their contiguity to the Sunderbunds become the refort 
of robbers-aud-decoits, and in which from their pumbers and fmallnefs the Police cannot be 
veflectualy preferved. ‘The paflage through the Sunderbunds is effectually protected by the 
Gidwary or guard-boats, but the fuppreition of robberies and depredations in the adjoiuing 
diftiicts, and -ef¥estual extirpation of the robbers, cannot -be accomplithed without the 
efiubliiment of Pannahs.or ftations for the prefervetion.of the Police. The Zemindars are 
declared velponfible for the prelervation of the peace of their difricts, but in particular 
inftances (as in the places I ain now {peaking of) it is totally impracticable. If an offence is 
commited in one of thefe fmali diftri¢is, the perpetrators may be out of the limits of it in a 
quarter of an hour, andthe proprietor of the next affords no afjifiance, perhaps, where there is 
not fome authority to cnforce it. For tie above reatons the eitablithments have been hitherto 
entertained, und in my opinion ought to be-continued. The Magittrate further ftates, that 
having difcontinued thefe Tannah -eftablifiments in confequence of having no farther 
authority to charge for the expenfe of them, many robberies were thortly after committed; 
and in bis letter, of the 31 May 1791, he repeats his recommendation for the eftablifhment 
of thefe Yannals. ‘The above extracts ave fufticient to thew the A a of keeping up the 
Police ettablilhments prepoted by the Magiftrate. The expenfe (as underttated) is contider- 
able, when compared with the advantages that will refult from freeing this navigation from 
the maurauders who infeft it, 