

The circumfances Gaited in This parazraph evince the pecs cen ereining the propofed 
finall efablifhinent: of boats. The, Board ageosdingly.wefplve, - that the Magiltrate be 
authorized to entertain the boats, and to provide for defraying the expente of tem in the 

Ggeccpn: i 


tax which he is diredted to alls upon tue Merehants i 


The reafons affigned by the Magiftrate for extending bie juitdtion jo the oppofite fide 
of the rivercan no longeroperate, as hy the General Regulations for the Police of the 
Collectorthips he will Le empowered to purtue perfons whe have been guilty of robberies or 
vetimes within the City, and to Saihend thea ia the juritdiétion of tie Magilirates of the 
jicent diftrigts, : ae Bros. 

Wil Sayer collections in the City haying bcen abolifhed, the reafons. aligne 
715 lene ici pte en ee er aap iss Man, ae ae 
onger cers. of Government, he tax which they form levied u. the Cv ners 0} 
Boats:tias been-sibolithedsi ulin. 2: aaa Hy ia 


is patac, . 


4 reo bb . > af f "i tx ' 
“The'Board will take Watideritiod ‘any propofals that may be made ative indi= 
vidual ey arcane. M al wheir own dees tia accordingly defive that he will forward: 
ey that may be bmmitted iin. ‘augeb nares Meare ee 


<Thatthe recomintnd to the people to. tile: their houfem, ot to. coves themmwith terraces, 
‘Thar it tuft be left; howexer, to the optica of the people to build fuch hoates as. they may, 
find inoft convenient and fuitable to their eireumftances. ‘That the Board-hope the .nalives 
| “wilbimprove in’their Gyleof building-ne they increale in opulence. testa F 
oggtd sisitee a 
ee 


“the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 191 


Appendix, N° 14. 


Extra&t Letter from) the Governor General in Council at Bengal (Revenue Department); 
“ _ dated gift Auguft izo7.° 


Para, 29. PROM former advices you will have obferved that the produce of the Police Tax, 
‘eftablithed by the egd Regulation of 1793, fell confiderably thort of the eftimated amount. 

» Many difticulties were alfo experienced in making a fair affejlinent of this tax, as no general 
rulé coild be deviled which fhould determine exactly what defcription of peony were 
properly fubjeét to the tax, or in what proportions it fliould be paid by the feveral- towns: 
and Gunges, or progrellively by the individuals of any particular towa or Gange, from whic! 

a contribution was deaaniabie® and we had reafon to believe that the alfeffors and Native 
Collectors often availed themtelves of thefe cireumflances to commit oppreiffon and extor- 
ton. ss 


30. Thefe confiderations furgefted at an early period the propriety of ome modification of 
the tax ; but as We Were unwilling to relinguiflia branch of the public Revenue without pre- 
vioully providing fome other adequate refowrce not fiable to the fame objections, and 25 we 
had not acquired fufficient experience to enable us to determine whether & modification could 
be introduced to obviate all the material objections, or whether thé plain itfelf fhould be-alto- 
gether abandoned, we thought it more prucent to fulpeud tor (ome time any tinal determina 
tion on the fubject. Rafe 