


10. When you have fettled the amount to be affeffed on each town, Gunge-and Bazar, 
and the manner in which it is to be raifed, you will commit the collection of it to two or more 
of the principal Merchants, Traders or Shop-keepers, in each town, Bazar or Gunge, deliverin, 
to them a writing under your official feal and fignature, {pecifying i total amount whit 
they are to collect from their refpective towns, Gunges or Bazars, and particularizing the 
rates of the tax, and the amount to be paid bythe feveral oat of Merchants, 
‘Traders aid Shop-keepers, together with the periods of payment. ‘This writing will ferve 
as an authority for collecting the tax to thofe who may be appointed to levy it, at the fame 
ona that: it will be a check upon their committing ‘any abufe in the difcharge of thair 
traft. ; 


11, You will be particularly careful to affure the Merchants, Traders and Uy 
irpole of 


that the fum direéted to be raifed upon them, will be applied folely to the pu 
defiaying the charges of the Police of the dittriét, 


12, Should you be of opinion, after due enquiry, that the raifing the whole of the fum 

above direcied would operate us a heavy burden upon the Merchants and Traders, you will 

~ flate at large the grounds of this opinion to the Governor General in Council, and at the 

fame time inform him what fum you think can be raifed without inconvenience to the 
perfons above-mentioned. mth 


13. Should you find the fum which you are directed to. raife more than fafficient for 
defraying the expenfe of the eftablithments neceflary for the protection of your diftrict, 
agreeably to the plan preferibed, you will affefs on the Towns, Gunges and Bazars, fuch fum 
ouly as inay be fuflicient for paying the requilite eftablifiments. 


. 14. The Governor General in Council is of opinion that the eftublifhment of the Police 
jurildiétions in general thould confilt of a Darogah, a Jemautdar, ten Birkandauzes, and a 
‘Mohurrer; an additional number of Birkandauzes to be‘ entertained, if neceffary, in the 
jurifdictions in which any large towns, Gunges or Bazars, may be fituated. That the Daro~ 
guhs in general fhould be aliowed twenty-five Rupees per month ; and thofe who may have 
the charge of the large towns, Bazars or Gunges, thirty Rupees per month, befides five Rupees. 
per mouth for a Cutcherry, ftationary and other contingencies; the Jemautdars eight 
Rupees, the Birkandauzes four Rupees, aud the Mohurrers five Rupees per month each. 
Should any alteration in the eftablifhments or fularies of the Officers appear to you advifable, 
you will fubmit it for the confideration of his Lordthipin Council. 4 


15. When you have fettled the amount to be levied on each town, Gunge and Bazar, the 
mode in which it is to be railed, and the eftablithment for each jurifdiétion, you will fubmit 
the detail of the arrangements ¢ Board, in the manner preicribed in the annexed form 5 
and when the fame fall have been approved no variation is to be made either in the fum 
affefled upon each town, Bazar or Gunye, or in the mode of raifing it from the Merchants, 
‘Traders and Shop-keepers, without the previous fanétion of the Governor General in Council. 