


Secondly. Goods imported into the town of Calcutta for exportation to England, with the 
exception of indigo and raw filk, were heretofore fubjeét to the 'Yown Duties. Under 
new regulation a drawback of thote duties is allow , under certain reftriétions, on all the 
principal articles of export to England. ‘The drawback may Le exteaded to other articies of 
export as circuunftances may hereafter require. “ I , 


34. The Town Duties eftablithed at the cities of Paina, Moorfhedabad, Dacca anit 
Benares, have been regulated on the fame principles as the ‘Lown Duties re-etablifhed at 
Calcutta, and will operate, with litte exception, as a tax on the inhabitants of thofe popu- 
lous and wealthy cities, who now pay no direct contribution whatever to the State. Your 
honourable Court will obferve, that goods in their tranfit through thofe cities, and all 
imported into them and atterwards exported within a prefcribed period, are exempted from 
the payment of the town duties. ¢ L tad ¥ R 


35-.The Government Cuftoms to be levied at the feveral fiations fpecified in Regulation 
11, 1801, will alfo, toa great degree, rate as an internal tax on the confumption of 
the articles charged with the, duties, which may be the produce or manuf.cture of the 
Britith territories in Bengal, and which may not be exported from thofe territories. Your 
honourable Court will obterve that goods, the produce or manufacture of the Britith tenito- 
ries in Bengal, which may be exported by fea, and goods imported into thofe territories from 
England and afterwards exported inland'to any place without thofe territories, will not be 
ablated by that regulation to any additional duty beyond that to which they are now 
iable. 4 & : ane 


36. Tt has Touytbela deemed. BEE indifpenfabl neeeflary to re-eftablith the Guiftorectouts 
formerly maintained at Hooghly, for fubjecting the imports and exports of the foreign fettle- 


ments of Chinfurah, Chandernagore Serampore, to the paynient of duty, and for main- ~~ - 


taining a vigilant controul over the trade of thofe fettlements, ~ 


37- No period of time could be more favourable than the prefent for completely reftoving 
the duties on the foreign trade, the’ foreign fettlements being now all in the poflettion of the 
Britifh Government. The Governor General in Council trufts, that in the event of thote 


fettlements being reftored to. their former poffeflors, care will be takew'to ftipuiate thar ” 


their trade fhall be fubject ‘to the fame duties, and be liable in its conduct to atl the regu- 
lations which may be preferibed for the trade of Britith fubjetis'in Bengal. At all events, 
the right of collecting the former duty of 2} per cent. on the trade of thoie fettlements, will 
remain with the Britith Government, and that right mutt always be exercifed to its fallett 
extent on every principle of commercial prudence and political wiffom. ae 


38. For the details refpecting the duties, and the rules for their collestion, the Governor 
General in Council begs ate to refer your honourable Court to’ the pri ations, 