

_ nhizable by that Court are now decided. 


Appendix, No. 16. 
‘Extrat-of a Letter fromthe Secret Gominittee -of the Cont of DireGiors to the Governor 
~  * General in Council at Bengal ; dated gd November 1787. 


‘UPON « full confideration of the fubject we have come to a refolation, and hereby direct 
you to defift from levying the Government Cuftoms. : : f 


Sayer. Appendix, No. 17. 
Rev, Dept f 
16 Apr.1790. " Extract Letter from the Governor General in | at Bengal (Separate Department); 
tee dae ; ea foe 


= » Par. 29. IN the orders and regulations which have been paffed at different prio refpect- 
ars Cyt. & ing the Sayer collections, the Calcutta Town Duties, and the Government Cultoms, your Go- 
ene svernment has uniformly referved to ittelt; che rightof re-eftablifhing any of'the branches of thofe 
mahieaeys duties which have been abolifhed or the collection of which has been fufpended, or of fub- 
saapeye.: ftituting for thofe duties any other défeription of duties or taxes. ‘The right toimpofe duties 
20. Junerzss. and taxes was of courfe decined to be inherent. in the Government; and the declarations which 
= “have been fo frequently made on this fubject, can be confidered cnly as.an intimation.of the 
Com. Dep, intention of your Goverament to improve the public refources, by the eftablithment of taxes 
«2 Dec. 3704. and duties.on the trade and commerce of the country whenever circumftances fhould xender 
ees at advi to haye recourfe to that meafure. ; : i 
4% Mex aah: _ 90. Having attentively confidered all the proceedings which haye been licld on the fubject 
! a ofthe ee Su ey aay ee mented he ia ig sane an ee was of 
i inion, that in the prefent flourifhing an {perous ftate of the Briti minions in 
_ Pub. Dep. Se aie petal Teafablihment.of the fener Town Duties, the exienfion of a-fimilar 
SoNoy, 1798 yftem of taxation to the cities of Patna, Daeca, Moorfhedabad and Benares, and the re- 
___ ftoration, with .certain modifications, of the Goyernmeut Cuftoms heretofore levied in the 
< oe Dep. interior of the country, would conftitute a productive fource of Revenue, without aflecting the 
16July 1798. commerce or induftry of the country. « . 
47June17a9. : gi. Ia 


» the Mhirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 193 


31. In framing the regulations for the:collection of thefe duties, it has been the object of 
the Governor General in Council, as far as was practicable, to render them in effeét taxes 
-on confumption, and to prevent any injury to the foreign import or export trade of the 
country, ' i 


32 The rates at which the Calcutta Town Duties are to be levied, are tobe the fame, with 
'fome exceptions, as the rates at which thofe duties were collected previoutly to their abolition 
by the 2d fection of the goth regulation of 1795. 


33: But the regulations under which thofe duties are to be now levied, differ from the 
fonner regulations for their collection in the following important points: 


Tirft. Under the former reguiztions the duties were levied on all articles whatever import- 
ed into Calcutta from the interior of the country ; aecorditig to the pretent regulation the 
duties are levied only on certain articles {pecified in the regulations. Care was taken to 
felect thole articles the cuties on which would be molt productive, and wl-ieh would’ be 
levied with facility. “fhe numerous articles of trivial value imported into the town, the col- 
leGion ‘of the duties‘on which occafioned confiderable vexation to the petty traders without 
adding materially'te the public Revenue, are exempted from the dutits as now refiored. 