


R 
“The preceding explanation of the (ice principles and policy o8 which the Regulations” | 


have been framed will fatisfy your honourable Court that every reafon exifis to tavour an 

expectation that thelé dutits will produce a large annual’ Revenue to the Compuny, without | 

ailecting the growing wealth dud profpérity of thef territories. : Ae nes 
7 Fe ao 


Appendixy No. 18. Ras 
Extract Letter from Board of Trade, to. Governor Geacral in Council at. Bengal ; date 
5th May 1795- fa RO ae 


Par. 1. DEEMING it a duty incumbent upon us, for the fatisfaition of sourHononrable foan! of « 


Board, and for the readier-mfonmation of the Court of Dizectors, to prefent aur proceedings ‘Trade. 


in the Salt Department in a comnedied point of view, we beg leaves in adiitioa to our 
Reports ta the ordinary courfe of our bufinels, now to furnith the following fimaurary of all 
material tranfactions in this branch of the Company’s affairs, from the commencement of 


‘our management to the prefent time. 5 = ee 
f nformably 


Salt. 


494 APPENDIN /o the Sccond REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


Muted 22 Feb. Conformably to your original inftrnctions, the Board of Reyenue and the Comptroller 

2793 delivered over charge to us on the 15th March 1793,’and we immediately proceeded to ex- 
by ‘Athine into the aétual ftate ofthe Department; the refult of this exannmation fhewed the 

deveral branches of the bufinefs to have been arranged under the following heads ; viz. 


ift. The Comptroller’s Office at the Prefidency. 
* “ad. Phe manufacture of Bengal Salt. 
3d. The provifion of the Oria Salt. 
4th. Oceafional Supplies of Coafi Salt. 
ath. The h Conyention Salt. 
( Milicit Prade. ¥ 


6th: S cone teations and 
‘UGhokies for preventing: Ticks Trade. 


7 : ary 1793- 
si! Paragraph 4th. “* Yon will report to us as foon as may be practicable what part of. the 
> prefent eftablithnent of the Comptroller's Office can be difpenied with, and what part of it 
. will be neceflary to continue to enable you to conduct the bafinels of the department.” 
~ th. You willanake it an object of your early attention to examine into the ftate of 
. : the Salt Chokies, and td‘propote fuch arrangements as‘ you may deem bei calculated to 
prevent the illicit importation of Salt, or the clandeftine manufaéture of it within the 
provinces.” op 
6th. © You will likewife examine minutely into the eftablifhed and contingent Aurung 
chatges of every defeription, and retrench or reduce fiuch as may appear to you exorbitaut 
or unneceflary.” ° 
7th. “ We farther defire that you will fuggeft to us occafionally fuch regulations as may 
Appear to you calculated to improve this very important branch of the public refources.” 


«4. Purfuant to thefe inftructions, we procceded to examine into the general bufinels of the 


Departments, viz. . 


é Firft.—The Comptroller's Office at the Prefidency. 


or | The Comptroller poffelfed a fuperintending authority over the Agents and all other 
eyo employed in the Salt Department, he arranged the periods and proportions of the 
fales, he ‘gave orders for the delivery of the Salt, he applied for the money neceflary for the 
» department, he made up the general accounts, and carried on the executive bulinets at the 
_ -Prefidency fuhject to your ultimatg fanction through the medium of the Board of Revenue. 
6. A reference to onr letter of the 6th June 1795 ‘Will thew the ee es eat: 
anents we propoled for the future management of the bufinefs of this Office; which having 
‘been approved by your Honourable Board, and no new matter having-occurred refpecting 
it, we ‘only deem it neceffary to remark that, after nearly two. years experience, we are not 
aware any petier arrangement-than that we then propofed eon be adopted for carrying on 
« the currené bufinefs of the Office ; which requires confiant perfonal attendance, as is, ex- 
semplified by the under-mentioned branches of it, which are intrufted to the management of 
-our deputy Secrétary, and which could not be conducted with effect by any perfon not on 
the ees fiace promptnefS in-complying with the applications of the hes ants for Orders 
F -and Rowannahs, when they have made their payments, «i no more than their right; at the 
fume time that it is advantageous'to Government, by bording encouragement to the pur- 
d chafers at the fales. ie fi fea 