


24. We have the pleafure to obferve that in November laft Mx. Chapman forwarded to 
vus an amended eftimate of his provifion of Salt for the current year, in whice there was an 
increafe of thirty thoufand Maunds, ftated to be in confequence of the abolition of the 
Adjoora tenure and of the engagement he had made with the late Adjoora Molungees. 


25. Having fully treated of the provifion of the Oriffa Salt now entru@ed to the 
‘management ef the Agent at egies under its proper head, we muft beg leave to refer to See Par. 64. 
that head for every information refpecting the Salt. 


26, The feparation of the Revenue from the Salt in this Agency, rendered the formation 
of a new Salt eftablifhment unavoidably neceflary ; and we accordingly fubmitted one to 
your Honourable Beard in December 1792, which you were pleaied to approve, and at the 
dame time to allow of its taking place from the firft of October preceding. 


TUMLOOK. 

27. The Agent, in anfwer to our circular letter, ftated it as his opinion, that no increafe of yetter dated 
‘the namufactare could beeffected. Eight and a half lacs of Maundshad been produced in. 94 June 1793. 
avery favourable feafon; fince which the difiriés had been vifited by the calamities of Proceedings 
it and inundation, followed by ne, Which had carried off a great number of the 1g Sep.1794- 
inhabitants. Government, on his reprefentation, had in confequence granted the Ryots a 
remiftion of Sicca Rupees 51,269. 3. 3.3 but fubfequent to this remiflion, they had again 
fuffered much from a recurrence of calamitous feafons. The Agent neverthelefs made 
various propofitions to us for the improvements of the manufacture, with the detail of which 
itis unneceilary to trouble your Honourable Board, though they attracted due attention froin 
usin our proceedings. 


28. On our calling upon the Agent of Tustoox for his explanations relative to the 

Petition of the Adjoomt Molungees, conformable to your orders, he in bis anfwer denied that pated 6June. 

the Vackeels were arthorized to make any complaints on the part of the Adjoora Molun- proceedings 

gees of his diftricts, and fent us a declaration of fundry Ticka and Adjoora Molungees, 12 Sep. 

ftating that they never defired the Vackeels to complain ; that the Vackeels incurred Darbar 

expeufes for them ; that they had no complaints whatever. The Vackeels on the other hand yide Boards 

contended, that they were daly authorized to complain, and offered to go into evidence of etter to 

athe truth of their allertion, 4t is to be obferved, that the declaration contained a denial on Gov. Gea. i 

the of the Ticka Molungees, concerning whom there wes no queftion. It is farther to Coun 
be obferved, that the Molungees afferting that the Vackeels incurred Durbar expenfes for 11 Sep. 17°4- 

them, feemed to imply fome connexion and correfpondence; fince they might wholly dil- 

regard any charge for the Durbar, or any expenfes upon account of the complaints, if not 