

re F 7. The branches of the bufinefs above alluded to are, 

a ‘ _ The receipts of Money, for the Salt fold, "nd its remittance to the General Treafury, 
f * The iffuing’ of the Orders to the Agents for the delivery of the Salt, and the granting of 


aba. 
=) the Rowannah to the Merchants. i 3 
____- The Collettor of the depotit from the Purchafers in cafh and paper after the files, the 
charge thereof, and the almoft daily. return of fome of the latter to fuch of the Merchants 
on ae Seno Les in part or completely made their Reels 4 
“a Be er la te ‘ing of frequent Applications made *perfonally-by, and a 
f= - F he iffuing Orders for Sead rae the Cargoes of Coatt Salt, on applications from the 
| ee ct Contractors. - ie ‘ nite 
| ae ae _ 8. With relpect to the eftablifiment of the Office as it now fiands,. we are of opinion 
| SSce Proceedings of that no further reduction can be eflected in it, and that confidering the extent of the bufinels, 
| that Srate, 7 it is upon a moderate fealé. The difference of expenfe, as fiated in our letter of the 6th 
BececuMtah late eee aan Od IE Mea viii 170) See Uti (0. Tn Mie AMD 0 
© Gow dated 7 bes _ Loi which mufibe deduéied a charge fanétioned by you of - 6,000 0 0 
5 pode Bee 5 - * a 
Ei Suns ig Bute $ Net difference perAnnwo + S*R® 60,736 9 0 


* : é ; ‘mich 


the Afairs of The LAST INDIA COMPANY. — sg5 


-much the greater part of which arifes from your abolition of the Comptroller's commillion, See Letter G'Jume 
aud fome from monies: firft brought by us to publie account, as has been particularly ex- 1793. 


plained. 


9. The erection of the Golzhs at Sulkey for the receipt of the coat “Salt having been 
completed, and the Salt being lodged there as it arrives, the office of Gola Keeper, which 
was eftablifhed in April 1793, with the fixed allowance of S* Itt 566 per month for his 
falary and the falaries of the neceifary fervants there, muft-be permanent-as long as the 
prefeiit plan exits. The duties ofthis office are to fuperintend the receipt and deliveries 
of the coaft Salt, of which he-has the charge, and to report the fame regularly to this oftice, 
for onr iuformation. He is alfo. authorized to feize illicit Salt, in-the fame manner a3 the 
Superintendants of Chokies. 


10. The number of Golahs built upon the {pot of ground near Sulkey, which your 
Honourable Board was pleafed to purehafe for that purpofe from Anund Chuud Seat, is 
feventeen, capable of containing five lacs-and.ten thoufand Maunds of Salt. ‘Thefe Golahs 
have coft Sicea Rupees 5,202, but there being fome farther difburfements neceflary, as lately 

ge to you, to render the place complete, the wholeexpente of it cannot yet be 
afcertained, 


Sccond.—11. The-manufedure of Bengal Salt. 
“Under the management of five Agents, fixed at.the under-meniioned flations; viz. 


Hidgellee, 

‘Tumlook, 

24 Pergunnzhs, 
Roymungul, and 
Buiwa aud Chittagong. 

12. An inereafe of the manufacture was not only cur wilh as the primary objedt tohe 
attained, but ipecially enjoined to our attention by the 6th and 7th paragreph of your ine 
fruétion. With that view we very early after we received.charge fe wddvelted circular letters 
to the Agents, calling upon them to give us their opinion on the beft means of effecting an 
increafe of produce; and in cate apy obftructions fhould exit, arifing cither from defects in 
the regulations or from any other cautes, to fate them, and to tuggctt luch meafures as might 
occur tor theit removal, We likewile directed the Agents to propote any changes or variations 
in their eftablifhments, which in their opinion tended to the better execution of the bufinefs; 
and wevecommended avreduction of the eftablithment, fo-far as it might be practicable 
-confiftently with the due difcharge of the duty. 