

employed by them, 


ag. Tie 


4S APPENDIX do fhe Second REPORT from the ScleB: Cominitice on 


<9. The Agent farther informed us, the Adjoora Molungées appeared perfedily fatisSed 
wwith their fituation ; yet fhortly after ke propoled “putting the Adjoora Molungees upon a 
more equal footing with the Trekas that equalizing the Sait Jumma in infiances where it falls 
sheavy, and reducing tle Serf, would give univerial fatisfaction to the Kyois in general.” 
go. He alfo infifted that “ the abolition of the Adjcora tenure would decreafe the manu- 
Fadiure ; that the idea of the Adjoora Molun, manuladturiag a certain-quantity fhould 
never be given up; if it was, there would a decreafe in the quantity of Sait, and he 
sthonght a difficulty in procariag an equal number of Ticka Molungees: that he fhould 
srecommend to siealiee them more, but full bold the Adjoors teaure.” 


1. The Agent's arguments failed to convince us of the folidity of his opinions; on the 
scontrary, they led to an obyious inference that there was fone degree of coercion upon the 
Adjoora people, or the decreafe he apprehended could not happen ; or why, if the Ryots, as 
che faid, were peviedily fatisfied, {ould he propote aa alterauoaavhich fhould give univertal 
“fgtisfaction to people already periecily fatistied. 

92. We did not deem it neceffhry to afcertain-the fat of complaint afferted and denied. 
“The complaints fiom Hidgellee- were certains the cafe of tye Adjoora people at both places 
appeared, ay it has fince proved, aualegous; the enquiries on foot-wonld thew what their 
*fituation was, and determination would follow accordingly. Upon this view of ihe queftion. 
oyour Honourable Board yere pleafed to refolve, thut-the Ravers venure fhould be abolifhed 
in Tumlook as well as in Hidgelice. i 


$3. We duly communicated your refolution to the Agent, taking care to notice to him 

-thatae trufted he would fulél the expeétations of your Honourable Board, for manufacturing 

ore additional quantity of Salt as. would compeatate for the advanced price to be paid in 
uture. 


34. The Agent has fince reported the fettlement he in confequence matte for his provifion 
-of the year; tocertain parts of which.we object, becaufe the terns he has concluded appeared 
-to. us to place the late Adjoora Molungees on a fiperior footing to the Wicka, which was 

ually contrary to our intention and your orders. We neverthelefs furaifhed bin with his 
pe ices, that the bufinels might not be impeded. In reply he gave explanations ; he urged 
that the agreements he had made were to the bett of his judgment the mult equitalile for the 

Company andthe manufacturers, and in to increafe of produce, he declined holding 
~out an papetaton if itfhould prove groundlets. He further remarked, the jivitem was new, 
req) 


anne uire utleaft a year’s expericace before any. judgment could, be formed on it; 
at the fame time he us of every exertion on Iie sa to effect an increafe. At prefent 
che willed not to meption any quantity, though he by it pleafinre in jaforming us that 
the manufacture was gin ‘on as well as he could poftib! a jand if the feafon would but 
turn out favourably he hud no doubt of being able to resilize our expectations. ‘The Agent's 
explanations, however, had not altered-our opinions of his feitlement; but unable for want of 