


ig. A reference to the documents that accompanied our faid Letters of the 18th Sep- 
tember 1794, will furaiih the fulleft explanations upon the fubjeét, and thew the grounds 
_ upon which we made our Report. i 


20. Under date the 26th September 1704, vour Honourable Board expreffed your opinioa 
hat the inveftigation we had made into ail the circumfances relating to the Adjoora tenure 
left yo room to doubt of its being a fyftem of coercion; confequently equally repugnant to 
-the fpirit of the Regulations and to the digtates of jutiice and good policy. You ee 
ny 


. | “the Mfiits of The EAST INDIA ‘COMPANY. 197 _ 


ingly diretted that the Adjoora fhould be abolithed in both Agencies, and that we fhould 
proceed to make engagements with the Molungees, who had hitherto provided Salt under 
this {y(tem, on terms fimilar to thofe contracted with the Ticka Molungees. In the execution 
of this arrangement, you were fatisfied that we would exert the moft unremitting endeavours 
to induce the Molungees to engage fuch an additional quantity of Salt, as CR ity compentate 
for the advanced price which would in future be paid to them; and you further informed 
us that you had communicated the above Refolutions to the Board of Revenue, and had 
dred them to make the neceflary modification in the engagements of Zemindars with 
jovernment. 


_ 21. A copy of your letter, refolving upon the abolition of the Adjoora tenure, having 
been imiined btaly communicated to the Agent at Hidgellee, Mr. Chapman, with inftruétions 
for the Settlement to be made in confequence, he addveifed us under date the 2oth Odtober 
lft, lating that he bad fully explained to the Molungees the alteration that had taken place 
in their fituation, with the expectations that were formed in confequence; that the intelli- 
gence was received with every poflible mark of fatisixétion, and the firongeit aifurances 
that every exertion would be made by’ them to prove how much what had been done would 
tend to the advantage of Government as well as of themfelves. 


22. Mr. Chapman at the fame time reported the price he had propofed for the Salt to 
‘be delivered by the late Adjoora Molungces, which he rated at the price paid to the Ticka 
Molungces in the difirits where the Adjoora men refided, and which were the loweit prices 
is agency. The men themfelves defired to be paid to the higheft price of the Ticke 
men, who it appeared refided in places lefs proper and conveniently fituated for the manw- 
facture; but in the end agreed to his propotals, only flipulating that he fhould tranflate and 
forward to us a Petition whick they meant to draw up. The Agent alfo obferved, that with 
the price fettled, the late Adjoora Molungecs underitand that they are to pay their Calary 
rents in the fame manner as the ‘Ticka Molungecs. 


25. In anfwer to the Agent's letter, the purport of which is above ftated, we wrote to 
‘him, that as from his local knowledge he was belt able to judge of ail the circumfiances 
which caufed the variation of prices in the different Pergunnahs, and as the rate he had 
dettled appears moderate, and the grounds he ailigned for fixing it feem juft, we entirely 
acquielced therein; and that with refpect to any claims which might be made upon the 
Molungees for Calary rents, we fhould xefer the mutter for the decifion of your Honourable 
‘Court, if any were made. 