


fanguine expectations that it will be confiderable, and that when extended to other papers” 


and tranfactions which experience may fuggett, it will in courfe of time become one of the 
molt productiveand unexceptionable braaches of the public Revenue. ? 

36. For conducting the detail of the bufinefs, we haye thought proper to appoint a Super- 
intendant, who will act under the immediate authority of the Board of Revenue. gen to 
draw a'commifiion of 2 per cent.on the net produce of the duties, in dieu, of «ll perfonal 
allowances ; and with refpect to the other expentes of the cftublifhment, we have only to 
xemark that every nece(fary utteation has’ been paid to economy. * 


363. ‘ 3c 


Mife* vt 
x > June, 
gth ) 
“Dp? 23d D° 

“4h Augalt. 


fig? «APPENDIN /o-#4e Second REPORT from the Sele Committce cr’ 


Appendix, No. 15. 


- “Extra® Letter fromthe Governor General in Council at Bengal (Judicial Department); 
‘ : -dated goth September 1802. 


‘Pat. 3. ON the proceedings of the Vice Prefident in Council, of the 18th March laft, is 
recorded a Letter from the Governor General, inclofing a Letter addrefied to bim by the 
Honourable the Chief Juftice, and a Proclamation relative to the eftablifhment of a new 

? Court tor the reeovery of fall Debts in the town of Caleutta, in conformity to the provifions 
-of the’ late Act of Parliament. The proceediags of the fame date contain an amended draft 

“of the Proclamation tranfinitted by Sir John Anfiruther to the late Vice Prefident in Council, 
which was publifhed in the Gazeite of the 13th March laft. Meflrs. Ebenezer Coleman, 
Richard Heming, and Anthony Muctier, were at the fame time appointed to be the firft 


sCominiftioners.of the Court. 
4. Onareference.to the Proclamation ycur honourable Court will obferve, that under the 
“authority granted by the Act of Parliament, the juriidiction of the Court has, in conformity 
“to the recommendation of Sir John Anfiruther, been limited to claims nop exceeding one 
Thundred'S*. Rupees, 
5: On-the 16th September the Governor General in Council authorized thie Commiffioners 
5 sto entertain .an eftablifhment-of Officers, to-aflift them in the difcharge of the duties of the 
he Court, amounting to S*. Rupees 1,483 per month. The falaries of the three Commiflioners 
were on the fame day fixed at 800 Rupees each. Information haying however been received 
of the death of the late Mr. Coleman, one of the Commiflioners, the Governor General in 
* Council, on the grounds ftated in his correfpondence with the honourable the Chief Juttice, 
sdotermived that the office of third Commiilioner fhould be abolifhed. Your honourable 
Court will obferve that there is every reafon to expect that the additional expenfe attendant 
on the eftablifment of this Court, will be more than counter balanced by the moos arifing 
from the new table of fees recommended by the Chief Juftice and approved by the Gover- 
mor General in Council. 

6. The Governor General in Council has likewife great fatisfaction in pointing out to the 
notice-of your honourable Court the beneticial effects arifing from the efiablifhment of the 
new Court of Requetts, with refpect to the regularity and difpatch with which the fuits cog- 