


fion. We haveno hefitation, therefore, in authorizing your Lordthip in Council to conclude a 
eleaneat f the Northern Circars, on the bafis of the calculations fubmitted by your Board of 
venue, fubjectto fach variations ait fhall. be found expedient to make in the progrets of 
concluding the fettlement. oy riety SEMEL ONG US fe 5B 
_ 20, Your Lordthipin Council will adopt fuch of the rules contained in the eighth Regula- 
tion, pailed in Bengal in the year 1793, and in any fubfequent Regulations, for the-fecurity of 
Tal Babs crease, farmers and-Ryots, as may be found applicable to the territories 
under your Prefidency. i é + rae 
ie Ve enter ‘ten doubt that in every point of view it willbe good policy to relinquifh 
a ims to old balances dive from the Zemindars,and to confine the demands on them, with 
to arrears, to a provifion for the difcharge of the balances of the year preceding that 


f tom the commencement of which the new fettlement may take place. 


‘The adoption of this principle as a gencral rule thould not, however, prevent the demand 
for the payment of balances of an anterior date, in particular cafes, in which the parties in 
arrear may eae the means of difcharging the demand without encroaching on the 
refources of the future Revenue, fi 

_ 23. The payment of any balances, which may accrue after the conclufion of the permanent 
Ee tiement, fhould be 


chiefly from the difficulty of determi 
| the proportion of the fixed affeffment on the whole tthe Zemindarsy af the dene, vehicn 
ought to be on the } ion fold. We. 


ined —* 
maces 


96. The. 


ihe Attire ‘of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 203 


-°26. The affeflment on the rae of the Stateaghlpated of at public fale mutt neceffarily 
hecome unalterable. It is evident, therefore, that unlefs effe@ual means be taken to charge 
thofe Pes a the due proportion of the fixed affeflment on the whole eftate, it will be eaty 
forindividuals, by connivance with the public Officers, to effeét the difpotal of E peenortion of 
their eftates at an overcharged affeflment, and toretain the remainder of an affefiment  preatly 
under-rated. The provifion made by the fecond claufe of the 29th fection of the 7th Regula~ 
tion of 1799, with regard to fabrications on rot errors in the accounts, by which the aflef~ 
ment on portions of eftates difpofed of at public fale may bave been regulated, is calculated to 
prevent abufes of this nature as far as is practicable. 

ate Tn tract of time the progreffive operation of this abufe would effentially affect the 

uiblic revenues. * 
x 28. The principles above fuggefted, with regard to the balances of the Zemindars now in 
the poffeftion of their Zemindarries, fhould be extended to thofe Zemindars whofe eftates are 
now under the immediate management of the Board of Revenue, folely on account of failure 
in payment of the ftipulated Revenue, and a fettlement may be concluded with thefe Zemin- 
dars under the general rules for forming the decennial fettlement. Any particalar cafes, in 
which the temporary or the permanent exclufion of any of thefe Zemindars may appear to 
your Lord(hip in Council advifable, may be made an exception to this rule, 