

Batee ts THE Right Honourable the Governor General has recorded in Council at this 
Prefidency the Report of the Board of Revenue at Fort St. George, dated the 2d September 
1799, in reply to the orders of your Lordthip in Council, requiring (in confequence of the 
ip(trucitons of the Governor General in Council of the 6th Auguft 1798) their fentiments on 
the introduétion of the fyfem of internal government eftabliflied in Bengal into the Britith 
polleffions on the Coaft of Coromandel. , - 

2. It is unnecefiary to retrace the very able and ample detail given by your Board of 
Reyenue of the fiate of the northera Circars, and of the other ancient poffeilions of the Com- 
pany on the Coaft of Coromandel. : 

3- It will be fufficieat to fiate, as the grounds of the inftruétions which we now have the - 
honour to convey to your Lordfhip, that we find thofe valuable poffeflions to be deftitute of 
every inftitation which can either promote the eafe and happinets of the people or the effi- 
ciency and vigour of the Government. Berre 

4. Itisa of great fatistaction, however, to know that we can now Pastis to apply 
the remedies to this, defective ftate of the Government ef the Britifh poffeilions fubjeét to” 
your immediate authority, under the moft juft expectations of fuccefs. _ 

§. The annihilation of the late hoftile power ef Myfore has impreffed the inhabitants, of 
thole pollellions with that confidence in the fiability of the Britifh power, and in the fecurity 
of the country from foreign inyafion, which was indifpenfably neceffary to the eftablifhment 
of any regular fyftem of Government. The principles which are now to be applied to-the 
reform of your internal Government have Tain the mof ample difcultion in Bengal. 
Weare in poffellion of the feutiments of the Honourable Court of Directors on the whole 
fubject; we havehad the mott ample experience of the beneficial effect of all the meafures 
adopted in confequence of thofe difcuflions ; and the fimilarity of cuftoms and ufages in the 
territories under the two Prefidéncies, leaves no room to. doubt that fimilar meatures will 
be productive of the fame benefits in the Company's poffeilions under your immediate 
authority. (i ale 

“6. We fhall therefore d to furnith your Lordthip in Council with our inftru@ions — 
-on the feveral general detailed in the 75th paragraph of the Report of your Board of 
Revenue; our decifion on which is required, to enable you to form the de ‘regulations 
which are to conftitute the bafis of your new Conttitution. 

7- The defeription of the Zemindarry tenures inthe Northern Circars, contained in thefe 
paragraphs, correfponds exaétly with the nature of thofe tenures in Bengal. All the argu- 
ments which were adduced in fupport of the policy of declaring the Zemindars in Bengal the 
proprietors of their lands, apply with equal force in favour of a iimilar declaration with refpedt 
to the Zemindars and other defcriptions of independent Landholders in the territories under 
your immediate Government... : ’ i . , 