


44. Mr Hamilton having premifed thefe remarks, proceeds to fu; eft various propofitions 
for the edhe wibungenhe oF the bufinefs, which may furnifh fome aerateauot in our future 
arrangements. 


. 45. Mr. Hamilton fhortly after refigned his tation, and much correfpondence paffed-with 
Mr. M. C. Horfley, who fuceceded him, and fome with Mr Mackenzie hiinfelf, on .the, fiate 
of the bufinels; and we are forry to fay, the refult has correfponded but too truly with what 
might have been éxpeéted, from the reprefentation with which Mr Hamilton, furnifhed us 
of the fituation of the Agency; thé caute is alfo further imputed to the, fevere indifpofition 
under which Mr. Sackenctae laboured having incapacitated him from exertion, and the 
contideration we wifhed to fhew to his unfortunate fituation, in the hope.of his recovery; not 
neglecting at the fame tim® every means in our power to excite his ailittant to-a zealous dif 
charge of the dutics of the fiation. The conclufion of the laft feafon fhewed the whole 
produce to be Maunds 2,38,371, purchafed at the enormous price of above S* R* 245, per 
100 Maunds. ; Rey } oe 


46. It is ncedlefs to trouble your Honourable Board further on this difagreeable fubjed, 
‘the circumfiances refpeéting it have been already fully reprefented ; you were in confequence 
pleace to abolifh Roymungul as a feparate agency, and annex fe bufinefs of it to the 

ivifion of the Twenty-four Pergunnabs; in due courfe we shall have the honour to report 
the refult of Mr. Goodlad’s proceedings. 4 : 


62. In the inftances wherein, fince we had tt of the depattment, the sper 
of ihe price has been eftablifhed, viz. the Adjoora Molungees of Hidgellee and Tumlook, 
and generally thofe of the Twenty-four Pergunnabs, your Honourable Board have; beea 
pleated to authorize fuch an increafe of price as was deemed reafonable, and we tuft sbe 
good effects thereof will be felis, 4 » sah 


the Affaies of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 201 
Appendix, No. 19. 
Extra of a Letter from the Cae eae oe at Bengal (Revenue Department); 


Para. 2. OUR advices from the public department will have apprized you of our deter- 
mination to difcontinue the eannorat opium in. Bengal, and seer gare ‘to prohibit 


‘the cultivation of the poppy throughout that province. 


93- This prohibition was fubfequently extended to the part of the province ef Bahar which 
is included in the Zillah of Boglepore, the eee provided in that Zillah having been always 
included in the Bengal contract ; and the reafon which induced us to ditcontinue the provifion 
of the Bengal opium, being equally applicable to the opium of this part of Bahar. 


Appendix, No. 20, gs hye, vy 


F Thee nia ’ 
LETTER from the Governor General in Council at Bengal, to the Governor in Council 
at Vort St. George, dated 31ft December 1799; together with Extraét Letter from 
Marquis Wellefley to Lord Clive, dated the 8th January 1800. P i 
To the Honourable Edward Lord Clive, Governor in Council at Fort St. George. 
‘My Lord, iy % J 