

'« By placiig the ‘Salt of the Defly and Barboriny on its prefent footing you have increafed 
““the produce of the Agency, which woild otherwife have annually diminifhed; for although 
“Timagined, as 1 may day, artificially to preferve the agency, by advancing money to the 
“ Molungees at thofe periods of the year when pone waoit in want of it, yet it was evident, 

363. 3 “ while 


200 - APPENDIX 0 the Second REPORT from the Scleét Committee on 


Vide Letter dated 
19 July 1793. 
Procetdliigs 2 Jan. 
3795+ 


Note.—This in- 
cludes ull Charges 
and outftauding 
Balances, 


Sce Board's Letter 
_aath Dec late. 


“ while ‘the Salt yielded them lef: than they could earn by any other labour, that it was a 
He ae that could not laft ; and that whenever grain became fo cheap that the people could 
 fubfift without the aflifiance of the Agent, they would quit a bufinefs that did not give 
“them an adequate compenfation for their labour. Had not the inereafe of price been 
“ granted, Government would this year have fuffered great lofs. I draw my conclufion from 
“ the comparative ftate of the Tatfals, which [ told you would not be affected by the plan, 
“and the reft ofthe agency in the Barbonny; I have not lofta Collary, and in the Deily f 
“ have even an increafe on latt year; while in the Taffals, according to prefent appearances, 
three-fourths of the people have quitted the bulinefs.” i 


# The Barbonny, before you adopted the plan of laft year, had 218 Amdanny Maunds of 
* Salt each Collary to deliver, to clear its advances; 2 quantity that deterred the people 
“from all exertions, and they feldom averaged more than 130 Amdanny Maunds each 
“ Collary. By the plan you adopted, the quantity of Salt to be delivered by a Barbonny 
“ Collary to clear its advances, was reduced to 156 Maunds; the confequence was, that the 
 laft years averaged me 220 Maunds a Collary. From this it is evident the people will not 
“ exert themlelves unlefs they have fome advantage to look forward to.” 


““ During the laft year I fettled all difputes relating to the lands yielding fuel: the only 
“ part of he Agency that materially wanted regulation was in the Pergunnah Moragotcha, 
“where the boilleg is carried on with paddy ftraw. The Ryotts were dillutistied, from the 
“«« Molungees not paying them their due; [have therefore in future engaged to pay them 
“ myfelf, and deduct it from the Molungees advances; being by this means aflured of re- 
“ ceiving what is due to them, they have engaged the enfuing year for vx increafe of four 
“thoutand Begahs of fuel, which will be almott as much as [can ute, and infure me an 
“ jncreafe of five or fix thoufand Maunds of Salt.” 


ROYMUNGUL. 


The Affiftant at this ftation, Mr. Hamilton, replied to our circular letter in confequence 
of indifpofition of Mr. Mackenzie. He reprefented the fituation of the Aurung to be ex- 
céedingly bad; the manufacture he informed us was carried on in an uninhabited country, 
during iome months deftitute of frefh water, unhealthy from the thicknefs of furroundin; 
woods, at the diftance of many days journey from the houfes of the manufacturers, ani 
sacceffible only by water. It is not any common inducement that would engay people to 
~wenture to fuch regions; yet it would appear, from an infpection of the efiablifhment, that 
the compenfation to the contractors and labourers was not only precarious, but at the beft 
inadequate; particularly, that the allowance to the labourer was calculated below the common 
price of labour in the inhabited country. Thus much it was neceflary to premife, in order to 
anticipate any comparifon of the rates already fubfifting in this Agency, with thofe eftablith- 
ed in other Agencies; there both contraétors and laboaees ferde during the whole year 
with their families; their engagements are not incompatible with the cultivation of their 
Jands, nor a variety of family occupations; they are not pert to the expenies, incon- 
veniences and dangers, which unavoidably refult trom the local fituation of the Aurungs under 
this Agency. From the above delineation, it would probably rather excite furprize by what 
means the maoufaciure had fo long fubfitted, than that obfiacles fhould occur to its improve- 
anent. Z 