

39. We entertain no doubt that the value which landed property will immediately acquire: 
ander the propofed permanent fettlement of the public Revenue, will render the lands fut- 
Ecient fecurity for the payment of the public dues charged on them. 

363. 3k 40. From 


204 APPENDIX (o thc Second REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 
ps 40. From the 7th Regulation of 1799, paffed in Ben ut will have obferved (as already 
noticed) that we have judged it ieieobiel to poftpone he of lands until the clole of the 


year. i 

41. The whole or a part of the Jands of the defaulters (according as circumftances may 
require) may in the mean time be attached, to make good the deficiency. 

42. In order to point out to your Lordthip the moft advifeble plan for the difcharge of 
arrears of public Revenue, it willbe fufficient to refer you to the regulations paiied in Bengal, 
for the ils regarding the fales of land. é z saa 

43. The regulations paffed in Bengal, which related to this head, may be adopted at Fort 
St. George, in cafes to which thof regulations thal] appear applicable. 

44. According to the principle of the Mahomedan Government, ali penfions of this de~ 
feription are taken fromthe public Revenue, and are fuppofed to be granted under the fanc- 
tion of the ruling power. 

. 43, Previous te the conclufion of the decennial fettlement in Bengal, thefe penfions and. 
| allowances were pair by the Zemindars, or the perfon in the immediate charge of the col- 

leétion of the public Kevenne of the country on the part of the Government, and an adequate 

deduction was made from the refources on which the public Revenue was calculated. 

46. Many pentions and allowances of this nature, which were payable under valid grants, 
were frequently withholden, while new penfions were often fraudulently inferted as 
chargeable on the refources of the country. x . 

47- With a view of enfurmg the punctual payment of all juft penfions, of precluding all 
future defaleations from the public refources, under the pretext of fraudulent pentions, and of 
sagucine tp Government the reverfion of all expired peafions and allowances, it was deter 
‘mined that an increafe, proportionable to the amount of thefe penfions and allowances, fhould 
be made in the engagements of the Landholders, and that the penfions and allowances fhould 
a paid from the public treafuries, under the regulation referred to by your Hoard of 

evenue. $ ‘ 

48. We recommend that a fimilar arrangement be made with regard to all fuch penfions, 
and allowances as may be chargeable on the relources of the texritorics under your immediate 
Government.” Fibs ' i 

49. The regulations eftablifhed in Bengal applicable to this head, and the arguments on 
which thofe regulations were founded, being fiated by your Board of Revenue to be equally 
applicable to your Prefidency, it only remains to exprei3 our fanction to their adoption, and 
to. your making fuch provifion for any /perions affected by their operations, as fuck perfons 
may appear to you to merit. , 