

8. Your Lordthip in Council has accordingly our fanction to confider the acknowledg- 
ment of the proprietary rights of the Zemindars and other detoriptions of independent Land- 
holders as the fundamental principle-of the new fettlement to be hacmsd with them. _ : 

9. The acknowledgment of this proprietary right-in the Zemindars and Landholders fhould 
not however be allowed in any. relpect to affect the sights of the Kyots or others who have 
hitherto been in any re{pect fubjett to the authority of the Zemindars or other Landholders ; 
nor is it to be contirued to preclude Government from pailing any laws or lations which 
may occafionally be deemed expedient for the protection of the rights of the Ryots or of 
other perfons, or for any other purpotes which may be deemed effential to the good govern- 
Meat of the country. 

to. It will therefore be neceflary that the declaration, acknowledging thefe rights to be 
velied in the Zemindars and Landholders, fhould be accompanied by reservations and reftric~ 

= tions 


-a commi 


202 
mys 


yea Thi c 
with the approbation of the Court of Direétors. 
- 14. We have no doubt that the Honourable Court will in. all cafes confirm in perpetuity 
the fettleme::t which your Lordfhip in Council may form:with the Landhollers. It is, how- 
ever, neceflury in the firft inftance, abfolutely to enfure to the Landholders the poffellign of 
their lands for: a confiderable'term of years, for the purpofe of inducing them to enter into 
engagements on the moft favourable terms which the prélent fiate of the country will admit, 
cand of Seca themto adopt meafures for the improvement of their lands. 

15- On this Lit is‘{ufficient to obferve, that no iy Appears to extending to your 

aa 


Prefdeiiey the rules regarding Talookdars, adopted in never thofe rules may be 


applicable. 
16. The exifting regulations in Bengal refpesting difqualified Landholders, may be gencrally. 
extended to the Landholders of that defeription tent Prefidency, as Mieeeettch’ by aie 


rd of Reycnue. 3 
-17- Confiderable incoavenience, however, having been experienced from the part of thofe 
regulations which relates to the fituation of the Managers of the eftates, we recommend that 
the M: ya be Officers felected and haps by your Government, and that they be allowed 
SF he res catmained da.the Lighth Megslationy wall’ Beogal in 3709, ri vega 
- 18. The rules contained in tion, Pin in 1793, with regaré 
to Seana beaten Hae the Revenue, may be seek to Lal fader 
lency, wi di ne prédicam i “by your Board of Revenue. 
The tands of thee L f aed A in far ‘oeararoll ork vara ‘or in particular 
cafes for a fhorter term, or be held Anianie as may be found advifable. “= 
io. For the reafons ftated by your Board of Kevenue (which 
rience in Bengal) the Governor'General in Council is fatisfied that no benefit would arife 
from pottponi he. t fettlement, in the es on of obtaining more accurate 


ds with our expe- 


Giincosenik of tie metidl veto srety ofitie eoutaysthiles keel PR i aEAGY at ou ofa” 