

$0. Such of the re is relating to this head as are in force in Bengal, and as may be- 
applicable to the territories under your Prefideney, may be ae 
951. the 7th Regulation of 1799, your Lordfhip in Council will obferye that thefe 
regulations have not only afiorded the moit compl: Oe the Hiyots and other under- 

-but have enabled them to withhold the juft demands of thole who beiore exercifed 
ahe moft unlimited powers of exaction. $4) 
_ 52. We were in confequence obliged to” -to the Landholders and Farmers a more 


fum means of ng payment of their rents. - \“ 

Pa 8 fome inconyenience has arifen from this operation of the regulations, the 
complete protection enjoyed by the Cultivators of land has produced the moft beneficial effect 
in the ovement of pa country. 

54. Itis with great fatisfaciion we obferve that the regulations regarding the provifion of 
the Co y's invefiment in Bengal, are recommended to be extended to the territories 

sod pauins heneadiits f fubjecting the public Officers employed in th 

55s , the necefity of fubjectin, ic ers ‘ed in the 

P oa Boat as race nag a ie the fatal i ia the Courts of Sidiee; for all 
their official aéts, is apparent. ‘The commercial Officers may at firk be fubject to fome incon- 
venience from this input reaapesteded that this regulation, by compelling the com- 


weavers and other manufacturers, will prove highly beneficial both to the invetiment of the 


2S, Conferable traéisof country at diferent periods have been} sind care. ll holdem 4 
Company in Bengal, which correfpond exactly with the Havilly or Demefne lands in the 
territories under your immediate authority, and many of which have been acquired by the 

“fame means. i 2 : ‘ 


57+ Government has always been under the neceflity of employing its owm Officers, or of 
Bap eraconese to paeipa ti ng, it of thee 3 Moke s and Farmers 
haying no permanent intereft in the improvement of the lands, often. )a temporary: 
advantage in committing frauds and abufes ; and it wasinvariably found that the lands belong~ 
. ing to the Government, although very advantageouily fituated, were worle cultivated than 
the contiguous lands of ee * , ’ ¥ 
was on thefe as well as in confideration of the injuftice committed againfi 
| Zemii , in the grant of thefe lands to the Company, that we reftored to the 
| the Twenty-four Pergunnahs or Diftricts, commonly called The Company’s Lands, 
which furrounded Calcutta, the Zemi: Hight in which was granted to the Company (to 
the exclufion of the former Proprietors) by Jaftier Ally Khaun. 
§9- No confideratiou could with juftice have beea demanded by the Company from thofe 


the Afbirs of The EASTINDIA COMPANY. 205 


paces for the reftoration. of rights of which they were originally deprived by an att of 
injuitice. ity ed 

60. With regard to the Haviily lands under your Prefideney, as detailed in the g2aft, 320d, 
end 323d paragraphs of the Report of your Board of Reveaue, we entirely concur 
opinion with that Board, that thefe lands fhould be parcelled out into eftates, and that they 
thould be difpofed of gradually as may be found ‘icable, aad converted into Zemindarry 
tenures, fubjeét to the payment of a definite and perpetual Revenue, in the event of the 
amount of that Revenue being approved by the Court of Diredtors. The terms of fale 
would include a referve in favour of the eftablifhed rights and cufloms of the immediate Cul- 
tivators and inhabitants of the lands; and the new Proprietors thould of courie be declared 
fubject to all the refervations and reftritions preferibed in the oth and 10th paragraphs of this 
Letter, with regard to the Zemindars and: Proprietors of land in general. 3 