

29. With refpeét to fuch of the Zemindars as have been difpoffefled of their lands for 
rebellion or acts of contamacy, it will be a queftion for the confideration of your Lordihip in 
Council, how far any of thefe Zemindars can be fafely reinftated. With Mae disse 5 

30. With refpeét to the Sayer collections, your Board of Revenue are of opinion that the 
terms on which they propofe to conclude the nent fettlement with the Landholders, 
fhould be confidered to comprehend the compenfation for this branch of their collections ; and 
we fee no objection to the adoption of their fentiments. j is 

31. The private credjtors of the Zemindars having hitherto poffeffed no means of enforcing 
payinent of their demands, and many of thofe demands being fiated to be ufurioys, or con~ 
tracted for improper peri it follows that any provifion for the difebarge of any part of 
thole demands, muft be confidered as a matter of mere diferetion. liaise 

32. We requeft to be favoured with the fentiments of. sie Lordfhip in Council with re- 
4pect to the principles to be obferved in the liquidation of thefe claims, m order that provifion 
may be made for the difcharge of {uch as may be deemed juft. A clanfe might be inferied 
in the engagements of the Zemindars, binding them to abide by an adjuttment of their debts, 

to be made by Government. This adjuftment thould be made fo as not to affeét their landed 
property, excepting in cafe of their failing to perform the termsof the adjutiment. 
33. As fome limitation mutt neceffarily be eftablifhed with regard to thefe claims, we are 
of opinion that the propofed adjuftment fhould not extend to any debts which are of 
fianding than twelve years. ‘This period of limitation may, we conceive, be pro- 
bee ly with regard to future claims, fubject to the qualifications in the regulations now in 
jorce on this head in Bengal. We requefi to be fumithed with the fentiments of your Lord~ 
thip in Council on this fuggeftion. oe TE Sif 
34. We alfo recommen that fome limitation be adopted with refpe@ to the intereft on 
all paft and future loans to be made by Zemindars or other Landholderse D 
35- Your Board of Revenue having {tated the regulations eftablifhed in Bengal with 
segard to lands of this defcription, as applicable.to the territories under your immediate 
government, your Lordfhip in Council has our tanction for the adoption of thofe regulations, 
with any rad ine iota which may appear to you advifable. > Pore 
36. The produce of thefe lands forms no part of the exifting affets on which the decen- 
nial fettlement is to be formed, confequently the Zemindars or others by whom thofe 
alienations have been made, can have no claim té the Revenue of thefe lands in the event of 
zefumption. As to the right to the pofleflion of the land, it muft be confidered as transferred: 
in perpetuity to the perfon in whofe favour the alienation may have keen made. It was on 
sthe/e principles that we determined generally to convert upon refumption fuch lands as had 
deen alienated without anthority into Zemindarry effates; fome qualifications, however, of thefe 
principles will be found in the regulations regarding alienated lands. wo 4 
37. The reply of the Governor General in Council to that part of the Letter frony the 
Honourable the Court of Directors, dated the agth September 1792, in which the Court 
exprefs an expectation of deriving an additional fource of Revenue from the watte lands in 
Bengal, is ftated by your Board of Revenue to be equally applicable to lands of that deferip- 
tion which are included in the Zemindarries or otlier landed tenures in the country fubject 
to your Government. We have no héfitation in giving our authority to your Lordthip in 
Council to adopt the principles laid down in that reply as the rules tor your guidance with 
tegard to waite lands. Hy ¥| ne 
» 38. The arguments adduced in the extraés from the difeuffions which pafied in Bengal on 
this queftion, prove that, under a penanaD fettlement, the indulgence of Government will 
heletsneceflary in cafes of drought or inundation, than under yourprefent fyftem of colledi- 
ing the Revenues: all individual engagements of 2 permanent nature mutt neceflarily be 
formed without reference to general and temporary calamity. In fuch extreme cafes, the 
people muft depend on the jufiice and liberality of the Government. It would be impotiible 
ty make any fpecial provifion for contingencies indefinite and uncertain in their nature. 