


; wie » = Sule Weight, 
‘40. The Agent computed his whole provifionat | -  - . - . Maunds. 609,000 
Deduct Serf 50 per cent. - - - - - - - ~  2,09,000 


Amdanny Maunds, or quantity on'Which the Molungess receive payment 4,090,500 

* At 77 Sicca Rupees per 160 Maunds, ‘the price. propofed for the future _- 3,08,000 

At 55 Sicca Rupees, the price heretofore, paid Syl cuschie GEA ae 4 Faas aD 
Eftimate of total increafe of expenfe_ ee So ah Sea raat B8,000_ 


41. The Agent aflirmed; an amount exceeding the half of this increafe annually remained: 
eurttanding in irrecoverable balances, due fromthe Barbonny-alonc. He fated the aétual 
increate to be about 30,000 Rupes; fo that in fact the amount was incontiderable; and even’ 
admitting it were confiderable, the Company would-be amply indemnified by their profit on 
the increale of produce, of which he was confident, if-his planewas carried into-eflect. 

42. On the clear expofition above furnifhed by the eel we could not do otherwife, 
than aequietee in his propofitions; we accordingly recominended them to your Honourable, Proceedings 
Board, and having been approved by you, itnow only remains to Bape the refult, which we g Jan. 1794. 
have the honour to do in the following Extract of'a Letter from Mr. Goodlad, dated the 
ioth November 1704. 3 el 


« The object of the plan T laid before you was to increafe the produce, by affording ‘the Proceedings 
“ manufacturers a fullicient compentation for their labour, and to reduce the balances; and 1-2 Dee. 1794 
“ affured you, eftimating the produce of the agency at fix lacs of Maunds, that I would in- 
“fure you, if the feafons were favourable, a lac of Maunds ineteafe. In this made an excep-, 
“tion to the Talkis, which would not be effected by the plan. * In judging therefore of the 
“ effeéts of the plan you are to confider the Taffals as totally difiing from it.” 


« However fanguine my e: tions might have ‘been when Thad firt the honour of 
“ addielling you on the fabject, [ am happy to fay thofe Pera have been exceeded. 
“In the accounts now before you, you will perceive that I have, during the year 1200, ex- 
«clufive of the Taffals, manufactured feven Ines feventeen thoufand and eighty: 
© of Salt, with a balance of only four thoufand nine hundred and ninety-two Rup 
“when you confider iid eninber of people employed and the value of the commodity, 
“©very triflirig ; and even fmall as this fum is, it would have beemadiminithed one half if the 
“uncommon heavy rains had not defiroyed a part of the Salt in the woods before {could 
““lodge it in the Golahs.” a e ‘ 

“Ta my letter of 27th June (reckoning the produce of the Agency at fix lacs of sree ‘ 
“informed yon that, according to the pian { propofed, the increate in the price of Salt would - 
“not exceed thirty thoufand, ghee; from Hetnereate oF the manufaéiure, and the reduc- 
‘tion of the balatices, the Salt is abfolutely cheaper now than if was before; the average 
“produce of the whole Agenty, as per amount yaluation for the three preceding years, - 
“1197-98 and 99, is 5,70,000 Maunds, and the coft afd baldnces’ made it amount to 
“ sak 13A*. oP. per %, Maunds, this year, including the balances of the Taffuls: Batbonny 
“Cand Delly, it comes to 54.4. and-the increafe.of produce, on theaverage of the three pre- 
“ ceding years, is two lacs and four thotfand: Maunds.> als - 