


local experience to inc on an ameadwent, aud unwilling to rifk a check to the 
-manufacture, we have permitted the bufinets to proceed, though under our diffatisfuction, on 
the grounds we have intimated. pee 


35- The fame feparation as that mentioned under Hidgellee having neceflarily taken place 
at this ageacy, a newcftablifhment for it was formed, amounting to Sicea Rupees 41,271. 13- 
_per annuin; fad it was fanétioned by your Honourable Board to cominence from the 1ftof 
OUdlober 1793. 
TWENTY-FOUR PERGUNNAHS. 


36, The Agent, in anfver to our circular letter, informed ars thatthe produce of his 
ediflriéts had certainly decreafed. ‘This he attributed in fome meafure-to the alteration of 
Syfiem, in relieving the people from-the coercion ander which they heretofore manufactured 
“Salt;.an altevatioa which eannot be too highiy applauded. 

(37+ The Agent ftated the deereafe to have arifen chiefly in the Barbonny, or thofe Collarics 
that work in the woods. On the alteration of fy{tem it was found necetiary to increafe the 
price paid to the Molungees, but the amount of itwas fiill extremely inadequate to the 
-atval cofi of the Salt; the natural confequence followed, that the Agent always found 
himie iged to make advances of additional fams, for the indifpentable dithurfements 
mannfadluce, or the people could not procure the materials wherewith to 
rv work. -Phefe advances have of late years uniformly been carried to the Dead 
it, es inrecgvereble balances due by the Molungees. Infiead of this money 

tothe head of advances, it fhould have been-an inereafe of price, for it 

was in faét all difbarted for the purpofes of the manufacture; confequently it could only be 
-contidered the fair cot of the Salt, and fhould have been charged as fuch. The Agent verified 

chis alfertions by fhewing, = y 4 2 

48. That the quantity of Salt which the Molungees agreed to manufacture, average about * 
“218 Maunds Amdai 2 mayeor 327 Maunds Weteht, ee sw Geen Colin preniy 
hex , with the ereeptoniet a aes) few inftances, the poflibility of what could be made. 
“The value of the Salt fhort delivered of the quaz uy agreed for, became an_outftanding 
balance. No excitement was held out either to the Molungees; for if by exee exertion 
staey thould completé the quantity, the total net earnings to each man would only be fix 
: ; “Rupees 


y, cethe Affairs of The EAST INDIA°-COMPAN YS = 199 


Rupees for feven ‘anda half months: labour, which was. about the time he was employed in 
the woods; this.was paid him in advance, and went to fubGift his: family during his ablence; 
while he himfeif lived upon the proviGen farnifhied to him: by the Company.’ From thit 
itatement of the fituation’of a Molangee, it will evidently-eppear that be-was paid a baré 
fubfiftence; that-he not only could not bring any thing home with binr on his return’ from bis 
toils, bat would molt probably be loaded witha heavy debron account of tlie Salt thort 
delivered of the quantity agreed for. Upon thefe grounds the Agent deemed the price inade- 
quate, and propoled to us to increafe it to.77 Sieva Rupees per too Amdanny-Maunds, of 
150 Maunds Sale Weight, and to fix'the “Salt to be manufactured -at-each Collary at 156 
Amdanny Maunds inflead of 2:8, a quantity which in his opivion could be manufacured 
with facility; ‘and Further, to pay-ut’ the fame rate on the Moluirgeés return i¥om' the woods, 
for‘any furplus quantity they nmght manufacture. aS eis 
39. The Agent further propofed a fimilar ineveafe to the Defly and Taffals: the maaufac- 
ture in the Deily he faid had been reduecd in conlequence of «the inatequate price paid fot 
the Salt, as he verified by infiunces he quoted of his having lofi che provition in, the Pergun- 
nals of Bullia and Bullunda, which ufed.to be about 30,000 Maunds; and he further diated 
the increafe of price as likely not “encourage tie people to renew the manuiadlure in 
thefe Pergunnahs, but call fore thé ons generally to effect an incréafe in all the Dells 
Collaries. In refpedt to the Tefta!s‘he had uot the fame expectations; they laboured dader 
difadvantages;-and indeed a quéeftion concerming them has fince o¢ ) that utakes it a 
matter-of confideration oa what’ footing “they thould be ‘hereafter placed, or whether they 
fhall'be altogether abolithed ; but We have not yet- made up our minds upon this fubject, 