

61. ff no purchaters for thefe lands fhould appear, we ave fatished that it will be for the inte= 
refts of the Company, of the occupants and inhabitants of thet lands, and of the country at 
Jarge, that the londs fhould be granted to individuals of acknowledged property; who would 
take them as Zemindarries, fubjeét to the payment of a fixed Revenue to 'Goyerament ia 
perpetuity. This Revenue might be eftimated for the prefent according to the prefent aflets, 
and be fubjected to fuch progreflive incveafe as from the extent of watté land or other 
circumftances might be reafonably expecied. : : fe 

62. The Governor General in Council however concars in opinion with the Board of 
Revenue, that no gratuitous grant fhould be made of the lands until it fhall be afeertained 
that wey cannot be difpofed of by fale. Until this point be determined, the rents may be 
collecied from the lands in fuch manneras cireumftances may render advifable. 

6g. Although fome difference would appear to exift between the tenures of the Meerafidars 
in the Jugheer and the Cultivators inthe other Huvelly lands, we are ntyerthelels of opinion 
that the arguments on which are TR sa ieee of your Board of Revenue, with 
regard to the difpofal of Havelly lands, ¢ 'y are equally applicable to the tenures of thefe 
Mee particular care howeyer {hould be taken to fecure them in all their exifting 
rights. : ei fi pee ine 

64. It is alfo onr defire that thefe orders, with regard to the difpoful of the Havelly lands, 
and the converlion of them into Zemindarries ata fixed Revenue, {liould be extended to the 
countries lately conquered from Tippoo Sultann, as foon as a fatislactory fatement fhall have 
been obtained of the refourees of thole conqueits. { 

65. We are perfunded that no increafe of Revenne, beyond the prefent refources of thofe 
countries, ean be expected from the fy{tem of bpd ead under annual or periodical affefl 
ments. On the other hand, by conveiting thefe lands, as well as thelands ceded by the late 
Sultaun in 179%, into Zemindarry tenures, and fixing the Revenue in per ra ee a fair 
eflimate of the prefent SENS of the country, we! be cer of ‘ing Revenue 
in perpetuity, of inducing thofe by whom’ it may be paid to improye the country, and of 
decuring the attachment of our new fubjeéts. ‘ pte) Shir 

66. We approve of the propofitions of the Board of Revenue with regard to the tenures 
included in the eeyy lands, under the denomination of Enaum, Agraharam, and Shotrum, 
the lands appropriated for religious endowments and charitable pacts and the Jan 
alienated by renters and Revenue fervants without any authority; and Glfo the grants of land 
obtained before or after the Cee Government, which aie exempted entirely from the 

payment of public Revenue, or afleffed at a fixed rate, but reduecd rate of Reyenue. ‘Tenures 
of a fimilar nature exift in Bengals and the propofitions of your Board of Revenue, with 
regard to them, oer with the Regulations now in force im thefe provinces, and may be 
adopted by your Lordthip in Council. . * a ap aby Gas 
67. The Governor General in Council, on further confideration of the’ inveftigation which 
has been inftituted at Fort St. George, for afcertaining what teriures are holden under valid 
grants or otherwife, entertains great doubts of the policy of that meafure. ; 