


ve NO 


134. Affuming 


‘gro APPENDIX vo the Second REPORT jram the Sele& Committee on 


34. Affluming therefore, asthe bafis of our criminal code, a: law confecrated by the ve- 
n of one clafs of our fubjects, and familiar to all the inhabitants of cur dominions, 
stience and practice have enabled us in Bengal to temper and ameliorate the adminittrs-, 
tiomot thatlaw, by the gradual introduction of improvements derived from the principles 
éf Brtifh jurifprudence, and occafionaliy from thefe of the Hindoo code. We are fa- 
tisfied that the fame courle may be purlued by your Lordthip iu Council with profpedts of 
qqnal advantage. t % 
+5285. Weare aware that in Tanjore and the Polygar countries (as in Malabar) the Maho- 
medan law may never have been adininifiered. In thofe places the law of the deiendant 
may be made the rule for the guidance of the Criminal Courts, with any modifications which 
thay be deemed neceflary to adapt that law more effectually to the purpoles of jut 
This principle has been adopted in Malabar, and we herewith tranfimit a copy of the Crini- 
nal Cade formed for that provinee. . 
» 136. We ere of opinion, however, thatthe Mahomedan law, with the alterations adopted 
in printed Regulations for Bengal, ought to be made the general rule for the admi- 
niftration of juttice in criminal cafes in the territories under your Lordfhip’s immediate go- 
+; excepting in the particular inttances above tiated, in which logal circumftances 
tay render a deviation from the principle adviteable. t 
+ 1372 The Governor Genera! in Council contiders it to be of the greateft importance to the 
maintenance of peace and order, as well as to our political fecurity, that the 
‘Deel of the country fhould be fuperintended by Officers efpecially nominated by the Go- 
ernment. 5: ee : 

138. The exercife of this important branch of the public authority in the hands of indi- 
vidual: icularly objectionable in the territories undér your Prefidency, as 
tonding to keep alive thofe sentiments of independence which have charagteribed the Land- 
holders, and which nuft be completely extinguithed before they can become ufeful and good 
fubjects. While any portion of public authority is allowed to devolve to them by inheritance 
in virtue of their pollefitons, they wiil never be brongit to confider themifelves as mere Pro- 
prictors of teftates. f 

139. Independent of thefe i t confiderations, to abandon the charge of the Police 
of the country to ‘the Landholders mutt always give rife to the moft flagrant abufes. In 
the enquiries which preecded the relumption of this charge from the Landholders in Beagal, 
it was eftablifhed, that the offices of Police were held chiefly by moft notorious robbers, whe 
im large fms of money to the Zemindars, or to ther Officers and dependants, for 
oe (e-fituations; the ffettion of which enabled them to carry oa their depredations with 
Pogo. “The arrangement fuggefted will not prevent your Lordfhip in Council from ‘deriving 
every afliftance from the Landholders, in maintaining the peace of the , in their in« 
dividual “eapacity of proprietors of efiates ; on the contrary, a claufe flrowld be inforted in 
their: a ee to convey to the Magifirates or to their Officers the earlieft 
infor of every circu 