

fe The permanent ‘ae the Land Revenue, and the operation of the new fyftem 


of Government, will, we are perfuaded, remove the two firlt of thefe caufés in the difiritts to 
which the fyfiem fhall be . ‘The operation, however, of thefe benefits will be but 
partial, even within thofe diftriéts, towards preventing the return of the fame calamities, unlefs 
all impediments to the tranfpert of grain, throughout the countries in the Peninfula fubiect to 
the immediate authority or inffnence of the Britith Government, fhall alfo be completely re- 
anoved, fo that the furp! BU aig ofthe country, in which the harveft may be plentiful, may 
ueeiey be transf to thofe countries iu which the crops may in any degree have 
hited. v4 te 
86. The Governor General in Council is aware that the chief obfiaclé to the general 
_ adoption of this arrangement, will be found in the perverfe and unaccommodating {pirit of the 
Council of his Highnefs the Nabob of the Carnatic. But his Lordfhip in Council deems the 
free tranfport of grain to be of fuch effential importance to the future profperity of the Com- 
pany’s pofleilions, as well as of the territorics of the Rajah ef Myfore, of the Nabob of the 
Carnatic, 


the Afhirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 207 


~ Caruatic, and of the Rajah of Tanjore; that we think it proper to direét that you make it an obje® 
of your particular attention, to carry this arraugement into eitett throughout the while of the 
Caraatic, Tanjore, Myfore, the Poligar diftcitts, and the Nortnera Cirears. Vor this purpoi 
it will be necesJary to declare, as foon as circumftances fhall admit, that grain of all deferip- 
tons fhali be univertally exempt from duty, and from ali moleftation whatever in its pallage 
throughout the territories of the Company, including Tanjore and the Poligar counties; 
and your Lordihip in Council will be pleated to direét the Relident with the Rajah of Myfore 
to take the necellary fieps for exes the arrangement to the territories of that Prince, 
‘The Right honourable the Governor General will immediately addrefS the Nabob of the 
Carnatic, urging him to adopt the arrangement throughout his territories. : 

57. On a confideration or the Quettion ftated in tie 436th and 437th paragraph of the 

Board Report, we fee no objection to the colleéion of the fame rates of duties on the export 
of the refpeétive Prefidencies, with this qualification, that fuch articles, the produce of either 
Prefidency, the growth or manufacture of which it may be deemed an object to encourage, or 
which it may be for the benefit of the Prefidency importing to admit tree of duty, fhall be 
exempted from all duty at the Prefidency at which they may be imported. " 
, 88. Under this rettriétion the Governor General in Council will have no objeétions to your 
collecting duties of 2} per cent. on imports from Bengal, aad we fhall take into conliderstion. 
‘the application of fimilar principles to the imports at this Prefidency from Madras. 

