

Govermnent. : : , 

“100. But if his Highnefs fhould refufe to accede to this arrangement, the Govemor 
‘General in Council is of opinion that it will not be the lefs ey yetain exclufively in 

¢ territories under your 


208 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele®& Committee on 


their eflates. . But it appears to us preferable that the abatement fhould be granted in the laft~ 
mentioned mode, as it wili bean alteration cf the afleffinent of the tard. 

i102, Both financial and political confiderations reader it advifabie that the privilege of 
manulaéturing Saltpetre fhould be reieryed exclufively to the Company. 

193. In Bengal the Cultivators of Beetle and Tobacco pay the eftablithed rents for the 
Jands on which thefe articles are produced to the Proprietors of the eftate. If exported 
beyond the Company's provinces, thete articles ave charged with the eftablithed duties, but 
nz Reyenue is-at prefent levied on the. retail vend of thefe articles within the Company's 
provinces, in any fate. We are of opinion, however, that a Reyenue might be derived from 
thele articles in Bengal, fo as to operate as a tax oa the confumption of them; and the fubject 
has been for fome time paft under the confideration of the Governor General in Council. 

io4. A tax levied on thefe articles; under the propoled plan, could not be confidered to 
initio in any refpeét with the engagements fablifting between Government and the Land- 

olders. 

105. As,it appears, from the Report of your Board of Revenue, thata Revenue, in the form 
of a tax on con{umption, is levied on Tobacco and Reetle, both at Fort St. George and at the 
dubordinate tations, and as we are of Spier that thele articles, as well as Ganja, are proper 
objects of taxation, we concur in the fentiments of that Board that the fale of Beétle and 
‘Tobacco fhould be fubjected to regulations calculated to render thofe articles productive 
fources of Revenue. But no necellity appeats to us for any reference or exception to thefe 
auticles in the engagements of the Landholders, who thould be allowed to collect the efta- 
Diithed rates of rent affeiJed on Beetle and Tobacco grounds, which cannot interfere with 
‘the tax upon the retail or vend of thofe articles. 

106, The Mint Cuftoms are connected with the objec of the coin ; and the rate of the quit- 
rent of the gardens in the vicinity of Madras, and of the ground-rent in the Black Town, are, 
we prefume, fixed and require no regulation. * ta ee z 

107. The abufes in the coinage in Bengal correfpond with thofe ftated to exift on the 
coaft, and haye yet been only partially remedied. nd 

108. The firft meafure necellury, with a view to the reform of the ett cat your Prefi- 

-dency, would be to eftablith ane exclufive mint. We are perfuaded that the Hajah of Tape 
would readily reftriét the coinage of his mint, fo as to rendcr it merely a nominal appendage 


of foyereignty. 4) hers che i 
zi Paes fimilar arrangement with regard to the mint of the Nabob of the Carnatic would 