


| for the manufacture of Salt fhould be made 
P eageyies ether coin fhould be confidered as a tender of 


payment, A fir rence to thefe principles, and facility afforded to individuals, in the 

cape cheap recoinage of lig Heat or coinage of bullion, would foon remove the 
“ ards, y nage, . 

F satse, Wah i seer the een Sees for the gold coin be not 


Ri apenty flees coin to pafs in exchange for the gold thould be left to find its propor- 


Lordthip in Council to judge how far it would be pragicable f 


115. It is of no effential importance to the fecurity of private rights. and property that ¢ ° 


Judges of which are bound by folenin oaths to adminifter the laws impartially between 
ord. By mrbmelgotiny abprok af Sh legitadie’repellinstsind hy fubjeting the Gor 
116. By promulgating in pris our legiflative regulations, and by fubjecting the Govern- 
ment itfel an its eee ty to the, panies thofe regulations, we afford to the 
i nts of thefe provinces the beft fecurity compatible with our fituation in the country 
oe enaction of falutary laws for the protection of the powers, rights, and property of the 
Be, and for the due adminiftration’ of the law. ‘In addition to the check ‘impofed on the 
gillative power by the publigity.of its proecedings jn India, thefe proceedings (as oblerved 


‘by your Board of sesénne) bome Seeulany, under the aupertee of the public. authorities at 
’ aay Phe ~ 


Rome, who thereby poffels the means ofan efficjent contro! 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 209 


117. The powers and conftitution of the Courts of Judicature, a5 founded on the principles 
aboye ftated ; the limitations to the authority of the executive Officers, particularly ‘the fub- 
jection of the Officers entrufted with the coileétion of the Revenue to the jurifdiction of the 
Courts; the mode of deciding petty fuits, as well as the forms of proceeding; are ampl, 
detailed in the feveral regulations referred to under this head by your Board of Revegue, 2 
in the fubfequent modifications of thofe regulations, as contained in the printedcode. Thefe 
laws, being founded on general principles, are no doubt, as ftated by your Board of Revenue, 
applicable in their general {pirit to the territories under your Lordihip’s immediate govern- 
ment. - : 

118. The pypoinlnen of licenfed Pleaders has fully anfwered the ends expected by the 
inftitution. The perfons who may be felected for this office in the Courts to be eftabiithed 
under your Lordihip’s Government, will be as well qualified as the perfons originally felected’ 
in Bengal: at all events, an early feleétion will tend to produce perfons properly qualified. 
Perfons more competent will never be found at any future period, until the new conftitutioa 
thall open a channel for the employment of their talents: individuals muft be introduced inte. 
the profcilion in order to acquire the neceflary qualifications for the exercife of it. _ 

119. It is a queftion of the greateft importance to determine what law fhall be adminiftered 
in the Courts to be jnftituted under ol Larcibig's authority. i 