89. Your Lordfhip in cc i} is already apprized of the articles af esos export which it 

Coromandel. To 


ounce 
is our with to continue exempt from duty on importation on the coaft n 
thefe may be added any other articles which, from confideration of local convenience, you may 
with to continue exempt from Sar 

90. We requeft that your Lord{hip in Council will tranfimit to us a lift of any articles, the 
produce of the’coaft of Coromandel, the exportation of which it may be an object to you to 
encourage. To thefe we fhall add fuch other articles as it may be an object, ox contideration 
of local convenience here, to admit free of duty. 5 

91. We cntirely approve the plan of rendering the fale of {pirituous Tiquors and intoxi- 
cating drags a fource of public Reyenue under your Prefidency. As the confumption of 
theie articles canuot be abfolutely prevented, they fhould be taxed fo high as to preclude, if 
pollible, the immoderate ufe of them, = s Saisie La eae ti) 

g2. Wearenot aware of any local objection at your Prefidency to your adoption of thik 
principle to the fullef extent. 

9 ‘The expediency of adopting the experiment recommended by your Board of Revenue 
i a paragraph, is’a quefiion which your Lordfhip in Council will be moft competent to 
ecide. 7 : eiaee’ 
“94. The large Revenue which is now realized with fo much facility in Bengal from the 
‘exclufive right of manufaciuring Salt referved by Government, night be u ‘ally injured 

by admitting the cdait Salt on any other terms than thofe on which it is now admitted. 

“os: We fhrotld not deem it prudent, without the moft deliberate confideration, to adopt 
any incafure tending to affect fo material a branch of the permanent réfourees of the Com- 
‘pany in Intl; we'thall, however, give the queftion the moft ferious attention, "The objects 
whieh thé plin‘has ia view, namely, the reduction of the fervice of Salt in Bengal, and the 
nprovemeit oF the“refourees of the Britith territories under the immediate government of 
your Lordihip in Council, are of great importance. ey: 8 
, 96. We have no kefitation, however, in authorizing you to form your permanent fettlement 
‘onthe principle, that the Company will, at fome period of time, pofliefs the exclufive right of 
Panufacturiig Salt from Ganjam at Cape Comorin. Ne EE 

*"97. Sinée ‘ehs yy concluficn’ of the lace treaty with the Rajah of “Panjore, no other 
abiixcte exifis to the accomplifhment of this Patt important arrangement for improving 
‘the refourees of your Revenue, than the defettive rights of the Company within the diftricts 
of the Nabob of Arest, delet sw Sas 

of. The Right honourable the Governor General will immediately addvefs his Highnefs, 
urgiig him to relinguifh to the Company the manufacture of within his territories, 
credit béing allowed in his kifts for the full amount of the Revenue which his Highnefs has 
enjoyed from this article, on an average of years. WR Petied 
99: We fhould hope that the Soria ingonfiderable intevelt sg his Highnefs in a 
-queltion, will not infizence hitn to oppofe any obitacle to the adoption of an arrangement w! 
alone might be expetted te defray hs aflaidonal ‘charges of the new {yitem of your te 