

to” 


E circumftance affecting the good order of the country; and they dhould 
be fubjected to punithment, extending in certain cates of-enormity to the forfeiture of their 
“eltates, if it fhould appear that they had connived at robberies, or protected robbers or other 
difturbers of the public peace. ; “4 uy 
14. The | iftrates, and the Officers‘aéting under them, fhould ee ‘the moft. abfolute 
control over allthe village watchmen of every.defeription. “At the tame time, thefe watch- 
‘men fhould be carefully tecured in tie lands, fees and allowances; of which they are ftates, in 
the 571ft paragraph of the Report of the Board of Revenue, to bein the enjoyment, fo.as to 
tender their fervices efficient to the original purpoles of their inftitution. Thete perfons will + 
no doubt become extremely wieful in preferving the peace of the:country under ‘the reforms 
propofed by-your Board ot Revenue. - SPINS pate St 
19a. ‘Ltis the ‘peitiaryidaty and intereft of the Sovereign of every country ‘to provide for 


svill be ineusred in applying this principle tothe Company’s poffcitions uader immediate 
canthoriy, sibbemreu oportion to ¢ loffes now fetabed hess the Donbeadveocdcialetion 
Resenze, hoe e 


‘any fettled 2 of civil or criminal juftico, and without any rule for the decurity of the 
poet the lives of its fubjetts. | a ¢ : 

144. If no confiderable increate inthe Land Revenue be obtained immediately, we fhould 

that a progre!live augmentation of all your refources imuft be the gradual effect of. 

‘fyitem now to beuntroduced. Atall-eveats, the refources which may be.reatonably expected 
‘to arile from the fale-of the Havilly lands, from the tax on fpiritacusJiquors and‘drugs, and 
from the refervation of the exclufive right of manufacturing fait, together with the reduttion 
‘of all ufctets cftablifmnentsant charges, aud.the adoption.ot the other ee ee meen 
‘bythe Board of Revenue with a view to meet the increafeot expenfe, will more ‘than-com- 
Fee for the immediate charges attending the efublithment ‘of the new confiitution. 

‘nefe points oflasdable enonomy dLthe mott minute attention, andwe-ase fatished that. 
they willreceive the ruileft cuufideration froin your LordShip in Cowneit: x sad OP 


2 ea 245. Under 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. ~ zn 


145. Under this conviction, and perfuaded that without avowed and liberal allowances to 
the public Officers no fyitem of government can prove efficient or pure, we direct that the 
allowances of the Judicial and Revenue Officers be fixed on the teale fuggefied in the 
Report of the Board of Revenue, provided that feale fhall appear to your Lordthip to be 
contormable to the principles ftated in thefe paragraphs. 

146. The number of Zillah Courts of Adawlut to be ereGed, as well as, the eftablifhments 
of Minifterial Officers to be attached to each, will of courfe be queftions that will require your 
Lordthip’s particular care. ‘i 

147. Having turaifhed your Lordfhip in Council with our fentiments on all the material 
points ftated in the Report from your Board of Reyenue, we fhall ftate the titles of the 
several regulations which appear to us neceflary to be paffed, in order to eftablith the firft 
foundation of your internal (sovernment, and to render its conftitution as perfect a8 may be 
practicable in the infancy of the propofed reform. ; 