

68. On general principles no other authority than a Court of Juftice ought to be vefied 
with fo delicatea power as that of conduéting a ferutiny into the titles by which individuals 
hold their property.” The Siate, fo far from benefiting by ferutinies fo conduéied, ofteit 
fuffers Re: atthe fame time that the invettigation is frequently converted into an inftrament 
of oppreilion. % . y e 4 t 

69. Thofe who are confeious of the invalidity of their titles, will ufe every endeavour to 
fupport them by fraud and corruption; on the other hand, thofe whofe titles are good, who 
mult neceffarily be uncertain with re{pect-to the refult of an investigation not conducted by a 
Court of Juftice, ma; ly be compelled to purchafe the fayour ot the Officarsappoiated | to 
Feport upon their titles. r , ah. aa 

7o. Thefe are not the only evils/arifing from fuch ferutinies ; befides preventing the State 
from the recovery of its juft dues, the property ittelf is renticred of Jeis value to the indi- 
viduals, as the apprehention of the recurrence of fimilar ferutinies’ will deter the holders of 
the lands from improving them. eee 

71. Good pdlicy, and the principles of the fyftem which is abattto be introduced into the 
derritories_ under your Lordthip’s immediate government, demand that no individual fhould’ 
be difpoffefied of property whith hé actaally holds, until his title to it fhall have been proved 
invalid by a regular fait in aCourt of Juttice. In all queftions refpecting property betweew 
the Government and its fubjeéts, the Government ought to proceed for the recovery of its 
rights under the law by the iame procels as is preferibed in fimilar caies to individuals. x 

72. No 


206 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sclott Cotnmiittee on 


” 72. No poffible injuries can arife to the public interefts ‘from the adoption of thefe prin- 
ciples. The Government in its legiflative capacity, by framing the jaw in the firft inftance, 
welcribes the itandard of the public rights. It is equally for the interefts and honour of 
overnment that it fhould leave its rights to be determined by that fiandard in the Courts 
of Juftice. 

73- Thele principles ought not to be confined to the cafes of alienated lands, but ought to 
be extended to all cafes whatever in which Government may be parties with individuals in 
matters of property. ¥ 

74. We therefore direét that the inveftigation ftated to be commenced into the titles of 
the holders of lands exempted from the payment of Revenue, be fufpended; and that you 
frame a regulation, declaring the fpecific rules by which tenures fhall be deemed valid or 
otherwife ; and that it be made the duty of the Board of Revenue, and of the Officers under 
them, to profecute in the new Courts of Juftice for the refumption of fuch tenures as may 
appear to be holden under invalid ts. 

75: The adoption of this principle will give fecurity to all valid tenures, at the fame time 
that it will !ead to the difcovery, according to regular procefs of law, of thofe tenures which 
have been fraudulently abesined: 