

120. In civil cafes little difficulty occurs; in queftions of inheritance, marriage, caft, or 
other matters affecting religious prejudices, the law of the parties muft of be made 
the rule of decifion, as in ence: With refpeét to other civil cafes, and to the forms of 
Peay it will be fufficient to refer your Lordfhip in Council to the regulations enacted 
in Bengal. oR fT ct 

rete ‘The Mahomedan criminal law, with certain modifications, has been made the rule of 
Aecifion in criminal cafes throughout the Company’s poffeilions in Bengal, including the city 
and diftriét of Benares, although that city is confidered as the metropolis of the Hindoo 
religion. % 5 a t 

aa We are. perfuaded alfo that (with few exceptions) it will be adyifeable to adopt 

-the fame law in. the territories {ubject to the immediate government of your Lordfhip in 
Council, under fuch modifications as experience may fug; , io 

123. We are-not aware ‘that the Hindoo criminal law hms in any inflance heen adopted - 
sue practical fyftem, nor would it, we believe, anfwer in any refpect the ends of public 

uftice. : f mat Sp 
124. This objection to the introduction of the Hindoo law as a fyftem of eriminal jurifpru- 
dence, renders it not only unfit to be adopted as a general code, but even as a rule for the trial 

of offenders prong Hindoo religion. The adoption of this law would be particularly 
-offentive to the Mahomedans, who have been accuftomed to impofe their own laws, inftead 
of being fubjected to the laws of other countries. Wig h ra. S  ER ni, 

- 425.°The introduction of the Englith criminal law, under whatever modifications, would, 
-we are confident, be equally ulgultige ee every clafs of our fubjects. It would be in yain to 

expect that either Mahomedans or Hindoos would ever Linea ee ‘that law, 
-or that they would ever be attached to its principles; independent of thefe objections; infur? 
mountable obfiagles would arife to the due adminiftration of that law, from the want of 
sperfons com) to its adminiftration. ae APN G 
126. The Mahomedan criminal law was the rule of the adininiftration of se through- 
out the Mogul Empire. We hi that law was often ill adminifiered, and in fome placce 
proehy neyer adminiftered at it was ueverthelefs the avowed law of the country, as 
applicable to criminal cafes. : i i ‘ 

+ 127. This obferyation is more particularly applicable to the Northern 
and all the countries ceded by Tippoo Sultan, or conquered from that Prince. — r " 
128. Whilft thefe countries were fubject to their former Mahomedan rules, criminal cafe 
were decided with reference to the tenets of the religion of the Sovereign and to the-efla- 
-blithed ufages of the Mogul Empire. rai $ Pian 

129. Having found this law eftablifed (however imperfectly or ¢ y adminiftered) as 
r on, it will new form 


the Jaghire, 


the rule for the trial of offences when the couatry came into our 
the moft natural bafis of our criminal code. ; ae ae 
130. We are certain that this law will be moft congenial to all our Mahomedan fubjects; 
and the Hindooecannot object to its exercife, as they have been y amenable to the * 
Mohomedan criminal courts in every part of India to which the .Mahomedan power has 
extended. ee SR Se toma 4 
131.' It is. to be prefuined that this law, with which the Hindoos are well acquainted, and 
which théy have always ‘the means of ftudying, will be preferred by them to."the Engli 
common law, with which it is {carcely poflible they thould ever become conyerfant. .) + ** 
192. Perfons-tkilied in the Mahomedan law can always be obtained from thete provinees, 
(if they canhot be found in the Peninfula) to affif in. its adminifiration. Thi td 3 
oe Supreme Englif) criminal law, or any code immbdiately fouaded- 
ado} ‘ PRC : + seg oP sree 
Pig indapeuteat of thefe confiderations, the introduéFion -6f- dn” entirely Hew code of 
sriminat Jaw might, excite ferious alarm throughout our péfieliions.. “Phe meafuré would be 
repugriant to. the fundaméntal principle of our policy in India,-which has been to+ddmis” 
nifter to ives théittowirlaws-in'the mild and Deneroiesetpine ef the Batith Confti-+: 