

76, Thefe in{tractions indeed correfpond with the Regulations in Bengal for the inveftiga- 
tion of the titles of the holders of alienated lands, which wehave already authorized your 
peat Council to adopt as the general rules for your guidance. 

77. With regard to the amount of the affeflment of the Havelly lands, the date for the 
affelfinent of thofe lands, as well as of the other parts of the Company’s potfefiions (exclufive 
of the recent conquefts) referred to by your Board of Revenue in the g82d, 383d, 384th, and 
985th paragraphs, and detailed in the Statements marked B and C, annexed to the Report, 
appear to be founded upon the moft correct materials which you can hope to obtain, and 
fhould therefore be le the bafis of your proceedings. 

78. The obfervations of the late Collector of the Jagheer, on the introduction of the pro- 
poted fyftem, are founded on principles of the moft erroneous policy. We entirely concur in, 
the remarks of your Board of Revenuc on thofe obfervations. 

79: Your Lordfhip in Council having already received our infirnétions for forming the 
fettlement of all Poligar countries on the bafis of your infiructions to the Board of Revenue 
under date the oth November laft, we have at prefent pore} further to add on this head, 
than that your Lordfhip in Council has our fanction to extend the principles of the inftrac~ 
tions contained in this r, tothe permanent {ettlement of the Poligar countries, as far as 
thofe principles Lapplicable. The quettion a peeing his Highnels the Nabob 
of the Carnatie’s account of the Defha Cawal Tee, will be hereaiter confidered in 

“a fepnrate difpatch, ee, Le ; 

~ So: Your Lordship has alf6 our fanétion to proceed to form a decennial fettlement of the 
country of Tanjore, to be eventifally declared perpetual. The principles preferibed in. this 
a 


ier, for forming a fettlement of the Company’s immediate pofieilions, fhould, as far as they 
be applicable, be adopted as the bafis of the fettlement of Tanjore. . 
. 81. The ts ufed in Hee relative to the expediency of refuming, from the Land+ 
holders and ail other individuals, the right of cole eing, the Sayer or internal duties, and of 
fubfequently abolifhing thofe duties, are equally applicable to the countries fubject to the, 
immediate authority of your Lordfhip in Council, and you haye our fanction for the adoption 
of the meafures. ~~ 

82. Thofe arguments, however, do not apply to the continuance of the colleétions of the 
Janel. Cuftoms at Fort St. George, and at the different towns and ports on the fea coals, In 

sry of continuing thofe collections we entirely concur. 

83: On the grounds fiated by your Board of Revenue, no neceflity appears to the Governor 
‘General in Council to exift, for granting’any compenfations on account of the refumption and 
aoe cE ‘the Sayer, excepting in the cafes referred to in the 434th paragraph of the 

's Report. 

84. As conneéed with the fubject of the ‘Sayer duties, we think if proper here to obferve, 
that the calamities which the. hern Cirears and particular purts of the Carnatic have at 
different periods fuffered from 'y of grain, may be aicribed to the decay of the tanks, 
refervoirs, embankments, and er works of a fimilar nature; to the extreme poverty of the, 
lower claffes'of the Cultivators of the lands, and to the obftruéiions exifiing to de free tranfit 
of grain throughout the Carnatic. ~ ° 