


Extra& of a Letter from the Right honoursb!e the Governor General to the Right 
* . -honourable Lord Clive, &e: dated the 8th January 1800. 


1, After the fulleft confideration of the Report of your Board of Revenue, I now have the 
honour to. tranfinit to your Lordfhip a detailed plan for the preliminary arrangement of a 


new fyftem of government for the territories {ubject to your immediate guthority, This. 


pian is contained ia the Difpatch from me in Couneil of the gift December 1799, and I truft 
it will enable you immediately to. commence the falutary work which it has been referved 
for your Lordthip’s happy adminifiration to aecomplifh at Fort St. George. The very able 
and comprehenfive Report of your Board of Revenue, and the intelligent and fatistatory 
Letters of Mr. Webbe to Mr. Barlow, afford abundant proof that your fervice can fupply 
both knowledge and talents fufficient to thé execution f the great plan im my contein- 
platioa, without the aid of any perfon deputed from Bengal, ad without requiring the 
attendance of Mr. Cockbume or of any other of your public Officers at this Prefidency. I 
am fatsfied that I fhall not find the zeal and diligence of your fervice interior to its other 
qualifications ; much of both will be required at the firft troduction of a reform adverle 
to the prejudices, habits and interefts, of fo many of your fubjeéts, as well European as 
native. The Ditpatch of the 31ft ultimo coniprehends the whole outline of the fundamental 
points of your propofed. conititution; the detaiis mult be filled up at Fort St. George; and 
‘one reference to me avill probably caable your Lordfhip to fix the fettlement ov its firk 

363. . 31 principles. 


of 1793. 
of 1795. 


of 1793. 


of 1793. 


#16 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


principles. You will neveffiarily frame your proclamation (after due enquiry) as the foundas 

tion floxe of the whole fabrick, and you wili trantinit it to me previous to publication, when 

I will return it to you without delay. . 

i have not fent Mx. Tucker to-you, not only becanfe Tam perfuaded his prefence at Fort 

Gcorge is unncceffary, but becawe L with to leave to your fervice the fuil and undivided 
credit of its own refo 1 traf that this motive will be duly appreciated at Fort St, 
George, and that alacrity ant ardour will be fiimuiated to fuch exertions as thall, fatisfy the 
world that you are not lets equal to the arts of pesce, i polity, and wife government, 
than you have proved’ yourfelves to be to the moft cxtenfive and vigorous military 
operations. “If, however, you fhould ultimately with for any afliflance from hence (either 
native or European) { will readily contribute whatever can be fpared. 

3. 1 with to meet the queftion of increafing the general {cale of allowances at Fort 
St. George on the faireft and broadeft principles. Your Civil fervice mutt be rendered an 
object of honourable ambition azd competent avowed profit, before it can-become a proper 
inttrument of pure goverrment over a large empire. Lordthip will perceive that my 
oflicial Difpaten of the 31f atiords you the opportunity of bringing the queftion before me 
in detail, and I fhall not fhirink from its decition. | It is for narrow views and fhort fighted 