


which collectively are to forin the new conttitution of your internal Government, it will be 
tequifite that all the. regulations the titles of which are above ftated, as well as any 

ional regulations which you may find neceffary to form the firft foundation of the 
tem, fhould bear the fame date, ia fuse manner as the regulations paffed on the 
-eftablithincut of the new conftitution in Bengal in 1793.- 

235. It will be neceffary, however, that the fettlement of your Land Revenue, or at leaft 
of the important branches of it, fhould be concluded before your Courts of Judicature can 
tbe eftablihed, or the general fy ficm be introduced. 

236. The premature introduction of the judicial eftablifhments, if not detrimental to 
their object, would at leaft be cumparatively afelets, and the expente of them would be un- 
necellarily incurred. aeees Ba hohe fe 

237. A great proportion of the moft important rights and privileges to which the new 
Couris are ravended to give fecurity, are to be conceded by the terms of the fettlement; and 
the grant of thote rights and privileges in the firft inflance will beft explain to your native 
fabjedis the obje@ and advantages of the new judicial inftitutions, and of the whole frame 
of your refonned Conttitution. < 

238. With thefe favourable impreffions they will be lefs liable to be alarmed or to be dif- 
-fatistied at the fubfequent cfiablifhinent of any parts of the fyftem, of which they may be 
aunable, from ancient prejudices and habits, to form a juft comprehenfion. : 

239. Although the regulations in no refpeét reltri¢t the executive autkofity of the Govern~ 
ment, in forming the fettlement of the Land Revenue in the frit inftance, it is advifeable 
that the Agents employed to make that fettlement fhould unite all the powers of Goyern- 
ment in their own perfons, in order to obviate the embairafiments which might be oceafioned 
by interefted or ill-difpofed individuals, were any means aflorded of counteradting the 
eltabliflment of the fyitem. - 

240. Independent of thefe confiderations, the execution of a meafure of fo much imn- 


portance to the public interefts, and to the happinefs of the numerous body of people _ 


concerned in tue cultivation of the country, ought to be confided only to-the moft abic and 
experienced of your civil fervants, whofe time aud exertions it will fully engage. x 
241, During the progrefs.of the fettiemcut, your Lordthip in Council will bave time to 
prepare all the different regulations which are to conftitute the fytem, and fo obtain the 
finai fanétion of the Governor General in Council for their adoption. When that fettle- 
ment hall have been concluded, the Courts of Judicature may be-eftablifhed,.and the whole 
fyftein be brougit into operation. ‘The moft able and experienced of your fervants in the 
department of Kevenue will then be-transterred to the judicial offices, for which the know- 
ledge neceffarily acquired by them in the formation of the fettiement wiil reader them more 
eculiariy qualified; the charge of managing and collecting your Revenue in its different 
ranches will then properly devolve on the civil fervants, whole appointments to the fervice 
axe of more recent date. 
Yort Wiliam, We heve the hononr to be, &c. 
the 31ft December 17¢9. + 