

__peliey to practice that fallacious economy which leaves to the public Officers no alternative 
but poverty or difhonour. But it will be more wife, as well as a more juft and moral 
principal of ftate, to confider the great increale of Revenue ch the providentia} iffue of 
the war bas placed in our hands, as a fund defined to the improvement of our fervice and to 
the profperity and. happinefs of our fubjets of every defeription, as well thofe who have fo 
Jong futfered under the imperfections of our own Government as thofe whoin we have 
recently’ refeuctt from the Barbarous defpotiiin cf our cn No better rete 

. made by us for the ‘igual fuccefs of our arms, than to convert the refources dirved 
our conquelts to the purpofe of purifying the adminiftration of eivil and criminal juftice, of 
founding and fecuring the rights of property, and providing fafeguards for the lives and 

of thofe fubjecied to our power. Power fo yfed muit be durable; while the pur-- 

oppofite maxims, would be little fhort of a difgualitcation of ourfeives for the 

fe of fovereignty. I will not at prefent trouble your Lordthip with any further 

ion on this intercfting fubject, imtending foon to communicate to you feveral, fug- 

> geftions intimately connected with it; but not of fo prefling a‘nature as to require any deiay 
of this Difpatch, which I forward by fea and land. ‘ 

4. 1 cannot, however, conclude without offering to your Lordthip my congratulations 
on the profpeét now opened to you of-contributing io effentially to the welfure or the people 
committed to your particular charge, and without exprefling my fatisfaétion and conndence 

- in being enabled to convey my {éntiments on this moft important” and arduous occafion,, 

. through. fo honourable and fecure a channel as that of an adminifiratiod conducted by 
you. ; e e 


< 


(A true Extract.) ‘ 
(Signed) B. Wyatt, 
Atlist, 


Appendix, No. a. 


TREATY with the Nabob of Surat, dated 13th May 1800. 


Articles of. Agreement between the Honourable Eaft “India Company and their Succeffors,: 
and the Nawaub Nafur ud Deen Khan, &e. &e. and his Heirs and Succetlors, for the 
~ bettcr‘acdminiftration of the Government of the City of Surat and its Dependencies. 

WHEREAS the Honourable the Englith Eaft India Company have been fubjected to a 
heavy expente for the protection of the city of Surat; and whereas the exifting fy{tem of inter+ 
nal governinentin the faid city has been found inadequate to the*protection of the perfons and 
properfy of the inhabitants; and whereas the Right honourable the Earl of Mornington, 
Governor Geueral of the Britith pofleffions’ in India, and the Nabob. Nafur ud Deen, &e. 
are mutually defrous of providing more effectually for tie external defence of the city of 
Surat, and for the fecurity, cafe, andhappinefs of the inhabitants; the following Articles of 
Agreement are concluded, on behalf of the Honourable Engtith Company and their facceffors,. 
by tae Honourable Jonathan Duncan, Governor of Bombay, velted with full powers for that 
purpofe by the faid Governor General on the one part, and by tire Nabob Nafur ud’ Leen 
and his heirs and fucceffors on the other part. 