

196, Each of thefe regulations fhould refer to the ftipulations in the general regulation 
above fuggefted, announcing the eventual permanency of the fettlement, and fhould fj city 
the details of the agreements between the Government and the Zemindars or other Lau - 
holde:s or Farmers, and alfo the rights of the Ryots and Cultivators in their refpe@ive 
lands, as faras your prefent information on the fubject niay extend. 

197. The titles of the regulations which it appears to us fhould be formed on this principle 
are the fix fullowing: . 

198. “ A Regulation for forming a decennial fettlement of the Circars of Chicacole, Reg. 8 of 179% 

“ Rajamundry, Ellore, Muftaphanagur and Moortezanagur; and for converting the Com- 
* pany’s Havilly lands in thefaid Circars into Zemindarries, and forming a decennial fettlement 
“ of tne fame; and for declaring the {aid fettlements perpetual in the event of their being 
“ approved by the Honourable the Court of Direétors.” 

igg. “ A Regulation for converting the Lands in the Company’s Jaghire into Zemindarries, 
“ and. for forming a decennial fettlement of the faid Zemindarries. : 

200. “ A Regulation for converting the ceded and the conquered countries of Barramahal, 
“ Salem and Coimbatore, into Zemindarries, and forming a decennial fettlement of the fame ; 
“and for declaring the faid fettlement perpetual in the event of its being approved by the 
“ Honourable the Court of Directors.” . 

201. “ A Regulation for forming a decennial fettlement of the country of Tanjore, and 
“for declaring the faid fettlement perpetual in the event of its being approved by the 
“ Honourable the Court of Dizectors.” 

202. “ A Regulation for forming a decennial fettlement of the countries of the fouthern 
“and weftern Poligars {abject to the authority of the Company's Government by the treaty 
“ concluded with his Highnefs the Nabob of Arcot under date the goth July 1798 

‘203. “ A Regulation for forming a decennial fettlement of the country of Canara, and 
“ for declaring the fetrlement perpetual in the event of its being approved by the 
“ Honourable the Court of Directors.” 7 

204. “ A Regulation for preferibing rules for the conduét of the Board of Revenue.” Reg’. 2 of 1795. 

205. As the general rule for the conduct of the Collectors throughout the country will be 38 of 9795: 
the fame, one general regulation containing thofe rules applicable to all the Collectors 
will be fufticient. The feveral rules contained in the fecond regulation paffed in Bengai 
in 1793, will perhaps be found, with ome alterations, applicable to the Board of Revenue 
and to the Colleétors at Fort St. George. : 

_ 206, “ A Regulation for eftablithing in-each Zillah an Officer for keepitig the Records in Reg’.21 of 170%. 
“ the native languages, which-relate to the public Revenue, and prefcribing rules for the 15 of 170% 
“ conduét of the Keepers of the Records.” & 

207. The twenty-firft regulation paffed in Bengal in 1793 will affift your Lordthip in 
Council in traming this Regulation. : 