

unithment, it will be nécellary to infert claufes to that effect for the guidance of thole 
rts. 

175. “ A Regulation for efiablifhing a Sudder or Chief Criminal Court for the trial of 
“ the criminal cafes in the latt reiort.” : 

176. The regulations for the Nizamut Adawlut at Fort William will ferve as a model for 
conftitution of the Sudder or Chief Criminal Court at Fort St. George. 

177. The law by which offenders may be tried before the Courts of Cireuit, will of courfe 
pe the rule by which the final fentence of the Chief Criminal Court will be re- 
gulated, 

178. “A Regulation for empowering the Judges of the Zillah Courts, the Magiftrates, the 
Judges of the Provincial Courts of Appeal, the Judges of the Courts of Circuit, the Judges 
of the Sudder Civil and Criminal Courts of Adawlut, and the Board of Revenue and the 
Board of ‘Trade, to propofe Regulations regarding matters coming within their cognizance 
eipectively.” 

179. This regulation fhould correfpond with the twentieth regulation in Bengal paited 
in 1793, with this addition, that the Boards of Revenue and of (as intimated by the 
preamble) fhould alfo be empowered to propofe regulations to the Goyernor in Council, 
exprefsly limiting, however, this power to matters coming under the cognizance of sheir 
relpective departments. . 

180, “A Peat for the appointment of Vakeels or Native Pleaders in the Courts of 
“ Civil Judicature in the territories under the immediate government of the Prefidency of 
« Fort St. George.” : 

181. “ A Regulation for the appointment of the Hindoo and Mahomedan Law Officers of 
“« the Civil and Criminal Courts of Judicature.” 4 

182. “ A Regulation for the appointment of the Minifterial Officers of the Civil and 
Criminal Courts of Judicature.” 

183. “A Regulation for preferving complete the Records of the Civil and Criminal Courts 
« of Judicature, and for requiring the Zillah and City Courts to tranfmit monthly Reports of 
« the Suits decided by them, to the Provincial Courts of Appezl, and for requiring the Pro- 
« vincial Courts of Appeal to fubmit mouthly Reports of the Appeals and Caufes decided by 
« them, to the Sudder Adawlut.” 

184. “ A Regulation for admitting Perfons of certain defcriptions to fue in the Courts of 
« Civil Judicature as Paupers.” 

185. “ A Regulation for providing for differences of opinion between the Judges of the 
“ Provincial Courts of Appeal and Courts of Circuit, and pretcribing rules with regard to 
“ other matters connected with their official fituations.” 

286. “ A Regulation for granting Commiffions to Natives to hear and_decide Civil Suits 
“ for fais of Money or pertonal property of a value not exceeding 50 Sicca Rupees, and 
& preening rules for the trial of the Suits and enforcing the decifions which may be pailed 
“upon them.” . 

187. “ A Regulation for eftablifhing a Regiftry off Wills, and of Deeds for the transfer or 
“ mortgage of real property.” < 

188. “A Regulation for gaa the Rates of Intereft on paft and future Loans.” 