

208. “ A Regulation for the recovery of Arrears of the public Revenue affeffed upon the Reg'.14 of 1793. 
“lands, from Zemindars and other Proprietors of lands, and Farmers of Jand holding. farms got iggs 
“immediately of Government.” ee 35 of 1705+ 

209. The fourteenth regulation of 1793, and the: alterations fubfequently made in that 7 of 1799. 
yegulation (as detailed in the regulations paffed in fubfequent years) will furnifh your 

hip in Council with full information as to the means adopted in Bengal for enforcing 
payment of the public ducs. Pea fo : 

210. Lt will be a queftion for your Lordfhip in Council ta confider, how far it will. be 
‘expedient to declare Zemindars ‘and other Proprietors of Jand exempt froin perfonal confine- 
sent on acconnt of arrcars of Revenue, as is the cafe in Bengal. A 


air. This 


214 APPENDIX #o the Second REPORT from the Sele Cominitice on 


211. This exemption was granted to the Landholders from the confideration that their 
Jands mutt always prove a fuflicient fecurity for the difcharge of the public dues; that the 
character of a Landholder was thereby rendered move refpeétable, and that landed property 
would become more valuable, and 2 more detirable fpecies of property than it had ever heen 
before efteemed when the poffeffors of land were fubject to every {pecies of degrading 
-eocrcion. Thefe expectations have been fully anfwered. 

212. If your Lordthip in Council fhould deem it expedient to allow a fimilar exemption 
from confiiement in the countries under your immediate authority, it might at the fume 
time be advifable, under the prefent character of the Landholders, to qualify the general 
sule, by referving to Goverament a power of confining defaulting Landholders in fpecial 
cafes, in which, from ciscumtiances, you may find it neceflary to have recourfe to that mode 
of coercion. : \ 

q 3. 213. “ A Regulation for empowering Landholders and Farmers of land to diftrain and fell 
Regs, wet Hie “ the perfonal property of Snider Fanners, Ryots, and dependant Talookdars, and (in certain 
“7 of 1799 “ fpecified cates) their Surctics, for arrears of rent or Revenue; and for preventing Landholders 
“ aad Farmers of land confining or inMicting corporal punifhinent on their Under Farmers, 

“ Ryotts, and dependant Talookdars, or their Sureties, to enforce payment of arrears.” 
_. 214. The rales contained in the feventeenth regulation of 1793, with the amendments, 
founded on experience, contained in the th: h regulation of 1705 and the icventh 
regulation of 1799, are calculated to enable duals of every defeription to colieét their 
juft dues, without at the fame time giving them the means of committing abure and op 
xellion. Thefe rules, with modifications adapted to local cireumftances, may, we conceive, 

made general throughout the feveral diflricts under your Lordthip’s authority. 

Reg. 24 of 1793" 215.“ A Regulation for determining the continuance of the 'Feaiions heretofore paid by 
“ the Proprietors or Fariners of lands, ‘but included in the Jumama or Revenue payable te 
“Government.” 