

189, “ A Regulation for prohibiting Britifh Subjects (excepting Mis Majefty’s Officers 
“ ferving under the Prefidency of Fort St. George, and the Grea coyenanted Servants of 
“the Company, and their Military Officers) from refiding at a greater diftance from Fort 
“ St. George than. miles, unlefs they render theildlves amenable to the Courtsof 
“ Dewanny Adawlut in Civil Suits-which may be inftituted againft them by any of the 
“ defcription of perfons mentioned in Seétion Regulation _ and for enabling 
< Britith Subjeéts to recover any demands recoverable under the Regulations which they may 
“ have upon fuch perfons.” 

ago. “ A Kegulation for re-enatting with modifications the exifting® Rules which prohibit 
“ coyenanted Civil Servants of the Co:npany, employes in the adminiftration of Juftice or 
« in the colleétion of the public Revenue, from lending Money to Zemindars or other Land- 
“holders or Farmers of land holding Farms immediately of Government, or to the Under 
« Farmers or Ryots of the above-mentioned deieriptions of Proprietors and Farmers of land, 
“orthe Sureties of any of them; and for re-enaéting with alterations the cia Rules pro- 
« jubiting Europeans ‘of any deicription from holding poileflion of Lands which maybe 
; “ mortgaged 


the Affiirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. ~ 213 


“mortgaged to them, or purchafing or renting Lands for erecting Houfes or Buildings for 
“ carrying on Manufaétures or other purpofes, without the fanction of the Governor in’ 
“ Council.’ 

« A Regulation for the trial of Perfons charged with Crimes againft the State.” Reg, 41 of 1799- 

“ A Regulation for referring Suits to Arbitration.” Reg, 16 of 1793- 

“ A Regulation for the guidance of the Courts of Juftice in cafes of a difference of opinion Reg. 10 of 1796. 
“ on the meaning and conitruction of the Regulations.” : 

191. For the details of the regulations to be formed under the fourteen preceding titles, 

it will be fufficient to refer your Lordthip in Council to the correfpondent regilations pafled 
in Bengal in 1793, and to the regulations pafled in fubfequent years. 
’ 192. A Regulation for announcing the determination of the Governor in Council to Reg. 1 of 1793- 
“form a fettlement of the Land Revenue of the Britith poffeffions under the immediate 
“ government of the Prefidency of Fort St. George, and tor declaring that the faid fettle- 
“ ment fhall be perpetual in the event of its being approved by the Honourable the Court of 
“ Directors.” 5 

193. This regulation fhould be formed on the model of the proclamation inferted in the 
firtt regulation, paffed in Bengal in 1793. 

194. We conceive that nearly the whole of the ftipulations contained in that procla- 
mation, from their general nature, will apply in fubitance to all the territories under the 
Prefidency of Fort St. George, and the regulations fhould declare thofe ftipulations to be 
the befis of all the fettlements to be formed. 

193. With regard to the details of the fettlements, the difference in local circumftances 
in the feveral parts of your territories may render it evpelen that the rules for the fettle- 
ment in each diftri& or divifion, in which peculiar cut and ufages with regard to the 
Revenue prevail, fhould be formed into a feparate lation. 