

enemies ; 


Trom the Nawaub Vizicr to Earl Cornwallis. 


[Received 21f July 17873 

Your Lordfhip’s friendly letter, every word 
of which breathes firengtit of friend(up, and 
every fyllgble contains a performance of the 
duties of intimacy and clote connection, ar- 
rived. in a happy hour, and afforded me 
infinite fatisfaction. Its contents are, that it 
isthe intention of the Company, and alfo 
your Lordthip’s finn refolution, that there 
thould be no interference in the detaii of my 
overnment. That the refident at Lucknow 
thouid receive a pofitive order, that neither 
from himfelf nor from any other gentleman, 
nor from any perfon concerned with your 
Lordthip’s Government, fhould any kind of 
interference take place; that leaving my ad- 
minifivation entirely to myfelf and my Mini- 
fters, all interference from others fhould be 


ftopped, and reprefenting the particulars of: 


every matter which was contained in your 
Lordihip’s heart, the Nawaub Hyder Beg 
Khan has fully explained to me the particu- 
lars of your Lordfhip’s kindnefs and magnani- 
mity, which form the ground of your Lord- 
thip’sfettlement of my aftairs,and has occafion- 
ed me an excels of pleafure and happinefs. I 
who have day and night received fuch happi- 
nefs from a recollection of your Lordthip’s 
goodneis, now enjoy fuch /pleafure from per- 
ceiving your kindneis, and am {o thankful for 
it, that 11 would require volumes to exprefs a 
finall fhare only. It is well known, that from 
the life-time of the deceafed Nawaub until 
the day of his death and the commencement 
of my adminiftration, the friendthip with the 
Engiith gentlemen has been perfect, ftrong, 
and fincere, and by the help of Providence 
will every day increafe. At this time that fo 
great a Chiet, poffelfed of divine wifdom and 
underftanding, is arrived with tull power and 
authority for the arrangement of this country, 
it may be very well conceived that [ under- 
ftand {uch an arrival to have happened fimpiy 
from my own ‘good fortune, and entertain 
the moft periect confidence that all miy « 
will be fettled to my own fatisfaction, V 

: : Teipect 


. 


the Affairs of The EAST 


enemies; yet fince at all times 
is doubtful, prudence and wifcom require 
that every poilible means fhould be ufed to 
determine it in our favour. Your Excellency’ 
mutt be fenfible that there is no comparifon 
between the troops of the Company and 
thofe in your Excellency’s fervice, and that 
without the afliftance of the former, your 
dominions and authority would Le infecure. 
1 am convinced that if your Excelleacy con- 
fiders thefe opinions, you will be fenfible of 
the propriety of my propofition, and approve 
the continuance of troops whofe valour and 

difcipline can be relied on, in preference to 
thofe who ave unfkilful and_undifeiplined ; 
and I doubt not but your Excellency will 

agree ‘to the additional expenfe of eflective 
troops, where the object is tie defence of the 
country. For this reafon I do not hefitate 
to recommend to your Excellency to dif- 
charge fo much of your own Army as will 
allow for the additional expenfe attending 
the continuance of thefe cifective troops: 
your Excellency muft-alfo be fenfible tha! 