

Firft.—The friendthip fubfitting between the Honourable Englith Company and.the Nabob 
Natuz ud Deen Khan, &e. &c. is hereby firengthened and coniirmed; and the friends and 
the enemies of one fhall be confidered to be the friends and the cueanies of the other, 

Second.—The Nabob ud Deen agyees that the management and collection of the 
Revenues of the city of Surat, and the territories, piaces, aud other dependencics thereof, 
the adininiftration of civil and criminal juftice, and generaily the whole civil and military 
Government of the faid city and its dependencies, fhali be velied for ever entirely and cxciu- 
fiveiy in the Hoaourable Englifh Company. 

. Third.—It isagrecd that the Nabob fall be. treated on all occafions with the fame refpect 
and diftinclion as his prevecedfors. : 
Fourth. 


‘the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 207, 


‘Fourth —The Englith Company agree to pay to the Nabob Nafur ud Deen and his heirs, 
wut of the Reyeoues of Surat and its depcudeacies, in four equal quarterly payments, one 
Jack of Rupees annually ; which fhall be confidered to be the firft harge payabie from the 
faid Revenues. The Company alfo engage to pay to the faid Nabob and his heirs,.in 
addition to: the above-mentioned lack of Rupees, a proportion of one-fifth of the annual 
Revenues now atifing, or which may hereafter arife from. the faid city and its dependencies, 
after deduéting the {aid lack of Rapecs, the fum payable to the Mahrattas, and the.ch: 
of collection. The refidue of the Revenues, after the foregoing deductions, fhall be at. 
the difpofal of the faid Company. - 

Fifth—In order that the Nabob may at all times have full fatisfaGion in refpe@ to the 
Revenues of Surat and its dependencies, he the. faid Nabob fhall be at liberty to infpedt all 
the accounts thereof from time to time, or to {tation a Vakeel or Accountant, at his own 
expenfe, in all or any of the cfficcs of colleétion, for the purpofe of taking and tranfinitting 
to his Excellency copies of all or any of the accounts of the faid Revenues, 

Sixth.—Courts fhall be eftablifhicd for the due adminiftration of Civil and Criminal Juftice ; 
which Courts, agreeably to’ the ftipylations in the fecond article, fhall be under the fole 
authority of the Englith Eaft India Company.- The faid Court fhall. he compofed of 
Officers to be appointed by the Governor in Council of Bombay for the time being, and fhall 
be condnéted according. to fuch ordinances and regulations “Gramed with.a due regard to 
the exifting laws and ufages of the country) as fhall from time to time be publi by the. 
faid Governor in Council. of 

Seventh.—In complaints brought before the Courts of Juftice, ii which it dhall appear 
either by the application of the. Nabob, or the reprefentation of the defendant, at or before the 
time of’ giving inbis or her anfwer, or by the petition of the complainant, that both partics 
are relations or fervants of the Nabob, it is agreed that fuch parties {hall in the fir iiftance 
be referred for juftice to’ the Nabob, or to any perfon he may appoint to difpenfeit. Any 
complaint againft the relations or immediate fervants of the Nabob, by perfons of a-different 
aAefeription, fhall jn the firft inflance be made to the chief Civil Servant at Surat, whe hail 
refer it to the Nabob; who .hereby engages to order an immediate inveftigation to be made; 
or in cafe the parties thould defire it, to order the difputes to be referred toa proper arbitration, 
the Nabob engaging to bring it to a direét iffue, and to carry the fentence or award, if unfi- 
vourable, to his relation or fervant, into immediate execution. i 