

the fums neceflary for the ‘pay of thefe troops 
are expended in your doiminions. 

The fole object of this. propofition is to 
provide, in an effective manner, for the de- 
fence of your Excellency’s country ; and your 
Excellency thutt be convinced of the benefits 
derived from our prote@ion ; fince, whiltt all 
other parts of Hindottan have been involved 

“in war, and expofed to the devattations at- 
tending it, your Excellency’s dominions have 
remained in the falleft enjoyment of peace 
and fecurity. Many other arguments of the 
greateft weight might be urged in fupport of 
any propofition; but fuch is my opinion of 
the force of thofe [ have alledged, that I 
truft they will make the fame impreffion on 
your Excellency, and that there” is ‘no ne- 
ceflity to urge others. “ : 

It is my frm intention not to embarrafs’ 
your Excellency with further expenfe than 
that incurred by the Company, trom their 
connection with your Excellency, and for 
the protection of your couatry, which by the 
accounts, | find amounts to 50 lacks of Fyza- 


bad 16 fun Sicea Rupees anvually. In this 
fun are concluted ‘the allowance to the 


Nawaub 


Snadut Aily Khan, the ftipend of 
Has, and the expenfes of the Refi- 
the part of this Government; in 
utention, from the date on 
greement. thall take place, 
liency {hall not be charged with 
mm of 50 lacks of Sicca 
jai no further demand thail be 

ixeelleney hereatter shall find 


to demand any. es from 

iy, your Es i pay the 
.excefs upon a fair eftimate, nther of 
the two ‘brigades or corp ry thall be | 
recalled; or any coufiderable di tion ‘in 
their foreé fhall take place, T will ailow for 
the decreafe of the expente from the fum 


agzced to by your Excetioncy, agreeable toa 
fair calculation. In order that ‘no grouds” 
for a difference in opinion or ddubt ‘meaty: 
main as to the real. meauing. of, this article, 
Vehink it neceflary to, inform yo cellency, 
that. whenever there is a necelli 
alteration in the arrangemeat of thét® troops, 
1963.0 ck green 


INDIA COMPANY. 219 
refpeé to the continuance of the troops 
ftationed at Lutteghur, which your Lordfhip 
has written with {uch greatnefs and magnant- 
mity, that they may remain as heretoiore, [ 
have perfeGtly underfood. Notwithttanding, 
from the great weight of expenfe which my 
Goverament has experienced every year from 
thefe troops, and the negociations which 
have pailed with former gentlemen on this 
fubject in particular, aud the manner in 


which this matter was fettied after fo ruci: 


come to this quarter, which is the g! 
defire of my heart, and from which [ receive 
the greatcli pleafure, 1 have poftponed any 
mention of thefe matters until that happy 
time ; and now confider it neceflary firlt to 
procure your Lordthip’s good will, afterwards, 
that you will mention from your great good- 
nefs and grandeur, which is univerially known 
and gives fatistaGtion and cafe to my heart, 
that which will tend to my profperity and 
happincts, and mect with your approbatio 
therefore, with a view to preferve your Lord- 
fhip’s geod will and fatistaétion, 1 agree”to 
the continuance of the troops how ftationed 
at Futty Ghur and Cawnpore, and to their ¢y- 
penfes, and the ftipend of my bréther Meer 
Saadut Ally Khan Behader, the Tuncaws of 
the Rohillahs, the difburfements of the Kefi- . 
dency at Lucknow and other gentlemen, and 
the-Refident with his Majefty and Scindia, 
the expenfes of the Dawk, ie which your 
Lordihip has fixed at 50 lacks annually for me 
to pay. Your Lordfhip has alfo faid that my 