

ination have crept into the payment 
of the public money; and now that I am 
arrived, is the feafon for cultivation, &c. I 
am.engaged in the affairs of the Sirkar, and 
under the bleffing of God,.and your ‘Lord-: 
thip’s profperity, every matter will be ar- 
ranged, and the - arrears ,due to. Colortt 
Harper and other geatlemen, whatever, after 
inveftigation, they may amount to, to the 
end of February 1788, hall be paid atthe 
expiration of the time, The amount of the 
i its or Kiftbundy of the Company's 
money,on account of the difburfements of the. 
troops, Sic. has been paid into the Treafury 
from March 1787 to June 1787, and by 
God’s help it will be paid in future, agree- 
able to the Kiftbuady, monthly. £ hope te 
be honoured with letters from your Lord- 

ips oe 
, ENCLOSURES. © 


Billdrawn byCathmeery Mulland Bukhrageon__ 
Sheopertand and Beileffer Dofs, on account 
arrears due to the ationed at Cawn- 

re and Futty Ghur; and the battalion at 
acknow, to February 1787, amounting to 

In 23, 24, 25 and 26 Sun 


For ‘the reft, your Excellency may have} ~ pvecg eee 
ihe molt are confence that 1 will mot pinta by De on D* eee 
faithfully y engagements of | “on account the money of 
the part of the Honourable Company. his Royal Highnefs oe 204173 — — 
Ditto drawn by De on De 
on account the money 
of Nawaub Saadut Ally 
Khan, arrears to Feb- 
ruary 1787, Lucknow, 
Sieca - - - = = = 1,00,000 —~ —~ 
Appendix, No. 24. a 


AGREEMENT with the Nabob of Oude, dated 2oth March 1797. 


Tranflation of an Agtcement entered into by his Excellency the Nawaub Vizier, with the 
Honourable thé Governor General ‘at Lucknow, executed gothi March 1797. 


THE Governor General having 


reprefented “to his Excellency the Vizier, the late very great 


increafe cf the Company’s Military Eftablifhment, by the addition of feveral'regiments of 


cavalry both Europea: 


a and Native, and in compliance with the 


any’s orders, folicited 


his Excellency’s affiftance to defray the confequent additional expenfe; hix Excellency, inthe 
fallet reliance that the Company’ troops are ever ready, in con‘ormity to exifting engage- 


nents, 


222 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


menis, to proteé and defend his dominions againft the attacks of all enemies, agrecs as 
follows: 

‘That he will annually defray the actual bon’ fide expenfes of a regiment of European, and 
onc of Native Cavalry; that is to fay, two regiments (the ainount of which expenfes, however, 
the Governor General cannot at_prefent {pecity) provided they fall not exceed upon every 
aecount, five lacks aud a half of Rupees per annum. ‘The amount to be defrayed by monthly 
iialments, of which the firlt fhall commence with the month of Byfaac of the prefent 

‘uly year. 


(A true Tranflation.) 
(Signed) - B. Edmonftone, 
Perfian Tranflator to the Government. 


Appendix, No. 25. 
TREATY with the Nabob of Oude, dated 21f February 1798. 


Treaty between the Nawatb Vizier Saadut Ally Khan Behader and the Honourable the 
Englith Eaft India Company. : 