

Excellency and his Minificrs, and no appeals from any of its inhabitants are te be received 
by this Government. No European is to be permitted to refide in the- Nabob’s dominions, 
without the written permifiion of the Governor General. 

10, The fourth article of the treaty of Chunar relative to Furruckabad ‘is to he adhered te, 
that is, the Englith Refident is to be recalied from thence, either now or at the end of the 
year, and no other appointed in his ftexd. The Nabob Vizier is to pay due regard to the 
rights of the Nabob Mozuffer Jung, atid allot a fuflicient fim from the Revenues cf the 
country for his honourable maintenance; and, as the mothcr of the Nabob Muzuffer Jung, 
his brother Dil Dilure Khan, and Deep Chend, late Dewan, have given proof of their at- 
tachment to the Company, and Dil Dilure Khan has become an objeét of the Nabob’s re- 
fentment on this account, a provifion or penfion is to be fettied on them out of the Revenue, 
fo as to make them independent of the Nabob, and the faine is to be paid them by the Refi- 


dent at Lucknow. 


To the Vizier. 


[Written 15th April 1787.] 

The treaty conciuded between the Englith 
Company and the Nawab Sujah ul Dowlah, 
Was founded on contultations of mutual ad- 
vantage to both partics, and the fame prin- 
ciple ras continued to operate in confirming 
and improving the friendfhip and alliance 
between the Company and your lixcellency ; 
a connexion formed with a view to the 
interefts of both Governments ought to be 
perpetual: for this reafon, fince my appoint- 
ment to the control over affairs here, my 
intentions have been directed towards men- 
fares tending to fuppert and ftrengthen this 
friendly fyftem. 

As Y confider the Company's territories 
and thofe of your Excgiiency as the fame, 
the protection of your Excellcncy’s dominions 
is abfolutely neceffary, as from its fituation, 
the boundary of the whole, it is more ex- 

. pofed to foreign attacks. This protection 
cannot be effected in a propce manaer with- 
‘out the affiftance of the Company's troops; 
and I therefore beg leave to reprefent to your 
Excellency {uch cirewmftances as have after 
mature reHection occurred to me. With re: 
fpcét to the troeps ftationed at Fatty Ghur, 
which had béen withdrawn as ftipulated in 
the treaty of Chunar of 1781, L advife that 
they fhall not be recalled, but continued. 
make this propofal upon _a conviction that, 
from the extent of your Excellency’s domi- 
nions, the Englith forces now ftationed there, 
are requifite for their defence. Although 
there is no profpect of any attack on your 
Exellency’s territory at prefent, its fecurity 
inuft ultimately depend upon the firength of 
the force ftationed for its protection, and 

_ While this is fufficient, no one will dare to 
entertain views of, hoftility again your 
Excellency. Although the bravery and ditcip- 
line of the Englith troops on all occafions 
are well knowa, and have been proved even 
when their enemies have been on the pro- 
portion of twenty to one, and by the bleiling 
of God they will always triumph over their 