


[Received 21ft July 1787.) 
T have already tranfinitted your Lordfhip. 
an Arzie, mentioning my arrival at Lacktow 
wi 


‘the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


the truft vefted in Dil Dilure Khan by this 
Government, itis much to be feared that, if 
left unprotected, he will fufler from the 
yeientment of Mozuffer Jung: I therefore 
expeét that your Excellency will engage to 
caule fpecific penfions to be paid to thefe 
perions, at the expenfe of Mozuffer Jung, 
through the Refident of this Government. 

By the accounts fubfifting between your 
Excellency and the Company, a large ba- 
lance is ftated tobe due trom your Exceilency; 
neverthelefs, in conformity to the principles 
I have fo expreffedly declared, 1 am not 
willing to embarrafs your Excellency with 
any other demands than what are abfolutely 
neceflary ; I-propofe, therefore, that your 
Excellency fhall liquidate fuch part of the 
“fated arrears as may be due to the troops 
employed in your country. The Refidency, 
the Nawaub Saadut Ally Khan, and the Ro- 
hillah Chiets, on the date from which this 
new agreement fhall be declared in force, as 
well as the arrears due to Mr. Anderfon, and 
the remainder, whatever it may be, fhall be 
ftruck out of’ the account, and be no longer 
confidered as a demand of this Government 
on your Excellency. 

‘the fubftance of what is here written has 
been difcuifed in frequent converfations with 
Hyder Beg Khan, who has fhewn himfelf a 
faithful fervant to your Excellency, and a 
friend to both Governments.. As he is fully 
scqusinted with your Excellency’s interefts, 
and is your moft confidential fervant, and 
Prime Minifter, I have confidered him as 
empowcred to fettle any arrangement for the 
mutual benefit of the two Governments, and 
-have accordingly communicated to him with- 
out referve, all that has occurred to me, to pro~ 
mote this object, in the fame manver as if your 
Excellency were prefent; neverthelefs, as 
your Excellency’s concurrence and approba~ 
tion are neceflary to give a final fanction to the 
articles agreed upon by Hyder Beg Khan, 
T have thought proper to mention the heads 
of them in this letter, and the Nawaub Hyder 
Beg. Khan will: fully explain all the particu- 
jars to your ‘Excellency. 


2ah 


which has doubtlefs been perefed; an anfiwer 
from his Excellency the Vizier is now fent 
to your Lordthip’s kind letter; from it your 
Lordthip will learn the particulars of his 
Excellency’s inclination to preferve your 
Lordfhip’s pleafure. Your Lordthip bas fhewa. 
kindnefs and favour in the affairs of his Ex- 
cellency, and there is no doubt but will always 
fhew kKindnefs towards them, becauie his 
Excellency entertains great. hopes from your 
Lordthip. A Kiftbyndy for the money for the 
expente of the troops, &c. goes enctofed in 
his Excellency’s letter, and | enclofe a drait 
for the amount ftated by. Mr. Wombwell to 
be due to the troops up to February 1787, 
together with two other drafts on account, 
the amount due to his Royal Highnefs, and 
and the ftipend of Nawaub Saadat Ally 
Khan to February 1787. ‘They will be feen 
by your Lordthip; as a long period elapfed 
during my journey, diforder has taken place 
in feveral modes in the affairs, and delay and 