


-expenfes fhould not exceed the fum of 50 


lacks of Rupces, and that nothing farther 
fhould be demanded of me; and that whenever 
either of the two brigades or corps of cavalry - 
fhould be ‘recalled, or. any material diminu- 
tion fhould take place in thofe troops, ade- . 
duction fhall. be made agreeable to eflimate 
from the fum of 50 lacks; Lagree to this, and 
fend the Kiftbundy’; and f am well convinced 
alfo that your Lordtbip will be kind and 
favourabie towards me in whatever will tend 
to my cafe and profperity. 1 bave not 
anfvered every particular of your Lordihip’s 
kind letter, becaute [have heard that your. 
Lordship pofitively means to come to this 
and when we meet every matter will 
red in a moft friendly manacr ; now 
ng acquictcence to your Lordthip’s 
orders and preferyation of your pleafure, as, 
the principle of friendthip, 1 have complied. 
Your Lordthip writes with refpect to Fur 
ruckibad, that it fhall. be and continue‘as 
before under ne; and.that the Englith Refi- 
dout there, either now or at the end of the 
Fear 1104: Fuffely, fhall be recalled, and > 
after that period he fhall notremain, por any 
otticr be appointed ; agd you order me to ba 
‘kind ‘and jaft towards ‘the rights of the 
fawaub Mozuffer. Jung; and that in what - 
loser manner it may be neceiary to fetile and 
farrange the affairs of -that difin@, 1 thould 


Jor any igite afitable allowance to the Nawaub Mo-. 


fier Sung; and as the, Nawaub’s- mother, 
ees pee and 


‘ther by increafing or diminifhing the 
'y or infantry, this article does not tend 
p le it, provided the whole force thall 
nat be confiderably decreated, and that no 
additional charge be made on your Excel- 
Tency on account of {uch alteration, 
A Refident, as at prefent, will remain at your 
i ‘out, but as it js the intention 
npany, aud my firm refolution, that 
ce fhall take place in the details 
of your Exeellency’s Govern- 
crders fhall be fent to him, that 
he fhall ni r interfere himdelf nor fuffer 
jaterference, by publi¢ or private claims of 
exemptions of duties, or in any other mode, 
from any Britifh fubject or perfen under the 
authority of this Government; in fhert, leay- 
ing the whole management of your country 
to your Excellency and your Minifters, 
will put a ftop to the interference of others ; 
and in order to carry this effectually into 
execution, [ propofe to your Excellency not 
to fufler any European to refide in ‘your 
dominions without, my written permiflion ; 
Yn cafe that fltoald be granted, a copy of it 
thall be tranfmitted to you. 

If any European thall refide there without 
my permniflion in Writing, your Excellency. 
thall oblige him.to quit the country; or, if 
demanded fend him, tg the Relident on the 
part of the’ Company. 

A retrofpect into pait'tranfactions, and the 
friendfhip ‘fo.well known ‘to exifi between 
your Excellency and the Company, indnce 
ine to fiate the following circumftance. That 
for feveral years the inhabitants of your 
Excellency dominions, from motives of felf- 
intereft, have. appealed to this Government; 
and this has been a fource of injury to the 
aflairs of your Government. Lam determined 
to put a ftop to this practice, and to difregard 
their ‘apptications. But as the connection 
between the two Governments is univerfally 
known, firidt attention to juftice on your part. 
vill add credit and renown to both. 