

By order of the Right honourable the Governor General in Coancil. ‘ 
? si (Signed), G.H. BARLOW, 
: _ Chief Secretary to thé Govern’: 


Appendix, No. 22. 


(Political Department); dated 19th February 1794. : 
Para.12. AN’ upright and fteady adminiftration of juftice is above all others the fir 
ronfideration in forming a fy{tem for the. happ' of thofe new fubjects, and with that view 
we tranfinit you a copy of the Regulations which have been propefod by Lord Cornwallis, 
and fubinitted to our confideration as applicable to the provinces under the Bengal Govern- 
ment, and you will report to us how far.the principles: they proceed upon appear to you 
applicable to the fubjects either formerly or recently brought under our Govtmment of 
Bombay. We indeed flatter ourfelves that. the knowledge Ms, Duncan and Mr. Boddam 
have of thofe regulations, and their attention having been drawn to the fubject by the Inftrue- 
tions of Lord Cornwallis, will have induced the Commiflioners to have anticipated our wifhes 
in-this refpect. ; 


Extiadt Letter from the’ Court of Directors, to the Governor in Council at Bombay, . 


Appendix, No. 23. 


TREATY or A gteement with the Nabob of Oude, as {pecified in Extra&t Letter from the 
Governor-General in Council at Bengal (Seerct 3 t); dated 17th May 1787; 


a i’ ; 
with Enclofure, and Letter from the Nabob, dated oft Juiy 1787. 


Paza, 5. No. 2. is a Tranflation of a Letter from Lord Cornwallis to the Nabeb Vizier, 
containing bis. Lordfhip’s erangements with Hyder Beg Khan. The following are the heads 
of the agreement which we-confider as fettled. “ 

6. That the troops: fiationed: at Futty Ghur fhall continue, and that the Vizier thall dif. 
ch:¥ze fo much of his own Army as'will allow for that additional expen’. 

. 7. That after the 1ft March latt, the whole fum to be paid annually by the Vizier to the 
Company thall be 50 lacks of Fyzabad fixteen Sua Siccx Rupees, including the charges for 
the brigades, thofe of the Refideney, the allowance to Sandut Ally Khan, and the fipends of 
the Rohillas. There is to be no excefS, ualets the Vizier fhall demand more forces trom thé 
Company. In that cafe the iaereafe is to be provided for on a fair eftimate. If either of 
the two brigades or corps of cavalry fhould be recailed, or any confiderable dismsations it 

ty 


218 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT frei the Seles Committee on 


their numbers fhould take place, the Company are to allow the Vizicr for the decreafe-of 
the expente trom, the fum of 50 lacks, agreeable to a fair valuation. 

8. ‘The arrears due to the Refidency, to the troops, to Saadut Aily Khan, to thé Rohillas, 
and to Lieutenant Anderfon, arc to be paid to the 1ft March; but the other arrears charged 
to the Vizier are to be firuck out, and no longer confidered as a demand of this Govera- 
ment on his Exccilency. ‘ : ; 

g. A Refident is to remain at bis Excellency’s Court, but itbeing a fyftem now declaredly 
and pofitively eftablifhed, that the Company fhall not interfere in any refpeét in the dé- 
tails of the Vizier’s Government, firiét orders are’ to be fent to him neither to interfere him- 
{elf nor to fuffer any interference for any public or private claims of Britith fubje@s, or 
Peron’ under our authority. ‘fhe whele management of the Vizier’s country is left to his 