

Fifteenth —The Nabob Saadut Ally Khan engages and promifes that he will not entertain 
any Europeans of any defeription in his fervice, nor allow any to fettle in his country with- 
out the confent of the Company. 

Sixteenth—The Nabob Saadut Ally agrees that a fuitable maintenance fhall he provided: 
for the repated children of his brother, the late Nabob Atoph ud Dowiah, and willingiy 
promises to take them under tis protection. 

Soventcenth.—The Nabob Vizier ul Momaluck Saadut Ally Khan Pchader, for himfelfand 
his heirs, and the Governor General Sir John Shore, Varonet, on the part of the Eat India 
Comp: refpeétively promife to obferve fincerely and firicily all the articles contained and 
fettle:! ‘ui the prefeat Treaty, and they both agree that they will give the greate‘t attention to 
maintain between themielyes, their dominions and their fubjects, this preient Treaty, and ail 
the articles tettled by it, that all the tranfactions between the two States fhall be carried on 
with the greatett cordiality and harmony on both fides, and that the faid Nabob thail poitets 
full authority over his houihokd aflairs, bereditary dominions, his oops and his fubjects. 


Kiftbundy (or Initalment) for the payment ef the annual Subfidy. 


uft. Kift for the month ef January, payable on the 1% of February - 6,3 5.4 
ad. Kitt for the month of February, ik of March - 6,33,333 5 4 
gd. Kift for the month of March, payable on the iff of April - - - 633,333 5 4 
4th. Kitt for the moath of April, payable on the aft of May - - - 633,338 5 4 
he Kift for the month of May, payable onthe iit of June" = - - 693,333 5 4 
Kit for the month of June, payable on the iftof July - -.- 633,333 5 4° 
7th. (Sift for the-month of July. payable on the rf of Auguit = - 6,32.333 05 4.4 
363. 3b gh. Nit 


224 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


8th. Kift for the month of Auguift, payable on the 1 of September - 54 
oth. for the month of September, payable on the 1ft of O@ober - 54 
roth. for the month of October, payable on the 1ft of Noveruber  - 54 
1ith. Kift for the month of November, payable on the fief December - 5 4 
eth, Kift for the month of December, payable on the 1ft of January —- 5 4 


Total - S* R* 76,00,000 — — 


Signed and_fealed by Sir John Shore on the part of the Company, and the Seal of the 
Nawaub Saadut Ally Khan affixed to the Pertian copy, 21{t February 1798. 
(A true Copy.) 
(Signed) G. H. Barlow, 
Sec’. to the Govt. 


Appendix, No. 26. 


TREATY with the Nabob of Oude, dated 20th November 3801. 


Treaty between the Honourable the Eaft India Company and his Excellency the Nawaub 
Vizier 001 Mamaluck Yemeen oo Dowlah Nazim ool Moolk Saadut Ally Khan Behader 
Mobaurez Jung, for ceding to the Company in perpetual fovereignty certain portions of 
his Excellency’s Territorial Poffeflions, in commutation of the Subfidy now payable to 
the Company by the Vizier. 

WHEREAS by the ‘Treaty now fabfifting between his Excellency the Vizier and the 
Honourable the Eaft India Company, the Company hate engaged to defend his Excellency’s 
dominions againft all encmies ; and to enable them to fulfil that engagement his Excellency 
is bound by the afrocfaid Treaty to pay to the Company in perpetuity the annual fubfidy of 
feventy-fix lacs of Lucknow Sicca Rupees, and is further bound by the faid ‘I'veaty to defray 
the expentfe of any augmentation of force which, in addition to the nunber of troops ftipulated 
in the Treaty, fhall be judged neceflary to enable the Company to fulfil their engagements 
of defending his Excellency’s dominions againft all enemies : And whereas it is advifable that 
the funds for defraying thefe charges be eftablithed on a footing which {hall admit of no 
flu@uation of either increafe or decreafe, and fhall afford fatisfaction and fecurity to the 
Company in regard to the regular payment in perpetuity of all fuch charges; the following 
‘freaty, confifting of ten Articles, 1 Toncluded on the one part by the Honourable Henry 
‘Wellefley and Lieut. Col. William Scott, on behalf and in tae name of his Excellency the 
moft noble the Marquis Wellefley, K. P. Governor General for all affairs, civil and military, 
of the Britith Nation in India, by virtue of full powers velted in them for this purpofe by the 
faid Governor General; and on the other part by his Excellency the Nawab Vizier ool 
Mamaluck Yemeen oo Dowlah Nazim ool Moolk Saadut Alli Khan Behader Mobaurez Jung, 
on behalf of himfelf his Heirs and Succeffors, for ceding to the Honourable the Englith Ea’ 
India Company in perpetual fovereignty certain portions of his Excellency’s Territorial Poffef- 
fions, in coinmutation of the former and augmented Subfidy, and of all other fums of Money 
‘hargeable to his Excellency on account of the Company’s defenfive engagements with 
cecllency, 