

4thly, At the end of, thefe ten years a permanent fetthement will be concluded with the 
fame perlons (if willing to engage, and it no others who have a better claim fall come 
forward) for fuch lands as may be in a fufficiently improved fiate of cultivation to warrant the 
niecafure, on fach terms as Govcrament fhall deem fair and equitable. 


Appendix, No. 28. 


TREATY with the Nabob of Arcot, dated 12th July 1792. 
Treaty between the Honourable Eaft India Company and the Nabob of Arcot, 12th July 1 


WHERESS a certain Engagement entered into between the Honourable Eaft India Com. - 
pany aud his Highuefs the Nawaub of the Carnatic, bearing date 24th February ayy. . 
purpoie of cemcating an everlafting friendfhip with each other, and of contr.but y 
towards thedetence of the Carnatic and countries dependant thereon, whereby itwas fy wied 
that the faid Company fhould maintain a military force, and that the faid hawaub tiouid 
nnualiy a certain fam of money arifing from the Revenues of the Carnatic, and 1 
furnith fufficient and fatisfaétory fecurity, under certain conditions exprefed in the 
Engagement, for the regular payment of the fum ftipulated to the faid Company; and wi 
it appears, by the reprefentations of the faid Nawaub, contsined ina certain Letter adureiied by 
him to the Governor General, &e. &e. dated the 18th of the month Shawal 1206, Heyree 
(correfponding with the oth June 1792) that the refources of the Carnatic are not competent 
to enable him to perform the ftipulations in the faid engagement; and whereas it further 
appears, that the fecurity which the faid Nawaub agreed in the above-mentioned engagement 
to furnifh, for the duc payment of the ftipulated fam to the faid Company, is in its nature 
inadequate to the end intended; and whereas certain agreements have’ alfo been entered 
into, between the frid Company and the faid Nawaub, for the difcharge of certain debts 
i y the faid Nawaub to private perfons; it has been mutually agreed, in confequence of 
ove-written circumftances, that the Engagement aforefaid fhall henceforth be con- 
fidered by the contraéting parties as annulled, and no longer of effect or in force: and in 
lieu thereof, the Right honourable Charles Earl Corawallis, Knight of the moft noble Order of 
the Garter, Governor General, Ke. &e. &c. invefted with full powers on the part of the faid 

: : Honourable 


the Afirs-of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 297, 


Honourable Englith Eaft India Company, to dife& and control the affairs of the faid 
Company in the Eaft Indies, in the name of and for the {aid Company their heirs and. 
fucceifors on one part, and the Nabob W allajah Ameer wl Maik, Afoph ul Dowlah Unevah 
ul Deen Khan Behader Zufter Jung Sepah Salar, Nabob of the Catnatie, in his own name, 
and for himfelf and his fueceiior, his eldeft fon, Nabob Omdut ul Oronrzs Necjeen ul Mulk 
Affud ul Dowlah Haffan Ally Khan Behader Zcol Sircar Zang, aad his heiis and fuceeffors 
on the other part, agree to the following Articles; which fhall be binding on the reipsétive’ 
contradting parties for the purpofes contained therein, notwiilitianding all or any of the 
conditions ftipulated in, the Engagement dated 24th February 1787, to the contrary. 