

Fourth. tn order to prevent any lois ariting to either party from this meafure, it is 
anutually agreed, that the ditisi@ or dittri ich fhall thus be affumed by the faid Com- 
pany, ibali be entire, as metitioned in the faid Schedule, and not parts of difrids, 

Fifth. In confequence of this meafure, whereby the difiricts mentioned in the Schedule 
No. 2. become refponfible for any arrears that may aceruc in the payment of the above 

ftipulated 


or difiricts thas affumed thall be reftored according to 
fe of any of the Nits for the fum remaining (after 
‘1 that is to fay, for the fum_ of 
limited, the faid 


the: Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY: 229 


Hipulated Kitts, the faid Nawanb agrees that.he will not grant Tunkaws gi afi its on 

any account on the Reverues thereof; and if, contrary to this condition, any Tunkaws or 

aflignmnents fhould. exift where the Taid diftriéts or any of them Shall be aflumed: by the faid 

Company, fuch Tunkaws or affignments fhall be declared by the faid Company and the faid 
~ Nawaub tobe of no value, nor Tall they remain in effect. : 

Sixth. It is agreed between the contracting parties, that the above-defcribed Balance 
Account fhall be annually adjufted, and a Committee confifting of four refjpeCtable and capable 
perfons, of which two fhall be nominated by the faid Company and _ two by the faid Nawaub, 
thall affemble on the Pf day. of Augutt.of every year, commencing with 1793, for the pur- 
pole of adjufting and drawing out a fair and cquitable ftatement thereof. 

Article 9.—In cafe the faid Nawaub fhall at any time haye occation for any number of 
troops for the collection of his Revenues, the fupport of his authority, or the good order and 
poonet of his country, the faid Company agree to furnith a futlicient number of troops 

for that purpofe, on public reprefentation being made by the faid Nawaub to’ the’ Prefident 
and Council of Fort St. George, of the neceflity of employing fiich troops, and of the objects 
to be obtained thereby ; and the faid Nawaub agrees to lelray the additional expenfe oftuch 
troops fo long as they may be employed at his requeft;. this additional expenle being the 
fam over and above the expenfe of fuch troops while in garrifon or at fixed quarters: and 
it thall be at the option of the faid Nawaub to reimburte the faid furplus expente, either on 
tthe conclufion of the fervice on which fich troops may have been einployed, in money, or 
to add it to the debit fide of tue account called Balance Account, and more particularly ex- 
plained in the fecond condition of the 8th Article. 

Article 10.—The faid Nawaub fhall receive regular information of a negociation which 
Shall relate to declaring war or making peace, wherein the {aid Company may engage, and 
the interefis of the Carmatic and its dependencies may be concernéd; and the faid Rawaub 
hall be confidered as an Ally of the faid Company, in all Treaties which fhall- in any refpe@ 
affect the Carnatic and countries depending thercen, or belonging to cither of the contradi~ 
ing parties contiguous thereto; and the faid Nawaub agrees that he will not enter into a 
negociation or political correfpondence with any Europcan or Native Power without the con- 
fent.of the faid Company. ‘This ‘Treaty, coutitting of ten articles, and having two Sebedules 
annexed thereto, marked No. 1. and No. 2. fall be in force and have effect from. the 12th day’ 
of duly 1792, (correfponding with the 22d day. of thé month Zekaida 1206 Hejire) and the 
contracting parties having aflixed their refpective feals and fignatures to two counterparts.on 
the dates under-mentioned, that is to fey, the Right honourable Charles Earl Corn- 
wallis, K. G. Governor General, &c. &e. Kc. fhall_aftix his feal and fignature te one 
counterpart, on the part of the Honourable Englith Eaft India Company, and the Nawaub 
Walla Jah Behauder, Nawaub of the Carhatic, fhall affix his feal and dgnature to-another 
counterpart ; fhall be exchanged. = K e . i 