

Article 11t.—The friends and enemies of cither of the contracting parties ‘fhall be con- 
fidered the friends and enemies of both. 


Article 4th.-The Nabob Wallajah agrecs to pay to the faid Company, for the purpofe of 
mutual defence, the fum of nine lucks of Star Pagodas annually, as bis thie of the expenfe 
for the military force; and alfo, in confequence of certain agreements entered into by him 
with the faid Company, and guaranteed by the Parliament of Great Britain, for the perpole 
of liquidating certain debts due by the faid Nawaub, a farther fum of 6,21,105 Star Pagodas 
annually; which further fam of 6,21,105 St Pags fhall ceafe oa the full liquidation of the 
debts above mentioned, and the fum of 9,00,000 of S* Pagodas only {hall continue to be 
paid by the faid Nabob.to the Company. . 

Article 5th—The faid Nabob having agreed to pay the aggregate fum of 15,21,105 
S' Pag? as mentioned in the 4th Article, determines that the tributes or Peithcuth payableby 
the Poligars, as more particularly mentioned in the Schedule No 1. hereunto annexed, {hail 
be coll by the faid Company ; who agree to make the ‘colleGion thereof at their own 
expenfe and rifk, and that they will not increafe the demand on the faid Poligars beyond the 
{um mentioned in the faid Schedule, except in the cafe hereinafter mentioned, nor charge to 
the faid Nabob either the expenfe atiending the faid collection or any deficiencies that may 
arife thereon; but will give credit to the faid Nabob annually for the aforefaid tributes or 
Peifheuth, in part payment of the fum of nirie lacks of Star Pagodas above mentioned, 
without any deduction whatever. Although the contraéting parties have in the prefent 
Inftrwnent agreed, that the {um of 2,64,704 Pagodas 20 F. 26 C. be deduéied from the tum 
of nine lacks of Pagodas, as the amount of the tributes or Peifhcuth from the Poligars, yet 
fiould it on future enquiry appear that the faid Poligars ought, by virtue of any exifting and 
lawful engagements, to pay a larger fiun, it fhall be demanded of them; and any addition 
that fhall thus be made to the fuins mentioued in the faid Schedule, fhall be deduéted from 
the funy of nine lacks, in like manner with the fum of 2,64,704. 20. 26, and a fimilar deduc- 
tion {hall in confequence be made in the. Kifibundy hereinafter meniioned. It is. however 
mutuaily agreéd, that the diminution of this aggregate fum, which {hall take place on the fall 
liquidation of the debts as {pecified in the 4th Arucie, fhall make no change in this Article, 
which fhall, notwithftanding fuch diminution, remain in full force. eS 

Article 6th.—The faid Company, defirous of prelerving the. rights of fovercignty over 
the faid Poligars to the taid Nabob, engage. to the utmoft of thcir power, and confifient 
with the realization of the tributes or Perthcufh from them, to enforce the allegiance and 
fubmiifion of the faid Poligars to the faid Nabob in cuftomary ceremonies, and in furnifhing 
the Poligar Peons, according to eftabiifhed cuftom, for the collection of the Revenues, 
the {ujport of Government, and for the protection of the ‘property of-the inhabitants of 
the faid: Nabob’s couutry ; promifing that all aéts ‘of authority fhall be exercifed, and all 
accounts of Revenue (of which accounts the faid Nabob, if he fo withes, thall be annually 
furniihed with copies) thall bear his the faid Nabob’s namc. For the better execution of 
“this and the 5th ‘Tricle, the faid Nabob promifcs to furnifh to the faid Company, that is to 
fay, to their repretentatives the Prefident and Council of Fort St. George, the necellary 
orders, under his feal and fignature, addreffed to each Voligar, and to the purport hereot, 
without delay. . : r 