


Fighth—As the Enel'th Company are not poffefled of any fortrefs in the dominions of 
Onde, the Nabob Seauut Ally hen having the fulleft reliance on the f likip of the 
English Company, agrees to make over to their exelufive pofletiion the fort ef Allehabad, 

its buildings and appurtenanc nd the Ghauts immeciarcly dependant upon the 

er with a3 much land farrounding y be necotiary tor the purpeta 
ompany agreeing to le to the Nabot for the amount 
ed from the teid Ghats ; 
be necetli 


Onipan 
of this fort, 


aying the expenfe to which it is applicable; 
, for the fame reaions, furtier agrecs to advance 
repairing the fort of Futtygaur, withia fi 
ment, a fum net exceeding on the whole three lacks 


dominions of the Nawanb Ssadat 
le to change the prefent lations of the troops at 
Nabeb Saadut Ally Khan contents thereto, and 
2 places as i jadgod moft adviitble and convenien:, 
de attending tmoval and making cantonmeiis for the 


Ally Khan it thou! 
Cawapore and Fu 
troops fhe! 
and that he 


id 


y have incurred a confiderable expen fe by their exertions 
o of the Nabob ut Ally Khan, the faid Naboo agrecs, in coa- 
fideration thercof, to pay’ the Company the fum of twelve lacks of Oude Sicca Runces. 
Bleventh.—As the piyment of the Compony’s trcops in Oude depeads upon the rege! 
difeharge of the fubiidy fteted in qre od and gd articles of the ‘Freaty, tie faid hs 
engages to exert iis utmoft endeavours to difcharge the fipulated Kilts with punduality 
but if, contrary to the fincere intentions and exertions of the thid Nabob, the paymentof tae 
Kifts fhould fall into a , the faid Nabob Saadut Ally Khan engages and preinifes that he 
then give fuch fecurity to the Company, for the difcharge of the exifiing arrears and 
the future regular payment of the Kitts, as thall be deemed fitistaciory. 
—Whereas by the engagements now entered into between the Nabob Vizier 
and the Company the amount of the fubfidy is confiderably increafed, and many other per- 
manent charges upon his Excellency are iacurred, on a comparifon of his diiburfements 
with the affets of his country, it becomes neceflzry to make fuch reduétion in the {aperfluous 
charges of the public eftabliihments, fervants, &c. as may be requifite, and are contiftent with 


cclieney’s dignity and convenience; to that end, the faid Nabob agrees to confult 
‘ gn.ty g! 


ith the Company’s Government, and in concert with them devife the proper obje@s of 
fach reductions and the beft means of effecting them. 

‘hirteenth.—As the political interefts of the Nabob Saadut Ally Khan and the Englith 
Company are the fame, it is.expedient and agreed that all correfpondence between the 
Nabob Saadut Ally Khan and any Foreign Power or State thal! be carried on with the know- 
ledge and concurrence of the Company; and the Nabob Saadut Ally Khan agrees and pro- 
me that no correfpondence contrary to the tenor of this article thall be carried on 

nim. 

*Vourtcenth.—As the ftipulations in the commercial Treaty between the two States have 
not been enforced with due atteution, particularly in the dominions of the Nawaub Vizici, 
the contraéting parties agree to exert their utmoft endeavours to give force and cifect 
to them. 