

Article 10th_—This Treaty, confifting of ten articles, having been fettled and concluded in 
the city of Lucknow on the :oth day of November in the year of our Lord 1801, correfpond- 
ing with the fecond of the month of Rejeb of the year twelve hundred and fixteen Hejira, 
the Honourable Henry Welletley and Licutenant Colonel William Scott have delivered to 
the faid Vizier one copy of the fame in Englith and Perfian, fealed and figned by them; and 
his Excellency the Vizier has delivered to the Honourable Henry Welleiley and Lieutenant 
Colonel Willian Scott another copy alfo in Perfian and Englith, bearing his fea and figtature } 

ant 


226 APPENDIX ¢0 the Second REPORT from the Scle& Commitice cw 


Seatt engage 


and the Honourable Henry We 
to procure and to deliver to. hi 
copy of the fame uader the feal 
Geacral, when tie copy under their foul 


{A true Copy, 


» withia ti 
celeucy the moti nob, 
atares thal be returned. 


eveacy the Vidi 
eof hi 


ned) N. B. Edmonjicn, 
Sec’, to Govt. 


Appendix, No, 27. 


Proclamation of the Lieutenant Governor and Commiffioners of the Ceded Provinces 
in Oude, dated 14th Juiy 1802. 


WHEREAS it is the intention of the Britifh Government to adopt, atthe expiration of the 
prefent Vaily year, fuch a plan for the fettiement of the landed Revenue of the Ceded Pr 
vinees, 2s may be moft couducive to the profperity of the country and to the happi 
the inhabitants: And whereas it is of tae utinoft confequence to the faccels of toe meature, 
as well as to the interefi of the Zemindars, 'Talookdars, and all others concerned, tuat tie 
nature and terms thereof fhould be made known as e: as poflible ; 


Notice is hereby Given, 

tft. At the commencement of the Fully year 1210, the Scyer of every denominatio: 
be feparated from the Mal, or land Revenue, and a fettlement for the latter only con 
in ail: practicable cafes, with the Zemiadars or other actual Proprictors of the foil (x 
when diiqualified by notorioufly bad characier, or other good and fufticient caule) for a 
period of three years, at a fixed, equal, and annual Jumma; it being underitood that fuch 
Zemindars as are Huzzoor Tchteel, or allowed to pay their Kifts immediately to the Col 
lector of the Zillah, are to be refponfible for the police of their refpective Zemindarries. 

diy. At the expiration of the three years another fettlement will again be made with the 

fame perfons (if willing to engage) for three years, at a fixed, equal, aunuai Jumma, which 
Jumma fnall be formed by taking the difference between the annual amount of the firft ieaie, 
and the actual yearly produce of the land at the time of its expiration, and adding two-thirds 
of {uch difiercnce to the snnual rent of the firlt leafe. 

gdly. At the expiration of the fixth year a new fettlement will be made with the fame per- 
fons (if willing to engage) for a further period of four years, at a fixed, equal, annual 
Jumma, formed by adding to the anuual rent of the fecond three years, three-fourths of the 
net increafe of Revenue during any one year of that peried. A 