

Article gth.—The faid Rajah fhall receive regular information of all negociations which 
fhall relate to declaring war or making peace, wherein the faid Company may engage, 
and the intereft of the Carnatic and its dependencies may be concerned ; the faid 
Rajah fhall be confidered as an Ally of the faid Company in all Treaties which fhall in any 
refpeét affect the Carnatic and countries dependant thereon, or belonging to either of the 
contracting parties contiguous thereto; and the faid Rajah agrees that he will not enter 
into any negociations or political correfpondence with any European or Native Power with- 
out the confent of the faid Company. + 

Article 10th. —The faid Rajah agrees to allow for the fupport of Serfogec, the adopted 
fon of the late Rajah Tulagee, deceafed, the fum of Star Pagodas eleven thoufand (11,000) 
per annum, and for the maintenance of the widows of the laid Tulagee the further fam 
of Star Pagodas three thoufand (3,000) each pe annum; which payment fhall be made 
by equal monthly inftalments into the hands of the Company, or whomfoever they 
may appoint to receive them, and applied to the above purpotes, according to their 

cretion. 


This Treaty, confifting of ten Articles, and having two Schedules annexed thereto, marked 
Nos. 1. and 2. hall be in force and thall have effect from the r2th day of July 1792, corre- 
{ponding with the 22d day of the month Zekaida 1206 Hejira; and the contracting parties 
having affixed their refpective feals and fignatures to two counterparts on the dates under- 
mentioned, that is to fay, the Honourable Sir Charles Qakeley, Bart. Prefident and 
Governor in Council of Fort St. George, ihall aflix the feal and fignature to_one coun- 
terpart, on the part of the Honourable Englith’ Eaft India Company, and his Excellence 
Ameer Sing, Rajah of Tanjore, fhall affix his feat and fignature to another counterpart, thal! Sic Orig: 
be exchanged. ‘ 


Signed and delivered at 


Schedule, No. 1. 


Litt of DISTRICTS, with the amount of the Net REVENUES from each, at 
which they fhall be eftimatcd and ailumed, according to the 7th Article of the ac 
companying Treaty, in force from the 12th July, correfponding with the 22d Zekaida 
ag 


Hejira, 

Mannargoody - - Net Revenue - - = | 2,45,198 
Trivady woe es - jee es = = = | 1,49,6 
Mayaveram - — - - - Do - se - e608 
Putticottah - - - - De - - - 27,638 


Star Pag’ } 5,87,113 


By the firft condition of the 7th Article of the faid Treaty it is agreed, that the faid Com- 
iy fhall affume the management of fuch diftri@ or diftriéts, the Reveaue of which, after 
leduéting the charges of colleétion, fhall equal the amount of the Kift which fhall’ have 
fallen in arrear. : 
The faid Company therefore, by virtue of this condition, fhall affume a diftri@ or diftrias 
from among the above-named, the net Revenue of which fhall be, as near as poflible, 
equal to the amount of the Kift which fhall have fallen into arrear. 


Signed and fealed at 


