

roportion. 

e rticle oth—The Englith Company engages ‘to. take into confideration the actual 
‘ fituation of the families of their Highneffes the late Nabobs Wallajah and Omdut ul Omraht 
Behadcr, .2s well_as the fituation of the principal Officers of his late Highnefs’s Govern- 
ment; and the Britith Government fhall charge itfelf with the expenfe (chargeable on the 

Reveaues of the Carnatic) of’a fuitable provifion for their relpedtive maintenance. 
amount.of the bore: mnentonel expenics tobe defrayed by. the Company, fhall be difiributed, 
with the knowledge of the faid- Nabob, in fuch manuer as fhall be judged proper. 

_ Artie 1oth—The fgid Nabob Azeem ul Dowlah Behader fhall in all places, on all 
occations, and at all times, be treated with the refpeét and attention due to his Highnefs’s 
rank and Gtuation as an Ally of the Britifh Goverment, and a fuitable guard all be 
appointed from the Company's troops, for the protection of his faid Highnets’s perfon and 

alace. 

Pa ticle 11th.—The entire defence of the Caraatic againtt foreign enemies, and the main- 
tenance of the internal tranquillity and police of the country, having been hereby transferred 
to the Britith Goverament, his ‘faid Riehnets engages not to entertain or employ in his 
fervice any armed men without the confent of the Brith Government, who will fix, in con- 
cert with his Highnefs, the number of armed men neceffary to be retained for the purpofes 
of fiate. Such armed men as his Highnefs may in.confequence of this Article engage in his 
fervice, {hall be paid at the exclufive coft and charge of the faid Nabob. . 

, Article 12th.—The Honourable Eaft India Company fhall, in conformity to the’ ftipula- 
sions of this Treaty, enter upon the exclufive adminiftration of the Civil and Military Govern- 
meant of the Carnatic, on the 31ft day of July 18013 and his faid Highnefs the Nabob fall 
iffae orders to all his Civil and Military Officers, to transfer the difixt or diftricts aoe their 


the Miits of The BAST INDIA-COMPANY. 333. 


refpedtive-charge, to fuch perfons as fhall be appointed by the faid' Company. to manage the 

Hid dif, and alfo: to deliver to the perfons eppointed all records, aaootks, and Sfiial 

Papers belonging to their refpective Cutcherries or offices. “ ° 

is Treaty, bearing date the ot day of July, A. D. 1801, and confifting-of twelve Articles, 

having been executed by Edward Lord’ Clive, Governor in Council:aforefaid, on the one part, 

and His Highnefs Azeem ul Dowlah Behader on the: other is. hereby mutually inter- 

changed, the faid Edward Lord Clive engaging that a copy of the faid Treaty-fhall be tranf- 

, mitted to Fort William, for thé purpote of being ratified by his Excellency the mof noble. 

the Marquis Wellefley, K. P. Governor General in Council ; and that ae foon as the ratified 

‘Treaty fhall be received from Bengal, it fhall be delivered to his faid Highnefs, who will then 
return to his Lordthip the copy which he now receives, 