


to exercife its diferetion in the mode and on the exteat of the provilion to be made accord- 
ag 


234° APPENDIX #o.the Second REPORT from the Sclo& Committee on 


ing to the oth Article of the Treaty, for the fupport of the family and principal Officers of - 
the Nabob Mahomed Ally, and of the Nabob Omdut ul Omrah.’ Aud it is further explained, 
that notwithftanding the liquidation of the private debt of the Nabob Mahomed Ally, or of 
sthe debt dug to the Honourable Company, the faid fum of Pagedas 6,21,105, fhall always 
be deduéted from the net Revenue, and thall in no cafe be included in the net Revenue, 
previoufly to the determination of the.fhare to be allotted to his Highnefs the Nabob Azeem 
ul Dowlah Behader; it being the intention of the contragting parties that the faid fum of 

~ Pagodas 2,13,421, and the faid fum of Pagodas 6,21,105, hall be confidered to be permanent 
-dedutions in all.times to come fromthe Revenue of the Carnatic, : 

Signed) CLIVE. 


J. STUART, 
‘WM PETRIE. 
By the Right honourable the 4 : E. W. FALLOFIELD. 
Governor in Council. ie oie 
jigned) 7 
Chief Secretary to Government. 


“(A true Copy.) 
‘ (Signed) J. Webbe, 
Chief Secretary to Government. 


Appendix, No. 30. 


ExtraG Letter ‘from Governor ‘in Couticil_ at Fort St. George (Political Department), 
: ae _ dated 20th September 1793. 


44. WE informed your Honourable Court, in our Addrefs of the 2d May laft, 

-of the iteps we had taken with regard to the Tanjare country, and of the doubt we enter- 
ceca: of the propriety of entrufting the Rajah with the charge .and management of the 
public Revenue. i ‘ 
arr On this dccafion-we judged it expedient to refer to the decifion of the Supreme 
‘Government, who obferved to us in reply, that although they had no pofitive, reafon at 
prefent to entertain a much more favourable opinion of the Rajah of Tanjore than when 
they wrote to us on that fubjeét in December laft, yet as they had not heard -of any late 
irregularity in his condué, they were of opinion that under. all’ the <cireumftances in which 
the queftion was involved, it would-be more fuitable to our national charaéter, to hazard an 
error on the fide of lenity, than to expofe ourfelves to the imputation of having treated him 
with-exeeflive zigonr. : : <= oh oe 

46. They further obferved, that when the reference was made‘to. them in December laft, 
-on the Rajah’s offer to undertake the management of his country on the terms which he at 
firft rejected, he had juft before-been guilty of feveral thocking outrages; and exclufive of 
all other confiderations; -if his reftoration had immediately fucceeded his mifdeeds, it might 
‘have been doubted. whether our Government had feriowfly difapproved of thofe enormities, 

47. That as the Rajah had for fome time felt the moft pointed and public marks .of our 
-diftatisfaCtion, and of our abhorrence of bis conduct, as the Company by the-terms of 
the propofed Agreement would be ultimately fecured in the receipt of the ftipulated Revenue, 
and would befides obtain an_abfolute tight of affam ing. the management of the country 
‘whenever the Rajah thould fail in his engagements, the Supreme Government recommended 
that his Excellency’s offer to execute the ‘Treaty that was propefed to him, .fhould be ac- 
cepted, andthe management of his country red to him at-the conclafion-of the current 
-revenue year, : 