


ae 


236 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


to pay the amount of the faid three fums, being four lacks fixty thoufand (4,60,000) Star-. 
Pagodas, into the Company’s Treafury at Madras, at the following periods: ; 


1ft November - = = 30,000 
aft December - - - 40,000 
aft January - - . - 40,000 
aft February - = = = - 50,000 
aft March” - = - = == ~—-50,000 
aft April-  - - *+ =~ 50,000 
aft May - + = = 50,000 
it June oe = = 50,000 
at July - - (+ + 1,060,000 


Star Pagodas 4,60,000 


And it is mutually agreed, that at the end of three years, when the additional payment of 
ene lack fourteen thoufand two hundred and eighty-five (1,14,285) Star Pagodas per annum 
is to commence, a proportionable increafe fhall take place in each of the above infialments, and 
that on the liquidation of the private debts before mentioned a proportionable deduction 
thall be made on that account. * 

Article 7th.—If, contrary to the intentions of the faid Rajah, any Pact of the fums 
mentioned in the inftalment or Kiftbundy fixed by the foregoing Article, thall not be fully 
paid at the expiration of fifteen days from the time limited, in that cafe the faid Company. 

all aflume the management of, and make the colletion of the Revenues from the diftricts 
mentioned in the Schedule No. 1. hereunto annexed, according to the following conditions, 
and for this the prefent En: ment fhall be confidered fufficient authority the faid Com- 
pany, through their Prefident in Council at Fort St. George, giving immediate and explicit 
information, according to the tenor thereof, to the faid jah, who fhall on the arrival of 
the Company’s Officers in the faid diftriéts, recall all his Officers except one in each diftrict, 
which Officer fhall remain at the Sudder Cutcherry, and fhall be furnifhed annually by the 
Officer of the faid Company with the copies of the Sudder Cutcherry accounts of’ the grofs 
collections, and of the net receipts, under the atteftation of the Officer of the faid Company 
and of the Sudder Omlah of the diftrict. 

Firft.—The faid Company fhall affume the management of fuch diftri@ or diftri€s, the 
Revenue of which, after deducting the charges of collection, fhall have fallen in arrear. 

Second.—The faid Company agree that a deduction thall take place proportionably from the 
amount of the nine Kifts above mentioned, equal to the amount of the net Revenue of the dif- 
trict or diftriGs which fhall have been affumed as above, fuch deduction commencing from the 
day that the affmption fhall take place. It is hereby alfo mutually agreed, that an account 
called Balance Account fhall be immediately opened, for this and other purpofes hereinafter 
nientioned, bearing att intereft of eight per cent. per annum, between the faid Rajab and 
the faid Company, in which the {aid Rajah thall be debited for the balance in his 
above ftipulated payments, and alfo for the amount dedutted as above from the nine Kifts, 
and thal be credited for the net Revenue collected from the faid diftri@ or diftrids, the faid 
Company continuing to exercife- authority in and to make the collections from the famé, 
until in “confequence of the full liquidation of the private debts-and- diminution of the 
anaual fui to be for that purpofe ‘pal by the faid Rajah to the faid Company, according to 
athe 4th Article, the faid Balance Account {hall be equal on the debit and credit fide, and 
nothing fhall remain due to the faid Company ; then the faid diftrict or diftris thall revert to 
the management of the faid Rajah. As 