Article 2d.—In orderto execute the foregoing Article, in its.full extent, the Honourable 
Englifh Eaft India Company agree to maintain a military force, aud the Rajah of Tanjore agrees. 
tocontribute annuallyacertain fum of money, hereinafter mentioned, as his thare of the expente, 
ofthe faid'military force; the faid Rajah. further, agreeing that the difpofal of the faid tum, 
together*with the arrangement and employments of the troops fupported-by it, fhall be left’ 
entirely to the faid-Company. 

Article 3d.—It is hereby alfo agreed, for the further fecurity and defence of the countrics 
belonging and fubject to the contracting parties in the Carnatic, &c. that all forts thal! be 

ifoned by. the troops of the faid Company ; and in the event of war breaking out in the 
Gxtnatic and countries appertaining to either party, and dependent on the Cariiatic or con- 
tiguous thereto, it is nerenl for the better profecution of it, that fo long as it fhall laff, the faid. 
Company fhall poffefs full autliority over the Tanjore country, and’ fhajl- collect the Revenues 
thereof, ‘the faid Company hereby engaging that during fuch war they will pay to the faid-. 
Rajah. one lack of Pagodas. (2000 per annum, and one fifth fhare ‘of the net Revenue 
arifing therefrom,, that at the conclifion. of the war the Tanjore country fhall be veftored. 
to the Rajah, except in certain cafes, which are hereinafter mentioned. 

Article 4ta:—The Rajah of Tanjore agrees. to. pay to- the faid Company, for the purpofe 
of mutual defence, the tum of three lacks and fifty-thoufand. (3,50,000) Star Pagodas aunually, 
as hig flare of the expenfe for the military force ; and _alfo, in confequence of an agreement 
between the faid Company andthe: Nabob of the Carnatic, a further dum of. Star Pagodas 
one lack fourteen thoufand twe hundred and eighty-five (1,14,285) annually, on account of 
ethe Peifhcuth payable from Tanjore to the ‘aid Nabob, and by him transferred in abfolute 
right to the faid Cor y ; and the faid Rajah further engages to pay the fum of fixty 
thoufand (60,000) Star Pagodas per annum, towards the difcharge of certain debts, fandtioned 
by the faid Company, and fpecited in the Schedule hereunto annexed, No. 2. which further 
{ato of fxty thoufand (60,000) Star Pagodas thall ceafe on the full liquidation of the faid 


Article 5th.—Although the fams above mentioned conftitute the regular ftated payments 
for which the Rajah of Tanjore is to be accountable, under the heads of fubfidy, Peiheuth,- 
and private debts, yet the faid Company confidering the actual ftate of the Tanjore country, 
which has for many years been declining in its Revenue, and defirous of affording the faid 
Rajah as much prefeut relief as may be confiftent with the abfolate neceffities of their own 
Government, in the confidence that he will turn it to the improvement of his country and the 
-eomfort of his people, agree that a temporary fnfpenfion fhall take place with relpeét to a 
part of the annual payment fated in the foregoing Article, that is to fay, for three years, 
‘commencing with the prefent Fuily, or 19th Faly laft, they conient the annual demand of 
Star Pagodas one lack fourteen’ thoufand two hundred and eighty-five (1,14,285) on 
account of Peifheuth, fhall be pottponed ; and that the amount which at the expiration o} 
that period will become due, being Star_Pagodas three’ lacks forty-two thouland eight 
hundred and fifty-five '(3,42,855) fhall_be added to the arrears owing by the faid Rajah on 
+his former engagements, and the thid Rajah agrees, towards the liquidation of this agaregate 
balance, to pay fifty thoufand (50,000) Star Pagodas per annum, commencing from the 12th 
July laft, and to be continved till the whole thall be difcharged; and after the expiration 
of three years, to pay his annual Peiflicath of one lack fourteen thoufand two hundred and, 
eighty-five (1,14,285) regularly as it becomes due. Thus the whole fam to be. paid after 
expiration of three years, will be Star Pagodas five lacks fourteen thoufimd two hundred 
and eighty-five (5,14,285) for account of the faid Company, and Star Pagodas tixty 
thoufand (60,000) per annum, for account. of the private creditors. 
Article 6th—In order to. make good the fum ftipylated to be paid annually for three 
years, namely, Star Pagodas three lacks and fifty thoufand (3,50;009) on account of the Ra- 
jah’s thareof the military expente, fifty thoufand (30,000) Star Pagodas on account of arrears, 
aad ‘fixty thoufand (60,000) Star Pagedas on account of private debts, the faid Rajah agrees 
363. 30 1° 