

: 4Signed) CLIVE. 


Chief Secretary to Government, 


J. STUART. 
WM PETRIE, 
: ‘ E. W. FALLOFIELD. 
By the Right honourable the . ; 
Governor in Council, (Signed) J. Webbe, 


SCHEDULE of the Acceunt referred to in the 8th Article of this Treaty. 
Amount paid by the:Company to his Highnefs the Nabob’s Creditors, on ac z 
count of the ‘confolidated Debt efa77z- ttt te 26,4 7,388 
is DEDUCT i 
Receipts of Revenue from the Carnatic furplus to the fixed. Military, 
Subady, in the Fufly years 1260 and 1201 - te %} 8,29,481 
‘Tntereft at £6. per cent. for 43 years -. - = - ‘= = 2,239,060 
Ee . 10,53,444 
Balance due by the Nabob  - = 5 + or = + = 5 3593040 | 
ADD Es . 
Tntoreft for 4 years and 41 months at 6 percent ~~ - ~ ~~ ¥ 470,218 


Adual Balance, 8° Ps 20,6454 
Gigned) CLIVE. 


By the Right honourable the &, W. FALLOFIELD. 


Governor in Council. . 
(Signed). J. Webbe, 
; ” Chief Secretary to Government. 
<A true Copy.) 
(Signed) J. Webbe, 
Chief Secretary to Government. 


Separate Explanatory Articles annexed to the Treaty for fetiling the faoceffion to the 
Soubadarry of the Territories of Arcot, and for veliing the admailiration of the Civil 
and Military Government of the Carnatic Payenghaut in the United Company of 
Merchants of England trading to the Ealt Indies. : eee 


Article 1f.—Whereas it is ftipulated by the 3th article of the Treaty that the furh to be 
appropriated to the fupport of the dignity of his Highnefs the Nabob Azeem ul Dowlah: 
auder, thall be calculated at one fifth part of the net- Revenues of the Camatic; and: 
whereas the improvement of the faid Revenues, which under Providence may be ex; 
to arile from the effets of the prefent arrangement, may render the {aid fifth part greates 
than will be neceflary to the purpofes intended by the contraGting parties, it is ex. 
plained, for the better underftan ling of the fifth Article of the Treaty, that whenever the whole 
net Revenue of the Carnatic, including the fums to be deducted according to. the fixth 
article of the Treaty, hall exceed the fam of twenty-five lacks of Star Pagodas; then and in 
that cafe the fifth of fuch farplus fhall be applied to the repair of fortifications, to the 
-eftablifhment of a feparate fund for the eventual exigencies of war, or to the military de- 
fence of the Carnatic, in fuch manner as may be determined by the Governor in Council of 
port St. George, after the previous communication to his Highnefs the Nabeb Azeem ul 
lab. : : 
Article 2d-—Whereas it is ftipulated in the fixth Article of the Treaty, that the fum of 
Hagolas 6,21,105, on account of the private debts of the Nabob Mahomed Ally, fhall be 
from the amount of the net Revenue, previoufly to the determination of the pro- 
pote’ be paid to his Highnefs the Nabob, it is neverthelefs hereby explained, that it 
not be incumbent on the Honourable Company to -appropriate lands yielding a 
Revenue to the faid amount 2,13,421 Pagodas, but that ‘the faid Company fhall be at liberty 