


perenne 


Star Pagodas 


By 


the Misics of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, ——231- 


By the firft condition of the 8th Article of the faid Treaty it is agreed, that the faid 
Company fhalt affume the management of fuch diftriét or diftris, the Revenue of which, 
after deduding the charges of colleion, fhall equal the amount of the Kifts which fhail 
have fallen’ in arrear. The faid Company, th re, by virtue of this condition, fhallaffume 
a diftri@ or diftri@s: from among the above-named, the net Revenue of which fhall be as 
rear as poflible equal to the amount of the Kift which fhall have fallen in arrear. ; - 

i and fealed, at 

. Chepauk Houfe, & 

this 


Signed and fealed,’ at- ; - G@igned) —_-G. F. Cherry, 
; For William in Bengel, Z : SPerian ‘Trans* to the Gor General. 
"Appendix, No. 29. 


TREATY with the Nabob. of Arcot, dated 3af.July 1801. 


"'Wresity for fettling the fucceffion to the Soubahdarry of the Territories of Arcot, and for 
vetting the adminiftration of the Civil and Military Government of the Carnatic Payen, 
Ghat in the United Company of Merchants of England trading to the Eaft Indies. _ 


“WHEREAS the feveral Treaties which have been concluded between the United Company 
“of Merchants -of England trading to the Eaft Indies, and their Highneffes heretofore 
Nabobs of the Carnatic, have been intended to cement and identify the -interefts of the 
-eontraCting parties; and whereas, in conformity to the fpirit of the alliance, the faid Company 
-did, by the Treaty concluded on the 12th July 1792 with the late Nabob Wallajah, relinguifh’ 
extenfive pecuniary advantages acquired by the previous Treaty of 1787, with the view and 
~on the confideration of lithing a more adequate fecurity for the interefts of the Britith- 
Government in the Camatic; and whereas fabfequent experience has. proved that the 
intention of the contracting perties has not been fulfilled by the provifions of any of the’ 
“Treaties heretofore concluded between them; and whereas the Mutiud of ibe soukaninnty UE 
Arcot having’ become vacant, the Prince Azeem ul Dowlah Behader has been eftablit 
by the Englith Eaft India Company, in the rank, property and poffeffions, of his’ anceftors, 
Heretofore Nabobs of the Carnatic; and whereas the faid Company and his Highnefs the 
faid Prince Azeem al Dowlah Behader have judged it cxpedient that additional pro-- 
-wvifions fhould at this time be made, for the purpofe of Supplying the defects of all former 
engagements, and. of eltablifhing the connection between the faid contractin ies on a’ 
permanent bafis of fecurity, in all times to come: Wherefore, the following is now 
eftablithed ‘and concluded by the Right honourable Edward Lord: Clive,- Governor in 
Council-of Fort St. George, by and with the fan@ion and authority of his Excellency the . 
moft noble the Marquis Wellefley, K. P. Governor General in Councit of all'the Britith 
polelfions in the Eat Indies, on behalf of the faid United Com iy, on the one part; and by 
is Highnefs the Nabob Wallajah Ameer ul Dowiah Madarul Mulk Ameer ul Hind Azcem’ 
ul Dowleh Behader Shawkut Jung Sepah Salar, Nabob Soubahdar of the Carnatic, on his 
-own behalf, on the other part; for {ettling the fucceffion to the Soubahdarry of the Territories 
-ef Arcot, and for vefting the adminiftration of the Civil and Mili Jovernment of. the. 
‘Carnatic in the United y of Merchants of England trading to the Eaft indies, - 
Article 1ft—The Nabob Azcem ul Dowlah Behader is hereby formally eftablifhed in 
the fate and rank, with the’ dignities dependent thereon, of his anteftors; hetetofore Nabobs 
-of the Carnatic, and the pofleffion thereof is hereby guaranteed by the Honourable Eaft- 
India Company to his faid Highnefs Azeein ul Dowlah Behader, who has accordingly 
fucceeded to the Soubahdarry of the Territories of Arcot. . Ne ee 
Article 2d.—-Such parts of the Treaties heretofore concluded between the faid Eaft India 
Company and their Highneffes, heretofore Nabobs of the Carnatic, 2s are caleulated to 
firengthen the alliance, to cement the friendthip, and to identify the intcrefts-of the con- 
traGting parties, are‘hereby zenewed and confirmed, and accordingly the friends: or enemies 
-of eithet are the friends or enemies of both parties.: ate pig eng Bey 
Article gd—The Honourable Company hereby charges itfelf with the maintenance and 
fupport of the military force necetlary for the defence of ‘the Carnatic, and forthe protection 
‘of the rights, perfon, ‘and property of the faid Nabob. Azeem ul Dowlah Behader; and with 
the view of reviving the fundamental principles of the alliance botween his ancettors and the 
Englith nation, the faid Nabob Azcem‘ul Dowleh ftipulates and a that.he will not 
enter upon any negociation or correfpondence with any European or Native Power, without 
the knowledge and confent of the faid Englith . gh ie 
Article 4th.—It.is hereby ftipulated and agreed, that the fole and exclufive adminiftration 
of the Civitand Military Government of all the territories and dependencies of the Carnatic 
Payen Ghaut, together with the full and exclufive right to the Revenues thereof, (with the 
esoeption of {uch portion of the faid Revenues seh be appropriated for the Santen 
363 : : : 3 eae eg 