

48. In conformity with this recommendation we refolved that the country fhauld be de- 
livered up onthe 12th July, and notified this intention to the Rajah. His Excellency in 
<confequence-figned.the Treaty, and is now in complete poffeilion of-his former, autharit 
We have likewife made over to him, as we had done in fimilar circumftances to the Nabol 
-all the balances outftanding in the Tanjore country, for which fecurity had not been pre- 
‘widufly given, or which had not.been in a courfe of collection piior to the aforefaid date. 


Appendix, ‘No. 31. 


“TREATY with the Rajah-of Tanjore, dated 12th July 1793. 


“WHEREAS a certain engagement was entered into between the Honourable Englith Eat 
‘Tndia Company and-his Excelleacy Ameer ‘Sing, Rajah of ‘Tanjore, bearing date the 10th 
day of April 1787, for the puipofe of cementing an everlafting friendfhip with each other, and. - 
of contributing mutually towards-the defeace of the Carnatic and conntries depending, 
thereon, whereby it was ftipulated that the faid Company fhould maintain a military force, 
and that the faid Rajah of ‘Fanjore thoald pay annually a certain fum of money, arifing from 
the Revenues of his’ country, and fhould furnith fufficient and fatisfaCtory fecurity under 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. . 235 


certain conditions expreffed in, the faid Engagement, for the regular payment of the fum 
flipulated to the faid Company ; and whereas it appears that refources of the faid country of 
Tanjore are not competent to enable the faid Rajah to perform the ttipulations in the faid 
Engagements; and whereas it further appears that the Jeculy which the faid Rajah of 
Tanjore agreed in the above-mentioned engagen:ent to furnith for the due payment of the 
Aipalated fum to the faid Company; is in-its nature inadequate to, tle end intended; and 
whereas certain agreements have alfo been entered into betwcen the faid Company and the 
faid Rajah, for the difcharge of certain debts due by the faid Rajah to private perfons; it 
has been mutually d, in confequence of the above written circumflances, that the en- 
gagement aforefaid fhall henceforth be confidered by the contracting parties as annulled, and 
no longer of effet or in force ; and in lieu thereof, the Honourable Sir Charles Oakley, Bart. 
Prefident and Governor in Council of Fort St. George, on behalf of the United Cumipany of 
Merchants of England trading to the Eaft Indies, their heirs and fucceffors, on’ the one part, 
and his Excellency Ameer Sing; Rajah- of Tanjore, in his own name and for himfelt his 
heirs and fucceflors, on the other part, agree to the following Articles, which fhall be binding 
on the refpective parties for the purpofes contained therein, notwithftanding all or any of-the 
conditions ftipulated in the Engagement, dated 20th April 1787, to the contrary. _ 


Article 1{t.—The friends and enemies of either of the contrafting parties thall he confidered 
the friends and enemies of both. 


