

‘Third—W benever the faid diftri€t or diftriéts thus affumed fhall be reftored according 

. to the above condition, it is agreed that in cafe any of the Kifts for the fum remaining due, 
after the deduction of the fum of fixty thoufand (60,000) Star Pagodas, that is to fay, for 
the fam of five lacks fourteen thoufand two hundred and eighty-five (5,14,285) Star Pagodas, 
be not paid fifteen days after the expiration of the time limited, the faid Company fhalt 
poflefs equal power to affume the diftricts mentioned in the faid Schedule No. 1. as in the 
firft inftance, and fhall accordingly affume fuch diftri@ or diftricts, the Revenue of which, ° 
after deducting the charges of collection, fhall equal the amount of the Kift which thall have 
fallen in arrear; from which they fhall realize the balance _that fhall have arifen in the pay- 
ment of the Kitts, and hall give credit to the faid Rajah for the furplus and fubfequent net 
Revenues, in the part payment of the fum of five lacks fourteen thoufand two hundred and 
eighty-five (5,14,285) Star Pagodas. And in this cafe, the management of the diftrié or 
diftriéis thus affumed, fhall for ever continue in the. poffeffion of the faid Company, any 
thing contained in the gd Article of the prefent Engagement to the contrary notwithftanding; 
nee we faid Company agree to give to the faid Rajah credit for the net Revenue arifing 
therefrom. 

Vourth.—In order to prevent any lof arifing to either party from this meafure, it is mutu- 
cally agreed, that the dire or diftriés which fhall thus be affumed by the faid Company, 
frail bg entire, as mentioned in the faid Schedule, and not parts of diftriés. 

_. Fifth—In confequence of this meafure, whereby the diftriGs mentioned in the Schedule 
No. 1. become refponfible for any arrears that may acerue in the payment of the above 
ftipulated Kitts, the faid Rajah agrees that he will not grant Tankaws or aflignments, on any 
account, on the Revenues thereof; and if, contrary to this condition, any Tunkaws or aflign- 
: 2 meats 


« the Affairs of The EAST. INDIA COMPANY... .... 237 
seeta ER: 

ments fhould exift, when the faid diftri@s or any of them fhall be affumed by the faid 

Company, fuch Tunkaws or aflignments fhall be declared by the faid Company and the faid 

Rajah to be of no value, nor fhall they semain in effect. ‘7: 

ixth—It is agreed between the ‘contracting parties, that the above-defcribed balance 
account fhall be annually adjufted, and a Committee ‘confifiing of four refpectable and 
capable perfons, of which two fhall be nominated by the faid Company and two by the 

, faid Rajah, “thall affemble on the firft day of Auguit of every. year, commencing with 
1798 i the purpofe of adjufting aud of drawing out a fair and equitable ftatement 
thereof. * 

Article 8th.—In cafe the Rajah fhall at any time have occafion for any number of troops 
for the colfection of his Revenues, the fupport of his: authority, or the gogd order and 
government of his country, the faid Company agree to furnith a fufficient number of troo] 
for that purpofe, on public reprelentation being made by the faid Rajah to the Prefident in 
Council of Fort St. George, of the neceflity for employing fuch troops and of the objects to 
be obtained thereby; and the faid Rajah agrees to dehy the additional expenfe of fuch 
troops fo long as they may be employed at his requeft, this additional expenfé being the 
fum over and above the expenfe of fuch troops while in garrifon or at fixed quarters; and it 
ihall be at the option of the faid Rajah to reimburfe the faid furplus expente, either on the 
conclufion of the fervice on which {uch troops may have been employed, in money, or to add 
it to the debit fide of the account called Balance Account, and more particularly explained in 
the 2d condition of the 7th Article. é 