


232 APPENDIX fo the Second’: REPORT jrom the Sclv&t Committee on 


of the faid Nabob and for the fupport of his dignity) fhall be for ever vefted'in the faid 
Englith Company; and the faid Company fliall accordingly poffefs the fole power and 
authority of conitituting and appointing, without any interference. on the part. of the fiid 
Nabob, all Officers for the collection:of the Revenues; and of eftablifhing Courts for the 
adminiftration of Civil and Criminal Judicature. ‘ ie 

Article 5th..—It is hercby ftipnlated and agreed that one fifth part of the net Revenues of 
the Carnatic thal be annually allotted for the maintenance and. fupport of the. faid Nabob 
end of his own immediate family, including the Mahal of his late. Highsefs the Ameer ul 
“Omrah ; the faid Gfth part fhall te paid by the Company in monthly inftalments of twelve 
thoufand Star Pagodas; and whatewcr cireumftance may occur affecting the net Revenues 
of the Carnatic, the faid inftalmente thall not be lefs than twelve thoutand Star Pagodas. 
‘Whatever balance of the fuid fifth may remain due at the expiration of each year, fhall 
be liquidated upon the fettlement of the accounts, and the faid fittlx part thall be at the free 
difpotal of the faid Nabob, confiftently with the principles of the faid alliance. 

Article 6th_—The fifth. part of the Revenues, as ttated in the preceding Article, thall be 
calculated and determined in the following manner; viz. all charges of every defcription - 
incurred in the collection of the Revenues, the amount of the Jaghire lands, ftated in the oth 
Article in the Treaty of 1787 at Star Pagedas 2,13,421, and the fum of Pagodas 6,21,105, 
appropriable to the liquidation of the debts of the late Mahomed Ally, {hall in the firt 
inltance be deduéted from the Revenues of the Carnatic, and after the deduction of thofe 
three items fhall have been made, ‘one fifth bert of the remaining net Revenue (including 
the Polygar Peifheufh, which fhall always be calculated at the fum of Star Pagodas 
2,64,704. 20. 26. according to the Treaty of 1792) fhall be allotted for the maintenance.of 
the {aid Nabob, and for the fapport of his Highneti’s dignity. 

Article 7th. W Bereas it was ftipulated by the 4th Article of the Treaty of 1792, that the 
fum of fix lacks twenty-one thoufand one hundred and five Star Pagodas fhould annually 
‘be applied to the difeharge of certain regiftered debts due by the late Nabob Mahomed Ally 
to hepeieate creditors, under agreements concluded between his Highnefs and the Honour- 
able Company, and guaranteed by the Parliament of Great Britain, until the faid regiftcred 
debt fhould be liquidated; the Honourable Englifa Company accordingly hereby charges itfelf 
with the annual payment of 621,105 Fagoda trom the Kevenues of the Carnatic, until the 
zpmainder of the faid regiftered debt thall be liquidated. 

Article 8tb.—W hereas certain debts are due to the faid Company by the anceftors of the 
faid Nabob; and whereas it is expedient, in order that the prefent Treaty may include a 
somplete arrangement of all affairs depeuding between the faid Company and the faid 
Nabob, that an adjnftment thould be of: the afore-mentioned debts; wherefore the faid 
Nabob formally and explicitly icknow] the debt commonly called the Cavalry Loan, 
amounting, with its intereft, to Star Pagodas 13,24,342. 6. 47. and alfo the ion of the 
regiftored debt herctofore paid by the faid Company to the Creditors of the late Nabob 
Wailijah (according to. the anneyed Schedule) to be juft debts; and whereas, exclufively of 
the above-mentioned debts, other unadjufted debts alfo remain, which were referred to the 
adjuftment and decifion of the Governor General in Council of Bengal; and whereas the 
faid unadjutted débts have not becn determined according to that intention, the faid Nabob 
hereby engages, that whenever the faid determination fhall be made, his Highnefs will 
acknowledge to bea juft debt, the amount of the balance which fhall be fo declared to be due 
to the faid Company. {tis not, however, the intention of this Article, to caufe any’ 
diminution from the fifth part payable tothe faid Nabob; but on the-contrary, it is {pecified, 
that no deduction fhall be made trom the Revenue on. any account sehatever, excepting the 
three items itated in the 6th Article, previoufly to the determination of his Highnelt’s 