

39. The,Governor General in Council alfo furnifhed us with a Proclamation, to be pub- 
Tifhed immediately after Serfojee fhould be placed upon the Mufnud; ia which are ftated the 
opinions of the firlt Pundits it favour of Ameer Sing; the circumttances which led to doubts 
of the integrity of thofe opinions ; the meatiires in confequence taken for afcertaining the 
legality of them 3, and fini iy, the grounds upon which the deciGion of Sir Archibald Campbell 
had been fet afide, and the claims of the rightful heir afcertaincd, acknowledged, and 
-eftablithed. 

40. On the delivery of the letter to Serfojee, the Governor General in Council required 
that he fhould affent to certain ftipulations for fecuring the objects of the Committion, for 
continuing in force the Treaty of 1792 uhtil the permanent arrangements directed by the 
Secret Conimittce fhould be carried into effect, and for affording full protection and a fuit- 
able maintenance to Anicer Sing and his family. a 

41. Confidering the diferders which had prevaited in Tanjore during the adminiftration 
of Ameer Sing, tic little experience which Serfojec could be fyppofed to poifefs with refpect 
ito the management of his a ‘sire, and his want af proper Officers for the condaét of buiinets, 
added to the heavy demands which he muft difcharge immediately upon his acceflion ; the 
Supreme Goverinent were convinced that it would be equally conducive to his own interefis 
as to thofe of the Company, that Serfojee fhould confent to transfer the management of his 
whole country to the Company’s Government for a period of one or tivo years, Eos rex, 

jowever, 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 239, 


however, founded upon the interpretation which might be given to fuch a meafure, and which, 
had been anticipated by the Secret Committee, the Governor General in Council did not 
think it proper to direct us to make a propofition of {uch a nature to Serfojee; but if the 
Rajah, fenfible of his inability to enter upon the immediate management of his country, 
thould for that reafon exprefs a defire that we flould affume a temporary charge of it, his 
Lordthip in Council fan@tioned our acquiefeence in his Excellency’s withes. 

42. The Supreme Government recommended that the Commiflion which was to be 
appointed fubfequent to the inftallation of Serfojee, fhould confit of three perfons, and as they 
were fatisfied this Government were equally fenlible with themfelves how deeply the honour 
-of the Company and of the Britith Nation was concerned in repairing the injaries which the 
country of Tanjore and its lawful Prince had fuftained by the uturpation of Ameer Sing, and 
how imuch the attaiument of this important object muft depend upon the condué of the Com- 
million, they had the fulleft confidence that we fhould feicét for it thofe fervants of this 
eftablifhment who were bett qualified to difcharge fo facred a truft. Ms 

43. As we judged it of the greateft importance that there fhould be no delay in carrying 
their inftrudtions into exceution, we immediately trenfinitted our orders to the Refident at 
Tanjore, for the accomplithment of the feveral objeéts pointed out to us by the Secret Com- 
‘mittee and the Supreme Government. For the particulars of them we beg leave to refer Conf.a5 June, 
your Honourabie Court to our Proceedings, noted in the margin. ‘4 