

44. We had very toon the fatisfaétion of recciving a Report from the Refident, Mr. Torin, Do. 17 July. 
that he had in communication with the Commanding Cllicer, Colonel Afton, carried the 
whole arrangement for the depofition of Ameer Sing, and the inftallation of Serfojee, into 
effec without the finalleft commotion or difturbance, and that Serfojee had affented to the 
feveral ftipulations required of him. 

45. Upon this occafion Serfojee adverted to his own inexperience, and to the affiftance 
which he required from the Company’s Government in undertaking the adminiftration of 
his affairs; but was immediately apprized by the Refident, that this was a fabjeé which 
would require very ferious confideration, and that as he (the Refident) was not authorized 
to make any propoftion relative to it, whatever his Excellency might have to propofe muft 
be the voluntary and deliberate refult of his own reflections. : 

46. In atew days the Refident tranfinitted to us a formal and exprefs application, written Conf.17July, 
by Rajah Serfojec himfelf, that on account of his inexperience in publie buGnefs, and the 
difficulty of retrieving his affairs from the embarraflment into which they had been thrown, 
he requefted that his country might be taken under the managenient of the Company 
for a period not exceeding two years. 

47- In executing this delicate and important commiffion, we thought ourfelves fortunate 
in having upon the {pot two gentlemen of fuch known character and integrity as the 
Refident (Mr. Torin) and Cotonel Afton, the Commanding Officer, and we have no doubt 
that the detailed Reports will imprefs your Honourable Court, as they have impreffed us, 
witha high fenfe of their conduct. ¢ 

48. We were no leis fatisfied with the perfonal addrefs of Mr. Torin, in conveying to 
Rajah Serfojee fo juft an eftimation of the Company's juftice and faith, as well as of the 
fituation and circuinftances in which he himfelf was placed, as to fatisfy him of the expedi- 
grey and good policy of requefting the afliftance of this Government in the adminiftration of 

Ns ailairs. 

49. Upon taking this important queftion into confideration, our Prefident; Lieutenant Conf. eoJuly. 
General. Harris, delivered in a Minute, in which he bas ftated his reafons, at confiderabie 
dength, for thinking it an inexpedient meafure to take the country under the Company’s 


“« the mott prompt execution of juftice, uch as the ita} 
advice and attittauce of the Commiliion, could accom Bs 
50. Upon thefe grounds alone, and the recoliection of the evils infeparable from fuch 
frequent tranfitions of authority, the General hefitated to repeat his opinion of the propricty, 
of taking charge of the country, but when he reflected upon the impreffion which may be 
received of the Company's conduct, in contequence of fuch a transier, and upon the cireum- 
ftances which had been difplayed fince the tranfiniffion of our e@ions to tie Refident, he 
had no longer any doubt upon the {abject ; for though the ftipulations under which the 
Supreme Government had autiorized xs to accept tiie transi¢ uefionably juft and 
honourable, General Harris feared that even the Native Princes in alliance with the Coni- 
pany, from being fo much accuftemed in their own conduct to confound the poffeffion of 
power ‘with the abufe of it, would with difficulty be brought to belicve that the propofed 
extention of the Companys authority in the ccuntry bad taken place from any other 
fuggeftions than thofe of benefit to themielves, while thofe Powers difaffected “to the 
Company would reprefent the transier to have been the fecret condition of Serfojee’s 
elevation. : Z : 
51. Under thefe circumtftances, the General was of cpinion that the enquiry which the Secre: 
Commitice and the Supreme Government had direGed to be made, would be better accom- 
plithed by permitting the country to remain under the Kajah’s management, aided by the 
363. “3P . advice 