


240° APPENDIX so the Second REPORT from the Sele6t Committee on 


advice of the Commiffion, and thereafter of the Refident, than under the temporary govern- 
anent of the Company. 
Conf.20July, 52. In compliance therefore with the recommendation: of General Harris, we ftated thefe 
doubts, of the expediency of afluming the management of the country, to the Governor 
General in Council, and have requetted, his ultimate inftrations upon this important point. 
In the mean while we directed Mr. Torin to take fuch meafures as might beneceflary for the 
management of thofe diftriéts not already under the-management of the Company’s fervants ; 
and as this arrangement would only be of fhort duration, we called upon the Rajah Serfojee. 
to give his entire confidence and ‘co-operation to Mr. Torin, for the promotioa of his Ex- 
celleney’s as well as the Company's interetts. ‘i ; 
Confo7Suly, 53° Mr. Saunders thought it necoffary to explain, in a feparate Minute, the extent of his 
7 * concurrence in this reference to the Supreme Goverament ; his reafons for thinking the affump- ~ 
tion of the Tanjore country ineligible for a period of only two years, were entirely confined to 
financial confiderations, and to the lofs which we are likely toiuffer in our immediate reccipts. 
from that country ; but as the political of the fubjecthad been fully inveftigated, and con- 
fidered upon a more enlarged feale by thofe who were moft competent to judge of its 
importance, he limited his concurrence to the financial pert of the queftion. 
-54. We proceeded at the fame time to fele&t fuch of the Company's fervants as we judged 
capable of difcharging the duties of the Commiflion, under the injunétions of the Secret 
Committee and the Supreme Government, and we have in confequence appointed the Com-- 
miffion to confift of Mr. Benjamin Torin, Mr. Charles Harris, Mr. George Stratton ; for 
the particular inftru@tions with which we have furnifhed them for their guidance, we beg leav2 
Conf, 25 Sep. to refer you to our Proceedings, noted in the margin. 
Dd Jut 55-_We have grarited the Commillioners each a falary of two hundred and fifty (250) 
+34 “WY+ Pagodas per mont! daring the time they may be employed upon this enquiry. 
* 56. We have the fatisfaGion of acquainting your Honourable Court, that fince the change 
of affairs at ‘Tanjore, the neceflary arrangements have been made for appropriating to Amcer 
Conf.28 Aug, Sing his perfonal property, and for putting Serfojee in poffellion of tuck part of the litle 
% roperty which was found in the Palace’ as was atcertained to belong to the Sircar; this 
divifion was made by means of confidential perfons from both Princes, under the infpection of 
the Refident, and has received their entire concurrence ; a difpofition ‘has alfo been made for 
the future accommodation of Ameer Sing in a part of the Palace’ of Tanjore, which he bas 
chofen, with the confent of Serfojce, for his refidence; and 9 temporary provifion bas been made 
for the depofed Prince and his family, until, by the determination of the Supreme Government 
upon the queftion of affuming the temporary management of the country, we fhall be enabled 
to propofe a fixed ftipend for the fupport of Ameer Sing. 23 as ae 
57. During thefe tranfactions at Tanjore, Rajah Ameer Sing appears, by the Reports of the 
Refident, to have manifefted an entire refignation to this important ‘change, and Rajah 
Serfojee to have thewg a moft commendable degree of moderation in himfelf, and a difpofition 
to relieve, as much ag poffible, the fall of his rival. 