

This Treaty, confifting of fifteen Articles, being fettled this day, the 25tlr Oétober 17909, 
corre{ponding to the 12th of Alpefhy, in the year Sedhartey, by Kenjamin ‘form, ttq. 
on the part of and in the name of the Right honourable Kichard, Earl of Mor 
Governor General aforelaid, and by his Excellency Maha Rajah Sertogee Rajah ou bis 
own part, the faid Benjamin Torin, Lig. has delivered to his Exceliency Mata Rajah 
Serfogee Rajab one copy of the fame, figned and fealed by himfeif and uis Cxcelieucy, 
Maha Rajah Serfogee has delivered to Benjamin Torin, Efy. anotaer copy of tue tame, 
fealed and figned by himfelf; and Benjamin Torin, Efq. engages that the fait Treaty 
fhall be ratified by the Right honourable the Governor Geacrai, under his teal and 
Gignature, within forty-five days from the date hereof. 


(Signed) SREE RAMPRETAUP. 


Seal. 


(A true Copy.) 


(Signed) Benjamin Torin, 
i: Y Refident at Tanjore. 


Appendix, No. 34. 


TREATY with Tippoo Sultaun, dated 18th March 1792. 


DEFINITIVE Treaty of perpetual Triendthip, for the adjuftment of affairs between the 
Honourable the Englith Eaft India Company, the Nawaub AfophJab Behader and Row Pundit 
Purdhaun Behader, and Tippoo Sultaun, in virtue of the authority of the Right honourable 
Charles Earl Cornwallis, Knight of the moft noble Order of the Garter, Governor General, &c. 
invefted with full powers to dire and control all the affairs of the faid Company in the Eaft 
Indies, dependent on the feveral Prefidencies of Bengal, Madras, aud Bombay}; and of the 
Nawaub Azeem ul Omrah Behader, poffeiting full powers on the part of the Nawaub Afoph 
Jah Behader and Hurry Ram Pundit Taulea Bchader, poffefling equal powers on tie part of 
Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader; fettled the 17th day of March 1792, of the Chriitian wra, 
anfwering to the 23d day of the month Rejeb 1206 of the Hejira, by Sir John Kenaaway, 
Bart. on the part of the Right honourable Charles Earl Cornwallis, Kaight. of the moft 
noble Order of the Garter, &e. and Meer Aulum Pehader on the part of the Nawaub 
Azeem ul Omrah Behader, and Buckajee Pundit on the part of Hurry Kam Pandit Taulea 
Behader, on one part; and by Golaum Ally Khaua Behader and Ally Reza Khan, on b 

of TippooSultaun; according to the under-inentioned Articles; which, by tie biefling dy 
fhall_be binding on their heirs and fucceffors as long as the tn and moon endure, and the 
conditions of them be invariably obferved by the contrasting partics, o 

Atti 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 243 


le 1ft-—The friendizip fubfifting between the Honourable Company and the Sircars of 

xuun, agreeably tofuriner Trea thefirft with theiate Nawaub Hyder Aily Khan, 
bearing date 8th Augufi 1770, and the other with Tippoo Sultaun, of the 11th"of March 1784, 
is hereby congimed and increafed, and the Articles of the two former Treaties are to remain in 
full force, excepting fuch of them as by the prefent engegement ere otherwile adjufted : and the 
Sth Article of the fedond entioned Treaty, dated th rch, 1784, correfpondin g 
with the 18th of the mouth of Rubbee Ulaeny 1108 Helira, confirming all the privileges 
and iminunitics of trade which the dgcealed Nawab Hyder Aly Khen granted to the faid 
Company by the Treaty entered into In the year 1770, isalto by virtuc of the prefeut Treaty 
renewed and confirmed. 