


‘Separate Articles appertaining to the Treaty of Myfore, concluded on the 22d of June 
1799, correfponding to the 17th of Mohurrun, anno Hejira 1214, between the Honour- 
able eogiils Eaft India Company Behader, aud the Nabob Nizam ud Dowlah Afoph 

ah Behader. 


Article 1ft.—With a view to the prevention of future altercations, it is agreed between 
his Highnefs the Nizam the Nabob Nizam ind Dowleh Afoph Jah Behader, and the 
Honourable Englith Eaft India Company Behader, that to whatever amount the ftipends 
appropriated to the maintenance of the fons, relations, and dependants of the late Hyder Ali 
Khan and Tippoo Sultaun, or the perfonal Jaghire of Meer Kummer ad Dien Khan, fhall 
hereafter be diminifhed, in confequence of any one of the ftipulations of the Treaty of My- 
fore ; the contracting parties fhall not be accountable to each other on this head. 

Article 2d.—And it is further agreed between the contraciing parties, that in the event 
provided for by the cighth Article of the Treaty of Myfore, tw Is of ‘the fhare referved 
for Row Pundit Purdhaom Behader thall. fall to his Highnefs the Nabcb D 
Jah Afoph Jab Behader, and the remaining third to the Honourable Englif 
Company Behader. 


un ud Dow- 
h Eatt India 


(Nizam’s Seal.) 
Ratiied at Hyderabad, by his Highnefs the Nizam, on the 13th day of July anno 


Domini 799. 
{Signed) J. A. KIREKPATRICK, 
Refideat. 
(A true Copy.) . . i 
(igued) G. Buchan, 
Chie! Secretary. 


_ Tr ''-- Ooo 
Appendix, No, 36. 


TREATY with the Rajah of Myfore, dated 6th July 1799. 


A Treaty of perpetual Friendthip and Alliance, concluded on the one part by his Exeel- 
lency Lieutenant General George Harris, Commander in Chief of the Forces of bis 
Britannic Majefty, and of the Englifh Eaft India Company Paliader, in tne Carnatic and 
on the Coafi of Malabar; the Honourable Colonel Arthur Welleflcy, the Honourable 
Henry Wellefley, Lieutenant Colonel William Kirkpatrick, and Lieutenant Coen 

are 


254 APPENDIX 0 fhe Seoond REPORT from the Sete& Committee on 


Barry Clofe, on behalf aad in the name of the Right honourable Richard Lar! of 
Mornington, K. P. Governor General for all Affaixs, Civil and Military, of the Britifh 
Nation in India, by virtue of full powers vetted in them for this purpofe by the faid 
Richard Earl of Mornington, Governor Getteral; and on the other part by Maha 
Rajati Myfoor Kiftna Rajah Oodiaver Behader, Rajah of Mytore. . 


WHEREAS it is ftipulated in the Treaty concladed on the 22d of June 1799, between the 
Honourable Eatt India Company Bahader aud the Nabob Nizam ud Dowlatt Afoph Jah 
Behader, for fivengthening the alliance and friendthip fubfifting between the faid Englith 
Eat India Company Behader, his Highnefs Nizam ud Dowliuh. Afaph Jah Behader, 
and the Pefhwa Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader, and for effecting a fettlement of the 
Territories of the late Tippoo Sultaun, that a feparate Government fhall be cftablifhed in 
Myfore, and that his Highuefs Maha Rajah Myfoor Kiftna Rajah Oodiaver Eehzder fhall 
polfefs certain Territories {pecified in Schedule C, annexed to the faid Treaty ; and that for- 
the effectual eftablifhment of the Goverament of Mytore, his Highnefs fhali be attifted with 
2 fuitable tubfidiary force, to be furnifhed by the Englith Eaft India Company Behader. 