

his Highnefs Nizam ud Dowlah Afoph Jah Behader, proceeded to hoftilitics in vindi- 
cation of their rights, and for the prefervation of their refpective dominions from the perils 
of foreign invafion, and from the ravages of @ cruel and relentle!s enem 

And whereas it has pleafed Almight God to profper the juit caute of the faid Allies, the 
Honourable Englith Sompany B er, and bis Highnefs Nizam ud Dowlah Afoph Jah 
Behader, with a continual courfe of victory and fuccefs, and finally to crown their arms 
by the reduétion of the capital of Myfore, the fall of Tippoo Sultaun, the. utter extinétion 
of .his power, and the unconditional fubmilfion of his peeple: And whereas the faid Allies, 

* being difpofed to exercife the rights of conqueft with the fame moderation and forbearance 
which they have obferved from the commencement to- the conclufion of the late fi ful” 
war, have refolved to ufe_ the power which it has pleafed Almighty God to place in their 
hands, for the purpofe of obtaining reafonable compenfation for the expentcs of the war, 
and of ettablifhiug permanent fecurity and genuine tranquillity. fer themfclyes_and their 
fabjedts, as well as for all the Powers contiguous to their yefpective dominions: Wherefore 
a Treaty for the adjuftment of the Territories of the late. Tippoo Sultaun, between the Englith 
Eat India Company Behader and his Highnels the Nabob Nizam ud Dowlab Afoph Jah 
Behader, is now concluded-by Lieut. General George Harris, Commander in Chief of the 
Forces cf his Britannic Majetty, and of the Englifh Eutt lodia Company Behader, in the 
Carnatic’ and on the-coafé of Malabar; the Honourable Colonel Arthur Welletles, the 
Honourable Wenry Wellefley, Lieut. Col. W™ Kirkpatrick, and Lieut. Col. Barry*Clofe, 
on the part and in the name of the Right honourable Richard Earl of Moraington, K. P. 
Governor General for all Aftairs, Civil and Military, of the Britifh Nation in India; and by 
the Nabob Meer Allum Behader, on the part znd’ in the name of bis Highnefs the Nabob 
Nizam ud Dowlah Afeph Jah Behader, according to the under-mentioned Articles ; which, 
by the bleffing of God, fhall be binding upon the heirs and fucceffors of the contraéting 
parties as Jong as the fim and moon fhall endure, and of which the conditions thall be 
reciprocally obferved by the {aid contracting parties, ‘ 

Article 1ft—1It being reafynable and juft that the Allies by this ‘Treaty fhould accomplith 
the original objects of the war, (viz. a duc indemnification for the expenles incurred in their 
own defence, and effediual fecurity for their. refpettive pofleflions, againit the future defigns 
of their cnemics) it is dtipulated ‘and agreed, that the DiftriGs {pecitied in the Schedule A, 
hereunto annexed, together with the heads of all the Paffes leading from the territory of the 
Jate Tippoo Suitaun to any part of the poffeffions of the Englith Eatt [adia Company 
Behader, of its Allies or ‘Tributaries, fituated between the Ghauts on either coaft, and ail 
Forts fituated near to and commanding the faid Paffes, fhall be fubjeéted to the authority and 
be for ever incurperated with the dominions of the Englifh Eaft India Company Behader; 
the faid Company Behader engaging to provide effectually out of the Revenues of the fuid 
Dittricts for the fuitable maintenance of the whole of the families of the late Hyder Ali 
Khan, and of the late Tippoo Sultaun, and to apply to this purpofe, with the relervation 
hereinafter ftated, an annual fum of not lefs than two’ lacks of Star Pagodas; making the~ 
Company’s fhare as follows: 