

Although T have not agreed to enter into a new Treaty with your Highnefs, through 
Meer Abul Coilim, for the reafons above afligned, yet your Higimeds, iu confideration of 
the authority velted in me by the King and Parliament of England, will confider my letter, 

gh merely purporting a clear explanation of the feveral Articles in the Treaty of 1768, 
roag aad cfheient upon the Englif Governments in India, equally fo as a ‘Treaty in due 
Id be, ince the Members of the Council have given their cheerful ecquiefcence to its 


ar High- 
of the 
but fhiouid - 


rther particulars of my fentimenis I beg leave to refer your Highnefs to Meer Abul 
Coflim, whom TU have confidered during this negociation as faiblully attached to your 
Highnefs, fully acquainted with your Highnefs’s interefts, and your moft confidential fervanty 
empowered to fettle any Agreement for the mutual benefit of the two Governments. 1 have 
accordingly communicated to him, without referve, all that has occurred to me on the 
ject of the clucidation of the Treaty of 1768, in the fame manner as if your Highuets 
vefent. Neverthelefs, as your Highnefs’s concurrence and approbation ‘are neceflary 
a final fanétion wo the Articles difcuiled, I have thought proper to mention them in. 
isletter; for the reft, your Highnefs may have the moft ailured a chaencs that I will mof 
faithfully abide by all the cngagements I have entered into on the part of the Company. 


Extra@ from the Journals of the Houfe of Commons, 15th March 1792. 


“ Refoized, that it appears that Earl Cornwal/is’s Letter, dated the 7th July 1789, 
“to the Nizam, was meant to have, aad has had the fulltorce of a Treaty exe- 
* cuted in duc fona.” 


260 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on. 


Appendix, No. 39. 
‘TREATY with the Nizam, dated 1f September 1798. 


An enlarged perpetual Subfidiary Treaty between the Honourable United Englifh Eaft 
India Company and his Hlighnefs the Nawaub Nizam ul Mulk Afoph Jah Behader, 
Soubahdar of the Deccan, his Children, Heirs and Succeffors, fettled by Captain James 
Achilles Kirkpatrick, by virtue of the powers delegated to iim by the Right honour- 
able Richard Earl of Mornington, Knightof the moft honourable Order of St. Patrick, 
one of His Britannic Majetty’s moft Honourable Privy Council, Governor General in 
Council, appointed by the Honourable Court of Direstors of the faid Honourable Eaft 
India Company to direét and control all their affairs in the Hatt Indies. 


WHEREAS his Highnefs the Nizam ul Mulk Afoph Jah Behader has, from the greatnefs 

“of exifting friendihip, expreffed a defire for an increafe of the detachment of the Honour- 
able Company's troops at prefent ferving his Highnefs, the Right honourable Earl of 
Mornington, Governor General, has taken the propofals to that effectinto his moft ferious- 
confideration ; and the prefent juncture of affairs, and the recent hoftile conduct and evil 
-defigns of Tippoo Sultaun, as fully evinced: by his fending Ambafladors to the Ile of 
France, by his propofing to enter into a Treaty offenfive and defenfive with the Vrench 
Republic againtt tthe Englith Nation, and by attually receiving a body of French troops 
into his dominions and immediate pay, rendering it indifpentably neceffary that effeCiual 
meafures for the mutual defence of their refpective poffeilions, fhould be immediately taken 
by the three allied Powers united in a defenfive league againft the aforefaid 'Tippoo Sultaun ; 
the aforetaid Governor General in confequence empowered Captain J. A. Kirkpatrick, 
A@ing Refident at the Court of his ‘Highnefs the Nizam, to enter, on behalf of the 
Honoarable United Englith Eaft India Company, into certain engagements with his High- 
nels the Nizam ul Mulk Afoph Jah Behader, for a permanent increafe of the Honourable 
‘Company’s troops in his Highnefs’s pay, in the proportion and on the condition fpecified in 
the following Articles, which muft be underftood to be of fuli validity when this Treaty 
fhall be returned, figned and fealed by the Governor General. 
. _ Article 1ft—Such parts of the letter from Earl Cornwallis to his Highnefs the Nizam, 
dated 7th July 1789, and which has always: been confidered in the light of. a Treaty, as 
relates to the ftationing of troops with his Highnefs, are to be confidered as in full force ; 
thatis, the fervices of the new permanent fubfidiary force are to be regulated precifely by 
the fame reftrittive claufes that operate on the prefent detachment, unlefs the Peifhwa 
fhall hereafter confent to any alteration in thofe conditions, and his Highnets likewife ap- 
prove of the fame. 