


— 


Trrroo's Jummabundy had not fuffered any other change fice the sear 178%, excepting tlie increafe thewn i 
Sthedale he gave the Allies in 1792 mult'have been lets than 


tan thofe: of. Colamn 4. 


oe 


Seringapatam, 8th July 1799. 


A.B. From the Total there thoald probably be deduéted two-thirds of Punganoor, for an eqaivale 


eee 


(Signed) 


y Colarm 25 contequen:iy the 
Jasuuubuudy in weusly ibe fame propsrtion that the fms in Column 5 ure tefs 


Filliam Macleod. 


takon fiom the Real's Mia tor the Nizam. 


258 APPENDIX # the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Appendix, No. 38. 


Lctter from the Governor General in Council, to the Nizam; dated 7th July 1789. 


To the Nizam. 
[Writtea 7th July 1789.] 


YOUR Highngfs’s Letter, containing ftrong expreffions of friendfhip, was prefented to me 
-by Meer Abul Coflim, and has afforded me the moft inexpreilible fhtisfaction. I bave’ 
rfecily underfiood all the matters catrufted to the verbal communication of Meer Abul 
-Coflim, and the fincere and tricndly Sentiments which I have difvovered your Highnots to be 
preiled with towards me, have induced me to fhew the confidence [ place in your Highnefs's 

ation, by candid and-explicit converfations with Meer Abul Coflim, on fubjects of the 
eft importance; and as they all of them have tendency to ftrengthen and inorcafe our 
Mtip, { fhati communicate without referve to your Highnels what has occurred to me 
xelative to them. 


“fubjeét, until [was convinced that your Highnefs, uninterrupted by war, had full leifere to 
«contider the propriety of the performance of this Article of the Treaty ; and until you might 
have had futticieat oppor:unity to put implicit confidence in my aTurances for the punctual 
-difeharge of the Peithcufh for the Northern Cirears; 1 then Geputed Captain Kennaway 
to your Highnets’s Court, with inftrutiors to make the demand of the Guntcor Circar, by 
virtue of the Treaty of 1768; to affure ycar Highnefs of wy firia intention to difcharge the 
balances, upon fair ftatement, due to your Highnefs on account of the Peifhcuth, and te 
ianprefs you with the fincerity of my intentions for its regular payment hereafter, 
have already expreifed my datisfaétion at your Highnets’s immediate comptiance to de- 
liver up the Guntoor Circar to the Company, and have affured your Highaels of my firm 
intention to perfevere in a ftriét fy2cem of faith to engagements; and now, with fuch a proaf 
of the fincerity of your Highnels’s friendfhip and good ith, I have, from a defire to teftify to 
your Flighneis that 1 am impreifed with fimilar fentiments, entered into a full difenilion of 
every Articie with Meer Abul Coflim, in order that fuch parts of it as are undefined, and bear 
.an obfcure and doubtlul meaning, may be fo explained as fhall preclude every neceflity of 
Suture difeulfion, remove all grouads of mifunderftanding, and give ttubility and permancacy 
to that friendfhip which now fubfitts betweeMus.. In adopting this rule of conduci, | do 
-no mote than fulfil the intention of the King of England and the Britith Natiou, who, by 
ahe fyftem lately efteblithed for the government of this country, had in view the im- 
portant end of giving efficacy to the exiting Treaties between the Englith aud the Powers of 
Hindoftan, and of fecuring a due performance thercof in future. This communication, | am 
perfuaded, will fuily fatisfy your Highnefs of the propriety of iny declining the propotal of 
‘Meer Abui Coflim ‘for entering into a new fecurity for the difcharge of the Feiheufh, by 
mortgaging « poriion of the Cirears ; contidering, as ido, the faith of tue Enyglith Nat oa 
pledged for the due payment of it. ln proof of the fincerity of my intentions tuat tie Treaty 
lhouid be ex: to full effect, Lagree that in the 6th Articic of the ‘Treaty, the words 
“ Whenever the fituation of affairs will allow of fuch a body of troops to march into the 
“ Deccan,” fhould be underftood to mean, that the force engaged for by this Article, viz. 
two battations of Sepoys, and 6 pieces of cannon manned by Europeaus, fhafl be granted 
whenever your Highoeis hall apply for it; making only oac exception: that it is not to be 
-employed againft any Power in alliance with tie Company, viz. Pundit Purdhaun Peillwa, 
Ragojee Bhootia, Madajee Scindia, aad the other Mabratta Chicts, the Nawaub of Arcot, 
and Nawanb Vizier, Rajah of Tanjore aad ‘lravancore, That the battalions at prefent not 
defiued in number fhai! not confitt of lels than 800 men each; that the fix ficld-pieces fhall be 
manned with the number of Europeans which is ufual in time of war. ‘That the expenie to 
be charged to your Highnefs fhali be no more than the exact fia which it cofts the Company 
to maintaia a body of that force when employed on fervice ia the field, and that this ex~ 
penfe be as per feparate Account. That tnis detachment fhali march within two months, ar 
jooner if poitible, aiter it is demanded, and your Highnefs hall be charged with the expenie 
of it from the day it enters your Highnels’s territories, until it quits them .on its return te 
the Compzny’s, with the addition of one month, at the average calculation of the whole 
Amount, in erder to defray the charges the Company mufé neceflarily jacur, to put fuch a 
force in a fiate fit for fervice. 