


conclude a comincrcial Trosty for this purpofe with as little delay a3 potlible, 

Article 14.—His Highneis Maha Rajah Myfoor Kiftua Rejuh Oodiaver Bebader hereby 
promifes to pay, at all times, the utmeft attention to fach advice as the Company’s Govera~ 
inent_fhall oceafionally judge it necellary to_offer to him, with a view to the economy of 
his finances, the better collection of his Revenues, the adminiitration of juttice, the 
extention of commerce, the encouragement cf trade, agriculture and induflry, or any other 
objects conacéted with the advancement of his Highnefs’s intereit, the happinels of his 
people, and the mutual welfare of both States: 

Article 15.—Whereas it may hereafter appear that fome of the diftricts declared by the 
Treaty of Myfore to belong ‘refpestively to the “Enytith Company Behader and to his 
Highness, are inconveniently fituated, witha view to the proper conucétion of their refpective 

363. 3T Hi lines. 


250 APPENDIX % theSocoad REPORT from 0 Scie Cotamitee on 


Wines of frontier’ it-is thereby ftipalated between te’ contraGing parties, that in’ all. fack. 
«gales they will proceed’ vo fuch an gdjuftinent; by means ef exchanges or otherwife; as thall 
Whe belt fiited tb the ovctfion. ua jis a 
Article 16~This Treaty, confifiing of Guiteer Articles, being this ‘day, the 8th of July 
:aano Domini 1799 (correlponding td thé 3d of Suffer; ano Hejira 1214, end to'the 7th of 
athe morith Affar of the 1721ft year of the Saluvund Alra) fettled and: concluded; at the Fort 
vf Nazzerbuh near Seringapatam, by his Excell Lieutenant General George Harris, 
-iGomimander in Chief of the Forces of ‘his Britannic Majefty, andof the Honourable Eaglith 
“Tat India Company in the Carnatic and on the Coaft of Malabar ; the Honourable Colonel 
-Arthur.Wellefley, the Honourable Henry Wellefley, Lieutenant Colonel ‘William Kirk- 
patrick, and Lieutenant Colonel Barry Clofe; with the: Maha Rajah’ Myfeor Kiftna Rajat 
Dodiarer Behader; the aforefaid gentlemen have delivered to the faid Maha Rajah one 
scopy of the fame in Englifh and Perfian, fealed aad figned by them, ard his Highnels Maha 
Rajah has delivered to the gentlemen -aforefaid another copy, alfo in Perfian and Englith, 
wearing his feal; and fig: by Luchuma, widow of the late Kiftna Raja, and and 
aned by Purnia, Dewan tothe Maha Rajah Kiftna Rajah Oodiaver. 7 
. And ‘the aforefaid gentlemen have-engaged to procure aud to deliver to the faid Maha 
‘Rajah, withont delay, a copy of the fame, ander the feal and fignature of the Right 
shphourable'the Governor General ;.on. the zeceipt. of. which -by the faid. Maha Rajah the 
prefent Treaty thall be deemed complete and binding on the Honourable the Englith Eaft 
ridia Company, and on the Maha Rajah-Myfoor Kiftaa Rajah Oodiaver Bebader, and 
wthe copy of it now delivered tothe ‘fait Maha Hajah thall bereturned. 
Re (Geal of the Maia Rajah) 
Z J 


(Ranies Signature.) 
~ fGeat ant Sigeaties of Pomezh) 
A teue Copy) ae ae wee 
: (Signed). &. Buchan, 
Secretary to Government. 