


Appendix, No, 37- : 
"REPORT of Captain Madleod,.on the Myfore Reveriues; dated Sth. July 1709. 
om ek “Porthe Commiffioners for the Affairs of Myfore. 


IN compliance-with the defire of the Right honourable the Governor General, conveyed 

i ig chis letter to you, the 21% June, exttadt of which was forwarded to me by your, 
Wide No..t1.. diredtions, I have tlie honour to'tranfimit to you a Statement of the Revenues of the Térritories 
g ately acquired for the Hongurable Company ; in which you will pleafe to obferve the grounds 
“en which. I-am led te-pelieve that thole acquifitions are capable to yield a grofs Kevenue 


late Tyopo> Suliun sited his Sunimabandg, in the 96, by atig hi Head 
e late Ty Sultaun rai! is Jummabu: in the year 1796, by atgmenting his Ix 
stent, three. maak Fanams on each Pagoda Gen: Fanams) ‘fappo! Gn, the county 


-eapable of bearing. this augmentation. .He alfo charged his Jummabundy. with balfa Fanam 
.03 a tax on ‘Shroff, and S aiaciee of a Fanam asa duty.oh ‘Tobacco. he two laf. articles 
were abfurdly added to the land-rept as well as the firft, the whole: amounting to 34 Fanams 
ry ten Fanams; fo. that, by this‘ increafe, every ten by the preceding Jummabupdg 
 19$ for the new Jummabundy, or 4o was raifed to 55. . oe ot : ; 
ere were, however; fomé inconfiderable articles of thé Revenué ¢xéluded from contribut- 
‘ing towards this augmentation ; fuck as the-rents of lands farmed for portions of the pro- 
. dace, and alfo the road duties :, but as:I could not procure an exact account of the amount 
-of items left out in forming the increafe, I have foppofed, for the convenience of calculation, 
that the increate. of 1796 exteniled.to the whole grofs Revenue; and, by following this mode, 
Uhave eftimated the increafe in Column 2 of the Statement greater than it really was; confe-. 
squently Column g or 4 is'eftimated lower than it otherwite fhould be, if the detuil of the whole 
Shereals had been acourately atcertained. ~ . . 
- _.. Phe fams in Canterai Pagoilas in the third Column, or in Star Pagodlas in the fourth, may,. 
in my opinion, be, confidered as, nearly the fair Jummabuudy which’ anay hereafter be ex- 
ted; though { cannot take pou myfelf to affert that the feveral diftridts’ ought to yield 
enue. equal to this valuation of them. |, oan 
“If fome of the diftriéts fhould be over-rated in'this Eitimate it is probable that others are 
vunder-valued, I think it is not unreaforable to expect, that, in the’ aggregate, the whole 
may, in the courfe of three or four years, produce a Revenue equal to the amount of Columa 
4; and if from this fum one-fifth be deducted fur the feveral heads of Imauims to Pagodas, 
_&e.. and fox defraying all. charges of collection, there would remain to the Company a clear 
Revenue of near welve lacks of Star Pagodas annually. ; : 
., Should this eftimate.of. the new acquifitioas be hereafter found, throogh better. infor- 
sation) te be materially erroneous, E hope it will be remenibered ‘that I followed the trueft 
“Wale which can. at prefent be procured.’ Much will always depend on.the tkill and talents of 