


Signed, fealed and exchanged, at Hydrabad, 1 Sept’ A. D. 1798, 
or 19 Rubby ul Orwal, anno Hejira 1213. 
(Signed) J. A. KIRKPATRICK, 
Adting Refident. 


Separate Article appertaining to the perpetual Subfidiary Treaty concluded between 
the Honourable Englifh Eaft India Company and his Highnefs the Nawaub Afoph 
Jah Behader, on the 1ft September, anno Domini 1798, or 1g Rubby ul Orwal, anne 
Hejira 1213. 


NO correfpondence on, affairs of importance fhall in future on any account be carried on 
with the Cirkar of Row Pundit Purdhaun or with any of his dependants, either by the 
Nawaub Atof Jah Bebader or by the Honourable Company’s Government, without the 
anutual privity and confent of both contracting parties; and whatever tranfactions, whether 
of great or finall import, may in future take place with the aforefaid Row Pundit Purdhaun 
or his dependants, a reciprocal communication of the fame fhall be made to the other con- 
trating party without delay and without referve. ¢ 


Signed, fealed and exchanged at Hydrabad, 14 Sept 
: anno Domini 1798, or 19 Rubby ul Orwal, 
anno Hejira 1213. 


Appendix, No. 40. 


TREATY with the Nizam, dated 12th Oéober 1800. 


Treaty of perpetual and general defenfive Alliance between the Honourable the Englifl 
Eaft India Company and his Highnefs the Nabob Nizam ul Mulk Afoph Jah 
Behader, Soubahdar of the Deccan, his Children, Heirs and Succeffors, fettled by 
Captain James Achilles Kirkpatrick, Kefident at the Court of his Highnefs, by 
virtue of the powers delegated to him by the moft noble Richard Marquis 
Wellefley, &c. &c. Ke. 


WHEREAS, by the bleffing of God, an intimate friendfhip and union have firmly fub- 
fifted for a length of time between the Honourable Company and his Highnefs the Nabob 
Nizam ul Mulk Afoph Jah Behader, and have been cemented and pengocte! by feveral 
‘Treaties of Alliance, to the mutual and manifeft advantages of both Powers, who with 
uninterrupted harmony and concord, having equally fhared the fatigues and dangers of war 
and the Hetiings of peace, are in faét become one and the fame in iutereft, policy, friendship 
and honor. Thete Powers, adverting to the complexion of the times, have determined, on 
principles of precaution and forefight, and with a view to the effectual prefervation of con- 
ttant peace and tranquillity, to enter into a general defenfive alliance, for the complete and 
xeciprocal protection of their refpective territories, together with thofe of their feveral Allics 
and dependants, againft the unprovoked aggreffions or unjult encroachinents of all, or of any 
enemies whatever. 

Article 1ft—The peace, union and friendthip, fo long fubfifting between the two States, 
thall be perpetual ; the friends and enemics of either fhatl be the friends and enemies of 
both; and the contracting parties agree, that all the former Treaties and Agreements between 

> the i States now in force, and not contrary to the tenor of this Agreement, fhall be con- 
firmed by it. 