

Article gth.—All former Treaties between the Englith and the Government ‘of the 
Nawaub Afoph Jah and the Peifhwa remain in full force. Should, hereafter, the Row 
Pundit Purdhaun exprefs a defire to enter into fubfidiary engagements fimilar to the prefent 
with the Company, the Nawaub Atoph Jah will moft readily give his concurrence. 

Article 10th.—This enlarged fubfidiary Treaty, confitting of 10 Articles, being this day. 
fettled by Captain Kirkpatrick, with the Nawaub Afoph Jab Behader, Captain Kirkpatrick has 
delivered one copy hereof in Englith and Perfian, figned’ and fealed by himfelf, to. the 
Nawaub, who on’ his part has alfo delivered to Captain Kirkpatrick one copy of the fame, 
duly executed by him{elf; and Captain Kirkpatrick Rereby engages to procure and deliver to 
his Highnefs, in the {pace of 50 days, a ratified copy from the Governor Gencral, itt every 
xefpect the counterpart of the one executed by hinifelf; and on the delivery of {uch copy, 
which will then have become a full and complete inftrament, the Treaty executed by 
Captain Kirkpatrick fhall be returned. In the mean while no time fhall be loft in writing 
for the advance of the propofed reiuforcement. 7 

Signed, fealed and executed, at Hydrabad, 1 Sept’. A.D. 1798, 

or ig Rubby ul Orwal, anno Hejira 1213. 


(Signed) _J. A, KIRKPATRICK, | 
Asting Refident. 


Separate Articles appertaining to the ‘Bereta Subfidiary Treaty concluded between 
the Honourable Eaglifh Eaft India Company and his Highnefs the Nawaub Afoph 
Jah Behader, on.the 14 September, anno Domini 1798, or 19th Rubby ul Orwal, anno 
Hejira 1213. 2 
WHEREAS, in conformity to a with expreffed by his Highnefs the Nizam, the ftipulation 
in the 6th Article of the Subfidiary Treaty, refpedting the delivering up of the French, is 
agreed to be made a feparate one ; his Highnefs hereby engages, that after the arrival of 
the Company’s troops at Hydrabad, the whole of the French Officers and foldiers in his 
fervice fhall be apprehended in fuch way as Captain Kirkpatrick may point out, and be 
delivered up to him, or for atime be kept in confinement in a habitation belonging to this 
Cirkar, but in the cuftody of the Company's troops; and upon the reorganization of the 
party lately under the command of the aforefaid French Officers and foldiers, fhall, within 
the {pace of two months, be delivered up to the Britith Refident ; {tri@ orders {hall moreover 
be given to all Talookdars on the frontiers, and to thofe in charge of all fords and paffes, to 
feize any Europeans whatever attempting to pafs their epee ftations, and fend them 
immediately, with all due precautions, en loners to Hydrabad, where they fhall inftantly be 
delivered up.to the Britifh Refident. On the above condition it is hereby agreed, that the 
Frenchmen thus delivered up thall not be confidered as common prifoners of war, nor be in 
any 


262 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT jfrom the Sele&t Committee on 


any refpe& mal-treated ; ther fhall be conveyed at the Company’s expenfe, and with as 
little refiraint as poflible, to England, and from thence be fent by the firft favourable oppor- 
tunity to France, without being detained for a cartel or exchange of prifoners. 