

Article 19th.—The contracting parties, being actuated by a fincere defire to promote and 
maintain general tranquillity, ‘will permit Dowlut Rao Scindiab to be a party to the prefent 
Treaty, whenever he thali fatisfy the contracting parties of his difpofitioa to enltiyate the 
relations of peace and amity with both States, and. fhall give fuch fecurities fer the maintes 
nance of tranquillity, as fhall appear to the.contracting parties to be fafficient. : 

Article 2oth—This Treaty, confifiing of twenty Articles, being this day fettled by Gapiaian 
James Achilles ‘Kirkpateiok with the Nabob ‘Aloph dah Behader, Captain Kirkpatrick has 
‘delivered one copy thereof in Englith and Perfian, figned and fealed by bimfelf, to pol 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 265 


Nabob, who, on his part, has alfo delivered one copy of the fame, duly executed by him~ 
felf; and Captain Kirkpatrick, by virtue of efpecial authority given to him on that behalf by 
the moft noble the Governor General in Council, hereby declarcs the faid Treaty to be in full 
force.from the date hereof; and engages to procure and. deliver to his Highnefs, in the fpace 
‘of thirty days, a copy of the fame from the Governor Gencral in Council, in every refpect ~ 
the counterpart‘of that executed by himifclf; and on the delivery of fuch copy the Treaty 
executed by Captain Kirkpatrick fhall be returned ; but the additional fubfidiary force, fpe~ 
cified in the gd Article, fhall be immediately required by-his Highnefs the Nizam, and fur- 
aithed by the Honourable Company ; ‘and all the other Articles fhall be in full force from 
this time. 


Signed, fealed and exchanged, at Hydrabad, on the 12th OMober, A. D. 1800, or 22d 
Jumady ool Orwal, A. H. 1215. 


‘Signed J. A. KIRKPATRICK, 
aa ; Refident. 


{A true Copy.) (Sigtedy Thomas Sydenham, 
. Secretary to xs Prefidency. 


Separate and’ Secret Articles appertaining to the Treaty of perpetual and general 

lefenfive Alliance concluded between the Honourable Englifi Eatt India Company, 

and his Highuets the Nawaub Afoph Jah Behader, on the 12th October A.D. 1800, 
or 22d Jumady ool Orwal A. H. 1215. ‘ 


Article 1f—The Peifhwa Rao Pundit Purdhaun fhall be admitted to the benefits of this 
general dcfenfive alliance, on the following conditions : : 

Firft.—Rao Pundit Purdhaun thall accept the mediation of the Honourable Company's 
Government, for the amicable adjuftment, on the bafis of the Treaty of Mah, of all claims 
or demands of Choute, and of all other claims or demands whatever on the territories or Go- 
verament of his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah. k . 
~ The Britith Government will alfo take into confideration the claims of bis Highnefs the 
Nabob Afoph Jah to a total exemption from Choute, and will arbitrate on the principles 
of juftice and equity, any queftion now exifting, or which thall hereafter arife relative to 
the fame, between Kao Pundit Purdhaun and the Nabob Afoph Jah, provided Rao Pundit 
Purdhaun shall agree to accept the faid arbitration ; and Rao Pundit Purdhaun thall not be 
admitted to the benefit of this general defenfive. alliance until he fhall have agreed to ac- 
cept the arbitration of the Britith Government with refpe& to the faid claim of the Nabob 
Afoph Jah to a total exemption from Choute. . 