

This Agrecment, coniiiting of three Articles, is fettledin the neighbourhood of Anjen; 
on the 17th November 1795, correfponding with the 5th of Cartikee 971, Malabar fiyle, by 
the faid reigning Rajah of Travancore and Mr. Duncan, by whom a copy thereof fhall be 
fent to the Honourable Sir John Shore, Bart. Governor Gcneral in Council; who, on approving 
thereof, is within two months of this date to fignify his ratification of the fame, by a letter 
from the Governor General to the Rajah Ram Kaje Behader; from the receipt of which 
ketter this Engagement is to become finally binding on the contracting parties, and 
to bein the mean time, ox trom this date till the expiration of the two months allowed 
for the receipt of the anfwer from Bengal, literally obferved on both fides. The amount of 
the fubfidy, under this temporary engagement, (hall, without fail, be annually paid in cath, ia 
three equal Kifts or inflalments, at the expiration of every four months, at Anjengo. 

{Sigaed) J. DUNCAN. 

363. : 3Y 


263 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Scleé&t Committee on 


* Appendix, No. 42. 


TREATY with the Rajah of Travancore, dated 12th January 1805. 


Friendfhip and Alliance between the Honourable Englith Eafe In 
der, and the | Maha Kajah Ram Rajah Behader, Rajah of ‘It 


- WHEREAS the Treaty concluded in the year 17: fo npeny 
t of 
y 


was intended to ‘deferid aud protect the ‘Travancore countr aft for 
ad to tirengthen and fix the terms of the aucient friendthip and fabli 


r 


crcas it is evident that tue intentious of the contracting panties have not been duly 

- creas the faid Company and his Highnefs the Rajah of Travancore have 

judged it expedieat that additional provifions fhould at this time be made, for the purpofe 

of fupply the defedis in the faid ‘Tveaty, and of eftablifhing the connection between the 
faid contacting parties on a permanent bafis of fecurity in all time to come ; 

Therefore, in order to carry into cffect the faid intentions, the prefent Treaty is concluded 

by Lieut. Colonel Colin Macaulay, Refident at Travancore, on the part and in the name of 
his I cy the moft noble Marquis Wellefley, K.P. and K.C. Governor Geueral in 
Council of ali the Britith Poffetfions in the Eaft Indies, and by his Highuels the Rajah of 
‘Travancore, fur himielf, agreeably to the following Articles; which fhall be binding on the 
g parties as long as the fun and moon fhail endure. 
le 11.—The friends and enemies of either of the contracting parties fall be coi 
fidered xs the friends and enemies of both; the Honourable the Eaft India Company Pehad 
(pecially engaging to defend and protect the territories of the Maha Rajah Ram 
ier of ‘Travancore againft all enemies whatever. 7 
Articie 2d.—W hereas by the feventh Article of the Treaty concluded in the year 1795, be- 
tween the Maha Rajah Ram Rajah Behader and the Englith Eaft india Company Leader, 
it was Ripulated, that when the Company fhali require any aid of his troops, to afift them in 
war, it {hell be incumbent on the faid reigning Rajah for the time being to furnith fuch 
aid, to fuch extent and in fuch numbers as may be in his power, from his regular i 
and cavalry, exclufive of the native Nairs of his comtry; and the Company being now 
willing entirely to releafe the Rajal: from the obligations incurred under the {aid ftipulations, 
it is hereby concluded and agreed, that the Ram Rajah Behader is for ever difcharged trom 
the aforefaid burthenfome obligation, 
- Article gd.—In confideration of the ftipulations and _releafe contained in the firft and 
fecond Articles, whereby the Company become liable to heavy and conftant expenfe, while 
great relict is afforded to the Revenues of the Rajah, his Highnefs engages to pay annually 
to the faid Company a dum equivalent to the expente of one regiment of the Honourabie 
Company’s native infangty, in addition to the fum now payable by the faid Rajah, for the 
force fubiidized by his Hlighnefs, by the:third Article of: the Subfidiary Treaty of 1795. 
The faid amount to bépaid in fix equal ‘inftalments, commencing from the ‘tirft day of 
January one thoufand &ight hunded and five: and his faid Highne!s further agrees, that 
the difpotal of uie faid fu, together with the amongemet and employment of the troops 
to be maintained by it; whether ftationed within the Travancore country or within the 
Company's difiricts, iliall be left entirely to the Company. 