


1,06,137 3h = 
1,901,977 9 — 
79,100 — — 


8710 — — 


855 —- — 
Retained by his Highnefs the Nizam- - - -] 2,96,780 —} — 
Remains to the Honourable Company - 8s 18,13,1 88 4F g 


Add the Adoui Country, which, together with all his Highnefs’s remaining’ poffeffions 
South of the Toombuddrah, is by the 6th Article of the annexed Treaty ceded, in ex- 
change for the above Diftricts, to the Honourable Company - - ~ R* 8,394,718. 12. 


(A true Copy.) 
Gigned) J. A. KIRKPATRICK, 
+ Refident. 


Appendix, No. 41. 
TREATY with the Rajah of Travancore, dated 17th November 1795. 


‘Temporary Engagement between the Honourable Eaft India Company and Raja Ram 
Raje Behadcr, the reigning Rajah of Travancore, fettled by the. Honourable Jonathan 
Denean, Etg. Governor of Bombay, on the part of the Honourable Company, in con- 
fequence of infiructions from thé Honourable Sir John Shore, Bart. Governor General 
in Council of Fort Williem in Bengal, in virtue of the powers vefted in him by the 
King and Parliament of Great Britain, and by the Eaft India Company, to direét and 
control the political Affairs of all the Company's Settiemcnts in India, on the one part; 
and by the faid reigning Rajuh on the other. 


Article 1ft—Until the receipt, within two years, of the approbaticn and ratification from 
Gyeat Britain, of the propofed terms of the Treaty of future perpetual ending, aleance and 
fubfidy, as written this day, the uth of November 1795, or 5th of Cartikeeo71, Malabar ftyle, 
and to be then in full force, and obferved-on both fides; the following Articles fhali conftitute 
the rule of guidance. 

Article 2d.—The Rajah of Travancore thall, from the 17th of November 1795, or 5th of 
Cartikee Malabar ftylc, pay to the Compaty, in the manuer noticed in the gd Article, the 

pofed terms of a perpetual Treaty, a fum equivalent to the expenfe of one battalion of 
the Honourable Company’s Sepoys; which battaliou fhall be kept ready for his fervice 
whenever he ftands in need therof, and fhall call for the fame, to detend his country againft 
external force; for which defence the Company engage, in the manner and under the con- 
ditions inferted under the 4th and 5th Articies of the propofed terms of a perpetual Treaty ; 
under this further claufe, that if during this interval the faid Rajah-fhall find occafion to call 
for more than one battalion to his afliftance, he is in fuch caie to pay to the Honourable 
Company a fum equal to the expenfe of two battalions, but no more than for two, for any 
further force for his defence that may prove neceflary. 

Article 34.—During the faid interval, or_ until the arrival from Great Britain of the 
approval of the propoied terms of a perpetual Treaty, the Kajah of Travancore is to be liable, 
to furnith and maintain, at bis own expenfe, on the requifition of the Company’s Governor at 
Bombay or Madras, one complete battalion of his troops, to ferve under the command of the 
Lritith Officer, in conjunétion with the Englith forces, on either fide between Madura and 
Calicut, in garrifon or in the field, for fuch period or periods within the faid interval as the 
afliftance of the faid battalion may be required; and any troops required beyond this 
battalion, the Kajal is, to the utmoft of his abiiity, to furnifi on the terms and to the extent 
of the 7th Article of the propoted terms of the perpetual Treaty, 