

Article 15th.—As by the prefent Treaty the union and friendthip of the two States are fo. 
firmly cemented as that they may be confidered as one and the fame, his Highnefs the 
Nizam engagcs neither to commence, nor to purfue in future any negotiations with any- 
other Power whatever, without giving previous notice, and entering into mutual confultation 
with the Honourable Laft India Company’s Government; and the Honourable Company's 
Government on their part hereby ‘declare that they have no manner of concern with any 
of his Highnefs's chikdren, relations, fubjes or fervants; with refpect to whom his High- 
nefs is abfolute. : 

Article 16th.—As by the prefent Treaty of general defenfive alliance, mutual defence. 
.and offence -againft ‘all enemies are eftablifhed, his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah.con- ~ 
fequently engages never to commit any act of hottility or aggrcilion againtt any Power 
whatever; and in’ the event of differences arifing, whatever adjuttment of them the Com- 
pany’s Government, weighing mattcrs in the fcale of truth and juftice, may determine, {hall 
meet, with full approbation and acquiefcence. Paces : Me ag Gre 

Article 17th.—-By the prefent ‘Treaty of general defenfive alliance, the ties of union, . by 
the blefling of God, are drawn fo clofe that the friends of one party will be henceforward 
eonfidered as thé friends of the other, and the enemies of the one party as-the epémies of the « 
other } itis therefore hereby agreed, that if in future the Shorapoor or Gudwall Zemindars,, 
or any other fubjects or dey ndants of his Highnefs’s Govermnent, fhould withbold the pay-. 
ment of the Circar’s juft claims upon them, or excite rebellion or difturbances ; the fubfidiary 
force, or fuch portion thereof as may be requifite after the reality of the fact fhall be. dul 
afcertained, fhall be ready, in concert with his Highnefs’s own troops, to reduce all fuch, 

* offenilers to obedience ; and the particular interefts of the two States being now in every. 
refpeét identified, it’ is further mutually a; that if difturbances fhall at any time break 
out in the diftriés ceded to the Honourable Company by this Treaty, his Highnefs the 
Nabob. Afoph Jah’ thall permit fuch a portion of the fublidiary force as may be requilite, 
to be emptoyed in quelling the fame within the faid diftri@s. ‘If diftarbances fhall at aay 
time break out in any. part of his Highnefs’s dominions contiguous to the Company's frontier, 
to which it might-be inconvenient to detach any portion of the {ubfidiary troops, the Bri- 
tith Government, in like manner, if required by his Highnefs the Nabob Atoph' Jah, fhall 
direé&t fach proportion of the troops of the Company as may be moft conveniently fia- 
tioned for the purpole, to ailift in quelling the faid difturbances within his Highnefs’s do- 
ininions. = 

Article 18th,—Whereas by the favour of Providence, a perfect union, harmony and con-. 
cord, have long and firmly fubfifted between the Honourable Eatt India Company, his. 
Highnels the Nabob Afoph Jah, his Highnels the Peithwa Rao Pundit Purdhaun, and 
Rajah Ragojee Buooflah; therefore fhould his Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaua and 
Rajah Ragojec’ Bhooflah, or either of them, exprefs a.defire to participate in the benefits 
of ‘the preient defenfive alliance, which is calculated to ftrengthen and perpetuate the foun- 
dations of general tranquillity, the contracting parties will readily admit both or either of 
the faid Powers to be a member of the prefent alliance, on fuch” terms and conditions -as. 
fhall appear juft and expedient to the contracting parties. 