

Secondly.—Rao Pundit Purdhaun fhall give full fatisfaGtion to the Honourable Eaft India 
Fempany ‘on the various points depending between him and the Britith Government in 

udia, e 

Thirdly —If Rao Pundit Purdhaun fhall e to the foregoing conditions, the Honour- 
able Eafé India Company and his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah will aflift him in the 
zeftoration of his aft autharity in the Mahratta Empire. 

Fourthly. —For this urpote Rao Pundit Purdhaun fhall agree to fubfidize, in perpetuity, 
fuch a body of the fain mpany’s troops as fhall hereafter be judged neceflary for the 
teftoration and maintenance of his authority. . 

Article 2d.—Rajah Ragojee Bhooflah fhall be admitted to the benefit of this 
alliance on the following conditions: Fir, Rajah Ragojee Bhooflah fhall accept the 
Honourable Company’s arbitration ‘of all jjufted points between his Highnefs the 
Nabob Afoph Jah and the faid Rajah, according to the tenor of fubfitting Treaties. Sé- 
condly, Rajah Ragojee Bhooflah ‘thall agree to fuch equitable interchanges of territory 
with the Honourable Eaft India-Company, as fhall be judged neceffary to complete or im- 
prove their refpective frontiers, or to fuch ceffions of territory (in confideration of a juft 
pecuniary equivalent) as fhall be judged neceffary to the fame purpofe. 7 

Article gd.—If, contrary to the {pirit and object of this defenfive Treaty, war thould here- 
after appear unavoidable (which God avert!) the contraéting parties will proceed to adjuft”, 
the rule of partition of all fuch advantages and acquifitions as may eventually refult from .. 
ithe fuccefs of their united arms. a, 

‘The contracting parties entertain no views of conqueft or extenfion of their refpective do- ” 
minions, nor any intention of proceeding to hoftilities, unlets in the cafe of unjuftified or 
anprovoked aggreffion, and after the failure of their joint endeavours to obtain reafonable 
fatisfaction through the channel of pacific negotiation, according to the teuor of the pre- 
ceding Treaty. {tis however declared, that in thé event of war, and of a confequent 
tition of éonquefts between the contracting parties, his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah thall 
be entitled to participate equally with the other contracting parties in the divifion of every 
territary which may be acquired by the fuccefsful. exertion of their united arms, provided 

his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jali fhall have faithfully fulfilled all the ftipulations of the 
preceding Treaty, efpecially thofe contained in the 12th and 1th Articles thereof. E 


ned, fealed and exchanged, at Hydrabad, on the 12th Odtober A. D. 1800, oraad - 


Sig 

" yi al A. H. 1215. ; 

Jamady ool Qrwa 5 (Signed) J. A: KIRKPATRICK, 
Refident. 


266 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele&t Committee on 


SCHEDULE of his Highnefs‘ the Nizam’s Territorial Acquifitions by the Treaty of 
Seringapatam, dated the 18th May 1792, and by the Treaty of Myfore, dated’ 
22d June 1799; and which, in conformity to the 5th and 6th Articles of the 
annexed Treaty, are now, together with the Talook of Adoui and all other Talooks 
fituated to the fouth of the Rivers Toombuddrah and Kiftnah, ceded in full and in 
perpetuity to the Honourable Eaft India Company. 