


(A true Copy.) 
(Signed) C. Macaulay, 
y * Refident, Travancore. 


Appendix, No. 43. 
Extra& Letter from the Governor in Council at Fort St. George, (Secret Department) ; 
dated 15th May 1809. _ 
Honourable Sirs, 
Para. 1. Our laft iipetc from this Department was dated on the 28th February laft, and 
oT Secretary addrefied a ietter to the Secretary to the Honourable Court on the oth March 


2. Ia 


Conf. 3 Mar. 


Conf. 3 Mar. 


Conf.14 Mar. 


270 APPENDIN ¢o the Second REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


2. In the fory 


r of thefe difpatches were detailed the fucce!sful operations of the detach- 
ment of tro under the comand-of Lieutenant Colonei St. Leger. The ftorm of the lines 
at Aramboo! the outhern frontier of Travancore, and tie confequent fail, without refitt- 
ance, of the important fortreties of Woodagerry and Falpanauveram; thefe events occurred 

“betiveen the roth enii ‘loth vebruary, and ‘Lieutenant Cotonet St. Leger, by the orders of the 
Refident, iubtequently took up a pofition in the vicinity of Trevandrum, the capital of 
‘Travancore. 

3. On the zoth February a detachment from the divifion on the weftern frontier encamped 
uilon, proceeded in tho columns uuder the refpective command of Lieutenant Colonel 
M teth Reaineat, and Licutcaant Colonel the Honourable Stuart, 

ne ulted and gallantiy carried fome batteries and works erected 

‘aptured feven guns, and repulled a body of the enemy confift- 


nemy at 
ing of about 
vapiain 


ad 

oc is Majefty’s Ship La Piedmontaife, volunteered his fervices at the 
nen and marines, and jomed the troops at the ftorm of the batteries, in a 
ly creditable to his public zeal aod perioual valour. 
ined it. proper, in confequence, to publith in General Orders our approbation of 
the meritorious exertions of the Officers and troops employed on this occafion, and to direct 
our public thanks to be communicated to Captain Foote. 7 

6. The fucceis of our troops upon this occafion, which appears to have been the laft 
ftruggle of tine eaemy in Travancore, facilitated the movement of the foree on the weftern 
line of approach, under the command of Licutcnant Colonel Chaliners, which had been 
employed in placing the difmantied fortrefs of Quilon in a ftate of defence adequate to the 
protection of the grain, provifions and ftores, lodged there Lieutenant Colonel Chalmers 
having with confiderabic exertions effected this pomt, and having formed into brigades the 
whole of the troops ferving in Travancore, advanced on the 26ta kebraary towards Padda~ 
vellum, to eiteét a junction with Licatenaut Colonel St. Leger, and encamped about tweive 
miles north of the Rajah’s Capital. 

7. The divifion under Lieutenant Coloncl Cuppage, dettined to profecute operations on the 
northern frontier of the country, entered tue lines on the.1f March, without oppofition; and, 


* according to inftructions from the Kefident, occupied the ftrong poft of Paroor. 


Conf. 5 Mar. 


D° Conf. 
7 Mar. 


Conf.to Mar, 
D° 14 D*. 