

24. The event which we have detailed offered a confident ground of expectation that the 
tranquillity of the country will not be again difturbed, and that the arrangements in progress 
for placing on a fatistactory footing the interefts of the Britifh Goverament in Travancore 
and Cochin, will experience no further interruption. ; 

25. We determined, in communication with the Officer commanding the Army in chief, Conl.7 Aprit. 
that the proportion of native troops neceffary to be retained in Travancore during the rains, 
thould confilt of feyen battalions, being three battalions in addition to the fubfidiary force ; 
viz. three battalions at Quilon, two at Aleppi, one at Woodagerry, and one divided between 
Paroor and Cochin, together with his Majefty’s 12th and 1oth Regiments, the former at 
Quilon, the latter at Woodagerry. We at the fame time dircéied ail Commands and Sta? 
‘appointments, not abfolutely neceffary in the exilting ttatc of affaifs, fhould ceafe, and that 
the Officers who eid them fheuld join their refpettive corps without delay ; that the troops 
remaining fhould be placed under the command of their refpective fenior Officers at the feveral 
ftations ; and that Lieutenant Colonel Chalmers fhould continue to exercife the general com- x 
mand over the whole. Conf. 5 May. 

26. We have fince directed that ali field allowances fhail ceafe on the 31ft of the prefent 
month; and confidering the longer continuance of two of his Majefty’s Regiments in Travan- 
core to be unneceflary, we have ordered his Majefty’s 12th Regiment to proceed to Seringa- 
patam, and his Majefty’s 19th Regiment to be moved from Woodagerry to Quilon. 

27. Deeming it of importance that the introduétion of arms and military ftores into the 
territories of Travancore and Cochin fhould in future be prevented, and underftanding that 
jarge {upplies of thefe articles had heretofore been imported into Travancore from Bombay ; Cont 
we have requefted :the Government of Bombay not to allow any arms or militafy flores to 9, April. 

‘be imported into ‘Travancore or Cochin from that Prefidency. 2 

28. We availed ourfelves of the accounts of the return of his Majefty’s 3d Ceylon Regi- Conf.28 Mar. 
ment to Columbo, to repeat to Lieutenant General Maitland our cordial acknowledgments 
for his Excelleney’s zealous co-operation, and our fati jon at the honourable teftimony 
dome by the Retident at Travancore to the merits of Licutenant Colonel Morris and a! 
the Officers and men eompofing the detachment. 2 

go. Lieutenant Colonel Macaulay informed us that the whole of the annual fupplics of 
Tobzeco from Ceylon to Travancore had been captured at fea by his Majelty’s fhips, ex- 
ccpting a finall quantity captured by the land forces. during the late military operations; 
and that the former bad been difpatched for adjudication to the proper Court at Columbo. 

Colonel Macaulay expreffied his apprehenfions that this tobacco would be condemned as 
legal prize, and fuggeticd the expedie cy of our taking meatures to prevent the illicit intro- 
duction of ncore: to the injury of the Revenue which the Rajah derives from 
the regulations under which that article is fold. We received at the fame time a requeft from Conf. 4 Aprih 
the Honourable Licutcnant Colonel St. Leger, that fome tobacco, elephants, &c. captured 
at Palpanaveram, and delivered in charge to Officers who had been appointed Prize Agents, 
363. 32 might, 