

Article 2d.—It is farther hereby ftipulated between the Honourable Eaft India Company 
and the Guicowar State, that the latter fhall permanently tubtidize from the Honourable 
Company a force of about two thoufand Sepoys, one company of European artiilery, and its 
proportion (coalifting of two companies) of Latcars; ‘the eitimated expente of which, includ- 
ing eftablithment of ftores, being about fixty-five thoufand Rupees per month, it is hereby 
agreed that landed Jaidad or fands be affigned fo as fully to cover this expenfe, and what- 
everitmay amount to, from fuch part of the Gyicosrar's territories as may be hereafter fixed, 
in view to the greateft convenience of both parties; but the article is not to ‘be carried into 
effeét until the war againft Kurry be clofed ; when it is allo propofed, through the co-opera- 
tion of the Englith, to effect a reduction in the numbers of the Arab force now‘kept up ; 
and meanwhile this is to be confidered as an eventual, and to remain at prefent an entirely 
fecret Article. : E ee tin eta kine : 

Article g34——The Perunnal of Chouraffey and the Guicowar’s fhare of the Choute of 
Surat having been ceded to the Honouzable Company, in puvfuanc ie Engagement, by 
letiers to that effect from the late Govind Raw to the fonoinable: the !Governor of Bombay, 
the fame is hereby confirmed for ever. eae 


Article 


_ 974 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Seleé Committee on 


Article 4th.—This Agreement to be binding and permanent when ratified by the Supreme 
Goveriment of Bengal, who in all political concerns control the other Prefidencies, but in 
the mean time to be in full force. “In witnefs whereof the parties have interchangeably fet 
hereunto their hands and feals, in Cambay, the 15th day of March 1802. 

(A true Copy.) 4 
(Signed) HH. Shank, 
Ading P. Secretary. 
(Signed) J. DUNCAN. 


Gigned)  ROWJEE APPAJEE. | See 


alk 


(A true Copy.) 
(Signed) J. A. Grant, 
Sub. Sec’ to Govt. 


Appendix, No. 45. 


AGREEMENT with the Guicowar Rajah, dated 6th June 1802. 


Articles of Agreement between the Honourable Jonathan Duncan, Efg. Prefident and 
Governor of Bombay, for and on behalf of the Honourable Eaft India Com- 
pany, and Rowjee Appajee, the Dewan or Minifter of Anund Row Guicowar Senah 

hafkhel Shumthere Behader, ‘for and in behalf of the faid Anund Row Guicowar, in 
virtue of the full powers vefted in the fuid Rowjee Appajee to treat and fettle for the 
Affairs of the Guicowar Princi ity with the faid Governor of Bombay; which powers 
bear date the gd of Zilkad or 8th of March, in the year of our Lord 1802. 

Article 1ft.—Whereas certain Articles were, under date the 15th of March laft, anfwering 
to the 10th Zilkad, entered into under the above-mentioned full powers by the faid con- 
trating parties, in reference to the war then carrying on againft Mulhar Row, and providing 
for the Guicowar Government’s defraying the whole expente thereof, and for its fubfidizing 
@ permanent force from the Honourable Company, and the ceding to them the Pergunnah 
of Chouraffy and the Guicowar’s.thare of the Choute of Surat: All thefe ftipulations are 
bein declared to be in full force, and of equal ftrength and folidity as if repeated in the 