

36. As the amount of the expenfe which might attend the granting this equivalent will 
be charged to the account of the Rajah, of Travancote, we refvived that a deduction fhould 
‘be made from the amount, equal to the-value of the property of every defcription belonging 
to the Rajah or his fubjeéts, which, in confequence of orders from the Oilficer commanding 
the troops, might have been {old or difpofed of in fuch manner as to preclude its being re- 
ftored to the owners. 

37- We directed that the pepper and all other property belonging to the Honourable 
Company fhould be reftored, or the value of it deducted’ from the fum to be paid to the 
troops. . 

38 We poftponed for future decifion, what corps, detachments or individuals, fhould be 
allowed to participate in the fum of money which may become payable to the troops under 
thefe orders, and under what rules the divilion of it fhall be made. 

39. In the fubfequent paragraphs of our Difpatch to your Honourable Committee, dated 
28th of February laft, we directed the particulars of an Agreement which had been concluded 
by Lieutenant Coionel Macaulay, with the Paleat Achin, as Minifier of the Rajah of Cocain, 
in behalf of his mafter and himtelf. 

40. From the fubfequent letters of the Refident there is a ftrong ground for believing 
that this Minifier did not fulfil the engagements entered into with him on the 8th February 
laft, thereby fubjecting himtelf to a forfeiture of the indemnity and privileges conceded to 
him by that inftrument. _ 

41. The Refident caufed communication to be made of thefe circumftances to the Minifter, 
informing him, however, that he fhould not withhold from him the benefit of the fecurity to 
his perfon, property and family, which he had formerly conditionally granted, but fuggetied 
to him the necetfity of his immediately quitting the texritory of Cochin, 

42. The Paleatacknowledged the truth of the charge, as well as the indulgence with which 
he had been treated, and agreed to repair to Bombay; to which place it.would appear he has 
fince proceeded. 5 

43. At the fuggeftion of the Refident, the Rajah of Cochin has nominated Koonfle 
Kefhen Mcnan to fucceed his late Minifter ; of the character of this perfon the Refident has 
expreiled himtelf in terms which bave induced us to’confirm the felection. 

44. Adverting to the circumftances connetied ‘with the conclufion of the fubfitting Treaty 
with the Rajah of Cochin, as detailed in the Proceedings of the Commiflioners deputed to 
Malabar in the year 1793, and to the late occurrences in the Cochin territory, we confidered 
the Britith Government io be entitled to require the Rajah of Cochin to enter into fuch 

engagements 


the Afirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 273 


engagements as fhould prevent his authority and refources from being again employed in the 
promotion of detigns injurious to the Britith interefts and power in the Peninfula. 

45. We conceived that this objec would be attained by concluding an Engagement with 
the Rajah, correfponding in its general principles with the exifting Treaty with the Rajah of 
Travancore. We accordingly directed the Refident to propofe to the Rajah the conciufion 
of a Treaty founded on tho/e’ principles, with {uch modifications as the political fituation of 
the Rajah, or local cireumftances, night appear to render expedient. 