

46. As the entire defence of the country will devolve on the Company, and as the Rajah 
will allo be relieved from the heavy expenfe of the large armed force which he has hitherto 
maintained, we confider it to be equitable that an adequate addition fhould be made to the 
tribate paid by the Rajah, and that this addition fhould not be lefs than the expente of a 
battalion of Scpoys in the field. : 

47. As anecellary confequence of this arrangement, we were of opinion that any fortreffes 
which the Rajah pofetfed fhould be difmantled or occupied by detachments of the Britifh 
troops, and that the Rajah thould alfo be reftrited from entertaining any greater number of 
armed men than might be neceflary for the purpofe of collecting his Revenue; and that all 
ordnance, arms and military ftores, ought to be delivered up, with the exception of the quantity 
fiipulated to be retained by the Agreement made with the Paleat Achin. 

48. The peincipal ColleGtor of Malabar was directed to furnifh the Refident with any 
information which he might require regarding the affairs of Cochin; and with the view of 
facilitating the execution of the arrangements prefcribed by thefe inftructions, we directed 
that until further orders the tribute of the Rajah of Cochin fhould be paid dire@ly to the 
Refident ; and that the charge of the Britifh interefts in the territory under the immediate 
amy of the Rajah, fhould be placed exclufively under the fuperintendance of the 

‘efident. 


Appendix, No. 44. 


CONVENTION with the Guicowar Rajah, dated 15th March 1802. 


ARTICLES of Convention between the Honourable Jonathan Duncan, Efq. Prefident 
and Governor in Council of Bombay, for and in behalf of the Honourable Eaft India. 
Company, of the one part; and Rowjee Appajee, for and on behalf of Anund Row + 
Guicowar Senakafkhel Shumfheir Behader, of the other part; for the fecurity of the 
Dominion and Government of the Guicowar in Guzzerat. 


Article 1ft—The faid Rowjee Appajee having folicited the affittance of the Englifht troops 
againft Muthar Row, with a view of bringing hin to reafon, either by peaceable or hoftile 
means, fo as to prevent his ruining the country of the State of the Guicowar, of which 
Anund Row is the proper and legitimate heir and head; and the Englith troops under the 
command of Major Walker having accordingly arrived in the territories of the Guicowar, 
and the faid Rowjee Appajee being alfo come to Cambay to meet the Honourable Governor; 
it is hereby agreed by and between them, that the expenfe already-incurred, and fuch others 
as may hereatter be occafioned for the pay, allowances and tranfportation of the troops, ex~ 
liture and tranfportation of ftores, ammunition, &c. fhall be accounted for and paid, with 
jntereft at the rate of three quarters per cent. per month of thirty days, by the faid Rowjee 
Appajee on Anund Row Guicowar and the State aforefaid, in two infialments; the firft 
becomes due on or before the 5th October next, and the fecond on or before the 5th January 
1803 ; for the fecurity of which he afligns and mortgages the Guicowar fhare of the Diftriét 
of Attaveefy near Surat; hereby agreeing, that on failure of the firft inftalment; the Englith 
are to take poffeflion of the faid country, and to retain the fame under their own collection 
and management until the whole be. fully cleared and made good to the ‘Honourable: 
Company with intereft. : 7 : ? 