


Conf. 14 Mar. 


Conf.28 Mar. 
D*7 April. 


8. On the 4th March the troops from the fouthern divifion of the Army, under the com- 
mand of Colonel Wilkinfon, took poffcition of the defile of Amagawaul, and proceeded to 
occupy the paffes of Sheucottah and Achingole. 

9. On the approach of our troops towards Trivandrum, we received intelligence from the 

Rclident, that the Dewan, Vayloo Tomby, had tuddenly fled ia the direction of the mountains 
on the northern fronticr, and was clofely purfued by partics detatched by the Kajah to 
apprehend hin. 

lo. We are informed by the Refident, immediately after the fight of the Dewan, that he 
had, at the invitation of the Rajah, proceeded on the Piedmoutaife frigate to Ponterah, a port 
in the vicinity of the ajah’s Capital, for the purpofe of concerting with him the necetiary 
arrangements for the rettoration of tranquillity. . 

i, The Rajah had appointed a perfon named Comara Pillay as aéting Minifter, in the 
room of Vayloo Tomby; and the Refident, though unacquainted with this perfon’s character, 
dcemed it to be advifable not td offer any immediate objection to the appointment. 

12. In the courle of the fubfequent confereaces with Comara Piliay, the Refident obferved an 
tunfatisfactory remiffnefs on his part in making the neceflary arrangements for the adjuftment 
of the affairs of the country, and a culpable want of energy on the adoption of the meafures 
requifite for the feizure of the perfon of the late Dewan, 4 alfo appeared that feveral perfons 
in the intereft of the late Dewan were ftill permitted to remain in power, and that the perfons 
who had been detached to apprehend the Dewan had themfelves abfconded ; the Kefident, in 
confequence, with the approbation of the Kajab, appointed Wamana Tomby to be acting 
Minifter, in lieu of Comara Pillay, and be procured the arveft and confinement of thofe by 
whofe collufion and treachery tie flight of the Dewan and his party had been favoured, as 
well as others who continued to fupport bis caufe. Fs 

13. Woinana Tomby, the new Munifter, is a natural fon of the late Rajah; he is defcribed 
by the Refident to be'of'a firm and refpectable character, faithful to ‘the interefts of his 
mafier ; he-is known to have been a decided opponent of the late Dewan, by whom he hed 
been until lately confined, and who had attempted to affafinate him. 

14. We approved the arrangements adopted by the Refident, and adverting to the pro- 
grefs which had been made towards the fettlement of the affairs of the Rajah’s Government, 
and to the further fecurity for the tranquillity of the country, derived from ‘our being in com- 
picte poffeilion of all the defences, fortrefies, arfenals and magazines, of Travancore; we con- 
fidercd it proper to dircét the adoption of immediate meatures for reducing the heavy military 
expenfes incurred on account of that country. 

15. We accordingly direéted that fuch of the corps then in Travancore, or in its vicinity, 
whoie fervices were not required, fhould be ordered to return to their fiations ; and we in- 
firuéted the Refident to ipecify, as foon as practicable, the force which he might confider 
indifpenfably pevellany to be retained in ‘fravancore, and the places at which he would recom- 
mend the troops to be ftationed: for the detail of our fuggeftions on this fubject, we beg 
leave to refer to our Proceedings. : 