


Coaf28April. 


272 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT front the Sele& Cominiitee on 


ith the ordnance, arms, &c. be relinquifhed as prize property to the troops 
t. 


fe received information that about 2,021 Candies of pepper, the property 
but ftored at Quilon in warehoufes belonging to the Rajaa of ‘fravancore, 
n poitetticn of by Odicers appointed Prize Agents, on behalf of the troops 
¢ Colonel Chalmers. : 

cqueace of tiete circumftances, we deemed it proper to apprize the Hefident 
ay ore, tat under the deciarations made in the proclamation publithed the ad- 
eof the oops into ‘Travancore, and the fubiequent conduct of the Rajah, which entitled 
he benefit of thofe declarations, it was our decided opinion that neither the property 
jah nor of any of his ts could, without a breach of public faith, be deemed to 
ful prize; the Britifa Govezninent never having confidered itfelf to be ai war with 


ne 
32. W e accordingly defired the Refident to furnith the Proprietors of the vefte!s, tobacco, 
and other property which had been conveyed for adjudication to the Prize Court at 
Columbo, with authenticated copies of that proclamation, and with fuch other documents- 
and information as might be neceffary to enable them to obtain the reftoration of their 
roperty. 

# ae We were at the fame time fully fenfible that the troops fuflered all the loffes and 
privations, and encountered all the dangers to which they would probably have been ex- 
pofed in an avowed and open war with the Rajah of Travancore, and it appeared to us that 
a diftinétion might reafonably be made between the ordnance, arms and miiitary ftores, which 
the Rajah’s rebellious fubjeéts had feized upon and employed as inftruments and means of 
offence againft the Britith voops, ‘and all other articles or property belonging to the Rajah 
or his fubjects which might have fallen into the pofleflion of the troops, but which were not 
inftruments or means of offence ufed to oppofe the advance of the troops. 

34. We accordingly refolved, as an nad toual mark of the high fenfe which we entertained 
of the gallant conduct of the troops employed in the foppretion of the late difturbaaces ia 
‘Travancore, that a fum of money equal to the valee of fuch ordnance, arms and military 
fiores, fhould be paid to the troops. This value we directed to be adjufted by the Military 
Board, {ubject to the approbation of the Governor in Council. 

35. We determined that this equivalent fhould be granted for the ordnance, arms and 
military ftores, captured or found at the places or on the occafions under-mentioued : 

The lines at Aramboley; the battle at Nagercoil; the forts of Palpanaveram and 
Oudegherry ; the battles and a¢tions fought by the troops at Quilon and Cochin ; the ord- 


him to 
of the 


* nance, arms and military ftores, which may have fallen into the poffeflion of the troops under 


Conf.a1Mar. 
D? 18 April. 


the command of Licutenant Colonel Cuppage before he received notice of the fufpenfion 
of hoftilities, in confequence of the letter of the 24th February laft, addreifed. by the Rajah 
to the Refident. 