

16. Having determined that the charges incident to the meafures adopted for fupprefiin; 
the difturbances excited in ‘Travancore and Cochin, fhould be defrayed by the Hajabs 7 

fe 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. a7 


thofe countries; we iffued orders to the proper Officers to prepare the accounts of thofe ex- 
penfes, and, agreeably to the recommendation of the Refident, we determined for the prefent 
that the Rajah of Cochin fhoutd be charged in the proportion of one-third of the whole ex- 

afe, leaving the remaining two-thirds of the amount to be defrayed by the Rajah of 
+ Travancore. : 

17. We have required the Refident to tranfinit a general return of the ordnance, arms and 
military ftores which have faien into ourpofletion in the courte of the late operations ; the 
quantity is eftimated by the Refident to be equal to the quantity captured in the dominions 
of Tippoo Sultaun. 

18. Your Honourable Court will obferve, from the Refident’s letter recorded on our Pro- Conf.14 Mar, 
ceedings, that all the Rajah’s regular infantry, and alio itis Nair battalions, have been dif D* 17 b° 
armed and ditbanded, excepting a part, of about 500 armed men, whom we permitted to be 
tetained near the Rajah tor the purpoies of ftate or for the protedtion of his Highnets’s 

erfon. 
: 1g. A fmall body of cavalry, which had been maintained by the Dewan, hasalfo been re- 
duced; the ferviceable horfes were transferred to the Company's Regiments; the Rajah has 
received credit for tic price of them as well as for the price of the unferviceable horles. 

20. Our Prefideat has received a letter from his Highunefs, in which he imputes the late Conf.28 Mar, 
hottilitics to the treacherous conduct of his late Minifter, and expreifes the ttrongeft allurance 
that his future conduct will be regulated in firiét conformity to the exifting Treaty. 

21, We are happy to be able to inform your Icnourable Committee, that nearly eleven Conf.7 April. 
lacks of Rupees were paid by the Rajah of ‘Travancore, on the 24th March laft, towards the 


Jiquidation of the arrears of Subfidy, and that we have been fince informed that the remainder 
of the arre as been dilcharged. 


22. We have infiracted the Refidents to require the Rajuhs of Travancore and Cochin to Conf.21 Mor. 
make early arrangements for the difcharge of the extra military expenfes which have been 
ineurred by the Government on the fuppretlion of the late difturbances. 

23. By the letters of the Refident, dated 29th March, your Honourable Committee will Conf.7 April. 
oblerve that the place of the late Dewan’s retreat was at length difcovered, and that in order D* 14 D% 
to avoid falling into the hands of perfons employed to apprehend him, he put an end to his 
exiftence ; the perfon of his brother was at the fame time fecured, and by the Rajah’s orders 
he was fent to Quilon, to be executed in tlic view of his Majefty’s Regiment, in the atrocious 
wurder of the patty belonging to which corps, at Aleppi, he bad borne an active part. 