

lependants, agaiuft the unprovoked aggrefliens or unjuft encroachments of all or any 
enemies whatever. ‘ ‘ 

Article 1.—The .peace, union and friendthip, fo long fubfifting between the two States, 
thall be promoted and increafed by this Treaty, and ‘hall be perpetnal ‘The friends and 

-enemies-of either fhall be the friends and enemics of both; and the contra¢ting parties agree 
that all the former Treaties aud Agreements between the two States, now in force, and not 
-contrary to the tenor of this Engagement, fhall be confirmed by it. 

Article 2-—if any Power or State whatever fhall commit any act of unproveked hoftility or 
aggrcflion againft cither of the contracting ‘parties, or againfi their re{pettive dependants 
or ilies, and, after due reprefentation, fhall refute to enter into amicable explanations, or fhall 
deny the juft fatisfaction .or indemnity which the contracting fortes fhall have required, 
then the contracting. parties will proceed to concert and profecute fuch farther meafures asthe. 
cafe fhall appear to demand. . 

For the more diftinct explanation of the true intent and effect-of this Agreement, the 
Governor General in Council, on behalf of the Honourable Company, hercby declares, thatthe 
Britith Government will never permit any Power or State whatever to-commit with impu- 
-nity any act of unprovoked hottility or aggreflion againft the rights and territories of his 
Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader, but will.at all times maintain and defend the 
fame in the fame manner as.the rights and territories of the Henourable Company are now 
-Inaintained and defended. fs 

Article 3—W ith a view to fulfil the Treaty of general defence and protection, his Highnefs 
Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader agrees ‘to receive, and the Honourable Eaft India 
Company to furnifh, a permanent fubfidiary force of not lefs than fix thoufand regular 
-native infantry, with the -ufual proportion of field-pieces and European artilleryanen 
attached, and with the proper equipment of warlike ftores and ammunition; which force is 
to be accordingly ftationed in perpetuity in his Highnets’s territories. 

Article 4.—For the regular payment of the whole expente of the faid fubfidiary force, 
his Highneis Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader hereby atligns and ‘cedes in perpetuity to 
the Honourable Eaft India Company all the territories detailed in the Schedule annexed 
to this Treaty. . . 

Article 5.—As it may be found that certain of the territories ceded by. the foregoing 
Article to.the Honourable Company may be inconvenient from their fituation, his High- 
nefs Rao. Pundit Purdhaun Behader, for the purpofe of rendering the boundary line of 
the Honourable Company's poffeffions a good and well defended one, agrees, that tach 
exchanges of Talooks or Jands fhall be made hereafter, on terms of a fair valuation of 
their refpective Revenues, as the completion of the faid purpofe may require. And it is 
agreed.and covenanted, that the territories to be affigned and ceded ty the Ilononrable 
Company by the 4th Article, or in confequence of the exchange ftipulated eventually in 
this Article, fhail be fubject to the exclufive management and authority of the faid 
Company and of their Officers. f . 
., Article 6.—Whiereas there is caufe to apprehend that the a@ual produce of a con- Alteration.—-Not- 