

roceeding with troops to Katia and Katiavod, was oppofed by him, and there enfued a 

attle. In confequence of this, we difpatched ‘Kehoualeddeen Hooflicn Khan Behader and 
Gopal Row Bapojee to you, and begged the afliftance of the Company Behader, on con- 
dition that we thal defray the charges of their troops; for which a due provifion has been 
feparately made: but in teftimony of our fenfe of the feafonable afliftance. afforded to us 
by the Honourable Company, we now make the Company a prefent of Chickly, within the 
province of Surat Attavifiy, to be taken poffeflion of by the Englifh at the beginning of 
the approaching year, or Suvant 1859, and to enjoy the benefit of it for ever. In thi¢ 
Perguanah, whatever are the gifts or donations, {uch as annuities, Enams of villages and 
grounds, charitable allowances, and the rights of the Zemindars, may be obferved and allowed 
for according to the ufual rules; and the balance of the prefent year, againft that Pergunnah, 

ha: ? 


may be difcharged agreeable to its accounts. 
. (A true Copy.) ' 
Dated 2d Suffer, or } Gigned)  H. Skank, 
4th June 1802. Ags Be See. 
Malfa Kaunt. : 


{In the Rajah’s own hand-writing.} 


J, Anund Row Guicowar, Sena Khafs Kheel Shumfhere Behader, db -hereby confirm. 
and ratify fuch Gompacis and Agreements as my faithtul Dewan, Rowjee Appajee, hath in 
ay aime, and on imy behalf, made and coneluded with the Honourable the Governor of 

jombay, 

363. 4a Firt. 


276 APPENDIX é the Second REPORT from rhe Seleft Committee on 


-Firt-L hereby confirm and ratify fuch grants of lands as my faid Dewan, Rowjce 
:Appajee, has made to the Honourable Company, either in Enam’ or Jaidad; and 1 allo 
declare, that 1 hold myfelf, my heirs and fuccellors, bound to repay in money, or in fuch, 
further landed affignments as may be fufficicnt for the purpofe, all debts and expenfes which 
the Englifh Government have been at or contracted in the courfe of their military 
operationsin Guzzerat, undertaken for the fupport of my Government. 

Secondly—I entirely approve and highly commend the prudence of my Dewan, in having 
obtained a body of Englith troops to remain permanently in this country, as on their 
courage and fidelity L place an uolimited dependance. 

1 have determined that the payment of this fubfidiary force fhall commence from the firft 

- ef -this month, Englith ftyle, or firft of April 1859 or Hindoo wera, 

‘Thirdly. As-1 repofe an entire confidence in the. Englifh, I depend on their friendfhip 

-ko fhieid me from misfortunes. I am fenfible that there are many evil difpofed perfons 
amongft the Arabs, who difregarding my legal authority, have plotted againft my jiberty, 

: andexen my life. 

By the favour of God they have been defeated; bat fhould their wicked machinations at 

. @ny time hereafter fucceed, I thall expect the Englith to releafe me; and defire that all my 
_ aéis and deeds, although executed by me in the ufyal form, while in that ftate of reftraint, 
.gnay'be confidered as of no validity. I defire, ‘therefore, that my fubjects will pay no 
attention to my orders in this fituation, but hear what Major Walker has to fay; ftrictly 
following his direGtions, and affifting him in every meafure that he fhall devife or direct for 
-Feftoring my perfon to freedom. 