: aroda, 


the Afisis of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. — 275 


Baroda, Caral, Senor, Pittad and Ahmedabad, to the fill amount of the Ruffid, which 
will be about 11,75,000 Rupees per annum, fhail be collc¢led by the Company in proportion 
to the advance that may be made by them ; and when this debt is fully paid, the collection of 
that part of the Revenue from the above named Pergunnaks {half revert again to ‘the « 
adminiftration of the Government of Baroda. 

Article 5th.—There ihall be a true friendfhip and pond underftanding between the 
Honourable Englith Eaft India Company and the State of Anund-Row Guicowar in purfuance 
of which the Company will grant the faid Chief its countenance and protection in all his 
public concerns, according to juftice, and as_may appear ‘to be for the good of the country; 
refpecting which he is alfo to liften to advice: atid the State of tke Guicowar having _ 
reprefented fundry points to the Governor, in which it is interefted, he has affured Raoba 
of the general attention of the Honourable Company to protect the adminiftration of 
Anund Row in all their sights, and to be aiding to its concerns, with his Highnetfs the 
Fetters or ellewhere, on al jutt occafions, where their aflittance may prove requifite and 
ufeful, . 

Article 6th,—For the cultivation and Promoting the permanency of the good under- 
ftanding between the two States, there fhall be a conftant good correfpondence kept ap 
‘between them, and Agents reciprocally appointed to refide with each. 

Article 7th—In future the fubjects of each State, who may take refuge with either, 
fhall be delivered up, if the State from which fuch party or partics fhall have fled appear 
to have any demand of debt, or any juft claim againft him or them; but as a free inter- 
courle between the countries and the two Governments is alfo intended, frivolous claims 
againtt parties reforting from their own to the other jurifdiction, are not to be preferred; 
and in all ferious cafes cordiality will be fhewn. 

Article 8th._—This Agreement to be binding and permanent when ratified by the-Supreme 
Government of Bengal, which in ali political concerns controls ail the other Prefidencies; 
but in the mean time to be in full force. 

In witnefs whereof, the parties to the foregoing Articles of Agreement have interchange~ 
ably put their hands and feals, in Cambay, this 6th day of June, in the year of our Lord 


one thoufand eight hundred and two. 
: (Signed) © JONATHAN DUNCAN, 


Signed, fealed and’ delivered, “ 
in the prefence of (A true Copy.) 
(Signed) 4. Walker, (Signed) HI, Shank, 
Kahmaulddeen. Ads B* Sec’, 
: {A true Copy.) , 
(Signed) J. A. Grant, 
Sub-Sec’ to Govt. 


Tranflation of 2 Sunnud or Grant of Chickly, written in the form of a Letter to the 
Honourable Jonathan Duncan BA. Prefident and Governor of Bombay, by Anund 
ioe Goicowar Senah Khas Kheel Shumfhere Behader. 


Mulhar Row Guicowar Himut Bebader being indebted to us for the arrears of 
our annual accounts, and having exchanged Behaders or fecurities for the future good 
condué on both fides, a fettlement had taken place; in the prefént year Mulhar Row unjuftly 
raifed a quarrel with us, and without peying any regard to the Behaders or fecarities we 
fent to him for, the purpofe of difcniling the fubjeét, the fort of Biflanagur was takea 
from us, and he occationed much difturbance in ‘our country; Babajee Appajee, in his 