

Ninth!y.—Lntereft_on that part of the pecuniary affifiance and aid which the Company 
may give on this occafion, fhall be reckoned and accounted for from the time the faid Com- 
pany may rail a loan: for that purpofe, and it fhall be. reckoned every fix months, at the» - 
tate. of three quartgrs per cent. per mouth of go dayy, inftead of every year or every eeke 

: Month. 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 257 


month. All or any: lofs, by exchange or otherwift, which may arife by bringing the 
spent from Bombay to this place, fhall be on my account, and made good by me and my 
fuceetlors, 

Tenthly—Conformably to Major Walker's fuggeRions and withes, the Articles contained 
in this Declaration were written, and to which Lhave given my affent ; but on the event of 
evil difpofed perfons attempting auy thing unfair or unreafonable againft my perfon, my 
Dewan, Rowjee Appajee, kis fon, his brother, nephew or relations, and Madow Row Fatia 
Muzeundar, or even fhould I myfelf or my fucceifors commit any thing improper or unjutt, 
the Englifh Government fhail interfere, and fee in either cafe that it is fettled according to 
equity and reafon. . ‘ 

T have'alfo required of Major Walker, on the part of the Company, to promife that my 
State and Government fhall ‘be permanent, an:l defend to the fineal inheritors of the 
Mufnud, and that the Dewanthip thall be prefirved to Rowjee Appajee. : 

In the laft place, 1 defire to form the moft intimate conncétion with the Company, and 
that all bufineiS with the Poona Durbar may be jointly managed by the Englith Refidoat 
and my Vakeel. 

Such are my wifhes and fentiments, So kelp me GOD. 


Given at Bembay, 29th July 1802. 
Witnefs, The date of the Mahratta verfion, in the 
Gopaul Row Bapoojee Vakeel, hand-writing of the Dewan, as alfo the fig- 
In behalf of Sena Khats Khel Shumbheir —nature—-Anjind Row Guicowar Sena Khajs 
Behader. Khel Shunjheir Behader. 
Witnefs, The following words arewritten in the Ra- 
Maguel De Lurie e Souza, jah’s own hand; “The above writing is gue.” 


Appendix, No. 46. 


TREATY with the Guicowar Rajah, dated e1ft April 2805; 


Delinitive Treaty of general Defenfive Alliance, between the Honourable Englith Eat 

- India Company on the one part, and the Maha Rajah Anund Row Guicowar Sena 
Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behader, and his Children, Heirs and Succeffors, on the others 
fettled by Major Alexander Walkcr, Refident at Baroda, having full powers from the 
Government of Bombay ; which js in like manner authorized by his Excellency the 
moft noble Richard Marquis Weliefley, Knight of the moft illuftrious Order of St. Patrick, 
one of His Britannic Majefty’s mott' Honourable Privy Council, Governor General in 
Council, appointed by the Honourable the Court of Directors to direct and control alt 
their Affairs in the Eaft Indics. 

WHEREAS various Agreements have been concluded between the Honourablé Com 
ypany on the one part, and Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas hhcyl Shumfheir Behader 
-an the other, all.tending to improve and inereafe the friendfhip and alliance between the 
scontracting parties, viz. a Convention dated at Cambay the 15th March 1802, fettled by 
:the Governor of Bombay -on. the part of the Honourable Company, arid by Rowjce 
Appaice, Dewan, on the part of Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir 