

vices may require, will proceed to Katty when there may be a real neceflity 
ith Government, whofe care and attention to ail the interefts of the Guica- 

e doubted, muft remain the judge of its neceflity. 

n order to provide the regular payment of the whole expenfe of this fubfi- 
diary force, Anund Row Gnicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behader has ceded, by the 
Agreements aforefiid, viz. dated the.1sth March, 6th June, and goth July 1802 and 
2d June 1803, ‘Diftriéts and other Funds, of-which a Schedule (A) is annexed to this Treaty, 
of the yearly net value of 1 10,000 Rupees. This ceflion is confirmed by this Treaty, and 
Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfheir Behader hereby cedes the Diftriéts of 
which the Schedule is annexed, with all the rights of fovereignty thereof, and all the forts 
which they contain, in perpetuity to the Honourable Company. : 

Article Sixth.—The diftriéts of Chowrafly Chickly, Surat Chouth and Kaira, have been 
ceded to the Honourable Company by Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumtheir 
Behader, as a proof of his friendfhip, and as a teftimony of his fenfe of the benefit which he 
has received from his alliance with the Honourable Corpany’s Government. The ceflion 
of thefe diftriéis is confirmed by this ‘Treaty, and Anund kow Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl 
Shumfheir Behader hereby cedes the ditiriéts above mentioned, with all the rights belonging 
at the fovereigaty thereof, and all the forts which they contain, in perpetuity to the Honoui- 
able ‘Company. . 7 

Article Beveath—Whereas the Honourable Company have ‘at different periods aflifted 
Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumfhcir.Behader, both from their owa funds 
and thofe of Bankers, with advances of Money, a particular account of which, as well as of 
-the Funds affigned for the payment of the fame, is contained in the Schedule annexed, 
marked B; itis hereby agreed that the full amount of the Kuffud of the Diftridts therein 
named, according to the provifions in the 8th Article of the Agreement of the egth July, hall 
-be collested, on account.of the Honourable Company and the perfons therein referred to, 
suntil thefe debts and the intereft due upon them {hall be fully paid ; and for the paft or any” 
fature advances which the Company's Government may make to that of the Guicowar, 
Mahals fhili be afligned as their fecurity. . 

Article Eigith—Grain andi all other articles of confumption, and provifions, all forts of - 
-materials for weqsing apparel, together with the neceflary numbers of cattie, horfes and 
camels, required for the ute of the fubfidiary force, fhall be exempted from duties. in. the 
territories of Anund Row Guicowar Sena Khas Kheyl Shumbheir Behader, and the Com- 
manding Officer and Officers of the fubfidiary force thall be treated in all refpests in. a manner 
fuitable to the importance of the truft placed in them, and the dignity of the Britith Govern- 
ment. dn like manner fhall the Officers of the Guicowar Government meet with fimilar 
confideration and refpec from the Honourable Company. In confideration alfo of the good 
i iendihip which has fo long happily fubfifted between the Honourable Company 
and the Guicowar Government, fuch goods and articles as’ may be, bona fide, requi for 
the private ufe or confumption of that family or of the Minifters, fhall be allowed to be pur- 
chafed at Surat and Bombay, and to be fent from thence free of duties, on being accom- 
panied by @ paffport from the Refident at Baroda. 