

‘the “Honoutable Company ‘alto a! tign, their “tern! in Hindoftan,.a 
Jajrgeet, to be holden on thé ‘fame that énjo' 

Revenue of two lacks of Rupees] 

- and the Jaggeer, amonsting te: 

. the daughter of that: Chieh: so ; oe . & 
__ Article 8th:—The Honouradlg:Gor apiing engeee to, enter into no. Treaty with the Rajahs 
of le and. Joudpoor and: Goftah, or -gther, Chiels;, tributaries. of, Dowlut, Row 
Scindia, fituated in Malwa, Mewer; oe Mawors in. Bpthape whatever to interfere with 

the fettlement which Scindia may make with thofe Chief Sta it a Been ae . 

Article oth.—-The Honotrible Company are now engaged th a war with Jefwunt Row 

!Holkar,.oad ufiag every exeztion for his Gion; but thould they hereafter make a peace, 

3. Be OF 


the Affiirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 28g 


or enterintoany agreement witlrthat Chicf, they engage not to reftore to him, or defire to be 
teftored to him, any of the pofleflions of the family of Holkar in the Province of Malwa, 
lying between ‘the river Taptie and Chumbul, which may hpve been ti by Dowlut Row 
Scindia; nor will the Honourable Company interfere in any mannér whatever in the difpofad 
of thofe Provinces; and they will confider Dowlut Row Scindia at full liberty to make fuch 
arrangement as he chufes with Jefwunt Row Holkar, or with any other branch of the Holkar 
family, refpecting the claims of that family to tribute from the Rajalis or others, or to any 
pofletions fituated to the North: of the river Taptic, and to the South of the River Chumbut: 

uit it is to be clearly undertiood, that as the Company's Government agrees not to concern 
itfelf with the arrangements which Scindia may make with ihe family of Holkar, refpecting 
their claims or hereditary poffefions fituated between the Taptiec and the Chumbul, that 
Government will not take part in any difpute or war which may be the refult or confequence 
of fuch arrangement or fertlement. ri . 

Article 10th.—As Sirjee Row Ghautka has aéted in a manner calcalated to difturb the 
friendthip between the two States, the Maharajah agrees never to admit that Chief to fhare 
in his councils, or to hold any public employment under his Government. 

Article 11th—This Treaty, confifting of cleven Articles, has been this day fettled by 
Licutenant Colonel Malcolm, acting under the dircétions of the Right honourable Lord . 
Lake, on the part of the Honourable Company, and by Moonthce Kavel Nyn, on the part of 
Dowlut Row Scindia. Licutcaant Colonel :John Malcolm has delivered one copy thereof, 
in Perfian and Englith, figncd and fealed by himfelf, to the faid Moonthee Kavel Nyn, to 
be forwarded to the Maharajah Dowlut Row Scindia; and has received from the faid 
Moonfhee Kavel Nyn, a counterpart of the faid Treaty, figned and fealed by the faid 
Moonfhee. Lieutenant Colonel Muicolm engages that a copy of the daid Treaty, ratified by 
the Honourable the Governor General, in every refpe@ a counterpart of the Treaty now 
executed by himfelf, fhall be delivered to Moonfhee Kavel Nyn, to be forwarded to the 
Maharajah, within the period of one month from this date; and on the delivery of fuch copy 
to the Maharajah, the Treaty executed by Lieutenant Colonel Malcolm, under the imme- 
diate direction of the Right honourable Lord Lake, fhall be returned : and Moonthce Kavel 
Nyn in like manner engages, that another copy of the faid Treaty, ratified by the Maharaja 
AL Jah Dowlut Row Scindia, in every refpect a counterpart of the Treaty now executed by 
himfelf, fhall be delivered to Lieutenant Colonel John Malcolm, to. be forwarded to 
the Honourable Governor Gencral, within the period of oné month from this date; and on 
the delivery of fuch copy to the Governor General, the Treaty executed by Mponfhee Kavel, 
Nyn, by virtue of the full powers and authority vefted in him as above-mentidéned, fh: 
alio be returned. 