

Article'15.—The contrasting parties will employ all practicable means of conciliation to 
prevent the calamity of war, and for that purpofe will at all times be ready to enter into 
amicable explanations with other States, and. to cultivate and aprore the general relations 
of peace and amity with all the Powers of India, according to the true fpisit and tenor of 
this defenfive Treaty; but if @ war fhould unfortunately break out between the contraéting 
parties and any other Power whatever, then his Highnefs Rao Pundit. Purdhaun Behader 
engages, that with the referve of two battalions of Sepoys, which are to remain near his 
Highnets’s perfon, the refidue of the Britith fubfidiary force, -confifting of four battalions - 
of Sepoys with their artillery, joined by fix thoufand infantry and ten thoufand horfe of his 
Highnefs’s own troops, and making together an army of ten thoufand infantry and ten 
thoufand cavalry, with the requifite train of artillery and warlike flores of every kind, fhall 
be immediately put in motion, for the purpofe of oppofing the enemy. And his Highnefs 
likewife engages to employ every farther cffort in his power, for the purpofe of bringin; 
into the ficld, as {peedy as poffible, the whole force which he may be able to fupply from his 
dominions, with a view to the effectual profecution and fpeedy termination of the faid 
war. 

The Honourable Company in the fame manner engages on their part, to employ, in a@tive 
operations sgaintt the enemy, the largeft force they may be able'to turnifh, over and above 
the faid fublidiary force. 

Article 16—Whenever war fhall appear probable, lis Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun 
Behader engages te colleét as many Benjarrics as polfible, and to ftow as much grain.as may 
be practicable in bis fronticr garrifons. z 

ticle 17—A8 by the prefent Treaty tlle union and friendthip of the two States is fo 
firmly connected that they may be confidered as one and the fame, his Highnets Rao 
Pundit Purdhaun Behader engages neither toa commence nor to purfue, in future, ai 
negociations with any other Power whatever, without giving previous notice, and entering, 
into mutual confultation with the Honourable Eaft India Company’s Government; and the 
Honourable Company’s Government, on their part, hereby declare that they have no map- 
aer of concern with any of his Highnely's children, relations, fubjects or fervants ; with 
refpect to whem his Highnefs is abfolute. . 

rticle 18.—Inafmuch as by the present Treaty of general defenfive alliance the ties of 
union are, with the blefling of God, forclofely drawn, that the interéft of the two States are 
i or rao it is farther mutually agreed, ihe if difturbances fhall at any time rs 

: . 4 


284 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


outin the diftridts ceded to the Honourable Company by this Agreement, his Highnefs Rao. 


Pundit Purdhaun Bchader thall permit fuch a proportion of the fubfidiary troops as may 
cling the fame, within the faid diftriéts, “If difturbances 