


Majyefty. 

Rrtizle 13.—The Maharajalr Ali Jah. Dowlut Rao Scindia engages never to take or retain 
in his fervice any Frenchman, or the fubje@ of any other European cr American Power, the 
Governnient of which may be at war with the Britifh Government, or any Britith fubject, 
whethes European er nauye of India, Without the oun of the Bait Gorerements x 

rticle 14.—In .order to fecure and improve the relati of amity ‘and peace herel 
eftablifhed between the Governments, it istag that aecreaied Miniiters from each thal 
refide at the Court of the other. “ie ges 

Article 1 pine Honourable Company beitig ‘bound by Treaties of ‘general defenfive alli- 
-ance, with his Highnefs the Soubab tar of the:Deccan and his Highnels Rao Pundit Purd~ 
haun, to which the Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlut Rao Scindia is defirous of acceding, he 
is to be admitted to the benefits thereof; and the Honourable Company, with a view to the 
future fecurity of the Maharajah’s territories, engage, in the event of his agreeing to the 
‘Treaty above mentioned, in two months to furnith him with a force confifting of fix batta~ 
Jions of infantry, with their complement of ordnance and artillery, and cfual equipments of 
military ftores, &c; and the expenfe of this force is to be defrayed out of the Revenues of 
the lands ceded by the 2d, 3d, and 4th Articles. But itis agreed, that in cafe it fhall fuit 
the interefts.of the Maharajah’s Government to decline to enter into the Treaty above~ 
mentioned, fuch refufal fhall not affect any of the other ftipulations of this Treaty of Peace, 
eer are in every other refpe@ to be binding on the contracting parties, their heirs and 
lucceffors. ¢ ; 

Article 16.—This Treaty is to be ratified by the Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindia in eight 
days from this time, and ‘the ratification is to be delivered to Major General Wellefley. 

Major Gencral Wellefley engages that it thall be ratified by his Excellency the moft noble 
the Governor General in Council, and the ratifications fhall be delivered to the Maharajah 
in three months, orfooner if poffible. 

The orders for the ccflions of the territories thall be delivered to Major General Wellefley- 
at the fame time with the ratification of the Treaty of Peace; but the forts of Affeerghur, 
Powanghur and Dohud, are not to be delivered up till accounts will have been receivedy 
that the territories ceded have been evacuated by the Maharajah’s Officers and troops. | . 

_- Signed) ARTHUR WELLESLEY, 
EITEL MAHADEE. 
KAVEL NYN. *. 

Done in Camp at Serjee Anjengaum, this ESWUNT RAO GOORPARAHS: 

goth of December 1803, anfwering to NAROO HURRY. ° 
the 15th Ramzaun, 1213 Fufly. . 


363. $P 


_ap& APPEMDIX-teshe Spoged REPORT from the Sele Committed on 


: Appendix, No, 50. } 
‘Treaty with Dowlut Rao Scindia, ‘dated 224 November 1805. 
: "Treaty With Seindia, with the Doclaratary Article annexed. * 

Definitive Treaty of Amity and “Alliance between the Hi irable the Englith Eaft Indis 
Company and the Maharajali Ali Jah’ Dowlut Rao Scindia er, and his Children, 
Heirs and Succeffors. Sec : # 