

oolkguree. : : 

‘Article 10.—Whereas much inconvenience has arifen from certain claims:and demands 
of the Mahratta State, affecting the city of Surat; it is a; that a juit calculation fhalt 
‘be made of the value of the faid claims, by his Highneis Rao Pundit Purdhaun ‘Behader 
and the Government of Bombay ;’and in confequence of the intimate friendfhip now 
-efiablithed between the contraéting ies, his Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader 
agrees for himfelf, his heirs and fucceflors, to relinguifh for ever all: the rights, claims and 
privileges of the Mahratia State affecting the faid city of Surat; and. all collections on 

at account fhail ceafe and determine from the day on which this Treaty. thall be concluded : 
in confideration of which act of friendthip, the Honourable Eaft India Company agrecs, 
that a piece of land, yielding a fum equal to.the eftimated.value: of the faid claims: of the 
Mahratta State, fhall be dedu@ed from the diftriGts ceded by Article 4th ;:and onthe fame 
principle, and from fimilar confiderations,- his Highnefs farther agrees, that the amount of 
the colleétions made for the Poona State, under the title of. Nagabundy, in the Pergunnahs 
of Chouratly and Chickly, hall be afcertained by an average taken from: the receipts of 2 
certain number of years, or by fuch other mode of calculation as may be determined on. 
And his faid Highnefs doth farther agree, for bimfelf, his heirs and fucceflors, to relinquifi: 
for ever the Nagabundy aforefaid, and they fhall accordingly ceafe fromthe conclufion of 
this Treaty: and it is agreed and ftipulated that a piece of land, yielding a fam equal to 
the amount of the faid Nagabundy collections, fhall be deducted from the diftridts ceded by © 
Article 4th, in the fame manner as ftipulated in regard to the Choute of. Surat... At 

Article 11.—Whereas it has been ufual for his Highnefs Rao Pundit Purdhaun Behader * 
to enlift and retain in his fervice Europeans of different countries ; his: faid Highnefs hereby 
agrees and {tipulates, that in the event of war breaking out between the Englifh and any = 
European nation, and of difcovery being made that any European or Europeans in his 
fervice, belonging to fuch nation at'war with the Englith, thall have meditated injury towards. 
the Englifh, or have entered into intrigues hoftile to their intereft, fuch European or. 
Europeans fo offending hall be difcharged by his faid. Highnefs, and not faffered to refide 
in his dominions; all Europeans in his fervice, belonging to fuch nation at-war with the 
Englith, thall be immediately difcharged, and not fuffered to refide in his dominions. j 

rticle 12—Inafmuch as by the prefent Treaty.the contracting parties are’ bound in & 
general defenfive alliance, for mutual defence and protection againft: all enemies; his. 
ighnefs Rae Pundit Purdhaun Behader confequen' ges never to- commit any act 
of perfonal hoftility and aggreftion againft his Highnefs the Nabob Afoph Jah Bebader, 
or any of the Honourable Company’s Allies or dependants, or againft any of ‘the principal - 
branches of the Mabratta Empire, or againt any Power whatever; and inthe evént'of . 
differences anna whatever adjuftment the Company’s- Government, weighing-matters im 
the feale of truth and juftice, may determine, fhall meet with fall approbation .and 