

Article 6.—The fort of Affeerghur, the city of Boorhanpore, the forts of Powanghur and 
Dohud, and the territories in Candeifh and Guzzerat depending on thefe forts, thall be 

. Feftored to the Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindia. 

Article 7—Whcereas the Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindia has reprefented that his family 

-have Jong held in Enaun, as a gift from the Kings of Hindoftan, the diftriéts of Dhoot 
Fors Baree, and Rajah Kerrah, which are fituated to the northward of the countries of the 
Rajahs of Jeypoor and Joudpoor,-and of the Ranah of Gohud; and that lands in Hindoftan, 

_eedted by the 2d Article of this Treaty to the Honourable Company and their Allies, are 
held in Jaghire by perfons of the family of the late Mauhajee Scindia, and others by 
principal Sirdars in his fervice, all of whom would fuffer difirefs if deprived of the ad- 
vantages they enjoy in thofe countries; it is agreed, that the Maharajah thall continue to 

. hold and erjoy in Enaum the lands of Dhoolpoor, Barce, and Rajah Kerrah; and that Bala 
Baye Sahib and Montfoor Sahib, Moonthee Kavel Nyn, Bougajee Jamdah, Amrajee Jadheo, 

Wirdah Charieg thall continue to hold their lands in Jaghire, under protection of the 
Honourable Company ; and further, in order that no individual may incur lofs or fuffer 
diftrefs in confequence of this arrangement, it is agreed, that the Honourable Compan 
thall either pay penfions, or gtant lands in Jaghire, pevontling to the option of the Briti 
Government, to certain other Sirdars, and others to be named by the Maharajah ; provided 
tHat the total amount of the fums paid, or Jaghircs granted or held, docs -not exceed 
feventeen lacks of Rupees per annum, including the annus! value of the lands which it 
is agreed by this Article that Bala Baye Sahib, Monfoor Sahib, Moonfhee Kavcl Nyn, 
ajee Jathdah, Amrajee Jadhoo, and Wirdah Charie, are to continue to hold; and pro- 
vi that no froops in the fervice of the Moharajah are to be introduced inte Dhoolptor, 
Baree and Rajah Kerrah, or the other lands held in Jaghire, under the pretence of col- 
lecting the Revenue; or any other pretence whatever, * 

Article 8.—Whereas ‘the Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindia has reprefented that his famil 
here long held in Enaum certain lands, villages, &e. in the territories of Rae Pundit Puree 

aun, viz. 3 . 

Chormargoondee Pergunnah, . 


Jamgaum, P 
Ranjingaum, ne 
Hat 


‘the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY.:: . af 


Talf of Seo Gaum Pergunnah, 
es in Umber Pergunnah, 
Five Villages in Pytun Pergunnah, 
Five Villages in Niwaz Pergunnah, 
Yive Villages in Kurla Pergunnah, 
Six Villages in Poona Pergunnah, 
Two Villages in Wahy Perguanah, 
Six Villages in Patutood Pergunnah, 
e Villages in Pandipeergaum VPergunnah, 
Five Villages in Pagood Pergdfinah, 
Two Villages in Parnyra Pergannah ; - 
which have lately been taken poffellion of by the Britif, Government and their ANies; 
it is agreed, that.thofe lands and villages thall be reftored to him, provided that no troops 
fhall ever be introduced into thofe lands and villages, under pretence of collecting the Ne- 
venues, or any other pretence whatever. é 
Article 9.—Certain Treatics have been made by the Britifh Government, with Raiahs and 
others, heretofore feudatories of the Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlut Rao Scindia. Thefe Treaties 
are to be confirmed; and the Maharajah hereby renounces all claims upon the perfons 
with whom fuch Treaties have been made, and deciares them to be independent ef his go- 
vernment and authority ; provided that none of the territories belonging to the Bisharajaby 
fituated to the fouthward of thofe of the Rajahs of Jeypoor aud Joudpoor and the Ranab of 
Gohud, of which the Revenues have been eéllected by him or his Aumildars, or have bees 
applicable, as Surinjamee, to the payment of his troops, are granted away by fuch Treaties. 
Lifts of the perfons with whom fuch ‘reaties have been made, will be given to the Mabara- 
jah Downs Rao Scindia; when this Treaty will be ratified by his Excellency the Governor 
Jencral. 
Article 10.—No perfon whatever is hereafter to be moieftcd on account of the part whick. 
he may have taken in the prefent war. i ° 
Article 11—It is agreed, that the rights of his Highnefs the Peifhwa to certain lands 
in Mulwa’‘and elfewhere, fhall be eftablithed as heretofore ; and in cafe any difference fhould 
arife refpecting thofe rights, it is agreed that the Honourable Company fhail mediate, ar- 
bitrate and decide, according to’ the Principles of juitice, between his Highnefs and the. 
Maharajah ; and whatever {hail be thus decided, will be agreed to by both partics, and will. 
be carried into execution. + : 
.. Article 12.—The Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindia hereby renounces all claims upon his 
Majefty Shah Allum, and engages on his part to interfere no further in the affairs of his 