


be requifite to be employed in qui 

fhall at any time break’ out in any part of his Highnefs’s dominions, contiguous to the 
Conipany’s frontier, to which it might be inconvenient to detach any proportion of the 
fublidiary force, the Britifh Government in like manner, if required by his Highnefs Rao 
Pandit Burdhaan Behader, fhall dire& fuch proportion of the troops of the Company as 
may be moft conveniently fituated for the purpofe, to affift in quelling the faid difturbances 
within his Highnefs’s dominions. 

Article 19.—It is finally declared, that this. Treaty, which, according to the foregoing 
Articles, is meant for the fapport and credit of his faid Highnefs’s Government, and to 
preferve it from lofs arid decline, fhall laft aslong as the fun and moon fhall endure. 

(Signed) By CLOSE, 
Refident at Poona. . 


SCHEDULE of the TERRITORIES ceded in perpetuity by his Highnefs Badjee 
Rao Ragonaut Pundit Purdhaun Behader, to the Honourable Englith Eaft India 
Company, agreeable to the 4th Article of the annexed Treaty. 


1f—Yrom: the Province of GUZZERAT and 
Territories South thereof. 


— together w ith Chooia, Koniapoor, and i ipoon ee 
Cambay, Choute, and Nafloor - - = = 60,000 — — 
South of the TAPTIE. 
_Pumair - - - = © 2 © e 
« Bootieer = 5 + 2 = © =| = 
. Banwanny-  - = - = = = f= a 
Baltur a 
~ Parchole wo eek ee mee 
Soopa ¢- 
, Sarbaun - - oe - - - - 
Wallore. - . - a - . a 
Bamdoo Kufbah. ee 
Waunfda Choate - 
123) yo = - - - - - - 
Paab De one: pate he ey cae, 
lS uftoms *-- - yeoos 2 ee 
Between the FAPTIE and NERBUDDAH. 
fareea a 
*OGifier 2 - .- oe 5 = ee 
Nunday.-  - - 5 © = © fe 
Total South of the Taptie, and Renween} 
Taptie and Nerbuddah - - = 
Deduét 20 per cent. on account of de- 
ereafe of Revenue - + = 
nore 8,30,400 — -— 
Nahabundy of Chouraffy and Chickly-  - = ae 
Phoolparra- = = = oe 2 =e 
Coomarria - - - - + -- = = 
Caltergom - - - - - - ee 
25,000 — — 


ad.—From the Territories near the 
TOOMBUDDRAH. 


Savancore, 26 Talooks oe 
From Bankapoor sie ce Ss 


10,22,838 — — 
5158;762 — — 
5 15,79,600 — —- 

36, aan 

in, tegift December, anno Deinini’ 1802, 


The Peifhwa’s Signature, i 


or the 5th Rawzan, A. H. 1217. 


The Seal of 
Pundit Purdhaun. 


Signed, fealed and exchanged, at Baife 


(A true Copy, rae 
Es 8 Clop. 


"the Affairs of Tae RAST INDIA COMPANY. 285, 


Appendix, No. 48. 


SUPPLEMENT to the Treaty of Baffein, dated 16th December 1803. 


A Tredty, confifting of nineteen Articles, was concluded at Baffein between the Honour- 
able Eaft India Company Behader and his Highnefs the Peithwa Badjee Row Rago- 

- naut Pandit Pardhuan Behauder.- The following Articles of Engagement are now 
agreed on and fettled, as fupplemental to the faid remy, by Lieutenant Colonel Barry 
Clofe, on the part of the faid Honourable Company; and Anund Row, Vakeel on the 
part of the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Bahauder ; under full power and authority granted 
to them refpeCtively for the purpofe. 


ift.—That of the Territory ceded in perpetuity to the Honourable Eaft India Company, by 
the faid Treaty of Baifein, the Country of Savenore, and Talooks of Bancapoor, in the 
Carnatic, yielding an annual Revenue of 16 lacks of Rupees, fall be reftored in perpetuity 
to the Sircar of the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Bahader. 
* ad.—That of the Territory ceded in perpetuity to the Englifh Eaft India Company, by the 
Treaty of Baffein, the Pergannah of Olpar in Guzzerat, yielding a Revenue anaualty of three 
Jacks and 16 thoufand Rupees, fhall likewife be reliored, in, perpetuity to the Sircar. of the 
faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Bahader, in order that it may be reftored to Nurfing Khandy 
Row, who has ferved the Sircar with fidelity and attachment. 
3d.—That a Regiment of native cavalry, of the fame ftrength and complement as the 
cavalry Regiments belonging to the Hyderabad fubfidiary force, thall be added to the Britith 
Poona fubfidiary force. : 
4th.—In the 15th Article of the Treaty of Baffein it is ftipulated, that 10,000 cavalry and 
6,000 infantry, witha due proportion of ordnance and military ftores, fhall be furnifhed by 
the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader, and in addition thereto, fuch further force as the 
Sircar of the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader fhould be liable to bring into the field ; 
this ftipulation is now anulled ; and in lieu thereof it is agreed and covenanted, that in time 
of war the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader {hall appoint and furnith 5,000 cavalry and 
3,000 infantry, with a due proportion of ordnance and military ftores, and in addition thereto, 
ak further force. as. the faid Row Pundit Pardhaun Behader fhall be able to bring into the 
5th.—That a corps of Mahratta cavalry, amounting to 5,000, fhall be maintained’ by. the 
- Britith Government, during the prefent war, for the fervice of the Poona State, under the 
orders of the Britifh Government ; of which 5,000 horfe, two thoufand fhall ferve with bis 
Highnels the Peifhwa, and the remaining 3,000 with the Britifh Army in the field; and in 
the faid 5,000 Mahratta cavalry are not to be included the Mahratta troops, ferving with the 
Britifh Army, under the Chicttains Bapoojee, Gunneis Parit Goklah, and -Sudojee How 
wen 3 which troops fhall continue to be fubfited at the charge of Row Pandit urdbaun 
‘ehader, : : 
6th.—By Articles 1f and ed of this Agreement, Territory yielding an annual Revenne of 
19,16,000° Rupees, is reftored to the Sircar of Row Pundit Purdhaun Behader ; in lieu 
thereof, and for-the purpofes hereafter mentioned, the faid Row Pundit Purdhaun Bebader 
agrees and ftipulates to cede in perpetuity to the Honourable Englifh Eaft India Company, 
from the Province of Bundelcund, conquered for the Poona State by Ally Behader, 
Territory jietding an eftimated annual Revenue of 36,16,000 Rupees, agreeable to the follow- 
ing detail. : 
irft—In lieu of the Country of Savenore, and Talooks of Buncapoor, in the Caruatic, 
and the Pergunnah of Oolpar in Guzzerat, a traét of Territory yielding an annual Revenue of 
19,16,000 Rupees. : : 
Second.—On account of the ftated high value of Oolpar, a tract of Territory. yiclding .an 
_ annual Revenue of 50,000 Rupees, in excefs for that Pergunnah. : 
Third —To bear the entire expenfe of the Regiment of cavalry mentioned in Article 34, 
a tract of Territory yielding an annual Revenue of 7 lacks and 50,000 Rupees. 
Fourth.—To fervé as an equivalent for the expenfes to be incurred by the Britifh Govera- 
ment, in paying and maintaining, during the prefent war, the 5,000 cavalry mentioned in 
«Article 5th, a trac of Territory yiclding an annual Revenue of 5,00,000 Rupees ;. and lafily, 
-a tract of Territory yielding an annual Revenue of 4,00,000 Rupees, to mect the extraordinary 
expenfe which the Britifh Government muft be fubjeét to in eftablithing its authority iu 
+ Burdlecund ; which is difturbed and ravaged by rebels, who muft be fubdued aud punithed. 
Total Country ceded from Bundeleund, 36,16,000 Rupees. . 
~_ gth.—The whole of the foregoing 'Térritory ceded as above from Bundeleund, to the 
‘Honourable Englith Eatt India Company, fhalt be taken from thofe quarters of the Province. 
mott contiguous to the Britith Pollellions, and in every refpect moft convenient for the 
~ Britifh Government. ©.” _- rot ‘ 
8th.—Inafinuch as the Pergunnah of Oolpor was particularly valuable to the- Honour- 
able Company’s Government, by reafon ofits proximity to the city of Surat, in the prof- 
perity of which the Britify:Goverument. bears un anxious concern; it is decordingly agreed 
and ftipulated, that the fad Pergunnah of Oolpar fhall be fo managed and governed at all 
times by the Mahratta authority, as to conduce to the convenience of the-faid. city, by at- 
tention to the rules of good neighbourhood, and the promotion of an amicyble and com 
_ mercial intercourle between the inhabitants of both States: and inafmachi as the favereignty 