


#86 APPENDIX ?o the Second REPORT from the Seic& Committee on 


of the river Taptie doth belong to the Britifh Government, it is accordingly agreed and 
covenanted, that the Maharatta authority in Oolpar fhall have no right or concern whatever 
in the wreck of any veifel that may be caft upon any part of the Goipar territory connect- 
ing with the faid River Taptie ; but be bound, in the event of any fach wreck, to render the 
veltel all practicable aid ; for which the parties aflifting thall be led w receive, from the 
‘owners of the wreeks, a juft and reafonable compenfation. : 


Appendix, No. 49. 
“TREATY with Dowlut Rao Scindia, dated oth December 1803. 


‘Treaty of Peace between the Honourable Englifh Eaft India Company and their Allies, 
on the’ one part, and the Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlet Rao Seindia on the other; 
fettled by Major General Wellefley, on the part of the Honourable Company and their 
Allies; and by Eitel Mahadee, Moonfhee Kavel Nyn, Efwont Rao Goorparah Amecrout 
Omrah, and Naroo Hurry, on the part of Maharajah Dowlut Rao Scindia; who have 
cack communicated to the other their full powers. 


Article 1—There fhall be perpetual peace and friendthip between the Honourable Com- 
pany ened their Allies, on the one part, and the Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlut Rao Seindia on 
the other. . 

Article 2.—The Maharajah ccdes to the Honourable Company and their Allies, in per- 
‘petual fovereignty, all his forts, territories and rights, in the Doab or country fituated be- 
tween the Juinna and Ganges; and all his forts, territorics, rights and interefis, in the 

. Countries which are to the northward of thofe of the Rujahs of Jeypoor and Joudpoor, 
and of the Ranah of Gohud; of which territories, ke. a detailed lift is given in the accomn- 
panying Schedule. Such countries formerly in the poffeffion of the Maharajah, fituated be- 
tween J eypoor and Joudpoor, and to the fouthward of the former, are to belong to the 
- Maharajah. 

‘Article 3—The Maharajah likewife cedes to the Honourable Company and their Allies, 
in perpetual fovereignty, the fort of Broach and territory depending thereon, and the fort of 
“Alinelog rand territory depending thereon ; execpting thofe lands which it is agreed, 
by Article 8 of this Treaty, that the Maharajah is to retain. 

Article 4.—The Maharajah likewife cedes to the Honourable Company and their Aliics, 
all the territories which belonged to him previous to the breaking out of the war, which 
are fituated to the fouthward of the hills called the Adjuntee Hills, including the fort 
and diftri& of Jalnahpore, the town and diftrit of Gandapore, and all other: ditiricts be- 
tween that range of hills and the river Godavery. 

- Article 5.—The Maharajah Ali Jah Dowlut Rao Scindia, for himfelf, his heirs and fuc- 

, ceflors, hereby renounces all claim to the forts, territories, and rights and interefts, ceded by the 
2d, 3d, and 4th Articles; and all clains of every defcription upon the Britith Government 
and: their Allies, the Soubahdar of the Deccan, the Peifhwa, and Anund Rao Guicowar. : 