

WHEREAS various doubts and mnitandéefindingg ere arifen ‘refpecting thé clear mean+ 

“ing and interpretation of parts of the Treaty of ¥ ‘ coneluded between the Britith Go- 
¥ ent and Dowlpt Row Scindia; at Serjeé Arigehgaum, on the goth December 1803: 
avith ‘a view’ of dotag ‘away all fuch doubts, and of. preventing the recurrence in future df 
any’ imifunderftanding;, this Definitive Treaty-of amity and alliance is concluded betweea 
the two States, by Lientetiant Colonel Jabn Meleolm, acting under the imniediate direion 


- and Srperintendance of the. Right honourable General Gerard’ Lake, Commander ini Chief 


of His | 
siveis and authority'-from the Honourable Sir George Hilaro, Barlow,’ Baronet,. appointed 


che part of the faid Maharajah Dowlut Row Scindia: --° - “ : 
gee “concluded By General Sir Arthur Wcl- 
t may be alt by this engagement, i- 1 


atin 
the Treaty of Serjee Anjengaum, to poffefs ‘the' fort of “ 


' 48 Penfiins forfeited by Bay Séine ue lathes Row, by 

the Britith Govertigient, fe lopped from the date of their Hioftility.  “: 

* ad. Bic of ft tf pei SMa eRe 

ath adtahied By. Slr, Jenkins td pattiev of the Mabirajab’s troops.’ a 

Chittges 6f culletnion, Ketfor the Provinces of Dhoolpodt, Bares; and Rajah Kerra. 
_ Article 5th.-—With id Se f preventing any mifund ing relat to theirs ite. 

~polfeffions on the quarter’ of Hmdottan, it is agretd: that the River Chupibol ‘thall form 

‘the boyhdary between: the t¥q’States, from the city: of Cottah to'the West, ta'the limits of 
‘the territories of Gohud to the’ Eaft ; ‘and within that extent of the courlt of the Chumbul, 
Dowlut Row Scindia fhall have no claim. orright to any “rile, tribute, Revenue or poffeftions, 
‘on its North bank} ahd the Honourable’ Company {hall havd.no claim or fight ‘to any role, 

tribute, Revenues of pofletions, on ‘the Sout bank of ‘thiat river. The Talodks of Bhadek 

‘and Soofeperarah, M#¢hich are oir te batiks of the Jumna, ‘will, however, remain in the poffet 

_ Gon;6f the Hopourable Company, 727 * a ee ‘ 

“Article Bth—By the 5th Article’ of this ‘Treaty, which thakes the tiver’Chumbul the 

Vboundary’of the two States, from the city uf Kottah to the Wet, to the limits‘of ‘the territories 

«ef Gobud to the Eaft, the Maharajah religns all pretenfions and claims to-any tribute from 
‘the Rajah of Boondce, or anyother on the North bank of the.‘Chumbul,. within the afore- 
sncationed limits ; as alfo to the countries of Tank, Ramporah, Bahraungaum, Zemeéidab, &c. 
‘and to the diftriéts of Dhoolpoor, Rajah Kerrah, and Baree ; alt which remain in polfeffion of 
the Honourable Company. °°”, ee ae acres Tee ee : 
"Article 7th. The Honourable Companys ont confiderstion of the Benefits derived: from 
‘the Article which makes the Chuniibul the boundary between’ the two States, and’ from friend- 
Ship to the Maharajab, agree.to grant Him, perfonally and‘€xchifively, the antmal fam of four 
‘lacks of Rupees, to be paid by quarter, in’ Sots th the'Refida the Durbar}, andy ° 