

Article 3.—He likewife cedes to the Honourable Company and their Allies, in perpetual 
fovereignty, all the territories of which he has collected tne Revenues in participation with 
the Soubah of the Deccan, and of thole of which he may have poifeflion, which are to the 
wefiward of the river Wurdah. i 
* Article 4th—It is agreed, ‘that the frontier of Senah Saheb Soubah, towards the territories 
of his Highnefs the Soubah of the Deccan, fhall be formed to the Wett by the river Wur- 
dah, from its iffue from the Injardy hills to its junction with the Godavery. 

‘The hills, on which are the forts of Nernallah and Gaurlghur, are to be in the poffefion 
ef Senah Saheb Soubah, and every thing ‘South of thofe hills, and to the Welt of the river 
Wardah, is to belong to the Britifh Government and their Allies. 

Article 5th.— Ditiriéts amounting to four lacks of Rupecs per annum, contiguous to and 
to the South of the forts of Nernullah and Gaurlghur, are to be given over to Senah Sabeb 
Soubah ; thofe dittricts are to be fixed upon by Major General Weilcfiey, and delivered over 

. to Senah Saheb Soubah at the fame time with the forts. 2 
_ Article 6th.—Senah Saheb Soubah, for himf{elf his heirs and fucceffors, entirely renounces. 
. all claims of every defcription on the territories of the Britiflh Government and their Allies, 
eae by the 2d, gd, and 4th Articles, and on all the territories of his Highnets the Soubal: 
of 1 an. 
_ Article 7th.—The Honourable Company’ engage that they will mediate and arbitrate, 
according to the Principles of juftice, any diiputes or differences that may now exift, or 
inay hereafter arife, between the Honourable Company’s Allies, Secundah Jah Behader, 
his heirs and fucceffors, and Rao Pundit Purdhaun, and his heirs and {ucceffors refpectively, 
and Senah Saheb Soubah. 

-Article 8th—Scnah Saheb Soubah engages never to take or retain in his fervice any 
Frenchman,’ or ‘the fubje& of any other European or American Power, the Government of 
which may be at war with the Britifh Government, or any Britith {ubjeét whatever, Luro- 
pean or Indian, without the confent of the Britith Government. The Honourable Company 
‘engage, on their part, that they will not. give aid or countenance to any difcoutented relations, 
dajahs, Zemindars, or other iubjects of Senah Saheb Soubah, who may fly from or rebel 
againtt his authority. 

* Aiticle gth.—In order to fecure and improve the relations of amity and peace hereby 

eftablithed between the Governments, it is agreed that accredited Minilters from each thall 
efide at the Court of the other. . 

i Article 10th.—Certain Treaties have been made by the Pritifh Government, with feudatories 

. of Senah Saheb Soubah. Thefe'Treaties are to be confirmed. Lifts of the perfons with whom 
duch Treatieg bave been made will be given to Senah Saheb Soubah, when this Treaty will be 
watified by his Excellency the Governor General in Council. 

,* Article 11th.—Senah Saheb Soybah hereby renounces, for himfelf his heirs and fucceffors, 
all adherence to the confederacy-fyrmed by him and Dowiut Rao Scindia, and other Ma- 
Thatta Chiefs, to attack the Honourable Company and their Allies. He engages not to aflift 