

Done at Mafulipatam, this twenty-fecond day of November, anno Domini one thoufand 

eight hundred and five, or twenty-ninth of Shuban, in the year of the Hejira 1220. 


Declaratory Articles annexed to the Treaty concluded between the Right hénoinrable Lord 
Lake, on the part of the Honourable Company, and Maharajah Dowlut Row Scindia, 
on the 22d cf November 1805. vaca f 
‘Whereas objestions have arifen to the terms of the sth and 6th and 7th Articles of the 
aforefaid Treaty, it is hereby agreed and declared, that in licu of thofe three Articles, the 
two following fhall be fubftituted : : ae 
Article 1ff—With a view of preventing an tnifunderftanding relating to the refpe Gie. 
polleffions of the Honourable Company and Maharajah Dowlut How Scindia, in the quatter 
of Hindoftan, the Maharajah hereby agrees to cede to the Honourable Company all the 
temritory, North of the river Chumbul, which was ceded to the Maharajah by the 7th Article 
of the Treaty of Serjee Angengaum ; that is to fay, the whole of the diftriéts of Dhoolpore, 
Baree, and Rajah Kerrah; and the Honourable Company ihall have no’ claitit or right to 
any rule, tribute, Revenues or poffeffions, on the South havik of that river. The Talooks . 
of Bhadek and Soorfeperarah, which are on the banks of the Jumna, will however remain 
in pofleflion of the Honourable Company. 
Article 2d.—The Honourable Company, from friendfhip to the Maharajah, agree to 
prane to him, perfonaily and exclufively, the amual finn of four lacks of Rupecs, to be paid 
by rtetly intalments, through the Refident at the Durbar. And the Honotirable Com- 
pany alfo agree to ailign, within their territories in Hindoftan, a Jaghire (to be holden on ‘the 
fame footing as that enjoyed by Balla Bye) amounting to a Revenue of twolacks of Rupees 
_ per annum, to Baezah Bhye, the wife of Dowlut Row Scindia ; and a Jaghire, amounting to 
‘one lack of Rupees per annum, to Chummah Bhye, the daughter of that Chief. 
Done at Hlahabad, this third day of December, one thoufand cight hundred and five. 


Appendix, No. 51. 
7 TREATY with the Rajah of Berar, dated 17th December 1803. 
Treaty of Peace between the Honourable Englifh India Company and their Allies, om 


« the one part, and Senah Saheb Soubalr Ragojec Bhoonflah, on the other; fettled by. 
Major General Wellefley on the part of the Honourable Company and their Allies, and 
by Jefwunt Rao Ranchunder on the part of Senah Soubah Ragojec Bhoonflah ; who 


have each communicated to the other their full powers. 


Article 1ft-—There fhall be perpetual peace and friendthi between the Honourable 
Gompany and their Allies on the one part, and Senah Saheb Soubah Ragejee Bhoonflah on 

ie other, " . 2 
Article 


290 APPENDIX 40 the Second REPORT from the Selc6&t Committee on 


‘ Atticle 2d.—Senah Saheb Soubah Ragojee Bhoon‘lahcedes to the Honourable Com. 
any and their Allies, in perpetual fovereignty, the Province of Cuttack, including the port 
tnd difirict of Balafore, 