

33» For.the uf of the mooring chains, according to the fize, and the feafons of the year, 
the accompanying Table will thé the ftations for the chains and rates of hire. 

36. For the warp bouts fer large fhips, 4 Annas per ton, or according to the time they 
are employed. 

37. For the light-houfe duties en large fhips, floops, fuows and brigs, two Annas per ton 
for each light-houfe. 

38. For the fupply of water to larger fhips, fuppofing they require water equal to § of 
their tonnage, at an eftimated average of S* K* 5 per ton; and for inows, floops, and other 
fquare rigged vellels, calculating four tons of water each, at 1 Rupee per.ton. 

39. For anchorage fees on vellels not requiring Pilotage, four Annas per ton. 

40. For fees on annual paflports and regifters for large and fimall vellels, four Annas 


per ton. 5 - 
41. For fees on regifters for fmall craft navigating the river below Calcutta, onc Anna 
per ton. 


42. For port clearances and manifetts, five Sicca Rupees cach per 100 tons. 

43. For anchors recovered, 25 per cent. on the prime coft, to be charged the owners. 

44. For marine ftores fold or fupplied to the thippiug, 25 per cent. on the invoice 

rice. : t 
n 45. "The Revenue derived from thefe fources and from the pilotage collections, after. paying 
the falaries of the pilots, &c. muit, as we have already obferved, be confiderable ;_and,. upon 
the beft calculation we can form of the tonnage of the thips and veflels of all deferiptions 
reforting to the port of Calcutta, we fhould be difpéfed to think it not over-rated.at eight 
lacks of Sicca Rupees; but wifhing, upon the cflablithment of what may be confidered as a 
new fyfieny, to form our gomputation upon the moft moderate feale, we fhall take the pro~ 
bable Revenue at four lacks of Sicca Rupees. Still this fum is an objet worthy of attention 
ia the pre’ of our afftirs ; and it is the more fo, becaufe the meafures from which we, 
calculate its production are at once advantageous to the Company, and beneficial to: the 
iaterefts of thofe who are fubject to their’Government in Bengal ; for, under ali the defects: 
af the prefent fyftem, we have no doubt that the charge now incurred for fhips of the larger 

ize exceed thole propofed to be eftablithed under various and evident improvements. 

__46. We are aware that expenfe muft be incurred, in the outfet of the arrangement, in the 
purchafe of mooring chains, building boats, cresting light-houfes, aud on other accounts 
incidental thereto; but we are of opinion thefe ferviees will not require the difburfement of 
amore tuan one year’s collections; with regard to inooring chains, we obferve by your Marine. 
Storekeeper’s books, there are feveral lying in ftore at Calcutta, which will now be brought 
into ufe; and we fhall tend out fuch further fupply ag may he necellary to complete the, 
anaibe! a belaid down ut the ceerene eaen rs ee : 

47. Refpedting the building of the light-houfes, you will give fuch ordergas may appear: 
nef caleatpeed a the ends ie view) pa ae with 7 due segerd to economy; we ‘hale as) 
already.obferved, fend out the lantern parts for them, ‘with proper directions for putting 
them up, and we conclude perlons may be found on the {pot who will be capable of-under- 
taking that bufinels from the direCtions to be forwarded. 