


Par.2. IN confidering the various eftablifhments under your government, our attention 
has beca drawn to thofe of the Marine Department, which we have recently had under our 
‘examination, in order to afcertain if the prefent expenfe thereof is not capable of reduction, 
or if'a Revenue may not be juftly derived to the Company from the charge now made for 
piloting fhips and veffels into and out of the river Hooghly, or from cther fources conietted 
with the navigation of the river, or with the Marine Department geacrally. 

3. The adoption of meafures by which Government, in return for advantages afforded. to 
the community at the public expenfe, may derive a proportion, of benefit, by the impofition 
of duties or, by fuck other means as are beft applicable to the purpofe, appears to us to be at 
all times juit and reafonuble, and it is more particularly fo in the prefent fiate of our 
affairs, whea every means within reach fhould be reforted to, as well to cilect a reduétion 
of expenfe, as improvement of the Revenue; on thefe grounds we have been induced to 
direét our attention to the Marine Eftablifhment. * 

4. The ordinary expente of the Marine in 1804-5 was S* R° 6,60,000, including the gun 
els, but exclulive of the eftablifhment of the Bombay cruizers or otlier armed velfels. 

5. OF the fam above mentioned, the eflablifhment of twelve pilot vetlels, with the offices 
immediatcly connected therewith, conftitutes about one-half; the expenfe of the veftels 
alone was S* Rt 2,34,000, including wages, fores, provifions and repairs : it is cur-intention to ~ 
enter into fone detail of this branch, as well in regard to the mede of conducting the 
bufinels appertaining thereto, as _to the collections and diftribution of the money received 
for piloting vellels ; for we are of opinion that both are capable of improvement. : 

6. We underftand that the pilotage is calculated according to the number of feet of 
water a fhip or vellel draws; foreigners, except the Americans, paying doubic the rates 
charged to Englifh veffels; the pilotage to an Knglith thip of 800 tons, in and out of the 
river, with the charges for boattwain, feadfmen, tow boats and warping the ship, anounts 
to about S* Ks 1500, cach voyage fhe makes to Calcutta. 

7. The amount of the collections on thefe accounts, we are informed, is upwards of three 
of Rupees per annum; the greateft part of which is diftributed among the pilots, 
matters and mates, belonging to the pilot {chooners ; the charges for tow boats and warping’ 
the fhips are received by the Mafter Attendant, who maintains the eftablifhment.of tox-boats 
ufed for thefe purpofes: one-fourth of the collections for piloting foreign veflels is‘reccived 
by the Company, and forms, with fome other fimall colleétions, the fund for penfions to the 
pilots and others belonging to the [chooners. : 

8. According to the information before us, cach pilot receives annually, in addition to the . 
pay from the Company of 1200 R* per annum, about 12,000 R? trom the pilotage collec- 
tions; and cach matter, in addition to his pay of S* K+ 840 per annum, about S* h’ 4,000 + 
fome calculations have caitied their reccipts even beyond thefe fums; as the collections are 
reecived and diltributed by the Marine Paymafter, you can without difficulty afecrtain the 
exad fam received by cach defeription of perfons in the pilot fervice ; but whatever be the 
amount, itis certain that the Company, whe bear ail the expente, derive no bencfit from the © 
collections for pilotage. : 