


n of Leven of your fhigs 
cnourable Court aeopy 


Appendix, No. 64. 


Extracts Letters from the Governor General in Council at Bengal (Public Depart- 
ment); dated 26th March 1786, and igth February 1787. 


45. HAVING lately received a Letter from Captain Franeis Light, giving an account of 
the Malays, the conquefts of the Dutch over fome of their Princes, the intrigues ofthe 
French, and the fituation_of the trade to the eaftward; with many Letters from the Princes 
of thefe countries to the Governor General, with which he was charged; alfo a Grant of the 
Hland of Pinang to the Englith Eatt India Company, from the King of Queda; we took 
fhe fame into confideration, with the Orders of your Secret Committce, dated in Oc&o- 

r 1780. : 

46. Captain Light reprefents that the fland of Pinang, lying in the Streights of Mataces, 
in latitude 5° 20’ north, has an excellent port en the eatt fide, where proviions of ail kinds 
are to be procured in abundance ; that it is convenient for fhips bound to China from all 
parts of India, and is fo well fituated that it matt, if not loaded with impotitions and re- 
diriétions, foon become the emporium of ‘the eattern trade. 

47. This ifland is fo peculiarly adapted asa mercantile {tution for veilels from all the 
Malay ports, the Moluccas, the Philippine JMlands, and Borneo, that we did not hefitate to 
accept the King of Queda’s Grant; as by an eftablifiunent properly feeured at this place, 
the Bengal trade with that of China willbe connected. We sre fully convinced, from the 
consluct of the Dutch, that it is become more neceflary tha ever Yor us to heve a pert 
where fhips of our nation may mect the eaftern merchants, as well for the promotion of 
that valuable commerce, as to afford a windward ftation of reirefhment and repair to the 
King’s, the Company's, and the country fhips. 

48. The depth and flow of water in the harbour, the facility of approach end retreat to 
fhips-of all burthens and at all feafons, together with the nature of tie foil aud produdtions, | 
are reprefented by Captain Light to be fuch as have convinced us this fituation is fuperiar 
to all others. It lics right in the track of the China fips from Bombay, Madras and 
Bengal, and the communication with Pinang and the Prefidencics of Bengal and Madras 
is at all times open, and not more than a moath or fix. weeks, in the mest unfavourable 
feafon, is neceflary to fend or receive advices from both. 

49. The poffeltion of this ifland cannot fail of being of the greateft utility to anv 
mutime Power in liviia, and we believe it to be a more eligible fituation in te northerly 
Monfoons than even Bombay; as it aflords a ftation from which his Majefty’s Squadron 
may at any featon proceed to the fupport of the Company’s Sctilements on the Malabar 
Coat, the Coromandel Coatt, or to any port in the Bay of Bengal, with great eate and 
quickneis; which cannot be done citicr from ‘Trincomalee or Bosubay; and faips of all 

363. 4Q ‘purthens 