

28. We compute that feveral thoufands of country craft, including fnows, brig: and floops, 
make one voyage to Calcutta in the courfe of the year ; which are exempt from pilotage and 
every other. defcription of duty ; it feemsreafonable, however, that according to ‘the eftablifhed 
caftom at the native ports in India, thefewelfels flhould pay a {mall duty, under the denomi; 
nation:of an Anchorage Fee, 5 ‘ 

29. The thips, veffels and fmall craft, fhould take out paffports and regifters, paying an 
eftablifhed. fee for the fame. We believe this was formerly done, and that the fees were 

” -received.by fome of our fervants ; but, in confideratior of the liberal falaries now given, if the 
fees are colle@ed, they are to-be brought to the Company's orcdit; if no fees are taken aw 
thete accounts, they are to be eftablifhed in future. e 

0. The fees now paid on port clearances and manifefts are the emoluments of the 
‘Collector of Cuftoms. We-confider the commiffion en the-Caitoms now drawn by the Collector, 
as. affording. an ample remuneration for-his fervices ; and-therefore dire& that the fecs on 
:port.clearances and manifetts.be in-tuture brought to the Company's credit. . 
gt When hips lofe their anchors in the river.the Master Attcadant-profits by the reco~ 
etics; we propofe, ‘in future, thatthe warp boats fhall be ufed for the purpote of recovering 
anchors, and. that all anchors fo recoseréd thail be retaraed to'the ewners on their paying to 
the Company a fixed advanee prime coft;. a meafnre of this natare, at the fame 
time that it benefits the Company iw a final] degree, is of nm advantage to-the owners, 


and fhews our attention to theix interes, which muf be gratifying te them, od 


a2. The _ 


334 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REPORT. ‘ from the Sele&t Committee on 


32. The fales of marine ftores, as at prefent conducted, appears to require reform ; we 
‘oblerve thefe are made at certain fixed periods, and from the lateft accounts before us we 
are concerned to find a confiderable tots bas accrued upon the invoice price of the ftorcs. 
TL occurs to us that the better mode of difpofing of our marine flores, would be by fixing a 
certain advance upon the invoice price, at which rate they might at any time be ifved to all 
purehafers requiring them; and with a view of further facilitating the difpofal of the mariue 
fiores, fuch of them as were required for the, ufe of the fhips or veilels in the river might be 
fent on the Company’s pilot {chooners. It may probably alfo be adviluble to eftablith Depots 
of thefe ftores at different fiations down the river, whence they night be more readily fur- 
nifhed to tlie fhipping in want of them. 

33. From the adopticn of regulations upon. the foregoing or fimilar principles, we can 
have no donbt that a confiderable Revenue would accrue to the Company, and that tke * 
navigation of the river would at the fame time be much improved, to th ent advantage 
of the community at larg: 

34. ‘Tne Reveaue muit of courfe depend upon.the amount of tonnage of the fhips and 
vellels importing into the river, and the rates and duties to be levied on the fhipping ; with 
regard to the latter, it occurs to us that the following might be eftablifhed, 