


Places, he is to return again to the Offing. 
Second. t, with the voing exceptions, no pilot {choonc? come in from fea unlefs in 


charge of the fourth fhip or vettel, and having then only the mate on board. 
Th Th cr repleniihing the flock of water and provifions at Kedgerce, where a 
fablifhed, cach fchooner fhail proceed again dor the Roads with fuch pilots as 


fea, frall have on board two months water and 


marine ttores 
8. This would 


tor {hips coming into the x 
afford confiderable ae 


regulations -aad avith due attention to fubordiaation and 
dife ¢ pilot fervi € conceive a confiderable improvement will be effected, 
to the manifelt advantage of the thipping navigating the river. 

And’being of opinion that the prefent mode of diftributing the pilotage collections is 
sabjectionable, we d that in future the charges to the fhipping, for piiotage, &e. .be col- 
Apeted for the Company, and that a fixed monthly falary be paid to the pilots, mates, Ke. at 
athe following rates : 


Each Pilot.- - 


- S*R*700 per Me. 
—— Mattr - - - 270 — 
—— Mate - - ~ 156 
— Boatfwain - - 60 —— 


16. The mode in which the pilotage is now charged appearsto us to require alteration, 
as the rate at prefent is the fame whether the fhip goes to Diamond Harbour or to Calcutta, 
-and whether the pilat is employed three days or three weeks; nor is any difference made 
ieteen the foutn-wett Montoon of feyen months duration, and the.remaining five months of 
-the year, 

2. Toobviate thefe defeéts, we think it will be advifzble to proportion the pilotage col- 
‘Actions to the tonnage of the fhips or vellels, and .the diftance they are conveyed up the 
aiver-urder the direction‘of the pilot; thus a veffel of 100 tons burthen to Saugur fhould 
wpay 50 Rupees, to Kedgeree 55 Rupecs, and fo on swith a fixed addition as they pro- 
ceed higher up the river. Vellels exceeding 100 tons to pay an. inereafe of.ene Anna per 
- ton for the excels, cach of the diftances ftated: thefe rates are to-be in force as to vellels 


19. Having thus detailed our fentiments upon thofe points which attach more particularly 
to the Pilot Kttablithment, we proceed toenumerate fuch other branches, connected with the 
navigation of the river, as have fallen under.our obfervation. 

20. The diftribution ef a fufficient number of mooring chains, at proper ftations, throughout 
the navigable part.of the river Hooghiy, including the anchorage off Calcutta and the Saugur 
Road, appears likely to be productive of great advantage to the Shipping importing into the 


siver, as securing them from the. many dangers to which they are fubjected in the uavigation 
thereof; and we have no doubt the owners would.readily pay a moderate -rate for.the ufe.of 

thefe chains, according to their tonnage. ° 
21. Asa meafure of farther fafety to the fhipping, .we-confider it-expedient.that a number 
of warp boats fhonld be kept in readinefs to accompany them in and out of.the-river, inftead 
of the tow beats now in ufe, which we apprehend are of very little fervice, and fhould be dif- 
continued to the large fhips; the warp Boats to be of adarge fize and-better conttruction al- 
together, and to be provided with a preper anchor and hawler forthe affiftance of fhips ; .thefe 
boats to keep with a fhip at half hawier diftance on the off fide.from any dangerous paflage, 
fo as to enable her to haul off inftantly If fhe touched the ground ; they would likewife keep 
the thipping clear of each other, and might warp them-to the mooring chzins, and thus prove 
of great fervice to the thipping in the river. Yor defraying the expenfe of thefe boats a 
dinall duty -might be levied puthe fhipping; which, from the alliftence and accommodation 
> they 