

. 48. You will proceed, without delay, in the adoption of meafures for carrying into effect: 
the general principles laid down in the foregoing paragraphs. With regard to the particular 
points relating tu the impofition of duties therein enumerated, you will confider them rather 
as conveying our ideas in.an outline, than as abfolute dire¢tions; in prepofing the rates of: 
the various dutics to be levied, we have proceeded upo: the beft information we could obtain 
upon the fabject ; this part, however, you will exa:mineinto with particular attention, in 
order to atcertain with precifion the quantum of duty that may. be levied, confiftently with.. 
the objects in view, by our orders now given ; viz. the foundation of a Reyenueto the Com- 
pany, and the advantage of the community in refpeét to thé navigation of the river ;-and in 
doing this you willconfider the propriety of:fixing a heavier duty to be paid by foreigners 
than that impofed on veffels under Englifh colours, according to the practice regarding 
pilotage; due care being at the fame time taken, that in any refpeét the duties are not fo 
sear ‘as to hazard the lofs of the trade to the port of Caleutta, and ‘its refort to foreign 
fettlements. Oe Z oe % : 


49: While 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 335 


49. While the principles of the fore: 


i p | going plan are under your confideration, you will give- 
Your attention to inch other improvements of the port of Calcutta, aad of the Revenue wich 
inay be derived to the Company ia confeguence, as may fuggeft themfelves from the local 
invettigation which will take ptace in conformity with thefe our Orders; and you will direét 
that thele be carried into eflcet at the fame time with the arrangements now pointed out. 
Sheeld any ferious objestions occur to you to the adoption of any particular item of the 
regulations we have determiaed on, you will poftpone carrying tle fame into eliect until a 
referer made for cur ultimate decition. 
probably, of obtaining the moft compicte information upon the various 


ed in fhipp 


em to 
you. wil iy a 


Peary 
of this Committee, 


Appendix, No. 63. 


‘Extrad Leiter from the Governor in Council at Fort St. George (Revenne Department) : 
dated 23d November 1794. 


Para. 1.—HAVING reccived advice of the approaching difps 
from Bengal, we take the opportunity by them of fading your 
of our Prefident’s Minute, at a Mecting on the 24th ultine, tating his dicrdihip’s reafons 
for propofing an immediate abolition of the Chicfihips of Mafulipatam and rapatan 
as well as the Refidency of Gangam, in which we entirely concurred, and hi 1 COR} 
Sequence placed your valuable poffeflions in that quarter im feparate divifions, under the 
charge of nine Collectors. We alto tranfimit, for the information of your Honourable 
Court, a copy of the Proclamation we thought it neceflary to publif on the occafion 
throughout the Circars, anda copy of the Itevenue Board’s Inftructions to the Collegoxs,. 
with other papers relating to the arrangement, 