


the’ Affaire of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 333 


they would afford, we have no doubt would .be cheerfully paid. We fubjoin a Statement of 
«he propofed dimentions of fuch boats, and:a fketch.of their diftribution. : 
22. The next point we have to meation,-concerning the fafcty and proteCion of the fhip- 

is the cretion of a light-honfe on Point Palmyras; a meafure which’ would enable 
gators in the S. W. Montoon to bring their fhips, at night, within the reef of the Point 
h fafety, and off.the mouth of the river Kanka or Kanika; within or at the ertrance of 
avhich the pilot vetlels might be ftationed with the beft effects. We ‘believe the erection of a , 
light-houfe on this {pot was, fome years patt, fubmitted to the attention of your Government; 
‘but, poflibly on account ofthe difkeulty attending fuch a plan, from the country not being 
at the fime in our poffeition, was relinquifhed. As this objection is now removed, and we have 
obtained pofleflion of that part of the-coaft, it feems to us, from every information we have 
een able to precure, that the mcafure would in every view be highly advifeable. 

23. Another light-houfe on Saugur [flund would producc advantages nearly fimilar in the 
NE. Montoon, : 5 

24. ‘The expenfe of erecting thee light-houfes, we apprehend, would not be of confiderable 
ameunt; the lanterns and other apparatus muft of courfe be fent from.this country; and as 
i nt of the charges attendant thereon, as wellin the firft coft asin the eftablifi- 
gent required, a moderate daty anay be levied upon the fhipping availing themfcives of the 
sevident benefits that rauft be derived to them, 2 
25. The fupply cf pure and wholefome water to the Sipping importing into the River 

‘ly is obvioufly aa e! ¢ have given particular atten~ 


‘the river a conftant fupply of pure and wholeforie water, is unneceflary ;” does not appear 
to us to be fuch as from the real importance of the fubject we fhould have expected ; for we 
cannot fuppofe that of a Board of twelve profeffional men, cleven members, all of whom muft 
have: been well acquainted with the circumflances on which they reported, would have given 
their opinion that defects exiftcd in the fyftem of procuring water, without a real foundation 
for their aflertions. 

26. The plan that has occurred to us as likely to remove the objections to the -prefent mode 
of obtaining water for the {iipping, is by forming one or more relervoirs, to be fupplied from 
the Loll Dicky or Great Tank ; water to be conveyed from the refervoirs, through iron 
pipes, to boats to be employed in carrying it te the fhips and veffels down the river; the 
expenfe of this meafure to be repaid to the Company by a charge for the water fo fupplied, 

* at a.certain rate per ton. ‘ : <<. 

. 27. We obferve on the Proceedings of the Marine Board, in July 1708, a Statement of © 
the expenfe of fupplying water to the Europe thips fronr November 1797 to 31f¢ May 1798; 
by which it appears the average was at the rate of 10 gallons for a Rupee. Gn that occafion 
‘the Board forwarded an Addrefs to the Governor General and Council, ftating ‘the incon- 
-veniences attending. the mede of fupplying water, with a propofal for building a -refervoir 
.at Kedgeree fer fupplying. water to ips lying at Saugur when the foutherly winds 
orend it difficult for-boats and floops to get down the ziver; you will refer to this when 
-the fabjeee ‘comes before you cunder our. cent orders, aa 