


336 APPENDIX #o the Sccond REPORT from the Sclo& Committee on 


Ravenfworth, and Captain Roddam difcharged his pilot on the 2d infant. 

54. Captain Roddam has been directed, after landing the troops, to proceed to Fort 
Marlbro’, where he will receive on board 150 Caflries ior Prince of Wales land, to be 
delivered to Captain Light for the purpofe of clearing the country; and having performed 

this fervice he is to return back to this place; from whence we purpofe to difpatch him for 
‘England carly in Auguf. This will afford you an early cargo, and fave the expenfe of 
taking up a packet at that fcafon. 

55. We muft confels it was with great relutance we adopted meafures which caufed the 
Company an immediate increafe of expenfe on a profpedct of diftant reimburfement, at a 
time when every fund is appropriated to anfwer a varicty of demands; but the plan has 
gone too far to be haiiily retracted, and the ufurpations of the Dutch in thofe parts, added 
to the great increafe of the Company's trade to China, rendered a Settlement in the 
Streights of Malacca more requifite than ever. 

56. The objects which we expect by this Settlement are both commercial and political ; 
.to coancét the Bengal and China trade, and procure a windward port during the north-eaft 
Monfoon, for the refrethment and repair of the King’s fhips in time of war. How far we 
may be juitified in thefe expe@tations time and experience can alone determine. 

57. We do not look upon the eaftern trade as a fource from whence much fpecie can be 
drawn into this country, but the advantages to be expected from it for the Company are; 
principally, by its becoming more extenfively than at prefent a mart for the barter of 
‘opium and the productions of Bengal,-for tin, pepper and other commodities, to be applied 
as funds in the Uhinefe markets for the purchuie of tea, inflead of the ruinous export of 
fpecie from this country, as well as from Europe. 

58. Captain Light having detailed the. political fituation of the Native Powers around 
him, requefted our orders, in coufequence of repeated epplications for affiftance from the 
King of Queda and other Princes, who dreaded an attack from the Siamefe Forces ; to this 
we peremptorily directed him to refufe compliance with the folicitations of either party, 
but at the fame time inftru&ted him to endeavour to cultivate the good will of all, declaring 

, that the defence of the ifland mutt be his fole object: we, however, informed Captain Light 
that the King of Queda was entitled to fome pecuniary confideration for his grant of the 
ifland, which we authorized him to pay by inftalments. 

59. Not concurring in the propriety of granting pailes to the Malay Prows, which Captain 
Light recommended in order to obtain greater commercial benefits, by affording our pros 
tection againft the exactions of the Dutch, we forbade it; for although we do not admit 
many of the exclufive privileges claimed by that nation in the eaftern feas, yet in cafe 
‘of their being arrogated before we authorized the Englith colours to be hoified, we con- 
fidered it neceffary to guard againft their being infulted; we-have, however, permitted 
Captain Light to grant papers to fuch veffels as belong to perfons actually inhabitants of the 
iflund, who fhall have takea the oaths of allegiance according to the tenets of their 