

9. We apprehend fach large allowances to men of the defeription of thofe forming the 
prefent Pilot Eftablifhment, cannot-bit be productive ‘of bad ctiects. Seamen who defert 
from the Company’s or other fhips, or who find their way by other means into Calcutta, . 


are, we underftand, received into the pilot ferviec, where they rife to boatfwains, mates, 
matters and pilots; wlren in the two latter ftations, they receive allowances fo ample to men 


in their clafs of life, as to encourage diffipation and idlenefs. We have been informed that 
itis not unufual for feveral of the pilot {chooners to lie idle off Calcutta while ihips are in 
the roads, and off the Sandheads, 1m diftrels for want of their affiftance ; aud we find on your 
records numerous inftances of complaints of drunkennefs, inactivity and i acity, wnong 
the pilots, matters, &e. which have frequently been followed by difmifion from the fer 
vice of the parties complained of We fhoald inter, from thefe cireumfiances, that there is a 
great want of difcipline in the pilot fervice, and it is evident that it requires reform, and - 
more efficicut regulations for its management. 

10, As # principal ftep towards improvement in the Pilot Eftablifiment, we fhall ufe our 
endeavours to procure a number of boys from Chrift’s Hofpital, or from fome other feminary 
wherein they may have received the requifite education, to be apprentices for a certain ter 
of years; atter which they may be appoitited mates in the pilot veflels, and rife gradually to 
matters and pilots.” The fervice would thus, in the courfe of a few years, confitt of well 
educated dad] fcientific men, inftead, as at prefent, of the idle, diflipated and ignorant. 

11, Should we meet with difappointment in procaring lads of the foregomg defcription, 
we fhall confider of the propricty of appointing volunteers for the pilot fervice, in like 
manner as for the Bombay Marine. : oe 

12, From what is obferved above, we are of opinion that the number of pilot veffels now. 
on the eftablifhment is greater than veceflary ; we therefore dircét that you take the fame inta 
confideration, and make fuch reduction therein as may be confiftent with a due attention to 
the navigation and commerce of the port ; or report to us yonr fentiments, if they {hall bein: 
oppofition to our own upon this point. : 

(363. 4P ‘ As 


. $32 APPENDIX to the Sccond REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


13. As the following Rules, for conducting the pilot fervice, appear to us effential, we dire 
that they be eftablifhed. ¢ 
Firft. That it be a ftanding regulation that no pilot veflel proceed higher up the river than 


Kelgerce, -unlefs fhe requ: docking, or except it be with onc of His Majefty’s or the 
Companys thips, or an 


nt thip of Soo tons and upwards. Should the pilot deem it 
necellary for the {chooner to proceed with thefe as far up the river as Mud Point or 
Diamond Yarbour, he 


is to be allowed fo to proceeds but on arriving at either of thote 