


xeligion. i 
60. We 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 337 


-6o0, We have ordered Mr. Macdonald, an Officer upon this Eftablithment, but on fervice 
at Fort Marlbro’, to proceed to Prince of Wales land and furvey the barbour. From his 
Report we may be better enabled to judge bow far this place will anfiver for the reception 
and repair of thips of war, and whether it will ferve as a place of deience. 

61. We have likewife direed Captain Light to tranimit us particular accounts of the 
exports and imports of goods, with the prices they bear; and fuch further information as 
anay enable us to afcertain how far the Settleanent will anfwer our expeciations in a com- 
mercial point of view. 

62, Having this information before us. we fhall be enabled to come to a final determina- 
tion, whether it will be prudent to continne or withdraw the Settlement altogether. 

63. We have authorized Captain Light to receive fuch Colonifts as he may judge ex- 
pedient; to allot fuci a portion of !and to each family as cireunftances would adinit; and, as 
an encouragement to trade, we have made the port free to all nations, and peremptorily 
forbade his levying any kind of duty or tax on goods exported or imported. 


——— 
Appendix, No. 65. 


Extra& Letter from Court’ of DireGtors, to the Governor General in Council at Bengal, 
(Public Department) ; dated gift Auguft 1801. 


Para. 8. THE nest place where'a material reduction may be effected, is in the Eftablifh- 
mentof Fort Marlbro’. It appears by the accounts of that Kefidency for the years, 1797-8 and 
1798-9, the lateft we have received, that the Company have fuffered an annual lols of above 
£.87,000, after making allowance for the profits derived from the purchafe of pepper 

roduce, 
i g. Weare decidedly of opinion that no reafon exitis to juftify our maintaining this Scttle- 
ment at fo enormous an expenie ; its chief importance to the Company is in a commercial 
view, and in this view it is evident we have been very confiderable loiers, from the fmall 
quantity of pepper fupplied, and the increafing charges of the Eftablifhment in every 
ranch, 

10. It was therefore a matter of fome doubt with us, whether it might not be expedient 
to withdraw our Settlements on the Weft Coaft of Sumatra altogether; againit this determina- 
tion, however, fome arguments of a political nature occurred, which appear to us of too 
much weight to juftily that decifion. 

11. After mature ‘confideration we have come to the refolution of making very con- 
fiderable reductions in the Eftablifhment at Fort Marlbro’, and of withdrawing the fubordi- 
nate Refidencies in general, and the following appears to us to be a larger Eftablifhment than 
can be required for the purpofe of collecting the Pepper for Europe or China; but we have 
allowed a greater number of Affiftants for the prefent than we think neceflary for a perma- 
nent Eftabiithment, in order to make immediate provifion, as far as we can with Propriety, 
for the Servants now at Fort Marlbro’; but as we are decidedly of opinion that a Refident, 
with four Affiftants, will be fufficient, the Eftablithment is to be reduced to that number as 