

17. We direct that after the expiration of five years fervice, the Writers of Prince of 
Wales Ifland fhall rife to the rank of Factor. 

38. After three years further fervice, to the rank of Junior Merchant; and, 

1g. After.three years further fervice, to the rank of Senior Merchant, in the fame manner 
as tne Writers upon our feveral Eitablifhments of Bengal, Madras and Bombay, rife to 
the fupenor ranks above mentioned. 

so. The perfon who at prefent officiates us Malay Tranflator we have refolved to con- 
tinue te office, and that the amount of his falary fhall be fixed by the Governor and 
Council. < : - 

21, ‘The foregoing allowances are to eommence from the arrival of the parties at Prince of 
Wales Ifland, and are to be in full of all allowances and emoluments of what kind or 
nature foever. 4. 

22. The rate of exchange for the above-mentioned allowances, when drawn for upon 
England, has been fixed at ‘5s. the Dollar; and when drawn for on Bengal, at two Sicca 
Rupees per Dollar; but you are not to draw on cither place for thofe allowances when your 
own Treafury can fupply the requifite funds. 

1 23. In addition to tie Eftablithment above-mentioned, we have refolved upon the fol: 
lowing: : 
Mater Attendant (already on the Ifland) 3,600 Deliars per annum. 

Civil and Naval Engineer. 

24. We have come to the-refolution to allow the fecond in Council, Mr. Oliphant, after 
vemaining three years at Prince of Wales Ifland, the option of returning to his rank at the 
Prefidency from which he was taken, or of refigning fech rank ; which determination is 
to be communicated to the Court of Directors, and he is to, wait their decifion at Prince 
of Wales Ifland. 

25, We have alfo determined to allow the other Servants under Council, who have been 
employed in India, the like option, after the expiration of five years. - 

26, We have likewife refolved that Colonel Norman Macalilter, the fourth in Council, 
he allowed the option, after remaining three years at Prince of Wales ifland under this ap- 
pointment, of returning to his proper rank ‘on the Bengal Eftablithment, or of refigning 
fach rank ; which determination is to be communicated to the Court of Directors, and. he.is 
to wait their decifion at Prince-of Waies Jfand. 

27. In cafe of a'vacancy in the Government, the next in Council is to fucceed pro 
tempore, and fo in fucecfiion, unti} our further pieafare is declared thereupon. 

28. The perfon fucceeding to the office of Superintendant of the Marine is not to-have a 
feat in Council without our previous f{znétion. 

29. Vacancies happening in Council to be provifionally fupplied in the following 
‘order, provided the perfons named fhali Lave conducted themfelves to your fatisfaction in 
the fiations to which we have nominated them. 


Mr. Henry Shepherd Pearfon, Mr, John Erfkine, 
— W. E. Phillips, — Thomas Raffles, 
— James Pi Hobfon, — William eobinion. 


— Quintin Dick Thompton, 


30. The rule to be obferved in filling up vacancies in offices under Council, is, that you 
thail felect from among the  perios bclow Council, fuch as may, from their peculiar quali- 
fications, appear bett iuited to the dilcharge of the duties of fuch particular office as may 
Decome vacant. 