

16. The pay and allowances to the Military include full Batta, which is the ‘higheft rate 
that can be admitted in that refpect. 

17. It will be ncceffary to relieve the detachment at certain’ intervals. 

18. We leave the appointment of the Refident and Affiftants to you, | 
may be taken from the Servants now there, unle{s you fee fome folid obj 
-gard to the Civil Servants who will become fupernumerary by thefe orders, on mature con- 
dideration we have refolved, that as foon as we have legal authority for fo doing, they fhall 
be transferred to the Madras Eftabtifhment ; as from the great addition of territory annexed 
to that Government, there appears to be fufficient room for the employment of an additional 
number of Servants ; but the Fort Marlbro’ fupernumerarics are to be placed, in regard to 
their feversl ranks, with a difference of five years dtanding below the Fort St. George 
Servants; the Writers at ort Marlbro’ who arc under 22 years of age may be fent to Fort 
‘St. George immediately, and rank under the Fort St. George Writers of the prefent featon; 
but this is to extend only to fuch as are of European parents, both father and mother. . 

19. And with regard to the’Servants above the rank of Writers, the transfer is in like 
manner to exténd only to‘fuch as are born of European parents, both father and mother; 
thofe who are not fo, mutt remain at Fort Marlbro’ upon their prefent allowances, gecording 
to their sank, except thofe who you think proper to appoint Alliftants to the Refident ; an 
no Servants can be transferred, who, from the inveftigation now making, may be found un- 
Worthy of future employments in our fervice; thefe muft of courfe wait our final decifion on 
their conduct seks 

eo. Until the transfer.can be made the fupernumerary are to’ be allowed to draw their 
prefent i y, cliet, and hoafe rent, according to their ranks. * 

21. The (ums outitanding on Loans from the Bank muft be called in as foon as pofiible ; 
but in this, as well as the inferior details of arrangement, we leave you to act according to 
your diferetion, * ' ; . 

22. In giving our directions upon this fubject, we have not paffed unnoticed the communi- 
cation, in your Public Letter of the 16th February laft, of the inftractions tent to the Com- 
miffioner, in view to the final arrangement for the management of our aifairs ou the Weft 
Coatt of Sumatra; but, from a firm conviction that a rad reform is abluiutely and imme- 
diately neceflary, we think proper to direét that the reduced Liftablifhment. ordered by us be 
forthwith carried into effect, without waiting for our fextiments on the points referred to 
the Commilliouers inveftigation, as noticed above; ~ 


Appendix, 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 33)-- 
Appendix, No: 66. 


Extract Letter from the Court of Directors to the Governor General in Council at Bengal, 
(Public Department); dated 28th Auguft 1800. 


Par. 6. FROM the importance of Prince of Wales Ifand in a commercial point of view, 
we are induced to direét that a fenior Civil Servant on your Eftablifhment, fully competent to 
the charge, be immediately appointed Superintendant of that [and ; and fhould any gentle- 
man not of this defcription have been previoully appointed to this fiation in the room of the 
Jate Major Macdonald, we further direct that he be removed therefrom, and that one of our 
Civil Servants be appointed in his room, 