

the Straits-of Malacca, therefore, it appears to be very defirable that the Britith Nation 

thould occupy the Port of Acheen. The importance of this fubject has been recognized 

at different times. In 1781 the Bengal Government was directed to endeavour to acquire 

a fettlement there; which defign was attempted in 1782, and again in 1784, without any 

other fuceefs than the admiffion of a Commercial Refidency, which was.withdrawa in 1785. 

Prince of Wales Iland indeed had not then been acquired; and for a time it feems to 

have been thought, that in obtaining this fettlement we had done all that was requifite 

for the {ccurity of the national interefts in thofe feas; but the gentlemen entrvited from 

time ta time with the care of that ifland, appear to have feen the value of a connection 

with the King of Achcen; for in 1798, Coloncl Macdonald, then Superintendant of the 

Hfland, fubmitted to the Governor General in Council propofitions for a, Treaty with the 

King of Acheen. The object of that Treaty, however, on the part of the King baving been 

* Sic Orig, thought only the exceptionable one of acquiring the * trade of monopolizing the trade of his 

‘Q mete. own dominions, and the inducement held out to the Company being no other than a 

fupply_of pepper (though poflibly a political connection might thence, have been 

cftablifhed) the propofitions were declined. But we have reafon to believe that the King 

‘of Achecn is now difpofed to give the Company a more important footing in his territorics ; 

ane we catertain a‘highly favourable opinion of the expediency of obtaining a footing at 

cheen. 

8. We obferve that in 1798, upon a correfpondence being opened with the Government 
‘of Acheen, the King expretied a defire to be tupplicd with two armed cruizers. The Govera- 
iment Gencral, however, declined giving their confentto the adoption of any meafures which 

ad a tendency to implicate the Mritith Nation in the local policy of any Native Governmeat, 
-which might prebably involve us in diftant petty hoftilities, to the great injury of the com- 
‘merce carried on between Bengal and the Coaft of Sumatra. 

g..{f thelc, or if any other difficultics fhould occur in obtaining an eligible Settlement at 
Achcen; or if, upon further enquiry in India, any folid objection, not known here, thould ap- 
pear againtt the profecution of this fcheme ; there is another place, namely, Merqui, where 
the French are faid to have of late reforted for provifions, and where, with a view of depriving 
them of the relources of that coaft, it might perhaps be expedient for the Company to 
Stablifh an influence of their own. But the decifion upon this fubjec& muft be referred to 
‘the Governor General in Council. . “ 

-10. As a Commercial Eftablithment Bencoolen has become of no importance; the only 
produce of it, pepper, is a lofing concern to the Company, who can be much better supplied 
with that article from the growing plantations of Prince of Wales Ifland,.as well as from the 
Malabar Coaft. It has no value in a political view, -for no other European Nation can tura 
it to mach account, cr bear the expenie which mutt be incurred in maintaining it. 7 