

11, Having: alfo taken into our confideration the. great expenfe at prefent Incurred at 
Malacea, wituont deriving any correfpondest benefit either from the Revenues or commerce 
of the place, and the propofed Lftublitament of Prince of Wales Ifland. being calculated to 
duperfede the neceflity of maintaining a Settlement poffelfed of no natural advantazes, either 
in point of produ@, trade or harbour, near to a fiation which is like i howe ad- 
vantages; we liave fignified to the Government of Madras, our determi. draw our 
garrion from Malacca‘and its dependencies, and- whatever other Et ay have 

ven formed there on our account. But, previors to the abandonmeit of the place, we have 
sdirested that the fortifications, arfenels, and public works of all defcriptions; inoutd be cont 

pletely 


- the Afairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 341 


pletely deftroyed and demolifhed, fo as to render it of the leaft poffible vaiue to the Encmy’s 
G at, in cafe the Bataviars fhould hereafter tum their attention to the occupation of 
n. ‘The garrifon and the public fiores and effeéts arc to be tanfported to Prince of 
Wales Ifland, and a particular accornt to be taken of them. 

12. To fuch inhabitants, natives of India or China, as may be apprchenfive of remai 
Malacca, after the Britith garrifon fhall be withdrawn, we have direted that every 
encouragement fhould be atforded them for the fafe and convenient reroval of their perfons 
and ctlects, i ig and ailifting them to eftablith themfelves under the Company's protce- 
tion at. Prince of Wales Hiand; and the evAcuation of the Settlemeat at Malagca is to be fo 
regulated as to give every facility to this object. You will therefore, upon their arrival, re- 
e them with kindaefs and hofpitality, and grant them, uy conditions as fhall here- 
7 a be fpecified, moderate portions of land to clear and cultivate for their own ule and 

cnekt. ' 

13. We have directed the Government of Fort St. George to communic:te with you on 
the fubject of our Orders refpecting the evacuation cf Malacca; it being our intention that’ 
when every thing thalt have been properly arranged under their directions for the com-_ 
picton thereof, that. the means of removing the garrifon ftores, &c. from thence to yout 

eed. fhall be provided by you, as the readieft and leaft expenfive mode of effecting that 
object. 

14. We are aware that, in the firft inftance, the new and more regular forms of govern- 
nent which we have refolved to adopt for Prince of Wales Ifland, mutt inereate the expenfe 
of that Settlement ; not only becaufe the number and quality of Servants there miuft be cn-’ 
hanced, but becaufe, hitherto, the perfons employed for the Company on the Iiland have becn: 
keptia gencral on falaries formed on the confideration of their having been allowed’ the 

rivilege of trade; but as we entcrtain a reafonable cxpetation that the Company will be 
indemnified for the charges they have already been at, and are further to incur, in fupporting * 
an Eftablifhment at Prince of Wales Hand, that indemnification mutt be fupplied in a great 
degree from trade ; which the Company may carry on proatcbly in pepper and other exports 
of the IMand, and imports from Europe. We expett, likewifc, that we thall be in part reim- 
burfed by datics, cuftoms and land rents, and internal taxes; all which will of courfe be 