

3t. All appointments and promotions to be made in confequence of the foregoing 
directions are to be declared provijional only, febject to our ultimate confirmation. 

32. Aiter earnelily recommending to you tie moft perfect harmony amongtt yourfelves, 
as an object of the higheft concern to the due exccution of the truit repofed in you, we 
procced tv give you the following Infiructions. 

33. We ‘hired that you afemble in Council once in every week at the leaft. At fuch 
Bfeetings the Governor in Council fheli preceed,.in the firft place, to’ the confideration 
of tuch matters in queftion as fliuli be propofed by the Governor; and as often as any- 
mantter ar que‘tica fhall be propounded by any of the Counfeliors, it fhall be competent to 
the Goversor to pattpone or adjourn the difcufion thereof to a future day, provided that - 
no fach adjourniaent thail exceed forty-cight hours; nor fhall the matter or queftion fo pro- 
poicd be adjourned more than twice, without the coufent of the Counfellor who propofed 


the fame. 


34. That 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 343 


34. That in cafe of ficknefs of the Governor, or of his being unavoidably prevented 
from attending at any Meeting of Council, the fenior Member who may be then prefent do 
take the chair. 

35. Upon an equality of votes on any queftion propofed in Council, the Governor or the 
Prefident for the time being fhall have the cafting vote. 

96. The correlpondence with any of the Malay Princes, or other country Powers, is to be 
carried on by the Governor only; but all letters fent by him are to be firft approved in 
Council; and the Governor fhail lay before the Council, at their next Mecting, all lettcrs 
received by him in the courfe of fuch correfpondence, for their information. 

37. Wedirect that ail your Refolutions and Proceedings be entered fair upon each day’s 
Confultations, which are to be figned by the Members preleat. ‘That an annual fet of your 
Confultations, zecompanied by 2 copious Index, be regularly tranfinitted to us, and broken or 
periodical fets by every convenient opportunity. 

38. We direct that you do not on any account, or under any pretence whatfoever, fuller 
any European to hold any poft, or to exercife any office in our fervice, Civil or Military, who 
thall not have been appointed or admitted into the Company’s fervice by the cxprefs 
authority of the Court of Directors. 

39. We refer you to the igoth and following Scétions of the A& of the 33d of His 
fent Majefty, relative to fhips and unlicenfed perfons trading within the Company's a 
and relative to unlicenfed perfons themfelves found within thofe limits. The 132d Clauie 
provides for the manner in which {uch perfons are to be treated, and the 133d Claufe virtually 
invefts the Governor of Prince of Wales Ifland wits the fame authority over fuch perfons 
as is vetted in the Governor General of Fort William, in the Governor of Fort St. George, 
and in the Governor of Bombay. In order to prevent the Ifland from being a receptacie 
for European adventurers, we direct that none be allowed to fettle upon the Hland (except 
fuch as thail have received our previous licenfe to remain in India) without the permiftion of 
your Government, which permiffion fhall be fubject to our confirmation ; and we direct that 
you fend us regular information of the perfons to whom you grant fuch permiflion. We 
enclofe you a copy of the ufual Covenants entered into with the Company by free Mer- 
chants and free Mariners, by which our refpective Governments are empowered to withdraw 
fuch licenfes, if they fhall think proper to do fo, on giving twelve months previous notice 
thereof. At the fame time we direét that you afford every proper encouragement to in- 
duftrious fettlers who are Natives of any part of India or China. 