

4. From thefe caufes ithas beea in our contemplation, for fome years, to place the ifland 
under the fame form of government as the Company’s other Settlements ia India enjoy, 
and to make it dependant immediately on the Company at home... By this mcaiure we ex- 
pect that the benefits of fixed goverament and laws will be eftablifhed, and induftry, com- 
merce and general refort, be thereby encouraged. 7 

5. Our attention has lately been called to this fubjeét, not only by the gencral_reafons 
already aifigned, but by the necetlity which the renewal of war has evinced of putung this 
important ffation into a fiate of fecurity from the attacks of our caemies. 

303. AR G6. Oa 


340 APPENDIX ¢o the Second REFORT from the Sele& Committee on 

6. On thefe grounds alone we fiiculd have dccmed it indifpenfebly neceffary to new 

‘model the Governmcni of the ifland, and take further meafures for its fecurity; but a Pian 

vhich has lately Been laid before us, of which a Copy (and the Paper accompanying it) is 

‘enciofed, at the defire of the Firft Lord of the Admiralty, for making the ifland a Naval 

Arlenal for the building and repairing His Majefty’s thips, gives a new and high degree 

‘of importance to the dubject, and renders the projeéted reform in tye government ab- 

folutely indifpeafable. We are fully imprefied witi the great national advantages of the 

‘object, propofed ‘by the Firtt Lord of the Admiralty, catertain fanguine hopes of its 

practicability, at leaft to a certain exteat, and have mot willingly agreed to afford the 

‘utiott aid iaotr power in carrying into execution the meafure propoted by His Majetty’s 
Government. 

In the ourfe of our deliberations on this fabject our attention has been drawn to a 

al confideration of the Britifh ‘interefts, political and commercial, in the countries on 

tern fide of Bengal. Befides Prince of Wales Ifland, the Company now poilels in 

raits of Malacea the town and fortrefs of that name; and on the South-weft Coaft 

of Sumatra, Fort Marlbrough and its dependencies. The importance, both in a political 

amd commercial view, of the ifland over which we have appointed you to prefide, has been 

already noticed; although this ifland may be made.a Naval Station, which under the authority 

of the Britith Nation may become paramount in that quarter, yet it will not deprive an 

European enemy ‘of the means of infetting with his fhips the Bay of Bengal, becauie 

‘there. is fill an inviting port open to him in Acheen, on the Weft Coait of Sumatra, 

ovhere the Eyench in the .two latt wars'were enabled to refit and fupply their fhips, and 

tpeedily to refume their depredations in the Bay. This port, properly ftrengtacned, 

might command thé fouthern’fhore of the Straits of Malacca, as as Prince of Wales 

Mand, and, in. the poffciion of the French, might prove the means of great annoyance 

to vur trade, if it did not at any time give them the means of ‘coping with the naval 

force .we fhould happen to have in that part of the world. To have the full command of. 