


. Appendix, No. 67. 


ExtraG@ Letter from the Governor General in Council at Bengal (Pablic Department), dated 
gift July 1801. * 


6. Dire& that a fenior Civil Servant be 6. The Governor General in Cowactl had 
xppointed Superintendant of Prince of Wales \. pointed Sir George Leith, Bart. to. the 
Mland. Further Orders on the fubject, charge of Prince of Wales Ifland, a confider- 
’ able time previous to the receipt of the Order 
-of your Honourable Court, and the affairs of that Government having been conducted with 
‘eat integrity and propriety by Sir G, Leith, the Governor General in Council is apprehen- 
Ere that any fudden change in the Government might produce an injurious effect upon the 
interefts of the Coimpany in’ that valuable Settlement, His Excellency in Couneil is there- 
fore fatisfied that your Honourable Court, under thefe circumftances, will approve his deter- 
mination to fufpend the execution of your Orders on this fubjeét, until he fhall have fub- 
mitted to your Honourable Court a full view of the ftate of affairs at Prince of Wales's 
ifand. 


Appendix, No. 68. 
Letter from the Court of Dire&tors to the Governor in Council at Prince of Wales 
3 Ifand; dated 18th April 1805. 
To Philip Dundas, Efq. Governor of Prince 
: of 
Wales Ifland. 


John Hope Oliphant, Efq. 2d in Council 
Alexander Gray, Efy. - 3d De 
Colonel Norman Macalifter, 4th De 


Para.1. HAVING refolved that’ the fature fyftcm of managing the Company's affairs 
at Prince of Wales Iland fhall be by. a Governor and Council, and -having the higheft 
opinion of your integrity and ability, we have appointed you to the execution of that 
important truft,.and enclofe you a Commiflion of Government accordingly, under the Com- 
pany’s feal. We likewife enclofe you a copy of a feparate Commifiion hich we have 
granted to the Governor, appointing him Commander in Chief of the Fort and Garrifon. 

2, Hitherto the Government seperated for this ifland has been confidered merely as 
of a temporary nature. It has long been our intention, however, to eftablifh a ular 
dyftem of adminiftration for the ifland, but from various caufes that fyftem has not been 
formed till now. Although from the fpirit of Britifh rule, even when imperfectly admini- 
tiered, induftry, enterprize and improvement, have appeared to a confiderable extent on 
the ifland, and its population, produce and commerce, are already very refpectable; yet 
the growth of the Colony has in many ways been impeded by” the ‘want of regular 

overnment and laws; and as the inhabitants have become morc numerous, that waut has 
Been more felt and complained of. 

3. The pofition of this ifland, its climate, its fertility, its harbours, its produce of large 
timber, its contiguity to Pegu, which contains the moft abundant Teak forefts in Atta, 
have long peinted it out-ps an acquifition of very great importance in a commercial and 
political view, being placed in a moft favourable fituation for an emporium of commerce 
in the Eaftern Seas, and for becoming a coimmanding fiation for the rendezvous, refitting, 
and fupply of that portion of His Majefty’s Navy required for the protection of the Cou- 
pany’s poilefions and affairs in the ealtern parts of Atia. 7 