


GRANTS OF LAND, STATE OF CULTIVATION, &c. 


45. We have reafon to apprehend, that upon our firft taking poffeflion of the Ifland, very 
little attention was fhewn to the tenures upon which fuch grants ought to have been iffued. 
A vague and indifcriminate order feems at firft to have been given, entitling every perfon to 
duch ground as he might be able to clear. At that period ground was faid to be of fuch 
little value, that to afk was to have, or to appropriate was equivalent to legal right. Hence 
extenfive tracts, from 50 to 100 oorlongs, were potleffed by men who could not cultivate more 
than from 15 to 20. We direct that you endcavour to afcertain the ftate of cultivation of 
the lands under (uch grants, for the purpofe of refaming fuch as may remain uncultivated, 
agreeably to a claufe which we underftand to have been inferted in the grant, that they fhould 
révert to the Company, if not brought into a ftate of cultivation within a fixed period, 

56. There, is reafon to appreliénd that fome Europeans have in a wanton_manner 


*feized upon, or acquired by triiling purchafes, extenfive tracis of the fineft lands. ‘The mott 


effectual check fhould be given to practices of this nature; and you will endeavour to afcer- 
tain the quantity of lands held by Europeans, and under what title, for the purpofe of con- 
fidering of the propriety of refuming {uch as.may have been transferred or acquired by Eu- 
ropeans without the bills of fale having been regiftered or the Company’s duties paid, ac- 


“cording to the cftablifhed regulations of the Ifand. 


57- You will ufe every potitble exertion to difcover and prevent any ufurious tranfactions 
m the Iand. It appears that, in fome inftances, loans to perfons in want of pecuniary 
ailiftance, inftead of being advanced in cafh, have been made in thip goods, at a confider- 


* able rate beyond the coff price in the Bazar, and that thofe advances actually coft the. 


parties to whom they were made 34 per cent. per annum, The intereft of money is not to 
exceed 12 per cent. which may be confidered as the legal interef eftablithed for the Eaft 


“Indies. 


58. We obferve by the inftructions to the late Lieutenant Governor that it was in con- 


-templation to refcind the Regulation of the 1ft Augutt 1704 tefpefting grants of land for 


the period of five years, and it was propofed to render all exifiing and future grants per- 
petual, We very much doubt the propriety of this propofed regulation. At leaft all future 
grants of lands to Europeans muft be made {ubje& to our.approbation; and inftead of bein; 
granted in perpetuity, they fhould be granted on long leafes, renewable on a certain fine, an 
‘on payment of a quit-rent increafing with the increafe of cultivation, and a fine on their 
being transferred; it being our determination that no EuropeanRefident in Europe {1.all hold 
Jands by Agent: and it mutt be a condition in the leafes, that it fhall not be obligatory on the 
Company to-permit the relations, in Europe, of Europeans who may die poffeffed of leafes, to 