


vextent, aud have moft willingly agreed ‘to afford the utmoft aid in-our power in carrying inte 
sexecution the meafure propoled by His Majefty’s Government. In what proportion between 
Government and the Company, the expenle to be incurred in the Naval ercttiong and forti- 
fications at Prince of Wales Ifland is to be-borne, has not been yet decided, nor is the con- 


fideration of the general fubject fufficiently mature to enable us to furnifh you. with any: | 


precife inftru@ions thercon at this moment.. It appears, however, to be generally acknow- 
edged, that the Ifland Jerajah, one fide of which forms the inner harbour, is the {pot moft 
proper for a dock-yard for King’s thips. The forming of a dock-yard will neceflarily require 
the erection of warehoufes, workfhops, and all the other appendages of fuch an eftablifhment. 
For the confiruction of -thefe a Civil Engineer and other artizans.will be neceflary, and will 
‘be fent out. It will naturally occur to you, that preparatory mcafures may be early taken 
swith a view to the commencement of this important undertaking ; among thefe you will ad- 
vert to the means of providing the various materials that may be wanted. Geod sione and 
brick, we underftand, ‘may be found upon the {fland, as allo various forts of ferviceable. 
timber, but for the fupply of that which is moft effential, namely the Teak, recourfe muft* 
be had to Pegu; and you will coafider of all the meafures that may be requifite for obtaining 
and tranfporting it. ‘We defire to hear from, you as early as poffible upon thefe points, after 
you fhall have procured information relative thercto. 


FORTIFICATIONS. 


63. We ‘find that fomething of the nature of a fort has already been conftructed on the. 


Afland, and whatever may be neceflary to put the [fland ona tolerable ftate of defence we 
with to-be immediately execated ; but itis our wifh thata regular fortification, for the per- 
manent fecuring againft an European force, hould be conftructed ; we therefore dire& that 

‘ou form and trinimit to us a plan and eftimate of fuch'a work, and if there fhould not 


No Stone on 
the ifland,ex~ 
cept ‘for mas 
fonry. 


a fkilful Engineer upon the {fland, you will make application to the Bengal Government | 


r the affiftance of one from thence; but no fortifications of any great extent, involving 
an expente of magnitude, are to be commenced without the plan and eftimate being fub- 
amittéd to our previous approbation, tee ; : 
MILITARY. 


64, We have already advifed you of the appointment ‘of Captain Lieutenant M¢Alifter ° 


‘to be Commandant of the Troops, and fourth ii Council upon:the Ifland. Copy of hi 
commiffion goes a number in the packet. We have deemed it proper -to grant a com 
miflion to this Officer, conferring upon ‘him the rauk of Colonel, by brevet, at Prince 
‘of Wales Ifland, and its dependencies only ; but the rank granted to him by this com- 
miffion is to ceafe upon his return to Bengal; nor is the Company to fuftain any expenfe on 
that account be: ed the falary of S* D'* 18,000 per annum, 4 ready allotted to him. 