

0 out in grder to ucceed to them. It mutt likewife be a condition of the grant, that no 
Farge trees applicable to the purpofes of fhip-building thall be cut down, except for thofe 
purpofes ; that the Company thall have the power of refiiming fuch portions thereof as it 
may be déemed neceflary to convert to public purpofes, or fuch as may be found to contain 
anings of,any defcription whatever. No grant of lands to be made to Europeans exceed- 
ing in-quantity 300 oorlongs, unlefs upon very fpccial reafons ftated to us, and approved by 
as. To cacourage the clearing and cultivation of the Ifland, by making {mall grants of 
ands to the indutirious Chinele, would be a moft defirable objeét. i 

59. We direct that you acquaint us with the ftate and extent of the Pepper and fpice 
plantations, diftinguifhing thofe held-by the Company, and by individuals. Vor our opinion 
and dircétions on the fubject of the {pice plantations, we refer you to the enclofed Extraét of 
-our Letter to the Goyernor General in Council, dated 29th February 1804. 

60. itis fiated by'the late Licutenant Governor, that in 1801-2, there were 723 perfons 
‘who potlei¥ed landed property, and that there were at that time upon the Ifland above 1200 
flaves. ‘Ve cannot authorize any encouragement being given to the introduction of flaves 
into the IMand; we could with that the clearing of the ‘jands, and the cultivation of the 
pepper and {pices thould, as we underftand they may, be carricd on by free people. At the 
jane time care muft be taken that flaves belonging to thips ‘occafionally reforting to the 
‘Mand, and who may land for the purpofe of obtaining their freedom, be delivered up, on 
fufficient prcof of their being the property of the claimants. 

COINAGE, 


. We are not fufficiently acquainted with the Coins current upon the Ifland to give any 
upon this fubject. The -Dollar, we underfiand, is the principal current Coin, 
3 to believe that the introduction of a Copper Coinage, of. various dencmi- 
much public advantage. We wifh to reccive your opinion upon this 
ake meafures accordingly; a gradual divifion of Coins, from the 
te the woud be of fingular convenience to the inhabitants. You will acquaint 
us ct you think it edvifabie that we fhould provide copper Coins for the ufe of your 
IMand, aad of what value and defeription, 7 


rations, wou! 
ject, that 


NAVAL 


“the Aifiirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY.” 347 


NAVAL ARSENAL. 

. 62, We have aheady obferved, :that the plan which, has been lately laid before us, at the 
sdefiré of the Firft Lord of the Admiralty, for aking the Ifland a Naval Arfenal, for the build 
fing and repairing of His Majefty’s thips, gives a new and high degree of importance to the 
‘fubject, and-renders the projedted xeform in. the Government abfolutey inlditpentable. We 
care fully impreffed with the greateft national advantages of the object’ propofed by the Firit 


Lord of the Admiralty, and entertain fanguine hopes -of ‘its probability, at leaft to a certain ° 