

wn on prelent force upon the Ifland, as ftated by the late Lieutenant Gevernor, con- 

o! . 


A fmall detachment of European Artillery, 
One Company of Golandaaze, 

One D° © of Gun Lafcars, 

Four Companies of Sepoys. 


FS 
66, The garrifon of Malacca, which, agreeably to*the intimation in a preceding para; 
sgtaph, is to be removed to your Ifland, will afford an addition to this force of about 360 
men; and fhould you deem the whole of this force infufficient for the ion of the 
Mand, you will make application to the Governor General. and Council at Bengal -for 
uch an‘augmentation thereof as fhall be deemed {ufficient for that purpofe. : 


“67. We enclofe, for your information and guidance, copy of the Mutiny A@ eftablifhed 


for the Eat Indies. : 
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE.’ 


68. The adminiftration of juftice being a very important part of the arrangement re- 
uired for.the better government ef Prince.of Wales liland, we ‘have prefented an humble 
etition.to His Majefty, that’ he will be gracioully pleafed to ta charter for the ad- 

aniniftration of juftice in Prince ef -Wales Ifland, by ere@ting the Governor and Council, 
with the affiftance of the Recorder, into a Supreme Court of Judicature. Hs 

69. When. we confider that at ithe itime we took poflefion of Prince of Wales Iflahd it 

was uninhabited, our right to preferibe the fyftem of Jaws which we may deem moft eligible 
‘for the government thercef cannot be-controverted, fince none of its inhabitants who have 
moped to the Ifland can, claim any prefer tive right founded’ on ancient ufage, to the 

lifhment of any particular fy’ of jaws or form of judicial proceedings. ‘The 
eftablifhing, as far as may be pollible, of one regular’ fyftem of laws for the various 
-defcriptions of inhabitants, with a proper attention to their re{pective cuftoms and manners, 
feems to be the moft politic mode that can be npiod under the prefent circumftances of 

4 : 


363. the 


348 APPENDIX to the Second REPORT yrom the Sele& Committee on 


she. Ifland ; -you will:therefore tranfmit.to us, from time to time, fuch regulations and laws as 
‘you may think proper to iffue for the internal government of the Ifland. 

."-7o. We think it necelfary to-refer you to the following Extract trom the Treaty-of Amity, 
‘Commerce, and Navigation, between his Britannic Majetiy and the United States of Amcrica,. 
«dated the 19th November 1794. 

Article 13th.—“ His Majefiy confents that the veffels belonging to the citizens of the 

“ United States of America, fhall be admitted and hofpitably.received in all the {ea-ports and 
* harbours of the Britith territories in the Eaft Indies, and that the citizens of the United 
“ States may freely carry on a trade betacen the faid territories and .the faid United States, 
“in all articles of which the importation or exportation.re{pedtively to or from the faid 
“ territories {hall not be entirely protibited : provided only, that it thall not be lawful for 
*“ them in any time of war between the Britith Government and any other Power or State 
“ whatever, to export from she faid tertitories, without the {pecial permillion of the Brith 