

52. With refpe@ to the import and export duties, we obferve that in 1801-2, a duty of 
two per cent. ad valorem was taid ou the importation of tin, pepper and beetle nut, and which 
in that year produced 5* Dollars 13,076. Upon the expiration of the year this duty was 
difcontinued, and an export duty eltablithed in its place, extending to other articles. We 
direét that you take it into your confideration what duties on goods, cither of export or im» 
port, can with propriety be impoled, and on what commedities fach duties fhould be laid. It 
4s a ferions queftion with us, whether we fhould encouras eign Europeans to'carry the 
commodities of our 1 Settiement, to rival us in the iercign markets of Europe, and by 
what means that practice, which feems to be a growing one, night be bel checked; and it 
order to aifiit our judgment hercin, we wilh for a particular Re rom you, of the ftate of 
the trade of foreign Europeans with Prince of Wales Lil nid what regulations may ap- 
pear to you proper with refpect to that trade. Every informatian upon this important fubject 
anait be tranfinitted to us, and to the Governor General in Council, whofe opinion thereon 
will be tranfinitted to us by you, though we fhall expect to receive it direét from that 
Government. To whatever articles, eithcr of import or export, it may be ueceffery to extend 
the cuftoms, it is by no means our intention that they thould-be farmied. On the contrary, 
-they muft continue to be managed through a regular Cufem-Houfe by the Company's 
“Offcers. We are aware that different rates of duty may be eftablithed on uifierent articles; 
to this point alfo you wiil of courfe direct your attention. You will likewife attend to thé 
following fuggeftion: that were merchandize, landed and re-exported, to be fubject to a duty, 
it might operate.to difcourage fhips from touching at the Mlatid, and from making ita depos 
for the Eattern trade. We are at the fame time ef opinion that a moderate tax might be 
Jaid on goods landed on the Itland for home confumption. Dutics might likewile be colledied 
on anchorage and port clearances. We have on this matcrial fubject confined ourfelves to 

eneral directions, leaving to you tlie important truft of judging concerning the rates of 

juties which fhould be impofed. We doubt not you will fully aniwer this confidence, and 
awe defire that you will Itate to us at large, -for our final orders, the reafons oa which your 
determination in every cate fhall be founded. 

53. Your attention will next be direéted to the raifing a Revenve from the taxable 
duce of the Iilaad, taking care not to opprefs the inhabitants, or check the rifing cultivation. 
‘We are of opinion, that hereafter a contiderabie Revenue may be obtained from the cultiva- 
tion of pepper and {pices, The following modes of railing a Reveaye were early fuggeited 
dy Captain Light, the firft Superintendant of the Ifland. 

Firlt—That a ground rent be levied on every houfe, after a.certain time from the fstt 
clearing of the ground. 