

“© Goverument-there, any milite val ftores or tice. ‘The citizens of the United 
- States thall pay for their velicis, when admitted into the faid ports, ne other or higher 
“tonnage duty than fhall be payable on Britith veffels when Sdimitted into-the ports of the 

United States ; and they {hall pay no other or bigher duties or charges ou the importation 
“ or exportation of the.cargoes of the fuid veiYels than fhall be payabie on the fame articles 
“ when.imported.or exported in Britith vefiels: but it is exp: y agreed that the velfcls 
~* of the United States ‘thall not carry any of the articles exported by them from the faid 
“ Britith territories to any port-or place, except to fome port or place in America, where the 
“fame fhall bo unladen, and fach regulations fhall be adopted by both parties as thall 
“ from. time to time be found necellary .to enforce the due and faithful obfervance of 
°* this ftipulation. 2 

“ dt is allo underfteod that the permiffion grauted by this article is net to extend to 

+ allow the veflels of the United States to carry on any part of the coafting trade of. the 
“faid Britihh territories; but veflels going with their criyinal cargees, or part thereof, from 
“ one port of diicharge to another, are not t6 be conic cerrying on the coufting 
““ trade. Neither is.this article tobe conftrued to allow the citizens.of the {aid States to 
“ fottle or refide within the {aid territories, or to go into the interior parts thereof, without _ 

“the permiffion of the’ Britith Government efiaviifhed there; and if any tranfgrettion 
a thould be attempted againit the.regulation of the Bnitith Government in this refpect, the 

“ obfervance-of the fame fhall:and may be enforced againtt.the citi of America in the 
“ fame manner as againtt Britith fubjects, or others trantgreiting the fame rule. And the 
“* citizens of the united States, whenever they arrive in any port .or barbour in the faid, 

* # torritories,.or if they fhould be permitted, in manner aforclaid, to go to any other place” 

* therein, shall always be tubject to the laws, government, and jurifdiétion of whatever nature 
“*eftabliflied in fucn harbour, port or place, according as the fame may be. “The citizens 
“ of the United States nay allo touch for refrefhment.at the Hand of St. Helena, but tubject 
“in all refpeéts to fuch regulations as the Britifh Governmeut may from time’ to time 
“ eftablith there.” 

* ri. We with, ina particular manner, to draw your attention to, and direct your ob- 
-fervance of that part of the article which prohibits the-citizens of Amierica, (in common with 
-other foreigners) from fettling or -refiding within the Company’s termtores without the 
yermiflion of-the Britith Government. “We likewife refer you to the enclofed-copy of a 
Claute of the 37th of the King, for canying the ~beforementioned Treaty into. ‘exe-~ 
cution. - 

72. The Americans being prohibited from carrying on the coatting trade in the Britifh 
-poffeffions in India, and from clearing out from tiem direct for Europe, we require your 
cattention to the, obfervance of ‘that iy 3 and that American fhips be received into 