

40. We likewite refer you to the 45th and 46th Sections of the above-mentioned AQ, relative 
to the powers vefted in the Governor General of Fort William, and in the refpective 
Governors of Fort St. George and Bombay, of iffuing warrants for fecuring perfons 
fufpected of carrying on an illicit, correfpondeace, dangerous to the peace ‘and fafety of the 
Company's poffeffions ; and relative to proceedings which are to be had when reafonable 
grounds for the charge fhall appear againtt fuch perfons. We hereby inveft you with fimilar 
powers within the limits of your government for the purpofes mentioned in thofe Sections. 

41. You will regularly and conttantly advife us of the ftate of affairs committed to your 
management, under diftinét heads. You will likewife be regular in the keeping and the 
tranfmiflion of your general books, and other books of accounts, with the accounts of quick 
and dead ftock, and lifts of the arrival and departure of fhipping, their tonnage, imports and 
exports, regifters of births, marriages, burials, &c. You will likewife furnith us every year 
with a ftatement of the Revenues and Charges of the Settlements, under diftinét heads, in 
comparifon of the preceding year; the progreflive ftate of cultivation of the pepper and 
Spice plantations ; with every other information that it may be neceffary to communicate to 
us. Upon fuch matters as may be deemed of a fecret natore, you will correfpond with the 
Secret Committce. 

42. We inclofe, for your information, copies of ihe Acts of the 24th and 33d of His prefent 
Majefty, for the better government of the Company. By the goth and 41ft Clanfes of the 
laft-mentioned Act you will perceive that the Goveracr General and Council at Fort William 
are empowered to fuperintend the other Prefidencies already crested, or to be erected in the 
manner therein def d; aud by the 36th Clauie of the firft AG above-mentioned, you will 
obferve that the fi nate Governments: are required to tranfinit to the faid Governor 
General in C of Fort William exad copies of all orders, refclutions, and aéts in Council 
of their refpective Prefidencies; allo advice and intelligence of all tranfCtions and_matters ’ 

* which fhail come to their knowledge, matérial to be communicated, or which the Governor 
General in Council fhiail from time to time require. 


; POLITICAL, 
43. We have already fuggefed the expediency of our endeavor 
. Acheen, or-of obtaining fuch a footing there as may tend to the exc 
Nations. But before you enter upon any negotiation with the King of Acheen for:that 
purpofe, you will obtain the previous fanction of the Governor General in Council, both as 
_ to the general objects of the negotiation, and the nature of tue conceflion on our part for 
procuring thofe objects. n 
44. We need uct point out to you the neceflity of yo# cultivating and proferving the 
friendthip of the King of Queda; for which purpofe it is highly neceflary that the fum of 
ten thouland dollars per annum, which we are bound by Treaty to pay to him annually, for: 
the ceflions already made to the Company, fhould never be in arrear. You will likewife 
obferve the moft friendly line of conduct, towards all the neighbouring independent Rajahs 
or States, and you wil! avail yourfelves of any opportunities that may offer for negotiating 
- 963. 48 Commerciat 