

48. It has been ufual, at the other Prefidencies, to difpofe of European imports at public 
fales, but we think it inexpedient to limit you.to that mode; probably, however, you may 
find it convenient to have one annual fale foon after the arrival of the thips from Europe. 
Jt mutt be left to your difcretion to regulate the private fales, at other times, as you fhall find 
mott advantageous to the Company, and for the encouragement of trade. An annual ac- 
-count of the imports and exports, diftinguifhing the different articles, lifts of arrival and de- 
parture of thips, their tonnage, &c. muft be tranfmitted to us. We find that the average 
annual tonnage of thips, for the laft four years, which have entered into and cleared out from 
sthe Iiland, is as follows, r 

Arrivals - ~ see 48,731 
Departures - - - > = arto $ 


4g. It has been fuggefted that an ample and varied fupply of marine ftores, as a monopoly 
in tne hands of the Company, would be produdtive of a lucrative fund of Revenue. It is 
therefore our intention to provide a quantity of marine ftores to be fent to Prince of Wales 
Ifland,.to be difpofed of at an advance of go per cent. on the invoice price, to fuch fhips re- 
forting to the Illand as may have occafion for them, and you will furnifh us regularly with 
-an indent for fuch marine ftorcs as, upon a moderate eftimate, you may be of opinion can be 
aunually difpofed of; aud we rely upon your taking-every precaution to prevent their waft- 
age and embezzlement. 

0. Having expreffed -our reafonable expectations that the commercial advantages of 
Prince of Wales Iiland will reimburfe the expenfes which have already been foftained in 
forming, and are likely to be fuftained in maintaining that Settlement, we thall proceed to 
the confideration of what other fources of emolument are likely to accrue to ‘the Company, 
from the impofition of duties and taxes, in further reimburfement of’ our expentes;-and this 
wwe fhall do under the head.of 


REVENUR. , : 
51. At prefent the principal fources of Revenue arife from the farms of opium, arrack, 
-gaming, tobacco and beetle leaf, and a duty on the exportation of goods and merchandize. 
‘We concur in the opinion-exprefled by Colonel Kyd, that the two articles of Revenue, the 
-farms of-opium and gaming-houfes, appear to give encouragement to the two moft dangerous 
vices in foci But we-underftand it has been thought that the Chinefe and Malays being 
naturally addicted:to both, it would not be practicable effectually to eradicate them; .and that 
under {uch circumttances it only remained to confine the indulgence to thofe propenfitics to 
particular parts of the town, under fuch regulations and seftristions as would furnith a re~ 
fource to Government, But it certainly would be far preterable, in a political as well ot 
an 


the Mfsirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. gas 


tnoral view, if thofe praGices could be fuppreffed, and we delire, therefore, that your atterrfion 
may be direGed to this cad ; towards the attainment of which, it is not to be haftily concluded, 
that a couric of prudeat government, gradually exciting habits of frugality as weil as induftry, 
would not do much, 