


ing to occupy the port of 
ion of other European 


324 APPENDIX fo the Second REPORT from che Sele& Committee on 


Commercial Treaties with them, upon grounds of reciprocal advantage; ‘but you are on’ ne 
Account to aim at-extenfion of territory, or take any part in their political affairs, unlets 
directed fo to de by the Governor General in Council. 


COMMERCIAL, 

45. Independently of the great political advantages of poffeffing a commanding ftation for 
ahe rendezvous, refitting and fupply, of His Majelty’s Navy. required tor the protection of the 
Comp:ny’s poffellions in the eaticra parts of {udia, with the ultimate view of conttruéting 
‘docks, &e. for building flips of war for the Royal Navy; one of its principal advantages, ina 

mercial point ef view, is the probability of its becoming in a more extenfive degree a 
depot for the commodotics of India and China, particularly thofe of the Britifh 
Aervitories. ft likewife is an emporium fo fituated as to afford an eaiy approaelt from every 
part of India, from the extremity of Chinato the coaft of Africa, and where merchants of 
all nations may conveniently mect and exchange their goods. From a fituation fo highly 
Aavourable for promoting the interefts of commerce in general, the Company naturally look 
40 derive advantages which willindeumnify themfelves fer the expenfe they have already been 
at, and are futher to incur in the fupport of this blifhment. 

46. It has been fuggefted that 250 chefts of opium, aanually fent from Bengal ou the 
‘Company’s account, might-be fold at a fixed advance of 20 per cent. on the medium of the 
fates at Calcutta, the produce te be remitted to Canton ia mozey or in goods. You will take 
this fubject into your confidcration, and, with your opinion as to the quantity of opium that 
may thus be aunually difpofed of at the Iiland, refer the decifion to the Governor General 
in Council. It appears that in 1789, three hundred chelts were difpofed of at the Mand, 
‘and that one hundred more were wanting to fupply the market. In 1792, a fupply of 200 
-chefts was required, in addition to the ufual quantity of 250 chefts. 

47. Another fource of commercial advantage to the Company may arife from the trade 
they may hereafter caizy on in pepper and other exports of the Iiland, and in imports from 
Europe. With refpeét to the former, you will acquaint us what quantity of pepper may be 
procured at the [fland, and at what price. You will likewife report what other articles of 
“export would be likely to yield a profit in Great Britain. Prices Current of the London Market 
will be annually trantimitted to you. With refpect to the imports from Europe, we have 
ordered an inveftment of woollens to be provided, to the extent of £.25,000, and of fuch 
-other goods as may be deemed fit for fale at the Eland. Wee rely upon your excrtions for 
-enluring to thofe goods as quick and advantageous a {ule as poflible. You will likewife tran{- 
anit tous an annual indent of fuch articles of Britifh manufacture as you think may meet 
«with a ready and advantageous fale at Prince of Wales Eland, particularly iron, copper, 
dead, broad cloth, cutlery, and the various manufaGures required by the Malays, Siamefe, 
Birmahs, &e. &e. 