

Second.—That a fhop tax be levied upon all retailers. : : 

Third.—That the privilege of retailing {pirituous liquors be farmed to the higheft bidder. 

‘Fourth That a duty of 2 per centbe levied upon the fale of ail houtes, Jands and 
* tenements; alfo upon the eftates and-effects of deceafed perfons. This was fiated to be ~ 
“ confonant to the cuftoms of the country. 

7 ae That a duty of 4 per cent. be levied upon all India goods imported on foreign 
veffels, : 

Sixth_—© That a duty of 4 per cent. be levied upon all goods imported on Choolias 
“ veffels, not immediately from any of the Company’s Settlements. 

Seventh —“ That a duty of 6 per cent. be levied upon all China goods without diftinion. 

Eighth“ That a duty of 6 per cent. be levied upon all tobacco,’ falt, arrack, fagar, and 
< coasie cloth, the produce or manufacture of Java or any other Dutch polleilion to the 

ward, & 

Ninth.— That a duty of 6 per cent. be levied upon all Europe articles imported by 
“ foreign hips, unlefs the produce or manufixciure of Great Britain. 

Tenth.—* Contains a propofition recited betore, that the Bengal Government fhonld fead 
“ an annual {apply of 250 chefts of opium. é 

Eleventh“ That a port duty on prows of 2 dollars per loyau be a future-confideration, 
“¢ when a greater freedom of navigation is allowed. 

‘Tweltth.—* That to encourage and extend the remittance of Monies to China by Englif& 
“ fhips, it be permitted, for the fake of difpatch, that veilels from any part of India, or be 
* longing to Prince of Wales Iland, who have been trading at the Malay ports, and bring the 
“ iproddee of the Malay countries to Prince of Wales Ifland tor fale, be ullowed to tranfport 
*« the fame on board of Englith veflels, without previoufly landing it; but that this indulgence - 
‘« do not extend to their trafficking with foreigners, who ought to purchafe from the Sctilers, 
‘+ and not from the veffels or prows. 

Thirteenth.—* To levy a general duty on all goods which come to Prince of Wales Hland 
‘« would (it was ftated) defeat the intention of Government, in making remittances to China 
‘ by the barter of the manufactures of India for the produce of thefe countries. The’ then 
* fituation of the furrounding kingdoms, diltraéted by foreign and civil wars, which deprived 
‘¢ their inhabitants of the privilege of bringing the produce of their lands to Prince of 
«Wales Ifland, added to the various impediments thrown into the way. of the Englifh tade 
<« by the Dutch, who prevented the China Junks and the Malay and Bugguefle Prows from, 
* palling Malacca, while by threats they caufed fome of the Malay States, and. ‘ by: fore 

obliged: 


No Notes. 


346. APPENDIX to the Second REPORT from the Sclc& Committee on 


“ obliged others, to defift from trading with the Englifh; were alfo reprefented as obftacles 
“ 00 great to admit of the levying with fuccefs any general dutics.” 

54. ‘The foregoing fuggettions of the late Captain Light and others, contained in his 
feveral letters of the dates mentioned in the margin*, will form a part of your deiiberations'on 
the important fubject of raifiag a Revenue towards reimburfing the Company for their ex- 
penfes in forming and maintaining a Settlement at Prince of Walcs Ifand. it alfo been 
duggetted that a tax on cocoa nut trees would yield from 15 to 20,000 dollars per annum. 