


-and that under whiclt it ought toremain, 


4. We have therefore refelved, that infiead:of a Governor and three Counfellors, your 
Government fhall in future confift of a Gavernor and two Counfellors. 


5. We alfo abolith.the place of Superintendant of Merine,a3 unneceffary under prefent cir- 
-eumftances ; but Mr. Erfkine, who fucceeded to it-on-the departuie of Captain Gray, may be 
allowed to hold it with a fulary of Dollars 8,000 per annum, until you can place him in fome 
other office adequate to bis rank. And as foon-as this is effected, whatever charge he may have 
-23 Marine Paymatter or Naval and Military Storekeeper, appointments attached to the office 
of Superintendant of Marine, fhall-be transferred tothe Export Warehoufe-keeper. 


6. Although we have great reafon.to be fatisfied with the conduét.of ‘Colonel Macalifter, 
“yet, as we.think it advifable at prefént that the office-of Governor of our Settlement of Prince 
of Wales Ifland fhould be.filled from the line of our Bengal civil fervice, it will be incom- 
patible with that intention to continue Colonel Macalifter in the Government. Upon this 
principle we accordingly had it in.contemplation to felect Mr, Thomas Parr, from his general 
character and particuiar merits in the Refidency of Fort Marlborough, for the office of 
-Governor. ‘The information, hewever, we have received of the melancholy. fate of that 
-genticman,. who (as you no doubt have becti informed) was. affailinated by a party of 
Malays, under circumitances of peculiar atrocity, fruftrated this idea, and pccaboued a delay 
in our deterinination upon this important affair, . 7 : 


’ 7. Having again deliberated on the meafures proper to be adopted ander thefe eircum- 
7 iS Ag i * '§ prop OP’ : 
ftances, we have, conformably to the intentions already wertioned, and confidering the 
-relation which has hitherto exilted between your Government and the Prefidency of Bengal, 
Amee the firlt fettlement of Prince of Wales Ifland, directéd the Supreme Goverment to feleé 
-a Civil Servant of that eftabliftinent for the fituation of Governor of your Preiidebey. 

“8. On the arrival of the gentleman fo feleSted at Prince of Wales Ifland, Colonel Maca- 
lifter is to refume his feat in Council as fecond Member, and in the event of any vacancy occur- 
ing in.the office of Governor, he is again to exercife.that office until fuch. vacancy thall be 
-regularly filled. ~ - é 


g. As we {ce reafon to be of opinion, that, upon any fcale.of cftablifhment requifite for your 
Prefidency, the office of a ftationary Commandant of ‘Troops will not be enently neceflary, 
wwe defire that on the death, refignation, or coming away of Colonel Macalifter, this office be 
-abolifhed, and the garrilon of Fort Corawallis, together with the command of fuch other 
-troops as may from.time to time form the military force of the Ifland, be placed under the 
authority of the fenior Cfficer doing duty on the Ifland; bat we-defire it.to be underttood, 
«that no allowance is to-be drawn by tuch Officer beyond the ufval hatta, &c. granted under 
ithe Prefideney of Bengal to Officers commanding Regiments. : A 