


be realizedin England inthe next. 


4ay F HAVEXG 


250. 


Aftairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 363 


honored for a correspondent period, is found to have been £15,489, j Date ‘Appendis 
deduéting the Intereft paid in consequence of the occasional OB Benge some oe pes 
of the Bills whea due, to theamount of £.120,963;'the Debit would be £.15,368,612,. Appendix, N° 
The difference between this sum and the amount credited in India, is £.622,574, and 
is chiefly to be accounted for by the payment having been made on the aétual rate of 
Exchange at which the Bills were drawn; whereas the Indian Credit is calculated at 
- a lower rate, in order to preserve a-general conformity with that used in the State- | 
ments of Revenues and Charges. Of the sum ftated to have been ‘paid in England, : 7 | 
£.7,472090 was expressly in liquidation of Indian Debt. a Nppendi, 4 
Your Committee, without entering into a further examination of the detail of 
various other Receipts for which India has credited England, in the Statement under . 
reference, will content themselves with ftating their amount to have been £.393,372 3) Appendix, Ne 
and the Total of the Supply.as a Cath Fund, for which England has been credited in ~~ ’ 
the Indian books, to have amounted to the sum of £.31,. Combining then, bs 
the Amount received in India on Loan and_ otherwise, viz. tates Appendix, 
ie ae ae 


ad othe in 
amount of the Resources by Supplies from Europe, the 
ordinary Funds which have been received int : 
1792-3 to the year 1808-9, will, on the 
$52,309,424, ; See or a 
Having ftated the Funds themselves, the next objeét- of Your f 
becomes the Application of them. ee Cas MeN 
‘The amount in which the Charges of the 
the Debts ciceeded that of the Territorial 


Bengal preventing an earlier transinission of thesetailed’ Diburscments of that Pre- ~ 
sidency. But accurate Statements: having been since received from -thePr ney of 


Bengal, of the Receipts and Ditbursemeuts of the years beldte dhewn in an incom-" 
plete ftate, Your Committee have thouglif it: ight to°call ty such Accounts as x 


Ie e necessary to be 

made. The Statement so correGted will be found iti the Appendix, “a os  Kppen 

The effet produced by these correCtions upon the Result first shewn, is an addition ALD. 
to the Excess of, Charge in the sum of £90,339. | The gross excess of the Charges 
beyond the amount of the Territorial Reyenues, which muft haye been defrayed from 
the Extraordinary Funds, will then. be found to. have been & 5,078, 015.0% ag 

The amount which India is considered fo have disbursed ony account of the 
merce, and in immediate Supply of or retura.to the Concerti: 
leading feature in the application of the Extraordinary Funds. A 

The Commercial Charges not added to the Invoices have been shewn to have’ _ ; 
amounted, during the period in queftion, to the sum of £-3,056,251) As, upon-the’ Second 
inspe€tion of that Account, it has been found to require correétion‘and adjuftin it PH ae 
another Account is added to the Appendix, by which the amount of these: Charges) “Appendix, N? 
appears to have been f. 2,916,279. ‘These Charges comprize’ the Salaries a 
Allowances of the Board of Trade at each of the, Presidencies, and their subordinate. ; 
Offices of a description ftriétly Commercial, with those of the Aurungs or Factories) 
where the Inveftments are provided ; and also the Charge of the Import Warehouses, i 
or the Departments where the Goods exported from. England to India are deposited 
and sold. he Board-of Trade:at Bengal pace the provision and sale of ee 