


and cleared put.from your Hand only in forimity thereto. 

73. A Pohlestion. of Mr. Dalrymple’s rts, &e. accompanies thefe. inftructions, and 
-which is to remaingas a depofit among*tly cial secarde f the Iland. i 

74. You weré,advifed, in a -preceding paragraph, of-our having appointed the Rev, 
Atwill Lae to-be-Ghaplain of your Jiland, and Mr. Thomas Cullum, Clerk and School- 
mafter. : As foon,as.may be convenient you will commence.the ercttion of a church upon the _ 
{pot already marked out by the late Licutenaat Governor for that purpoie. {If the building 
now in fe forsthe performance of Divine Service. fhait not be dceme cligible, a more pro- 
<per one muft inthe mean time be fele¢ted. We truft that by.Mr. Lake’s endeavours and 
3your example, the interefts of religion and morality will, be.,prowoted in the Ifland. 


* We are your leving Friends, : Peat ae oe 
(Signed) - CHAS GRANT. 3} «A. ROBERTS. 
. GEO. SMITH. Wa THORNTON. 


ome WM DEVAYN -ROBr THORNTON. 
London, the  JNO-ROBERTS. “EDWD PARRY. 
8th April,1805. PAUL LE MESURIER. |S. TOONE: 

THOS PARRY,‘ -J. HODLESTON. 

E. BARING. 


the Affoivs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. - 349 


‘Appendix; No. 69. 


SLETTER fromthe Court of Directors to the Governor in Council at Prince of Wales 
Tfand-; dated 21ft April 1809. 


Separate Department. 
‘Our Governor.and ‘Council at Prince of Wales Ifland. 


‘Para. ‘Since-the date of our public difpatch of the 2d March 1808, which direSted the 
sremoval of Mr. Pearfon from the office of Governor of Prineé of Wales Hland,to which 
(under an erroneous interpretation of our infiruétions) be bad fueceeded in preference to 
Colonel Macalitter, whofe right of fucceffion to the Government we thought proper then to 
confirm, we have .repeatedly had -under our confideration the adoption of fome definitive 
arrangement for the future Goverament of your Prefidency. 


2. Inthe formation of your Government, as newly conttituted in 1805, aud in regulating 
the eftablifhmentito be’ «fligacd to it, we had a fpecial regard to a meafare then propofed to 
us by His Majeity’s Minit and adopted by us, with,a view both to the fcrvice of the 
public and'to the advanceinent of commerce in India, namely,'to makethe Hland an impor- 
taut Naval Station, where an arfeual and docks fhouit be conitructed to render it-commodious 
for the refort and repair of Britifh thips cf war and other fhips employed in the eaftern feas, 
and alfo.for'building fhips both for the Royal Navy and for the purpoles of commerce. 


3. His Majcftv’s Minifters are defirous of alcertaining corre@lly, by the conftru@ion and 
actual coft.of one or more thips-of war at_your Prefidency, whether the {jfiem may reafoui- 
ably be expecied.to be permanently bereficial for the public fervice. In that ftate of uncer- 
tainty, therefore, as to their intentions, and being ourfelves unwillmg to incur any con- 
-fiderable expeafe in the conftruction of an arfenal or docks, until we-are fatistied that fuch 
works will really be effential to the public intereft, we think it expedient to redace the 
eftablifhment of the Ifland nearly to what:may be requifite for it as an important commercial 
-entrepot and a feparate Prefidency, dependent immediately upon us, under-the management 
-of a Governor and Council; which couftitution, as far as.we «can now judge, is, in our 
decided. opinion, on the whole, fitteft for the prometion -of all the objets connected with it, 