

Your Committee mutt here observe, that though the Home Concern is for the moft 
part Commercial, itis, in caflt transaétions as much inyolyed with the Political ftate of 
the Company, as the Concern in India; and the dificilty of making a separation in 
these Accounts also is, in many respeéts, greater, ~ aS 
_ Thevordinity and eftablithed source from which the Home Treasury has derived 
its SupplieS irom year to year, is the Proceeds of the Sales of Goods imported from 
India and China. ‘he returns made to India and China by Exports of Goods, 
Stores and Bullion, and by the payment of Bills of Exchange, together with the 
varions expenses and outgoings incident to the Concern, are to be considered as chiefly 
provided trom this source; although it will be found, that this ‘Lreasory, in like 
Tmanner with those in India, has occasionally received aid from extraordinary sources, 
a increase of Capital Stock, by Loans on ond and Repayments by Goyernment of 
Disbursements made in India, on account of the Public. bie 

Your Committee will not enter into an examination of the extent of the Com- 
pany’s Capital aétually employed, or of the real amount ef Capital which is absolutel 
required for the couduct of the Concern, in a view purely Commercial ; nor is it their 


_ Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY: $59 


Intention at all to discuss, in this. Report, the propriety, prudence, or economy of the | 
Commercial management of the Company’; the present purpose of Your Committee 
being merely to examine and report upon. exiliing facts, as demonfirated inthe 
Accounts which have been laid before the House and Your Committee, r 


From these Accounts is to be deduced, that when a Surplus Revenue exiited in | 
Tndia, it was, in conformity with the principles laid down in the Aéi of 1 793, applied 
to Advances for the purchase of Invefiments for consignment to Europe, or for the 
supply of the Canton Preasury; and when combined with the Funds available in 
India from Supplies from Europe, it was found insufticient for these purposes, the 
difference was furnifhed by Monies raised on loan in India. In whatever amount, 
therefore, the Capital of the Company in England was not snflicient for carrying on 
the trade, and for the conduét of the Concern generally, the deficiency was supplied 
hy Monies raised in India. . ‘The impraéticability of diftinguithing what part of these 
Monies was applied to Commercial, and what part-to Political , having already | 
been frated, the object of these additional remarks is merely intended as a farther | 
<lemontiration of the ftri& connexion of the Political and Commercial affairs at home 
as well as abroad; and as a proof of the. corie€iness of the position, that till it fhall” 
be clearly ascertained that the Supplies from the Home Treasury to India and China, . 
were derived from sources purely Commercial, the queftion of a diftinct view of the — 
proportion of the Indian Debt which is to be termed Political or Commercial, muft 
remain undecided, whatever may haye been the amount of those Supplies. 