

: 10. As 


350 APPENDIX é0 the Second REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


10. As the plan juft tated will affect the profpects of Mr. Pearfon, who now holds a feat ix 
your Council, fo far as regards his fuccefiion to the Government, we direct that he refume his 
¥ank in the civil eftablifhment of the Government of Bombay, to ‘which he was originally 
appointed by us, and to which, from henceforth he is to confider himfelf attached ; and on 
ine receipt of this difpatch, he is to be required to procced to that Prefidency by the firft 
convenient opportunity, where we fhall direct that he be provided with a fituation tuitable to 
his rank and tervices, 2 

11. According to this arrangement, the following appointments, with the folarics 
and allowances annexed thereto, are to take effeCt upon the arrival at Prince of Wales 
Mand of the gentleman who fhall be appointed to the office of Governor of your Prefi- 
dency, viz. . 


Mr. to be Governor and Treafurer, including houfe-rent - 
Colonel Nounan-Macalifter, te be Second Member of Council and Commandan 
of the forces fo long es he fhall remain at your Prefi- 
dency. In the event, however, of his death, refigna- 
tion or coming away, the Jatter office is to be abolifhed, 
and’a Civil Servant is to be appointed to the vacant 
feat in Council, who is alfo to hold the office of 
Woarehoute-keeper and Paymatter, to be allowed a 
commifiion upon the fales of Company’s goods of 
“3 percent. and his income, including that commiftion,. 
: which is to be revifed anaually, is not to be lefs than_) 
Mr. W. E. Phillips - - to be Thied and laft Member of Council, and to retain 16,00 
og + the office of Colleor of the Government Cuftoms zi oe 


16,000 


12. The pro error madé by Mr. James Philip Hobfon, in his calculation of the profit 19 
‘de derived. by the purchafe of the fpices captured from the’ cnemy by His Majetty’s thips 
Greyhound and Hazrier, would have tended to imprefs our minds ‘with a yery unfavourabie 
opinion of that gentleman’s qualifications for the fituation of Accountant General at Prince 
of Wales Ifland, if we had-not been informed that at the time Mr. Hobfon prepared the 
calculation adverted to, he was labouring under a fevere indifpofition, and that his mind was 
alfo niuch deprefied by the dangerous ilinefs which prevailed in: his family. The belief of 
thefe facts arreft the judgment which we thould otherwife feel it.indifpeniably neccflary to 
fs upon this occafion; a judgment to which the diffatisfaction you appear repeatedly to 
ave exprefled at the backward ftate of the bufinefs of the Accountant's Uffice, would have 
amore impelled us, if the charge thus implied againtt him had not been materially extenuated 
by the delay of other Officers (particularly that of Superintendant of Marine) in tranfinitting 
eir accounts. : . 


13. We have been informed that Mr. John James Extkine, now Superintendant of 
Marine, is in a ftate of health which renders it improbable that he can continue to difcharge 
the duties of that office. If it thould prove otherwife, and that he fhould be reftored to a 
ftate of perfect efficiency, we defire that he may continic to exercife the office of Superin- 
tendant of Marine, agreeably to the conditions ftated in a preceding paragraph, and alfo 
to be a provifional Member of Council, to fucceed in cafe of a vacancy ; but if the illnefs 
ander which he is faid to labour fhould not be removed, we defire that, if Mr. Hobfon 
fell here conducted himfelf to your fatisfaction, he be appointed Provitional Counfeilor in 