

5 $ 4 : 
250 ial 


SS “Appendix to Se" 
Goud Report, N°9. 


364 Third REPORT from the Select Committee on the 

two important articles of internal trade which the Government of India preserves 
exclusively for the benefit of the State, viz, Saltand Opium. This Board has likewise 
the control over the greateft part of the Department ofthe Cuitoms ; it has likewise 
the direction of the Marine, which branch may perhaps, irom being principally of a 
commercial description, be considered as. falling within the sphere of its immediate 
duties. The Board of ‘Trade at Madras superintends a small part only of the 
Cuftoms under that Presidency. © With respect to the Board of Trade at Bengal, 
a queftion mizht arise whether, under the circumftance of the extension of Duty that 
took place in the year 1798, whcn the superintendence of the trade in Salt and Opium, 
from which the averaze annual gross Receipt in the three laft years, amounted to 
£. 2,352,000, and of the Cuftoms amounting to nearly £. 300,000, was committed 
to it, the expense’of its eftabliihment should be considered as wholly attaching to 


“the Commerce, or apart fhould full asa charge upon the Territories, with the Revenues 


of which these articles are classed. On this point, Your Committee observe, that 
the Charges of provision, manufacture, transport, or sale, attaching to the Salt and 
Opium, are inserted in the Territorial Charges ; in like manner are the Charges of the 
' Cuftom-Houses. The datics of the Board of ‘Trade are merely superintendence or 
control. . The Salaries of the Members, in the year 1792, previous to the transfer of 
these duties, amounted to £. 24,360, and in te en 1809 to £. 25,520. The number 
of the Members has not been increased; and the new Duties have not in any way 


 affe€ted the subordinate Offices under them of a Commercial description. 


The Advances made for the purchase of Invefiments for Consignment to England, 
are a very important,part of the application of the Extraordinary Funds. ‘The amount 
is tiated to have. bee 038,266. Although it might be inferr(d, in an ab- 
feraét view, that amount of these Advances was principally supplied by 
Funds derived immediately from England; Jommittee are apprehensive that the 
queltion, as to; 


2 particular of the ary Funds from which the Com- 
lied, whether from Money ‘on loan in India, or from aids re- 
Europe, cannot, under the mmftances of the years in which the 
de, and of the nature of the syltem exilting in those years, be sa- 


* ‘tisfaGtorily. ééided, without an cxamiation far more minute than is required by the 
"observations proposed to be matle on the subjeét in this part of the Report. 


» Appendix N™ 15 
andig, 


ty furnithed by the several Presidencies and Settlements in India to the 

Factory at Canton, must, as Your Committee are led to think, be considered asso much 
advanced for the positive and direét purposes of the Trade of the Company, and may 
* be fiated asa Supply ultimately from India to England. The amount applied for this 
as, a ania bat £. 3,313,054, whichis the net Supply. ‘The transaétions be- 
~tiveen India and Pa iéiory of Canton. leading to this result, are shewn in detail in the 
account in the Appendix; irom whieli it will appear, that the gross Supply from India, 
Payments into the Canton Treasury under yatious engagements, by payments of 
Isof Exchange, by Consignments of Cotton, Sandal Wood, &c. amounted to 