


The observations already made render it unnecessary for Your Committee to call 
to the recollection of the House, that the General Result now fiated, has been pro- 
duced by the direct Cath transactions of India, both Political and Commercial. ‘The 
Sources fiom which the requisite Funds were derived, and the application of those 
Hoods by which this Result bas been produced, have been respectively examined in 

etail, in the laft and in the present Reports: the Produce of the Territorial Revenue, 
and the Expenditure of it, in the fonner; the Extraordinary Funds, and the Disbirse- 

ment of them, iv the latter. It only, therefore, now remains to ftate, for the 
tion of the House, the immediate causes to which the Result now ex! i ited o be 
attributed; or what circumftances may be presumed to haye occasioned an absorption 
to 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. - 369 


to the amount of this defalcation. This will be seen by a reference to the Statement 4 
which exhibits the Extraordinary Disbursements, and by selecting from it such articles 
as come under the description of pusitive and direct Charge, or of alienation of Pro- 
perty in India; which has been accordingly done, and an Account has been drawn 1p 
upon these principles, and added to the Appendix. As the details of the several Appendix, N*2% 
items contained ia this Account have already been explained, Your Committee need 
only advert at present to the Total of them, which is £. 12,590,303, and which will 
be found as near to accuracy as, upon full consideration of the geueral principles by 
which the inquiry hus been directed, could possibly be expected, when it is considered 
that that inquiry embraces the receipt and application of a sum approaching two 
hundred and forty-five millions fierling. 


: In ftating the apparently unfavourable variation above fhewn, Your Committee feet 
it incumbent on them to observe, that it is by no means to be inferred from thence” 
that the general complexion of the affairs in India is in reality unprosperous, or that 
no adequate counterbalance is to be found for the sacrifives of Funds which have Leen 
made. Although the Political Government of India ulay not regularly come within 
the purview of this branch of inquiry, further than as to the expense attendant upon 
it, and as to the means of detraying that expense; the extension, the internal ia- 
provement, and the additional security of the Indian Empire at the present time, com= 
pared with the year 1792, cannot be loft sight of, any more than the present high fiate 
of public credit, which to these circumftances is juftly attributable. Tt is true that, Appendix, N* 28, 4 
notwithitanding the progressive increase of the Revenues, the increased facility 4 
| 
y 


pendix, N26. 


of realizing them throughout the Territories, the comparison of the Surplus Produce 

of the year 792-3 with the excess of Charge in the year 1808-9, exhibits a Result 

by no means satisfactory; and certainly ftrongly points out the necessity of measures 