


‘ommercial,“ but for the 
as muft be oem as diminution of property, from 


aur applicati ‘the way of defraying Charge, or so as to 
Pi ge abies ali 
"Of the total amount of Extraordinary Funds; which has been ftated at £. 52,309,424, 

r fill: iains; tobe accounted for, the sum of £.8,514,801. This upona 

minute ex be found, with a comparatively small exception, to have 
been employed :an increase in the Assets in India, To ascertain the fa& 
with every practicable of accuracy, Your Committee have entered upon an 
‘examination rather in detail of the Statement of the Assets annexed to their Second 
Report. The Jaft-year a that Statement is said to have been made up, in regard to 

. Bengal, from we Ga ‘Stock Account of that Presidency of the 31" January only, 
being the lateft wed, As itsis of importance that the periods of the several 
Accounts fhould. accord with each cther‘at the end of the official’ year, namely the 
30" April, and as it has ‘been represented that the Statement now referred to re- 
‘quired correétion on account of an error in calculating the Exchanges ita part of it, 
Your Committee have subftituted another Statement of the Assets, which is added’ to 

~ the Appendix of this Report. According’to this correéted Statement, the. total of 
the Assets on the 30% of April 1792, amounted to the sum of £. 72553,834; and on 


of Funds, either 
ty 


» the go" April 1809, to £.20,127,707 5 being,/on firft view, an Increase of 


$12,573,873. 7 F . 
‘The amount in which thé Assets might be supposed to Have increased by: Le 
__ The amount in wl he Ass sed by the appli 
cation of Funds raised in India, namely £. 8,514,801, leads molt obyiously to, the 
inference, that very considerable adjuftments muft be made of the Increase now ftated. 
- Your Committee have therefore direéted. their, particular attention to this point, be- 


ites in their Judgment it appeared to be of essential importance. 


The adjuftments thought to be necessary, are of various descriptions: firft, the 
absolute.exclusion of bad Debts, or Debts apparently nominal, from both periods of 

» the Account; Revenue Balances, as they were in no-way created’ by the application 
of Indian Funds; Debts from the Nabob of Arcot and Rajah of Tanjore, a very 

r a5 material 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, _ 367 


material part of them having originated in Charges or Advances brousht to account 
antecedent to the year 1792, or were in Debits on Arrears’ of Subsidy, under the 
engagements with those Princes, before the conclusion of the Treaties by which the 
Company now hold the possession of their respective Countries. ‘The part of the in- 
crease occasioned by the Imports from Europe in Goods and Stores cannot, in any 
view, be supposed to have been produced by Indian Funds: it is therefore excluded 
in like manner with the above. ‘Lhe expense attending the Expedition to Exypt is 
erroneously kept on the Bengal Quick Stock Account 2s an Asset, from being con- 
sidered us a claim upon the Public. That claim having been liquidated, ithas | pro- 
perly been excluded from the Accounts made up in Endland: the amount, £.1,733,328, 
is therefore ftruck out upon the present occasion. 