


¥ 


Your Committee mutt observe, that some diftinGtion will beh 
reference to the various services to which the application of the I straording ¢ 
has been direéted, for the purpose of specifying with acciracy the outlay of Money io 
direét Charge; or in that way in Which the amount, in “Some fhape or other, was: ~ 
ultimately converted into property, and found in the Assets of the Company, either,” 
abroad or at home: but this point will perhaps come mo rly under consider- 
ation in another part of the Report. , Your Committee “sities ore only now remark, 
that with the exception of the increase of Indian Assets, Wiich is the lait point in this 
branch of the examination, the particulars remaining to be considered are of the 
description juft adverted to, viz. a positive issue of Money, or Loss, which may in ~~ 
fa& be classed among the Charges of the Indian Territories: ~ \ : . 


: , ee pay 

The firft issue of this description isa payment of a portion of the Debts of the 

Private Creditors of the Nabob of Arcot, to the amount. of £.3,058;953.. This. pay-" 
ment was made under Orders sent to the Presidency of Madras, dated 20 January 

1796; which Orders originated with the Board of Commissioners for the Affairs of 
India, and were tratismuitted to India, under the exercise of the powers vetted in them 

by the Legislature. Rove be - pe 


A payment was likewise made to the Private Creditors of the Rajah of Tanjore, 
amounting to £.64;044, under orders transmitted to India, dated 18" Sept. 1792, i 
founded on the Treaty with the Rajah, in which provision was made in favour of the Appendix, N° 20.. 
Private Creditors. ‘The sum above fiated was the amount paid in India ; it will Appendix, 8% 
hereafter be hewn, that a further sum was paid from the Treasury in England upon 
the same account. . LA ce 2 


Your 


566 Third REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


Your Committee have, in their laft Report, brought to the view of the House the 
particular result of the Revenues and Charges of each of the Presidencies, from 
swhich it appeared that the excess of the Charges.of Madras and Bombay, uring the 
period under review, amounted to no less a sum then £. 20,579,627. They have 
not examined minutely by what mode the wants of. these Presidencies were supplied, 
either in respect of their excess of Charge, or the Disbursements for the purchase ot 
Tnvefiments, &c. as it is sufficiently clear that the Presidency of Bengal afforded 
assistance to Madras and Bombay toa large amount. ; 


Rpentin, ye 22. ‘The total Supply as debited in the Bengal books, amounted to £. 27,853,171 


‘The amount at which this sum is. creditedin the books of Ma- 
dras and Bombay, is only - - Lon es = = 26,979,768 


“Being lesé than the Debitibyei= Ay SS = LY 873,403 


id syhich matt chiefly be attributed to the effeét of the Exchanges at which the Remit- 


pendix, Nees 


tances or Consignments were made, but partly to the Exchange at which the conver- 
ae ‘of the Colas of each of the Presidencies is effeGted in order to preserve con- 
_formity with ‘the rate used igpie ‘calculation of the Accounts of the Revenues and 
Charges. In either case, for the view now to be given, itis presumed to be correct 
fiate the ; fat as a loss of so much property. \f 
* Your Committee having been informed that various sums have been written off the 
Indian Books of Acco for losses’ incurred at the Presidencies, which losses were 
“notincluded in the A@gounts of the Charges, have called for an Account/of the same; 
. by which it appears, that the amount in the seventeen years under review, was 
’ ~~ rd 
unt ofthe whole of these. tes of Expenditure, is £. 43,794,623 
727 was an expenditure in the course of Commercial Manage- 
ical description, which, from being converted into property, would 
than realized. The fonaane £. 10,889,896 was an expendi- 
greater part of a Political nature; and in 