


fs The 


_ Appendix to 24 
Report, N*7. 


r 


re Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 351 


‘The apprehension that such might be the effeét produced by those circumftances, it 
$s presumed, suggefted to the Government General the necessity of having recourse z 
Yo some other ent by which the increase of the Debt might be checked, or the ‘ ‘ 
redu@tion of it @ffeGted. A plan, under the name of Sinking und, was accordin, ly Appendix, No 36 
inftituted in the year 1798 at Bengal, and in the 1799 at Madras, the principles aud 3%. 
of which are {hewn in the documents added to the Appendix. It appears to have 3 er 
borne no affinity to that which passes under a similar appellation in England, and 
consisted of Sums either raised by Bills on the Court of Directors, or derived from 
the general resources of the Country, and applied to the purchase of Public Secu- 
Tities in India, The operation of this Fund began in the year 1798-9, at the former 
Presidency, and in the year 1799-1800, at the latter; and effeted a reduétion 4 
of the capital of the Debt at Intereft, down to the year 1808-9, to the amount of Appendix to 2€ 4 


£. 4,038,696. Report, N° 7. 
The anxiety with which the increase of the Debt in India has been contemplated by 

the authorities at home, is firongly evinced by a Letter addressed to the Chairman, 

Deputy Chairman, and Court of Direétors, by a late President of the Board of Com- 

missioners for the Affairs of India, when quitting that Department in 1801, which is Printed by Order — 

already upon the Table of the House. The suggeftions contained in it were not of the House, 4 


enetleéled by his successor; and in the next year exertions were made to carry into. 19 Match 1806. 
veffeét a part of what was recommended in that document. The general principle of 5 
the measures (which were apparently confined to the space of two years) was to 
accomplith a more rapid liquidation of the principal of the Indian Debt, than could 
be effected by the exifting arrangements. ‘Lhe proposed plan being brought to matu- 
rity, a consmunication of it was made to the Bengal Government, by a Letter. dated 
1" June 1803, with orders for carrying it into execution. ‘This Document will like- 
wise be found in the Appendix ; and the amount of the Exports of Goods and of Appendix, N38. 
Bullion, in the years 1803-4 end 5, will prove that every cffort was made to cnsure Appendix, N° 5.. 
the success of the measure.. ‘The accumulation of the Indian Debt, however, which 
appears in subsequent years, fhews its entire failure. The cause of this, Your Com- 
mitice attribute to the War with the Mabratta Chieftains, which broke out in the very 
ear in which the plan commenced, and did not finally close til] April 1805. 


Reverting to the Sinking Fund inftituted in the year 1798, and to its operation as 
lately (hewn, it is thought proper to inform the House that this plan for the liquida- 
tion of the Debt has been discontinued, and the Accounts relating to itordered to be Appendix, N° 39. 
¢losed in the General Hooks of the Bengal Presidency. ‘The operation of the Fund Appendix to Se- 
on the Debtof the Madras Presidency, appears by the General Account of the Debts, cond Report: N° 7e 
to have ceased from the year 1806-7; J’rom this circumftance, and from the preced- 
ing observations, itis to be deduced that no regular plan for the liquidation’ of the 
Indian Debt, exifis at the present time ; but that whatever reduétion may be effected 
in its amount, muft arise from the application of the superabundant Funds, which, 
more from adventitious canses than trom an excess of Income, have accumulated in 
the Indian Treasuries; or from Transfers made to Europe, upon the principles 
which will presently be brought to the notice of the House. But these means of re- 
duGion moft obviously appear to be merely temporary; and although it cannot be 
denied that the effeét, as immediately applicable to our situation in India, is salutary 
from lessening the demand for Intereft, the farther liquidation of the Principal of the 
Debt fhould not be loft sight of ; as the subttantive interefts of our Indian Empire 
imperatively prescribe the absolute importance of devising and carrying into effe&t, at 
the earlieft praflicable period, some mode of lessening the Debts, either by pro- 
essive operation or otherwise, in such a way as to avoid the risk of deranging the 
inancial syfiem, by occasioning the necessity of increased Loans in India, or by 
falling with overwhelming effets upon the Treasury at Home. 