

being devised to effect a reduction of Expenditure, which, from a variety of causes, 

both in Charge and in Intereft on the Debts, mult now be considered to be excessive. : 
A cursory view of the latter ycars of the Statement annexed to the Second Report, will Appendix to 2 
thew that much has been already done towards this desirable end ; and’ Your Com- Report, N° 6. 
mittee are encouraged to expett, by the tenor of advices lately recei ‘on Bengal, 

that the time is not diftant when the Surplus Produce of the Revenues will be cqual Appendix, N°29, 
to, if not exceed, what it was at the commencement of the period they have reviewed ; 

and that, by the gradual reduétion of the Debt, which may be rational looked for, Appendix, N° 30, 
a saving of Intereft will accrue, which, pre tanto, will be a further addition to the See also Ne 29. 4 
Surplus Revenue. | 


Your Committee muft ftate further, that notwithftanding the defalcation now 
fhewn, would, on another view, be enhanced by the addition of the principal part of 
the Arrears, &c. which have been deduéted from the Debts owing by the Company; | 

et to whatever extent the Revenue Balances deduéted from the Assets hall be i 
hereafter realized, and in whatever sum the value of the Buildings and the Dead Stock “a 
of India may have increased by Indian Expenditure, in. both cases the amount | 
muft be considered as a reduction of the above defaication ; to which may fairly be 
added the net amount of the sum recovered in England, in liquidation of the Dis- 
bursements in India ebargeable to the Public, 


Your Committee having, in another part of this Report, intimated their intention 
of offering some further remarks respecting the Debt, which by progressive operations Me 
has accumulated to the amount at which it ftands, now resume that subject. 


| 
The increase of the Debt bearing Intereft has been fhewn to amount to i 
£- 10,059,897; and the increase of the Intereft payable upon it may be fiated at the Appendix, N° 2. 3 
sum of £. 1,575,009. A fixed annual demand to so large an amount, upon resources 102) 
not directly susceptible of increase by additional assessment, is certainly a mott unfa- 
vourable feature in the Accounts, and very firongly enforces the necessity of every 


effort being made for its reduction. 


Your Committee consider it as due to those entrufted with the Government of 
India to fiate, that the growing amount of the Debt has, from a very early period, 
been the subject of their anxious observation ; and that it has always been an object 
of their earncft solicitrde, to devise practicable plans for its reduction. Various 
measures have been resorted to from time to time for this purpose, which have been | 
in different ways brought under the notice of the House: but Your Coumitice 4 
think it right here to bring to your consideration this part of the subject somewhat 
more in detail. The 


370 Third REPORT from the Select Committee on she A 
'-< "Phe effects of the war which ended in the year 1783, were particularly prejudicial 
to the Financial syftem of India. The Revenues had been absorbed ; the pay ond 
allowances of both the Civil and Military Branches of the Service were greatly in 
arrear; the Credit of the Company was extremely depressed; and, adde«! to all) the 
whole syftcm had fallen into such irregularity and confusion, that the real ftate of 
affairs could not be accurately ascertained till the conclusion of the year 1785-6, 
The increase of the Debts being known in England, the special attention of the 
Board of Commissioners for the Affairs of India, soon after its inftitution, and of the 
Court of Directors, was ftrenuously applied to discover the moft effectual means for 
fits reduction; and, afler verry mature deliberation, ‘a mode was determined upon, 
which appeared well adapted to the exifting cireumftances of the time. ‘This mode 
‘was a transier of the Debt to England, by the subftitution of a Certificate or Lill upon 