

* the Court of Directors, at a fixed rate of Exchange, in lieu of the fodian Security, 
Bond, or Note, with an option of poftponement, when due, for a certain period, in 
order to. meet the conyeniene@ of the Home Treesury, The means of payment were 
‘expected to be found in Hhegeartins produce of the Revenues remitted to England, 
torough’ the medium of Inveltuient, combined with the profit of the Trade. This 
plan, from being suited to the convenience and interett of individuals wishing to 
remit their property to England, appeared to promise permanency in its operation ; 
Sie: abut this expectation was disappointed, Although in the year intediately iollowing, 
Ste Account pre- viz. 1786-7, the amount subscribed was £.1,498,712, in the next yeur it was only 
 stitedto the | £210,084. The rateof Exchange at which the remittance was fixed, was considered 
J pane pees unfavourable ; un alteration was therefore made, and orders were conveyed to Iadia 
A erienilt , N° 3a, for an increase of the rate at each of the Presidencies, with the expectation that when 
Appendix, N°33. inore favourable terms. were- oflered,“the holders of the securities would be readily 
See Account disposed to avail themselves of them. ‘This latter arrangement was, for a considler- 
printed 4 Fel.1793. able time; attended with success; and the Act of the 33° of His present Majeiy 
Beste tio & Tecoguized this pian of liquidation, but limited theamount payable within cach year, 
Bais. a a to the suny of x. 500,000, and limited the extent of the operation, so that the Debt 
: thould not, be-reduced below the sum of £. 2,000,000. ‘The Court of Directors, by 
Appendix, Ness, Letter dated 25" June 1793, signified their orderstothe Bengal Government, respect- 
ing the Bills to be drawn conformably to the principles prescribed in the Act which 


‘Appendix, N° 31. 


ee 


ae bis had recently passed. ‘ 

Fea E Your Ci ‘ominittee feel that their olservations: upon this subjeCt have extended to a 
hear period not immediately in the contemplation of their present Report, which has been 
tas : {eneraliy Confined to the transaétions subsequent to April 1792; and they have been 


led to them only by the subjeét now under discussion naturally imposing on them 
& some reference to the measures in aGtive operation at the period when their inquiry 
Originated. A reference to the Statement of Debts aifnexed to the Second Report, 
will thew that.the operations of the plan may be supposed to have been completel ly 
efiicient during the years 1792-3 and 1793-4. In 1794-5, the decrease of the Debts 
was in a much less amount, and the Debt after that period has, in every year till the 
Year 1808-9, progressively increased. But Your Committee here beg leave to 
remark, that the Increase or Decrease of the Debt thewn in this Statement, mutt not 
he taken to be a direét criterion of the operation, or indeed of the continuance of this 
or of any cther plan, as, ih the years where an Increase or Decrease appears, the cul- 
‘culation is made including new Loans raised in the year. © It has oceurred:that, not- 
withftanding the remittance was made in some years to a large amount (the ftate of 
affairs in India requiring Money to be raised on Loan) an Increase of Debt has been 
% exhibited, In order to. give the moft complete information respeéting the operation 
fe of the remittance plan during the period in queftion, Your Committee have drawn 
Ppendix N° 55, ito one view the amount of the sums subscribed from the year 1792-3 to the latcf 
pees as flated annually to Parliament, and added the Account to the Appendix. 
he total of the Account amounts to the sum of £.4,554,471; but on referring to the 
Ken _ etail, it will be seen that in the year 1797-8, the operation of the plan began to relax, 
. and continued, with some exceptions, less from year to year till 1804-5; after which 
: it may be supposed to have entirely ceased. The dircét cause of this efieét is to be 
traced in the political ftate of India, from which the demands for Funds became so 
pressing as to have induced the Government there to have recourse to a syftem of 
‘raising Money by Loan upon new principles. From this circumftance, and from the 
increased facility of making remittances to Europe at more advantageous rates of 
Exchange than those of the traiisier remittance, that plan was entirely superseded. 