


The cffeét produced by these several adjuftments, is ewn by an Account in the 
Appendix, to reduce the amoutit of the increase of Assets to the sum of £. 7,703,611 ; 
to which, however, fhould be added a consignment of Treasure from Bengal to 
Madras, which, though properly exeluded from the Bengal Quick Stock of April 
1809, had not arrived at Madvas in sufficient time 49) Be inserted in the’ Account of 
that Presidency. ‘Fhe amount of the value of this Treasure was £.717,5 ‘The 
total Increase of Assets, procured by the application OF employment of Funds in the 

2 r 


Indian Treasuries, will then be found to amx unt to the sum of £/ E7255 
which, however, fhlould be deduéted for inom view, the Incre the ain 
due from Individuals‘on Advances made to them for the proyisi 

between April 1792 and April 1809, as the Whole of the ces mi 
1808-9, a) already been included in a fo: part of the Rep I 
be deduéted is £. 122,506. The amount employed ia the Increase of | 
then be reduced to the sam - 8,298,686, of which the Commit 
satisfa€tion to observe, £.5;615,494 is in Cath ed pt as the, Tres 
Presidencies of India. rican. SR 2 


‘The Company are besides possessed of property to a considerable 
Presidencies and Settlements in India, which, trom not being conside 
immediately available, is not inserted in what is termed their Bir 
of which a view has now been taken. is pro] sists fof. 
Furniture, Guns on the Ramparts, Arm: ms py fescsiflions 
Buildings might also be mentioned, butythe coft of them is’su; | to-have 
* cluded in the Charges. These several articles, with the doubtful Debts of the Company, 

are cartied into an account termed’ Dead Svock. In many respetissthe articles so 
described are nevertheless to’be considered as .real property'31 : i , 
not been included in the Charges in ike Maiiner with Bu gsand Forti i 
can only have been procured by the advance of Tunds, either nd or India. 
Your Committee having already adyerted to the difficultiés in the way of acccrately 
accounting for the disposal of the Stores consigned from Europe, they haye only 
now to add, that these diflicultics operate upon the pre scasion, and render: it 
almoft impossible to diftinguifh the partof the Guns, Arms, &e. which was received _ 
from England. ‘The net Increase on the whole of the Beat & in India, in ‘so 
far as it consisted of Plate, Houschold Furniture, Guns, Stores, &c. amounts to 
£.929,291, of which stim it is eliniated that £200,000 was produced by the 
application of Indian Funds, oe en sh 


satisfactory as could be esp 
Finances of this great Empi 
Commercial branches of its government~and management. ah ~ 
Your Committee having thus effered to the consideration of the House such re- 
inarks as appeared to them requisiie, in order to explain the several sources from 
which the Extraordinary Funds were derived, and the modes in which they were 
expended, fearing that the manner ih which those remarks have been brought for- 
ward may be thought too diffuse or desultory for a ready consideration of the sub- 