


a -Affite of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


“The consideration which Your Committee have given to the subject, has eftablithed 
(tq their own conviction at leaii) that. the only principle upon which the line can at 
present be drawn’ between the Political and Commercial branches of the Concern, is 
by the adjuftinent of an Account between the Indian Treasuries solely, and the Trea- 
sury in England; ftating on the one side, the Advances made by India for the immediate 
account of England; and on the oiber side, the Disbursements by England for the 


- immediate account of India, and thus ftriking the Balance. 


373 


Viewing the subject in the light of a mere Cath transaction, the point at issuemight 
be determined by referring to a Statement inserted in the Appendix, in bi tbe 
Supply derived irom Europe, as an available resource, between the year 1792-3 and 
the year 1808-9, is calculated to have amounted to the sum of £. 31,404,230; and 
‘the Advances made in return, including the Commercial. Charges not added to the 
Invoices, with the Supply to China, aré'fhewn to have amounted to £. 34,597,435, 
being, an excess ofipayment by: India, amounting 'to £.3,193.205. But a Result so 
drawn may not, in the judgment of Your Committee, be looked upon as correct, be- 
cause the detail does not comprize either the entire payments by India, which eventually 


felt into’ the Treasury in England, or the whole expenditure of the E 
fairly chargéable to the Indian Political Concern. —Seyeral material 

therefore necessary ito place the matter in a more’ correct point of view. Th - 
included in the Territorial Charges,’ conftituting Claims upon th Public which were © Pe ad 


lth Treasury 
ai 


{ments are 


© amount. 


recovered in Englandy and the Disbursements of a Political nature in England, are 
the principal featares in these adjuftments. * The mode in which Your 


sume this queftion might be determihed upon general principl 


orf 


uimittee pre- 
dverting at the same 


time to all these cireumftances, is by ftating the Supply by India to England, and the 


Return by England to India, upow the following principles : 
SUPPLY by INDIA to ENGLAND. 
Invefiments of. Goods = = or BER 
Salidry-Advances for Bills, &c. repayable in England. -. - 
Com ineoit Charges not added to the Invoices - - 


Net Amount of Supply to Canton Ba PA SS 


Bt 


paid in England by His Majefty’s Government - — - 


Advances and Charges in India admitted as Claims upon the Public, and 


SUPPLY from ENGLAND to INDIA. 


In Goods and Stores —the Total Amount of the Consignments, 
as credited in the Indian Books - 4 = - Sf. 
Jn Bullion dabei? a 


By Bills of Exchange = = =  - = 
Sundry Receipts for which England is credited 


£. 


Total credited to England in the Indian Books 
Add 
Disbursements of His Majefty’s Paymafters General, 
on account of Regiments serving in India, 1793 to 
1807 - - - - - - = £. 2,638,988 
Vidtualling Office Demands - a = = 
Antereft allowed on Repayments by Government = 