


Your Committee, having thus given a fhort sketch of the general measures adopted 
from time to time for the reduétion of the Indian Debt, wiil draw this part of their 
Report to a conclusion, by a tew observations respesiing the Debt itself; a farther 
explanation which is the more necessary, from the alteration in the terms of borrowing 
in India being the admitted cause of those embarrassments of the Treasury in Eng- 
land, which have been, upon another occasion, brought to the view of the House. Your 
Committee will not go into detail upon this subje&, but be satisfied with adverting 
generally to what preceded the year 1798. _ Previous to that timie whatever was the 
rate at which Money was raised by loan in India, the transaCtion was almoft entirely 
local, and no power of demand in England, either for Principal or Intereft, was al- 
lowed to the Lender, (except as far as etek to the principal under the ey 

259. 5 : 


it printed 
der of the 


endix, N°45. 


if and 2d Reports. 
é 1 


) this branch of inquiry: 
Dye 


i 


prescribe, this Report mizht be brought to an immediate, close,. if. they bad not to: 
apprehend such a detail might not, as readily as was desirable, direét the judgment: 
to any conch:sion approaching to correéiness, of the diftinCtion which is presumed to: 

obtain between the Political and Commercial parts. of the transaétions. An absolutes, 
diftinGtion upon accurate principles, under the present system, cannot be,drawn 5. but 

Your Committee ave of opinion, that with’ some ‘addition, the documents. in the; 
Appendix to this and ethers of their Reports, will throw very considerable light upon, 


This subjeét twas adverted to.in the concluding part of their Second Report, and a 
Document produced by the Court of Direéiors, entitled, Exposition of the State of ! 
the Company's Affairs both home and abroad, from haying a near connection< 


“ with it, was added to the Appendix; but no direct opinion upon this Document.was 


then offered. Your Committee do not now, as they did not upon that. occasion, . 
think proper to enter upon a detailed examination of the principles, opinions and 
conclusions, which are set forth in the Paper alluded to, whatever be their sentiments + 
in respe€t_to the useful and important information which in wany.respeéts:it mult’ 
be admitted to contain. ‘The only part which, in the opinion of Your Comuittee, 
direGtly calls for remark, is that which relates to the Balance between the Supplies of » 
the Home ‘Treasury, and India and China, for the space of eleven years, which Balance 
is ftated to be in favour of the former, in the sum of £.8,118,861. : 


Tt was observed in the Second Report, that this Result ot drawn in a manner... 
corresponding to the principles upon which Your Commitice have though! 
pedient to conduct their inquiry.” ‘The principle by which they’ have’been gover 
aad the end which is more immediately in their view, 18, to make 'a separation of 
Political from the Commercial part of the Company's affairs; whereas the Accou! 
ti Whence the Balance or Result now adverted to is drawn, blends the. Sup| 
India, of which a partis Political and apart Commercial, with that to China, whi 
is entirely Commercial. ‘They do not dispute the propriety of this mode of statément, 
as referring to the object for which it was professedly intended, namely, to ascertain’ 
simply the Balance of the Debit and Credit between England, and‘ India and ; 
upon a*broad ard general principle; which led the Directors. to-commence their A 
count with the year 1797-8, confining it to a period fhorter than that. of whicl Your 
Committee have taken a review, and also fhorter than that referred toin the Statement 5 
of the Revenues and Charges of India, inserted in another.part of the Appendix to - 
tue Exposition, SRLS Le sary Bia 