

ment), dated 28° May 1810 SIGN, fed A ALEC. ie MT ee 

No. 44.—Extraé Letrer from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Depart- 

ment), dated 4** Jannary 1811 - - - 2 - Pe hes ibid. 

No. 45.—Extraét Lerrer from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial De- 

s partment), dated 4° January 1811 - - - - - - ibid. 


No. 46.—An Accounr, thewing the Amount of all Sums paid by the Eaft India Company 
from their Treasury in England, supposed to be chargeable to the Territories in 


India, from the year 1793-4 to the year 1809-10 inclusive ~ p- 414 
No. 46. (a.)}—Examination of Charles Cartwright, Esquire, Accountant General of the 
Eaft India Company pees We ec) rt 7 ibid. 


No. 47.—An Account of the Amount of Losses incurred by the Eaft India Company in 
their Cargoes homeward from India and China respectively ; from the year 1792-3 
to the year 1809-10 inclusive, diflinguifhing each year - = = p. 41h 


Appendix, No.1. 
Committee on the Affairs of The Eaft India Company. 


Jovis, 20° die Junii 1811. 
Examination of WILLIAM WRIGHT, Esq. Auditor of Indian Accounts, 


A® E you Auditor of Indian Accounts ?——Yes. 
Is it the duty of your office to draw up the Accounts of Revenues and Charges, and of 
the Debts and Assets of the Company in India ?—Itis. 

Are the Statements in the Annual Budget Accounts, termed Abftrat Receipts and Dis- 
bursements of Bengal, Madras and Bombay respeétively, Abftraéts made of Statements in 
detail received from those Presidencies ?—They are. - 

Do not the Statements so received purport to be in general the entire Cash Transactions of 
those Presidencies, comprizing the Revenues and Charges as well as the Extraordinary Re- 
ceipts and Disbursements ? rainly. 

Do they not form the basis of the Accounts drawn by you, thewing diftinétly the Revenues 
and Charges of those Presidencies under their respestive heads ?—They do. 

Has it not occurred both in Receipt and Disbursement, that articles included under the 
head Extraordinary in the Statements received from India, have been considered as Revenue 
or Charge, and carried to account as such ia the Accounts to which the laft queftion 
refers ?—Certainly. vee : 

Has it not occurred, with regard to the Bengal Accounts particularly, that the Military 
Charge has been calculated on the Advances made to the Paymafters, because the detailed 
Disbursements had not been received in time for completing the Accounts ?—It has. 

Ta such cases, as well as others, when Documents are afterwards received from India, 
which render it necessary to make alterations in Accounts presented to Parliament, are you 
aotin.the habit of so deing?—Conftantly. % 

Are not Books kept at the several Presidencies, termed General Books ?—Yes, 

Are not the General Books supposed to include, in Abftraét at leaft, the whole of the 
‘Financial Transaétions of those Presidencies ?—Unqueftionably. ; 

Are the Statements of Receipt and Disbursement firft alluded to, supposed-to be drawn ig 
conformity with the General Books ?—They are. 