


&. The dividends hitherto made to the Tanjore Creditors have been improperly calcu- 
lcted in the proportion that the a:mual Intereit due to them bore to the actual Receipt; we 
therefore think it necessary to lay dewn a rule for your future guidance, whenever the 
period fhall arrive for putting the Rajah a; into possession of bis country, upon all 
“arrears of Subsidy being discharged, and his proportion of the expenses incurred in the war 
completely liquidated ; viz. 


The full amount of the Subsidy, agreeably to the kifts mentioned in the treaty, muft in the 
firft inftance be secured to the Company. As the Company are to provide for the general 
defence of the country, aud as the Hiaja's roportion of the military expenses has been 
settled on a fair caiculation, this is indisputable. 


After the amount of the anoual Subsidy fhall have been thus previously secured to the 
Company, agreeably to the fiipulations in the 2¢ article ef the treaty, the Creditors thall 
receive’ their proportion of the sums that may be paid to the Company under the 14" ar- 
ticle. But as the Company, since the conclusion of the treaty of 1787, have, for a valuable 
consideration, obisined aright to the annua! Peishcufh usually paid by the Rajah to the 
Nabob of Arcot; and also to the lage arrear that was due thereon, and have in consequence, 
in order to afford relief to the Rajeh’s finances, consented to make for the present a very 
cons‘derabie reduction in the sams to bé annually paid by the Rajzh on those accounts, 
agrecably to the ftipulations in the 14" article, you are to observe, that fhouid the Rajab’s 

* paynients 


the Affsirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 399 


payments on the various accounts specified in this article, unespettedly fall fhort, at a fue 
ture period, of the redeced amount to be received from him, under the abatement before» 
mentioned, the Creditors proportioa muft be calculated not upon the reduced amount, but 
upon the whole three facs or in the preportion of $0,000 to 2,20,000. But if the Rajah’s 
payments under the 14® article (hail, in the tirft inftance, secure to the Company the 
reduced amount they have agreed for the present to receive on account of the current Peith- 
cuih and arrears, we fhall have no objedion to the Creditors receiving the whole benefit of 
the flipulation in this article (if the ftate of the Rajah’s funds fhail be answerable thereto) 
notwithftanding the very considerable abatement that is to be made on account of the 
Company. And_ this we think a very fair and equitable arrangement with respect to the 
Tanjore private Creditors, and perfectly cousittent with the sentiments and directions cou- 
tained in our Dispatch upon this subje@ of the 12" April 1786, upon which the arrange- 
ments in the treaty were founded; indeed we have rather relaxed in favour of the Creditors, 
from those orders, by consenting, as we haye done in the preceding para. to their receiving 
their proportion of the payments to be made under the 14" article, whereas, by the Orders 
of 1786 the plan for the Rajah’s Private Debts was in nowise to interfere with the payment 
of his annual proportion of the Charges for the general defence of the Carnatic and former 
arrears, nor with the discharge of his engagements with the Nabob of Arcot. 