


From Bengal: +: - 215 Lacs of Current Rupees, 
From Madras - - 25 De D° ‘and 
From Bombay -  -- 10 De b 


150 Lacs of Current Rupees. 


The funds to be provided by the usual amount of certificates, by. the ‘sale of exports, and 
the remainder from the Surplus of the territorial Revennaes; and this to be exclusive of what 
you may be enabled to send to China. 


We truft that when you refle& how mach the welfare of the Company is committed on the 
success of this plan, it is annecessary for us to recommend the amon caution in the purchase 
of the Inveftments, in order that they may be such, both in assortment and quality, as may 
realize to us the greateit profit on our sales; and for this purpose, we enjoin a particular 
atteunnon to the Abftraé of Indent herewith transmitted, requiring that our Board of Trade 
fat! fiute to you at large their reasons for any deviation from it. We have flated that no 
allowance is made in the above sum for exports te China, and the ‘observations, of your 


Accomptant 


the Affairs of The EAST-INDIA COMPANY. 407 


Accomptant General seem to point out that you have little expeCation of being able to apply 
any considerable amount to that purpose. “You mutt, however, be sensible that the sale of 
Bengal produce or manufactures there would afford the greateft assifance to the Company, 
in carrying on; that valuable and important branch of their trade, and you are therefore 
direéted to use every exertion tor that purpose. : 


We think it also proper to remark, that a great profit arises to the Company from the sale 
of Coat goods, It hus been suggefted to us, that the amount of this article might be 
considerably increased, and that funds for the purpose might be provided, by sending to 
Madras un annual supplygt Bengal commodities, marketuble there: we-have also reason 
to believe, that from both if. Coafts there might be procured, in exchange for the manutac- 
tures of Bengal, goods adapted to the consumption of China, particularly sandal, pepper, 
and cotton. 


To this subje& we dire your particular attention, as it would be an essential relief ta our 
situation at home, could methods be found of supplying our China parchases from Bengal, 


without draining that country of ‘its circulating specie, which fhould, on no consideration, 


be admitted of. Every article also of internal trade, by which the wealth of onr provinces 
can be increased, so as to enable them the better to support the annual remittances to, 
Europe, mutt be encouraged and extended with the utmott care, as the plan now adopted, 
retts in a great measure on a consideration of the amount which we think can be annually 
brought from India, either by the Company or its servants, consiftently with a due attention 
to thé prosperity of that country. 


You are, as soon as possible, to acquaint us with your proceedings in consequence of these 
Orders, and you are to wait our further direétion respecting the fieps tobe taken for the 
discharge of capital on such of our bonded Debts as {hall not be subscribed into this plan ; 
continuing, nevertheless, regularly to pay the Intereti thereon. : 