


51. In assuming the total of Debts, the Carrent Pagoda in which the Madras Debts are 
Rated, have been valued conforinable to his Lordthip’s calculation, at 425 C* RF per 100 Pa- 
godas, but this valuation is considerably higher than that preceding the war; nor can we 
admit of the Debts at Madras being Converted into C' Rupees, in order for their being 
drought ‘hone at so high a valuation. We have so rited them Here only to preserve con 
fermity in the comparison, and because we were not willing to undervalue the amount of the 
Debtsin general. * 


Appetidix, No. 34. 


‘Extract ‘Getter from the ‘Court of Direéors to the Governor General in Councif at 
‘Bengal(Public Department), -dated 25'* June 1793. 

Para. 163. IN discussing the several heads for‘forming the late arrangements previous to 
sthe passing of the AG, it ‘was deemed ineligible to reduce the Company’s Debt in India, 
bearing Intereti, below two crores of Rupees, ‘or-two millions of Pounds Sterling. By the 
clause, the Company’s Indian Debts bearing Intereft, are taken at seven sg os Sen 

upees, 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. — - 409 


Rupees, or about seven millions of Ponnds Sterling. Agreeably therefore to what is enacted 
in this respeé, we authorize you to deaw Bills upon the Court of Directors, from time to 
time, towards the liquidation of the Company’s Indian Bond Debt, until it fhall be reduced. 
to the sam before mentioned; butit is not our intention to limit the amount of Bills to be 
annvally drawn upon us on that account, provided that not more than to the amount of ~ 
£.500,000 be made payable in any one years if therefore in-1704, the Bills called for in 
consequence of the eee for. that purpose thall exceed £. 500,000; thie excess beyond 
that amount may be sy with an option to the Company to poftpoue the» payment 
thereof, on allowing Tat on the Bills: payable lialf-yearly, at the rate of 5 percent. per 
annum, from the date of their becoming due, The rate of Exchange for the ensuing year, 
is not to exceed 15, 11d. per Current Rupee. 7 tot 


104. In case the Company's Creditors in India thall declineito accept Bills to the amount 
of £. 500,000 in any year, thie clause points oat the modelin which this deficiency is to be. 
supplied. In the execution of these Orders respeéting the drawing the Bills on account of 
the India Debt, the Governor General in Council mutt take the leadyand our other Presi- 
dencies muft be bound by the orders they thall receive from them on this subject. 


105. We are already under Acceptances to the amount of £- 392,000, to be paid on the 
1** March 1794; if therefore you thould not procure Bills at the before-mentioned rate of 
as. 11d. the Current Rupee, we authorize you to discharge, in cafh, so much of our Bond 
Debt, as will make that amount equal to £. 500,000, provided you hive not already drawn 
upon us to complete the sum of £. 500,000 by the expected {hips of this season, of which 
we have not yet received advice. 