

tain 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 405 


tain hopes that there will be a considerable reduction in the charge of Lutereft at Bombay, 
aud probably some redu@tion at Fort St. George. 


Appendix, No. 31. 


Copy Letter from the Court of Direétors to the Governor General in Council at Bengal 
(Separate General Department), dated 15°" September 1785. 


WE have taken into our serious consideration the large amount of Debt owing by the 
Company to our servants and others iu India, the alarming ftate of our Credit there, and 
the embarrassments in which our Governments are involved in consequence thereol. After a 
moft attentive review of every-purticular of our situation, both at home and in India, we have 
resolved to grant you permission to draw biils upon as on account of our Indian Debts, at the 
rates and to the amount hereinaiter specified. We proceed therefore to give you our direc- 
tions for carrying into effeé this important operation; but, previous to our entering on its 
detail, we think it proper to remark to you, what cannot however escupe your notice, how 
great a reliance we have fhewn by this measure, on sour zeal, integrity and firmness, in the 
adminiftration of the Government entrufted to you. We have adopted this plan from a 
alecided opinion, that our resources are adequate to its support. But we are not ignorant 
that misconduét in our servants may produce a failure in Usose resources, the cousequences 
of which might be in the highett degree detrimental to our incerefts. _We doubt not, that 
this consideration will operate as un additional motive to you for the friGeft and molt un- 
remitting attention to every circumfiance which may diminith our expenses, extend our 
resources, and promote the welfure und prosperity of the provinces under our Government. 
Impressed as we are with the ftrongeft conviction, that by such a line of conda& alone we 
can hope to be relieved from the embarrassments under which we labour, and to answer the 
extensive demands to which we are liable, we call upon you to assift and co-operate with us 
in the great object. We have not been wanting to the ease und relief of our Settlements in 
India, Bt have even subjected ourselves to heavy burthens at home, in order to eftablith their 
-eredit on a firm and latting foundation. On your part we expect an cqual atteation to our 
interefts, and, above all, a rigid and impartial economy ; assuring you of our determination to 
support you to the utmoft in the discharge of a duty which we know to be difficult and 
arduous. 


In the discussion of the subje& matter of this Dispatch, our attention was, in the-firf in- 
fiance, direéted to the amount of the demands which may be made upon ys in India. The 
exaét sum we found ourselves unable to ascertain with accuracy, particularly as epee of whaf 
appears on the ftatements lately received consifts of arrears in accounts not finally adjutted ; 
besides which, we 2onceive there is jut ground te expect, that befure the arrival of this 
Letter, some considerable part, particularly of the Military Arrears, will have been dis- 
charged uut of the Surplus arising from our Revenues, after the reductions made by our 
servants indndia, and those direéted by us in our letter of the 11** of April laft. 