


All these bills, bot for the bonded and the other Debts, are to be drawn at an exchange 
of one filling and eight-pence the Bengal Current Rupee, and at a proportionable rate of 
exchange for the Pageda and Bombay Rupee, to be seitled by our Governor General and 
Council. They are also to be made payable 548 days after date, with an option to the 
Company to poftpone the full payment thereof on paying Lotereft upon them half yearly, 
at the rate of 5 per cent. per annum, from the date of their becoming due, and also in pay- 
ing inflalments of not less than 10 per cent. on the Principal in every year after the 1* 
March 1790, unless it fhall suit our convenience to discharge them by curlier or larger pay- 
ments: and Jor the purpose of rendering those Bills more convenient to the holders, they 
are to be issued to each Creditor in bite of Five hundred pounds aud oue biil for the 
SraGtional part, if any such fhall be owing to'him. 


‘The funds for these payments at home, and for those which are necessary to answer the 
demands which may be made upon us before the above period, muft arise from an increase 
in our Inveftments for that purpose, beyond the sum allotted in our Reports to the House of 
Commons. From every consideration which we have been able to give to the subject, and 
‘on an examination of all-the materials in our possession which might tend to elucidate il, 
particalarly of the observations of our Accomptant General al Bengal on our Reports, we 
are fully convinced that if our Revenues in India ore properly adminiftered, there mutt arise 
a Surplus beyond our reduced efablifhments, amply sufficient for the purpose of this plan, 
On this head, therefore, we have only to repeat our general injunctions, to which we cannot 
too often recur, that. you ‘observe the utmoft economy in every department, aud that you 
pay a proper atteniion to the due collection of the Revenues. é 


With regard to invefting this Surplus and our other funds in India in goods marketable in 
Europe, the amount of such inveftment is a consideration of ng little difficulty. We have 
attended to it, not only with a view to the necessary supply of our sales at home, but also 
in so far as it may affect the propriety of our possessions in India. We conceive that there 
is danger, left by bringing to Europe too large an amount of the Revenues of those Countries 
im goods: for which oo return is made, we thould occasion @ drain which our territories may 
be unable to support; especially after the pressure of those diftresses under which they have 
so recently laboured: on the other hand we observe, that our Accomptant General, in his 
observations ftates, and we think with reason,-the mischief which might, arise from any 
considerable reduction of the sums which have been annuaily difiributed amongft the manu- 
fa@urers of the country, and from which they have derived the means of subsifience and 
the reward of labour and ingenuity. 


We have therefore had recourse to the experience of former years. It appears, that on 
‘an average of five years, ending in .1778,. goods were iuvefted from India for Europe to the 
amount of 120 lacs; and in the two iatt of those years to the amount of 139 lacs of Current 
Rupees, exclusive of what was sent to China, amounting, on an average of the same periods 
to £.67,106, and £.88,928 ; exclusive of what was sent.by our servants, and what was 
remitted through foreign companies on the capitals of our. servants, or brought home in 
specie; of either of which we are able to form no exact eftimate, although many considera- 
tions induce us to believe that they would amouat to a very large sum. Under ali these 
circumftances, when we consider the means of remittance which this plan offers to our 
servants for bringing home their fortunes, and the consequent reduction which muft take, 
place in the trade carried on by foreigners on their capitals; we think that we incor no 
danger of too large a drain on our Indian possessions, by directing an inveltment for Europe 
from all India, to the amount of 150 lacs of current rupees for the ensuing seasva, aud thé 
same for that which will follow it, unless orders to the contrary thal previously be received 
dy you. The diftribution of this to be as follows, viz. 