


10, For the details of the Plan, we beg to refer you to the Accountant's letter. We fhall 
here only add, that from the considerations above flated, and being of opinion that the Plan 
did not, in any respect, interfere with the engagements between Government and its present 
Creditors, we resolved to adopt it, and the Accountant General has been called upon to lay 
before us a Draft of the Rules for the application and management of the Fund. 


—_— 
Appendix, No. 37. d 


Extraét Letter from the Governor in Council of Madras (Public Department), 
dated 19** Oétober 1709. 


a6. THE Governor General having fiated his convidtion of the absolute necessity of adopt- 
ing immediate measures for the rettoration of the credit of the Public Securities ona per- 
maneht basis,-thought no measure better calculated for that purpose, than the efiablifiment 
of a separate Sinkiug Fund for the gradual discharge of the Company’s Debts at this 
Presidency. 

a7. A Commission has accordingly been appointed, according to the recommendation of 
the Governor General, whose proceedings will be conduéied on the principles of the Sinking 
a eftablifhed in Bengal, for liquidating the whole of the Debt in India, on the 3° of 

pril 1798. - ‘ r 7 


Appendix, No. 38. 


: Copy Letter from the Court of Diredtors to the Governor General in Council at Bengal 
+ =. (Public Department), dated 1* June 1803. - 


HAVING taken into our moft mature consideration the present amount of our Indian 

| Debt, ‘and the large charge of Intereft payable thereon, we deem it indispensible, as well for 

the purpose of deriving to our affairs theamportant advantages which muti resuit from an 

eatly reduétion of the rate of Intereft abroad, as’also with a view of relieving India from the 

\ burtbens thrown upon it by the war, to adopt the moft active measures for the liquidation of 

that Debt; and fhould insurmountable obfiacles not oppose themselves to the execution of 

the'measures Hereafter detailed more at length, it appears from tbence, and from the Efti- 

mates we have had before us, that the result may be, that we fhall be able to pay off not less 
than two millions (.£.2;000,000) of the said Debt in each of the two next years. 


That 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. au 


That you may be enabled to frame your measures with a view to the execution of this im= 
portant objeé, we think it proper to apprize you, that it is our determination to sénd out 
from hence such a Supply of Bullion (fhould it be procurable in Europe) in addition to the 
Export of Geods and Stores, as we truft will be more than svfficient, when aided by the 
Surplus Revenue in India, to provide us with an Inveftment in India and China, of at leaf 
£.4,000,000 in each year, the separate appropriation of which will be as follows: 


China, about =o - - = £.2,000,000. 
India, aboug be ty, Hebe s = 2,000,000. 


We eftimate the Funds for the Invefiment as follows: * ¥ 
Surplus Reyenues- = - = = | £. 1,000,003. 
Goods and Stores = 2 = = = 2,060,000, 
Bullion +92 0 * =e rh. 1,000,008. tien 