


CHARLES MILLS, 
London; 15" Sept 1785. 


408 Appendix to 11 REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Appendix, No: 32: 


Extract Letter from Governor General to Secret Committee of Court of Diregtors, 
(on the Finances), dated 16 November 1786. 


‘Pura. 6%, FHE plan of remitting the Debt, suggefied in Europe, if it had succeeded, 
‘would certainly have operated to a diminution, and ultimately to the extinction of all our 
énibarrassments. But however fair the principles on which  ityyas founded, however solid 
the reasons by which it was supported, ithas not answered the Mblic expectations. 


62. Amongtt the causes to which this disappointment is owing, we may enumerate the 
following : the low rate of Exchange ; the remote period held out, for liquidation of the 


Billyon Europe; the advantages made in this country by the purchase of Paper; und the 


superior profit derived from remittances by foreign.channels. 


Appendix, Na. 33. 


Extract Letter from the Court of Direétors to the Governor General in Council at 
Bengal (Separate General Department), dated g1* July 1787. 


Para 47. 1T was on “Hachette + that we transmitied to you, in September 1785, a Plan 
for trensferring-our Indiin Debt te England. 


48. We are urach concerned to find that this Plan has, in a great degree, failed of suc~ 
cess ; but we are {till impressed with the satne convidtion of the advantage to be derived 
from a measure of this mature, provided it be carried into effect in such « manner as not to 
make the compensation to be given by us of anure veal yalue to our Creditors than the aétual 
‘discharge of their Debts in India. : 


49. For it is evident, that even if such payient could now be made by us, some consi- 
dérable diminution would arise to such of our Creditors as were desirous of remitting to 
Europe the amount which they had received ; and it is therefore clearly juft, that a due con- 
sideration fhould be hud of this vireumftauce, when the Company otier to carry on that 
operation for them, and to take upon themselves the expense and risk of the transfer. But 
as there are su aaiy points in the application of this principle which depend.on local and 
temporary circuinftinees, of which we have found it impossible for us to acquire a sufficient 
knowledge, and as wé repose a full and perfect confidence in your zeal, abilities and inte- 
grity, we now authorize you to draw Bills upon us on account of our Indian Debts, including 
those at Bencoolen, for such a sum as, together with those drawn in consequence of the 
orders now referred to of the 25° September 1785, {hall amount in the whole to six crores 
of current rupees, for the acceptance of which we have obtained the consent of the Lords 

‘ommissioners of His Majety’s Treasury, a copy of which is herewith enclosed. 


50. The rate of Exchange at which subscriptions are to be received, és left to your discre- 
Hea but the terms muff, in other respects, be regulated by the following orders ; viz, That 
the Bills hall bear date on a day to be fixed by you, on which day Interett is to cease on 
them in India; and that Intereft at such a rate as you find expedient, notexceeding 5 per 
cent. per annum, (the amount of which muft be considered in fixing the reft of the terms) 
fhall commeice in England at one and a half year after date; that we fhall bind ourselves ‘to 
discharge our Indian Debts so transferted” by half yearly payments of not less than’ 
(£. 500,090) five hundved thotsand pounds in each “payment, to commence from the 
1** September 1790, but that in such payments a preference thall be given to those Creditors 
who have Consenied to the terins offered in our Jeuter of 15% September 1785. ‘The rate of 
exchange with the other Settlements, and ‘the other meusures of detail for carrying these 
orders into execution, we leave as before for your adjufiment. F 