


With respeét to the remaining Arrears, you. are to José no time in adjufting the several 
Accounts on which they may depend, paying particular attention to the nature and juttice 
of the diferent claims; and using every proper mode of enquiry to prevent our being 
charged with any demands for which a juft consideration has not been received. We have 
given similar dire@ions to our other Presidencies, and fhall, after receiving the final account 
thereof, transmit to you our further orders on the subject. 


As we conceive that this measure will preclude the necessity of drawing any. bills upon 
us, except for the execution thereof, we firittly prohibit your drawing bills on any other 
account, except only the usual certificates to Commanders of fhips, And you are also to 
observe, that as this plan has been calculated on a limited sum, you are to dedu& from the 
above amount of 6,00,00,000 Current Rupees, which you are allowed by this Letter to draw, 
the amount of any bills which may have been drawn by you or our other. Governments of 
India, of which we are not now advised: for this purpose we have subjoined an account 
of the lateft advices which we have received of bills drawn from any of our Presidencies. 


Our bonded Debt at Bencoolen is to be included in this operation ; and as that Settle- 
ment has now become a subordinate to Bengal, the Arrears there due are to be included in 
Account of Bengal Arrears. - oo: 


As by the present arrangement we have made so equitable a provision for the remittance 
of the fortunes of our servants in India, we think it incumbent upon us to advert to the A& 
of Parliament of 1783, whereby it is ena@ted, “ That it fhall not be lawful for any servant 
“ of the Eaft India Company, or any other. Britifh subje@ residing in India, to lend avy 
« sum of money to any foreign Company, or to any foreign European Merchant, or to 
“ purchase any goods in. India on the account of such foreign Company or European Mer~ 
“ chant, nor to be concerned in lending any such sums, or purchasing any such goods, or 
“ farnifhing such foreign Company or European Merchaut, with the credit of the bills 
“ drawn upon the correspondents of any such servant or Britith subject, or any other person 
“ ia Europe,” under the penalties inflicted by the said AG. a o 


And therefore we direé you to attend to the provisions of the said Adt in a more especiat 

anner, and to see that they are carried into firict execution. Our servants would at no‘time 
te juttified in departing from the regulations prescribed by Parliament; but would be ttilf 
less so now, becanse they can have no pretence whatever to complain of any supposed bard- 
fhip they might apprehend from a firi@ enforcement of the Act, as an easy and advan- 
tageous channel is opened under the syitem we have here laid down for the remittance of 
such fortunes as may have been juftly and honourably acquired. : 

We are your affectionate Friends, 


W. DEVAYNES, JAMES MOFFATT. 
NATH. SMITH. SAME SMITH Jun‘. 
L, SULIVAN. - HUGH INGLIs, 
THO’ FITZHUGH. JOHN TOWNSON, 
JOHN MOTTEUX, GEORGE CUMING. 
JOHN ROBERTS. JOHN MITCHIE. 
THO® CHEAP. THOMAS PAKRY. 
F, BARING, E. BOEHM. 