


VYVAVVA 


paves 


1,027,209 344,579 


Ealt India House, (Errors excepted.) 
7m June 1811, a s 


Chat Cartwright, 
Acct Gen’ 


"Fourth Report from the Select Committee oni the Affairs of The Eaft India Company. 


Tur Appendix, No. 47—(Further Documents refpecting the Private Trapr)—forms 
a SyprLement; and will be delivered in a few days. . 


2 May 1812, 


"7 
FOURTH REPORT 
FROM quln 
SELECT COMMITTEE 
ox THE 


Affairs of The EAST IN DIA Company. 


—— 


Ordered, by The Uouse of Commons, fo be printed, 10 April 1812. 


a 


The Serecr Commirrex appointed to enquire into the presen 
State of the Affairs of The East India Company, and to report the 
same, as it shall appear to thém, to the House, with their 
Observations thereupon ; and also, their Proceedings from time 
to time to. the House ;. Have, pursuant to the Orders of 
the House, further examined the Matters to them referred ; and 
have agreed upon the following REPORT: 


yor Committee, in their Second and Third Reports, have submitted to the 
House the results of their enquiry into the State of the Affairs of the East 
‘India Company, as far as related to the Receipt and Expenditure of the Treasuries 
‘of the several Presidencies and Settlements in India, during seventeen years, from 
1792-3 to 1808-9 inclusive; and having stated the Ordinary and Extraordinary 
Funds, with the sources from which they were respectively derived, together with the 
application of them, have cndeavoured, in the latter of the above Reports, to shew, 
the general effect produced upon the Balance in India by the various and compli- 
-cated transactions which had been the objects of their detailed exaniination. 


Your Committee anxiously desired to pursue the course of enquiry proposed in 
their Third Report, and complete the investigation of the State of the Finances ge- 
erally, both abroad and at home, during the fast Session of Partiament; but found 
the time insufficient to cnable them to enter so fully into the Financial transactions 
termed those of the [ume Concern, as the importance of the subject rendered in- 
dispensable, notwithstanding the Accounts and Documents connected with. it were 
neither so numerous, nor apparently so complicated, as those which had already been 
brought to the notice of the House. 


Your Committee having already described generally the nature of these Accounts, 
and stated their intention of considering the China ‘Trade, and the Expense of the 
Settlement of the Island of St. Helena in connection with them, now proceed to re- 
‘view these branches of the Company’s Affairs. 


The Home Accounts commence in 1793, and end in 1$10; those of ‘China and 
‘St. Helena in 1792, and terminate in 1809, embracing respectively, like these of 
India, the space of seventeen years. 

The House is already apprized, that although the transactions of the Treasury at 
home are in their cha’ Y ipally Commercial, they are nevertheless clesely in- 
terwoven with others of a Political nature, and that to a degree which yenders the 
Cifficulty of distinct separaticn much greater than has been experienced in the cxa~ 
amination of the Aeccunts confined to the Affairs in India, The manner in which 