


That no possible misunderftanding may exift npon a sibjeé so important to the Company's 
interefts, we think it necessary to. repeat, and specially to direct, that the provision of 
Invefiment to the extent mentioned in the former part of this Letser, that is to sa 
£.4,000,000, (four million of pounds Sterling) is to take place of every other application 
our Funds, whether they aris tony! tus Reveiitie, the Sale of Se hence, 
from Bullion, or from Bills on the Court of Diredtors. ee P ee i; 

- . ee the Fased Tia 

Y@ahwill ‘receikel font timerte tame! infignehtonedar the dire@tow bi cond sith 
reference to this important object; in the meantime we'rely on your tiuking the mo! judici iS 
measures for deriving to our ‘ioangpe al the benefits, both ia the early reduction of Intereit, 
as also'in the favourable Fate of Exeh » which may naturally be expected to resol idle 

rigs we | 
re 


rae 


the application of so large w Sinking Fund in cach year to the liquidation of our 
Debt, ; - we ‘ 


412 Appendix to III‘ RERORT from the Sele& Committee on 


Appendix, No. 39. 


Extract Letter from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Department), 
dated 224 Ociober 1810. 


IT is proper to mention that the amount of the Government Securities redeemed by the 
Commissioners of the Sinking Fund, has been deducted from the Debt of this Presidency at 
both periods, as your honorable Court will observe from the Leiter of the Accountant 
General, recorded on our Proceedings of the 23* March laft, arid from that officer’s Letter 
of the 29" ultimo; iathe proposes to close the Account of the Sinking Fund in the General 
Books, and to-curry at once, to the Credit of the-Acconnt Current London, the amount of 
any Bills which may henceforward be drawn apon your honorable Court, 


Extra@’ Letter from Accountant General: of Bengal to Mr. Secretary Tucker; 
; dated 29 Sept: 1810 :—(Enclosure to the above.) 
The progress of the Sinking Fund has been suspended for a considerable time paft, and 
itis therefore my intention to recommend that the Account be closed on the 3ot April lait, 
and the Securities belonging to the Fund cancelled. Di 


bo phe . 


‘Appendis, No. 40. 


Extra& Letter from the Court of Direétors' to the Governor General in Council 
at Bengal (Public Department), dated g" December 1807. 


Para. 4, WE take this occasion however to observe, that it is very desirable that no more 
Loans fhould be made in India with an option of payment in Englaad, because cireumiflances 
nay exift to render the punctual liquidation of such Debts at home abselutely impracticable. 
The reasoning contained in your Letter in the Public Department of the 23* April 1807, with 
the aneRmens which you have urged in favour ofsuch’an option, have not served to reconcile 
us t syltem, nor to remoye the ftrong objections which we entertain to its continuance. 


Appendix, No. 41. 


‘Extra&t Letter from the Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Department), 4 
| , dated the 14% May 1808. 