


Para. 2. SINCE ovr Dispatch of the above-mentioned date, we have had the honor to re~ 
ceive your honorable Court’s Letter, dated the of* December 1807, im reply to our Dis- 
patches from this Department of the 18'* February, 23" March, 23¢ April, 25° May, and 
theg™June 1807, F sb f ps q 

3. The important points discussed in these Letters, at present occupy our moft serious 
consideration. 


Appendix, No. 42. Snes as 8 
Extract Letter from Governor General in Couineil at’ Bengal (Financial Department), 
f dated 224 O&ober1810. R : i é 


* ¥ eye 
; 


Para. 48. THE operation by which the Optional Loans have been deprived of the privilege 
oF transfer to England, was parti¢ularly explained in our Letter of the 28 May Ire, and 
“we have. great satisfaction in reporting to your honorable Court, that the measure has been 
attended with complete sucess. - ens . 
x sy eee. Thy a + dans St 5, ite 
83... Wehave already had the/honour to mention to your honorable Court, that the firft 
‘ undertaken by us was attended with complete success,'and you will no doubt 
iénce peculiar satisfaction in: learning, that we haye at length accomplifhed what has 
“been $0 long pe ae by you as an objeé of the greateft importance. The pablie Debt of 
>this Presidency has now been placed upon the footifig which was considered by you so 
desirable, and which muft preclude all future solicitude originating in an apprehension of its. 
“sudden transfer to England, fea ell + : 


aa ™ > ¥ i ~ 


e _ the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 413 


Appendix, No. 43. 


Extra& Letter from Governor General in Council at Bengal (Financial Department), 
dated 28% May 1810.° 


Para. WE have lately considered very deliberately, the measures which it might be ex- 
pedient to pursue for the purpose of placing the Debt of India upon the footing so ftrongly 
recommended by your honorable Court, as well as for the purpose of effeéting a reduction 
in the annual charge of Intereft which that Debt bears at present; and having had the 
benefit of a private communication with the Governor General on the subject, we finally 
determined, with the concurrence of his Lordfhip, to adopt a course of measures for the 
accomplifhment of this important object. 


50. The Letter from the Accountant General, which your honorable Court will find » 
recorded on our Proceedings of the 11" infant, fhews the nature of the firft operation which 
we have undertaken, and for your more particular information, we thall explain concisely 
our views in offering to the Public Creditors an opportunity of exchanging the securities at ~ 
present held by them, for notes to be issued on the terms of the advertisement which was 
publifhed on the recommendation of that Officer, 4 


51. The firft and moft important object which we had in view, was, to take from the exift~ 
ing Debt the liberty of transfer to England, and with this view your honorable Court will. 
observe, that the Principal of the new notes is made payable in Bengal only. x 