

as, 5 0 the 


“Cra, 


Appendix, N° 1, 


418 Fourth REPORT from the Seteét Committee on the 


the Rooks have been kept in the latter case, enabled your Committee to make some 
distinction, and to offer such Statements and Results as they trust will have fur- 
nished the means of assisting the judgement of the House in distinguishing the Poli- 
tical transactions from those more sti ctiy Commercial; but in the Home Accounts, 
the entire Receipt and | penditure in cach year is compressed into one gene- 
mal Cash Account, in which, as to the Disbursements particulerly, what is Political, 

v blended toa considerable amount with what is apparently a Charge 
mmercial. ‘This Account has been presented annually to Parliament, 
under the ions of the Act of 1793, accompanied by the Statement of the 
Debits and 3 of the Company at home. Other Accounts have been also pre- 
sented to the Hense (as that entitled the Stock by Computation and the Amount of 
the Sales of Goods in cach year) on distinct motions for the same. These several 
Accounts will form the basis of the investigation proposed to be pursued; but Your 
Comittee will, us occasion nay prescribe, add'to their Appendix such further State- 
ments as shall appear r ite lly to elucidate the subject, and enable them to 
bring the wile to the view of the House in the most intelligible manner. It will 
not be in the power of Your Coumittee to adhere precisely to the course they have 
pursucd in respect to the Indian Accomnts; as upon many occasions recourse must 
be had to e: » for the exhibition of certain results; but in every case the grounds 
of the calculations will be distinctly explained, that the House may judge of the cor- 
s of the principles upon which they are made. 

Itis not however meant by this remark to queftion the propriety of the mode in 
ich the Books of the Company at Home have been kept, or to imply that the 
Accounts piesented annnally to the House unter the directions of the Act, are not 
of a deseription to tuvnish the information intended by the Legistature. « Your Com- 
mittee, on ‘the ec er it due to the Court of Directors to state, that with 
respect to this branch of the Accounts, which is under their more immediate control, 

the | provisions of the Act have been most punctually attended to, both as to the mode 
of Statement (which is upon a very general principle) and the time. The Accounts in 
question appear to have been pr epared i in strict conformity to the system under which 
the Coinpany’s '3 affairs have been ‘conducted, of combined Political and Commercial 
management, the separation of which has not been hitherto required. 


diectly { C 


The Concern in Crna being the most import tant branch of the Commerce of the 
Company, Your Committee will examine the employment of Frnds in that ‘Trade, 
hefure they review the effects produced by it upon the Home Treasury. ‘Phe Ex- 
peuses of the Settlement of the Island of St. Helena, which are principally defrayed 
by Supplies from. England, will be next considered. By this process the enquiry into 
the state of the Company's Affairs abroad will have preceded that of the Home 
‘Treasury, and by a gradual course the combination of the whole, as originally pro- 
posed, will finally be effected. e 