


£. 4,000,000. » 


In suggefting the aboye preportions, it will naturally occur to you, that.it is impossible to, 
foresee with precision the exact amount, either of Exports or of Bullion, which cireumiiances 
may enable us to send from hence ; but-confidently hoping that we may haye it in our power 
to furnifh, in these articles together, a Supply at leaft equal to’the proposed extenty‘and that 
the residue will be forthcoming from the Surplus Revenues in India, it will be your duty to 
take care, that at all events, the purchase of our Inveftment, according to the directions which 
will be hereafter more amply detailed to you, (hall have precedence’ of every other applica~ 
tion of any part of our Funds under your adminiftration, #: $ agk 


Ge 

Tf there fhould occur any disapointment upon this Eftimate, we direét the deficiency of 
the Fupds above pointed out, below four millions, fhall be made up by Bills. of Exchange 
upon the Court of Directors at Home, so-as to complete: un Tuveftment from India and 
‘China, to the amount of four-millions in each year. We hope this will not be the case, 
Dut that, on the contrary, we may be able to procure from Funds properly applicable to the 
reduction of Indian Debt, further Supplyiot Bullion. In whatever. amount the supply of 
Ballion may be extended, or the Indian Surplus may exceed the sum at which itis above 
a you will have Funds to a certain extent disposable towards the liquidation ‘of 

ebt. oi Ai oa TL yigd ‘ay 


Reckoning as we do, therefore, with some degree of confidence upon your being enabled to 
supply above one million, (.€.1,000,000) even in the firft year, from the Surplus Revenue ” 
towards the provision of an Invefiment, and which matt, we fhould hope, be increascd in 
every subsequent year by the saving in the charge of Intereft, we authorize you for the two 
next years to draw Bills on us for such farther sums as may be required, to enable you to) 
Jiquidate two millions (£.2,000,000) of Debt within the year, mayen the/amount of Bills 
drawn for this purpose, including those drawn for the Invefiment, if such fhould be necessary, 
thull in no case exceed the difference between the amount of the value sent out in, Bullion 
and Exports, and the sum of five millions, which is the utmoft extent of Funds whith it is 
heels for us at prefent conveniently to provide, and sct apart at Home for the seryice of © 

ndia in any one,year. In-whatever sum the Surplus Revenue (hall exceed a milligf, ‘a ¢or- 
responding redaction will of course take place in your demands upon us, six millions being 
the aggregate annual sum which muft be realized in your Treasury, for the puFposes "of In+ 
vefiment and liquidation of Debt. Z en 


‘ ¥ 5 ee Sh rth . 
We fhall take care to keep: you accurately informed of ‘the ai wiht of Bullion and Ex-" % 
ports which may be in progress of exportation frombence,,so’ that youymzy know before 
pe with precision, how to proportion your Dills accordingly, taking care to include in the 
above sum whatever may be payable in this country, either for Principal or’ Intereft upon s~ 
* the Decennial and other Loans, which may be remitted to Europe; and you may be assured, 
that it will be our endedvour to send: out as liberal a Supply of Bullion as possible, in order 
that you may not be driven to the necessity of drawing Bills to an extent which muft have ) 
an injurious effeét upon the rate of Exchange. E | 