


The produce of the Chinese Empire, immediately the object of the trade of the 
Company, consists at present only of ‘I'cas, Silk, and Nankeens. In former years 
China-ware was purchased to a considerable amount, but was relinquished in conse- 
quence of the improvement of the British manufacture, which has superseded the 
necessity of the.importation of that of China. 


The extent of this branch of the Company’s Commerce, with the result of it, and 
-the Funds by which it has been carried on, will be brought into view in other parts of 
this Report. Your Committee will therefore only add in this place, that.a consider- 
able part of those Funds was produced by Exports from this Country in Woollens and 
Metals, carried to the utmost extent that, from: the best information, it was conccived 
.the market.in China would.admit. ~ : 


Ab Account of the Expenses of the Factory of Canton having been annually pre- 
sented to Parliament during tie period to which the present enquiry is directed, 
Your Committee have thought proper to add to the Appendix a Statement com- 
prizing in one view the whole of these Accounts. This Statement exhibits the Charges 


of the Factory, as far-as relates tothe Salaries, &e. and the accommodation of the - 


Supra-Cargoes and others employed in the business of it, and the Expenses attend- 
ing the receipt and delivery of the Goods imported and exported ; . but it should be 
remarked, that it includes the emoluments of the Supra-Cargocs in part only, the 
remainder being made up in England in full of the commission allowed to them on 
the sale of the goods ; and that the amount of Charge as shewn in the Statement now 
adverted to, is uniformly added to the Invoice Price of the goods. There is, however, 
a further apparent Expenditure not included, which comes under the denomination 
of Loss, which will hereatter be more distinctly noticed. 


Your Committee having thus explained the principles upon which the Company's 
Commereial intercourse with China may be said to exist, and has been conducted, 
will examine this very important branch of the Concern as directly connected with 

*the Financial Affairs of the Company in India and in England, together with the 
+ final Result in existing property, as it applies to the Factory at Canton exclusively, 
for the period in question. 


The Sources from which the Funds realized in the Treasury at Canton were 
derived, are of two Kinds;. first, Supplies from the Indian Presidencics ; secondly, 
Supplies from England. 


The 


Curva, 


Appendix, N°1. 


Appendix, N® 2. 


Appendix, N° 3. 


420 Fourth REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


Cursa, The former have already becn brought to the notice of the House by Your Com- 
‘ ag, Mittee in their Jast Report, in which the net amount of the Supply to Canton by 
8! Report. p. 364, NEES An a oe cbon adaearenen ‘ ties th 
‘Appendix to g¢_ the Indian Presidencies was shewn, in order to account for the employment of the 
Report,N“15416, Funds which came into the Treasuries of these Presidencies. But it must be 
observed, that the Accounts from which that view was given, being necessarily and 
properly drawn from the books kept at the Presidencies of India respectively, will 
not be applicable to the purpose now in contemplation, without a more laborious 
investigation of the detail, on a comparison with the books of the Factory at Canton, 
than the time of Your Committee would admit, or indeed is at all required. It has 
therefore been thought proper to call fur Accounts prepared from the Factory books, 
as affording the best means of attaining the end ity view, viz. the Receipt and Appli- 
Appendices, N° 4 cation of the K ‘unds of the Canton Treasury. By these Accounts, which are inserted 
Gee in the Appendix, it appears that India is credited in those books for Supplies, by 
g Lills of Exchange, Lullion, and consignments of Cotton, Sandal Wood, &c. to 
Appencix, N° 4. the amount of £. 4,946,393. and that india is debited for Returns by Canton in 
various ways, but principally by consignments of Bullion, which the necessities of the 
: former required at the periods they were made, amounting together to the sum of 
Appendix, Xe 5. £, 2,069,232; making a Balance in favour of India, or shewing the net Supply by 
: India to have amounted to the sum of £. 2,877,161, which is less by £. 430,493 
than the net amount stated trom the Account in the Appendix to the Third Report, 
which was drawn from tbe books of the Indian Presidencies. ‘This difference is 
principally to be attributed to the remittance of Bullion from England originally 
destined to China, but arrested in transitu and applicd to the service in India, as 
* Report, pp. 262 adverted- to in that Report, for which remittance Canton credited England and 
& 364. debited Pengal. 7 
Your Committce having observed some transactions to have occurred between the 
Settlement of the: Island of St. Helena and this Factory, think it right to notice 
" Appendix, N°6. them in this place. The Supply received from St. Helena amounted to £. 29,039, 
Appendix, Ne7. and the Consignments made to that Tsland to the sum of £.110,730, making a 
balance in favour of Canton to the amount of £. $1,697. 