

‘The connection-of the Company with China is entirely ‘of a Commercis! nature, 
and although any lenathened explanation of the principles upon which this highly 
imports at branch of th ‘cmmercial economy is conducted inay be superfluous, 
ar nature of it presctibes the propricty of offering some general remarks 
uation of the Liouse. 

‘Trade witly China has for a very long period formed a part of the exclusive 

yy ge of, the Company, and has been carried: on upon principles conducive, in a 
very ctuinent degree, not only to the advantage of those embarked in it, but likewise 
terests of the British Empire in its Revenue, in the emp! loyment of its 
re dina steady end continned demand for its Manufactures. It is never- 
jess fact universally known, that the Company have no footing whatever in 
China coming under the denomination of permanent; that the intercourse with the 
Merchants of that extensive Empire is very limited, being exclusively confined to a 
sinall Pactory.in the vicinity of the City of Canton, occupied by the sufferance of the 
Court of Pekin, under strict regulations, designating the parties with whom, andthe 
‘manner in which the Trade is to be conducted. ‘The Fu ‘actory of Canton may there: 
fore be considered as the place of mere occasional residence for the convenience o| 
the Agents of the Company in their transactions with the Merchants, ‘who are termed 
Hong) ferchants, expressly licensed by the Chinese Government to have dealings with 
them. These MM Merchants re very limited in number, being in 1793 twelve, and 


The 


-in 180$ fourteen. 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 419 


The official designation of the Agents of the Company is that of Supra-Cargoes. 

‘hey are united in one Commission, aud gencrally the four Senior are termed the 
President and Select Committee, who are assisted in the transaction of the busi- 
ness of the Factory by the remainder, and by Writers and others holding sub- 
ordinate appointments, the whole being under special covenants for the periormance 
of the duties committed to them respectively. A description of the several persons 
thus employed is added to the Appendix. ‘I'he residence of the Supra-Cargoes and 
their Assistants at the Factory is only during the season of their intercourse with the 
Chinese Merchants, for receiving and paying for the produce of the Country. The 
purchases of this produce used to bein part made by the barter of the Woollens 
and Metals consigned from England, and in part by Cash. But for some years this 
plan has been altered, and an absolute sale has been made of the Exports of this 
Country, the produce of which, combined with the other Funds of the Canton Trea~ 
-sury, is applied to the discharge of the demands ofthe Merchants of China, for the 
goods supplied by them. 


The business of the Season being finished, and the ships laden and dispatched on 
their return to England, the Supra-Cargoes retire from .the Mactory to the Island 
of Macao, a Settlement belonging to the Portuguese, where. they continue till the 
opening of the ensuing Season. The periods of the commencement and close of the 
‘Season are. not distinctly laid down, being affected by various contingencies; and as 
to what is termed the official year according to the books of the Factory, Your 
Committee find that no precise period has ever been fixed for its definition; but the 
balancing of them has generally been governed by the conclusion of the Season, which 
has been most communly in the months of February or March. ‘The species of 
Coin made “use of in the books of the Factory, are Tales, Mace, and Candarines, 
which are nominal. The common valuation of the Tale being at 6s, 8d. Sterling, 
will be assumed in the sequel of this Report. 