


As to the Consignments from China, the same difficulty does not exist; the trans- 
actions of the Canton Treasury being totally Conimercal, the entire amount of the 
Bills drawn by the Supra-Cargoes must be supposed to have been applied to the 
purchase of the goods, and consequently the whole of the difference arising, upon 
the principle now under consideration, is chargeable to the ‘Trade, and is an addition 
to the Prime Cost. The Amount of the Bills drawn, according to the exchange in the 
Estimate, was £.7,569,944; and the sum actually paid on those Diils was 
£.8,566,378, consequently the Invoice price will be increased and the Profit 
lessened in the sum of £.996,434. ee) 


The total deduction to be made from the Profvexhibited in the Estimate, will be 
found to amount to £. 1,517,233; so that the net Profit will then be £. 20,438,159 ; 
which is the sum to be assumed as the Result of the homeward-bound Trade of the 
Company, in so far as it has been productive of Funds in aid of the general opera- 
tions of the Treasury in England. : 

The Result thus shewn is merely the Profit upon the Goods in one view. The 
entire of the Commercial Profits of the Company, and a General Result on the whole 
of their Commercial Concerns, is a question far more extensive, which it is intended in 
another part of this Report to consider, and to submit to the House the best view 
that tlhe documents procured by Your Committee will admit, in order to shew what 
may be supposed (upon principles which will be explained) to have been the powers 


of 


Home Accounts, 


Appendix N* 10 
it & 26. 


Appendix, N° 26. 


Append’x, N°10. 


Home Accounts, 


Appendix to 
34 Report, Ne1g. 


Appendix, N° 27. 


Appendix, N° 25. 
N°26. 


Appendix, N° 25. 
Ppa Xe 10. 


Cap. 59. 


428 Fourth REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


of the Commerce as applied to its own immédiate Concerns during the period in 
question. 


The partial view already given of the Profits being purposely confined to their 
effect at home, the Disbursements in India termed Commercial Charges not added 
to the Invoices, amounting to £.2,916,279, have not been taken into the present 
calculation; they will however be brought to account hereafter. 


The nature of these Charges has been adverted to in the Third Report of Your Com- 
mittee; as well as the duties of the Boards of Trade, and the Officers under them at 
the several Presidencies, the Pay and Allowances of which Departments they include. 
It is clearly just that the largest proportion of the sum now stated, should be deemed 
a Charge upon the goods purchased in India under the superintendence of these De- 
partments, and from being in fact an addition to the Invoice cost of the goods, must 
tend, pro tanto, to diminish the Amount assumed as the Profit on the Trade; but the - 
difficulty of determining the sum that may be so charged to the goods exclusively, is 
great, if the general duties of the Boards of Trade is taken ‘into consideration. These 
duties, including the direction of the manufacture of Salt and Opium at Bengal, the 
Customs at that Presidency, and in part at Madras, cannot be considered as exclu- 
sively Commercial, independent of the consideration that the Marine Department, and 
the business of providing Shipping for Political purposes, are under its conduct. 