


is the-difference between the computed Demands and the actual Payments, respecting 
which an exact agreement between the amount of the Sales and the Receipts is not 


to be expected on various accounts, but particularly on that of Re-sales, which are- 


occasionally made in consequence of purchasérs not fulfilling the conditions of the 
Sale. It is satisfactory however to find in so extensive an amount the deficiency so 
small as that now stated, being only 7%d. per cent, which Your Committee cannot 
but observe suggests an impression highly favourable to the management of this branch 
ot the Commercial Concerns of the Company. 


The Receipts on Sales made of Private Trade and Neutral, &e. Goods, compared 
with the Sale Amount, is reserved for consideration iv another part of this Report. 


Your Committee having shewn the nature and extent of the Trade of the Com- 
pany, will next proceed to the examination of the Result of it upon their Finances, 
or in other words of the Profit derived from it. ‘This point, in so far as the Trade 
from India is concerned, has led to such variety of opinions, and has been the 
subject of so much controversy amongst those whose general information on Com- 
mercial subjects and particular acquaintance with the Trade in question gives their 
opinions great authority, as to render any conclusion that may be offered a matter 
of considerable delicacy, it being hardly possible that any decision between the con- 
flicting parties should escape objection. 


It would be obviously hopeless to arrive at any determination respecting the Profit 
alluded to, from the Statements already the subject of discussion, as they ouly shew 
the Sales, the Receipts and the Payments made, with the Proceeds, as a simple 
Balance of Cash from year to year, according to the system upon which the Com- 

iny’s Concerns have been uniformly conducted; which, owing to its being so 
intimately involved with the affsirs of the Territories in India, cannot be properly 
termed a mere Commercial one. This circumstance necessarily imposed modes of 
arrangement and management most conducive to the interests of both. The com- 
bination of these interests having so repeatedly been brought to the notice of the 
House, Your Committee only here make a reference to it in order to justify the 
necessity of resorting to calculations upon Estimate, for the purpose of affording 
any intelligible view of the Result or Profit upon the Import Trade of the Company 
from India and China. 


Your Committee are fully aware of the objections that may be started to this 
mode of calculation, if it be contemplated on principles abstractedly Commercial, in 
as much as, upon. those principles, the Profit or Loss upon Commercial adventure, 
ought to be ascertained with strict precision; but they trust that the observations 
already made will explain why this is absolutely impracticable, and those observa~ 

tions 


Homs Accounts, 


Appendix, N° 22. 


Appendix, N° 23. 
Ibid. 