

our 


“Se. Henena,. 
pila 


Appendix, N° 19. 
& 20, 


N& 5&6. 


Appendix, N°23. 


Ibid. 


Homgz Accounts. 


Appendix, N° 22. 


424 Fourth REPORT from the Sele& Committee on the 


Homz Accounts. Your Committeee into some detail, although their observations are not designed to 
a ee apply so much to the principles upon which the Commercial affairs of the Company 
are conducted, as to the Receipt and the Employment of the Funds in a financial 
view. ni 
Your Committee have likewise caused a statement of the Debts and Assets to 
be drawn up, shewing at one view the Amount of them respectively during the whole 
of the period. It will be remarked both in the detail and totals, that the first and 
last years of the Statement are somewhat different from the Accounts originally 
presented by the Company. The differences are to be ascribed to their having 
obtained a more accurate comparison of the periods, by balancing the Accounts at 
corresponding dates, so that at each period a precise conformity as to the official 
year, both abroad and at home, should be established. ‘The Home Stock Account 
delivered in 1793, was made up to January instead of March, and the adjustments 
of the Indian Accounts at various dates. The Stock Account in 1810, though balanced 
as to the Home Concerns to March, was made up in reference to the Foreign Concern 
at discordant periods. These adjustments of the foreign Accounts in both instances 
could not be avoided, from the necessity of calculating the Stock by Computation in 
. the Home Accounts on the latest advices received at the time. The general State- 
” Appendix, N° 23. ment of the Debts and Assets thus corrected is added to the Appendix. 


The Funds of the Home Treasury on the Company's account, exhibited on the 
Appendix, N°22. Receipt side of the General Statement first referred to are of various descriptions; 
: the amount of the Sales of Goods from India and China; Monies raised upon the 
credit of the Company, on Bonds and on Capital Stock ; Charges and Profit on Private 
Trade; Re-payments by His Majesty’s Government on Advances and Disbursements 
by the Company on account of the Public, abroad and at home; and Receipts on 
sundry Accounts not necessary to be detailed. ‘The Application of these Funds will 
be attended to in its proper place. 


The first head-of the Account which will be adverted to, shews the Amount received 
from year to year on the Sale of Goods, embracing one of the most prominent objects 
‘of the present enquiry and Report; viz. the whole of the Trade of the Company from 
India and China. 


“The consideration of this subject will naturally induce the examination of the nature, 
-extent and result, of the Import Trade of the Company. It will likewise afford an 
opportunty of ‘bringing into view the nature and extent of the Imports by Private 
Traders, or in the way of Neutral Commerce, &c. under the Act of 1793, and 
other Acts, by which the entire Sale Amount of the Imports into the port of London, . 
from India and China, during the period in question, will be ascertained. 