


426 Fourth REPORT from the. Select Comimittee on’ the 


Home Accounts. tions will be admitted as suggesting a sufficient excuse for the mode which they feel 


Appendix to 
Exposition, B. see. 
2¢ Report, p. 65. 


Appendix, N° 25. 


themselves under the necessity of adopting, unless what in their judgment is a very 
material feature of their enquiry should be entirely passed over. 


Tt may not however be improper t® remark, in more detailed: illustration of the 
necessity of having recourse to calculation by estimate, that the Shipping employed 
by the Company have, in conformity with their system, been for the most part, 
during a very long period, constructed for Warlike as well as Commercial service ; 
and have been frequently, and in fact constantly used for Political purposes, either 
in conveyance of Troops and Military Stores, or in Expeditions against the Posses- 
sions of the Enemy. The part ofthe Freight therefore chargeable to the Trade can 
only be ascertained by estimate. Further, a practice has prevailed, whether correct 
or not Your Committee do not pretend to determine, of charging the largest propor- 
tion of the whole Freight of the voyage to the homeward-bound trade, ‘The Charges 
also directly appertaining to the Trade are so interwoven with those of a Political 
nature, that it would be extremely difficult to make a separation ; it has been there- 
fore the practice to calculate a certain part of the General Charges in England as 
‘Commercial, assuming § per cent. on the Gross Sale Amount of the Goods as the 
fair proportion so chargeable. The difficulty of ascertaining the particular Fund 
from which the purchase of the Goods was made, might likewise be mentioned, 
from the effect which would be preduced upon the Invoice price of them in the rate 
of Exchange. 4 


From these several causes, but more particularly from those applying to the 
Freight and Charges, such difficulties have ever existed in the way of celculating the 
Profit or Loss on the Trade“upon actual Accounts, that the custom has obtained of 
shewing them-upon estimate. Estimates of this description have, on many occa- 
sions, been laid upon the Table of the House, and particularly on the renewal of 
the Company’s Charter in 1793. So late as the Session of 1810, the Court of 
Directors inserted in the Appendix to an Exposition of the state of the Company's 
Finances, a computation of the Profits upon the Trade, drawn upon similar prin- 
ciples. It must be remarked, however, that the Invoice price of the Goods, in the 
several doctments now adverted to, is calculated with reference to the Exchange 
on such part of the purchase as was made by Monies procured for Bills upon the 
Company in England. 

As the Result proposed to be shewn, canriot therefore be ascertained otherwise 
than upon estimate, the attention of Your Committee has been particularly directed to 
the principle to be observed in the framing of such Estimate. In respect to the 
Freight and Charges upon the goods, they do not at present see reason to depart from 
the course usually pursued ; but as regards the Invoice price of the goods, upon every 
consideration connected with the plan which has been laid down in the prescnt 
enquiry, and as applicable to the general combination proposed to be made of 
the Result of the Financial operations. abroad.and at home, itis desirable that the 
Disbursements from the several ‘Treasuries in India and China,. for the purchase of 
Goods, as shewn in the Invoice Amount of such as were brought to sale, should uni- 
forusly be converted into Sterling moncy at the same rate of exchange used in the 
several Accounts that have been hitherto the objects of examination. 