


the balance remaining in 179% with that in 1809. The sum expended so as to cause- 


an increase in Stores, &c. falling under the head of Dead Stock, amounted. to 
£-62,589, the application of which sun will cause the Disbursements to exceed the 
Funds now stated by £.645. Your Committee do not deem it necessary to direct 
their further attention to the means of reconciling this small difference. og 
: —_!,, 

Your Committee now proceed to examine the AccouxTs of the Treasury n Ene~ 


LAND, or the General Result as it has affected the interests of the Proprietors of India, : 


Stock as well as those of the Public. It has already been observed that the Home 
Accounts presented annually to Parliament, in pursuance of the Act of 1793, are 
only two, denominated, “ Annual Account iriade up to the 1st day of March (in each 
“ year) containing the Amount of the Proceeds of the Sales of Goods and Merehandize 
of the East India Company in Great Britain, and of their Commercial and other 
“ Receipts, Charges and Payments, in Great Britain, under the several heads thereof ;” 
and “ A Statement of their Bond Debts, and Simple Contract Debts, with the rates of 
“ Tnterest they respectively carry, and the Amount of such Interest, and the State 
“ of Cash remaining in their ‘Treasury, and other effects appertaining to the Company 
* in Great Britain and afloat.” 


._ The former of these Accounts contains the entire Receipt and Expenditure of the 
Cash of the East India Company in course of the year, including the Receipts and 
Payments on the account of Private Traders, which by the Act are to pass through 
the medium of the Company. As further observations will hereafter be necessary 
upon this point, all that is at present requisite is, a general explanation of the Account 
as it relates to the Company's Concerns exclusively. A cursory inspection of this 
Account will shew the Sources from whence the Funds were derived, and the: mode 
in which they were applied in the conduct of the Affairs of the Company. : 


Your Committee have caused the whole of the Accounts which have’ been presented 
tothe House from year to year, during the period under examination, to be drranged 
and drawn up inone General Statement, distinguishing the Company’s Concerns from 
those of Private Traders, By this mode a view inay at once be taken of the whele of 
‘the: Cash Transactions of the ‘lreasury in England; from the ist:March 1793.t0 the 1st 
March 1810, and the examination may be made how far the :prescriptions of the 
Regulating Act of 1793, and of subsequent Acts,. have been complied with: - In 
oxder.to render the view more complete, as well as to preserve uniformity in their 
enquiry, Your Committee have, according to the plan adopted in their Second: 
Report in respect to. the Indian branch ofthe Accounts, introduced: a column: 
shewing the Estimate'produced by the Court of Directors in the. year -1.793,: upanr 
which the, arrangements were made, and'the expectations were grounded in referene¢* 
to their, financial Affairs; in. England. This, Statement’ is added to.:the Appeadixs 
tbe gopsideration of it under the heads itito which it divides itself will pe 