


For a more detailed explanation of the various functions imposed on these 
Departments, Your Committee beg leave to call the particular attention of the 
House to a Statement delivered in by one of its Members, and inserted in the 
Appendix. , : : 


The examination of the detail of the Estimate from which the Result upon the 
Company’s Trade has been produced, renders some further explanation requisite; 
and first, in reference to the general connection of this Estimate with the Statement 
which has been before referred to, in order to shew the nature and extent of the 
Trade as exhibited by the gross produce of the Sales, that the difference between the 
produce thus stated, and the Amount in the Estimate, is in part to be ascribed to the 
effect of re-sales, and in part to the sale of Rice and Wheat not brought to account 
in the Estimate. : , 


The extent ofthe Trade from India and China has been shewn by the produce of 
the Sales of the goods from thence. ‘The extent of this Trade, according to the sum 
annually embarked in it, so as to produce this Sale Amount, is to be ascertained by 
reference to the Estimate now brought forward, by which the Prime Cost of the goods 
imported from India and brought to sale, appears'to be £. 23,060,334. ; adding the 
difference in the rate of Exchange £. 520,799, the Total is £. 23,581,133, and is the 
Amount employed during the seventeen years.in the purchase of goods from India, and 
brought to sale, being on an average £. 1,387,125. 


The Prime Cost of goods imported from China was, on the same principle, 
4, 27,157,066 ; difference in rate of Exchange £. 996,454; Total £. 28,153,500, 
which is onan average £. 1,656,088. 

The whole of the Amount so employed during the period, is £. 51,734,633, and 
shews the extent of the Trade upon this principle, trom whence it will re-uit that the 
anual Expenditure for the purchase of goods from India and China, as far as they 
have been brought to sale in England, was upon an average £. 3,043,214. 


It will be remarked that after tse year 1798-9 the Customs stated in the Estimate 
to have been paid upon the good: “mported from India, amount to much less than in 
former years. Your Committee having examined into the cause of this difference, 
find that it is not to be imputed to a positive defalcation in the Duties levied on the 
importation of goods from India, but to.an alteration in the mode of their payment, 
in consequence of an Act passed in the year 1799, iatituled, ““ An Act for permitting 
“ certain Goods imported from the East Indies to be warehoused, and for repealing 
“ the Duties now payable thereon, aud granting other Duties iv lieu thereof.” 


An explanation of the particular causes which led to the passing of this Act, is to 
be found in several documents already upon the Table of the House, which were 
presented end printed in. pursuance of their Orders of 12th, 15th and 18th June 
1801, ‘These documents comprize a Memorial from the Directors of the East 
India Company to the Lords of the Treasury, dated 7th May 1797, on the subject of 