


The Receipts from Government, in’ payment of Advances and Supplies to the 
service of the Public, having been so amply discussed in the Reports of Your Com- 
mittees in 1805 and 1808, Your Committee do not feel it necessary to dwell on 
this bead, nor do they deem it requisite to do more than merely mention the other 
head of the Receipts from Government for the purchase of Hemp in India for His 
Majesty's Service. 


‘The sum stated to have been received upon the Loyalty Loan, amounting to 
£.1,727,122. is the Sale Produce of the Portion of that Loan which became possessed 
by the Company as Subscribers. The payment side of the Account shews the 
Amount of the Advance upon this account to have been £. 1,835,000; consequently, 
on this view, a Loss was incurred by the transaction, amounting to £.107,878. 


Passing over the several other subordinate heads of Receipt, as not requiring particu- 
lar notice, Your Committee proceed to examine the Funds which were raised upon the 
Credit of the Company, the first of which is the Receipt on the increase of the 
Capital Stock, amounting to £. 2,027,295. The Capital Steck of the Company, 
at the commencement of the year 1793, amounted to the sum of £. 5,000,000, 
bearing an Interest of 8 per cent. perannum. By the Act of the 33d of His present 
Majesty, cap. 47. sect. 8. & 13. the Company were empowered to casas thet 

Sapital 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. °: 433 


every one hundred pounds of Capital, or at snch other 
tors of the Company, with the approbation ef the Lords 
ivect. And in another Act of the samo year, cap. 52. 
sect. 131 and 124, the Dividends or Interest payable upon the Capital was in- 
creased to the rate of ten and a half per cent.; a principle was also laid 
said Aci sich, alter the specified appropriations of the net proce 
Company's affairs should have been satistied, the remaining proceeds were to be 
applied to the © went of a Fund, as a guarantee to the holders of Capital 
Stock, to the ex 


nt of ‘Twelve millions Sterling; but as the state of affairs never has 
been such as to admit any payment on account of this Fund, any remark on the 
subject would be superfuous. 

The Amount above stated is the only sum received on the increase of the Capital 


Stock of the Company ing the period in question, notwithstanding perniission was 
granted by the Act of the 37th of His present Majesty, cap. 31. to incroase the 
Capital then standing at six millions, by raising two additional millions upon the 
same conditicns as those which applicd to the existing Capital by the Act of the 
334, cap. 52. 

One of the stipulations of the Act of the 33d, cap. 47. was, that of the Money so 
to be raised, a part was to be reserved for the purpose of reducing the Bond Debt of 
the Company to the sum of £.1,500,000; and certain modifications or restrictions 
have, by subsequent Acts, been imposed upon the increase of Capital allowed under 
the Act of the 37th, which, as relating to the extent to which the Company are 
allowed to “use their Credit in raising a Loan on Londs, will fall more properly 
under consideration with the enquiry into the state of their Bond Debt. 