


are rep: 
veral 


In the years 1804-5 the Resting by the Company for the Duty on Tea are first 
introduced into the Statement of their Cash Receipts, In that year the sum of 
£.500,000 only is brought into the Aceount, but the Balance in the Company's 
hands on those Duties appe sto have been added to the Cash Balance at the com- 
mencement of the following year 1805-6; to which cireumstance the diiference 
between the Balance remaining at the close of 1804-5, and that stated at the com- 
mencement of 1805-0, is to be attributed, the former being £. 12,020, and the latter 
£ 572,628. From this period the entire "Receipts and Payments of these Duties are 
inserted in this Statement; so that trom 1804-5 to 1809-10, the sum which passed 
through the ‘Treasury ou Reccipts of this description amounted to £. 17,080,166. It 
was however paid over to the proper Departinents of Government, betwee n 1805-6 
and 1809-10, to the Amount of £. 16,454, 358. as appears by the other side of the 
Account, and the difference, being £. 6 5,808, is found in the Statement of Debts 
included in what is due for Customs and Excise.on the 1st March 1$10. It is un- 
necessary to enter into any detail respecting the particular rates of these Duties. 
Your Conuittee will therefore confine themselves to giving some explanation of the 
mode of levying them, under which the Treasury of the Company i is the medium of 
their passing into the hands of the Commissioners of Excise and the Collector of 
Customs. ‘This praétise commenced under the Act of the 24th of His present’ 
Majesty, cap. 38. sect. 2, which directs the Duties then enacted, being a per centage 
oa the Gross Amount of the Sales of Tea, to be received by me Company, who are to 

pay 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 435 


pay the same into the Offices above mentioned within forty days after each quarterly Home Accounts. 
Sale. From this circumstance it has occasionally happened that a Balance accrued — 
‘in the hands of the Company. It could only remain, however, a_ short time as 
the directions of the Act were imperative in reference to the period of payment, and, 
no delay could take place without the pei ion of the Lords of the Treasury. Your 
, tee have considered it a part of their duty to enquire into the cause of the 
‘oduction of the Receipt and Payment of these Duties, heretofore kept distinct, 
into the Accounts of the Company, and the reason why the Payment in 1807-8 
particularly was so far below the amount of the Reccipt. The general answer to 
tue enquiry upon these points arises for the most part out of the situation of the Com- 
pany’s financial aflairs at these periods, in consequence cf the large advances made by 
theta at home and abroad for the service of the Public, the payment ef which was 
g to a difference of opinion upon the principle of the demand between 
y's Goverament and the Company, which was only at last settled by an 
of the House of Commons in the year 1805, on whose 
Report a million was voted to the Company upon account, and the detail of their 
Claims ordered to be examined by Accountants, to be nominated by the Lords of 
the Treasury and the Company, on their respective parts, In the Session 1806 i* Report, p. 5. 
another million was voted to the Company, on the Report of the Accountant to the 
‘Treasury that it was less than their Claim; but the Account between the Company 
and the Public was not fully made up till the year 1808, whca on the Report of your —_4* Report. 
Committee a vote passed for £. 1,500,000. the Balance according to the Accounts 
then presented. During the remainder of the period under review, the payment of 
these Duties has been made according to the directions of the Act, with the oxcep- 
tion of £.1 30,000, which becoming due in January 1810, was pestponed till the Appondix, N° st. 
7th of February following, when it was discharged. The suux due upon this accouat 
in March 1810, arises out of the common course of the transactions, and the sus- 
pensions or accommodations as to time occasionally granted to the Company, appear Ibid. 
to be justified by the circumstances, 
The agsregate of the several heads of Receipt in the Home Treasury, between the 
years 1793-4 and 1$09-10, including the Balance of Cash on ist March 1793, and 
the Balance of the Tea Duties in March 1805, appears by the Statement to have 
amounted to thé sum of £. 143,593,248. Deducting from this sum the amount bor- Appendix, N° 22 
rowed or raised on the credit of the Company, the Tea Duties, and the sum advanced 
by Government for the purchase of Hemp, it will be found that the affairs of the 
Company, partly Political, but mostly Commercial, produced the Receipt of Monies 
oto the Home ‘Treasury to the Amount of £.115,643,987. Ibid. 
ne 
Having thus ascertained the sum received, Your Committee have directed their 
attention to an examination of the purposes to which it was applied, as exhibited on 
‘the Payment side of the Account. Jt must be premised, however, that the expendi- 
ture immediately connected with the Reccipts of Monies raised on Bond or by Loan 
from the Bank, will be passed over without any further remark; also that their 
observations will be merely directed to the principal heads cf Disbursement, or such 
as are conccived to require particular explanation. 