

reyguladng 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. acy 


regulating the Duties on East India Goods, with sundry Papers annexed ; 
Memorial of the Merchants and principal Agents in England for persons r r 
the Kast Indies, to the Lords of the ‘I'reasury, dated May 1797, sctting forth the 
advantages that would arise from lowering the Duties on East India CGroods; and 
another Memorial of the Merchants, Buyers of Goods at the Kast India Company, 
Sales for exportation, to the Lords of the Treasury, dated the 31st May 1797, 
tating their entire acquiescence in the reasonings contained in the Memorial of the 
Court of Directors. ‘The principal objects of the respective Memoriaiists appear to 
have heen the removal of some serious impediments to the effect intended to be pro- 
duced by the Regulating Act of 1793; by which removal such a facility would be 
afforded to the export ot India Goods to the Continent, as effectually to maintain a 
compeiition in the markets with Foreign ‘Traders. Circumstanced as the ‘Trade was, 
the purchaser of the goods at the Sales was obliged to employ a capital to the extent 
of the Sule price, including the Duties payable on them, a drawback being returned 
on their exportation. Some advantage was likewise expected to be derived as to the 
goods sold for home consumption. 


The proposition of the Court of Directors thus acquiesced in by all the parties 
interested in the Trade, was that all goods from India and China, except Tea, 
should be allowed to be imported and warchoused without being subject to any Duty 
till sold, and then to be subject only to a positive Duty of 2 per cent. on the Sale 

. Value, to be paid by the Company out of the Sale Price, and to remain with the Crown, 

whether the goods were exported or not. The goods taken out of the warehouse for 
home consumption to be subject to the amount then payable, a3 also to the 2 per 
cent. additipnal Duty. . 

Such were the general principles upon which the Act above adverted to was 

founded ; and the sum inserted in the column of Customs upon - the goods since the 
“time of passing the Act is to be considered as the Amount paid from the Company's 
‘Treasury upon those principles, exclusive of the Duty upon ‘Tea, but of course is not 
to be looked upon as the entire Revenue derived from the Company’s Trade, the 
remainder being paid by the purchasers on clearing the goods for home con- 
sumption. 

The principle upon which the Freight of .the goods is estimated has been already 
adverted to, it only now remains again to remark, that it is doubtful .whether it is 
perfectly correct to charge more Freight upon the Imports than actually belongs to 
them, because the accuracy of the Result, as applicable to them exclusively, is thereby 
questionable. 

The Charges being estimated at 5 per cent. on the Gross Sale Amount, as already 
stated, certainly bears the appearance of an arbitrary calculation, and in fact may be 
so considered. It should however be here observed, that from an anxiety to ascer- 
tain how far the calculation thus made has been justified by the Charge actually in- 
curred within the period, Your Committee have called for an Account of the portion 
of the sum disbursed, under the general head of Charges Merchandize, which may 
justly be considered as chargeable to the Commercial branch of the Company's affairs 
athome. ‘The Total of these Charges on the goods in the Estimate is £. 5,135,409. 
The ‘Total of the adjusted Commercial Charges is £. 5,969,786 ; respecting which it is 
to be observed, that from the Company incurring many Charges of a Commercial 
nature exclusive of those dircctly on their Imports, it may be inferred that the pro- 
portion thus calculated upon those Imports is not far from a correct one. 