Momr Accotxts. 


Appendix, Ne22. 


Act 33 Geo, HIT. 
eap. 52. sect. 99. 


Appendiz, N° 23. 


Act $3 Geo. III. 
cap. 47- 


Votes, 4% April 
1811. 
Appendix, N° 22. 


Ibid. 


“Appendix, N° 22. 


432 Fourth REPORT from the Select Committee on the 


has been thus calculated, will appear in the Account referred to. The Prime Cost is 
taken from the Amount actually paid, the Customs, Freight and Charges, according 
to the expense computed to attach to the article, and the Sale Produce at the sum re- 
ceivable from the Ordiance Board, of which £961,941 has been already paid. It is 
remarked in a Memorandum added to the Account, that a new agreement has been 
entered into by the Company with the Board of Ordnance, for a supply of Saltpetre 
upon a considerably enlarged scale, at an increased price. 


Your Committce now proceed to consider the Amount received for Charges and 
Profit on Private Trade, which was £.2,440,937- 


This head of Receipt is not to Le assumed as entirely a Profit, because it is in part 
a reimbursement of the expense incurred upon the Goods of Privileged and Private 
‘Traders, from the time of landing them to their final delivery trom the Warehouses, 
cither to the original Owners or Consignees, or to the Purchasers. These trans- 
actions, in reference to the Privileged Traders, originated at the time of passing the Act 
of 1793, when eularged facilities were granted to individuals to participate in the 
commerce of the East, this Charge was then reduced from 7 per cent. to 3 per cent. to 
be levied as a Duty or allowance upon the Gross Sale Amount of all Imports by Private 


“ ‘Trade, over and above the Freight chargeable on the same. ‘The expenses of this 


description actually incurred by the Company upon these goods, being for the most 
part blended with their General Charges, it is not practicable to state with accuracy the 
net advantage accruing from this species of agency. It should however be remarked, 
in explanation of the excess which is apparent beyond what would arise on the Gross 
Sale Amount of Private Trade goods in the manner directed by the Act, that this 
head of Receipt includes likewise certain dues the Company receive upof: goods im- 
ported under an indulgence to the Commanders and Officers of their chartered Ships, 
which are calculated at various rates. 


‘The sum stated to have beer received from Government for Interest, amounting 
to £.629,225, is the Interest on what remains due from the Public to the Company on 
what are called East India Annuities, which sprung from Loans from the Company to 
the Public, made from time to tifne in consideration of renewals of their exclusive 
privilege. The Principal Sum of these Annuities was in the year 1750, £. 4,200,000, 
bearing an Interest of 3 per cent. per annum. Under powers for that purpose granted 
by the Act of 26 George III. cap. 62. these Annuities were sold by the Company to 
the Amount of £.2,992,440. 5s. reserving the sum of £.1,207,559. 15s. yielding an 
Interest of £. 36,226. 158. 10d. ‘The management of the Annuities, as to the payment of 
the Interest, was vested in the East India Company, and an allowance on that 
account was made by the Public up to the years 1793, when an Act was passed trans- 
ferring the whole to the Bank ; and the Principal Sum now rémaining due to the Com- 
pany on these Annuities, viz. £.1,207,559. 158. is the Amount payable by the Public on 
the determination of the Charter of exclusive privilege, a notice respecting which 
was given to the Company during the last Session of Parliament, 