


That a very different Result from what has now been shown, might have been ex- 
spected, from the prospects held out in the year 1793, is not to-be denied. These 
prospects however were grounded on calculations to be realized only by the continuance 
sof peace. ‘The effect of a state directly the reverse, which has with little intermission - 
subsisted since that time, and which, in producing the most unfavorable influence a 
the Affairs of the Company abroad, could not fail to have one little less so.on those.al 
home, and, in fact, the pressure on the Treasury in England, with the interruption. of 
-resources, owing .both to European and Indian war, has been severely experienced ; 
though not perhaps to the degree naturally to have been apprehended, when the 
demands for India, great beyond the measure of all former precedent, are adverted 
to. Viewing the subject in this light, coupling it with the Charge arising out,of the 
Military arrangements in 1796, and the extraordinary increase in the Homé 
Expenditure, both Political and Commercial, incident to the war, that a Deficiency 
.should have occurred in the resources, and the necessity have arisen of resorting to 
-extraordinary assistance to meet circumstances of extraordinary difficulty, is not to 
-be wondered at. But it must not be forgotten, that this extraordinary aid has not 
been required by extraordinary demands for an Expenditure by which so much pro- 
;perty was sacrificed. The Money shewn to have been raised upon Capital, was 
y 5U received 


442 Fourth REP-ORY from the Select Committee on the 


Hour Accounts, received in the year 1793 to be applicd to purposes specified in the Act of that year, 


Appendix to 
3¢ Report, Ne 2 


Appendix, N% 15 
& 16, 


Parvare Trades, 
&e. 


‘The amount hitherto raised on Bouds, was chiefly in commutation of a further addi- 
tion to the Capital allowed by Parliament, to give room for the enlargement of the 
Commerce of the Company. ‘That the Capital employed in their Trade bas been to 
a larger Amount than in the year 1793 is demonstrated by a comparison of the Prime 
Cost of the Investments, as estimated at that period, with its Amount on the average of 
the seventeen following years, the former being £. 2,000,481, and the latter 
£. 2,953,963, being an Increase of £.917,482 calculated at similar rates of exchange. 
As far as the Commercial Application of the Funds is implicated, the Result which will 
be exhibited hereafter is satisfactory, from shewing that it has been so far successful 
as not only to provide for the expenses computed to be strictly Commercial, but to 
furnish funds for the payment of the Dividends to the Proprietors of the Capital 


“Stock, and the Interest on the Bonded Debt, that too when struggling with many 


difficulties and occurrences of unusual disaster. As the Amount of the Supplies from 
the Home Treasury to the Concern abroad, appears to have exceeded that of the 
Returns made from thence, a very large proportion of the increase of the Assets in 
India may be assumed to have been produced by the Expenditure of the Treasury in 
England. The increased Amount of the value of Import Goods in the Warehouses in 
India, between 1792 and 1809, was £. 780,206, and of Stores purchased in Europe 
£.634,346, as stated from the Quick Stock Accounts for those periods. ‘The increase 
of Dead Stock, principally consisting of Stores furnished frem the same source, was 
for a like period £. 729,291. ‘The Total of these sums is £.2,143,843, but deducting 
the 10 per cent. in the Invoice amount, £: 1,948,949. Although the period in which 
this coniputation is made is not in strict agreement with that of the Agcount imme- 
diately under examination, the view thus given is sufficient to demonstrate the extensive 
effects of the Expenditure of the Home Treasury. This observation is likewise appli- 
cable to the increase of the Stock in China and St. Helena fora like period, amounting 
together to £.711,340. The increase of the Assets in England, including the Debt 
supposed by the Company to be due from the Public, is stated to have amounted to 
£. 4,287,856. The combination of these several sums will shew, that notwithstanding 
the accumulated Demands upon the Treasury have so far exceeded the ordinary Re- 
sources, as to require the aid of auxiliary Funds, the situation of the Company has 
undergone less positive deterioration than the first vicw of the case might have led 
to the apprehension of. 