


The next Disbursement of the Home Treasury that offers itself to attention is 
the sum paid for Freight and Demorage; it amounted to £. 23,645,283, exclusive 
of £. 1,572,375 charged in another part of the Statement to the Private Traders, 


. which is simply a deduction from the Gross Amount paid under the head of Freight, 


Appendix to 
‘3 Report, N° 46. 
Appendix, N° 25, 


founded upon the actual repayment made by Private Traders, as shewn on the 
Receipt side, but is by no means to be assumed as the real Charge incurred for 
Freight ou Goods imported: in Private Trade. For in whatever amount the re- 
payment by the Private Trader for the Freight of his Goods, falls short of the rate 
actually paid by the Company, it becomes a Charge upon the Company, and is 
accordingly so left in their general Disbursement for Freight ; but the discussion of 
this point will be resumed hereafter with more particularity. ‘The sum stated to 
have been paid by the Company, which is the present object, comprizes au Expen- 
diture partially chargeable indecd to the Territories or to the Political Concern, 
but principally to the Commercial one. ‘The part chargeable to the Poiitical Concern 
is stated, in an Account inserted in the Appendix to the last Report of Your Com- 
mittee, to have amounted to the sum of £. 1,854,133. while that appertaining to the 
Commercial one, amounts to £. 21,791,150, of which £.19,610,275 has already 
been stated as directly chargeable on the Goods. ‘The remaining £. 2,180,875 
anust be supposed to have been an expense of this description upon other branches 
of the Trade, and including what has been incurred by providing Tonnage for the 
accommodation of Private Trade, under the directions of the Act of 1793, In excess 
of the Amount stated to have been repaid upon that account. An addition is still to 
be made to the suin last stated, as the Total of the original Disbursement for Freight 
is merely what, on the Balances, is ascertaincd to be due to the Owners from the 
Home ‘Treasury on the making up of the Accounts of their respective Ships. In 
these Accounts the Company are credited for Advances made from the ‘Treasuries 
abroad, to be accounted for at home, as adverted to in the Third Report of Your 

Counnittee, 


Affais of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 437° 


Committee ; also for short Deliveries, &c. charged to the Owners of the Ships. The Hose Accounts. 
addition to be made on these accounts is £.1,390,260, but. the effect of it will be — 


A .. pire: . Appendix, N* 34- 
brought more immediately in view into other parts of this Report. ik Ya) aid 


The Expenditure of the Home-Treasury in Consignments and Supplies to India 
and China, as exhibited in the several heads of Exports of Goods and Stores, India- 
Debt, Bills of Exchange, and Bullion exported, being a point distinct in itself, will 
be so,considered, notwithstanding Your Committee may find occasion to offer some: 
remarks upon cach of these heads separately. 


