


The Transactions which relate to Private and Neutral Trade, and to the sale of 
Prize Goods, are shewn separately at the bottom of the Statement. 


Although Your Committee have, in a former part of their Report, brought to the 
attention of the House the nature of the various Imports from the East under these 
heads, and the extent of them according to the Sale Amount, they conceive it pro- 
per here again to advert to the subject. In a former part of the Report it has been 
stated, that the Sale Producgof the Private ‘Trade Goods, from 1793-4 to 1809-10 
inclusive, amounted to the sam of £. 33,991,256. and of Neutral and Prize Goods 
to £. 3,803,601. together £ 37,794,857. 

Under their successive’ Charters of exclusive privilege, the Trade between Eng- 
land, and India and China, was in the strictest sense vested in the East India Com- 
pany, before the period of passing the Act in the year 1793; and till that time no 
British subject, either abroad or at home, could embark in it, except under the express 
|e prima of the Company, while the Commerce of Neutrals was wholly interdicted 

ill the passing of another Act in the year 1795. 

Any discussion of the particular causes which produced the Enactments, giving a 
limited admission to the Trade of individuals with India in the year 1793, is unne- 
cessary. 

To examine at large in what degree the intentions of the Legislature have been 
realized, is hardly consistent with the course which Your Committee have thought it 
their duty to adopt for the general conduct of their present enquiry, which has been 
studiously confined to the state of the Finances of the Company. Feeling, however, 
that a strict adherence to this line would admit of little tetoan. a mere Statement of 
the connection between the Sales of the Goods and the Receipts and Payments of 
the Home Treasury, they trust no improper deviation willl be imputed to them, if 
referring to the Documents already before the House, and others in the possession of 


Your 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 443 


Your Committee, they venture in this instance to take a somewhat wider range of Patvatz Trade 
observation. &e. 


The Account of the Sales of Private Trace already referred to, from biending in 
one view the Private Trade of all descriptions, making no distinction between the 
‘Tvade with India and that with China, although sutticient for every purpose of 
application hitherto required, is not adapted to the object now in view: Your Com- 
mittee have therefore culied fur another Account, making the necessary distinctions. Appendix, N°4s. 
In this Account the ‘Trade is separated into two heads, Pi e Trade and Private 
Trade. The Privilege Trade (contrary to the cousnon ptation of the term) is 
that which was establisicd under the Act of 1793. Vat is, called the Private 
Trade, is that enjoyed by the Commanders and Officers ci the Company's Ships, by 
an indulgence of ancient practice in the Service, under whica a Tonnage to a_certain 
extent iree of Charge tor Freight, was conceded to them in various proportions ac- 
cording to their respective ranks. Upon this extent the Charge amounted to 7. per 
cent. upon part of the Private Trade trom China, and te 3 per cent. upon that from 
India, being the rate alse established by Law upon Privilege ‘Tvade from India, but 
upon all Excess beyond this indulgence, the amount of Cliarge was regulaied at the 
<iscretion of the Company. The Privilege Trade, as shewn in this Accouni, # with 
India oaly, whereas the Private Trade is both with fadia and China. 