


This stipulation was founded on an agreement between His Majesty's Govern- 
ment and the East India Company, that the Public were eventually entitled toa 
-certuin portion ef the Profits accruing to the Company from the. prosperity of their 
Revenve and Commerce. According to the mode of calculation laid down in the 
Act, this conditional Participation could accrue only from the following seurces, viz. 
:from the Surplus remaining of the net Proceeds of the Sales of Goods at home, from 
:the Duties and Allowances arising by Private Trade, and from all ether Profits of the 
Company in Great Britain, after providing for the payment of Bills of. Exchange 
already accepted; for the current Payment of ether Debts, Interest, and other 
Outgoings, Charges and Expenses; (the Bead Debt computed in another part of the 

-clause at £. 1,500,000 always excepted) for a Dividend on the Capital Stock at 10 per 
-cent. per annum, ‘increased to 103; and lastly, for Bills of Exchange in liquidation of 
sthe Debt contracted in India, to the extent of £. 500,000 per annum. Provision 
having been made for these several Payments, the annual sum payable to the 
Public in the way of Participation, was fixed at £. 500,000, to be set apart hali- 
yearly, on the 1st July and the 1st January in cach year, beginning with July 1793. 
Provisions were likewise made in the Act to ensure punctuality in the payment of 
sthese sums into His Majesty's Exchequer ; but it was enacted, that in the event of a 
Deticiency in the Amount of- the Proceeds (after making the Payments to which 
-precedence was given) arising from extraordinary Expenses incurred in time of war, 
-or preparations for war, or from cireumstances incidental to war, that the 
Deficiency or Deficiencies were net to be made good from the Surplus of the 
‘future year or years, but were to be dtectned a Debt to be made good to the Public 
sat the determination of the exclusive ‘Trade of the Company, in case their ene 
Assets: 


Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 449 


Assets should be more than sufficient for the payment of all their just Debts, and for Arrrorntations, 
making good the value of the Capital Stock, rated at £.200 for every £.100 of © © ~~ 
such Stock. 


The Payments shewn in the years 1793-4 and 1794-5, from having been made 
when a Deficiency of-Funds for the purpose, according to the privciple of Participa- 
tion laid down, is fully apparent, Your Committee think it right to state to the 
House, that a reference to the 124th section will furnish an explanation of the trans- 
action, by shewing that the Payment was specifically directed to take place antecc- 
dent to the addition of the £ per cent. to the Dividends of the Capital Stock, and that 
it must be considered to have been made from the Balance of Cash in the hands of the 
Company, distinct from their net Proceeds of the year. 


As to the Sources from which the Participation of the Public was to be derived, 
namely the Surplus Proceeds, &c. as described in the beginning of the section, Your 
Committee cannot avoid reverting to the Estimates on which this arrangement was 
evidently founded, and again remarking that the Supply of a Million annually from 
the Surplus Revenue in India, as directed in the 107th section, must have been 
assumed as the basis of the expectations then held out to the Public, because it seems 
clear that the Surplus Proceeds in contemplation by the 111th section of the Enact- 
ment, were in reality the combined Profit derived from Revenue and Commerce. 
And this conclusion is further supported by provision being nade for failure of payment 
in the event of a Deficiency of Surplus Proceeds happening from war. As the Deft- 
ciency which has in fact existed from the time of passing the Act, is to be ascribed to 
the wars in Thdia and Europe, no further Payment has been made to the Public under 
the directions of the Act, but Your Committee observing that in some years a Surplus 
of Funds is shewn in the Account notwithstanding the war ye making the payments 
for Dividends, and on Bills of Exchange for Indian Debt) have thought it necessary 
to ascertain and to state to the House the causes why payment was not made on the 
Participation in such years. 