


It is scarcely practicable to ascertain with accuracy what effect has been produced 
‘in the Export Trade from England by these facilities. The Tonnage engaged out- 
ward was net a third part of that homeward, but the increase of the former, shewn 
in the last eight years of the Account, leads to a belief that the increase in the Exports 
-must have been in some degree proportioned. to that of the Imports. 


. Adverting to the whole Amount of the Tonnage furnished and,paid for by the 
Company antecedent to the year 1802:upon the od Gs plan, and from 1803 to « 
1810, when the Extra Shipping was introduced by the Court of Directors, inorder to 
~examine the effect of the New Arrangements, as applicable to the Finances of the 
“Company, Your Committee find that the Tonnage furnished outward and home- 
sward in the first period amounted to 31,669 tons, for which was paid by the. 


ibid. 


«Company the sum of £. 741,254, and that they received £. 648,348; making a Loss Appendix, Ne 46, 


sef £. 92,906, or about 12 per cent. The ‘Tonnage furnished in the second period 
was 60,515 tons, for which was paid £.1,281,740, and received, £. 962,933 ; making 
-a Loss of £.348,807, or nearly 25 per cent. 


- The alteration in the mode of Supply has enhanced the loss to the Company in a 
-double-ratio, notwithstanding: the Slipping is understood to be of a description in- 
ferior to the regular Shipping, 

Whether the provisions made by the Act of 1793 for the enlargement of the 
Privilege ‘Trade were-fulfilled, or more than fulfilled in the subsequent practice, as is 
alleged cn one side, or whether they were not fulfilled, asis alleged on the other, is a 
yestion which Your Committeé have not thought it within their province to decide. 
he consideration of thisimportant subject is connected with a variety of cireum- 
stances arising out of.the state of public affairs during the whole of the period, as 
well the effects of almost unremitting war, as the extraordinary obstacles opposed to 
commerce by the Government of France in the course of the last five years ; nor must 
it in justice be assumed, that if the Commercial and Political relations of ee 

5x cn 


hy 


446 Fourth REPORT fromthe Select Committee on the 


Private Trape, been during this period under the influence of peace, a very considerable portion of 


&e. 


AprRoeRtations, 


Appondix, No 18, 


the Foreign ‘Trade with India would not have continued im. its jormer and natural 
channels. That the experiment has succeeded, even under these unfavorable cir- 
cumstances, cannot be doubted, if the ‘Tonnage employed in the Trade and the Sale 
Amount of the Goods imported may be taken as the criterion, : 


But notwithstanding the success of the Act may be contended for in this point of 
view, the proceedings in the year 18u2, and the various documents laid upon the 
Table of the House, both before and subsequent to that period, imply that the 
facilitics in this Trade ad not been dispensed in ‘a manner to afford satisfaction to 
those concerned init. Among the complaints on the part of the Private Merchants at 
an early period, those felating to the rate of Freight,-and the remedy furnished by 
the Court of Directors, have already been noticed: — In addition to these, the general 
resirictions belonging to the node of management by the Company, as the time of 
ing the Tonnage, the payment of Freight in advance, the assortments of Cargoes, 
pericds of Sailing, deviations for Political purposes,.and other causes which Your 
Couunittee refrain trom minutely detailing, appear to have been the principal matters 
of dissatisfaction. 