


A: subject of this magnitude being thus already before the House, the attention of 
Your Conmmittee was naturally drawn to it, and though: not competent to pronounce 
any opinicn upon it, did not feel it consistent with. their duty, or what might be the 
expéctations of the House, to pass by it without notice. They have therefore, as far 
as appeared within the line of their functions, endeavoured to collect such informa- 
tion iu respect to it as might assist the House.in forming its own judgment. For 
this purpose some Gentlemen engaged in the Trade have been examined upon the 
leading points referred to. ‘The Court of Directors of the East India Company were 
pertuitted to offer their observations upon the complaints and the evidence in support 
of them, and the Privilege Traders were further allowed to reply to the observations 
of the Court. 


Copies of the Evidence so taken, ‘and of the Observations adverted to, are in- 
serted in the Appendix. These documents, combined with those already upon the 
‘Fable of the House, appear in the opinion of Your Committee to embrace the most 
material points applicable to the subject, and to exhibit the general grounds on which 
the Privilege Traders rest their complaints, and the replies of the parties to whoin the 
occasion of them was imputcd. 


‘The various causes to which the failure of the Cash Resources of the Home 
Treasury is attributable, with the further expected Demaids upon this Treasury, by 
the transfer of the Debt of India, having been already brought to the attention of the 


“House, and the measures adopted by Parliament to enable the Company to meet 


the pressure as far as it has been hitherto ascertained, Your Committee proceed to 
examine how far the transactions of the Home Treasury are in conformity to the 


directions of the Act of 1793, by which they were to be regulated. a 


‘The labor of Your Committee in this respect has been considerably assisted by the 
Order of the House of the 15th March 1811, for an Account intituled “ An Account 
* of the Net Procceds of the East India Company's Sales of Goods at home, with 
“ the Duties and Allowances arising from Private Trade, and all other Profits of’ 
“ the said Company in Great Britain, after providing for the paymeit of Bills of 
Exchange accepted by the suid Company, as the some have become due; and for 
“ the current payment of other Debts, Interests and other Outgoings and Expenses 
“ of the said Company (their Bond Debt always excepted) from the year1793 to 
“ the present time, distinguishing cack year, and specifying how much of the said 
“ Net Proceeds have been applied in each year in payment, Lirst, of a Dividend 
“ of £.10 per cent. per annum on the Capital Stock of the said Company: Secondly, 
* of £.500,000 per annum for the reduction of the Company's Debt in India to 
“ the sun of £.2,000,600 Sterling: Lhirdly, of a sum of £. 500.000 per annum 
« into the Receipt of His Majesty's Exchequer : and Fourthly, in further reduction 
« of the said Company's Debts in India and at home;-in augmentation of the said 
<< Company's Diviuend; in providing a sum of £. 12,000,000 as a Guarantee Fund 
« for the Company's Capital Stock ; and whut Surplus thereof, after the Payments 