


‘The connection between the Political and the Commercial branches of the Concern, 
being so strict as to render.it wholly impracticable to make a proper distinction, 
Your Committée have divided the subject into three heads, viz. Territorial or Political; 
doubtful as to the part Territorial or Commercial ; and Commercial; and from the 
consideration that it would be the most intelligible manner of bringing it into view, a 
Statement has been drawn up and added to the Appendix, shewing the various 
Charges classed under the above heads respectively. As the detail of the items so 
classed have becn selected from the mass of the Accounts in the Appendixes of this 
and former Reports, and have.for the most part already been the subject of remark, 
the only observations now requisite are those which relate to the combination 
proposed. 


The extent in which the Political branch of the Affairs has contributed to produce 
the Balance, is stated at the sum of £. 6,364,931; which sum results from adding to 
the Surplus Charge of India every other positive expense belonging to the Territories 
which had not -been included in tHe Accounts of Revenues and Charges annually 
presented to the House, being in the greatest part Disbursements made in England, 
cither by His Majesty's Paymasters General for the troops serving in India, or by the 
Company at home for Freight of Military, or the expense considered to have becn 
incurred under this head, ~ ~ 


The Charge of the Settlements of Prince of Wales Island, Bencoolen, and 
St. Helena in a small degree, has been blended in the Territorial Accounts with the 
other Charges, and was defrayed mostly by Supplies from Bengal. ‘Ihe Amount so 
cartied to Account was £.2,817,146. It being very questionable whether these 
Settlements are more requisite for Political or Commercial objects, the above sum has 
becn deducted from this head and added to the second. The excess of Political 
Charge or Expense is exhibited at £.14,936,230. A considerable part of this sum 
consisted of Supplies and Advances for the Public Service, and in the expense of 
Expeditions, for which, upon an agreement with His Majesty's Government, the 
Company were to be reimbursed. The adjusted Amount of repayments in Cash, in 
Advances by the Paymasters General, &c. is stated at £. 8,571,299, and the net 
Excess of Political Charge is then £.6,364,931, as before shewn. 


The Total of the part termed Doubtful as to its application, is £.5;953,660. On 
this head it is only necessary to remark, that an adjustment has been made in the 
Supplies to Bencoolen, St. Helena, &c. from its having been discovered thatthe sa 

ol 


Aifairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 453 


«of the Charges and Losses at St. Helena had been brought to account inthe next Baraxce oy 
article, at the sum of £.1,046,653, the Result produced by the adjustment of the  Prorgrry, 
10 per cent. on the Exports from England, The part ef the Supply which was from ae 
India, being £.131,406, is deducted accordingly. Appendix, Ne 53, 