


The Dead Stock abroad having been increased by the employment of either ‘the 
Indian or the [ome Funds, the Money so-employed should be brought to account. 
“The Total Increase in India is £. 862,992, and at St. Helena £. 58,698, which sums 3¢ Report to 
respectively are the net Ameunt, after deducting 10 per cent. on the part supposed to Appendix, N° 95, 
‘be invoiced from.Europe. Appendix, Ne 21, 


The combination of these several sums will produce, under the heads of Political 
‘Charge, Doubtful, and Increase of Dead Stock, the sum of £. 13,240,281, excecding 
the difference to be accounted for by £. 2,219,715. It is obvious this excess must 
have been provided for by an excess of Income or Profit upon the Commerce. 


The enquiry into the manner in which this provision has been made will afford an 
‘opportunity of carrying into cffect the intention mentioned in a former part of the 
Report, of furnishing some view of the Result of the whole of the Commercial Concerns 
of the Company abroad and at home. ‘That this view must be chiefly hypothetical 
or given upon estimate has already been shewn. The first sum exhibited under the 
‘Commercial head is the adjusted Receipt.on the Sales of Goods, after taking into view 
what was due at the conclusion of the period. ‘The net sum which is thus added to 
the Commercial Receipt is £. 700,097, which is for the most part to be attributed to 
the Receipt of Balances due on former Sales. ‘The Profit on the Sales of Goods 
from India and China is shewn from the Estimate of it, and after deducting the differ- 
ence on the Exchange of Bills for reasons before explained, is stated at £.20,438,159. 
adding to this sum the Charges and Profit on Private Trade, the Interest on the 
Annuities, the Net Profit at China, and the Profit on Sales ef Export Goods ia India, 
calculated on the actual cust of them, that on Stores not being stated ; the Total then 
is £.24,800,785, subject in the first place to deductions for the part of the Profit 
derived on the Sale of Spices from the Eastern Islands agreed to be paid to the ye p, 
Government, for which credit was given by the Company in their General Account Appendix, N*4. 
with the Public, and for the Loss sustained by the delivery of Saltpetre to the Board Appendix, Ne 30. 
of Ordnance. These articles, amounting together to £. 860,084, reduce the Profit 
to £.23,940,701, from which deducting the Commercial Charges paid in India, not 3¢ Report, 
added to the Invoices, the Net Profit will amount to £. 21,024,422, which added to Appendix, N° 12. 
the Receipts on the Sales of Goods of former years before stated, produces the sum 
of £. 21,724,519, as the Total of the Conzmercial Funds applicable to the payment of 
the further Commercial Charges, the Dividends on Stock and Interest on Bonds, or 
in aid of the other branch of the Concera. 


The other Charges upon the Commerce are shewn under their respective heads 
after deducting. from the Amount actually disbursed under each head, the sums 
carried to account under other heads, and making the adjustments of what was due : 
at the conclusion of the period. The sam thus remaining in the Customs is £.537,168, Appendix, N* 51, 
supposed to be in part chargeable on the Exports. That on Freight is £. 1,986,135, . 
and is to be considered as chargeable to the Exports, to the Loss on supplying ‘Tonnage 
to the Privilege Trade, to the outfit of Ships, “Tonnage and Deck Duties, &c. That 
on Charges General amounts to £. 1,596,096, which includes the Charge on ma- 
naging the Privilege and Private ‘Trade, for which the Company are remunerated by 
@ per centage, as formerly explained. The head of Losses outward and homeward, 
including Freight paid to Owners of lost Ships and Salvage, also-a loss by fire at the Appendix, N° 58. 
Saltpetre Warehouse, amounts to £. 2,543,493, which may torm the ground of Appendix, N° 35. . 
calculating the rate per cent. of the risk sustained by the Company in their Commer- . 
cial Transactions during 17 years. 