


WOOLLENS. 


Para. 44. The Honorable Court will have perceived in the foregoing part of this Letter, 
fome allufion to the unfavorable ftate of this branch of their Commerce, and it is with 
extreme concern we vow inform them that it is in a flate of extreme depreftion. 


45. Our intention of endeavoring at an increafe of price, in purfuance of the Honorable 
Court’s wifhes, bave been already noticed; and though the accounts we heard previous to 
the arrival of the (hips, were fufficiently alarming to suppres every hope of that kind, the 
confidence we had that the quantity would be-confiderably diminithed, banifhed any 
apprehenfion of a diminution of our former prices. 


46. The extent of the inveftment announced to us on the arrival of the fhips, quickly put 
an end to thefe hopes, and on our arrival at Canton we were foon convinced that a contider- 
able reduétion was unavoidable. 7 


47. It wasfome fatisfaGtion to us to perceive that this depreffion was not the effect of any 
difgui taken to the Munufaure itfelt, but originated in caufes which had affected every 
article of Import in fimilar manner. Cotton, the ftaple of the Country Trade, was fold as 
low as g Tales per Pecul; Tin at 14 Tales, and Lead in proportion ; fo the whole trade of the 
place appeared to be in a fate of perfe&t ftagnation. 


48. The canfe to which this was generally attributed is a terrible inundation of the Great 
River called the Wang Ho, which ‘had nearly depopulated the country through the whole 
extent of its courfe ; and of the few inhabitants who had efcaped its fury, the dittrefs was fo 
great that many thoufands were daily fed at the public expenfe. In fuch a fituation they 
would not be expected to parchafe foreign luxuries ; and as the part of the country con- 
fumed a very confiderable portion of the articles imported here, the effect was immediately 
felt by the Traders, who inftead of the ready fale they had been accuftomed to, found a 
country comparatively defert, and their urchates of the former Seafon remaining untold at 
a time they ought to return for freth fupplies. if 


49. As this calamity was more particularly felt by the lower orders of the people, fo it 
has in a peculiar manner affeéted the fpecies of goods they were the confumers of, the Long 
Ells and Coarle Cloths being very much fallen, while the Saperfines are little affected: the 
former in particular, which ated to be fold among the Chinefe at 10 and 11 Tales per piece, 

3 al 


and were an article of confiderable profit on our arrival at Canton, were as low as 7. 5, the 
very price we uled to fell at, and have fince, we are tuld, been fold at 6 Tales per piece. 


50. That we might not, by being too precipitate, accede to terms more unfavorable than 
the exigency of the cale required, we waited till the end of October, when finding the Lon, 
Ells rather failing than etherwife, and the final clearing of the thips being a meature whic! 
could not longer be retarded, we came to a conclufion with the Merchants on terms calcu- 
lated nearly to divide the additional tofs between them and the Company: thefe were, that 