


LEAD. 
Extract General Letter from Canton, dated 28th November 1802. 


29. -We ftated to the Honorable Court, in our advices by the Canada, our expectations 
of ubtaining for the Lead of the Seafon, netwithfianding the increafe of the quantity, at 
Jeaft § Tales per Pecul, That we have failed in our endeavours, however, may be afcribed to the 
‘extenfive importation, to the fmall confumption, by the limited demand for Bohea, as well 
tor our own invefiment.as on the part of the Americans, Swedes, Danes, and Dutch, and to 
the recent difcovery of the Lead Mines in the Province of Houquang, which proved ex- 
tremely produétive, and from whence the ‘fea Country has been partly fupplied, on more 
moderate iertas than can be effected from Canton. 


30. {n the difpofal of this article we employed every means in our power, and the in- 
fluence we might be fuppofed to poflels with the Merchants, to induce an offer of 5 Tales, 
which would have been equivalent to a redudtion of 15 per cent. on the price of the laf 


: Tm ‘ 
Seafon (5. 8.) but our effort unfortunately proved fruitless. They urged the ftate of the 


: om 
market, ai precluded them from offering more than 4. 2, the fale price not exceeding 
Pom Tom 


4. 8 or 4. 9, and from whence the Datics and Charges of 7 Mace were to be deducted, nor 
: . om ‘ 

had they in any inftance given more than 4. 3. After much difcuffion, we finally prevailed on 
. om, 

them to agree to 4. 5 per Pecul. 


31. And although we cannot but lament our difappointment, and, the lofs which will be 
incurred, on the confignment, of this Seafon, this price, under every circumitance, may be 
confidered more favourable. than we had a right to expect, viewing the current value and large 
grantity inthe market; and, except when the Merchants can difpofe of it in barter for Teas 
‘or other goods, we are forry to remark, they muft inevitubly fuftain fome lofs. 


33- While the market continues in its deprefied ftate, we cannot therefore venture to rée- 
commend any auginentation of this article, or of the Lead, beyond the amount of the Indent. 
The latter indeed it might be advifable rather to diminith, the quantity ut prefent on hand 
being undoubtedly {ufficient for the confumption of three years. . 


: CAMLETS. 


Extraé of the General Letter from Canton, dated 4th February 1803. 

Para. 22, They declare, nor have we any reafon to doubt the aflertion, that the quantity 
in the market is adequate to {upply the demand for nearly three years, and that their loffes 
fall little {hort of 40 per cent, the average of the Company’s Camleis, including the Duties, 
being 48Dollars, and the retail price in the fhops, for a due proportion of the three forts, only 
34 and 35 Dollars. 


£3. Had the importation been confined to the Company alone, this depreffion would in all 
probability have been prevented, but 6 or 7,000 P* have been brought to market by foreign 
thips, and a {mall quantity in private trade; and though the prices at which they have been 
fold, not eding 22 Dollars, may deter future {peculations, the prefent injury thereby oc- 
exfioned is ferious and irremediable. z 