


T. 
the Superfines fhou!d remain at their former price of 2. 7 per yard; the fecond and third 
forts 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 465 


forts be reduced 1 Mace per yard, and the Long Ells 8 Mace per piece; the whole making a 
diflerence to the Honourable Company of about g per cent. on the foriner prices. The lols 
to the Merchants we were in hopes would not have been more; but we are concerned to fay 
that the value of the commodity has fince decreafed fo rapidly, that many dave loft upwards 
of £.25. per cent. by their purchafes. 


51. In this arrangement the Camlets were not included, as the demand for them was 
likewile in a ftate of confiderable depreffion, and the great additional importation this Seafor 
might have had the effeét of retarding the fale of the other Woollen. The knowledge of the 
quantity imported has, we believe, confiderably affected the fale of thofe brought out in 
Private Trade, which from the beft information we can get (uulefs their quality is very inferior 
to the Company’s) cannot have netted their firft coft; and though there appears as yet no 
Jenfible dinunution of the quantity imported in Private Trade, thefe repeated lotfes maft, in 
the end, we imagine, put an entire ftop to illicit importation, 


Extra& General Letter from Canton, dated the 2eth January 1795. 


Para. 53. The Camlets are not yet difpofed of, as the prices offered are ftill below prime 
coft; but we have hopes, when the effeéts of the general demand for Money, occafioned by 
the approach of the new year, bas fomewhat Cubfided, that we may be able to difpofe of then 
to greater advantage, 


55. The amount of the Indent tran{mitted by this Difpatch will be, as we caiculated, about 
%- 400,000; and in refolving to this extent we are rather influenced by our hopes of a 
favorable change, than guided by any fymptoms of that kind at prefent apparent. 1f the 
caufe of the great depreffion is truly flated, the effe& may and will probably be but tem- 
porary ; but confidering the immente quantities which we have the mortification to feein 
the hands of the Merchants yet unfold, and the extenfive Indent expeéted next Seafon, we 
dare not venture to recommend any addition. 


Extraét Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated 3d June 796. 


3 . = 29. It was with infinite concern we received an account of the 
ae Chins 20 tannery a7 9S A aleonitoas flate of many of the inhabitants of China, from the 
44 8 51) fat - eats sb terrible inundation of the river Wang Ho, and the difa ble 
: effect, in confequence thereof, to the fale of our European Exports. 
We had, previous to the receipt of thefe advices, made confiderable purchafes of Woollens, 
though not to the fall extent of what might probably have been made in the courfe of the 
Seaton; but we thereupon withheld our orders, fo far as could be confiftently done with our. 
revious engagements, and as far as appeared to us prudent with the encouragement that 
fas hitherto been givento the Woollen Manufatures of Great Britain. 