


2 LEAD. 
Extra& General Letter from Canton, dated 21ft November 1809. 


Lead, we are forry to fay, is almoft unfaleable; the depreffion of the market for this article 
is faid in fome degree to arife from regulations prohibiting the exportation to the Northern 
Provinces by fea, from apprehenfons of its falling into the hands of the Ladrones, a ver: 

conGderable 


the Affairs of The LAST INDIA COMPANY. 467 


cdnfidereble proportion of the quantity imported lat ycar is remaining unfold, and even the 


7 m. 
nominal Chinefe price does not exceed 5; from wisich dedu@ing a Duty ef about 9 Mace, 
Bee 
not more than 4. 1. 2 could be afforded to the Importer. We {hall prefer keeping this 
articie on hand jor fome time, in the hope of a iavorable change in the market to accepts 
ing fuch terms; indeed even this low price, we might find difftulty in obtaining, as the 
Merchants neither collectively or individually appear defirous of becoming purcbalers, 


LONG ELLS. 
ExtraG&t General Letter from Canton, dated 214 November 1809. 


From the fmall quantity of Long Ells that have yet come ander the inipeion of the 
Merchants, we canuot fpeak with any confidence of their opinion of their quality; the re~ 
duétion in the quantity has proved extremely acceptable to them, as the price at which they 
have been fold in the market during the lait year has been very unfavorable, varying fro 

mT om aa 
6. 4 to 6. 8 per picce ; in confequence, many of the former years importation are remain- 
ing on hand, particularly with Mowqua. 


Extra@ General Letter from Canton, dated 3d-March 2809. 


” Para. 34. As a circumtftance affeGting the welfare of 2 numerous and induftrious clafs of oar 
fellow countrymen, as well as the general interefts of our Country, we much lament that we 
cannot recommend the importation of Long Elis into China, on the prefent extended feale; 
but we fhould be wanting in our duty to our employers, did we not fiate to them our opinion 
of the neceflity of contracting the quantity, at leaf for fome Seatons, unlels they conceive 
the advantages of-an éxtended importation, fuch as to-counterbalance a depreffion in price. 
Confiderable quantities of the importation of 1807-8 fill remain in the Merchants’ Ware- 
hovufes, and with thofe brought by the fhips of the prefent Seafon, form an aggregate whict 
we canvot hope will be difpofed of before the arrival of the next year; from this a lols 
mutt arife that there can be no queftion will ultimately, in fome fhape or other, full upou 
the Company. Some fales have been made under 7 Tales, leaving, with the addition of Duties, 
alofs of nearly 2 Tales per piece, to the original purchafe. 7 

35- In the Indent we have herewith the-honor to tranfinit, we have not reduced the 
quantity fated to be required for Seafons paft, being defirous-of recommending the iin- 
portation to the full extent that the market will bear; but even this quantity exceeds 
what many of the Merchants ‘think fhould be imported, and fhould not in our opinion be 
exceeded. ‘ 