


Extract General Letter from Canton, dated 14th May 1795. 
WOOLLENS. 


Para, 15. We are concerned to acquaint the Honorable Court, that the demand for 
this important branch of manufacture {till contiaues very mach depreffed, aud has, if any 
thing, rather declined fince the beginning of the Seafon. ; 


16. The Countries which we mentioned to have fuffered from Jnundations, ftill remain in 
afttate of moft lamentable devaftation, and till they recover in fome degree their former 
condition, the demand for our Imports in general muft continue very limited. 


17. Under thefe circumfiances, we thought ourfelves fortunate to get rid of oar Camlets 
‘on the following terms ; viz. 


T 
1ft fort, or fingle Camlets, at 35 p’ Pecul. 
2d do. worfted Do. 27, «De 
3d do, or fingle worfied Do. 24 Do. 


Hairbines at the Invoice price; and the feveral Merchants have confented to take them at 
thofe prices in advance on their Contracts for the enfuing Seafon: reduced as thete prices are, 
we _are aflured the market is fo overftocked with this article, that they will not lofe lefS than 
10 Tales per piece by them, 


Extraét of the General Letter from Canton, dated the May 18:0, 


39- With refpeét to the terms on which to fettle our reciprocal Contraéts of Imports and 
Exports, the large Inveftmeat imported on the fhips of this Seafon, combined with the 
information deduced from the Eftimate of Stock per Swallow, of the fill greater amount 
of the outward Cargoes of 1799-1800, preciuded iu our opinion the moft difiant hope or 
grounds, for the prefent, of any greater benefit than was fuccefsfully urged and obtained at 
the clofe of laft year; while, on the other hand, we apprehend danger Irom agitating a quettion 
which, as it wouid lead to an enquiry and difclofure of the total amount of the expected 
Imports, though we thould have been enabled todefine their exact component parts, might, to 
fay the leaft of it, have excited cautions ard furprize, if not perhaps alain, having no 
reafon to doubt what we colle&ed from the Merchants, that little more than half the Long 
Ells had yet left Canton for the Northern Provinces, and that this market was vot expected to 
° be 


466 Appendix to IV" REPORT from the Selc& Committee on 


be cleared before the 8th month or Moon of September next, at fooneft; and it might impede 
a provifional claim we had in contemplation to introduce in our Contradts, with a view to 
fecure a reduction in our Cargoes adequate to any advance it might be in our power to make 
at the clofe of our Book, which could not then be decided. 


Extract of the General Letter from Canton, dated the 14th January 1801. 


59. We have not yet agitated the queftion of our Tin, and are forry to remark, this 
article feems, for the prefent, in no demand. 


Extra General Letter from Canton, dated the 28th November 1802. 


Para. 27. It will be obferved by the Indent for 1804-5 tranfmitted, a number in the 
David Scott’s and Arnifion’s Packets, that we have limited the quantity of this article to 
12,000 pieces, and perhaps this number ought not to be exceeded for one or two years, as 
the pretent importation, added to what ftill remains on hand of the preceding Seafon, will be 
amply futlicient, as the Merchants aflert (and corroborated indeed by our own obfervation) 
to fupply the demand for at leaft two Seafons, 