


Extract Company’s General Letter-to Canton, dated -3d July 1795. 
Para.-2. As it is effentially neceffary to our fuccefsin China, that upon no account what-" 
ever any caufe of offence fhould be given to the Chinefe ‘Government, we recommend to 
your particular attention that nothing of that kind fhall-eccur refgedting the articles of the 
Pade market, laden on the Belvidere, :and of whieb you will recei¥e advice in our Letter of 
the 5th ultimo. 
i 3. With 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 469 


3. With regard to the Sword Blades which form apart of that export, we are particularly 
anxious that the utmoft circum{pection fhould be obferved. For that purpole, we direct that 
yougive iminediate notice to the Government of Canton, of the Sword Blades being on board 
“the Belvidere; and no attempt muft be made to land them, until the coufent of the Viceroy 
fhall have been obtained. Should the Government of Canton be inclined to purchafe them, 
every altention mutt be paid to their withes. 


Extraét General Letter from Canton, dated 23d June 1796. 


Para. 60. We are concerned to inform the Honorable Court, that our endeavours to dif- 
-pole of the articles intended for the Pekin market, have not been attended with the fuccets 
we could with for. © 


61. The Scotch and Irith Linens and wove Paper were fhewn to Puan Khequa and 
Mowgua, the Merchants we judged moft likely to fulfil the purpofes the Honorable Court 
-have in view.; but the latter declined having any thing to do with either of the articles, and 
the former would be only prevailed onto take one cheft, of the Paper, which he 
promifed to fend to Pekin as expeditioutly as pollible, by a friend who was fhurtly to fet of 
for that place: he feems however to have little expectation that-it will anfwer us an article of 
‘trade which could be an object to the Honorable Company, though, a fall quantity might 
fell to advantage for the purpofe of prefents. a¥ 4 


62. That the confignment of Sword Blades fhould have been’ attended’ with even lefs 
:fuccefS than the two preceding, the Honorable Court will perhaps not be furprized at, as 
they feem to be aware. that fome difficulties might attend the introduction of them into this 
-country through the ordinary channels of trade: the nature of the confignment indeed was 
fach as precluded any individual from interfering with it; andas they could not be offered 
to Government but through the intervention. of the Merchanis, which the delicacy of the 
~commiffion induced them to decline, we have been under the neceflity of returning this 
-eonfignment by the Belvidere, from which. fhip it has never been landed. 


63. Thecafe of Shawls has been feveral times fhewn to the Merchants, but as no price 
has been offered, and they declined giving the prime coft, we have wrote them off in our 
sbooks as unfold, 


64. The great objeion to this manufacture appears to be the unfitnels of their form fou 
any prpofe of drels or furniture appropriate to the country; but fome of the Merchants 
-are of opinion, that if they were made twice the breadth, and about feven Covids long 
sinftead of ten, they would be liked as coverings for beds. 