


Extra General Letter from Canton, dated the 8th June 1797. 
_ Trisn and Scorcn Linens and SHawis. 


Para 51. Thefe articles the Merchants have taken in equal fhares at prime coft, and we 
-alfo divided amongft them the remainder of the prefents on the Cirencefter, which has 
produced Ts. 1,403,200. : ; : 


Srationery. 


52. This confignment per Belvidere we are at laft under the neceffity of writing off our 
books by profit and lofs, as Puan Khequa, after the experience of fome months, declares it to 
be unfaleable at Canton, and too dear to bear the tranfit charges into the Northern Provinces; 
the reft of the Merchants confirmed this opinion, and as it was pertinently remarked :by them 
that it might be employed for the Company’s ufe, we could not prefs their bearing any lols 
in any article of that defcription. 

53. We mutt look therefore for an indemnification to the Honorable Company, for this 
unfuccetsful-experiment, in the retrenchments we fhall make in our future Indents. 


Extract Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated 12th May 1797. 


“Letter from China, 23d June 96. 
(63 & 64) The Shawls have been 
flewn to the Merchants, and are ftill 
-unfold—appear lo be unfit for drefs 
or furniture: fome Merchants are 
of opinion if they were twice the 
breadth and not {fo long, they might 
be liked as coverings for beds. 


Para. 104. When this article was fent out, there was very little 
expectation of it anfwering, and was only meant as an experiment ; 
therefore, when they are difpoted of, a feparate account of the fala 
muft be attended to, and tranfmitted in the Packet, that we ma) 
be reimburfed the lofs that may accrue thereon; and we fhall 
decline fending any more for the prefent; but if on further en~ 
quiry the fort for covering of beds is likely to aniwer, you will 
take care that we are made acquainted with. it. 


Extract of the General Letter from Canton, dated 4th February 1799. | - 


To China, January 1798. 
44. No more frilh and Scotch 
Linens and Shawls will be fent. 


Para, 59. phe Merchants are pleafed with this information. 


Extraordinary 


aye Appendix 74 IV" REP ORT. from she Sele@ Committee on - 


EXTRAORDINARY FINE AND DUTCH CAMLETS. 
- Extract of the General Letter from Canton, dated. 4th February 1799. 


Para. 130, .We have given the faircft trial to this article, and we 
are inclined to think, on reading our proceedings undér the date 
of the 10th of January, the Honorable Court will not judge it 
advifable to admit it into the lift of their Invetiments. 


To Canton, 20 April 98. 
(36.) Refpcets wo bales of extraor- 
dinary five Camlets for Fort William. 
* 


» Fetterto, dated goth April 1708. 


_ 131. Puiqua, however, from a prepoffefion that this latter ar- 
(57) Obiervations on an_experi=” oe may LG iurportes hes defired io have 500 piece on pas- 
went ininitation of Dutch Camlets. ticular account, o| imenfions notieed in our ini lent; in this fancy, 
however, he ttands condemned by the concurring opinions of other 