


“To Canton, “April 1801. 
21, 22,,Confignment of Cheap 
“Long Ells; which’ the Honorable 
Court are defirous of rendering a 
permanent article of Export, by af 
-fording to the poorer'clifles of the 
sinhabitantsa more fuitable garment 
+ to defend.them againit the-cold and 

wet. 


~-23. Thefe objedtions appear to reft on the-fuppofition that frauds may be attempted by 
- the dealers, and which from the prefent mode of. packing cannot be guarded againtt. It 
- is conjeGured that men who are ditpoted to pradtite atts of villainy, might eafiiy introduce 
into the-bales of the comuion Long Ells, pieces.of thefe inferior kinds, and by adding the 
+ tillets, there would be no means of detection until too fate to trace it to the perpetrator. Such 
- adeception would entail the moft ruinous coifegnences on our general Trade, by weakening 
the ecnfidence in the.Campany’s Mark, which M@pretent enfures their goods 2 ready pallport 

- throaghout the Empire, and gives fo muclr facifity to eur butiness.. 


26. Should the experience of the prefent and enfuing Seafon tend to prove the Merchants’ 
nhjcctions to-be ill-founded, and any quantity can be dilpoled of in addition to the prefent 
-Importation ot the feven Tales. Long. Fils, we tbalt wot fait to include. them in one futues 

P » . -Indents; 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 4yt 


Indents; and as a fufficient time will be afforded forthe experiment, and to collect information, 
and the Merchants have expreiled their willingnefs to take their proportion at 5 Tales, the 
Honorable Court’s objeé may perhaps, ultimately, be realized. 


27. [fever we are able to accomplith the introdu@ion of thefe cheap Long Ells, without 
injury to the prefent fort, and it fhould anfwer the Company's purpofe to dye them of 
Te im 


different colors, the Merchants, it may be relied on, will give 5. 6 per piece; of the 
expence of dying, we poffefs no accurate information, and can confequently form no opinion 
of the comparative profit or lofs that might be derived by attending to this fuggettion. 


e8, Under every circumftance, therefore, we have not thought it advifable to include 

the cheap Long Ells in the Indent of Woollens now fent, the objections of the Merchants 

to their becoming a permanentarticle of export from England appearing fufficiently forcible 

to deter us from recommending to the Honorable Court a perleverance in the exportation 

of any goods which might eventually tend to endanger fo valuable a branch in the Com- 
rade, : 


pany’s 
Extraé General Letter from Canton, dated 4th February 1863. 


Para. 24. Itis with infinite regret alfo that we muft acquaint the Honorable Court, that the 
Merchants have pofitively declined renewing the engagements for the cheap Long Ells; 
the whole of the prefent importation, except in the inftance of Ponqua and Gnewqua, fill 
remain in the warehoutes, and are altogether unfaleable, even at 6 Dollars; nor does there 
appear the moft diftant profpedt of a rife, 