


Extra@ General Letter from Canton, dated 14th May 1795. 
[For Paras. 15 to 17, fee the other Collection.] 


Para. 43. We have already mentioned in cur Letter of the 2oth of January, the little 
probability there was that the Ivifh Linens and Lawns would find a vend in tis Conntry ; 
bat in order to afcertain that point more particularly, we have difpofed of the whole con- 
fignment ty Mowqua at the Invoice price, who has promifed to dilpofe of them in different 
fhops, and to keep an aecount of the prices offered for each degree of quality. é 


44. He feems at prefent to be of an opinion that the lower priced ones, not exceeding 3s. 
-per yard, may poflibly anfwer, but all above that are too dear for the wear of the Chinete. 


Suawis. 
Extra Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated 6th May 1795. 

Para 7. On the fame fhip we have forwarded a cafe marked C.S. No.1} it contains fome 
‘Shawls which we are’ defirons of trying as an experiment. You will difpofe.of them as toon 
-as poflible, and furpjfies with au account of the Profit or Lofa that fhall arife thereon; as 
allo your opinion how far it is likely they may prove an advantageous article of traffic, and 
to what extest we may fupply you therewith. 


Liken Cuorn, Sworn Buangs, and Stationery. 
Extra@t Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated 5th June 1795. . 

” Para. 7. We have taken into, ‘cenfideration the oth Para. of the Letter from our late 
“Secret and Superintending Committee at Cunton, dated the 10th March 1794, and alfo their 
proceedings of the gd February 1794, refpecting a Litt of Articles, which in Lord Macartney’s 
-opinion might be. introduced with advantage at Pekin, and which was delivered to them by 
his Lordihip previoufly tg bis leaving Canton. 

°°: 8, We content ourfelves; for the prefent with fending famples of three of thofe articles, 
aviz. Linen-Cloth, Sword Blades, and woe Paper, the recommendation in favor of which has 
been lately confirmed tous by Lord. Macartney. 

g. On the Ship Belvidere’ you'wjfl therefore receive the following articles,as particularized 

«in a feparate Invoice fent in the Packet; viz. 


! [Linen Cloth, Irifh, to the value of + - = - “ £.300 2: 
Do + ‘Scotch - - - - - = = 200 
“Gill's Sword Blades -~ eo - - - = 250 
Wove prefled Paper for-writing and drawing - - = 250 
: 1000 


,.10.'Tt is our with that no time may be loft in forwarding thofe fpecimens.to Pekin, under 
+fach circumtiances as may appear to you the moft likely to afford every advantage lo the fale, 
in order to determine.how far it may be proper to purfue the fpeculation in future. 


11. You will therefore-either accept the offer made by Shy Kinqua to our late Secret and 
“Superintending Committee (and which appears on their above-mentioned proceedings of the, 
3d February 1794) of fending thefe famples.to the Northward, under the.care of one of his 
-own people’; or x upon any other Chinefé Merchant who you may deem more likely to fulfil 
~our views in this inftance. 