


48. Another objection which you have ftaled, and which remains to be noticed, is the 
Merchants’ apprehention left fraud thould be attempted by the Retail Dealers, by fubitituting 
them in lieu of the common Long Ells. Thofe that will be configned you this Seafon are 

cked in a different fhaped tillet, and are preffed without a creale, like the fuperior Long 

lis, the quality of which it is impoflible they can, by the mofi hafty obferver, be miftaken 
for. We therefore trutt this ground of objection will be removed. It may be remarked that 
a fimilar objection might be made to the fecond Single Camlets, which are of the fume length, 
width, @plour and package, as the other two forts, and we have not yet heard of any fuch 
deceptidhs naving been praWifed on thefe goods, 

49. An equitable reduction in the amount of Daty, in proportion to the value of thefe, 


Long Ells with the common forts, we Should hope would be an object you would be able to 
1486 SE obtain; 


From Canton, 28th March 1802. 
23 &28, Stating their proceed- 


47 Appendix.to IV" REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


obtain; but this only remotely affeéts the Company, in as far asit facilitates or impedes thé 
confunption of thefe Long Ells. = be 


50. We have been thus minute in calling your attention to thé points above mentioned, 
more with a view to aflift you in the inveftigation on the {pot into the expediency of con- 
tinuing this article in‘ the lift of our Inveftment, than to combat the judicious obfervations 
you have made. You will have ob{erved from what we have now written,as well as from our 
Orders of April 1801, that if this article facceeded, we had fanguine expectations that its 
export would be to a confiderable extent; but, however we ‘may have been impreffed with 
its ultimate importance, we have, in confequence of the fentiments you have communicated 
tous, deemed it proper to confine the export of this defeription of Long Ells to abont 13,000 
this Seafon; nor fhall we confign you any further quantity in the following Seaton, uniets 
your fubfequent reports fhould be more favorablees”” 


Extract of the General Letter from Canton, dated the 27th November 1802. 


Para. 21. In our Advices of laftSeafon we communicated to the Honorable Court the fenti- 
ments of the. Merchants on the fubjeé of the Cheap Long Ells. The reporis of the prefent 
feafon are infinitely more difcouraging to the continuance of any confignment of this articte, 
than we even then conjeélured. The Country Dealers are decidedly oppoted (o the importa- 
tion, as well from the great jateriority in the quality, as from their being fubjecied to dmilar 
Dut and Charges of Tranfport to the interior Provinces, as thofe of the eomimon kind; 
and while the fuperior wanufaétare can be obtained at very little additional advance, the 
Merchants requeit ne more may be fent on any account: the injary that may event 
refult from their introdaction, by the innumerable frauds and deceptions that can be 1 
tifed, to the evident detriment of the Seven Tales fort, exclufive of the lols to which they 
are likely to be expofed, being an additional motive to julicit the Honourable Court’s 
attention to this requeft. 