

* , » .Meichants. “Vide Cons, 10 January. “ay 


* Extract Company's General Letter: to Canton, dated 24th. December 1709. 
i te Feb. 99. 
Gg T biden %b. 99. exe - Para. 48. TheCamlets of the firit fort not being in eftimation, and 
traordinary fineCamlets,und inclined the Mecchants having defired no more of them may be tent, and 
to think it will not be judged ad- this article being of the fame kind, we have declined ordering any 
-vifublc to admit them in the fit of te be fent you. 
-Invetiment. 2 ‘ au 
(132.) Puiqua, from a prepoffeffion. that this article (Datch Camlets) may -be imported, indents for . 
- -§09 pieces ; for which. flauds-condenned in the opinion of other Merchants. 


; INFERIOR LONG -ELLS. 
's Extraét General Letter to Canton,. dated gth April 1801. 


‘21. You. will receive by the thips of the prefent Fleet, ten thoufand Long Ells of an 
interior quality. to thofe that have been ufually exported by the Company, We fehd them 
. #s-pn experiment, ander.a belief that by affording them at a cheap rate, they may become 
- an article of gencral weat among the poorer claties of Chinefe; us from the information we 
have received, we are-incliued to think that it may be fold by the retailer on fuch terms as 
- will aiake it come to the parchafer at a price not mush dearer than that which he now pays 
for @ cotton’ garment of a like dimenfion : if-this can be efleCted, the manifelt advantage & 
Woollen diets muft poffefs over a Cotton, in more effeCually defending its wearer both 
from wet and cold, may make the demand for Long Ells of this defeription very confiderable. 
They have been packed in a different manner to the-others, not only with a view to reduce 
2 their"coft, but-to .prevéent their being mitiaken for the common Loug Ells, whereby the 
Chinefe might conceive that they-had fuffered a depreciation in quality; the outfide of the 
-bales are marked “ Cheap L. £7? 


22. If the inferior Long Ells ean be difpofed of at five Tales each, which is twoTuales lets 

* than you have obtained for thé ether Long Elis in the two laft Seafons, we fhall make them @ 

permanent article of export; you mutt imprefs on the Merchants the neceility of their 

endeavoring to effect a proportionate reduction inthe Duty, and we recommend your 

fuggetting. to them, tliat it would be more defirable if they could fell thefe goods to perfons 

who are accuftomed’ to trade te the Northern Provinces, where it is conceived the article 
would meet ¢ more fuceefsful competition with the Cotton garments. 


"+ Extra? of the General Letter from Canton, “dated 28th March 1802. 


Para. 23. We have been obfervant of the Honorable Court’s 
orders on this fubjedt, but neither the information we have been 
enabled to. collet, nor the opinions of the Merchants, lead us to 
recommend a repetition of fimilar configninents. 

24.-The prefent importation has been difpofed of at five tales, 
and we have prevailed on the Merchants to take their retpective 
proportions of the 30,000 pieces expected the enluing sealon, their 
opinions-on thefe Loug Ells are fully detailed in-our Cunfultations 
on that fubject; front whence it appears, ferious injury and much 
mifchief may be apprehended to the common fort, fhould the 
Honorable Court refolve to continue the exportation. 