


25. In this ftate of the market, therefore, we fhall derive confiderable fatisfaQion if our Ad- 
drets of the 28th March laf fhould have been received fufficiently in tiiue to enable the 
Honorable Court to countermand their orders for this article, whicii the experience of 
two Seaibns now fully proves cannot be rendered a permaneat branch of the Company's 
Woollen Trade. 


Extra@ General Letter to Canton, dated 17th Decmber 1So02. 


Para. 46. We have attentively perufed thefe paragraphs, as alfo 
your Confultations of theagd Be Bebraary and 8th arch, where- 
: . 4 In your fentiments on labject of this new article of export are 
pa Tebalive to the dif al a the nore fally detailed. You wil bear in recollection that our chief 

ngoment o! P tong MNS object in felecting this deferiptiou of goods was the probability of 

anextention of the Woollen Manufaéture, and in the event of its faccefs, to afford a re- 

: mittance on more advantageous terms than any other manufacture sf which your snus 

Inveliment is compofed. e latter object you have fully ac- 

for mathe Cheap Long Ells fold complithed by Obiaining for them the price at which we had 

ice £.1.1 oe "The ate fort fell eftimated ; their difpofal yielded, as you will perceive by “their 

fever T. les, 46s. 8d. The average Invoice, a profit of 3s. 4d. on each Long Ell, and which we per- 

Inv even fales, 4{ about aaa dd ‘3° ceive could have been inereafed two Mace, had you deemed it 

yavonee, price was about 47%/3¢: pradent to perfift in the advance ; while by the difpofal of the 
common fort at feven Tales, there is on the average a lofs of near fixpence each. 


47. Under thefe favorable circumftances, we cannot feel much apprehenfion, in a 
commercial light, left their introduGtion fhould attend a diminution of ibs common fort; 
we certainly had in view their introduction to a different clals of people, whofe circum- 
ftances would not permit thei to avail themfelves of the comfort of woollen garments at 
the prices they had been hitherto rendered at, and thereby increafe the means of fapplying 
the homeward Invefiment. We therefore cannot wholly concur in your obfervation, that 
one of the cireumftances to be apprehended is, Jeft the introduétion of Cheap Long: Elis 
fhould excinde “an equal cusber of the common fort, and thereby reduce the means of 
“ fupplying the Inveftinent 2 Tales per picce, and confequently necellurily add to the 
* exportation of Bullion.” Qn general principles of tvade, the cheaper any article can be 
yendered, in a greater proportion will its confumption be increafed ; and we can fearcely 
conceive it poflible, from the immenfe population of China, but this low article muft be 
fuited to the finances of a lower clafs of inhabitants, and that therefore the confumption of. 
ihe common fort will remain, with very little redudtion, as its former ftandard ; this idea feems 
alfo to be juftified by a comparifon with your prefent Indent fur Long Elis (2,20,000) 

Sic Orig. and that of 1702 (thirty-eight thoufand.) 