


and as they are a new pattern, itis tice of the Hoppo, who has included both bal 


les in his prefents 


particularly withed they fhould be to Court, and we are fanGtioned by the Merchants in an Indent 
fhewn the Merchants for their opi- for five hundred pieces; requetling, however, that the obfervation 
nion; which, with fuch further re- fent apart, after a careful examination and defcription ch 
marks as can be collected, matt be piece, may be attended to. i — 


tranfmitted by an early conveyance 


44. Together with the obfervations on emboffed Long Ells, are 


to the Honorable Court. forwarded thofeon the embolted Cloths, fold at the former price 


of 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPAN 


473 
Tm 

of 1, 5 per yard, of which the Company may fend about 300 pieces, to arrive in 1802-3. 

The Indent however for both articles ought not to be exceeded, as on account of fo large a 

fhare being required by the Hoppo, to forward. to Court, it is evident they produce no 

profit to the Merchant; and witha view tolefien the grievance, it is requefied the pieces on 

yellow grounds may not be too many. 


CAMBLETEENS. 


Extra General Letter to Canton, dated 1gth February 1802. 


Para. 59. By the thips David Scott andCuffucls, we have configned you fix hundred pieces of 
Cambleteens, being an article which we underfiznd has occafionally béea earried out in 
American fhips, and fold to advantage; you will th © take an early opportunity of 
advifing us of the opinion of the Merchants on this defcription of goods. 


Extract General Letter frem Canton, dated 28th November 1802, 


Para. 34. In order to concentrate as much as poflible the information we have to commu- 
nicate, and to bring the fubjeét of Inports, as far as muy be, under one point of view to the 
Honourable Court’s notice, we fhall proceed to mention the dilpefal of the Cambletcens 
and Cochineal, although not immediately under reply. 


the margin, we beg to refer 


dings rintive to the fale of 


o c 35- To our Confultations in 
Gons, rath, 13th Sept. 6th Nov: the Tfonorable Court, for our 


the Cambletcens ;_ with much perfuafion, and after confide diificuity, we prevailed on 
the Merctiants to allow the Invoice Coft, or 8 Dollars per piece; it was however conceded 
under the exprefs fipulation, that this price fhould not be ettablithed as a precedent in the 
event of their again forming a part of our Inveftment. 


36. The moment for an experiment of this nature proved extremely wifavourable; the 
market being co:pletely overftocked and the prices comparatively low, could not fail to 
affect an article of fimilar manufacture and of inferior quality ; but exclutive of this caufe, 
the coarfenefs of the goods, and the open texture of a very large proportion per David Scott, 
renders them, in the opinion of the dealers, totally unfit for ute, and precludes the idea of 
their ever becoming an citablithed article of import; the Merchants therefore earnetily re- 
commend the experiment may not be repeated. 