


22. The prefent price barely exceeds 6 Dollars, and even at that rate there is litte or no 


“ démand; the lofs to the Merchants, therefore, may be fairly cltimated at 20 per cent. 


To Canton, 17 Dec. 1802. 

50. Anfwer to the objections 
to receiving cheap Long Ells, and to 
their forming part of the Indents for 


46& 


Woollens, 


Extra@ of the General Letter from Canton, dated 2gth January 1804. 


Para. 32. We traft the Honorable Court will believe it was as 
much our inclination, as i,is oyr daty and intereit, to promote the 
extention of the fale of our Woollensin this Country, and are con- 
cerned whenever opinions feem to convey any obtiacle to it. We 
mutt however adhere to our fentiments refpecting the cheap 
Long Ells, given in our Addrefs of the 28th March 1802, and 
particularly detailed in our Confultations of the 28th February of tht year; the truth of 
which, experience kas fully confirmed. 1n the early part of the Seafon we attempted to 
difpofe of thofe configned to us by the prefent hips, but found them fo generally depreciated 
that no offer was made, but what, if accepted, would have entailed confiderable lois. As 
we perceived the price of Woollens to be rifing in tlie market, we declined difpofing of 
them till a more favourable opportunity. Towards the clofe of November, Exchin was in- 
duced to offer us five Tales per piece for the whole quantity, on condition of our agreeing 
to purchafe nearly 3,090 chefts of Twaokay he had fhewn to us, which we had approved, 
and from 3 to 4,000 chefts of Congo; this we readily acceded to, as the fule price of thele 


Long Ells in the fhops is now four Tales, the Duty 1 “b confequently there is an apparent 
es 


= : 
lofs of 2. 4 per piece. This wil! probably be made up, in part, by the rate at which he may 
be able to pus thew to the Tea Merchants, and the profit he may derive from the fale of 
his Teas; but his principal inducement we believe to be, the credit this tranfadtion will give 
him with his countrymen, and the future favor and notice he hopes it will entitle him to 
from the Houfe. To thele circumftances we attribute our getting off this article fo favor- 
ably, on which otherwile the Company muft have fuffered confiderable lols. We confider 
this manofacture to have had now a fair experiment at this market; and, at the general defire 
of our Merchants, requeft that it may not form a part of the futare consignment of 
Woollens to this Country, Should there ever appear any change which will permit os to 
advile its introduction again, the Honorable Court may be affured we fhall watch the oppor- 
tunity of recommending it, 


EMBOSSED LONG ELLS. 
Extra@ of the General Letter from Canton, dated May 1801. 


To China, May 2800. Para. 43. This article, as well as the former, was firft fhewn 


Par. 19. 


By the Exeter will re- the Merchants in a body, and afterwards fent round to their 


ceive two cafes emboffed Long Ells, Hongs. We augur favorably from their having attracted the no- 