

36. We are willing to hope that the very dull fale which the Long’ Ells have experienced 
during the prefent Seafon, has arifen from caufes of a temporary nature, owing to the difap- 
pointment the Manufaéturers of Nankeen Cloth have experienced in not finding a fale for 
their goods among the‘Americans, and ‘eonfequently have been unable to purchafe this 
article of the Honourable Company’s import, iu which-they otherwife deal largely; and alle’ 
from many of the Up-Country Dealers hearing, on their way to Canton, the ditturbed ftate 
of the trade and country, returned, and have relinquifhed the trade for the Seafon; but from 
whatever caufe it may have arifen, the effect mutt be an overltocked- market, and which we° 
fear can only be remedied by a reduced importation. : 


eee ln neta 
Appendix, No. 13. ; 
ATTEMPTS made fince 1794 to introduce NEW ARTICLES into CHINA; thofe Articles’ 
being manufactured in-the United Kingdom. g 
ARTICLES for PEKIN, 
Extra& Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated 23d April 1794. 

Para. 16. HAIRBINES, {rith Poplins, ‘Tabbinets, and Irifh Lawns and Linens,“being 
recommended to be fent as a trial, 5 bales of Hairbines, marked No. 1 to 5. H; 3 cafes of 
Tria Linens and Lawns, marked No. 6 to 8.1. L. are fhipped on the Alired, and every 
iptormation mutt be obtained -refpeéting them, and the eftimation they are likely to be 
held in. 

17. The Hairbines fent as an experiment, being boiled to foften them, which procefs they 
had never undergone before, ‘about 4o pieces of them do not run their intended lengths, and 
are invoiced particularly. 

18. Not any Tabbinets are fent, as it appears every precaution has been pfed to prevent 
their being miidewed, and which lvas proved to be ineffectual. i 

20. There is fent per Canton a bale marked No. 251. F.C. containing 20 pieces figured 
Camlets, deferibed inthe Invoice, The fame attention mutt be paid to this, that has been 
required to every other article lately fent by way of experiment. 


Extraé General Létter from Canton, dated goth January 1793. 
“Para. 54. The Hairdirits have.beeu fewn to all the Merchants, and we are happy to find 
iicy are fo much improved by boiling, that no complaints are made on Lie feore of Mifnels,. . 
6D and 


468 Appendix toIV" REPORT from the Scle& Committee on 


and in generai they are not known to be other than Camlets. We are forry to-find they are 
fuhigh priced, as they-do not appear, in the opinion of the Chinefe, torank with the firft fort 
-of Camlets, and confequently will never fcll for a propertionate profit: if, however, the 
‘Honorable Court’s abjeét be merely to aid the Mauufacturer, that end may be accomplifhed 
without lofs whenever the demand for Camlets thall revive. We have accordingly inferted’ 
goo pieces in the Indentfor the prefent year; thefe. may be of the fame colour with the 
‘Camieis, except purple, which in the Hairbines feems rather defeAive, and liable to ftain. 


Trisu Lawns and Linens. 


Para. 55, Thefe, we are forry to fay, will not anfwer in any degree; the Chinefe have too 
litle knowledge of their value, and too little diftinction of their qualities, for us to hope they 
could be induced to parehife them at any price proportioned to their firft coft. We thall 
-endeavour, in the courfe of the Séafon, to force them into their notice, if poftible ; but the 
times are fo-unfavorable for experiments of this kind, that our hopes of fucceis are too fmall 
to juliify our recommending a fecond trial. 