


‘The Honorable Committee were apprized, by the fame conveyance, of our endeavours to 
ditpofe of the Cloth configned to us by the Ganges, Alfred, and Woodford, having proved 
ineffectual; fince that period, however, we have found lefs reluctance on the part of the 
+Chinefe to offer for thefe Woollens; and although their prices were generally low and mach 
under the Invoice value, we did not confider any advantages were likely to refult from 
delaying the fale until the enfuing Seafon, when poiiibly indeed an additional confignment 
might rather tend to lower their value. Weconfequently clofed with a propofal made us on 
the gd inftant, exceeding by 4,000 Dollars that of any other perfon, as per accompanying 
Account Sales, and have the houor tg inciofe a Bill for the ameunt, conformably with the 
infiructions conveyed to us by Mr, Secretary Ramfay. : 


Every poffible exertion has been employed to do juftice ta this experiment, and we regret 
that the refult is fo little calculated to afford encouragement to its repetition, or to anfwer 
the expectations formed; but the averfiou of the Chinefe to innovation is infurmountable ; 
add to which, they politively declare, that at the prefent prices both the Broad Cloth and 
Long Ells are a preferable manufaGure, and that Cloths of this defcription can never 
anfwer. 


We have neverthelefs reafon to imagine that could the Manufadurer be induced to alter 
the dimenfions of thele Cloths, entirely omitting the firiped and fpotted patterns, and 
proportioning the colours as in the Broad Cloth, that a fmall quaatity might annually be 
difpofed of at the following prices; viz. 


The Worleys, of 32 inches wide, at - - - - - - 7. 2 peryard. 
Templars, do. eee eee ee RH dow 


: 7 fn. 
Cloths, Gimilar to thofe in Bale N*1, 48 inches wide, 1. or 1. 2 per yard. Tie 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 475 


The foregoing prices, however, are exclufive of the Duties, which muft therefore be deducted 
from them, 


Extraét Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated 10th April 1804. 


Para, 2. By the fips Alnwick Cattle, Cuffnells, and Arnifton, we have configned to you 
aquantity of Woollen Goods of a defcription thet has been reprefented to us to have found 
a profitable market in China: the perfon who bas furuifhed thefe goods has entered into an 
engagement to guarantee that the taid Woollens (hall prodace in China a fum equal to their 
prime coft and charges in England; you will therefore, by the earlieft conveyance, inform 
us the terms on which you have dilpofed of them, and how fur they are likely to become a 
beneficial article of Invetiment. 


Extra@ Gencral. Letter from Canton, dated 34 March 1805. 


P Para. 4. Immediately on the receipt of thefe goods, the different 
Tetter, 1 dated solh. Apel Abode: Merchants were furnithed with ites; and after an attentive 
Bete of Woollen °C cods, per ¢x#tnination of them, the highet offer that any were difpoted to 
hiss ‘Ain wick Cattle, Cufinells, a make, and with which it was judged advifabic to clofe, wilt 
‘Arhifion «information to be feat by [ave @ lofs on the Invoice amount of more than 18 pet cent, 
die earlieQ conveyance of the ter y Thefe terms were offered by the perfon who purchafed the Con- 
ahi h thes ne dif ok dof, aad figoment of laft Seaton, and who pofitively afferted, that in the 
he er far dies ste lik el a becone a refent {tate of the market, he mult inevitably be a lofer by his 
be ficial ai sle of I y ts if argain; which, from the very low offers made by fome of the 
sicaleama tae Rk meme he other Merchants, and fubfequent enquiries, we have reafon to 
believe to be the cafe; and that thefe terms were offered under the idea that they would be 