

acceptable to the Company, and give him a claim to their future fupport and affiftance. 


5. With the diflike of the Chinefe to all innovation the Honorable Court are fully ac- 
quainted, and mutt therefore be aware that time and repetition of the confignment will be 
neceflary to reconcile them to thefe goods; which, if ultimately accomplithed, it is appre- 
hended, muft reduce the importation of Long Ells and the 2d and gd forts of Cloth. It 
remains therefore with the Honorable Court to decide on the propriety of forcing this 
manofacture at the rifk of depreciating the eftablifhed and approved forts, or of endea- 
vouring with greater facility to extend their confumption, 


6. The principal objection to this new Woollen Manufacture appears to reft on their fall 
breadth expofing them to fimilar Duties with the Broad Cloth. The terms on which 
Gnewqua is willing to receive an annual quantity of thefe Cloths, of the dimenfions therein 
feted with his obfervations on their colours and qualities, are forwarded Numbers in the 
packet 

7. In this Account, it may appear extraordinary that the Dentous are ftated as not fale- 
able on any terms, although a profit is derived by thofe of the prefent Seafon. This arifes, 
we find on enquiry, from a miftake on the terms offered, the purchafer having formed an 
average of the whole, and in confequence paid litile attention to the proportionate price, fo 
long as the whole amounted to the fum he was dilpofed to give. : 


Extraét Company's General Letter to Canton, dated 12th February 1806. | 


Para. 58. You have already been advifed that it was not our in- 
tention to repeat a confignment of thefe articles. The diflike of 
the Chinefé to innovation, will precludeus in future from encourag- 
ing the fpeculative attempts of individuals, to the injury, as it 
now appears, of the ftaple article of our export. 


* Letter from, dated 3d March 1805. 
(4 to 6.) Mr. Cooke’s Woolless. 
Were foiced to fell them at a lofs of 
18 per cent. and Merchants a lofer 
thereby; but took them to find fu- 
ture favor with the Company ;_re- 
peat diflike of Chinele to innovations, It refts with Court whether they will force this manufa@ure at 
the ritk of the eftablithed approved forts. 


FUR SHAGS, 
Extra& of the Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated the 26th February 1808, 


77. By the thip Exeter we have configned to you fome Woollens of a new defcription, 
calied Far Shags; thele articles were fent at the particular requeft of fome Manufactarers 
in the Weft of England. From the reprefentations you have made to us of the diflike of the 
‘Chinefe to novelty, we are not fanguine of their fuccefs; but with a view to give every 
article of Britith manufacture a fair trial in a country whofe immenfe population raifes fach 
ftrong expedctations in the unind of the artift, we have been induced to permit the prefeut 
experiment to be tried. 


Extra& General Letter from Canton, dated 3d March 1809. 


3 - Para.167. We are forry to have to make a very unfavorable re- 