


pofal. 


Extra& General Letter te Canton, dated the 11th January 1811. 


Letter from China, dated 26th Para. 83. We haye not fent the Cloths herein requefted, becaufe 
February i810. they could not be invoiced at lefs than 26s. or 27s. per yard, and 
Para. (256.) Tranfmitting an In- which exceeds the price it appears Tinqua was willing to parchafe 
dent from Tinqua for 17 bales of them at. 
Ratteens, at 20s. per yard. , 


VARIOUS ARTICLES of EXPERIMENTAL CONSIGNMENT. 


Extract: Company’s General Letter to Canton, dated the 29th September 1809. 


Para. 20. From this fate of things itis to be expected your Treafury will fuffer a diminution 
of receipts for the fale of Britith Staples in the year 1810 to the full amount of Eighty 
thoufand Tales; being the difference between the Sale proceeds of Ten thoufand Peculs of 
Tin, of which we hall be deprived, and of Ten or Twelve thoufand Peculs of Lead, which 
we matt fubftitute in its place. 


21. Although this expected defalcation in the fale of Britith Staples, will have arifen from 
-circumfiances wholly out of our controul, it is ftill a matter which we greatly regret. We 
are fully imprefled with a fenfe of the duty and importance of endeavoring to extend in 
Afia the fale of the Produce and Manufactures of Great Britain and freland, as will be found 
in numerous inftances upon your records. And we take this occafion to direét that you refer 
to your foriner proceedings (particularly about the period of the Embafly of Earl Macartney) 
and that you make it a matter of efpecial confideration, whether the vend of Britifh Articles 
already known can be increafed, or other Britith Articles not known can be introduced. 
Your deliberate opinion, in anfwer to thefe enquiries, may be tranfmitted to us by the firft 
dhips of the Chinete Seafon, 18:0.—See our Letter of the 8th January 1808, para. 18. 


22. In confequence of the expeéted deficiency in the quantity of Tin, we have deter- 
miued to revive the export of Copper from this Country to China; but as the price of British 
Copper has advanced more than ity per cent. fince the period of our laft confignments, 
we haye detertained to limit our firftexperiment to Twenty Chefis only,.which thaliconfift of 
all the various affortments in general ule. 


23. We have likewife refolved to fend to you a fmall confignment of Window Glafs, upon 
which, as alfo upon the Copper, yeu will tranfmit to us all the information which you can 
procure, 


24. The 


the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 407 


24. The price of Britifh Bar Iron of good quality is become very reafonable, from the 
general ufe of machinery in the manutaciure of that commodity. Should the Miners 
continue to decline delivering to us their Tin, we are apprehenfive that it may not always be 
found convenient to fupply the deficiency with Lead, as well by reafon of the great fluctua 
tion in the price of that commodity in England, as by the fear of overftocking the market 
in China. We therefore think that upon this account, as well as upon the gencral principle 
of extending the fale of Britith Staples, it may be ceiirable to endeavour to difpofe annually 
of a quantity of Britith lron in China, which can be afforded at about four Tales five Mace 
per Pecul, We fhiall fend a fmall confignment in the approaching Seaton, by way of 
experiment. 