


Extra& Company's General Letter to Canton, dated the goth March 1810. 


Para. 5. Our Experimental Confignments will be as follow ; viz. 
Copper, eon thine of all the deicriptions which we confign to cur Indian Prefidencies, 
Iwenty Tons, 
fh-Iron, of all deferiptions, Fifty Tons. 
Window Giats, part being of larger fizes than we fend to India, Fifty Chefts. 
Red Lead, Five Tons. 


6. We recommend this experimental confignment to your moft particular attention, and 
it is our delire that you report fully upon each and every article which we have now fent out, 
with a view to the exteafien of the confomptionof Britith Manufactures, ifa demand can pol- 
fibly be found, as more fully exprefled in the 214t Para. of our Letter of the 2ath Sepiem- 
ber 1809. 


7. At the fuggeftion of Sir George Staunton, and being at all times defirous of 
encouraging every endeavour to promote the confumption of Britifh Manufatures, we have 
dentby the fl hip Bombay, as an experiment, Ten Balesof Salifbury Flannels : fhould this article 
be approved in China, and a vend for any confiderable quantity be hereafter effected, it- 
would be produétive of advantage to a Manufa@aring Dittriét of England, which has not 
hitherto participated in. our Eaftern Commerce. 

8. As the Merchants have always thewn a reluctance to advance on the original price of 
any article, notwithitanding its value in England may have rifen, we would have the 
price of thefe Flannels in the firft inftance fixed fo as to meet an increafe of price in 
England, namely at an advance of from fifteen to twenty per cent. on the {nvoice price, 
as you may fee a difpotition in the Merchants to accede to. 


Extra@ General Letter from Canton, dated March 1811. 


Para. 47. Since the date of our laft Difpatch, we have taken every opportunity, ably 
to your Honorable Court's recommendation, of paying attention to the difpofal of our 
feveral experimental confignments, particularly that of the Salifbury Flannels. ¢ 


48. The ufual prejudices entertained by the Chinefe ageing any new article of . Import, 
were fully inftanced by the terms of the earlier offers made for thete goods, whether thofe by 
the Outfide Deaiers, or by the Hong Merchants; and their condué on this occafion appeare: 
to be” influenced by the general opinion, that the fuperior finenefs of the material was no 
adequate compenfation for its deficiency of fubflance. 


49. On a further examination, however, this manufadture feems to be confidered by the 
Chinefe more favorably, and under the idea probably that ufes will-be found for which it is 
better adapted than the other fpecies of Woollens already known, more fuitable offers have 
‘been made from different quarters, the moft advantageous of which, hitherto, are thofe of 
Conleequa, who has confented to give what may be confidered equivalent tu Invoice cott, 
namely 33 Tales for the Broad Flannels, and 28 Tales for the Yard-wide. . 


53. Among our experimental confignments of the prefent Seafon, the Duroys ftill remain 
‘on our bands, being hitherto unfaleable; with relpeee to the reft, we are forry to obferve 
we continue tu have but little encouragement from the Merchants, to recommend their 
future import on account of the Company, 