

0 Chine bth Feb, 1808 je. Portof the reception theie goods met with, as the, neral opinion 

77.) Con! ‘Weatie oe ited. Yur as decidedly againit their being appiicable to any ufeful purpote in 
cription of Weorlens, calcd Fur China, aid no higher price than 10 Dollars a piece has been 

Shags. offered; from fome however with whom we ‘have coufulted, it 
oF appears 


1476 Appendix fo IV" REPORT from the Sele& Committee on 


appears poffible they may come into ufe in the Northern Provinces. Until this point car. 
be afcertained, we have thought it better not to difpofe of them on the terms offered, whict 
might operate unfavorably on their future fale; conceiving that if we can bring them into 
ute, even the total lots of the finall quautity now imported is not an object. 


Extraét General Letter from Canton, dated 25th February 1810. 


Para. 280. We’ are forry to inform the Honorable Court that the Woollen Shags, con- 
figued to China laft Seafon, are entirely difapproved of. Every pains has been taken, and 
time allowed to the Chinefe to examine and form their opinion of this manufacture; but 
ail agree in confidering them perfectly inapplicable to any ufeful purpofe in China; few 
were willing to take them on any terms, and none offered more than the price of Long Ells, 
We have, however, prevailed upon thé Merchants to receive them at 10 ‘Tales per piece; 
a price which we are forry to Say will not fave the Company from lofs. 


SERAGLIO RATTEENS and MOSCOW.CLOTHS, 
Extra& of the Company's General Letter to Canton, dated 24th March 180g. 


Para. +9. Mr. Jofeph Cotton jun. of your Eftablifhment, having reprefented to us, that 
Exchin, one of the Hong Merchants, had applied to. him to bring outa few pieces of fuperfine 
Cloth of the defcription worn by Europeans, we have thipped on the Coutts, three bales of 
a Cloth called Seraglio Ratteen, and two bales of Mofcow Cloth, which we wish to be left 
at Mr, Cottan’s dilpofal, That gentleman having expreiled his confidence, that the higher 
claffes of Chinefe would prefer fuperfine Cloths of flouter fabric and finer appeurance than 
the general fupply, we with the fentiments of the Merchants to be obtained thereon, 


Extract General Letter from Canton, dated 26th February 1810. 


Para. 256. Thefe Cloths, agreeably with the Honorable Court's 
diredtions, have been left entirely at Mr. Cotton’s difpofal; but we 
are forry to fay the opinions of the Merchants do not juflify our 
fuppofing they will ever become in extenfive demand; as al- 
though the Cloths are admired, the price few are willing to give. 

: Thofe received the prefent Seafon have realized the firlt colt, as 
will appear by that gentleman’s Letter of the 2oth January, covering alfo an Indent from 
Tinqua, for feventeen bales of various colors, the patterns of which are forwarded ; and a 
number in the packet at the priee of about 205. a yard. 


To Canton, 24th March 1809. 

ag.) A few pieces of Sersglio 
Ratteens and Mofcow Cloths, fent 
out to be left at Mr.-Cotton’s dit 