


54. The Iron is the only article upon which we have bad any offers amounting to a profit 
upon the Invuice coft: bat we doubt whether any larger quantity would find a fale, or 
wheiber at all events fuch an article of trade would be found to merit the attention of the 
Company. 


, Tr 
55. Having had offers for the whole as high as 3,250 Per pecul, and the Invoice Coft 


being about 2,800, there appears tobe certainly a profit upon this confignment of about 8. 6. 
per cent.; but this we are inclined to believe could not be realized upon any extenfive im- 
portation, ss the Jron is not upon the whole approved, being too hard for the means of 
working it with which the Chinefe are acquainted. They are of opinion, however, that very 
finall rods, of abont 1% inch in circumference, being more convenient for ule, might fell 
as high as7 or 8 Drs. per Pecul: of the bars now imported, they value the large at about 
“3 Drs. and the fmali at about 5 Drs. pez Pecul, efteeming however the different kinds, taken 
together, at the average price above flated. : ‘ 

56. We 


478 Appendix fo 1Ve REPORT from the Selc& Committee on 


56 We have noticed on our Proceedings, our intention of tranfmitting to your Efonourable 
Court, fiatements of the feveral offers which we were in expectation of receiving from the 
Merchants and others, for the various articles of Copper manufaure fet out to us this 
Seafon ; and they have accordingly been repeatedly exhibited to them for this purpofe ; but 
we regret that we have been unable to obtain more than general offers for the whole, on the 
plea that the articles themlelves not being in ule among the Chinefe, their value depends 
folely upon the material, aid the form in which it is worked is accordingly indifferent. 


Ts. 

57. The moft favourable offer made us is only 18,700 per Pecul, and is altogether inade- 
quate, as the average cof on the Invoice is not lefs,than about 28 Tales; and although the 
intrinfic vatue of the feveral articles of Bolts, Nails, Staples, &c. night probably be realized, 
if they could be applied to the purpofes of Ship-bailding, for which they feem to be exclu- 
fively intended, their re-exportation from hence with that view would be attended with 
fach difticahies as would wholly defeat the object of rendering them a profitable article of 
export to the Company. 


58. The article ot Window Glafs, which is incladed among our experimental confign- 
ments, is not altogether a new Import, haying frequently been introduced into China ia 
limited quantities by the Commanders and Officers of the Company's thips, and fometimes 
with advantage; that it is not at prefeat however a profitable article, will clearly appear from 
the following comparifon of the Invoice Coft with the Market Price; ihe former, including 


Ts. Ts, 
the value of the packing cafes, is 34,530 per cafe, or 29,250, exclufive of the package. Thefe 
chetts, containing 200 fquare feet of Glafs in each, will not now obtain in this market a higher 
T 