


37. We have not, after the moft firi& enquiries, been able to afcertain that goods of this 
deicription were ever imported by the Americans, nor were they at all known to the 
Chinefe, though it was difcovered on a reference to the Hoppo’s books, the French had 
formerly dealt in this article; but the prices at which they were ufually fold, we have not 
been able to learn. 


BARRAGONS, and EMBOSSED FLANNELS. 
Extract of the General Letter from Canton, dated 2gth January 1804. 


Para. 186. The report of our four principal Merchants, with that of feveral retail Deslers, 
has been very unfavorable to the experiment of the Barragons and Lwbofled Flannels 
forming a part of our Woollen Confignments. For the Emboffed Flannels the beft offer 

om 


was 4. 3, the Company paying the Duties; which, on a comparifon with the prihe 


m,"c. 
coft, 7. 3,1, would leave a lofs of 41 per cent. For the Barragons, whofe firt cot amounts 
to 39 Tales per piece, ouly 30 Tales could be realized, uot deducting the Duties of 11 Tales; 
and this manufacture, though fine in appearance, and approaching in the itiffnefs to the 
Dutch Camlets, is totally unfit for ufe in this Country; the thread of the warp being un- 
ufually large and clumfy, while thofe of the wool were delicate and fine; and it had 
altogether an appearance of coarfenefs which would prevent the richer clafles, for whom by 
its price it was alone attainable, from ufing it in drefs. 


187. The Emboffed Flannels, whether as regarding the manufadture itfelf or the patterns, 
were totally unfit for this country. Our Merchants, with their ufual liberality, have con- 
fented to relieve the Company froin the lois they otherwile mutt fuftain by thefe articles, by 
agreeing of their divifion among them at the prime coft, requefting at the fame time, that 
no more of either may be fent in future. 


188. And we mutt beg leave on this oceafion to remark, that we are decidedly of opinion 
that the extenfion of the fale of onr Woollens in this Country, is more likely to take place 
by keeping up the ftandard, or ameliorating the quality of the eftablifhed ailortments ofually 
imported, which we underfiand are of the kind moft beneficial to our Country, the raw 
material and labour being entirely Britith, than by attempting the introduétion of any novel 
articles, which the prejedices of the Chinefe, fo abborrent of innovation, will always refift: 
and it is to be obfaved, that there is little chance of introducing an inferior kind with 
fuccels, as it will probably be burthened with a duty equal to a fuperior manufattare; and 
this not confined to the Foreign Importation, but accompanying various internal Duties 
in its progrefs through the Empire, 

189, The 


474 Appendix 0 IV® REPORT JSrom the Sele& Committee on 


189. The Honorable Court have frequently been advifed of our ineffectual attempts to 
refift this arbitrary and capricious affeflment of Duties; but it feems now an etiablithed 
regulation at the Hoppo’s Office, that no article, however interior in quality, fhall be affeffed 
ata rate lower than that already and ufually imported. 