


Mr. COOKE’s WOOLLENS. 


Extract Letter from Canton to the Secret Committee, dated the 2gth January 1804. 


Your Honourable Committee’s marked Inftructions called our particular attention to the 
difpotal of the, improved Woollen Manofaclure, and we fhould be happy to have to com- 
municate that there was a probability of its ever obtaining a favorable iale in this Country, 
‘or of forming a part of the Honorabie Company’s confignment. 


Our firft attention was to get it claffed at as low arate of Duty as poffible; for this pur- 
pole we called on the particular attention of our Merchants. Our endeavours for this 
objet were, however, unfuccefsful. The affortment was compoied of fuch variety of fabric 
and appearance, that Hoppo’s Officers exercifed their power of ¢laffing as their different 
femblances firuck them, or as their caprice diGated. he fame Cloths by different thips 
are diflerently claffed, and fome of them at a very high rate; and we have reafon to appre- 
hend, in future importations, they will abide by the higher affeflment; and the Honorable 
Court have been frequently adviled by us, in our public department, of our inability to refit 
this arbitrary valuation. 


We diftributed them among our Merchants, and the great retail of Cloth Shops, requefing 
® particular attention to attain a faithfal account of their v They were generally 
received with difapprobation, and many of them, from their mixture of colours, und as being 
firiped and {potted, were on fight declared altogether improper for this market. 


When the Accounts required were delivered, although there was fome difference in them, 
they appeared to us generally unfavorable ; but we could uot determine to what extent till 
the Woodford’s arrival, having neither Invoice, nor any other document which might inform 
us of theireflimated value. SThofe, when received, confirmed our apprehenfions, and their 
comparifon with the prices offered will prove the total impoffibility of introducing this 
manufa@ture with advantage; only 6,000 Dollars being offered for what is invoiced 
at above £. 5,000. 


With regard to prior advantageous fales of this manufacture noticed by the Honorable 
Committee, we muft remark, that on fome articles, particularly Woollens, the Duty bears 
fo great a proportion to their value, that a faving of part of that by a contraband fale will 
itfelf yield a profit, when a regular and honorable fale might occafion confiderable lols, 
And the fluuations of this market, particularly in the prices of the Exports, are fo great, 
and they fuffer fuch a depyeciation at certain periods, that {ales made by barter frequently 
have the appearance of being advantageous, when the fame articles, if fold forready money, 
might have entailed a heavy lofs. 


We underftand fome {mall quantities of thefe Woollens have been brought here in Private 
Trade, part of which have been difpofed of at a lois, part returned as unialeable. 


Extract of the Secret Letter from Canton, dated 6th March 1804, 