


a fee est 
148,502 | 15,270 | }22,784,037 | 2,563,204 | 2,787,305 | 229,196 


=== 


618,562 
97,763 


Amount paid more than at the foregoing Rates - ~ - £, 520,799 


Dollar, that Refidency is excluded in this Account, 


(Errors excepted.) Cha Cartwright, 
Acct, Gent, © %. 


‘498 Appendix fo" IVs REP ORT fromehe Select’ Committee on 


Appendix, .No; 27. < 
STATEMENT delivered in by Cuanizs Grant, Efq.. a Pebiter of the. Committee 
ny 16th March 1812. x 
ee the greater part of thofe Gk, arife from the’ maintenance of various fubordingte 
Fadtories and Aurungs, which have been eftablithed for the provifion of the Company's Indian 
Inveftment, itis not to be difputed that they moft naturally fall upon the Commercial branch of ‘the 
Company's Affairs, and fiould be deduded from the Profits of the Trade. Butas it may be alleged 
that the Charges are needlefsly great, and that whatever is exceffive in them is to be attributed to 
_ the improvident management of a p Conary. it ras be fair to fute fome Confiderations which bear 
eee this point. : . - 
Thofe fubordinate FaGtories, with their. Dependencies werey: generally fpeaking, ereéted by the 
Company in the early period of their efteblifhment in India, when the coft of fuch Buildings was 
~ @liaper than they have fince become, and the Profits on the In ‘Trade greater. They were made 
_ fufficiently fabftantial and fpacious to bea fecurity for the Property contuined in them, and a com- 
~ fortable refidence for the European Servants of the Company. “Thefe places became the firft feats of 
the Manufactures of the Country, for the Company, in confequence of being a permanent body, 
gave employment to the Manufacturers all the year round, and from year to year; by which means 
Workmen continued attached to them from Father to Son, and from this contivuity, as well as from > 
the tafte of Europe for finer’ fabrics than were in general v by the Natives, the beft fandard of 
qualities was eftablithed’ und upheld by thofe Fa€tories. fn confequence alfo. of this fyfteim of per- 
manency, the Gompatiy did not, upon every change of in Europe, immediately difcontinue 
employing the Workmen of & particular article ey len a Jittle out of fathion, becaufe thefe 
Workmen could not turn themfelyes eafily, other lines and ince the Company have poffefied 
Territory, it has alfo been generally found € ppt 10 uphold ws much as pottible the provifion of 
the Company's Inveftment, -becaufé a failure in’ the wfual Advances for it was found to affect the 
abt moft of the Manofaéturers being alfc ° iecupiers of Land, 


she fealeMof tote Edabliliinents, aud” the” expenfe of keeping them in repair and properly 
guarded, may certainly be rather Seer than'would be deemed neceffiry if they were to be formed 
anew at the prefent day, when the Couvtry i is fo much under the power of our fuperior fyftem c of Go- 
‘vernment, “but fill: that feale is preferable to an entire reduction of them for fomething more ti mple 
_and diminutive, even if it were not ‘always expedient to have places of fume fecurity for yeluable 
property againft fudden convullion and diforder, from the danger of which no Country can be fuid 
to be abfolutely free: And it may alfo be obferved, that 4 local’ Britiih influence is thus extended 
“to different parts of the Country. ina manner moft conciliating to the Natives, that is by laying out 
Money in promoting their ufeful apultty. . 