

Why i—Because it was to supply a contract with Government that the order was, 
es to us. 7 ry : 

fo you know the times at which the ds of the private Merchants are ordered by 
the Government of India to be brought thio theke rareliode I speak now particularly of 
Bengal?—t believe in the month of October, or the begiuning of November H but I 

annderstand 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. pei 


| 


‘understand it is intimated by the Board of Trade to the Merchants that they must apply Ur. Poe | 


for their freight in the month of September. 

Is not the month of September in the very middle of the season for growing and 
manufacturing Indigo?—I am not prepared to answer that question correctly; but [ 
believe it is impossible for the manufacturers of Indigo to ascertain what’ quantity 
they can grow at so early a period in the year. 

en by what means is the Agent or Merchant enabled to ascertain what quantity 
of tonnage he shall require for Indigo?—Ie must ask for such a quantity of tonnage as he 
‘thinks his Indigo will amout to. 

But supposing either that the crop should turn out very productive or yery deficient; 
sin those two cases, what is he to do?—IfF productive, he would have considerable 
difficulty I apprehend in getting a tonnage for the different quantity, but if deficient 
he must either pay the freight, or fill up the tonnage with other articles. 

Then these must have been articles that he had not been prepared beforehand to ex- 
port, otherwise he would have asked for tonnage for them too ?—I have frequently known 
articles come home in tonnage of that description which would not have been otherwise 
sent, and those articles have not uncommonly scold for less than the freight and the 


charges, 
The foods you say are ordered to'be in the Company’s warchouses about the month 
of Octaber eve or the beginning of November. 

Have the extra Ships usually sailed at or about that period ?—I believe they seldom 
or ever have sailed before the montlis of May or June afterwards. 

goods are to lie in the Company’s warehouses from the month of November 
till the month of May or June?—Yes, unless the Merchants agree to ship them on board 
the regular Ships at an increased rate of freight, and the Company agree to allow it. 

Do you happen to know whether the Company charge any warehouse rent? —I 
really cannot say. k 

At what time are the Bills usually drawn for those goods?—When the goods are 
deposited in the Company’s warehouses. 

_Are those Bills generally drawn after date, or after sight?—Almost always after 
sight. 

PD hetieve it rarely or never happens, that there is not an opportunity of conveyance 
from Bengal to England between the months of November and May?— The Com- 
pany’s requlae Fleet constantly sail between those two periods. 

Does that cireumstance occasion any loss either to the Merchant there, or any ad- 
vance to the Agent -here?—It occasions the loss of interest of course to the Merchant 
there, and the inconvenience of advance to the Agent here. i 