

Is not the time, at which the Bills are made payable, adapted to the period that 
generally elapses before the sale, and is not that time fixed on the presumption of the goods 
-sailing when ready ?—The Bills fer all goods shipped in private trade are drawn at three 
and six months sight; but it happens sometimes that those drawn for oes shipped 
in the privilege of the Company's Officers, are made peraile go days afier the prompt 
(the day on which the payment for the goods sold at the India House becomes due) of 
ithe goods so shipped. 


(No. 3.) 


Martis, 9° die Maii 1809. 
Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. John Innes, again called in, and examined. 


“YOU said the other day that you would give us a distinct Statement of the difference 
of Insurance between ship and ships, and Insurance upon the extra and regular Ships of the 
India Company ; can you now state what it is?—The Insurance for £.100 effected on 
-a regular Ship, at £. 7 per cent. will require, with commission and duty, £. 108. 108, 
‘to cover the Insurance ; and upon an India-built ship at 10 Guineas per cent. will require, 
£.112. 15. to cover the Insurance for £.100. for the homeward Voyage; an Insurance, 
upon ship or ships at 15 Guineas will require £.119. 15s. to cover the £. 100 so insured ; 
by which Statement, in the event of a loss happening, the Merchant would lose £.11. 5 s- 
by having the Insurance made upon ship or ships, instead of being made upon a regular 
Ship; and £.4. 58. upon its being ade upon an India-built Ship by name, instead of its, 
being made upon a regular Ship. 

You stated yesterday that one of the grievances complained of, was the loss that, the 
Merchants suflered from being obliged to insure upon ship or ships, instead of insurin; 
-upon an individual ship by name; is this the extent of that loss?—It is in the event 
-capiure or loss happening to the property so insured. 

4s there any and what difference in the event if the ship arrives safe?—There is the 
Joss of the commission upon the difference between the sum insured upon the ship by. 
name and upon ship or ships, but no other. sf 

‘ou stated on Saturday another grievance, which was, that Merchants did not get 
freights at the times they wished for it; have you ever applied for any freight to India at 
any time lately?—We frequently have occasion to apply for freight to India; the last. 
freight we applied for which we had any difficulty in obtaining, was in November last, 
the 7th I think; it is only within a fortnight that that freight has been granted to us. 

And when is it to be given to you?—It is probable that the ship on which it is 
granted may suilin the course of the next month, or the beginning of July. 

Is not such delay in procuring a seeiate 2s you have mentioned a considerable incon- 
venience to your principal in India?—Unquestionably the inconvenience must be. very: 
oe and, in this instance, an inconvenience may very probably be suffered by the 

iovernment in India. 