


India Board, Whiteial, 
18th June, 1801. W. BRODRICK. | 


Jvpoment ArrimMep. 


(No. 2.) “i 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. rey 


(No. 2.) 


MINUTES OF EVIDENCE. 


Committee on the East India Company’s Affairs. 


Sabbati, © die Maii 1809. 
Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronct, in the Chair. 
Mr. John Innes, called in, and examined. > 


© you carry on a considerable trade between India and England ?—A very con- 
siderable trade as Agent. 7 

Will you state to the Committee, to what extent the regulations of the Act of 
1793 have answered the PEEP ORe of the PrivateMerchants, in facilitating their trade between 
India and England ; and if they have not, what are the impediments of which the Private 
Merchants complain?—I did not get the information to attend this Committee till a 
Tate hour last night, and am not sufliciently prepared to answer that question in such 
detail as 1 should wish, but I will be ae upon another day to give that intor- 
mation to the Committee; but, in a general way, am prepared to answer it now. The 
principal impediment is the difficulty that the Merchants in India have in obtainin; 
freight for their sopdes when ready to ship for this country, and the ignorance in uabick 
they are kept’of the names of the ships in which the goods are to be sent; by their want 
of ‘such freight the Agents here are brought under advance for the Bills drawn against the 
prone, consigned to them, because it seldom happens that that property can be disposed of 
here in time to meet their payment, and by not knowing the names of the ships they 
are prevented from giving orders for the Insurance upon the particular ship by name, 
the Insurance being obtained at a better rate, than when it is made on ship or aos it 
is therefore for some time past customary for the ts in India to have their Insurances 
effected in India rather than in this country, by which means they are subjected to ahigher 
premium, and the Agents here to the hazard of having the payment of their Policies refused, 
in the event of loss, ay the Houses where they are made payable in this country. 

“ Do you think it possible the Private Merchant if at liberty to send the 
their own way, could always anticipate the Insurance here upon pasticular ships >—Cert 
not, if they are rerentoh as they have frequently been, from having any intercourse with 
their domespontes in this country for several months; but if we have the Continent 
open, and could write oyer-land as fener then we should be kept regularly advised of the 
quantity of goods to be consigned, and the ships in which they would be sent. 

Whether, when you insure upon ship or ships from India, instead of insuring upon a 
particular ship, and the goods are afterwards found to have been Jaden on any of the 
regular Ships of the Company, you do not get a return of Premium of the difference or 
nearly the whole difference of the rate of Insurance on ship or ships, and oa such par- 
ticular ship?—Yes, we do; but then the additional freight charged by the Company 
for goods sent by the regular Ships, is more than equal to the whole Premium. 