

What is the difference iu the rate of Insurance, between the Company's regular 
Ships, and the private Indian Ships ?—If they sail with SOnyOys only 2 per cent. .. 

You have mentioned that the Merchants in India are obliged to imsure their goods 
there on account of the uncertainty of transmitting timely advice to Engiand; are they not 
induced to insare in India, on account of receiving the premiums of this great branch of 
business among themselves?—That may be one reason why part of their Insurances 
are done in India, but the Merchants never would run the risk of having their Bills 
returned with protests for non-payment in the eyent of the Joss of their Tropeny, by cap- 
ture or otherwise, for the advantages they would derive by eifecting such Insurances in 
India. pays Listes 

Have the Insurance Offices in India agents and funds to pay the losses in England? 
—They have agents, but very frequently those agents are without any funds belonging 
to the Office. Bh Sts 

‘Are the losses, upon any Policies made in India, payable-in England?—They are; 
but the agents in Logland would not pay such losses i they were without funds be- 
longing to the Offices. 5 : , . 

Do not the Offices in India, when they stipulate for such payment, provide funds or 
credit in England for that purpose ?—The only tunds they provide are the Bilis drawn by 
the Shippers of goods upon their agents in England for the premium. — 

Do you know of any instances of demands for such losses haying been refused by 
agents in England —Yes, I do. 

351 & 162, x Is 


Mr. Innes, 


sere 


Bo Appendis, No. 47-—SUPPLEMENT 0 the FOURTH REPORT 
; uent occurrence?—No, I believe not; but I apprebend it will soon 


i tter of fre be ‘ 

. ekaaats a a eoasiderable amount, when the Policies effected for the shipments by the 
Waipole become duc. tes * 3 ‘ 3 

i a the delay in dispatching ships from India, Bills drawn upon 

You mention that, from the delay pe i Aenminnte the ee te sige ; 


ds become payable before the goods are realized. cord f 
Sean 4s the Shas state of the Continent, do you think it would be possible to prevent 


i whatever time the ships might sail from India?—It would certainly be prevented, 
‘called acne, if the ships eae to sail when the goods were ready. The Bills are 
drawn the moment the goods reach Calcutta, and it frequently pln that these goods 
cannot be shipped for want of freight for several inonths afterwards. : 

Do not goods come to Caleutta when no ship can sail for England ?—Then the Bills 
cannot be transmitted to this country for acceptance, as we have had no communication 
over-land for several years. * 4 i . 4 

Are not Bills Namenies Tangential by neutral Ships?—It is some time since any 

tral Ships have arrived from India. : 
mWith reagent to the great article of Indigo, is not the crop of 1807 still unsold here, 
‘on account of the state of the times?—It is certainly unsold; but the sale commences 
‘on Monday next. 4 

Would the inconvenience, which yon have described, be Fepedicd by, eriods being 
fixed for the sailing of ships, and those periods being strictly adhered to ?—1 think it would, 
in a great measure. , ! ' 