

un 


sobferved by Lord Hale, that natural-born fubjects of this country entangled themfelves 
confliding duties, when they became naturalized fubjedts of another State. Yet it is clear 
‘that we, andail thecivilized nations of Europe, do adopt the natural-born fubjects of other 
countries. (See Vatell on the Law of Nations.) Our Law gives certain privileges, and 
sithholds certain privileges from our adopted fubjects; andfowe may couceive that fimiler 
regulations take place among all other nations. But our adopted citizens are entitled to all 
forts of Commercial privileges with ovr own natural-born fubjects. We fhould consider 

- them as Englith, in the language of the Navigation AG. The United States, acting on the 
fame principles with us, fhould confider their adopted fubjeéts as within their Laws; 
they thould confider the natural-born fubjects of the King of Great Britain, which 
thave been adopted by them, as entitled to all the Commercial. privileges with the 
natural born {ubjects of the United States; as we fhould confider the natural-bora fubjects 
of the United States, if adopted by us, to be within our Navigation Laws. The Cale feems 
to work itfelf clear, and comes to this queftion, What difference does the circumftance of 
adopted fabjects of the United States, being natural-bora fubjects of Great Britain, make? 
Is there any general principle in the Law.of Nations out of which this adoption fprings? 
Let-us come to our own Municipal Laws. Lord Hale fays, we may involve ourfelves in 
confliGing duties. This is very vaguely faid; there is no precifion in it. What are thefe 
duties w may be conflicting? “By our Law, perfons muft not arm themfelves againit 
the Pareat State. Perhaps, if they return to this country, they may be prevented from 
returning to the State that has adopted them. They may be bound to receive the King’s com- 
mands, Whether the proclamation which has been introduced into this Caufe ‘has the fame 
effect, is. a queftion not necellary to be here difcufled; it cannot havea greater effect, nor 
of adifferent nature, and therefore it may be left out of this cafe. : 


Our Municipal Laws may attach on fuch natural-born fab et in fome other cafes, but 
I conceive in no inftance of fait analogy, which can govern the prefent cafe; and we have 
had no fuch argument from analogy ithe courte of this preceeding shall it be allowed 
to be faid, that a natural-born fubject fhall not trade to the Ea ies, though he is an 
adopted fubject of another country, whofe fubjeéts in general are allowed to trade to the 
Fatt Indies? Shall any man’be permitted to fay the reit of the King’s fubjetts are not 
allowed, and you being a ead fubje¢t are not? This anfwer may be made: 1 have 
privileges which the reft of the King’s fubjeéts have not. [am the ing’s fubject, but I 
am alto a fubject of the United States of “America as well as of Great Britain. “You, as a 
Britith fubjedt, ought not to trade to the lofs and injury of the Eaft India Company. ‘This 
le may and ought to be carried on by the the United States, under the 
authority “of the Laws of this Country; under the of the fame Laws 
ahat give the Eatt India Company  themfelves their Mon They may fuffer 
a JofS, but it is damnum fine injuria. It being once granted that’ the fubjecis 
of Great Britain may become fubj of the United States of America, there is no 
breach of moral or legal duties, no conflict of duties, in claimi and exercifing the pri- 
yileges that belong to that charaéter. On the fame principles of reafoning, is it not fuf- 
ficietitly effablifedl to be now taken for clear Law, on the grounds on which we ought to 
declare this conttraétion with refpect to a natural-born fubjot naturalized, and afterwards 
become an adopted fubject of a foreign State, that he is to be confidered under our Na- 
vVigation Laws as a fubjeét of that foreign State, when aéting in the character of Majter 
of a veflel, and acting in the fervice of that foreign State. Such aman is to many purpofes 
a fabject of that country ; he is fo within the words of the Navigation AG ; he is Efibjedt 
of the United States by the 37th of the King. In point of title to this charaéter of fubject, 
he is fufliviently fo even within our Navigation Laws; I mean he is fufficiently adopted, 
according to the Cafe in ae to be confidered as a fubjecét of that country within the 
Navigation Laws: Suppofe aman to be a natural-born fabjeét of His Majetty; I am not 
pee ‘to fay that circumftance will control or fufpend the legal operation of his being 
=a aject of the United States. It appears to me that there is no conflict of duties. Both 
characters may ftand together: and if fome eagles inconveniences, fuch as thofe fuggefied 
He us in the argument (though thele I confefs appear very remote) if fuch inconveniences 
hould follow ; if thefe BE oe are not of confequence enough to prevent the prac- 
tice of adopting the fabjeGs of Great Britain by every other State in Europe, I cannot fay 
they ought to contro! the legal confequence. . " 
pi mt ae eae we are all of opinion that there is no Erroz in this Judgment, and that it 