

Have the extra Ships with the private trade sailed at fixed periods ?~On the contrary ; 
the extra Ships have very frequently been dispatched at a season of the year the most 
unfavourable tor a voyage to England, and the consequence in several cases have been, that 
the goods were damaged in their passage down the Bay. of Bengal, particularly in a receut 
one to a very great extent. If the ship is dispatched from Bengal at an unfavourable 
season, the voyage is unfavourable throughout. 

At what time are the Bills usually drawn from Calcutta upon the proceeds of the goods?— 
They are given about the period of the goods being delivered to the Company's export 
warehouse, for the purpose of being ship; 

Are those goods always dispatched within a short period after they are put into the Com- 
pany’s go-downs?—Not always ; I have known them sometimes lay there a great length of 
time before they were. 

When that circumstance happens, is it not attended with a considerable inconvenience to 
the Drawers of the Bills?—No doubt, because the Bills are payable at a fixed period, and 
unless the goods arrive to meet those Bills, they must lead hitn, the correspondent in Lon= 
don, into an advance of cash to meet those Biils without their possessing the security even 
of _a bill of lading. 

For which of course he charges you Interest and Commission ?—Always. 

It is stated to us, that some inconvenience arose from the not being at liberty to “assort 
your cargoes 2s you please ; have you found such an inconvenience ?—Undoubtedly. 

Js that an inconvenience to a Merchant situated as your House at Calcutta was, of 
any considerable extent ?—It may be of extreme importance, because a Jarge quantity of 
one kind of goods may come in one ship, and be too much for the market ; whereas if it 
were divided in the different periods of the season, they would all arrive in a small pro- 
portion to more favourable sales; a large importation of any one article of course occasions 
a glut in the market; an assorted cargo would be more valuable. 

How do gr make your Insurances here upon ship and ships ?—Our House has 

152 & 182, just 


Mr. Bazett, | 
cate Pacnsiatal 


4 per ton, upon goods that we were compelled to © 


86 Appendix, No. 47—SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


Mr. Bazett. just made an Insurance of £.200,000 for a single correspondent upon ship or ships, from 
‘ , hot knowing upon what ship the goods are likely to come. 

Does that make any difference in the Insurance ?—Certainly ; an additional premium is 

required. 
“Ww hen your goods arrive here, or when you export from this country to India, are there 
any inconveniences arise ?—As to the arrival of goods, I do not think there are any of 
magnitude enough to be noticed; they are usually brought to sale in the way that as @ 
Merchant 1 should wish. With regard to the exports, I certainly have felt very great incon- 
venience, irom being disappointed of the freight for which Ehad applied, “I will if you 
please state a specific case, a recent one; in April 1805 I applied for tonnage in order to 
export goods that were commissioned from a House of business in Calcutta: these 
were directed about three months afterwards to be shippéd-on the Northumberland ; part of 
these goods were left out for want of tonnage. Those were the last ships'sailing ; it being in 
the month of June, the ships Northumberland and Euphrates had both a circuitous Voyage 
to muke ; that is to say, they were to go toSt. Helena before proceeding to India, which was a 
disadvantage. Some of the goods I have mentioned were left out, for want of tonnage, although: 
the freight fur the whole had been paid in to the Company's proper Offices: these goods, so left 
out, I naturally expected would be shipped by the first ships of the following season ; they 
were not, nor upon the second Fleet of that next season ; they were shipped in May 1806, 
being above twelve months after the application for freight was made, in the Tottenham. In 
consequence of this delay of twelve months in the shipment, the House who commissioned 
those goods from India refused to receive them, and they were sold for our account, who 
were the Shippers, to a very considerable loss; conceiving myself entitled to look to the 
Honse who ordered these goods, for a loss that derived itself from no fault of mine, but 
solely from the tonnage not being allotted upon earlier ships, I am at this moment engaged 
in a controversy with the House who ordered the goods, in order to recover this loss, which 
he disputes, upon the ground that he did not receive his goods in due time. Another incon- 
yenience which I have experienced is, that when the application is made for freight to the 
_ Honourable the Court of Directors, not knowing when it will be granted, I dare not orderto 
be packed a variety of. ls that are of a perishable nature, until I am told shat tonnage 
is ready to receive it, This is frequently done at a fortnight’s notice ; that is to say, I am told 
that op such a day in about a fortnight you must have the goods ready for shipping: during 
that pruot it is impossible to purchase, pack, and prepare for shipping, goods, some of 
which may come from distant manufacturing towns, and some by water, of which the’ 
passage is uncertain; provided the goods are not ready upon the day that is notified, there 
js a fine chargeable upon every package, which 1 myself have never paid, but I have known 
it to be paid by others. : 