

What proportion of the extra Ships do you suppose to have sailed from India at un- 
seasonable periods ?—It is impossible for me to state from recollection how many of them 
may have so sailed. ; 

Do you suppose that the generality or the half of them have so sailed ?—Speaking from 
recollection, without reference to any document, I think more than an_half have sailed at 
a Reriod which I do not consider desirable, subsequent to the end of Mareh. 

‘ou have mentioned the inconvenience of having Bills drawn payable before the goods 
are realized ;is not that an unavoidable consequence of the present state of the trade in 
Europe ?—No doubt if | wished to support the value of goods by taking them in at the 

uiblic sales for disposal at a more favourable opportunity, 1 incur that inconvenience, but 
it is not forced upon me as in the other case, it is merely optional. 

But with respect to the time of bringing your goods to sale, has it not been from your 
own choice that you havé delayed the sale of them, and consequently the realizing the 
produce ?—We have sometimes wished them to be brought to as early a sale as possible; 
sometimes to postpone, according to the demand in the market. 

In the last two or three years, have not the sales of the private goods been put off 
repeatedly at the desire of the Merchant ?—They have repeatedly. 

In comparing the advantage of lading your goods from India on the ships of your owa 
and on the Company’s Ships, have you not the advantage of being exempted from the 
Joss attaching on goods put on board as dead weight, which commonly yield no profit — 
There is no doubt that during a war, when the article of Saltpetre is not allowed to be ex- 
ported by individuals, it is difficult to substitute dead weight that will carry a profit, or 
even be a saving from loss; and by shipping in the Company’s Ships, this is certainly re- 
medied in some degree in time of war. 

You have mentioned, that in the way in which the Merchants are obliged to ship their 
goods from India in the Company’s Ships, they oceusionally clash with each other at 
this market; do not ail the goods shipped in the same scason from India come to sale 
here together ?—All ihe goods shipped in the same season do not come to sale together 
assuredly, because there are two sales in the year. 

151 & 182. Z Do 


Mr, Bazelt. 
x y 


88 Appendix, No. 47--SUPPLEMENT (0 the FOURTIT REPORT 


_ Do they come regularly to the market at the same time at stated periods ?—They are sold 
at periods not fixed, 

You have mentioned a case of applying for tonnage at home, and not getting part of it 
till the scason following; do you know any other instance of this kind?—Yes, I do; it 
is in regard to freight for Bombay applied for by our House also, the name of the ship [ 
do not remember ; but a gentleman now summoned to attend, Mr. Fawcett, who conducts 
that department of our business, must have a competent knowledge o: 

What was the amount of the sum you paid in advance upon the freight?—I do not recollect 
what the freight at that time was. 