


A 
tet 
o 
cal 
=i 
=) 
4 
% 
4 
nS 
+ 
6 
a 
ry 
# 
§ 
Es 
< 


s8dig ymy-knunoD ssditig wag sfuvduiog | -sdiyg aynay soudwoo | uray ssdiyg 10 drug *sdiyg yytaq-fyun0g sadiyg naieg sSavduiog | vsding arjn3ay s,(uedwog 


VIGQNI NI SWOAIWGUG ‘adOUNA NI SWOAINAUd 


on the Affairs of The LAST INDIA COMPANY. 83 


(No. 4.) 
Foris, 11° die Maii 1809. 
Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. Richard Campbell Bazett, called in, and examined. 
WHEN did you last return from India?—In 1802. 


I belies you were concerned in a very considerable house in Calcutta ?—I was, from the 
year 1788. s . 

T believe you are now concerned in an Agency-house here?—I am. 

' Was you in India muci engaged in the export of goods from India to Earope?—Very 
largely. 

Tsuppose you are aware of the regulations that took place in the year 1 id the new 
modification of those regulations that took place in the years 1891 8 Lg 

State whether you think those regulations have afforded the ‘fae to the private trade, 
which it requires to carry it on with advantage ?—I certainly do not think that they have, 

> Can you state any of the impediments that have becn thrown in the way of the private 
trader in consequence of these regulations ?—The inconveniences or impediments that have 
occurred, originated principally in regard to the tonnage, both as to the cost of it, as well 
as to the manner in which we are called upon to supply the freight for that tonnage. 

Can you detail those inconveniences ?—One of the principal inconveniences is, that the 
periods at which we ere forced to apply for the tonnage, are such as will not admit our 
calculating with any degree of nicety what tonnage we shall require in the course of that 
season; the month of September was that in which our applications for tonnage were de- 
manded from us inIndia, and at that period of the year the principal article of exportation, I 
allude to Indigo, from our port of Calcutta was not then manufactured in such a degree as 
to enable us to say how much we should require tonnage for ; the price of the freight demanded 
by the Hondarable Company completely prevents us from shipping many gruff goods, and 
even comes too heavy upon such as Indigo and other goods of greater value; we have been 
charged as high in the year 1806 as £. zi 
ship on regular Ships, because theré“Were no extra Ships, none of that'sort of ‘tonnage 
which the Ret of Parliament intended us to be supplied with, in India. 

The inconvenience arising from the being obliged to ask the quantity of tonnage before. 
you can ascertain your quantity of , Must it not be attended with either making you 

juire too much or too little? Assu ly. ‘ . 
“ir you happen to demand too much, does the Company make you bay the freight upon 
all you demand ?—Those are the terms advertised always, to avoid which we frequently have 
shipped Boose which we were well aware could not answer to us to ship, rather than forfeit 
the freight. : - 

"Supposing you demanded too little, could you at all times with facility procure the 
additional freight that you might require?—If there was 3] freight, Ido presume the 
Board of Trade at Calcatta would have allowed individual to fillit; but I have known 
many instances in which there was not spare freight, and our goods have laid over till the 
next year. 