

Do you pay your export freight here in advance ?—Yes; always. ; 

Ts that usual in other exports ’—The freight in other trades is paid when you get your bill 
of lading when the goods are on board; but in the case that I have just stated, with regard to 
the Tottenham, that freight was paid above twelve months before the goods left England. 

Whether those inconveniences that you have stated either from India ur from Euroy 
would arise if you were af liberty to export and import in ships of your own 7Cereainly 
nots we have had experience of that under Lord Wellestey’s permission to send ships to 
this country; when I came to this country, T brought a considerable property belonging 
to the House. was there concerned with, and others, in one of the country Ships, and came 
passenger with my goods myself; the cargo was assorted for the demand of this market, 
and came to a profitable sale on a freight proportionably low; the freight on the regular 
ships would have been too heavy for some of those articles ; the article of Cotton is one 
that is the least capable of bearing a heavy freight from its ‘bulk. 

Are you of opinion, from-your knowledge of the trade to and from India, that if the re- 
atrictions and inconveniences which you have stated were removed, that the trade either 

\Z from India or from Europe would admit of considerable extension ?-€I am decidedly of opi- 
nion, that were the Merchants residing in India allowed to export their goods on the Indiae 
built bottoms, and to load those goods without the interference of the Government there, that 
the trade“ of India to this country would be. very greatly extended. Much of that which 
now goes into foreign ships would not be sent to foreigners, but sent home on our own ac- 
counts,; The impediment of the high tonnage payable on the Company’s Ships frequently 
compels a.sale on the spot, in preference to sending them to this market, more particularly 
since the recent disappointment that was experienced by the Merchants in India in regard 
to the charge made for the tonnuge allotted to them on certain regular Ships of the Com- 
pany, which were tendered to them in consequence of there being no extra Ships in India to, 
receive the private goods ; those goods so shipped upon the Lord Duncan, Walpole, Surrey, 
and Castlereagh, were charged £. 44 per.ton. This was in 1806, when no extra Ships were 
arrived in lodia,” ee : 

The following season an advertisement of Government in the Calcutta Gazette, of the 
goth July 1807, which [now deliver in, states that £.32. 5s. per ton would be charged for 
goods laden on regular Ships for the season 1805, and £.30. 10 s. for 1805; these ships in that 
season went home, and to the astonishment of the Shippers, they found the freight-account 
made up at £.44 per ton, . Representations of the apparent injustice of this charge, aud its 
inconsisiency with the advertisement alluded to, were made by the agents resident in Lon- 
don on the part of their principals in India, to-which no answer to this hour has been offi- 