

How much has the freight arisen upon private Indian Ships since the year 1802, whether 
in India or to Europe ?—I do not know te extent of the rise in India upon ships tradin; 
from port to port; but I am informed by. our friends there, that they could afford to a 
home their ships ata freight of £..22. 203. as I have already stated, 

Is it not one of the great objects of the Indian Merchants to haye Indian Ships employed 
in the commerce of Europe, independent of all facilities in the transport of their goods j— 
It is an object for a Merchantat all times to make his capital, whether employed in shipping 
or otherwise, as advantageous to him as possible. 

Do you think that in the time of Peace, when we are not loaded with the charges and in- 
conveniences of war, and the Americans have no advantage over us from their neutral cha- 
racter, they could compete with the India Company or British Individuals in the trade from 
India to Europe ?—Certainly, if the present restrictions imposed by the Company upon pri- 
yate trade are to bee! ste of eee apy. a oy 

Do those restriétions, ly, the irregular time iling, waiti convoys, i 
freight, arise out of a time of war ?—Not always; they arise ioe the impolide wae 
tions of the East India Company. ; 4 

State which of them arise from impolitic regulations —The mode of loading their ships, 
the great expense of their equipment, and a saueey of other matters. 

In the advantages which you conceive to be able from the employment of private 
ships, do you include British as well as India xe and British Merchants resident ia Eng- 
land as well as in India ?—I haye generally alluded to India-built Ships, and Mechants re- 
sident in India; but I am persuaded it would be greatly to the advantage of the East India 
Company, and to the interest of this country, to allow British Ships as well as India-built 
Ships, and British Merchants as well as Merchants resident in India, ‘to trade frecly to and 
from India, ure. y, r 

When you speak of the increase in the export of British manufactures thereby to be 
produced, do you mean to say that the Spon of Britisl: manofactures might be 
greatly increased among the Natives of India?—I should think so; because where the Na- 
tives of any country can purchase an article at a cheap rate, they will consume a greater quau- 
tity of that article than if they paid a high price for it. . 

Do you conceive that any difference in the rate of freight would alter the taste of the 
Natives, with respect to the articles of consumption ?—I should suppose not. 


151 & 182. 28 


p95 pBbr sags ee: “6 giscar cient gt oe a= 
28 ete ey 2 MUA ~ seaming org - diyg apnq-mpuyuesaed = - = 2 
Sp Bp ~~ 7 aneus “Sind poe worseyaciog “amjimasg yates wos aod £7 ye pasosos Tdygaweseas w sed spot wi ost -F ad 
‘ “ONOp Yaad JAvy saduLINsHy OW yng ‘soy Siq uaa E : 
SARY PINOAL a1 ayy] JO $199 sad svaNiND £ usaq suq Weopaey UV] —*paiiuss sey aourysur zoyio ou amy apis suite quoa sod £-F seas “togy ut eymayea ye “eooMy of vIpuy moay Tuareg OUT, 