

Do you know any thing of the times of the sailing of the extra Ships from England? 
—That entirely depends upon the pleasure of the Court of Directors. 

Do they sail in cata the periods of the year, and at the times that are most 
convenient for the shippers of goods here, or do they arrive in India at the time that would 
be most convenient for the shippers of goods there?—-It is a convenience for people 
here to ship their goods at any season, but it is evident that these extra Ships.are not dis- 
patched from here at proper scasons, otherwise they would arrive in India at the time 
proper for their being dispatched to this country. 

Do you_know of any extra Ships that have been taken up by the Company for one 
voyage?—They have latcly teken up three extra Ships for one voyage. r 

jo you know at how much per ton?—One of them belongs to the House in 
which I am a partner; the freight we have for her is £.39. 15s. per toa, payable on 
her return. 2 

Does that £. 99. 15s. include war contingencies and extra allowances ?—It does. 

Is it upon one of those ships that you ere to have the freight you mentioned ?—E under 
stand itis. 

What freight are you to pay Nine Pounds per ton for the outward foyaee. 

Is’ it your opinion that in time of Peace, with the facilities that might be granted to 
do away ‘these objections that you have stated, that the Private Merchant, either in England 
or in India, could import his goods at such a rate as to be able to meet the Americans and 
cother foreigners in the market of Europe?—I apprehend that other objections than 
those I have stated’ must be removed before that could happen; the Merchant in India 
must not only be allowed’ to ship his goods when they ate ready, but he must be permitted 
to assort them in whatever manner he thought most likely to be advantageous to himseli 
vand the Owners of the ship. ‘ . 

You do not mean by that that you must be allowed to trade in those articles that are 
exclusively confined to the Company?—No, I do not; 1 mean that before that can be done 
the ship must ‘be the Merchant's, and he must be permitted to load that ship, and dispateh 
her as he thought most proper. : ¢ ‘ 

‘Then, independent of the question of expense, one of the inconveniences the Private 
Merchants complain of is, their not being allowed to Joad and assort their cargoes at their 
own pleasure ?—It certainly is an inconvenience which they frequently complain of. 

Are there any other inconveniences which you think should be removed, in order to 


obtain that object ?—It cannot be obtained in my opiuion unless the Merchants are allowed | 
ae 


to load their goods in their own ships, India-built Ships. 3 
“Yaa aeigenican by that, any acti privilege to India-built Ships?—No, I do ules 
2 


151 & 282. 


820 


Mr. Innes. 


Vv 


nf 


Appendis, No. 47-—SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


that you could meet the Americans and other foreigners 


inion is the 
Alina at ka seneare if these facilities were afforded you?—I have not 