


in the market of Europe in time of Peace, 

i ubt of it. 8 ‘ F 

Mita eines ese afforded you, from your knowledge of the mode in which trade 

would be carried on, are you of opinion that it would tend to increase the export of British 
i ?—T am firmly of that opinion. i ” 

sia ere if nanietacede do For conceiye would be increased by it?—All sorts of 


factures usually sent to India. ‘ 
eeWhat ne of freight was paid by Private Traders to the Company on the outward yoyage 


for theseason 1807 4,i-=f8. 108. Bet (0 
What as the he of freight homeward for the same season from Bengal?—We do not 


know. a : . 
What was the rate for the season of 1806-7 ?—TI do not at present recollect ; et the freight 
Pelt) 


charged for the preceding season was £-44 per to i ips. 
supnoting Es had not been restrict ships in the service o! the Company, could 


have exporied and imported your goods in those seasons at lower rates of freight?—Un- 


ay coubtedly ; if allowed to ship goods on cou is ~built ships. ; 
Can you form any calculation at what rates you cou! y fave imported or exported your 


N 


goods on country-built ships ?—At a freight not exceeding £.22. 105, per ton home; and 
£.7. 105. out. & 

iby did it happen that all the Indigo of the season you haye mentioned came home in 
regular Ships re eranse there were no extra Ships at that time in India to receive it, 

Do you know whether a great part of the Indigo of last season did not come home also 
in regular Ships for the same reasons?—I_am unfortunately 100, well acquainted with that 
fact, having a large quantity oa board the Walpole, which was wrecked off Margate. 

Do you know any thing of any offer that was made by the Merchants in Calcutta, 

to pay whatever freight the ships might cost the Company in the last or the preceding 
season ?—I do not. E * 
“When you insure en a ship or ships, is it not always with a condition that if the 
goods are shipped on a regular or an extra Ship of the Companys the rate of Insurance is 
to be regulated accordingly ;- that is, as if the particular ship had been at first specified and 
whether jn case of loss the premium is not settled accordin; ly?—If 1 am to insure 
upon a particular regular Ship by name £.100 ata premium of £.7 percent. 1 shall in 
the event of a loss have £.93 to recover. {If I insure £.100 upon an India-built ship 
by name, at a premium of 10 Guineas, I shall in the event of a loss haye £. 80. 108. to 
‘recover; butif I insure £,100 upon ship or ships, I shall in the event of a loss have only 
£-84. 5s. to recover) Perel 

1s this all that you would recover if you had specified in the Poliey, that if the 
aoe aie laden on regular Ships, the premium would be. only £.7 per cent?— 

ertainly. i 

Do ior not allow it to be necessary, that some particular period of the year should 
be fixed, in which freight should be applied for to the Company, that they may have an 
opportunity of preparing freight accordingly ?—It is no doubt necessary that the Com- 
pany should have time to prepare freight; what I complain that we cannot obtain 