


cially given. 
78 When 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. ; 87 
‘When were those representations made t—I think st is near 12 months since; itwasinthe Ay, Bazett. 
Se 


Jast summer. 

In the mean time you have paid the freight?—The fircight was deducted. Ihave no 
doubt it has been all paid long since. - : 

Would the trade from Europe to India, if the restrictions were removed, admit of any 
extension ?—Certainly, of very great extension. We should export largely, that the ships 
might not return without cargo; which exports would not take place under the present 
system. 
vin time of peace, are you of opinion that if the restrictions that have becn stated were 
removed, you could be able to meet the Americans in the markct of Europe to advantage. 
—I think, if permission of the nature I have before described of sending bome our own ves~ 
sels without being subject to restrictions that impede the lading of them at such period of 
the year, and in such manner as the Merchants would wish, that we certainly might meet 
ee foreign traders whomsoever. 

n time of war, supposing that there was a certain rate of increase of duty upon foreign 
trade in India, over and above what was paid by the British Merchant, do you think you 
could meet the American in the markets of Europe ?-—Under the regulations and permis 
sions to ship, of which I have spoken, I think we should. 

Are you concerned at all in India Shipping?—Not at all at the presenttime, 

« Have your Partners in India any concern in India Shipping ?--None. 

Do you believe that during war private traders, if left perfectly to their own way, 

could carry on their trade quite free of the inconveniences now complaincd of ~The Mer~ 


Tt erage rate of what you now pay on the Company’s extra Ships?—- 
£22. 15s. forthe home ireight, and | think £.9 for the outward freight. 

Have the Merchants ever paid freight on goods they did not ship in the Company's 
Ships?—I do not know whether they have not invariably filled the tonnage with articles 
that they did not consider desirable rather than forfeit the freight ; I have done so myself. 

You do not know any instancé of their having so paid it?—-L do not recollect any. 

If you employed only ships of your own, could you always conform your goods to your 
tonnage, or your tonnage tu your goods ?—I have no doubt I always could. 

What is the difference between the rate of Insurance on the Company's Ships, and 
private India Ships @—During war, the premium of Jasurance has greatly varied, accordin 
to the protection’ afforded to the trade in the India Seas. I have paid £.19—£.15 an 
as high as £.18 per cent. On the Company’s extra Ships at the sainc period I have paid 
£12 and £.15 per cent. 

Do you mean with or without convoy ?—With returns for convoy in both cascs. 

What are the returns ?—Usually at the rate of from one and a half to two per cent. for the 
voyage from India to St. Heleva, and one and a half or two per cent. for the remainder 
of the voyage from St. Helena to England. 