

freight when we require it. z "i Msg wanes 4 

1 you were left entirely to your own private ships, both from India and from Eug- 
Jand, ‘you could obtain precisely the times of dispatch that you want, and the certainty 
of the freight that you require?—As to the freight, we would willingly take our 
chance of that; as to the dispatch, that’ must depend upon the Government's allowing us 
convoy. 

* Do you not know, that the period in India for giving notice of wanting freight for 
goods is extended to the end of October ?--I have stated ail that I kaow of that subject. 

Are not the crops of Indigo perfectly ascertainable as to quantity by the end of Sep- 
tember ?—Certainly I understand not. me 

__ in the uncertainty of the produce of Indigo which you state, would not the inconyenience 
likewise result if the Indigo were to be ladea on private ships?—No, certainly not; because 
the Owners of the private ships would have their cargoes assorted, and would send indigo ot 
not, as they thougiit proper. 

Whether private goods have not frequently heen received by the Company, to be 
laden after the months of October and November ?—There is no doubt of it, 

1s not Indigo frequently laden in the Company’s regular Ships ?—Yes, at the enormous rate, 


» asThavealready stated, of £.44 per ton. 


_Is that the usual freight 2—It is the feet for the scason I_ mentioned, of 1805-6. 
aa any other season ?—I believe as high a freight as £.52 has been charged by the 
mpany. en ae i 
What do you conceive the general rate of the charge to be on the Company’s regular 
Ships for Indigo ?—Invariably too high for the Merchanta in ladies a ia Ras 
tageous trade'With this country. ‘ ae 
_ Can you specify the general rate of freight for that article on the regular Ships?—— 
No; it Varies according (o the directions given by the Court of Directors, 
id at rate per cent. do you suppose the difference would be of the freight on Indigo 
on the Company’s ships and Private ships on the value of the Indigo?—That isa Se 
; ; whiel 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 83 


which requires too much calculation for me now to answer; but as I have stated the private 
ships could be advantageously sent to this Country at a freight of £.22. 105, per ton, the 
difference jn the rate of freight would be between that sum and the £. 44 charged by the 
Company, £. 21. ag per ten. : 

What do you understand the general average of the freight of the Company’s e: 
Ships out and home to be?—The freight Rete I andere, varied freak the aoe 
1802 very considerably; in that ee the rate was £.5 per ton out, in the present year it 
‘ £-93 in 1801-2, the rate of freight home was £.14 per ton, and it is now, I believe) 

22, 158. 

Was not 1802 a year of peace ?—It was. 

Has not the price of stores and all sorts of equipment for ships generally increased 
since in the country ?—Yes, very considerably. 

‘You mentioned three extra Ships taken up for one voyage at £.39. 15s. do you mean 
to say, itis only on those extra Ships that the Private Merchants ate to have freight?—~ 
Certainly not; there ave other ships upon which freight has been granted to Private Mer- 
chants besides the three I mentioned. 