

Supposing the Merchants had the liberty of using any ships they please, whether built in 
India or in England, and had the liberty of loading their ships at their own time and in 
their own way, whether Cotton could, under those circumstances, be profitably brought to 
Europe ?—I think it might. 

By profitable, I mean a fair market profit ?—I think it might ; and I think with proper 
encouragement we might supplant the Americans in the supply of it. 

151 & 182. Do 


Mr, Fawcett, 
Ra etd 


94 Appendix, No. 47—SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


Do you mean that if proper encouragement was given, you could beat the American 
Cotton out of the market by Tndian Cotton ?—We could undersell them I believe. + 

Is the quantity of Cotton that may be exported from Bombay or Surat very considerable? 
—I think the export is about 90,000 bales of three hundred weight and a half each 
a year. 

“Might great of that be brought to Europe ?—J_ think it might. 

Are’ hae anglimpediments to the purchase ‘of Cotton in India ?—There were not formerly, 
but latterly I understand, but I do not know the circumstance sufficiently to speak to it, 
that there are some impediments in the Company's Districts, giving a preference to the 
Company’s own purchases, 

Could any means be adopted to suit the Surat Cotton more to the market of 
England i—I think there might, by proper regulations to prevent adulteration. 

jupposing the Merchants had t e facilities given them which have been spoken of, do 
ou think ‘haat the freight from India to England, particularly in Cotton, and the trade 
from England to India, could be considerably increased or increased at all ?—I think it 
might be considerably increased, particularly the trade from India to England. 

Could the cultivation of Cotton in the Company’s Territories be inc?eased so as to supply 
any additional demand for Cotton that might arise ?—I have not any local knowledge of 
the Company's Territories lately acquired ; I have generally understood that the produce 
might be increased in Guzarat and Malva. i 

ill you state what you mean by further encouragement ?—If the difficulties were re- 
moved with regard to freight principally, and the attention I have mentioned be paid to 
prevent adulteration. : * 

‘Were you in India in the year 1805 ?—I was not. 

Were the 2,000 tons of Cotton which you stated that the Merchants wished to send at 
that time to Europe provided purposely for the Europe market ?—I cannot say for others, 
but the proportion or a great part that Messrs, Bruce, Fawcett and Co. shipped, they 
vised us of having provided on purpose for the market. « 

How much was the quantity ?—I do not know the precise quantity ; it was some they 
had taken great pains to collect, and the finest picked out of all the purchases for the 
season. 


In the year 1806, when you expected the Sir William Pulteney at the rate of £. 14 
per ton freight, could you have hired an Indian Ship at that rate to Europe ?—No, I do 
not think we could. 3 