

‘ave you ever considered of any regulation of the present system, that would remove, in 
some or in a great degree, the inconveniences which you have stated, short of leaving the 
trade open to Indian Ships, or ships the property of the Merchants concerned in the trade, 
instead of those chartered by the Company tt never has-been the expectation of the 
Merchants, that the trade should be so far thrown open as that their ships should not be 
subject so far to the vontroul of the Government of India as may be necessary to prevent 
the exportation of articles either monopolized by the Company, or in any other degree cone 
traband 3 our object is to be allowed to ship upon Indian bottoms the produce of India, 
without being subject to those restrictions as to the period of departure, thé mode of loading, 
and a variety of other restrictions, which we feel to be a great clog upon the present state 
of our trade with Europe, and expose us to a considerable degree of which might be 
avoided : I know of no other mode by which the same encouragement to the trade from 
India can be given, under the regulation of the present system, that is, supplying the ton- 
nage from this country as at present practised. 


CALCU LATION, shewing theincreased rate per centat which the following Articlesof East * 
India produce would be charged Freight, if shipped on board the Honourable Com- 
e assumed rate of £.20 per ton 


any’s extra and regular Ships, compared with 
en Endia-built Ships. jeg 


Goove Average Value On Extra Ships On Regular Ships 
2 " per Ton. at £.22. 45s. per Ton, | at £. 90 10s. per Ton. 


Shells - - 
Pepper - - 
Sugar - - - 
N.B. -.- pa on which the shore Calculate poor 

ate ‘reight per extra Ships - - {.22. 155. ton, 

5 be i bas on Be ae aaa 

- of - D* per Com ’s regula § = = £.30. 108. ton, 

being the Rate changed sines 1807. : Pry 


D-of - D- - - -D ---D---£ ton, 
being the Rate charged in 1806, aaa 
York Place, Value per ton of goods, according to average prices from actual Sales. 
1 
May the 15th, 1809, m : Rt. C. Bazett. 
a 


Mr. Trail. 


g2 Appendix, No. 47—SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


(No. 6.) 
Luna, 15° die Mait 1809. 
SirJOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. Henry Trail, called in, and examined. 


IT has been stated to us, that there is a considerable difficulty arises to the Private Mer- 
chants from their being obliged to insure on ship or ships, instead of being able to insure upon 
individual ships, from the mode in which the trade is now carried on; is that so?—It is. 

Is there any considerable difference between the rates of Insurance upon ship or ships, 
and upon an individual ship ?—Yes, generally a difference of two or three per cent. 

Can you with the same facility obtain an Insurance upon ship or ships to a large extent, 
as you could upon individual sheer no means. 

hat isthe reason of that ?—The dislike the Underwriters have to insure generally arises 
from the fear of having their interest all upon one bottom, instead of being divided into 
several risks. 