

I believe you are not a Ship-owner?—I am not 3 

Are you of opinion that if the Merchants were allowed to load their own ships at their 
own times, and in their own way, that the trade between Europe and India, and India and 
Europe, would be considerably increased or not ?—I am strongly of opinion that it would 
considerably increase. 

In both ways?—Not so mych out as from India. 

Are you or not of opinion that in time of peace you could meet the Americans and other 
foreigners in the market of Europe, if the restrictions that are now imposed upon the 
private trade were removed ?—I should suppose nearly so. 

In time of war, supposing a double duty laid upon foreigners in India, and the Americans 
obliged to make a circuitous Voyage by Ameriea, do you think if the restrictions were 
removed, that you could meet the Americans in time of war ?—It would be more y 
- equality; I think we could supply the Europe market as cheap as they could in time 
of war. 

I believe your House in India never were Ship-owners ?—They never were. 

I believe your's was one of the largest Agency-houses in Calcutta ?—It was reckoned so. 

‘Will you'explain more in detail how the increase in the exports to and from India pe 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. | 93 


take place upon the change of system ?—I think it would only apply to the raw materials, 
and not to the manufactured goods from India. 

With regard to the exports from this Country, how do you conceive they would be 
enlorged ?—1 am not aware that they would be materially affected by the indulgence pre- 
sumed, only that they would go out at a lower rate of freight, and be therefore supplied 
cheaper than they now are. I do not suppose the consumption could be increased. 

Upon the supposition of the proposed enlargement, would it be practicable always to 
insure from India upon specific ships ?~That would depend upon having opportunities to 
me home for insurance, and upon a certainty of getting those goods shipped upon par- 
ticular vessels. 


(No. 7.) 
Mr. Henry Fawcett, called in, and examined. 


YOU were for a long time resident at Bombay I believe :—I was; I was in the Com- 
pany’s Service, and also a Merchant there. : 

A very considerable Merchant there /—Yes. 

You are now concerned I believe in a House of Agency in this country ?—I am. 

The Committee have been inquiring whether the facilities given to the private trade have 
answered the purposes of the Private Merchant, and if they have not, ‘what are the impe- 
diments that stand in the way of the private Merchants ?—We have experienced considerable 
impediments in delays in the furnishing of tonnage in England and in India, but prin- 
cipally in India. 

Does any inconvenience arise from the mode of shipping your goods in India, not 
xnowing the ships that your goods are to go upon?—At Bombay, in the act of shipping, 
a aos Bet know of any = culties of rp co! ence. is Raid : 

en you say you have met wi in furnishing the in India, do you mean 
that there was re sufficient tonnage ready ?—Instances of “that kind may have fa ed, 
but we did not make application, because we knew it could not be complied with, without a 
reference to Bengal, and that would be such a delay that it was not an object. 