

151 & 182. From 


Mr, Baxett. 


go Appendix, No. 47—-SUPPLEMENT ¢o the FOURTH REPORT 


From what did you take the average value upon the articles here stated —I took it prin- 
cipally from the account of sales of the articles from our own books of account. 

You stated yesterday that the demand of the high freight of tonnage upon the regular 
Ships, £.44 per ton, was an unexpected demand?—I did. . 

Do you know whether the Board of Trade at Calcutta ever notified that high rate of 
freight to the shippers of the goods, or whether they ever notified any other rate of freight 
than you sta‘ed in the Advertisement you delivered in yesterday /—I{ am positive that that 
rate of freight was not notified to the Public, because upon its becoming known the Govern- 
ment was memorialized by the Merchants upon the subject. ‘ 

Were many or any of the pocds that were imported that year provided either upon a sup- 
position of a rate of freight of £. ge. 5s. upon the regular Ships, or upon the supposition of 
the freight stated in that Advertisement for the cxtra Ships 2 Phey were no doubt provided 
upon the expectation of extra Ships being there to receive them, which not being the case 
they were under the necessity to ship them on those four regular Ships that were allotted to 
the Publi¢, or thé goods must have remained on hand. 

Would those goods or many of them have been provided at all if the Metchant had been 
aware at an carly period that there would be no extra Ships to carry his goods that year, and 
that the freight upon regular Ships should be £.44 per ton?—TI am perfectly satisfied that 
hey would not have provided a variety of goods, because it would have been to their certain 

Joss. 

Did you ever see an Advertisement respecting extra shipping, which was issued in the 
moith of August 1805 by the Board of Trade in Bengal ?—I know there was such an Ad- 
vertisement. 

Have you a Copy of it?—I have not. 

Do yon"know the rate of freight which the Government of Bengal advertised in India 
tipoa extra shipping for that year ?—The tenor of the Adversisement 1 can give you from a 
document that was fhia before the Government of India, and I believe referred by them to 
to the Court of Directors. The Advertisement of the 29th of August 1805 in the Calcutta 
Gazette, the 5th paragraph, is as follows: 

“ Information of the rates of freight to. be paid by Individuals for goods laden on 
~ © extra Ships of the Season of 1805-6, is contained in the subscquent Extract of a 
“ Letter from the Secretary to the Governor General in Council, and the terms and 
“ conditions to which it refers; the Extract of the Secretary’s Letter above alluded to 
« js us follows, {I am further dirceted to xequaint you that the Court have resolved that 
“ the same rates of freight be charged to Individuals, and that the same terms and 
* conditions do continue in force fer ‘oods laden on the extra Ships for this season, 
“ outand home, as was settled by the Court the 24th of Jane 1803. 
“ These Resolutions state as follows: 
“ The 4th article. The peave-rate of freight homeward shall not excced £. 11 per 
“ ton, and than an additional freight of £. 3 per ton, be paid on Goods inden in India 
“ on extra Ships, whose voyages trom England shall have commenced in the ensuing 
“ twelve months, if the War shall continue so long.” 
‘oe freight did you actually pay for the goods that you imported upon that year?— 
22. 108, 3 