

Did the same thing happen inthe season of 1806?—Yes, the same, excepting that the 
advertisement was syccifically for 1805; and, from undergoing no alteration, implied as 
anuch for the year 1806. 

Of course, in the first year at least, these goods were provided, upon the idea that the 
freight was to be £.14 per ton home ?—Surely. 

You have said that you think thet the trade from India to Europe, and from Europe to 
India, might be considerably extended (speaking of ordinary times,) if you had that liberty 
you bave been contending for?—I have no doubt of it. 

Do you think that any new articles might be introduced into the commerce between India 
and Europe that are not now imported, or imported in but small quantities, if those facilities 
we have been now pointing at were given—I have uo doubt that a variety might: the 
produce of the territories lately ceded in the north-west-of India might, I conceive, farnisi: 
many new articles, and that even some would be tricd, the produce of Bengal, of the Coin- 
pany former provinces. 


place w "y ships 
that there would be any 
soine profit. 

Have you any reason to believe that the supply at present falls short very considerably of | 
the censum ptioi *—In some articles, and at some periods, there is no doubt that the 
supply docs iall short ; for instance, the article of Copper has lately been seliing in Calcutta 
at £.100 per cent, above the extraordinary high price that it bore when f left India. 

From your knowledge of India, do you conceive that the consumption of Exropean 
articles is likely to be much increased ?—I am of opinion that ap increase would take place 


Upon 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. gu 


upon these inds, because they will be much cheaper, from the competition of several im- fr. Bazett. 
porters; and thereby many persons of lower condition would be able to purchase, who at 
present are not. 
Do you suppose that, if the trade was facilitated in a greater degree, any new markets 
would be:opencd beyond the dominions of the East India Company ?—I think probably 
they would. . 
Do the facilities which are wished for by the Private Merchants, extend to require the 
liberty of trading from England to every port in India, or only to the ports occupied by the 
East India Company ?—Only to the Company’s ports. 
For what rate of freight do you conceive Indian Ships could have been sent home in the 
year 1805 ?—I think about £. 20 per ton. 
Can you state what those productions of the north-west of India are, that you think might 
oad to the exportations from India to this country ?—Principally dyeing drugs, exclusive of 
indigo. . e 
When you mention your belief that the exports from England could be increased accord- 
ing as the trade should be made more free, do you mean to.apply your answer to the existing 
state of the trade, or suppose that the export would go on to increase progressively according 
as more ships came into the trade?—I do not mean to say that more ships might be neces- 
sary, but, if India-built ships were substituted for the tonnage at present allotted to the 
British Merchants resident in India, unshackled by some restrictions which are felt to be 
vexatious and embarrassing, that an increase of the exportation to India would be the 
consequence. : 
‘Would that increase be progressive as more ships came into the trade ?—Under the system 
that the Merchants have in view, I think it woul 
Do you not know that, in Bengal, Copper has very often been an unsaleable article, partly 
on account of the new importations of that article from Diarbakia?—I never knew of any 
importations from Diarbakia, until very recently by the Georgiana packet for the first time. 
Eas the artisle of Copper been generally a profitable one in Bengal ?—Speaking from my 
own experience as a consignee of that article, I do not recollect an instance in which it was 
not profitable; the latest shipments we have made have been uncommonly profitable. 