

Was it £.100?—I really do not know what the sum was; I do not conceive it was an 
object of great importance; it was not a large amount, because it was only such goods 
as the Company had not room to ship. ° 

.You mentioned that part of the goods were shipped in the month of June ?—They 
were. 

Do you recollect at what time you applied for that freight?—In April. 

You mentioned paying the freight on the outward export in advance ; is it not common 
with all exports from this country, that the freight is paid upon the shipment of the 
goods?—It is usual to pay the freight on the delivery of the goods at the destined Port; 
im some cases I have known freight paid at the period of shipping. 

Is not the homeward freight on the Company’s Ships from India always paid after the 
sale of the goods here ?—I believe always ; ] know nothing to the contrary. 

When private ships are freighted from India, are they. not paid a large proportion of 
the freight homeward in advance?—That depends entirely upon the: special arrangement 
between the Shipper and the Ship-owner; it is sometimes leas with a view to accom- 
modate the Ship-owner, but the rates of freight are in such cases very considerabiy 
decreased. 

What do you stippose the difference per cent. to be on the Company’s and privat 
from India, ‘on the value of the article of Indigo?—I{ conceive that in answeriag this 
squesiion, it is necessary to state that the East India Ships that have hitherto been adowed 
to come home, were not built expressly for this kind of trade; if they, were of viat size 
which would be most advantageous for a voyage to Europe, I conceive that the irei 
would be considerably lower than it ever has been upon the ships taken up by necessi 
Supposing. the freight to ke £.22. 158. which is intended to be charged in this cas 
conceive that the difference would be very trifling between the freight on the ex! 
aud on the India-built Ship on that article, 

State your reasons for thinking that if the ships of Private Merchants were allow 
navigatiug between Europe and India, the consumption of British produce in Lud 
the Natives would be much increased, and the consumption of Indian produce ia 
likewise much increased ?—I never have stated that I supposed the Natives would c 
more; what I stated was, that if the facilities which have been in question were giv 
the Private British Merchants, that a considerable extension of the exporis and impo: 
* India would be the consequence. 

Do you mean that the consumption would increase as regarding the Europeans « 
Natives >—I do not know how they would be consumed; I ik they would be imporu 
at a cheaper rate, and be consequently saleable at a lower price. 

Wither you conceive that that free Navigation would increase mu:h in Europe the 
scuisumption of India commodities ?—Many commodities [ think it would. 


Calcutta Gazette, goth July 1807. 


‘Ye following EXTRACTS from a General Letter, dated the 18th of February i807, 
addressed by the Honourable the Court of Directors to the Honourable the Governor 
General in Council, are published for geacral information. 