


« We have resolved, that the following Sums shall be charged to Individuals for the 
“ freight of goods laden by them homewards, on the regular aud cxtra Ships of the Sea- 
“ sons under mentioned; viz. . 

Season 1804. 
£-30. 108. per ton, for goods laden on regu!*i Ships. 


Season 1805. 
£- 3%. 58. perton, for goods laden on lar Ships. 
£- 22. 158, per ton, for goods Jader: a extra Ships. 


Season 1 
£. 22. 158. perton, for goods iaden on extra Ships: 
4% 30. 103. per ton, fer goods laden on regular Ships, 


* You have been acquainted with the rate of freight to be charge to Individuals for all 
goods laden on the regular Ships, for Season 1807-8.” 


Published by order of the Boa: 
Fort Wiliam, 28th July 1807. 


2 of Trade. 


ed) J. Thornhill, Sec. 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. &g 
CXo. 5.) 
Sabbati, 19° die BMaii 1800. 
Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Bart. in the Chair. 
Mr. Richard Campbell Bazett, again called ia, and examined. 

DO you think that whiist this country is engaged in war, it can carry onthe Indian gz, Bazett 
trede to cqual advantage with Neutra!s?—-Under the imposition of double daties upon fo- , ahi 
reigners in India, and having permission to scnd home our country-built ships in the manner 
that has been alluded to before, I think we might. 

Do you mean this answer to apply to such a state of things as the present, when our 
ships have no access to the ports of foreign Europe ?—Certaialy not, but in ordinary times 
that we have seen for some years back. | mean, that if Neutral Vessels were allowed to 
import the produce of {ndia to the Continent, and the intercourse from this country com- 
pletely cut off, then that we could not trade with such advantage as Neutrals, the ove having 
a market, the other not. F 

Do you mean to include in your answer, not only Neutral Ships coming directly from 
India to foreign Europe, but coming from America to foreign Europe?—I mean, coming 
from America to foreign Europe, which is the oaly channel that [am aware -is open. 

What do you think would be the effect if a trade were permitted between Great Britain 
and the ports of the Continent in Neutral Ships, although British Ships were excluded ?— 
The effect upon the trade from India would operate most favourably, compared with the 
‘present situation of things. 

Under these circumstances, do you think you could enter into competition with the Ame- 
rican trade?—I do, under the reservations that { made before of the doubie duties, and 


gation at_a cheaper rate 
than it is possibie fer any class of British subjects, whether resideut in: India or in Europe, 
to do?—No doubtithe ficight of American ships is lower than what we could provide our- 


fiom America to the Continent, could be performed at less expense than, on our owa 


were engaged in war, and tho I 

Jn the case of an American’ si ng directly fron: India to foreign Europe, how do 
you conceive it would then be !—J should consider that an illegs trade, and therefore not 
insurable at all, meaning by ia from British ports in India, 