

Has it ever happened to you to meet with that difficulty ?—It has. 

Have you any objection to state the case ?—There has not been any recent instance ; but 
three or four years ago we had a very large sum to get covered upon ship or ships, which we 
effected with a good deal of difficulty. 

Did youeffect it all at once?—The first sum we effected in the course of a few days; a 
fresh order-came for a larger sum to be covered in the same manner : we were advised by 
our broker at Lloyd’s to postpone effecting the second insurance until we could advise the 
Underwriters of the ships’ names upon which the goods composing the first insurance were 
shipped, from the fear of having their former risks increased.” 

id you follow that advice ?—We did. “ 

How long was it between the period of the one and the other ?—About three months. 

Then during that three months was the second sum uncovered ?—It was waiting for the 
advice of the ships’ names on which the goods were laden. 

You effected the Insurance upon the second sum three months after ?—Not so soon; ac- 
counts arrived of the capture of the Althea, which occasioned an immediate rise in the pre- 
mium of from 15 to 25 percent. 

Did you effect the insurance at 25 per cent. ?—We were obliged todo it; we waited two 
months, in hopes that the premium would fall to its former rate, but it did not, and we ef- 
fected the Insurance at 25 Guineas. 

The former Insurance I think you said was effected at 15?—It was. The same ship 
that brought the account of the capture of the Althea, brought the account of the ship- 
ment of the goods contained in the first Policy, or about the same time. 

At the time you first received the order for the second Insurance, if you had been able to 
have specified the names of the particular ships upon which the goods were to be laden, 
could you have effected the Insurance at Lloyd’s?—I have no doubt of it, 

With regard to the times at which goods are shipped in Bengal, I believe the Merchants 
in Bengal are under the necessity of informing the Board of Trade at a given period of the 
year, in August or September, I think ?—We are called upon to specify the quantity of 
tonnage we shall want in the ensuing shipping season. 

Does any inconvenience result from that ?—It sometimes happens that the Merchant has 
not the means of ascertaining what quantity of goods he will have to ship, and therefore he 
sends in his application at a Fazard of having too much or too little. 

Did it ever happen to 0 your House to pay any forfeit for having asked for more tonnage 
than you found you should have occasion for ?—On one occasion it has. 

Did you pay forfeit ?@—Yes, 

‘What was the amount of it?—About 5,000 Rupees. 

Are there any inconveniences experienced by* the Merchants from the circumstance of 
the uncertainty of the time of sailing of the ships, or the uncertainty of loading their 

?—There is an inconvenience in not being able to give orders about our Insurances ; 
we must do it generally, instead of upon ‘Poroeular ships. 