

Then you would have applied for the tonnage if you had not known that the Company 
could not supply you with it ?—Several times we might have done it; in the year 1805 the 
three principal Houses in Bombay had occasion for about 2,000 tons, and applied to Govern- 


Mr, Traii. 
~ 


Mr. Fawcett, 
ee 


ment then for the extra ship Devaynes that was tying in the harbour to take a part of it; - 


she was refused to them, upon the plea that she was bound to Bombay and Madras. The 
Merchants replied, that they had information from Madras, that so far from wanting tonnage 
there, that they were offering what tonnage they had at areduced freight, in order to induce 
the Merchants to load their ships 3 notwitl standing, that the Bombay Government positively 
refused to suffer the Bombay Merchants to load there ; this was about the month of April 
or May 1805; the tonnage was not supplied to the Merchants until the 13th Se bese 
when ‘they gave us the Retreat extra Ship, and afterwards took up two county Ships, the 
Milford and Hercules; the Milford arrived in April 1806, the Devaynes did not reach 
England till the oth of June 1806.” y 

‘hen in April or May 1805, if there had been tonnage, your three Houses would have 
shipped 2,000 tons for Europe ?—Yes, certainly. 

‘ere there any inconveniences attended your speculation in trade from the circumstance 
of the shipment being postponed, from the cause that has been mentioned, from May till 
September ?—It must have been attended with great inconvenience and great loss, for if 
loaded in May it would have saved all the warehousing, which is very high during the 
Monsoon Season; the cargo would have arrived in England almost as soon as it was 
actually shipped afterwards: there was certainly @ loss of interest for six months, and there 
might or might not have been a differencein the market. 

hat was that cargo ?—Chiefly-Cotton ; the application was for Cotton. On the 8th 
May 1806 the same Merchants applied to load the extra ship Sir William Fraltengy, then 
lying in the harbour, and were refused on the plea of her being destined for Bengal. 
? apprehend there was no other tonnage came in that way till the 19th of October 1806, 
when they were called upon by the Government to know if they still had the goods ready to 
ship, and in that case offering them the Experiment, which they accepted, stating to 
Government that they concluded that the rate of freight would be the same as they 
would have been charged for the Sir William Palen : this matter was referred to the 
Governor General and Council at Bengal; but as they were desirois to dispatch the 
ship, and indeed called upon to load her immediately, they did load her, and when she was 
completely loaded, the answer received from Ben; ve it as their opinion, that it must 
be charged £.20 per ton instead of £.14, which the Sir William Pulteney had been 
charged ; the ship in consequence came home and arrived in the same Fleet with the 
Sir-Wilham Pulteney; the freight was charged upon the Experiment at £.20 per ton, 
and upon the Pulteney at £. 14 per ton. i 