

Are you not aware that American ships have imported a great deal of the produce of 
the Dutch and of the French Islands, and of other parts of India, net British possessions, 
directly to forcign Europe?—I am not acquainted with the fact. 

Are you acquainted with the facilities and advantages derived by the Americans in the 
trace by connecting it with the trade between China and America‘—I am not acquainted 
with the subject of the American intercourse with China. ° 

You have mentioned the very high rate of freight for the Company’s Ships for onc or 
two years ; do you think that circumstance weighs much in the contemplation of the 
general question of the Indian trade ?—I do think it to heve very great weight. 

(IF free permission were given for the importation of Indian ships here, would not the 
Merchants of that country concerned in the trade to Europe naturally become Ship- 
owners In answering this question, 1 can speak of myself'as a Merchant in India, and 
say, that it would not influence me to become a Ship-owner; how it might influence others, 
it 1s impossible for me to say. 

Were you a considerable Ship-owner while you remained in India?—I have been a Ship 
owner, but to no great extent; 1 have had two or three ships at a time whilst I was in India. 

You were asked by Mr.Grant what difference it would make between the high freightthat 
you paid upon the regular Ships and the £.22 or £.23 per ton which you paid pon the extra 
Ships,—how much per cent. upon the supposed value of the commodity upon the India Ships; 
you were at that time not prepared to answer that question; have you sincé made any cal~ 
culation, and how it wouldapply to your articles ?—I did answer the question ; understanding 
that it applied to the difference between extra and the Indian Ships on the specific article of 
Indigo ; I said that I conceived that per centage would be but inconsiderable on that article. 

Did you understand yourself then to be speaking of the difference between India-built 
shipping and extra-built shipping ?—Yes. 

ave you since been able to form any calculation of the difference per cent. of the rate of 
freight upon the average value of the different articles between even extra shipping and 
India shipping,—how much fer cent. it wculd Le upon the different articles >—Having been 
asked the question J alluded to, I did upon returning home calculate how it would apply, for [ 
observed at the time that it was a question of calculation, and could not be answered off-hand. 

Have you such calculation? —[ have it here (producing it). 

Do you assume that you could procure tounage in India homeward bound at the rate of 
{20 per ton?—In the present time 1 think I could, and in time of peace lower. 

At. what rate, supposing you could get freight for £.20 home, would you caiculate upon the 
outward voyage ?—Sometlung under that which the Company demand, abont £. 8 per ton. 

Then this is a calculation of the difference that the £.3 per ton would make upon the 
average value of the erticles that are stated in this calculation ?—-[t is. 