

What might have been the freight of an Indian Ship to Europe in that season?—I do 
not know that any came. 

If you had been allowed to send a ship of your own that year, what would have been 
the rate of freight?—The Milford and Hercules sailed the latter end of 1805, and they 
were at £. 20 per ton, 

Were they not Indian Ships ?-—They were. 

You have mentioned, that Cotton might be brought to this Country so as to supplant the 
supply from America; do you think this could be done at a time when we are at war, 
and the Americans at peace, supposin the-Merchants to have the facilities they wish for ? 
—It is difficult to say in time of war what might be the case ; there are many circumstances 
which increase the expense of the ship and the rate of Insurances, but in general I think they 


might. 

fhe export of 90,000 bales of Cotton from Bombay which you mentioned, does it not 
now go chiefly to China ?—It does. 

Ts not that trade profitable to the Company’s Settlements and Territories ?#—It used for- 
merly to be, but I think it has considerably declined. 

‘ould it be continued if it were not profitable ?—Sometimes to employ our ships, we 
send them on voyages where there is no profit ; if we can save ourselves, we are very glad 
of taking the chance of a retuming cargo. 

Is the selling price of Cotton in China reduced of late?—I believe not ; but the first price 
of it has increased considerably at Bombay. 

Is not that a sign of the increase of the trade ?=It is principally occasioned by the Com- 
pany’s purchasing largely. 

Is not the balance of trade between India and China now greatly inst China, and 
chiefly arising’ from the article of Cotton; or does not China pay a ce to India in 
specie every year ?—Frequently the returns are made in specie, on account of the high 
price of China articles there. ‘ 

Do you conceive that if the China articles were ever so low there, that India could con- 
sume what would suffice for the returns of the Cotton importations into China?—Yes, in- 
cluding what is generally supplied to the Company for Bills of Exchange on England; my 
answers apply to Bombay only. 

Whether, if the cotton sent from Surat to China now were to be diverted to Europe, it 
would not occasion a great derangement and detriment to the profitable trade carried on 
from India to China?—I do not think it would affect it at all, but be rather beneficial, 
as I think a smaller supply to China would increase the price there. 

Were you or your House Ship-owners in India?—The House in which I was a Partner 
were Ship-owners. i 

Was it not a great object of the Merchants of India who were likewise Ship-ewners to 
obtain an introduction of their Indian Ships into the navigation between India and Europe? 
——It is an object to all Ship-owners to increase the employment of their shipping. wis 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 95 


Whether, upon the same principle you have already mentioned, that you sometimes send -. Fawee: 
ships to China, the Merchant of India might not be induced to send ships to Europe ?—They Mr. Fe i 
might certainly, but being a longer voyage it is a greater risk. ‘ 