


(No. 9.) 
Sabbati, 20 die Maii 1809. 
“Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. John Bebb, again called in, and examined. 


Mr. Bebb. I beg leave to offer some explanations of some of the evidence I gave on 
“Thursday last. I stated that when the Company’s Ships were taken up, they were taken up. 
at £.16 per ton for heavy goods, and £.20 a ton for piece goods ; that freight was paid in 
Bengal three fourths in advance, and of course it assisted the owners with capital, and 
saved them interest and risk. I think I stated that.from the skill of their servants and their 
capital, the Company could carry on trade with more advantage than individuals. I would add, 
that the Company’s goods have a character for exccllence, which the goods of private per- 
‘sons do not attain; this gives the Company a considerable advantage in the Europe market, 
A foreign Merchant can give bis correspondent in London an order to purchase Company's 
goods, with confidence that the goods wiil prove of the quality he desires; in respect of the 
goods of individuals, he is at an uncertainty; he must trust to the judgment and attention 
of his correspondent, and is liable to disappointment in the quality of the goods. The 
Company's goods sell at a higher price than the goods of private persons, even though 
such goods may happen to be equal in quality to the Company's. When engaged on my 
own account in correspondence to this countty from Bengal, I conceived the difference to 
be equal to fifteen per cent. on piece goods, though my goods were provided by myself with 
great care and attention. The commission which falls upon the goods of Private Merchants 
at the different places of purchase, shipment and sale, except where the owner himself may 
reside, in their transit from the place of produce in Bengal, through Calcutta and London, 
to the place of consumption abroad, by its repetition acts with a pressing weight upon the 
produce of goods, and abates the profit, or eventually creates a loss or tends to it; some of 
the rates of commission were 10 per cent. for procuring gaods at the place of manufacture, 
te and a half per cent. for shipping, and two and a half per cent. on gross sales in 
ndon. $ 

1 wish to add to my answer to another point where a foreign State in Europe ‘may 
determine to support its own.commerce by high duties, or where prohibited altogether the 
introduction of fodian articles, except in its own ships, it will supply itself with Indian 
goods directly from India as far as its credit or the proceeds of its native productions or its 
151 & 182. , Ce acquired 


Mr. Bebb. 


» dr. Bebb. 
| ell 


100 Appendix, No. 47-—-SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


acquired articles which it may send to India, may enable it to procure in India, and so far 
will it share in the commerce to and from India, and so, fr counteract. the notion of 
rendering London the emporium for the trade of the East Indies. 7 : 

How far do you think aay regulation on our‘part might be made to operate against the 
foreign trade as you describe ?—I apprehend it will be checked in some degree by higher 
dutics and higher port charges ; but the former must be laid ow with judgment, or else the 
goods will be smuggled om board of foreign ships, and evade the duties altogether. 