

Howsanany cubical feet to the tondo.the Company pay for, and charge tothe privatetraders? 
-~—Where the tonnage is. settled by, measurement, 50 feet outside measurement, and indi- 
viduals are rated in the same manner ; the general sage of the Port of London I understand, 
in measured goods is to reckon 40 cubical feet to the ton; the Company’s compiftation of 
tonnage on many articles which in the Port of London would be taken by measurcment, is 
taken in some articles by tale, in others by short weights ; for instance, piece goods are com- 
pute so many pieces to the ton, according to the scale of some old date; those piece goods 

yy experiments I have had made, will in some instances weigh 21 or 22 cwt. to the ton, and 
measure above 60 feet to the ton; in other instances they will weigh about 13, 14, or 15 
ewt. to the ton, and measure about 50 feet: Raw-silk is taken at ten. hundred weight to 
the ton, Pepper at sixteen hundred weight to the ton: I mention the two latter as instances 
in which the tonnage is computed by short weight ; 1 mean by short weight, short of twenty 
hundred weight to the ton, but not as goods measured. In reference to the statement of 
individuals as to the price at which they can let ships to carry goods, it’ should be neces- 
sary for them to explain what computations of tonnage they refer to, whether the Com- 
pany’s computation of tonnage, or the usual rate of 4o feet for ineasured goods, according to 
the custom of London. : 

Is it advantageous or otherwise for the Private Traders to have their goods received at the 
Company’s computation of tonnage ?—=-Certainly, very advantageous. . 

Explain why ?—Because articles which sevonding to the usage of the Port of London 
would be paid for at 40 cubical feet to the ton, are by the Company's computation of ton- 
nage more favourable to the Owners of goods. e 

is it advantageous to the Company or otherwise to furnish the dead weight to the extra 
Ships when the Owners of the goods do not?—-Of late years, from the great glut of Sugar in 
the London market, it has been very disadvan us to the Company, and operated as @ 
considerable bonus to the Private. Merchant; if he had filled his ship bimself, he must have 
borne the loss ypon the dead weight, which the Company now bear; ox if he had carried 
no dead weight in merchandize, he must have earried kentlidge or ballast, and thet would 
have enhanced the freight on the light articles. 3 

Can you state the season of the year at which the-produce of Indigo for the year is ascer- 
tainable ?—I have never myself been concerned in Indigo. works, but have frequently seen 
them, and from observation and frequent enquiries of Indigo manufacturers, I understand 
that by about the middle of the month of September the produce of the crop may be ascer- 
tained with tolerable accuracy. 

Do you know at what time the Merchants draw Bills of Exchange for goods which they 
consign to Europe ?—Generally atthe time that the goods areshipped especially. those ns - 
who look to the proceeds of particular consignments of goods to anwser particular Bills. 