

f the trade between this country and India were now thrown open, do you conceive that 
it could be cartied on on terms equally advantageous as Neutral nations have carried it on, 
whilst tifis country was engaged in war ?—Certainly not. 

‘What is your opinion upon the same points, supposing ‘this country to be at peace ?—If 
the duties on Indian articles exported from this country were not higher than on the same 
articles imported into and exported from America, and that they can enter into any in- 
different country on ‘the same terms as to duties or other charges, I apprehend that the 
contiguity of this country to the Continent of Europe, would give this country a very con- 
sidérable advantage over the Americans. I give this answer on the presumption that the 
Americas Ship is to.deliver her Indian cargo in America, and re-ship it from thence 
to Europe. . 

How do you suppose the comparison would stand between this country and the nations of 
Europe, supposing a atate of general peace?—I apprehend we could carry it on more ad- 
vantageously than other European nations. . 
. Then these answers suppose the trade to be thrown open; state your opinion what the result 
would be in time of peace, supposing the Indian trade to remain under its present system and 
regulations ?—The same; for 1 conceive the Company, from their greater capital and generally 
speaking better intelligence and skill of their servants, able to carry cn the trade with India 
to more advantage to themselves and the country than individuals. I presume always that the 
illicit practices of individuals are out of the question,—that the trade is to be fairly carried on. 

Under any system of regulation for the Indian trade, what’ is your opinion of the prac- 
ticability of extending the sale of British manufactures in India tao not think it can beex- 
tended among the Natives of India. The great article of national manufacture,woollen cloths, 

the Comipaiy already sell to a loss and have for many years, consequently individuals could 
not sell then on better terms ; the next. t articles of national manufactures, silk and cot- 
ton, are out of the question, as they are the produce of India; and with regard to the lesser 
articles, India is already supplied through the privileged trade of the Captainsand Otficers of 
ships, which being ‘wholly free of freight, go into the market on more favourable terms than 
any individyals can, who are obliged to pay for freight; and the usages and habits of the na- 
tives of India render them little solicitous about the use of articles not the produce of their 
own country. 


LETTER from the Board of Trade of Bengal to the Vice President in Council ; dated 
20th December 1805 ; received by Lady Castlereagh 19th July 1806. 


IT appearing by a Statement, laid before us by the Export Warehouse Keeper, of the 
s, in store at the Export Warehouse, and expected to. arrive by the 2oth January, that 
regular Ships appointed to sail from this Port with cargo for Europe, could not be com- 
pletely laden without the addition of private goods, for the allotment of which to those 
ships one application had only been received by us, namcly, from Messrs. Trail, Paimer & 
Co. for 100 tons, we considered it to’be expedient to ascertain, as far as might be practicable, 
the farther quantity of such goods for which regular tonnage might be required; and with 
this view, a Notice to the following Purport ‘was on the 13th instant circulated by our 
orders to all the individuals by whom application had been made to us under the Adver- 
tisement of the 2d of August last, for statutable tonnage in the extra Ships of the present 
season. 
That persons desiring that any part of the statutable tonnage already allotted to them 
should be granted on.the regular Ships which may be dispatched froin this Port in February 
make applications to us for that purpose, the goods for which tonnage might 
be desired on the regular Ships to be delivered at the Export Warehouse by the goth Ja-’ 
nuary, beyond which period no goods would be received, and freights to be paid oa the 
gor at the same rate as may be paid by the Honourable Company for the ships on which 
e goods may be allotted. eS : 
In consequence of the Circular Notice above stated, we received the under-mentioned 
applications for tonnage on the regular Ships of the present season. 