

's the Cotton, of India or the Cotton of America preferred in the markets of Europe?—The j va 
Surat Cotton, if we can get it clean and fine, as we do sometimes, is preferred to the. Bowd \ 
Georgias, as it takes the dye better; in general the Bowd Georgias are much cleaner than 
the Surats. j i 

Are the Bowd Georgias the best Cottons that come from America?—No, it is an inferior 
Cotton, but it comes immediately in competition with the Surats. : 

Does the Bowd Georgias come to this country in large quantities?—Yes, in very large 

juantities, 
: Is there much of the Surat Cotton of a fine fibre ?—Not much. 

How is the best of the Surat Cotton compared with the Brazil and the the West India 
Cotton ?—It does not come at all in competition with them, it is inferior in quality, and em- 
Ployed in different manufactories, 

re you aware of any other article besides Cotton, the export of which would be materially 
increased, by the facilities which have been mentioned ?—Yes ; Fossil Alkali, or Barilla might 
be imported in very large quantities. . . 

Are there any other articies?—There are a number of drugs froin Arabia, and some from 
the different Provinces in India. i . 

From the knowledge you have of India, cat you say whether the consumption of Euro- 
pean articles would admit of much increase there ?—I have not been resident, in the interior 
of India, but Bombay is in that situation, that it in fact forms the Commercial Capital of 
the West of India; goods from all the coasts from Mosambique to Cape Comorin are brought 
to Bombay principally in country craft, and exported from thence to distant countries ; 
these couatry craft carry back foreign articles imported into Bombay from Europe, from. 
China, and from ail parts of tue world from whence they come, in large ships ; if those articles 
from Europe can be afforded to them cheaper than at present, I have little doubt but what 
the exports might be increased. 

What is thg description of articles to which you principally allude ?—The princi 
articles which are imported, are iron, copper, lead, woollens, and many other articles which 
1 cannot immediately enumerate. 

By furnishing the articles cheaper, do you mean buying them cheaper in England, or con- 
veying them at less charge?—By carrying them at less price we could afford to sell them 
cheaper. . 

In a general way, have you formed any opinion of the rate per cent. on the value of the 

ds that the freight could be reduced by paving the Merchants the conveyance of goods 
in their own ships ?—I have not formed an idea of it; the per centage must depend entirely 
upon the value of the articles, 


STATEMENT of the quantity of Cotton annually imported into Great Britain, of the 
quality which comes in competition with that produced in Guzzerat; taken on the average 
of 1805, 1806, and 1807. 


North America, Fast India, 
_ Bales. 

In 180, - - - 1200078 - +5 2,039 
1806 - 124,092 .- - - 7,963 
1807 - - - 171,267 - - ~ 11,409 
In three years - 417,437 > ~ * 21,411 