

Would not it follow from that mode of reasoning, that the Company, in a commercial 
point of view, have nothing whatever to fear from the trade being thrown open to the com- 
petition of Private Merchants, whether in India or in Europe ?—I have often reflected uj 
the subject, and I have been of the same opinion for twenty years, that they would have 
nothing to fear in a point of view merely commercial, : 

Then supposing the Company’s exclusive privilege to cease, and that they were in future 
to carry on their trade as a Chartered Company, which they would remain in common with 
the other Merchants of this country or India, do you think that the Company could carry. 
on their trade under these circumstances to greater advantage than tite Private Merchants?— 
Certainly ; but in such case it could not be expected that they should export articles of 
national manufacture to a loss as they now do, or import from India articles for the benefit 
of Government on the terms they often now import them. 

What articles do the Company import into this country for the use of Government ex- 
cept Saltpctre ?—At present they bring Sunn-hemp for the service of Government, without 
any profit whatever. é 

his is the first year I believe that they have brought any ?— Yes, on Government account; 
but they are under a disadvantage in bringing it in proportion as they may lose by the dead 
weight necessary to be put on the ship ; and some years ago, on the occasion of the first 
rupture with Russia, they brought it on their own account, at the wishes or at the instances 
of His Majesty’s ministers, for the purpose of answering the national exigencies, and they. 
Jost greatly by it. 

Did they bring a large quantity ?—A considerable quantity. 

Do you apprehend that under the present circumstances of the East India ‘Company, they 
navigate their regular ships as cheaply as the Private Merchants could navigate their own 
ships ?—Not having experience in shipping on my own account, I cannot answer the question 
decidedly ; but the ships are taken up by open competition, and they have an advantage 
in being at a considerable less insurance than the private ships. 

When you state the commission that is paid upon providing private goods in India, do 
you on the other hand state the charges of all the Commercial Extablishinenes that the Com- 
pany have been at in India ?—The regular Establishment is not added to the invoice. 

Is there any warehouse rent added to the invoice ?—No, 

Have the expenses of the building and purchasing the warehouses in India been added 
at any time to the invoice of goods?—No. 

Then when you are to state a comparison in a mercantile point of view between the Com- 
pany and a Private Merchant carrying on his trade, would it not be fair and reasonable to 
add those articles ?—They should be put on the same footing in that respect; if they are 

charged in one they should be charged. in the other. 

Have the extra Ships always sailed from India at fixed periods, and always during the fair 
weather season ?—During the time I was in India they generally have sailed in the fair 
weather season, or at least the major part have. 