

Is it usual 16 set apart room for 3,000 tons whether it is called for or not 2—Certainly not, 
unless required ; therefore notice is given at the proper season, I think in the month of Sep- 
tember, for certain individuals to state what tonnage they require. 

“Were not the extra Ships for the purpose of carrying home the. private trade sent out 
annually to the extent ‘of 3,000 tons 1 Generally, especially in later years. 

Do you know at what rate of freight private Indian Ships could sail from India to Eng- 
land in time of war?—Never having been concerned in shipping, I cannot speak from my 
own experience as a Ship-owner ; bat the Merchants of Calcutta stated to the Government 
originally, that they could sail their ships at £. 12 per ton in time of peace, and £. 16 per 
ton iti time of war. ‘ 

In what year was that ?—It must have heen aboit the year 1796, and ships were hired 
from them to bring home chiefly rice or ponderous goods at the rate of £.16.-per ton, and 
& 20. ton. for fine or bulky goods; the benefit of the voyage out they had wholly to 

ves. I believe they. found that their rates were too low, and it was owing to the 
desire of getting into the trade that they made such low offers. 
~ State the way in which the Private Merchants delivered their goods in order to be shipped ~ 
for England on the Company’s Ships: were they required to send them into the Company’s 
warehouses, till an opportunity for shipping should offer ?—When the ships were ready to 
receive the goods, notice was given to the Merchauts, and they. were required to send their 
geods to sloops laying at the wharf ready: to receive them, and the goods were.put by 
em on board the boats and carried to the sloops ; they were never received: into the ware- 
houses after the operation of that Act. 
hether there was any specified time which, limited the delivery. of the goods to the 
ships ?—When the Merchants gave their notice what tonnage they would want, they were 
required to state, as nearly as they could, when the goods, would: be ready, and the goods 
were called, for as the ships. were ready. to receive them, as nearly ag possible to the time, 
and adverting also to.the sort of goods which it was fit for the ship to receive. I do not re- 
: Heer srhetber. there was any date fixed in the Advertisement beyond which goods would not 
e received, : 

Did. not the Company always put in.what is called the dead weight on the ships on which 
private goods were laden?-—Since the war of 1793. there was no Saltpetre exported, on ac« 
count of individuals, it was prohibited for political reasons.} but some years ago, when it 
was thought profit in Calcutta to send Sugar from India.to this country, the Sugar of in- 
dividuals was put in the bottom of the ship in common with the Company's Sugar as ben 

r weight ; 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. - rd 


weight ; of late years individuals have not sent Sugar to this country, «ind then the Compan, 
have been under the necessity of putting a due proportion of dead weight, chiefly _ Mr, Bebb, 
or Saltpetre, upon the ships. 