

Up to the time when you left India, when were the ships with private goods generally 
dispatched to England ?—Generally during the seasonable time of dis , which is from 
October to the end of March, and of that period the time chiefly from January to March ; in 
‘one or two years I believe they fell into May or June, owing to the late arrival of ships, or 
political circumstances. : 

Since your departure from India, have you been acquainted with the period at which the. 
extra Ships have usually been dispatched from thence ?~Only by teference to the documents 
at the India House. ; 

Can you assign the reason for the lateness of the dispatch of the extra Ships, when they 
have been dispatched beyond the seasonable period of the year?—I think, and in whiel 
I differ in opinion from several of my colleagues, that the manner in which the extra Ships 
are taken up, that is to be fitted out again for India as soon as possible after their arrival 
in this country, will often occasion their falling into unseasonable time of dispatch from. 
India, and I have understood the reason why this system has been followed, was to ac- 
commodate the views of Private Merchants, who wished to send goods at various times of 

year. 

Supposing the period of dispatch to be properly regulated, and the rate of freight to be’ 
reasonable, lo you conceive thet it is materially detrimental to Merchants not to be allowed 
to convey goods in ships of their own?—Generally, I cannot conceive there is detriment, 
to them 3 at the same time the fondness of men for speculation, and their idea of individual 
profit, and the desire of the Ship-owners in India to get theix.ships introduced into the 
trade between India and Europe, will often induce: representations that they suffer conside- 
rably : another reason is, that the Indian Agency-houses in this country, for the purpose of 
increasing their individual concerns by Indian Ships being put under their management 
when in this country, will produce representations to the same effect. 

Do you understand that Americans and other Neutrals, have at present an advant 
over the Traders of this country from India in the sale of Indian goods in. foreign Europe 
and America ?—Considerably. 

To what causes do you ascribe this ?—The lower rates of freight and of insurance arising 
from their neutral character, and their access to different countries in hostility with Great 
Britain ; they have also an advantage in certain articles from the operation of the duties of 
this country, more especially in piece goods and nankeen cloths, who can afford to sell at 
different ports, and particularly in the West Indies, for a profit which would be about 
equal to the duties retained in this country. 5 ? ‘ 

151 & 182. De 


_ Mr. Bebb. 


aoaary Az 


“next, wou! 


98 Appendix, No. 47—SUPPLEMENT ‘to the FOURTH REPORT 


Do you conceive that the Americans-navigate cheaper than the English do?—I under- 
staad that they build their hulls cheaper, and provision them cheaper, but that many 
articles of equipment an sallorsweges, especially of the middle and southern States, are 
higher than in this couutry-in time of peace> ‘ 