

The Euphrates and Northumberland procceded from Portsmouth to Cork, and from 
thence with the Expedition to Madeira, and afterwards to St. Helena, their port of destina- 
tion, 

E request you will have the gcodness to lay this Letter before the Committee, as my 
answer to the question I was.unprepared to reply to on Saturday. 


5 T have the honor to be, Sir, 
East India House, Your most obedient servant, 
26th May, 1809. John Bebb. 


Right Honourable Sir J. Anstrather, Bart. 
Chairman of the East India Committee. 


(No. 11.) 
Jovis, 25° cis Maii 1809. 
Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. John Woolmore, called in, and examined. 


DID you formerly command one of the Company’s regular Ships?—Yes. 
Did you likewise ommand a ship in the country Yade fh India Yes. Afr. Woolmore. 
From your experience in the navigation of shipsin Europe and ships in India, state your ~~ 
opinion of the comparative cheapness of Indian Ships navigated from India, and British 
Snips carrying on the commerce from India to Europe ?—In answering that question gene= 
rally, I must couple it with the particular practice at the time when I was more Paction 
jarly acquainted with it, from the year 1800 to 1803. I am satisfied that the British Ship- 
owner could have sailed cheaper under the same circumstance than a Country Ship-owner. 

Do you mean to speak of British Ships generally, or to distinguish between the Com-- 
pany’s regular Ships and other class of British Ships?—I mean to speak of kind 
of ship under equal circumstances with each other. I mean to state that if 1 took 
a regular Company’s Ship, built aad fitted out in. India or in England, that I would, under 
the ‘same circumstances at that time, have built-a British Ship and navigated her 
cheaper than I could bave done an Indian Ship: the same observation applies to the two 
other distinct services ; the regular 800 ton ship and the regular 550 ton ship. The first 
regular Ship I spoke of was a 1,200 ton ship. 

‘hen { understand you to say that if yoa had had a house in India and a house in Europe, 
and had been offered by the East India Company to fit out an India Ship under precisely 
the same circumstances and regulations, either in India or in England, as you might 
snk Bt, that you would have preferred fitting her out from England as the cheapest? 
—Exactly so. | 

Do you mean to say that it follows from thence that English-built Ships may be 
freighted at a lower rate in the India trade. than India-built Ships ?—It occurred to mé 
at that time, from the calculations that I then made, that I could sail a British Ship 
cheaper in general than a Country Ship. 

State your opinion of the expediency and the effect of employing Lascars, in navigation * 
bétween India and Europe, in substitution for European Seamen?—I very much doubt 
whether,. ina geen system, as employed in onr ships, they are an actual saving os 
not. I am satisfied that ‘the Insurance upon a ship and cargo under such circumstances 
would be grexter than with the Europeans. Taking the expenses attached to Lascars and 
the expenses attached to Europeans, I very much doubt whether any saving can be made 
by the employment of Lascars, compared with Europeans, in the navigation from India 
to Iturope. 