

Would not the uncertainty of convoy attach to ships of Private Merchants as well as 
to those taken up by the Company ?—Certainly. a 

Do you not conceive that if the trade between India and England were thrown open, 
the great increase of buyers abroad and sellers at home would enhance the cost of goods 
in India, and lower the selling prices of them in England, to the general disadvantage of 
all persons engaged in the trade ?—From the eagerness of speculation I believe it would at 
first, but the heavy losses that would arise would check that spirit. 

Do you conceive that in the case of an open trade, individaals could be prevented from 
sending ships and goods from the British Settlements in India, to various other parts of 
the world besides Great Britain ?—If they conceived it to be their interest so to do, they 
certainly. woald find the Laeroe dy it. Fo olep te Fl dh fue 

hat do you suppose to be the aggregate rate per cent. of all the commercial ch 
in Bengal upon the Company’s investment out and Bon e I am not prepared at present 
to answer that question. s - ear aye 

Taking the whole of. the costs and charges of the Company’s Commerce in Bengal and 
the costs and charges of the trade pf individuals there, together with the quality of the 
goods purchased, which trade do you suppose to be done upon the midst advantageous 
terms ?—Most assuredly the Company's ; because 1 found that the advatttages of my own 
trade were not equal to those of the Company’s, and 1-believe I catried on my own 
trade fully as economically and advantageously as any Private Merchant, 

151 & 182. Do 


102 Appendix, No. 47.~-SUPPLEMENT ¢o0 the FOURTH REPORT 


. Bebb. Do you recollect the periods settled in the Charter Parties of the Company’s 
Mee Be , Ships, 3s a favourable seuaon for commencing and ending the dispatch of those Ships ? 
zZ —For the regular Ships the commencement is varied a little; it has’ sometimes I 
believe teen as early asthe ist, and sometimes as late as the 15th of November, but 
generally about the 10th, and the end of the time has been from the 1st to, { think, the 
Joth or 15th of March, generally the 10th of March. * 
Do not the inconveniences suffered in the manner of loading and dispatching the extra 
_ Ships relate almost entirely to a time of war ?—Certainly they are greatly aggravated by a 
tine of war, and if the extra Ships were taken up so as to sail from this country at the 
most favourable times of the year, they would return, under common circumstances, at the 
most favourable time of the year from India in time of peace. 
Do you know any instances in which Merchants have paid forfeit for the ton! 
which they had engaged irom the Company and had not occupied @—Whilst 1 was in 
Bengal there was one instance, and I believe only one, in which the forfeit was éxacted, 
from the House of Cockerill, Trail & Co. and a degree of strictness was used towards 
them, because it was believed by the Members of the d of Trade that they had acted 
incorrectly or improperly, by diverting tosome other channel the goods for which they had 
required tonnage. 
{What is your opinion of the effects and the expediency of navigating ships from India 
to England by Lascars ?—The ships are less equal-to defence against an enemy, and the 
Lascars are less capabic of enduring severe weather in cold climates; and a shocking mor: 
tality has eccurred in the country ships, L believe m: ly. ateribut le. to.the "want of proper 
‘ ig and proper lodging and a hearteniiigd the Lascars : on this subject there 
ssay” Written by Dr. Hunter ‘of “Bengal, 