

Do not you know that in point of fact extra Ships have very often sailed in June?—I 
know they have in April and May; I speak only to the end of 1799. 

When do you say the fair weather scason ought to end?—If I could perfectly command 
the circumstances of the commerce, I would wish every ship should sail from Bengal be- 
tween the beginning of November and the 2oth of February; but I have known ships 
frequently sail in March and make very good voyages. 

fo not you reckon April, May, and June; as very unfavourable times of dispatch ?— 
Certainly, they are unscasonable times of dispatch. 
Might not the sailing of the ships at the most convenient-seasons, for the purposcs of 


- :trade, be fixed on so as to preclude the disappointment which has been complained of by 


Private Merchants?—I apprehend that the detentions for convoy frequently occasion them 
to go at unscasonable times which would not ogcur; and the Convoy Act, in its operation in 
this country, occasions great delays and loss to the Company. 

“Do not the regular Ships almost always sail in fair scasons?—They endeavour to make 
them sail in fair seasons. 

Do they not, generally speaking, succeed in those endeavours ?—They generally sail in 
fair seasons, certainly; but then it must be explained: that the regular Ships are taken up 
to sil from England in fair times, whereas the extra are taken up to return as soon as they 
can, to meet.the wishes of the Merchants. 

Do you mean that the Merchants wish them-to sail from this country at such a period as 
would necessarily throw them in to return in the foul weather season ?—F was not in the 
In:lia Direction at the time the.present system was adopted, and, as I before stated, I differ 
in opinion with my Colleagues on the subject, but have understood the system was adopted 
to meet the wishes of the Merchants, . 

Do you then understand the wishes of the Merchants to be, that their ships should.re- 
turn in a bad season ?—As an abstract question, no man would answer in the afirmatiee, 

. eannot 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 3101 


T cannot speak to their wishes, I am not in their confidence ; but I believe they have often ar. popp, 
made unfounded representations in order to perplex and embarrass the case. i x 
Is there not every year an Advertisemgnt issued at Bengal, stating the rate at which ine aunt 
«tonnage is to be paid upon extra Ships, and upon regular Ships ?—Wben' I was in Bengal 
regular notice was given of the’ rate of the statutable tonnage, but there was no regular 
notice given of the regular Ships, though it has occasionally been done at the discretion of 
the Board of Trade ; nor is it required to bé given. 

‘Do you know whether, in the season of 1805-6, a fair season, there were any extra Ships 
at Bengal at all?—I cannot speak to it without referring to the Records at the India House, 

Did you ever see a Letter from the Court of Directors, directing the freight upon regular 
Ships, for the season.1805-6, to be £.30. odd per Ton?—There is a Letter of the 18th of 
February 1807, which conveyed the Orders of the Board to India for three seasons, two 
xetrospectively, and one prospectively, The four ships, which I mentioncd the other day, 
shad arrived in England before that Letter was written. : 