

From your degree of acquaintance with the people and manners in India, do you think 
it probable that the consumption of our manufactures, and the use of articles fashionable 
among us, could be carried to any great extent ?—I should think not. i 

Of these Europcan articles that are_now carried. from England to India, is not a large 
proportion sent in the privilege of the Commanders and Officers of the ships employed by 
the Company ?—I should think they are; but J do’ not know what trade has been to Europe 
independent of the Company’s ships. E 

How far, in your judgment, is it practicable for this country to maintain a competition 
with America, and the nations of foreign Europe, in the trade from India to Europe and 
America ?—As far as the shipping department goes, namely, as-to freight, I am in very 

reat doubt even in time of peace whether we could sail so cheap as they do, even under 
the same circumstances as to regulation ; in war certainly not, because their wages, insurance 
and out-fits ; generally must-be cheaper than ours, artis 

What is your opinion of the class of ships fittest to be used between Europe and 
India, in carrying on the Indian trade?—I should think the class of ships from 509 to 550 tons 
would be the cheapest navigated, upon the principle of the superior West India ships. I am 
now speaking particularly as to the trade to Bengal. : x 

Do you include, in this answer, security as well as cheapness -and expedition ?—I do in- 
clude security, as far as it respects every thing but war. 

In what situation were you in India?—A Captain and part Owner of a ship of about 
700 tons, or from 650 to 700 tons, trading from port to port in India and China. 

Were you concemed, to any considerable degree, in the commerce of exporting from 
India to Europe, ‘or importing from Europe to India?—During the time I commanded that 
ship, not at all. : 

Did you continue ‘to command that ship till you left India?—I did ; and I left India in 
1787. a Te ‘. 
Bs re that time, there was no commerce, T believe, open to the Merchants, either of India or 
of this country, between India and England ?—I believe not. °f oo 

Did you reside at all in the interior of India?—Not at all, * 

Have you mucli acquaintance with the manners.or habits of the people in the interior of 
India ?—Certainly not in the interior, only upon the coast. Cahaee 5 

Then from your own knowledge of the habits of the people in the interior of that Country, 
you cannot speak about the practicability of extending the sale of European exports, sup- 
posing the price considerably reduced ?—Certainly not, aan 

Are you suiticiently acquainted with the products of the interior of India, to be able to 
give an opinion respecting the possibility of increasing the import of raw commodities into 
this country, supposing they could be brought at a lower rate of freight than they now are? 
—I am certainly not acquainted, from local information, of any of the raw materials that 
may be produced in the interior of India ; but from some observation in this country of the 
raw material of Hemp that has been brought here, I should think that that might, upon low 
freight, be brought bere with advantage. z i 