

Did those ships gencrally eail either from’ India or Europe at the proper season ?—I 
believe, generally, they have sailed at ull times of the year. 

‘When the ships sail either from India or England ‘at what is called out of season, does 
not that necessarily incresse the expense of tear aud wear, and the risk to the Ship- 
owners ?—No doubt it docs. 

Tf you had been to employ your own ship, would not yqu have avoided that expense?— 
Certainly, without I had seen any profit that might arise which would have more than 

walled it. : 

“a Supposing you to tender extra Ships to the Company now, would you not take.all those 
etpeumutances into your consideration in the freight you would demand ?—No doubt 
of it. . 

Those circumstances which you have mentioned as inconveniencts to the Ship-owners, 
are they not also inconveniences to the Merchant Exporter from England to India, or 
from India to Europe?—I should think both ‘these circumstances, with respect to the 
Merchant, must depend upon the price of the articles atthe time they want to import 
orto export them; no doubt that the unceitainty of the sailing must be an injury to the 
Merchant. 

Supposing you were a Merchant carrying on a trade of export and of import to and 
from India, would it not be a considerable convenience to your trade to be allowed to 
Joad your sbip in you own way, and sail her at your own time, and under your own 
controul ?—I should certainly think so. , 

. Imean it as compared with the uncertainty of sailing of the ships under the controul 
ofthe East India Company, and the regulations which they have established ?—Of course. 

\Would it be impossible to form any regulation or any system for the care and protection 
of Lascars while they remain in this country ?—I should very much doubt if it was possible 
to take better care of them than they are now taken caré of by the East India Company. 

Is there not a great mortality of European seamen in thé Bengal River during: certain 
periods of, the year ?—Certainly, there is. . “ 

151 & 182, _ Whether 


Mr, Woolmore, 
Ve 


a5 Appendix, No. 47.—SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 
Hr. Weolmore.t “Whether do you think the European character mest likely to suffer from the dissoluteness 
‘Jef a Lascar returning to India, or the dissoluteness of au English Sailor in the streets of 
aa India I think in these two extreme cases that they are very much in the same state ; but 

{I think we keep our Europeans more on board ship in India than the Lascars are kept here, 

{ and therefore the circumstaaces do not apply exactly} « 

You said you reckoned ships for the Indian trade the best fitted ep in the style of the 
superior West tndiamen ?—I think so. I meant as to cheapness of freight as well as to 
general security that such ships are fully cqual tv give security in every respect, except 
fighting. 

SW hether the Company's extra shipping is now fitted out in the manner the superior 
class of West India shipping is?—Yes, tar beyond them. i 