

What is your opinion with respect to the efficiency of those two classes of Sailors ?—I 
think that a ship which could be navigated with 50 Europeans, ought to have in proportion 
from 80 to go Lascars : the superior class of Indian Lascars will not come. to Europe, and 
in times of danger, and when particular exertion is requisite, T think 80 or 90 Lascars would 
not be equal to 50 Europeans, 


151 & 182. Dd : In 


104 Appendix, No. 47—SUP PLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


Mr, Woolmere. In very perilous circumstances in the European Seas, can you get Lascars at all to exert 
te et themselves as the occasion requires /—ertainly not. 
What do you think as to the efect of navigating to Europe upon the constitutions of 
Lasears, and the proportioa of mortality produced by it among them ?—1 have no exact 
calculation to answer that question, but, generally speaking, [ lave always understood from 
the Commanders of mine who have bad the Lasears, that the moment they have come into 
cold weather that they have, generally speaking, been very useless and sickly, and required 
very great attention in themselves to keep them to do their duty. T have been particularly 
desirous to afford them every comfort, by clothing and nourishing them in every way to make 
them useful. 
Can you speak to the condition of the Lasears whilst they remain in this country 2 
have found thein ranging about the strects apparently in very distressed situations, arising 
very much from their conzection with the lower érder of women at the eastera part of the 
town. I have found them to have all the same propensities the British sailors have, exceptitig 
iéi¥ Insolence ; but they appear to have much more of that now from their intercourse wit 
England than they formerly had, which [ believe to arise from their connection with our 
women. 

Tron. your acquaintance with Indian manners, do you suppose that this intimacy of 

‘ Lascars with European women derogates from the respect that those natives of India are 
otherwise accustomed to pay to Europeans ?—I certainly thiuk it has. 

From your acquaintance with the trade of India, what is your opinion of the practicability 
of greatly extending the sale of British.manufactures there ?—. [ have not been in India these 
Jast 16 or 17 years to be capable of judging of that question in its extended view ; but if [ 
nay judge from the state of the markets in ‘Todia for European goods at the present time, it 
is so over-stocked, that taking the average prices of all the European goods, they will hardly 
bear at present any profit beyond the freight, insurance, and expenses attached to them :— 
I mean in short to say, that the exportation is at present cqual to the demand. 

Do you ‘think that if the price of European goods could by any means be considerably 
reduced in India, the demand would increase in proportion ?—I should rather think not, as 
far as my judgment gocs; at the same time I aw not acquainted with the interior of the 
country so as to be able to form a correct judgment how far the sale of any particular 
articles might be extended, from being at a low price. 