

Did not that Letter convey the Orders of the Court of Directors, respecting the rate of 
freight that. was to be charged for that season retrospectively @—{ think they were for 

-1804-5, 1805-6, and 1806-7. i 

You said that those four ships were offered to the Merchants upon the conditions that 
they should pay the freight that the Company actually paid ?—Yes. 

Were not the Merchants under the necessity of accepting that rate of freight, because 
there were no extia Ships at Bengal at the time, and because the Company would not give 
them freight upon the regular Ships at any lower rate ?—Not being in Bengal at the time 1 
cannot speak to the subject; nor having seen any official document which states the cir- 
cumstances the question presumes, I cannot reply to it. 

Do you think that if the Merchants had extra Ships properly fitted and ready to sail in 
the inonth_ of November, December or Janucry, at the rate of £.23 per ton, that they 
would, under those circumstances, have consented to pay that which eventually turned out 
to be £.44 a ton?—On fine goods it might answer to them, considering the difference 
of Insurance tq, send it on regular Ships, more especially if the ships proceeded from India 
without convoy. 7 

Would it have answered upon any but the very finest goods, the difference in these twe 
rates of freight?-—Of. course it must depend upon the value of the goods. 

Supposing a Merchant had provided a quantity of goods in the expectation of shipping 
them upon an extra Ship, at the rate of about £.23 per ton, and when the season came, 
he found that he could only export them at the rate which he paid upon those four ships, 
must he not upon some goods at least have run the risk of exporting them to a con- 
siderable loss, or been obliged to dispose of them in Calcutta, at the loss of his specu- 
Jation ?—Without knowing what the case is exactly, I cannot answer to it. 

Is not the loading of the goods, and the uncertainty that the Merchant is under what 
ships those goods will be placed in, an inconvenience to the private dealers ?—Certainly 
there is some inconvenience attends it ; but formerly, when there was a regular intercourse 
by land from India to England, that inconvenience as to Insurance did not exist in the 
manner that it now does: when your goods were shipped, you could write in time to effect 
an Insurance in London. . 3 

‘That was during the continuance of the over-land dispatch ?—Yes. — - 

1 believe that the regular over-land expresses were not received with any peculiar favour 
by the Court of Directors ?@—I was not at that time in the Direction. 

What are the articles that the Company export from this country at a considerable 
Joss?——Woollens. . 

Do they always lose by Woollens?—I cannot say always, but generally it is a losing 


trade. 

3 course you mean ‘jt is a losing trade at the rate and the expense at which it is now 
carried on?—~At the costs and chargés which fall on the Woollens, undoubtedly it is. 