

. fave 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. : 105 


Have you ever used any of the Sunn-hemp?—Yes. 

Are you acquainted with the nature of the material >—Yes, 

Do-you think it could be made use of asa substitute for Hemp ?—Yes, decidedly. 

Have you had occasion to make auy comparisons between it and Hemp?—I have. - 

Do yeu recollect the result of those comparisous?—I think that the Sunn-hemp wilt 
generally bear the proportion of from 70 to 85 or go. 

Does not some of the Sunn-hemp bear a much nearer proportion to Hemp ?—It varies 
very much, and I think bas latterly been improving; some of it has borne more or equal to 
the best Hemp. 

I believe you either are now -or have been a considerable Owner of India shipping I 

” bave been, but I am now a very small Owner of India shipping; 1 have only one left. 

Supposing you wére at liberty to build and navigate your ship in your own way as a 
Merchant, cither in India cr in Europe, could you not sail that ship cheaper than you can do 
ander the regulations-of the East India Company ?—TI should think so. 

You once, I believe, were a considerable Owner of extra shipping >I had between 34 
and £.35,000 in them, 

In the year 1801 the East India Company entered into an understanding with the 
‘Owners, Merchants, and Traders, to provide them with shipping at a moderate rate, to sail 
at fixed periods, and to leave India during the fair-weather scason: Heve those agree- 
anents or understandings been complied with by the East India Compary?—L should 
think not. é 

Were the regulations of the East India Company, and the mode in which they em= 
ployed those ships an inconvenience to the Owners of those ships?—In the manner in 
which they were cartied into exccution, they certainly were; as far as respects myself, 

certainly, 

What were the inconveniences that yon say the Ship-owners felt, from the mode in which. 
the Company employed the ships ?—The inconveniences were their being. employed in 
some caves to political purposes, when I expected, as a SI wner, that they would have 
been simply, except in cases of extreme necessity, applied to bringing the trade only. 
‘There was another inconvenience which I suffered, that the cargo in India was not kept 
within its dimensions. 

From the mode in which those ships were employed, were you able, in the course of a 
pres number of years, to make the same number of voyages, out and home, as you would 
have been if the ships had been entirely at your own disposal?—Certainly not. 

Did not that ncessarily cither diminish your profit, if you had hired your ship for a 
given number of years, or increase your demand for freight, supposing ee to have been 
about to make an agreement for hiring your ship for a given time ?—It certainly would 
have been the means of my increasing my freight, if I had had to teader ships for the 
same employ again. 

Did not the detention of the sbip in India on her ontward voyage increase the expense 
to you the Ship-owner ?—The detention in India being paid by the East India Company, 
did not injure me as a Ship-owner for a certain period ; but beyond a certain period, the 
allowance that the Company made me would not have answered the expenses; at the 
sane time, these increased the freight generally. 