


(AS 

is jf was published in 1804, which is 
deserving of attention. I ynderstand the Lascars on their arrival in this country are 
extremely licentious and dissolute, and I have understood very frequently quit their ships to 
beg about the streets without being under any necessity. 


Se ee 
(No. 10.) | 


LETTER from John Bebb, Esquire, to the Chairman of the Committee, dated 26th May, 
& 1809; in explanation of his Evidence of the zoth. - 
Sir, : in 
ON the question being asked me on Saturday last, whether there were any extra Ships in 
Bengal in Deceinber 1805, I replied I could not then say, but that I could easily state by 
reference to the Records at the India House ;_ I have since referred to the Records, and 
find that the Carmarthen, laden with 632 tons of. goods, and General Stuart 642 tons, 
sailed from Bengal for England the 2d December 1805. . 
I find also the under-mentioned ships were taken up to sail from Gravesend, in the year 


1805; viz. x 
= + + 13th March. 


Northampton 
Sarah Christiana 
Union- - - - 


Sir W" Palteney 


The Comet was in the first instance put under the orders of Admiral Troubridge, on the 
2oth April, but not arriving at Portsmouth in time to proceed with the Admiral, was after- 
wards detained there until the 17th July, and, with the other above-named ships, wasy'at 
the instance of His Majesty’s Ministers, employed to carry His Majesty's troops to the Cape, 
for the reduction of that Colony ; and had it not been for this circumstance, these ships 
would in the usual course of the voyage have beca in Bengal before the month of 
December. 

The further under-mentioned. extra Ships were also sent to India in 1805, and ordered to 
sail from Gravesend, as follows: 


Retreat * 


- 13th May. 


peveue 
penuns 
preee 


Tee 2 112 Tf + sseh March, 
Ann - - - - + = = goth May. 
Diana + - _ - 13th De 


Euphrates - - - -2. 
Redthambertand oe } . 28th June. 


and arrived at their respective destinations as follows ; viz. 


Retreat - - = - Bombay - -.- - 11th August 1805. 
- ‘Tigris- -.- - - Madras .- - + - 2d March i806. 
Ann - = - - - De - - - -.-,- 2d March. 
Diana- - = - - Te - - = = - © 11th February. 
Euphrates - - - P.W.Island- - - 4st-June. 

d - D® . - = = - = 2gth May. 


Northumberlan 


on the Allsirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, 103, 


The Tigris was in 


cf 


st instance pxt under the ordevs of Admiral Trowbridge on the 
goth April, but not it Portsmouth ‘in time to proceed with the Adiniral, was sub- 
sequently detained there until the 17th July, on which day she sailed trom theace with the 
Ann for Falmouth and Cork, and proceeddd with the Expedition against the Cape to Ma- 
deira, their port of destination, where they remained 18 days. 

‘The Diana was put under the orders of His Majesty’s Ship Belliqueux on the Sth July at 
Portsmouth, and proceeded with that ship to Falmouth and Cork, from the latter of which 
she was to have sailed with the Expedi sinst the Cape on the gist August, but mecting 
with an accident was under the u of returning to Portsmouth for repairs, from 
whence she again sailed for India on 27th September following. 