

In what respect ?--I mean in their equipments as to stores generally; 1 mean, generally, 
that she is fitted out at more expense than a West Indiaman. 

Does not that extra fitting enhance the freight very considerably ?—Certainly; there isa 
general security considered in consequence of that. 

Supposing yeu, as a Meschant, or as a Ship-owner, looking to your own interest and 
our own profit only, and trading to and from India, woul you employ a ship which you 
ave described as superior, a West Indiaman, or would yeu build and employ ships like the 

extra ships of the East India Company /=-The superior class of West Indiamen, and the East 
Tadia Company’s extra ship, L consider tobe the same as to the ship; but the extravagant 
out-fit attached to those ships, their being docked when they come home, frequently un- 
necessarily, in my opinion, is’one of the great causeés of the expense of their freight; indeed it 
is the principal cause of it, and I consider that the expense of freight of those ships is 
occasioned first by the foregoing causes; secondly, by the attachment to regulation ; and 
thirdly, by the cargoes in India not being properly compressed, so as that they can bring 
a sntficieacy of tonnage home. 

. _ ‘The Merchants have stated that the Company have not afforded them the facilities which 
they had expected for themselves from the regulations of 1801; do you know any thing 
how far the Merchants’ complaints upon that head are well or ill founded }—I think they 
may have had reason to complain of the ships being applied to political purposes; and 1 
think that last.year it struck me_particularly, that the extra Ships did not go out so early as 
they ought to have done, if the Merchants applied for shipments in proper time. 

You said, I think, that zs far as you knew, the British commodities were not now exported 
to any considerable profit ?—Not with any considerable profit beyond the price of freight, 
insurance, and interest of money. - 

Of course you mean the present rate of freight 7—I mean merely the outward freight. 

Do you think it is possible, with any facility that could be given to the shipping, that the 
Enropean commodities could be supplied to India so much at an under rate as to very 
much increase their consumption ?—From my limited intercourse with India, I very much 
doubt their being increased. % 


(No. 12.) 
Sabbati, 27° die Maii 1809. 


Sir JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. John Woolmore, again called in, 


Mr. Woolmore. I beg to state that I am properly called a Ship-owner, and not a 
“Merchant. ; ; 
You have stated the iaconveniences experienced with tespect to the Company’s extra 
Ships as to times of sailing, detention, &c. Do you not think that if the trade was left entirely 
free, that those inconveniences would be experienced in a certain de; by individuais 
during such a war as we are now engaged in?—Thev might in a small degree, but 1 shouid . 
not think in any serious degree, that a Merchant might always have it in his power to con- 
nect the time oF sailing of the ship very much agreeable to his own wishes, except in cases 
of extreme accident, . : 
Would they not_be obliged. to wait for convoys, as the Company’s Ships are ?—They 
might sometimes ; but I conceive that I could sail without a convoy. 
re you not aware that the law now prohibits that ?—I understand that you may go 
without convey or with convoy by a license of Government: as the convoys are generally 
appointed at a particular period of the year, between the months of. Jenanty, the latter end of 
December, and the monthsof March, April and May, that I could. in the month of Sep- 
tember previous to that or even in December, Prepare my ship under my own management, 
so.as to get away either with the January, March, or May convoy. 
With respect to convoys from India, would you not be subject to the ‘same regulations 
as the Company’s Ships If I was obliged to take them, certainly. : 
: With 