

in what space of time have_your extra Ships performed two voyages, 2s they have been 
managed by the Company ?—From the beginning of the first voyage to their going cut 
again upon the third voyage, I think four years; but [ will send to the Committee tne stated 
times. 

You have spoken of the delay and loss occasioned to the ships hired by the Company by 
detaining thei for political purposes ; is there not an allowance made for those detentioas in 
the terms of freight ; and if ships were to go without any restriction of this sort would not 
the rate of freight be cheaper?—The rate of freight, in the particular instance that [at 
speaking of, would not have been cheaper than it was, but it would have been dearer if [ 
had not had an impression that these ships would not but in extreme cases have been divert- 
ed to any political purpose. The demurrage allowed by the Company does not apply in many 
cases to cover expense to the Owners, and in very few circumstances are they a complete 
compensation, and in other circumstances very far from adequate, The first point of elucida- 
tion’ [ mean to apply to, is that I conceive in the particular case I am alluding to, that the 
East India Company paid me I suppose about six days demurrage, which cost me a loss it 
the first instance of fourteen days, and in the second instance a loss of at least a month, [ 
will state the case: the Sir William Bensley that was to have sailed in May, sailed in June, 
she was ordered to call at the Cape either with Soldiers or to take away Soldiers, or both; 
she was there according to thé best of my recollection 10 or 12 days or a fortnight; the con- 
sequence of going into the Cape I consic'er as a loss of three days, the coming out again to 
the same situation a loss of two days; the Company would pay for the intermediate nine days” 
demurrage of the fourteen, but I consider the consequence of her going to the Cape. threw 
me backward in my arrival in the Bay of Bengul, so late as to have lost the south-west mon- 
soon and to occasion me to Jengthen my passage between England and Bengal, at least trom 
twenty-five days to a mouth, for which demurrage is not allowed. 

In your computation of the time in which you could perform two or three voyages be- 
tween India and England, do you make allowance for the casualties which are unavoidable 


1 


Afr. Woolmore. 
a 


in any given space of time in that navigation ?—Certainly I do, because I could I think, by - 


the sailing at any of these pertuils of the year, almost deteriaine, from my practice in naviga~ 
tion, what those casualties would be. _ 
Are not the Company's extra ships taken up by contract, by open competition ?—They 
are. : 

151 & 182, Ee Is 


Mr. Woolnore. 
SSE Canna 


108 Appendix, No. 47-—-SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


Is it not optional for every Owner to tender at such rate of freight as he thinks fit ?—Cer~ 
tainly, but in the instance that I allude to when I first began, the regulations of the out-fit 
of those ships I think was not promulgated. I oaly think so because I was disappointed in 
the impression which I had entertained of the intention of those ships, that they would not 
have been stored exactly and fitted as they were, nor diverted to political purposes, except in 
extreme necessity, which was the occasion of the low rate of freight at which I tendered, and 
which, was the lowest rate of freight at which that class of ships was taken. 