

7.—That not more than fifty chests of wine, or fifty hogsheads of beer belonging to one person, 
be laden on any ship. 

8.—That the tonnage of wines or chests of liquors on freight, be calculated at two chests, 
containing twelve dozen quart bottles each to the ton, and not at three chests to the tou, ws has! 
occasionally been the practice heretofore, 


” : { 
9:—That the Tonnage of Carriages on freight be caleulated as follows, vis. 


A Coach or Barouche = - - = = __, 10 tons 
Chariot - Ft = ptoulabe= coe 8 
Phaeton + * 4 = e, 6 
Curricle - ,- 5 = - é ah 
two-wheel Chnidorte ice ite uae. Pee 


10.—That not more than two four-wheel carriages, or four two-wheel carriages, be laden on 
any ship, nor any oné house be permitted to ship more than one carriage on each ship. 

11.—That if quicksilver be allowed to he shipped oa freight, no expense or risk thereby 
be incurred by the Company or owners of the ship. 

12,—That the peace rate of freight for goods shipped in England on extra ships for India, 
be at a rate not exceeding £.5. per ton; and that such additional freight be paid for goods 
shipped in England in war, as the circumstances of the time may render necessary. 

13.—That the peace rate of freight homeward shall not exceed {.11. per ton; and that 
such additional freight be paid on goods laden in India on extra ships, in war, as the circun- 
stances of the time may render necessary. 

14.—That wine freighted from Madeira to India, on the Company’s extra ships, be at the rate 
of £.5. per pipe of 110 gallons. i 

15.—That the same rate of (reight be paid for wine sent from Madeira to any partof India, both 
in peace and war. 


151 & 182. Mim " 16. That 


250 Appendix, No. 47S UP PLEMENT ¢o the FOURTH REPORT ~ 


16.—That the freight of wine brought from India to England be £.8 per pipe in time of 
peace, and £.12 per pipe in time of war, and that this freight be paid previous to the delivery 
of the wine in England, and charged at the above. rates respectively, whether the pipes contain 


the full quantity or not. ‘ & 

17.—That persons requiring tonnage for wine from Madeira to be landed in India, or to be 
carried to India and from thence to England, be permitted to lade in articles for Madeira, freight 
free, to the amount of the tonnage they may be dllowed in wine, and that two pipes be cal- 


culated equal to one ton. 

18.—That the ships be allowed to remain at Madeira two working days for every twenty 
tons of goods they may have been permitted cither to carry to or receive on board at that 
island (the days of arrival and sailing not included), and thatif the agents of the shippers shouli 
not complete their lading within that period, the ships do preceed on their voyage, and the 
freight paid in England do thereby become forfeited. 

19.—That all persons do make a deposit in the Company’s treasury, within fifteen days after 
their requests to ship goods or wine shall have been granted by the Court of Directors, of the 
amount of freight chargeable on such goods or wine at the rates above mentioned, under the 
regulations of the Act. 