

Whether in the terms and conditions published by the Court of Directors as the ground 
on which tenders were to be made, the manner of storing those Ships was not expressly de- 
elared?—I think in that instance that though the terms’ and conditions where the schedule 
containing the quantity of stores was not applied to them, and though the terms { believeex- 
pressed that the Company might divert them to political purposes, yet the impression I re- 
ceived from my general conversation with some of the Directors and parts of the Committee 
of Shipping, was that those ships would not be diverted to political purposes but in the most 
extreme necessity. 

Did not the Charter Party contain an express stipulation that the ship should be liable to 
be employed on political services ?—Certainly. 

You complained of the out-fit of the extra ships employed by the Company as expensive, 
was not that known at the time of your tendering the rate of freight?—No, it was not. [ 
have stated that the Schedule applying to the out-fit was not arranged at the time; if it had 
been arranged, I could not have been disappointed. 3 : 

But generall speaking, is not the manner of fitting out the ships of the Company known 
before the tenders of freight are made ?—In every instance that has come within my recol- 
lection since, it is; but this was anew thing. . 

Does not the expensive mode of fitting out the Company’s ships, add to the security of 
the cargo from damage and capture ?--Not in all cases; an unnecessary out-ft, [ cannot 
conceive, can add to the security of the cargo; as to the fitting and anning, there is no-doubt 
that it reduces the price of insurance, and gives a public confidence in its security. 

Is it your opinion that the ships hired by the Company, regular and extra, are sufficiently 
paid in point of freight?— When I first entered into it, yes, perfectly; naw certainly not; 
they are, [ may say, soiled by the patronage that is attached to them. 

Sapleia what you mean by patronage-—I mean that the individuals who have been 
brought up in the service, engage their friends to hold shares of the ships, for which they 
realy do not receive interest for their money, with a view of employing them in the com- 
mands. 

From your acquaintance with the trade of India from port. to port, is it your opinion that 
the different marts in the Indian seas have been thoroughly explored by the British Navi- 
gators in India?—{ should really think they have;_1 know i explored a great many myself, 
and naturally suppose that the same has been applied by other people as well as myself. 


REMARKS. 


Sir William Bensley’s first Voyage 


This ship was originally ordered afloat in 
May 1802, bound to Bengal direct, and to 
be in the Downs 2d June 1802. 


I requested to be permitted to bring the 
ship afloat with some ships that were to be 
in the Downs fourteen days before that 
time, which was granted, on my agreeing to 
stay 14 days longer than usual in India be- 
tore I claimed demurrage. 