


Wo. 14.) 


Mr. William Bell, called in, and examined. 


YOU are I believe a Merchant and Underwriter ?-—Yes. 

The Committee wish to receive from you information respeeting the rates of premium on 
insurances from India to England, in all the different modes in which it is'done by parti- 
cular ships of the Company, regular ships, extra ships, on specific ships, on ship or ships, 
and on Indian ships ?—From India to Europe, we give seven per cent, 

Mr. Bell was shewn the paper which had been put in this morning by Mr. Allen, and 
said those were the premiums that had been given for this season, and {for the two or three 
seasons last past. 


412 Appéndix, No. 47.—-SUPPLEMENT ¢o the FOU RTH REPORT 


Ni * 
nee TONNAGE NOT AFFORDED WHEN REQUIRED. 


‘Obfervations 
on Evidence _ : v ae ee 5 
lating | IN reply to the reprefestation, that the Company, in fome infiances, have not been prepare 

i Private” ade to afford Tonna 2 lg the period ‘when it was required, we are ready to admit that the Com- 
with India. aint may not be altogether unfounded ; but if the Merchants mean to infer that this has 
ey the elult of premeditation or defign oii the part of the Company, we moft decidedly 

dlittlaim the imputation. : . < 
. We are not difpofed to convey our fentiments in the language of afperity, but it is impof- 
fible to avoid remarking, that, from the very uroment of patiing the Charter Ac of 1793 
to the prefent period, the Merchants have never been fatislied either with the indulgences 
us originally gianted them by the Act, of with thuie that have been gratuitouily extended to 


them in various fublequent periods, 


By the terms of the AQ, they were to be furnifhed with Tonnage at fpecific rates of freight, 
whetber the Company were able toobtain it at thofe rates or not. , After a feries.of the moft 
indefatigable exertions, with a view to eftablifh a permanent rate of freight upon the loweft 
pottible fcale; we were unable to prevail on the Owners to accept of lower terms than 
£21. 105. per ton for Bombay, and £.25. 10s. per ton for Coatt and Bay, as a Peace 
freight, to which was to be added in time,of War, of preparation, for War, fach additional 
“expenfes as fhould be aétually incurred. 


The terms upon Which we were obligated to fupply the Merchants was limited to.€. 5. 
per ton outward, and £.15. per ton homeward, in ume of Peace, which in War was to be 
encreaféd in proportion to the additional rates paid by the Company. \ 


© Under this arrangement the Company were fubject to a lols in each year of £41. 10, per 
ton from Bombay, and £.3.10. per ton from Bengal in time of Peace, with a further pro- 
ortionate lols in tine of War, exclufive of the charges arifing from the ron Kentlidgeand 

“ ora 


ae 1 
Bennsrse) s 


With this advantage in their favours the Merchants were not fatisfied. - It was urged, that 
the Company's thips, under prefling exigencies, were {abet to be diverted to political pur- 
te whereby the Merchants were liable to fuffer nveniences and dilappointments. ° 