


REMARKS. 
The Fleet that sailed the 13th February 
posed Madeira 22d February, { therefore 
lost thirty six-days in my passage to Madeira 
in consequence of this detention, and was 
aid tern days demurrage for detention at 
ortsmouth and Piymouth. The honourable 
Committee will please.to compare this with 
my statement respecting the inadequacy of 
demurrage. 


This ship, from the commencement of her 
first to the commencement of her fourth 
voyage, was five years ten months and a half. 
If the honourable Committee will please to 
compare this with my statement, they will 
find the average to be as | stated, nearly two 
years a voyage, instead of two voyages in 
three years, 


(No. 13.) 


Tovis, 1° die Junii 1809. 
Six JOHN ANSTRUTHER, Baronet, in the Chair. 
Mr. Grant Allen, called in, and examined. 


STATE, in as particular a manner as you can, the rate of premium of insurance paid on 
single ships from India, ship or ships, Company's regular ships, Company's extra ships, and 
Indian ships @—Understanding that these questions would be put to me, L:have put down on 
paper an answer to them as clearly as [ possibly could. £ deliver ia this paper. 


The Paper put in. 
RATES OF INSURANCE FROM BENGAL TO ENGLAND. 


On a Company’s regular ship - - On. goods £.7, per cent. on the ship, 7 guineas per cent, 

On “ship or ships,” Cumpany’s regular ships - D° - = © D- + 

On the ship, 9 Guineas per cent. to return £.1 per cent. for 
convoy to St. Helena, and £.1 per ceut. more for convoy 
from St. Helena to England. 

On goods, £.9. per cent, tu return 19s. and 19s. per cent. for 
convoy as above. 


Ds -  - 


On a Company’s extra ship - - 


po. - 
Ona 


On Company’s extra “ ship or ships,” - = 
151 & 182. 


Mr. Woolmore. 
aaa 


Mr, Allen, 
Kee 


Mp. Allen, 


A Ey 


Mr, Bell, 
os 


410 Appendix, No, 47 ~SUPPLEMENT to the FOURTH REPORT 


Rates of Insurance from Bengal to England —continued. 


15 Guineas per cent. to return £.2} per cent. for convoy to 
Onan Indian ship - = = St. Helega, and £.24 per cent. more for D* from thence to 
England. * 


On Indian “ship or ships,”- - - - D- - - De ee De 


15 Guineas per cent. to return £.8 per cent. for regular ships, 

+ . or £.6 per cent. for extra ships, and £.1, 2 i 
On “ship or ships” generally — - cent, more for convoy. as above, or £.u4 per c 
£-24 per cent, for Indian ships, if with couvey as avove. 


By insaving ‘on “ship or ships” 
generally, and afterwards getting a . . 
cari forthe, goods being in re- A less is sustained of 15 per cent, 
gular Ships, 
Should there be a short interest on the sum insured, a further loss is sustained of 10 per cent, on the 
amount of the short interest. 


N. B. In case of capture or total loss, there are no Returns made, consequently the difference be- 
tween the premium of 15 guineas per cent, on * ship or ships’4generaily, and £.7 per cent. the 
premium op-regular ships, would be a loss of £.8. 158. per cent. ‘ 


As it appears that by insuring on ship or ships generally, the premium is much higher 
han by insuring on specific supe, and the return, in case of loss, proportionably less, what 
is the method the Merchants take to cover themselves from this excess of Joss in such cases? 
—If I have £.100 to insure from India, and the premium is fi percent. I value my 
goods in the Policy at £.100. In that case, if the ship is totally lost or captured, I recover 
net £.03.- If I am obliged to give fifteen guineas per cent. I must value my goods higher, 
in order to save myself in case of Joss, a3 I have no return of the fifteen guineas; ‘t therefore 
value my goods, say at £.125 and then in case of loss I recover net £.105. 68, 3d. The 
result of this is, that in case of loss I save myself; but if the goods arrive, | have paid more 
premium than otherwise I should have done upon a single ship. 