


“ We were glad to find that the Governor in Council had taken care to prevent the she 


“ ration of thofe evils, or to alleviate their effeéts; and that with this view, it was deem: 

« necelfary to afford every pollible encouragement to the Private Merchant, in order that he 
« might be enabled to fapply the place of the Company in the market, and to fimnifh that 
« fupport to the Manafaéturers which could not proceed from the Company’s funds.” 


Of the correctnefs of this principle there cannot reft the fhadow of adoubt, Tt conftitutes 
the only true and fabfantial around upon which every portion of this valutble branch of the 
Company’s Commerce ought ever to have been conceded. But what was the fact?) Thi: 
Merchants of India, mindful only of what they thought to be their own immediate interett, 
inftead of affording relief to the Manufuéiurers in the vatious Vactories and Auraugs febor- 
dinate to the Company’s more immediate, government 5 inttead of making up deficiencies 
in the ufaal and well known fabricks of which the Company’s Invefiment haye long been 


compofed, and which were about to be curtailed 5 intiead of filling up that chafin which the 


semporary embarraflinent of the Company hud created, and thereby fupplying the eae: 
“. we 


: ‘on the Affaics of The EAST INDIA COMPANY, » 193 


= —== 


+ The following Fifteen Numbers, are APPENDICES to the foregoing 
. © OnsERvaTions.” 
as 


No. 1. 


East India House, 12th November 1806. 
Terns and Coxprtioys under which the East India Company are willing to furnish Tonnage, 
exclusive of that to be provided by the Act of the ggd of His present Majesty, cap. 52. 
1.—TIAT the applications for tonnage be received on the first Wednesday in the months of 
September, December, and March in each year, and that such applications be indorsed, 
“ Private Application for ‘Tonnage ;” and that any application made in the intermediate months, 
unléss Fequired by advertisement, will be considered only in the ensuing quarter. 


2.—That all applications be made by the persons who actually ship the goods, and not by any 
agent or clerk, and specify that the said goods are bona fide intended to be sent to India on 
account of the persons making the application, or on commission received from persons in India, 
whose names must be inserted in the applications; and the person making application must 
engage to verify the same by affidavit, if so required by the Couft of Directors. 


3.—That every application do specify the tonnage of measurable and heavy goods respectively, 
the particular articles of which each species of tonnage con the Presidencies to which they 
are to be consigned, and the periods when the same will be ready to be shipped. , 

4-—Thag no material deviation be permitted in the articles of tonnage specified in any request, 
after such request shall have been granted. ' 

5<—That no application for a less quantity than’ one ton be granted, 

6.—That the Court of Directors, in order to encourage the export of a sufficient supply of 
necessary articles for consumption in India, do not intend to restrain the exportation wholly to the 
letter of the Act, which limits the articles to such as are of the growth, produce, or manufacture 
of Great Britain, but the Court reserve to themselves the power of limiting the exportation of 
articles which are not of the growth, produce, or manofacture of Great Britain, or the exportation 
of which by individuals is not permitted by the Act, to such quantities as the Court may judge 
proper, And they farther reserve to themselves a power to reduce the quantities of any particular 
description of goods applied for by any individual, which may appear to them to operate to the 
exclusion of others. ¢ 