


The cause for this request was, to save 
the south-west monsoon up the Bay of Bengal. 


A few days before my time for sailing from 
Gravesend, I was ordered to the Cape, and 
on the 18th May (in writing) to prepare 
water and provisions, &e. for the conveying 
90 troops irom the Cape to India. 


The water, &c. was sent from London, 
and the ship sailed on the 26th for the 
Downs, with a foul wind at N. E. (although 
fair from thence for India,) and actually 
passed through on the goth May at the tail 
ofa N. E, wind, which had been blowing 
rom the 2oth May, thé time I should have 
been there, if not detained for political neni 
: yn 


The expense I incurred by getting the shi 
ready, wll shew my idea of the value or 
time at that period, but which the subsequent 
act of the Court rendered nugatory ; on set- 
tling the freight account of that voyage, three 
days demurrage was deducted from my ac- 
counts, in consequence of this agreement, the 
ship having through the Downs three 
days before the 2d June. 


The Committee will here perceive, by my 
exertions in getting the water, X&c. &c. on 
board, the continued idea of the value of 
time at that period. 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 


Sir William Rensley’s 1st Voyage—continued. 


On the 27th August, the ship was in with 


109 
REMARKS. 


The honourable Committee will please to 


the Cape’Land, and was prevented getting » compare this with my statement, relating to 


into the Bay, by a hard gale of fair wind for 
India, until the 2d September. 


She sailed again on the :4th September, 
Dut did not get clear to sea until the 17th, 
the difference in time being twenty-one days. 


She arrived at Bengal oh the 25th Novem- 
ber, having been six months, wanting five 
days, on her passage from the Downs; a 
ship which sailed from the Downs the 18th 
May, arrived at Madras the 25th Sep- 
tember; and had not my ship been detained 
on that political service, [ will venture to as- 
sert the Bensley would have been in Bengal 
the first week in October. 


the inadequacy of deinurrage. 


The honourable Company paid me twelve 
days demurrage for detention by calling at 
the Cape. 


I therefore have no hesitation ia saying I 
lost fifty days wages, provisions, and ex- 
penses, from’ the ship being crdered on that 
political service, for which 1 was paid tele 


days, 


Sir William Bensley’s second Voyage. 


This ship arrived at Portsmouth 8th Fe- 
bruary 1804; on the 13th the first convoy 
sailed, and this ship was not permitted, but 
‘on the 2oth sailed for Plymouth to joia some 
other convoy, from which place she sailed on 
the 26th February at the tail of a fair wind, 
and arrived at Madeira on the goth March. 


Arrived at Madras outward in July, and at 
Bengal goth August 1804; sailed from Ben- 
gal on her homeward voyage 28th January 
1805, artived at Madras 12th February, 
sailed again the gth March, and arrived in 
England in September 1805. When the 
cargo was cleared, I inclosed my concern in 
this ship, but 1 find she sailed again on her 
third voyage the 4th March 2806, arrived 
dack in July 1807, and sailed again on her 
fourth voyage 15th April 1808, 