

_ To obviate this objection, the Company undertook. to charter extra (hips, for the purpofe of 

their being more immediately premepsated to the ufe of the Private Traders. The Merchants 

were ftill dilcontented. They looked to oiher-objecs. They complained that the rate of 

_ freight was a check to their exertions; and it was hinted, that if the Company would further 

revile their Naval Syftem, and enterinto apermanent engagement to charter’ fhipsfor agiven 
“number of voyages, fuy tbr eight inflead of four, as had been the former. prattice; and alfo. 

» condition that thefe vellels thould be kept sonfanilgemplored in pafling and repailing be- 

. tween the two Countries without avy intermiffion, the erchants of this Country, as wellas of 

Tndis; would build fhips, and tender them upon reduced terms.. The Company liftened to this 

. faggcition, and Advertifements were iflued both here and in India, inviting tenders accord- 

ingly. In this Conntry fome offets wero made and accepted; but in India (notwithfanding 

, all that has been faid about Indian flipping) not a fingle propofal was receiv Fora 

detailed account of the principles and views by whieh theCompany were governed in'form- 

ing thele arrangements, we take leave to reter to the paragraphs that were fabmitted to the 

- confideration of the Board of Commifiioners for the ‘Affairs ot India, under date the 15th Fe- 

broary 1802, which are already before the Committee *. From this document it will -be 

feen, that no effort has been wanting on the part of the Company to afford the Private 

i Traders everyaccommodation that was in their power to bellow, of that the Merchants could 

; owith reafon of propriety expec. 4) ax) ‘ 

That the Company have not at all times and under all circumftances been able to effect 


the objedt, not lets of their. own’ than the Merchants withes, will not, when confidered in’ 

* “combination | the fingular etents that have occurred during the laft ten. or twelve years, 
be thou; : ry. War hagalways an-unfavovrable influence upon the opérations 
of sae and during its continuation the be concerted plans are liuble to be deranged 
by exigencie as little to be forefeen as'avoided. = a atl s 


enhanced rate of freight, sere iebtereey that in ftating the fact, the Merchants ought 


rs from 21 May i801 to 30 March 
ETS. i 


ae 
ee 


page G4 pri 


on the Affairs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 133° 


Piece Goods to any confiderable extent beyond the Company’s rewular and aceufiomed Im- 
ports, fay, 800,000 pieces per annum ; fince it is fen, thet un addition of 400,000 Pieces 
per annum in three years, brought this deteription of goods duwn near 4o percent: Butir 
is neceffary to obferve, that the evil of this rivailhip has not merely been coulined to the 
markets athome. The Company have equally fuffered fiom the couipetition that hus been 
excited againft them in the Aurtings and manufadturing difiriGs abroad, where eayernels of 
demand has unavoidably led to encreale of price; and wliat is no lefs to be regretted, the 
fabricks have in fome infiances been fo fhametully debafed, that, as one of the Company's 
Agents has jufily obferved, the original ftandaids are no longer to be fen?” The Com- 
pauy’s Records both at Bengal and the Coaft’are full of complaints on this heads they are tou 
voluminous to be introduced in this place; we fhall therefare infert only the follewing: 