

20.—That the Court of Directors do reserve to themselves the right of allotting to any of the 
sbips in their service, bound to the respective places of consignment, the goods or wine in such 
proportions as they may think proper; at the same time, the Court will endeavour to comply, as 
far as circumstances will admit, with the particular wishes of the proprietors, respecting the ship- 
ping of their goods or wine. 

* 

21,—That if the goods allotted as, above-mentioned be not sent on board the ships, previous’ to 
the day appointed by the Court for the ships clearing out at the Custom House, the freight paid on 
such goods shall be forfeited. 

22:—That should the produce of such goods or wine be paid into the Company's Treasury at 
either of the three Presidencies, or Bencoolen, bills will be granted on the Court of Directors, on 
the terms of the season allowed to other individuals, _ 

29-—That the proprietors of goods shall be exactly on a similar footing with the Company, in 
respect to short delivery, as is contained in the terms and conditions under which the ships shall 
have been engaged, 

24.—That each shipper of goods, jointly with the Company, shall be entitled to all allowance for 
ship damages and short delivery, not exeeeding £.4. per ton on their respective tounage; that is 
to say, £.4. per ton to such persons who occupy the like proportion of tonnage out and home, 
whether the damage be on the outward or homeward goods, and £.2. per ton on the outward 
goods, and the like sum on the homeward goods, when they belong to different proprictors, 
averaging on the whole at the rate of £.5. per ton on the builder’s measurement, agreeably to the 
terms under which the ships sball have been engaged. _ ‘ 

25.—That in all other cases the owners of goods will be subject to the same decisions and 
determinations only, as the Company themselyes are liable to. 

26.—That the tonnage of all goods (except the articles before mentioned) be calculated accord- 

_ ing to the computation of tonnage used by the Company. 

27.—That three days at least shall be appointed by the Court for shipping goods on board of each 
ship appointed to carry out the same, and that public notice shall be given, at least three days 
before such day of shipping, by the officer for private trade outwards. 

28.—That not any order will be given by the officer in the private trade department outwards, 
for goods allowed to be shipped on freight, until the several petsons who are permitted to export 
‘the same shall have delivered into the office an exact account of the tonnage of each article which 
they have been allowed to ship. 

29.—That before any goods shall be shipped, the same shall be registered with the officer for 
private trade outwards, in books to be kept by him for that purpose, which registry shall describe 
the marks and numbers of each bale or package of goods to be shipped, and the amount of the whole 
tonnage allowed to the person so shipping, and all guods which shall be shipped without being so 
registered, will be considered as goods illicitly shipped, and the goods will be subject to such seizure 
and forfeitures, and the owners, shippers, and agents concerned therein, to such forfeitures and 
Penalties, as any person shall be subject to by law, for carrying on trade toand from the East Indies 
without the Company’s licence. 