


adopt a fyftem of liberality fuited to the policy of extention. 

It is not intended to trouble your honourable Committee with political fpeculations ; but 
aright underftanding of Trade cannot be feparated from a knowledge of the political cir 
cuimftances of differéat' Countries: ‘The, revolutions in India, within thefé laft 60 years, have 
given a direction to the views, aud a charadter to the purtuits of the Eaft Jadia Company, 

182. Yy ; periett.y 


Bs Afiis of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 
iy themfelves at kome, and th 


es a oe ey recent oues, declared their cae 


tat Tea ho 
» that 
ctl fier cheap, 


er ‘tape 
the renee 
ftands, fo ditfer 


Trade: ren 
better; ii 
ASQ 


fation for th 
which a 
chants traf 
soncl 


be unpardonable fe 
‘infift upon as an-evil 
With thele Obfe 


P 
thoagh it nat 
juftly murmur at 
their voyages, ha 


the commodity, 
that the Comp: 


on the Aftirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY. 185 


¢ fupply to the.demand, that the average annual number of 643,909 pieces, 
te sakes aha of £.1. 14. 8 Bhar isc ft certainly would have Mordechai 
feen how far this refult, counected with the ftate of markets, and ‘the operation of 
‘events, can fairly be atcribetl tq, wife and difereet management, of how far even it 
s to be confidered a fair mergantile profit in all the eiremnftances of’ the eale. 

eannot however efcape obfervation, that the period’ of 25 years here alluded to; was 
that in which the Cotton manufactures of this Country, and of all other partsct Europe, 
He ly eftablithed, and were far from being able to'vie with or imitate thofe of Briuih 
india, It would not be furprizing, if during fuch 2 period, the Trade in ‘Piece 
ly and their profit certain. But int any in ion on thi ‘the Mere 
|an average of four years, from 1802 to 1805 feledied, in order t 

confequences of exceilive importation 3 . , 

Ino complaints ela an additional proof to thofe furnithed 

i Trade of a great Company is diftur 


OW, grievoully 
and lowly it aécommodates itfelf to rapid fluctuation ofsCo 
‘necellities oceafioned by political events. © whole of this head of the 
affords a firong, but uuintentional itinftration of this important fact. 

The truth owever, that the difireffes of the Compan: 
the tual Inveftment from: ordinary fources 

to a confiderable extent, the interference af the 

calling in the aid of the P on fucl 


‘another 
a 


Pi juftalluded 
to few the danger of admit 
“underftood to be anin: 
Tagement given toany 
eerie that when 
vent it requires, 


<That at 
rife in poi c 
: , or altogether re) 
decifive fuperiority. 
ly as they can, to 1 i 
- wanton and abfurd profufion, If 
SA 3 ar 


on th is of The RAST IN DIA COMPANY. . 189 


n £.732,410. inftead of £8 765833-5 and the amount of 
smpany did nof trade, was fo oureas: “infiead of £. 933,352+ 
Re doubilefs made to other items in the Statement now under 
want of official documents: ‘precludes the invefiigation. 


fiated is, Rowever, fufficient to difplay, the inaccui of 
of abit after deductin; i snout cet foods 
did deal, and of Indigo, in which they did not deal, 