


ty contend, that “it will reful that the boalied’, 
of abe which” ‘thas been in fucka de bs z 


ital could not embrace, is reduced 
earl ul whieh if meer wots e 
er, ~ What is "this Dut Hee hs 
yer annuin are excluded, and 
ed to the fum of 


its prefent fyfiem. ce 

mnpany es fo decifively, as th 
the Venegas Tine with: Pak a 
empire ‘ upon ran 
cole eg en. 
undeniable. The 


the fluctuation of! Comm m 
which it 


Sfepteten a 

Upon ‘this fubjed th 
on the Statements 
Commerce. ‘The digi 


ently 


, td of Commerce. “The nat 


| 
; 


én the Aftairs'of The EAST INDIA COMPANY: 20g , 


Tf, therefore, from this annual file amount we deduct in the firt inftance £.876,435. for _ Memoir on the 
the amount of the’ goods of the defeription of thofeowhich form the Company's regular and Trade to and from 
eftablithted foveliments;.and fecondly, £.633,£06. for the article of Indixo, which has lon: Indiz. 
been conceded to the Merchants of Indiwexclulively, making together £.1 1,930. it will at 
appear in refult, that the bozfted furplas Trade of Lndia,, whieh it was adfert ed “the Come a 
pany’s capital could not embrace,” is reduced to the eoniparatively trifling annual amount 
of £,300,846. from which, if the article of Cotton is excluded, it will be further reduced ia 


value to about £. 195,305. per annum. ats 

Itis evident therefore, that the views/and expeGations of the Private Merchants, fo far 
as regards the creating an extended Innportation of Indixn 1 red of adelcription different x 
from. thote which compolé the Compgny’s agelansene gfiablied Invefiments, as nenrly if 
not altogether failed. But itwill probably be ‘urged, valthonsh on,this head they lave 
not accomplithed their object 10 the fullefi extent, they have. neverthelets proved in 2 generat 
point’ of view, that is a furplus Trade in Indja beyond apepowsrs of the Company's 
capita’ to embrace, ch us they have imported. upon aanedinm of five years, 
amount of £.876, amum in’ Piece Goods, Raw Silk, Sultpetre, Sugar, cc. im ad- 
dition to the Imports of fimilar commodities made by the Company. ‘That fuch encreafed 
Imports have bees mude is an indifpurable fact; bat that they have been made with ad- 
vantage to the Importers, and Without “ih the Hatihes deatee diminithibg the commercial 
profil of the Company,” is a pofition to which we feel ourfelves bound. to give a direct 
negutiye. a x : 


In order the:more clearly to evince that the Company’s regular and eftublifhed Trade has 
been ferioufly injured by the interference of the Private ‘Traders, and particularly in the 
ftaple article of Piece Goods, it may be neceflary to place, in a contrated point of view, the 
prefent with the former ftate ofthis branchvof Dade at various diftingt periods. 


ss : tat 
Having obtained the neceflury official documents for accomplifhing this object, as far as 
regards the Piece Goods of Hengal and the Goalt, in which Oe ie os Lae ears 


particularly felt, we find that of the ~ ? 


3 


