


TJokn Innes. 
RC. Bazett. 

Right Hon Sir Joha Anftruther, Bart. Hi. Fawcett, 
.&e, Se &e. Henry Trail. 


REMARKS 


on the Affvirs of The EAST INDIA COMPANY: 173 


, i > 


REMARES 


ON THE 


“ Osservartioys, of the Chairman, and Deputy Chairman, 
“ of the Eaft India Company, on the Evidence given before 
“ the Committee of the Houfe of Commons, appointed for 
“ the Confideration of India Affairs, on the Subje@ of the 
“ Private rape with India.” 


HE Chairman, and Deputy Chairman, of the Court of Directors of the Eaft India 
Company, have been pleated to communicate to your honourable Committee avery” 
elaborate and detailed Paper, intituled “ Objervations on the Evidence given before the Com- 
“ mittee: of the Houfe of Commous, appointed for the Conjideration of India Affairs, on 
“ the Suljeét of the Private Trade with India” The title of this work does not futticiently 
detpeak e extent and variety of difeuilion which it embraces; for it is addreiled rather to 
the (serie object of the enquiry, in which the honourable Committee is engaged, than 
confined to the particular branch to which the evidence it comments upon, was directed. 
The’ Authors of the following Remarks, however, do not ba the By of explaining 
or elucidating-the topics. on which they were examined. ey truft that the candour of your 
honourable Commitee will permit them, in their turn, to prefent to your confideration, a 
brief expofition of the fa¢is and principles which they humbly apprehend their evidence to 
eftablith, and which have been altailed with fo much ability and information, and by fuch 
high authority... They feel the weight which belongs to the gentlemen under whofe aulpices 
the Obfervations.are introduced to the Committee, and the credit which their talents, their 
experience, and their ftation, mutt, confer upon their opinions. In proportion to the influence 
of all thefe, however, they humbly apprehend it to be their duty to fubmit to your honourable 
Committee, their fentiments upon a view of the fubject, which extends to nothing lefs than 
a complete {upprellion of the Private Trade. 2 


Tn performing this talk, they affure themfelves, that they Miall require but a {mall portion 
of the time and attention of your honourable Committee. 1f they do not greatly err, much 
of the differtation laid before you by the Chairman and Deputy, however curious and 
interefting in fome refpests, is of little importance in the practical difcuffion of the points 
on which alone the Merchants prefume to trouble you. They hunibly conceive, that the prin- 
cipal object of the Enquiry, as far at leaft as they thould be juttified in taking a part init, 
is, what obftacles at prefent oppofe the fuecels of ithe Private Trade beeween Britifh India 


and this Country, and what facilities may with fufcty be extended to it? 


The Merchants would be inclined to proceed at once to a detailed reply to thofe parts of the 
Statements of the Chairman and Deputy, conneéied with this view a the tubjeG@, were they 
not convinced, that it would prove Thortett and moft fatisfaciory mode of attaining the 
true refults of this inveftigation, to premife a few obferyations on the nature and objects of 
the Private Trade. it is impodible that it can efeape the notice of your honourakle Com- 
mittee, that the whole feope of the ee, of tie Chairman and Deputy, is, that the, 
Private Trade is injurious to the Eaft India Company, without being adyantagcous. to the 
Public, and that it ought to have no place in any uew arrangement of the Affairs of India, 
on the renewal of the Charter. If this conclufion be well founded, the objections of mere 
detail, which attach to the prefent fyftem, muit difappear ; on the other hand, if an extention 
of the Trade with India would proye not only beneficial to Great Britain, and to the vatt 
territories it has acquired in Afia, but are not incompatible with the true interefis of the: 
Company, and the prefervation of its aBhe and privileges, as the great link of comnedtion 
with our Afiatic dominions, it would be wife, not oniy to temoye minor obtiacles, but to 