

The Memorialisis observe, that the Court are careful that theirow1 psshall arrive in Warehouses: 
Tadia in thefine weather season; and notice, that only two exta Ships arrived in that seasorf’ 
ity 1805, "and none are at present arrived for the season 1807. ‘The statements in the present 20 Now 1807. 
Address will enable the Government General to judge of the result which must ensue from 
their shipments of gruff goods at £.22. 155. ton in extraShips, which will enable \ 

Government to deduce what it must be, should they pay at the rate off. 30. 108. on regular 
Ships. They must therefore embrace the alternative of shipping their goods on the terms 
now proposed, or submit to the detention of the goods in India, at the expense of high in- 
terest of money, of heavy charges on the bulky articles, of the probable luss of the market 
in England, and from the material injury which the goods of a perishable nature must. sus- . 
tain by remaining so long in warehouse in India, and in England before the proceeds can be 
brought to the credit of the unfortunate proprietors. : ; 

The Memorialists then suggest, that country tonnage may be taken up, equal to the im- és 

niediate occasion. 2 
"Your Committee beg leave to represent to the Court, that the observations contained in 
the Memorial, embrace two distinct considerations ; first, that the present system of supply- 
ing the Private Merchants in India with tonnage on Europe extra Ships, is not attended 
with sufficient facilities to those Merchants, that the rates of freight paid for the carriage 
of goods upon the extra Ships are higher than the trade can support ; and, secondly, that 
there has been a want of due care i Bond ictlna ie eraeR enc the puippeexta Ships, 
and of accommodating them to the views of the Merchants, agreeably to the intimations 
which have been made to the Publie by the Court, a gu : 
_ In order to bring the whole of this important subject into one point of view, it may be A 
necessary for your Committee briefly to recapitulate the circumstances which have led to the | 
present situation of the trade of the Indian Merchants, and to the participation which they 
now enjoy in the commerce between Great Britain and India, 7 

Previous to the year 1793, the Cpe exci trade oat granted by legisla- 
tive enactments ; and, except in the indulgence granted the mi and Officers of ‘, 
the ships? no British subjects were allowed to engage u the Indian trade; occasionally ¥ 
however, by special and temporary permission of the Com, Private goods were Jaden in « 


the Company’s Ships. Pei eeee we Talis ta tie 


e 


The Act of 1793 allowed that reogepeesh air: ; 
Company's Shins British Bey or produce to the extent of 3,000 tons or more _ 
annually, and import returns for the same at reasonable rates of freight, to be revised from 
dime to time, " i fie). ‘aha? 3 ; . 

At the passing of the Act of 1798, ie in existence, or in contemplation, exce 
the regular Ships of 800 tons, (for th di 
of the private goods had refi 