d the 


remaining 
is that ant of 
see san sbip 
( in a subsequent para 
eing the case, the Merehant 
piece goods to Lendonon 
ants donot complain 
wners, which amounte 
ialists represent, that 
rted from. India to Es 
fo the situation of | 


rely brought 
: <a ith, ctor et Wool, . 
10 oO ito the Brit 


ian ships, and £2 . Europe extra Ships, cannot be an 
a aigte cae irectois, pees months before the Mer~ 
eprorial, had sy 


4 to import Cocton Wool, and had 
-_, we for that serv etermination of the Court might 
been known to tae Merchants at 


jue of writing their Memorial. With 
“ \ respect 


* Ores 


eon the Affirs pf ThOEAST INDIA COMPANY: ay) 
respect fo the term “ Unfortonse,” there is no doubt but that the private traders have sus- _ Ifeport ies, | 
tained gregt losses, from theif having overstocked the London market, (in iculae of Committee of » 


with piece-goods, which by law they are not permited to import;) but no man will venture Warehouses, 
to sty, that the utmost attention has ne® been shewn by the Company to the advantazeous 
management of the private géods*in London, and that his wishes and views have not been 
furthered with the greatest readiness, and at times at an extra expense to the Company, 
nittee apprehend that the only conclusion which the Memorialists propose should 
from these remarks is, that the employment of Indian ships would obviate such in- 
conveniences—an inference which your Committee deny, as the difference of freight, in 
any mode of calculating it, could form but an inconsiderable part of the loss. 
Note Committee will now proceed to consider that of the Memorial to which the 
eatest importance is attached by the Merchants, viz. that extra Ships were not provided by 
the Court tor the use of the Merchants in the Indian season 1805, until long after the sea- ° por 
sonable time of dispatch; which evil was continued until the period of the date of the 
‘Memorial, or the Indian season 1807. And here your Committee cannot but Jament, that 
the Memorialists omitted to state the cause of the ships not being in India, which, in can- 
dour, they ought to have done, as it must have been perfectly within the knowledge of every 
person in India. The Court did provide fourteen ships for the use of the ae traders in 
the season 1805, to the extent of 7,784 tons, which were brought afloat in London at several 
times between the 4th December 1804 and 28th May 1805; all of them in very sufficient 
time to haye been in India in the fair weather season. Three of these ships sailed from 
England early, and arrived in India in proper time; the remai na eres were put under> 
the convoy and direction of a squadron of King’s ships going to the Cape of God Hope, 
in consequence of which they su detention, both ia Lelia at ‘at the Cape. These 
¢leven ships did not sail from Cork harbour until the first of September 1805, and an 
‘accident happened to one of them, which reduced the number to ten. At Madeira, Sir 
Home Popham selected six ships for military purposes, and sent two on to Bengal, where 
they arrived 2d March ; Sir Home thea allowing the remainiug two to proceed to St. 
Helena awl Prince of Wales Island, at which latter place they bad a large quantity of stores 
to deliver for His Majesty’s naval service. In December 1805, the cadets, soldiers and 
seinen were ordered to land from eee wy gene assist in the 