

The mainstream (Thalweg) of the Rhine, shall constitute the frontier; provided, however, that the changes which may hereafter take place in the course of that river shall not affect the property of the islands. The right of possession in these islands shall be re-established as it existed at the signature of the [treaty of Luneville](https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Treaty_of_Luneville&action=edit&redlink=1).

6.—In the department of the Doubs, the frontier shall be so regulated as to commence above the Ranconniére, near Locle, and follow the crest of Jura between the Cerneux, Pequignot, and the village of Fontenelles, as far as the peak of that mountain, situated about seven or eight thousand feet to the north-west of the village of La Brevine, where it shall again fall in with the ancient boundary of France.

7.—In the department of the Leman, the frontiers between the French territory, the Pays de Vaud, and the different portions of the territory of the republic of Geneva, (which is to form part of Switzerland.) remain as they were before the incorporation of Geneva with France. But the cantons of Frangy and of St. Julien, (with the exception of the districts situated to the north of a line drawn from the point where the river La Loire enters the territory of Geneva, near Chancy, following the confínes of Sesequin, Laconex, and Seseneuve, which shall remain out of the limits of France,) the canton of Reignier, with the exception of the portion to the east of a line which follows the confínes of the Muras, Bussy, Pers, and Cornier, (which shall be out of the French limits) and the canton of La Roche (with the exception of the places La Roche and Armanoy with their districts) shall remain to France. The frontier shall follow the limits of these different cantons, and the line which separates the districts continuing to belong to France, from those which she does not retain.

In the department of Montblanc, France acquires the sub-prefecture of Chambery, with the exception of the cantons of L'Hospitol, St. Pierre d'Albigny, la Rocette, and Montmelian, and the sub-prefecture of Annecy, with the exception of the portion of the canton of Faverges, situated to the east of a line passing between Ourechaise and Marlens on the side of France, and Marthod and Ugine on the opposite side, and which afterwards follows the crest of the mountains as far as the frontier of the canton of Thones; this line, together with the limit of the cantons before mentioned, shall on this hide form the new frontier.

On the side of the Pyrenees, the frontiers between the two kingdoms of France and Spain remain such as they were on the 1st of January,1792, and a joint commission shall be named on the part of the two crowns for the purpose of finally determining the line.

France on her part renounces all right of sovereignty (suzeraineté) and of possession over all the countries, districts, towns, and places, situated beyond the frontier described, the principality of Monaco being replaced on the same footing on which it stood before the 1st of January, 1792.