

In the year 1805 Mr. Pitt acted upon the same principles, by proposing an addition to the Property Tax, by which its produce was augmented about 1,400,000l. but in consequence of increasing Expence, the Loan of that, year was raised from ten millions, which had been its amount in each of the two years preceding, to twenty millions.

Early in the following year my noble friends, Lord Grenville and the late Chancellor of the Exchequer, (whose absence this day I greatly regret,) succeeded on the decease of the great statesman of whom I last spoke. They were fully impressed with the importance of the system adopted at the renewal of the War, and determined by a great and painful effort to carry the War Taxes to as great extent as could be reasonably attempted. In. fact near six millions were added to their amount in the year 1106. In 1807, no taxes were proposed, in consequence of the plan brought forward by my noble friend, to provide for the further expences of the war, and which has been sufficiently discussed on former occasions: and the produce of the taxes imposed last year by the Right Honourable Gentleman opposite, cannot yet be fairly ascertained, but I see no reason to doubt that, together with the short Annuities which expired, they will be sufficient to provide for the charge of the Loan.

I have gone through this detail to shew that by the practice as well as the declared opinions of all the Ministers who have conducted the Finances of this Country, for many years, and by repeated decisions of Parliament, confirmed, so far as I can learn, by the general judgment and approbation of the Nation, the principle has been recognised and established, that to equalize the Income and Expenditure of the Country is the only system upon which we can depend for bringing this arduous and protracted contest to a secure and successful termination.

Let me not, Sir, be misunderstood as the advocate of excessive or unlimited taxation. I am aware that all taxation is in itself an evil, and I can conceive many circumstances under which I should think the Chancellor of the Exchequer had acted in the present instance with prudence and judgment.

The first and most obvious of these would be a great and general impoverishment of the Country, It might then hap- 1144 pen (as in fact it did towards the close of the American War) that the imposition of new taxes would add nothing to the Revenue, but only depress the produce of the old ones. Rut I would ask the Right Honourable Gentleman, and every Gentleman present, from whatever part of the Country, where the symptoms of such impoverishment appear? Supposing, however, such a decay to exist, I say that the same necessity which contracts our means ought to limit our expences. Shall we be the richer for plunging deeper in debt? Will it increase our resources to consume those which yet remain?

In another case of a very opposite kind, I might think it advisable to abstain from further taxation—that of a very rapid improvement of the existing Revenue. Did our resources appear to be increasing in a degree nearly commensurate to our wants, I should be unwilling to endanger so prosperous a state of things by any interference: or to abridge the comforts of the public by any change which might be safely avoided or deferred. But though I am convinced that the National Wealth is progressively increasing, I fear we are far from such a state of things. The Revenue has of late appeared rather to decline than to increase.