

A second objection to this diversion of the War Taxes from the purposes for which they were originally granted by Parliament, is, the continual and progressive increase it must occasion in the difficulty of raising the supplies. Supposing (which I have shewn not to be the fact) that there remain a considerable sum, which might not improperly be continued, in time of Peace; still as the amount of the Loan must 1146 annually be augmented by a sum, equal to the War Taxes which have been appropriated both by that, and all preceding Loans, they would be most rapidly consumed, by a continual accumulation of compound Interest; and when it shall become unavoidable to seek for fresh funds for these augmented Loans, where will they be found, and in what state of credit will these Loans be raised? If the Right Honourable Gentleman thinks that the People, having been indulged with a respite from further taxation, will return to it more rapidly, he is greatly mistaken. Having once been told by authority, that further burdens were either intolerable or unnecessary, they will readily listen to those, who will never be wanting to tell them the same thing again; and they will be disposed to countenance wild plans of retrenchment, and chimerical schemes of Finance.

Another most important objection occurs when we consider the establishment which it will probably be necessary to maintain, whenever Peace may be concluded. It has been not unusual to insert, among Resolutions of this nature, a conjectural Estimate of the future Peace establishment.

But I have not thought it advisable to propose any thing so vague and uncertain, and depending on so many contingencies, beyond the reach of any human foresight. Yet thus much I must be allowed to say, that judging from every circumstance within our knowledge, and unless a state of things wholly dissimilar from what now exists shall take place, our Peace establishment must so far exceed whatever has hitherto been known in this country, as to require, in addition to the ordinary revenue, the continuance of as large a portion of the War Taxes, as can by any one be deemed proper to be supported during Peace.

It is an objection not less important, though of a totally different nature from any of the preceding, that the system of Finance pursued this year, has the strongest possible tendency to encourage prodigality in the public expenditure.

It is no less true in public than in private œconomy, that what is easily acquired, is often needlessly spent. It is also the natural bias of every department, and may even proceed from laudable though inconsiderate zeal for the public service, to draw to itself as large a portion as possible of the Supplies. If this be not checked (as I fear at present it cannot be) by a firm 1147 and over-ruling controul at the Treasury, it naturally leads to an indefinite and wasteful expence. But the stongest stimulus to excite the Treasury to perform its duty by a vigilant restraint on the public expenditure is wanting, if supplies can be obtained without an immediate pressure on the people. The temptations which perpetually occur to a Minister, of a loose and careless administration of the public purse, are constantly counteracted by the impending and painful task of taxation; the irksomeness of which, few men have experienced more than I have done, having been officially concerned in raising almost half the existing revenue of the Country. This temptation to carelessness of expence, is another strong distinction between the measures of the present year, and the plan of 1807; which was not only compatible with the strictest œconomy, but was calculated on data which required and enforced it.