                             Appendix

  trade with France or Britain in the event that either power
  should cease violating American neutral rights.
19 April 1809—Madison issues a proclamation legalizing trade
  with Britain because of the assurance of Erskine, British min­
  ister to the United States, that the Orders in Council of 1807,
  as applicable to the United States, will be revoked. O n 30 M a y
  1809, the British Foreign Secretary Canning disavows Erskine's
  statements; and on 9 August 1809, Madison revives non-inter­
  course with Britain.
26 April 1809—British Order in Council lifts the blockade from
  all European ports north and east of the E m s River.
August, 1809—The Danish government limits its subjects' priva­
  teering to the waters around Heligoland. In the following
  March, full powers to sweep the seas around Denmark are re­
  stored to the Danish privateers.
17 September 1809—Peace of Frederikshavn brings an end to
  the war between Russia and Sweden. Sweden surrenders Fin­
  land and accepts nominal membership in the Continental Sys­
  tem.
23 March 1810—Rambouillet Decree. Napoleon orders the sei­
  zure of all American vessels that have entered the ports of France
  since 20 M a y 1809.
1 May 1810—Macon's Bill N o . 2. United States repeals the N o n ­
  intercourse Act. In the event that either France or Britain
  should revoke or modify its edicts so as to cease to interfere and
  injure the neutral commerce of the United States, then the
  President shall make a proclamation to that effect; "and if the
  other nation shall not within three months thereafter so revoke
  and modify her edicts in a like manner, then . . ." the N o n ­
  intercourse Act "shall, from and after the expiration of three
  months from the date of the proclamation aforesaid, be revived
  and have full force and effect, so far as relates to the dominions,
  colonies and dependencies," and products of that nation.
July, 1810—Napoleon annexes Holland to the French Empire.

                               284
