w days, began to receive supplies by sea from a magazine established at Calais. 20 Supplying War The held town him town fell on out for a few after another al! the time. 25 June. Turenne continued to Brégues which days only. He then marched inland, taking one as he went, and having his supply-boats follow Early in September he reached Oudenaarde which, again, held out for a few days only. Not having enough food on hand, he was unable to continue to Brussels. Instead, he marched to Ypres which, besieged on 13 September, fell a fortnight later. This conquest enabled him to march up to the Escaut and camp comfortably on its bank. Having wasted some weeks on the river, he made a drive for Brussels in Novernber but found it was already too late in the season. Turenne thereupon saw to it that the places he had taken were fortified and provisioned for the winter, then left for Paris.°° Acting on the sound principle that it was possible to supply a campaign - really a series of sieges — only by water, Turenne had thus started the year’s work at Dunkirk and subsequently made his way inland. Boats loaded with bread and ammunition followed him wherever he went, and use was made of recentlyconquered places in order to set up an expanding network of magazines. The only item for which the army was almost entirely dependent on local supply was, as usual, fodder, and shortages in this commodity did in fact appear whenever it was necessary to undertake a siege of any duration. As it was, it speaks well for Turenne and Le Tellier’s organization of the campaign that on no occasion did logistic difficulties force the suspension of a siege, though such difficulties certainly did play a central role in deciding which places should be besieged. Important as they were, the reforms of Le Tellier belong unmistakably to the age of the ‘horde army’ in that they bore a temporary, makeshift character. Magazines were established, and stores amassed, in order to support this or that operation; there could be no question of creating any kind of permanent reserve. Indeed, so far was this from being the case that any surplus was always sold immediately after the termination of the campaign, the aim being hoth to ‘relieve the King’s subjects’ burdens’ and to fill their master’s pockets. Louvois, to introduce the we find ourselves leaving the standing armies. Louvois, in fact, created first of these was supposed It remained to Le Tellier’s son, first permanent magazines, With that one era and entering another, that of not one type of magazine but two. The to assist in the defence of the realm by The background of two centuries 21 designating a chain of frontier towns and fortresses as places fortes du roi, which were to be made permanently ready to stand a siege by being always filled with enough provisions to feed the garrison for six months and their horses for two. More revolutionary were the magasins généreaux. From these it was intended to meet the requirements of field armies embarking on campaigns beyond France's own borders. Both kinds were placed under governors whose duty it was to see that they should be well stocked at all times, and a good part of Louvois’ correspondence contains admonitions to his governors to resist the temptation of using the magazines in order to meet day-to-day needs. Like his predecessors, Louvois as secretary of war supervised rather than negotiated. He did not purchase directly for the State but dealt with contractors, the reason being not merely the absence of a suitable administrative machinery but also a shortage of funds. His procedure as it emerged from innumerable letters and memoranda was generally as follows: first, he would calculate consumption by multiplying the number of troops by the number of days the campaign was expected to last, usually set at 180. Then he wrote down the price he was prepared to pay for each separate item and, by adding the price of transport, storage and distribution to that of purchase, arrived at the total cost. Con- tracts were then drawn up with the State normally asking for eredit. This was perhaps the weakest point of the whole system because, unable to pay the contractors in time, Louvois was helpJess in face of their depredations.*! As it was, the evils involved could not be eradicated and were to last as long as did the ancienne régime itself. Louvois made no innovations in the hauling of provisions from magazine to camp. Regular transportation-corps being still a long way in the future, the normal method remained the employment of locally-requisitioned vehicles supplemented by barges where possible. It was, perhaps, in the system of distribution that Louvois made his most important change. For the first time, it was established as a matter of principle that every soldier was entitled to have his basic daily ration free of charge. Standard fare consisted of two pounds of bread per day, sometimes replaced by the hard biscuit which, a century later, was to serve as the fuel propelling Napoleon’s armies to and fro across the European continent. This basic ration was supplemented according to circumstances by meat, beans, or other protein-containing food."* These 22 Supplying War were not included in the standard fare and were supplied, sometimes free, sometimes at hal€ or quarter their market price. On one occasion the army as a whole might benefit from ‘the King’s generosity, on others, the infantry only. Concerned with discipline as he was, it did not apparently occur to Louvois to exercise control over consumption, the result being that the men frequently wasted their food or, alternatively, bartered it for wine. Louvois’ reforms are said to have allowed increased freedom of manoeuvre, made possible greater speed in movement and extended the length of the season during which it was possible for the French army, and especially its cavalry arm, to stay in the field.** To some extent these claims are indeed valid, as is demon- strated by the first campaign wholly organized by Louvois. This was also his most successful and, in more ways than one, marks a revolution in warfare. For Louis XIV’s war against the Dutch in 1672, Louvois built what was perhaps the largest field army since Xerxes, 120,000 men strong, mobilized from all over Western Europe. The approach to Holland from the south being barred by row after row of river fortresses, it was decided to launch the invasion from the east through Guelderland. The army was to be kept supplied from a chain of magazines established in advance on the territory of France's ally, the Elector of Cologne, who earmarked four of his towns — Neuss, Kaiserswerth, Bonn and Dorsten - for the purpose. The next step was to send agents into Cologne who, while ostensibly working for the Elector, were to have those magazines filled. The principle followed throughout — one that may sound strange in these days of ‘export or die’ — was to procure from one’s own country only that which could not be got at abroad. In this particular case it was necessary to bring up the artillery from France, but everything else was acquired outside her own frontiers. The powder and ammunition even came from Amsterdam by means of the good offices of a Jewish banker there, Sadoc. At the same time, France's own magazines along her northern frontier were also filled. The campaign proper opened on 9 May. Turenne with 23,000 men and 30 guns left his camp at Chatelet (near Charleroi) and marched down the Sambre. Taking Tongres and Bilsen on his way, he reached Maestricht and invested it. At this point he was joined by Condé’s Army of the Ardennes which had come marching down the Meuse. On 19 May the united Army left Liége for The background of two centuries the Rhine, Condé left, both marching at Emmerich on 11 was now that the French 23 crossed the river while Turenne stayed to its north along the opposite banks until re-united June. The Rhine was crossed on 12 June and it war began in earnest. In just one week the had reached Amersfoort, sixty miles from Emmerich and perhaps twenty from Amsterdam. At this point the Dutch opened their dykes and, in face of the rising water, the campaign came to an abrupt halt. From Chitelet to Emmerich the army had marched mainly over friendly territory. Far from drawing away from its magaziues, it was in fact getting nearer to them with every day's advance. In spite of these exceptionally favourable circumstances it did not cover more than about 220 miles in thirty-three days, averaging under seven miles a day in what was to be the most mobile of all the campaigns of Louis XIV. It was not unti] enemy territory was reached that performances somewhat improved, aided by the fact that distances were short and opposition almost nonexistent. It was, to be sure, a highly successful campaign, but one perhaps more marked by the thoroughness of its organization than by any extraordinary mobility. Coming now to the limitations of the system, it is important above all to keep in mind how incomplete it was. The usual method, indeed the very aim of warfare in this period was to live at the enemy’s expense. As Louvois himself put it in a standard formula that he used whenever informing his intendants with the army of a forthcoming campaign, ‘His Majesty has. ..a considerable army assembled. . .in order to enter the lands of His Catholic Majesty and live at their cost until the governor of the Catholic Low Countries will give in to his demands, . .[the intendant] will be responsible for making the Spanish lands pay the taxes that will be imposed on them.* Even when it was Louvois’ express intention to ‘avoid burdening the country’, fodder was one commodity that had to be taken away from it on practically every occasion.** Usually, however, there was no room for such niceties. French commanders were instructed to ‘live off what you can find on the way’ even when it was only a question of making a relatively short flank march, and to this purpose were authorized to use means every bit as ferocious as those employed by Wallen- stein, including the destruction of houses and the seizure of men, beasts and movables.** Even in the early phase of a campaign, when part at least of the army's demand had to be met from a 24 Supplying War magazine set up on home territory, ‘the means. . .that will enable {the troops] to live more comfortably’ had to be taken from the enemy and consumed at his expense.’ That this was a truly monumental understatement the following few figures will illustrate. A typical army of Louvois’ day numbering, say, 60,000 men would have 40,000 horses between cavalry, artillery and baggage.** At two pounds per head, the men consumed 120,000\b. bread per day. In addition there were quantities of other food and beverages weighing, at the very least, another 60,000lb. The horses’ rations could vary very considerably with the season of the year, but would normally amount to about ten times those of the men, i.e. twenty pounds per head, making a total of 800,000 a day for the whole army. Overall consumption would thus amount to no less than 980,000Ib. per day, of which only 120,000 - or just over eleven per cent ~ were ever stored in magazines or moved in convoys. All the rest was procured locally as a matter of course, either because it was impossible to store and preserve for any length of time — as in the case of food for men - or because it was too bulky by far for its transportation to be even remotely possible, which was the case for the horses’ fodder. It is obvious plies that were more to dictate were, but this beginning with that the need to obtain the ninety per cent of supnot brought up from the rear must have done the movement of armies than the ten per cent that has been ignored by the great majority of critics Guibert who censured Louvois’ ‘mania’ for maga- zines, and ending with modern writers who, echoing this criticism, have described contemporary warfare as being ‘shackled’ by an ‘umb