towns or villages." It was, to be sure, high time for the army to expand its ‘base’ area once again. In September, the way for this was opened by the signal victory at Breitenfeld. Having defeated Tilly, two courses were once again open to Gustavus Adolphus. He could continue his way along the Oder; strategically this might have been the logical thing to do, for down to the southeast lay the centre of his enemies’ power, Vienna. Alternatively, he might advance to the Rhine. This second route promised better going for the artillery.2* What was more, it would carry the Swedes into the richest part of Germany instead of the bleak mountains of Bohemia. The upshot was that, once again, logistics were allowed to prevail over strategy. November found the Swedes near Mainz, having in three months taken possession of the greater part of central Germany. What- ever its other merits, the decision had certainly justified itself in terms of the army's material state down to its very appearance. Almost overnight, the crowd of beggars infesting Brandenburg and Saxony had been turned into a rich, well-appointed force.”* This, of course, was achieved by thoroughly squeezing the towns on the way, priests and Jews everywhere being made to pay an extra contribution. The winter of 1631-2 was spent in the general area of Wiirzburg-Frankfurt-Mainz. By this time, Gustavus Adolphus had under his command over one hundred thousand men. In preparation for the next campaign, he hoped to double that number. Even though his troops were now able to draw on the resources of half Germany, however, it was clear that no such enormous BALTIC SEA libeck, Hamburg Mecklenberg Brandenburg Havelberg \Breitenteld *Leipag Saxony ‘Nyremberg Alte Feste ie .‘ \ Nerdlingene’ fSirasbourg Donauwort Isa iF I6Ingolstadt_g I2. 1, The operations of Gustavus Adolphus in Germany, 1630-2 N 16 Supplying War army could be supported unless some new conquests were made. Once again, the direction of the march was determined by geography. The Swedes moved east along the Danube, crossed the Lech, then set about holding Bavaria to ransom. Before the summer was out, however, it was realized that even the huge sums extorted from such towns as Nuremberg and Augsburg were insufficient. To prevent disintegration, the army had to continue its ‘flight forward’ along the Danube.** The march to Vienna was soon interrupted by the news that Wallenstein, by debouching from Bohemia and infesting the Lower Saxon Circle, was endangering the Swedes’ communications with the Baltic. In a show of concem that was rare for his day — he was in fact operating hundreds of miles away from his ‘base’ - Gustavus Adolphus left Donauwarth and, after some marching and countermarching, arrived at Fiirth near Nuremberg where he set up camp. Here the army remained for the next two months, Gus- tavus Adolphus and Wallenstein each doing his best to starve the other out. As it was, the latter proved more adept at this kind of operation; by early September, the King was forced to march, no matter where. It is a telling comment on the state of the seventeenth-century art of supply that Wallenstein’s troops, even though they had just won their first victory over the Swedes at Alte Feste, were too sick and hungry to fallow up. Back on the Danube, Gustavus Adolphus continued his Iabor- ious advance eastward into Bavaria. In October, his communica- tions with Sweden were again in danger of being cut, and so he took along 20,000 men and marched for Naumburg in order to seize the crossings over the Halle, covering 270 miles in twentyseven days. Of all his strategic marches, this was the only one in which the Swedish King even approached Napoleonic performances, and it was made in retreat through territory that had already been occupied and garrisoned. Gustavus Adolphus’ place in the annals of military history is secured above all by his tactical and technological innovations. Apart from impossibly grandiose dreams about a concentric advance by five - or even seven — armies on Vienna,?* however, his strategy typified rather than transcended that of his age in that, far from exploiting the comparatively small size of his field forces to move about freely, he was unable to stay for long at any one place and compelled by his supply system - or lack of it — to march wherever and whenever his stomach, and that of his horse, M7 The background of two centuries led him. With a latter-day monarch, the King might well have said that it was food and forage, not he, which commanded the army. In the next generation, however, efforts to rid strategy of this particular kind of dependence on logistics began to be made. Rise of the magazine system ‘History’, many more wrote Richelieu armies in his political testament, ‘knows ruined by want and disorder than by the efforts of their enemies; and I have witnessed how all the enter- prises which were embarked on in my day were lacking for that reason alone.”* Dating to the period when the Thirty Years War was entering its last, and worst, stage, when Central Europe was already so devastated that it could no longer support armies as large as those of the early 1630s, the words well reflect a situation in which, following the departure from the scene of both Wallen- stein and Gustavus Adolphus, the problem of maintaining armies of any size was becoming well-nigh insuperable. Tortenson, Baner and Wrangel were never able to concentrate more than 15,000 men at any one point. As the war degenerated into a series of more or less deep cavalry raids against enemy towns, most of which were destined to disintegrate owing to a lack of supplies, it looked as if military art was about to make a return to the middle ages.*? That it did not end up by so doing was due primarily to the efforts of two Frenchmen, Le Tellier and Louvois. Between them, this pair of father and son established a system of magazines which, during the next century and a half, is said to have exercised a decisive influence upon the wars of the age. Magazines, Throughout of course, had never heen entirely unknown. history, it was frequently necessary to wage war in poor, or ravaged, country. To make sure that designs would not be frustrated by this, military writers of the early seventeenth century advised their readers to set up numerous magazines in conveniently situated towns and fortresses. A well-appointed camp should always have fifteen days’ provisions in store, to be touched only in emergency.”* These and other principles (‘never put too many eggs in one basket’) are as old as warfare itself. However, the limited size of armies did not make it necessary to put them into practice except for rare occasions. Like magazines, regular convoys serving to bring up supplies from base were needed only in exceptional cases. Even then, the 18 Supplying Wer transport did not form part of the army’s establishment; rather, wagons were provided on a makeshift basis, either by commercial contract or, perhaps more frequently, by requisitioning local peasant-carts for which payment was subsequently supposed to be made upon presentation of a suitable receipt. The transporta~ tion of supplies, or for that matter of anything else, was apt to be a dangerous business. Centring as it did round fortified towns, seventeenth-century warfare paid scant attention to the gaps between them and did not normally know well-defined ‘fronts’ to separate enemy from friends. The providing of escorts to protect the convoys was therefore essential under all circumstances and cases are recorded when whole armies found themselves thus employed. Quite apart from the absence of a suitable financial and administrative organization, this factor must have played a major role in the relatively late appearance of a regular system of supply from base. With armies unable to form any kind of con- tinuous defensive lines, or even to thoroughly dominate any large area, a system of this kind was far too vulnerable to cavalry raids. Appointed intendant to the Army of Italy on 3 September 1640, Le Tellier set out for Turin where he spent the next two campaigns (1641 and 1642) in trying to improve administration. Besides demanding more regular pay for the troops he attempted to combat corruption and, though he did not feel able to dispense with contractors, strove to make them improve on their jobs by imposing stricter contracts, retaining transport through the winter months, and forcing them to keep at hand at least some magazines. These measures were thus directed towards a more effective implementation of existing arrangements rather than towards the creation of entirely new ones. It was only after being created secretary of war in April 1643 that Le Tellier could start rebuilding the supply service in earnest. The first course, an point that Tellier to he / much prerequisite for any regular logistic system is, of exact definition of requirements. So elementary is this it may sound self-evident, yet it was necessary for Le begin his reforms by laying down in regulations just tood and other supplies each member of the army was entitled to. The figures varied enormously, ranging from the 100 rations per day allotted to the commander in chief to the single one allowed the private infantryman. Similar provisions were made for the horses carrying or hauling the officers’ persons, valets and baggage, the exact number again being dependent on The background of two centuries 19 rank. He followed this up by drawing up standard contracts to replace the multitude of ad hoc agreements by which the army had hitherto been supplied. Under the terms of such a contract, the war ministry undertook to pay the sutler, exempt his convoys from tolls and other duties. and also to provide them with an escort, Arriving in camp, the sutler was assured a place to ply his trade, protection against excesses hy the soldiers and, if necessary, compensation for losses. In return, the sutler undertook to deliver the agreed quantity at the royal depots where its quality would be checked by the général des vivres. Responsibility for transporting the provisions from the magazines to the army also rested with the sutler, who was authorized to requisition wagons along the way and pay for them at the normal rate. Having brought the flour into the proximity of the army, the sutler was authorized to engage civilian bakers — by force, if necessary - and make them work ‘day and night’. Le Tellier did not therefore depart from existing principles in that he continued to restrict the tasks of the army proper to control and supervision, for which purpose he created a special corps of intendants in August 1613, His greatest single innovation was the establishment of the équipage des vivres, a permanent vehicle-park which, guided by specialist army personnel, was designed not so much to carry provisions from the rear as to accompany the army in the field as a rolling magazine with a few days’ reserves. Given these arrangements, the use of magazines gradually became more frequent. As early as 1643 we find Le Tellier amassing provisions at Metz, Nancy and Pont-A-Mousson for the siege of Thionville and to assist Turenne’s manocuvres on the Rhine. In 1644 he established a magazine to feed the cavalry — always the first force to run out of subsistence during a long stay at any one place ~ while participating in the siege of Dunkirk. Again, in 1648, he told Marshal Gramot to erect mag sat Arras aud Dunkirk in preparation for the siege of Ypres.” But Le Tellier’s greatest achievement came during the very successful campaign of 1658 which, since its course was determined largely by logistic considerations, is worth following in some detail. Turenne left his winter-quarters at Mardic for Dunkirk in mid-May. We are not told how he lived on the way, but it appears that his force had been made self-sufficient during the ten days’ march. Arriving at Dunkirk, he laid siege to the town and, alter a fe