ge was conducted or a camp maintained for long, fodder was invariably the first commodity to run out. The background of two centuries 35 Since only a fraction of the victuals needed for man and beast were ever available in ready-made form, however, an army staying for long in any one place was tumed, inevitably, into a food-producing machine that milled grain, gathered wood, baked flour, and reaped fodder. Since the tasks involved had to be car- ried out rhythmically every few days, it is easy to see how much they interfered with the regular functioning of an army.’* Indeed, it was perfectly possible for tually suspended in favour This was especially the case extraordinary precautions to an army's military function to be virof logistic ones for entire periods. when fodder had to be reaped, and avoid being surprised during such a time were necessary. Before drawing our conclusions from these facts, a word must be said about the consumption of ammunition in the wars of the two centuries preceding the Freuch Revolution. That figures on this problem are so very hard to obtain is itself an indication that it was not very important. Compared to the provision of subsistence, that of ammunition was to remain insignificant until well after the Franco-Prussian War of 1870.** Indeed, so small were the quantities required that armies normally took along a single supply for the entire campaign, resupply from base being effected only on comparatively rare occasions — most frequently, of course, during sieges." In the first half of the seventeenth century, an army going on campaign took along a basic load of 100 balls for each artillery barrel, which is not surprising in view of the fact that, even during a siege, no gun was expected to fire more than five times a day.** Later in the century, Vauban calculated four rounds per gun per day, so that consumption of ammunition remained negligible beside that of food and fodder.** The figures for field operations were lower still; during two battles in 1636-8, the Bavarian artillery only fired seven shots per gun in eight hours, though these figures owe their survival to the fact that they were regarded as a record low.** Frederick IJ, who relied heavily on his artillery, usually took along 180 balls on campaign, and instances when a shortage of ammunition forced him to alter his plans only occurred during sieges. Apart from this, there is no evidence that the problem of ammunition supply had any in- fluence on the conduct of operations, nor is the issue mentioned by even those exponents of eighteenth-century warfare who most strongly insist on magazines as a conditio sine qua non for a successful campaign. 36 Supplying War ‘An umbilical cord of supply’? In the annals of military history, late seventeenth- and eighteenth- century strategy is often said to occupy a special place. Opinions as to the exact nature of its characteristics vary. To some, it was a ‘civilized’ age when the ideas of the Enlightenment and the decline of religion as a motivating force allowed some humanity to be introduced period of ‘limited into the business of war, warfare’ and to others it was ‘strategy of attrition’, both the of which meant that campaigns supposedly aimed not so much at the complete overthrow of the enemy as at the attainment of definite politico-economic goals, by making it more expensive for him to continue the war than to make concessions." To another school, the limits of warfare in this period resulted not so much out of choice as from necessity, and among the factors contributing to these limits, logistics are usually allowed pride of place. Given the enormous effect that ‘the shackles of supply’ and the ‘tyranny of logistics’ are supposed to have exercised upon strategy in this period, it is a curious fact that research into the actual methods by which armies were supplied and kept moving has not to date advanced far beyond what was known 150-200 years ago. As we saw, it was Tempelhoff who invented the ‘five days’ system’ that subseqnently came to be ridiculed in virtually every book on the subject, and it was Clausewitz who, more than anybody else, emphasized the difference between Napoleon's logistics and those of his predecessors. Between them, these two writers have been allowed to dictate what is to this day the ‘accepted’ view on the movement and supply of eighteenthcentury armies. A detailed examination of the logistic methods employed, how- ever, shows the whole of this picture to be absolutely without foundation. Pace Tempelhoff, not even Frederick II ever em- ployed the ‘five days’ system’ except perhaps during the first three years of the Seven Years War, and even then the limitations inherent in the technology of the age made it impossible for him to transport much more than ten per cent of the army's requirements, Clausewitz notwithstanding, eighteenth-century armies lived off the country as a matter of course and at least one of them — the super-scrupulous Habsburg army - even organized a special supply corps with precisely this objective in mind. As a consequence, eighteenth-century armies were capable of marching- The background of two centuries 37 performances much better than is usually acknowledged;** ironically, some of these marches are spelt out by Clausewitz himself. That armies did not usually cover more than ten miles a day for any length of time is true, but what force, its men limited to their own feet and unmetalled roads, has ever been able to do more? Contrary to the impression given by many modern books on military history, whose authors seem to delight in calculating the size of the ‘tail’ needed to feed the armies of a Louis XIV or Frederick II, such descriptions are rare in contemporary sources. The scale of baggage allowed - especially to the officers ~ was admittedly generous, but, this had nothing to do with the need to supply the army from base.** The only case I have been able to discover when a commander actually explained his inability to carry out an operation by the size of the supply columns occurred in 1705, when Houssaye told Louis XIV that, to besiege Landau, a train fifty-four miles long would be needed.** Nor was this due to any weak-heartedness or reluctance to live off the country; rather, Landau had already been besieged twice in pre- vious years (by Tallard in 1703, by Marlborough in 1704) so that the surrounding area was thoroughly exhausted. As for supply convoys accompanying armies in the field, there is little in contemporary sources to suggest that their presence inevitably acted as a brake on the movements of armies, nor that they could not be got rid of when the occasion demanded. In any case, it was primarily when sieges were undertaken that such convoys were needed at all; and it was only then that there could be any question of a regular resupply from base. For the rest, eighteenth-century armies lived as their predecessors had always done, and as their successors were destined to do until — and in- cluding — the first weeks of World War I; that is, by taking the bulk of their needs away from the country. That eighteenth-century armies did not, in comparison with their successors, show much expertise in the art of living off the country may be true, but this was not due to any excessive human- ity. What was missing was an administrative apparatus specifically responsible for feeding them in the field. As a result, foraging had to be engaged on by the troops, and since this was rightly thought to cause heavy desertion it could only be carried out in complex, highly-organized operations. Wary of the latter, commanders were usually content to leave the exploitation of the 38 Supplying War country to the contractors, whose depredations were such that armies could starve even in the richest territories.® If long, rapid marches were comparatively rare, and if military critics insisted on the need to base any campaign on long prepared magazines, this stemmed not from any inability - much less, unwillingness ~ to live off the country but from the fact that late seventeenth- and eighteenth-century warfare concentrated above all on sieges. This in turn was due, partly to a military system (the standing army) that made soldiers too expensive to be lightly risked in battles. partly to a conception which regarded war primarily as a politico-economic (as distinct from moral or ideological) instrument aimed at the attainment of definite, concrete objectives, and partly to the fact that, unless the enemy decided to stand and fight, a strategic march deep into his country was likely to hit thin air. Add to this the extraordinary power of a town fortified by Coehorn or Vauban, and the fact that for- tresses are by nature unable to run away, and the reasons why sieges were so frequent, and rapid marches so relatively few, will become apparent. Had an army of, say, 100,000 men, wanted to bring up all its supplies for the duration of the campaign - usually calculated as 180 days - from base, the resulting burden on the transportation system would have been so great as to make all warfare utterly impossible. Calculations as to the quantities that would be needed in such a case were sometimes made,” but, there is no indication that they ever constituted more than a theoretical exercise. To even imagine that the huge quantities of fodder that were required by the 60,000 horses which accompanied such a force could ever be brought up from base borders on the ridicu- lous. That logistics did exercise an influence on the two centuries of warfare under discussion is of course true, but this influence had little if anything to do with supposed ‘umbilical cords of supply’ restricting the movements of armies. Rather, the problem facing commanders from the Thirty Years’ War onward consisted pre- cisely in that armies, with their hordes of retainers, had grown too large to remain for long at any one place; like the Flying Dutchman, they were forever doomed to wander from one location to another. Under such conditions, some of the most famous marches of the age - notably that of Prince Eugene from the Tyrol through Venice into Lombardy in 1701 - really consisted of The background of two centuries 39 ‘flights forward’ and were carried out for no better reason than that, since money for magazines was not forthcoming, it was impossible to sit still." Furthermore, these conditions turned every one of the many sieges that had to be undertaken into a race against time. It was in order to solve this problem, not to secure any increased mobility, that Le Tellier and Louvois first set up their system of supply magazines. In this they were successful, yet we have seen that the magazines never contained, nor could contain, more than a fraction of the army’s needs, and that French troops on the march continued to live off the country as a matter of course. Finally, in one sense, the whole concept of supply from base was contrary to the spirit of the age, which always insisted that war be waged as cheaply as possible ~ an age, indeed, when wars could be launched for the sole purpose of making the army live at one’s neighbour's expense rather than one’s own. To imagine that rulers as parsimonious as Frederick II ever took away from their own country a single thaler that could possibly have been stolen from another is to misunderstand, not merely the eighteenth century but the very nature of that horrible and barbaric business, war. This fact, no mere ‘enlightenment’ has to date done much to correct. ‘An army marches on its stomach!” The end of siege warfare It may be that no fanfares greeted Napoleon’s decision of August 1805 to go to war military history, his against Austria. campaign However, marks the in the annals transition from of the eighteenth to the nineteenth century. Brilliant and even novel as the future Emperor's early exploits may have been, they belonged, in more ways than one,' to the previous age. In 1805 his s