 however, admits this to be an underestimate, conceding that it was possible to extend the range by another forty miles by using the regimental bread-wagons to carry flour as well. In fact, the entire system was a myth, the clever invention of an armchair strategist. Even Frederick II, the only commander who is said to have tried it out in practice, helped himself by other means whenever the opportunity presented itself.’ Nor, it should be remembered, was the system complete even in principle, for only a very small percentage of an army's needs was ever supplied from base. In particular, the problem of transporting the huge quantities of fodder required was so difficult that its solution was never even attempted." How relatively simple it was to organize the supply of an army on the march even when the distances involved were considerable is proved by Marlborough’s famous movement from the Rhine to the Danube in 1704, This was not a very large affair by contemporary standards; the Duke had with him just 30,000 men and was joined by another 10,000 on the way. The practical details of this march are well known. Setting out at dawn, the troops would cover twelve to fourteen miles each day and reach camp at noon. The cavalry went ahead of the infantry and the artillery which, in the charge of the Duke's brother, got stuck in bad weather and consequently fell well behind schedule.*? Nevertheless, between 20 May and 26 June, some 250 miles as the crow flies were covered, though the actual marching distance must have been closer to 350. After this performance, men and horses were still in sufficiently good condition to win Prince Eugene’s unstinted admiration. 30 Supplying War How was it all done? It has been said that ‘the essence of Marlborough’s system of transport and supply. ..consisted of a contract with one Sir Solomon Medina who supplied it with bread and bread wagons’."* This is an oversimplification. The Duke had originally hoped to steal a march on his enemies by establishing magazines and preceding them into the field,*® but money for this was not provided by the Dutch Estates General and nothing came of the project. Nor could such magazines have provided him with more than an initial push, since problems of transportation and preservation made it all but impossible for their contents to be carried very far. Instead, Marlborough got his bread from the brothers Medina who in turn purchased it in the surrounding country, employing no doubt local agents. Everything else the troops were expected to buy from their pay, for which purpose each company and regiment had individual contracts with sutlers great and small, We are thus presented with a charming picture. The troops arrive in camp around noon each day and are greeted by the sutlers with soup kettles at the ready. The local peasants have also been alerted and are happy to sell their products to soldiers who, for once, were well able to pay their way. One eats one’s fill, settles accounts, then goes on siesta. Reality, of course, was different. Small though borough’s Rather, army was it was too big to simply buy necessary to make it was, Marl- its way forward. sure in advance that enough supplies would be ready and available for purchase. To this purpose, the Duke would send ahead impeccably polite letters, e.g. to the Elector of Mainz: ‘it would please your highness. . to see to it that we may find provisions on our way, pending prompt repayment. It would be very advantageous for the troops and also for the country ranged by in preventing sending officers disorders ahead if [this]...may to regulate be ar- everything. ..’. Similarly, he informed the Estates of Franconia that he had sent ahead munitionaires of the army to collect supplies and asks for cooperation.°° When such cooperation was not forthcoming the consequences could be dire. Marlborough would express his ‘surprise’ at the resulting disorder, then inform the recalcitrant town that, since they were now presumably more ready to accept his ‘protection’ than before, he was sending a detachment for the purpose with orders to scour the surroundings and bring in everything edible for man and beast, a task in which the magistrates were kindly asked to assist.*! Marlborough’s advance thus ot o> == Marlborough’s march Bavarian army French army (Tallard) E> Franco-Bavarian army oO Spanish Netherlands Frankturt Mannheim Lorraine Strasbourg 2. The Campaign of 1704 SOmies 82 Supplying War swept the country bare, with the result that he, like Wallenstein before and Napoleon after him, was unable to traverse the same country twice. This caused him to split the army into detachments when following the beaten Franco-Bavarian forces back westward after their defeat at Blenheim.” As regards supplies other than food, Marlborough followed a similar procedure. Rather than taking the trouble to accumulate stocks, he simply purchased whatever came his way, hiring trans- port to bring the goods into camp when possible, marching the army or part of it to fetch them at the place of manufacture when necessary.°* Far from constructing magazines to support a war of movement, Marlborough did so only when the army stopped moving around. Thus, we find him writing from the camp at Aicha in Bavaria, where he had arrived after completing the march from the Netherlands, that ‘we came to this camp on Friday, and have since been drawing what corn and provisions we could for erecting a magazine in this place, intending to leave a garrison here. . .’. And again, from another camp at Friedberg: ‘since we are going to stay here for some time, take care about the magazines’.°* Nor were these isolated incidents; rather, they formed part of a strategy which, late in July and early in August 1704, was moti- vated almost exclusively by logistic considerations. The aim of Marlborough’s operations during this period was, in his own words, to prevent his opponent — the Elector of Bavaria ~ from getting the least subsistence out of his country.** Coming from the northwest, he beat the Elector at Donauwérth and forced him to retreat across the Danube and southward along the right bank of the Lech at Augsburg, where he made use of the town’s fortifications to establish himself safely. The Duke also crossed the Danube, and marched along the opposite bank of the Lech until reaching the above-mentioned camp at Friedberg. Having thus interposed himself between the Elector and his country, he set out to ravage Bavaria, sending out fying columns which, after taking away everything movable, set fire to the rest. Marlborough himself described this operation, sometimes as coercive, sometimes as punitive — intended either to force the Elector to defect on his French alliance or to punish him for not doing so.** The real object, however, was military. Faced with a numerically superior enemy ~ the Elector had now been reinforced by Tallard’s French — Marlborough preferred to starve him out rather than risk a battle. He therefore intended to move The background of two centuries 33 against Ingolstadt and Ulm, from where the Franco-Bavarian troops were drawing their supplies. He did not, however, feel strong enough to carry out this move to the north and west of his opponents while still leaving a force to guard the Lech, It was necessary to find some other means to make the crossing of the river not worth while for his opponents. Having achieved this by plundering Bavaria, Marlborough retraced his steps along the Lech and returned to the Danube. Rather than sitting still at Augsburg around and watching the noose of starvation draw tightly their necks, however, Tallard and the Elector raced the Duke to the Danube and, by occupying a strong position Hochstadt, blocked his way. Instead of depriving the enemy supplies, Marlborough was now faced with starvation once got through the provisions taken from Bavaria. No help could at of he be expected from the Empire, and though ‘it was thought a very hazardous enterprise to attack such a numerous army, as they were so advantageously posted’,*’ there was little to be done but risk all. Thus, the battle of Blenheim was fought and won. By exercising careful foresight and sometimes accompanying his requests for supplies with barely disguised threats, Mar!- borough was able to feed his army without much difficulty. Problems only arose when he halted at any one place, in which case fodder was invariably hard to come by.** On the move, however, there was no need for a complex logistic apparatus to encumber his troops and prevent them from making marches hardly inferior to those of Napoleon one hundred years later. The comparative rarity of such marches should be attributed, not to their impracticability but to their ineffectiveness in an age when a state's main strength consisted in its fortresses. The battle of Blenheim did not, after all, end the war against France, while the march of Marlborough and Prince Eugene against Toulon proved to be a blow in the air. The relative ease with which it was possible to feed an army on the move also explains why it was unnecessary to establish a regular supply corps. Proposals in this direction were sometimes made, but met with no reaction; in spite of all abuses, the rulers of the age were unanimous in considering it cheaper to employ contractors whose main advantage was that they could be dis- missed after the war was over. The contractors, however, never supplied more than a fraction of the army’s requirements; in particular, fodder invariably had to be gathered on the spot in 34 Supplying War complex, well organized operations."® The troops of the time being “the scum of the earth, enlisted for drink’, these foraging expeditions led to much desertion, and it was to prevent this that the Austrian army set up the first supply-corps in 1783. Far from being expected to help bring up supplies from base, the task of this corps was to collect them from the country.” That the density of Europe's population, and the development of its agriculture, made it perfectly possible to feed an army as long as it kept on the move the following figures will show.’ An army of, say, 60,000 men, required 90,000 bread rations per day.’® At a baking ratio of 3:4, twelve ounces flour were needed to produce a pound of bread. Assuming a daily consumption per head of two pounds the total quantity of four needed in a ten day period was Omoxsxexte = 1,350,000Ib, or 600 tons. At a density of forty-five people per square mile self-sufficient, the quantity of flour and assuming a region was available in Apri! — when campaigns normally started - must have amounted to six months’ supply, or probably around tons. which miles have would 180 x2 x 45=16,200Ib, around seven Given a strip of country 100 miles Jong and ten wide — meant that foraging parties had to go no further than five on either side of the road — the total quantity available must been around 7,000 tons, of which less than ten per cent be needed to feed the army during its ten days’ march- through. Problems, therefore, could only arise when it became necessary to stay for long in any one place; in other words, dur- ing a siege. More difficult, but essentially not dissimilar, was the provision of fodder. Even upon the most pessimistic assumption, an acre of green fodder could feed fifty horses.’® The 40,000 animals accom- panying an army would therefore require 800 acres per day. Taking ten days to cross a strip of country ten miles wide by 100 long, an army's horses would therefore devour the fodder grown on 8,000 acres, i.e. 1/80 of the total area.” That a much larger area must have been devoted to growing fodder, however, is easy to prove, for 8,000 acres would only have fed 4,000 horses for one year,” a number which, compared with that of the inhabitants, is much too low.”* Lacking exact figures, it is not possible to say just how long an army was able to stay in any given area. All we know is that, whenever a sie