ilical cord of supply’? There were instances of the system of supply from the rear limiting the movements of armies, one of the most glaring examples being perhaps the inability of Luxembourg to find transport in order to bridge a gap of just sixteen miles between Mons and Enghien in 1692, yet on the whole it was the availability or otherwise of local supplies, much more than magazines or convoys, that determined the movements of Louvois’ forces just as it had those of Gustavus Adolphus. This applied even to the King himself who, together with his ‘army’ that is, a party numbering 3,000 men - could not be assured of finding provisions on his way in 1684 and had to postpone ing through the annals of the this problem that crops up to assist at the siege of Luxembourg his departure by two weeks.*° ReadWar of the Spanish Succession, it is most frequently. On one occasion The background of two centuries 25 Bourgogne could not reinforce Tallard at Bonn because the latter had barely enough flour to feed his own army while the surrounding countryside had been all eaten up. On another Houssaye explained to Louis XIV that it was impossible to lay siege to Landau because its surroundings had been occupied twice already during previous campaigning seasons and could there- fore support neither the besieging nor covering armies.'* Accused by his royal master of dispersing his troops and thus exposing them to attack, Puységur replied that the Spanish Netherlands were too poor to keep them supplied if they were concentrated in a small area.*? But on no occasion is the dependence of Louvois’ army ~ the one whose supply system was the envy of all Europe — on the resources of the country brought out more clearly than in June 1684, when Louis XIV was hesitating as to whether his next victim ought to be Mons, Ath or Charleroi. The capture of the former was thought to constitute ‘a real blow’ to the Dutch, but would present ‘invincible difficulties’ because there was no subsistence available locally. This being so, Louvois concluded his letter by pointing out to the King that ‘it is better to take one of the other places than to do nothing at all’.** If warfare in the ‘siécle de Louis XIV’ often appears to us petty and unenterprising, the reason for this was not so much the supposedly exaggerated dependence of armies on their magazines and convoys but, on the contrary, the inability of even the best organized force of the day to do without local supply for practically all its fodder and much if not most of its provisions. From Louvois’ correspondence it appears that bodies of troops marching from one place to another beyond the area dominated by France - and sometimes within it as well - were either made selfsufficient for the duration or told to ‘live off what you can find on the way’. In no instance that I have come across is there any question of a force on the move being supplied solely by convoys regularly shuttling between it and its base, and it has even been claimed that the mathematics involved in this kind of operation were too sophisticated for the military commander of the age to tackle. From beginning to end, the most difficult logistic problem facing Louvois, his contemporaries and his successors was much less to feed an stationary from of Marlborough in front of Lille army on the move than to prevent one that was starving; witness the pride with which the Duke recorded this particular aspect of his operations on the victory column at Blenheim Palace.** 26 Supplying War Since the system's aim was to sustain armies at times when they were not moving — that is, during sieges - the whole image of forces operating at the tip of a more or less extended ‘stem’ consisting of regular transport - albeit hired or requisitioned — is a false one. Rather, there was likely to be leading to a besieged town not a single, long line of communication but several short ones — normally two to four - each feeding from a magazine containing either bread or ammunition. One for fodder might some- times be established in order to supplement the resources of the country, never to entirely replace them.‘* Under this logistic system, speed and range counted for very little. Rather, it was a question of disguising and dispersing one’s preparations — then as now, dispersion was an essential element of surprise — and of minntely coordinating the movements of troops, siege-train and supplies with their different modes of transportation and controlling them in stich a way as to make everything and everybody, from Vauban to the King, appear in front of the selected town at exactly the right moment. It was in demonstrating how to do all this without disturbing normal trade and without arousing the suspicions of the enemy, while overcoming the defective means of communication, administration and transportation of the day, and drawing, when possible, on the enemy’s resources rather than one’s own, that Louvois’ contribution to the art of logistics really lay, not in a futile attempt to endow strategy with any greatly in- creased freedom of movement. The age of linear warfare Of eighteenth-century armies it has been said that they could not march on their stomach but only wriggle on it, and a picture is drawn of forces which, while endowed by their magazines with a certain freedom to choose the direction of their movement, were limited in speed and range by these very magazines and, furthermore, forever concerned with protecting their all-important lines of communication.*” All authorities agree that the resulting type of warfare was slow and laborious; a few have gone so far as to call it pettifogging and pusillanimous. However, when it comes to analysing just which elements of the logistic system imposed this relative lack of mobility, and how, confusion reigns supreme. Eighteenth-century armies are supposed to have fed from maga- zines in their rear, yet the very writers who emphasize this point The background of two centuries 27 most strongly also claim that the aim of warfare normally was ‘to subsist at the enemy's expense’, a phrase employed as a matter of course even by the ‘prophet of mobility’, Guibert himself.** It is said that it was impossible for a commander to get more than fifty, sixty, or eighty miles away from their base (‘the limit for horsedrawn vehicles’) yet all armies seem to have been ‘encumbered’ by something called ‘rolling magazines’ which, if the term has any meaning at all, surely implies wagons loaded with provisions which, by making the army self-contained for a time, should have allowed it to move in any direction, to any distance, for as long as stores lasted. The picture, then, is contradictory. Clarification is called for. Apart from everything else, the character of eighteenth-century warfare was a direct consequence of its political ends. Wars were regarded as personal feuds between sovereign princes; one had a claim or a ‘grievance’ against one’s neighbour, to obtain satisfac- tion of which one sent an army into his territory and lived at his expense until he gave in.*° If there was any hope of permanently keeping the province in question after the war, care was taken to preserve one’s future capital; if not, exploitation could be ruthless. In any case, magazines would only be established to provide the army with an initial push. It would then cross the border, march into enemy territory, and select a convenient place - easy to defend, situated near a good road or river - to set up an entrenched camp. The procedure to be followed from this point onward is well described by that incomparable writer on eighteenth-century warfare, Maurice de Saxe: ‘provisions will not be lacking for present consumption, but some management is required in the method of procuring supplies for future exigencies. . .In order to accomplish this it will be necessary to fall upon a method of drawing supplies of provisions and money from remote parts of the country. . the best way is to transmit to these places. . .circular letters threatening the inhabitants with military execution on pain of their refusal to answer the demand made from them’." Parties numbering twenty to thirty men, commanded by an officer, were sent to gather the contribution, failing which, the magistrates’ houses could be either plundered or burnt down as appropriate. The money having been collected, a combination of force and persuasion was used in order to purchase or commandeer supplies at prices suitably fixed by the army’s intendant. While the presence of an enemy in the neighbourhood might make it expedient 28 Supplying War to speed up this process in order to prevent him from drawing near,! it was normally carried out without hurry. One simply stayed in one’s place until the resources of the surrounding country were exhausted. The first commodity to go short was invariably fodder, and when this happened one gathered whatever supplies were still to be had, struck camp and moved to another area. While the strategy of ‘eating all there is to eat”? did not require any very great administrative resources — its very purpose, in- deed, was to make it possible to wage war without such resources*® — problems were bound to occur whenever a siege lasted longer than expected. To capture a town before the resources of the surrounding country gave out was a cardinal problem of warfare, and to solve it the curious (if Iogical) arrangement under which the terms obtained by a garrison stood in inverse proportion to the length of its resistance was instituted. Even in the eighteenth century however, such expedients did not always work, and when they failed it became necessary to set afoot those tremendous supply-operations that have become the laughing stock of all subsequent critics. To mention but one example, and that the most famous of all, in 1757, Fredrick II was compelled to raise the siege of Olmiitz because an indispensable convoy with 3,000 vehicles was intercepted by the Austrians. Later in the year, therefore, we see him taking great precautions to avoid a similar disaster. First, 15,000 men were used to escort a convoy from Tropau to QOlmiitz, then 30,000 to bring another to Kéniggriitz, and finally 8,000 to secure the line of communications to Glatz. It was, in Clausewitz’s words ‘as if the whole Prussian war-engine had ventured into the enemy’s territory in order to wage a defensive war for its own existence’."* That this was so on this occasion is undeniable. The implication that Frederick's army was too cumbersome to move, however, is false, because this state of affairs was caused, and could only have been caused, by the demands of siege warfare. That Frederick H could move very fast when he wanted to is proved by his performances in the field. In September 1757, he took thirteen days to cover 150 miles from Dresden to Erfurt; two months later, he covered 225 miles from Leipzig to Parchwitz in fourteen days. Again, in September 1758, he took just one week to march 140 miles from Kiistrin to Dresden and a year later he covered 100 miles from Sagan to Frankfurt on Oder in a week in The background of two centuries 29 spite of having to fight the battle of Minden on the way. As Clausewitz himself points out, Frederick did away with his baggage and supply convoys in order to carry out these marches; nor were they needed, for an army moving from one place to another could always find something to eat. This brings us to the so-called ‘five days’ system’, the methodi- cal shuttling to-and-fro of wagon columns that is supposed to have exercised a paralysing influence on eighteenth-century strategy. As described by Tempelhoff, the limiting factor consisted above all in the number of four-wagons operating between the field-bakeries these were and emptied the every magazines day, the in the maximum rear; since distance 1/9 of that an army could get away from its base was 9:2=4.5 marches, or approximately sixty miles. Even Tempelhof himself,