14 allows a glimpse into the limits of what could be achieved by that means of transportation. The German campaign against Russia in 1941 is interesting as a problem in the transition towards a wholly mechanized army; whereas, in the Allied forces of 1944, that transition had been completed. Finally, Rommel’s Libyan campaigns of 1941 and 1942 present some aspects worth studying because unique. From beginning to end, we shall be concerned with the most down-to-earth factors — subsistence, ammunition, transport — rather than with any abstract theorizing; with what success, remains for the reader to judge. The background of two centuries The tyranny of plunder The period from 1560 to 1660 has been described as ‘the military revolution’ and as such was characterized above all by the immense growth in the size of Europe's armies. Marching to suppress the revolt of the Netherlands in 1567, the Duke of Alba made a tremendous impression by taking along just three tercios of 3,000 men each, plus 1,600 cavalry; a few decades later, the Spanish ‘Army of Flanders’ could be counted in tens of thousands.’ The most important engagements of the French Huguenot wars during the latter half of the sixteenth century were fought with perhaps 10,000-15,000 men on each side, but during the Thirty Years War battles between French, Imperial and Swedish armies numbering 30,000 men and more were not uncommon. At the peak of their military effort in 1631-2, Gustavus Adolphus and Wallen- stein each commanded armies totalling far in excess of 100,000 men. Such numbers could not be sustained during the later stages of the Thirty Years War, but growth continued after about 1660. At Rocroi in 1643, the largest power of the time — Imperial Spain - was decisively defeated by just 22,000 French troops, but thirty years later Louis XIV mobilized 120,000 to deal with the Dutch. Even in peacetime under his reign, the French Army seldom fell below 150,000 men, that of the Habsburgs being only slightly smaller, numbering perhaps 140,000. The war establishment of both forces was much larger still, the French one reaching 400,000 during the years of peak military effort from 1691 to 1693. In 1709, it was already possible for 80,000 Frenchmen to meet 110,000 Allied troops on the battlefield of Malplaquet. More and better statistics could be adduced, but they would only serve to prove what is generally recognized: namely, that apart from a period of about twenty-five years between 1635 and 1660, Europe's armies 6 Supplying War multiplied their size many times over between about 1560 and 1715. As armies grew, the impedimenta surrounding them increased out of all proportion. Unlike the spruce, well-organized force that Alba took with him to the Netherlands, the armies of early seventeenth-century Europe were huge, blundering bodies. A force numbering, say, 30,000 men, might be followed by a crowd of women, children, servants and sutlers of anywhere between fifty and a hundred and fifty per cent of its own size, and it had to drag this huge ‘tail’ behind it wherever it went. The troops consisted mostly of uprooted men with no home outside the army, and their baggage — especially that of the officers — assumed monumental proportions. Out of 942 wagons accompanying Maurice of Nassau on his campaign of 1610, no less than 129 were earmarked to carry the staff and their belongings, and this figure does not include a perhaps equally large number of ‘extracurricular’ vehicles. All in all, an army of this period might easily have one wagon, with two to four horses each, for every fifteen men.* Under special circumstances — when it was necessary to try and make a force self-sufficient for an unusually long time, as during Maurice’s 1602 campaign in Brabant - the proportion might even be twice as much, on that occasion, no less than 3,000 wagons were collected to accompany 24,000 men.* In view of the ever-growing hordes of troops, women, servants and horses, the methods used to feed them are of some interest. By and large, the military forces of every country consisted of mercenaries; the army as such owed them little more than their solde, out of which they were expected to purchase not merely their daily food but also, albeit often helped by an advance from their company captain, their clothing, equipment, arms, and, in at least one money system tioned regular case, their powder. Always provided the treasury sent and that the officers were honest in distributing it, the could work well enough as long as the troops were stamore or less permanently in some well-populated place. A market could then be organized and put under the super- vision of the intendant, who was responsible ~ to the government, not the commander in chief — for finding out what could be supplied and for policing the premises allocated for commerce and exercising price and quality control.‘ The trade between the troops and the local population was generally conducted on a voluntary basis except when some shortage was expected; in such The background of two centuries 7 a case it might become necessary to prevent the richer soldiers from buying up all the available stock for their own use.’ The system, as is well known, was subject to endless abuses that worked against the interests of almost everyone involved. Never- theless, there was not in principle anything manifestly impossible about it. Once the army had to operate away from its permanent station, however, the situation became very different. Establishing markets takes time, and the local peasants could not be counted upon to sustain the force unless, as was usually the case, its movements were slow and marked by lengthy pauses. The prospect of gain could induce some larger merchants ~ the sutlers properly speaking — to follow the army, but they and their wagons would increase still further the size of its tail® while their stocks could not in any case last forever. In friendly territory it was sometimes possible to send commissionaries ahead in order to organize the resources of this or that town and set up a market. In a very few cases, when armies were repeatedly using the same routes for years on end, more or less permanent stations would be organized in which everything required by the soldiers was available for sale.” Another method of keeping an army on the move supplied was to quarter it on the inhabitants of the towns and villages on the way. In addition to free shelter, salt and light, these could be expected to provide other necessities en lieu of cash payment. In practice, of course, this did not always work out well; as often as not, the soldiers would both take their food and keep their money, not to mention that of their hosts. On the other hand, no logistic system of the time could sustain an army embarked on operations in enemy territory. Nor, indeed, was the need for such a system felt prior to our period. From time immemorial the problem had heen solved simply by having the troops take whatever they required. More or less wellorganized plunder was the rule rather than the exception. By the early seventeenth century, however, this time-honoured ‘system’ would no longer work. The size of armies was now too large for it to be successful. However, the statistical data and administrative machinery which, in a later age, would help to cope with this increase in numbers by turning plunder into systematic exploitation did not yet exist. As a result, the armies of this period were probably the worst supplied in history; marauding bands of armed ruffians, devastating the countryside they crossed. 8 Supplying War Even from a strictly military point of view, the consequences of such a situation were disastrous, Unable to feed their troops, commanders were also incapable of keeping them under control and of preventing desertion. To overcome both, but also in order to secure a more regular source of supply than could be afforded even by the most thorough plundering,* commanders during the last few decades of the sixteenth century began to see the need to have the army furnish the soldier with at least his most elemen- tary needs, including food, fodder, arms, and sometimes cloth. This, again, was done with the help of sutlers, with whom contracts were signed to supply the army; the resulting expenses were then deducted from the soldiers’ pay.? The beginnings of this new system can be traced almost simultaneously in the armies of two of the largest powers of the time, France and Spain, led respectively by Sully, Minister of War to Henry IV, and Ambrosio Spinola.’* Whatever system of supply was used, the first requirement for a well-ordained army was invariably money. During the second half of the sixteenth century, however, the growth of armies far exceeded that of their governments’ financial possibilities. Even the richest power of the time, Imperial Spain, was bankrupted no Jess than three times by military expense during the period from 1557 to 1598. By the time of the Thirty Years War, no major European State except the Dutch could afford to pay its troops. Consequently, it was necessary to resort to the system of contribution. Though ultimately adopted by all belligerents, it is generally recognized to have originated with Wallenstein, the Imperial commander." Instead of demanding provisions from local inhabitants which were to be paid for by treasury receipts, Wallenstein extracted large sums in cash which then went to the Army cashier, not to the individual soldier or unit. While frankly based on extortion, the system had two distinct advantages: it assured the soldier of regular pay on one hand, and relieved him of the need to rob for his own personal benefit on the other. In intent it was more orderly, and therefore more humane, predecessors; though in practice it worked than its out so terribly that, shocked by its horrors, Europeans everywhere were still making efforts to avoid its repetition a century and a half later. So much for the supply system of the period. In assessing its effect upon strategy, the most striking fact is that armies, unless they were more or less permanently based on a town, were forced The background of two centuries 9 to keep on the move in order to stay alive. Whatever the method employed — whether ‘contribution’ @ la Wallenstein or direct plunder - the presence of \arge bodies of troops and their hordes of undisciplined retainers would quickly exhaust an area. This state of affairs was particularly unfortunate because it coincided with a time when the spread and development of the bastion was rapidly reinforcing the defence as against the offence. If Charles VII had been able to conquer Italy ‘col gesso’, the strength of a late sixteenth- and early seventeenth-century power no longer consisted mainly in its field army; series of sieges; whereas instead, it lay in the fortified towns, and a country liberally studded with these would even find it possible to wage war without any real field army at all. Under such conditions war consisted primarily of an endless a strategic move into enemy country often struck thin air. When it came to deciding just which fortress was to be besieged, or for that matter relieved, considerations of supply often played a very important role. The logistics of the age being what they were, a town whose surroundings had been thoroughly devastated might well be immune to either operation. This is well illustrated by the Dutch failure to relieve Eindhoven in 1586, a failure caused less by the difficulty of feeding a force of 10,000 men on its fifty-mile approach march to the place than by the inability to do the same when it was encamped beneath its walls.’ Since a really protracted siege would cause the surrounding countryside to be completely eaten up regardless of its previous state, it was only possible to conduct an operation of this kind under exceptional circumstances. Thus, Maurice during the siege of Ostend could keep his army 