trategy changed, and what subsequent critics were to term Vernich- tungsstrategie was born and came of age at one and the same moment. It is not easy to say just what constituted Napoleon's new style of warfare; too many factors were involved for a simple definition to be possible. Much has been written about the ‘new’ and ‘democratic’ character of the French army of the time, whose impregnation with a revolutionary ideology endowed it with an altogether new type of driving force, and about Napoleon’s single- minded concentration on the defeat of the enemy's army instead of the attainment of geographical objectives, and his determina- tion to wage war @ outrance, to break his opponents’ heads rather than chopping off their limbs. That there is much truth in every one of these explanations none would deny, yet they seem to ignore the central point; namely that, in order to adopt a ‘new’ system of strategy, it is necessary first of all to find new means to carry it into practice. It is above all on these means that the present chapter will concentrate. Owing to the enormous size of the forces under his command, the logistic problems presented by Napoleon’s new strategy were of an order of magnitude that was altogether new. We have already tried to show that Jong strategic marches were, even in the eighteenth century, by no means as impossible to carry out as is usually assumed. If they were invariably small scale affairs, ‘An army marches on its stomach’ this cannot be attributed primarily 4 to logistic considerations. Rather, the difficulty was that, whereas the relationship between offence and defence was such that one field army could engage another of equal size with reasonable hope of success, a numeri- cal superiority of no less than 7:1 was thought necessary in order to besiege a strong, well-defended fortress. Therefore such an operation could only be engaged on by a large force, e.g. the 120,000 men that Marlborough concentrated round Lille in 1708. When such forces were not available, however, the only thing that could be done was to march and fight - multiplying numbers by velocity, no doubt, but even so without much hope of achieving a decisive victory as long as the enemy's fortified places remained Eugene intact. Between followed up one 1704 and 1712, Marlborough victory in the field with and Prince another, yet France's power remained unbroken, and she ended by making & favourable peace. If Marlborough therefore, and with Eugene 40,000 with men 30,000 marched to Toulon, to the Danube, this reflected not inerely their ‘casting off the tyranny of logistics’ but, to an even greater degree, the fact that to use such small forces against even a single first-class fortress was a hopeless undertaking. Given such small armies, indeed, it was impossible even to merely invest fortresses while simultaneously pushing forward, This, more than any supposed dependence on supply from magazines, expl why such strategic marches as were embarked on normally skirted the enemy’s territory instead of penetrating deeply inside it. [ad Marlborough been forced to seal off, much more capture, even one strong fortress on his way from Flanders to the Danube the whole of this famous strategic manoeuvre would surely have come to nothing. It was, in fact, his inversion of the relationship between sieges and battles - between the relative importance of the enemy's fortresses and his field army as objectives of strategy- that con- stituted Napoleon's most revolutionary contribution to the art of war. Early in the eighteenth century, Vauban counted 200 (unsuccessful} sieges but only 60 battles during the previous two centuries.? Napoleon, however, conducted only two sieges during his entire career, and his experiences Mantua demonstrated that solving the warfare was far from easy even for to his stepson in 1809, ‘the method in feeding the army logistic problems of a Bonaparte. As he of feeding on the round siegewrote march 42 Supplying War becomes impracticable when many troops are concentrated’, Hence it was necessary, in addition to requisitions from the immediate neighbourhood, to have supply convoys coming in from places farther away. That ‘this [combination] is the best method’* Maurice de Saxe would have readily agreed. While Napoleon’s determination to concentrate all his troops at the decisive point led to his insisting that garrisons should not be provided by the field army but made up of the local population or the national guard, this does not mean that he regarded fortresses as entirely without value. His armies, however, were large enough to invest a fortress - more than one, if necessary -— and to continue on their way forward. As he once wrote while commenting on Turenne’s maxim that an army should not exceed 50,000 men, a modem force of 250,000 could afford to detach a fifth of its number and yet remain strong enough to overrun a country in short order.* Far from abolishing fortresses altogether, therefore, it was merely necessary to have them relocated in new places. Instead of fortifying the frontier (which he regarded as folly, since it meant exposing one’s depdts and centres of arms- sanufacture) they had to be located deep in the rear, preferably round the capital.* Carrying out a siege under such conditions would jnevitably cause logistic difficulties, as the Germans - the railways notwithstanding ~ found ont, to their cost, in 1870. Napoleon, in short, realized that it was the eighteenth-century predilection in favour of siege warfare that led to endless logistic difficulties. As he himself was able, thanks to the size of the forces under his command, to do without sieges he rendered the logistic apparatus of the eighteenth century largely superfluous. Hence the explanation for a fact which, at first sight, appears incomprehensible. Although the technological means at his disposal were hy no means superior to those utilized by his predecessors — indeed, he was rather conservative in this field, rejecting new in- ventions and doing away with some old ones - Napoleon was able to propel enormous forces right across Europe, establish an example as it does round Empire stretching from Hamburg shatter an entire (old) world. How - concentrating to Sicily, and irreparably it was done, the following his most successful ever — will try to show. the campaign Boulogne to Austerlitz of 1805, The amount of attention paid to bureaucratic and logistic detail ‘An army marches on its stomach’ 43 was not, as is well known, one of the strongest points of the Republican armies that came to be established after 1789, and though the French army had come a long way since Napoleon found it, to use his own words, ‘naked and ill fed. ..among the rocks’, its administrative organization in 1805 was still by no means impressive. All questions of administration were the domain of the Ministry of War Organization, whose head at this time was Dejean. Responsible among other things for feeding, dressing and equipping the army with transport, the minister's authority ended at France's frontier. In the field, responsibility for administrative matters - supply and transportation included fell on the army’s intendant-general whose powers, however, were strictly limited to the zone of operations. While administration and supply at both ends of the pipeline were thus well regulated, it was typical of contemporary warfare that there existed no permanent machinery to control the zone of communications or exploit its resources. Here the Emperor would make ad hoe arrangements, usually by thrusting responsibility upon commanders whose achievements in the fiekl he deemed unsatisfactory and to whom employment on such a task was therefore something of a reprimand if not an actual punishment.’ In 1805, the Army's intendant was Petiet. Under him came four war-commissionaries and the heads of the various branches of supply (régisseur des vivres-pain, des vivres-viande, de fourage, and the directeur général des équipages de transport). Napoleon, however, constantly bypassed this central organization by sending orders regarding transportation and supply directly to his corps commanders. The latter had on their staff an ordonnateur whose job it was to fook after the corps’ supplies in accordance with the broad directives laid down by the intendant at Imperial Headquarters. Each divisional staff also included a commissionary who received his orders partly from the corps ordonnateur commander, and partly from his direct superior, the divisional two authorities that could, and sometimes did, come into conflict. The material means at the disposal of these officials were totally inadequate, This had nothing to do with any lingering Republican tradition of hungry, marauding hordes living off the country since the Peace of Amiens, Napoleon had had ample time to correct this state of affairs had he wanted to — nor to any misconceptions as to the importance of a proper train. Rather, it stemmed 44 Supplying War from the fact that the army had spent the last year and a half Preparing for a landing in England. Given the superior British strength at sea, this operation had no hope of relying on a regular line of communication leading back to the Continent. Once it got across the Channel by one means or another, the French Army would have had to live off the country — which, after all, was rich enough to support it - while its hopes for returning to France would have rested entirely on a rapid victory in the field and, following this, a dictated peace. The army at Boulogne was therefore almost totally without any means of supply and transportation. Even if we assume that Napoleon’s project for invading England was never more than a feint, however, he could not have created the machinery for waging war on the Continent without alarming his enemies. But, as was always the case, a major con- sideration governing Austerlitz campaign tional surprise. Napoleon's logistic arrangements for the was the need, at all cost, to preserve opera- Thus, the campaign of 1805 faced the Ministry of War and the army's Intendanture with the gigantic task of hurriedly scraping together the entire transport and supply apparatus for 170,000 French troops in the space of a few weeks; a problem made all the more formidable by the fact that, during all this time, the bulk of the units for whom this apparatus was destined were not stationary but marching from their camps round Boulogne to the deployment area on the Rhine. An additional complication was presented by the 80,000 new recruits whose organization into units had to be completed even as the process of deployment was in full swing. Indeed, the fact that it telescoped the normally separate stages of mobilization and deployment into a single, combined operation was not the least unorthodox aspect of Napoleon's plan of campaign. Having decided, on 23 August, to go to war against Austria, Napoleon's first move was to order his forces to their areas of deployment. Of his eight corps, two - commanded by Marmont and Bernadotte — came respectively from Holland and Hanover and, forming the Army’s left wing, were to concentrate first gen and then at Wiirzburg. The remaining corps were supposed to deploy along a line stretching for some from Hagenau northward through Strasbourg — where at Gottinoriginally fifty miles more than three corps were to be concentrated — to Schelestadt,* for which purpose five of them had to cross the entire width of France from ‘An army marches on its stomach’ 45 west to east, while the sixth consisted of recruits arriving in bits and pieces from every corner of the Empire. The march towards the area of deployment thus presented problems of coordination and supply on a gigantic scale. It speaks volumes for the efficiency of Napoleon's chief of staff, Berthier, that he could start sending out his orders on 25 August and just 24 hours later. And these down not merely the sequence quantitie