supplied from the sea; unfortu- nately the garrison was able to make use of the same means, the result being that the siege lasted for a record-breaking two years. In so far as it was possible to eat up one place after another commanders found it easier to operate in the field. Since armies were not supplied from base, and also because in many cases they did not even expect to be paid by the states in whose name they were fighting, lines of communication were of little moment in determining the directions of their movements. The system of contributions made Wallenstein’s hordes almost self-sustaining. The same is true of most other forces, including those of Gustavus Adoiphus who, from the beginning of 1631 onward, was extracting the bulk of his supplies from the country in a manner not 10 Supplying War notably different from anybody else’s. Except for a few special cases, it was therefore strategically impossible to cut seventeenth- century armies off from anything except, sometimes, their areas of recruitment. Campaigns having this last objective in view were occasionally launched.** Subject to the limitations discussed below, armies could ~ and did — follow the call of their stomachs by moving about freely to whatever region promised supplies, while largely indifferent to their own communications with non- existent bases.’* Far from calling for speed in operation, this kind of warfare did not even make for a sustained and purposeful advance in any well-defined direction. As against this almost unrestricted freedom from lines of communication, the strategic mobility of seventeenth-century armies was severely limited by the course of the rivers. This normally had little to do with the difficulty of crossing as such; rather, it stemmed from the fact that the shipping of such supplies as were carried along by water was always very much easier than dragging them overland. While this particular consideration applied equally to all armies it was found, paradoxically, that the better a commander organized his supplies the more dependent on the waterways he became. This was due both to the enormous carrying-capacity of ships as compared to that of horse-drawn wagons, and to the fact that the former did not create additional requirements of their own. Thus, one of the foremost military engineers of the century calculated that 100 lasten flour and 300 lasten fodder could be contained in just nine ships, whereas on land no less than 600 wagons were needed in order to transport the former alone.’® Of ail the commanders of the age, none showed himself more adept at exploiting the advantages offered by water-courses than Maurice of Nassau ~ and, conversely, no one found it more diffi- cult to operate without them. By rapidly shipping his artillery train from east to west and back along the great rivers — Maas, Rhine, Lek and Waal - Maurice succeeded in surprising the Spaniards time and again, appearing now in Flanders, now in Guelderland, always catching the Spanish fortresses before they could be made ready for defence. Once he got away from the rivers, however, he was lost. This is best illustrated from his campaign of 1602, which, incidentally, was one of the very rare con- temporary instances of an attempt to win a war by means of purposeful strategic manoeuvre, The background of two centuries ll Crossing the Maas, Maurice planned to avoid the fortresses on his way, penetrate deep into Brabant, bring the Spanish army to battle and finally swing west into Flanders; the ultimate aim being the liberation of both provinces. For this purpose, a large field army - 5,422 cavalry and 18,942 infantry - was concentrated; he also had thirteen cannon, seventeen half-cannon and five field pieces, but of this artillery train only twelve half-cannon were to accompany the army in the field, the rest being sent by water to meet him. The force was supposed to be self-contained for the first ten days, and was accompanied by 700 wagons carrying fifty lasten flour; another fifty were to go by water. In spite of these not inconsiderable preparations, there could be no question of even trying properly to organize the army’s supplies for the dura- tion of the campaign; all the above-described measures were only supposed to last the army until it should be possible to harvest the fields on the way and process the grain into bread. As it was, the campaign was launched too early in the season. Crossing the Maas on 20 June, it was immediately found that the corn of Brabant was not ripe for harvesting. The stores carried along also proved disappointing, the army's English contingent in particular wasting its allocated share and having to he assisted by the others. Maurice thereupon wrote the Estates General that he did not know how he was to continue the campaign, that he would try and bring the Spaniards to battle, but would have to retum to the Maas if he was unsuccessful. Having marched for just one week, the army came to a halt on 27 June; for the next three days the process of baking fresh bread was pushed ahead ‘with great industry’, so that the advance later, Maurice could be resumed on 2 July. When another pause for baking had to be made three days definitely made up his mind that, if unable to force a battle near St Truijen, he would return to the Maas. By 8 July, St Truijen was in fact reached, but then it was dis- covered that only sixteen out of the fifty lasten supposedly follow- ing the army by water could be found. Faced with starvation, Maurice decided to retreat. After the remaining flour had been distributed and baked, the march back started on 10 July but had to halt on the next day because it was ‘exceedingly hot’. On 12 July, the English contingent had again wasted all their bread and had to be helped out by the army. Back on the Maas, a large consignment of bread and cheese reached Maurice on 19 July, whereupon he determined to march into Flanders. However, the 12 Supplying War Estates General had now had enough of his aimless manoeuvring; they categorically forbade this move, and Maurice settled down to besiege Grave.’* It has been claimed that Spain failed to con- quer the Northern rivers; on their side, Netherlands because there were too many the Dutch made no headway in Belgium because there were not enough of them. Even those commanders who did not bother overmuch with the state of their supplies, however, were dependent on the rivers to some extent because of the enormous weight of the artillery of the period. who For example, in the artillery of Maurice of Nassau, among other things was a great artilleryman, the heaviest pieces — the so-called Kartouwen — weighed about 54 tons and had to be taken apart for transportation. Even so, they required no less than thirty horses each, of which perhaps twenty to thirty per cent were expected to die annually of exhaustion. A modest artillery train consisting of six half-cannon, each with its 100 Normally, the rounds of ammunition, required about 250 horses to draw the guns proper, as wel! as the wagons loaded with shot, powder, tools and engineering materials of all kinds.1’ artillery required twice the time to cover a given distance than the army as a whole, giving rise to complex order-of-march probJems on both the advance and the retreat. Not all contemporaries were content with this state of affairs. Maurice’s cousin, Johan of Nassau, was but one among many who made practical proposals to lighten the artillery. More important were the efforts of Gustavus Adolphus, with whom this problem became something of an obsession. To solve it he abandoned the super-heavy murbricker, had the barrels shortened and their thickness reduced, and also introduced a series of ultra-light pieces, the most famous (if not most effective) of which was the leather gun. Though these reforms made it possible to reduce the number of horses and wagons accompanying the artillery by almost fifty per cent they did not, as we shall see, free his strategy from the limitations imposed by the relative immobility of the artillery; nor did they prove lasting, and after his death heavier cannon were again cast in Sweden."* To sum up, the fundamental logistic facts of life upon which seventeenth-century commanders based their strategy were as follows. First, in order to live, it was indispensable to keep moving. Second, when deciding on the direction of one’s movements, it was not necessary to worry overmuch about maintaining con- The background of two centuries 13 tact with base. Third, it was important to follow the rivers and, as far as possible, dominate their courses. All three principles are well illustrated by the career of Gustavus Adolphus, whose opera- tions are generally believed to have been more purposeful than most and are used to demonstrate everything from the importance of having a base to the virtues of the indirect approach. In fact, logistics determined his course of action from the moment he tanded at Peenemiinde in July 1630. Indeed, were it not for the fact that supply difficulties prevented the Imperialist general, Conti, from concentrating his superior force against him, the landing might not have been possible at all. Even though the King’s army numbered only 10,000 men, he found it impossible to feed it in devastated Pomerania’? and had to expand his base first. To this end he moved this way and that without any apparent strategic aim, taking towns as he went and providing each with a garrison, The process gradually enlarged the area from which he could draw for supplies. However, it also proved self-defeating in that, the more numerous the fortresses besieged or otherwise taken, the more troops had to be found to hold them down. Under these circumstances it is not surprising that he took until the spring of next year before he was able to collect a field army of any size and start operations in earnest. Having eaten up whatever was left to be had in Pomerania, Gustavus Adolphus felt the need, during the winter of 1630-1, of expanding his base still further.?° Since not even his artillery could he moved except by water, he had the choice of two routes, either reaching west and southwest in order to get to the Elbe or marching south up the Oder. He tried, but failed, to do the first, and then set out to add Brandenburg to his area of supply. It was during this period that the King, whose promises had induced the citizens of Magdeburg to rebel against the Imperial authority, should have gone to the town’s aid, However, he could not do this as long as he did not possess the fortresses of Kiistrin and Spandau, respectively guarding the confluences of the Wartha with the Oder and the Spree with the Havel. These allimportant waterways could only be secured by negotiations with the Elector Georg Wilhelm. By the time they had been thus secured, however, Magdeburg had fallen. Almost a year had now passed since the King’s landing in Peenemiinde, and throughout this period he had lived much as did all other armies, at the country’s expense. On 18 July we find 14 him Supplying War writing to his chancellor, Oxenstierna, from the camp at Werben: “we have often informed you of our conditions, i.e. that we and the Army are living in great poverty, difficulty and dis- order, all our servants having left us, and we are compelled to wage war by ruining and destroying all our neighbours. It is so at this very moment, for we have nothing left to satisfy the men except for what they can rob and plunder...’ And in another letter: ‘regardless of your own proposal, Mr. Chancellor, to send us 100,000 thalers a month. . the Army has not received one penny for the last sixteen weeks. . to feed our men we have had only such bread as we could squeeze from the towns, but there is a limit even to that. It has been impossible to restrain the horsemen .. who live simply from wild plunder. Everything has been ruined thereby, so that nothing more can be found for the soldiers in 