 defiles and other narrow places, because of the lack of leadership. Columns and individual vehicles behaved as they pleased, often resting on the roads and thus blocking them.'® After Kéniggritz, the army continued to live mainly by requisition, which compelled Moltke to suspend the standing orders and permit corps, divisions and even battalions to skip the services of the quartermasters and look after their own supplies in order to save time.’ However, Bohemia did not yield very much; villages were frequently deserted, and all transport had been taken away by the retreating Austrians. The only item that was really plentiful was meat, while bread was very short, sometimes for weeks on end. This occasionally Infantry Division was opinion of at least one longed, these shortages affected operations, e.g. when 2. Guards brought to a halt on 19 July.?? It is the expert that, had the campaign been promight have been catastrophic.'? Even as it was, the strain of weeks of marching coupled with undernourishment led to a bad outbreak of cholera. Fortunately, how- ever, the Seven Weeks’ War ended KGoniggratz, before the shortcomings were even properly understood. Though the Prussian army of 1866 supply apparatus, it was not, in regard a mere twenty days after of the logistic apparatus did have a well organized to the actual methods used When demigods rode rails to feed the troops in the field, very much 81 more modern than Napoleon’s Grande Armée sixty years previously. The same was true for the supply of infantry ammunition. In spite of being issued with the needle gun, Moltke’s soldiers were able to carry all their ammunition inside the corps, a total of 163 rounds per rifle being distributed between the regimental wagons, the battalions’ carts and the men’s backs. Arrangements to provide for a constant flow of ammunition from the rear did not exist, nor were they needed in view of the extremely modest consumption. Throughout the campaign, no more than 1.4 million rounds were expended, an average of seven per combatant.’ As a result, the number of rounds transported in the various wagons was reduced after 1866, while that loaded on the infantryman’s back was increased until it formed one half of the total supply - another indication of the still comparatively primitive state of the logistic services."* One very significant consequence of the attempt, however unsuccessful, to feed the troops from base, was a new and severe limitation on the maximum number of troops that could be marched over a single road. In Napoleon’s day, this limit was im- posed by the need to secure for each unit a piece of country sufficiently large to allow it to forage; under Moltke’s organization, however, the number was dictated by the distance that his horse- drawn supply trains could travel each day. Assuming that this was 25 miles, the maximum length of a column of marching troops could not be allowed to exceed 12.5 miles if the convoys in the rear were to reach the advance guard and travel back to replenish in a single day. In theory, it was possible to multiply this figure by employing large numbers of wagons divided into echelons each carrying a day's supply, but this would involve the regular shuttling of columns past each other in opposite directions, an operation not at all easy to carry out on the roads of Central Europe in the eighteen sixties. In practice, it was found that no more than one corps — 31,000 men — could be marched over each road, which led Moltke to make the celebrated dictum that the secret of strategy was ‘to march separately, fight jointly’, As it was, it was not always possible to observe this rule. After Kéniggritz in particular, the shortage of victuals at 1. Army stemmed partly from the fact that its three corps were crowded on a single road so that the supply trains could not get through.'* Even so, recognition of the principle led each of the three Prussian Armies approaching the battlefield along five roads, with 82 Supplying War good lateral communications between them, whereas the entire Austrian army had to march by two roads only.’* A joker in the pack The second half of the nineteenth century was the great age of the railways, and no part of Moltke’s system of warfare has re- ceived so much attention and praise as the revolutionary use made of this novel means of transportation for military purposes. Before going on to analyse the role of the railways in the Franco- Prussian War, therefore, it is necessary to say a word about their development as an instrument of war and conquest. As is well known, one of the first to suggest that armies could benefit from the utilization of railways was Friedrich List, an economist of genius who, in the 1830s, foresaw that a well con- ceived railway net might enable troops to be shifted rapidly from one point to another hundreds of miles distant, thus multiplying numbers by velocity and enabling them to concentrate, first against one enemy, then against another. Surprisingly enough, the first to grasp the full military potentialities of this were the Russians.*® In 1846, they moved a corps of 14,500 men, together with all its horses and transport, 200 miles from Hradisch to Cracow in two days by rail. This was followed, four years later, by the Austrians moving 75,000 men from Hungary and Vienna to Bohemia, this being perhaps the first time when the railways played an important part in international power politics, by help- ing to bring about the Prussian capitulation at Olmiitz. Seven years subsequently, however, it was From 16 April to 15 July, 604,381 men France's turn to give a startled world an object lesson in the strategic use of railways. transported by tence, of whom rail, involving all the and 129,227 horses were French lines then in exis- 227,649 and 86,357 respectively went directly to the theatre of operations in Italy.” In Prussia, by contrast, the idea that the railways might be use- ful for military purposes at first met with nothing but opposition. The heirs of Frederick II echoed his saying that good communications only made a country easier to overrun. Attempts by commercial interests to construct new lines often met with determined opposition on the side of the army, which feared for the safety of its fortresses, and a committee set up to deal with the question concluded, in 1835, that railways would never replace high- When demigods rode rails 83 roads, This kind of thing went on until 1841, when the debate died down owing to lack of interest. The Prussian army only began to take a serious interest in railroads during the revolutions of 1848-9, when moving troops by road became unsafe. This, together with the revolutionaries’ re- peated use of the lines in order to make good their retreat, finally led to a volte face. Progress was slow initially, and the Prussian troops using rail in order to get to Olmiitz, arrived there in such confusion that they were unable to face a much better organized Austrian force. Though some of the worst shortcomings had been corrected by the time Prussia next mobilized in 1859, the perfor- mance of her railways in the military service was still eclipsed by that of France. This was partly due to the fact that there were in Germany at this time dozens of different companies operating lines, between whom there was little coordination and less con- trol. Though efforts to provide some measure of uniformity and central control by the German Bund started in 1847, the system that was to permit the unrestricted use for military purposes of the railways in time of war was not completed until 1872.?+ By the mid-sixties, enough progress had been made to enable the Federal Army — which in practice meant those of Prussia and Austria — to make effective, though scarcely spectacular, use of the railways for military purposes. Accordingly, from 19 to 24 January 1864, the Prussians transported an infantry division (15,500 men, 4,583 horses, 377 vehicles) by rail from Minden to Harburg, using a totat of forty-two trains — an average of seven per day to move this force over 175 miles. Subsequently, use was made of the railways to bring up supplies, an average of two trains per day being employed for this purpose between Altona and Flensburg during the second half of February. Towards the end of this period, it also became possible to send trains further north into Schleswig. Since the scale of these operations was so very small, no lessons of any importance were learnt. Traffic usually worked smoothly, though there was one accident. More significantly for the future, it was found that the unloading of trains created a bottleneck and experiments were accordingly carried out with mobile wooden ramps, unloading trains from the rear instead of sidewards, and the like.?? During the campaign of 1866, the railway-network dictated not merely the pace of Prussia’s strategic deployment but also its form. In preparation for a war against Austria, it had been the Supplying War 84 intention of Moltke and the General Staff to deploy the Prussian army around Gdrlitz, so as to enable it both to cover Silesia and to take in flank an Austrian advance through Saxony to Berlin. The Prussians, however, started mobilizing later than did the Austrians, and to make up for the delay were compelled to make use of all five railways leading to their frontier. This resulted in their forces being deployed on a 200-mile-long arc, and thus Moltke’s subsequently celebrated ‘strategy of external lines’ was born, not because of any profound calculations but as a simple accident dictated by the logistic factors of the time - space and the configuration of Prussia’s railway system. As it was, the use of the railways during the war of 1866 could hardly be regarded as a resounding success. Mobilization, it is true, proceeded smoothly; in twenty-one days, 197,000 men, 55,000 horses and 5,300 vehicles of all kinds were deployed, and it is said that an officer visiting Moltke during this period found him lying on a sofa and reading a book. The subsequent opera- tion of the railways, however, was far less satisfactory. For the first time, it became clear that sending supplies to the railheads was very much easier than getting them from there to the troops. Having failed to allow for supply trains in the mobilization timetables, Moltke von made Wartensleben, matters worse by taking his railway expert, along to the field. He thereby deprived the entire system of a central directing hand and made it possible for the corps quartermasters to rush forward supplies in great abundance, without taking the slightest notice of the railheads’ ability to receive them, the result being that they became con- gested and then altogether blocked. Thus, towards the end of June, it was estimated that no less than 17,920 tons of supplies were trapped on the lines, unable to move either forward or backward, while hundreds upon hundreds of railway wagons were serving as temporary magazines and could not therefore have been used for the traffic even if the lines had been free to carry them. While bread went stale, fodder rotted and cattle died of malnutrition, field commanders were at least free to ignore the effects of logistics on operations because, as the troops had com- pletely outrun their supply convoys, all connection between them and the railways was lost. Between 23 June, when the first for- mation crossed the Austrian border, and the end of the battle of K@niggratz, the railways did not, therefore, exercise the slightest influence on the progress of the campaign.” When demigods rode rails 85 After the victory of Kéniggratz, the Prussians found that their inability to make tinuation of the manded that the ‘essential. ..with use of the Austrian railways hampered the conadvance into Austria. On 2 July, Moltke derailway from Dresden to Prague — said to be an eye to our very difficult supply situation’ - be opened at the earliest possible moment, but four 