f gross mismanagement occurred; for example Marmont complained about the ‘scandalous behaviour’ of one Baron Lienitz, master of the Circle of Wasstertrudingen, who had caused 20,000 biscnit rations pass- ing through his territory to be held up. Most important, however, was the fact that the Grande Armée was now operating in a relatively restricted area. Its original front, which on 30 Septem- ber had stretched over more than 100 miles from Freudenstadt to Wiirzburg, had contracted to just forty-five on 6 October, While much has been made of the difficulties afflicting the army (nring this period, one should not lose sight of its achievements. For example, considerable Austrian stores were captured at Memmingen, Friedberg, Augsburg, Donauwérth and Sald- miinchen where they had apparently been piled up to await the arrival of the Russian army. Though no corps had been ordered to take along stocks of fodder we find a total of ninety-eight wagons loaded with that commodity passing through Heidenheim on 7 October, of which fifty-four belonged to Ney alone; at one ton each, this should have been enough to feed his 2,600 horses for at least two days. At Hall, Davout had requisitioned fodder for no less than thirty days, and on 10 October Dumas the Emperor that he had informed just seen 3rd Corps’ ‘beautiful train’ with stores for six days passing through Neuburg. Nor is it entirely true, as is so often claimed, that Napoleon's armies could only live as long as they kept moving fast. Although considerable difficulties 56 Supplying War were caused by the corps settling down to besiege Ulm or to form a strategic barrier round Munich and Dachau it did enable the system of supply to be put on a more organized footing,” the result being that provisions became more plentiful after about 20 October. Throughout the march from the Rhine to the Danube most questions of supply had necessarily been the responsibility of the individual marshals, Napoleon himself being able to con- tribute little but reprimands (‘general Marmont had an order to obtain four days’ bread and have four days’ biscuit baked; he cannot count on anything but his own resources’) or exhortations to improvise, replace one commodity by another, and secure the troops” provisions “by hook or by crook’. Though ‘forced by circumstances’ to march without magazines he fully realized the danger of such a procedure, and accordingly began his efforts to put the logistic apparatus on a more sound basis even before the fall of Ulm. On 4 October the Emperor decreed the establishment of a second line of communication hack to Spires in order ‘to have a secure service of subsistence by this route.?? On 12 Oct ber all the corps were ordered to disgorge their surplus of requisitioned transport and put it at the disposal of the artillery park. Twelve days later the Emperor issued instructions for the establishment of a huge base near Augsburg, the aim being to concentrate no less than 3,000,000 rations - enough to feed the army for 18 days - within the next fortnight. In addition, the marshals were at this time drawing provisions for themselves from such towns as Munich, Ingolstadt, Landshut and Landsberg. These efforts resulted in even Ney, whose corps was not normally noted for the excellence of its organization, obtaining a twelve days’ supply. To transport these quantities the Emperor appears to have relied on the arrival of the vehicles promised by the Com- pagnie Breidt, as well as a flotilla of barges then being organized at Augsburg. Meanwhile, the service of communications back to France was also being vastly expanded. An order of 23 October divided the line from Strasbourg to Augsburg into seventeen sections, each of which was to be covered by sixty four-horse wagons shuttling to and fro. Assuming that each wagon was capable of making a return journey each day — not an exaggerated requirement in view of the distances involved** — the overall capacity of the service must have amounted to between sixty and 120 tons per ‘An army marches on its stomach’ 57 day consisting mainly of clothing and ammunition. These arrangements may appear sketchy by today’s standards. At the time, however, they represented a triumph of organization in making possible the maintenance over unprecedented distances of a regular system of supply and transportation such as Marlborough marching over the same country a hundred years previously neither wanted nor needed. While the quantities involved were admittedly small, they were clearly regarded as ample at the time — the proof of this being that, far from expecting a shortage, the same order made explicit provisions for dismissing some of the transport should there be too much of it. As to the Grande Armée’s ammunition supply, we saw that, in the eighteenth century, the latter exercised little or no influence on the strategic movements of armies owing to the very small quantities involved. Napoleon, however, allocated 2,500 out of 4,500 wagons with which he intended to equip his forces to the artillery park — which also carried two thirds of the supply of infantry ammunition — and only 2,000 to the service des vivres. A typical division of 8,000 men took along 147-300 rounds per gun but only 97,000 infantry rounds in addition to the sixty to eighty carried on each man’s back. While the quantities involved were thus by no means negligible in either relative or absolute terms, the fact that they could not as a rule be procured in the theatre of operations prevented them from becoming a brake on strategy. Like his predecessors, Napoleon was taking along at the outset most, if not all, the ammunition required for the duration of the campaign. Far from being indifferent to this aspect of his logistic requirements, the Emperor was in advance of his time when he established, immediately after Mack's surrender at Ulm, a great artillery depot at Heilbronn through which went a daily fow of 75,000-100,000 rounds of ammunition. that, reverting This is perhaps the first example of a continuous resupply of ammunition ever recorded, and together with the previously mentioned relay service suggests far from to a more primitive logistic method, Napoleon's system was one link in the chain of developments that was ultimately to make modern armies truly shackled to an umbilical cord of supply. Resuming its advance down the Danube, the Grende Armée engaged on what was effectively a completely new operation. The main enemy at this stage was no longer the Austrians but the Russians, and the aim of the advance, not to beat an opponent 58 Supplying War who stayed put in his place, but to try and come to grips with one who, was though he might occasionally put up a rearguard forever retreating and slipping away, threatening action, to draw Napoleon behind him into the endless spaces of Bohemia, Poland, and elsewhere.** The ‘mechanical’ problem presented by this retreat was all the more formidable because the nature of the terrain did not allow wide outflanking movements in the best Napoleonic style but instead tended to funnel the army into the narrow space between the Danube and the Alps where the number of roads was constantly decreasing. There were five roads leading from the base on the Isar to the Inn, three from there to the Enns, but only one from there on to Vienna. Attempts to find additional roads through the mountains farther south failed and the corps which tried to get through (Davout's) got stuck in the mud. Consequently, numerous corps had to share a single road, columns reached monstrous length, and the army as a whole tended to lose its cohesion as well as the ability to concentrate the corps. Throughout this march the Emperor thus found himself racked between the desire to catch the Russians and the fear that the advance guard might become engaged against superior forces while out of touch with the main army, a dilemma which he did not succeed in solving and which was finally to compel him to go way beyond Vienna to Austerlitz, Having been instructed to procure themselves an eight days’ supply of bread and biscuit in Bavaria, the corps forming the Grande Armée crossed the Isar in three columns with forty miles between them on 26 October, Murat, Davout and Soult marched in the centre, forming a column fifty miles long; Lannes was on the left, Bernadotte on the right. It was intended, after the initial supplies gave out, to feed the corps once more by means of orderly requisitions carried out by the ordonnateurs and paid for, even though this was enemy country, by receipts. To this purpose an attempt was made to allocate each corps a separate foraging area, Davout, for example, being ordered to leave the country to his right untouched so that it could be utilized by Soult follow- ing him. Marmont, who from 27 October was marching behind Bernadotte, was told to ‘go as far as necessary’ to his right in order to secure supplies from an area already traversed by the latter. Some of the marshals, notably Davout, Lannes and Soult, also had convoys from Munich following in their wake, though the speed of the advance was such that there was no hope for ‘An army marches on its stomach’ 59 them to catch up with the troops over roads which, in addition to being crowded, were also covered by snow and ice. Logistically as well as strategically, the army’s march from Munich to Vienna may be divided into three stages. The first of these brought the French to the river Inn. As the country in between was wooded and extremely poor” the troops must have crossed it by consuming the stores requisitioned from the inhabitants of Bavaria who, as the Bulletin of 28 October euphemisti- cally put it, had demonstrated ‘great zeal and industry’ in catering to their needs. From the Inn to the Enns the country opened up and it was possible to make considerable requisitions. As the Inn had served as Mack’s original area of concentration, some Austrian magazines Linz. During the could consequently hands of the corps arising, some units were also captured at Braunau, Altheim and first few days of November many divisions be fed by means of regular requisitions at the ordonnatenrs. Far from any grave shortages at least seem to have enjoyed a surplus which the troops, strict orders to the contrary notwithstanding, either sold or simply threw away.?? Finally, there came the week-long march from the Enns to Vienna. It was at this stage that serious difficulties arose and complaints similar to those already heard around Ulm were voiced once again. However, this had nothing to do with Napoleon’s system of supply or lack of it; since four or five corps were now crowded on a single road, problems were bound to appear whatever the method adopted. Yet alternative was to cross the Danube and advance along banks, which was a dangerous thing to do in view of the all the bridges had been burnt by the retreating Russians force operating north of the river thus became exposed the only both its fact that and any to being caught in isolation. In the event, so bad did conditions along the road to Vienna become that Napoleon which led directly to the best part of a in the ‘affair’ of Diirnstein, This reverse that the Grande Armée the fact that the Emperor allowed a decided to take the risk, division being annihilated suffered was due partly to sixty-mile gap to develop between himself and the advanced spearheads, which in turn was caused by his determination to personally supervise the organization of his supplies at Linz. Thus, far from being ‘indifferent’ to his communications, he allowed his care for them to interfere with his conduct of operations. The establishment of an intermediate magazine at Haag was ordered as early as 29 October. On the 60 Supplying War same day the Emperor also provided for a depét to be set up at Braunau, the aim being to bake there 50-60,000 rations per day in preparation for an expected stand by the Russians. When the desired combat did n