anco—-German border. In this way, six lines were made available for the Prussian forces and three more for their south German allies, and not more than two corps had to share a single line.>? In the actual transportation, priority was given to the combat troops, those of the two corps on each line following one another directly, while their transport and services were supposed to come up later. This arrangement was logical, but it meant that the logistic instrument, the fragility of which had already been demonstrated in the previous campaign, was thrown out of gear before the war against France even started. More significant still, the burdening of the railways by trains carrying troops made it impossible to push supplies forward, and when trains carrying subsistence finally started running on 8 August the lines quickly became blocked.** The result was that, as in 1866, the supply services could not even begin to tackle the task of feeding the troops in their areas of concentration. The General Staff had ordered field ovens to be set up at Cologne, Koblenz, Bingen, Mainz and Saarlouis, fed from peacetime magazines, and sup- plies were purchased in Holland and Belgium and shipped down the Rhine. But as the troops had been separated from their transport, these supplies could not be distributed, and when com- plaints were made to Moltke he replied that quartermasters ‘should limit themselves to what is strictly necessary and avoid bothering the railway authorities’.** Under these circumstances, the Army commanders were forced to use their own initiatives. Requisitioning transport at 400 wagons per corps, they purchased victuals on a grand scale because they were afraid, rightly as it turned out, that the experiences of 1866 would be repeated and the General Staff prove unable to cater to their men’s needs.‘° Since the troops were at this time being fed by quartering, it was not surprising that shortages soon developed even though country was rich and the population ready for sacrifice. the When demigods rode rails 91 When the German advance into France started on 5 August, their I Army had as its line of communication railway line F; II Army had lines A, C, B and D (the latter in common with III Army) and III Army relied on lines D and E. To a large extent, however, these arrangements had already ceased to function, for the stream of supplies from the rear was such that the railheads, especially those behind II Army in the Palatinate, were becoming blocked even before the deployment was completed.*? Once the advance started, moreover, the railways were quickly left behind and contact with them was lost. For example, it was not until after the battle of Spicheren on 6 August that the railhead behind I Army was advanced as far as Saarlouis, still inside German territory. The railhead of I] Army was advanced to Saargemund on 11 August, then, four days later, to Pont-a-Mousson where it was destined to remain until the mobile phase of the campaign was all bat over. III Army's railhead was at Mannheim, and this too could not be advanced beyond Mars-la-Tour.? Thus, the experiences of 1866, when the railways had been left too far behind to exercise any influence on the campaign, were repeated, with the one difference that, profiting from the lessons of the previous war, the Prussians had made preparations to construct an emergency railway round the fortress of Metz and were able to achieve something of a coup by the speed with which these preparations were translated into practice.‘* While the fact that congestion similar to that of 1866 was allowed to recur points to the conclusion that German railway organization still left something to be desired,** the difficulties experienced in the rapid advancing of the railheads were not due to any Tack of foresight. In countless memoranda covering the years 1857-70, Moltke had concerned himself with the possibili- ties of demolishing and rebuilding railways in wartime. In 1859, he had ordered the first Eisenbuhntruppe formations to be set up, whose task it was to deal with these novel aspects of the military art. The idea behind their creation was that they should carry out minor repairs and build small bridges, work of a larger scope being left to civilian experts. The railway troops formed part of the pioneer force and were expected to guard the lines as well as restore them. Although the former task was formally taken away from them in 1862, it was found that, in practice, comman- ders often refused to allocate other units to this purpose. In the war of 1866, there were three Eisenbahnabteilungen — 92 Supplying War each consisting of a commander and 50-100 men, including 10-20 specialists ~ who were attached to the three Armies operating in the field, All served tolerably well, but proved wholly inadequate for the magnitude of the task. In particular, labour was lacking to complete the line Berlin-Gorlitz, as well as to build emergency lines round the fortresses of Josephstadt and Kéniggritz. Alt supplies had to be run over the single line Dresden—Gorlitz— Reichenberg-Turnau, with results that have been described in the previous section.** In 1870, the number of railwaydetachments had been increased to five (including a Bavarian one), each just over 200 men strong and commanded by a hoherer Eisenbahntechniker, who also served as adviser on rail- way questions to the General-Etappeninspekteurs.** In the early stages of the campaign, however, these preparations proved not so much inadequate as irrelevant. Well-trained and well-equipped as the railway troops might be, they were powerless to do any- thing against the French fortresses barring the way, particularly that of Toul. True, as one historian has written, reducing this and other fortresses ‘was only a matter of time and concentration’,*? but in spite, or perhaps because, of this it was not achieved until 25 September, when the French regular armies had already virtually ceased to exist and Moltke’s forces were approaching the gates of Paris, That the reduction of Toul was not allowed higher priority was, therefore, itself an indication of the fact that the Prussians found it possible to make do perfectly well without any great need for the railways. Meanwhile, after a somewhat muddled start, the Franco— Prussian War was developing into one of the most spectacular campaigns of all time. After Spicheren, there came Froeschwiller and Vionville-Mars-la-Tour, following which Bazaine with 160,000 French troops found himself penned up at Metz. Having won this victory, the German II Army was divided in two; four of its corps were left behind to invest Metz, while the remaining three were designated the Army of the Meuse and sent to the northwest in order to help fight the other part of the French army, now concentrating around Sedan. There followed, on 18 August, the battles of Gravelotte and Saint-Privat. By 1 September, Napoleon III had been surrounded at Sedan, and two days later he surrendered, The way to Paris was now open. Having been compelled by the configuration of the railway network to open the campaign on a broad front without any very pueazims unpuery 6 woatuahy veut ie ae sage T-OL8T 3° JBM OYL 'S Ieiquese qysihequow, SUPA auBoinog | i Subd [0 aBa1g au jo eas SuOIe:3do eWay = aus sueg jo a6ag our sued jo abaig au jo 1eis ay ie sueWi95, UN 01 a|GeI1BNe SACAALEY me 94 Supplying War clearly defined Schtwverpunkt, the German army had now become grouped into two great parts. One of these, consisting of I and IL Armies, was besieging Metz, where, although Moltke’s foresight made it possible to advance their railhead to Remilly on 23 Sep- tember, very great difficulties were experienced in keeping this stationary force supplied. Further to the north, HI Army and the Army of the Meuse were preparing to follow up their victory at Sedan in order to march on Paris, despite the fact that, as the railways had been opened only as far as Nancy, they had almost totally lost touch with their bases of supply. The two halves of the German army being separated by the Argonnes, communica- tion between them was very difficult, and giving mutual support even more so. That Moltke could still, under these conditions, order a further penetration hundreds of miles into enemy territory shows how little dependent on regular supply from base the German armies still were. As King Wilhelm’s troops started marching on Paris, chaos on the railways behind them was swiftly assuming monumental proportions. This was due to many different factors, including the continued attempts of supply agencies in the rear to rush supplies forward without regard to the ability of the unloading stations to receive them; a shortage of labour for the quick emptying of trains; the inability of the army's horsedrawn transport columns to clear the stations of the goods that kept piling up; and the tendency convenient blocked of local commanders temporary for hundreds to impress magazines. As railway a result, wagons lines of miles, the backlog of motionless as became trains stretching back as far as Frankfurt and Cologne. Though frantic efforts were made to clear the mess by unloading all goods regardless of the facilities available to store them (which, of course, meant that much of them was simply left to rot), on 5 September there were standing on five different lines no fewer than 2,322 loaded wagons, containing 16,830 tons of supplies for II Army alone. The traffic jams also contributed to an acute shortage of rolling stock, which led Moltke to write to the Army commanders on 11 September and ask them to use their cavalry in order to lay hands on b.*nch wagons and locomotives.‘* Soon after the start of the campaign, difficulties were being caused by francs-tireurs who attacked trains and obstructed the lines, and on 12 October Moltke wrote that it would take months to repair them at the places where they had been demolished.‘ Thus, although traffic When demigods rode rails 95 was by no means very heavy ~ an average of only six supply trains per day for the whole army went to France during the first months of the war — congestion was such that, from 1 to 26 October, only 173 out of 202 trains sent from Weissenburg to Nancy ever reached their destination.”° The chaotic situations on the railways in the rear, however, did not prevent the Prussian armies from continuing their inexorable advance into France. On 6 September, the march on Paris got under way; by the end of the month, the ring around the city was in the process of being closed. Further in the south, Metz delayed the Germans until 24 October, when Bazaine’s surrender made it possible for I Army to march west in order to join the siege of Paris while If Army was sent further south into the Loire Valley. During this entire period the railheads remained, been ever since the end of August, around Nancy. as they had In the event, it was not until December 1870 — when Moltke’s forces had extended south to Dijon, southwest to Orleans, and west to the English Channel — that the situation on the railways in their rear started improving. Three lines were now running across the frontier from Germany into France, but one of them — of the war. Paris through passing from Mulhouse through Vesoul and Chaumont to Paris — remained blocked by the French fortress of Belfort until the end Another line reached Metz, Méziéres and Rheims, but this was blocked by no less than three fortresses and did not become available to the Germans until the fall of Méziéres on 2 January 1871. These facts limited all German rail transport to a single stretch of railway between the Moselle Valley at Frouard and the Mame Valley at Blesmes, though even this line did not become available until the fall of Toul on 25 September, by which time the German armies had already reached Paris, and then demolitions of bridges and tunnels in the Marne Valley delayed the advancing of the railhead by another two months. Th