f the lessons taught by the great Corsican. Following this attempt to study and emulate Napoleonic logis- tics it did not take long for two opposed schools to appear. Of these, one is perhaps best represented by André de Roginat, a French officer who had taken part in the Emperor's wars and who published his reflections on them as early as 1816.7 In a chapter entitled ‘Des grandes operations de la guerre offensive en Europe’, Roginat subjected Napoleon's administrative arrange- ments to a scathing criticism and reached the conclusion that his ultimate failure was due above all to the inadequate attention he paid to the lines of communication. In Roginat’s view, strategic penetration deep into the enemy’s country was all very well as long as it was carried out by small armies, Modern forces, however, 76 were Supplying War enormous munition and in size and made replacements on demands in subsistence, am- a scale that was more enormous still. Roginat further emphasized the difficulties that inevitably follow an army living off the country, including desertion, indis- cipline, and trouble with the population. Calling the Austerlitz campaign ‘the height of madness’, he accused Napoleon of allowing 300,000 men to starve to death in Russia and another 200,000 in Saxony. To remedy all these evils, Roginat suggested that the future lay in a ‘methodical’, step by step, system of warfare. Armies were to be loaded with a maximum of eight days’ provisions, then to advance to a distance of no more than thirty to forty leagues from their base, at which point they were to stop, take stock, and wait for the armée de reserve, which Roginat considered essential for any successful military enterprise, to catch up. Stores would then be accumulated and a new base established. Not until everything was complete could the process be repeated. Very different were the deductions of another, and greater, writer, Karl Clausewitz von was, Clausewitz. surprisingly When enough, it came to nuts less impressed and with bolts the rapidity of the Emperor’s strategic movements than were the majority of his contemporaries. Pointing out that the need to make requisitions, especially if it could not be done directly by the troops, could impose delays quite as bad as those made necessary by a system of supply from base, he used Murat's famous pursuit of the Prussians in 1806 in order to demonstrate that there was nothing here that Frederick JI, for all his great train and baggage, had not been able to do equally well.? Clausewitz, however, thought that the French system ~ or lack of it - hecame more advantageous in proportion as distances grew, it alone had made possible those tremendous marches from the Tagus to the Niemen. Whatever his reservations, therefore, Clausewitz was he concluded that ready to see the wave of the future in supply by the country. Contradicting his own detailed examination, such was the superiority of a war carried on by means of requisitions over one dependent on magazines that ‘the latter does not at all look like the same instrument’. While this may be taken as the considercd theoretical opinion of the post-Napoleonic generation, attempts to put it into practice soon showed that mere plunder was an unsatisfactory method of feeding an army. Thus, the Russian Administrative Regulations of When demigods rode rails 7 1812 charged the intendant general to use ‘requisitions, purchase and contracts to exploit the resources of occupied countries for the army’s special benefit, cases’. In not possess enough while practice, only resorting however, to our Russian initiative to maintain own stocks. . .in commanders their men did in this way, with the result that ‘much suffering’ took place during the campaigns of 1828-9 (against Turkey) and 1931 (in Poland). Conse- quently, ‘ambulant magazines’ were introduced in 1846 together with trains of field bakeries and butcheries. These arrangements did not, however, prove themselves during the Crimean War, with the result that innumerable carcasses of men and horses lined the routes to Bulgaria and Sebastopol.* Unlike the Russians, who were forced by geography to conduct their wars in poor and thinly populated areas, the Austrians in 1859 found themselves operating in the rich country of north Italy whose resources should easily have fed the army. Requisi- tioning was therefore resorted to as a matter of course. The troops’ organic transport, however, did not arrive on time, while attempts to organize columns of local vehicles took so long that the troops, who were strictly forbidden to help themselves, starved. In addi- tion, cooperation between the intendant general and the corps was not without friction; so that the eutire organization was subsequently characterized as a ‘complete failure’.* As organized in 1814-15, the Prussian train-apparatus was comparatively sketchy affair, consisting of provisions-columns (theoretically capable of carrying four days’ food for the army), a field bakeries, remount depéts, and ambulance wagons. A Royal order of 1831 organized these into ‘train companies’, of which one was allocated to each corps, a train company consisting of seven {subsequently reduced to five) provisions-columns, a field bakery column and a ‘flying’ remount depét. To manage the service of supply, a body of train officers (with personnel detached from the cavalry) was established in 1816. In the same year, the corps were instructed to appoint commanders of the trains, though the latter were made subordinate to the inspector of trains and thus independent of the formations they were supposed to help maintain. Apart were to from the command designation the trains, of officers an who, organization in time of war, responsible for operating the service of supply did not exist. Only part of the materiel for the trains was stored in depéts and was thus immediately available for use. It was intended to supplement this 78 Supplying War with requisitioned horses and vehicles. Similarly, nuclei of qualified NCOs to train the necessary personnel were not established, and the entire organization had to be built up from scratch during mobilization. During the events of 1848 and 1849, these arrangements were tested for the first time and, as might have been expected, found completely inadequate. The main problem lay in the quality and quantity of the personnel. The commander of the trains, a Major von Freudenthal, was 69 years old while his principal collaborators were veterans of the campaigns of 1812 and 1813, the youngest of them being aged 55. No officers were available to command the field hospitals and bakeries, which consequently had to be entrusted to NCOs, some of them invalids who had never previously even ridden a horse. Equipment, especially clothing, was so short that some of the men spent fourteen days at the depsts before finally being issued with their uniforms. Arrangements for feeding the horses had not been made, and dreadful confusion ensued when officers tried to group men whom they did not know into units that did not exist. Under these circumstances, the trains were unable to reach the area of deployment in time, which led that soldier-prince, Wilhelm of Prussia (subsequently King and then first German Emperor) to write that supply and transportation were the weakest points in the entire Prussian army organization.* In 1853, thoroughgoing reforms were accordingly initiated by the Minister of War, von Bonin. In January, the training in peacetime of train officers and NCOs was provided for; this was fol- lowed three months later by a more detailed order signed by Frederick Wilhelm himself, specifying that each corps should detail a staff officer for the establishment of a ‘nucleus’ (Stamm) of train personnel, and that this personnel should engage in supply-exercises during fourteen days each year. In 1856, these ‘nuclei’ of train personnel were expanded into regular train bat- talions which, moreover, were now made subordinate directly to their respective corps headquarters. A train battalion consisted of a staff, five provisions-columns (overall capacity 3,000 Zentner flour, approximately eight days’ consumption), a field bakery, a remount depét, one main hospital and four field hospitals. How- ever, when the army was mobilized against France in 1859 many of these turned out to exist on paper only. After demobilization measures aimed at bringing the trains of all corps up to establish- When demigods rode rails ment were introduced. Finally, in June 1860, 79 there came yet another reorganization which turned the train troops into an independent arm (Waffe) of the army and gave them their own inspector-general. This inspector was subordinated, not to the General Staff, but to the Ministry of War, and was responsible for training and nominating the train-commanders. Each of the nine corps into which the Prussian army was now divided was given its own train battalion which, in peacetime, consisted of 292 officers, NCOs and men. The personne] were listed as combatants, and accordingly wore the regular army uniform. Complete in theory, these arrangements were not really tested in the Danish campaign of 1864 because Prussia put into the field on that occasion only 43,500 men (rather less than two complete corps), 12,000 horses and 100 guns — a fraction of her overall military strength. During the period of concentration, the army as a whole was provisioned by quartering. However, magazines of flour and fodder were set up around Kiel, as was a reserve wagonpark, 1,000 strong. It being winter, some difficulties were experienced with the weather because the roads were iced over, which made marching difficult. As distances were smal! and the country rich, the organization functioned smoothly on the whole, though problems were caused by the lack of training of some of the personnel. In any case, it does not appear that the experiences of this little war led to any important changes in the service of supply.’ Very different were the experiences of the Prussian-Austrian War of 1866. Though the train organization should theoretically have been capable of catering to the army's needs, the sheer size of the problem was overwhelming; 280,000 men, concentrated in a single theatre of operations, were to be supplied from base, an enterprise far exceeding anything previously attempted, with the exception of Napoleon's ill-fated Russian adventure. As in 1864, the troops were fed during the period of concentration mainly by quartering, supplemented by free purchase. It was intended, how- ever, to supply the advance against Austria from the rear, 1. Army in particular making its arrangements as if Saxony, where it was to operate, plans. The troops until the Austrian quently left were a desert." In the event, nothing came of these trains generally succeeded in keeping up with the about 29 June (a time, however, when the invasion of territories had not yet got very far) but were subsebehind and did not succeed in catching up until 80 Supplying War after the battle of Kéniggriitz was fought and won.? While the trains became entangled in monumental traffic jams and battled for priority on the roads, the troops were fed by quartering, re- quisitioning, and sometimes not at all, As Moltke himself wrote to his Army commanders on 8 July, this failure was caused by the following ‘abuses’: a. The trains were crowded off the roads by columns of infantry, cavalry and artillery, sometimes being immobilized for days on end and thus became separated {rom the troops they were supposed to supply. b. Field police, who should have been available to supervise marching discipline, were frequently employed on other jobs. Moreover, their commanding officers used the fact as an excuse for not carrying out their proper duties. ce. Supply trains tended to become inflated by unauthorized vehicles, many of which were not suitable to military purposes. d. Congestion was especially frequent in