s of provisions that each individual place on the way. report on them to the Emperor orders were detailed; they laid of formations but also- the exact regiment was to draw from each Under Berthier’s master plan, the divisions forming the cavalry corps were the first to leave the Channel coast, which some of them started doing as early as fantry corps of Davout, Soult, three parallel routes arranged the last two had to share a Napoleon's instructions, 25 August. Then followed the inNey and Lannes marching along from north to south so that only road between them. Recording Berthier wrote that ‘it is the Emperor's interition. . to feed the troops on the route as they were in camp’, ie. by means of the machinery provided by the Ministry of War in coordination with prefects, sub prefects and mayors on the way. Provisions were to be distributed every two or three days, and as he issued his orders to the corps Berthier also wrote to the various local authorities informing them of the coming movement and asking for their cooperation, Marching from Holland over friendly territory, Marmont was told to ‘live off what the country can supply’; whereas Bernadotte was to take along seven or eight days’ supplies of biscuits in order to ‘avoid burdening’ the neutral country of Hesse-Kassel.” Within this general framework much initiative was left to the marshals, each of whom was to send his ordonnateur and commissionaries ahead in order to make the detailed arrangements. Excellent as Napoleon’s orders may have been in principle, the organization of the march left something to be desired, both because the time allowed was too short and because local authorities everywhere were reluctant to cooperate with the army which, thanks to its system of recruitment, was already becoming unpopular. On the other hand, there were cases when too much co- operation led to drunkenness and disorder. Davout's corps in the north found it difficult to secure appropriate quarters and had to spend more than one night in the open. The right-hand corps fared better in this respect but suffered when their supply-system 46 Supplying War broke down while on the final leg of their march. Apart from a phenomenon of ‘temporary desertion’ ~ men exploiting the fact that they were passing in or near to their homelands in order to slip away for a few days and then rejoin their units on the Rhine — discipline was excellent and moved at least one prefect to write Berthier that he had ‘nothing but praise’ for the troops passing through his department. Others were less content, and on IL December ~ almost five months since the beginning of the campaign and a week after it had been crowned by the victory of Austerlitz - the Minister of Finance was still complaining to Dejean about the army's failure to settle accounts with the districts through which it had been passing in August and September.?* On the whole, however, the men did well enough on the march; there are records Jeft of extreme fatigue,” but not of hunger. The same could not be said of the horses which suffered heavily from bad roads, rain and a shortage of fodder. Nearly every commander who depended on the animals to carry his troops or haul their equipment had cause for complaint, either because the riders were untrained and caused injuries to their mounts, or because the horses were too young and broke down, or simply because there were not enough of them. By the time the concentration on the Rhine was complete the horses of the cavalry corps were starving because there were no finds to buy fodder. Soult had only 700 animals to draw his train instead of 1,200 he needed, whereas Marmont’s cavalry suffered from the effects of having been cooped-up for five weeks aboard ships in preparation for the abortive invasion of England. It was the old story that we shall see repeated right up to 1914; in every case feeding the horses and keeping them in good health proved a good deat more difficult than doing the same for the men. Exactly what Napoleon’s operational plans were at this stage we do not know. In his letters to Talleyrand, his foreign minister, and to the Elector of Bavaria, his ally, he did not go beyond generalities - marching to the aid of Bavaria at the earliest pos- sible moment, sending 200,000 men to Vienna, and beating the Austrians before they could be reinforced by the Russians. How and in what manner he hoped to achieve these objectives the Emperor did not say, possibly because he was determined to maintain secrecy but more probably because he did not yet know himself. Nor are there any real clues as to his intentions in the ‘An army marches on its stomach’ 47 instructions he gave for the conduct of reconnaissance in Germany. Thus, Bertrand was ordered to carry through a thorough survey of Ulm and its surroundings, then to proceed east along the left (north) hank of the Danube while paying special attention to the exits through Bohemia. Marmont which the Russians might debouch from Murat, presumably in preparation for the operations of and Bernadotte, was instructed to follow the Main to Wiirzburg, then to reach before turning the Danube, which he was to descend to the Inn. Travelling south along that river, he was to reach Kufstein west and, after crossing Bavaria, to return to France by way of Ulm-Rastadt which he was ta reconnoitre with special care. A better understanding of the Emperor's intentions can perhaps be obtained by looking at his orders of deployment. These initially included a very heavy concentration at Strasbourg, where Petiet was supposed to prepare tents for no less than 80,000 men, or enough to house almost half of the entire Grande Armée. Add to this the fact that Napoleon asked his Bavarian ally to prepare large stores of provisions at Ulm, and it becomes fairly clear that, whatever his ultimate purpose, the Emperor's first intention was to forestall the Austrians in Bavaria by marching there over the most direct route, the one through the Black Forest. The fact that he did not have this area reconnoitred does not gainsay this conclusion, The Black Forest was after all, the route traditionally followed by French armies during the wars against the Habsburg Empire, and its features must have been well known. While Napoleon was pondering his operational plans and supervising the vast process of deployment and concentration, Dejean, Petiet and Murat - the latter acting in his capacity of commander of the army in the Emperor's absence - were making great efforts to complete all material preparations within the short time allowed. Dejean’s ordeal began on 23 August, when a curt order from the Emperor instructed him to prepare 500,000 biscuit rations at Strasbourg and another 200,000 at Mainz, all to be ready within twenty-five days, A similar if more polite note went to the Elector of Bavaria who was to prepare no less than a million biscuit rations equally distributed between Wiirzburg and Ulm."? A comparison of these figures with the number of troops involved shows that Napoleon's preparations were by no means as sketchy as is usually supposed. The 700,000 rations concentrated in the area of deployment would have lasted the 116,000 N Sonos e 6 Scary? WSU Tunigesio eiweyog nessed aqnueg ap 0} auiyy amp ory -p 4 ~. UsBuwway, eat wrayuapt puns) Toe Sse. ee nw x2 3 ® Ng IAs, apersuapnes, ®, TA * % 2 a] APEISa}EUS Binogseisf™ sey rwbisew aaynusey, w wo, ayeujejedg sedge _ wayuveyy \~ OL eS Sfebuns H auoignan NEL vat PONS ewnssinor Ceo ~ < . F6unquaynou, ‘ ‘ Ta [Bioquajeysy\ ben mh w ‘Unpuery Ln, ON ay zuaygoy! 4 ‘An army marches on its stomach’ 49 men that formed the main body of the Grande Armée (excluding the corps of Marmont, Bernadotte and Augerau; the latter was to take no part in the early stages of the operation) for six days, which them to be corps together with four days’ bread would easily have taken to Bavaria. Here, another four days’ supply was supposed waiting at Ulm. Preparations for feeding the northernmost were just as extensive, arrangements being made to have supplies to last 55,000 men (including the 20,000 Bavarians whom Marmont and Bernadotte were to pick up at Wiirzburg) for no less than nine days in addition to the normal four days’ bread. All in all, the army's subsistence was thus to be secured for a full two weeks, which was more than enough to enable them to reach Bavaria without making any requisitions at all. As it was, meeting all of the Emperor's demands did not prove possible. In the area of deployment proper, only 380,000 biscuit rations, or just over half of the number originally demanded, could be made ready by 26 September. Another 300,000 were ready in the rear but could not reach the army in time for the beginning of operations. The Bavarians failed to prepare anything at all either in Ulm — which, in view of the surprisingly rapid Austrian advance to that place, was just as well — or at Wirzburg, and on 15 September they had to be asked ‘for heaven's sake’ to prepare at least 300,000 rations in Wiirzburg, the response being that it could not be done because prices were high and biscuits unknown to the bakers, Nevertheless, it appears that when Marmont and Bernadotte arrived at Wiirzburg they did find some biscuits awaiting them, though how many we do not know.* While the preparations made to secure provisions were thus falling behind the Emperor's expectations his instructions for providing the army with adequate transport also proved incapable of fulfilment, According to the original plans, the army’s vehicle park was to consist of the following: (2) 150 wagons brought up from Boulogne; (b) just under 1,000 wagons to be furnished by the Compagnie Breidt, with whom a contract had been placed in May; and (c) 3,500 wagons to be requisitioned in the French departments along the Rhine. The total number of wagons supposed to accompany 116,000 men - Marmont and Bernadotte had been warned that they could ‘expect nothing’ from the army and told to find their own transport — may seem meagre by modern stan- dards. It was less so at the time, and in fact the ratio of vehicles 50 Supplying War to men happened to be exactly the same as in the Austrian army under General Mack.'® Again, the 2,000 wagons left to the service des vivres after the artillery had taken its share of 2,500 would have sufficed to carry provisions for 116,000 men for eleven days if one assumes that consumption amounted to three pounds per day and that the average load of a four-horse wagon was around one ton - which is probably too low. As it was, only a small part of this transport materialized. The wagons from Boulogne were sent to the wrong place owing to a bureaucratic error, whereas the Compagnie Breidt only had about a fifth of its vehicles ready in time. Finally, the drivers of carts impressed in large numbers along the Rhine used every opportunity to desert, taking their horses along when possible. If the Grande Armée suffered from a shortage of transport, this was due to the lack of time in which to set up proper trains rather than to any preconceived determination on the Emperor's side to do without them. Exactly when he first became aware that it would not be possible to meet all his demands we do not know but a clue may perhaps be found in a letter to Dejean in which, on 28 August. he ordered the 500,000 rations previously assigned to Strasbourg to be distributed Spires. What is is no mention Mainz, nor do mediately after between that town, Landau and even more significant in our context is that there at all made of the 200,000 rations ordered for they reappear in any subsequent document. Imthis reduction in the total amount of provisions an order was sent to Savary to reconnoitre, for the first time, the crossings of the Neckar in an area well to the north of that which Murat had previously been instructed to traverse. Finally, on 30 August, there came a whole series of orders altering the army’s area of deployment and shift