ot take place it was decided to turn Braunau into an advanced centre of operations. Flour for three million rations was to be concentrated there and baked into bread at the rate of 100,000 rations per day. Transportation to the army was to be carried out both by water and overland, for which Soult, Ney and Bernadotte were ordered to disgorge surplus transport. Meanwhile, the equivalent of three allied divisions were detailed to guard the line of communications. as Important these measures were, they were destined pri- marily to form a hedge in case of failure and could hardly con- tribute much to sustain the operation which, as Murat informed the Emperor, was beginning to assume the character of a ‘flight forward.’* Happily for Napoleon, Vienna was now near at hand. Here, there were such vast quantities of arms and ammunition (‘enough to equip three or four armies’, as the Bulletin put it) that all the Grande Armée’s difficulties in this respect were solved at one stroke. More important still, 10,000 quintals of flour and 13,000 bushels of fodder were found in the Imperial magazines alone. The town was ordered to find food to last 80,000 men for three weeks, which involved the delivery of 75,000Ib. bread, 25,000lb. meat, 200,000|b. oats, 280,000]b. hay and 375 buckets wine in one day alone. Exactly what requisitions were made during the subsequent period we do not know, but an indication of their magnitude can perhaps be found in the fact that the demand for wine alone rose to 677 buckets per day from 26 November onward. To enjoy these replenishments, the Grande Armée was granted three days’ rest even though this meant that Kutuzov was allowed to slip away at Hollabriinn. Our sources have left us with scant details concerning how the army fared on its way to Austerlitz, On 20 November, Murat informed Napoleon that the supplies for 300,000 rations had been found at Pressburg, and this was followed by an order to establish ovens capable of producing 60,000 rations per day at Spielberg. It is also useful to note that the Grande Armée now stood with its back to Bohemia, a country which at this time was classified by experts as sufficiently rich to support an army,”* and that the distance to Vienna was by no means excessive even for horse-drawn vehicles. ‘An army marches on its stomach’ 61 Operations having come to a standstill, Napoleon's army soon found itself in supply difficulties even though requisitions were being made far and wide.*° Luckily for him, the allies were faring still worse and were ultimately compelled to attack the Grande Armée on pain of disintegration.”’ As a result, a battle was fought; and the Blitzkrieg from Boulogne to Austerlitz was over. Many roads to Moscow As sole commander in chief possessing absolute authority Napoleon was not in the habit of drawing up detailed memoranda, hence there is no information as to how he assessed the performance of his army’s supply apparatus nor what lessons he drew from it. To judge from his subsequent actions, however, it appears that the Emperor was at first well-content with his own system. When the Grande Armée took the field again the following year it was still for days, operating in exactly the same way and, indeed, achieved similar results hy thrashing the Prussians in a war that lasted just six weeks. This time the army took with it provisions ten and prior to the battle of Jena—Auerstidt lived largely off the country. After the victory, huge requisitions were made at such enabling months tawns the troops as Weimar, Erfurt, literally to wallow October-December 1806. With Leipzig in luxury the new and Kiistrin, during the year, however, the army entered Poland where very little could be found, and it became necessary to establish a regular line of communication back to Saxony. It was at this stage that Napoleon first came face to face with considerable opposition and partisan activity between the Oder and the Vistula. The transport service was organized by Daru with the help of German contractors. Use was also made of the waterways (Havel, Spree, Oder, Wartha, Netze, Bromberg Canal, Vistula) which, since the winter was exceptionally mild, were serviceable from the middle of February onward. None of these measures fully met requirements, however, and so the estab- lishment of a military train consisting of seven transport-battalions with 600 vehicles each was decreed on 26 March. Again, we have little information on the logistic aspects of the 1809 campaign. This time the Austrians stole a march on Napo- leon and took him by surprise, so that there was no time to form a proper base even if he had wanted to. Nevertheless, some stores were apparently concentrated at Ulm and Donauworth, 62 Supplying War and following his experiences of 1805, the Emperor organized a flotilla of boats to forward these stores along the Danube. Since, however, the campaign unfolded with extreme rapidity from the start of the French advance on 17 April to the occupation of Vienna just three weeks later, it is unlikely that this measure was of much use. Rather, the troops must have lived by drawing on the reserves carried along — this time put at twelve days — and off the country.** Looking back upon these campaigns, all so successful in spite of being conducted ~ involuntarily, for the most part - on a logistic shoestring, it seems ironical that Napoleon’s first major failure resulted from the operation that he had most carefully prepared. For the invasion of Russia was no ill-conceived adventure as it is so often described. Of all Napoleon's wars, it was the one for which he had assembled means, human and material, out of all proportion to anything that went before, not merely in his own day but during the previous centuries as well. It is inconceivable that Napoleon did not know what was clear to every other military man of the time, namely that in ‘the waste- lands of the Ukraine’ (Guibert) it was impossible to live off the country. He had in fact written his son in law that ‘the war in Poland will hardly resemble that in Austria, without adequate transportation, everything will be useless’, Not only had the Depét amass de Guerre all possible received, as early as April information on 1811, an order to Russia, but he was familiar with the history of Charles XII’s Russian campaign and must have known that the Swede was faced not merely with a thinlypopulated country but one that had been systematically ravaged by the retreating enemy.** Nor were his experiences during the 1809 campaign — the last he had commanded in person — of a kind to encourage logistic neglect. After the halt inflicted on it at Aspern, the Grande Armée had found itself cooped up in the island of Libau and laboured under great supply difficulties. Hence preparations for a defensive war against Russia had started long before the Emperor made up his mind to attack. For example, 1,000,000 biscuit rations were ordered for Stettin and Kiistrin as early as April 1811.** At the same time, Napoleon also increased the size of his train service. These preparations, however, had a purely precautionary character ~ proof that Napoleon was reckoning with the eventuality of a Russian attack and did not intend to be caught off-balance. ‘An army marches on its stomach’ Towards the end of 1811, the measures 63 taken to improve the army's logistic system in Poland began to assume a more offensive character. In January 1812 the provisioning of Danzig with vic- tuals was ordered. By 1 March, subsistence to last 400,000 men and 50,000 horses for fifty days was to be concentrated there. In addition, further ‘large stores’ were to be stockpiled on the Oder.** To carry these provisions, the train service was vastly expanded until it numbered no less than twenty-six battalions (in proportion to the army’s size, rather more than those accompanying Moltke’s ‘modern’ forces in 1870), eight of which were equipped with 600 light and medium vehicles each, and the rest with 252 four-horse wagons capable of carrying 1.5 tons.; 6,000 spare horses were also made available.** The decision to concentrate on heavy vehicles has often been criticized, for they proved unable to negotiate the atrocious Russian tracks. More than most modern writers, how- ever, Napoleon was aware that lighter carts would have spelt an even greater number of horses and, consequently, increased diff- culty in feeding them.” Similarly, the equipment of the army with ammunition was carried out on a grandiose scale. Here, the main depét was at Magdeburg whence huge quantities of shot and powder were shipped down the Elbe and so on to East Prussia." A note of 1 May 1812 gave the stocks available at Danzig, Stettin and Magdeburg as follows:** for pounders 59 34 330 69 Kiistrin, rounds 24 20 12 82,612 32,804 226,568 6 365,982 8 314 Glogau, 53,835 All of this was in addition to the siege artillery.*° Thus there were available between 670 and 1,100 rounds per barrel for most calibres, figures that do not compare at all badly with those of an industrialized and highly militaristic Germany one hundred years later. Exactly what Napoleon intended to do with all these preparations is hard to say, for none of his operational plans — if such ever existed ~ have survived. It can only be conjectured, therefore, that he recognized that no horsedrawn supply system, Supplying War 64 however well organized, could sustain him all the way from the Niemen to Moscow, as the following figures will show. Even if he were to arrive in the Russian capital with only one third of his original 600,000 men, taking sixty days to do so (in fact he took eighty-two) overall consumption during this period would have come to 18,000 tons for the men alone, which was almost double the overall capacity of his supply trains, which, moreover, would have to supply other parts of the army as well. Furthermore, daily consumption in Moscow would have come to 300 tons, and to cater for this at a distance of 600 miles from base (assuming a very high performance of twenty miles per day by the supply columns) 18,000 tons of transport would have been needed. Re- gardless of whether he used his trains as rolling magazines or to shuttle (in relays) between the army and the frontier, therefore, there was not the slightest chance of feeding the troops in this way during an advance to Moscow. As it was, Napoleon took with him into Russia twenty-four days’ provisions, of which twenty were transported by the train battalion and 4 on the men’s backs. However, it is improbable that he expected the campaign to be over in twelve days (on the assumption that the army would have had to march back as well), as one modern writer‘! has implied. Rather, he must have been thinking in terms of a war lasting for about three wecks (this, we remember, had been the duration of both previous campaigns in the Danube Valley) during which time he would have penetrated Russia to a depth of over 200 miles, hopefully more than enough to catch the Tsar’s army and bring it to battle. After that, provisions would have been supplied to the victors by the vanquished, as was Napoleon’s normal practice.’* Whatever the Emperor’s exact intentions, there can be no doubt that he allowed logistic considerations to play a crucial part in the planning of the campaign. The supply from base of fodder for the 250,000 horses accompanying the army being an utterly insoluble problem, the beginning of the war had to be postponed to the end of June. He also started off from Kovno and proceeded to Vilna for logistic reasons, for whereas a deployment further north would have met very great obstacles in view of the appalling Polish roads (which Napoleon knew from his experiences in 1806-7)** one further south would have made it difficult to use the Niemen in order to supply the army, Whether, during the last weeks before the start of operations, the Emperor ‘An army marches on its stomach’ 65 intended to break through the enemy's