 centre, or to envelop him from the north, or the south, we do not really know. Nor does it matter, for logistics determined his strategy in a way that would have delighted Louvois. Similarly, the Russians’ plans for the defence of their country also rested on logistic considerations. That only the factors of distance, climate and supply could defeat the French army - the largest ever assembled, and commanded as it was by one of the greatest generals of all time ~ the Tsar's advisers unanimously agreed. The question was not whether to retreat, but where and how far. Here political considerations seem to have played some role, for the nobles were afraid that too long a retreat would lead to a revolt of the serfs.** Another difficulty facing the Russian planners was how to compel the French to follow their retreating forces instead of ignoring them. To solve both problems, the Tsar’s chief military adviser, General Pfuel, set up a fortified camp at Drissa, midway between the roads to Moscow and St Petersburg, assuming that Napoleon would not be able to bypass the camp during his advance against either city. If the French were to follow the Russians to Drissa, they would find themselves operating in poor country where they would find only a fraction of the necessary supplies.’* At the same time, another Russian army was to operate in Napoleon's rear, making the task of feeding the French troops more difficult still. The interest of this much maligned plan does not lie in its supposed weaknesses, ridiculed as these have been by Clausewitz. It lies instead in the fact that, like Napoleon's own schemes, it rested on logistic rather than strategic considerations. In the event, the plans of both sides came to nothing. Napoleon crossed the Niemen on 23 June. Two days later, he was already angrily exhorting Berthier to send provisions to Tilsit where the army ‘is standing in great need of them’. Such cries of distress were to become a standard feature of the campaign, and there is no need to go through them all. The main reasons for the failure of Napoleon's logistic plans were as follows. First, the army's supply vehicles proved too heavy for the Russian ‘roads’, a prob- lem aggravated still further when thunderstorms during the first fortnight of the campaign turned them into bottomless quagmires.‘7 Secondly, the river Vilnya, on which Napoleon had relied for shipping supplies to Vilna, tured out to be too shallow to allow the barges through. Thirdly, discipline in the army was lax, 66 Supplying War with the result that the troops plundered indiscriminately instead of carrying out orderly requisitions, the outcome being, paradoxically, that the officers — at any rate, those who refused to take part in such excesses — starved even when the men found enough to eat.‘* Furthermore, the troops’ indiscipline caused the inhabi- tants to flee, and made the establishment of a regular administra- tion in the army’s rear impossible. Fourthly, some of the troops, notably the German ones, simply did not know how to help them- selves. Finally, there was deliberate destruction by the Russians. This sometimes assumed disastrous proportions, e.g. early in July when Murat reported he was operating in ‘very rich country’ which, however, had been thoroughly plundered by the Tsar's soldiers. Though innumerable grumblings and complaints accompanied the Grande Armée’s march to Moscow, this did not mean that all the troops were invariably and equally badly off. In particular, the advance guard usually fared better than the rest of the army because it was the first to enter new territory. The rearguard — consisting of Napoleon’s darlings, the Imperial Guard ~ also did comparatively well, either because the Emperor took good care of them or, which seems more likely, because they were marching at some distance behind the rest of the army and habitants of the villages on the way already dwellings.” Davout’s corps, marching well to main force in an attempt to cut off Bagration’s thus found the inreturning to their the south of the 2. Russian Army, repeatedly found ‘more [food and fodder] than I ever hoped’, and at one point deemed it necessary to emphasize that, in spite of the glowing reports, the troops were not wallowing in luxury.”® On the other hand, the forces operating away Armée’s main body Jerome in particular cavalry, who found their horses had died from the Grande — those under Princes Poniatowsky and - fared worse than most, as did Murat's it so difficult to obtain fodder that half of by the time the Dvina was reached. At that point, however, the thinly populated areas of Lithuania and Belorussia had been left behind, and the worst of the army's suffering was over. Napoleon must have known before he embarked on the campaign that the regions round Smolensk and Moscow were comparatively rich - the number of inhabitants varied from seventy to 120 per square mile.*! This, in all probability, was the major reason behind his decision to continue eastward after the disappointment of his hopes to beat the Russians ‘An army marches on its stomach’ 67 near the frontier. Nor did the Emperor's calculations prove wrong. From about the middle of July onward, unit after unit reported that while the villages on the way had frequently been pillaged the country was ‘improving with every step forward’, ‘very good and well cultivated’, ‘magnificent’, ‘covered with wonderful crops’, and ‘offered the most abundant harvest’? That many of these reports originated with the Guard, which was making up the rear and could therefore expect to find the country it entered already phindered and devoid of resources, proves conclusively that the Grande Armée’s troubles stemmed less from any shortage of provisions in the country than from a lack of discipline that not only drove away the inhabitants but also extended to pillaging the army's own convoys. Nevertheless, even those eternal grumblers, Eugéne and Schwartzenberg, found the going easier.** As a private letter sent back from around Smolensk on 22 August put it, “the country which we are entering is very good; the har- vest is abundant, the climate agreeable. You may imagine that it offers great resources. . the health of the army is excellent. We do not lack either bread or meat. As for wine, there isn’t as much as in Bourgogne, but we have no reason to complain." The present chapter is not intended to belittle the logistic difficulties facing Napoleon’s invasion of Russia, especially in view of its disastrous outcome. It should be recognized, however, that the worst shortages were experienced during the first two weeks of the advance (ie. precisely the period for which Napoleon had made his most careful and extensive preparations) and that the situation gradually improved afterwards. Also, the Grande Armée’s problems were at all times ~ including the retreat from Moscow* ~ largely due to bad discipline. This, of course, was itself partly due to logistic shortages. However, the fact remains that those units whose commanders were strict disciplinarians (e.g. Davout’s) consistently did better than the rest, while the Guard even managed to keep such good order that, far from run- ning away, the inhabitants enthusiastically welcomed it. Nor is it true, as is so often maintained, that the country as a whole was too poor to support an army. Writing from Drissa early in July, Murat - operating as he was in an area which Pfuel had selected for the erection of his fortified camp precisely because it was supposed to be without resources — informed Napoleon that while the region around was tolerably well provided it would be possible to exploit it only after a proper administration was set up and an 68 Supplying War end put to the troops’ marauding." All our sources agree that the country became more abundant the closer one got to Moscow, which, together with the (justified) hope that the Russians would not give up their capital and holy city without a fight, was probably why Napoleon went there instead of terminating the campaign at Vitebsk. The above facts also dispose of the attempt, recently made," to refute Clausewitz’s objections to Pfucl’s plans for the defence of Russia and show that the latter were correct after all. That Pfuel relied on the logistic wisdom of the age is undeniable, but this in itself is not enough to prove him right. The plan’s main fault was that the camp at Drissa was too close to the frontier, and would surely have been reached by the Grande Armée regardless of the economic circumstances on the way; that more than a few days’ starvation were needed to put France’s troops off the scent was demonstrated time after time throughout the wars of the Revolution and the Empire. As it was, Napoleon's army in 1812 succeeded in reaching Borodino in sufficiently good order to beat both the Russian armies combined, despite the enormous dis- tances and logistic problems involved. What would have been the fate of Barclay de Tolly’s troops had they waited for the Emperor behind their trenches at Drissa is only too easy to imagine. While bad discipline did, as we saw, play a crucial role in the failure of the campaign, the arguments attacking the French army’s technical proficiency appear largely unfounded. It may be true that Napoleon reduced the supply of his army over the 200 miles closest to the frontier to an arithmetical problem, not tak- ing sufficient account of the ubiquitous ‘friction’ of war, though it must be remembered that he had to make his calculations for the campaign on the basis of inadequate information. That the quality of the French train-personnel left something to be desired is certainly shown by the surviving evidence, but then this was due above all to the difficult circumstances and not to any lack of experience, for the train-organization had by this time been in existence for five years. Above all, the claim that the French troops and commanders did not know how to live off the country is utterly ridiculous and unworthy of its author; their expertise in this field was deservedly famous and indeed had reached such heights that it helped them, within the unprecedently brief period from 1800 to 1809, to overrun all Europe and set up an Empire the like of which the world had never seen. SaWOOL } eissny SUBIOWS, § Sa AanBoyy z=) Chev 48901, 2171S s } ‘ \, oN, \, x@paiBorcyy N asuyt) ~ e881 sn, : pysrugog Yoon, et 3 3 BK usu ny2eua A ysIO|Og x Se ee . ee MSF . s % ~S ~N, elsisny \ S, JO pues \. f& . \ ee ete, = vas Date 6i2ueg AS essnig Oe MOSIBAA sue AYyaIngs, ene \ ‘ 1948610, “ ‘a> ¥ eam i yauge, fet sporsiieg f ouPOMD gun & Baroy f oupo: fo SL OMAN LEAD x One 2 TWeIIaAg a unas oN te 4, The Campaign of 1812 70 Supplying War That the Grande Armée suffered enormous losses during its march to Moscow is true,** as is the fact that hunger and its con- sequences — desertion and disease — played a large part in causing these losses. It would, however, be unwise to attribute this solely to the problems of supply. The need to protect enormously long lines of communication and and to leave garrisons behind, the effect of distance per se were also factors of major importance. As regards the army's material losses, there is reason to believe that much if not most of the equipment abandoned on the way to Moscow was later retrieved.*® In 1812 Napoleon’s main force marched 600 miles, fought two major battles (at Smolensk and at Borodino) on the way, and still had a third of their number left when entering Moscow. In 1870, as in 1914, the Germans, operating over incomparably smaller distances, in very rich country and supported by a supply organization that became the for model all subsequent reached conquerors, and Paris the Marne respectively with only about half of their effectiveness. Compared with these performances, excellent as they were, the French Army of 1812, for all its supposedly worthless service of supply, did not do too badly. Conclusions In rea