ding modern accounts of Napoleon's logistic system, one comes across so many misunderstandings that the question as to their origins inevitably presents itself. That only a first class writer could have given rise to these errors is beyond question. The threads of investigation in fact point to the greatest military critic of all time, Clausewitz. It is not altogether surprising that he should be the source of these errors, for the Prussian’s whole doc- trine was based on the assumption that Napoleonic warfare was qualitatively different and represented an entirely new departure. It was, after all, Clausewitz who called the Emperor ‘the God order of War’, and who to describe what invented the term ‘absolute war’ in he believed to be the essence of his system. Clausewitz assumed as a matter of course that a revolution in warfare as fundamental as that effected —in his view — by Napoleon could not have taken place without an equally profound change in the an army logistic which methods employed, did without and this led him to invent magazines, lived off the country, “An army marches on its stomach’ paid no attention to considerations of supply 71 and sometimes seemed to grow wings in its marches from one European capital to another. That this picture was exaggerated, contemporaries were well aware. Writing about the campaign of 1805, the much-maligned Biilow rightly observed that the French army had never been able to do entirely without magazines and attributed its speed of movement less to any freedom from logistic shackles than to the absence of heavy baggage." If an excuse for Clausewitz can nevertheless be found in the fact that he was so close to the events and thus lacked perspective, this does not apply to modern historians, especially as they have shown Napoleonic warfare — his strategy, tactics, organization ete. - to be the logical outcome of progressive developments originating in the previous thirty or forty years.*? That the only aspect of Napoleon’s operations which, to this day, is believed to have been not merely completely original but actually regressive in comparison with earlier practice is remarkable and should in itself have led to second thoughts, In this chapter, we have deliberately concentrated on the two campaigns the representing the extremes of Napoleonic warfare - unprecedentedly successful war of 1805 on one hand, the disastrous one of 1812 on the other. We saw that, during the former, the French managed without either magazines or a wellorganized transport service because there was insufficient time to set them up. We saw also that the number of vehicles with which Napoleon originally intended to provide his army was exactly similar, in proportion to its numerical panying the forces of the much strength, to that accom- maligned ‘unfortunate General Mack’. The fact that he did not succeed in getting hold of this quantity of wagons or in manufacturing the provisions necessary to fill them compelled Napoleon to change his plans and shift the direction of his advance from a poor, thinly-inhabited part of Germany to another that was richer and offered more resources. In this respect, far from being free from the tyranny of logistics, Napoleon's practice was similar to that of Wallenstein and Gustavus Adolphus 170 years previously. Having arrived in Ulm, however, the Emperor realized that he would not be able to go on in the same way. He therefore organized a transport service on an unprecedentedly large scale, and his provisions for its establishment may well be regarded as a model of their kind. He caused huge magazines to be set up in 72 Supplying War the towns of boats to bring failed to have due above all Bavaria and provided for convoys of wagons and them to the advancing army. If these arrangements much effect on the conduct of operations, this was to the intolerable crowding of such enormous forces on a very smal] number of roads. At one stage as we saw, no less than five corps had to share a single road between them. Under such conditions any army was doomed to suffer logistic hardships. Even present-day armies with their tens of thousands of mechanical vehicles cannot easily solve the problem of supplying such a dense mass of men. If some supplies nevertheless got through, if the army did not starve, nor the majority of its units disintegrate, this was due, not to any supposed neglect of logistic considerations but to a triumph of foresight, organization and leadership. Such a triumph, however, could only be achieved by a genius of Napoleon's own calibre, and it is therefore no accident that, precisely during this period, we find him dozens of miles behind his advanced spearheads and allowing his care for logistic organization to seriously interfere with his conduct of operations. It is scarcely surprising that Napoleon should have rested content with the military machine ~ its administrative and logistic services included — that had made a victory of the magnitude of Austerlitz possible, but he nevertheless took sufficient cognizance of its shortcomings to order that larger reserves should be carried along during the subsequent campaigns. In 1807, moreover, he took a step that was, at the time, revolutionary: for the first time ever, the Grande Armée was given, in addition to the vehicles accompanying the troops, a regular train service. This consisted, no longer of requisitioned and hired vehicles and drivers but of fully militarized personnel and equipment. Far from reverting to a more primitive practice, therefore, Napoleon - in this field as in most others — was ahead of his rivals; that the train service, novel as it was, did not at first fulfil all expectations is not astonishing. This brings us to the campaign of 1812. As we saw, the inva- sion of Russia was not started without adequate preparations; on the contrary, Napoleon’s measures exceeded anything Louvois ever dreamt of. Even so, the technical means of the age made it hopeless even to try and feed the men - much less, the horses — from base, a fact of which Napoleon was fully aware and which led him to plan a campaign which, for the most part anyway, would be won and finished before the defects of his logistic appara- ‘An army marches on its stomach’ 73 tus would become apparent. In the event, the blunders of his sub- ordinates — above all his brother, Jerome — made it impossible to cut off and annihilate even that part of the Russian army which seemed within his grasp, with the result that he found himself at Vitebsk - the furthest point to which his logistic system might, albeit only by means of a supreme effort, have proved adequate — without having achieved his objective. Faced with the alternative of either retreating or making another attempt to force the enemy to battle, the Emperor hesitated, vacillated, and finally decided in favour of the latter. This was made easier by the fact that the poorest part of Russia had already been left behind and that requisitions could be made in a country that became richer the further east he went. That good results could be obtained provided discipline was kept is shown by the fact that the Guard reached the Russian capital virtually intact. During the advance to Moscow, the train service of the Grande Armée broke down as Napoleon always expected it would. How- ever serious its own shortcomings, there can be no question that this was a consequence of the impossible circumstances, and had comparatively little to do with the inexperience, indifference or corruption of the personnel. In 1870, and again in 1914, the Ger- mans with their immeasurably superior and excellently organized supply apparatus utterly failed to feed their armies from base and had to resort to requisitions, in spite of the fact that the distances involved were smaller by far, the roads available very much better and more numerous. Coming now to the actual methods of requisitioning, Napoleon had at his disposal an unrivalled administrative machine in the shape of the ordonnateurs and the commissionaires de guerre, to whom he owed a large measure of his success. Perfectly aware of the harmful effect that ‘direct’ requisitioning had on the morale and discipline of an army, he tried to avoid such a procedure whenever possible, either by having supplies collected in ad- vance — as did Marlborough, albeit against ready cash, in 1704 or by levying contributions with which supplies were subsequently purchased," as was the standard practice of every eigtheenth-century commander. Either way, receipts were given and accounts kept, even in enemy country, the intention being to settle with the ~ hopefully defeated - opponent after the war. Only in extreme necessity, e.g. during the time when 150,000 men were massed around Ulm in 1805, did Napoleon resort to ‘direct’ 74 Supplying War requisitioning, and this was, of course, suspended again as soon as was practicable and opportune. Given this dependence on the country it is not surprising that Napoleon's forces, like their eighteenth-century predecessors, ran into logistic trouble whenever they stayed for too long in any given place. This was the case round Mantua in 1796, during the enforced pause before the battle of Austerlitz in 1805, when the army was confined in Lébau in 1809, and during the stay at Moscow. How- ever, perhaps the most revolutionary aspect of Napoleon's system of warfare was precisely that he usually knew how to prevent such pauses from taking place, that he was able to go straight on from strategic march to battle and then to pursuit, and that he avoided sieges. How right he was to do this is also demonstrated by the experiences of his marshals in Spain, where geographical circumstances made siege-warfare inevitable and where one French army after the other accordingly suffered from starvation. There were many factors that gave rise to the unprecedented momentum that enabled the French armies to do what their predecessors had normally failed to do, namely to march from one end of Europe to the other, destroying everything in their way. These included the corps darmée system which, by dispersing the army's units, made it easier to feed them from the country; the absence of baggage (more important, this, in hampering the movements of eighteenth-century armies than any supposed dependence apparatus Europe on supply was from responsible now more for magazines); making the existence of a regular requisitions; densely populated the fact than previously that (this is stressed, and rightly so, by Geza Perjes); and, to quote Napoleon’s own explanation, the sheer size of the French armies which made it possible to bypass fortresses instead of stopping to be- siege them. In the final account however, none of these ‘material’ factors adequately accounts for Napoleon’s success. This suggests that, even in a study so mundane as the present, the role of genius should not be underestimated. 3 When demigods rode rails Supply from Napoleon to Moltke Scarcely had the guns of Waterloo fallen silent than soldiers everywhere began the process of studying and analysing Napoleon's campaigns with an eye to learning from them lessons for the future. Since the mobility of the French armies throughout the revolutionary period was legendary and universally recognized as a crucial factor in their success, the problem of logistics was subjected to a particularly searching examination, a process, indeed, which had started several years previously as comman- ders strove to imitate Napoleon’s methods ad hoc. Thus, for example, the establishment of wagons, pack horses and baggage authorized to Austrian formations was drastically cut down as early as 1799-1800, and again after the defeats of 1805, with the result that, in the campaign match of 1809, the Austrians were able to the marching performances of the French for the first time.’ Again, on their way from Saxony to the Rhine in 1813, the allies showed that they had absorbed some o