days later he was forced effect." to recognize In particular, the that his exhortations were having no fortresses of Kénigstein, Theresien- stadt, Josephstadt and Kéniggriitz blocked the lines to Barduwitz, and inquiries as to whether it would be possible to circumvent them by building emergency lines did not lead to any results before the campaign ended.” As it was, the Prussians decided to ignore the fortresses and march towards Vienna, leaving them behind, with the result that, during the second part of the ¢ampaign also, the railways were unable to exercise the slightest influence on the course of operations. Meanwhile, the troops lived by requisitioning, impressing what local transport they could find, and behaving as if the railways did not exist, which, effectively, was the case. In a letter to Bismarck of 6 August 1866, Moltke drew the following conclusions from this.** The campaign, he wrote, had demonstrated how easy it was to repair minor damage to the railways: ‘the only obstruction of any duration’ had been caused by the fortresses, and the chief of the General Staff therefore recommended that Prussia’s own railroads should he made to pass through the perimeters of existing ones whenever possible. However, this did not mean that more fortresses should be constructed. The Prussians, after all, had been able to continue their march to Vienna in spite of the blocking of the railways, and at no time had the Austrian fortresses become more than a nuisance in their rear. Consequently it was with rails, not brickwork, that the future Iay. What Moltke neglected to say, however, was that, from the completion of the deployment onward, the Prussian army’s railways, and to a lesser extent its train service as well, had proved a complete failure and were irrelevant to the outcome of the war. Whatever part they may have played in the Austrian—Prussian War, Moltke’s railways are almost universally supposed to have given him a crushing margin of superiority which, four years later, played a vital role in Germany's defeat of France. A detailed examination of the place of logistics - including supply by 86 Supplying War rail - in the Franco-Prussian War will have to wait until later in this chapter, and here we will only point to the fact that, during the 1860s, the German — and Prussian — railways were inferior to the French ones from almost any conceivable point of view. Even as late as 1868, the anonymous officer who wrote Die Krieg- fihrung unter Bentitzung der Eisenbahnen felt that, the recent campaign against Austria notwithstanding, the ‘overall French [railway] performance exceeds the Prussian. . .by far’.2’ This was due to the following factors: a. French trains of all kinds travelled faster than German ones, this being made possible - in the case of troop transports — by an arrangement which required the men to take their provisions along, instead of having them disentrain in order to be fed at the stations. b. Owing to political difficulties, the German railway network was less unified, and its material less standardized, than the French. ce. Only twenty-four per cent of the German lines were double-tracked, as against sixty per cent of the French (this was the case in 1863; after 1866, a start was made to improve the situation). d. In general, the capacity of French stations was larger than that of the German ones; this, of course, governed the crucial factor of how long it took to unload. e. The quantity of rolling stock per mile of track available in France exceeded that of Germany by almost one third. f. The number of daily trains that could be run over a French double line was far larger than its German equivalent; in theory, the figures were said to be seventeen and twelve respectively, but in practice the French were capable, in 1859, of running as many as thirty trains a day.?* In the military as opposed to the civilian sphere, the French advantage was thought to be even greater than these facts indi- cate, for strategic considerations had guided construction from the very beginning. This was not the case in Germany, where political fragmentation meant that economic and local interests played a much larger role. The French combination of lines run- ning parallel to the frontier, and connecting the major fortresses When demigods rode rails 87 with a spider web of routes extending from a central nucleus was considered ideal for the needs of war, comparing most favourably with the ‘geometric network’ of north-south and east-west lines characterizing Germany’s railway system.”® The assumption that France’s railways were superior to Germany's was shared by Moltke himself, and figured large in his intention to stay on the defensive in a war against France. After the war of 1870, French and German writers accused each other of having constructed their railways with intent to wage aggressive war. That Moltke had a say in the planning of the German network is true. Apart from minor detail, however, he was satisfied that commercial lines were good enough to serve his purpose. On one occasion only did he propose the construction of new lines for purely military ends, but the only response he received to his suggestion was a polite letter of thanks.® In 1856, a similar proposal led the Prince of Prussia himself to write to the Minister of War:” General Groeben. . .advises the construction of railways along the right bank of the Rhine, to which purpose he asks for nine million thalers to be allocated. The events of recent times have shown that enough private capital is available to build railways, so that burdening the treasury does not appear justified. Far from driving through military considerations in the construc- tion of new lines, the soldier-prince was perfectly content to leave the development of this crucially important Jateral line to private enterprise, though hoping, of course, that the military would benefit later on. At the very least, this seems to show that the claim, so often heard, that the Germans allowed strategic considerations to play a larger role in the planning of their railway system than did the French, requires some evidence to support it. Finally, it is a curious, but seldom understood, fact that German theoretical writings on the influence of railways on strategy were absolutely wrong. The early exponents — including Ludolf von Camphausen, Moritz von Pritwitz, Heinrich von Riistow, and one chief of the Prussian General Staff - General von Reyhe — all expected that railways would work in favour of the side operating on internal lines,** as did List himself, who hoped that they would ‘turn the central situation of the fatherland, which 88 Supplying War has hitherto been a source of endless evil, into a source of the greatest strength’.** In the event, far from facilitating operations on internal lines, the events of 1866 and 1870 were to show that railways helped the belligerent operating on external ones - in- deed, in the former casc, they compelled him to do so. By contrast, the French railway network in 1870 presented them with magnificent opportunities to exploit the advantages of internal lines, but this did thoroughly beaten. Another error, not, and one of course, prevent that involved them Moltke from being personally, has been made concerning the effect that railways were supposed to have on the relationship between again, List led the way, writing that: offence and defence. Here, The most beautiful thing about it all is the fact that all these advantages [i.e. of operating on internal lines} will benefit the defender almost exclusively, so that it will become ten times easier to operate defensively, and ten times as difficult to operate offensively, than previously. In List’s view, “greater speed in movement always assists the defender’, the reason being that he ‘must adapt his moves to that of the attacker’. A well developed railway system would there- fore raise the defensive power of a great nation ‘to the highest degree available’, to the point that, in the view of List and others, war would become altogether impossible and peace reign on earth ~ another of those predictions that are apt to accompany the appearance of new instruments of war but which somehow seem doomed to be always disappointed. List was no military man, and derived his conclusions merely from ‘a healthy human understanding’. However, his opinion was shared by Moltke, whose reasoning was that whereas a defender would have full use of his own network, the attacker would not be able to rely on any lines in advance of his front.*? Hence, the railways would help the defence more than they did the attack, a conclusion not substantiated by the fact that Moltke did, after all, wage history, some of the most successful offensive campaigns which were followed by half a century of attempts in to show that railways had made the attack into the best, indeed the only, way to fight a war. Exactly what one is to make of these facts is not easy to say. When demigods rode rails Certainly, they tend to show 89 that the common view attributing much of the Prussian victory over France to the excellence of her railway organization is wrong. Given the shortcomings of their network and the errors in their doctrine, the Prussians must have owed their triumph either to some exceptional gift for improvisation that enabled them to overcome both problems during the campaign, or to the fact that railways did not, after all, have much influence on their conduct of the war. Which of these two interpretations is correct, it will be the task of the following pages to investigate. Railways against France On 13 July 1870, Bismarck released the edited version of the Ems telegram and two days later Prussia, together with the remaining German States, found itself in a war against France, Having ex- pected something of the kind to happen, the Prussian army was ready; at the outbreak of war, it was only necessary to push a button in order to set the whole gigantic machine in motion. Between August 1866, when the war against Austria came to an end, and July 1870, Moltke frequently addressed himself to the question of mobilizing and deploying his troops against France. Since the French army — unlike the Prussian one - was a standing force, it could be expected to be quicker off the mark. Assuming that Napoleon would exploit this advantage by launching much an early offensive, the problem facing Moltke was not so to prepare for an advance into enemy territory, as to em- ploy the railways in such a way as to achieve numerical superjority at the earliest possible moment. The further forward the deployment was carried out, the less German territory it would be necessary to give up. Nevertheless, there were compelling reasons for concentrating the army well to the rear. In the first place, it was necessary to reckon with the possibility that a French offensive would disrupt the German railway network near the frontier. More important still, the number of trains that could be run over each line per day stood in an inverse ratio to the length of the section to be covered. Hence, the desire to hold as much German territory as possible clashed with the need to concentrate the army at the greatest speed, and it is typical of Moltke that his final plan (apparently prepared in the winter of 1869-70) provided for the concentration to take place far to the 90 Supplying War east behind the river Rhine, thus sacrificing, if necessary, the entire Rhineland to an almost unopposed French advance.** As for the actual distribution of the troops, it was dictated less by strategic considerations and by what was known of the enemy's intentions than by the physical configuration of the railway system. As in 1866, the demand for speed made it imperative to exploit the greatest possible number of lines; hence the decision to deploy the 13 corps into which the Prussian army was now divided on a very broad front all along the Fr