ing it sixty miles to the north so that it now extended from Strasbourg through Hagenau to Spires with a strong concentration of forces on the left wing. In accordance with these new dispositions the bulk of Napoleon’s forces would now move through the rich territories of Baden and Wiirttemberg instead of by way of the Black Forest whose defiles had witnessed the sufferings of many a previous French army. Discussing the reasons behind this change, Alombert and Colin claim that it could not possibly have been due to logistic causes because the poverty of the Black Forest must have been wellknown to Napoleon long before he gave his original orders. If, however, one agrees with our above conclusion that the Emperor ‘An army marches on its stomach’ 51 never intended his troops to live by requisition while on their way to Bavaria, and that he first perceived the inadequacy of the means at his disposal during the very last days of August, this objection falls by the wayside. The area of deployment having been changed, preparations to receive the approaching columns of the Grande Armée continued. Towards the middle of September Murat returned from Germany and began inspecting the work done, sending back enthusiastic reports to the Emperor. On 17 September he was at Landau, on the next day he visited Strasbourg, and three days later he spoke to Petiet who, Murat said, was fairly bursting with enthusiasm and sure he could lay hands on everything down to the last detail. This feeling was shared by few of the marshals as they started arriving on the Rhine. On 22 September Soult informed Murat that ‘whatever the intendant general may say’ his troops at Landau were in danger of running out of bread, while there was nothing left to be purchased in the country around. On the next day, Davout presented Petiet with a list in which he expressed his dissatisfaction with every single detail of his corps’ material preparations." The shortage of transport in partic was such that barely enough vehicles to carry the army's ammunition were available, the result heing that Marmont had to send forty per cent of his ammunition by way of the Rhine. Arriving at Mainz, it was found that there was not enongh water in the Main (carry out the orders for the barges to continue their voyage to Wiirzburg, and so the corps marched on minus much of its ammunition and heavy artillery. Napoleon himself had meanwhile arrived in Strasbourg where he reprimanded the officers responsible for the army's logistics I gave you’, he snapped at Dejean) and busied himself with the details of marching and feeding the army once it had got across the Rhine. [is orders for the corps were laid down on 20 September. Davout, Soult, Ney and Lannes were to cross the Rhine on 25 and 26 September, each marching by a separate route according to the usual Napoleonic system. Mar- mont and Bernadotte were also given their marching orders, the latter being ordered to cross neutral Prussian territory at Ansbach in order to avoid congestion. However, he got into trouble when the Prussians, who had originally granted passage for thirty-five days, suddenly revoked their permission and so caused the French marshal to be separated from his heavy baggage which remained 52 Supplying War stuck at Hanover. The same orders also provided for each corps to take along bread for four days and biscuits for another four, the latter to be regarded as a reserve and touched only in an emergency. As it was, few of the marshals succeeded in taking out these strongly reduced quantities and even Davout, who was accused by Soult of creating for himself a reserve for seven or eight days at his (Soult’s) expense complained that he did not have enough. Mutual recriminations among the marshals and complaints to the Emperor were to mark the campaign from beginning to end, yet one cannot fail to recognize the vigour of the young commanders and their readiness to assume responsibility in leading tens of thousands of men hundreds of miles away from France with nothing but an incomplete supply apparatus to support them. Once across the Rhine, Napoleon kept his corps well apart and provided for them all, except the southernmost one, to tive off the country to their left,"7 an arrangement which must have caused some hardship as units had to find quarters at distances greater than those that might otherwise have been necessary, but which was probably meant to overcome the shortage of maps and allow the troops to forage without friction. The details of the operations were fixed by each corps separately and the instruction issued by Ney can be taken as a model of its kind. The normal method of subsisting the men was to quarter them on the inhabitants together with their horses. Rations for men and NCQs were fixed at 14Ib. bread, half a pound of meat, one ounce rice (or two ounces dried fruit) per day, while wood for cooking was also to be supplied by the unwilling hosts. No exact scale of rations for the officers was laid down, it being determined merely that they were to be ‘decently fed in accordance with their rank’ but without making ‘excessive demands’ upon the inhabitants. Whenever the corps’ troops were too closely packed together for this method to be practicable the ordonnateur was responsible for commandeering supplies from the neighbouring areas. He and the divisional commissionaries were to inform local authorities of the number of men and horses to be fed and the demands made on each of them, as well as fixing the place or places to which the provisions were be made, but priated were to for the French to be brought. No payment for anything was to receipts specifying the exact quantities approbe handed out in all cases so as to make it possible treasury to settle accounts with the State authori- ‘An army marches on its stomach’ 53 ties at some unspecified future date.7* In issuing these orders, Ney did not forget to tell his men that they were to treat the inhabitants as if they were French. In theory at any rate the Grande Armée was therefore very far removed from a mere host of marauding plunderers. Rather, its supply system resembled that of Marlborough in that provisions were accumulated in advance along its route, the only difference being that the Duke paid in cash and not in paper receipts. As to the actual method of procurement, we have already seen that Marlborough could be quite as ruthless, though hundred years later. When the Rhine perhaps had been more polite, crossed, as his successor one the bridges over it were closed in accordance with an order of 29 September which directed that all traffic to and from the army should pass through Spires, The town was put under the command of an officer (General Rheinwald) who was thus made responsible for the upper part of the pipeline leading to the army. Every five to six leagues (fifteen to eighteen miles) a relay station was set up, while the line of communications was policed by auxiliary troops of the Baden army as well as brigades of gendarmes. Through these points streamed reservists and convoys, and also sick, wounded and prisoners on their way back to France. The original line of communication was the road from Spires to Nirdlingen, but on 5 October the commander of Spires was made responsible for the entire area to the right of the Rhine and ordered to see to it that all transports to and from the army went through Heilbronn, At this stage the line of communication still ended at Noérdlingen which served as an advance base from where distributions were made to the corps. While Napoleon’s orders were admirable, their execution was less so, particularly because of the ubiquitous shortage of transport. Whatever the corps could raise from the country they naturally retained for their own use, the result being that the line of communication services desperately lacked wagons and horses. The cavalry and the corps wagon-masters stole and hid all the animals they could lay hands on, and by 11 October it was no longer possible even to maintain a regular courier service with the homeland. Napoleon thereupon intervened in his usual decisive manner and ordered the corps to give up their surplus transport. Starting as they did from a front that was well over 100 miles 54 Supplying War wide, the corps ought to have advanced with little friction and in fact did so apart for some minor incidents - for example, an error of Berthier’s almost sent Davout across Soult’s line of march on 80 September. Two days later the routes of Lannes and Ney crossed each other as the former pushed from Stuttgart towards Ludwigsburg. Lannes’ corps was so unfortunate as to share a road with d’Hautpoul’s cavalry division preceding it and the Guard following in its wake. Repeatedly, Murat complained that Ney was poaching on his preserves. Bernadotte, whose original itinerary included the city of Frankfurt, was turned away from there at the last moment, the result being that he had to reach Wiirzburg by circuitous roads and so exhausted his troops that they had to be granted three days’ rest upon arrival. Difficulties were also experienced in feeding the artillery park making up the army’s rear, with the result that convoys had to be sent to it from Spires. On the whole, however, the army did well enough during the first ten days. Soult, Lannes and Ney all made large requisi- tions, and Davout was able not merely ‘to live very well’ off the country but to build himself a reserve of six to nine days in addition to the 200,000 biscuit rations following his corps of 25,000. Complaints only came from the two corps on the extreme left wing, whose difficulties probably stemmed from the fact that Napoleon’s orders for biscuits to be baked at Wiirzburg had been only partly obeyed. At the same time, the Prussians refused to sell anything to Bernadotte’s men crossing their country.’ It was to Bernadotte, too, that Berthier wrote on 2 October: ‘as to subsistence, it is impossible to feed you by magazines. ..the entire French army, the Austrian army even, lives off the country’. As they gradually tured requisitioning into a fine art, the corps ordonnateurs were able to draw enormous quantities of supplies from the towns and villages on their way. Thus, for example, Soult forced Heilbronn and its surroundings - total population perhaps 15,000-16,000 - to surrender no less than 85,000 bread rations, 24,000Ib. salt, 3,600 bushels of hay, 6,000 sacks of oats. 5,000 pints of wine, 800 bushels of straw and 100 four-horse wagons. Hall and its district probably had only about 8,000 inhabitants but were nevertheless made to yield 60,000 bread rations, 35,000Ib. meat (seventy oxen), 4,000 pints of wine, 100,000 bundles of hay and straw, 50 four-horse and 100 other carts, as well as 200 horses with harness. Even much smaller places were able to bring forward truly astounding quantities. Fer example, Marmont and ‘An army marches on its stomach’ 55 his 12,000 men stayed for five days in the village of Pfhul (forty houses, 600 inhabitants) and ‘did not lack for anything’.*° Bugeaud’s famous question to his sister, ‘judge for yourself if 10,000 men arriving in a village can easily find enough to eat’, should be answered in the affirmative! As the army approached the Danube, suddenly worsened, probably reaching October but slowly responsible improving however, the situation its nadir round 9-12 thereafter. Many for this state of affairs, especially factors were the fact that the enemy was now close at hand which made it impossible to prepare stores in advance. Instead of being centrally organized, the task of requisitioning devolved on the divisional commissionaires and sometimes even on individual regiments. This in turn led to every unit fending for itsclf, with the cavalry in particular racing ahead and oceupying the villages that had been earmarked for the infantry and making it almost impossible for the latter to find any supplies at all, Occasionally instances o