the movements of the right-wing Armies, especially after 30 August, were erratic and subject to unexpected changes of direction, it frequently happened that trains loaded with supplies for certain units were un- able to locate them, and subsequently got lost until somebody at headquarters remembered to inquire about their fate.” So-called ‘wild’ wagons, trains loaded with well-meant presents to the 180 Supplying War troops, were often sent back from railheads unable to receive them, and would then roam the network with little or no control from above.”* All these were temporary shortcomings that time, experience and strict discipline would cure. By the time they were cured, however, the battle of the Marne had been fought and lost. The effectiveness of the lines of communication behind each individual Army varied considerably. It was Kluck’s force - paradoxically, the one with the longest distance to cover — whose situation was best. Apparently surprised by the direction of the advance, the Belgians had not had the time to demolish the railways in front of him thoroughly. Obstructions of a minor kind demolished tracks, tunnels blocked by running trains into each other (on one occasion seventeen locomotives were used to this purpose) and the like - were fairly common, but could be re- paired with relative ease. Working round the clock, the Eisen- bahntruppe opened Landen to traffic on 22 August, Louvain two days later, Cambrai on the 30th, and Saint-Quentin on 4 September. Nevertheless, the railway system behind from satisfactory, as the following table shows: Date: 1. Army Front-line passing Railhead at: through: 22 August Brussels Landen 24 August Condé Louvain 26 August Crévecoeur Brussels 29 August Albert-Péronne Mons 30 August Corbie-Chaulnes-Nesle Cambrai ASeptember Coulommiers-Esternay Saint-Quentin 5 September Coulommiers-Esternay Chauny was far Distance: 40 miles 70 miles 80 miles 65 miles 40 miles 85 miles 60 miles For much, indeed most, of the time Kluck’s troops were operating well beyond effective supporting distance from the railheads — a fact which was all the more serious because the above figures represent a minimum which, in many cases, was largely theoreti- cal. The opening to railway traffic of any given point did not automatically mean that the Amny’s transport companies would henceforward be able to collect all their loads from that point. Rather, as one station after another was reached and then left behind, there was a tendency for stores to accumulate in a series of dumps all along the line. For example, though Saint-Quentin was serving as 1, Army's railhead on the eve of the battle of the ! sawOg 39011 a6Ne6 MoE ++ 32211 aug HH o PE BIGNOD mee ——__—— xr seu ne einacoangig aouel 7} fuineU hig “0D akoy esuossiog om neaieus FIGT toquiaydas ¢ ‘aouery pue Auewien wy yoauay Ajddng dempey ueueg “g Pre MN. ayadeyy Sfessuug 182 Supplying War Marne, much of Kluck’s ammunition was still stored in magazines at Valenciennes or even as far back as Mons.’* With the nearest supply point 85 miles behind the front, difficulties were inevitable. If the rail support of 1, Army worked more or less in accor- dance with the original plans, the situation of 2. Army to its left was very different. Advancing south-west along the Sambre, Biilow found his natural line of communication blocked by the fortress of Namur. The town fell on 23 August, but the bridge over the Sambre was so heavily damaged that the section to Charleroi could not be opened to traffic until nine days later. Meanwhile, 2. Amny’s supplies had to make a big detour from Liége to Landen, and from there southward by single track to Gembloux (23 August), Charleroi (25 August, which was just on time as Billow had threatened to suspend his advance unless this particular rail- head was restored to service)? and Fourmies (30 August). The line from Aix-la-Chapelle through Liége to Louvain was therefore heavily burdened by the supplies of two Armies. From 30 August to 2 September, yet another Army — Haussen’s Third - was also supplied by the same route, so that each of them was receiving just six trains per day.”° Meanwhile, the distances separating 2. Army from its railheads were gradually increasing, as shown in the following table: Date: Front-line passing through: Railhead at: 23 August Binche-Thuin-Namur Gembloux 25 August Thuin-Gevet Charleroi 30 August Saint-Quentin—-Vervins Fourmies 2September Soissons—Fismes Fourmies 4September Montmirail-Epernay Couvin Distance: 22 20 30 95 105 miles miles miles miles miles Keeping well within supporting distance during the early part of the campaign, 2. Army rapidly outran its communications at the very time when the opening of the battle of the Marne drastically increased the consumption of ammunition. Likewise, 8. Army was also receiving its supplies from Couvin on 4 September, from where 85 miles had to be covered by road along the line Epernay: Chalons sur Marne. However, from Couvin to Le Tremblois there was a narrow-gauge line, described as ‘wenig leistungfahig’, which reduced the distance by some fifteen miles. The wheel that broke 133 In addition to this, the railway in question suffered even greater difficulties than those afflicting the network in general. These began at the upper end between Ans and Liége, where the track was so steep that four locomotives had to pull and push each train forward. Further down, Liége formed a bottleneck that was often congested. Each day brought its special problems. On 18 August the transport of heavy siege artillery toward Namur caused the suspension of most other transports, and on 21 August an accident at Liége blocked the line. On 23 August there was another accident, this time at Ans. On the following day supply trains were held up by troop-transports carrying IX. Reserve corps from Schleswig-Holstein. In the last days of the month, communications between Liége and Aix-la-Chapelle — seat of the crucially important Militdreisenbahndirektion 1 — were interrupted. Thus the railway serving as the Germans’ main artery of supply in Belgium was in an almost permanent state of crisis. Further to the east, things were somewhat better. The 4. Army had a double-tracked line reaching Libramont from Luxembourg on 16 August, and a single one to Paliseul a fortnight later, From Paliseul, a narrow-gauge line reached the destroyed bridge over the Meuse at Balan on | September. At this point supplies were ferried across the river, then sent by single-track standard-gauge line from Sedan to Raucourt, September. Consequently, the front were as follows: Date: 30 August 1September 4September which was opened distances between Front-line passing through: Rethel-Stenay Grandpré Menehould to traffic on 4 the railheads and Railhead at: —_ Distance: Paliseul Balan Raucourt 70 50 60 Though the distances to be covered by road were not excessive, compared with those behind the right wing Armies, 4. Army depended on a rather complicated logistic chain that limited its supplies to some 300 tons a day, mainly ammunition.” Compared with this, the situation of 5. Army near the pivot of Schlieffen’s gigantic Klaptur, was best of all: 134 Supplying War Date: Front-line passing through: Railhead at: Distance: 25 August 30 August 4 September Montmédy-Conflans Stenay-Romagne Clermont-Harville on either side of Verdun Veriton Montmédy Montmédy 20 15 45 and 40 respectively At Montmédy, a tunnel had been destroyed and remained out of service until the end of October. Overburdened and at times close to collapse, as they were, there is no direct evidence to suggest that the failure of the rail- ways to carry sufficient traffic, or to keep up with the pace of the advance, played any significant part in the German defeat on the Marne. Had that battle gone in their favour, however, there is every reason to believe that the state of the railway network would have prevented the Germans from following up their victory and penetrating further into France. We have already noted that the scope and intensity of demolitions tended to increase with the duration of the campaign. Even Kluck, who had enjoyed incredible good fortune in finding the line to Chauny and SaintQuentin intact, was meeting with serious obstacles early in September. Had there been no retreat to the Aisne, these would have taken him a long time to repair."* Of the other German forces, 5. Army could probably have continued its march for a very few days until it got out of range of Montmédy. For 2., 3. and Armies any further advance was clearly impossible. 4. Strength and reinforcement of the right wing Throughout his years as chief of the General Staff, Schlieffen had repeated doubts as to whether the forces available would be sufficient to carry out the great Plan.”* German utilization of national resources, especially manpower, was nowhere as comprehensive as that of France. Though her population exceeded that of her rival by some two thirds, she found it hard even to obtain parity in the forces deployed against her. Schlieffen had ‘solved’ this problem in his usual facile manner by including in his Aufmarsch a number of nonexistent corps. Though these additional forces were available in 1914, transport limitations prevented their use on the right wing and they were sent to Lorraine instead. The wheel that broke Although Schlieffen querors’, the German recognized that, 185 ‘like all previous con- armies would incur very heavy losses dur- ing the advance through Belgium and France, he did not draw the logical conclusion of making sufficient reserves available. Nor was the plan of campaign suited to contribute towards a solution, involving as it did an extension of the German front from 140 miles at the beginning of the march to about 190 by the time Brussels was reached - not to mention Schlieffen’s fantastic vision of a shoulder-to-shoulder advance along the 350 miles from Verdun to Dunkirk, for which his forces were totally inadequate. Even along the far shorter front of 1914, the German troops were Armies not sufficiently dense on the ground. were constantly opening up, the Gaps between being result the that Haussen’s 3. Army in the centre was continually changing direction as he tried to answer his neighbours’ calls for flank protection.®° As it was, the German defeat on the Marne was the direct outcome of a thirty-mile gap between 1. and 2. Armies. To make matters worse, events in August and September 1914 fully justified Schlieffen’s fears about the wastage involved in a rapid advance through enemy territory. No complete statistics are available, but evidence compiled from a variety of regimental histories and personal diaries show that, on arriving at the Mame, many German battalions were reduced to half their effectiveness.” Losses incurred in combat and sickness, and the need to guard impossibly long lines of communication against a hostile popula- tion all contributed to this. Also, there was sheer exhaustion among the men. Schlieffen’s Plan demanded very great exertions of the troops of the right wing, some of whom had been covering distances of between 20 and 25 miles a day for many days. On 4 September, the commanders of 1. and 3. Armies both reported that their units were fast approaching the point of collapse. Back at OHL, Moltke was equally well aware of the situation, and seems to have wanted to give all the right wing Armies a day of rest on the 5th. Events made this impossible, and in fact it was only Haussen’s troops who did enjoy a breathing-pause. After the campaign was over, and he was no longer chief of the General Staff, Moltke appears to have acknowledged that the uninterrupted rush from the frontier to the Marne had been a mistake. In so far as he considered providing any reserves at all - he had once written that ‘the best reserves are an uninterrupted stream of bullets’** — Schlieffen had planned to bring up two 136 Supplying War corps from his left wing in Lorraine. In 1914, 