to replenish them from the rear in order to arrive with these stocks still intact. To this purpose, the Army was able to take along a total of 4,750 tons of food and fodder; at seven pounds per man per day, this should have sufficed to supply 100,000 men for 17 days.°° In the event, only the first part of these plans proved capable of realization. Around 20 October, Ht Army departed from Metz with its provisions-columns fully loaded. The transport convoys earmarked to replenish them from the rear, however, were hope- lessly unable to keep up with the pace of the advance, so that requisitioning had to be resorted to on this occasion also. As the country in question had already been scourged by the French in order to victual Paris, it was decided that this could be best achieved by paying in cash, which was acquired by laying the towns on the way under contribution in exactly the same manner as Wallenstein had done two and a half centuries earlier. Thanks to this lack of respect for private property, the Germans did in fact reach the Loing with their provisions-columns full. Eventually, even the formality of paying for the requisitioned goods was abandoned as the French built their ‘national’ armies and the war assumed a less chivalrous, harsher character. Having crossed the Loing with its provisions-columns full or When demigods rode rails 101 replenished, II Army continued its march to the Loire through ex- tremely rich territory, though some difficulties were caused by the fact that, since many of the inhabitants had been called up to serve in Gambetta’s new armies, labour to bring in the harvest was short. However, the potato crops had already been gathered and they were abundant. Meat and vegetables were also plentiful, and when any problems arose it was always possible to supplement the men’s rations with the famous Erbstwurst. Throughout this period, Il Army was more or less out of touch with the rail- ways. Hopes for the rapid transfer of the railhead from Blesmes to Montargis had been disappointed, and even when it was finally advanced to Lagny at the end of November the distance to be covered by road still amounted to some 130 miles in both directions, so that the troops preferred to help themselves. While II Army was thus engaged in a leisurely tour through the heart of France, very great difficulties were experienced in supply- ing the three German Armies now concentrating in a small area around Paris, Under conditions of static warfare, requisitioning soon ceased to be satisfactory, and so far away were the railheads that the wagons of III Army, for example, took ten days for the return journey. Moreover, all the Armies had lost much of their transport - that of I Army was down to exactly one per cent of its original establishment — so that not enough vehicles were available to bring up even half of the quantities consumed each day. As usual, difficulties were experienced with the railways, which in this period were constantly being blown up in addition to being burdened by the transportation of heavy artillery for the bombardment of Paris, which Moltke had ordered on 9 September. To solve the problem of subsistence, which was greater by far than anything experienced since the beginning of the war, the German forces around Paris were turned into a gigantic food- producing machine, the like of which had not been seen on the battlefields of Europe since the end of the eighteenth century. Thousands of soldiers were taken away from their posts in order to gather in the harvest (corn, potatoes, vegetables) and to process it by means of local machinery, such as threshing machines, mills, bakeries etc. Regular markets were established and kept supplied by the French peasantry. To supply the troops with water, a river was diverted. The army had therefore been made largely self-supporting, and for this reason could not find the time or the resources to engage on its proper business, war. Not 102 Supplying War until the end of November were the railheads pushed forward sufficiently to relieve the wagon-park and make it possible to embark on the stockpiling of ammunition for the bombardment of Paris. If, during the greater part of the war against France, the Ger- man armies lived a supply of food so small that an hardly necessary munition was so off the country and did not depend heavily on from the rear, consumption of ammunition was instrument to care for its replenishment was at all. As in 1866, expenditure of infantry amlow that the reserves carried with the troops were only partly consumed. Thus, in five months’ campaigning, an average of only fifty-six cartridges were fired by each Prussian Landser, which was rather less than what he carried on his back and only about one third of the stocks available in the corps’ organic transport. If temporary shortages nevertheless occurred (above all at I Army during the battle of Mars-la-Tour) this was due, not to any shortage of ammunition, but to the inability of the troops’ wagons to carry it forward during the battle. The figures for artillery ammunition are as follows:* Date Battle of: 4 August — Weissenburg 6 4. , (C«, 16. C«, 18 » 30, 81 » 1 Sept. Worth Borny Mars-la-Tour Gravelotte Beaumont Noiseville Sedan No. of guns: 90 234 156 222 645 270 172 606 Rounds —_ Average expended: per gun: 1,497 16 9,399 40 19,575 34,680 6,389 4,353. 33,134 88 53 23 25 54 2,855 18 Since not all the guns took part in all battles, however, overall expenditure was much lower than these figures indicate, amount- ing to an average of only 199 rounds per gun for the entire war." The normal number of rounds carried inside each corps was 157, therefore the turnover was so low that the troops could afford to disregard the entire Etappen system and refill their vehicles directly from the railways, even though the distances involved were sometimes very considerable. Moreover, so small was consumption that the troops did not hesitate to part with their vehicles for weeks on end. For example, after Sedan, the wagons When demigods rode rails 103 of IIT Army were sent back to Nancy to refill, and did not rejoin the corps until after the latter had reached Paris." It is clear, therefore, that in this respect also Moltke’s army did not depend on supply from the rear to any very great extent. Rather, as in the campaigns of earlier days, a very large proportion of the ammunition required was simply carried along at the outset, with the result that the army was self-contained for the greater part of the war. Did wheels roll for victory? In the annals of warfare, the operations of 1870-1 are often said to occupy a special place, because they were followed by ‘a modern line of communications, stretching away from the [troops] to their base’ and served by a ‘meticulously organized” train apparatus, This apparatus is said to have been ‘so intimately interlocked with the force it served that any separation of the formation from its own particular sources of supply. . .must spell dislocation in its movement and may mean disaster’.** In addition, it was the first time — in Europe, at any rate ~ that the full potentialities of the railways as an instrument of war were realised, the beginning of a process, in other words, which gradually took away ‘the secret of strategy’ from the soldiers’ legs and transferred it to wheels instead. As is shown in the above pages, these claims are entirely with- out foundation. That they have nevertheless been accepted for so long, is a remarkable testimony to Moltke’s ability to impress his own account of events upon history, and, to an even greater extent, to the credulity of historians and their readiness to accept without question the words of a commander whom fate has crowned with victory, in spite of the fact that all the evidence to the contrary has long since been published and is readily available. A detailed analysis of the shortcomings of the Prussian army's logistic system will take us too far and can, in any case, merely repeat what has already been said in the preceding pages. Nevertheless, the following points appear worth making: (1) While the Prussian army did, in 1870, have a supply service theoretically capable of catering to its needs, this service proved an utter failure in practice. Though marching performances were not terribly high - the pace of the advance seldom 104 Supplying War averaged more than ten miles the method of deployment had gear even before the campaign ciently armed, and thus unable discipline was slack, and a day for a fortnight at a time — thrown the train apparatus out of started. Train troops were insuffito defend themselves. Marching repair facilities for vehicles so inade- quate that nine out of every ten wagons had to be left behind.** As a result, it soon became clear that the hopes pinned on the train were incapable of fulfilment. Not merely the provisions- columns, but the entire elaborate organization of mobile field bakeries and butcheries failed to work, making it necessary for the troops to help themselves on the great majority of occasions. Indeed, so irrelevant were the trains to the army's supplies that field commanders were indifferent to their whereabouts, with the result that they frequently remained without orders for weeks on end and finally had to go looking for their units on their own initiative.” (2) As regards the supply of ammunition also, the success of the campaign was due less to any elaborate system of replenishment from the rear than to the fact that expenditure was very small throughout the campaign. This more than made up for the fact that, at the outset, estimates concerning the relative expenditure of infantry- and artillery ammunition proved to be wrong.” On the whole, despite shortages here and there, providing the troops with ammunition was a very much casier task than keeping them fed, In this sense, as in so many others, the campaign of 1870 can- not be regarded as ‘modern’. (3) The role of the railways during the war has been grossly over-estimated, most historians being all too ready to accept the extravagant claims made by Moltke and his ‘demigods’ as to their importance.”? In fact, the railways fulfilled a crucial function only during the period of deployment, following which they ceased to play a major role until well after the mobile phase of the campaign was over and the war all but won. This was due, partly to difficulties with the railway traffic itself, partly to the inability of the railheads to keep up with the advance, and partly to the impossibility of moving supplies from them to the front. Altogether, these three factors made it possible for the railways to play a role only when operations were more or less stationary, and even then — as around Metz - the greatest difficulties were experienced in their operation. An interesting aspect of the railway problem is the failure of When demigods rode rails 105 Moltke and the General Staff to learn from experience. Every one of the obstacles that arose in 1870 had already been rehearsed in 1866, and yet they were allowed not only to recur but to become infinitely worse. In part, this was due to the inherent limitations of a system of supply based on the unfortunate combination of the technical means of one age ~ the railways - with those of an earlier one. It is no accident that the worst difficulties occurred at the transfer points from one system to the other, ie. at the unloading stations. However, errors in organization did also contribute to the confusion, and for this Moltke was undoubtedly to blame. Enough troops to guard the lines against sabotage were not available, and difficulties seem to have been experienced in the transfer of rolling-stock from the German civilian railways to the army.”* Despite the experiences of 1866, a central supply- and railway-transportation headquarters for the whole army had not been created, with the result that the contractors, in their anxiety to make 