hemselves. In 1870-1, as indeed in all previous periods, a gun was expected 1 The wheel that broke to last for the duration of the campaign and usually did, artilleryfire being seldom powerful enough to thoroughly destroy it. A carriage might be blown to pieces, but the barrels themselves were almost indestructible. By 1914 this situation had completely changed, as artillery fire was now easily capable of quickly re- ducing whole batteries to mangled heaps of twisted steel. As for the guns, so for all other pieces of arms and equipment, the regu- lar replacement of which was to form a heavy and growing burden on the transportation services. To meet these and other demands, the number of horses serv- ing with armies in the field was constantly heing raised, the pro- portion of animals to men increasing from about one to four in the Prussian army of 1870, to one to three for the same army forty years later. Horses, however, eat about ten times as much as men, the result being that, even though the quantities consumed by the troops themselves did not presumably undergo significant change, the total subsistence requirements per day, for any given unit, increased by about fifty per cent. Man for man, the weight carried along, and consumed from day to day, by armies in 1914 was therefore many times that of 1870, over and above the increase in sheer size. To compensate for this extraordinary growth, the most important means of strategical transportation - recognized, since the early 1860s, as the railways — also underwent spectacular development. However, the limitations of railways did not escape the notice of military experts. Railways are by nature a rather inflexible instrument, though by 1914 the density of the European network was such that Moltke’s dictum about an error in deployment being impossible to correct for the duration of the campaign was beginning to lose some of its force.? Though 117 trains could carry a 1914 corps over 600 miles of double track in just nine days, loading — and unloading — times were such that the use of railways for covering distances under 100 miles was regarded as uneconomical, at least for large units of all arms. The lines themselves, as well as the troops using them, were singularly vulnerable to enemy action. For all these reasons, it was difficult to use railways operationally, and their employment was confined mainly (though not exclusively, as the battle of Tannenberg was to show) to transportation to, and behind, the front. Within these limitations, how well did the development of railways keep up with the growth of armies? There were 65,000 112 Supplying War miles of track in the Europe of 1870, as against 180,000 in 1914. This represented an increase of almost 200 per cent, with the leading countries, Cermany and Russia, having an even larger increase. Qualitatively, progress was even greater. At the time of the Franco-Prussian War it was reckoned that a single line could carry eight trains a day, a double one twelve, whereas on the eve of World War I the figures were forty and sixty respectively. In August German 1870, nine double-tracked troops in fifteen days, lines served to deploy 350,000 so that 2,580 men rode each line each day. Forty-four years later, thirteen lines brought up 1,500,000 men to Germany’s western frontier in ten days, making 11,530 men per day per line. Also, wagons had become bigger and locomotives more powerful, so that it was possible to carry the subsistence of a corps for two days on a single train, which was half the number required in 1870, in spite of the fact that, in the meantime, the effectives of a corps had risen by fifty per cent from 31,000 to 46,000 men.* These figures are far from exhaustive, but they do tend to show that as far as the tasks of mobilization, deployment and supply were concerned, the development of railway transportation did keep up with the increase in the size and bulk of armies. The same, however, was not true for transportation beyond the main-line railways. All armies had, it is true, developed light field railways in 1914 and trained units in their use, but the capa- city of these was limited and they could hardly be regarded as anything but temporary substitutes.t Time and terrain frequently imposed strict limits on the construction of such lines, with the result that troop-movements, as well as the transportation of material and supplies, had to be carried out mainly by other means. Qualitatively, transportation had improved hardly at all; for their tactical mobility, the armies of 1914 were still dependent on those time-honoured means of locomotion, the legs of man and beast. In theory, there was no reason why marching columns should not be able to sustain a steady fifteen miles a day, a figure that had not changed since time immemorial. However, this was being made increasingly difficult by the huge proportions of the trains. Between 1870 and 1914, the number of wagons on the establishment of each corps had more than doubled, from 457 to 1168, and this was quite apart from the often still greater amount of transport required to refill the troops’ mobile reserves as they became depleted. Though the horse-drawn transport operating in The wheel that broke 113 the army's rear was capable of considerably outmarching the men (twenty-five miles per day being reckoned as a steady average), it was forever shuttling forward and backward between front and base and was therefore certain to fall farther behind with every day's march. These factors, combined with the great increase in the quantity of supplies consumed, were responsible for the fact that the so-called critical distance, the maximum one at which a force could operate away from its railhead, was actually falling during the period under discussion. By the early twentieth century, the 100 miles of the 1860s had fallen to about half that number.’ All such figures are dependent on a great many variables —the weather, the state of the reads, enemy interference with the transports, and the like — to be very meaningful; nevertheless, the downward trend is unmistakeable. To exacerbate the prob- lem, in 1914 the combat troops of a corps took up so much road twenty miles and more — that the transport companies often found it difficult to reach them in one day's march. A corps, in other words, was getting so big that it was difficult to keep it supplied even when it was not advancing at all! To this extent the mobility of armies had declined relative to their bulk during the years leading to World War I. Logistics of the Schlieffen Plan The debate as to why the German Army failed to conquer France in the campaign of 1914 started very early after the events, and has since when the been continued with almost unabated withdrew, historians vehemence. Even before the year was out, some of the leading figures in the great drama had put on record their own versions of what had happened during that autumn. The controversy was carried on in a flood of memoirs published during the 1920s and 1930s, and participants finally stepped in.° Such factors as the state of the road- and railroad- network in Belgium, the density of the troops per mile of front, and difficulties of marching distances and supply are mentioned in many of these accounts. However, on the whole, the logistic aspects of the Schlieffen Plan, both as conceived by its originator and as put into practice by his successor, have been thoroughly neglected.’ Whether or not the Plan was logistically feasible; what part, if any, did logistic factors play in its failure, whether, finally, the hard facts of distance and supply would have enabled 114 Supplying War the German army to carry on had the battle of the Marne gone in its favour; all these are questions that remain to be answered. As might be expected, the prime considerations governing the evolution of the Schlieffen Plan, from its origins in 1897 to its fully-developed version of December 1905, were not logistic but strategical. As the German chief of the General Staff saw it,® his country was surrounded by enemies on all sides and would sooner or Jater become involved in a war on at least two fronts. Working within the tradition established by Clausewitz,” Schlieffen aimed not merely at the more or less incomplete defeat of Germany's opponents but at their total annihilation. For a number of reasons ~ including the ratio of troops to space and the availability of a good road- and railroad network — he felt that this aim could be most easily achieved in France, which accordingly became the target for the bulk of the forces at his command. East Prussia was to be protected against the Russians only by a weak screen that was to hold out somehow until victory over France made it possible to bring up reinforcements. Thus, the whole Plan de- pended on speed in mobilization, deployment and execution, for which a total of forty-two days were allocated. Acting against the possibility of a swift victory in the west was the fact that France had heavily fortified her border with Germany, which led Schlieffen to believe that the prospects of 2 successful breakthrough were distinctly unfavourable. An outflanking advance through Switzerland was considered and ruled out for topographical reasons.'* This left a lunge through Belgium as the only possible alternative. As it finally crystallized, the Schlieffen Plan displayed breathtaking — not to say foolhardy - boldness. Some eighty-five per cent of the German Army were to be de- ployed on the Reich's western frontier, and of these 7/8 were to form part of the right wing, consisting of five Armies with 33% corps (two more were to be brought up later from the left wing in Lorraine) and eight cavalry divisions between them. Echeloned from right to left, this mighty phalanx was to march west into Belgium, wheel south against France, envelop Paris from the west, and, leaving behind forces to invest the city, advance east and finally north-east in order to take the French Army in the rear and pin it against its own fortifications. Schlieffen’s great Plan has been faulted on both political and operational grounds," but it is the logistic side that we are con- The wheel that broke 11s cerned with here. In this respect, the first question to be resolved was just how large the wheel through Belgium should be. Strategic considerations of speed and concentration demanded that the outflanking movement be made as short as possible, that is a thrust along the southern (right) bank of the river Meuse against the line Méziéres-La Fére. However, it was feared that a manoeuvre on such a narrow front would find space too restricted, and roads too few, to carry the Army and allow it to deploy. Furthermore, on the size of the wheel depended the width of the area of concentration to be used by the right wing Armies, prior to the beginning of the campaign. Had the shift in the direction of the advance from west to south taken place near Namur, as seems to have been Schlieffen’s original intention in the 1901-2 version of this Plan,'? this area could not have extended north- ward further than Saint-Vit. Between that point and Metz — the pivot of the right wing — there were only six double-tracked railways coming in from the east - whereas the imperative demand for speed dictated, as it had in 1866, that the maximum number of railways be made use of. The between strategic and logistic resolved it in favour of the latter. of the double-tracked railroads frontier, he decided net result was thus a conflict considerations, and Schlieffen To make the most extensive use leading to Germany's western to detrain his troops all along the line from Metz to Wesel.'* To enable the Army to advance without undue congestion he proposed to violate Dutch neutrality in addition to that of Belgium, by seizing the province of Limburg (the so-called Maastricht Appendix) as well as that of Northern Brabant. Finally, in order to secure 