adequate railways were available for this purpose, as was a suitable quantity of rolling-stock, made ready for the purpose from the tenth day of mobilization onward.” By the evening of 23 August, the French attack in Lorraine had been delivered and bloodily repulsed; nothing now prevented the two corps from being transported to Belgium as scheduled. In the event, Moltke did not carry out this part of the Plan, preferring instead to go over to the offensive on his left wing also. The reasons for his decision to carry out this socalled ‘Extratour’ in Lorraine have been discussed elsewhere and need not concern us here.** All we are interested in is whether, from the point of view of transport and supply, it would have been possible to bring up additional forces to the right wing in time for them to intervene in the battle of the Marne. The speed at which troops can be moved by rail depends on a great many factors, including the number and quality of lines available, the state and quantity of the rolling stock, and, perhaps most important, the number and location of stations available for loading and unloading the trains. Except for the fact that four well-developed railways were available, we have no precise data about any of these, and will therefore have to confine ourselves to a few very elementary calculations. In 1914, it took 240 trains, with fifty wagons each, to transport two German army corps. Assuming that this many trains were, in fact, available, that all four lines could have been cleared of all other traffic to carry sixty military trains per day, and that there were enough quays to allow the simultaneous loading and unloading of all these trains within short distances from the troops, under these ideal conditions, it should have been possible to cover the 150 miles from the Metz-Diedenhoffen area to Aix-laChapelle in about four days, en- and disentraining times included. The movement would thus have been completed on the evening of 27 August. Apart from the obviously impossible demands made above, this calculation assumes a clockwork efficiency in carrying out all movements. What is more, it does not take account of the fact that 90,000 troops and all their supplies would have had to cover a considerable area in order to find railway stations capable of handling them. Nevertheless, assuming that they could have left Aix-la-Chapelle on 28 August, the two corps would have had just 18 days to march the 300 miles to the Marne and arrive at the end The wheel that broke 137 of the battle there on 9 September. Even if they could have sustained a pace of twenty miles per day, they would have arrived too late. At this time it was impossible to transport troops forward from Aix-la-Chapelle by rail. Only one double-tracked line was avail- able to 1. and 2. Armies, and this could handle only some 24 trains per day, of which 4 were needed for the operation of the railways themselves.” To bring up the fighting elements of two corps, 120 trains were required. Even assuming that one third of the normal traffic along the line had been stopped, the two corps would not have arrived until after the retreat to the Aisne had been completed — this, at a time when Gréner was repeatedly warning the Armies dependent on the line to reduce their demand for supplies to the indispensable minimum." It has been suggested that, instead of marching on foot, the two corps might have used motor-lorries to travel at ‘100km. a day’ to the threatened right wing.*® To carry the combat units involved, however, no less than 18,000 vehicles would have been needed,®* and there were only 4,000 available to the German Army in 1914. Such an idea was obviously impracticable. There remains the question of whether it would have been logistically possible to employ additional army units - up to 10 corps, according to one authority®' - on the right wing, had the Germans employed their national resources to set up such units, Given the need for 1. and 2. Armies to pass through two defiles, first at Aix-la-Chapelle-Liége and then between Brussels and Namur, it is certain that road-space would not have allowed more troops to be employed north of the Meuse than was actually the case.” It has, however, been suggested that another Army numbering, perhaps, four corps — could have followed in Kluck’s right rear and, by fending off the threat to his flank at the Mame, turned the battle there into a German victory.** As the authors of this proposal admit, it would not have been possible to feed these forces would from the already presumably have by troops, overburdened expended very railways. However, little ammunition they and could have been made to live off the country. This argument overlooks the fact that the country in question had already been traversed Kluck’s and that supplies, especially fodder, would therefore have heen difficult to obtain. Assuming that it would have been necessary to bring up only half of the additional Army’s needs from base, it is possible to calculate that some 500 188 Supplying War three-ton lorries would have been required.** This was more than were available to all five German right wing Armies in August 1914. Conclusions Any attempt to give a definite answer to the question whether the Schlieffen Plan was logistically feasible is bound to suffer from a lack of information. Thus, in spite of the enormous literature on the subject, we have no precise data about a great many vital factors, including the consumption of subsistence and ammuni- tion at various times and places during the campaign, the number and loads of trains travelling over the Belgian railroads, the exact number, state and location of the railway stations used, statistics about supplies reaching the troops in the field, and so on. In so far as it is possible to follow his thought in any detail, Schlieffen does not appear to have devoted much attention to logistics when he evolved his great Plan. He well understood the difficulties likely to be encountered, but made no systematic effort to solve them. Had he done so, he might well have reached the conclusion that the operation was impracticable. Though not primarily interested in transport and supply, Schlieffen was able to foretell the pattern of railway demolitions in Belgium with uncanny accuracy, in some cases going so far as to name the very installations whose destruction would cause the greatest difficulties in 1914. His prediction that it would be possible to make the Army live off the country proved largely correct, despite the scepticism of practically every well-informed military writer of the day. Had Schlieffen been wrong on this point, the entire campaign would have floundered very soon alter its start. Moltke did much to improve the logistic side of the Plan. Under his direction, the problem was seriously studied for the first time and officers trained in the ‘technics’ of warfare which, in Wilhelm II’s Army, were apt to be disregarded or looked down upon. It was to him that the Army owed the introduction ot motor-transport would number companies have been without which, utterly impossible. of changes in the Plan. Ie From again, the operation did, it is true, make an exclusively a logistic point of view, some of these were beneficial, but most were harm- ful. Nevertheless, taking his period of office as a whole, he prob- 139 The wheel that broke ably did more to improve the Plan than to damage its prospects. As it was, the Germans enjoyed a success beyond the limitations of the Plan. In 1914, marching distances far exceeded anything that had been thought possible in peacetime.** The country was rich, the season of the year most favourable. Though railway demolitions were much generally proved more serious than expected, they less so at the place where they counted most, i.e. behind 1. and 2. Armies. While it is not clear what quantities of supplies damaged were carried railways forward over the of 1914, though network, the heavily- difficult to operate, proved more or less capable of feeding the army. Even at the time of the greatest pressure, when no less than three Armies were dependent on one line, the six trains reaching each of them daily carried sufficient supplies to meet the most urgent least, there is no evidence to the contrary. requirements. At Though the railways were able to handle the requisite quanti- ties of supplies, it proved impossible to advance the railheads sufficiently fast to keep within supporting distance of the army. By the time of the battle of the Mame, all the German Armies save one had gone well beyond that distance. Only for Kluck was there any prospect of a rapid reconstruction had the battle been won, and even he would probably have met with the greatest difficulties. It would have been impossible to keep the other Armies supplied at all. In spite of a thorough reorganization carried out in 1908, the second tier of the German supply system — the heavy transport companies operating in the zone of communications — proved a complete failure.*’ Their task admittedly had been made heavier by Moltke’s provision for more than one corps per road, a measure which threw the entire organization out of gear before the campaign even started, and which could not be corrected thereafter. Given the relative speed of marching columns and horsedrawn vehicles, however, the troops would have outdistanced their transport anyway. For much of the German Army in 1914, one crucial link in the Efappen system proved simply irrelevant. Its place had to be taken by motor transport columns, and it was thanks to the enormous efforts they made that the advance got as far as it did. Although there were temporary shortages and hungry days, supply difficulties were not responsible for the German defeat on the Mame. Food was obtained from the country, horses went 140 Supplying War unfed until they died, and ammunition somehow did arrive from the rear in more or less adequate quantities. In August and September 1914, no German unit lost any engagement because of material shortages. Had the battle gone in Germany's favour, however, there is every reason to believe that the advance would have petered out. The prime factors would have been the inability of the railheads to keep up with the advance, the lack of fodder, and sheer exhaustion. In this sense, but in no other, it is true to say that the Schlieffen Plan was logistically impracticable. As it was, the entire ‘technical’ side of the great design was characterized, not by the thorough and methodical planning com- monly associated with the German General Staff, but by an ostrich-like refusal on Schlieffen’s part to face even those problems which, after forty years of peace, could be foreseen. Moltke did much account to improve it was furious matters in this respect, but in the final improvisation, made preparations, that enabled did. As the officer responsible behind 1. Army was to put it: not reliance on carefully- the Army to reach as far as it for the communications zone The hurry and stress of the first few months were so great that. . the whole doctrine of supply had been somewhat upset by the rapid advance. The service of supply could not, therefore, adhere closely to previously accepted principles. For this reason it did no special harm when we were issued. . .all the various regulations dealing with the service of supply etc. . .These regulations were carried along, nailed up in a packing box; but, as far as I know, the box was never opened until the Army withdrew behind the Aisne.* That the Army achieved as much as it did, at a time when the standing orders could only be said to have caused no actual harm, is remarkable indeed. Critics of the advance would do well to keep this in mind. The Schlieffen Plan proved to be the last of its kind in several ways, As Liddell Hart has written, manoeuvres of the scope and boldness planned by Schlieffen had been possible in Napoleon's day, and motor transpor