kness and sickness that could not be effectively dealt with, as there was no proper field veterin- ary service.? So bad were the arrangements made to feed the horses that some of the artillery teams died very early in the campaign, sometimes even before the border into Belgium had been crossed."* Cavalry commanders repeatedly complained to OHL about the shortage of fodder, the reply invariably being a bland exhortation to live off the country even if this meant curtailing the pace of the advance.** The failure to pay sufficient attention to the problem of feeding the horses did, in fact, have its effects very early in the campaign. Already on 11 August one cavalry division, its horses starving and exhausted, had to be taken out of the line. Two days later, an order for all the cavalry forces preceding 1. and 2. Armies to halt and rest for four days had to be issued. In spite of this breathingspace, 2. cavalry division (1. Army) was again brought to a standstill by supply difficulties on 19 August, and by the time the Germans crossed into France all the horsed forces were suffering from exhaustion. On the eve of the battle of the Marne, the Ger- man heavy artillery — like the rest, horse-drawn — the one arm in which they did enjoy a definite qualitative advantage, was no longer able to keep up, and the cavalry was incurring unnecessary casualties because the horses were too weak to carry their riders out of danger quickly.** By this time, too, one German Army af least was finding that the state of the cavalry seriously interfered with operations. As Moltke himself put it, the army no longer had a single horse capable of dragging itself forward. If the supply of food could - at the cost of an occasional hungry day — be more or less improvised, and that of fodder ignored until the horses dropped dead, ammunition presented a more serious problem. Precision-made moder arms require their own specific ammunition and spare parts. The days when a Napoleon could simply incorporate the entire Austrian arsenal, lock, stock and barrel, in the armaments of the Grande Armée were over. Small arms, machine guns, field artillery, howitzers and heavy artillery all had to be kept supplied, and supplied at a rate that had never been thought possible before the war. Here, again, the 126 Supplying War horse-drawn heavy columns failed completely to the extent that, instead of fulfilling their proper function, they found themselves used-or rather, not used- as rolling magazines.*” The entire task of supplying the right-wing with ammunition thus fell to the wholly inadequate number of motor-transport companies available.” These, together with miscellaneous requisitioned vehicles and a civilian car-park set up by some enterprising citizens of Aix-la- Chapelle, proved to be of a value out of all proportion to their number when the great test came in 1914. The problems encountered by the motor transport companies as they struggled to maintain the flow of ammunition are interesting because they are typical of an Army which, though standing on the threshold of a new mechanical age, had not yet adapted either its instruments of control or its thought-processes to the newly-acquired technical means. Though the right wing Armies did have a considerable number of lorries between them, means to guide and supervise the columns were lacking, and the only way to contact convoys on the move was to send out hordes of staff officers to find and dants at all levels intercept them. were trained Furthermore, to give German ammunition inten- absoltite priority over all other items of supply. This order was obeyed very strictly, indeed so strictly that the drivers whose lorries were 1. Army's only effective carrier of ammunition were often unable to get their tanks refilled with petrol.’* Important as they were, the motor-transport companies were utilized inefficiently, and could not adapt themselves to the rapidly changing tactical situation. In addition, there were all the usual problems that make the supply of a fast-advancing army such a difficult operation. Motor lorries, which according to regulations were to cover no more than sixty miles a day, six days a week, were in fact driven so hard that sixty per cent of them had broken down by the time the battle of the Marne was fought. As drivers worked round the clock, fatigue was responsible for many accidents. Spare parts, and tyres in particular, were almost impossible to obtain, because of the enormous variety of vehicles in use, and the pressing into service of locally-requisitioned vehicles only made the situation worse.®° Also, the erratic rate at which ammunition was consumed meant that the advancing motor-columns often found the regimental transport wagons still filled up with unused rounds and were thus unable to unload their cargoes. In such cases, field com- manders were tempted to ‘hijack’ the trucks and use them as roll- The wheel that broke 127 ing magazines. Alternatively, they would be sent back with their loads intact. Either practice would result in the columns doing nothing useful for days on end, but neither could be entirely stamped out despite the issue of strict orders.’ By 24 August a shortage of ammunition, especially for the artillery, began to make itself felt.*? Fortunately for 1. Army, consumption fell very sharply after the battle of Le Cateau on 26 August. Had this not been the case, the supply service would, in all probability, have broken down. Though the distances involved and the sheer magnitude of the task were responsible for most of the difficulties in maintaining the flow of ammunition, some were due to faulty organization, carelessness on the troops’ part, or plain bureaucratic mismanagement. Deprived of organic transport which OHL feared would impair their mobility, the cavalry divisions were chronically short of ammunition and formed a constant burden on the army corps so unfortunate as to be responsible for them.** Ammunition was often unloaded in quantities greater than those needed, and would then be left lying in the open field.“ Finally, though each Amny controlled its own provisions depét, the supply of ammunition was centralized in the hands of General Sieger of OHL, who was only willing to relinquish his fast-diminishing reserves at the last possible moment, and would then demand that they be sent forward with all possible speed. This arrangement was clearly unsatisfactory. In the future, wrote Gréner in his diary, it would be necessary to give Army commanders complete control over their own stores of ammunition.” The supply difficulties of 1. Army were aggravated still further by the fact that, immediately before the battle of the Marne, its movements had been extremely erratic, and became even more so during the battle itself. Coming from the north on 26 August, Kluck turned south-west in pursuit of the British Expeditionary Force he had beaten at Le Cateau, then changed the direction of his advance to the south-east on 31 August. Having crossed the Marne, 1. Army's corps had to be wheeled abruptly west across their lines of communication in order to face the French on the Ourq. Finally, after the order for the retreat to the Aisne was given on 9 September, a corps had to be sent east again across the Army’s lines of communication in order to avoid losing contact with 2. Army on its left. That the supply of ammunition, and in- deed communications in general, did not break down during this 128 Supplying War confused period should be remembered as a triumph of staff work. As the battle approached its end though, the effect of the marches and countermarches was beginning to tell, and there was considerable confusion and congestion in 1. Army’s communications, Driving over to meet Kluck on 9 September, Lieutenant- Colonel Hentsch, on his fateful mission, got entangled in this confusion and had to resort to force in order to find his way out.** That the unfavourable impression thus created contributed to his decision to have the Germans retreat to the Aisne can well be imagined. Nevertheless, tion to 1. Army in spite of all difficulties, the supply of ammuni- did not break down during the battle of the Marne, nor is there any evidence that severe shortages were experienced by the other right wing Armies. Such shortages developed only after the battle was over — the first orders to conserve ammunition went out on 15 September ~ and then they did not result from any transportation difficulties within or behind the Army, but rose out of the general depletion of the stocks available in Germany. State of the railroads Though hundreds of supply companies and tens of thousands of vehicles were crowding the roads of Belgium in August and Sep- tember 1914, the advance into France could only be sustained if new forward railheads could be opened at a pace comparable to that of the troops. Though no precise details are known, it appears the the Germans had counted on utilizing four distinct lines to supply their five right wing Armies. One of these was to follow Kluck through Liége, Louvain, Brussels and Cambrai, and to provide the logistic support of 1. Army and the right wing of 2. Army. Then there was to be another line running south-west from Liége to Namur, which was to sustain 2. and 8, Armies. 4. and 5. Armies near the pivot of the great wheel were to be fed from two lines passing through Luxembourg and from there on to Libra- mont-Namur. At a later stage, it was expected to have a line from Metz to Sedan in operation. Since it could not of course be foreseen exactly which lines would be most heavily damaged by demolitions, the scheme was necessarily a general one and depended for its implementation on the rapid repair of blocked track, The wheel that broke 129 As it was, this task proved heavier than expected. The deeper the advance into Belgium and northern France, the more extensive the demolitions became until, midway through September, the 26,000 men of the railway construction companies were no longer able to cope, and had to be supplemented by German civi- lian firms which alone possessed the capacity to carry out thorough repairs. In the meantime, the Army had to manage as best it could, and this was clearly not good enough. Out of fortyfour major Kunsthauten blown up or otherwise destroyed in Belgium, only three the Marne.” At the of the 2,500 miles operation. Nor do had been restored by the time of the battle of same period, only three or four hundred out forming the Belgian network were back in these figures, revealing as they are, tell the whole story. Even where tracks were found more or less intact, signal and communications gear was usually lacking, having been dismantled either by the Belgians or by the German vanguard itself. The strength of the rails, as well as the length of the crossings and side-tracks, often proved insufficient to take fully-laden German military trains. Already overburdened with work, the unfortunate Eisenbahniruppe were compelled to guard the railways against marauding enemy civilians and cavalry raids. Very little Belgian rolling stock was captured in the early stages of the campaign, and when larger quantities were found later it was blocking the rails and had to be evacuated and rearranged. Over these railways, sometimes precariously repaired’? and usually stripped of even the most basic equipment, traffic was ini- tially chaotic. No very great performances could be expected of those parts of the network that had been put back in operation, but zone-of-communication authorities, eager to satisfy the demand for supplies, reduced their efficiency still further by rushing through the greatest possible number of trains, regardless of the consequences to the subsequent working of the lines.’ Impatient field commanders often interfered with the traffic, either ‘hijack- ing’ trains destined for other units or putting wagons out of operation by using them as convenient magazines. Since 