t would make them feasible again in the next generation.’* Meanwhile, the sheer size and weight of the The wheel that broke German 1 Army in 1914 proved wholly out of proportion to the means of tactical transportation at its disposal. This was true even though the really great increase in consumption came only after the campaign of the Marne was over. In 1914, a British division required just twenty-seven wagon-loads of supplies of all classes per day. Two years later, daily consumption of current supplies — food, fodder and the like — still stood at twenty wagons, but the number needed to carry the material of combat, especially ammunition, had risen to about thirty. After 1914 subsistence for men and horses was to form only a fraction, and usually a small fraction, of the total supplies needed by armics in the field. For this very reason, it was no longer possible to meet a good part of their needs on the spot. That the old modes of transport were inadequate to handle the demands of modem war, is demonstrated by the permanently-fixed lines of trenches that were a hallmark of World War I. As happens so often in history, the lessons of this experience were misunderstood. The German campaign of the Marne, and especially the operation of the Feldeisenbahnwesen, were analysed time and again between the Wars. It was shown that, had a few tunnels been blown up along Kluck’s route, the entire campaign would have been utterly impossible. In 1940, the Belgians thought they had learnt their lesson by mining every one of their major railway-installations and preparing them for instant demolition. By then, however, the face of war had changed once more. 5 Russian roulette Problems of the semi-motorized army When Hitler came to power in January 1933 he brought with him a firm, if ill-defined, commitment to the modernization and mechanization of German life which, however useful and even necessary it may have been on economic and strategic grounds, cannot be adequately understood on the basis of utilitarianism alone. The National Socialist Party had always taken a great interest in motor-cars parades and drivers’ corps, and made demonstrations. the NSKK. much It even use of them in its rallies, incorporated a special Hitler himself loved cars, had a sur- prisingly good understanding of their technology and construc- tion, and showed a lively interest in their engines, the men who drove them and the roads built for their use, far beyond the interest that a head of state could normally be expected to take in what was, after all, only one element in his country’s system of transportation, and that not the most important. White-coloured Autobahnen and bug-shaped Volkswagens stood out as National Socialist showpieces par excellence. Far from being merely an instrument in the hands of the Third Reich, the motor-car stood, in more ways than one, as its symbol. From the point of view of the German Army, especially from that of the various departments responsible for supply and transportation, this state of affairs was a mixed blessing. The problem was mainly that Hitler, in this field as in all others, took no interest in administrative detail, nor did he have the patience to carry through the long-term projects which alone might eventually have provided him with a well-balanced motorized army. Instead he had an eye for the spectacular and wanted quick results hence his strong tendency to concentrate on the two ends of the scale, the decorative-representational on the one hand and Russian roulette 143 the tactical on the other. After a few years of National Socialist domination the results of this policy could be seen almost daily in countless parades and military tattoos. Along with the columns of vehicles carrying Nazi dignitaries there came armoured and motorized units with their serried fighting vehicles. These were ranks of Panzers and other glittering affairs, yet behind the glamour lurked problems, some of which were due to mistaken policies, but others to difficulties so fundamental as to render the entire course on which the Wehrmacht was now embarked highly questionable. Perhaps the most important issue was the role of roads vis @ vis railroads. During World War I, the latter had enabled Germany to make full use of her internal lines and thus resist the combined resources of almost the entire world. The recognition of this achievement subsequently served to transform Gréner from head of Schlieffen’s railway department into Minister of War of the Weimar Republic. The railways were too clumsy to sustain mobile operations in the field, however, as was proved in 1914 and thereafter in virtually every offensive that was launched on the Western front by both sides throughout the war. Even where follow. a tactical In armoured, breakthrough staking their future self-propelled was achieved, supplies success on the fighting vehicle, could tactics therefore, not of the Hitler and his generals were obliged to cast around for a more flexible logistic instrument, which could only be found in the motor truck. If motorization of the army’s supply service could rightly be regarded as important, indecd indispensable, in securing its future success more dubious. in the Given field, the strategic benefits appeared far the technological conditions of 1939, no less than 1,600 lorries were needed to equal the capacity of just ore double-tracked railway line. What is more their greater con- sumption of just about everything (fuel, personnel, spare parts, maintenance) in relation to payload meant that the railway re- tained its superiority at distances of over 200 miles. It followed that, while motorization was essential for operational and tactical purposes, its effect on strategy would be limited. Also, however great the effort, there was little chance that motor vehicles would relieve, much less replace, trains as Germany's main form of transportation in the foreseeable future.* As it was, Hitler’s decision to motorize his army led him to fall between two stools. The outlay involved meant that the railways 144 Supplying War suffered comparative neglect, leading to a decline in the total quantity of locomotives and rolling-stock available between 1914 and 1939.? At the same time, Germany's automobile industry was insufficiently developed to meet the needs of the new army in addition to civilian requirements. On 1 September 1939 there were just under a million four-wheeled motor vehicles of all descriptions on Germany's roads, a proportion of 1:70 per head of the population compared with 1:10 in the United States, Finally, motorization required rubber and oil, which Germany did not have, instead of coal and steel, which she did. Even before World War I broke out, voices were raised to question the wisdom of a policy relying on raw materials that had to be imported. Despite synthetic manufacture and heroic improvisation, difficulties in obtaining both rubber and oil created problems throughout the war.* Thus, although motorization may have been the only way out of the tactical impasse of 1914-18, logistically its advantages were doubtful. Between 1933, when Hitler embarked on re-armament, and 1939, the capacity of Germany’s motor industry proved wholly inadequate divisions motorized to equip the army on the requisite scale. OF 103 available and on the eve of the ‘light’ formations were war, just 16 armoured, fully motorized, and thas to some extent independent of the railways for both tactical and strategic movement. The rest all marched on foot, and, though a complement of 942 motor vehicles (excluding motor cycles) was the authorized establishment of each infantry division, the bulk of their supplies was carried on 1,200 horse-drawn wagons. Even worse, all these vehicles were organic to their units and ear- marked mainly for work inside the zone of operations. To bridge the distance from the depots to the railheads, only three motor transport regiments (known as Grosstransportraum, in contrast to the Kleinkolonnenraum of the troops) were available for the whole army, having between them some 9,000 men, 6,600 vehicles (of which twenty per cent were expected to be undergoing repair at any given moment) and a capacity of 19,500 tons.* Since not all the Wehrmacht’s units were ever likely to see action at one and the same time there is no point in comparing this with figures of consumption. One may, however, note that the Allies in 1944 used no less than 69,400 tons of motor transport to support forty-seven divisions in France, but nevertheless suffered from a grave shortage. Since vehicles were so very hard to obtain. it was necessary to Russian roulette 145 take a large proportion of them straight from the civilian economy. This resulted in an impossibly large number of types, all of which had to be kept supplied with spare parts at a rate that was greatly accelerated by the demands of war. So heavy were these demands that, during the early years of the war, it proved impossible to maintain even the modest degree of motorization already achieved. In the winter of 1939-40, and again in that of 1940-1, it was necessary partly to demotorize units and services. This was in spite of the fact that, by the latter date, no less than eighty-eight German divisions - some forty per cent of the total — were equipped with captured French material.® Another problem resulting from the fact that the Wehrmacht was only partly motorized was a lack of homogeneity. Instead of being thinly spread over the entire army, Germany's military motor vehicles were concentrated among a small number of units. In effect, this meant that there were two separate forces, one fast and mobile and the other slow and plodding. Coordinating these two heterogeneous parts was difficult as the former out- ran the latter and, as they were left behind, it was imperative to exercise the strictest control over the movements of the infantry formations in order to prevent them from obstructing the supply convoys of the all-important armoured spearheads. It was a nice problem of selecting roads, calculating the time it would take to move along them, and maintaining traffic discipline — in short, of logistics. If the equipment of the Wehrmacht’s logistic apparatus left something to be desired, so did its organization. In wartime all transport by rail or inland waterways — both civilian and military — was under General Gercke, whose post was that of Chef des Transportwesens at the Army High Command (OKH), while at the same time serving as Wehrmachittransportchef at the Armed Forces High Command (OKW). Motor transport in the zone of communications, however, was controlled not by him but by General Wagner, quartermaster-general at OKH, who, of course, was also responsible for the supplies which were to be transported. In this way logistic support for the army was split between two authorities, one of whom controlled both ends of the pipeline while the other governed its central section. Worse still, Gercke’s authority did not extend to either the navy or the air force. His function with regard to them was a purely coordinating one, and the best he could do was to ask them to put transport-capacity at his disposal.* 146 Supplying War Even though they were short in duration and conducted over relatively small distances the campaigns of 1939 and 1940 already revealed every one of these problems, and more. During the operation against Poland, destruction of railways by both sides was so heavy that the logistic system was only by the speedy Polish surrender,’ while tions on the roads led to losses of up to fifty companies’ vehicles. To make good these saved from collapse the appalling condiper cent of the motor losses proved impos- sible, for the 1,000 trucks allocated to the land army each quarter out of new production, were insufficient even to replace thse lost through normal wear and tear." Faced with a fast-diminishing vehicle park, OKH in January 1940 was dr