e state of the line of communications behind II Army in the Loire Valley was even more difficult. Until 9 Decem- ber the railhead remained valleys of the Seine and impassable. Later, the this time II Army had This particular railway at Chaumont, for demolitions in the Yonne had rendered the lines further west railhead was advanced to Troyes, but by got still further away to the Céte d’Or. was also exposed to numerous attacks by francs-tireurs, with the result that, towards the end of November, an entire army corps had to be detailed for its guard.** 96 Supplying War Though the 2,200 miles of French track were being operated by Germans when the war came to an end, traffic on them always remained chaotic and sometimes hazardous. Trains were involved in crashes, were derailed, and fell into the Meuse. Sometimes this was due to sabotage, but in most cases the accidents stemmed from incomplete and hurried repairs, the inexperience of the German personnel and slack discipline. Nevertheless, the Germans tended to attribute every failure to the action of saboteurs, which led to Moltke’s notorious order that French hostages should be taken along on the locomotives.** There is no doubt that the German siege and bombardment of Paris, involving as they did the concentration in a small space of very large masses of men and heavy expenditure of artillery ammunition, would have been wholly impossible without the railways. Also, the view that the German use of the railways to de- ploy their forces at the opening of the campaign as a supreme masterpiece of the military art is amply justified, though we have seen that this triumph was only achieved at the cost of disrupting the train apparatus before the war against France even got under way. Between ever, is the railways because because sonable these two phases of the struggle, however, do not seem to have played a very important role, of difficulties with the lines themselves and of the impossibility of keeping the railheads within distance of the advancing troops. Most surprising, fact that none of this had much influence the partly partly a reahow- on the course of operations, or indeed caused Moltke any great concern, which can only be understood by examining the actual methods by which the German army of 1870-1 was fed. Logistics of the armed horde Ever since the Franco-Prussian War, historians have regarded the supply organization as one of the Prussians’ greatest achievements,”* a belief that Moltke himself helped create when he wrote that, in the entire history of warfare, no army had been as well fed."* It is true that the German forces did not suffer from grave supply difficulties during most of their campaign against France, but it is not true that this fact was due to any superb feats of organization. Failure to recognize this has tended to distort, not merely accounts of the war itself, but also most attempts to allo- cate it a place as a stage in the development of the military art. When demigods rode rails a7 The shortcomings in the supply apparatus that were revealed by the 1870 campaign were not, admittedly, due to any lack of organization or foresight. From a very modest beginning, the train service of the Prussian army had by this time developed into an impressive machine, each corps being served by a train bat- talion with 40 officers, 84 doctors, 1,540 men, 3,074 horses and 670 wagons. The marching order of these was not rigidly fixed, but the combat troops could expect to be followed closely by the bat- talion’s spare horses, pack horses, teen, all of which were supposed during days of combat, and were came the so called small baggage, medicine cart and mobile canto stay with the battalion even known as Gefechtsbagage. Next consisting of the wagons of the divisional staff, those carrying infantry ammunition, the field forges, the remaining canteen wagons, the troops’ provision columns, plus one reserve provision column and one field hospital per infantry division. Finally, there was the heavy baggage; this consisted of ammunition columns, officers’ baggage, the field bakery, the field hospitals not forming part of the divisions, the remaining provisions-columns, the pontoon-column, the second echelon ammu- nition columns and the remount depét. Replenishment of the troops’ vehicles was to be carried out when half of them were empty, for which purpose they were able the train columns proper to the rear during the night, in on their way to the front.** To Army also acquired a reserve vehicles by requisitioning. arrangements. From to be left behind — to en- to catch up with them — or driven order to avoid crossing other units help the corps in emergency, each wagon-park of several thousand On paper, these were the beginning, however, they failed to func- tion, and for this Moltke himself was largely to blame. As Rhine we saw, impressive Moltke’s swift deployment of his forces on the was only achieved by separating the troops from their transport, with the result that, when the campaign got under way, the latter had not yet arrived in the areas of concentration and was unable to discharge its functions. Given the relative speed of movement of troops on foot and transport by horse, especially since the latter was supposed to shuttle between the front and the railheads or at least stay in place in order to be replenished, this gap was not easy to close. Therefore during their advance to the frontier, the German troops had to be supplied by quartering and purchase, a procedure that caused friction and hardship to the civilian population. When the German-French frontier was 98 Supplying War crossed, the trains had still not succeeded in catching up. For example, those of III Army only reached the front in mid August, after several battles had already been fought and won, and Ger- man troops had crossed the Meuse. During the advance into France, the supply problems faced by the various German forces were very dissimilar. On the left, I and II Armies marching against Metz did not have very far to go and could be kept within reasonable distances from the railheads. These, however, were too congested to be of much use, with the result that, even though three trains per day were supposed to arrive for IL Army,** both Armies had in fact to be fed mainly by requisitioning, supplemented by captured French supplies.*’ This worked well enough as long as the German troops kept on the move. Once operations came to a halt around Metz, however, ‘enormous difficulties’ were experienced. The distance from the railheads now amounted to some forty miles, part of which were crossed only by narrow mountain roads. Congestion on these was extreme, and when they were weakened by rain a shortage of labour made it impossible to have them repaired, Having finally settled down, the troops around Metz were required to give up part of their transport to help the forces besieging Paris, which, at least, went some way to solve their supply problem because, as always, fodder had proved especially difficult to procure and the number of dead horses was legion. Though it will be remembered that careful preparations had allowed a railway to Remilly to be built quickly, this was nullified by the fact that congestion forced supplies to be unloaded wherever labour and space were available, which was often in stations far to the rear. Provisions were unloaded without regard to storage facilities and left to rot, and since no labour was available to bury them (the local population proved reluctant to carry out this task, nor did it possess the necessary tools) the stench soon rose high. These difficulties were just beginning to be overcome when, following the battle of Sedan, I Army and the Army of the Meuse started obeying Moltke’s order to send back captured rolling-stock, with the result that the station of Remilly was con- gested still further.** All in all, keeping I and IT Armies supplicd during the siege of Metz therefore proved considerably more difficult than it had done during the previous and, as we shall see, the subsequent period. Meanwhile, on the left flank of the German advance, III Army When demigods rode rails 99 was free from these difficulties because it lived entirely by requisitioning. Its supply trains had only just succeeded in catching up with the troops when an unforeseen strategic opportunity arose, as Macmahon’s army was reported standing between Rheims and the Meuse on the Germans’ right. Faced with the choice of either plunging into the Ardennes without properly organized supplies in order to cut off the enemy, or waiting until the logistic situation improved at the risk of allowing him to escape, III Army decided to march, A rest-day that had been ordered for 27 August was summarily cancelled, and the troops were instructed to look after themselves by living off the country, supplementing their finds with iron rations when necessary. This was, of course, the correct decision. Shortages of victuals did appear towards the end of the month, but this was a small price to pay for the victory at Sedan.”* The experience of the other force which took part in the battle of Sedan, the Army of the Meuse, was somewhat similar, When it had been decided to send four corps of II Army to the northwest, a reserve to supply them for fourteen days was built up at Mars- la-Tour. However, the Army was unable to bring this up because too many wagons had been given up to transport troops, or to help with the construction of the railways. Consequently, the Army during its march had to be fed by the usual combination of quartering and free purchase, and while these sufficed on the whole, shortages did arise during the last days of August when it became necessary to resort to the iron rations.“° Once again the victory justified the decision, though both German Armies were marching without any reserves and would have faced disaster if the battle had gone against them. With the heavy concentration of troops around Sedan during the last days of August, supply difficulties naturally arose, though these were alleviated by the fortunate capture of French stocks at Carignan. Not until after the battle had ended did the supply columns of the two German armies succeed in catching up with them, though by this time it was found that their load had been much reduced through their own consumption. It was im- possible, therefore, to build up a proper basis for the advance on Paris, the more so since the nearest railhead was still at Metz, some 80 miles to the rear. These difficulties were made good, however, by the fact that a French army capable of opposing the German troops no longer existed. Consequently, the latter were able to spread out over a broad front, with each corps marching over a separate 100 Supplying War road. The country being very rich, no great difficulties were experienced, and it even proved possible to form a surplus at Rheims and Chalons. However, the closer the Germans came to Paris, the more often villages were found deserted, crops burnt, and cattle driven off.°' Similarly, I Army after the fall of Metz set out on its way towards Paris through the valley of the Seine without making any special logistic preparations. Reliance was again placed on requisitioning, though in this case results proved disappointing and it became necessary to resort to free purchase on a grand scale,” Alone among the four German Armies, II Army did make some considerable preparations prior to its march from Metz to Or- leans. Although the siege of Metz lasted for about two months, the difficulties of feeding the investing troops were finally overcome. In mid-October, ample provisions were available around the city despite the need to feed, in addition to the German forces, 150,000 French prisoners. This enabled the Intendantur of IE Army to issue an order that all units were to start their march to the Loing with their provisions-columns fully loaded, the intention being 