rmy, which was now supposed to carry out two sharp changes of direction, by marching around the Maastricht Appendix instead of through it. Since Kluck’s troops were now to enter Belgium from the south-east instead of the north-east, it became much more difficult to include the Bel- gian Army in the turning movement. There was the danger that it would escape into the great fortress of Antwerp, which was just what happened eventually. Finally, the decision to respect Dutch neutrality meant that another basic tenet of German military doc- trine** was abandoned. As 2. and 1, Armies defiled through the Liége gap the six corps making up each of them would be re- duced to three roads only, which would lead to the formation of huge columns some eighty miles long and, inevitably, congestion and a loss of contact between combat units and their logistic support.** Under such circumstances, the whole system of supply was certain to be thrown into disarray. During its advance to the Meuse, 1. Army would have to live off provisions sent ahead to the railways at Bleyberg, Morsnet and Henri-Chapelle.* The question as to how many troops should - and could - be made to operate in Belgium north of the Meuse was also affected by Moltke’s decision to leave the Maastricht Appendix alone. Schlieffen, as we have seen, wanted to employ sixteen corps and five cavalry divisions (some of these forces were not yet available in his day) in this area, to be followed by a number of Landwehr, or second reserve, formations whose lines of communication task it was to take over the and invest such fortresses as might be The wheel that broke 121 left standing in the rear. To keep these forces supplied, Schiieffen apparently counted on having three separate double-tracked railways, including two passing through Dutch territory at Maastricht and Roermond.** Now that these could no longer be relied upon, 1. and 2. Armies would have to share the line from Aix-la-Chapelle (Aachen) to Litge, which meant that the maximum number of corps that could operate ~ in the first instance, at any rate — north of the Meuse went down to twelve.*? For this reduction of the forces on the extreme right wing — the famous “Verwasserung’ of the Schlieffen Plan —- Moltke has been severely taken to task. However, the change was more apparent than real. Firstly, the decision to respect the neutrality of the Netherlands made it unnecessary to allocate any troops to contain the Dutch, whose Army, numbering approximately 90,000 men, was held in some respect by the Germans — more so, indeed, than the Belgian one* ~ and would have tied down at least two corps. Secondly, Schlieffen expected to employ no less than five corps to invest Antwerp,*® whereas his successor finally made do with only two. Though it is therefore quite true that Moltke’s right wing was not as strong as Schlieffen had planned to make it, this loss was more than compensated for by the economies effected in his version of the Plan. If the merits of Moltke’s decision to spare the Netherlands a German invasion and accept the consequent technical complications are open of the Plan was we have noted, of the German to debate, there is one aspect in which his version definitely superior to his predecessor's. Schlieffen, was much concerned with the question of the size wheel through Belgium. From 1897 to 1905 it con- stantly grew larger until it embraced, first Namur, then Brussels, and finally Dunkirk as well. The marching distances involved were enormous and Moltke, who did not share his predecessor's almost monomaniacal preoccupation with the danger of open flanks, was certainly in the right when he determined that Brussels was as far as the German Army would go before begin- ning its great turning movement to the south-west. This alteration of the Plan involved the additional complication of compelling 1. and 2. Armies to contract their front and arrange their corps behind each other as they passed through the defile between Brussels and Namur, but this was more than compensated for by the reduction of the distance involved by almost one hundred miles. Carrying out Moltke’s ‘small’ wheel in 1914, the German 122 Supplying War forces somehow kept going until, albeit literally staggering with fatigue, they reached the Marne some 300 miles from their start- ing point. Had they tried to brush the Channel in accordance with Schlieffen’s prescription, sheer exhaustion would certainly have brought the advance to a halt long before it ever reached the lower Seine. Logistics during the campaign of the Marne It can be said that World War I broke out on I August 1914, the date on which most European powers ordered general mobilization. Ten Reich’s days frontiers later, the according German Army to plan, and was deployed on the preliminaries the of occupying Liége and Luxemburg had been successfully completed. The great wheel across Belgium was now ready to get under way. In this wheel, von Klack’s 1. Army operating on the extreme right wing was destined to play a role of crucial importance. Since it would have to cover the greatest distances at the highest speed, its logistic problems would perforce be the most difficult, reflecting, as it were, those of the Army as a whole in a magnified form. For this reason we shall concentrate our discussion on this force, referring to the others when rejevant. Setting out from its area of concentration around Krefeld and Jiilich on 12 August, the Army found itself marching down an inverted funnel which grew progressively narrower as the advance went on. By the time Aix-la-Chapelle was reached, the Army’s six infantry corps (its cavalry corps had preceded it through the Liége gap, being subordinated to 2. Army for the purpose) had to share three roads between them, a situation which persisted until they got across the Meuse thirty miles to the west. Already in this early stage of the advance - indeed, even before the frontier into Belgium had been crossed — the heavy {Army) transport companies were falling behind, and were soon to find themselves separated from the units, whose organic supply vehicles they were supposed to replenish, by miles of endlesslymarching troops.‘° Fortunately, the region up to, and including, the Meuse had already been more or less cleared by Bilow’s 2. Army. Apart from the occasional straggler or franc-tireur, Kluck’s troops met with no resistance and were kept supplied directly from the Aix-la-Chapelle-Liége railroad. Having defiled through Lidge, 1. Army changed direction from The wheel that broke 123 south-west to north-west and, expanding its front laterally, began racing the Belgian army to Brussels. Though the country had now opened up sufficiently for each corps to have a road of its own, the heavy columns had been left so far behind that they could not catch up with the fighting troops until ¢fter the retreat from the Marne." As was to be expected, the forces forming Kluck’s ex- treme right were the first to feel the strain, and by 19 August — only three days after crossing the German-Belgian border ~ they were beginning to fall behind schedule‘? Consequently, the attempt to ‘scoop up’ the Belgian army in the enveloping movement, never very promising since Moltke’s decision to change the direction of the advance and refrain from violating Dutch neutrality, was doomed to failure. As 1. Army lost contact with its heavy transport columns during the very first days of the campaign, it quickly became clear that the arrangements made to provide the troops with subsistence were hopelessly inadequate. Captain Bloem’s company, forming part of III. Reserve Corps, was typical in that it did not catch a single glimpse of the transportation companies during the entire advance.** Fortunately for the Germans, the country they were traversing was rich, and the season of the year favourable. Also the advance had been so rapid that the retreating Belgians often failed either to destroy or evacuate their supply dumps. Thus, III. Reserve Corps, mentioned above, was able to manage without having to draw anything from its organic transport except for some vegetables and coffee. Sharing a road with III. Reserve Corps at the beginning of the march, IX. Corps was so fortunate as to find vast stores of Belgian flour at Liége. Having entered Brussels on 20 August, 1. Army promptly requisitioned enough food to fill the needs of four corps for one day. Again, at Amiens, IV. Reserve Corps found subsistence in considerable quantities.“ After the battle of Le Cateau, III. Reserve Corps was living well off British loot.** So, thirty years of dire warnings, uttered by of modern Millionenheere to exist in the field turned out to be everybody from the great Moltke downward, about the inability wrong. Instead, Schlieffen’s confident view that it would be possible to more or less fill the bellies of the men from the country was proved correct. There were, of course, problems. Each army corps, a complete little army in itself, consumed about 130 tons of food and fodder a day,** and to find such vast quantities foraging parties had to 124 Supplying War be sent out over a large area, increasing still further the length of the daily marches. While many items were fairly easy to obtain, bread — the most important single constituent of the soldier's diet - was always in short supply, either because it went stale on the way or because the mobile field-kitchens were not allowed to stay sufficiently long at any one place for baking to be completed. Likewise, the arrangements made to supply fresh meat by pur- chasing local cattle and driving it along with the Army proved such a failure that the transport allocated for this purpose was soon put to other uses.‘? Finally, the attempt to increase the mobility of the cavalry by depriving them of their own organic subsistence companies was unsuccessful. Instead of happily ‘travelling light’, the cavalry commanders became unduly fussy about their supplies, racing (and, of course, beating) the infantry to such food and shelter as were to be had, and impeding their own freedom of movement by impressing heavy Belgian peasantwagons into their service.* On the whole, the men were, therefore, able to live ~ and sometimes live well — off the country. It was only on odd occasions, especially in the period immediately before and during the battle of the Marne, that it was necessary to resort to the iron rations carried by the soldiers.? Since the country tended to become even richer as the advance continued, it is fairly certain that, despite the occasional hungry day, the problem of feeding the troops would not have presented insuperable difficulties even if the battle had gone in Germany's favour. This, however, does not hold true for the horses’ fodder. The German experience in 1914 served to confirm the old wisdom that the animals accompanying an army were very much more difficult to subsist than its men. Years before the War, there had been waming voices raised against placing any reliance on the resources of the country to sustain large masses of cavalry," but both Schlieffen and Moltke had chosen to ignore them. In fact there was little else they could do, for the fodder requirement of the German Army in 1914 was so huge (Kluck alone had 84,000 horses consuming nearly two million pounds per day, enough to fill 924 standard-model fodder wagons) that any attempt to bring it up from base by means of the Etappen system would have made the whole campaign utterly impossible. Consequently, the Germans entered the War with little or no arrangements to feed their horses in the field, and were again fortunate in that the sea- The wheel that broke son of the year was found, ready-harvested very favourable. and neatly 125 Fodder was stacked, in the frequently fields, and could sometimes be processed on the spot with the help of local machinery." Most of the time, however, it was necessary to feed the horses green corn, causing wea