sufficient roads inside Belgium proper, he stretched the front of the advance until, in his own words, ‘the last grenadier on the right wing should brush the Channel with his sleeve’.1* This presented yet another advantage, for it would enable the Germans to ‘scoop up’ in their enveloping movement not merely the Belgian Army but any British force that might be coming to its aid. If the size of Schlieffen’s newly-prescribed wheel helped him solve one logistic problem it immediately created two others. First, since the time that could be allowed for the operation as a whole still stood at 42 days, tremendous marching performances had to be demanded of the troops. In particular, those forming the extreme right wing would have covered almost 400 miles by the time they reached the Seine way below Paris after passing 116 Supplying War near the Channel coast. Second, the enormous size of the move- ment presented the problem of supporting and supplying large forces — von Kluck’s 1. Army on the extreme right alone numbered well over a quarter of a million men — at such tremendous distances from the homeland, Schlieffen, in other words, resolved the conflict between logistic and strategic considerations only at the cost of creating two new, and, as it tumed out, formidable sets of logistic difficulties. To ‘solve’ the first of these problems, Schlieffen simply wrote it into his Plan that the troops of the right wing would have to make “very great exertions’. Normally, a corps could be expected to sustain an advance of fifteen miles per day for three days on end, but Schlieffen ignored this and instead provided for Kluck’s Army to cover the distance to the Seine in about twenty-five days, with days of fighting not excluded. Such performances might, perhaps, have been asked of Napoleon’s Grande Armée in its prime, but we have seen that the ponderous bulk of the armies of 1914 made them singularly unsuited to such feats. The danger thus existed that, when finally coming face to face with the French Army at the end of their tremendous march, the German troops would be too exhausted to give a good account of themselves, and in fact it was exhaustion, as much as any other factor, that would have prevented the continuation of the advance even if the battle of the Marne had been won by Germany. As for the second problem, Schlieffen does not appear to have come to grips with it at all, Though his admirers have claimed that ‘a warlord [sic] of Schlieffen’s calibre would have carefully considered, prepared, and determined all the arrangements as regards lines of communication, Etappen, railway traffic, and the supply of ammunition, provisions and military equipment as a matter of course’,"* there is in fact little to show that he was much preoccupied with the question as to how the right wing was to be sustained during its rapid and far-flung advance. An elaborate three-tier supply system — based on the one first introduced by the elder Moltke in the mid-nineteenth century — did exist. Under this system, German infantry (but not cavalry, a point to which we shall have occasion to refer later on), regiments and corps each had their own organic transport columns, divided into two echelons and marching either with the fighting troops or directly behind them. These were replenished by the heavy transport companies operating in the zone of communications, which in turn The wheel that broke 17 were fed from the railways.'’ But the system as a whole was rigid and elaborate, better geared to a slow, methodical advance than to a war of sturmisch movement. In particular, the wagons forming the system’s second tier were liable to be left behind as soon as the speed of the advance exceeded some twelve miles a day. Even if, by some miracle, this did not happen, the range at which they could support the Army was strictly limited. It must therefore have been clear to Schlieffen, as it was to the leading military minds of the period, that in the long run it would not be possible to move the Army any faster than the pace at which'the railheads could be made to follow in its wake. There was normally supposed to be one double-tracked railway line behind each Army.'* To seize, repair and operate them quickly was a task of crucial importance, for which the Oberste Heeresleitung (OHL) had under its own direct control some 90 companies of highly trained railway troops. Equipped with socalled Bauzuge, trains carrying everything needed to repair damaged tracks and lay new ones if necessary, these units were expected to march with the leading forces or even precede them.'* Forecasting — correctly, as it tarned out — that the French would thoroughly Meuse demolish Valley between their railways in the general area of the Verdun and Sedan, Schlieffen wrote that ‘lines of communication must be sought mainly through Belgium north of the Meuse’. How, one may well ask, did he expect to supply the three Armies operating south of that river? And what if the Belgians were to blow up the railroads in the northern part of their country, the task being facilitated hy the countless tunnels, bridges and flyovers marking ‘the world’s best network’??? To these questions, Schlieffen appears to have had no answer beyond the dubious argument that ‘the Belgian railways form the best possible connection between the German and French systems’.#* The impression that the logistic side of the great Plan was not properly thought out, gains in strength from the fact that Schlieffen, who made the railway department of the General Staff carry out extensive war-games to test the feasibility of transporting troops from one wing of the Army to the other, and from the western to the eastern front, did not apparently use similar means to examine the supply and maintenance of the troops on his allimportant right wing, The reasons for this indifference are hard to discover. It may, as one writer thinks,”? have stemmed from the hope that the question would not arise in all its magnitude Supplying War 118 during a short, victorious campaign such as the advance into France was expected to be. A more likely explanation, however, is that Schlieffen defied the common military wisdom of his time* in that he hoped to feed his Armies, in part at least, from the country they traversed. As for the supply of ammunition and other equipment, it was still, in this innocent age, expected to be ‘as nothing” compared to that of food and fodder.?* To go by such evidence as can be found in the various drafts of Schlieffen’s Plan, the logistic side of this intention appears to have rested on singularly shaky foundations. Exactly how large a proportion of their subsistence — and especially of that allimportant commodity, fodder - the German Armies would be able to draw from the country depended on the season of the year and was therefore impossible to foresee. Nor were the tables laying down the consumption of ammunition, based as they were on experience forty years out of date and making completely unrealistic assumptions,?* of much use to those responsible for planning the Army's transportation.*? Just how little Schlieffen appreciated what the war would be like is apparent from the fact that he did not provide for the arming of the troops operating the lines of communication, nor did he prepare for German civilian firms to assist in the restoration of the Belgian railways.” As it was, one could only trust to finding adequate quantities of food and fodder in Belgium; set up as many formations of Eisenbahntruppe as possible, and send them forward as far as possible; and hope for the best. The Plan modified On 1 January 1906, Schlieffen was placed on the retired list and his function as chief of the General Staff taken over by Helmut von Moltke Jr. The latter has since been blamed by generations of historians, first for tampering with the Master's design and then for lacking the resolution to carry it out. And indeed, as far as the logistic aspect was concerned, Moltke was much less ready than his predecessor to stake Germany's future on hazy, illdefined expectations of loot and extraordinary good luck. Scarcely one month after he had taken office, the first realistic study of the supply and transportation problems of the great Plan was written. Its author was the head of the railway section of the General Staff, Lieutenant Colonel Gréner, who was later to turn The wheel that broke 119 into the leading exponent of Schlieffen’s thought; he cannot therefore be suspected of excessive caution, Nevertheless he concluded that, as it stood then, the Plan stood little chance of success. Gréner did not share Schlieffen’s optimistic assumption about the Germans being able to live largely off the country. In his opinion the advance would be far too rapid to allow for a thorough organization of supply feeders, required to sustain a huge army, from Belgium and France. Everything would therefore depend on the regular operation of the railways, and great difficulties were to be expected ‘if the railroads are thoroughly destroyed’, Horsedrawn transport, Gréner clearly saw, would not be able to keep up with the adva:ce, so that the moment could be foreseen when ‘the Armies would have to halt and let the supply columns catch up’. In this situation, motor transport could be very useful, but Gréner foresaw, correctly as it turned out, that it would be a long time before the German army was able to acquire an adequate supply of this.?” Clearly, this was not an optimistic forecast. The man who, more than anybody else, was to be responsible for keeping the stream of supplies following behind the right wing armies was very doubtful whether it could be done. Apart from initiating the first serious study of the Plan’s logistic aspects, Moltke felt that the whole subject of supply and subsistence had been neglected by his predecessor. Consequently he instituted, in addition to the normal staff-rides of the General Staff, the so-called ‘Mehtlreise’ (literally flour-rides) in which sub- ordinates were to be trained in the intricacies of transport and supply. He drove this sensible policy through against considerable opposition, and was to re-emphasize the difficulty of conducting real operations, as distinct from the war games beloved by his predecessor, during the last major exercise he directed shortly before the war."® Time and again, Moltke expressed his doubts about the feasibility of the great Plan, indeed about Schlieffen’s whole image of war.’ Given this, it is surprising that he retained the basic outline of the design, not that he modified it so much. This does not mean that, even from a strictly logistic point of view, the changes introduced were all beneficial. Unlike Schlieffen, who seems to have entertained some illusions on the matter, Moltke did not expect the Dutch tamely to allow the Germans through. Rather than violate their neutrality and take on another opponent, he decided that careful staff work would, after all, 120 Supplying Wer make it possible to carry out the Plan without trespassing on Dutch territory. Schlieffen had provided for two Armies consisting of sixteen corps (including seven reserve corps forming a separate echelon) and five cavalry divisions to ‘cross the Meuse by five routes below Liége [that is, through the Maastricht Appendix]. ..and one above it’,*? but Moltke disagreed with this and contrived to march 1, and 2. Armies, forming the hammerhead of the right wing, through the narrow gap between the Dutch frontier and the Ardennes. Whatever the political merits of this decision, the number of roads available to these Armies was thereby cut by half, thus compelling them to march behind each other instead of side by side and imposing a delay of about three days. At the same time, the need to employ the maximum number of railroads made it impossible to narrow down the area of concentration, so that another forty miles were added to the distance to be covered by I, A