as much profit as possible, pushed forward the maximum quantity of supplies without regard to the limitations of the railways.’* Labour and vehicles to help in the unloading of trains were short. German troops frequently dismantled the signal and communications gear of captured lines, an evil that successive orders were unable to eradicate. Consequently hundreds of thousands, indeed millions, of rations were allowed to rot away. This was in spite of the fact that the demands made on the railway network were, in reality, very modest, Consumption of each corps being only about 100 tons a day (fodder included), the entire requirement of the Prussian army could have been covered by six or seven trains. This was well below the capacity of one wellorganized single-tracked line. More significant than the above, however, was the fact that the railways were entirely unable to keep up with the pace of the advance. This, as we saw, was due less to any lack of preparation for their restoration than to the fact that the Eisenbahntruppe were helpless against the French fortresses blocking the lines. That Moltke had failed to foresee this is difficult to believe. He had, after all, written a memorandum on the influence of the Austrian fortresses on the events of 1866, and the rapid recon- struction of a railway around Metz was a military masterpiece. Rather, the failure to draw conclusions from the events of 1866 must have been due to the fact that, contrary to what is generally thought, the railways did not play a major role in the war against Supplying War 106 Austria. Unlike modern historians, Moltke recognized this fact, and it led him to the logical conclusion that his order of priorities was right. This, of course, was proved to be the case in 1870. The advancing Prussian forces simply bypassed the fortresses, and not until the mobile phase of the campaign was over did the latter turn into serious obstacles. Another aspect of the war of 1870 about which many writers have been mistaken is the alleged superiority of the German railway system over the French one. Exactly how this erroneous opinion originated I am unable to discover, as there is not the slightest evidence in its favour. Since the German railways are supposed to have played such a large role in the victory, most historians seem to assume that they must have been superior in some way. This, however, was not the case. On practically every account, the French railway system in 1870 was actually better than the German one. This was even more true of the military aspect than of the civilian one, for political factors made it easier for France than for Germany to take strategic considerations into account. During the 1860s, therefore, it was thought that nowhere did the French enjoy as great an advantage as on precisely this point.”* In any case, as had been recognized long previously, the distinction between a ‘civilian’ and a ‘strategic’ railway network is largely unreal:” While every State will undoubtedly hesitate to undertake the expense [of constructing military railways]... .it will naturally try to accelerate the traffic of people and goods in, . the directions dictated by the density of the population and the volume of trade. However, these directions, these routes of traffic and commerce, are usually — indeed, almost invariably — identical to the lines of operations of armies. That these sensible words could be written by the Bavarian minister of war in 1836, when experiments with the military use of railways had hardly begun, is a sad testimonial to the readiness of many historians to copy each other’s words without giving the slightest thought to the evidence on which it is based. It is true that great difficulties were experienced by the Germans in using the railways for military purposes during the cam- paign, yet the problems experienced in transporting supplies from 107 When demigods rode rails the railheads to the troops were probably greater still. To overcome them, some attempts were made to use road steam- focomotives, but without much success. Since the engines were only able to use good roads, they were frequently forced to make large detours. Their ability to negotiate slopes was limited, and they were slow and difficult to manoeuvre. Road locomotives were used to bypass the fortress of Toul, to circumvent the demolished tunnel at Nanteuil on the railway from Nancy to Paris, and to go round the destroyed bridge at Donchery (this attempt broke down completely, the cargo finally reaching its destination with twenty-five the aid of forty-six horses, eleven pioneers). There were seven other drivers and attempts, all marked by breakdowns and a tremendous waste of time, since the loads transported, usually railway locomotives, were too heavy to be carried in one piece and had to be dismantled, transported and finally reassembled at the point of destination. That these experiments did not give rise to any great enthusiasm is understandable.” Given the failure of the train service to discharge its proper function, the entire German campaign of 1870-1 was only made possible by the fact that France is, after all, one of the richest agricultural countries in Europe, and that the war started in a favourable season of the year. For much of the mobile phase of operations, the Germans were therefore able — indeed compelled, by the failure of their supply apparatus —~ to live off the country much as Napoleon’s soldiers had done seventy years earlier. In this, they were helped by the fact that Europe had grown far richer since 1800, and if eighty people per square mile were considered very good in 1820 the average in 1870 was nearer 120. The size of armies had of course also risen, but this was largely offset by the fact that all of Moltke’s forces in 1870 were never concentrated at any single point and were able, following the French defeats early in the campaign, to spread out their corps over a wide front. Thus, during the march of II Army from Metz to the Loing, it was estimated that the country traversed had no Jess than 100,000 tons of flour and 100,000 of fodder in store, against a consumption by the army during its passage of only 1,080 and 5,500 tons respectively. As the intendant of I] Army wrote, ‘in the enemy's country it is unnecessary to economize as much as at home’. Though it was, therefore, usually possible to feed the Armies 108 Supplying War from the country, this was only true as long as they kept moving. When operations came to a halt, as they did during the sieges of Metz and Paris, very great supply difficulties were at once ex- perienced. In the case of Metz, these were only solved after a considerable period of time by the great efforts of the train com- panies, aided as they were by the fact that the railheads were relatively close at hand. In the virtually to suspend the military duration of two months and have visions instead. This employment case of Paris, it was necessary functions of the army for the the troops look after their proof an army as a food-producing machine is, to my knowledge, unique in the annals of war after 1789 and would have caused much amazement to Napoleon. Certainly, it was the last occasion when a large force belonging to an advanced State was so utilized. It is the fact that Moltke’s forces could only live as long as they kept moving, and experienced the greatest difficulty in staying in one place for more than a few days at a time, that the supreme proof lies that the military instrument in his hands did not, after all, belong to the modem age. 4 The wheel that broke State of the art For Europe as a whole, the period between 1871 and 1914 wag one of very rapid demographic and economic expansion. In just forty-four years, population grew by almost seventy per cent, from 293 to 490 millions. During the same period, industry, trade and transportation developed by leaps and bounds until, on the eve of World War I, they had totally transformed the face of the continent. In 1870, the combined production of coal and lignite by the three leading industrial countries — Britain, France, and Germany — amounted to just under 160 mitlion tons a year; by 1913, it had more than trebled to reach 612 million tons. Similarly, in 1870, the production of pig iron in the same three countries was around 7.5 million tons a year, whereas by 1913 it had grown to 29 million tons, an increase of almost 300 per cent. This expansion, needless to say, was accompanied by vast changes in the pattern of occupation and residence. If the industrial revolution may be said to have begun a hundred years before 1870, it was nevertheless the Franco-Prussian War that truly ushered in the age of coal and steel. As factory chimneys grew ever taller, so did the size of the military instruments maintained by the major continental powers. In fact, the expansion of European armies and navies during the period under review, particularly in its second half, was even more rapid than that of population and industry. Social progress, increasing administrative efficiency, and, above all, the now almost universally adopted principle of conscription, made it possible to raise huge forces which, in relation to the size of the politico-economic systems supporting them, were far larger than anything previously recorded in history. For example, in France, the second-largest military power, the pool of trained military 110 Supplying War manpower available in 1870 amounted to not quite 500,000 men in a population of thirty-seven millions (a ratio of about 74 to 1). In 1914, however, this total had grown to more than four millions, despite an increase in population of less than 10 per cent. Similarly, though the population of the German Empire grew by almost two thirds in this period, the expansion of the armed forces was such that one out of thirteen people was immediately available for military service at the outbreak of World War I, as opposed to only one out of thirty-four in 1870-1. In Europe as a whole, the size of the armed forces in their various degrees of readiness and mobilization stood at about twenty million in 1914, a figure probably never again to be approached in time of peace. As warfare became more complex the impedimenta carried by armies into the field, as well as their consumption per man per day, increased at an even greater rate than their manpower. To mention only a very few figures for the country that concems us most, the wagons constituting the train (field bakeries, hospitals, engineering equipment, etc.) of a German army corps numbered thirty in 1870, but this had been more than doubled forty years later. The count of artillery pieces available to the North German Confederation for its war against Napoleon III is said to have stood at 1,584 whereas in 1914 the total must have been nearer 8,000, many of which were far bigger and heavier. Though the number of weapons of all types organic to each corps changed surprisingly little (the number of guns, for example, grew only from sixty-four to eighty-eight) those of 1914 were mostly quickfiring and sometimes automatic, capable of shooting off quantities of ammunition much greater than their 1870 predecessors. At that time, 200 rounds per rifle were carried along inside the various transport echelons (the body of the soldiers, battalion and regimental wagons, corps reserves) of each corps, but only fifty- six of these were, on average, expended during six months of campaigning. In 1914, the number of rounds carried had increased to 280, and these were completely expended during the very first weeks of war. In 1870-1, every German gun had fired an average of just 199 shells, but the 1,000-odd rounds per barrel held in stock by the Prussian within a month and a With the increased lem, largely novel in War Ministry in 1914 were almost depleted half from the initiation of hostilities. consumption of ammunition came the prob1914, of replacing the weapons t