e. Since there were no tanks to escort them, fifty per cent of Panzerarmee’s lorry columns were shot to pieces by British armoured cars.** But the retreat dramatically cut the distances to he covered and on 16 December, with Rommel near Benghazi and preparing to evacuate the town, we are told that ‘Ib [quartermaster] officers [of DAK] have no worries; the divisions are fully supplied.’5* Sirte to Alamein Panzerarmee 191 as a whole, however, had far less cause for satis- faction. On 14 November, German pressure forced the Italians to resume convoys to Tripoli," but initially this led only to further losses. Fuel in particular was so short that, by the middle of December, the Luftwaffe in Africa found itself limited to a single sortie per day.’* This, of course, could not be allowed to continue. Overriding his admirals’ objections, Hitler resolved to send German U-boats into the Mediterranean, and the imminent reinforcement of the German air force in the Mediterranean by units coming from Russia was announced on 5 December. As an interim measure, they brought heavy pressure to bear on the French to sell them 3,600 tons of fuel.** Meanwhile, the Italians made an all-out effort to save Rommel. Having materially assisted his retreat by using warships and submarines to bring fuel to Derna and Benghazi, they next made a supreme effort and sent four battleships, three light cruisers and twenty destroyers to escort a convoy to Libya on 16-17 December. Although the operation was successful - only the battleship Littorio was damaged - it dramatically highlighted another of the problems afflicting the Axis presence in North Africa. Owing to the extremely limited capacity of the ports, only four ships could actually be escorted, and even so one of them had to leave the convoy and head for Benghazi rather than Tripoli.*? With 100,000 tons of warships being used to protect 20,000 tons of merchant shipping, the cost in fuel became prohibitive. Only once, at the beginning of January, could an operation of these proportions be repeated. Mussolini was making use of the crisis in order to revive his cherished designs on Tunisia. On 2-3 December he suggested various measures {including the supply of German oil to the Italian Navy and the use ‘on a grand scale’ of German air transport) to alleviate the situation, but at the same time added that only Bizerta could definitely solve the problem.** Hitler agreed to the first two measures, but feared that excessive pressure might drive the French down the Duce’s into the British camp, and therefore turned Tunisian plans, adding that the route from Bizerta to Libya was too long in any case.** On 8 December the chief of the Italian Armed Forces High Command accordingly considered the matter ‘liquidated’.** Once Rommel had evacuated Benghazi on 24 December, the charge, demanded that however, Mussolini returned to Germany make ‘concessions’ to 192 Supplying War France, and said he was ready to use force, even ‘the entire Italian navy’, if necessary.“ A horrified Hitler allowed negotia- tions with Vichy to be reopened, but these led to nothing."” Whether the use of Bizerta would have helped Rommel very much is doubtful. The problem of port-capacity in Africa would have been solved at a stroke, but another 500 miles would have been added to his overextended lines of communication, Of these, over 300 miles were served by two separate railways, but the L50mile gap from Gabés to Zuara would have had to be bridged by motor vehicles, of which there was a shortage. Bizerta itself, as well as the entire route to Tripoli, was well within striking range of Malta, and the railways would have made excellent targets for the RAF. In view of these facts it might have been preferable to employ ‘the entire Italian navy’ to capture Malta, though even this would not have removed the two basic problems afflicting Rommel ~ the capacity of the ports and the distances to be covered inside Africa. Meanwhile, as the DAK quartermaster’s diary shows, the situa- tion was improving. Since only 39,000 tons got across the Medi- terranean, it is clear that the improvement had little to do with any increased safety of the sea-routes. Rather, it resulted from the unexpected discovery of 13,000 tons of Italian fuel reserves near Tripoli. Even more important, Rommel's retreat to El Agheila had reduced his lines of communication ta a more manageable length of 460 miles. The arrival on 6 January 1942 of the second ‘battleship convoy’ with six vessels carrying supplies eased the situation still further. Though supplies reaching Africa during the month can hardly found Panzerarmee better.7° have and exceeded especially 50,000 DAK tons,” feeling the new very year much 1942: Annus Mirabilis The beginning of 1941 saw Hitler at the zenith of his power, dominating the whole of Western Europe and preparing to extend his hold over the Balkan peninsula also. One year later, though the territory under German control had expanded enormously, the situation had changed completely and already the shadows were gathering around the Third Reich. On 10 Decem- ber 1941, the United States formally joined in the struggle against Sirte to Alamein 193 Hitler. At the same time, the Wehrmacht in Russia was being held, then thrown back for the first time since the beginning of the war. Whether it is true, as some authorities argue, that Ger- many had already forfeited any hope of emerging the victor may remain an open question. Certainly, the one chance which she still stood was to concentrate all available forces in a supreme effort to defeat the enemy in the East before those in the West could bring all their resources to bear, and therefore everything else should have been subordinated to this one aim. Whether, under these circumstances, a fresh attack in North Africa was warranted is questionable. In January 1942, Rommel was still holding an area large enough to defend. The shorter line of communications had impreved his supply situation, and the burden of maintaining a logistic organization over hundreds of miles of desert now rested on the enemy. Though the arrival of Kesselring’s 2 Air Fleet had done much to ease the situation in the central Mediterranean, the supplies would only become really secure if a railway from Tripoli to the front were constructed.” Not even Rommel could overlook the fact that logistic difficulties were bound to reappear once the offensive was resumed. Accordingly, he demanded another 8,000 trucks for his supply columns. This was out of the question, since at the time all four German armoured groups operating in Russia could muster only 14,000 lorries between would again disrupt and even them.” Mussolini Rejecting wamed this Rommel his supplies. request, OKH, Rintelen that any fresh advance For the second time running, the German general disregarded the warning and on 29 January, after another lightning-stroke, his forces re-entered Benghazi where they were fortunate to recapture some of their own stocks. The rest of the story can be read in the diary of that paradigm of military efficiency, his own DAK. On 9 February, 100 per cent supplies could no longer be guaranteed to the troops, and by the next day tactical developments had overtaken Jogistical possibili- ties to such an extent that, because of the enormous distances and chronic lack of vehicles, no more ammunition was reaching the forward troops. On 12 February the DAK quartermaster angrily demanded an urgent interview with Rommel. On 13 February it was announced that the advance would stop at El Gazala, 900 miles from Tripoli.” From mid-February to May, the voluminous correspondence between Panzerarmee Afrika and OKH is for the most part free 194 Supplying War from complaints about the logistic situation.’* This is remarkable, for while reinforcements had raised Rommel’s strength to ten divisions (three German, seven Italian) and, accordingly, increased his requirements to 100,000 tons,’* he was in fact receiving an average of only 60,000 tons during each of these four months.’ This was rather less than what a considerably smaller Panzerarmee had received during the difficult period of June- October 1941, and yet it enabled Rommel, first to take the offen- sive, and then to prepare another and even more spectacular one. These seemingly incomprehensible facts can be accounted for by the following considerations. First, the demand a month was much of ten German exaggerated; divisions at full for 100,000 tons it corresponded to the needs strength, whereas the forces actually under Rommel’s command were much smaller.’* Second, Panzerarmee was able to maintain itself at 900 miles from Tripoli because Benghazi, which had contributed little during the pre- vious offensive, was now operating at full capacity.”* As a result, the distance to be covered by approximately one third of his supplies was reduced toa still formidable, but ultimately manageable, 280 miles, As there were no ports of any size east of Benghazi, however, a further advance was bound to end in a new crisis. Mussolini and his chief of the Armed Forces High Command, General Cavallero, realized this and demanded that a halt be called, but Rommel intended drive to to wait Tobruk, only for reinforcements the Libyan—-Egyptian before frontier, resuming and his beyond. Asked by Commando Supremo how he intended to keep his army supplied, Rommel confessed that he did not know — the logistic services would somehow have to ‘adapt themselves’ to the tactical situation.*° Having failed to dissuade Rommel, the Italians tried to prevent him from carrying out his plans by taking advantage of Hitler's wish to capture Malta, the focal point of the British position in the central Mediterranean, before mounting a fresh offensive in Africa.’ By preparing a landing of such propor- tions that it could not possibly be carried out before the end ol July, they hoped to force Rommel to postpone his offensive until the autumn.* The newly-appointed German CIC South, Field! Marshal Kesselring, spotted this intention and tried to persuade them to take Malta by a coup de main.** The Italians, however, were obstinate, and the question was referred to the Axis leaders at their meeting of 29-30 April. Since Hitler supported the idea Sirte to Alamein 195 of an early offensive — he considered Egypt ‘ripe for revolution’ a compromise solution was worked out. Late in May, Rommel was to attack and capture Tobruk. He was not, however, to cross the Egyptian frontier, and was ordered to terminate operations by 20 June, to enable the Luftwaffe to redeploy for the seizure of Malta. During the last thirty years, the merits of this decision have been endlessly debated. From a purely operational point of view, it was probably correct. By denying the Cyrenaecan airfields to the British, Malta was isolated.** The logistic problem, on the other hand, was far more complex. Rommel’s supplies, as we have seen, depended less on Malta than on the capacity of the Libyan ports and the distances to be covered inside Africa. While the former problem could perhaps have been solved, the latter was bound to remain because there were not enough vehicles available to bring DAK up to establishment.** Thus, an advance to Sollum, while not producing any strategic victory, would merely have added another 150 miles to his already overextended line of communications, at a time when the Italians were using the excuse of a shortage of fuel oil in order to divert a growing proportion of the German commander's oil back from Benghazi to Tripoli.’ With the capacity of Tobruk so limited, even the cap- ture of Malta would not have solved Rommel’s supply problem. This had become clear in June of the previous year, when the length of Panzerarmee’s communications had caused endless difficulties even though supplies were crossing the Mediterranean practically unhindered. The problem facing the Axis, then, was a double one —- how to guarantee the sa