er to reach Moscow — not to mention the line, still further away, from Archangelsk to the Volga — by means of motor transport alone, at least ten times the number needed." At of vehicles the same actually time, the available would Eisenbahntruppe, have on been whose shoulders the main burden of the logistic apparatus ultimately rested, were hy no means sufficiently numerous, as well as being in some ways ill-equipped and ill-trained. That the railways were far from being a sufficiently flexible instrument to be able to give backing to a Blitzkrieg, the events of 1914, or even those of 1870, had amply demonstrated. Yet even by disregarding the entire railway network and concentrating all its resources on motor vehicles, the Wehrmacht could not have even approached a degree of motorization sufficient to enable it to carry on war against Russia by means of motor transport alone. Thanks to the fact that it concentrated the bulk of its motor vehicles behind the four Panzergruppen, and also because the infantry did not have too much fighting to do during the early stages of the campaign, the Wehrmacht succeeded in driving its spearheads to Luga in the north, the Dnieper in the south and Smolensk in the centre. At these points operations came to a halt, as had indeed been expected to happen even before the campaign was launched. At Army Group North, the building of a new base took so long as to nullify any prospect of taking Leningrad. At Army Group South, it was so difficult as to make it necessary to start the next offensive without any proper base at all, with the result that operations east of the Dnieper always hung by a 176 Supplying War thread and ultimately came to a halt short of the operational objectives. At Army Group Centre, the construction of a forward hase took the best part of two months and even then some cru- cially important items, including above all spare parts, tyres and engine oil, remained in short supply. As to the ‘supply’ of tyres, this was so small as to merit one adjective only - ridiculous. There is no doubt that the logistic situation would not have allowed an advance by Army Group Centre on Moscow at the end of August. At the very best, a force of between 14 and 17 armoured, motorized and infantry divisions might have been so employed 7*t and whether this would have been enough, even in September 1941, to break through the city’s defences is very much open to question. It is arguable, moreover, that since the approaches to Moscow were less suited to mobile warfare than was the Ukraine, not even Panzergruppe 2 could have been supplied. By preventing Guderian from being sent to Kiev, OKH would have spared his tanks much wear and tear and perhaps made it possible to speed up the replenishment of 2 Army. The main forces of Army Group Centre would not have been affected, however, The for their supplies performance came through of this line was such another railway-line. that, even as late as 26 September, fuel stocks of Army Group Centre were actually falling. The delay imposed by Hitler's decision to give the Ukraine priority over Moscow was therefore far shorter than the usual estimate of six weeks. The postponement, if there was one, can hardly have amounted to more than a week or two, at the very most. The difficulties experienced in building up a base for the attack on Moscow also rule out another suggestion that is some- times made, namely that Hitler, instead of dissipating his forces in simultaneous offensives along three divergent axes, ought to have concentrated them for a single attack against Moscow. The logistic situation ruled out such a solution, however, for the few roads and railroads available would not have allowed such a force to be supplied. Even as it was, the concentration of seventy divisions for the attack early in October gave rise to very great difficulties, especially with the railways and the supply of fuel. It would have been utterly impossible to construct an adequate forward base for a force twice that size. Among the factors that prevented the Germans from entering Moscow, general mud is usually considered the most important. It is true that the weather delayed the Germans by two Russian roulette to three weeks, but it must be remembered 177 that a crisis in railway transportation had been developing well before the onset of the rasputitsa, the season of slush. During October, railway performance was hopelessly inadequate, and supplies of fuel almost nonexistent, owing to shortages in the Reich. Had it not been for this breakdown of railway transport, it is probable that Bock could have resumed his attack by up to a week earlier than was actually the case. In the event, frost when it came hit the railways more than it did motor transport, and whereas the Jatter was still giving valuable — if limited — service in November, the former was reduced to almost negligible proportions by a shortage of locomotives, In view of the undoubted importance of mud as a factor in the German defeat, it has been suggested that the Wehrmacht was wrong in basing its logistic system on wheels instead of tracks.1** It is true that only tracklaying vehicles could have negotiated the approaches to Moscow in October. However, to suggest that all the 3,000-odd vehicles of the armoured divisions ought to have been of this kind is to misunderstand completely the working of the German war machine during this period. Even if they had been capable of producing so many tracked vehicles, which of course they were not, the Germans would have been hopelessly unable to provide them with fuel and spare parts, both of which were in desperately short supply. Indeed, such are the demands of tracked vehicles in these two respects that, even in today’s world, which is capable of feats of production far in excess of the Wehrmacht’s wildest dreams, there is not a single army anywhere in the world that carries all, or even most, of its supplies on such vehicles. Since the Wehrmacht that set out to conquer Russia in 1941 was a poor army with strictly limited resources, success — from the logistic point of view ~ depended above all on a correct balance between railways, wheels and tracks. A detailed scrutiny of the logistic system, as well as the plain fact that the German victories of 1941 were among the greatest of all time, seem to indicate that, by and large, this balance was achieved and that the solution which was actually adopted was probably the best possible. Had politico-military-economic considerations allowed Germany to attempt the conquest of Russia in a slow and method- ical manner, more reliance could have been placed on the railways. Had a very much stronger motor industry existed, wheels 178 Supplying War and tracks could have played a larger role. However, during the whole of World War II there was only one belligerent that could even begin to create a fully motorized army — the United States. This should not be taken to mean that, within the limits of the resources available, German planning and organization were always ideal. This was far from being the case, as is shown by the following examples. The division of the transportation system between two authorities, the Chef des Transportwesen and the quartermaster-general, with only the chief of the general staff to coordinate their functions, was ill-conceived and led to endless friction. The structure of the quartermaster-general’s organization was also unsatisfactory, for it deprived the Army Group com- manders of their own supply-apparatus and left them sandwiched uneasily between OKH on one hand and the Army quartermasters on the other, the latter receiving their orders not from the com- manders but from Wagner's Aussenstelle. In planning the campaign, too much reliance was placed on the capture and utilization of Russian rolling-stock, When locomotives and wagons failed to materialize in the desired quantities, it became necessary to convert the lines to German gauge, an operation which was not technically very difficult but which required more Eisenbahniruppe than the Germans had available. The result was that both German and Russian lines had to be used, the transfer-points becoming bottlenecks that were con- stantly being pushed forward but never eliminated. Coordination between the headquarters responsible for reconstructing the railways and those who operated them was faulty, with the former ignoring the requirements of the latter. Planning and control of the railway transports into Russia were far from perfect. The governor of Poland, Frank, was uncooperative, and it was not until November 194] that the army finally succeeded in having its demand for absolute priority for military trains accepted.’** There was not enough personnel to unload the trains, and prisoners of war had to be used for this task.** Traffic control was decidedly lax, so that some trains were ‘hijacked’ and others completely lost. Communication with local personnel was difficult, because of the language problem. Between the time a railway was completed and its becoming operational, long and unwarranted delays often occurred.'** The system lacked flexibility, especially regarding the cancellation of trains.!"* The forces allocated to guarding the lines were totally inadequate. Russian roulette 179 As the number of field police was far too small, road-traffic control was at all times poor, and sometimes led to considerable friction, especially at the beginning of the campaign - when the Handkoffer earmarked to replenish the ‘fast’ formations remained in the same place for days on end — and during the battle of Moscow, when competition for the few available roads reached catastrophic dimensions.’*’ The motor transport companies were badly organized, not enough of them being concentrated in the hands of OKH.'** The troops were continually trying to overcome the shortages of material by bypassing the regular supply channels, an evil that could never be entirely eradicated. On the other hand, the same troops displayed a marked reluctance to cooperate with the service of supply, the result being that their organic vehicles were not sufficiently utilized and, even though they were exposed to enemy action, actually suffered fewer losses than did the overworked Grosstransportraum. The quartermasters at army level were unable to exercise proper control over the division of booty, the result being that some units saturated themselves with captured vehicles, whereas others, especially the rear services, suffered from grave shortages. The loading of the motor transport had initially been based on erroneous calculations, there being too much ammunition and too little fuel. The result was a shortage of the latter, whereas the former had to be left lying in the field because the trucks that were supposed to carry it could not get their tanks replenished.*? That the utilization of the lorry companies was not always perfect is shown by the incredible diversion of 5,000 tons of precious Grosstransportraum from Bock to Rundstedt, at the very moment when the former was about to begin his decisive offensive against Moscow. Back in Germany, calculations as to the loss of vehicles to be expected were hopelessly optimistic. It was intended to conduct the operation without bringing up any replacements as all."° The relative priorities allowed to the production of self-propelled vehicles — including tanks ~ on one hand, and their spare parts on the other, were ill-advised. This was the result of Hitler's fascination with numbers, and his insistence that establishing new formations was preferable to the bringing up to establishment of existing ones.* Spare parts were therefore in short supply, and the arrangement by which they were only issued to the troops en liew for used ones led to constant friction with the supply service.'*? The organization of the repair-service was also faulty, 180 Supplying War since a large part of it remained in th