e Reich on the assumption that the campaign would be over before a major overhaul became necessary.™4* While listing all these shortcomings, it is essential not to lose a sense of perspective. Logistics form but one part of the art of war, and war itself is but one of the many forms that political relationships between human societies may assume. Whether Germany was strong enough, in 1941, to defeat Russia while waging a war on two fronts may well be doubted.“* However, it is difficult to see what other way was open to Hitler, after his failure either to reach a political settlement with Britain or to render her harmless by military means.'** Risky the war against Russia may have been, but there can be little doubt that it was essential for the Third Reich’s survival, even if one does not believe that a Soviet attack was imminent. This war was lost on grounds other than logistic, including a doubtful strategy, a tickety structure of command and an unwarranted dispersion of scarce resources. While recognizing the magnitude of the achievement — among other things, logistic - that brought the Wehrmacht almost within sight of the Kremlin, the above-listed factors certainly played an important role in its failure, and for this it is OKH, not Hitler, who must be held responsible. In logistics, as in everything else lying between minor tactics and strategy, the Fithrer had no interest whatsoever. Apart from one or two points, any errors that were committed in these fields ~ which is said to comprise nine-tenths of the business of war — must be laid squarely at the door of Halder and the General Staff. Even the most important decision Hitler made during the campaign of 1941, namely the sending of Guderian into the Ukraine instead of towards Mascow, was justified on logistic grounds and certainly had little to do with the postponement of the drive on the Russian capital. In war, it is often the small things that matter; and in many of these the Wehrmacht had been weighed, counted, and found wanting. 6 Sirte to Alamein Desert complications The question whether an Axis advance into the Middle East could have won the war for Hitler is still one of the most controversial in the history of World War II. Whereas earlier writers claimed that by supporting Rommel in a drive from Libya through Egypt, Britain,” more Palestine, Hitler could have gone recent Syria and far towards scholars have Iraq to the winning questioned Persian the war this Gulf, against view and assert that, in the final analysis, the Fihrer was right in refusing to regard the Mediterranean as anything but a secondary theatre.? Whatever their differences, both schools agree that the problem was essentially one of Hitler's volition. That is, the question was not whether he could have sent more forces to the Mediterranean but whether he should have done so. This, how- ever, is by no means self-evident. While Rommel in his memoirs has cast the blame for failing to solve his supply problem very widely, the man responsible for coordinating those supplies - the German military attaché in Rome - has written an article claiming that the problem was insoluble in the first place." Since, however, both accounts are cursory, and their authors hardly disinterested, the question remains whether the aforementioned objectives were within reach of the Axis forces. To begin with, the problem itself needs to be clearly defined. First, although Hitler and his staff did in fact have plans for the occupation of Gibraltar and even for seizing French North-West Africa with the adjacent islands,‘ we shall assume that it was in the eastern Mediterranean, if at all, that the war against Britain could have been won. Second, it is assumed that any Axis advance into the Middle East would have been limited to the south, ie. Libya and Egypt, because an attempt to go through Turkey 182 would Supplying War have met with Soviet resistance and developed into a German-Soviet war.’ These two assumptions enable us to ignore most of the political difficulties involved in Germany's cooperation with Italy, France, Spain and Turkey, and to focus on the question whether a German-Italian advance from Egypt and the Middle East was militarily feasible. Libya into Rommel's first offensive In the annals of military history the campaigns waged in the Western Desert are often said to occupy a unique place, and no- where is this more true than in the field of supply. By and large, the story of logistics is concerned with the gradual emancipation of armies from the need to depend on local supplies, though we have had ample occasion to see that this development was by no means a straight and simple one. Even a Guderian in Russia and a Patton commanding a motorized army in France were able to make direct use of some local resources at least, and behind both there came vast administrative machineries whose purpose it was to organize the zone of communications and exploit it in the interest of the war-effort as a whole. Operating in the desert. neither the British nor their German opponents had the slightest hope of finding anything useful but camel dung, and while the former did at least possess a base of some considerable size in Egypt, the latter were entirely dependent on sea-transport even for their most elementary requirements. For just over two years, every single ton that was consumed by Rommel’s troops had to be laboriously crated in Italy, then shipped across the Mediter- ranean, Ammunition, petrol, food, everything was brought up in this way, and such were conditions in the desert that even water often had to be transported over hundreds of miles. Added to this problem were the enormous distances that were out of all proportion to anything the Wehrmacht had been asked to deal with in Europe. From Brest-Litovsk, on the GermanSoviet demarcation line in Poland, to Moscow it was only some 600 miles. This was approximately equal to the distance from Tripoli to Benghazi, but only half that from Tripoli to Alexan- dvia. Apart from odd bits of 95cm. track,* these vast empty spaces had to be entirely covered by road, and even of these there was only one - the Via Balbia stretching endlessly along the coast, sometimes liable to be interrupied by floods and always a con- Sirte to Alamein 183 venient target for aircraft roaming overhead. Apart from this there were only desert tracks, which, though they had perforce to be used, subjected the vehicles traversing them to greatly increased wear and tear. Wholly unaccustomed to desert warfare as they were, the Germans faced some further problems that reflected their lack of experience. Their diet, for example, was unsuited to the African heat, its fat-content being too high. Partly as a result of this, it was considered impossible to have a soldier stationed in Libya for more than two years without his health being permanently affected. German engines, especially those of motor cycles, tended to overheat and stall, Tank engines also suffered, their life being reduced from 1400-1600 miles to only 300-900.7 Some of the effects of the heat and poor roads might have been prevented by strict maintenance, but this was not a field to which Rommel paid the greatest attention. In any case, maintenance ially difficult because German standardized.* Looking back was espec- Rommel wrote and Italian equipment was not some years later, that a general should take personal care of his supplies in order to “force the supply staffs to develop their initiative’.° In practice, however, this only meant that in the balancing of operational prospects against logistical possibilities the latter were frequently ignored. The sending of Wehrmacht units to North Africa was first given serious consideration in the early days of October 1940."* A German staff officer, General Ritter von Thoma, was detached to the Italian army advancing into Egypt in order to study conditions on the spot. On 23 October he reported that only motorized forces were of any use in the desert. To ensure success, ‘nothing less than four armoured divisions would suffice’, and this was also ‘the maximum with supplies in an advance This small force would have implying the replacement German ones, a step that could be effectively maintained across the desert to the Nile Valley’. to be of the highest quality, he said, of the Italian troops in Libya by to which, as Hitler well knew, Mussolini would never give his consent."' No decision was made, and with that the matter ended for the time being. In January 1941 it arose again. Instead of penetrating further into Egypt, the Italians were being thrown out of Cyrenaica by Wavell’s Nile Army. Hitler, although he felt that even the loss of the whole of North Africa was ‘militarily tolerable’ to the Axis,’* 184 Supplying War sufficiently feared the political repercussions of such a development on Mussolini’s position to want to send a Sperrverband to help stem the British advance. Since, as his staff hastened to point out, such a unit would ultimately have to be taken away from the forces earmarked for the projected invasion Fiihrer resolved to keep it as small as possible. In the event, the maintenance of Russia,’* the of even this small force proved problematical from the beginning. Some personnel and a limited quantity of supplies could be flown in. Early in 1942, no less than 260 aircraft - including a mumber of giant ten-engined hydroplanes — were thus engaged. However, the bulk of the materiel would have to go by sea. With Naples, Bari, Brindisi and Taranto all available as ports of embarkation, little difficulty was to be expected at the Italian end of the crossing, though the structure of the Italian railway network was such that most transports were confined to the first of these ports. However, following their retreat from Cyrenaica, the Italians, in February 1941, were reduced to a single port for untoading supplies. This was Tripoli, the largest Libyan harbour by far, capable of handling — under ideal conditions - five cargo ships or four troop transports simultaneously. Its capacity, as long as no unforeseen explosions wrecked the quays, and the largely local labour-force was not driven off by air raids, amounted to approximately 45,000 tons per month. At Tripoli, however, the problem of maintaining an army in North Africa was only beginning. On operational grounds, Hitler wisely made his agreement to help Mussolini in Africa conditional on the Italians holding not just Tripoli and its immediate surroundings, as they had originally intended to do, but a considerable area that would enable his forces to manoeuvre and afford some protection against air attacks.’* This decision, together with Churchill's withdrawal of part of Wavell’s force for employment in Greece, led to the front being stabilized at Sirte, 300 miles east of Tripoli. Since there was no adequate railway running eastward from Tripoli circumstances, this the meant that, German even under force would the have most to favourable operate at a distance from its base half again as large as that normally considered the limit for the effective supply of an army by motor transport.'* Instigated by his generals, Mussolini ventured to draw Rintelen’s attention to this fact; the Germans, however, chose to override him, thus creating for themselves that clash Sirte to Alamein 185 between operational and logistic considerations that was to bedevil their presence in Africa to the end. A motorized force of one division, such as the Germans originally sent to Libya, required 350 tons of supplies a day, including water. To transport this quantity over 300 miles of desert, the Army High calculated Command apart that, troops’ the from organic vehicles and excluding any reserves, thirty-nine columns each consisting of thirty two-ton trucks would be needed.’* This, however, was only the beginning. Rommel had scarcely arrived in Tripoli when Hitler, overriding he started clamouring for reinfor