by the fact that the surface of such metalled ones as existed had already begun to deteriorate on the third day of the campaign.?? There were unmetalled roads, but during the first week of July heavy rainfall turned them into quagmires, thus confirming the fears expressed by Lossberg one year earlier. Because of the appalling roads, and also enemy action by isolated parties that had not been smashed by the advancing Panzers, losses among the lorries of the Grosstransportraum already reached twenty-five per cent within 19 days of the start of the campaign.*° A week later the figure for Army Group Centre reached one third, a situation which was made worse by the fact that facilities for making major repairs were not pushed forward, but remained far to the rear in Poland and even in the Reich itself. = 3G . e Y Finland N a 2 > gr Tallin BALTIC SEA CZ GD l y 6 , ‘ iLadoga ‘Lgrungrad Lat timen sValdai Kalinin RICO, AG. : £ jonas 2DD Konigsbeyg Prussia 4°" S L- Citevskt Me Nene Stovakia red a Lvov yo “ 2 s tog ‘ 1 nf Cale _pOrel * nya : ol Kiew Umane Roy Kursk Kharkhovg. ee y% Odes; i a niepropettovsk Permovaisk ‘ tON} oN SS re Bryan = = Marshes: or, Hungary q ~ * ppd Tuk Roslavl rgatnoweni S - AG. So Orta Minsk? or" wd (AS) drvaiside 2A Polajd ‘Vyaz'ma ‘Smalenske, East ° Moscow : ad lotsk ~ Warsant . naberg Oot "eo” Worth] PEN Rostov st Manupol SEA OF "AzOV ~ Rumania 2g 200 mules BLACK Z SEA 7. German operations in Russia, June—December 1941 Intog Russian roulette 157 Apart from the rapid decrease in the quantity of motor trans- sport available, conditions in Russia also created difficulties in the operation of such vehicles as remained. There was an increased demand for fuel caused by the bad roads, rising to 330,000 tons a month (9,000 daily) instead of 250,000 as had been expected. In Russia, a normal Verbrauchssdtz for 100 km (60 miles) lasted for 70 only.*? The ruthless utilization of engines led to their rapid deterioration and increased the consumption of oil as against that of petrol from two to five or seven per cent.** Spare parts, especially tyres, were hard to obtain, because of the Reich's rapidly sinking stocks of rubber. Under such conditions the actual capacity of the Grosstransportraum fell far below that which had been expected, and it became difficult to supply the operation every time the front was more than sixty miles removed from the railways.** In view of the hopes of OKH different gauge of the Russian railroads, the for their operation rested heavily on the utilization of captured rolling stock. Partly because the combat troops did not pay sufficient attention to the problem, however, these hopes were disappointed and it became necessary for OKH to furnish the army groups, as well as the air force supporting them, with a daily list of railways to sever inside their respective theatres of operation.** Nevertheless, it proved impossible to retain as large a part of the original network as had been planned. The task of conversion was heavier than expected, and the troops responsible for it were hampered by the fact that, since operations mostly followed the roads, the railways frequently had to be cleared of the enemy first.** This, then, was one result of the attempt to conduct a campaign with the technical means of one age and keep it supplied with those of another. Though aided by the fact that the Russian sleepers were made of wood, not iron, the changing of the gauge was time consuming and did not solve all problems. Russian rails being lighter than German ones, per unit of length and the number of sleepers being smaller by one third, it was impossible to run heavy locomotives over converted track, which meant that use had to be made chiefly of older material. As Soviet engines were larger than German ones, water-stations were further apart, and many of these had been destroyed. Russian coal could not be used by German engines except by adding to it either German coal or petrol. Signal and communications equipment was in very short supply, having 158 Supplying War been dismantled by the retreating Soviets or, as frequently, by the advancing German troops. Nor did the railway construction battalions always carry out the repairs in a form that was acceptable from the point of view of those who would have to operate the lines. Concerned above all with restoring the greatest possible length of tracks and bridges, the Eisenbahntruppe frequently paid no attention to such vital matters as access to quays, workshops and engine sheds, the need to supply locomotives with coal, or even the elementary fact that one double line can carry more than two single ones. All this meant that, though General Gercke might fix the number of trains to be run each day at 48 and 24 for the two kinds of lines respectively, his figures remained largely theoretical and could never be approached in practice.** Finally, the conversion of Russian track created problems with the rolling-stock that was captured. Although a simple procedure could adapt wagons to standard gauge, equipment thus treated could not be used outside Russia. Locomotives were impossible to convert at all, and were therefore handed over to the Finns. Another problem that must be considered before passing to the more detailed examination of the relationship between logistics and operations is that of the utilization of captured supplies. We have seen that Soviet fuel, both liquid and solid, was different from German fuel and could not be used without at least some preparations. Though Russian food was of course perfectly edible, the retreating Red Army did not form dumps but distributed pro- visions meant straight that from there the were trains few to the magazines troops’ vehicles, to capture. which As the Germans penetrated deeper into Russia, it became possible to make use of the resources of the conquered country, and at one point Wagner estimated that only fifty per cent of all subsistence had to be brought up from the zone of the interior. Nevertheless, provisions - even when fodder is included ~ formed only a small fraction of all supply requirements, German economy, However beneficial to the the utilization of Russian resources could not relieve the demands made on either the railways or the Gross- transportraum to any significant extent. Of the three German army groups that entered Russia on 22 June 1941, Field Marshal von Leeb’s Heeresgruppe Nord was the smallest and in this respect, the easiest to supply. It was also the one whose objective was nearest, the distance from its base in East Prussia to Leningrad being only about 500 miles. Compared Russian roulette 159 with the rest of Russia the Baltic countries had a good road and railroad network, especially near the coast. The further north-east one went, however, the forests became denser and the roads fewer. The head of the quartermaster-general’s Aussenstelle with this Army Group was Major Toppe. To carry out his task he had under his control (apart from the Grosstransportraum which was subordinated to Wagner himself) fifty lorry-columns and ten motorized supply companies with bakeries, butcheries and so on. Also at his disposal were two supply bases at Tilsit and Gum- bingen, containing between them 27,803 tons of ammunition, 44,658 tons of provisions and 39,899 tons of fuel, as well as pioneering, engineering and signals equipment.*° Leeb’s forces were divided into three armies, 16th, 18th and 4th armoured (known as Panzergruppe 4) and comprised a total of 26 divisions, including six ‘fast’ ones. The section of an armoured division could be expected to consume about 300 tons of supplies a day, the rest perhaps 200. Also, Keller’s I Air Fleet with some 400 planes was to be supplied. Ordered by Hitler's directive of December 1940 to destroy the Soviet forces in the Baltic countries first of all,*° Leeb’s forces crossed the frontier at 0305 hours with Panzergruppe 4 sandwiched between the two infantry armies and acting as a spearhead. The pace of the advance was spectacular, with one arm- oured corps (von Manstein’s 56th) reaching Dunaburg and seizing the crossings over the Dvina on 26 June, thus covering a distance of almost 200 miles in five days, However, the Panzergruppe had already outrun its service of supply. Crowded off the roads by the columns of marching infantry, the lorry-columns were brought to a standstill for days on end, with the result that, as early as 24 June, only an airlift could avert serious shortages of fuel and ammunition in both armoured corps.’ Under these conditions the establishment of a forward supply base was an indis- pensable preliminary to any further advance, and this compelled the tanks to rest, immobilized, until 4 July. Even then, a fresh operation could only be mounted by concentrating the bulk of Army Group North’s Grosstransportraum behind Panzergruppe 4, at the cost of bringing 16. Army to a temporary halt. Having crossed the Dvina, the two corps that made up Panzer- gruppe 4 were sent north along two divergent axes. Manstein’s force moved towards Lake Ilmen with the aim of sealing of Leningrad from the east, while Reinhardt’s 41st Armoured Corps 160 Supplying War made its thrust further west towards Luga on the direct road to Leningrad. Once again, the rate of progress was incredible. By 10 July, Reinhardt’s units were standing at Luga, another 200 miles from Dunaburg and only about 80 from Leningrad. By this time, however, both corps were operating in terrain that was heavily wooded and ill-suited for armour, so that the advance slowed down, suffering from a lack of infantry. The latter had been left far behind and was still strung out over hundreds of miles all through the Baltic countries. At this point, Army Group North found itself facing a dilemma. It was clear that infantry was better suited to the type of terrain now encountered. On the other hand, Panzergruppe 4 had already announced that the supply situation would not allow it to reach Leningrad unless both 16. and 18. Armies were halted in order to enable all available transport to be concentrated behind a single thrust.*? Von Leeb could not bring himself to make such a radical decision, however, and the units of Panzergruppe 4 therefore found themselves almost within going one supply crisis after the As the armoured spearheads Eisenbahntruppe behind them railways and convert them to reach of Leningrad, but under- other.“ plunged deeper into Russia the worked feverishly to restore the German gauge. By 10 July some 300 miles had thus been rebuilt, but line capacity was still so low that, instead of the ten required, only one train per day was reaching Dunaburg which was already hundreds of miles behind the front.* For the railheads to keep up with the advance was clearly impossible. Russian tracks with captured rolling-stock had to be used, and (Umschlagstellen) bottleneck it soon from became German clear that to Russian of the entire logistic system, Thus, the transfer-points trains formed heavy the congestion occurred at Eydtkau as early as 30 June.’® Three days later, the situation at the railway transfer point of Schaulen was said to be ‘catastrophic’, to the point that the shock waves went all the way up the military hierarchy until they reached Field Marshal von Brauchitsch, commander in chief of the army, himself.*" Nevertheless, the station of Schaulen was again blocked on 11 July. Instead of the regulation 3 hours, it was found that unloading the trains took 12, 24 and even 80 hours, hopelessly congesting the stations and making it impossible to utilize more than a fraction of the capacity of those lines that were in use.** So great was the confusion that whole trains were being ‘lost’, some never to re- Russian roulette 161 appear again.** As a result, the service of supply, though it never actually broke down, was constantly in a state of crisis. Scarcely a day passed without some unit sounding the alarm. Whereas Toppe thought he need