e average number for the first half of August did not in fact exceed 18. After the conversion the Orsha-Smolensk railroad on 16 August some improvement, but the target number was never reached.1°? Though this was to be act of the Russian campaign, OKH to the of the German gauge of situation showed 30 trains per day final and decisive did not concentrate all its resources behind it. On 15 August a nervous Hitler ordered Hoth’s Panzergruppe 3 to send out a corps in order to help Army Group North, a move which not only led it into very difficult country where the ‘use of tanks was very stupid’, but also created supply difficulties because it involved a change of direction by almost 180 degrees.1°* Nevertheless, Brauchitsch seems to have agreed with Hitler on this occasion. What is more, he ordered 5,000 tons Grosstransportraum to be diverted from Army Group Centre to Army Group South, where stockpiling was meeting with great difficulties.°* In view of this almost unbelievable dispersion of resources, 9, Army on 14 September flatly declared that its trans- port “was insufficient to support the coming operations’.'°° The commander of 4. Army, von Kluge, took a personal interest in the state of supply when he wrote:?* Russian roulette 171 The supply situation of the Army may, on the whole, be regarded as secure. . .with the growing distances, the Army is almost completely dependent on the railways. At the moment, the latter meet current consumption only. The transport situation did not so far allow the establishment of depéts sufficiently large to enable the troops to receive what they need in accordance with the tactical situation, The Army lives from hand to mouth, especially as regards the fuel situation. After being interrupted for eight days because of floods," stock- building for Army Group Centre was resumed on 21 September, and by the end of the month was more or less complete. However, this could only be achieved by cutting back on subsistence, so that the troops were forced to live off the country. Other shortages included motor oil (the bottleneck of the entire transportation system), vehicles, engines, spare parts for tanks (which, on Hitler's orders, were not being manufactured at all) and tyres, which only arrived at the rate of one a month for every sixteen vehicles.*? Fuel was so short that the shortage threatened to bring the operation to a halt in November. This was due partly to its non-availability at home, and partly to the impossibility of supplying six armies (including three armoured ones — Hoepner’s Panzergruppe 4 had now joined the Army Group Centre) with some seventy divisions between them, at a distance of 400 miles from their bases.'** After getting off to a late start on 2 October, the German attack on Moscow was at first as successful as during the previous offen- sives. formed Operating Vyaz'ma a prong in the usual manner, Hoth of a pincer-movement on 8 October, and Hoepner that snapped trapping some 650,000 each shut at Russians. At the same time, Guderian in the far south was making good progress in his efforts to outflank the defences of Moscow from the right. There were problems of supply from 4 October when Panzergruppe 4 complained that it had begun the operation with only 50 per cent of its motor transport still serviceable.° Four days later 4. Army protested against the small number of fuel-trains arriving from the rear.’? Between 9 and 11 October, the weather broke; rain turned the countryside into a morass, and the few roads that were available quickly broke up under the weight of traffic. From this time for about three weeks all armies were stuck 172 Supplying War in the mire, unable to move either forward or backward, and the troops reduced to living on whatever could still be taken away from the country. In the autumn mud, Hitler's soldiers foundered. For the success of its offensive, the world’s most modern army now depended on small parties of infantrymen, unsupported by heavy weapons and accompanied only by panje carts. Although Army Group Centre remained stuck in its place until frost set in around 7 November, this does not mean that the situation was everywhere uniformly bad, or that no local improve- ments occurred, enabling at least some supplies to go through. Moreover, close scrutiny of the quartermasters’ diaries reveals what divisional histories tend to conceal, namely that the diffi- culties were due as much to the poor performance of the railways as to the ubiquitous mud. Since the crisis in railway transportation {especially of fuel) began well before the onset of frost, this goes some way to correct the impression that the German failure to take Moscow stemmed solely from the lateness of the season.?? Thus, at Guderian’s Panzergruppe 2, the state of the roads led to grave supply problems from 11 October onward. At the same time, however, the number of fuel-trains reaching Orel fell very sharply, thus making it impossible to resume the offensive even after frost had hardened the roads and the tactical situation had once more become ‘favourable’. At Strauss’ 9, Army, only four fuel-trains arrived in the twenty days from 23 October to 13 November, in spite of the fact that mild frost (5 degrees centigrade below zero) did not set in till 11 November, and remained at this level for several days more."!* South of the main motorway from Smolensk to Moscow, Panzergruppe 4 was still advancing slowly as late as 25 October, driving ‘a weak opponent’ before it and imploring OKH to make ‘ruthless use’ of the railways in order to provide it with fuel."* At 2. Army, the situation first became serious on 21 October. Its artery of supply, the road from Roslav!’ to Bryansk, had deteriorated and out of the 3 daily trains that the Army was demanding at either Orel or Bryansk only one arrived. Weichs thereupon wamed that his supply situation would become desperate unless trains arrived, an admonish- ment that was repeated day after day until the end of the month."** Alone among the Army commanders, von Kluge repeatedly asserted that his stocks were large enough, but the diffi- culty lay in bringing them to the troops, for which purpose the railway to Vyaz'ma was coming into operation from 23 October Russian roulette 173 onward. There followed a few critical days, but on 28 October the supply situation was once again said to be ‘secure’, and there is evidence for this in the reserves then available to the troops." Frost in this sector seems to have started earlier than anywhere else, thus improving conditions on the roads and enabling the Army to assert repeatedly, between 6 and 8 November, that the supply situation was ‘secure, also in view of the coming operations’.@ By 13 November Kluge had lost some of his optimism, claiming that Eckstein’s Aussenstelle Mitte was favouring other armies at his expense.” It seems certain, therefore, that the mud was only one factor that brought the Wehrmacht to a halt. No less important were the railways, which had already experienced such tremendous difficulties in building up a base at Smolensk and which were simply unable to cope with the increased demands of « fresh offensive. After the middle of November, the relative importance of these facts became more obvious. Frost had now set in everywhere, making the roads passable once more, though hewing the vehicles out of the mud in which they were stuck up to their axles was a difficult process in which many of them were irreparably damaged. Ignition systems, oil and radiators also gave trouble, though in theory at least all army groups had been supplied exclusively with freeze-proof POL from 1] October onward.'?° However, it was on the railways that the cold had its worst effects. German locomotives did not have their water-pipes built inside the boilers so that seventy to eighty per cent of them froze and burst." The transportation crisis that followed was far greater than anything that had gone before. Between 12 November and 2 December hardly any trains at all arrived for 2. Army, leading to grave shortages of every description that to have had little to do with the state of the roads.” until 23 November only one fuel train for 9. Army arrived, contents of this one could not be distributed because the appear From 9 and the lorries’ tanks were themselves empty. Nevertheless, during this entire period, the Grosstransportraum were consistently more efficient than the railways, bringing up considerable quantities of supplies and enabling the Army somehow to hold out.* With Panzer- gruppe 4, supplies from the rear ~ especially fuel - simply did not arrive after 17 November.’™* As was the case in the previous month, 4, Army seems to have been the exception. Its Grosstransportraum had fallen to a bare eighth of its original strength, 174 Supplying War but supplies were reaching it by rail in more or less adequate quantities.’?> Meanwhile, considering far away in East the situation. On Prussia, Hitler and OKH were the evening‘of 11 November a meeting was held, in which the Fiihrer not only confirmed his intention to capture Moscow, but also set objectives far beyond the city. Visiting Army Group Centre two days later, Halder faced vehement protests by Eckstein. Bock, however, did not support his supply officer, insisting that to make one final effort was preferable to spending the Russian winter in the open. Even though it was clear to him that the operation could not be adequately prepared, Halder reluctantly allowed himself to be persuaded by Bock, saying that he would not rein in Army Group Centre if it wanted to attempt the attack, for an element of luck belonged to warfare.’** Thus, the final attack was authorized, only to fail, in the first place, because of the state of the rail- ways. Before we leave the German forces in their sorry state in front of Moscow, it is necessary to say a word about the much-discussed problem of winter equipment. That Hitler forbade his commanders even to mention the subject may be true, though this did not prevent Halder from taking a preliminary look at the problem on 25 July..*? Anyone who has studied the documents cannot fail to be impressed by the hundreds upon hundreds of orders, direc- tives and circulars concerning winter supplies that began to emanate from OKH from early August onward, covering every detail, from the reconnoitring of suitable shelters to the provision of freeze-proof POL, from winter clothing to veterinary care for horses.'** To what extent these documents represent a concrete reality is very difficult to say, but there is no reason to suppose that OKH was engaging in mere mental gymnastics. Moreover, we have the evidence of Wagner and his subordinates that winter equipment was available in ‘sufficient’ quantities, but could not be brought up owing to the critical railway-situation.1? It is certain that the railroads, hopelessly inadequate to prepare the offensive on Moscow and to sustain it after it had started, were in no state to tackle the additional job of bringing up winter equipment. Therefore, the question as to whether or not such equipment was in fact available is perhaps of secondary rele- vance. Russian roulette 175 Conclusions The German invasion of the Soviet Union was the largest single military operation of all time, and the logistic problems involved of an order of magnitude that staggers the imagination. The means with which the Wehrmacht tried to tackle these problems were extremely modest. If it came so close to its goal, this was due less to the excellence of the preparations than to the determination of troops and commanders to give their all, to bear the most appalling hardships and to make do with whatever means were given to, or found by, them. For the Russian campaign, the Wehrmacht never had sufficient means available, and this was even more true of raw materials, reserve stocks and means of transportation than it was of combat forces. It has been estimated that, in ord