cements and Halder’s objections, decided to send him the 15th armoured division. This raised the motor-transport capacity needed to maintain the Deutsches Afrika Korps (DAK) to 6,000 tons; since this was amount proportionally ten times as much allocated to the armies preparing to invade announcement was quartermaster-general met who by howls feared of protest lest Rommel’s from as the Russia, the the OKH insatiable re- quirements would seriously compromise operation Barbarossa.” Moreover, should Rommel receive still more reinforcements — or should he go heyond the 300 mile limit - a shortage of vehicles was bound to ensue. Coastal shipping, it was found, could not significantly alleviate the problem; while granting Rommel his trucks, therefore, Hitler conpled them with an explicit order Rommel’s demand for a forbidding him from taking any large-scale offensive action that would raise his requirements still further.’® Even second without an offensive, however, division had already jeopardized his supplies. Together with the Italians, the Axis force in Libya now totalled seven divisions which, when air force and naval units were added, required 70,000 tons per month.'® This was more than Tripoli could handle effectively, so that a crisis was bound to develop unless the French agreed to allow 20,000 tons of supplies a month to pass through their port of Bizerta.?° Although Rommel was usually at loggerheads with his nominal Italian superiors, they were in agreement this time, for Mussolini had long been looking for just such an opportunity to penetrate Tunisia. Hence Rommel's request was enthusiastically seconded.” Negotiations with Vichy were accordingly initiated. Firstly, the premier, Admiral lorries stationed Darlan, was asked to sell the Germans in Africa, to which he immediately Encouraged by this success, Hitler next summoned French agreed.” Darlan for a 186 Supplying War téte a téte on 11 May, in the course of which he told him that the unloading facilities of Tripoli harbour were ‘being used to capacity’ and asked for permission to use Bizerta. Darlan acceded to the request, and on 27-8 May a German-French protocol was signed in Paris, granting the Germans rights of transit through Bizerta. It also provided for French ships to be chartered by the Axis, and mentioned Toulon as a possible alternative port of embarkation in case Naples became choked.”* At this point, however, Vichy was alarmed by the British invasion of Syria. For reasons of their own, the Germans also came to regret the agree- ment,” and by the end of the summer not a single Axis load had passed through Bizerta. Meanwhile Rommel, defying Hitler's explicit orders, had taken the offensive at the beginning of April. Catching the British oft balance, he drove them out of Libya, invested Tobruk which he was unable to eliminate in his first assault, and finally came to a halt at Sollum on the far side of the Egyptian frontier. However brilliant tactically, Rommel’s lightning advance was a strategic blunder. It failed to bring decisive victory, while adding another 700 miles to his already extended line of communications. As OKH had predicted, the resulting burden proved too much for his rear services to carry. In mid-May Rommel started complaining about his supplies for the first, but not the last, time.” His difficulties were not due, as has frequently been maintained, to the failure to put Malta out of action. Even in May, a peak month for the year so far, no more than nine per cent of the supplies embarked were lost en route to Africa.?* From February to May, Rommel and his Italian allies received a total of 325,000 tons of supplies, or 45,000 more than current consumption.*? Once he had started his offensive, however, the means at his disposal simply did not allow him to effectively bridge the enormous gap from Tripoli to the front. The result was that supplies piled up on the wharves while shortages arose in the front line. The quantities involved were often very small, e.g. a few tons of anti-tank ammunition that was urgently needed on 6 May,** but nevertheless significant. At the same time the Italians were experiencing even greater difficulties, because for 225,000 men trucks.?° June, therefore, was a month of crisis, they only had 7,000 Although a record quantity of supplies — 125,000 tons — were unloaded, the situation was ‘in great danger every day’ and Rommel was forced to live Sirte to Alamein 187 from hand to mouth.*? On 4 April the Axis had re-occupied the port of Benghazi, only 300 miles from the Egyptian frontier, but this did not greatly improve matters, since only enough coastal shipping to carry 15,000 tons a month, instead of the projected 50,000, was available.‘ Though theoretically capable of processing 2,700 tons a day, Benghazi was well within reach of the RAF and suffered accordingly.** With an unloading capacity of 700800 tons only exceptionally reached,** supplies continued to pile up at Tripoli while Rommel’s situation became increasingly acute. By his tempestuous advance the German commander had put himself in an impossible position. With Benghazi’s capacity so limited, to stay where he was spelled certain disaster. To retreat was tantamount to admitting that OKH, where he was now known as ‘that soldier gone mad’, had been right all along. The only way out of the predicament was to attack and capture the port of Tobruk. However, Rommel had to concede quirements for such an operation would be no less German armoured divisions ~ precisely the number envisaged by von Thoma.** This, however, was an demand. Not only were Germany's forces now fully against Russia, but to grant Rommel’s request meant would need another 20,000 tons a month, for which that his re- than four originally impossible committed that DAK unloading facilities were not available.** The Italians were consulted and it was agreed that Rommel would have to make do with the forces at hand.” By way of consolation, the Axis units in Libya were, on 31 July, renamed Panzerarmee Afrika and Rommel, now elevated to full General, was put in command of both the German and Italian troops. Whether, in view of what was to happen in 1942, even the capture of Tobruk would have helped Rommel very much is doubtful. The port was theoretically capable of unloading 1,500 tons a day, but in practice rarely exceeded 600. When consulted about its use, the German navy dismissed it as a disembarkation port for large ships, and bluntly told OKH that it would do well to rely exclusively on Tripoli and Benghazi to keep Rommel supplied.* Since in this period (July-August 1941) insufficient coastal shipping was available even to utilize Benghazi fully,® Rommel’s scheme for solving his supply difficulties by capturing Tobruk scems highly impracticable. Meanwhile, was behind deteriorating. him, Early the situation in June most in the Mediterranean of the German 10 Air fo weurg s T } 4 | © punog o. 5 ‘0 GWORN eyL eAqiy BIAe}SOBNA / sa e e “ ( // / jeoog bos ent 3%,Snjur WOU !300 ~ evaeppewe wruensodiiy aun gs (S88 Sateen gouty AaNRYL UROUY eoreuasay = equoe rzey6us . feneweot woe \ en. ¢ cnne) euebing saa aa Soyouensegyy seen, vey - tt yovIe Aayany va$ sop a} woe euebly > ° ‘51 ueaeg 8 moe }O ‘ | Sirte to Alamein 189 Corps, which had hitherto protected the African convoys from bases in Sicily, was transferred to Greece, so that the British aero- naval forces based on Malta and elsewhere gradually recovered much freedom of action. Losses at sea, which had hitherto been negligible, began to rise alarmingly. In July, nineteen per cent of all supplies (by weight) sent to Libya were sunk; in August nine per cent; in September twenty-five per cent; in October twentythree per cent again.”° In addition, Benghazi was heavily bombed in September, causing ships to be diverted to Tripoli and thereby extending the line of communications from 250 to about 1,000 miles. The various headquarters involved now began to blame each other, Commando Rommel, Supremo always strongly of inefficiency, anti-Italian, demanding accused the that the entire supply organization be taken over by the Wehrmacht.’ The German Navy agreed, voicing the suspicion that the marked Italian preference for Tripoli might have something to do with their alleged desire to save their merchant fleet ‘for the period after the war’."? OKH prepared a detailed study to show that the Luftwaffe had neglected the protection of the convoys in favour of attacks on targets in the eastern Mediterranean.** The possibility of sending supplies from Greece direct to Cyrenaica was studied, but this would have entailed dependence on a single- track railway from Belgrade to Nish, which was constantly being blown up.*t On their side, the Italians argued that continued use of Tripoli was needed ‘to split the enemy forces’, claimed that they had no fuel-oil to enable their navy to deal with the Maltabased Force K, and demanded that the German air force tackle the job. However, when the head of OKW offered them German navy personnel to help operate the Libyan ports, his proposal was politely rejected.** Early in October, a half-hearted attempt was made to supply Panzerarmee’s most urgent needs by air, but this failed owing to a shortage of aircraft,*° leading to more accusa- tions and counter-accusations. At one point Rommel so far lost control of himself that he began to see imaginary British convoys passing through the Mediterranean, which earned him a sharp rebuke from the Armed Forces High Command.” In all the confusion, one fact was entirely overlooked. Despite everything, the Italians succeeded in putting an average of 72,000 tons — or just above Rommel’s current consumption — across the Mediterranean in each one of the four months from July to October.** Rommel's difficulties, therefore, stemmed less from a 190 Supplying War dearth of supplies from Europe than from the impossible length of his line of communications the German commander cent of his precious fuel cent. If Panzerarmee’s requirements (excluding a reasonable guess that inside Africa. Thus, for example, discovered that he needed fully ten per simply to transport the other ninety per fuel is put at about one third of its total water and personnel), then it would be thirty to fifty per cent of all the fuel landed in North Africa was wasted between Tripoli and the front. Obliged to cover 1,000 miles of desert each way, thirty-five per cent of the vehicles were constantly out of repair. Under such conditions, any supply service was bound to break down. November brought the inevitable crisis, During the night of the 9th an entire convoy of five ships carrying 20,000 tons was sunk off Cape Bon by British surface units, after which the Italians declared Tripoli to be ‘practically blockaded’. Supplies disembarked during the month dropped to a disastrous 30,000 tons,”' while shipping losses rose to thirty per cent.’® Since, however, Rommel’s main fighting force consisted of his two German divisions, which together consnmed ahout 20,000 tons a month and still had some supplies available, this was of less immediate significance than the fact that the British offensive which opened on 18 November made the routes inside Africa unsafe. British aircraft and armoured cars inflicted heavy losses on the lorry columns, simultaneously reducing their capacity by half, by restricting movement to night-time only."* For a few days after 22 November both divisions were actually cut off and only an occasional convoy got through.™* Under these circumstances the front could not he held, and on 4 December Rommel ordered a general retreat. Curiously enough, the diary of the DAK quartermaster for the same day reads: ‘Supply situation favourable from every point of view.’** Initially, retreat made the situation more difficult still. Nat only did the coastal road become clogged with westward-moving traffic, but the need to evacuate stores made the shortage of vehicles even more acut