iven to reduce the number of motorized supply columns in each infantry division by a half, replacing the rest with horse-drawn wagons, but even this drastic measure could only bring the units to ninety per cent of establishment when the next campaign was started. The army that was to shake the West was a scavenger. Its hopes for victory rested in part on the capture and utilization of French, Dutch and Belgian vehicles. During the campaign in the West, indeed, the incomplete state of motorization went far to dictate not merely the pace of the advance, but even its form. As the army consisted of two heterogeneous parts, it was initially planned to have the opening attacks carried out by the infantry divisions, thus husbanding the ‘fast’ units for breakthrough and exploitation. This was in fact standard German practice which they were later to employ in the Balkans as well as against Russia. In the case of France, however, it was feared that the few roads traversing the Ardennes would be blocked by the infantry divisions in their rangierten Angriff (setpiece attack) against the river Meuse, and it was therefore decided to carry out the initial offensive by means of armoured and motorized forces.? In the event, however, the armoured spearheads moved too fast - Guderian reached the Meuse in three days, instead of five as planned - so that a gap opened up between them and the infantry, a gap which caused Hitler to fear for his left fank and ultimately contributed to his decision to halt the tanks short of Dunkirk . Once the first part of the campaign had ended encirclement and liquidation of the Anglo-French Belgium, the Germans were faced with the problem of ing their units in order to continue the advance against with the forces iu resupplythe Wey- Russian roulette 147 gand line. For this purpose it was intended to set up a forward supply base in the Brussels-Lille-Valenciennes—Charleroi-Namur area, a big job made all the more difficult because destruction of railway bridges, tunnels and viaducts was quite as heavy as in 1914. Around 20 May Wagner therefore rang up the Reich Minister for Transport and demanded that ‘all the lorries of Germany’ be put at his disposal immediately. They were to proceed to Aix-la-Chapelle, where an officer was waiting to form them into columns and to furnish the drivers with ‘German Wehrmacht’ armbands. A special staff charged with supervising the establishment of a new supply basis in Belgium was sent to Brussels and reported ready to start work on 22 May. On that day a total of 12,000 tons (including 2,000 from Holland) of motor transport were loaded and sent on their way. At the same time Wagner also made use of such trains as could reach Antwerp (fifteen per day as from 24 May onward) and water transport from Duisburg to Brussels. Such were his efforts that the Germans were able to resume their offensive on 5 June.'* Though the campaign against France lasted for only six weeks and ended in one of the greatest victories of all history, the army's fundamental logistic weakness did not escape Hitler's attention. Though consumption of many items — especially ammunition had heen moderate, the difficulty of supplying the armoured spearheads during their rapid advance was considerable, and, but for the use of aircraft and the opportune capture of large quantities of fuel, might have brought their attack to a halt. Also the great mass of footslogging infantry had turned out to be scarcely more mobile than twenty-five or even seventy years previously. Lack of marching discipline led to horse-drawn and motor transport sharing the same roads, which conseqnently became congested and sometimes even blocked, Though demolished railways were repaired with great speed, the Eisenbahntruppe were too few in number to work them efficiently, and the quality of the personnel supplied by the civilian Reichsbahn for this purpose left something to be desired, Even as the campaign was going on, thercfore the Fiihrer ordered the army's supply system to he completely reorganized." In the event, this proved inadequate, and no amount of jugglery was able to make up for Germany's basic weaknesses, such as an insufficiently developed motor industry and an insecure supply of fuel. 148 Supplying War Planning for ‘Barbarossa’ Among the many thousands of books that have been written about Hitler’s Russian adventure, there is probably not one that does not at some point attribute the Wehrmacht’s failure, in part at least, to logistic factors - primarily the difficulties resulting from distance and bad roads, However, no detailed logistic study of this campaign, the largest ever conducted on land, has been undertaken so far. The exact date of Hitler's ‘decision’ to take on the Soviet Union has been the subject of much controversy among scholars. There is no doubt, though, that the first detailed studies of the problem - whether one cares to regard them as ‘operational’ or ‘contingency’ plans — were made in August 1940, when work began simultaneously at both OKH and OKW. In both studies logistic factors naturally loomed large, but, interestingly, the emphasis was very different right from the beginning. At OKH, the early planning for what was to grow into operation ‘Barbarossa’ was the task of General Marcks, chief of staff of 18. Army. Marcks was interested mainly in the Russian road-network, the problem consisting in that, whereas the districts north of the Pripet Marshes were better suited for strategic movement on account of the larger number of roads, the country south of them was deemed more favourable for combat. An advance south of the Marshes would lead the Germans into the Ukraine which, though perfect ‘tank country’, had only one good west to east road via Kiev. On the other hand, though the number of roads north of the Marshes was greater, a thrust in this direction would lead the Wehrmacht into the forests of Belorussia and thus confine the advance to a few widely-separated axes between which little or no contact was possible. Faced with this dilemma, Marcks hesitated, seemingly unable to make up his mind. Finally, he decided to have the best of both worlds, the tactical and the strategic, by recommending that the attack be launched in equal strength along both sides of the Marshes, its objectives being to reach both Moscow and Kiev at the same time. By contrast, Marcks’ opposite number at OKW, Colonel von Lossberg, was interested less in the roads than in the railroads. Realizing from the outset that only the latter could be relied upon to keep the operation supplied, once it got away from the immediate vicinity of the borders of German-controlled Poland and moved into the infinite spaces of Russia, he very properly con- Russian routerte 149 cluded that the offensive ought to be launched where the railway lines were best and most numerous, ie. a thrust straddling both sides of the great highway from Warsaw to Moscow. A similar conclusion followed from the need to deploy the forces prior to the operation, a huge undertaking that could be accomplished only by means of the railways. Lossberg was not unaware of the advantages of the ‘southern’ approach, but it was typical of the wider view taken at OKW that he saw the main advantage of an attack in this direction as lying in the shorter distances from the Rumanian, and, ‘later’ the east-Galician oilfields. Unlike Marcks, who was impressed above all by the openness of the Ukraine and its suitability to armoured warfare, Lossberg also foresaw that problems would be caused in this area when rain turned the ground into a morass, However, all these were secondary considerations. It being assumed that, tactically and operationally, the Germans were superior to their opponents, the main problem was to keep the operation supplied, and since this could only be done by means of the railways, along the railways it must go. As it was, none of these factors proved decisive to Hitler. Ad- ding an economic and an ideological dimension to the various tacti- cal, strategic and logistic considerations advanced by his generals, he decided first of al] that a drive into the Ukraine was indispen- sable if Germany Caucasus. At the was to secure grain and, later, oil from the same time, the seizure of Leningrad as the centre of the Bolshevik Weltanschauung was deemed essential. The result was a double offensive along diverging lines thousands of miles apart, a situation complicated still further by the fact that the chief of the Army General Staff, General Halder, wanted an attack on Moscow and, in deploying his forces, made his dis- positions accordingly.* The resulting “Directive No. 21’ in which Hitler laid down his basic orders for the operation was therefore a rambling and confused document that provided for an advance by three Army Groups along separate axes towards Kiev, Moscow and Leningrad up to the general line Dvina—Smolensk-Dnieper. Returning to the logistic aspect, the problems involved were of a magnitude far greater than anything experienced before and, in some ways, since. The number of troops involved, almost three and a half million, was more than five times that which Napoleon took across the Niemen in 1812, and this enormous mass, with its hundreds of thousands of horses and vehicles, had to be marched, and supported while marching, towards objectives which, from 150 Supplying War sorth to south, lay 600, 700 and 900 miles away from the base of departure. All this was in a country where roads were known to be few and bad, and where every single yard of railroad had to be converted to standard gauge before it could be used; a country, moreover, which was presently furnishing the Reich with considerable quantities of vital strategic materials, from oil to rubber, the supply of which would of course cease the moment operations were launched. How to secure sufficient stocks of these materials was, in fact, one of the principal concerns of the men who planned the Russian campaign. As always, the first difficulty Jay in determining just how much would be needed, but this depended on many factors that could not possibly be foreseen, including the speed with which operations would unfold (which would influence fuel requirements), amount enemy of ammunition resistance (which would determine the needed), and, of course, the duration of the campaign. As it was, the stafls responsible made a number of highly optimistic assumptions; for example, that the expenditure of ammunition would be similar to that of the Western campaign, and that the Russians would be defeated west of the line Dvina- Smolensk-Dnieper. Even so, however, it was still difficult to obtain some items. Tyres, for example, were in such short supply that for some types of vehicles their replacement by steel-shod wheels had to be considered, and production of rubber soles was brought to a standstill. Even though current consumption of fuel was cut back to a level below that which the army regarded as the indispensable minimum, a reserve of no more than three months’ consumption (in the case of diesel oil, only one month) could be built up. With the operation due to start in June, a certain shortage of fuel was expected as early as July, though the situation would hopefully be improved therealter by deliveries from the Rumanian oilfields straight to the army in Russia.'* Nor was there much hope of utilizing captured fuel, for Russian petrol had a low octane content, and could only be used by German vehicles after the addition of benzol in specially-constructed installations. Since preparations for ‘Barbarossa’ involved a great expansion in the size of the army (from 9 armoured divisions to 19, and from a total of 120 divisions of all kinds to 180, later revised to 207) spare parts for existing formations were almost impossible to obtain. This problem was aggravated still further by the fact that the Germans in Russia used no less than 2,000 Russian roulette 151 differen