ed thirty-four trains per day (at 450 tons each) in order to meet all requirements, he actually did not get more than eighteen from the Chef des Transportwesen and even this number was reached only on exceptional occasions.” Though Aussenstelle Nord repeatedly claimed that at no point had the troops suffered from an actual shortage, the situation certainly was bad enough to give rise to an acrimonious debate as to where the blame lay. Distrustful of the rear services as all frontline troops are, the Army commanders — especially the out- spoken Hoepner of Panzergruppe 4 ~ accused Wagner's organization of indolence and a trains earmarked Armies."* Wagner lack of flexibility, claiming in addition that for his troops were ‘hijacked’ by 16. and 18. in turn shifted the blame to Gercke who, he said, did not provide enough trains to carry all supplies. Gercke denied responsibility, pointing out the failure to unload the trains quickly. The dispute even went beyond the land army and turned into a matter for inter-service rivalry. The Luftwaffe, so Wagner's men claimed, took a larger share of the railway transport than had been agreed upon, and even had officers armed with sub- machine-guns riding on the trains in order to prevent outside interference.” There problems. were, however, less subjective reasons for the supply Because the number of daily trains was barely suffi- cient to keep the front supplied, stockpiling proceeded slowly and the This the cent creation placed capacity because of new bases could not keep up with the advance. an intolerable burden on the Grosstransportraum, of which had already been reduced by forty per the atrocious roads prevented the use of trailers.** It also wasted railway capacity, as Toppe was forced to order mixed trains instead of ones that were Rassenrein, uniformly loaded with a single item only. In so far as the supply service admitted its inability to procure the supplies requested by the troops in less than seven or eight days, the accusation that it suffered from a certain rigidity was not perhaps unwarranted. Also, it did not help matters when Toppe’s organization was called upon to supply additional units from Army Group Centre.* However, as Wagner did not fail to remind Hoepner, the main problem stemmed from the fact that Army Group North had pushed its spearheads 162 Supplying War forward some 400 miles in four weeks, and was operating at the tip of a long and complex line of communications which, besides being congested by infantry and rear echelon troops still making their way forward, was already becoming the target of ‘really unpleasant’ partisan attacks that prevented the unloading of trains as far forward as would otherwise have been possible."” Despite this, the quartermaster-general at OKH regarded the logistic situation of Army Group North as ‘the best by far’ of all the German forces in Russia, a point that was understandably lost on von Leeb.°* To what extent the supply problem contributed to the German failure to take Leningrad is difficult to say, for the planning of the operation had been defective from the outset and its execution marred by Hitler's nervousness and his inability to establish a clear order of priorities.** Moreover, the approaches to Leningrad were even less suitable for armour than the rest of the Baltic countries, and on 26 July all three tank commanders - Hoepner, Manstein and Reinhardt - unanimously recommended that it should be withdrawn.” Given the fact that it was facing a numerically superior enemy, however, it seems certain that Army Group North's best chance for capturing Leningrad came around the middle of July, when Reinhardt’s corps had within 80 miles of the city. At this time, however, penetrated to supply diffi- culties ruled out any immediate resumption of the offensive. Having had their own way for the first fortnight of the campaign, Hoepner's forces were meeting with stiff opposition which, in turn, led to heavy consumption of ammunition. Demands for extra ammunition could only be met with great difficulty, so that appear 2 stocks sank to less than fifty per cent of establishment.** During the second half of July, the supply service was incapable of supporting even the most limited offensive because it was fully occupied in moving its base forward from Dunaburg to the area around Luga, and in this period the start of the attack was postponed no fewer than seven times.*? So hopeless did the situation that, on August, Hoepner suggested the desperate expedient of attacking the city and its two and a half million inhabitants with a single armoured corps. The quartermaster- general did not think he could support even this, however, and the idea was accordingly rejected. The offensive was resumed on 8 August but by this time the defences of Leningrad were ready. Heavy rain soon turned what roads there were into Russian roulette 163 quagmires, making it impossible to meet the troops’ demands for ammunition.** On 11 September, Hitler finally recognized the un- suitability of the terrain and ordered the withdrawal of Panzer- gruppe 4, which was to join in the final assault on Moscow, and, with the Fiihrer’s simultaneous decision that Leningrad should be tackled by the Luftwaffe, the final chance was forfeited. To an even greater degree than Army Group North, Field Marshal von Rundstedt’s Army Group South was faced with ill- defined, widely divergent objectives, which besides the conquest of the Crimea included the seizure of Ukrainian wheat, Donetz coal and Caucasian oil.** Consisting of forty-one divisions grouped in four armies (6, 17, 11 and Panzergruppe had under its command a number 1) Army Group South of Rumanian, Hungarian to prove espe- Italian divisions, the maintenance of which was tanks. However, railways than and cially difficult because these allied units were meagrely provided with motor transport and unfamiliar with German procedure.” Setting out from Poland south of the Pripet Marshes, Army Group South soon found itself operating in terrain that was ideal for there were less north of the Marshes, and the heavy black soil quickly turned into a morass whenever there was a fall of rain. Of force in the gress the three army groups invading Russia, it was Rundstedt’s which found itself facing the heaviest numerical odds and, person of Timoshenko, the ablest Soviet commander. Proon this front was therefore slow, and it quickly turned out that the loading of the Grosstransportraum with ammunition and fuel at a ratio of 1:2 was based on erroneous calculations.** More than any other, Army Group South was affected by the weather, and by 19 July fully half of its lorry companies were out of action. On the next day panje columns were organized in order to help the world’s most modern army out of its supply difficulties.” Throughout the second half of July, there was a ammunition and bitter recriminations arose as the manders accused Weinknecht’s Aussenstelle Sud of and each other of ‘hijacking’ trains."° Nevertheless, shortage of Army comfavouritism, by the end of the month the entire western bank of the Dnieper was in German hands, but supply difficulties, coupled with the usual inability of the German infantry to keep up with its own armour, made it necessary for Panzergruppe 1 to waste its time reducing the encircled enemy around Uman instead of striking further across the river.” 164 Supplying War Having reached this point the German advance came to a halt. Work to establish a forward supply base for an advance across the Dnieper began at once, but met with difficulties, owing to the fact that the capacity of the railways was still very low so that the lorry columns had to be-driven back all the way to the Russian— Polish border. On 1 August. only four days before the new attack was due to begin, the armies comprising Rundstedt’s force still had only between a sixth and a seventh of their basic load of ammunition.’? As it was, stockpiling proceeded so slowly that it was decided to resume the offensive without waiting for the new base to be completed. This resulted in operations during August being conducted on a logistic shoestring, with shortages constantly appearing everywhere. At von Kleist’s Panzergruppe 1 in particular, the shortage of fuel and ammunition was such that the contents of incoming trains had to be distributed in accordance with the immediate tactical situation, the details of which were, for this purpose, telephoned to the quartermaster by Zeitzler, the chief of staff." By 23 August, the shortage of ammunition was becoming critical. At this moment, however, ‘generous help’ from 17 Army enabled the Panzergruppe to overcome its difficulties, at least for a time. Acting upon Hitler’s order and very much against its own will, OKH was now preparing to turn Panzergruppe 1 round by 90 degrees and send it north towards Kiev. In order to prepare for this move Kleist’s Grosstransportraum was pulled out and re- freshed during the last days of August, but the grievous shortage of spare parts prevented its capacity from rising above sixty per cent of establishment.* Even so, it does not appear that Panzergruppe 1 suffered from any serious problems during its operations against Budenny’s South Western Theatre. The good weather facilitated the movements of wheeled transport, and the distance to the railhead at Permovaisk was not excessive. How- ever, the performance of the two railways available to Army Group South was inadequate, the southern one becoming blocked by floods and the northern one by congestion. At Nachschubsammelgebiet (main supply base) South chaos reigned, and the target number of twenty-four trains per day could be met on only twelve days during the whole of September.” In addition, trains were arriving partially loaded.”* The bridges over the Dnieper having been blown, any attempt to launch a serious advance to the east of it met with great difficulty, and late in September Russian roulette 165 Army Group South warned that, unless the railheads were pushed forward across the river, it would not be possible to reach the “operational objectives’ or occupy the Crimea.” With the Kiev cauldron liquidated, Army Group South resumed its advance eastward on 1 October. Progress was initially very fast, and by 3 October Kleist had already completely outrun his communications which, moreover, were blocked by the usual infantry columns trudging up from the rear.** On 6 October the weather broke, and two days later it was slowing down Rund- stedt’s advance. Under ‘the worst imaginable’ circumstances al} motor transport of Army Group South was brought to a halt (in any case, only 48 per cent of the trucks were still operational) and only Panzergruppe 1 on the far southernmost wing could keep going until it too was brought to a halt on 13 October. From this point onward, the situation deteriorated with extreme rapidity. On 17 October it was said to be ‘catastrophic’, and three days later no supplies at all were reaching the troops, who lived exclusively off the country.”” Though no real improvement could be expected before the onset of frost, by 24 October the weather had improved sufficiently to allow the replenishment of at least one corps in preparation for the attack on Rostov.*? Meanwhile, the troops were helping themselves by organizing panje columns which served surprisingly well."" Since there were no railway connections across the Dnieper, 6. Army improvised with sections of Russian track, whereas Panzergruppe 1, its spearheads now at Mariupol (subsequently renamed Zhdanov) and Taganrog, re- ceived small quantities of fuel, ammunition and spare parts by air. Far away to the rear, the railways were in an ever more disastrous state. During the whole of October, only 195 trains out of 724 scheduled actually arrived, and even this number included 112 left over from the previous month.*? It took some time for the true nature of the difficulties now faced by Army Halder Grou