p South to be realized by OKH, returned to duty on 3 November and when (he had fallen off his horse and broken his collarbone) he felt that Rundstedt had become unduly pessimistic and urgently required ‘a push forward’. On the next day, however, he recognized that ‘all armies are stuck in the mire’ from which no mere words would extricate them. There was ‘no sense in putting pressure on the commanders before a solid base is established’.** Everyone was now waiting for the beginning of frost, but when it came on 13 166 Supplying War November the temperature at once fell to 20 degrees (centigrade) below zero. While the roads did improve, the quantity of motor transport available fell dramatically because engines refused to start. The performance of the railways deteriorated still further, and ice floating in the Dnieper endangered the regular ferrying of supplies across the river.** Faced with total breakdown, Aussenstelle Sud began to divest itself of its functions. The armies were referred to their own resources for fuel, the Wehrmachtsbefehl- haber Ukraine back to the quartermaster-general at OKH."* That Kleist still succeeded in reaching Rostov under these conditions is remarkable; that the supply situation could be described as ‘se- cure’ during the subsequent retreat to the Mius, is even more so.*" In the case of Army Group South, the warning that it would not be possible to support the operation beyond the 300 mile limit was proved correct. Despite considerable difficulties, the supply service did manage to sustain the advance for as long as it was possible to employ at least part of the Grosstransportraum in order to relieve the railways, and even the sharp swing northward by Panzergruppe 1 towards Kiev did not present it with insoluble problems, since the other armies were at this time practically immobile. However, the attack over the Dnieper was started without adequate logistic preparation, long before there was the slightest prospect of pushing the railways across the a time when the lines leading from Poland were great confusion which, incidentally, had nothing to Russian winter. Aussenstelle Sud had predicted that under these conditions, be possible to reach the river and at the scene of do with the it would not, ‘operational objectives’ - which apparently meant the Donetz Basin. However, there is not the slightest hint that its view was taken into account by Hitler, Rundstedt, OKH, or indeed Army Group South usually regarded as the most cautious itself. Even of the three Army Group commanders, did not intend to suspend operations until after the conquest of Rostov. That this objective was itself beyond the reach of his logistic apparatus, not even he seems to have contemplated. ‘Storm to the gates of Moscow’? Of the three army groups that Hitler launched into Russia on 22 June 1941, the strongest by far was Field Marshal von Bock’s Heeresgruppe Mitte, consisting of 49 divisions grouped in four Russian roulette 167 armies (another army, von Weichs’ 2nd, was kept back as an OKH reserve and brought up later), of which two (9th and 4th) were infantry and two (8rd and 2nd) armoured and motorized. The two Panzergruppen were subordinated to the infantry armies, a measure which was probably designed to prevent them from advancing too quickly and losing contact with the infantry in their rear. Divided into two wings, with the ‘fast’ formations on the extreme left and right, it was the task of Army Group Centre to defeat the enemy on its front by means of three Kesselschlachten, with the last pair of pincers closing in at Smolensk. At this point, mobile operations were to come to a halt."" Having overcome the resistance put up by the Soviet frontier troops, Bock’s advance gained momentum during the morning of 22 June and the two Panzergruppen, particularly Guderian’s 2nd on the right wing, found themselves advancing rapidly into the depths of Russia. Though the country was less suitable for armour than the Ukraine, it was nevertheless much easier than that faced by Hoepner farther north, However, roads were few and march- ing discipline poor. Huge masses of infantry blocked the bridges over the Bug, and by the evening of 25 June the Grosstransportraum earmarked for Guderian’s support had still not succeeded in crossing the river. As early as 23 June, Guderian was therefore obliged to request the supply of fuel by air.** Similar problems arose in the area of 9. Army, whose infantry and the supply columns of Hoth’s Panzergruppe 3 were struggling for priority on the roads. Fuel consumption by both armoured groups was very high, but could be met because that of ammunition was correspondingly low, and because Panzergruppe 2 madc a timely discovery of a large Russian reservoir near Baranovichi.** Scarcely any subsistence at all was making its way forward, but the troops found and it possible Hoth closed to live off the country. On the first of their pockets 26 June, at Minsk, Guderian while the although the infantry in their rear was at the same time building a smaller pocket at Biyalistok. On 16 July the armoured groups met again, this time at Smolensk. No very great difficulties of supply appear to have been encountered during these operations, distances covered were such that, already on the tenth day of the campaign, some tanks were lost because of a shortage of spare parts.°° Moreover, the encirclement at this time was a very sketchy affair; it would be weeks before the infantry could catch up, and in the meantime the armoured formations were compelled 168 Supplying War to stay almost immobile, beating off counter-attacks and fretting over their inability to push forward. Since the fighting now bore a defensive character, the consumption of fuel fell sharply while that of ammunition rose to extraordinary heights, giving rise to more than one critical moment.** Meanwhile, there were problems on the railways which, at such distances from the border, could alone guarantee the service of supply for any length of time. The road-bound German method of fighting had left much of the length of the railways untouched, and there were far too few sccurity-troops to deal with the situation. For this German to reason, Russian and also because rolling-stocks formed transfer points bottlenecks, from perfor- mance fell so far below expectations that 9, Army complained that it was only receiving a third of the daily contingent of trains to which it was entitled.®? Instead of improving, the situation grew worse. After 8 July, the railway only carried supplies for Panzergruppe 3 and 9. Army had to use its Grosstransportraum even though the distance from base now exceeded 250 miles and the roads in between were atrocious.®* As always, it took some time for OKH to grasp what was going on. On 13 July Wagner optimistically reported that he could supply the armoured groups for an advance to Moscow, but next day he modified his estimate, in so far as he now admitted that they could go no farther than Smolensk, and that the infantry would have to halt even further to the west, on the Dnieper.** From Centre Wagner the middle of July, the supply-situation of Army Group was and developing Halder were signs of schizophrenia. aware of some On ‘strain’, but one hand neverthe- less confident of their ability to build up a new supply basis on the Dnieper, from which further operations were to be launched around the end of the month. They appeared not to hear the loud cries for help from the armies. The consumption of ammunition throughout this period was very high, and could be met only - if at all - by means of a drastic curtailment in the supply of fuel and subsistence.** 9. Army was fighting around Smolensk, but its nearest railhead was stil] at Polotsk - and this at a time when a basic load of fuel lasted for only twenty-five to thirty miles instead of the regulation sixty-five.* Around the middle of August, both 9. and 2. Armies were living from hand to mouth, with stocks of ammunition still falling instead of rising in preparation for a new offensive. Moreover, the supply of POL Russian roulette 169 (petrol, oil and lubricants) was quite insufficient, and did not take into account the worn state of the engines.*’ The continued resistance of the Russian troops trapped inside the Smolensk pocket delayed the refreshment of the armoured formations and this finally required almost a month, instead of the three or four days Guderian thought would be needed. Even then it remained incomplete, for Hitler refused to make available new tank engines at the expense of the program of vehicle production.** Meanwhile, even though the Smolensk pocket had finally been liqui- dated, Army Group Centre was still engaged in heavy fighting. Throughout August it had to face enemy counter-attacks from the east, causing heavy expenditure of ammunition that could only be met by cutting back on subsistence. offensive was impossible.” As Bock’s forces were coming Stockpiling for a new to a halt, OKH and Hitler had very different ideas about the continuation of operations. The former talked of decisively beating the Red Army by advancing to Moscow, the one objective from which the Russians would find it impossible to retreat; the latter was more interested in Ukrainian wheat, Donetz coal and steel, Caucasus oil, and the capture of the Crimea (‘that aircraft carrier against the Rumanian oilfields’). Against the proposals of OKH for the continuation of the offensive in the direction of Moscow, Hitler argued that the Russians simply ignored threats to their rear and went on fighting ~a theory that was borne out by the fact that, in every one of the previous battles, the Red Amy had continued to resist even when surrounded and often succeeded in getting out large bodies of troops from the thinly-held pockets, Given this relative immunity to encirclement, Hitler argued that the previous German operations had been too ambitious. The way to destroy Russia’s ‘living force’ was to proceed slowly and methodically, driving the Russians into successive small pockets and eliminating them one after the other. For a start, he proposed to liquidate what the Germans insisted on calling 5 Soviet Army near Kiev, though in fact the forces involved numbered at least four Armies and parts of two more.’ The greatest advantage of this operation was that it could be carried out by Army Group South in conjunction with Panzergruppe 2, which had now finally been extricated from the battles round the Smolensk pocket and was at least partly refreshed. The rest of Army Group Centre would not be involved, which in view of its logistic situation was just as well. 170 Supplying War To judge from the records of Panzergruppe 2, Guderian’s forces did not ~ thanks mainly to the German railway reaching Gomel late in August ~ suffer from any very great supply difficulties during the southward thrust to Kiev. On the other hand, the need to support this operation did have some negative effect on the replenishment of 2. Army, which was leading a precarious hand to mouth existence at the end of a Russian railway line from Gomel! to Gorednya. The capacity of this line was initially small. It had just started showing signs of improvement when, on 12 September, floods blocked the roads from the railhead to the corps and forced its operation to be suspended. Under these circumstances, it was only on 15 September that 2. Army could again describe its supply situation as ‘secure’ (gesichert).'** Stockpiling got slowly under way again, and seems to have been more or less complete by the end of the month. However, the logistic situation was such as to preclude an attack by the Army before the beginning of October. Further to the north, the situation of the other units making up Army Group Centre was not dissimilar. To meet current consumption and build up stocks for the attack on Moscow, Bock esti- mated that he needed 80 trains daily. Gercke only promised 24, however, and th