t types of vehicles, the spare parts required by those in the area of Army Group Centre alone numbering well over one million.”* A further problem lay in the estimation of the consumption of ammunition. An estimate was finally reached in terms of the quantities that could be carried rather than those that would be required. However, this meant that, far from establishing a reserve for twelve months’ fighting, as demanded by the commander of the replacement army, the Germans crossed into Russia with only 2-3 Ausstattungen (basic loads) plus an unspecified reserve for 20 divisions. It might be expected that these shortages would have induced the German leadership to reconsider the rationale of the whole campaign. Instead of so doing, however, they managed to convince themselves that what they had origin- ally estimated would take five months to achieve could, in fact, be achieved in four, or even in one.’° The German general staff seemed to have abandoned rational thought at this point. Rather than cutting down their goals to suit their limited means, they persuaded themselves that their original calculations were overcautious, and that the goals could be achieved more easily than they first estimated. Overshadowing the above problems, however, was the diffi- culty of obtaining sufficient transport to support the operation. On this point the Germans were facing a fundamental dilemma; the size of the operation was such that it could only be maintained by means of the railways, but this was made impossible because the Russian railways did not conform to the German gauge. To wait until such time as it would be possible to convert them was out of the question, for this would have allowed the Russians to retreat into the depth of their endless country and thus deprive the Wehrmacht of its one chance of victory. It followed that, as was the case in the West a year previously, everything depended on an adequate supply of motor trucks, but these were still in as short a supply as ever. By ‘reorganizing’ the army's rear services so as to take away their vehicles, purchasing lorries in Switzerland, and replacing those of the civilian economy with captured French own vehicles, the OKH very modest succeeded requirement for in more or less meeting its an average of 20,000 tons Grosstransportraum behind each of the three army groups. How- ever, this left no reserves whatsoever, and such was the shortage that seventy-five infantry divisions had to be given two hundred panje wagons (a type of peasant cart) each.’ 152 Supplying War Exactly how deep into Russia these lorries would have enabled the army to penetrate before it was compelled to halt and build up a new supply basis is almost impossible to say, owing to the widely differing figures of fuel-consumption and ammunitionexpenditure. It was generally recognized, however, Russians would have to be defeated within the first 500 miles) if they were to be defeated at all, and the plans OKH did in fact start from the premise that the distance that the km (300 made at from the frontier to Smolensk could be covered in one mighty leap, to be followed by a pause that would allow the railways to catch up.'* Assuming - and this is a very optimistic assumption indeed — that the lorry columns were capable of covering 600 miles in both directions within the space of six days, loading and unloading times included,”? the daily tonnage that could be delivered to the army with its 144 divisions would amount to 60,000:6= 10,000 tons, giving an average per division of just 70 tons a day, of which well over a third would consist of rations. To consider the problem differently, one might estimate the requirements of the 33 ‘fast’ divisions (plus their supporting troops, headquarters etc) at 300 tons a day each, which would mean that, at a distance of 300 miles from the starting point, all the army’s Grosstransportraum put together would be barely sufficient to supply them alone, Jeaving absolutely nothing for the remaining 111 divisions. There is no detailed evidence of this, and these figures rest on nothing but our own elementary calculations. Nevertheless, they do appear to show that the hopes of OKH were too sanguine and that the army would meet with supply difficulties long before all its divisions penetrated 300 miles into Russia. In fact, however, OKH did not intend to supply its armoured and motorized spearheads by means of lorry columns shuttling between them and the frontier. To do so would be impossible, even if enough lorries had been available, for the German army, in this campaign as in the previous ones, marched in two heterogeneous bodies one behind the other. Sending the lorries supplying the forward units back through the advancing infantry divisions in their rear would inevitably lead to further congestion on roads that were already badly congested. Rather, it was a question of making the armoured spearheads independent of base-supply during the first stages of the operation. For this purpose, the normal fuel-carrying capacity of each armoured and motorized division, amounting to some 430 tons,?° was supple- Russian roulette 153 mented by a further 400-500 tons of so-called Handkoffer, con- tainerized fuel, thereby enabling them to cover some 500-600 miles in all. Since it was calculated that the vehicles of an advancing army drove two miles for every mile conquered, this would have given a radius of 250-300 miles. It was intended to dump the additional supplies at points between the armoured formations and the infantry masses following in their wake, and to have the former use their Kleinkolonnenraum in order to replenish themselves, Mounting guard over these depéts would be the task of special detachments sent ahead by the infantry divisions.”* By thus concentrating a great part of the available motor transport in support of the advanced spearheads OKH hoped to reach the line Dvina-Smolensk—Dnieper without a major halt. However, it was clear that this was the maximum that could be achieved.”* In order to go beyond the 300 mile limit the Wehrmacht would have to rely on the railways. The latter were also the only means by which it was possible to deploy the army on the Russian frontier, and work to increase their capacity was accordingly initiated in the early autumn of 1940. By April of the next year, overall capacity of the railroads crossing Poland from west to east had been increased to 420 trains in both directions.?* This, it turned out, was in fact too much and was never fully utilized. However, the expansion of the railways was not achieved without cost. In particular, the Eisenbahntruppe which should have spent the winter exercising the conversion of the Russian railroads to standard gauge, were employed on other tasks and thus entered the Russian campaign without adequate training. Nor was this the only problem faced by the railway troops. Not being combat units, they figured low on the list of priorities and were finally allowed only 1,000 motor vehicles, most of which were inferior French and English material, so that a bare sixth of their formations was fully motorized and two thirds remained without any motorization at all. Dependent on the army groups to which they were allocated for their supply of fuel, the railway troops were often poorly supplied. Also, they were short of signal and com- munications gear, which was expected to last for the first sixty miles only. Finally, their numerical strength proved hopelessly inadequate, and as early as July 1941, it became necessary to complement them with men taken from the Reichsbahn.”§ To lead and supervise the entire gigantic operation, a new organization was created. This consisted of ‘Aussenstellen’, or 154 Supplying War advanced detachments, of the quartermaster-general at OKH. Each army group was allocated one of these. They remained, however, independent of the field commanders and were sub- ordinated only to Wagner himself, a solution that does not appear ideal but was probably dictated by the shortage of trained supply officers. Each Aussenstelle was responsible for a number of depéts, which were grouped together in ‘supply districts’, one per army group. Initially located on the frontier, these supply districts were to be moved forward as soon as the railways became available. To make use of captured industrial and supply installations inside enemy territory, a new branch of the Wehrmacht, the so-called technical troops, was instituted.** While the quartermaster-general and his various subordinates did control the magazines as well as the Grosstransportraum, they did not, as explained above, exercise any authority over the railways. This rested in the hands of the Wehrmachttransportwesen, and the number of trains to be despatched each day, as well as their destination, had to be fixed by a process of negotiation between the two authorities, each of whom would, of course, act with his own particular interests in mind.?* The supply-apparatus with which the Germans entered Russia was, therefore, far from impressive. At the cost of demotorizing a large part of the army and depriving it of its strategic mobility the problem of supplying the ‘fast’ units during the first 300 miles or so was more or less solved, but at that point logistic difficulties would certainly force a halt regardless of the situation in the field. The Eisenbahntruppe, whose task it was to enable the railways to take over the burden of supply at the earliest possible moment, were in some ways ill-equipped for the purpose and nowhere near numerous enough, If one railway behind each army was the normal requirement, conditions in the East were such that it was possible to construct only one line behind each army group. Even on the most optimistic estimates of consumption, stocks of some kinds were dangerously low and their supply to the front uncertain. Whether, under these conditions, even the attempt to reach Moscow - not to mention other objectives further away still - was warranted appears questionable.** Certainly, excessive reliance was placed on defeating the Red Army in a short time and within a reasonable distance from the frontier. Should these plans fail to be realized, supply difficulties were bound to affect the continuation of operations. Russian roulette 155 Leningrad and the Dnieper At 0300 hours on 22 June 1941 the artillery of 144 German divi- sions, deployed along the Soviet border on an 800-mile front stretching from the Baltic to the northern frontier of Hungary, opened fire and thereby gave the sign for the start of the largest land-campaign of all time. Achieving complete surprise, both strategic and tactical, the German armies initially met with little opposition. Apart from isolated strongholds like Brest-Litovsk, the resistance put up by the Soviet border-guards was broken within a few hours and the way opened for the armoured and motorized divisions to race forward in order to carry out the first of the planned encirclements. Marching hard, but increasingly left behind, was the great mass of infantry and their horse-drawn transport. The often inadequately-secured spaces in between were filled only by columns of empty lorries returning from the armoured spearheads, and by parties of Eisenbahntruppe sent ahead to begin the task of repairing and converting the railways even before the surrounding country was well in hand. Instead of the logistic apparatus following in the wake of operations, it ‘was supposed to precede them, a procedure probably unique in the annals of modern war, and one that is indicative of the desperate expedients which the Wehrmacht was forced to take in order to maintain its forces at all. Until the railway lines could be used, the whole burden of supplying the gigantic operation rested almost exclusively on the Grosstransportraum, and here problems were encountered from the first. Though OKH had known that roads in Russia were few and bad, it was surprised 