on and transport for this operation are, as usual, not available, a rough guess can be made. At that time, the Allied-operated railway in Normandy reached from Cherbourg to the Dol—Rennes area. To bring up supplies for three divisions over the 80 miles from there to Brest, some fifteen GTR companies must have been kept busy. In addition, there were the organic trucks of all these units. Though no detailed figures are available, there is reason to think that, if formed into provisional transportation companies, the vehicles of the nine divisions involved could have increased the quantity of supplies reaching Hodges in Belgium by another 1,500 tons.** His overall requirements would thereby have been cut by twenty-two GTR companies, and of the seventy-one such com- panies needed to carry out the drive on Dortmund 52+15=65 would have been available. Our conclusion, though necessarily tentative,*® must therefore be that it could have been done, though only just. Conclusions On the basis of the best information available, we have calculated that, in September 1944, enough transport could have been found to carry Dempsey and Hodges to the Ruhr, The number of truck companies at hand, however, is only one factor among the many involved. To complete our investigation, these must ow he briefly considered. Had Eisenhower accepted Montgomery's proposals and con centrated all his logistic resources behind the thrust by 2. Buitish 228 Supplying War and 1, American Armies, twelve out of the forty-three Allied divisions in France would have been completely immobilized and their truck complements taken away. In addition, seven divisions coming up from the Mediterranean in operation ‘Dragoon’ were irrelevant to the main effort, so that only twenty-four would have been left over. Of these, six belonging to 1. Canadian Anny would have been operating against the Channel ports. For the advance on the Ruhr proper, only eighteen divisions would have been available - a fairly small number, admittedly, but one which would in all probability have sufficed to break through the weak German opposition at this time. Since distances to be covered inside Germany were relatively small, providing air support for the exposed flanks should not have been unduly difficult — as it would no doubt have been in an advance on Berlin. Instead of having to cross four rivers, which was what the Allies tried to do during the Amhem operation, they would have found their way barred by two only. The road network leading eastward to the Ruhr was excellent and superior to that leading north into Holland. Since transport to set up substantial forward dumps in Belgium, in addition to daily consumption, was not available, the drive on the Ruhr would have to be launched with the Allies’ main supply base still hundreds of miles in the rear. This would no doubt have entailed long delays between the requisitioning of supplies and their arrival at the front, a fact that could have serious con- sequences in case of a sudden emergency. However, an allocation of 650 tons per day was generous almost to a fault, and Allied communications in France and Belgium — especially rail transportation facilities*® - were being rapidly and daily improved. In view of this, the risk of operating at such distances from base could have been accepted, especially as the Luftwaffe was power- less to interfere with the line of communications. Against this, it has been argued that the Allies, having already twice preferred strategic to logistic considerations during their advance across France,’ could not have done so a third time without stretching their communications to the breaking point. This view, however, ignores the fact that the distance from Bayeux to Dortmund is no longer than that which Patton covere:! from Cherbourg to Metz. In other words, the Allies did succeed in supporting their forces over 450 miles - but did so in the wrong direction. War of the accountants 229 An interesting aspect of the problem is the fact that, contrary to what is generally believed, acceptance of the plan for a drive to the Ruhr would not have entailed the transfer of transport from American to British units, with all its consequent complications.*? Rather, it was a question of switching vehicles from one American Amy to another. Of the three Allied commanders in Belgium — Crerar, Dempsey, and Hodges - it was Hodges whose supply difficulties did most to prejudice Montgomery’s plans.** Had Patton been stopped, it was to his 1. Army that the transport thereby freed would have gone. By refusing to halt 3. Army Eisenhower made his prophecy come true that no advance into Germany would be possible without Antwerp, for it was only when that port was opened in late November that distances behind Hodges were cut from over 400 miles to seventy. The British did not need Antwerp, as they were by that time living comfortably from the Seine and Channel ports.** If Eisenhower must therefore be held responsible for failing to realize where the centre of gravity lay and adjusting his priorities accordingly, it cannot be denied that to have done so would have required almost superhuman foresight. At the time when the idea of a change in the Allies’ fundamental strategy was first voiced, Patton was marching at full steam whereas Montgomery — even though the distances he had to cover were much smaller — was merely inching his way forward towards the Seine. By no stretch of the imagination was it possible to foresee that, during the next two weeks, this normally so cautious commander would he wanted him suddenly surpass himself and advance 200 miles to the German border. Nor, it will be remembered, did Montgomery at first even ask that Patton protect the flank be halted. On of his own the contrary, offensive, and for that to purpose demanded that the direction of Patton's advance be altered from east into Lorraine to northeast into Belgium. By the time he realized that forty divisions carrying out ‘the Schlieffen Plan in reverse’ could not be supported logistically it was already too late, as he himself admitted. Montgomery did even more to prejudice acceptance of his plan by engaging in loose talk, first of an advance on Berlin and then of a ‘knifelike thrust’ into the heart of Germany. While there is good reason to believe that a drive by eighteen divisions against the Ruhr would probably have succeeded, there could be no question of occupying the greater part of Germany with such a 230 small War of the accountants force. As for knifelike thrusts, they may be successful if conducted over a distance of a mere 130 miles but become distinctly risky and even reckless when launched in search of objectives 400 miles away — and with the nearest base another 300 miles to the rear. Nor could such a thrust by even eighteen divisions have been supported logistically. Rather, Montgomery's staff were thinking in terms of twelve only. The latter’s maintenance would have to be reduced to 400 (in some cases, 300) tons per day and even this was more than 21, Army Group could manage with its own resources."® As Eisenhower has rightly said, nothing but certain destruction could have resulted from such a move, In the final account, the question as to whether Montgomery’s plan presented a real alternative to Eisenhower's strategy must be answered in the negative. Though our computations seem to show that the means required for a drive to the Ruhr could, in theory, have been made available, it is not at all certain that, even if strategic developments could have been foreseen in time, the supply apparatus could have adapted itself with sufficient speed or displayed the necessary determination. Given the excessive conservatism and even pusillanimity that characterized the logistic planning for ‘Overlord’ from beginning to end, there is good reason to believe that this would not have been the case. It is impossible to imagine the prudent accountants, who considered the advance to the Seine impracticable even while carried out, suddenly declaring themselves willing tisk of supporting an ‘unscheduled’ operation across border. That the SHAEF logisticians were not cast mould it seems it was being to take the the German in the heroic impossible to deny. Yet it is hardly for us, who have seen so many great campaigns come to grief owing to a lack of logistic support, to condemn one which did after all terminate in an undisputed — if possibly belated - success. 8 Logistics in perspective Looking back over the present study, particularly its latter chapters, it sometimes appears that the logistic aspect of war is nothing but an endless series of difficulties succeeding each other. Problems constantly and backward, different guise. that a serious wonders how appear, grow, merge, are handed forward are solved and dissolved only to reappear in a In face of this kaleidoscopic array of obstacles study of logistics brings to light, one sometimes armies managed to move at all, how campaigns were waged, and victories occasionally won. That alt warfare consists of an endless series of difficulties, things that go wrong, is a commonplace, and is precisely what Clausewitz meant when talking about the ‘friction’ of war. It is therefore surprising that the vast majority of books on military history manage to pay lip service to this concept and yet avoid making a serious study of it. Hundreds of books on strategy and tactics have been written for every one on logistics, and even the relatively few authors who have bothered to investigate this admittedly unexciting aspect of war have usually done so on the basis of a few preconceived ideas rather than on a careful examination of the evidence. This lack of regard is in spite - or perhaps because - of the fact that logistics make up as much as nine tenths of the business of war, and that the mathematical problems involved in calculating the movements and supply of armies are, to quote Napoleon, not unworthy of a Leibnitz or a Newton. As a great modern soldier has said:* The more I see of war, the more I realize how it all depends on administration and transportation. . It takes little skill or imagination to see where you would like your 232 Supplying War army to be and when; it takes much knowledge and hard work to know where you can place your forces and whether you can maintain them there, A real knowledge of supply and movement factors must be the basis of every leader's plan; only then can he know how and when to take risks with those factors, and battles are won only by taking risks. The history of logistics has been divided into periods according to two main criteria. Following the tradition originating in Clausewitz and Moltke, some writers have identified three distinct periods of logistic history in modern times, based on the supply systems used. The first of these comprises the age of standing armies, when military forces were magazine-fed, the second embraces Napoleonic ‘predatory’ warfare, and the third, opening in 1870-1, is marked by a system of continuous supply from base. Variations on this classification have occasionally been produced, e.g. by one authority who regards the Etappen system as ‘essentially a modification of the rolling magazine of the eighteenth century’,? This implies that the development of logistics was, apart from a short and regressive period around the beginning of the nineteenth century, a smooth and continuous process. Alternatively, inquiring into the causes behind the successive developments in logistics, other authors have concentrated on the technical means of transportation employed. This made it possible to divide the history of warfare into neatly compartmentalized periods: the age of the horse-drawn wagon was succeeded by that of the railway, which in turn was superseded by that of the motor truck. Though each of these methods of transportation had its own characteristic qualities and limitations, the overall trend was nevertheless to