 battle of Ef Alamein, no less than a third of Panzerarmee’s very limited stocks were still at Benghazi, many hundreds of miles behind the front.1?° Finally, the often-heard claim that Hitler did not support Rommel sufficiently is not true. Rommel was given all the forces that could be supported in North Africa, and more, with the result that, as late as the end of August 1942, his intelligence officer estimated that in the number forces he was more generous Panzerarmee was actually superior to the British of tanks and heavy artillery.'?? To support these given a complement of motor-trucks incomparably than that of any other German formation of similar size and importance, and if the problem of securing Panzerarmee’s communications inside Africa was, as a result of the above-listed factors, never quite overcome, Rommel blame. Too late, he realized that: The the and the himself was largely to first essential condition for an army to be able to stand strain of battle is an adequate stock of weapons, petrol ammunition. In fact, the battle is fought and decided by quartermasters before the shooting begins. The bravest men can do nothing without guns, the guns nothing without plenty of ammunition; and neither guns nor ammunition are of much use in mobile warfare unless there are vehicles with sufficient petrol to haul them around. Maintenance must also approximate in quantity and quality to that available to the enemy.'* Sirte to Alamein 201 Given that the Wehrmacht was only partly motorized and un- supported by a really strong motor industry; that the political situation necessitated the carrying of much useless Italian ballast; that the capacity of the Libyan ports was so small, the distances to be mastered so vast; it seems clear that, for all Rommel’s tactical brilliance, the problem of supplying an Axis force for an advance into the Middle East was insoluble. Under these circum- stances, Hitler's original decision to send a force to defend a limited area in North Africa was correct. Rommel's repeated defiance of his orders and attempts to advance beyond a reasonable distance from his bases, however, was mistaken and should never have been tolerated. 7 War of the accountants The pitfalls of planning In the course of our inquiries so far, we have deliberately con- centrated on a number of the most spectacular mobile campaigns of all time, and though some of these ended less happily than others, there does not appear to have existed any very clear connection between the amount of preparation involved in a campaign and its success or lack of it. For example, march to the Danube administrative difficulties which was probably one place. Two of Napoleon's Marlborough’s certainly entailed incomparably less than did the least of Louvois’ sieges ~ reason why he undertook it in the first most successful campaigns — those of 1805 and 1809 - were launched with almost no preparation at all, while although his war against Russia was prepared on a scale and with a thoroughness unequalled in the whole of previous history, this did not prevent it from becoming a monumental failure. In 1870, the Franco-Prussian War came as a surprise even though military preparations for it had been going on for years, with the result that there was little connection between the course of the campaign and Moltke’s plans. Nothing daunted, a generation of staff officers before 1914 spent every minute including even Christmas Day — planning the next war down to the last train axle, yet when war came it was totally unexpected, and the meticulously prepared plans Jed to nothing but failure. Twenty-five years later, the entire German invasion of Russia was nothing but a huge feat of improvisation with a preparation time of barely twelve months — not much in view of the magni tude of the problem. Rommel’s African expedition was launched without so much as six-weeks’ preparations and with no previons experience whatsoever, yet is commonly regarded as one of the most dazzling demonstrations of military skill ever. War of the accountants Given the very short preparation 203 times allowed to many of these campaigns, it is not surprising that they had to be conducted on a logistic shoestring. Napoleon in 1805 did not succeed in obtaining even one half of the wagons with which he intended to equip his army. In August 1914, the outbreak of war caught the Great General Staff in the middle of a major reorganization involving the complete overhaul of the gigantic railway deployment plan.’ In 1940, the Wehrmacht’s invincible Panzer divisions consisted, for the most part, of Mark I and II tanks - small machines that had never been intended for anything but training purposes. Though German equipment was not designed with desert warfare in mind, much of it proved more suitable to the North African theatre of operations than anything the British possessed.? Together with one modern authority, the men who prepared and conducted these campaigns might have said that ‘the central problem of logistic planning’ involves the differential in Icad time.’ While it might take years to design and perfect a new piece of equipment, and more years to mass-produce an existing one, operational — not to mention political — requirements can change in a matter of weeks or even days. In view of these facts, the greatest soldiers of all times knew there is a limit to the length to which planning can, or should, go, and those who did not recognize this were not normally the most successful.* Shifting political constellations and changing operational situations have probably prevented the vast majority of past commanders from conducting their wars with anything resembling the number and type of resources they would ideally like to have. This personal has meant qualities, such that commanders as adaptability, have needed resourcefulness, certain ability to improvise, and - above all — determination. Without these qualities, even the most clear-sighted commander with the best analytical brain would be hardly superior to an adding machine. For him to exercise them, however, flexible staff and a system of command organization, it is necessary to have a not made rigid by over- Exactly how large the ‘brains’ of an army should be in comparison with its body is not easy to say, but again it must be noted that there is no obvious correlation between this factor and success expanded in the field. Thus, Napoleon’s endlessly until it came 10,000 men. Much Imperial Headquarters to resemble a little army of of this was useless ballast, however, for the 204 Supplying War Emperor always did everything himself. The organization set up by the elder Moltke did not number more than perhaps two dozen officers, yet managed to win some of the most brilliant victories in all history. Schlieffen’s Great General Staff may have been as perfect a machine as can ever be built out of fallible human components, yet its strategy was doubtful and its logistics probably even worse. In 1941, the Germans unhesitatingly put up to 70 divisions under the command of a single Army Group with no more than 800-900 working rooms at its disposal; which did not, in spite of everything, prevent them from winning a series of stun- ning triumphs, Rommel frequently managed with hardly any head- quarters at all, either touring the battlefield in his ‘Mamut’ radio truck or flying over it in his Fiesler Storch reconnaissance plane. Seen against this background of ill-prepared, hurriedly assembled forces, often only partly equipped with the wroug hardware, and ordered to launch a campaign at a moment's notice, the Allied Expeditionary Force invading France in June 1944 represented a triumph of foresight and organization. Here ‘was an army which was free to dictate the starting date of its own battle whose every movement had been planned in detail for two years on end, an army which, to an extent unprecedented before or since, was able to select, design, develop, test and manufac- ture the hand-tailored equipment it claimed was needed for the task at hand, and which was commanded by men who, perhaps because they had behind them a number of large-scale seaborne invasions in two world wars, insisted on making detailed provisions for the loading and unloading of the last jerrycan of fuel. In short, an army which like no other in history relied on systematic planning in order to prepare its operations and carry them out;" and on whose structure of command a word ought therefore to be. said. As constituted in September 1944, the Allied Expeditionary Force in France was made up of 47 divisions, divided into three Army Groups - two American, one British - with six Armies between them. Overall command over these forces was in the hands of Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF), mixed Anglo-American organization which was itself divided into an Advanced Section of vast proportions and a Rear Section larger still. Coordination between these bodies, as well as between them and the other armed services of both nations, was achieved by means of an immense network of committees, boards War of the accountants 205 and liaison officers. To concentrate on the logistic services of the U.S. troops alone, there were in November 1943 no less than 562 officers and men engaged on planning. These were distributed between a rear and forward headquarters (known as COMZ and ADSEC respectively) 90 miles apart, so that it was necessary to set up ‘a rapid courier service’ to enable them to communicate." The system of split headquarters had originally been created to solve the Communications Zone’s problem of operating on both sides of the Channel, but it was retained long after everybody had moved to the Continent and led to friction between the two, particularly when ADSEC organization. ordinated Both directly COMZ to tried to break away from its parent and SHAEF, ADSEC, with the moreover, result that were sub- General Bradley, the senior American ground commander in France, could ask for supplies to be divided between his Armies but was unable to order it. The 1944 army, to sum up, resembled a Brontosaurus, except that, in the case of the latter day monster, the brain was large out of all proportion with the body, instead of vice versa. Apart from its structure, the thought-processes of ‘the brain of an army’ deserve comment. These can best be studied, not on the basis of some supposed ‘national’ characteristics but from the actual records produced by the instrument of command. Headed as it was by a man who thought the greatest military quality to be the ability ‘to weigh calmly the factors involved in a problem and so reach a rock-like decision’,? SHAEF in 1944 seems to have adopted Moltke’s slogan ‘Erst wegen, dann wagen’ (first consider, then risk) without, however, knowing how to strike the balance between its parts. As the records reveal, decisions — often on very minor issues — were made as follows. First, an order to work out some matter - e.g. whether a particular port should be made to handle rations or POL - was issued. Responsibility for this was then handed down the chain of command until, inevitably, it reached somebody who was no longer able to pass it on. A reconnaissance of the port in question would then be made, and a report written on every aspect of the question. Next, the memoran- dum would start its climb back through the hierarchy with every successive authority adding more arguments, reflecting a progressively wider point of view, until it finally reached the man in charge. On the basis of all the information thus accumulated, he would then announce his decision. The process appears systematic, 206 Supplying War businesslike, even magnificently rational. To find out just how effective it was is the task of the rest of this chapter. Before embarking on this task, however, it remains to note that, from the historian’s point of view at least, the exercise of combing through the SHAEF documents i