 vehicles of all kinds had been lost.*” The units that still remained had been battered beyond recognition by Allied air and land forces, had been compelled to withraw from a series of pockets such as those at Falaise and Mons and had lost all resemblance to organized fighting formations. Thus, for example, 1. SS division escaped over the Seine with only 40 tanks and 1,000 fighting men left. 84, infantry division had 3,000 men whereas 2, armoured division had only 2,000 men and 5 tanks; 2. parachute corps, despite its name, numbered only some 4,000 men ~ hardly more than a strong brigade — with all but light weapons Jost.*® According to its own estimates, the Wehrmacht was outnumbered along the entire front by ten to one in tanks, three to one in artillery (this particular imbalance was regarded as ‘not too serious’ in itself, but the Germans suffered from a shortage of ammunition) and to an ‘almost unlimited’ extent in the air.*? Hitler, moreover, concentrated most of his forces on the Moselle in order to stop Patton, with the result that, according to Eisenhower, he only had the equivalent of two ‘weak’ armoured and nine infantry divisions available north of the Ardennes, all of which were said to be ‘disorganized, in full retreat and unlikely to offer any appreciable resistance’. Indeed, such was their state that a member of Eisenhower's staff (probably COS Bedell Smith himself) con- War of the accountants 223 sidered it ‘possible to reduce the strength of the Allies’ forces in this area by 8 divisions and, far from prejudice the advance, aid it’.° In short, the route to the Ruhr — Germany's industrial heart, where more than half of her coal and steel were produced - lay wide open. As Liddell Hart has written, rarely in any war had there been such an opportunity. In order to understand why this opportunity was missed, it is necessary to return to the spring of 1944 when the Allies’ basic strategy for the coming Continental campaign was laid down. In a memorandum of $ May - signed, incidentally, by British officers - it was laid down that Berlin, while forming the Allies’ ultimate objective, was too far away and that their first goal in Germany should therefore be the Ruhr. While it was recognized that the easiest and most direct route to this area led north of the Ardennes through Liége and Aix-la-Chapelle, it was decided that there should be a second thrust through the Saar in order to compel the Wehrmacht to stretch its resources and keep it guessing as to the Allies’ intentions. On 27 May, the principles formulated in this memorandum were embodied in a directive issued over Eisenhower's signature.*! Whether the best way to utilize an overwhelming numerical superiority such as the Allies possessed is to split it up so as to enable the enemy to operate on internal lines will not be discussed here. Suffice it to say that the battle for Normandy had, as we saw, developed in a manner very different from what had been expected. While progress had initially been slow, the breakthrough when it came proved much more decisive than anyone had hoped. In view of this, Field Marshal Montgomery began to entertain second thoughts as to the wisdom of the Allies’ strategy and - so it seems — first voiced them to his American colleagues on 14 August.’? Three days later, his ideas had crystallized suffi- ciently for him to tell Bradley that ‘after crossing the Seine, 12. and 21. Army Groups should keep together as a solid mass of forty divisions which. . should advance northwards. . .with their right flank on the Ardennes’.** Montgomery, however, did not see Eisenhower until 23 August, and by then had modified his argument. Instead of demanding that the whole of 12. American Army Group be deployed to protect his right flank in Belgium, he now considered that this task would have to be carried out by the nine divisions of Hodges’ 1. Army alone. The rest of 12. Army Group - that is, Patton’s 3. Army - was to be kept in its place, for Supplying War 224 the Allies did not possess enough logistic resources to support a simultaneous advance by all their forces and, in trying to be strong everywhere, would end up by being too weak to gain a decisive victory at any one point.** While Eisenhower refused to halt Patton — instead, he authorized him to continue eastward at least as far as Rheims and Chalons-sur-Marne ~ Montgomery gained his point in that Hodges’ entire Army was ordered to advance north of the Ardennes in conjunction with 21. Army Group.** However, Eisenhower intended that the main objective of the northward thrust would not be the Liége—Aix-la-Chapelle gap, but the port of Antwerp, without which he believed no further advance into Germany could be sustained.** With that, the first round of the great argument came to an end. It took place at a time when Montgomery was only just completing his eighty-mile approach to the Seine, whereas Patton, who had far longer distances to go, was already across the river and advancing fast. Apart from all considerations of national prestige and public opinion, it is not surprising that Eisenhower did not want to stop his most dashing commander in favour of one who, up to that point, had scarcely proved himself a master of pursuit operations. Ten days later, however, 21. Army Croup had pushed forward 200 miles and was closing on the German border. With his position thus immensely strengthened, Montgomery wrote Eisenhower that:” 1. I consider that we have now reached a stage where one really powerful and full-blooded thrust towards Berlin is likely to get there and thus end the German war. 2. We have not enough maintenance resources for two full-blooded thrusts. 3. The selected thrust must have all the maintenance resources it needs without any qualification and any other operation must do the best it can with what is left over. 4. There are only two possible thrusts: one via the Ruhr and the other via the Saar. 5. In my opinion the thrust likely to give the best and quickest results is the northern one via the Ruhr. The wording of this message was extremely unfortunate, for the objective mentioned — Berlin ~ was still over 400 miles away and, War of the accountants 225 as we shall see, definitely beyond the reach of the Allied forces at this time. Nor did Montgomery aid his cause by sending, a few days later, an ‘amplification’ in which he spoke of a ‘knifelike thrust. . into the centre of Germany’.*® These exaggerations subsequently enabled Eisenhower to claim, with some justification, that the British Field Marshal's proposals were reckless and illconsidered, The confusion as to the nature and direction of the proposed offensive in the north increased still further when, on 8 September, the first V 2 landed on London and caused the British govern- ment to demand that 21. Army Group overrun the launching sites in Holland. This led to Montgomery modifying his ideas once more, and instead of striking east at the Ruhr he now decided to move north to the Zuider Zee. In so far as he authorized the Arnhem operation, Eisenhower supported him. However, he remained adamant throughout that no advance into Germany was possible unless Antwerp was first opened up.‘ Thus, Montgomery's own ideas as to just what he wanted to do were much less clear than he would have us believe. His original ‘solid mass’ had been whittled down to a ‘knifelike thrust’, and his mention of Berlin as the objective continued to bedevil all discussion.*° should The confusion not be allowed surrounding to obscure the the main issue, question, however, namely whether it was logistically possible, in September 1944, to capture the Ruhr without first opening Antwerp. The argument as to whether or not Germany was at that time on the point of collapse is not directly relevant to this question, for there is no doubt that, whatever forces Hitler was or was not able to mobilize ‘in the centre of Germany’, the way to the Ruhr lay wide open in the early days of September. The only question, therefore, is whether the logistic means at the Allies’ disposal were sufficient to support a drive for the Ruhr. First, a few definitions must be made. For the purpose of our inquiries, a ‘drive to the Ruhr’ is taken to mean an advance by 2. British and 1. American Armies, with a combined total of 18 divisions, to Dortmund, a move which would have left the Ruhr encircled. The starting point of the British forces would have been the Meuse~Escaut Canal (that is, if the Amhem operation had not been launched), whereas the Americans would have set out from the Maastricht-Liége area. The distance from these starting points to the objective of Dortmund is almost equal and 226 Supplying War amounts to some 130 miles. It is assumed that all railway transportation facilities in Germany would have been put out of action and that no supply by air to the forward troops would have been possible owing to the non-availability of airfields. All calculations are made in terms of 200-ton American GTR companies, which was the practice of the SHAEF logisticians themselves. The target date for the start of the attack is taken as 15 September. If a consumption of 650 tons per division per day is assumed (as an average for both American and British units, this may be somewhat too high) overall supplies required for the operation would have amounted to 18X650=11,700 tons a day. Of this, the British with their 9 divisions would have accounted for 5,850 tons. This quantity would starting bases diverted from and by road, in Belgium have been brought forward to the by rail (2,800 tons); by air, in planes the Arnhem operations, to Brussels (1,000 tons), in American trucks taken from three divisions immobilized in Normandy (500 tons), making a total of 4,300 tons." The remaining 1,550 tons Montgomery would have had to bring up from the Caen-Bayeux area by means of his own motor transport, Assuming that each truck company was capable of no more than the regulation 100 miles per day, forty-six such companies would have been required for the purpose. The operation itself, assuming a turning time of two days for the distance of 260 miles’ to Dortmund and back, would have required (5,850 x 2):200=58 GTR companies in support. Since the Bri at that time possessed a grand total of 140 such companies,"* thirty-six would have been left to supply the six divisions of 1. Canadian Army and for port clearance. It could be done — thoug) only just. By contrast, the situation of Hodges’ 1. Army was considerably more difficult. His nine divisions consumed 5,850 tons per day. but his allocation at this time amounted to 3,500 only - and COM Z found it difficult to deliver even this. To bring up the difference from the railways south of the Seine, 200 miles away, approxi- mately thirty-five additional GTR companies would have been required. The advance on Dortmund itself would have necessitated fifty-eight such companies, so that the total deficit amountect to 93. The question, then, is how many lorries could have been frec«t if 3. Army, instead of being allowed to continue to the Moselle, had been halted on the general line Paris—-Orleans. No detailed War of the accountants figures as to the amount of transport 227 supporting Patton are available, but a rough estimate can be made. On 15 September, 3. Army was receiving at least 3,500 tons per day — possibly some- what more, for Patton used his own trucks for hauling the line of communication, instead of confining them to the zone of operations. To move this quantity over the 180 miles between the above-mentioned line and his front, the equivalent — in one form or another — of fifty-two GTR companies must have been employed.”* In the middle of September, a U.S. corps — the VIII - was operating against Brest. Originally meant to secure adequate port capacity, this operation had by now become out of date. If it was nevertheless carried out, the reason was simply prestige.” Though detailed figures of consumpti