s a disappointing and, for this very reason, a singularly instructive one, The amount ot information provided in the bulky files is huge, the number of graphs, tables and statistics far in excess of anything found in the papers of other modern armies (e.g. the Wehrmacht in 1941), not to mention previous ones. Yet when all these masses of material have been sifted and digested, in the final analysis little of real informative value can be found. To say just why this is so will only be possible after the completion of our study. Meanwhile, it is worth noting that of all the campaigns studied in this book the one waged by the Allies in 1944-5 alone gave rise to the question whether, in view of the balance of forces involved, it was a walkover.* To answer this question existence is surely indicative. is not our purpose, but its very Normandy to the Seine ar’, Napoleon is said to have mused on the eve of the battle of Borodino, ‘is a barbaric business in which victory goes to the side that knows how to concentrate the largest number of troops at the decisive spot.’ Depending on one’s point of view, identifying this point may be a matter either of genius or of sheer good luck. Once it is identified, however, the feeding into it of men and material is a question of bases, lines of communication, transport and organization — in a word, of logistics. The men who planned operation ‘Overlord’ were well aware that the success of an eventual Allied invasion of Europe would depend above all on their ability to feed-in troops and equipment at a higher rate than the enemy. While the problem itself was not in principle different from those facing commanders of ail ages, the Allies’ approach to it was unique. Starting approximately eighteen months before the invasion, a huge theoretical model consisting of thousands of components was gradually built up, the aim of the exercise being to achieve a comprehensive view of ali the factors that would affect the rate of flow.* After some months had been spent on the construction of this model, most important of these factors were identified as follows: the War of the accountants 207 {a) The number of landing craft, coasters, troop transports, cargo ships, tankers and lighters likely to he available on D day. These determined the maximum amount of troops and equipment that could be landed within a given time. Moreover, since they all had to return to base (wherever that may have been) in order to reload, it was vital that those bases should be as near as possible in order to reduce turning time. (b) The size and number of the beaches, their gradient (a vital consideration if ships of all types were to come as close ashore as possible, thereby dispensing with complicated transfer-arrangements which would inevitably have become bottlenecks) as well as the prevailing conditions of tides, winds and waves. Access from the beaches to the areas further inland was vital. Since it was thought that the beaches, however well selected and operated, would not be able to meet all requirements for long, it was decided to supplement them by constructing two artificial harbours and towing them across the Channel in sections, which again meant that certain geomorphological and meteorological conditions had to be met. (c) The availability at a reasonable distance from the beaches of deep water ports of considerable capacity (which itself depends on a whole series of interrelated factors'*), Tt was assumed that only such ports could secure the Allied foothold on the Continent in the long run, especially as the landing craft and artificial harbours would present only a temporary solution until the advent of winter conditions made their operation impossible. (d) The feasibility of providing air support, on which depended the Allies’ ability to hamper enemy operations and slow down his attempts to bring up reinforcements. Having constructed this model, the planners under General Morgan went to their maps and began looking for places in Europe where these conditions could be met. In doing this, they soon discovered that an ‘ideal’ landing site did not exist, as the conditions set in the model often contradicted each other. Thus, beaches that appeared ideal from the point of view of their gradient (as in some places along the Pas de Calais coast) did not allow easy access to the country beyond, being bound by high 208 Supplying War and extensive sandy dunes. The Bay of Biscay area afforded a number of good ports but was beyond the range of fighter support. In their attempts to examine the 3,000 miles of German- dominated coastline and arrive at the best possible combination of all the relevant factors, Morgan's men might well have kept looking forever were it not for two basic considerations. First, it was imperative to launch the invasion somewhere not too far away from the Allies’ main base in Britain so as to allow the landing craft and other shipping to turn quickly, a condition which in itself ruled out both the Mediterranean and Norway, leaving only the western coasts of France. Second, the landing sites had to be within reach of the RAF’s Spitfire planes operat- ing from Britain. Taken choice by about together, these two factors limited the ninety per cent, leaving only north western France, either the Pas de Calais or Normandy. From a strategic point of view, the Pas de Calais presented the shortest and most direct route into Germany, as well as the oppor- tunity of cutting off all German forces south of the Seine by means of a bold thrust eastward to Paris and beyond. On the other hand, it was also the most heavily defended area, and one which could be quickly reinforced by means of an excellent road and railroad network. In finally selecting Normandy, the Allies settled on an area which, owing to its geographical configuration as a peninsula jutting westward into the Atlantic, was relatively easy to isolate from the rest of France. However, this very factor was equally likely to operate against them in their attempt ta break out after obtaining their initial foothold. The landing sites having been selected, a comprehensive plan for logistic support during the first ninety days was worked out. The plans laid down exactly how many troops would be landed, where, when, and in what order; the procedures for clearing and operating the beaches, as well as the places where dumps to be established; the would be replaced by and DUKWs operating from Britain and later were point at which one system of unloading another (e.g. the shift from landing craft over the beaches to Liberty ships coming to other deep-draft ships sailing directly from the USA); and even the moment when one method of packing would be substituted by another (e.g. the replacement ol jerryeans by bulk POL on D+15). To make sure that all these hundreds of thousands of items would be unloaded at the right time and place, a rigid order of priorities was worked out, laying War of the accountants 209 down detailed procedures for the storing, requisitioning, packing, forwarding and distributing of literally every single nut and bolt. Since the Allies intended to capture a whole series of ports and use them for unloading troops and supplies, restoration plans for more than a dozen of them - including of handling no more than a few hundred even those capable tons a day - were worked out, an attempt being made to determine in advance just what resources would be needed for the purpose, where, and when."? This planning was certainly comprehensive, and it is not surprising that it took all of two years to complete. In view of the unparalleled scope and thoroughness of the plans, it might be expected that the victory was due largely to their successful implementation. This, however, did not prove to be the case. Within hours of the first landings, all plans for orderly unloading were brought to nought by the heavy surf and, espee- ially in the American sector, in face of fierce enemy resistance. A navigating error led to the landings being carried out in the wrong place and in the wrong order, with the result that engineer units preceded the assault parties to the beaches and, consider- ably reduced in men and material, had to work without the latter's protection. For several days after D day progress in clearing the beaches was slow and not enough exit roads could be opened, with the result that the whole area became hopelessly congested, a perfect target for the Luftwaffe, had it been able to intervene. The waterproofing of many vehicles turned out to be inadequate and numbers of them were lost. Required to make voyages of up to ten or twelve miles in a choppy sea, overloaded DUKWs out of fuel and sank. Since lorries were in short supply, ran DUK Ws travelled further inland than would otherwise have been the case, thus taking longer to turn and performing poorly. Under these circumstances, supplies unloaded on the beaches during the first week amounted to only one half of the planners’ forecast. Shortages, particularly in ammunition, quickly developed and made it necessary to resort to rationing, While many of the above difficulties were due to the hazards of combat, some resulted from faulty planning which, in its desire to ensure that all the components of the logistic machine would mesh perfectly with each other, was too rigid and too detailed. Thus, only 100 tons of shipping per day - rather less than one per cent of the supplies to be unloaded even as early as D+12 ~ were set aside for emergency purposes. Provisions for flying in 210 Supplying War 6,000lb. per day of emergency stores did exist, but there was no way to effect a resupply within less than forty-eight hours of requisitioning. As might Continent to great have been expected, the attempt to adhere to a rigid order of priorities in unloading supplies on the led confusion and men in small boats bobbing from one ascertain the nature of their cargoes. the reloading of ships and landing England were too tight and did not result that ports became congested emergency measures, in the course interminable delay, with ship to another in order to The timetables governing craft upon their return to allow for delays, with the and had to be cleared by of which many a unit was torn apart or simply lost. Confusion in the ports was increased still further by the fact that no less than three organizations MOVCO, TURCO, and EMBARCO - were responsible for em- barkation, But the plans’ greatest fault was that they did not allow sufficiently for the inevitable friction of war. Intended to eliminate waste, their tightness actually caused it because difficulties at the lower end of the pipeline would immediately reverberate all along its length. Beginning on D-+1, a start was made on the construction of the two artificial harbours. Highly complex and extremely costly to build and tow across the Channel, these installations failed to meet expectations. The British one in particular reached Normandy only after forty per cent of its component parts had been lost at sea, with the result that performance fell far behind expectations.'? The American artificial harbour arrived more or less intact, but had hardly started operating when it was swamped by a gale and literally blown to pieces. In the event, it was the time-honoured device of blockships that proved most useful in providing protection for the landings. Much of the complicated and expensive equipment of the artificial harbours (some of which had been designed for entirely different operations and was apparently taken along simply because it was available) only served to clutter the landing area with wreckage and thus increased the danger to shipping. Here, as elsewhere, the men who planned operation ‘Overlord’ had clearly violated Hindenburg’s maxim that, in war, only the simple succeeds. While beaches and artificial harbours had to be relied upon to support the early stages of the operation, its ultimate success could 