fety of the convoys from Italy, and how to secure an adequate port at a reasonable distance behind the front. The solution of both problems was essential for success; overcoming either separately would not do. Given these facts, two courses were open to the Axis. One was to adopt the Italian proposal — Rommel should stay where he was and the Italians should capture Malta in their own time. Assuming that oil for the Italian navy could have been found, and given some extension of the port of Benghazi, this would have enabled Rommel to hold out in- definitely and to prepare a large-scale attack on Egypt at some later date. Alternatively, enough reinforcements — another two to four German armoured divisions** - should have been brought up, and sufficient stores accumulated, to enable Rommel to take 196 Supplying War Alexandria in one swoop. This, as Halder had pointed out as early as 1940,"° would have solved the problem of port-capacity once and for all, while at the same time turning Malta into a strategic backwater and making it possible to starve her out.”° With or without Malta in Axis hands, it is questionable whether an advance on Alexandria would have been practicable. Even if Hitler had the additional forces at his disposal, bringing them to Africa would have increased Panzerarmee’s requirements to a point far beyond the combined capacity of Benghazi and Tripoli. This in turn would have made the accumulation of stores for an attack a hopeless task, while the number of vehicles required to transport stores inside Africa was far beyond the strictly limited resources of the Wehrmacht. Perhaps the only way to solve the problem would have been to rid Panzerarmee of its useless Italian ballast; this had been Thoma’s demand in October 1940. Answering it, however, would have led to a different war. As it was, the capture of Malta might have enabled Rommel to hold out indefinitely at a reasonable distance from his bases. This, after all, had been the task originally assigned to him. Any attempt to do more, as Cavallero and Rintelen never tired of pointing out, was bound to be frustrated by the hard realities of the logistic situation. Under these circumstances, the solution actually adopted proved to be the worst possible. On 26 May Rommel started his offensive. On 22 June he captured Tobruk and found the port intact." The Axis, however, was in no condition to exploit this success. Though shipping losses in June had risen hardly at all as compared with May, lack of oil for the navy caused the tonnage plying the Africa route to fall by two thirds, while supplies disembarked dropped from 150,000 tons to a disastrous 32,000. The fuel shortage, moreover, forced the unloading of even this small amount not at Benghazi but at Tripoli®? This made Rommel’s situation desperate. Unable to stay where he was, he had either to fall back or ‘flee forward’ in the hope of living oft the enemy.** The protests of the Italian High Command. seconded by the German CIC South, were of no avail. Proclaiming that the supplies captured at Tobruk would carry him to the Nile, Rommel was determined to go on and Hitler, who had never been very keen on the Malta operation, supported him.”? The Axis hopes now hung on 2,000 vehicles, 5,000 tons ol supplies and, above all, 1,400 tons of fuel captured at Tobruk," Sirte to Alamein 197 but this was just not enough. After an advance of another 400 miles, the ‘difficult supply situation’, as well as exhaustion and stiffening resistance, brought Panzerarmee to a halt on 4 July." As Rommel himself subsequently admitted, he was fortunate to be halted at this point. Had this not been the case, he might have arrived at Alexandria with two battalions and 30 tanks, and his line of communications longer still. Although brought to a stop at Alamein, Rommel had by no means given up. He still intended to resume the attack after a few days’ recuperation.*® However, the full impact of his long communications line now made itself felt, Of the 100,000 tons needed each month,'” Tobruk — itself hundreds of miles behind the front - could handle barely 20,000. Lorries were in as short a supply as always, and attempts to use the British railway from Sollum resulted in only 300 tons per day being transported instead of 1,500 as planned.?*! What was worse, the port and the sea-routes leading to it were hopelessly exposed to the attacks of the Egypt-based RAF. Sending supply ships straight to Tobruk (or to the even smaller and more valnerable ports of Bardia and Mersa Matruh) was difficult. On the other hand, unloading them at Benghazi or Tripoli, 800 and 1,300 miles behind the front respectively, involved impossible wastage and delay. Faced with this dilemma, Commando Supremo hesitated. In July, disregarding a storm of protest from Panzerarmee, the Italians opted to unload at Benghazi and Tripoli, with the result that although only 5 per cent of the shipping was lost and 91,000 tons put decided to stake across, it took weeks for the supplies to reach the front.!°? Rommel himself saw the dilemma clearly enough, but, he insisted that the Italians send their ships directly into Tobruk,*** with the result that in August losses rose fourfold and the quantity of supplies put across dropped to 51,000 tons.*** The lessons from these facts were clear enough. With or without Malta in Axis hands, the ships going to Tripoli and Benghazi usually got through, while those sent further east only served to turn Tobruk into the ‘cemetery of the Italian navy’.'°* In midAugust, therefore, the Italians decided to disregard Rommel and to concentrate on Tripoli and Benghazi." With this, Panzerarmee’s position became desperate. To stay where it was meant suicide. Although he had only 8,000 out of 30,000 tons of fuel he claimed he needed for August, Rommel now everything on a final attempt to break through to the Nile. He 198 was Supplying War supported by Kesselring, who promised more tankers for Tobruk. When these were sunk he said he would fly in 500 tons of fuel a day. Kesselring’s planes failed to arrive and, having spent 10,000 tons of precious fuel, ‘that lout of a Rommel’ after four days of fierce fighting at ‘Alam Halfa found himself back where he had started.?”” Having tried and failed, Rommel now realized that the game was lost. He even began to consider withdrawal from Africa, but at this point Hitler intervened and forbade any retreat.’°* Disregarding Panzerarmee’s protests, the Italians in September con- tinued to concentrate on Tripoli and Benghazi'** — with the result that supplies put across rose to 77,000 tons and dropped only slightly in October. The fact that they never again met Rommel’s full requirements was not due to losses at sea. In September these dropped back to their level of July, and although they rose again in October''? they still remained well below those of August." Rommel’s difficulties were due rather to the dramatic fall in the shipping tonnage plying the Africa route."? Whether this reflected a real shortage of ships, or was due to Italian relue- tance to lose more of them, is difficult to say. According to the best available figures, out of 1,748,941 tons of shipping that Italy possessed in the Mediterranean in June 1940, 1,259,061 had been lost by the end of 1942, However, between, 582,302 German-captured struction, salvage, at the end of 1942 tons ships, etc, must during the period in were added in the form of German and and another 300,000 or so from new conso that the overall tonnage still available have amounted to some 1,362,682 tons, or seventy-seven per cent of what it had been when Italy entered the war.""* Moreover, it is significant that Cavallero could, as late as mid-October 1942, describe Italy's losses for the year as ‘light’."* In any case, Rommel refused to believe that a shortage of shipping existed and accused the Italians of favouring their own troops.'* As the situation grew worse, the bickering between the allies intensified, but to no avail. At the start of the battle ol El Alamein, Rommel’s troops were down to three basic loads ol fuel — instead of the thirty or so which he claimed were needed! in Africa - and eight to ten of ammunition. Since the railway from Tobruk was Aooded, the transport situation was again said to be ‘very difficult’"* and in fact, 10,000 tons of supplies werc still at Tobruk, from where it was impossible to bring them to the front. Sirte to Alamein 199 Conclusion: supply and operations in Africa After the war in North Africa was over, Rommel bitterly com- mented that, had he received but a fraction of the troops and supplies that Hitler poured into Tunisia in a hopeless attempt to hold it, he could have thrown the British out of Egypt times over. This claim has since been echoed by many writers. However, many other it ignores the fact that the Axis’ presence in Africa had been put on an entirely different basis by Rommel's retreat and by the Allied landings in North West Africa. Having seized both Bizerta and Toulon, as well as the French merchant fleet, the Axis now possessed the means with which to send rein- forcements to Africa at a rate Panzerarmee had never known. Even so, however, they did not succeed in maintaining them there for very long. The lessons of the period of the Libyan campaigns proper seem clear. First, Rommel’s supply difficulties were at all times due to the limited capacity of the North African ports, which not only determined the largest possible number of troops that could be maintained, but also restricted the size of convoys, making the business of escorting them impossibly expensive in terms of the fuel and shipping employed. Second, the importance usually attributed to the ‘battle of the convoys’ is grossly exaggerated. At no time, except perhaps November-December 1941, did the aeronaval struggle in the central Mediterranean play a decisive part in events in North Africa, and even then Rommel’s difficulties were due as much to his impossibly long — and vulnerable — line of communications inside Africa as to losses at sea.'? Third, the Axis decision of summer 1942 not to occupy Malta was of far less moment to the outcome of the struggle in North Africa than the fact that the port of Tobruk was so small and hopelessly exposed to the attacks of the RAF operating from Egypt. More si icant even than the above factors, however, were the distances that had to be overcome inside Africa, These were out of all proportion to those that the Wehrmacht had met in Europe, available including Russia, to bridge them. and there Coastal was little motor transport shipping was employed on some scale in 1942, it is true, but given the RAF’s domination of the air its effect was limited because, the nearer to the front a port lay, the more exposed to attack from the air it became. Given these facts, Rintelen was right in pointing out that only a railway could solve the supply problem. This, after all, was part of the British 200 Supplying War solution, The Italians, however, never mobilized the resources for this purpose, nor did Rommel have the patience to wait for them. That the reverses inflicted on Rommel during the summer and autumn of 1942 were due to the non-arrival of fuel from Italy, or to the fortuitous sinking of a disproportionately large number of vitally-important tankers, has frequently been maintained but is in fact without foundation. A detailed scrutiny of the list of ships sunk between 2 September and 23 October 1942 reveals that, out of a total of twenty-seven vessels, only two were tankers."?® Also, the average quantity of fuel that Rommel received during the months July-October was actually slightly larger than that which he got during the haleyon days from February to June." This suggests that his difficulties stemmed from the inability to transport the fuel inside Africa, rather than to any dearth of supplies from Europe. This impression is reinforced still further by the fact that, during the