wards carrying ever greater loads at ever higher speeds. With the exception of Napoleonic practice, the development of logistics could be pictured as a continuous process. In the light of our investigation of the details of the logistics systems employed during the last century and a half, there docs not appear to be much accuracy in either of these classifications The image of eighteenth-century warfare as magazine-fed, its movements shackled by its own supply apparatus, is largely false. Napoleon, far from regressing to more primitive methods, in fact made more extensive use of his predecessors’ normal practice and ended up by constructing what was by far the most comprehen sive system of supply the world had ever seen. Pace Moltke and Logistics in perspective 233 the demigods, the arrival of the railways and the Etappen system did not effect any revolution in the supply of mobile operations, with the result that, even as late as 1914, the German troops were expected to live off the country and actually did so. Seen as an exercise in more or less well-organized plunder, the history of warfare from Wallenstein to Schlieffen forms an easily-recognizable whole. The period is characterized above all by the fact that armies could only be fed as long as they kept moving. Once they came toa halt in front of either Mons (1692) or Metz (1870), however, they experienced immense difficulties, which had to be overcome by resorting to ‘artificial’ means. This was so even in 1914, as German troops investing Antwerp found to their cost.4 If this continuity was finally broken in 1914, this was due not so much to any sudden humanization of war, as to the fact that, following the enormous rise in the consumption of ammunition and other prerequisites of war (including, for the first time, motor fuel), armies found themselves no longer able to take the majority of their supplies away from the country. Whereas, even as late as 1870, ammunition had formed less than 1 percent of all supplies (6,000 tons were expended as against 792,000 tons of food and fodder consumed), in the first months of World War I the proportion of ammunition to other supplies was reversed, and by the end of World War I subsistence accounted for only eight to twelve per cent of all supplies. These new demands could only be met by continuous replenishment from base. Thus it now became relatively easy to support an army while it was standing still, almost impossible to do so when it was moving forward fast. It is not surprising that it took time for this reversal of all previous notions to be understood. Until the problems thus generated could be overcome, a type of warfare evolved which, precisely because the railways could not replace the horsed wagon, entailed supplies and sometimes troops, being kept in the same place for literally years on end. Huge quantities of supplies (e.g. one-and-a-half million shells for the single offensive launched by the British on the Somme in 1916) were brought up the front, dumped at the railheads, and could never again be moved forward, backward or laterally. To a far greater extent than in the eighteenth century, strategy became an appendix of logistics. The products of the machine—shells, bullets, fuel, sophisticated engineering materials—had finally superseded those of the field as the main items consumed by 234 Supplying War armies, with the result that warfare, this time shackled by immense networks of tangled umbilical cords, froze and turned into a process of mutual slaughter on a scale so vast as to stagger the imagination. Whether or not the subsequent products of the machine — trucks, tracks, airplanes - have enabled armies to overcome the effects of mechanized warfare is a moot point. Comparisons between modern mobile campaigns and those of earlier days have sometimes been made, but their results are hardly convincing in view of the difficulty of finding the right things to compare.‘ A more fruitful approach to the problem would seem to be, not to measure the speed of present-day armies as against that of previous ones, but to try and see to what extent they have been able to realize their maximum theoretical speed as determined by the technological means available ~ in other words, to measure the effects of that elusive factor, ‘friction.’ Looked at in this way, it appears that the maximum sustained speed of century armies was three miles per hour ~ the pace of man ~ and that they were occasionally able to cover fifteen miles per day for two or three weeks on end. eighteentha marching as much as As against this ratio of 1:5, modern vehicles — even tracked ones — can easily cover fifteen miles an hour, but no army, not even the British “Blade Force’ chasing Rommel in North Africa or Malinowsky’s armoured columns in pursuit of the Japanese in Manchuria, has managed to sustain a pace of seventy-five miles a day for more than a very few days at a time. Another way of looking at the same problem is to consider the so-called ‘critical distance’, ie. the maximum one at which armies can, with the aid of a given type of vehicle, be ‘effectively’ supported from base. We have already had cause to remark that the concept itself is not very useful, dependent as it is on a very large number of accidental factors, Nevertheless, a theoretical examination based on it appears interesting. Assuming a wagon of one-ton capacity drawn by four horses, each of which consumes 20]b. of fodder per day, the maximum distance the vehicle can travel before using up its entire payload which probably no more than 120, per cent, have ever been utilized in a 5-ton World War II motor truck could probably travel at least 5.000 is ene =555 miles, of or approximately twenty-two practice. Compared with this, loaded with nothing but fucl miles before getting through Logistics in perspective 235 its load. However, no more than, at the most, 500 — or ten per cent of the maximum capacity — have ever been utilized in a European campaign. Even Rommel, a commander who understood the art of squeezing the last mile out of his transport like no other, ran into insoluble difficulties when he tried to double this figure. It follows from these facts that, far from eighteenth-century armies being slow and magazine-bound, they managed to do very much better in relation to the theoretical limits of the means at their disposal than do modern forces. This is only to be expected, for the friction within any machine — human or mechanical- increases in proportion to the number of its parts - a prime example of the law of diminishing returns. Given these facts, and in spite of the development of all means of transportation in the thirty years since World War II, the speed of mobile operations cannot, in our opinion, he expected to rise dramatically in the foreseeable future. It was demonstrated in the Israeli-Egyptian campaign of 1967 that not even an army operat- ing under ideal conditions, enjoying complete superiority in the air and taking a second rate opponent by surprise, stands much chance of covering more than forty miles per day.’ To conclude from this that the 1944-style army is ‘dangerously obsolete’, however, is to misunderstand the development of logistics during the present century, characterized as it is by the fact that the speed and range of successive new means of transport have been largely, if not completely, offset by the enormous increase in friction and, above all, by the quantities of supplies required. Hence, even if an entirely new and unprecedentedly effective means of transport were to appear tomorrow, it is to be expected that only a small fraction of its maximum theoretical capacity will ever be utilized in practice, and that its effect on the speed of mobile operations will therefore be marginal. A further interesting question concerns the proportion of service to combat formations. This proportion is frequently cited as a rough indicator of an army's efficiency — a low proportion representing a high efficiency. But this is to misunderstand the relation of service to combat units. Romantically heroic politicians and gung-ho generals notwithstanding, the aim of a military organization is not to make do with the smallest number of supporting troops but to produce the greatest possible fighting power. If, for any given campaign, this aim can only be achieved by having a hundred men pump fuel, drive trucks and construct 236 Supplying War railways behind each combatant, then 100:1 is the optimum ratio. To work out this ratio with its thousands of component parts in theory, however, is an almost impossible task, involving as it does a model of tremendous complexity, worthy of a battery of computers presided over by a mathematical prodigy. Moreover, when all the calculations have been done, and the preparations made on the basis of them completed, there is always a strong possibility that a fresh strategic or political requirement will render them worthless. In practice, there is scant evidence that the task has been attempted by the majority of twentieth-century (not to mention earlier) operational planners. Rather, most armies seem to have prepared their campaigns as best they could on an ad hoc basis, making great, if uncoordinated, efforts to gather together the largest possible number of tactical vehicles, trucks of all descriptions, railway troops, etc., while giving little, if any, thought to the ‘ideal’ combination which, in theory, would have carried them the furthest. Nor, as we saw, were the results of the only com- prehensive attempt that was made in this direction particularly encouraging. In spite, or perhaps because, of the fact that the plans for ‘Overlord’ made detailed provisions for the last pre- packed unit of fuel, they quickly tumed out to be an exercise in conservatism, even pusillanimity, such as has not often been equalled. Not only did the actual development of the campaign have little in common with the plans, but the logistic instrument itself functioned very differently from what had been expected. Consequently, it would hardly be an exaggeration to say that the victories the Allies won in 1944 were due as much to their disregard for the preconceived logistic plans as to their implementa- tion. In the final account, it was the willingness - or lack of it to override the plans, to improvise and take risks, that determined the outcome. It is perhaps fitting that the present study — starting, as it did, with the determination to avoid ‘vague speculations’ and concen- trate on ‘concrete figures and calculations’ - should end with an admission that the human intellect alone is not, after all, the best instrument for waging war and, therefore, understanding it. The intellect must play a central role both in planning and execution, if only because no better instrument is available to us; but to believe that war, or indeed any other aspect of human behaviour, can ever be grasped by means of the intellect alone is to give Logistics in perspective 237 proof of a hubris like that evinced by those who built the Tower of Babel and deserving similar punishment. To recognize the truth of Napoleon’s dictum that, in war, the moral is to the physical as three to one; in the final account, this may be all that a study of the influence of logistics on mobile operations may be able to teach us. Note on sources Owing to the long period and different countries covered by the present book, the sources used and available are extremely varied in nature. Apart from the first chapter, which bears an intro- ductory character, an effort has been made to obtain all the sources available for the study of each campaign; but this was not always possible. In particular, the writing of chapters 3 and 4 (the campaigns of 1870 and 1914) was handicapped by the fact that virtually all the records were destroyed by bombing during World War II. For these chapters, heavy use was therefore made of memoirs and other publishe