only be assured if deep water ports were captured and restored to use. Since tactical developments on the Continent War of the accountants 211 proceeded more slowly than had been anticipated, however, these hopes were at first disappointed. Thus, Cherbourg - by far the most important port in Normandy - began operating six weeks behind schedule and it was several more weeks before it reached its scheduled capacity of 6,000 tons per day. Saint-Lo, supposed to fall by D+9, did not in fact do so until D+48. Granville and Saint-Malo were expected to start operating around D+27 but remained in German hands until D+50. The proximity of the Normandy In event, landing Brest in particular, had played ‘Overlord’. the these sites to the Brittany ports, a major role in their selection for ports were only taken months behind schedule and by then proved too far away from the front to be of any use. Other ports, such as Grandchamp and Isigny, these during were occupied more or less on time but were too small to make any significant contributions to Allied supply. As a result of all factors, total American supplies disembarked the month of June reached only 71 per cent of program, which led to a whole series of operations - ‘Axehead’, ‘Lucky Strike’, ‘Beneficiary’, ‘Hands Up’, ‘Swordhilt’ ~ being successively initiated, considered and rejected for purely logistic reasons.’ If the above facts did not lead to the collapse of the Allied operations in France, this was due to the fact that the beaches, even though deprived of the protection that was supposed to be afforded by the artificial harbours, proved capable of discharging supplies far in excess of what the plans had allowed for. This, however, was achieved only by disregarding all the plans, The first breakthrough came on D+2 when it was decided to ignore the predetermined order of priorities and unload everything regardless. Having for months resisted the beaching of its craft during low determine tide (a fact, incidentally, that had done much to the exact date and hour of the operation) the Navy suddenly discovered that such a procedure was feasible after all, thereby making it possible to discharge cargoes directly to the shore and dispense with many of the laboriously assembled boats, floating piers, pontoon causeways and the like. Thus, un- loading proceeded not so much in accordance with the plans as without them, and in some cases against them, which was addi- tional proof that the planning staffs had grossly overestimated the value of complex artificial arrangements and underestimated what determination, achieve. common sense and improvisation could 212 Supplying War Another factor which prevented the shortcomings of the logistic apparatus from exercising too negative an influence was the planners’ overestimate of consumption. This resulted partly from the fact that tactical progress was much slower than expected — by D+19 the Allied lodgement covered only about ten per cent of its anticipated area. With distances limited to no more than a few dozen miles in any direction, vehicles consumed only a fraction of the POL provided for them. How inaccurate the planners were is illustrated by the fact that, although unloading on the Continent continued to lag somewhat behind expectations throughout the months of June and July, it actually proved possible to land additional divisions ahead of schedule D+24 onward. from If the slow unfolding of tactical operations reduced consump- tion of some supplies, it also caused problems in other fields. Thus, expenditure of ammunition — particutarly small arms, hand grenades and mortar bombs - in the Normandy hocage was heavier than expected, as were losses in ordnance. Storage space was hard to come by so that camouflage and dispersion often had to be dispensed with. The volume of vehicular traffic in the shallow lodgement caused congestion and was soon to lead to the deterioration of the relatively few roads available. Though the railway network in Normandy was captured, against expectations, ‘almost intact’™ rail-traffic was uneconomical owing to the small distances involved. The fact that the front was only some twenty miles away from the beaches gave rise to friction between COMZ and the Armies, since the latter were naturally reluctant to relinquish control over their supplies in favour of the former. Friction also arose between COMZ and ADSEC, with the result that the former's transfer to the Continent was carried out ahead of schedule. While it is therefore true that the slow unfolding of tactical operations in June and July 1944 caused some logistic problems, the net effect nevertheless was to create a lodgement area that was packed with troops and supplies. On the eve of operation ‘Cobra’, the breakout at Avranches, there were confined within the space of 1,570 square miles 19 American and 17 British divisions totalling a million and a half men, with supplies for the former alone averaging 22,000 tons a day. Though almost 90 per cent of this tonnage was still being discharged over the beaches, it was already clear that Cherbourg, once opened, would easily War of the accountants 213 exceed the cautious estimates of its capacity made before D day.’* Owing to the small distances, reserves of POL reached un- expectedly high levels while the state of ammunition supply improved dramatically during the lull in the fighting that preceded the breakout.*® Yet amidst this cornucopia Allied supply officers continued to worry, making gloomy forecasts of shortages that were expected to materialize in the fall (when the weather would make the unloading of supplies over the beaches impracticable) and thinking of fresh variants of plans whose purpose it was to acquire the Brittany ports after all. Uncomfortable about the state of supplies in Normandy, General Lee of COMZ tended to regard the continuation of operations in France with greater pessimism still. As originally conceived, the logistic plans for ‘Overlord’ had been based on the assumption that the Wehrmacht would fight a systematic defensive campaign, putting up resistance along one river line after the other. This in turn was expected to result in an Allied advance almost as slow and deliberate as that of 1918. While logistic support for this advance would have to be furnished mainly by motor transport (it was thought that up to seventy-five per cent of the railway network in France would be out of action due to either German demolitions or attacks by Allied aircraft) its rate would be sufficiently low to make it possible to leapfrog the railways from one river to the next. Supplies would thus proceed in an orderly manner from beach (or artificial harbour, or port) to railhead and from there to truckhead and Army dump. Operating in this way, the Allies hoped to reach the Seine by D+ 90 and the German border around D+360. In the event, tactical developments assumed a very different form. By 25 July ~ D +49 - the Allies were still only holding the line they had hoped to reach on D+15. If the Seine was to be reached on schedule the distance between it and this line would therefore have to be covered in forty-one days instead of seventyfive as planned. A staff study, aimed at finding out whether such an acceleration was possible, was ordered by the SHAEF G-4 (supply officer), General Crawford, but concluded that it could not be done, for a deficit of no less than 127 quartermaster truck (GTR) companies was to be expected on D+90 and serious logistic difficulties encountered even as early as D+80. This was a very pessimistic view indeed of logistic capabilities, Fortunately for the Allies, a decisive leader took charge of the 214 Supplying War situation. Unlike the majority of his fellow commanders, General Patton refused to be tied down by the logisticians’ tables. Indeed, such was his indifference to them that, throughout the campaign of 1944-5, he only saw his G-4 twice — once before he assumed active command and again in the last week of the war.17 Made operational on 1 August, Patton’s 3. Army began its stormy career two days later by ignoring all plans and feeding no Jess than six divisions through the Avranches~Pontaubault bottleneck within seventy-two hours. At Pontaubault, they spread out like a fan and began advancing east and south-east, even though the single road serving as their artery of supply was still being counterattacked. By 6 August Patton’s forces were threatening Laval and Le Mans. On 16 August they were in Orleans, and three days later the Seine was reached at Troyes. Moreover, Patton’s advance out- flanked the positions from which the Germans had been trying to contain the Allied lodgement in Normandy and threatened to cut them off, with the result that, after the failure of their coun- terattack at Mortain, they rapidly fell back and thus enabled the remaining Allied forces, Hodges’ 1. U.S. Army and Montgomery's 21. Army Group, to effect their own breakout and reach the Seine.’* This they did, and the river's western banks were finally cleared on 24 Angust — fully eleven days ahead of the schedule which, according to the logisticians, could not be met. Mean- while, in a manner reminiscent of the proverbial kettle rattling behind the dog’s tail, those same logisticians continued to insist that what Patton and Hodges were doing was impossible. While it may be true that erring on the safe side is normally preferable to its opposite, the discrepancy between expectation and actual performance in this case is so great as to call for an explanation. Such an explanation is readily found when one realizes how modest were the demands that the planners made on the means at their disposal. Thus, for example, it was assumed that a truck company could provide no more than fifty miles forward lift a day (that is, overall distance covered in 24 hours was not supposed to exceed 100 miles'*) whereas actual performance turned out to be at least thirty per cent higher.?* Almost unbelievably, the plans had been made on the assumption thal the state of the French road network would not allow supply by motor transport at more than 75 miles from the railheads®! — 1 gross underestimate that was exceeded at least three or four times over. Finally, consumption by a single Allied division was War of the accountants 215 put at 650 tons a day, whereas a force engaged in pursuit actually required only a fraction of this amount, possibly not more than 300 or 350.7? Even when these facts are taken into account, however, it seems difficult to reconcile the pessimism of the Allied planners with the superabundance of the means at their disposal. In late August 1944 there were twenty-two American divisions in France. Of these, sixteen were operating on or near the Seine at a distance of some 250 miles from Cherbourg whereas the remaining ones were still disembarking in Normandy or facing east towards Brittany. Putting their average distance from the ports at 200 miles and assuming that consumption did in fact amount to the regulation 650 tons, 22 x 200 x 650 = 2,860,000 ton/miles forward lift per day were required. There is no evidence of just how much transport was available at this time, but even as early as 25 July it had totatled 227 GTR companies plus the equivalent of 108 more in rail transportation facilities.* Overall forward lift there- fore amounted, even if only according to the regulations, to 3,350,000 ton/miles a day - and this does not take account of the fact that additional August, nor that GTR companies the divisions were were brought furnished with in during truck com- ponents so lavish that they were capable, as subsequent events were to demonstrate, of hauling own supplies over hundreds boundaries.** a substantial of miles behind fraction of their the Armies’ rear While the evidence is far from complete, the above facts suffice to show that the Allied advance from Normandy to the Seine, however successful and even spectacular strategica