lly, was an exercise in logistic pusillanimity unparalleled in modern military history. This is even more astonishing when one compares the conditions prevailing during this campaign with those governing some of the others that we have studied. Not only were the Allies possessed of more motor transport than any other army had ever dreamt of, but they were operating in favourable summer weather and over a road network that was among the best and most dense in the world. There was little enemy air activity,” and a friendly population furnished considerable assistance rather than engaging in sabotage. Yet for all these advantages, the Allied offensive had to be carried out against the logisticians’ advice. To paraphrase a famous quotation, in the kingdom of supply something was rotten. 216 Supplying War “Broad front’ or ‘knifelike thrust’? OF all the problems western Europe raised by the Allied campaign in 1944-5, the question whether in north- it would have been possible to put an early end to the war by means of a quick thrust from Belgium to the Ruhr is perhaps the most important. The literature on this subject is vast and still growing. Here we shall only attempt a brief summary of the main views. These appear to be as follows: (a) The one put forward by Chester Wilmot and, above all, Field Marshal Montgomery himself. These two have argued that the strategic opportunity presented itself in September 1944. Given a clear-cut decision and a willingness to stake out a meaningful order of priorities on the part of the supreme commander, 2. British and 1. American Armies could have captured the Ruhr ~ and perhaps Berlin as well. Eisenhower, however, refused to concentrate his logistic resources behind Dempsey and Hodges. In particular, he did not want to halt Patton's 3. Army. Consequently, the opportunity to end the war in 1944 was lost.?¢ {b) To counter Montgomery's accusations, Eisenhower has defended his decision on strategic grounds, claiming that a thrust by part of his forces into ‘the heart of Germany’ was too risky and would have led to ‘nothing but certain destruction’.?” Subsequent writers have produced more arguments to justify his decision, including the need to avoid offending Allied (that is, American) public opinion by halting Patton, differences over the structure of the chain of command in France, and — last though not least — logistics.?¢ (c) Finally, Basil Liddell Hart has suggested that, while the opportunity to go for the Ruhr did exist, failure to utilize it lay not so much with Eisenhower as with Montgomery himself. In particular, the discovery at the critical moment that 1,400 British-built lorries had defective engines was decisive. Given this, there was little that Eisenhower could do to help, for Patton’s 3. Army was receiving so few supplies that not even by stopping it could enough transport have been made available to enable Montgomery to occupy the Ruhr.” War of the accountants 217 Although the accounts of the situation that faced the Allies early in September 1944 differ in conclusion and even in detail, advance across there is little doubt that operations in the period just preceding had been among the most spectacular in history, Having sent its formations the Seine on 20 August, Patton's 3. Amny covered almost 200 miles in twelve days until it stopped in front of Metz. Hodges’ 1. Army on his left advanced even further, reaching the Albert Canal in eastern Belgium on 6 September. Montgomery's 21. Army Group, whose rate of progress had hitherto been markedly slower than that of the American forces, now surpassed itself by surging forward across northern France and Belgium, capturing Antwerp — its port virtually intact - on 5 September and only coming to a halt on the Meuse~Escaut Canal four days later. It was a performance of which the originators of the Blitzkrieg would have been proud, and one which the Allies themselves had not foreseen. As might have been expected in the light of previous events, all these operations were carried out against the advice of the SHAEF logisticians, who declared them to be utterly impossible. Compelled to revise their cautious estimates of July, they com- pleted a new feasibility-study on 11 August. This showed that if a whole series of conditions was met it might be possible to support a tentative offensive by four U.S, divisions across the Seine on 7 September. Even this conclusion, however, was qualified by the suggestion that operations south of the Seine should be halted in favour of an attack on the Channel ports, and that the liberation of Paris should be postponed until late October when railways from the Normandy area would hopefully be available to carry relief supplies. As it was, Paris was liberated on 25 August. By the target date of 7 September both Patton and Hodges had already gone 200 miles behind the Seine. A week later 16 U.S. divisions were being supported, albeit inadequately, on or near the German frontier on both sides of the Ardennes while several more were engaged on active combat operations in Brittany. All this was achieved in spite of the fact that the conditions laid down in the paper of 11 August had been only partly met. Seldom utterly wrong. can calculations by staff officers have proved Supply over the rapidly expanding lines of communication so - those in the American sector grew from 200 or 250 miles to over 400, and those in the British one from 80 to nearly 300 - could ° Sinqued —_—, OL o uag [ Binogsens, query prog, °§ sue9)30 souvay® 109% _sunsinG sn ¢ NeI is eueg Binquiey* Ae MYL URNS *SUO}EUD® MOURN, swieuy? suo lassnid, SL quomu$ oe, eee”? pr f" waNUy wepaney, “OT EEWOY oo souuaye lege 220 Supplying War not, of course, be effected without abandoning all orderly proce- dures and employing emergency measures. With petrol in their tanks and rations in their pockets, combat units, faced with ver’ little organized opposition, could accelerate their progress alma. at will. Not so COMZ, however, which found it impossible to make depéts keep pace with the rapidly advancing front. No sooner had a site been selected than it was left behind, and after several attempts (each costly in terms of transport) COMZ gave up in despair and concentrated on bringing up the most essential items from bases that were sometimes as much as 300 miles in the rear. The transport to carry the supplies across these distances came from hundreds of units considered less essential — heavy and anti-aircraft artillery, engineers, chemical warfare, and the like - which were stripped of their vehicles and left immobilized, sometimes on reduced rations, as were three divisions newly arriving in France, whose organic trucks were taken away and formed into improvised GTR companies. While rations, POL and ammunition were being rushed forward, the supply of everything else, including, in particular, clothing and engineering stores, hac| to be deferred. Air transport was used on a grand scale but failed to deliver more than an average of 1,000 tons a day becanse of the lack of airfields near the front Jinc and, even worse, because aircraft were withdrawn to take part in a series of would-be airborne operations that never materialized. The most famous ol all these expedients to supply the front was the Red Ball Express, a loop system of one-way highways reserved exclusively for the supply service over which thousands of trucks rumbled night anc day. These emergency measures notwithstanding, the How of supplies reaching the front gradually diminished until, on 2 September, 3. Army's advance was brought to a halt. 1. Army struggled on for a few more days before it too came to a standstill. Compared with deliveries to both Armies of over 19,000 tons a day during the second week of August, COMZ could only promise 7,000 at the end of the month, and it is doubtful whether even this figure was in fact met.** Stocks in the hands of the front-line units dwindled at an alarming rate, e.g. from 10.5 days of POI. supply at 1. Army on 5 August to 0.3 days on 2 September and zero one week later.” Meanwhile, reserves available in Normandy actually rose as they could not be transported forward, Though consumption of ammunition had fallen off by thirty to ninety per War of the accountants 221 cent since July, deliveries fell so short of demands that a single corps (the XX) could request supplies in excess of all the tonnage allocated to 3. Army, whatever ammunition to which dumps it belonged, that could put together. be established Since were quickly left behind, both 1. and 3. Armies resorted to the creation of rolling magazines, a procedure which, though effective in ensuring that at least some supplies would always be available, wasted transport. As always happens when supplies are short, friction and even tension arose between the front-line troops and the supporting services in their rear. 3. Army in particular was notorious for the unorthodox means it employed in order to obtain what it needed. Roving foraging parties impersonated members of other units, trains and convoys were diverted or hijacked, transportation companies were robbed of the fuel they needed for the return journey, and spotter planes were sent hundreds of miles to the rear in order to discover fuel-shipments. Inside the zone of communications itself, the strain on men and material working around the clock led to fatigue, accidents, malingering and occasional sabotage. Vehicles went without maintenance until they broke down and the number of major repairs needed rose rapidly. Record- keeping of the movement of supplies, which had always been a weak point in the Allies’ organization, became even worse during the rapid advance of August, with the result that some of the limited transport available was wasted on items which the Armies had not requisitioned and did not need. Occasionally, instances of a worse kind of waste occurred. Thus, out of 22,000,000 jerrycans more than half had been lost by the end of August, with the result that this humble item limited the entire POL supply system. Supply discipline, especially at 3. Army, was poor and led to enormous quantities of equipment, particularly clothing, being in more senses left behind, so that the salvage companies were swamped with, work.*? Instead of trying to capture French locomotives and rolling-stock, Patton’s men deliberately shot them up - finding them, as one author puts it, ‘a rewarding target than one’.’> Though the logistic situation of the British forces operating in Belgium was also strained, it was not as difficult as that of the two American Armies. Distances here were smaller - 21. Army Group was operating on the ‘inside track’ along the coast — and roads were more numerous than in Lorraine. On 80 August, when 222 Supplying War Hodges and Patton had run out of fuel, Dempsey informed SHAEF that his supply situation was ‘very favourable’.* Though the length of their communications increased to almost 300 miles during the subsequent week, the British coped by reducing un- loading at the ports from 17,000 to 6,000 tons per day - thus freeing truck companies - and immobilizing many units, includ- ing one complete corps (the VIII).** So rapid was the advance that the Belgian railroad network, the world’s best, was captured intact, though its utilization was delayed because the Americans did not hand over rolling-stock as scheduled.** Above all, Montgomery's advance did not take him away from the ports, as did that of Bradley's forces. On the contrary, it put him in a posi- tion to clear up a whole series of ports along the Channel ~ including Le Havre, Dieppe, Boulogne, what the Calais and Dunkirk — so that their situation regarding unloading capacity promised to become much better than had been expected even a month earlier. Meanwhile, of German enemy? Since D day, the Wehrmacht’s casualties in the west had been staggering; 400,000 men, 1,800 tanks and assault guns, 1,500 other guns and 20,000