

Whatever was emblematic of the revolution 

* Hifltoire d'Hayti, pp. 176, 17T. 



14 NOTSS OH BAITI, 



badtd with tnaBpoxt in theooioiiy; the 

mtwrnl coloms woe adopted with enthufflaam^ 

md the lalitia awiinihted to the national guard 

ofRaaoe. But in the midst of all this transport^ 

there woe appiehenaioiis of insurrection; and on 

a ndioaloas ramoar <^ the rev<dt of three thou- 

aand a^roea, the national guard marched out 

fnxn the Cape, and letomed shthout having 

aeen an a^my. This report was injurioos, as 

it suggested to the slaves the possibility of the 

reported evei^ being realised. 

The tr e e p o o|Je of colour, thoiigh peaoefU, 
were not iwattpntive to passii^ eyeais: tEey^ 
sent a depntation to France, to daim th^ na- 
tural rights fiom the l^islatore. That depu- 
tation ai^ieared on the 22d of October, 1789, 
at the bar of the National Assembly, with a 
stat eme nt of their grieyances — presented six 
m il l i on s of liyres to Franee*-and declared their 
oonstitufflits to be ready to contribute one-fifUi^ 
of their property to liquidate the national debt. 
The President of the Asciembly assured them 
'* that no part of the nation ever reclaimed, in 
▼ain, their rights from the Assembly of Repre- 
sentatives of tbe French peoide. " 

It was about this time that M. Charles de 
1-ameth, one of the deputies, made his well- 
known declaration :— 



i 



coNTiKttBD rxcrreicENT. 16 

^^ I am cnoie of tibe greatest proprietors in %ti 
DomiBgo; but I declare to you tibat, ymte I 
to lose all I possess^ I should prefer it, mther 
than not recc^nise the principlai Aat jiwtiee 
and humamty have consecrated: I declare my-» 
self in favour of the admisBicn of the .mized 
races into the administrative assemblies, and of 
the liberty of the blacks." 

Such declarations appear to have inspired 
confidence in the coloured populaticm, who, 
thenceforward began to press their claims in 
the colony itself, though with little success; 
for one of their number, one Lacombe, was 
executed at the Cape for having signed a pe- 
tition beginning, '' In the name of ike Moat 
Holy Trinity;'' and in the west, M. Fenand 
de Baudiere, who had been seneschal of the 
Petit Goave, was murdered in a popular se- 
dition, because he had drawn up a petition for 
his coloured neighbours, daiming political pri- 
vileges. The '^ petits blancs" had their full 
diare in these transaiCtionB, according to general 
report. 

Some parishes, however, did concede to llie 
free-coloured population the right of ^assisting 
at the primary assemblies; but on its being 
required that, in ad<]tition:tothe dvic oath, they 
i^ould take unother to respect the whites, a 



16 NOTES ON HillTl* 

refusal was given and arms taken up ; tran- 
quillity was, however, re-established witiiout 
bloodshed. 

Scarcely was the public irritation allayed, 
when it was again excited by the decree of the 
National Assembly of the 8th March 1790. By 
this decree the general principle of self-legisla- 
tion was conceded ; but there being no men- 
tion of the mixed races, they were excluded-by 
a limited interpretation of its import. At the 
time of its arrival, two hundred and thirteen , 
representatives of the colony had met at St. 
Mark's, and created themselves into a General 
Assembly ; and one of their first acts >was a 
declaration that all the whites would prefer 
death to sharing, political rights with ^^ a bas- 
tard and degenerate race; '/and they voted 
themselves the only lawful representatives of 
the colony. . On the 28th of May they issued 
a declaration of ih&x rights, which many mo- 
derate members refiised to sign; and withdrew. 
Freed from their embarrassing presence, they 
proceeded to organise committees of war, of 
marine, and even of diplomacy ; and ventured 
to summon the heads of the colonial govern- 
ment. 