

Columbus' first restablishment was the city 
'^ La laabeUa/' on the ncHih sidex>f tbe island, 
and so named in. honour (^ his. royal patroness. 
At a subsequent period, though not l<mg s^ter, 
his brother Di^o founded the city of Santo 
Domingo, which, on the abandomnent of Isa*- 
bella, became the capital. I have already no- 
ticed the change in the site of thia city from the 
left to the right bank of the river- Ozama. 



4 NOTES ON HAITI. 

. Various tovfJis were successively built by the 
Spanish goyembfs, notwithstanding the almost 
constant internal dissensions that prevailed, 
even from the period of its first discovery ; but 
with the exception of some ravages by the 
buccaniers/ by Drake and others, no systematic 
or successful permanent inroad appears to have 
been made' before 1625, when a formidable 
body of their previously transient enemies, the 
buccaniers, commenced a series of attacks, and 
in 1630 took forcible possession of the island 
of Tortuga, from which they expelled the resi- 
dent Spaniards. This island, which lies about 
two leagues to the north of Port de Paix,/wk8 
a most advantageous poet for the fi'eebooters, 
who continued their unsanctioned depredations 
until 1665, when a formal settlement with the 
authority of the French government was effected 
by the same description of men, under the com- 
mand of a French gentleman named Pogeron. 
From that time to the end of the seventeenth ^ 
century, the warfare between the two neighbours 1 
was incessant; in the course of which, however, ' 
the original aggressors gradually extended their 
possessions to the larger island; and as the 
rights of coast were. Undefined, the collisions 
were so frequent, that it became necessary for 
the courts of Versailles and Madrid to determine 



CHARACTER OF THE COLONIES. 6 

tfaeboundaryof the two colonies. This wa» done 
in 1776, by the " Traits des Lumtes.^' By this 
treaty it was decided that the boundary point 
to the south should be at ^^ Anse k Pitres/' and 
to the north in the bay of Mancenille, between 
which two points an undulating Une passed by 
Valher/ San Raphael, the Black Mountain, and 
the Salt Lake; so that, with the exception of 
a small portion, the French colony no where 
extended more than ten leagues from some part 
of the coast, .while the sea Une was not less 
than two hundred and thirty leagues in extent. 
The facilities of access to the coast were con- 
siderably less in the Spanish portion of the 
island. 

The Spaniards possessed nearly two^thiids of 
the surface, while their neighbours boasted of 
a population nearly six times greater than that 
of the more extensive region?) 

Besides these differences, there were others 
fully as remarkable in the constitution of the 
society, and in the objects of pursuit. The 
Spanish court had, at a very early period, aban- 
doned this its first American colony to its own 
resources ; the French government and nation, 
on the other hand, regarded their portion as 
their most valuable colony : - and while de- 
pression and langour pervaded the one, activity 