



CONDITION OF THE COLOUBEl) CASTE. 9 

tinued even after the revolu^on had begun its 
courie. 

The(6ondition of the firee-coloured population 
was, if possible, worse than &at of the slaves, 
although, by the fifty-seventh article of the 
code noir, even foreign-bom slaves, on being 
manumitted, were entitled to enjoy the advan- 
tages of natural-bom free subjects.* It is de- 
scribed by various persons as tmly degraded. 
Although individually free, all coloured persons 
were considered public property, and, as such, 
exposed to perpetual insult and humiliation: 
they were governed by a set of local laws appli- 
cable only to them. As soon as they had attained 
the age of manhood, they were obliged to serve 
three years in the^^^mar^chauss^e,'' a kind of 
, militia, to keep the runaway slaves in check: 
they were besides compelled to serve in the re- 
gular militia. During a considerable portion of 
the year, they were subject to a corvee for the 
maintenance of the roads : they were excluded 
from all public employment, as well as from any 
of the liberal professions : they could not even be 
scbbolmasters or apothecaries ; and lastly, the 
mixed races were not penxiitted to bear the 
names of their white progenitors. The number 

* See Appendix, note (Q.) 



10 yOTBS ON HAITI. 

of tins clavftof diepoptdaticm at the commence^ 
ment of the French revolution, was not &r short 
of thirty thousand ; and as many of them, even 
among tiie free blaeks, had enjoyed all the ad- 
vantages of European education, these disquaK^ 
fioations pressed witii great severity, end gave \ 
rise to a spirit of remtanoe) which it must be 
acknowledged to have been perfectly natural* 
The infliction of physical injury will be respited 
by tile most rude as well as the most enlight- 
ened ; but the privation of political and personal 
rights will be the move keaily felt and resisted, 
in proportion to the mental improvement of the 
individual suflTering from it. 

The constitution of the white population also 
appears to have been singularly fitted for 
disorder : they were divided into two grioat 
classes — Europeans and Creoles, or natives of 
the island. Hie former were generally public 
functionaries or the military, who r^arded them- 
selves as holding the frist rank in the commu- 
nity, over which they are said to have exercised 
much' petty tyranny. The remainder of the Eu- 
ropeans were merchants, some few proprietfirs, 
and adventurers in every trade and professi<Hi. 
The lower order, who ^^erallyexercisedtheme-^ 
chanical arts, and carried on a large share of the 
retail trade, were called the ''petitsblancs,"and 



WttlTS POTUI*ATION. 11 

&€y pwrticidflily distinginshed themselves by 
&€ir oppofiitum to the firee people of colour. 
Hie resident creole-wlBtes coottdered them* 
selves the iidys of the soil, and lived piincipallj 
on their estates ; some few bdng merchants, or 
piffsning some other professiim besides planting, 
lived in the towns as well as the great bulk of 
the Europeans. It seems to be imderstood on 
all hands that great jealousies existed among 
the whole of the whites; and to add to tfadr dis- 
union, the events of 1789 in the mother coun* 
try came in aid, and gave birth to an additional 
dktmctioi^-^that of royalist tmd republican* 