

Thus, though there were ostensibly three, 
parties ^r castes, each in a high state of exci-*- 
tation, there was another subdivision, which 
eventually thought about Alliances between par- 
ties that under, ordinary circumstances would 
have beenmost hostile to each other; and also 
brought /into collision those who otherwise 
would have had but cme comuKm interest.''^ 

The political changes which had begun to 

* " Un esprit d*^iflme,.d'orgiieU, et de vanit^ r^gnait dans 
toutes les classes : les grands plantears m^prisaient les petita 
blancs ; lea petits blancs m&prisaient les hommes de coulear et 
mnrs affrancfais, et ceax-d, & lenr tbur, les malheuretix es- 
/daTea." Esaai aur lea CaasM de la RivolatioD, &c. Par ht 
Barea Vastey, p. 4. 



12 KOTBS OK HAITI. 

develop themnelves in Fnnoe, in the course of 
1788, had excited an ahnosi feyeiish state in 
the cciaaj ; and that was carried to its height 
by the lesolution of the States General, on the 
27th of December of that year, to admit into 
that body a number of the " Tiers Etat," equal 
to that of the other two orders. The colonists 
claimed a right to participate in the represen* 
tation; and in spite of the exertions of the 
govemor-general Duchilleau to moderate the 
popular ebullitions and to prevent the formation 
of parochial assemblies, they were organised in 
all parts; and they unanimously voted that the 
colony had the right of sending deputies to 
the States General : accordingly eighteen were 
elected ; and without being summoned by the 
government at home, or authorised by that of 
the island, they embarked for France, They 
arrived about a month after, the formation of 
the National Assembly ; but only six of them 
were allowed to verify their powers and to take 
their seats^ 

It is said that the society of the ^' Amis des 
Noirs" was established about this time, for tbe 
purpose of ameliorating the condition of the black 
population in the West Indies : its leading mem- 
bers were Brissot, Petion, Mirabeau, Claviere, 
Condorcet, and the celebrated Abb6 Gregoire. 



REVOLUTIONAaY EXCITEMENT. 13 

The planters of St. Domingo, on the other 
hand, formed the '^ Clab Massiac/' so named 
from the hotel in which they held their meet- 
ings, for the avowed purpose (I state this on 
the authority of Placide Justin*) of supporting 
the revolution ; but in reality, only to do so when 
such support was calculated to give them weight 
against the authorities in the colony, who were 
supposed to favour the principles of an equality 
of rights among all the free population. This 
society is also described to have contributed,' 
by its correspondence with secret societies in 
the colony founded, on principles similar to 
their own, very largely to unsettle the minds of 
the population. 

* The capture of the Bastille ' acted so power- 
frdly on the feelings of the colonists, that they 
became the aggressors, and demanded from the 
intendant-general Barb6 Marbois an account 
of his official acts, for which he was responsible 
only to the king. As resistance might have been 
hazardous as well as unavailing, this officer, 
by the advice of the governor-general Peynier, 
who had succeeded Duchilleau, did not await 
the proposed investigation, but withdrew to 
France. 