



* The'French wiiten allege a partidpatioxi, in sending out 
€^ for reToiutiottary ptffpofM^ to the Paris and London com* 
ttinea for tlio abolition of 4lie«bve trade^ and an aotLve agoa^ 
to Mr«)Clark8on. On the application of a common friend» that 
gentleman was ao obliging as to fomish me with the moit satis* 
factory refutation, in four letters, which in justice' I give. 
-See Appendix^ note (Rk) 



20 NOTES ON HAITI. 

was short and energetic. The only reply from 
either of these parties was to send out Colonel 
Mauduit with a body of six hundred men^ who 
were completely routed. Colonel Cambefort, 
with one thousand five hundred men, suc- 
ceeded in defeating and dispersing this hand- 
ful of insurgents. Og6, with his brother and the 
two brothers Chavane^^ed into the Spanish 
territory ; but on being claimed by the French 
authorities^ they were surrendered by the 
Spanish governor^ Don Joachim Garcia. Afr 
ter a trial which lasted for two months, these 
mihappy men were convicted and sentenced to 
be broken aUve upon the wheel, and their pror 
perty confiscated. This cruel punishment was 
carried into effect in the front of the cathedral/ 
on the 9th of March, 1791, in the presence of 
the Assembly ; and it appears to have destroyed 
all confidence between the white and coloured 
people. 

Partial insurrections took place in the west 
and south, nearly at the same time with that 
of Og^ ,• but they were speedily repressed. It 
was in that of Cayes that Rigaud, who event- 
ually played so conspicuous a part in the 
subsequent contests, first appeared. 

During the progress of these operations, the 
members of the General Assembly who had 



4 

PROGRESS OF REVOLUTION. 21 

etnbarked in the Leopard, reached France, and 
had been summoned to the bar of the National 
Assembly, that the charges against them, and 
their defence, might be heard. After a pro- 
tracted- discussion, it was decreed, on the 12th 
of O*ctober, 1790, that the General Assembly, 
having been guilty of unconstitutional acts, 
^Mras suppressed ; that the members were de- 
prived of their seats in the Colonial Assembly, 
for which a new election was to take place ; 
that their decrees (including those affecting the 
free persons of colour) were annulled ; and to 
enforce obedience, among other precautions, 
the king was requested to send out two ships of 
the line, and a sufficient number of troops of 
the line, to maintain order in the colony. 

The arrival of this decree in St. Domingo 
was a signal for fresh commotion. Many of the 
primary assemblies refused to recognise the 
abolition of the General Assembly, and re- 
elected the expelled members. But the chief 
difficulty arose from the right given to the co- 
loured population to vote. 

While these passions were most active, the 
two ships of the line, " Le Fougueux" and " Le 
Boree,^^ with two frigates, arrived at Port-au- 
Prince with the second ba|j|talions of the regi- 
ment of Arto^s and Normandy. Blanchelande, 