

From the time Aat'Sonihonax ^Mid Polver^ 
were invested with foil authority, their pohcy 
was decided. They formed a commissi<xi, 
which they called ** Intermediaire/' consisting 
of twelve members, six of whom were white, 
and six of colour. This council supplied the 
place of the colonial assembly, and filled up 
all vacatticies, whether military or civil. A 
slight commotion among the whites at the Cape 
being suppressed, the united efforts of the 
two leading parties were directed to the over- 
throw of the common enemy and the revolted 
blacks. The first attempt was successfol at 
the '^ Platons,*' where Blanchelande had been 
routed by a party of soldiers under the com- 
mand of Commandant Harty, who forced the 
intrenched camp. 



PB06RESS OF REVOLUTION. 3!^ 



Roehambesii haying left St. Domingo to 
some the commaBd at Martinique, General La- 
TeanXi a noUeman of old bmilj, waa appointed 
by thfe coiintiisaioneFB ooinmander4n-chief. The 
vigoiouB measures c^ this officer restored a tem- 
poraiy calm ; but discredit tms thrown on this 
success fay the arrest of the Abb6 de la Haye, 
the cur6 of Grande Rivi^, and of his brother 
cur6 at Doiukm, and the meditated execution 
of both, on account of having officiated as 
almoners of the^ leaders of die rev<dt. Notwith- 
standing mudi urgency, Sonthonax was merci- 
fill, and for once wise ; for by the i^ency of 
those whose lives he had saved, he obtained an 
extensive influence over the insurgents. 

While these proceedings were in progress, 
Borel usurped the supreme authority at Port- 
au-Prince. This was however soon inter- 
rupted by the combined efforts of Generals 
Lavalle and Beauvais ; and the commissioners 
entered the city without capturing Borel, at 
whose escape they are suspected of having con-^ 
nived, lest it should have been necessary to 
have made an example of so turbulent though 
influential a person. 

The risings in the North and South, in spite 
of several pacific overtures, gained ground imtil 
the month of May, 1793; when Rigaud, 



40 llOTBft ON HAITI. 

who had been flent to tespteas the movements 
among the whites at Grande Anae, was de* 
feated* At Uiis coiqmM^taie Galbaud airived^ 
invested with the chanicter of oommandaiit* 
general ; and finding the authority of the 
eommissioiiera to be wayering, he endeavoaied 
to subvert it entirriy. This atten^ led to san^ 
gninaiy cimteBts, which terminated in the ooor* 
flagration of the Cape^ and the expnkicni of 
Galband. The c^Mkmiissioners called to ikeir 
aid, not only all the fMons in the prisons^ but 
the black insurgent chiefe I^enpot and Maoaya* 
Having been thus fersucceaslul, the comims- 
aioners aimed at a permanent union with their 
leaders ; but although the latter became the 
medium of cornmumcation with Jean Francois 
and Biassouy he resolutely resisted ail the 
blandishments of Pcdverel ; and in reply to all 
the seductive allurements held out to induce 
him to range under the republican banners, he 
is said to have uniformly used the following 
exquisite jargon : — 