

llm new asaeidbl^ asdnmed the style of the 
GoloiaalAflflemblyy refttsedto communicate the 
-tiOjsUes to^ the mother cefws^tttfy and appealed 
to the Earl of Effingham, the governor of Ja- 
maica, for succour. The assistance obtained 
from that -quarter was smaller than was ex* 
pected, owing to a want of means. Mr. Bryan 
Edwards, who had visited Cape Francois, 
on his return to Jamaica, attempted to raise a 
loan &r the relief of the French colonists, 
though without suecess. In the paean ^me the 
dissensions^ instead of being calmed, became 
more vehement, and the black forces acquired 
force and consistency: they designated them- 
selves ** Gens du Roi;'- and the negro-general 
Jean Fran9ois took the title of Grand Admiral 
of France, and his lieutenant Biassou, that 



2S . NOTES ON ITAITX. 

of generalissimo^ of the conquered countiy; 
General Blanchelande attempted to reclaim 
them; but they replied^ in a letter of consider* 
able lengthy that " it was too late/' It is as* 
serted that the Spanish colonists, and some 
refugee French loyalists, encouraged and as*- 
'sisted these projects ; and, in support of this 
opinion, a letter is quoted by the French writers, 
vritten by a Spanish functionary, and found 
on the plantation Gallifet, when the negroes 
were expelled from it. The atrocities committed 
on all sides during a succession of sanguinary 
contests are dreadful; but as they do not 
throw any light on the progress of the revolu- 
tion, I gladly omit the details. The priests are 
accused of having sanctioned the murderous 
proceedings, of the negro chiefs, and sever^ 
were execjuted. The spirit of dissension did not 
confine itself within the French lines: Jeannot, 
who had acquired considerable reputation for 
his military achievements as well as for his cru- 
elties, was attacked by Jean Fran§ois, and put 
to death. Boukman also fell; but though 
success appeared to attend. the measures of the 
government, the seeds of self-destruction were 
daily planted by the internal jealousies of the 
planters and the functionaries. An evil inter- 
pretation was given to whatever was done, for 



INTEBNAL DISCORDS, 29 

the complaining parties seem only to have acted 
from the impulse of passion. Fixed principles 
yyere never thought of, and every passing event 
afforded a fresh topic of discontent to men pre^ 
pared to be dissatisfied. The dissolution of a 
society so circumstanced and so influenced be- 
pame inevitable. 

. The coloured party in the West and South 
acted more in concert, and placed themselves^ 
under the orders of General Beauvais, who had 
at an early period distinguished himself by his 
talents : Croix des Bouquets was their principal 
post. To disperse this assemblage, parties of 
armed men were sent from Port-au-Prince, but 
they were disgracefully routed. 
. This defeat led to conferences, which termi-t 
nated in the signature, by the respective chirfs, 
of what is called the " Concordat de Croix dea 

• 

Bouquets," by which it was agreed that thence- 
forward the garrison of Port-au-Prince should 
be composed of equal numbers of the two par^ 
ties; that the Colonial Assembly should be; 
decomposed on the principles of the decree of 
die 15th of May preceding ; that any opposition 
to this should be overcome by joint force; that 
the judges of Og^ and his fellowHSufferers 
9hould be voted infamous. This was signed on 
(he 23d of October, 1791; and in conformity 