

General Blanchelande next proceeded to the 



4Soiith, mih a view of propitiating the party 
headed by General Rigand ; but doubts being 
oitertai&ed of the goTenMur's sincerity owing 
to his previous conduct, he failed ; and after 
an unsuccess&l attack on the Platons near 
CayeSy he was obliged to quit the South, leaving 
it a prey to blood and spoliation. On reaching 
the Cape, he found the insurrection raging to 
the East, where it was said to be fomented by 
the neighbomring Spaniards. 



36 NOTES OM HAITI. 



CHAPTER III. 



Arriral of new Commisdioners— Impradent discusiions — He- 

tum of Ailhaud, Sontbonftx, andPdftfrel, with ftill power — 

Kevolution adv»itces -^-Pidiiot and . Maeaya-^Iibeity of 

slaves proclaimed, first by Sontliooaz^.iifterwards by Folverel 

— English invasion — New Commissioners — Toussaint L'Ott- 

verture — History — Sonthonaz sent to France — General He- 

douviile'^Contests between Toussaint and Rigaud — Attempts 

oi Consnls-^-Colooial coastUiitiim-*-French invasion— ^Bloody 

war — Success of Leclerc-^Ezpulsion of Bochainbtaa. 

♦ 

On the 19th of September, the succours 
which had been promised by France anived, 
accompanied by two new commissioners, Pol- 
verel and Ailhaud, who were associated with 
Sonthonax. Their powers were unlimited ; and 
their first declaration before the Colonial As- 
sembly was, that they would recognise only 
two classes of inhabitants in St. Domingo ; free 
men, without distinction of colour, and slaves. 
This declaration gave confidence to the new 



DISCUSSIONS AMONG COLONISTS. 37t 

citizeiid ; while the arrival of six thousand ef« 
I ficient troops assured the proprietors that their 
properties would be protected,' These circum-* 
stances were favourable, and the colony might 
have been saved ; but the commissionerSy pro-* 
bably influenced by personal motives, instead 
of acting with vigour against the insurgents^ 
allowed them to gain* a head, and occupied 
themselves with comparatively insignificant 
matters. They hstened to recriminatory com-* 
plaints from different parties, expelled General 
Blanohelande, and dissolved the Colonial As- 
sembly; while, by a fortnal arrfit^, all its mis* 
deeds were excused. 

The intelligence of the melancholy events 
of the 10th of August gave rise to fresh disor^ 
ders. The royalists aimed at a counter-revolu- 
tion ; but during their hesitation to direct the 
troops that they had ^ned, the commissioners, 
at'the head of eighteen hundred men from Mar- 
tinique, decided their conduct, and thus de-* 
stroyed the plans that had been anxiously formed^ 

The commissioners then named the too cele- 
brated General Rochambeau as governor. Ex- 
peditions were sent against the rebels; each 
of the worthy agents of the republic- had aQ 
allotted fort ; and before separating, in order 
to prove their claims to having prepared lists of 



38 NOTES on HAlTf. 

pMBcribed peraonSy many of wkom, tiumgh 
moit estiinable, were theie inwoibed because 
ihey were aiu^cted of a seeiet leaning to the 
ancient regiiiiey-^Soatlioitax and Folrerel re« 
mained m the iskuid, the one in the pio?inoe of 
the North, the other in that pact of the West; 
but Ailhaud bad scarcely^ visited the sonthy 
when he embaiked for Fmncey froln the ^ow^ 
▼iction, it is supposed, that his powevs, as wdl 
as those of his coUeagoes, were inadequate to 
the wrdubus duties assigned to them* 