

Rdchai^^beaufsucceeded in the command, and, 
by enormities that rivalled those of Dessalines, 



54 NOTES ON HAITI. 

•oon alienated the few black and coloured 
partisans of France. After an imyarying sue* 
cession ofTiolence and crime on both sides^ the 
French aimy were reduced to the last extre- 
mity, and had the altematiTe of capture by 
Dessalines, or of capitulation to the English 
squadron, which^in consequence of the renewal 
of hostihties between Great Britain and France, 
blockaded the harbour of Cape Francois under 
the orders of Commodore Loring. The memory 
of Rochambeau in Haiti is associated with 
all that is infamous ; and even with some of 
his own countrymen it ranks very low. The 
cruelties described to have been perpetrated by 
him have produced an impression that can 
never be removed, and will long maintain that 
extreme jealousy of French advances, which 
may be considered an essential part of every 
Haitian's creed. The evacuation of the Cape 
took place on the 28th of November, 1803.* 

* According to lAcroiz, at tbe time of tbeir expulsion, which 
may be considered final of the French* the actual loss of the 
expeditionary array by sickness, battle and murder, amoonted 
to sixty-two thousand four hundred and eighty •one persons/ Of 
forty-two general officers, seventyfive perished J^ ▼iolence : 
and of eleven general officers of the colonial f6rce»niDe perished 
miserably. 



INDEPENDENCE ESTABLISHED. 55 



CHAP. IV. 

FixBt establishment of independence— Deftalinea, general- 
in-chief — Cbarecter — Treachery— Declaration ci indepen- 
dence — Atrocity of Dessalines — Invasion of the Eaat— Ai- 
snmption of imperial dignity — Cruelties — Revolotion^Es- 
tablishment of two repabllcs under Christophe and PetioD— 
Cbristophe king — His character — Lawe^Court— Nobility-^ 
Order of knigfathood— Poticy— Treasttre— Deatb-^CoBse- 
quences. 



This event may be considered as completing 
the second great epoch of the revolution of 
,St. Domingo^ in which its independence, as a 
; separate state, was estabUshed de facto. Des- 
salines, as the senior officer, was chosen general* 
in-chief of the *' indigene army." He had been 
originally the slave of a free negro of his 
own name, and was unable either to read 
or write.y His personal activity, courage, and 
mihtary talents, are said to have been consider- 



56 NOTES ON HAITI. 

able ; but these were overbalanced by his igno- 
ranoe^ by an unrestrained cruelty, as well as 
by a most preposterous * yanity. His private 
morals were execrable; and the only person 
who appears to have exercised any kindly influ- 
ence over him was his second wife, who was 
alive when I was at. Port-au-Prince, respected 
by all who knew her, and honoured chiefly for 
the humanity with which she afibrded protec- 
tion, under the most critical circumstances, to 
every unfortunate being who needed it, without 
distinction of colour. . 

A short time after the evacuation of the 
French army appeared inevitable Bessalines^ 
as one of his first acts as general-in-chief, ad- 
dressed a proclamation to the inhabitants of ^ 
CapeFran9ois, "to drive away the fears" that 
the approaching change might produce, and to 
assure them, that the war had " no reference to 
the inhabitants of the colony; and that he 
sought to insure the tranquillity of the inhabi- 
tants, of all colours.*' He farther appealed to 
his conduct to tjie inhabitants of every class at 