

The base treachery of the whole transaction 
was coo.pI*d in a Lner worthy of tho au- 

* In the former volume, p. 9, an authentic instance is re- 
corded of part of the system pursued at this time. I heard 
many others, which it is unnecessary to recount, as the proceed- 
ings are familiar to every one conversant with this period of 
Haitian history. 



TBEAC.HERY OF DBSSALINES. 61 

t 

thor. ^ A proclamation was issued^ stating^ that 
the French having been sufficiently punished, 
those who had escaped the butchery were in- 
I Tited to the principal square to receive certifi- 

I cates of protection. Many of the unhappy 

wretches who escaped obeyed the summons. 
They were all seized, conveyed to the place of 
execution, and shot. 

- A few of the clergy, medical men, and some 
others, amounting altogether to about one-tenth 
of the whole, were spared : and the 20th of 
April witnessed the last of these sanguinary 
Qutrs^es on humanity. 
i . Many, and among the rest Christophe, highly 

disapproved of these proceedings ; but Dessa- 
i linesi boasted of them, and of the superiority of 

I , his mind to those narrow views that restrict re- 
tributive justice ; and even accused Toussaint 
of a want of fidelity to his own caste. He ex- 
ultingly declares, " Oui, nous avons rendu ces 
anthropophages guerre pour guerre, crime 

pour CRIME, OUTRAGE pOUr OUTRAGE. Oui, 

j'ai sauv^ mon pays — j'ai venge TAm^rique! 
L'aveu que je fais k la face du ciel et de la terre, 
fait mon orgueil et ma gloire : quelle est pour 
moi la. consequence de Topinion qu'auront de 
ma conduite mes contemporains et les g^n^ra- 



62 NOTES ON HAITI. 

lions ftttures? J'ai fait mon devoir; je m'a|H< 
prouve : cela me suffit."* 

The reason assigned to me for this horrible 
breach of ISsith was, that Dessalines wished to 
compronuse all his countrymen so deeply with 
France, as to render any future connexion im* 
possible. Others have . said, that a promise of 
vengeance made to his army before the occu- 
pation of Cape Frangois was thus cruelly re- 
deemed. No motive, however, can lessen the 
horror with which the uncontrolled fury of 
this savage can be regarded. 

The city of St. Domingo, which had fallen 
into the hands of a detachment of the French 
army before Toussaint's submission, still dis- 
played the banner of the mother country. It 
therefore became an object of attention to 
Dessalines as soon as his massacre had been 
completed. He collected a force, and his en- 
t^y into the Spanish territory was preceded by 



* This passage is extracted froni the Histoire D'Haiti ; on 
the authority of which, Gonfinfied by respectable natiTe evidence 
10 the republic, the above details rest. I never saw any copy 
of the proclamation, except in the work cited j but as its au- 
thenticity was never denied by the most competent persons, 
it is fair to look upon it as genuine, especially as it corresponds 
with the character of the man. 



INVASION OF THE EAST. 63 

a proclamation^ accusing the unfortunate in- 
habitants of treason and of vicdation of trear 
ties. He in person headed one corps d'arm^^ 
that penetrated by way of San ^<Jiian, while 
Clervaux advanced by the Northern frontier, 
as has been already mentioned. Both these 
corps formed a junction under the walls of th^ 
city of Santo Domingo, and v^nly besieged it 
for some weeks ; a vigorous resistance having 
been made by General Ferrand, the governor. 
The unexpected appearance of a small French 
squadron led to a precipitate flight, and the 
retreat may still be traced by the wanton de- 
struction that took place. Some notice of this 
has been already taken. 