



68 NOTES ON HAITI. 

wards Prince de Liinb^. As a matter of course, 
a fresh constitution wa^ concocted,' and it was 
put forth on the 17th February, 1807. I haye 
never succeeded in obtaining an authenticated 
copy of it ; but its principal provisions, as given 
by Placide Justin, resembles very closely that 
of Port-au-Prince, except that the presidency 
was for life, with the right of naming a suc- 
cessor ; and that magistrate had the nomination 
of the council of nine, who formed the deUber- 
ative body: beside^, he alone proposed laws, 
which, though passed by the council, were in- 
effectual without his final approval. Thus all 
real power centred in his hands. 

The disputes between the two chiefs, were 
maintained with vigour until 1812, when a, 
t^ce seems to have been tacitly admitted. A; 
second siege of Port-au-Prince had failed, and 
there was no immediate prospect, though ac- 
tive hostilities were suspended, of a union 
between the two parties ; for . Christophe, who 
was generally the assailant, was engaged with 
other, pursuits, which most probably distracted 
his attention from his adversaiy. It is certain, 
from their mutual recriminations, that the ces- 
sation of violence did not arise from any increase 
of esteem. On the 28th' March, 1811, an act 
was passed by the council already described. 



BSTABLISHMENT OF MONARCHY. 69 

eafitledy *^ Loi: Constitutionnelle du Conseil 
d'Etat, .qui ^tablit la royaut6 al.Hayti,''* and 
Christophe was declared the fiist king of Hayt^ 
under the name of Henry I. Whoever is curious 
to obtain nunute information on the history of 
this transaction may with adTantage consult an 
octavo volume^ written by the Count.de limonr 
ade, entitled; '^Relation des Glorieux £<v^e- 

c 

mens/' &c. &c. printed at Cape Henry, 1811. . 

By this constitutional law the absolute power 
of the monarch and the principles of feodal 
law were established. In the month of January, 
1812, the Code Henry, consisting of seven laws, 
was prepared by the same council, and receive<f 
the royal sanction. Tliis code is a digest of the 
laws passed for the general government of the 
kingdom ; but it appears to be less than equi- 
Tocal that the will of the sovereign was para- 
mount to the written law. 

In the work of Count de limonade there is 
an ostentatious statement of the arrangements 
consequent on the 'erection of the monarchy 5 
the establishment of various ranks of. nobility ; 
the creation of an order of knighthood, that of 
St. Henry ; and all the exterior of an old court, 
show how earnest Henry was in elevating his 
court to a level, at least in form, with that of 

* See Appendix, note (W.) 



60 NOTES ON HAITI. 

adopted, and Dessalmes was named govemcM'* 
general for life. Thus established, he proceeded 
with less caution in his designs against the ^ 
white colonists, many of whom, allured by his i 
promises of protection, had remained^ and 
others had returned, in the belief that these 
promises would have been held sacred. In the 
proclamation of the 1st of January there was 
enough to eXcite distrust ; but it does not ap- 
pear to have done so. The first serious mis- 
givings are said to have been raised by (a pro- 
clamation in the month of February, directihg. - 
judicial proceedings against all those who had 
participated in the atrocities of Le Clerc and 
Rochambeau. The object was apparently to 
induce the entire population to revenge their 
friends. But public feeling did not go with^ 
him, and he then commenced a military expe- -. 
dition, with which he overran the principal 
towns, marking his footsteps with blood * and f 
slaughtet. 