

He sent home Vincent with this act of inde- 
pendence, in spite of the most honorable and 
manly remonstrances : but all was unavsuling, 
for the negro chief's decision had been taken. 
The peace of Amiens being concluded, the ruler 
of France was left at full liberty to pursue his 
colonial views, and to oppose the independent 
projects of the governor of the'colony. But to 
effect thia there was more knowledge requisite 
than even Napoleon possessed. . xoussaint had 
formed and maintained a respectable military es- 
tablishment, the discipline of which, according 
to Lacroix, was enforced with an inexorable ri- 
gour — Ufe and obedience, or death and disobe- 
dience being the alternatives. The well-doing of 
the superior officers was secured by the system of 
farming which he had estabhshed, and according 

* See Appendix, note (S.) 



52 NOTES ON HAITI. 

io Lacroix, the whole were ccMitiolled by ther i 
discreet use of certain wcwd?. ''They were 
told,'' says that distinguished officer, '' that 
they were free ; and they believed it, because, 
by a series of adroit insinuations, they .ranked 
above the cultivators, and every soldier was 
right who complained of a black who was not a 
soldier. The supremacy of the military negro 
caused him to be feared and obeyed.'^* 
/ The anxiety of the French ruler to re-acquire , 
an ascendancy in the West Indian ArchipeJ^o . 
led him to fit out, early in December 1801, an 
expedition under the command of his brother- 
in-law. General Le Clerc, against St. Doming^.! 
the naval command being assigned to Admiral 
Villaret Joyeuse. They arrived at the end of 
January .1802, and, early in February,; Cape 
Fran9ois, then under the orders of Christophe, 
was summoned. Christophe refused, by the 
orders of Toussaint, to receive the French arma- 
ment ; but finding resistance vain, he set fire 
to the city, (giving the example by kindling his 
own house,) and evacuated it, leaving nothing, 
but ruins to the invaders. 

Fort Dauphin and Port-au-Prince soon fell 
into the hands of the J'rench. An attempt was 

* Memoires, par Lacroix, torn. i. p. 408. 



INVASION BT LB CLBBC. 53 

ti^en frmtleflel J made to induce Toussaint to 
abandon his own caose, by the mediation of his 
duldren, who, with their tutor Coesnon, had 
gone from Fiance : the intendew, as described 
by Laanoix, was touching, and marked the stern 
character of the negro general* 

In the West and South, the war was main- 
tained with vigour ; nor was it until after much 
bloodshed,, and the memorable defence of Cr^te 
k Pierrot, which baffled the repeated attacks of 
the French gener^ that Toussaint, Dessalines, 
and Christophe submitted to Le Clerc. Shortly 
after that submission the former was treacher^ 
ously arrested for alleged treasons, and sent to 
France, where he perished in the Ch&teau de 
Joux — *' Crisp^ de froid et des regrets," as it is 
expressed by Lacroix. Shortly after this most 
of the native leaders submitted -^ but a succession 
of injudicious measures by Le Clerc, both towards 
the coloured officers and the black labourers, 
excited disgust : the defection of one chief was 
followed by that of another ; and the governor- 
general lived just long enough to witness the 
entire failure of all his objects. Montl;Lolon, in, 
his Memoirs, gives some curious information , 
respecting the blunders of this expedition. 