

The city of St. Domingo, which had fallen 
into the hands of a detachment of the French 
army before Toussaint's submission, still dis- 
played the banner of the mother country. It 
therefore became an object of attention to 
Dessalines as soon as his massacre had been 
completed. He collected a force, and his en- 
tity into the Spanish territory was preceded by 

* This passage ia extracted firom the Histoire D'Haiti ; on 
the authority of which, confiniied by respectable native evidence 
io the republic, the above details rest. I never saw any copy 
of the proclamation, except in the work cited j bat as its au- 
thenticity was never denied by the most competent persons, 
it is fair to look upon it as genuine, especially as it conesponds 
with the character of the man. 



J 



INVASION OF THE EAST. 63 

a proclamation^ accusing^ the imfortunate in- 
habitants of treason and of violation of trea.- 
ties. He in person headed one corps d'arm^, 
that penetrated by way of San jj^uan, while 
Clervaux advanced by the Northern frontier, 
as has been already mentioned. Both these 
corps formed a junction nnder the walls of th^ 
city of Santo Domingo, and vsSnIy besieged it 
for some weeks; a vigorous resistance having 
been made by General Ferrand, the governor. 
The unexpected appearance of a small French 
squadron led to a precipitate flight, and the 
retreat may still be traced by the wanton de- 
struction that took place. Some notice of this 
has been already taken. 

After Dessalines* return from this unhallowed 
expedition he intrigued for, and procured his 
own nomination as Emperor of Haiti : — ^he was 
consecrated on the 8th of October, 1804, by 
the capuchin Bi-elle, who was afterwards Chris- 
tophe's first , archbishop. A new constitution, 
aftier the abandonment of the colonial title of go- 
vernor-general for that of emperor, was a ne- 
cessary consequence; and accordingly it was 
submitted to the approbation of the new-made 
monarch on the 20th of May 1805, by twenty- 
three generals, at the head of whom was Chris- 
tophe : but it included Petion and all the 



■ 



64 NOTES ON HAITI. 



otber general officers of the island. This ^^m-* 
stitution has been printed in the reports laid 
before the House of Commons last year^* in 
pursuance of an address to his Majesty in 1828. 
Apparent provisions are made for the govern- 
ment in all its branches ; but the spirit of the. 
legislators and their notions of liberty may be 
gathered from the 30th article, which runs thus : 
" L'Empereuryart, scelle, et promulgue les lois ; 
nomme et r^voque k sa volonte les ministres ^ 
les g&i^raux en cheif de Tarmee ; les conseillers 
d'etat ; les g6neraux et autres agens de I'empire ; 
les officiers de I'annee, de terre et de mer ; les- 
membres de les administrations locales ; les com-, 
missaires du gouvernement prfes les tribunaux ; 
les juges et autres fonctionnaires publics." In 
short, the Entire power was vested in the em- 
peror, and ^^e could of course delegate extraor- 
dinary authority to others. It was by this consti- 
tution that, for the first time,>^ll whites were ex- 
cluded from being or ever becoming proprietors. 
All Haitians too were to[be called blacks , although 
a few whites had become citizens. The spirit 
of the times was strongly marked by the con- 
cluding article " Au premier coup de canon 