



60 NOTES ON HAITI. 

adopted, and DeBsalmes was named goyemor- 
general for life. Thus established, he proceeded 
with less caution in his designs against the 
white colonists, many of whom, allured by his i 
promises of protection, had remained^ and 
others had returned, in the belief that these 
promises would have been held sacred. In the 
proclamation of the 1st of January there was 
enough to eXcite distrust ; but it does not ap- 
pear to have done so. The first serious mis- 
givings are said to have \>een raised by .aT pro- 
clamation in the month of February, directfhg. - 
judicial proceedings against all those who had 
participated in the atrocities of Le Clerc and 
Rochambeau. The object was apparently to 
induce the entire population to revenge their 
friends. But public feeling did not go with^' 
him, and he then commenced a military expe- 1 
dition, ynth which he overran the principal 
towns, marking his footsteps with blood * and ( 
slaughter. 

The base treachery of the whole transaction 
was completed in a manner worthy of the au- 

* In the former volume, p. 9, an authentic instance is re- 
corded of part of the system pursued at this time. I heard 
many others, which it is unnecessary to recount, as the proceed- 
ings are famBiar to every one conversant with this period of 
Haitian history. 



TKEAC.HERT OF DBSSALINES. 61 

tfaor. . A proclamation was issued, stating, that 
the French having been soffidently punished, 
those who had escaped the butchery were in- 
vited to the principal square to receive certifi- 
cates of protection. Many of the unhappy 
wretches who escaped obeyed the summons. 
They were all seized, conveyed to the place of 
execution, and shot. 

' A few of the clergy, medical men, and some 
others, amounting altogether to about one-tenth 
of the whole, were spared : and the 20th of 
April witnessed the last of these sanguinary 
outrages on humanity. 

. Many, and among the rest Christophe, highly 
disapproved of these proceedings ; but Dessa- 
liues boasted of them, and of the superiority of 
his mind to those narrow views that restrict re- 
tributive justice ; and even accused Toussaint 
of a want of fidelity to his own caste. He ex- 
ultingly declares, *' Oui, nous avons rendu ces 
anthropophages guerre pour guerre, crime 

pour CRIME, OUTRAGE pOUr OUTRAGE. Oui, 

j'ai sauv6 mon pays — j'ai veng6 TAm^rique! 
L'aveu que je fais k la face du ciel et de la terre, 
fait mon orgueil et ma gloire : quelle est pour 
moi la consequence de Topinion qu'auront de 
ma conduite mes contemporains et les g6n^ra- 



62 NOTES ON HAITI. 

tions futures? J'ai fait men devoir; je m'ap-' 
prouve : cela me suffit.*'* 

The reason assigned to me for this horrible 
breach of ftith was, that Dessalines wished to 
compromise all his countrymen so deeply with 
France, as to render any future ccmnexion im* 
possible. Others have. said, that a promise of 
vengeance made to his army before the occu- 
pation of Cape Frangois was thus cruelly re- 
deemed. No motive, however, can lessen the 
horror with which the uncontrolled fury of 
this savage can be regarded. 