



• See communications received at the Foreign Office relative 
to Haiti.— Parliametitarj Papers, 10th June 1S28, p. ^34. 



CONSPIRACY AGAINST DE8SALINES. 6& 

d'ajarme les yiUes disparabaent, el la nation 
est debqut." 

. The cruelties committed almost daily by Des- 
salines soon midermined the devotion of his 
adherents; and. in 1806 a conspiracy was or*- 
gajiised by Gerin, then secretary at War^' and 
nicknamed ' Cote de fer/ (retion, and others. 
It is said (and it is also denied) that Chris* 
tophe/was a party to the plot, although he did 
pot . appear ; and, indeed, when it broke out 
prematurely in the South, He affected that yain 
attempts had been made to shake his fidehty. 
/iSessalines, whoee personal courage never seems 
/to have deserted him, on learning what had 
I occurred, immediately proceeded with a small 
force to Port-au-Prince^ where he expected 
support from Petion. Inough dissuaded from 
advancing, he persisted, and pressed forward, 
attended by only a few officers of his staff. At 
a short distance from Port-au-Prince, at a place 
called * Pont Rouge,' on the 17th October, 
.1806, he fell into an ambuscade, when expect- 
ing to meet his own advanced-guard. Irri- 
tated, but not intimidated, he rode boldly up 
to the men to chastise them with his . cane, 
, when he fell pierced with balls, and his body 
; was brutally mangled. Only one of his staff 
• escaped^' which he djd by recognising, before he 



66 NOTES ON HAITI. 

had approached too nearly the troops of the 
. South, who were awaiting the emperor. 

The death of the despot once more set 
intrigners at work; and the most prominent^ 
were Petion and Christophe^ On the 27th •, 
December, 1806, deputies who affected to re* 
present the people, but who had been in fact 
named through the influence of these two ge* 
nerals, assembled, and formed the constituent 
assembly. Gerin, soon disgusted, withdrew. 
The competition lay between Petion and Chris- 
tophe, as the ostensible chiefs of the two great 
parties, though the seniority of the latter was 
in his favour. The constitution* of 1806 was 
formed : it consisted of various articles, classed 
under thirteen heads, comprehending the prin* 
ciples on which the recent revolution had been 
founded. The first class may be regarded as 
declaratory : by its provisions slavery was for 
ever abolished^ the executive was declared to 
be elective, and not hereditary in any family ; 
the republic to be at peace with all her neigh- 
bours ; that the house of every man was his 
castle ; and that thenceforward no white man 
should hold landed property. The remaining 
^ twelve classes embraced the territorial divisions 
of the state ; the necessary qualifications for 

, •See Appendix, |ote (V.) 



CHANGE OF GOVERNMENT. 67 

citizenship ; the idiigion to be Roman Catholic ; 
the composition of the senate ; the duties and 
attributes of the president; the fonnati(Hi of 
conrts of law ; the Organisation of the army ; 
the protection of agriculture and commerce ; 
the state of the finances; and several minor 
pcMBts. Hating adjusted these points, it be- 
came necessary to elect a chief. The presi- 
dency was offered to Christophe ; but it was so 
burd^ied with conditions, to which he would 
not assent, that he would not accept the office 
at Ihe hands of the assembly; but assuming the 
titles of president and generalissimo, he col- 
lected an army, and pushed on to Port-au- 
Prince.^ On the 1st January, 1807, he encoun- 
tered Petion at a place called Cibert, about a 
league from the city X^ a smart action ensued, 
which ended in the complete defeat of the 
Southern army. Their leader escaped with di^ 
Acuity. Christophe then beleaguered the city 
for a fortnight, after which he withdrew to the 
. North, the whole of which he successively sub- 
dued; until he extended his frontier from St. 
Mark to Mirebalais, where he came into contact 
with the Spanish boundary. On his return to 
the Cape he assembled a council, consisting of 
general officers and the leading citizens, at the 
. head of whom wa8^ General Romain, after- 