

Previous to these successes, the consular 
gOTemment had been established in France ; 
and it would seem that Bonaparte wished to 
regain that influence^ the decline of which had 



ADVANCES OF BONAPABt£. 49 

been clearly proved by the expulsion of Hedou- 
ville; and to attain this^ he sent out Vincent, 
(who had been despatched by Roume to inform 
the directory of the sanguinary and desolating 
warfare between the rival chiefs,) and General 
Michel, both of whom were associated in the 
commission with Kaimond. Toussaint, suspi- 
cious of fraud, arrested both his own friend 
Vincent and his colleague, but liberated theAi 
on their arrival at the Cape,* where they com^ 
municated to him the change of government in 
France, as well as the confirmation by the con- 
suls of his rank of general-in-chief of the army of 
St. Domingo. This confirmation was naturally 
grateful to the black leader; but he distrusted 
the proclamation of the first consul to the citi- 
zens of St. Domingo, announcing the revolution 
at home ; promising the formation of laws suit- 
able to their 'condition; and pledging hindself 
to respect the liberty and equality of the blacks. 
Confidence could not be inspired, even by the 
flattering conclusion of the proclamation : — 
" Braves noirs !. souveriez vous que le peuple 
Fran5ais seul reconnait vos droits/* The scheme 
of legislating in France for St, Domingo was 
probably the principal cause of dissatisfaction : 
be that as it may, Michel was treated with so. 

VOL. II. " c 



50 NOTES ON HAITI. 

much coldness^ that he returned to Europe, 
leaving his two colleagues behind. 

Being now freed from domestic riyals. Tons- • 
saint began to deyelope his schemes of personal 
aggrandisement; he received with kindness the 
old colonists^ restored the Gregorian calendar^ 
in opposition to that of the republican style ; 
attached to his person white officers; treated, 
the clergy with unbounded reverence; and sur- 
rounded himself with a chosen body-guard of 
one thousand eight hundred men^ dressed in 
the costume of the old " gardes du corps" of 
France. He selected, without reference to com- 
plexion, the most efficient officers for every 
branch of the public service, and promoted agri- 
culture both for home use and foreign export, on 
the last of which he well knew his pecuniary 
resources depended. Under the pretext of en- 
forcing the treaty of Basle, he announced in 
1800 to the Spanish governor, Don Joachim 
Garcia, his intention of taking possession of the. 
Spanish colony ; and in spite of the Spaniard's 
moderation and the arrival of the French vessel 
with dispatches (which brought, as was ex- 
pected, orders against such an attempt), he 
pressed forward at the head of an irresistible 
force, and occupied the whole of the Spanish 



PROMULGATION OF CONSTITUTIO'N. 61 

colony. The messenger with the dispatches 
was then permitted to dehver his miavailing 
instructions. 

The next step in his (Career was^ with the aid 
of Borgella,^ Pascal and others, to promulgate 
the constitution of the colony of St. Domingo, 
(without the sanction of the French govern- 
ment,) by which he was declared governor for 
life. But still the title of colony was retained; 