



46 1IOTB8 OK HAITI. 

Us face, aiid all the world trembled befove 
biB generals" — a short but intelligent deacriptkn 
of th^mode of govenuneni then in inogne. 

ToQssaint has been accused ot licentiousness 
in his morals in aflter-Ufe, though abstemious 
in his food; and it is asserted that, while^he 
used all the terrors of Cathohc superstition to 
augment his authority^ he secretly communis 
cated to the directory that his measures were 
cmly dictated by policy. 

Notwithstanding these statements, there can 
be but little doubt that he would have been a 
distinguished man in any country in which a 
field for his exertions had existed: the facts of 
his elevation attest this ; but the ccmfirmation is 
to be found in the measures he pursued to 
maintain order and industry, by which only he 
could ensure the independence of his country. 

In order to be freed from the presence of his 
early -friends, Sonthonax and Laveaux, he pror 
cured their election as deputies from the colony 
to the legislative body in France — an honour 
that could not be rejected. With every external 
demonstration of respect, these two personages 
were dismissed from St. Domingo ; and many 
black officers who disapproved of such mea- 
sures, accompanied them to Europe. 

Raimond alone remained of the last party of 



TOU5SAINT ANB RIOAUD. 47 

fire commiasioners, and he co-operated with 
Toussaint. (^gaud still was in arms for the 
I republic in me Souths without coalescing with 
' the Black leader; Notwithstanding the external 
demonstrations of cordiality and confidence on 
the part of the directory, it would seem that 
they feared the ascendancy of their general-in- 
chief/ and sent out General Hedouville (who 
had previously been employed in some delicate 
missions) as their agent. This officer, notwith* 
standing his reputation, committed a capital 
fault in marking his distrust in his new col- 
league by landing at the city of Santo Do« 
mingb ; and some ill-timed remarks of his staff 
confirming Toussaint's suspicions, led to the 
assassination (it is asserted by his orders) of 
two of Hedouville's aides-de-camp. The at- 
tempt that the general made to reconcile 
Rigaud and Toussmnt also iailed, owing pro- 
bably to the mutual distrust of all parties. 
After the British had evacuated, in 1798, their 
last stronghold, Toussaint appears to have 
thought it unnecessary to retain his disguise, 
at least in the colony. An insurrection was ex- 
cited among the cultivators, and Hedouville 
was obliged to embark. In an artful letter to 
the directory, the now uncontrolled general-in-* 
<kie{ laid claim to having re-established order 



48 NOTES ON HAITI. 

and regulaiity, after they had been thoroughly 
aobverted. 

HedoQYille left a fatal legacy to Haiti. Al- 
though Toussaint had long held the cominisaon 
of general-in-chiefy the same rank was by him 
conferred on Rigaud; thus creating an addi- 
tional motiye for contention between these two 
leaders and their respective followers. It was 
in Tain that Roome (who had returned from 
the East) endeavoured to reconcile these two 
parties ; for each giving way to the most unre- 
strained passions, carried on a war of extermi- 
nation, which ended early in 1800 in the 
expulsion of Rigaud, and the firm establishment 
of his rival's authority. After the discomfiture 
of the Mulatto party, Toussaint despatched his 
satellite Dessalines to chastise the great body 
of that unfortunate people ; and the atrocities 
which he is described to have perpetrated in 
the South are said to have exceeded even those 
of his chief. It is recorded that upwards of 
ten thousand persons of both sexes were immor 
lated during his expedition, with every refine- 
ment in cruelty. 