



* This pasflion displaced itself in a whimsical way, in ez- 
hibitions as a dancer» with which he gratified bis countrymen. 
He always had a dancing-master in bis suite to increase his ac- 
complishmentsr; The duty of instruction must have been ana- 
logons to that of teaching a tiger civilisation. •. 



BAD FAITH OP DEB8ALINES. 67 



i, 



J, CayeSy and Port-au-Prince, a» a *' cer- 
tain pledge of his good fSeuth and honour." 
And he invited all who chose to st^y to in- 
dulge their inclinations, and permitted all who 
desired it to accompany the French army. * 

On the eye of the evacuation another pro- 
damation, bearing the names of Dessalines, 
Christophe, and Clervaux, was particularly ad- 
dressed, to the proprietary of St. Domingo, 
guuunteeing the lives and properties of all who 
had abandoned the notions of slavery, inviting 
those who had fled to return, and deploring 
the assassin:9.t]ons of mapy, from '* the soldiery 
and labourers, blinded by a recollection of for- 
mer wrongs." — "We sigh," says this perfidious 
document, *^ with every generous soul over 
their deplorable lot ; and we declare to the uni- 
verse, whatever evil intentioned people may 
say, that these murders have been committed 
against the will of our hearts. " f 

Although the independence was established, 
de facto, by the expulsion of Rochambeau and 
his army, yet it was not formally announced 
before the 1st of January, 1804, when the Act 
of Independence,^ signed by all the generals, 

• Histoire d*Haiti, pp. 407, 408. 

t Ibid. p. 410. 

t See note (T) in Appendix. • 



58 NOTES ON HAITt* 

was promulgated^ and a proclamation bearing 
the name of Dessalines alone was issued.^ The 
.summary of the former, as will be seen at the 
end of the volume, was, that " the general-in* 
chief, having assembled all the leaders of the 
army, had explained that their true interests 
rendered it necessary to secure to the people 
of Haiti a stable government, and to secure the 
ind^endence of their country ; that the gene- . 
rals had sworn to posterity — ^to the whole uni- / ] 
verse — to renounce France for ever, and to die' 
rather than live under her dominion.*' The pro- 
clamation* was fuller. It declared that the 
expulsion of the French was not enough : that 
a last act of national authority was necessary 
to assert eternal Uberty in their coxmtry, and 
to destroy all hope in the French of ever 
re-enslaving them : that independence or death 
ought to be their rallying cry: that nothing 
had been done, while the French name still 
stained the country : that every thing revived 
recollections of that '* barbarous people" — 
laws, manners, and even names of towns — 
while every thing showed that there was nothing 
in conunon aniong the two nations: that cli- 
mate, colour, distance of one from the other, 

* See note (U) in Appendix. 



DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE* 59 

all proved the fact. All ages, sexes, and con- 
ditionSy were invoked to avenge the wrongs of 
their country on those who should attempt to 
deprive them of their acquired rights, particu- 
lariy the French, whom they were called upon 
to put to death whenever they should dare to 
violate the " territory " of Uberty. They were 
next ui^d to follow the example of those na- 
tions who, looking anxiously to futurity, and 
apprehensive of leaving to posterity an example 
of baseness, preferred extermination to slavery. 
The address recommended abstinence from any 
interference with their neighbours, who^ unlike 
ihefnselves, had never suffered from the it/ranny 
of their rulers, and had no vengeance to level 
against the authority that protected them : peace 
with all the world except France. It called on 
the inhabitants to maintain their independence 
at any cost. It urged them to remember that 
for fourteen years Dessalines had sacrificed 
every thing for them — relations, children, for- 
tune ! That hb sole riches consisted in their 
liberty ; that his name was held in abhorrence 
by all tyrants and lovers of slavery^ and that if 
they should refuse or receive sullenly the laws 
dictated by their guardian genius, they would 
deserve " the fete of ungrateful people.'* 
At this time the aboriginal name of Haiti was 