

* See Appendiz, note (Y.) 



92 NOTES ON HAITI. 

to be composed of such public officers as '^ the 
people shall have designated." There was no 
house of commons, nor appeal to the people : 
in fact^ neither the people nor the executive 
had much power, all being vested in an oli- 
garchy, consisting of the nominees of the first 
constituent assembly. The deviations from 
the American standard are very striking. In 
the one case the institutions are very democra- 
-tical. the people exercising a constant control 
.over them. In the other the people had no 
influence after the election of the constituent 
•assembly; the executive was feeble and em- 
barrassed ; and the entire power intrusted to an 
oligarchy of an objectionable kind ; inasmuch 
as the individual members of it were subject to 
changes which might be productive of a coun- 
terchange of measures. Of the objections to 
this form of republic, some of the writers on 
.Christophe's party, especially Vastey, took con- 
stant advantage; and it would seem that its 
inapplicability to practical purposes was disco- 
vered by its fraiQers ; for, on the approach of 
the period for the revision of the constituti^ii, 
which had been fixed at the -expiration of the 
jiinth year, the senate, in an address to the 
people, announced their intention of revising 
the details of ten sections, which was done ; 



PROGRESS Of THE CONSTITUTION. 93 

and the results of fheir labours were embodied 
iu the revised constitution, and presented to 
the senate by the assembly of revision, on the 
2d of June, 1816. In this document, which 
has been printed with my Reports on Haiti, by 
the order of the House of Commons, the aboli- 
tion of slavery was confirmed ; the general dis- 
positions as to the rights of persons detailed ; 
the territorial bounds fixed ; the religion of the 
fitate determined to be that of the church of 
Rome ; the chamber of coi^ons established, 
and its powers defined ; the functions of the 
8enate somewhat restricted ; the mode of pro- 
mulgating laws decreed ; the authority of the 
executive rendered much more efficient; and 
as the changes in that authority were very re- 
markable, and at variance with the original in- 
stitution, it will be necessary to note some of 
the most important modifications in their proper 
place. Enactments of a general nature, relative 
to the army, agriculture, commerce, the finan- 
cial department, and the future revision of the 
constitution, with a view to the correction of 
its defects, all occupy a portion of the consti- 
tution. Perhaps the document would not bear 
a very rigorous analysis, especially in the 
points on which so much stress is laid, both in 
&e republic and by her admirers elsewhere ; for 



94 NOTES'ON HMTI. 

the profieflaioii of liberty and equality does not 
altc^ether accord with the direction which hag 
been given to the whole power of the state ; a 
direction whidi cannot be inisimderBtood bfjf 
any one who takes the trouble of examining 
. the subject. 