

After Dessalines* return from this unhallowed 
expedition he intrigued for, and procured his 
own nomination as Emperor of Haiti ; — ^he was 
consecrated on the 8th of October, 1804, by 
the capuchin Brelle, who was afterwards Chris- 
tophers first , archbishop. A new constitution, 
after the abandonment of the colonial title of go- 
vemor-geneml for that of emperor, ms a ne- 
cessary consequence; and accordingly it was 
submitted to the approbation of the new-made 
monarch on the 20th of May 1805, by twenty- 
three generals, at the head of whom was Chris- 
tophe : but it included Petion and all the 



74 MOTSS ON HAITI^ 



CHAPTER V. 



Petion elected President — Hb history — His system — Friendlj 
to Britain — Gamnan'sreTolt— Anrival of Rigaod — SepaiatiiQii 
of the South— Fire goveniments — Death of Petion — ^Elec- 
tion of Boyer— Union of whole Island — French negotiation* 
— Baron Mackao— Recognition of independence — ArriTal of 
foreign agents. 

After Christophe had retired from the siege i 
of Port-au-Prince, in January, 1807, the con- / 
stituent assembly, then sitting in that city, were 
left at leisure to select a president more suited 
to their views ; and all opposition having been 
lulled by previous intrigues, Alexander Petion, 
now styled the founder of the republic, was 
chosen president for four years. This chief V 
real name was Sabez, the son of a French 
jeweller at Port-au-Prince^ At the commence- 
ment of the revolution he had rendered him- 
self conspicuous by his talents, as well as by 



HISTOET or PSTION. 75 

an insatiable love of intrigue. vQn the English 
invasion he devoted himself with zeal and fide«- 
lity to the service of the French republic, in 
which he attained the rank of chef de brigade. 
In that capacity he served in the contests be- 
tween Rigaud and Toussaint ; and on the defeat 
of the former he accompanied him to Francey 
whence he returned to Haiti with the expedition- 
ary army under Le Clerc; He directed the artil- 
leryatCr^te at Pierrot, and was eventually placed 
in the command of twelve hundred men, with 
wh<»ai he gallantly served France, until a short 

* 

time before the death of the governor-general, 
when he abandoned the post assigned for him, 
and joined the insurgents with the whole of his 
party. .^ The French allege concert with the re- 
bels as the cause of his defection : his friends 
declare that the discovery of a secret plan to 
cut him oflF, with the whole of his men, alone 
actuated him. It is probable that the mutual 
distrust of both parties may have given rise to 
acts on both sides that may countenance both 
assertions. The effect on Petion was decided : 
from the moment of his secession he became 
the determined enemy of France, being as de- 
voted in his hatred of, . as he had previously 
been in his zeal for, that country. He was 
one who signed the Act of Independence in 



76 NOTES OK HAITI. 

1804, and who also signed Dessalines' Con-^ 
stitution of 1806, by which that chief became 
emperor. 