



SEPABATIOK 6T THB SOUTH. 79 

rious discusfiions and some military movements 
followed, without any^ definite result beyond a 
sort of armed truce ; and to¥rards the end of 
1811 the sunrivor of the earliest revolutionary 
chiefs expired at the plantation Laborde, near 
to Cayes. The present General Boi^ella, then 
Rigaud's second, succeeded to the supreme 
command, and shortly afterwards joined the 
party of the president. 

During the period just described the island 
{u-esented the singular spectacle of as many in- 
dependent goYemments as existed at its first 
discovery, viz. five \ that of Henry, of Petioa> 
I^gaud, Gauman, and Old Spain* 

The defection of some of Christophe's fleet 
augmented the resources of the republic ; and 
the revisal of the constitution of 1806, in 1816; 
by which the government was rendered appa«- 
. rently more popular by the^ formation of a lower 
, house, while the hands of the executive were 
: strengthened by various means, especially by 
I the office of president being for life,* with the 
i. right of naming a successor, were favourable 
to the wishes of Petion<; but still he was disap- 
pointed in the advancement of his favourite 
republic, and he sank under accumulated griefe. 

* Prenoas to this Potion had beeo re-elected president thrice, 
and a&er this revisioB he was chosen for life. 



80 NOTES ON HAITI. 

He died the 29th of March, 1818, after having 
presided over the republic upw^ds of eleven 
years. He i^ much lamented by his party ; but 
there are others who do not regard his memory 
with the same feelings. Amid such conflicting 
testimony as is adduced for and against this 
chief, it would be impossible to form a positive 
opinion ; but it appears probable, from balan* 
cing all that is alleged, that his ambition was 
as unbounded as that of Christophe ; but he 
possessed more prudence^ t^ greater power of 
self-command, and m(»re passive courage. It 
does not appear equally probable that he had 
less disposition to shed blood; he only con- 
trived (at least it is so said and corroborated by 
ample details) that offenders, or at least those 
who opposed him, should not fall by the hands 
of the executioner, but rather that they should 
do so in resisting authority of which they were 
probably ignorant. It must be admitted that 
the late president was surrounded by no ordi- 
nary difficulties; and it may not be impossible 
that these very difficulties may have occasionally 
led him to act in opposition both to his better 
judgment and to his better feelings. Previous 
to his death, he is reported to have given as a 
parting injunction to his successor. General 
iBoyer, " never to treat with France. '* 



NOMINATION OF BOYER. 81 

Hie. late president's nomination of General 
3oyer was confirmed, by the senate and prae- 
torian bands of Haiti. (This officer had been 
in the French service^ had emigrated with Ri* 
gaud and others, had been in the United States, 
and had accompanied Petion on his return in 
1802. He served as aide-de«camp to General 
Boye, who was chef d'etat major of Rocham- 
beau's army. Eventually he.Vas attached to 
Petion's stafi*, and 'became commandant of the 
city of Port-au-Prince* After his elevation the 
term of the political embarrassments of the re- 
public began to diminish. Very soon G^uman 
.'fell, after a laborious pursuit^ by Generals Bor- 
gella and Lys for nine months ; and in 1820 
i'Christophe's death re-opened the North. The 
.confusion and disunion among the leaders of the 
revolt afforded an opportunity to General Boyer, 
of which he very judiciously availed himself, by 
pressing forward with, a considerable force, and 
taking possession of every strong place in the 
late kingdom. Thus, fof the first time since the 
death of Dessalines, the whole of the late French 
St. Domingo was re-united' under one govern- 
ment. The sudden dissolution of the iron rule 
of Christophe produced such entire disorga- 
nisation, as to render it impossible to restore 
even so. much discipline as might have been 