



82 NOTES ON HAITI. 

useful; and the habits of the North were 
gradually assimilated to those of the South. 
The supremacy of the Port-au-Prince govern- 
ment was not long undisturbed^ for scmie of 
Henry's old generals were accused of putting 
forth pretensions to the government. They were 
seized; some were tried, condemned, and exe- 
cuted; others destroyed themselves; and some 
fell as Romain has been described to have done 
in the first volume of these Notes. 

The repubUc being now- restored to its ori- 
ginal limits, the only object necessary to its- 
perfect internal consolidation that remained in- 
complete, was the acquisition of the Eastern, 
or Spanish portion of the island. The history 
of the revolutions that there occurred, from the 
treaty of Basle to 1822, have been already given. 
The final annexation at this last named period 
completed all the views of the Haitian govern- 
ment with respect to territory. Yet the ab- 
sence of all foreign recognition excluded them 
from political rank. Even Colombia, the chief 
of which owes so deep a debt of gratitude 
for essential services in the hour of necessity, 
refused to entertain political relations with her 
ancient friend. The first recognition (and it 
was essential that it should so originate) was 
from the mother coutitry. But as that act was 



lt£COGKlTION BT FBANCE. 83 

pr^eded by a long, series of negotiatioDSy it wiU 
be conyenient here to relate them very briefly 
in the order of succession. 

Immediately after the restoration of the 
Bourbons a powerful body of persons^ inter- 
^ted in St. Domingo, are said to have com- 
menced their intrigues ; and, so early as Octo* 
ber 1814, Dauxion Lavaysse, with Medina 
and Draverm^i, were sent out with instruc-* 
tions from the French minister of marine, M, 
Malouet. — ^The former proceeded to Port-au- 
Prince, and proposed to the president, Petion, 
that the sovereignty of France should be re- 
cognised, and that the president and the prin- 
cipal chiefs should be appointed president and 
members of a provisional government of Haiti, 
acting in the name of Louis XVIIL 

The Haitians refused to listen to these termsi^ 
but proposed that their independence should 
be recognised, on the payment of moderate in- 
demnity. This being considered inadmissible, 
Lavaysse's mission terminated, and was after- 
wards disclaimed by the French government. 
It is said that this negotiator was authorised 
to excite discord, which was well known to 
Petion; who, however, allowed him to return 
in safety. Not so with Medina, who had for*- 
merly served under Toussaint, and was accused 



84 NOT£S ON HAITI. 

of having betrayed his trust. By the intr^e» 
and treachery of Vastey, it was discovered that 
he was possessed of documents calculated to 
promote dissension. He was seized, exhibited 
in public, kept in close confinement, and was 
no more heard of: it is supposed that he was 
secretly assassinated: Draverman escaped. The 
next negotiation, in 1816, was intrusted to Vis- 
count de Fontanges and M. Esmangart, both for- 
merly large landed proprietors in St. Domingo. 
Their propositions, which were modifications of 
those made by Dauxion Lavaysse, were equally 
vain. These propositions were made both to 
Petion and Christophe. The third attempt was 
made in February 1821, about three years after 
the election of the President Boyer. M. Aubert 
de Petit Thouars was sent to renew negotiations 
on a different footing. The chief demands 
were: that the suzerainete of France should 
be acknowledged, and an indemnity paid for 
cession of territory and property. The second 
proposal was alone Ustened to: the first wias 
decidedly refused. As neither party would 
give way, all intercourse between the govern- 
ments ceased until 1823, when M. liot arrived 
at Port-au-Prince from the French govern- 
ment, and urged the president to make his own 
proposals, as every advance made by France 