



NEGOTIATION WITH FRANCE. 86 

had been unavailing. This was accepted ; and 
General Boy6, who had formerly senred in St* 
Domingo mider Rochambean, and was a friend 
of the president, although a Frenchman, was 
named as the Haitian negotiator. He repaired 
to Europe in August 1823, and met M. Esman- 
gart at Brussels, where the conferences com* 
menced. The Haitians required that their in- 
dependence should be fully acknowledged ; 
that the flags of both nations should be ad- 
mitted into their respective ports, with the 
exception of those of the French colonies, 
with which Haiti was to maintain no inter- 
course; that, for four years, French goods io 
French bottoms should be exempted from all 
duties, and afterwards to have only one half 
of those imposed on others; that Haitian pro- 
duce in Wench ports were to pay no more than 
the duties levied on the most favoured nations ; 
that vessels of war, for the protection of com- 
merce, should reciprocally be aamitted into the 
ports of both countries ; and that political and 
commercial agents should be reciprocsdly ad- 
mitted. 

. All these points were agreed upon, except 
the mode of indemnifying France : a sum of 
money being demanded by the Frenchman, the 
negotiation ended. 



66 NOTES ON HAITI. 

In the month of November 1823 Esmangari 
despatched M. Laujon, on the part of the 
French goyemmenty to Haiti, to renew the ne- 
gotiation. The president, in compUance with 
this appUcation, sent, in May 1824, MM. La- 
rose and Rouanez with powers to offer a ob- 
tain sum to France as sn indemnity, payable 
either in money or produce, in five equal 
amounts ; to place the admission of all French 
goods in to the republic on the footing of the 
most favoured nation. On the other hand, 
they were to require that Haitian produce, 
either in French or Haitian bottoms, should 
pay no higher duties in France than similar 
productions from the French colonies. In all 
minor points the propositions corresponded 
with those made by General Boye. 

These were all adopted ; and Esmangart, for 
the first time, announced that the treaty could 
only apply to the French part of St. Domingo, 
as the king of France could not stipulate for 
the king of Spain. This was deemed inad- 
missible by the deputies from Haiti, who, in an 
interview with the French minister, Clermont 
Tonnere, stated that in the ordonnance decla- 
ratory of their independence (which was to be 
a preliminary to the treaty), the king of France 
would only reserve to himself the ** souverainete 



ARRIVAL OF BARON MACKAU. 87 

ext^rieure.'' On these two proposals^ the nego* 
tiations again broke off, and the deputies re- 
turned in August to their own country. 

It does not appear that any public nego- 
tiation was carried on, whatever private com* 
munications may have been made, until the 
month of July 1826, ^hen Baron Mackau 
arrived, with a strong squadron of about four- 
teen ships of war, that remained in the bay of 
Port-au-Prince, while he himself proceeded to 
the capital, with the ordonnance of the 17th 
April 1825> in which the independence of 
French St. Domingo was recognised on the fol* 
lowing conchtions: that the ports should be open 
to all nations ; but that the French flag should 
only pay half duties both inwards and out- 
wards ; and that on^ hundred and fifty millions 
of francs should be paid, as an indemnity, in 
five equal payments,, the first on the 31st De- 
cember 1825. v.The ordonnance was accepted 
on the 11th July ;, and from tlie festivities de- 
scribed in the official papers, it would appear 
that a load of debt, and most humiliating con- 
ditions, were considered by the Haitian go- 
vernment matters of unfeigned delight: the 
people, however, I believe, think very dif- 
ferently. . Three new commissioners, MM. 
Daumec, Rouanez, and Fremont, accompanied 