



88 NOtES ON HAITI. 

the baron on his return to France, for the ptir* 
pose of completing a treaty, and of raisii^ a 
loan to ' extinguish their debt with France, 
which was confirmed by a particular law of the 
legislature. In October of the same year a 
convention was concluded at Paris, and Rou- 
anez and Fremont, the two surviving commis- 
sioners, returned to Haiti ; but, on their arrival, 
the president refused his ratification, on the 
score of the conditions being unfavourable to 
his country. Various negotiations have been 
on foot, without any favourable issue, up to 
the beginning of this year ; but the ordonnan^e 
is in full vigour, except in the clause granting 
the privilege to France of half duties on ex- 
ports. The export duty having been entirely 
abolished, no nation can be more .favoured than 
another. • 

Towards the close of 1826 M. Maler, thei first 
French consul-general, with a consul for Cayes, 
and a vice-consul for the Cape, arrived in 
Haiti. Early in the following year I followed : 
Prussia, Lubeck, Hamburgh, Holland and 
Sweden also sent agtots, the three first con- 
suls-general, and the two last consuls. The 
United States have a commercial agent at each 
of the principal ports ; but some dissatisfaction 
with President Adams' message on the subject 



«% 



BESIDENT FOREIGN AGENTS. 



89 



of Haiti had interfered with their being re- 
(x^nised by the government J Whether other 
fiinctionaries from countries than these named 
have since gone to the republic I do not know. 



90 NOTES OM HAITI. 



CHAP. VI. 



Oorenment-^Population—Ecclenastical Establishment. 

GOVERNMENT. 

After the various struggles, of which a 

rapid outline has been already given, the whole 

island of Hispaniola, and its various dependent 

islets, are subject to one government, under 

the style and title of the Republic of Haiti. It 

will be interesting to give a summary of the 

actual state of the existing government, in so 

far as it can be considered, without touching on 

fiprbidden ground, The original constitution 

of 1806 is said to have been founded on that 

/ of the United States of North America, which 

I has since been the acknowledged model of 

i all the constitutions of the New World, except 

that of Brazil : yet there were some very re- 



CONSTITUTION OF GOVERNMENT. 91 

markable deriatioiis from both the spirit and 
form of the great original. 

The principles on which the constitution of 
1806 are formed are clearly expressed in the 
report made by the constituent assembly, on 
the 27th of December of that year. * Groaning 
under the recollection of the recent usurpations of 
Bessalines, that body laid down their opinions 
with precision ; and, from the accuracy of some 
o{ these opinions, there cannot be many dissen- 
tient Toices. While they considered the best * 
system of government for every people to be 
that which, being most conformable with their 
particular habits and manners, secures the 
greatest sum of happiness for all its members, 
they suggested that there are certain good prin- 
ciples common to all states ; and among these 
die first was the separation of the executive and 
l^islative functions : the former was to devolve 
on a ppteident, to be chosen every four years, 
and the latter on a senate consisting of twenty*- 
four members. The latter also had the«OBar^*/ " ^' 
Hfttien of all public Amctionaries, as well as 
ccmtrol over the public expenditure, by con- 
stant inspection. The senate was first to be 
named by the assembly, and afterwards it vms 