

<^1^ great objects of Petion's life appear to 
have been the; consolidation and improyement 
of the republic, and the subversion of the au- 
thority of his Northern rival. The materials 
with which he had to operate r^idered the ac-^- 
complishment of his task exceedingly arduous. 
He was the chief of the smallest numerical 
caste, and consequently did not dare to act 
with the rigour of his opponent. The blacks 
were to be propitiated ; and, to accomplish this 
important end, he was driven to temporising 
measures: necessity appears to have forced 
him into a systematic opposition to those of 
Christophe. Though his exchequer was so low, 
that he issued base money^ and he knew well 
that, without exports, it would be vain to expect 
to carry on commerce or to obtain a revenue, 
yet he encouraged repose. Though declaiming 
in favour of industry, he protected idleness t 
instead of resolutely punishing disorder, he 
palliated crime, and, when it became too strong, 
got rid of it by intrigue : instead of enforcing 
the discharge of public and private duties, he 
wmked at licentiousness. His partisans in- 
creased in number, though probably not itk 



FRIENDLY TO ENGLISH COMMERCE. 77 

respectability; and his police is said to have 
been most wretchedly inefficient. 

Petion, however, encouraged trade, especi- 
ally with Great Britain, to which he gave a 
decided preference, by reducing the duties on 
British goods to five per cent, while those levied 
on every other nation were twelve percent:* he 
introduced the subdivision of land, in the hope 
that every proprietor .of land would thus have 
.an individual interest in the soil; and he was 
anxious to reduce his mihtary force. He also 
introduced a base coinage; and it is estimated, 
. whether correctly or not I cannot say, that at the 
time of his. death twelve millions of dollars of 
this depreciated currency were in circulation, al- 
though he had only issued about five millions. 
, At present a similar coinage exists, and is exten- 
sively counterfeited ; and the distinction between 
.the real and the imitative money is, that the 
latter contains more silver and is better executed. 

In addition to the distresses already alluded 
to, Petion had to contend with internal dissen- 
siDn. About the end of 1807 Jean Baptiste 
Perrier dit Gaumcm or Goman, raised the stan- 
dard of revolt among the mountains of J^r^mie, 
ostensibly to promote the cause of Christophe, 

* See Appendix, note (X.) 



^ I 



78 NOTES ON HAITI. 

but more probably to effect some more personal 
object y ,and carried on for years a successful 
predatory warfare : in 1810 General Rigaud, 
who had been detained in France from the 
time he had been sent back, without having 
been allowed to land at the Cape, by General 
Le Clerc, escaped by the way of the United 
States, and appeared at Cayes, whence he pro- 
ceeded to the capital. Rigaud's partisans assert 
that he left France secretly : Petion*s party, on 
the othec hand, as confidently allege that he 
was an emissary of Napoleon ; and in support 
of this allegation adduce many statements. 
Whether one or other of these be true, it is 
certain that the two chiefs met with mutual 
.suspicion; Rigaud naturally regarding his for- 
mer subaltern as occupying the station which 
he was entitled to fill ; while Petion became 
suspicious of the designs of his old commander. 
The reception was affectedly cordial, and the 
declarations of each appeared to be believed by 
the other. In a short time, however, suspicion 
changdd to disgust, and disgust was roused to 
animosity. After some warm differences Rigaud 
threw off the mask, and assumed the command 
of the province of the South, (under the style of 
general commanding in the Souths) assisted by 
a council resident at the city of Cayes. Va- 