

yearly. 

The clergy w^re divided into the seculars and 
i^Jilars. ^ The former were again divided into 
the ch^tpter of the cathedral and the parish 
priests. The first establishment of the chapter 
was on a very munificent scale, there being 
twenty-five members of it. The number was 
eventually reduced to seventeen; and on the 
concession of the tithes and parochial charges 
to the king^ their income was paid oiit of the 
public treasury;^, at the rate of eight hundred 
dollars a-year to the canons^ and one thousand 
to the dignitapes. 

The parochial clergy were not very numerous, 
and were respectably paid. 

Since the last revolution the numbers of the 
cathedral had fallen off; so that in 1827 there 
were, exclusive of the demi, (who was also vicar- 
general,) only two dignitaries and two canons ; 
the first received twelve hundred dollars, and 
each of the remainder six hundred dollars an- 
nually. It is probable that the number has 
decreased still more since the time of which I 
speak, as some of the incumbents were old and 
iafimu 

At that period there were in the East ei^teen 



128 NOTES ON HAITI. 

parish priests^ besides the ehaphda of the ch(»f 
in the cathedral. 

There were formerly monastic ini^titutions at 
St. Jago, Santo Domingo^ Azxui, and San Juan^ 
The monks were DominicaBs^ JVIe^rcenarians^ 
and Franciscans ; the nuns, Mejcenariains, CaT 
puchins, and of the orders of Santa Clara, wA 
Regina Maria. 

The Dominicans had their priors, the jMei'ceT 
narians their superiors, the Franciscans their 
guardians, and the nuns their abbesses, who su* 
perintended their internal discipline, under the 
control of the di^c^an. 

All the monasteries are in ruins, except tho$^ 
pf the city of Santo Domingo, and all have 
been suppressed. The nunneries have shared 
the same fate ; but an asylum is still afforded 
to a few old nuns, of whom there were, when I 
was at Santo Domingo, six, one of whom was 
an old woman of ninety. 

In the three provinces that belonged to France 
there was no bishop; but they were divided 
into fifty-two parishes, imder (by an especial 
grant) the direction of the two missions of the 
Dominicans and Capuchins ; the former occur 
pying the West and Soyth, and the latter the 
North. Two apostolic prefects presided oyer 



PROGRESSIVE CHANGES. 129 

these two commimitieSy subject to their respec* 
tive ecclesiastical superiors in Europe. There 
were also several monastic institutions, which 
have ceased to exist. 

.1 am not aware that any public change took 
place in the administration of church afiairs 
eottsequent on- the French revolution. Und^ 
Toussaint's rule it is certain that the forms 
remained unaltered. DessaKnes had no na- 
tional religion. 

On Christophers elevation to the throne, of 
his proper authority he appointed two arch- 
bishops in succession, and erected three bishop- 
rics in the West. The first archbishop was a 
Frenchman', the second a Spaniard. Both in- 
curred his displeasure, and disappeared. The 
bishoprics do not appear to have been filled up. 