

A French bishop came out to the republic, 
and was received for a time at Port-au-Prince. 
With the mode of his appointment I am wholly 
unacquainted. The president finding that he 
involved himself in disputes with a factious Irish 
priest, who had, before his arrival, exercised 
great influence, expelled both. Since that the 
affairs of the church in the West have been 
carried on by four vicars-general, subject to the 
archbishop of Santo Domingo, who is consi- 
dered the diocesan. There were in this portion 



130 NOTES ON HAITI. 

of the republic, at the thnie of which I dpeak, 
twenty parish priests, four of whom were the 
Ticars-generai ; making a total of thirty-di^t 
clergy in the republic, the whole of whom are 
paid, and, I believe, nominated by the president. 

It is reported that in Christophers time an 
attempt was made to form a concordat with fhe 
See of Rome ; but from some cause that I can- 
not trace it failed. It is also reported that more 
recently a similar attempt was made by the pre- 
sent goTemment, with a view to form a national 
clergy; but that his holiness called for in- 
formation before coming to a decision. The 
government is, I believe, not disposed to form 
any concordat, without a* perfectly national 
clergy be conceded to them. For that purpose 
an establishment has been formed at Millot, 
under the Abb6 Besson, as I have formerly men- 
tioned. At present the majority of the clei^ 
are Spaniards, or at least, Spanish Americans, 
a few Frenchmen, and, I believe, one Italian. 

The constitution declares Roman Catholicism \ 
to be the religion of the state, while it tolerates / 
all ; although Dessalines disavowed any state 
religion, and was equally tolerant. Although 
Christophe adopted Roman Catholicism as the 
religion of his kingdom, it is reported that he 
very seriously meditated the establishment of 



KELI6IOUS TOLERATION. 131 

Protestantirai ; and the introduction of ihe 
English language is considered to have been a 
preBminary. 

When I was in Haiti the various sects amoi^ 
the American emigrants enjoyed the uninter- 
rupted exercise of their religious rites ; though 
I-am not aware that any regular church estab* 
iishment has been formed, except that of Rome* 
A few years before my arrival some Wesleyan 
preachers from England were obUged to return 
home, in consequence of being persecuted by 
the populace. I have understood that the go- 
vernment disclaimed any share in the outrages^ 
and the president presented about five hundred 
pounds to the funds of the society. Various 
causes have been assigned to me in Port-au- 
Prince for this persecution : none^ however, 
reflecting on the personal integrity of the mis- 
sionaries ; and as I know not whether any be 
correct or not, it is unnecessary to repeat 
them. 

All perapi^, without reference to their reli- 
gious faith, are allowed to be interred in the 
public cemetery ; with this sole difference, that 
the bodies of Catholics are taken, previous to 
interment, to the churchy where the service for 
the dead, according to the forms of the Catholic 
ritual, is performed ; while those of other sects 