



132 NOTES ON HAITI. 

are conveyed directly to the place of burial, 
where it is also pennitted, if Protestants/ that 
the funeral service of the Church of Ei^land 
should be read over them. All this is mere 
usage; and a few years ago the Irish priest 
who has been already alluded to attempted, 
though uBSuccessfuIlyy to set it aside, and to 
disinter the body of the infant child of an 
English resident. 

No civil or military disqualifications attach 
to any difference of reUgious. creed : indeed I 
am not aware that the mode of faith is on aj^y 
occasion made a subject <rf inquiry. Were it. 
made a qualification to understand, or to ex^ 
plain the grounds of belief, I f^ar that the re- 
jected would be Qumerous. 



AGRICULTURE. 133 



CHAPTER VIL 



AGRICULTURE. 



It is obviously necefteary, in treating of the 
agrieultarc^ of Haiti^ to divide the subject into 
two branches ; viz. of the cultivation of articles 
for domestic consumption^ and that of inter- 
changeable articles^ or^ as it is phrased in the 
republic, *' la culture des vivres," and, *' les 
grandes cultures.'^ Indian com is, I beUeve, 
the only grain produced ; plantains, yams, and 
all the usual tropical vegetables are grown in 
considerable abundance; but of the absolute 
quantity nothing can be said, as I possess no 
documents on the subject. I apprehend that 
most of these articles are yielded in sufficient 
quantity for home use, as they were in pre- 
ceding periods. Indian com, however, which 
I have been informed was formerly not an in- 
considerable . article of export, is occasionally 
not to be procured on any terms ; and is also 



134 NOTES ON HAITI. 

sometimes imported firom the United States of 
America. In this chapter I shall therefore 
coafiBe myself to such objects afi can be illus- 
trated by documents, both because they con* 
Btitute the only test of the e^hangeable wealth 
of the country, and because my attention was 
especially directed to them by his mi^esty's 
govenunent, and consequently my infonnation 
is more complete than it is on topics which 
I could only incidentally investigate. 

As a preliminary to an accoimt of the st^te of 
the s^ricultural produce at different periods, it 
is requisite to give a brief outline of the various' 
systems pursued to ensure labour for the branch 
of which I treat, after the abolition of slavery by 
Scmthonax, which he effected on the Slst Au* 
gust, 1793.* Polverel, then in the South, hesi- 
tated; but in order to ensure an influence equal 
to that of his colleague, confirmed his act by a 
proclamation on the Ist November of the same 
year, 

I am not aware that Sonthonax issued any 
regulations to induce his new freedmen to la- 

* The statemeots now given are sabBtandally and ofteti literatiy 
tlie reports made bjf me to tbe Foreign Office ; for the more 
carefully I lia^ re-examined my atatefnents, tbe more secure I 
fieel my own aecarai^ piotected^ except indeed from designing 
and maleTolent falsehood. 