

"^ Sec DOte (It) in Appendix." 



LOCAL RETURNS. 167 

quantify; haying in 1818 amounted to aboye 
one hundred and thirty-one thousand pounds, 
while in 1826 it was scarcely thr^e thousand 
five hundred. 

Cacao may be said also to have been aban* 
daned ; for, since the year 1819, only ooee, m 
1824/ the sjx^ail quantity of eight t^ousand^ six 
hundred imd fifteen pounds appears to have 
been ex;p(»ied. Even the dye-woods QiOgyfood, 
Nicaragua wood, and lignum vi^ae) seeoi to 
have fallen off, and in 1826 were scarcely a 
fourth of what they had been in 1818. 

Since 1819 mahogany has considerably d^imi- 
Btshed ; and although the decrease has been 
irregular, still it has been always going on. 

Indigo cannot be treated of, as only one 
hundred and thirty-four pounds, in one year 
out of nine, were shipped..* 

The table of the exports from Cape Haitian 
is £he most valuable. 

: The export of raw sugar was nearly .doubled 
within the fii^t of these periods ; and during the 
fourteen years of Christophe's rule it was a re- 
gular branch of trade ; varying, however, in 
extent fix>m above five hundred ibcAisand to 
six millions of pounds. Since ihe time of the re* 

* See note (J J) ia Appendix. 



168 NOTES ON HAITI. 

public^ the amount suddenly fell in two years 
to two hundred thousand pounds, and ever 
since 1822 it has entirely ceased. 

Coffee under Dessalines was at its maximum 
in the first year of his rule, and at the minimum 
ia the third ; altogether, it diminished in quan- 
tity. Under Christophe it varied from five mil- 
lions to above ten millions ; and subsequently 
it has fluctuated firom about four millions to six 
millions five hundred thousand pounds. 

Cotton was largely reduced under Dessalines ; 
rose with great irregularity under Christophe to 
about four hundred and fifty thousand pounds ; 
and within the last six years of the table has 
fallen off to little more than fifteen thousand 
pounds. 

Cacao alone seems to have increased in quan- 
tity during the entire period of twenty-three 
years; as there is not one year in which 
the quantity does not considerably exceed that 
of 1803. The largest amount was in 1818, 
and the smallest in 1809. Even in 1826 it 
was more than three times that of the first year. 
Dye-woods have varied, but upon the whole 
there is an augmentation. Under Christophe, 
it is worthy of remark that their amount was 
smallest in 1807, 1808, 18D9, and 1810, when 
the coffee crop was large. 



LOCAL BETVRK8, 1£D 

. Mahogany hafionly become an article of trade 
at Cape Haitian since the death of Christophe, 
and it has progressiTely increased in. value* 

.Tobacco has also gradually risen in import* 
ance from three thousand seven hundred to 
above one hundred and seventy-two thousand 
pounds. 

The quantity « of rum exported has always 
been small, and was confined to Christophe's 
reign. At present, all that is made is consumed 
in the country. 

Indigo, after a trifling increase, ceased alto- 
gether to be an article of export. The quantity 
of molasses is very small ; and we may add 
castor oil, which does not appear to have been 
exported since 1819. No. other return can at 
present be furnished. 