

Nicaragua wood and lignum vitse have also 
fluctuated. In three years (1823, 1824, 1825,) 
none was sliipped, and the maximum exceeded 
eighty-one thousand pounds, while the mini- 
mum was about ten thousand five hundred. 

Mahogany has risen from one hundred and 
forty-four to thirteen thousand one hundred 
and thirty-nine feet. Nothing, however, is es- 
tablished by this increase, for very little is 
produced in the immediate neighbourhood. 
It is chiefly brought from the East, and this 
importation depends in a great degree on the 
means of direct shipment being more or less 
abundant. 



I 



,LOCAL RETI7BNS. 165 

Tobacco too has been increased from thirty- 
five thousand, six hundred and sixty-six to 
eighfy-eight thousand nine hundred and sixty- 
five pounds. In 1826 it was only seventy-two 
thousand one hundred and thirty pounds^ or 
above .double the quantity of 1823. 

Ginger and cigars have lately appeared ai^ 
articles of expofi in small quantities. 
' In the return of the department of the South * 

s n\ \t' 'A. ' r ^ /" ' ' ' , • 

the results are very similar. Raw sugar, which 
in tSlq amoimted to three hundred and forty- 
one {housand nine, hundred and forty pounds, 
h^ been reduced to nothing. 

Coffee, on the other hand, has increased 
frqm about one million to above twelve millions 
five hundred thousand pounds; and in 1826 
exceeded seven, millions five hundred thousand.^ 

Cotton has varied so much that it is impos- 
sible to say whether the variation has arisen 
firom the great irregularity in the cultivation of 
it, or the uncertainty of the crop. The quantity 
at one time (1825) was about two thousand 
pounds, while in 1818 it exceeded five hundred 
thousand ;. but in 1826 it was something better 
than fifty-five thousand pounds, being about 
four thousand more than in 1810. 

* See note (HH) in Appendix. 



in 



166 NOTES ON HAITI. 

Cacao bas upon the whole increased m quan* 
tity, although very irregularly. In 1810 it was 
above thlrty-^ve thousand pounds^ ^ind only in 
one year (1812) has it ever been below that 
amc^t ; in 1826 the cacao produced was at its 
maximuiii^ being three hundred and thirty^ght 
thousand seven hundred and ninety-six. pounds. 

Logwood, Nicaragua wood, aiid ligminivitaBy 
have somewhat increased in quantity^ although 
at no defined rate. . 

Mahogany too has been very unc^er^in 
its^ P^^og^^f i but the amount shipped in, 1810 
(two thousand five hundred and six .superficial 
feetii rOs^ nearly fifty fold in 1826. 

Of late tobacco has disappeared altogetdier, . 
aS) well as castor oil. 

Sirup or molasses, which formerly was an 
object of some consequence, has altogether 
ceased since .1820. Pistachio nuts also, which 
at one time were a small object of expcot, ha^ve 
in additicm disappeared.* 

The Jacmel return possesses all the general 
characters of. its companions. Raw sugar is 
no longer an article of export. Coffee varies 
from about three millions to about five millions 
of pounds. Cotton has largely dimimehed in 