

I met him again by accident as I was walking in the garden 
of the Thuilleries. We stopped and talked. He appeared to 
me to be in an agitated state of mind. He said that the cruel 
treatment of the deputies of coloiir by the white colonists at 
Paris was not to be borne. From the white colonists at Paris be 
then went to the white colonists at St. Dominsro. He said that 
the people of colour there were men of property as well as 
these — that they were men of education as well as these — that 
they had mind and intellect as well as these— that they had 
souls as magnanimous and courageous as these. He Was going 
on, when I beseeched him to be more tranquil ; and to pacify 
him, I told him that if he and his colleagues would call upon 
me in the evening I would be at home to receive them. 

At the time appointed Og^ and three others came to me ; the 
other two were indisposed. They seemed now, all ot them, to 



260 KOT£S OK HAITI. 

have caaglkt tlie infection, ff»r tbey all complained Sictferly. I 
heud what they had to aaj most pati«nify, and toU them tigusA 
nnd again that I sympatbieed with Chem in their dl9tt«8§. After 
Bome farther conversation I bad thetn adieu, aa I was to lesre 
Paris in two days ; and recommended to them, in the mdPt ear- 
nest and impressive manner I could, moderation aftd forhear- 
ance as the beat legacy I could leave them ; and I entreafed 
them rather to give up theh s^ats ih th« assembly than to canry 
their anger borne ; for that with patieilce tb* ir cause would ulti* 
mately triumph. They replied, that I had preficribed to them a 
most difficult task, but that they would endeavour to follow my 
■advice. There was, however, evidently a spirit of dissatis^- 
tion in their countenances, which nothing but a redress of their 
grievances could subdue ; and it appeared clesr to me, that if 
the white colonists should persevere in their intrigues, and the 
National Assembly in delay, afire might be lighted op in St. Do* 
mingo which could not easily be extingofshed. Tiiis was aU 
that ever passed between me and the deputies of colour at Pa- 
ris, either^in my conversation with them as individuals or as a 
collective body. I may add, that I had no particular intimacy 
with any of them — that I never paid a visit to any of them — ^in 
fiiCt, that I never knew where any of them lodged. 

I intend to continue my account as soon as I can get an op« 
portnnity. You will of course preserve this letter fbr Mr. 
Mackenzie ; but you need not acknowledgis the receipt of it. 

I am, dear Sir, your's truly, 

Thomas Clarkson. 
No. 2. , 

Playford-Hall, August 15, 1828. 
Bear Sir, 

I sent you on Wednesday last (for Mr* Mackeneie) an ac- 
count of my knowledge of Og6, as far as it went, during my 
residence in France. I now Send you an account of ray know- 
ledge of him, as far as it goes, during his residence in England. 



APPENDIX. 251 

1 left Paris, to the best of mj recollection , about the latter 
end of December 1769. In about three or four months after 
this, say somewhere in April IT90» when I was in London, I 
received a letter &om Og6at Paris (the first thai ftud ererpMted 
between us), stating that he was coming to £ngland for a week 
or two^ and that he would then take an opportunity of calling 
upon me. I was then at lodgings in Frith-street, and he had 
' contrived some bow or other to fiiiS out my address. This in- 
telligence gate me great uneasmesi ; for the errand of the depu- 
ties of colour to France was as odious to the slave-merchants 
and planters of England, as it weis to the white colonists at Parrs, 
and I trembled therefore at the thought of being seen in com- 
pany with Ogk in London, lest it should do a serious injury to 
our cause. I communicated the news to Mr. Wilberforce, who 
thought exactly as I did upon the subject, and who declared 
that he would never see him, if he came, and forbad me there- 
fore to bring him to his house. I began then to deliberate 
whether I ought not try to find out some reason for preventing 
his coming, and to write to him to that effect ; but be gave me 
no time to do this : for one morning, about four dajs after the 
receipt of his letter, while I was at breakfast, and while I was 
considering what I should write to him, to induce him to put eS 
his journey, he came into my room. I received him, I believe, 
with all the civility due to his situation ', but I questioned him 
closely as to Ids motive for coming to England, when he in- 
formed me that his object was to go to the United States, where 
he had friends, and that there were more and better opportu- 
nities of getting thither from the ports of England than from 
those of France. After having breakfasted with me, he left me 
to go to his inn, and to inquure whether any vessels in the 
Thames were going to the American ports. 