



248 NOTES ON HAITI. 

however, by way of precaution, to change my hotel, aud to go 
to another, to be near to General Lafayette fbr protection, and 
not to stir out at nigh^ 

I saw nothing more of the deputies for a fortnight, when they 
proposed a viait, to which I immediately assented. All the six 
were present. They complained bitterly of the white colonibts in 
Paris* Some of these, whose faces they had before seen at the 
Cape, had insulted them, and particularly Og^, in the streets ; 
but what was worse than all, they had spread terror among ma- 
ny of the members of the Assembly, so as to make them believe 
that the we^are of the mother country would be endangered by 
hewrvng thiir clainu : they appeared to be quite disheartened. 
They were now sore that they should not be able to make head 
against theur intrigues. l)ay after day had been fixed for the . 
hearing of their cause— -day after day it had been deferred. ' 
They were now weary with waiting. Og^ could not contain 
himself, but broke out with great warmth : — ** 1 begin, '^'^sajjsbit, . 
*' not to care whether the National Assembly will admit us or 
not. But let it beware of the consequences. We wiU no 
longer continue to be held in a degraded light. Despatches 
shall go directly to St. Domingo, and we will soon follow them. 
We can produce as good soldiers upon our estates as those in 
France. Our own arms shall make us respectable and inde- 
pendent. If we are once fonced to desperate measures, it ^'ill 
he in vain that thousands will be sent across the Atlantic to 
bring us back to our former state."/ On hearing this 1 entreated 
the deputies to wait with patience. I observed to them» " that 
in a great revolution like that of France, the Assembly would 
have a thousand things to attend to at home before tliey could 
thi^k of any thing abroad. France would ^r«^ take oare of her- 
#«(/*— she would then^ I had no doubt, extend her care to the 
eolonies. Was it not reasonable to conclude that this would be 
the case, when they, the deputies, knew that they had almost 
all the first men in the assembly, such as the Due de Kocbe* 



APPENDIX* 249 

Tancaulty Lafayette, Mirabeau, Gregoire, and others, in their 
favour?" I entreated them therefore to wait paticntiy, at 
well as upon another coosideration, which was, that by an 
imprudent conduct, they might not only ruin their otcn cause in 
France^ but bring indescribable misery upon their native land. 
They all seemed to listen to what I said except Og6, whose 
mind seemed to have been so violently stirred up, that its emo- 

I 

tions, like the waves of the sea after a storm, could not be 
stopped at once. This was the last time I ever saw all the 
deputies together. 

I began now to think of returning to England, and concluded 
at length that my stay in Paris should not exceed another week. 
Duriug this time I fell in with Og^ in one of the streets. He 
seemed to be very gloomy. He revived the subject spoken of 
at our last meeting, namely, the wicked and barbarous conduct 
of the white planters at Paris towards the deputies, but more 
particularly towards himself. We exchanged, however, but 
few words ; for I told him that I was going by appointment to 
see a friend, and that I should be too late if I stopped longer. 