

Thomas Clarkson. 

You need not acknowledge the receipt of this letter. 

No. 4. 
Playford-Hall, near Ipswich, August 20^ 1828. 
Dear Sir, 
It was my intention merely to, have handed, through you, 
to Mr. Mackenzie, certain facts connected with my acquaint- 
ance with Og^, and to have allowed him to judge for himself on 
the subject; but after some consideration, I have thought it 
right to come forward myself, and to say yes or no to the dif- 
ferent charges brought against me hy certain French writer» 



APPENDIX* 257 

relative to that unfortanate indi?idual. These charges amount 
to FOUR. ] . That Og^ was introdaced to me in London by 
letters from the Amis de Noirs at Paris. 2. That his object in 
London was to confer with me on a plan for exciting an inimr- 
rection or re solution in St. Domingo. 3. That I encouraged 
or assisted him in this his plan or design : and 4. That I was 
the means of sending him from England to his own country to 
execute it. I will reply to these charges in their order. 

1. VUeny that Og^ was introdaced to me in London by the 
Amis des Noirs at Paris. He wrote to me in London himself^ 
and followed his own letter here. Og6 did not stand in need uf 
any such introduction ; for he had been acquainted with me 
numy months b^ore. He and his colleagues iWid visited me four 
jor five times at my own lodgings, and we had also met and 
talked in the streets. I will venture to say that Og^ knew 
me better than most of the Paris committee did ; for though I 
was six months in Paris, X never attended that committee 
more than three times, 

2. That Og€ came to me for the purpose mentioned is equally 
false. He came to me, not to promote any revolviionary plan, 
but because he could stay no longer in Paris without getting 
into a jail, and because he could not get home apparently by any 
other means than mine. 

3. That I promoted or encouraged his plans for the wicked pur> 
pose above-mentioned, is equally false ; for I never knew ^ either 
from himself or any other person, that he ever entertained any 
such plan or design. That Og€ was, if I may so say, desperately 
irritated against tlie white colonists in Paris on account of 
their wicked intrigues and denunciations against himself and 
his colleagues, and that he once broke out into the most in- 
temperate and furious language, threatening vengeance both 
against them and the National Assembly, I have shown you 
in my first letter ; but it will have appeared by the same letter 
that I came forward immediately as a peace-maker on that occa- 
sion ; by which he would see that I set my face against all 



258 NOTES ON HAITI. 

violent mauareB. Indeed, I considered tbU threatening; only as 

I 

the effiuion of a highly exasperated mind at the moment. 
When he was in London, he was apparently more hamhled, 
more softened, more composed; and yet be was yery irritable 
if old grievances came across his mind. But neither im Paris 
ner in Lmdmt did he ever give mi a hint that he had any 
pUiH in contemptattbn ekher for iHromoting inturrections or 
bringinfT ahmtt a revolulitn in St. Domingo* I myself there- 
tote stand enihretif dear of the charge of ever haviaf^ known of 
any scheme of this native ; and. if I myself, who knew Oge, 
cannot be implicated in it, how can the London committee be 
supposed to have had a hand in it, whenever saw Mm? I may 
add here, that if the Amis df» Noirs of Paris had ever had the 
rashness to propose to the London committee fur the abolition 
of the slsTc trade, any revolationary measure for St. Domingo, it 
is my belief not only that the latter ^suM have insiantif broken 
offaU connexion with the former, but that they wonld Aave waHed 
upon one of his Majesty's secretaries nf state to have iftf<nmed him 
of the proposal. The London committee at this time consisted, 
fifteen out of twenty, of Quakers, and their religion would for- 
bid them to be concerned in military operations in any shape. 