

In two or three days afterwards be called upon me again, 
and wished me to introduce him to Mr. Wilberforce. I tuld 
him that Mr. Wilberforce was too ill to see any stranger ; and 
this was really the case at that particular moment. He then 
informed me that he expected to sail in a week, and wished to 
know when it would be convenient to me to let him have the 
money, as the captain wished to be paid before he allowed him 
to come on board as a passenger : I said he might receive it in 
the course of three or four days at most, and appointed a meet- 
ing for that purpose. 

He came at the appointed time and dined with me again. 
I then paid him the money: it was either twenty or thirty 
pounds— I think it was thirty pounds. When I told him that it 
was a gift and not a loan, he expressed himself in terms of the 
greatest gratitude. He said that his colleagues in Paris were 
unable to assist him; that they were all-in debt; and that 
Monsieur Raymond was trying to borrow money upon his 



264 NOTES ON HAITI. 

estate in St. Domingo to supply himself and them also till re-^ 
mittances should arrive. He said he was glad that he had 
escaped from France. He hoped that his creditors there would 
not follow him, and that he shonld escape soon out of England. 
He should have no rest till he turned his back upon Europe. 
He seenied to me to be a much more humhled man than when 
I saw him in Paris. His language too was more moderate 
when I spoke of the white proprietors there ; but it was evident 
that he had not forgotten old grievances : for oo all these occa- 
sions he was not only agitated, but his eyes bespoke a yindic- 
tive spirit. At length he left me, promising that he would 
call again to take his leave ; but I waited day after day, and 
he never came. Not knowing where he lodged, I knew not 
where to send to inquire about him. I was in this uncertain 
state, when I learnt by mere accident, from an agent for ship- 
ping in Wapping, that he had actually left London in a vessel, 
which had cleared out for the United States. Why he did not 
call to take his leave of me I could never unravel. I once 
tiiought that he was secretly displeased with me for not having 
introduced him to Mr. Wilberforce and tlie committee, and for 
not having done more for him in a pecuniary way ; but I gave 
up this notion afterwards, and supposied that he had been 
called upon to go on board suddenfy, or sooner than he ex- 
pected, and that he had not had time to perform his promise. 

You will be pleased to give this, my second letter, to Mr. 
Mackenzie when you see him. 

I remain, dear Sir, yours truly, 

Thomas Clarkson. 

You need not acknowledge the receipt of this letter. 

No. 3. 

Playford Hall, August 17. 1828. 
Dear Sib, 

I have already sent yon an accdunt (for the use of Mr. Mac- 
kenzie) of my knowledge of the unfortunate Og^ during my re" 



APPENDIX. 265 

Hdenet in ParU, tatd filso of aiy liiiowl«dge of him dnrmg kh 
residence in Londott* One tfaiAg only bow- remains^ am] that is 
ttb86iiitely nece»9ary to be known by Mr. Mackenzie before be 
can fentt an eniire judgment on the case before him, viz. 
whethar I ei^er had any connexion, either by letter or message, 
#itb Og^ after bis departnrci from this country, or whether I 
ferer held any correspondence with any, one in St* Domingo after 
this period, and with whom P 