

In about three days after this a letter came directed to him 
at my lodgings with the Paris post-mark upon it. I had not 
-seen him during this time, and not knowing where his inn was. 



252 NOTES ON HAITI. 

I knew not where to send it. When he came the Deit time, be 
told me that he had been in search of a yessel from day to 
day> and that he thought he had found'one. I then gave him his 
letter. He opened it immediately and read it, and appeared 
much affected by it. I asked him if he had received any bad 
news. He then gave me the letter to read. It was from one 
of his colleagues. It stated that " he had received letters 
from St. Domingo, and that not only no remittances had come, 
but that none were likely to come for some weeks, and that 
he (Og^) had but just got out of Paris in time, for that his cre- 
ditors were in his lodging the very day after bis departure ; 
and they were desperately incensed against him." It was 
clear to me, after having read this letter, what was Og^*8 de- 
sign in coming to England. He came in fact to England be- 
cause he had neither mtmey nor credit to convey him to Nantes 
or Havre, and from thence to an American port ; and because 
he could no longer stsy in Paris without getting into jail ; and 
as a msn on the point of drowning catches at a straw, so 
he thought there might possibly be a chance of surmounting 
his diiEculties by throwing himself upon me in London, the 
only person he knew there, and that he preferred this measure, 
however degrading it might be, to the certainty of lingering for 
an unknown time in a French prison. As these were my senti- 
n|ents after reading the letter, I communicated them to him 
frankly ; when he confessed that he had never had any inten- 
tion of coming to England at all, but that circumstances forced 
him ; aol he hoped that I would advance him a little money 
to enable him to get to the United States. He had then twenty 
louis d*ors left, and a small sum in addition would be sufficient. 
He would go even as a steerage passenger : be would submit 
to any thing to get clear of Europe. In answer to this I made 
him no promises, but asked him to dine with me the next day, 
when we would talk the matter over. 
The moment he left me, I began to think most seriously of 



APPENDIX. 263 

bis sitoation as well as my own ; and io a few minutes the case 
appeared to me to be so plain, that I was no longer at a loss 
how to act on the occasion. Considering that the longer he 
staid in London the more his pecuniary means would be ex- 
hausted, and that ultimately some one must come forward to 
help him, or he would get into an English jail, and that no 
person in England knew him but myself ; and considering again, 
that the longer he staid in London, the greater chance there 
was that his acquaintance with me might become known, by 
which the great cause then in my hands might be materially • 
injured, I thought it a matter of common prudence (putting 
humanity out of the question) to say that I would accede to his 
request provided matters could be arranged upon a frugal scale ; 
and accordingly, when he dined with me the next day, I un- 
bosomed myself to him in the most frank manner on the sub- 
ject. I was pleased to find that he accommodated himself to 
my views ; for that he desired only to be enabled to set his 
foot on the shore of the United States. 