

Note (E).— No. U 

The gentleman alluded to in the text is Joseph Arnould, M.D. 

of Camberwell, to vhose friendship I owe the full coiumuni- 

<;ation8 that futlow. 

Playford-Hall, Attguat IS, 1828. 

• I now send yoo, in eonteqoeace of yonr letter, (for Mr. 
Mackenaie's perusal and acceptance,) ail that I can collect, both 
from mimuteM and memory, relfCtlTe to the late unfortunate 
Og)^, and &nt aa t9my Imowledgg qf him at Paris: 

/V^hen I waa at Paris in the ye^ 1789, I dined occasion- 
ally with General Lafayette. It happened on one of these 
oocaiions, that the depoties of cohniVy who had then jnst ar- 
rived from St. Domingo^ had beext inviied to dine there also. 
Of conrto we met {witli about fifty others) in the san^e room. 
The general introduced me to theni^ and when we took onr 
•eattatthe dinner table, he placed me between two of theiuy 
Moni. Raymond, a mild gentlemanlike man, and another, 
#hoae name I have forgotten. In the course of conversation I 
learnt their errand, and they leant mine, which was simply to 
get the anbject of the Havt'trttde intntdvced inio the Nattonal 
AasemMff, if possible, whUe IwasaiPafis, Thia firat interview 
was purely accidental. 

In the course of three or four days Biqfroond, Og6, and tim 
four othdrS) called upon mti at my hoteh It was a mere visit of 
compliment, in eonfceqtience of having dined together at Gene- ' 
ral Lafayette's. I wished to return the compliment, but was 
prevented in consequence of not knowing, their address. I was 



APPENDIX. 247 

told that they did not lodge together, btit had separate lodgingi 
of their own in different streets. 

In about a week after this a mere accident broogfat 110 
together again. They were going in a body (six of them) to 
consult their advocate, M onsr. Jollie ; and it so happened that 
in their way thither they passed near the street in which I li?ed. 
At this moment one of them proposed calling upon me, and the 
rest agreed. They came, they said, to inform me that they had 
been admitted the day hefore into the body of the National As- 
sembly to prefer their claims, and that the president bad assured 
them they might take courage ; for that the assembly knew no 
distinction between whites and blacks, but considered all men 
as having equal rights. They hoped soon to be admitted there 
as deputies. They did not stay more than ten minntes with me, 
and then left me, apparently all of them in high spirits. 

At another time I received a message from Mons. Ray- 
mond to say, that^e had something to comftinnicate to me, and 
that he would bring one or two of his friends with hira to see 
me, if it were agreeable. They came accordingly. He then 
said that the liberal speech of the president of the Assembly, 
wl:ich had given them last week so much pleasare, had called 
forth an host of the bitterest enemies against them. The white 
planters resident in France, and the irAtfeplanfortosuaUy resi- 
dent in the colonies, but then at PariSy supposing that they, 
the deputies, (who had slaves' blood in their veins,) were to 
have a seat in the assembly, and equal rights and privileges with 
themselves, had been worked up by that speech to a feeling 
bordering upon madness. They held nightly meetings ; they 
had sent to them (the deputies) anonymous letters, threatening 
their assassination, if they persisted in their claims. They said 
"too, that thev had reason to think that these white colonists bad 
a design upon my life also, and they wished to put me upon my 
guard. I replied that I had received letters to the same pur- 
port, but that I should still go on as before. I had determined 