

I bare then to say that I never wrote any letter, or sent any 
message eittier to Og6 or to any of his colleagaes or friends, 
after his departure from England. In the first place I knew 
not how to address either him or them. I knew not where they 
lived in St. Domingo. And secondly, there was no subject on 
which I felt the least inclination, or had any business to write 
to him. Nor did I ever receive any letter from him or any of 
his friends, colleagues, or adherents, after he had left London. 

I will not say, however, that I never wrote a letter to St. Do- 
Mingo, or that I never received one from that quarter. I was 
certainly in comespondence with the late Henry Christophe 
after he became king ; bat then this was more than twenty years 
after the death of the unfortunate Og^, or after the beginning 
of the revolution in that island; and with respect to this 
correspondence, / never sought it myself. I should never have 
engaged in it if the king had not first written to roe ; and I can 
traly say that I was never more surprised than I was when I 
received a letter from him inviting me to such a correspondence. 
I may add also, that all my letters to him were written, accord- 
ing to the best of my judgmenty for the good of Haiti, to pro- 
mote its prosperity, its strength, its liberty, and its civilisation. 
With this view, one of my first objects was to try to prevail 
upon the king to unite in a sincere and lasting friendship with 
Petion his rival ; but I did not succeed there. When I heard of 
an act of cruelty practised by his (Christophers) governor upon 
an Irishman supposed to be a spy, I reprimanded him without 



256 NOTES ON HAITI. 

fear. I fdrniahed certain masters for his schools. I advised him 
to take a certain number of the free blacks ia the United States, 
and bring them into his dominions, to the amount of thirty or 
forty thousand, by way of giving him the appearance of greater 
strength in the eyes of the French government ; and I stipulated . 
for their personal and religious liberty, on the basis of what rea>- 
son and experience had shown to be the wisest for those pur- 
poses. I found out for him also the terms which the French 
government would propose to him, if he wished to have his 
independence acknowledged in that quarter. Upon these and 
many ether guhjecis I wrote to him at his own request; and 
though, like many others, I might have been mistaken in my 
judgment, I always counselled him for the best. Setting aside 
then these letters^ either to the king or his ministers, I never 
wrote or sent a message to any person whatever in St. Dotuingo 
in the course of my life* 

You will be so good as to hand this third letter to Mr. IVIac- 
kensie. The three letters together will probably enable him to 
form a decided judgment on the case. I am in doubt whether 
I ought not to address to him a fourth ; hut I shall take a little 
time to consider of it. Should I think it necessary, it will be 

the last. 

I remain, dear Sir, your's truly, 