



APPENDIX. 305 

•' times, to my knowledge, it was to have come on, but something 
. always happened to prevent it. Not satisfied with this, thej had 
' threatened them with assassination if tbey persisted in their 
^ claims, so that they seldom stirred oat of doors without fear or 
i caution. They insulted them also in the streets/;. Monsieur 
Malouet was stated to have been at the head of the Planters' 
Conmiittee for these vexatious proceedings. These things, one 
after the other, kept Og6's mind in a state of continued irrita- 
tion, so that' he appeared at times like a person driven to mad- 
ness, and I have often thought that if, after his return to St. 
Domingo, there should be any disagreeable collision between 
him and the whites, he would be an ungovernable and a dan- 
gerous person, s^d perhaps lose his life there ; but I had 
no notion that be had left either Paris or London with 
any organised plan of force to redress his grievances. Mr. 
Mackenzie tells me that the ^French authors roundly as- 
sert that the expedition was carried into effect through 
• my means. I should really laugh at this idea, if the subject 
, were not a grave one, forj the word expedition implies a pre- 
vious collection of arms, ammunition, money, &c. ; bulihow was 
a poor creature like Qg6 to prepare for an expedition in Lon- 
don, when he came there with only twenty louis d'ors in his 
pocket, and had not wherewithal to get home without the aid of 
charity ? -But if it should be said in answer to this, that Og6 
deceived me — that he pleaded poverty to me when he had 
plenty of money at command — and that he spent his time in 
London, when he was out of my sight, in preparing what he 
wanted for his expedition, I have only to say that I have all 
the acknowledgment I can wish for, for I only wish to be able 
to say with truth, that if he ever did such things in Loudon, 
they were done entirely without my knowledge. 

I have entered thus largely into the subject that Mr. Macken- 
zie mayMiave no longer any doubt upon his mind concerning it. 



306 NOTES ON HAITI. — APPENDIX. 

Yoa will therefore now, as I hare closed loy corrpspondence, 
be 80 good as to write me a few limee immediuiehff to let me 
know iffou have received four lettere, inclading this. I wrote 
you Ihree before, and this makes ihe fourth and lait. 

I remain, dear Sir, 

Your's truly, 

Thomas Clarkson. 



THE END. 



PRINTED BY A. J. VALPY, 
BED LION COURT, fLBET STREET. 



k 



VALUABLE WORKS 

RECENTLY PUBLISHED BY 

MESSRS. COLBURN AND BENTLEY. 



In 2 ToU. 8f o. illastrated with Views of the City of Timbuctoo 
and its. Buildings, a Map of the Route, a Portrait of the 

Author, &c* &c. 308. 

TRAVELS TO TIMBUCTOO, through 

Central Aprica, and across the Great Desert lo 
Morocco : performed in the Yean 1824—1828. By RENE 
CAILLik 

In 2 vols, small 8vo. with Plates, 21s. 

TRAVELS IN KAMTSCHATKA, SIBE- 
RIA, AND CHINA. By PETER DOBELL. Esq. Coun- 
sellor to his Imperial Majesty the Emperor of Russia. 