 a limitation of place would also operate as a temptation? He could not conceive why the first limitation should act as a direct temptation, and the other in the inverse ratio. If either was to have any effect, both combined must have a greater, for it could not be supposed that both together should fail when one was irresistible. With respect to the limitation 620 of the time of service, there were many different opinions; and he should not venture to hazard any, though he could not but admit, that it was a subject which would be productive of many difficulties in the detail in the committee. Any body might see that a great variety of difficulties would occur. If the change were to be made in time of war, and the condition to be extended to all at present serving, would not the offer be a boon to one, whilst it would be a mischief or a punishment to another? But should they begin from the present moment, how were they to proceed? were the new levies to be in corporated with the old battalions? what a source of disquietude, heart burnings, and dissatisfaction? were they to be disposed of in separate battalions? then they would come to the present bill, and do that precisely which it professed.—He bad no hesitation in saying that the idea of a colonial army met his approbation, without exception even of the black corps. But any body who looked to the population of the colonies must perceive that it was impossible there to supply the army, and it would therefore be necessary to recruit in Europe. Mark the consequences of restricting the army from service in her colonies. Would the other powers of Europe follow the example? Supposing the army of St. Domingo to attack Jamaica, would it be wise to tie up the disposable force of this country in Europe, and suffer one of the most valuable of its possessions to be destroyed? As to the other parts of his right hon. friend's speech, without any intention of disrespect to him, he did not think them of much importance. Among the suggestions of his right hon. friend there were some, which among an enthusiastic and romantic people, might be very well received; but he would put it to the candour of his right hon. friend, whether if instead of the bill of last session it had been proposed by ministers, as an encouragement to enlisting, that soldiers, should have a box at the play, or serjeants should be allowed to shoot partridges, that right hon. gent, would have been inclined to treat the proposition as serious. If there was any thing like a contrary disposition on the part of ministers not to manifest a readiness to do every thing in their power for the national defence, or if there was any thing imminently dangerous in our situation, that called for the committee moved for by his right hon. 621 friend, then, indeed, there would be some I which we at present stood, and compared ground for acceding to it: but the case it with that of last year, to refrain from was quite otherwise. Perhaps it might be for the satisfaction of the house to slate a view of the whole military force of the country. The total of disposable force on the 1st of Jan. 1804, was 143,251; on the 1st of Jan. 1805, 154,660; the whole of our limited force on the former date, 27,890, on the latter, 20,747. Deducting the limited force, which was included in the former aggregates, the whole of the disposable force was, on the 1st of Jan. 1804, 115,000; on the 1st of Jan. 1805, 135,000, making an increase of disposable force of from 18,000 to 20,000 men. The quantity I procured by recruiting was from 24 to 26,000; and 15,000 since the operation of the present bill. The total of between 11 and 12,000 increase, is not only in the unlimited force, but in the destination of the army at home. This circumstance was sufficient shew the bill had not been idle and nugatory. Thus, 12,000 men were now ready to be ordered in any direction, in addition to the force provided; besides this, we had the essential improvement in the volunteers, which he could not agree to consider unconnected with the question on the extent of the military power of the country: their number now ascended to 300,000 men, who have stood the test of time, who have resisted the temptations to ease and indolence; and 160,000 of this vast body have been reported fit for service. He did not mean they were adequate to contend with the troops of Prussia or Austria, but that they were competent to the defence of such districts of the island as should be committed to their protection. Could we with such a force have any room for the gloomy representations frequently made? Could more be expected from the nature and extent of the population of the country? If we wish for a criterion by which to estimate the military force of the country, let us look to the state of the different powers on the continent, let us look particularly to France, which, with a population of 35 millions, had an army not exceeding at any time 5 or 600,000 men, while in G. Britain, which contained but 15 millions, the regular force amounted to three hundred thousand men, besides those to v whom the domestic defence was entrusted, as also 70,000 militia, and 300,000 volunteers. It was impossible for any men who fairly examined the situation in 622 which we at present stood, and compared it with that at last year, to refrain from allowing that it was greatly improved. Could such a man be found, he would ask him, was it nothing to have added, as we had clone, to the strength of those fleets whose peculiar province it was to protect us from the execution of the menaces of the invader? Was it nothing to have succeeded so completely in the blockade of the enemy's flotilla, that instead of venturing on the ocean to attack us, it was with difficulty that it could be slily moved along the coast from one part to another? What would the enemy have said, had we acted in the manner they hare done? Had we in the first instance, prepared an extensive armament for the express and avowed purpose of invading their shores, then allowed it to be insulted at least, if not injured, by the assaults of hostile squadrons, and concluded by sending a flag of truce to the very parties to whom we had denounced destruction. With what exultation would they have then exclaimed, "such were your threats, and such has been your execution!" With regard to many of the suggestions which his right hon. friend had thrown out relative to the improvement of the state of the army, he had only to lament, and this he did with the utmost sincerity, that he had not the advantage of official situation to put them into practice; he was convinced that government would hear with attention, and adopt with anxiety any of those suggestions, the propriety of which was obvious. He must repeat what be had said on the measure, which was the object of his right hon. friend's motion. The principle of that measure could not be said to have failed, for only the first part. of it had been put into execution, the last yet remained to be executed. The two parts were perfectly distinct; the on was comparatively torpid and insensible; the other active and vigorous. It would; be a strange, and surely a very contradictory mode of proving to the country the stability of our councils, to abandon a plan to which we had not yet given a fair trial; this would rather be an was nothing of fluctuation and uncertainty: If what he had asserted was tree, if there was nothing in the present situation of out affairs that of could justify in us either precipitation or despondency, but if, on the contray, the measure under consideration contained it the seeds of a permanent system, which 623 would ultimately put us in possession of a disposable force greater than any one we had yet had at our command, he then thought his right hon. friend had not made but a case sufficiently strong to induce the house to go into the committee lie required. 