

The hon. Baronet accordingly read the following letter:— Treasury Chambers, 24th March, 1827. Sir:—I am commanded by the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury to transmit to you the accompanying papers, being statements prepared by the Auditors of Colonial Expenditure, showing the Income and Expenditure of Ceylon, the Mauritius, the Cape of Good Hope, Trinidad and Malta, for periods of ten and more years for each of them respectively, preceding the latest date up to which the accounts are in the possession of the Auditors, and I am to request that you will lay the same before Lord Bathurst, and call the serious attention of his Lordship to the results which are exhibited by these papers. His Lordship will perceive that the collective expenditure of these several Colonies has so greatly exceeded the Colonial Revenues, applicable to the discharge of it, as to have constituted a deficiency, amounting altogether to 2,524,000l. according to the latest accounts under examination. Lord Bathurst will also observe, that according to the rate at which the income and expenditure of each of the Colonies were proceeding at those dates, the annual accruing deficiency could not be estimated at less than 200,000l. My Lords are aware that these observations do not apply to Malta or Trinidad in the same manner as to the other Colonies, although they are included in this account, and that the excess of expenditure at the former of these, was owing to a peculiar calamity, which may not recur. They also bear in mind that at the Cape, the excess of expenditure beyond the Revenue has been small in comparison with that of the Mauritius and Ceylon; but they have judged it most advisable to present a view of the whole together. They are well aware that the expenditure by which the deficiencies above stated have been created, was incurred for public services such as could not, consistently with a due regard to the interests, either of the Colonies, or of the empire at large, have been avoided, and they desire to be distinctly understood as not intending to convey any doubt upon that subject, or to impute to those under whose control and management the expenditure in those past years was directed, any want of due regard to public economy, when they state their decided opinion that some alteration is urgently required in the system under which the financial arrangements of the Colonies (not having legislatures) has hitherto been conducted. My Lords are confident that Lord Bathurst will not hesitate to concur with them, as to the necessity of some change in this respect, when they draw his attention to the manner in which the above deficiency has been gradually created, and principally provided for. It appears that of the above-mentioned sum of 2,524,000l. there has been furnished out of the public funds of the United 510 Kingdom, partly by bills upon this Board, by advances to the agents for the Colonies, and by the discharge of debts to the East India Company, about 2,435,000l. and that the remainder is still existing as a debt of the Colony, either in the shape of a paper circulation without funds for the discharge of it, or in some other form, in addition to all the debt of this description which existed at the commencement of the account. Of the expenditure thus defrayed, or remaining to be defrayed under the authority of this Board, I am to observe, that under the system hitherto pursued, the greater part has been incurred without any previous communication with my Lords; and that the Treasury has been uninformed, not only of the measures which have from time to time led to occasional and extraordinary expenses in these Colonies, but even of the state of their ordinary revenues and the permanent charges upon them. My Lords have therefore had no opportunity either of preparing for such expenses, as it might be indispensable to provide for by funds at home in aid of the revenues of the Colonies, or of suggesting, with respect to those services which might have been susceptible of reduction or postponement, such modifications as a due regard to other more pressing demands upon the general funds of the United Kingdom would have rendered expedient. Of the great inconveniences to which this imperfect administration of an important branch of the public expenditure is obviously liable, my Lords are well assured that Lord Bathurst will entertain the same opinion with themselves; and I am therefore to request that you will submit to his Lordship the desire of this Board, to receive as early as possible an estimate of the present and permanent annual revenue, and also of the present and prospective annual expenditure of each of the above-named Colonies, in such detail as may enable their Lordships to communicate fully with Lord Bathurst upon the subject, in order to determine in what manner, whether by diminution of expenditure or augmentation of the Colonial Revenue, if any such be practicable, or by the aid of additional funds under the authority of Parliament, if such should be indispensably necessary, a regular and sufficient provision may be made for the charges to be defrayed in each Colony, instead of throwing an excess of yearly expenditure unprovided for, according to the present practice, upon the annual grant for the extraordinaries of the army. I am to add, that the information which has been obtained from the Auditors of Colonial Accounts upon this subject, does not afford to my Lords the knowledge which they desire to have of the present and prospective state of the revenues and expenses of the several Colonies, inasmuch as that information relates only to periods already long passed, and it does not appear that the Auditors are competent to supply any other.—I am, &c. (Signed) "J. C. HERRIES. 511 From this letter, the hon. Baronet continued, it appeared, that nothing was known of the colonial expenditure; that even the auditors could give no account of it, and that the Treasury knew nothing about it. He believed that the vicious system described in that document had not been changed, and that no improvement had been made in it. A board under the Government, indeed, had been appointed to investigate these abuses; but three years had elapsed since that document was written, and the same abuses were continued. The House ought not, in his opinion, to vote one farthing, till the report of this Board of Commissioners was made, and till this most flagrant and most vicious system of the Executive Government was corrected. The House would not discharge its duty if it voted these sums till then. At least in future, an estimate of the expenses of the principal colonies ought regularly to be laid before the House every year, by the minister for the colonies, like the estimates for the other branches of the public expenditure. A budget for the colonies, with ways and means, ought annually to be submitted to the House; and if that were not done, the House would not be justified in continuing to vote money for the expenses of the Colonies.