

contended it was most convenient, on account of its proximity to the public offices.

§

complained of the unprotected stale of the records in Westminster Hall. He suggested that no time should be lost in their removal.

§

wished to inquire if any alterations were to be made in the entrance and interior of the courts of Westminster Hall, which, in their present state, were found to be extremely inconvenient. He had presented a petition on the subject, and was desirous of obtaining information as to the intentions of the Government concerning it.

said, he was extremely anxious to effect the removal of the records, and he was happy to tell the hon. Member who had asked the question, that the records of the Com- 518 mon Pleas would be very soon transferred to a house in Westminster belonging to the Government; and it would be his duty, as it was his disposition, to remove all the other records into some place of safety as soon as he possibly could, leaving it to be decided, on some future day, whether it would not be advisable to erect some building in which all of them might be deposited. He knew that there had been complaints made of want of room in the Courts of Westminster Hall, and he had received a memorial suggesting the propriety of making alterations upon a plan which the House had before condemned. That he did not consider it advisable to assent to; but he was, at the same time, most anxious to promote the object which the memorialists had in view; and to obtain for gentlemen connected with the law, that accommodation in the courts which they ought to have; but he was afraid that the space was too limited to allow of compliance with their wishes.

§

suggested to the right hon. Gentleman the propriety of providing some secure place also for the records preserved in Doctors' Commons, on which so much of the property of the country depends.

§ Vote agreed to.

§ 4,700l. was voted to defray the expenses of the Commissioners of the Holy-head and Howth Harbour Roads.

§ 10,000l. was voted to defray the expense of the new buildings in the British Museum, for the year 1830.

§ 30,500l. was proposed for the purpose of defraying the expense of all salaries and allowances of the Officers of the Houses of Lords and Commons, for the year 1830.

§

said, it would be extremely desirable that the House should have a detailed account of this Estimate, which seemed very large; and before the report was brought up he should endeavour to get some correct information laid before the House.

said, that the sum then moved for was absolutely necessary in addition to the fees received by the officers of both Houses. The little difference between this and former estimates on the same account, arose from a fluctuation in the amount of fees.

§ Vote agreed to; as was a vote of 17,000l. to defray the expenses of the Houses of Lords and Commons for the year 1830.

519

§ It was proposed that 24,000l. should be granted to his Majesty to make good the deficiency in the Fee Fund of the several public offices in the Treasury Department for the year 1830.