

wished to have the Estimate drawn up in a different form in future years. He did not object to the vote; but as the Estimate now stood it was impossible to know how the money was to be applied.

would have no objection to meet the wishes of he hon. Member, and in future would take care that the manner in which the different sums, composing the whole of this vote were appropriated, should be set forth.

§

said, it had been his intention to move that a reduction of one-tenth should be made in all salaries above 200l. a-year paid for the public service; he would not, however, bring the matter forward that Session, as he was not possessed of the necessary documents. He had no means of ascertaining the amount of money paid to the public servants, and he might, if he carried such a motion, be inflicting injury on the few without conferring benefit on the many. He would, therefore, abandon his design for the present; and in doing so begged to ask the right hon. Gentleman opposite if he would have any objection to furnish him with accounts, before the next Session, of the sums paid by the public for all officers and for all services above 200l. a-year.

said, that the Government had intimated its intention to him of opposing the motion which he proposed to bring forward to-morrow night; in which, if he succeeded, he could pledge himself to the hon. member for Dorsetshire that he would show him the amount of all the principal salaries. And this he knew would answer the hon. Member's purpose, who was as little disposed as himself to stoop to ignoble game, while flights of voracious birds of prey were gloating in the upper regions of the air. They would direct all their efforts against these, and urge them by every argument, ad invidiam and ad verecundiam, to adopt that course which had been pursued by only one officer then serving his Majesty. He meant the Duke of Northumberland, the Viceroy of Ireland [cries of "Lord Camden"]. Lord Camden had made the sacrifice of his 520 salary long ago—it was before the pressure of distress was so universally felt by the nation, and before an urgent cry for relief had been raised by the people in that House, through the voice of their representatives [cries of "Mr. Moore"]. He had forgotten Mr. Moore, whose conduct was certainly deserving of the highest praise; but thus it was, that the only instances of patriotism were to be found in the persons of one amongst the humblest and one amongst the most exalted of the public servants. He would accordingly, if the information he sought for were denied, call upon the House to declare whether it was a thing to be endured that they, the guardians of the public purse, should be left in ignorance as to the mode in which the public money was expended. He could assure the right hon. Gentleman that it was just as painful to him to put these interrogatories, as it was irksome for the right hon. Gentleman to reply to them; but he had a public duty to perform, and would not, consequently, hesitate to show how ignorant a country gentleman could be of the arcana of office by asking him to explain what the Fee Fund was, and what was the meaning of the several items he saw connected with it, under the title of Superannuations and Retired Allowances.