

said, his hon. friend must be aware that the answer to the document he had read had been moved for: and he was surprised that it was not yet laid on the Table of the House. When that answer was laid on the Table the two documents might be considered together; but it was hardly fair to discuss one without the other. He would only observe, that the Colonial Auditors were not appointed by the Colonial Office, but by the Lords of the Treasury. It was, however, of more importance to consider what ought to be, than what had been done, and though there were many official difficulties in the way of the proposition of his hon. friend, he agreed with him in thinking that a regular Estimate of Colonial expenditure ought annually to be submitted to Parliament.

said, as he was the author of the letter alluded to, he would say a few words, though he was convinced that it would be proper to postpone the discussion till the other document was laid on the Table. He would, in the first place, say, that the hon. member for Cumberland 512 was quite unwarranted in his assumption that no improvement had been made in the Colonial management since the date of the document he had quoted. He could assure the hon. Member that in this he was mistaken; and if the hon. Member had attended to the information laid before the Finance Committee, he would have found that the management of the Colonies was not so defective as he supposed. Respecting the auditors' ignorance to which the hon. Baronet alluded, that was merely an ignorance of the estimate of the expense in future, which the auditors could not know.

§

said, that the letter quoted was dated in April, 1828, and there had been certainly some accounts laid before the Finance Committee. He had urged the Government to have these accounts printed and laid before the House; and he had understood that it was to be done. He was surprised, indeed, that they had not already been laid on the Table; and he could only account for it by supposing that at the Colonial office little or nothing was done. Three weeks had elapsed since one letter was ordered, and it was not yet ready, which was a pretty good specimen of the negligence at that office. Till the accounts he had mentioned were laid on the Table, he, for one, should be unwilling to vote a shilling for the Colonies. The Report of the Commissioners ought, indeed, first to be laid on the Table before any money was voted. The Colonies were loaded with unnecessary officers, with large salaries; they were unable to support their own expenditure, and the country was accordingly called on to support their expensive establishments. He was afraid that Government was tardy in submitting the documents to the House because they would not justify its extravagant expenditure.

said, as he had not been a member of the Finance Committee, he could not judge of the improvement made in the management of the Colonies by the documents submitted to that Committee; but he saw before him the Chairman of that Committee, and he had lately given to the public, in an authentic form, the result of its labours. Within two months the judgment of that hon. Baronet was, that the Colonial accounts were in a state of unintelligible confusion. It was at that hon. Baronet's suggestion that he had taken the liberty of inquiring into the 513 matter. He would admit that he was in error if the right hon. Gentleman opposite, or any of the right hon. Gentlemen sitting near him, would state from any source the entire sum demanded from this country for the support of the Colonies. If they would tell him from the Miscellaneous Estimates, the Civil Contingencies, and the Army Extraordinaries—for under each of these heads there were charges for the Colonies—the amount of the expenditure, he would at once admit that the accounts were intelligible and that he was wrong.