

§

admitted that it would be very proper to have Colonial Estimates, both of the expenditure and the receipts of the Colonies; and he should have no objection to prepare such documents, if it could be accomplished in future, though he believed that there would be many difficulties in the way. With respect to the observation of the hon. member for Aberdeen concerning the documents submitted to the Finance Committee, it happened that those documents were very incorrect, and the remoteness of the Colonies had prevented him from obtaining the corrections necessary to make them fit to be submitted to the House. With regard to the letter which had been read, the other document connected with it was about to be laid on the Table, and then the two might be considered together.

wished to say a few words on the vote before the Committee. The Government desired to have a large Church establishment and extensive patronage, with Bishops, and fine churches; and in order to have these, it had been anxious to get rid of the Moravians, who were far better qualified to teach both the negroes and the whites of the West-Indies religion than the members of our Established Church. The Moravians were humble men, who lowered themselves to the humble intellect of the people they undertook to instruct. So long, however, as the House voted money, so long would there be Bishops, and churches to be paid for.

denied that the West-Indians had demanded the establishment of Bishops in the West-Indies, but he remembered that expressions reflecting on the religion of the West-Indians had been used in that House, and he remembered that a Church establishment had been described by several hon. Members as a desideratum in the Colonies, and that the West-Indians 514 had assented to the plan, though the proposition did not originate with that body. The West-Indians did not wish, and never had wished, to interfere with the Moravians, or to get rid of them; but they had wished to have proper spiritual guides. His hon. friend had spoken of palaces; but he believed the palaces built for the Bishops were only common houses. He wished that a Colonial budget should be annually submitted to the House, and it would then be seen that Jamaica cost this country very little. It defrayed all the expenses of its internal government, the salary of the Governor, and of all the public officers; and it defrayed the expense of a great portion of the King's troops, which were kept for the defence of that valuable colony. Other colonies in the West-Indies cost this country very small sums; and he believed if the 4½ A per cent duties were applied as they ought to be, those colonies would not put this country to one farthing expense. He was willing to unite himself to the hon. member for Cumberland in all his praiseworthy undertakings; but he ought to recollect that a large portion of the expense he had referred to in the letter he had quoted, arose from other colonies than those of the West-Indies. That letter related chiefly to the Cape of Good Hope, the Mauritius, and Ceylon.