

rose to ask, as he saw a sum of 508l. voted for the rent of a house for a Bishop of Barbadoes; whether that sum was for a second residence for the Bishop, as the House had just heard that a place had been built for that Ecclesiastic.

said, that this charge was for the rent of a house before the present one was built. It was a charge which would not be repeated in future.

§

wished to know, why the people of England should be obliged to pay for erecting palaces for the Bishops of the West-India islands? An end ought to be put to such extravagance. He should certainly oppose such votes. He wished to know why there was every year to be an additional expense under these heads, and he trusted the House would not sanction it by its vote.

said, that the Bishops had been appointed, with the approbation and wish of the House for the ecclesiastical government of the West Indies. At first they were obliged to hire 508 houses, and the rent of those houses was paid for by bills drawn on the Government, which were charged in the Army Extraordinaries. But it was desirable to relieve the country of that charge, and construct a residence for the Bishops. This had been done, and their houses were not, as the hon. Member said, palaces, but houses. If they were palaces, the Government deserved great credit for its economy in having built them for a sum of 4,000l. each. Now the Bishops had houses provided for them, the country would not be called on to incur a similar expense again. The Parliament had given its assent to the appointment of the Bishops; it had thought a Church Establishment in the West Indies necessary, and houses for the Bishops were as necessary as churches.

was surprised at the notice that was now taken of the expenditure on this subject. The building of churches in the West Indies, and the sending out of Bishops was an arrangement called for by the West Indians themselves, as well as the people of this country. If the colonists would undertake to be at all the expense of subsequently supporting these establishments, they were told the Government would consent to the appointment. The proposition had come from the West Indians, and had met with the support of Parliament. It was thought to be of great importance, and the Government was called on to give it its support.

said, the right hon. Gentleman (Mr. W. Horton) would confer a great favour on himself and other Members, if he would point out to them where they could find an authentic account of the Colonial expenditure. He confessed that he had sought after this with some diligence, but he had been unable to discover any correct source whence he could learn what was the whole amount of our Colonial expenditure. His right hon. friend would not be surprised at this, when he reminded him of a document recently published—an authentic document, signed by the present Master of the Mint. He was not aware that any change had taken place in the Colonial management since that letter was written. He would, with permission of the House, read the letter, which had been printed at his request. It was a letter from the present Master of the Mint, who was then Secretary of the 509 Treasury, to his right hon. friend, who was then Under-Secretary of the Colonies.