

complained, that the hon. Baronet, notwithstanding all his professions, did not act with that frankness towards his political opponents for which he was disposed to take credit. The hon. Baronet, in saying that Government had declared its intention of opposing his motion, had only given half the statement that was made to him, because it was added, that the hon. member for Lincoln had moved for a series of Returns so ample that they would embrace all the hon. Baronet proposed, and, consequently, that Government would find it necessary to oppose the granting of any partial Returns. He therefore denied any wish to exclude the House from information on the subject of those salaries. He also thought it extremely hard that he, who honestly, though perhaps inefficiently, discharged his duties in an office for which he received that remuneration bestowed on his predecessors, had been designated as a bird of prey, rather than the hon. Baronet, who enjoyed the income derived from the territorial possessions of his ancestors. 521 From what vocabulary was it that the hon. Baronet derived such phrases; or, why was it that he was to be subjected to them in a society of Gentlemen? Notwithstanding what had fallen from the hon. Baronet, he should be always happy to give him all the information in his power: but as for the Fee Fund, it had been, on several occasions, sufficiently explained.

admitted, that he had, when speaking on this subject, employed a metaphor which had drawn an expression of feeling from the right hon. Gentleman that he was very sorry to observe. He was bound to apologise for the metaphor, which he could assure the right hon. Gentleman he had not meant to be personal in any manner, or offensive to him, when he indulged in it. The right hon. Gentleman had certainly soared into the higher regions with much industry, but without any stain whatever on his character. Having thus apologised for the form of the expression, he must, with every possible deference to the right hon. Gentleman, adhere to its spirit, and must contend that it was unworthy of the Government to cut down the salaries of inferior clerks, while the great officers of the State, possessed of private fortunes, wealthy connections, and ten thousand other advantages which these clerks did not enjoy, were allowed to remain with undiminished salaries. He begged to state now, that he should submit a motion on this subject to-morrow; and he wished to observe, that the motion of the hon. member for Lincoln, which went to obtain a Return of the salaries of all the officers of the Government, from the highest to those who had only 200l. a year, would by no means meet the object he had in view, which was to direct attention particularly to the salaries enjoyed by the members of the Privy Council.

§

also thought, that the two motions would not interfere with each other, and he should certainly support that of the hon. member for Cumberland, believing that it would not render his own unnecessary.