

§

wished to recall the Committee to the consideration of the vote before it, and to the whole subject of which it was a part. The vote was to make good the deficiency in the Fee Fund, part of that going to pay the public servants of the Treasury, who derived their emoluments from no less than fifteen dif- 522 ferent sources. The whole estimate for the services of the Treasury in 1797 was about 44,000l., but now it amounted to 87,000l. He could not conceive what reason there was for so considerable a difference; particularly as the accounts were now more simplified than they were then, and the whole business better arranged. In 1827 the Fee Fund was 294,000l., of which 130,000l. only was appropriated by Act of Parliament, and out of which 93,000l. was paid into the Exchequer as fees on the issue and receipt of our own money. He thought that was most wasteful extravagance. We were paying money twice over, because the Treasury would not simplify the accounts. Promises to do that had been made year after year, which had never been fulfilled, and he did not know whether the solemn pledge given this year would not also be violated. He wished to ask how it was that Mr. Stewart, the present Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, received the same salary as his predecessor, when the Treasury Minute of 1821 directed its reduction on the next vacancy from 2,500l. a year to 2,000l. a year?

said, that Mr. Stewart's predecessor had other allowances which the present possessor of the office did not enjoy. At the same time his labours were so great, that they were not more than paid by 2,500l. a year.

§

replied, that Mr. Hill, the former holder of the office, had been a man of long experience in business, and yet the same salary was now given to the present officer, perhaps because he was a military man. If Treasury Minutes were to be so violated, he did not see of what use they were.

observed, that the salary was not kept up to 2,500l. a year in favour of any particular individual. The hon. member for Cricklade, who sat immediately under the hon. member for Montrose, had suggested the observation as to Colonel Stewart having been a military man. It was true he had been so, and had served with distinguished merit in the Rifle Brigade, during the Peninsular War; but it was not on his military services that his claim to his present salary had been founded. After the peace, Colonel Stewart had entered the Civil service, and, as Comptroller of the Army-accounts, had laboured most effectually for the public advantage. His 523 exertions had recommended him to the post of a Commissioner of the Excise in Ireland, when preparations were making to consolidate the different Boards. In that office he saved a considerable sum of money to the public, by the investigations he instituted and the control he exercised over the subordinate officers of his department. On the first vacancy of a Chairmanship here, Lord Liverpool, who approved most highly of his services, appointed him Chairman to the Board of Stamps; and from a sense of his zeal and ability in the public service, he himself had recommended Mr. Stewart to the Duke of Wellington, who certainly had not selected him on account of his being a military man.