

Orga.n ization Organization of the Navy The highest form of operational organization in the Navy was the fleet. Under normal circumstances, a fleet was formed into a single line before action commenced, and in some instances broke apart in the course of the fighting into duels between individual ships. For this reason a subordinate admiral, whether in command of a division or a squadron, did not playa vital role in combat. He was advised by Admiralty instructions to 'be particularly attentive in observing that a ship which carries his flag, and all the squadrons and divisions under his orders, preserve very correctly their station in whatever line or order of sailing the fleet may be formed'. The manner in which an admiral divided his fleet lay entirely at his own discretion, though he generally apportioned at least ten of his ships of the line to a squadron. These could then be sub-divided into divisions while at sea or to function in this form in battle. Squadrons were approximately of equal strength, with those at Trafalgar being 13 and 14 ships, respectively. In 1807, Admiral Gambier had three equal squadrons of ten ships, with each squadron divided into two divisions, under a rear-admiral or commodore. While cruising, fleets did not usually organize themselves according to the line of battle that they assumed when in the presence of the enemy. They might cruise in two parallel lines of approximately equal strength, a mile or more apart, with each line's vessels sailing bow to stern with two or three cables (a cable being 100 fathoms, or 200 yards) between them, or in line abreast, with ships sailing on parallel courses. In order to maintain communications between the various divisions, frigates were positioned at various points around the fleet and lookouts kept aloft at their stations. The vast majority of ships in the Royal Navy were assigned to one of the main fleets, which were distributed around the world. Some vessels served exclusively on convoy duty, while others, on individual missions from the Admiralty, were not attached to a particular fleet. Each fleet was led by a commander-in-chiefalways a very senior admiral. While some squadrons were formed for specific purposes and often bore the names of their commanders, fleets were normally

The primary function of the sailing warship, which was defined by the number of guns she carried, was to engage the enemy. Guns, today commonly referred to as 'cannon' but more correctly as 'great' or 'long' guns, were simply weapons consisting of an iron tube, without rifling, mounted on a heavy carriage with four small wooden wheels on fixed axles. A gunner could raise or lower the elevation of his weapon by + 10 degrees or -5 degrees by inserting or removing a quoin, or wooden wedge. The carriage itself could be aimed to a limited extent by pulling on the gun tackles - a series of ropes fastened to the sides of the carriage and secured to the deck. Handspikes and crowbars were also employed in manhandling the gun into the desired position. Every gun was commanded by a 'gun captain' whose men varied in number according to the size of the gun. If a ship were firing from one side alone, the crew from the unengaged side would assist the men on the opposite side of the gun deck, so increasing the rapidity of fire. (Royal Naval Museum)