

In 1795 the Channel Fleet consisted of 26 ships of the line, plus 17 frigates. In 1800 it had three first rates, 11 second rates and 33 other ships of the line. With its frigates and other vessels it numbered in total 72 ships and smaller craft. In 1805 it numbered 35 ships of the line and 16 frigates, but by 1812 it was down to just 15 ships of the line, 14 frigates and ten other smaller vessels. Since the Brest Fleet was not present at Trafalgar it was never destroyed, and hence the strength of the Channel Fleet necessarily remained high. It fought one large action, at the First of June 1794, but notwithstanding French losses of six ships the remainder of the opposing fleet reached Brest and thereafter had to be continuously watched.

The Irish Squadron Based principally at Cork, in southern Ireland, the Irish Squadron existed to protect trade moving westwards across the Atlantic, as well as to defend Ireland from invasion, though its smaller numbers obliged it to depend on assistance from the Channel Fleet as circumstances required. In 1797 the squadron had 16 ships, only one of which was a line of battle ship, the others being frigates and sloops. This force was reduced two years later to 12 ships. In 1805 it had 23 ships, of which 12 were frigates and eight were sloops. In 1812, with naval supremacy achieved, the Irish Squadron consisted of only 13 ships, with no complement of line of battle ships. North Sea Fleet The second most important major home command was the North Sea Fleet, whose name is slightly misleading since part of its area of responsibility extended into the Channel as far as the Dutch and Belgian coasts. In 1797 it numbered 56 ships, including 20 of the line. It was with this fleet that Admiral Duncan fought and won the battle of Camperdown in that year. Attached to the North Sea Fleet was the Downs Squadron, which protected the entrance to the Channel. When war began in 1803 this squadron and others were combined into a single fleet, which two years later, in the year of Trafalgar, reached a strength of 80 ships, including 11 of the line and 20 frigates, the whole divided into five squadrons, with responsibilities for blockading the French port of Boulogne, and the Texel and the ScheIdt, the main entrances to the Dutch ports. The strength of the fleet fluctuated greatly over the years, with 34 ships in the Downs Squadron in 1807, of which one was a ship of the line. Eight vessels were based at Yarmouth, but none larger than a sloop; seven small vessels hailed from Sheerness; and 15 from Leith. In 1812, the Downs Squadron had 31 ships, but none of the line or frigates. At Yarmouth there were eight

As in the British Army, wh~re a certain flexibility enabled the number of brigades composing a division to vary according to circumstances, the same principle applied in the Royal Navy, in which a fleet could consist of a fluctuating number of vessels depending on the resources available, the nature of the task to be fulfilled, detachments made for auxiliary operations or the acquisition of supplies, and other factors. Nor did a fleet necessarily operate as single, consolidated force. The vast expanse patrolled by the Channel Fleet required its commander to allocate a proportion of his vessels to blockade duty while the bulk of his ships of the line remained either in port or at sea, ready to confront a rival fleet when required. Similarly, whereas at Trafalgar Nelson assembled virtually the whole of the Mediterranean Fleet, his force at the Nile seven years earlier had comprised only a squadron from the same fleet (then under St Vincent), though naval historiography, both contemporary and modern, often refers to his 'fleet'.