

6

•

•

Combat mission The roles performed by the Royal Navy were manifold, with its primary function being the defence of the United Kingdom from invasion. It was also required to blockade enemy fleets in port so as to leave the initiative at sea in British hands. By confining the enemy's principal warships to their berths, the Navy was free to harass enemy shipping and enable the Army to conquer overseas possessions, however far flung they might be. The Royal Navy was also responsible for protecting British merchant vessels plying the seas to and from the Continent, across the Atlantic to America, Canada and the West Indies, in and out of the Mediterranean as far as the Levant, and around the Cape of Good Hope to India and the East Indies. In addition, the Navy performed the general task of maintaining a permanent presence at sea, cruising for the purpose of hindering the movements of enemy warships and merchant vessels. The Navy also supported the operations of the Army, whether it was conducting short-term operations, as in the West Indies where ships were required to transport troops for the seizure of particular islands, or where fighting took place over an extended period, as during the Peninsular War (1808-14) when the Navy maintained communication and supply routes between Britain and Wellington's Army in Spain and Portugal. Finally, the Navy was expected to bring the enemy's main fleet to battle and there, if possible, to destroy it. Defending the coast of southern England entailed constant patrolling, in conjunction with a vigilant watch over the Channel ports, particularly Brest. So long as the enemy's main fleets could be bottled up in port their location

The battle of the Nile, 1-2 August 1798. By destroying the French fleet in Aboukir Bay, Nelson not only isolated - and thus neutralized Bonaparte's Army in Egypt, but re-established the naval presence in the Mediterranean that Britain had lost in 1796 as a result of the Franco-Spanish alliance of that year. (Philip Haythornthwaite)

7

The West Indies in 1790 Spanish possessions British possessions French possessions BERMUDA

~) GRAND BAHAMA .".,.,..

BAHAMAS "')

• British naval bases

~. ',\ ~

,-

Dutch possessions Danish possessions

_

..

100 I

200

VIRGIN ISLANDS

ST CROIX ST KIDS

I

tDOMINICA MARTINIQUE

ST LUCIA

SEA

0 (British base 1794-1802)

ST VINCENT CURACAO (British base from 1807)

400km

ANGUILLA ST MARTIN AND ST EUSTATIUS BARBUDA ANTIGUA .GUADELOUPE

NEVIS MONTSERRAT

CAR/BBEAN

300 mi

i

200

BARBADOS (British base from 1806)

GRENADA

~

SPANISH AMERICA

r-·_·...·,; \.....,GUIANA ._)

\ The seizure of the French sugar islands in the Caribbean played a fundamental part in British naval strategy. Practically every French-held island in the Caribbean was captured by forces conveyed by the Royal Navy, only to be restored to France at the Peace of Amiens in 1802. When war was renewed the following year, a series of British expeditions retook the islands, denying France vital raw materials and the considerable revenue generated by her formerly lucrative West Indian trade.