

HMS Shannon captures USS Chesapeake, I June 1813, in one of the most celebrated frigate actions of the War of 1812. In a mere matter of minutes, Captain Philip Broke of the Shannon systematically pummelled his adversary's port side with accurate and highly destructive fire, killing the quartermasters, disabling the wheel and forcing Chesapeake to luff up out of control.Already seriously wounded in the opening salvo, James Lawrence, the American captain, was struck again, and while lying in the cockpit to receive medical care issued his famous order, 'Don't give up the ship!' But it was to no avail: the Shannon raked the stricken vessel, and when exploding ammunition cleared away those standing on Chesapeake's quarterdeck, Broke personally led a boarding party and seized the ship after a brief, though bloody hand-to-hand encounter in which Broke was clubbed by a musket butt and received a serious blow from a cutlass. (Stratford Archive)

9

Boarding action. Although such attacks often took place when two ships stood abreast, often secured together by hooks or chains, they could also involve ships' boats, as depicted here. A midshipman, dressed in black coat and round hat, urges both sailors and marines forward into the ferocity of handto-hand combat. Boats, which could be rowed or sailed, were stored on beams in the ship's waist and hoisted by tackles from the yards. In addition to boarding actions, boats served numerous other purposes, such as carrying supplies, turning a ship under windless conditions, performing cutting-out expeditions, providing communication with other vessels, and landing sailors and marines. (Angus Konstam)

10

course, had to be replaced, and could result from a combination of factors: combat deaths and injury, disease, desertion and injuries sustained in the ordinary course of what was a hazardous duty even without an enemy in sight. The number of volunteers was never sufficient for the nation's needs because conditions aboard ship were so poor, with considerable periods spent at sea, dreadful food, harsh discipline and low pay. A solution was found in the practice of impressment, whereby the state maintained the right to seize men for service as the need arose. Even contemporaries regarded this legacy of medieval times as an assault on the liberties of free men - not to mention an inefficient method of raising crews but as Parliament refused to introduce conscription either in the Army or the Navy, the practice was regularly and shamelessly employed. Men in port towns were the most vulnerable to impressment, for they were the most likely to have served at sea, usually aboard merchant vessels or as discharged sailors from the Navy. Some men were exempt: men of sufficient means, Le. 'gentlemen', seamen already serving in the Royal Navy, fishermen, tradesmen, apprentices, those under 18 or over 55, and a few other categories of men. Anyone else who appeared reasonably fit could potentially fall prey to a press gang, a party of ruffians assembled by a lieutenant, who proceeded to collar those who looked of some use aboard ship. Not only were men taken on the streets, but merchant ships were often stopped as they returned to home waters and stripped of their best sailors. Men were often offered the chance to 'volunteer' so that they could claim the bounty (this varied throughout the wars from between £1 lOs and £10) offered to those who willingly enlisted, and thus it is difficult to determine precisely how many men joined the Navy as genuine volunteers. Such men may have accounted for as little as a quarter of a ship's company.