

8

was, self-evidently, known (whereas, of course, when at sea they could easily elude detection), even if maintaining them in place could not be absolutely assured. Like those on blockade duty, ships assigned to convoy merchant vessels often remained at sea for many months, particularly those assigned to protect trade to and from India, to which a return journey took in the order of six months. Even to North America the journey lasted four to six weeks depending on the winds and current. When conveying troops for operations overseas, the Navy cleared the path of enemy vessels and protected the transports carrying the infantry, cavalry and artillery, which necessarily composed the expeditionary force. The ultimate aim of the Navy was, however, to seek out the main enemy battle fleet and destroy it, an objective effected only gradually as a result of the six most decisive battles of the period: First of June (1794), St Vincent (1797), Camperdown (1797), Nile (1798), Copenhagen (1801) and Trafalgar (1805). In all but two of these cases (Nile and Copenhagen) the enemy fleet was caught in the open sea and defeated through superior tactics, gunnery and ship handling. At the Nile and at Copenhagen, the British attacked while the French and Danes, respectively, were at anchor and confident of their apparently unassailable position. Yet again, superior British training, discipline and firepower proved more than a match for their adversaries. In the case of Trafalgar, the defeat inflicted on the combined Franco-Spanish fleet proved so crippling that it prevented the French from ever again seriously

challenging British naval supremacy, and constituted such a mortal blow to Spanish maritime power as to bring a definitive end to her position as a great naval power - a process which had begun as long ago as the defeat of the Armada in 1588.

Recruitment and the press The younger sons of the middle class - as opposed to the aristocracy, which preferred the Army since only there could wealth secure an instant commission - entered the Navy as aspiring officers, and often did so from a young age. A boy of 12, for instance, might begin in the capacity of a captain's servant, which only meant that he was in effect a trainee and not an actual servant. After a few years at sea he could become a midshipman, a type of noncommissioned officer immediately below the rank of lieutenant. A few men spent time at the Royal Naval Academy, Portsmouth, but most young officers received their education and training aboard ship under the tutelage of the ship's schoolmaster or chaplain, who guided them in mathematics, navigation and other subjects. Once he reached the age of 20 (and the required six years' service at sea), a midshipman took the lieutenant's examination, the passing of which entitled him to that commissioned rank and enabled him thereafter to work his way up the ladder of promotion. While this could be an extremely slow process, in wartime it was not necessarily so, owing to deaths in combat and, above all, from sickness and disease. One could also achieve promotion through patronage - what contemporaries called 'interest'. Since, in marked contrast to the Army, a commission could not be purchased nor promotion secured by financial means, making the best use of one's personal connections was the next best option. In theory the Navy, like the Army, was a volunteer force, but with the Navy's worldwide commitments always increasing and its ship-building programme seemingly perpetual, Britain was chronically short of men, with only 65,000 men available in 1794, gradually rising to 140,000 men in 1815. Losses, of