

The battle of Trafalgar, a victory so comprehensive as to confirm British naval supremacy for the next hundred years. (Philip Haythornthwaite)

26

Admiral Those in command at the highest level, in the name of the Admiralty, were the admirals, who led squadrons of approximately ten or more ships, or two or three squadrons, which composed a fleet. These men, all with years of practical experience dating back to the time they joined the Navy as midshipmen, were promoted automatically by seniority from the rank of captain. By the time they reached this rank they had demonstrated thoroughly their abilities at seamanship and command. They were expected to have a good grasp of strategy and be relied upon to execute the Admiralty's orders with steadfastness and

intelligence, since poor communication and great distances would often require an admiral to use considerable discretion in the interpretation of his orders. The members of the Admiralty generally knew admirals personally, and therefore were confident in entrusting them with direct responsibility over large numbers of ships and men. Not all admirals were suited to fleet command. Some performed administrative tasks ashore, some commanded shore establishments, and others governed British colonies. Admirals could retain their positions and rank for life, and thus they could be quite old and inefficient. Some took voluntary retirement on a sizeable pension; others worked until infirmity or death. There was no shortage of men from which to choose admirals, and by 1807 there were over 150 of them, often known as flag officers. Unsurprisingly, an admiral in charge of a fleet (normally comprising at least 20 ships of the line, plus ancillary vessels, especially frigates) had myriad responsibilities, as shown by Keith's orders of 1799, which included 15 clauses. He was instructed: To correspond with the governors of Gibraltar and Minorca, and all British consuls in the Mediterranean; To give every assistance to the governor of Gibraltar; To appoint such of His Majesty's ships and vessels under your command to convoy the homeward bound trade, as are the least fit to remain abroad, as you shall judge sufficient for their protection; To detain and keep under his command any ships sent out to him, except storeships, which were to be sent back when unloaded; To send surgeon's mates to help in Gibraltar hospital if needed; To have his ships apply for provisions at Gibraltar; To notify the Admiralty of any store and provisions lacking; If purchasing any ships and vessels, to get Admiralty permission, and to have them surveyed by the commissioners at Gibraltar; To conform to the established rules and customs of the navy; Not to appoint any victualling officers on shore, but to apply to the Admiralty for permission;

The battle of San Domingo, 6 February 1806. Fought off the east end of the island of Hispaniola, in the West Indies, where a squadron under Vice-Admiral Sir John Duckworth defeated his French counterpart,Admiral Leissegues, whose vessel was forced ashore. As the British commander later reported to the Admiralty: 'the French admiral, much shattered and completely beaten, hauled direct for the land, and, not being a mile off, at 20 minutes before noon ran on shore, his foremast then only standing, which fell directly on her striking.' (Stratford Archive)