

Sailors floating on debris. Contrary to popular belief, ships rarely sank in battle; storms and shoals were the principal culprits. When a ship did sink, panic normally ensued, as one sailor described: 'All hands were now struck with consternation and dismay, and everything was enveloped in uncertainty and gloom. The officers, hoarse by so much exertion of voice, issued their orders hesitatingly, and in vain. Subordination, the first and most important branch in naval discipline, seemed for the time being suspended in every man ... In vain did the captain call out for all hands to remain on board till day break, when all would be saved; everyone acted to the best of his own judgement.' (Philip Haythornthwaite)

Idlers Those men who were not a part of one of the watches were known as idlers, the name given to those whose services were needed on a constant basis during the day, and therefore were not expected to keep any of the night watches, unless of course all hands were summoned on deck at night. Idlers constituted about 7 per cent of the crew on a first rate and about 10 per cent on a sixth rate. Idlers included the master at arms and the various corporals, the armourer, sailmaker, cooper and the mates working along with them, the yeoman of the boatswain's, carpenter's and gunner's store rooms. Other idlers included the cook and his assistants, butchers, hairdressers, barbers, tailors, pursers, poulterers, the first lieutenant's secretary, the purser's steward and various officers' servants (not domestic servants - though they did perform menial services from time to time - but rather young officer hopefuls). Some of the marines would fall under the category of idler, as well, plus tailors, shoemakers, painters and bakers. Topmen Apart from the idlers, the rest of the crew were assigned part of the ship for which they were responsible, a designation that gave rise to nicknames which reflected the area in which they carried out their tasks. Thus, the topmen, the most skilled seamen, worked aloft in the masts and amongst the rigging. Ships of the line had three types of topmen, one each for the fore (forwardmost), main (middle) and mizzen (rearmost) masts. Aboard smaller ships, the mizzentopmen formed part of the afterguard, which will be described later. The topmen, maintopmen, foretopmen and mizzentopmen had to be extremely fit and agile, for they had to perform work in the highest masts, sometimes in the face of high winds and rain and a rolling ship. Their numbers varied, but, for instance, aboard the San Domingo, a 74, there were 2S foretopmen, 27 maintopmen and 2S mizzentopmen in each watch. Each group was led by a petty officer, known as the captain of the foretop, mizzentop or maintop, as appropriate. Forecastle men Owing to their specialist abilities and knowledge, the topmen enjoyed a virtual monopoly on work aloft, with the remainder of the crew rarely permitted (or indeed able) to go into the rigging. The forecastle men worked towards the front