

Officers Midshipman Midshipmen were usually volunteers, aged between 14 and 18, eager to be commissioned as lieutenants - the first rung on the ladder of promotion in naval service. Some, however, were men promoted from the lower deck, such that midshipmen could be considerably older - up to perhaps 40 - having failed to pass the exam for lieutenant. Once aged 14 or older, a midshipman held the same rank as a petty officer, while younger midshipmen held the equivalent rank of an able seaman. Midshipmen oversaw the work performed by most of the crew of lesser rank, and kept the watch system, whether two or three, functioning on time. The senior midshipman of the watch stood on the quarterdeck, the second on the forecastle, and the third abaft the mizzen mast. Others, of less experience, answered to their superiors and carried out all manner of tasks such as taking and recording soundings, notifying the officer of the watch of anything of note, and marking the log slate. Using sextants or quadrants, midshipmen would also record the ship's position at noon, being careful to take this and other pertinent information down in their journals, which the captain would later inspect. Midshipmen oversaw signalling, commanded the boats and worked aloft, situating themselves, according to directions from a lieutenant, in one of the mast tops, where they supervised the furling and reefing of sails. Each of the ship's divisions was assigned a midshipman who was responsible for numerous tasks, such as ensuring that the men had clean clothing, that the ill were accounted for on the sick list and reported to the sick bay, and that hammocks were stowed after use. Midshipmen could inflict minor punishments on seamen, usually in the form of blows delivered by a knotted rope. Sailors with years of experience behind them, and sometimes considerably older than a midshipman, had no option but to endure the reprimands and punishments of mere teenagers.

Organization of ship's officers

A ship contained four types of officers, the most senior being commissioned officers - the captain and his lieutenants - who were appointed by the Admiralty, with midshipmen training to become lieutenants. Warrant officers were next in importance, and consisted of the master, who was responsible for the navigation of the ship, the chaplain, who performed church services, the purser, who stocked, supplied and managed the ship's stores, and the surgeon, who served as a physician as well as a surgeon proper. Standing officers so-called because they remained with their ship even when it was de-commissioned - consisted of the boatswain, who supervised all the work conducted above decks, the gunner, who looked after the ship's armament on a day-to-day basis and managed the guns during battle, and the carpenter, who cared for the yards, masts, hull and wooden fittings. Last came petty officers, consisting of men with various specialized skills.

Commissioned officers

Captain

Standing officers (not of wardroom rank)