

21

of the ship, known as the forecastle (pronounced 'foc-sul'), and handled, amongst other equipment, the anchors. They were often the oldest and heaviest sailors, since they were depended upon for both skill and strength, not dexterity; nor were they required to act with particular swiftness, like those in the tops. A 36-gun frigate contained about 20 forecastle men, all but perhaps two of whom were petty officers or able seamen, led by a captain of the forecastle for each watch.

Heaving the line, one of the innumerable tasks performed by sailors in the operation of a ship. Weighing anchor, for instance, required the combined strength of much of a ship's company, not only to turn the capstan which raised the anchor (of which ships of the line carried several), but to coil the massive cables as they were hoisted aboard. At the same time, much of the remaining crew would be busy setting sail and thereafter make more, or shorten, sail depending on weather conditions and the captain's instructions. (Stratford Archive)

Afterguard and waisters The afterguard, which worked on the quarterdeck and poop, was composed of men who almost never went aloft, except perhaps to help furl the mainsail (pronounced 'mainsul'), and were effectively used for their brute strength, such as for pulling and hauling. Aboard a 36-gun frigate there were about 28 such men, perhaps half a dozen being able seamen, which is to say men possessing more skills than ordinary seamen. The waisters possessed the fewest skills of the men on deck, being composed of the least useful landsmen, whom some of the crew regarded as less than true sailors. Waisters performed the least interesting and most onerous work on the main, or gun, deck and sometimes assisted with the lines and ropes. A 74-gun ship might contain about 30 waisters in each watch. These six parts of the ship (three types of topmen, forecastle men, afterguard and waisters), accounted for about half the ship's company, the remainder being officers, marines, boys and servants. Divisions Large and medium-sized ships were also organized into divisions to enable the officers to administer the ship's company along logical administrative and social lines, as opposed to the system previously described, which concerned their duties only. According to the Admiralty Regulations and Instructions, the captain, aided by his officers, was to: Divide the ship's company, exclusive of the marines, into as many divisions as there are lieutenants allowed to the ship; the divisions are to be equal in number to each other, and the men are to be taken equally from the different stations in which they are watched. A lieutenant is to command each division; he is to have under his orders as many master's mates and midshipmen as the number on board, being equally divided, will admit; he is to sub-divide his division into as many sub-divisions as there are mates and midshipmen fit to command under his orders.

22

The division enabled the captain and his officers to monitor the health and welfare of the ship's company. Proper sanitation aboard the ship was essential in order to ward off sickness and disease, and thus the officers inspected the clothing and bedding of their division, and were responsible for seeing that the men did not swear or get drunk - no simple task. Petty officers and midshipmen kept lists of the men for whom they were responsible within a given division, each list indicating every sailor's duty and the number of his hammock. When in port, those in charge of a division mustered their men each evening, and conducted inspections for health and cleanliness every Sunday morning.