

Boarding. In the frenzy of combat firearms could not be reloaded hence the preference amongst most seamen for edged weapons. The attackers (right), largely armed with cutlasses - apart from the tomahawk-wielding sailor in the foreground - are led by an officer, identifiable by his bicorn hat worn 'fore-and-aft'; that is, with the peaks to front and rear, as opposed to 'amidships', or side-to-side. The defenders (left) favour the pike which, while often effective for repelling boarders, proved a liability if an assailant managed to parry a thrust and skirt past the point of the weapon. (Royal Naval Museum)

20

East Indies and the Cape Ships assigned to these stations carried out raids in the East Indies and protected merchantmen in convoys bound for Europe. The East India Squadron in particular mostly protected trade originating from India. In the first year of the war it numbered 13 ships, including five third rates. By 1797 it had 32 ships, including ten of the line, 17 frigates and four sloops. Two years later this number had declined to 17, rising again to 23, including 17 of the line, by 1803. In 1805 it numbered 29 ships, including eight of the line. In 1812 the fleet was 24 ships strong, including one of the line.

Organization of the crew No vessel could operate properly without an adequate system for the organization of its crew. Ships often carried considerable numbers of men, who could not be expected to perform usefully as a single entity. A first rate, for instance, contained over 800 men, and the larger frigates over 300, with some proportion being unwilling occupants, while others were unable to read, disaffected or lazy. There were also some affected by illness, tiredness or drunkenness, or who harboured grievances of one sort or another. In the face of all these obstacles, the ship, in all its complexity as something of a small floating village, had to be managed. As the same crew might remain aboard the same vessel - in extremely cramped conditions - year after year, with consequently little in the way of new social contacts, an exceptional degree of discipline and intelligent organization was required to keep the ship running efficiently. The crew was divided into groups and assigned specific tasks, often several at a time depending on the mission of the ship at any given time. A sailor could be assigned to a specific part of the rigging, serve a particular gun during battle, or work the pumps if necessary. When the ship docked or disembarked, he might play some other role, and even this might change - for instance to duties connected with his mess at mealtimes - depending on which watch it happened to be. Whatever his responsibilities, usually assigned to him by the first lieutenant who first considered the man's aptitude and fitness for the job and these could be a dozen or two - a seaman was expected to perform them quickly and efficiently. It was the first lieutenant's responsibility to ensure that enough men were on duty at any given time so that the ship was safe and functioning well. He normally divided the crew, therefore, into two or three watches. The majority of ships used the two-watch system, which resulted in nearly every man belonging to one or the other, in nearly equal numbers, with the watches known as larboard and starboard. If both watches were on deck, those men assigned to the larboard watch might be responsible for the ropes and line of their side of the ship (the left-hand side as one faces the bow), while those of the starboard watch manned the other side.