

greater significance - Cape St Vincent in 1797, the Nile in 1798 and Trafalgar in 1805. Like the other geographical commands, the fleet designated for service in the Mediterranean did not always confine itself to what ought to have been a clearly defined area. Thus, St Vincent and Trafalgar were fought west of Gibraltar; in the latter case Nelson even chased Admiral Villeneuve across the Atlantic before following him back to European waters. The Mediterranean Fleet varied in strength as circumstances required. In 1795 it had 31 ships, including five first and second rates, 11 third rates, and 11 fifth and sixth rates. In 1797 it surpassed even the strength of the Channel Fleet, with 62 ships, including 23 of the line, 24 frigates and ten sloops. By 1812 - years after the decisive victory at Trafalgar - it was even larger, with 90 ships, consisting of 29 of the line, the same number of frigates, and 26 sloops. The West Indies Whereas during the American Revolutionary War the West Indies had been a very active theatre of naval operations, particularly in the later stages of the conflict, this was not so during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, when the French did not maintain a fleet there, particularly after the fall of Martinique. The British naval forces in the Caribbean were divided into two commands, one for Jamaica and the other for the Leeward Islands. The former was based at Port Royal. Its principal function was to combat privateers and provide convoy service in the western Caribbean. When the war began in 1793, the Jamaica Squadron consisted of a SO-gun ship, three 32-gun frigates, four sloops and a schooner. In 1795 there were 19 ships on the station - three ships of the line, two fourth rates, six fifth rates, a sixth rate and three schooners. Two years later the station had 31 ships, including seven of the line, 15 frigates and seven sloops. This was increased by 1805 to 51 ships, including three of the line, 14 frigates and 24 sloops. In 1812, with all of the French West Indian possessions in British hands, the station amounted to only 19 ships, of which one was a ship of the line, eight were frigates and the rest smaller vessels. The Leeward Islands Squadron was based at Antigua and Barbados, though it could also use Martinique and St Lucia once those French colonies had been captured. At the beginning of the war this force numbered nine ships of the

17

18

Launching a ship of the line. Ships of this size took years to construct, either in the Royal dockyards or in private yards. Much remains to be done to the ship depicted here, which must now be 'fitted out' with three vertical masts and a bowsprit, together with all the yards, booms, and gaffs to which sails will eventually be attached. Fully fitted ships were festooned with miles of rigging - all the ropes, cables and chains used to support the masts and spars and to raise, lower and adjust sails and yards - together with the tackle - pulley blocks, eyebolts and other apparatus used to hold or adjust them. After the rigging came all the ancillary equipment, including the rudder and wheel, anchors and their cables, capstans, the ship's boats, the galley stove, pumps and other equipment. The ship's armament was also added, together with the tools and tackle associated with it. The interior of the ship had also to be finished, including the cabins and quarters, galley, magazine and store rooms. Once complete, the ship was formally commissioned, at which point all her stores were added and a crew assembled to man her. (Royal Naval Museum)