

line and 14 smaller ships and vessels, though it was increased within a year by three more ships of the line and seven other vessels, together with a large convoy of troops with which began the campaigns for the capture of the French West Indian possessions. In 1795 the Leeward Islands Squadron consisted of 26 ships, including eight third rates, ten frigates, six sloops and other vessels. In 1797 it numbered 44 ships - nine of the line, 16 frigates and 11 sloops. Thereafter the fleet was gradually decreased as a result of the capture of most of the French colonies. By 1801, just before a short-lived peace was signed at Amiens, the fleet was down to just 26 ships and vessels, including one of the line, nine frigates, seven sloops and other craft. As the settlement at Amiens restored most French possessions, when war resumed in 1803 the fleet in the West Indies had to be increased so as to enable it to capture these islands all over again. In 1805 it numbered six of the line, 13 frigates and the same number of sloops, but by 1812 it had again been reduced, owing to the fact that by 1810 all the colonies of France and her allies had been retaken. Royal Navy warships in the West Indies totalled 27, including one of the line, five frigates and 13 sloops. The North American Station Two squadrons were maintained off the American coast, with bases at Halifax, Nova Scotia, and at Newfoundland. These were considered minor areas of responsibility, for the United States remained neutral until 1812. When war with France began in 1793, the Halifax Squadron had only four ships and vessels, none of which exceeded 32 guns; the Newfoundland Squadron had one 64-gun ship, three frigates and five sloops. Nor did Royal Navy strength grow by an appreciable degree: five ships in 1797, seven two years later, 13 in 1805, and 12 in 1812. In 1795, the Halifax Squadron had ten ships, of which three were third rates. In 1800 this rose to 13, including two third rates. The number fell five years later to only eight ships, none of which were larger than frigates. As a result of the war with the United States, however, the waters along the

Distribution of the crew of a 36-gun frigate Foretopmen

(Starboard Watch)

Maintopmen

t t tt._ ttt. ttttttt

ttttttttttt ~ ttttttttttt ~ (Larboard Watch)

Forecastlemen

ttttttt~t ttttttt~t

~ ~

Waisters

ttttttttt~ ttttttttt~ Officers

Afterguard

tttM~

ttt. . .

Idlers

ttttt ttttt Boatswain's mates

Mizzentopmen

servants

.. .. tttt Gunner's crew

tttttttttttt

Quartermasters

tttttt

tttititt

Carpenter's crew

Key Commissioned officer

Mates and midshipmen

Landsman

Marine officer

Seaman warrant officer

Petty officer

Artisan

Marine NCO

Civilian warrant officer

Ordinary able seaman

Boy

Marine private

Every man on a ship was assigned a station based on aptitude, fitness, training and experience.

19

American and Canadian coasts grew in importance, and by the late summer of 1812 the station had 25 ships, including one of the line, eight frigates and seven sloops. This increased again by the following year, when the North American station numbered 60 ships, including 11 third rates, 16 fifth rates and 25 sloops.