

29

Warrant officers Warrant officers were men with specialist skills responsible for the maintenance and management of the ship. In contrast to officers of the wardroom who had become lieutenants with a commission granted by the Admiralty, the warrant officer received his commission independently from the Navy Board. Warrant officers had to be literate, as they were required to manage the ship's stores and keep an accurate account of them. They were subdivided into four categories, the first of which contained men enjoying the privileges of the wardroom and consisted of the master, surgeon, purser, chaplain and schoolmaster. The second category comprised the standing officers, being the boatswain, gunner and carpenter. The third section consisted of petty officers - the master-at-arms, sailmaker, armourer and carpenter's mate. Finally, belonging more properly to the lower deck, were the cook, caulker, ropemaker and sailmaker's mate. The master was the most senior warrant officer, and was responsible to the captain for everything concerning navigation, steering and the general manner of sailing the ship. Thus, the master had charge of all navigational instruments, including charts, compasses, nautical tables and astronomical instruments. His additional duties required him to look after the condition of the rigging, sails, anchors and cables. It was his responsibility moreover to ensure that the ship sat evenly in the water, which meant that he had to supervise the stowage of provisions. Stores improperly loaded would adversely affect the ability of the ship to sail at its most efficient and could even imperil those aboard by causing the ship to heel. The master also maintained the security of the ship and had

Ropemaker's crew Ropemaker

Sailmaker

Sailmaker's mate

Sailmaker's crew

These men made and repaired the miles of line that made up the ship's standing and running rigging. The sailmakers maintained and cut new sails, and repaired tears and holes created by high winds or enemy fire.

charge of the spirits aboard it, as well as the ship's logbook, or journal. It was this vital document that was produced at a court martial in the event the ship grounded, foundered or was otherwise lost. Masters often entered the Navy from the merchant marine, though others joined first as midshipmen or lieutenants, or had attained their rank by advancing up from quartermaster or as a mate from the lower deck.

30

Surgeon The Surgeon was not trained by the Navy, but would have learned his profession as a civilian and then entered naval service after passing an exam at Surgeon's Hall in London or by a Physician of the Fleet if he applied for work while abroad. The Navy Board having granted him a warrant, he then served an apprenticeship as a surgeon's mate before receiving promotion to surgeon.

Quartermaster's crew Quartermaster

Quartermaster's mate The quartermaster's crew was responsible for steering the ship and maintaining its proper course.

Over 700 surgeons served in the Navy during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. As to be expected, the surgeon was responsible for the health of the officers and crew, from administering the very crude forms of medicine of the time to those laid up ill, to coping with injuries from accidents, to performing operations, particularly in the wake of battle. He was also responsible for the management of the ship's sick berth, which stood on the orlop deck. It was generally maintained that: A naval surgeon of abilities and circumspection is generally the most independent officer in the ship, as his line of duty is unconnected with the others. He has the entire charge and management of the sick and hurt seamen on board his ship; is to perform surgical operations on the wounded as he may deem necessary to the safety of their lives; and to see that the medicines and necessaries with which he is supplied from the said board, or their agents, are in good in kind, and administered faithfully to the sick patients under his care. Much has been said about surgeons being quacks or drunkards; clearly a few were incompetent or inebriated on duty, but most surgeons were well-intentioned