

Yeoman of the powder room

Quarter gunner

Gunner's steward

Gunner's tailor The gunner's crew shared responsibility with the annourer for the maintainance of all the ordnance, the training of the gun crews, the condition of the ammunition and powder, and the repair of the guns.

35

Carronades in action. Gun crews varied in number depending on the size of the weapon: the heavier the ordnance the more men were required to handle it. These numbers fluctuated in any event, since some members of the crew might fall in battle or could be called away to perform another duty, such as taking part in a boarding party, working a pump when the ship sprang a leak or suffered an injury below the waterline, trimming the sails, or plugging a hole. Normally, the guns on one side of the ship remained unengaged, which meant that half the gun crews were theoretically available to assist their counterparts on the opposite side of the deck. In this case, the gun captain on the engaged side remained in command of his weapon, while his counterpart from across the deck became his second in command. (Angus Konstam)

repair the hull, as well as spare spars which lay in a crudely cut state to be prepared to the required specifications, whether for yards or topmasts, as circumstances demanded. The carpenter paid particular attention to masts that split as a result of heavy seas or high winds. In these cases, he attached a type of splint to reinforce them. As with the boatswain and gunner, the carpenter's stores were periodically checked to ensure that he was not engaged Carpenter's crew Carpenter

Carpenter'S mate

Carpenter'S seaman

Cooper

Caulker

Caulker's mate

36

These men were responsible for the condition of the ship, woodwork, metalwork and canvas. They were in greatest demand in the wake of a storm or an encounter with the enemy.

in fraudulent activity. As the carpenter worked only during the day, he did not keep watches like most of the rest of the ship's company, and hence came under the category of 'idler'. The carpenter was responsible, in addition to the aforementioned tasks, for determining if the hold contained any water that had leaked in, and if so to see that it was pumped overboard. He ensured that all the ship's pumps were in proper working order - a vital service, for without them the ship potentially stood in mortal danger. Water trapped in the bilge also had to be extracted, for it could have a deleterious effect on the health of the crew. The carpenter and the carpenter's crew played an important role in action, when they stood in the depths of the ship, below the waterline, ready to plug shot holes with oakum, nails, sheet lead and wooden plugs. When the ship was moored for refitting or careening, the carpenter would see that the hull was properly shored up by stout timbers, and that any newly fitted masts were firmly fixed at each deck level. Armourer The armourer worked with the gunner, looking after the small arms, both firearms and edged weapons, including muskets, pistols, cutlasses, pikes and tomahawks (sometimes called 'boarding axes'). In this respect he possessed skills as a blacksmith and understood and could repair the mechanisms and component parts of firearms. His task extended beyond weaponry to a limited extent, for he repaired anything aboard ship made of iron and could produce replacement articles such as nails, bolts and hinges. Often a civilian locksmith or blacksmith before entering naval service, the armourer repaired locks and any other device that required skills in metalwork.