

HMS Sibylle (38) in single combat with La Chiffonne (36) off Mahe, on the Indian coast. On 18 April 180 I, discovering the French frigate anchored with a damaged foremast, Captain Charles Adam anchored 200yds from his opponent and began an action lasting 17 minutes, in the course of which the Sibylle received raking fire from a French battery positioned on the coast (left background). La Chiffonne, having suffered 53 killed and wounded, cut her cable, lowered her flag in token of surrender, and drifted on to a reef. Captain Adam, with only two men killed and one wounded, sent a boat to take possession of the prize and, turning his guns against the enemy battery, forced its surrender. As with most French vessels captured in serviceable condition, the Admiralty purchased La Chiffonne and commissioned her into the Royal Navy. (Stratford Archive)

31

and conscientious men with a good understanding of contemporary medical science (such as it was), who did their best under difficult circumstances. Indeed, the difficulty of those circumstances is difficult to exaggerate. Surgeons had to cope with every conceivable malady and injury on a daily basis, including seasickness, abscesses, boils and toothache, to physical injuries - a common problem aboard ship with strenuous work so much a part of the regular routine - such as fractures caused by falls or concussion resulting from banging one's head on low deck beams or being struck by a falling object. The daily lifting and lowering of heavy objects like casks, barrels and boxes sometimes resulted in internal injuries and hernias. Surgeons faced all manner of illnesses to try to prevent and treat, a problem exacerbated by the fact that contagious disease spread easily in an environment where all hands were confined to a small space. Thus, influenza, typhus and consumption (tuberculosis) could strike many members of the crew in a short period, while tropical diseases - malaria, cholera and yellow fever being the most common - found their way aboard, particularly among vessels operating in West Indian waters. Yellow fever was amongst the nastiest and most difficult diseases to treat. On the rare occasions when men were allowed ashore, they sometimes returned with gonorrhoea and syphilis, and though scurvy had largely been eradicated by this time, it could occasionally crop up when supplies of fresh fruit and vegetables were exhausted and no rapid means of replenishing them existed. The resulting bleeding gums, listlessness and anaemia caused by the lack of vitamins became a daunting challenge to a surgeon for whom the necessary medications and citrus juices were unavailable. Infection was one of the most common causes of death, whether from simple cuts or bullet or splinter wounds, the latter of which required either probing for the foreign object or amputation. If a limb were removed, the surgeon had to tie off the severed arteries and blood vessels with ligatures that were then left and allowed to fall off from the stump over time, thus leaving the exposed area at risk from infection. A sailor could endure a considerable amount of pain during the course of an operation - particularly in an age of regular hardship - but he still faced the great risk posed by post-operative infection, which, at its most extreme, could develop into gangrene or tetanus. Gangrenous tissue could be cut away during a subsequent operation, but lockjaw usually resulted from tetanus, from which recovery was rare. During battle the most common injury was caused by flying splinters, showers of which were produced by shot striking and shattering wood planking, beams, stays and other features of the ship. A man hit by a ball itself might survive, though usually not without the loss of one extremity of another. In the midst of battle surgeons attended patients in the order in which they fell, irrespective of rank or severity of injury; triage did not yet exist. Amputation was commonplace and was carried out in a matter of minutes, not simply because of the urgency of other cases, but owing to the absence of anything like modern anaesthesia. A blow to the head or abdomen from a round shot usually spelled instant death, and there were many recorded instances of men being decapitated, though injuries of various kinds always outnumbered deaths. Surgeons also had to tend