

Gunner The gunner was responsible for the ship's ordnance, which meant more than merely the guns themselves, but also the magazines, gunpowder, shot, cartridges, gunlocks and other equipment such as small arms and edged weapons. The gunner remained with the ship when it was decommissioned, ensuring that it was ready for service at short notice. Together with the Inspector of Ordnance, who was dispatched by the Board of Ordnance, the gunner inspected all the guns and carriages supplied to the ship. He also checked to see that all magazines were dry and ready for the arrival of the

Boatswains's crew Boatswain

Boatswain's mate

Yeoman of the boatswain's stores

34

The boatswain's crew carried out general duties connected with seamanship.

powder to be stored there. In addition to examining all the stores and equipment connected with gunnery, the gunner had charge over his mates, the quarter gunners, yeoman of the powder room and gun captains, and saw to the training of the gun crews. As with the boatswain, the gunner was responsible for a large amount of stores and equipment, and thus had to provide accounts to the captain on a monthly basis showing the articles expended. In addition, he would account for the amount of powder, shot and small arms ammunition expended during practice firing. Again, like the boatswain, the gunner's stores were inspected by gunners from other ships to protect against fraud, and in turn he himself would be called upon to do the same aboard other ships. When the ship sat in dock for refitting or to be heeled over and its hull cleaned to remove barnacles and other sea creatures, the gunner saw that all the guns and associated stores were transferred to facilities in the dockyard. When the ship was ready again for sea, the equipment and guns were then re-embarked.

Carpenter The carpenter had to serve a seven-year apprenticeship on shore before taking up his position aboard ship, which meant that he would have begun his trade as a civilian. He might then have spent another seven years in the capacity of a carpenter or shipwright before joining the Navy. Many such men had worked in the Royal dockyards or in private facilities or been seized from merchant ships. The carpenter was responsible for a large quantity of supplies and equipment and therefore was accountable to the captain every month with lists showing the items expended in the course of his duty. He used specialist equipment, plus an array of other items such as nails, bolts, copper and lead sheeting, glue, glass, paint, pitch and tar. The nature of his trade also required that he managed a supply of timber to enable him to Gunner's crew Gunner

Gunner's mate

British sailors and marines made numerous landings on enemy coastlines, either in support of the Army or to attain objects of naval significance. Landing parties carried out raids on docks, anchored naval vessels, fishing or merchant fleets, gun emplacements and arsenals in ports, and on fortified positions. Aboard ship, marines stood guard over the captain's cabin, the magazine and the ship'S supply of alcohol, enforced discipline amongst the crew, lent their muscle for particularly arduous tasks such as raising the anchor, and sniped at the enemy during battle. (Philip Haythornthwaite)