

27

To visit ships and muster men, and see that they were rated properly, and to look to the cleanliness and economy of ships under his command; To have his ships refitted at Gibraltar and Minorca; To order his captains to take good care of rigging, stores and so on; Not to allow his ships to come home except in cases of necessity; And to keep a journal, and send regular reports to the Admiralty.

Richard, Earl Howe (1726-1799). Commander of the fleet on the North American station during the War of American Independence (1775-83), Howe was one of Britain's most accomplished naval commanders, finishing his career with his tactical victory over the French at the battle of the Glorious First of June in 1794. He provided assistance to his brother, Sir William Howe, commander of British forces in North America, between 1776 and 1778, before assuming command of the Channel Fleet, in which capacity he brought relief to the besieged British garrison at Gibraltar.At the Glorious First of June, Howe captured six French ships from the fleet under Admiral Villaret-Joyeuse, for which achievement he was promoted to full admiral. He retired in 1797, though he was held in such high esteem that the Spithead mutineers approached him with their petition for referral to the government. (Philip Haythornthwaite)

Admirals were classified according to three divisions, each of which contained three ranks. In the wake of the Anglo-Dutch wars of the 17th century, the Navy was divided into three squadrons, with a single colour designated for each, based on seniority: red was the highest, followed by white and blue. This flag was flown at the ensign staff of each ship in the fleet, though it is important to note that the white ensign was later altered to include the red Cross of St George in order to distinguish it from the flag of Bourbon France, whose flag was also white (though all possibility of confusion ceased when from about 1795 the French began to fly the revolutionary Tricolour). Admirals, like the red, white and blue squadrons of the fleet, were themselves subdivided into individual ranks, the most senior rank being (full) admiral, followed by viceadmiral and rear-admiral. An admiral senior enough to command an entire fleet rather than merely a squadron normally positioned his flagship at its centre, whereas a viceadmiral, serving as second in command, directed the activity of the van (the leading squadron of the fleet), with a rear-admiral, as his title implied, commanding the rear. The senior post in this hierarchy - Admiral of the Red - required an officer to rise nine places once he was promoted from captain or commodore. Thus, his long ascent, facilitated by the retirement and death of those senior to him, began as Rear-Admiral of the Blue, which was the lowest rank of the lowest squadron. This was modified in 1805 when the rank of Admiral of the Red was redesignated to fall between Admiral of the Fleet and Admiral of the White, thus requiring those seeking the highest position to ascend ten places on the ladder of promotion. The most senior position of all - Admiral of the Fleet - entitled the holder of that rank to fly the Union flag (or 'Jack') at the head of the main mast. The ranking of admirals can thus be summarized as follows: Admiral of the Fleet Admiral of the Red (rank created after 1805) Admiral of the White Admiral of the Blue Vice-Admiral of the Red Vice-Admiral of the White Vice-Admiral of the Blue Rear-Admiral of the Red Rear-Admiral of the White Rear-Admiral of the Blue