

Schoolmaster The schoolmaster, normally only found on a ship of the line, was principally concerned with the education of midshipmen in mathematics, theoretical navigation and trigonometry in order to prepare them for commissioning. Candidates for schoolmaster underwent an examination to ensure their fitness for the post. They might also teach reading and writing to the younger members of the crew. Boatswain The boatswain held many responsibilities and was answerable to the ship's master for all matters connected with the rigging, sails, cordage, blocks, anchors,

33

cables and ship's boats. The boatswain was greatly experienced in all aspects of seamanship, and held the rank of a standing officer, which meant that he remained aboard the ship even when it was laid up and out of service. This ensured that when the ship was recommissioned, the same boatswain bridged the transition, for his intimate knowledge of the ship was invaluable to the captain. The boatswain not only inspected the rigging every day, but saw that his mates (all petty officers) roused the men to take up their watch on deck or aloft. Regulations required that he be: Very frequently upon deck in the day, and at all times both day and night, when any duty shall require all hands being employed. He is, with his mates, to see that the men go quickly on deck when called, and that, when there, they perform their duty with alacrity and without noise and confusion.

Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood (1750-1810). Collingwood commanded the Barfleur (98) at the battle of the Glorious First of June in 1794, but later transferred to various other ships, eventually becoming captain of the Excellent (74), then serving in the Mediterranean. In 1797 he distinguished himself at the battle of St Vincent where he captured two Spanish ships. Thereafter Collingwood took part in the blockade of Cadiz, becoming a rearadmiral in 1799 and transferring to the Channel Fleet, which blockaded Brest. Promoted to vice-admiral in April 1804, he commanded a squadron that joined Nelson off the Spanish coast in the autumn of 1805. At the battle of Trafalgar Collingwood, second in command, led the lee column and succeeded to commander-in-chief of the Mediterranean Fleet on Nelson's death. Collingwood continued to serve in the Mediterranean until he succumbed to exhaustion and died in 1810. (Philip Haythornthwaite)

Responsible for the sails and a large amount of stores and equipment, the boatswain was required to provide monthly accounts to the captain indicating the articles purchased or used during that period. To prevent fraud, the ship's provisions were gathered and inspected by boatswains from other ships, and the boatswain would in turn perform the same service aboard other vessels. Prominent among his responsibilities was ensuring that the sails were kept in good condition and properly aired and dried. The boatswain saw to it that all the stores were removed and stowed ashore during re-fitting or when the ship was laid on its side and cleaned, a process known as 'careening'. Once the ship was ready for sea, the boatswain ensured that all the stores were returned aboard. While the ship sat at anchor, the boatswain saw that the sides were washed and kept free of lines or ropes.