

Armourer's crew Armourer

Armourer's mate

The armourer's crew maintained the guns in serviceable condition, together with the ammunition and powder.

Cook A ship's cook need not have any specialized skill in cooking, though he occasionally had civilian experience of working in a tavern. Occasionally the cook was a disabled sailor whose impairment fitted him for no other position aboard ship. The most junior of the warrant officers, the cook nevertheless held this position above the ordinary seamen as he had the important responsibility of maintaining the safety of the galley stove fire - the only major fire hazard aboard ship. In addition to preparing the ship's company's meals, the cook had to present clean utensils and pots for inspection every afternoon.

Ship losses through accident, 1793-1815 Shipwrecked

Burnt/exploded

Line (64 guns and over)

3

17

8

28

Frigates

4

67

2

73

68

170

5

243

Rating

Sloops, brigs, etc.

Foundered

Totals

37

Cooks Cooks

Captain's cook

Cook's mate These positions were nonnally reserved for sailors who had been disabled through accident or in batie, thus rendering them unsuited to virtually all other fonns of employment aboard ship.

Marines In addition to its ordinary crew, every warship from sloops through frigates and ships of the line was supplied with a contingent of marines, who comprised about a fifth of a ship's company. Approximately 120 marines served aboard a 74-gun ship, whose full complement numbered about 550. About 150 served aboard a first rate. Marines (who were designated 'Royal Marines' from April 1803) had originated as soldiers, drawn from foot regiments and assigned for service at sea. Unlike many sailors, marines were never pressed, but rather were composed entirely of volunteers who normally agreed to serve for the duration of the war. Many other differences separated sailors and marines, as one contemporary observer noted: The launch in 1766 of HMS Magnificent, one of many ships of the line constructed in the mid18th century yet still serviceable during the Napoleonic Wars. (Stratford Archive)

38

No two races of men, I had well nigh said two animals, differ from one another more completely than the 'Jollies' and 'Johnnies'. The marines ... enlisted for life, or for long periods as in the Regular Army, and, when not employed afloat, are kept in barracks, in such constant training, under

the direction of their officers, that they are never released for one moment of their lives from the influence of strict discipline and habitual obedience. The sailors, on the contrary, when their ship is paid off, are turned adrift, and so completely scattered abroad, that they generally lose ... all they have learned of good order during the previous three or four years. Even when both parties are placed on board ship, and the general discipline maintained in its fullest operation, the influence of regular order and exact subordination is at least twice as great over the marines as it can ever be over the sailors. When hostilities began in February 1793 the marines numbered only 5,000, but by 1802 they had expanded enormously to 30,000, a figure which remained about the same until fighting with France ended 12 years later. The Royal Marines were based at four locations: Chatham, Portsmouth, Plymouth and Woolwich.