

Ratings

28

Ordinary seamen Seamen were categorized as befitted their experience and ability, and were divided into three rates: ordinary seaman, able seaman and petty officers. These men generally worked aloft, maintaining the sails and all the lines that controlled them, splicing and knotting, handling the rigging and heaving the anchors. Each man would perform his duties on one of two or three ship's watches, and bore responsibilities connected with each mast. As

described earlier, topmen - the fittest and, often, the youngest and most agile men - worked in the highest yards where work was precarious but vital. Older, stronger seamen performed their duties amongst the lower yards and on the forecastle. Finally, those of the afterguard worked on the quarterdeck and around the mizzen mast. Once battle commenced, however, most of the men, whatever their usual station, would be required to work the guns. Thus, in the course of only a short period at sea the ratings acquired a host of skills that enabled them to work in various capacities aboard ship. Beneath the ratings were landsmen who possessed no skills in seamanship and therefore were used for their brute strength to haul on ropes, rotate captans, and perform other laborious tasks. They could potentially acquire skills in the rigging if the captain allowed them into the lower rigging, but for the most part they remained on deck. Able seamen An ordinary sailor could rise to able seaman, which depended on his ability in certain skills. According to the Admiralty: The letters A.B., which mean Able Seaman, are placed against the names of only those who are thorough-bred sailors, or who, in the sea phrase, can not only 'hand reef and steer', but are likewise capable of heaving the lead in the darkest night, as well as in the daytime; who can use the palm and needle of a sailmaker; and who are versed in every part of a ship's rigging, in the stowage of the hold, and in the exercise of the great guns ... In these, and twenty other things which might be pointed out, he ought to be examined by the Boatswain and other officers before his rating of A.B. is fully established on the books.

Various ratings Captain's clerk

Master's mate

Master-at-Arms

Yeoman of the sheets

Coxswain

Trumpeter

Ordinary trumpeter

Captains of the forecastle, foretop, maintop and afterguard

Barber

Examples of some of the many titles held by ordinary seamen aboard a British warship. In addition to his specialist skills, nearly every sailor understood the functions of the many miles of the ship's rigging and could find the correct line even in darkness or in the midst of a storm. He could tie perhaps two-dozen knots with ease, splice ropes in several ways and recognize the many hundreds of features aboard his vessel, from sails and spars to armament and equipment. If sent aloft, he could speedily make his way to the end of a yardarm to furl or reef a sail as required, applying his strength and dexterity under highly dangerous conditions.