

Estimated number of fatal casualties in the Royal Navy, I793-181 5 Cause of death

Percentage

Individual, non-combat (illness and personal accident)

84,440

81.5

Collective, non-combat (foundering, shipwreck, fire, etc.)

12,680

12.2

Enemy action

Total 32

Number

6,540

6.3

103,660

100

to men who received burns from the discharge of the guns or from fire; fever and shock often followed such traumas to the body. Perhaps the most unlikely form of death connected with combat was what contemporaries called 'wind of ball', which meant the internal injuries caused by the flight of a round shot in close proximity to the victim's body. No outward signs of wounds were produced by this phenomenon, but there are a number of documented instances of passing shot, speeding past a seamen, causing instant death, though the victim was sometimes spared when the projectile passed his head rather than his abdomen. Purser The purser served in a civilian capacity in charge of managing the provisions aboard ship. As such, he procured all the food, spirits, wine, clothing, tobacco, bedding and other provisions needed for the entire ship's company. He actually ran a business of sorts, for while the Navy provided these various commodities, the purser was required to purchase some of these items with his own means and sell them on to the crew either for a profit in the case of clothing, or slightly underweight, in the case of food, profiting from the difference. Thus, for every pound of food supplied to the ship, the purser issued 14 ounces. When he sold clothing or tobacco he took a commission of five per cent and ten per cent, respectively. He also managed the distribution of coal and wood for the galley fire, the heating stoves of the officers' cabins and the lower decks, as well as lanterns, candles, wooden cutlery and other items. Chaplain The chaplain held the same rank as the master and surgeon, though obviously his position was not so essential to the daily routine of the ship. As a result, very few could be found aboard ships lower than third rates. Chaplains during this period were in all cases Anglicans, with responsibility for conducting religious services every Sunday for the entire ship's company, irrespective of the denominations actually represented. They were always in attendance at funeral services, which in almost all cases concluded with burial at sea, and held services of thanksgiving after battle. Chaplains were often learned men with training in theology, classical languages and modern languages - these last skills being useful in interpreting captured or intercepted dispatches and in communication with foreign ships and ports.

The death of Lieutenant Grant at Copenhagen - a heavily sanitized version of the actual event, in which a round shot carried away Grant's head. The deck would also have been strewn with torn canvas, spent ammunition, severed lines, splinted wood, fallen men and pools or rivulets of blood, depending on the roll of the ship. (Philip Haythornthwaite)