

p,.... . PA CIFIC

~ .

PACIFIC OCEAN

OCEAN West Indies Port Royal, Jamaica CuraGao from 1807 Antigua Martinique, 1799-1802 Barbados from 1806

ATLANTIC OCEAN Cape Town (1795-1802 and from 1806)

INDIAN OCEAN

Royal Navy bases overseas

the merchant yard's design with the intention of selling the vessels to the Admiralty. Private yards of course also produced merchant ships, some of which the Admiralty chose to buy and convert for its own needs. In addition to ship construction, the Royal yards also had to provide workmen for the Navy and repair and maintain its ships. Royal dockyards were situated at Portsmouth - the largest in the country - Plymouth and Chatham. A naval hospital stood at Haslar, near Portsmouth, together with an ordnance depot, a gunwharf and a marine barracks. Chatham and Plymouth had similar facilities. Portsmouth, Chatham, Sheerness and Plymouth were all fortified and were situated near the main anchorages. Ships in service only docked in port for refitting or to allow their crews leave; otherwise they remained at their respective anchorages, offshore, from where they could put to sea with little delay. Ships operating out of the Nore watched the Dutch coast; those in the Downs covered the North Sea and the southern coast of Holland; the anchorages at Spithead and St Helens were bases for ships monitoring the Channel; and Torbay served as the station from which to watch Brest, Spain and the Atlantic. Ships based at Plymouth operated in the Atlantic and beyond. Dockyards in home ports could provide most of the needs of the Navy, but with its world-wide responsibilities the Royal Navy had to maintain bases across the globe. These facilities contained stores, food, depots for munitions, and equipment and materials for repairing ships afloat. In some cases medical care was provided, such as at Gibraltar. A civilian representative of the Navy Board oversaw the bases. At the beginning of the wars in 1793 the Navy's overseas bases were located at Gibraltar, Halifax in Nova Scotia, and Jamaica and Antigua in the West Indies, but these were added to throughout the conflict so that by 1815 British ships could defend all the nation's principal trade routes. To supply the bases, the Admiralty bought naval stores in Britain and left their conveyance abroad to the ships of the Transport Board. The Victualling Board purchased food and drink for the use of the Navy, though supplies could be acquired locally when ships docked in foreign ports. As at home ports, the Board of Ordnance provided ordnance to British ports overseas, where ships repaired and replaced damaged weaponry.

British territory

The possession of these establishments across the world not only enabled Britain to protect her trade and colonies but to harass those of her enemies. The relatively small extent of the Empire at this period reveals that the great age of British imperial expansion a prominent feature of the mid- to late-Victorian era - had not yet begun. British possessions on the Indian sub-continent in the early 19th century were still largely confined to Bengal, which, like Canada, had been conquered during the Seven Years' War (1756-63). Cape Colony, in southern Africa, was seized from the Dutch, a French ally, while New South Wales had been founded only a few years before the outbreak of war with France in 1793. Malta and Gibraltar, captured in 1800 and 1704 respectively, occupied key strategic positions in the western and central Mediterranean. Although extremely small in geographical terms, Britain's West Indian colonies remained her most valuable overseas possessions, with sugar, slaves and rum generating vast wealth for the Treasury.