

41

allocated to the captors according to a man's rank. Up to 1808 the captain was entitled to three-eighths of the prize money, with commissioned officers receiving one-eighth, warrant officers one-eighth, petty officers one-eighth, and the remainder of the crew, including marines, receiving one-fourth of the money paid for the prize. A new division of the spoils took effect from 1808

Management and administration in London

Earl Spencer, First Lord of the Admiralty, I794-1 80 I.The period of his tenure proved a remarkably successful one for the Royal Navy, which during these years seized nearly all of the French colonial possessions in the West Indies, decisively defeated the enemy's Mediterranean Fleet, and generally drubbed it in all manner of engagements from ship-to-ship encounters to massive fleet actions. (Philip Haythornthwaite)

Government and Parliament As Britain was a constitutional monarchy, the king, George III, did not exercise absolute power and relied on the prime minister and cabinet to make executive decisions, to which he almost invariably gave his consent, and to Parliament for the passage of laws and the allocation of funds for the running of the affairs of state. With respect to the management of the Navy, the cabinet contained the First Lord of the Admiralty, whose decisions were subject to a consensus reached in cabinet meetings. Once a decision was made, the Navy depended on the House of Commons to vote it funds. The Commons, and to an extent, the House of Lords, took an active interest in naval affairs and regularly debated issues connected with the cost of the service and its role in the war. Above all, it voted the annual estimates that supplied it with money. The naval estimates were divided into three categories. The 'ordinary' funds covered the cost of maintaining ships and dockyard facilities. During peacetime these costs were generally higher, for during wartime much of the burden of maintenance was paid for under other categories. The second estimate was known as the 'extra', which were funds allocated for the construction of new ships. Lastly, Parliament conducted a vote to cover the cost of a particular number of seamen and marines, which largely determined the naval force available for that year. The British Army was small as compared with Continental powers; the Royal Navy, on the other hand, exceeded 100,000 men and over 100 ships of the line, and had no comparable rival in the world, including France. Having said this, there were few checks to ensure that the money was used as intended, the number of men actually on service never quite reached the figures that Parliament pledged to fund, and there were no mechanisms to ensure that the money voted actually reached Navy coffers. More importantly, the money was never sufficient, so from year to year the Navy was chronically in debt. Contractors largely accepted this system, as payment eventually did reach them, so the Navy managed well enough from year to year, notwithstanding the fact that seamen's pay could fall into arrears for years at a time.