

Command, control and communications Command and control Perhaps surprisingly, instructions to commanders-in-chief were not issued upon appointment, but rather, in lieu of a new set of orders, the new commander inherited the standing or unexecuted orders of his predecessor. Even then, he received little in the way of guidance, such that he regularly made decisions without regular communication with the Admiralty. This was natural, particularly for commanders in distant stations such as in the West Indies, the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean. Instructions normally came in the form of individual dispatches. A station commander was expected to maintain a regular correspondence with the governors of British colonies in his area, overseas bases and army officers, consuls and diplomats ashore; to make decisions regarding convoy duty in his area of operations; ensure the proper supply of his fleet; detach squadrons or individual ships as needed to perform special tasks; to keep in regular contact with his squadron commanders and individual ship's captains; to ensure the cleanliness and efficiency of the fleet; to arrange for ships to be refitted as necessary; to ensure that captains maintained the rigging, hull and stores of their ships in accordance with Admiralty regulations; and to send regular reports to the Admiralty on the affairs of his fleet. Junior (vice- and rear-) admirals appointed senior captains to lead squadrons, particularly those composed of frigates. If, as it usually did, the fleet operated as a single cohesive force, junior admirals led divisions and squadrons within those divisions. A junior admiral led his division into action and saw that the individual ships in his division followed the orders of the commander-in-chief. The most senior of these men would also succeed the commander-in-chief in case of the latter's death. A junior admiral might also command a detached squadron, such as Nelson did in 1798 when he was sent by his senior, Lord St Vincent, to pursue the French fleet which had left Toulon for an unknown destination - which in the event proved to be Egypt. Beneath the admirals were the individual ships' captains, who were responsible for the running of their ship. These men issued commands to their lieutenants who in turn executed them or passed them down to the midshipmen. The authority of the captain rested on more than his commission - and the fact that he could run his ship almost entirely as he saw fit - but on a combination of reward, punishment, courage, personal example and financial incentive. Thus, the captain possessed the power to promote on the spot anyone below the rank of midshipman and, indeed, often did in the wake of an action in which particular men had distinguished themselves. Punishments came in many forms, from 'disrating' (Le. a demotion in rank) to the stopping of grog (the traditional sailor's drink), to flogging, with a dozen lashes being the maximum allowed without recourse to a court martial. In practice, however, a captain need only charge the offender with several offences and tally up the lashes awarded. The most serious offences were referred to a court martial, which consisted of between five and 13 members, all officers. Large numbers of lashes could be ordered for those found guilty, or even hanging. Captains also depended on prize money to encourage their crews. A condemned prize could be sold to the Admiralty, with the proceeds