

49

HMS St Albans (64) being launched at Deptford, a private dockyard which supplied the needs of both the Navy and civilian commercial firms. Newly built ships in British yards were launched stern first, in contrast to vessels built on the Continent, and then towed away to be provided with masts and fittings elsewhere. The masts and yards for a third rate weighed about 70 tons, rigging and cordage a further 40 tons, cables and cordage about 44 tons, anchors 13 tons and sails eight tons. In addition to the various stores and equipment brought aboard a fully fitted ship, a 74 carried about 160 tons of ordnance, approximately 50 tons of ammunition and 350 barrels of powder. (Stratford Archive)

50

Various new ports were acquired during the course of the wars, two of the most important being in European waters. In the Mediterranean, the Army captured Minorca in 1798, thus enabling the Navy to use Port Mahon thereafter. When, however, peace with Spain was renewed in 1802 by the Treaty of Amiens, Britain restored the island to her erstwhile enemy. Port Mahon was of particular importance in enabling a fleet to watch the main French Mediterranean port at Toulon. Malta fell to British forces in 1800 after a two-year siege, providing the Navy with the invaluable port at Valetta, which was retained throughout the wars and formally acquired by Britain in 1814. The value of Malta as a base was recognized by many, including Admiral Lord Keith: Malta has the advantage over all the other ports ... that the whole harbour is covered by its wonderful fortifications, and that in the hands of Great Britain no enemy would presume to land upon it, because the number of men required to besiege it could not be maintained by the island ... At Malta all the arsenals, hospitals, storehouses, etc, are on a grand scale. The harbour has more room than Mahon and the entrance is considerably wider. In North America, the Navy had use of Halifax and Bermuda, at the latter of which construction of a dockyard began in 1809. Britain also had temporary use of Alexandria, Egypt, in 1801-02, and Ajaccio, Corsica, from 1794 to 1796. Lisbon was available from 1808 to 1814 as a result of the British campaign in the Iberian Peninsula. In the Caribbean the Leeward Islands Squadron used the base at English Harbour, Antigua, while the Jamaica Squadron used Port Royal. Martinique was under British control from 1794 to 1802 (like other colonial possessions, returned to France at the Peace of Amiens), and Curas;:ao was taken from the Dutch in 1807. Ships operating as far as India made use of the base at Madras and the East India Company's dockyard at Bombay, which produced several ships purchased by the Royal Navy. In southern Africa, on the route to India, the Navy had access to Cape Colony with the fall of that Dutch colony

to an expeditionary force in 1795. This was returned to Holland in 1802, but recaptured in 1806. One of the directors of the East India Company summed up the importance of this distant base: The importance of the Cape, with regard to ourselves consists more from the detriment which would result if it was in the hands of France, than any advantage we can possibly derive from it as a colony. It commands the passage to and from India as effectually as Gibraltar doth the Mediterranean; and it serves as a granary for the Isles of France; whilst it furnishes no produce whatsoever for Europe, and the expense of supporting the place must be considerable.