

Communication at sea Communication at sea proved one of the most difficult problems to overcome in the age of fighting sail. Admirals could speak face-to-face with their captains from time to time, particularly before battle if time permitted, and written orders could be sent to the various ships in the fleet by summoning boats to the flagship to collect such orders. If vessels passed close enough messages could even be passed vocally through a megaphone, though this was not always possible. In any event, such forms of communication were slow and altogether impossible during enemy action. The alternative was the use of flags. Prior to the new system developed at the turn of the 19th century, signalling flags had specific meanings. This served commanding officers reasonably well throughout the 18th century, but flags were limited in their application to particular circumstances, foreseen during peacetime, yet not always practical during wartime. Admiral Lord Howe invented a system that employed 14 different flags, each of a different design, which was added to the Signal Book of 1790. These included ten flags representing the numbers one through nine, plus zero. Each numerical flag had a particular meaning, while four further flags were used to signify'substitute', 'preparative', 'finishing' and 'affirmative'. Howe's system could create approximately 260 messages, though over time these were expanded in number and the design of the flags improved. The most effective system of signalling, however, was the product of Admiral Sir Home Popham, who realized that Howe's system remained of limited value. In 1800, employing the same flags as Howe had used, he developed a system that came into immediate use. Popham's system involved the use of a combination of flags to represent words and phrases that enabled captains and admirals to create thousands of words very rapidly. The main advantage, however, rested on the ability to expand the vocabulary for words not already represented by flags. Any word could be spelled out letter by letter by using a flag for each letter of the alphabet. So comprehensive was

Horatio, Ist Viscount Nelson (1758-1805). Britain's greatest admiral and perhaps the most accomplished naval commander of any era, Nelson typified the bold, resourceful, aggressive character of so many Royal Navy officers of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic era. When the war began in 1793, Nelson was captain of the 64-gun Agamemnon and served in the Mediterranean under Lord Hood. He first came to prominence in February 1797 when he demonstrated his daring at the battle of St Vincent by first cutting the Spanish line and then boarding two ships in rapid succession. He was badly wounded in a failed attack on Tenerife later that year, but his injury did not prevent him from further service, and he rejoined the Mediterranean Fleet in the Vanguard (74). In 1798 Nelson utterly crushed the French at the battle of the Nile, bringing an end to Bonaparte's dreams of an empire in the East. In April 180 I Nelson led the successful though costly attack against the Danish fleet at Copenhagen, adding further laurels to his reputation. The climax of his career proved, however, to be his apotheosis: victory over the combined FrancoSpanish fleet at Trafalgar on 21 October 1805 ended all realistic prospect of an invasion of the British Isles for the remainder of the Napoleonic Wars, but it cost Nelson his life. (Royal Naval Museum)