

john jervis, Ist Earl of St Vincent (1735-1823). When war broke out with France in February 1793,jervis commanded a naval expedition to the West Indies, where his squadron took the French islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe in the spring of 1794. He was briefly commander-in-chief of the Mediterranean Fleet in 1795-96, but the conclusion of a Franco-Spanish alliance obliged the British to withdraw their ships to the safety of Gibraltar. In February 1797, jervis stood off Cape St Vincent, on the coast of Spain to prevent French and Spanish ships from the Mediterranean linking up with those at Brest with the intention of supporting a French invasion of Britain. jervis's victory over the Spanish on 14 February, aided by Nelson's extraordinary conduct, put an end to the threat of invasion and jervis was raised to the peerage as the Earl of St Vincent. In 1800 he took command of the Channel Fleet, and kept a continuous watch over Brest. He was appointed First Lord of the Admiralty during Henry Addington's ministry between 180 I and I804. Although dictatorial and harsh, St Vincent set high standards for discipline and contributed much to the organization of the Navy. (Philip Haythornthwaite)

47

slaughterhouses and breweries to meet the needs of the sailors, and had its own ships to convey provisions to the Board's naval facilities at Gibraltar and elsewhere. The Sick and Hurt Board conducted examinations for surgeons, supplied their equipment, and managed the Navy's hospitals. The Transport Board conveyed Army and Navy personnel aboard a combination of privately hired merchant vessels and Navy ships. The Transport Board was noted for its efficiency and ran between 40 and SO storeships for the Navy alone, with many more used for the Army. In 1796 the task of managing prisoners of war passed into its hands from those of the Sick and Hurt Board.

The Royal Dockyard at Chatham, in Kent, which could cater for just about any ship's material needs. Vessels ordered by the Admiralty were constructed according to plans based on a scale of I:48. The keel was laid first, with the stem and sternposts attached and the frames erected to define the shape of the hull. Before the sides were planked with oak the frame of the ship was shored up to keep it vertical, and left to stand to season, sometimes for more than a year. In the course of construction and fitting out, a 74 required approximately 100 tons of ironwork, 30 tons of copper bolts, 12 tons of oakum, 5 tons of pitch, 12 tons of tar to coat the hull, 12 tons of copper sheathing and 4 Y2 tons of paint. (Philip Haythornthwaite)

48

The Board of Ordnance The Board of Ordnance, a government department separate from the Admiralty and based in the Tower of London and at Woolwich, held responsibility for supplying all the Navy's (and Army's) armaments - everything from pistols and dirks to cannon. The Board ran the factories that manufactured powder and guns; it provided the transport to convey the munitions and arranged contracts for work through civilian firms. It also experimented with new types of guns and powders and made studies of existing weaponry. The Board of Ordnance not only maintained supplies, it also had responsibility for equipment already aboard vessels and in the dockyards. This meant liaising with ship's captains to determine the condition of every weapon on his ship and the amount of shot and powder used, both during practice and in action. Guns and powder captured from the enemy had to be logged by captains, with the list of items sent on to London. Proper functioning of this organization would not have been possible without a large number of officials and clerks, and the offices of the Board of Ordnance were lined with pigeon holes and boxes containing information in the form of lists and correspondence received from ships around the world concerning all the ordnance aboard every ship in the Navy. Every captain was required to account for the expenditure of all ammunition and shot, barring which he received a reprimand from the Board, wherever in the world he might happen to be. Royal Navy dockyards and bases At the beginning of the wars Britain maintained six dockyards, all run by the Navy Board. By 1815 these had launched 41 ships of the line and 78 other ships. About 60 private yards constructed another 60 ships of the line and over 600 other ships, some produced according to Admiralty design, others of