

The battle of Copenhagen, 2 April 180 I, an extremely hardfought action in which the North Sea Fleet fought a formidable combination of shore batteries and enemy ships of the line at anchor. (Philip Haythornthwaite)

5I

Admiral Lord Hotham's action, 13 July 1795, off Hyeres, near Toulon. In the course of watching Toulon with the Mediterranean Fleet, Hotham enjoyed only limited success, proving himself unable either to contain in port, or bring to battle in a decisive encounter, the French fleet. He managed to capture the Alcide (74), but shortly after she struck, this prize caught fire and blew up with the loss of her entire complement of 61 5 officers and men. (Stratford Archive)

52

Popham's system that when Nelson issued his famous signal, 'England expects that every man will do his duty', only the word 'duty' needed to be spelt out as individual letters. In addition to their being used to pass the admiral's orders, flag signals were employed for various purposes, particularly for conveying intelligence. Frigates were so placed around a fleet as to be in position to relay messages from one ship to another, to observe the horizon, and provide the admiral with timely warning of an approaching enemy. This was all very well in practice, but in reality a captain or admiral still had to decide up which mast his signal was to be hoisted to enable the recipient to see it clearly, considering the fact that the ships' positions sometimes shifted owing to winds, currents, or the decisions of individual captains. Lookouts had to keep a keen eye out for signals, otherwise the sender had to fire a warning gun to attract their attention. At night, signals could be sent using a combination of guns, flares and lights, with approximately 70 messages available by these means. Of course, in the smoke of battle, in fog or where relaying frigates were not to hand, signals might go unseen or fail to be understood. In rare instances, signals were ignored, the most famous instance being when in 1801 Nelson chose to disregard Admiral Parker's signal to withdraw from action during the battle of Copenhagen. Placing the telescope up to his blind eye, Nelson declared to the officers around him: 'I have only one eye. I have a right to be blind sometimes. I really do not see the signal.' As we have seen, Popham's signal system was successfully employed at Trafalgar, and was the means by which Nelson's famous signal was conveyed to the fleet, read in the following order: Read down the mainmast Read down the foremast Read down the mizzen mast Read down the peak, or gaff Read down the starboard side of the mainmast Read down the port side of the mainmast Read down the starboard side of the foremast Read down the port side of the foremast Read down the starboard side of the mizzen mast Read down the port side of the mizzen mast

By interpreting the flags in the foregoing order, other ships could discern the message as follows: Mainmast: '2', '5', '3': 'England' Mainmast: '2', '6', '9': 'Expects' Foremast: '8', '6', '3': 'That' Foremast: '2', '6', '1': 'Every' Mizzen mast: '4', '7', '1': 'Man' Gaff: '9', '5', '8': 'Will' Mainmast (starboard side): '2', '2', '0': 'Do' Mainmast (port side): '3', '7', '0': 'His' Foremast (starboard side): '4': 'D' Foremast (port side): '2', '1': 'U" Mizzen mast (starboard side): '1', '9': 'T' Mizzen mast (port side): '2', '4': 'V'