

890

1,000

1,000

1,280

Bow-chasers were employed to fire at a vessel being pursued, with the intention of striking its masts or rigging, disabling it sufficiently to prevent the vessel's escape. Stern-chasers were used against a pursuing ship, with the similar intention of disabling it sufficiently to bring an end to the chase. Swivel guns constituted the smallest form of ordnance. These were mounted on swivels so that they could fire at practically any angle. Like chasers, these served as anti-personnel weapons, loaded with lead shot and fired at close range, particularly at enemy boarders. They were often mounted on the ship's rail, but they were small enough to be carried aloft before action and, together with a gun mount, lashed to a spar or top and used to fire down onto the enemy's deck. Swivel guns were also ideal weapons aboard ships' boats, particularly when employed against opposing boats. Although rockets were invented centuries before in China, William Congreve, who worked at the Board of Ordnance, put them to effective military use in the West. The rocket which came to bear his name was little more than a rudimentary warhead in the form of a pointed metal cylinder filled with gunpowder, attached to a long stick to stabilize its flight. Warheads came in different varieties, depending on their purpose. Some were explosive for use against ships or troops ashore, while others were incendiary, to be used against ships, harbour facilities and coastal towns. Some contained shrapnel for use against enemy crews or formed units on shore. Rockets, like ordinary

62

Gun tools and ammunition, showing, from top to bottom: case shot, a scouring worm, a ladle, a worm, a flexible rammer and sponge, chain shot and bar shot. (Angus Konstam)

ammunition, were classified according to their weight, with the 32-pdrs and 42-pdrs being the most common. The former had a range of 3,500 yards, but they and all other rockets were wildly inaccurate and could only be depended on to fall in the general area intended. The 32-pdr rocket was made of a 42in. iron cylinder, four inches in diameter, at the tip of which was fitted a conical nose. A 15ft stabilizing stick was attached to the side of the cylinder. Rockets were normally fired by small boats specially fitted for such weapons, including a frame mounted on the deck in such a way as to be unencumbered by sails or rigging. Thousands of rockets were used in 1807 to destructive effect during the bombardment of Copenhagen, much of which caught fire as a result.

Types of ammunition Various types of ammunition were used by the Navy, the most common being a solid iron ball called a round shot (the term 'cannon ball' was not in use at the time and, indeed, is merely a landsman's term which was never applied to artillery, whether on land or at sea). Gun crews could also make use of a variety of anti-personnel ammunition, including canister shot, which consisted of a cluster of small shot held together in a canvas bag or thin metal container. They could also make use of langridge, which comprised scrap metal similarly held together so that on discharge the container easily broke open and spread its contents like a giant shotgun. Such ammunition was only effective at short range, but if fired at a crowded enemy deck when close at hand the results were devastating. Other forms of ammunition were reserved for destroying enemy rigging or to damage, if not destroy, the enemy's masts. Chain shot, which consisted of two balls attached by metal links, could tangle or cut through lines and shred sails, thereby impeding the enemy's ability to control his direction and speed. Bar shot, which consisted of two spheres joined by an iron bar, performed a similar function, though it was more effective than chain shot against masts and spars. The Board of Ordnance specified the number of rounds to be carried for each gun when a ship left port. For a ship of the line this was typically 80 round shot, three of chain or bar shot, and five of canister shot. Hot shot was a variation of ordinary round shot, which was heated to a critical redness in a special furnace before being loaded into a gun and fired at an opposing ship or some other target vulnerable to burning. Preparing hot shot was an exceedingly risky venture, for on a rolling ship the shot could fall from its special cradle and, in any event, finding a suitable and safe place for a furnace aboard ship was no easy matter. Hot shot therefore was principally the weapon of choice of shore batteries seeking to destroy enemy ships. Loading