

'Great' or 'long' gun. After this weapon was discharged, it recoiled inboard, with ropes restraining the ordnance to prevent it from moving out of control. The muzzle was then sponged out to render safe any unburnt fragments of the spent cartridge case or powder, which might otherwise set off a premature explosion when the next cartridge was rammed down the barrel. (Philip Haythornthwaite)

57

Alexander Hood, First Viscount Bridport (1726-1814).At the start of the French Revolutionary Wars Hood was appointed Admiral Lord Howe's second in command and served at the Glorious First of June in 1794, commanding the rear of the fleet and receiving a peerage for his conduct. At the battle of lie de Groix on 23 June 1795 Hood captured three French ships, but was criticized for failing to inflict a decisive blow on the enemy. He was given command of the Channel Fleet in March 1797, just prior to the outbreak of the mutiny at Spithead. Hood failed to stem its spread to most of the fleet and eventually his flagship, too, refused to take orders from its officers. After the mutiny, which ended peacefully, he spent years blockading Brest before retiring after 60 years of naval service. (Philip Haythornthwaite)

58

consequence of which they did not possess the firepower or structure to be able to hold their place in the line of battle. Nor were fourth rates fast enough to serve as frigates, as a result of which this type of vessel also declined in number as the war progressed. Single-decked frigates, carrying between 28 and 44 guns, on the other hand, could manoeuvre well, were fast, and sufficiently wellarmed to be able to perform operations independently of the fleet, or as part of an all-frigate squadron. If attached to a fleet, frigates performed reconnaissance duties for the commander-in-chief, with their main function being to locate the enemy fleet, notify the admiral of its location and course, and follow it until battle was joined. All navies respected the unwritten convention that a frigate was not to be fired upon by a ship of the line during fleet actions unless the frigate fired first. The smallest of rated vessel was the sixth rate post-ship, the lighter of the two types of frigate, which carried 20 to 28 guns, making it slightly larger than a sloop. Beneath this came 'unrated' vessels, such as sloops, which were armed with up to 28 guns. Brigs and schooners fell below these, with gunboats smaller still. When considering the number of guns associated with a ship, it is important to note that this unrefined statistic reveals less about the strength of a ship than appears obvious on the surface, for numbers of guns say nothing of the actual weight of shot they fired. Thus, the main armament of a 74 was the 32pdr cannon (the weight, of course, referring to that of the shot, not the ordnance itself), while those on a 64 were 24-pdrs. Moreover, no ship mounted all the same type of guns. Thus, while a 64 self-evidently carried 64 guns, these were a mixture of 26 24-pdrs, the same number of 18-pdrs, and 12 12-pdrs. Finally, carronades were not counted when calculating armament, which meant that the fighting power of a ship, particularly at close range where carronades could inflict considerable damage, was not uniformly reflected in the tabulation of long guns (Le. ordinary cannon) alone.