

Opposing crews come to grips in hand-to-hand fighting. (National Maritime Museum, neg. x 164)

63

The battle of St Vincent, 14 February 1797, where Nelson, though not in command, broke the Spanish line on his own initiative. (Philip Haythornthwaite)

64

this glowing red ammunition required special care: two men carried it in special tongs to the gun, which had been prepared with a charge protected by a damp wad, or wet clay, before being rammed home. Without this precaution, the heat of the shot could cause a premature explosion, wasting the ammunition and perhaps injuring some of the gun crew in the process. Time was also of the essence, for the crew had to act sWiftly by ramming a second wad in front of the shot before training the gun and firing it. To propel these various types of ammunition, ships carried vast amounts of gunpowder, stored in the magazine. Gunpowder, properly known to contemporaries as 'black powder', was produced from a composite of saltpetre (potassium nitrate), sulphur and fine charcoal. A process known as 'corning' converted these substances into granules of varying degrees of fineness. The largest guns used the coarsest variety, while small hand-held firearms like pistols required the finest type, which was also used in priming the charges of cannon. Members of the crew made up charges for the guns in the form of cartridges, consisting of flannel or paper containers of varying sizes, depending on the weight of powder required. Naturally, the heavier the ammunition, the greater the weight of charge needed to propel it. A full charge for a 32-pdr, for instance, required Illb of powder. To issue a salute, which of course required no ammunition at all, only 6lb were needed. As black powder is highly combustible, nothing more than a simple spark is required to detonate it. It therefore required special handling and was carefully stored in a magazine, or 'powder room', situated deep within the ship, far from the galley and other sources of fire or sparks. As it became useless when wet, the powder also had to be protected from water. Magazines were situated next to the'filling room' where cartridges were prepared. The use of iron tools and equipment in or near the magazine was strictly forbidden, notwithstanding the fact that the powder was stored in wooden barrels, ostensibly proof from danger. Even the barrels were bound with copper or wooden hoops, rather than the standard iron ones, to reduce the risk of catastrophe. Such was the volatility of black powder that a fire in the magazine, whether from a candle, spark, flame or enemy shot, nearly always resulted in the instantaneous destruction of the ship. Black powder was a crude substance which when fired produced a dense cloud of white smoke which, in the absence of wind, could remain in place for several minutes, reducing Visibility for the gunners and obscuring the target for both sides. It was this phenomenon that gave rise to the expression 'fog of war', though it has come to mean much more since 1815. In battle, burning grains of powder caused 'powder burns' when they settled on the men's faces, arms and hands, while the smoke would blacken their skin with unburned powder