

residue. The fumes created by the multiple explosions also gave the men a raging thirst and could cause severe headaches - indeed, these were unavoidable in any event owing to the loud report of the guns, together with the shouts of the men and the rolling of the gun carriages. With ships at great risk from fire and explosion, the Yeoman of the Powder Room specifically monitored the gunpowder and ensured that it was stored and handled properly. To minimize the risk of fire, the powder charges were held in cylindrical wooden containers and taken up to the gun decks by 'powder monkeys' - nimble young boys who raced up and down the ladders as rapidly as possible. Small arms Members of a ship's crew could make use of a variety of hand-held weapons for close action, including firearms and edged weapons. The Board of Ordnance maintained an arsenal at the Tower of London, though civilian contractors also supplied the naval service with muskets and pistols. The former consisted of a shorter version of the land pattern musket, or 'Brown Bess', which measured 46in. in length, weighted 9lb 4oz., and fired a lead ball with a 0.7Sin. diameter. Muskets and pistols were not rifled, and thus suffered from the same deficiencies in accuracy as their smoothbore counterparts in naval ordnance. Effective range was at best 100 yards, though across a rolling deck all but a marksman was lucky to hit a man with an aimed shot. Writing in 1814, a colonel in the Army lamented that a musket ball: Will strike a figure of a man at 80 yards; it may even ... at a 100, but a soldier must be very unfortunate indeed who shall be wounded by a common musket at ISO yards provided his antagonist aims at him: and as to firing at a man at 200 yards with a common musket you may as well fire at the moon and have the same hope of hitting your object. I do maintain and will prove whenever called upon that no man was ever killed at 200 yards by a common musket by the person who aimed at him. Firearms were therefore used with best effect when ships stood practically side by side or during boarding, though once discharged they were rendered little better than clubs, for there was no time in the heat of a melee to reload them. This accounts for pistols always being issued in pairs. Shore duty, of course, was another matter, and for this task sailors were quite sensibly armed with muskets and bayonets.

British sailors (in blue) and marines (in red) boarding an enemy ship. Apart from the prestige attendant upon capturing an opposing vessel, sailors enjoyed the financial incentive of prize money, by which the Admiralty paid the victors a proportion of the value of the prize. (Stratford Archive)

65

Tactics British naval strategy imparted numerous responsibilities upon the Royal Navy, including the seizing of the enemy's colonial resources, the defence of the nation from invasion and the protection of British supplies from overseas. Control of the sea was largely maintained by frigates, which could operate as reconnaissance vessels, perform convoy duty, and fight in ship-to-ship actions. Ships of the line did not cruise the seas in this manner, but rather performed blockade duty and, when possible, confronted the enemy in fleet actions. This, indeed, was a fleet's raison d'etre: to bring a rival fleet to battle and destroy it. Once engaged with the enemy, general strategy gave way to the more technical art of tactics - the actual methods employed to defeat the enemy in battle. British tactics were based on the line of battle, which required an admiral to draw up his fleet in one or two lines, usually with the flagship in the centre and the frigates stationed on the unopposed side, so distributed along the line as to be capable of repeating orders from the flagship to the rest of the fleet before the engagement began. The enemy would also form a line, and the British attack would come either obliquely or in parallel, with, theoretically, every ship engaging an opponent of equal or weaker strength. By employing such tactics, the maximum strength of each ship's broadside could be brought to bear. Prior to action, the admiral would already have decided whether he wished to attack with the weather gage or the lee gage. The side with the weather gage, by which the wind blew one's force in the direction of the enemy, could almost invariably make contact with an opponent, whether he wished to engage in combat or not. The side with the weather gage also provided the attacker with the opportunity to double the enemy's line (Le. to attack him from both sides simultaneously) or pass through or break his line. On the other hand, the fleet with the lee gage could allow its weaker or damaged ships to leave the line when necessary. Moreover, the heel of the ship, which elevated the trajectory of the guns on the lower deck, allowed a vessel's lower-deck ports to remain open longer, and provided more opportunities for firing on the enemy, the angle of whose opposing guns being depressed would not allow continuous fire. In short, a fleet determined