

Ship types - unrated vessels Sloops This category covered a large variety of small vessels. Though less glamorous than the ships of the line that fought the main actions, or even the frigates, many of which fought celebrated ship-to-ship encounters, hundreds of small vessels enabled the Royal Navy to function. Tasks such as inshore patrols and convoy escort duty were vital, if tedious and repetitive, and kept Britain's naval war against France alive. The largest unrated vessel was the ship-sloop (usually abbreviated to 'sloop'), which came in several variations, but in all cases was smaller than a sixth rate frigate and was led by a commander instead of a post captain. Some sloops had both a quarterdeck and a forecastle, others had neither, with the upper deck running continuously the length of the vessel. Most sloops were two masted (thus qualifying them as 'boats' rather than as 'ships'), though they could occasionally appear in a three-masted version. The tasks performed by sloops varied, but included the protection of commerce, inshore defensive patrols conducted all along the coasts of Britain and Ireland to protect against invasion and smuggling, and patrols designed to harass the enemy's coasts. The sloop could not perform the functions of a weakly armed frigate since its armament was insufficient for such duties and because it was quite slow, so that it suffered from the double disadvantage of being not only unable to outrun an enemy frigate but was also incapable of defending itself from one. Most sloops carried carronades that were ideal at short range. Sloops with three masts usually carried up to 28 guns on the upper deck as well as swivel guns on the quarterdeck and forecastle. These were gradually replaced by 32-pdr carronades on the upper deck and six 12-pdr carronades on the quarterdeck, plus two 6-pdr long guns as chasers. The Navy List in 1805 contained 39 vessels of this type, and 57 ten years later at war's end.

Brigs Slightly smaller than the sloop and led by a lieutenant rather than a commander, the brig-sloop (or, more commonly, simply 'brig') usually carried 14 24-pdr carronades, but might also carry a number of long guns. Such vessels were sometimes converted merchantmen where shortages in the Navy could be made up. Two square-rigged masts propelled a brig. Bomb vessels These were shallow-draught vessels used to approach close in shore and fire shot by high trajectory into the interior of a fortification or town. Bomb vessels contained mortars mounted so as to be able to fire at a high angle. Seventeen such vessels were in commission in 1805, and were employed in the attack on Copenhagen in 1807, against Walcheren in 1809, and in the attack on Fort McHenry dUring the Anglo-American War of 1812. Fireships Fireships were loaded with combustibles and handled by a skeleton crew who would manoeuvre the vessel into a position from which it could be carried by the wind or current into an anchored enemy fleet. Just prior to releasing a fireship on its somewhat uncertain course, the crew would light the fuses to the explosive charges or inflammable material and make their escape in boats. A few purpose-built fireships existed in the Royal Navy during the wars, but they were generally fitted out only when a particular need arose, such as at Toulon in 1793 and during the attack on the Basque and Aix Roads in 1809. Employing fireships was particularly difficult, for they tended only to achieve success when sent against a large enemy fleet at anchor and amidst favourable wind and tide conditions - these last being particularly fickle. Schooners Schooners normally carried two masts, and were fast but weakly armed, with square topsails on the foremast and gaff-rigged courses aft. They were well suited for carrying messages between ships and in the pursuit of other, similarly armed and built enemy craft, such as privateers. Gunboats Gunboats were powered by oars or a single sail, and sometimes by both, and armed with one or two heavy guns at either end. Such weapons could only fire straight ahead, for the recoil would capsize the craft if the ordnance were placed in any other position. Gunboats served in harbours and inshore waters, but could not attack a larger vessel except when deployed in great numbers, such as on Lake Borgne in December 1814 during the campaign against New Orleans. Thus, a brig or sloop, if stationery owing to becalmed conditions, could occasionally fall prey to a swarm of gunboats, particularly if close to shore. Ships' boats While vessels lay in harbour their boats could carry people and stores between themselves and the shore, or between ships. Ships' boats could also patrol around the ship while it was anchored in a foreign port to prevent an enemy from approaching or to stop sailors from deserting. Boats could also aid in communication between ships at sea and rescue men who had fallen overboard. Most importantly, boats played an essential role in amphibious operations and cutting-out expeditions, which sometimes required lengthy bouts of rowing. Ships' boats could also be used to tow a damaged vessel or one stuck in a calm, or for moving the anchors. Boats were stowed on the parent vessel, but in battle were often towed astern to protect them - not always with success owing to stray shot - from enemy fire. If left aboard during an action, ships' boats were often riddled with musket balls and shattered by all manner