

HMS Guerriere (38) v USS Constitution (44) one of several epic

74

frigate actions fought during the Anglo-American War (1812-15). Contrary to popular belief, guns were not fired simultaneously as one thunderous broadside, except perhaps for the opening salvo, for the shock to the ship and crew would be extremely great. Guns were normally fired on the orders of individual gun captains who timed ignition according to the moment during the constant roll of the ship when their guns came to bear on the enemy. (Stratford Archive)

A strange noise, such as I had never heard before, next arrested my attention; it sounded like the tearing of sails, just over our heads. This I soon ascertained to be the wind of the enemy's shot. The firing, after a few minutes' cessation, recommenced. The roaring of cannon could now be heard from all parts of our trembling ship, and, mingling as it did with that of our foes, it made a most hideous noise. By-and-by I heard the shot strike the sides of our ship; the whole scene grew indescribably confused and horrible; it was like some awfully tremendous thunder-storm, whose deafening roar is attended by incessant streaks of lightning, carrying death in every flash and strewing the ground with the victims of its wrath; only, in our case, the scene was rendered more horrible than that, by the presence of torrents of blood which dyed our decks. Throughout the fight Leech heard the cries of the wounded all around him some men dismembered by shot and others disfigured by flying splinters. The wounded were carried below to the cockpit, the dead heaved overboard. One of the powder monkeys was severely burned in the face when a cartridge in his hands caught fire. 'In this pitiable situation,' Leech wrote, 'the agonized boy lifted up both hands, as if imploring relief, when a passing shot instantly cut him in two.' One of the other members of the gun crew lost his hands to a passing shot, followed by a second which opened his bowels. With no hope of survival, he was thrown overboard by his comrades: Such was the terrible scene, amid which we kept on our shouting and firing. Our men fought like tigers. Some of them pulled off their jackets, others their jackets and vests; while some, still more determined, had taken off their shirts, and, with nothing but a handkerchief tied round the waistbands of their trowsers, fought like heroes. Men aboard ship, frightened though they might have been, had no means of escape from the combination of shouts, screams, smoke and the roar of gunfire. There was little choice but to carry out the tasks for which they had been trained, as Leech further observed: We all appeared cheerful, but I know that many a serious thought ran through my mind ... To run from our quarters would have been certain death from the hands of our own officers; to give way to gloom, or to show fear, would do no good, and might brand us with the name of cowards, and ensure certain defeat. Our only true philosophy, therefore, was to make the best of our situation by fighting bravely and cheerfully. Soldiers and sailors throughout history have sought protection in battle through prayer. Even those, like Leech, who had no particular religious dispositions, still sought divine intervention when faced with the imminent prospect of death: I thought a great deal ... of the other world; every groan, every falling man, told me that the next instant I might be before the Judge of all the earth. For this, I felt unprepared; but being without any particular knowledge of religious truth, I satisfied myself by repeating again and again the Lord's prayer and promising that if spared I would be more attentive to religious duties than ever before. This promise I had no doubt, at the time, of keeping; but I have learned since that it is easier to make promises amidst the roar of the battle's thunder, or in the horrors of shipwreck, than to keep them when danger is absent and safety smiles upon our path. As fate would have it, her American adversary easily outgunned the Macedonian, and Leech, together with the remainder of the crew, was taken prisoner.