

enabled them to swing themselves into new positions - nor to bring up their stern anchors. The French were thus forced to fight in a static position and could do nothing to prevent the British from engaging from the landward side - a position thought to be too shallow for a ship of the line to negotiate. Not only were the French crews under strength, but they had also stacked boxes, barrels and crates on the landward side of their decks, making it, at least initially, impossible to handle the guns on the port side. Appreciating that the enemy rear was in no position to assist the centre and van, Nelson concentrated his initial attack on only a portion of the French line, bringing for this purpose 13 ships (the fourteenth, HMS Culloden, had grounded on a shoal at the mouth of the harbour and took no part in the action) to engage only eight French. This numerical advantage, compounded by the superior rate of fire of the British crews, enabled Nelson to overwhelm each enemy ship in turn, and move successively down the line, disabling and capturing more vessels after fierce exchanges of fire. Not only could the ships composing the French rear offer no assistance to their consorts further up the line, but most of these eventually succumbed to the British onslaught, with only two ships of the line and two frigates managing to escape.

Trafalgar, 21 October 1805 At Trafalgar - unlike at the Nile, fought in the open sea - Nelson divided his fleet into two roughly equal-sized columns, one of which was to separate the Franco-Spanish centre and rear from their van. The other would pierce the enemy line through its centre. By doing so, the van would be unable to support its consorts without coming about - a process that could take so long that the battle might already be lost. By isolating the van, Nelson not only compensated for his own numerical inferiority (33 Franco-Spanish ships of the line to his 27), but also could then himself outnumber his opponents in the centre and rear. This form of attack entailed a certain degree of risk, however: the leading vessel of each column, by sailing directly against the enemy's broadsides, would receive fire against its stern without any means of reply until the line was reached. In the event, the Victory and the Royal Sovereign reached the enemy line without injuries serious enough to prevent them from passing through Admiral Villeneuve's line, against which a whole succession of British ships issued devastating broadsides while crossing the enemy's IT'. Once both columns broke through, Nelson relied on individual captains to engage the enemy's ships and capture or destroy them through superior gunnery, morale, discipline and seamanship. The admiral knew that once battle was joined, issuing new signals would probably be of little use, for they

The battle of Trafalgar, 21 October 1805. Nelson, with 27 ships of the line, smashed the combined FrancoSpanish fleet of 33 vessels in the most decisive naval encounter in modern history. (Umhey Collection)