

WBerwick San Juan de Nepomuceno

Men clinging to wreckage and fallen rigging during the battle of Trafalgar. Notwithstanding their intimate connection with the sea, very few sailors could actually swim. (Philip Haythornthwaite)

would probably be unseen in the smoke and confusion. It was for this reason that Nelson issued instructions which covered all contingencies: 'In case signals can neither be seen nor perfectly understood no captain can do very wrong if he places his ship alongside that of an enemy.' As expected, the fighting then developed into a series of ship-to-ship encounters - what the admiral called a 'pell-mell' battle - including several unsuccessful French attempts to board the Victory and other vessels. Very belatedly, the FrancoSpanish van attempted to wear and come to the assistance of the centre and rear, detaching ten vessels for the purpose. Ships from Collingwood's column, however, prevented Admiral Dumanoir Le Pelley from rescuing a hopeless situation by interposing themselves between the shattered centre and rear and the as yet unengaged Franco-Spanish van. The resulting British victory was nothing if not decisive: 18 enemy ships of the line captured or destroyed more than half Villeneuve's force.

The brig HMS Little Belt and frigate USS President exchange fire, 16 May 181 I, more than a year before hostilities broke out between the United States and Britain. Commodore John Rogers of the President had been sent to cruise off New York to prevent British ships from stopping and searching American vessels in pursuit of British seamen seeking to avoid service in the Royal Navy. Rodgers pursued and confronted the Little Belt but could not make contact until darkness had fallen. The British sloop refused to identify herself, whereupon a shot was fired - neither side laying claim to it and a 30-minute action ensued, leaving I I British dead and 21 wounded, to the Americans' single injured ship's boy. While Rodgers himself expressed regret for the action, his countrymen and government were growing increasingly irritated by the impressment of American citizens by Royal Navy captains. (Stratford Archive)

73

Genesis of battle: a first-hand account The classic naval encounter between the 38-gun HMS Macedonian and the USS United States (44) in October 1812 as described by Samuel Leech gives a good impression of how a ship prepared for battle and actually fought. A lookout high in the rigging, possibly perched on one of the tops (a platform fixed up each mast), indicated the presence of another vessel with the words, 'Sail ho!'. The captain immediately came on deck and called for the direction of the strange ship and enquired into its nationality. On hailing the lookout again, after a few minutes passed, he received the information he required. Once it was identified as an enemy - in this case an American - ship, the captain issued his command and the ship was readied for battle: All hands clear the ship for action, ahoy! The drum and fife beat to quarters; bulk-heads were knocked away; the guns were released from their confinement; the whole dread paraphernalia of battle was produced; and after a few minutes of hurry and confusion, every man and boy was at his post, ready to do his best service for his country ... To ensure that every man remained at his respective station, the junior midshipmen were told to shoot anyone who deserted his post. The guns were loaded and the slow matches lit, in case the matchlocks misfired. A proportion of the men were then allocated the task of making up a boarding party, should one be required. Leech then described how: A lieutenant then passed through the ship, directing the marines and boarders, who were furnished with pikes, cutlasses, and pistols, [and told] how to proceed if it should be necessary to board the enemy. He was followed by the captain, who exhorted the men to fidelity and courage, urging upon their consideration the well-known motto of the brave Nelson, 'England expects [that] every man [will] do his duty'. The men in the tops, usually responsible for working the sails, were issued with small arms so as to direct fire down on the enemy. Below, on the main deck, Leech was stationed at the fifth gun, where he was responsible for ensuring that his gun was supplied with powder by running up and down the ladders to and from the magazine with cartridges covered by his jacket. The ship was then manoeuvred to enable the starboard guns to come into action, with a telltale sound indicating the start of the engagement. Leech recorded that: