

Plus Cleveland (20) (transport vessel), 20 fireships, three explosion vessels, storeships and other vessels

Lissa, 13 March 181 I An encounter between Captain William Hoste, commanding four frigates, and a Franco-Venetian squadron under Commodore Dubourdieu, with three French frigates, three Venetian frigates and five smaller warships, off the Dalmatian coast. In a furious three-hour action the French fought in two divisions against Hoste's single, closely formed, line. Despite being outnumbered and outgunned, the British squadron drove the French flagship ashore, where it later blew up, and captured three more enemy frigates.

Amphion Cerberus Active Volage

32 32 38 22

Captain William Hoste Captain Henry Whitby Captain James Gordon Captain Phipps Hornby

Lake Erie, I 0 September 181 3 On Lake Erie, control of which was disputed during the Anglo-American War

87

HMS Guerriere (38) v USS Constitution (44), 19 August 1812. While cruising off the coast of Nova Scotia shortly after war had begun between Britain and the United States, Captain Isaac Hull in the Constitution encountered the frigate Guerriere, a former French ship, under Captain Richard Dacres. At about 5 pm action began in one of the war's epic ship-to-ship actions - a slugging match in which heavier American weight of shot would prevail over the British frigate's superior rate of fire. Within fifteen minutes the Guerriere's mizzen mast crashed to the deck, the wreckage blocking the helm and trailing over the side, enabling the Constitution to assume a new position and rake her adversary for the next twenty minutes. Even as Dacres was assembling a boarding party as his last chance to rescue the situation, the main mast fell forwards, bringing down the fore mast and jib boom at the same time. Reduced to a mastless, floating wreck, the Guerriere struck, but so comprehensive was her shattered state that her captors deemed her fit only to be burned the next morning. (Stratford Archive)

88

of 1812, Captain Oliver Perry held command of two brigs, six schooners and a sloop, a force opposed by the British flotilla under Captain Robert Barclay which consisted of two ships, two brigs, one schooner and a sloop. Barclay approached the American anchorage at Put-in-Bay, whereupon Perry emerged to meet him. The American flagship was soon put out of action, but one of the brigs proceeded to break the British line and cripple three of its opponents, including Barclay's flagship. Seeing the futility of further resistance the whole British squadron had surrendered by mid-afternoon. Detroit Queen Charlotte Lady Prevost General Hunter Little Belt Chippewa

19 18 12 6 3

Commander Robert Barclay Lieutenant Buchan Lieutenant Bignal

1

Plattsburg, I I September 1814 Captain George Downie, commanding the British squadron on Lake Champlain, took on the numerically equal American flotilla under Lieutenant Thomas Macdonough, who was deployed near Plattsburg. In a close-fought action lasting two hours, Macdonough's frigate, though badly damaged, outgunned Downie's flagship, which struck her flag. Deprived of necessary leadership, the British squadron thereupon followed suit. Confiance Linnet Chub Finch