

First Aigeciras, 6 July 180 I Fought off Gibraltar between Rear-Admiral Sir James Saumarez and a FrancoSpanish squadron under Admiral Linois. The British had six ships of the line to oppose three ships of the line and one frigate at their anchorage in Algeciras Bay. Linois was obliged to run his ships ashore, though Saumarez lost the Hannibal (74) when she ran aground near Spanish fortifications and was obliged to surrender. Putting into Gibraltar to effect very rapid repairs to his heavily damaged ships, Saumarez again put to sea in order to engage Linois a second time.

Caesar

80

Rear-Admiral Sir James Saumarez Captain Jahleel Brenton

83

Pomp ee Spencer Venerable Hannibal Audacious

74 74 74 74 74

Captain Captain Captain Captain Captain

Charles Stirling Henry Darby Samuel Hood Solomon Ferris Shuldham Peard

Second Aigeciras, I 2-1 3 July 180 I In his second action in a week, Saumarez, with six ships of the line, took on a Franco-Spanish squadron of eight ships of the line and three frigates under admirals Linois and Moreno. The fighting began after dark on 12 July and carried on through the night. Two Spanish ships of the line caught fire and collided around midnight before sinking with immense losses. Shortly thereafter a French 74 was captured. Notwithstanding serious damage to several of his ships, Saumarez managed to reach Gibraltar safely with his prizes.

Caesar

80

Venerable Superb Spencer Audacious Thames Carlotta (Portuguese) Calpe Louis

74 74 74 74 32 14 armed brig

Rear-Admiral Sir James Suamarez Captain Jahleel Brenton Captain Samuel Hood Captain Richard Keats Captain Henry Darby Captain Shuldham Peard Captain Aiskew Hollis Captain Craufurd Duncan Commander Hon. George Dundas Lieutenant Francis Truscott

Finisterre, 22 July 1805 (Calder's Action) In a prelude to Trafalgar, Vice-Admiral Sir Robert Calder, stationed off Ferrol on the northern Spanish coast with 15 ships of the line, was ordered to intercept the squadron under Admiral Villeneuve, which had returned to European waters from the West Indies, in order to prevent its junction with the Spanish squadron in Ferrol. Heavy fog delayed fighting until evening, when an indecisive encounter followed in which the British temporarily prevented the French from reaching port. Calder took two Spanish ships of the line, but was later roundly criticized for failing to achieve greater success.

84

Hero Ajax Triumph Barfleur Agamemnon Windsor Castle Defiance Prince of Wales

74 74 74 98 64 98 74 98

Repulse Raisonnable Dragon Glory

74 64 74 98

Warrior Thunderer Malta Egyptienne Sirius Nile Frisk

74 74 80 40 36 lugger cutter

Captain Hon. Alan Gardner Captain William Brown Captain Henry Inman Captain George Martin Captain John Harvey Captain Charles Boyles Captain Philip Durham Vice-Admiral Sir Robert Calder Captain William Cuming Captain Hon. Arthur Legge Captain Josias Rowley Captain Edward Griffith Rear-Admiral Charles Stirling Captain Samuel Warren Captain Samuel Linzee Captain William Lechmere Captain Edward Buller Captain Hon. Charles Fleeming Captain William Prowse Lieutenant John Fennell Lieutenant James Nicolson