

San Domingo, 6 February 1806 Fought off Hispaniola in the West Indies three months after Trafalgar. Having eluded the blockade of Brest and escaped into the Atlantic, Rear-Admiral Leissegues with a French squadron found himself pursued all the way to the West Indies by a British force under Vice-Admiral Sir John Duckworth. Joined by reinforcements at Barbados, Duckworth with six ships of the line and two frigates made for Hispaniola where he discovered the French off the eastern coast of the island. In an action lasting only an hour and a half, two French ships of the line were driven ashore and later burnt, while Duckworth captured the other two. Only the two French frigates escaped. Superb

74

Canopus

80

Spencer Donegal Northumberland

74 74 74

Atlas Agamemnon Acasta Magicienne Kingfisher Epervier

64 40 36 16 14

74

Vice-Admiral Sir John Thomas Duckworth Captain Richard Keats Rear-Admiral Thomas Louis Captain Francis William Austen Captain Hon. Robert Stopford Captain Pulteney Malcolm Rear-Admiral Hon. Alexander Cochrane Captain John Morrison Captain Samuel Pym Captain Sir Edward Berry Captain Richard Dunn Captain Adam Mackenzie Commander Nathaniel Cochrane Lieutenant James Higginson

Basque and Aix Roads, 1 1-16 April 1809 Following Rear-Admiral Willaumez into the anchorage of Basque and Aix Roads near Rochefort, Admiral Gambier proceeded to blockade his adversary. Shortly thereafter Lord Cochrane arrived with a strong force of fireships and explosion vessels, each packed with hundreds of barrels of gunpowder. With wind and tide in his favour, Cochrane led the attack, forcing many French ships to cut their cables. Some vessels fouled each other and ran aground, but Gambier refused timely assistance to Cochrane and only four French ships of the line were captured or burnt. Further British attacks over the ensuing days were less successful once the element of surprise was lost. Caledonia

86

120

Admiral Lord Gambier Captain Sir Harry Neale (1st captain) Captain William Bedford (2nd captain)

Caesar

80

Gibraltar Hero Donegal Resolution Theseus Valiant Illustrious Bellona Revenge Indefatigable Imperieuse Amelia Aigle Emerald Unicorn Pallas Mediator Beagle Doterel Foxhound Lyra Redpole Thunderer Aetna

80

Insolent Encounter Conflict Contest Fervent Growler Martial Whiting Nimrod King George

74 74 74 74 74 74 74 74 44 38 38 36 36 32 32 32 18 18 18 10 10 8 8 14 14 12 14 12

14 14 4 hired cutter hired cutter

Rear-Admiral Hon. Robert Stopford Captain Charles Richardson Captain Henry Ball Captain James Newman Captain Pulteney Malcolm Captain George Burlton Captain John Beresford Captain John Bligh Captain William Broughton Captain Stair Douglas Captain Alexander Kerr Captain John Rodd Captain Lord Cochrane Captain Hon. Frederick Irby Captain George Wolfe Captain Frederick Maitland Captain Lucius Hardyman Captain George Seymour Commander James Wooldridge Commander Francis Newcombe Commander Anthony Abdy Commander Pitt Greene Commander William Bevians Captain John Joyce Commander James Caulfield (bomb vessel) Commander William Godfrey (bomb vessel) Lieutenant John Morris Lieutenant James Talbot Lieutenant Joseph Batt Lieutenant John Gregory Lieutenant John Hare Lieutenant Richard Crossman Lieutenant Joseph Marrett Lieutenant Henry Wildey Master's Mate Edward Tapley Master's Mate Thomas Mercer