

Thirdly, the civil expenditure by Great Britain on account of the colonies is chiefly defrayed by sums annually voted in the Miscellaneous Estimates, under the head of colonial services; some portion of it, however, is paid for under Acts of Parliament. It may be estimated this year at 300,000". It consists of numerous items, to some of which I shall have presently to refer. I will now only mention that we pay 27,000l. a year for the Colonial Office, 20,000l. a year for ecclesiastical establishments in the West Indies, between 11,000l. and 12,000l. a year for the clergy of North America, and that last year we divided the diocese of Australia into four bishoprics, erected a bishoprick at Cape Town, and conveyed the right rev. gentlemen who held these sees to the colonies, at the expense of this country.

Lastly, under the head of extraordinary expenditure by Great Britain on account of the colonies, I put down such items as the insurrection in Canada, for which in the interval between 1838 and 1843, there were special grants to the amount of 2,096,000l.; as the Kafir war, on account of which there is a special grant this year of 1,100,000l., and for which we shall have probably to pay eight or nine hundred thousand pounds more; as the Maori war in New Zealand, which, at a low estimate, will cost half a million; as 214,000l. for the payment of the debts of South Australia, in 1842; as relief of sufferers by fire and other disasters in the colonies, for which we gave 50,000l. in 1846; as the risk of non-payment of loans, such as 236,000l. to the New Zealand Company, and 716,000l. to the West Indian planters; and innumerable other items. On the average of the last ten years, 200,000l. a year would have been wholly inadequate to cover the extraordinary expenditure by Great Britain on account of the colonies. I will put it down, however, at 200,000l. a year, and I will omit all mention of the sums paid for 820 emancipating the negroes in the colonies, and the civil expenditure on account of our attempt to suppress the slave trade, which many persons would charge to the account of extraordinary colonial expenditure.

If the four sums which I have just mentioned be added together, namely, 2,500,000l. for the Army, including ordnance and commissariat, 1,000,000l. for the Navy, 300,000l. for civil services, and 200,000l. for extraordinary expenses, the total direct expenditure by Great Britain on account of the colonies, would amount to at least four millions a year; and I am inclined to think that this is very much less than the actual annual cost of the colonies to Great Britain. Now, I beg the House to observe, that the declared value of British produce and manufactures exported to the colonies in the year 1844 was nine millions sterling, including the one million's worth of exports to Gibraltar, which are sent to Gibraltar to be smuggled into Spain. Therefore the expenditure of Great Britain on account of the colonies amounts to nine shillings in every pound's worth of its exports; or, in other words, for every pound's worth of goods that our merchants send to the colonies, the nation pays nine shillings; in fact, a large portion of our colonial trade consists of goods which are sent to defray the expenses of our establishments in the colonies. What are the advantages which we derive from our colonial possessions in return for this expenditure? Colonies are supposed to be useful either for political or commercial purposes, and with reference to these objects they should be divided into two classes, which should be considered separately; first, military stations, acquired chiefly for political purposes; secondly, colonies, properly so called, supposed to be of value chiefly for commercial objects.