

The rate of expenditure is the lowest in the North American colonies, where there is the greatest amount of self-government; in fact, since the last insurrection in Canada, and the establishment of the doctrine of responsible government, Canada has become, in most respects, an independent State, except as far as the civil list is concerned, and except that it is now and then subjected to some mischievous and foolish interference on the part of the Colonial Office. Now, the expenditure of the North American colonies in 1845, was 1,134,000l., their population was 1,700,000; therefore the rate of expenditure was 13s. 1d. per head of the population, or 1s. 7d. less than the average rate of the colonies with representative assemblies. But it should be remarked, that of the 1,134,000l. expended in 1845 by the North American colonies, 500,000 was an extraordinary expenditure by Canada, on account of new works and buildings, a large portion of which was defrayed by a loan. If a portion of this loan be omitted, as it ought to he, from the annual expenditure, then the rate of expenditure by the North American colonies for the year 1845 would have been nearly the same as it was for the year 1842, when it amounted to about 9s. a head of the population. Though this rate of expenditure is low as compared to our other colonies, yet it is about 30 per cent higher than that of the United States for similar purposes. The difference mainly arises from the high scale of salaries paid to the higher functionaries in the North 839 American colonies. Generally speaking, those functionaries receive from three to four times the amount of the salaries of similar functionaries in the United States. For instance, in the Canadas, with a population of 1,200,000, the Governor is paid 7,000l. a year; in the United States, the President has only 5,000l. a year, and no governor has more than 1,200l. a year; in the State of New York, with a population of 2,600,000, the Governor only receives 800l. a year. Again, the Chief Justices of Upper and Lower Canada are paid 1,500l. a year each, while the Chancellor and Chief Justices of the State of New York receive only 800l. a year each. The puisne Judges of Canada receive 1,000l. a year each; those of New York only 200l. a year each. The Governor of Nova Scotia is paid 3,500l. a year; the Governors of New Brunswick and Newfoundland are paid 3,000l. a year each. In Massachusetts, with a population much larger than that of the three last colonies added together, the salary of the Governor is only 500l. a year. In fact, the four North American colonies which I have just mentioned, pay 2,500l. a year more for the salaries of their four Governors, than the thirty States of the Union do for their thirty Governors. Now in the colonies the salaries are fixed by the various civil lists. These civil lists, being removed for a series of years from the control of the representative assemblies, are perpetual causes of quarrelling and discontent; and there is always a dispute going on between the Colonial Office and some colony or other on this subject, which frequently leads to the most unpleasant results. For instance, the dispute about-the civil list of Canada was one of the causes which ultimately led to the insurrection in that colony; and at present the Colonial Office is involved in a civil-list quarrel with British Guiana. In all these quarrels, the object of the Office is to keep up the pay of its functionaries; and the object of the colonists is a reduction of expenditure. There can be no doubt that the salaries of the higher functionaries in the colonies are excessive as compared to the standard of the United States, which is the usual standard of comparison in the colonies. For the salaries of the Governors of the thirty States of the Union amount in all to but 14,000l. a year; therefore the average is 460l. a year for the salary of each Governor. Now there are eighteen British colonies which pay for their own governors; 840 their salaries amount in all to 72,000l. a year; therefore the average is 4,000l. a year for the salary of each of these Governors—or nearly nine times the rate of pay in the United States. In fact, nine out of the eighteen Governors in question receive as much as, or more than, the President of the United States. For instance, the Governors of Canada, the Mauritius, and Ceylon, receive 7,000l. a year each; the Governor of Jamaica has 6,500l. a year; and the Governors of Gibraltar, Malta, the Ionian Isles, the Cape of Good Hope, and New South Wales, have 5,000l. a year each. I do not think this rate of pay is too high for noble Lords and other gentlemen of rank and connexion, when they undertake the duties of governors of the colonies; but if we are determined to employ such persons in the colonies, we ought to pay for them ourselves. On the other hand, if we insist upon the colonies paying their governors, it appears to me that, with the exception of the military stations, we should permit the colonies to elect their own governors and other functionaries, and to pay them what salaries they think fit. Such was, in olden times, the constitution of our colonies of Rhode Island, Connecticut, and Massachussets. And the honour and distinction attached to the office of governor would induce the best men in the colonies to serve for moderate salaries. If, however, the colonists were to choose, in any particular case, a person unfit to be a governor, they would be the sufferers; they would have no one but themselves to blame: but, as I will presently show, it would be difficult for them to make a worse choice than the Colonial Office generally makes.