

Before I leave this subject I must call the attention of the House to a Treasury Minute of 10th June last, in which my Lords of the Treasury complain of the delay in rendering, and especially in auditing, colonial accounts. My Lords instance those from Ceylon, the Mauritius, the Falkland Islands, Van Diemen's Land, and New South Wales; and the Commissariat accounts from China, the Cape of Good Hope, Van Diemen's Land, and New South Wales, to which I will add those from St. Lucia, South Australia, and Western Australia. My Lords state that these accounts are so much in arrear that they cannot admit the sufficiency of the reasons assigned for that delay. The delay has certainly been very extraordinary. 837 I find that there are, at present, in the Audit Office the unaudited accounts of ton years from the Mauritius; of eight years from the Cape of Good Hope; of SIX years from Ceylon; and of four or five years from the other colonies to which I have referred. It is evident that, with such delay, it is impossible to exercise an effectual check over colonial expenditure.

I shall now proceed to the consideration of that portion of the colonial expenditure of the British empire which is defrayed by the colonies themselves. A return has just been presented to the House of that expenditure for the last year, in which it could be made up. In most instances it is for the year 1845; it is not materially different from the returns for previous years; I may, therefore, without any considerable inaccuracy, assume that it represents the ordinary annual expenditure by the colonies, and especially for the year 1845. From that return, it appears that the total expenditure by all the colonies—excepting Ceylon, and the stations on the west coast of Africa, for reasons which I will presently state; and likewise the Ionian islands, from which there was no return—was about 3,350,000l. for the year 1845. The population of these colonies was about 3,400,000; therefore, the annual expenditure was at the rate of 19s. 8d. per head of the population. The rate of expenditure, however, varies considerably in different colonies, according to the form of local government. It is greater or less, according as the colonists have loss or more control over their own expenses. This is a most important fact, to which I wish to call the especial attention of the House. I have instituted a comparison between the rate of expenditure of those colonies which have, and those which have not, representative assemblies. From that comparison I have omitted Ceylon, because Ceylon is not a colony, properly so called, but belongs to the class of our Indian possessions; and it is evident that a rate of expenditure which might be considered trifling for a population composed chiefly of Europeans, might be excessive for a population of the Cingalese and Veddahs of Ceylon. I have likewise omitted the colonies on the west coast of Africa; for there is no account of their population on which any reliance cane placed; and the Ionian Islands have also been omitted, because, as I have already said, their expenditure has not been returned to Parliament in the return in 838 question. With these omissions, I find that the rate of expenditure of the colonies with representative assemblies is less than one-half of the rate of the expenditure of the colonies without representative assemblies. The colonies, with representative assemblies, have a population of about 2,580,000, and their expenditure, in 1846, was 1,930,000l., or at the rate of 14s. 11d. per head of their population. On the other hand, the population of the colonies, without representative assemblies, was about 820,000, and their expenditure, in 1845, was 1,420,000l., or at the rate of 1l. 14s. a head of their population, or 18s. 7d. a head more than in the colonies with representative assemblies. I am convinced that this great increase of the rate of expenditure in the Crown colonies is mainly to be attributed to the want of self-government; for it is most apparent when the rate of expenditure, in each class of colonies, is examined and considered separately.