

In the West Indies the military force amounts to about six thousand men. In the year 1843–4, the military expenditure was 513,386l.; the civil expenditure was 74,462l. This civil expenditure consists of an annual charge of 20,300l. for ecclesiastical establishments, of about 18,000l. for the salaries of governors, and of about 834 35,000l. for the salaries of stipendiary magistrates. The total amount of the direct expenditure incurred by Great Britain, on account of these colonies, for 1843–4, has been returned at 593,834l., or within a trifle of what it was in 1835–6. But in order to form a fair estimate of the whole cost of these colonies, we should add to this direct expenditure a portion of the expense of the fleet on the North American and West Indian station, which fleet, as I have already stated, must cost the country at least 300,000l. a year; a portion, likewise, of the expense of the packet service to and from the West Indies, which is contracted for at 240,000l. a year; likewise something on account of the risk of the non-repayment of loans, such as 50,000l. this year, on account of the hurricane in Tobago; 166,000l. which the Colonial Office, somewhat usurping the ordinary functions of Parliament, promised, without consulting Parliament, to British Guiana and Trinidad in February last; and the 500,000l. with which the noble Lord the Member for the city of London has vainly hopped to appease the West Indian interest. How much of these loans will ever be repaid? And we must likewise add the cost of landing captured negroes free of charge in the West Indies; I have already mentioned the cost of capturing them. I am afraid, therefore, that our West Indian colonies will, in future, cost this country directly much more than 700,000l. a year, which is just one-fourth of the declared value of our annual exports to these colonies, on the average of five years, ending 1844. And that export trade is decreasing, and will decrease; for there can be no doubt that the value of West Indian property has greatly diminished. I will not trespass on the patience of the House by making any observations on the state of the West Indies, as that subject was so fully discussed a short time ago. I will merely remark, that some West Indian proprietors have said that we must either restore the value of their property, by protecting their sugar, or they will throw off our dominion. Now, if we must choose between these alternatives, there can be little doubt which would be the cheaper. For, if we were to abandon those colonies, there would be a direct saving of 700,000l. a year, and no protecting duty on sugar. In fact, if we were to make them a present of ten millions sterling, on condition of their becoming independent States, we should be gainers 835 thereby to the amount of at least 350,000l. a year. Though I utterly disbelieve that the West Indian colonies can ever be of the slightest value to the country, as colonies, for their climate is quite unsuited to our race, and they will, in all probability, become negro islands, like Haiti; though they have been the most costly, the most worthless, and the worst managed of our colonies, a perpetual drain on the pockets of the people of England; yet I do not propose to abandon them, except at the express wish of the colonists. I should merely propose to reduce our military force to half its present amount, and to effect a saving of about 300,000l. a year.