

To return to the question of the comparative rates of expenditure in those colonies which have, and those colonies which have not representative governments. In the West Indies the colonies with representative assemblies are Jamaica, the Leeward Islands, the Windward Islands—with the exception of St Lucia—and the Bahamas. Their population is about 700,000; their expenditure in 1845 was 450,000l., or at the rate of 12s. 10d. per head of their population; the rate of Jamaica was 13s. Now, compare this rate with that of the West Indian colonies without representative assemblies, namely, St. Lucia, Honduras, Trinidad, and British Guiana—the Combined Court of which cannot with any propriety be termed a representative assembly—their population 841 is about 190,000; their expenditure, exclusive of the cost of immigration, was 284,000l., or at the rate of 1l. 9s. a head, or more than twice as much as that of the West Indian colonies which have representative assemblies. The salaries of the higher functionaries in the West India colonies are all excessive, as compared with the standard of the United States. Twelve governors and lieutenant-governors receive 29,000l. a year, 16,000l. of which are paid by the colonists to five governors. As I have already observed, the Colonial Office is involved in a civil-list dispute with British Guiana. In consequence of the distressed condition of that colony, at the close of last year, the elective members of the Court of Policy proposed a reduction of 25 per cent upon all salaries above 700 dollars a year. The Colonial Office refused to accede to this proposal; and the Governor carried the estimates for the year in the Court of Policy by the exercise of his double vote. The Combined Court then refused to vote the supplies for the period required by the Governor. The Colonial Office has retaliated upon them for this conduct by stopping immigration to British Guiana, and by refusing the usual licenses to carry liberated negroes from Sierra Leone to that colony. This unexpected proceeding has occasioned considerable inconvenience and loss to various shipowners in this country, who complain that no reliance can be placed upon the Colonial Office with its perpetually shifting-regulations.

The Cape of Good Hope and the Mauritius have each of them about the same population, namely, 160,000, and being Crown colonies, their rate of expenditure is about the same as that of the Crown colonies of the West Indies, namely, 1l. 7s. a head; they are grievously taxed, especially the Mauritius. As I have already said, the Governor of the Mauritius has 7,000l. a year; and the Governor of the Cape has as much as the President of the United States.

It may be said that the rate of expenditure is higher in the Crown colonies, because, generally speaking, those colonies are more thinly peopled than the colonies with representative assemblies. It is perfectly true, that, everything else being the same, the rate of expenditure in a thinly peopled territory will generally exceed that of a thickly peopled one. But the Crown colony of the Mauritius is four times as densely peopled as Jamaica, yet the rate 842 of expenditure in Jamaica per head of the population, is loss than one-half what it is in the Mauritius. Again, the Crown colony of Malta is one of the most densely peopled spots on the face of the earth; yet the rate of expenditure is 16s. 6d. a head of the population, or twenty per cent more than that of the plantations in the West Indies; or nearly double the ordinary rate of expenditure in the thinly peopled North American colonies. Again, Malta is more than twice as thickly peopled as the Ionian States; but those States have a certain amount of self-government, and their rate of expenditure in 1840—the last return which I have been able to get at—was 14s. 3d. a head, or 2s. 3d. a head less than that of Malta.