

In the other Australian colonies which have not representative governments, I am unable to state with accuracy the rate of expenditure per head of the population. In South Australia, at one time, it exceeded 10l. a head per annum; and the colony became utterly bankrupt through the extravagance of its Governor, Colonel Gawler. We had to liquidate its debts, partly by a gift in 1842 to the amount of 214,236l., and by a loan of 85,000l. This loan will be repaid, because South Australia is becoming rich in consequence of the discovery of mines. With regard to these mines, it is said that the Colonial Office has created great dissatisfaction in this colony by reserving a royalty of one-fifteenth of their gross produce. The House is probably not aware that almost every year the Colonial Office makes some change in the management of the waste lands of the Australian colonies, which affects to a greater or less extent the value of all landed property in those colonies. For instance, with reference to minerals. Originally all minerals were reserved to the Crown, and only the surface of the soil was conveyed to the purchaser. In one instance, however, Lord Bathurst, when Secretary of State for the Colonies, gave all the coal in New South Wales to one company. In consequence of these reservations, no one had any interest in searching for or in discovering mines, therefore no mines were discovered, or, if discovered, they were carefully concealed. When, however, the noble Lord the Member for the city of London became Secretary of State for the Colonies, he, with his usual good sense, at once perceived the impolicy of such reservations, and under 845 his rule all minerals were conveyed to the purchaser of the soil. Then mines were discovered, especially in South Australia; and then, to the astonishment of most persons, the Colonial Office determined upon reserving a royalty upon all future mines. [Mr. HAWES: No, no!] What! Do you mean to say that you have in no instance reserved a royalty? [Mr. HAWES: I mean to say that the late Colonial "Secretary, Lord Stanley, did it.] Well, it matters not who did it. The consequence is, that the previously discovered mines, which are nearer the coast, and therefore can he worked with less expense, will have to pay-nothing, whilst the subsequently discovered mines, which are further from the coast, and therefore more expensive to work, will have to pay a royalty of G| per cent on their gross produce. Such a measure is bad on economical grounds, and bad also in policy. For sound policy requires that this country should interfere as little as possible in the internal affairs of its colonies, and, above all, as little as possible with their pockets. The policy of the noble Lord (the Member for the city of London) was the right and statesman-like one; sell your land to the colonists and have done with it. Seigneuries and royalties are relics of feudalism, wholly unsuited to colonies. Their establishment is another instance of the utter ignorance of men and things which the Colonial Office generally displays in its administration of the colonies; and, to crown the absurdity, the Emigration Commissioners report that these royalties arc, at present, not worth collecting in South Australia.