ht here remark that if they had no colonies they would still be obliged to maintain a large fleet and a considerable force for the general protection of trade and commerce; so when the hon. Gentleman spoke of the packet service in connexion with our colonies, he must protest against the hon. Gentleman's inference, because it was clear that that service must be maintained, whether they had colonies or not. In the review which his hon. Friend had taken, he had but slightly noticed the island of Ceylon. Now, he was happy to tell the House that the fixed establishment in Ceylon had been recently placed under the review of the Council; and he was confident that in that island, as in other colonies, great reductions of expenditure might be and would be made. The tariff had been revised, and duties largely reduced already. He quite agreed with his hon. Friend, that it was their bounden duty to reduce the colonial expenditure in every case as far as was compatible with efficiency; and with regard to Ceylon, they had an earnest of this declaration by the Legislative Council having been called upon to review the cost of the fixed establishments, which had hitherto been withheld from their control. Many complaints had been made of the cost of the government of the Mauritius; but in September last, when there was a great probability of a commercial crisis in that colony, his noble Friend (Lord Grey), seeing the approach of difficulties, urged upon the colonial government the duty of reducing the expenditure, and, consequently, the taxation of the island. They had now received from the Governor a reply to these instructions, from which it appeared that 871 there had been effected a reduction of taxation to the amount of 65,000l., including an immediate relief to the planters to the extent of 30,000l. a year, by taking off the stamp duty on the indentures of labourers; and relief to other classes to the extent of 20,000l. He had now shown, that as regarded self-government there was every disposition to establish it where the colonies were in a condition to receive it; and as regarded the expenditure, he had shown two marked instances, namely, Ceylon and the Mauritius, where taxation had been greatly reduced. He had proved that the Colonial Office had not been altogether idle in administering the affairs of the colonies. He would not detain the House to show the effect of our colonial policy; but it was important to state that our colonial trade was an increasing trade, whilst the cost of government was not increasing. The hon. Baronet had stated that for every pound sterling of exports 9s. were paid for the expenses of colonial government. If that were true the colonial system would indeed be indefensible on account of its extravagance; but he was confident that more accurate examination would show that it was incorrect. In 1845 the total value of British manufactures exported to the colonies was 15,100,000l., and that of the exports from the colonies was 13,400,000l. [Sir W. MOLESWORTH had referred only to our exports to the colonies; he never thought of introducing the value of colonial exports into the calculation.] He thought he was justified in taking both: if the cost of colonial government was to be thus tested, it should be proportioned to the whole capital employed; and not charged only on one portion of it; and looking at the case in that point of view, it would be seen that the cost of colonial government was far less than 9s. in the pound upon the value of imports and exports combined. Remarks had been made upon what was called the meddling policy of the Colonial Office; and the hon. Member for Gateshead had observed that South Australia would become a flourishing colony if the Colonial Office would but act wisely. [Mr. HUTT: I said if the Colonial Office would let it alone.] Let it alone! Why, if it had not been for the Colonial Office, the colony would have been bankrupt. South Australia had been essentially a pet colony with some gentlemen, and its management was assigned to amateurs. The result was, that they brought the colony to the verge of 872 bankruptcy, and were obliged to come to the Colonial Office for a loan of 200,000l. Subsequently the government of the colony was transferred to the Colonial Office; and from that moment to the present it had been progressively in a flourishing condition. With reference to the royalties on mines which had been referred to in terms of complaint, he begged to inform the House, that the tax had been established by Lord Stanley, after the most careful consideration. But the system had this inequality—that it only applied to some of the mines, because in many cases these had been opened after the land was sold, with all the minerals beneath it. Well, representations had been made to his noble Friend on the subject. His own impression was that the tax was a fair one; but representations continued to be made, and almost the last act of Earl Grey was to remove those duties. Now, before hon. Gentlemen made sweeping assertions, some inquiries ought to have been instituted. [Sir W. MOLES-WORTH: When were the royalties removed?] Very recently. [Sir W. MOLESWORTH: Within the last three or four days?] No. The abolition had taken place sometime back, though only recently communicated to the colony. The progress of this and other colonies showed that the colonial policy of England had not been so unsuccessful as the hon. Baronet represented, in proof of which he might refer to the progress which Port Philip had made. In 1844 its revenue was 69,000l., in 1846 it was 96,000l.; in 1844 its imports amounted to 151,000l., in 1846 they reached 316,000l.; in 1844 its exports were 256,000l., in 1846 they amounted to 425,000l. As regarded South Australia, to which he had already referred, the result was equally gratifying, as the following comparative statement would prove:—