

§

thought that the hon. Member the Under Secretary for the Colonies had been very successful in showing the improvement that had taken place within a recent period; and if the hon. Gentleman had confined himself to the recent administration of the colonies, he would have done very well. The hon. Gentleman, however, with more of chivalry than of prudence, went back through a long series of years defending all that had occurred. He thought also, that the hon. Gentleman would have been more prudent, as well as more generous, if he 877 had not taunted the New Zealand Company with having received a loan. The hon. Gentleman ought not to have forgot-ten that it was admitted by all that the distresses of the company had been produced by the manner in which they had been thwarted by the Colonial Office until they were driven into a state of bankruptcy. The hon. Gentleman had alluded to the inconvenience which arose from the constant changes in the Colonial Office; but he had not proposed any remedy for that inconvenience. He thought that there should be a permanent board of commissioners or directors for the management of the Crown colonies, similar to that which had acted so well for the management of British India. The system under which the Indian empire was managed had been admitted not merely by Englishmen, but by foreigners, to have succeeded admirably; and why should not a similar system be extended to the colonies? For the last ten years there had been a change in the administration of the Colonial Office on an average once in every sixteen months, and the inconvenience thus produced was one of very considerable magnitude. The noble Lord had been, he believed, convinced, for many years past, of the advantage of giving representative governments to the colonies; but what answer was it for the hon. Gentleman to say that Earl Grey was now in correspondence with Sir Harry Smith about giving a representative government to the Cape, when he (Mr. Mangles) recollected that for twenty years past that colony had been petitioning for a representative form of government?

§ Debate adjourned.

§ House counted and adjourned at a quarter past Twelve o'clock.

Back to CASE OF SIR J. T. CLARIDGE.

Noticed a typo?| Report other issues (data@parliament.uk)|
