

§

thought, whether he regarded the importance of the subject involved in this debate, upon which he entirely concurred with his hon. Friend who had just sat down—or whether he considered the magnitude of the subject, or the multiplicity of details which it involved—and admitting fully at the same time the propriety of discussing it; he must at the outset ask the House to extend to him its kindness and indulgence while he drew somewhat largely on its attention. Both his hon. Friend who supported the Motion, and the hon. Baronet who introduced it, had impugned not only the colonial policy of the present day, but the whole colonial policy of England. Reproaches, too, had been heaped upon the Colonial Office and his noble Friend now at the head of it—reproaches in which he begged humbly to take his share. [Mr. HUTT: If the hon. Gentleman alluded to him, he begged it to be distinctly understood that he cast no reproaches upon the noble Lord at the head of the Colonial Office.] He thought that what fell from his hon. Friend the Member 861 for Southwark (Sir W. Molesworth), did cast not only reproach upon the colonial system, but upon those who had long and now administered it. Now, it was not for him to presume to defend all the errors and defects which might in past times have characterised our colonial system; but this he did say, that our colonial policy, taken as a whole, was the most successful and the most beneficial which the world had ever witnessed. He asked hon. Members who thought otherwise to point to any foreign colonial possessions either now or in past times where there had been the same success and the same progress. Let them point to any system of colonial government, ancient or modern, where free popular institutions had been so systematically established—where a free press and trial by jury were universally conceded—where personal liberty and political power were so fully enjoyed, so freely conferred, as in the colonial possessions of the British empire. This was the system of colonial government he defended. Both his hon. Friends had referred to and lauded what they were pleased to call "the old colonial system." Now, much as be had endeavoured to ascertain what that system was, he owned that the phrase referred to conveyed to his mind no very definite idea. He had heard it said that the old colonies of America were to be taken as a model by which we were to be guided in amending our colonial system. Now, he hardly knew one of those colonies which bad not been exposed to the direst vicissitudes and misfortunes and disasters, recurring, too, through long periods of time; and when hon. Gentlemen talked of colonies to be formed and founded, comprising every grade of society, he asked them to tell him when and where they found members of the aristocracy, and men of great eminence under the older colonial system, going out for the purposes of colonisation. They might be found going out for the purposes of gaining wealth, tempted by the possession of slave labour—they might find them going out simply from motives of gain—but certainly not for the purpose of colonisation in the sense in which we now understood the term. He believed there was not one colony of recent foundation to which we might not point as a triumphant contrast to the chequered progress of the old American colonies. Whether we looked to New Zealand, or South Australia, or Port Philip, or any other place where we had 862 attempted to found a colony—everywhere the most marked success had attended our efforts, so much so, that it ought to encourage us to continue in the course which contrasted so beneficially with the older colonies to which reference had been made. Not one of the old American colonies had succeeded so rapidly, for instance, as South Australia—not one. He was, therefore, not disposed to recur to the old colonial system, as it was called, when he remembered that it comprehended both monopoly and slavery within its supposed elements of success—nor was be disposed to look with favour upon that system until he had ascertained more definitely from his hon. Friend what that system really was to which he referred. The hon. Member for Southwark had referred to the patronage of the Colonial Office. He thought he had beard him say, that none but needy adventurers, men with Parliamentary influence, were appointed to important positions in our colonies. His hon. Friend, he thought, might have recollected name after name of men who had held high office in the colonies, some even at the present moment, which would give the most decisive answer to this charge. He did not now speak of the exercise of patronage by his noble Friend at the head of the Colonial Department—what he said applied to and included those who had preceded him. His hon. Friend might have recollected the names of many Governors of our colonies, which would show to the House that men of distinguished ability and the highest character had then, as now, been called to fill official positions. He might have recollected the name of Lord Metcalfe first in Jamaica, and subsequently in Canada; of Lord Elgin also, first in Jamaica, and afterwards in Canada, which he now so ably governed, in harmony with the feelings and wishes of the people; of Sir Harry Smith at the Cape of Good Hope; of Sir W. Colebrooke, now going out to Barbadoes—men all marked out by peculiar ability, and eminently fitted for their duties. It appeared to be necessary to remind the House of these appointments, since they were overlooked by his hon. Friends. They were now speaking not to England only, but to the colonies, and it was important to show that the appointments to high places in our distant possessions had not been made from the unworthy motives which had been assigned; but that men had been appointed whose ability had been 863 proved by the success which had attended their administration. He might refer to more recent appointments—to Mr. More O'Ferrall, Governor of Malta. Was there any man could impugn that appointment? To Captain Grey, Governor of New Zealand. Was there any man could impugn that appointment? To Lord Harris at Trinidad, and to many others, which would equally show that the motives assigned had not influenced these appointments to the government of our colonies. His hon. Friend had said, that he was for conferring upon the colonies at once a large measure of self-government; but he understood him at the same time to say, that he was for abandoning none of our colonies. It followed, therefore, as a general rule, that all our colonies should be self-governed. Now, he admitted to a very large extent, that wherever a colony was found fitted for that form of government, the home authorities were bound to confer it; but when his hon. Friend looked over our colonial empire, he would find that that general maxim admitted of great and necessary qualification. Take, for instance, Canada, where self-government has been carried to the utmost point. Did his hon. Friend mean to say that he would apply the same form of government to the little island of Nevis? Take the Mauritius, which was excluded from self-government. That was a colony partaking of a military character as well as a colony; in which imperial interests had to be consulted, as well as the welfare of the colonist. Both could now be reconciled. But if a perfect system of self-government prevailed, imperial interests would clearly become subordinate, and in the upholding of these interests the colony was deeply interested. Then, again, where there were hostile races, or where Europeans were in a minority, would his hon. Friend give local self-government to a mere European minority, and thus, perhaps, place absolute power in their hands? It was here that the moderating influence of the Crown came in, and had been useful in maintaining a harmonious action between hostile races and between unequal numbers of different races; a result which, from obvious causes, could scarcely be expected from placing power without control in the hands of a European minority. Experience here was a safer guide than mere speculation. Our colonial possessions might be grouped in four classes. There was first our territorial possessions, over the surface of which we sought to diffuse 864 our race, name, and language. They varied essentially one from another. Such were our North American and Australian colonies, New Zealand, and South Africa. Then there were the plantations, the great object of which was to supply tropical produce to this country. There were great anomalies and difficulties in the way of applying self-government to these islands, obvious to the most casual observer. Then there were our trading possessions, our great commercial depôts, such as Hong-Kong, Labuan, and our various possessions on the west coast of Africa. Those possessions were held for different purposes of policy and interest, and did not admit of one uniform system of government. Then there were the great military stations, but which he understood his hon. Friend did not mean to include in his sweeping policy. This general survey of the colonial possessions of the country showed the impossibility of subjecting them to any one system of government. The government must be varied with the variation of their necessities and peculiarities, which forbade, even if it were possible, the uniform application of one system through all our colonial possessions. He quite agreed with the hon. Baronet in thinking that local self-government ought to be the rule. He was not at all disposed to interfere with that as the general rule; and, whenever a colony or a community was fitted to receive that form of government, it ought to be the first duty of this country to confer that privilege upon it. He was prepared to show, that this had been the guiding principle of our colonial policy. Whilst he was glad to hear that his hon. Friend did not propose to abandon the colonies, it followed, whilst they were retained, that some form of home or central government must exist, whether, as now, by the responsible superintendence of the Secretary of State for the Colonies, or by a colonial commission as proposed by some high authorities. But a home or central authority must be retained in some form or shape very similar to that which at present existed. The hon. Member for Gateshead had talked of the despotic authority of the Colonial Office; and so did the hon. Member for Southwark. What did they mean? Despotic authority! Where was it exercised? The Colonial Minister was amenable to Parliament. The humble individual who now addressed the House was there to explain and defend, as far as 865 he thought it could with justice he defended, the colonial policy of the country. The debates relating to the government of New Zealand could scarcely be forgotten. They were an answer to the charge of despotic authority. And equally so was the power of moving for papers which the House possessed. The debates upon the government of New Zealand, the full disclosure of every transaction in that colony, were equally an answer to the allegation that any secret influence existed—a charge rather made to give zest to speeches in that House, than founded upon fact. Such an imputation was calculated to injure the just authority of the Colonial Government; and he regretted that for a mere passing purpose such observations should be made. But he would now proceed to state how far the principles of self-government, or responsible government, had been recognised as part of that colonial policy which he defended. Would any one deny that Canada possessed the largest measure of self-government? She made her own laws with scarcely any interference; she imposed her own taxes; she expended their produce. She possessed the largest powers of self-government any colony ever possessed. Not only had she local self-government, but she had responsible government; and never had Canada enjoyed it so full