

It is no wonder that the colonies are discontented, and that they are badly and expensively governed. Is there any remedy for this state of things? I have 851 traced the evil to its source in the colonial system of the Colonial Office. Can that system he amended? It appears to me that the Colonial Office, as an instrument for governing the colonies, must always be far inferior to any mode of self-government by the colonists. For it is evident that at least in ninety-nine cases out of every hundred, the colonists, the men on the spot, must he better judges of their own interests than honourable gentlemen far away in Downing-street can possibly be. It is evident, likewise, that (though the empire at large has a deep interest in the good and economical government of the colonies; though all of us here present are most sincerely desirous that the colonies should be contented and happy), yet we have other things to do besides studying colonial affairs and looking after the Colonial Office. Therefore, the Colonial Office is virtually irresponsible; it may play what pranks it pleases; it is only when we have to pay for a Canadian insurrection, or a Kafir war, that an outry is raised, and the Colonial Office is called to account, and then there is not above a score of us who know anything about the subject, even after a laborious study of the documents carefully prepared for the purpose by the Colonial Office. Remember, likewise, that implicit reliance cannot be placed on those documents. Some, for instance, are long didactic despatches, written for the sole purpose of being presented to Parliament, not intended to produce any specific results in the colonies; but full of well-turned periods, containing lofty sentiments and apparently statesman-like views, calculated to gain credit for the Office, and to satisfy the minds of honourable, ignorant, and confiding Members, who soon afterwards forget all about the matter. Again, as a collection of materials for enabling the House to form a judgment with regard to colonial affairs, those documents are not to be trusted, for, generally speaking, they are tainted with partiality, and necessarily so; because they are selected out of a vast mass, on account of their supposed importance—of that importance the Colonial Office is the sole and irresponsible judge—it determines without appeal what shall be produced and what shall be suppressed—in so doing, it must obey the unchanging laws of human nature, and attach greater importance to those documents which confirm its views, and less importance to those which are adverse to its opinions; the former, therefore, 852 obtain its special care, and are sure to be produced; the latter are comparatively neglected, and liable to be forgotten and suppressed; the result is inevitable, namely, partial statements; instances of human fallibility, affording incontestable proofs of the impossibility under which this House labours of forming a correct judgment with regard to colonial affairs. For similar reasons the Colonial Office labours under a similar difficulty, because the statements made to it by the colonial authorities must frequently be of a partial character, and at times wholly untrustworthy; yet always months and sometimes whole years elapse before any explanation of those statements can be obtained. Therefore ignorance and irresponsibility are the characteristic defects of our present mode of governing the colonies. For these defects there is no remedy but local self-government.