

§ RETURN SHOWING THE GENERAL CONDITION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA IN THE YEARS 1840, 1845, AND 1846:—

| 1840. | 1845. | 1846. |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Total population | 14,610 | 22,390 | 25,893 |
| Acres in cultivation | 2,503 | 26,218 | 33,292 |
| £ | £ | £ |
| Exports of colonial produce | 15,650 | 131,800 | 312,838 |
| Revenue | 30,199 | 32,099 | 52,406 |
| Expenditure | 169,966 | 36,182 | 49,388 |

The copper ore exported from South Australia in 1844 was valued at 4,009l., in 1845 at 17,179l., and in the two quarters of 1846 at 54 168l."

873

§ Take any one of the Australian colonies, and it will show a similar progress. It was true that upon some points, such as the minimum price of land for instance, dissatisfaction might prevail; but, generally speaking, the colonies were progressing, and these colonies, if tested by the generally thriving condition of settlers, might fairly be described as happy and contented. New Zealand was another instance of successful colonisation. [Mr. HUME: No thanks to the Colonial Office.] The Now Zealand Company applied to the Colonial Office for a loan, which was granted to a libera amount, and by the great ability and sound judgment of the Governor, Captain Grey, and the renewed exertions of the Company, the colony since that time had made rapid progress in prosperity. He would read an extract from a despatch of Governor Fitzroy to Lord Stanley, dated the 16th of September, 1844, which described the miserable condition of New Zealand at that time:— The state of this colony is unprecedented and most critical; but I trust that the blessing of God on our utmost exertions in so good a cause will enable us to surmount every difficulty, however threatening. We have no money, except the paper currency reported in my despatch of the 15th of April last (No. 11). The receipts of customs are diminishing monthly, owing to general poverty: fees on grants to land cannot be paid, for the same reason; and near 400 deeds of grant which I have signed since my arrival, are now lying in office, because those in whose favour they are made out are too poor to pay the fee required by law. He would now refer only to the last despatch of Governor Grey, which was dated the 17th of March, 1848, to show the present state of the colony:— Firstly, I would generally report that peace and tranquillity prevail throughout every portion of New Zealand; that the general revenue is rapidly increasing; and that internal traffic and commerce are rapidly extending themselves—so much so, that I should think the native trade in manufactured goods had already become an object of some consideration to British merchants; although, as a great portion of this passes through Sidney, it may appear in Great Britain to be a trade with New South Wales. Secondly, upon the state of the native population generally, I would report that they are making rapid and remarkable progress in the arts of civilised life. The various reports I have transmitted upon their employment by the Ordnance department—upon their construction of roads and bridges—upon the number of small vessels owned by them—must all have elucidated the progress the native population are making. Thus the native population was advancing in prosperity, and partaking in the general advantages of civilised government, making 874 not an unimportant feature in the progress of modern colonisation. As regards the revenue, Governor Grey, on the 15th April, 1847, thus addresses the Secretary of State for the Colonies:— In my despatch (No. 46) of the 12th May last, in stating the probable revenue for 1847, I estimated it at only 22,000l., adding that probably the estimated amount might fall below the real revenue, but that I thought it better to incur the risk of erring upon the side of under-calculating the revenue, rather than upon that of leading Her Majesty's Government to form too favourable an opinion of the financial state of the colony; at the same time I recorded my belief that the revenue would shortly exceed the estimated amount, and continue rapidly to increase. Probably the best idea that can be given of the increase which is taking place in the revenue will be conveyed by my stating, that the revenue of the colony of New Zealand, for the year 1845, amounted to only about 6,422l., or only to one-sixth of the revenue for the year 1847, calculated on the present rate of revenue, which will, however, I believe, rapidly increase. His hon. Friend had largely insisted on the excessive expenditure, naval and military, which appeared to have taken place in connexion with the colonies. papers on the subject were presented to Parliament in 1832, and again in 1843 and 1844. He had his attention directed to these papers some time back, and he owned that he was struck with the rapid increase of the colonial expenditure, chiefly under these heads. Upon comparing the years to which he had referred, he found that the increase in the expenditure amounted to about 700,000l. In order to ascertain the cause, he had an account made out in detail, showing, under every head, how the increase arose; and one broad result was rather remarkable. He found, upon looking into the account, that nearly the whole of that increase was confined to three colonies—Canada, the Cape of Good Hope, and New South Wales; the latter being; a great military station, and including New Zealand. To a certain extent be considered this a satisfactory result, because he thought that the present condition of these colonies would place it in the power of the Government to reduce that expenditure. In all, war had ceased. The civil expenditure had not increased much—not more than 40,000l.; and when the House came to consider that new settlements had been made at St. Helena, the Falkland Islands, South Australia, and North Australia, the explanation of that increase was apparent. Neither had the naval expenditure increased much, the increase being not more than 8,000l, 875 He was bound to admit, however, that he thought the general expenditure, both that which might be considered imperial, as well as that which was properly colonial, might be reduced; but he did not think that that could be done by granting, without discrimination, local self-government to all the colonies. The rule which he would venture to lay down was, that as soon as a colony had arrived at that amount of population, and attained that amount of intelligence, which could furnish the materials for good government, that then it was the bounden duty of a Secretary of State to grant local self-government. His hon. Friend had alluded to the constant interference of the Colonial Office with the legislation of the colonies. In order to ascertain the amount of that interference, a paper had been prepared, which showed that from the 1st of January, 1847, to the 30th of June, 1848, no less than 912 laws or ordinances had been passed by colonial legislatures, of which only 55 had been objected to by the Colonial Office. He had the detailed objections in his hand, and if examined they would be found fully to justify this much misrepresented interference—they were objections calculated rather to improve than to impede good legislation. He was quite aware that the Colonial Office did not just now enjoy the good opinion of many of his hon. Friends; but he was at a loss to conceive or to trace that dislike to any clear or intelligible cause. It was an office which must at all times be more or less verging upon unpopularity. Every man who had a crotchet upon emigration ran to the Colonial Office, and unless his plan were immediately adopted, of course he was a disappointed man. Again, it was sometimes the duty of the Colonial Secretary to discharge a colonial judge; and they and all their respective friends, of course, looked upon all connected with the office with a prejudiced eye. Colonial Secretaries sometimes had to remove persons holding important public situations, and those persons had their friends, who raised objections to the Colonial Office. But if the House would call to mind who had been the Colonial Ministers in past years, they would see that a general imputation of what was called despotism must be altogether unfounded. When the House recollected that Mr. Huskisson, Lord J. Russell, and Lord Glenelg had been Colonial Secretaries, he did not think that a desire to exercise despotic 876 authority could be attributed with much justice to them. He could say with confidence that he believed those who had filled this high office, down to the time of the right hon. Gentleman opposite (Mr. Gladstone), and including him in that eminent list, had conferred the greatest possible benefit on the colonies, and had been actuated by the purest and most disinterested motives. He had now brought the observations which he had to make on the Motion of his hon. Friend to a conclusion. He had not the least objection to the Motion, which only carried out that course of policy which he had endeavoured to describe. He thought that the passing of the resolution would strengthen the hands of his noble Friend, and enable him to proceed still further in the prosecution of the views which he entertained. At the same time, he certainly could not concur in many of the statements made and views expressed by the hon. Baronet the Member for Southwark, which, if carried out, he thought must end in the abandonment of our colonial empire. It might be difficult now to foresee what relations the colonies would bear to this empire when they enjoyed that perfect local self-government which the hon. Baronet indiscriminately advocated. But even if this policy were adopted wisely and opportunely, he trusted that other ties would spring up which would bind the colonies as closely as ever to the mother country. At present there were between them the common ties of language, of kindred, of free institutions, and of great advantages bestowed and received; and he hoped that this great change, necessary and inevitable as it was fast becoming, would tend to bind the colonies in a closer connexion than before with the Parent State, by inseparably identifying their interests with the prosperity and strength of the empire at large.