

857 In making these observations, I wish merely to show, that if vast sums of money are to he expended on the colonies, they can he expended in a manner far more beneficial to the interests both of the colonies and of the rest of the empire than they have been hitherto expended. I do not, however, intend to propose to the House any plan of systematic colonisation, or any grant of public money for that purpose. My only objects, at present, are reduction of useless expenditure, and reform of had colonial government, which are things good in themselves without reference to any ulterior measures. But I will presume to express my belief that there is a great and noble career open for any statesman who, possessing the power, shall with firm and vigorous determination, curtail that expenditure, reform that system of government, and, at the same time, promote systematic colonisation. In what manner colonial expenditure can be curtailed without detriment to the interests of the empire, in what manner the system of colonial government can be amended for the benefit of the colonies, I have attempted to show; and in the hope that I have succeeded in proving that that expenditure ought to be curtailed, and that system of government ought to be amended, I take the liberty of moving the resolution:— That it is the opinion of this House that the Colonial Expenditure of the British Empire demands inquiry, with a view to its reduction; and that to accomplish this object, and to secure greater contentment and prosperity to the Colonists, they ought to be invested with large powers for the administration of their local affairs. And if the Government will accede to this Motion, I give notice that next Session I shall follow up this subject by moving for a Committee of Inquiry.

§

rose with considerable diffidence to address the House, after a speech which had displayed such great ability and such extensive knowledge of the subject; but be rose with great confidence to second the Motion of the hon. Baronet. There was scarcely any opinion which the hon. Baronet had expressed in the course of his extended speech which be was not prepared to maintain and support. He agreed with the hon. Baronet that the large expenditure which this country undertook on account of its colonies was productive of very little beneficial result in its application. He believed, too, that this expenditure was sometimes admitted as a justification of the perpetual and mischievous 858 meddling of the Colonial Office with the internal affairs of the colonies. The idea of colonial administration to which these evils were incident was a very miserable substitute for the policy which in former times regulated the relations between this country and the colonies; that policy was inexpensive, it was practically beneficial to the colonies, and did not require that those who administered it should be overwhelmed with an amount of business which no human capacity could properly execute. He was astonished that Earl Grey should have been led for one moment to support such a system as this. Did the system work well? The working was absolutely ridiculous. Look at the present feeling existing in the colonies in regard to their administration. It was said this was one of the ancient institutions of the country; that it was hallowed by long associations. The very reverse was the fact. Gentlemen were alive who remembered the time when no Colonial Office existed. It was not his intention to speak with disrespect of the noble Lord at the head of the Colonial Department; but to whatever individual the fault might be attributed, it was notorious that the working of the Colonial Office was in the highest degree unsatisfactory; and one of the most offensive features in the system arose from the fact of its perfect irresponsibility. There was a strange and mysterious agency always at work in the Colonial Office, with which nobody could cope, and which nobody could understand. A party of persons interested in one of the colonies paid a visit, in the character of a deputation, to the Secretary of State. They laid before him some colonial evil, and asked for redress. A remedy was proposed, and the parties took leave of the Minister, thankful for the kindness with which he had attended to their interest; and reported to their friends that nothing was more satisfactory than the interview they had had. They expected they were going to have their grievances redressed; but by and by, on the same evening perhaps, at some dinner party or ball room, some attaché of the Colonial Office made it apparent that all their expectations were idle—that the Colonial Office had no intention of carrying out the measures—and that in fact the deputation had only lost their time, and mistaken their errand. What could be more offensive than to find that these irregular communications—these backstairs announcements—were better founded than the solemn assurances of the 859 Secretary of State? It was impossible that these sort of proceedings could often go forward without creating extensive and well-founded discontent; for this irregular influence was always exercised on the side of obstruction and bad feeling. His hon. Friend had called attention to the most flourishing colony of South Australia. That colony had the single advantage of costing this country nothing. The persons who founded that colony deserved every encouragement from the Colonial Office; but the whole encouragement they had received from the Colonial Office would afford an entertaining article in the columns of Punch. The colony of South Australia was formed in spite of the Colonial Office: it was now the most flourishing colony of the British Crown. The Colonial Office had an unlimited extent of fertile soil at their disposal; at home there was a people entirely disposed to colonisation, and gifted with qualities most calculated to succeed. There was a large amount of the working classes suffering from the circumstances of the times, and most anxious to obtain employment in distant dependencies. There was also any amount of capital which could be employed with safety. With such elements, wisely and judiciously combined, the most magnificent results might be expected. What were the results? The Colonial Office had made such use of these elements that they had rendered anything which deserved the name of colonisation almost impossible. He could appeal to the hon. Member for Liskeard, if in making this broad assertion he was not using the language of soberness and truth. Who were the parties who now proceeded to our colonies? Men of no character, adventurers and malcontents, and believers in El Dorado—men who did well in no country—formed the bulk of the present settlers, and it was out of materials such as these that you expected to produce great and flourishing colonies. There was at this moment a great desire amongst the working classes to emigrate to the colonies, and there were thousands of men in England pining for opportunities of distinction, willing to confront any trial, if it would only lead to a career of honourable enterprise—men inferior in no high quality to those colonists who laid the foundations of our colonial empire—men whose presence amongst the emigrants would be an incalculable blessing both to them and any settlement to which they might proceed, but who would not 860 hear of the colonies on the terms on which they were now offered them. It used to be said that the bold Anglo-Saxon colonists brought their Lares and their Vates with them; but that was not exactly the fact, for they carried no such things with them. It was true they carried the Habeas Corpus Act and the Bill of Rights with them, and every colonist might go to church on a Sunday if in the colony in which he was placed he had a church to go to. The most peculiar characteristic, however, of the system of colonisation was, that we, who were a monarchical people, had spread persons of democratic principles over the globe. It had been remarked by Mr. Fox of the British, that there was no system but the British constitution under which a British subject could live with comfort; but he had not described the character of the colonies. He believed that the subject was of the greatest importance—that the destinies of this country were intimately connected with our future colonial policy; and he was firmly impressed with the conviction that more depended upon our colonial policy than ever depended upon the issue of a battle, or upon the approach of a revolution. British colonisation was one of the most important subjects which could engage the attention of Parliament, and therefore he had pleasure in seconding the Motion.