y as since Lord Elgin had held the reins of government. He acted without reference to one party or the other; and the Ministry he appointed to conduct the affairs of the country was the Ministry in which the majority of the Assembly had confidence. Such was the principle of colonial government in Canada; and he must add, that Canada, when throughout Europe the greatest anxiety prevailed, and the greatest changes were taking place, was perfectly tranquil and contented with the Government she possessed. In Canada, no attempt had been made to create either excitement, or even advocate a change of government. On the contrary, the people relied on the Government they had, which was that of the majority of the Assembly; and in conformity, therefore, with the wishes of the majority of the people electing the members of that Assembly. Canada, then, presented a case in which responsible government had been carried to a practical and successful result. New Brunswick presented another instance. There a complete system of local self-government existed. He held in his hand an extract of a despatch which his noble Friend at the head 866 of the Colonial Department had addressed, in June, 1848, to the Governor of New Brunswick:— The principle on which, in my judgment, the Governor of a representative colony, such as New Brunswick, should act, is that of endeavouring to form such a council as he thinks will command the greatest confidence from the inhabitants and their representatives, and, when constructed, to give to it all fair support in carrying on the government of the province, while at the same time he should carefully abstain from committing himself to the interest of any one political party in such a manner as to place him under any difficulty in giving similar constitutional support to their opponents, if through any change in public opinion, a change of his council should become necessary. Such were the principles on which his noble Friend had acted with respect to New Brunswick. The hon. Baronet seemed to think he had enunciated a new principle, which had never heretofore been acted on. In Nova Scotia, again, a change of Administration had taken place. The province was satisfied with the change; and the Administration was now conducted by the new Ministry, having the assent of the Assembly, and the Governor giving them his cordial support, according to the instructions of the noble Lord at the head of the Colonial Department. He would quote a passage from a despatch dated November 3, 1846, addressed to Sir John Harvey, the Governor of Nova Scotia, in which his noble Friend said— The object with which I recommend to you this course, is that of making it apparent that any transfer which may take place of political power from the hands of one party in the province to those of another, is the result, not of an act of yours, but of the wishes of the people themselves, as shown by the difficulty experienced by the retiring party in carrying on the government of the province according to the forms of the constitution. Well, then, Nova Scotia also had a constitution, had local self-government. Generally, the North American possessions of this country enjoyed the large and full fruits of the British constitution. But the hon. Member for Southwark made some rather harsh observations on the Bill of his noble Friend for the government of New Zealand, overlooking altogether the liberal and constitutional character of that Bill. The hon. Member was not very accurate in what he said. That Bill, he was disposed to think, did confer a good constitution; in that Bill, for the first time, there was introduced this most important provision—a provision for a franchise to the native population. It was, he believed, 867 the first time in the history of the colonies that the attempt had been made to introduce the natives to the exercise of political power; and there were many who would soon become qualified to exercise the privileges conferred. A more intelligent race did not exist—men more fitted to make good subjects of the Queen. With respect to Australia, his hon. Friend had said, the constitution had given great dissatisfaction in the colony: now no constitution had been proposed. How stood the fact? A despatch, not a Bill, had been sent out to elicit the opinions of the colonists. The object of his noble Friend was to place a general measure before the colonists. Their opinion was adverse to the scheme thus propounded—the Bill which Lord Grey intended to propose was at an end—and the future Bill which, in consequence, it might be his duty to propose—would be founded upon the existing constitution of New South Wales, with full power to amend it as the wants or wishes of the colony should suggest. That was surely not a measure indicating despotic authority, or a determination to govern the colonies without consulting them. Then it was said, the Cape ought to have representative government. What had been done? His hon. Friend had attempted to show that an indisposition existed on the part of the Government to grant a constitution and local self-government to the Cape. The fact was quite the. reverse. Among the papers printed and presented to the House was a despatch dated the 10th of December, 1841, from Sir G. Napier, then Governor of the Cape, to Lord Stan-Icy, recommending a representative government for the Cape. Lord Stanley replied in a despatch, in which he made many objections to the scheme, but expressed a hope they would be successfully met. But the noble Earl at the head of the Colonial Department, having had his attention called to the subject, addressed the Governor in a despatch dated the 2nd of November, 1846, as follows— I turn now to a totally different subject, on which I hope to receive the benefit of your advice and assistance so soon as the settlement of the affairs of Caffraria shall have left you leisure for the purpose. I advert to the applications which have been addressed to Her Majesty for the establishment of a representative form of government in the colony of the Cape of Good Hope. Her Majesty's Government entertain the strongest prepossessions in favour of that system of colonial polity, and will be prompt to avail themselves of any opportunity of extending it to the British settlements in Southern Africa. 868 The House was aware that the progress of the Cape had been interrupted by the Kaffir war; and that the consequent state of the colony was unfavourable to the establishment or consideration of constitutional government. But peace had been restored; and to show that this great principle of our colonial government was not forgotten, he would now quote a passage from a despatch of Sir Harry Smith, dated December 10, 1847:— I propose to myself, with reference to your Lordship's despatch to me of the 10th of September last, to embrace in one general report the remodelling of the whole of this Government upon a comprehensive view, ever regarding popular representation as the true English form of government. Thus the first thing Sir H. Smith did after the termination of the war was to turn his attention to the civil government of the colony; and they had his assurance that he would speedily make a report upon the civil government of the Cape upon a popular basis. Passing now from their territorial possessions, they came to their colonies in the West Indies—the plantations. Here a different state of things existed: there were small European communities, and a large coloured population. Whether in Trinidad, or the smaller islands, or in British Guiana, the observation applied to all. He asked his hon. Friend if he was prepared to confer upon these colonies local self-government? If so, one of two things must happen. They must either take precautions to secure a large and extended franchise for the coloured population, or they must prepare for the small European minority exercising a power over the coloured population without control—a power he doubted whether any one who was well acquainted with these colonies would wish to see thus exercised. He spoke advisedly when he said—and he was sure that every one acquainted with the legislation of the West Indies for the last ten or fifteen years would hear him out—that the tendency of that legislation had been to pass laws with reference to the labouring population which would have more or less placed them in a state of entire subserviency to their masters; and he believed the influence of the Crown had been most beneficially exercised in controlling, on the one hand, the power of the Council and the Assembly; and on the other in restraining the labouring population, and maintaining a harmonious action between those two portions of these communities. But then, it was 869 said that colonies possessing representative assemblies conducted their affairs more economically than those governed by the Crown. Now, they had no returns sufficiently correct to form any sound judgment upon this point. He must state candidly that he had found the greatest difficulty in obtaining anything like an accurate account, whether of population or of finance, or the expenditure and cost of government in the West India colonies having representative assemblies. He must candidly state, that if there were any colonies with regard to which there existed difficulties in ascertaining these matters, they were our West India colonies. New Zealand, New South Wales, and Australia supplied statistical returns of the greatest accuracy; but this was not the case with the colonies he had referred to. And with regard to the calculations of his hon. Friend, especially those relating to New South Wales, it must be remembered that the rapid introduction of 40,000 or 50,000 emigrants would alter materially the cost of government, and affect the general result when the cost of government was measured by its comparative cost per head of the population. Without accurate information on these points, therefore, no results on which dependence could be placed could be obtained. He would refer to one instance. He held in his hand a return of the cost for one year of the government of British Guiana. The total cost, including military expenses, (which were 42,000l.,) was 313,000l. The mother country only contributed the amount required for military protection, stipendiary magistrates, &c.; and of the 270,000l. which was raised by the colony. 100,000l. was spent in immigration. [Mr. BARKLY: You mean dollars.] No. The accuracy of the amount was undoubted; 100,000l., not dollars, was spent in the importation of labourers; but his hon. Friend (Sir W. Molesworth) had not directed their attention to this point. [Sir W. MOLESWORTH specially excluded the expenses of immigration.] He did not so understand the statement of the hon. Baronet, and had therefore selected this colony as presenting a remarkable instance of the apparent cost of the government, whilst it included so large an amount for the importation of labour. Again, his hon. Friend had pointed out Hong-Kong as a settlement where great extravagance prevailed, and, as he understood him, he objected to the policy which led to its formation. Now, 870 when he referred to the reports from Hong-Kong, he found strong proofs of the wisdom of those who founded it. Sir J. Davis, in a despatch dated the 13th of March, 1847, forwarded the third blue book of the colony, being for the year 1846, which showed that the income for that year had increased, from 22,000l. to 27,000l. in 1847; and further, that whilst the income had increased, the expenditure had diminished, the difference amounting to 6,375l. Thus, while the income was increasing, the expenditure was decreasing. Hong-Kong was an important station, and was maintained for the protection of our trade, and not for the sake of patronage; and it could only be upheld by the and of a naval and military force. But it was not fair to charge that expenditure upon the colony. Indeed he mig