

*Email: [[email protected]](https://www.academia.edu/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection)

© 2014 Southseries Inc
144 D. Schimmelpenninck van der Oye

The Testament was the lodestone of imperial Russian foreign policy right up to the reign of
Nicholas II. For some two hundred years, Romanov emperors and empresses faithfully followed
their illustrious ancestor’s grand strategy for ensuring geopolitical primacy. Nowhere was this
more evident than in tsarism’s perennial ambition to secure a maritime outlet on the Indian
Ocean by conquering Britain’s vast South Asian possessions.
Virtually none of this is true. With a provenance as dubious as its contents, Peter’s Testament
was ﬁrst published in 1812 by Napoleon’s foreign ofﬁce on the eve of his Grande Armée’s inva-
sion of Russia (Blackstock, 1966; Blanc, 1968; Mezin, 2010; Ragsdale, 1980; Reis, 1985). Never-
theless, like the equally spurious Protocols of the Elders of Zion, the tsar’s apocryphal scheme for
world domination has enjoyed a long afterlife. As recently as 1979, an article in Time magazine
(15 January) invoked it to help explain Soviet policy in the Near East. What makes this artefact of
Napoleonic disinformation particularly durable is that it appears to be supported by historical inci-
dents, thereby lending an air of authenticity to the forgery.2
Speculations about Russian designs on British India are a good example of the ways the past
can distort perceptions of the present. For much of the nineteenth century, many Britons detected
ulterior motives in tsarist Central Asian conquests. The seemingly inexorable Russian advance
into Turkestan appeared to presage ambitions for their own colonies to the south. However,
there is little evidence that Saint Petersburg ever seriously contemplated such a move – save
Downloaded by [] at 01:34 01 July 2014

one attempt by Emperor Paul I in 1801. After surveying earlier Russian interest in India and
the immediate diplomatic context, this article will recount the tsar’s quixotic campaign to drive
the British from their colony with some 22,000 Cossacks and consider the implications for the
Anglo-Russian rivalry over Inner Asia during the nineteenth century.
Ironically, the idea that Russians might reach India over land may well have come from Eng-
lishmen. While there had been commercial links between Kievan Rus and southern Asia as early
as the eleventh century, these tended to be carried out through Central Asian intermediaries and
usually went via the Caspian Sea and other waterways (Rybakov 1948). In 1551, Richard Chan-
cellor and two other explorers founded the Company of Merchant Adventurers to New Lands in
London, to ﬁnd the Northeast Passage, or the maritime route along northern Eurasia’s shore to the
fabled Orient. Rechartered as the Muscovy Company four years later by Queen Mary, its efforts
yielded as little success as similar European attempts to discover a Northwest Passage over the
American continent.
One of the company’s more able agents, Anthony Jenkinson, happened to arrive at Ivan IV’s
court in 1557, a little over a year after the tsar’s conquest of Astrakhan had substantially extended
Russia’s southern frontier. This suggested that India’s lucrative markets might instead be reached
over land. Although the Englishman did reach Bokhara and Persia, the subcontinent proved mad-
deningly elusive (Jenkinson 1886).
Russia’s rulers themselves likewise began to seek access to the India trade via Central Asia.
One of the tasks of Tsar Alexis Mikhailovich’s embassy to Bokhara in 1675 was to establish direct
commercial links with the Mughal Empire. The Posol’skii Prikaz (Foreign Ofﬁce) tasked
Makhmet-Iusup Kasimov, a Tatar merchant accompanying the party, to travel from the khanate
to the court of the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb with a letter from the tsar professing his friendship
and proposing regular trade. Among Kasimov’s other duties was to discover how to proceed to
India either via the Caspian from Astrakhan or over land from Western Siberia. In the event,
Kasimov only made it as far as Kabul, when Aurangzeb had him turned back on the grounds
that ‘since time immemorial no Russian ambassadors had gone to India’ (Kobeiko 1884, vii).
Alexis’s heir, Peter the Great, continued to seek a reliable route to India (Donnelly 1975). Like
his father, Peter’s motive was commerce rather than conquest: to rival the great maritime powers
of the day by establishing an alternate path to the Orient’s lucrative markets. At the turn of the
second millennium, Kievan Rus had prospered as a major trading route between north-western
Central Asian Survey 145