

Europe on the Baltic Sea and Byzantium on the Black Sea, ‘from the Varangians to the Greeks’. A
similar logic drove Peter the Great’s Oriental ambitions. As Sergei Solov’ev pointed out,
Having achieved his principal goal [access to the Baltic], … he did not let the East escape his gaze.
Well aware of its importance to Russia, he understood that Russia’s material well-being would
improve if it became the commercial intermediary between Europe and Asia. (1993, 336)
One possibility was through Persia. Already in 1695, Peter dispatched the merchant Semen Mal-
en’kii on a trade mission via the Near Eastern empire to Aurangzeb’s court. While the Mughal
ruler was more welcoming on this occasion, and even entrusted Malen’kii with an elephant to
take as a present to the tsar, Peter’s envoy did not survive the trip back (Lavrentsova 1958).
Artemy Volynskii’s embassy to Isfahan 20 years later was likewise charged with exploring the
possibility of ‘sending merchants through Persia to India’ (Bushev 1978; Ovchinnikov 1965,
36). When the Safavid dynasty fell in 1722, Peter took a more aggressive course. According to
Lindsay Hughes, one of his motives for the Persian campaign he launched that year was ‘as a
follow-up to Russian probes into a region which promised access to the riches of India and
beyond’ (Hughes 1998, 57; see also Kurukin 2010).
Nevertheless, Central Asia remained the most direct route to India, and Peter sent several mis-
sions there as well.3 None was successful. The most spectacular ﬁasco was Prince Aleksandr
Bekovich-Cherkasskii’s ill-fated embassy to Khiva in 1717. Commissioned by Peter the Great,
Downloaded by [] at 01:34 01 July 2014

the expedition was launched primarily to verify reports of rich gold deposits in the region,
although it was also meant to promote commercial ties with the Mughal Empire (Ovchinnikov
1965).4 In the event, virtually all of the prince’s 7000 troops perished at the hands of the
Khivans. It would be over a hundred years before another approach would be made to the
khanate (Solov’ev 1993; Terent’ev 1906).
Peter’s successors did not abandon his quest for a path to India. The polymath Mikhail Lomo-
nosov argued that there are three requisites for ﬁscal prosperity: internal order, external peace, and
foreign trade. He pointed out that Peter had achieved the ﬁrst and second, but the third still needed
to be accomplished. Lomonosov went on to stress that Russia must pay particular attention to
China, Japan and India (Lomonosov 1950). Catherine the Great may well have read Lomonosov’s
summons, but she was certainly very familiar with Montesquieu’s Spirit of the Laws (1962, v. 2),
which pointed out that since the days of the Roman Empire, trade with India had brought wealth.
Catherine therefore likewise endeavoured to increase commercial intercourse with the subconti-
nent (Atkin 1980).
The empress also ﬂirted with less paciﬁc ideas. According to one possibly apocryphal
account, she may already have been tempted in 1791 during a particularly tense moment in
relations with Great Britain. As the Royal Navy set sail for the Baltic Sea, one of her admirals,
Prince Karl Nassau-Siegen, presented a plan for a diversionary strike at India. The scheme was
the brainchild of a certain M. de St.-Génie and it called for a force to march through Bokhara
and Afghanistan to the British colony. Meanwhile, Catherine would issue a manifesto restoring
the Mughal Emperor to the throne. St.-Génie did not foresee too many difﬁculties. The Islamic
inhabitants of the intervening lands would certainly welcome any army that supported a coreli-
gionist. Furthermore, he knew some reliable guides for the Hindu Kush’s passes. The ageing
empress liked the idea, but her conﬁdant, Prince Potemkin, dismissed it as entirely unfeasible,
and St.-Génie’s proposal was quietly shelved (Eton 1799; Idarov 1884).
Catherine’s Persian campaign in the last year of her reign is much better documented.
Responding to Shah Aga Mohammad’s reoccupation of Georgia in 1795, the empress sent a
force of 30,000 troops under the command of her current favourite’s brother, Valerian Zubov,
to conquer Persia.5 She explained to General Zubov that the operation also had important econ-
omic aims, for control over the empire would ‘open up the routes to India’ (Atkin 1980, 32). The
146 D. Schimmelpenninck van der Oye