

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions
Central Asian Survey, 2014
Vol. 33, No. 2, 143–152, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02634937.2014.909672

Paul’s great game: Russia’s plan to invade British India
David Schimmelpenninck van der Oye*

History Department, Brock University, Ontario, Canada

This article examines the ill-fated Russian expedition to conquer British India in 1801 with a
Cossack host via Central Asia. Undertaken by Emperor Paul I during his brief diplomatic
dalliance with Napoleon, the enterprise proved highly unrealistic and was abandoned less
than a month after it began. I pay special attention to the knowledge that ofﬁcials in Saint
Petersburg had about the regions to be traversed. I conclude that, despite British fears of a
tsarist overland invasion of their South Asian possessions during much of the nineteenth
century, this poorly planned mission was the only Russian attempt ever made.
Keywords: Russia; India; Central Asia; Orientology; military intelligence; Cossacks;
Napoleonic wars
Downloaded by [] at 01:34 01 July 2014

[I must] attack [the British] where the pain will be greatest and their expectations least. Their domin-
ions in India are best of all. It will take us three, four months at the most, to march from Orenburg to
India. … All India’s riches will be our reward.
(Paul I to Lieutenant General Vasilii Petrovich Orlov, 12 January 1801)1

Peter the Great was a man of unbounded ambition. Toward the end of his life, Russia’s ﬁrst
emperor bequeathed a remarkable plan to his heirs. His reign had already seen semi-medieval
Muscovy metamorphose into a formidable military machine that replaced Sweden as the domi-
nant power in Northern Europe. It was the tsar’s ardent wish that future Romanovs take his
realm even further. ‘In the name of the most holy and indivisible Trinity, We, Peter, emperor
and autocrat of all the Russias’, commanded ‘all … [his] successors to the throne and the govern-
ment of the Russian nation’ to fulﬁl a series of tasks that would make their realm the greatest on
earth. To carry out this sacred destiny, they would have to ‘keep the nation on a constant war
footing’ and, through a series of diplomatic machinations and armed conﬂicts, subjugate all
Europe. As for Asia,
Approach Constantinople and the Indies as closely as possible. … Hasten Persia’s decadence; pene-
trate to the Persian Gulf; re-establish, if possible, the ancient Levant trade and advance right up to the
Indies, the storehouse of the world. (Robert 1860, 1–7)
Peter’s ‘Testament’ was securely ﬁled in the archives at Peterhof Palace. Nevertheless, its contents
were leaked and copies eventually found their way to the French foreign ministry. The Chevalier
d’Eon de Beaumont, a transvestite Bourbon spy, spirited one of them to Paris around 1760, during
the reign of Empress Elizabeth. Some 25 years later, a second copy came across the desk of Platon
Zubov, Catherine the Great’s last favourite, where his Polish secretary happened to read it; she
transmitted the details to a compatriot serving in France’s Polish Legion, General Michel
Sokolnicki.