

Yarmouth to break the Baltic alliance (Manfred 1971; McGrew 1992; Saul 1970; Schroeder 1987;
Sorel 1903)
On 12 January 1801, Emperor Paul I issued an order to the ataman (chief) of the Don Cossack
Host, Cavalry General Vasilii Orlov:
The English are planning to attack me as well as my Swedish and Danish allies with their ﬂeet and
army. I am ready to take them on, but I must go on the offensive and attack them where the pain
will be greatest and their expectations least. Their dominions in India are best of all. It will take us
three, four months at the most, to march from Orenburg to India. I entrust the expedition to you
and your troops. … All India’s riches will be our reward.6
The ataman was to gather his host and proceed from Orenburg via Bukhara and Khiva to the
English colonies on the Indus River. In a second rescript, Paul explained that Orlov’s goal was
to ‘destroy all [British political and economic domination], liberate the oppressed from their over-
lords, gently bring them under our dependence, and divert their trade to us’.7
Orlov was a good choice for the mission. He had enlisted in the Don Cossacks as a private 25
years earlier and had risen rapidly through the ranks. By the Russo-Turkish War of 1768–1774,
Orlov commanded a regiment and was awarded the Order of St George 4th Class for bravery. His
valour at the siege of the Danubian port of Ismail in 1790 during the next war with Turkey won
him a second George’s Cross. Seven years later, the tsar appointed him ataman of the Don
Downloaded by [] at 01:34 01 July 2014

Cossack host (Volkov 2010, Vol. 2).
To what extent was the operation Paul’s brainchild? There is some speculation that Napoleon
had proposed a joint Franco-Russian strike at the British colony. On 16 January the Danish
ambassador to the republic reported to Copenhagen that the ﬁrst consul had told him:
The emperor of Russia could not attack England more damagingly or with more advantage than by
sending an army of 100,000 men from the Caucasus across Persia to fall on the English in India.
(Ragsdale 1980, 80)
And in March Napoleon ordered his minister of the navy and colonies to assign two or three ofﬁ-
cers to draw the public’s attention to a ‘projet d’expédition dans l’Inde’ (Napoléon 1861, 80).
Sometime before 1840 details of a project for an ‘expedition to India by land organized by the
First Consul and Emperor Paul I’ were found among the papers of Count Curt von Stedingk,
Sweden’s ambassador to Saint Petersburg at the time. According to the scheme, Napoleon
would order 35,000 troops from his Army on the Rhine to sail down the Danube and
eventually rendezvous with an equivalent Russian force at the southern Caspian Sea port of
Astrabad. Together, the corps would gallop across Persia and Afghanistan to ‘expel
permanently the English from Hindustan and deliver these beautiful and rich lands from the
British yoke’.
The document also included a brief correspondence between Paul and Napoleon in which the
former explained that there would be plentiful forage and fodder along the way, since the soil
there was well irrigated: ‘Rice is abundant. … There are many cattle, sheep and game, and the
fruits are varied and delicious.’ In any case, hadn’t ‘the Second Alexander’, Nader Shah of
Persia, taken the same route in his assault on the Moghul emperor only 60 years earlier, in
1740? Paul conﬁdently expected the trek to take 35 to 40 days (Hoffmans 1840, 39–56).
No such plan has been found in either the French or Russian archives.8 Even if the document
is genuine, there is the problem of timing: Napoleon’s project was to be delivered to Paul by his
envoy, General Géraud Duroc. As Dmitrii Miliutin (1857) points out in his history of the Second
Coalition, Duroc only arrived in the Russian capital in late May 1801, well after Orlov and his
men had returned from their campaign. The evidence in the Russian State Archive for Military
History (RGVIA) suggests that the decision to attack India was Paul’s alone.9 He had every
reason to be vexed, since perﬁdious Albion had denied his beloved Knights of St John their
148 D. Schimmelpenninck van der Oye