

operation began auspiciously in spring 1796, as Zubov captured the Caspian port of Derbent,
inspiring the court poet, Vasilii Derzhavin, to sing hosannas to the victor.
Oh happiness! See already thronging to us,
Elephants laden with riches,
Covered with carpets from India!
Throngs of people!
Silver and gold ﬂow like beneﬁcent rains from heaven! (Atkin 1980, 32)
Zubov was all set to invade Persia itself when events back in the imperial capital intervened.
Catherine died in November of that year and her heir, Paul I, who opposed much of his
mother’s politics, immediately ordered a halt to the war (Atkin 1980).
By the end of Catherine’s reign, Russia was contending with a new threat in the form of revo-
lutionary France. The empress had been horriﬁed by the regicidal violence, not to mention the
threat of republican contagion, as French armies marched beyond their borders. Nevertheless,
she hesitated before becoming too actively involved in the First Coalition against France of
Britain, Prussia, Austria and other powers, preferring instead to ﬁnish partitioning Poland. Her
son and heir, Paul I, was initially inclined to remain even more aloof from the turmoil to the
West. Shortly after he acceded to the throne, the new tsar ordered his diplomats to set up defensive
Downloaded by [] at 01:34 01 July 2014

alliances beyond his empire’s borders but otherwise maintain a policy of neutrality in Europe
(Bazhova 1998; Madariaga 1981; Ragsdale 1980; Sorel 1903).
When an ambitious Corsican general in French service, Napoleon Bonaparte, seized the
Eastern Mediterranean island of Malta less than two years into his reign, Paul could no
longer stay on the sidelines. The Orthodox sovereign had long been infatuated with the vener-
able Catholic knightly order that had made Malta its base. Arranging to have himself elected as
its Grand Master, Paul now saw delivering the knights’ erstwhile home from the revolutionary
inﬁdel as his personal crusade. Malta would become one of the top priorities of the tsar’s diplo-
macy for the remainder of his short reign (McGrew 1979; Nastenko and Iashnev 2005; Touman-
off 1979).
Napoleon’s occupation of the strategic island had come in the context of an expedition to
wrest Egypt from the Ottoman Turks as a stepping-stone to conquering India. Not only were
the French eager to avenge the loss of their South Asian colonies to the British a quarter of a
century earlier, during the Seven Years War, they also hoped to deprive their enemy of a major
source of its wealth and prestige. In the event, the campaign proved to be a failure. While the
French expeditionary force was eventually forced to quit Egypt, its commander remained deter-
mined to regain India (Cole 2007; Symcox 2003).
As for Paul, Napoleon’s refusal to return Malta to the Knights of St John led to a declaration of
war on the French republic. Russia now found itself allied with Austria, Britain, Portugal and
Turkey in the Second Coalition against revolutionary France. Although the war witnessed
some brilliant successes by the Russians under General Suvorov in Italy, within two years Paul
was growing increasingly disillusioned with his allies. A joint expedition with the British to
Holland ended in defeat. Meanwhile, once having driven the French out of Italy with his Austrian
partners, the latter now refused to leave the peninsula. To add insult to injury, when Britain
wrested Malta from the French it reneged on the promise it had made to give Russia a foothold
there. By 1800, Paul was more than ready to reconsider his allegiances.
Over the course of the year, Napoleon, now the French Republic’s ﬁrst consul, began to court
the petulant Russian emperor. His efforts failed to bear fruit before Paul was assassinated in a coup
the following year. Nevertheless, the tsar’s anger drove him to re-establish the League of Armed
Neutrality with Sweden, Denmark and Prussia against the British in December 1800. While it was
not a formal declaration of war, London took it as one, and began to assemble a ﬂeet at Great
Central Asian Survey 147