

rightful home on Malta. To add insult to injury, he had news that the Royal Navy was about to
make course for the Baltic.
Paul’s intelligence about the route to India was sketchy at best. As he put it in a postscript to
his orders to Ataman Orlov, ‘my maps only go as far as Khiva and the Amu Darya. Gathering
details [about the way beyond] is your affair.’10 Indeed, according to Aleksei Vigasin, there
were no Russian maps of India before the nineteenth century.11 What little knowledge Saint
Petersburg had of the area was not promising.12 The situation had not improved signiﬁcantly
since Kasimov’s failed attempt to reach India over a century earlier, when Tsar Alexis’ Prikaz
tainykh del (Ofﬁce of Secret Affairs) compiled a very rough route description based on mer-
chants’ and captives’ accounts (Lavrentsova 1958).
Aside from the famous travelogue by the ﬁfteenth-century merchant Afanasy Nikitin, by
Catherine’s reign only a handful of Russians had written about their voyages to the subcontinent
(Vigasin and Karpiuk 1995; Birman and Kotovskii 1965; Khalﬁn and Shastitko 1986).13 Chief
among them was army sergeant Filipp Efremov. Taken prisoner in 1774 by insurgent Cossacks
during the Pugachev rising and sold into slavery in Bokhara, the hardy NCO eventually
escaped and made his way via the Tian-Shan Mountains and Western Tibet to Calcutta. In
1786, four years after returning to his homeland, he published his Ten-Year Journey and Adven-
tures of a Russian Non-Commissioned Ofﬁcer Efremov, now Collegiate Assessor, in Bokhara,
Downloaded by [] at 01:34 01 July 2014

Khiva, Persia, India and His Return to England (Vigasin 1995). While it enjoyed a relatively
large readership and provided interesting ethnographic details about Central Asia and India,
the book was hardly meant as military reconnaissance.
Such was not the case with the Explanations (Ob”iasneniia) a Greek cleric, Metropolitan
Khrisanf, presented to Prince Platon Zubov on the eve of his brother’s Persian campaign
(Vigasin 1995). Having served near Athens for a decade, the metropolitan had a falling-out
with the local pasha in 1784 and, after a stay in Constantinople, undertook a lengthy journey
east. Beginning in Egypt and Syria, he travelled through India, Tibet, Afghanistan, Khiva and
Bokhara, eventually reaching Astrakhan in 1795.
Khrisanf’s arrival in the Russian port happened to coincide with the preparations for Cathe-
rine’s Persian campaign. Here was an excellent opportunity to obtain a ﬁrst-hand overview of the
operation’s possible theatre, and the empress quickly summoned the Greek traveller to her capital.
Presented to Prince Platon Zubov for his brother’s use, the Explanations provided a succinct intel-
ligence report of, among others, Persia, India and Central Asia – as the metropolitan reported,
about their agricultural riches, wealth, and populations of these nations and about the possibility of
subduing them, upon the victories of the Russian army in Persia under the command of General
Count Valerian Aleksandrovich Zubov. (Vigasin 1995, 261)
Khrisanf’s Explanations give the impression that vast conquests were entirely feasible. Thus, it
would take only about 20,000 men to occupy north-eastern Anatolia (the Greek author suggested
that an alliance with Persia to take on the Ottomans would be preferable). As for India, the metro-
politan anticipated many nineteenth-century Russian schemes for taking the British colony:
Over this entire region troops of English origin total twenty, perhaps twenty-ﬁve thousand men and no
more than ﬁfty thousand natives. Such is the strength of the army with which England imposes its
power over its extensive domains! Perhaps your Excellency knows how the strength of the British
forces [in India] compares to that of Russia’s army. (Vigasin 1995, 283)
One Russian ofﬁcial in a good position to know the terrain for Paul’s Indian campaign was the
new military governor of Orenburg, Nikolai Bakhmetev. When queried about trade routes to
Khiva and India by the Senate’s procurer-general, Major General Pavel Obol’nianinov, Bakhme-
tev discouragingly reported in late 1800 that proceeding from Orenburg to India was fraught ‘with
many difﬁculties and dangers’. For one thing, the Kirghiz-Kazak Lesser Horde, ‘a savage people’,
Central Asian Survey 149