

perennially menaced the steppes beyond the frontier town. The Khivans to the south were hostile
and dishonest, while the path from Khiva to Kabul was not without peril either. As for the Hindu
Kush, its high mountains were impassable to horses (Ovchinnikov and Sidorov 1965, 406–409).
Paul may well have been emboldened by a more positive memorandum that Major Egor Blan-
kenagel, a retired ofﬁcer who had travelled to Khiva in 1793, had submitted to the State Council in
1797. According to Blankenagel, conquering Khiva and Bukhara would be fairly straightforward,
thereby clearing the way to India (Arkhiv 1888, 625–635). However, a subsequent letter to the
State Council by the previous governor of Orenburg, Lieutenant-General Baron Otto Igelström,
painted a much more sombre picture about the ease of travelling to India (Arkhiv 1888, 642–652).
Despite Igelström’s discouraging intelligence, on 1 February, Ataman Orlov conﬁdently
reported to his master that he would gather a force of 21,000 men, who would be ready to ren-
dezvous at his assembly point within a fortnight.14 Ultimately, Orlov’s host would total 22,507
cavalry. Mostly composed of Don Cossacks, it also included some 500 Kalmyks. Every soldier
reported with two mounts and 1.5 months of provisions (Batorskii 1886).15 Twelve physicians,
as well as translators competent in the languages of Khiva, Bukhara, India and Persia were
assigned to the group, while Orenburg’s governor, Bakhmetev, provided more maps of the area
to the south. Meanwhile, the imperial treasury allotted 1.67 million roubles for the campaign
(Batorskii 1886).
Downloaded by [] at 01:34 01 July 2014

The tsar was clearly impatient. On 7 February, he wrote to the ataman, ‘This expedition is very
necessary and the sooner the better.’16 So important was the mission that Paul released the dis-
graced veteran of Catherine’s recent Turkish campaign, Major-General Matvei Platov, to
command Orlov’s ﬁrst echelon.17
Informed by some rudimentary English and French maps of India, Orlov gave orders to Esaul
(Captain) Denezhnikov to gather more details about the proposed route. His instructions were
extensive and had to be carried out in great haste: ‘Beginning in Orenburg, what is the best
route for our force, across the Kirghiz-Kazakh Steppe … to Khiva, and thence to India?’18
Orlov was interested in both the terrain and the local population, and he sent the esaul to Orenburg
to conﬁdentially question ofﬁcials as well as residents familiar with the Central Asian caravan
trade. The subaltern was also to recruit a Tatar merchant, along with a Cossack, to reconnoitre
the terrain ‘under the pretext of commerce’ and report back by April. All of this was to be
carried out in the greatest secrecy, ‘so as not to incite rumours that might arouse the hostility
of the Kirghiz-Kazakh and other peoples, since the expedition is not meant to disrupt their
peace’ (Batorskii 1886, 56–58). It would have been difﬁcult for the esaul to complete this ambi-
tious task within less than two months. In any case, by 27 February, Orlov’s host was on the move.
The Cossacks initially advanced at a pace of 30–40 kilometres a day. However, they soon
encountered difﬁculties. While they were still well within the empire’s borders, harsh winter
weather began to slow the march. Meanwhile, a poor harvest the previous year made forage
and fodder scarce. For several days the Cossacks went without any food. As the group approached
the Volga in mid-March, a sudden thaw further hampered their progress. One of the commanders,
Major General Andrian Denisov, recalled:
The snow that year was very deep, but just at this time milder weather set in; the melting snow turned
small gullies into large rivers, and we stumbled more and more through water, unable to make out the
road, since the snow was full of water. (Denisov 1875, 240)
Meanwhile, a steady drizzle dangerously thinned the Volga’s ice. Nevertheless, with the help of
the local peasantry, the men managed to cross the waterway, losing only some horses in the
process (Batorskii 1886; Denisov 1875).
The Volga River proved to be the last obstacle. Back in Saint Petersburg, Paul had been assas-
sinated in a coup during the night of 11 March. His son, Alexander I, was now in power, and one
150 D. Schimmelpenninck van der Oye