

NORTHERN STUDIES· 31 public opinion, especially liberal opinion, was a constant source of difficulty as long as the Russian alignment was maintained. The abandonment of that alignment would remove the difficulty and also increase the popularity of the government. Another factor in Sweden's policy during the Crimean War was the growth of anxiety about Russia's intentions towards Sweden and Norway. The policy of 1812 only made sense if there were mutual confidence that both parties had no further territorial designs on the other. It was not enough that Sweden renounced all thought of regaining Finland; Sweden also needed to be convinced that Russia was satisfied with the territorial status quo in Scandinavia. From the early 1830s onwards the Swedes and Norwegians were alarmed by i~dications that this might not be the case. The fortifications which the Russians began to build at Bomarsund on the Aland islands were seen as a potential threat to Sweden, and even Carl Johan in the last decade of his life expressed some anxiety on this point.24 There were also signs of Russian interest in Finnmark, the northernmost region of Norway, and this fuelled fears that the Russians might wish to acquire the ice-free ports of northern Norway.25 Finally, the Russians seemed to show considerable interest in the Baltic island of Gotland. All the evidence suggests that Russian intentions towards Sweden and Norway were essentially innocent, but it is clear that Swedish and Norweg~an apprehensions were genuine.26 There was no intense or immediate fear of Russian aggression, but the Alands, Finnmark and Gotland prompted a nagging anxiety over a long period of time, and this anxiety was reinforced during the period immediately preceding the outbreak of the Crimean War by what the Swedish authorities regarded as Russia's high-handed and aggressive behaviour towards the Turks.27

Since the 1830s the British authorities had to some degree shared Swedish apprehensions over Gotland, the Alands and above all Finnmark, because of the potential threat to British maritime supremacy involved.28 With the outbreak of the Crimean. War, Britain became more prepared to act on such apprehensions. The Russian fortifications at Bonnasund on the Alands were destroyed by an Anglo-French naval squadron

operating in the Baltic, and under the terms of the Treaty of 
Paris which concluded the Crimean War in 1856 Russia was 
obliged to agree that the Alands should remain unfortified in 
the future. In November 1855 the western powers guaranteed 
Sweden and Norway against Russian attack in return for an 
undertaking by the united kingdoms of Sweden and Norway 
not to cede any of their territories to Russia. What the western 
powers were not prepared to do was to guarantee the 
reacquisition of Finland or financial and military support on a 
large scale in order to bring Sweden into the war. However, the 
essential point is that the Crimean War led to British naval 
activity in the Baltic and above all to heightened British interest 
in the Nordic region. This jnterest was not great enough to 
bring Sweden into the war, but it did make the Swedish 
government feel that there was now a far more effective 
counterweight to Russia in the Nordic region. 
This brings us to the final and quite decisive reason why 
Sweden abandoned the Russian alignment during the Crimean 
War. All the factors mentioned so far provide motive rather 
than opportunity. The crucial consideration was that from the 
start it seemed unlikely that Russia would win the war. To put 
it another way, the Swedish government broke with Russia 
during the Crimean War because for the first time in decades it 
felt it could afford to. Similarly, the Swedes could perhaps have 
renewed the Russian alignment after the Crimean War, but 
they did not do so, because they did not need to. And they did 
not need to, because Russia emerged weakened from the 
Crimean War. The course taken by the Crimean War made it 
possible for the Swedes to think about acting upon fears, 
resentments and ambitions which would otherwise have had to 
be suppressed. 
These observations about why the Russian alignment was 
abandoned lead naturally to some general remarks about the 
policy of 1812, which may serve as a conclusion to this article. 
The policy of 1812 survived for about forty years and its life 
span coincided with the period in which Russia and Britain 
were the two preponderant great powers in Europe, and 
nowhere was this more true than in the Nordic region. Given 
Sweden's geographical position and her weakness, the only 