

The change in his outlook was clearly manifested during the events which followed the July revolution of 1830. Carl Johan disapproved of the Belgian and Polish uprisings, partly because they might serve as an unfortunate example for Norway, and he generally followed the Russian lead. He clearly sympathised with Russian attempts to suppress the Polish revolt. He was becoming and sounding increasingly reactionary. He expressed disapproval of the new Whig government in Britain and of the Great Reform Bill. Essentially, he remained conservative in outlook and maintained close ties with Russia until his death in 1844.11

However, at no stage did Carl Johan look exclusively eastwards. Sweden and Norway were extremely vulnerable not only to Russian might but also to British naval power. Carl Johan frequently asserted that the greatest threat to the security of Sweden would be an Anglo-Russian war in which she was forced to take sides, and he always insisted that Sweden should

THOMAS MUNCH-PETERSEN attempt to remain neutral in such a conflict. It is significant that when Sweden issued a pre-emptive declaration of neutrality early in 1834 because of the crisis in the Near East which it was feared might lead to war between Russia and Britain, the terms of the declaration favoured Britain in one important respect. The declaration stated that belligerent warships might use Swedish ports, a concession that was of no value to a power with ports of its own on the shores of the Baltic. In the commercial sphere, Sweden's links were with Britain far more than with Russia and Swedish commercial interests always provided an argument for good relations with Britain. After 1825 Carl Johan followed Russia's lead, but Sweden was never a part of the Russian security system and Britain remained to some degree at least a countervailing presence.12 A fundamental difficulty with the policy of 1812 was that it lacked a firm foundation of popular support among the politically-conscious classes in Sweden. There was a body of opinion in Sweden which supported Carl Johan's attitude to Russia13, but his concept of Sweden's proper relationship with Russia was emotionally repugnant to many Swedes. The loss of Finland had snatched away a substantial and ancient portion of the Swedish realm, and Carl Johan seems not to have appreciated, perhaps because he was a foreigner, how difficult Swedes found it to accept the loss as permanent. Nationalistic resentment of this kind was a latent threat to Carl Johan's policy throughout his period at the head of the Swedish government, but it only came to the fore after 1825, when traditional russophobia became allied with new liberal currents of opinion. The liberal opposition within Sweden did not only concern itself with domestic affairs but also took a strong interest in world events. It regarded Russia as the main pillar of reaction in Europe and was bitterly critical of the Swedish government for aligning itself with Russia rather than the liberal forces in Europe. The opposition regarded Carl ]ohan's Russian alignment as the ultimate reason for his conservatism at home. Swedish liberals sympathised strongly with the Poles during the rebellion of 1830-31 and this produced the first serious clash between Carl Johan and the liberal opposition over a foreign policy issue. In April 1831 the main liberal