---
source_url: "https://www.ssns.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/Munch-Pedersen_1996_Vol_31_pp_37_56.pdf"
final_url: "https://www.ssns.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/Munch-Pedersen_1996_Vol_31_pp_37_56.pdf"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "ee24b5e4544c71840bd15fd6a7db955bf680f6631f25fc229ae2177f3fcc7277"
title: "Thomas Munch-Petersen"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

## Thomas Munch-Petersen

The Policy of 1812: Swedish foreign policy from the Congress of Vienna to the outbreak of the Crimean War

The title of this article probably requires a few words of 
explanation. The term, "the policy of 1812", is used by Swedish 
historians to describe a particular phase in the history of their 
country's foreign policy. In the first instance, it relates, as its 
name suggests, to the foreign policy programme adopted in 
1812 and pursued during the following two or three years. 
However, the term is also used to describe the cardinal feature 
of that programme, the new relationship with Russia which it 
implied. The term is therefore applied in addition to the 
following forty years or so during which this new relationship 
may be said to have persisted. The purpose of this article is to 
discuss not the initial, dramatic phase of the policy of 1812 
between 1812 and 1815 but its longer, second phase from the 
Congress of Vienna to the outbreak of the Crimean War. 
Before turning to foreign policy proper, it is desirable to say 
a few words about Sweden's domestic affairs and about how 
foreign policy was fonnulated in Sweden during these years. In 
1809 the king of Sweden, Gustaf IV, was deposed and 
succeeded by his uncle, Carl XIII. This coup d'etat was followed 
by the introduction of a new constitution, which established the 
separation of powers as the guiding principle for the 
government of the country. Executive power was vested in the 
crown, assisted by ministers whom the king appointed and 
dismissed but who could also be removed from office by 
parliament through the procedure of impeachment. Parliament, 
which consisted of four estates, had the power to vote taxes and 
pass legislation, but it only had to meet once every five years. 
The formulation and conduct of foreign policy was clearly 
placed in the hands of the crown.1 
During the period covered in this article, the Swedish throne 

was occupied by men well able to exploit to the full their 
constitutional powers over foreign policy. Carl XIII was elderly, 
unwell and childless, and in 1810.the Swedish parliament 
elected as his heir Jean Baptiste Bernadotte, one of Napoleon's 
marshals. First as crown prince and then, from 1818, as King 
Carl XIV Johan, Bemadotte - or Carl Johan as he should more 
properly be called - was the effective ruler of Sweden and the 
architect of the country's foreign policy from 1810 to his death 
in 1844. He was succeeded by his son, Oscar I, who reigned 
until the late 1850s and who kept an equally finn grip on the 
formulation of foreign policy. For almost fifty years Swedish 
foreign policy was controlled by two men of French birth, the 
elder of whom never managed to learn Swedish. The foreign 
minister and Swedish diplomats were able to exert influence, as 
was parliament when it was in session and even more the 
press, but the ultimate power of decision resided with Carl 
Johan and Oscar. 
In Swedish domestic politics, the most dramatic 
developments of this period were provided by the growth, 
especially after 1830, of a liberal opposition. It made its voice 
felt in parliament and above all in the press. As we shall see, 
the liberal opposition had strong views on foreign policy 
questions, and in the 1830s, 1840s and 18505 the agitation of the 
great liberal newspapers over foreign policy issues made a 
considerable impact.2 
The policy of 1812 was conceived as a response to the most 
traumatic catastrophe in Swedish history, the loss of Finland to 
Russia in 1809. Finland had been an integral part of the 
Swedish kingdom for hundreds of years. Swedish penetration 
of Finland began in the twelfth century and was accompanied 
by colonisation which created a sizeable Swedish-speaking 
minority in Finland. Sweden's absorption of Finland was the 
most tangible result of her involvement over the centuries in 
the lands along the shores of the eastern Baltic. This 
involvement frequently brought Sweden into conflict with 
Russia and led to numerous wars between them. Modern 
Swedish historians of nationalistic bent have presented the 
struggle with Russia as one of the great themes of Swedish 
history. Be that as it may, there is no doubt that many Swedes 