

newspaper Aftonbladet published an article on Poland which 
combined a powerful mixture of concern for the ideal of liberty, 
russophobia, distaste for the policy of 1812 and hankering after 
revenge for 1809.14 
In the course of the 1830s Swedish liberalism found its own 
foreign policy programme in the ideology of Scandinavianism. 
The origins of Scandinavianism were as a cultural and 
intellectual movement based on a growing awareness of the 
linguistic, social and cultural similarities of the Scandinavian 
peoples, but it had developed by the 1830s into a movement 
with political objectives as well. In its political form, 
Scandinavianism sought the extension of the existing union 
between Norway and Sweden to include Denmark and perhaps 
also a Finland liberated from the Russian yoke. The aim was a 
united Scandinavia organised on liberal principles and siding 
with the forces of freedom and progress throughout Europe. In 
the shorter term, Swedish Scandinavianists were concerned 
that Sweden should lend support to Denmark in the growing 
clash between Danish and German nationalism in 
Schleswig-Holstein, though some of them were extremely 
uncomfortable about taking sides in a dispute between two 
Germanic people.lS 

Carl Johan was infuriated by the attacks of the liberal opposition on his foreign policy. In December 1838 he accused Swedish liberals of seeking a war of revenge aimed at regaining Finland and warned that this approach would destroy everything he had achieved.16 His attitude to Scandinavianism was equally condemnatory. In April 1837 he sent a circular despatch to the great powers and several smaller countries in which he rejected the idea of Scandinavian political union and emphasised the desirability of preserving the Swedish-Norwegian state within its natural frontiers. This circular was prompted by a Russian approach, drawing the Swedish government's attention to the dangers of Scandinavianist agitation.17 Throughout the next 15 years, the Swedish authorities had to take account of Russian hostility to Pan-Scandinavianist ideas when formulating their own response to the growing appeal of Scandinavianism within Sweden.

This point was demonstrated in 1844 shortly after Carl 
Johan's death and the accession of his son, Oscar I. In the 
previous year, a meeting of Danish and Swedish university 
students had been held at Uppsala. Scandinavianist speeches 
had been made and some had been explicitly anti-Russian. Four 
Finnish students who attended the meeting were refJ,lsed 
readmission to Helsinki University after they returned home, 
and the Russians complained to the Swedish government that it 
had allowed the meeting to take place. In these circumstances, 
Oscar thought it prudent to ensure that the return visit of 
Swedish students to Copenhagen in 1844 was cancelled, and he 
successfully applied strong pressure on the Swedish student 
leaders to prevent a meeting that year.18 
This episode demonstrates that Carl Johan's death caused no 
immediate change in Swedish policy towards Russia, and this 
continued to be the case throughout the first 8 or 9 years of 
Oscar's reign. However, Oscar's outlook was not identical with 
his father's. He was resentful of the circumspection he was 
obliged to observe in his dealings with Russia.19 He was 46 
when he succeeded to the throne and was ambitious to play a 
role, to make a mark. Political Scandinavianism might in some 
circumstances offer oppoitunities to satisfy such ambitions. The 
Danish royal family would clearly soon die out in the direct 
line; if Scandinavia were to be united, the house of Bemadotte 
was most likely to provide the reigning dynasty. Oscar was also 
far more sensitive to Swedish public opinion and the strength 
of Swedish liberalism than his father had been. He was 
unwilling to concede much to Swedish liberals in domestic 
affairs, but was aware that liberal opinion might to some 
degree be appeased and distracted by new departures in 
foreign policy. 
Swedish policy during the first Schleswig-Holstein crisis 
illustrates these points but also the continuing strength of 
Russian influence in Stockholm.20 By the end of April 1848 the 
Danes had been driven out of Schleswig-Holstein by German 
nationalist rebels supported by Prussian troops. In Sweden, 
Scandinavianist opinion demanded Swedish assistance to 
Denmark and the Danish government also requested such 
assistance. In the last days of April, Oscar decided that Sweden 