

NORTHERN STUDIES· 31 should send a detachment of troops to Denmark. It is clear that he was influenced in his decision by public opinion and by a desire to appease Swedish liberals, who were disappointed by his domestic policies. Oscar also wanted to pursue an active foreign policy for its own sake, and often stressed that Sweden, though a power of the second rank, could not allow the fate of the Nordic region to be determined without her participation. However, what was crucial was that Russia made no objection to Swedish intervention in Denmark. Nicholas I disapproved of the rebellion in the duchies and of Prussia's assistance to the rebels. Oscar's decision to intervene was only taken after he had learnt of Russia's attitude to the crisis in the duchies. He was therefore able to combine a policy of semi-Scandinavianist activism with continued adherence to a pro-Russian line. Early in June a small Swedish corps was transported to one of the Danish islands, but it never saw active service, since fighting on land remained restricted to the Jutland peninsula. By the time Swedish troops arrived in Denmark, negotiations were already under way for an armistice to end the fighting, and Sweden was able to play quite a prominent role in these diplomatic discussions. Oscar was careful always to act in the closest accord with Russia, and both Sweden and Russia pressed Denmark and Prussia to come to terms. The armistice negotiations were held at Malmo under Swedish mediation, and a seven-month armistice was finally concluded in late August 1848. The crisis, of course, dragged on for another four years and a final settlement was not reached until 1852. Sweden continued to play a role, but in intimate cooperation with Russia. Oscar was at pains to maintain close contact with the Russian government, to inform it of his own intentions and to adhere to its proposals. It was generally felt within Sweden that Oscar's policy during the Schleswig-Holstein crisis of 1848-52 represented a fairly successful excursion onto the broader international stage and that Sweden had asserted her right to be heard in the resolution of problems in the Nordic region. It had, of course, only been possible for Oscar to follow this policy because it suited Nicholas that he should do so, and Sweden's general dependence on Russia was undiminished. For example, after Napoleon Ill's coup d'etat in 1851 the Swedish government

felt it necessary to consult Russia before deciding whether to 
recognise his imperial title.21 
However, Oscar's close adherence to Russia between 1848 
and 1852 was to prove the swan song .of the policy of 1812. 
During the Crimean War Swedish foreign policy was to be 
radically revised and the long standing link with St. Petersburg 
broken. A detailed account of Swedish policy during the 
Crimean War would fall outside the framework of this article.22 
Oscar's aim during that conflict ultimately became to enter the 
war on the side of the western powers and to reconquer 
Finland from Russia. Sweden did not in fact enter the war, 
largely because the western powers did not regard her 
adherence to their cause as sufficiently important to justify 
meeting the guarantees Oscar sought, but Sweden's behaviour 
during the conflict proved a decisive and permanent break with 
the policy towards Russia adopted 40 years earlier. Why did 
this change occur? One reason was undoubtedly resentment at 
Sweden's subordination to Russia, and there was intense 
irritation within the Swedish political leadership that the 
Russians often felt entitled to express an opinion about the 
domestic policies pursued by the Swedish government.23 
Secondly, it was clear to Oscar that any policy of territorial 
aggrandisement could not be followed if Sweden continued to 
be aligned with Russia. There were only two directions in 
which Sweden could expand, Finland and Denmark, and 
Russia would oppose expansion in either direction. The 
semi-Scandinavianist policy pursued between 1848 and 1852 in 
relation to the crisis in the duchies had only been possible 
because the question of political union with Denmark had not 
been raised. 
A third reason is the attitude of Swedish public opinion. The 
policy of 1812 created a cleavage between the government and 
the people. Anti-Russian sentiment in Sweden took two forms. 
One was ideological and arose from liberal aversion to Russia 
as the champion of reaction in Europe. The other was 
nationalistic and often led to revanchist feelings and dreams of 
reconquering Finland. These two forms of russophobia were 
nearly always intermingled and produced a potent 
combination. The widespt:'ead russophobia among Swedish 