

in the early nineteenth century would have subscribed to this 
view and regarded Russia as Sweden's hereditary enemy. The 
first recorded use of the term "our ancient hereditary enemy" 
by a Swede to describe Russia dates, incidentally, to the early 
seventeenth century.3 
The loss of Finland was the result of the agreement 
concluded at Tilsit by Napoleon and Alexander I in 1807. One 
aspect of this agreement was that Sweden would be forced to 
adhere to Napoleon's "continental system" and to declare war 
on Britain. Sweden's refusal to accept these demands led to war 
with Russia and in the course of 1808 the Russians overran 
virtually the whole of Finland. Southern Finland was of 
considerable strategic importance to Russia, ~bove all because 
of its proximity to the imperial capital, St. Petersburg, and 
when peace was made between Sweden and Russia in late 
1809, the Swedes were forced to cede the whole of Finland to 
Russia.4 

The catastrophic turn taken by the war provoked the coup d'etat which deposed Gustaf IV and led ultimately to Carl Johan's selection as heir to the throne. Carl Johan had been chosen mainly because it was hoped that his election as crown prince would improve Sweden's relations with France and enhance the prospects of regaining Finland with French support.5 The nature of Carl Johan's own views when he arrived in Sweden in October 1810 on the course Swedish policy should follow is unclear, but he was aware of the hopes placed in him and realised that his chances of succeeding to the Swedish throne depended on achieving a striking success. The evidence suggests that from the outset his overriding objective was the conquest of Norway rather than the reacquisition of Finland. Norway had been a province of Denmark for many centuries and control of Norway had conferred on Denmark the great advantage of being able to attack Sweden from the west as well as the south during the numerous wars between the two countries. The idea of breaking Danish semi-encirclement of Sweden by conquering Norway had long attracted Swedish statesmen, and Carl Johan was quick to take it up. His attitude to Finland was more flexible. He was prepared to accept Finland and indeed parts of Denmark

proper in addition to Norway if they could be obtained, but 
Norway was always the essential price for his alliance. 
Throughout 1811 Carl Johan kept in touch with both Napoleon 
and Alexander, but early in 1812 he chose a Russian alignment. 
Under the terms of the Russo-Swedish alliance concluded in 
April 1812, Alexander promised to support the acquisition of 
Norway by Sweden in return for a guarantee by both countries 
of the other's territorial possessions, including Finland, and 
Swedish military assistance against France. This agreement was 
later supplemented by an Anglo-Swedish treaty which pledged 
British subsidies and support for Sweden'S aspirations in 
Norway in return for Swedish participation in the war against 
Napoleon. The Russo-Swedish alliance was the core and 
foundation for the "policy of 1812". It implied that Sweden had 
forever renounced all hope of regaining Finland and would 
seek friendly relations with Russia, while satisfying her 
national aspirations in Norway. 
As a result of these agreements with Russia and Britain, a 
Swedish army under Carl Johan's leadership participated in the 
campaigns of 1813-14 against Napoleon and early in 1814 
Denmark was forced to cede Norway to Sweden. Carl Johan's 
relations with his allies were often soured by mutual distrust 
during these years. He knew that they were more sympathetic 
to a legitimate monarch like the king of Denmark than to a 
dynastic upstart like himself, and he feared that they would 
cheat him of his reward. For their part, the other members of 
the anti-French coalition were intensely irritated by his 
insistence on diverting his army from the main theatre of 
operations in order to attack Denmark and by his later intrigues 
to prevent the restoration of the Bourbans and to make himself 
the .next ruler of France. Through it all, the personal friendship 
he had established with Alexander and Alexander's 
fundamental, though not unwavering, loyalty towards him 
remained his most valuable asset. 
Carl Johan claimed that the policy of 1812 had permanently 
created a new: basis for Sweden's relations with Russia and 
more generally for Sweden's position in international affairs.' 
He argued that in the long run the loss of Finland was not 
reversible. Even if Finland could be temporarily regained, it 