

frequently taking the same line. In 1823, for example, he was 
strongly critical of French intervention in Spain, which he 
portrayed as typical of the way reactionary great powers 
treated small nations with free institutions.8 
This line in Swedish foreign policy culminated in an attempt 
to establish a much closer relationship with Britain. The 
occasion was provided by the events surrounding the uprising 
in Latin America against Spanish rule. The Swedish authorities 
were very interested in developing Swedish trade with the new 
republics of Latin America and also regarded adherence to 
Britain's lead over Latin America as a means of drawing closer 
to Britain. In May 1825 the Swedish government contracted to 
sell old Swedish warships to Mexico through an intermediary. 
This move provoked a strong Spanish protest and for their part 
the Russians demanded that Sweden cancel the transaction. 
The Swedish response was to consult Lord Bloomfield, the 
British minister in Stockholm, who advised the Swedes to 
proceed cautiously. The British government, he explained, did 
not want an open breach between Sweden and Russia at that 
time. His remarks were interpreted as meaning that no British 
support was to be expected and in October the Swedes gave 
way to the Russian demand. Carl Johan, however, refused to 
accept that this was the end of the matter. He was determined 
to perservere with his efforts to reorientate Swedish foreign 
policy. What he had in mind was to wipe out the humiliation 
he had suffered by recognising the Latin American republics in 
defiance of Russia. In October 1825 Bloomfield was asked 
whether Sweden could count on British support if the Russian 
reaction were a threatening one. 
At this time, Carl Johan was full of vituperation against 
Russia, a power he described as a threat to her neighbours. If 
Sweden wished to maintain her independence, she would have 
to emancipate herself from Russia and she could only do this 
by developing closer links with Britain. However, the reply of 
the British foreign secretary, George Canning, to the Swedish 
overture was not encouraging. Britain, he wrote, could give no 
assistance if Sweden's recognition of the Latin American 
republics led, against all expectation, to a Russian attack, and 
he advised the Swedes to act with caution. In these 

circumstances, Carl Johan felt unable to proceed and the 
proposal to recognise the Latin American states was dropped. 
What had gone wrong? Above all, the moment was badly 
chosen. In the second half of 1825, Canning had bigger fish to 
fry, as the Greek struggle for independence from Turkish rule 
pushed Britain and Russia towards a rapprochement. Canning 
was not inclined to endanger this development by supporting 
Sweden against Russia.9 
For Carl Johan, the whole affair was a clear and humiliating 
defeat, and he felt he had no choice but to mend his fences with 
Russia. The death of Alexander not only made a deep 
impression on Carl Johan but also provided him with an 
opportunity for overtures to Russia. The condolences he offered 
and several goodwill gestures he made rapidly helped to 
restore good relations. The Latin American episode was a 
turning point in Carl Johan's life. Never again did he seriously 
challenge Russia or think in terms of a British orientation. His 
ties with Russia were reinforced by his growing conservatism. 
By the late 1820s his ideological attitude had changed 
significantly, above all because of the increasing strength of the 
liberal opposition within Sweden and the attacks which it made 
on his government.10 