

THOMAS MUNCH-PETERSEN could not be held. Continuing Swedish aspirations in Finland would lead to perennial conflict with Russia and Sweden lacked the resources to sustain such a struggle. By accepting the loss of Finland as permanent and recognising Russia's frontiers, Sweden had renounced her traditional involvement in the eastern Baltic and removed all grounds for future conflict with Russia. The union with Norway had immeasurably strengthened Sweden's strategic position and' had made her part of a semi-insular state whose only land frontier lay in the remote and inhospitable far north. Carl Johan's analysis of his achievement between 1812 and 1814 implied that Russo-Swedish relations would be marked by natural harmony in the future. His critics, who often included the British minister in Stockholm, suggested that Russia demanded more of Sweden than the renunciation of Finland and that Carl Johan was subservient to Russia. In fact, it is not appropriate to speak of either natural harmony or subservience without making two . important reservations. The first is that there was a period of strained relations between Russia and Sweden in the 1820s, culminating in quite a serious crisis in 1825. The second is that Carl Johan never felt able to ignore Britain and to adopt an exclusively Russian alignment. For two or three years after the Congress of Vienna relations between Russia and Sweden were excellent. Carl Johan remembered with gratitude the support Alexander had given him in the past, and felt the need for Alexander's continuing protection. Carl Johan's position was anomalous and he knew it. As a dynastic upstart, he was ill at ease in the new Europe and ill regarded by legitimists". In these circumstances, his special relationship with the Russian emperor was a valuable asset.6 However, this relationship was about to sustain a blow from which it never fully recovered. When Denmark ceded Norway to Sweden in 1814, it had been agreed that the king of Sweden would pay to Denmark a proportion of the Danish state debt commensurate with Norway's population and resources, and that the precise amount would be settled through subsequent negotiations. When these negotiations began in June 1815, it rapidly became clear to the Danes that the Swedes did not intend to be accommodating. The negotiations

made no progress for several years, largely because the Swedes 
pursued a deliberate delaying policy. The Danes appealed to 
the great powers to put pressure on Sweden and they did so 
with the crucial exception of Russia. Alexander refused to 
interfere. Once again, Carl Johan felt the benefits of being 
Alexander's protege. However, he was beginning to push his 
luck. The Swedes were clearly behaving badly in the matter, 
and early in 1818 the Russian finally agreed to attend an 
ambassadorial conference of the great powers in London under 
the chairmanship of the British foreign secretary, Lord 
Castlereagh. 
Carl Johan's reaction was one of surprise and anger, and 
throughout 1818 his exchanges with Alexander on the subject 
became increasingly acrimonious. Carl Johan stubbornly 
refused to yield to the collective pressure of the powers and by 
the spring of 1819 the Russians were talking about a 
commercial blockade of Sweden as the only means of bringing 
him to heal. It did not come to that. In May 1819 Castlereagh 
suggested to the Swedes a compromise solution, which 
involved a significant reduction in the amount 
Sweden-Norway would have to pay, and Carl Johan was quick 
to accept it. 
The crisis was over, but Carl Johan never entirely overcame 
his resentment at Alexander's failure to protect him. Moreover, 
Britain had been quite helpful to Sweden during the final stages 
of the crisis. Throughout 1818 Carl Johan's propaganda in the 
Swedish press had claimed that great power interference in a 
bilateral Swedish-Danish dispute was not legitimate. He had 
complained bitterly that the matter was discussed at the 
Congress of Aix-Ia Chapelle at which Sweden and Denmark 
were both unrepresented, and compared such behaviour to 
Napoleon's international tyranny. This line of argument was 
directed equally at all the great powers, but Carl Johan's 
propaganda also portrayed him as the champion of small states 
and the ideals of liberty against reaction.7 Given his 
antecedents, this pose was a more natural one than the role of 
Russian protege, but he only adopted it after Alexander failed 
to provide protection. The outcome of the crisis gave him no 
reason to change his tune, and in the early 1820s we find him 