

In spite of the fact that the boy had seen dozens of half-drowned
persons brought back to consciousness, the process never lost to him its
half-terrible fascination. He always felt the lurking danger and he had
been well-trained never to forget how much hung in the balance. Always
it was a human life, flickering like a candle-flame in a gusty wind.
Always the outcome was unknown.

Once Eric had worked for a solid hour over a man who had been brought in
from the beach before he had been rewarded by any sign of life. The
U. S. Volunteer Corps had drilled into him very thoroughly the knowledge
that tireless patience and grim persistence will almost work miracles.
Accordingly, when it came his turn, he joined readily in the work of
restoration. The swim had tired him a little, and he was glad to quit
when another member of the station took his place over the half-drowned
man's body.

"Why do we use the Schaefer method, Doctor?" Eric asked.

"It's the best system for our work," was the reply, "because it can be
done by one person. Quite often, a fellow may make a rescue and bring
some one to shore, so that he will have to work alone. You're not going
to be right at a station always."

"That's true," the boy said meditatively.

"Watch, now," continued the doctor, pointing to the life-saver, who was
at work and who was kneeling astride the prone figure of the unconscious
man. "You see Johnson's hands are pressing right between the short ribs,
aren't they?"

"Yes, that's the base of the lungs, isn't it?" Eric queried.

"It is," the doctor answered. "Now when a man brings down the weight of
the upper part of his body on his hands--the way Johnson is doing
there--it means that about one hundred pounds of pressure is applied to
those lungs, doesn't it?"

"Sure; fifty pounds on each lung," agreed the boy.

"You can see how that forces out nearly every bit of air in the lungs.
Then, as soon as he leans backwards again, and takes off the pressure,
the air rushes in to fill the lungs. That makes artificial breathing,
doesn't it?"

"Of course."

"That's the whole secret of restoration; that, and keeping everlastingly
at it."

"But if the Schaefer method is the best way," protested Eric, "I don't
see why everybody doesn't use it."

"Such as--"

"Well, the Life-Saving end of the Coast Guard doesn't!"

"I don't say the Schaefer is the only good method," answered the doctor;
"nothing of the kind. It's the one that suits us best." He stepped over
to the prostrate man, never relaxing his vigilant watch for the first
sign of life. Then, returning to Eric, he continued, "The Coast Guard
uses the Sylvester method, doesn't it?"

"One of the forms of it, Father told me," the boy answered. "He showed
me how. It's quite different from what we do here."

"How did he show you?" asked the doctor interestedly; "there are so many
different ways."

"Father told me to stand or kneel at the head of the chap who had been
rescued, then, grabbing hold of the arms above the elbows, to draw them
up over the head, keep them there a couple of seconds, then force them
down and press them against the sides of the chest. I suppose the
principle is about the same."