

"Exactly the same," the doctor said, "but of course every one has his
preference. I like the Schaefer method best, myself, because in it the
tongue hangs out and the water runs from the mouth naturally, while in
the Sylvester method, the tongue has to be tied."

"But which is the better?" persisted Eric.

"There really doesn't seem to be much difference in the result," was the
reply, "it's the man behind the gun, not the system. The Coast Guard so
far holds the record for the most wonderful cases of recovery and theirs
is the older method. The important thing is to know exactly what you're
doing, and to do it with everlasting perseverance. Never give up! I've
seen some wonderful examples of fellows just snatched back to life long
after we thought they had gone. There was one, I remember--"

"Doctor!" called Johnson, "I think he's coming to!"

The rescued man gave a gasp and his eyelids fluttered. The doctor was
beside him in an instant, but instead of seeming satisfied by his
examination he shook his head doubtfully as he rose from the side of his
patient.

"Going all right?" queried Eric.

"No," was the answer, "he's not. I think he's got smokers' heart. You'd
better watch him a bit closely, boys! One can't ever tell in these
cases."

"You mean he's not out of the woods yet, Doctor?" the lad asked.

"Not by a long shot," was the reply. "You can't play any monkey-shines
with the heart. Judging by the shape that fellow's heart is in, I should
be inclined to say he's been smoking for nearly ten years, smoking
pretty heavily, too. And he can't be a day over twenty-three!"

"Do you suppose that had anything to do with his drowning?"

"Of course it had," the doctor answered. "Swimming is a real athletic
exercise and you've got to keep in shape to swim well. What's more,
you've got to have a decent heart to start with. But if a youngster
piles into cigarettes, it's a safe bet that he's going to cripple
himself for athletics in manhood."

"But you smoke, Doctor!"

"Sure I do," the other rejoined. "And I swim, pretty nearly as well as
any of you young fellows. But I didn't start any cigarette business when
I was a kid, the way lots of boys do now. It wasn't until I was in
college that I smoked my first pipe."

"Then you think it's all right for a chap to smoke after he's grown up?"

"I wouldn't go as far as to say that," the doctor said, "but there's no
doubt that the cases which have turned out worst are those in which the
habit began early. Nature's a wise old scout, Eric, and you're apt to
find that a man who's likely to be hurt by smoking won't develop a
craving for it unless he started too young, or unless he forced himself
to excess."

The boy wanted to question the doctor further, for he was thoroughly
interested in finding out that smoking prevents an athletic manhood,
when the speaker was interrupted by a cry from the half-conscious man.

"Jake!" he called.

The doctor was beside him in a second.