

"But still I don't see how you can teach them on land," Willett
objected.

"Why not?"

"You're supposed to swim with your legs as well as your hands, aren't
you?"

"Of course. It's the legs that you really do the swimming with."

"That's what I thought. But how can you kick out with both legs when
you're standing on them?"

"Oh, that's what's troubling you," said Eric laughing. "But there's
nothing difficult in that. The idea in the leg motions of swimming is to
bring the legs to the body, isn't it?"

"That's what I always thought."

"It doesn't make any difference if you bring the body to the legs, does
it?"

"I--suppose not," the other said, dubiously.

"Of course it doesn't. That's just the idea. You watch the kids going
through the drill and you'll get on to it. Why, I can put a bunch wise
to swimming, though they're a thousand miles away from any water deep
enough to drown in."

Eric had hardly got outside the station when the boys flocked to him in
a body. He answered their fusillade of greetings with equal heartiness
and then called them to attention.

"Get to business, now!" he called, and the group lined up in fours, each
boy about six feet from his neighbor. "Ready!" he called. "One! Hands
together, palms to each other. Swing 'em around a little behind the
level of the shoulders turning 'em palm outward as you go. This way!" He
showed the motion. "At the word 'Two'--bring the hands in to the breast.
At 'Three' put the hands forward. All together, now: One! Two! Three!"

The boys followed the motions, some doing it well, but others looking
very clumsy and awkward. A dozen times or more the boys went through the
drill until a certain amount of regularity began to appear.

"Leg motions next," Eric called briskly. "At the word 'One!' bring the
body down to the heels in a sitting position. At the word 'Two'
straighten up and jump with both legs wide apart. At the word 'Three,'
jump and bring the legs close together. That's the one that shoots you
ahead."

This was repeated a dozen or more times and then Eric started the
youngsters doing both the arm and leg motions together. It was really
hard work, but when he let the urchins go at the end of about half an
hour, some of them could do it like clockwork.


[Illustration: BREAKING A DEATH-CLUTCH FROM BEHIND.

Courtesy of U.S. Volunteer Life-Saving Corps.]


[Illustration: BREAKING A DEATH-CLUTCH FROM THE FRONT.

Teaching life-saving at its best, the Commodore [the tallest man in
uniform] watching.

Courtesy of U.S. Volunteer Life-Saving Corps.]


"How much real swimming do you suppose the kids learn from that stuff?"
Willett asked.

"About one-third of them can swim right away," Eric answered. "It's
mostly in getting used to it. After all, if a kid gets hold of the right
stroke and practises enough so that he can do it automatically, he can't
do anything else but that when he gets into the water. The more scared
he is, the surer he is to do the thing he's got used to doing. What
sends people down in the water, is that they've got a wrong idea. They
wave their arms about, and as soon as your arms are out of the water, it
just alters the balance enough to put your mouth under."