

"Don't you think that's carrying it a bit too far?" queried his chum.

"I used to think so," Eric said, "but I don't now. I've got the idea
that's behind the rule. Everybody isn't cut out to be a light-keeper.
The work calls for just one thing, a tremendous conscientiousness.
There's no one to keep constant tab on men in isolated stations. Men who
haven't got the right point of view won't stay in the service, and those
who have got it, get it developed a lot more. The way it looks to me,
the Commissioner has built up an organization of men who do their work
because they believe in it, and who naturally have a liking for
regularity and order."

"You're sure stuck on the Lighthouse Service, Eric," said his chum with
a laugh.

"Why wouldn't I be?" the lad replied. "If all my folks are in it, I've
probably got some of that same sort of feeling in my blood. But I'm
different, too. The same thing to do over and over again, day after day,
month after month, would get my goat. I want to do something that's got
more variety and more opportunity. That's why I'm going to join the
Coast Guard--if I can get in."


[Illustration: THE "EDDYSTONE" OF AMERICA.

Minot's Ledge Light, off Boston, one of the most important lighthouses
on the American coast, a triumph of engineering.

Courtesy of U.S. Bureau of Lighthouses.]


"Well," the Eel said, sighing, "I envy you. So far as I can see, I'm
like your lighthouse-keeper. I'm stuck at a desk for the rest of my
life. You go ahead, Eric, and do the big stuff in rescue work, with
uniform and epaulets and all the rest of it. I'll stay right on my job
in the city and--on Saturdays, Sundays, and vacations--I'll do my little
best in the volunteer job on this beach."

"It's bully work here, all right," agreed Eric, "and I'm only sorry I
can't be in two places at once. Good luck, old man," he continued,
shaking hands with his chum heartily, "I'll drop you a line written
right on Tillamook Rock, and maybe it'll have the real sea flavor to
it!"

Eric was quite excited in joining his father at Astoria, where they were
to take the lighthouse-tender _Manzanita_ to Tillamook Rock. During all
the years his father had been connected with the light, both as
light-keeper and as inspector, he had never taken his wife or son there.
Of course, under no circumstances would they have been allowed to stay
over night, but Eric had never even visited the rock. The boy had begged
for a chance to stay over one night, just to stand one watch in the
lighthouse, but--rules were rules. The utmost privilege he could get was
permission to go to the lighthouse with his father, when the latter was
making his final inspection before transfer to another district.

"I hear you've been distinguishing yourself, Eric," the veteran said,
when the _Manzanita_ had cast off from the wharf.

"How do you mean, Father?"

"Rescues, and that sort of thing. It made me feel quite proud of my
son."

"There were a few," the lad answered, with a quick flush of pride at his
father's praise, "but at that I don't think I got my full share. We had
a fellow there we called the 'Eel.' Nobody else had a chance to get
anything when he was around."