

"Doctor, shall we be able to beat out the sea?"

The Highland imagination of the doctor instantly caught the lad's
meaning.

"You've heard it, too!" he said. "Many and many's the time I've thought
the sea was skreeling in triumph when a drowned man was brought ashore.
But I've snatched a many back."

"Will you--" began the boy.

"Doctor!" came a cry from within.

"Well?" he answered eagerly, stepping to the door.

"I thought I caught a breath!"

The doctor's keen eyes glinted as he knelt beside the prostrate figure.

Nine, ten, eleven times the weight of the life-saver was brought forward
and released. At the twelfth, there was a slight respiration.

"Did you see, Doctor?" he cried, pausing in his work.

"What the mischief are you stopping for?" was the doctor's impatient
answer. Then he added, "You're doing splendidly, Murchison; just keep it
up!"

Five more minutes passed without a single sign. Both men had begun to
feel that possibly they had been mistaken, when there was a definite
flutter of an eyelid. The surfman would have given a triumphant shout
but for the doctor's rebuke a moment or two before.

Quietly the old Scotchman began to promote circulation by rubbing the
legs upward, so as to drive the venous blood to the heart and thus try
to start its action. Almost ten minutes elapsed before the doctor's
patience was rewarded with the faint throb of a heart-beat, then
another. It was soft and irregular at first, but gradually the blood
began to move through the arteries and in a few minutes a pulse could be
felt. The lips lost a little of their blue color and breathing began.

"He's got a grand heart!" said the old doctor, ten minutes later, as the
pulse-beats began to come with regularity. "I hardly believed that we
could bring him round. It's a good thing it was this chap and not the
other. We could never have saved yon man if he had been half as long
submerged."

"You really think that we shall save him?" queried Eric, more to hear
the doctor's assurance than because of any doubt of the result.

"We have saved him," was the reply. "In a day or two he'll be as well as
he ever was. And, to my thinking, he'll be wiser than he was before, for
he'll never do such a silly thing as to go out for a swim at night-time
after dinner with--well, after a heavy dinner."

"Seems too bad that we can't tell his friend," the boy suggested. "It's
just awful to hear him accusing himself all through the night."

"If he's asleep," the doctor answered, "that's better for him than
anything else. Oh, I don't know," he continued, "he seems to be
stirring. Do you want to tell him?"

Eric flashed a grateful glance at the doctor.

"If I might?"

"Go ahead!"

"Mr. Willett," said the boy, coming close to the stretcher. "Mr.
Willett!"

"Well?" said the rescued man, waking out of a remorse-haunted dream.

"Jake has been saved. He's all right."

In spite of his exhaustion and his sudden awakening from sleep, the
first man who had been rescued sat up on the stretcher and craned his
head forward to see his friend. In spite of the sufferer's bruised and
swollen appearance, it was evident to the most inexperienced eye that
life was not extinct. The convalescent looked at the doctor and tried to
find words, but something in his throat choked him.