

"When my pal reached there, he got Mooney aboard, the other two
clambered in and they started for the shore. Mooney was as purple as a
grape and his arms were so stiff that two men, one on each side, could
barely move them. Nearly a quart of water was got out of him, and they
had an awful job prying open his jaws.

"They worked over him for an hour and twenty minutes before there was
the slightest sign of life. Not until twenty-five minutes more did the
heart begin, and Mooney did not regain consciousness until nine hours
later. As his watch had stopped at 4:20 P.M. and it was 4:53 when
Streeter got ashore, that man's heart had stopped, his breathing had
stopped and he had been practically dead for more than two hours."

"Just goes to show," said one of the others, "that it isn't merely
swallowing water that drowns a fellow."

"It isn't swallowing water at all, as I understand," rejoined another
member of the group. "Drowning's a kind of poisoning of the blood
because the lungs can't get oxygen. It's just like choking to death or
being hanged."

There was a call from within.

"Murchison!"

The life-saver who had just been speaking, got up quickly and went in to
relieve Ryan.

"Any luck?" Johnson asked, as the latter came out.

The Irishman shook his head.

"There's nothin' yet, but he moight come round anny minute," was his
reply, with the invincible optimism of his race.

Eric had been thinking of Murchison's description of drowning.

"Why did they roll half-drowned people on a barrel in the old times?" he
asked.

"Sure, they were ijits," Ryan answered cheerfully.

"But what was the idea? To get the water out?"

"Just that. They used to think the lungs were a tank."

"Murchison was saying that people drowned because they couldn't get
oxygen. Isn't there oxygen in water?"

"Av coorse there is," the Irishman replied. "But ye've got to have the
gills of a fish to use it. Annyhow, a man's got warm blood an' a fish
has cold. It takes a lot of oxygen to get a man's blood warm. An' if he
doesn't get it, he dies.

"Ye see, Eric," he continued, "that's why ye've got to go on workin'
over a drowned man. Ye can't tell how badly he's poisoned. An' it's
honest I am in tellin' ye that I think we've got a chance in there."

"You do?"

"I do that," was the cheery answer. "There's no tellin'."

Again came that cry from the station, a cry whose very repetition made
it all the more nerve-racking,

"I've drowned him! I've drowned him! I had to kick him free to save
myself!"

Eric shivered. There was something gruesome in the monotony of the same
words over and over again. The noises on the beach died down. Several of
the men, who did not live at the station-house, went to their cottages.
The boy gave a jump when he heard a step behind him and saw the old
doctor standing there.

The night was very still. Nothing could be heard but the roar of the
surf on the beach. Eric, who was imaginative, thought that the surf
seemed to be triumphing in having snatched another life. Feeling sure
that the doctor would understand him, the boy turned and said,