

"That's because you're not taking the trouble to think," was the
impatient reply. "You know that light is made up of all the colors of
the rainbow?"

"Of course."

"And red is only a small part of that, isn't it?"

"Yes."

"Well, don't you see? Red glass only lets the red rays through and cuts
off all the rest. How could it help being a lot fainter? And, what's
more, red doesn't excite the nerves of the eye as much as white does, so
that if there were two lights of equal power, one red and one white, the
red would be less easily seen."

"Why do the railroads use red for danger signals, then?"

"Habit, mainly. It's wrong, of course, and a good many of the railroads
are changing their danger signals from red to yellow. So far as we're
concerned in the Lighthouse Service, however, we're getting rid of all
the fixed red lights wherever a long-range warning is needed."

"How do you distinguish the different lights, then?"

"Using flashing lights, with flashes of different duration."

"Why didn't you always do that?" asked Eric.

"Didn't know enough," was the simple reply. "It's only lately that
we've found out how to work a flashing light without any loss of power.
In the old days we used to depend on occulting lights, but now, flashing
lights are much more powerful. You know the difference?"

"Sure! An occulting light means that some of the time the light is shut
off, and at others it isn't. Wasn't it worked by a revolving shutter
with wide slits in it?"

"That was the old idea. We use it still as a cheap way of changing a
fixed light to one with a definite character. It works all right, only
it's a waste of power to have the light darkened part of the time. Then,
too, if the shutter revolves too quickly, the light is like little
flashes of lightning, while, if it goes too slowly, a lookout might
happen to scan that point on the horizon at the instant it was dark. In
that way the value of the warning would be lessened."

"I know the flashing light is quite different, Father, but just how is
it worked?" asked the boy. "It's because of some arrangement of the
lens, isn't it?"

"Exactly. Light travels in straight lines in every direction. One of the
problems of illumination in lighthouse work is to make all these beams
come to one focus. We don't want to light the sky, nor the sea at the
foot of the lighthouse. So a first-order light is built up of rows on
rows of prisms so arranged that the light will be refracted from every
direction to one point. An ordinary student's reading lamp, inside a big
lighthouse lens, would give a light that could be seen a good many
miles!"


[Illustration: REFILLING PINTSCH GAS BUOY.

Courtesy of Safety Car Lighting Co.]


[Illustration: LIGHTHOUSE TENDER APPROACHING BUOY.

Courtesy of Safety Car Lighting Co.]


"That is, if it were high enough up."

"Of course."

"Just how quickly does the earth's curve come into play, Father? I know
the earth is round, of course, but, somehow, it seems so big that one
never thinks of taking it into any practical account."