

"I see," said the boy thoughtfully.

"It's a good deal the same sort of development that's struck the cattle
country," the Westerner said, meditatively. "When I was a youngster, a
cattle-puncher was really the wild and woolly broncho-buster that you
read about in books. In the days of the old Jones and Plummer trail,
when there wasn't a foot of barbed wire west of the Mississippi, a
cowboy's life was adventurous enough. A round-up gang might meet a bunch
of hostile Indians 'most any time, and a man had to ride hard and shoot
straight. But now the ranges are all divided up and fenced in. The
range-runner has given way to the stock-raiser. It's like comparing
Dan'l Boone to a commercial traveler!"

"I don't quite see how that fits the Lighthouse Service," said Eric,
smiling at the Daniel Boone comparison.

"Well, it does to a certain extent. When I first went into the Service,
half the coast wasn't protected at all. And even the important lights we
had were weak, compared with what we have now. Why, Eric, we've got
lights so powerful now that we can't even tell how strong they are!"

The boy looked up incredulously.

"It's an absolute fact," the old inspector continued. "The most powerful
light we have is on Navesink Highlands, near the entrance of New York
Harbor. It's reckoned at between two million and ten million
candle-power. Nobody's been able to measure it. The United States Bureau
of Standards was going to do it, but so far, they've left it severely
alone."

"How far can that be seen, Father?"

"All depends on the height of the ship's deck from the water," was the
reply. "The curvature of the earth determines that. Say, thirty miles on
a vessel of moderate size. But the reflection of the Navesink Light on
the sky has been seen as far away as eighty miles."

"White light?"

"Yes, white flashing," was the reply.

"I've noticed," the boy said thoughtfully, "that red is only used for
the smaller lights. I wanted to ask you about that the other day. Now
there's Point Adams Light," he continued, pointing off the starboard bow
as the lighthouse-tender steamed out of the mouth of the Columbia River,
"it looks just as big as this light on the other side, on Cape
Disappointment, but it's a lot harder to see. When I've been headed for
home, on a misty night, after a day's fishing, I've missed Point Adams
when Cape Disappointment was as clear as could be."

"But you could see other lights?"

"Oh, yes, there wasn't any difficulty in making the harbor, either in or
out. I was just wondering whether the color of the light had anything to
do with making it seem dim?"

"Of course," his father answered; "a red glass cuts off sixty per cent,
of the light. You can't see the Point Adams Light for more than about
eleven miles, but, in ordinarily clear weather, you can see the fixed
white light of Cape Disappointment for all of twenty-two nautical
miles."

"I don't quite see why," said the boy, puzzled.