

"One of the things that makes Tillamook so dangerous is that you can
never tell when it is suddenly going to change from its ordinary
wildness to a pitch of really savage fury. A ground swell, hardly
perceptible on the surface of the sea, will kick up no end of a smother
on the rock. The engineer lost no time in his survey. He had already
made a study of the rock from every point of the sea around it, so that
he was able to do his actual survey ashore quickly. Less than an hour
was enough. By that time he had every detail needed for his report.

"But when he was ready to go, Tillamook was less ready to loose her
capture. The waves were dashing over the landing place and the sky was
rapidly becoming beclouded. Yet, for the engineer, there was no question
of choice! To stay there meant being marooned, death from exposure and
starvation. There was nothing to do but dare. The engineer, beckoning
for the boat to come in as near the rock as possible, cast himself into
the sea. It was touch and go, but we picked him up, although he was
nearly done for when we got him. The report was duly sent into
Washington and approved.

"The next thing was to arrange about the actual building. For this a man
of skill and experience was needed. John W. Trewavas, a famous
lighthouse expert, one of the constructors of the Wolf Rock Light off
the English Coast, came to America to pit his knowledge and his
strength against the Pacific Ocean. Although it was summer weather, he
hung around Tillamook for a month before there was even a chance to make
a landing. Then, on September 18, 1879--I was steering the boat--Mr.
Trewavas thought he saw his opportunity. I took the boat right in, so
that her nose almost touched the rock. He leaped ashore, and, at the
same instant, with a tremendous back-water stroke, the oarsmen jumped
the surf-boat back out of danger. One second's--yes, half a
second's--delay, and the boat would have been in splinters.

"The slope on which Trewavas had landed was wet and covered with
slippery seaweed. Experienced and cautious, he waited for a moment to
make sure of his foothold, well knowing the dangers of slipping. Peril
was nearer him than he knew. A roller came breaking in, sending a spurt
of water right over the spot where he was standing. So precarious was
his footing that he did not dare move away quickly. Trewavas had just
shuffled his feet a few inches further on that slippery slope when a
comber heaved its great length along the rock. Almost without a curl it
struck just below the landing and a boiling torrent of spume and spray
hid the daring man from sight. Just for a second, but when the wave
receded, he was gone. The rock was empty."

"Couldn't you pick him up, Father?"

"We never even saw him again, in that whirlpool of currents. The
undertow dragged him down immediately and he never came to the surface.
The body was never found."

"Who was the next to land?" asked Eric.

"I was," his father said, "and I landed on exactly the same spot. I had
taken off my boots, but even so, the seaweed was slippery and dangerous.
Remembering poor Trewavas' fate, in a jiffy I was off the slope and on
the level platform of the rock. They threw me a line from the boat, and
I pulled ashore some tools and supplies. With a rope to help them,
several of the men joined me. That was the beginning of the conquest of
Tillamook."