


[Illustration: THE DEFIER OF THE PACIFIC.

Tillamook Rock, against which six thousand miles of ocean surges beat in
vain.

Courtesy of U.S. Bureau of Lighthouses.]


"Ed!" exclaimed Eric. "Who'd have thought of seeing you here!"

"Why not, old man?" said the other laughing, "I live here."

"Do you? Bully! So do I. The folks moved here yesterday."

"Your father, too?"

"Sure."

"I thought he'd never leave the Coast."

"He didn't want to," said Eric, "but he was appointed inspector in
charge of this district, so he had to come. But what's happened to you,"
the lad continued, "what have you been doing with yourself?"

"Got my arm broken in a mine rescue," the other said.

"What kind of a mine rescue? An accident?"

"Coal-mine explosion."

"But what are you doing with coal mines?"

"I'm trying to qualify as a mining expert. You're not the only one who
thinks Uncle Sam's the best boss there is. I'm going into the
government, too."

"You are? In the Geological Survey?"

"Bureau of Mines," the other answered. "How about you? Still thinking of
the Revenue Cutter Service--no, Coast Guard it is now, isn't it?"

"Yes, Coast Guard," Eric agreed. "You bet I'm going in, if I can make
it. But the exams are the stiffest things you ever saw! I'm going to
cram for them this whole winter."

"Isn't that great! I'm doing special work here, too. What's your end?
Mathematics and navigation, I suppose?"

"Mostly mathematics," Eric replied. "What's yours?"

"Mineralogy and chemistry," his friend replied. "I'm going to try to
specialize on the prevention of accidents in mines. I've got a good
reason to remember my subject." He nodded with a certain grim humor to
his bandaged arm.

"How did you do it?"

"I was down with a rescue party," said the older lad, "and we got
caught. That was all."

With his characteristic impetuosity, Eric took hold of his friend's
unbandaged arm and led him to a seat in Owen Park, just facing Belle
Isle, the most beautiful island park in the United States. With his love
of lighthouses, the Light at the northeast corner seemed to Eric like an
old friend.

"There," he said. "Now you're going to sit right there, Ed, and tell me
all about it. I've only had two or three letters from you since you left
'Frisco, and we were in First-Year High together."

"That's so," his friend agreed. "All right, if you've got to have the
yarn, here goes." He leaned back on the bench, and began his story.

"You remember that Father was interested in mines?"

"Of course," Eric answered; "he showed me that little model of a
colliery he kept in his study."

"You do remember that," the other said, his eyes kindling. "I helped him
make it. It was a lot of fun. Dad was a crank on conservation. He was
one of the first men in America to take it up. You know it was his
influence that swung Washington into line? The waste in coal really used
to worry him. He was always afraid of a coal famine, and he spent a lot
of time doping out ways to stop the waste in mining. He was just daffy
about it, then."