

"I should think they'd have been poisoned for fair," said Eric.

"Not a bit of it," his friend replied. "The leak of white damp had all
come on the outside of the roof-fall, and there was hardly any of it on
the other side. Some of the men were pretty weak from lack of air and
that sort of thing, but not seriously hurt. It was the rescuers who
suffered."

"How was that, Ed?"

"Three of the five men who were in my gang died," said the other
mournfully.

"Great guns! Died?"

"Yes," the young miner said, "poor fellows, they went under. Another man
and I were the only ones who got over it."

"Died in saving others! That's sure tough!" There was a pause, and Eric
added, "What got you two clear?"

"The other chap had been lying full length on the ground, while
working, and as white damp rises, he had breathed less of the gas than
the others. I wasn't able to work, so I didn't have to breathe deep." He
looked down at his broken arm. "It's a queer thing," he said, "but it
was breaking my arm that saved my life."




CHAPTER IV

SNATCHED FROM A FROZEN DEATH


"Father! Father! What do you think?" cried Eric, bursting into the
sitting room at breakfast one morning, a couple of weeks after his
encounter with his young mining friend, "I'm going into the Life-Saving
work right away!"

"What's the excitement?" his father asked, speaking for the rest of the
family. "Cool down a bit, my boy, and tell us all about it."

"I've--I've just got a letter from the Captain Commandant," replied
Eric, fairly stuttering in his haste to tell the good news, "and he says
I can enlist in one of the lake stations until the close of navigation.
I'll get some real practical training that way, he says, and then I can
take up prep. work for the Academy all winter."

In view of the fact that there had been considerable correspondence
between the ruling head of the Coast Guard and Mr. Swift, the old
inspector was less surprised than the boy expected. Not for the world
would the lad's father have let him think that there had been any
consultation about this plan. He wanted the boy to have the sense of
being "on his own"!

"I remember now," he said, "you said something about writing along that
line a couple of weeks ago."

"I did write, Father, I did want so awfully to get a chance. But I
hardly believed that they'd actually let me do it."

"I don't see why they wouldn't. After all you told me about your
swimming, they ought to have made a special bid for you," he added
smiling.

"You don't mind my going, do you?"

"I'm perfectly willing, my boy," his father said. "I'm sufficiently on
to your curves, Eric, to know that it isn't much use trying to pin you
down to books while there are a few weeks of summer left. You'll be out
of mischief at a Coast Guard station, that's one sure thing. I think
I'll take you out to meet old Icchia, the veteran of the Lakes. He holds
the record for one of the most sensational rescues in the history of the
service. I've often heard your Uncle Jim tell the story, but I won't
spoil the yarn for you by telling it myself, I'll let Icchia do that."