

"The contest is to find out how good the men are, individually, and to
teach them team work. Each man has a breathing apparatus, and a safety
and electric lamp, while each crew has a canary bird."

"A what?"

"A canary bird!"

"What kind of a machine is that?" asked Eric, thinking the other was
referring to some name for a piece of rescue apparatus.

"A canary bird? It's a yellow machine with feathers, and sings," said
Ed, laughing.

"You mean a real canary bird?"

"Yes, a live one."

"But what the crickets do they need a canary bird for?"

"To give them a pointer as to when the air is bad. You see, Eric,
there's all sorts of different kinds of poisonous gases in coal mines.
Some you can spot right off, but there's others you can't."

"I thought gas was just gas," Eric answered, "'damp,' don't they call
it?"

"There's several different 'damps.' Take 'fire damp' or just plain 'gas'
as the miners call it. That's really methane, marsh gas, the same stuff
that makes the will-o'-the-wisp you can see dancing around over a marsh.
It'll explode, all right, but there's got to be a lot of it around
before much damage'll be done. 'Fire damp' is like a rattlesnake, he's a
gentleman."

"How do you mean?" queried the boy.

"Well, just the same way that a rattler'll never strike before giving
you warning, 'fire damp' always gives you a chance ahead of time."

"How?"

"You know every miner carries a safety lamp?"

"Yes."

"'Fire damp' makes a sort of little cap over the flame of the lamp, like
a small sugar-loaf hat. As soon as a miner sees this, he knows that
there's enough 'gas' around to make it dangerous. As it's a gas that it
doesn't do much harm to breathe, you see he can always make a get-away.
Isn't that being a gentleman, all right?"

"Yes, I guess it is."

"Then there's 'black damp.' That's ordinary carbon dioxide, or carbonic
acid gas."

"Isn't that just the stuff we breathe out?" questioned Eric.

"Exactly," his former schoolmate replied. "In an old mine, though,
you've got to remember, nearly all the oxygen is absorbed by the coal.
That gives a lot less chance for a leak of carbonic acid gas to mix with
enough oxygen to keep the air pure. For 'black damp' though, the lamp's
a good guide again. When a miner sees that his lamp is beginning to
burn dim, it's a sign the air's short of oxygen."

"Of course," said Eric, "we used to have that experiment in our high
school chemistry."

"We did. But do you remember just how much oxygen a lamp has to have?"

"No," the boy was forced to admit, "I've plumb forgot."

"A safety lamp will go right out with less than seventeen per cent. of
oxygen, while a man can live fairly comfortably on fifteen or sixteen
per cent. So the flickering out of a lamp is a sure sign that the danger
line's not far off."

"It's a gentleman, too, then," said Eric with a laugh.

"Yes," the other assented dubiously, "but there's less margin. Now,
'white damp,' or carbon monoxide, is a horse of a different color.
That's the real danger, Eric. Pretty nearly all the cases of poisoning
in mines are due to 'white damp.' Just the other day, in Pennsylvania,
two hundred men were killed--whouf!--just like blowing out a match. But
'white damp' hasn't got any effect on the flame of a safety lamp. If
anything, it may hit it up even a trifle brighter. So the lamp isn't
any good. That's where the mice come in."