

"Gee," he said, "that's great!"

The puzzle-maker smiled, and showed him how mass-play in football was a
matter of science, not strength, and how lacrosse was a question of
trajectory.

"Not only in games," he said. "'Rithmetic, geometry--in everything. You
know Muldoon."

"Sure I know Muldoon," the boy said.

"Have you seen him shoot?"

"With the Lyle gun, you mean? Isn't he a dandy at it?"

"That is what I would say," the old man continued. "How does he fire
him?"

"Why, he just fires it! No," he corrected himself, "he doesn't either. I
see what you're driving at. That's right, I did see him doing some
figuring the other day."

"I teach Muldoon," said the old man. "I show him how to tell how much
wind, how to tell how far away a ship, how to tell when a line is heavy
or light. He figure everything, then fire. Bang! And the line to bring
the drowning men home falls right over the ship. It is?"

"It is, all right," the boy agreed. "Muldoon gets there every time. I
always thought he just aimed the gun, sort of naturally."

"It is all mathematics," said the old man. "You have guns in the Coast
Guard?"

"Rapid-fire six-pounders," the boy answered. "At least I know that's
what the _Itasca's_ got. She's the practice-ship at New London, you
know."

"Do you have to learn gunnery?"

"Rather," said the lad. "Every breed of gunnery that there is. You know
a Coast Guard cutter becomes a part of the navy in time of war, so an
officer has got to know just as much about big guns as an officer in the
navy. He might have to take his rank on a big battleship if the United
States was at war. You bet I'll have to learn gunnery. That ought to be
heaps of fun."

"But gunnery is ballistics," the old man said. "And ballistics is
trigonometry. Big gun is fired by figuring, not by looking."

"I'm only afraid," the lad replied, "that I'll never have a chance at
the big gun. Everywhere I go, it's nothing but figuring. And I simply
can't get figures into my head."

"You really want to learn?"

"You bet I do," said Eric. "I'm working like a tinker at the stuff every
chance I get, but I don't seem to get the hang of it somehow."

"If you come to me, I teach you."

"Teach me all I want to know?" said the boy in amazement.

The old man shook his head.

"Teach you to want to know all you have to know. Teach you to like
figures."

Eric looked at him a minute.

"All right, Dan," he said, "I'll go you. I've still got some of the
money I saved up from my work this summer and I was going to spend part
of it on tutoring this winter, anyway. I'll tutor under you, whenever
I'm off duty, and if you can teach me to like figures, you're a good
one. Any way, your cottage is so near that I can get right on the job if
the station calls."

True to his word, a few days later Eric appeared at the tiny little
cottage--it was scarcely more than a hut--which was the home of the
eccentric old puzzle-maker. The top part of it was a home-made
observatory, and the whole building looked a good deal like a large
beehive.