

"String in the corner," said the old man, after welcoming him. "Get
him."

"It's all knotted, Dan," the boy replied, holding up a piece of rope
with a couple of dozen strings hanging from it, of various colors, all
intertwined.

"Of course he is," the old man replied. "Read him."

"What?" asked the boy.

"Read him," repeated the old man.

"What does it mean?"

"He's what Incas used to count treasure with," the old man said. "He's
quipu, a copy of one Cortez found in City of Sun. You like to read what
he says?"

"You bet I would."

"Bring him here."

Wondering a good deal at the odd puzzle-maker's manner, for the lad had
gone to the cottage in good faith with his books, expecting to work on
the problems that were disturbing him, he brought over the knotted
quipu.

"Green string means corn," said the puzzle-maker, "because he's the
color of growing corn. What you suppose white is?"

"Silver," guessed the boy.

"Right. And yellow?"

"Gold."

"Right, too. And red?"

"Copper?" hazarded the boy.

"Not bad guess," the old man said. "Not copper color, red."

"Red stands for war," said Eric meditatively, then, with an inspiration,
"in those days a country was rich if it had soldiers. Does the red mean
soldiers, Dan?"

"Soldiers, right," the old man answered. "The Quipucamayocuna--"

"The what, Dan?"

"Knot officers," explained the other, "kept track of him all. They
counted tens, single knot meant ten; double knot, hundred. Now read him.
Cross-knotting is for groups."

Eric worked for a quarter of an hour and then looked up.

"I've got it," he said.

"What is he?"

"In this town," said the boy, "there were seven regiments of soldiers,
I've got down the exact number of men in each regiment. Some had plenty
of food in the regimental storehouse, some had only a little. But--if I
get it right--there was money belonging to each regiment in a
treasure-house, somewhere, like a bank. I suppose they could exchange
this for food. And, if I've read it right, there was one regiment which
had money but no men. I suppose they were wiped out in battle."

"Very good," answered the puzzle-maker, looking pleased. "You keep
accounts, your own money?"

"Of course," answered the boy, pulling out a little diary from his
pocket.

"Here, string," said the old man. "Write your week's accounts in quipu."

Thoroughly interested, Eric took up a pile of colored strings, from the
corner and started to convert his week's accounting into quipu. He
worked for half an hour, but couldn't make it come out right. It proved
an exasperating puzzle, because it seemed impossible and yet conveyed
the suggestion that there ought to be some way of doing it. Already Eric
had so keen a sense of the old man's comments that he hated to say that
he couldn't do it. But, after a while, red in the face and quite
ashamed, he said,

"I can't do it, Dan."

"No, he is not possible," said the puzzle-maker cheerfully. "That's what
I wanted you to find. The quipu is wonderful but he's not wonderful
enough, eh?"