


[Illustration: GOLD LIFE-SAVING MEDAL.

Given only in recognition of heroism wherein loss of life was risked by
the rescuer.

Courtesy of U.S. Coast Guard.]




CHAPTER V

SAVED BY THE BREECHES-BUOY


The last words of the old keeper, "Goodness don't lay in tryin' to be a
hero, but jest in plain bein' a man," rang through Eric's mind, many and
many a day after, when, on his own Coast Guard station, he had to face
some difficulty. His post chanced to be in a somewhat sheltered spot,
and thus gave him an opportunity to become a good oarsman. His work with
the volunteer corps had made him a first-class swimmer and a fair
boatman. The government service, however, he found to be a very
different matter. There, efficiency had to be carried to the highest
degree.

He snatched every opportunity, too, to get ahead with his studies, and
luck came his way in a most unexpected shape. It happened that quite
near the Coast Guard station was the hut of a queer old hermit sort of
fellow, called "Dan." He had been a life-saver many years before, but in
a daring rescue had injured his back, and could never enter a boat
again. In those days there were no pensions, so for forty years and
more he had made a living by inventing riddles and puzzles, tricks of
various kinds, and clever Christmas toys. His especial hobby was
mathematical puzzles. He used to drop into the station quite frequently,
for he was very popular with the men.

"Dan," said Eric to him one day, "I don't see how you can be so
interested in that stuff. It's the bane of my life. I'm nailing as hard
as I can to try and get in shape for a Coast Guard exam., and I simply
can't get hold of the mathematics end of it."

"Why for not?"

"Don't know enough, I guess," the boy answered. "I'm right up on
everything but mathematics, but that gets me every time. I know there's
some sense in it, but I can't see it. Everything else I've got to study
I can find some interest in, but mathematics is as dull as ditch-water.
How you can find any fun in it, I can't see!"

This was like telling a painter that color had no emotion, or a
scientist that science had no reasonableness. The old puzzle-maker
gasped.

"No fun!" he exclaimed. "It is the mos' fun in the world. I show you!"

Pulling from his pocket a pencil and an old envelope he drew a baseball
diamond, and marked the positions of the players. Eric's interest arose
at once, for he was a keen baseball fan. As the sketch grew the old man
talked, describing a queer entanglement of play.

"Now!" said the old man, "what shall he do?"

The boy, judging from his knowledge of the game, made a suggestion,
which the other negatived. As soon as the boy made a guess, the other
showed him to be wrong. Eric, really interested in the baseball problem,
cudgelled his brains, but could find no way out.

"I show you!" the old man repeated.

Using a very simple rule of algebra, which the boy knew quite well, but
giving an application he never would have thought of, Dan brought the
solution in a second. Hardly believing that mere mathematics could be of
any service in a baseball game, Eric tested the result. It was exactly
as the old man had said.