

The next morning, Eric found the old puzzle-maker busy with a
chess-board.

"Aren't we going to do any work to-day, either?" he asked,
disappointedly.

"Soon as I finish," the old man answered. "Get pencil and paper. As I
move knight from square to square, you draw."

Shrugging his shoulders slightly, but not so noticeably that the
puzzle-maker could see, Eric obeyed. It seemed very silly to him. But as
the knight went from square to square in the peculiar move which belongs
to that piece in chess, the boy was amazed to find a wonderful and
fascinating geometrical design growing under his hand.

"Another way, too," said the old man thoughtfully, the instant the
figure was finished, not giving the boy a chance to make any comment.
And, without further preface he started again. This time an even
stranger but equally perfect design was formed.

"But that's great!" said Eric, "how do you know it's going to come out
like that! I wonder if I could do it?"

"Try him," the puzzle-maker answered, getting up from the board. For
half an hour Eric moved the knight about, but never got as perfect an
example as the old man.

"Are there only those two ways?" said the boy at last.

"Over thirty-one million ways of moving the knight so that he occupies
each square once," was the reply. "Every one makes a different design."

"I'll try some this evening," said the boy. "But it's funny, too. Why
does it always make a regular design?"

"You want to know? Very well." And the puzzle-maker quietly explained
some of the most famous mathematical problems of all time, working them
out with the chessmen and the board.

"You know what they call him, magic?" queried the old man.

"Magic! No!" exclaimed Eric pricking up his ears at the word. "Tell me
about it, Dan."

"Numbers all friends, live together, work together," the puzzle-maker
answered. "I show you." And, taking pencil and paper, he dotted down in
forms of squares and cubes rows and rows of figures. "Add him up," he
said, "up and down, cross-wise, any way. He all make same number."

"They do, sure enough," said Eric, after testing half a dozen magic
squares, "but how do you do it? Do you have to remember all those
figures and just where they go?"

"Don't remember any of him," the other answered. "He has to go so."

"But I can't make them come that way," exclaimed the boy, after trying
for a few minutes. "What's the trick?"

"All friends," repeated the old man, and in his curiously jolting speech
he told Eric the startling links that are found in the powers of
numbers. As soon as he had the principle clearly in mind, the boy found
that there was no great difficulty in making up the most astonishing
magic squares.

As the winter drew on, and calls for help on the stormy waters
increased, the opportunities for sessions with the shrewd old
mathematician grew fewer, but Eric stuck fast to his promise to spend
all the time he could afford with his instructor. He was keenly
disappointed that the puzzle-maker showed such an absolute disregard of
the actual things the boy wanted to prepare for in his examinations. But
Eric had been rigidly trained by his father in the sportsmanlike
attitude of never complaining about any arrangement he had made
himself, and he paid for his coaching out of his small earnings without
a word. In order to make up for what he inwardly felt was lost time, he
worked by himself at his books in such few minutes as he was able to
snatch from his life-saving duties. And, although he was tired almost to
exhaustion, many and many a day, he found that even in that work he was
getting along quite well.