

"Nice shooting, Muldoon," the keeper said. "We'll have to give the
credit to that well-fittin' coat you've got on." The lighthouse-keeper
was at least twice the Irishman's size.

Muldoon looked particularly proud, because he had wanted to distinguish
himself before the girl. It was of vital urgency, moreover, for if
Muldoon had not been able to land the line, it would have meant a trip
back to the Coast Guard station to get out the surf-boat, with very
little likelihood of being able to force her up against the gale.

The men on the steamer started to haul in and the life-savers bent on a
larger rope with a block and tackle. Again the steamer burned a flare to
show that the block had been hauled on board and securely fastened, and
then the coastguardsmen began to haul on the line, pulling out to the
ship a heavy hawser on which ran the carriage for the breeches-buoy.
Everything worked without a hitch, the hawser was got on board and the
breeches-buoy hauled out.

Then the trouble began. The steamer lay partly submerged. She was a
small boat and her only mast had gone by the board. The bridge was a
tangle of wreckage. The breeches-buoy, therefore, could only be made
fast to the stump of the mast a few feet above the deck. Ashore, the
same difficulty prevailed. There was no high land, the tripod being down
almost on water-line. As soon as the hawser got wet and heavy with snow
and the ice from the blowing spray, it began to sag so that it nearly
touched the water.

With the weight of a man on it, the breeches-buoy line sank below the
surface of the water, or rather the mush-ice. It was bad enough for the
rescued men, already nearly perishing with exhaustion, to have to get a
ducking, but there was still a greater danger. This was that the tackle
might not stand the strain of dragging the breeches-buoy, with a man in
it, through the mush-ice. The increased resistance might break the line
and risk anew the perishing of every life on board.

The keeper saw the difficulty and decided promptly.

"Jefferson and Harris," he shouted, "you're the tallest. Get out into
that mush-ice and see how deep it is. Wade out as far as you can go.
Follow the line and stand ready to catch the breeches-buoy."

The two men chosen waded out, battling almost for their lives with big
pieces of ice. Fortunately the bottom sloped gradually and they were
able to walk out a considerable distance. Shouting to them through his
trumpet to wait there, the keeper ordered the rest of the crew to haul
in the first man. As the keeper had expected, the rope sagged terribly,
but, by drawing up his legs, the rescued man did not actually sink into
the mush-ice until nearly up to the spot where Jefferson and Harris
stood. The two men grasped the buoy and started pulling it ashore, one
man holding the survivor's head above the water and ice, while the other
made a path in the ice by forcing his way ahead of the buoy.

Half-way in, Harris collapsed. It afterwards developed that he had been
quite badly hurt on the ice-barrier but had not said a word about it. As
four men were needed on shore and there should be three to help in the
ice, the crew was a man short.