

Had it not been for the instinctive stimulus of his life-saving
training, Eric would have deemed that the man was beyond help and would
have sought safety himself. But his whirling senses held the knowledge
how often life lingers when it appears extinct. Scarcely conscious
himself of what he did, Eric grasped the unconscious man in his arms,
raced back across the terror of the red-hot deck, reached the
stern--how, he never knew--threw his moaning burden overboard and dived
in after him.

The shock as his parched and blistered body struck the cold sea water
steadied Eric for a second, just long enough to grasp the man he had
rescued, as the latter came floating to the surface. Then the pain of
the salt water upon his cruel burns smote him, and he felt himself give
way.

He tugged twice at the life-line as a signal that he was at his last
gasp, bidding them pull in. Then, gripping the last flicker of his
purposed energy on the one final aim--not to loose hold in the sea of
the man he had rescued from an intolerable death, the boy locked himself
to the sufferer in the "side carry" he once had known so well.

A sinking blackness came over him, flashes of violet flame danced before
his eyes, his head suddenly seemed to be as though of lead, his legs
stiffened and refused to move, and in the lurid glare of the burning
steamer, rescuer and rescued sank beneath the waves. The last thing that
Eric felt was the tug on the life-line underneath his arms. His cry for
help was answered! The Coast Guard boat was near.




CHAPTER VII

REINDEER TO THE RESCUE


When, the following morning, Eric awoke to consciousness in his bunk on
the _Itasca_ he found himself the hero of the hour. He had been
well-liked in his class before, but his daring feat increased this
tenfold. Like all clean-cut Americans, the cadets held plucky manliness
to be the most worth-while thing in the world. The surgeon, who was
bandaging his burns, told him, in answer to the boy's questions, that
the rescued man would probably recover.

"You're not the only one I've got to take care of, though," the doctor
said to him. "Van Sluyd's in sick bay this morning, too."

"What's the matter with him?" queried Eric.

"Van Sluyd's got grit," was the reply.

"What did he do?"

"I'm just going to tell you. About half an hour after the two of you had
been brought on board, and while I was still examining your burns, Van
Sluyd came up and asked if he could have a word with me.

"'Of course,' I answered, 'what's on your mind?'

"'My father's a doctor,' he said, 'and I've picked up a little medicine.
Is the fellow that Swift rescued badly burned?'

"'Yes,' I answered, 'he is.'

"'Wouldn't he have a better chance if some skin-grafting were done?'

"'Not a bit of doubt of it,' said I.

"'Then,' he said, 'if it won't incapacitate me for the service, you can
go ahead on me.'"

"Who'd have thought it of Van Sluyd!" exclaimed Eric. "Talk about nerve,
that's the real thing! What did you do, Doctor?"