

With a sharp cry of pain he leaped back to the rail again.

The deck was burning hot!

In spite of the spray that now and again came spattering over the
derelict, the heat had been conducted throughout the craft. Not having
thought of the possibility of a heated metal deck, Eric was barefoot. Of
what use was it for him to be on board unless he could find out whether
any one were there! The decks were empty. The steamer had sunk too deep
for any one to be below, and live. There was only one place in which a
survivor might still be--the sole remaining deck-house.

Thither the wireless aerial led! There, if anywhere, was some deserted
creature, author of the unread message that had sparked across the sea.
There, and there only--and between Eric and that deck-house lay the
stretch of red-hot deck, a glowing barrier to attempted rescue.

Surely it was beyond attempt!

Like a flash came to the boy's remembrance the old ordeal for witchcraft
in which a man had to walk fifty feet over red-hot plowshares, in which,
if he succeeded without collapse, he was adjudged innocent. At once Eric
realized that some must have survived that awful test if the ordeal was
of any value. What man had done, man again could do! It was at least as
good a cause to save some man or woman from a fearful death as it was to
save oneself from penalty of witchcraft.

Daring all, he leaped down from the rail on to the superheated deck.

In spite of his stoicism, the boy could not repress a cry of agony, that
rang cruelly in the ears of his comrades in the boat. They had seen his
figure outlined black against the red glare of the burning craft, and
exulted. At the boy's cry, they shuddered, and more than one man
blenched.

The iron seared and crisped his flesh as his feet touched the torture.
He could feel the skin curl and harden. Gritting his teeth, he sped at
topmost speed of the house whither the aerials led.

The door was jammed!

Though the skin of his head seemed to tighten like a metal band, though
his lungs stabbed within him as he breathed, though the pain in his feet
was unendurable, Eric wrenched again and again at the handle, but the
door would not budge. He called, but there was no answer. Almost
delirious with baffled rage and excruciating suffering, the boy hurled
himself against the door, throwing his shoulder out of joint with the
power of the blow. The door fell inwards and he fell with it.

The heat that poured from the room was overpowering, a dull red glow in
the far corner of the floor showing that the flames were immediately
beneath. With a gasp and a clutch on his reeling senses, Eric saw
stretched out on the wireless table before him the figure of a man,
moaning slightly, but insensible. Unable to stand on the hot floor,
unable to escape from the room in which he had become trapped, he had
lain down on the instruments and his writhings near the key had sent
those tangled messages that the operator on the _Itasca_ had not been
able to understand.