

"Ye-es," the other said dubiously, "but it was a two-thousand-foot
slide! They wound small chains around the runners of the sleds to try
an' check their speed a little, an' hoping that they wouldn't hit
anything, let 'em go. Just as the first sled had begun slidin', Alexis
told me he called out that he thought they were a little too much to the
north an' all the sleds would go off a precipice into the sea. It was
too late to stop, then. It took three hours to climb one side of the
mountain, an' less than three minutes to go down the other side.

"From there they went straight along the coast to Kiyilieugamute, where
they had reckoned on gettin' dogs to replace the young dogs on the
'scratch teams' Alexis had made up. All the dogs had gone on a trip for
fish an' the natives said it would be two days before they arrived. So
Jarvis went ahead with the two good teams, leavin' Bertholf to follow as
soon as the native dogs arrived. Four days of hard traveling, stoppin'
at Akoolukpugamute, Chukwoktulieugamute, Kogerchtehmute, and
Chukwoktulik brought 'em to the Yukon at the old Russian trading post of
Andreavski.

"On the Yukon, I guess they made good time. You know, in the fall, when
there are sou'westerly gales in the Bering Sea, the water rises in the
lower Yukon, an' as it freezes quickly, there may be a trail of smooth
glare ice for miles. Then there's prime traveling. But, often as not,
the water flows back again before the ice is thick enough to travel on.
It makes a thin shell, an' dogs, sleds an' everybody goes through an'
brings up on the solid ice below.

"As a matter of fact, it put Jarvis' teams down an' out; most of his
dogs were bleeding at every step from ice-cuts in the cushions of their
feet. He had trouble with the natives, too. Two of them got violent
colds, an' they were no use for traveling."

"Seems queer to think of Eskimos catching cold," said Eric; "now if it
had been Lieutenant Jarvis, I wouldn't have been surprised."

"There's nothing as tough as a white man," said the whaler. "If you look
up stories of explorers you'll always find it's the natives that get
used up first."

"Why, do you suppose?"

"A white man is more used to putting out energy. After all, natives are
lazy, an' a white man on an exploring expedition or a rescue is pushing
natives faster than they have ever been used to going."

"He's taking the same trouble himself!" objected the boy.

"Sure, he is. But then, in one way or another, he's pushing all the
time. Jarvis told me that the next two or three days were bad. Off Point
Romanoff the ice-crush was piled high an' they had to lift the sleds
over the hummocks for two days on end. A snowstorm came up in the middle
of it, an' I guess it was touch and go until they made Pikmiktallik,
nine miles further on. Next day, late in the afternoon, they drove into
St. Michael's, havin' covered three hundred and seventy-five miles in
twenty-one days, with only one day's rest.