

The officers of the _Bear_ worked incessantly. In the dark they were
here, there and everywhere, and Eric, filled with the spirit of the
service, was on the jump. He was busy in the storehouse shortly before
eleven o'clock in the morning when a man groped his way in, saying that
he had just escaped an avalanche and that several men were marooned in a
steamer lying off the cannery wharf half a mile below the dock. This was
Eric's chance. So often had he made the trip from the ship to the
storehouse that morning that even in the dark and through the flying
spume of yellow horror he made his way direct to the first lieutenant,
and saluted.


[Illustration: GOING TO PIECES FAST.

Courtesy of U.S. Coast Guard.]


[Illustration: "WE SAVED 'EM ALL."

Coast Guard crew (including the dog) which rescued every sailor of
wrecked vessel's crew.

Courtesy of U.S. Coast Guard.]


"Yes, Mr. Swift?"

"I have information, sir," he said, "that there are seven men cut off
either in a steamer near the cannery, or in the cannery itself, half a
mile below the pier. I am told there is neither food nor water in the
building and that it is at the base of a hill from which it may be
overwhelmed by an avalanche at any minute. I think, sir, that a party
could reach them."

The lieutenant nodded and sought the captain. He returned a few moments
later.

"There are high hills between the village and the cannery," he said,
"and the road winds along the beach. We have absolutely no means of
knowing what the conditions may be. Under the circumstances the captain
does not feel justified in ordering a party on what might prove to be
their death. But--"

"Yes, sir?"

"He directed me to say that neither would he feel justified in refusing
permission to those who desired to attempt a rescue. If there should be
volunteers, I have no doubt that you would be given the opportunity to
lead the party."

Eric saluted, though in that dim strange dark he could scarcely see his
superior's face, and withdrew. In spite of the unknown nature of the
ordeal not a man drew back. Eric chose his friend, Homer, two warrant
officers, three enlisted men, one local resident for a guide, and the
master of the imperilled steamer.

The road was level, the distance only half a mile, but so great was the
danger of ash avalanches that every man was roped to the other--all
carried lanterns and there were several shovels.

"Hope we don't get buried under this stuff!" Eric whispered to Homer, as
they started out.

"I feel just about buried now," was the hoarse reply.

At the end of the score of houses that made the village street, the
party struck a deep drift of the volcanic ash. It took the guide to his
waist and he stumbled and fell. The fine acrid pumice filled his mouth
and his nostrils, and when Eric picked him up, he feared the man would
strangle to death. A mouthful of fresh air would have meant much to the
sufferer, but there was nothing but the sulphur-laden atmosphere to
breathe. In a minute or two, however, choking and gasping, the guide
cleared his nasal passages and throat of the burning dust. Blinded and
staggering, he recovered enough to be able to walk, but Eric took his
place and led the way.