

"All night?" queried the boy.

"Luckily, he didn't have to," the other answered. "Two hours later, a
search party found him. They dug a hole in the snow an' camped right
there.

"The next day they only made five miles. The storm was so bad that the
man breakin' trail couldn't stand up an' had to crawl on his hands and
knees. Even the reindeer wouldn't travel in a straight line, wantin' to
turn their tails to the blast. This would have taken the party straight
out to sea over the ice. After three days' delay, Jarvis insisted on
travel, an' he nearly had a mutiny on his hands. But he put it through.
He's one of the kind of men that always keeps on going!

"Then came the time for diplomacy. Jarvis had to persuade 'Charlie'
Artisarlook, just on his say-so, to give up his whole herd, his entire
wealth, promisin' that the same number of deer should be returned. As a
small village had grown up around this herd of Artisarlook's--which made
him quite the most prominent member of his race for miles around--an' as
they depended entirely for their food and clothing on the reindeer herd,
it was like askin' a city to empty its houses of everything for the sake
of men they'd never even seen. I think it says a lot for the Eskimos
that they agreed."

"It's bully!"

"That's me, too. It's something to give up every penny you own merely on
a promise that it will be returned, to leave your wife, family an'
neighbors starving, an' go eight hundred miles from home in an Arctic
winter over a terrible road to help a party of white men in distress.

"When Artisarlook agreed, Jarvis and he went on ahead, leaving Surgeon
Call to follow with the herd to Cape Prince of Wales. This, Jarvis told
me, was one of the worst bits of road on the entire trip. Here's what
Jarvis said himself about it:

"'As I remember it, the thermometer was over thirty below zero and there
was a tidy blizzard blowing when we started for Cape Prince of Wales.
The going was rough beyond words. In the afternoon, suddenly Artisarlook
wanted to camp, but I thought he was trying to work on my fears, so I
made him go on. But the boy was right, for shortly after it got dark we
struck the bluffs near Cape York and our road was over the ice crushes
that lined the shore.

"'I have never seen such a road. Artisarlook went ahead to try and pick
out the way, if indeed it could be called a way, which was nothing but
blocks of ice heaped in confusion and disorder. I stayed behind to
manage the heavy sled which was continually capsizing in the rough ice.
By eight o'clock I was done out and quite willing to camp. But this time
Artisarlook would not stop. It was too cold to camp on the ice without
shelter or wood--the ice we were on was in danger of breaking away from
the bluffs at any minute, and then it might be the end of us. We must
get on beyond the line of bluffs before stopping.

"'To make matters worse I stepped through a crack in the ice into the
water, and, almost instantaneously, my leg to the knee was a mass of
ice. I was now compelled to go on to some place where the foot-gear
could be dried. As though in a dream, suffering the most horrible
tortures of fatigue, we pushed on dispiritedly until midnight, when we
came to a small hut about ten by twelve, in which fifteen people were
already sleeping. It was the most horrible place I have ever been in,
but, at the same time, I was never so happy to be under a roof before.
Though I had eaten nothing all day, I was too tired to do more than to
crawl into my sleeping-bag and sleep.