

"You bet I did, and I worked as hard as any of the men--for a while. Two
or three hours of it did me up, though. I was only twelve years old,
remember, but most of the men kept on the job for forty-eight hours
straight with only fifteen minutes allowed for meals. By that time the
foundation was secure with thirty feet of solid concrete twenty-two feet
thick."

"That ought to hold it," said Eric.

"That was only the beginning," said his friend. "What would hold it,
resting on the top of the sand?"

"I'd thought of that," admitted the boy, "but I supposed the weight
would be enough to drive it in."

"Never," the other said. "The next step was to drive it down into the
hard sand at the bottom of the bay. Father had made borings and found a
true sea-bottom sand fifteen feet and a half below the level of the
shoal. It was to that depth that the whole caisson had to be sunk.

"You remember that I told you there was an air-shaft in the middle of
the caisson?"

"Yes."

"Well, on the top of this air-shaft an air-lock was built. The water in
the air-shaft was forced out by compressed air and the men entered the
caisson."

"Into the compressed air?"

"Yes. It takes a special kind of worker for the job. In the air-lock,
you know, the men have to stay for a while before they enter the
chamber, so as to get used to the compressed air gradually. Lots of
people can't stand it."

"Did you try it?"

"Yes. I asked Father and he wouldn't let me. But I slipped into the
air-lock once and tried it, anyhow."

"Well?"

"Not for me!" said his friend. "I got out in less than five minutes. My
head seemed bursting, and I was bleeding from the ears as well as the
nose. But some of them, especially an old chap called Griffin, the
foreman, didn't seem to mind it at all.

"As soon as the caisson was clear of water and the men were ready, they
entered the caisson, crawled down the long ladder and began to dig away
the sand. A large four-inch pipe led up the air-shaft and over the sea.
The sand and small stones were shoveled into a chamber from which a
valve opened into the pipe and the compressed air drove up the sand and
stones like a volcano into the sea. The work proceeded rapidly and
without a hitch until the caisson had been sunk thirteen feet and a
half. Then, when only two feet from the total desired depth, an
unexpected and terrible thing happened.


[Illustration: "THE BOAT WENT INTO MATCHWOOD."

A sudden tempest breaking upon Smith's Point Lighthouse in the early
stages of its construction.

Courtesy of McClure's Magazine.]


"At three o'clock in the afternoon a low hissing was heard in the
caisson, and with a quick flicker the candles first burned low, then
flamed anew, the color of the flame a lambent green. For a few moments
none of the men realized what had happened, and stood there, stupefied
and staggering. An acrid burning sensation gripped the men by the throat
and they were stricken blind. Suffering terrible agony, every man
managed to climb the long ladder, each step of which seemed an eternity,
and entered the air-lock. Ten hale and hearty men had entered the
caisson, ten wrecks emerged, the flesh of the inside of their throats
raw and their eyes swollen and reddened beyond recognition.