

"Down came the cylinder again and as she careened, every man clambered
on. The added weight made her top-heavy and she began to ship water
badly. Four of the fresh men were put at the pumps to relieve the others
who were exhausted by their efforts.


[Illustration: "THE IRON RIM ROLLING SAVAGELY."

The cylinder of the Smith's Point Lighthouse caught in a storm while
being towed down Chesapeake Bay.

Courtesy of McClure's Magazine.]


"Father had climbed on the cylinder, with a rope slung over his
shoulders. He called to the men to haul in. At the end of it was a large
piece of canvas, an old sail. With nothing to which they could hold on,
with the waves dashing high and that great iron drum reeling drunkenly
on the sea, those men lay flat on their stomachs and spread that sail
over the top of the cylinder. More than once it seemed as though wind
and sea would get under that sail and with one vast heave, pitch every
man into the sea, but they held on. One of the men, an old time
shellback, bent that sail on to the cylinder so snugly and cleverly that
almost two-thirds of the surface was protected. With teeth as well as
hands the men held on, and lashed the canvas into place.

"Every second they expected to feel the cylinder founder beneath their
feet, for though the pumps were going steadily and furiously, more water
was being shipped than could be taken out. Once the sail was lashed
fast, however, the cylinder shed most of the wash and the pumps, now
working at top speed with eight men at the handles, began to gain. Water
still scuttled down the iron sides, and as the sea was rising, she put
her whole side under for the fraction of a second, twice. I was watching
it all from the steamer, our searchlight playing full on the ungainly
craft.

"Presently, so perilous did the situation grow and so rough the sea,
that the captain of the steamer signaled to one of the smaller tugs to
take up her anchor and stand by to pick up survivors should the cylinder
founder. He broke away his anchor himself and the big ocean-going tug
steamed to windward of the cylinder, letting down a heavy coat of oil on
the sea. It worked like a charm. The smoothening effect of the oil was
just sufficient to enable the men to work on the cylinder with a slight,
a very slight, margin of safety.

"Six men scuttled down the rope ladders on the inside of the cylinder.
It chanced that there were four buckets on the iron drum and with this
they organized a bucket brigade. The water was still three feet deep and
swishing about like a whirlpool. Every man knew that one large wave
would send them to Davy Jones' locker.

"Down in the bowels of that iron cylinder they toiled. Not a gleam of
light was anywhere, the white shaft of the searchlight overhead only
making the shadows denser. No man could see his fellow; only by feeling
were the buckets passed from hand to hand. But, between the bucket
brigade and the pumps, little by little the water lessened, the load of
the cylinder lightened and she rode higher in the water. Little choice
was theirs, either to bail unceasingly or to drown like rats in a hole.