

This decided the matter. Every one was somehow stowed on board the
_Bear_ and at slow speed, only enough to give steerage way, with two
leads going, and the oldest and most experienced pilot in the bow to con
her through the narrow channel, the cutter made her way out safely. She
anchored in the outer harbor, fortunately having secured a bearing from
Woody Island, whereby she could run out to sea by compass course should
conditions warrant. This also gave an opportunity to relieve the
suffering on Woody Island, and 104 persons were brought on board, making
486 people to be fed from the supplies handled by the _Bear_. It was
incredible how so many could be accommodated, but the organization was
perfect.

The night was spent in great suspense; but Eric, who had been relieved
from duty, slept through it. It was noon before he finally wakened, to
find a bright sunlit sky and a ship clear of ashes. In the afternoon, as
the effects of the eruption cleared away, three expeditions were sent to
Woody Island, to St. Paul, and to the neighboring islands. Eric was sent
with the _Redondo_ on the rescue party that was headed for Afognak.

There it was learned that the eruption had come from Mount Katmai, on
the mainland of the Alaska Peninsula, opposite Kodiak Island, and that
there were people in distress in the region of the volcano. Without an
instant's delay the _Redondo_ was headed out of the harbor, and despite
a dense fog, she was run through the Kupreanoff Straits and across
Shelikoff Straits to Kaflia Bay.

At half-past two in the morning, the _Redondo_ dropped anchor near the
volcano, and as soon as it grew light, Eric was sent to head a landing
party. Every hut was covered with ashes, and a native, pointing to one
of the drifts, said it was as high as "five houses," or about fifty feet
high. All the streams were buried; there was not a drop of liquid of any
kind, and the villagers had lived in the tortures of that ash-choked air
for three days, waterless. Two were delirious from thirst, all were at
the point of exhaustion when the Coast Guard men appeared to save them.

With her engines throbbing at their utmost speed, the _Redondo_ passed
from point to point of the stricken coast, saving over fourscore lives
that a half a day's delay would have rendered too late to save. When the
dusk of that day deepened into evening, the _Redondo_ turned homeward
from those shrouded shores, bearing to safety the homeless victims of
the peninsula and islands close at hand.


[Illustration: NATIVE REFUGEES FROM KATMAI ERUPTION.

From waterless shores covered six feet deep with orange-grey dust, come
famishing fishers in their kayaks.

Courtesy of U.S. Coast Guard.]


Still in the far distance rumbled the defeated earthquake, still upon
the sky was reflected the lurid glow of the volcano, which, through the
daring and the courage of the Coast Guard men, claimed not a single
victim.




CHAPTER IX

DEFYING THE TEMPEST'S VIOLENCE