

"How big was the cylinder?" queried the boy.

"It was thirty feet in diameter and each of the courses was six feet
high. That's twelve feet for the two courses. Inside the big cylinder
was a second smaller one, like an air-shaft, five feet in diameter. A
pump was rigged on the edge of the cylinder for the journey down the
bay, in case any water should splash over the sides from the wake of the
tug.

"When the springtime came and there was a reasonable prospect of fair
weather, quite a fleet set out for Baltimore with Father and me in the
leading tug. I felt as proud of myself as if I'd been an admiral! I
wasn't quite sure," he added, laughing, "whether Father was the boss of
the job or whether I was, myself.

"We had a large ocean-going tug towing the caisson, but we went ahead
at very slow speed. Besides the big tug there were two tugs towing seven
barges with the iron work, with building materials, stone, cement, and
all that sort of thing. It made quite a gallant show.

"I want to tell you right now, we missed our guess when we supposed that
Chesapeake Bay was being coddled by any of the softening influences of
the gentle springtime! It was only lying low! It took us three days to
get to the site of the lighthouse, which was marked by a buoy. We
reached there on a quiet and peaceful evening, the sort that landlubber
poets write about. A little after sundown it began to breeze up, and by
four bells of the first watch, there was a stiffish wind, which at
midnight began to climb into half a gale.

"Then the sea began to rise. It only takes a capful of wind to make
things nasty on the bay, and that iron cylinder began to toss like a
cork. We'd left four men aboard the cylinder and by half an hour after
midnight they were pumping for their lives. There was a big searchlight
on the tug and Father came tumbling up from below and ordered the
searchlight turned on to the cylinder.

"I tell you, that was a sight. There was nothing to be seen in the
smother but the great black iron rim rolling savagely, the white water
spouting about it, and, as it heaved above the waves, the searchlight
showed its black sides with the water streaming down. There, clustered
at the pumps, were the four men, working like a bunch of madmen and
shouting for help as the cylinder rose above the water, strangling and
clinging to the pump-handles like grim death as she went under. It was
for their lives that they were working, for if ever half a dozen tons of
water should slop over the side of the black monster, it would sink
straight to the bottom, and so great would be the suction that there was
not the slightest chance that any of them would ever come up alive.

"That was one time I saw Father in action. He yelled for the lifeboat
and got volunteers. Out of the blank confusion he brought order, and in
less than two minutes the lifeboat was over the side with twelve men
aboard, Father one of them. The little boat rose on the waves like a
feather and the third wave dashed it against the rim of the cylinder. As
the frail craft crushed like an eggshell, every man leaped for the edge,
hanging on to the sharp iron edge like grim death.