


"I've been wondering," said Eric to Homer, a few days after his rescue
trip on the _Redondo_, "what we're going to do with all these natives.
We can't take them back to the Katmai country. They just about live on
fish and everything that swims was killed during the eruption. How are
they going to exist? It'll be years before the fish come back."

"I can tell you all about that," his friend replied. "You know the
commanding officer of the Bering Sea fleet came up, while you were
away?"

"Yes, you told me."

"I heard all about the plans which the department had approved, on his
suggestion. A new village is going to be built at the place which the
Coast Guard picks out along the shore as being the best site for a town.
It's going to be a regularly laid out place, with sanitary arrangements
and everything else complete."

"Give them all a new start, eh?"

"That's it, exactly. One of the other ships of the fleet is cruising now
along the coast to pick out the best spot. We're to send a carpenter
ashore there and leave him for the winter to look after the erection of
igloos. He'll be in charge of enough supplies to last the settlement
till spring."

"Whereabouts is this town going to be?" asked the boy.

"It's not definitely decided yet," was the reply, "but probably it'll be
on Stepnovak Bay. It'll be quite a place, too, because it'll start out
with a population of over 500 natives, maybe a thousand."

"That's a metropolis for Alaska," agreed Eric.

"And, what's more," continued the young engineer, "they're going to give
the new town the name of 'Perry,' in honor of our skipper, as the
department said, for 'recognition of his heroic services at the time of
the eruption.'"

As soon as arrangements for the wintering of the homeless natives had
been completed, the _Bear_ returned to Unalaska and thence made one more
trip to Nome on business connected with the Federal Courts at that
place. Then, as winter was closing in, the Coast Guard cutter stood out
to sea up toward the Bering Straits, to await the outcoming of the
several vessels in the whaling fleet, and make sure of the safety of
every American sailor in the Arctic. The last of the whalers cleared the
straits on October 29, and on the following day the _Bear_ started on
her southerly course, leaving the Arctic to its annual eight months of
unvisited silence.

Eric had wondered a good deal what assignment or appointment he would
get for the winter. Great was his delight to find that both he and his
chum had been assigned to the _Miami_, and were to report for duty on
December tenth. The extra couple of days allowed him on the journey
across the continent gave the boy a chance to visit his relatives in San
Francisco, and he also managed it so that he took a short run up to
Detroit to see his family and to have a chat with his old friend, the
puzzle-maker.

He found the _Miami_ to be a beauty. Unlike the Bear, which depended as
much on sails as on steam, the _Miami_ was well-engined. Almost the
first thing that struck Eric when he came to go over her arrangements
was her unusually large coal and water capacity.