

When Eric came on deck again, he found the _Miami_ on her way south
again on the search for the derelict, _Madeleine Cooney_, this time
reported by the United States Army mine planter, _Schofield_. Two days
afterwards in latitude 27 deg. 52' N., longitude 84 deg. 34' W., a vessel
was found in 65 fathom of water, with her anchor down, burned to her main
deck and on fire aft. She was dismasted and her bowsprit had gone. Eric
was sent in charge of one of the boats to run a line. The sea was
comparatively smooth, so that the _Miami_ made fast alongside her stern
and put two lines of hose aboard. The cutter's heavy pumps were attached
and in fifteen minutes the fire was out.

The anchor chain was fouled, so the first lieutenant gave orders that
the cable should be slipped. Some of the cutter's men worked around the
masts floating alongside and the entangled rigging, and cut away enough
of the rigging to make a heavy wire bridle which was passed through the
hawse-pipes in the burned vessel's bow. This was necessary as none of
the upper works of the ship remained to which a tow-line could be
attached. To this bridle was bent the ten-inch hawser of the _Miami_,
and the derelict was towed into Tampa Bay.

On the way, however, rough weather came up and the masts and spars broke
adrift. As they were right in the path of traffic, the _Miami_ went back
to destroy these. The spars were separated and allowed to drift, as the
set of the current would soon take them ashore out of harm's way. This
got rid of everything except the lower part of the mainmast. As this
heavy spar itself might be the means of sinking a vessel if left
adrift, tossing on the waves, the _Miami_ parbuckled the big timber on
board, chopped it into small pieces--none of them large enough to do a
vessel any damage--and set them afloat.

The weather continued squally as the _Miami_ ran down the coast, the tag
end of the gale blowing itself to tatters on the stretch from Cape
Hatteras to Cape Fear. Little though Eric realized it then, before the
year was out, he was destined to know that coast from painful experience
and every curl of those hungry breakers was going to be imprinted on his
brain.

The _Miami_ was off Cape Canaveral when a radio message was received
that there was a derelict bark two hundred miles to the westward of
Abaco Island, the northernmost of the Bahamas. In less than three
minutes after the receipt of the message over the wireless, the captain
had been advised, the course changed and the _Miami_ was headed for the
derelict at full speed. She had been running for a little over an hour
when a second radio was received from a land station, relayed from a
steamer.

"Schooner _Marie-Rose_ reports passing water-logged vessel 23 deg. 40' N.
and 73 deg. 10' W. Signs of distress observed. _Marie-Rose_, crippled and
running before gale, could not heave to. Not known whether any one on
board."

Then the wireless began to be busy. Within twenty minutes the same
message was received from Washington, from the station at Beaufort,
N. C., from Fernandina, Fla., from Key West and from Nassau. Then by
relays from vessels on the coast, from the _Seneca_, the Coast Guard's
great derelict destroyer, far out on the Atlantic; from the _Algonquin_,
stationed at Porto Rico; from the _Onondaga_ patrolling the coast north
of Cape Hatteras and from the _Seminole_ in port at Arundel Cove
undergoing repairs, came orders from the Coast Guard Headquarters. The
_Miami_ was instructed to proceed at once to the point indicated, to
rescue survivors if such were to be found and to destroy the derelict
which was floating into the trade route and was a menace to navigation.
Meanwhile, the long harsh "buzz" of the answer sounded all over the ship
from the wireless room as the operator answered the various calls with
the information that the _Miami_ was already proceeding under full
speed.