

Eric slid down the deck to this barricade. The first man seemed to be
dead, the heart of the second was beating feebly, but the third, a
white-haired old man, appeared only to be asleep, the deep sleep of
exhaustion. When the boy put his hand on his shoulder, the old man
opened his eyes wide.

"So you have come the third time," he said, in a queer far-away voice,
"but it is too late."

Eric slipped his hand into his coat pocket and brought out a small phial
of restorative he had provided just before leaving the cutter. He gave
the survivor a few sips. The old man changed not a muscle, only repeated
in the same dull and far-away voice,

"So you have come the third time, but it is too late!"

Perceiving that the sufferer regarded him as an apparition and that in
his hallucinations born of exhaustion and exposure he must have believed
he saw rescuers before, Eric picked the old man up bodily and, half
crouching, half climbing on the sloping deck, carried him to the
derelict's side. Two of the sailors climbed up and helped him lower the
old man to the boat.

Meantime the other boat had made fast and the second lieutenant joined
him. He was a man of considerable experience, and while Eric was quite
proud of his knowledge and skill as a life-saver, he was amazed at the
deft handling of his superior officer.


[Illustration: THE GREATEST MENACE OF THE SEAS.

A sunken derelict ready to sink any vessel that strikes her.

Courtesy of U.S. Coast Guard.]


[Illustration: BURNED TO THE WATER'S EDGE.

Vessel abandoned and floating in the path of commerce, hunted as a
dangerous beast, and found by the Coast Guard cutters.

Courtesy of U.S. Coast Guard.]


"I think this one's gone," said Eric in a low voice, pointing to the
first man he had seen.

The other cast a quick look at him and shook his head.

"Pretty far gone, but not quite," he answered. "There's always a
fighting chance that we can pull him through. I'll take these two into
my boat and get back to the cutter. We'll probably blow this craft up,
afterwards; we couldn't ever tow her this way."

"Why, sir? Because she's too heavy?"

"Not only that, but she lies too low. On end, the way she is now, she's
probably drawing thirty-five or forty feet of water. She might stick in
a channel somewhere and that would be worse than getting rid of her out
here."

The boats raced back to the ship and the survivors were handed up to the
_Miami_ where the surgeon immediately took charge. All preparations had
been made, meanwhile, for the placing of mines and Eric was told off in
the boat under the second lieutenant to see to the placing of the
charges.

This was work to which Eric was unaccustomed and he watched with
considerable interest the gunner's handling of the mines. It was easy
enough to place the charges in the upper works of the stern where they
would be sure to blow that part of the ship to pieces, but so much of
the forward portion of the hulk was under water that the problem there
was more difficult. In order to make sure of the job, five mines were
set and connected with each other by electric wiring. A long strand of
insulated wire was then carried to the boat, over a hundred feet in
length.