

"Every year," he had said, "hundreds of vessels, both sail and steam,
leave their home ports for foreign shores, or start from foreign ports
for home. The day of the expected arrival comes and goes, two or three
days drag by, and still there is no sign of them. Anxious relatives and
friends besiege the shipping offices daily for word, and no word comes.
When suspense has passed into assured disaster, the underwriters
inscribe against that vessel's name the one word, "Missing!" An average
of a vessel a day is the toll of the Seven Seas upon the world's
shipping. And the principal cause is--derelicts."

As the _Miami_ plowed her way through the water, dipping her nose into
the waves raised by a stiff southeaster, Eric thought of the suddenness
of the catastrophe if the Coast Guard cutter, in the darkness, should
strike one of those abandoned hulks, floating almost level with the
water, and scarcely visible from the vessel's decks.

It was a night calculated to shake the nerve of a youngster who knew
that this deadly menace to the life of every one on board might be
suddenly lurking in the trough of any one of the waves, that came
shouldering their vengeful resentment against the sturdy little vessel
that defied them. They had nourished their grudge against Man, the
violator of their ancient domain, over a thousand leagues of sea, for
the _Miami_ was a hundred miles to the eastward of the Lookout Shoal,
though westward of the limit of the Gulf Stream. The billows thus had a
stretch of unbroken ocean from the frozen continent of Antarctica. Of
this they made full use, and staunch little vessel though the cutter
was, she was making bad weather of it.

The fog was dense and the gale whipped the spray into a blinding sheet.
This was varied by squalls of sleet and hail and for three hours a
blinding snowstorm added to the general discomfort. Less than thirty
miles to the eastward lay the Gulf Stream, where the water was over 70
deg. and where no snow could ever be, but that gave the crew of the
_Miami_ little comfort.

It was not a coast on which vigilance could be relaxed, and Eric was
glad when the search for the _Madeleine Cooney_ was abandoned for a
while. It was time, too, for the _Miami_ had all she could do to take
care of herself. The Coast Guard vessel was midway between the Frying
Pan and the Lookout Shoals, two of the most famous danger points on the
Atlantic coast, and the wind had risen to a living gale. The first
lieutenant was on the bridge a great deal of the time. For forty-eight
hours there had been absolutely no sign of the sun or any star. There
was no way to determine the vessel's position except by dead
reckoning--always a dangerous thing to trust when there is much leeway
and many cross-currents. The lead was going steadily, heaved every few
minutes, while the _Miami_ crept along cautiously under the guidance of
that ancient safeguard of the mariner.

It was the evening of the second day after the worst part of the blow
started that the _Miami_ dropped her anchor in eight fathoms of water
off the North Carolina coast. Steam was kept full up, although the
position of the cutter in the lee of a point of land precluded the
immediate possibility of her dragging her anchors.