

At a signal given him by the lieutenant, Eric pressed the button. There
was a tremendous roar as a waterspout shot up from the surface of the
sea. As though some vast leviathan had passed underneath the old bark
and shouldered her out of the water, the long black hull heaved herself
up slowly. She seemed to hang poised for a fraction of a second on the
surface of the water as if, in her death agony, she had for a moment
thought of her old life when, under press of sail, she flew bounding
over the billows, defying the very elements which at last had worked her
ruin. Only for a moment she hung there, then with a dull crash she
broke her back. The bow plunged downward with a sullen plunge, but the
stern still held poised. Then, quite suddenly, the air imprisoned in the
hull broke free and slowly, almost, it seemed, with dignity, the
remainder of the vessel sank forever beneath the surface of the waters.

It was the end of the _Luckenback_ and somewhere at the bottom of the
sea her distorted steel plating marks the spot where rest the nine
members of her crew lost before the rescuing Coast Guard cutter hove in
sight.




CHAPTER XI

THE WRECKERS OF THE SPANISH MAIN


"Well, Eric," said Homer Tierre to his friend, as they stood together
one evening a few days after the rescue of the survivors of the
_Luckenback_, watching the phosphorescence of the sea, "we're getting
down to the old Spanish Main, now."

"Isn't that a great word for bringing up ideas!" exclaimed Eric in
reply. "It makes one think of the old stories we used to read as kids,
of the black flag with the skull and crossbones and all that sort of
thing. Too bad there aren't any pirates left!"

"I suppose you'd want us to go chasing them!"

"Of course. We should have to, if there were any, wouldn't we?"

"Certainly," his friend answered. "Don't you remember how the old bos'n
of the _Itasca_ used to tell us about the early days of the Revenue
Cutter Service when chasing pirates was a regular part of its duties?
Officially it is still, I suppose, but there aren't any more pirates to
chase."

"What has put them all out of business?" Eric said thoughtfully. "I've
often wondered."

"Steam, mainly," his friend replied, "that 'insult to a seaman's
intelligence,' as our friend the fluent skipper of the _Northwestern_
called it."

"But I don't see why," persisted Eric. "After all, in the days of
sailing ships, the pirates only had sailing ships--and they weren't
always such an awful lot faster. Why couldn't pirates to-day have
steamships, just as fast in comparison to the steamers of to-day as
their clippers were to the sailing ships of old? They'd get much bigger
hauls. Why, one good hold-up of an Atlantic steamer would make a pirate
crew rich for life!"

"You'd better take to the trade," suggested his companion.

"I'd sooner do the chasing," replied the boy; "it's much more fun,
anyway, and I'd rather be on the right side, every time. But don't you
think that there really would be a chance for a big Atlantic greyhound
pirate?"