

Eric peered into the darkness, putting his hand over his eyes as though
to look intently.

"Pirate, ahoy!" he called softly. "Three points off the starboard bow!"

The young lieutenant of engineers laughed.

"You'll be dreaming of pirates in your next watch below," he said, as he
turned away, "or you'll be running up the skull and cross-bones instead
of the Stars and Stripes and we'll have to court-martial you."

"Little chance of that," replied the boy, "but maybe there'll be a
submarine pirate some day that we'll have a chance to chase. I'll live
in hopes!"

By a somewhat curious coincidence, a few days after this conversation,
the _Miami_ passed the Dry Tortugas, the old-time capital of that
Buccaneer Empire which for forty years held the navies of the entire
world at bay. It was a curious chapter in the history of the seas, and
Eric caught himself wondering whether the future of navigation held any
such surprising and adventurous period in store. He was to learn
shortly, however, that the Coast Guard was thoroughly fitted to meet
similar emergencies and that her naval powers could be made swiftly
operative even in times of peace.

As the cutter was proceeding to her station at Key West, she sighted a
schooner, which, by signal flags, reported that she had that morning
passed a bark flying the reversed ensign, with her yards awry and her
sails aback. On running close to the schooner the _Miami_ learned that
the bark had changed her course when the schooner approached, and when
the schooner fell on her course the bark came aback again. A second time
the schooner went to her relief, and again the bark squared off on her
course.

"Queer thing," said Eric, after the flags had been read. "What do you
suppose it is?"

"Looks like mutiny," said his chum. "I suppose we'll chase her and find
out. Too bad the schooner never got near enough to see her name."

"What's the odds? We've got a description. Hello! Forced draft, eh?"

"Yes, it looks like trouble. You wanted to see a pirate chase, Eric. I
don't believe that's on the boards, but at least a mutiny chase smacks
of the old days."

The information given by the schooner proved to be startlingly correct,
for a couple of hours later the lookout in the crow's-nest reported,

"Sail on the port bow!"

"Where away?" asked the chief officer.

"Nearly dead ahead, sir," was the reply.

The captain leveled his glass at the craft. Eric watched him closely,
for his expression was puzzling. In an hour's time the _Miami_ which,
under forced draft, was flying through the water, overhauled the vessel.
Just as the schooner had reported, the bark was in irons, with her yards
braced athwartwise and her sails aback. The British merchant flag was
flying at her mizzen-gaff, with the ensign down.

No sooner was the _Miami_ within a mile or two of the bark than the
vessel squared around her yards and began to scud before the wind. She
had a good pair of heels and it was not surprising that the schooner had
not started to pursue. There was no real reason why she should
interfere. But with the Coast Guard cutter it was another matter. A
signal of distress had been seen, an American vessel had called on the
cutter, and now the suspected craft was running away. The chase began.