

Courtesy of U.S. Coast Guard.]


"You mean that the wreckers have put up a false light to lead vessels on
to the reefs?"

"It's that decoy light that brought me here," said the skipper, "and if
you hadn't come when you did, I reckon every one of us would have had
our throats cut and the vessel would have been skinned by this time."




CHAPTER XII

THE GRAVEYARD OF THE DEEP


Following on the information given by the captain of the Norwegian
steamer, which had so nearly been looted by wreckers, the _Miami_
started on a search for the decoy light that had led that steamer to her
fate. The captain was an able navigator, and, until the moment he had
seen the false light and been led astray by it, he had been absolutely
upon his right course. Under such circumstances it was not difficult to
find the latitude and longitude where the captain reported having first
seen the light. He had also given the bearing in the log, so the _Miami_
crept slowly forward in the direction indicated, heaving the lead
constantly for treacherous shoals.

From where the captain of the steamer had cited his position there was
not a single sign of a lighthouse or a light. But, as the _Miami_ crept
on, far out of the regular ship's channel, as suddenly as though it had
been just placed there, rose a spar, held in place with three wire
stays. On the top was a little round platform, not more than a foot
across, and spikes had been driven into the mast to act as a ladder by
which to climb it. The _Miami_ was almost on the tiny outcrop of rock
before the mast was visible. It was painted a watery blue, which merged
in with the color of both sea and sky, and was exceedingly difficult to
see.

A boat's crew was sent ashore to demolish the mast and also to make a
search for the light. To Eric, who went ashore with the men, it was
quite an exciting hunt, "almost like looking for Captain Kidd's
treasure," as he said afterwards to his chum, the young lieutenant of
engineers. The quest was in vain, for though every inch of the islet was
searched, there was no sign that the ground had been disturbed. So far
as that went, there was very little ground to disturb, for the islet was
little more than a coral rock, nearly covered at high tide. It was
evident that the wreckers, when they were ready for their work, brought
the light with them.

As the light for which the decoy was intended to be a substitute was
quite a powerful light, with a regular occulting flash, the decoy itself
must be powerful, and the _Miami_ was anxious to trace it. If the
native wreckers had such a lantern in their possession, probably they
had some kind of clockwork and could alter the occultation of their
decoy so that it would duplicate any one of several different lights on
the coast.

It was not until some time afterwards that the Lighthouse Service
learned that there actually had been such a light in the hands of the
wreckers at one time. In a quarrel among themselves, however, over the
division of the spoils of a small schooner which had run ashore, one of
the disgruntled wreckers had thrown the lantern overboard in deep water.