

No sooner did the bark realize that she was actually being chased than
men were sent aloft, and the fore-royal and main sky-sail were set, a
heavy press of the sail for the full breeze. This absolutely determined
the fact that the Coast Guard cutter would chase, for the bark was
fleeing. It was getting late in the afternoon, and within a couple of
hours darkness would close down. The moon would not rise until nearly
midnight, so that there would be two or three hours in which the sailing
vessel could give the cutter the slip. Little by little, however, the
_Miami_ began to close up. The breeze freshened, increasing the chances
of the fugitive, but still the cutter lessened the distance between
them.

Immediately after dinner, a few minutes before eight bells struck in the
second dog watch, the first lieutenant, at the captain's direction, gave
orders to clear away the bow gun. The gun crew sprang to stations, and a
moment later the sharp crack of a rapid fire six-pounder sounded across
the waters of the Gulf of Mexico, an order from Uncle Sam for the
fleeing bark to stop.

But the stranger paid no heed. With the glass, figures could be seen on
the main deck and on the poop, but it was too far away to determine what
they were doing.

The captain turned suddenly to the officer of the deck. "Did you see
anything, Mr. Keelson?" he asked.

The officer, who had his eyes glued to his glass, replied,

"I thought I saw the smoke of shots!"

"That's what I thought," the captain answered. Then, in a quick voice
of command, he added,

"You may use solid shot!"

A few seconds sufficed to carry out the work.

"Try for her upper spars!" was the next order.

The sharp crack of a shot from the six-pounder was the reply, and
simultaneously, holes appeared in the gaff topsail and the main
topgallant staysail. The wind immediately slivered the sails to ribbons
and they began lashing about the rigging. At this, the main yards were
swung round, the mainsails came aback and ten minutes later the _Miami_
was alongside.

Two boats' crews, fully armed, were sent aboard. The situation which
greeted Eric, in the second lieutenant's boat, was unusual. A rope
ladder had been thrown over the ship's side from the main deck. Above
the ladder was an excited group, all shouting at the top of their
voices. The senior second lieutenant, who was in charge of the boat to
which Eric had been assigned, took command of the party. He asked for
the captain. One of the men pointed to the helmsman.

"Are you the captain?" the Coast Guard officer demanded.

"Si, signor," the man answered, "I the captain."

"Johnson," said the lieutenant, "relieve the wheel!"

One of the Coast Guard men saluted, stepped forward and took the wheel.
The vessel was hove to.

"Are you English?" the lieutenant asked, when this manoeuver had been
completed.

"Italiano!" the captain of the bark replied.

"Then what's that flag doing there?" the Coast Guard officer asked,
pointing to the reversed British merchant flag which still hung at the
gaff.