

Morning broke with that blue-gray veiling of the world in a covering of
storm that sailors know so well. It was one of those mornings when the
best of ships looks worn and drazzled. The _Miami_ showed scars from her
night's battle with the tempest. One of the starboard boats had been
stove in, and the davits twisted with the force of a wave that had come
aboard. Even the most rigid discipline and the most perfect order failed
to make the little vessel trim. There was an "out all night" appearance
to the cutter which told--more than great actual damage could have
done--the dogged endurance of the vessel against the fury of wind and
sea.

But, down in the engine-room, the unceasing metal fingers that are the
children of men's brains throbbed steadily, and the screw of the little
vessel drove her on to her work of rescue. On deck, the Coast Guard men,
clear-eyed and determined, handled their day's routine with a sublime
disregard of the dangers of the sea. Other vessels might scurry to safe
harbors, but the _Miami_, flying the colors of Uncle Sam, set out on her
mission to save, with never a moment's halting.

On the _Miami_ drove. Presently, the crow's-nest lookout reported a
steamer. She was one of the big West Indian liners, and she came reeling
towards the cutter with lurchings that were alarming to behold. Only a
certain quick jauntiness of recovery told the tale that she, too, was
confident of her powers to weather the storm. She called by wireless
that she had passed the disabled steamer _Union_ two hours before, that
the vessel was dragging her anchors and was in too shoal water for the
liner to attempt a rescue.

"She's going to strike, sure," said Eric to his friend Homer, as the
news of the message was received.

"And going right over the Diamond Shoals. How would you like to have
charge of the _Miami_ now, Eric?"

The boy looked thoughtful.

"A year or two ago," he answered, "when I was in the Academy, I'd have
been tickled to death at the chance. Right now, when I think I know a
bit more, I'm quite satisfied to have Keelson on the bridge. I notice
the captain's been around a good bit, too."

"Our chief has been on the job below nearly all night, as well," Homer
replied. "I'm thinking, Eric, that this is about as bad weather as any
vessel can live through!"

On through the storm the _Miami_ sped, her engine driving at its fullest
speed despite the terrific strain put upon it when the vessel heaved her
stern out of water and the screw raced madly with nothing to catch. On
she sped, though her bow was pointed straight for the most treacherous
shoals on the Atlantic coast, bars of avid quicksand, on which thousands
of vessels had gone to swift and awful destruction. On toward the
Diamond Shoals the cutter pierced her way, though the gray veil of
driving spray hid everything a score of fathom before the vessel's bow.


[Illustration: A RESCUE ON THE DIAMOND SHOALS.

The Coast Guard Cutter in utmost peril, saving the lives of the crew of
the wrecked steamer, _Union_.