

     "Of all books recently published on practical
     electricity for the youthful electricians, it is
     doubtful if there is even one among them that is more
     suited to this field. This work is recommended to every
     one interested in electricity and the making of
     electrical appliances."

     _Popular Electricity and Modern Mechanics._

     "This is an admirably complete and explicit handbook
     for boys who fall under the spell of experimenting and
     "tinkering" with electrical apparatus. Simple
     explanations of the principles involved make the
     operation readily understandable."

     _Boston Transcript._

     "Any boy who studies this book, and applies himself to
     the making and operating of the simple apparatus
     therein depicted, will be usefully and happily
     employed. He will, furthermore, be developing into a
     useful citizen. For this reason we recommend it as an
     excellent gift for all boys with energy, application,
     and ambition."

     _Electrical Record, N. Y. City._

     "A book to delight the hearts of ten thousand--perhaps
     fifty thousand--American boys who are interested in
     wireless telegraphy and that sort of thing. Any boy who
     has even a slight interest in things electrical, will
     kindle with enthusiasm at sight of this book."

     _Chicago News._


_For sale by all booksellers or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers_

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., BOSTON




HANDICRAFT FOR HANDY BOYS

Practical Plans for Work and Play with Many Ideas for Earning Money

By A. NEELY HALL

Author of "The Boy Craftsman"

With Nearly 600 Illustrations and Working-drawings by
the Author and Norman P. Hall 8vo. Cloth

Net, $2.00    Postpaid, $2.25

[Illustration]

This book is intended for boys who want the latest ideas for making
things, practical plans for earning money, up-to-date suggestions for
games and sports, and novelties for home and school entertainments.

The author has planned the suggestions on an economical basis, providing
for the use of the things at hand, and many of the things which can be
bought cheaply. Mr. Hall's books have won the confidence of parents, who
realize that in giving them to their boys they are providing wholesome
occupations which will encourage self-reliance and resourcefulness, and
discourage tendencies to be extravagant.

Outdoor and indoor pastimes have been given equal attention, and much of
the work is closely allied to the studies of the modern grammar and high
schools, as will be seen by a glance at the following list of subjects,
which are only a few among those discussed in the 500 pages of text:

MANUAL TRAINING; EASILY-MADE FURNITURE; FITTING UP A BOY'S ROOM;
HOME-MADE GYMNASIUM APPARATUS; A BOY'S WIRELESS TELEGRAPH OUTFIT;
COASTERS AND BOB-SLEDS; MODEL AEROPLANES; PUSHMOBILES AND OTHER
HOME-MADE WAGONS; A CASTLE CLUBHOUSE AND HOME-MADE ARMOR.