

As the lieutenant had pointed out to him, the whole ice question assumed
great importance, viewed in the light of the Atlantic Ice Patrol. The
_Miami_, on orders from the department, steamed north and relieved the
_Seneca_ on duty. She picked up the bergs which the _Seneca_ had found
and plotted their positions on the chart. Every day at eight bells of
the middle watch (4 A.M.) the wireless operator on the _Miami_ sent to
the Hydrographic office a statement as to the exact position of all
bergs that had been sighted and the amount of their probable daily
drift. This information was sent out again as a daily ice warning to
merchant vessels by the Hydrographic Bureau.


[Illustration: ICEBERG WITH _MIAMI_ IN THE BACKGROUND.

Courtesy of U.S. Coast Guard.]


[Illustration: THE GHOSTLY ALLY OF DISASTER.

Berg in the lane of Atlantic travel, continuously watched by Coast Guard
Cutter, safeguarding thousands of human lives.

Courtesy of U.S. Coast Guard.]


The experiment of trying to demolish the larger bergs by gunnery was
tried, and a six-pound shot was fired full at close range at one of the
bergs. But it had no other result than to shake down a barrelful of
snow-like dust. Following up the various bergs kept the _Miami_ busy. At
the same time she sent and received messages from passing steamers along
the line of travel.

Only one large berg really got into a dangerous position, and this one
was as carefully plotted and its position as thoroughly made known to
vessels navigating the Atlantic as though it were a fixture. The course
of the large Atlantic greyhound _La France_ lay directly in the path of
the berg and, had it not been for the warnings of the _Miami_, there
might have been another ocean disaster to record. As the summer months
approached, the cruising was delightful but not particularly
interesting, and Eric, who craved excitement, was glad when, at the end
of June, the _Miami_ was ordered to resume her old station at Key West.

Two months passed before an emergency arose, but when it did come, it
proved to be one to tax the Coast Guard cutter to the full. Toward the
end of September a storm warning of a hurricane was issued, and the
_Miami_, which was searching for a derelict reported two hundred miles
west of Daytona, Florida, decided to run for Matanzas Inlet. About
daylight the next morning, the first actual warning of the hurricane,
aside from the notice sent out by the Weather Bureau, began to show
itself in short gusty puffs. The barometer fell low, finally touching
28 deg., lower than Eric had ever seen before.

The sky clouded gradually, and by breakfast time, the wind was
freshening from the southeast. By ten o'clock, the wind had risen to
half a gale, and before noon it was blowing not less than forty to fifty
miles an hour. The _Miami_ made good weather, but in the afternoon the
hurricane reached such a pitch of violence that it was decided to run
before the storm and try for the lee of Cape Fear, possibly finding a
safe anchorage in Masonboro Inlet.