

     "Mingled with the story of football is another and
     higher endeavor, giving the book the best of moral
     tone."--_Chicago Record-Herald._


MAKING THE NINE

The life presented is that of a real school, interesting, diversified,
and full of striking incidents, while the characters are true and
consistent types of American boyhood and youth. The athletics are
technically correct, abounding in helpfull suggestions, and the moral
tone is high and set by action rather than preaching.

     "The story is healthful, for, while it exalts
     athletics, it does not overlook the fact that studious
     habits and noble character are imperative needs for
     those who would win success in life."--_Herald and
     Presbyter, Cincinnati._


IN THE LINE

Tells how a stalwart young student won his position as guard, and at the
same time made equally marked progress in the formation of character.
Plenty of jolly companions contribute a strong, humorous element, and
the book has every essential of a favorite.

     "The book gives boys an interesting story, much
     football information, and many lessons in true
     manliness."--_Watchman, Boston._


With Mask and Mitt

[Illustration]

While baseball plays an important part in this story, it is not the only
element of attraction. While appealing to the natural normal tastes of
boys for fun and interest in the national game, the book, without
preaching, lays emphasis on the building up of character.

     "No normal boy who is interested in our great national
     game can fail to find interest and profit, too, in this
     lively boarding school story."--_Interior, Chicago._




THE GREAT YEAR

Three fine, manly comrades, respectively captains of the football,
baseball, and track and field athletic teams, make a compact to support
each other so that they may achieve a "great year" of triple victory
over their traditional rival, "Hillbury."


THE YALE CUP

The "Cup" is an annual prize given by a club of Yale alumni to the
member of the Senior class of each of several preparatory schools "who
best combines proficiency in athletics with good standing in his
studies."


A FULL-BACK AFLOAT

At the close of his first year in college Dick Melvin is induced to earn
a passage to Europe by helping on a cattle steamer. The work is not so
bad, but Dick finds ample use for the vigor, self control, and quick wit
in emergency which he has gained from football.


THE PECKS IN CAMP

The Pecks are twin brothers so resembling each other that it was almost
impossible to tell them apart, a fact which the roguish lads made the
most of in a typical summer camp for boys.


THE HALF-MILER

[Illustration]

This is the story of a young man of positive character facing the stern
problem of earning his way in a big school. The hero is not an imaginary
compound of superlatives, but a plain person of flesh and blood, aglow
with the hopeful idealism of youth, who succeeds and is not spoiled by
success. He can run, and he does run--through the story.