

Modern ingenious work such as the above cannot fail to develop
mechanical ability in a boy, and this book will get right next to his
heart.

     "The book is a treasure house for boys who like to work
     with tools and have a purpose in their
     working."--_Springfield Union._

     "It is a capital book for boys since it encourages them
     in wholesome, useful occupation, encourages
     self-reliance and resourcefulness and at the same time
     discourages extravagance."--_Brooklyn Times._

     "It is all in this book, and if anything has got away
     from the author we do not know what it is."--_Buffalo
     News._


_For sale by all booksellers, or sent on receipt of postpaid price by
the publishers_

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., Boston




ON THE TRAIL OF THE SIOUX

The Adventures of Two Boy Scouts on the Minnesota Frontier

By D. LANGE

Illustrated  12mo  Cloth    Price, Net, $1.00    Postpaid, $1.10

[Illustration]

This story was written by a prominent educator to satisfy the insistent
demand of active boys for an "Indian Story," as well as to help them to
understand what even the young endured in the making of our country. The
story is based on the last desperate stand of the brave and warlike
Sioux tribes against the resistless tide of white men's civilization,
the thrilling scenes of which were enacted on the Minnesota frontier in
the early days of the Civil War.

     "It is a book which will appeal to young and old alike,
     as the incidents are historically correct and related
     in a wide-awake manner."--_Philadelphia Press._

     "It seems like a strange, true story more than fiction.
     It is well written and in good taste, and it can be
     commended to all boy readers and to many of their
     elders."--_Hartford Times._


THE SILVER ISLAND OF THE CHIPPEWA

By D. LANGE


Illustrated  12mo  Cloth    Price, Net, $1.00    Postpaid, $1.10

[Illustration]

Here is a boys' book that tells of the famous Silver Island in Lake
Superior from which it is a fact that ore to the value of $3,089,000 was
taken, and represents a youth of nineteen and his active small brother
aged eleven as locating it after eight months of wild life, during which
they wintered on Isle Royale. Their success and escape from a murderous
half-breed are due to the friendship of a noble Chippewa Indian, and
much is told of Indian nature and ways by one who thoroughly knows the
subject.

     "There is no call to buy cheap, impossible stuff for
     boys' reading while there is such a book as this
     available."--_Philadelphia Inquirer._


_For sale by all booksellers or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers_

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., BOSTON




PHILLIPS EXETER SERIES

By A. T. DUDLEY

Cloth, 12mo   Illustrated by Charles Copeland   Price per volume, $1.25


FOLLOWING THE BALL

Here is an up-to-date story presenting American boarding-school life and
modern athletics. Football is an important feature, but it is a story of
character formation in which athletics play an important part.