

     "It is a good, wholesome, and true-to-life story, with
     plenty of happenings such as normal boys enjoy reading
     about."--_Brooklyn Daily Times._


_For sale by all booksellers or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers_

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., BOSTON




_ST. DUNSTAN SERIES_

By WARREN L. ELDRED

Illustrated   Large 12mo   Cloth    $1.50 each

THE CRIMSON RAMBLERS

Five close friends in the freshman class at St. Dunstan's school, and a
teacher of the best sort, plan for a summer vacation in camp in Maine.
They adopt the name which gives the title to the book, and having gone
to Boston by water, complete their journey on foot, with plenty of
adventures along the way.


CAMP ST. DUNSTAN

A typical summer camp for boys, with all its interesting routine, is
described in connection with the story. Interesting new characters are
introduced, a mystery develops, and every element of a good boy's story
is present.


CLASSROOM AND CAMPUS

A group of likely lads entering upon the second year at "St. Dunstan's"
are led to believe that things might be much better at their school if
there were a higher standard of student honor and obligation, and these
active, vigorous boys work wonders in school sentiment.


ST. DUNSTAN BOY SCOUTS

[Illustration]

There are no better stories for boys than the really clean tales of
school life, and the boys of the school called "St. Dunstan" in this
series are types of the best sort of American youth, good fellows and
good students, in most cases, but not _too_ good. They become interested
in the "Boy Scout" movement and organize a company at the school. There
is work for them of a mysterious and puzzling nature, and they acquit
themselves well. In conclusion, they have a very enjoyable week's
"hike."

     "Here is a thoroughly wholesome book for boys, filled
     with boy life from cover to cover."

     --_Baltimore Sun._


_For sale by all booksellers or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers_

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., BOSTON




FOUR GORDONS

By EDNA A. BROWN


Illustrated Large 12mo    Decorated Cover    $1.50

[Illustration]

Louise and her three brothers are the "Four Gordons," and the story
relates their experiences at home and school during the absence of their
parents for a winter in Italy. There is plenty of fun and frolic, with
skating, coasting, dancing, and a jolly Christmas visit. The
conversation is bright and natural, the book presents no improbable
situations, its atmosphere is one of refinement, and it has the merit of
depicting simple and wholesome comradeship between boys and girls.

     "The story and its telling are worthy of Miss Alcott.
     Young folks of both sexes will enjoy it."--_N. Y. Sun._

     "It is a hearty, wholesome story of youthful life in
     which the morals are never explained but simply
     illustrated by logical results."--_Christian Register._