


UNCLE DAVID'S BOYS

By EDNA A. BROWN


Illustrated by John Goss    12mo Cloth
Price, Net, $1.00    Postpaid, $1.10

[Illustration]

This tells how some young people whom circumstances brought together in
a little mountain village spent a summer vacation, full of good times,
but with some unexpected and rather mysterious occurrences. In the end,
more than one head was required to find out exactly what was going on.
The story is a wholesome one with a pleasant, well-bred atmosphere, and
though it holds the interest, it never approaches the sensational nor
passes the bounds of the probable.

     "A story which will hold the attention of youthful
     readers from cover to cover and prove not without its
     interest for older readers."--_Evening Wisconsin._

     "For those young people who like a lively story with
     some unmistakably old fashioned characteristics, 'Uncle
     David's Boys,' will have a strong
     appeal."--_Churchman._


_For sale by all booksellers or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers_

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., BOSTON




    Transcriber's Note: The following typographical errors
    present in the original text have been corrected for
    this electronic edition.

    On the copyright page, "Norwood Perss" has been changed
    to "Norwood Press".

    In Chapter II, a missing period was added after "I don't
    claim to be amphibious, exactly".

    In the illustration captioned "Sliding Down to Work",
    "Lighthhouse-builders" was changed to
    "Lighthouse-builders".

    In Chapter III, "holdin on to him" was changed to
    "holdin' on to him", and "sixteeen per cent" was changed
    to "sixteen per cent".

    In Chapter IV, a comma was changed to a period following
    "rousted out the crew".

    In Chapter V, "come to live" was changed to "come to
    life".

    In Chapter VIII, "overwhemed by an avalanche" was
    changed to "overwhelmed by an avalanche".

    In Chapter X, "As the _Miama_ neared her" was changed to
    "As the _Miami_ neared her".

    In Chapter XI, "were sent abroad" was changed to "were
    sent aboard".







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOY WITH THE U. S. LIFE-SAVERS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.