

                                     14
                                                                    If ifI"    • t , •• :;.'   • '7($:·




                          Sir




        Srgn ..... r.
        be: r.bjamtJ at hu '<lom,) unJer our n<                     I atm. COIIIm"""'f: lhi d.y or
        II 0 P r. $: Comp>n~: tn whkh we pr <"1".1 rdi I and ««i" m'l be: ~rcn,
               fib!. or YOl" .'OTOUn mJ fnmdflup lu our It                    )11'0. ...
                                                                     p.er.me ..,
        ''''l"cll the                       all'lUlIll! lou lh'" "". llllol1 C!ld ,oun ..III be:
        cnl"h.-d to mer.                     Ini. tbern.
                                             \\ it.h "    •.crecL


                            ',.




            .....' ,•• r.II, ,'rllo.l\              trOPr..



Tlx S'"",     0( \',    J. II. .   '''I n   1.\    HOP I..



The • ><= 01'), ~I, Il             IIt'.·n        1I0PI




        Circular announcing the establishment of Hope & Co., 1762
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

 devise a system of calculating cost prices within the Oost-Indische Com-
 pagnie.!
  Towards the end of the Seven Years' War, Thomas and Adrian Hope
 were joined in the firm by Thomas's son, John, and their American
 nephew Henry. Henry's father, it will be recalled, had emigrated to Boston
 round about 1730. In 1735 his wife bore him a son, and five years later a
 daughter, Henrietta Maria. Henry Jr. was sent to England at the age of
 thirteen to complete his education, and in 1754 he commenced his com-
 mercial career in the house of Gurnell Hoare & Co. of London, with
 whom the Amsterdam Hopes also were associated. 2 In 1760 he visited his
 uncles, and such was their opinion of him that he was invited to join the
 house. Indeed, they were so taken with their nephew that on 1st January
 1762 he and Thomas's son, John, were admitted to partnership of what
 was henceforth to be Hope & Co. In 1763 the property to the east of
 Thomas's house on the Keizersgracht was purchased, probably for Hen-
 ry's benefit. John meanwhile continued to live further along the canal. 3
  Of the two new partners, Henry Hope was the better known and without
 doubt the more able. He may be regarded as the successor to Thomas,
 although he was less of a public figure than his uncle. This was undoubt-
 edly related to his Anglo-American origin, as a result of which he will
 have identified himself far less with specific Dutch situations than his
 cousin, John. When, in the 1780s, contrasting political opinions flared up,
 Henry Hope observed that because of his civil status (he took no part in
 administrative affairs) he was not obliged to take sides, and that he there-
fore maintained strict neutrality in his actions in Amsterdam. 4
  Like Thomas, Henry Hope had pro-Orange sympathies-which he made
no attempt to hide-but as an outsider he felt no compulsion to drain the
cup of political engagement. Such polarization was not in keeping with his
character, which is described to us as 'singularly even, mild, engaging and
amiable.' Henry Hope was well known for his concern for his fellowmen,
a concern manifested in many ways including liberal donations to charity. 5
'None ever more perfectly realised the idea of a merchant prince, diligent
in gathering, delighted to distribute wherever he could find an object of
commiseration and this not thoughtlessly, on the impulse of the moment,
merely to relieve the unpleasant sensation of witnessing distress, but with
judgement and consideration for the improvement of the sufferer as well
as his immediate relief and with all the delicacy of a refined mind, which
led him to lessen as far as possible the weight of obligation when his quick
tact showed him that it would be oppressive.' 6
  A relative of the authoress of this glowing tribute experienced the extent
                                     16
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM