




                                    VIII
  INTRODUCTION

THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM
                            CHAPTER ONE

          THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM
             SOME OBSER V A TIONS ON COMMERCE AND
              BANKING IN THE LATE 18TH CENTURY



'This is my plan for you, my Lord, and you never had a better opportunity
for executing it ... Your Lordship should come over in the beginning of
April, spend some weeks with us at The Hague till the end of May, then
some weeks at one of my seats in this province from whence we make all
our acquaintance to see the country ... Towards the end of the year we
may spend some time in Amsterdam, return to The Hague and from
thence I give you my word of honour that I and my wife will accompany
you to England to make a considerable stay there.' 1
  In this letter, dated 12th March 1776, John Hope, merchant of Amster-
dam and a partner in the house of Hope & Co., not only sketched his
seigneurial mode of living, but also confirmed his kinship to the recipient,
the Earl of Hopetoun, by signing himself 'Your most affectionate cousin.'
  John Hope'S urge to confirm and maintain his ties with the noble Scot-
tish branch of the family merits closer inspection, for genealogists have so
far not succeeded in providing irrefutable proof of the relationship be-
tween the Scottish and Dutch branches.
  According to the tradition, a certain Jean de Hope travelled from France
to Scotland with one of the French wives of James V, the Scottish king. It
is improbable that this Jean will have accompanied James's first wife,
Madeleine of France, for she died in July 1537, only six months after her
marriage. It therefore seems more likely that he accompanied Mary de
Guise, whom James V married in 1538.
  For those who are inclined to doubt this romantic origin, there is a
certain John Hope, who was admitted as a Burgess and Guild Brother
of Edinburgh in 1528 or 1529. One thing is certain: in 1560 or there
abouts, the son of Jean or John Hope, Edward, played a part in bringing
about the Reformation. The succeeding generation included a Henry
Hope, who married Jacqueline de Tot or de Jot; they had at least four
sons. The French-sounding name of Henry's wife may indicate a Con-
tinental link; indeed, an entry in the Edinburgh Roll shows that their
son James, a 'factor in Dieppe,' was admitted as a Burgess and Guild
Brother in 1619.
  Upon the death of James Hope in 1634, his son Henry or Harry took

                                     3
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

{lver the business activities. The diary kept by Henry's uncle, Thomas,
who received a baronetcy and took the title Hope of Craighall, contains
references to his nephew's regular visits to port towns in France. The
diary for 1637 also refers to contacts with Holland: 'Saturday 5th August:
Harry my nephew went by sea to Calais and given him five twelve pound
pieces of gold; and at his return he promised to serve some merchant in
Amsterdam.' The visit can not have been of long duration, for on 26th
March 1639 Sir Thomas recorded that: 'This night Harry Hope, my
nephew, came from France.'
  It is tempting to allow this Henry to marry his cousin, Ann, daughter of
Sir Thomas, and to let the couple move to Rotterdam in 1660 or there-
abouts; this, however, does not correspond to the genealogical facts,
added to which it is unlikely that Henry, at his relatively advanced age,
would have raised a family in Rotterdam. As a last possibility, there
could have been a Henry Hope Jr. who, moreover, might have married
the daughter of Sir Thomas's son. No evidence of this is to be found in
Edinburgh. 1
  It has, however, been established that in 1664 Henry Hope and Anna
Hope (variously written as Hop or Hoop) had their son Archibald
christened in the Scottish Church in Rotterdam. They subsequently had
other children, three of whom, Bethea, Elizabeth and Anna, reached
adulthood. 2
  In the 1680s Henry Hope's business fortunes declined, and eventually he
and his family were forced to leave Rotterdam and settle in London. But
even there his creditors continued to harass him: on 3rd September 1688,
Gilles van Braem, a merchant in Rotterdam, authorized John Schoppens
and Samuel Sale of London to recover monies owed to him by Henry
Hope. 3
  Shortly after this, it appears, Henry Hope died, leaving his wife and
children in impoverished circumstances. In the meantime, however,
Archibald had resumed his father's profession in Rotterdam and, as his
Wills show, was increasingly successful. In 1694 he married Anna Claus,
the daughter of a well-to-do Amsterdam buttonmaker and like himself, a
 Quaker. Their union was richly blessed with children, of whom eight sons
 and two daughters reached adulthood. With each new Will, they were
 more handsomely provided for. 4
  Archibald did not forget his mother and his sisters. Even before his
 marriage he had brought them back to Rotterdam, where he gave his
 mother an annual allowance and provided his sisters with capital to start
 a draper's shop.