

                                     12
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

of peace in February 1763, and funds continued to be required for pur-
poses such as the restoration of currencies weakened by the war, as in the
case of Prussia, or the payment of war levies, as in the case of Saxony.
With money so scarce, the greatly inflated circulation in the form of drafts
could only be maintained by honouring a matured draft with a draft on
another house. This wisselruiterij or cross-accommodation system was
hazardous inasmuch as a failure anywhere along the line could bring the
whole structure tumbling down. To make matters worse, many houses
were holding large stocks of colonial produce, the price of which had
slumped with the news of peace and the prospect of an early resumption
of fresh supplies direct from the colonies.
  At the end of July I763 the ground caved in, and the speculators com-
menced to drag each other over the precipice. The most startling bank-
ruptcy concerned the house of De Neufville, which had achieved a dubi-
ous reputation by indulging with others in practices aimed at debasing the
currency in Prussia. 1 Efforts by those at the Stock Exchange, including
Hope, to establish an emergency fund failed when Pels backed out. The
house of Pels had a reputation for being rigid and conservative (its dwin-
dling turnover with the Exchange Bank in the years after I7S8 is an indi-
cation of this). Thomas and Adrian Hope had not been in danger for a
single moment during the crisis: their cautious and consistent policy of
covering risks had stood them in good stead. 2
 It is noticeable that the turnover of all six houses which we investigated
declined during 1762, indicating that they reduced the scale of their credit
operations before peace was proclaimed. With the exception of De Smeth,
who lost more than 400,000 guilders when De Neufville failed, they em-
erged from the crisis comparatively unharmed. 3

At this point, let us take a closer look at the Hope brothers. Soon after
1720, Archibald Jr. had moved to a house flanking the Herengracht and
situated near the Blauwburgwal. In 1726 he had married Geertruyd Rees-
sen, the daughter of a merchant in the Warmoesstraat. In the following
year, Thomas Hope had married Margareta Marcelis, the daughter of an
Amsterdam merchant and soap-boiler, and they, too, had settled on the
Herengracht, but 'beyond the Bergstraat.' They had one son, John. Tho-
mas's brother, Adrian, who was a bachelor, made his permanent home
with them.4
 In I7S8 Thomas purchased a house, with adjacent coach-house and
stables, situated on the Keizersgracht, near the Molenpad. This he ac-
quired from Mattheus Levestenon van Berkenrode, who at that time

                                    13
                      THE FAMIL Y AND THE FIRM

represented the Republic in France. Thomas paid cf 83,000 for the house
and its contents. Shortly after the purchase he embarked on a programme
of alteration and expansion which was to occupy several years. The first
step was the acquisition of houses situated on the Prinsengracht and
backing on to Thomas's home. When he had acquired six of these, he had
them demolished and replaced by two large warehouses known as Kerk-
kroon A and B, which were used for storage and stabling. Wagons loaded
with goods entered the premises via a narrow street leading past the stables
and ending in an inner courtyard which had once been the garden of the
house on the Keizersgracht. 1
 It took until 1769 to obtain all the properties needed to make way for the
warehouses, and this fact alone indicates that the house must still have
handled a large volume of goods. The next step was to join the original
coach-house and stables to the house proper; this was probably done for
the benefit of Thomas's brother, Adrian.
  Conditions in the house on the Keizersgracht are revealed in the diary of
Bengt Fermer, a Swedish professor of astronomy who, in company with
the son of the wealthy Swedish manufacturer Lefebure, was touring
Europe. Thanks to Lefebure's business connexions, the two were invited
to dine with Thomas and Adrian Hope on a day in March 1759. When
the company had finished discussing the progress of the wars on the Con-
tinent and in America, and the activities of the English pirates, the conver-
sation tumed to the swarm of Dutch authors who, Thomas Hope com-
plained, were always trying to dedicate books to him in order to get
money out ofhim.2
  As one who depended upon the favours of the rich, Fermer was annoyed
by the ease with which Thomas Hope dismissed such authors as 'beg-
gars.' But he went on to remark that the Hopes were recognized as ex-
perts par excellence in mercantile matters and that both men, especially
Thomas, worked like slaves. The latter observation will not have been
meant as a compliment, but it does show once again that the 18th-century
merchant was not content to sit back and live on his capital.
  Fermer also noted that Thomas Hope was 'a director' of the Oost-Indi-
sche Compagnie. After the death of William IV in 1751, Thomas Hope had
relinquished the post of representative of the stadholder on the Board of
the West-Indische Compagnie, but in 1756 he was made a director of the
much more important Oost-Indische Compagnie. From 1766 to 1770 he
represented Stadholder William von the Board of this company, where, as
previously, his immense energy and drive soon made him the pivot about
 which everything revolved. He was the first and only person to attempt to