

                                    4
                      THE FAMIL Y A ND THE FIRM

 A Will dated 1720 shows Archibald to have been the owner of malting
 houses in Ipswich, Stowmarket and Bury St. Edmunds, and of two vessels
 used specially for the transport of malt. He also owned at least two other
 vessels, the 'Henry' and the 'Marlborough,' which were engaged in the
trade with England and Ireland. 1
  The ties with Scotland were also maintained. On 22nd February 1701,
 Charles Hope of Hopetoun authorized Archibald Hope, 'Merchant in
 Rotterdam, My Cousin,' to collect a debt owed to him by the Rotterdam
merchant Cornelis van der Pot. Charles Hope, who owned important lead
mines, had supplied Van der Pot with lead ore for which the latter had
failed to pay. This authorization is of particular importance because it
provides irrefutable proof of the relationship between the Hopes of Rot-
terdam and the ennobled Scottish family.2
  Archibald Hope's Will of 1720 stipulated that, upon his death, the
merchant house should be carried on by his sons Henry and John. Places
in the firm were also reserved for their brothers Isaac and Thomas, who
were then under age. The name of the second eldest son, Archibald Jr.,
does not appear in this connexion, but it is known that in 1720 he lived
with his uncle, Warner Lulofs, at a house flanking the Singel in Amster-
dam and worked with him as a stockjobber dealing in speculative issues.
It was not until 1722 that the name of Archibald Hope Jr. appeared in the
Amsterdam Notarial Archives and in the account books of the Exchange
Bank in that city.3
  It is interesting to note that several other Amsterdam merchant houses
which played an important role in the 18th century also commenced oper-
ations there during the early decades of that century. For example, the
distinguished house of Andries Pels & Sons was founded in 1707, while in
1712 Pieter Schout Muilman and Dionijs Meulenaar established a house
from which the firm of Muilman & Sons was to evolve fifteen years later.
The house of Hogguer, like that of Hope, was not of Dutch origin. At
about the time when Archibald Hope was establishing himself, Jacques
Christophe Hogguer, on the advice of his father, set up in business in Am-
sterdam. The Hogguers, who were of Swiss extraction, had settled at
Lyons in 1680 or thereabouts and had rapidly achieved a prominent po-
sition in banking circles there. 4
  Despite the consolidation and a mild recession in certain sectors of Hol-
land's trade, the Amsterdam of the early 18th century was evidently still
so attractive and vital as a centre that enterprising foreigners undertook
ventures there-and succeeded.
The notarial archives show clearly that Archibald Jr. followed in his

                                    5
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

father's footsteps, albeit in Amsterdam, and devoted himself to trade and
shipping. He was soon joined by his younger brother Thomas, who evi-
dently foresaw a better future in Amsterdam than in the family business in
Rotterdam. On 14th June 1724, Archibald Jr. granted power of procu-
ration to 'His Brother Thomas Hope, also a Merchant of this place,' en-
abling him, in Archibald's absence, to perform any acts necessary in the
interests of the house. 1
  In the absence of accounts for this period, it is difficult to form an
opinion of the nature and extent of the business transacted by the Hope
brothers. However, the figures for the house's annual turnover with the
Amsterdam Exchange Bank are of some value in this context, particularly
when they are compared with the turnover of certain other houses. For
this purpose we have chosen the aforementioned houses of Muilman, Pels
and Hogguer, and in addition the somewhat older houses of De Smeth
and Clifford. De Smeth, which, like Hope, was later to earn a reputation
as an issuer of loans, had its roots in the Southern Netherlands. After
residing for some time in Cologne, Joost de Smeth settled in Amsterdam
round about 1650. The Cliffords were by origin British and had arrived in
Amsterdam a little later. 2
  The majority of the changes affecting the accounts maintained with the
Exchange Bank related to sums transferred to or from other bank ac-
counts. The total of the credits and debits during a period of a year con-
stituted the turnover of the account concerned. The value for our purpose
of the sums thus obtained, and reproduced in graph form, is, of course,
relative, since we do not know the ratio between the Exchange Bank ac-
count turnover of a given house and its total turnover. The ratios may
well have varied from year to year and from house to house. Nevertheless,
they at least afford a certain indication of the level of business. 3
  If we examine the figures relating to the early years of the Hope brothers'
career, the first thing that strikes us is the gradual nature of the growth: in
 1728 neither Hope nor Hogguer reached a turnover of two million
guilders. In the same year, Muilman and Clifford achieved more than
twice this figure, while Pels, with a turnover of twenty million, stood head
and shoulders above them all. In 1726, when, in the wake of the adoption
by France of the monetary system devised by John Law, French gold and
silver coin poured into Amsterdam, Pels had achieved the staggering fig-
ure of thirty million guilders. It is clear from the absence of peaks in the
graph relating to the turnover of Archibald and Thomas Hope that they
did not then deal in specie on a large scale. 4
  The third decade of the eighteenth century saw a change in the house of