

                                      6
Power of attorney granted by Charles Hope of Hopetou n to Archibal
                                                                   d Hope of
                              Rotterda m, 170 I
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

 Hope in Amsterdam. Archibald Jr. died on 28th March 1733. His death
 occurred in Rotterdam, and the fact that he was buried there-even
 though he was described as a 'merchant of Amsterdam' -suggests that he
 had earlier ceased to concern himself with the day-to-day affairs of his
 business. 1 Prior to Archibald's death, a younger brother, Adrian, had
joined the firm, and in 1734 Thomas made him a partner, whereupon the
title of the house was changed to Thomas & Adrian Hope. 2
  Of these two, Thomas was destined to achieve the greater reputation as a
 merchant, and his fame reflected on the firm which bore his name. The
house of Thomas & Adrian Hope was renowned for its consistent policy
 of covering risks and for the high degree of continuity in its commodity
trading in the face of changing political circumstances.
  The turnover figures at the Exchange Bank confirm this image of solidity
and stability. Until the outbreak of the Seven Years' War in 1756, the
figures continued to grow slowly but surely, displaying no sensational
peaks or troughs. It is notable that De Smeth achieved an appreciably
smaller rate of growth, and that Hogguer stood still.
  The graphs representing Clifford and Pels display dramatic peaks in the
post-174° period. These are undoubtedly allied to the outbreak of the War
of the Austrian Succession, a trial of strength between Prussia and France
on the one side, and England and Austria on the other, which afforded
exceptional trading opportunities for Holland, a neutral state. But by 1743
the era ofrecord turnover had passed for Pels, and by 1745 the same ap-
plied to Clifford. In the latter year, the country's trade commenced to
decline under the influence of the war between France and the Dutch
Republic.
  By the eve of the Seven Years' War, Thomas & Adrian Hope had left
Hogguer and Muilman far behind in terms of turnover with the Exchange
Bank. They were roughly on a par with De Smeth, and in the period 1750-
1755 both houses achieved an annual figure of about ten million guilders.
Pels and Clifford were at this time turning over something like twenty
million annually, Pels remainingjust under this figure and Clifford slightly
above it.
  In 1747, under the pressure of the French invasion of the southern part
of the Netherlands, the stadholdership was restored in the provinces of
Holland, Zeeland, Utrecht, Geiderland and Overijssel. The young stad-
holder, from whom major political reforms were expected, was showered
with offices and powers. As an example, he was appointed Director-
General and Governor of the Oost-Indische Compagnie and the West-Indi-
sche Compagnie in 1750, but soon afterwards he appointed Thomas Hope
                                     8
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM