



The setting for this study is reflected in the sub-title 'Merchant bankers
and diplomats at work.' The aim is to follow the partners in their many
and diverse activities: in their relationship towards each other, in their
contacts with other houses and in their attitudes towards government of-
ficials. Moreover, the author has attempted to show the motives for their
commercial and financial actions, where these were discernible. A point of
departure such as this implies that the surviving correspondence consti-
tutes the principal source of information. Quantitative data are included,
but within this framework their role is subsidiary.
  Because this book is intended for various categories of readers, it has
been divided into three parts. The introductory chapter, which contains an
abridged history of Hope & Co. up to 1815, is intended for those whose
interest in the subject is of a more general nature. In the same chapter, a
number of main themes such as the growth of foreign loans in the Nether-
lands and the technique per se of issuing loans are discussed, and at-
tention is devoted to some of the problems of trade and to the question
whether Hope & Co. should be viewed as merchants or as bankers. In
conclusion, an impression is given of the part played by Amsterdam as a
financial centre during the Napoleonic era and of the very exceptional po-
sition which Hope & Co. occupied at that time.
  In the succeeding chapters, the principal themes are examined in detail
with the aid of a number of case studies. There is more to the subdivision
into Baltic Affairs and Iberian Affairs than appears at first sight: while
Baltic Affairs according to the sub-title deals only with loans, and Iberian
Affairs only with produce, it becomes clear in the elaboration of the
chapters that, in the eyes of Messrs. Hope, mercantile transactions and
financial affairs were inextricably interwoven. Accordingly, only in the
final chapter do contents and title correspond.
  The Notes are intended for researchers who desire to go deeper into
certain aspects of this study. This explains their comprehensive nature.
  But for the decision taken by Messrs. Hope in 1953 to commission a
history of the house, this study would not have been embarked upon.
Without the decision of the present-day Board of Bank Mees & Hope to

                                    VII
                                 PREFACE


allow the study to continue and to have the result published in book form,
the work would not have been completed. The great abundance of data in
the Hope archives is illustrated by the fact that, in spite of the length of
this book, the author was obliged to limit himself to the period up to 1815.
  The author acknowledges with gratitude the interest displayed by the
former partners and by the members of the present Board throughout the
period during which this book was written. This applies particularly to
Jhr. W.J. van Sminia, to whom the book is dedicated. Without his sup-
port, mediation and encouragement, this study might well not have seen
the light of day.
  The author owes a debt of gratitude to his mentor, Jhr. Prof. P.J. van
Winter, who brought about the contact between Messrs. Hope & Co. and
him, and who, by reason of his exceptionally wide knowledge of the sub-
ject matter, has been a source of constant support. Prof. E.H.Kossmann
read through the chapters and, drawing on his very great knowledge of
literature and wide experience, offered valuable advice which benefited
this book and for which the author is most grateful.
  Three successive librarians of the University of Groningen, Dr. H. de
Buck, the late Dr. S.J.Bouma and Mr. W.R.H.Koops, offered the hospi-
tality of their institution to the Hope archives and to the author for a
period of twenty years. The author is greatly indebted to Mr. Koops who,
as a friend, allowed him to benefit from his experience as a publisher. The
author's thanks are due to the staff of the University Library for their
willing assistance and their interest in the advancement of the study.
  A search into the history of Hope & Co. would be impossible without
data from the municipal archives in Amsterdam. The author is grateful to
the archivist, Dr. W.J. van Hoboken, for having made it possible for him
to freely carry out his researches, and also to Dr. S.Hart who, with his im-
mense knowledge of economic data, so willingly assisted him in this task.
  Many have assisted the author during his investigations, or have aided
him in other ways. While it is impossible to refer to them all by name, the
author wishes to make an exception in the case of Mr. Derek S.Jordan,
the translator of this book, whose critical observations were instrumental
in ironing out a number of wrinkles.
  Finally, the author is indebted to his family: to his children, who from an
early age have shown him every consideration, and above all to his wife,
who sustained her husband in the broadest sense of the term throughout
the genesis of this book.