

 and another Amsterdam merchant, Jan van Marselis, to represent him in
 the latter. 1
  This, however, was not to be the only token of the stadholder's favour.
Among the problems facing William IV was the economic decline of the
 Republic. Concern at the eclipse of Holland as a trading nation by Eng-
 land, and at the increasing competition from France, Sweden and Den-
mark in the maritime sector, had been expressed during the second decade
 of the century. In addition, Hamburg was growing into a competitive
staple market for colonial produce. In the industrial sector, Dutch firms
were suffering increasingly from protectionist measures in the neighbour-
ing countries. Added to all this, the French invasion of the southern part
of the Netherlands, as we have seen, had adversely affected the country's
trade, and when, following the ending of the War of the Austrian Suc-
cession, the anticipated recovery failed to materialize, William comman-
ded that a committee should be established to draw up a plan to revive the
commercial and industrial activity.
  Jan van Marselis and Thomas Hope were appointed members of this
committee, though not without protest. Hasselaer, a powerful burgomas-
ter of Amsterdam, described Thomas Hope as 'the greatest scoundrel of
Amsterdam,' and when Gronsfelt, a favourite of the stadholder and a
champion of Hope, stood up for him and praised his skill, Hasselaer re-
torted that this was one more reason for being on one's guard against him.
Charles Bentinck, who also enjoyed the stadholder's favour and who was
present during the conversation, added that in this respect the Amsterdam
Stock Exchange shared Hasselaer's opinion. 2 The immediate causes of
these spiteful remarks by Hasselaer and Bentinck, are of secondary im-
portance. In all probability, they stemmed from a combination of envy
at Hope's success in business and jealousy of his position as confidant of
the stadholder. It is clear that Thomas Hope had become embroiled in a
struggle between rival factions at the Court, but this was something which
would be repeated when the house undertook loans for countries ruled by
despots.
  The committee of which Thomas Hope was a member had meanwhile
set about its task. One of the focal points of its deliberations was the ex-
tent to which import and export duties would have to be reduced if the
Republic was again to be attractive as a staple market for the whole of
Europe. After lengthy discussions, Thomas Hope succeeded in getting his
views adopted. These embraced a limited free trade system in which, in
order to provide a measure of protection for traders, farmers and cattle
breeders, import duties were retained for a number of competitive com-

                                     9
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

modities. The end of all import duties was in any case not feasible, for the
revenue from these was used by the provincial Boards of Admiralty to
defray the costs of maintaining the fleet. At the same time, the transit
trade had to be given a measure of relief in order to attract more goods to
the staple market.
  In August 1751 these plans, in the shape of a 'Proposition,' were sub-
mitted by the stadholder to the States General of the Republic and the
Provincial States of Holland, accompanied by an explanatory document
entitled 'Verhandeling over den Koophandel.' A fragment of the draft of
the 'Verhandeling' has survived, and as this is in Thomas Hope's own
hand it may safely be assumed that he was the author of the document. 1
 The Proposition was ill-fated. The first setback came with the death of
William IV a few months after it had been submitted. Added to this, there
was disunity among the provinces of the Republic, each of which desired
that locally produced goods should be protected by a tariff barrier.
  In spite of all efforts by Thomas Hope and his supporters, the Propo-
sition stranded on the rocks of provincial and local particularism. The
widow of William IV, the English princess Anne, who ruled as 'Gouver-
nante' in the minority of her son, was so preoccupied with the mainte-
nance of her own power, and so unfamiliar with relationships in Holland,
that she was unable to force a decision on the plan. Furthermore, interest
in it began to wane in 1755, when it became clear that the War of the
Austrian Succession had been no more than an initial phase in the struggle
between England and France for the colonies in North America and In-
dia. The Republic, which had maintained close ties with England since
the reign of the King-Stadholder William Ill, faced a new threat of being
caught up in the Anglo-French conflict.2
  In the debate concerning the strengthening of the armed forces, a sharp
controversy arose on the question of whether the army or the navy should
receive priority. The Gouvernante greatly favoured reinforcing the army,
and this led to the suspicion that, as an English princess, she sought to
pursue a harsh, anti-French policy. When hostilities commenced in 1756,
the issue of higher or lower import duties became one of secondary im-
portance: what mattered now was to preserve Holland's neutrality in
order that trade with all the belligerent parties should continue.
  Thomas Hope continued to work for the adoption of the Proposition to
the bitter end, but after the death of the stadholder he associated himself
less closely with the group surrounding the Gouvernante and with her
policy of orientation on England. He showed himself to be a supporter of
a powerful policy of neutrality in the face of British demands -an attitude