

                                    10
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

which i~ the more remarkable since he maintained contact with the Hopes
of Hopetoun and, through them, with political circles in England. Thomas
Hope took the view that ties with a particular party or country of origin
ought not to imply unconditional conformity with the opinions prevailing
there, and this view was to be shared by his successors. 1
 The information obtained from the Exchange Bank shows that the
Hopes' definitive rise to the summit of their profession coincided with the
Seven Years' War. From 1755 onwards, turnover rose steeply, reaching 34
million guilders in 1759. A period of diminished growth ensued, but in
176I turnover again rose, reaching 47 million guilders in 1762. This peak
was followed by a sharp decline in I763 and I764. when the figures were
42 and n! million guilders respectively.
 The other houses to which reference has been made also made progress
in this period, but with the exception of Pels and Clifford their rate of
growth was considerably less spectacular. Peb and Clifford reached max-
ima of 4I and 341 million guilders respectively. It is noteworthy that Pels's
turnover reached its peak in 1758, after which it declined steadily. De
Smeth succeeded in maintaining a level in excess of 20 million guilders
from 1758 to 1761, but three years later this had plummeted to just under
four million.
 The steep rises achieved by Hope, Clifford, Pels and De Smeth indicate
that these houses had their share of the greatly enlarged trade in specie.
The war served also to stimulate commodity trading, but in this sector
large profits could turn into equally large losses in the event of piracy or
confiscation.
  Despite the risks, the Hopes engaged in commodity trading on a large
scale. They had originally concentrated on Great Britain, but by now
their activities had for some time been extended to embrace the whole of
Europe and even areas beyond, such as North America and the West In-
dies. Bya fortunate coincidence, a member of the family had emigrated to
Boston, and was available as correspondent there. Henry, the eldest
brother of Thomas and Adrian, had left his father's firm in Rotterdam in
1720 or thereabouts, and had set up in business on his own. But, like his
grandfather before him, he had had little success, and his position steadily
deteriorated until, round about 1730, he left for America. With the death
of Archibald Sr. in 1743, the Rotterdam house had passed into the hands
of Henry's younger brothers Isaac and Zachary, and now specialized in
the conveyance of emigrants to North America. 2
  During the Seven Years' War the brothers in Amsterdam and Rotterdam
maintained a lively correspondence on the subject of trade with the Carib-

                                     I I
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

bean. Trade with the islands of the French West Indies, which were cut off
from the mother country by the superior English fleet, was maintained via
the Dutch colonies of St. Eustatius and Cural;(ao. This back-door supply
route was a thorn in the flesh of England, and it is thus not surprising
that the correspondence between the brothers abounds with reports of
vessels and cargoes being lost as a result of British naval superiority or the
activities of pirates. Nevertheless, the trade with the Western Hemisphere
continued, albeit caution was exercised in the traffic with the French colo-
nies.
 Isaac and Zachary Hope were among the most enthusiastic supporters of
the attitude adopted by the Province of Holland, which was pressing the
Gouvernante for a rapid expansion of the fleet and strong action against
the English 'piracy.' 1 But the Gouvernante persisted in her view that if the
navy was enlarged, the army would have to be also. With this, supporters
and opponents of a strong policy against England and supporters and
opponents of the Gouvernante began to discover common ground. It was
not until Anne's death in 1759 that the conflict abated.
 Thomas and Adrian Hope utilized the services of their brothers in Rot-
terdam for the delivery of coin to France via houses in Brussels and Ant-
werp. The Amsterdam house also supplied cannon to the French East
India Company. These were ostensibly sold to the Hopes in Gothenburg,
and the house had them shipped to Amsterdam at their own risk. There,
the French East India Company resumed ownership.2 The timber trade
with France and the Iberian peninsula, in which the Hopes engaged on a
large scale, also continued, although the number of cargoes declined. 3
 As far as the Hopes were concerned, the trade with, and for the benefit
of, France in no way diminished the ties with England. In the financial
sector, in particular, there was much for houses such as Hope and Clifford
to do. Between 1756 and 1762 the British government was obliged to float
loans totalling nearly 50,000,000 pounds sterling to defray the cost of the
war, and a substantial portion of these loans were placed in Amsterdam
through the medium of Hope and Clifford. Amsterdam also served as the
intermediate centre for the transfer of subsidies to Prussia and other allies
of Britain on the Continent. For this, the British government issued
payment orders to houses like Hope, and these were negotiated in Ger-
many. Subsidies were also paid in gold and silver bullion, most of which
passed through Amsterdam. 4
 The incessant calls made upon the money market in Amsterdam led to a
scarcity of funds, and this in turn produced a major extension of ac-
ceptance credit. The demand for credit did not cease with the restoration