

                                     22
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

As we are about to concern ourselves increasingly with Hope's loan ac-
tivities, it is of value to look more closely into the technique developed by
the house over the years.
  Firstly, there is the manner in which Hope and the borrowers came into
contact. It is probable that the house's entree to the sphere of loans to
governments resulted from its own initiatives, since this was an area in
which it had yet to earn a reputation. Later, the approach in many cases
came from the borrower, but the Company continued to deploy initia-
tives. In the case of Russia, Hope succeeded in supplanting De Smeth as
the issuing house by assisting the Russian Court Banker at a crucial
moment, thereby getting him on their side. 1
  The loan negotations were usually conducted in Amsterdam, the mon-
arch in question being represented by his envoy or by a special represen-
tative armed with the necessary authority. When agreement was reached,
the loan sum, the interest rate, the loan period, the securities, the repay-
ment periods and the commission due to the issuing house were embodied
in a contract. This was subject to the approval, by decree, of the monarch,
who then signed a principal debenture in which, having set out the under-
taking to the lenders in the matter of interest and principal payments, he
declared himself officially to be the debtor for the full sum of the loan.
Upon receipt of the principal debenture, the house concerned could em-
bark upon the issue of the bonds, which were usually of cf 1,000. All loans
entered into in the Netherlands carried the stipulation that interest and
principal should be paid in that country and in guilders Hollands Cou-
rant. The latter provision meant that bondholders were not affected by
fluctuations in rates of exchange-a decidedly important point in view of
the fact that debasing of the currency and inflation were common phe-
nomena in the countries which sought capital.
  It was customary for British and French loans to be issued in those
countries. Interested Dutch investors could purchase bonds of these loans
either in the country of issue or through a house in Amsterdam. 2 But then
these were countries with a certain reputation for creditworthiness and a
well-developed economy, which were thus in a stronger position vis-a.-vis
the lenders.
  Other countries chose Dutch houses for the issue of their loans in order
to enhance their credit standing. Most of these were countries in which
capital formation was non-existent or, at most, in its infancy. They had a
predominantly agricultural, often feudal structure in which the land-
owning nobility, usually under the protection of an absolute monarch,
was omnipotent. Generally speaking, the middle class was small and polit-
ically powerless.
                                     23
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

The majority of the countries in this category were situated in the 'outer
zone' of Europe. They included Sweden, Russia, Poland, Austria, a num-
ber of large and small German states, Spain and Portugal. The young
United States, a pioneer country with a matching hunger for credit, was
a special case, but there, too, the capital formation was inadequate to
meet the demand.
  On the one side stood those abroad who sought capital, and on the other
the Dutch capitalists who, because of the relative fall in the volume of
trade and the fact that the Amsterdam exchange market had passed its
zenith, were having difficulty in finding suitable objects for investment.
The role of an issuing house lay in bringing the parties together through
the medium of a loan. The task of actually mobilizing capital in Holland,
however, did not fall to the issuing house, but to other, usually smaller,
houses which were concerned with selling the bonds. A special broker was
in turn engaged to induce these houses to subscribe a given portion of the
loan sum-a form of underwriting as we now know it in the world of
marine insurance. The names of Ten Kate, Volckmar and Berck, who ful-
filled this role, appear on numerous occasions in connexion with the loans
issued by Hope & Co. In many cases, two or three such brokers were en-
gaged, their joint services being rewarded with a certain percentage (usu-
ally t %) of the sum subscribed.!
  In the Hope correspondence, these underwriters are referred to as entre-
preneurs. While it is realized that this may cause confusion, the title has
deliberately been retained: 'stockbrokers' could be equally misleading,
for the entrepreneurs included merchant houses of substance which on
other occasions acted as issuing houses. For example, Weduwe E.Croese
& Co., who were among the entrepreneurs in the majority of loans issued
by Hope & Co., themselves issued loans on behalf of Spain. Similarly,
Pieter Stadnitski issued loans on the security of America's domestic debt,
while Abraham and Dirk van Vloten acted as trustees for a number of
American loans. Nor was there a clear dividing line between brokers and
entrepreneurs. The brokers repeatedly subscribed to loans which they had
helped to arrange, partly for their own account and partly on behalf of
others. 2
  Up to the time of the French invasion of 1794, the number of contract-
ing entrepreneurs per loan continued to rise. In 1780 there were eight, but
in 1792, when a loan was floated for Spain, there were thirty-two. The
majority, having once participated, continued to do so. Of the eight in
1780, five were still subscribing to loans in 1792. The increase in the num-
ber of houses which engaged in entrepreneurial activities, in this sense,