

                     A.nuttniDm I n     D"U7IW ,8.5.
                                                                J.   'YAJI   ua POLL.
                                                                C . ...      aD.   0   DERMEULEN.

                                                                l. BONDT.
                                                                l . .. BURL£TI'.
                                                                l . .... DO MA. DELE.




Final report of the representatives of the holders of Russian bonds, dated December
        [8[5. This states that Messrs.Hope decline the offer by the bondholders
                              to share in the costs incurred
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM


  offered-and these could expose particular weaknesses in the system of
 government. Sometimes guarantees were demanded which struck at the
 dignity of a monarch. King Stanislaw Poniatowski, for example, refused
 for this reason to provide a guarantee by his heir, relating to the mort-
 gaging of the king's personal possessions. 1
   In correspondence and personal contact with ministers and senior civil
 servants, it was necessary to observe the existing rules of respect and even
 servility, yet at the same time to avoid excess subservience in order not to
 undermine one's own position. With his eminent amiability, Henry Hope,
 in particular, must have been a master in the art of balancing on a sharp
 edge. His action in declining the title offered to him by Empress Cathe-
 rine II in November 1789 must be viewed as an extremely refined way of
 showing that the Hopes preferred their citizenship to an obscure barony
 in one or other Eastern or Northern European country. The noble estate
 of the Scottish Hopes will certainly have influenced his decision. In this
 respect, too, the Hopes differed from the Hogguers, the De Smeths and
 the Hasselgreens. 2
   In their activities on behalf of absolute monarchs, Hope & Co. came in
 contact with intriguing cliques and Court cabals, which in many cases
 served to determine the course of government. The difficulties which this
produced are clear from the description of Robert Vo[lte's first sojourn
in Russia. 3 The conseq uences of a shift of power at the Court emerged
during Voute's second visit to that country, when, following the eclipse
of the wife of Paull, the Company had for many years to endure the
enmity of the head of the treasury.4 At the time of the Spanish affairs,
Hope suffered greatly from the trouble stirred up by a Spanish confiden-
tial agent in Paris, Izquierdo, who regarded Hope as a lackey of Napoleon
and equated the house with the speculator-financier Ouvrard. Izquierdo's
reports to Madrid repeatedly short-circuited communications between
Hope and the Spanish Court. 5
   In his way, Labouchere perpetuated Henry Hope's policy towards for-
eign Courts. His personal relationship with both French and Russian
ministers earned him a position which the Prefect of the Zuyder Zee
departement, De Celles, spitefully summed up as 'an unaccredited agent
of a foreign power.' 6 The amicable relationship between his brother-in-
law, Alexander Baring, and Sir Arthur Wellesley, later the Duke of Wel-
lington, gave Labouchere an excellent entree in England, a factor which
assisted him greatly in his peace mission on behalf of King Louis Napo-
leon. 7