

of Henry Hope's mildness at first hand. A young Cornishman, John
Williams, worked as a clerk in a merchant house in Amsterdam. He be-
came seriously ill and, to make matters worse, did not receive the neces-
sary care at his lodgings. News of his plight reached Henry Hope, who
immediately took action to assist him, going so far as to have the sick man
transferred to his own house. He was so taken by his compatriot-for so
must Henry Hope have regarded him-that Williams continued to live in
the Hope household.
  Henry Hope's sister, Henrietta Maria, had married in 1762. Her hus-
band was John Goddard, an English merchant in Rotterdam. Their
eldest daughter, Anne, was the apple of Henry's eye, and he contrived
a plan which ended in his niece marrying his protege, John Williams,
in 1782. Simultaneously, the latter was made a partner of Hope & Co. l
Out of gratitude to his benefactor, he added the name Hope to his own
surname.
 John Williams Hope is described to us as a 'desk man' who ran the office
precisely and with pleasure. He was not a dynamic, enterprising mer-
chant, however, and the manner in which he acquiesced in the otherwise
well-intentioned arrangements made by Henry Hope is suggestive of a
measure of docility. His wife, Anne, possessed the qualities which he
lacked, and according to the stories resembled her uncle both inwardly
and outwardly. For a woman with such a strong character, it is not sur-
prising that a mariage de convenance ultimately proved to be too much.
 With the description of this remarkable episode, we have got somewhat
ahead of our story. We have still to concern ourselves with John Hope,
the second of the new partners admitted in 1762. In 1737 his father had
entered his name in the register of births of the Mennonite Community in
Amsterdam, and in doing so had shown that he had not completely
abandoned the Quaker sympathies which existed in his parental home.
Thomas Hope will therefore not have been a member of the Established
(Reformed) Church, and public offices will not have been open to him.
But in 1756 John, then aged nineteen, was baptized in the English Presby-
terian Church in Amsterdam, probably in preparation for membership of
that Church. As the English Presbyterian Church was recognized by the
Netherlands Reformed Church on a basis of equality, the way to public
office lay open for John Hope. 2 With his marriage in 1763 to Philippina
Barbara van der Hoeven, the daughter of a member of the Vroedschap of
Rotterdam, he took the first step towards membership of the regency
class. In 1768, at the intercession of William Y, he was made a member of
the Vroedschap of Amsterdam. In all probability he benefited here from

                                    17
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

his father's close ties with the stadholder. By now, John Hope had entered
upon a process of aristocratization which was gradually alienating him
from the everyday affairs of the firm. Lagging appreciably behind his
cousin Henry in mercantile skill, he sought satisfaction in official po-
sitions and a seigneurial style of living. In 1770, he succeeded his father as
a director of the Oost-Indische Compagnie. In 1767 he purchased the
Groenendaal estate near Heemstede, to which the adjoining Bosbeek
estate was added in 1784. Plans to erect new buildings on the land were
thwarted by his death in the same year, but these were subsequently imple-
mented by his widow. 1
  In 1774 John Hope acquired Nederhorst den Berg Castle, which lay
amid the Ankeveen lakes, near Hilversum, and with it the right to the
title 'Master of Nederhorst den Berg.' In Amsterdam, he had assumed
occupation of the family home in 1772, but in 1782 he moved again, this
time to a house on the Herengracht. In the same year he bought 'a house
and adjoining property known of old as Het Tapijthuis' situated on the
north side of the Korte Voorhout in The Hague. His duties as Delegate
Councillor of Amsterdam in the States of Holland and his connexion
with the Stadholder's Court will have influenced this purchase. 2 With this
widely scattered property, his life became one of continuous travel from
one seat to another, a nomadic existence which was common among the
English nobility and was reflected in John Hope's travel plan for his
illustrious Scottish relative, with which this chapter opened.
  Henry Hope and his relatives in Amsterdam had meanwhile applied
themselves to the business, and had achieved some notable successes.
From 1765 to 1772, the firm's turnover with the Exchange Bank comfort-
ably exceeded the record levels attained during the Seven Years' War.
Between 1768 and 1772, the annual figure was of the order of fifty million
guilders, with a peak of more than sixty-five million in 1769. With the
exception of De Smeth, the other houses also achieved higher turnover
after 1764, but they failed by a substantial margin to match their wartime
maxima. Only Muilman and Hogguer, who had profited little if at all
from the wartime conditions, achieved a substantially higher figure after
1765 than during the Seven Years' War.
  Although commodity trading in Amsterdam began to recover after 1765,
the spectacular growth of Hope's turnover with the Exchange Bank must
be attributed solely to their considerably enlarged share of the money
trade in all its forms. The house had gained experience during the Seven
Years' War, and it clearly succeeded in making use of this in the post-war
era. At this time also, the house commenced to issue loans for foreign