


                                     32
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

 Having thus dealt at length with the numerous aspects of the role of an
 issuing house, let us turn to trade, and in particular to the nature of the
 organization and the various links which went to make up the chain.
According to a treatise which appeared at the beginning of the 19th
century, Dutch merchants could be divided into categories, the first com-
prising maritime traders, the 'first hand,' who were responsible for the
supply of wares to the Dutch market and who usually concentrated on
particular geographical areas, and the 'second hand' consisting of rich
merchants, specialists in particular commodities, who, by storing huge
stocks, fulfilled a buffer role between supply and sale. Exports were handled
by wholesalers, who distributed them in the various market areas. 1
  This picture earlier attracted criticism on the grounds that it was too
rigid and schematic, and that there was very little division of responsibili-
ties in the world of trade in the 18th century.
  For Hope & Co., as general merchants, this division was in any case of
minor importance, since the house combined all three functions. Nor was
there any question of specialization, geographical or in terms of merchan-
dise. Hope's commercial contacts embraced the whole of Europe and
north and central America, stretching from Archangel to Asia Minor. As
far as wares were concerned, it would be difficult to find an article in
which the house did not trade: money, grain, colonial produce, ship's
articles, gold, silver, diamonds, drysaltery, ordnance, textiles, tobacco,
tea, wine, flower bulbs; in short, anything which could be sold at a profit
was traded. 2
  Nevertheless, a distinction between first and second hands did exist:
Henry Hope himself employed these terms in l787, in his description of
the cochineal trade in Cadiz.3 It may be deduced from this that trade was
classified, but that the boundaries were neither sharply defined nor gener-
ally upheld. We encountered a similar situation when describing issuing
houses, entrepreneurs and brokers.
  As general merchants, the partners of Hope & Co. could not, of course,
be au fait with the situation in every area with which contact was main-
tained, or have detailed knowledge of every article in which the house
dealt. This know-how resided in the brokers, whose original role as inter-
mediaries in trade in specific articles was at times changed by Hope into
one of partners in a transaction. These men were regarded as indis-
pensable, as is evidenced by Henry Hope's remarks concerning Rouen,
where all transactions took place between merchants, a practice which
was costly in time and, according to Hope. demanded greater knowledge
of wares than the average merchant possessed. 4 Robert Voute, who had

                                     33
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

started out as a broker in coffee, tea and dyestuffs but, through his
personal friendship with the Hopes, had progressed beyond the role of
pure middleman, observed during his stay in Moscow that there were no
brokers there either, which fact put foreign merchants in an unfavourable
position. 1
  Foreign trade was fraught with risks, and houses which engaged in it
had to be on their guard not only against their associates abroad, but also
against the governments with which they had to deal. Most of the coun-
tries with which Hope & Co. were concerned were mercantilistic in their
trade policy, and their governments tended to protect their own mer-
chants against foreigners; this was especially true of the economically less
developed lands. The protection could take the form of reserving monop-
olies or specific areas of trade for indigenous houses, or of harassing
foreigners. The consequences of the latter policy were clearly demon-
strated to Robert Voute during his first period in Russia. 2
  Governments frequently failed to honour agreements entered into with
foreigners. In many cases this can be attributed to ill-will, for attitudes
towards strangers were in general grudging; but in others it is conceivable
that the Court or a particular minister simply did not have sufficient grip
on the often corrupt administrative apparatus. In Hope's case, the official
monopoly for the sale of Brazilian diamonds proved to be anything but
watertight, while the exclusive right to trade with the colonies in Spanish
America was soon breached for the benefit of Court favourites and high
officials. 3
  In its dealings with foreigners, too, the house frequently met with un-
pleasant surprises, and owing to the distances involved it was far more
difficult to react adequately to these than would have been the case had
another Dutch house been involved. In serious cases, the cause could lie
in embezzlement, as occurred with Alexander Fordyce, or the use of
funds for purposes other than those for which they had been entrusted.
The latter practice resulted in heavy losses for Hope when the house of
Sutherland at St.Petersburg went bankrupt in 1794. 4
  Less serious, but equally annoying, was the furnishing of partially or
wholly inaccurate trade information. In many instances, the cause lay in
ignorance rather than malice. Erroneous information concerning extant
stocks of cochineal was among the causes of the failure of Hope's specu-
lation in the article. The ideal solution lay in sending a trusted representa-
tive to collect information on the spot, but this could only be justified if
the transaction was large and involved a restricted area. In the ensuing
chapters of this book we shall find Hope & Co. employing such agents. 5