

                                    24
                                                                    · ,,·.;nrr('t _




                                                                         .f . c
                                                                         ,;..,
                                                                         .$0.000
                                                                         /00.000
                                                                         100. QtJtJ
                                                                          ).'-01)0
                                                                         MO.




Part of the entrepreneurs' contract relating to the 8th Russian loan of May 1790
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

clearly reflects the growing importance to Holland's mercantile houses of
the business of floating new issues. Following the French invasion, the
volume of this business declined, and with it the number of entrepreneurs:
in 1807 only four or five subscribed to the loans which Hope & Co. issued.
  Most entrepreneurs-32 of the 42 known to us from contracts-lived in
Amsterdam. The remainder hailed from smaller towns in the provinces of
Holland and Utrecht, such as Rotterdam, The Hague, Leiden, Haarlem
and Utrecht itself.l The principal market for bonds relating to the loans
issued by the Company will thus have comprised the three western prov-
inces of the Netherlands. Merchant houses elsewhere in the country-and
abroad-ordered bonds from Hope, either directly or through business
associates in Amsterdam. We have already referred to the role of the bro-
kers in this context. The Company counted the Austrian-controlled region
of Brabant among its most important markets outside the Republic.
  When the prospect of a new issue arose, Hope lost no time in ascertain-
ing, via the brokers, which of the entrepreneurs would be willing to partic-
ipate. It often happened that the contract with the entrepreneurs was
signed simultaneously with the loan contract, or very shortly afterwards.
In the case of the Polish loan of 1786, the contract with the entrepreneurs
actually preceded the loan contract.
  If the entrepreneurs judged the times to be unfavourable, they reduced
their shares, leaving the issuing house to shoulder a larger portion of the
burden. In such a situation, there was, of course, little likelihood of the
issuer giving an explicit guarantee that the loan would be fully subscribed.
But the reverse could also apply: if the issuing house felt that the circum-
stances were conducive to a quick sell-out, it could reserve a larger pro-
portion of the loan for itself. 2
 Entrepreneurs' contracts usually contained a clause stipulating that the
apportionment of the loan to the entrepreneurs would be preceded by the
opening of a public subscription list at the offices of the issuing house. The
sum thus subscribed was deducted pro rata from the portions allocated to
the entrepreneurs, the douceur of t %or t %granted to public subscribers
being deducted from the entrepreneurs' commission. If the entrepreneurs
felt that they could place more bonds than they had contracted to take,
they could always obtain the balance by way of the public list, and thus at
least earn the douceur.
 The rate of commission granted to the entrepreneurs was not high. Up to
1789, it varied between I % and I t %; thereafter, as the contracts with
which we are familiar show, it rose to 2 %. This increase probably indi-
cates a strengthening of their position as intermediaries. But even 2 % was
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM