

                                     18
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

powers, but its activities in this field were not of such magnitude as to
 constitute an explanation for the sharp increase in turnover with the Ex-
 change Bank.
  Hope & Co. was not the first house to issue loans, nor was it the only one
to engage in this activity. Loans had been entered into in the Republic
during the 17th century, mostly at the request of foreign monarchs and
with guarantees provided, from political motives, by the States General.
At first, many such loans were issued by collectors of taxes, but with the
passing of time they proved to be less than well-suited to the role of
bankers, if only because the sums required became steadily larger. 1
  A second line developed directly from the mercantile sector, in which a
number of houses succeeded in obtaining a monopoly of the sale of cer-
tain articles. When a ruler who had granted a monopoly ran into serious
financial difficulty, he would demand larger and longer-term advances on
the sale of the article concerned. If the burden of these advances became
too great, the house which held the monopoly could at a given moment
resort to issuing a debenture loan, and in doing so exchange the role of
merchant for that of banker.
  A good example of this is provided by the Amsterdam house Deutz,
which in 1659 secured a monopoly of the sale of Austrian quicksilver.
When, during the wars against Louis XIV, the German emperor faced a
financial crisis, a number of loans were issued on the security of quick-
silver. These commenced in 1695 and were initially guaranteed by the
States General because it was in Holland's interest to ensure that the
emperor had the funds to pursue the war against the French. When hos-
tilities ceased in 1715, however, the guarantee was withdrawn. 2
  The next step was to divorce the loan from the delivery of a given article,
and instead to require as security a number of specified sources of revenue
accruing to the ruler. This applied to two loans, totalling six million
guilders, issued by Deutz on behalf of the German emperor in 1734 and
1736, the security for which consisted of revenues from Silesia. This de-
velopment, however, did not preclude loans on the security of quicksilver
or another article being negotiated concurrently or subsequently. Mixed
forms also occurred, as will become clear in the chapter describing the
Portuguese diamond loan. 3
  Later still, loans carrying guarantees given by another power appeared.
This arrangement would be applied in the case of a country with a doubt-
ful financial status, which for political reasons received support from
another, e.g. the loan to Poland which was guaranteed by Russia. 4
As far as can be ascertained from the information at our disposal, Hope's

                                     19
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

activities in this field commenced in 1768 with the issue of a loan of cf
750,000 on behalf of Sweden. The chapter which deals with that country
shows that the affair originated with a request by the riksdag that the king
should arrange a loan abroad. In the period up to the end of 1787, Hope
& Co. issued twelve loans on behalf of Sweden, totalling cf 14,500,000. In
1769 the Company issued a loan of cf 250,000 on behalf of Count Louis of
Nassau-Saarbriick. In 1771 the house assisted the Elector of Bavaria with
a loan of cf 400,000 at 4 % interest, for which the Bavarian crown jewels
served as security.!
  A distinctive variant of the loans which had developed from trade was
manifested in the so-called plantation loans, for which plantations in the
Caribbean-which in this context covered the West Indian islands and also
the coastal area of Guiana-served as security. In the majority of cases, the
underlying contract stipulated that all the produce of the plantation
should be shipped to the issuer of the loan-who was known as 'the di-
rector' -so that the proceeds could be used first and foremost for the
payment of interest and principal. 2
  Hope & Co. were concerned in loans to planters on the Danish West
Indian islands of St. Croix, St. Thomas and St. John. In 1768 the house of
Lever & De Bruine had placed a loan, identified by the letter A, on behalf
of planters on all three islands and a second, similar loan, identified by the
letter B, on behalf of planters on St. Croix only. These were probably for
the benefit of planters who had got into serious financial difficulties as a
result of a tornado which had caused damage estimated at more than one
million pounds sterling on St. Croix alone. The management of these loans
was subsequently transferred to Hope. It may be assumed that this
change reflected the close relationship which then existed between the
Company and the Danish Court, and which in turn explains the special
ties with the Danish West India Company.3
  Hope & Co. also managed a number of loans to planters on the British
West Indian islands of Grenada and Tobago. Under a special law passed
in England, foreign bondholders, in the event of non-payment, were en-
titled to apply to a British court for an order for the sale of the mortgaged
plantation. To the greater reassurance of Dutch investors, the payments of
interest and principal on these loans were guaranteed by a London house. 4
  In spite of guarantees of this sort, bondholders will all too often have had
cause to regret their choice of investment. The planters were easy-going
and thriftless, and overproduction, delay in shipment or other setbacks all
too soon led to debts. In some cases, the upshot was that the creditors
took over a plantation-and with it the attendant commercial risks. We