

not overly generous, particularly if one considers that, in order to reach
the ultimate investors, it was often necessary to employ middle men, who
also demanded their reward. The entrepreneurs therefore had to rely upon
the volume of their turnover in bonds, and accordingly they aimed not
only at the moyen peuple, but also at the small saver. Some contracts prov-
ided for such widely spaced instalments by the entrepreneurs that these
extended beyond the date at which interest on the allocated bonds com-
menced to be paid. This could mean a small bonus for the entrepreneurs,
and in the vast majority of instances Hope willingly granted this.
  Hope's own commission-from which all other expenses had to be met-
was naturally higher than that accorded to the entrepreneurs, but was sub-
ject to wide fluctuation. especially in the '70S and '80S. In the case of the
Swedish loans, it ranged from 4 % to 91 %.1
  Why a lower rate of commission was granted at a given moment, is not
clear. An obvious assumption is that an abundant money market, in
which a loan could be easily placed, tended to produce a lower commis-
sion -always provided that the borrower was aware of the state of the
market. In return for a high commission on the Swedish loans, the Com-
pany was required to guarantee their success. 2 A demand for such a guar-
antee was normally made only if the borrower was extremely short of
funds, or if conditions on the money market were less favourable; in ei-
ther case, a guarantee was costly by reason of the borrower's weak posi-
tion. It was customary for an issuing house to require a courtage for hand-
ling payments of interest and principal; this was in addition to the nor-
mal commission. For interest payments, the rate varied from 1 % to 1 % of
the sum paid out, and for principal payments it was usually r %. The Rus-
sian Court was only prepared to pay Hope a commis~ion of 5 % on its
loans, but subsequently allowed itself to be persuaded to raise this to
61 % on condition that the courtage was included. A similar arrangement
was stipulated for the great conversion in 1798.3
  The loan contracts entered into prior to 1794 provided for Hope & Co.
to take over the loans at par. In a few instances, the entrepreneurs were
permitted to pay for their bonds 'at 99 % free money,' which implied a
profit of I % if, as was clearly intended, they sold them at par. After 1790,
however, contracts with the entrepreneurs stipulated a minimum selling
price. At first this was 98i%, but in 1792 it rose to 991%-probably on
account of the abundance of capital in that year. It had apparently be-
come the custom to sell below par, and Hope was anxious to put a stop to
this.4
In the Napoleonic area, takeovers at par could not be sustained. The
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

majority of the older loans had fallen in price, and new ones had to be
competitive if they were to appeal to the investors. Accordingly, the Por-
tuguese loan of 1802 and the Spanish and Neapolitan loans of 1807 were
taken over at 90 %.1
  Like the transfer price, the rate of interest was an important factor.
Apart from the obvious financial advantage to the borrower, a low inter-
est rate possessed status value: it was a symbol of a country's credit-
worthiness. It was consequently a personal triumph for Baron Liljen-
crantz, the Minister of Finance under Gustav III, when, in 1775, he
achieved a reduction of the interest on a Swedish loan from five per cent
to four. Conversely, Poland's poor credit standing was reflected in the
fact that she was obliged to pay 5 % for loans in 1777 and 1786, while in
those years Sweden paid only 4 %and 41 %respectively. 2
  Russia also set great store by equality with other powers in the matter of
interest on loans. When Hope & Co. first issued loans on behalf of Russia,
the Court, while consenting to an extra 1 % for douceurs sous mains, was
adamant that the interest should not exceed 4 %. When the Company
raised the rate on its own initiative, it was able to avoid a dispute by
pointing to the success of the loan in comparison with one of 4 % for
Austria, which had not got off the ground. Moreover, Hope pointed out,
douceurs sous mains might well have tempted the entrepreneurs to sell
below par, and that would have been highly injurious to Russia's credit
standing. 3
  In addition to the prestige and creditworthiness of the borrower, the
level of funds available on the market also played a part in determining
the interest rate. The loans issued by Hope & Co. between 1767 and 1792
bore interest at rates of between 4 % and 5 %, but even this variation was
sufficient reason for a government to keep a very close watch on the
money market in Amsterdam, and to grasp any and every opportunity to
convert old, high-interest loans into new ones and thus benefit in terms of
its interest burden. One example ofthi& was provided by Sweden, which in
 I780 converted a number of 5 % loans into 4 % issues. Another came in
 I792 when Russia, having induced De Wolf in Antwerp to make an offer,
used this as a lever to force Hope to effect an identical conversion on her
behalf. Sweden performed a similar balancing act, with Hasselgreen &
Co. on one side and Fizeaux Grand & Co. and Hope & Co. on the other,
and succeeded thus in avoiding overdependence on either. 4
  With the French invasion, the flow of capital diminished and interest
rates gradually rose. In I802 Portugal succeeded in obtaining a loan at
5 %, but by I805 Spain had to pay 51 %, as she was again obliged to in
                       THE FAMIL Y AND THE FIRM