

                                     20
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

shall see how, in the Napoleonic era, Hope & Co. inherited problems of
this nature.

A fresh economic crisis in 1772 brought an abrupt end to Hope's record
levels of turnover with the Exchange Bank. The cause of the upset lay in
England, where the ending of the Seven Years' War had been followed by
lively speculation in shares of the British East India Company. But the
high expectations of dividends, which had done much to encourage the
speculation, were not fulfilled. At the end of the war, the East India Com-
pany was obliged to extend its administrative apparatus to cover a far
greater area than before, a task for which it was ill-equipped in both
organizational and financial terms. By 1772 the company's debt to the
Bank of England reached the point where further credit was withheld. At
about the same time, the Bank of England, faced with roaring speculation
in goods and shares, restricted the discounting of drafts. 1
  When news of the East India Company's plight became known in Lon-
don, its shares declined in value, to be followed shortly afterwards by
other issues. In the commodity sector, the disclosure put an end to the
steady rise in prices.
  On the heels of these developments came the sudden bankruptcy of the
London house of Neale & Co. It transpired that one of the partners,
Alexander Fordyce, had on his own initiative speculated with the firm's
capital. Fordyce fled to France, and in the wake of his disappearance
twenty other London houses failed.
  Speculation in English shares was just as rife in Amsterdam, and ac-
ceptance credit there was just as overstrained. The house of Clifford &
Sons had indulged so rashly in bull speculations that it was obliged to sus-
pend payments at the end of 1772, ruining a number of smaller firms in
the process. In 1773 Andries Pels & Sons went into liquidation, partly, it
was said, as a result oflosses suffered through Clifford's downfall. 2
  Hope & Co. were involved financially in Neale's bankruptcy. The part-
ners had done a lot of business with Alexander Fordyce, and this had
included advancing him monies in association with Gurnell Hoare &
Harman of London. A sum of fifty thousand pounds sterling was out-
standing when Neale & Co. failed. In addition, Hope had under-
taken commissions for Fordyce on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange,
involving dealings for the account in shares of the British East India
Company.
  When the Hopes heard that Fordyce had levanted, they did not await
instructions from the receivers but proceeded to liquidate his forward

                                    21
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

deals. By writing off the proceeds against their claims on Fordyce, they
succeeded in keeping their losses within reasonable limits.!
  Although the Company came through the crisis well, it suffered from the
aftermath. The turnover with the Exchange Bank plummeted from more
than 50 million guilders in 1772 to 30 million in 1773, thus falling beneath
the lows established in 1764 and 1765. It is remarkable that the figures
should have remained at this low level, climbing to 38 million only in
1779. The levels of turnover achieved in the 1760s, after the Seven Years'
War, were thus by no means equalled during the ensuing decade.
  It is not possible to draw comparisons with Pels and Clifford for the
177os. Hogguer's turnover in this period was generally lower, although
the differences were less significant than those applying to Hope. De
Smeth and Muilman achieved a higher level of turnover in the 1770S than
in the preceding decade, the former by a margin of 9-10 million guilders
annually. In assessing these figures, however, it must be borne in mind
that the 17605 were exceptionally unfavourable from De Smeth's point of
view. It is possible that the firm's share in the issuing of loans for Russia
during the succeeding decade tipped the scales.
  It is not easy to pinpoint the cause of Hope's lagging turnover. It is
known that the crisis of 1772 had a more lasting effect upon the economy
than the crisis of 1763. The scarcity of credit also impeded commodity
trading, and it was not until 1775 that the curve commenced to rise. Ifwe
proceed from the premise that Hope's high turnover figures in the 1760s
stemmed principally from financial operations, it is conceivable that the
decline in the '70S reflected the diminution of activities in that sphere. One
thing is certain: the crises of 1763 and 1772 undermined Amsterdam's
position as the centre for billbroking. With its superior credit organiza-
tion, London gained ground at the expense of Amsterdam, which had
neither a central bank nor deposit banks. 2
  The rise in the number of foreign loans issued is also indicative of a
decline in exchange dealings. The effect of this was to release money, for
which other forms of investment were sought. For Hope & Co. and their
correspondents, a decline in mercantile or credit operations automatically
led to increased activity in the loan sector. 3
  The loans issued by Hope & Co. in the 1770s included those for Sweden
to which reference has already been made, and which between 1770 and
 1780 totalled 6 million guilders, and one of cf 2,625,000 for the Republic
of Poland, which was negotiated in 1777; the latter is described in detail
elsewhere in this book.4 The loans to planters in Tobago and Grenada
also belong to this period.