

 1807. In that year, the loans for Naples and the Kingdom of Holland
 were issued at 6 %, although this was purely nominal since the takeover
 price was of the order of 90. If the issuing house and the entrepreneurs suc-
ceeded in selling bonds at a higher price, the profit was theirs-a specu-
 lative element which certainly possessed attractions.
  A conversion could also have attractive speculative aspects, especially if
it related to old loans which stood low on the Stock Exchange. This is
illustrated by the great Russian conversion of 1798, which embraced a
 number of loans to the Republic of Poland, its ruler and several Polish
magnates, on which neither interest nor principal had been paid for many
years. By buying up the bonds prudently and in good time, the partners of
 Hope & Co. made a huge profit. According to the agent of Prussia, Nie-
buhr, the partners admitted having made six million guilders, but he
believed that the true sum was considerably greater.!
  The Spanish loan of thirty million guilders floated in 1807 similarly af-
forded opportunities for speculative profit on the conversion of old, low-
priced Echenique bonds. But Spain's financial predicament, coupled with
political developments in the country, produced an early drop in the
market quotation for the new bonds, making them difficult to sell. 2
  Hope & Co. viewed a measure of speculation in bonds as an aid to sales;
but excessively large or rapid fluctuations in quoted prices were undesir-
able and could bring the issue into disrepute. It was with this in mind that
Labouchere watched with anxiety the bear speculation on the Russian
bonds following Napoleon's invasion of Russia, the principal victims of
which were small investors who lived from their dividends. Major price
falls were in general pernicious, for they could erode the prestige of bor-
rower and issuer alike, and frighten the respectable investor to death. 3 In
1793 Hope & Co. felt it their duty to purchase Russian bonds in order to
support the price, thereby giving investors the certainty of being able to
encash their Russian holdings from day to day without incurring losses. 4
  In some cases, instructions for support-buying came from the govern-
ment concerned. When the price recovered, the bonds so purchased were
disposed of at a profit. In addition to the economic motive, considerations
of prestige will certainly have played a part in such actions. A significant
fall in the price of an issue was a blow to the credit standing of the govern-
ment, and could adversely affect the placing of subsequent loans.
  The prestige element was also of importance to the issuing house. Al-
though its role, once the loan had been fully subscribed, was limited to
the payment of interest and principal, the house regarded it as a point of
honour to ensure that the conditions of the loan were complied with. The

                                     29
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

name of Hope & Co. constituted a guarantee for the borrower that the
loan wuuld be fully subscribed, and for the investor that the terms on
which it was effected would be scrupulously adhered to. Thus, the Com-
pany's code of ethics and its business interests compelled it to stand up
for the bondholders in all cases where the payment of interest or principal
was imperilled. To this end, partners in the firm, or their confidential
agents, made repeated visits to Russia and other distant places, primarily
in order to defend the interests of bondholders. During the history of the
Portuguese loan, no effort was spared to safeguard the interest and prin-
cipal instalments, while in the case of Spain these payments were financed
for as long as possible from the proceeds of the Mexican silver trans-
action. 1
  Hope & Co. also saw it as their duty to stand up for other houses. When
a government which had defaulted in regard to previous loans approached
the Company for a new one, it was required to set right its default before
negotiations could proceed. This is plainly demonstrated in the Company's
handling of the Spanish loan of 1807, when, after long insistence, it
succeeded in getting the outstanding Echenique bonds converted. 2 During
his journey to Russia in 1797-98, Robert VOllte acted on behalf of a
number of other houses, and such was the success which he achieved that
Hope was requested to take up the cudgels for the holders of Austrian
bonds when, in the early 1800s, the government of that country central-
ized payments against its loan in Vienna, and proceeded to effect these in
depreciated paper money. Two journeys to Vienna for this purpose were
rendered fruitless by the prevailing circumstances, but a third, undertaken
by Pierre Cesar Labouchere in 1818, brought the long-awaited rehabili-
tation of the Austrian loans.
 The relationship between the issuing house and the borrower govern-
ment forms a quite separate facet of the business of floating loans. This
was always a delicate relationship. Mter all, nearly all the monarchs
concerned were absolutists, and sometimes even despots, who were accus-
tomed to recruiting their ministers and senior civil servants from among
the nobility. In their kingdoms, the middle-class citizen was a second-
rate figure who, as a provider of funds to the Court and those who sur-
rounded it, might occasionally be raised to the rank of nobleman, but
even then continued for long to be regarded as a parvenu.
  On the other hand, however, the monarch's position vis-a.-vis the house
was one of a supplicant, and this implied a measure of weakness. Before
the loan which he desired was placed, there were down-to-earth questions
to be answered concerning the value and dependability of the securities