

                                     43
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

numbered, Henry Hope made less and less of a secret of his preference for
the old government. In a letter of 4th October 1787 to Councler in Mar-
seilles, he said: 'Our internal troubles are at last coming to an end, our
fine city having decided to join with others in bringing about the re-estab-
lishment of the former constitution, the only means by which we can pre-
serve our commercial prosperity, our existence and our political respect.' 1
  In Amsterdam, however, the revival of the old order was no straightfor-
ward matter. The Patriots were still armed, and in spite of an official decree
prescribing the wearing of an orange cockade (the colour forbidden by the
Patriots), such a demonstration was not without hazard. The Messrs.
Hope were to discover at first hand that, as the Nieuwe Nederlandsche
Jaarboeken expressed it, 'the defeated party did not find it easy to sup-
press its pain and rancour.' 2
  In pursuance of the decree of the previous day, a number of merchants
wearing orange cockades appeared at the Stock Exchange on 12th October.
Among them were Henry Hope and John Williams Hope. The Nieuwe
Nederlandsche Jaarboeken subsequently noted that: 'Some embittered
Patriots, incensed by the somewhat larger Orange Cockades worn by the
Gentlemen referred to, drew attention to these, made scornful utterances
and at last pushed towards them on the Exchange, ostensibly out of curi-
osity; but they jostled so forcefully that the Gentlemen named were in
danger of being crushed and trampled underfoot; assistance was there-
upon requested, and a number of officers of the Law hurried to the place,
but they were not able to deal with the situation. Thus on the orders of the
Government a Company of armed Citizens was sent, whereupon the ma-
jority of those present left the Exchange, and the Gentlemen referred to
were conducted safely to their homes.' 3
  Messrs. Hope were so angered by the scorn heaped upon the Stock Ex-
change and 'the slight to which they had been subjected,' that they lodged
a protest with the Court of Justice; in anticipation of the outcome, they
avoided the Exchange. The court, however, was unable to give them satis-
faction until after 15th October, when Amsterdam admitted troops loyal
to the prince in order to avoid further Prussian occupation. On the very
next day, Messrs. Hope were collected from their homes by the Schepe-
nen Van Muyden and Muilma:1, and taken to the Stock Exchange,
where Van Muyden made a 'very polite' speech 'in the presence of many
members, as a result of which the wearing of Orange on the Stock Ex-
change has since become sufficiently general.'4
  To Baring, Henry Hope wrote only a few sentences concerning the epi-
sode. But in another letter he clearly revealed his feelings of bitterness:

                                     44
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

'This miserable country, having been devastated and practically ruined
during the past ten years by an ambitious faction, is about to take a little
rest, but twenty years of economy and industry will not succeed in making
good the ruinous losses.' Here, once again, the emphasis is on the eco-
nomic consequences of the political troubles.!
  But whereas the confused situations had clearly had an adverse effect on
trade, the reverse applied to the activities relating to loans. The events in-
volving Joseph II had been something of an obstacle to the placing of
Swedish loans, but by the time the one of 1786 was issued the investment
climate in Amsterdam was decidedly favourable. A loan for Poland was
floated in the same year, and the principal objection raised by Hope in
connexion with this related not to the difficult political situation in the
Netherlands, but to King Stanislaw's unsteady position. 2
  The relationship between the stagnation of trade and the ease of placing
loans emerged even more clearly in 1787. While drawing the attention of
the Swedish government to the effect of political unrest on trade, Hope
desired to increase the sum of the loan which had been requested from one
to one and a half million guilders. The fact that, under the prevailing cir-
cumstances, Hope and Fizeaux together accepted responsibility for two-
thirds of this loan indicates that they were confident of being able to place
the bonds. 3
 The summer and early autumn of 1787 also saw preparations for the ini-
tialloans to Russia. On 9th October of that year, the day preceding the
official capitulation of Amsterdam, Henry Hope, in a letter to the Russian
Court Banker, made a passing reference to the disturbances; but he clearly
viewed the situation as transient. As far as the placing of the Russian loan
was concerned, Henry Hope was cautiously optimistic; in the event, he
was proved right in a manner surprising even for him: while the brokers
had proceeded on the basis of a loan of one and a half million guilders,
subscriptions totalled six million within a week. 4 Apart from the slightly
higher rate of interest, which was also a factor, Henry Hope attributed
this phenomenon to a lessening of 'the general diffidence, which pre-
vented people from placing the large sums which have been accumulating
in consequence of the stagnation of trade for so long a time.' In a letter to
Baring, he described the success of the loan as 'a melancholy proof of the
discredit of our own Government securities.'5
 Thus we arrive at an economic factor-stagnation of trade, which caused
money to be diverted into other channels-and a political factor-an ab-
horrence of the re-established regime, which led Patriot supporters to
subscribe to foreign loans in preference to those issued on behalf of the