

                                     49
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

the Hopes had repeatedly urged the need for compulsory loans, since only
by this means could the Patriots be forced to participate. But the govern-
ment had been both lax and timid in responding to the advice, with the
result that the country was now beyond salvation.!
  Pierre Cesar Labouchere and the young Alexander Baring, a son of Sir
Francis who was serving his apprenticeship with the house, remained at
their posts until the last minute. A severe frost in mid-December had
robbed the major rivers of their value for defence. Early in January 1795
the defeated Anglo-Hanoverian army retreated eastwards. The Dutch
army was in disarray, and the civilian population was in the grip of
apathy. Holland was there for the taking.
  The time had come for Labouchere and Baring to make their escape.
But ice, driven by the westerly gales, had jammed the estuaries, making
a crossing to England impossible. It was 17th January before the wind
moderated and backed to the southeast, freeing the packed ice. On the
night of 18th January-at about which time the first French troops were
entering Amsterdam-the two embarked at Den Helder. 2
  In London, the Hopes had meanwhile suitably installed themselves.
From his distant relative, Lord Hopetoun, Henry Hope purchased a
house in Harley Street, off Cavendish Square, to which he added a wing
to accommodate the works of art which he had brought from Holland. 3
He also acquired a country seat, the East Sheen estate, near Richmond.
  The offices in Amsterdam had been left in the charge of Paulus Taay,
'trusted clerk.' The plan provided for Taay only to liquidate current
transactions. There would, of course, be no place under the new regime
for a 'maison anglo-orangiste' such as Hope & Co. With this in mind,
Messrs. Hope arranged for an advertisement to appear in January 1795,
stating that payments by the Company would henceforth be made in
London and that drafts on Hope should be sent there. 4
  With the ending of the Terror, however, things in France had changed,
and this became apparent after the conquest of the Netherlands. The
'representatives of the people of France,' who had occupied Hope's resi-
dence on the Keizersgracht, gave assurances that they would respect the
offices, and issued express instructions that the Company was not to be
hampered in completing its affairs. Their attitude stemmed not only from
the milder political climate in France, but also from a realization that a
substantial portion of Holland's wealth, both capital and goods, was
highly mobile and could only be enticed back by the right kind of noises.
  The new Batavian rulers in Amsterdam were no less forthcoming and
they, too, laid emphasis on the peaceful continuation of the business, 'as

                                   50
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

in that case the Inhabitants of these Countries would not suffer in the
 matter of the payments to be made to them by that House of Commerce.'
 Taay optimistically informed the worried correspondents that Messrs.
 Hope would certainly not have departed if they had known everything in
 advance, 'since the new order of things has been established here in an
 indescribably orderly and peaceful manner.' 1
   This unexpected reprieve, however, gave rise to new problems. Now
 that early liquidation was no longer the primary issue, Taay faced the
 costly duty to meet incoming claims. Although arrangements had been
 made with a number of business friends to assist Taay in time of need,
they backed out when the stream of demands grew into a flood. At the
crucial moment Robert Voute came to the rescue of the despairing Taay
 and provided him with the funds necessary to keep the business going.
 'If I had not had that good friend, everything would have been in ruins,'
a grateful Taay later wrote to London. 'He is a clever chap, and he is
always ready to help, day and night.' 2
  The arrangements for the payment of interest and principal on current
loans had been made prior to the Hopes' departure. In the case of the
 Russian loans, the house of Martin Dorner had been appointed to deal
with interest coupons tendered by Dutch bondholders. The Hopes dealt
with the Spanish loan of 1792/1793 direct from London, because Spain
was then at war with France. 3 For the Swedish loans, agreement was
reached with Hogguer, who had been associated with Hope & Co. in
floating these.
  When shortly afterwards trade revived, albeit via Hamburg, it became
easier for the partners to meet current liabilities, thus avoiding the bank-
ruptcy of the Amsterdam house. Their energetic associate, Hermann
Albrecht Insinger, dealt with the diamonds, which since 1791 had been
despatched to Hope by the official Portuguese government contractor in
Lisbon. 4 Insinger also handled the sale of coffee which, with Hope's
mediation, reached Amsterdam. We can probably interpret this as a
means of assisting bondholders of the West Indian plantation loans to
obtain their rightful interest. When England and Spain became embroiled
in war in 1797, the partners transferred responsibility for the payment of
interest on the Spanish loans to Jnsinger. Official confirmation of In-
singer's position as a trusted agent came with the transfer to him in May
1796 of the power of attorney vested in Robert Voilte when the latter was
preparing to leave for Russia to intercede on behalf of the holders of
Polish and Russian bonds. 5
The occasion was also used to grant power of procuration to Jan Jacob