

                                     45
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

Dutch government. A general lack of confidence in the chances of sur-
vival of the stadholder's regime, which depended upon Prussian and
English support, may also have played a part.
 This is not the place to go into the placing of the successive Russian loans
(this is dealt with in a separate chapter), but the market, at times easy and
at others stressed, more or less clearly reveals a number of general trends.
In 1789, fear of a financial debacle in France initially produced reticence
on the part of the investors, but when the anticipated catastrophe failed to
materialize a relative glut of funds existed, because much had remained
uninvested. 1 In 1790, issues became more difficult following the revolt in
the Southern Netherlands, which aroused all manner of anxiety con-
cerning international ramifications which, however, did not occur.2 In
1791 the capital market was easy in the extreme. The principal reason for
this must be sought in the assignats-paper currency issued in France and
secured by confiscated Church property-the value of which began to fall
alarmingly in May of that year. The outbreak of the fourth Anglo-
Dutch war had caused an appreciable proportion of investors in the
Netherlands to switch from English stocks to French, and the results of
this were now being felt. As French loans were usually issued in Paris,
interest was paid in French currency. With the assignats falling in value, a
mass flight from French stocks occurred, and this manifestly benefited
Hope's Russian loans. 3
  Henry Hope, who described this process in a memorandum, and the
house which bore his name soon became the bete noire of the French revo-
lutionaries. When, in 1789, southern Europe suffered a general shortage of
grain and France purchased large quantities of corn in Amsterdam, the
French charge d'affaires in The Hague, Caillard, circulated a report which
suggested that Hope & Co., on instructions from the Dutch government
(and probably also from England), was buying up corn in order to block
supplies to France and so add to her difficulties.
  The facts were otherwise. When, in the summer of 1789, a number of
Amsterdam merchants reacted coolly to huge orders from France, the
French minister Necker intervened personally, and successfully, with the
Company. The grootboeken show that Hope & Co. purchased wheat to a
value of slightly more than half a million guilders on behalf of the 'King
of France.' The house also bought rye and wheat on behalf of the burgo-
masters of Amsterdam and Haarlem and the magistrate of Liege. When
the prices fell, the Company, acting on instructions from its principals,
resold the cereals. 4
In later years, Caillard accused Hope & Co. of having a hand in the fall
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

in the French rate of exchange. Another spokesman asserted that the
Company repeatedly drew on Paris with the aim of undermining the rate.
It was alleged that when their drafts were returned protested, the partners
refused to meet the redrafts, and that by this means they sought to elicit
a legal process ending in a ruling that there was no rate of exchange for
drafts on France. The only element of truth in this ridiculous story lay in
a recommendation to the National Convention that the Hope assets held
by the Paris house of Vandenijver should be confiscated. 1
  It is abundantly clear from these stories that radicalism was steadily
gaining ground in France. In 1792 the French Legislative Assembly de-
clared war on Austria, a development which brought the revolutionaries
dangerously close to Holland, since the war was initially to be fought in
the Southern Netherlands. The conditions embodied in the contracts
made in 1792 show clearly that the entrepreneurs were again experiencing
difficulty in disposing of bonds. 2 In the autumn of that year the political
situation became decidedly alarming, following the victory of the French
general Dumouriez in the Southern Netherlands. It became still worse
when the Convention declared war on 'the King of England' and 'the
Stadholder of Holland' early in T793. By March of that year Dumouriez
had advanced to the major rivers, but his defeat by the Austrians and his
subsequent defection provided a brief respite.
  In February 1793, a loan of six million guilders was issued on behalf of
Spain. Like the Russian loans, this was in tranches. In May of the same
year Hope & Co. contracted for two more Russian loans, each of three
million guilders. 3 Subscriptions to these loans continued during the
summer, but a major French victory in September brought the flow of
funds to a halt. Of the Spanish loan, only the first tranche, of six million
guilders, had by then been subscribed. In the case of the Russian loans,
which came on to the market later, it proved impossible even to reach the
first three million guilders. 4
  Remarkably, Hope's turnover with the Exchange Bank during the event-
ful years after 1785 reached heights which were not achieved in the pre-
ceding fifteen years. Between 1786 and 1790, the annual figure was of the
order of 40 million guilders; in 1791 it rose to 52 million, and in the
following year the all-time high of 76 million was attained. The factors
which contributed to this peak are not immediately apparent. It is very
probable that payments arising from the numerous Russian loans nego-
tiated in 1791 played a part. After 1792 the turnover fell sharply, totalling
40 million in 1794. Of the other houses which we investigated, only
Hogguer achieved a comparably protracted and significant improvement