

                                     41
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

plained that he thus far had been able to stand his ground between the
opposing forces 'for, not being obliged either by status or duty to take
sides, I have observed strict neutrality.' In this context, we must not over-
look his Anglo-American origin.l
  Hope, devoting himself to 'the neglected issue amid all this confusion,
trade,' even managed to set up a speculation in cochineal, details of which
appear in a subsequent chapter. At this time he was also deeply involved
in the building and furnishing of his country seat 'Welgelegen', which was
situated in the wooded area known as the Haarlemmerhout, on the out-
skirts of the town of Haarlem. He had purchased the farmstead of that
name in 1769, and had steadily enlarged the estate by the acquisition of
adjoining properties. The farmstead was demolished in 1784, and two
years later the construction of a new house commenced.
  Henry Hope's country seat was designed by the consul of the Sardinian
Court in The Hague, Triquetti, who had modelled it on the Borghese and
Albani villas in Rome. When it was completed, in 1788, Hope obtained
permission from the municipal authorities to transplant some of the trees
in the Haarlemmerhout (at his own expense) in order to obtain an unin-
terrupted view from the house.
  'Welgelegen' is the only example of a villa suburbana in the French clas-
sic style which exists in the Netherlands. The facade, with its centrepiece
of twin Doric and Ionic columns, is characterized by a terrace which ex-
tends over the full width and is approached by means of two curved drives.
The whole is decorated with reproductions of classic sculptures. The high
central hall, overlooked from the balcony with its gilded, wrought-iron
balustrade, the library, the circular music room, the reception room and
the octagonal dining room are all richly adorned with classicistic orna-
ments. The three large front rooms on the first floor were for the purpose
of housing Henry Hope's collection of paintings and sculptures. 2
  Three catalogues of paintings, which were compiled by insurers follow-
ing Henry Hope's departure for England, provide an insight into the ex-
tent and nature of his collection. The emphasis was on works by Italian
and Dutch masters, but Flemish and French painters were also repre-
sented. Henry Hope had been careful to spread his purchases, with the
result that the collection contained no more than ten works by a single
artist. His favourites among the Italian masters were Titian, Guido Reni,
the Caraccis and Maratti. Of the Dutch painters, Rembrandt, Willem van
Mieris and Gerard Terborch were the best represented, although their
works were somewhat less numerous than those of the Italian artists. The
collection also contained a substantial number of canvases by Van Dijck

                                     42
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

and Rubens. Altogether 372 paintings were shipped to England in 1794.1
  The party quarrels in the Republic had meanwhile reached a new climax.
The vacillatory stadholder having funked a military solution to the crisis
of authority in Holland, his wife, Princess Wilhelmina, journeyed to The
Hague in an attempt to win support for him there. On 28th June 1787, she
was stopped by Patriot militiamen near Goejanverwellesluis and forced
to abandon her mission.
  King Frederick William II of Prussia viewed the detention of his sister as
a personal insult, and he demanded full satisfaction from the States of
Holland. In this he was supported by the British government, which put
heavy pressure on the French Court to withdraw its promise to the
Patriots. Throughout the month of August the issue of satisfal:tion re-
mained in abeyance, but in Prussia itself preparations were made for a
punitive expedition. France, which continued to retreat because it was on
the rocks financially and dared not risk another war with England, made
an abortive effort to persuade the States of Holland to meet the Prussian
ruler's demand. When a fresh ultimatum by Prussia was rejected on 13th
September, her troops commenced to advance across Dutch soil. 2
  Henry Hope had continued to hope for a peaceful settlement of the con-
flict. 'We are at present enjoying a large measure of peace locally, and we
console ourselves with the thought that the issues between the provinces
will soon be settled, in one way or another, without influencing the safety
of the individual or the peace of Europe,' he wrote to his correspondent in
Marseilles, Councler, on 30th August. With the Prussian invasion, how-
ever, his tone became more sombre, and in a letter of 14th September to
Baring he said: 'We are still more embarrassed in regard to our own situ-
ation, which has become very serious, but we still hope that extremities
possibly may be avoided.' The stagnation of trade was an extremely hard
blow, particularly as far as the cochineal speculation was concerned, and a
Franco-British war could have incalculable consequences. 3
  The last days of the Patriotic resistance were a period of great anxiety for
Henry Hope. On 16th September 1787, Prussian troops occupied Utrecht.
Two days later, the States of Holland surrendered and consented to the
restoration of the prince in all his dignity. Amsterdam alone refused to
capitulate, and became a centre for Patriots put to flight elsewhere. The
power of political radicalism in Amsterdam became so great that the city
refused to bow to demands for submission, preferring to face repeated
clashes with the Prussian forces. After three days the city surrendered, but
the capitulation was not signed until loth October. 4
As it became increasingly clear that the days of the Patriot regime were