

lation give the impression of having been arrived at arbitrarily. The expla-
nation for this probably lies in the abundance of capital in 18th-century
Holland, which made it difficult for the house to find productive in-
vestments for all its funds. Moreover, it was the custom for solid houses
to maintain substantial liquid assets which usually earned no interest. 1 It
is therefore probable that the loss of interest on invested capital was
viewed less seriously than it is today.
  It is also noticeable that the partners did not seek to make a profit at any
cost. Labouchere's admonition to Vincent Nolte, to place honour above
profit in establishing business contacts in the United States, is a brief but
unmistakable example. 2 This was not an empty gesture for the benefit of
the world outside, for Labouchere's instructions to Nolte were confiden-
tial. That he did not stop at words became clear when relations with the
house of Stephen Girard of Philadelphia were broken off following the
latter's discourtesy towards Hope. Nolte, who described the incident in
his autobiography, confessed that such a high sense of honour went too
far for him, and that he would have given preference to the material
advantage. 3 Labouchere and his co-partners were also patently relieved
when the detestable Michel the Younger finally went away, taking with
him his ill-gotten drafts on the Mexican treasury.4 This code of ethics in
no way precluded keenness in business matters, or the running of risks,
but the latter were always of a calculated nature and the margins set were
such as to rule out any real danger.
  But we digress. We were about to examine the fortunes of the house in
the 1780s. That period brought far-reaching changes in the partnership.
Thomas Hope had died in 1779, and his brother, Adrian, in 178I. It thus
became necessary to inject new blood into the firm, and to this end
Nicolas Bauduin, who had been in Hope's employ since 1765, and John
Williams Hope, whose acquaintance we have already made, were admitted
as partners on 4th July 1782. Their contracts ran for six years, commencing
on 1st January 1782, and were subject to one year's notice of termination.
One of the opening paragraphs contained the stereotyped sentence: 'that
the firm shall engage only in matters of commerce and commissions, and
not in any negotiations relating to deposited funds or similar trans-
actions.' This meant that outside capital would not be accepted. The
stipulation was probably made because the house was already finding it
difficult enough to keep its capital profitably invested. Later, too, con-
siderable reservations were exercised in regard to deposited funds, while
on current account interest a charge and a decharge was charged only
where large sums were involved, and even then with reluctance. 5

                                     37
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

A striking feature of the partnership contracts is the care taken to ensure
that the assembled capital remained within the firm. In these, the decease
of the partners in all conceivable sequences was anticipated, and the manner
in which the share of each in the capital was either to pass to the other
partners or could gradually be withdrawn by the deceased's heirs was laid
down.
  In the partnership deed of 1782, Henry Hope took a ·H-ths share in the
capital, John Hope a ~~ths share, and the other two partners a share of
966ths each. The sum of the capital at the end of 1782 was cf 8,731,205.0.0.
The ploughing-back of profits steadily increased this, with the result that
by 1794 it totalled cf 13.435,648.7.8.1
  With the death of John Hope in 1784, fresh arrangements became neces-
sary. John's sons, Thomas, Adrian Elias and Henry Philip, were still
minors, and Nicolas Bauduin had intimated his desire to retire from
business upon the expiry of his contract at the end of 1787. To ensure the
continuity of the house, J an Casper Hartsinck Cornelisz., a sheriff or schepen
of Amsterdam, was admitted as a partner. Pending Bauduin's retirement, he
was to have no share in the profits or losses, but would receive a salary
of cf 15,000 per annum. The partnership which thereupon commenced
was to be for a period of 14 years. Henry Hope's share of the capital was
 ~ ;jths, John Williams Hope's ·H-ths, John Hope's children's share -H-ths
and Hartsinck's 966ths, the portion with which John Williams Hope had
commenced in 1782. This contract, too, contained provisions relating to
inheritance and to the period for the withdrawal of shares. 2
  The contract, however, was short-lived. Nicolas Bauduin died of a stroke
in January 1787, and on 16th November 1789 Hartsinck resigned from the
house 'on account of accepting senior government posts,' a probable ref-
erence to his nomination to the Vroedschap of Amsterdam at the end of
 November 1787 when, following the intervention of a Pruss ian army in
Holland's domestic troubles, Prince William v dismissed a number of
Patriotic regents from the Vroedschap and replaced them by his support-
ers. Hartsinck was zealously pro-Orange, and had taken an active part in
 organizing those loyal to the prince. Evidently his new office occupied so
 much of his day that he had no time left for his duties on behalf of the
firm. Hartsinck received cf 500,000 from his co-partners by way of com-
 pensation, and was given the option of taking this in cash or in bonds at
 the price ruling on the day. He was obliged to leave the house which he
 rented from John Hope's widow, and this makes one wonder whether,
 apart from the demands of his position on the council, his resignation
 stemmed from differences of opinion with his colleagues. 3
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM