

In a convention entered into at this time, Henry Hope, John Williams
Hope and the widow of John Hope agreed to continue the house in the
manner prescribed in the event of Hartsinck's death. His share in the capi-
tal was divided among John Williams Hope and the three sons of John
Hope. The new situation was to become effective on 1st January 1790 and
run for the period originally stipulated in the contract with Hartsinck, i.e.
until the end of 180 I. 1
  The convention referred to the possibility of John Hope's son, Thomas,
taking an active part in the firm in due course; however, the surviving
correspondence contains no reference to Thomas's role and it must there-
fore be assumed that he was no more than a sleeping partner. Thomas
turned out to be a passionate collector of works of art and a connoisseur
of antique architecture, which he studied during his many journeys
through the Mediterranean countries. After eight years of travelling
about, he settled in Duchess Street, off Portland Place, in London, where
he displayed his collection of antiquities, which was as bizarre as it was
valuable, in a manner which may be described as ostentatious rather than
tasteful. 2
  With the description of this enthusiastic supporter of neo-classicism, we
have moved ahead of our story; nevertheless, it shows clearly why there
was little to be expected from this member of the family when it came to
the day-to-day business of the firm. So, despite all efforts, it had not
proved possible to fill the gap in the management which in fact had arisen
with the deaths of Thomas and Adrian Hope. This may well account part-
ly for the appearance in the 1780s of a man who was to head major specu-
lations in tea and dyes on behalf of Hope & Co. He was Robert Voute
- known to his friends as 'Little Bob' or 'Swarte Rob' - born the son of a
Huguenot emigre, Jean Jacques Voute, in Amsterdam in 1747. At the age
of twenty-four he entered his father's brokerage firm, which specialized in
dyes, coffee and tea. 3
  In 1785 and the years which followed, Robert Voute co-ordinated large-
scale speculations in tea and indigo undertaken by Hope. The houses of
Thomas Littledale in Rotterdam, and Harman Hoare & Co. and John and
Francis Baring & Co. of London were also concerned in these. 4 The co-
chineal speculation, in which Hope & Co. also availed themselves of Ro-
bert Voute's services, is described in detail in this book. The mercantilistic
intervention of governments in the economic life of their countries fa-
voured monopoloid operations of this nature. At the end of 1792 Robert
Voute withdrew completely from the house which bore his name, in order
to have time for his hobby, the study of the economy, and for journeys on
behalf of Hope & Co.
                                      39
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

The leadership which the house needed was to be forthcoming from a
young man who entered Hope's employ in 1790. Pierre Cesar Labouchere,
the son of a Huguenot cloth merchant, was born in The Hague in 1772.
While working in his uncle's merchant house in Nantes, he rapidly distin-
guished himself to a degree which led his uncle to recommend him to
Henry Hope as a clerk. The latter engaged him, and was so impressed
with his achievements that after three years he gave Labouchere power of
procuration. When the partners moved to England, the day-to-day man-
agement of affairs was to rest with him. 1
 Labouchere's contacts with John and Francis Baring & Co. were also to
prove of great value for the future. The earliest transactions with this
house dated from before 1770, but it was only with the joint speculations
that the parties became well acquainted. The Barings almost certainly had
their roots in Groningen, in the northern part of the Netherlands. An
early ancestor was a Lutheran minister in Bremen, from whence he moved
to London. One of his sons, John, opened a cloth mill in Devonshire. Of
the ensuing generation, two sons, John and Francis, moved to London,
where they bought raw materials for their father's mill and also sold the
products of it. Gradually, however, the house dissociated itself from the
family business, and by the beginning of the 19th century it had become
one of the most important in its field. 2
 Legend has it that the transactions with Hope laid the foundation for
Baring's later greatness. The Hope archives do not bear this out. They do,
however, show that the strong and fast-growing house of Baring made
grateful use of the capital belonging to the partners of Hope & Co. when
they fled to England. As the Hopes did not develop any activities there,
they needed objects in which to invest, and Barings were an excellent
starting point. 3
 Hope's relationship with Barings was closer than with any other house,
and this fact can only be explained by a far-reaching similarity in outlook,
in both the commercial and private spheres. This naturally did not rule
out differences of opinion in matters of business, or personal tiffs, but
these did not impinge upon the underlying mutual confidence. Thus was
the foundation laid for a friendship which has survived to this day.