

                                    51
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

Voilte, Robert's eldest brother, whose merchant house, and an account
which Robert Voilte maintained there, provided the partners with another
avenue through which to continue certain activities on a modest scale.
For example, we find settlement accounts relating to tea speculations set
up previously. Extensive correspondence with the house of De Coninck &
Co. in Copenhagen suggests that the Hopes had a financial interest in the
sending of a Danish ship to Batavia. 1 As has been explained, there was
no question of the Hopes undertaking any independent activities in
England, and such business as there was to be done was channelled via
Baring or Harman & Co.
  The scale of operations in Amsterdam was deliberately limited in order
not to arouse the jealousy and greed of the municipal and provincial
authorities. To meet the dire shortage of funds, compulsory loans and
levies were rife, and the authorities were very keen to draw the house of
Hope & Co. into their net. The partners in London instructed Taay to
deny that he had any power to act on behalf of the Company, and to
inform the authorities that they need not anticipate any communication
on the subject from London. When the pressure on Taay increased, the
partners, to the dutiful man's intense dismay, requested him to stay away
from the office. The upshot was that Hope's possessions were sequestered. 2
  The confiscatio!1 was provisionally a formality and, coming from a mod-
erate administration, was probably aimed at silencing extreme radicals.
A moderate policy was to be expected, for Voilte had meanwhile achieved
major successes in his efforts on behalf of the holders of Polish and
Russian bonds. 3 Under the conventions of 30th June and 29th October
 1797, all debts incurred in Holland by the Republic of Poland, its king and
the Polish magnates were converted into Russian bonds bearing interest
at five per cent. A third convention, signed on 15th January 1798, had the
effect of converting all Russian loans issued in Holland and Belgium into
the same 5 %type. 4
  The implementation of these conventions was entrusted to the house of
 Raymond and Theodore de Smeth, Hope's erstwhile competitor in matters
 concerned with Russia's finances. It had briefly looked as if the Company
 would be able to resume operations in Amsterdam, when the politically
 very moderate administrators of the province of Holland made tentative
 proposals for a return by the Hopes. But at the crucial moment the
 partners broke off the contact, because no absolute guarantees were
 forthcoming regarding the safety of persons or property.5 The wisdom of
 their action emerged in January 1798, when a radical group succeeded in
 obtaining the French government's approval to carry out a coup d'etat, in
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

which the moderates were swept from power. For the 'Anglomaniac'
Hopes, little good could be expected from the new regime.
 Fortunately, the partners were able to render valuable services from
their exiled headquarters. When the house of Martin Dorner ran into
serious difficulties after the proprietor's death, and the payment of interest
on the Russian bonds was jeopardized, Labouchere travelled to Hamburg
to put matters right. On his advice, the house of Matthiessen & Sillem
was appointed to succeed Dorner. The old connexion which was thus
strengthened was later to prove immensely valuable to Hope & Co. 1
 The links with America, which were reinforced at about the same time,
were also destined to be of importance to the Company. The American
banker and land speculator William Bingham had written to Hope in 1792
concerning the advantages of buying land in Maine. In 1794 he had sent
an agent to visit the partners in Amsterdam, but by then they had other
problems to contend with and so the man returned to the United States
empty-handed. 2
 With the Hopes settled in London, however, things had changed. There
was now a need for suitable investments for the capital withdrawn from
Holland. Against this background, it is understandable that they associ-
ated themselves with a visit to America by Alexander Baring in 1796. The
Hopes committed themselves to a three-quarer share in any purchases or
other undertakings entered into by Alexander Baring. During his stay,
Baring allowed himself to be talked into buying 600,000 acres which
Bingham had earlier acquired. The land was situated between the Penob-
scot and Scodiac rivers, and was valued at nearly 270,000 dollars. The
deal brought Bingham release from financial difficulties, and Baring a
wife, for he married one of Bingham's daughters. For Baring & Co., the
connexion with Bingham meant an introduction to the circles concerned
with American government finances, and this was subsequently to prove
extremely valuable. 3
 The Hopes were left with a three-quarter share in land which produced
nothing but disappointment and expense. The main stream of immigrants
entered the United States at more southerly points, and most of them
headed west. Year after year, the reports from Hope's agent in Maine,
John Richards, echoed the disconsolate theme of drudgery in getting
colonization under way and of scarcity of settlers who, moreover, were
not an asset but a liability from the financial point of view. 4 The only
redeeming feature in the situation was perhaps that it helped to focus
Hope's attention on America.
Allusions in the surviving correspondence reveal that in 1797 Alexander