

                                     47
                      THE FAMIL Y AND THE FIRM

in the years 1785-1794. De Smeth's turnover declined in this very period,
and the figure achieved in 1787 was not repeated until I79I. The growth
of turnover by Muilman, while not marked, was consistent.
  As the economic history of the Netherlands shows, trade as it were
continued to bask in autumn sunshine during the last years of the old
Republic.! The figures of turnover with the Exchange Bank reveal that
Hope & Co. had their full share of this recovery, and more. The revival of
trade with Russia will have contributed to this. The Company did a large
volume of business in Russian produce with the house owned by the
Court Banker, Sutherland, in St.Petersburg. The underlying transactions,
which in part were aimed at restoring the rate of exchange in Russia, were
undertaken on the instructions of the government. 2 In 1794, Hope & Co.
received special permission from Empress Catherine II to import a large
quantity of sugar into Russia. 3
  Early in the 1790S Hope also established relations with merchant houses
in the United States. They had long ignored these avenues on account of
political developments. At that juncture, however, there was no question
of the Company becoming involved in America's national finances. Gou-
verneur Morris, who, as the executive agent of President Washington, was
on a tour of western Europe, during which he visited the Hopes, attempted
to interest the partners in his country's financial affairs, but without
success. The time for such business had not yet come. 4
  It will be abundantly clear from the foregoing that the partners were
busy safeguarding life and property against the French armies. In France
itself, radicalism had reached its climax in the Reign of Terror, the targets
of which included bankers and speculators. In the Southern Netherlands,
the French occupation had been followed by a wave of confiscations of
property belonging to 'aristocrats', and this boded ill for the North.
Shortly after the declaration of war on the Netherlands and England, the
Convention, anticipating the victory, declared forfeit the property of the
stadholder, 'his friends, his supporters and his willing slaves' -categories
which plainly embraced the Hopes. s
  When Breda fell to the French in February 1793, Henry Hope, sensing
imminent danger, fled to England, taking John Williams Hope's family
with him. The daily management of the house was left in the hands of his
protege. Although he returned in December 1793 when, following Du-
mouriez's defection, the situation appeared to be slightly easier, he no
longer felt really safe. 6
  The summer of 1794 brought a fresh defeat for the allied armies, and
again the future of the Republic was in doubt. Against this background,
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

the partners prepared once more to leave for England. Henry Hope
enquired of the British government regarding the possibility of British
ports being opened for the goods and chattels of refugees from Holland.
The foreign secretary, Lord Grenville, through his envoy in Holland,
sought the views of the government there. The Raadpensionaris, Van de
Spiegel, flatly rejected the idea of permission being granted, as this would
be tantamount to a sauve qui peut. And he added, bitterly, that an inverse
measure would be more appropriate, 'in order to leave to the Hopes and
other over-grown capitalists of this country no other chance for saving
their property than the giving or at least lending a part of it to supply the
wants of the Government.' 1
  While Van de Spiegel's bitterness is understandable, the material and
moral bankruptcy of the regime was so complete that there was no jus-
tification for condemning Henry Hope's attempt to save himself and those
dear to him from almost certain death under the guillotine. An outsider
could not know that the Terror had just then come to an end.
  Indeed, Henry Hope had given all possible assistance to the government
following the restoration of the stadholder in 1787. He had, for example,
expressed to Van de Spiegel his readiness to support a loan for the benefit
of the decrepit Oost-Indische Compagnie. At the same time, he was not
willing to throw good money after bad. When the Compagnie's debts
continued to mount, and the States of Holland maintained support for the
Compagnie even at the risk of their own financial position, Henry Hope
slowly turned away from the government. To make matters worse, the
Compagnie, in an attempt to recover lost ground, resorted to senseless
prohibitions. In 1791 it persuaded the States of Holland to thwart the
sale of some parcels of tea imported by Henry Hope, and in 1793 the
same thing occurred with a cargo of Javanese sugar consigned by Hope
in an American vessel. 2
  When the French had advanced to the river Maas, and a Patriot action
group openly took up the cudgels against the sitting regents in Amster-
dam, the Hopes considered that their time had come. On 17th October
 1794 Henry Hope and John Williams Hope embarked at Hellevoetsluis
and crossed to England, where the latter's wife and children had been
 since the end of August. Thomas, Henry Philip and Adrian Elias fled to
 Germany.3
  Before leaving, John Williams Hope had explained the reasons for their
 departure to the hereditary prince, later King William I. He had pointed
 to the systematic neglect of the army and the fleet, which was among the
 causes of the country's hopeless position. Since the outbreak of the war,