

                                     34
                      THE FAMIL Y AND THE FIRM

A commission having been placed with a foreign house, it remained to be
seen whether this was executed with appropriate enthusiasm and busi-
ness sense. It might involve purchase, as in the case of the cochineal
speculation, or selling, as in the case of Operation R.M. following Robert
Melvil's departure from Russia.! A lack of success could stem from lack
of drive or commercial acumen on the part of the correspondent, but it
could also result from a counterspeculation undertaken secretly by the
agent concerned, for his own benefit, which was given priority over the
commiSSIOn.
 The slowness of postal communications could also adversely affect busi-
ness, the more so where long distances were involved. Instructions issued
from Amsterdam on the basis of market information received there had
to complete the long journey back, and often a month passed before these
reached the correspondent. By this time, the market situation could have
changed so drastically that to implement them would have been valueless.
The effect of this situation was particularly marked during the cochineal
affa ir. 2
  Should the partners of a house such as Hope & Co. be regarded as
bankers? Opinions on this are divided. The crux of the matter lies in the
question whether a clear degree of specialization between merchants and
bankers had already manifested itself in the 18th century.3 Strangely
enough, while contemporary outsiders repeatedly referred to the Hopes as
bankers, the latter seldom if ever applied the term to themselves in their
correspondence. During the political troubles of 1787, Henry Hope ex-
pressly described himself as a merchant, not as a banker. 4 In the view of
the partners, exchange dealing and acceptance credit fell within the scope
of trade, and the issuing of loans did not lead to neglect of trading in
commodities; on the contrary, where possible the partners attempted to
combine trade deals with loan transactions. This mercantile approach to
loan business was to continue beyond the period dealt with in this book.
 Finally, in this context, we must examine the stature of the firms with
which Hope maintained contact, and the stature of the house itself.
Needless to say, solidity was a prerequisite for an association with Hope &
Co. For the outsider, however, it was difficult to establish the magnitude
of a firm's capital and how much of this was committed to transactions.
The higher the percentage available in cash or on demand, the greater
was the solidity of the house. But those on the outside could do no more
than guess. In many instances, outward signs served as a yardstick: a
luxurious style of living and dissoluteness in the private sphere were
regarded as signs of reduced solidity. Sobriety, a good family life, hard

                                    35
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

work, knowledge of the trade, prudence and reliability: these were the
hallmarks of the first-class merchant. Trading beyond the limit of one's
financial resources was regarded as a mortal sin. Financial capacity was
of course important, but was not the primary consideration. 1
  The amount of credit which could be allowed to a correspondent was of
great importance. In determining this, references were usually sought
from more than one house, and these were compared. This information,
together with the solidity characteristics already referred to, were entered
in separate books. If a change of partners occurred, information had
quickly to be obtained concerning the wealth and solidity of the new
member or members. Sometimes the death of a partner revealed weak-
nesses which were capable of bringing a house to the verge of bankruptcy.
With the death of the Hamburg merchant Martin Dorner, it transpired
that his affairs had been so neglected during his long illness that suspen-
sion of payments could not be averted. 2 When James Rowand, a partner
in the Moscow house of Thomson Rowand & Co., died in 1791, a seven-
year backlog in the bookkeeping was discovered, making it almost im-
possible to assess the solvency of the firm. 3 Clearly it was possible to
struggle on for years without actually coming to grief, and thus we may
assume that similar arrears also existed in houses whose affairs were to all
appearances in first-class order.
  Against this background, the punctiliousness of Hopes' bookkeeping
stood out well, and it explains the reputation of the house in this respect.
Twice a month, the daily entries in the journaal were transferred to the
appropriate account in the grootboek in accordance with the double-entry
system. At the end of the year, the credit or debit balances were entered
in the Balance Sheets, from which the Profit and Loss Account was
derived. The profit, or loss, was then divided among the partners in the
proportions laid down in the partnership agreement. Usually a substan-
tial portion of the profit was allocated to the firm's capita1. 4
  In thus describing Hope's exactitude in matters of accountancy, one runs
the risk of creating an undue impression that the partners were 'modern'
men. They lived in an era of mercantile capitalism which produced a
mentality differing from that which we know today. As the considerations
and motivations of the partners will repeatedly emerge in the following
chapters, mention of one or two specific points suffices here.
  In the correspondence at our disposal, where reference is made to the
writing off of losses on transactions, there is in no case any trace of a
deliberate attempt to calculate the loss as a more or less exact proportion
of the capital invested. The sums written off during the cochineal specu-
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM