

Political developments in the Holland of the 1780s also gave rise to count-
less problems for the partners. The war against England came to an igno-
minious end in 1784, but this by no means solved the domestic difficulties.
The demands by Emperor Joseph II of Austria for the opening of the
ScheIdt, which the Dutch had kept closed since the outbreak of the anti-

                                    40
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

Spanish revolt, served to maintain the tension. The Patriots utilized the
situation to widen their influence. Their belligerence towards the Austrian
ruler, however, was largely of a verbal nature, France having refused the
military support which they sought. Only when an agreement with Joseph
II was reached would the French be willing to enter into an alliance with
the Republic. 1
  Strengthened by the support of this ally, the Patriots succeeded in weak-
ening the power of Prince William v in Holland to the point where he and
his family were obliged to leave the province. The prince embarked on a
series of goodwill visits with the aim of strengthening his position in other
regions. While these were taking place, an ideological split in the Patriot
ranks emerged; this was most serious in Holland and Utrecht. The regents
who opposed the stadholder had only one aim, to increase their own
power, and they had no desire to share this with radical groups among the
populace which, on grounds of historical rights and customs, claimed a
voice in municipal and regional government. 2
  The situation became even more complex when foreign diplomats com-
menced to concern themselves actively with the party conflicts. The
British envoy, Harris, proceeded to organize the Orange party and to
bribe regents; his French counterpart openly supported the Patriots, albe-
it only verbally. In the meantime the stadholder, with the aid of his army,
had managed to restore his authority in a number of towns in Gelderland.
The response of the radical groups was to seize power in several towns in
Holland, thereby gaining the upper hand in the States of Holland. Patriot
militia, so-called free corps, thereupon crossed the borders of Utrecht to
aid their political associates in the provincial capital. 3
  While all this was going on, the Hopes had remained in Amsterdam,
although with the radicals in power there they were anything but safe. On
30th May 1787 a full-scale battle developed between the pro-Orange ship-
wrights, the 'Bijltjes,' and the Patriot militia-an encounter which ended
with the siege and capture of the 'Bijltje' bastion of Kattenburg. This
Orange defeat was followed by the plundering of the homes of prominent
supporters of the prince, some of whom escaped death by fleeing through
their gardens. While, according to Harris, 'many of the first commercial
families' sought refuge in The Hague, Henry Hope remained at his post
throughout this turbulent period. Naturally, the troubles had an adverse
effect on trade. For example, an auction of a consignment of tobacco on
behalf of the Swedish Crown failed to take place for the simple reason
that the brokers stayed away.4
In a letter to the French banker Laborde de Mereville, Henry Hope ex-