

                                     53
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

Baring was instructed by the partners of Hope & Co. to attend to their
interests in the Caribbean. Because of the war, arrears of payment had
arisen, particularly on the part of debtors on the islands of St.Eustatius
and Guadeloupe, and these could not be allowed to continue. Baring,
however, found no opportunity to undertake this task, and in 1799 Hope's
interests in the area were entrusted to William Gordon Coesvelt, who
lived on St.Croix. In 1808 and later years we shall find Coesvelt acting as
Hope's agent in Spain and, later still, as a manager at the Company's
offices in Amsterdam. 1
  The bonds between the houses of Hope and Baring had meanwhile been
strengthened by Labouchere's marriage to Dorothea, a daughter of Sir
Francis Baring. Legend has it that when his courtship began to develop,
Labouchere enquired of the partners of Hope & Co. whether, in the event
of his marriage to a Miss Baring, he would be admitted to partnership,
and that upon receiving an affirmative reply he went to Sir Francis, to
whom he imparted the news and thereby won Dorothea's hand.
  This story is probably untrue, for not until the house had returned to
Amsterdam do we find Labouchere as a partner. Nevertheless, it is char-
acteristic of his shrewdness in matters of business. In this, he was a match
for his friend and later brother-in-law, Alexander Baring.
  The lack of progress achieved by England and her allies in their struggle
against Napoleon produced a gradual improvement of Hope's chances of
being able to return to Holland. Czar Paul I had declared war against
France in 1798, but when his armies, after initial successes, suffered de-
feats at the hand of the French (principally as a result of the lack of
Austrian support), he virtually withdrew from the arena. Bonaparte
thereupon vigorously attacked Austria, and a series of French victories
paved the way for the Peace of Luneville in February 1801. England, with
no continental allies and no prospect of a decisive military success, opened
negotiations with France which led to peace preliminaries on 1st October
of that year.
  For the partners of Hope & Co., the time had come to make serious
preparations for the return to Holland, and early in 1801 far-reaching
discussions were held with Robert Voilte, who travelled to London for
the purpose. The idea of returning was certainly attractive, for during
their exile the partners had been obliged to decline requests for a loan for
which Brazilian diamonds were to serve as security. Their circumstances
had also necessitated turning down an Austrian approach for a new loan. 2
  Robert Voilte proved willing to investigate the feasibility of the proposed
move, and was given lengthy instructions regarding the vital issues. First

                                     54
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

and foremost was an investigation of the state of trade in Amsterdam and
the opportunities for the house to resume its activities there. It might be
possible for one of the partners to return to Holland ahead of the others
to look after the Russian loans, and perhaps also the Austrian. But his
presence might not be construed as formal resettlement, and the repatriate
would have to receive protection against house-searches or other forms of
harassment connected with the fiscal claims against the Hope family.!
  Upon his return to Holland, Voute, in conversations with friends and
acquaintances. gathered a certain amount of information concerning the
economic situation. The prospects were none too encouraging. Behind a
facade of prosperity, many Amsterdam houses possessed an inner weak-
ness which, in Voute's opinion, could not fail to lead to their bankruptcy
if the war were to last. 'This country will go to the devil unless it again
becomes seventeen provinces, as in the days before William of Orange,'
he half-jokingly remarked to a friend. The latter promptly replied: 'Can
you persuade England to achieve this? That would be an excellent thing.' 2
A prophetic utterance, which was to be borne out in 1815.
  In Voute's opinion, the lifting of the judicial attachment on Hope's prop-
erty was a matter of urgency, because it was imperative that the house
should be ready to resume its former position when trade revived after the
cessation of hostilities. Early in October 1801, Voute visited The Hague to
discuss the matter with the new government, the Staatsbewind, which had
come to power as a result of pressure exerted by Napoleon. In accordance
with Bonaparte's overall effort towards reconciliation, the new rulers were
mainly conservatives, both Patriot and pro-Orange. This boded well for
Voute's cause.
  In spite of the mutual goodwill, however, Voute made little progress, and
when the first half of November passed without a decision he handed the
task over to Insinger. By the end of the month Insinger had managed to
achieve a settlement concerning the restitution of the confiscated Hope
property, and this was restored to its owners upon payment of a sum of
cf 180,000. 3
 In the meantime, the political skies had cleared to the point where
Labouchere ventured a brief visit to the Republic. From there he travelled
to Portugal to negotiate with the government on a proposed loan against
the security of diamonds. As we have seen, the proposal was not new. His
mission and its outcome form the subject of one of the chapters of this
book.4
 With the signing of the Treaty of Amiens at the end of March 1802,
which finally brought an end to hostilities between England and France,