

                                    55
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

the early return of the partners to Holland became a matter of great im-
portance, not only from the point of view of the impending Portuguese
loan but also of the management of the Russian loans. Voute had revis-
ited England at the beginning of 1802 and had repeatedly referred to
this. He had also hammered in the point that the deed of partnership
should be amended to cover every conceivable contingency in the event of
a new war. A fictitious contract, in which only the names of those partners
who would play an active role in the house appeared, should be drawn up
for external purposes. Voute also felt that two domiciles should be main-
tained, one in London and one in Amsterdam. The London house could
bear the title Henry Hope & Co., and the Amsterdam house Hope & Co. l
  Family quarrels and the failure to obtain permission for the Portuguese
loan delayed the signing of the new deed of partnership until the begin-
ning of October, by which time Labouchere and John Williams Hope and
their families were on the point of leaving for Holland. The contract itself
has not survived, but correspondence and accounts show that the Hopes
of London took a five-million guilder share in the Amsterdam house
through Henry Hope & Co. Labouchere figured as a partner, but with a
relatively small and fluctuating share which by 1808 had grown to
cf 700,000; however, he had a -tth share of profits. Earlier plans to admit
Alexander Baring to the partnership were not implemented, probably
because of the deterioration of relations between England and France. As
mentioned in the chapter dealing with the Portuguese loan, Sir Francis
Baring considered the possibility of establishing a house in Antwerp. A
merger between Hope and Baring also appears to have been seriously
considered. 2
  Adrian Elias Hope ceased to be a partner, and his share in the old house
was credited to an account held in his name by Henry Hope & Co. It
appeared advisable to exclude him from all discreet arrangements because
of his strange and unpredictable character. 3
  The action of the Staatsbewind in obstructing the Portuguese loan made
Henry Hope decide to stay in England. John Williams Hope repeatedly
delayed his return to Holland, and this, too, will undoubtedly have been
due in part to the opposition to the loan. Weighed down by domestic
problems and attacks of gout, this man, who possessed little fighting spirit,
was reluctant to exchange the familiar circle of family and friends for an
uncertain future in a Holland which had become strange to him.
  The re-establishment of the house in Amsterdam, which was announced
in a circular dated 5th November 1802, was not without its difficulties.
The house naturally resumed control of matters which had been entrusted
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM


to others during its exile, and one such matter concerned the Portuguese
diamonds, for the sale of which Hope held a monopoly under the terms of
the Portuguese loan. At the same time, care was taken not to offend other
houses and, in view of the difficult times, to allow them a share in current
business. Moreover, the position of the 'Anglomaniac' house was some-
what delicate, and it was therefore in its interest to create a circle of well-
disposed business associates. The controversy surrounding the Portuguese
loan had amply demonstrated the need for friends. 1
 Accordingly, the sale of Russian bonds was left in the hands ofVoute &
Co., and it was not long before tea imports, under government licence,
added a new dimension to the relationship between the two houses. In-
singer retained a role in the marketing of the diamonds and also became
involved in the growing volume of colonial produce which arrived in
American ships. Sale of brazilwood, for which Hope & Co. secured the
monopoly, were entrusted to the house ofMuhl & Van Winter. 2
 In the case of the Russian bonds, the situation was more complicated.
Hope's uncompromising enemy, Treasurer Vasilyev, made sure that the
house of De Smeth continued to be concerned with the Russian loans even
after the Company had resumed operations in Amsterdam. Hope, how-
ever, remained the principal agent where the encashment of repurchased
bonds was concerned. 3
 In the chapters dealing with the Russian loans, it is explained how trans-
actions in Russia on behalf of the French government were embodied in a
loan to the United States to enable that country to purchase the French
colony of Louisiana. We also see here that the initiative for that loan
stemmed from Alexander Baring. In the light of all that has been written
about Baring's American contacts, this is not surprising.
 In May 1803, Baring and Hope entered into a convention with the
French government concerning the terms of payment by the United States
for Louisiana. When, in the same month, war broke out between France
and England, Hope as it were automatically came to the forefront in the
further negotiations, because they constituted the best avenue for the
payment of the loan instalments to the French Treasury.4
 In a supplementary convention entered into on 2 I st April 1804, the
French government undertook to surrender immediately to Baring and
Hope all American bonds which it still held. As a quid pro quo, the two
houses undertook to substantially accelerate the instalments. The negoti-