




Prospectus of the 'Share in ajoint property of original American Stocks,' 1803
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM


part of the Dutch investors to find more peaceful havens for their capital
increased. To this end, Labouchere enquired of Baring whether a further
one million dollarsworth of bonds could be transferred to Amsterdam.
But the deteriorating rate of exchange on England made the bonds too
costly in Amsterdam, and consequently Labouchere was forced to aban-
don the idea. 1
  Individual investors, however, did purchase bonds in England. Indeed,
N.&J.& R. van Staphorst, Ketwich & Voombergh and Willem Borski
went so far as to establish an administrative office to handle joint hold-
ings of Louisiana stock. They themselves probably succeeded in syphoning
the bonds, which had a total value of [78,800 doJlars, from London to
 Holland. 2
  Those who participated in the 'Joint Property' at no time had cause for
complaint. Even in the difficult years after 1808, the United States con-
tinued to meet its obligations promptly. In 181 I, coin was sent to Amster-
dam on board an American warship in order to safeguard the interest
payment. In 1812, there was a threat of stagnation owing to opposition by
the French government, but the outbreak of war between England and
the United States in that year had the effect of ironing out the diplomatic
wrinkles.
  In 18 [9, ]820 and 1821, the loan was redeemed. During the whole period,
1,340 bonds were purchased for the reserve fund, producing for the hold-
ers of the 11,128 shares a final bonus of cf 55.75 per share after deduction
of expenses and commission. 3
  It is surprising to observe how a merchant house such as Hope & Co.,
with its manifest ties with England, became steadily more involved in the
Napoleonic finances. The process is explained in detail in later chapters,
but it is perhaps just as well to preview the sequence of events and the
manner in which the various transactions fitted together.
  The subject of the loan for Portugal was broached even before the part-
ners returned to Amsterdam. After visiting Lisbon, where he successfuJly
concluded the negotiations with the government, Labouchere went to
Paris to plead on Portugal's behalf for an extension of the instalment
period for the war levy imposed by the French. His representations to the
minister offoreign affairs, TaJleyrand, finally achieved the desired result. 4
  Early in 1803, while the house was still occupied with the placing of the
Portuguese bonds, Hope and Baring assumed responsibility for the finan-
cing of the purchase of Louisiana. The payments which Hope was required
to make to the French Treasury in this connexion led on the one hand to
large-scale purchases in Russia of shipbuilding materials on behalf of the
                                      60
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

French navy, and on the other to dealings with the financier and specu-
lator Ouvrard, who in 1804 commenced to tighten his grip on France's
finances.
  When Ouvrard went to Spain to recover monies owed to France, and
while there succeeded in securing a virtual stranglehold on that country's
finances also, Hope became involved in the execution of the gigantic plans
which he had devised for Spain.! If everything had gone as Ouvrard en-
visaged, the two could have secured a joint monopoly of the import and
export trade of all the Spanish colonies on the American continent, and
all the gold and silver accumulated in those colonies would have flowed to
Europe via channels planned by Hope. Spain could then have met her
commitments towards France, Ouvrard could have replaced the stag-
gering edifice of credit which he had erected around the French Treasury
with real money, and he and Hope would together have made profits no
less colossal than the plan in its entirety.
  The failure of the gigantic project is described elsewhere in this book.
When Napoleon purged the French financial system early in 1806, and
forcefully eliminated Ouvrard and his associates, he spared the Company.
This was wise, for late in 1805 it had opened a loan of 10 million guilders
on behalf of Spain, the primary purpose of which was to pay that coun-
try's 'contribution' to France. As Napoleon had temporarily shelved
Ouvrard's American plan in toto, this was one of the few ways to obtain
money from Spain in the short term.2
  Admittedly, the French government, after disposing of Ouvrard, de-
manded the return of the drafts on Mexico which Hope & Co. still held,
but after a time Napoleon also realized that the encashment of these could
best be entrusted to the Company. In 1807, the operation which Ouvrard
had launched was continued, but now with Napoleon as Hope's partner. 3
The French Treasury fared well under the arrangement, for it received in
all IO million piastres or nearly 40 million francs. Three-fifths of this was
in the form of colonial produce, which was shipped to European ports in
American vessels. 4
  1807 also saw the opening by Hope & Co. of a new Spanish loan. This
was of 30 million guilders and, like the previous one, was for the pur-
pose of meeting Spain's financial commitments towards France. The Com-
pany, however, took steps to ensure that older Spanish bonds and overdue
interest vouchers were as far as possible rendered convertible so that in
the event of the loan being fully subscribed, no more than IO million
guilders would be made available in cash. In the event, the subscriptions