

                                    73
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

against Prussia. The ruling Hats attempted to meet the cost of these
military operations by the simple expedient of printing money. A decree
issued in 1745, that banknotes would henceforth not be redeemable in
coin, caused this paper money to depreciate to only one-third of its face
value. 1 Many suffered hardship from the measure, and for some time
there were signs that the riksdag of 1760-1762 would put an end to the
dominion of the Hats. But by skilful manoeuvres, chief among which was
the ending in 1762 of the war against Prussia, they managed to save their
political skin. 2
  However, no solution had been found to the confusion which surrounded
the nation's finances and, to make a critical situation even worse, a
number of disasters occurred. In 1762 the agrarian sector suffered a heavy
blow in the shape of an epidemic of rinderpest, and in the following year
many Swedish business houses were bankrupted by the collapse of the
Stock Exchanges in Amsterdam and Hamburg, which resulted partly from
Sweden's inability to meet its liabilities. 3 Efforts to obtain a loan abroad
failed utterly.
  The bill was finally presented to the Hats during the riksdag of 1765-66.
The Caps had at last secured a majority of support in all Estates, and they
demanded an immediate investigation into the country's financial posi-
tion. The extent of the mismanagement, extravagance and corruption
which the investigation revealed was so great that the riksdag was obliged
to make drastic cuts in expenditure in all fields and to impose heavy taxes,
particularly on merchant members of the Hat party, who were accused of
complicity. Because of these measures, the assembly went down in history
as the 'Reduktion Riksdag.' 4
  During the deliberations of the riksdag, the representatives of the four
Estates had approached the king with a request that he arrange a foreign
loan. A year later, in 1767, this was negotiated, and on 17th November of
that year King Adolph Frederick appended his signature to a document
in favour of Hope & Co. providing for a ten-year debenture loan of
750,000 Dutch current florins bearing interest at 5 %. Two special collat-
eral securities were provided: first, 'the duties levied on the consumption
of imported goods and upon mercantile dealings, the revenues from stamp
duties, the surplus revenue of the postal service, the tithes and the duties
levied upon iron and the appointed fund for the payment of the State's
debts'; secondly, Hope received forty promissory notes of 10,000 rix-
dollars each, issued by the 'Swedish State Treasury' and guaranteed by
the Estates. These were to remain in Hope's possession until the final
repayment against the loan had been made. It was these notes which

                                     74
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

imparted the character of a secured loan to this and subsequent trans-
actions, and with this the title Negotiaties van helening, or loans on
security.
  On 25th February 1768, John Hope, bearing the forty notes, appeared
before Cornelis van Homrigh, notary, in whose presence these were
deposited in a tin box, which was then wrapped in bleached linen and tied
round with a red ribbon to which Hope and Van Homrigh attached their
personal seals. The two then journeyed to the Amsterdam Town Hall,
where the box was handed to the burgomasters. Their seals were im-
pressed upon the package as well, and it was then taken to the Exchange
Bank for safe keeping.1 Apart from the cumbrousness of the procedure,
the reader will have observed that the total value of the promissory notes
exceeded the sum of the loan by one-third; it may well be that this
reflected Sweden's poor credit standing. Be this as it may, such a margin
was not incorporated in subsequent loans.
  Despite this loan and another negotiated in Genoa, the new Caps ad-
ministration failed to balance the budget. In an effort to reduce imports,
fines were imposed for drinking coffee and wine, and smoking tobacco,
but the savage economies and the over-hasty recall of the paper money
caused prices to fall, bringing hardship to large sections of the population.
Dissatisfaction grew and was intensified by the action of the Caps in ever
more openly turning to Russia, where Catherine II was only too eager to
interfere in the affairs of her neighbours. 2 The Hats at that time were
strongly supported by France. Everywhere voices were heard for a new
riksdag to be convened, but not until a serious clash had occurred with
King Adolph Frederick (who went so far as to abdicate for a week in
order to enforce his will) did the Caps consent to call an extraordinary
riksdag for April 1769. The ensuing election campaign was fought with
immense ferocity and amid repeated interference by foreign powers,
notably France and Russia, which liberally distributed funds to the parties
of their choice. In spite of dire warnings by the Caps that their defeat
would open the way for a Russian intervention, the Hats obtained a
majority in all four Estates. 3
  Prior to the election the Hats had given a written undertaking to the
French envoy to reform the Swedish constitution in an autocratic sense:
it was, of course, as much in France's interest that Sweden should be
strong as in Russia's interest that the country should remain weak and
disunited. 4 But although moderate, the reform proposal was rejected by
the riksdag in November 1769, after a protracted debate. The French
reacted by cutting off all subsidies to the Hats, thereby placing the govern-