




IInt"'4>ri(l ••• P. C. L A BOUC H E RE
                                                                ~ J("
Ualtrf4>rirl ~.n fll ER ONIM U S SILLEM
                                                                          I~fb
IInlnr<tri(1 "on ADRIA N •• "            0 . ..   HOOP
                                                                 &rl<-
                                                                  lf~~·

Circular announcing the re·establishment of Hope & Co. in 1815
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

in advance of the completion and provisional balancing of the accounts.
She had from the outset been on bad terms with her cousins, Thomas and
Henry Philip, whom she suspected of planning to cheat her.1
  On I7th July, the two brothers bought out their troublesome relative.
She received the capital which her first husband had possessed according
to the balance sheet for 181 I, less a share of the losses suffered by the firm
as a result of the manipulations of a fraudulent bookkeeper at the Am-
sterdam office. With accrued interest from 1st January 1812 to the day of
John Hope's death, she received a sum of 183,509.2-4 pounds sterling. 2
  This action heralded the complete dissolution of the former partnership.
On 3rd September 1813 Thomas and Henry Philip Hope transferred
everything relating to that partnership to Alexander Baring, and in return
each received three promissory notes to a value of 25,000 pounds sterling,
payable on 1st September in the years 1816, 1817 and 1818. Baring ac-
cepted responsibility for 100,52147 pounds of the payments to Baroness
Von Dopff. He thus paid 250,521.4.7 pounds sterling for the two houses,
Hope & Co. and Henry Hope & Co., and the freedom to make of these
what he wished. 3
  The ideal for which Sir Francis Baring had striven in 1802 had been
achieved. But he did not witness the event, for he had died in 1810. In any
case, he would probably not have been pleased by the condition of the
new acquisition. After all, Hope & Co. was little more than an empty
shell, the facade of which could either be left standing or used to front a
new building, at the discretion of the new owner.
  Although no immediate decision on its future was taken, thoughts of
liquidation receded in November 1813, when the French domination of
Holland came to an end and trade revived.
  For the house itself, things provisionally continued as before. Alexander
Baring approved the payment of current interest and principal instalments,
but made his decision regarding the future of Hope & Co. dependent upon
the decisions which the Congress of Vienna would take regarding the
future of Holland.
  With its fate hanging in the balance, the house could make only a limited
response to Russian requirements for credit to maintain the armies of
occupation in western Europe. 1n spite of going to the limit of its capa-
bility, Hope was more than once obliged to bow to the house of Roth-
schild, which was only too anxious to demonstrate its financial strength
to the allies. 4 The role which Hope & Co. had earlier fulfilled in the loan
sector was to pass to Rothschild after 1815.
The protocol of 2 I st June 1814, in which the allied powers consented to
                                      68
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM