

titles bestowed upon them by Napoleon, the majority were of middle-
class origin and thus did not suffer from the inhibitions which Voute and,
later, Melvil were to encounter in Russia. Labouchere was even on
friendly terms with Talleyrand, an old-style aristocrat, though it must be
admitted that the latter's flair for monetary matters will certainly have
influenced their relationship. 1
  These sound connexions in Paris were of great importance to the house
in Amsterdam. Subordinate police officials in Holland observed Hope's
actions with the utmost suspicion, and in their reports to Paris they re-
peatedly urged that the Company's books and correspondence should be
investigated. 2 But thanks to the protection which the Company enjoyed
in the highest government circles, such an investigation never took place.
In this context. it is piquant to read how, in r8I2, Labouchere, who was
then at Bad Pyrmont, arranged for his letters to England to be carried by
extra couriers detailed to travel on behalf of the Duchess of Rovigo, the
wife of the French Minister of Police. 3
  Hope's unassailable position engendered ill-feeling, not only in those
countries which had to suffer Napoleon's caprices, such as Spain, but also
in Holland itself. The radicals who had been present at the birth of the
Batavian Republic found it difficult to stomach a situation in which the
Anglo-Orangist house in Amsterdam was not only permitted to go its
own way unhindered, but even occupied a position of utter supremacy.
  Niebuhr, who as agent of the defeated Prussia had gone to Hope to beg
for a loan, and who afterwards felt that he had been treated humiliatingly
by Labouchere, wrote with scarcely disguised hate of the 'monopolizing,
tyrannical supremacy' of the house. The Amsterdam merchant Brants had
earlier intimated to Niebuhr that he could obtain a couple of million
from other houses, but that for a loan of 20 million he would inevi-
 tably end up 'entre les mains du tyran.' 4 This brings us face to face with a
cold, haughty trait in Labouchere's character which had played him false
during the negotiations with the Staatsbewind concerning the Portuguese
loan. Niebuhr, too, would not forget Labouchere's treatment of him.
  As the Continental System increasingly paralyzed trade to and from the
 European ports, the commercial importance of the Amsterdam house
 declined in the eyes of the partners in London. Personal factors also
 played a role. Henry Hope was nearing seventy years of age and was
 taking a steadily less active part in the business. John Hope's sons still
 displayed a complete lack of interest, and John Williams Hope longed
 more and more to turn his back on Holland and return to England.
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

 In April 1808 John Williams Hope sold the Welgelegen estate, near
 Haarlem, to King Louis Napoleon for cf 300,000. In Amsterdam, John
 Dixon, a former partner in Littledale & Dixon of Rotterdam, was engaged
 in order to strengthen the day-to-day management. It was also arranged
 that Henry Hope Jr., John Williams Hope's eldest son, should work in the
 office. In September 1808, John Williams Hope left for England. His wife
was to have joined him after travelling via Germany, but halfway through
the journey she turned back and joined her lover, Colonel Von Dopff,
with whom she had maintained an association for many years. 1
  Nolte describes in his autobiography how Henry Hope favoured a
divorce, but was opposed by John Williams Hope out of sensitivity
towards the reputation of his benefactor.
  The volume of the grootboeken and journals reveals the extent to which
business decreased after 1808. The Spanish affairs had got completely out
of order since the occupation of Spain by French troops in that year.
William Gordon Coesvelt, acting as Hope's special agent, made frantic
but unsuccessful efforts to find a way of continuing the interest payments. 2
Even earlier than Spain, Portugal had been occupied by the French, and
its Court and government had fled to Brazil. Interest and principal pay-
ments on the Portuguese loan could henceforth be expected to emanate
from Brazil, and it would be far easier to broach these matters from
London than from Amsterdam. 3
  In 18IO Henry Hope Jr., having found that office work interested him
little, resigned from the Amsterdam house. Dixon suffered a stroke in the
same year, from which he died soon afterwards. In an effort to fill the
vacancies, power of procuration was given to one of the foreign cor-
respondents in the office, Pierre Firmin Lestapis.
  With the annexation of the Kingdom of Holland to France, a new era
in the Company's history commenced. Labouchere by now desired to
relinquish the reins of day-to-day management, but the ramifications of
the Spanish affair and growing difficulties concerning the Russian interest
and principal payments prevented him from doing so.
  The gradual disintegration of the Amsterdam house was accelerated by
the death on 25th February 1811 of Henry Hope, 'attacked by a disorder
which baffled all medical skill.'4
  Labouchere had already planned a journey to England for consultations
on the interest and principal due on the Portuguese loan, and his arrival
in London was thus timely from the point of view of the future of the
Amsterdam house. After ample discussions with the surviving partners,
it was decided that Labouchere should retire at the end of the year. He
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM