


                                     61
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

totalled only 23 million guilders, and of the sum remaining available only
9 million francs flowed into the French coffers. 1
  These various operations on behalf of Napoleon did not escape the
notice of his relatives. Elsewhere in the book it is shown how King Louis
Napoleon of Holland withheld permission for a 30-million guilder loan
for Spain until Hope & Co., in association with four other Amsterdam
houses, had succeeded in placing a loan of 40 million for the Kingdom of
Holland. 2
  Hardly had this obstacle been surmounted when King Joseph of Naples
approached the house. His requirements were modest, a mere 3 mil-
lion guilders, but the capital market was tight and the loans for Spain and
Holland were a long way from being fully subscribed. The solution which
emerged involved the house assuming temporary responsibility for a
portion of the loan, the balance being furnished by ihe king's brothers in
France and Holland. 3
  With the Neapolitan loan, the limit had been reached. Overtures by the
Prussian agent, Niebuhr, to obtain a loan in Amsterdam for the purpose
of financing his government's war levy to France met with a refusal from
Labouchere. Similar attempts by a number of small German states and by
the Kingdom of Italy met with a similar fate. 4
  The foregoing shows how important a role the Amsterdam money mar-
ket continued to play within the framework of the Napoleonic regime. In
many instances, the calls made upon it related to a form of pre-financing
of the war levies and contributions imposed by Napoleon on defeated
enemies and allies alike. It is particularly interesting to see how, through a
combination of circumstances, it fell to the pro-English house of Hope &
Co. to play the principal role and, as a result of this, to achieve a more
dominant position than ever in Amsterdam.
  Just how closely Hope's mercantile and loan activities were interwoven
was again demonstrated during the malaise which accompanied the war.
Between 1802 and the end of the Napoleonic wars, the Portuguese loan
brought more than 280,000 carats of diamonds to Holland, enabling a
degree of continuity in the employment of the polishers in Amsterdam to
be maintained. Similarly, the brazilwood monopoly, to which reference
has been made, kept trade in this article going.
  The transactions with Ouvrard, and later with Napoleon, released a flow
of colonial produce which was largely directed towards Amsterdam. This
current of trade was accelerated by the payments which the United States
faced in Holland, and which stemmed from the Louisiana loan and earlier
financial commitments.
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

In the light of these studies, one may pose the question whether the
Napoleonic era did in fact result in such catastrophic losses on the part of
holders of foreign bonds as is commonly suggested. This is not the place
for a detailed investigation of the matter; but of the loans discussed here,
only those granted to Spain had ruinous consequences for the bondhold-
ers. France and Sweden arbitrarily reduced their debts by two-thirds, but
did not abrogate them altogether. Russia and Austria were in arrears in
varying degrees, but both ultimately rehabilitated their former debts,
thereby reactivating large sums which had been considered lost. Amster-
dam's amazing recovery as a loan centre and the amount of capital
invested abroad in the decades after 1815 suggest that the losses suffered
previously were limited. 1
  We have already referred to the delicate nature of the relationship be-
tween a government which desired to float a loan and a middle-class house
such as Hope. In the case of Napoleon and his ministers. the relationship
was more difficult in some ways and easier in others.
  Napoleon's profound dislike of merchants and speculators is revealed in
no uncertain terms in the chapter dealing with the Spanish loans. His
treatment of Ouvrard shows that he could translate this dislike into deeds.
It is thus the more surprising to find him unreservedly displaying respect
for Hope & Co. When on a mission to the house, one of his senior offi-
cials, who was later to become Baron Louis, was patently given the cold
shoulder by Labouchere, yet no hint of a reprisal was forthcoming. 2
  It is obvious that Hope & Co. enjoyed a position of power. They could
have allowed the Mexican transaction to fail without fear of action on the
part of the French government. There was also the point that the nucleus
of the house was situated in England, and was thus beyond the reach of
Napoleon. But there were more factors at work. In spite of his dislike of
merchants, Napoleon must have possessed respect for the independence of
a man like Labouchere and for the financial strength and integrity of a
house which had shown itself to be averse to shady deals and unsound
financing. His statement to his ministerial council, that Hope would not
be tempted by a sum of 40 million francs to furnish false correspondence,
was probably embellished by the spokesman, but it will nevertheless have
reflected the essence of Napoleon's opinion. 3 The diplomatic missions
subsequently undertaken by Labouchere on behalf of both Louis Napo-
leon and Bonaparte himself support this view. 4
  Hope's relationships with the ministers and senior civil servants who
surrounded Napoleon were generally easier than those with similar
officials in countries such as Russia and Spain. Despite the handsome
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM