

the unification of Belgium and Holland, provided Alexander Baring with
the certainty which he desired. A circular was sent to Hope & Co.'s
correspondents, advising them that, with effect from 1st January 1815,
the affairs of the house would be directed by Pierre Cesar Labouchere,
Hieronymus Sillem, Adriaan van der Hoop and Pierre Firmin Lestapis.
Sillem had been a partner in the house of Matthiessen & Sillem of Ham-
burg, of which we learned in connexion with the perilous days of 1798.
Sillem had visited Russia in 1812, and while there had skilfully represented
the interests of the holders of Russian bonds. Labouchere's role in the
new management team was in some ways as theoretical as his partnership
under the agreement of 1811, for he had stated emphatically that he no
longer wished to bear responsibility for daily affairs. His removal to
London served to underline this. 1
  Hope & Co. had thus been reborn, though it was not the Hope & Co.
which we have come to know through our researches. But the significance
which had become attached to the name with the passing of the years was
clearly reflected in the considerable sum which Baring was prepared to
pay to acquire it.
 Around Hope a silence had descended. All the major houses with whom
Hope has been compared in our story had disappeared: Clifford and Pels
following the crisis of 1772, and Hogguer, De Smeth and Muilman during
the difficult first decade of the 19th century. 2
  Amsterdam's position as the principal financial centre in Europe had
passed to London, and the new-style house was destined to operate within
a narrower framework. The transactions which had been entered upon in
the preceding period provided an outline of the areas upon which the
efforts of the reborn Hope & Co. would be focussed: Russia and the
United States. The family and the firm had gone their separate ways, but
the old business principles remained, and so Hope & Co. in its new
framework remained what it had been in the old: the leader in its field;
a house with a first-class reputation.
      BALTIC AFFAIRS

SWEDISH, POLISH AND RUSSIAN LOANS
                            CHAPTER TWO

                   SWEDISH PRELUDE



Sweden lost its position of power in the Baltic at the beginning of the 18th
century. When in 1687 Charles XII, then fifteen years of age, succeeded
his father, Saxony, Poland, Denmark and Russia considered the moment
ripe to deprive Sweden of the areas on the other side of the Baltic Sea
which it had conquered during the 17th century. In the early
stages of the Great Northern War which ensued, the Swedish king achieved
major successes, but eventually the sheer expanse of Russia and the
superiority of the armies of Czar Peter proved too much for the limited
Swedish forces. At the Peace of Nystad, in 1721, the Baltic states and,
with them, the hegemony in the Baltic region passed into the hands of
Russia, and from then on Russian influence became a permanent feature
there. In the 18th century this unpredictable and expansive country was
to exert ever-increasing pressure on its neighbours.
  In Sweden, the death of Charles XII in 1718 was followed by a reaction
among the nobility which nullified the absolutistic reforms introduced by
earlier kings. Sweden again became a constitutional monarchy in which
the power of the ruler was insignificant in comparison with that of the
riksdag. In this body, the nobles dominated the representatives of the
other three Estates, the clergy, the burghers and the peasants. The nobles,
however, soon disintegrated into two fiercely antagonistic factions: 'the
Hats' and 'the Caps.' The Hats favoured a strong foreign policy, which
they felt could be best achieved by restoring the old ties with France; the
Caps were of the opinion that the country's interests would be best served
by a policy of cautious neutrality. Soon opinions were similarly divided
in the other Estates.
 While the country was recovering from the effects of the long war, the
urge for peace triumphed; but gradually a mood of belligerence developed.
In 1739 the Hats came to power. Their period in office was marked by a
number of ill-conceived wars which produced no gains and brought the
country to the brink of financial ruin.! From 1741 to 1743 Sweden waged
war against Russia, with a signal lack of success, and in the Seven Years'
War (1756-1763), at the instigation of France, forces operating from
Swedish Pomerania undertook a series of pointless and fruitless campaigns