

                                    88
                            SWEDISH PRELUDE

quested. As a portion of the tobacco had to be excluded on grounds of
age or incompatibility with Swedish tastes, Cohen secured the right to
replace it with an equal weight of other tobacco. Thus, after many ob-
stacles, the transaction was completed. Hope confessed-not without
exaggeration - to Ruuth: 'Of all the operations which we have undertaken,
none has brought us so many difficulties and so much sorrow.' 1
  Although the entire transaction was of a commercial nature and was
conducted by Hope, it was considered to form part of the loan affairs
managed jointly by Hope and Fizeaux. Accordingly, the commission,
which amounted to cf 45,096.5.0, was divided equally between the two
houses and added to the account with the Swedish Crown. 2
  Despite all the difficulties concerned with the tobacco, the loans were not
lost sight of. On 23rd June 1787 Hope and Fizeaux warned Ruuth that
the second million guilders of the 1775 loan was due for repayment on 1st
November, and that steps should be taken without delay. If the minister
wished to prolong the tranche, the two houses should be informed of the
fact as soon as possible. 3 When Ruuth reported that the king desired a
fresh loan of I-I t million guilders, he was informed that the entrepreneurs
had rejected the request on the grounds that so small a sum, in addition to
the repayment due, would create an adverse impression 'in view of its
modest proportions.' In spite of the 'ingratitude of the political situation
of this country, which has a dominant influence on trade, especially at a
time when the Stock Exchange is experiencing failures which add to the
uneasiness and lack of confidence,' the Amsterdam houses favoured in-
creasing the loan to 1,500,000 guilders. With the surplus available after
1st November, it would then be possible to repay to Jan and Carl
Hasselgreen the cf 500,000 which the Swedish Court had caused to be
advertised for 1st February 1788, 'which will enable us also to
reconcile the facilities which are required with the wishes of His Majesty.' 4
  In the opinion of Hope and Fizeaux, what was needed was a loan of
1,500,000 guilders at 4 % interest, one half being repayable after twelve
years and the balance after fifteen years, in both cases calculated from
1st November 1787. On that date, however, the two houses would be
required to furnish only cf 1,000,000 to cover the repayment of the second
tranche, while the remaining cf 500,000 would not become due until 1st
February 1788. The interest due on the balance over the three-month
period would accrue to the negotiators, by whom it was regarded as no
more than 'a reasonable incentive in the circumstances existing at the
present time.' The king was not disposed to grant an increase in the
commission of 6 %, and the issuing houses accepted the position even
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

though, in their eyes, this was a mediocre recompense 'in view of the 41- %
interest which the king then paid, whereas it costs him only 4 % today.' 1
  The loan in its entirety was made subject to the right of cancellation 'in
the event of the Sovereign imposing a ban on foreign loans in the mean-
time.' It was unlikely that such a ban would be imposed by Stadholder
William v, 'though perhaps appropriate, in the light of the adverse state
of the political and financial affairs of this country.' Just how seriously
we should take the latter statement is not clear; possibly the houses, for
tactical reasons, wished to appear to Ruuth to be disinterested. 2
  Under the agreement with the entrepreneurs of 30th July 1787, holders
of redeemable bonds were accorded priority until 1st October; the portion
thus subscribed would be deducted, pro rata, from the shares taken by the
entrepreneurs. These would assume responsibility for the remainder of the
loan upon payment in cash in the months of November and December,
paying to the issuing houses interest from 1st November until the date of
taking up their shares. The entrepreneurs received a commission of 11-%,
less a !- % 'douceur' for the brokers, 'who will arrange for the conversion
of redeemable bonds or for subscriptions, these to be paid in cash.' 3 It
was further stipulated that cash subscriptions would be limited to a total
of half a million guilders up to 1st October, 'and remain open until 31st
October for the Balance of the Negotiation, then being finally closed,
unless this Negotiation be previously fully subscribed by the Entrepre-
neurs or other Persons.' Hope and Fizeaux were parties to the contract,
jointly accepting responsibility for two-thirds of the principal sum. As in
1786, this high proportion reflected optimism on the part of the issuing
houses rather than pessimism among the entrepreneurs (it was the latter
who had advised increasing the loan to one and a half million and, with
a loan which in effect served to postpone two repayments, the risks were
comparatively small).
  A month after the 'final closure' on 31st October, Hope wrote to Ruuth
expressing indignation concerning rumours that the house of Jan and
Carl Hasselgreen was about to float a one-million guilder loan for Sweden
and, moreover, on terms very favourable to the entrepreneurs. The tenor
of the reproach was the same as in 1776: why a new loan so soon, from
another house and while Hope and Fizeaux still held the greater part of
their bonds? Hope and Fizeaux had made it known that the cf 500,000
 remaining after the repayment on 1st November would be used to repay
a debt to Hasselgreen on 1st February of the following year. It must be
clear to the minister, they argued, that any other transaction in this
 respect could only prejudice the credit of the Crown.4