

 the 'firmly' contracted million devolved upon the entrepreneurs, albeit
with the proviso that public subscriptions would be deducted pro rata
from the sum of the loan. 1 The terms provided for the bonds to be taken
up and paid for within six months of the closing of the period for public
subscriptions, 'subject to the payment of Interest up to the time of taking
up, at 4 per cent per annum.' 2 No mention was made of the fact that the
interest on the bonds up to the moment of taking up would accrue to the
issuing houses, who could thereby obtain an interest bonus of i % in
addition to their commission. 3
  On 3rd February-less than a week after the signing of the contract-the
entrepreneurs empowered the brokers, Volkmar and Ten Kate & Berck, to
subscribe on their behalf to the lists held by Hope & Co. and Henri Fi-
zeaux & Co. 'on the same conditions as all other persons, thus benefiting
from a douceur of t % and with the obligation to take up forthwith half
the sums accepted by us in the capacity of Entrepreneurs, this on condi-
tion that the half thus subscribed shall immediately go to reduce our com-
mitment.'4
  Thus, for a bonus of t % the entrepreneurs were willing to make imme-
diate payment for half their shares, a fact which pointed to an unexpected
response to the public subscription. Now, Hope and Fizeaux were assured
of cf 500,000 at short notice. 5 Soon a start was made with raising the
second million, though this proceeded more slowly than the first. On 9th
April the two houses requested Liljencrantz to spread his drawings over a
somewhat longer period: drafts of cf 250,000 monthly, commencing on
1st May, would be most convenient. 6
  On further consideration it appeared unwise to allow Liljencrantz to
draw on the second million. The first, cf 1,000,000, tranche of the 1775
loan became due for repayment on 1st November 1785; it would thus be
folly to allow him to draw a million guilders which he would have to repay
to Hope and Fizeaux shortly afterwards.? The Swedish minister agreed to
the proposed amendment.
  The effect of this repayment, however, was to deprive Liljencrantz of the
second million, thus leaving a gap which had to be filled by other means.
In a letter dated 18th August, the minister advised Hope and Fizeaux that
the house of De Weduwe Jean & Martin Smets of Antwerp had offered
to negotiate a loan of cf 2,000,000 at 4t % interest. Whether this offer was
solicited or not, is not known, but it is clear that the notification of it was
designed to goad the Amsterdam houses into action. 8 From the Swedish
point of view the result was satisfactory, for early in October Hope and
Fizeaux offered to open a new transaction on or about 1st February and

                                      85
                            SWEDISH PRELUDE

formally committed themselves to furnishing cf 1,000,000. As the entre-
preneurs had not finalized the placing of the previous loan, the new one
could not be launched earlier.1 They advised strongly against arranging a
loan in Antwerp, 'not only because there is no certainty that it would be a
complete success, but also because it will have a highly adverse effect upon
our investors, who would certainly not display any interest in it and who
would perhaps not look with favour upon any fresh negotiations which
the Court might be contemplating.' 2
  With the abandoning by Joseph II of his plans for the opening of the
ScheIdt, and his acceptance of an offer of compensation, the investment
climate in Amsterdam recovered considerably. 3 In the new situation,
Hope and Fizeaux felt justified in offering to guarantee not one, but one
and a half million guilders, in addition to which they undertook to fur-
nish the Swedish government with the proceeds of the loan before loth
June 1786. As with the previous loan, they were allowed 6 %commission. 4
  Even before the contract with the Swedish king was signed, an agreement
was entered into with the entrepreneurs. As in 1783, their share was limited
to one-third of the principal sum, but it is probable that in this instance
the issuing houses did not wish to assign them any more. The contracted
shares had to be taken up and paid for by 1st May, and interest on the
bonds from 1st February accrued to the issuing houses. The entrepreneurs
received I %for their services. 5
  Faith in Sweden's credit had played a major role in the successful nego-
tiation ofloans for that country. This faith, in turn, was allied to the great
personal prestige enjoyed by Liljencrantz in financial circles. But his days
as a minister were numbered. Gustav III was moving steadily towards
absolutism, in which there was no place for independent ministers. Liljen-
crantz's sermons against the extravagances of the Court and his pleas for
economy so incensed the monarch that he had Liljencrantz 'promoted' to
the Senate. He was succeeded at the end of 1786 by Baron Erik Ruuth,
who at the time of the appointment was a protege of circles well disposed
towards the king, and who exercised only nominal authority: before ac-
cepting the post, he requested-and obtained-an undertaking from the
king that he would not be held responsible for the uses to which the monies
which passed through his ministerial hands would be put. 6
  This adverse development did not remain hidden from Hope. A cor-
respondent in Gothenburg kept Hope informed of developments through-
out 1786. The man was clearly in great fear of being identified, for he went
so far as to erase the place name 'Gothenburg' from his notepaper. In
that year the king, partly at Liljencrantz's insistence, summoned a riksdag