

                                    90
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

On this note of discord (it is questionable whether we would be justified
in saying 'as a result of this discord'), Hope's activities on behalf of the
Swedish Crown came to an end. Dissatisfaction with Ruuth's conduct
was not in itself sufficient to cause the severance, for, as we have seen,
clashes of this nature had occurred previously, but these had been settled.
Hope's partner in the Swedish transactions-who since 1st January 1788,
had borne the name Hogguer Grand & Co.-did not attach permanent
consequences to the affair, and in fact issued further loans for Sweden in
 1789, 1790 and 1797. 1
  The true cause of the breach with Sweden must rather be viewed against
the background of the commencement of loan negotiations for Russia.
On 5th December 1787 Hope & Co. entered into a contract for a loan of
cf 3,000,000 to Russia; their partners were the same group of entrepreneurs
with whom the Swedish loans had been arranged. A second contract for
a similar sum was signed on loth December. With this operation, Hope
thus competed directly with its own and Hasselgreen's negotiations for
Sweden. And the competition was the more serious by reason of the fact
that the Russian loan bore interest at 41 %compared with 4 % for the two
loans to Sweden. In a letter to Ruuth dated 5th January 1788, Hope
reported that the Swedish bonds were un saleable in Amsterdam and
Antwerp without sacrifices. 2 They maintained that this was a conse-
quence of Ruuth's dealings with Hasselgreen, but it is obvious that the
true cause lay in the higher interest on the Russian loan.
  Any prospect which Hope may have entertained of resuming the Swedish
negotiations evaporated with the launching by Gustav III of the long-
prepared war against Russia in the summer of 1788. We shall not concern
ourselves here with the progress of this conflict. After the peace, in 1790,
Hope was too much occupied with Russian loans to devote any attention
to Sweden. 3
  Looking back on the initial series of loans floated by Hope on behalf
of a foreign power, one is moved to enquire why the partners left the
Swedish transactions to Hogguer Grand & Co. and proceeded to do
business with Russia? The surviving correspondence in the Hope archives
does not provide the answer, so that we must be content with a number of
assumptions.
  Firstly, confidence in Sweden's creditworthiness will have been weakened
by the dismissal of Liljencrantz at the end of 1786 and by the comparative-
ly unfavourable information concerning his successor. Increasing oppo-
sition to King Gustav III, both in the riksdag and beyond, may have
played a role insofar as it created uncertainty regarding the approval by
that body offresh loans.
                                      91
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

The desire on the part of Hope to act alone in the issuing of loans will
also have been a factor in the shift to Russia. With its extensive experience
and its financial strength, the firm felt confident to undertake loan nego-
tiations without a partner. With the Swedish loans, Hope had virtually no
alternative to continuing with Hogguer Grand & Co. in view of the
latter's excellent relations with both the Swedish and French Courts.
Later correspondence reveals that the partners in Hope & Co. were not
impressed by Hogguer's business methods, but to what degree they were
influenced by this is not clear.
  It is also conceivable that the partners felt uneasy about the outcome of
the clash between Sweden and Russia, the threat of which had long
existed. In the Republic itself, the conflict between the Patriots and the
supporters of the prince was settled, in favour of the latter, by the inter-
vention of the Prussian army. This development, however, placed the
Netherlands in the position of a protectorate of Prussia and England.
Would Sweden, poor in terms of population and internally just as divided
as the Republic, not face a similar fate if she went to war with Russia?
  As the influential position of the Republic declined, it became increas-
ingly important to the capitalists in Holland to find a safe investment for
their money, i.e. in countries which could not be swept off the map by a
single war and with governments possessing sufficient authority to justify
a reasonable expectation that they would honour their commitments.
  The extent to which Russia met these requirements is revealed in the
ensuing chapters.