

                                     75
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

ment in a difficult financial position-the more so since, as of old, public
funds were dispensed lavishly. As in the previous riksdag, a solution was
sought in foreign loans.!
 Three loans for Sweden were negotiated in the Republic in the year 1770:
in March, a loan of cf 1,250,000 at 5 % interest by Horneca Hogguer &
Co.; in September one of cf 1,250,000 by Bargum, which was subse-
quently extended by Van den Sandheuvel & Son and Van Orsoy & Son;
and in December a further loan of cf 1,000,000 by Hope & Co. and
Horneca Hogguer & Co. The last two also bore interest at 5 %.2
 On 21st December 1770, Adrian Hope and Daniel Hogguer, representing
their respective firms, appeared before Van Homrigh carrying two de-
bentures issued by the State Treasury, each in the sum of 200,000 rix-
dollars. This time the bonds were not lodged with the Exchange Bank via
the Town Hall, but were placed by Van Homrigh in an iron chest in his
office and one of the keys was given to each of the parties. 3
 The principal debenture did not contain a specification of the goods and
revenues mortgaged (this was not surprising after the two previous loans),
but as an additional guarantee of payment of the interest it was stipulated
that: 'a satisfactory quantity of copper shall be supplied to the lenders by
way of security.' 4 Because of the importance of its copper mines, Sweden
maintained both silver and copper standards; indeed, copper was the
security upon which banknotes were issued. Payment in copper, if other
means failed, was thus a logical demand. 5
 In February 1771, Adolph Frederick died unexpectedly. At the time of
his death, the Crown Prince, Gustav III, was in France. The government
there utilized the opportunity to oblige the young ruler by entering into a
new treaty which gave him an annual subsidy of 1,500,000 livres. In
an effort to counter Russian intrigues, France despatched her best
diplomat, De Vergennes, to Stockholm. Gustav III had meanwhile
returned to his capital, where he had become involved in the fierce
electoral battle for a new riksdag. Thanks to Russian bribes, the
Caps had achieved considerable success in all but the noble Estate,
and again a change of government was threatened. To avert this, the
king did his utmost to have a Hat elected as talman, or spokesman
for the nobility, but since De Vergennes had arrived in Stockholm
empty-handed, the king lacked the funds to attain his goal. Without
consulting the French envoy, he drew on Horneca Hogguer & Co. for
more than 2,000,000 guilders, offering as collateral only the first in-
stalment of the French subsidies, which did not become due until 1st
January 1772. With the funds from Horneca, he succeeded in getting his
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

 man elected. 1 No mention of these transactions appears in the books of
 Hope & Co.: in all probability, the partners viewed financing activities
 of this nature as being too adventurous and too risky.
   Despite this initial success on the part of the king, the Caps gained a
 firmer foothold, and it began to look as if they would succeed in making
 Gustav's position as insignificant as that of his father. Gradually, the
 notion of a coup d'etat commenced to fix itself in the mind of the king,
and this was strengthened by the realization that a Cap government
 would make the country completely dependent upon Russia. But if he
 was to act at all, he would have to hurry, for the war which Catherine II
 was waging against the Turks was progressing extremely favourably from
the Russian point of view and could well end soon. Admittedly, the
 Russians were also occupied with the First Partition of Poland, but there,
too, things could change rapidly. On 19th August 1772 the king, with the
help of a handful of loyal supporters, succeeded in taking his enemies by
surprise. Cowed by the display of military power, the riksdag adopted a
new constitution on the following day.2 The hegemony of the nobility
was at an end, but the rights of the monarch continued to be somewhat
limited by, among other things, the budgetary powers vested in the
riksdag.
  In preparing the coup, Gustav had enjoyed the fullhearted support of
the French envoy. De Vergennes had gone so far as to promise him
10,000 ducats, but on the eve of the coup the money had still not arrived.
At the last minute, a courier arrived bearing 5,000 ducats borrowed from
Grill & Co. of Amsterdam against a guarantee from De Vergennes. 3
  The events which took place in Sweden represented a major setback for
Catherine II. Russia could expect little from a powerful Sweden closely
allied to France. Indeed, even a resumption of the policy of revenge
pursued by the Hats seemed probable. Catherine started to prepare for
war with Sweden, but setbacks in the Turkish campaign forced her to
postpone her plan-not, however, before she had made secret agreements
with Denmark for a future attack against Gustav m.4
  The restoration of peace, albeit somewhat uncertain, provided Gustav
with an opportunity to effect all manner of reforms. Apart from the army
and the navy, the country's finances again demanded much of his atten-
tion. To avert a threat of bankruptcy, the king appointed the skilful and
incorruptible Baron Liljencrantz to the presidency of a newly established
Department of Finance. The latter's first act was to implement a much
needed and greatly overdue reform of the currency. His initial concern
was to abandon the dual standard in favour of a single, silver, standard.