

                                   77
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

Then, when the rixdollar had been devalued by 50 %,1 the old bank-
notes (which had become worth only one-third of their face value)
would have to be replaced by new ones. Lastly, the new banknotes would
have to be freely exchangeable for coin. This last step was dependent upon
the Riksens Standers Banque, the historic bank of Sweden, obtaining finan-
cial support from the government, and this in turn depended upon,
among other things, a foreign loan of 1,200,000 rixdollars. In July 1775, in
the face of persistent refusal by the governors of the bank to accept the
convertibility of notes, out of fear of a run on the bank, the king inter-
vened personally. He commanded the governors to comply, but agreed to
postponement of the operation until the beginning of 1777. The interim
period provided Liljencrantz with an opportunity to negotiate the loan
abroad, to which end he approached Hope and Horneca Fizeaux & Co.,
the latter the successor to Horneca Hogguer & Co. 2
  On 26th September and 9th October 1775 Henry Hope and Henri Fizeaux
attended the offices of Van Homrigh for the enactment of the protocol
and registration of debentures provided by Gustav III. The first, in the sum
of 2,000,000 guilders, was dated 6th July and the second, of 1.000.000
guilders, 5th September, 1775. The constituent bonds relating to both
were dated 1st November 1775, giving the appearance of a single loan. 3
  The fact that, despite the absence of a guarantee by the Estates, the loan
bore interest at 4 % instead of 5 %, and was of more favourable duration,
marked a personal triumph by Liljencrantz. 4 The commission due to the
negotiators was admittedly the same as for the 1770 loan, i.e. 41- %, but
in neither case could this be regarded as high.
  The rewards accruing to the negotiators were scrupulously divided.
 Commissions, interest payments and principal monies, all were shared
 down to the last penny. If either exceeded his share as a result of pay-
ments, or if the sum of the silver coins, mostly piastres, sent to Sweden
was less than one-half of the total, the difference was adjusted at the end of
every year. 5
  In addition to the reform of the currency, the national economy de-
manded Liljencrantz's attention. To cover the deficit over 1776, he ob-
tained at the beginning of that year a 4 % loan of cf 3,000,000 from the
 Amsterdam bankers Jan and Carl Hasselgreen. This greatly embarassed
 Hope and Horneca Fizeaux, who had then just floated their loan on the
 market, and in a letter despatched to Sweden they expressed their dis-
 pleasure in no uncertain terms. If Liljencrantz needed more money and
 desired to increase the loans, they argued, he should have approached
 them. What would the public reaction be to a new loan so soon after the
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

other, and one obtained from a different source at that? Sweden's credit
would inevitably suffer.l Liljencrantz's reply was amicable in the ex-
treme, and from the king the bankers received 'the most flattering assur-
ances of the sustained continuation of His protection and His goodwill.'
A severance of relations with Hope and Horneca Fizeaux would not have
been in the interest of Sweden, which by spreading its loans over several
sources avoided undue dependence on anyone. Nevertheless, further
loans to Sweden by Hope and Horneca Fizeaux were out of the question
for the time being.
  After 1775 the government of Gustav III began to lose much of its initial
popularity. In response to a proposal by Liljencrantz, distilling, in which
the peasants had hitherto freely indulged, was decreed a state monopoly.
Efforts to lease to private enterprise the distilleries founded on behalf of
the Crown failed. The government, in a mood of anger, proceeded to run
them, but soon found its efforts sabotaged by large-scale smuggling and
the clandestine production of spirit. 2 The measure was extremely unpopu-
lar among the people.
  For the government, faced with the collapse of this anticipated new
source of revenue, the repayments due against the two ten-year loans
taken up in [770 represented a very heavy burden indeed. If a disastrous
drain on the Treasury was to be avoided, steps would have to be taken to
extend the period of repayment of the existing loans, or to convert them
into new ones. Negotiations were started with Hope & Co. and Fizeaux
Grand & Co. (since 1779 successors to Horneca Fizeaux & Co.) for a loan
to replace the one of cf 1,250,000 entered into with Horneca Hogguer &
Co. on 1st March 1770.3 On 12th November 1779, 'Monsieur de Heiden-
starn,' Charge d'Affaires of the Swedish King at the States General of the
Seven United Provinces of The Netherlands, signed, on behalf of his
sovereign, a contract with Hope and Fizeaux providing for a twelve-year
loan of cf 750,000 bearing interest at 4 %. The fact that the sum to be
repaid by the Swedish government exceeded the newly negotiated loan by
cf 500,000 served to reduce Sweden's debt by this amount. The two bank-
ing houses received by way of commission 2 % of the principal sum,
plus a further 6 % 'as a gratification for the brokers and entrepreneurs
concerned in this operation' and to meet all other expenses. 4
  Having dealt with the loan dated 1st March 1770, the Swedish govern-
ment was faced with the problem of the one-million guilder loan dated
1st December of the same year. Again they succeeded in obtaining a
partial novation. On 14th June 1780, Gustav signed the principal debenture
for a I5-year loan of cf 750,000 bearing interest at 4 %. As had been
                                    79
)1'1'/'   /It/" ,1:, lC' .# '
  ~ ~ (1 (      ~/"C.'" '" I~J"r'/f.F IIISNO"""€..>
                                       ,
21. :1(, 1'11-1."'1 M/~II ·. ftl7·t, ,