

 ary 178 I a new contract was signed: of the half million guilders, 50 %
 was to be made available immediately, the balance becoming due only
 after the loan had been floated. The remaining conditions were identical
 to those of the suspended loan. 1
   It was not until 1782 that Hope and Fizeaux were able to achieve the
 postponed repayment of the Bargum loan. In the contract entered into
 with the Swedish envoy on 7th April of that year, they undertook to ar-
 range a loan of cf 1,250,000 by 1st June, the date on which repayment of
 the loan became due. The entrepreneurs were given until mid-June to com-
 plete their part, which meant that, if the worst came to the worst, the
 issuing house would be obliged to advance the principal sum for two
 weeks. Of this sum, Hope had in any case contracted to furnish cf 400,000,
 and Fizeaux cf 150,000.2
  In 1783, bellicose plans on the part of Gustav III necessitated fresh
 foreign loans to Sweden. Early in that year the king seriously contem-
 plated precipitating a war with his old enemy, Denmark, once Russia be-
 came embroiled with the Turks. This, however, did not come about imme-
 diately, and it was finally decided to postpone the Danish war until the
 following year. Liljencrantz, who was the last to be informed of the king's
 plans, received instructions to obtain the funds necessary to increase the
country's armament. 3 In September 1783 King Gustav left Sweden for a
 political tour of southern and western Europe. Before departing, however,
he signed the principal debenture for a new loan from Hope and Fizeaux,
this time one of cf 1,500,000 for fifteen years and bearing interest at
5%·4
  Liljencrantz had succeeded once more and, apart from the higher rate of
interest, on terms which were very favourable to Sweden. The contract
with Hope and Fizeaux, which was dated 30th September 1783, gave them
only 4 % commission, compared with 7 % on the previous loan, but
against this the contracting houses committed themselves only to achieve
the completion of the negotiation at the earliest possible moment. Thus,
no fixed period for payment was laid down, nor was any guarantee of the
success of the loan given. 5 The entrepreneurs' commission took the form of
'99 per cent free money,' which implied a profit of I % if the bonds were
taken up at par. The entrepreneurs, like the issuing houses, were not bound
by time limits and were free to accept the bonds 'at the most convenient
time or times.' They were also free to accept and subscribe for such
additional sums as they might desire, while it was stipulated that the com-
mission paid to brokers and third parties should not exceed t %. 6 Of the
principal sum, the entrepreneurs accepted responsibility for no more than
                          SWEDISH PRELUDE

one-third-a remarkably small proportion. Volkmar and Ten Kate &
Berck, the brokers, jointly undertook to provide half the sum, but it may
be assumed that they were acting for principals who did not wish to be
named. Hope finally subscribed just over one-sixth.!
 The terms on which this loan was negotiated reveal a degree of uncer-
tainty and a lack of faith in the prospects for an early placing. The heavy
blows dealt to the Dutch merchantmen and to the nation's trade by the
English fleet almost certainly contributed to this. Who the brokers' prin-
cipals were, is not clear; perhaps the issuing houses (or the Swedish
government) attempted thus to camouflage a fiasco.
 The eighth loan to Sweden, at the end of 1784, was arranged only after
many difficulties had been overcome. The principal debenture, for
cf 2,000,000 at 41- %interest, had already been issued in the name of Hope
and Fizeaux when Liljencrantz suddenly demanded that another Amster-
dam house (probably Hasselgreen) should be admitted to the consortium. 2
The house concerned had independently offered its services to Liljen-
crantz, and the minister, who was very well disposed towards Hassel-
green, was anxious to reward the initiative. 3 Hope and Fizeaux, however,
stood firm and ultimately got their way. On 25th December a contract
was signed with the Swedish envoy, but only for half the sum stipulated in
the principal debenture. In correspondence with Liljencrantz, both houses
had earlier drawn attention to the thorny situation in which the Republic
was placed and which formed an obstacle to the floating of the loan. They
were in fact referring to the threatening attitude of Emperor Joseph II of
Austria who, as lord of the Southern Netherlands, was demanding the
opening of the ScheIdt estuary and was prepared to use force if necessary
to achieve this. In October 1784 hostilities had broken out near Saeftinge,
on the Scheldt. 4
 It was arranged that the one million guilders covered by the contract
would be available to Liljencrantz from January up to and including April
1785, by way of 70-day drafts, but Hope and Fizeaux were unwilling to
commit themselves in respect of the second million and so the success of
the loan as a whole was at the risk of the Swedish king, 'without which
reservation we are unable to take this upon us under the present circum-
stances.' 5 Each of the two houses received 6 % commission for the ser-
vices rendered. Because the contract was not in accordance with the origi-
nal plan, the royal approval had to be obtained; only when this had been
received could the contract with the entrepreneurs be signed. The agree-
ment of 28th January was so worded as to suggest that Hope and Fizeaux
had undertaken to furnish the floating million, so that responsibility for
                            SWEDISH PRELUDE