

                                    94
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

The Russo-Turkish war which finally came in August 1787 brought a
greater need for foreign money, and this fact inspired Henry Hope to
undertake a detailed examination of Russia's financial position. He at-
tributed the fall in the rate of exchange (which Sutherland had sought to
prevent) to the high rate of expenditure by the Court and to the decline
in Russian exports to England. This decline he in turn ascribed to the
suspension of the 1734 trade treaty between the two countries. Hope saw
no prospect of an early recovery of the rate of exchange, first because the
war would impose an additional burden on the already inadequate sources
of aid and secondly because, in the war situation, the requirements from
abroad would increase still further. It was therefore imperative that
Russia should obtain, at an early date, 'des retours en dehors' -and a loan
in Amsterdam offered the best solution. After all, 'this is the obvious
place in which to deposit your funds to meet needs in various parts of
Europe.' This would apply particularly to Italy, at least if, as during the
previous war with Turkey, the Russian Court despatched a squadron to
the Mediterranean. Hope advised the Russians to start by negotiating a
loan of 1- I 1- million guilders with a target date of February or March 1788
and to repeat this if and when circumstances demanded. The timing of
Hope's letter, 9th October 1787, was not very favourable, 'on account of
the disturbances which have long ravaged our country, interrupting trade
and preventing the circulation of money.' 1 This was a reference to the
Patriot disturbances in the Republic (which, in fact, ended on the follow-
ing day with the complete capitulation of the Patriots in Amsterdam to the
Prussian troops).2 If the situation in Amsterdam shortly returned to
normal, and if the Russian armies achieved success against the Turks- 'for
the credit of a country depends largely upon its success, and, conversely,
its success depends upon its credit' - then Hope was certain of being able
gradually to float the loan on the market. In consequence of the Turkish
war, the last Russian loan from De Smeth, at 41- %, had fallen below par
and a further drop was to be expected when news of an extension of the
Russian loans was circulated in the Republic. At the outbreak of the
previous Russo-Turkish War, the Russian Court had been paying 5 %
interest on the loans from De Smeth, and substantial discounts had been
granted to the entrepreneurs; Hope was anxious to limit the interest to
41- %with the aid of bonuses, douceurs sous mains or interest facilities. 3
  Hope stressed-not only to Sutherland, but also to third parties-that the
house which bore his name had not sought business with the Court
Banker; it had even turned Sutherland down after his appointment
because, under his predecessor, such business had been conducted with

                                    95
                     MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR