




                                     92
                          CHAPTER THREE

       MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR



The accession to the throne of Empress Catherine II of Russia in 1762
heralded a resumption of the vigorous territorial expansion which had
 been set in train during the reign of Czar Peter the Great. The finances of
the economically underdeveloped country, however, were inadequate for
the waging of lengthy wars, and when, in 1768, Russian intervention in
the chaotic domestic situation in Poland led to a conflict with Turkey,
the empress found herself in an extremely embarrassing position. The
issue of paper money in the form of assignats, for which purpose the
Assignat Bank was founded in 1768, afforded a certain respite. 1 In addi-
tion, Catherine succeeded during the Turkish War in obtaining a number
of loans in the Republic of the Seven United Provinces through the
intermediacy of the house of Raymond and Theodore de Smeth of
Amsterdam. These loans carried interest at 5 %.2
  The treaty of Kutchuk Kainardji in 1774 admittedly gave Russia little
territorial gain, but this fact did not deter Catherine in her far-reaching
plans in regard to the Turkish Empire. In 1782 she entered into an alliance
with Emperor Joseph II of Austria, the aim of which was the division of
European Turkey between the two nations. Although the plan provision-
ally remained on paper the theme of Catherine's policy was clear to see.
The loans negotiated with De Smeth in 1781 and 1782-three and a half
million guilders at 41- % and five and a half million guilders at 4 %, re-
spectively-were said to be required not for purposes of war, but for the
colonization of the areas wrested from the Turks and for reform of the
administration. 3
  It was not until 1787 that Catherine felt strong enough to embark on the
war against Turkey. The latest series of loans, which commenced to become
available in 1788, were not, however, in the hands of De Smeth, but of
Hope & Co. There was no obvious reason for a change of intermediary,
and the fact that one took place merits closer examination. As we have
already seen, Hope, in company with another house, had regularly nego-
tiated loans for Sweden since 1768, and relations between Sweden and
Russia had long been strained. 4 Furthermore, the firm had severely cur-
tailed its trading interests in Russia in the years prior to 1787 on account

                                    93
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

of the substantial losses suffered there. In April 1787 Robert Vollte wrote
to Hope: 'You told me on the last occasion that Russia had proved fatal
for your house, and that this was the reason why your house had ceased
to work there.' 1 The grootboeken for the years prior to 1787 show that
while Vollte exaggerated somewhat, the accounts of the Russian houses
which dealt with Hope displayed little activity.2 Thus, Hope's entry into
the area of the Russian state finances stemmed not from a close involve-
ment with the Russian economy, but solely from a rapid, commercial
coup which in psychological terms was cleverly prepared. In 1784 Richard
Sutherland, with the support of Catherine's powerful favourite, Potemkin,
was appointed to the post of Court Banker. Opposition to the appoint-
ment in certain circles remained, and during Potemkin's protracted ab-
sence from the capital while preparing for the war against the Turks, the
intrigues against Sutherland grew. 3 The efforts of Sutherland's enemies to
blacken his name among his correspondents abroad and to cast doubts
as to his solidity were so successful that in the spring of 1787 De Smeth,
Blaauw & Wilkieson and Pye Rich & Co., all of Amsterdam, declined to
accept his drafts.4 His discredit in Amsterdam quickly spread to other
centres and threatened to completely undermine his position as Court
Banker. At this critical juncture, Henry Hope acted: he accepted supra
protest the disputed drafts from Richard Sutherland and his brother
Alexander Henry in London, and made substantial credits available to the
former through his own house.
  The relationship between Hope & Co. and the extremely grateful Suther-
land rapidly grew in importance. From a sum of cf 78.4.0, which stood
unchanged from 1778 to 1787, the account between the two houses rose
in the brief period June-August 1787 to cf 715,565.8.0, which sum
related solely to the draft transactions. 5 In the trading sector, connex-
ions were established with the firm of Sutherlands & Bock, in which the
Court Banker's commercial interests were vested. The firm acted as inter-
mediary for the purchase of Russian iron and sailcloth, and was com-
missioned by Hope to buy up cochineal, in which large-scale speculation,
spearheaded by Robert Vollte,6 was then taking place. No clear demar-
cation between banking and mercantile dealings was maintained. As early
as 1788, the proceeds of sales to Hope of hemp, iron, ships timber and
linen were offset against Sutherland's account as Court Banker, and
similar adjustments appear in the records for later years. With these
mercantile transactions, which were undoubtedly undertaken on instruc-
tions from the Russian government, Sutherland attempted to reduce the
outflow of money, and thus to shore up the rate ofexchange. 7