

                                     86
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

to decide, among other things, upon a number of tax proposals. To the
amazement of the royal advisers, opponents of the king secured an elec-
toral majority in three of the four Estates and proceeded to torpedo prac-
tically all the proposals. Symbolically, the proposed taxes were all re-
duced by I %-a reminder to the king that the riksdag held the purse-
strings.!
  According to Hope's correspondent-who is identified in later corre-
spondence as J aco b Andersson - the Estates, in their investigation into the
State's finances, ignored the loans obtained abroad on the pretext that the
responsibility for these rested solely with the king and that they were
nothing to do with the national debt. 2 This did not imply that the Estates
were opposed to the repayment of the debts, but rather was a hint to the
outside world not to heed future loan proposals from the king. The pro-
ceeds of these loans had after all gone to finance theatrical displays which
in the eyes of the people of poor, remote Sweden were unnecessary.3 The
nation would thus meet its obligations-not out of love for the king, but
only to protect its credit abroad. According to Andersson, Ruuth was a
puppet operated from behind the scenes by his father-in-law, Wahren-
dorff, a Stockholm merchant and a large-scale speculator who had been
involved in many an obscure affair.4

The commercial transactions undertaken for the Swedish Crown, into
which the two Amsterdam houses were drawn by Ruuth, were of the
normal type. In 1787 the Amsterdam house of Benjamin Cohen & Son
had purchased a consignment of tobacco on behalf of the Swedish Crown
and had stored this in its own warehouse. 10,000 or so 'paniers,' or
baskets, of the tobacco were sold, via an intermediary in Paris, to the
Fermiers Generaux, the tax farmers in France, who also controlled the
tobacco monopoly, an important and growing source of their income. 5
In June 1787 Hope entered into negotiations with H. Coecq & Son, the
Amsterdam agents of the Fermiers Generaux, for the sale of the remainder
of the stock held by Cohen. 6 At that time, trade in Amsterdam suffered
severely as a result of the quarrels between the Patriots and the prince's
supporters, which in late May of that year led to a complete civil war. As
a result, a long time elapsed before the brokers acting on behalf of Coecq
visited Cohen's warehouse to inspect the consignment. 7 In the meantime,
a letter arrived from Ruuth containing instructions to sell the tobacco by
public auction on 31st July and to advertise the sale in national and
foreign newspapers. 8
 With great reluctance, the partners in Hope & Co. set about arranging
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

the auction. Because, in their view, it could serve no useful purpose under
the prevailing conditions, they urgently appealed to Ruuth to be allowed
to act as circumstances demanded. The confusion reached its zenith a
week later with the arrival of a letter from Ruuth stating that Ferdinand
Grand of Paris, a brother ofthe erstwhile partner in the house of Fizeaux,
had been empowered to offer the whole consignment to the Fermiers
Generaux for cf 250,000, and instructing Hope to come to an arrangement
withhim.l
  Upon receipt of this information, the partners immediately despatched
a letter to Grand, asking how his negotiations were progressing. They
meanwhile suspended their discussions with Coecq. The Swedish minister
was advised that there could be no question of advertising the sale until
such time as a reply was received from Paris. If the effort there failed, it
would be necessary to recommence negotiations with Coecq, and the
latter would be the more reticent if the plan were to be brought to the
notice of the public in advance. 2
  July came and still Coecq was without definite information from the
Fermiers. Grand maintained a complete silence. Hope expressed to Ruuth
a suspicion that the Fermiers might well keep everyone waiting until it
was too late in the season to sell the tobacco elsewhere, and thus be in a
position to dictate their own price. 3 To meet the minister's wishes, steps
were taken to arrange a public auction for 22nd August, but the partners
repeatedly advised Ruuth to adopt another course. The prevailing cir-
cumstances, both political and commercial, gave grounds for believing that
the sale would go badly; a consignment of this size, moreover, would
deter buyers and this was bound to be reflected in the price. The price
limits set by Ruuth were decidedly too high and would have to be revised.
Why on earth did the minister not accept Cohen's offer to purchase the
whole consignment for cf 200,000? Indeed, Cohen had offered to pay
cf 220,000 on certain conditions, namely that he should be allowed to
import the tobacco into Swedish ports in lots of fifty to a hundred thou-
sand pounds; to pay import duty on half the imported quantity six
months later and on the remainder a year later; and that if there was no
market for it in Sweden, that he should be free to ship it abroad again
without liability for export tax. 4
  In mid-August Hope received Ruuth's approval of this arrangement,
whereupon the sale was negotiated. Cohen was to buy more than a million
and a half pounds of tobacco for cf 220,000, payment to be made in cash
within six weeks without any discount or deduction for warehousing.
Ruuth, for his part, acceded to the import and re-export facilities re-