

 tude for the honour which had been bestowed upon him. The portrait, he
 wrote, was 'a striking instance of the magnanimity and magnificence of
 the exalted Personage ... Her elevated genius and almost supernatural
 loftiness of mind ... ' Hope instructed Sutherland to give the painter of
 the portrait a gift of one hundred guineas, and he sent, via the Committee,
 a letter of thanks to Catharine, to be delivered' if the etiquette admits it.' 1
  In his references to the Committee, Henry Hope was considerably less
flattering. This body had objected to the extension of the time allowed for
 the payment of instalments of the fifth loan and with this to the 6t % com-
 mission paid to the Company. In Hope's view, at least two-thirds of the
excess of It % over the 5 % offered earlier was 'a sine qua non.' The Com-
 pany denied that Russia was being asked to pay more than any other
Court; on the contrary, Spain gave 7 %plus I %for repayment and 2 % for
 the payment of interest; Poland gave 6 %, also with I % for repayment
and 2 % for the payment of interest; and Sweden had paid the same or
more, according to circumstances. Shortly before this, Sweden had offered
 Hope 8 %, but the Company, which since the opening of the first Russian
loan had dissociated itself from all other negotiations, had declined this,
as it had a Polish request. 2
  With regard to the extension of the settlement date, Henry Hope com-
 mented that: 'an indulgence has been given in proportion to the urgency
of the times.' In the case of French loans an interval of three months was
allowed between the commencement of interest payment and the deposi-
tion of monies by the lender, while England, at the time of the American
War of Independence, went so far as to pay interest from the time of
receipt of the first of twelve monthly instalments. Hope was not disposed
to indulge in further correspondence concerning this humiliating problem,
and he merely requested that the debentures for the eighth loan, with
which the debt to De Smeth would be repaid, be sent to him.3 No mention
was made of the debentures for the ninth and tenth loans to which he had
referred a month previously.
  Henry Hope refused to give any undertaking regarding either an acceler-
ation of the payments to Russia or an opening date for a new loan. In his
view, the 'Brabant Revolution,' the revolt by the people of the Southern
Netherlands against the centralist regime in Austria, could give rise to all
manner of dangerous, international complications, with unforeseeable
consequences for the money market in Amsterdam.
  In the event, these complications were of such a mild nature that on 16th
February 1790 Hope was able to enter into a contract with the entre-
preneurs for a seventh loan. This new three-million guilder loan bore

                                      I05
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

interest at 5 % and, like all loans since the third, was for twelve years.
The entrepreneurs received a bonus of 2 % and were permitted to pay
in four monthly instalments immediately following those relating to
the previous loan. The inclusion in the contract of an agreement between
the entrepreneurs not to sell the bonds at a rate below 98i % proves that
this loan was less easily subscribed. The entrepreneurs also bound them-
selves 'not to permit or to seek any bartering, rebate of interest, commis-
sion, variation, premium, indulgence, etcetera, or any advantage what-
soever, large or small, which renders this agreement illusory.' Any change
in the rate of 98i % required the approval of a majority. 1
  The contract for the eighth loan was signed on 13th August 1790, the
interest rate again being 5 %. The entrepreneurs were given the choice
of paying in cash or in bonds relating to a loan from De Smeth in 1781
which was due to be repaid at the offices of Hope & Co. on 1st
February 1791. The interest on these would accrue to the entrepreneurs
up to the date on which they were lodged with the Company as payment.
Even though this exchange arrangement would in itself make the loan
easier to place-the more so since the De Smeth loan bore interest at 4 %,
making prolongation attractive-the entrepreneurs were permitted to settle
in five monthly instalments instead of four, as with the previous loan.
Clearly, the opportunities for placement had decreased in the course of
1790. The stipulation of a minimum rate of 98i % and those concerning
'bartering' and other illicit rebates were incorporated without amendment
in the new contract, as was the provision for a bonus of 2 %.2
  The slowness with which the 1790 loans were negotiated was matched
only by the speed with which those of the following year were arranged.
The ninth, for which Hope and the entrepreneurs entered into a contract
on 6th January 1791, provided yet more evidence of the difficulties in the
year which lay behind. On 18th February 1790, the Russian Court gave
its approval for the opening not only of the eighth loan, but also the ninth
and even the tenth. Thus, the opportunities had up to then remained far
below expectations. The terms of the contract for the ninth loan were
broadly similar to those of the document of 13th August 1790, although
there were no redeemable bonds from De Smeth and the number of
monthly instalments had again become four-a sign that the tightness had
commenced to ease. 3
  On 28th February 1791 the entrepreneurs, who had still to pay the first
instalment towards the ninth loan, entered into a contract with Hope &
Co. which simultaneously covered the tenth and eleventh loans; this was
for six million guilders, which the entrepreneurs undertook to furnish in