

                                    103
                     MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

In spite of the threatening political situation, Hope was able to report to
Sutherland on 25th September 1789 that the fifth loan had been placed,
albeit with a minor concession to the entrepreneurs in the matter of their
instalments. Until shortly before the placing, Hope had taken a very pes-
simistic view of the financial prospects, and although he still feared the
consequences of 'a check to the current payments in France' he took the
view that it was better to embark on a new loan at that moment than
later. If an emergency should arise, a loan which had been launched would
fare better than one which was still at the negotiating stage. There was also
the fact that Russia had scored a major naval victory over Sweden at
Svensksund-and this had to be exploited. Together, these considerations
had led Hope to decide to enter into a contract with the entrepreneurs for
a sixth loan. 1
 The results by far exceeded Hope's expectations. By 13th October, less
than a fortnight after the loan had opened, the entrepreneurs had placed
two million of the three million guilders. 2 In later correspondence, Henry
Hope attributed this sudden success to reticence on the part of investors
in the early part of the year, at which time there was widespread fear of a
catastrophe in France. The failure of this to materialize for the time being
had led to large sums remaining uninvested, and these produced 'an unex-
pected ease in finances.' This situation was, of course, of a temporary
nature; nevertheless, Hope was anxious to obtain debentures for seventh,
eighth, ninth and tenth loans in order to profit from the circumstances of
the moment. Particular care was taken to make each loan appear to be the
last and to convince the public that peace between Russia and her enemies
would bring the whole affair to an end. The Committee in St. Petersburg
had approached the Company on the subject of a separate loan for the
Court, but Hope felt that it would be wrong to upset the established pat-
tern and that it would be preferable to embark upon an eighth loan imme-
diately after the seventh. 3 From the loans remaining to be negotiated, a
sum would be required by February 1791 to repay a loan obtained from
De Smeth in 1781; the remainder would be available for the prosecution
of the war. In the event of hostilities ceasing during the coming winter, the
loans would be of value 'to restore your numerary' and could be used to
curb the large amount of paper money in circulation if the Russian gov-
ernment deemed it wise 'to keep any quantity of it afloat.'
 Catherine II demonstrated her satisfaction with the Company's conduct
of affairs by presenting Henry Hope with a portrait of herself. She had
offered him a title, but this he had declined. 4 In a letter to Sutherland, he
expressed, in a manner appropriate to the autocratic empress, his grati-

                                    104
                      MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR