

                                   108
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

in placing the bonds are evidenced in the provision allowing them to
subcontract portions of their shares to third parties, provided that not
less than cf 50,000 was subcontracted at a time and that the subcontractor
became a party to the terms and conditions of the contract. It was even
felt necessary to impose a penalty for 'bartering, rebate of interest,' etc.;
this took the form of forfeiture of the bonus and a fine of one hundred
golden ducats for each offence, 'all to be applied to the benefit of the
Gerefor111eerde Nederduitsche Poor Relief Board in this City.' 1
  In the autumn of 1792 the military situation in the Southern Netherlands
imposed an increasing threat. Having defeated the Austrian troops in a
battle there, the French general Dumouriez proceeded to occupy the
whole country. In France, the king, after an interrogation before the
National Convention-a new body of deputies elected by universal suf-
frage-was condemned to death in January 1793. Shortly after this, on
1st February, the Convention declared war on 'the King of England' and
'the Stadholder of the Republic.' By early March Dumouriez had reached
the major rivers and it seemed that the Republic was lost. So grave did
the situation appear to Henry Hope that he, in company with the wife of
John Williams Hope and her children, fled to England. Later in the same
month the French general suffered a defeat which forced him to withdraw
from the Southern Netherlands. His subsequent desertion to the Austrian
side helped to bring to power in Paris extreme radical groups which
declared a popular war and acted with vigour against their enemies both
at home and abroad.
  In May 1793, when the period for settlement of the last loan contract
expired, a new contract providing for the eighteenth and nineteenth loans
was negotiated. The terms of this are not known, but records show that
Hope had to subscribe a considerable sum in order to reach the total of
six million guilders. A large sum was also required to support the value
of the Russian bonds so that the holders could be sure from day to day
of being able to exchange these for cash without suffering a 10ss.2 The new
loans bore interest at 5 %.
  The summer came, and in the weeks during which the war against France
proceeded favourably subscriptions totalling more than two million
guilders were received; but with the defeat of the allied armies at the
hands of the French in September, Dutch investors tightened their purse-
strings. It was very fortunate that the Russo-Turkish war had ended in the
Spring of 1792, for this fact served to reduce Russia's need for loans
abroad. The war against Sweden had ended in 1790.
Robert Vofite, the adviser and very close friend of the partners of Hope

                                    109
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

& CO. had left Holland in July 1793, travelling in the direction of Russia.
Besides the unsatisfactory progress of subscriptions to the latest loans for
that country, Voute had matters to attend to in Poland, where major
political changes threatened to endanger the Company's interests.
 Voute's journey in fact marked the end of the initial phase of Hope's
loan-raising activities on behalf of Russia, the provision of money for the
Turkish war. In the second phase the emphasis would be on consolidation
and measures aimed at ensuring regular interest payments and repayment
of principal money. Before dealing with this, however, we must concern
ourselves with the Company's connexions in Poland.