

Hope respected his decision, 'in view, inter alia, of your blessed and ad-
vanced age.' It would have been very agreeable if a friendly and not too
powerful house had seen its way clear to collaborating with the Company,
but as Hope recognized-and intimated to Roosen-'It is far better not to
begin than to end in distress.' 1
 As had been the case with the Swedish transactions, Hope's aim was to
combine loans with other business. During the previous Turkish War, the
Russian Baltic Fleet had penetrated the Mediterranean and had there
destroyed the Turkish fleet. Acting on the premise that this might well
occur again, Hope made plans. Late in November 1787-that is to say,
prior to the opening of public subscription for the first loan - the Company
established contact with the house of Cambiasso in Leghorn with a view
to preparing the financial operations which such a naval expedition might
demand. 2
 New opportunities arose in March 1788, when the British government
prohibited the use of English ships for the carriage of Russian troops and
supplies to the Mediterranean. Apprehension concerning the ever more
apparent urge for expansion on the part of Catherine the Great, and
resentment at the ukases aimed at England's dominant role in Russia's
foreign trade, clearly played a part in the decision. 3
 Alexander Henry Sutherland, a London merchant and a brother of the
Russian Court Banker, who had been engaged in chartering vessels in
England, approached the partners of Hope & Co. with a request that they
should take over this activity. The Company consulted J.e. van der Hoop,
the Advocate Fiscal to the Admiralty in Amsterdam and confidant of the
stadholder in maritime affairs.4 Van der Hoop was at first very optimistic
about obtaining official approval, since this charter business would help
to bridge a period of malaise for Holland's merchant fleet.
 To Henry Hope's intense dismay, pressure by England on the govern-
ment of the stadholder resulted in a ban on the chartering of Dutch ves-
sels. Efforts by Hope and the Russian envoy, Kalichev, to secure a reversal
of the decision failed. The weak government of the Republic, recently
rehabilitated with British support, dared not risk incurring the displeasure
of its patron. 5 Hope, with Kalichev's support, made a fresh approach to
Van der Hoop in April 1788. The Advocate Fiscal was somewhat more
responsive, but he demanded that the Company's activities on behalf of
the Russian fleet should have no adverse consequences for relations be-
tween the Republic and the Sultan of Turkey or for Holland's trading
interests in the Levant. 6
In order to avoid embarrassing the government, Hope drew up a plan

                                    102
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

under which the chartering of vessels would pro forma be undertaken by a
friendly house, De Coninck & Reyersen in Copenhagen. No opposition
was expected from the Danish government in view of its close relations
with Russia. 1 There are no details of the progress of the plan, but it is
known that Dutch vessels were not chartered because the Russian fleet
was kept in the Baltic by the outbreak of the Swedish-Russian War.2
  This new war, which had to be waged alongside the struggle against the
Turks, served to increase Russia's financial needs. The expectation voiced
by Hope early in March 1788, that it would be possible to proceed with a
fourth loan before September, was not borne out, and it was not until the
end of the year that agreement was reached with the entrepreneurs. This
delay. coupled with the increase of the interest rate to 5 %, suggested that
the scarcity of money, about which Hope had complained in February,
had become acute. The loan, like the last and all those which followed,
was of three million guilders, and Hope's commission on this and subse-
quent loans was 6t%.
  Simultaneously with the fourth loan, the Russian Court empowered the
Company to negotiate a fifth, but the contract between Hope and the
entrepreneurs was not signed until 3rd April 1789. The tighter conditions
on the money market favoured the entrepreneurs, who were thereby in a
position to extract more favourable conditions for their participation in
the fourth and fifth transactions. Their bonus rose from I % for the first
three loans to Ii- % for the fourth and 2 % for the fifth, and in addition
they now received 'the Interests due in the current month, in which the
monies are furnished' -a perquisite which they did not relinquish in sub-
sequent contracts.
  The new contract provided for the entrepreneurs to meet their obligations
in four instalments instead of three, as in the case of the first two loans;
the provision for public subscription at the offices of Hope & Co., and the
accompanying douceur of t %for private investors, however, was omitted.
Hope's share of the fifth loan was cf 870,000, compared with cf 750,000
for the first two. 3
  The increasing political confusion in France will certainly have contri-
buted to the scarcity of capital. After protracted difficulties with his sub-
jects, the French king was finally obliged by lack of funds to recall the
legislative body, the Etats-Generaux, after an interval of more than a
hundred and fifty years. Instead of voting the monies requested, the dele-
gates demanded political reforms; these were refused, and in the summer
of 1789 revolutionary movements burst forth both in Paris and in the
rural areas.