

 Orange, or was the run on the Russian loans a symbol of doubt as to the
 survival of the Republic as a sovereign state? Hope feared that the unfilled
 demands for capital at home might well lead to a general ban on foreign
 loans, as had been the case previously. To avoid precipitating such a step,
 the entrepreneurs concerned in the second contract were bound to secrecy
 until a date to be decided, and Hope also urged Kalichev, the Russian
 envoy in The Hague, to keep the affair secret. 1
  Hope's success afforded Richard Sutherland a great deal of support in
 his struggle against his numerous enemies; it also served to justify the
 change of hands which he had effected. 2 This change was, of course,
painful for De Smeth, a fact which he confessed to Hope 'with his natural
 candour' when the latter visited him after the first transaction. He added,
 however, that he did not flatter himself that he could retain the Russian
business without having to simultaneously take on extensive and some-
times fearsome Court affairs, which, despite their advantages, were not to
be preferred to peace and quiet. 3
  Hope's superior financial strength had once again proved decisive,
though it was naturally not unlimited. In his dealings with the Committee,
Sutherland had earlier gone too far in his praise of the house of Hope, in
its being equal to all possible wants and exigencies both in regard to loans
and advances of money, and this mistake was later to come home to
roost.4 The Committee was under the impression that Hope would have
no difficulty in negotiating a loan of twenty million guilders by August
 1788 and also that the house could furnish any advance which might be
required. In a cautiously worded letter aimed at correcting this misappre-
hension, Hope pointed out that it would be an unpardonable folly for any
house, however strong, to measure its strength against the needs of a
major country which was in a state of war. Without that qualification, any
offer of services would be pointless and ridiculous. 5
  In order not to appear too negative, Hope hinted that it might well prove
possible to reduce the period ending on 1st July 1788, within which, under
the terms of the contract with the entrepreneurs, no loan might be nego-
tiated, and he requested that the relevant debentures and the official in-
structions of the Court be despatched without delay.6
  Hope's zeal for the Russian cause was well and truly tested when, early
in January 1788, it was learned that the Russian Court proposed to nego-
tiate a loan of three million guilders with the house of C.J .M. de Wolf in
Antwerp. In the opinion of the Hope partners, Antwerp was much too
close to Amsterdam, so that a loan there would mean competition on
Hope's own territory. When the 'Brabanders' had money to invest, they

                                     99
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

usually looked to Amsterdam. Hope advised the Committee that as far
as he was concerned the Antwerp loan could fail, and he expressed the
hope (vainly, as it transpired) that De Wolf would not succeed in obtain-
ing the approval of the Austrian government. De Wolf had initially whet-
ted the appetite of the Russian Court with promises of a J! %loan, but the
negotiation ultimately commenced on the basis of 4 %. When this failed to
produce any activity on the market, he succeeded in getting the rate raised
to 41 %, at which figure he came into direct competition with the loans
floated by Hope. There was also the fact that the methods of issue em-
ployed in Antwerp adversely affected the issue price of loans: there were
no entrepreneurs and so the loan continued to remain open for public sub-
scriptions. The result was that investors delayed subscribing in the hope
of discrediting the loan and so obtaining bonds cheaply.!
  While the Russian Court was thus busy thwarting Hope-and, by its
rash borrowing, creating an impression among investors that it was in dire
need offunds-it was knocking on Hope's door for sums of twenty million
and more! Hope would have done well to raise twelve million in 1788, but
there was no certainty of this 'because of the needs of our neighbours and
of this country itself, and because money is scarce.' 2 When Hope wrote
this, on 19th February 1788, the easiness on the capital market had largely
disappeared. As a gesture of goodwill, Hope asked for debentures for
third and fourth loans of three million guilders each for periods often and
twelve years respectively, commencing on 1st July 1788. The rate of in-
terest could be kept down to 41 %, although there would be pressure as a
result of the scarcity of capital. The proceeds of these loans, however,
could not be made available to the Court until they had been publicly
announced. 3
  The Hope partners were anything but satisfied with the 'extremely mod-
est nature' of the 5 %commission offered. They felt that they were entitled
to an additional remuneration, a premium sous main, since they could
earn so much more by investing their money in other business that under-
taking the Russian loans amounted to 'a deed for the sake of glory.' They
stated that other Courts allowed 6 % and that they desired this from Rus-
sia also. It fell to Sutherland to plead their cause with the Committee, and
this he of course did in cautious terms, 'on grounds of delicacy.' The led-
gers of that time reveal that the request was looked upon favourably; in-
deed, Hope enjoyed a commission of 6t %on these loans. 4
  Sutherland also sought the assistance of Hope in supporting the rate of
exchange of the rouble, which showed signs of crumbling. Before agreeing
to do so, Hope insisted on knowing the true par value, by which he meant