

                                    100
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

the intrinsic value of the rouble expressed in Dutch or English currency.
Hope believed that the exchange rate was 36-38 stuivers to the rouble, as
against a true par value of 34. Thus the rate of exchange could fall to 34
stuivers without adverse consequences for Russia. It would be dangerous
to enforce the exchange rate on grounds of needs abroad, for this could
lead to a serious financial crisis such as had occurred, for example, in
Sweden. 'For,' Hope reminded Sutherland, 'it is an invariable axiom that
any nation whose debts exceed the value of its revenues or of its balance of
trade will be stripped of its effective in gold or silver, unless it has the
wisdom to borrow money, to find ways to defer meeting a deficit and to
establish a ratio between the repayment and the annual surplus on its
balance of trade.' Thus, instead of offering his support in raising the rate
of exchange of the rouble, Hope urged the wisdom of consolidating the
national debt.
  By mid-March 1788 Hope had reached agreement with the entrepreneurs
on the third loan for Russia, and he communicated the fact with satis-
faction to the Committee. 1 He was obliged to inform the Committee that
the date earlier referred to for the fourth loan, 1st July 1788, could not
be maintained because the entrepreneurs had insisted on a moratorium on
fresh issues until 1st September, although, he added, they would probably
be willing to reconsider this. Hope viewed the Committee's action in de-
clining loan proposals from the house of Boas in The Hague as very wise
in view of the fact that such firms could not hope to succeed in The Hague,
added to which Boas's reputation was inadequate for such a transaction.
  Russia meanwhile was drawing on other foreign sources of finance, not
only in Antwerp, which has been mentioned, but also in Genoa, where a
loan was negotiated with the house of Regny.2 At Sutherland's request,
Hope went so far as to seek the opinion of his long-standing colleague
Beerend Roosen in Hamburg concerning the prospects for negotiating a
loan in that city. If Roosen was open for such a proposition, Hope wrote,
he could best adopt the Amsterdam method and work with entrepreneurs.
The I %which he would have to pay them out of his commission was vital
to the success of a loan such as was proposed, for 'nothing elicits greater
activity than self-interest.' 'Without this incentive,' Hope continued, 'the
negotiations here would not proceed so smoothly.' He advised Roosen to
start with a moderate sum, say one million marks, and if this went well he
could consider larger loans. Hope expressed his willingness to take a share
of one hundred thousand marks in an initial loan if this would assist in
overcoming Roosen's objections. Roosen remained averse to the sugges-
tion, advising Hope that he saw no prospect of raising a loan in Hamburg.

                                    101
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR