

                                    106
                     MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

six monthly instalments. In the months of May and June, these ran
parallel with instalments of the previous loan.! On 18th July the entre-
preneurs again participated for a further six million guilders, for the twelfth
and thirteenth loans, under an almost identical contract. This time the
parallel instalments fell due in September and October.2 On 21st December
of the same year they set a crown on their efforts by pledging themselves
to furnish monies for fourteenth and fifteenth loans.
  While these latest loans bore interest at 4 %, compared with the 5 % of
the ten preceding ones, the entrepreneurs undertook to furnish their shares
in five months as against six under the earlier six-million guilder contracts.
In addition, they bound themselves not to sell at a rate below 991 %, an
increase of ~ %on the previous figure. 3 In all, the entrepreneurs committed
themselves in 179 I to furnish twenty-one million guilders in the space of
sixteen months, an average of more than a one and a quarter million per
month.
  It is obvious that an immense undertaking such as this could only
succeed in a money market characterized by abundance. That such ample
funds were available in the Republic for investment was largely due to the
developments in France. Admittedly, a constitutional monarchy had been
established there in September 1791, following a period of intense bicker-
ing. but since 1790 the king had been at odds with parliament over the
sequestration of Church property and the placing under state supervision
of the Catholic clergy.
 As security for the confiscated Church property, mortgage debentures or
assignats were issued, and these soon assumed the role of a paper currency.
But lack of confidence in this new tender caused the rate of exchange of
the ecu to fall from about 56 stuivers before the Revolution to 50 stuivers
in November 1790. Between May 1791 and the end of that year it dropped
from 44 to 37 stuivers. 4 Investors in the Netherlands who, from political
motives or in pursuit of profit, had earlier opted for French stocks with
their higher rates of interest now had to pay the penalty. This was made
heavier by the fact that these investors had purchased the majority of the
stock through houses in Paris, the interest being paid in French currency
in that city, so that they bore the full brunt of the exchange losses. This
development will have caused a mass flight from French government
securities, from which Hope and his entrepreneurs were able to benefit. 5
 We know from another source that news of the abundance of available
capital had reached Russia and that the Committee for Foreign Loans
saw in this an opportunity to obtain the long-sought reduction in the
interest rate. The Russian Court was due to repay to De Smeth a 41 %

                                     107
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

loan of two and a half million guilders in 1792 and wished to obtain a new
loan of the same size and with the same rate of interest. In addition, it
desired to convert a loan of three and a half million guilders from De
Smeth, which still had several years to run, into one of 4 %. When
Hope declined to reduce the interest rate on his loans, as he had done
in 1789, the Committee approached De Wolf in Antwerp, the former
competitor of the Company. De Wolf was quite willing to provide the
services requested and in the summer of 1791 the house appeared on the
market with a loan for Russia bearing a lower rate of interest (probably
the desired 4 %). In order to avoid incurring Hope's displeasure, it was
made to appear that the bonds were issued in St. Petersburg ; but the
intention was clear to many, including Hope. In the face of angry
representations by the Company, the Committee agreed to cancel the loan
on condition that Hope negotiated one of six million guilders at 4 %
to replace it. It is against this background that the lower interest rate
on the fourteenth and fifteenth loans must be viewed. In this connexion,
it is noteworthy that the contract with the entrepreneurs dated 21st
December contains no reference to an exchange of De Smeth bonds. 1
  The records also show that the entrepreneurs encountered obstacles in
placing the fourteenth and fifteenth loans. The abnormally low rate of
interest will undoubtedly have been the principal stumbling block, but
there was also the adverse effect of the political developments which took
place in the early part of 1792. In April of that year the Legislative As-
sembly in France declared war on 'the King of Bohemia and Hungary,'
as it chose to describe Emperor Francis II of Austria. It was plain that the
war would be fought mainly in the Austrian Netherlands and on the
Rhine, and would thus come dangerously close to the Republic. In the
early stages of the war the French armies made little progress; indeed,
their setbacks enabled the radical groups in Paris to grow in strength
until in August they succeeded, by allegations of treason, in bringing
about the suspension of the monarchy. It is obvious that under such
circumstances investors were less anxious to subscribe to loans than they
had been in the previous year.
  The contract providing for the sixteenth and seventeenth loans, to which
Hope and the entrepreneurs appended their signatures on 6th August 1792,
also bears signs of a less plentiful flow of money. The interest rate was
4-!-%, one half per cent more than in the contract of December 1791, and
the entrepreneurs were given eight months to pay instead of five. It was
agreed that no further loan would be opened until the eight instalments
had been paid, in May 1793. The difficulties which faced the entrepreneurs