




                                    110
                           CHAPTER FOUR

                  POLISH INTERLUDE



Robert Vollte arrived in Warsaw at half past eleven on the night of 24th
July 1793. It was pouring with rain. He had left Berlin on the 19th and,
despite the discomforts of the journey, had travelled day and night over
roads which had been turned into quagmires by an incessant downpour. 1
But Vollte allowed himself and his companions no more than a day or
two's rest before resuming the journey to Grodno, more than 250 kilo-
metres distant. There, the Polish sejm had been in session since the 17th.
Among the issues facing it were demands from Russia and Prussia for
fresh territorial concessions. 2 Hope had a direct interest in this matter,
for such concessions would significantly affect the Polish state finances,
with which the Company had been concerned for more than fifteen years.
  If there was one country which needed the name of Hope to establish its
credit and win the confidence of investors, that country was Poland. The
'Republic' was ruled by an impotent king chosen by the nobility-in whom
the true power rested. These nobles met in sejmiki, or local diets, which
sent delegates to the sejm, or parliament. Under the Polish constitution,
every measure introduced into the sejm had to be adopted unanimously;
a single dissenting voice was sufficient to send a proposal crashing to the
ground. This was the notorious liberum veto. There also existed a 'right
of confederation' which gave to an arbitrarily chosen group of gentry the
authority to impose their wishes, if necessary by force of arms. Many of
these noblemen, however, were in straitened circumstances and were
economically dependent upon twenty or so extremely rich landowning
families, the magnates, many of whom behaved as if they were sovereign
rulers. The remainder of the population consisted of impoverished, un-
educated serfs. Towns of any size or with a prosperous middle-class were
practically non-existent.
  With its form of government, this economically backward country was
constantly open to anarchy, a fact of which its more powerful neighbours,
Russia, Prussia and Austria, often took advantage in order to interfere in
its internal affairs. In 1772 this situation led to the First Partition, the
name given to a treaty under which Prussia acquired what later became
West Prussia; Russia obtained a part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania,

                                    III
                           POLISH INTERLUDE

which was linked to Poland by a personal union; and Austria acquired
territories which became Galicia.
  This amputation served to revive a reformatory movement to which
King Stanislaw Poniatowski - who, on the recommendation of Catherine II,
had been elected in I763-had earlier contributed. The political and finan-
cial frameworks were among the objects of reform. The principle of
majority decision was introduced in the sejmiki, tax reforms were enacted,
import and export duties were introduced and a type of budget devised.
The sejm of 1775 rendered exceptional services in the financial sector.
Among its acts was to vote the king a fixed allowance, a necessary step in
view of the loss of revenue to the Royal Treasury, in particular following
the cession of territory. 1 Owing to a deficit in revenues from taxation, the
sums voted to the king could not be paid in full, but in the light of the
expenditure by the king of substantial sums in the nation's interest, the
sejm of 1776, in Warsaw, authorized the monarch to obtain loans abroad
to the extent of his claims on the Treasuries of Poland and Lithuania,
which totalled nine million Polish guilders (cf 2,625,000). For the repay-
ment of these loans, the king received an annual sum of 50,000 ducats
from the newly established Sinking Fund. As security for the payment of
interest and repayment of principal money, he was also granted, for a
period of ten years, the revenues from the subsidium charitativum, the tax
on those living in property owned by the Church, amounting to 700,000
Polish guilders annually.2 The net revenues of the 'oeconomies' of Brest-
Litowsk, Kobrin, Olitzka and Szawel served as additional security. An
'oeconomy' was an estate, the revenues from which were destined solely
for the Court and the Royal Treasury.3
  In the opinion of Hope & Co., who were approached by the Warsaw
banker Pierre Ferguson Tepper, the sum of these guarantees was inade-
quate. The Company desired in addition a guarantee from Catherine II,
and in this it revealed a realistic view of Poland's dependence upon
Russia. The empress expressed her willingness to provide such a guaran-
tee, which she did in a document dated 18th September 1776.4 The princi-
pal guarantor was the Republic of Poland, which in particular was required
to guarantee that the 'oeconomies' mortgaged as security for the repayment
of the debt would continue to be reserved for this purpose even after the
death of King Stanislaw. In the event of the lenders having any complaint
whatsoever, Catherine was empowered to take over the 'oeconomies' and
to arrange for any arrears to be paid out of the proceeds. On these con-
ditions, the Company negotiated in 1777 a lo-year loan of nine million
Polish guilders (cf 2,625,000) bearing interest at 5 % and commencing on
1st February of that year. 5
                                    II2
                                                                             --=