

another firm (i.e. De Smeth), so that Hope, 'on grounds of delicacy,'
preferred not to interfere. If the Court had at any time changed its policy
in this respect, however, he would not have hesitated to undertake the
business. Of the acceptance by Hope of Sutherland's drafts, which pre-
ceded the new relationship and in which the initiative indisputably came
from Hope, there was no mention. 1
  As far as the cochineal affair was concerned, we know that Henry Hope's
pessimism regarding the economic circumstances in the Republic at that
time was more than an attempt to temper over-sanguine expectations. The
signal success of the first loan was the more surprising by reason of the
gloomy atmosphere in which it was launched. On 5th December 1787, the
day after the arrival of a letter in which the Committee for Foreign Loans
in St. Petersburg gave its approval for the negotiation of a loan of
1,500,000 guilders, a contract was arranged with the entrepreneurs for
a loan of 3,000,000 guilders-twice the sum which Henry Hope had
envisaged. 2 The list of subscriptions relating to the contract can be divided
into two distinct parts, each of one and a half million. An obvious con-
clusion is that the brokers had initially proceeded on the basis of a loan of
1,500,000 guilders but that during their soundings the interest on the
part of the entrepreneurs had proved so great that the sum had immediately
been doubled. Of the twenty entrepreneurs who subscribed to the first half
of the contract, only five applied for a share in the second half, of which
their total share was just over a quarter; Hope accepted responsibility for
one-half, and the balance was shared among houses outside Amsterdam
which had unsuccessfully applied for a share in the first half. 3
  The final bombshell came on loth December, when a contract for a
further loan of 3,000,000 guilders was negotiated with the entrepre-
neurs. This was for twelve years, as against ten for the previous one, but
both commenced on the same date, 1st February 1788. To avoid the two
 becoming confused, and also to give the entrepreneurs time to place their
initial portion on the market, it was decided that the public subscription
to the later loan would not open until 15th January 1788. The entre-
preneurs were committed to meet their share in three monthly instal-
 ments falling due one month after the corresponding shares in the pre-
 vious loan. Hope ultimately undertook not to float any further loans for
 the Russians before 1st July 1788 without the prior approval of the entre-
preneurs. 4
  Greatly satisfied, Henry Hope wrote to Sutherland: 'This operation
 astonishes everybody and we have received the highest compliments on
it.' 5 In Hope's view, the principal reason for the success lay in the interest
                                      V30 een Nc<;otiatic voor Rcekening en een behoc\'e van hee
      '."o"
o , • _ \                    •       Rusfiscb Keizer·ryk , grooe DIUE           llLLIOE, E             Guldens lIol-
~             ~.l>-A.
.             ~ ;;~ *bnds CoU'3'lC geld , teegens vier en een half Percent IOlr ;se in
               .; .:~:~                        .
] ~ : _~ j'[ jaar, ecn Compeoire van de I {ceren HOPE & COMr. Banquiers
-:.       "b~ . :- "b            •
. .' ¢ ........ _            ~ tOt      /lmner-13m , onder vcrband van nile de Inkomseen van bet
cog:?Q~
~~e . g s:
;