pretext that the treaty had lost its validity because of the new Polish con-
stitution.! As usual, Stanislaw bowed to the might of the empress and
repealed the constitution. But not before Russian troops had commenced
to occupy Poland.
 Prussia's true nature was revealed in January 1793 with the signing, with
Russia, of a second treaty of partition. The effect of this was to deprive
Poland, whose wings had already been clipped, of half its territory and a
similar proportion of its people. 2 Troops of each of the powers occupied
the areas of Poland which they had thus obtained. Under pressure from
the occupying Russian forces, elections were held for a sejm which was
given the task of ratifying the treaty of partition. The newly appointed
Russian envoy, Baron Sievers, succeeded by liberal gifts of money in
securing the election of the delegates whom Russia favoured. King Sta-
nislaw at first refused to travel to Grodno, where the sejm was to assem-
ble, but his financial plight made him so dependent upon Catherine's
benevolence that he was finally obliged to yield.
 The king's financial difficulties were allied to the total stagnation in mon-
etary transactions in Poland. When news spread of the entry of Russian
troops, and soon afterwards of Prussian forces, money ceased to circulate
and credit transactions ground to a halt. Support from outside was not to
be expected, for the Dutch Republic had just become embroiled in a war
against the revolutionary French, and England had suffered a severe finan-
cial crisis which was to lead to countless bankruptcies. 3 In Poland, a
number of banks and merchant houses were so hard hit by the stagna-
tion that they were forced to suspend payments. Among them were the
banking houses of Tepper and Blanc. In February 1793 Tepper informed
Baron Sievers that he was owed one and a half million ducats by the king
and that if the money was not soon forthcoming he would be obliged to
declare himself bankrupt. The king's debts at that time amounted to
nearly thirty-four million Polish guilders. In consultation with King Sta-
nislaw, Sievers had Tepper's offices in Warsaw placed under seal in order
that the king's financially perilous position should not become public
knowledge-and also to prevent any leakage of information concerning
the bribes which his predecessor had paid, via Tepper, to numerous mem-
bers of the Polish gentry.4
  Naturally, the further payments of interest and capital on Hope's loan
were placed in jeopardy by this development. It was with the aim of seek-
ing some clarification regarding these matters that Robert Voute arrived
in Warsaw on 24th July. The prospects were not particularly favourable.
V oute reported that the sum of the commitments of the houses which had

                                    118
                          POLISH INTERLUDE

been forced to suspend operations was no less than ten million ducats.
Tepper's affairs were in a sad state and he would almost certainly go
bankrupt; with luck, the assets might be sufficient to meet 50-60% of
creditors' claims. Tepper himself was also to blame; his book-keeping was
seven years in arrears and the accounts were in such a state that although
two senior clerks had been able to systematically rob the firm for years,
their crime could not be proven. Tepper was now living in a single room
somewhere, on thirty ducats a month, while his son was trying to find a
livelihood outside Warsaw. Despite Tepper's demise, Voute was of the
opinion that, in principle, banking in Poland still had a solid foundation,
since loans to the gentry were granted only with land as a collateral. The
banks also accepted money on deposit, on which they paid interest; but
the rapid rise in the number of banking houses in the preceding years had
caused the interest rate to rise from 3 % to between 5 and 6 %.
  Blanc & Co. were in a slightly more favourable position, but Blanc him-
self was ageing and was embarrassed by his circumstances. Voute reported
that Blanc had offended Sievers by failing to offer him loans quickly
enough, or of sufficient size, when he arrived in Warsaw and was therefore
out of favour with the Russian envoy. Sievers's current favourite was the
much younger Jean Meisner, a skilful man possessing great physical
strength and thus 'better suited, in all senses, to live among the Poles.' 1
Meisner was closely associated with Hasselgreen of the Amsterdam house
of the same name, who, like Voute, was studying the situation on the
spot-and who in Grodno lived completely in the Polish manner. While in
Warsaw, Voute also met Glilcher of Glilcher & Mulder who, like Hope
& Co., had negotiated a loan for the Polish king and, moreover, were
involved in various loans to Polish magnates. 2
  Voute was accompanied on the journey by William Porter of William
Porter & Co., St. Petersburg. They were jointly authorized to act on
behalf of Hope & Co. and Baring & Co. in negotiations with the house
of G.Thomson Rowand & Co. in Moscow. Porter's presence was of great
value to Voute, for he spoke the language and was au fait with local con-
ditions. When the visitors arrived in Grodno, the sejm had just accepted,
amid violent protests, the cession of territory to Russia; but the anger
expressed on this issue paled into insignificance alongside the fury and
bitterness with which the assembly rounded on the treacherous Prussians
and their demands. Sievers, whose work on behalf of Catherine was done,
left the Pruss ian envoy, Buchholtz, to face the tirade of abuse from the
livid Poles and did not lift a finger to support him. He thus contrived to
demoralize his counterpart to the point where he concurred in the fron-