

                                    I29
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

empire,' but in his private life a degraded individual who was addicted to
gambling and abhorred regular work. But when he worked, he did more
in a quarter of an hour than others did in a whole day. Markov, his
secretary, was equally lazy and degraded; his household was ruled by an
actress and several other beauties. He, too, was a gambler, 'but as sharp
as a needle' and he was gradually shifting his loyalties to the up and
coming man, Zubov. Voute reported that the Vice-Chancellor, Ostermann,
an elderly, tired figure, was head of the foreign ministry in name only,
and that he had always been treated like a doormat by his colleagues. 1
Samaylov was good-hearted, but he was a soldier and not a politician; he
was ignorant of jurisprudence and disinterested in financial matters. As
a brother-in-law of Potemkin, he had risen with him, but after the latter's
death in 1791 Samaylov's influence had waned, though he had retained
his office. He, too, was a gambler and was thus continually short of
money.
  Alexander Zablukov, the Imperial Treasurer, struck V oute as being one
of the few respectable people in this environment. He was a man of
enlightened views, well disposed towards foreigners and the only one with
a normal family life. 2 Voute also had great respect for Myatlev, one of the
senior directors of the state-controlled Assignat Bank, whom he described
as 'an unusual man,' adding that he had notions of justice. 3
  This, in Voute's view, was the principal shortcoming in Russia: each and
everyone of the courts could be bribed, and in this situation decent
people had little incentive to bring actions, with the result that only those
who, like Trosien, were up to no good attempted legal proceedings. Voute
was convinced that for fifty thousand roubles he could easily have had
Trosien convicted, but his aim was to secure justice and in doing so to
set an example. The government's financial needs were limitless, and the
Court spent vast sums and paid with cabinet bonds which ran for four
years and at times changed hands at 30 %below par.
  So short of funds was the Russian government that it was unable even
 to meet its commitments towards its own citizens. As a result, trade was
dislocated and private individuals found themselves unable to press their
claims in courts of law since the government was ultimately the principal
debtor. Voute reported that this situation lay behind Bezborodko's deci-
 sion to terminate saltpetre mining on one of his estates. All the organs of
government were affected by the dearth of money, and the failure to meet
invoices for drugs supplied to the College of Medicine added to Suther-
land & Co.'s difficulties. Even the Assignat Bank was living from hand to
 mouth: it was rumoured that when a lady had called to withdraw 50,000

                                    13 0
             A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

roubles, the bank was obliged to borrow the money from the St. Peters-
burg merchant Ritter.l All these bodies, Voute wrote, were headed by
military men with no understanding of the job and who earned too little,
yet all managed to amass a fortune. They spent more time talking than
working, and every day saw decisions taken which conflicted with earlier
ones.
 The picture which Voute painted of the foreign merchants in St.Peters-
burg was just as dismal. In his opinion, Wegelin, of the house of Bonar,
and Porter and his partner, Brown, were the only men with honest
principles. Bagge, of the house of Bagge & Van Eyssel, was a righteous
man but could not be described as a shining light. Ritter, whom Voute
described as a classic example of duplicity, was on excellent terms with
Samaylov and Ostermann, and because of this Russia's needs abroad had
since Sutherland's death been financed with drafts issued by the house
which he headed. Ritter also had a grudge against Hope & Co. which he
aired everywhere by saying that the Company had made millions out of
Russia. 2 RaIl alone was a match for Ritter, because he understood the
situation in St.Petersburg and knew just who possessed influence and who
did not. Voute judged that RaIl would get very far-a prediction which was
later to come true, with extremely unpleasant consequences for Hope &
Co. RaIl also had connexions with Hasselgreen and, through him, was
associated with Meisner and with the financing operations in Poland. In
view of the very bad example set by the foreign merchants in St.Peters-
burg, Voute concluded that it would be quite wrong to have any illusions
concerning the mentality of their Russian counterparts there.
 The reports which reached Voute concerning Richard Sutherland were
largely adverse. He was said to have recklessly lent out monies entrusted
to him and to have incurred huge losses on exchange operations and
exports of goods. He was described as well intentioned but unsuited to his
profession. He had frittered away his time and money in chasing after
the wife of another merchant, Severin, and had put her above his business
interests. Having achieved the position of Court Banker, thanks to pro-
tection and to his connexions, he had found it extremely difficult to
refuse requests for loans, especially from Potemkin, the mention of whose
name was said to have made him tremble. The upshot of this situation
was that Potemkin's descendants alone owed him 762,000 roubles. Voute
subsequently learned that, prior to his appointment as Court Banker,
Sutherland had incurred debts totalling 450,000 roubles; he had pinned
his faith on recovering this sum, and more, through his new office. When,
in due course, his position indeed improved, success went to his head and