

                                    119
                            POLISH INTERLUDE

tiers set out in the treaty and made no further mention of the changes
which his government had proposed subsequent to the signing.! Accord-
ing to Voiite, the sejm was 'bouillante': the noise was deafening. While he
was present, a motion tabled by Buchholtz was rejected in favour of a
counterproposal calling upon the King of Prussia to first recognize the
integrity of Poland; only when this had been done could there be any
question of a treaty with that monarch. While this spectacle was taking
place, Voiite wrote, the building in which the sejm assembled was sur-
rounded on the one side by a Russian army and on the other by a Prus-
sian army, and a battery of Russian 24-pounders was trained on the royal
castle. He, Voiite, now realized 'that we in the Republic have been badly
informed and have had a very false picture of the behaviour of Russia and
Prussia towards Poland.' 2
  Voiite found it strange that the Poles had continued to cling to the repub-
lican form of government while they, like the Dutch, suffered under its
shortcomings and vices. The situations in the two countries differed great-
ly, of course, but government in Poland was in the hands of many who, in
spite of their differences, had a common aim: to deprive the king of his
power-something which had earlier been attempted against the stad-
holder in Holland. If the tyranny of the minor despots could not be
brought to an end, Poland would soon be done for; it would then fall
under foreign dominance, 'perhaps the only means of changing the vicious
disposition of the inhabitants, a product of the example set by the nobil-
ity.' Voiite thus took the view that the failures of the system of govern-
ment in Poland lay at the root of the partition; in fact, it was the efforts to
eliminate those failures which had given rise to the Russian intervention
and with it the Second Partition.
  Voiite and Porter were the first foreigners to be present at the assembly
of the sejm, and they accordingly attracted a good deal of attention. News
of their presence reached King Stanislaw, who sent a secretary to inquire
who they were, and if he, the king, could be of service to them; indeed,
this occurred so often that the visitors eventually felt obliged to seek an
audience of the ruler. To this end, they enlisted the aid of the British
envoy, Gardiner. During the audience, the king asked searching questions
concerning the state of trade in England, and also the bankruptcies which
had occurred there and which had contributed to Poland's distress. When
the audience came to an end, the king drew Voiite and Porter on one side
and, 'his face etched with grief,' said he was sure that they could judge the
wretched position in which he was placed through his country's serious
plight, and he expressed regret at being unable to make their sojourn in

                                     120
                           POLISH INTERLUDE