

                                    125
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

Maintaining direct connexions with Russian merchants seemed to VmIte
to be a risky policy, involving as it would incessant parrying of their
artifices. But trading in imported goods for one's own account, as in 'the
good old days,' would be profitable. 1
  To do this would require a foreigner resident in Moscow, or a foreign
merchant who entrusted his interests to a compatriot there. By abandon-
ing the bare role of commission agent, such a merchant would be in a
position to secure better payment terms, say, part in cash and the balance
in instalments spread over six or twelve months instead of wholly in
instalments which dragged on from year to year.
  According to VOllte, Moscow was a more important centre for imported
goods than St. Petersburg, where the emphasis was on exports. He was
greatly impressed by the city of Moscow, with its half a million inhabitants
and its innumerable churches, and also by the volume of its trade. The
various provinces of the czardom traded with one another in the same
way as the nations of western Europe, and from their offices in Moscow,
Russian and Armenian merchants conducted business with faraway places
such as Persia, Bukhara and China. Most of their business was done in
wintertime, when the merchandise could be transported cheaply by sledge.
Moscow was bristling with merchants of every nationality, in addition to
whom there were innumerable money-changers, who congregated in a
particular part of the shopping area. They sat in open-fronted kiosks, the
boxes containing the various currencies standing behind and to one side
of them. The arrangement, Vollte noted, was similar to that employed in
Amsterdam prior to the opening of the Exchange Bank in 1609. The
principal dealings involved changing copper coins for silver-a product of
the retention by the Russian government of a dual standard.
 Trade with China, it was reported, had ceased to be conducted by
caravan since the opening of a road linking the two countries. During his
stay, VOllte dined with a merchant named Gusyatnikov, who was among
Thomson Rowand's debtors and who, with two other!>, monopolized the
trade with China. Vollte extracted from him a promise that he would be
allowed to draw samples from his warehouse. Although Gusyatnikov was
reputed to be a rich man, he did not pay his debts either to Thomson
Rowand or to Amsterdam houses such as Hovy, Hasselgreen and Wilkie-
son, but kept his creditors on a string with promises of payment in three
years time. Here was decisive proof of VOllte's contention that direct
associations with Russian merchants were to be discouraged. 2
 VOllte's role as a broker was to prove a sore point in his dealings with
houses in Moscow. For example, he was greatly incensed to discover that

                                    126
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 the house of Muilman in Amsterdam had written to Thomson Rowand
 saying that 'One Mr.Voute, a chief broker in the article of teas,' was on
 his way to Russia and might well stop in Moscow. The house of Tamesz &
 Co. had so far failed to pay its respects to him and it could well be that
 they had also been informed of the purpose of his journey and of the fact
 that he was but a 'chief tea broker.' A sharp attack in the direction of the
 partners of Tamesz & Co. revealed plainly how deeply he was hurt and
 how great in his eyes was the social gap between brokership and the
 profession of merchant, as personified by the Hopes.!
  Early in September 1793, Carr arrived from St.Petersburg. The impres-
 sion which he made on Voute was anything but favourable, and when he
 began to quibble over the conditions for his resignation from Thomson
 Rowand, Voute took a firm hand, with the result that the deed dissolving
the partnership was quickly signed. Under the terms of this deed, the
house of Rowand & Carr in St. Petersburg would cease to exist and would
be wound up by Hawes and Grant. 2
  The signing of the deed providing for the new partnership was not
achieved so smoothly, however. Voute had prepared a draft agreement
in which Thomson Rowand would be subject to a form of supervision by
the house of Porter in St.Petersburg-to such an extent, indeed, that in the
event of the indisposition or death of Grant the house would come under
the control of one of the partners of Porter, since Hawes could not
manage alone. 3 As an appendix to the deed, Voute had also drawn up a
list of instructions for merchants, showing how and when a balance sheet
should be prepared, how the affairs of the house should be conducted and
how the securities provided for the debts to Hope & Co. and Baring & Co.
should be managed. The complaisant Hawes concurred in both docu-
ments, but Grant asked for time to consider them. Grant was evidently
digging his heels in; according to Voute he had previously been employed
as a clerk by Porter and, in his heart, still looked up to him.4
  It is conceivable that Grant adopted delaying tactics because he believed
that time was on his side. After all, the agreement was the only item on
the Voute-Porter agenda in Moscow, while all manner of urgent business
awaited them in St.Petersburg. In the event, Voute decided to leave the
matter in abeyance, and on 20th September he and his companion
departed for St.Petersburg. Grant had meanwhile left for the same
destination to close the books of Rowand Carr & Co. 5
  Among the disagreeable matters which Voute wished to discuss at a high
level was one concerning Trosien. In December 1792, the house of
Blanckenhagen & Co. in London had been forced by a serious credit