




Authorization by King Stanislaw of Poland to Pierre Tepper & Co. to negotiate with
                    Hope & Co. in the matter of a loan, 1785
                           POLISH INTERLUDE

In 1784, two years before the period of the loan expired, the sejm,
meeting at Grodno, voted to renew the allotment to the king of the
revenues from the subsidium charitativum, totalling 700,000 Polish guilders
per annum, for the same period as before and with the freedom to use
these as security for a fresh loan abroad.! Hope & Co. had by now ceased
to be the only potential source of such a loan. King Stanislaw had ob-
tained a loan of cf 1,000,000 from the Amsterdam house of Quirijn Willenl
van Hoom in 1781 and in addition maintained financial contacts with
Theodoor Glilcher & Mulder, also in Amsterdam. 2
  Early in January 1785 a Redemption Bureau was established on the
premises of Ferguson Tepper & Co. in Warsaw; its principal function was
the administration of the new loan. It was to this bureau that the Public
Treasuries of Poland and Lithuania would pay the approved subsidium
charitativum of 700,000 Polish guilders per annum. 3 The elimination of
the Royal Treasury from the administrative chain was probably aimed
at giving the lenders a greater sense of security.
  As before, the task of negotiating with Hope & Co. was entrusted to
Tepper. He was instructed to negotiate a loan of 250,000 ducats, or
cf 1,312,500, but when he put this to the Company he was advised that the
sum could, if desired, be increased by 100,000 ducats on condition that
part of the proceeds were employed for the accelerated payment of the
first three instalments on the Van Hoom loan. The price of the Van Hoom
bonds had by this time fallen to 94 %, indicating a lack of confidence
among investors; advancing the repayments would have the effect of
restoring the price to par, and this was a prerequisite for the successful
launching of the new loan.4
  In the months which followed, little progress was made in the negotia-
tions. The principal obstacles from the Company's point of view were
the absence of a further guarantee by Catherine II and lack of confidence
in the stability of Stanislaw's kingship, and even an express declaration by
the Public Treasury that the subsidium charitativum would continue to be
paid after the king's death failed to smooth the path. 5
  Late in 1785 King Stanislaw despatched 'Monsieur de Wickede, who is
charged with safeguarding the interests of the King of Poland in this
country,' to Amsterdam with instructions to continue the negotiations
with the Company. To the vexation of the king, the new negotiator met
with a continued lack of confidence in the continuation of his reign.
Stanislaw attributed the mistrust to German newspaper reports suggesting
that new stormclouds were gathering over Poland and that he planned to
abdicate. The truth of the matter probably lay in an Austrian plan which
                                    II4
                           POLISH INTERLUDE