

                                    II6
                           POLISH INTERLUDE

 credit in the Republic would be at an end. To avoid such a situation, the
 Company had decided to proceed with the advertisement and, if neces-
 sary, to meet the interest and capital repayment out of its own pocket.
 The arrears of capital were swiftly paid off, but the interest outstanding
 from 1st January and totalling cf 27,143.15.0 remained a subject of dis-
 pute. In January 1788 Hope again wrote on this subject to the king, and
 also to De Wickede. Even though the interest computation may have been
 'too great a favour,' this fact should have been considered before the
 contract was signed; the terms of the contract were deemed to have been
 approved by the king and as such were inviolable. The writer expressed
 the hope that the king would issue orders on the subject 'which may at
 once bring an end to our fears for the troublesome consequences of the
 refusal of His Chamber of Finances.'! Despite this appeal, Hope's claim
 was not met until 1790.2
   In the request made to King Stanislaw in January 1788, Hope wrote of
 'many other, more essential matters' which undoubtedly occupied the
 monarch's attention. The reference was to a widespread reform move-
 ment in Poland which sought to utilize Russia's preoccupation with the
wars against Turkey and Sweden to extend the modernization of Poland
without risk of Russian intervention. During the 'four years' sejm' (1788-
92), the task commenced in 1775 was carried a stage farther. New taxes
were imposed, the army was strengthened and measures were introduced
to improve the lot of the peasants. These efforts were crowned with the
constitution of 1791, which converted Poland into a hereditary monarchy
and invested the king with executive power. In the new parliament, in
which the peasants were represented, decisions were taken by a majority
vote and the right of confederation was abolished. 3
  In 1790, Poland had entered into a treaty with Prussia providing for
mutual assistance in the event of attack by a third power. 4 This, the Polish
government believed, would protect the country against Russian inter-
vention. The true value of the treaty was revealed in 1792 when Catherine
II, her hands unfettered by the cessation of the war against the Turks, lost
no time in dealing with what to her were displeasing developments in
Poland. Under her auspices, a confederation was formed (ostensibly at
Targowica, but in fact in St. Petersburg) which protested against the new
constitution with its 'pernicious, revolutionary ideas copied from France.'
The confederation appealed to Catherine for military assistance, which
she of course gladly furnished. The King of Prussia- who had cast covet-
ous eyes on more Polish territory, and who was performing an obscure
balancing act between Austria and Russia-left his ally in the lurch, on the

                                    117
                           POLISH INTERLUDE

