

                                    127
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

crisis there to suspend payments. The house of De Bary & Co. in Amster-
dam had thereupon felt obliged to intervene in the matter of drafts drawn
by the St. Petersburg merchant Michel Trosien on Blanckenhagen and
later assigned by him to De Bary to be further dealt with. The repayment
of the advances, however, was not forthcoming despite a series of honeyed
letters from Trosien. He even managed to persuade De Bary to extend to
him a credit of 150,000 marks banco on Beerend Roosen of Hamburg,
for which De Bary stood as guarantor. Trosien, however, continued to
find excuses for non-repayment, even after De Bary wrote to him saying
that further default would lead to their ruin.
  This was no idle threat, for in March 1793 the house was obliged to cease
payments. However, their creditors supported them in an approach to
the Schepenen of Amsterdam with a request that the partners be allowed
to continue in control in order that, with the assistance of the trustees in
bankruptcy, the firm would be enabled to repay its creditors in full. The
trustees, J.C.Hasselgreen, Voute Bros. and A.Vereul, empowered three
houses in St.Petersburg, Amburger & Son, Raimbert & Co. and Rowand
Carr & Co., to collect debts totalling cf 307,000 from Trosien. At the
same time they arranged, through the Russian envoy in The Hague, for
the Vice-Chancellor, Count Ostermann, to be acquainted with the situa-
tion. They argued that Dutch merchants had for some time been suffering
severe losses as a result of the large number of bankruptcies in Russia and,
moreover, were the victims of the evasion by Russian debtors of the law
and of the legal processes for its enforcement.!
  Trosien, stung by these acts against his person, refused to negotiate with
the appointed houses in St. Petersburg. He did not like the look of the
first; he disliked Frenchmen and he refused to negotiate with an English-
man. And he ignored further correspondence from the trustees. 2
  Much more serious, and of direct interest to Hope & Co., was the shaky
position of the house of Sutherland in St.Petersburg. Baron Richard
Sutherland (he had been raised to the nobility by the empress) had died
in the latter part of 1791, soon after his mighty patron, Potemkin. The
enemies who had earlier harassed him now fell with renewed vigour upon
the house which bore his name, accusing it of having indulged, under his
leadership, in questionable financial practices. The campaign led the
Russian government to set up a committee to examine Sutherland's
accounts during his period as Court Banker; pending the committee's
report, the settlement of his estate was suspended.
  Voute's first act upon reaching St.Petersburg was to visit Sutherland's
office and make the acquaintance of the surviving partners, Browne,

                                    128
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

Whishaw and RaIl. His initial impression of them was mixed: Browne
(a son-in-law of Sutherland) he described as 'a man who would not hurt
a fly,' of Whishaw he had a higher opinion, while RaIl was 'a he-man, an
intriguer through and through, restless, possessing the gift of the gab,
and destined to make progress in this country.' Sutherland's own son, a
degenerate libertine, was ill and could not be present, but Whishaw ex-
plained that his condition was improving, 'for Madame Mercury has got
him out of trouble.' 1 Whishaw revealed that the house was going through
a difficult period pending the settlement of Sutherland's estate and that
their drafts were not willingly accepted. From Rail, Vollte learned that
the government was disputing the firm's claim to commission on the
fourteenth and fifteenth loans, and that bad debts of at least 80,000
roubles would have to be written off.2
  With all these factors in mind, Vollte deemed it wise to delay broaching
the subject of Hope's claims on the house. As far as the Trosien affair was
concerned, he proposed to first quietly reconnoitre the ground. He and
Porter did, however, obtain an audience with Count Samaylov, the Attor-
ney General, who occupied a central position in domestic affairs, justice
and financial matters, but whose powers had been limited during the
reign of Catherine II by the influence of the empress's favourite. 3
  The favourite could exert considerable pressure, for good or for evil, and
thus it was advisable not to ignore him. In I793 it was upon Platon Zubov
that the empress's favour fell, and after the meeting with Samaylov Vollte
obtained an audience with him. He also accorded due honour to Zubov's
secretary, Altesti, an Italian fortune-hunter who, within the protection of
his master's influential position, maintained his own circle of proteges
and who was in a position to furnish an entree to Zubov.
  In his reports to Hope & Co., Vollte had difficulty in describing in detail
Zubov's position at the Russian Court. He had soon discovered that his
letters were opened by the Russian police, and thus he had to be ex-
tremely careful in his references to government officials and to the situa-
tion at Court. He went so far as to experiment with a code based on key
words, but even this failed to provide the required secrecy and in the end
he resorted to using the diplomatic bag of a foreign embassy, which was
not subject to Russian censorship.4
  In one such confidential letter, he described Zubov as 'well disposed
but oflimited knowledge and a man with a heavy burden of debt.' It was
reported that he had ousted Bezborodko, the Secretary of State and for
many years the true head of the foreign ministry, from his position of
power. 5 According to Vollte, Bezborodko was 'the brain behind the whole