

                                    123
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

by whom he had previously been employed as a clerk, and this merely
exacerbated the situation.
 Within the firm, Carr was embroiled in a serious conflict with Grant,
whom he accused of embezzling funds belonging to the house, even
though he had earlier given his approval for these to be used by Grant.
By June 1793 the conflict had assumed such proportions that Carr an-
nounced his intention to resign. Liquidity problems, which were so acute
that only loans from friends saved the house from bankruptcy, pro-
bably contributed to this decision, but of these he made no mention. Dis-
quieting reports concerning the house had started to reach Hope & Co.
soon after James Rowand's death, and in 1792 the partners deemed it
wise to send an observer to Moscow. The warning signals received from
this person in the summer of 1793 were among the motives for Voute's
journey. 1
 Voute and Porter arrived in Moscow on 14th August 1793. They were
warmly received by the partners, Grant and Hawes, who offered them
shelter at the house of a former partner. At first the visitors were hesitant
to accept the offer, but as the purpose of their visit had leaked out (the
result, according to Voute, of Carr's malevolence), they decided that it
would be more prudent to do so and thus avoid giving the world outside
an impression that things were amiss.
  After a cursory examination of the firm's books and correspondence,
Voute expressed the view that Carr's resignation should be accepted,
adding that the sooner this was done, the better. Carr's papers, however,
should be retained by the other partners in order to prevent him from
damaging the reputations of Hope and Baring.2 Rowand's books, like
those of Tepper in Warsaw, revealed an immense backlog of entries,
making it difficult to obtain an accurate picture of the firm's financial
position. The last occasion on which Rowand had had a balance sheet
drawn up was in 1784. Voute commented sarcastically that this had
probably revealed more than enough to Rowand, who had feared to
discover more. To obtain a clearer picture, Voute gave instructions for
trial balances to be prepared for the years 1785 to 1792 inclusive. These
showed that, while losses had been incurred, the house was financially
sound and that it enjoyed a high reputation in Moscow. This reputation
was closely linked to the credit obtained from Raikes and other houses,
and this in turn was based on confidence in the person of James Rowand.
But his death and Carr's rash conduct had undermined confidence in the
house, added to which the slowness with which debts were paid gave rise
to problems of liquidity. According to Porter, the Russian debtors, with

                                    124
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

the exception of a few doubtful individuals, were of substance, as were the
 securities or bonds which they furnished. 1 However, there was no pros-
pect of early settlement, for the Russians viewed the weakness of the rate
 of exchange, from which they too had suffered losses, as a reason to delay
paying their accounts. In April 1793 the weak position of the rouble had
led to a drastic reduction of imports, and this also had an adverse effect
 upon trade. 2
  Vollte devised a plan whereby the firm's creditors would be paid on the
due date. Hope & Co. and Baring & Co. alone would be excluded in the
sense that they would leave sums of cf 200,000 and cf 100,000 of their
claims, totalling cf 1,047,589 and cf 530,805, at the disposal of Thomson
Rowand for a period of three years, during which they would receive
interest at 4 % per annum. Vollte felt justified in proposing this because
he was reasonably confident of the abilities of Hawes and Grant. In his
opinion, the latter possessed 'esprit,' even genius and a flair for business,
and he got on well with the Russians. Hawes was a true office man, quiet,
not brilliant but sufficiently intelligent. Both conducted their business
affairs as Rowand had done, in the manner which was common to foreign
houses in Moscow-and which made such connexions with Russia ex-
tremely hazardous. These houses acted as commission agents, and the
monies which they earned enabled them to spread their wings ever wider.
It was thus easy for them to make their fortune. According to Vollte, they
displayed no initiative, nor had they any profound insight into the pattern
of trade in Russia; they were concerned only with earning their commis-
sion, and paid no heed to the finer points of their business deals.
  Thomson Rowand's premises were situated three-quarters of an hour's
walk from the trading centre proper (too far in Vollte's opinion) and the
Russians who wished to do business with them were obliged to travel the
distance. They were received by a Russian clerk, the partners remaining
behind their desks and, like their Dutch counterparts, making too few
appearances in the warehouse and among the traders and shopkeepers. 3
Such reticence, Vollte considered, was the more serious in Moscow be-
cause there were no brokers or other middlemen able to provide infor-
mation concerning the merchandise, as was the case in Holland, and thus
the foreign merchants became even more isolated. In contrast, the Russian
merchants-who monopolized the home trade and, insofar as they did not
have direct contacts, placed orders for west European goods with houses
such as Thomson Rowand-did everything for themselves, saw each other
every day, kept each other informed of developments and acted accord-
ingly. Specialist middlemen were consequently less important.