

envisaged the replacement of Stanislaw by the Elector of Saxony,
who was less dependent upon Russia. 1 De Wickede had received instruc-
tions to negotiate with other houses in Amsterdam, but it was made clear
to him by Hope that the king must choose between dealing with the
Company alone or going elsewhere. This was communicated to the mon-
arch, who replied that he had no objection to the Company acting alone
in the matter. This decision was accompanied by some flattering com-
ments concerning the partners in Hope & Co., whom the king had 'had
the pleasure to meet thirty years ago. '2 Gratifying as the compliments paid
by King Stanislaw to the erstwhile partners, Thomas and Adrian Hope,
were, however, the Company remained firm in the matter of guarantees.
In addition to the declaration by the Treasury regarding the subsidium
charitativum, Hope desired a special guarantee from Stanislaw's heir,
Joseph Poniatowski, concerning the mortgaging of the king's personal
possessions. In the eyes of the king, a private guarantee from his nephew
and heir was neither proper nor becoming, and he expressed the view that
Hope should respect these 'raisons de delicatesse.' He had no objection
to the insertion of the words 'present and future' in the clause relating to
the mortgaging of his estate, but he would go no farther than that. 3 If this
failed to satisfy Hope, the king was prepared to include his income from
the two Treasuries, totalling four million Polish guilders per annum, in
the securities; and he added that he did not wish to borrow more than one
and a half million guilders altogether.
  The loan was finally arranged at the beginning of April 1786. As on some
previous occasions, the signing of the contract with the entrepreneurs pre-
ceded the issue of the principal debenture. The contract was for two mil-
lion guilders at 5 % interest and for a period of lOt years commencing on
1st June 1786. The contract stipulated that the public subscription to the
loan would open at the offices of Hope & Co. fourteen days after the
publication of the Berigt and that the subscribers would receive a douceur
of t %. The entrepreneurs were to receive a bonus of I % on the total sum
for which they participated plus one month's interest on this sum, which
was equivalent to an extra bonus of /2 %. In addition, they were to receive
t % of the sum actually allocated to them following the public subscrip-
tion. On the assumption that the definitive share would be smaller than
that which they had contracted to subscribe, they would thus have re-
ceived bonuses totalling 2 %of their allotted shares. 4
  The principal debenture, which was dated 21st April, and the contract
between Hope and De Wickede reveal that the king had all his own way
in the matter of mortgages, for there is no mention of special guarantees

                                    115
                           POLISH INTERLUDE

by his heir.1 A notable feature of the loan is the sum, two million guilders,
which exceeds by half a million the amount referred to by the king less
than two months previously. If, however, we deduct the 6 % commission
received by Hope and then compare the result with the 350,000 ducats to
which Hope desired in 1785 to increase the loan, we arrive at approxima-
tely the same figure, namely just over 1% million guilders. 2 No further
mention was made of accelerating the repayment of the Van Hoom loan,
nor of the Redemption Bureau at the house of Tepper; in all probability
this did not operate because the administration of the loan was ultimately
shared between Tepper and the banking house of Blanc. 3
  Hope was also obliged to yield to the king's demands in the matter of
commission on the loan and to accept 6 % instead of 7 %, Stanislaw
having threatened to withhold the I % on the interest payments and
repayment of principal money. It is conceivable that Hope conceded
this in order to sweeten the pill of the 5 % interest, which was t % more
than the king wished to pay and higher by the same margin than the
Swedish loan floated on 1St February 1786.4 This margin and the differ-
ence in bonus paid to the entrepreneurs- I % on the Swedish loan as
against 2 % on the Polish -afford a rough indication of the credit enjoyed
by these countries in Amsterdam.
 According to the contract between Hope and De Wickede, the nett pro-
ceeds of the loan were to be transferred in four instalments, three of
cf 500,000 due on the first day in the months of August, September and Oc-
tober and the fourth, of cf 380,000, on 1st November. Interest, however,
was payable on the whole sum as from 1st June, and this Hope kept for
themselves. A simple calculation shows this to be worth more than 1%,
which means that they were able to give the entrepreneurs a bonus of 2 %
without affecting the remainder of their commission. 5 In December 1786
the king, became aware of the advantage accruing to Hope from the com-
mencement of interest payments on 1st June and, filled with indignation, he
commanded De Wickede to secure a change in the position. Meanwhile
the Chamber of Finances took the law into its own hands and remitted
only half of the seven months' interest due on 1st January 1787.6
 Hope's refusal to issue a certificate of payment for the full sum of the
interest was met by the withholding of the half-yearly interest due on 1st
July 1787. On 25th June the Company had advised King Stanislaw that it
was in the extremely unpleasant position of having up to that moment
received no remittances in respect of interest or the first instalment of the
principal money, while it faced an immediate duty to announce the pay-
ment in the newspapers. If the notice failed to appear, the Polish king's