

Poland as pleasant as possible. To hear such words from the mouth of a
king, Voute wrote, was indeed unusual, and in his opinion the man was to
be pitied because he was not the cause of his country's downfall. The
matter of the king's debts had not arisen during the audience, but Voute
was not optimistic on this score. There was little or no doubt regarding
the payment of the debts incurred by the Republic of Poland because,
among other things, the Russian and Prussian governments would each
accept a share; but Voute had been informed that under the law of Poland
the king himself could not incur debts. Moreover, the king had nothing:
all his property and revenues had been seized by the Russians. 1 Voute's
only hope lay in a meeting with Sievers, but he was so occupied with
affairs relating to the sejm that although Voute and Porter dined at his
house they did not see the man at all. The envoy sent them a written apology
and enclosed letters of introduction to the governors of Minsk and
Smolensk, which would assist them on their journey to Moscow.
 On the eve of their departure for that city, early in August, Voute had
another meeting with Hasselgreen, who was anxious that Voute should
read his memorandum to Buchholtz concerning the debts owed by the
king, the Republic and the magnates, and who had travelled to Grodno
from the Meisner estate near Minsk especially for this purpose. Voute felt
unable to decline so flattering a request, though he feared that, in spite of
Hasselgreen's reasoning, the claims by the Dutch against the king and the
magnates might well be equated with those of their Polish creditors.
 While Poland's future remained undecided, however, nothing could be
done about the loans made to the country, so that Vofite and Porter were
free to concentrate on the commission which they were to undertake for
Hope and Baring in Moscow. When that had been concluded, Voute pro-
posed to travel to St. Petersburg to raise the question of the Polish loans
with the person who wielded the real power, Empress Catherine II of
Russia.




                                    121
                            CHAPTER FIVE

             ADUTCH BROKER AT THE
                RUSSIAN COURT


Although the problems which occupied Voute and Porter during their
visit to Moscow concerned but one mercantile house, they were in many
ways symptomatic of the whole process of trading with Russia. Because
of this, and also in the light of a speculative investment in cochineal,
which will be described later, it is of interest to examine the house con-
cerned more closely.
  Geo.Thomson Rowand & Co. had maintained a business relationship
with Hope & Co. for very many years; since 1788, the extent of their
transactions had grown rapidly. Following the shipment of large quanti-
ties of cochineal to the Moscow home, its account with Hope rose to
more than one and a quarter million guilders in 1791, at the end of
which year a sum of just over a million guilders in Hope's favour was
carried forward to a new account. 1 As this sum included the as yet unsold
cochineal, the Company, not surprisingly, kept a close watch on the situa-
tion following the death of the senior partner, James Rowand, in the
summer of 1791. Shortly before this, Rowand had accepted Thomas
Hawes, George Carr and Alexander Grant into partnership. The four
were also partners in the house of Rowand Carr & Co. of St. Petersburg,
where Carr was responsible for day-to-day management.
  In addition to Hope & Co. and Baring & Co., Thomson Rowand's prin-
cipal correspondents included Raikes & Co. of London, from whom they
purchased diamonds and other precious stones. Like Hope, Raikes were
liberal in the matter of credit. With the death of James Rowand, uncer-
tainty arose regarding the legal validity of his Will in Russia: would it be
accepted, or would the State assume possession of his assets? The effect
upon Carr was one of panic. In his anxiety to disengage himself from the
house, he wrote alarming letters to Raikes. Their reaction was to refuse
further drafts from Rowand and to freeze the house's credit in Amster-
dam. This produced a deluge of accusations from Carr and eventually the
dispute, which was conducted by correspondence, reached the point
where, in May 1792, Raikes refused to have anything more to do with
Rowand as long as Carr remained a partner. Carr had earlier found
among James Rowand's papers a criticism of himself written by Raikes,