

                                   13 1
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

he commenced to fling his money about. Those who had procured the
office for him had known of his weakness and indulgence, and had abused
them shamelessly. During his lifetime Sutherland had never been called
upon to account for his management of the finances, but now that he was
dead the vultures, spearheaded by the most unscrupulous profiteers, were
tearing at his bones. Voute observed that the smallness of Sutherland's
estate (he left practically nothing) said much for his goodheartedness, but
little for his ability as a merchant. 1
  Voute was nevertheless of the opinion that the shortcomings which he
had experienced in the Russian society represented only one side of the
story: against the laziness, depravity, corruption and waste must be set
the immense resources and the limitless potential of the country, which
continued to overawe the observer. It seemed to him that, up to a point,
this potential encouraged the fatalism, improvidence and waste, inasmuch
as the nation, in time of real need, could always fall back on its untapped
reserves which, with only efficient exploitation and strict control, could
rapidly enable the largest deficit to be converted into a surplus. 'If we can
maintain peace, we will repay all our debts within six years,' Voute was
told. And he believed this.2
  Russia's natural resources, however, lay open to attack by her redoubt-
able neighbours, and she was therefore compelled to protect her territory,
which she did by expanding her frontiers. Had Voute been told that: 'The
Russians will never enter Constantinople or Peking,' he would have
replied: 'They will be there; they can do anything on which they set their
minds.' 3 One more war with the Turks would suffice to impart 'a clear
structure' to the pattern of trade in southern Russia, because then the
links with the Greek archipelago and the whole of the Mediterranean
would be firmly established. Voute commented that a glance at the map
of Europe was sufficient to show that Russia's favourable position and
the vastness of her territory enabled her government to smash any nation
which opposed her. Whatever Sir Francis Baring might say in his letters
to Voute, one visit to Russia would be enough to make him change his
views and agree with Voute that Russia's immense strength was founded
on 'the irresistible principle that there is more than enough food to feed
the population.' England was also powerful, but her strength was stretched
over the seas, whereas Russia could concentrate hers. "If only system and
order exist, all must bend.' 4
  Voute might well conjure up visions of system and order, and dream of
the country's inestimable potential wealth, but this in no way detracted
from the fact that the reality in Russia was made up of chaotic situations

                                    132
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 and a desperate scarcity of money. This was brought home to Voute
 when, before he had an opportunity to broach the subject of Hope's loan
 to Poland, he was buttonholed by RaIl with a request for a loan for a
 distinguished Polish lady. At first RaIl declined to reveal her name, but
 later he disclosed that he was acting for the Countess Potocka, who was
 greatly in favour with Catherine II by reason of her pro-Russian sympa-
 thies and of the services which her husband, Count Felix Potocki, had
rendered to Russia in organizing the Targowica Confederation.! The early
 messages indicated that the countess desired a loan of 400,000 ducats,
 security for which would be provided in the form of mortgages on her
estates in Galicia and a guarantee from Catherine II herself. The empress
had formerly advanced money to meritorious subjects, against the secu-
rity of estates, but she could no longer do so since the Treasury coffers
were empty. Voute was informed that the valuation of serfs, which was
customary in the case of imperial loans, would apply to the loan request-
ed. This would be at the rate of forty roubles per head, a very low figure
because women, children, houses and land were totally ignored for the
purposes of a mortgage. If the debtor failed to meet his or her obligations,
the estate was forfeited and became Crown land-with consequent benefit
to the empress. The proposed loan would run for eighteen years-an ab-
normally long period-and bear interest at 5 %. The countess was very
rich, but events in Poland had left her short of ready money and she faced
the obligation to repay a large sum in Dubno, in Galicia, by 6th January
1794. If she failed to do so, she would be put in an extremely difficult posi-
tion, and this had to be avoided at all costs. Voute considered it impor-
tant that Hope & Co. should provide the loan; after all, the countess
ranked high in the favour of the empress and could thus influence, one
way or the other, the proposal that Russia should accept responsibility
for Hope's loan to Poland. Apart from this consideration, however, it was
imperative that the loan be furnished, for: 'The empress must never re-
ceive the impression that your house is unable to surmount its difficulties,'
and her guarantee would have to suffice to ensure success. 2
  Initially, Voute assumed that the imperial guarantee had been given only
to Countess Potocka, but it later transpired that Countess Alexandra
Branicka, a niece and former mistress of Potemkin, had also succeeded in
obtaining such a favour. Her husband, Count Xavier Branicki, had been
concerned in the Targowica Confederation, where he had rendered ser-
vices to the empress comparable with those of Count Potocki. 3 Countess
Branicka had consulted Ritter, to whom she had intimated her wish that
the guarantee be transmitted to Holland as security for a loan to be floated