

                                     133
             A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

there. Vofite had earlier drawn Samaylov's attention to the adverse effect
which incidental, guarantee-backed loans could have upon Hope's latest
Russian loans, which had still not been fully subscribed.
 When he heard that the guarantee was after all to be transmitted to Hol-
land, Vofite hurried to Zubov's palace, where he was met by Countess
Branicka and her husband, Prince Lubomirski, Count Limpicki and
Zubov himself. Countess Branicka, whom Vofite described as 'an avari-
cious virago who tyrannized her husband,' had the most to say. Like
Countess Potocka, she desired that Hope & Co. should arrange for an
advance to be placed at her disposal at Dubno early in January. Vofite
replied that this was easier said than done, since the defeat by the French
of the Dutch armies in Flanders had produced a scarcity of credit, making
fresh loans impossible for the time being. Furthermore, the ban imposed
by the States General of the Republic on foreign loans had to be consid-
ered. The best course would be to await further developments; indeed,
that was the only advice which he could offer. Vofite added that the
guarantee would have to be despatched to Hope, as otherwise the Russian
loans could be prejudiced, and that would be contrary to the wish of the
empress. The countess ultimately agreed, and even allowed herself to be
persuaded to appoint Rall as her agent for the loan. When Vofite reached
this point, Prince Lubomirski commenced to calculate how much money
the Amsterdam merchant Giilcher had in Warsaw, adding that he would
be paying him 25,000 ducats in December. Vofite promptly handed back
the guarantee to Count Branicki and observed that the loan would clearly
not now be required since Prince Lubomirski could furnish the ducats.
This, however, was not in the prince's mind, and the episode ended with
the guarantee being returned to Vofite with a request to try to obtain the
loan in Amsterdam. 1
  One thing which Vofite did achieve was a reduction of the loan sums:
Countess Potocka would now receive no more than 150,000 ducats, and
Countess Branicka 100,000; of these sums, 54,000 and 100,000 ducats
respectively were required in Dubno before 6th January. He again ap-
pealed urgently to Hope & Co. to do their utmost to promote the success
of the loan, if indeed there was any chance at all. He proposed that Berck,
one of Hope's brokers, should spread the sums over as many entrepreneurs
as possible, thus reducing individual shares to a minimum. It was believed
in Russia that Hope & Co. could achieve anything, and with an eye to
other issues it was vital that this impression should be sustained.
  Vofite had already discussed the matter of the loan to King Stanislaw
with Altesti, Zubov's secretary, and on 21st October, at the latter's re-

                                   134
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

quest, he set down the details in a memorandum which was to be given to
Zubov. Motivated by the guarantees in respect ofloans to the two coun-
tesses, Voute made it appear that the loan to King Stanislaw in 1786
formed an extension of the loan of 1777, and that the guarantee given by
Catherine II in 1777 therefore also applied to the loan of 1786. He postu-
lated that Hope & Co. had agreed to negotiate these loans only because
they stemmed from dispensations granted by the empress to the King of
Poland. If the Russian government was prepared to place bonds of the last
Russian loan to a value of cf 800,000 at the Company's disposal, it would
surrender its claims on King Stanislaw to the empress and, moreover, meet
the remaining interest and principal payments in respect of the Polish
loan. Catherine could settle the resulting claim on King Stanislaw by as-
suming direct control of the 'oeconomies' of Brest-Litowsk, Grodno,
Kobrin, Szawel and Olitzka. 1 It is remarkable that Voute should have
invoked a non-existent Russian gurantee for the loan of 1786, the more so
since the Russian government must have known as well as he did that it
did not exist. Moreover, the 'oeconomies' to which he referred served as
mortgage security only for the 1777 loan and not for the one of 1786-un-
less, of course, one wishes to read this into the passage: 'All the wealth
and property, present and future, which belongs to US.'2
  In a memorandum written a few days later and intended for Samaylov,
which dealt principally with the Russian loans, Voute reverted to his
conversion plan. After giving an interesting and detailed description of
the technique of placing loans in Holland (reference to which has already
been made in this treatise), he stated that, following the military defeat in
Flanders, the once so abundant flow of money had dried up, with the
result that only two million guilders had been subscribed towards the
eighteenth and nineteenth loans.
  A victory by the armies of the Dutch Republic and its allies, the memo-
randum continued, would bring an early resumption of the flow. Admit-
tedly, the suspension of the loans to Poland, to King Stanislaw and to the
Polish magnates had no bearing on Russia's credit, but it did not enhance
the loans as a whole. If the empress would agree to accept responsibility
for the balance of cf 800,000, this would undoubtedly have a favourable
influence on the Russian loans in the Republic. Such a step would be natu-
ral now that Catherine had furnished guarantees for loans to individual
Polish subjects, and the Russian government could accomplish this with-
out injury or disadvantage by sequestering the revenues of King Stanislaw
and having the interest and principal payments met from these. In his
proposals, Voute thus allied himself completely with the concept of the