

                                    135
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

liquidation of Poland, and in his view the chances of these being accepted
were increased by the fact that on 14th October 1793, under severe pres-
sure from 'the venerable and truly great Mr. De Sievers,' the sejm had
approved a treaty which brought Poland completely under Russian tute-
lage.!
  Late in October 1793 Samaylov informed VOlite that the empress had
consented to take over the loan to the Polish king; however, she had stip-
ulated that the transfer should constitute a separate transaction in order
not to let it weigh upon the bonds of the latest Russian loans. Voute saw
in this an opportunity for speculation: he was willing to buy up Polish
bonds at the current low price, safe in the knowledge that either the King
or the Republic of Poland would ultimately have to meet the obligation,
and that the news that Catherine had assumed responsibility for the loan
would send up the price. 2
  During the discussion, Samaylov referred to the lack of success with the
eighteenth and nineteenth loans to Russia. He had, he said, been offered
six million guilders at 4-2- %interest, whereas Hope had insisted upon 5 %.
It was not the half per cent which was worrying him, but rather the fact
that he had expected immediate results and had not got them. V oute
attempted to convince him that the prevailing circumstances were res-
ponsible for the delay and that if Hope & Co. could not succeed, an
inexperienced house would have no chance whatsoever.
  To Voute, Samaylov's offer smacked of one of the many intrigues which
had been woven in the latter's circle since the death of Sutherland, against
which it was wise to be on one's guard. Voute was particularly apprehen-
sive of Hasselgreen, who, during a visit to Warsaw, had won over the
Russian envoy, Sievers, by means of sizeable loans. Reports indicated
that Hasselgreen was at that moment on his way to St.Petersburg, almost
certainly with the aim of supplanting Hope & Co. at the Russian Court. 3
  Hasselgreen, however, did not put in an immediate appearance, and
Voute had no cause for complaint about the manner in which he was
received into society circles in St. Petersburg. RaIl showed his gratitude to
Voute for having involved him in the loan to Countess Branicka by invit-
ing him to a banquet attended by a host of counts and countesses, and
Samaylov, in a burst of affability, invited Voute to a ball which he and his
wife gave for the Grand Duke Alexander and his lady, at which all the
Russian nobility were present. It was on the grand style, 'les tables splen-
didement servies et les salles illuminees superieurement.' It was none the
less a convivial occasion, unmarred by sharp distinctions of rank or class:
'It resembled a family rather than a group of people of differing classes;
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 everyone, from the members of the Imperial family to plain officers, mixed
 and danced together; there was no trace of etiquette and the rules of pro-
 cedure were flexible and not in the least restrictive. In short, it was the
 greatness of Russia showing itself in all its splendour.' 1
  Despite all the friendly gestures by Samaylov, the wearisome wait in
Zubov's antechamber and the lengthy discussions with Markov and Os-
 termann, little progress was made in the matter of the Polish loan. On 3rd
 December Samaylov promised a decision on the following day, but when
 this arrived the decision was postponed until the sixth on the grounds that
the empress was indisposed. It was later put back to the tenth, and finally,
 on the fourteenth, the Attorney General announced that Catherine was not
favourably disposed towards a settlement because she was greatly dis-
pleased with the King of Poland. 2 Her displeasure will have been directed
not so much at the king himself as at the growing tide of resistance
throughout Poland to the enforced surrender of territory. Vollte declined
to regard the rejection as final and remained convinced that the empress
would change her mind.
  At about the same time, a letter arrived from Hope & Co. saying that the
Company could not entertain the proposed loans to the two countesses.
The news came as a most unpleasant shock to Rall, who had committed
himself to help Countess Potocka, and he appealed to Hope to assist him
in keeping his promise. After consulting Vollte, the Company offered Rall
a credit of cf 130,000. Vollte was gratified by the fact that the warrants and
the guarantees were in the Company's hands, thus preventing the reputa-
tion and the credit of the empress being compromised. 3
  Where the loans in Holland were concerned, Vollte's relationship with
Samaylov became less pleasant. Hope & Co. needed approximately three
million guilders for interest payments on various dates in 1794, but the
Russian government had already received more than half of the two mil-
lion guilders raised towards the eighteenth and nineteenth loans. In a
letter written to Samaylov at the end of November 1793, Labouchere
explained that the Company, in anticipation of further subscriptions to
the loans, was prepared to advance the balance of the sum required.
However, he made it clear that the offer did not apply to the million
guilders already placed a the disposal of the Russian government. 4
  Later reports from Amsterdam severely diminished Vollte's optimism
regarding the chances of completing the Russian loans. The conquest of
Toulon by the forces of the revolutionary government in France- 'a de-
velopment which has deeply disturbed me' -could hardly fail to make the
money market in Holland even tighter.