

                                    143
             A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

included a number of public holidays, so that Hope's business would be
further delayed.!
  While these events were taking place, the outlook for the house of
Sutherland had become steadily more dismal. The committee of inquiry
had still not completed its report, and unless and until Sutherland's estate
was settled the house could not remain solvent. To make matters worse,
the firm's credit standing steadily deteriorated; while on the one hand
Alexander Sutherland in London was threatening to return drafts totalling
80,000 roubles, on the other there was the situation that it would take a
ukase to make the firm's debtors pay up-and this could only come when
the committee had reported on its findings. Voilte reported that the house
faced bankruptcy unless a quarter of a million roubles was received from
the government at an early date. Both he and Whishaw made desperate
efforts to stave off the collapse. Whishaw drew up a plan for dealing with
the firm's liabilities, which totalled 876,100 roubles (including 351,000
roubles owed to Hope & Co.). The assets amounted to 700,800 roubles
and thus, in theory, were adequate to meet 80 %of the debts.
  Whishaw was prepared to accept responsibility for this percentage of
the commitments on condition that Sutherland Jr. and his brother-in-law,
Browne, undertook to meet the balance.
  In a memorandum to Samaylov, Voilte pleaded for honourable treatment
of the Sutherland affair. He agreed that the late Court Banker owed the
government 3,700,000 roubles, but pointed out that this sum included
losses of 660,000 roubles on export shipments and 584,000 roubles on
exchange operations, both of which had arisen from complying with
verbal instructions from the former Attorney General, Prince Vyazemsky,
aimed at bolstering up the value of the rouble. In his opinion, the losses
on these transactions should be borne by the government. Moreover, the
memorandum continued, claims by the house of Sutherland on various
government bodies must be deducted, as must the debts incurred by
Grand Duke Paul and the late Potemkin, amounting to 200,000 and
762,000 roubles respectively. The balance of the deficit might well be met
from the sale of houses and cabinet bonds and the recovery of liquid
debts.
  Voilte went on to say that while he did not seek to cover up the baron's
shortcomings-a cash deficit of 147,000 roubles was a very serious matter-
it was only fair that attention should also be focussed on the complicity
of those who, knowing Sutherland's weaknesses, had helped him to
achieve his office and had then taken advantage of him. It was through
Sutherland that Hope & Co. had finally become convinced of Russia's

                                    144
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

wealth, whereupon the Company had been willing to provide huge sums
for the strengthening of the country's army and navy.1 If Sutherland
were to be declared bankrupt at the time of his decease, not only would
this mean the end of the house which bore his name, but it would also be
a slap in the face of Hope & Co. and would seriously jeopardize Russia's
credit.
 The die, however, had been cast. Voute attempted to see Zubov and
Samaylov, but Zubov threw the ball back into Samaylov's court, and the
latter was adamant. 2 He argued that everyone, inside and outside Russia,
knew that the baron had died a bankrupt, and that it was about time the
fact was established. Voute replied that this was the first he had heard
about it in all the months of effort, by way of memoranda and audiences,
to secure a satisfactory settlement of Sutherland's affairs. He reiterated
that Russia's credit standing would be severely harmed if the house of
Sutherland, Browne and Wi shaw was made bankrupt by reason of the
insolvency of the late Court Banker.
 This remark incensed Samaylov, who asked what Voute was driving at;
was he trying to compare a mighty country like Russia with republics
such as Genoa and Lucca? Sutherland had inflicted great damage on
Russia, and his successors must be made to pay. When Voute repeated his
arguments concerning the role of those who had arranged for Sutherland's
appointment, Samaylov informed him that the empress had commanded
that all who had been concerned in the affair should be punished. Seeing
no point in prolonging the argument, V oute requested a firm decision
concerning the estate on 11th March: either the baron had died insolvent,
in which case the house which he led would become bankrupt on the 12th,
or the successors would receive 250,000 roubles from the estate, in which
case Voute would go to their assistance with a further 100,000 roubles.
Samaylov agreed to the proposal and even offered to delay the departure
of the courier to Amsterdam until the 12th so that Hope & Co. could be
informed of the decision as quickly as possible. 3
 With this, the fate of Sutherland, Browne and Whishaw was in fact
sealed. V oute visited a number of senior officials, but on I Ith March 1794
the empress gave her verdict, which corresponded broadly with Samaylov's
views, and on the following day the house of Sutherland collapsed. 4
Voute was profoundly disappointed: this, then, was the outcome of five
months' hard work. As for the action against Trosien, that would run its
course; he had lost interest in it and had decided to leave for Moscow as
soon as possible. 5
The fact that the empress, as a soothing gesture, had-at long last-con-