

                                   149
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

tances were beirig taken care of, not by Ritter but by the Court Broker,
Fock. A substantial portion of the monies involved was destined for Hope
& Co. to be used for the payment of interest. By this means, the govern-
ment was trying to get back into the Company's good books.
  Samaylov made repeated inquiries regarding Voute's progress, and made
it clear that he would be a welcome visitor when his condition permitted.
Voute replied that he was still far too weak, and that he desired to return
to Holland as soon as possible after his recovery. He did, however, visit
Zubov at the Tauric Palace, where he received an extremely friendly wel-
come. During their meeting, Zubov promised to take firm action against
Thomson Rowand's debtors. On the advice of Myatlev, the sworn enemy
of Samaylov, Voute, still weak from his illness, painfully drew up yet
another memorandum on the Sutherland case; this was to be passed to
one of the empress's secretaries so that the matter might be brought di-
rectly to Catherine's attention. There were indications that all the earlier
memoranda on the subject had failed to get beyond ministerial level. The
situation had changed in Voute's favour inasmuch as Catherine had again
taken the reins, and while doing so had administered a severe lecture to
her ministers concerning the unsatisfactory developments in Poland. She
was understood to have relieved Zubov of control over Poland and to
have entrusted this to Bezborodko. 1
  Voute's recovery was a slow process, and early in May 1794 he suffered
renewed attacks of fever accompanied by severe stomach pains. The
British ambassador gave him some 'James pills' (a renowned remedy,
according to V oute), but although these afforded temporary relief they
did not prevent the fever recurring at regular intervals-and always at four
o'clock in the morning. He was obliged to decline a second invitation
from Zubov, but the latter so persisted in his enquiries as to the gen-
uineness of Voute's indisposition that Bagge was eventually obliged to visit
him in person to convince him of the fact. 2 Zubov sent a message to
Voute, assuring him that the Trosien affair would be settled to his satis-
faction and that other matters would be brought to a similarly satisfactory
conclusion. Voute was moved to observe that his illness had at least
served some purpose.
  To be ill in Russia at that time was a costly business: the quinine powders
which Voute had to take at hourly intervals in the early days of his illness
were expensive, and to these were added the cost of bed and bedclothes,
the price of the oranges, lemons and refreshing beverages, and finally the
doctors' fees, which were almost as high in St.Petersburg as in London. 3
Voute's correspondence reveals that Dr. Guthrie accepted banknotes in

                                    ISO
             A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

payment for his services, but that Voute found it more appropriate to
purchase a gift for Sir Samuel Rogerson. Dr. Guthrie advised him to leave
St.Petersburg as soon as possible on the grounds that a change of air
would assist his recovery. Voute had proposed to travel overland via
Narva, Reval and Riga, but this was impossible in view of the Polish
revolution and so he decided to go by sea to Lubeck. 1
 By now, Voute's health was showing a decided improvement and he was
gradually recovering the strength to deal with business matters. The case
against Trosien ended as Zubov had predicted, the arbitrators unani-
mously finding in favour of De Bary and ordering Trosien to pay
cf 307,000, in default of which his assets would be seized and he himself
imprisoned. 2
 By 29th May, Voute was well enough to attend an audience with Zubov
at Tsarkoye Selo. The most important news imparted by Zubov was that
the empress had read Voute's memorandum and the copy of Hope's irate
letter of 31st March and had thereupon stated that she wished to receive
Voute in audience on 5th June. Such an honour was seldom bestowed on
untitled persons, and certainly not on those who had not previously been
presented to her. Zubov went on to say that he had been instructed to
inform Voilte in advance that the empress was completely satisfied with
Hope's conduct and that she would uphold the reputation and honour of
the Company in every possible way. The favourable verdict in the Trosien
case, Voute learned, had been due to Catherine's personal intervention,
and it was she who had instructed Prince Dolgoruky, the Governor
General of Moscow, to support Thomson Rowand in their actions against
their debtors. Whatever the outcome of their struggle might be, Voute
wrote, it was good that the whole of Europe should know that those who
violated the law, as Trosien had done, would be brought to book as soon
as their deeds became known to the empress, and that she was always
ready to put an end to such unjust practices. 3
  On 5th June Voute travelled to Tsarkoye Selo for his audience with
Catherine, 'a memorable moment in my life.' The empress, he later wrote,
was the essence of amiability, and although he had at first been somewhat
shy, the conversation had gone easily and smoothly. But in the matter of
Sutherland she had refused to budge an inch, saying that the manner in
which the Court Banker had abused her trust, and all the things which she
had found out concerning the baron's accomplices, had made her decide
to end the custom of appointing a Court Banker. Voute's impression was
that the empress wished the Crown's claims upon Sutherland's estate to
be placed on the same footing as those of the other creditors. In any case,
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT