

                                    139
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

General to explain-in Voiite's presence-his continued default. During
this encounter, Voiite was informed that the case would be laid before an
arbitration tribunal on the following Friday.
  Voiite also succeeded in extracting a number of undertakings in regard
to Sutherland's estate. Whereas he had previously got no farther than
some vague promises to report to the empress, Samaylov now informed
him that the sole obstacle was a report by Bezborodko to Catherine,
which he consented to expedite.
  In view of the pending hearing involving Trosien, Voiite again delayed
his departure for Moscow. At that moment, bringing down Trosien was
his prime objective. As he saw it, Trosien would, at the least, be ordered to
pay a portion of his debts; if he was unable to do so-and this appeared
very likely-his assets would be sequestrated and he would go bankrupt.
If all this took place, he, Voiite, would have shown that Trosien had an
Achilles' heel, and an action of this sort would be of value in his negotia-
tions with the partners of Thomson Rowand.!
  Despite all the straight talking, however, Voiite was ill at ease. He was
again haunted by the thought of Hasselgreen's arrival in St.Petersburg.
Hasselgreen was said to be on very close terms with Ritter, who in turn
had a hold over Samaylov, not only by reason of the credit which he had
furnished in Frankfurt but also because he had settled some of Samaylov's
private debts. It was rumoured that Hasselgreen would make sweeping
proposals to the Russian government and, indeed, that numerous under-
takings had already been entered into. Voiite would dearly like to see
Hope & Co. make an offer to counter the threat. Should the Company
advance the monies for the interest payments in 1794, even though the
million guilders had been placed at the disposal of the Russian govern-
ment, or should it not? This very sombre image formed the prelude to
Voiite's greatest grievance, namely that Hope & Co. had not given him
full powers to act on their behalf.
  He decided that the Company would have to make up its mind on this
issue: either it gave him full power for a specified period and up to a
specified monetary limit, or he would wash his hands of the Russian loan
affair.2 Voiite maintained that he needed this degree of backing in his
negotiations with Samaylov, for he did not hesitate to say what was on his
mind, and the truth was not always to the liking of the Attorney General.
A memorandum from Voiite on the subject of rates of exchange, which
was in fact destined for the empress, had lain on Samaylov's desk for more
than two months for the simple reason that Samaylov was frightened to
pass it on. 3 In this document, Voiite had dealt in depth with the fall in the

                                     140
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 value of the rouble and the factors which had caused this. In a cautious
 but unambiguous manner, he had laid the blame at the feet of the Russian
 government, which had financed its deficits by the inflationary act of
creating assignats.
  Voute also expressed himself at some length concerning the position of
 Court Banker, one which was customarily entrusted to a foreigner. He
referred in particular to Richard Sutherland who, he said, had established
 Russia's credit abroad but, by stubbornly believing in a boom in the
exchange rate of the rouble even when this continued to fall, had suffered
serious losses on exchange operations and the exporting of goods; these
losses, he went on, had harmed Sutherland himself, the Russian govern-
ment and Russian trade as a whole, for the last-named had not been
shown where the fault lay. That, in the final analysis, the fault lay with
the government and its inflationary policy, Voute left unsaid.
  All ills, it was argued, could be cured by taking a slice of Russia's
inestimable natural resources and increasing exports of these. Then why,
for example, did the government leave so much copper in the soil? If
copper mining were to be greatly expanded, exports of this metal could be
increased and silver imported in exchange. With this silver as security,
assignats, which would have to be freely exchangeable for silver roubles,
could be issued. In this manner the exchange rate for the rouble could be
restored to its former intrinsic silver value of 36 stuivers, with consequent
benefit to Russia's trade and to the government itself, which could then
meet its commitments for interest and principal abroad at much less cost
in terms of roubles. Other mined products such as lead and saltpetre
could be dealt with similarly. In later years Voute was to continue to
hammer home the theme of 'the treasures of the bowels of the earth,' and
even to achieve temporary success. 1
  Voute may have refrained from committing any startling truths to paper,
but in a conversation with Samaylov he implied that he was well aware
that, because they were in debt, those at the top hesitated to do justice to
those who sought it. 'He fell silent and appeared embarrassed; a deep sigh
which escaped him convinced me that I had touched a sensitive spot.' For
this reason, Samaylov was anxious for the case against Trosien to be
settled amicably. If Trosien were to be committed to prison, matters
which could better remain hidden might well come to light. It seemed to
Voute that the weakness of Samaylov's position enhanced his own influ-
ence somewhat: 'Bear in mind that a Russian is proud and haughty when
he has the upper hand, but weak and servile when he is at the wrong end
of the stick.' 2
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT