

                                    137
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

The revolts by royalists in the Vendee and in Brittany threatened to col-
lapse, and if the French ceased to be preoccupied in those regions, the full
force of their armies would be turned on the allied troops in Brabant,
Flanders and Germany; the consequences did not bear contemplation. It
was rumoured in St. Petersburg that the Turkish ambassador in London
was planning to mediate between France and the allied powers; if he were
to succeed in his mission, the Turks would gain a firm foothold in central
Europe, but it would make little difference whether they or the French
were there: 'the only distinction lies in the manner in which they chop off
the heads.' 1
 Voute had initially reacted with enthusiasm to Henry Hope's return to
the Republic early in December 1793, but now he began to think differ-
ently. Henry Hope had urged Voute to appeal to the Russian government
to take a strong line with regard to the pro-French tendencies of Denmark
and Sweden, but Voute was careful to avoid the subject: 'that is comple-
tely outside my sphere; it is a political matter, and this fact alone would
make me avoid it.' He reported that the Russian Court favoured action
but that the severity of the Russian winter made it impracticable. 'The
climate is a supreme power and as such cannot be trifled with.' 2
  While in the process of writing his letter dated 18th January 1794, Voute
was urgently summoned by Samaylov, who requested him to approach
Hope & Co. regarding an advance on the uncompleted eighteenth and
nineteenth loans, in the form of gold coins. Voute referred Samaylov to
Labouchere's letter oflate November 1793 in order to show that money was
too tight to permit any advance, adding that under the prevailing circum-
stances earlier promises could not be maintained. He went on to point out
that a report had just been received, stating that the Duke of Brunswick and
General Wurmser had both suffered defeats and that Mannheim had fallen
to the French. In this situation, Holland's riches were illusory, for with no
money in circulation the Dutch investor was obliged to view his bonds as
evidence of money which he had once possessed, and not as proof of
money which he still possessed. He stressed that, in compliance with ear-
lier instructions from Samaylov, Hope & Co. had already despatched a
sum in golden ducats to Igelstr6m, the Russian envoy in Warsaw. Samay-
lov conceded this, but requested that the Company should keep available
a further sum in gold coins. For the moment he would be content with a
draft on Warsaw for 240 ducats, and this Voute could not bring himself to
refuse. 3
  At the end of January 1794, Voute became seriously ill. 'One colique
continuelle' was how he described it to Hope, adding that Dr. Guthrie, a
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 well-known British doctor in St.Petersburg, had saved him from the
grave. 1 Voiite blamed his illness-of which, according to him, there were
 then a thousand other cases in the city-on the mild winter with its wet
 snow. He was put on a diet and, because this had to be prepared separa-
 tely, he was obliged to seek a new headquarters, the Huguet Hotel, even
 though this cost 60 roubles a month more.
  Although Voiite was a sick man, Samaylov summoned him with the
utmost urgency to the Court, where, in the presence of the full ministerial
council, he informed Voiite that the Russian government required a sum
of 200,000 guilders to be placed at its disposal in Frankfurt, and that a
decision must be taken within a matter of hours. Voiite, ill and weak, and
kept on his feet with Chinese rhubarb, drew the attention of the Court to
the large sums owed to Hope & Co. by all manner of merchant houses in
 Russia and to the two million guilders still owing for interest payments in
 1794. Samaylov thereupon offered to give him 160,000-170,000 roubles
which he could remit to London or Amsterdam, on condition that the
cf 200,000 for Frankfurt was forthcoming. Voiite was requested to give his
answer by 6.30 p.m. When he returned, he found that the urgency had
evaporated: it later transpired that Ritter had furnished the money in the
form of drafts on Melvil & Co. and Hasselgreen of Amsterdam. 2
  This episode gave rise to a discussion between Samaylov and Voiite con-
cerning Russia's finances as a whole, and this was continued on the fol-
lowing morning. The meeting gave Voiite an opportunity to bring up the
Trosien case, and he made no attempt to disguise his displeasure concer-
ning the affair. Trosien had used Voiite's presence as an excuse to refuse
further contact with the appointed houses in St. Petersburg. He had
threatened to bring an action against Voiite, who had thereupon let it be
known that he was willing to meet Trosien only in the presence of four or
five merchants of good standing and reputation, in order to have reliable
witnesses should this be necessary. The case against Trosien should have
been heard at the end of November 1793, but owing to slackness, for
which Samaylov was partly to blame, no progress had been made up to
the time of the discussion, in late January 1794. Voiite made it plain that
if people like Trosien were allowed to escape the law, he would have no
alternative but to inform his principals that Russia was an abyss in which
foreign capital became swallowed up, and as such was not worthy of
further credit. 3
  This strong line produced results. Samaylov immediately gave instruc-
tions for the merchant Bacharacht to be summoned and, after a conversa-
tion between these two, Trosien was ordered to appear before the Attorney