

                                    147
             A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

of these had vented his spleen was such that Vofite put them aside and
went back to bed. On the following day, 17th April, letters dated 28th
March arrived from Amsterdam; the pile was now so high that Vofite
spent a large part of the next day reading them. It was not easy to deliver
Hope's letter to Samaylov, for it was Maundy Thursday and the Attorney
General, together with the other members of the Court, had gone to
church at six o'clock in the morning and would not return until four in
the afternoon.
 During the evening, Vofite developed an acute fever; Dr.Guthrie was
called and administered an emetic, but the patient brought up only bile.
By the next day his condition had so deteriorated that Dr. Guthrie called
in Sir Samuel Rogerson, a Scot and the physician to Catherine II, who
diagnosed 'inflammation of the gall bladder, accompanied by fever' and
prescribed quinine. 1 This indeed proved beneficial, and by the 24th Vofite
was over the worst and his skin had commenced to turn yellow. Guthrie
and Rogerson were agreed that only Vofite's strong constitution had
saved him. By the 26th of the month the patient had recovered sufficiently
to write a letter to Henry Hope; this was given to the English courier and
would be posted in Utrecht or Naarden in order to evade Russian cen-
sorship.
 In this, he disclosed that all of Catherine's ministers had been knocked
off balance by Hope's letter of censure to Samaylov, and added that
because the recipient had been so stupid as to leave it on his desk, all
St.Petersburg was now aware of the Company's rage. The letter had
already had some effect, for those of Samaylov's minions who were en-
gaged at Sutherland's offices were now less arrogant, and one had inad-
vertently mentioned that the final outcome of the affair might be less
disagreeable than had at first been thought. 2 It was the custom for those
who attended Eastertide church services to embrace each other before
going their separate ways. The congregation at the Court chapel had
included Grand Duke Paul, who otherwise lived in complete retirement,
and after the service he had embraced all except Samaylov and Zubov;
to Vofite, this was further proof that the two were hand in glove.
  Rogerson had confided to Vofite that the empress's health and intellec-
tual faculties were declining. In contrast, however, it was known that she
had in the past fortnight repeatedly voiced her severe displeasure with the
course of events in Poland, and that she was particularly rankled by the
refusal of the Hollanders to make further loans to Russia. Vofite ascribed
the Russian defeat in Poland-the prime cause of Catherine's wrath-to
lack of experience on the part of the generals and the total failure of the
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 commissariat, to which had to be added the utter chaos in the State's
finances and a lack of ability among its ministers.
   Despite the setback, Voute was sure that the 'Jacobins Polonois' would
 ultimately be crushed by the sheer physical superiority of Russia and
Prussia, and that the Hydra of the revolution would lose even the last of
 its heads. It was a source of satisfaction to him that the rebels would be
given no quarter. After a veiled warning to Hope against 'K' (Kalichev?),
he signed the letter 'Andre Cartier,' reasoning that, with the unsettled
conditions in Poland, there was no certainty that the missive would reach
 Hope & Co. intact.!
   Voute's health improved only slowly-to the great consternation of the
 Russian ministers who, following Hope's letters, feared that the Company
would sever its connexions with Russia. They realized that the drastic
decree in which the Sutherland affair culminated, and which was published
on 28th April, could be equally damaging to good relations with Hope.
The decree prescribed that the sum of the monies owed to the Crown
should be calculated at the unfavourable rate of exchange ruling at that
moment, and not the rate applying when the money had flowed from
Holland to Russia. The State would take over Sutherland's house and its
contents, the inventory of his office, his mortgages on other houses and
his cabinet bonds. At the same time, the government committed itself to
pay the debts incurred by the various official bodies, but excluding the
sums claimed from Potemkin, and it undertook to take vigorous steps to
ensure that private debtors met their obligations. 2
   On the very same day, Sutherland's debtors were pilloried. Zakrewsky,
the president of the College of Medicine, and Cley and Dolst, two of the
members, faced a charge of having extorted money from Yeames, former-
ly Sutherland's cashier and the person principally responsible for deliv-
eries of drugs, for passing Sutherland's invoices. Khlebnikov, head of the
second department, was charged with failing to exercise adequate super-
vision of Sutherland and, in 1787, of having neglected to report the
protesting of Sutherland's drafts to the then Attorney General, Vyazemsky.
Khlebnikov was also ordered to repay 25,000 roubles unlawfully paid to
him by Sutherland. Yeames was held responsible for the cash deficit of
147,000 roubles, and RaIl was accused of delay in informing the authori-
ties of the true state of affairs following Sutherland's death. 3
  Voute predicted that Khlebnikov and Yeames would be severely pun-
ished, but that RaIl had only been dragged in to please Ritter. RaIl would
certainly emerge unscathed, and in any case Ritter was losing favour now
that, on the instructions of the Attorney General, the majority of remit-