

v oute did not have long to wait for evidence of the weakness of which
he suspected Samaylov. Early in February 1794 he received an alarming
letter from Hope & Co. concerning a threat of Russian-guaranteed loans
to Poland being negotiated through other intermediaries. After adopting
the treaty with Russia, the sejm at Grodno had discussed the personal
debts incurred by King Stanislaw; these were still unpaid, and his credi-
tors, who included Tepper, Blanc and Meisner, faced serious difficulties.
In response to Polish complaints on this issue, the Russians had offered
to guarantee a loan of lot million guilders which was to be raised in
Holland against the security of Crown lands; this sum roughly corre-
sponded with the total of the king's personal debts as determined by the
sejm at its meeting on 9th November 1793. 1
 In Warsaw, Sievers had commenced negotiations with Hasselgreen and
Gi.i1cher, who were still in that city; but when, in December 1793, he fell
into disfavour-probably as a result of intrigues woven by Zubov-his
successor, Igelstrom, contacted the merchant James Durno from Memel,
who, on his instructions, wrote to Hope & Co. on the subject. 2 To the
Company, the latest Russian plans came as a bolt out of the blue, and the
reply sent to Igelstrom testified to the shock felt by the partners. A copy
of the letter was sent to V oute with instructions to thrust it under Samay-
lov's nose. Voute, who had already heard vague rumours in St.Petersburg
concerning the new Polish loan, made for the Attorney General's office,
bearing the missive. Samaylov listened to him in stunned silence and then
confessed that the guarantee had been given completely without his
knowledge. Voute was inclined to believe him, for it was almost certain
that the principal figure in the whole affair was Zubov, of whom it was
said that where Poland was concerned he had managed to reduce Samaylov
to the role of executor of other people's decisions. 3
 Taking advantage of Samaylov's dismay, Voute again proceeded to
hammer away, both verbally and in writing, at the fundamental issues: an
early decision in the Trosien and Sutherland cases, and the conversion of
Hope's Polish loan into a Russian loan. A copy of his memorandum was
sent to the powerful Zubov, with the advice to look for a new Court
Banker so that he might be expertly advised on economic matters. 4
Voute also discussed this question with Samaylov, advising him to appoint
Rail, who had been in charge of the only efficiently run department of the
house of Sutherland. 5
 As always, Samaylov was lavish with his promises, but Voute was gradu-
ally losing his faith in these: it was already mid-February and no progress
had been made. In matters of finance, the Attorney General repeatedly
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 displayed his utter ignorance. While consenting to raise the matter of the
Polish loan with the empress once more, he appeared to have forgotten
that the sum involved would be deducted from the proceeds of the
eighteenth and nineteenth Russian loans, from which he was anticipating a
million guilders in gold in addition to the sum required to pay the interest.
 When the facts eventually dawned on him, he proposed a new loan of three
million guilders, from the proceeds of which the sum of the Polish loan
would be deducted and the balance remitted to Russia.! When Voute at-
tempted to point out that it would be folly to embark on a fresh loan while
the previous ones were still less than fully subscribed, Samaylov replied
that he had been offered twelve million guilders in Brabant prior to em-
barking on the eighteenth and nineteenth loans with Hope & Co., and
Voute was quite unable to convince him of the absurdity of such an offer
from a quarter which bordered on a theatre of war. Samaylov contented
himself by saying that the financial sacrifices made by Hope in order to
support the price of the Russian bonds on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange
would have to be met from the proceeds of the two loans, and that be-
yond this it was no concern ofhis.2
  Against this background, it is no wonder that the partners in faraway
Amsterdam found it increasingly difficult to understand the situation, and
became more and more impatient with the absence of results. V oute
wrote in lyrical terms about the inestimable riches of Russia and the
immense opportunities which existed there, but no progress was made
with the conversion of the Polish loan, nor were any of the outstanding
debts received. 3 Voute defended himself by pointing out that the situation
in Russia was totally different, that it could in no way be compared with
the situation in Holland or in England. He maintained that he approached
matters 'in a vigorous manner' because he was convinced that a weak and
watery attitude was out of keeping with an atmosphere 'where the severity
(of the weather) tones up the muscles better than does our damp climate.' 4
If any of the Hopes had been to Russia, he wrote, his actions would be
better understood. 5 It was not surprising that, in this colossal empire,
little interest existed in events outside: 'Here, everything must serve to
reinforce the coherence and power of the empire; anything which does
not do so is of no consequence.' Voute was himself anxious to exercise
the patience which seemed to be required, until such time as the Company
cried 'Enough.' But no rapid progress could be expected, for on the day
on which he wrote this to Hope, 25th February 1794, the carnival season
was beginning and all official departments would be closed for eight to
ten days. This would be followed by a six-week period of fasting, which