

                                   145
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

sented to the conversion of Hope's Polish loan did little to comfort Voute.
Fortunately, he could not know that even this success was to elude him,
for on 12th March, the day on which the courier was to leave with the sad
news of the bankruptcy of Sutherland and the good news of the con-
version, an anti-Russian revolt broke out at Ostrolenka, in Poland, and
this made any early settlement of Poland's debts an impossibility. 1
  However unhappy the Sutherland affair may have been, Voute now at
least had an opportunity to devote himself fully to matters concerning
Thomson Rowand-and these certainly required some supervision. The
reader will recall that, up to the time he left Moscow, Voute had been
unsuccessful in persuading Grant to sign a deed of partnership which, in
fact, would have placed the firm under the supervision of Porter in St.
Petersburg. Consequently, no agreement had been reached regarding
security for the debts owed to Hope & Co. and Baring & Co. Instead of
remitting funds, the partners in Moscow had continued to draw on Hope
 & Co. and, moreover, had borrowed money against security in Moscow,
for which they would be paying at least 10 or 12 %interest. 2
  It was for the express purpose of putting an end to these demonstrations
of independence that Voute arrived in Moscow on 25th March, tired and
uncomfortable after a journey lasting exactly a week. From St.Petersburg
 to Novgorod he had travelled through melting snow, but then it had
 started snowing again and between Twer and Moscow the temperature
 had fallen to 20 or 25 degrees below zero. Only when they had stopped at
 Twer had he been able to undress, and then even his hopes of a good
 night's sleep had been dashed by an uncomfortable bed. But after only
 two days in Moscow he was sufficiently refreshed to receive Grant and
 Hawes. Their account had a familiar ring: little of the money owed to
 them had been received, and they had urgently needed 46,000 roubles to
 pay for goods which were to be sent to Baring & Co. Voute gave them a
 stern lecture, pointing out that if they continued to delay their remittances,
 confidence on the part of Hope & Co. and Baring & Co. might one day
 be shaken. 3
  The partners were also warned to take more interest in the domestic
 trade, particularly that with the Crimea, the Caspian Sea and eastern
 Siberia.
   Voute was unable to devote a great deal of time to the affairs of Thomson
 Rowand, for soon he would have to return to his post in St.Petersburg to
 see what impression he, with the aid of Hope's letters concerning the out-
 come of the Sutherland affair, could make on Samaylov. Voute made no
 mention of the signing of the partnership agreement in Moscow, so we
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

must assume that Grant's policy of obstruction succeeded once more.
  On 10th April 1794, in the same changeable weather as had accompanied
his earlier journey, Voute left Moscow. From there to Klin, a distance of
fifty miles, he drove through rain, but this gradually turned to snow and
on the first night an icy north wind caused the temperature to drop so
sharply that Voute was unable to keep warm despite wearing two fur
coats and two pairs of fur boots. During the daytime it became too hot
even for one fur coat, but for five successive nights it was bitterly cold.
The jolting of the coach over the frozen roads so troubled him that he
was no longer able to face bread or meat, and ate only a few apples and
oranges which Countess Golowkin had given him in Moscow. The arrival
of the frosts made it safer to cross the frozen rivers, but on one occasion
Voute, not trusting the ice, insisted on making the crossing on foot, while
the Russians, intrepid as ever, drove the coach-and-six over a staging laid
011 the hard-packed ice.
  The vehicle itself also suffered from the journey, the wheels threatening
to disintegrate, the harnessing pole being fractured and the box shaken to
the point where it had to be held together with pegs and ropes.
  On 15th April Voute alighted from the coach outside the Huguet Hotel,
where he ran into Brown, Porter's partner. Brown, while not expecting
him for another three or four days, had nevertheless instructed Huguet
to light the stoves in Voute's rooms. Although his head was swimming,
Voute remained outside to supervise the unloading of his baggage, 'for
one must keep a weather-eye open in view of the St. Petersburg ravens,
who are less kind than those who attended Elijah.' 1 Once inside the hotel,
he briefly lapsed into unconsciousness. When he recovered, he attempted
unsuccessfully to take some food, and then retired to bed-for the first
time in five days. A few hours later he was awakened by Whishaw, who
brought him letters from Hope & Co.; these were dated 25th March, thus
prior to the arrival of the fatal news from St. Petersburg. Voute could
think of nothing except the wrath which he knew was being voiced in
Amsterdam and of the insult to the Company, and in his own words he
became so worked up that sleep was almost impossible; when he got up,
he fainted so frequently that Dr. Guthrie had to be called in. His diagnosis
was brief but unambiguous: 'You are physically and morally overheated;
little medicine, but a lot of rest and quiet will cure you.' 2 A purgative
served to refresh Voute, and after drinking four glasses of port and eating
some rye bread to give him strength he returned to his bed.
  That evening, Bagge of the house of Bagge & Van Eyssel arrived bearing
letters from Hope & Co. of 31st March. The language in which the writer