

                                    153
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

was not even aware that Messrs. Hope had sent a representative to Rus-
sia and that he was anything but satisfied with what he had found there.
 Myatlev was the next to have an audience with the empress, to report on
the affairs of the bank. At the mention of Samaylov's name, Catherine
snapped angrily: 'Be on your guard for that man, he will deceive you; he
has just played me a shabby trick.' She was so incensed that she forcibly
pushed away the table which stood in front of her. Myatlev, who contem-
plated his enemy's disfavour with satisfaction, had later told VOllte that
Samaylov had been ordered to lay all matters for which he was responsible
before the ministerial council in future, and to adhere to its decisions.
Samaylov had thus been placed under supervision - but for how long?
 On 5th July 1794 VOllte arrived in Travemiinde, where he disembarked
and proceeded to Liibeck. When he reached the home of the merchant
Blohm there, he found a pile of letters from Hope & Co. waiting for him.
These included letters of introduction to Hope's correspondents in the
city. To his great satisfaction he read that the partners of Hope & Co.
were fully in agreement with his decision to return to Holland. The letters
of introduction had an almost magical effect, and VOllte received so many
invitations that it would have taken many weeks to pay all the calls. But
he excused himself wherever possible, not only because he was anxious to
return home quickly but also because he wished to avoid creating obli-
gations towards persons who would in all probability view these as an
excuse for seeking additional credit from the Company.!
 While having a meal at his hotel, VOllte heard that traffic on the route
via Hanover was very heavy and that there was consequently a shortage of
horses. There were also stories of the great French victory at Fleurus on
26th June and the ensuing retreat of the English and Austrian armies.
This news strengthened VOllte's resolve to leave as soon as possible and
so put his anxious relatives at ease. 2 He left on 8th July, but it took him a
week to reach Amsterdam. The journey took longer than anticipated
owing to the looseness of the road surface following a severe drought,
and the movement of large numbers of wagons carrying money to Ham-
burg. The flight of Dutch capital from the advancing French armies had
begun. A phase in the history of Hope & Co. was drawing to a close.




                                    154
                            CHAPTER SIX

             THE GREAT CONVERSION



The departure for England of the partners of Hope & Co. in the latter
part of October 1794, and of the managers, Pierre Cesar Labouchere and
Alexander Baring, on the night of 18th January 1795, heralded a tempo-
rary suspension of the Company's activities on behalf of the Empress of
Russia. The invasion by French troops did not come as a surprise to the
Company, which some time beforehand had taken steps to ensure that,
as far as possible, its assets and property were placed beyond the reach of
the French or of any new, revolutionary government in the Republic.
Among the consequences of this action was that, for the first time, Hope
& Co. were unable to make payments of interest on loans. In response to
questions from bondholders, Paulus Taay, Hope's confidential clerk, who
remained behind to look after day-to-day matters in the Republic, was
obliged to announce that there was as yet no information regarding the
payment of interest on the Russian bonds. However, an advertisement
placed by the partners informed the holders that the interest vouchers
which matured on 1st February and 1st May were redeemable at the house
of Martin Dorner in Hamburg, and that subsequent instalments would
also be paid via that house. 1 For the Dutch investors, this was a round-
about procedure involving extra expense, but at least it safeguarded the
payments by making it impossible for the invaders or the revolutionary
government, which by then had taken office, to seize the monies remitted
from Russia.
  But while the interests of those who had invested in the Russian loans
were provisionally safe, the prospects for the holders of bonds relating to
the Republic of Poland and its king were a great deal less favourable.
 As was explained in a previous chapter, Hope & Co. was not the only
house in Amsterdam which was involved; others, such as Quirijn Willem
van Hoorn and Theodoor Gtilcher & Mulder, had provided loans, not
only to the Republic of Poland and King Stanislaw but also to Polish
magnates. Raymond and Theodore de Smeth, Pieter de Haan Pietersz.
and Hogguer Grand & Co. had also been active in this area. In most
cases, the interest and principal instalments on the loans negotiated with
these houses had ceased following the financial crisis early in 1793, though