

                                    157
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

The outlook being so' gloomy, De Haan, not surprisingly, began to look
for other solutions. He approached other houses in Amsterdam which,
like himself, had furnished loans for Poland. 1 If concerted action was to
be taken, the holders of bonds of the various loans would have to be in-
formed and their sanction obtained. In consultation with the brokers and
entrepreneurs, the necessary deeds of authority were drawn up, after which
the bondholders were informed by an advertisement that these would be
available for inspection and approval at the offices of notary Van Beem
between 20th February and 31st March 1796. At the end of this period it
was found that a sizeable majority of the bondholders had indicated their
approval of the plan. On 11th April of the same year, the Court of Hol-
land empowered the various houses to act on behalf of the interested
parties, but it added a rider that those who had not already signed must
be given an opportunity to attend the Court in company with the repre-
sentatives of the issuing houses on the 6th, 9th and loth May; this was to
be communicated to those concerned by means of an advertisement.
Anyone who failed to attend would be deemed to have given his consent.
On loth May the Court empowered the houses to jointly send one or
more authorized agents to Russia to act on their behalf, and three days
later the mission was formally entrusted to Robert Voiite, 'Observing
that he has no reason to assume that he will be persona non grata for the
purpose of dealing with this matter in the appropriate place.' 2 The choice
of Voiite was an obvious one in the light of his earlier and relatively suc-
cessful journey to Russia. As we shall see, the mission covered not only
the Polish negotiations, but also Hope's Russian loans.
  The sums which V oiite was charged with attempting to recover were
quite considerable: nearly 3.6 million guilders for Raymond and Theodore
de Smeth and Hogguer Grand & Co.; 3 million for Quirijn Willem van
Hoorn and Theodoor Giilcher & Mulder jointly; nearly 2.7 million for
Theodoor Giilcher & Mulder severally; and 2.5 million for Pieter de Haan
Pietersz. Hope & Co.'s interest concerned their loan of 1786 totalling
2 million guilders. These were all nominal sums, a portion of some loans
having been repaid. The capital debts owed by the Republic of Poland and
King Stanislaw totalled just over 6 million guilders, while the outstand-
ing claims on the Polish magnates amounted to 5.8 million plus interest,
which in most cases had not been paid since the end of 1793 or the
beginning of 1794. 3 Hasselgreen had not invested Voiite with authority
to deal with his loan but, as we have seen, he personally looked after his
interests in Poland and Russia, and thus felt that he did not require
Voiite's services.
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

Immediately prior to accepting the authority to deal with the Polish
loans, Vollte appointed Hermann Albrecht Insinger and Jan Jacob Vollte
Jr. to act on behalf of Hope & Co. The relevant deed omitted any reference
to the powers vested by the Company in Vollte himself, and this was
probably done in order to avoid difficulties with the Batavian government,
should it conceive the idea of recovering taxes levied on Hope from third
parties. 1
  De Haan urged Vollte to travel to St.Petersburg via Wilno and Minsk,
in order to investigate the situation there, but he flatly refused. The
failure of Willink's efforts had already shown that it would be a waste of
time and money to visit provincial towns when all decisions were taken in
St.Petersburg. Vollte did not wish to have anything to do with Willink,
firstly because the man seemed to him to be totally unsuited to work of
this nature, and secondly because he regarded Willink's censorious re-
marks concerning the corruption and bad justice in Russia as unseemly.
Vollte had apparently forgotten his own comments on such matters in
1793 and 1794. As in 1794, he held the view that the causes of the partition
of Poland lay with the Poles themselves: 'disorders, intrigues and oligar-
chs.' The giving away by the empress of one of Oginski's estates was
certainly a difficult issue, but Vollte was more afraid of Oginski's actions
than of the empress or the committee, which in his opinion had behaved
correctly. He was convinced that a calm approach and hard work were
the prerequisites for success in dealing with the matters at hand, 'and
these qualities are not given to everyone.' 2
  On his way to Russia, Vollte did however visit Berlin, where late in
July 1796 he wrote a memorandum on the subject of the Polish loans for
the benefit of Kalichev, who in the previous year had exchanged the post
of envoy to The Hague for the equivalent post in Berlin. In January 1795,
following the suppression of the Polish uprising (in the preceding No-
vember), Russia and Austria had reached agreement on the partition of
the remainder of Poland, and in October of that year Prussia had perforce
become a party to this.3 The partitioning powers had also expressed their
willingness in principle to accept responsibility for the debts incurred by
the Republic and its ruler, but consultations on the practical steps, such
as the setting up of a joint committee and the apportionment of the
responsibility, had yet to commence. Negotiations between Russia and
Prussia were proceeding at ambassadorial level, and thus it was logical
that Vollte should be anxious to lay his views concerning the Polish debts
before Kalichev.
Vollte reasoned that if Russia were to assume responsibility for the loans