

Robert VOllte, whose whole prestige as an influential figure at the Rus-
sian Court now hung in the balance, had naturally not stood idly by. On
the day of the arrest, 5th September, he had personally informed the
empress of the incident. His protestation resulted in a courier being sent
to Kronstadt with an order countermanding the arrest, but this arrived
an hour too late. The reason given for the puzzling action on the part of
the authorities was that the police had mistaken Pierre for the Amsterdam
merchant Gtilcher, who had travelled with the VOlltes as far as Warsaw
and who was persona non grata in Russia. Robert VOllte was so distressed
by the episode that he was obliged to rest for a few days-a physical
reaction to mental strain which, as we have seen, also occurred during his
earlier journey. The authorities, however, made formal reparations. An
imperial courier left for Copenhagen in October, and in the early days of
the following month he officially escorted Pierre VOllte to St.Petersburg,
travelling via Sweden. 1
  Despite the official steps taken to remedy the injustice, there is still
something mysterious about the whole affair. Did it stem purely from an
administrative error on the part of the police, or did it point to the work
of a faction opposed to Hope & Co., personified by Robert VOllte? Why,
when VOllte repeatedly assured the police that a mistake had been made,
was his word not accepted? Who invented the story concerning VOllte's
supposed travelling companion, and why was Pierre VOllte deported with
such haste that the mistake could not be corrected? There are no clear
answers to these questions, not even in the letters written by Robert VOllte
himself-for whom it was doubtless a matter of personal prestige to make
the affair appear to be a blunder on the part of the police.
 The situation in Russia altered completely with the death, on 17th No-
vember 1796, of Empress Catherine II and the succession of her son, Paul.
The czar's rule was despotic and thus it was vital for VOllte to get on good
terms with him; this, however, was no simple task, for Paul proved to be
an extremely fickle and unpredictable ruler. But by good fortune VOllte
was looked upon with favour by the empress, Maria Feodorovna, and as
she greatly influenced her husband during the early part of his reign, Voilte
enjoyed his favour also. 2
  VOllte's chances of succeeding in the matter of the Polish loans rose
when, on 26th January 1797, a convention dealing with the division of
the debts incurred by the Republic of Poland and its former king was
signed by the Czar of Russia and the King of Prussia. 3 The Emperor of
Germany also associated himself with this. The convention provided for
a committee, the members of which would be nominated from among the

                                    161
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

three Courts, to meet to verify and liquidate these debts. The debts in-
curred in Holland by the Republic of Poland (the existence of which had
been recognized by the sejm held in Grodno in 1793), together with the
interest which had meanwhile become due, were divided between Russia,
Prussia and Austria in a ratio of 13: 13: 4. The king's debts, which had
been assessed at 40 million Polish guilders, were divided between Russia,
Prussia and Austria in a ratio of 2: 2: 1.1 The committee charged with
realizing the assets of the bankrupt Polish bankers (among them Pierre
Tepper, with whom we have already made acquaintance) was to be re-
vived. This body had originally been set up by the sejm at Grodno, but
had disappeared from the scene during the chaos which accompanied the
uprising in Poland.
 The convention contained nothing akin to Voute's notions of a Russian
acceptance of the Polish debt in its entirety. Voute, however, had not
been wasting his time in St.Petersburg, for on 30th June 1797 a convention
was entered into between Alexei Vasilyev, head of the Treasury, and Robert
Voute, the authorized agent of the creditors of the former Republic of
Poland, its king and also a number of citizens of the former republic. 2
The negotiations leading up to this had commenced on 28th April, and
progress had initially been slow. Vasilyev and, to a greater extent, the
Chancellor, Bezborodko, had opposed Voute's proposals, and in the end
only the direct intervention of the czar had enabled agreement to be
reached on 30th June. 3
 Voute had every reason for satisfaction with the outcome, for this time
his ideas-the ideas which he had elaborated to Kalichev in May 1796-
had in their entirety been embodied in the convention. Russia accepted
responsibility for all the loans made to the Republic of Poland and to its
king, and covered by Voute's powers of attorney, plus overdue interest
up to 31st December 1797. Russia also took over the loans made to
Prince Alexander, Prince Joseph Lubomirski and Count Michael Oginski,
again including the interest due up to 3 I st December 1797. These were
but a few of the loans made to Polish magnates, but Prince Alexander
Lubomirski had taken over the estates mortgaged by his brother Joseph,
and with these the latter's debt, and had then sold all the mortgaged
property to the Russian Crown. The fate of Michael Oginski's assets, the
unsold portion of which had been confiscated by Catherine II, has already
been explained. Both the last-named cases thus involved loans to Polish
magnates against securities which had meanwhile come into the pos-
session of the Russian Crown.
The procedure established for the transfer required that all the original