

because the estates which she had mortgaged for the purpose of the loan
were situated in areas of Poland which had since come under Pruss ian
and Austrian control.l In addition to the loans on which Voilte was
empowered to negotiate, a claim by Jean Meisner against the Marquis
Franyois Wielopolski for 66,6661- ducats was included in the conver-
sion, as were six bonds for the account of Prince Dominique Radziwill,
a minor. These had been signed by his guardian, Prince Matthias Rad-
ziwill, and the principal and arrears of interest totalled more than 120,000
ducats.
 These bonds, too, were held by Meisner, for whom their conversion
heralded the full restoration of his credit standing. The loans converted
under the terms of the second agreement totalled cf 3.449,130.14, which
implied that the czar had accepted responsibility for debts of nearly 16
million guilders. 2
 In considering the second convention, one is faced with the question:
Why was the czar prepared to assume responsibility for the Polish mag-
nates' debts even though these were not included in the agreement with
Prussia and Austria? Voilte partially answered this in his memorandum
of 24th July 1796 to Kalichev. Nearly all of the mortgaged estates lay in the
Russian-occupied part of Poland; the value of the estates was far in
excess of the sums loaned; in the event of default, all the assets of the
borrowers could be seized. Czar Paul's action in taking over these loans
could be interpreted as a friendly gesture towards the Polish nobility;
there is, however, the point that he thereby obtained a financial hold over
the magnates, and this will almost certainly have deterred them from acts
hostile to the new regime. For the lenders in Holland the conversion
brought the solution of a complex problem, namely that the partition of
Poland had resulted in the mortgaged estates being on Russian territory,
while the laws of Russia prohibited foreigners from holding mortgages on
land because these could afford rights relating to serfs.
 The Polish affairs having been successfully dealt with, a settlement of
the Russian loans in the Republic became a matter of urgency. The
earliest of these would become due for repayment on 1st February 1798,
and the third on 1st July. But because of the adverse rate of exchange, the
Russian government was disinclined-and perhaps hard put-to remit the
necessary funds to the Republic.
 On 2nd November 1797, a few days after the signing of the second con-
vention, Voilte sent Vasilyev a memorandum which contained a proposal
for reconstituting Russia's foreign loans. In this, Voilte went somewhat
too far, for the loans which Russia had negotiated in Genoa were not

                                    166
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

 within his domain. He calculated as follows. The loans obtained in
Holland totalled cf 53,500,000.1 To these must be added 3 million guilders
 which Russia had obtained from De Wolf in Antwerp, the 16 million
guilders from the two conventions relating to the Polish debts, 12 million
guilders as a reserve, and the commission due to Hope & Co. As far as
the last-named was concerned, Voute proposed 6! % on the loans issued
by the Company (the figure agreed for all eighteen loans) and 4 % on the
sums of the Polish conversions and the Antwerp loan. This commission,
totalling cf 4,233,803.0.0, would be paid in Russian bonds which, how-
ever, would commence to bear interest upon the expiry of the terms of
the converted loans and not on 1st January 1798, as was the case with the
other bonds.
  The reserve of 12 million guilders would serve to meet unforeseen
needs, to finance credits for the repurchase of bonds, and to meet other
expenses on behalf of the Russian Crown. No interest would be payable
on the portion of the reserve not used by the Court, nor would any
commission be due thereon. Ifbonds relating to the reserve were broached,
these would bear interest from the date of use, and the full commission of
6t %would be payable on the sum involved.
  After the expiry of twelve years (a normal period for a Russian loan),
i.e. on 1st January 1810, the Court would have to commence the repay-
ment of the balance of the capital; this would be effected in twenty equal
instalments, so that the debt would finally be eliminated on 1st January
1830-thirty-two years from 1st January 1798. Accelerated repayment
would be permitted. The principal sum, which was nominally cf88,300,000,
would bear interest at 5 % per annum. This figure, which had been laid
down in the two conventions relating to the Polish debts, implied an
increase in the rate of interest on seven of the eighteen loans. 2
  As calculated by Voute, Hope's commission at first sight appears high.
However, if we compare the figure of cf 4,233,803.0.0 referred to in
Voute's memorandum with the cf 76,300,000 on which interest would
immediately become payable and which would be repaid (cf 12,000,000,
it will be recalled, was provisionally to be kept in reserve), we arrive at
a mean commission of 5t %. In contrast to the commission on Hope's
other Russian loans, this would not be payable in cash when the loan was
subscribed, but in bonds, which would be handed to the partners. Such
bonds, however, could not be sold at par. During the second half of 1797,
the average quotation for the Russian bonds did not exceed 90 and the
underlying trend was downward. 3 The Hopes themselves held about 2,000
Russian bonds, some of which they had repurchased, and the effects of
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION