

                                    ISS
                         THE GREAT CONVERSION

a few of the magnates had continued to make payments after that date.
During his stay in St. Petersburg, Voiite had done his best in the matter of
Hope's loan of 1786 to the Polish king, but the outbreak of the revolt
against Russia in the Spring of 1794 had prevented the imperial decision
(which was favourable) being implemented. 1
  The loans to the Polish magnates had been granted against the security
of all or part of their estates, but the creditors in Holland had no way of
enforcing their claims on these properties. In 1795 the territory remaining
to Poland had been divided between Russia, Prussia and Austria, and the
occupying powers had arbitrarily seized a number of estates. Any creditor
insolent enough to attempt to exercise his rights on the spot found himself
entangled in a bureaucratic web, as is evident from the correspondence
between Pieter de Haan in Amsterdam and his agent in Poland, Jan
Abraham Willink, on the subject of the securities provided for the loan to
Count Michael Oginski.
  De Haan's loan, of cf 1,000,000, to Oginski was covered by a contract
signed on 1st February 1791 in The Hague, where Oginski was at that
moment serving as special envoy of the Polish monarch. As security for
the loan, he mortgaged a portion of his estates in Lithuania, the value of
which was put at cf 2,500,000.2 Interest on the loan was paid up to early
August 1793, but the repayments of principal, which initially became due
on 1st February 1794, failed to materialize.
 The cause lay in Oginski's involvement with the Polish uprising of 1794
and the consequent loss of his property, which was confiscated by Em-
press Catherine. De Haan was on the point of bringing an action against
Oginski when, at the end of April 1795, Prince Nikolai Repnin, the Rus-
sian military governor of Lithuania, issued a decree forbidding the courts
oflaw to admit actions against Oginski and his property. On 25th May of
the same year, Repnin announced that Oginski's creditors had three
months in which to appear before a special committee which sat in
Grodno, and which was shortly afterwards given judicial powers. De
Haan thereupon instructed Willink to go to Grodno, taking with him the
principal debenture and the mortgage deeds for verification by the com-
mittee. 3 In spite of all his efforts, Willink failed to obtain a written accep-
tance by the committee of the validity of his claims. Nor did it help him
to extract, by means of a handsel, confidential information from the secre-
tary to the committee, for that body as a whole flatly refused to recognize
a memorandum on the subject in Willink's handwriting. In a desperate
move, Willink bribed a servant to let him into the house of one of the
members of the committee, Brigadier Rusanov, who at that moment had
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

 another of the members with him. When Rusanov persisted in his refusal
to accept the memorandum, Willink commenced to read the contents in
a loud voice; but the commissioners continually interrupted him and
finally Rusanov shut himself in his bedroom. Approaches to Count
Panin, the civil governor, and, via him, to Repnin similarly produced no
 result. Repnin went so far as to admit verbally that De Haan's claim
seemed well founded, but a written confirmation was out of the question.
It must be remembered that the committee had been set up by the empress
and was therefore independent of all other authorities; in this situation,
Repnin did not even dare to guess what Catherine's purpose might be. 1
  Even more disquieting was the information, obtained unofficially from
the committee, that very little property belonging to Oginski was situated
in Lithuania, and that Willink would do better to try his luck elsewhere.
When Willink continued to press the matter, he was unceremoniously
shown the door. Further investigation showed that the committee had
been right: of the estates mortgaged to De Haan, only the 'oeconomy'
known as Wilnenska was situated in Lithuania-and Oginski had sold
most of the land which comprised this oeconomy after he had obtained
the loan. 2 Much of the land had since been resold and thus it was difficult
to discover who it actually belonged to. The majority of the remaining
mortgaged property lay in the area which had been ceded to Russia in
1793 and was now under the control of the governor general of Minsk. 3
The fact of the estates being spread out probably made Repnin even more
unwilling to give any firm ruling which could bring him in conflict with
General Tutolmin, his opposite number in Minsk-where Oginski had
similarly realized his assets. There, on the eve of the uprising, he had sold
nearly all his estates at far below their true value. What remained had
been confiscated by Catherine, who had then given part of it to one of her
generals, Count Soltikov.
  Throughout the winter of 1795 and the following Spring, Willink made
every effort to obtain from the Supreme Court of Lithuania a formal
recognition of the validity of De Haan's claims; but he realized that he
had little chance of success because, during the Polish uprising, Catherine
'out of mistaken generosity' had held out to her generals and ministers a
prospect of rewards which, however, could only be realized by the confis-
cation of property. Having done this, she had closed the door on the cred-
itors with claims to the confiscated estates. Obtaining the necessary docu-
ments was a costly business in Poland, but according to Willink the
situation was far worse in Russian-controlled areas, where law and justice
had been supplanted by whim and subjugation. 4