

Although we may assume that Czar Paul, in bringing about a settlement
of the Polish debts, was moved by feelings of sympathy towards the
Poles (he confessed to Kosciuszko, a hero of the resistance, that he had
consistently opposed the partition of the country), the elements of busi-
ness were not lacking on the Russian side when it came to the signing of
the convention between VOllte and Vasilyev. 2 The Russian members of
the mixed committee concerned with verifying and liquidating the Polish
debts were instructed that the principal obligations which Pierre VOllte
brought to Warsaw were to be submitted to the committee for verification
like any other documents. This procedure was not expected to produce
any difficulties, since the claims had all been recognized by the sejm at
Grodno. Only the loan of cf 760,000 made to the Republic by Pieter de
Haan Pietersz. in 1792 could possibly evoke objections, because the
banker Prote Potocki, who had since become bankrupt, had not depos-
                        THE GREA T CONVERSION

ited these funds in the Treasury, but had allowed them to become dissi-
 pated along with his own capital. His malversation, however, did not
 relieve the former Republic of Poland of its responsibilities. Potocki him-
self faced an inquiry into his conduct by the three Courts.
  The Russian members of the committee were also instructed that if,
contrary to expectations, their colleagues disputed the debentures and
bonds submitted for verification, they were to block further discussion by
stating that their Court had already recognized the legality of these and
that therefore they were not permitted to indulge in any argument. If the
documents submitted were verified, the commissioners were to see to it
that interest up to 31st December 1797 was included. When the process of
verification and liquidation had been completed, the commissioners were
to announce that the czar proposed to deduct the sum of these claims
from his share of the debts incurred by the Polish king. These claims
together totalled less than the amount which the czar was committed to
pay under the terms of the agreement of 26th January 1797. The balance
due from Russia could be dealt with within the committee's terms of
reference. 1
  As Voute had earlier explained, the conversion served temporarily to
relieve Russia of a series of current or impending repayment commit-
ments; in addition, it brought Russia the political advantage of appear-
ing to the outside world to be the saviour of the creditors of the erstwhile
Poland. If Poland's foreign debts had simply been divided, Prussia would
in all probability have attempted to convert her share into a new loan,
and this could have handicapped the Russians in their own conversion.
In the final analysis, the czar had not taken on any commitments beyond
those imposed on him by the convention which regulated the sharing of
the debts, and thus there was no question of any sacrifices on behalf of
Poland.
  At the end of October 1797 a further success set a crown on Robert
Voute's mission on behalf of the Dutch creditors. Early in that month the
czar had issued instructions to Bezborodko and Vasilyev that the balance
of the Dutch claims against the Polish magnates were to be taken over by
the Russian Crown. On the 29th, a second Acte de Cession, in which the
transfer was regulated, was signed. In this, all the loans to Polish magnates
which came within the powers vested in Voute were taken over by the
Crown and converted into a Russian loan which, like the last, was in-
corporated in the other loans obtained in Holland; the interest rate was
fixed at 5 %. The only loan excluded from the conversion was one of
cf 400,000 to the Dowager Princess Jablonowska, and this was probably
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION