

                                   162
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

debentures, which were still held by notaries in Holland, be sent to
Warsaw for verification by the Russian commissioners appointed to the
Mixed Committee for the Polish Debts. Upon the signing of the con-
vention, Pierre Vollte had departed for Holland to attend to this matter.
  In addition to the claims with which Vollte was empowered to deal, the
convention also embraced a number of personal debentures of King
Stanislaw, in all involving a sum of 125,000 ducats, a substantial propor-
tion of which had been borrowed from Carl Hasselgreen and Jean Meisner.
Theodoor Glilcher's involvement amounted to only 4,200 ducats. The
erstwhile Republic of Poland had issued four assignats, totalling 48,500
ducats, in favour of Jean Meisner, and these were also included in the
agreement. In all these cases, the loans had been used by the king and the
republic to keep on their feet during the second partition of the country.
We may safely assume that the agreement came as a great relief to the
house of Meisner, which faced certain bankruptcy unless the responsi-
bility for meeting its claims was accepted elsewhere. It may also be
assumed that the inclusion of these claims in the convention reflected
efforts by Meisner and Hasselgreen rather than by Vollte. 1
 The czar undertook to convert all these loans and the claims thereon,
which together totalled cf 12.458,455.5.0, into a loan for the account of
the Russian Crown, and to embody this in the loans entered into by
Catherine II in the Batavian Republic, as Holland had become known
since the French conquest. The rate of interest on the conversion loan
was fixed at 5 % per annum, commencing on 1st January 1798 and being
payable half-yearly at the offices of Hope & Co., in their capacity as
bankers of the Crown, or at the offices of any other house whom they
might appoint for the purpose. The conversion of old bonds into new was
to be effected before 1st January 1798.
 The conclusion of this agreement was a major success for Vollte, and
thus also for the Company. Thanks to Vollte's efforts at the Russian
Court, more than 10 million guilders of Dutch investors' money had not
only been saved, but also reactivated after years of dormancy.

The amicable feeling towards Hope & Co. which ensued coincided with
an ebb tide in the fortunes of the revolutionary government in the Ba-
tavian Republic. The initial enthusiasm among Dutch revolutionaries had
been heady, and now many of them were suffering from an emotional
hangover. The bill, in the shape of the Hague Treaty, which the French
presented for their benefaction was startlingly high. Furthermore, fears
regarding the conduct of the active radical wing were growing in the more
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

moderate revolutionary circles. In France, the discovery of the commu-
nist plot headed by Gracchus Babeuf had brought about a pronounced
swing to the right. Peace negotiations with England were started, and an
accommodation between the two states appeared probable. Since the
political course in France had a decisive influence on the run of affairs in
the satellite states, the change favoured the more conservative body in the
Batavian Republic. Some conservative supporters of the old Patriot Party
went so far as to establish secret contacts with members of the House of
Orange who were then in England and Germany. It is therefore not
surprising that the Representatives of the People of Holland, as the States
of this province were by now calling themselves, sought to get in touch
with the Hopes with a view to discussing the latter's possible return to the
Republic. Among the obstacles to such a development was the earlier
confiscation of Hope's assets there. In a polite letter, the commissioners
who had ordered the confiscation, while defending their action, invited
Messrs. Hope to return to the Republic, stating that they were prepared
to suspend their claim if the Company could show good reason why they
should do so.
 But although the partners felt that the time had come to reveal the secret
of their associations with Insinger and Vollte, and show openly that they
were concerned in the settlement of the Polish debts (as if the public had
not long since connected them with this !), they chose not to enter into
direct correspondence with the new rulers in Holland and continued to
challenge the legality of the sequestration of the Company's assets. The
wisdom of their policy was to emerge later. 1