

she was not willing to regard Sutherland as an agent of the Crown in
operations which she regarded as having been outside the authorized
plan. Catherine went on to say that the credit which Sutherland had
enjoyed had been due entirely to the Crown and could thus not be counted
among his merits. In spite of this strong condemnation of Sutherland's
conduct, Voute had the feeling that much would still depend upon the
manner of the liquidation, as prescribed in the report to be published by
the committee charged with investigating the late baron's affairs.
  Turning to the matter of Hope & Co., the empress repeated the flattering
references which she had earlier made through Zubov. She assured Voute
that she had always met her obligations and that as far as Hope was con-
cerned she would continue to do so. When the issue of Russia's natural
wealth arose, Catherine was very modest in describing her role. Since her
accession to the throne, she had had more than ten million roubles in gold
coins minted, compared with the one million of her predecessors in a
similar period; in addition, silver coins to a value of one hundred and
fifty million roubles had been minted during her reign. Banknotes, she
stated, were only for domestic use (this, Voute had already discovered).
The empress had only very vague notions concerning rates of exchange,
but she could not be blamed for this, for she was seated in between three
tables, on each of which lay piles of papers and books. It seemed to Voute
that ruling a vast empire like Russia was never-ending servitude. From six
o'clock in the morning until after dinner in the evening she was conti-
ously absorbed with the affairs of state-a situation which Voute had not
encountered anywhere else in Russia, 'for cards keep any number of
people busy.' 1
  After the audience, which had lasted for more than two hours, Voute
made his way to the office of Zubov, to whom he handed copies of Hope's
most recent letters to the Attorney General and the latter's replies to these,
and also a list of loans opened in Holland and the relevant Berigten in
order that Zubov should have a picture of the current situation in that
area.
  Matters having suddenly taken so pronounced a turn for the better,
Voute was faced with a dilemma: to go, or to stay? If he was to achieve
anything in the Sutherland affair, or to round off the case against Trosien,
he would have to resign himself to a stay of at least six months. But then
it was on the cards that Samaylov and his followers, who had been pushed
into the background by Voute, but only temporarily, would start their
intrigues all over again and finally rob him of his goal. Following his
sensational audience, Catherine's ministers were eagerly trying to discover
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 what had been discussed, and foreign diplomats, headed by the represen-
 tatives of Britain and the Dutch Republic, were exceedingly curious. On
 balance, Vollte decided that it would be better if he departed on the crest
 of the wave, leaving the strongest possible impression of Hope's influence
 upon Catherine.!
  Thus, Vollte reverted to his earlier plan to go by sea. He reasoned that if
he were to cross to LUbeck and travel overland from there to Holland via
 Hamburg, he would have the certainty that his baggage would not be
searched and that no one would pry into his papers. The Prussian customs
officials were just as inquisitive as the Russian in this respect, and VOllte
was determined to avoid trouble of this nature at all cost. Apart from
this, reports of the military situation in the southern part of the Nether-
lands were becoming steadily more disquieting and he was anxious to
return home before any danger threatened the Republic. 2 Having taken
his leave of Samaylov and had a final audience at Tsarkoye Selo, VOllte
left on 18th June for Kronstadt where, having supervised the loading of
his carriage, he and his servant embarked.
  The voyage was relatively slow and afforded the traveller ample oppor-
tunity to review the events of the preceding weeks. Now, he could commit
his thoughts freely to paper and, having done so, had no need to sign the
letters with the name of Andre Cartier. In his conversation with the
empress, VOllte had carefuIIy avoided any reference to Zubov: 'His phy-
sical relationship with Catherine is so intimate that it would be wrong not
to assume that his bodily virtues outweigh his moral failings, and that the
ageing madonna has a very soft spot for him in her heart.' 3 To VOllte,
Zubov was a true Russian-which implied that he was unreliable. This
trait was aggravated by his position, for if Catherine should die he would
find himself in a serious plight, having no private fortune and, moreover,
being saddled with debauched and thriftless relatives. In his memoran-
dum to Catherine, too, Vollte had been at pains not to say anything
derogatory concerning Samaylov, Markov or Ostermann, for he knew
that the vain Catherine prided herself on her choice of servants, and kept
them in their positions in spite of any criticism. VOllte had seen evidence
of this when at last he had succeeded in bringing his memorandum and
Hope's letters to the attention of the empress. She had received the papers
on the Sunday morning, and must have read them after dinner on that
day; for the remainder of the evening, he afterwards learned, she had
been preoccupied and gloomy. Her first task on the following morning
was to summon Samaylov, to whom she gave a blistering reprimand for
having kept important matters hidden from her with the result that she