

                                   159
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

made in Holland to the king, the Republic and the magnates, and if she
were to convert these into Russian bonds, she would for a time be free of
the obligation to repay principal money. If, on the other hand, the loans
were simply to be divided between the three powers, it was likely that
Russia would immediately be confronted with repayments which were
either being made or were about to be made. There was also the point
that the vast majority of the assets mortgaged by the Polish magnates
were situated in Russian Poland, and that their value was greatly in excess
of the sums loaned. The magnates were committed to pay interest and
principal in Holland in gold or silver coin. The Russian government could
either allow this practice to continue, in which case the total of the
remittances which it was called upon to make would be smaller, or it
could order the payments to be made in Russia and thereby maintain the
reserves of precious metals. Voute's line of thought was not entirely
correct, for the new bonds which would be created for the purpose of the
conversion would add to the interest burden in Holland, and the increase
would have to be deducted from the deferred repayments of principal.
  Voute proceeded to reason that a conversion operation of this nature
could also be applied to the Russian loans provided in Holland, the
initial repayments against which were due to commence in 1798; however,
in view of the extremely unattractive rate of exchange, such a move might
well be to the disadvantage of the Russian government. 'The general
circumstances in Europe are such that they point to grounds of expediency
which would not have been noticed but for these circumstances.' 1 Here,
he was probably referring to the French offensives in southern Germany
and Italy, which had further inflamed anti-French feeling in St.Petersburg
and increased the risk of a Franco- Russian conflict.
  Soon after his arrival in St.Petersburg, Voute suffered a serious setback.
Having no children of his own, he took as his companion his favourite
nephew, Pierre, the second son of his eldest brother, Jan Jacob. In the
early hours of 5th September 1796 a police officer called and arrested
Pierre in his bed. Pierre was staying with the Bagge family of the house
of Bagge & Van Eyssel, with whom Robert Voute had been in communi-
cation during his earlier visit to Russia. Despite strong protests from
 Robert Voute, Pierre and his servant were taken to Kronstadt, where the
commandant sent them on to a guard-ship two hours' sailing from the
shore. Vessels leaving the port of St.Petersburg were ordered to moor
alongside the guard-ship and take the deportees on board. At six o'clock
that evening, Pierre and his servant boarded a Danish ship bound for
Copenhagen, where they arrived a fortnight later at the end of a stormy
voyage. 2
                                    160
                        THE GREA T CONVERSION