




Announcement by the hOllse of De Smeth, consenting to convert the Russian bonds
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

 commission rose by cf 293,000 as a result of this, but was still not exorbi-
 tant, as we have already seen; nevertheless, this new concession will have
 been a thorn in the flesh of Bezborodko and Vasilyev, who were declared
 opponents of the conversion. 1
  The czar conceived a highly original plan to show his respect for Robert
 Vollte. On 19th February 1798, Pierre VOllte, Jose Pedro Celestino Velho
 and Alexandre Franr;:ois RaIl announced that they had formed a company,
 VOllte Velho RaIl & Co., and that the czar had appointed the company to
 be bankers to the Court and commission agents for foreign trade. The
 '& Co.' disguised Robert VOllte, who had thus accorded the honour to
 his favourite nephew while retaining the most influential position for
himself. 2
  Thanks to the support of the empress, VOllte succeeded in securing
 acceptance of his earlier plan to improve the rate of exchange of the
rouble by increasing copper exports. The output of copper would be
increased from 160,000 poods to 1,200,000 poods, and the foreign exchange
thus earned would form the basis for an issue of banknotes to a value of
 150 million roubles. Part, at least, of this plan was implemented; the
obstacles to its completion will become clear in due course. 3
  Now that the matter of the conversion had been settled in principle,
Messrs. Hope felt that a good purpose would be served by giving Vasilyev
a few hints. It was of the utmost importance that the interest on the loan
should be paid promptly. This would bring about a recovery in the price
of the bonds, which had fallen somewhat as a result of the postponement
of the maturing date. Vasilyev's plan to effect a principal repayment on
 1st January annually, and to announce this in advance on 1st October,
seemed to the partners to be very effective. A million guilders annually,
commencing on 1st January 1799, was the very minimum acceptable, they
said. In extreme circumstances, this sum could be paid in two instalments
with an interval of six months. The Hopes also drew attention to the
desirability of repurchasing bonds while the price was still low, thus re-
ducing the burden of interest, but they stressed that this must be done
discreetly and that De Smeth and their agents must be advised in advance
of the sums available for the purpose.
  With the appointment of new Court Bankers, the way was now open for
the remittances of interest and principal to be spread over the whole year.
It fell to the Court Bankers to react flexibly to the fluctuations on the
Exchange, by increasing or reducing their purchases of bills of exchange
in accordance with the quantity offered. According to Hope & Co., it was
a simple task to calculate whether the remittances would have an adverse
                                     17 2
                        THE GREA T CONVERSION

effect on the value of the rouble: if the value of these exceeded the export
surplus shown on the trade balance, the rate of exchange would fall; if it
failed to match the surplus, the rate would rise.!
 Despite all the wise counsel, however, little came of the plans. This was
due in part to unforeseen obstacles, but the principal factors were that
Vasilyev, an opponent of the conversion from the outset, went out of his
way to thwart both VOllte and the Company, and that it was not long
before RaIl commenced to support him. The methods which were em-
ployed will be dealt with in due course.