

                                     177
                        THE GREA T CONVERSION

Harman & Co. in order, above all, to avoid the name of Hope appearing. 1
Insinger, Hope's principal agent in Amsterdam, was advised that confi-
dential messages should be written in lemon juice at the end of letters,
their presence being indicated by a small cross at the top; holding such a
letter to the fire caused the invisible writing to appear.2 Having also
settled these matters to his satisfaction, Labouchere was free to return to
England. 3
  At about this time, Robert Voute's position at the Russian Court was
seriously threatened by an intrigue which led to the empress being de-
prived of all political influence. A favourite of the Court, a man of
Turkish origin named Kutaysov, who had risen from the position of
Court hairdresser to a high office, succeeded in turning the czar against
his own wife by insinuating that he allowed it to appear to his people that
he was ruled by women. At the same time he provided the czar with a
mistress, thereby completing the alienation between the couple. At the
beginning of August 1798 the czar forbade his wife ever to concern
herself with politics, and shortly afterwards the Princes Kurakin, two
ministers sympathetic towards the empress, were dismissed from the
government. 4 Others concerned in the intrigue included Bezborodko and
Vasilyev, both opponents of Voute, and after the elimination of his
patroness, Voute faced a cheerless period.
  Exactly what took place is not clear, but we do know that early in
October Vasilyev, with RaIl's collaboration, manoeuvred Robert Voute
into a position in which he was forced to ask for the resignation of his
nephew, Pierre, from Voute Velho RaIl & Co. The results of a!1 investi-
gation by Councillor of State Wulff into the firm's financial policy were
used as a pretext for the move. Nikolai Rogovikov was appointed Court
Banker in place of Pierre Voute. 5 In this and other ways, Vasilyev made
life so intolerable for Robert Voute that by the end of December 1798
he had no choice but to leave Russia. He journeyed to Warsaw to join his
nephew, who at the onset of the difficulties had set off posthaste to return
to Russia, but had paused in Poland to await further developments. Early
in 1799 the two left Warsaw, bound for western Europe; Robert Voute's
first task was to cross to England to report to the partners of Hope & Co.
 on the events which had taken place. <'

Despite the severe damage done to the Company's influence in Russia
by Voute's enforced departure, the conversion of old bonds into new
continued undisturbed in Holland; even an attempt by De Wolf in Ant-
werp to throw a spanner into the works by refusing to send the principal

                                    178
                         THE GREAT CONVERSION

 debenture to Amsterdam until such time as the bonds were delivered to
 him, duly receipted, failed to upset the process. 1 By his action, De Wolf
 sought to achieve a separate settlement in respect of the Antwerp loan,
 the effect of which would be that he, and not Hope & Co., received the
 full commission. When official letters and instructions from Vasilyev
 failed to dissuade him, and even a visit to Antwerp by De Smeth produced
 no result, it was decided to proclaim the conversion a success and suspend
 the payment of interest on the Antwerp bonds. This, it was considered,
 would spur holders of bonds of the Antwerp loan to bring De Wolf to
 heel; and indeed this succeeded. 2
  On loth December 1798, Baron von Stackelberg, the authorized agent of
 the Russian Court, completed the task of signing and sealing the 88,300
 bonds relating to the new loan. 3 Out of consideration for the Court, and also
 to propitiate its representative, the Hopes had placed their private residence
 in Amsterdam at Von Stackelberg's disposal. As the envoy firmly refused to
 accept a gift to mark the occasion, the Hopes decided that the expenditure
incurred on behalf of Von Stackelberg and his entourage should be met by
 the Company as part of the overall cost of the conversion. Such a gesture,
 the envoy could scarcely decline. 4
  With the end of the conversion now in sight, the time had come to
reward the services rendered, and in this the Hopes were usually generous.
Pierre de Smeth and Robert Voute were each given 400 Russian bonds,
and Jan Jacob Voute Jr. received 100. Hope's confidential representative,
David Berek, was rewarded with 30 bonds, and the lawyer Schimmel-
penninck received 10. 5 Voute had gained the necessary experience during
his first visit to Russia and had already attended to the matter of 'gifts' to
the Russian officials concerned, who included Vasilyev. 6
  The political events which took place during 1798 had been anything but
favourable from the point of view of the Russian loan. During his advance
towards Egypt, General Bonaparte had occupied Malta-to the fury of
Czar Paul I, who shortly beforehand had assumed the patronage of the
Knights of Malta. The czar increasingly came to regard himself as the
spiritual leader of the resistance to the ideas which emanated from the
French Revolution, and towards the end of 1798, after difficult negoti-
ations and numerous promises of subsidies from England, a coalition
consisting of Austria, England, Russia and Naples was formed to oppose
France.
  With minor wars breaking out here and there in Europe, and a clear
threat of a major conflict hanging overhead, it is not surprising that the
reaction of the bondholders was less enthusiastic than the Company had