


The general peace in Europe which had enabled John Williams Hope and
Labouchere to return to Amsterdam was not of long duration. In May
 1803 hostilities again broke out between England and France. Elsewhere
on the Continent, however, the situation remained calm-at least tempo-
rarily-and this gave Napoleon an opportunity to prepare a large-scale
expedition against England. Such an undertaking demanded not only a
large army, but also a powerful fleet, and so obviously the period of
preparation was accompanied by an extremely urgent need for shipbuild-
ing materials in France. As Russia was the principal supplier, the French
equipment programme would necessarily lead to the export of large quan-
tities of material from Russia, and this could only improve the rate of
exchange of the rouble. This improvement, in turn, would increase the
possibility of repayments against Hope's Russian loans and also im-
mensely facilitate the normal payments of interest.
  While this development was in itself of importance to Hope, the Com-
pany, as good merchants, could not ignore the French procurement
programme, which had got into its stride in June of 1803. In that month,
the house of Recamier in Paris, on behalf of its agent, Xavier Farm-
bacher,l approached Hope & Co. with a request for introductions to
houses in 'diverses places du Nord.' Shortly afterwards David Parish re-
ported from Antwerp that Recamier had entered into an agreement with
the French government for the supply of large quantities of Russian
goods, and that Farmbacher, en route for Russia, had arrived in Hamburg
and had approached various houses in an effort to obtain sizeable credits
on St.Petersburg. As a result of Farmbacher's activities, the drawings on
Paris had assumed such proportions that the rate of exchange there had
fallen. As Hope had predicted, Farmbacher made little headway in Russia,
for besides being unfamiliar with commercial practices there he was un-
duly restricted by the instructions issued from Paris. 2
  Another major obstacle was the virtual absence of exchange facilities
between St. Petersburg and Paris, so that Farmbacher's payments had to be
routed via Hamburg or Amsterdam. Thus it is not surprising that the draft
on Recamier, which was given to the merchant Jos. Morison of Riga, was
presented to Hope & Co. 3
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

While Hope & Co. were regarded as suitable intermediaries in the normal
pattern of financial traffic, some extraordinary events in France served to
emphasize their role. These concerned the sale to the United States of
Louisiana by Napoleon. In 1801 Spain, initially under conditions of strict
secrecy, had ceded Louisiana to France. The formal acceptance of the
territory by France became possible only with the Treaty of Amiens, but
in the United States the revelation of the Franco-Spanish treaty produced
such unrest that President Jefferson was moved to send an envoy to Paris
to negotiate for the transfer of a part of Louisiana to the United States.
But before the envoy reached his destination, Napoleon, who regarded a
resumption of the war against England as inevitable, decided to sell the
whole of the territory on the grounds that it could not be defended. On
30th April 1803 he signed a treaty with the United States providing for
the sale to the latter of Louisiana at a price of 15 million dollars. The
terms provided for the deduction of 3* million dollars representing pre-
vious American claims against France. With the signing of the Franco-
American treaty, the expeditionary force created for Louisiana and com-
manded by General Victor, which was standing by for embarkation at
Hellevoetsluis, was disbanded. 1
  As the United States was not in a position to effect immediate settlement,
it was decided to pay France in 6 % bonds on which interest would be
payable in London and Amsterdam. This solution was proposed by
Alexander Baring, who had been staying in Paris since Christmas 1802
and whose business and family ties (his father-in-law was the American
millionaire, Bingham) linked him closely with America's finances. During
the negotiations Baring had acted as financial adviser to Jefferson's repre-
sentative, and thus it is not surprising that on 3rd May 1803-four days
after the signing of the Franco-American agreement- he, as a representa-
tive of his own company and also of Hope & Co., entered into an agree-
ment with the French Minister of Finance, Barbe Marbois, which resulted
in the two houses acquiring the l I t million doIIarsworth of 6 % American
bonds for the sum of 52 million francs. It was agreed that when con-
firmation reached Paris that one-third of the 6 % bonds had been handed
to a representative of the two houses in America, drafts totalling 171- million
francs would be placed at the disposal of the French government; 6
miIlion francsworth of these would become due in the first month and
thereafter 2 million francsworth monthly. When this portion had been
paid to the French government, a similar tranche would follow at the rate
of 2 million francs per month. As each third of the drafts was placed at
the government's disposal, Baring and Hope would receive the following