

                                     lSI
                       THE GREA T CONVERSION

blockading the Elbe and despatching a fleet of warships to Denmark; the
latter resulted in the destruction of the Danish fleet at Copenhagen. 1
 Russia having withdrawn, Austria was left alone to face Bonaparte-who
prosecuted the war with immense energy. After a series of French victories
in southern Germany and Italy, the Austrians were forced to treat for
peace with Napoleon. With the signing of the Treaty of Luneville in
February 1801, Austria accepted the new situation in Europe.
 For the partners in London, this development implied an intensification
of the pressures which, since 1799, had tended to exclude them from
matters concerned with the Russian loans. It was becoming increasingly
clear that Rail was the evil genius and that his aim was to deal solely with
De Smeth, to the exclusion of the partners of Hope & Co. The stagnation
of Russia's trade with England, a product of the czar's policies, had an
unfavourable influence on the rate of exchange of the rouble, and this, as
in the previous year, made it impossible to announce a repayment against
the Russian loan. Despite this disappointment for the bondholders, how-
ever, the price of the bonds remainded reasonably high; this was probably
due in part to the cessation of hostilities between France and Russia and
the steady improvement in relations between them. 2
  With these circumstances in mind, the partners in London deemed it
wise gradually to dispose of the Russian bonds, which they had received
by way of commission, in the Batavian Republic, and to reserve the
proceeds for future requirements. To this end, an •Account X' was opened,
ostensibly by Robert Voute, with the house in Amsterdam which bore his
name. The proceeds of the sale of bonds, through the broker Willem
Borski, were placed in this account. Borski was instructed to sell only
when the bonds were in demand and when the price was over 80. 3 Be-
tween loth October and 31st December 1800, a total of 1,103 bonds were
disposed of in this manner at prices which ranged between 82-2- and 87t.
During the following year a further 3,130 were sold; up to October, in
which month England, the sole remaining opponent of France, signed the
peace preliminaries, the price fluctuated between 81 and 84, but with the
news of peace the figure shot up to 89.4

Meanwhile, major changes were taking place in Russia. The caprices of
the czar had eventually assumed such proportions that even a clever
courtierlike Vasilyev could no longer stand his ground. In the autumn of
1800 he had fallen into disfavour and had been dismissed. Prior to his
downfall he had succeeded in obtaining a modest loan in Hamburg, but
a similarrequest to Hope met with a firm refusal. s Following Vasilyev's

                                    182
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

 dismissal, Voute was approached by the St. Petersburg merchant J.C.Ber-
gien who hoped, with Voute's assistance, to have Vasilyev's protege, RaIl,
 removed from his position as Court Banker. Bergien argued that there
was no better way of establishing his reputation than by succeeding where
 RaIl and Vasilyev had failed, and that he accordingly s~)Ught- Voute's
opinion on the chances of a new loan via Hope & Co.
  Before anything definite could be discussed, Russia was thrown into
turmoil by the assassination of Czar Paul I on 23rd March 1801. The new
ruler, Alexander I, who had known of the plot against his father, chose
his ministers from among those who had earlier fallen into disfavour.
This meant that not only did figures such as Zubov and the Princes
Kurakin become ministers, but also that Vasilyev, who could claim to
have been a victim of the previous czar, was rehabilitated. Bergien assured
Voute that Hope & Co. had nothing to fear from the reappointment of
Vasilyev, for under the new regime the disregard for the Company would
be at an end; after all, one of Alexander's first acts had been to reverse
his late father's anti-British policy.!
  All these friendly gestures were allied to the financial crisis which the
Russian government faced as a result of the capricious conduct of the late
emperor, and in the circumstances a loan arranged by Hope & Co. would
be extremely welcome. 2
  Acting on instructions from the partners, Robert Voute had meanwhile
visited Amsterdam to see whether it would be possible for the Company
to re-establish itself there. As far as a new Russian loan was concerned,
his findings led him to the conclusion that a portion of the bonds held as a
reserve by the Russian government could be sold in Amsterdam at the
current market price. This, however, was conditional upon the repayment
of at least one million guilders of principal money in the near future. 3
Only thus could the Russian government secure fresh funds, for the
Staatsbewind, as the new government of the Batavian Republic was known,
would certainly not consent to a loan being floated publicly.
  Back in London, the partners approached Voute's proposals with the
utmost caution. Labouchere was convinced that the Company ought not
to make it too easy for the new Russian government to obtain money, for
that would encourage improvidence and extravagance in Russia. As for
a Russian loan in England, to which Bergien had also referred, he felt
that the chances of success were slim, though they might improve when
trade relations between the two countries had been restored. 4
  Such views were anything but welcome to Vasilyev and, faced with little
prospect of obtaining a loan, he again allowed the correspondence to lapse.
                       THE GREA T CONVERSION