

The settlement of Dorner's affairs proceeded far more smoothly than
had been anticipated. Confidence having been restored by the creation of
the guarantee fund, the outstanding debts were speedily collected. By
mid-July, 75 %of these had been paid and it appeared that not only would
complete settlement soon follow, but also that a larger sum would be left
for the heirs than had at first been supposed. The monies belonging to the
Russian Court which had been in Dorner's charge were consequently
transferred to Matthiessen & SiIlem without further delay. Dorner had
been 'a worthy man,' but had lacked discretion; among his correspon-
dence, Labouchere found confidential letters from the Hopes which
should have been burned immediately they had been read-and which,
according to Dorner's earlier assurances, had been. And just then the
necessity for discretion was greater than ever.
  The explanation for this lies in the fact that the British government was
working on plans aimed at preventing its nationals from participating in
foreign loans, especially those issued in Holland, and at making all cor-
respondence with the inhabitants of a hostile country a treasonable
offence. The reason for these measures lay in the extremely critical situa-
tion in which England then found itself. In 1797 the country had been
struck by a financial crisis of such severity that the convertibility of paper
money into coin had to be suspended. 1 At about the same time, a mutiny
in the fleet had paralyzed the country's defences-and this just when an
 open revolt, which would probably be supported by a French army of
invasion, threatened in Ireland.
  Against this background, Labouchere, who was still in Hamburg, faced
 the task of organizing the payments of interest and principal on the
 Russian debt in such a manner that they would proceed smoothly without
 the need for intervention by, or correspondence with, Messrs. Hope in
 England. 2 To this end, he introduced, by letter, the houses of Matthiessen
 & Sillem and Voute Velho RaIl & Co. to De Smeth and Insinger. It was
 of even greater importance that the new Court Bankers and the agents in
 Hamburg should become accustomed to each other's ways of working,
 and to further this Labouchere, in his discussions with Matthiessen &
 Sillem, repeatedly cited the person of Robert Voute: 'This is our most
 intimate friend, whose understanding and integrity we respect the most;
 you may count on it that this association can only bring you the greatest
 benefits.' Conversely, as we have already seen, he praised the partners of
 Matthiessen & Sillem in his letters to Voute. The last-named was strongly
 urged to remain in Russia for the time being, because without his support
 little would come of the house ofVoute Velho RaIl & Co. on account of
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

 'the peculiar characters of the respective members of which it consists';
 this was an aspect which inspired little confidence among the partners in
 England.
   Pierre Voute, to whom Labouchere referred derisively as 'Monsieur Ie
 Banquier,' was a good-natured young man whose principal trait was that
 he meekly allowed himself to be swayed by the advice of his uncle, Robert.
Velho was an insignificant figure, but Rall was an intriguer and needed
 constant watching. The correspondence in Dorner's files showed that
 Rall planned his business operations well; but while he boasted in his
letters that he always kept 100,000 roubles in cash for emergencies, he
retained monies belonging to Hope with the excuse that he was unable to
repay them. 1
   The setbacks suffered by the Court Bankers, such as the Dorner affair
and the difficulties with remittances caused by the low rate of exchange,
favoured Voute's former enemies, in particular Treasurer Vasilyev who,
in Labouchere's view, had already been far too dilatory in despatching to
Matthiessen & Sillem the official guarantee in respect of the Court
Bankers' operations.
   In the meantime a start had been made with the implementation of
Voute's plans for a large-scale increase in copper exports, and at the end
of February Dorner had reported to Voute that he was prepared to have
copper samples from Siberia assayed. Matthiessen & Sillem now took
over Dorner's role, going so far as to offer to advance between 500,000
and 1,000,000 marks banco on shipments of copper, provided that the
quality was satisfactory.2 Once copper exports got into their stride, both
interest and capital payments could be actively pursued, and it would also
be possible to raise the rate of exchange in Russia. In view of the fickleness
of the czar, however, it remained to be seen what would come of all these
fine intentions.
  Labouchere having thus settled the principal issues, there remained the
matter of correspondence with England. Vasilyev was requested to enclose
letters to the partners in an envelope addressed to Count Simon Voront-
sov, the Russian envoy to the English Court. Matthiessen & Sillem re-
ceived provisional instructions not to write to Hope & Co. unless it was
absolutely necessary, and then in such a manner as not to compromise
the partners. Reports from De Smeth were to be treated similarly, the
date being put on a separate sheet and mention of places or names being
avoided. If anything serious or unexpected should occur, De Smeth was
to send a letter to Mr. James Smith on the island of St.Croix; as with all
other letters, this was to be enclosed in an envelope bearing the address of