

In the absence of any agreement concerning the reserve, the Russian
government had little choice except to find a way to remit the funds
needed for the interest payment to Amsterdam. All these transactions
took place between the Court Bankers and De Smeth, and did not involve
the Company. When the time came for the next interest instalment,
however, it would probably be impossible to by-pass Hope & Co. com-
pletely, for by this time, December 1801, the plans for a return to the
Republic were taking shape. The signing of the Peace of Amiens on 25th
March 1802 served to remove the last obstacle to the return of the part-
ners; but owing to the difficulties surrounding the Portuguese loan it was
not until October 1802 that John Williams Hope and his family reached
Amsterdam.
 The sale of Russian bonds via 'Account X' proceeded steadily during
1802 at prices round about 90. The proceeds were used to partly finance
the payments due on the Portuguese loan in 1802. 1
  If a complete loss of confidence in the promises made by the Russian
government was to be avoided, it was now imperative that a start be made
with the repayment of the Russian loan. After a good deal of shilly-
shallying, a sum of 263,000 pounds sterling-a balance held in favour of
the Russian Court by the British government and stemming from an
earlier subsidy-was placed at the disposal of Hope & Co. 2 However,
appeals by Harman and Henry Hope to the British Foreign Secretary,
Lord Hawkesbury, to release the money before 15th November 1802
became bogged down in the bureaucratic machine, with the result that
the maturing date for 2,000 bonds had to be postponed from 1st January
to 1st July 1803.3 When the announcement of the redemption appeared,
the price of the bonds rose, reaching 96 at the end of March. During this
period Borski carefully fed the market, limiting his sales to fifty bonds or
less per day.
 The redemption of the 2,000 bonds was the first act which the Company
undertook in connexion with the Russian loan after its formal return to
Amsterdam; but this return was not without an element of irony. Vasilyev
refused to extend the redemption and the preceding ballot to cover the
reserve bonds. Redemption of these, he reasoned, would not lighten the
burden of interest which rested upon the Russian government; moreover,
Hope would be entitled to claim commission on drawn reserve bonds,
and this Vasilyev begrudged the Company. Although De Smeth was no
longer being involved in the payment of interest, the Court Bankers
routed a substantial part of their remittances via that house, and it was
also concerned with the repurchase of bonds by the Russian government.
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

The Hopes were back, and they had taken up the reins of the Russian
loan; but the prospects of smooth progress in the loan affair, like those
in the political sphere, were anything but encouraging.
                         CHAPTER SEVEN

              'LES TRAITES DU NORD'
                AND OPERATION R.M.