

                                    174
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

was part. During a serious discussion with the partners, however, Labou-
chere learned that Matthiessen-and to an even greater extent Sillem-was
opposed to anything which could support 'Ie systeme actuel en France,'
and that there was absolutely nothing to fear as far as they were con-
cerned. Matthiessen, who was about forty-five years of age, possessed
sound judgement and his heart was in the right place; but, according to
Labouchere, he was more interested in science and philanthropy than in
business, and it appeared probable that he would soon resign from the
firm. Sillem, in spite of being seventy and suffering severely from gout in
his arms and legs, had 'an excellent brain and all the nerve required in the
spirit of conducting the most difficult business.' His son, Hieronymus, who
had recently married, was the key figure in the firm. Labouchere could not
speak too highly of the young man. 1 He was 'an incredibly clever fellow'
who combined the adroitness required to do business on the hellish market
in Hamburg with 'the most refined sense of honour and integrity.' The
fourth partner, Texier, who was married to Hieronymus's sister, was a good
office-man, but that was all. The thrift and order manifested in the house-
holds of these four men compared most favourably with the magniloquence
of so many other residences, and this, above all, pleased Labouchere.
  Just how solid the house of Matthiessen & Sillem was, emerged during
the negotiations concerning an agency for the Russian Court. When
Labouchere explained that the Court expected its agents to accord un-
limited credit, Matthiessen replied that it was the custom of the house
'never, in any business, to risk more than it could afford to lose without
prejudicing either its independence or its freedom of action.' In this case,
the house was prepared to go up to 300,000 marks banco. In reply,
Labouchere let it be understood that the Court would spread its business
if it failed to find a house willing to provide all the facilities which it
desired. At this, Sillem Sr. immediately raised the credit limit to 500,000
marks banco; Matthiessen, however, was reluctant to concur. Labouchere
hastened to assure the partners that he did not seek to force them to reveal
to the Court the limit to which they were prepared to go, but that it was
important for him to know this. After all, he reasoned, one could hardly
offer the Russian Court anything short of unlimited credit; at the same
time, he would certainly have thought badly of the partners had they
offered this, for they did not yet understand the Russian government's
ways of doing business, so that such an offer would have been extremely
imprudent. Thus, the house came through the test with flying colours.
Labouchere concluded by assuring the partners that the Court would
seldom if ever make use of the unlimited facilities. 2

                                    175
                        THE GREA T CONVERSION