

An unforeseen obstacle, and one which imperilled the continuity of
 remittances by the Court Bankers, arose in Hamburg. There, the house of
Martin Dorner, which since 1795 had been responsible for the payment
of interest on the Russian bonds, and which under the new arrangement
had been assigned an important role in the remittances to Amsterdam,
had run into difficulties following the death of Dorner. When the news
that the trustees of Dorner's estate had found it necessary for the house
to suspend payments reached the Hopes in London, they despatched
their partner, Pierre Cesar Labouchere, to Hamburg with instructions to
ensure that, in any circumstances, the bills presented by the Court Bankers
would be honoured. A situation which revived memories of the events
surrounding Sutherland in I787 had to be avoided at all costs. Labouchere
was also instructed to seek a suitable successor to Dorner.
  The collapse of Martin Dorner was a serious setback to the new Court
Bankers and also to Hope & Co. Rumours that Dorner was having
difficulty in having his bills negotiated and that, old and in ill health, he
hardly concerned himself with the business, leaving everything to a part-
ner, had reached the Hopes a year previously.2 Following his death on
12th April 1798, the suspension of payments by the house which bore his
name had caused quite a commotion in Amsterdam, for it brought to a
halt the encashment of the Russian bond coupons. 3 As soon as the sus-
pension was announced, the Russian envoy to the Kreits of Lower Saxony
and the Hanseatic towns, Baron Grimm, set about salvaging the Russian
funds; he was assisted in this task by Pierre Voute, who had been obliged
to leave Russia for health reasons in March 1798 and, while en route for
England, fortunately happened to be nearby.4 As a result of their efforts,
eight Hamburg houses contributed to a guarantee fund which assured
more than a million marks banco. This paved the way for the resumption
of the payments on 14th May and for the settlement of the other aspects
of the affair. 5

                                    173
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

Upon his arrival in Hamburg, Labouchere discovered that much was
amiss with the settlement of Dorner's affairs. For example, creditors were
advancing money to the estate against preferential acknowledgements of
debt, which they then used to obtain payment of their ordinary claims
against Dorner. The effect of this was to shift the risks associated with the
liquidation on to the shoulders of creditors such as Hope & Co., who did
not enjoy preferential status. Labouchere lost no time in putting a stop
to this stratagem, after which he proceeded to have new trustees ap-
pointed who treated all creditors impartially.1 He was particularly im-
pressed by Gabe, the principal partner in J.Gabe & Co., a house which
enjoyed the highest credit and an excellent reputation. Labouchere's
opinion of other businessmen in Hamburg was poor: to him, the mer-
chants were parvenus who, with great ostentation, spent money as rapidly
as they earned it. Fortunately, the way oflife of the partners in Matthiessen
& Sillem, the house which Labouchere had in mind as the successor to
Dorner as far as Hope & Co. were concerned, contrasted strongly with
this pattern.
  Upon his arrival in Hamburg, Labouchere had been warned about
Matthiessen & Sillem's pro-French sympathies, and he had resolved to
carefully investigate the matter. Grimm also had let slip something to this
effect, and it was obvious that he would have written to the Russian Court
on the subject. A report of that nature would not have pleased Czar Paul I,
for just then he was becoming increasingly prejudiced against France.
Labouchere discovered that, some years earlier, Matthiessen had married
a Mademoiselle Henriette de Sercey (it was perhaps not without signifi-
cance that Labouchere spelled her name Circe), a pupil and a relative of
the famous femme de fettres, Madame de Genlis. 2 That was not all,
however. A daughter of Madame de Genlis, Pamela, had married Lord
Edward Fitzgerald, one of the leaders of the United Irishmen, a move-
ment dedicated to the violent overthrow-with the aid of a French army-
of the British administration in Ireland and the establishment of an
independent republic. But shortly before the date appointed for the up-
rising, Lord Fitzgerald had been arrested; and he later died from a shot
wound. Immediately after his arrest, his wife had been compelled to leave
Ireland and, still unaware of his death, she had just arrived in Hamburg,
where she was lovingly welcomed by her cousin and intimate friend, Frau
Matthiessen.
  There was thus a danger that the Matthiessen residence would become
a sort of headquarters for a Franco-Irish conspiracy-and anything of
this nature could compromise the company of which Matthiessen himself