

                                     179
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

earlier anticipated. The preparations for war which were being made in
Russia itself and the financial operations brought about by a war in
western Europe combined to steadily depress the rate of exchange of the
rouble, with the result that the repayment of principal on 1St January
1799, which Hope & Co. so eagerly awaited-and which was to have
made the prolongation of the loans more attractive from the bondholders'
point of view-could not take place. This disappointing development was
reflected in subsequent market quotations for the Russian bonds. Whereas
in the first half of 1798 the price did not fall below 92, Insinger reported
on 20th October that it stood at 83-84.1 The interest payment made on
1st January 1799 put 21 million guilders into circulation, producing a
marginal improvement in the price, but this proved only temporary. The
war, which now erupted in full fury in southern Germany and Italy, added
to the fear among bondholders that, in spite of the express assurance
contained in the principal debenture, Russia might well suspend interest
payments in the Batavian Republic, an ally of France. 2
  These fears grew even stronger when, at the end of August, an Anglo-
Russian military force landed near Den Helder and then attempted to
push southwards. But a lack of energetic leadership on the part of the
British component, coupled with the fact that no pro-Orange uprisings
were taking place elsewhere in the country, caused the expeditionary
force to re-embark in mid-October. The effect upon bondholders of this
incursion is clear from the fall in the market price of the converted bonds
from an average of 85 during the first half of 1799 to a maximum of 74
during the second half. 3
  Although the outlook in the Batavian Republic was gloomy, the Russian
government was in fact doing its utmost to ensure the payment of interest
on 1st January 1800; but its efforts were hampered by what Hope & Co.
described as 'the astonishing revolution which is making itself felt in the
principal areas of currency.' 4 The English subsidies to the Russian and
Austrian armies and the equipping of the Anglo-Russian expedition,
among other factors, produced a financial crisis which dislocated the
rates of exchange and caused the pound sterling to fall so drastically that
many English houses were moved to ship gold and silver to Hamburg as
a protection against excessive exchange losses. The partners in London
 acted similarly, sending gold to Matthiessen & Sillem via Harman & Co.
in order to advertise the interest payment due on 1St January 1800. This
gold, however, could be despatched only in small quantities, for London
 underwriters had become cautious following the loss of the frigate 'Lutine'
 offVlieland, with an extremely valuable cargo of gold, and they were now

                                    180
                       THE GREA T CONVERSION

 unwilling to insure gold consignments exceeding thirty to forty thousand
 pounds in value. 1 As the volume of exchange transactions between Am-
 sterdam and Hamburg had also fallen to zero, it was left to Matthiessen &
 Sillem to decide whether, in the light of price ratios, it was better to send
 the gold straight to Amsterdam, or to sell it in Hamburg.
  Matthiessen & Sillem were given strict instructions to ensure that the
 3.1 million guilders required reached De Smeth before 1st January; in the
event of the orders from the Court Bankers in Russia falling short of this
sum, the house was empowered to take the necessary action under a
 personal guarantee from the Hopes. Messrs.Hope were greatly displeased
by the fact that the Court Bankers, without consulting them, had made
 arrangements for remittances to De Smeth; their annoyance was the
greater because some of the instructions were pointless. For example,
Harman & Co. had been instructed to remit direct to Amsterdam at a time
when exchange transactions between London and Amsterdam were im-
possible. To the immense relief of the partners, the circulation in Hamburg
was restored fairly rapidly and sterling became stronger. Added to this,
exchange traffic between Hamburg and Amsterdam was revived and thus,
despite some anxious moments, De Smeth was able to make the interest
payment on time, as a result of which the price of the Russian bonds rose
again.2
  In the latter part of 1799 Czar Paul virtually dissociated himself from
the war against France. The fruitless invasion of Holland, coming on top
of the defeats suffered by the Russian armies in Switzerland (principally
through poor co-operation with their Austrian allies), produced in the
impulsive emperor a political volte face. Although Russia formally re-
mained at war with France, Paul I informally made increasing efforts
towards a rapprochement with Napoleon, who in November 1799 had
seized power in France. At the same time, Paul adopted a cooler attitude
towards England, which he accused of failing to restore Malta to the
control of the Knights, and which, because of its great naval superiority
in the Mediterranean, constituted a threat to Russia's influence in that
area. In December ISOO his anti-British policy was manifested in a Treaty
of Neutrality between Russia, Sweden, Prussia and Denmark, the aim of
which was to oblige England-if need be, by force of arms-to respect the
rights of neutral vessels in international waters. The measures adopted
under the treaty included placing an embargo on British vessels and
cargoes in Russian ports. In ISOI, under the pretext of maintaining
neutrality, the Danes occupied Hamburg and the Prussians did the same
to Hanover and Bremen. The British answer to these acts included