

                                    203
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

repurchased bonds and to the reserve, which, as a result of the raising of
Hope's commission in 1798, no longer totalled cf 12,000,000, but
cf 11,525,000. It was made plain to both members of the Committee that
it was also in the interest of the Court that a start should be made with
the sale of the repurchased bonds, since this would not involve the pay-
ment of a further 6t % commission, as was the case with the reserve. The
entire operation, the letter continued, should be entrusted to a single
house, as had been done with the sale of the repurchased bonds. The 2,060
bonds held as security by Israel Dehn & Co. should therefore be brought
back to Amsterdam; the money required for their release could be ob-
tained by Hope and De Smeth from the sale of the balance of the bonds.
Prior to the commencement of the sale, the two houses had jointly held
9,227 repurchased bonds. Of these, 3,000 had been sold by the beginning
of February 1808, so that the balance and the reserve together represented
a nominal value of nearly 18 million guilders. 1
  Hope & Co. offered to try to persuade the entrepreneurs to take over the
bonds in three consecutive transactions, each involving 6 million guilders,
the terms and conditions of which could be adapted to meet the rapidly
changing situation. The partners were confident that the first of the
transactions could be accomplished at a transfer price of 90 %, payment
being made in instalments between early February 1808 and 1st January
1809, leaving the entrepreneurs a douceur of 2-2-!- % in the shape of inter-
est. If the tranches could be disposed of to the entrepreneurs in rapid
succession, it should be feasible to sell all 18 million guildersworth
of bonds to investors during the course of the year. Hope and De Smeth
would require -!- % commission plus a i % brokerage fee on the value of
the repurchased bonds; Hope would also be entitled to the deferred
commission of 6-!- % on the reserve. The Company proceeded to say that
the Russian Court would naturally appreciate how advantageous such an
arrangement would be: at a time when other powers, in spite of offering
interest rates of 8 % and even 10 % on par value, were unsuccessful in
their attempts to obtain loans on the market, Russia would succeed for
less than 6 % of the par value. The opportunity lay solely in the fact that
the public at large would not discover that, in fact, a new loan was being
floated; but to ensure that it did not, absolute secrecy must be maintained,
even towards those 'who seem to have the best opportunity to interfere
with it.' That this was a reference to RaIl and his associates-and, doubt-
less, to Bergien and Krehmer also-will have been obvious to the ministers.
No one, Hope added, must know of Russia's needs; and if the public
were awed by Russia's resources, this would guarantee success.

                                   204
                          'LES TRAITES DU NORD'