

                                    201
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

2,000 bonds each. 1 At about the time when this amendment was issued,
Hope & Co. reported to Wulff that all of the one thousand bonds held
by De Smeth, and about half of the thousand which they had, had been
sold at prices ranging from 92 to 92t. With the proceeds of these sales,
plus the remittances from Israel Dehn and others from Rail to De Smeth,
Hope now had sufficient funds to cover the interest due on 1st January
1808, and under these circumstances the Company enquired whether the
government wished for more bonds to be sold.
 Early in October 1807 Bergien had put out a feeler to Hope regarding a
new loan of 10-12,000,000 guilders with a life of 10 years. In a separate
letter he had urged a quick decision. 2 According to Bergien, the Russian
government was prepared to take the necessary steps to obtain the ap-
proval of King Louis for such a loan. Hope passed Bergien's letter to
Robert Voute, who had accepted the office of Director General of the
Treasury under King Louis and could therefore greatly influence the
sanctioning of new loans in Holland. Voute considered Bergien's proposal
to be inopportune on the grounds that there was already a heavy demand
on the capital market in Holland as a result of a Dutch state loan of 40
million guilders, a Spanish loan of 30 million and a loan to the Kingdom
of Naples of 3 million. 3 Hope & Co., who were involved in these loans,
had assumed that Bergien was unofficially angling for a loan, and on
receiving Voute's views they fobbed Bergien off with the statement that
the Russian Treasury employed far simpler means to obtain funds for
interest payments. 4 Only later did the Company discover that Bergien
had acted with some authority-and that he had also raised the subject of
a loan with Bethmann in Frankfurt.
  In his overtures, Bergien had hinted that his government would not be
unsympathetic to a request for a quantity of Russian goods as security for
part of the loan. This suggestion offered interesting possibilities, for with
the value of the rouble at a low level (in November 1807 the rate in Am-
sterdam had fallen below 20 stuivers), large quantities of goods could be
bought cheaply in St.Petersburg; ifthf. rate subsequently recovered, these
could be sold and the proceeds-including a substantial profit-transferred
to Holland.
  Another opportunity for profiting from the exchange situation lay in
lodging funds in Russia with the aim of withdrawing them when the rate
improved. Matthiessen & Sillem, who broached this to Hope, felt that no
risk would be involved if the monies were deposited with the Assignat
Bank, but Hope argued that any operation of this nature would require a
trusted associate, and that they knew of no one to fill the role. The Com-

                                    202
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

pany had ended its personal connexion with Rall many years earlier and
had no reason to think well of his business principles. It had not forgotten
the example of Sutherland, Browne and Whishaw-whom it had instructed
to deposit money in the Assignat Bank, but who had failed to do so-and
was only willing to participate if Matthiessen & Sillem accepted the risk
inherent in employing their agent in Russia, for which they would receive
a commission of t %or I %.1
  The name of Bergien, as a trusted agent, does not appear anywhere in
this letter. The indiscreet manner in which he exceeded the credit afforded
to him by Hope has already been described; to make things worse,
however, he offered the Company bank debentures, as a collateral for
fresh credits, at an exchange rate of 25 stuivers per rouble while Hope
could obtain them for 18 stuivers by having them purchased in Russia and
later allowing the buyers to draw on Amsterdam. Once again it was im-
pressed upon Bergien that a collateral, be it money, goods, banknotes or
in another form, was required whenever he drew on others. As Hope &
Co. were unwilling to allow Bergien to make a remittance at the low rate
of exchange then ruling, they agreed to wait until the following Spring
on condition that Bergien continued to hold Russian goods to a value
commensurate with the security required. There were at that moment
good opportunities for purchases and contracts in that sector. 2
 The lack of consistency in the policies pursued by the new Minister of
Finance was shown by a letter from the St.Petersburg merchant J.A.Kreh-
mer, of Krehmer Lang & Co., who, almost at the same time as Bergien
but entirely on his own initiative, put forward a proposal for a Russian
loan-this time, however, one of between 30 and 50 million guilders.
Hope & Co. promptly replied that a loan of this size was out of the
question since it would interfere with the placing of the bonds of the
current loan. The Company suggested that the government would do
better to take another look at the proposals which they had put forward
in 1803 concerning the making available of goods in Russia by the govern-
ment as security for the furnishing of guilders in Amsterdam by Hope. 3
In an effort to clarify this highly unusual situation, Hope sent a copy of
Krehmer's letter to Bergien. The confusion reached its climax when, on
the last day of 1807 according to the Russian calendar, Rumyantsev and
Golubtsov sent two letters to Hope, one of which requested a loan of at
least 30 million guilders, while the other contained an instruction to
place the 12 million guildersworth of reserve bonds on the market! 4
Hope's reply was tactical, but unambiguous. No reference was made to
the proposed loan, but the letter did refer to the encashment of the