

                                    199
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

three areas were corrected at the central point, Hamburg. 1 The proclama-
tion of the Continental System and the occupation of Hamburg, however,
had eliminated this balancing facility, and Russia was to feel the conse-
quences.
  Not surprisingly, there was a degree of pessimism in Amsterdam con-
cerning the question whether the Russian remittances for the interest
instalment due on 1st January 1807 would arrive and, if so, whether they
would be on time. Fortunately, Matthiessen & Sillem reported in mid-
December that RaIl and Rogovikov had instructed them to remit the
appropriate sum to Hope & Co. Owing to the war situation in eastern
Europe, the Russian remittances had had to be routed via Sweden. Mat-
thiessen & Sillem had transferred the funds received from Russia to a
place of safety even before the French occupation, but it proved possible
to remit to Amsterdam in the normal manner.2 Hope & Co. were thus
enabled to pay the interest on the due date, with consequent benefit to the
price of the Russian bonds. Despite the war with Russia, the price had
held up excellently, thanks to the prompt payment of interest, and during
1805 and 1806 the six-monthly average had not fallen below 95. 3
  The Russian armies had no more success in 1807 than in the preceding
years. While winter held the country in its grip, the battle continued to
sway back and forth, but in June Napoleon secured a decisive victory at
Friedland. The czar and the King of Prussia sought peace, and this Napo-
leon gladly granted in order to avoid a risky campaign deep in Russia.
During a personal meeting, Napoleon so captivated Alexander that the
Peace of Tilsit, signed on 7th July 1807, in fact embodied a Franco-Rus-
sian alliance. In the treaty, the czar undertook to declare war on England
if that country had not become a party to the general peace by 1st Decem-
ber 1807, and also, in company with France, to force the governments of
Denmark, Sweden, Austria and Portugal to adopt the Continental
System. Denmark no longer required forcing, for the British government,
upon receiving news of the Peace of Tilsit, had anticipated the consequen-
tial decisions and had occupied the island of Seeland. After a preliminary
bombardment, Copenhagen was captured and the Danish fleet was taken
to England intact. Not surprisingly, the Danish government declared war
on England, to be followed soon afterwards by Russia. 4
  It is almost superfluous to say that this upset in the political relation-
ships on the continent of Europe had serious consequences for foreign
trade, and thus for the rates of exchange in Russia. England now ceased
to be the principal buyer of ships supplies, and although this trade link
was later to be restored, under foreign flags, a decline was unavoidable. In

                                   200
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

fact, exports to England continued at the previous level throughout the
season of 1807 because British traders, anticipating the severance of rela-
tions with Russia following the Peace of Tilsit, laid in the largest possible
stocks of Russian goods.!
  With Russia's trade thus proceeding on relatively favourable lines, the
departure in May 1807 of the formidable Councillor of State Wulff for
Copenhagen, from whence he attempted to mobilize funds in western
Europe for the benefit of the Russian government,2 did not augur well. In
mid-June he approached Hope & Co. regarding the possibility of a loan
on the security of bonds. Wulff had been empowered by Vasilyev to nego-
tiate with the repurchased bonds and the reserve of 12 million guilders
in order to minimize remittances from Russia at the low rates of exchange
which then obtained. 3 The Company replied that it favoured selling the
repurchased bonds, adding that the price had risen to 90-92 following the
Peace of Tilsit, compared with 85 or thereabouts during the first half of
1807. A loan on the security of bonds entailed certain risks, because it
would imply that the Russian government was bound to fixed repayment
periods, and with the exchange rate falling this could result in major
losses. 4 If Wulff was in urgent need of money, Hope was prepared to
advance 2-300,000 guilders on the security of the bonds which the Com-
pany held; this would be repayable at a mean annual rate of exchange.
 Wulff ultimately chose a compromise between his own plan and Hope's
proposals. The Company received instructions to send 2,060 repurchased
bonds to Israel Dehn & Co. in Altona, who would then remit to Amster-
dam. De Smeth and Hope were each instructed to sell one thousand
bonds, but the order to De Smeth was pointedly issued first with the aim
of emphasizing Vasilyev's displeasure with Hope. 5 In fact, the instruction
to De Smeth was pointless, for upon receiving it the house immediately
approached Hope and consented to the whole of the sale being effected
via the Company. Hope & Co., in turn, gave instructions to the broker
Willem Borski, with whom it was agreed that the bonds should be sold
only when the price was above 90. A condition for this was that they
should be released gradually and without 'empressement.'6
 The death of Vasilyev on 15th August 1807 may have freed Hope of a
bitter enemy in Russian government circles, but as his successor, Fedor
Golubtsov, had little expert knowledge and so relied heavily on Wulff and
RaIl for advice, little really changed from the Company's point of view.
Golubtsov and Count Rumyantsev, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Trade, together constituted the Committee for Foreign Loans, and in this
capacity Golubtsov instructed De Smeth and Hope to sell not 1,000, but