

                                    195
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

conditional freedom to accept any draft accompanied by such a document.
  In Russia, too, commercial practices proved stronger than Napoleonic
regulations. The merchants of St.Petersburg were accustomed to drawing
immediately after the despatch of the invoice, and nothing would satisfy
them but that De Lesseps should waive the five-day waiting period. 1
  From Hope's point of view, a very disagreeable note was introduced by a
request from Van Cammenga of Emden that the Company should fur-
nish ante-dated, false correspondence for the purpose of securing the
release of a number of vessels which had fallen into British hands. Labou-
chere had made it clear to Decres and his staff in March 1804 that the
Company was only willing to allow drafts to be drawn on them, but would
have no part in the underlying transactions. 2
  When Decres began to press the matter, Hope, gambling on the rivalry
between two ministers and their departments, enlisted the aid of Barbe
Marbois. To the Minister for the Navy, the Company again emphasized
that it was acting as banker to the French Treasury, by whom it was re-
quired to accept instructions emanating from the Admiralty concerning
the funds which it held on behalf of the Treasury, but that its obligations
did not go beyond this. From Barbe Marbois's department, Labouchere
learned that the minister was fully in agreement with Hope's standpoint,
but that he could not admit this publicy, in order not to contradict his
colleague. 3 The matter was finally raised in the ministerial council, where
Napoleon ruled in favour of the Company. According to Roger, the di-
rector of the Droits Reunis and a good friend of Labouchere, the emperor
said: 'Messrs. Hope, who are accustomed to handling transactions of 80
to 100 million, will not furnish these items for 40 million.' This flattering
remark concerning the Company was said to have brought the debate to
anend. 4
  In a review of the matter, Hope & Co. pointed out to Decres that it did
not concern a mere formality, but tampering with existing correspondence
and the issuing of false statements-actions which would debase the Com-
pany in its own eyes and those of others. 'In the profession of merchant,
loyalty and strict rectitude are the sole qualifications for earning the
 respect of the public; it is upon these qualities that we are entitled to the
 confidence we are honoured with. Only on this basis can it delight us and
 do we strive for it, beyond all the gains attached to hazardous opera-
 tions.' 5 For the partners, it must have been very gratifying to be able to
 teach a French minister a lesson, safe in the knowledge that they had the
 approval of the highest in the land.
 By the end of 1804, this operation on behalf of the French Treasury was
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

virtually completed. The balance of the 9 million francs was used to
meet late invoices in 1805, and the unbroached 3 million francs, in the
form of drafts issued by the banker Desprez, were transferred to France in
December 1804.1 All in all, the operation was one upon which Hope could
look back with satisfaction: it had, indirectly, facilitated the Russian
remittances by reason of the drafts on Amsterdam, and, despite the differ-
ences of opinion at the end, the Company's prestige in the eyes of the
French government had remained unimpaired. 2
  Now that the credit established with the Company by the Treasury for
this purpose had been liquidated, the question of financing subsequent
expeditions from the Baltic arose. Decres sought Hope's views on private
expeditions to French ports. Hope felt that such a scheme had merit, but
recommended that the financial aspect be entrusted to a Paris merchant,
to whom the government should supply the necessary funds and who
would take over from the Admiralty the task of maintaining contact with
the merchants in the Baltic. The Company considered De BondevilIe,
with whom it had long been associated, a highly suitable intermediary.
 Under such an arrangement, all transactions could be carried on be-
tween individual merchants, as had been the case during the American
War of Independence, when Hope purchased and consigned ships stores
for the French Admiralty and was only required to negotiate with Le
Chevalier Lambert and Dujardin de Ruzc. For its services on that occa-
sion, the Company had received a commission of 2 % on the value of the
invoices, plus the customary commission on insurance, freight charges
and other services. The French government had had a few of the vessels
engaged in that operation neutralized, but had accepted the risks which
this entailed.
 The Company also expressed the opinion that it would be preferable for
the cargoes to be shipped for the account of the Baltic merchants, and
offered to cover the shippers' risks at an annual premium of 12 %, in the
name of and for the account of the Paris house. Hope felt that it would be
better if the merchants were not informed that the French Admiralty was
behind the transactions, and if they were spared the necessity to furnish
certificates concerning the rate of exchange. Too many formalities and
excessive secrecy were repugnant to the merchant fraternity. Even if
Decres should decide to place orders direct with the Baltic merchants,
Hope would still prefer to have only one house in Paris with which to
correspond; this would in future prevent Decres's time being taken up
with petty issues raised by the merchants. 3
With this elegant ploy, the Company attempted to make it clear that, as