

                                   197
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

a mercantile house, it was not anxious to have direct dealings with a
French government department. The reference to Hope's role as a sup-
plier to France during the American War of Independence is noteworthy,
for it reveals that even then Henry Hope, a convinced supporter of the
House of Orange, separated politics from business. But little came of
further large-scale deliveries to the French fleet. In October 1805 that
fleet was destroyed by Nelson at Trafalgar, and with its defeat its role as
an instrument of power came to an end. Hope & Co. continued to be
concerned in the financing of French naval purchases after Trafalgar, but
the sums involved were small. Between 1805 and 18II, a six-year period,
the entries 'pour Ie Service de la Marine' totalled cf 1,672,288.15.8, an
average ofless than 280,000 guilders a year. 1

The keen demand abroad for Russian goods, among other factors, had
resulted in the prompt payment of interest on the Russian bonds at the
end of 1804. While the czar continued to be neutral in the matter of the
war between France and England, this favourable situation might be ex-
pected to continue; but his neutrality was not to last very long. In the eyes
of Alexander I, Napoleon was a threat to Europe, and his plan to partition
the Turkish Empire conflicted with Russia's interests. Despite the efforts
of the British to get the czar on their side after the Treaty of Amiens, he
remained uncommitted, although his relations with France steadily
deteriorated. In May 1804 the French envoy in St. Petersburg was recal-
led, a development which threw the exchange rates into a state of confu-
sion. Bergien wrote to Hope that: 'It was another striking example of the
extent to which political events imperiously control and influence business.' 2
In the autumn of 1804 the czar signed a treaty with Austria, and in April
of the following year he allied himself with England. When, in August
1805, Austria joined the Anglo-Russian alliance, war became inevitable.
 The war, when it came, went extremely well from Napoleon's point of
view. Early in December 1805 he succeeded in defeating the Austrian and
Russian imperial armies at Austerlitz, whereupon Austria sued for peace.
Alexander, however, returned to eastern Europe to continue the struggle
there. For Prussia, which had still not made up her mind whether or not
to join in on the side of Austria and Russia, Austerlitz was a sign to enter
into an alliance with Napoleon. Two months later, under French pressure,
she closed her ports to English ships. When the Prussian decision was
communicated to the British government early in 1806, it retaliated by
blockading the entrances to the Eems, the Weser, the Elbe and the Trave,
and placed an embargo on Prussian vessels. 3 Shortly afterwards England
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

 declared war on Prussia. This situation, however, did not by any means
 imply that Prussia was now firmly in the French camp: faced with the
 growth of France's power after her defeat of Austria at Austerlitz, Prussia
 ultimately decided to challenge Napoleon. But in a lightning campaign
 the Prussian armies were defeated at Jena and Auerstiidt, and shortly
 afterwards, in November 1806, Napoleon proclaimed in Berlin the
 Continental System, which prohibited all trade with Britain or her colo-
nies. At about the same time, French troops occupied Hamburg, Bremen
 and Lubeck. 1
  All these disruptions left their mark on France's trade, and that of her
allies, with Russia, and resulted in a growing scarcity of Russian goods. 2
Diminishing stocks and rising prices are a prescription for speculation,
and Hope & Co. were not the type to let such an opportunity pass. The
partners envisaged particularly high profits on potash, and accordingly a
number of orders for this commodity were placed. Bergien was among
the recipients, and he was instructed to purchase 4,000 po ods at a price
not exceeding 46 roubles per pood. When he reported that the price had
risen sharply, he was given discretion, and proceeded to purchase a
quantity at 54 roubles per pood. But when it came to shipping the potash,
fresh problems arose. On 27th April 1806 Bergien wrote to say that the
news of the blockade of the Elbe, Weser and Trave had reached St. Peters-
burg, and that he was in a quandary regarding the choice of flag for the
shipment. A month later he reported that the French government had
declared all vessels carrying cargoes of Russian origin which might be
captured in open waters as prizes of war. In view of this, he wondered
whether it might not be wiser to resell the potash in St.Petersburg; but
finally he decided to consign it to a house in Lubeck, with instructions to
ship it to Hope in a Danish vessel via the Holstein Canal. 3
  Russia also suffered as a result of the stagnation of trade with western
Europe. In April 1806 Bergien was already complaining of the inactivity
on the commodity markets and the decline in rates of exchange, but by
November he reported that things had got far worse. The commodity
markets were dead, and in the complete absence of business the value of
the rouble was steadily falling-and was in any case purely nominal. 4 The
occupation of Hamburg by French troops will certainly have had some-
thing to do with the difficulties in that November. After all, Hamburg was
an important centre for the financial aspects of Russia's foreign trade.
Under normal circumstances, Britain had a deficit in her trade with Rus-
sia, while the German territories had a trading surplus with Russia but a
deficit with England, so that imbalances in the demand for drafts in these