

 The Committee had little answer to such a proposal, and after some
 mutterings to the effect that a new loan would be preferable, Hope's plan
 was accepted at the end of March 1808, the sole amendment being that the
 price of 90 % should immediately be applied to the whole transaction. It
 was also expressly stipulated that the sale of the repurchased bonds should
 be effected in collaboration with De Smeth. 1
  When the time came to agree terms with the entrepreneurs, however,
 developments on the international political scene did not favour the
 Company. The peace which many had expected to spread through Europe
 as a result of the Tilsit treaty had still not materialized. Napoleon utilized
 the breathing space afforded by the alliance with Russia to carry the
 completion of his dominion a stage farther and to bring more states
 within the Continental System. Portugal was occupied in November 1807
 and was followed a few months later by the Papal State. Meanwhile,
 military preparations for a French conquest of Spain were being made.
In northern Europe, Czar Alexander launched an offensive against Fin-
land in order to force Sweden to adopt the Continental System in ac-
cordance with the provisions of the peace of Tilsit.
  The clash of arms and the 'combinaisons politiques' together made
Dutch investors more cautious, with the result that the price of the Russian
bonds fell, while the rate at which the market could absorb bonds de-
clined noticeably. Whereas they had stood at over 921 in early February
1808, the bonds fell to 91i or less during the first few days of March. By
the end of that month they had fallen to 90, and it required powerful
support by Hope to restore them to 9 It by early April. 2 This recovery
was vital if a contract with the entrepreneurs was to be achieved. At the
end of April the Company was able to report to the ministers that it had
succeeded in negotiating an agreement with Borski, 'Ie principal des
entrepreneurs, au nom de tous.'
  On 26th April 1808, Hope transferred to Borski Russian bonds to a
nominal value of 17 million guilders, at a price of 90 %, plus the
interest thereon since 1st January. The agreement stipulated that the
Russian government should not negotiate any fresh loan abroad before
1st July 1809 without the prior sanction of the entrepreneurs. Should the
Court do so, the entrepreneurs would be entitled to cancel the contract
and to claim compensation of 2 % of the uncompleted portion. Termi-
nation of the contract by the entrepreneurs would render them liable to
pay Hope & Co. 10 % of the uncompleted portion and to forfeit the
privilege of the interest. 3
Observing that Hope had a 6-million guilder share in this operation, it

                                     20 5
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

is strange that the Company adopted a critical and reticent attitude to-
wards the Committee in the matter of Borski's contract. In all probability
it was forced to take part in a transaction, the feasibility of which it
viewed with doubt. After all, the magnitude of the sum and the short
period in which the sale of bonds had to be completed made it a risky
venture, and if circumstances became unfavourable the parties to the
contract might ask to be released from part of their commitments-al-
though in that case they would naturally face a 10 % penalty. However,
the contract not only assured the interest payment due at the end of the
year but also enabled a reserve fund to be created, and this could only be
welcome to the Russian government. 1
  Just how welcome this fund was, emerged from the fact that the Russian
Court called upon it even before it was created. During the war against
France, a Russian naval squadron under the command of Admiral Zen-
yavin had operated successfully against the French bastions on the Dal-
mation coast, and also against the Turkish fleet, from bases on the Ionian
Islands. These islands were ceded to France under the terms of the Peace
of Tilsit, and this meant the ending of the Russian occupation and the
evacuation of the Russian flotilla. Because the Turks had blockaded the
straits, Zenyavin was obliged to sail via the Atlantic Ocean in order to
reach the Baltic. 2 When the flotilla had passed through the Straits of
Gibraltar and into the Atlantic, a severe storm blew up, forcing the vessels
to put into Lisbon. This event, in November 1807, coincided with Na-
poleon's orders to General Junot to occupy Portugal. Faced with this
threat, the Portuguese government entered into an agreement with England
providing for the British navy to convey the members of the Portu-
guese royal family to Brazil. Almost at the same moment came the news
that Russia had declared war on England. The British thereupon block-
aded the Lisbon roads, leaving Zenyavin and his men trapped in the
harbour.3 The Russian government now faced the problem of sending
money to the flotilla for the purchase offood and other necessities. 4
  On arrival in Lisbon, Zenyavin wrote to Hope saying that he proposed to
draw on the Company to meet the costs incurred in maintaining his ships
and their crews. 5 During his stay there he drew in all cf 2,550,000. At the
end of August 1808, Zenyavin and his British counterpart signed a treaty
which provided for the Russian crews to be repatriated at British expense,
in return for which Zenyavin would sail his vessels to Portsmouth, where
they would be left 'in custody' until the end of the hostilities. 6
 With the Russian government facing such an urgent need for funds
abroad, the Committee in St.Petersburg had little option but to approve