

                                    19 1
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

even when the repayment failed to materialize, the demand for bonds
continued. Adding to the number available by placing the reserve bonds
on the market would certainly cause the price to fall. In a letter to Bergien,
Hope & Co. made it clear that the Russian government need not count
upon a fresh loan, for with the law passed on 1st June 1802 the Staats-
bewind had firmly closed the door on the floating of foreign loans in the
Republic.!

This absolute rejection of Bergien's overtures will not have been entirely
dissociated from Hope's anxieties concerning the Louisiana loan. Owing
to difficulties and delays in America, the confirmatory report did not
reach Paris until late in March 1804. Despite the advance of 10 million
francs which Hope and Baring had furnished, Napoleon was still in dire
straits. Indeed, such was his need of money that on 21st April 1804 Barbe
Marbois put his signature to an agreement which provided for Hope &
Co. to receive the remaining two-thirds of the American bonds imme-
diately in return for a substantial acceleration of the instalments. Labou-
cbere signed on behalf of the Company. For anticipating the payments,
Hope and Baring were granted a discount amounting to 1,675,000 francs.
Among the methods of payment agreed was the establishment by Hope &
Co. of a credit of 12 million francs, divided into 8 bonds of It million
each, the first of which would mature on 1st May 1804 and the re-
mainder at monthly intervals until the end of the year; the sums which
thus became available could be drawn on, up to the monthly limit, by
German and Russian merchants holding permits issued by the French
Admiralty. 2
  Hope & Co. were no strangers to the Admiralty at that time. The pay-
master of the expeditionary force which had been destined for Louisiana
had availed himself of their services for a number of minor indents, and
when the expedition was abandoned the cash balance was returned to the
Payeurs de fa Marine in Dunkirk via the Company.3 Shortly before the
credit for the 'traites du Nord' was made available, the Minister for the
Navy, Decres, had instructed Hope to charter ten neutral vessels and to
place these at the disposal of Morison in Riga for the conveyance of masts
to the Emden merchant Philippus Julius Abegg. 4 Six days later, on 16th
 March 1804, the minister cancelled the instruction, but with the avail-
 ability of 12 million francs in Amsterdam he contacted the Company
fourteen days later.
  By the end of March, both Barbe Marbois and Decres had furnished
 Hope with the names of the authorized merchants and the limits to which

                                     192
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

 they were permitted to draw on the credit.! Labouchere applied to the
 French envoy in the Republic for a passport for France, but as this was
 not required until 7th April it must be assumed that the negotiations
leading up to the agreement, which was to be signed on 21St April, were
conducted by him in writing from the Republic. Of the 12 million
francs which Hope & Co. were to make available during the remainder of
 the year, only 9 million had provisionally been allocated. Half this sum
was earmarked for four (later three) merchants in Riga, including Mori-
son; he was to receive just over 2t million. A number of merchants in
St.Petersburg, who were still to be appointed by the French consul gen-
eral, De Lesseps, would together be granted credits totalling 1,800,000
francs; a house in Hamburg was to be allocated 800,000 francs; a house in
Koningsberg 500,000 francs; and three (later two) merchants in Emden
were authorized to draw up to 1,400,000 francs. 2
  The sources and merchants from and through which the shipbuilding
materials were to be supplied were clearly chosen with care. In Konings-
berg and St.Petersburg, only hemp was purchased, while in Riga two
houses, Helmund & Son and J.Morison, were charged with the pur-
chasing of timber. Another Riga merchant, Justus Blanckenhagen, con-
centrated on hemp, and later one-third of the credit originally earmarked
for the St.Petersburg houses jointly was transferred to him. The records
do not reveal the reason for this change, but it may be assumed that the
prices and the stocks available in Riga favoured its selection as the point
of supply. The credits granted to the two houses in Emden, Thomas van
Cammenga and Claas Tholen, were to cover the costs of handling, neu-
tralizing and re-shipping timber and, to a far lesser extent, hemp from
Riga. All shipments from the Baltic to Emden were made in East Frisian
vessels flying the Prussian flag. Some cargoes were taken direct from Riga
to French ports such as Morlaix, Bordeaux, Nantes and, in isolated
instances, Marseilles, and these were carried in Russian or Swedish ships. 3
  The hemp obtained in St.Petersburg was in all cases shipped direct to a
French port, Bordeaux and Nantes being the principal destinations. All
such cargoes were carried in Russian vessels. 4 It was not long before the
credit of 800,000 francs earmarked for Hamburg was allocated to Peh-
moller & Droop, who were requested to supply copper. 5
  The costs and commissions relating to the goods shipped varied greatly,
both in terms of commodity and source. The costs of handling and ship-
ping timber were particularly high, dues and other charges averaging 70 %
of the value of the cargo. 6 The figure for hemp was much lower, probably
because the transport, storage, loading and unloading charges were con-