

 one-third of the American bonds. The payment would thus occupy two
years from the date of arrival in Paris of news of the transfer of the initial
batch of bonds. 1
  Ratification of the agreement by the First Consul did not materialize
until 22nd May, and it was not until 30th July that Alexander Baring was
able officially to hand over the drafts for 52 million francs to the American
envoy who, however, was instructed not to release the initial one-third
until Alexander Baring had reached America and taken possession of a
corresponding portion of the bonds.
  But the war against England had meanwhile recommenced, and Napo-
leon was in dire need of funds. It so happened that President Jefferson
had succeeded in persuading Congress to vote a sum of 2 million
dollars in order to provide his negotiator in Paris with at least a degree of
financial backing. With this security behind them, the Americans in Paris
offered to guarantee an advance of 10 million francs, which was to be
furnished by Baring and Hope. After all, it was conceivable that the long
delay might have caused Napoleon to change his mind, in which case all
their work would have been in vain. 2 On 30th July 1803, the day upon
which the American envoy accepted the drafts from Baring and Hope,
Alexander Baring put his signature to an agreement with the French
Minister of Finance, under which the latter would receive 2 million
francs in the form of drafts on the house of Willings & Francis of Phila-
delphia. It is probable that the money was used for the French expedi-
tionary force on the island of Haiti, which at that very moment was in an
extremely precarious position. 3 Hope & Co. had earlier made efforts to
obtain the balance of 8 million francs, required for French purchases in
Russia, in Amsterdam, but the Company had failed to reach agreement
with the French government on the rate of exchange, and accordingly this
method of payment was abandoned. 4

Following the signing of the contract between Barbe Marbois and
Alexander Baring on 3rd May 1803, Hope & Co. approached Vasilyev in
St. Petersburg with a proposal that funds be made available in Amsterdam
for French purchases in Russia, but that such purchases should in fact be
paid for by the Russian government, which could thus create a credit
balance in Amsterdam and thus avoid the necessity for remitting funds-a
factor of importance in relation to the highly unstable position of the
rouble. Vasilyev reacted by sending Voute's old enemy, Councillor of
State Wulff, 'Controleur des Banquiers de la Cour,' to Amsterdam to look
further into the plan, but owing to the breakdown of the negotiations
                                     190
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

between Hope and the French government nothing came of it-probably
to the great relief of Vasilyev, who in his discussions with others had
earlier revealed his opposition to the whole project. 1
 Bergien, the St.Petersburg merchant, who had got wind of the proposed
arrangement and had seen in it an opportunity to advance his own in-
terests at the Russian Court, approached Voute, and later Hope, pre-
senting himself as the indispensable broker who could manipulate his
many important connexions in such a manner as to ensure that Hope's
proposals were not rejected out of hand. He reasoned that Hope could
expect nothing from Vasilyev, for he was opposed to any suggestions from
them. Knowing that Bergien was a sworn adversary of Rall (as was
revealed in the previous chapter) and that he did indeed have connexions
at the Court, the Company, partly out of consideration for Robert Voute,
opened a credit of cf 50,000 in Bergien's name and persuaded Baring to
do likewise. FollowingVasilyev's dismissal in 1800, Bergien had assumed
responsibility for remittances on behalf of a number of government bodies
and it was in Hope's interest to assist him in this matter. Bergien, however,
did not use the credit for transactions of this sort, but for speculation in
foreign exchange, with the result that he exceeded the limit, and when
called upon to repay the excess he did so with drafts on Baring.2 However
useful Bergien may have been, such conduct was inadmissible, and both
Voute and the Company made it plain to him that the credit afforded was
for the purpose of remitting funds from the Russian government: it did
not constitute an account for speculative purposes, nor would a constant
deficit of cf 50,000 be tolerated. In the uncertain political situation, they
added, Bergien should exercise caution in his transactions. In addition,
Voute informed him that his reputation was at stake, 'in adopting such
a cavalier attitude to the essential aspect of your position as a banker,
namely the credit which is accorded to you.' 3
 That Bergien, in spite of his tendency to speculate with other people's
money, could be of value emerged at the end of 1803, when he reported
to the Company that he had been approached by several Russian ministers
regarding the prospects of obtaining a new loan or broaching the reserve
of 12 million guilders. 4 This news was anything but welcome to the
Company, which had counted on a repayment of principal against the old
loan, but certainly not on a request for a new one. Wulff's visit to the
Republic had given rise to a host of vague rumours, and the public had
got it into its head that his presence was a prelude to a further repayment
of principal in the following January. Indeed, the sum of 6 million
guilders had been mentioned, and this had caused the price to soar to 971;