

                                    193
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

siderably less than those for timber. The St.Petersburg houses charged a
total of 13 % for 'droits, frais, commission, passage de Sund, etca .' The
commission paid to the houses in Konigsberg and in Russia varied be-
tween 3 %and 4 %.1
  In the case of the hemp and timber shipped to Emden, the costs of
neutralization, sometimes supplemented by transshipment expenses, were
added to those already mentioned. Van Cammenga's and Tholen's in-
voices for charges and commission on hemp, timber and copper
valued at just over 1 t million guilders and shipped to Emden totalled cf
252,264.3.8, or 16 % of the invoice value of the goods. This implies, for
example, that timber purchased in Riga almost doubled in price by the
time it left the harbour of Emden.
  When, in August 1804, news of the blockading of the Channel ports and
the arrest by the British of a number of vessels engaged in these operations
was received, Decres gave instructions that future timber shipments were
to be consigned to Ryberg & Co. in Copenhagen. This house would
undertake the unloading of the ships and would pay the freight and
unloading charges. 2 Ryberg's charges on ten cargoes of timber shipped to
them by Morison amounted to 34% of the invoice value-more than twice
the figure charged in Emden. Hope & Co. eventually received t % com-
mission on all payments which they effected. 3
  In such uncertain times, the insurance of vessels and their cargoes was
difficult. Decres had initially stipulated premiums of 2 % for marine risks
and 4t-5 % for all-risk cover, but Hope & Co. soon disillusioned him:
insurers in Amsterdam were already demanding 5-7 % for marine risks,
and all-risk cover could not be obtained for less than 8-10%.4 Upon
receiving this information, the minister gave the Company a free hand in
the matter on condition that the premium paid covered the voyage to
a French port. By the time the letter reached Hope, however, the situation
on the Amsterdam insurance market had changed; the report of the
arrest by the British of three ships operating for BIanckenhagen and
Morison, coming on top of other losses, had made it impossible to obtain
insurance against war risks there. 5 In addition, the underwriters were
plainly averse to offering cover on damage; the cause lay in the fact that
a number of merchant houses who had indulged in speculation, and lost,
had resorted to deliberately allowing cargoes to be damaged in order to
be able to shift the consequences of their imprudence on to the shoulders
of the insurers. 6
  With such poor prospects in Amsterdam, Hope advised Decres to try
his luck in Hamburg. The underwriters there proved to be more flexible

                                   194
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

in the matter of marine risk cover to French ports, but all-risk insurance
 on cargoes bound for France had been withdrawn at the beginning of
August, and even Decres's offer of a 10% premium-and later one of
 15 %-did not tempt the insurers. 1
  In response to an allegation by Decres that Hogguer & Co. in Amster-
dam were offering all-risk insurance on shipments to French ports at 6!-
7 %, Hope & Co. replied that Hogguer dealt with Swedish vessels, and
that Swedish captains inspired more confidence than their Russian coun-
terparts, with whom the Company was principally concerned. The
Swedish captains, like the Prussians, were renowned for their skill, knew
every inch of the North Sea, the Baltic and the Channel and, moreover,
sailed in solidly built ships. The Russian merchantmen were inferior,
being built of deal, and easily sustained damage to their cargo-a fact
which in the case of hemp, with its susceptibility to moisture, could result
in heavy claims upon the insurers.2 Apart from this, the premiums in-
creased as the season advanced, marine risk cover rising from 6 % in
August to 7-8 % in September and October. 3
  The formalities which the French authorities sought to impose on the
commercial transactions constituted an obstacle to the whole operation.
According to Decres's original instructions, the sums corresponding to
the invoices were to be drawn only after the loading of the goods. The
merchants in the Baltic were required to furnish Hope & Co. with a
resume of the invoice details and a certificate showing the rate of ex-
change, both bearing the seal of the local French consul or agent. Five
days after these documents had been forwarded, the merchant was per-
mitted to draw on Hope & Co., the periods being 70 days for St.Peters-
burg, 65 days for Riga and 60 days for Konigsberg, while those for Ham-
burg and Emden were governed by local custom. Hope was forbidden to
disclose to the merchants the sum of the credits earmarked for them.
  Decres had initially desired that Hope should verify the invoices and,
before accepting drafts, satisfy themselves that the drawer had fulfilled his
commitments; but the Company, with the support of Barbe Marbois,
succeeded in talking Decres out of this. Hope also advised against the
stipulation that the documents which were to accompany the drafts
should be stamped or initialIed by the French consul in Amsterdam, for
this would attract undesirable attention. The Company would consent to
no more than the initialling by the consul of the letter of advice, which
procedure, it was stressed, would have to be completed rapidly, for in
Amsterdam no more than twenty-four hours was ever allowed for the
acceptance orprotestation ofdrafts. 4 Furthermore, Hope insisted on the un-