

                                    206
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

Hope's contract with Borski. Nevertheless, it made its approval subject
to the deletion of the clause prohibiting new loans, on the grounds that
such a stipulation was incompatible with the honour of the Russian
Court. 1 Despite Hope's insistence on secrecy regarding the contract with
Borski, events proved that a leakage had occurred. On 1st June 1808
Robert VOllte informed Hope by letter that he had arrived in Amsterdam
to look into the conditions and payment dates relating to the Russian loan
which, it appeared, was to be floated. Despite the fact that VOllte had
enjoyed Hope's confidence, and presumably continued to do so, his
position as Director General of the Treasury made him an outsider as far as
the Russian transaction was concerned; Hope therefore replied in friendly
terms that, according to the latest reports from St. Petersburg, the Russian
Court was not planning to negotiate any new loans, but that if Hope
received any further news on this subject, VOllte would be informed
without delay. The letter made no mention of the encashment of the
reserve, which VOllte himself had earlier urged. 2
 The mood of the market proved to be anything but favourable for the
execution of the contract with Borski, with which a start had meanwhile
been made. Early in June 1808 the demand for bonds fell alarmingly and
the price of the Russian issues dropped to 90-the figure at which they had
been transferred. When, after considerable difficulty, they were eased up
to 91, others took advantage of the situation and sold. During June the
turnover in Russian bonds declined so severely that at the end of the
month the entrepreneurs were extremely reluctant to accept a further 2,000.
 In order to make the fulfilment of the conditions of the contract more
palatable to the entrepreneurs, Hope & Co.-again on their own initiative-
drew up a supplementary agreement on 4th July 1808. The document
implemented the rejection of the clause prohibiting new Russian loans,
but against this it provided that if such a loan should be floated the
entrepreneurs would have the right to demand that the Court purchase the
unsold bonds of the current transaction at the market price. It was also
stipulated that the penalty of 10 % for non-acceptance of the balance of
12 million guilders in bonds would not become payable until the end
of the year, and that this would apply only to the tranche which the
entrepreneurs then refused to accept. 3
 In defence of their unilateral action, Hope & Co. pointed out to the
Committee that further delay would have rendered it too late in the year
to guarantee the payment due on 31st December. If they had not made
some concessions, the entrepreneurs would probably have declined to
accept further bonds. Indeed, if the entrepreneurs had been faced with the

                                    20 7
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

decision at that moment, when the Russian bonds stood at between 86 and
88, they would never have embarked on the transaction. Looking at the
other side, the Company argued, the difficulties encountered in disposing
of the bonds showed very clearly that the government could only raise
funds by placing the reserve on the market, since under the prevailing
circumstances a new loan would be doomed to failure and would merely
destroy the established credit. It had required a great deal of time and
effort to get the entrepreneurs to accept the supplement to the contract
and to dispel the mood of panic which they shared with all on the Stock
Exchange. The fact that, as a result of the measures adopted, funds would
be available for the interest payment at the end of the year was of the
utmost importance for the Russian Court, because the continuing erosion
of exchange rates in St. Petersburg (the rouble had by now fallen to r6
stuivers in Amsterdam) made remittances increasingly undesirable. 1