

                                   21   5
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

that their commission was still minimal, because the Russian bonds stood
no higher than 88 and thus the douceur from Hope served only to bridge
the gap between the market price and the acceptance price of 90.1 While
this transaction served to assure the payment of interest on 1st January
1809, it did little to extract the entrepreneurs from their predicament. Of
the 13,109 bonds which they had accepted, less than 4,500 had been sold,
and the political situation did not justify any expectation of an improve-
ment during the first six months of 1809.2

In the meantime, Melvil, travelling via Osnabriick and Leipzig, had
arrived in Konigsberg. His reconnaissance of the market there revealed
few opportunities for speculation. Hemp and flax were available only in
limited quantities, and the prices were considerably higher than in Russia.
Melvil therefore decided to make for Riga as quickly as possible, but
poor roads and difficulties concerning his passport resulted in an unwel-
come delay. In Mitau, he was obliged to stay for a whole day because the
local governor refused to recognize the validity of his passport. When he
finally reached Riga, he found that, as in Archangel, prices were higher
than in St. Petersburg on account of the large export trade. Exports of
flax to England were reported to have been even greater than in previous
years. Out of a total of 180,000 ship-pounds of flax exported from Russia
-which equalled the level in previous shipping seasons-nearly 80,000
ship-pounds had left from Riga. 3
  As we have seen, the difficulties which confronted Napoleon in Spain
served to divert his attention from the rest of Europe. British shippers
gladly seized upon this opportunity to send vessels to ports all over the
continent, including Russia, in an attempt to make good the shortfall in
the first half of the shipping season. The crisis in Anglo-American rela-
tions, which centred around the rights of neutral vessels, had not yet led
to a conflict, and thus American vessels continued to call at Russian
ports. 4
  When Melvil reached Riga early in December, the shipping season had
ended and the price of hemp had fallen to a level at which, according to
insiders, there were opportunities for speculation. Melvil instructed J.D.
Drachenhauer & Co. and B. Zuckerbacker Klein & Co. each to purchase
500 ship-pounds of hemp for delivery in the Spring, under their own
guarantee; payment was to be effected by means of drafts on Melvil & Co.
In accordance with advice, Hope & Co. remained completely outside this
transaction in order not to betray the connexion, and Melvil accordingly
avoided the houses which the Company had recommended s . Shortly be-

                                   216
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

fore his departure from Riga, Melvil purchased a further 1,000 ship-
pounds on contract from Hope's former correspondent, Cumming and
 Fenton. As 30,000 ship-pounds had already been contracted in Riga and
the owners of hemp, in anticipation of still higher prices, were hesitant to
sell, he decided to suspend further purchases until he reached St. Peters-
 burg.
  Melvilleft Riga on 13th December 1808, and arrived in St.Petersburg
four days later. Golubtsov accorded him a very friendly welcome, but on
the subject of the rate of exchange the minister was adamant and refused
to depart from the procedure which he had earlier devised. This put paid
to the plan for Melvil to apply to Golubtsov for funds whenever he thought
fit and then to apply the rate of exchange on the final postday. Moreover,
the minister refused to accept a letter from Melvil as the basis for a
payment unless a letter referring to an identical sum simultaneously
reached the Committee from Amsterdam. Obviously, it had not escaped
Golubtsov's attention that Hope & Co. had been vague in their reply on
this point. He reasoned, not without justification, that if Melvil's proposal
were to be accepted, one party would be aware of the rate of exchange
and would secure all the advantages. The fact that Melvil was in a position
to offer him half a million guilders on the spot made no impression
whatever on Golubtsov. Faced with this situation, Melvil had little choice
but to render the blank letters from Hope unusable and to send a mounted
courier to Amsterdam with a message urging the Company to send an
early report to the Committee concerning the payment of monies in
Holland. Only when this had been received could he resume his negotia-
tions with the minister. In the meantime, he would devote his energies to
a thorough study of the market in St.Petersburg, and afterwards cautious-
ly embark on the purchase of goods.!
  In the light of the rumours which were circulating in Riga, Melvil at
first found the prices in St.Petersburg somewhat high; but on reflection
he had to confess that they were higher still in Riga. 2 There was general
anxiety in the Russian capital concerning the disposal of the country's
produce in the ensuing year, but this was tempered by the fact that the
State Loan Bank provided credits on the security of goods, thus enabling
Russian merchants to store their wares, albeit on payment of high charges,
until the last moment, thus keeping prices relatively high. Sometimes a
merchant would be unable to renew his credit, and when this happened
there were bargains to be had. To deposit money in the Assignat Bank, it
was first necessary to submit a request in writing, but when the bank
accepted funds it issued a simple receipt which, with a blank endorsement,