

St. Petersburg than in Riga, and could be kept for years without loss of
quality. White tallow, which contained mutton fat and thus did not fully
solidify, had a much shorter storage life. Melvil preferred Siberian tallow,
which was extremely hard and could be kept for very long periods. A
large quantity of this was held by a small group of rich merchants.!
  Iron prices, it was anticipated, would shortly reach their lowest level,
reflecting a need on the part of stockholders for money to be sent with
their agents to the mines in Siberia to meet all manner of liabilities. The
cost of transporting iron would be 60 kopecks per pood, and would add
substantially to the overall costs.
  Potash, brushes, hides and wax travelled overland, the principal desti-
nation being Memel. In spite of the high transport costs, however, Melvil
felt that potash offered possibilities for speculation.
  If we compare Melvil's findings with the information furnished by Hope
& Co., we see how frequently and how seriously the information sent
from Holland was at variance with reality. In the case of flax, the Com-
pany had clearly been completely misinformed, and the same applied to
linen fabrics and calamancoes; similarly, Hope's information concerning
the keeping qualities of tallow differed widely from Melvil's findings. The
fact that the Company's contacts were regarded as solid and reliable did
not, it appears, afford any guarantee against erroneous commercial infor-
mation. This will certainly have been among the reasons why the Com-
pany attached so much importance to having its own agent in making
purchases on the scale involved.
  Melvil had also made enquiries concerning the merchant houses in
St.Petersburg. It was rumoured that Rall had sunk in the government's
estimation, not only by reason of his somewhat abrupt manner, but also
on account of his 'different system of politics.' His skill and his wealth,
however, were not doubted. Just what Rail's political convictions were,
we are not told, but as the majority of Alexander's ministers at that time
were pro-French, it seems probable that his sympathies were with the
English.
  Because of its relative displeasure with RaIl, the Russian government
employed other houses for the purchase of coin abroad. Bothlingk,
Stieglitz, Bergien and Severin Bros., were among these. Hope's reaction
to the spreading of these orders over several houses was to pray that,
faced with hard reality, the Committee would at last realize 'that it is not
always in the multitude of counsellors that there is wisdom.' 2 According
to Melvil, Bergien was increasingly finding favour and being given all the
special assignments. He was particularly friendly with Golubtsov and

                                    21 9
                          'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

Prince Kurakin, while his competitor, Krehmer, was on intimate terms
with Rumyantsev. Melvil expressed the opinion that Bergien, like RaIl,
had a manner which made him extremely well suited to doing business
with the truly great men, from whom the merchants in Russia appeared
to derive the greater part of their profits. It was sad but true that a Russian
house, in order to survive, had to engage in usurious practices of which
a Dutch merchant would be deeply ashamed. Just how bien rec:u Bergien
was in high circles became evident when, during their visit to Russia in
January 1809, the Prussian royal family, accompanied by their imperial
hosts, were entertained at the Bergien residence. Following the death of
Rogovikov in February 1809, the post of Court Banker became vacant;
it was not, however, given to Bergien, but to Severin Bros., who thereupon
joined RaIl and formed the firm of RalI & Severin. Observing that the
czar was attracted to one of the Mesdames Severin, the appointment can
scarcely have been fortuitous.!
  Of the merchants in St. Petersburg, J.C.Meyer, of the house of Meyer &
Bruxner, made the best impression on Melvil. Meyer was prudent, in-
corruptible and opposed to hazardous draft speculations. Sillem and
Bethmann had both expressly recommended him to Melvil, and the last-
named was proposing to place a portion of the orders with Meyer and,
following his departure, to entrust Meyer with the overall supervision of
the operation in Russia, with particular reference to storage and ware-
house accommodation. Bothlingk & Co. was a solid, reliable house, and
the same could be said of Cramer Smith & Co., which traded mainly with
America, in which country one of the partners, Smith, had travelled
widely. The firm maintained a cordial relationship with the American
conl'oul general, Harris, and this benefited it greatly, for vessels arriving
from the United States with cargoes consigned to the house could count
on Harris's full co-operation. 2
 Among the German merchants in St. Petersburg, P.J.Blessig and F.W.
Ktimmel were the most solid. The house of Wolff & Schltisser, which
specialized in trade with Brabant, was also satisfactory. All the British-
owned houses, including Rowand & Co. in Moscow, were inactive, and
many of the partners were awaiting a suitable moment to leave Russia.
Melvil, following Hope's directives, nevertheless proposed to try to in-
volve a few of these houses in the speculation via J.C.Meyer.3
 Melvil's courier reached Amsterdam on 6th January 1809. After a brief
consultation, the partners prepared a reply stating that, in view of the
Treasurer's objections to the method of payment proposed by the Com-
pany, the operation would be limited to one million guilders, 'as it would