

                                   2II
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

the test. He was advised that it would be worthwhile to pay a visit to Riga,
and perhaps also to Archangel, even though the results would probably
be meagre because, according to reports, the volume of trade had ex-
hausted stocks in these towns, especially the latter. He was in principle
free to purchase goods of every nature, provided that they were cheap,
possessed sound storage properties and could be sold at a profit. The aim
of the operation was to resell the goods locally at a profit, even if this took
some time. If, as a result of speculation by others, exchange rates fluctu-
ated widely, Melvil could accept solid drafts on Hamburg, London or
Amsterdam and transmit these to Hope. If he made only occasional
appearances on the market, other houses would not guess the reason for
his presence and would therefore not thwart his plans. Broadly speaking,
the best time to invest in commodities was in the Spring, when the stocks
from the rural areas reached the port towns and prices were at their
lowest.
  As far as the Amsterdam end of the financial transaction was concerned,
the partners felt that it would perhaps be wise not to make more than
three to five hundred thousand guilders available at the outset. If the
exchange rate was highly attractive, this could promptly be increased,
since the total sum was immediately available in Amsterdam. Melvil was
to receive twelve letters from Hope informing him of payments made in
 Amsterdam, but these would be undated and the space for the amount
 would be left blank. If the exchange rate seemed favourable, he could fill
in the blanks at will in accordance with the formula contained in Golub-
 tsov's letter of 2nd September 1808. 1 To meet the possibility of officials of
 the Ministry of Finance abusing their knowledge of Melvil's activities and
 informing other houses, he was instructed to cease operations whenever
 it might be expected that he was busy, and vice versa. It could be dan-
 gerous to complain to the most senior officials about such abuses, but
 it was best left to Melvil to choose his opportunity. Of the goods which
 lent themselves to the operation, hemp and flax headed the list. It was not
 easy to find satisfactory warehouses in which to store them, but Hope was
 counting on assistance from the Russian government in this matter. It was
 of great importance that the stocks should be seen as Russian property in
 all circumstances, including war. It was imperative that the goods be
 insured against fire, and this could best be arranged in Hamburg now that
 cover in England had been rendered impossible by political developments.
 The underwriters in Amsterdam were demanding a premium of 2-2-! %
  on the grounds that the warehouses were timber-built, but the rate in
  Hamburg was sure to be lower.

                                     212
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

Because of its wide sales potential, hemp was the prime commodity for
 speculation -and the one whose price was most rapidly influenced by
political changes. Melvil was instructed to watch these changes very care-
fully, since a quick reaction could produce large speculative gains. Ac-
cording to Hope, he could assume that clean hemp purchased for 40
 roubles per pood, the rouble standing at 20 stuivers, could be allowed to
depreciate by 20 %, the sum of lost interest, warehouse rental, insurance
and other charges, over a period of two years and could, in all probability,
then be sold at a profit of 20 %. When this was discussed, the rouble stood
at 16 stuivers and clean hemp was fetching between 47 and 51 roubles per
pood. 1 If Melvil were to buy at that price and resell when the exchange
rate improved, the profit margin of 20 % would be assured. Because he
would be on the spot, Melvil would have the great advantage of being
able to seize every opportunity to resell locally at a profit-a practical
impossibility for other major buyers, such as the Americans and the
British and French governments.
  Flax was a commodity which held little interest for the brokers; in the
Prussian ports, however, it attracted a great deal of attention. 2 Melvil was
advised that in the event of flax which was of lower quality, but better
processed, being offered in other Baltic ports, he could send his drafts on
Amsterdam and Hamburg to the port concerned for the purchase of this.
Such a procedure, however, was worthwhile only if a substantial profit
could be envisaged.
  Sailcloth and raven-duck, a fine grade of sailcloth, both of which were
made from linen, had been bought in large quantities by the Russian
government in order to bolster up the price. As the demand by the Ameri-
cans for these had also increased in the preceding years, Hope & Co. felt
that the price would be too high to justify speculative purchases. But they
suggested to Melvil that he should approach the minister with a proposal
for a major deal involving all or part of the government-held stock. These
materials were very interesting commercially because, not being bulky,
they were easy to store and, in contrast to hemp and flax, did not shrink
or lose their quality during storage.
  As regards tallow, the demand fluctuated continuously and could not be
predicted; moreover, tallow deteriorated in store. It might be worthwhile
purchasing a quantity on contract for delivery in July 1809, but this would
imply speculating on the possibility of selling it locally or despatching it
elsewhere in 1810. Iron prices were extremely low, but it might be worth
buying large quantities of selected grades. The shipping of iron usually
produced difficulties, because the freight charges could only be offset by