

way of telling Hope, in terms which would not offend the censor, that the
minister knew nothing of the world of business and the demands which it
imposed.
  Melvil's relationship with Golubtsov suffered a setback when the latter
received a report from Hope & Co. stating that they were not disposed to
make any large advances to the Russian Court within the framework of
the agreement with the entrepreneurs. The minister took the view that this
refusal was deliberate and was aimed at forcing him to yield in his dispute
with Melvil. His action in broaching the subject to Melvilled to a some-
what fruitless discussion about who benefited most from the payment
transaction. Golubtsov offered to fix the rate of exchange for a period of
several months, but Melvil declined this on the grounds that it would
rule out any possibility of combining exchange rate and commodity price.
He, in turn, offered the minister an option on a given offer with the free-
dom to decide 'from one postday to another.' For example, Golubtsov
would receive an offer from Melvil on a Wednesday, based on the previous
day's exchange rate, and would have until before the post on Friday to
accept or decline. Golubtsov replied that such an arrangement would
require the approval of the czar, and that it would take at least ten days to
obtain this.!
  The minister also stated that his colleague on the Committee for Foreign
Loans, Count Rumyantsev, who was now back in the Russian capital
after a long sojourn in France, was also not enamoured of the contract,
and insisted on strict compliance with its provisions. He went on to
disclose that Rumyantsev had given an audience to Russian merchants
and commercial counsellors who had protested against the contract with
Hope. This was a sharp rebuff to the partners, who had fully expected
that Rumyantsev, as a good friend of Bethmann, would support the
transaction with the Russian government. 2 In order to show Melvil that
the government was not dependent upon Hope & Co., Golubtsov dealt at
length with French plans to purchase large quantities of Russian produce
-of which he had learned on Rumyantsev's return. Melvil-rightly, as it
transpired-did not have a great deal of faith in large-scale purchases by
France, but the report certainly had an effect on trade. 3 In Riga it caused
the exchange rate to rise, and in St.Petersburg it made the merchants even
more determined to hold on to their wares. The price of hemp rose by a
rouble per pood.
  Of the events which took place outside Russia, only vague reports
reached St.Petersburg, and these aroused interest only when Russia was
involved. The outbreak of war between Austria and France at the begin-

                                    222
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'


ning of April sent a tremor through the exchange and commodity markets,
but when it became clear that the Russian Court was keeping out of the
struggle, and that the declaration of war on Austria was merely a for-
mality, the markets quickly recovered. The absence of British reprisals in
the Baltic, which had earlier been feared, contributed very greatly to the
recovery.
  Following the czar's return from Finland at the beginning of April,
Melvil was informed that the proposal which he had put to Golubtsov had
been rejected. This did not greatly dismay him, for with the approach of
the shipping season the prices had commenced to rise, and he would not
have known what to do with the money if the government had accepted
the proposal.! In the light of the declining exchange rates, Hope & Co.
concurred fully. The season for buying was past, and the time had come
to think about reselling. The partners would have preferred Melvil to
manage this personally, particularly in view of uncertainties created by
the war between France and Austria, but it had earlier been agreed that
he should return to Holland in the Spring and they therefore went no
farther than to req uest him to delay his departure for a few weeks, pending
clarification of the political situation in Europe. 2
 In addition to the Franco-Austrian war, the situation in Sweden de-
manded attention. There, the passionately anti-French King Gustav IV
had been deposed in March 1809, and his successor, Charles XIII, at-
tempted to bring the wars against France and Russia to an end. If his
efforts led to the adoption by Sweden of the Continental System, this
would have repercussions on the attitude of the British Baltic Fleet, which
had hitherto found support in Sweden; the outcome of these repercus-
sions, in turn, could affect the possibilities for shipping goods from Russia.
 As far as the resale of goods in Russia was concerned, Hope & Co.
proposed to instruct Melvil to sell a quarter at 10 % profit, a quarter at
15 %, a quarter at 20 % and the balance at 25 %. But Matthiessen & Sillem
considered that a larger proportion could be sold at a profit of 10%,
particularly if this involved commodities purchased for future delivery
and on which there was an immediate saving of handling and storage
charges. They also urged greater flexibility in regard to price margins in
view of political developments-for example, the revolution in Sweden-
and the possible effect of these on trade. 3 Although somewhat reluctant,
the partners of Hope & Co. agreed to these suggestions.
 The Company desired that the potash-which was eagerly sought in
western Europe-should be excluded from the local resale operation. If
the route across the Baltic was not free, the potash would be sent by cart