

                                    21 3
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

employing it as ballast, but against this it could be stockpiled for years
without losing its value. Potash had become an important product in
Holland in the preceding years and, even at the high price which it was
then fetching, it could be sold at a profit. It had, however, the drawback
that it deteriorated rapidly. Linseed, hare pelts and brushes were also
unsuitable as objects of long-term speculation owing to their rapid dete-
rioration, but if they would be purchased at a price which permitted them
to be sent overland to Hamburg or Amsterdam, Melvil could consider
them.
  As France and England were both in the market for masts and hemp, it
would clearly be worth trying to obtain licences for these two countries;
it would be necessary to apply for an equal number so as to ensure that
the same quantity of shipments reached each country. Fortunately, they
had until the following Spring to consider this matter. 1
  Melvil left for Russia on 1st November 1808, taking with him credentials
which he was to present to Golubtsov, Rumyantsev and Count von Stackel-
berg, the Russian envoy to Prussia, who at that moment resided in
Konigsberg and who had been given a certain amount of information
regarding the true purpose of Melvil's journey. As Melvil despatched his
letters in duplicate, one via Matthiessen & Sillem and the other via
Bethmann, both houses were kept simply up to date with developments. 2

We have seen how Golubtsov was obliged by circumstances to accept
Hope's supplementary agreement with the entrepreneurs. However, the
situation on the bond market so deteriorated that the concessions which
he had made became less and less attractive to the hard-pressed entre-
preneurs. During the month of July, not a single Russian bond was placed,
and the price-which was purely nominal-scarcely rose above 86. Accord-
ing to Hope, the market had been gripped by fear and panic. Undoubtedly
the investors had a premonition that Europe was heading for another
period of major unrest, now that the uprising in Spain was proving so
surprisingly successful: for the first time since the French Revolution, an
entire detachment of the French army had been forced to surrender.
Under these adverse circumstance, the entrepreneurs could be persuaded
to take only one thousand bonds by I st August. 3
 In spite of the difficulties which beset the Russian finances, money was
shortly required, for on 1st December 1808 the balance of the Russian
loan obtained from Regny & Co. in Genoa was due to be repaid. The
sum outstanding was nearly 4i- million Genoese lire, which was equivalent
to about Ii million guilders. 4

                                   214
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

Remitting funds to Genoa, however, was no simple matter; indeed,
drafts were scarce at all the financial centres in Italy owing to the stag-
nation of the country's trade. When it proved impossible even to remit
via Hamburg, Hope & Co. opened credits in Regny's name at the Paris
houses of Babut and Baguenault & Co. However, the acute shortage of
drafts on Paris rendered it impossible for these firms to provide drafts to
the equivalent value, and in the end Hope & Co. were obliged to send
rixdollars, Mexican piastres and bars of silver to cover the deficit.!
 Viewed against the Russian government's great financial need, the failure
of the entrepreneurs to meet their obligations under the new agreement
was a bad omen. At the beginning of September they were totally in
default, and in early October and again in November they took no more
than one thousand bonds. The Conference of Erfurt, at which Napoleon
had gathered around him the rulers of all the countries which he had
subjugated and also those which had allied themselves with his cause, had
produced little of substance for the emperor, despite all the outward
manifestations of continental unity and the formal expressions of friend-
ship by Alexander I. The Emperor of Austria was absent from the con-
gress, and within his empire vigorous preparations for war were taking
place.
 Although the circumstances thus hardly favoured a revival of demand
for Russian bonds, it was vital that the interest payment due on 1st
January 1809 should be assured. The greater part of the funds held by
Hope & Co. on behalf of the Russian government had been used up in
the drafts for Zenyavin and in payments for the settlement of the debt in
Genoa, and so the Company was obliged to enter into a new agreement
with Borski before the year ended. Late in November, Hope had got him
to the point where he gave a firm undertaking on behalf of the entre-
preneurs to take 4,109 bonds at a price of 90. Borski was given until 1st
July 1809 to decide whether he would take over the balance of 4,000 bonds,
and it was agreed that the 10% penalty should apply only to bonds which
the entrepreneurs refused to take on that date. 2 The payment of interest
on these 4,000 bonds proved to be a thorny problem. Borski insisted on
receiving the full year's interest on bonds accepted during the course of
1809, but Hope & Co. were only willing to give six months' interest which,
however, would be proportionally increased if Borski and his associates
accepted the bonds at an earlier date. The obstacle was eventually sur-
mounted when the Company offered the entrepreneurs a 'remedy' in the
shape of 2 % out of the 6-!- % commission which it was to receive on the
bonds relating to the reserve. The entrepreneurs, however, complained