

The exchange position led Hope, in the letter to the Committee, to revert
once again to the proposal which they had made to Wulff in r803, that
guilders should be made available in Amsterdam in exchange for roubles
in St.Petersburg, at the rate ruling on the day. Wulff had not been recep-
tive to the suggestion, but he had died on 30th January r808, and Hope
evidently reasoned that with his passing, and that of Vasilyev, a fresh
opportunity existed. 2 The Company was unwilling to go above the ruling
rate as this would make it more profitable to draw on Hope from st.
Petersburg and then to invest the proceeds of the drafts in Russian prod-
ucts. The Company was thinking in terms of several million guilders,
subscribed by a number of rich investors in Amsterdam, against which
the Russian government would make roubles available in St. Petersburg at
the day rate. By this means, Dutch capital would be invested in Russia,
while that country would be relieved of a quantity of goods, the sale of
which was greatly hampered by the suspension of shipments to England.
  As has already been mentioned, exports of Russian products to England
continued at a high level during the shipping season in r807. However,
during the winter of that year, following Russia's declaration of war on
England, both Bergien and Krehmer complained of low prices and small
turnover, which produced a critical situation on the Russian market. 3
  British shipments to Russian ports were also limited during the early
part of the shipping season of r808. It was in St. Petersburg that the
consequences of the declaration of war on England were most noticeable:
by the end of July, no more than 25 vessels had entered Kronstadt and
only r6 had sailed. In Riga and Archangel the situation was slightly better,

                                    208
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

because official controls were less stringent and neutral vessels were gener-
ally admitted without delay.l Nevertheless, the level of shipments up to
the end of August was far below those of the preceding years. At this
point, the influence of the events in Spain began to be felt. Napoleon had
gradually accomplished the military occupation of Spain, and he followed
this by deposing the reigning monarch and replacing him by his brother,
Joseph Bonaparte. The reaction of the Spaniards to this step was not long
delayed, and Napoleon found himself faced with a popular revolt which
rapidly spread to all parts of the country and occupied increasingly more
of his attention, which was thus diverted from events in the rest of Europe.
  Meanwhile in Russia, the economic problems left Golubtsov little alter-
native to accepting, for the second time, a fait accompli presented by
Hope. He did, however, stipulate that the Company should advance
monies to the government in the event of the proceeds of the bond trans-
action proving inadequate to meet the Court's needs. Golubtsov indicated
that he considered the proposal to furnish guilders in Amsterdam in
exchange for roubles in St.Petersburg to be worthy offurther examination,
but he insisted that matters such as the rate of exchange at which the
guilders made available would be converted into roubles and the manner
in which the money was to be invested in Russian goods would have to be
agreed in advance. In the minister's view, the correct procedure would be
for the Company to report to the Committee when the funds had been
assembled in Amsterdam, the date of posting the letter being taken as the
basis, in conjunction with a fixed transmission time of twenty-one days for
such postal items. The rate of exchange at which the guilders were to be con-
verted would be that ruling on the St. Petersburg Exchange on the first day
of business after the expiry of twenty-one days from the posting date.
Payment would be made via the Treasury in St.Petersburg to a company
or individual named by Hope. The purchase of the goods would have to
be effected by Hope or their representative, since the government as such
never participated in speculative transactions. 2 The guilders furnished by
Hope would not be credited to the Court's ordinary account, but to a
separate one. Unknown to Hope, the minister simultaneously made simi-
lar proposals to Matthiessen & Sillem in Hamburg and Bethmann Broth-
ers in Frankfurt, while at the same time enquiring about the possibility of
a loan. 3 As a matter of fact, Hope had already joined with Matthiessen &
SiIlem, at their invitation, in the speculative purchase of hemp via
BothIingk & Co. in St.Petersburg; conversely, the Hamburg house had
been informed of Hope's proposals to Golubtsov-at first in vague terms
but later, following the minister's positive reaction, in detail.