

                                     220
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

 be contrary to all rules of prudence and judgement to venture from hence
 at random, without knowing what variations may have occurred in the
 interval in the course of exchange or in the prices of produce.' 1 A letter
 couched in similar terms was sent to the Committee. The partners subse-
 quently advised MeIvil that if Golubtsov's proposal were to be accepted,
 the government would have prior knowledge of the decisive day from the
 point of view of the exchange rate; in such a situation, it might succumb
 to the temptation to force up the rate on the day in question.
  On 4th February 1809, Melvil reported that he had reached agreement
 with Golubtsov concerning the exchange rate, which was to be 17i stuivers
to the rouble, and that accordingly a sum of 1,134,751.77 roubles had
 been paid to J.C.Meyer. 2 As the highest denomination of the banknotes
 was 100 roubles, Meyer had to transport a mountain of paper. In ac-
cordance with the agreement, he deposited part of the money with a
 number of houses. Cramer & Smith, Blessig and Wolff & Schliisser each
received 100,000 roubles, the balance remaining with Meyer. All held out
the prospect of 5 %interest on the deposited funds. 3
  In the matter of the government-owned warehouses, Golubtsov de-
manded Melvil's written approval of the establishments which had been
proposed. As all the hemp warehouses were leased to Russian merchants,
Golubtsov offered to have a shed build 'in a proper situation.' In the
interests of a smooth settlement of affairs after his departure, and in order
to ensure secrecy, Melvilleft the matter of the inspection of the buildings
entirely to Meyer. 4 The secrecy, however, proved to be a myth. Details of
Melvil's operation, even down to the names of interested parties and the
extent of their financial participation, were known. The method of pay-
ment, however, had not leaked out, and therefore it was anticipated in
St.Petersburg that numerous drafts on Hamburg and Amsterdam would
shortly appear. Melvil suspected that the source of the leak lay in Holland,
for far too many people there knew of the affair. The effect was that every
unidentified purchase was attributed to Melvil, who in the eyes of out-
siders became a buyer on a fantastic scale. 5
  The minister intimated that he would be pleased to continue the payment
transaction with Hope & Co. - but on his terms. He remained amiable and
polite, with 'the softest manners,' even though he was fully aware that the
assembly of funds by Hope in Amsterdam and the reports sent to St.
Petersburg concerning that operation were a complete sham. Melvil re-
ported that he had found Golubtsov looking weak and weighed down by
the burden of his office, and that this probably prevented him from making
a special study of mercantile affairs. 6 This was almost certainly Melvil's

                                    221
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'