

                                    21 7
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

became fully transferable. Upon the change of ownership of a receipt, it
was necessary to submit another written request-this time for the account
to be transferred to the new owner- but the cost was limited to one day's
interest.! Despite the fact that money invested in goods earned no interest,
it was better to use it thus than to lodge it with the bank, for both the
price of goods and the exchange rate offered possibilities for profit.
  As far as hemp was concerned, Melvil reported that there were oppor-
tunities for speculation in St. Petersburg, but that individual purchases
would have to be small. Half the St. Petersburg hemp had already been
bought up, and Russian merchants were combing the countryside in
search offurther stocks and even offering small advances to tempt possible
sellers. As a result, the price of hemp in the rural areas, in relation to the
current price in St.Petersburg, was higher than normal. The Russians sold
only enough to provide funds for their purchases in the country. If the
stocks thus being built up were to be taken to the ports in the Spring, and
if problems of shipment were to deprive the merchants of their markets,
trade in this commodity would entirely collapse. 2
  Flax, Melvil wrote, was not a neglected article, as Hope had thought,
but a true object of speculation; accordingly, stocks were held until the
commencement of the shipping season. The quantity offered on the market
would not exceed 35,000 po ods, to which perhaps a further 14,000 poods
would be added from the new harvest. But because the additional quan-
tity would not arrive until late in the season, Melvil considered it wise to
make purchases of local stocks without delay; this would largely obviate
the disputes about quality which tended to occur when forward purchases
were delivered. Taken in conjunction with the rate of exchange, the price
was low, while the exorbitant prices which flax fetched in England showed
that there was an immense demand. 3 Linen, sailcloth and other linen
fabrics and calamanco, a woollen material, were also suitable as objects
of speculation, Melvil reported; contrary to the information given by
Hope, the prices of these had risen only slightly, and stocks were just then
arriving in the port towns. The quantities offered in the following season
would certainly not be greater, for the Russian government required
substantial amounts for the army and the navy.4 Moreover, it was already
evident that prices would be higher by then because, as a result of the fall
in the rate of exchange, the labour costs and transport charges affecting
these articles had risen. Sailcloth was chiefly sold to North America.
  There were also sizeable stocks of tallow. Although the nominal price
was high, the low rate of exchange made this commodity well worth
considering. Yellow tallow was at least 7 roubles per pood cheaper in

                                     218
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'