

                                    20 9
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

As presented to Matthiessen & Sillem by Hope, the speculation was
simple and safe. Because the blockades decreed by England and France
had brought trade in Hamburg and Amsterdam practically to a halt, the
affair was attractive as an investment, and Hope & Co. were certain of
finding between 3 and 4 million guilders among their closest busi-
ness friends. The Company proposed to entrust the management to an
intelligent and reliable agent, who would be sent to Russia to conduct the
purchases. The partners favoured Hieronymus Sillem for the post, but
they were aware that he had been away from Hamburg for several months
and that he would probably not be interested in a new and lengthy
sojourn abroad. 1 According to Bothlingk, the winter was the best time
for making purchases, for then the demand from abroad declined. Hope &
Co. were prepared if necessary to advance their partners a half-year's
share at 4 %interest. Secrecy was vital to the success of the operation. 2
  Ultimately the Company's choice of agent fell on Robert Melvil of the
Amsterdam house Melvil & Co. After making the necessary enquiries,
Melvil consented on loth October 1808 to undertake the journey.3 The
partners thereupon briefed him on all the aspects of the operation. After
Hope & Co., the principal participant was Willem Borksi, 'l'agent et Ie
conseil de la plupart de nos capitalistes,' a description which implied that,
as usual, he was acting on behalf of many others. He initially took a
quarter share of the total sum of 4 million guilders, but subsequently
increased this to three-eighths. The correspondence with Borski does not
reveal the names of the others whom he represented. Matthiessen & Sillem
took a one-eighth share, amounting to cf 500,000, and Bethmann a one-
sixteenth share, of cf 250,000. Melvil was given until a month after his
arrival in St. Petersburg to decide whether he wished to participate and,
if so, was given the option of a one-sixteenth or a one-thirty-second
share. The remaining seven-sixteenths, representing cf 1,750,000, was
taken by Hope.
  The partners, Melvil was informed, had considered a similar speculative
transaction after the peace of Tilsit, but the arrival of so many American
and other vessels in the Russian ports had caused prices to rise again. The
Company anticipated that the meeting between Napoleon and Alexander,
which was very soon to take place at Erfurt, would lead to stricter appli-
cation of the Continental System in the Russian ports, producing a buyer's
market in the winter of 1808. Rigorous controls on the trade with
England could scarcely fail to depress the prices of Russian goods.
  Under his contract, Melvil was to be reimbursed for travelling and
lodging expenses, and to receive commissions of 2 % on the value of all

                                    210
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

goods purchased and I % on exchange operations. This implies that the
Company was willing to pass on to him the whole of the commission
which it had requested from the Russian Court.! It was laid down that all
transactions should be effected through local merchants. Melvil was free
to choose these, and it was left to him whether or not he used the houses
with which Hope had connexions. He was given letters of introduction
to known houses, but these contained no reference to the reason for his
presence in Russia or to his relationship to the Company.
  Melvil was also given information concerning Hope's association with
the above-mentioned houses. He was told that, despite the drawbacks of
which we are aware, Bergien could be brought into Melvil's activities,
particularly in view of his connexions with the Court. In the light of the
long feud between Hope and RaIl, Melvil was advised to seek a letter of
introduction from another firm, for example Matthiessen & Sillem. Porter
& Brown, old and trusted friends of Hope, had, like other British houses,
been non-operational since the Russian declaration of war on England,
and their assets had been confiscated. Nevertheless, Brown could be an
extremely valuable source of information, and it might even prove feasible
to involve him in the operation under the name of another house.
  Hope & Co. had also had incidental dealings with other firms in St.
Petersburg, such as J.C.Meyer (the successor to Thomson Bonar & Co.),
Bothlingk & Co., Cramer Smith & Co., Archibald Cramp and Ant.Co-
lombi. In Riga, they had recently corresponded with Jos.Morison, and in
earlier years Cumming Fenton & Co. had rendered good service. In
transactions for third parties-by which the partners meant the French
Admiralty, although it was not necessary for Melvil to know this-the
Company had had dealings with Justus Blanckenhagen & Son and HeI-
mund & Son, but of these Hope considered only Blanckenhagen to be
suitable as an associate.
 Since the termination of the correspondence with Thomson Rowand &
Co., Hope had had no correspondents in Moscow; but Melvil was advised
that if he required anyone there, Brown could make a suitable recommen-
dation.
 As a general rule, Melvil was advised to pay more attention to integrity,
skill and drive than to wealth and 'ostensible importance' in his search
for the right houses. Influence in government circles, however, was also
an advantage, for this would enable matters to proceed much more
smoothly.
 When Melvil received funds from the Treasury, he was to lodge these
with various houses with the aim of putting their goodwill and counsel to