

The negotiations concerning the interest payment due on 1st January
1812 opened with a memorandum from Labouchere, in which he set out
the Russian government's position. The Court had only to find the
cf 4,240,000 to cover interest at the beginning of the year, since funds
were already available for the monthly redemption of 100 bonds. 2 After
deducting sundry assets such as 50 % of the Russian government's claim
against De Smeth and the proceeds of the sale of Russian goods abroad,
e.g. in Austria and Sweden, a sum of cf 2,400,000 would be needed.
According to Labouchere, this could best be obtained by the repurchase
of 4-5,000 bonds at 80 % between August and the end of the year. As the
price was now 56-57, this would go some way towards compensating
holders who had bought their bonds at par. To make the repurchase more
attractive, he stipulated that the Russian government should agree to
make roubles available in St.Petersburg, if desired, at exchange rates of
9 stuivers on Amsterdam or 941 centimes on Paris and to allow the roubles
thus obtained to be used for the purchase of Russian goods or colonial
produce, and also that the Court should offer free storage of either type
of goods in government warehouses until 1st July 1813. It would also be
necessary to allow the tax-free export of the goods by land or sea. Clearly,
Labouchere's memorandum was written while he was still hopeful of a
speculation in colonial produce.
  The repurchased bonds could either be placed on the market gradually,
or simultaneously by contract at a price of 60. The proceeds could be
used for the interest payment on 1st January 1812. If it should prove
impossible to dispose of all the bonds by that date, Hope & Co. would
advance the deficit. Labouchere further suggested that 300 bonds, and
not 100, should be redeemed on 1st January 1812 in order to restore the
price to 60, the figure upon which the whole transaction was based. It
would also assist the sale of bonds if an imperial declaration were issued,
guaranteeing that the Russian bonds, together with both matured and
due interest vouchers, would at all times be accepted, at par value and at
the rate of exchange ruling on the day, in payment for the purchase of
 Russian land within the context of the domestic loan, or for other pay-
ments to the Crown. To this end, bonds and coupons could be exchanged
at the Company's office for receipts countersigned by the Russian consul
general in Amsterdam. Measures of this nature, Labouchere felt, would
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

assist the market price of the bonds and reduce Russia's interest burden,
and also enhance the price of the land which was to be sold, thus benefiting
the amortization of the paper money.1
  Finally, Labouchere reiterated the Company's plea on behalf of the
entrepreneurs, who in the meantime had addressed a letter to the czar,
seeking absolution from the penalty of cf 400,000. The granting of their
request, he said, would benefit the price of the Russian bonds in Holland.
  In his reply, Guryev concurred in the basic proposal, i.e. the purchase of
4,000 bonds at 80 % and their resale at 60 %. This implied contracting a
debt of cf 3,200,000 for a payment of cf 2,400,000 on 1st January I8I2.
The debt would have to be repaid in four instalments in the years I8I2-
18 I 5, but no interest would be payable in this period because, in Guryev's
view, the bonus of cf 800,000 was sufficient recompense. The government
was willing to provide bonds issued by the Bank and others relating to the
domestic loan to a total value of eight million roubles as security, but it
insisted that the interest on these bonds should accrue to the Russian
Court. The minister also agreed that 300 bonds should be redeemed on
1st January 18 I 2 and that the matured interest vouchers should be ac-
cepted, at the day-rate, as payment for customs duty or for the purchase
of land. 2 He made no reference to the provision of roubles at fixed rates
of exchange or to the facilities asked for in relation to the purchase of
goods in Russia; on the subject of payments in Russia, he referred only
to the vouchers, but not to the bonds themselves.
  Despite fresh representations by Labouchere, Guryev remained adamant
in the matters of furnishing roubles in St.Petersburg and the payment of
interest on the new bonds. Only new bonds which had been drawn by lot
would be accepted for the purchase of land or the payment of import or
export dues, and only those vouchers of the existing Russian bonds which
had become payable, but not the bonds themselves, would be acceptable
for these purposes. The minister did not refer to tax-free exports, and he
made it clear that the purchasers of the new bonds would in any case not
receive interest. 3
  Labouchere was understandably disappointed at this, the second rejec-
tion of his proposals; but the final decision by the ministerial council,
when it came, corresponded fully with the spirit of Guryev's reply. The
council's only concession to Labouchere's demands was that new bonds
which had been drawn and, during the year in which they matured,
vouchers relating to the existing issue should be accepted in payment for
land or for customs dues. Finally, it was agreed that the cf 400,000
forfeited by the entrepreneurs should be reimbursed in the form of metallic
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA