

 whole transaction and admitted that he was glad it was not being con-
tinued. 1 Hope detected in both men 'a little fretfulness at merchants
differing from Ministers.' Clearly, the notion of dealing with merchants
 on a basis of equality was essentially unacceptable to them, and in their
hearts they looked down upon Messrs.Hope and their representatives.
This attitude had undoubtedly lain at the root of Vasilyev's grim hostility:
he had been unable to stomach the mastery of the middle-class Citizen
Voute during the negotiations with Czar Paul I. 2
  Melvilleft St.Petersburg on 25th May 1809 and travelled via Riga and
Berlin to Amsterdam, where he arrived early in July.3 On his advice, the
Company decided to cease shipping the goods and to concentrate on
selling these locally. As English ships were now admitted to Russian ports
almost without let or hindrance, while sailings to western Europe con-
tinued to suffer from the British blockade, local resale had become much
easier and far less risky.4
  With the return of Robert Melvil, the initial phase of Operation R.M.
drew to its close. During his stay in Russia, Melvil had dispensed nearly
two and a half million guilders for the purchase of goods. Of this sum,
nearly 4 % had been invested, through A.Becker of Archangel, in tar,
pitch, iron and mats. Purchases of hemp in Riga had accounted for a
further 8 %, and the remaining 88 % had been spent by eight houses in
St.Petersburg. Of this, 38 % had gone to Melvil's trusted agent, Meyer.
Besides his own share, Meyer had purchased hemp on behalf of Porter
Brown & Co. and Thornton Cayley & Co. who, as British houses, were
debarred from trading but who were thus enabled to obtain a commission.
The purchases made on their behalf accounted for 12 % of the total sum
invested. Next, in order of importance, came Wolff & Schliisser with II %,
Bergien & Co. with 9 %, P.J.B1essig & Co. with 8 %, Cramer Smith & Co.
(which by now had become Cramer Bros.) with 6 %, and Bothlingk & Co.
with4%·
  Nearly one-third of the total was invested in linen fabrics, which ranged
from coarse linen, sailcloth, raven-duck and Flemish linen to damask,
and calamanco. As already mentioned, these were easily stored and
suffered scarcely any loss of quality. Hemp, on which Melvil spent more
than 28 % of his funds, did deteriorate in store, but then it was a readily
saleable commodity and, moreover, was in great demand everywhere.
Hope had earlier indicated that clean hemp purchased at 40 roubles per
pood would afford a substantial profit even at a rate of exchange of 20
stuivers to the rouble. Melvil had paid an average price of 45 roubles, and
for the purpose of his accounts had taken the rate of exchange to be 17

                                    225
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

stuivers to the rouble. If we calculate his purchases at this price and
exchange rate, we see that an extra profit of one guilder and fifteen
stuivers per pood could be obtained. Iron, of which nearly 340,000 pood
was purchased-and which was again a commodity with virtually un-
limited keeping properties-accounted for 23 %. The balance of the money
was invested in potash (8 %), flax (6 %), tallow (2 ~~) and linseed and
copper (each I %).1 If we compare the prices which Melvil was obliged to
pay for the various commodities with those indicated by Hope on 27th
October 1808, it is clear that in general he was skilful in his purchases. 2
  The choice of houses revealed a degree of concentration. Cramer Bros.
and Bothlingk & Co. supplied only linen fabrics; Blessig & Co. and
Wolff & Schliisser supplied linens, calamancoes, potash and tallow; and
Bruxner supplied linens, flax, hemp, linseed, iron and copper. Bergien
received a contract for a large quantity of iron.
  On the sum of the purchases, i.e. cf 2.445,696. 10.0, Melvil received the
agreed commission of 2 %, amounting to cf 48,913.19.0. His commission
on the draft transactions, which totalled cf 105,°38.17.0, was 1 %, so that
in all he received nearly cf 50,000.3 The offer of a 116 th share in the trans-
action was politely but firmly declined.
  If the speculation was to be a success, it was vital that the stocks should
be sold quickly and at good prices; this, in turn, depended upon the
continued freedom of vessels to reach Russian ports. This freedom would
also counteract, or at least limit, any further decline in the value of the
rouble. And even if this should fall, the loss would not be very serious
provided that the brisk shipping trade continued, for then the demand
alone would produce higher prices.
  The ultimate success of Operation R.M. thus depended upon political
developments. The practicability of the contract with the entrepreneurs,
the promptness with which the interest on the Russian bonds would be
paid and the possibility of a resumption of the principal repayments also
depended to a very great extent upon events in the political sphere. And
in 1809 it was already clear that the prospects in this area were not
encouraging.