

 hopefully have improved sufficiently to justify remittance. Other houses
followed this example. Within the Company, a sombre view was taken of
the future of the operation, and at the end of 1810 the remaining stocks
 were written down by cf 200,000- 8 %of the original investment.!
  The progress of Operation R.M. during the first half of 1811 served to
confirm Hope's pessimism. Despite all efforts, practically nothing was
sold; when, at the end of June, Labouchere set off for Russia, the stock of
potash was still virtually intact, and 86 % of the iron also remained. Of
the linen fabrics, nearly all the damask and sailcloth had been disposed of,
 but of the Flemish linen and the raven-duck, two-thirds was still in the
warehouses. Not a metre of the calamancoes or the coarse and plain linen
had been sold, but this was due in part to the high import duty in England,
the principal market. The Russian merchants together held Hope assets
worth 130,000 roubles. 2 Although the Continental System as such had
ceased to be effective, strict control of the neutrality of vessels entering
the Russian ports made the shipping season of 1811 a poor one. The
Americans, who derived the most benefit from the new situation, took
Russian goods in exchange for the colonial produce which they shipped
in (in large quantities), but Russian exports to England scarcely equalled
half the figure for the previous year. 3
  Labouchere lost no time in setting about the task of liquidating the
stocks as far as possible. He had the entire stock of potash shipped,
stimulated the sale of linen fabrics to the best of his ability, and put
pressure on the Russian merchants to remit the proceeds of sales with a
minimum of delay. As the exchange rate had eased upwards to 9-10
stuivers since the Spring, monies could be remitted without undue losses.
By the end of 1811, thanks to Labouchere's efforts, the entire stock of
plain linen and calamanco had been disposed of. By the end of November,
only one-third of the original stock of Flemish linen remained, and just over
half the stock of raven-duck. But of the coarse linen, less than 5 % had
been sold. In many instances, these articles were bought by other Russian
merchants with an eye to speculation. Owing to the rate of exchange,
among other factors, these sales were generally effected at a loss, which in
the case of the coarse linen and part of the calamancoes reached 14 %.4
Unsold stocks at the end of November were valued, at ruling prices, at
more than 1,350,000 roubles, of which iron, the quantity of which had not
changed, represented two-thirds and linen fabrics one-third. Labouchere
had considered using a portion of the funds available in Russia for a
speculation in colonial produce such as cotton and sugar-the prices of
which had declined as a result of the large American shipments-but when

                                    239
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

it became clear that the large-scale re-exports of these to other European
countries made it impossible to achieve the margins which he desired, he
decided against such a transaction. 1