

                                    23 0
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


circulation. This loan was to be funded with capital obtained from the
sale of some of the land owned by the State. 1
 Hope at first objected to the new loan on the grounds that its announce-
ment alone would further undermine the already shaky price of the
Russian bonds in Amsterdam. But in the end they accepted Guryev's
argument that it was not in fact a loan but an amortization of the national
debt, and that it would ultimately lead to an improvement in the rates of
exchange. Such an improvement, however, lay in the future, and Guryev
had difficulty in getting the cf 863,000 remitted. 2
 The changes in the political situation in Holland constituted a further
obstacle to Hope's efforts to keep up the price of the Russian bonds.
Dissatisfied with Louis Napoleon's lukewarm attitude towards the pro-
visions of the Continental System in Holland, Napoleon decided to in-
corporate the territory into the 'Grand Empire.' The area south of the
major rivers was occupied in March 1810, to be followed by the remainder
in July of the same year. In Holland, the loss of national independence
produced serious unrest, and this in turn led to general stagnation on the
Stock Exchange. In mid-June the Russian bonds still stood at 73, but by
mid-August they had fallen to 56. When the initial shock had passed, the
price rose to 60, but this was short-lived, for in mid-September it fell back
to 56 following reports from St. Petersburg of growing disunity between
Russia and France. 3 Only by support-buying was the Company able to
restore the price to 60.
 The unsatisfactory price levelled Labouchere in mid-August to propose
to Guryev that the cf 863,000 should be used not for prolongation, but for
monthly repayments commencing on 1st November 1810. However, as
the terms of the principal debenture stipulated that three months notice
of a repayment of principal should be given, it was already too late to
effect the initial payment on 1st November. To overcome this problem,
he suggested that the payments due on 1st November and 1st December
1810 and 1st January 181 I should be paid simultaneously on the last date
in order to impart a suitable element of sensation. Interest would have to
be paid on all redeemed bonds up to 1st January. If this approach suc-
ceeded in bringing about a more favourable climate, Hope could attempt
to dispose of the remaining bonds and thus secure the funds required for
the interest payment on 1st January.4
  Labouchere did not wait for Guryev's reply before approaching the
Lieutenant General of the newly annexed Holland, Lebrun, for permission
for the projected repayments. When the assent from St. Petersburg was
received, the text of the advertisement was laid before Lebrun, and only

                                    23 1
                        PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


when his approval was obtained was this printed in the newspaper.1
Under the terms of the annexation, Hope & Co. were required to deal
with the Russian envoy in Paris on official matters, and this made commu-
nications with Russia more circuitous and more complicated. It was
therefore fortunate that the first secretary at the embassy, Count Nessel-
rode, was a friend of Labouchere, and that at this very time he was in
charge of day-to-day affairs by reason of the fact that the envoy, Prince
Kurakin, had suffered a serious accident. 2
 The appearance of the advertisement and the draw held on 28th Septem-
ber 1810 produced the anticipated result: in the space of a few days the
price of the Russian bonds rose from 60 to 70. But this improvement, too,
was short-lived, for in mid-October fresh reports of Franco-Russian dis-
unity, coupled with an economic crisis which commenced with the failure
of a number of banks in England and produced a severe shortage of funds
on all the money markets, caused the price to drop back to 60. Hope,
however, had meanwhile managed to place 1,800 bonds. When, in late
November, efforts to boost the price failed and sales commenced to
slacken, the Company eagerly accepted an offer by the entrepreneurs to
take over the remaining 1,861 bonds at a price of 60. With this develop-
ment, the funds needed for the interest and principal payments on 1st
January 181 I were assured. Guryev had been unable to render much
assistance, for the general shortage of money had pushed the value of the
rouble to a new low. In Amsterdam, it had fallen from IIi stuivers in
August to 8i at the end of September; it had rallied slightly in October,
but early in December a new low of 71- stuivers was reached, and the rate
remained at or about this figure until the end of 1810. 3
 Faced with this slump, Guryev was obliged to cease all foreign trans-
actions at the beginning of December, 'our assets having been reduced
to nil,' and he requested Hope to furnish advances. As security for these,
he offered to deposit silver roubles with the Bank and to hand the receipt
for these to an authorized agent of the Company in St.Petersburg. 4