

Political events were among the factors which contributed to this crisis.
Following his victory over the Austrians, Napoleon set his mind to
closing the loopholes in the Continental System which had emerged so
clearly during 1808 and 1809. The Kingdom of Holland was annexed, and
along the German North Sea coast French troops and customs officials
exercised strict supervision. In the Baltic, Prussia and Russia, under
pressure from France, tightened their control over illegal imports, fre-
quently resorting to the seizure of vessels and their cargo. s Late in the

                                   232
Blank authorization for the transfer to Hope, De Smeth and Willink of the Louisiana
     Stock , which was domiciled in Amsterdam. The Hope coat of arms which
               appears on the seal is identical to the coat of arms of the
     Scottish branch of the family. The motto ' At Spes Non Fracta' was used by
                 both the Dutch Hopes and the Hopes of Hopetoun
                          PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

 season of 1810, more than 600 English merchantmen, which had been
 forced by adverse winds to lie up in the Gothenburg Roads for more than
 two months, sailed into the Baltic. There, they were struck by an autumn
 gale and the fleet was split up, the survivors being driven towards Prussian,
 Swedish and Russian harbours. Under pressure from France, those which
 sought refuge in Russian and Pruss ian ports-160 ships in all-were cap-
 tured and impounded. Those which reached Sweden were safe for a
 time, but in mid-November 1810 this country, having been presented
 with a French ultimatum, declared war on England and undertook to
introduce the Continental System.!
   In Russia, the ending of the Continental System was drawing nigh. The
annexations and occupations perpetrated in western Europe in order to
achieve rigid adherence to the system had begun to irritate the czar. His
indignation reached a climax when Napoleon, while demanding that the
Russian Court rigorously impose the measures against British goods,
allowed these to be imported on licence into his own empire. This de-
velopment, coupled with the problem of low rates of exchange and the
country's overall economic difficulties, led the Court to ban the import by
land of certain goods with effect from 31st December 1810, and to dras-
tically increase the import duty on others. Goods brought by ship were
to be admitted upon the production of a certificate of origin issued by a
Russian consul. 2
   With this ukase, a turning point was reached in relations between
Russia and France. The czar had not only dissociated his country from
the Continental System but, by placing obstacles in the path of overland
trade, had openly turned against France. Imports from that country could
only reach Russia by land, and the list of proscribed goods included a
number of important French exports.
  The decision afforded Russia an economic breathing space, but in
Holland the outlook for the holders of the Russian bonds was sombre.
What would become of the payments if war broke out between Russia
and France? Even if Russia was willing to meet her commitments, it
would be almost impossible for her to do so, for with practically the
whole of Europe in Napoleon's grip, and England isolated by the Conti-
nental System, there was no centre via which Russian remittances could
reach Amsterdam.
  On the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, tension, which now and then gave
way to spasms of panic, reflected the anxiety which existed concerning
future developments. It was all very well for Labouchere to write in a
somewhat lighthearted vein about the panicky figures on the Stock Ex-
                                     234
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA