

                                   228
                          PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

Golubtsov having indicated in his reply that he wished for more infor-
mation concerning Hope's proposals, the managers pursued their theme.
The Russian government, they stated, would have to supply such goods
as the purchasers desired, and, if required, store these in government
warehouses at its own risk and for its own account. Dealing with the
balance of the bonds, they expressed the wish to reduce the transfer price
from 90 to 80, because the market price in Amsterdam had meanwhile
fallen to 81. 1
  It is not clear why the managers in Amsterdam, who were aware of the
experience gained from Operation R.M., made such far-reaching stipu-
lations. It may well be that they felt that the minister, wearied by financial
worries, would this time give way. The Committee's reply will in any case
not have surprised Labouchere: Hope's proposal was rejected in its en-
tirety on the grounds that it was an affront to the dignity of the Russian
Court and therefore unacceptable. The managers were requested to cease
the sale of Russian bonds and to keep the balance at the disposal of the
Committee pending further instructions. 2
  The tone of the letter from Russia was stern, and to Hope & Co. it
sounded like a declaration of war. And indeed it was intended as such, as
emerged soon afterwards when reports were received that Golubtsov was
combing the financial centres of Europe in search of fresh loans. In Paris,
his efforts led to a loan being floated by Perregaux Laffitte & Co., but
this failed. 3 The reports caused serious disquiet on the Amsterdam bond
market, and this caused the price of Russian bonds to fall to 68. Support-
buying by Hope & Co. served to restore the level to 75, but this was purely
nominal. At the end of 1809 the rouble fell to a new low of 13-14 stuivers
on the Amsterdam exchange market. Admittedly, the interest on the
bonds was paid on the due date, but Hope was unable to answer the many
questions concerning the date of the first principal repayment. 4
  Golubtsov had by now made his position as Minister of Finance unten-
able. By his inept excursions on the European money markets he had not
only undermined his own creditworthiness, but also brought the Russian
bonds in Holland into discredit and further alienated himself from Hope
& Co. The steady decline in the exchange rate of the rouble was closely
allied to the increasing quantities of paper money which were being
created, and while Golubtsov could not be held solely responsible for this,
his purchases of coin abroad-which were as ill-considered as they were
ineffective-had exacerbated the exchange position.
  In Russia, too, it became clear that things could not go on as they were.
On 24th January 1810, Dimitri Guryev reported that the czar had relieved

                                     229
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

Golubtsov of the office of Treasurer of the Russian Empire with effect
from 1st January 1810 and had appointed him as his successor. All
matters relating to foreign loans would henceforth be referred to him, and
not to the Committee. With this development, Rumyantsev's influence
on the country's financial policy came to an end. Guryev had received
particular instructions from the czar to maintain close relations with
Hope & Co. and to reverse his predecessor's unsuccessful action in ap-
proaching other houses and other money markets. 1
 It was, of course, in Guryev's interest to reach agreement with the Com-
pany, for an initial repayment against the Russian loan had somehow to
be effected in the course of 18IO if the Court's credit abroad was not to
be severely shaken. Guryev began by postponing the repayment date until
the end of 1810. He then argued that, owing to the complete stagnation of
trade and the low rate of exchange which resulted from this (a disputable
conclusion, as we have seen), the Russian government would not be in a
position to remit to Holland the sums needed for repayment for two or
three years. This being so, he continued, he was thinking in terms of an
exchange of bonds drawn by lot for others made more attractive by, say,
interest in excess of 5 % or the chance of a bonus on redemption. Such
a new loan-for that was what it would amount to-would have a life of
8-IO years, with the possibility of earlier redemption. In their reply, Hope
& Co. strongly urged that the forthcoming repayment be effected on 1st
July. This, they stated, would serve to dispel anxiety on the part of many
bondholders. If necessary, the instalment could be reduced to, say, two
million guilders. Moreover, it might be desirable to offer holders of drawn
bonds a bonus in exchange for prolongation; the money thus saved would
enable a further repayment to be made, and the prolongation bonus could
again be offered. Indeed, this could be repeated until the whole of the sum
was exhausted. For the outside world, this would create an impression of
large-scale repayments, whereas in fact only two million guilders would
actually be paid out. 2
  Guryev was in favour of a simulated repayment on these lines, but he
could muster no more than cf 863,000. This, he suggested, could be used
for a prolongation bonus of 20 % on the drawn bonds, or to raise the
interest rate on all Russian bonds by I %, whichever Hope considered the
more advantageous. 3
  With the rouble standing at 111- stuivers in Amsterdam, Guryev was quite
unable to remit more than the sum referred to. However, he was very
hopeful that the exchange rate would benefit from a loan which was to be
floated in Russia for the purpose of reducing the excess of paper money in