

                                    223
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

to Memel, from whence it could be taken overland to Elbing and finally
to Hamburg. 1 Blessig was prepared to supply 2,000 poods immediately
from his own stock, on condition that this could be replenished from the
quantities purchased by Melvil on contract from Wolff & Schltisser,
which were due to arrive in St.Petersburg by barge from the hinterland
between May and July. Hope & Co. stipulated that the cost of transport
from St. Petersburg to Memel should not exceed 4 roubles per barrel.
They estimated that the journey would take a month. Melvillater learned
in Riga that it was a good thing that the order for the transport had been
given comparatively late in the Spring, for during the preceding thaw the
roads had been in such a terrible condition that many carriers had given
up and had simply left goods lying by the wayside. 2 After 200 barrels of
potash had been moved by this method, the Company abandoned it on
grounds of cost in view of the fact that the movement of vessels to and
from the Russian ports during the shipping season of 1809 proceeded
almost without hindrance. Accordingly, the volume of cargoes was far in
excess of the 1808 figure, and this was reflected in commodity prices. At
St.Petersburg, ship arrivals in 1809 totalled 376, compared with 60 in the
previous year. In Riga, the number doubled. 3 The majority of the ship-
ments were destined for England, and together these served to restore
Russia's trade with that country to the normal level. 4
  Strangely, however, this spectacular revival of exports was not reflected
in the parity of the rouble. Under the agreement reached between Melvil
and the Russian government on 30th January, this was fixed at I7"i
stuivers. At the beginning of May it was down to 16 stuivers and by the
middle of the month had slipped to 1St. Although it recovered to 17
stuivers at the end of May, there was nothing to suggest a strong recovery,
and indeed the rate of 17 stuivers was scarcely attained during the re-
mainder of the shipping season. 5 The absence of a true recovery will
certainly have been due in part to the continued creation of paper roubles
and to the amateuristic manner in which Golubtsov, with the assistance of
a number of houses, obtained coin from abroad. A proportion of this
coin was put into circulation, but rapidly disappeared.
  With the rate of exchange falling, the Russian government was obviously
not disposed to annul the agreement with Hope. Admittedly Golubtsov,
in a moment of irritation following Hope's refusal to accept his condi-
tions, had said that there could after all be no question of the government
providing warehouses, but he had subsequently rescinded this, albeit not
wholeheartedly. He remained polite, but 'in a condescending manner.'
Rumyantsev, on the other hand, made no secret of his dislike of the

                                   224
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'