




                                     226
                          CHAPTER EIGHT

               PER ASPERA AD ASTRA
           FROM THE SUSPENSION OF PAYMENTS TO THE
                    ARRANGEMENT OF 1815


 In the previous chapter we left the entrepreneurs, headed by Borski, in a
 state of great anxiety. Through their spokesman, they had agreed at the
 end of 1808 to take a further 4,109 bonds, and they had been given until
 1st July 1809 to decide whether or not to accept the balance of 4,000. We
 also learned that, of the 13,109 bonds which the entrepreneurs had ac-
cepted up to that point, less than 4,500 had been placed. During the
 opening months of 1809 the situation was, if anything, even worse. The
threat of war in eastern Europe led to a virtual absence of buyers, and the
price fell from 86 in January to 82 in April, in which month the conflict
between France and Austria finally broke out. l
  Faced with this situation, Hope & Co. approached the Committee in
St.Petersburg with a request that the penalty for bonds not taken up on
 1st July be waived. Borski and his associates, the Company wrote, re-
gretted their boldness, for they had been left with a large portion of the
bonds which they had already accepted. As there was no prospect whatso-
ever of the situation improving by 1st July, they would not under any
circumstances accept the remaining 4,000 bonds, preferring to pay the
10 %penalty-however painful such a course might be for respectable men
who owed their sad plight to their blind faith in Hope's persuasion and
their long-established preference for everything which came from Russia.
The Company, the letter continued, was embarrassed by its role, for it
had thus disheartened those who had secured the acceptance of foreign
loans on the Dutch capital market and had bred prejudice against the
once eagerly sought Russian bonds. Hope blamed the unfortunate situ-
ation on political developments, which none of the parties concerned
could influence, and on these grounds requested that the penalty clause
be waived. If the Russian government acceded to the request, the Com-
pany would reconsider its earlier decision not to increase the advances to
the Russian Court. 2
  The Committee's reply, dated 23rd June 1809, stated that the czar had
refused the submission and that Hope & Co. could recover the advances
from the one million guilders which had been placed at the disposal of
the Russian government in Amsterdam under the terms of the agreement

                                   227
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


with Melvil. The managers suspected that this abrupt rejection was allied
to the Russian Court's displeasure at the stagnation of Operation R.M.!
On 4th July, Hope reported to the Russian ministers that the entrepre-
neurs had indeed chosen to pay the penalty. The bond price at this time
fluctuated between 82 and 83, and this made it impossible for the entre-
preneurs-whose number, moreover, had recently declined-to place a
further 4,000 bonds. A failure would damage their good name and cause
the price to decline even further. As an alternative, Hope proposed that
the repayment of the initial lo th of the balance of the loan should be
effected early in 1810. This would certainly assist the entrepreneurs, who
would then be in a position to place the balance of the bonds which they
held, and subsequently to accept the remaining 4,000. If the proceeds of
the sale were inadequate for the repayment, the entrepreneurs might be
willing to make good the deficit in exchange for Russian goods due for
delivery in the Spring, at day-prices determined by both commodity price
and exchange rate. 2
  From Bagneres, whence he had taken his wife for the benefit of her
health, Labouchere expressed all manner of objections to this plan. He
saw no great likelihood that the Russian government would agree to it,
for Operation R.M. had already shown that the Court would have no-
thing to do with the purchase and supply of goods. How, he asked, was
this new transaction to be explained to Matthiessen & SiIlem, Bethmann
and Borski's associates, the participants in Operation R.M.? This, after
all, had only just got under way, and would certainly suffer as a result of
the new undertaking. 3 Labouchere also drew attention to the political
situation: would France and Russia remain on friendly terms, or would
their relationship change? We may assume that the writer, whose journey
took him to the French capital, had learned from a reliable source there of
the cooling of relations between the czar and Napoleon.
  Early in July 1809, Napoleon had won a decisive victory over the
Austrians at Wagram, and at the Peace of Press burg in September of that
year he had added the Austrian part of Galicia to the Grand Duchy of
Warsaw, a French protectorate. As the nucleus of a new Polish state, this
would have a certain attraction for Polish subjects under Russian domi-
nation, and could therefore cOI\stitute a pocket of unrest on Russia's
western frontier. We have already seen how, on the one hand, the rigorous
application of the Continental system seriously damaged Russia's trade
while, on the other, the admittance of British ships to Russian ports, to
which the authorities had closed their eyes since the summer of 1808, was
a thorn in the flesh of Napoleon.