

change; in the past, he had himself expressed misgivings at the growing
estrangement between Russia and France. It was gradually becoming
clear that a conflict between them was only a question of time. How, then,
could the most be obtained for the bondholders before the explosion
came?

Even without Guryev's decision temporarily to suspend remittances to
 Hope, the question of payments by the Russian government would have
been open to doubt. At the end of 1810, both Matthiessen & Sillem in
Hamburg and Raymond and Theodore de Smeth in Amsterdam were lost
as intermediaries. On 16th November of that year, Hieronymus Sillem
informed Hope that he and his partners had decided to liquidate the
house, since the strict enforcement of the Continental System had made it
impossible to trade in Hamburg. Labouchere replied that he was sorry to
learn of the reason for the step, but that he welcomed the decision as such.
When he heard that Sillem was prepared to travel to Russia if required,
he was delighted, for this would enable Operation R.M. to be completed
under expert supervision. 1
  The loss of De Smeth, who was obliged to seek a moratorium early in
December, was a far more serious blow. The house was brought down as
a result of granting excessive facilities to other firms, particularly a num-
ber in France which had run into difficulties owing to the financial crisis.
Pieter de Smeth had died shortly before the crash. Labouchere was
appointed Receiver, and this enabled him to effect a timely intervention
on behalf of the Russian Crown following the formal declaration of
bankruptcy. He succeeded in withholding a number of remittances from
Rall & Severin and Colombi from the assets, and these were returned to
St.Petersburg via Hope & Co. with a request that fresh remittances be
made. 2
 The elimination of Matthiessen & Sillem and De Smeth also had serious
consequences for the entire Russian diplomatic mission in Paris. Follow-
ing the disappearance of these houses, Perregaux Laffitte & Co. refused
to grant further advances to the members of the embassy until such time
as the Russian Court designated houses in Amsterdam and Paris from
whom monies could be recovered. Faced with this emergency, Prince
Alexander Kurakin appealed to Hope & Co. to furnish a credit for the
members of the embassy in anticipation of fresh arrangements by St.
Petersburg, and this was graciously done. 3 The Russian government's
satisfaction at this act of service was increased when the Company de-
clined Guryev's offer to deposit silver roubles with the Bank as security

                                    235
                        PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

for advances. 'We know of no better security than the sense of loyalty of
which His Imperial Majesty has not ceased to give to the whole of Europe
the most constant and most convincing proof,' the Company wrote, with
a mixture of elegance and flattery matched to the occasion. That there was
more behind this than an obligatory rhetorical flourish, and that there
was a genuine conviction on Hope's part, was to emerge at a later date. 1
  For RaIl, the failure of De Smeth was more than a mere setback in
business, and when, early in February I8II, his other correspondent in
Amsterdam, De Weduwe Eduard Croese & Son, was similarly obliged to
seek a moratorium, he had perforce to eat humble pie. In a brief letter to
Hope & Co., he expressed his regret for the long break in their business
relationship, and asked that this might be resumed. As parties with par-
allel goals, namely the safeguarding of Russian interests in the bank-
ruptcies of De Smeth and Croese, the two houses had little difficulty in
patching up their differences. 2
  Although St.Petersburg felt little effect from the wave of bankruptcies
which had swept Europe, the scarcity of credit and the extreme shortage of
money had an adverse effect upon the rouble, the value of which did not
rise above 8 stuivers during the opening months of 18 II. The Russian
government was accordingly hard put to resume the remittances to Hope.
But the interventions with De Smeth and Croese on behalf of the Court
Bankers, the monthly redemption of one hundred bonds-which con-
tinued-and the payment of interest at the end of the year made it impera-
tive that funds should be remitted, since Hope could not furnish un-
limited advances. The Company had received a number of bonds from
the assets of De Smeth, but there were fewer and fewer buyers, and the
atmosphere on the Stock Exchange was one of near-panic. The liquidation
of De Smeth and the periodic rumours of war caused the bond price to
drop from 60 to 5 I. They later rallied, but did not rise above 57. 3
  Gradually it became clear that unusual measures would be needed to
ensure the payment of interest on 1st January 1812. After consultations
between the partners, it was decided that Labouchere should go to Russia
for further discussions with the Court. Trade in Amsterdam being in the
doldrums, it was in any case not necessary for him to remain there. His
first task was to obtain a passport, and for thi1> he vir.ited Paris, where
Prince Kurakin promised to arrange for the necessary documents for
 Labouchere, his secretary, his valet and a courier to be made available at
 Memel. Besides discussing the loan, Labouchere wished to deal with the
settlement of the claims against De Smeth and the unsold stocks from
 Operation R.M.4