

                                   236
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

As we saw, Melvil departed from St.Petersburg at the end of May 1809,
leaving local sales in the hands of the houses through which the goods
concerned had been purchased. The unusually high level of shipments
during the 1809 season, in which vessels from England sailed in and out
of Russian ports almost unhindered, served to raise commodity prices
and thus facilitated the disposal of Hope's stocks. In the opinion of the
partners, however, the St.Petersburg houses did not react swiftly enough
to upward price trends, and when a number of them-who included
Meyer, Melvil's confidential agent-remitted willy-nilly, 'without at once
securing the exchange,' Hope's anger was really aroused. The Company
expressed to Sillem its suspicion that, 'par les interets plus immediats,'
Meyer and his associates had seized upon the higher prices to dispose of
their own stocks and had relegated Hope's interests to second place.
Labouchere wrote that this type of behaviour by the houses in Russia had
always been the drawback to employing 'any concerns that way.' He had
hoped that Melvil's presence would have prevented this, but clearly the
problem was as great as ever.!
  Sillem sought to excuse the merchants by pointing to the wide fluctuation
in prices and exchange rates in Russia, but he was forced to admit that the
houses in St.Petersburg at times displayed a lack of zeal and intelligence. 2
It was fortunate that the shipping season of 1809 was abnormally long.
The English, probably sensing possible events in the year ahead, con-
tinued to buy in large quantities with the result that satisfactory, and at
times even high, prices were obtained well into the autumn. This did much
to offset the initial shortcomings, and by December 1809 even Labouchere
was obliged to confess, albeit not with enthusiasm, that the results were
better than had been expected. 'The operation R.M. is liquidating and
would do well if the houses in Russia were either more intelligent or more
honest.' 3
  Examination of the quantities sold and the profit margins achieved
reveals that the results were indeed better than had been anticipated-more
so, in fact, than Labouchere admitted. A notable aspect is the wide
differences in the profit margins achieved by the various merchants. In
the case of hemp, the average profit in Riga was 12 %, whereas Meyer in
St. Petersburg made 19 %. Only 8 %was earned on flax. On tallow, Wolff &
Schliisser made a profit of 17 %, while Blessig hardly managed to break
even. On sailcloth, Blessig could make no more than 51- %profit, whereas
Meyer achieved between 1 I % and 16 %. Blessig made a loss of 1- % on
Flemish linen, while Wolff & Schliisser made a profit of 4 %. These margins
are based on a rate of exchange of 17 stuivers to the rouble at the time of

                                    237
                         PER ASPER A AD ASTRA

purchase of the goods, and a mean rate of 15 stuivers for the post-sale
remittances. These figures reflect the order of intelligence-and also per-
haps of honesty-of the merchants involved. It is evident from this that,
despite all Labouchere's criticism, Meyer was worthy of the confidence
placed in him.
 The figures also show that the market for linen fabrics was not particu-
larly good; however, their keeping qualities and low storage cost enabled
them to be kept in anticipation of better times. Of the stock of iron -also
a commodity with a long storage life-only 5 % was sold, the gross profit
obtained being I I %. By 1st January 1810, cf 955,100, representing 39 %
of the total sum invested in the various commodities, had been remitted
to Amsterdam. 1
 Sales in 1810 were substantially below the 1809 level. As explained
earlier, Napoleon made an all-out effort to isolate England economically
from Continental Europe, and this included exerting pressure on Russia
to take more stringent measures against British ships. Meanwhile, in
England itself the abnormal volume of imports from Russia in 1809 had
produced a sharp fall in prices, and thus profits were reduced. Remit-
tances to Holland in 1810 totalled only one-seventh of the figure for 1809.
The merchants in Russia, however, were doing their best, and the levels of
profit on such sales as they did achieve were very reasonable, particularly
because rising rouble prices compensated the falling rate of exchange. 2
With linen fabrics, in particular, the merchants were more fortunate than
in 1809. Meyer & Bruxner's profit on sailcloth in 1810 was only 9 % gross,
but Cramer Bros. made 18 % and Blessig achieved a remarkable 221 %.
Bothlingk & Co., who had contributed nothing to Operation R.M. in
1809, made handsome profits, viz.an average of 20 % on Flemish linen and
371 % on raven-duck. It is conceivable that stockpiling by the Russian
government had an influence on the prices of these products. In Archangel,
Alexander Becker's only success lay in iron, on which he made a net profit
of 13%. He suffered a loss of 9 % on the sale of four-fifths of the stock of
pitch, and fared even worse with tar, of which half the stock was sold at
a net loss of 35 %.3
 In September 1810, Meyer sold a further 30,000 poods of the iron lying
in St. Petersburg at twice the purchase price. He did not, however, remit
the proceeds to Amsterdam, for with the rouble, as stated earlier, standing
at less than 9 stuivers, remittance would have been uneconomic. After
consulting Hope, Meyer deposited the money with the Bank, where it
would earn interest at 5 %. The plan was to withdraw the capital, plus
interest, in the following Spring, by which time the rate of exchange would
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA