

                                    25 1
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

tomed were of no avail, and in the end he was obliged to submit. 1
  Pierre Cesar Labouchere thereupon threw himself into the task of ar-
ranging the two journeys with the minimum of delay. Requests for pass-
ports for himself and for Borski and S.P.Labouchere were submitted to
the Director-General of Police in Amsterdam, Devilliers du Terrage, and
the Minister of Police in Paris, the Duke of Rovigo. In support of the
applications, Labouchere wrote to the Foreign Minister, while Robert
Vofite-who had been appointed by Napoleon to a senior financial post-
added his recommendation in memoranda to Governor Lebrun and
Mollien, the Treasury Minister. The request submitted to the Duke of
Rovigo was accompanied by a similar document addressed to Napoleon.
In this, however, it was explained that the applicants sought to give the
Russian government an opportunity to reverse its decision 'even before
the end of hostilities brings the inevitable consequence of the success of
your campaigns.' 2 This piece of flattery was obviously added for the
purpose of reconciling Napoleon to the fact that Hope & Co. already
desired contact with the Russian government. When the request was
made, on 30th September 1812, the first report of Napoleon's entry into
Moscow on the 14th of the month had just reached Amsterdam, and it
looked as if the French emperor was in a position to dictate peace terms
to the czar.
  Sillem's services were invoked for the purposes of the formalities at the
Russian end. He was instructed to submit a request to Guryev for a pass-
port for Labouchere. While the passports from the French government
were speedily forthcoming, as had been anticipated, Sillem's efforts met
with a polite but firm refusal from Guryev. The official reason given was
that Labouchere, in his journeys to England, had undertaken semi-diplo-
matic negotiations on behalf of King Louis Napoleon of Holland and
also Napoleon himself, and that a visit by him to Russia could be con-
strued as a diplomatic mission aimed at bringing about a rapprochement
between France and Russia. 3 Although couched in elegant terms, the
refusal boiled down to the fact that the Russian government had no
intention of resuming the payments and therefore did not welcome so
'powerful' a mission.
  Labouchere took the refusal philosophically. Because its tone remained
extremely friendly towards the Company, he felt that no unfavourable
significance need be attached to it as far as the bondholders were con-
cerned. At the same time, he deemed it advisable to cancel the steps taken
in Paris in connexion with his passport as quickly as possible and im-
mediately to shift the emphasis to the contact with England. 4

                                   252
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

Developments in the military sphere also pointed in this direction. The
conquest of Moscow was followed by a fire which rendered the city
unsuitable as winter quarters for the French troops. Moreover, Napoleon
wasted a whole month in fruitless efforts to arrive at negotiations with the
czar. By the time he had decided on a withdrawal, the Russians had
brought up fresh troops and the French were forced to retire along the
route which they had plundered during their advance. The unexpectedly
early onset of winter added to the ordeal of their disorderly retreat.
  Immediately prior to the news of the French setbacks, the price of the
Russian bonds reached a new low; on 24th October they stood at 25.
Early in November, when reports of the withdrawal began to trickle
through from Moscow, the rate rose to 30, and by the end of the month
it had reached 35. 1 The sudden change of fortunes, which grew into a
catastrophe for the Grande Armee, soon attracted speculators. Thanks to
the speed with which reports concerning the situation in Russia reached
him, Count von Stackelberg, formerly the Russian envoy to the Kingdom
of Holland and now occupying the equivalent post in Vienna, was among
the first to approach Hope & Co. In October he instructed the Company
to purchase ten thousand guildersworth of Russian bonds. 2 He was
followed early in December by Moritz Bethmann of Frankfurt, with
whom Labouchere was at that moment staying, with an order for fifty
thousand guildersworth. 3
  With the cancellation of Labouchere's visit to Russia, SiIIem's operations
in St.Petersburg became indispensable. The matter of the remuneration
for his services again became an issue at the end of 1812 when John Hope
changed his mind yet again and refused to pay Sillem a penny unless the
other interested parties contributed. In his morbid state of irritability, he
despatched a stream of letters urging the early collection of outstanding
debts and the sale of any bonds which could not be transferred to England
or taken to other places of safety. In Amsterdam, the consequence of
this action was to confront the managers with a serious shortage of liquid
assets. On 1st August 1812 they had only cf 40,000 in hand, yet faced
three monthly payments of cf 100,000 each.4 Only with the greatest diffi-
culty could John Hope be persuaded to place sufficient funds from his as-
sets in Holland at the disposal of the managers to enable them to meet
their current commitments. 5
  In spite of John Hope's refusal, the managers decided at the end of 1812
to pay Sillem a sum of cf 10,000 for his efforts in the matter of the
Russian loans during the previous six months. In a letter to John Hope,
Berck expressed his great dismay at the former's directives concerning