

                                    249
                        PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

and including 1st August. Labouchere recommended that these payments
should cease and that the balance of the instalments should be met with
Russian bonds at a price of 60. As the transaction affected only Hope and
a circle of close associates, the bonds would not have to be physically
deposited, but each of the interested parties would retain his share.!

To the managers in Amsterdam and to Willem Borski, Guryev's an-
nouncement came as a bombshell. The letter containing words of con-
solation and advice which Labouchere had sent to the managers had not
arrived by the time the bad news reached them on 29th August. After
prolonged discussions with the confidants, Borski, Berck and Bondt,
William Gordon Coesvelt, one of Hope's new managers, was despatched
to Frankfurt for consultation with Labouchere, who was then in that city.
A report from St. Petersburg prohibiting further ballots for the Russian
bonds had already been received in Amsterdam, and this news caused the
price of the bonds to fall from 46 to between 38 and 39. 2
  In his talks with Coesvelt, Labouchere reiterated the points of view with
which we are already familiar. He added that he had been startled by the
'disposition des esprits a Amsterdam' -a reference not only to the reaction
of the investing public, which he described as 'insensee et impolitique,'
but also to the state of mind of a man like Borski (to whom he addressed
a separate letter of consolation). Borski, he maintained, ought not to be
so overcome with dismay; this was not in keeping with his character. He
should not bemoan the misery of others, but should do something to help
them. He must join with the managers and Bondt and appeal to the
public; he must retain the initiative, and not allow the public to take
action. Borski would be the ideal person to go to England; Coesvelt and
Van der Hoop, another new manager, could not undertake the mission,
for that would create the impression of 'une affaire concertee,' and this
would produce an even worse situation. Borski should not await Labou-
chere's return before embarking on the journey; Labouchere no longer
desired to play an active role, but longed to retire and 'vegetate,' and
devote himself to his ailing wife. 3
  John Hope, however, was not sympathetic towards his partner's desire
for inactivity, and continued to press him ~o go to Russia. Hope countered
the wording of Guryev's official announcement-in which it was stated
that the czar had commanded that remittances to enemy countries should
cease-by asserting that in the principal debenture of 1798, Hope & Co.
was referred to as 'actuellement a Londres,' and that this situation again
applied since all the partners in the firm now resided there. But neither
                         PER ASPER A AD ASTRA

this somewhat tortuous assertion nor reminders of the Company's earlier
services to Russia could alter the czar's decision.!
  In Amsterdam, the managers and their advisors, aided by Labouchere's
moral support, resumed an active role. A dignified letter on the lines set
out by Labouchere was sent to Guryev. In this, while naturally protesting
against the measure, they expressed confidence in the future, when the
war was over. The letter requested the minister to consult with Sillem
with the aim of arriving at measures which could at once reassure those
living on their capital and prevent speculation.
  In accordance with Labouchere's proposal, a meeting of bondholders
was called for 17th September 18 I 2. This was extremely well attended, and
the announcement of the orders from the Russian Court concerning the
cessation of interest payments made a deep impression on the audience.
In spite of the shock suffered by the public, the discussion was restrained
and not one offensive word was uttered. The establishment of an inde-
pendent committee was felt to be unnecessary, since all present had the
fullest confidence in the Company. 2
  When the meeting drew to a close, the managers received a visit from
J.van der Poll, C.van der Oudermeulen, J. de Burlett and J. van der Man-
dele, representatives of the bondholders present, who, together with
Bondt, had come to report on the decisions of the meeting. After reiter-
ating their confidence in the faits et gestes of the Company, the bond-
holders urgently requested that Labouchere should revisit Russia or, if
this were not possible, that he should take other action in the matter of
the loan. They asked the Company to accept vouchers for the payment
due on 1st January 1813 from those bondholders who wished to surrender
them, but at the holders' responsibility. The meeting thus sought to
contribute, albeit with provisionally non-negotiable paper, to the costs.
The announcement caused the bond price to fall from 37 to 32, but
compared with the gravity of the measure the decline was modest. 3 Borski
and Samuel Pierre Labouchere journeyed to Frankfurt to convey the
bondholders' request to Labouchere. It proved relatively easy to persuade
him to resume an active part, but he made his co-operation conditional
upon both emissaries agreeing to go to England for consultation with
John Hope. Borski more than once objected on the grounds that he had
never been to sea and that the autumn was anything but a good time to
embark on such an adventure, but Labouchere stood his ground. Even
Borski's lamentations over his large family, the impossibility of neglecting
the management of his affairs, his longing for peace and quiet and his
dislike of any interruption of the manner of life to which he was accus-