

                                   259
                        PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


would be able and willing to advance a sum of money. In addition, the
managers were authorized to sell, if necessary, 200 Portuguese bonds and
the balance of the Russian bonds which they held; the price of the latter
had meanwhile risen to 56.1
  The Amsterdam house must thus generate its own funds as far as
possible, and not draw on Baring, because the rates of exchange in
England had become extremely unfavourable as a result of the govern-
ment's subsidy commitments. Pro forma drawings on Baring Brothers
were allowed, but on condition that the drafts were sent to Alexander
Baring, for the account of Henry Hope & Co., the London house which
managed the interests of the Hope family.2
  While De Gervais had yet to present himself to the managers, Samuel
Pierre Labouchere, who headed a merchant hou~e in Rotterdam, received
news from Harman that shipments of gold consigned to Hope & Co. were
on their way. He was instructed to accept these at Hellevoetsluis and
arrange for their conveyance to Amsterdam. With the ports still largely
blocked by ice after a long and severe winter, and difficulty in moving
goods by road, this was not an easy task. Samuel Pierre therefore decided
to employ a trusted agent, in the manner of the Jewish money dealers,
and to send him to Hellevoetsluis to attend to the inward clearance of the
gold and its journey via the offices of the customs agents along the route,
at each of which the passport for the gold had to be signed by the excise
authorities. 3
  Because De Gervais required cash immediately for the maintenance of
 the Russian armies, the managers in Amsterdam set about buying gold
coin in Holland even before Harman's consignments arrived. Samuel
Pierre Labouchere in Rotterdam and, later, Bethmann in Frankfurt were
 also brought into this operation. 4 Between the end of February and the
end of April 1814, more than cf 750,000 in cash was placed at the disposal
 of De Gervais. In the early stages, the managers recouped their costs by
 simply retaining equal sums out of Harman's consignments, but De
 Gervais informed them that he required all the money and that they
 would have to finance their purchases by drawing on the credit opened in
 his name with Harman. 5
  The nature of the coinage given to De Gervais varied during the first
 two months. During February and the first half of March, he received
 not only Napoleons d'or (which were primarily destined for occupied
 French territory), but also large quantities of guineas and Hanoverian
 pistoles, of which the last two were in circulation in Germany, especially
 in Hanover. The British government had minted the pistole in England

                                   260
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

with a view to its use in Germany, but in the eyes of Pierre Cesar La-
bouchere the measure served also to circumvent the ban on the export of
gold bullion. 1 He was annoyed at the delay in setting up the Mint in
Utrecht, the result of which was that in March 1814 there was still no
means of converting gold bars into ducats, a form of coinage which had
long been in circulation outside the Netherlands. According to Labou-
chere, government circles in England were amazed by the slowness with
which everything was done in Holland, and he maintained that such signs
of exhaustion served to diminish foreign interest and willingness to do
anything to assist Holland's recovery. 2
  Following the capitulation of Paris on 31st March 1814 and Napoleon's
abdication twelve days later, the Russian armies were especially in need
of French money. This is reflected in the records of the purchases made
by the managers after 1st April, in which French coinage, especially silver
Napoleons, predominated. The Napoleons, packed in kegs, were sent to
Paris by special courier. 3
  The plan to meet half the bills of credit with overdue Russian vouchers
had made little headway in the meantime. Admittedly, Pierre Cesar La-
bouchere recognized the difficulties. At the end of February 1814, with
Napoleon'S downfall still in doubt, Labouchere was most anxious to
avoid the personal intervention of De Gervais if the question of borrowing
on the security of the bills should arise, for 'the name of the Company
must not appear.'4 Collaboration with another house was out of the
question for the same reason. Moreover, the supplementary convention
to the Reichenbach Treaty, dated 30th September 1813, expressly stipu-
lated that the bills of credit were to be used only for the prosecution of
the war, and thus England would probably raise objection to a payment in
overdue Russian vouchers. There was also the possibility that the Prus-
sians would complain on the grounds that many of the vouchers had
come into the hands of speculators, often at less than half their nominal
value. Such men would thus be in a position to offer the bills of credit for
sale at 80 % or less of their value, and make a handsome profit to boot.
Prussia would then be faced with the choice between keeping the bills
allotted to her until all those from Russia had come on to the market, or
accepting a substantial loss. Added to all this, it was of the greatest
importance to England-and not only for reasons of prestige-that the
bills should retain their par value. After all, they had been devised in
order to assist Russia and Prussia in their struggle against Napoleon, and
not to line the pockets of a handful of speculators. 5 These considerations
led to the issue of the bills being repeatedly postponed. Guryev's rejection
                          PER ASPERA AD ASTRA