

bonds relating to the domestic loan. 1 All these decisions were confirmed
in a ukase dated 28th September 181 I.
  Even though not everything turned out as Labouchere had envisaged, he
was not completely dissatisfied. The Russian Court, he informed the
partners in London, still showed evidence of its desire to fulfil its commit-
ments, though this might involve major sacrifices. Therefore, he con-
tinued, while it was not his aim to expand the Company'~ interests in
Russia, the creation of the new bonds as an additional security for the
whole was justified. We may safely assume that this statement was made
in order to forestall certain objections to the new arrangement on the part
of the partners in London. 2 The ominous facet of the arrangement lay in
the fact that it provided only for the payment due on 1st January 1812,
and that fresh negotiations would be necessary during the course of that
year. Before leaving St.Petersburg, LabouchCre had received a solemn
undertaking from the czar that nothing would be allowed to interfere with
his decision loyally to meet his obligations, and that LabouchCre could
set the minds of the Hollanders at rest on this point. The limited time
scale of the arrangement, however, indicated otherwise. 3
  LabouchCre left St. Petersburg on 18th September 18Il and, travelling
via Riga, Berlin, Leipzig and Frankfurt, arrived in Amsterdam on 25th
October. While in Leipzig he had a meeting with Hieronymus Sillem, who
had travelled from Carlsbad for the purpose, and during this it was finally
agreed that Sillem should go to St.Petersburg to supervise Hope's inter-
ests there. 4
  Back in Amsterdam, Labouchere set about finalizing the arrangements
for placing the new bonds. He informed Guryev that, while the restitution
of the cf 400,000 had 'electrified' the entrepreneurs, the holders of the
earlier bonds were now less inclined to sell, and therefore a contract
between Hope and WilIem Borski had been signed on 11th December
 18Il providing for the latter to take over new bonds to a nominal value
of cf 3,200,000, for which he would pay cf 2,400,000 in twelve monthly
instalments of cf 200,000 commencing on 1st January 1812. Borski also
had the option of paying the instalments in Russian bonds, which for this
purpose would be valued at 60. As the new bonds could not be dealt in on
 the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, Hope undertook to advance a sum of
between five and six hundred thousand guilders upon demand, and at 5 %
interest, on bonds which were not in their year of maturity, for which
purpose a price of 80 would apply. Moreover, the Company bound itself
to repurchase, if Borski should so wish, bonds to a nominal value of
cf 800,000, divided equally over the maturing dates, at a price of 75. 5
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

Upon reading the last-mentioned terms, one may wonder why the Com-
pany was prepared to commit itself financially towards Borski to such an
extent, and whether it would not have been simpler to make the new bonds
saleable on the Exchange. Among the probable reasons is that the issue of
new Russian bonds would have undermined the price of earlier ones,
thereby demolishing one of the pillars upon which the new operation
rested. Moreover, deals via the Exchange would have required the prior
approval of the French government, and a request for this might well
have sparked off an official inquiry into Hope's affairs-something which
the Company would not have relished at that juncture. Labouchere, it
will be remembered, was planning to retire on 31st December 18II, and
John Hope-who had become the senior partner following the death of
Henry Hope early in 18 II - was pursuing a policy of retrenchment, the
safeguarding of funds and the transfer of these to England. In any case,
there was no question of actual repurchase because the 4,000 bonds were
in the hands of friends.
 The agreement with Borski was therefore no more than a smoke screen
behind which Hope's funds were transferred to a place of safety. It was
agreed between the parties that 2,170,000 guilders worth of the new bonds
out of the total of cf 3,200,000, would be in the name of Adrian Elias
Hope. More than half this sum was deposited with Willem Borski, in
whose name the bonds were registered. The balance was lodged with
Berck and Entrop Muller, who administered the affairs of the mentally
weak Adrian Elias. But even this amount of camouflage did not satisfy
the partners. As Adrian Elias Hope continued to reside in Holland, assets
in his name could not be classified as enemy capital, and the partners, who
were in England, utilized this situation to safeguard their share in the new
bonds. Their action emerged when, at the end of 1812, the initial
cf 800,000 of the loan was repaid: ~ ~ ths went to John Hope, ~ gths to Hope
& Co. (i.e. to John Hope and his cousins by marriage, Thomas, Henry
Philip and Adrian Elias), -laths to P.C.Labouchere, and a similar portion
to Willem Borski. Whether, and in what degree, Borski acted for others
in this matter, it is impossible to say.1
 In practice, Hope must thus have furnished the greater part of the deficit
of cf 2,400,000 which existed on 3 I st December 181 I. The 'payments'
made during 1812 were thus purely ledger entries. Nevertheless, the pay-
ment of interest and the redemption of 300 bonds on 1st January 1812,
which Labouchere had stipulated, had a beneficial effect upon the Russian
bonds, the price of which rose from 56-57 in the autumn to 65 and even
higher in December and January. 2