

                                    247
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

As far as the prime objective of Sillem's journey was concerned, the
early signs were favourable. The czar graciously received him in audience
and gave the impression that the interest due on 31st December would be
promptly paid. Soon however-indeed, before the formal outbreak of
hostilities on 24th June 1812-Guryev commenced to express doubt as to
the possibility of remitting sufficient funds to Holland, blaming the situa-
tion on the inadequate postal service in Germany and the scarcity of
sound drafts on foreign capitals. Sillem reported that the latter excuse
was not valid, because exports, particularly from the Black Sea port of
Odessa, were running at a high level, so that remittances were quite
feasible.! But the minister continued to funk a direct reply and, in spite
of memoranda and audiences, Sillem was unable to obtain clarification.
On 5th July, Guryev announced officially that the czar had decided to
suspend all payments, both of interest and principal, relating to the loan
in Holland. The decision, it was stated, flowed from the outbreak of war
between Russia and France. 2
  The conflict brought an early improvement in relations between Russia
and England, and on 18th July 1812 this was manifested in a treaty be-
tween the two countries. In the negotiations leading to this, Russia had
demanded that the British government should assume responsibility for
Russian debts in Amsterdam, but this the English negotiators had refused
to do. We may assume that Guryev's announcement to SilIem concerning
the suspension of the payments followed this refusal. 3 In his formal letter
to Sillem, the minister stated that the repayment of the first quarter of the
advance of cf 3,200,000 would not be affected and that the instalments of
principal already advertised (which covered the period up to and including
1st September) would also be met by the Russian Court.4
  The decision came as a severe blow to SilIem, and he weighed the respec-
tive merits of going to the czar's headquarters at Wilno and approaching
him personally, and of sending him a memorandum. In the end he decided
on the latter course and despatched the memorandum to Guryev with a
request that it be transmitted to the czar. Thus, he reasoned, the minis-
terial council could not feel that it had been by-passed. On the one hand
Sillem wished that Laboucbere were present, so that he would be relieved
of some of the blame for the way in which matters had gone; on the other
hand he realized that Labouchere's presence would make little difference,
for there was no question of the czar reversing his decision. s
  Laboucbere, who, with his wife, was staying in Kassel, was the first to
receive the sad news. With somewhat forced optimism, he continued for
a time to hope that the decision had emanated from the 'college des
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


finances,' and not from the czar himself. Perhaps 'this piece of kite-flying'
was for the purpose of testing public reaction in Amsterdam? 1 For the
Company, however, the main issue was what to do next. According to
Labouchere, there were two possibilities: either France would soon be in
a position to dictate peace terms to Russia, in which case Napoleon would
look after the interests of his subjects-interests which he knew extremely
well-or the campaign would drag on, in which case the Company would
do better not to diminish the legal weight of its claims by dragging them
through the mire. With this cryptic utterance, Labouchere probably meant
to convey that, in the event of a prolonged campaign, Hope would be
well advised not to depend too manifestly and unilaterally upon French
support.
  Upon examination of the measure announced, Labouchere could not
discern any intention hostile to the lenders. He understood the Russian
action up to a point, although he could not of course approve of it under
any circumstances. At the same time, the decision fell well short of
infringing the rights of the lenders or renouncing the obligations towards
them. The czar's statements during the last audience before Labouchere's
departure had been too specific for anything of this nature. One of the
most grievous aspects of the suspension was that many people who lived
on their capital would be forced into ruinous transactions which would
benefit a handful of speculators. The best course of action seemed to him
to be for Borski, Voombergh and a few others to call a meeting of bond-
holders, at which advice would be given concerning the measures to be
adopted. It would be necessary for the meeting to elect a committee with
power to act on its behalf; the committee's first task would be to request
Hope & Co. to disclose the true state of affairs. It would also be necessary
to consider addressing a memorandum to the Duke of Bassano, and to
arrange for this to be shown to Napoleon in order that he might display
his paternal vigilance for the interests of his subjects. To counterbalance
this, it would also be important to send a delegation to London to discuss
with John Hope the steps which could be taken by Sillem. Labouchere
felt that Willem Borski was best suited to this role. His own advice now
counted for little with Hope, and his intervention would probably do
more harm than good to the cause. If Borski was unwilling to go alone,
Labouchere's brother, Samuel Pierre, might be persuaded to accompany
him. The French government would certainly issue the necessary pass-
ports.
  Under the terms of Hope's contract with Willem Borski dated lIth
December lSI I, monthly instalments of cf 200,000 had been paid up to