

                                    245
                         PER ASPER A AD ASTRA


chere took a dismal view of the trading situation. According to him, the
losses suffered and difficulties experienced by the Americans in their
shipmenh to Russia had been such that these would not be repeated. But
on his arrival in Russia, Sillem was able to send more cheerful news:
despite everything, American vessels continued to arrive in large numbers.
Early in June 1812, however, the war between England and the United
States heralded the disappearance of American vessels from European
waters, and thus Labouchere's prediction was ultimately borne out.
  Like Robert Melvil, SiIIem was given comprehensive information con-
cerning persons with whom he might be involved commercially. Broadly
speaking, the information corresponded to that previously communicated
to Melvil. 1
  By 14th April matters had progressed to the point where Sillem was able
to depart for St.Petersburg-a great favour, as Labouchere subsequently
learned, for at that time no other passports were issued. Sillem reported
that he had had an extremely unpleasant journey, the roads being in very
poor condition following the advance of units of the Grande Armee,
which was preparing for the attack on Russia. As postal services in
Germany were irregular, Sillem and the managers agreed with Hope that
their letters would be numbered so that they would know immediately if
one went astray. As they advanced, the French commandeered grain for
which they paid little and left only a bare minimum for the inhabitants. 2
This occurred not only in Danzig, but also in Konigsberg and Elbing.
  The nearer Sillem came to his destination, the more obstacles he en-
countered. At Polangen, his servant was sent back because his name did
not appear in Sillem's passport. Deeper in Russia, the roads had just
commenced to thaw, and SilIem's coach became bogged down in the mud.
It took hours of toil to get him on his way. On 6th May he arrived in
Mitau, where he requested a visa, only to learn that such matters were
dealt with in Schaulen, twelve miles further on. There he was informed
that his passport would have to be sent to Wilno, thirty-six miles away.
When his request to be allowed to visit Riga in the meantime, to attend to
his affairs there, was refused, Sillem had no choice except to wait, fuming
with impatience, for a week until the document was returned. After a
lightning visit to Riga, he finally reached St.Petersburg on 28th May. His
first act was calmly to take stock of the situation. 3
  Labouchere was annoyed by John Hope's preoccupation with liquidating
the current business and his reticence to offer Sillem the prospect of a
 salary.4 The bondholders, Labouchere wrote, had offered him 2 % of any
principal and interest which they received as a result of his efforts, but no
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

such offer had been made to Sillem. It was unlikely that the latter would
be keen to run the gauntlet in St.Petersburg on a commission basis; he
must at least be offered a salary. During a somewhat acrimonious ex-
change of correspondence, John Hope allowed himself to be persuaded to
offer SiIlem cf 20,000, but this he did grudgingly. Relations between the
partners took on a decidedly sharp note when Hope began to press for
the transfer of the Company's Russian loans to Insinger & Co. He insisted
that this should at the latest be accomplished by the time the new partner-
ship came to an end, i.e. late in 1814, but added that the sooner it was
done the better. Labouchere replied that such a development would not
be well received, either by the public or the managers in Amsterdam. When
Labouchere wrote this, on 15th May 1812, war between France and Russia
was imminent. He pointed out that if John Hope were to carry through
his plan at such a time, the investors would rightly be incensed; moreover,
it was by no means certain that Insinger would undertake to manage the
loans under the circumstances or, if he did, that he would be able to
continue. After all, the price of the Russian bonds had fallen since Febru-
ary from 65 to 50, and it would look as if Hope had abandoned the loan
in the hour of danger.
  In his reply, John Hope yielded some ground. While he continued to
insist upon the transfer of the Russian loan 'or any other concern of ours'
to Insinger, he consented to delay the operation until a moment which
Labouchere deemed appropriate. The letter ended with the suggestion that
Labouchere should broach the subject to both the managers and Insinger. 1
  In the meantime, Sillem had got to work in St.Petersburg, and had
secured the acceptance of the receipts bearing the countersignature of the
Russian consul general in Amsterdam. However, there were many for-
malities to be complied with before the Russian customs officials would
accept these as payment. Guryev did not wish large numbers of receipts
to be tendered at once, for they involved remittances abroad, and a flood
of these could adversely affect the rate of exchange. 2 In fact, the risk of
an excess of receipts was small, since ordinary bondholders displayed
little interest in this form of interest payment. Such vouchers as were
tendered nearly all emanated from the Hopes' private holdings, and even
if war should break out the family could count on a payment via London.
There was also the fact of Smirnov's departure from Amsterdam at the
end of May, which followed an 'official visit' to Varel earlier in the month.
This meant that receipts could no longer be countersigned by him, and
gave the Russian government a formal excuse for refusing to accept any
which lacked his signature. 3