

                                    257
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

the Dutch creditors would be closely watched, but on the subject of a
resumption of payments he remained vague. In an effort to expedite the
matter, Labouchere handed Nesselrode, who had accompanied the czar,
a memorandum addressed to Guryev. In this, Labouchere set out a plan
to put the Russian farmers in the devastated provinces on their feet, and
at the same time to enable the interest due in 1812 and 1813 to be paid on
1st January 1814. The sum required as interest would be 10 % of
cf84,000,000 i.e. cf 8.4 million, or 15,655,555 roubles. Under the plan, a
committee would lend each of the million or so stricken farmers a sum
of 10-12 roubles for between 5 and 10 years at 5% per annum. On the
strength of the certificates of indebtedness, the committee would issue
rescriptions which could be exchanged in Amsterdam for interest vouchers
maturing on 1st January in the years 1813 and 1814. Redemption in
guilders or roubles, at the holder's option, could be effected in five instal-
ments. At the same time it would be necessary to announce the resump-
tion of interest payments during the ensuing year; the first of these, at the
end of 1813, would be no problem because, partly as a result of meeting
the last four instalments for 1812 in bonds, the Russian government
would have at least 1,300 bonds at its disposal, and with the news of the
resumption of interest payments these would certainly rise substantially
in price and, when sold, provide a portion of the necessary funds. In this
way, Russia would be able to payoff the 8-!- million guilders over a
period of 10 years, while the creditors in Amsterdam would have an
incentive to raise Russia's prosperity as far as possible. 1 Even if La-
bouchere's plan tallied in mathematical terms, it failed to take account of
the true situation in Russia. The Russian civil service would have been
unable to set up such a detailed administrative system in peacetime, let
alone just after an exhausting war and in an area which had been occu-
pied by the enemy.
  At the beginning of January 1814, P.C.Labouchere set off for London,
travelling via Amf>terdam. On his advice, the managers sent Guryev a
letter in the spirit of Labouchere's proposals, adding that, during his visit
to London, Labouchere could perhaps arrange for the aid, in the form of
subsidies, which stood at Guryev's disposal there to be used to meet the
commitments in Holland. 2 This new attempt, like others, failed. The
Company's letter was ignored, and Labouchere's memorandum was re-
turned to Sillem in March-a clear indication that Guryev did not wish to
discuss the resumption of the interest payments. 3

In December 1813, Sillem had drawn Labouchere's attention to the
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

potential value of the bills of credit as part of a new arrangement for the
payment of overdue interest. In February I8I4, Guryev and Bethmann
both introduced Hope to Councillor of State De Gervais, who had been
appointed Russia's representative on the committee charged with issuing
the bills of credit, and who would temporarily be residing in Amsterdam. 1
As the British government had specifically stated that the bills might not
be sold, but used only as security for advances by merchants, De Gervais
enquired of Hope regarding the possibilities in that respect in Amsterdam.
In a letter from London, Labouchere explained to De Gervais how the
stock of capital in Holland had become depleted as a result of the reduc-
tion by two-thirds of the State's domestic debt and the cessation of
principal and interest payments on various foreign loans. In addition,
the new government had introduced an accelerated tax, the effect of
which had been to swallow up such funds as were still available. As if all
this were not enough, foreign demands were being made on the Amster-
dam money market at a moment when Dutch commerce and industry
had scarcely got into motion after a long period of stagnation. Not only
was it extremely doubtful whether there would be any money for the
Russian and Prussian bills of credit, but there was also the danger that
these would become objects of speculation and decline in value out of all
proportion, because they would not commence to be redeemable until a
month after the signing of peace, and it was anybody's guess when that
would come. Such a decline in value would be decidedly unacceptable to
the British government. If, however, the Russian Court would agree to
accept matured Russian interest vouchers for half its quota of the bills,
up to a maximum of eight million guilders, it might yet be possible to
launch an operation. 2
 As De Gervais was in urgent need of money, Pierre Cesar authorized the
managers to place half a million guilders at the disposal of the Russian
commissar. Before doing so, he had sought the views of Alexander Baring,
who in fact was the only partner in the Company at that moment, and of
Harman, who, together with Baring, had looked after Hope's interests in
England and had been co-opted by the British government in connexion
with the transfer of subsidies to the Continent. 3 The managers were told
that the advances given to De Gervais must as far as possible be financed
in Holland-for example, from the funds held by Hope & Co. on behalf
of Adrian Elias. As Elias was no longer able to manage his affairs, it
would be necessary to consult David Berck, one of his trustees. With the
death of Willem Borski on 5th February I814, a valuable link with the
Dutch capitalists had been lost, but it was conceivable that his widow