

                                    243
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

Early in January 1812, Sillem visited Amsterdam for consultations prior
to accompanying Labouchere to Paris. Despite the fact that he had
retired from Hope & Co., the latter had been approached by a sizeable
group with interests in the Russian loan, with a request that he should
visit Russia again and personally intervene in the matter of the interest
payment due at the end of 1812. Labouchere had planned to take his wife
to the south of France again in the summer, but he felt that he could not
ignore such a call from the bondholders; he did, however, enquire through
his friend Nesselrode, who had meanwhile returned to St.Petersburg,
whether his arrival would be agreeable to the czar, and whether he could
be certain of obtaining a passport in the event of a radical change in the
political situation. 1
 As a journey of this nature also required a special permit from the
French authorities, Labouchere journeyed with Sillem to Paris, where,
he reasoned, his connexions in the highest circles of government might be
of benefit both to himself and his companion. In Amsterdam, Sillem had
received ten receipts for deposited interest vouchers to a value of cf 9,550,
which were countersigned by Smirnov, the Russian consul general there,
and had been instructed to try to encash these when he reached St. Peters-
burg. On the basis of these, Hope could ascertain whether such a trans-
action would be sufficiently advantageous. Sillem was also instructed to
register in the names of the entrepreneurs the metallic bonds given to them
as compensation for the cf 400,000 penalty. The share accruing to Strockel
& Van Dijk, who had meanwhile left the consortium, was divided equally
between Hope and Borski. 2
  At the beginning of February 1812, Labouchere approached the Duke of
Bassano, the French Foreign Minister, with a request for a passport for
Sillem and his servant with the minimum of delay. He did not ask for one
for himself, probably because he wished first to consult Nesselrode, who
was due to visit Paris with a special mission. In this matter, however, the
political circumstances were very much against Labouchere. Although it
had been clear since the end of 1811 that war between France and Russia
was not far away, both parties continued to avoid precipitating the con-
flict. The czar's reasons for staying his hand were that he wished to let
Napoleon appear as the aggressor and that he was anxious to sign a peace
treaty with Turkey first, in order to have the whole of his army available
to meet the French; Napoleon, for his part, was obliged to wait until the
roads had dried up and until sufficient forage for the horses had been
stockpiled. 3 As part of his game of political chess, the czar kept Napoleon
on a line with promises of NesseIrode's arrival in Paris for the purpose of

                                    244
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

starting talks on the differences between the two governments; but, for
mysterious reasons, Nesselrode was repeatedly prevented from leaving
St.Petersburg. The postponements were the more displeasing to Labou-
chere because Guryev had written to say that the emissary was authorized
to discuss with him a new financial operation in the interest of the pay-
ments due at the end of the year. Even though he failed to realize that the
linking of the talks on the interest payment with a vague, specious affair
such as Nesselrode's mission was a bad omen, and in spite of the fact that
he was still confident about a payment at the end of the year, Labouchere
refrained from pressing the matter of his visit to Russia. 1
  While he was waiting, Labouchere bought the contents of Talleyrand's
library for 350,000 francs, of which 100,000 francs was paid in cash and
the balance in Russian bonds. The purchase was made on behalf of John
Hope in London. Painful though this step was, Talleyrand had no option,
having suffered serious losses following the bankruptcy of Simons & Co.,
the house which had contributed to the faIl of De Smeth. As neither John
Hope nor his cousins by marriage, Thomas and Henry Philip, had any
personal interest in the works, which numbered 10,000 volumes,
Labouchere was instructed to have the entire library shipped to Harman
& Co. in London. Labouchere was moved to enquire whether the English-
language volumes, which accounted for a substantial portion of the whole,
could not better be sold in France; but John Hope insisted that every-
thing be sent to London, and after considerable argument with French
customs officials the books were allowed to be exported. 2 It is surprising
that Talleyrand was willing to accept Russian bonds as payment at a time
when war with that country was inevitable. He must have been confident
of making an exchange profit in the long term; certainly this accords with
his political outlook.
  Anticipating Sillem's departure, Labouchere wrote letters of introduc-
tion for him to Guryev, Rumyantsev and Speranski, the last-named a
confidant of the czar. Sillem received comprehensive instructions, and
was briefed on the history of the Russian loans. Labouchere impressed
upon him the need to make the Court understand that it could not count
upon further advances by Hope & Co.: the government must first display
a more serious attitude in the matter of remittances. There was already
bear speculation in Russian issues, and investors abroad (this reference
will certainly have included France) were hoping that the prices would
further decline. This could only be averted by prompt or, better still, early
repayments of capital. If war between France and Russia came, funds
could be remitted to Harman & Co. or Baring Bros. in London. Labou-