

                                    253
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


Sillem; if Sillem had not received any remuneration, he stated, Hope's
honour would have been at stake. Berck went on to say that Sillem was
too valuable to lose: by obtaining a repayment against the loan of
cf 3,200,000 and the metallic bonds relating to the reimbursed penalty dur-
ing 1812, he had more than justified the expense incurred. l
 John Hope also strongly opposed the planned visit of Borski and
S.P.Labouchere to England on the grounds that 'they can be of no use
here on account of the Government.' Harman and Baring were said to
have shared this view. Following the approval by the French government
of the passport applications, a request for similar facilities, with Harwich
or Gravesend as the point of disembarkation, was made to the British
authorities via Baring. News of the approval of this request came at the
end of February 1813, but now John Hope's letter raised doubts concern-
ing the probable outcome. The managers, supported by Berck, advised
against the journey but, at the insistence of the bondholders, Borski and
S.P.Labouchere decided to go. By cancelling the agreement entered into
with the Company for payment for their journey, they left themselves
financially free in their approach to Hope. 2
  The two emissaries left for England early in March 1813. But they were
not destined to meet John Hope, for he had died on 12th February. In all
probability, his urge for liquidation and the settlement of affairs was
prompted by the decline in his already poor health. Faced with this
situation, Borski and S.P.Labouchere approached Harman and Baring,
but after spending only a few days in London they received an official
ultimatum to leave the country without delay. Their expulsion, it ap-
peared, had been motivated by the Russian Court, which desired to avoid
fresh claims. 3
  With the suspension of the payments, Sillem's role in St.Petersburg had
necessarily become a passive one. The lack of progress in rounding off
Operation R.M. also contributed to this situation. Small quantities of iron
were sold from time to time, but there could be no question of disposing
of the stock of linen until trade with America was restored, and this
depended upon a cessation of hostilities between England and the United
States. 4 In a review of Operation R.M. undertaken at the end of November
1812, it was established that losses had been incurred on linseed and
potash. One ship carrying potash had sunk, and another had fallen prey
to Danish pirates. As we have seen, the stock of tar had also been sold at
a loss; indeed, the price obtained for the cargo which Becker had shipped
to London did not even cover the freight charges. All thes,e commodities
had originally been purchased with a view to early resale, and although

                                    254
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

this failed to materialize, the efforts of Labouchere and Sillem had at
least kept the operation alive.!
  Following the news of the suspension of the ballots, the parties to the
agreement with Willem Borski dated I Ith December 18 II met their
monthly commitment of cf 200,000 on 1st September 1812 in Russian
bonds at 60 %, as we have already seen. Sillem was instructed to apply to
Guryev for the payment of the four remaining instalments, which totalled
cf 800,000. The minister was not particularly pleased by the request, but
he had earlier approved the agreement with Borski and in the end he was
obliged to pay. Sillem received a commission of I % on the first quarter of
the cf 3,200,000 and the four instalments of cf 200,000. In addition, La-
bouchere left his share of these payments in Sillem's hands for a year in
order that he might invest the money and enjoy the interest thereon. 2
  After the signal failure of Napoleon's Russian campaign, Sillem received
numerous letters from Holland and France, requesting him to trace
missing relatives and provide them with money. This was not a simple
task, for the prisoners were spread over a number of provinces and there
was no central administration. As a last resort, people took to adver-
tising in the St.Petersburg and Moscow newspapers, but this quickly
assumed immense proportions, and for a time such advertisements were
banned on superior orders. Finally the czar commanded the provincial
governors to draw up lists of prisoners of war in their areas and to send
these to St.Petersburg. 3
  For Napoleon, the defeat in Russia was the beginning of the end. Late
in February 1813, Prussia signed a treaty with Russia, and Sweden sent
troops to Germany. By the Spring of 1813, the French had difficulty in
maintaining their position west of the Elbe. However, Napoleon suc-
ceeded in assembling new armies, and a number of successes in Saxony
enabled him to restore the military balance, at least temporarily. He then
requested, and obtained, an armistice, and this took effect on 4th June
1813. To the consternation of England, which, in its struggle against
Napoleon, could ill afford to lose the continental armies, the Austrian
Foreign Minister, Von Metternich, adopted a policy of neutrality towards
France and Russia, thereby threatening the joint military efforts against
France. At the Reichenbach Convention on 15th June 1813, England
agreed to provide subsidies for Russia and Prussia on condition that both
powers fielded armies of a certain strength. 4
  For Russia, the Reichenbach offer implied a grant of It million pounds
sterling during the course of 1813, subject to the proviso that the money
should be used only for military purposes. England, however, was suffer-