

                                   255
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

ing from a scarcity of cash, and on 30th September 1813 a clause was
added to the agreement, providing for a portion of the subsidy to be paid
in bills of credit. These bills, which were issued by the Exchequer and bore
interest, did not become encashable until one month after the signing of
a general agreement ending hostilities. 1
  The political and military developments were reflected in the market
price of the Russian bonds. This rose from 35 at the end of November
1812 to 40 at the beginning of 1813, albeit not without temporary relapses.
On 20th March, shortly after Prussia declared war on France, the rate
briefly reached 50, but on 1st June, following Napoleon's victories in
Saxony, it rose no higher than 41. The news of the ceasefire on 4th June,
however, brought an improvement to 46. 2 In January 1813, Labouchere
had been somewhat nettled by the fact that the bonds had reached 40 and
more, a situation which he described as 'just as absurd' as the low of 25 in
the previous October. If no interest payment was forthcoming at the end
of the year, he predicted, another low was inevitable. On this occasion,
however, he was mistaken. 3
  During the ceasefire, peace negotiations took place between Napoleon
and the allies. The Company attempted, with the aid of Robert Voute,
who was then in Paris, to have a clause providing for a resumption of the
Russian payments incorporated in any peace treaty which might be ne-
gotiated, but the breakdown of the talks on I I th August 18 13 put an end
to these efforts.4 Hostilities were resumed, and now Austria opposed
 Napoleon. While the negotiations were still in progress, Von Stackelberg,
as usual well informed, instructed Hope to safeguard his funds and secu-
rities in Holland against confiscation by entering them in another name
in the accounts and holding them at the disposal of a Swiss house. He also
instructed the Company to sell his Italian bonds, which in his view would
very probably fall sharply in the event of Napoleon's defeat. In fact, the
 news of the resumption of hostilities alone had caused these to fall to 40
 on the Milan Exchange. 5 The news had also caused the Russian bonds to
fall to 40 in Amsterdam, but Von Stackelberg made no mention of selling
his holding of these. We can but imagine his surprise and anger when, in
 September, he received news from Hope & Co. that not only the 33
 certificates of his Italian bonds, but also his 27 Russian bonds, had been
 sold, and with this a curt explanation that it had appeared necessary to
 dispose of the Russian bonds in order to make good the losses on the
 Italian securities and that he would be receiving a draft on Sillem in
 St.Petersburg for the sum of the proceeds. 6 Enraged, the envoy wrote to
 the managers in Amsterdam and to Labouchere in Frankfurt, saying that
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


he had neither asked for his Russian bonds to be sold nor for a draft on
SilIem, and that the disposal of the bonds was scandalous because, with
the war against Napoleon going so well (the French emperor had been
defeated by the allies at Leipzig in a battle lasting from r6th to r8th
October), everything pointed to a boom in the price of the bonds. 1
  The solution to this puzzling event was not revealed until the second half
of November, after the liberation of Holland. Despite the fact that La-
bouchere was greatly respected in the highest circles of government in
France, the authorities in Amsterdam watched the activities of the 'Anglo-
maniac' house of Hope & Co. like hawks. In a confidential report to the
Minister for Home Affairs in Paris, the Prefect of the Zuyderzee departe-
ment, De Celles, complained that Labouchere, with his quasi-diplomatic
journeys to England and Russia and his continual toings and froings
between Amsterdam, Paris and Frankfurt, behaved like an unaccredited
agent of a foreign power. The present managers in Amsterdam, he
continued, were no better: Coesvelt had lived in Spain for years, and at
the time of the revolt there had mixed first with the rebels and then with
the French armies. It was he 'who gives the orders, after which the Ex-
change has to toe the line.' Van der Hoop, he wrote, came from a noto-
riously pro-Orange family, and Lestapis, although a native of Bayonne,
had been brought up in England and was an enemy of the French govern-
ment. Together, these men supported Russia's credit in such a manner
that, incredible as it might seem, Dutch merchants, who in other respects
were good at arithmetic, valued the issue at 45 % even though no interest
had been paid in either the previous or the current year. 2
  Faced with a comparatively unfavourable political situation, the French
government exercised strict supervision of sales of French and Italian
stocks, because such sales could be construed as indicating a lack of
 confidence in the future of the Napoleonic regime. When Von Stackel-
berg's instructions had reached the managers, they had sought advice
from Labouchere. The settlement of John Hope's estate and the assess-
ment of death duties were expected to involve inspection of the Company's
books by the French authorities, and the managers knew that a simulated
transaction would be bound to emerge. With the full approval of La-
bouchere, they thereupon decided to sell both the Italian and Russian
bonds and, by means of the draft on Sillem, to make it clear to the
 French authorities that Von Stackelberg's assets were beyond their grasp. 3
  In the meantime, Czar Alexander had paid a visit to Bethmann in
 Frankfurt, and Labouchere had availed himself of the opportunity for a
 meeting with him. The czar repeated his assurance that the interests of