


the most important issue. Castlereagh, who had meanwhile returned to
England, gave instructions that a written guarantee of the payment by
England and Holland of the Russian debt in Holland was to be given to
the czar. However, he stipulated that this was not to be handed over until
Russia had signed the treaty drawn up at the end of the Congress. It was
also agreed-again at Castlereagh's suggestion-that the negotiations on
the elaboration of this decision-in-principle should take place in London,
in consultation with the British Treasury. 1
  The negotiations opened in the British capital on 30th April 1815. La-
bouchere who, like the Dutch delegates, had been kept out of affairs in
Vienna, now found himself being consulted as an expert by the Russian
ambassador to Great Britain, Count Lieven. Labouchere had taken the
precaution of having the relevant documents sent to him from Amster-
dam, and these he now handed to the ambassador. During a meeting
with Count Lieven and Baron Von Nicolai on Sunday, 14th May, La-
bouchere gave the total figure for the claims on Russia, namely
cf 101,486,000.2 From Lieven and Von Nicolai he learned of the commit-
ments which England and Holland had assumed in regard to the payment
of interest. In addition to the fact that both countries were obligated to pay
interest on cf 25,000,000, Russia could claim I % of this sum as a con-
tribution towards the repayment of principal. Indeed, this contribution
could be increased to 3 % at Russia's request, but in that case Russia
would have to pay a similar percentage over her share of the debt. 3
  Labouchere strenuously urged that the payment of interest should be
resumed at the end of 18 I 5, but Lieven informed him that neither England
nor Holland was prepared to pay immediately, because the war against
Napoleon imposed an extremely heavy burden on their financial re-
sources; moreover, it had an adverse effect upon rates of exchange. We
may assume that Russia welcomed the delay also. Labouchere made a
particular issue of the stipulation that the British and Dutch commitments
would lapse in the event of Holland and Belgium being separated. 4 The
Sovereign Ruler had proclaimed himself King of the Netherlands after
the return of Napoleon, but in Labouchere's judgement the Belgians were
only waiting for a sign to throw themselves into the arms of the French
once again. 5
  At the moment when Labouchere learned of the stipulations from Count
Lieven, the convention remained to be signed, and the strictest secrecy
was imposed on him and also on the partners in Amsterdam. Even after
the signing on 19th May 1815, the Company was obliged to await an
official report from Guryev before making an announcement to the bond-
                                     272
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

holders. Fortunately, the campaign against Napoleon ended soon after
the victory at Waterloo, and thus Russia's finances were spared further
testing. Under the second Peace of Paris (20th November 1815), a war
levy of 700 million francs was imposed on France. From her share of this,
Russia could more easily transfer monies to Amsterdam. The czar went
so far as to accede to a request by Labouchere that the bondholders
should receive an additional douceur, by allotting a bonus of cf 250,000
to be distributed, by ballot, among holders of overdue vouchers which
had matured in the years 1812-1815 inclusive. 1
  On 9th November 1815, Hope & Co., acting on behalf of the Russian
Government, issued a circular giving details of the arrangement for dealing
with the overdue vouchers. The matured vouchers, plus interest at 5 %
per annum, would be capitalized and converted into bonds, which would
be identical to those of 1798 and be considered as part of that issue.
Commencing on 1st January 1816, all bonds would again bear interest at
5 %per annum. On 1st July of each year, beginning in 1816, at least 1,000
bonds would be redeemed by ballot. In the event of war between Russia
and Holland, the payment of interest and principal would continue. This
new arrangement superseded the ukase of 16th/28th September 1811, in
which the interest vouchers assumed monetary value for the purposes of
buying Russian land and paying customs duty.2
  The draw for the bonus on the interest vouchers took place on 9th
December 18 I 5 in the presence of Hieronymus Sillem, representing Hope
& Co., and Messrs.Jan Bondt, Jan van de Poll, Cornelis van der Ouder-
meulen, Jan de BurIett and Johannes van der Mandele, representing the
bondholders. A few days later, in an official letter on behalf of all with an
interest in the Russian loan, these gentlemen expressed their gratitude for
all that the Company had done to secure full recognition of the Russian
debt, and announced their desire to discuss the matter of recompensing
Hope for the costs incurred. 3 Replying on behalf of the partners, Adriaan
van der Hoop politely declined any form of recompense because, among
other factors, it was the intention of Czar Alexander to compensate all
concerned in the Russian negotiation to the greatest possible extent. By
circulating copies of all the correspondence, the bondholders' representa-
tives brought Hope's handsome gesture to the notice of those for whom
they acted. The decision to do so, they wrote, had been taken 'in the
interests of greater satisfaction on the part of all concerned.' 4
  There were indeed sound reasons for this 'satisfaction.' The 'Old Rus-
sians,' as the bonds were soon to become known, were the first on which,
after a period of stagnation, interest was paid in full. Moreover, the