


of Labouchere's plan for the Russian vouchers was thus not such a severe
blow. The reaction from the czar's headquarters, where Labouchere's
proposals had been learned of through De Gervais and Nesselrode, was
similarly negative. Just how little the rate for the bills of credit interested
the Russian government emerged from Guryev's disclosure to Sillem that
any losses suffered on realizing the bills were for the account of the
British government, and that he, Guryev, was concerned only with the
amount of money which he received. 1
  With the date for the issue of the bills receding, the British government
was obliged to seek other ways to meet the urgent needs of its allies.
Among these were to allow the foreign powers to draw on London, to
transmit money to the Continent, and to send drafts to the head of the
British payment office in Amsterdam, Sir George Burgmann, with in-
structions to hand them to the representatives of Russia and Prussia. The
commissary-in-chief, John Rerries, who was responsible for providing
British troops abroad with funds and supplies-and was therefore con-
cerned with the subsidies for the allies-resorted increasingly to the last
of these methods, since this was the only way to prevent the pound sterling
declining further under the influence of indiscriminate drawings. The lack
of concern on the part of the allies in this respect was also clear from
Guryev's remark to Sillem. In his transactions, Rerries employed the
services of Nathan Mayer Rothschild, who at that time headed the
London office of the well-known Frankfurt banking house and who had
previously rendered great service to Rerries in the financing of the British
army in Spain. 2
  Labouchere was convinced of the need for Rope & Co. to give all
possible help to Russia, even ifno early settlement of the interest payment
issue was forthcoming. To this end, the Company must decline all com-
missions, complete all current affairs as quickly as possible, and in any
case maintain 'une caisse bien garnie' -even if the loss of interest thereby
incurred should more than swallow up the total commission on the trans-
actions. Labouchere maintained that profit was of less importance than
demonstrating goodwill at that moment, and he greatly regretted the fact
that the uncertainty concerning the future of the Company was an ob-
stacle to increasing the aid still further. 3
  After Napoleon's abdication and his banishment to Elba at the begin-
ning of May, there remained the question of a peace treaty with France
and, allied to this, the encashment of the bills of credit. Under the terms
of the convention of 30th September 1813, the bills were to become
negotiable one month after the general armistice; but the bills themselves

                                     262
                         PER ASPER A AD ASTRA

had not yet been issued! Early in May 1814, Rerries travelled to Paris to
settle these matters. Re went by way of Amsterdam, where he had dis-
cussions with Sir George Burgmann. Besides De Gervais and the repre-
sentatives of Prussia and Austria, the visitors to Paris included Pierre
Cesar Labouchere, who had journeyed to France with Alexander Baring. 1
  Rerries succeeded in extracting promises from the Prussian and Austrian
representatives that subsidy funds would no longer be drawn on London
without the prior consent of the British Treasury. Instead, they would
receive the necessary monies through the Treasury agents in Paris or
elsewhere. To seal the agreement, sizeable sums were promptly placed at
the disposal of the two countries, an action realized with the assistance of
the Rothschilds. 2 De Gervais also consented in principle to the new
arrangement, but he added that the final decision rested with Guryev. In
view of this, he was not empowered to accept the 200,000 pounds sterling
which Rerries had placed at his disposal in Amsterdam. To avoid awk-
ward discussions, De Gervais left Paris shortly after this. Before depart-
ing, however, he persuaded Pierre Cesar Labouchere to furnish a letter of
credit on Baguenault of Paris for one million francs, thus ensuring that
the Paymaster-General of the Russian army in France was not without
funds. Re offered bills of credit for an equivalent sum as security. 3
 The Russian and Prussian governments had sent memoranda to the
British Foreign Secretary, Viscount Castlereagh, giving their views on
how the bills of credit should be dealt with. Both countries desired that
the bills should be directly converted into 6 % bonds via Sir George
Burgmann's department, thus keeping them out of the hands of third
parties. They also asked for a firm date from which the instalments over-
due since the signing of the Reichenbach Convention would bear interest.
On 15th March 1814, nine instalments were owing (the convention was
signed on 15th June 1813), and as Paris had capitulated on 31st March
1814, the first of April seemed a suitable date for the interest to commence.
If the British government would agree to make available all matured bills
of credit or bonds, Russia and Prussia would undertake not to put them
into circulation, but only to use them as security. It would, moreover,
please the governments if the bonds could be made negotiable at centres
other than Amsterdam alone. Finally, Russia and Prussia wished for the
advances already made against the bills to be deducted from the final
payment due from the British government.
  The Lords Commissioners of the Treasury broadly concurred in these
requests, albeit they were only willing to extend the area of negotiability
to centres where not less than one million Prussian talers had been
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA