

                                    281
                        EARL Y LOANS TO SP AIN

French feeling. Following the storming of the Tuileries and the imprison-
ment of the French royal family in August 1792, the Spanish Prime Minis-
ter, Aranda, deliberately headed for a conflict.
  The declaration of war, however, came from the French side, in March
1793. It followed a similar action against the Stadholder of Holland. The
spread of the theatre of war towards the Republic prevented Hope from
getting beyond the first tranche of six million guilders. The defeat of the
allied armies by the French in September 1793 caused Dutch funds to dry
up, just as had occurred at the time of the Russian loans. 1
  In their war against the French revolutionaries, the Spanish fared as
badly as the Dutch. At the end of 1792 Charles IV, who had ruled since
1788, replaced his Prime Minister, Aranda, by Manuel Godoy, a protege
of the queen but a man with no political experience. The war against
France turned into a fiasco and it was not long before the revolutionary
armies penetrated deep into Catalonia. In August 1795 the Spanish
government followed the example of Prussia and signed a peace treaty
with the French at Basle. 2
  Dislike and fear of England, whose influence was penetrating ever deeper
into the Spanish colonies, served to drive the Spaniards into the arms of
France, and in August 1796 the two even entered into an alliance. The
war with England, to which this alliance gave rise, was even more disas-
trous for the Spanish economy than the war of 1779. The vital flow of
silver from Mexico again ceased and the vales reales, of which ever larger
quantities were issued, rapidly declined in value. A decree of 1799 im-
posing an arbitrary rate of exchange of 94 % backfired and ultimately the
 vales stood at 25 %of their par value. 3
  These financial perils naturally had an effect upon the payment of inter-
est and principal money on the Spanish loans in Holland. Threatened by
 the advance of the French armies, the Hopes had fled to England at the
 end of 1794. In 1795, and again in the following year, they succeeded in
 remitting the interest from London, though the payments from Spain
 arrived very late and only after repeated requests.
  In 1797 the payment of interest in Holland was resumed. By this time
 England and Spain were at war and it was considered that the operation
 could more safely be conducted from the newly established Batavian
 Republic. The matter of the Spanish interest was entrusted to H.A.In-
 singer & Co. This house had conducted the sale of Portuguese diamonds
 sent to Hope & Co. prior to 1795 under the terms of a contract with a
 Portuguese merchant. Correspondence from Insinger to the Hopes in
 London shows clearly that this firm also found it extremely difficult to
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

 obtain remittances from Spain, and how long it was obliged to wait for
reimbursement of the advances which it made.!
  The year 1798 brought fresh distress to the government of Spain in the
shape of the need to repay the first loan from Echenique and also the 1792
loan from Hope & Co. As far as the latter was concerned, no further
effort was demanded from Insinger because the Spanish Court had in 1798
appointed the Amsterdam house of Weduwe E.Croese & Co. as its ban-
kers. A partner in the firm had travelled to Madrid to seek the appoint-
ment and had been supported in his efforts by Valckenaer, the envoy of
the Batavian Republic in Spain.2
  An attempt in May 1798 to float a loan of 3 million guilders at 5 %
interest via Croese had failed. Despite the added attraction of a lottery
with 600 prizes and the possibility to use the 600 redeemed Hope
bonds as cash, the reaction of investors was so lukewarm that the loan did
not get off the ground. The avoidance of any mention of repayment of the
first Echenique loan probably did much to lessen the interest. 3
  In October 1799 Croese, again with Valckenaer's support, succeeded in
obtaining a royal patent for a new loan, of which half could be met with
Echenique bonds. The 600 bonds from Hope & Co., which were due for
redemption on 1st November 1800, could also be used for payment and,
indeed, would even carry a bonus of 6 %. Holders of bonds relating to the
abortive loan of May 1798 were given the opportunity to exchange their
holdings for new bonds, and those who did so received a 5 % bonus and
an extra 4 % as compensation for loss of opportunity to win a prize in the
lottery. The loan was for 3 million guilders at 5 % and ran for eight
years from 1st September 1799. 4
  On 1st November 1800 Croese issued a second loan, this time for 21-
million guilders, on practically identical conditions. A dubious feature
of this loan was that the house was permitted to resell Echenique
bonds accepted for conversion, but not cancelled, at the time of the
previous loan, plus those tendered for conversion for the purposes of the
new loan, at the market price, provided that this was not below 50 %.
Clearly the Spanish Court was in such financial straits that it was obliged
to sabotage its own conversion loan. 5
  The reasons for its plight were set out in the opening lines of the royal
patent dated 17th June 1801, relating to the third loan, namely expendi-
ture arising from the war with Portugal, the high cost of equipping the
fleet at Cadiz and the interest which the Court was committed to pay to
Holland. This third loan, which was for 41 million guilders at 5 %interest,
commenced to run on 1st September 1801 and, like the two previous ones,
                         EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN