


advanced on the security of the bonds. They indicated that they wished
to settle the matter of the advances not upon the final instalment, but
during the ensuing months; moreover, where such advances had been
made in foreign currencies, settlement would be made at the rate of
exchange ruling on the date of the advance. This, of course, meant that
Russia and Prussia would still suffer the exchange losses brought about
by their draft transactions. 1
  With the signing on 30th May 1814 of what was later to become the
first Treaty of Paris, the bills of credit or corresponding 6 % bonds became
normal drafts, of which one million Prussian talersworth were negoti-
able monthly for a period of fifteen months. This implied that, if not
freely negotiable, they were discountable and possessed the advantage
over normal drafts of bearing interest at 1- % per month. 2 Of the total of
15 million Prussian talers, Russia received two-thirds and Prussia one-
third.
  Even before the treaty was signed, De Gervais wrote to P.C.Labouchere,
who was then in London, requesting an advance against the matured
Russian bills of credit. In return, he offered seven monthly instalments,
totalling 4,666,666-t Prussian talers, and, in addition to the monthly in-
terest of t %, a discount of I % per month. He asked for the advance to
 be made in equal instalments in Hamburg, Berlin and Frankfurt or
Leipzig. He required the money urgently in order to withdraw the Russian
assignats with which the German states had become flooded since the
entry of the Russian troops. Just how urgent was the Russian govern-
ment's need of funds became apparent from a letter from De Gervais a
 week later, in which he offered to raise the discount from I % to 2 %
 provided the whole sum could be put at his disposal by 1st July 1814.3
  Labouchere's reaction was cautious in the extreme. The future of the
 Company had still not been determined, for Alexander Baring had made
 his decision dependent upon the outcome of the allied rulers' deliberations
 concerning Holland, and this was still not forthcoming. Under such
 circumstances, the reserves were inadequate to undertake so large an
 operation as this, with its attendant risks. In Labouchere's view, the
 principal obstacle lay in the indeterminate rates of exchange which, by
 reason of the subsidies and the extent of the British government's financial
 needs on the Continent, were subject to considerable fluctuation. He
 therefore declined to go beyond an offer to permit acceptances on Hope &
 Co. once the maturing dates and rates of exchange of the bills had been
 established. The best arrangement seemed to him to be to make De
 Gervais's drafts on the Company payable at Hope's offices one month
                          PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


after the corresponding bill matured. De Gervais would thus be permitted
to draw I million guilders on Hope, due on I5th August, against the
666,6661 Prussian talers which became payable on I5th July. As there
was no longer any question of large-scale advances, Labouchere agreed
to accept a commission of 2 %.1
  Such a conservative approach, however, was not what De Gervais had
in mind, nor did it meet his needs. Fortunately for him, there was another
house which, by reason of its extensive transactions on behalf of the
British government, had adequate reserves and could influence the ex-
change rates-the prime obstacle in Labouchere's eyes. The house of
Rothschild, which at that time sought to establish relations with as many
governments as possible, grasped the opportunity to serve the Russian
Court and at the same time to demonstrate its financial strength. On 17th
June 1814, De Gervais informed Labouchere that he had entered into a
contract covering the first six months' matured bills, and that under this
he would receive hard cash in Hamburg, Dresden and Warsaw. While
expressing regret that it had not been possible to reach agreement with
Labouchere in this matter, he said that clearly the inconveniences which
stemmed from the long distances had been against this. De Gervais
discreetly refrained from naming the house which had succeeded in
bridging these long distances. 2
  Officially, Labouchere could only be relieved by the news that De Ger-
vais had succeeded elsewhere, but privately he was saddened by the
thought that the Company had been forced to decline a transaction which
it would certainly have accepted in earlier times, when the assets of the
Hopes were available. Undoubtedly this reflection added to his annoyance
when it transpired that De Gervais was willing to meet Labouchere's
advance of I million francs in Paris in bills of credit, but refused to repay
the credit of cf 500,000 given at the end of February 1814 in the same
manner. This, he wrote in bitter tones, was the gratitude for Hope's
support of De Gervais's operations at a time when the fortunes of war
were uncertain, when no one would accept the bills of credit as security,
and when money was so scarce and dear that it was almost impossible to
get bills discounted. 3
  Labouchere was equally dissatisfied with the commission of 5 % which
De Gervais was willing to allow the Company on the advance of 1
million francs made in Paris. In February 1814, when Hope's reserves
were fully committed in supporting De Gervais, Sir George Burgmann
had offered the Company bills of credit as collateral at 9 % interest.
Subsequent to the agreement with Rothschild, De Gervais had himself
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA