


stocks; the boom in grain reflected the heavy demands of distillers, who
used large quantities of dried rye, in particular.!
  Sillem left St. Petersburg at the beginning of December 1814 and, travel-
ling via Riga, Berlin and Hamburg, reached Amsterdam at the end of
January 1815. A mild winter had left the roads in Russia and Prussia
almost impassable, and the river crossings were not without danger. In
Amsterdam, Sillem found temporary shelter above the offices on the
Doelenstraat, whence the Company had transferred its seat. Upon the
death of John Hope, the house on the banks of the Keizersgracht had
passed to his widow, and she and her second husband, Baron Von Dopff,
were so hostile towards Hope & Co., that it had become impossible for
the Company to remain there. 2
  As had been agreed, the question of the settlement of Russia's debts in
Holland was again raised at the Vienna Congress. The British cabinet at
first showed little inclination to implement the undertakings which
CastIereagh had given the Russians on this point. By the end of 1814 the
allied camp was rife with dissension, and early in January 1815 England,
Austria and France entered into a secret alliance in order to resist, with
force if necessary, the Russian and Prussian demands in matters concern-
ing Poland and Saxony. However, CastIereagh had gone beyond the
instructions of his government in becoming a party to the alliance, and
thus the English delegation was anxious to settle the matter amicably.
Among the means to achieve a more moderate approach on the part of
the Russians was a proposal that Russia, England and Holland should
each accept responsibility for one-third of the debt in Holland. The Dutch
delegates, who had no part in the actual negotiations, proposed that
Russia should shoulder one half of the burden, and that the other half
should be shared between England and Holland. They argued that Russia
had earlier made her approval of the unification of Holland and Belgium
dependent upon a settlement concerning her debt in Holland. The terri-
tory now awarded to Holland was less than had originally been asked for
by William I, and thus the quid pro quo which Holland was called upon to
give could be smaller. 3 In view of the objections on the part of the cabinet
in London, to which reference has been made, this line of reasoning suited
the British delegation extremely well. Castlereagh thereupon drew up a
memorandum on the lines of the Dutch proposal, but he made the pay-
ments by Holland and England dependent upon the North and South
Netherlands remaining united.
  When, on 4th March 1815, news of Napoleon's landing in the south of
France reached Vienna, the restoration of unity among the allies became
                                      A           v            I           s.
    Let etroru et I" uens«. que .. Bllui... fl' obhgh de r.ire DOft Mult"' " t pour                         1' __
    pOtunr en IIh2 Ull ;ftjIUlt: &aUi.leat • • • i. roUt d.ftrair. I. ulprlrad'l qQ~ ,'floil .... raJ"' I.
    Fn.nc. e' ff'nd.... aux 1u.1«. nahOd.l ('elle illt.ll~ndliDc. II ('f'('oli elh. II lfur bonhf'DT tl 1
    It"r pr... ~rlll, n'unl pu rt'nai.. A IAJ£ TE L'£l'P£Rtl'n d, 10,,1('& It'. nUilUiu. d.
    c'onLinuu ,"n I. m\!.,.. uaclilude • rt.nplir lu tnS'It-Inn) 'lilt' ~I ""JWltt. Prldtc .... CI("•
    .....oint rrh ~nvt',. lu intfrult. d.,U. lu "atpna.nu d. RI.I.u it fin UGllantk.