

                                          279
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

charged with the discounting of bills and dealing with incoming and out-
going remittances on behalf of the Crown. 1
 The war against England also delayed the ambitious canalization project
which was aimed both at reducing the cost of inland transport and pro-
viding a source of irrigation. One of the plans, dating from the time of
Charles Y, was based on a canal alongside the Ebro, the so-called Imperial
Canal. By 1778 the stretch from Tudela to Saragossa was complete, but
a further extension and the cutting of branches, such as the Tauste Canal,
were threatened by lack of funds.
 In 1779, 1780 and 1781 the board which controlled the Imperial Canal
and the Tauste Canal succeeded in having three loans floated by the
Amsterdam house of Echenique Sanchez & Co. Two of these were of two
million guilders and ran from 1st May 1778 and 1st January 1779 re-
spectively. The third, which ran from 1st November 1780, was to have
been for cf 2,41 6,000, but the subscriptions totalled only cf 2,298,000. 2
 All three loans bore interest at 3! % and were for a period of twenty
years; however, the royal letters patent under which they were authorized
were so worded as to leave open the possibility that this period would be
exceeded. The first ofthese documents expressly guaranteed the continued
payment of interest after twenty years, while the third announced the
setting up of a separl:1-te fund at the Treasury for the purpose of meeting
interest payments. No mention was made of repayment. The terms provi-
ded for half the sum of each of the loans to be repaid, if desired, with
bonds relating to earlier loans, which would thus be converted. This
circumstance may explain the unusual sum of the third loan and also the
fact that this was not fully subscribed. In many cases of conversion and
repayment, a portion of the bonds was surrendered much too late, or not
at all, probably as a result of inadequate notification of holders.3
 As the war against England dragged on, the financial plight of the govern-
ment, exhausted by years of fruitless beleaguering of Gibraltar, worsened.
Through the intermediary of Cabarrus & Lalanne, Madrid, the merchant
house in which Francisco Cabarrus had an interest, the Spanish Court
succeeded in concluding a loan of three million guilders at 5 %interest with
Hope & Co. and Fizeaux Grand & Co., the alliance of Amsterdam houses
which at this time was also negotiating loans for Sweden. The date of
commencement of the loan was 1st November 1782, and repayment was
to be effected in four equal portions in the period 1789-1792. As with the
Swedish business, the loan was scrupulously divided between Hope and
Fizeaux Grand. 4
Entries in the grootboeken show that while the principal was remitted via

                                   280
                         EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

 Cabarrus & Lalanne, the interest was received via the Bank of San Carlos.
 A probable explanation for this procedure is that the Bank of San Carlos
 did not open its doors until 1st June 1783, so that payments prior to this
 date necessarily passed through other channels. The fact that Cabarrus
 was the central figure in the bank and also in the loan transaction does not
 necessarily imply that the capital furnished was applied for the benefit of
 the bank. Not only are there no indications in the grootboeken and cor-
 respondence of Hope & Co. that this was so, but, as experience was soon
 to show, the Bank of San Carlos had an excessive amount of capital. 1
  After peace had been concluded with England in 1783, the Spanish
 economy quickly recovered and, strictly in accordance with the agree-
 ment, the loan from Hope and Fizeaux Grand was repaid between 1789
 and 1792.2 No fresh loan was negotiated immediately, although the sub-
ject was raised in correspondence, and the reason lay in an absence of
agreement between the erstwhile partners. In 1788 Fizeaux Grand & Co.
had become Hogguer Grand & Co. and, according to Pierre Cesar La-
 bouchere, Hogguer and Hope trod different paths in loan matters. It is
conceivable that the partners in Hope & Co. disliked Hogguer himself,
but there is the fact that since the Company had concerned itself with
loans for Russia it had declined to collaborate with any other house. For
a company which felt strong enough to undertake an issue alone, associa-
tion with another house had little appeal: it halved the profit and fre-
quently doubled the worries. 3
  The Spanish government, however, declined to accept the situation. In
the autumn of 1792 the Minister of Finance, Don Diego de Gardoqui, sent
his brother, Juan Ignacio, to Holland, and early in the following year a
contract was arranged between him and the Company providing for a
loan of six million guilders at 41 % interest, the rate which had applied to
the contract entered into with Russia in August 1792. Repayment, in
annual instalments of cf 600,000, was to commence on 1st November 1798
and would thus be completed by 1st November 1807.
  As had been the case with Russia, the loan was to be the first of a long
series. When the initial six million had been taken up, a further loan for
a similar sum would be floated and then a third, bringing the total to
eighteen million guilders. 4
  The marked increase in the sum of these loans, compared with the one of
1782, was probably attributable to Spain's urgent need of funds at a time
of preparation for war against the French. The course of events in France,
particularly the actions against Louis XVI, had not gone unnoticed among
the king's kinsmen in Spain; indeed, they had aroused widespread anti-