


good fortune to come near to His Imperial Majesty, and to receive from
this Grand Monarch himself the most moving assurance of the interest
which he still condescends to take in Holland.' 1
  Now that the czar was back in Russia, it was time for Sillem to return
to his post in St.Petersburg in case any decisions should be taken there
prior to the Congress of Vienna, which was due to open on 1st October
1814. Sillem also faced an important personal decision. Prior to his
journey to western Europe, Labouchere had approached him regE:rding
a partnership in a new house of Hope & Co., and during his stay in
England this had been among the central issues during three days of talks
with Labouchere and Alexander Baring at Tunbridge Wells. It was there
that the decision to breathe new life into the Company was taken. 2 In the
meantime, the future of Holland-upon which Baring's final decision
depended-had been discussed at a ministerial meeting in London, and
on 21 June 1814 the allied powers had signed a protocol agreeing to the
unification of Belgium and Holland. Nesselrode, on behalf of Russia, had
signed subject to the czar's approval, but he later announced that, in
return for Russia's support, Alexander desired England and Holland
jointly to assume responsibility for Russia's debt in Holland. The final
decision on this, however, would be taken in Vienna. 3
  Whereas this declaration in principle by the allied powers had been
sufficient to enable Baring to decide upon rejuvenating the Company,
Sillem continued to delay his decision regarding a partnership. Early in
August he had journeyed to Amsterdam in the company of Labouchere,
who remained there to make the necessary arrangements. Only after his
return to St.Petersburg in mid-September 1814 did Sillem write confirming
his acceptance of Labouchere's offer, in order that they might together
continue to serve the Company; he thus explicitly coupled his name with
that of Pierre Cesar Labouchere. It is probable that Sillem's decision
depended in part on the arrangements which he was able to make in
Hamburg concerning his association with the house of Benecke & Co. in
the partnership Sillem Benecke & Co. 4
  This new turn of events imposed limits on Sillem's stay in Russia, since
it was desirable that he should be back in Amsterdam at the end of the
year in order to take his place in the reborn Hope & Co. on 1st January
1815. No fresh negotiations of importance were anticipated in St.Peters-
burg in the immediate future, for the czar had left for Vienna on 13th
September, and in his absence discussions with ministers would be as
unfruitful and devoid of commitment as in the past. Furthermore, as
already stated, the decision regarding the resumption of the Russian

                                  268
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

interest payments was to be taken in Vienna and not in St. Petersburg.
  It was, however, important that the remains of Operation R.M. should
be cleared up before Sillem's departure. As far as the iron was concerned,
Sillem, on his own admission, was extremely fortunate. Less than a month
after his return, he had sold 200,000 po ods to an Armenian merchant,
Ivan Gabriel Michailov, who offered him 3 roubles per pood, the rate
of exchange for the deal being fixed at lot stuivers to the rouble. Sillem
could not understand what had moved Michailov to make such an offer
at a time when peace between England and America seemed so far away.!
Remembering that, in fact, it came about at the end of 1814, it seems
likely that Michailov was able to look back on a successful speculation,
although whether this stemmed from sound political information or pure
luck is a matter for conjecture. A fortnight later the remainder of the
stock of iron and copper was sold at a slightly higher figure still. The
linen goods were far slower to move, and finally Sillem accepted a cash
offer from Stieglitz & Co. of St.Petersburg in order to avoid further delay,
and also because it had been found that too long a period in storage
resulted in a loss of quality. 2
  A closer examination of these final sales reveals that, in contrast to
Sillem's optimistic view, the iron was the least profitable. Allowing for
the fall in the value of the rouble from 17 stuivers or thereabouts in 1809
to lot stuivers in 1814, the profit on iron, after deduction of costs, was
2 %. Linen and raven-duck, however, produced a net return of 20 %.The
operation was now five years and four months old. If we put the loss of
interest at 5 % per annum, we find that ultimately losses of 241 % were
made on the iron, and 61 % on the linen goods. The principal cause of
this unfavourable end to the operation will have lain in the war between
England and America. 3
  For Sillem, there remained little to do except to give letters of introduc-
tion to the new firm of Hope & Co. to the correspondents in St.Peters-
burg, and to collect the penultimate instalment of cf 800,000. Before
leaving, he corresponded with the managers in Amsterdam regarding the
houses in St. Petersburg and their respective merits. When Holland was
liberated, a number of these had made proposals to Hope concerning
financial transactions and the sale on commission of Russian goods, but
the Company had declined them all in order to leave itself free for De
Gervais's operations. But now these lay behind, and the Company could
again think of mercantile matters. According to Hope, hemp, tallow and
grain were the only commodities for which a ready market existed in
Holland. The demand for tallow probably resulted from diminished
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA