

offered the house of Gontard in Frankfurt 7 % interest plus 2 % commis-
sion for an advance against the November 1814 instalment. 1 Despite these
protests, however, Labouchere adhered to his standpoint that the interests
of the Russian Court were paramount. It was with this in mind that he
had declined to speculate in the bills of credit. As far as the single monthly
instalment of 666,666t Prussian talers which had been allotted to Hope &
Co. was concerned, he wished only to receive the sum in guilders which
the Company had originally advanced. Therefore, the credit of cf 500,000
given in February must be debited at par value in the normal manner, plus
a bank commission of 1% and interest at 5 % per annum. 2 In order to
ensure that De Gervais should not distort the facts when he returned to
Russia, a comprehensive report on all that had taken place was sent to
SilleminOctober 1814.3

A victim of circumstances, Sillem had achieved little in the matter of the
Russian loans. For the time being, his activities remained limited to
collecting the annual repayment of cf 800,000 against 3,200,000 guilders-
worth of newly created bonds and keeping an eye on the commodity
markets in Russia in the hope of opportunities to round off Operation
R.M. Sillem had by now become financially interested in the operation,
he and P.C.Labouchere each having acquired one-half of Hope's 176ths
share. Early in 1813 he reported to Hope that the previous autumn had
been bad from the point of view of shipments, because foreign markets
were more than adequately supplied with Russian goods. An early end
to the war in America should result in a good market for the linen goods,
for considerable quantities of linen had been destroyed in the burning of
Moscow. 4 Sillem succeeded in selling about 4,500 poods of iron to a ship's
master who required ballast for his vessel, and shortly afterwards he
disposed of 1,000 pieces of raven-duck and 400 pieces of Flemish linen to
the American Company in Russia, which was preparing an expedition.
The proceeds of these sales, however, scarcely covered the original cost,
let alone the loss of interest or the storage charges. 5
  In spite of this poor result, Sillem was optimistic regarding the future.
The reopening of the routes to America was bound to produce a substan-
tial rise in iron prices, for there was no more than I! million po ods on the
market, and with mine owners complaining that selling prices did not even
cover their costs, there would be no large-scale deliveries for the time
being. The output of the linen mills had fallen for the same reason, and
most spinners had gone over to cotton textiles. But the army needed linen
goods, and thus peace in America could not fail to produce a boom. 6

                                     266
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

 However, the peace from which Sillem expected so much was not to
come until 24th December 1814, and so sales of the goods involved in
Operation R.M. remained at a very low level. The Spring of 1814 did
indeed bring some improvement in linen prices in Russia, but the slow
progress which Sillem was able to achieve with Guryev in the matter of
the resumption of the interest payments made him decide to leave af-
fairs in Russia where they were for the time being and return to western
Europe. As long as the czar remained abroad, no decisions of any mag-
 nitude were taken in Russia, and the time had come for Sillem to build
for his future. He was anxious first to review the situation in Hamburg
and assess the prospects for starting a new house there, and then to
cross to England -something which Labouchere had repeatedly urged
him to do. 1
  Sillem left St.Petersburg on 3rd May 1814. After a smooth journey he
arrived at Altona, from where he travelled on to Amsterdam in early
June. There, he discussed the Russian affairs with De Gervais. He did not
stay long in Amsterdam, for Labouchere urged him to cross to England
without delay, because the czar and Nesselrode were there and it might
be possible to obtain an audience to discuss the Russian interest pay-
ments. 2 In Paris, Labouchere had approached Nesselrode with a request
to be presented to the czar, but the latter, with his peculiar charm, had
replied that, as Labouchere was an old friend, there was no question of
formal presentation, and that he would invite him to dinner. However,
by delaying the invitation, the czar had kept the guest-and his awkward
questions-at a distance. Eventually, Labouchere and Alexander Baring
had been obliged to return to London, and therefore Labouchere had
pinned his hopes on the czar's visit to that country. But once again he
was disappointed, for the czar was kept so busy with festivities that there
was no time left for a meeting with Labouchere and Sillem. 'Everyone
here is so agog with excitement that one does not notice anybody, and
nobody is in a mood for anything,' an irritated Pierre Cesar said in a
letter to Amsterdam. 3
  On 27th June 1814, Czar Alexander embarked at Dover for the journey
back to Russia. En route he visited Holland-probably with the aim of
promoting a marriage between his sister, Anna, and the Crown Prince-
and during his stay he received the managers of Hope & Co. in audience.
To them he repeated the promises which he had earlier made to Labou-
chere concerning the resumption of the interest payments. In the style of
true courtiers, the managers wrote to Guryev, saying that the most enjoy-
able days of their lives were 'those during which we had the inestimable
                        PER ASPERA AD ASTRA