

                                    273
                        PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

capitalization of the overdue vouchers made good the losses incurred in
earlier years. The fact that final redemption had been put back to some
time in the distant future was less weighty by comparison, though it did
influence the market price of the bonds. During the second half of 1815,
the price fluctuated between 66 and 75. In 1816, following the ballot for
the bonus and the announcement of the first interest payment on 1st
January 1817, it rose to between 82 and 88, but during the next three
years it showed scarcely any improvement; not until the second half of
1819 did it exceed 90. 1
  This early, full resumption of interest and principal repayments earned
Russia a reputation for creditworthiness and solidity. This in turn in-
gratiated her with a wide circle of investors in Holland-a situation from
which she was to profit until the collapse of the czarist regime in 1917.




                                  274
    IBERIAN AFFAIRS:

SILVER, DIAMONDS AND COCHINEAL
Silver
                               CHAPTER NINE

               EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN



       I wish that the house might always have as its motto 'honour and profit';
        bllt if either o/these words must be erased, I would that it be the latter.
          Pierre Cesar LabouchereJo Vincent Nolte, 22nd January 1806.


With the coming to power of the House of Bourbon at the beginning of
the eighteenth century, Spain commenced to raise itself from the state of
decay into which it had sunk during the preceding century. A start was
made with centralizing the machinery of government and reorganizing
the civil service on modern lines. 1
  Round about 176o, under Charles III, came the introduction of 'en-
lightened despotism.' Among the ways in which this was manifested was
a well-defined government policy aimed at increasing prosperity. The rise
in farm prices and the resumption of growth in the production of silver in
Spanish America, where Mexico now emerged as the leading producer of
the precious metal, served to boost the Spanish economy. 2
  The favourable circumstances contributed to a growing desire to regain
the monopoly of trade with the Spanish colonies. To this end, and on the
analogy of England and the Netherlands, privileged trading companies
were established for particular areas. At the same time, the monopoly en-
joyed by Cadiz in respect of trade with the colonies was gradually dis-
mantled, and by 1778 the principal Spanish ports had obtained access to
the majority of the colonies in Central and South America. 3
  This flourishing development was interrupted by the war between the
North American colonies and England, in which Spain, in company with
France, chose the side of the rebels. But so completely did the English fleet
succeed in severing Spain's links with its colonies that the Spanish govern-
ment faced a severe financial crisis. To meet the deficit, it was decided to
issue vales reales, a form of paper money which, however, was not legal
tender in the retail trade or for the payment ofwages. 4
  On the advice of his foremost financial adviser, Francisco Cabarrus, one
of the leaders of the 'Enlightenment' in Spain, Charles III established the
Bank of San Carlos in 1782. The bank's principal task was to effect a
gradual withdrawal from circulation of the vales reales, but it was also