

                                   293
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

Labouchere and Ouvrard that this would be 3 francs and 75 centimes for
each piastre. 1 On the basis of a nominal rate of exchange of 50 stuivers for
the piastre, and with the franc standing at just over 91- stuivers, Hope &
Co. would thus have made a gross profit of 14 stuivers on each piastre.
 It was not in Ouvrard's nature to leave this profit entirely to Hope. In
addition to the two agreements between the Company and Franr;:ois
Ouvrard & Co., a third was concluded which provided that the stipu-
lations relating to the piastres 'rest jointly between Messrs.Hope & Co.
and M.Auguste Ouvrard.' Hope & Co. undertook to open an account
into which all profits accruing from the aforementioned stipulations
would be paid. The balance of this account was to be shared equally
between the Company and Auguste Ouvrard. Although somewhat ob-
scure, the wording reveals clearly that Ouvrard, via another brother,
obtained his share of the profit made from the piastres. 2
 Before leaving for Paris two days after the signing of this agreement,
Ouvrard handed Labouchere drafts on the Mexican Treasury to a value
of nearly two million piastres. Hope also received fifty licences for a simi-
lar number of expeditions to the Spanish colonies. 3
  Ouvrard took the view, as did Labouchere, that this was but the begin-
ning of a transaction which, if all went well, could be enlarged to any
desired scale. An efficient and reliable network of agents was indispensable,
and every attention should be paid to achieving this.
  A second and no less important aim was the removal of political ob-
stacles, and for this it was necessary to bring Hope's closest business
associates, Francis Baring & Co., into the affair.




                                    294
                           CHAPTER TEN

                THE FRANCO-SPANISH
                 FINANCIAL CRISIS


On lOth May 1805, just two days after Ouvrard had left Amsterdam,
Labouchere wrote to Sir Francis Baring concerning the Spanish American
operation. It was of the utmost importance that neutral vessels should be
adequately protected against arrest by English cruisers, and subsequent
confiscation, when carrying piastres and colonial produce from Spanish
America to England or an English colony, and on the return voyage
British produce.
  Baring was requested to lay strong emphasis on the latter operation in
his approach to his government. He was to play an important role in the
export of produce from England and the import of colonial produce and
piastres. The British government, wrote Labouchere, must be interested
in thus obtaining the piastres, of which the country was in constant need,
and at the same time recovering part of the trade which North America
had virtually monopolized in recent years.
  Labouchere also pointed out with urgency that the Americans must not
be hampered in their trade with Spanish America, in order to avoid
'remarks and jealousy' from a certain quarter, which could bring about
the failure of the entire operation. Whether or not he had Napoleon in
mind when referring to the 'remarks' is not of major importance; what is
important is that he was anxious to keep open a route via the United
States in addition to one via England.!
  Sir Francis Baring did not reply to the letter immediately, so that La-
bouchere was able to devote all his attention to the establishment of the
agency network in North America. First and foremost, the right persons
had to be found. The man considered by Labouchere for the post of
general agent, David Parish, had been approached at the time of the
negotiations with Ouvrard, and agreements had been made with him. 2
  Parish was a younger son of a Scottish merchant, John Parish, who had
accumulated a large fortune in Hamburg. David Parish had established
his own company in Antwerp following the Treaty of Amiens. A timely
piece of advice from Talleyrand, with whom he was on good terms, had
enabled him to make a considerable profit from speculation in colonial
produce at the time of the renewed hostilities against England. As the war