




                 ANO                           180S·




               MADRID EN LA IMPRENTA REAL.




Rcal Cedilla issued by the Spanish king and relating to the lo-million
                         guilder loan of 1805
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

 While all this was going on, Ouvrard's Compagnie, still without the
piastres from Mexico, had got into such serious financial difficulties that
 on 1st October 1805 Boyd humbly approached Hope & Co. with a request
 that the promised advance of one million guilders be transferred even
before the arrival in Amsterdam of the royal warrant.! Labouchere replied
 that the Company could not advance any monies until such time as
complete agreement had been reached with the Spanish government. The
 loan could not be opened until I st November at the earliest, for on that
date Croese was due to pay about a million guilders in capital and interest
on the loan provided by Hope in 1793, and it was generally assumed that
the greater portion of this sum was being reinvested. Croese had made
payments of capital and interest on the three conversion loans on 1st
September 1805, but the new loan had not then been finalized and so the
opportunity to channel the liquid resources thus released in the direction
of the new loan had been missed. 2
  Croese had received drafts on Paris houses early in October, but let it be
known that he would not pay the sum due on 1st November unless
these were negotiated before that date. There was every reason for this
reticence: the Caja de Conso/idacion was sinking deeper into the financial
quagmire, and the situation in Paris gave grounds for anxiety. Labouchere
therefore offered to take over the drafts from Croese and provide him
with funds to meet his commitment on 1st November. Vanlerberghe and
Ouvrard concurred in the proposal and gave permission for Hope & Co.
to deduct the sum of the drafts from the proceeds of the loan operation.
Labouchere, however, was unwilling to take any risks and he sent the
drafts to Baguenault & Co. with instructions not to release them until
debentures to an equal value were received from the Receveurs Generaux
as security. After an agitated exchange of correspondence and the appli-
cation of the necessary pressure on Croese, the matter was settled at the
eleventh hour. 3
  Diplomatic pressure from Paris and a number of hurried visits to The
Hague finally combined to secure the approval of the Batavian govern-
ment for the loan and its opening on the scheduled date, 1st November.
During an audience with the Raadpensionaris, Schimmelpenninck, it be-
came apparent to Labouchere that the rate of stamp duty on the loan had
been increased from t %to I %. Schimmelpenninck had informed Ouvrard
of this in April, but, to Labouchere's annoyance, the information had not
been passed on. In the event, however, Vanlerberghe and Ouvrard agreed
to pay the excess. 4
The pressure exerted from Paris on the Batavian government to sanction
                                    300
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS