

was for a period of eight years. Once again Croese was given permission to
resell converted Echenique bonds provided the price was not below 50 %.1
 According to Labouchere, only 8 million guilders of the nominal
total of 10 millions was subscribed to these three loans. Of the 4,000
Echenique bonds which could be converted, 1,000 at the most were
redeemed, so that following the floating of the three 'Conversions Es-
pagnoles' more than 5,000 Echenique bonds remained in circulation. 2

It is true that the Treaty of Amiens in 1802 provided a brief respite and
enabled Spain to export large quantities of silver from Mexico, but in
May 1803 hostilities again broke out between England and France. Spain
was anxious to keep open the lanes of communication with the colonies,
but this was possible only if it were exempted from its treaty obligation to
provide military assistance to France. Bonaparte was more in need of
money than manpower at that moment and thus the parties were able to
reach agreement, albeit after some tough negotiations, in October 1803.
Spain undertook to pay 6 million francs per month with effect from the
outbreak of the war on 20th May 1803. Of this sum, 2 million francs
per month were deductable in respect of supplies delivered to France. 3
 But while France was urgently in need of money for armaments, Bona-
parte discovered to his intense annoyance that the Spaniards were in no
hurry to pay the subsidy. There was little silver in Spain itself, and efforts
to obtain loans in Amsterdam, Paris and Hamburg were in vain. In
Amsterdam, De Smeth and Hogguer, in addition to the Court Bankers,
Croese, were involved in these efforts at the beginning of 1804. The loan
proposed was of 10 million guilders for ten years at 51- % interest. To
make it more attractive to investors, the issue price was 95 % and a bonus
of 5 % on repayment was offered. Despite these incentives, none of the
houses succeeded in obtaining the approval of the government of the
Batavian Republic for the loan.4
 In the meantime the deficits incurred by the French Treasury had reached
such alarming proportions that the minister concerned, Barbe Marbois,
was forced to contemplate a shortfall of 116 million francs by September
1804. Of the 40 million francs due from Spain in March of that year, only
18 million had been received. Admittedly, bills for the full amount had
been lodged with the French Treasury, but while Spain remained in default
there was little that Marbois could do with these. S
 Not knowing what to do next, the minister approached the Compagnie
des Negociants Reunis, in which the prominent army and naval contrac-
tors Ouvrard, Vanlerberghe and Desprez had joined forces. On 4th April
                         EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

 1804 an agreement was concluded between the Compagnie and Marbois;
 under this, Ouvrard was to receive drafts on the Spanish Treasury to a
 value of 32 million francs, representing eight months' subsidies. Of this
 sum, half was immediately made available to the minister and the re-
 mainder was used to meet outstanding invoices for goods supplied to the
 army and the navy. 1
  As security, the Compagnie accepted obligations entered into by the
 Receveurs Gem?raux, the collectors of direct taxes. It was their custom at
 the commencement of each fiscal year to enter into an obligation to the
Treasury regarding the total sum which they anticipated collecting in taxes
 in each month. Their commitment lapsed four months after the taxes in
each of the months concerned were considered to have been received in
full. Thus, nearly eighteen months passed before the whole of this revenue
became available, and to meet this the Treasury had the habit of discount-
ing the obligations promptly at the beginning of each fiscal year. The
obligations transferred to the Compagnie were entrusted to Desprez. 2
  The preparations for the assault on England increased the French Trea-
sury's need for funds still further, and in June 1804 Barbe Marbois again
approached the Compagnie, this time with a request for 150 million francs.
Ouvrard again agreed to furnish advances but, as previously, after the
deduction of sums outstanding for deliveries to the army and navy, then
amounting to 48 million francs. In order to deal more adequately with
business on such a gigantic scale, the Compagnie established connexions
with Armand Seguin and the brothers Michel the Elder and Michel the
Younger, men of questionable propriety who were later to cause the
Compagnie no end oftrouble. 3
  It will be clear from the foregoing that Ouvrard was the soul of the whole
affair. Gabriel Julien Ouvrard, speculator, naval contractor, banker and
architect of the most grandiose financial projects, was born at Nantes in
1770. By skilful speculation, he amassed a fortune while the French Revo-
lution was still young. When in 1793, during the Reign of Terror, Carrier
was settling his score with the counter-revolutionaries by means of his
notorious noyades, Ouvrard succeeded in keeping his head above water
by joining the republican army which was fighting the royalists in the
Vendee. From there he journeyed to Paris to present to the Convention
the banners captured from the counter-revolutionaries. Once in Paris he
stayed there, using his experience in the Vendee to become one of the most
successful contractors to the French fleet. His fabulous riches and his
grand style of living made him a textbook example of the nouveaux riches
from whom the era of the Directory derived its notoriety.4
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN