

 which could help to fill the state coffers, were as yet not forthcoming.
 During the absence of this silver-and with the projected loan in Amster-
 dam still unrealized-Ouvrard, in order to meet his commitments towards
Spain, was obliged to fall back upon the French Treasury and the Banque
de France, via the Compagnie des Negociants Reunis, a course which added
to France's monetary plight. 1
  Clearly, Ouvrard's financial juggling had to be brought to an end as
quickly as possible; but this could only be done if he succeeded in obtain-
ing the English government's approval for the shipment of the piastres.
From a purely commercial point of view, there was a chance that he
would do so, for the need for precious metals was just as great in England
as in France-and if permission were forthcoming at least a portion of the
shipped piastres would remain behind in England. Initially, however,
Ouvrard's appeal to Pitt fell on deaf ears. Pitt was aware of the financial
difficulties which faced Napoleon, and while the French army at Boulogne
seriously threatened England's security Pitt was not at all disposed to
assist in alleviating Napoleon's difficulties. 2
  Labouchere was kept posted regarding Ouvrard's faits et gestes by his
Paris correspondents, Baguenault and Hottinguer. To them he expressed
his annoyance at the manner in which Ouvrard peddled his plans from
door to door. In Labouchere's opinion, Ouvrard's efforts to draw the
Americans into the affair was 'an error of judgement' accompanied by
talent and even by genius-a situation which could exist only in France.
Ouvrard need not think that any Englishman would become a party to
such a transaction and thereby compromise himself in the eyes of his own
government. 3
  Ouvrard's efforts to arouse American interest in his projected transaction
were, however, not original: negotiations with the son of the United
States envoy in Paris, Robert L.Livingstone, and his compatriot, the
merchant and speculator Daniel Parker, had taken place in the winter of
1803. They offered to purchase 15 million piastres from Spain, deliverable
in Vera Cruz, Havana and Montevideo. The equivalent, 57 million francs,
would be paid in Amsterdam, Hamburg and Paris in four equal instal-
ments. Despite urgings by the French Foreign Minister, Talleyrand, who
was commercially concerned, the projected transaction did not take place.
At the last moment Godoy refused to give his consent, partly from un-
willingness to pay the subsidy and partly from fear of unfavourable reac-
tions from England. 4
  Early in March 1805 Labouchere received, via Baguenault, a letter from
Count de Cabarrus, on whose initiative the Bank of San Carlos had come

                                    290
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

into being. At the time of the French Revolution he had fallen into dis-
favour on account of his enlightened views, but now he stood so high in
the esteem of the Spanish Court, to which he acted as financial adviser,
that he had been raised to the nobility. Labouchere's reply indicates that
De Cabarrus had approached him on the subject of getting Mexican
piastres to Spain, a transaction of a similar nature to that for which
Ouvrard had obtained a monopoly.
  Labouchere's reply was cautiously worded, but did not amount to a re-
jection of the plan. One must naturally be circumspect when putting
proposals to one's English connexions, he wrote, but it was quite feasible
for the shipments to be routed direct from North America to Amsterdam
without by-passing London. Labouchere had sufficient confidence in
Baring and his American associates to advance monies against the piastres
when news reached him of the receipt by Baring of the funds.
  In order to comprehend this somewhat obscure passage, we must bear in
mind that a substantial part of the large British exports to the United
States were paid for out of the proceeds of American exports to the
Continent. There was thus a constant stream of monetary transactions
between the principal import centres on the Continent and London, and
this could be used for the payment for the piastres. Indeed, Baring & Co.
were specialists in intermediacy.
  Labouchere, however, was curious about the relationship between De
Cabarrus's proposals and the arrangements existing between the Spanish
Court and Ouvrard who, after all, had also received drafts on the Mexican
Treasury. If such documents were to find their way into various hands,
their value would depreciate. Labouchere knew that De Cabarrus had
laid his plan before Hogguer, and he did not take very kindly to this: if
De Cabarrus, like Ouvrard, knocked on all doors simultaneously, he
might find that none was opened. 1
  When Labouchere spoke in such reserved terms about Ouvrard he had
already been approached, via Desprez, concerning the great transaction.
On 14th February 1805 he reported to Desprez that his company was
greatly honoured by the offer, both as regards the piastres and also the
licences to trade with Spanish America. Discretion on the part of Hope &
Co. was guaranteed, but the lack of secrecy on the other side caused
Labouchere to flinch. In some ways there was nothing novel about the
operation, for Spain had since 1797 made repeated efforts to arrive at
transactions of this nature. The publicity which had surrounded all these
plans had made Hope extremely reserved towards them. Even on the
highly attractive conditions announced by the Spanish Court in 1800 and