

                                   29 1
                          EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

 r801, the Company had never dared to offer more than 50% of the value
 of the piastres for spot purchase. Ultimately a fairly sizeable operation
 was mounted, but the peace preliminaries of 1801 had thrown a spanner in
 the works.
  The Company was thus well informed concerning the sort of transactions
 about which Desprez had written, and was willing to accept the offer if
 agreement could be reached. The advances which Desprez had requested
 were out of the question, if only because of the attendant publicity, but
 Labouchere was agreeable to providing one million francs at 6 % interest
 upon the transfer of the drafts on Mexico. Secrecy was of the utmost
importance and therefore Labouchere was not disposed to commit details
of the affair to paper. He insisted that trusted agents should assemble the
funds on the spot and transmit them. If Hope & Co., who were at that
moment fully occupied with the payments relating to the Louisiana loan,
assumed an active role in the affair a month later, the drafts could be
presented in Mexico in four or five months time.
  Once the wheels were in motion, the tempo could be adjusted to suit the
requirements. Labouchere proceeded on the basis that 'our friends in
America' could be in receipt of the first consignment of piastres during
the month of September r805 and that Desprez could count upon re-
mittances from Hope & Co. commencing in October or November. For
the completion of the French aspect of the affair, Desprez would have to
deal with Baguenault, with whom Labouchere was wont to transact all
delicate business in Paris.
  If the affair could be kept completely' American,' the cause of secrecy
would be served and the costs reduced. The piastres were the focal point
of the transaction, and the use of the import and export licences would
have to be made subservient to these. Labouchere feared that excessive
sailings to Mexico might attract English cruisers; he therefore proposed
that the port of Vera Cruz be temporarily closed to all vessels save those
engaged in transporting the piastres.
  It is interesting to see how, in this letter to Desprez, the principles for the
operation were in fact laid down in the absence of any further contact
with Ouvrard. The assertion in Ouvrard's memoirs, that Messrs.Hope
almost fell from their chairs when, early in April r805, he broached the
matter to them in Amsterdam, is thus fallacious. 1
  After a month of negotiation the parties reached agreement, and on 6th
May r805 the contract between Hope & Co. and Fran.;;ois Ouvrard & Co.
was drawn up. The signatory on behalf of Ouvrard & Co. was Fran.;;ois
Ouvrard, the nominal head of the firm and, in this instance, a figurehead

                                      292
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

 acting on behalf of his brother. Ouvrard had initially proposed that Hope
 should become a party to his contract with the Spanish Court, but La-
 bouchere declined the opportunity. Hope & Co. thus functioned purely as
 commission agents, in which role they formally undertook to comply with
 the instructions contained in the contract. Those instructions, however,
 were fully in accordance with the draft laid before Desprez by Labouchere
 in February.
   The agreement stipulated that Hope should appoint a general agent in
 the United States, whose task would be to direct cargoes from Europe to
 the United States, and from there to the Spanish colonies. The agent would
 also be responsible for shipments from the colonies to the United States
 or direct to Europe. In order to carry out these operations, the general
 agent was permitted to appoint special agents in the various Spanish
colonies, insofar as the transactions made this necessary. He was also
given discretion to enlist the aid of merchant houses in the United States
for the operation. The appointment of merchant houses in the Spanish
colonies, however, remained the prerogative of Franyois Ouvrard & Co.
   Hope & Co. also undertook to try to obtain guarantees of safe passage
from the English government, but with the proviso that their efforts
should be circumspect so that in the event of refusal the other operations
would not be jeopardized. The maximum sum payable for a safe passage
was 4 %of the value of the cargo.!
  A supplementary agreement, in which the commissions to be paid to
Hope were stipulated, was signed in September 1805. On their own ship-
ments to Spanish America the Company would receive a commission of
2 %, and on shipments for third parties, in either European or American
waters, I %. Return cargoes from America and consigned to Hope would
also carry a commission of 2 %, and those bound for other European
ports I %. One-half per cent commission would be payable on all insur-
ance. Hope & Co. would be required to pay the general agent's com-
mission out of their remuneration. 2
  The commission on the piastres shipped was remarkably low, a mere
1- %. Against this, however, the Company was free to export any desired
portion of the piastres for its own account at the price which the piastres
would have yielded had they been exported directly for the account of
Ouvrard & Co., and also to deduct from this price the costs incurred. 3
  In practice, since Franyois Ouvrard & Co. were unable to export the
piastres themselves, this meant that Hope & Co. could do with them as
they wished. The price which the Company would be required to pay for
the piastres was not stipulated in the contract, but it was agreed between