

later it was reported that English men-of-war, in the absence of a decla-
ration of war, had seized three Spanish frigates which carried nearly five
million piastres.
  To Labouchere, the only possibility now lay in De la Colonilla initiating
expeditions from Spanish American ports to Amsterdam, calling at a port
in the United States en route; but he did not press the matter.! There was
little point in continuing to negotiate with De la Colonilla, for early in
1805 Hope & Co. became involved in the transactions which Ouvrard
had meanwhile commenced with Spain.
  As we saw in the preceding pages, Ouvrard took over from Barbe Mar-
bois a claim for 32 million francs on the Spanish Treasury in April 1804.
At the insistence of Napoleon, who was anxious to see the security of
32 million francs in the form of debentures from the Receveurs Generaux
returned to his Treasury as quickly as possible, Ouvrard journeyed to
Spain at the beginning of October 1804. There he succeeded in winning
the favour of the powerful Godoy by quickly satisfying the acute financial
needs of the Court, with which an agreement was concluded whereby
Ouvrard assumed the role of France as creditor for the sum of the Spanish
subsidy.2 Much greater successes lay ahead of him, however.
  On 26th November 1804, a new series of agreements were signed which
gave Ouvrard a position of financial power in Spain equal to that which,
via the Compagnie, he possessed in France. Under these, he first under-
took to supply two million quintals of corn to alleviate the famine in
Spain. Ouvrard was destined to become a contractor to the Spanish army
and navy, and even to meet the immediate financial needs of the State.
The latter activity involved the Caja de Consolidacion, a sinking fund
established for the purpose of withdrawing the vales reales but which in
practice served as an ancillary source of funds for the government. The
Bank of San Carlos was originally established for this purpose, but mis-
management and speculative losses had destroyed much of its credit.
  The Caja obtained a loan of 10 million francs plus extensive credits
from French houses such as Michel the Elder and Michel the Younger. In
addition, Ouvrard undertook to float a loan of 10 million guilders in
Holland-something which De Smeth and Hogguer had thus far failed to
realize. For all these credits, and others which were to follow, Ouvrard
received drafts from the Caja de Consolidacion. 3
  Ouvrard's crowning glory, however, came with an agreement between
himself and Manuel Sixto Espinosa, who as Contador General acted as
representative of the Spanish Crown. This agreement provided for the
establishment, with joint capital, of the house of Fran~ois Ouvrard & Co.

                                   288
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

which, for the duration of the war against England, was given a monopoly
of imports and exports in all the Spanish colonies. This included the
export of gold and silver. 1
 It must have been a source of satisfaction to the Spanish government, in
theory at least, to regain some control of trade to and from the colonies.
As we have seen, trade with America was thrown open to all Spanish ports
in 1778, but was very expressly limited to Spaniards. With the outbreak of
the war against England in 1796, this monopoly ceased to have practical
meaning, and in 1797 the Spanish government could do no better than to
open the ports in Spanish America for neutral trade, on condition that no
prohibited articles such as precious metals were exported and that the
vessels plying the trade should call at a Spanish port on the homeward
voyage. American ships profited especially from the easier situation, but
breaches of the restrictions were so widespread that in 1799 all Spanish
American ports were closed to trade except for the import of food. Oppo-
sition to this action was so fierce that these ports were reopened in 1801,
albeit a system of special licences was introduced. During the brief sus-
pension of hostilities from 1802 to 1804, the Spanish monopoly was
restored, butin December 1804 the licensing system was revived. Many of
those who were in favour at the Court obtained the right to sell licences,
to which end they employed agents. Such an arrangement was, of course,
in flagrant contravention of the monopoly granted to Fran~ois Ouvrard
& Co., but at the same time it was characteristic of the general atmosphere
of corruption which pervaded the Spanish government machine. The
effects of this on Ouvrard's transactions will become clear as our story
unfolds. 2
 In a subsequent agreement dated 4th December 1804, Espinosa asserted
the rights of his government more emphatically. Fran~ois Ouvrard & Co.
were now compelled to ship goods to and from the American colonies for
the account of the Spanish government. In addition, the house's com-
mission on shipments of gold and silver was reduced from I %to 1- %.3
 For Ouvrard, access to the piastres from America, which he had ob-
tained through these agreements, formed the hub of all his transactions
with Spain. Only with these could the impoverished Spanish government
pay Ouvrard and, through him, France. The French Treasury, too, was
interested in the early mobilization of the Mexican silver because its lack
of resources was becoming steadily more acute. As Napoleon rejected any
form of consolidated national debt and, still mindful of the assignats, was
equally unwilling to resort to issuing paper money, the arrival of Mexican
silver was the only solution to the shortage of funds. Fresh conquests,
                         EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN