

                                   297
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

The error of allowing the names of Vanier berghe and Ouvrard to appear
on the warrant came home to Boyd, but to the intense annoyance of
Labouchere he reacted by writing to Ouvrard in Madrid, requesting a new
warrant in which, in addition to Hope & Co., the house of Van der
Hoeven & Co. of Amsterdam was mentioned. Labouchere tartly informed
Boyd that even though Van der Hoeven might have connexions with
Vanlerberghe, their participation would constitute a ground for Hope
abandoning the loan. Even after a conversation during which Van der
Hoeven expressed his deep disappointment at Labouchere's views, there
was no other course open to Boyd than to write to Ouvrard again, this
time to request a warrant in the form desired by Labouchere. 1
  Within the context of the new loan, Labouchere raised the matter of the
Echenique loans. Strictly speaking, these were perhaps not a matter for
the Spanish Court; nevertheless, the king had entered into a lasting
guarantee in respect of them. Labouchere's aim was that Ouvrard should
persuade the Spanish government to convert the Echenique bonds still in
circulation into new 5 % bonds and to redeem these on a date ten years
after the signing of a peace treaty between Spain and England. The con-
version operation could best be undertaken by Echenique and would,
moreover, yield a commission of 2 % for that house. It might also be
possible to obtain drafts on Mexico to serve as security for the new bonds.
But this well-meant plan in the interest of the Echenique loans fell on deaf
ears in Madrid. 2
  Boyd having had the warrant amended to conform with Labouchere's
various wishes, the final text was agreed at the end of September, after
which the document was sent from Madrid to Amsterdam. The com-
mencement date for the loan, as prescribed in the principal debenture,
was 1st July 1805. The rate of interest was 5-!- % and repayment of the
principal money, plus a premium of 5 %, was to be effected over a period
of ten years, i.e. the duration of the loan. Security was provided in the
form of ten drafts on the Royal Treasury in Mexico, totalling 8,484,375
piastres. The maturing dates of these were so arranged that in the event
of non-payment by the Spanish government, the relevant sums could be
in the possession of Hope & Co. before 1st July of the year concerned. 3
  The Company received a commission of 5 % on the sum of the loan. The
official letter from the finance minister referred to 7 %, but we may
assume that the difference of 2 % accrued to Ouvrard. One-half per cent
commission was payable on sums of interest, and I % on principal repay-
ments. The price at which the issue was to be taken over was fixed at
92-!- %, it being stipulated that the bonds should not be offered to the
public at less than 95 %. 4
              REAL CEDULA
                           DE S.M.

              r SENORES DEL CONSE]O,
      ACEPTANDO LA PROPOSICION HECHA
      por la Casa de Hope y Companla , del Comercio de
      A-nsterdam, de pooer eo la Caxa de Consolidacioo
      de! Vale3 13 cantidad de diez. millones de ftorines
        corrientes de! Holanda en calidad de pre tamo,
             baxo las condiciones que se expresan.