

 the Spanish loan was a by-product of the continuing deterioration of
  France's financial position. Immediately after the signing of the agree-
 ment with the Company in May 1805, Ouvrard had paid another visit to
 Spain to arrange matters there. The success of the various agreements
 depended upon the early arrival of piastres from Mexico. Ouvrard's
 efforts, through the intermediary of the British consul in Madrid, to reach
 an accord with Pitt in this matter failed, however, and because of this
 Ouvrard's financial edifice commenced to rock on its foundations. 1
   By the end of June 1805, payments to army and naval contractors had
 so sapped the liquid reserves of the Banque de France that Barbe Marbois
 was obliged to appeal urgently to the Spanish government for a payment
 of three million piastres. The money, however, was slow to arrive, with
 the result that the Banque's reserves continued to fall. At the end of
 September a mere 1,200,000 francs remained. 2
   The exporting of the piastres brought pressure upon the Caja de Conso-
lidacion and thus upon the price of the vales reales, for the redemption of
which it had, of course, been established. When the value of the vales
 began to fall sharply, the Spanish government resorted, as it had done in
 1799, to the imposition of an artificial rate. The result was similar: specie
disappeared and the vales fell to 58 % below par.
   The depreciation of the vales placed the Spanish government's creditors
in a very difficult position. This was particularly true of Ouvrard, who
faced the prospect of being paid for his purchases of corn and his de-
liveries to the fleet and the army in a heavily devalued form of tender. To
keep his head above water, Ouvrard was forced to bolster up the price of
the vales, and the only means of achieving this was to suspend the export
of piastres. 3
  Deprived of its lifeline, the Banque de France sank deeper into the mire;
its plight was not lessened by the ever-increasing demands made by the
Compagnie des Negociants Reunis in an effort to meet the needs of the
army. Late in September 1805 Napoleon had embarked on his campaign
against the Austrians and the Russians, and this taxed the Banque and the
military contractors to the limit. Napoleon was aware of the country's
financial distress, but in his view a major military victory offered the only
solution. As he said to Mollien, the director of the Sinking Fund: 'The
financial position is serious, the bank is meeting with difficulties; my task
of putting these things in order does not lie here.' 4
  Desprez had meanwhile got into such a predicament that he resorted to
the direct collection of monies received by the Receveurs Generaux. He
had earlier discounted the corresponding debentures from the Receveurs

                                    301
              THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

with the Banque de France, which was thus obliged to meet the cost of
redemption in full on the due dates. Increasing the quantity of banknotes
in circulation afforded but a temporary alleviation and fanned the growing
embers of mistrust. More and more people began to exchange their bank-
notes for coin and when, at the beginning of November, it became known
that the Compagnie was in difficulties, a veritable run on the Banque de
France ensued. Simultaneously Vanlerberghe, acting on behalf of the
Compagnie, disclosed that there was a deficit of 70 million francs, of
which 26 million were owed to the Treasury. The principal cause of the
crash lay in Spain's failure to honour its commitments. 1
 In view of the fact that Napoleon's campaign against the Austrians was
in full swing, Barbe Marbois continued to support the Compagnie, even
though the Treasury was in very great straits. On 27th October 1805 he
advised Hope & Co. that the Spanish loan-the documents pertaining to
which, he stated, were being despatched-had been transferred from Van-
lerberghe & Ouvrard to Desprez. Marbois had concerned himself with
the matter because the proceeds of the loan, 'en derniere analyse' would
accrue to the Treasury. Desprez wrote to Hope on the same day, urgently
requesting an advance; but Labouchere would go no further than to
remit the drafts from Croese. The emperor had admittedly forced an
Austrian army to capitulate at VIm, but that did not signify the end of the
war, and the financial situation continued to be critical. 2
 On 5th November, Barbe Marbois urgently requested that one of the
partners of Hope & Co. should visit Paris. Labouchere arrived there on
the nineteenth to find a large company assembled; Ouvrard, however, was
not present.
 With his customary optimism, Labouchere wrote that the situation in
Paris was not as serious as the stories which had been circulating had
suggested, and that means would be found to overcome the problems
expected in the month of December. 3 This did not mean that there
were then no difficulties in Paris. Prior to his departure for Spain,
Ouvrard had laid the foundations for a large-scale exchange operation
or circulation between Desprez, the capitals of all the French depar-
tements and the houses of Doyen, Recamier, Fulchiron and Thornton
Power. The basis for the circulation was formed by debentures to
a value of 12,000,000 francs issued by the Receveurs Generaux;
these had been discounted by the Banque de France and Ouvrard had
committed himself to replace them with piastres from Spain in September
1805.
Owing to the catastrophic consequences of the enforced rate for the