

                                   295
              THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

continued, however, business in Antwerp became less and less interesting
for him. Labouchere's offer opened up all manner of new prospects in a
completely new area. The financial aspects of the deal were also an attrac-
tion: 25 % of the profit on all transactions which he was instructed by
Hope & Co. to supervise. A separate account was to be maintained,
showing the profit shares accruing to Hope and to Parish, which would
be paid to them out of the account held jointly with Auguste Ouvrard- who
quickly appeared as Auguste Ouvrard & Co. in Hope's books.! In addi-
tion, Parish would be reimbursed for all travelling and hotel expenses
incurred by him, and he was permitted to do business for his own account.
Labouchere was evidently very keen to recruit this enterprising and astute
young man, who was renowned for his engaging manner and his psycho-
logical insight, for the new operation. 2
  Labouchere's choice for the agency at Vera Cruz fell on Armand Pierre
Lestapis, a native of Bearn in Southern France, who was employed as
Spanish correspondent at the office in Amsterdam. He had earlier worked
for the house of Juan Plante in Santander. Upon the death of another
employee of the house, Jose Gabriel de Villanueva, his birth certificate
fell into the hands of Lestapis. Fearing that the Mexican authorities might
raise objections to the arrival of a foreigner, Labouchere persuaded Lesta-
pis to assume the identity of De Villanueva for the journey to Vera Cruz.
It was in this name that the application for his passport was made to
Madrid. 3
  A third agent was to be stationed at New Orleans. For this post, La-
bouchere's eye fell on Vincent Nolte, who was employed in his younger
brother's merchant house in Nantes, and whose excellent style of cor-
respondence had attracted Labouchere's attention. Nolte had little to do
in Nantes and was keen to travel to America. On 13th May, a week after
the signing of the contract with Ouvrard, he set out for Amsterdam to
collect his instructions. 4
  Early in July 1805 Nolte sailed from Amsterdam in the 'Flora,' bound
for New York. Parish had matters to attend to for his firm in Antwerp,
after which he journeyed to Paris for discussions with Ouvrard. Lestapis
was detained in Amsterdam, problems having arisen concerning his pass-
port for Mexico. 5
  In their role of commission agents for Fran~ois Ouvrard & Co., Hope
 ordered a consignment of Silesian linen from their correspondent in
 Hamburg, Matthiesen & Sillem. Ouvrard was not favourably impressed
 by the initiative and urged the necessity for caution in view of the proba-
 bility that the consignment would be delayed by the developing naval
              THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

war.1 In April 1805, the French squadron from Toulon had succeeded in
eluding Nelson and, together with Spanish naval units, had made for
Martinique in the West Indies. The plan was that they should wait there
until the squadron from Brest joined them, and thus lure Nelson's ships
to the West Indies. If this ruse succeeded, the Franco-Spanish fleet would
return with all speed to the Channel to pave the way for the French
invasion army to cross to England. Ouvrard's anxiety concerning the
situation in the Caribbean was certainly well founded, but there was the
additional factor that 'engagements reels' were extremely inconvenient to
him because the French and Spanish finances absorbed all his funds. 2
  Besides the preparations for the great American operation, there was the
lo-million guilder loan to Spain to consider. Ouvrard had undertaken to
float this on behalf of the Spanish Court, but he had failed to reach
agreement on this during his meetings with the partners of Hope & Co. in
April 1805. In July, Walter Boyd, acting on Ouvrard's instructions, again
raised the matter with the Company in a letter sent from Paris.
  The warrant or 'cedula' issued by the King of Spain entrusted the nego-
tiation of the loan to the house of Vanlerberghe and Ouvrard. Ouvrard
wished the last line of the document to be left blank so that the name of
Hope & Co. could be inserted, but the Spanish government was unwilling
to accede to the request, probably to avoid offending De Smeth and
Hogguer, with whom negotiations had been in progress for longer.
Ouvrard had thus been compelled to offer the loan to these houses, but
by imposing very severe conditions he had obliged them to decline the
business. 3
  Labouchere objected to the appearance of the names of Vanlerberghe
and Ouvrard in the warrant on the grounds that this would deter investors,
who would find themselves bound up with the common interests of France
and Spain. Also, he regarded the issue price of 95 %proposed by Boyd as
too high; this, he felt, should not be more than 92 %. Furthermore, he
desired a purely formal relationship with the Spanish government: the
Spanish Court must issue an instruction for the proceeds of the loan to be
paid to Vanlerberghe and Ouvrard, whose receipt must be recognized by
the Caja de Consolidacion as official payment. Also, Vanlerberghe and
Ouvrard must be the effective owner of the constituent bonds, which
Hope & Co., for a commission of 7 %, would dispose of. The drafts on
Mexico, which totalled nearly 8t million piastres, should not remain
under the control of the Caja, he maintained, but should be deposited
with a notary in Amsterdam (as had been done in the case of the Croese
conversion loans).4