

After the seizure of power by Bonaparte in 1799, conditions became less
favourable for Ouvrard. The new dictator had an inveterate dislike of
les fournisseurs, the contractors to the army and navy, who in his view
took advantage of the impecuniosity of the government to make scan-
dalously large profits. When Ouvrard presented Bonaparte with an out-
standing account for deliveries, the First Consul ordered an investigation
of the ledgers with the result that Ouvrard was summarily arrested and
ordered to repay one and a half times the sum which he had claimed was
due to him.1
  But Bonaparte could not manage without the connexions and talent for
organizing possessed by the fournisseurs. Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe, his
new partner, accordingly played a significant role in the preparations for
the Italian campaign of 1800-1801, albeit they employed a man of straw
to submit their tenders. As subsequent events will show, Ouvrard em-
ployed this artifice on numerous occasions. For a man such as Bonaparte,
this dependence upon persons whom he hated and despised was well-nigh
intolerable, and he adopted the policy of delaying payment of accounts
from thefournisseurs for as long as possible. 2
  Ouvrard was no stranger to Hope & Co. They had been in contact in
 1802 in connexion with the Rescriptions Bataves, bonds issued by the
Batavian government and covering half of the war levy which France had
imposed on the vanquished Holland in 1795. In time of war, bonds to a
value of 3 million guilders would be redeemed annually; in time of
peace, double this sum. Because of its acute financial position, the French
government had disposed of these rescriptions as quickly as possible. In
view of the uncertainty whether the situation was one of war or peace, a
highly speculative stock was marketed, and this must have been attractive
to a man like Ouvrard. 3
  In 1804 there was very frequent contact between Hope & Co. and the
 Compagnie des Negociants Reunis. As explained elsewhere, Labouchere
 had signed an agreement with Barbe Marbois on 21st April of that year
providing for Hope and Baring to acquire all bonds relating to the
 Louisiana loan, in return for which they would, inter alia, furnish a sum
 of 5,825,000 francs in Paris and take over French bonds to a value of
 15 million francs which became due for redemption in the following
 September and October. As the Compagnie, through the agreements of
 April and June 1804, had become very closely concerned in French finances,
 Hope's payments in respect of the Louisiana loan passed directly via
 Desprez. 4
 After this, however, Labouchere for a time appeared reluctant to become

                                   286
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

involved in the affairs of the Compagnie. He declined a request by Desprez
for a credit of between I and 2 million guilders against the security of
bonds from the Receveurs Generaux, giving as his reason that Hope & Co.
were wholly occupied with the payments for the Louisiana loan and the
Portuguese subsidy to France. 1 According to Labouchere, the demand on
the Amsterdam money market from Paris was so heavy that every financial
transaction was hazardous. 'People are trying to do too much at once,'
wrote the Paris house of Baguenault & Co.; and Labouchere agreed
fully with the sentiment. In his view, Desprez could keep his operations
going only at the expense of every rate of exchange in Europe. 2
 Early in May 1804 Hope & Co. were approached by the Marquis de la
Colonilla, acting on behalf of the Spanish Court. The Marquis, a French
banker, had received his title in Spain and headed a firm in Madrid. The
aim of his visit was to speed up the payment of the Spanish subsidy to
France. De la Colonilla proposed that Hope should negotiate a loan of
5 million piastres at 6 % interest, the equivalent of which, in francs, was
to be transmitted to Paris. Repayment, in piastres, would be effected in
Madrid in three equal instalments in the years 1807, 1808 and 1809; the
Spanish authorities would permit the free export of the piastres. 3
  Labouchere's initial reaction was lukewarm. De Smeth, Hogguer and
Croese were already active on behalf of Spain, though not with much
success; moreover, De la Colonilla had lowered the prestige of the pro-
posed negotiation by hawking it in Paris prior to writing to Hope & Co.
Quite apart from the question whether the Batavian government would
withdraw its objections to a foreign loan, little response could be antici-
pated from the Dutch public since many were saddled with large stocks
of colonial produce which was very slow-moving as a result of the scarcity
of money. Labouchere expressed the view that it might be feasible to start
with a small sum, say one million piastres, and to accept as payment the
outstanding bonds of Hope's 179210an.4
 Such a proposal did not, of course, fit in with the aims of the Spanish
government. In an effort to progress the matter, Labouchere inquired of
Alexander Baring whether perhaps the English East India Company
would be interested in acquiring piastres in Spain at two-thirds of the
current rate of exchange. In England, however, the return to power of
Pitt had produced a much more uncompromising policy towards France
and her allies, and thus Baring did not respond to Labouchere's over-
tures. s
 In the latter part of September 1804, rumours of tension between
England and Spain commenced to circulate in Amsterdam. A month
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN