

Napoleon returned to Paris on 26th January. On the very next day he
summoned his ministers and demanded from them an explanation for the
financial crisis. Mollien, of whom Napoleon was very fond, was invited to
be present. Barbe Marbois launched into a lengthy speech about the state
of the national finances, but was interrupted by the emperor, who con-
cluded that the Compagnie, by means of the resources of the Treasury and
the Banque de France, had succeeded in meeting the needs of both France
and Spain. Since Spain had only been able to promise piastres, France
had ultimately paid a subsidy to Spain, instead of the other way round.
Napoleon thereupon insisted that Ouvrard, Desprez and Vanlerberghe

                                    304
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

should be stripped of their possessions, which were to be given to the
Treasury, and that Spain should honour its commitments. Marbois was
accused of allowing himself to be taken in by the Compagnie and of giving
Desprez a free hand with Treasury funds. The emperor then relieved him
of his office.
  After this ominous beginning, Ouvrard, Vanlerberghe and Desprez were
summoned and treated to one of Napoleon's notorious verbal broadsides.
In the face of threats of imprisonment, and even execution before a firing
squad, Vanlerberghe and Desprez burst into tears; but Ouvrard remained
absolutely calm.
  When the emperor's fury was spent, Ouvrard attempted to convince him
that he, Ouvrard, was the best person to carry the complex financial
operations, which were conducted via Holland, England and the United
States, to a successful conclusion. But such were Napoleon's sense of
irritation and his abhorrence of military contractors that he peremptorily
gave Ouvrard and his friends the choice between criminal prosecution and
the surrender of all their possessions. All three chose the latter. This
sweeping reconstruction of France's upper financial echelon was com-
pleted by the appointment of Mollien to the post of Minister of the Trea-
sury.!
  In a decree dated 8th February 1806, it was stated that Ouvrard, Desprez,
Vanlerberghe and Michel the Elder together owed the Treasury 87 million
francs. As the first instalment of their debt, they were to hand over to the
Treasury the proceeds of the Spanish loan negotiated through Hope & Co.,
drafts on Mexico to a value of 9,802,000 piastres and others to a value of
32} million francs issued by the Caja de Consolidacion. The wool which
Ouvrard had shipped to Hope and Baguenault for sale on commission
was also declared the property of the French Treasury. Supplies for the
army and navy were subjected to a discount of 50 %, with a maximum of
18 million francs. 2
 The drafts on Mexico, to a value of 6} million piastres, which Ouvrard
had given to Labouchere during their meeting, but for which no approval
had been forthcoming from Spain, were also among the assets confiscated.
Mollien instructed Hope & Co. to surrender these to one of his officials,
Daumont, who journeyed to Amsterdam in order to receive them. The
partners, however, refused to part with the drafts without Ouvrard's
permission. Only when he arrived in Amsterdam were the drafts handed
to Daumont. The drafts for 5 million piastres which had already been
sent to David Parish for collection escaped Mollien's grasp.3
Hope & Co. expressed to Mollien their willingness to exchange their
              THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS