

                                   318
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

had drawn on their continental consignors and negotiated in London. In
some cases Baring remitted direct to Paris-after all, the monies were
destined for the French Treasury. But as a general rule Hamburg was
preferred for remittances to the Continent because it was on the exchange
market there that the deficit in Britain's trade with Russia was adjusted. 1
 The transfer to Paris of funds held by the Company was achieved in part
by way of remittances to Baguenault & Co. or by drafts drawn by
Baguenault on Hope. In order not to bring the exchange rate for drafts
between Amsterdam and Paris under pressure, a system was also employed
in which other houses drew on Hope & Co. and themselves remitted to
Paris. The houses concerned were Matthiessen & Sillem in Hamburg
(who thus were able to deal with remittances from Baring), Littledale &
Dixon in Rotterdam, David Parish & Co. in Antwerp and Bethmann
Brothers in Frankfurt.

The operations for Account 'X' naturally had a major influence on Hope's
own commercial relations with the United States. The initial contacts,
which were probably influenced by the Company's relationship with
Baring & Co., dated from the early 1790s. 2 But no more than ten con-
signments per year were involved and the total value of the goods did not
exceed half a million guilders. The American consignments ceased after
1795 and the accounts with American houses remained dormant until
1801, when they were all struck off the books. 3
 The years 1802 and 1803 saw a modest revival of the trade, with one or
two consignments, but in 1804 the number grew to fifteen with a total
value of nearly 2 million guilders. In the following year there were
twenty-eight representing a value of 2,340,000 guilders. The records
reveal that an upward surge occurred in 1806, when goods to a value of
more than 91- million guilders, distributed over ninety-five accounts,
arrived. The climax came in 1807, when the value of goods totalled more
than 10,80,000 guilders spread over a hundred and six accounts.4
 The remittances from David Parish, however, did not match the value of
the goods. In 1807, for example, his remittances, including those which
passed through Baring & Co., totalled just under 6,800,000 guilders-and
this included remittances for consignments to other houses. It may thus
be concluded that only a part of the consignments to Hope were a result
of Parish's activities. Whether or not the volume of this trade would have
increased so sharply without Parish's intervention can no longer be
ascertained, but we may assume that, once having discovered Hope & Co.,
the houses concerned continued to consign cargoes to the Company with-

                                    3 19
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

out prepayment or partial financing. Although incomplete, the reports
sent to David Parish concerning the arrival of American vessels in Am-
sterdam reveal that the consignments to Hope & Co. exceeded those
addressed to Couderc & Brants-a firm of importance in its field-by
something like 50 %.1
  It is not possible to deduce from the archive material available just
which American houses Parish employed for the purpose of his remit-
tances to Europe. But the fact that houses which were concerned in
Parish's operations to Spanish America appear on the list of shippers
warrants the assumption that they profited from the advance payments in
piastres.
  Chief among these were Robert and John Oliver; John Donnell, Robert
Gilmor & Sons and Thomas Tenant in Baltimore; Archibald Gracie in
New York; John Craig in Philadelphia; and Amory & Callender and
Geo.T.Phillips in New Orleans.
  The Oliver archives reveal that both that house and Craig in Philadelphia
had their own 'troops,' merchants to whom they advanced money, on
behalf of Parish, for consignments shipped to Europe. The names of these
persons and firms indeed appear in the grootboeken and on separate
accounts in the Hope archives. Examples are: in Baltimore, John Sherlock,
Mark Pringle, Smith & Buchanan, Hollins & McBlair, William Patterson
& Sons and Lemuel Taylor; in Philadelphia, Willings & Francis, Stephen
Girard and Savage & Dugan. But there were others in more distant ports,
such as James & Th.Perkins of Boston, Gracie & Andersons of Peters-
burg, Virginia, and Geo.M.W.Woolsey of New Orleans. 2
  The majority of the cargoes from America consisted of sugar, coffee,
tobacco, rice and cotton. In correspondence with Parish, Labouchere
complained from the outset about the malaise in the sugar trade, a result
of the supply exceeding the demand. The cause of the surplus lay in a
substantial expansion of the sugar cane plantations in the non-British
areas of Central America, the effect of which had been to bring about
fierce competition. 3
  Throughout the Spring of 1806 Labouchere remained optimistic con-
cerning the markets for the remaining commodities, but the knowledge
that a British negotiator had gone to France for peace talks brought
dealings in colonial produce to a virtual standstill. There were also com-
plaints concerning the merchant houses in Rotterdam, which, 'being al-
ways inclined to extremes,' did not sell within a system. By 'system' was
meant a mild form of cartel in which a number of large houses would
maintain prices at a certain level in order to deter bear operators and