

                          ACCOUNT 'X'



At about the moment when Napoleon was putting an end to Ouvrard's
plans, the network established in America to carry out those plans com-
menced to operate. Vincent Nolte had arrived in New York in September
1805, to be followed shortly afterwards by Lestapis. They waited there for
David Parish, who arrived early in 1806. Rumours of the transaction had
preceded him and this fact made his task decidedly more difficult. 1
  Shortly after he set foot on American soil, Parish received a request from
Baring & Co. to hold back the Mexican drafts. There were good prospects
for an agreement with the British government, and this would pave the
way for the direct shipment of the piastres from Vera Cruz to London.
Parish, who had had far-reaching discussions with Sir Francis Baring in
London before setting off for America, was content to await further news.
After all, Sir Francis was a director of the East India Company and had
excellent connections in high government circles, while his son, Alexander,
was a director of the Bank of England. 2 But when fresh instructions from
Baring & Co. failed to materialize-for reasons which will become ap-
parent-Parish, seeing the time passing, found himself in a quandary.
Eventually Lestapis, carrying drafts for a million piastres, left for Vera
Cruz with instructions to present them to the Mexican Treasury and to
deposit the funds obtained with friendly houses in Vera Cruz for the time
being. During his sojourn there, De Villanueva, as Lestapis thereafter
became known, acted in conjunction with the houses of Pedro Miguel de
Echeverria and Francisco Luis de Septien.
  Parish also found it difficult to work with blank licences for trade with
the Spanish colonies. During his stay in New York he had succeeded in
disposing of three to Archibald Gracie, but the majority of merchants
there were highly sceptical, demanding proof of Parish's monopoly of
trade with Spanish America before committing themselves to an expedi-
tion. In mid-February, Parish decided to move his headquarters to Phila-
delphia in the hope of finding more takers. 3 But instead of fresh prospects,
Parish found competitors there. As we have seen, the Spanish Court, in a
flagrant breach of the monopoly granted to Ouvrard, had also given a
number of favoured persons and senior civil servants the right to issue

                                    3I l
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

licences, and these were sold, via agents, to anyone who would buy them.
Espinosa sent Francisco Sarmiento to the United States for this very
purpose. Sarmiento was a brother-in-law of the Philadelphia merchant
John Craig, who thus obtained six licences for trade with Vera Cruz.
Another brother-in-law of Craig, the Baltimore merchant Robert Oliver,
also became involved. Robert Oliver and his brother John headed one of
the richest and most dependable merchant houses in that city. The
Spanish envoy in Philadelphia, the Marquis de Yrujo, was aware of the
affair and supported Craig and the Olivers.l
  To Parish, this complication meant further delay in disposing of the
licences which he held. His first act was to send a letter to Madrid, de-
manding in the strongest terms that the Minister of Finance, Soler, take the
necessary action to maintain his monopoly. In the meantime he had to
contend with a situation in which others had already prepared five expe-
ditions to Vera Cruz and in which his efforts to obtain the support of the
Spanish envoy were without avail.
  Lengthy discussions with Craig and Robert Oliver finally led to an agree-
ment in late March or early April 1806. This provided for Craig and the
Olivers to take over the licences held by Parish, in consideration whereof
they were to pay commissions of 2t %, based on the invoice value of the
goods shipped, to Parish himself and 3J! %, based on the nett proceeds,
to his principals. Parish gave a guarantee against confiscation in Vera
 Cruz, but was not required to bear responsibility in respect of cargoes lost
through shipwreck or piracy while bound for Vera Cruz. 2
  Import duties were levied both in the colonies and in Spain. In consul-
 tation with the Spanish envoy in Philadelphia, Craig and the Olivers
 consented to give Parish 20 % of the invoice value; he would take steps to
 ensure that these monies were paid, via Hope & Co., to the Caja de
 Consolidacion. Parish was to receive a further 5 % commission for these
 services.
  The nett profit was deemed to be the sum remaining after the deduction
 of commissions, insurance, freight charges and dues payable in Vera Cruz.
 In addition to the commissions already referred to, 6t % of the gross
 proceeds in Vera Cruz was due to Villanueva and the Spanish house which
 acted as intermediary for the sale.
  The dues levied in Vera Cruz varied during the operation. Import duties
 ranged from IO % to 20 % of the pro forma invoice value, and in one or
 two instances reached 30 %. Other dues, which were sometimes levied and
 sometimes not, included a consular fee, which ranged from 1 % to 5 %;
 war tax, also between 1 % and 5 %; and an Admiralty tax, which varied