

                                   320
                               ACCOUNT 'X'


profiteers. Such a system, however, could operate to the disadvantage of
stockholders; in the case of cotton, for example, the brokers, who were
also buyers, banded together to keep prices down. Moreover, there was
strong competition in this commodity from the Rotterdam merchants
who, using agressive selling methods, covered the German hinterland. 1
  Hope & Co. also complained about the invoices issued by the American
houses, which, in terms of the description of the goods, were usually
unreliable. Goods were often too highly priced, making their sale at a
profit an impossibility and causing good opportunities to be missed.
  When, early in August 1806, it was rumoured that the documents herald-
ing peace between England and France had been signed, Labouchere
anticipated panic followed by selling at any price. He did his very utmost
to interest speculators in the low-priced sugar, but his efforts were
thwarted by new customs regulations in western Germany. As part of the
redistribution of lands in that area, Napoleon's brother-in-law, Murat,
had been assigned the Grand Duchy of Cleves and Berg, which subse-
quently became part of the Confederation of the Rhine, a conglomeration
of satellite states which were closely allied to France. 2
  By 1st October Labouchere had become so pessimistic about the sugar
situation that he could scarcely contemplate the recovery of the payments
made in advance. It was decided that Parish would have to stay in the
United States for a further year at least, in order to give the market an
opportunity to recover. Labouchere did not subscribe to the view that
peace was imminent. Later in the month of October he reported that none
of the current expeditions in sugar and coffee were profitable. Whenever
an opportunity arose to dispose of some sugar, there was always a house
willing to undercut the price. At times the Company even bought sugar
in an effort to halt the panic, but it was only able to resell it in times of
political tension, when war threatened and everyone was on the alert. The
tension was highest in Germany, where an extremely obscure tug-of-war
was in progress; this centred around Prussia, which vacillated between
war with France and peace. 3
  The ultimatum of 1st October 1806 by Prussia, which finally chose war,
and the breaking off by England of the peace negotiations had the effect
of breathing some fresh life into the commodity markets. Coffee was the
first to revive, but sugar remained inactive. Even the news of the Prussian
defeats at Jena and Auerstadt failed to bring any real improvement, for
 the further pattern of events was uncertain and, according to Labouchere,
 uncertainty meant death to trade. 4
The news of the Berlin Decree of 21st November 1806, by which Napo-

                                    321
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

leon fore bade the importation of British goods into all allied or occupied
territories, ordered the confiscation of all British goods within his grasp,
and even excluded from harbours under his control or in friendly coun-
tries any ship which had called at a British port, served to revitalize trade
and improve prices. In Holland, the decree was underlined by a regulation
covering all incoming vessels: these were allowed to dock only after an
authorization had been obtained from King Louis Napoleon, and were
required to obtain permission to leave. However, when it transpired that
the permit system was applied extremely liberally and that, for Holland at
least, the traffic to and from England was scarcely affected, the commodity
market suffered a relapse.!
  Despite the relatively small stocks, prices-particularly that of sugar-re-
mained low throughout the Spring of 1807 in anticipation of large-scale
imports during the ensuing summer. The stocks of coffee were not large,
but a considerable amount was being smuggled from England; at the
same time, consumption was declining under the influence of growing
poverty in Holland and the confused situation created in northern Ger-
many by the war between Sweden and France. 2
  At the end of April 1807, Labouchere reported that huge quantities of
sugar were being imported from America and England, although no
demand existed. Furthermore, substantial amounts were being returned
from Brabant because the high French import duty rendered it uneconom-
ic to export sugar to France. Sales in general improved during the months
of May and June, albeit sugar prices remained low. In July the market
again collapsed in the wake of renewed rumours of peace negotiations
between France and England. Moreover, buyers were seen to be awaiting
the outcome of the peace talks between France and Russia, which were
taking place at Tilsit. 3
  A peace treaty was signed at Tilsit on 9th July 1807, but this did not end
the uncertainty, for it was followed by anxiety concerning relations be-
tween England and the United States. Late in June 1807 a British man-of-
war had stopped the American frigate 'Chesapeake' off the coast of
Virginia, overpowered her crew and taken off a number of British de-
serters. In Amsterdam, fears of an Anglo-American conflict were so great
that underwriters refused to insure American vessels. The commodity
buyers, gripped by fear and uncertainty, remained inactive. But when the
rumours of war increased, they came to life again, motivated by the
thought that a conflict would lead to the rupture of communications with
the United States and thus force up prices. 4
Danger also threatened from another direction, however. Following the