

12 million francs; this would comprise 4 million from the balance of the
proceeds of Hope & Co's loan of 10 million guilders, 3 million from the
proceeds of the wool shipped to Hope and Baguenault, and 5 million in
the form of drafts bearing the joint signatures of the members of the
consortium.
  The agreements reached on loth May had far-reaching consequences for
Hope & Co. With the protesting of their drafts by the Caja, Seguin and
Michel the Younger, sensing impending trouble, had taken timely steps
to secure the judicial attachment of those assets of Vanlerberghe &
Ouvrard which were held by Hope & Co. Fulchiron, another victim of the
failure of the Compagnie, followed their example. 1
  On the day of the agreement with Izquierdo, Desprez advised Hope &
Co. that as far as the loan of 10 million guilders and the consignment of
wool were concerned, Izquierdo's instructions must henceforth be obeyed.
Having divested themselves of the responsibility for these matters, Van-
lerberghe & Ouvrard considered themselves absolved from guaranteeing
the payment of interest and principal on the approaching 1st July.2
  The latter announcement was particularly displeasing to Hope & Co. be-
cause they were then on the point of entering into a contract with Willem
Borski for the remaining 3,900 bonds at the attractive price of 92 %. The
terms of the agreement, however, gave the entrepreneurs the option of
paying with interest vouchers and bonds which became due on 1st July
1806. The news of the withdrawal of Ouvrard's guarantee caused Borski
to suspend the negotiations, but a week later he made a fresh offer. In this,
he not only reserved the right to effect payment by means of the interest
vouchers and bonds which became due on 1st July, but also partly with
interest vouchers relating to the Echenique loans, the payment of which
had to be advertised by 23rd June 1806 at the latest. It is probably safe
to assume that this condition in fact emanated from Labouchere and that
its purpose was to remind the Spanish government of its financial com-
mitments.3
  At the end of May 1806, Hope received a visit from Michel Simons,
Talleyrand's confidential agent, who, as we have seen, was busy trying to
negotiate a loan of 30 million guilders with De Smeth. As the author-
ized representative of Izquierdo, he sought control of the Ouvrard assets
held by the Company. Labouchere made it plain to him that the Com-
pany's hands were tied until such time as the writs of attachment secured
by Michel the Younger, Seguin and Fulchiron were withdrawn. Labou-
chere was quite prepared to allow Simons to take over all the Vanler-
berghe & Ouvrard assets held by Hope & Co. on condition that he also

                                    308
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

accepted responsibility for the claims which attached to them. That, how-
ever, was not what Simons had come for: his orders were to obtain money
-if possible, 4 million francs from Hope's Spanish loan and a further
3 million from the consignment of wool.
  After much discussion, Labouchere consented to advance the 4 mil-
lion francs from the loan on condition that the interest vouchers and
bonds falling due on 1st July and also the vouchers relating to interest on
the Echenique loans, which had become due on 1st May but had not been
paid, were accepted as part of the sum. In view of the slow progress made
with the sale of the wool, Labouchere was willing to advance only I
million francs on this, and then only after he had obtained the consent of
his partner in the consortium, Baguenault. 1 Moreover, his offer was sub-
ject to the lifting of the attachment. There was little prospect of this, for
Michel the Younger, who had also travelled to Amsterdam, announced
that he would make efforts in Madrid to realize his claims and that pend-
ing the outcome the garnishment would continue. 2
  The emergence of other figures and the gradual eclipse of Ouvrard con-
stitutes a suitable point at which temporarily to draw a veil over the
events on the Continent. Looking back on these, it is clear that the col-
laboration with Ouvrard produced results quite different from those which
the partners in Hope & Co. had envisaged. Thanks to a cautious policy
born of sagacity, however, the Company emerged unscathed from the
financial crisis of 1805-1806. By insisting on security for all credits, it
avoided the fate which befell Recamier, Hervas and Fulchiron. It recog-
nized the dangers attaching to Ouvrard's flimsy financial schemes in good
time, and took care not to become too deeply involved in these. Further-
more, the Company remained true to the principle that a country cannot
undertake new loans until clear arrangements have been made to repay
previous ones.
  The operation had got off to a good start, but the financial crises in
Spain and France, followed by Napoleon's drastic intervention, had
caused the flow of drafts to cease abruptly. By then, however, drafts to a
value of 5 million piastres had been sent to Parish and could not be
recovered. Under the agreement of loth May 1806, the Company could at
most anticipate drafts for a further 5 million piastres from France. The
transfer of these by the French Treasury took much longer than was
anticipated. The reason for this will emerge in a subsequent chapter, when
we come to deal with the events in England and America.
                          CHAPTER ELEVEN