

'compensations', based on the nett value of the cargo, continued to be
entered.
  However, we know that another, more advantageous method of calcu-
lation was employed for 22 of the 32 cargoes shipped by the Olivers.
Although there are no details of the commission received by Parish in
respect of licences disposed of to third parties, it is clear that the appli-
cation of the n! %system to all licences left a highly attractive margin for
Parish and Hope.
  In order to establish the profits derived from the Oliver shipments, it is
necessary to separate the three arrangements. On the first 22 shipments the
Company received 33t % of the nett profit plus 5 % commission on the
nett value of the cargo, making in all more than 410,000 dollars, the
value of the dollar then being on a par with that of the piastre.! On the
last ten shipments the Company received a further 15% of the nett value,
amounting to 96,000 dollars, in the form of 'compensations.'
  If we now apply the method of profit-sharing between the Olivers and
Parish to the last 2 shipments only, the question arises: what portion of
the profit may be regarded as 'nett profit'? For the first 22 shipments, the
proportion, as stated earlier, was about two-thirds. Ifwe apply this to the
final shipments, we see that Parish received a further 60,500 dollars, or
one-third of the gross profit. On this basis, the proceeds from the pre-
ceding 8 shipments would have amounted to nearly 164,500 dollars;
as stated, however, this is no more than a hypothesis. 2 In all, thus, the
earnings from the expeditions carried out through Robert and John
Oliver must have totalled at least 566,500 dollars.
  Understandably, the Olivers were anxious to avoid competition from
other houses in the trade with Vera Cruz. But, as has been established,
Parish, prior to his arrival in Philadelphia, had transferred a number of
licences to Archibald Gracie of New York. Nolte had taken 6 with him
to New Orleans, where he disposed of them to Amory & Callender, with
whom he worked closely. In spite of strenuous appeals from Oliver, Parish
reserved the right to grant licences to whosoever he wished, although the
quantity concerned was not large. Among the recipients were Isaac McKim
and John Donnell, both of Baltimore, who carried out four expeditions,
two jointly and two for McKim's account. It is clear from surviving details
that one cargo constituted very direct competition with those of the
Olivers. Of the other three, one consisted chiefly of military uniforms,
dyes and paint, and the remainder, which were shipped in November and
December 1807, comprised southern European produce such as brandy,
almonds, cork, writing paper and iron and steel. The goods which made

                                    315
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

up these three cargoes were probably of Spanish manufacture and shipped
on behalf of the Spanish government, and as such did not constitute
serious competition for the Olivers.l
  Besides shipping two cargoes for his own account, John Craig partici-
pated with the Olivers in four expeditions to Montevideo under the pro-
tection of licences furnished by Parish. The house of Robert Gilmor &
Sons had an interest in all four, and was supported in two of them by Le
Roy Bayard & McEvers and Archibald Gracie of New York. Alas, there
are no details of the proceeds of the sale of these four cargoes. Single
licences were given to James Brown of New York (who travelled as
supercargo) and to Geo.T.Phillips of New Orleans.
  Pro forma invoices and final accounts relating to fifteen expeditions by
merchants other than the Olivers have survived. The invoices total more
than a million dollars. On the basis of the relatively unfavourable 37t %
system, there would have been a balance of 15 %, or nearly 155,000 dollars,
for 'compensations.' 2
  Hope & Co's account to Auguste Ouvrard & Co. and the Caja de Con-
solidacion was for the total invoice value of the 53 cargoes, amounting
to approximately 2,900,000 dollars. Import duty at 20 %, totalling more
than 560,000 dollars, was paid to the Caja, and the 15 % for 'com-
pensations', amounting to 422,000 dollars, less expenses, losses and
commissions, was shared between the Caja and Auguste Ouvrard &
CO.3 By our calculations, Parish probably received 566,000 + 155,000 =
721,000 dollars, which implies that a margin of nearly 300,000 dollars
remained for the Company.
  All these items were credited to Account 'X,' the account in which all
transactions relating to the Spanish American operation were entered.
  The size of the profit on cargoes shipped to Spanish America was, of
course, governed by the prices which the goods fetched at the port of
unloading. The more closely the cargo was matched to the local require-
ments, the greater was the profit on its sale. The Oliver archives reveal
that goods imported by third parties also occupied an important place. It
grieved the Olivers to find that the Spanish government was also under-
mining Parish's monopoly for the benefit of others. The house of Gordon
& Murphy of London, which had received permission to obtain piastres
from Vera Cruz on behalf of the Spanish government, also proved to be
liberally supplied with trading licences. The only hope of averting the
ruination of the market in Vera Cruz lay in co-ordinating the activities of
the two houses, and this the Olivers set out to impress upon the London
merchants. 4