

                                   316
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

In order to arrive at a suitable range of goods for shipment, the Olivers
sent an agent to reconnoitre the market in Vera Cruz. He returned bearing
a list of items which had been specially recommended by De Echeverria.
In place of Silesian linen, 'English Goods' such as fancy chintz, calicoes,
corded dimity, cambric dimity and black velvets were specified. 1 These,
however, were not readily saleable on the North American market and
consequently would have to be specially ordered from England. Through-
out 1806 there was talk of peace negotiations between England and France,
and if these should be brought to a successful conclusion it would not be
advisable to be left with stocks of goods for Spanish America. If peace
were to be restored, Spain would certainly close its ports to foreign
vessels and the Olivers would be left with the task of disposing of goods
which were not in great demand.
  Greater care in matching the supply to the demand enabled the antici-
pated rise in profits to be achieved in the short run. This trend emerged
clearly after October 1806, but profits declined in the autumn of the
following year. This was partly due to inability on the part of the Olivers
to supply a number of current items, but changes in the pattern of demand
in Vera Cruz, whereby certain articles went out of favour, was also a
contributory factor. 2 Profit margins on the 'loose' expeditions were gen-
erally higher in the second half of 1807 than previously, but these ship-
ments arrived in Mexico so late in the year that the prices which they
fetched may have been favourably influenced by the United States em-
bargo on foreign trade which had been imposed in the meantime.

From the Company's point of view, the method of transporting piastres
on the return voyage from Vera Cruz to the United States constituted
another very important facet of the agreement with the Olivers. Archibald
Gracie's vessels had already carried piastres to New Orleans, and the first
ship despatched under a licence obtained from Parish, the schooner
'Messenger', arrived in Baltimore in June 1806 carrying 133,000 piastres,
of which 50,000 had been shipped by Villanueva for Parish's account.
 The Olivers objected to this method of shipment on the grounds that, in
their eyes, the piastres were the property of the Spanish Crown and as
such were a sure prey for British cruisers. The fact that they were really
destined for the French Treasury merely increased the danger. To avert
this, it was decided that in future the Olivers would only carry piastres
which were their rightful property. In pursuance of the decision, they
purchased, at a discount of 21 %, drafts drawn by Parish on Villanueva.
This price applied to a sum of 500,000 piastres, but soon Parish was pro-
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

testing at the discount, which he considered too high. He succeeded in
getting the rate reduced to 17 % for subsequent shipments, but even this
was excessive in his opinion. When, in October 1806, it became known
that vessels in ballast were to be allowed to enter the port of Vera Cruz
free of licence, Parish was given the freedom to ship piastres separately
from consignments of goods. 1
  Nothing is known concerning the extent of these 'free' shipments, but
much can be deduced. In all, some 6.450,000 piastres were exported from
Vera Cruz through the agency of Parish. Of these, 1,450,000 were shipped
for the account of the Olivers, and thus 5,000,000 must have been ex-
ported by other means.
  The expeditions to Spanish America and the return cargoes of piastres,
however, represent only a part of the activities reflected in Account 'X.'
Parish also had the task of getting the piastres to Europe. Various possi-
bilities existed. The most obvious of these was to ship them direct, but
little use was made of this method, and according to Hope's ledgers only
two shipments totalling 60,000 piastres were undertaken. 2
  By far the greater portion was used to make advance payment to North
American merchant houses for goods which they shipped to Europe. The
houses then drew on the consignees for the sum of the advance plus
interest at 6 % per annum. Parish sent the drafts to Hope & Co., who
presented them for payment on the dut. date.
  Hope & Co. was not the only house in Amsterdam to be involved in
transactions of this nature. Parish also remitted drafts drawn on Couderc
& Brants, Daniel Crommelin & Sons, W. and J.Willink, P. and C. van
Eeghen, Van Staphorst & Co., Severijn & Hazebroek, Braunsberg & Co.,
Ruys & Zimmerman and Raymond & Theodore de Smeth. The first five
of these had long-established connexions with the United States. The
Rotterdam link was formed by Littledale & Dixon, while in Antwerp
most of the business was transacted via David Parish & Co. and the
remainder via Ridgway & Mertens. Completing the chain were Trotreau &
Labouchere, the house controlled by P.C.Labouchere's younger brother,
and De La Roche & Co. in Nantes.
  This extremely simple and obvious model allowed of variation, each
variant affording a given rate of profit according to the relationship be-
tween the rates of exchange. For example, Parish could draw on Baring &
Co. and remit the drafts to them. As we have established, the United
States had a deficit on its balance of trade with England and so negotiable
documents on well-established British houses were very much in demand.
Baring, in turn, could remit to Hope & Co. drafts which American houses