

draft agreement with Ouvrard of 12th December 1805 for one in the same
form with the French Treasury. As regards the drafts which had already
been despatched, Hope was prepared to settle with the minister, via
Baguenault, when remittances were received. David Parish was instructed
not to enter into any fresh transactions until further notice. 1
 Labouchere took advantage of Ouvrard's presence in Amsterdam to
settle other matters such as the placing of the balance of the IO-million
guilder loan. Dealings with the entrepreneurs had commenced in Novem-
ber 1805 at a price of 921- %, but the Franco-Spanish financial crisis and
the ensuing bankruptcies had gradually forced the rate down. Hope
wished to reserve the right to dispose of the remaining 4,800 bonds at
90 %. It was agreed that Ouvrard & Co. would guarantee the interest and
principal due on 1st July 1806. 2
 Ouvrard returned to Paris at the end of February 1806. It soon became
clear that the power of decision no longer rested with him. Mollien in-
sisted on a price of 3 francs 75 centimes for the piastre with a monthly
payment of I million francs, commencing on 1st March 1806. The price
for the piastres was acceptable to Labouchere, but he was strongly op-
posed to the idea of fixed instalments, because it was impossible to predict
whether the proceeds of the sale of the piastres would arrive with the
desired regularity. Mollien yielded to Labouchere's objections in respect
of the bills which had already been despatched, but as far as the available
ones were concerned he stood firm on minor points, with the result that
the negotiations became deadlocked. 3
 For Ouvrard, the heavens grew darker and darker. Mollien had ordered
a further investigation of the Treasury's books, which were anything but
easy to interpret, and this revealed that the Compagnie had debts totalling
not 87 million francs, but something approaching 142 million. Its assets
amounted to 80 million francs or thereabouts, so that the true deficit was
of the order of 60 million. Security for this deficit comprised drafts on
Spanish America to a value of nearly 20 million piastres and others worth
321- million francs issued by the Caja de Consolidacion. A substantial
portion of the latter drafts had been given by Ouvrard to French houses
as security for credits granted to Spain. For example, Michel the Younger
held drafts to a value of nearly 111- million francs, and Armand Seguin
held others worth something like 7 million.
 Spain, however, had given Ouvrard drafts totalling considerably more
than it had received in money and goods. This is understandable because
the proceeds of the drafts on Spanish America had still to be received.
Now, all the drafts which Ouvrard had held had been transferred to the

                                    306
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

 French Treasury, and it would be most unfair to make Spain responsible
 for the payment in full of these. 1
   The man appointed to negotiate on behalf of Spain was Don Eugenio
 Izquierdo, Godoy's personal agent, who, over the heads of his country's
 official diplomatic representatives, liaised with the French authorities.
 Since 1797 Izquierdo had undertaken numerous secret diplomatic mis-
 sions to France on behalf of Godoy. In 1806 Godoy set out to obtain
 Napoleon's agreement to a partition of Portugal, whereby he, Godoy,
 would acquire a kingdom of his own. With this great prize in view, he was
 prepared to go to any lengths to meet Napoleon's financial demands. An
 obstacle to an early settlement was the inability of the Caja de Consoli-
 dacion to honour the drafts drawn on it. Efforts by Izquierdo, with the
 assistance of Talleyrand's confidential representative, Michel Simons, to
 negotiate a loan of 30 million guilders with De Smeth in order to provide
 the Caja with much-needed funds, produced no immediate result. 2
  On loth May 1806, Mollien and Izquierdo finally agreed that the onus
 which could reasonably be imposed on Spain was limited to the actual
 deficit of the Compagnie, i.e. 60 million francs. This sum was to be paid by
 means of drafts on Spanish America totalling 10 million piastres, for
which a rate of exchange of 3 francs 75 centimes was agreed, and others
to a value of 24 million francs drawn on Espinosa. As France already held
drafts on Spanish America totalling 20 million piastres and others on
Espinosa to a value of 321 million francs, the balance of 10 million
piastres and 81 million francs, was given back to Spain. It was agreed that
the drafts on Espinosa would be met in cash at the rate of 3 million
francs per month, commencing on 31st May 1806, and that the governors
of the colonies in Spanish America were to be instructed to permit the
French Treasury or its agents to freely export the 10 million piastres
accruing to it. 3
  In addition to this official agreement with the French Treasury-indeed
on the same day-Izquierdo reached a compromise with the Compagnie.
This concerned the difference between the deficit of 60 million francs
which Spain was committed to pay to France and the 34 million francs
which the Compagnie had actually advanced to Spain. Under pressure
from Mollien, Ouvrard and his partners in the consortium undertook to
return all drafts from the Caja which were in their possession, since these
would no longer be honoured by the Caja, and also to persuade other
holders, such as Michel the Younger and Seguin, to do the same. It was
left to the Compagnie to settle with them.
The Compagnie also undertook to pay the Spanish Treasury a sum of
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS