

                                   302
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

 vales, Ouvrard, as we have seen, was unable to honour his promise, with
the result that the circulation collapsed and Recamier and Fulchiron were
 forced to suspend their payments. 1
  Even more disturbing were the consequences of the exchange operations
 set in train by the Caja de Consolidacion with the houses of Hervas and
 Bastide in Paris, Croese in Amsterdam and Meyer Michel David and Van
 Heyningen & Co. in Hamburg. The Caja had furnished drafts on Mexico
to a value of two million piastres as security, but when Ouvrard failed to
produce funds and the rate for the vales collapsed, the Mexican drafts
became temporarily worthless.
  Logically, in view of all these distressing events, the meeting attended by
Labouchere in Paris sent a report by express messenger to Ouvrard in
Madrid, and with it a request that he return as soon as possible. He did
not, however, arrive until 6th December and even then was unable to
offer any comfort. He had the greatest difficulty in keeping his feet and
did not think twice about sacrificing the interests of others to save himself. 2
One after the other, those who had participated in the circulation by the
Caja were ruined; first Hervas and Bastide, then Croese and finally David
and Van Heyningen in Hamburg. Hervas, who for a time had served as
the French Charge d'Affaires in Spain and, at the request of Napoleon,
had been given the title of Marquis d' Almenara, sought a way out of his
difficulties by accepting the post of Spanish envoy in Constantinople. 3
  No such opportunity, however, existed for Croese and he was forced to
apply to the Schepenen of the City of Amsterdam for a twelve-month mora-
torium. As receivers they appointed Paul Iwan Hogguer, Joan Hodshon
and Pierre Cesar Labouchere. The last-named was not particularly keen
to undertake the task, but he saw only too well that he could not decline
in view of the house's deep involvement with Hope's Spanish interests.
Moreover, Hope & Co. were in a better position than any other house to
defend Croese's interests before the Caja de Consolidacion by reason of
the substantial securities which they held. 4 In addition to the business
with Spanish America and the loan of 10 million guilders, the Company
could also bring into the discussion the 2,590 bales of Spanish wool which
Hope and Baguenault jointly had received from Ouvrard for sale on
commission. There was also the matter of 2,465 bales of Spanish wool
which Ouvrard had had shipped direct to Ball Davis & Vaughan in
Bristol, to which, if need be, a claim could be laid via Baring. 5
  With the collapse of his edifices of credit, Ouvrard's position and that of
his Compagnie began to crumble. To start with, Ouvrard was confronted
with the resignation of Desprez, whose role as co-ordinator at the Treasury

                                     30 3
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

was transferred to a syndicate of the Receveurs Generaux. Next, Barbe
Marbois demanded a statement of Ouvrard's account with the Treasury.
Payment of his claims against the Ministry of War and the Admiralty was
postponed until the account with the Treasury had been examined. Lastly,
Ouvrard was obliged to subordinate his claims on Spain and other coun-
tries to settling his affairs with the French Treasury-a task which could not
be completed before the emperor had returned. Thus, by the time Napo-
leon arrived in Paris, the activities of the Compagnie had largely ceased
and the day of reckoning for Ouvrard had dawned.!
  Labouchere's own dealings with Ouvrard, after the latter's return to
Paris, were partially successful. To his great annoyance, Labouchere could
make no headway in matters of benefit to Croese, because Ouvrard re-
jected every compromise. In a letter to Baring, Labouchere wrote of
Ouvrard: 'There is in the man's disposition a spirit of distrust and avarice
which cannot easily be conceived.' In Labouchere's view, Ouvrard was
damaging his own plans by his short-sighted self-interest just when these
were about to bear fruit. This was the only occasion on which Labouchere
voiced explicit criticism of Ouvrard. 2
  In the matter of the piastre transaction, Labouchere made slightly more
progress, though no settlement was reached. On 12th December 1805 a
provisional agreement was reached between the two, after which Labou-
chere offered to take over drafts for between 10 and 15 million piastres at
a rate of exchange of 3 francs and 75 centimes. Ouvrard, whose position in
 France and Spain had been undermined by events, was hesitant about
entering into a definitive agreement, and he wrote to Madrid requesting
approval. In anticipation of this, Labouchere took back to Amsterdam
drafts worth 6t million piastres. At the end of January 1806, Labouchere
 made a further attempt to finalize matters, but by that time Ouvrard had
 other things on his mind. 3