

                                    312
E I Rey se ha servido conceder permiso a la Casa
de                                                       para que
desde el puerto de                                pucda despachar
con pabellon                                    ycon arteglo a fa
R eal Orden de 24 de D iciembre de 1804                       1
                      tlombrado

      D ios gum-de a            v.       muchos tlnos.
                           de                  de 180




     Blank licence for trade with the Spanish colonies
                               ACCOUNT 'X'

between 5 % and 71 %. The total percentage of dues gradually increased,
from I I %in May 1806 to 33 % in the second half of 1807, but this varied
within such wide limits that no clear line is discernible. 1
  The insurance premium for the round voyage amounted to 121 % of the
value of the cargo. To ensure that, in the event of the loss of a ship and its
cargo, the insurance premium and the 71- % commission for Parish and
Hope would be recovered, the Olivers inflated the estimated value of the
cargo.2
  From the archives of Robert and John Oliver, documents relating to
22 expeditions have survived, and these show the nett profit, of which
one-third was due to Parish's principals. This amounted to approximately
two-thirds of the difference between the nett value of the cargo when it
left Baltimore and the nett proceeds of the sale in Vera Cruz. The remain-
ing one-third represented freight charges, insurance and other costs in-
curred by the Olivers.3
  Craig's death, in June 1807, opened the way for a new and very different
agreement between the Olivers and Parish. Instead of one-third of the nett
profit, Parish had to be content with 371- % of the nett value of the cargo
in Baltimore; moreover, the 20% import duty and Parish's own com-
mission were to be paid from this, leaving a mere 15% for other 'com-
pensations.'
  For Parish and his principals, the new situation was decidely less favour-
able than the old. In place of 20 % import duty plus 21- % commission for
Parish himself and 5 %for Hope & Co., all calculated on the nett value of
the cargo, plus 3J! % of the nett profit, there now remained only a bare
15 % of the nett value of the cargo. This arrangement, it appears, was
applied to eight shipments.
  The last two cargoes shipped by the Olivers under licences obtained from
Parish were subject to another arrangement. The 371- % of the nett value
was retained, but the expeditions were undertaken jointly by Parish and
the Olivers. In view of the extremely unfavourable nature of the 371- %
system, one may wonder whether the arrangement reached for the two
final expeditions did not perhaps apply to the preceding eight. When
Craig died, it was more or less a foregone conclusion that someone would
take his place. The expeditions in the months of February to May 1807
produced nett profits in excess of the nett value of the cargoes. Parish's
commercial insight being what it was, it is extremely unlikely that he
would have been prevailed upon to accept such less favourable terms.
  In settling their accounts with Auguste Ouvrard & Co. and the Caja, the
Company maintained the 371- % system, i.e. import duty at 20 % and 15%
                                     3 14
                               ACCOUNT 'X'