

                                  333
             BETWEEN SA TEL LITES AND N APOLEONITES

on this subject, but certain conditions put forward by him had thus far
made it unlikely that the entrepreneurs would be greatly interested.
 It was essential that the new loan should serve as a means for the con-
version of the outstanding portions of all the previous Spanish loans
obtained in Holland, with the exception of the one of 1805. Moreover,
measures would have to be taken to put an end to the Spanish habit of
reissuing bonds accepted upon conversion-and at lower price at that.
This practice had caused more than enough trouble in connexion with the
conversion loans issued by Croese.
 Labouchere felt that it would be advisable to reduce the rate of interest
from the 6 % referred to in the royal warrant which Simons brought with
him to 51 %, and to lower the premium from 5! to 5 %, thereby matching
the conditions of the new negotiation to those of the loan of 1805 and
protecting the entrepreneurs against losses on 1805 bonds which were still
in their possession. He also proposed that the initial repayment should
be deferred from the end of the first year to the end of the third, in order
to avoid overloading Spain's finances. He made it plain that there could
be no question of limiting commission to bonds actually sold: in many
instances, it was precisely the initial lots which demanded substantial
sacrifices in the shape of reductions, etc. to secure placement. If the
Spanish government refused to yield on this point, the loan was unlikely
to get off the ground. Finally, it was for Labouchere a conditio sine qua
non that as yet unhonoured drafts drawn by Croese on the Caja de Con-
solidacion should be met by way of the new loan in order that that house
could resume normal business. 1
 Fortunately for Hope & Co., time was not on Izquierdo's side. The
French continued to press the Spanish Court for prompt payment of the
agreed 3 million francs per month, and the Negociants Reunis had
protested the drafts for 5 million francs which had been given to
Izquierdo on loth May 1806, with the result that he was unable to fall
back on this reserve. Moreover, Mollien had no intention of allowing
Spain to share in the 50 % discount on supplies to the army and navy
which he had forced upon the Negociants Reunis for the benefit of the
Treasury. Faced with this situation, Izquierdo temporarily sought refuge
in chicanery-something which fitted in well with the policy of Godoy,
who in the summer and early autumn of 1806 was considering breaking
off relations with France. 2
 Following the great French military successes against the Prussians at
Jena and Auerstadt, however, Godoy abandoned his plan and devoted
himself to the task of getting back into Napoleon's good books. The early

                                    334
              BETWEEN SA TELLlTES AND NAPOLEONITES

 negotiation with Hope & Co. of a loan, which would enable the payments
 desired by France to be effected, was thus of some political importance.
   But final agreement with the Company was not immediately forthcom-
 ing. Izquierdo had on his own initiative raised the capital sum of the loan
 to 36 million guilders in order to provide additional monies for payment
 to France. Labouchere rejected the proposed increase, adding that even
 30 million was excessive. In days gone by, an issuing house could enter
 into contracts with entrepreneurs which provided guarantees for the lender
 of payment at set times; but the majority of the entrepreneurs had long
 since disappeared and now a house could consider itself fortunate if it
 succeeded in placing a loan in dribs and drabs among the few entrepre-
 neurs who remained. Unless the Company received remittances for inter-
est and principal on the 1793 loan on 1st November, there was no hope
 of floating the new one. 1
  This ultimative conclusion failed to elicit any word from Madrid, but,
 acting on behalf ofIzquierdo, Simons-who had visited Amsterdam in the
company of Ouvrard at the end of October-authorized the Company to
advertise the payments on 1st November. With this step, a foundation
 upon which the parties could come to terms was laid. 2 By the 13th
 November they had agreed to the point where Labouchere was able to
apply to King Louis for formal permission to open the loan. 3
  The proposed loan was of 30 million guilders for twelve years, com-
mencing on 1st November 1809. The rate of interest was to be 51 %, and
a bonus of 5 % would be payable on principal sums repaid. As security
for the loan, the Company received drafts on Mexico totalling nearly
281 million piastres which matured regularly throughout the period, and
which could be collected in Vera Cruz in the event of the Spanish govern-
ment failing to meet its obligations towards the lenders.
  Hope & Co. expressed their willingness to take over the loan at 90 %. In
addition, they stood out for, and secured, a commission of 7 % on the
value of bonds placed-which implied that Labouchere had acquiesced in
the Spanish demands on this point. It was agreed that I % commission
would be payable on principal repayments and 1 % on interest. Interest
would be payable from 1st November 1806 and a bonus of six months'
interest would be paid 'aux preneurs des obligations.' Time would reveal
that preneurs and entrepreneurs were one and the same.
  The following were to be accepted in lieu of cash for the purposes of the
loan: the balance of the bonds of the Echenique loans, in value totalling
more than five million guilders, at the price of 95 %; the balance of the
Croese conversion loans, totalling 4,300,000 guilders; and the last 1,200