

                                    337
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

additional security. Auguste Ouvrard & Co., however, remained guar-
antors for the full sum pending settlement by the Spanish Court. 1
 The Company reserved in full its claims in respect of other credit bal-
ances on Auguste Ouvrard & Co.'s account, including sums receivable.
The drafts for 1,250,000 piastres, which had earlier been handed to
Alexander Baring, were specifically referred to in this respect. By carefully
avoiding any reference to Fran<;ois Ouvrard & Co., the Company re-
emphasized its refusal to recognize the transfer of Auguste Ouvrard's
assets.
 This statement elicited the formal approval of Michel the Younger and
Fulchiron, but no word was received from Seguin or Espinosa. There
could thus be no question of unfettered access to the monies placed in
Baguenault's charge. For Hope & Co., this arrangement at least had the
significant advantage that they were absolved from any further manipu-
lations on Ouvrard's part. Incoming credits for Ouvrard's account were
transferred to Baguenault, after which the question of who was to receive
the money became one for Ouvrard and his creditors to squabble about.
Hope & Co. were required to do no more than exercise formal super-
vision. 2
 Although dissociating itself from Ouvrard and his affairs, the Company
had by no means abandoned him. This became clear to Councillor of
State Louis when, during his sojourn in Amsterdam in the Spring of 1807,
he haughtily demanded to be allowed to inspect Ouvrard's various ac-
counts. Labouchere replied that the Company was under no obligation
to disclose to Louis whether or not it controlled funds belonging to
Ouvrard, adding that Louis must be aware of the impropriety of his
question. That the rebuke had found its mark was shown by Louis's first
letter following his return to Paris: in this, he asked which of his actions
in Holland had seemed to Labouchere to be out of place. 3
  Apart from this verbal duel, Louis's contacts with Hope & Co. were
valuable and fruitful. As explained earlier, they led to agreement con-
cerning the method of dealing with the drafts on Mexico which remained
in the possession of the French Treasury. Moreover, Louis was charged
with making a further effort to obtain the approval of King Louis Napo-
leon for the floating of the Spanish loan. Labouchere, too, made many
journeys to The Hague for this purpose, in addition to which the good
offices of the French and Spanish envoys were invoked. 4
  The various audiences with King Louis showed that he first wished to see
a loan for Holland placed, and that his approval for the loan to Spain
depended upon this. When the councillor of state requested the king's
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

 final word on the matter, the latter replied: 'I will gladly give it when my
 loan is assured, but not before.' 1
   Hope & Co. were thus obliged to embark willy-nilly on a negotiation for
 the considerable sum of 40 million guilders-and this for the benefit of
 a government of which Labouchere wrote: 'it can attribute its discredit
 only to its own bad financial policy.' Following the intercession of Robert
Voute, acting in the capacity of Director of the Treasury under the regime
 of King Louis, a consortium was formed consisting of Hope & Co.,
 Raymond and Theodore De Smeth, W. & J.Willink, J.Hodshon & Son
 and W.van Brienen & Son, all of Amsterdam. These houses jointly de-
clared their willingness to launch a loan of 40 million guilders at 6 %
interest. To encourage investors, bonuses and even an additional bonus
were offered. The loan was to run from 1st April 1807 to 1st April 1825.
 A sum of 4 million guilders was to be set aside annually from the taxes
collected in Amsterdam, and placed in a sinking fund to be set up for the
purpose. All matured but unpaid interest vouchers relating to the national
debt, including the debts of the Oost-Indische Compagnie which had been
taken over by the government, were to be accepted in lieu of cash, as were
matured drafts payable by the Receiver General, Daniel Hooft.2
  It was of the utmost importance to the Company that subscriptions to
the loan should be forthcoming speedily and in such a volume that the
king could not withhold his approval for the loan to Spain. On 7th April,
one week after the loan had opened, 10 million guilders had been sub-
scribed; by the 12th the 15t million mark was reached. But then the flow
ceased. By 19th April just over 18 million had been received, and from
that point the total inched upwards, finally reaching 22 million on 11th
May.3
  This point having been reached, Labouchere felt that the market should
be left to settle until the end of the month. In the meantime, a start could
be made with the Spanish loan, the Berigt of which he wished to have
published by the 19th. But the death of the king's son and the ensuing
Court mourning caused publication to be postponed until the 25th.4
  This did not mark the end of Hope & Co. 's involvement with Napoleon's
family. Early in May 1807 another Napoleonite approached the Company
regarding a loan. Acting on instructions from King Joseph of Naples,
Gerardin, his equerry, visited the Company's offices bearing a letter of
introduction from Louis. The nature of his instructions and the conver-
sations which followed made it clear that King Joseph desired to bring his
country to the notice of the capital market in Holland by means of a
modest loan. 5