

takers: no one was willing to risk dealing in politically-tainted drafts. In
desperation, the consul turned to David Parish, who was perfectly willing
to put them through Account 'X.' During the three years 1807-1809,
more than a million piastres was paid to De Beaujour. 1
 In the meantime, Baring Bros. & Co. had energetically set about imple-
menting the contract. Late in May 1807 the frigate 'Diana,' with Charles
Baring on board as supercargo, had set sail. Unfortunately, the documents
sent from Madrid did not include an order for the vessel to be admitted to
Caracas and thus this part of the expedition had to be abandoned. The
drafts on Caracas were transferred by endorsement to Baring's agents in
Jamaica, Atkinson & Co., in order that they could make an attempt to
present them at a later date. 2
 On 20th October 1807 Baring Bros. & Co. reported that the 'Diana' had
arrived safely at Portsmouth with 3,679,835 piastres on board. The freight
charges and attendant expenses had to be repaid to the Bank of England.
A sum of 25,780 pounds sterling, representing commissions for Charles
Baring and Sir Francis Baring, and incidental expenses, was claimed. The
nett proceeds totalled just over 772,000 pounds sterling, which means that
the sum paid per piastre was four shillings and twopence. 3 The French
Treasury was recompensed at the rate of 3 francs 85 centimes for each
piastre received in London plus i %commission for Hope & Co.'s agents,
making approximately 3 francs 90 centimes in all. Assuming the pound
to have been equal to cf I 1.50 ,and the franc to 48 guilder cents, it can be
calculated that Hope and Baring made a joint profit of 52 guilder cents on
each piastre. This, however, is only an approximate figure because it is
impossible to ascertain the exact rates of exchange applying to these
remittances.
 While the 'Diana' was loading the piastres off Vera Cruz, another
British man-of-war set sail for Malta carrying a cargo of two million
piastres for Gordon & Murphy's account. Thus, the deliveries of piastres
for the Spanish government continued normally alongside the Hope-
Baring operations. 4

The developments concerning the drafts on Havana to a value of
700,000 piastres were considerably more adventuresome. In September
r807 Parish had sent an agent to Cuba with instructions to present the
drafts, but shortly after arriving there the man had died of yellow fever. 5
Parish thereupon requested Nolte to wind up his affairs in New Orleans
and take charge of the collection in Havana. The original plan provided
for New Orleans to play an important role, both for the shipment of

                                    32 9
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

merchandise and the reception of cargoes of silver. But under the sub-
sequent contract with the Olivers the majority of cargoes were shipped
from Baltimore and the vessels, laden with piastres, returned to that port.
Such silver as did arrive in New Orleans could be remitted only with the
utmost difficulty owing to the scarcity of safe drafts on ports in the
northeastern part of the country and on England. 1
 When Nolte arrived in Cuba he was faced with an unforeseen problem.
The letter of advice from the Spanish Minister of Finance, which accom-
panied the drafts, referred specifically to payment in silver coin. With the
interruption, by the war with England, of communications with Mexico,
the golden dubio on had become the sole coinage in Cuba, and thus
payment in the stipulated coinage could not be made. Nolte's reaction to
this situation was to propose to the Intendant of Cuba, Don Rafael
Gomez Roubaud, that the drafts on Havana should be exchanged for
drafts on Vera Cruz. At first the Intendant was not sympathetic towards
the suggestion, but veiled references to the displeasure of Don Rafael's
patron, Talleyrand, and the prospect of a handsel, finally won him over
to Nolte's point of view. 2 In exchange for the draft for 700,000 piastres,
he received one on Vera Cruz for 945,000 piastres.
  Nolte had reasoned that the rate of exchange of the piastre in relation to
the dubloon was lower in the United States than in Cuba. He accordingly
maintained that in order to collect the required sum in piastres in America,
the amount in dubloons would need to be increased by one-sixth. More-
over, because the Spanish government had failed to meet its obligation to
effect payment in Cuba, he felt it necessary to include an insurance pre-
mium of 25 % for the voyage from Vera Cruz to Philadelphia. Even with
a surchange of 35 %, or 245,000 piastres, it would pay the Spanish govern-
ment to settle on these terms. In all probability, the handsel of 14,000
piastres was the decisive factor. 3
 At the end of 1807 the dqlft for 945,000 piastres was sent to Vera Cruz,
where it was promptly accepted and paid. For Nolte, the homeward
voyage proved to be an anti-climax. The vessel in which he travelled was
wrecked on a reef near one of the Florida Keys, and he and the crew were
washed up on an uninhabited island. Although they were soon rescued by
a fishing boat from Nassau, in the Bahamas, it was mid-March before
Nolte reached Philadelphia. 4
  As a result of this unexpected delay, Mollien heard about Nolte's trans-
action before Hope & Co. The Intendant of Cuba reported on it to
Talleyrand, and the letter, carried by a Spanish vessel which evaded the
English cruisers, actually reached Talleyrand. According to Mollien, the