

                                    34 1
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND N APOLEONITES

1807 were to prove beneficial to his efforts. In July, following the Treaty of
Tilsit, Napoleon demanded of Portugal that it should sever all political
and economic links with England. The Spanish government was not told
of this in advance, but now that it seemed that Portugal was at last being
dealt with, the matter of its partition-and with it Godoy's aspiration
after a kingdom of his own -again came up for discussion. 1
 The negotiations on this subject opened in Paris in September. In Napo-
leon's view, they afforded a suitable opportunity to put pressure on
Izquierdo, as Godoy's agent, concerning the arrears in the Spanish pay-
ments to France. For Izquierdo, it was an opportunity to repeat his usual
excuses about Spain's poverty, but now with added emphasis: if Napoleon
wished Spain to mount an army against Portugal, he ought not simul-
taneously to demand her last resources.
 This argument must have convinced the emperor. The grootboek entries
relating to the Spanish Crown and to the loan of 30 million guilders
reveal that on 11th November 1807 a sum of I-} million francs was placed
at Izquierdo's disposal; in contrast to the five previous entries, however,
there is no reference to payment of this sum to the French Treasury. 2
 Ifwe examine the accounts relating to this loan in 1807 in their entirety,
we observe that the sale of 23,000 bonds yielded something over 20
million guilders. Of this sum, nearly 9 million guilders was subscribed in
the form of vouchers and bonds from earlier loans. Of the balance, more
than d- million was paid to the French Treasury. Because Spain failed
to make any remittances in respect of interest or capital repayments,
totalling cf 3,850,000, in 1807, this sum was charged to the new loan.
Unmet drafts on the Caja de Consolidacion which were held by Croese,
and which totalled cf 1,400,000, were also charged to the account. The
balance of cf 1,750,000 had been used by Izquierdo himself, who had
purchased two thousand bonds of the new loan; but it had been stipulated
that these should remain in the charge of De Smeth until such time as all
the conditions applying to the loan had been met. This implied the pay-
ment in full of Croese's drafts or approval for Hope & Co. to deduct the
sum from the proceeds of the loan, the exchange of all old Spanish bonds
with payment for overdue vouchers, and the full discharge of Spain's
financial commitments to France. 3
 The submission by Hope of the annual account for 1807 concerning the
loan produced no response from either Izquierdo or Espinosa, a fact
which did not please Labouchere. The silence on the part of the Spanish
Court implied the withholding of its approval of the account and a possi-
bility of subsequent objection to certain items. We shall in due course see

                                    34 2
                    BERICHT
   Van eene Negotiatie groot DRn: MILLIOENEN GULDENS Hollnnds Cou.
rnntgeld, ten Comptoire de Heeren HOPE EN COMP. , voor rekening
van zijnc Koninglijkc Majesteit JOSEPH NAPOLEON , Koning van
Napels, Sicilien &c. &c. onder verband von aile de Inkomll:cn van Hoogst-
deszelfs Rijk cn Kroon, en Speciaal der Domeinen van Tavogtiere in de
Provincie van Pouillc, dewelke door H oogstgednchte Zijnc Koninglijke Ma·
jesteit, Specianl zijn afgezonderd, tot berating der IntIesfen en der Termij.
nen vaG Afiosling de:z.er Negoriati e.