

                                    339
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

Labouchere explained the pros and cons of such a loan to Gerardin.
Naples was unknown to the Dutch public as a borrower, and thus little
interest could be expected from investors, certainly in the beginning. On
the other hand, King Louis was well disposed towards the loan which his
brother sought; indeed, he was understood to be considering putting part
of the 5 % reserve on his own loan, which was provisionally blocked, into
the loan to Naples.
   In view of King Joseph's total lack of experience of loans in Holland,
Labouchere made a proposal on the lines current at the time. It would be
necessary for the king to furnish a principal debenture for a loan of 3
million guilders; a model for this was given to Gerardin. The loan would
be for seven years, commencing on 1st July 1807, and interest, at 6 %,
would be payable annually on a set date. Repayment, at the rate of
500,000 guilders per year, would commence at the end of the second year,
which implied that the loan would be paid off on 1st July 1814. The
required security would comprise the revenues of the Kingdom of Naples
in general, and those of the domain of Tovegliere, in the province of
Puglia, in particular.
   Hope & Co. were willing to take over the bonds at 90 %, in addition to
which they required a commission of 5 % on the principal sum. It was
stipulated that a commission of I % would be chargeable on payments of
interest and principal, and that stamp duty on the principal sum, esti-
mated to be I %, would be payable by the Kingdom of Naples. The sum
of the interest due on I st July 1808 would be deducted from the proceeds
 of the loan and remain in the Company's charge. A similar stipulation
had been made in respect of the loan to Spain in order to guarantee at
least the initial interest payment and thereby to give the entrepreneurs an
 opportunity to place the loan on the market gradually. As a final con-
dition for the Naples loan, Labouchere insisted that Hope & Co. should
 be clearly designated agents for King Joseph, and nothing more; in this
 role, they would not be required to guarantee the success of the loan. On
 the same day, 13th May 1807, Gerardin accepted Labouchere's conditions
 and authorized the Company to float the loan. He thereupon departed for
 Paris, leaving the Company to obtain the formal approval of King Louis.!
   Labouchere, however, was preoccupied with the Spanish loan. Even
 before the Berigt appeared, Raymond and Theodore De Smeth and
 Willem Borski had become involved in the matter. Hope & Co. accepted
 responsibility for half the loan sum, De Smeth for 130 ths and Borski for
  120 ths. All risks attaching to advances to Spain were to be shared in this

 ratio, as were the subsequent profits. 2

                                    340
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

The Berigt appeared in the newspapers on 25th May 1807. On the same
day, Hope & Co. and Willem Borski, acting on behalf of an anonymous
group of entrepreneurs, signed the initial contract for the acceptance of
3,000 Spanish bonds relating to the new loan. Payment was to be effected
in four monthly instalments. In addition to enjoying interest with effect
from the date of the first instalment, the entrepreneurs received a com-
mission of 5 % and a bonus of six months' interest, which was equal to an
extra commission of 2i- %. Half of the sums which comprised the in-
stalments were to be paid in cash, and for this purpose the matured
vouchers relating to the Echenique loans and Hope's loan of 1793 would
be regarded as cash. The same was to apply to all payments advertised by
Croese but not effected because of his moratorium. The entrepreneurs
were also permitted to meet up to one-quarter of their obligations, or
cf 750,000, with Echenique bonds and a similar amount with bonds re-
lating to Croese's conversion loans or Hope's 179310an.l
  This pattern was broadly maintained in all subsequent contracts, albeit
the 'cash' portion gradually increased to tths and in some cases reached
17oths. In the period up to 1st November 1807, 23,000 bonds were trans-
ferred to Borski and his fellow entrepreneurs. 2 With this, activity virtually
ceased, the entrepreneurs merely taking options on 3,000 bonds until 1st
January 1808, on 2,000 between 1st January and 1st March 1808 and on
the remaining 2,000 between 1st March and 1st May 1808. Izquierdo was
advised that the Company's ability to maintain the monthly payments of
I t million francs to the French Treasury depended upon these options
being converted into firm contracts. In no case did this occur,
however, and Hope's final payment was accordingly made in November,
by which time 9 million francs had been paid over from the proceeds of
the loan. 3
  To Labouchere's annoyance, Izquierdo was slow in making his payments
to the French Treasury. Immediately after the floating of the loan in June
1807, Labouchere had complained to Mollien that Izquierdo was delaying
the payments on purely formal grounds. In July the delay had assumed
such proportions that Baguenault & Co. commenced to charge interest
on the funds which they had made available but which had remained idle
because of Izquierdo's dilatory tatics. Mollien ultimately ordered the
attachment of the Izquierdo assets which were in Hope's charge, but this
had little effect. 4
  The explanation for Izquierdo's conduct probably lay in his sincere
desire to defend Spain's weak financial position against the French, inso-
far as this lay in his power. Political developments in the second half of