

                                    335
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

bonds relating to Hope & Coo's loan of 1793, which fell due in equal
portions on 1st November 1806 and 1st November 1807. To these could
be added the interest due on all the bonds up to the date of redemption,
the interest and principal payment announced by Croese in 1805 (the
bonds concerned having been deposited but not encashed) and the pro-
ceeds of the redemption of 1,000 bonds on 1st July 1806, with which
Hope & Co. had provisionally debited Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard. Finally,
it was stipulated that the sum of interest due on 1st November 1808
would be deducted in advance from the proceeds of the loan.
  The nett result would be to adjust debts by Spain totalling cf 14,428,000
via the new loan. In addition, the Company reserved the right to use as
payment drafts on the Caja de Consolidacion totalling cf 1,462,000 which
were held by Croese.
  After the deduction of the 10 % margin on the issue price, Hope & Coo's
commission of 7 % and the Spanish commitments totalling cf 15,890,000,
just over ten million guilders remained. It was agreed that when the loan
had been floated the Company would aim to make It million francs
monthly available to the French Treasury, but it was stressed that
its ability to do so would depend upon the success of the loan operation.
The Company also agreed to try to obtain a reduction, from 5 % to I %,
of the stamp duty demanded by the Netherlands government on the 10
million guilders which would actually be furnished. Of this I % only a
quarter would be borne by the Company.!
  Labouchere had every reason for satisfaction with this loan contract.
Thanks to Godoy being in a tight corner, the Company had secured the
conversion of all the old Spanish loans-something which had not been
achieved at the time of the 1805 negotiation. Furthermore, the Croese
affair, which had bothered Labouchere since 1805, would shortly be re-
solved. From a business point of view also, the deal afforded interesting
prospects. The Echenique bonds, which could be converted at 95 %, stood
at 60% or thereabouts at the end of 1805. A timely purchase of these
 bonds could thus lead to a very substantial profit; this fact will not have
 escaped Simons and his patron, Talleyrand. 2
  This hopeful and potentially profitable beginning gave way to immense
disappointment. On 18th November 1806 the Dutch Minister of Finance,
 Gogel, reported that King Louis had decided to withhold approval of the
 new Spanish loan. 3 Izquierdo, who had meanwhile arrived in Holland,
 immediately set off for The Hague, where it was made clear to him that
 the king's decision was less than final. The news cheered him somewhat,
 but it did little to dispel the problem of meeting the claims by Hope & Co.
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

for the payments made by them on 1st July and 1st November of that
year-claims which he knew the Company would not allow to remain
unmet for long. He offered drafts on Mexico to a value of 3,200,000
piastres but these were refused by Labouchere on the grounds that com-
munication by sea had been rendered extremely uncertain by the Berlin
Decree of 21st November 1806. The problem was solved by an offer by
Auguste Ouvrard & Co. to guarantee the sums advanced. Here, too, the
American operations provided the Company with indispensable cover in
the back in its dealings with Spain. 1
 In late December 1806 Ouvrard sent Jean Baptiste Ouin to Amsterdam
as his agent, for the purpose of settling those of his affairs in which Hope
& Co. were concerned. To Labouchere's intense displeasure, a deed
stating that Auguste Ouvrard & Co. owed It million francs to Fran~ois
Ouvrard & Co. was signed in Paris at the same time. Ouin attempted to
persuade the Company to pay a similar sum to Fran~ois Ouvrard & Co.
from remittances received from America for Auguste Ouvrard. Such re-
mittances were not to be used for other purposes until such time as the debt
to Fran~ois Ouvrard & Co. had been settled. The effect of this 'milking' of
Auguste Ouvrard & Co. would be to devalue that company's guarantee in
respect of the advances made by Hope & Co. on 1st July and 1st No-
vember 1806 for quite a long time. 2
 Labouchere protested against what he regarded as tampering with ac-
counts, and consented only to discuss Ouvrard's interests privately with
Ouin without reference to the Paris contract. At the same time, being
mindful of Ouvrard's urgent need of funds to finance his supplies to the
French army and navy, he was at pains not to be too inflexible, with the
result that Ouin was able to return to Paris in mid-January with an
agreement in his pocket. Labouchere, however, made the implementation
of the agreement conditional upon the approval of Espinosa, Seguin,
Michel the Younger and Fulchiron. He also stipulated that any monies
placed at Ouin's disposal would be channelled via Baguenault & Co. in
Paris-with the full maintenance of the Company's claims. When, at the
end of January, Ouin transferred monies received via Baguenault to
Desprez, Labouchere declared that he would have nothing more to do
with the arrangement and would in future deal only with Baguenault. 3
 The affair was finalized early in April 1807 by a joint statement by Ouin,
Desprez and Vanlerberghe. Labouchere had limited his claim on Auguste
Ouvrard & Co. to the sum of the payment made on 1st November and
had instructed Baguenault to pay to Desprez the equivalent of the re-
deemed bonds plus the interest on these. The bonds would thus serve as an