

                                    33 0
                               ACCOUNT 'X'


Intendant had complained about the manner in which Nolte had dictated
the terms. 1
  Faced with this situation, Labouchere could do no more than promise to
obtain further information at the earliest possible moment. He did, how-
ever, immediately point out that Nolte's action had averted a redraft,
which would have added at least 28 % to the costs. After receiving Nolte's
report, Labouchere offered to pay 4 francs 50 centimes per piastre for the
700,000 covered by the draft, an increase of 60 centimes per piastre on the
contracted figure. Mollien, however, persisted in his demand that the
amount be paid in full, and eventually Labouchere agreed to this at a
price of 3 francs 75 centimes; but a substantial sum was deducted to
cover the expenses incurred. 2
  The Havana affair was officially concluded in September 1809 when
Nolte (who had meanwhile returned to Europe) and Labouchere together
tendered the final account to Mollien. During the meeting, Mollien re-
iterated the message of gratitude from the emperor which he had earlier
conveyed to Labouchere.
  With this happy ending, we have anticipated the remainder of our story.
Summarizing, it can be said that of the 10 million piastres, in the form of
drafts, which remained in French hands, more than 6 million were
collected via the United States. The treaty of July 1807, under which the
balance of the drafts were entrusted to the care of Baring Bros. & Co.,
was probably inspired in part by the increasing harassment by British
cruisers of the schooners despatched by the Olivers, and the impossibility
of obtaining British licences to cover their voyages. 3
  Whether or not Baring Bros. & Co. would succeed in carrying out further
expeditions as smoothly as the first, depended to a very great extent upon
the political situation. In the following chapter we shall see how a political
reversal in Spain completely blocked the piastre affair.




                                     33 1
                        CHAPTER TWELVE


                BETWEEN SATELLITES
                 AND NAPOLEONITES


As we saw at the end of Chapter Ten, the winding-up of Ouvrard's busi-
ness relationship with the French and Spanish governments on 10th May
1806 led to the formal transfer to Spain of the balance of the proceeds of
the 1805 loan and also of the wool which Ouvrard had shipped to
Baguenault and Hope.
 After protracted negotiations with the Company, Michel Simons suc-
ceeded in obtaining for Spain an advance of one million francs on the sale
of the wool. As the transfer of ownership to Spain had been effected to
enable that country to payoff its debts to France, Labouchere instructed
Baguenault & Co. to pay the million francs into the French Treasury on
30th June 1806. 1 The placing with the entrepreneurs of the balance of the
bonds relating to the loan of 1805 had been accomplished sooner than
had been expected, so that Hope & Co. were able to make further pay-
ments totalling 2,300,000 francs on 31st July and 25th August, for the
purposes of which the attachments by Seguin, Michel the Younger and
Fulchiron of the Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard funds held by Hope & Co.
were suspended. 2
 Where payments for the benefit of Spain were concerned, however, the
attachments, and also the Company's claims, were fully maintained. When
Espinosa failed to remit the monies to cover the redemption, with interest
due, of 1,000 bonds on 1st July 1806, a sum of more than 1,400,000
guilders was debited to Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard's account, and it was
made clear that the entry would not be expunged until such time as an
official notification was received from the Spanish government stating
that the sum might be met from the sale of the wool. Thus, as far as the
Company was concerned, Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard's guarantee of the
payment due on 1st July remained fully 111 force, whatever had been
stated in writing from Paris.3
 Spain's continuing, acute shortage of finances necessitated searching for
possible new sources in Holland. Simons's efforts to negotiate a loan of
30 million guilders with De Smeth having failed, Izquierdo made a
formal approach to Hope & Co. at the end of August 1806. Labouchere's
response was cool. Informal discussions had earlier been held with Simons