

                                    322
                               ACCOUNT 'X'

 Treaty of Tilsit, Napoleon firmly made up his mind to close the whole of
 Europe to British goods, and he proceeded to apply pressure to Louis
 Napoleon with the aim of tightening the prohibitive measures in Holland
 and elsewhere. On 16th September 1807, King Louis issued a new decree
 providing for the confiscation of any vessel which had called at a British
 port or which carried a British cargo.!
   While these developments were taking place, the atmosphere on the
 commodity market remained lively and prices continued to rise, helped
 by the action of the American consul in Amsterdam in advising the masters
 of American vessels to leave as quickly as possible. In spite of the arrival
 of fresh cargoes from America, the market remained active throughout
 the autumn. 2
  The end of the boom was nevertheless in sight. On 11th November 1807,
 partly under pressure from a faction having commercial interests in the
 West Indies, Orders in Council were issued in England which made it
 virtually impossible for neutral countries to continue shipments to the
 Continent. The acceptance of a certificate of neutrality from a French
 consul would henceforth lead to the confiscation of the cargo concerned.
 Vessels of neutral states bound for the Continent were required to call at
 an English port en route and there to pay tax on the goods carried. 3
  Napoleon's reply to this was the Milan Decree of 17th December 1807,
 which laid down that any vessel which had called at a British port would
 be declared a prize. The door was finally closed when, on 22nd December,
the United States Congress approved a proposal by President Jefferson
banning all traffic to foreign ports. With this, American trade with
Holland steadily declined. Early in January 1808 four vessels managed to
slip in via Texel, but at about the same time six American ships were
captured and taken to French ports, where they were later confiscated. 4
  On 23rd January King Louis closed all Dutch ports to foreign shipping.
Occasional evasions occurred, but these were of little importance to the
Company since it could not base its advice to American merchants on
such mere coincidences.
  In mid-February 1809 Labouchere informed Parish that not a single
pound of sugar, coffee or cotton remained. Examination of the accounts
for American imports, however, reveals that, as in his previous report,
LabouchCre took a somewhat sombre view. In 1808 the value of the goods
to which these accounts related was in excess of 5,650,000 guilders, and in
1809 nearly one and a half million guilders, indicating that the decline
in the volume of business with America was more gradual than Labou-
chere suggested. 5 Nevertheless, by early May the Company decided that
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

the time had come gradually to close the American accounts. The era of
copious shipments, from which the Company had made substantial prof-
its, was at an end.!
While the proceeds from the initial batch of drafts on Mexico were
trickling into Europe, in the shape of colonial produce, the Company, in
wnsultation with Baring & Co., was busy devising a more rapid method
for the collection of the drafts which were at that moment still held by the
French Treasury. Labouchere had first raised the matter in a letter to Sir
Francis Baring on loth May 1805, after which it had lapsed. Late in
September of the same year he raised it again. He proposed that two or
three American vessels should take cargoes from Spain to that country's
colonies and there take on board piastres, which would be unloaded at an
English port. If this were not feasible, the operation could be routed via
America, for American account. 2
  Baring's reaction was to send his confidential agent, James Richards, to
Amsterdam, but when he arrived, late in November, he found that La-
bouchere had just left for Paris to attend to matters arising from the
"financial crisis between Spain and France. 3
  The memoranda which Richards-who followed Labouchere to Paris-
carried with him reveal that the attitude of the British government to-
wards the projected operations was somewhat inconsistent. On the one
hand it was keen to stimulate the export of British goods to the Spanish
colonies, to which end it was prepared to allow British traders to export
goods from Jamaica to Vera Cruz and from there to import Mexican
products and precious metals, provided that such imports were the prop-
erty of British subjects (this, of course, implied that the Spanish govern-
ment would have to issue similar trading licences); on the other hand,
however, it was opposed to the exportation to England of unlimited
quantities of piastres because four-fifths or five-sixths of these would
 ultimately find their way into the Spanish or French Treasuries and thereby
 become 'sinews of war.' A limited operation involving, say, five to ten
million piastres would be acceptable, though even this was likely to arouse
 sensitivities, particularly in naval circles. 4
  The affair had clearly been rendered more urgent by the arrival in
 London of a Spaniard named Saratea, who made efforts, via the house of
 Gordon & Murphy, to obtain licences for the export of British manu-
 factures to ports such as Lima, Buenos Aires, Caracas and Vera Cruz. He
 stated that he was in a position to acquire the necessary Spanish licences
 and also permits for the export to England of unlimited quantities of
 piastres. s