

                                   32 4
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

This threat of competition made it vital that Labouchere should obtain
the licences requested from the Spanish government without delay. In
December 1805 he and Richards held discussions with Ouvrard, following
which there was every indication that the matter would soon be settled.
In view of Baring & Co.'s desire to participate in future piastre trans-
actions, Labouchere wrote to Alexander Baring in the following January,
urging him to come to Holland as soon as possible so that final agreement
could be reached with Ouvrard regarding the twelve million piastres
which had been offered. Baring replied that there were signs of progress
in regard to the affair in England, but that owing to Pitt's illness it was
difficult to obtain a decision from the government.!
  Pitt's death on 23rd January 1806 and the coming to office of the more
peace-seeking cabinet headed by Grenville-Fox brought a sudden change
in the situation. In France, the dramatic encounter between Napoleon
and Ouvrard on 27th January put an abrupt end to the latter's gigantic
plans.
  The scene thus changed completely. So much more sympathetic did
Alexander Baring find the new British government that on 18th February
he was able to report optimistically that: 'We are again in a fair way on a
new track on this side and can encourage you to move. Our position gives
better security than it has ever done.' 2
  Simultaneously, however, Hope & Co. were obliged to surrender their
holding of Mexican drafts to the French Treasury, with the result that all
the negotiations had to be started afresh. Whereas the urge for peace on
the part of the British government had facilitated Baring's negotiations,
it formed an obstacle to the Company's efforts to reach agreement with
the French Treasury inasmuch as a restoration of peace would render its
services as a mediator superfluous. 3
  In March 1806 Labouchere was still optimistic about an early decision,
but by April his attitude had become tinged with reservation. We have
already seen how Mollien, having abandoned his original demand for
fixed monthly payments, refused to yield on minor details.4
  Despite the slow progress of the negotiations with the French Treasury,
Alexander Baring considered the matter of sufficient importance to justify
making his long-postponed visit to Amsterdam, where he arrived at the
beginning of June 1806. He hoped to be able to take a signed contract
back to England, but the French government continued to raise objec-
tions, chief among which was that, should peace come, Hope and Baring
would make far too large a profit on the terms offered. 5
A positive facet of the visit was that it enabled the two companies to

                                   32 5
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

agree on terms and conditions. Their discussions were based on the prem-
ise that both would act as buyers and not as agents. Freight costs, marine
risk and other hazards not covered by insurance would be met jointly and
equally. In preparation for a final agreement, two contracts were drawn
up. In the first of these, Baring Bros. & Co. undertook to pay 3 francs
75 centimes in Paris for every piastre collected. In the second, they prom-
ised to pay a sum (which was unspecified) to Hope & Co. in London for
each piastre. The latter figure was to be the price at which Baring would
sell the piastres. The difference between the two figures represented the
profit, and this was to be shared equally by the two houses.
  The first draft contract was for external consumption. In it, Hope under-
took to deliver, via their agent in Vera Cruz, up to 6 million piastres on
board Spanish or neutral vessels, from which they would be transferred
to vessels authorized by Baring to load piastres in the Vera Cruz roads.
Baring Bros. & Co. were committed to pay 3 francs 75 centimes for each
piastre in Paris within sixty days of the receipt of the bills of lading re-
lating to these shipments, up to a maximum of two million francs per
month. Sums remaining unpaid after the expiry of the sixty-day period
would incur interest at 1- %per month.
  Hope & Co. also committed themselves to make every effort to obtain
guarantees from the French and Spanish governments that no attack
would be made on Baring's property, irrespective of the political situation.
It was also necessary to ensure that the authorities in Mexico would not
impede the movement of the piastres to the waiting vessels, even if these
were British warships. The piastres were to be delivered on board free of
duty or charges, and vessels used exclusively for the carriage of piastres
were to be exempted from all import or export duties.
  Baring Bros. & Co. agreed to pay all freight charges and marine risk, but
the consequences of arrest by warships or by freebooters flying the flag of
France, Spain or a country allied to them were for Hope's account until
the piastres were delivered to an American port on the Gulf of Mexico or
a port in a British colony, or were put aboard a British man-of-war.
 The other draft contract, in which the transaction was approached from
the Company's position, provided for the Company to deliver the piastres
at a port in the British West Indies or in the United States. Baring Bros. &
Co. undertook to accept the piastres thus delivered and, via their autho-
rized agents, to issue receipts for these. Upon presentation of these re-
ceipts in London, Baring would pay an unspecified sum per piastre to
Hope. A different, and similarly unspecified, sum would be paid for
piastres conveyed in a British man-of-war. Baring Bros. & Co. undertook
                               ACCOUNT 'X'