

 to obtain from the British government a guarantee that the Company
 would not be hampered in its participation in the transaction and that it
 would be free to remit abroad the monies accruing to it. Baring also
 undertook to try to obtain from the British government armed protection
 for any neutral vessel which Hope might employ for the shipment of the
 piastres and, if possible, British licences for such vessels. Although the
 piastres were for Hope's account and at their risk until such time as they
 were handed over to Baring's authorized agent, Baring agreed to pay to
 the Company a sum of four shillings and sixpence for each piastre in the
event of a ship carrying piastres being arrested and seized by a British
man-of-war or by a freebooter, in spite of sailing under a British licence.!
  Before leaving Amsterdam in July 1806, Alexander Baring was given
drafts on Mexico to a value of 1,250,000 piastres for onward transmission
to David Parish. Hope & Co. had received these drafts from Ouvrard;
they represented the Spanish government's contribution to the capital of
Franl;ois Ouvrard & Co., and as such had been excluded from the drafts
restored to Mollien. 2
  From July onwards, little was written concerning the piastre contracts,
although the negotiations with the French Treasury were pursued. In mid-
November Napoleon inquired impatiently of Mollien how matters stood
in regard to the drafts on Mexico. In December he authorized Mollien to
sign any reasonable contract, provided the rate of exchange at which he
had originally accepted the piastres, i.e. 3 francs 75 centimes, was main-
tained as a minimum. 3
  Early in February 1807, Councillor of State Louis travelled to
Amsterdam, where he had various matters to attend to. Among them was
the conclusion of a contract for the Mexican drafts. As Hope & Co. had
settled the matter with Baring in the previous July, it did not take long to
reach agreement with Louis. The rate of exchange of 3 francs 75 centimes
embodied in the draft contract in July served as the basis for an agreement
covering in all 5 million piastres. 4 A report of the agreement was sent
to Baring Bros. & Co. with a request that they settle matters with the
British authorities. When this had been done, Baring Bros. & Co. would
be in a position to sign a firm contract with the Company, a copy of which
would be sent to Amsterdam.
  When Baring Bros. & Co. approached the authorities in search of their
approval, they met with an unpleasant surprise. Gordon & Murphy and
Reid Irving & Co. had already negotiated a contract to ship 10 million
piastres for the account of the Spanish government, and the British
government had undertaken not to sanction any fresh operations until

                                    32 7
                               ACCOUNT 'X'

this contract had been completed. Gordon & Murphy and Reid Irving &
Co. had reached virtual agreement with Saratea regarding the IO million
piastres during the winter of 1805, but the peace negotiations between
England and France had caused the Spanish government to hesitate be-
fore giving its approval. But the negotiations had been resumed during
the French campaign against the Prussians in October, and had ended in
agreement. 1
  Nevertheless, Alexander Baring, by reason of his position on the board
of the Bank of England, succeeded in negotiating a contract for the de-
livery of piastres. Alas, his letters to Hope & Co. do not reveal the manner
of his success. 2
  The way was now clear for Baring to sign the contract with Hope and
send it to Amsterdam. With the countersignature of the document by
Hope & Co. on 24th March 1807, the matter was settled-to the immense
relief of Louis, who, with mounting impatience, had remained in The
Hague to await the completion. 3
  On 17th April, Labouchere received drafts on Mexico to a value of
2,753,170 piastres. He also received drafts on Havana and Caracas, in
each case for 700,000 piastres, making a total of more than 4 million.4
  In correspondence with the Company, Baring Bros. & Co. indicated a
desire to extend the contract to cover drafts sent to Parish but which
remained uncollected. Hope & Co. had agreed to this in order to avoid
the two houses competing with each other in Vera Cruz. Baring was not
greatly interested in the drafts on Havana, the value of which was in-
sufficient to warrant despatching a British warship there. The piastres
from Caracas were also something of a problem, but it was felt that these
could probably be collected at the same time as those in Vera Cruz. 5
  Mollien gave his approval to the extension of the contract on condition
that a price of 3 francs 85 centimes per piastre was paid for the most recent
 drafts-ten centimes above the contract figure. The parties reached agree-
ment on this point, and on 20th July 1807 Hope & Co. and Baring Bros. &
 Co. signed a supplementary contract. The original contract thus now
 covered the entire sum of the drafts on the Spanish colonies which the
 Company held. Parish continued as principal agent, but Baring Bros. &
 Co. took over control from Hope & Co. with all the attendant dangers
 and risks. 6
  The agreement with the French Treasury also covered the drafts which
 Mollien had sent to the French consul general in Philadelphia, De Beau-
jour, in 1806 with instructions to dispose of them. De Beaujour had
 offered them to all the merchants in Philadelphia but had found no
                               ACCOUNT 'X'