

 expressed his readiness to float the loan on condition that King Louis
 agreed to furnish 1 million guilders. 1
  A further complication, in the shape of news from V oute that the king
 was not prepared to go beyond cf 500,000, caused publication of the
 Berigt to be delayed; but on 14th October Labouchere was able to an-
 nounce that the loan had opened at a nominal price of 95-96 %. It was
 stated that the bond allocations would be very small indeed, and this
 implied that the loan would be placed gradually. Labouchere had set his
 sights on rentiers, who would keep their bonds in portfolio and not use
them to play the market. 2
  The issue price of 95 % proved too high, but on 5th November Hope &
 Co., reported the signing of a contract with the entrepreneurs for
cf 500,000 at 90 %, with 5 %commission. The bonds did not move far, for
 Hope, in conjunction with Willem Borski, acted as their own entrepreneur.
 King Louis ultimately agreed to furnish cf 400,000 towards the loan, for
which, at the price of 90 %, he received 440 bonds; these were transferred
to the directors of the sinking fund relating to the 40-million guilder loan. 3
  On 24th December 1807 Hope & Co. advised Roederer that a further
cf 500,000 had been placed with the entrepreneurs at a price of 90 %.
Simultaneously Baguenault & Co., acting on behalf of anonymous prin-
cipals, applied for bonds to a nominal value of cf 500,000. We may
assume that they were instructed by Napoleon, who thus acquired an in-
direct share in the loan. The reason for his secrecy is a matter for con-
jecture, but it is probable that he did not wish to create an imperial
precedent and at the same time desired the freedom to resell the bonds
whenever he pleased. He employed the same strategy when, some time
later, a Prussian loan was floated in Amsterdam. 4
  With 2 million guilders already secured, Hope and Borski felt justified
in jointly providing the remaining million from their own funds, thus
completing the obligation towards King Joseph. 5
  During the great political upheaval which took place in the early months
of 1808, Joseph exchanged the throne of Naples for the throne of Spain.
His departure from Naples was preceded by a number of financial reforms
which concerned Hope & Co. Responsibility for the repayment of the
loan raised in Holland was transferred to the sinking fund, and Hope &
Co. were instructed to deal with its director, Prince De Gerace, on future
matters concerning interest and principal payments. 6 On 25th June 1808
Roederer informed the Company that King Joseph had instructed him to
transfer 500,000 francs from the proceeds of the loan to Paris for his civil
list. This would enable the monarch to bridge the gap between the ces-

                                     345
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

sation of one rule and the commencement of the next, and ensure that he
did not arrive in his new kingdom, Spain, completely without funds. 1

The second half of 1807 saw Ouvrard sinking deeper and deeper into the
financial morass. In June he had attempted to persuade Hope to shift the
overdue commitment for interest and principal repayment in 1806 from
his account to the new Spanish loan of thirty million guilders, but had
failed. Labouchere informed him politely but firmly that this was a matter
between Ouvrard and Espinosa. 2
  In France itself also, Ouvrard's position was becoming steadily more
perilous. Louis wrote to Labouchere early in June informing him that
Mollien had officially forbidden Ouvrard to leave Paris. The minister was
afraid that Ouvrard would go to Amsterdam and there try, to the detri-
ment of his creditors, to lay hands on the funds which Hope & Co. held
in his brother's name. Louis could not understand why a man with so
high a sense of loyalty and duty as Labouchere should protect an individ-
uallike Ouvrard against his legal creditors. All the bitterness felt by Louis
concerning his failure to get his way with Hope in February 1807 emerged
from his letter. 3
  In his reply, Labouchere flatly denied being on Ouvrard's side. The fact
that Ouvrard's assertions were precisely the opposite of Louis's proved
this. The Company was willing to be of service to Ouvrard for as long as
it believed that his ideas and plans were of general benefit or that, by
doing so, harmful operations could be avoided. There was no question of
 Hope conspiring with Ouvrard to hide funds; everything was duly ac-
counted, albeit the Company maintained its claims on Ouvrard's assets.
The Company would never lend itself to operations which conflicted with
its 'delicatesse' or with the principles of sound business. 4
  Labouchere in turn complained about a certain Maury, who had called
 upon the Company bearing a letter of recommendation from Louis.
 Maury, a partner in Sarraille & Maury, proved to be the agent for Gordon
 & Murphy. In the letter of recommendation, Louis had indicated that
 official pressure had been exerted on him to arrange piastre contracts via
 Maury. It was not clear to Labouchere whether this amounted to a hint
 to Hope & Co. to co-operate with Gordon & Murphy in the piastre deals;
 but it was very clear to him that Hope & Co. wanted nothing to do with
 a person like Maury. Three years earlier Sarraille & Maury had gone
 bankrupt, and the manner of the bankruptcy had led to criminal pro
 ceedings on grounds of embezzlement.
 Labouchere had deemed it prudent not to disclose too much information
              BETWEEN SA TELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES