

                                     354
             BETWEEN SA TELLITES AND NAPOLEONlTES

 the central junta, had authorized Hope & Co. to use the Spanish funds
 held by Gordon & Murphy and Reid Irving & Co. in the event of the
drafts for It million piastres proving un negotiable in Mexico. At about
the same time, a similar authorization had reached the Company from De
Cabarrus. 1 Labouchere was temporarily relieved of the necessity to make
a painful choice, for the junta's days in Aranjuez were numbered.
  Napoleon had not submitted tamely to the capitulation at Baylen and
Junot's defeat. Since early November his armies had been on the offensive
all over the country, and on 2nd December 1808 French forces marched
into Madrid for the second time. The central junta fled to the south,
choosing Seville as a temporary residence. 2
  This development came as a relief to Coesvelt. The junta had become
increasingly unwieldy and had ultimately assumed control over all sorts
of ministries. As far as the loans from Holland were concerned, Coesvelt
was dependent upon a committee formed from members of the junta who
knew nothing whatever about the matters with which they were supposed
to deal, and accordingly failed to reach any decisions. 3 Moreover, thanks
to Labouchere's letters, the relationship between De Cabarrus and Coes-
velt proved not to have been permanently harmed, and normal contact
was soon re-established. At the beginning of January 1809 De Cabarrus
finally gave his approval for the payment made on 1st November of the
preceding year out of Auguste Ouvrard's funds. 4
  The possibility of further shipments of piastres from Mexico, however,
had evaporated. The early days of February 1809 brought news of the
definitive protestation of the drafts for It million piastres. Coesvelt and
Labouchere were still hoping for a favourable turn of events as a result of
a letter which the Caja was to send to the Viceroy of Mexico, in which it
was to be clearly stated that the protested drafts were for the purpose of
meeting a Spanish debt to Holland and that they were in no way con-
cerned with the situation in Spain itself. Labouchere was anxious for
Baring & Co. to persuade the central junta in Seville to write a similar
letter, thus achieving support from both sides for Hope's case. It was just
possible that France would assist financially in order to bolster up King
Joseph's prestige. 5
  In a subsequent chapter we shall see whether these optimistic expec-
tations were realized. The prospects were none too favourable. On 14th
January 1809 the British government signed a peace treaty with the junta
and also undertook to support it in the struggle against Napoleon. This
opened the way for silver from Spanish America, which was then still
loyal, to reach Seville unhindered. 6

                                   355
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

The situation had indeed altered radically. For Hope & Co. there was
no more silver from Mexico, not even in the shape of colonial produce,
and it remained to be seen whether they would have free access to Spanish
funds held in England. The greater part of Spain was in French hands,
but outside the cities a guerilla campaign exploded which almost de-
stroyed the country economically. The practical significance, under such
circumstances, of King Joseph's authority and financial position would
soon become evident to Hope.
                       CHAPTER THIRTEEN