

                                   35 2
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

 ments due on 1st July in respect of the 1805 loan could be met from the
 available funds, but a question mark hung over the interest and principal
 due on Croese's conversion loans on 1st September and the interest due on
 1st November on the 30-million guilder loan: apart from anything else,
 there was no confirmation that the drafts on Mexico had been met.
 Admittedly, De Cabarrus had given Coesvelt permission for the payments
 on the Croese loans on 1st September, but he had since departed, with
 King Joseph, to Vittoria, in northern Spain; Coesvelt, however, was still
 in Madrid, although Van der Hoop and Verhuell had left the city. To
 support his reasons for staying, Coesvelt could cite the example of the
 Russian, Austrian and American ambassadors, all of whom still resided
 in Madrid.!
  Viewed in the light of the rapid sequence of events, the correspondence
from Labouchere at that juncture seems almost unreal. While letters were
leaving Amsterdam addressed to De Cabarrus in Madrid, Coesvelt was
 negotiating with a group of ministers and senior civil servants who had
remained in Madrid but were in close touch with the Central Junta in
Aranjuez. This body had been set up during Ferdinand's brief reign and
now functioned as a sort of Free Spanish Government. Acting in the
name of the Caja de Consolidacion, the Marquis de Fuerte Hisar in-
structed Hogguer to secure the attachment of those of Ouvrard's funds
which were in Hope & Co.'s charge. Simultaneously, De Cabarrus, who
was in Vittoria, instructed the Company to collect all monies owed by
Ouvrard and his associates, and at the same time revoked the authority
vested in Izquierdo. Both parties inquired of Hope regarding the collec-
tion of the million and a half piastres in Mexico. 2
  Labouchere was very concerned about the fate of these drafts. Reports
indicated that De Villanueva was preparing to leave Vera Cruz at the end
of May 1808, since there was a possibility that the United States embargo
and the obstacles to trade in Europe would put an end to the activities of
Hope's American network. 3 In September came a report stating that on
19th June (that is to say, after news of the events in Spain had reached
that country's colonies) the British warship 'Melpomene' had sailed from
Jamaica bound for Vera Cruz. On 7th July she hove to off that port, but
after a delay, during which the drafts were refused, she sailed again. On
14th August the vessel again made for Vera Cruz, where the previous
pattern was repeated. It became clear from the reports of what was hap-
pening in Mexico that De Villanueva had left Vera Cruz in the nick of
time. The news of the change of government in Spain resulted in the
emergence of popular movements sympathetic towards the former Spanish

                                   353
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

government, and for Lestapis, to which name he had reverted, such a
situation could have been dangerous. 1
 Labouchere meanwhile faced the problem of the interest due on the
30-million guilder loan on 1st November 1808. Although it was stipu-
lated that this should be paid from the proceeds of the loan, no sub-
scriptions to this had been received since 1st November of the previous
year. It was then that the value of the claims on Ouvrard's funds became
apparent. After some solid pressure had been applied to Ouvrard, Hope &
Co. received authority from Auguste Ouvrard & Co. to meet the interest
payment from funds held by the Company on their behalU Labouchere
thereupon advised De Cabarrus that he hoped to recover the sum paid
out from the sale of the remaining 7,000 bonds. De Cabarrus had earlier
made it plain that the payment need not be effected and that he did not
desire the sale of further bonds, because a French military victory would
naturally enhance King Joseph's credit. Labouchere had ignored these
instructions, however; in his opinion, failure to pay the interest due would
harm the loan to the point of rendering the sale of the remaining bonds
impossible for a long time. 3
  De Cabarrus's indifference in the matter of Spain's obligations towards
Hope & Co. was partly a product of his annoyance at the fact that
Coesvelt had chosen to remain in Madrid. While apologizing on behalf
of the Company for Coesvelt's conduct, Labouchere made it appear that
Coesvelt had intended to accompany De Cabarrus to Vittoria but had
been prevented by exceptional circumstances from leaving Madrid. 4
  John Williams Hope, who had meanwhile travelled to England via
Germany, despatched a strong reprimand to Coesvelt-so strong, in fact,
that Labouchere felt obliged to stand up for Coesvelt. He informed Hope
that while he also would have preferred Coesvelt to leave Madrid, the
fact that he had not done so must be attributed to the fear that the Com-
pany might be pushed out by Gordon & Murphy. He explained that
Coesvelt had allowed himself to be persuaded to undertake the mission
because of his loyalty to Henry Hope, and added that too powerful an
'extinguisher' could have a harmful effect, and might even alienate him
from the Company. The relationship with De Cabarrus had not been
completely ruined, because contact with him had been maintained from
Amsterdam. And anyway Coesvelt was not an official agent of Hope &
Co., so the Company could not be held responsible for his actions. In so
confused a situation as then existed, the wisest thing was to remain as pas-
sive as possible while, of course, covering oneself against all eventualities. 5
This, however, was easier said than done. De Fuerte Hisar, on behalf of