

to the visitor, and had parried his questions by saying that Hope and
Baring functioned merely as intermediaries. Gordon & Murphy had
crossed Hope's plans during the American business; their operations on
behalf of Spain had been none too successful and now it looked as if they
were going all out to get a foothold in Paris. 1
  Eventually, however, the point was reached at which Labouchere's sup-
port could no longer save Ouvrard. In the autumn of 1807 the Compagnie
des Negociants Reunis ceased payment, and on 31st December of that
year Vanlerberghe and Ouvrard had no choice but to follow suit. 2
  A fortnight before he applied for a moratorium, Ouvrard authorized
Hope to correspond directly with Espinosa regarding accounts in the
name of Auguste Ouvrard & Co. This came as a great relief to Labou-
chere, for it had long been obvious that the disgrace which attached to
Ouvrard in Spain also reflected on Hope & Co. It had vainly been as-
serted that all funds belonging to Auguste Ouvrard & Co. were intact and
that the only payments made from these had been to Spain. In the absence
of supporting accounts, Espinosa had ignored the assertions. He had even
ordered the seizure of the Mexican drafts to a value of 1,250,000 piastres
which Labouchere had given to Alexander Baring in July 1806, of which
I million piastresworth had meanwhile been collected. 3
 In the light of mistrust in Spain concerning the Company, and the un-
satisfactory nature of communications, Labouchere had decided in June
1807 to send a confidential agent to Madrid. His choice fell upon William
Gordon Coesvelt, a native of the West Indies, who had previously ren-
dered valuable services to Hope & Co. in connexion with the settlement
of long-standing claims on planters in the Western Hemisphere. Labou-
chere was aware that further piastre shipments were under discussion in
Spain and felt that it was advisable to have a man on the spot via whom
further steps could, if necessary, be taken. To all intents and purposes,
Coesvelt would visit Spain as 'a man of pleasure' and would carry no
instructions from Hope. The Company was still sparing in the granting of
authority to act on its behalf, especially to agents who had still to prove
their worth. 4
 At the end of July Coesvelt received a memorandum giving him the full
history of Hope & Co.'s relations with Spain since 1782. His principal
task was to inform the authorities in Spain of the true conduct of affairs,
and by so doing dispel the erroneous impression to which Izquierdo's
actions had probably given rise there. Furthermore, he was instructed to
keep an ear open for news of fresh Spanish piastre expeditions and, in a
plain but not obtrusive manner, to stress to those concerned the reliability

                                    347
              BETWEEN SA TELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

of the Company's system of collection. Coesvelt was warned not to have
any contact with Michel the Younger, who, as stated earlier, had gone to
Madrid with his drafts on the Caja de Consolidacion in the hope of getting
them honoured. Thanks to his wife's charms, Michel the Younger had
become Murat's confidential agent and go-between in dealings with
Godoy, and thus it was on the cards that he would succeed in having his
drafts exchanged for others on Mexico. 1
 Coesvelt broke his journey in Paris, where he called on Izquierdo. The
latter showed no sign of abandoning his negative attitude. At the end of a
lengthy discourse, during which he dealt with all sorts of issues of prestige,
he informed Coesvelt that he wished to see an end to the French Treasury's
seizure of the Spanish assets held by Hope & Co. Having insisted that all
matters should pass through his hands, he then threatened to block them
until he got his own way. He also repeated his earlier accusation that
the Company favoured the French government at the expense of the
Spanish. 2
 Labouchere wrote to CoesveIt, instructing him to collaborate with
Adriaan van der Hoop, a partner in Wed.E.Croese & Co., in an effort to
settle the matter of the drafts on the Caja once and for all. Despite the
fact that these had been specifically included in the loan contract, Espinosa
persisted in his refusal to recognize the claim. Hope had already paid the
sum of the drafts to Croese, but in return had demanded a guarantee of
Espinosa's eventual approval. A united effort on the part of Van der Hoop,
CoesveIt and the Dutch envoy to Spain, Verhuell, succeeded in breaking
down Espinosa's resistance and enabled the matter to be finally disposed
of.3
  Labouchere had a favourable opinion of Espinosa, whom he regarded
as extremely loyal to his country, though blind to the fact that his associ-
ates and subordinates did not always match him in this respect. If it
should transpire that Espinosa was embarrassed by the drafts on Gordon
& Murphy, Coesvelt was empowered to offer to take over 100,000 pounds-
worth, provided that half of the proceeds were used for the interest and
principal instalments due on 1st July 1808. 4
  To CoesveIt, Espinosa poured forth his grievances about the role played
by Ouvrard. Labouchere admitted in a letter to Coesvelt that Ouvrard's
policies had had adverse effects for Spain, but he remained convinced that
Ouvrard had always meant well and that his failings stemmed from in-
experience. In Labouchere's opinion, Espinosa would do better to free
himself gradually from Ouvrard rather than break off the association
abruptly: after all, the contract between the Caja and Franr,;ois Ouvrard &
              BETWEEN SA TELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES