

Co. would remain in force at least until the end of the war at sea. As
regards the trade with the Spanish colonies-for which, according to
Coesvelt, Espinosa was willing to enter into an arrangement with Hope-
Labouchere considered the risks at that moment (late December 1807) to
be too great. He agreed to re-examine the question in the following Spring,
by which time it would be clear whether the Orders in Council and the
Milan Decree amounted to anything or not. If Espinosa felt that he
would fare better by continuing to deal with Gordon & Murphy in
regard to the piastres, he must do so; but under no circumstances would
Labouchere consider collaborating with such people. 1
  Tn his discussions with Coesvelt, Espinosa had also broached the subject
of deliveries of Venezuelan Varin as tobacco to the State monopoly in
Spain. Labouchere was not averse to a transaction of this nature and he
sought information on the subject from Dixon in Rotterdam. Hope & Co.
already had 500 hogsheads, making them one of the largest stockholders.
The quantity required, 4,000 hogsheads annually, made the affair too
risky: Varinas tobacco was traditionally the property of the Crown, and
the Governor of Venezuela was hesitant to sell it to American traders.
When it was learned that Hogguer had also been approached on the sub-
ject of Varinas tobacco, Labouchere lost interest and Coesvelt was in-
structed to refer Espinosa to Hogguer. 2
  Coesvelt reported with some satisfaction that Espinosa was prepared to
remit to Hope the IOO,OOO pounds sterling in drafts on Gordon & Murphy,
and also to allow half the proceeds to remain in Amsterdam in prepara-
tion for the payments due on 1st July 1808. The trade decrees had severely
restricted traffic to and from England, but Labouchere confidently antici-
pated that the drafts could be presented via Baring Bros. & Co. He would be
very pleased if Coesvelt also succeeded in obtaining permission for the
1,031,250-piastre draft on Mexico, which constituted security for the in-
terest payment due on 1st November 1808, to be met via Hope. Labou-
chere did not rely greatly on Espinosa's assertion that he would arrange
for funds to be remitted from Madrid. 3 Early in February a report reached
Amsterdam stating that the Company was free to collect the draft on
Mexico, provided that one for 500,000 piastres for the Spanish govern-
ment was presented with it.4
  Upon receipt of the news, Labouchere immediately wrote to Henry Hope
in London, asking whether he could arrange for the drafts to be sold there.
The drafts did not form the subject of any contract with Baring Bros. & Co.
and so it was worthwhile trying to keep the profit in the firm. A month later
Henry Hope replied that the operation could not be carried out solely for

                                    349
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

the Company's account as the insurance would then not be valid in law.
After investigating the possibilities, he had after all settled on Baring Bros.
& Co., who had undertaken to send a warship to Vera Cruz to collect the
piastres; the vessel was prepared to remain there for up to thirty days for
this purpose. Baring Bros. & Co. would pay 177 pounds 10 shillings for
every 1,000 piastres reported to have been placed on board.!
  In the meantime, the situation on the Iberian peninsula was steadil)
approaching a climax. The Franco-Spanish treaty providing for the par-
tition of Portugal was signed at the end of October 1807. French troops
now had the right to traverse northwestern Spain on their way to the
Portuguese frontier. However, they also had the opportunity to penetrate
deeper into Spain without attracting attention. When, at about the same
time, the French envoy to Spain compromised himself by his involvement
in an intrigue aimed at eliminating Godoy in favour of the Crown Prince
in the event of the death of Charles IV, Napoleon's thoughts turned in-
creasingly towards the replacement of the weak and unreliable Bourbon
regime by a satellite government headed by one of his brothers. 2
  Since the end of December 1807 Labouchere had been perturbed by the
developments in Spain, and on more than one occasion he inquired of
Coesvelt regarding the movements of the French troops. With the ad-
vance of the armies, financial transactions had become perilous: all
manner of adventurers followed in the wake of the troops, in search of
easy profits, and their operations undermined the rates of exchange.
Espinosa could thus scarcely anticipate any early remittances from Am-
sterdam. 3
  At the end of February 1808 Izquierdo was commanded by Napoleon to
deliver an ultimatum to the Spanish government: Spain must cede to
France the territory north of the Ebro. Upon hearing of Izquierdo's
sudden departure for Madrid, Labouchere instructed Coesvelt to make
 contact with the Spanish government so that in the event of Izquierdo
 distorting the facts, the truth could be established without delay.4
  In spite of the serious nature of Izquierdo's mission and the haste with
 which this was undertaken, Coesvelt succeeded in arranging a meeting
 with him in Godoy's presence. Izquierdo lost no time in stating that he
 was directly responsible to the minister of finance and that he was there-
 fore not obliged to show his accounts to Espinosa. When Coesvelt pointed
 out that it was the Caja de Consolidacion which had the greatest interest
 in the loan, Izquierdo suddenly produced the letters addressed to him by
 Hope & Co. and the accounts to which these referred. It was impossible
 to see much of the contents, for Izquierdo hurriedly put the papers away