

for Amsterdam to submit his plans to the Company's managers. Their
reaction, following Clary's visit, was predictable: they rejected the idea of
any fresh loan until the old one had been fully subscribed. If Spain failed
to meet its commitments on 1st July and 1st November, it could abandon
all thoughts of a new loan. 1
  The problems surrounding the payments on 1st July 1809 were formi-
dable. There was still no news from England concerning the fate of the
drafts on Gordon & Murphy and Reid Irving & Co. The Company had
a claim to assets of Auguste Ouvrard & Co., but as the Spanish American
operations had to all intents and purposes come to an end, the remittances
in favour of this account were becoming smaller and smaller. Moreover,
Ouvrard had just lost an action brought against Vanlerberghe and himself
by Seguin, and this had cost him 7 million francs. There was thus all the
more reason to view critically the guarantee which Ouvrard had provided
on behalfofSpain. 2
  Fortunately, an official report had arrived from Paris stating that the
French Treasury had relinquished its claim to the 7,000 bonds. The way
was thus clear for a definitive contract with Borski for 2,600 bonds at a
transfer price of 70 %. As had been the case in the previous contracts, the
entrepreneurs received a bonus of six months' interest. The interest
vouchers which fell due on 1st July 1809 and the bonds of the loan of 1805
which became redeemable on the same date were both acceptable as
payment. Bonds and vouchers relating to the loan floated by Hope & Co.
in 1793 and those of Croese's conversion loans were also acceptable, as
were 160 bonds relating to the Echenique loans; for the last-named, the
price was fixed at 95 %. In addition, Borski was permitted to exchange
350 Echenique bonds at 95 % for a similar number of bonds of the 30-
million guilder loan. 3
  In essence, this agreement meant that the entrepreneurs exchanged ma-
tured bonds and vouchers for new ones. The effect of this procedure
(which also applied to a number of older Spanish loans) was to clear up
as many old Spanish bonds as possible under the umbrella of the Auguste
Ouvrard guarantee. And since Hope & Co. held funds belonging to that
company, no risk would be involved even if Spain failed to meet its
obligation.
 The action of the managers in thus securing breathing space in con-
nexion with the July payment was fortunate indeed, for the plan with the
drafts on England miscarried completely. At the end of June 1809, Baring
& Co. reported that Reid Irving & Co. had transferred all the Spanish
funds which they had held to the junta in Seville. Gordon & Murphy
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

would have followed suit had it not been for the fact that certain of their
assets in Mexico had been seized and they were thus retaining the balance
on the Spanish account by way of security. In any case, the British govern-
ment would in no circumstances lift its embargo on these.!
 After visiting Amsterdam, Coesvelt proposed to cross to England to
attend to private business. There would thus be an opportunity for con-
sultation with the partners in London. His journey, however, was any-
thing but straightforward, for on 30th July 1809 a British expeditionary
force had landed on the island of Walcheren and had advanced to the
outskirts of Bergen op Zoom. In the panic which ensued, the wildest
rumours circulated, including one to the effect that a fresh British landing
at Den Helder was imminent. This led to an embargo being placed on all
Dutch ports. 2
 In addition to other matters, Coesvelt had been instructed to discuss the
loan to the Kingdom of Naples with the partners of Hope & Co. The
relationship with the director of the Neapolitan Sinking Fund had from
the outset been less than satisfactory. There had been no difficulties with
the interest payment on 1st July 1808, because the sum involved had been
retained out of the proceeds of the loan. De Gerace had clearly been
disappointed by Hope's lack of interest in participating to a substantial
extent in the Neapolitan Consolidated Debt. This debt, which amounted
to 14 million ducats, was for the purposes of buying out the tax farmers
and compensating the former owners of Church property which had been
nationalized. According to Falconnet & Co., there were good profit
opportunities for foreigners, because the shortage of money in Naples had
depressed the rates of exchange. This shortage was in turn a product of
stagnation of exports under the influence of the Continental System. 3
 Hope & Co.'s reply to this tempting offer was to the effect that the
Company might consider participating if Naples made regular remittances
for the interest payments due in the following year. 4 It had rapidly become
clear that this was not a simple matter, for few commercial contacts had
been established between Italy and Holland, with the result that drafts
were scarce on the market. Hope & Co. had advised De Gerace to spread
the net to embrace Leghorn and Genoa, but this did little to increase the
tempo of the remittances. 5
 De Gerace was also anxious to commence repayment of the loan as soon
as a sum of any magnitude reached Hope, and it was only with the
greatest difficulty that he could be convinced of the irrevocability of the
payment date of 1st July laid down in the principal debenture. 6 He there-
upon demanded interest on the monies which he remitted, up to the day
                         THE SPANISH MORASS