

 De Cabarrus. In his view, a new loan could not succeed. The turnover in
 shares on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange totalled only 50,000
guilders a day, and business was as dead as it had ever been. There was, of
course, no question of accepting De Cabarrus's draft for I million francs;
as a reason for refusing, the managers could point to the fact that the
 French Treasury had not relinquised its claim to the 7,000 bonds.!
  From Brussels, where Labouchere interrupted his journey to allow his
wife to recover from an attack of fever, the travellers journeyed cautiously
to Paris, where they arrived on 17th May. Labouchere availed himself of a
pause in that city to discuss the Spanish affair with Mollien, Louis,
Ouvrard and Baguenault. Mollien was ultimately persuaded to consent to
the withdrawal by the French Treasury of its claim to the 7,000 bonds,
subject, of course, to the emperor's approval. 2
  While in Paris, Labouchere was visited by Colonel Clary, an adjutant of
King Joseph and a relative of the queen, who bore a letter from the
Spanish monarch. It was clear from this that the sum of I million francs
was for the king's personal use, and indeed was destined for investment in
Russian and American securities. Labouchere took the view that the
question of honouring the draft for this sum was best left to the managers
in Amsterdam. He did, however, advise them to hold as security any bonds
which might be purchased until such time as news concerning the drafts
on Gordon & Murphy and Reid Irving & Co. was received from London. 3
  After staying for a week or so in Paris, the Laboucheres moved slowly
southwards. They frequently travelled at night in order to spare the
patient the discomfort of the heat during the daytime. At the end of May,
having journeyed via Poitiers and Bordeaux, the company reached Orthez,
where the Labouchere family had its origins. There, mail from Amster-
dam, Paris and Madrid awaited them.4
  The managers in Amsterdam reported that they had received a visit from
Colonel Clary and that they had made it plain to the young man that
there could be no question of yielding to the king's 'personal views' until
such time as arrangements were made for the payments due on 1st July
and 1st November. s
  A letter from Coesvelt stated that he would be making for Bayonne with
a military convoy which was due to leave Madrid on or about 5th June.
During his absence, matters would be taken care of by Sanchez Toscano,
a former partner in the house of Echenique. Coesvelt's expectations were
not high, for Toscano suffered from consumption and had been at death's
door on two occasions during the previous year; moreover, he was a
Spaniard and a timid one at that.

                                   359
                          THE SPANISH MORASS

De Cabarrus had requested the Viceroy of Mexico to honour the drafts
deposited with Hope & Co. as security for the payments due on 1st No-
vember 1809. Coesvelt, however, had as little faith in the payment of these
drafts as of those for 1st November 1808. 1
  At the end of a long and tiring journey lasting twenty days, Coesvelt
arrived in Bayonne on 25th June 1809. Shortly afterwards he joined the
Laboucheres, who had meanwhile moved to Bagneres. 2 In addition to
reiterating his proposal for a loan secured by former Church property, he
produced a plan devised by De Cabarrus for a loan coupled with a lottery.
In an accompanying letter addressed to King Joseph, De Cabarrus set out
to show that of the anticipated total revenue of 92 million reales, only
16,300,000 had in fact been collected. In the provinces, in particular, the
meagre revenues had been totally absorbed by the cost of maintaining the
troops. Then there had been the taxes levied by the French military
commander. In Madrid itself, the growth of illicit trading had caused
revenues to steadily diminish. The Mint would soon have to cease opera-
tions because of the shortage of precious metals, and this while the
reserves for expenditure by the Court and by ministers were insufficient
for one month.
  To meet the deplorable financial situation, De Cabarrus proposed that
a lottery loan be entered into; this would cost Spain a great deal of money,
but under the circumstances it was the only solution. The loan would be
of 6 million pesos duros at 20 reales per peso, half of which would be
payable in coin and the balance in vales reales at their full nominal value.
10,000 bonds each of 600 pesos would be issued, and these would bear
interest at 4 % and be redeemable within five years. In addition to the
fixed interest, annual bonuses, the total of which would have to be in-
creased year by year, would be balloted: these would be necessary in order
to attract capitalists who were not interested in the purchase of nation-
alized Church property. Under this plan, the Spanish government would
have to spend 7,856,332 pesos in order to obtain 4,200,000 pesos. Outside
Spain, facilities for subscription would exist at the offices of Hope & Co.
in Amsterdam, Chapeaurouge in Hamburg, Paul Maistre in Geneva and
Roux Freres in Marseilles. Clearly, the minister anticipated greater results
from the provincial towns in France and from the satellite states than
from Paris. The plan had still to be approved by Napoleon. 3
  Coesvelt discussed all these plans with Labouchere, after which he out-
lined the De Cabarrus project with Baguenault; the latter, however, saw
little chance of a loan in France succeeding. 4
His discussions with Labouchere having been completed, Coesvelt left
                          THE SPANISH MORASS