


D e lnmsfen mlleo • 6 pCe. 's Joan worden bewld op Coupoos, WUMII de ..rile vcr-
f.beenen zat zijn • Julij .808.
  Dcczc   egoul d. aI gcrclIlboureetrd worden op de vol&end. Termijnen:
                I JuJij 1809.                              1500000 : -
                I Julij .8ro.                              • 500000:-
                1 Julij .8 ••.                             • 500000 : -
                • Julij .8u.                               • 500000 : -
                I Julij . 8' 3,                            • 500000 : -
                1 Julij 18 14.                              • 500000 : -
   En dat bij toting, da>r roe in dcr djd voor NOlllrls cn GetUl~ Ie doeD, om Rcclico,
ieder von Honden! yolgeode Nummcro·..
   De Provifionede Recepbfeo voor de Fonmisfemtnrcn decKr Negotiatie, door de Heerm
HOPE en COMPo ulnegevtn, zullen zoocIn mo,.Ujk regcn Obligullen, met de nodig. I.a-
IrcSl!>ewij= foorzien, en door den Now Mr. W. VAN HOMRIGH, gecoDcnlignecrd
worden ingcrrollen en vcrwisfelcl.




                             Bericllf of the loan to Naples, 1807
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

how a series of events increased Spain's inertia-and how the Company
attempted to arm itself against the consequences.

In addition to the Spanish loan, with all its ramifications, there was the
matter of the loan to Naples. The moves which led up to an agreement
with the representative of the Neapolitan Court at the beginning of May
1807 have already been described. The important thing now was to obtain
official sanction for the loan and then to choose a propitious moment at
which to float it. The negotiation for Spain and the fitful progress of the
Dutch loan temporarily hampered a public subscription, and with this
fact in mind Labouchere approached Louis, who had introduced Gerardin
to the Company. Labouchere knew from Louis's letters that the emperor
was interested in the success of the loan, and he therefore felt that it would
be reasonable to expect the French Treasury to contribute a portion of the
sum. At the same time, he asked Robert Voute to find out whether
Mollien would be prepared to put up a million guilders towards the
Naples loan, adding that, if necessary, the money could be furnished from
Hope's monthly payments on behalf of Spain.!
 Labouchere also inquired of Voute whether King Louis was still dis-
posed to participate in the loan to his brother and whether he would
agree to a million guilders from the 5% reserve relating to the Dutch
loan being invested in the one for Naples. He was convinced that unless
these contributions were forthcoming, the loan was doomed to failure. 2
 Gerardin and Roederer, the Neapolitan Minister of Finance, did not take
kindly to Labouchere's reasoning. His original letter, they argued, had
contained no reference to the need for French and Dutch participation,
and it looked as if the Company was searching for excuses to delay float-
ing the loan. 3 Their argument was not entirely without foundation, for
when permission for the loan was suddenly given, Labouchere sought
refuge in the stipulation that a copy of the principal debenture must be
sent to the minister of finance. And when this condition was met, he
sought to win time by pleading the absence of support by the French
Treasury. This could not be anticipated until the emperor returned from
Tilsit, where he had negotiated peace. 4
 When Labouchere remained adamant, Roederer suggested limiting the
loan initially to 2 million guilders, in the hope that France or Holland
would furnish a further million at a later date. The Neapolitan Treasury
was in urgent need of cf 300,000 to repay a debt to the house of Falconnet
& Co. of Naples, which fell due on 1st July, and Roederer sought to draw
on Hope & Co. for this sum. Labouchere consented to this and also
                                     344
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES