

                                     35 0
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

again. His excuses for not having written to the Company were so vague
and incoherent that Godoy ordered him to approve those of Hope's
accounts with which he agreed and to write to the Company about
matters on which he disagreed, and to do so immediately he returned to
Paris. According to Coesvelt, the true reason for Izquierdo's resentful
attitude lay in his having been refused interest on the 2,000 bonds de-
posited in his name with De Smeth. 1
 Soon after this episode the anxieties concerning Spain's financial position
were eclipsed by a series of major political events. Amid the general
uncertainty, and with rumours of continuing French military advances
rife, a popular revolt broke out at Aranjuez on the night of 17th March.
This led to the fall of Godoy and his subsequent imprisonment, and to the
abdication of Charles IV in favour of the Crown Prince. 2
  Coesvelt and Van der Hoop jointly wrote to Labouchere about the
sudden turn of events. Confidence in the new government, they said, was
very high, but they wondered whether the pace-by-pace advance of French
troops towards Madrid was as innocuous as official circles maintained.
The absence from official French statements of any reference to the new
monarch, King Ferdinand VII, and his government was to the writers a
bad omen. Nevertheless, they were of the opinion that there were oppor-
tunities for business. The aura of enthusiasm had changed the fortunes of
the vales reales, which now stood at nearly 50 %. If Labouchere could buy
some vales drafts on Spain before the great news spread, the Company
could make a handsome profit. 3
  In his reply, Labouchere was obliged to disappoint Coesvelt and Van
der Hoop. The vales displayed little fluctuation in Holland, and offered
no opportunities for speculation. Clearly, everyone was waiting to see
how the situation in Spain would develop.4
  In view of Spain's uncertain future, Labouchere impressed upon Coesvelt
the importance of steering clear of politics, which did not form part of the
Company's area of operation. This, he pointed out, was limited to Spanish
financial commitments in Holland. 5
  The warning came at a very opportune moment, for since the uprising in
March the situation in Spain had altered with immense rapidity. The
change in the monarchy had given Napoleon the opportunity for swift
intervention which he had sought. The Commander-in-Chief of the French
forces in Spain, Murat, received orders to occupy Madrid. Ferdinand VII
was enticed to the northern part of the country and from there to Bayonne,
in France. Similar tactics were employed against Charles IV and his wife.
When the royal family was reunited on French soil, Napoleon forced

                                    35 1
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

Ferdinand to abdicate in favour of his father. Charles promptly abdicated
in favour of Napoleon, who then had his brother Joseph, previously the
King of Naples, appointed King of Spain by a council of Spanish noble-
men.!
 On 2nd May 1808, while Charles IV was still officially the monarch, the
popular revolt against the French broke out in Madrid. The revolution-
aries had little chance against the orderly French troops, but their action
was a sign for a campaign of resistance throughout the country. Napoleon
at first underestimated the power of the resistance movement, and re-
turned to Paris in June confident that the Spaniards would soon resign
themselves to the new order.
  With the entry of King Joseph into Madrid on 20th July, Coesvelt's
uncertainty ended-at least for the time being. During Ferdinand's brief
reign, Espinosa had been replaced as contador general of the Caja by a
directorate consisting of the Marquis de Fuerte Hisar and Don Antonio
Cortabarria, both of whom were complete outsiders where financial
matters were concerned and accordingly had to be advised from the
outset. 2 In the interim period Coesvelt had been forced to mark time, but
under King Joseph the situation seemed to be improving. Count de
Cabarrus, with whom we have already made acquaintance, was appointed
minister of finance and contador general of the Caja, and this implied that
the Company could in future deal directly with the minister of finance on
loan matters. De Cabarrus also had close ties with Baguenault & Co., and
thus Labouchere hoped to gain access to him via them. In correspondence
with Coesvelt, Labouchere stressed that he must concentrate on the pay-
ment of interest and principal on the Spanish loans. In the still obscure
situation, any vague offers concerning a new loan to Spain with jewels as
security, or concerning deliveries of tobacco, must be discouraged. 3
 The wisdom of this advice soon emerged. Eleven days after entering
Madrid, Joseph, accompanied by some of his ministers, transferred his
seat to the northern part of the country because he no longer felt safe in
Madrid. His fears were not altogether without foundation, for on 22nd
July a French army had been obliged to surrender to the Spaniards at
Baylen, in the south. On 1st August, a British expeditionary force led by
Arthur Wellesley landed in Portugal. A month later, Wellesley, aided by
Portuguese patriots and units of the Spanish army, forced the French
general Junot and his men to capitulate. With this defeat, little remained
of French authority on the Iberian peninsula, except in a limited area to
the north of the Ebro.
For Hope & Co., this debacle had unwelcome consequences. The pay-