

                THE SPANISH MORASS



With the disappearance of the resources from America, Coesvelt's efforts
to obtain funds in Spain itself for interest and principal payments assumed
greater importance. Labouchere took the view that France had a duty to
relinquish her claim on the proceeds of the remaining 7,000 bonds, and
De Cabarrus agreed to write to Mollien on these lines.!
  Coesvelt was meanwhile busy in his own way. At the end of February
1809 a report was received stating that the junta in Seville had ordered
the seizure of the funds held by Gordon & Murphy and Reid Irving & Co.
Little could thus be anticipated from London, and so Coesvelt cautiously
approached Labouchere with a proposal for a new loan, for which na-
tionalized Church property would serve as security. Labouchere, how-
ever, resolutely resisted any precipitate action: Amsterdam had lost three-
quarters of its resources and also its influence on the investors. Apart
from this, the 30-million guilder loan had yet to be fully subscribed; only
then could any new venture be embarked upon. At the time of Labou-
chere's letter, in March 1809, everyone was anxiously waiting to see
whether war would break out between France and Austria, and in such
a situation it was pointless to approach the market with a new loan. 2
  Labouchere and his wife planned to visit the south of France during the
summer; she suffered from rheumatism and wished to take the waters at
Bagneres. The trip would also provide an opportunity to discuss future
policy with Coesvelt in person. During Labouchere's absence from Am-
sterdam, the day-to-day supervision could be entrusted to the managers
who had been appointed in 1808, at the time of John Williams Hope's
departure for England. They were Henry John Hope Jr., the eldest son of
John Williams Hope, and John Dixon, a former partner in Littledale &
Dixon of Rotterdam. 3
  Labouchere advised De Cabarrus that the Company was proposing to
dispose of a part of the remaining 7,000 bonds to the entrepreneurs at 70 %
(approximately the quoted price) with a bonus of six months' interest.
85 % of the purchase price was due in cash or redeemable vouchers, and
the remainder in Echenique bonds. This would provide funds for the
payments due on 1st July and 1st November 1809, thereby raising the

                                   357
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

price of the issue and making it possible to dispose of the remaining bonds
at a more advantageous price. Coesvelt was under the impression that the
emperor had already released the 7,000 bonds, but Labouchere knew
better: Napoleon had left for Germany in April in view of the impending
war against Austria, and in his absence no decision on this matter could
be taken in Paris. 1
 This postponement afforded Coesvelt an opportunity to revert once
again to his plan for a loan secured by former possessions of the Church.
For this, it would be necessary for the Spanish government to place the
property of the Maltese Order in Catalonia at the disposal of the bond-
holders, who in return would be required to furnish 50 million reales in
coin and a further 30 million in vales reales; for this purpose the real was
considered to be equal to 21 stuivers or 121 guilder cents. The vales reales
stood at 60 % below par, and thus the true sum involved was 62 million
reales in coin. However, interest, at 5 % per annum, would be payable on
the whole of the 80 million, giving bondholders an effective interest rate
of6i%·
 Bondholders would have the right to sell their share in the land, subject,
of course, to surrender of the relevant bonds. The Spanish government
would have to undertake to buy back land remaining unsold after four
years; this it would do by redeeming the bonds at the market price plus a
bonus of 5 %. In order not to jeopardize Spain's credit in Holland, 12
million of the 62 million reales would have to be retained in Holland to
meet the payments due in 1809. Finally, Coesvelt proposed that he should
receive a commission of I %.2
 Coesvelt's plan offered no solution to De Cabarrus's immediate financial
needs, and for this reason the minister authorized the Company to dispose
of the remaining 7,000 bonds. No reference was made to permission
having been obtained from Napoleon. Subject to the stipulation that I
million francs remained for the Spanish Treasury-which sum De Ca-
barrus required immediately-up to 15% was payable in Echenique
bonds. The letter was accompanied by a draft for 100,000 pounds sterling
on Gordon & Murphy and another for 177,000 pounds sterling on Reid
Irving & Co. 3
 Although the British government had blocked these funds for the benefit
of the central junta in Seville, De Cabarrus was confident that the junta
would recognize the duty to make the payments to Hope & Co. John
Murphy, who had just been released from captivity in France, simul-
taneously wrote to his office in London, supporting the claim.4
Labouchere was not impressed by Coesvelt's letter, nor by the one from
                         THE SPANISH MORASS