

                                   374
                          THE SPANISH MORASS

 Soon after this Coesvelt gave up the idea of coming to an arrangement
 in Madrid. Ultimately, he wrote, any negotiations or decisions would have
 to take place in or come from Paris. It would be best if Spain were to be
 incorporated into France, for King Joseph's authority was steadily
 waning. It might be possible to limit the annexation to the area north of
 the Ebro and, subsequently, to compensate King Joseph in Portugal for
 the loss of territory. On neither count was there any point in his remaining
 in Spain, for he was merely being kept on a string. 1
   Indeed, partly as a result of developments within the Company, Coes-
 velt's stay in Spain was drawing to a close. With the death of Henry Hope
 in February 181 I, new arrangements had become necessary. Labouchere
 had earlier intimated his wish to retire, and in April of the same year he
 reached agreement with John Williams Hope, who had changed his name
 to John Hope following the death of Henry Hope. It was agreed that
 Labouchere should leave the Company at the end of I8II, but that he
should continue to sign documents on its behalf. John Hope undertook
to indemnify Labouchere against any consequences arising from the use
of his signature. In practice, this meant that Labouchere appeared to the
outside world to be still a partner of Hope & Co. but that he was absolved
from the financial responsibilities attaching to the position. It was further
agreed that Coesvelt, Adriaan van der Hoop and Pierre Firmin Lestapis
should be given power of procuration. 2
  In the light of these arrangements, it was of importance that Coesvelt
should make his way to Amsterdam as quickly as possible, the more so
since Labouchere proposed to go to Russia and wished to settle all out-
standing matters before he left. Moreover, he was anxious to speak to
Coesvelt before he sought Van der Hoop's reaction to the proposed
appointment. Pierre Firmin Lestapis, who was 'always perfectly well dis-
posed,' would concur in any arrangement. Coesvelt left Madrid early in
May and arrived in Amsterdam on loth June. By the 15th, matters had
all been settled and the circulars signed. 3
  Before embarking on his duties in Amsterdam, Coesvelt wished to visit
England and settle his affairs there. He took with him drafts on Vera Cruz
to a value of 50,000 piastres, which were to be sold in London. These had
been received from Gennaro Francesconi & Co., the company in which
Prince de Gerace had merged his business activities. Drafts for a further
300,000 piastres arrived after he had left, and these were forwarded to
him in London. 4
  In spite of these transactions, relations with De Gerace were anything
but smooth. On 1st July 1810 the Sinking Fund was still nearly

                                    375
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

100.000 guilders in arrears with its payments, and by 1st July of the
following year the deficit had risen to nearly cf 150,000.1 Meanwhile,
the squabbling over the date for the payment of interest and prin-
cipal on the Neapolitan bonds (which was among the causes of the slow-
ness in making remittances) continued. 2 The atmosphere did not improve
when, at the beginning of November I8Il, Coesvelt returned to Amster-
dam with the news that the assets of the drawer of the piastre drafts
-whose name was not disclosed-had been confiscated, and that other,
similar drafts had been returned protested. 3 De Gerace began by accusing
Hope & Co. of having underestimated the premium on the guilders banco.
When this allegation was refuted, he cast suspicion on the slowness with
which the redeemed bonds were surrendered. Assertions by Hope & Co.
that this was a common phenomenon, and was due to poor communi-
cations with the bondholders, were treated almost with incredulity.4
  As if this were not enough, De Gerace also complained that, in dealing
with his remittances, the Company did not adhere sufficiently to the due
date, with the result that the Neapolitan Court was deprived of a portion
of the discount. Hope's managers pointed out that payees of drafts on
Italy usually remitted the funds to a third centre and therefore desired
some latitude in respect of the due date, but without consequences for the
rate at which bills were accepted. They added that, in general, De Gerace
 benefited by dealing with Hope, because bills bearing the Company's
signature were frequently accorded a better rate than those presented by
other firms. 5
  By 1st July 1812 the arrears of remittances from Naples had risen to
cf 175,000, while the Company, in consequence of the death of Henry Hope
 and the policy of liquidation pursued by John Hope, was experiencing a
 steady decline in liquidity. The managers referred this problem to La-
 bouchere, who, with his wife, was at that moment in Bad Pyrmont.
 Labouchere replied that he was not enamoured of De Gerace's manner,
 but that he had little doubt that Naples would honour its obligations. In
 the light of this advice, the managers decided to make the payment due,
 but at the same time to address a rebuke to De Gerace and to demand
 immediate settlement of the arrears. 6
  When, following the death of John Hope in February 1813, the Company
 actually went into liquidation, there was no longer any question of ad-
 vancing money on behalf of Naples. In March of that year De Gerace was
 warned that the payment on 1st July would be limited to the sum held by
 the partners. The majority of the remittances were in the form of bills
 drawn by Gennaro Francesconi & Co. on Agostino Serra and Giulio di
                                                                                 ,A.Jt.U U .D,U( 15 JOlI'& l B. f .