

                                   37 2
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

committees' questions. His response to requests to look into the circum-
stances under which Charles IV and Ferdinand VII had surrendered the
Spanish throne to Napoleon, and whether they had been within their rights
in doing so, was that these were too ridiculous even to discuss. 1
  However, in the face of an urgent appeal from Alexander Baring to
answer the questions, in order not to prejudice Parish's position, La-
bouchere agreed in June 18Il to issue a brief statement. In this he af-
firmed that the monies received from Parish had been accounted for to
Auguste Ouvrard & Co., but that because the Spanish government had
debts in Holland which exceeded the sums received, these had, with the
prior knowledge of the Spanish government, been applied to the payment
of these debts. The Spanish government, he maintained, had never been
concerned in the dealings with Auguste Ouvrard & Co. and Parish. 2
 This, however, did not settle the matter. In 1812 the case was heard by
the United States Circuit Court. The prosecution demanded that Parish
should furnish a bond of 150,000 dollars, and this was upheld. Parish's
lawyers, who also represented the Olivers, submitted that the case should
be struck off the list on the grounds that the Court could not put forward
a person as the King of Spain unless that person had been so recognized by
the government of the United States. This was an embarrassing point and
one which the Court, while giving no reason, refused to pursue. After a
brief consultation, Parish's counsel decided to withdraw the submission
and to concentrate on a complete denial of the prosecution's 'cause of
action.' For this, however, counsel required copies of all the contracts
with Ouvrard and all accounts relating thereto. 3
  Labouchere viewed the request for documents as indiscreet, to put it
mildly. If it were acceded to, details of Hope's transactions, including
those which had no bearing on the case, would be revealed to all and
sundry. 'Let Sarmiento bring an action against Hope & Co. in a court of
justice in London, where Messrs.Hope will gladly address themselves to
him,' was his reply.4 Again Alexander Baring intervened, this time to
point out that the court in America would construe a refusal to answer
the questions as recalcitrance, and that this would jeopardize a favourable
verdict. For the second time, Labouchere allowed himself to be influenced
by Baring and furnished the replies requested. 5
 In order to be in as strong a position as possible, Labouchere desired
the return of all unmet drafts on Mexico and Caracas. To achieve this,
Baring went so far as to write to Echeverria, into whose custody De
Villanueva had given the remaining drafts. 6 Early in 1813 the question-
naires, duly completed by Labouchere, and the relevant accounts and

                                   373
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

authentic copies, all attested by a notary and by the American Consul-
General in Amsterdam, Sylvanus Bourne, were despatched to the United
States, where a very distressed David Parish awaited their arrival. 1
  In the early weeks of 1814, by which time Holland had been liberated,
an American landed in Amsterdam with instructions to obtain fresh
answers to the questions. His arrival intensely annoyed Labouchere, to
whom the legal battle was as ludicrous as it was irritating. To him, Ameri-
can justice was a riddle: Parish had won his case, yet here was the action
being brought again-and without an appeal being entered!2
  The greatest problem facing Parish was that he was unable to prove that
the Spanish government had been among the parties to the transaction.
This evidence was only forthcoming when Ouvrard re-emerged from the
prison into which he had disappeared in 1810. It was not until after the
fall of Napoleon that he was released-and indeed this was the excuse
which he tendered to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court for his long
silence. Ouvrard himself still hoped to reach a settlement with the Spanish
Court, and pending this he was prepared to offer any assistance in clari-
fying matters. Our sources do not reveal whether or not this clarification
was achieved, but we do know that Parish secured a definitive legal victory
over Sarmiento in 18 I 6. 3
  After that brief diversion, let us see how fortune was dealing with
Coesvelt. We take up our story with D'Almenara's return to Spain in
November 1810, still without any promise from Labouchere or Coesvelt
regarding fresh loans. In a letter sent other than by the official mail,
Coesvelt set out his cheerless view of the situation in Spain. Ministers,
he wrote, avoided discussions which might lead to clear conclusions or
firm agreements. Not that this was surprising, for Spain was bankrupt
and unable to meet its creditors. The only solution lay in the transfer of
freely-controlled national possessions and private property to a value
equal to the total Spanish debt. This debt would then be soundly consoli-
dated and, with such security, up to 6 or 7 million guilders could be
advanced. 4
  Viewed from Amsterdam, Coesvelt's assessment of the situation was
unrealistic, for in the economic crisis of I8IO-I8u an advance of any
magnitude was out of the question. Furthermore, Coesvelt was obliged
soon afterwards to report that the custodian of Spain's national posses-
sions had personally stated that, because much had already been sold and
because communications with the provinces had virtually been severed by
guerilla activities, the possessions which could be assembled would be
worth less than 30 million reales. 5