

Labouchere and De Cabarrus on the subject of new loans for Spain. It
became clear that an impasse had been reached: Labouchere was un-
willing to undertake any new issue until the arrears of interest had been
paid, and De Cabarrus insisted that the arrears should be met from the
proceeds of a new loan. Coesvelt was aware that a loan against the
security of Crown jewels was out of the question, since these had already
been sent to Baguenault in Paris to be sold. 1
 As he contemplated his forthcoming journey to Madrid, Coesvelt was
reminded that this was taking him farther and farther away from Am-
sterdam, where at that moment important decisions were about to be
taken. Early in r8IO Henry Hope Jr. had revealed his disinterest in the
Company's activities by resigning his directorship and leaving Amster-
dam. Some time previously John Dixon had suffered a stroke, and despite
a partial recovery he had ceased to take an active part in day-to-day
affairs. In order not to leave the Company entirely without management
during Labouchere's absence, executive power had been vested in Pierre
Firmin Lestapis, a younger brother of Armand Pierre, with whom we have
already made acquaintance. 2
 Coesvelt, who eagerly desired a similar position, wrote one agitated
letter after another to Labouchere. In these, he repeatedly blamed himself
for having journeyed on to so remote a place as Bayonne instead of
awaiting Labouchere's further orders in Paris. He was not at all keen to
go on to Spain, if only because of the dangers which threatened travellers,
and he had lost faith in the idea of a new Spanish loan since he had learned
that Spain would be obliged to maintain the French troops stationed on its
territory. This, he considered, would ruin the country completely.3
 It was a very reluctant Coesvelt who, on 9th April 1810, joined a military
convoy bound for Madrid. Just before his departure he had received a
letter from Labouchere, setting out in some detail the latter's idea of
asking the French government to provide funds for the interest and
principal payments on 1st July 1810. Labouchere, too, had heard that
France proposed to place the full burden of maintaining its garrison in
Spain on that country's Treasury, and he took the view that as France
would thus save huge sums annually, it could well afford to spend some
of this money to restore Spain's credit abroad.
 At the end of a journey fraught with privation and peril, Coesvelt
arrived in Madrid on 3rd May. There he learned that De Cabarrus had
died. 4 His successor was the Marquis d' Almenara, a victim of Ouvrard's
Franco-Spanish operations, who is already familiar to the reader. It was,
of course, necessary to recapitulate events for D'Almenara's benefit. Ac-
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

cording to Coesvelt, the change might well prove to be for the better since
De Cabarrus 'could not refuse those who were present and ... forgot his
obligations towards those who were absent.' 1
  Coesvelt was received in audience by D'Almenara on a number of occa-
sions, but the results were meagre. They discussed the possibility of
France standing as guarantor for the current debt-which was in line with
Labouchere's thinking-but no decision on this could be taken in Madrid.
The situation had in one respect been simplified by the incorporation of
the Kingdom of Holland into the French Empire, which was officially
accomplished on 1st July 1810. The people of Holland thereby became
direct subjects of Napoleon and as such could count upon him to protect
their financial interests. 2
  A long memorandum dealing with the plan followed from Coesvelt, but
the first of July 1810 had meanwhile come and gone without payment of
interest or principal. Spain had nothing to offer, neither money nor wool,
and the king desired to keep the remaining diamonds for private purposes.
Coesvelt, however, received an offer of several 'remarkable' paintings as
security for a private loan of 250,000 or 500,000 francs, which was to be
payable when the paintings reached a safe place. Coesvelt sought the
advice of Labouchere and also offered him a half share in the loan.
Labouchere replied that nothing would induce him to participate and
that Coesvelt would be well advised to have nothing to do with the affair.
Amsterdam was the only place where the paintings could be properly
valued, and who was to be responsible for any damage which might occur
in transit?3
  Coesvelt's doubts regarding his mission increased when he learned that
D' Almenara would be leaving for Paris early in August for talks with the
imperial government. Under such circumstances, he saw no point in re-
maining in a country where utter chaos reigned and the most scandalous
forms of cunning were the order of the day. Added to this, Spain's
financial resources were in fact controlled by French military men who
attempted to collect taxes behind the Spanish government's back. Nego-
tiating with D' Almenara's deputy, Don Francisco Angulo, meant explain-
ing everything from the beginning for the umpteenth time in the know-
ledge that no decision would be forthcoming. If anything was to be
achieved, Labouchere would have personally to raise the matter with
 D'Almenara and the imperial authorities in Paris.4
  Labouchere paid little heed to this advice. He had made two journeys to
Paris in the space of six months, and the time had come to prepare for his
 retirement from the Company at the end of the year. The peace mission to
                         THE SPANISH MORASS