

                                   370
                          THE SP ANISH MORASS

 year, so that it would take three hundred years to dispose of the stock. In
 Paris, Nicolas Clary was still left with some quicksilver which had been
 captured in the Tyrol during Napoleon's campaign in 1800.
  To achieve larger sales, it would be necessary to export the material to
 North and South America; but this would require Spanish, French and
 British licences. If these could be obtained, it would be quite a different
 matter: if American vessels were used, it might be possible to combine the
 exporting of the quicksilver with the importing of North American to-
 bacco for the Spanish tobacco monopoly. In considering tobacco imports,
 Labouchere reverted to an earlier plan; but again he did not go beyond
the realm of contemplation.!
  Early in November 1810 Simons returned to Amsterdam, this time in the
 role of negotiator for D'Almenara. Once again the familiar issues were
listed: the disposal of the remaining 4,000 bonds, the potential use of
warrants for the purchase of nationalized Church property, the 30,000
quintals of quicksilver (which might produce some immediate funds) and
the possible importation of American tobacco. Only one thing was missing,
the thing which interested the Spanish government above all others,
namely ready cash. 2
  Simons was thus obliged to return to Paris empty-handed. He arrived
there just in time to impart the disappointing outcome to D' Almenara
before his departure on lIth November 1810. Simons's own future soon
became uncertain, however, for he was obliged to seek a moratorium at
the end of November 1810. He carried with him the house of Raymond &
Theodore de Smeth, which got into such difficulties that at the beginning
of January 181 I it was obliged to cease payment altogether. 3
  For David Parish, the beginning of I8Il coincided with a desire to
terminate the association with the Spanish American affair. He had earlier
declined a seat on the board of Hope & Co., and now he resigned from his
company in Antwerp, though this provisionally continued to bear his
name. It was his intention to return to the United States and seek his
fortune there. 4
  Account 'X', which Parish had now finally closed, has already been
referred to. No good purpose would be served by repeating the estimates
of the profits from the various transactions which passed through this
account, the more so as the Hope archives do not reveal a grand total
from which the level of profit could be determined with certainty. We
shall thus have to accept Nolte's estimate, which refers to a profit of
862,250 pounds sterling, or just over 3,800,000 piastres. This figure does
not include the profit on the 4 million piastres shipped direct from

                                    37 1
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

Vera Cruz to England. According to our rough calculations, this was just
over 83 0 ,000 piastres. 1
  The shipments to Spanish America under licences issued by Parish were
to have a long and disagreeable sequel. Early in 1809, following the out-
break of the civil war in Spain, Espinosa's agent, Sarmiento, reported that
he had received instructions from the Caja de Consolidacion henceforth to
deal directly with the American merchants concerning the import duties
due to Spain. At the same time he demanded from Parish and the Olivers
import duties totalling It million dollars, which was equivalent to 50 %
of the value of the cargoes. Although Sarmiento acted on behalf of
Charles IV, it quickly became clear that the demand had originated from
the junta in Seville, which thereby attempted to secure funds. 2
  Parish's lawyer in Philadelphia, Charles W.Hare, saw it as his first task
to obtain copies of the contracts between Espinosa and Ouvrard and
between Ouvrard and Hope. He also proposed that committees of in-
vestigation be sent to Europe to interrogate witnesses and, if necessary,
summon them to appear in the United States. In Hare's opinion, it was
of the utmost importance that Hope & Co. should produce documents
showing that all monies transferred by Parish had indeed been remitted
to the Caja. 3
  The case dragged on for eight years, the hearings taking place in one
court after another. In the autumn of 1808 it was the Philadelphia Court
of Common Pleas; in 1810 it came on in the Pennsylvania Supreme Court;
and finally it reached the United States Circuit Court. Whenever a judge
found in favour of Parish and the Olivers, Sarmiento appealed to a higher
court.4
  The questionnaire used by the investigating committees revealed that
Parish was suspected of having shipped goods to Vera Cruz on his own
initiative and having failed to remit to Hope the duties due on these.
Among the other matters investigated were whether Hope & Co. had
acted as the agent of the Caja de Consolidacion and whether any monies
had been paid to the governments of Joseph Napoleon, Charles IV or
Ferdinand VII. 5
  In Labouchere's eyes, the matter was a simple one. Hope's principal had
been Auguste Ouvrard & Co., and the Company had settled its account
with them. If the Spanish king sought to derive extraordinary authority
from the decree upon which the trading licences had been based, he should
 address himself to those to whom the licences had originally been issued,
namely Auguste Ouvrard & Co. In pursuance of this view, Labouchere
declined to hand over copies of contracts with Ouvrard or to answer the