

     THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN



We have selected this measure as the means to introduce the reestablishment of our House
with eclat, by manifesting the most conciliatory disposition and unequivocal proof of our
                         attachment to the interest of the country.
            Henry Hope, in a letter to P. C. Labouchere, 3rd August 1802.

The powerful military expansion which took place in France following
the outbreak of the Revolution in 1789 had disastrous consequences for
Portugal. As members of the first coalition of the European powers against
France during the wars of the French Revolution, Portugal and Spain
had become involved in the campaign of 1793; but Portugal had been
unable to follow Spain's example in suing for peace two years later. To
have done so would inevitably have meant a break with England, and this
was something no Portuguese government could afford. Since the begin-
ning of the eighteenth century the country had been largely dependent
upon England in the economic sphere, and the French Revolutionary Wars
had increased that dependence. If the English navy, with its supremacy,
were to cut off Portugal's vital imports from the colonies or, worse still,
occupy her overseas territories, she would be helpless.
  As Spain became more and more a satellite of France, the situation along
Portugal's frontiers became more perilous. Added to this, French pirates,
operating from Spanish ports, interfered with shipping in Portuguese
waters. The consequences were catastrophic: falling revenues and rising
expenditure brought the threat of economic collapse.
  To meet the situation, the prince regent appointed the energetic Don
Rodrigo de Souza Coutinho to the post of Minister with responsibility
for the colonies, the navy and the country's finances. This combination of
posts was not fortuitous, and by rebuilding the Portuguese fleet and
pursuing the war at sea with greater vigour he succeeded in controlling
the pirates, thereby enabling shipping to move freely again and thus
improving the country's financial position. The modernized Portuguese
fleet even operated with success against the French off Malta and in the
coastal waters of Egypt. 1
  For Napoleon, the peace treaty with Austria was a prelude to settling
accounts with Portugal and simultaneously bringing about the closure of
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

Portuguese harbours to British ships. Spain had bound herself to assist in
accomplishing this, and as a reward had been offered a prospect of addi-
tional territory-at Portugal's expense. As British support was limited to
a few subsidies, Portugal could offer little resistance to this attack.
  The conflict was as brief as it was insignificant. On 6th June 1801 Spain
signed a peace treaty with Portugal at Badajoz. The settlement included
the cession of some Portuguese territory. Despite the fact that the French
envoy to Spain, Lucien Bonaparte, had been a signatory to the treaty,
Napoleon refused to ratify the settlement on the grounds that, in his
opinion, both his brother and the foreign minister, Talleyrand, had been
bribed by the Portuguese. Further negotiations led to the Treaty of
Madrid on 29th September 1801-two days prior to the signing of peace
preliminaries by England and France. For Portugal, the price of peace
included keeping her ports closed to British ships until a final settlement
in Europe was negotiated, and the payment to France of a war levy of
ten million crusados, the equivalent of more than I I million guilders.
  Faced with this short-term commitment, for which it simply did not
possess the funds, the Portuguese government was in an acutely embar-
rassing position. A loan was the obvious solution, but the chances of
obtaining one were poor unless adequate security could be provided. With
the possible exception of a tax revenue, no suitable security existed in
Portugal. Her colony, Brazil, however, produced an article which was
ideal for the purpose, namely diamonds.
  The discovery in 1727 of rich diamond deposits in what is now the state
of Minas Gerais had made Brazil the world's largest producer of this
precious stone. The Portuguese government, realizing the possibilities,
had assumed control of mining operations and thereby obtained a virtual
monopoly. The marketing of the diamonds was left to merchants, who
entered into a contract with the government; in this, they undertook to take
a certain minimum quantity during a set period at a fixed price per carat. 1
  The Hope archives reveal traces of the Company's repeated efforts over
a long period to secure this 'diamond contract.' In 1765, the Hopes in-
voked the aid of the Danish Court, with which they maintained good
relations. The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Baron von Bernstorff,
consented to transmit a memorandum from Hope on this subject to the
Danish envoy in Portugal, together with his recommendation, and to
instruct the envoy to present it to the government. 2 But the 'balances'
relating to the years which followed contain nothing to suggest that the
contract was obtained, and thus it must be assumed that this remained in
the hands of its possessor, the house of Gildemeester.
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN