

 upon which these were paid to the investors. Even after extremely pro-
 tracted correspondence De Gerace refused to accept the fact that the
 Company never paid interest on remittances of this nature and, moreover,
that the total stagnation of trade ruled out any profitable investment of
 the monies concerned. 1
   De Gerace took his revenge by withholding remittances to Amsterdam
even beyond the payment date of 1st July, with the result that the Com-
pany was repeatedly obliged to make advances. By 1st July 1809, Cf210,000
had been advanced out of a total of cf 692,875. Needless to say, this
was a constant source of annoyance. At the same time, De Gerace had no
scruples about allowing one of his subordinates, Gennaro Francesconi,
to draw on Hope & Co. for his personal requirements, leaving the Com-
pany to recover the sums from a firm in Genoa. Later, De Gerace merged
his private activities into the commercial operations of Gennaro Fran-
cesconi & Co., a mercantile house which was to play an important role in
foreign remittances. 2
  Late in July 1809 Labouchere and his wife embarked on their journey
northwards. For much of the time he was deep in thought, searching for
a solution to the problem of the Spanish payment in November. In his
correspondence with Sanchez Toscano, Labouchere continued to toy with
the idea of covering the 4 million guilders due on that date by the
transfer of the possessions of the La Oliva cloister at Navarre and other
ecclesiastical assets in that region; but the weakness of King Joseph's
authority outside the towns rendered this plan as illusory as those put
forward by Coesvelt. 3 Labouchere hoped that the Napoleonic victory
over the Austrians at Wagram and the ensuing armistice of 12th July 1809
would lead to sterner military action in Spain, but as things stood this was
tantamount to wishful thinking.
  All the plans for the November payment crashed in ruins when De
Cabarrus rejected the contract with Borski for the 2,600 bonds; the rejec-
tion also threatened the payments due on 1st July 1809. Hope & Co. were
even deprived of their authority to negotiate further contracts with the
entrepreneurs. De Cabarrus had also lost faith in the payment of the
drafts on the English houses and those on Mexico, which were to cover
the payments on 1st November, and he forbade the Company to incur any
further expense in connexion with these. 4
  In their reply, the managers pointed out that De Cabarrus had earlier
given permission for the payment on 1st July, and that the contract with
the entrepreneurs was the only means by which to obtain the money
required. They urgently requested De Cabarrus to make such arrange-
                          THE SPANISH MORASS

ments for the 1st November payment as would ensure that Spain's credit
abroad did not collapse suddenly. They stated that the outgoings could
provisionally be limited to the payment of interest. The 2,500 bonds which
were due to be drawn by lot for redemption could then be used, at the
holder's option, for the purchase of Spain's national possessions. 1
 Shortly after the letter was despatched, a later one from De Cabarrus
arrived at Hope's offices. In this the minister set forth a plan for a loan of
3 million francs, for which fifty or more paintings from the Escorial
would serve as security. The loan would be for three years and bear
interest at 6 %, and there would be a commission of 2 %. Labouchere's
reply was that any attempt to raise new money for Spain would be
doomed to failure unless the payments due on 1st November were forth-
coming. Even if the idea of such a loan were to be entertained, he stated,
it would first be necessary to send an expert to Spain to value the paint-
ings. 2 Also, the lenders would probably insist that these be removed from
Spain to the safety of Amsterdam.
  Startled, De Cabarrus replied that he had envisaged a private transaction
with Hope & Co. and not a public one. If the Company was unwilling to
undertake this, he would negotiate with 'a few of your capitalists.' The
pictures could be given into the custody of the lenders, but would only
become their property if Spain defaulted in its repayments. 3
  On his journey back to Amsterdam, Labouchere stayed in Paris. While
he was there, Izquierdo made repeated visits to his address, initially
without success. Labouchere had not forgotten Izquierdo's failure to
reply to all his letters, and had made up his mind 'to be as costive in
speaking as Izquierdo (had) been in writing.'4
  Eventually Izquierdo managed to see Labouchere and to unburden
himself. As a loyal servant of Charles IV, he had come to humbly plead
for the 2,000 bonds lodged with De Smeth in his name. The interest on
these alone would make him a happy man, for his former sovereign was
now in Marseilles, poor, ill and overwhelmed by debts following the
failure of the French Treasury to pay him his civil list. He had bor-
rowed 230,000 francs from Doyen & Co. and they were now pressing him
for repayment.
  Labouchere gave no immediate reply to the request but instead inquired
why Izquierdo had ignored all the letters from Hope. When the latter
commenced to make vague references to 'political reasons,' Labouchere
asked what a simple acknowledgement had to do with politics. Izquierdo
thereupon embarked on a story about having been afraid of hampering
the Company's progress and thereby prejudicing it against himself. La-
                          THE SPANISH MORASS