

England on behalf of King Louis had failed. He was subsequently ap-
proached on the same subject by Ouvrard, who appeared to be acting on
instructions from the emperor. Labouchere wrote to Alexander Baring
and Lord Wellesley, but made no more progress than on the previous
occasion. When news of the correspondence reached Napoleon's ears, he
was furious. It then transpired that Ouvrard had not been acting on behalf
of the emperor at all but, in company with Fouche, had ventured a private
attempt to secure peace. Fouche was dismissed from office, and Ouvrard
was returned to the prison from which, thanks partly to Fouche's inter-
vention, he had been released in 1809. Labouchere was summoned to
Paris to explain his role, but so well did he succeed in convincing his
questioners that he had acted in good faith that he left without a stain on
his character. Just how perilous his position was at that moment, however,
is revealed in letters from Coesvelt referring to his great anxiety over
reports from Paris that Labouchere had been arrested, or was about to
be.!
  Against this background, Labouchere decided that the negotiations with
D' Almenara should be conducted by David Parish. Parish had arrived in
England early in July 18 IO and had crossed to Amsterdam in August to
present his report and accounts concerning the Spanish American busi-
ness. In mid-September he left for Paris carrying letters of introduction to
Talleyrand, D' Almenara and numerous French ministers. 2
  Labouchere instructed Parish to test reactions to the idea of disposing of
the total Spanish debt in Holland to the United States in exchange for
3/0 bonds, of which I/o would be redeemed annually. Payment would
be required in Amsterdam in guilders, or in dollars at a rate of
exchange of 50 stuivers per dollar. The United States would thus
receive 37 million guilders or 14% million dollars at 5t % interest, plus a
5 % bonus on redemption. On the basis of 3/0 bonds, which then
stood at 60 %, the whole exchange would cost the United States less
than 9 million dollars. In addition there were the drafts on Mexico,
which had been calculated at the favourable rate of 32 stuivers to the
piastre. 3
  To make the deal even more attractive to the United States, it would be
necessary for Spain to agree to sell Florida to the United States for the
sum of the debt in Holland. The effect of this would be to confront
Mexico with the choice between approving the cession of Florida or
meeting the Spanish debt; if it chose the latter, the United States would
greatly btnefit financially. The crux of the matter, of course, was whether
Napoleon would agree to such a settlement. If it was true that Florida had
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

declared its independence and had asked the United States for protection,
it would almost certainly be to Napoleon's advantage to approve the sale.
  At Labouchere's suggestion, Parish also consulted Daniel Parker, the
merchant and speculator whose name has already appeared in connexion
with the piastre affair. Parker, who had long experience in the sale ofland,
proposed a shift of emphasis. He felt that it would be feasible to combine
Spain's financial requirements and her need to repay her debt in a new
loan of 40 million guilders at 51- % interest, three-quarters being payable
in existing bonds and the balance, 10 million guilders, in cash. The new
loan would be redeemable in ten years by the sale of 20 million acres of
rich farmland on the shores of the Gulf of Mexico. During the ten-year
period, an estimated 2 million acres could be sold at 10 dollars per acre,
enabling the loan to be repaid in full. The remaining 18 million acres
would fetch 2 dollars an acre, making 36 million dollars. At the conclusion
of the loan, every bondholder would be entitled to one forty-thousandth
part ofthis sum, i.e. 900 dollars.!
  In the matter of the interest payment, Parish and Parker adopted a plan
put forward by D' Almenara and the Spanish envoy in France, the Marquis
de Santa Fe. This envisaged placing at Hope & Co.'s disposal 30,000
quintals of quicksilver, which lay in Seville, at a price of 100 guilders
per kilogram. Half of the proceeds, i.e. cf 1,500,000, would have to be
placed at the disposal of the Spanish government, and the balance would
serve for the payment of the interest. 2
  Labouchere's initial reactions were unfavourable in the extreme. He was
not at all impressed by Parker's ideas about selling land in Florida:
'Nothing would induce the Dutch to invest more money in land in
America, whatever people there may think. It will take half a century to
erase the consequences of earlier errors from European minds.' This was
plain speaking indeed-certainly towards Parish, who had himself indulged
in land speculation in America on a large scale.
  To Labouchere, the ideas put forward by D' Almenara and De Santa
Fe reflected the old misconception on the part of the Spanish Court that
its foreign debts constituted a source of new revenue. The ominous rise in
the number of bankruptcies throughout the empire ruled out any chance
which a proposal of this nature by Spain might otherwise have had. 3
  The 30,000 quintals of quicksilver were nominally valued at 4 million
guilders. According to Labouchere, the demand on the Continent did not
exceed 20,000 pounds in a year-and there was continuous competition
from German and Austrian quicksilver. He took the view that the Com-
pany could be well satisfied if it succeeded in selling 10,000 pounds per