

Fresh remittances from De Gerace enabled 75 bonds to be redeemed on
1st November 1814, but Labouchere continued to warn against granting
any advances in view of the uncertainties of the political situation in
Naples. 1
  Since the opening of the Congress of Vienna, which was occupied with
the redisposition of Europe, Metternich had changed his mind about
Murat's position. In northern Italy, which was now controlled by Austria,
Murat's presence might well give rise to lasting nationalist agitation. He
decided to drop Murat. In January 1815, with the knowledge of the
British government, he signed a secret agreement with Louis XVIII of
France providing for Murat to be driven out of Naples and for the resto-
ration of the house of Bourbon.
  Murat was aware of the plots against him and he therefore moved more
and more towards Napoleon, who had been granted the island of Elba as
his empire and who, from there, was continuously engaged in preparations
for a return to France. As early as mid-November 1814 Labouchere
warned of the risk of sudden hostility on the part of Murat, which might
lead to the interruption of remittances from Naples to Genoa; in the
event, however, it proved possible to redeem 50 bonds on 1st January 1815
and a similar number on 1st ApriI.2
  With this, matters provisionally came to a standstill. On 1st March 1815
Napoleon landed in the south of France, and on the 20th he again took
up residence at the Tuileries in Paris. For Murat, this was the signal to
declare himself against Austria and to call upon the peoples of Italy to
unite. Early in May 1815, even before the Battle of Waterloo, he was
defeated by the Austrians, whereupon the throne of Naples was restored
to the Bourbons. A desperate effort by Murat to bring about a revolt in
Naples ended with his imprisonment and subsequent execution in the
latter part of October 1815. Fortunately for the Company, Ferdinand I of
Naples recognized the existence of the loan, so that it was possible for a
further 80 bonds to be redeemed on I st April 18 16 and the balance of 245
on 1st June 1818. 3
  With Coesvelt's return to Amsterdam, a silence descended on the
Spanish loan. The next reference to it in the Hope archives is a message of
congratulation to the Caja de Consolidacion on the occasion of the libera-
tion of the two countries, with which was coupled the hope that it would
not be long before agreement was reached on the loans granted to Spain.4
  This was followed by a fresh silence. Eventually Labouchere approached
the newly appointed Dutch envoy to Spain, Cambier, who consented to
plead the cause of the Dutch bondholders with the Spanish government. 5

                                   379
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

In recognition of Cambier's assistance, Labouchere provided him with
letters of credit drawn on Baguenault & Co. in Paris and Sanchez Toscano
in Madrid. Cambier's early reports from Madrid were couched in reason-
ably optimistic terms, but by March 18 I S he, too, had lost heart. 1 In a
letter sent in August, which for safety was written in Dutch and carried
by a private courier, he explained the situation more fully.
  'We are making little or no headway in the matter,' he wrote. 'And if we
continue to follow the royal path, we shall not easily reach our destina-
tion. Two persons of relatively subordinate rank enjoy the full confidence
of the Master of the Royal Household and administer its funds, almost to
the exclusion of those who appear in the books. It is said they are ex-
tremely approachable, with the proviso that one friendship must be repaid
with another. This, however, is not unusual and is even found among
judges. Since no one is paid, how could it be otherwise?' 2
  This lengthy citation reveals a very great deal about the situation in
Spain in the period after 18ls-and indeed before that. Weak monarchies,
favouritism, corruption and poverty are the hallmarks. While the scope
of this treatise precludes us from following step by step the later fortunes
of the Dutch loans to Spain, we can, as it were from a distance, envisage
the remaining Dutch claims gradually sinking into the Spanish financial
morass.
  The brief period of liberal government from 1820 to 1823 brought a
resumption of interest payments on the debt to Holland. In 1830 and 1831
the loans in their entirety were converted into s% perpetual rentes on
which interest was paid until a second conversion was effected in 1834.
This conversion in fact amounted to a reduction by one-third: of the
S % perpetuals, two-thirds were converted into a S % active debt, and
the remaining one-third into a passive debt which carried no interest. In
the event, the payment of interest on the active debt continued only up
to 1836.3
  Little purpose would be served by recording the progress of this twice-
converted debt. Suffice to say that it was not until the end of the 19th
century that Spain became ripe for a period of expansion such as took
place in the middle of the 18th century, at which point in history our
story opened.
Diamonds
                           CHAPTER FOURTEEN