

 bouchere, mindful of the stories which Izquierdo had told in Coesvelt's
presence, let him go on. When at last he spoke, he said that there could be
no question of acceding to the request: the 2,000 bonds would remain in
De Smeth's keeping, and Izquierdo would not receive the interest.! A
payment of this nature could be interpreted as a political decision, and the
Company could not afford to run such risks.
  While in Paris, Labouchere also met Nolte, who, as explained earlier,
had gone there to present the final account for the piastre transactions to
the French government. He drew Nolte into a plan which Ouvrard and the
Minister of Finance, Fouche, had devised and which was clearly inspired
by Hope's Spanish American transactions. The plan envisaged the crea-
tion of one hundred licences, with the aid of which American or neutral
vessels would be able to bring colonial produce into the Neapolitan ports
and, in exchange, export goods from the country itself.
  Murat, the new King of Naples, had been informed about the plan, but as
he was with his armies in Austria the negotiations proceeded slowly. The
safety of the inward-bound cargoes of colonial produce constituted a
problem: after all, a decree had been issued in Milan prohibiting such
imports. Labouchere accordingly insisted that a sum of 2 million ducats
be deposited in advance to cover any goods which might be confiscated.
As the date of the emperor's return to Paris drew nearer, Murat and
Fouche became less and less enthusiastic about the project. When La-
bouchere left Paris at the beginning of October, nothing definite had been
decided. Nolte travelled with him to Amsterdam. 2
  By now, a decision whether or not to make a payment on Spain's behalf
on 1st November had become a matter of urgency. When a final appeal to
Mollien to save Spain's credit remained unanswered, Hope & Co. placed
an advertisement stating that no interest or principal would be paid. The
bonds thereupon fell to 50 %, but later recovered to 55-56 %.3
  Under the circumstances, the wisest course appeared to be for Coesvelt,
who had returned to Amsterdam from England at the beginning of
November 1809, to make his way back to Spain and find out what could
be salvaged. No communication had been received from De Cabarrus
since Labouchere's negative reaction to his proposal for a loan secured by
works of art, and it was not clear whether, like his predecessors, he was
hiding behind a barrier of silence or whether his couriers had been de-
tained, or even murdered, by guerillas. 4
  At the same time, King Joseph appeared to be more firmly in the saddle
following the French military successes. The authority of the junta in
Seville had collapsed after the battle of Ocana on 19th November 1809.
                          THE SPANISH MORASS

The junta withdrew to the Isla de Leon, an almost impregnable peninsula
in the vicinity of Cadiz, where, with the support of the English fleet, it was
able to maintain its existence. 1
  Late in December, De Cabarrus, no doubt encouraged by these suc-
cesses, sent Hope & Co. a decree from King Joseph which amounted to
no more than an official proclamation of the lottery loan plan launched
previously. The decree referred to a loan of 21 million guilders at 6 %, a
higher rate of interest than had originally been proposed. The sum of the
payments due on 1st November 1809 and 1st July 1810 was to be met from
the proceeds of the loan, the balance being transferred to Spain. No
reference was made to the 4,000 unsold bonds of the 180710an.2
  In the meantime, Coesvelt had travelled via Paris to Bayonne, where he
awaited a military convoy to Madrid. While in Bordeaux, he had met
Duclerc, De Cabarrus's agent, who had explained the loan plan to him.
Coesvelt was fairly optimistic about the success of such a scheme, but
with the proviso that the matter of the 4,000 bonds of the 1807 loan would
have to be settled first. 3
  Labouchere took a considerably less sanguine view; he found it highly
regrettable that Coesvelt had not waited for him in Paris so that they
could have discussed the subject in detail. Labouchere had been charged
by King Louis with a peace mission to England and this required his
presence in Paris. He was opposed to a new loan such as De Cabarrus
had proposed. The previous Spanish loan had declined in price to 46 %,
 and in the light of this it was pointless to go to the market with a new
issue. The interest due on 1st November 1809, and with it the 5 % bonus
 on the maturing bonds, must first be paid, and this must be repeated on
 1st July 1810. The sum of these payments was of the order of two million
guilders and this could be obtained through a loan of five million francs,
 for which Crown jewels and paintings could serve as security; these
 would be deposited for safe keeping with Cabarrus & Co. of Bayonne, the
 partners in which were related to the minister. A loan of this nature could
 be limited to a small circle of investors. If this failed, consideration might
 be given to the issue of warrants valid for the purchase of national
 possessions in Spain. It might be possible to find a group of speculators
 willing to take over warrants of this kind. Also, bonds drawn on 1st
 November 1809 and 1st July 1810, but not redeemed, could be exchanged
 for the warrants; holders not wishing to do this could be offered prolon-
 gation of their bonds. 4
   Coesvelt remained in Bayonne from late January until early April 1810,
 during which period he was intensively engaged in correspondence with
                         THE SPANISH MORASS