

In 1777, the fall from grace of the powerful Portuguese minister Pombal
brought a fresh opportunity. There was every chance that those who had
enjoyed his protection would also disappear from the scene. The house
of Thomas Mayne & Co. in Lisbon wrote in most optimistic terms about
such a development, even going so far as to give themselves a good chance
of securing the contract. If this occurred, Hope & Co. might become
Mayne's commision agents in Amsterdam-a disappointing prospect for
a house which itself sought the contract! 1
  But there were others with an eye to the main chance. Robert Lewis
Cantofer, a Lisbon merchant, informed Hope that, thanks to his contacts
in government circles, he would certainly be considered for the contract
(although the price per carat offered was also a factor of importance),
and in that event he would gladly join forces with Hope. A fixed quantity
of 60,000 carats would have to be taken annually, on conditions cor-
responding to those which Gildemeester had imposed on the Jewish
diamond merchants at Amsterdam in previous years. This implied that
a fixed quantity would be delivered quarterly at a fixed price and with a
six-month advance at 3 %interest per annum. Against the 60,000 carats to
be delivered, Canto fer wished to draw cf 450,000-about two-thirds of
the estimated value-quarterly. The balance would become payable after
the principal annual sales. 2
 All these efforts were to no avail, however, for shortly afterwards Mayne
reported that Gildemeester's contract would expire in the normal way. In
1787 a further attempt failed, but in 1791 Hope had at least a measure of
success. 3 Joachim Pedro Quintella, the new contractor, appointed the
Company as his agents in Amsterdam for the duration of his contract, i.e.
until the end of 180 I.
  The correspondence with houses in Lisbon contains numerous references
to Hope's wide experience in the diamond trade. This embraced the sale of
uncut diamonds in Amsterdam as well as the export of polished stones,
especially to Russia and Turkey. The former activity related to commis-
sions from Jewish diamond merchants in London. The earliest surviving
'balance,' which dates from 1763, contains such names as Eleasar Salo-
mons, Gompertz & Heyman, Salomon de Silva and Nathan Salomons.
  Perusal of the grootboeken for 1770 and the following years shows that
the quantities traded varied greatly from one year to another. In some
cases the cause can be attributed to political factors, as in 1779-80 and
1793-94, but in others no such influences are discernible. Generally
speaking, the annual totals were fairly high: in 14 of the 25 years between
1770 and 1794, more than 15,000 carats were sold. 4
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

It is worthy of note that, commencing in 1785, the Company also effected
sales on behalf of Jewish merchants in Amsterdam. According to the
grootboeken, one of these, Ruben Harmsz. Kijzer-who later became
Hope's and Insinger's confidential representative-had previously been a
diamond merchant in London, and must therefore have moved to Am-
sterdam later. 1
 The sales made on behalf of Quintella in the years 1791 to 1801 inclusive
display the same irregularity as those for the London merchants, but here
the cause lay partly in the war. In 1795, following the departure for Lon-
don of the partners of Hope & Co., diamonds ceased to be consigned via
the Company.2 It is true that a new channel-which led via London and
Hamburg to the Amsterdam house of Insinger & Co.-was established in
the succeeding years, but that house received so few diamonds in 1798 and
1799 that it was moved to issue a warning to Labouchere. The cessation of
supplies in 1795 had already caused serious damage; if the existing situation
continued, lasting harm would be done to the diamond polishing industry,
and this in turn would have an adverse effect on the market for the gems. 3
Fortunately, supplies were restored at the beginning of the 19th century.
 That advancing money against diamonds and lending money on the
security of diamonds differed only in degree, became clear round about
the turn of the century. Quintella had approached Messrs. Hope in Lon-
don in the matter of a loan in 1796, and in March 1800 he did so again. On
both occasions the partners declined. Since Quintella's first proposal, the
demand for diamonds in Holland had risen and sales had improved, but
the money market in England was no place for loans on the security of
private property.4 They did, however, offer, jointly with Francis Baring &
Co., to advance a reasonable sum for a shorter period-say, 100,000
pounds sterling for two years at 6 %interest plus a commission of 5 %.
 The interest and a portion of the principal could be paid out of the dia-
mond sales effected by Insinger & Co. in Amsterdam; the balance of the
debt would be payable by Quintella on the due date, by way of a remit-
tance. As security, Hope would require diamonds totalling 40,000 carats,
'pour notre tranquillite personnelle.' The diamonds, which represented a
value of cf 1,765,000 or 147,000 pounds sterling, would be deposited with
the Bank of England. 5
 This implies that Hope, in company with Baring, was prepared to ad-
vance a sum equal to two-thirds ofthe value of the security for a period of
two years. This differs little from the earlier situation, in which two-thirds
was advanced for one year. In their correspondence with Quintella, the
partners accordingly kept the whole affair strictly in the sphere of trade by
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN