


             (. YC"'''.;)'' k (1,,/.. ./?iN>;) ".... ci>..£.o C.".". /}. {,,,,,,,,/...




       Acceptance of the payment order for cf 1,700,000 per annum
from th e tobacco leases as part collateral for the Portuguese diamond Joan,
                    signed by the tobacco lessees, 1802
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

handed to Labouchere until 26th February. On 2nd March, Labouchere
and George Baring embarked in the Dutch corvette 'Diana' for the voyage
to Gibraltar, from whence they journeyed via Madrid to Paris, where they
arrived on 17th April. 1
  During the negotiations in Lisbon, Labouchere had promised Don
Rodrigo that he would intercede with the French government in an
attempt to have the levy on Portugal reduced or, if this failed, to urge
that the payments be spread over a longer period. In the event, Talley-
rand, the French Foreign Minister, proved unwilling to reduce the sum,
but Labouchere eventually persuaded him to extend the period. Under
the new arrangement, a cash payment of 3 million livres before 1st June
was demanded, and thereafter monthly instalments of I million livres, the
last of which would fall due on 31st August 1803. (The value of the livre
at that time can be put at cf 0.48). These sums, together with the 2 million
livres which the French government wished to be paid in Lisbon in con-
nexion with the expedition to the rebellious Santo Domingo (for which
sum Bandeira and Quintella had drawn on Hope in March and April),
made up the sum of the war levy.2
  As we have seen, the issue of the transfer price had not been settled.
Labouchere had agreed conditionally to a price of 92, but from the outset
he doubted whether this could be achieved, particularly in view of the
prices of other government issues. The news that the government of the
Batavian Republic had floated a 30-million guilder loan at an issue price
of 75, and bearing the same rate of interest as the Portuguese loan, added
a convincing dimension to his argument. The agreement reached with the
French government had the effect of increasing the commitment by
Baring and Hope to the full 13 million guilders, and this will un-
doubtedly have made the Portuguese government more receptive to
advice and persuaded it to agree to a transfer price of 90. 3
   As promised in the 'Plan d'un emprunt,' the diamonds which lay in
Lisbon were placed at Labouchere's disposal immediately after the sign-
ing of the contract. There were 114,342 carats with an estimated value of
cf 2,740,000. Bandeira and Quintella had the stones packed in six parcels
and sent to London, from whence they were consigned to lnsinger & Co.
in Amsterdam-the house to which Hope, with a mixture of wisdom and
caution, provisionally continued to entrust diamond sales. 4 By the end of
1802, 54,342 carats had arrived in Amsterdam, and of these more than
33,000 carats were sold in the same period. The remaining 60,000 carats
were despatched during the first quarter of 1803. By the end of that year,
45,000 carats of the total stock remained. 5
                                    394
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN