

was clearly in rendering itself 'as much as possible, the general pivot of the
World, upon which everything should turn.' Countries like England and
France, with their rich resources, could regulate and restrict as it pleased
them; for Holland, 'a comparatively nothing,' such a course would be
fatal, however. In the artificial situation in which Holland was doomed to
subsist for an eternity, circulation would prove to be the basis for trade
-not only because trading enterprises were linked to foreign loans and
circulation, but also because a healthy circulation had to be founded on
capital if it was to beget trade and nourish it. Limiting the use of capital
on the grounds of a temporary emergency could destroy the chance of
prosperity in the future.
  If permission for the loan were to be refused, Barings were prepared to
establish a first-class house in Antwerp with the funds which arose from
the Portuguese operation. If the diamond contract and an agency for
imports from the island of Tobago (and perhaps also one for goods from
Martinique) could be added to the loan, the foundations would be laid
for a house which could become one of the most important in Europe and
which would enjoy the support of the powerful and enterprising firm of
Baring & Co. Then the Portuguese bonds would circulate in Hol-
land-only they would bear the name Baring instead of Hope, and Ant-
werp as the place of domicile instead of Amsterdam!
  For Hope & Co., there was little incentive to return to Amsterdam if this
implied being limited to trade in Holland. The Company's capital was too
great for so small an arena: it had to be free to swell, to flow in any direc-
tion and to be invested in, or withdrawn from, exchange transactions,
loans or mercantile operations at will. 1
 The manner in which Henry Hope coupled his family's return to Amster-
dam with the maintenance of the free movement of capital makes one
wonder whether the threat to establish a branch in another country was
really so serious. We cannot be certain, though we may assume that
Henry Hope's arguments were intended for a wider audience than Labou-
chere alone, who certainly knew the writer's views and would probably
have shared them. One thing is certain: at that time, Sir Francis Baring
had plans for a complete merger between Hope & Co. and his own house.
Thus the reference to an initiative on his part for the establishment of a
branch in Antwerp may well contain an element of truth. 2
  There can be no doubt as to the genuineness of Henry Hope's disap-
pointment. In February 1803 he confessed to John Williams Hope that
the failure of the Portugal affair had given his nerves a severe jolt, 'and
enhanced on the natural effect of advancing years, so that I find myself

                                    399
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

unfit for the business ... and absolutely unequal to the shock of any
untoward accident in the course of it.' He became steadily less disposed to
visit Holland, 'from several causes, not the least of which is the coup de pied
de /' {me which we have received, which I shall never be able to digest.' 1 This
was not the first occasion on which Henry Hope had spoken of retiring from
business, as the introductory chapter reveals. Moreover, a return to Holland
would mean adapting to totally changed circumstances in that country-an
extremely difficult task for anyone of his age. The steadily deteriorating
relations between England and France constituted yet another reason
for following Voiite's advice to maintain a safe pied aterre in England.
 There was, however, no question of abandoning the idea of returning to
Amsterdam, or even of a lengthy postponement of the move. It was true
that capital was mobile, and that talent and diligence were to be found in
equal measure elsewhere; but the protection which friends in Amsterdam
could offer in time of need was not easily matched. Amsterdam appeared
as the place of issue for the loan in all the agreements with the Portuguese
government-indeed, it had been especially recommended during the
negotiations-and so a unilateral amendment was out of the question.
Towards the end of August, Paulus Taay had gone to the trouble of
airing and tidying the house in Amsterdam and opening the cases con-
taining the beds and bedding which had been sent from London. 2
 The Laboucheres arrived in Holland round about loth October 1802,
to be followed shortly afterwards by Mrs. Williams Hope and her family.
John Williams Hope stayed on in England. He was still there on 5th
November, the date of the circular informing friends and business asso-
ciates of the re-establishment of the house in Amsterdam. 3 His reason for
putting off his journey becomes clearer if one recalls the opposition to the
Portuguese loan. Among the elements of this opposition was a lingering
antipathy in radical-patriotic circles towards the Anglo-Orangist 'emi-
grant house.' In the summer of 1802 a pamphlet was circulated, de-
nouncing those 'who desert the Republic in time of danger, and return in
time of peace.' 4 The Portuguese envoy in The Hague, Bezerra, was in-
formed openly that another house would have been given permission to
open a loan, and although the truth of this assertion may be doubted, the
hostility towards Hope was unmistakable. 5 For this very reason, Voiite
advised John Williams Hope that when the moment for his return arrived,
he should avoid The Hague at all costs, re-establish himself quietly in
Amsterdam and refrain from discussing the Portuguese affair. This could
wait until the beginning of November, when Voiite, who was in The
Hague, proposed to visit Amsterdam. 6 Under such circumstances, it is