

 placing the proposed transaction on the same footing as commission sales
 of wool and silk. 1
   Early in 1801 the Company was approached for the first time, albeit
 indirectly, by the Portuguese government. The partners' reply was cau-
 tious but did not amount to a rejection. They said that, in such turbulent
 times, there was naturally little incentive to tie up their funds in an article
 which could only be placed on the market slowly, but that if the Court was
 prepared to dispose of a high proportion of the diamonds which it held
 and to refrain from releasing any more on to the market for a given period,
 a transaction would merit serious consideration. 2 They went to great
 lengths to recommend the participation of Quintella, since it seemed to
 them unwise to ignore such a respectable and powerful house.
   After the Peace of Madrid, however, the Portuguese government had no
 time for guarded moves of this nature: it needed money, and quickly, in
 order to meet its commitment to France. It thus sought a house able and
willing to provide immediate advances, and also to float a loan on the
English market. As the partners of Hope & Co. had not actively pursued
their profession of merchants and bankers since their flight to England,
the principal role at this juncture passed almost automatically to Baring &
Co., a house which had achieved wartime prominence by the handling of
international finance.
   During the early days of October 1801, Baring & Co. were approached
by John Stanley of Lisbon concerning a loan of 300,000 pounds sterling
to the Portuguese Court. It quickly transpired that Stanley, a long-stand-
ing business contact of Barings, had close connexions with Jacinto Fer-
nandez Bandeira, a rich and influential merchant who was acting as agent
for the Court in the matter of the loan. After a favourable response from
Baring, more information was forthcoming. The French government had
initially demanded a cash payment of four million crusados, plus dia-
monds to a value of three million crusados and a similar sum in cotton
and sugar. One million crusadosworth of diamonds and a further million
in drafts had been given in mid-November. Now, the French were insis-
ting that the balance be paid in cash, and to meet this Stanley proposed
that the loan should be increased to 1,200,000 pounds sterling. This would
enable the Court to settle its debt to France and also 'to provide at once
for all the exigencies of Government for a long time.'3
  In a 'Plan d'un emprunt' drawn up by Don Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho
on the orders of the prince regent and transmitted to London by Bandeira,
the Portuguese government set out the conditions upon which it wished to
negotiate. The payment of interest and repayment, over ten years, of the
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

principal could be made from the revenue from the tobacco lease or that
from the Crown lands. In addition, the Court was willing to deposit imme-
diately diamonds to a value of 250,000-300,000 pounds sterling with the
Bank of England. These would be placed at the disposal of the house
which assumed responsibility for the loan, and the proceeds of their sale
could be used to repay the principal. The diamond consignments would
continue until the final repayment against the loan was made. The Court
required the monies subscribed to the loan to be made available in ten
monthly instalments, commencing on 1St November 180 1.1
  It may be assumed that the Portuguese Court, in drawing up these con-
ditions, took account of the wishes of Francis Baring & Co., and that this
house, in turn, sought the advice of Messrs. Hope, who after all were more
experienced in such matters. The deposition of diamonds with the Bank of
England-a point raised by Hope in the previous year-points to this.
Later correspondence shows also that the proposed loan carried the ap-
proval and patronage of the British government. This is not surprising, for
prompt settlement of the French claim would mean the restoration ofPortu-
gal's freedom of action, and this could only be to England's advantage. 2
  By this time, Labouchere had left for the Continent to make prepara-
tions for the re-establishment of the Company in Amsterdam once peace
between England and France became a reality. During his stay he had
been regularly informed of the position in regard to the Portuguese affairs,
and now that the negotiations were beginning to take shape he received
instructions from John Williams Hope in London to hold himself in
readiness for a journey to Portugal. 3
   The fact that Labouchere was to conduct the negotiations enabled the
partners to reconcile themselves to some extent with the subordinate role
which the Company had up to then played in the affair. Robert Voute was
 negotiating with the government of the Batavian Republic on the condi-
 tions for a resumption of the Company's business, but, alas, he had not
 made sufficient progress to permit an early return to Amsterdam, 'where
 we might embrace a greater object by participating or dividing the Con-
 cern with the publick.' 4 It was agreed that the name of the Company
 should not be mentioned for the time being; but the major part which
 Labouchere was to play in the preparations for the affair would certainly
 become known, and this would naturally draw attention to the Company.
   The affair possessed attractive facets from the points of view of both
 houses: for Hope it presented an opportunity to gain complete control of
 the diamond trade, and for Baring the prospect of becoming sole agent for
 the Portuguese Court in matters involving foreign transactions. The re-
                 THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN