

                                     400
B                            c     11      1".




    Bericht of the Portuguese loan, 1802
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

understandable that John Williams Hope kept on postponing his return,
the more so since he had little desire to return to Amsterdam. To Sir
Francis Baring, this hesitant attitude was a source of irritation - to the
point, indeed, that, shortly after John Williams Hope's arrival in Amster-
dam, Sir Francis tersely informed him that he could perhaps understand
his conduct were he proposing to transform the Amsterdam house into a
sort of Andries Pels & Sons-by which he meant a house which had the
means to do anything, but did nothing. Such behaviour, the letter con-
tinued, smacked of weakness and a lack of the energy which was vital if a
house was to be kept 'in the real rank ofthe great and prominent.' 1
  In dealing with the Portuguese loan, however, caution was a more impor-
tant attribute than energy. The request to the Staatsbewind having been
turned down, there was little choice except to have the bonds signed
outside the Batavian Republic. In order to avoid any risk of giving offence,
it was decided that the task should be entrusted to Bandeira in Lisbon. 2
Just how wise this decision was, emerged during a chance meeting be-
tween Voiite and Spoors at Bezerra's residence. When 'the affair and the
person' (i.e. the Portuguese loan and Labouchere) were mentioned,
Spoors flew into a temper, becoming if anything more enraged than on
the previous occasion. According to Voiite, some unrepeatable things were
said-all in the presence of Bezerra, who, Voiite added by way of conso-
lation, was nonetheless prepared to institute an advertisement concerning
the first payment of interest and principal. 3 Indeed, in the closing days of
the year, two Dutch newspapers carried an announcement by the Portu-
guese envoy, stating that the Portuguese Court had furnished Hope & Co.,
'Banquiers de la Couronne de Portugal,' with funds to enable it to make a
payment of interest and principal, together totalling cf 1,033,000, in
respect of the Court's debt to Hope & Co. of 13 million guilders
Hollands Courant. 4 Simultaneously with this announcement, Bezerra
informed the Staatsbewind of the payment in a formal note. As neither
document bore a reference to the place of issue of the loan, and as Hope
& Co. acted only in their capacity of Court Bankers, the announcements
produced no reaction from the government.
  But although matters appeared on the surface to be proceeding smooth-
ly, the situation backstage was less satisfactory. The tobacco lessees in
Lisbon, who were bound by contract to furnish a sum cf 1,700,000 annu-
ally (admittedly, less the proceeds from the diamonds sold in the year
concerned) for the payment of interest and principal, had been so lax in
regard to their commitment that Baring had been obliged to make good
the deficit in order that the payment announced could be effected. The
                                    402
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN