

Now that the wheels were beginning to turn, it was time to prepare for
the placing of the loan on the Dutch market. Robert VOllte had also done
some spadework in this connexion. He reported that the signing of the
Peace of Amiens had distinctly improved the prospects for the Portuguese
loan, but added that it should not be placed while the new Batavian loan
of 30 million guilders was still on the market. 1 As it was necessary to
obtain government approval for foreign loans, VOllte had already had an
exploratory discussion in The Hague with the Treasurer-General, De Vos
van Steenwijk, whose office was comparable with that of a minister of
finance. During their meeting, VOllte made it appear that he had visited
Hope in London in January 1802 with the aim of keeping the diamond
trade in Holland, and that the Company had subsequently sent a partner
to Lisbon. The emissary had achieved his goal, but as a quid pro quo a
Portuguese loan would have to be floated in Amsterdam. The discussion
ended with the Treasurer General indicating his approval and promising
to place matters before the Staatsbewind-a governing board with twelve
members, in which executive power had been vested since the previous
year-and to inform VOllte of its decision. 2
  An unforeseen complication arose in the shape of a Bill aimed against
the contracting of foreign loans in the Batavian Republic. If adopted by
the Legislative Assembly, this would make it illegal for persons living in
the Republic to raise money on behalf of foreigners or foreign powers
unless such persons were able to furnish security in the form of a mortgage
on their own assets to a value of twice the sum to be raised. VOllte pro-
posed to await the arrival in Amsterdam of one of the partners of Hope &
Co. before publishing the Berigt concerning the Portuguese loan.3 With
this legislative obstacle looming on the horizon (the Bill was due to be-
come law on 1st June), it was important that the arrival should not be
unduly delayed. VOllte accordingly urged Labouchere, who was then in
Paris, to return to the Republic as quickly as possible. However, the
negotiations with the French government took longer than had been
anticipated, and it was May before Labouchere was able to free himself
from the Portuguese matters. Even then there was no question of him
travelling to Amsterdam, for more pressing affairs required his presence
in London. The re-establishment of the house in Amsterdam necessitated
revision of the deed of partnership, since it was imperative for the house
to arm itself against all manner of contingencies and dangers which could
threaten it in the event of a fresh outbreak of war.
  Upon the completion of the arrangements for the new partnership-to
which reference was made in the introductory chapter-Labouchere left

                                   395
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

London for Amsterdam, where he arrived early in July 1802. There, he
and VOllte jointly drafted the Berigt, whereupon the two men journeyed
to The Hague to plead their case with the authorities. VOllte, who had
contacts in government circles, asked that his presence be made known to
Spoors, a member of the Staatsbewind, by whom he was received. By the
time Labouchere joined them, Vollte had explained the matter and had
obtained Spoor's assurance that he would do his utmost to ensure a
favourable decision on the difficult issue of the date-which was subse-
quent to the decree of 1st June. At this point, a discussion arose between
Labouchere and Spoors which became increasingly heated and finally
deteriorated into an argument. From the somewhat veiled description of
the scene in VOllte's handwriting, it appears that Labouchere informed
Spoors in a fairly sharp tone that the French government had given its
approval to the loan, and that Spoors interpreted this as an attempt to
intimidate the Staatsbewind. VOllte succeeded in restoring calm, but
Spoors sought refuge in officialdom and remained clearly displeased. 1
  Spoor's touchiness was in all probability allied to the failure of the efforts
to secure the withdrawal of French troops from the Batavian Republic.
Despite its promises, the French government had maintained its occu-
pation of the Republic after the Peace of Amiens. Spoors had recently
reached agreement with the French government for the withdrawal of its
forces, and, with some pressure, secured the approval of his colleagues in
the Staatsbewind. But the troops had not departed and thus fresh nego-
tiations would be necessary-a situation which compromised Spoors. 2
   Despite this inauspicious beginning, it was important not to lose any
more time. Before the day was out, Labouchere and VOllte, assisted by
 Hope's lawyer in The Hague, Van Son, had prepared a written request to
the Staatsbewind and submitted this in person to the president of that
 body, Van Hoogstraten. The president welcomed them in a most friendly
 manner, and was very sympathetic towards the matter of the loan. At the
 end of this emotional day, Labouchere, having no further business in The
 Hague, returned to Amsterdam.
   On 13th July, the request came up for discussion in the Staatsbewind. In
 it, the petitioners stated that the loan had been entered into at the begin-
 ning of the year, and that the principal sum had already been advanced.
 Now that the house of Hope & Co. was proposing to return to Holland, it
 desired to transfer the loan to Amsterdam. As a token of its loyal dispo-
 sition, the house was willing to pay a tax of! % on the nominal sum, and
 to submit to stamp duty on the bonds at the rate of six stuivers. The Staats-
 be wind referred the request to the Treasurer-General and the councillors of
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN