

the Treasury for advice, and they, in turn, requested the petitioners to
furnish a facsimile of the proposed bonds and a copy of the Berigt. 1
  From the outset, Van Son, Hope's lawyer, was pessimistic concerning
the outcome. VOllte did all he could to advance the matter, and this in-
cluded having a further interview with the Treasurer-General, who again
promised his support. After this he, too, left The Hague-not for Amster-
dam, but for his newly acquired country residence, Middagten, to recover
from the rheumatic fevers which plagued him.2
  With growing impatience and irritation, Labouchere awaited the out-
come of the request; but days and weeks passed without a decision. VOllte
had difficulty in restraining him from taking fresh steps. VOllte was of the
opinion that it would be better to withdraw the request. How could it be
proved that the loan sum had actually been furnished in England? The
house could not allow the Staatsbewind to inspect its books! The only
convincing proof lay in not announcing the loan in Holland; to attempt
further action in The Hague could only lead to the conclusion that Hope
indeed planned to place the bonds in the Republic. It would be best if
Labouchere went his way and left the whole thing to VOllte, who could
then say that he knew with certainty 'that matters now rest in England,
between your friends and those of Sir Francis.' 3
  VOllte's strategy was obviously aimed at allowing plenty of time for the
heated tempers to cool and then broaching the matter afresh. Of course,
it remained to be seen whether an issue which had penetrated so deeply
into the regions of prestige would emerge from them in the short term.
In this context, it was unfortunate that the proceeds of the loan would
largely find their way into the French Treasury coffers, for this fact em-
bodied a painful reminder of France's overall superiority. It was doubtful
whether the Staatsbewind would be in favour of allowing Dutch investors
to contribute in any shape or form to the payments. It was all very well
for Labouchere to contemplate that rejection of the request would merely
imply altering the name 'Amsterdam' on the bonds to 'London,' and that
the bonds, in this form, would still appear on the Amsterdam Stock Ex-
change; for opponents of the loan, this was one more reason for resisting
it. 4
  On 5th August 1802, the Treasurer-General and the councillors of the
Treasury, after ample deliberation, tendered their advice to the Staatsbe-
wind. They recommended that the loan be approved. But in the meantime
the president of the Staatsbewind, Van Hoogstraten, had joined the
opponents (probably under Spoor's influence), and when the matter was
referred to a committee-of which Van Hoogstraten and Spoors were

                                    397
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

members-the future looked bleak for the petitioners. 1 On 20th August,
Van Son reported to Voute that the request had been turned down.
  Labouchere did not experience the setback at first hand. On 23rd July,
acting on Voute's advice, he had left for Paris, from whence he had
journeyed on 15th August to London. 2 There, his report of the way things
had gone produced deep disappointment. Even before the news of the
official rejection was received, Henry Hope had expressed his anxiety to
Labouchere. If the Staatsbewind were to turn down the request, he argued,
one of the principal sources of 'circulation and prosperity' in Holland
would be blocked and the opportunity to float future foreign loans
destroyed for good. A full explanation of all the circumstances surround-
ing the Portuguese loan ought to have immediately satisfied the Batavian
government, 'for we have selected this measure as the means to introduce
the reestablishment of our House with eclat, by manifesting the most
conciliatory disposition and unequivocal proof of our attachment to the
interest of the country.' 'But,' he continued, 'if we are obliged to believe
that we are suspected of not dealing in good faith, a regard for the
character we have always maintained and which we never will abandon
might result in our revising completely the plans concerning ourselves. If
those in Holland abandon the vital principle of circulation, neither our
capital nor ourselves, nor even the country, will be of any use. And as far
as talents and diligence are concerned, these are present in the neigh-
bouring countries in equal, if not greater, measure.' In participating in the
loan, at Baring's invitation, Hope also aimed at securing the diamond
trade for Holland and for the house, thereby preventing the English de-
veloping into competitors in that sector. It had been Hope's idea to
 transfer the loan to Holland, and it was he who had proposed doubling
the principal sum. 3 Holland could surely not object to the houses of Hope
and Baring investing part of their idle funds in this relatively small loan?
Their action in doing so also showed clearly that they were not proposing
 to draw capital away from an exhausted country. On the contrary, the
return of the Hope family would bring a great deal of money into the
country-and without Henry Hope having to sell a single one of the Portu-
guese bonds which he held. It would, of course, be necessary for a portion
 of the loan to be placed on the Amsterdam market, if only to arrive at
a quotation, and to satisfy the Portuguese Court. But Hope was certain
 that this 'circulation' would not rise above the sum required annually for
 interest and principal payments.
   In Hope's opinion, it was about time the leading statesmen in Holland
got down to considering where the country's true interest lay. And that
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN