

                                    390
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

 The size of the loan was left in abeyance. The minister desired
 cf 13,000,000, payable in instalments of cf 1,000,000 in the months January
 to November and a final payment of cf 2,000,000 on 31st December 1802.
 Labouchere consented in principle to this arrangement, adding that he
 hoped to be in a position to accomplish the desired increase of the prin-
 cipal sum. This, however, would require consultation with his friends,
 and pending this it would be necessary to limit the formal contract to
 cf6,500,000.1 Of this, cf 4,500,000 would be made available on the signing
 of the contract and the handing over of the diamonds in Portugal. The
 balance would follow after the arrival from Brazil and transfer of the
 diamonds which were available there. In all probability, Hope and
 Baring were prepared to place a larger sum at the minister's disposal once
 the contract had been signed.
  If we compare the instalments specified by the minister with those in the
'Plan d'un emprunt,' we observe that the number was increased from ten
to twelve, and that the date for the final payment was put back from 1st
August to 31st December 1802. Labouchere, for his part, made the pay-
ments conditional upon the handing over of the diamonds: 4t million
guilders following the signing of the contract and the depositing of
 114,000 carats, and 2 million guilders upon the arrival and transfer of
the Brazilian portion of the security, which was estimated at about
100,000 carats. Observing that the two deposits of diamonds represented
a value of more than 5 million guilders, Labouchere's action in urging
his principals to double the sum offered is not in the least surprising. 2
  As Don Rodrigo lacked experience in matters of this nature, it was left to
Labouchere to indicate the official documents which had to be prepared.
First and foremost was the contract between the minister and Labouchere,
as the authorized representative of Hope and Baring, and an allied decree
bearing the prince regent's confirmation and approval of the agreement.
Two further decrees were required in order to safeguard the sum of
cf 1,700,000 needed yearly for interest and principal payments. One of
these would serve to mortgage the total output from the diamond mines
and transfer it to the two houses during the life of the loan, and the other
would give Hope and Baring a yearly payment order for cf 1,700,000
from the tobacco lease. The latter sum was a maximum and would reduce
annually by the sum of the proceeds of the diamond sales in the year in
question. It would be necessary for the tobacco duty farmers, as a group, to
officially accept this payment order and undertake to pay the sum indicated.
fn addition, each would be required to give a personal guarantee in respect
of both the payment order and the undertaking. Lastly, there was the
principal debenture.
                                   39 1
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN