

spective interest of the two houses were reflected in the agreed ratio of
participation, namely five to two, Hope taking the larger share. Both
were of the opinion that the sum requested, 1,200,000 pounds sterling,
was too large, and initially they were unwilling to go beyond 700,000
pounds, of which 400,000 pounds would be made available on 31st
January 1802 and further sums of 100,000 pounds on 30th April, 31st July
and 31st October of that year.!
 Against all expectations, the Company was accorded recognition of the
position which it so ardently desired. On the day after John Williams
Hope recorded his chagrin concerning the opportunities in Amsterdam
which were being missed, it was decided, on the advice of Francis Baring,
to transfer the entire Portuguese negotiation to the Batavian Republic.
While we can only guess the motives which led to this sudden change of
course, it would be safe to assume that the settlement reached with the
Batavian government at the end of November, concerning the long-
standing claims against the Hope family, had a bearing upon it. Only
when this obstacle had been overcome did a return to Amsterdam be-
come feasible, and the move, in turn, was a prerequisite for introducing
the Portuguese negotiation. Repatriation and Portuguese affairs thus
became interwoven-a circumstance which was subsequently to produce
com plications. 2
 The news of the momentous decision reached Labouchere in Paris. It
was expedient to have the Portuguese affair settled by the time the peace
treaty between England and France was signed, whereupon the house
would be able to resume operations in Amsterdam. Labouchere was in-
formed that he should therefore depart for Lisbon without delay, leaving
matters of secondary importance such as the restoration of trade links
with Madrid and Cadiz. If possible, he should charter a vessel in order to
avoid the long and circuitous overland journey. 3
  Accompanied by George Baring, the youngest son of Sir Francis, Labou-
chere travelled via Nantes, La Rochelle and Bordeaux to Bayonne, where
both men tried to charter a vessel to take them to Portugal; but their
efforts were in vain. Deeply conscious of the need for haste, they hired
a train of mules and a driver, by which means they travelled for nine days
in bitter winter weather to Madrid, where they arrived on 20th January.
The journey was continued at the same tempo, and on 28th January
Labouchere was able to report from Lisbon to his principals that he was
ready to commence the negotiations. 4
  He was certainly not handicapped by lack of instructions. Mail had
preceded him during his journey, and in Lisbon a stack of letters from
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

both Hope and Baring awaited his arrival. In essence, the plans had not
altered since mid-November 1801, which implied that the principals
adhered to the 'Plan d'un emprunt,' albeit the sum of the loan was limited
to 700,000 pounds sterling. Moved by a spirit of caution, John Williams
Hope in particular exhorted his negotiator to keep his eyes open and to
ensure that the interest payments against the loan commenced on 1st
January 1802. Labouchere was advised that the loan instalments should
be as widely spaced as possible, since Baring and Hope were about to
participate in a loan in England and therefore their liquid resources would
be somewhat stretched for a time. In view of the pressure of time, the two
houses had agreed to allow Don Rodrigo de Souza Coutinho to draw
100,000 pounds sterling on Hope & Co. in Amsterdam, but they were
fervently hoping that Labouchere would reach Lisbon before the sum was
drawn. 1 This limited ad vance reflected a certain fear of competition. 2
 Labouchere's first impressions were wholly favourable. The sovereign
and the minister both inspired him with confidence, and the securities
which they offered were so solid that nothing in England could match
them. The only real hazards lay in the political sphere, for there were clear
signs of French intrigue inside Portugal; but provided that the peace
congress at Amiens produced the desired results, Labouchere did not
envisage any dangers in the current year.
 In order not to leave the minister in doubt, Labouchere drew up a 'First
Overture to His Excellency,' in which he set out the basis upon which the
two houses wished to negotiate. First, they required the minister's approv-
al for the transfer of the loan to Amsterdam. This would be in the interest
of the Portuguese Court also, for foreign loans were difficult to place in
England and very costly.3 In Holland, where the house of Hope would
resume its activities as soon as peace was restored, the situation was much
more favourable, for there loans of this sort had long been commonplace.
Although the majority of government bonds yielded more than 6 %,
Labouchere deemed it wiser to fix the interest on the new loan at 5 % and
to lower proportionately the price at which the loan would be taken over.
If a 6 % loan stood at par, a 5 % loan should command 83t %. However,
6 % Americans commanded 96 %, and on this basis the price of the Portu-
guese loan would be 80. This corresponded to the prices of Austrian,
Spanish and even Dutch issues. As a special favour, however, Labouchere
offered to place the Portuguese Court on a level with the Russian Court,
or even on a higher plane. Thanks to Hope's tireless efforts, the Russian
bonds then stood at 88-89, and against this Labouchere offered the
minister a takeover price of 90.4