

Not surprisingly in view of these circumstances, Hope's claims embar-
rassed the regency council-so much so indeed that it issued a decree
forbidding the tobacco lessees to meet the Company's drafts and also
suspending their commitment for the duration of the war, on the grounds
that this concerned payment to Dutchmen, i.e. enemies. 1 Hope's conten-
tions that the provisions of the principal debenture remained valid in
time of war, that Holland was not at war with Portugal, that Hope & Co.
had been an English company at the time when the contract was signed,
and that the drafts would be collected by Barings, all failed to make any
impression on the council.
  In spite of all this, however, the payment of interest and principal at the
end of 1808 and 1809 took place normally. In 1808, the Company assisted
to the extent of about two hundred thousand guilders, but as nearly half
the bonds were held by Henry Hope & Co., a proportional amount of the
advance was, as it were, merely transferred from waistcoat pocket to
trouser pocket. In 1809 the sales of the remaining diamonds, amounting
to 54,500 carats, produced nearly one and a half million guilders. This left
a deficit of just over a quarter of a million guilders, half of which was
covered by funds from the Bandeira and Quintella accounts and the
balance by drafts on the tobacco lessees to the order of Baring.2
  Hope's efforts in Lisbon, which were as numerous as they were fruitless,
were viewed with disfavour by Alexander Baring. In his opinion, all these
approaches to people who, because of the war, had no money were point-
less and even dangerous. The next thing would be that the government in
Rio de Janeiro would use the requests from Lisbon as an excuse for not
paying. There was only one place to achieve anything, and that was Brazil,
where the highest authority lay and where the means of payment existed. 3
  The necessity to make representations in Brazil had not escaped the
notice of the partners of Hope & Co. Indeed, they had realized this
immediately after the prince regent's departure, but correspondence with
faraway Rio de Janeiro, where the situation was still confused and ob-
scure, would certainly be a slow procedure and would in all probability
produce little result. To get anywhere, it was vital to have a capable and
reliable confidential agent on the spot, who could represent the Hope-
Baring interests in person at the Court. In February 1808, Hieronymus
Sillem, a partner in the house of Matthiessen & Sillem of Hamburg, put the
partners in touch with a man who appeared to possess the qualities
required. This was Kieckhoefer, a merchant, who at that moment resided
in Hamburg. Kieckhoefer stated that he had lived in Portugal for many
years, during which he had learned to speak the language fluently and had
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

met many influential Portuguese. Now that Brazil was open for all
foreign trade, he foresaw good opportunities for himself, especially in the
trade in Silesian linen, and was planning to emigrate with his family to
Rio de Janeiro and to establish a merchant house there. To this end, he
was anxious to obtain the support of three first-class houses, in Hamburg,
Amsterdam and London, and Matthiessen & Sillem, Hope & Co. and
Baring Brothers & Co. seemed to him to be the most reliable.!
  After lengthy discussions with Kieckhoefer, the partners of Hope & Co.
agreed to invest jointly with Barings a sum of 60,000 marks banco in the
new house, on condition that Matthiessen & Sillem also participated. In
return, Kieckhoefer would have to undertake to represent Hope and
Baring to the best of his ability in negotiations with the Portuguese
government in Rio de Janeiro.2 In the latter part of July 1808, Kieck-
hoefer, travelling on a Russian passport, journeyed via Wismar to Sweden,
where he embarked at Gothenburg for the crossing to England. He made
a good impression on the Barings, to whom Hope had introduced him,
although his plans were considered 'rather premature.' While in London,
Kieckhoefer also had a meeting with the Portuguese envoy to England,
Don Domingo de Souza Coutinho, a brother of the former Minister of
Finance and now, in Rio de Janeiro, the Prime Minister. As they parted,
the envoy casually requested him to enquire of Barings regarding the
position of the Portuguese loan, but without mentioning his name.
Evidently the envoy had reasons for not enquiring himself. 3
  Coutinho's attitude did not bode well for the success of the mission to
Brazil. Kieckhoefer and his family arrived in Rio de Janeiro at the end of
April 1809 after a voyage lasting fifty-two days. The city was inundated
with emigres who complained loudly of the intense heat and lack of
comfort, and Kieckhoefer did not find it easy to obtain accommodation.
His first task was to call upon the Prime Minister, who accorded him a
most friendly welcome and made a point of asking that his regards should
be transmitted to Labouchere. The purpose of these gestures became
plain during the ensuing discussion, in which the minister repeatedly
touched upon the theme of a new loan, but carefully avoided any refer-
ence to diamond shipments for the purposes of the existing one. When,
later, Kieckhoefer, ill with malaria, hurried to the Prime Minister's office
upon receiving a report that diamonds to a value of one million crusados
were to be exported, Coutinho curtly requested him to make an offer for
the parcel, adding that he could have the stones in exchange for drafts for
half the estimated value. In the absence of instructions from Baring and
Hope, Kieckhoefer was obliged to let the parcel gO.4