

men in Lisbon promised to mend their ways in time for the payments in
the following year, but Sir Francis Baring deemed it advisable to remind
them that their tobacco contract had been renewed only after an express
request by Labouchere, and that any further deficit or other shortcoming
in their remittances might even at this stage be construed by the Minister
of Finance as a reasonable ground for cancelling their contract.!
  In the early months of 1803, the need to advance monies on behalf of the
tobacco lessees was anything but convenient to Barings, for the house
stood on the threshold of a major transaction which would probably
demand a great deal of capital. Since Christmas 1802, Alexander Baring
had been in Paris, where he sought to obtain for his company a share in
the financial transactions which would arise in the event of Napoleon
deciding to sell Louisiana to the United States. 2
  With all these matters to attend to, Baring's personal participation in
the Portuguese loan was extremely limited. By the end of 1802, 3,418 of
the 5,000 'sold' bonds had been taken over by the firm of Henry Hope &
Co. Of these 3.4 18, 1,793 had been resold, principally to members of the
family, and 942 had been set aside as 'Hope & Co., reserve.' A further 972
had been sold to 'sundry investors,' a term which covered business friends
like Voute and Insinger, members of Pierre Cesar Labouchere's family
and clients and acquaintances such as William Gordon Coesvelt, Quin-
tella, Bandeira and the Portuguese envoy in Paris, Don Jose Maria de
Souza. 3 The list reveals that the Amsterdam house was most circumspect
in its sales and, as far as 1802 was concerned, had substantiated Henry
Hope's view that the magnitude of the Portuguese 'circulation' would not
exceed the sum available annually for interest and principal payments. 4
  In 1803, in order to avoid ugly rumours, the partners fell back on their
trusted circle of friends in Amsterdam. In that year, 1,000 bonds were
transferred to a consortium of entrepreneurs headed by Willem Borski at
a price of 95. Henry Hope & Co. repeated their purchase of 1802, taking
3,000 bonds, also at 95. Purchases by friends and acquaintances in 1803
totalled 571 bonds. s By 31st December 1804, the group headed by Borski
held 2,678 bonds; a year later their holding amounted to 3,201. 6

In spite of prompt 'payment of the loan instalments by the houses which
were parties to the contract, Portugal's financial position remained so
serious that eventually the government took the plunge and approached
the Company for a fresh loan. If the house would be so kind as to furnish
2 million guilders or, if that was not feasible, then at least I million,
the necessity to draw on Bandeira or Quintella for the overdue remittances
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

-a step which would be most inconvenient to the government-could be
averted. The balance could be of use in connexion with the establishment,
in Lisbon, of a bank in which the Court, as a 'private Person,' desired to
associate itself with a number of merchants. 1
  As was to be expected, the reaction of the two issuing houses was one of
flat refusal. Sir Francis Baring pointed to the critical political situation
and to the danger of being unable to withdraw from such a bank having
once become involved in it. In a letter to Hope, he expressed a preference
for leaving it to smaller houses to participate, 'whilst we hold the candle.' 2
Labouchere succeeded in making it plain to Bezerra that it was unwise to
display special reserves in a situation in which war between England and
France could break out at any minute. Perhaps the envoy could tactfully
suggest to his government that it would be wise to sell a portion of its
silver plate in London. Silver prices were very high at that moment, and to
leave the plate lying idle in Lisbon would be to expose it to all manner of
hazards-a prediction which was to prove all too accurate. Apart from
this, however, Labouchere was unwilling to give even the faintest ray of
hope until the diamond shipments from Brazil arrived. 3
  In the threatening political situation, the non-arrival of these diamonds
from Brazil was a source of great anxiety. According to the promises
made, they should have arrived at the end of 1802; in fact, they were not
received until early in May 1803. But the chain of command in Brazil was
long, and the civil servants were slow to react. In the case in point, the
Viceroy in Brazil, upon receipt of orders from Lisbon, had to instruct the
Captain General of the Minas Gerais area to despatch the diamonds to Rio
de Janeiro. The latter, in turn, had to pass the order on to the directors of
the Royal Diamond Mines at Tijuco. In the event, however, there had
been such a muddle that a special messenger had had to be sent from Rio
de Janeiro to collect the stones. 4 The reports concerning the size of the
consignment varied widely. At first there was talk of 85,000 carats, but
later this rose to 120,000 carats. The increase was attributed to the sup-
pression of a gang of mulattoes- 'desperate fellows' - who, it was said, had
discovered new gold and diamond fields in the interior and had established
a lively trade in contraband stones, which were sold in Rio de Janeiro. It
was reported that their activities had been brought to a sudden halt, with
the result that the output from the mines had been raised. 5
  In Europe, the tension between England and France had meanwhile
erupted into conflict. On 12th May, the English envoy, Lord Whitworth,
departed from Paris, thereby confirming the breach between the two
countries. With this, the onward transmission of the Brazilian diamonds,
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN