

                                    406
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

The Hope correspondence contains only slanting references to the
events in Portugal. The partners made no mention of them in their letters
to Don Louis de Vasconcellas, and such news as did circulate emanated
from Baguenault, of the house of Baguenault & Co. of Paris. On 18th
May, he reported that the payments relating to the contribution would be
made via Bandeira and Quintella, and he added a wish that Hope might
also be drawn into the process. 1 When Baguenault wrote this, Hope had
already decided to assist with the payments which Bandeira was required
to make on the instructions of the Portuguese government. 2 There was
thus no question of an advance of any kind to the government; the trans-
action was a purely commercial one between two merchant houses, in
which one received payment orders from the other. These formed the
subject of a separate account, designated F.R., in which debits and credits
were required to balance as far as possible from month to month. The
necessary funds reached Hope partly in the form of remittances from
Bandeira, and partly from the proceeds of the shipment of produce to
French ports, which Bandeira had entrusted to the Hope management.
The principal cargo was cotton, which went chiefly to Nantes but also to
Caen, Rouen, Dieppe and Marseilles. 3 As far as dealings with Barings
were concerned, however, no sharp distinction was made between these
trading activities and the Portuguese loan, and in a letter to that house
the partners said: 'these concerns ... are connected with our joint adven-
ture as explained verbally to your Mr.Alex. Baring, and will continue in
common in the same proportion for profit and loss, till the negociation
shall be run off.' 4 Here, as in the case of the Swedish loans, we find mer-
cantile transactions being freely mingled with loan matters.
 The transactions entered in Account F.R. in 1804 included one which,
while probably allied in origin to the Portuguese payments to France,
stood quite apart from these in execution, and was of earlier date. This
was related to a contract between Bandeira and Hope for the supply and
sale of pernambuco wood, or brazilwood, a dyewood; the Portuguese
government had a monopoly of the sale of this wood and, as with dia-
monds, leased the annual proceeds for a given period of time. If the lessee
resided in Lisbon, he could enter into a contract with one or more houses
in other European cities.
  In October 1803, Hope was approached by Bandeira's confidential
agent, John Stanley, who enquired whether the house would be interested
in a contract for brazilwood. He explained his offer by saying that the
lessee, Bandeira, was dissatisfied with his Amsterdam agents, Tomasachi
Marcella & Co., and that as their contract was due to expire at the end
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

of the year he was anxious to make a change.! If one realizes that Ban-
deira himself was at that moment trying to persuade Hope to agree to a
supplementary loan for the Portuguese government, one tends to take the
motive for the offer with a pinch of saIto Labouchere's reaction was fa-
vourable yet cautious, 'as on this score much must depend on political
circumstances, which may materially impede our communications.' 2 A
week later, however, he again wrote to Stanley, this time dealing at great
length with the trade in pernambuco wood-about which he had evidently
obtained information in the meantime. In this sector, sound organization
was the key to success, and in Labouchere's opinion this had been lacking
of late. Markets for dyewood existed in London and Amsterdam, and
approximately equal quantities were sold on each of these. Sales in Ham-
burg were small-about 50-60,000 pounds annually. France obtained
supplies direct from Lisbon, and thus sales in that country need not harm
the market in Holland, provided that satisfactory price limits were set.
But Brabant and Flanders should be included in the territory covered
from Amsterdam. 3
  Early in 1804, Hope & Co. took over 160,000 pounds of pernambuco
wood from Tomasachi Marcella and became the agent for Amsterdam. In
his correspondence with Bandeira, however, Labouchere let it be known
that he had higher ambitions, namely to control the whole of the European
market for this commodity. He accordingly enquired whether the Portugu-
ese government could supply unlimited quantities of the wood, and whether
contractors were required to take any quantity which might be offered. 4
  Bandeira replied that intensive felling in earlier years had increased the
distance between the source and the point of shipment, thus adding to
the time and cost of transport, and that he therefore anticipated a reduc-
tion in the supply. But Labouchere remained sceptical. He reasoned that
the stock was virtually inexhaustible, and that if transport from the
existing supply areas became a major problem it would be solved simply
by drawing on a new forest. What guarantee had he that the Portuguese
government, faced with a financial crisis, would not put ever larger
quantities on the market? The consumption of pernambuco wood fluc-
tuated widely and was to some extent governed by competition from
other dyewoods, which would flood the market if peace were to come. It
was also possible that, in the event of traffic between Brazil and Portugal
being interrupted, supplies of pernambuco wood would be carried in
American vessels, thereby eclipsing the contractors. In all probability,
stocks of sufficient size to last for several years-and also to ruin the unfor-
tunate contractor-were already lying in Brazilian ports.