

                                    412
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

 in 1803, Napoleon at first concentrated on his planned invasion of Eng-
 land to the exclusion of all else. When this proved incapable of being
 accomplished, fresh wars against Austria, Russia and Prussia caused his
 armies to move to central and eastern Europe.
  This, however, did not imply that the emperor had lost sight of other
 regions on the Continent. In a decree issued in Berlin in November 1806,
 while the war in the east was still raging, he proclaimed the famous Con-
tinental System forbidding all the countries of Europe to trade with Eng-
 land. It was patently obvious that Portugal, which still maintained close
economic ties with England, would be among the victims of the system.
At the Peace of Tilsit, which brought hostilities between France and the
 Russo-Prussian alliance to an end in July 1807, Napoleon and Czar
Alexander I agreed that Portugal, Denmark and Sweden should be forced
to adopt the Continental System. As far as Portugal was concerned,
 Napoleon did not let the grass grow under his feet. On 12th August 1807,
the French envoy in Lisbon handed the Portuguese government an ulti-
matum demanding an early and complete break with England. By the
time the government acquiesced, French troops were advancing on Por-
tugal's frontier, supported militarily by Spain, to whom an area of Portu-
guese territory had been promised. The Moniteur of 13th November
1807 carried an official notice stating that the House of Braganza had
ceased to rule. 1
  The report of the deposition brought an end to the protracted hesitation
on the part of the prince regent. On 27th November, he and his family
embarked in a British naval squadron which lay ready in the Lisbon
roads, taking with them their treasures in the form of gold and diamonds.
On 29th November the vessels set sail for Brazil. On the following day,
the spearhead of the French force, led by General J unot, entered Lisbon. 2
  The partners of Hope & Co. watched the developments in Portugal with
rising anxiety. How were the future payments of interest and principal to
be realized, now that the Portuguese government had its seat in Rio de
Janeiro? The diamonds could presumably be sent direct from Brazil to
England and would thus reach Hope, but the government no longer had
any control over the vital remittances from the tobacco lessees. Without
these remittances, which thus far had totalled about a million guilders
annually, it would be impossible for the Court to effect further payments.
Urgent requests for information were sent to Stanley, Bandeira and Quin-
tella, and these were followed by even more urgent requests for remit-
tances; but all remained unanswered. 3
The silence on the part of the tobacco lessees can be attributed in part to
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

the upsurge of unrest in Portugal. On the heels of the revolt by the
Spaniards against the rule imposed on them by the French, an uprising
broke out in Portugal one month later, in June 1808. Soon the whole
country was up in arms, and with the landing on 1st August of a British
expeditionary force led by Wellesley, who later became the Duke of Wel-
lington, things began to look black for Junot. Aided by units of the Portu-
guese resistance and Spanish regulars, Wellesley defeated Junot at Vimeiro
and forced him to capitulate with his entire army. In exchange for a safe
passage to France, the army withdrew from Portuguese territory On 18th
September the regency council, which had been left behind when the prince
regent fled, was restored to power, albeit under the supervision of the
British commander-in-chief. Portugal was free again-for a time, at least. 1
  During this highly eventful period in Portugal's history, the remittances
from the tobacco lessees had practically dried up. Hope could do little
with the 46,500 guilders which had been forthcoming. The Company had
succeeded in substantially raising the volume of diamond sales-to 45,000
carats- but there nevertheless remained a deficit of cf 567,606.16.8. This
was partially offset by broaching the private accounts of Bandeira and
Quintella, and the balance, amounting to cf 194,976.1.8, was met with
drafts on the tobacco lessees to the order of Baring.2
  In May 1809, Bandeira and Quintella replied to the letters addressed to
them. They explained that because the war had prevented them from
making any payments, they had approached the head of the department
of finance, Cypriano Ribeiro Freire, with a request that he should
arrange for the deficit to be met. Freire, pleading lack of knowledge of the
matter, had asked for time to study the papers. 3 His closing observation
that, in the critical situation which then existed, all available funds were
needed for defence against the enemy, did not augur well for the request.
Napoleon, it must be remembered, had not acquiesced in his defeats on
the Iberian peninsula, and had personally led a major counteroffensive in
the autumn of 1808. By the beginning of the new year the war had spread
to the northern part of Portugal, and now battles were swaying to and fro
across large areas of the country. The consequences of the conflict were
disastrous for the populace and also for the nation's economy. To all this
was added the economic emancipation of Brazil. The decree of 28th
January 1808 which opened Brazilian ports to the ships of all friendly and
neutral states heralded a sharp decline in trade relations between Portugal
and Brazil. Produce from Brazil now travelled direct to its destination,
without the ships calling first at Lisbon, and imports into Brazil were
handled by foreigners, mainly Englishmen. 4
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN