

In spite of all Alexander Baring's good intentions, the correspondence
became so rancorous that on 18th January 1810 Don Domingo was
moved to write to Sir Francis Baring, 'of whose friendship and civility to
me I have never failed to receive constant proofs.' Much as he regretted
it, the envoy said, he would in future be compelled to ignore letters from
Barings concerning diamonds unless they bore Sir Francis's signature,
since there was someone in that house who signed his letters on behalf of
the firm but 'who does not know how to write to me.'
  At the moment when the conflict between Alexander Baring and Don
Domingo came to a head, the long-awaited instructions from Rio de
Janeiro were on their way. Having been kept on a line for some time with
the statement that the government was still studying the papers, Kieck-
hoefer was suddenly informed by the Prime Minister that he had in-
structed his brother to reach a settlement with Hope and Baring. 1 To
have achieved so little after dancing attendance on the government for so
long was hard, and Kieckhoefer's letters reveal an unmistakable note of
bitterness. In his view, the principal cause lay in the fact that he lacked
the status of an official negotiator for the two houses and was thus not in
a position to put his foot down at critical moments. The lack of appre-
ciation for all his efforts dismayed him, and he complained of insinuations
on the part of Barings to the effect that he had neglected the matter of the
loan. 2 It is true that little confidence in the newly fledged linen merchant
was forthcoming from that quarter: Alexander Baring described him to
John Williams Hope as 'more of an Intriguant than a Merchant,' thereby
revealing his fear that Kieckhoefer's tendency to speculate might well
result in the rapid disapparance of the loaned capital. 3
  In essence, the outcome of Kieckhoefer's discussions with the ministers
was that the latter would deem it a great favour if Baring and Hope would
agree to take over the loan of 600,000 pounds sterling which the Portu-
guese Court had obtained from the British government in April 1810.
References to the old loan were limited to a few hollow phrases and vague
promises. But the friendly note which had been sounded at the outset was
fading, and by 29th May, when Kieckhoefer had an audience with De
Souza Coutinho, it had completely disappeared, to be replaced by a
tirade against the two houses, especially Hope & Co. Why, the Prime
Minister asked, had these gentlemen not used their powerful influence on
Bonaparte to have the balance of the loan paid while the French occupied
Portugal? He had counted on that, and had acted accordingly. As for the
diamonds, in spite of all Alexander Baring's assertions the fact remained
that Goldsmiths in London had offered 3 pounds sterling per carat.

                                    4 19
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

He would not dream of handing over the diamonds to Hope, thereby
running the additional risk of their being confiscated. It was impossible
to do business with Baring, for there had lately been so much evidence of his
'atrocious behaviour' that no government could continue to deal with him.!
  The Prime Minister's conduct showed very plainly that news of the row
between Alexander Baring and Don Domingo had filtered through to
Rio de Janeiro. The Lord Treasurer, Count d' Aguiar, showed Kieckhoefer
a letter in which Don Domingo stated that Baring planned to use the
diamonds solely for the repayment of the old loan, and that they were
therefore not to be surrendered to him under any condition. 2 By thus
distorting the truth, the envoy succeeded in having a 17,500-carat parcel
of fine stones, which were for the purpose of repaying the British govern-
ment's loan, consigned to him and not to Baring. He was, however,
instructed to negotiate with Baring on a new loan of 4-500,000 pounds
sterling, the securities for which would be those which served for the
original loan. 3
  Following the explosion in January, those in London had come to the
conclusion that good relations with the Portuguese envoy had to be
maintained at all costs. Sir Francis Baring, to whom so many urgent
appeals had already been made, was obviously the best person to initiate a
reconciliation. In this he was supported by Labouchere, who, through a
fortunate combination of circumstances, was just then heading for
England. The semi-independent Kingdom of Holland was viewed with
growing disfavour by Napoleon for being insufficiently strict in its imple-
mentation of the Continental System. In the autumn of 1809, the emperor
summoned his brother to Paris, where he informed him of his plan to
annex Holland. Louis Napoleon, whom fear had endowed with inge-
nuity, developed the theory that the English would go to any lengths to
prevent the annexation, and that the mere prospect of it would be enough
to bring them to the negotiating table. Napoleon encouraged him in this
notion and advised him to bring the issue discreetly to the notice of the
English : 'You have an opportunity, for in Amsterdam you have nego-
tiators who are associated with English houses. So take advantage of it,
and show the English the threat which hangs over them,' he is reported to
have said. 4
  The emperor's utterances were clear beyond any doubt, and it was not
surprising that the mission was entrusted to Labouchere, who had both
business and family ties with England. On 5th February 1810 he landed at
Yarmouth; a month later he returned to Holland, having achieved com-
paratively little.