

which, as we have seen, arrived in Portugal at the beginning of May, was
in jeopardy. Sir Francis Baring had given instructions that the diamonds
were to be shipped aboard a man-o'-war, and had chartered the frigate
'Amazone' for the purpose. She sailed from Portsmouth on 12th July
with orders to take the whole consignment- 104,000 carats, as it now
transpired-on board. But on 13th July the mailboat 'Duke of York'
left Lisbon with 15,000 carats on board. This vessel arrived safely in
Falmouth on 3rd August. The 'Amazone' arrived in Lisbon on 25th or
26th July. Shortly before this, the mailboat 'King George Packet'-un-
wittingly in contravention of Sir Francis's instructions-had left for Eng-
land carrying a further 15,000 carats; this vessel was less fortunate than
the 'Duke of York,' for on 1st August, after a ficrce encounter, she fell
prey to the French privateer 'La Repn!saille,' operating from Bordeaux. 1
  The whole affair was extremely painful, and if mismanaged could
disrupt the delicate intermediary role which Hope and Baring would
henceforth have to play in the Portuguese affair. In a lttter to the Portu-
guese envoy in Paris, Sir Francis, in a moment of thoughtful abstraction,
suggested that Portugal might withhold the final instalment of her debt to
France, thus putting pressure on the French government; but ultimately
he decided that it would be wiser to make a protest and leave it at that.
Such a protest would have to be based on the premise that the diamonds,
although addressed to Barings, were the property of the Portuguese
Crown and were in transit to Hope & Co., who had been instructed to sell
them in order to recoup advances made to Portugal to meet the war levy
due to France. 2 However, the official steps taken by Don Jose Maria de
Souza produced no results, for on 16th September the owners of the
privateer had succeeded in obtaining from the Prize Court a 'decision de
bonne prise et de possession,' and, as Talleyrand explained to the envoy,
such a decision was irreversible. 3
  For Portugal, the consequences of the new conflict between France and
England were just as disastrous as those of the earlier one. On 3rd June
1803, in an effort to steer a course between the belligerents, the prince
regent proclaimed Portugal's neutrality, but even this feeble attempt at
independence was unacceptable to France. The heavy political pressure
exerted on the Lisbon government by the French envoy, Lannes, led
first to the dismissal of the most powerful ministers, including Don
Rodrigo de Souza Coutinho, on a charge of 'Anglomania.' Don Rodri-
go's successor, Don Louis de Vasconcellas, was forced to sign a treaty in
which France recognized Portuguese neutrality, but in exchange for this
exacted a contribution of I million francs per month for the duration
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

of the war.1 Thus, within four months of being liberated from her finan-
cial commitments towards France (the final monthly payment had been
made on 31st August), Portugal was again obliged to make sacrifices
-this time for a neutrality which was fictitious from the outset. But the
Treasury coffers were as empty as they had been at the beginning of the
year. While the negotiations with France were in progress, Bandeira had
sought the views of Hope and Baring regarding the possibility of a sup-
plementary loan, for which diamonds would again constitute a security.
Of the two houses, Barings, in particular, were opposed to such an
operation -a very understandable reaction in view of the war situation. It
was not feasible to destine the diamonds for a second loan while the first
had still to be completed. That would shock public confidence and bring
both operations into disrepute. It was difficult enough in such times to
keep up the price of the Portuguese bonds, even nominally, and thus the
government would be well advised to try to meet its needs at home. 2
Labouchere, while concurring in this view, was clearly less opposed to
becoming involved in the new Portuguese payments to France and incur-
ring certain commitments, always provided that these were balanced by
sound guarantees in case the government's emergency resources failed to
flow sufficiently rapidly. He would have liked to see England standing as
guarantor, but if this were not possible the tobacco lessees would suf-
fice. 3 Enquiries made by Baring showed that Labouchere's expectations
concerning a guarantee by England were illusory. In 1802 the British
government had encouraged the Portuguese loan because at that time the
prompt payment of the war levy offered a means to lessen French influ-
ence on the country. Now, with a new war ahead, London had no desire
to stimulate a loan which would pave the way for remittances from a
neutral country to France. 4
  In the meantime, the French government had to some extent moderated
its demands on Portugal. The open-ended financial demand had been
replaced by one for 16 million francs, payable within sixteen months.
Even so, it was as much as the Portuguese government could do to make
ends meet, and it was not until 19th March 1804-exactly three months
after the signing of the treaty of neutrality-that the parties finally reached
agreement. The French negotiators in Lisbon had adhered to the demand
for 16 million francs within sixteen months, and had stipulated that
the period should run from 1st December 1803. One month after the
exchange of the ratification documents, the sum then due had to be paid
in Paris, while the Portuguese envoy was required to deposit undertakings,
bearing his own signature, in respect of the balance. 5