


                                      .
'Voila cette affaire en bon train,' said~Baguenault in June 1804, in a letter
to Labouchere concerning the payment of the Portuguese 'contribution';
but his optimism was to prove less than well-founded. 3 In the official
announcement to Talleyrand, Hope said cautiously that the Company
would be pleased to learn which department of the government the monies
should be remitted to, 'depending upon the extent to which we are enabled
to effect the payments.' 4 By the same post, the Company informed the
Portuguese envoy, De Souza, that it held payment orders amounting to
only 2 million francs, and urged him in the strongest terms to press the
French government to extend the instalment periods. 5 This placed the
envoy in a difficult position, for how was he to reconcile this instruction
with the terms of the Franco-Portuguese treaty, which stipulated lump-
sum payment of all instalments due since 1st December 1803? According
to the letter of the treaty, 7 million francs were due at that moment,
but only 2 million were available. It is no wonder that Baguenault
observed 'une incertitude et vacillation continuelle' on the part of De
Souza. 6 To make matters worse, there had been a clear mistrust of the
envoy in French government circles since early in 1803, when it had
emerged that, on his own initiative, he had suspended payments to the
French Treasury.7 Fresh evidence to show that this mistrust was not
entirely misplaced was about to be presented. At De Souza's instigation,
Hope's official announcement to Talleyrand of the commencement of the
payments to France was delayed for a week, and the 2 million francs
held at De Souza's disposal by Baguenault were deposited with the
Banque de France instead of being paid to the Treasury.

                                    410
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

 De Souza was no less stubborn in his efforts to avoid signing under-
 takings relating to the balance of the payments to France. 1 He began by
sounding Baguenault regarding the possibility of having Hope's drafts
accepted upon Bandeira's responsibility. If that were not feasible, he
desired that Hope should guarantee his commitments or, if this were not
possible either, that BaguenauIt should guarantee them for Hope's ac-
count. 2 But all these propositions met with a blank refusal from Labou-
chere; he had resolved to make payments only when the necessary funds
had been made available, and had no inclination to depart from this
principle. At the same time, he anticipated that, as had been the case with
the earlier payments, Talleyrand would be willing to extend the instal-
ment period if the Portuguese Court provided convincing proof of poverty
and lack of funds. 3 The ensuing events showed that he had been right, and
in the end the French government agreed to accept 2 million francs in
cash and the balance in five monthly sums of I million francs following
the payment of the final instalment. 4
  With all these 'lenteurs diplomatiques,' nearly half the month of July
passed without the 2 million francs which Baguenault had deposited
with the Banque de France being paid over to the Treasury. The French
government, incensed by these 'tricks,' demanded immediate payment and
the replacement of De Souza. s On 14th August, Bandeira instructed
Baguenault that in future he should make prompt payments to the French
Treasury, and that he was not to accept orders from De Souza in the mat-
ter. By the time the letter reached Paris, De Souza had taken it upon him-
self needlessly to delay the payment of the third million for a week. 6 But
the days of his chicanery were numbered, and although he was not recal-
led until the end of October he was increasingly by-passed in diplomatic
affairs. 7