

                                   416
                    THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

Faced with the news that fresh consignments of diamonds would soon be
arriving in England, Hope and Baring set about dealing with the problem
of how they should react. Consultation between the two had become easier
since John Williams Hope's return to England in the autumn of 1808.
Alexander Baring felt that it would be best to feign innocence, to simply
enquire of the Portuguese envoy whether the diamonds had arrived and,
if so, to express readiness to accept them 'and transmit them to their
ulterior destination.' 1 He decided against threatening to recoup the
overdue payments from the loan which the English government was to
make to Portugal, on the grounds that no official support for such an
action could be expected.
  As usual, Labouchere took a more optimistic view. He pointed out that
the necessary steps had been taken to ensure the payment of interest and
principal at the end of the year, and that the balance to be claimed was
scarcely worth worrying about. Provided that no political difficulties
arose, and that agreement could be reached with the tobacco lessees
regarding their arrears, he was even prepared to consider a new loan in
the following year. 2 There was something fishy about the diamond
deliveries, but Labouchere did not regard this as a machination aimed at
repudiating responsibility for the loan, but rather as a desperate attempt
to obtain funds on the spot. 'Want knows no tie or law,' he wrote. More-
over, he felt sure that the British government, at whose instigation the loan
had been arranged, would not permit Portugal to be discredited for the
sake of so small a sum. 3
  The consignment of diamonds about which Kieckhoefer had written,
and which totalled 50,000 carats, had arrived in England in September
1809, but had remained in the custody of Don Domingo de Souza
Coutinho pending a reply from Rio de Janeiro concerning the loan
statements which Kieckhoefer had handed to the Prime Minister. Baring
offered to open a separate account for the envoy in the meantime, if he
was prepared to surrender the diamonds to the house, and even to allow
him immediate advances on the stones. When these had been sold, the
balance of the proceeds would be placed at his disposal, and he would be
free to use all or part of this for Portugal's creditors, according to his
instructions from Rio de Janeiro.4
  Don Domingo declined the proposal, but he offered Baring 25,000
carats which he had had valued and made up into collections, at an
average of 3 pounds sterling per carat. He wished to postpone the sale
of the other half until the Court's decision became known, but in the event
of his receiving permission to sell, Baring would again be given first refusal. 5

                                      4 17
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

In the view of Alexander Baring, the envoy was asking too high a price.
Hope's accounts showed that the carat price in Amsterdam had averaged
only 241- guilders in the preceding months. 1 Sir Francis Baring had earlier
informed Don Domingo in writing that in England no absolute valuation
could be given for the whole consignment, 'as there is no person in this
country who understands the trade sufficiently for the purpose of forming
a general assortment, in order to establish an average value; the Jews and
Jewellers being very little better than shopkeepers in that respect.'2 Alex-
ander Baring accordingly refused to advance more than 2 pounds
sterling per carat and, moreover, insisted that the stones should be sold by
Hope in Amsterdam. 3 The envoy, however, would not go below 3
pounds sterling, and he announced his intention to commence marketing
the stones in parcels of 2,000 carats a week later in order to discover the
true price. Baring had until then to buy the whole consignment if he
wished. 4 An agitated Alexander Baring replied by return of post, warning
of the harm which such fragmentary sales would inflict upon the diamond
trade. To John Williams Hope, Baring unburdened himself concerning
Don Domingo's attempts at intimidation and the tone of his letters,
which Baring described as 'civilly impertinent' and 'not a little provoking.'
He had, he wrote, been tempted 'to treat him rather roughly,' but, remem-
bering the unfortunate sequel to Labouchere's handling of Spoors, he
had decided against it.5
  Thus, moderation prevailed-temporarily at least, and under pressure
from John Williams Hope-and minds were centred on making the best
possible showing to the government in Rio de Janeiro.6 This, however,
did not imply that no further steps were taken in England, least of all
when it became known that Don Domingo had carried out his threat and
had sold half the consignment to the house of Goldsmith in London. 7 John
Williams Hope's reaction was to inform the Secretary of State for War and
the Colonies, Lord Liverpool, of the situation and to promise to furnish
him with a brief summary of the loan affair. B Alexander Baring attacked
Don Domingo's assertion that no official instructions had been received
from Rio de Janeiro. This could not be attributed to the absence of official
documents, for his brother in Rio de Janeiro had received them all.
There was also the point that the two houses were keenly interested in the
future of the small case of diamonds which had reached the envoy a short
time before. If Don Domingo dared to allege that Barings had offered
only 2 pounds per carat, he would be guilty of a manifest untruth, for
'our offer was to advance to that amount in anticipation, accounting to
you for any surplus they might produce.' 9
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN