

                                     408
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

It was a prerequisite for long-term planning that Bandeira's lease con-
tract be extended beyond 1808, the year in which it was due to expire. If
this could be done, Hope could simply enter into annual contracts with
Bandeira. Provision would have to be made for reduction of the contract
price if peace should be negotiated during the year. Naturally, Labou-
chere wrote, sales would have to be limited to the Company, with the
proviso that the Portuguese government could reserve 150,000 pounds for
home consumption and for export to Spain-via contraband channels-
and the Barbary Coast. 1
  Bandeira's reply to this letter has not survived. Much later, in a report
to Barings concerning the 'Portugal Concern' in 1804, Hope wrote: 'The
wood concern was intended to embrace the article of Fernambucq wood
throughout Europe, but remains limited to this place, where however we
hope it will make a satisfactory appearance in this year's account.'2
  Clearly, Hope's sales efforts were concentrated on Amsterdam. In
February 1804, the Company, in a letter to Bandeira, had hinted at the
possibility of raising the quantity sold annually to 3-400,000 pounds at
44-45 guilders banco per quintal (I quintal = 100 pounds), and in the
course of that year it proved that it was capable of substantiating this
pretentious proposal. 3 On the 9th April 1804, Hope, acting through the
broker L.H. Voute, sold to Messrs. Jacob Muhl and Van Winter 'two
hundred thousand Pounds of Whole Fernabuck wood with the original
mark R, at the price of forty-five Guilders Banco per Hundred Pounds
with Two per Cent Discount.' The sale was conditional upon the buyers
being given a monopoly of this wood in the Netherlands and upon a ban
on exports of dyewood from Lisbon to Brabant and to French ports
north of Dieppe. The buyers took an option on a further 100,000 pounds
at the same price, and subject to Hope having this much in stock. The
Company, for its part, undertook to store any brazilwood received during
the rest of that year, and not to sell to third parties inside or outside the
Batavian Republic. It was agreed that further negotiations with Voute
concerning the conditions should take place in December at the latest.
 On 4th October 1804, Voute converted the option for 100,000 pounds
into a firm agreement, and on 19th November he purchased 300,000
pounds, which had arrived in the meantime, at the same price. 4 The
contract relating to the latter purchase stipulated that the price of dye-
wood in England should not be lower than that in Amsterdam and that,
in the event of a fall in the rate of exchange, the prices in England should
be raised proportionately, 'being the adjustment necessary for the suc-
cess of the article on both markets.' This shows that agreements between
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

parties concerning the establishment of prices were feasible. The fact
that the price in London could influence the price in Amsterdam in such
a manner is further proof of the close contact which existed in spite of the
state of war between the two countries.
  L.H.Vollte entered into an agreement with the house of Muhl & Van
Winter whereby he took a half-share in the purchase of the dyewood, 'the
gradual sale of which they, alone and in their own names, will conduct.'
This agreement also applied to all future transactions involving the article.
Hope & Co., in turn, confirmed in writing to Vollte that the undertaking,
although entered into in the latter's name, related solely to the Company. 1
Once again, circumstances had been turned to the best possible advantage:
Muhl & Van Winter continued to pursue their trade, and Hope, unbeknown
to all but a select circle, shared in the benefits. The contract was renewed
largely on the same terms in 1805, 1806, 1807, 1808 and 1811. 2