

In spite of all Stanley'S exalted stories concerning subdued mulatto
gangs and the suppression of smuggling, parcels of diamonds continued
to reach Amsterdam through other channels. In its report to the Portu-
guese Minister of Finance concerning the position of the loan in 1803, the
Company had already complained that the market was being ruined by
illicit parcels which were offered at cut price. 8 The problem stemmed not
only from the consignment of 15,000 carats which had been seized at sea,
and which appeared on the market at prices 5-10 % below Hope's figure,
but also from a stream of large parcels which reached Amsterdam and
London direct from Lisbon. 9 Amsterdam houses such as Gildemeester &
Co., made offers for parcels of 20,000 carats, the composition and price

                                   411
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

of which were approximately the same as those handled by Hope. Partic-
ularly painful was the discovery that Lorla & Co. in Amsterdam had
received a 2,000-carat parcel consisting of exceptionally large and fine
stones, and that not only was there a similar parcel in London, but that
others were on their way from Lisbon.l Labouchere emphasized to Quin-
tella that the situation threatened Hope's sales, and that the tobacco
lessees would thus have to transfer larger sums for the interest and prin-
cipal payments due on 1st January of the following year.
  Matters took a much more serious turn when it was reported that the
Portuguese Court was attempting to secure a loan of 500,000 pounds
sterling in London on the security of diamonds. In a letter to the minister,
De Vasconcellas, Labouchere pointed out that this not only undermined
the diamond market, but also adversely affected the price of the Portu-
guese bonds. After all, he reasoned, the value of the bonds was largely
based on the security - the proceeds of the entire output from the diamond
mines-and if this was jeopardized, the market price of the bonds would
inevitably decline. If the loan was obtained in England, it would in any
case fall to the Company to sell the diamonds given as security.2 Quintella
replied that the prince regent had been obliged to make a present of an
insignificant parcel of large stones a few months previously and, more
recently, under pressure of circumstances, to dispose of a fairly large
parcel of small stones. The latter was in the hands of the Paris agent,
Diogo Dittmer, and was at Hope's disposal; indeed, Dittmer had been
instructed to negotiate with the Company concerning the future of these
stones. 3 As far as the large stones were concerned, Quintella was obliged
to use the gift story, because their sale would have contravened the terms
of the mortgage agreement. Regarding the small diamonds, there could
be no excuse other than the acute shortage of money from which the
Portuguese government suffered in the Spring of 1804. This might even have
driven the government to seek a loan in London after it had been refused
by Hope and Baring. Quintella, however, flatly denied the suggestion.
  In spite of Quintella's convolutions, the affair continued to be depres-
sing. Diogo Dittmer ignored all correspondence, and parcels of diamonds
continued to trickle into Amsterdam, where they changed hands at prices
below those fixed by Hope. The effect on the market was felt throughout
1804, and in their report to Don Louis de Vasconcellas the partners stated
with bitter satisfaction that because of the illicit shipments their sales for
the year had amounted to only 4,5651- carats. 4
 Although the political situation remained threatening, some time passed
before the storm broke over Portugal. With the resumption of hostilities