

                                    43 1
                 COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

as follows:
430 seroons in the hands oflarge importers or 'first hand' in Cadiz;
433 seroons held by traders or 'second hand' in Cadiz;
450 seroons in London;
437 seroons in Amsterdam. 1
  Users' stocks, he believed, had dwindled almost to nothing, for with
prices falling, buyers had covered only their immediate needs. The new
racolta would be only mediocre, because the continuing low prices of
recent years had produced a sharp decline in the breeding and collection
of the cochineal insect. 2 Thus, the slightest movement in trade would
rapidly send prices upwards. Hope planned to buy as much cochineal as
possible-at least three-quarters of the available stock-at the low price.
He would place his orders in such a manner that purchases were made
simultaneously, thus preventing any warning signals being passed be-
tween centres. In this way he hoped to secure 1,200-1,500 seroons with-
out forcing up the price. He estimated the investment at I -t-2 million
guilders.
  Hope had written to both Laborde de Mereville and his London asso-
ciates, the house of John and Francis Baring & Co., concerning the specu-
lation, but Laborde showed little interest and so further negotiations were
limited to Barings. 3
  There was no element of risk, Hope argued, for the extremely low prices
which persisted in the face of low stocks, and which were 'occasioned
greatly, at least in this country, by political fears and great scarcity of
money and the general depressed state of trade,' afforded the certainty
that no losses would result from this enterprise, even though the high
expectations were not being fulfilled. 4
  The house in Cadiz which Henry Hope proposed to entrust with the
purchases, Thomas Ryan & Co., was 'perfectly au fait of the article'; it
could therefore grade the purchased bales according to quality, and send
the finest grades, which were suitable for the London market, to Baring
and the balance to Amsterdam. If necessary, some could be sent to Mar-
seilles or Rouen.
  Henry Hope explicitly sought Baring's views on the speculation as such,
and enquired as to the sum which that house was prepared to invest. He
also asked for information regarding estimated stocks of cochineal in
London and the quantity which Barings felt they could buy up without
forcing up the price. The correspondence between the two houses
breathes an intimacy which is decidedly lacking in the letter to Laborde.
The operations in Amsterdam were to be handled by Robert Vonte, 'our

                                   43 2
                 COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

 little friend ... and you may be assured they will be executed in char-
 acter.'! Baring could expect to receive a separate letter from him, and
 Henry Hope was confident that in this Voilte would be able to convince
 Barings of the solidity of the whole undertaking. Although it was cus-
 tomary for the larger houses to employ brokers in their transactions, and
 although speculations of this nature were founded on their knowledge of
the market and the commodity, it was not usual to accord them so much
influence or so great a say. The departure from this principle in the
 cochineal affair can only be explained by Voilte's exceptional qualities
and the friendship which bound him to the partners of Hope & CO.2
   With the arrival of a letter containing Baring's consent to take a one-
fourth share in the speculation, the way was open. Thomas Ryan & Co.
received instructions to purchase immediately as much cochineal as they
could find. For the ordinary Amsterdam quality, they were empowered to
pay 65-67 ducats per arroba (a unit equal to 2J! Amsterdam pounds) and
proportionately more for the finer grades, which were suitable for the
English and French markets. Of prime importance at the outset were the
first hand stocks which, if necessary, could be purchased for cash. Ryan
was provided with the necessary funds by way of letters of credit on two
Paris houses, although he was not permitted to despatch these until after
completion of the purchases. 3 This arrangement ensured that no one
would discover the whys and wherefores of the credits until after Ryan
had made his move. Urgent letters could be addressed to Boyd Kerr &
Co. in Paris, while normal correspondence, in a plain envelope, was to be
addressed to the Administrateur des postes in Antwerp. This would
reduce the delivery time by a few days and also afford greater secrecy.
  Hope anticipated that Ryan would complete his purchases in ten to twelve
days, and this period was borne in mind when despatching the pur-
chasing orders to Rouen and Marseilles, two markets which, together
with St.Petersburg, were brought into the speculation after further con-
sultation. 4 Voilte felt that Baring, in London, should start immediately
but act with the utmost caution, 'as your place is the most difficult and
most susceptible of sensation on any transaction of moment.' In Amster-
dam, 'where a better harvest is more probable than anywhere else,' and
where secrecy was so much more easily maintained, the offensive would
be opened ten days later, on the 27th.
  The choice of purchasing agent in Rouen fell on P. Bournissien Des-
preaux et Fils, with whom Hope had earlier done business in dyestuffs. The
partners of this house were instructed to buy up between two-thirds and
three-quarters of the available cochineal in such a manner as not to in-