

In Amsterdam, too, matters were not going according to plan. On 21st
August 1787, Robert Voute had commenced to purchase 'little straggling
parcels' which fell outside the normal trade. The actual purchases in Am-
sterdam had been entrusted to the brokerage house of De Bruin Abois &
De Bruyn, but it was not long before Hope became as dissatisfied with
them as with Ryan. At the end of a campaign lasting a fortnight they had
secured only half the available stocks, leaving an opening for possible
counterspeculation. 1 If Hope had not felt a moral obligation, on grounds
of past connexions, to employ De Bruyn, with his narrow mind and
limited outlook, and instead had used 'our little friend,' the market would
have been emptied in one sweep! Early in September, Hope had got De
Bruyn to the point of agreeing to collaborate with Voute, but owing to
the political upheavals the results were still below expectations. Only with
the capitulation of Amsterdam did things start to move again. On 12th
October-Hope's unlucky day on the Stock Exchange-470 seroons were
bought at gradually rising prices. 2 As had been the case in Cadiz, how-
ever, small parcels continued to trickle in, and by the end of November
Hope's stock in Amsterdam totalled 600 seroons-nearly 50 % more than
the estimated total stock. 3
  In London, Barings completed their purchases in exemplary fashion.
On 4th September, when De Bruyn had with difficulty reached 200
seroons, the figure in London was 364, and by 28th September this had
risen to 550. The 'better harvest' which Hope had prophesied in Amster-
dam was in fact gathered in London. The phenomenon of the 'lurking
parcels' was as apparent there as in Amsterdam, and by the end of
November repeated ancillary purchases had brought Baring's stock to
nearly 800 seroons. 4
  Meanwhile, in Marseilles, Councler had shown himself to be made of
the right stuff. On loth September, the day on which Hope's letter
reached him, Councler was able to report the purchase of 123 seroons, all
within the prescribed price limits. Hope duly praised the 'mesures sages
et intelligentes' with which Councler had shown that he understood the
spirit of the instructions and had been capable of acting in accordance
with this. Proof of the wisdom of Councler's conduct lay in the absence
of any alarm in Marseilles, where his purchases were seen as an invest-
ment or simply as an abortive speculation, 'observing that there is little
sign of any boom in this article, which has been almost forgotten by the
commercial world.' 5 Councler had expressed some misgivings concerning
the port of Genoa, but Hope was able to give him every assurance that no
orders had been placed there because he, Hope, had been unable to

                                    437
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PA TRIOTIC ERA

overcome his deep-rooted prejudice against Italian ports, particularly in
the case of an article such as cochineal, which could so easily be tampered
with.! Councler's decision to continue purchasing beyond the prescribed
period, and not to adhere too strictly to the estimated quantity of 200
seroons, similarly earned Hope's full approval. Councler was advised
that in the event of cochineal arriving from Leghorn or Genoa, he was
free to buy it and to use his discretion in the matter of price. When the
market neared exhaustion, he could buy up the balance at up to 20 %
above the limit, thereby establishing a datum point for the subsequent
resale. 2
  Bournissien Despreaux proved to be a weak link in the chain. Rouen was
not among the important markets for cochineal, and the stocks there were
so widely distributed that individual purchases were limited to very small
quantities. By the end of the set period Bournissien had secured only 40
seroons and, moreover, had gone above the limit for the greater part of
this.3 Worse still, these purchases, small as they were, had quickly
sparked off rumours elsewhere. Sources in London, for example, were so
well informed as to be able to tell Hope exactly what had been bought and
what instructions the principals had given to Bournissien. This leak added
to the difficulties confronting Hope's brokers in Amsterdam: several
stockholders who had initially been willing to sell at the ruling price of
26 schellingen per pound now withdrew in anticipation of further de-
velopments. 4
  As had been the case in Cadiz, Hope was unable to discover just how
much cochineal existed in Rouen. As the correspondence with Bournissien
progressed, the quantities-and the prices-steadily increased. Reports
reaching Hope from another source referred to a counterspeculation in
Rouen. This, it was said, had been based on the outbreak of hostilities
between England and France, and when this failed to materialize the
holders had tried to get rid of their stocks to Hope at the best possible
price. In a letter to Baring, Hope voiced the suspicion that Bournissien
might be tempted to indulge in double-dealing, and might even have been
involved in the counterspeculation. 5
  According to Sutherlands & Bock, Hope's information regarding the
stocks of cochineal in St.Petersburg was inaccurate. There were, they said,
no more than 83 seroons, and the price was above Hope's limits. Hope
raised the limit, albeit with some reticence, but the relevant letter crossed
one from Sutherlands & Bock reporting a steady rise in prices in St. Peters-
burg, the effect of which was to exceed Hope's limits once again. Hope's
initial reaction was to refuse a further increase, 'as we only wish them a
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PA TRI0TlC ERA