

 happy riddance of what they have on hand at such prices,' but as it would
 doubtless benefit the resale operation 'to set up that market,' he finally
 consented. At the same time he expressed to Sutherlands & Bock his
surprise at such price increases 'when the article is in disgrace in every
 other place.' 1 But an even greater surprise was in store: in mid-Novem-
ber, Sutherlands & Bock reported that they had purchased 931 seroons,
two-thirds of which had been obtained at less than the lowest price
limits.2 There was now practically no more cochineal in Moscow, for 65
seroons or thereabouts had been sent to Astrakhan in exchange for raw
silk. The Russian markets were principally transit points for cochineal,
much of which found its way from them to the Islamic countries in Cen-
tral Asia where, in accordance with the Koran, only dyes made from scale
insects were used for dyeing fezzes and tarbooshes. 3
  The unexpected extension of the speculation, both in time and volume,
made it difficult to close off the account and draw up a resale plan. When
the original buying period expired at the end of September, 1,415t seroons
had been acquired; by early November the figure had risen to 2,288t, and
by the end of the month it was 2,860-1,000 seroons more than the total
stock originally thought to exist in Europe and twice the amount which
the speculators had anticipated purchasing. Baring's misgivings about 'the
final success of the undertaking' are understandable if one reflects that
by the end of November some 5 million guilders had been invested in
the speculation.
  Details of the sales plan were discussed with VOllte, 'as it will be chiefly
directed by him.' 4 Vollte expressed the view that the stocks held in Mar-
seilles and Rouen should be shipped to Amsterdam and London, and
those from Cadiz to Marseilles, 'to keep up the circulation and augment
the appearance of demand.' This, he maintained, could not be done if the
cochineal was resold where it lay. VOllte advised delaying the sale be-
cause, France having capitulated in the struggle involving the Patriot
party, small consignments from all manner of sources would be coming on
the market at the beginning of November. If the speculators were to
emerge simultaneously, it would appear that they, too, had gambled on a
war, and this would inevitably depress prices. Under these circumstances,
he advised buying up any cochineal offered at a reasonable figure and
then waiting, even though this implied a risk that the new racolta from
Mexico would meanwhile reach the market in Cadiz, 'which we must not
lay ourselves open to the effects of but on the best grounds.' 5
  The exporting of cochineal from France in the manner which VOllte had
envisaged was fraught with difficulties. Hope had instructed Councler to

                                    439
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

transfer half of the 250 seroons purchased into barrels and send these by
road to Amsterdam. But the Chambre de Commerce in Marseilles
protested at what it described as 'ransacking the local market.' 1 As the
regulations governing sea cargoes were less stringent, Hope made efforts
to charter vessels to take the bales to Amsterdam, but this, too, proved
far from easy, for sea transport in the stormy winter season was costly
and dangerous, added to which there were few regular sailings to Mar-
seilles from either Amsterdam or London. 2 Meanwhile, Councler was
instructed to commence repacking the cochineal, and was told that if the
Chamber of Commerce raised an alarm he could simply offer a quarter of
the stock at 24 livres per pound; he was also authorized to give an assur-
ance that parcels of 25-50 seroons could be ordered from Cadiz as
required. 3 Towards the end of December, in response to an urgent plea
from Councler, Hope abandoned his export plans. It is probable that
rising costs and growing stocks had made him more receptive to Coun-
cler's argument that 'drawing on the one hand and stocking up on the
other' was costly, and that it would be wiser to allow Councler to meet
the substantial demand for cochineal for export to the Greek archipelago,
Turkey and the Levant from his stock. There was also the point that
transport by sea would not be possible until February.4 Similar consider-
ations led to Bournissien being allowed to retain his stock, and to Rouen
being designated 'un depot pour fournir tous les environs.' 5
  The events in France having rendered Voilte's stock transfer system
impracticable, it became necessary to ship the cochineal lying in Cadiz
direct to London and Amsterdam. At first Voilte proposed sending 200
seroons of the best quality to London and a similar quantity of the lesser
quality to Amsterdam, but later he decided that Rotterdam would make a
better central storage point, since it could be shipped from there to other
ports at comparatively low cost. Voilte maintained that, in contrast to
Rotterdam, cochineal could not be imported into London 'without
eclat' and that as the quantity held by Baring was more than sufficient
to meet consumption in England, news of such a large stock on hand
might well have an adverse effect on the latter's sales. But Baring was not
to be convinced by this line of reasoning and in the end Voilte had to
agree to ship 400 seroons to Rotterdam and 200 to London. The fact
that trade in the Republic was in the doldrums will almost certainly have
had a bearing on this arrangement. 6
  As fal as actual sales were concerned, Voilte's advice at the beginning of
November had been to wait. The resulting delay had played a role in the
drawing up of the plans. Before conceding to the pressing desires of the