

                                    420
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

From the point of view of a resumption of negotiations with Don
Domingo, however, Labouchere's presence in England was of great value.
As one who was familiar with the conditions of the loan and its history,
he was an ideal partner for Sir Francis in defending the interests of the
two houses and straightening out matters distorted by emotions, the more
so since he was not handicapped by recrimination. By the beginning of
April, relations had improved to the point where serious negotiation on a
plan to repay the old debt became feasible.
  In the view of Alexander Baring, it would be best if all outstanding
claims on the Portuguese Court were incorporated into the loan granted
to the Court by the British government. There would then be no problem
concerning the arrival of diamonds.! As an alternative, Sir Francis
Baring suggested that, as previously, the two houses should receive the
diamonds and should assume responsibility for payments of interest and
principal. If the proceeds of the diamond sales were inadequate for the
purpose, the houses could advance the deficit up to the full value of the
diamonds deposited with them. In any case, the envoy would have to
limit his search for a solution to England, and not look to Holland for a
fresh loan. 2
  Early in August 1810 a serious counterproposal from Don Domingo
imparted relief to the negotiations. He intimated that he did not wish to
concern himself with Hope's existing claims on the tobacco lessees: these
were matters for the lessees, the prince regent and the houses concerned
to settle among themselves. He was prepared to furnish the monies
required for the interest and principal payments due on 31st December
1810 in two instalments, the first on the due date and the second on 31st
March 181 I. The two houses would be required to effect the final pay-
ments in respect of the loan on the due date, 31st December 18I1, but
they would not be reimbursed immediately. The envoy requested an
extension until 31st December 1812 to give time for the repayment to be
made from the proceeds of the sale of colonial produce which was to be
sold in France and Holland. Baring and Hope were required to approach
the British and French governments for licences to import the produce. 3
  Alexander Baring met this with yet another proposal in which great
emphasis was placed on the claims against the tobacco lessees in Lisbon.
This was important in view of the fact that the prince regent had, at last,
ordered the lessees to meet their obligations. 4 Quintella had earlier written
to Hope, offering, subject to the approval of the prince regent, to send the
remainder of the stock of tea, which had arrived in 1808, in part-settle-
ment of the debt. 5 In May 1810, Labouchere wrote to the French Minister

                                    421
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

of Home Affairs, the Count of Montalivet, concerning the possibility of
importing the consignment, consisting of 2,000 chests, for this purpose. 1
  Regarding the payments due on 31st December of the years 1810 and
1811, Baring expressed his willingness to accept De Souza's drafts on the
Portuguese government's London agents, Lucena and De Paiva. The
diamonds which had been mortgaged to the two houses would then be
placed at the disposal of the Portuguese government. 2 No reply to this
proposal was forthcoming. In a letter to Labouchere dated 15th October
1810, Alexander Baring commented: 'Mr. de Souza continues amusing us
with plans and projects about tho: Portugal concern without it having been
yet in our power to bring him to anything specific.' He also gave the
reason for this galanty show: poverty in Rio, in London, in Lisbon,
everywhere. The summer of 1810 had brought Portugal even greater
disasters than the previous year. Under pressure from Massena's offen-
sive, the British commander-in-chief, Wellesley, had gradually withdrawn
his troops to prepared positions at Torres Vedras, a little to the north of
Lisbon. For the unfortunate populace, this meant being exposed once
again to the miseries of war. 3 Under such circumstances, no useful
purpose would be served by irrevocably linking the payments at the end
of the year to the claims against the tobacco lessees: 'Arguments you
know are unavailing where there is nothing,' Baring explained to Labou-
chere. 4 If the houses simply stood their ground, De Souza would be forced
to pay up, because he could not afford to be in arrears at the end of
the year and thus gamble his country's creditworthiness. Conversely, it
would be wise 'to square our claims at last to his means,' and thus avoid
driving the man to distraction; to obtain a fresh admission of the debt
and to have it brought to a state of liquidation would be a major step
forward.
  Baring proved to have been a good judge of the situation, for on 13th
December 1810 the envoy, on behalf of the prince regent, signed a new
agreement with Hope and Baring. In this, the houses jointly undertook
to advance to the Court the sum of the payment due on 31st December,
totalling cf 1,700,000. As an earnest for the repayment of the advance,
Don Domingo handed over 30,000 pounds sterling and a parcel of dia-
monds weighing 44-45,000 carats and with an estimated value of 100,000
pounds sterling. The balance of 50,000 pounds sterling was to be met
from the sale of diamonds, which were to be consigned exclusively to
Hope and Baring until such time as the Portuguese loan and the various
sums advanced to the Portuguese government by the two houses had been
completely liquidated. The choice of market and method of sale of the