

                                   433
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

fluence the price. As Hope planned to resell the cochineal in Rouen, the
agents were informed that commissions and other charges were to be kept
to a minimum. 1 The order for purchases in Marseilles went to Veuve
Councler et Fils Aine. As at Rouen, Hope estimated the stocks here to
total 150-200 seroons, although the price limits indicated to Councler
were considerably lower, namely 15-15-! livres per pound in Marseilles
against 20-21-! livres in Rouen. 2 According to Hope, this was 'as near as
possible the pair with 25-! to 26-! in loco.' This was his way of saying that a
pound of cochineal costing, say, 15 livres in Marseilles would have to
fetch 25-!-26-! schellingen in Amsterdam in order to cover freight, insurance
and other charges. These par values could not be stated precisely, how-
ever, for account had naturally to be taken of current prices in the various
markets, which in turn were influenced by factors such as demand,
turnover and trading customs. 3 As in the plan for simultaneous purchases,
the main aim was to prevent speculative sales between markets. The
order sent to Ryan on 17th August 1787, it was estimated, would take
three weeks and would thus arrive on 7th September. News of Hope's
transactions in Rouen and Marseilles would not reach Cadiz until the 22nd
at the earliest, so Ryan would have fourteen days in which to complete his
purchases. As an added precaution, the letters to Bournissien and Coun-
cler were held back until 30th August. If we assume that an urgent letter
to Rouen took five to six days, and one to Marseilles ten to eleven days,
we see that it was feasible to complete the purchases at those places by
 25th September without forcing the market. 4
  In St. Petersburg, the house of Sutherlands & Bock was chosen as buying
 agent. The principal partner in this firm was Richard Sutherland. He was
 banker to the Russian Court, but engaged in trading activities through
the house which bore his name. Hope estimated that between 300 and 400
 seroons of cochineal were available there. After purchasing the stock,
 Sutherlands & Bock would arrange for storage pending instructions for
 resale. They were instructed to look first for superior grades, 'such as is in
 general imported from London,' then for cochineal from Amsterdam, and
 lastly that from Cadiz.5
  Sutherland had since the Spring of 1787 increasingly channelled trans-
 actions relating to the Russian Crown through Hope & Co. Their con-
 nexion formed a most pleasant basis for combining normal business with
 the cochineal operation. Sutherland, in his role as Court Banker, could
 take over the drafts which Sutherlands & Bock were to draw on Hope,
 and use these for his remittances to Hope. This would not only ensure
 secrecy, but would also bolster up the rate of exchange of the rouble. 6

                                     434
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PA TRIOTIC ERA