

 the death of Henry Hope and what amounted to aloofness on the part of
 John Hope, it was necessary to infuse some new blood into the firm, and
to this end William Gordon Coesvelt, Pierre Firmin Lestapis and Adriaan
van der Hoop were made directors of the firm. Affairs having thus been
 satisfactorily settled, the ways parted, Labouchere leaving for St. Peters-
 burg to attend to some very urgent matters relating to the Russian loans,
while Coesvelt travelled to London on family business and also for the
purpose of collecting the diamonds which had been withheld from Labou-
chere. Although a letter from the French Minister of Home Affairs, stating
that diamonds imported into France would be taxed only on the basis of
their weight, had arrived on the eve of Coesvelt's departure, Barings
sought confirmation of the fact from the house in Amsterdam. 1
  Whereas it was clearly difficult to convince Barings that reliance could
be placed on the reduced scale of import duty, it proved an impossible
task where the Portuguese were concerned. In spite of all assurances and
the production of official French documents, the Portuguese government
agents in London persisted in their mistrust. Ultimately a solution was
reached in which the two houses purchased the parcel of diamonds then
in London at 47 shillings per carat, thereby departing from the customary
practice of sale on commission. As all risks were now borne by Hope and
Baring, and as it was difficult to obtain cover, the parcel of 24,191 carats
in Coesvelt's possession when he left London on 19th October was
uninsured. Fortunately he arrived safely in Amsterdam, where the stones
were gratefully accepted by Insinger & Co. Despite the scarcity of dia-
monds at the time, the sale was disappointing. The parcel contained many
third and fourth grade stones, whereas the demand was principally for the
highest grades. 2 It was obvious, Hope and Insinger both wrote to Barings,
that Goldsmiths in London had put their own interests first when sorting
the stones. 3 The high import duties levied by the Russians on goods from
Napoleon's realm -a symptom of the growing estrangement between the
two empires-had brought the export of diamonds to Russia almost to a
standstill, while in Amsterdam itself the absence of regular consignments
since 1809 had produced a decline in the numbers of cleavers and polishers,
and with this a fall in the demand for diamonds. 4
  In the agreement of 13th December 1810, Don Domingo de Souza had
made the redemption of the last 1,607 bonds on 31st December I8II
contingent upon the importation into France of colonial produce from
Brazil. The request which Labouchere had submitted to the Minister of
Finance on this subject, and the subsequent approaches to the government
by Baguenault, however, were fruitless, and thus the holders of the bonds
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

had to be content with 5% interest.! Early in 1812 Labouchere left for
Paris to make a final appeal on the subject to a number of ministers who
were well disposed towards him.2 But this attempt, too, failed, for the
emperor rejected the request 'pour des motifs d'une importance majeure.'3
  Little progress had meanwhile been made in regard to the final settle-
ment of the Portuguese loan. At the end of August, Barings wrote to say
that, in the absence of a suitable opportunity, they had not dared to send
the diamonds: despite the official French import permit, the house
trusted only 'the very best hands.' 4 This news caused immense disappoint-
ment in Amsterdam, for Insinger & Co. were rapidly getting through
their stock and, in contrast to the previous year, the smaller stones were
fetching extremely good prices. 5 In February 1813 Insinger appealed
urgently for fresh stocks, adding that the market was 'extremely bare' and
that it would be a catastrophe if the polishers, who had so courageously
started up again a short time before, should again find themselves without
work. According to Ruben Harmsz. Keyzer, Insinger's confidential
representative, the firm could easily sell between one and one and a half
million guildersworth of diamonds annually. 6
  In the absence of the diamonds, the problem of meeting the interest
payment due on 31st December 1812 bore increasingly heavily on the
managers in Amsterdam, for John Hope allowed them very little freedom
in the financial sense. On 20th October, after repeated requests and on
the advice of Alexander Baring, he gave instructions for the interest to be
paid. He was, he wrote, relying on the available funds being adequate for
the purpose, 'the more so as almost one half of this sum will be credited to
us.' 7
  After John Hope's death in February 1813, his heirs transferred the
partnership and all pertinent matters to Alexander Baring, upon whom
the decision whether or not to pay the interest on the Portuguese loan
thus devolved. In reply to a question from the managers in Amsterdam in
the autumn of 1813, he consented to the payment, but said that the
advertisement should be postponed for a little longer 'for caution's sake.' 8
This circumspection is the more understandable if one realizes that
Baring's letter was written on 14th October 1813, a day or two before the
Battle of Leipzig, which was decisive for the whole of Europe. At that
moment it was impossible to predict Holland's future with any degree of
certainty. He did not run a major financial risk, for the diamonds con-
tinued to arrive from Brazil, providing him with an equivalent security. In
selling them, however, he did not use the services of the Amsterdam
house, and such of the stones as found their way to the market there were
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN