

bought in London by houses such as Braunsberg. The reborn Amsterdam
house of Hope & Co., headed by P.C.Labouchere, Sillem and two of the
managers of the former firm, A.van der Hoop and P.F.Lestapis, com-
menced its existence on 1st January 1815, but it was not until 24th No-
vember of that year that Baring could bring himself to entrust the sale of
the Portuguese diamonds to the new house, which under the arrangement
accepted full responsibility for any profits or losses which might ensue
from future operations connected with the liquidation of the loan. 1
  Matters having been thus arranged, the partners announced that the
remaining 1,607 bonds would be redeemed on 31st December 1815.
Shortly before the end of the year the first consignment of diamonds,
totalling 20,000 carats, arrived, and this was followed by a parcel of
similar size in 1816. For the first time in years it was possible to write
down the Portuguese loan.2 In 1817, the diamond shipments totalled
only 20,000 carats, which fact prompted the partners to remind the
Ministry of Finance in Lisbon that a reduction in supplies would result in a
reduction in the ranks of diamond polishers and thus to a reduction in
demand for the gems. 3
  Hope's claims against the tobacco lessees, which dated from the annual
accounts for 1808 and 1809, remained outstanding until the end of 1818,
when the arrival of a new consignment of diamonds enabled the Portu-
guese loan to be finally written off. 4 The final accounts for all the dia-
monds could not be submitted until the following year, the partners
wrote, 'but we have grounds for hoping that the result will be such as to
move the Court to continue to accord to our market the preference which
it has justly acquired above all others by its very organization, by its
connexions and its superior avenues for marketing, and by all the other
local advantages which it would not be appropriate for us to mention in
detail here.' 5
  The fact that, in a period of malaise in Holland, such things could
truthfully be written about the Amsterdam diamond market and the
branch of industry which was allied to it, was due in large measure to the
loan which just then was drawing to a close.
Cochineal
                         CHAPTER FIFTEEN

                   COCHINEAL IN THE
                    PATRIOTIC ERA
                A SPECULATION WHICH WENT AWRY


 'The spirit of emancipation is gaining ground every day and operates in
 all countries in accordance with the genius of the people,' said Henry
 Hope in a letter of 9th August 1787 to the French banker Laborde de
 Mereville. In Hope's view, the French government was still so strong
 that it had no reason to fear the evil consequences of the development;
 but in the Republic the picture was gloomier: 'here ... everything has
 been upset, and it can only end in absolute tyranny, whether by the
Prince or by the people-the inevitable outcome of the complete anarchy
which reigns today.' 1
  As explained in the introductory chapter, the confrontation between the
Patriots and the supporters of the prince reached a climax in the summer
of 1787; in Amsterdam, indeed, it led to a complete battle. Surrounded by
the tumult of war, Henry Hope had remained at his post and had con-
centrated on trade-'the neglected issue amid all this confusion'-which
had stagnated since the end of the fourth war against England in 1784.
Hope, however, consoled himself with the thought that the malaise could
not be fatal, for 'trade is frequently ailing, but never dies.' 2
  The truth of this statement was demonstrated by Henry Hope himself
when he seized upon the slump to embark on a speculation in a com-
modity which, in his view, had reached rock-bottom price and, because
it was scarce, could be controlled with relative ease. This was cochineal, a
valuable carmine dyestuff produced in Mexico by drying the bodies of
females of the cochineal insect, which are found on certain types of cacti.
The annual harvest or raeoTla was transported from the interior to Vera
Cruz and shipped from there to Cadiz, where it arrived between January
and the end of June. Anyone who succeeded in tracing and buying up the
stock after June could be sure of a free hand until the following year.
Cochineal also possessed a high intrinsic value and could be kept for a
long time. These factors made it attractive as an investment affording
protection against a contingent 'revolution in public affairs, which
naturally diminishes the value oflanded and funded property.' 3
  According to Henry Hope, the stocks of cochineal throughout Europe
amounted to no more than 1,750 bales or seroons, and were distributed