

                                   440
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

houses in France and Spain to commence selling, it was necessary to
establish the price ratios to be maintained between the four principal
markets, namely Cadiz, London, Amsterdam and Marseilles. The prices
in Amsterdam were relatively the lowest, and thus it was expedient to
raise these. Hope thought in terms of an increase from 3 I schellingen to 33-
34 per pound, but this was contingent upon the return of Voute, 'whose
animating genius is extremely necessary.' 1 Following his return on 13th
December, 'the parr of the markets' was determined. The point of depar-
ture was a given price per arroba in Cadiz, from which each of the houses
arrived at the selling price on its market. On this basis, Counc1er was
permitted to sell 25 seroons at the equivalent of 98 ducats in Cadiz, while
Bournissien's price for 12 seroons had to be based on 100 ducats. Ryan
was initially given permission to sell 100 seroons at 90 ducats per arroba,
but this was subsequently reduced to 25 seroons at 100 ducats with the
proviso that sales were limited to three or four buyers. Baring was given a
price indication of 95 ducats. 2 The two French houses received sound
marketing advice from Hope. It was very important not to force matters,
but to wait for the emergence of demand. As sales progressed, efforts
would be made to raise the price, but the increase had to be natural and a
product of demand. In some instances it would be possible to assist
Nature by fixing a prix general on which a discount could be given to any
buyer who took a certain quantity. This incentive would attract the
commission agents, who in turn would stimulate individual buyers. 3
 The sales plan was thus complete, but no actual sales materialized. Trade
was slack in the winter, and such demand as there was for cochineal could
provisionally be met from other sources. The speculators were well aware
that the impending arrival of the new racolta was among the factors
responsible for the lack of demand, and this filled them with anxiety. The
main questions were how much would arrive from Mexico, and when?
Hope wrote that the new racolta would be 'regular but not abundant,'
totalling 1,500-1,600 seroons, but this was not confirmed and the uncer-
tainty was reflected in the prices quoted in Cadiz. Despite all Ryan's
assurances that there was no cochineal whatsoever on the market, prices
there refused to rise above 72 ducats per arroba. And while Cadiz remain-
ed low, Voute's 'parr of the markets' would have no significance.
 As we have seen, the cochineal price in Amsterdam was also low. In the
latter part of December 1787 the brokers had with difficulty succeeded in
reaching 36 schellingen, but on 1st January 1788 they were obliged to drop
to 32, albeit with the idea of gradually climbing back to 36. This level was
indeed achieved for the odd bale or retail sale during January, but with

                                    441
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA