

In order to complete the circle of market control, it was decided to bring
 Hamburg into the speculation. As Hope had no knowledge of prices or
 stocks of cochineal there, instructions were sent to the elderly Beerend
 Roosen to purchase 'up to the last market price known to you' or, if
 necessary, up to 4 % above this. In contrast to St. Petersburg, preference
 was to be given to cochineal imported direct from Cadiz, but 'none of
 that which they adulterate, sift and make up for the Russian market;
 however, we have nothing against that which has been sent from repu-
 table houses in London, and under no circumstances any from Jews.' 1
  By the beginning of September, all the purchasing instructions which
 Hope and Baring considered necessary to secure the lion's share of the
 cochineal available in Europe had been issued. The extent of this share,
 however, had risen substantially since Henry Hope had launched his
 plan. Adding the estimated stocks at Marseilles, Rouen, St.Petersburg
 and Hamburg to the 1,750 seroons already referred to produced a total
 of 2,650 seroons, of which the speculators needed to acquire nearly 2,000
-an increase of more than 500 seroons. Obviously the preliminary infor-
mation had not been correct. We are left with the impression that Voute's
intense preoccupation with purchases of tea and his numerous journeys
abroad for that purpose adversely affected the preparations for the co-
chineal speculation.
  The stiff resistance put up by the Patriots in Amsterdam, which was
referred to in the introductory chapter-and which, as Messrs. Hope were
to discover, continued after the capitulation-sorely tried Henry Hope's
patience. Trade declined under the influence of the Prussian blockade of
all the major roads to Amsterdam, and auctions had to be postponed
'owing to the public unrest which at present occupies minds to the ex-
clusion of business.' 2 Practically no progress was made with the purchase
of cochineal either. The rumours of an early outbreak of hostilities be-
tween England and France, which radical elements in Amsterdam ex-
ploited in an attempt to keep up their spirits, greatly disturbed Henry
Hope: 'This event will bring about a very profound revolution in business
and will impart an infinite degree of lustre to our speculation, although
this was in no way motivated by that consideration; we should be very
sorry if it were to owe all its merit to a revolution so distressing to human-
ity.' 3
  Nevertheless, the prime objective was to get the flagging speculation into
motion again as quickly as possible. If the market was to be swept clean
in a single operation and without substantial price increases, speed was
imperative: the desired two-thirds or three-quarters of the stock must be

                                    435
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

acquired before the end of September. Cadiz, the fountainhead of the
speculation, was the focal point in this respect. On the 22nd of that month
-the agreed final date for his purchases-Ryan reported that he had ~e­
cured 658 seroons and I I I sobernales or half-seroons at prices within the
limits laid down. 1 He had done well, although he had let a consignment of
145 seroons held by the Five Gremios slip through his fingers by failing to
bid promptly even though the price had been well within his limits.2 Hope
viewed this as 'a terrible check in our speculation' and authorized Ryan
to go to 75 ducats per arroba in a final attempt to secure the consignment.
Hope found it extremely regrettable that Ryan had ignored 100 seroons
of very poor quality cochineal, for 'bad as it may be it may do us much
harm, more even than if it was of good quality, as under the name of
cochineal it diminishes the nominal quotation.' 3 And why had Ryan not
succeeded in securing the consignment from Prasca & Arbore? This was
now being shipped abroad, principally to London, where it would have to
be bought up at a high price, which implied that others would walk off
with a portion ofthe profit. 4
  Under such circumstances, a rapid completion of the buying programme
followed by the 'setting up' of selling prices was an impossibility. It was
not until 6th November that Ryan reported that he had secured the 145
seroons from the Five Gremios at 70 ducats per arroba. At this point he
held 1,005 seroons and I I I sobernales-almost the whole of the stock in
Cadiz, it was hoped, although there was no certainty of this because
Ryan's information had earlier proved to be incomplete and at times even
contradictory. Altogether the speculators now held twice as much
cochineal at Cadiz as they had anticipated buying there, but in spite of
this it transpired that more stocks existed in all sorts of unexpected places.
In many cases these were held by 'rich and tenacious Spaniards,' and it
required long and hard bargaining to persuade them to part with their
stocks, not all of which were fresh. 5
  Gradually it became clear that the speculators were busy saddling them-
selves with a dead stock of cochineal. This was anything but a pleasant
discovery, for Hope's plan was based on the assumption that the quantity
of cochineal existing in Europe was limited and scarcely covered the
annual consumption. Now that the true position had proved to be so
different, the dead stock would have to remain dead for the time being.
 Hope, however, remained confident that the damage which had been
suffered would be amply compensated by the profit when sales com-
menced. 'We think the Chapter of Events is very greatly in our favour,' he
wrote to Baring - but without specifying the events to which he referred. 6
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA