

                                   422
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

  diamonds would be matters for De Souza to determine, but it was
 stipulated that if no instructions were forthcoming from him one year
 after the arrival of a parcel, the houses would be free to choose their
  methods of sale. The agreement also provided that Hope and Baring
 would use their best endeavours to secure licences from the British and
 French governments for the importation into Napoleon's Europe of
 colonial produce from Brazil, the proceeds of which would be used for
 the payment of interest and principal on 31st December 18II. Should
 this plan fail, the houses would do their best to secure the approval of the
 bondholders for the capitalization of the final instalment of principal, at
 an annual rate of interest of 5 %. Finally, the agreement upheld in full the
 guarantee given by the tobacco lessees, and gave Hope and Baring a free
 hand to obtain the arrears from this source.!
   It was with justification that Alexander Baring reported: 'We have got
 more out of de Souza than I expected.' 2 Labouchere, he knew, would be
 less than satisfied with many details of the agreement, 'but we could not
 do better.' Indeed, they could not have done better: on one side of the
 scales lay an advance of 50,000 pounds sterling on 31st December 1810
 and the payment of interest at cf 80,350 per annum until the final liqui-
dation of the debt, and on the other the restitution, supported by numer-
ous signatures, of the diamond monopoly.3 Whether the monopoly would
benefit Hope in Amsterdam remained to be seen, for in the second half of
 1810 Napoleon had modified his economic strategy against England and
now occasionally allowed the import of colonial produce upon payment
of a special duty of 50 % ad valorem. If the diamonds were to be classed
as 'colonial produce,' and Amsterdam eliminated as a market, the houses
could always fall back on London for the lion's share of the sales, and
leave the rest to smugglers. With Portugal in such a piteous state, the re-
established guarantee by the tobacco lessees was of greater significance
for the future than the present, and it was a good thing that Baring had
not made the negotiation of the agreement contingent upon the payments
in Lisbon.
  The news of Barings' success reached Hope & Co. on Christmas Day
1810, a few days after Labouchere had received a new passport for Eng-
land from Lebrun, Duke of Plaisance, Arch-Treasurer of the Empire and,
since July 1810, Lieutenant General of Holland, now annexed to France. 4
Agreement having been reached with Don Domingo, the urgency of
Laboucbere's journey to London had diminished and he was free to
devote all his attention to the interest and principal payments due on the
last day of the year. This was no sinecure, for Amsterdam, like other

                                    42 3
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

European centres, had been in the grip of a serious financial crisis since
the autumn of 1810. But in spite of the acute shortage of money, Labou-
chere succeeded in assembling the funds for the Portuguese payments and
others, and on 27th December he wrote with just pride: '. .. notwith-
standing the penury and the shortness of the notice ... the payment is
announced to the public together with those for Russia and Louisiana,
together seven million florins which must assist the circulation mate-
rially.' 1
  By late January 181 I, matters had been settled to the point where
Labouchere was able to turn his attention to his journey. Finding it
impossible to obtain a passage from a Dutch port, he journeyed to
France and crossed from there. He was given a passport on condition
that he visited Paris on his return and gave the emperor a reliable and
unbiassed report on the political situation in England. 2
  In a tragic sense, Labouchere's arrival in England was opportune, for
shortly beforehand, on 25th February, the death had occurred of Henry
Hope. Much of Labouchere's stay was taken up with discussion of mat-
ters relating to the continued existence of the house. Having reached
agreement with John Williams Hope (who now called himself John Hope)
on the measures to be adopted, he departed for the Continent at the end
of April. 3 As agreed, he travelled via Paris to report to Napoleon.
  While in Paris, Labouchere took the opportunity to write to the Minister
of Finance, the Duke of Gaeta, requesting approval for the importation of
diamonds and colonial produce from Brazil. He informed the minister
that although he had the emperor's permission to import diamonds into
Holland on his homeward journey, the London agents of the Portuguese
government had refused to part with the stones because they feared that
these would be subject to the high import duty levied on colonial produce.
In the letter, he requested total exemption from import duties for this
article, 'and to allow us to authorize our correspondents in London to
accept them on this basis and to send them over when the opportunity
arises.' He also asked for import licences for Brazilian produce such as
sugar, cotton, hides and dyewood, the sale of which would provide the
funds necessary for the payments due on 31st December 18II. He sug-
gested that the French government would welcome the opportunity thus
created to export certain French products to Brazil, 'and of creating
there a demand which will imperceptibly make those regions more
directly dependent upon France.' 4
  Pending the reply to his letter, Labouchere journeyed to Amsterdam,
where he proceeded to reorganize the house in the manner agreed. With
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN