

the three houses to which the cochineal had been consigned ran into
serious difficulties in that year. Richard Sutherland had died in 1792, and
an investigation had revealed that his affairs were in a state of chaos. The
Russian Court demanded 3,700,000 roubles from his heirs as compen-
sation for serious neglect of the interests of the Court. Robert Voute,
who had visited Russia in 1793 on behalf of Hope & Co. in connexion
with Polish and Russian loans, sought through the personal intervention
of Empress Catherine II to prevent Sutherland's merchant house be-
coming involved in the debacle, but he had no success. Sutherland was
declared bankrupt in March 1794, Hope & Co. being involved to the
extent of 351,000 roubles; it is probable that this sum included a claim
relating to cochineal consignments. 1
  The difficulties which concerned G. Thomson Rowand & Co. in Moscow
were fortunately of a less serious nature. Like many others, the house had
been hit by the acute scarcity of money in Russia, a product of the dis-
ruption of trade in western Europe by the French wars of conquest.
Voute submitted a claim on Hope's behalf in which a sum of cf 586,404
relating to the cochineal account figured, but it proved possible to save
the house from collapse.
  Hope's fortunes in the matter of this claim fall outside the scope of this
story. Suffice to say that Pierre Cesar Labouchere, during a sojourn in
St.Petersburg in 1811, disposed of the claim on Thomson Rowand & Co.
to another debtor to Hope & Co. in order to be rid of the worry. 2
  Thus ended a speculation which certainly caused Messrs. Hope a great
deal of anxiety and undoubtedly brought heavy losses. The failure of the
house of Sutherland and the delay in settling the claim on Thomson
Rowand & Co. will have necessitated the writing off of further sums.
Nevertheless, this unsuccessful affair fits into the general picture of the
house of Hope & Co., for in the world of business one must continually
take risks, and if the house had not done so it would never have achieved
eminence. But it was characteristic of the policy of the partners that the
cochineal speculation, like other ventures, was a calculated risk; the
house could permit itself to undertake this investment. While millions of
guilders were tied up in cochineal for years on end, Hope & Co. embarked
upon one Russian loan after another without ever incurring problems
of liquidity. Nevertheless, the cochineal affair was a source of anxiety,
especially in the early stages. In the letter books which we consulted, the
letters referring to the speculation outnumbered those dealing with the
Russian loans by more than five to one. And it was at this very time that
the first Russian loans were being floated.

                                    449
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PA TRIOTIC ERA

Let us examine the causes of the failure of the speculation. Chief among
these was the incompleteness of the information regarding the stocks of
cochineal in Europe. The true figure will have been more than double the
1,750 seroons to which Henry Hope referred at the outset, and these
stocks were far more widely distributed than was thought. If we ask
ourselves who was primarily responsible for the incompleteness, we are
forced to the conclusion that it was Robert Vollte. He was the broker
with specialized knowledge of dyestuffs; it was he who, prior to the com-
mencement of the speculation, supplied information concerning potential
sales in Russia; and he helped to draw up the entire plan. His too numer-
ous absences and his preoccupation with other matters are bound to have
had an adverse effect on the execution of the plan. This opinion, however,
is not expressed in the correspondence, and, in spite of the unhappy note
on which the undertaking ended, Vollte continued to enjoy the confidence
of the partners, who called upon his services in many important matters.
  The lack of demand for cochineal on the various markets greatly vexed
the speculators, particularly as they were powerless to alter the situation.
In planning the speculation, they proceeded from the premise that, in
spite of the malaise, a revival of demand was inevitable, and when the
inevitability of this was not borne out they became obsessed with the
notion of a plot.
  Besides the malaise in the French textile industry, which has already
been mentioned, the factors leading to the failure of the speculation in-
cluded the system of par prices, the effect of which was to cause holders of
parcels of cochineal to either foist these on to the speculators or their
agents, or sell them to third parties at a fraction less than the par price.
The overextended buying period also played a role. This was in part
allied to the underestimation of the existing stocks, but political factors
beyond control of the speculators were also among the causes. For exam-
ple, the disturbances involving the Patriots in Amsterdam and the after-
math of these demonstrably slowed the buying programme in that city,
while the subsequent appearance on the market of stocks released by
disappointed war speculators hampered its completion. The time-con-
suming work necessitated by a lack of drive on the part of some agents,
such as Ryan and Bournissien, was yet another factor.
  The slowness of communications with distant ports such as Cadiz was
also a major obstacle. This, after all, made it impossible to issue orders in
time to meet the fluctuating market situation. The cry 'too late' echoed
repeatedly during this episode. Amsterdam, which by its sales record so
sadly demonstrated its fall from the position of central market, was no