

                                    443
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

loss to know what to do: 'We have a great share of timidity and little
faith even in the arguments we have used' (i.e. towards Bohl). If only they
could be sure that 1,000-1,200 seroons would be sold before the bulk of
the new racolta arrived, and had even a rough idea how much would
arrive and when, 'we should have sufficient strength of mind to give
pretty haughty orders to Cadiz.' But in the absence of even a rough idea,
Hope found himself in a most unpleasant situation of uncertainty and
indecision which was aggravated by the urgent need for a firm plan. Did
Baring perchance have a plan? If so, Hope would gladly consider it.!
  In spite of the anxieties and doubts which beset him, Hope was obliged
to maintain an optimistic tone in his correspondence with others con-
cerning the speculation. This was necessary because the events in Cadiz
had not left the other markets untouched, particularly since the instruc-
tion 'sell, sell large quantities' had been issued. In Marseilles, relatively
close to Cadiz, Councler was having an exceptionally difficult time. It was
at his insistence that Hope had agreed to leave the bought stock there,
and he felt honour bound to sell it quickly and profitably. But all his
efforts were thwarted by the arrival of small parcels from Italy and Cadiz.
The par price which had originally been indicated to Councler was far too
high in view of the fall in prices in Cadiz, and had a reverse effect. Coun-
cler began by buying up as many as possible of the parcels which appeared
on the market at this price, but when these continued to flow in he lost
courage. A further reduction of the par price had no effect whatsoever and
in the end he was instructed to sell at one or two ducats beneath the Cadiz
price, provided that this was still profitable. 2 Hope instructed him to
cease buying for the purpose of supporting the price: 'ce serait la mer a
boire'; if no more were purchased, these imports would dry up. Councler
would be well advised to ignore the criticasters who predicted that the
speculation was destined to fail; if it succeeded, they would alter their
tune. 3 Hope gratefully seized upon reports of more stable prices in Cadiz
to revive Councler's spirits, although to Baring he confessed to fears that
speculative purchases might well have played a significant part in the
 recovery.4 It was perhaps this fear which led him to instruct Councler to
 cease selling if the bottom were to fall out of the market. In that case he
 was to wait, while at the same time doing all in his power to get the price
 rising again.
   Councler succeeded in selling a few parcels of between 2 and 4
 seroons, but over February and March the total amounted only to about
 30 seroons and this made little impact. To cheer him up, Hope hinted,
 as he had done to Bohl, that although it was not proposed to perpetuate

                                    444
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA