

the operation, this could well span several years. In all probability a polit-
ical development-for example, the war against the Turks-would favour-
ably influence the speculation, though Councler should not bank too
heavily on this but should meanwhile try to sell as much as possible. Hope
conveyed the impression that the speculators were able to influence prices
in Cadiz, 'comme il convient au bien de la chose.' In view of the extremely
limited nature of Bohl's brief, this was a bold assertion.!
  In Rouen, sales were practically nil and even a gradual decline in price
levels produced little or no improvement. Hope, in a somewhat bitter
mood, implied that Bournissien had earlier asked for a depot for cochi-
neal, but was unable to justify the central position which he claimed in the
sales plan. Bournissien had initially attributed his lack of success to the
high par price which, he maintained, had resulted in buyers ordering
direct from Cadiz and thus supporting prices there. This argument, how-
ever, had ceased to be valid following the price reductions, for buyers in
Cadiz were now reported to be paying 78-80 ducats per arroba and Bour-
nissien could scarcely have difficulty in competing with this in Rouen?
Bournissien had repeatedly made vague references to a war, and anything
of that nature could certainly influence sales. Hope did not relish the
idea, but if Bournissien had any information, those in Amsterdam would
like to know about it as soon as possible. War did not seem very probable
to Hope, 'in view of the disorderly finances of the Sovereign Courts and
of the strange tricks they play.' 2 War or no war, the fact remained that
there was no demand in Rouen for Hope's cochineal. On 27th March, in a
burst of optimism, Hope wrote to Bournissien saying that he had read
somewhere that the 'fabriques' in France were showing signs of revival.
On 7th April he lamented that the stagnation in trade could not last for
ever. 3
  The tone of the correspondence with Baring at the beginning of April
concerning the policy to be followed was if anything more pessimistic
than that of a month earlier. The primary aim of the speculation-to
corner the market in cochineal while prices were low and to sell when
prices subsequently rose-had not been achieved. Hope was unable to put
his finger on the exact causes of the failure, but one thing was clear:
wherever the speculators had assembled stock, there had been a refusal
to buy. The later observer is less convinced of the existence of a boycott
and is more inclined to attribute the absence of demand to the economic
malaise of the time, from which France in particular suffered. There was
certainly a threat of war, which could have forced prices upwards, but it
did not occur and this fact was a disadvantage rather than an advantage

                                     445
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

to the speculators because, in the prevailing uncertainty, buyers became
even more reticent. The war which did take place, between Russia and
Turkey, added to the difficulties, because the hostilities in the border areas
impeded the cochineal trade with Asia. 1
  Baring took a much more optimistic view of the future than his partner
in the speculation. The London house felt that attention should continue
to be focussed on Cadiz, 'to keep up a certain spirit there as the spring of
every other,' and this required that one-third or one-fourth of all the
cochineal which arrived in Cadiz be bought up by the speculators. The
result would be to keep up the price of the remaining stocks, and this in
turn would assist prices elsewhere to the benefit of the speculators, whose
sales, Baring was convinced, would greatly exceed their additional pur-
chases in Cadiz, so that on balance the 'stock on hand' would diminish.
He added that the issuing of instructions to Bohl was a matter of some
urgency if they were not to be too late for the arrivals in June. 2
  Hope and Voute regarded Baring's view as far too optimistic. In the
light of 'the general combination which seems formed against us,' they
saw little possibility of a surplus of sales, and in addition they had no
inkling of the quantities which would arrive from Mexico. It could well be
that, following the report of improved prices in Cadiz, all the manpower
available in Mexico had been directed to the collection of cochineal
insects and also that every scrap of old stock would also be put on the
market. If Bohl was stimulated prematurely or on too large a scale, the
speculators might soon find themselves saddled with a further 1,000
seroons merely in order to keep up the price, while it might be necessary
to change the policy altogether if such colossal stocks actually arrived on
the market. 3 It therefore seemed prudent to Hope and Voute to await
further news before issuing fresh instructions to Boh!.
  Hardly had this letter been written when Hope received news from Bohl
that the frigate 'The Confidence' had arrived in Cadiz with 295 seroons of
cochineal and that the 'Mentor' and the 'St.Raphael,' together carrying
400-500 seroons, were expected shortly. Hope's letter instructing Bohl
that no more purchases were to be made had reached him at about the
same time as 'The Confidence' arrived. Faced with this order, Bohl had
made no move, with the result that several parcels had gone to other
buyers at 76 ducats per arroba. Bohl added that he would continue to
support prices of between 76 and 80 ducats and hoped that these would be
maintained. Ryan wrote to say that he would purchase for his own
account any cochineal offered at 74 ducats. 4
Thus the time lag between Hope's instructions and the market develop-
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA