

the news of the arrival in Cadiz of part of the new harvest from Mexico,
the price again fell to 32 in mid-February.!
 Early in January Hope, dissatisfied with the situation in Cadiz, decided
to employ another house there. His eye fell on Bohl Bros. & Co., an
extremely solid and capable house, 'for many years devoted to us.' Ryan
had rendered good service in the purchase of cochineal, but he was not
the right man to keep the price up in Cadiz, 'for lack of bold and animated
conduct.' The unexpected arrival in London of63 seroons, of which Ryan
had made no mention, was the last straw. 2 After a thorough dressing
down in which Hope, in veiled terms, accused him of taking part in a
counterspeculation, Ryan was to all intents and purposes dropped. 3
 In the instructions issued to Bohl, priority was given to raising the price
of cochineal in Cadiz. The speculators had lost two months as a result of
bungling on the part of Ryan, who had failed to buy up the remaining
parcels of cochineal at 80-90 ducats and thus block any underspeculation
on the other markets. This delay made it imperative for Bohl to be in-
formed as quickly and accurately as possible regarding the consignments
expected from Mexico, the vital issue being whether the greater part
would arrive during the first two months of the year or between March
and June. Enclosed with the letter to Bohl were three sealed envelopes
containing instructions. The first of these was to be opened if 4-500
seroons arrived in January and February, with the anticipation of a further
700-1,000 seroons in June; the second in the event of the bulk of the
harvest arriving first and the balance later; and the third if only a couple
of hundred seroons arrived during the first six months and the balance
thereafter. 4
 The tactics differed in the three letters of instruction, but always the aim
was to buy as few arrobas as possible at the highest possible price and to
take an option on the balance of the stock. This kept up expectations
among the sellers, while giving the speculators time to dispose of their
stocks elsewhere at good prices. If the cochineal market were to fall again
at the end of the year, the speculators could replenish their stocks at low
prices. In this manner, large investments in the article could be avoided.
 A westerly wind in the Atlantic favoured the ships, but played havoc with
Hope's support plan. Almost at the same moment as the instructions to
Bohl were being written, four vessels arrived in Cadiz with more than 500
seroons of cochineal on board. They had completed the voyage from
Havana in the unusually rapid time of 45 days.5 At that moment no house
in Cadiz held orders from Hope to support the price, and the result was
that a considerable amount of cochineal changed hands at 72 ducats per

                                    442
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

 arroba-three ducats below the minimum price for which Hope was
 aiming.
  When the first report of the arrival of the vessels was received, Hope had
 ordered Bohl to carry out Instruction Number One, but when it became
clear from the second letter, which was dated 21st February, that the
position was virtually irretrievable, Bohl was given greater freedom of
action. 1 Hope expressed deep regret at his inability to entrust 'the man-
agement of this important concern' to Bohl at an earlier date, and added
that this was not 'a mere speculation, but rather an investment of money
in a branch of trade which will be continued.' However, the letter bore a
postscript replacing the greater freedom of action with an instruction to
cease all buying until further notice, 'as it would be idle now to attempt to
force the prices above their strength, which would be only favouring the
late low priced purchases.' 2
  The extent to which the slowness of the post hampered merchants and
made it impossible for them to react adequately to certain market devel-
opments is evidenced by the time which elapsed before Bohl received
instructions matched to the situation. Hope's original instructions of 7th
January did not reach Bohl until the end of the month. On the 29th,
Bohl wrote to Hope, giving details of the adverse developments in Cadiz
since 7th January. Meanwhile, Hope had received Bohl's letter of the 8th
announcing the arrival of the four cochineal ships. In reply to this, Hope
instructed him on the 31st to implement Instruction Number One. Bohl's
letter of the 29th January reached Hope on or about 20th February, and
in the reply to this the execution of Instruction Number One was replaced
by a ban on further purchases. This did not reach Bohl until the middle
of March and thus more than six weeks elapsed before he was in posses-
sion of corrected instructions. During this period Bohl, acting largely on
his own initiative, had cautiously bought small quantities; in this he was
supported by Ryan who, at his own risk, bought up all the small parcels
which came on the market, intending to offer them to Hope later at a
higher price. 3 Ryan's parcels were declined, but Bohl's action in contin-
uing to buy met with Hope's full approval even though it conflicted with
the directives of 21st February, which probably stemmed from a fear of
unbridled stockpiling. Now that Bohl had shown himself to be made of
the right stuff, the reins could be slackened-the more so since his actions
had been successful and prices in Cadiz were recovering well. 4
  The speculators had extricated themselves as best they could from the
difficulties in Cadiz, but it was clear that their escape was temporary and
that the difficulties still existed. Hope confessed to Baring that he was at a