

    PAGE 104

1 Letters of 25th and 29th September 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron
  Sutherland, St.Petersburg. The entrepreneurs were thus two months in arrears
  according to the terms ofthe contract, which provided for payment in four monthly
  instalments in the period November to February. They received a bonus of 2 %. The
  loan was for twelve years commencing on 1st September 1789, but provision was
  made for repayment after seven years. Hope's share was cf 590,000, nearly one-third
  of the total sum.
2 Letter of 13th October 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron Sutherland,
  St.Petersburg.
3 Letters of loth and 24th November 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron
  Sutherland, St.Petersburg.
4 Letter of loth November 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron Sutherland,
  St.Petersburg.

    PAGE 105

I Letter of 4th December 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron Sutherland,
  St.Petersburg.
2 Letter of 25th December 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron Sutherland,
  St.Petersburg. Count Vorontsov, in particular, objected to the commission paid to
  Hope. The contracts between Hope and the Russian Court are missing, so we do not
  know whether the figure of 6-!- %included commission on interest and capital
  payments. This seems probable, however, because Hope here compares the Russian
  commission with the Polish figure of 6 % plus 1 %for interest payments and 2 % for
  repayments of capital (the last figure is incorrect: Hope received only I % on capital
  repayments). Even if the commission paid to Hope by the Russians did not include
  remuneration for such payments, the comparison would be unfortunate. We must
  assume that the total comprised 5 % on the sum of the loan, I %on capital
  repayments and t %on interest payments.
  If a separate commission of 1 %on capital repayments had been granted, this would
  have been payable only from the eighth to the twelfth years-assuming that the loan
  was for twelve years with provision for repayment after seven years. On the basis of a
  five per cent loan, payment of the commission on the repayment of capital at the
  commencement of the loan, instead of after the eighth year, would have given Hope a
  profit on interest of t %. For a 12-year loan, the half per cent on the interest
  payments, if paid on the principal sum, is equal to something like It % on the
  interest due if this were paid annually. The grootboeken contain no reference to
  commission on interest paid; capital repayments were then not yet due. Hope's
  reasons for not undertaking any loans except those for Russia are self-explanatory:
  the Company worked with a fixed group of entrepreneurs who could only place a
  certain number of bonds and, as our story shows, were kept busy enough doing that.
3 Letter of 25th December 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron Sutherland,
  St.Petersburg. As the preceding note shows, we have no information concerning the
  terms of payment agreed between Hope and the Russian Court. It is conceivable that
  Hope requested indulgence when the entrepreneurs got into arrears with their
  payments for the fifth loan. A similar indulgence in respect of the sixth loan would
  largely have benefited Hope because, under the relevant contract, the entrepreneurs