

    PAGE 141
1 For example, in a letter of 6th February 1794 from R. Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope
  & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 18th and 22nd February 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.
  It is open to doubt whether the principles underlying Voute's argument were
  entirely original. The idea of expanding the exploitation of the mineral wealth was
  also developed by William Porter in two of his letters, one of 1st October 1793 to
  John Williams Hope and the other of 29th October 1793 to Sir Francis Baring.
  Voute also championed the cause of the serfs. He recommended that they be given
  the certainty of some property, however little, because they would till the soil better if
  they could be sure of sharing in the fruits of their labours.
2 Letter of 6th February 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 142
I   Blum, Sievers, III, 475-480. The king's debts totalled 34 million Polish guilders, which
    was equivalent to cf 10 million. Thus, one Dutch guilder can be said to have been
    worth 3-4 Polish guilders.


                                            577
                                  NOTES PAGE 142

2 Letter of 19th August 1794 from Charles de Glave Kolbielski, Amsterdam, to Thomas
  Christie, London. A.F.Pribram and E.Fischer, 'Ein politischer Abenteurer (Karl
  Glave Kolbielski, 1752-1831),' Akademie der Wissenscha/ten in Wien, Philosophisch-
  historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte, Band 216, Abhandlung v (1937). Sievers is
  believed to have fallen from favour because he was too lenient towards the growing
  anti-Russian demonstrations. Meisner and his associate, Hasselgreen, who had had
  close ties with Sievers, temporarily lost some of their influence following Sievers's
  dismissal. The consignments of ducats from Hope & Co. served to keep Igelstrom out
  of Meisner's hands for quite a long time, but when a consignment of 30,000 ducats
  from the Company failed to materialize in time, Igelstrom was forced to fall back on
  Meisner. Letters of 8th, loth, 12th and 26th February 1794 from R.Voute,
  St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam. Concerning James Durno, British Consul
  in Memel: Dietrich Gerhard, England und der Au/stieg Russlands (Munich and
  Berlin, 1933),299, note 77.
3 Letters of 6th and 12th February 1794 from R.Voute, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. Voute also delivered to Samaylov and Zubov memoranda in his own
  handwriting on this subject (both were dated loth February). After the failure of the
  transaction with Hope & Co., Igelstrom sent Charles de Glave Kolbielski, a politico-
  financial adventurer in the service of the Polish government, to Holland in the hope of
  achieving a resumption of the negotiations. The Polish rebellion, however, brought
  these discussions to an end (Pribram and Fischer, 'Politischer Abenteurer,' 36).
  Kolbielski asserted that he had played a major role in the negotiation of the loans to
  the Republic of Poland and to its king, and of many Dutch loans to Polish magnates
  (ibid., 30, 31, note 13). In a letter to Thomas Christie in London, Kolbielski referred
  specifically to the loan of cf 3,055,555 to the Republic of Poland through Hogguer
  Grand & Co. This was negotiated in 1790. In August 1794 we find Kolbielski in
  England, where he approached Thomas Christie on the subject of a loan to Russia.
  He proposed a loan of 12 million guilders, half to be furnished in cash and the
  balance in Dutch bonds relating to loans to Polish magnates, which had fallen to
  30--40 % below par as a result of the political situation and could thus be bought
  cheaply. The Russian government, which was in a position to sequestrate the
  mortgaged estates at any time, would have to accept the bonds at their par value.
  Under Kolbielski's plan, Hope & Co. would float the loan, half of the sum of which
  would ostensibly be subscribed by dummy investors in St.Petersburg, who would
  then privately exchange their Polish bonds for Russian bonds. Hope would receive
  the normal commission on the loan, but the conversion of the bonds relating to the
  Polish magnates would have to be effected without the intermediary of the Company.
  The necessary capital would have to come from English investors, and Kolbielski and
  his associates (who were probably senior officials) would be content with a small
  percentage.
  Christie rejected the plan on the grounds that loans to foreign countries were not very
  popular in England where, moreover, there was general abhorrence of Empress
  Catherine for her policies towards Poland. Christie also felt that the proposal was
  unfair to Hope & Co., who would only be in nominal control of a transaction of
  which the salient details remained hidden from them. He was sure that Hope's
  friends in London would not accept such a situation. At the precise moment at
  which Christie wrote this, the Company was engaged in transferring the focal point of
  its operations from Amsterdam to London.
                                 NOTES PAGES 142-145