

London, 21st May, 1813.

£100 R. Heath.

£150 Anthony Finn
Kemp.

£150 B. I.
Mitchell."

In the Committee
Room is preserved the first Insurance Policy of which there is any record, and
which was taken in the name of a ship, the Golden
Fleece, which was insured for a voyage from Lisbon to Venice for
£1,200, at 4 per cent., On January 20, 1600.

The wording of the
usual policy in use at Lloyd's at the present day is, with one exception, the
same that was used in 1779. The exception consists in the substitution of the
words, "Be it known that," for "In the name of God, Amen!"

The effecting of
Marine Insurance is, however, the main duty of underwriters at Lloyd's, and it
is in respect of this very important function that the members of and
subscribers to Lloyd's may be classified as (1) the underwriters, who accept
the risks; and (2) the brokers, who place the insurance on behalf of the owners
of the ships or cargoes.

Here, then, in a
great room, without the slightest pretence to artistic surroundings, sits the
army of under­writers whose business it is to assist the brokers who appear
before them in effecting the insurance of ships throughout the world.

It is very
necessary that an underwriter should be possessed of a minute knowledge of
ships and of the individual and personal history of the people connected with
them, no less than the peculiarities and conditions of the trade in which they
may be (or have been) en­gaged, as this information, reinforced by the reports
which are constantly being received by Lloyd's Intelligence Department from its
correspondents in all parts of the world, places them in a position to
determine speedily and correctly the condition of almost every merchant vessel
afloat. A great deal of this information is pub­lished daily in Lloyd's List, which is the legitimate
successor of Lloyd's News,
established in 1696, and which, with the exception of the London Gazette, is the oldest existing
newspaper published in Europe.

The Captain's Register is a marine
"Dictionary of Biography," wherein is recorded as minutely as the
history of the vessels themselves, every known fact regarding the seafaring
life of every captain, the names of the various ships which he has commanded,
the accidents and disasters his ships have met with, as well as any record he may
have for creditable performances or for heroic service; in short, every. thing
that can possibly have any bearing on any case connected with him.

In the instance of
a ship that has either met with a serious accident or has been wrecked, the
whole circum­stances are recorded in the Loss Book, which is posted up from the
records supplied to Lloyd's from day to day.

The famous bell
which hangs in the Underwriters' Room is tolled twice when an overdue ship is
heard from, and once upon the announcement of a ship's being lost. This bell
was taken from H.M.S. Lutine, which sank in the Zuider Zee in 1799, carrying
down with her treasure amounting to upwards of one million sterling, £40,000 of
which were recovered as recently as 1870.