30 P. E, TETLOCK AND A.

IN

those for evaluating an important category of counterfactual (our ideal type
2, the nomothetic).

Statistical tests of counterfactual plausibility also play a pivotal role in the
chapters by game theorists. Weingast’s notion of comparative statistics re-
minds us of the need to build appropriate time lags into our assessments of
covariation. And Bueno de Mesquita’s work on medieval church-state rela-
tions reminds us of the need for probabilistic tests of hypotheses concerning
mixed-strategy equilibria

Projectability

‘Theory evaluation and counterfactual evaluation are inextricably entangled,
Sound counterfactuals require sound theories that provide the lawlike gener-
alizations that fill in the missing data points in our thought experiments.
How can we judge, however, whether these lawlike generalizations are r0-
bust enough to support counterfactual inferences? Here Nelson Goodman’s
(1983) concept of projectability is helpful. Goodman draws a sharp distine-
tion between coincidental generalizations that just happen to be true at a
particular time and place (and are therefore unprojectable) and robustly law-
like generalizations that hold up over a range of circumstances and permit
projection into the past and future. An example of a merely coincidental
generalization is “All the coins in my pocket yesterday were silver.” Noth-
ing follows from this observation—certainly not “If this penny were in my
pocket yesterday, it would be silver.” The counterfactual fails because “if
this penny were in my pocket yesterday,” we would simply assume that the
original generalization—“all the coins in my pocket yesterday were sil-
ver”—was false. By contrast, a robustly lawlike generalization—such as
that oxygen is a necessary but not sufficient condition for fire—inspires
confidence when we move either backward in time (if there had been no
oxygen, the Great Fire of London would not have occurred) or forward in
time (if we cut off any future fire’s source of oxygen, the fire will expire)
Most social-science generalizations, of course, qualify as neither merely
coincidental nor robustly lawlike; they take the form of either contingent
generalizations (under this set of boundary conditions, x causes y; under that
set, x causes 2) or statistical generalizations (x increases or decreases the
likelihood of y) or contingent statistical generalizations (cf. George and
Smoke 1974; George 1993). From Goodman's perspective, however,
whether the generalization is bounded or unbounded by moderator variables
and whether the generalization is deterministic or probabilistic it is subject
to the same acid test of scientific legitimacy: namely, its projectability or its
ability to predict what will happen in new, hitherto unobserved cases. The
same causal principles that allow us to retrodict the past should allow us to

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS, 31

predict the future. Indeed, the strong Popperian form of this argument as-
serts that we should take counterfactual claims seriously if and only if the
lawlike generalizations supporting the claims yield falsifiable forecasts, We
see this classic philosophical argument resurfacing in the recent meth-
odological advice of King, Keohane, and Verba (1994), who urge scholars
to search aggressively for the observable implications of their causal con-
structs by regularly asking themselves, “If my argument is correct, what else
should be true?” Counterfactuals that are devoid of testable implications in
the actual world leave us marooned in hypothetical worlds of our own sub-
jective making. Projectability, from this vantage point, stands as the preemi-
nent criterion for judging the value of counterfactual speculation,

Perhaps not coincidentally, the most outspoken advocates of the pro-
Jjectability standard in this volume tend to be the most nomothetic in their
overall approach to social science. Bueno de Mesquita and Weingast are not
content with post-hoc exercises in which they fit game-theoretic models to
data; they derive testable implications from theit models and show how
those predictions can be statistically or historically disconfirmed. In a similar
vein, Russet is not satisfied with showing that the democratic-peace hypoth-
is captures an intriguing regularity in the brief slice of history that we call
moder; he seeks out alternative data sources—Greck city-states and tribal
societies—into which we can project the hypothesis. In his computer sim-
ulations, Cederman explores the replicability and robustness of his counter
intuitive result that defense-dominance increases rather than decreases the
likelihood of the emergence of hegemons. And in their critique of structural-
ist theories of revolution, Kiser and Levi raise the suspicion that structuralist
theories—with their emphasis on complex conjunctions of preconditions —
are ultimately exercises in post-hoc data-fitting that will never pass the pro-
jectability test.*

“The strong version of the “projectability” argument teats backward and forward reasoning
{in time as symmetical. There are good reasons, however, for suspecting that even when we can
construct compelling explanations of the past, we will often do a terible job of explaining the
future (Dawes 1993; Chapter 2, Fearon). When we look back into the past from the present, we
‘occupy a privileged but also easily abused position, We know which one of the many futures
that were once possible has actually occurred. With the benefit of this retrospective knowledge,
itbecomes relatively easy to find antecedents that depict the consequence as the inevitable result
‘of some “inexorable” causal process. Yet we risk capitalizing, indeed massively capitalizing, on
chance. By contrast, when we look forward into the future, we cannot avoid the complexity and
indeterminacy of possible relationships among antecedents and consequences. We can draw
‘upon our knowledge of past causal relationships to anticipate the future, but are often disap-
pointed by the results. The causes we identified retrospectively for a class of consequences
prove to be anemic predictors of the same class in the future. Dawes (1993) illustrates this,
lrgument with the crash ofa passenger airplane into a parked truck on a runway under repair at
Mexico City aigport on October 31, 1979. The FAA fight investigators easly constructed &
‘causal story for the outcome that invoked such plausible antecedents as poor weather. smog.
pilot fatigue, radio malfunction, cryptic communication by traffic controllers, and stress. But

