   The notion that the introduction of the potato dramatically increased agricultural productivity,

which resulted in increased population growth, has long been recognized by historians (e.g.,

Langer, 1963, McNeill, 1948, 1999, Salaman, 1949). William Langer (1963, p. 14) argues that in

Europe “the spread of the potato culture everywhere corresponded with the rapid increase of

population”. Historians have, in fact, attributed even greater significance to the potato. McNeill

(1999, p. 67), in an article title “How the Potato Changed World History”, argues that “potatoes,

by feeding rapidly growing populations, permitted a handful of European nations to assert domi-

nation over most of the world between 1750 and 1950”.

   Our study contributes to the historical literature by providing empirical estimates of the effect

of the potato on population and urbanization. Only one previous paper has empirically examined

the effect of the introduction of the potato. This is the study by Joel Mokyr (1981), which estimates

the relationship between potato cultivation and population growth across Irish counties in 1845.

To address problems arising from the endogeneity of potato adoption, Mokyr estimates a system

of two equations using 2SLS. He finds that potato cultivation resulted in a statistically significant

increase in population growth. He also finds no evidence that the potato was adopted in response

to rapid population growth.8

   Our study differs from Mokyr’s (1981) in two important ways.                          First, our difference-in-

differences estimation strategy is very different from Mokyr’s IV strategy. Our estimates are

identified not by variation in the cross-section only, but from the interaction of regional variation

in potato suitability together with time variation arising from the introduction of potatoes from

the New World. Second, our study also examines the impact of potatoes beyond the Irish context

and over a longer time horizon. Therefore, we are able to provide estimates of the full impact of

potatoes on population and urbanization across the Old World during the 18th and 19th centuries.

   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the background on potatoes. Section 3

describes the data, Section 4 presents the empirical strategy, and Section 5 discusses the results.

Section 6 offers concluding remarks.
   8 The only other piece of empirical evidence about the effects of the potato, although indirect, is from Baten and

Murray (2000). The authors examined the determinants of the heights of 4,100 men and women that were incarcerated
and sent to two prisons in Bavaria between 1856 and 1908. Included as a control variable in their analysis was the per
capita production of potatoes in the prisoner’s region of birth. According to their estimates, men and women from
regions with greater potato production were taller. This was also true for regions with greater milk production, but was
not the case for the production of bread grains, which was negatively correlated with heights.




                                                           5
