relative to medicine or sanitation. Instead, our goal is to causally identify the importance of

nutrition by estimating the effect of one positive shock to nutrition on subsequent population

growth. Because this shock occurred more than two centuries before improvements in modern

sanitation and medicine, the results can be plausibly interpreted as reflecting the benefits of

improved nutrition only.

   We also estimate the effect of the introduction of potatoes on the share of population living in

cities. The estimates provide evidence of the importance of agricultural productivity in spurring

the transition from rural agriculture to urban manufacturing. A productivity shock in agriculture

could have two potentially offsetting effects on urbanization. On the one hand, it may delay

urbanization as workers become more attracted to the agricultural sector. On the other hand, the

increased agricultural productivity means more workers can be freed from agriculture, allowing

them to migrate to the cities and work in industry. Our estimates of the effect of the introduction

of potatoes on urbanization provide historic evidence of the net effect of a significant positive

agricultural productivity shock on the movement of labor from the countryside into cities.6

   Any study attempting to estimate the causal effects of improved nutrition faces two main

empirical difficulties, both of which arise because of the endogeneity of nutritional improvements.

The first is the problem of reverse causality. For example, Cullen (1968) argues that in Ireland,

population expansion led to the adoption of the potato, and not the other way around as many

others have argued.7 In this case, the correlation between improved nutrition and population may

reflect the reverse-causal effect of population on nutrition. The second problem arises from the

existence of potentially omitted variables. Population growth and improved nutrition may both

be outcomes of an unobserved factor, such as political stability.

   The principal contribution of our study is to provide a strategy that helps resolve these prob-

lems. Our estimation exploits the introduction of the potato to the Old World following the dis-

covery of the Americas. This event, together with geographic and climatic variation in a country’s

ability to cultivate and adopt the new food crop, provides a source of variation in nutrition that is

plausibly exogenous to other factors that affect population growth. Because potatoes are superior

to existing crops in terms of both calories and nutrition, we proxy for access to improved nutrition
   6 The existing empirical literature has found it very difficult to establish causality when looking at the relationship

between agriculture and development. The best macro-level studies attempt to infer the effect of agriculture on
economic development by examining panel data and employing lags and Granger causality tests (Tiffin and Irz, 2006).
   7 For others arguing reverse causality see Salaman (1949) and Connell (1962). Also, see the empirical evidence from

Mokyr (1981).



                                                            3
