with the amount of land that is suitable for cultivating potatoes. Our empirical strategy is similar

to a differences-in-differences (DD) estimation. We compare the levels and changes in Old World

population and urbanization before and after the introduction of potatoes between regions that

were suitable for cultivating potatoes and regions that were not suitable. Because our estimates

are identified from the interaction between time (from the introduction of potatoes) and country

characteristics (suitability for potato adoption), we are able to control for time-invariant country

characteristics (country fixed effects), as well as country-invariant differences in the time periods

being examined (time-period fixed effects).

   Despite the existence of country fixed effects in our estimating equation, country characteristics

may still bias our estimates if they affect population or urbanization differentially during the

period after the adoption of potatoes as a field crop relative to before. We address this possibility

by controlling for the interaction of potentially important country characteristics with an indicator

variable for the post-adoption period. The set of controls in our baseline specifications include

interactions with three alternative measures of agricultural suitability – the overall suitability of a

country for growing any agricultural plant or crop, suitability for growing Old World staple crops

(e.g., rice and wheat), and the suitability for growing New World staple crops (e.g., maize and

sweet potatoes) – as well as interactions of geographic measures potentially correlated with potato

suitability. Because potatoes were particularly suitable for cultivation on rugged terrain at high

elevations, we also control for these two geographic characteristics in our estimates.

   Our results show that Old World regions that were suitable for potato cultivation experienced

disproportionately faster population and urbanization growth after the introduction of potatoes.

The estimates are extremely robust to a variety of sensitivity checks, including the omission of

outliers and influential observations, the omission of Western Europe, the inclusion of the countries

north of Mezzo America, and the inclusion of a host of additional control variables.

   The magnitudes of our estimates are also interesting. One way to measure the estimated effects

is to ask how much of the average difference in population or urbanization levels (or their growth

rates) between the pre-potato adoption period (1000–1700) and the post-adoption period (1700–

1900) is explained by the introduction of the potato. Doing this calculation, our baseline estimates

suggest that the potato accounts for 12% of the increase in population, 22% of the increase in

population growth, 47% of the increase in urbanization, and 50% of the increase in urbanization

growth.


                                                  4
