“available” as a staple food to the Old World. This date is in the late 1600s. Because our data are

only observed at the century level, we take 1700 as the approximate treatment date.

   Before taking this date as given, we first let the data "speak" by estimating a flexible equation

that allows the effect of potatoes to vary for each century. This enables us to compare the timing of

the effect observed in the data with the historical evidence before we impose greater structure on

the data and estimate our main DD specification.


C. Other New World Staple Crops

After the discovery of the Americas, other New World crops, in addition to potatoes, were also

introduced to the Old World. These include maize, tomatoes, chilli and bell peppers, cacao, and

the sweet potato. Of these, the two crops that became high-caloric staples in the Old World are

maize and the sweet potato.

   Maize is unable to rival potatoes in terms of nutrients or calories. It produces significantly fewer

calories per acre of land. Further, humans are unable to subsist on a diet that is too concentrated

in maize. Significant consumption of maize is associated with Pellagra, which is a disease caused

from niacin deficiency. The effects of Pellagra include skin disorders, digestion disorders, mental

disorders, and eventually death. The disease was first observed in the 1730s in Italy and even

today continues to affect poor populations with diets that rely too heavily on corn. A second

adverse effect of a primarily corn diet is protein deficiency (Messer, 2000a). Given the negative

effects associated with diets too heavily dependent on corn, one would not expect corn to have the

same positive effects as potatoes.

   Sweet potatoes are also nutritious and produce similar amounts of calories per acre of land as

potatoes. But they differ from potatoes in two important ways. First, the archaeological evidence

suggests that sweet potatoes, transported by Polynesians, reached the Old World long before the

European discovery of the New World. For many countries in our sample, their impact would

have been felt as early as 1000 AD (Hather and Kirch, 1991). Second, a close substitute to the sweet

potato, the yam, already existed in the Old World (O’Brien, 2000). Yams are broadly similar to

sweet potatoes both in terms of nutritional content and the requirements for cultivation. Many

regions that were suitable for cultivating sweet potatoes had already cultivated yams when the

former were introduced. Therefore, the sweet potatoes would not be expected to result in the same

increase in agricultural productivity and caloric-availability as potatoes.


                                                  10
