the exact date of its first introduction, the existing evidence suggests that the potato was probably

brought to the Philippines in the late 16th century and later brought to Java in the 17th century

by the Dutch (Burkill, 1935). It’s introduction to China probably occurred several times during the

seventeenth century. It was cultivated as early as 1603 by Dutch settlers of the Penghu Islands, and

later in Taiwan after the Dutch occupied the island from 1624 to 1662. Given the Dutch initiation

of trade links between Taiwan and the coastal province of Fujian, it is likely that the potato was

also introduced to mainland China during this time. There is evidence from a document, dating

back to 1700, of potato cultivation in a mountainous area of northern Fujian. According to Lee

(1982, p. 738), by 1800 the populations in Southwest China had replaced the traditional lower yield

crops of barley, oats, and buckwheat with either potatoes or maize, another New World crop.14 By

the mid 19th century, potatoes had become an important field crop in Manchuria and the Korean

Peninsula.

   Historic evidence suggests that the potato first reached India not much later than Europe, taken

there either by the British or the Portuguese. The earliest known reference to the potato in India

is from an account by Edward Terry, who was chaplain to Sir Thomas Roe, British ambassador to

the court of the Mughal Emperor Jahanagir from 1615 to 1619, in Northern India. British colonial

governor Warren Hastings promoted potato cultivation during his term from 1772 to 1785. By the

late eighteenth century, potatoes were well established in the hills and plains of India (Pandey and

Kaushik, 2003).

   The introduction of potatoes to Africa is not well documented. The first written account sug-

gests that it arrived slightly later than other parts of the world, around the end of the 19th century.

In Ethiopia, the potato was introduced in 1858 by a German immigrant named Wilhelm Schimper.

Subsequent adoption by native farmers occurred gradually over a period of several decades.

   As the historic evidence illustrates, the actual date when the potato was adopted as a field crop

varied across the Old World within a 150-year window. This was due in large part to idiosyncratic

factors, such as the views of individuals and the ability and desire of governments to promote the

adoption of the crop. For our estimates, we wish to avoid having our estimates affected by the

timing of adoption, which was endogenous and potentially determined by a host of factors that

may bias our estimates. Instead we use the initial date of the introduction of potatoes as a field

crop to continental Europe, the earliest adopter of potatoes, as the date of when potatoes become
 14 In our analysis, we are careful to control for the effects of maize and other New World food crops.




                                                           9
