   We define land to be suitable for cultivation if it is classified in the database as being either

“very suitable”, “suitable”, or “moderately suitable”. Put differently, our measure defines land to

be suitable if it yields at least 40% of the maximum possible yield.16 Our baseline measure of a

country’s suitability for growing potatoes is the fraction of each country’s land area that is defined

as suitable based on our definition. Note that because the FAO does not report the distribution

of suitability within each category, we are unable to calculate a measure of average suitability for

each country. We can only calculate the fraction of land that falls into different categories.

   Figure 2 illustrates the FAO’s suitability measures at the grid-cell level for the Old World

countries of our sample. The map shows grid-cells classified according to the five categories above.

Also shown are the extreme grid cells for which 100% of the maximum potato yield is obtainable

and for which 0% is obtainable. A darker shade corresponds to greater suitability.

   A number of facts are immediately apparent from the map. The first is that much of the world

is completely unsuitable for growing potatoes. The result of this is that 53 of the 130 Old World

countries in our sample have a measure of land suitable for cultivating potatoes equal to zero. In

our empirical analysis we pay particular attention to this fact, and show that our results are not

being driven by zero suitability countries. We obtain similar results if we omit zero suitability

countries from the sample.

   The second fact that is apparent from Figure 2 is that much of the land area suitable for potato

cultivation is concentrated in Europe. This fact is a potential cause of concern since we know

that Western Europe diverged from the rest of the world after 1700. The underlying causes of

this divergence may bias our estimated impact of the introduction of potatoes on population and

urbanization. We address this concern explicitly in a number of ways. We show that our estimates

do not change if we control for underlying determinants of Western Europe’s divergent growth

after the 18th century. Furthermore, we also show that our results are robust to the exclusion of

Western European countries from our sample.

   A final concern with our potato suitability measure is whether the measure calculated in the

1990s by the FAO is an accurate indicator of suitability two hundred years ago. The construction

of the suitability measures gives us confidence that it is. The measures are based primarily on

geographic characteristics that do not change over the period of our study, namely, temperature,
  16 The results are very similar when we use 20% or 60% of the maximum yield as alternative cut-offs. They are not

reported for sake of brevity.




                                                        14
