crop and grid-cell (the growing period is, by definition, the period of time for which the minimum

temperature and moisture requirements of the crop are satisfied).

   At this stage, an initial classification of each grid-cell and crop pair was performed. If the

minimum requirements for cultivation were not satisfied, then the grid-cell was determined to be

unsuitable for cultivation of the crop.15 If the minimum requirements are met, then a second stage

is performed where the actual potential yields are determined. For each crop, the “constraint-free

crop yields” were determined, and the yield in each grid-cell was measured as a percentage of

this benchmark. Next, the FAO identified additional constraints existing in each grid-cell for each

crop. The procedure quantified the “agro-climatic” constraints (i.e., variability in water supply and

existence of pests and weeds) as well as the “agro-edaphic” suitability (i.e., soil erosion) of each

grid-cell.

   The end product of the entire procedure is, for each crop, a GIS raster file with global coverage

that contains information on the suitability of each grid-cell for the cultivation of the crop in

question. The FAO also constructed a country level version of the database, which reports for

each country and crop, the proportion of the country’s land that is classified under five mutually

exclusive categories describing how suitable the environment is for growing the crop. The cate-

gories are based on the calculated percentage of the maximum yield that can be attained in each

grid-cell. The five categories, and their corresponding yields, are: (i) very suitable land (80–100%),

(ii) suitable land (60–80%), (iii) moderately suitable land (40–60%), (iv) marginally suitable land

(20–40%), and (v) not suitable land (0–20%). To approximate historical conditions as closely as

possible, we use the variables constructed under the assumption that cultivation occurs under

rain-fed conditions and under medium input intensity.




  15 This is done by comparing each crop’s requirements with the grid-cell’s calculated (i) length of the growing period

(LGP), (ii) temperature profile, (iii) and the accumulated temperature.


                                                           12
