of food from a given plot of land.


B. Diffusion from the New World to the Old World

Archeological evidence suggests that the potato was first cultivated in the Andes between 7,000

and 10,000 years ago (Messer, 2000b). After the discovery of the Americas by Christopher Colum-

bus in 1492, the potato was soon introduced to Europe by the Spanish in the late sixteenth century.

It was first cultivated in the Spanish Canary Islands around 1570. The first record of potatoes being

cultivated as a staple crop was in England in the 1690s, where the potato was used as a supplement

to bread (Langer, 1963, McNeill, 1999).12

   By historical standards, the diffusion of the potato throughout Europe was rapid if not instan-

taneous. By most accounts, it took less than the time necessary for the 13th and 14th Century

diffusion of gunpowder through Europe.13 The rapid adoption is all the more surprising since

at first the potato was generally viewed either as a strange exotic gift and botanical curiosity,

or as a poisonous and dirty plant that caused leprosy (Langer, 1975). Adoption was probably

encouraged by failures of existing crops during the “Little Ice Age” and the wars and famines of

the period. In many countries, adoption was also encouraged by policy. For example, in 1744,

Prussia’s Frederick the Great ordered his subjects to grow potatoes as insurance against cereal

crop failure and distributed free seed potatoes with instruction on how to plant them. The French

scientist Antoine Parmentier, influenced by his observation of the benefit of potatoes in Prussia

during the Seven Years War (1756–1763), devoted his research to investigating and extolling the

virtues of the potato. Once persuaded to plant potatoes, European farmers quickly recognized

their advantages over other crops, and soon potatoes became the staple field crop they are today.

By the late 18th century, potatoes, with the encouragement of government policy, had become

an important field crop in countries such as France, Austria, and Russia. (Langer, 1963, McNeill,

1999).

   The potato was spread to other parts of the Old World by European mariners who carried

potato plants to ports across Asia and Africa. Although we do not have historical evidence on
  12 The first documented introduction of potatoes to continental Europe was in 1601 when Carolus Clusius reported in

his Rariorum Plantarum Historia that he had seen potatoes planted in Northern Italy (McNeill, 1999, p. 73).
  13 There is some debate on whether gunpowder was first introduced to Europeans during the wars with the Islamic

empires or during the Mongol invasion. In either case, it first was introduced to Europeans during the early to mid
13th century and became widely used by the end of the 14th and beginning of the 15th centuries in European warfare
(Parker, 2000).



                                                         8
