significant way.

   As a check of the sensibility of our potato suitability measure, we examine whether our measure

is correlated with historic potato production. The earliest period for which data are available for a

cross-section of countries is 1900. These data are from Mitchell (1998, 2003). We construct the natu-

ral logarithm of tons of potato production per capita and examine its relationship with our potato

suitability measure. The correlation between the two variables, measured by the standardized beta

coefficient, is 0.42. This is statistically significant at the 1% level. The correlation is similar if we also

include New World countries in the sample, or if we control for a measure of overall agriculture

suitability (which we describe in detail below). The positive correlation between potato suitability

and historic potato production provides added confidence in the validity of our measure.

   In our analysis, we also control for the suitability of Old World staple crops and for New World

staple crops. These measures are also constructed using data from the FAO’s GAEZ database. We

define Old World staple crops to be wetland rice, dryland rice, and wheat; and New World crops

to be grain maize, silage maize, sweet potatoes, and, of course, the potato. For both aggregate

measures, we take the maximum of the shares of land that are suitable for growing each of the

component crops.18 In other words, the measures are the fraction of land that can grow the most

suitable Old World and New World staples, respectively.19

   The FAO database also provides a composite measure of the suitability of an area for growing

any agricultural crop for human consumption (i.e., not including crops for fodder). The measure,

which captures the suitability of 154 crops, is much broader than our constructed measures of the

suitability for cultivating Old World staple crops or New World staples. The measure of overall

agricultural suitability also includes: other cereals, such as sorghum, millet, rye, and barley; other

roots, such as cassava; pulses, like beans, chickpeas, and cowpeas; oil crops, such as the soybean,

groundnuts, sunflower, palm oil; fiber crops, such as cotton; sugar crops, like sugarcane and sugar

beets; and fruit crops, such as bananas and plantains. We include this measure as an additional

control to capture a country’s overall agricultural productivity.20

   In our analysis we also consider city-level measures of suitability. We construct the city-level
   18 As with our potato suitability measure, here (and for all other measures) we define land to be suitable for cultivation

if it is classified as either “very suitable”, “suitable”, or “moderately suitable”.
   19 An alternative strategy is to measure the union of the land that was suitable for all the crops in each category. In

other words, this measure is the fraction of land that can grow any Old World and New World crop. These alternative
controls yields very similar estimates. Unsurprisingly, the two measures are highly correlated.
   20 The raw correlations between a country’s potato suitability and its suitability for growing Old World staple crops,

New World staple crops, and all crops are reported in Appendix Table A1.


                                                             16
