   In our empirical analysis, we are careful to make sure that our results are robust to controlling

for any potential effects of other New World staple crops.


3. Data

A. Crop Suitability

Our analysis uses a measure of a region’s suitability for growing potatoes, as well as measures of

the suitability of Old and other New World staple crops. To construct these variables, we rely on

data from the FAO’s Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) 2000 database. The data measure the

suitability for cultivating individuals crops at a very disaggregated geographic level.

   The construction of the FAO’s GAEZ database occurred in two stages. The FAO first collected

information on the characteristics of 154 different crops. These data were used to determine what

environmental conditions are required for the cultivation of each crop. The FAO then compiled

data on the physical environment of 2.2 million grid-cells, spanning the entire globe. Each grid-cell

is 0.5 degrees by 0.5 degrees, which is approximately 56 kilometers by 56 kilometers (measured at

the equator). The primary characteristics used are climatic and are taken from a global climatic

database that has been compiled by the Climate Research Unit (CRU) at the University of East

Anglia. In total, nine variables from the global climatic database are used by the FAO: precipitation,

frequency of wet days, mean temperature, diurnal (i.e. daily) temperature range, vapor pressure,

cloud cover, sunshine, ground-frost frequency, and wind speed. The second set of characteristics

are land characteristics and are taken from the FAO’s Digit Soil Map of the World (DSMW), except

for the information on the slope of soils, which are from the GTOPO30 Database developed at the

U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) EROS Data Center.

   Combining the information on the constraints for the cultivation of each crop with the data on

the physical environment of each grid-cell, the FAO calculated an estimate of the potential yield

of each crop in each grid cell, given an assumed level of crop management and input use. This

process involved a number of detailed steps, which we briefly summarize here.

   First, for each grid-cell and crop, the FAO identified the days of the year when the moisture

and thermal (i.e., temperature) requirements of the crop are met. With this information, the FAO

determined the exact starting and ending dates of the length of growing period (LGP) for each




                                                 11
