humidity, length of days, sunlight, and rainfall. In constructing our measure, we also deliberately

use the FAO measures that assume rain fed conditions, avoiding measurement error caused by

changes over time in irrigation technology and intensities of irrigation use.

   It is also important to recognize that factors that can respond quickly to human intervention,

such as soil pH or slope, only enter the calculation in an indirect manner, and only have small

effects on the underlying measures. Climatic characteristics, which are unaffected in any signifi-

cant way by human actions, are the sole determinants of whether potatoes can be cultivated on a

grid-cell. Conditional on their ability to be cultivated, the estimated productivity of a grid-cell is

affected by factors that can be influenced by human actions, such as land characteristics like the

pH and/or slope of the soil. As a robustness check, we also constructed an alternative measure of

potato suitability that classifies any land that can cultivate potatoes, no matter how productively or

unproductively, as being fully suitable for potato cultivation. This measure, although potentially

less precise, has the benefit of being determined solely by climatic factors, and not by factors

potentially influenced by human action.17 We find that our results are robust to the use of this

alternative measure of potato suitability. For brevity the results are not reported in the paper, but

are available upon request.

   A second reason why our FAO-based variable may be an imperfect measure of suitability in

the past is because of the evolution of new potato varieties overtime. Certainly, since the Potato

Blight (Phytophthora infestans) of 1845 and 1846, there has been a concerted effort to develop new

varieties. However, the effort was focused on developing new varieties with increased resistance to

Phytophthora infestans, not on developing varieties that could be grown in new climates (Salaman,

1949, pp. 159–166). In the 20th century, the focus was on developing varieties that were visually

appealing to consumers. To this end, varieties were developed that were oval or kidney-shaped,

had a uniform skin color, and were without sprouts in their pits. The other major objective

has been the development of varieties that are resistant to ‘dry rot’, which can develop during

transit (Salaman, 1949, pp. 169–171). In short, the development of new potato varieties has not

focused on creating varieties that can be grown in new locations. Therefore, it is very unlikely that

the development of new varieties results in measurement error that biases our estimates in any
  17 Recall that climatic factors only are used by the FAO to initially determine if a location is suitable or not. If an area

is suitable, then additional factors, including soil characteristics, are used to determine just how suitable the area is. The
alternative measure that we construct captures the first stage of the procedure only, and therefore is unaffected by the
factors most likely influenced by human actions.




                                                             15
