   Our estimation strategy has all of the potential advantages and hazards of standard DD esti-

mators. Country fixed effects control for all time invariant factors that differ between countries.

Time period fixed effects control for any secular patterns of population growth or urbanization

that affect all regions similarly. Our identification relies on the assumption that conditional on the

controls, there are no other events, also occurring around 1700, that may have affected population

or urbanization. This assumption should not be taken for granted since there were many changes

during the 18th and 19th centuries which could have affected population or urbanization. In the

section on robustness, we will consider and control for a large number of alternative country

characteristics and historic events that may potentially confound our estimates. We discuss this

in more detail in the Section 5C.

   One important caveat when interpreting our results is that the strategy literally estimates

the effect of suitability conditional on the introduction of potatoes, rather than the effect of the

introduction of potatoes. As with any “experiment”, our estimates cannot directly estimate the

effect of potatoes relative to a counterfactual state of the world where potatoes do not exist. To

use our results to shed light on the overall effect of the introduction of potatoes, there must not be

spillovers between countries. In Section 5B we test for the presence of spillover effects, and show

that they are estimated to be very close to zero.


5. Estimation Results

A. Flexible Estimation

We begin with estimates for our flexible estimating equation (1). The estimates are reported in

Appendix Table A3 and visually in Figures 3 and 4. The figures show for each of our four outcome

variables – population, population growth, urbanization, and change in the urbanization rate –

the relationship in each time period, between the outcome of interest and, either the suitability

for potato cultivation, or the suitability for overall agriculture. These coefficients are the β j ’s and

δj ’s in equation (1). The y-axes of the figures are identical in scale so that the magnitudes of the

coefficients can be easily compared. Because equation (1) includes time-period and country fixed
                                                    j                 j
effects, the estimated coefficients for Potatoi × It and AllCropsi × It must be measured relative to a

baseline time period, which we take to be the year 1000. Therefore, the figures show the estimated

relationship between suitability in the dependent variable relative to the relationship in 1000 AD.



                                                    21
