   Figures 3 and 4 show that potato suitability had little effect between 1400 and 1700. But, begin-

ning in 1700, countries more suitable for potato cultivation began to experience faster population

growth and faster increases in urbanization. In contrast, the figures show that the correlation

between agricultural suitability and the outcomes of interest did not change systematically over

time. These patterns are similar for all four outcomes.

   The figures also show that the effect on urbanization is delayed by roughly one century relative

to the effect on population. This should be interpreted only as a rough approximation of the

length of the delay because our data are at the century level. Hence, any effects on urbanization

that occurred after the middle of the 18th century, for example, will show up in our results as

a one century delay. In any case, the difference in timing between the effect on population and

urbanization is consistent with potatoes having an immediate effect on population growth, but a

delayed effect on the movement into cities.


B. Preliminary Differences-in-Differences Population Estimates

Given the historic and empirical evidence for 1700 being the key date of potato adoption, we now

turn to our main estimating equation (2), which explicitly assumes that potatoes were adopted after

this date. We begin by reporting preliminary estimates focusing on population as the outcome

variable (i.e., ln population and population growth). The estimates are reported in columns (1)

and (2) of Table 2. Recall that in addition to controlling for All Cropsi , equation (2) also controls for

our measure of suitability for growing Old World staple crops, New World staple crops, and for

average terrain ruggedness and elevation, each interacted with the post-1700 indicator variable.

   Table 2 also reports a number of preliminary sensibility checks. We first address the quality of

our historic country-level population data. We do this by reporting alternative estimates based on

city-level population data. Although it is difficult at best to measure the ability of a city to adopt

potatoes, the use of city-level data has the advantage that historic city populations are arguably

more accurately known than historic country-level populations.26 Therefore, the alternative city-

level estimates provide a check of the sensibility of our country-level results.
  26 There is little information on the actual distances that potatoes traveled when moving from the countryside into

cities, except statements that it generally was not very far. Salaman (1949) reports that potatoes consumed in cities were
obtained from local gardens and nearby rural villages. In our analysis, have used different distances from each city
when constructing our city-level suitability measures. The results are robust if, rather than using 100 kilometers, we use
either a 200 or 500 kilometer radius.




                                                           24
