   We also examine the average annual change in the urbanization rate between time periods. This

is calculated as follows:

                                                     City population shareit − City population shareit−n
      Change in city population shareit =
                                                                              n

where as before n is 100, except when t = 1400; then n = 400.

   Urbanization is an interesting outcome to examine, in and of itself, because it reveals whether

the net effect of the positive shock to agriculture caused by the introduction of potatoes facilitated

the movement of people to cities. However, urbanization can also be taken as a proxy for historic

industrialization and income per capita.22 A number of studies have shown that, historically (and

today), urbanization rates serve as a good proxy for per capita GDP (DeLong and Shleifer, 1993,

Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2002, 2005). In particular, Acemoglu et al. (2002) document the

strength of the correlation between urbanization and per capita income.23

   Accuracy is an obvious concern for historic data that spans such a long time horizon and broad

cross section. McEvedy and Jones (1978), which is the standard source for historic population data

at the country level, provide detailed discussions of the sources used to construct their population

estimates. It is important to keep in mind that measurement error in our outcome variables will

not bias our regression estimates as long as it is random. Systematic variation in the error either by

time period or by country are addressed by country and year fixed effects. As a robustness check,

we also estimate the effect of potatoes on city population growth. Since the historic populations

for larger urban centers are generally thought to be more confidently known than for smaller

rural towns, this provides an alternative estimate of population growth based on data that are

potentially more accurate (Bairoch, 1988, pp. 524–525).24 Similar findings using the data at the

country and city levels will give us confidence in the country-level data.

   Our country-level sample consists of 132 Old World countries. With the exception of seven

countries, each country is observed in each time period. Our city-level sample consists of 1,143 Old

World cities (i.e., locations with over 20,000 people). The number of cities observed increases each
  22 Because per capita income data are unavailable prior to 1500, and even in 1500 they are only available for 22 Old

World countries, we are unable to examine the effect of the introduction of potatoes on income directly.
  23 Using the most extensive historic income data available, which are from Maddison (2003), we have also examined

the relationship between urbanization and income back to 1500. In a panel setting with either country fixed effects
and/or year fixed effects, we find that the correlation between urbanization and income is extremely strong and highly
significant.
  24 The clear draw back of the city-level analysis relative to the country-level is that, although a country’s suitability for

potatoes is clearly defined, the suitability of a ‘city’ is far from clear. For this reason, we use the country as our standard
unit of analysis, and rely use the city-level estimates only as a robustness check.


                                                              18
