was able to effectively produce more calories, then this may have also benefitted its trading

partners.28 Negative population spillovers could have occurred through migration. An increase

in a neighboring country’s suitability may have negatively affected a country’s population if there

was movement out of the country and to the neighboring country that adopted the potato. Because

our estimates are identified from comparisons between potato-suitable and non-suitable regions,

any positive spillovers will attenuate our estimated impact of potatoes, while negative spillovers,

will cause our estimates to overstate the true effect of potatoes.

   In columns (5) and (6), we test for the existence of spillovers. This is done by constructing, for

each country, a measure of the average suitability of all adjacent countries i.e., Neighbors’ Potatoi ×

ItPost . We then include this measure in our baseline estimating equation (2). The estimation results

fail to provide any evidence for the presence of spillover effects. The estimated coefficients for

Neighbors’ Potatoi × ItPost are very small in magnitude and statistically insignificant. Given the lack

of evidence for spillovers, we can be more confident that our DD coefficients provide consistent

estimates of the effect of potatoes on historic population.29

   The final check that we perform is motivated by the notion that potatoes may have had the

greatest benefit in regions that were less suitable for pre-existing staple crops. We test for this by

allowing the impact of potatoes to differ depending on whether a country was suitable for the

production of Old World staple crops. This is done by including Potatoi × ItPost × Old World cropsi

in our baseline estimating equation. Columns (7) and (8) show that the estimated interaction terms

are negative, providing some evidence that potatoes had smaller benefits in regions that were more

suitable for existing staple crops. However, the coefficients should be interpreted cautiously since

they are not statistically significant.
  28 The fact that potatoes are not highly traded does not rule out the possibility of positive spillovers from trade. A

region may adopt potatoes and only consume the potatoes domestically. Because potatoes are much more efficient to
produce, this may free up resources for the production of other, more freely tradable crops.
   29 We have also undertaken alternative tests to ensure that migration, in particular, is not affecting our estimates.

We have estimated equations where the dependent variable is the “natural change” in the population of each country,
which we calculate as the change in the total population that was not the result of either in- or out-migration. This was
done by taking the McEvedy and Jones (1978) population data and subtracting the net immigration for the century. The
migration data are from Mitchell (1998, 2003). The estimated impact of potatoes on population, using this alternative
measure of non-migration induced population increases, are nearly identical to the baseline estimates reported here. An
alternative strategy is to estimate our baseline equations controlling for net migration in the 100 years prior to period t.
Our estimates remain virtually unchanged when we do this.




                                                            26
