C. Baseline Differences-in-Differences Estimates

Having addressed the two largest issues facing our estimates – the quality of the historic country

level population data, and the existence of spillover effects – we now turn to our baseline DD

estimates, and report country-level estimates for all four of our outcomes of interest: population,

population growth, city population share, and change in the city population share. The estimates

are reported in columns (1) and (7) of Table 3. As shown, we find a positive and statistically

significant effect of the introduction of the potato on both urbanization and the change in the

urbanization rate. Consistent with our flexible estimates, the DD estimates also show that potatoes

had a positive effect on the rise of cities.

   The remaining columns of the table show the robustness of our baseline estimates to alternative

specifications. In columns (2) and (8), we interact each of our baseline control variables with a full

set of time period fixed effects. As the estimates show, our results are fully robust to allowing our

set of covariates to have a completely flexible effect on population and urbanization over time.

   In columns (3)–(6) and (9)–(12) of Table 3, we report estimates, including additional control

variables that may capture alternative determinants of differential growth in certain parts of the

world after 1700. The fact that a large fraction of Europe is suitable for potatoes raises the concern

that our estimates capture other factors that may have affected the divergence of Europe during

this time period. One explanation for this divergence is that many European countries benefited

from a history of Roman rule (Jones, 1981, Landes, 1998). Acemoglu et al. (2005) construct a

measure meant to capture this determinant of Europe’s divergent growth: an indicator variable

that equals one if a country was part of the Roman Empire.30 We control for the interaction of this

variable with an indicator variable for the post-1700 period. Columns (3) and (9) show that our

baseline estimates are robust to the inclusion of this control.

   Another potentially confounding factor is the occurrence of the Black Death. If the plague,

which killed up to 30% of Europe’s population, was more severe in regions that were suitable for

potatoes, then our estimates may overstate the true effect of potatoes. The coefficients in columns

(4) and (10) show that our estimates are robust to controlling for the average annual growth rate of

population between 1000 and 1400.31

  30 This variable is taken from Acemoglu et al. (2005), who construct their measure using information from Langer

(1972).
  31 In this specification, our sample is reduced by 12 observations since the pre-trend control variable cannot be

constructed for two countries, New Zealand and Finland, because of missing population data for the year 1000.


                                                        27
