   Our second estimating equation examines the impact of the introduction of potatoes in a more

structured manner, using a strategy that is similar to differences-in-differences estimation. This

strategy compares the outcome of interest before and after the introduction of potatoes across

countries with varying suitability for potato cultivation. Given the endogeneity of the date of

adoption, we use the approximate date of the introduction to Europe, 1700, rather than the actual

date of adoption. We also continue to use a country’s suitability for cultivating potatoes rather

than the extent of actual cultivation.

   We estimate the following baseline equation.


             Yit = β Potatoi × ItPost + δ All Cropsi × ItPost + η Old World Staplesi × ItPost
                                                                                        1900
                                                                   µ + ∑ γc Iic +        ∑ ρt It + ε it
                                                                                                  j
                        +φ New World Staplesi × ItPost + Xi0 IPost
                                                              t                                                    (2)
                                                                            c          j=1400

                                                                                                  j
As before, Yit denotes one of our four outcomes of interest, and ∑c Iic and ∑ j It denote country

and time period fixed effects. Our measure of potato suitability, Potatoi , is now interacted with an

indicator variable that equals one after 1700, ItPost . All Cropsi , Old World Staplesi , New World Staplesi

indicate our suitability measures for overall agriculture, Old World staples, and New World sta-

ples. We control for these measures, each interacted with a post-1700 indicator variable.

   Our coefficient of interest is β, which is the estimated impact of potato suitability on the differ-

ence in the outcome variable before and after 1700. For concreteness, consider population growth

as the dependent variable. The estimated coefficient, β̂, measures the additional population growth

rate experienced by countries that are suitable for potatoes relative to those that are not, after

potatoes were introduced in 1700 (relative to before). If the coefficient is positive, then this indicates

that countries with a geographic environment more suitable for growing potatoes witnessed a

greater increase in population growth after 1700 relative to before 1700.

   In our analysis, we are also careful to control for various geographic characteristics, which may

be correlated with potato suitability and may have affected population differentially after 1700

relative to the period prior to this date. Because one of the benefits of potatoes is that they can be

grown on rugged terrain at high levels of elevation, in our estimates we are particularly careful to

control for a country’s average elevation and ruggedness.25 The vector of interaction controls is

denoted by Xi0 IPost
                t    in equation (2).
  25 Details of these measures are reported in Tables A1 and A2 of the Appendix.        Table A1 reports the pair-wise
correlations between suitability for potatoes and the two geographic controls, and Table A2 reports summary statistics.



                                                          20
