   Next, we consider the fact that the spread of potatoes occurred during a period of increased

globalization and overseas trade. Columns (5) and (11) show that our estimates are robust to

controlling for an interaction between access to trade, which we proxy with a country’s average

distance from an ice-free coast, interacted with the post-1700 indicator variable.32

   Finally, we consider the large global trade in slaves from Africa. The slave trades reached their

height in the 18th century, which is approximately the same time that potatoes were being adopted

globally. If the countries that were least able to adopt potatoes are also African countries that

were depopulated because of the slave trade, then this may explain part of the effect of potatoes

on increased population growth and urbanization after 1700. To capture the potential effects of

Africa’s slave trades, we include a country and time-period specific measure of the number of

slaves taken during the 100 years prior to period t. The results are reported in columns (6) and

(12). As shown, including this control has little effect on our estimated potato coefficients.

   We next turn to the possibility that our baseline estimates are being driven by a few influential

observations. Figure 5 shows the partial correlation plots between potato suitability and the out-

comes of interest from the baseline estimates reported in columns (1) and (7) of Table 3. The eastern

portion of the plots show that it is primarily the Eastern European countries such as Belarus (BLR),

Latvia (LVA), Lithuania (LTU), and Poland (POL) that have the greatest leverage, or influence, on

our estimates. The fact that the main beneficiaries from the introduction of potatoes are primarily

Eastern European countries helps alleviate the concern that our estimates also capture benefits to

population and urbanization from the industrial revolution or the rise in Atlantic trade. Eastern

Europe did not participate in the Atlantic trade during this period. Nor did they experience

the industrial revolution until the final decades of the 19th century (Stearns, 2007, pp. 90–94).

Figure 5 also shows that Australia (AUS), New Zealand (NZL), Philippines (PHL), and Thailand

(THA) are outliers, with either large positive or negative residuals. This is likely because these

countries experienced large population changes, due to colonization, that were unrelated to potato

cultivation.

   To check that our results are not drive by these outliers, we re-estimate our baseline specification

using a number of restricted samples that omit potential outlying observations. These are reported
  32 The measure of a country’s average distance from an ice-free coast is taken from Nunn and Puga (2007). The results

are also robust if we focus specifically on the lucrative Atlantic, which has been emphasized by Acemoglu et al. (2005).
Our results are robust to controlling for an indicator variable that equals one if the country was an ‘Atlantic trader’, as
defined by Acemoglu et al. (2005), interacted with a post-1700 indicator variable.




                                                            29
