in Table 4. Column (1) reports our baseline estimates with the full sample of observations for

comparison. Column (2) omits the influential Eastern European countries, and column (3) omits

the observations with the largest residuals. These auxiliary estimates show that our baseline results

are not sensitive to these potentially influential observations.

   We now address a number of potential concerns related to our potato suitability measure.

One concern is the large number of zero-suitability countries in our sample. Column (4) reports

estimates with all zero-suitability countries omitted from the sample. Although, this reduces the

sample size significantly, our results remain robust.

   An additional concern with our suitability measure is that many suitable countries are Western

European countries, which experienced the industrial revolution at approximately the same time

potatoes were adopted. In Table 3 we attempted to control for potential determinants of the rise of

Western Europe. Here, we pursue an alternative strategy and simply omit all Western European

countries from our sample.33 Omitting these countries does not affect our estimates.

   Because our identification strategy only applies to regions in which potatoes were not indige-

nous, our baseline sample contains only Old World countries. It is disputed whether potatoes were

cultivated by the indigenous populations north of Mezzo America before their “re-introduction”

by European settlers. Historians have found no evidence that they did, although there are no

widely accepted theories of why the crop did not diffuse into these regions. Therefore, out of inter-

est, we expand our sample to include the countries north of Mezzo America, namely Canada and

the United States.34 The estimates are shown in column (6). They are very similar to the baseline

estimates both in magnitude and statistical significance. These estimates should be interpreted

cautiously, since potatoes may have already existed in America and Canada. Further, the native

populations of the Americas suffered large negative population shocks due to diseases introduced

by Europeans


D. Magnitudes of the Estimates

It is well known that after 1700 the world experienced an unprecedented increase in the growth of

population and urbanization. This well established fact can be seen in Figure 1, which shows the

evolution of World population and urbanization between 1000 and 1900. The figure shows that
  33 The Western European countries include:    Belgium, Denmark, Germany, France, Finland, Great Britain, Ireland,
Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland.
   34 Because FAO data are unavailable for Greenland, it is not included in the larger sample.




                                                        32
