   Although seemingly counter-intuitive, there is a straight-forward explanation for the opposite

differential effects from trade openness. First, consider population. The finding that the effects

of local agricultural productivity shocks are reduced when an area is more integrated is a well

established prediction of trade models. As a country becomes more integrated it becomes less

responsive to domestic shocks and more responsive to foreign shocks. Donaldson (2008) provides

a trade model applied to colonial India that highlights this effect of integration. He also provides

evidence that increased integration made domestic prices less responsive to local weather shocks.

Next, consider urbanization. If cities located in countries that were more engaged in overseas trade

were more dynamic and had greater economic opportunities for workers, then the surplus labor

generated from potato cultivation would have moved more extensively, and more quickly, into

cities located in countries more open to trade. It is important to note, however, that the estimates

should be interpreted cautiously, and as suggestive evidence only, since three of the coefficients

are insignificant.

   We also explore the possibility that labor was pulled into cities by growing labor demand (e.g.,

from industrialization) by examining whether a high initial demand for urban labor increased the

benefits of potatoes. It is possible that regions with more developed cities and greater opportuni-

ties, exerted a greater pull on labor in the country side, resulting in faster urbanization growth after

the adoption of potatoes. We test for this by taking the urbanization rate in 1700 as an admittedly

imperfect proxy for pre-existing urban labor demand. We then test whether the benefits from

potatoes were greater for countries with a higher urbanization rate in 1700. The estimates are

reported in Panel B of Table 6.36 Across the four outcomes of interest, we do not observe any

consistent pattern. Three of the four coefficients are negative, and none are statistically significant.

The lack of a robust positive coefficient for the triple interaction suggests that there is no evidence

that potatoes had a larger effect in countries that were more urban at the time of adoption.

   Finally, we explore whether the effects of potato adoption differed depending on the ability of

the elites to capture the returns of labor. If the increase in agricultural productivity arising from

the introduction of potatoes accrued primarily to a small group of elites, rather than to labor more

generally, then this may cause potatoes to have a smaller positive impact on aggregate population

growth and urbanization. We proxy for the ability of elites to capture the benefits of potatoes
 36 It is unclear whether one would also expect a heterogenous effect for population growth. However, for completeness

we also report estimates with population and population growth as the dependent variable.




                                                         35
