relative to the pre-1700 period, after 1700 there is an increase in both the level and the growth rate

of population and urbanization. These facts are summarized for the Old World in the first three

rows of Table 5. The first row reports averages for the pre-1700 period (1000–1700), the second

row reports averages for the post-1700 period (1700–1900), and the third row reports the difference

between the two periods. The table confirms that after 1700, Old World countries witnessed a

significant increase in average population, population growth, urbanization, and the rate of change

of urbanization.

   As a way to illustrate the magnitude of our estimated effects of potatoes, we calculate how

much of the observed differences between the pre- and post-adoption periods can be attributed

to the introduction of the potato. On average, approximately 7.78% of a country’s land is suitable

for potato cultivation according to the definition used in this study. This is the fraction of land

that could potentially be used to grow potatoes after 1700. Prior to 1700, since potatoes were

not yet introduced, no Old World country was able to grow potatoes and therefore this number

was 0%. The introduction of potatoes, therefore, increased the average amount of land that could

potentially be used for potato cultivation from 0 to 7.78%.

   Our DD estimates provide a measure of the impact of being able to cultivate potatoes on

population and urbanization after 1700. We use our baseline estimates of the effect of potatoes

on each outcome, reported in columns (1) and (7) of Table 3. These are reproduced in the fourth

row of Table 5. Because the coefficients report the estimated impact on the relevant outcome from

a one unit (i.e., 100%) increase in a country’s share of land suitable for potatoes, the average gain

to an Old World country from the introduction of potatoes is given by the coefficient multiplied by

the average increase in suitability, which is 7.78% or 0.0778. These effects are reported in the sixth

row of Table 5.

   The final row of the table reports how much of the difference between the pre- and post-1700

periods can be attributed to the introduction of the potato. This is calculated as the difference

between the two periods that is explained by potatoes (reported in row 6) divided by the observed

difference between the two periods (reported in row 3). Doing this calculation for each of our four

outcome measures, we find that the availability of potatoes can explain: 12% of the increase in

population, 22% of the increase in population growth rate, 47% of the increase in urbanization,

and 50% of the increase in urbanization growth.

   While these effects are large, they are not as large as they may seem at first glance. Take for


                                                 33
