   We construct a measure of the average suitability of each country’s neighbors by first identify-

ing, for each country, all countries that share a border. We then construct an average measure of

suitability, weighted by land area. For islands, their neighbor is effectively the ocean, where one

cannot cultivate potatoes. We therefore assign zero suitability for islands. All results using the

neighbors’ potato suitability measure are completely robust to simply omitting islands from the

analysis.


Population and urbanization

Country level population data are from McEvedy and Jones (1978). Data on the populations of

cities with more than 20,000 inhabitants are from Chandler (1987), Bairoch (1988), and Modelski

(2003).


Geographic characteristics

A country’s average elevation, average ruggedness, and average distance from an ice-free coast

are taken from Nunn and Puga (2007). A country’s average elevation is measured in meters.

Ruggedness is the average uphill slope of a country’s land area. A country’s average distance from

an ice-free coast is measured in kilometers. See Nunn and Puga (2007) for details of measurement

and the underlying data sources.


Other control variables

The number of slaves taken from a country during the Indian Ocean, Red Sea, trans-Saharan,

and trans-Atlantic slave trades each century from 1400 to 1900 is taken from Nunn (2008). Our

control variable for slave exports is the natural log of the number of slaves exported (measured in

millions of people). When we take the natural log, countries with zero slaves exported are treated

as exporting one slave.

   Our control for a history of Roman rule is an indicator variable that equals one if a country was

a part of the Roman Empire. This measure is taken from Acemoglu et al. (2005).

   We construct an indicator variable that equals one if there is evidence of either legal serfdom

or domestic slavery in a country in 1700. For information on the prevalence of domestic slavery

we rely on data from George Peter Murdock’s (1967) Ethnographic Atlas. Using the location data

provided for the 1,267 ethnic groups in the Atlas, we match each ethnic group to a modern country.

                                                41
