


The coe were always enemies to the imperious Vizier. They are all my 
friends. 


ARTICLES to be executed by the Kine, enclosed in a letter from 
the Presirent and Councrt at Beneat to Mason Hecror 
Munro, Commander-in-Chief of the Army, sent the 6th 
of December 1764. 


In consideration of the assistance and fidelity of the English Company, 
which has freed us from the inconveniences we laboured under, and strengthened 
the foundations of the Empire which God has given us, we have been 
graciously pleased to grant to the English Company our Royal favours aceord- 
ing to the following Articles, which shall remain firm both in present and in 

uture, 


As the English Company have been put to great expense and their affairs 
exposed to danger by the war which the Nabob Shujah-ul Dowlah, unjustly, 
and contrary to our Royal pleasure, waged against them, we have therefore 
assigned to thém the country of Ghauzepoor and the rest of the zemindarry 
of Bulwunt Sing, belonging to the Nizamut of the.Nabob Shujah-ul Dowlah : 
and the regulation, and government thereof, we have given to their disposal 
in the same manner as it was in the Nabob Shujah-ul Dowlah’s. The afore- 
said Rajah having settled terms with the Chiefs of the English Company, 
1s, according thereto, to pay the revenues to the Company; and the amount 


8 Punjab—Delhi—No. I. Part I 


shall not belong to the books of the Royal revenue, but shall be expunged 
from them. 


The army of the English Company, having joined our standard, shall put 
us in possession of Illiabad and the rest of the countries belonging to the 
Nizamut of the Nabob Shujah-ul Dowlah; and the revenues, excepting 
ee o Rajah Bulwunt’s zemindarry, shall be in our entire management and 

isposal. 


As the English Company will be ata further expense in putting us in 
possession of Illiabad and the rest of the Nizamut of the Nabob Shujah-ul 
Dowlah, we will therefore, as we get possession, grant to them out of our 
treasury, such a proportion of the revenues as the exigencies of our affairs 
will admit of ; and when we are put in full possession, we will reimburse the 
whole expenses of the Company in this business from the time of their joining 
our Royal standard. ; 


Firmatnp executed by,the Kine—1764. 


As the English Company have been put to great expense and their affairs 
exposed to danger by the war which the Nabob Shujah-ul Dowlah, unjustly, 
and contrary to our Royal pleasure, waged against them, we have therefore 
assigned to them the country of Ghauzepoor, and the rest of the zemindarry 
of Rajah Bulwunt Singh, belonging to the Nizamut of the Nabob Shujah-ul 
Dowlah ; and the regulation and government thereof we have given to their 
disposal, in the same manner as it was in the Nabob Shujah-ul Dowlah’s. 
The aforesaid Rajah having settled terms with the Chiefs of the English 
Company is, according thereto, to pay the revenues to the Company. 


The army of the English Company having joined our standard, shall put 
us in possession of Iliabad, and the rest of the countries belonging to the 
Nizamut of the Nabob Shujah-ul Dowlah ; and the revenues, excepting those 
of Rajah Bulwunt’s zemindarry, shall be in our entire management and dis- 
posal. : 