


When the mutiny of 1857 broke out, the mutineers in Delhi applied to 
the King, Bahadur Shah, to put himself at the head of the movement. At 
first his conduct was most vacillating, but he subsequently identified himself 
with the rebel cause. After the fall of Delhi, he was captured and tried on 
the charges of, 1s¢, aiding and abetting the mutiny of British troops ; 2md,. 
encouraging and assisting diverse persons in waging war against the British 
Government; 3rd, assuming the sovereignty of India; 4¢4, causing and being 
accessory to the murder of Christians, The Ex-King was convicted on each 
and all of the charges, and was removed to Rangoon, where he died on the 
7th November 1862, 


During the rebellion in 1857, when communication between Delhi and 
Agra and Calcutta was for the most part cut off, the administration of the 
Delhi and Hissar territories was assumed by the Chief Commissioner of the 
Punjab, and after the restoration of peace these districts Were finally put under 
the control of the Punjab Government. In this territory there were several 
Chiefs who held the position rather of jagirdars than of native princes. ‘They had 
been subjects of the Mughal (Mogul), and after the overthrow of the Mahratta 
power by Lord Lake, their estates were either confirmed to or conferred on 
them by the British Government, in most cases as a reward for services ren- 


4 Punjab—Delhi—Pataudi. Part I 


dered. These Chiefs were the Nawabs of Pataudi, Loharu, Dujana, Jhajjar, 
Dadri and Bahadurgarh, and Farrukhnagar, and the Raja of Ballabhgarh. The 
Chiefs of Jhajjar, Ballabhgarh, and Farrukhnagar were executed, and their 
estates were confiscated for rebellion in 1857. The Dadri and Bahadurgarh 
estates were also confiscated, and the Chief was allowed a pension of Rupees 
1,000 for his subsistence. 


The Ballabhgarh Chief held no sanad of a hereditary nature from the 
British Government. The Dadri and Bahadurgarh territory originally formed 
part of Jhajjar, and is included in the Sanad (No. II) granting that State. 


1. PATAUDI, 


The original grantee, Faiz Talab Khan, was brother of the Jhajjar Nawab, 
Najabat Ali Khan, He was severely wounded in an action with Holkar’s 
troops, and for his services he was granted (No, II) the pargana of Pataudi 
in perpetual jagir. He died in 1829, and was succeeded by Akbar Ali Khan, 
who was succeeded in March 1862 by his son, Muhammad Ali Taki Khan. 
Muhammad Ali Taki Khan died in 1867, and was succeeded by his son, Mu- 
hammad Mukhtar Husain Ali Khan. 


Muhammad Mokhtar Husain Ali Khan died in March 1878, only three 
months after he had been entrusted with the management of the State, at the 
age of 22, leaving a son, Muhammad Mumtaz Husain Ali Khan, who succeed- 
ed him, being then about three and-a-half years of age. 


The State is administered during the minority of the Chief by a Manager 
under the political superintendence of the Commissioner of the Delhi Division. 

The Chief of Pataudi has received a Sanad of adoption (No. III), assur- 
ing him that any succession to his estate which may be legitimate according 
to Muhammadan law will be recognised and confirmed. 