

It becomes the Company to show their grateful sense of our Royal favours, 
and to exert themselves to the utmost in the proper management and regula- 
tion of the country; to encourage and befriend our subjects; to punish the 
contentious, and expel the rebellious from their territories. They must use 
their best endeavours to promote the welfare of our people, the ryots, and other 
inhabitants ; to probibit the use of things of an intoxicating nature, and such 
as are forbidden by the Law of God; in driving out enemies, in deciding 
causes, and settling matters agreeably to the rules of Mahomed and the Law 
of the Empire ; so that the inhabitants may apply themselves, with peace 
of mind and satisfaction, to the cultivation of the country, and the exercise 
of other their professions, and that the weak may not labour under oppression 
and violence. They will consider these as our strict injunctions. 


Written on the 4th day of Rajeb, the 6th year of the reign, 29th Decem. 
ber 1764. 


Part I Punjab—Delhi—Pataudi—No. II. 9 


No. II. 


SuNNUD granted to AssuDoo-Dow1an Nusgausut ALEE Kuan. 
Bawapoor, dated 4th May 1806. 


Adverting to the merit of your services and conduct, the Right Honourable 
General Lord Lake, Commander-in-Chief, assigned to you from the beginning 
of the Fussul Rubbee of 1213 Fussly year (corresponding with September 
1805, A.D.) the undermentioned Jands as a jaidad for a Risaleh and aga 
jaghire for your individual support, and that of your dependents, together 
with the whole of the land revenue and collections of customs, with an excep- 
tion to such gardens and Ayma jaghires, punarth, and other rent-free lands, 
besides such daily allowances as have always been assigned (for charitable pur- 
poses), on condition that you shall not require the aid of the British Govern- 
ment, and that you settle your mehals properly with your own troops, and that 
in any season of exigency you furnish, on application, to the aid of the ‘British 
Government, a force consisting of 400 horse, and that you always remain 
firm in your attachment to the British Government, and employ your exer- 
tions to promote its interests. The grant has now been confirmed to you by 
Government. In consideration of your approved attachment to the British 
interests, which has been made known by the communications of the Right 
Honourable the Commander-in-Chief, Government has been pleased to confer 
on you and your family, from generatiou to generation, a perpetual grant o 
those lands. 

The British Government will never have any concern with the lands, an 
they will remain in your possession. 

Impressed with a due sense of gratitude for this distinguished act of 
favour, you will always continue to manifest your attachment to the British 
Government, and your exertions to serve its interests, as involving your own 
happiness and welfare, ; 


ScHEDULE of the Lanps comprehended in the Grant. 


Land granted to Assudoo-Dowlak Nujaubut Allee Khan Bahadoor, to- 
gether with the whole of the land revenue and sayer duties. 