


3.—Notifications of the Government of India investing the Resident in Kashmir and 
his Assistant with the necessary powers for enquiring into and trying criminal 
cases against European British subjects and others, dated 8th May I891 


AFGHANISTAN. 


4,~-Description of the Afghan frontier between the Hari Rud and the Oxus . P 


5,—Synopsis of boundary marks demarcating the frontier between Persia and Afghan- 
istan in the Hashtadan Valley 


° . . e e e e ° 


Inpex To VoLume ° 


Paas 


CORRIGENDA. 


Page 67,—In page-heuding, omié ‘* Hill States,” 
Page 123.—In line 21, for “ Raja Hira Singh” read “ Rai Hira Singh.” 
Page 205.—Ia line 6, for “ Khagan” read “ Kaghan.” 


Page 210.—In line 29 
Page 211.—In line 10 


Page 230.—In the margin of the last paragraph, read-— 
“ (a) Galai or Gali Khel, 
(6) Hasan Khel, 
(c) Ashu Khel, 
(d) Jawaki Khel.” 


Page 232,—In line 83, for * Shirakis” read “ Sherakis.? 

Page 239.—In line 18, for “ Malla or Muta Khel” vead “ Malla or Mula Khel” 
Page 252,—In line 16, for Karam” read “ Kuram.” 

Page 348.—In line 10, for “Skardu” read “ Skardo.” 

Page 417.—In line 20, for “ Akchah” read * Akcha,” 


\ Sor “ Madakhel” read “ Mada Khel.” 


PART I. 


—, 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SANADS 


RBLATING TO THE 


TERRITORIES SUBORDINATE TO, OR IN POLITICAL 
RELATION WITH, 


THE 


LIEUTENANT-GOVERNORSHIP OF THE PUNJAB 


I.—DE LH I. 


Donne the disorders of Mir Jafar’s first administration of Bengal, Muham- 
mad Kuli Khan, Subadar of Allahabad, instigated by two powerful zamindars, 
Rajas Somdar Singh and Balwant Singh, formed the purpose of invading Ben- 
gal. His kinsman the Nawab of Oudh joined in the design, and in order to 
give a colourable pretext to the invasion, the son of Alamgir II., who had fled 
from his father’s court to Rohilkhand, and who was invested by the Emperor 
with the Subadari of Bengal, Behar, and Orissa, was put at the head of the 
expedition. 

Towards the close of the year 1758, the army advanced, under Kuli Khan 
and the prince, to Patna. But the Nawab of Oudh, who was following, 
treacherously seized the fort of Allahabad. Kuli Khan returned to repossess 
himself of his territory. He threw himself on the generosity of the Nawab, 
who immediately seized him and put him to death. Left thus unsupported, 
the prince agreed with Clive, who had advanced to Patna for the purpose of 
repelling the invasion, to withdraw across the Karamnasa on receiving a small 
sum for the supply of his immediate necessities. 

In 1760 a second invasion was undertaken. In the meantime, the 
Emperor was murdered by his Wazir, and the intelligence of this reached the 
prince shortly after he had begun his march. He at once assumed the title of 
Shah Alam, and conferred the office of Wazir on the Nawab of Oudh, in whose 
hands he was virtually a prisoner. The imperial army was finally defeated in 


January 1761, and the Emperor, tired of his dependence on the Wazir of 
B 


2 Punjab—Delhi. Part I 


Oudh, joined the English camp. He was there met by Kasim Ali, who had 
been made Subadar of Bengal on the deposition of Mir Jafar, and who agreed 
to pay to the Emperor twenty-six lakhs of rupees a year, on condition of being 
confirmed in his office. After making an offer to the English of the Diwani 
of Bengal, Behar, and Orissa, the Emperor marched towards Delhi to take pos- 
session of his paternal throne. The Mahrattas had before this overrun Northern 
India and possessed themselves of Delhi, but they met, with a disastrous defeat 
at Panipat from Ahmad Shah Abdali, who, after proclaiming Shah Alam as 
Emperor of Hindustan and inviting him to Delhi, returned to Kabul. Want 
of money, and the opposition of Kasim Ali, prevented the English from ful- 
filling their intention of aiding Shah Alam in the recovery of his throne. 