


The area of Loharu is 226 square miles; the gross revenue is about 
Rupees 66,000 a year; the population according to the census of 1891 is 
20,139, The Chief keeps up (1891) a small force of 9 field guns, 2 fort guns, 
20 cavalry, and 74 infantry, including artillerymen, and he is bound to furnish 
a‘contingent of 200 horse when required. The State is under the political 
superintendence of the Commissioner of the Delhi Division. 


3, DUJANA. 


The estates of this Afghan family are held on condition of fidelity to the 
British Government, and military service when required. The original grant 
was conferred on Abdus Samad Khan and his sons for life by Lord Lake, but 
on the 4th May 1806 the tenure was made perpetual by a Sanad of the Gov- 
ernor General (No. VI), and several estates in the Hariana territory were 
added. The Hariana estates were afterwards exchanged for the villages of 
Dujana and Mehrana in Rohtak. Abdus Samad Khan was succeeded'in 1825 
by his son Dunde Khan, who was succéeded in 1850 by his eldest son, Hasan 
Ali Khan. Hasan Ali Khan died in 1867, and was succeeded by his son 
Saadat Ali Khan, who died on the 15th October 1879, leaving an only son, 
Mumtaz Ali Khan, aged 15 years. Mumtaz Ali Khan attained his majority 
on the 7th December 1882, when he was invested with full powers, 

The Chief of Dujana has received a Sanad of adoption (No. IIT), assuring 
him that any succession to his estate which may be legitimate according to 
Muhbammadan law will be recognised and confirmed. 


The area of Dujana is 89 square miles; the population, according to the 
census of 1891, was 26,450 souls; the revenue amounts to Rupees 77,170 per 
annum, and the military force (1891) numbers 165 men, The Nawab furnishes 
a contingent of 200 horse when required. The State is under the political 
Superintendence of the Commissioner of the Delhi Division. 


Part I Punjab—Delhi—No. I. 7 


No. I, 


PRopPosaLs made by the Kine Suan AatumM, and enclosed in a 
letter from Mason Hector Munro to the Presrpent and 
Councrn at BencaL, dated from the Camp at Benares, the 
22nd of November 1764, 


If this country isto be kept, put me in possession of it, and leave a 
small detachment of the troops with mé, to show that I am protected by the 
English, and they shall be at my expense; that if any enemy come at any 
time against me, I will make such connections in the country, that, with my 
own troops, and the aforementioned small detachment, will defend the 
country, without any further assistance from the English, and I will pay 
them, of the revenues of the country, what sum they shall demand yearly. 
If the English will, contrary to their interest, make peace with the Vizier, 
I will go to Delhi; for I cannot think of returning again into the hands of a 
man who has used me so ill. I have no friends I depend on more than ~the 
English; their former behaviour to me will make me ever respect and regard 
them. Now is their time to be in possession of a country abounding with 
riches and treasure ; I shall be satisfied with whatever share they please of it. 