


After his deposition and final defeat at Patna, Kasim Ali fled and claimed 
the protection of the Wazir of Oudh, who, with the Emperor rather as a pri- 
soner than as a monarch, was encamped at Allahabad, planning an expedition 
against Bundelkhand. The Wazir hoped, under the pretence of assisting 
Kasim Ali, to seize Bengal for himself, and a joint expedition across the Ka- 
ramnasa was commenced. The army of the invaders was overthrown in the 
battle of Baxar on the 23rd October 1764; the Emperor detached himself from 
the expedition and joined the English camp, and the Wazir retreated to his own 
dominions. It was proposed to depose the Wazir, and put the Emperor in 
possession of his territories, with the ‘exception of the country of Ghazipur 
and Benares, which the Emperor granted (No. I) tothe English. The ar- 
rangements thus made, however, were severely condemned by the Court of 
Directors. as burdensome and profitless, and therefore, in 1765, the Wazir was 
restored to his dominions, with the exception of the districts of Allahabad and 
Kora, which were left in possession of the Emperor. The districts of Ghazi- 
pur and Benares were likewise restored. But the circumstances which led to 
this treaty, and to the subsequent acquisition of territory by the British Gov. 
ernment in the Gangetic Doab, are more intimately connected with the history 
of Oudh (Vol, II, Part If) than of Delhi. 


The Emperor Shah Alam continued to reside at Allahabad, but manifested 
great impatience to mount the throne at Delhi. The Mahrattas were, in the 
meantime, again overrunning Upper India to re-establish the influence they lost 
at Panipat, and to punish the Rohillas for the assistance they had given to Ahmad 
Shah Abdali. For the easier accomplishment of these objects, they undertook 
to replace Shah Alam on the throne, who, notwithstanding the dissuasions of 
the British Government, placed himself in their hands. The Emperor was led 


- 


Part I Punjab—Dolhi. 8 


into Delhi in all pomp on the 25th December 1771, but he was a mere puppet 
in the hands of the Mahrattas. 


In 1773 the Mabrattas extorted from the Emperor a grant of the provinces 
of Allahabad and Kora, but the imperial deputy at Allahabad applied for leave 
to put them under British protection, as the King had been compelled, while 
@ prisoner, to grant the sanads. The districts were, in the following year, 
sold to the Wazir of Oudh for fifty lakhs of rupees. 


The Emperor continued a mere State prisoner in the hands of the Mah- 
rattas till 1808, when he was released by Lord Lake, and brought under the 
protection of the British Government. All the territories and resources 
assigned for his support by the Mahrattas were continued to him, and a pecu- 
niavy provision, fixed at Rupees 60,000, but afterwards increased to Rupees 
1,00,000 a month, was granted in addition. Shah Alam died on the 19th 
November 1806, and was succeeded by Akbar Shah, who was succeeded in 1837 
by his eldest son Bahadur Shah. The movements of the King were confined 
to the neighbourhood of Delhi, and he was not allowed to confer titles, or to 
issue a currency ; but he had the control of civil and criminal justice within 
the palace. 