


In 1884 the Nawab of Pataudi ceded to the British Government full 
jurisdiction within such portions of land lying within his State as are 
occupied, or may be hereafter occupied, by the railways comprised in the 
Rajputana-Malwa Railway system, including the lands occupied as stations, 
out-buildings, and for other railway purposes. 


Pataudi has an area of 53 square miles; the population according to the 
census of 1891 was 19,002, and the gross revenue of the State is about Rupees 


Part I Punjab—Delhi—Zoharu. 5 


78,955. The military force consists (1891) of 6 guns, 25 cavalry, and 70 
infantry, including gunners. The Nawab furnishes a contingent of 400 horse 
when required to do so. 


2, LOHARU. 


Abmad Bakhsh Khan, the founder of this family, was a vakil of the 
Raja of Alwar, and for his services in the negotiations between Alwar and 
Lord Lake he received Loharu in perpetuity from the Raja, and the pargana 
of Firozpur in the Gurgaon district from Lord Lake, on condition of fidelity 
and military service (No. IV). The original grantee, Ahmad Bakhsh Khan, 
died in 1827, and was succeeded by his son Shams-ud-din Khan, who was exe- 
cuted in 1835 for the murder of Mr. Fraser, the Agent at Delhi. The Firoz- 
pur pargana was confiscated, and the Loharu pargana was made over to Amin- 
ud-din Khan and Zia-ud-din Khan, the two brothers of Shams-ud-din. Ow- 
ing to disputes between the brothers the younger was deprived of all share in 
the management of the State, and a fixed allowance of Rupees 18,000 per 
aunum was assigned to him. 


In 1847 Zia-ud-din Khan preferred a claim, which was finally disallowed, 
to be entrusted with the management of the State, or to have half of it sepa- 
rated off to himself. These two brothers remained in Delhi during the siege 
in 1857, and after the capture they were put under surveillance, but were 
eventually released and restored to their position. 


Amin-ud-din Khan died in December 1869, and was succeeded by his son 
Ala-ud-din Ahmad Khan, Claims put forward by Zia-ud-din Khan to a right 
of management of the State were again negatived. In 1874 the title of Nawab 
was conferred by Sanad (No. V) on the Chief of Loharu and his successors 
on condition of faithful allegiance to the British Government. 


The Chief of Loharu has received a Sanad of adoption (No. ITT), assuring 
him that any succession to his estate which may be legitimate according to 
Muhammadan law will be recognised and confirmed. 


Ala-ud-din Ahmad Khan by his extravagance involved the State in debt. 
In 1878 the Imperial Government granted a loan of Rs. 23,000, and in 1882 a 
further loan of Rs. 95,000, with which the Commissioner of Hissar settled the 
Claims of all concerned. One of ‘the conditions on which the second loan was 


8 Punjab—Delhi—Dujana. Part I 


granted by Government was that Ala-ud-din Ahmad Khan should live out of 
Loharu, the management of the State being vested in his eldest son as Manager- 
Ala-ud-din Ahmad Khan died on the 31st October 1884, and his eldest son 
Amir-ud-din Ahmad Khan, then aged 24 years, succeeded him. 