


5th.— When’ the Shah shal! have established his ‘authority in Kabul and Kandahar, he will 
annually send the Maharaja the following articles, viz., 55 high-bred horses of approved colours 
and pleasant paces, 1J Persian ecimitars, 7 Persian poniards, 25 good mules, fruits of various kinds, 
both dry and fresh, and sardas or musk-melons of a sweet and delicate flavor (to be sent through- 
out the year). By the way 6f Kabul River to Peshawar, grapes, pomegranates, apples, quinces, 
almonds, raisins, pistabs or chesnuts, an abundant supply of each, as well as pieces of satin of 
every colour, choghas of fur, kimkhabs wrought with gold aud silver, Persian carpets, altogether 
: tho number of 10] pieces; all these articles the Shah will continue to send every. year to the 

aharaja, 


6th.—Each party shall address the other on terms of equality. 


7th.— Merchants of Afghanistan, who will be desirous of trading to Lahore, Amritsar, or any 
other part of the Maharaja’s possessions, shall not be stopped or molested on their way ; on the 


D 


18 Punjab—Punjab Proper. Part I 


Indus. The Shah’s expedition to Kabul ended in disaster, and he returned to 
his exile in Ludhiana, whence he was summoned in 1838 to make another 
effort for the re-establishment of his power. The supposed designs of Russia 
on Afghanistan, the preference shown by Dost Muhammad for a Russian alli~ 
ance, and his invasion of the territories of Ranjit Singh, induced the British 
Government to adopt the cause of Shah Shuja. It is unnecessary to refer fur- 
ther to the policy and war of the British Government in Afghanistan than to 
State that their operations were preceded hy a tripartite Treaty (No. XIV) 
between the British Government, Ranjit Singh,and Shah Shuja, which renew- 
ed the provisions of the treaty of 1833 between the Shab and Ranjit Singh ; 
bound the Shah, in the event of the attainment of his object, to pay two lakhs 
of rupees for the assistance of Ranjit Singh’s troops; to give up claims to 
supremacy over Sind on condition of payment by the Amirs‘of a sum to be 
fixed by the British Government, of which fifteen lakhs should go to Ranjit 
Singh ; not to attack or molest the ruler of Herat; not to negotiate with foreign 
States without the consent of the British and Sikh Governments; and to op- 
pose any power having the design of invading the British or Sikh territories. 


contrary, strict orders shall be issued to facilitate their intercourse, and the Mahurnja engages to 
eee the sume line of conduct on his part in respect to traders who may wish to proceed to Af- 
ghanistan. : 


&th.—The Maharaja will yearly send to the Shah the following articles in the way of friend- 
ship :—55 pieces of shawls, 25 pieces of muslin, 11 dopattas, 5 pieces of kimkhabs, 5 scarves, 5 tur- 
pans, 55 loads of Bareh rice (peculiar to Peshawar). . 


9th.—Any of the Maharaju’s Officers who may be deputed to Afghanistan to purchase horses 
or on any other business, as well ns those who may be sent by the Shah into the Punjab for the pur- 
pose of purchasing piece goods or shawls, &c,, to the amount of 11,000 rupees, will be treated by 
both sides with due attention, and every facility will be afforded to them in the execution of their 
commission. : 