


Jbujjur. ‘ *  Kontee. 
Badlee. * . Naroul, : 
Kanoundh, Bandul. 


Ditto to Fyze Tullub Khan in jaghire. 


Pattoudhee, together with the whole of the land revenue and sayer col- 
lections. 


Ditto to Mohummud Ismael Allee Khan and Fyze Mchummud Khan. 
G 


10 Punjab—Delhi—Pataudi, Loharu—Nos. III & IV. Part I 


As a jaidad for the Risalehs of Mohummud Ismael Allee Khan and Fyze 
Mohummud Khan, on condition that they prove their obedience to Nujaubut 
Allee Khan, as follows :— 

Dadree, including Bhodenahir and Jhaul. 

Boodhwanna. 
In jaghire to Mohummud Ismael Allee Khan. 
Bahaudurgurh, 
In jaghire to Fyze Mobummud Khan. 
Pattoudhee. 


Dated 4th May 1896, answering to the 14th of Suffer 1221 Hijerce year. 


No. III. 


ADorTion Sunnup granted to the NawaB of PatowpEE—1862. 


Her Majesty being desirous that the Governments of the several Princes 
and Chiefs of India who now govern their own territories, should be perpe- 
tuated, and the representation and dignity of their Houses should be conti- 
nued, in fulfilment of this desire this Sunnud’ is given to you to convey to 
you the assurance that, on failure of natural heirs, the British Government 
will recognize and confirm any succession to your State which may be legiti- 
mate according to Mahomedan Law. 


Be assured that nothing shall disturb the Engagement thus made to you 
so long as your House is loyal to the Crown, and faithful to the conditions 
of the Treaties, Grants or Engagements which record its obligations to the 
British Government. 


Dated 5th March 1862. CANNING. 


Nors.—Similar Sunouds were granted to the Nawabs of Loharoo and Dojana. 


No. IV. 
TRANSLATION of a Drart of a PeRwawnnadg in favor of AHMED 
Buxsa Kuan Banapoor, dated 4th May 1806. 


Adverting to the merit of your services and attachment to the British 
interests, the Right Honourable General Lord Lake, Commander-in-Chief, 


Part I Punjab—Delhi—Zoharu—No. V. I 


conferred on you an istimrauree (permanent) grant of the Mebals of Feroze- 
pore, Jherkeh, and the Tuppahs Saungris, Botahanna, Nujhoor, and Nugeena, 
including the customs, as well as land revenue of them, excepting such 
gardens and ayma jaghire, punarthee, and other rent-free lands, as have been 
long disposed of, aud other fixed and established daily allowances, &c., on 
condition that you require no aid from the British Government, and that you 
settle the affairs of the mehals with your own troops, and that you be charged 
with the expense of providing for the maintenance and support of Khanja 
Hanjee and other dependants of the late Mirza Nusseeroolla Beg Khan, and 
provided also that you furnish, on occasions of exigency, to the aid of the 
British Government, a party of 50 troopers, and that you always remains 
steadfast in your attachment and good will to the British Government. 


The British Government having become acquainted with your character 
and disposition, and with the merit of your services and attachment to its 
interests, from the communications of the Right Honourable the Commander- 
in-Chief, has now been pleased to reward those services by confirming to you 
and your heirs in perpetuity, from generation to generation, the whole of the 
mehals above mentioned, inclading both land revenue and the sayer duties, 
with the deductions and under the conditions however above specified, from 
the beginning of the Fussul Rubbee of 1213 Fuslee Era (answering to Sep- 
tember 1805). From that time the British Government will have no concern 
whatever with those mehals, which will always remain in your possession, 
and that of your descendants ; as those lands require the exercise of arbitrary 
power, no complaints will be received from the inhabitants of them. 