


20 Punjab—Punjab Proper. Part I 


1845 the first action was fought at Mudki. The battle of Firozshah 
followed three days later. On the 28th January 1846 the Sikhs were 
defeated at Aliwal. The Khalsa army received its final defeat, in the 
battle of Sobraon on the 10th February 1846. On the ]3th the whole 
British furee crossed the Sutlej, and on the 14th a proclamation was issued, 
declaring that the occupation of the Punjab would not be relinquished 
till full atonement had.been made for the breach of their treaty engagements 
by the Sikhs, and that the hill and plain districts between the Sutlej and the 
Beas would be annexed in part indemnity for the expenses of the war. On 
the night of the 15th a conference was held between Mr. Carrie and Major 
Lawrence ou behalf of the British Government, and Raja Gulab Singh, Diwan 
Dina Nath, and Fakir Nar-ud-din on behalf of the Sikhs, at which the pre- 
liminaries of a treaty were arranged. The Treaty (No. XVI) was signed at 
Lahore on the 9th March 1846. This treaty left the British Government in 
possession of the hills and plains east of the Beas, and of the hill countries 
between the Beas and the Indus, including Kashmir and Hazara; it regulated 
the strength and constitution of the Sikh army ; gave the British Government 
the control over the Beas and the Sutlej as far as the Indus, and of the Indus 
to the borders of Baluchistan, and made the British Government the arbiter 
in all disputes between the Lahore Darbar and neighbouring States. Two 
days later an Agreement (No. XVII) was made, by which Government left 
a force at Lahore for the protection of the Maharaja, and certain matters re- 
garding the territories ceded by the treaty were specifically determined. 


The Lahore Darbar being anxious for the assistance of the British Gov- 
ernment to maintain the administration of the Lahore State during the mi- 
nority of Dalip Singh, an Agreement (No. XVIII) was concluded on the 16th 
December 1846, by which the treaty of the 9th March was temporarily modi- 
fied, a Resident was appointed at Lahore, a Council of Regency, consisting of 
eight members, was established to conduct the government in consultation 
with the Resident, and the country was occupied by a British force, to be paid 
for by the Lahore State. 


Many of the Sikh Chiefs, who had been accustomed to revolution and 
excitement, were not satisfied with the arrangements for the pacification of the 
eountry, and harboured evil designs. The murder, on the 20th April 1848, of 
Mr. Vans-Agnew and Lieutenant Anderson at Multan, and the revolt of its 
ex-governor, Mulraj, gave an opportunity for the development of a wide and 
dangerous conspiracy in the Sikh army, which had for some time existed, with 


Part I Punjab—Punjab Proper. 21 


a view to the re-establishment of the Khalsa independence. Sardar Chhatar 
Singh Atariwala raised the standard of rebellion in the north. Raja Sher Singh, 
his son, joined Mulraj, and proclaimed a religious war. He was followed in 
open rebellion by the great body of the Sikh army and the Sikh population | 
which the Darbar were powerless to control. In October 1848 the British 
army crossed the Sutlej. The indecisive battle of Chilianwala was fought on 
the 18th January 1849. But on the 22nd February 1849 the rebels were 
zotally defeated in the decisive battle of Gujrat. This was followed by the 
surrender of the entire Sikh army, and the annexation of the Punjab to the 
British territories. 