


Under such a system causes of quarrel were never wanting. The diffi- 
culties with which the Sikhs had to contend in their early struggle for exist- 
ence kept them at first well together. But with success came dissensions, and 
the weak fell before the strong. One of the Sardars, who earliest raised him- 
self to power and influence, was Maha Singh of the Sukarchakia Misl, one of 
the weakest and latest formed of the twelve clans. To him, on the 2nd 


‘November 1780, was born a son, Ranjit Singh, by his wife, a daughter of 


the Raja of Jind. During the invasion of Shah Zaman in 1798, Ranjit 
Singh rendered service to the Afghan monarch by recovering for him several 


Part I Punjab—Punjab Proper. 15 


pieces of artillery which had been lost in the Jhelum, and.he had the address 
to procure for himself the appointment of Governor of Lahore. 


By force and artifice Ranjit Singh gained possession of the city, where he 
established himself, and whence, in concert with Fateh Singh Ahluwalia, and 
Mai Sadda Kaur, his mother-in-law, the virtual head of the powerful Kanhaya 
Misl, he soon ex‘ended his supremacy over the neighbouring Sardars between 
the Jhelum and th Sutlej, and meditated the extension of his authority beyond 
the Sutlej. Atthe same time he was steadily labouring to bring under his 
dominion the scattered elements of the Sikh people, a task which was lightened 
by the mutual jealousies of the Sardars. In 1808 he made proposals to Lord 
Lake for the transfer to the British Government of the territory belonging 
to the Sikhs south of .the River Sutlej, on the condition of mutual defence 
against the respective enemies of himself and the British nation. The offer 
was declined. 


The year 1805 witnessed the extinction of the system of confederacies 
‘ acting in grave matters jointly for the common benefit. In that year the last 
“ Gurumata” was held; and thereafter the force of the Khalsa was directed by 
the will of one man. In the same year Ranjit Singh was recalled from a cam- 
paign against the Muhammadans between the Chenab and the Indus, by the 
sudden appearance of ‘Holkar in the Punjab, closely pursued by Lord Lake. 
Disappointed in the hope of procuring assistance from Ranjit Singh, Holkar 
concluded a treaty with the British Government, and returned to Hindustan. 
A Treaty of friendship and alliance (No. VII.) was at the same time con- 
cluded between the British Government on the one part and on the other 
Ranjit Singh and Sardar Fateh Singh Ahluwalia, his ally. 


In 1806. Ranjit Singh began to Jay his hands on the possessions of 
the Phulkian Misl on the left bank of the Sutlej, His systematic aggression 
at last excited the alarm of the Sikhs of Sirhind, and in 1308 they sent a de- 
putation, consisting of Raja Bhag Singh of Jind (Ranjit’s uncle), Bhai Lal 
Singh of Kaithal, and Chain Singh, Diwan of Patiala, to beg the protection 
of the British Government. The answer they received was such as to encour- 
age their hopes, although it conveyed no formal assurance of protection. 