


In the meantime, the prospect of a French invasion of India had induced 
the British Government to depute Mr. Metcalfe to the court of Ranjit Singh 
to establish a friendly alliance. Towards the close of 1808, in consequence of 
acts of hostility committed by Ranjit Singh on the south of the Sutlej while 


16 Punjab—Punjab Proper. Part I 


negotiations were pending, Government determined to comply with the wishes 
of the Cis-Sutlej] Chiefs, and Mr. Metcalfe was instructed to declare the 
country between the Sutlej and the Jumna under British protection. Mr. 
Metcalfe’s mission resulted in the Treaty of Amritsar, of 25th April 1809 
(No, VIII), by which the British Government agreed to have no concern 
with the territories and subjects of the Raja of Lahore to the north of the 
Sutlej, and Ranjit Singh agreed neither to commit nor suffer encroachments 
on the possessions or rights of the Chiefs to the south of that river. The 
Raja was guaranteed in the possession of the conquests made by him on the 
left of the Sutlej up to September 1808. 


After the conclusion of this treaty, the intercourse of the British Gov- 
ernment with the Lahore Darbar was, for many years, confined to the inter- 
change of friendly letters and presents, Ranjit Singh was too prudent and 
far-seeing to give occasion of offence by a violation of his treaty engagements, 
and he confined his schemes of conquest to the direction of Multan, Kash- 
mir, and Peshawar. By the close of 1811 he had occupied Kangra, and com- 
pleted the absorption of the old confederacies trans-Sutlej. A battle in 
July 1813 between the Afghans and the Sikhs left Fort Attock in his hands. 
In the same year he extorted the Koh-i-Nur diamond from Shah Shuja, then a 
refugee at Lahore. In 1818 Multan was seized. In 1819 he took Kashmir. 
In 1823 he was at last successful in occupying Peshawar. 


In 1831, when Lord William Bentinck visited Simla, Ranjit Singh sent 
a complimentary mission to him. Arrangements were made through the 
Political Agent at Ludhiana for an interview between His Lordship, and the 
Maharaja of Lahore, which took place with great pomp in the month of 
October at Rupar. At Ranjit Singh’s particular request an assurance 
(No. 1X) of perpetual friendship was executed and given to him on this occa- 
sion. 


From this period the utmost cordiality prevailed between the British 
Government and the Lahore Darbar, In the following year a Treaty (No. X) 
was concluded, to regulate the navigation of the Indus and the collection of 
duties on merchandise. The levy of duties on the value and quantity of the 
goods, however, gave rise to misunderstandings, and in November 1884, it 
was arranged by a supplementary Treaty (No. X1) to substitute a toll, to be 
levied on all boats with whatever merchandise laden. Five years later, an- 
other Agreement (No, XII) was made for the levy of duty on the merchan= 


Part 1 Punjab—Punjab Proper. 17 


dise at one place and not on the boats. A fourth Treaty (No. XIII) for the 
regulation of these duties was made in 1840 with Maharaja Kharak Singh, 
the son and successor of Ranjit Singh. 