


Guru Govind waged an unequal war with the Emperors of Delhi. Fre- ° 
quently defeated and broken up, persecuted with inhuman cruelty, the Sikhs 
were driven to hide themselves in the valleys and caves of the hills from the 
fury of their enemies. Openly to profess their religion became a capital crime. 
The sect would soon have been exterminated had not the distractions of the 
Empire, which followed the death of Aurangzeb, given them a breathing time 
from persecution. 

Gradually the Sikhs emerged from their hiding places, and, gathering in 
small parties, established themselves in petty isolated forts. Issuing from 
these, always well mounted, they scoured the country, burning and plundering, 
and giving infinite annoyance to the weak Muhammadan Governors of Lahore 
and Sirhind. After the return of Ahmad Shah Abdali to Kabul from his fifth 
invasion of India, in which he had broken the Mahratta power in the decisive 
battle of Panipat, the Sikhs found themselves strong enough to possess them- 
selves of the country round Lahore. But they drew down the vengeance of 
Abmad Shah, who, in 1762, returned to India, disastrously defeated them at 
Barnala near Ludhiana, and destroyed and polluted their sacred temple at 
Amritsar, 


From this defeat the Sikhs scon recovered. In the following year they 
defeated the Afghan Governor of Sirhind, and spread themselves over the plains 
south aud east of the Sutlej, as far asthe Jumna. The eighth invasion of 
Ahmad Shah, which took place in 1767, ended in leaving the Sikhs masters 
of the country between the Jumna and Rawal Pindi. Within three years 


their authority was extended over Jammu and the Rajputs of the lower 
hills. 


N 


14 Punjab—Punjab Proper. Part I 


The spread of the dominion of the Sikhs south of the Sutlej received a 
severe check from the Mahrattas, who, recovering from their disastrous over- 
throw at Panipat, again overran northern India. In 1788 Sindhia was in 
possession of Delhi, and by 1802 the Mahrattas had established their supremacy 
as far as the Sutlej, and exacted from the Sikh States to the south of that 
river a tribute of three lakhs of rupees. The Mabratta power in the north 
was broken by Lord, Lake in 1803, The Chiefs of Kaithal and Jind tendered 
their allegiance ‘to Lord Lake, and rendered occasional service, and all the 
Chiefs of Sirhind became virtually dependents of the British Government. 
It was the policy of the day, however, to maintain a strict neutrality in regard 
to the affairs of the Chiefs north of the Jumna; and beyond establishing the 
Sikh Chiefs in the territories which they then held, and rewarding those who 
had done good service, the British Government did not interfere in their affairs 
till 1809, when the Sikh Chiefs threw themselves on its protection from the 
encroachments of Ranjit Singh. ' 


The constitution of the Sikh Khalsa contained within itself elements df 
weakness and discord. The Sardars or Chiefs owned no subjection to each 
other. They were followed into the field by their relatives and dependents 
and each seized for himself whatever territory he was strong enough to hold, 
The Chiefs, with their clansmen and retainers, associated themselves into 
Misls or confederacies of equals, twelve in number. Each Chief parcelled out 
the conquered lands among his followers, who held their portions in indepen- 
dence, bound only by considerations of mutual advantage and the general weal ; 
of the Misl. A bond between the confederacies was supplied in the solemn 
assembly of the whole Sikh people, which met every year at least once at 
Amritsar. There the Council of Chiefs termed the “Gurumata” discussed 
affairs affecting the Khalsa or planned new expeditions. 