


On the 29th March 1849 an Agreement (No. XIX) was made with Ma- 
haraja Dalip Singh, whereby he resigned the sovereignty of the Punjab, re- 
ceiving a pension from the British Government. He shortly thereafter per- 
manently took up his residence in England, which was his domicile down to 
1886. In the course of time the Maharaja became dissatisfied with the 
allowances made to him, which he declared to be less than those to which he 
was entitled under the agreement of 1849. He also put forward claims to 
certain estates, etc., in the Punjab, which he stated to have been his private 
property and, therefore, not liable to confiscation under article 2 of the agree- 
ment. Much was done from time to time by the grant of loans, etc., on easy 
terms to improve the Maharaja’s position, which had become embarrassed 
owing to want of economy. The demands put forward by him, however, were 
quite inadmissible. Failing to obtain what he asked for, the Maharaja, ac- 
companied by his wife and family, left London in March 1886 with the 
avowed object of resettling in India. Before leaving England he had used 
menacing language and had issued a seditious proclamation addressed to the 
Sikhs. He was detained at Aden by order of the Government, but was final- 
ly allowed to return to Europe, where, having resigned his pension, he lived 
first in France and afterwards in Russia. 


In 1890, however, Maharaja Dalip Singh expressed regret for his past 
conduct and sued for Her Majesty’s pardon, which was accorded on the 
understanding that he would in future remain obedient to the Queen and 
regulate his Movements in conformity with the instructions of Her Govern- 
ment. The allowances which he had enjoyed up to 1886 were restored to him, 
the undrawn arrears being placed at bis disposal, At the same time the rate 
of interest payable on the debt owed by the Maharaja to Government was 
reduced. 


22 Punjab Proper—Lahore—No, VII. Part I 


No. VII. 


TREATY of FRIENDSHIP and Amity between the HoNoRABLE 
East Inpra Company and the Srrpars RUNJEET Sine and 
Forres Sine—1806, 


Sirdar Runjeet Sing and Sirdar Futteh Sing have consented to the 
following Articles of Agreement concluded by Lieutenant-Colonel Jobn 
Malcolm, under the special authority of the Right Honorable Lord Lake, 
himself duly authorized by the Honorable Sir George Hilaro Barlow, Baronet, 
Governor General, and Sirdar Futteh Sing, as principal on the part of himself 
and plenipotentiary on the part of Runjeet Sing. 


ArtIcLE 1, 


Sirdar Runjeet Sing and Sirdar Futteh Sing Aloowalla hereby agree 
.that they will cause Jeswunt Rao Holkar to remove with his army to the 
distance of 30 coss from Amritsur immediately, and will never hereafter hold 
any further connection with him, or aid or assist him with troops, or in any 
other manner whatever ; and they further agree that they will not in any way 
molest such of Jeswunt Rao Holkar’s followers or troops as are desirous of 
. returning to their homes in the Deccan, but, on the contrary, will render them 
every assistance in their power for carrying such intention into execution. 