


In 1833, Shah Shuja, the ex-monarch of Kabul, who was living as 
a British pensioner at Ludbiana, undismayed by the failure of his previous 
attempts to recover his kingdom, resolved to make one more effort, and for 
this purpose he entered into a treaty* with Ranjit Singh, in which, in con, 
sideration of the assistance to be rendered by the Maharaja, he disclaimed 
all title to the territories in possession of the Maharaja on either side of the. 


* TRANSLATION of the Teeary concluded between Masarasa Rangit SIneH snd Saag 
SHusa-UL-Mouxx, dated the 12th of March 18384, 


Relations of friendship having been firmly established between Maharaja Ranjit Singh and Shah 
Driewnbte Shuja-ul-Mulk, so that there neither is nor ever shall be any alienation or differ- 
° ence of interest existing between them, they agree to adopt the following Articles 

in consideration of the terms of good-will and friendship by which they are reciprocally actuated, 


ist.—Shah Shuja-ul-Mulk disclaims all title on the part of himself, bis heirs, successors, and 
all the Suddogais, to whatever territories lying on either bank of the River Indus that may be pos- 
seased by the Maharaja, viz, Kashmir, including its limits E, W. N. and S., together with the 
fort of Attock, Chach, Hazara, Kabel, Amb, with its dependencies on the left bank of the aforesaid 
river, and on the righ¢ bank, Peshawar with the Vusufzai territory, Khataks, Hashinagar, 
Michni, Kohat, and ull places dependent on Peshawar as far as the Khatbar Puss ; Banau, the 
Waziri territory, Dawar, Tank, Girang, Kalabagh, aud Khushalgarh with their dependent 
districts ; Dera Ismail Khan, and its dependency, together with Dera Ghazi Khan, Kot Mithan 
and their dependent territory, Sangarh, Harand, Dajal, Hajipur, Rajipur, and the three Kachis 
as well as Wansera with its district and the Province of Afeltam, situated on theleft bank. These 
Countries and places are considered to be the property and to form the estate of the Maharaja ; 
the Shah neither has nor will have any conceru with them. They belong to the Maharaja and his 
posterity from generation to generation. 


2nd.—The people of the country on the other side of Khnibar will not be suffered to commit 
robberies or aggression or any disturbances on this side. If any defaulter of either State, who has 
ores the revenue, take refuge in the territory of the other, each party engages to surrender 

im, ; 

8rd. -As agreeably to the Treaty established between the British Government and the Maha- 
raja, no one can cross from the left to the right bank of the Sutle} without a passport from the 
Maharaja, the same rule shail be observed regarding the passage of the Indus, whose waters join 
the Sutlej, and no one shall be allowed to cross the Indus without the Maharaja’s permission. 


4th.—Regarding Shikarpur and the territory of Sind lying on the right bank of the Indus 
the Shah will abide by whatever may be settled as right and proper, in conformity with the happy 
heme of friendship subsisting between the Britis Government and the Maharaja, through Cap- 
tain Wade. 