


10th.—Whenever the armies of the two States may happen to be assembled at the same place, 
on no account shall the slaughter of kine be permitted to take place. 


11th.—In the event of the Shah taking an auxiliary force from the Maharaja, whatever booty 
may be acquired from the Barakzai, in jewels, horses, arms, great or small, shall equally be divided 
between the two contracting parties. If the Shah should succeed in obtaining possession of their 
property without the assistance of the Maharaja’s troops, the Shab agrees to send a portion of it 
by his own Agent to the Maharaja in the way of friendship. 


12th.—An exchange of missions charged with letters and presents shall constantly take place 
between the two parties. : 


13th.—Should the Maharaja require the aid of any of the Shah’s troops, the Shah engages to 
send a force commanded by one of his principal officers ; in like manner the Mabaraja will furnish 
the Shah, when required, with an auxiliary foree composed of Muhammadans and commanded by 
one of his principal officers, as far as Kabul. When the Maharaja may go to Peshawar, the Shah 
will depute a Shahzada to visit him, on which occasion the Maharaja will receive and dismiss him 
with the honor and consideration due to his rank and dignity. 


14th,—The friends and enemies of the one shall be the friends and enemies of the other. 


15th.— Both parties cordially agree to the foregoing Articles: there shalt be vo deviation from 
them. The present Treaty shall be considered binding for ever. 


Part I Punjab—Punjab Proper. 19 


On the death of Shah Shuja, this treaty was considered to have become null 
and void. 


Ranjit Singh died on the 27th June 1839 in his fifty-ninth year. This 
remarkable man, who was absolutely illiterate, had by intrigue and force and 
his own energy of character raised himself from being the head of one of the 
smallest of the Sikh clans to a kingdom which, at the time of his death, yield- 
ed a revenue of upwards of two and a balf crores of rupees, covered an area of 
14,000 square miles, and was garrisoned by a well drilled army of 82,000 
men. Within a few years after his death, the kingdom which he had created 
by his personal abilities fell to pieces under his successors. 


He was succeeded by his son Kharak Singh, who died on the 5th November 
1840. Nao Nehal Singh, the only son of Kharak Singh, was killed when re- 
turning from his father’s funeral. Thereafter there followed a series of revo- 
lutions, by which the power passed successively into the hands of Chand 
Kaur, the mother of Nao Nehal Singh, his uncle Sher Singh, and lastly Dalip 
Singh, the reputed son of Ranjit Singh. These revolutions were effected 
with the aid of the army, which had now become thoroughly disorganised and 
mutinous. 


During the minority of Dalip Singh and the regency of his mother, all 
regular government was overthrown, and the Khalsa army became virtually 
the rulers of the country. Military operations, as well as the attitude of the 
army towards the executive government of the country, were solely determined 
by their Panchayats or regimental committees. The army considered itself, 
and was regarded by others, as the representative body of the Sikh people, as 
the visible Khalsa and master of the common-wealth. To divert the attention 
of the army from domestic politics, they were led to resolve on a campaign 
across the Sutlej, a movement which for some time previous had been expected 
by the British Government. On the 17th November 1845 the Panchayat 
of the Khalsa resolved on war ; and the resolution was approved by the Darbar. 
The Sikhs committed the first act of aggression in December 1845, by cross- 
ing the river near Firozpur and carrying off some camels. On the 13th De- 
‘cember the Governor General issued a Proclamation (No. XV.), setting forth 
the views and objects of the British Government, and the unprovoked invasion 
of British territories by the Sikhs, declaring the possessions of Maharaja 
‘Dalip Singh on the left bank of the Sutlej confisc*ted and annexed to British 
territories, and calling on the protected Chiefs to co-operate cordially with the 
British Government against the common enemy. On the 18th December 