


Entertaining a proper sense of gratitude for this distinguished favour, 
you will continue to manifest attachment to the British Government, and 
your exertions to promote its interests. 


In this consists your own advantage and welfare. 


Dated 4th May 1806, answering to 14th of Suffer 1221 Hijree. 


No. V. 


SUNNUD granted to ALLA-ooD-DEEN AHMED KHAN, CHIEF of 
Lowaroo—1874. 
On the recommendation of the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab, I 
hereby confer upon you and your heirs and successors, in the Chiefship of 
oharoo, the title of Nawab, on condition of faithful allegiance to the British 
Overnment, e 


(Sd.) NortHBRook. 
Dated 3rd August 1874. 


12 Punjab—Delhi~Dujana—No. VI. Part I 


No. VI. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD granted to ABbooL SummuD 
Kuan, dated 4th May 1806. 


Adverting to the merit of your past services and conduct, the Right 
Honourable General Lord Lake, Commander-in-Chief, assigned to you from 
the beginning of the Fussul Rubbee (spring crops) of 1213 Fuslee year, 
September 1805, A.D., the undermentioned mehals as a jaidad, for entertain- 
ing a Risalah, and also for a personal jaghire for yourself, comprehending the 
whole of the land revenue and the collection of customs, with an exception 
to such gardens and such ayma jaghire, punarth, and other rent-free lands, 
as also such daily allowances as have long been assigned for charitable pur- 
poses, on condition that you require no aid from the British Government, and 
that you settle the affairs of your mehals with your own troops, and provided 
also, that in any season of exigency, you furnish, on application, to the aid 
of the British Government, a force consisting of 200 horse, and that you 
always continue to manifest your attachment to the British Government, and 
your zeal to serve its interests, This grant has been confirmed to you by 
Government, who, sensible of the merit of your services and conduct, which 
have been made known to it by the communications of the-Right Honourable 
the Commander-in-Chief, has been pleased to grant those lands to you and 
your heirs for ever. The British Government neither have, nor will have any 
concern with them whatever, but they will remain in your possession, and that 
of your posterity. 

Entertaining a due sense of gratitude for this distinguished mark of 
favor, you will continue steadfast in your attachment to the British Govern- 
ment, and in your exertions to serve its interests. 


In this consist your own advantage and welfare. 


SCHEDULE of Lanps in HurReana, etc., as follows:— 
Mehal of Hansi, with the Fort belonging to ‘it. 


x of Hissar, 

» Of Mohim. 

» of Turshaum, 

» of Burwala. 

» of Bhawl. 

»» Of Jemalpore. 

» of Ugrora. 
2 ditto comprehending Rohtuck, joined with Baree and Dobuldee. 
Tuppas Bhode, Nabar, and Jhaul belonging to pergunnah Dadree. 


Dated 4th May 1806, answering to the 24th Suffer 1221 Hijree year- 


Pa 


Part I Punjab—Punjab Proper. 18 


II.—_PUNJAB PROPER. 

The sect of the Sikhs traces its origin to Nanak, a Hindu of the Ksha- 
triya caste, who was born in 4.D. 1469, at Talwandi, near Lahore. From his 
infancy he was given to religious meditation, In riper manhood he wandered 
into various countries, and returned to his home with his mind matured with 
reflection and travel to preach the unity of God and charity to men. The 
new creed spread rapidly, but soon provoked the persecution of the Muhamma- 
dans. The cruelty with which the Sikhs were treated turned them, under 
Govind, their tenth and last Guru or teacher, from a band of religious devo- 
tees into a chosen religions and military commonwealth or “ Khalsa,” animat- 
ed with undying hatred to the Musalmaus. 