


ARTICLE 5. 


‘A tariff shall be established, exhibiting the rate of duties leviable on each 
description of merchandize, which, after having been approved by both Govern- 
ments, is to be the standard by which the Superintendents and Collectors of 

- Customs are to be guided. 


’ Arricte 6. 


Merchants are invited to adopt the new route with perfect confidence ; no’ 
one shall be suffered to molest them or unnecessarily to impede their progress ; 
care being taken that they are only detained for the collection of the duties in 
the manner stipulated at the established stations. 


ARTICLE 7. 


The officers who are to be entrusted with the examination of the goods 
and collection of the duties on the part of Maha Rajah Runjeet Sing, shall be 
stationed at Mithinkot and Herreske. At no other places, but those two, 
shall boats in transit on the river be liable to examination or stoppage. 


ARticte 8. 


When the persons in charge of boats stop of their own accord to take in 
or give out cargo, the goods will be liable to the local transit duty of the 
Maha Rajah’s Government previously to their being embarked, and subsequently 
to their being landed, as provided in Article 2. 


Part I Panjab Proper—Lahore—No. X. al 


ARTIOLE 9. 


The Superintendent stationed at Mithinkot having examined the cargo, 
will levy the established duty, and grant a passport, with a written account of 
the cargo and freight. On the arrival of the boat at Herreeke, the Superin- 
tendent at that station will compare the passport with the cargo, and what- 
ever goods are found in excess will be liable to the payment of the established 
duty’; while the rest, having already paid duty at Mithinkot, will pass on free. 


Articte 10. 


The same rule will be observed in respect to merchandize conveyed from 
Herreeke by way of the rivers towards Sindh. 


ArtIcLe 11. 


Whatever may be fixed as the share of duties on the right bank of the 
River Sutlej in right of the Maha Rajah’s own dominions, and of those in 


allegiance to him, the Maha Rajah’s officers will collect it at the places 
appointed. 


ARTIOLE 12, 


With regard to the security and safety of merchants who may adopt this 
route, the Maha Rajah’s officers shall afford them every protection in their 
power, and merchants on halting for the night on either bank of the Sutlej, 
are required, with reference to the Treaty of friendship which exists between 
the two States, to give noticé and to show their passports to the thanadar or 
officers in authority at the place, and request protection for themselves. If, 
notwithstanding this precaution, loss should at any time occur, a strict inquiry 
willbe made, and reclamation sought from those who are blameable, 


Articie 13. 


The Articles. of the present Treaty for opening the navigation of the 
rivers above mentioned, having, agreeably to subsisting relations, been approved 


by the Right* Honorable the Governor-General, shall be carried into execu- 
tion accordingly. 