


(Sd.) W. C. Benriox, | L. §. 


Part I Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. X. 25 


B S. 


Treaty concluded between the East Inpria Company and His 
Hieguness ManarasAn RunyEet Sine, the Ruler of the 
PunsaB, 1832. 


No. X. 


Seal and signature of 


Rounyeet Sina. 


” 


By the grace of God, the relations of firm alliance and indissoluble ties 
of friendship existing between the Honorable the East India Company and 
His Highness the Maha Rajah Runjeet Sing, founded on the auspicious 
Treaty formerly concluded by Sir C. T. Metcalfe, Baronet, and since con- 
firmed in the written pledge of sincere amity presented by the Right 
Honorable Lord W. C. Bentinck, G.C.B. and G.C.H., Governor-General of 
British India, at the meeting at Rooper, are like the sun, clear and manifest 
to the whole world, and will continue unimpaired and increasing in strength 
from generation to generation. By virtue of these firmly established bonds 
of friendship, since the opening of the navigation of the Rivers Indus Proper 
(z.e., Indus below the confluence of the Punjnud) and Sutlej, a measure 
deemed expedient by both States, with a view to promote the general interests 
of commerce, has lately been effected through the agency of Captain C. M. 
Wade, Political Agent at Loodianah, deputed by !the Right Honorable the 
Governor-General for that purpose, the following Articles, explanatory of the 
conditions by which the said navigation is to be regulated, as concerns the 
nomination of Officers, the mode of collecting the duties, and the protection 
of the trade by that route, have been framed in order that the Officers of the 
two States employed in their execution may act accordingly. 


ArticLE 1, 


The provision of the existing Treaty relative to the right bank of the 
River Sutlej and all its stipulations, together with the contents of the friendly 
pledge already mentioned, shall remain binding, and a strict regard to pre- 
serve the relations of friendship between the two States be the ruling prin- 
ciples of action, In accordance with that Treaty the Honorable Company 
has not nor will have any concert with the right bank of the River Sutlej. 


ARTICLE 2, 


_ . The tariff which is to be established for the line of navigation in question 
1g intendéd to apply exclusively to the passage of merechandize by that route, 
and not to interfere with the transit duties levied on goods proceeding from 
one bank of the river to the other, nor with the places fixed for their collec- 
tion, They are to remain as heretofore. 

E 


a 


26 Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. X. Part I 


ARTICLE 3. . 


Merchants frequenting the said route, while within the limits of the 
Maha Rajah’s Government,are required to show a due regard to his authority 
as is done by merchants generally, and not to commit any acts offensive to 
the civil and religious institutions of the Sikhs, 


ARTICLE 4, 


Any one purposing to go by the said route, will intimate his intention to 
the Agent of either State, and apply for a passport, agreeably to a form to be 
laid down ; having obtained which he may proceed on his journey. The mer- 
chants coming from Amritsur and other parts on the right bank of the River 
Sutlej, are to intimate their intentions to the Agent of the Maha Rajah at 
Herreeke, or other appointed places, and obtain a passport through him; and 
merchants coming trom Hindoostan or other parts on the left bank of the 
River Sutlej will intimate their intentions to the Honourable Company’s 
Agent, and obtain a passport through him. As Foreigners and Hindoostanees 
and Sirdars of the protected Sikh States and elsewhere are not in the habit of 
crossing the Sutlej without a passport from the Maha Rajah’s officers, it is 
exnected that such persons will hereafter also conform'to the same rule, and 
not cross without the usual,passports. 