


ArtioLe Ist, 


Shah Shooja-ool-Moolk disclaims all title on the part of himself, his heirs, 
successors and all the Suddozais to all the territories lying on either bank of 
the River Indus, that may be possessed by the Maharajah, 2z., Cashmere, 
including its limits E.W. N.S., together with the Fort of Attock, Chuch, 
Hezara, Khebel, Amb, with its dependencies on the left bank of the aforesaid 
river, and on the right bank Péshawur, with the Eusufzai Territory, Kheteks, 
Hisht Nagar, Meehnee Kohat, Hungoo, and all places dependent in Peshawur, 
as far as the Khyber Pass, Benno, the Viziri Territory, Dowr Tank, Gorang, 
Kalabagh and Kushalgher, with their dependent districts, Derah Ismail 
Khan and its dependency, together with Derah Ghazee Khan, Kot Mithan, 
Omarkote, and their dependent territory, Singher, Heren, Dajel, Hajeepore, 

ajenpore, and the’ three Ketches, as well as Mankera with its district, and 


¥F 


OE ee ee ee ee ee Ee ee pe ee ee 
84 Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. XIV. Part I 


the province of Multan situated on the left bank. These countries and places 
are considered to be the property and to form the estate of the Maharajah— 
the Shah neither has nor will have any concern with them. They belong 
to the Maharajah and his posterity from generation to generation, 


ARTICLE 2ND, 


The people of the country on the other side of Khyber will not be suffered 
to.commit robberies or aggressions, or any disturbances on this side. If any 
defaulter of either State, who has embezzled the revenue, take refuge in the 
territory of the other, each party engages to surrender him, and no person 

shall obstruct the passage .of the stream which issues out of the Khyber 
defile, and supplies the Fort of Futtehgurh with water, according to ancient 
usage. , 

ARTICLE 38RD. 


As agreeably to the Treaty established between the British Government 
and the Maharajah, no one can cross from the left to the right bank of the 
Sutiej without a passport from the Maharajah, the same rule shall be observed 
regarding the passage of the Indus, whose waters join the Sutlej, and no one 
shall be allowed to cross the Indus without the Maharajah’s permission. 


ARTIOLE 47H. 


Regarding Shikarpore and the territory of Sinde on the right bank of 
the Indus, the Shah will agree to abide by whatever may be settled as right 
and proper in conformity with the happy relations of friendship subsisting 
between the British Government and the Maharajah through Captain Wade. 


ARTIOLE 5TH. 


When the Shah shall have established his authority in Cabool and Canda- 
har, he will annually send the Maharajah the following articles, v¢z., 55 high- 
bred horses of approved colour and pleasant: paces, 11 Persian scimitars, 7 
Persian poignards, 25 good mules, fruits of various kinds, both dry and fresh, 
and sirdas or musk melons of a sweet and delicate flavour (to be sent 
throughout the year), by the way of Cabool River to Peshawur, grapes, pome- 
granates, apples, quinces, almonds, raisins, pistahs or chesnuts, an abun- 
dant supply of each, as well as pieces of satin of every colour, choghas of fur, 
kinkhabs wrought with gold and silver, and Persian carpets, altogether to 
the number of 101 pieces. All these articles the Shah will continue to send 
every year to the Maharajah. 