


Seal and signature of Sigvature and seal of 
C.T. Mercatre. - Rayan Rungeet Sina, 
Company’s 
Se, |. ; (Sd.) Munro. 


Ratified by the Governor-General in Council on the 30th May 1809, 


24 Punjab Proper -Lahore—No. IX. Part I 


No. IX. 


TRANSLATION of the Paper delivered by the Rienr Honor- 
ABLE the GOVERNOR-GENERAL to ManaRasJan RoUNJEET 
Sine, on the evening of the 31st October 1831. 


In these days of auspicious commencement and happy close, while the 
sound of rejoicing has gladdened the firmament, a meeting has been arranged 
at a fortunate moment and under favourable circumstances between the heads 
of the two exalted Governments, on the terms of reciprocal friendship, ana 
in all cordiality, with reference to the relations established of old between the 
two States, and many interviews and conversations have been held with mirth 
and joy and mutual satisfaction; the rose buds of our hearts on both sides 
having expanded, and the garden of our sensations being in blossom from the 
exceeding joy and good feeling that prevailed. Of a truth the growing frieud- 
ship and cordiality which subsisted between the two Durbars of ‘exalted 
dignity have been watered and fostered by the hand of Providence, and by 
the showers of the Divine grace, so as to have reached a maturity and strength 
for which God be praised. Nevertheless, your Highness may derive further 
satisfaction from the assurance that, agreeably to the relations of friendship 
which have been thus established, in the same manner, from generation to 
generation, as settled by reciprocal engagements, shall the growth of this 
friendship continue and increase, and the materials of the existing good 
understanding be sought and extended at all times and at all places. There 
shall never at any time, or on any account whatsoever, be any difference or 
estrangement, nor shall such feelings in any way find entrance. But on the 
contrary, the example of the unanimity and long standing friendship shall, 
like the sun, shine glorious in history, and the reputation of it shall become a 
bye-word amongst the princes and rulers of the earth and be a subject of 
conversation to all ranks of men, in all countries, and at all times, so that, 
observing the fruits of this long standing friendship, the well-wishers of the 
two Governments shall rejoice, and their’ enemies and those who envy their 
good fortune shall be downcast and repentant. 


Hereafter all the gentlemen and authorities of the British Government 
will study to maintain in perpetuity the relations which exist, as established 
by mutual engagements of long standing, so as to raise and display to the 
world the standards of the mutual good faith, fidelity, and cordiality of the 
two Governments. 


These few lines have been committed to writing, asa testimony of 
friendship, at Rooper, and have been signed and sealed by me, to be delivered , 
in person at this last interview, on the 31st October 1831, corresponding with 
the 24th of Jumadee-oos-Sanee, 1247 Hegire, to His Highness Maharajah 
Runjeet Sing Behauder, 