


Cinnabar or Vermillion Shingurf eve : 


(True translation.) 


Abul Subaee (Sd.) GEORGE CLERK. 


Ranjeet 
Singh. 


Approved by the Governor-General on the 12th June 1839. 


Part I Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. XIII. $13 


No, XIII. 
TRANSLATION. 
Treaty with Mana Ragan KuurruK Sineo—1i840. 
(Signed by Mana Rasan Kuurrvux Sines.) 


Seal of 
Naha Rajah 
Kharruk 
Singh. 

Formerly a Treaty was executed by the Right Honorable Lord William 
Cavendish Bentinck, the Governor-General of India, on the 14th of Poos, 
Sumbut 1889 (corresponding with A, D. 1832), through Colonel (then Captain) 
Wade, concerning the navigation of the Sutle] and the Scinde rivers in the 
Khalsa territory, in concurrence with the wishes of both the friendly and allied 
Governments. Another Treaty on the subject was subsequently exeeuted 
through the same officer, in Sumbut 1891 (corresponding \with A.D. 18384), 
fixing a duty on every mercantile bont, independent of the quantity of its 
freight, and the nature of its merchandize. A third Treaty was executed on 
this subject, in accordance with the wishes of both Governments, on the arrival 
of Mr. Clerk, Agent to the Governor-General, at the Durbar, in May 1839, 
adjusting the rate of duties on merchandize, according to quantity and kind; 
and although at the end of that document so much was specified as that the 
two high powers should after this never propose a rate below (less than) that 
specified, yet, notwithstanding after this, when that gentleman came to the 
Khalsa Durbar at Amritsur, in Jeth, Sumbut 1897 (corresponding with 
May 1840), he explained the difficulties and inconvenienve which seemed to 
result, to trade under the system proposed last year, in consequence of the 
obstruction to boats for the purpose of search and the ignorance of traders, and 
the difficulty of adjusting duties according to the different kinds of articles 
freighted in the boats, and proposed to revise that system by fixing a scale, of 
duties proportionate to the measurement of boats, and not on the kind of 
commodities, if this arrangement should be approved of by both Governments, 
Having reported to his Government the circumstances of the case, he now 
drew up a Schedule of the rate. of duties on the mercantile boats navigating 
the Rivers Scinde and Sutlej, and forwarded it for the consideration of this 
friendly Durbar. The Khalsa Government, therefore, with a due regard to the 
established allianee, having added a few sentences in accordance with the late 
Treaties, and agreeably to what is already well understood, has signed and 
sealed the Schedule, and it shall never be at all liable to any contradiction, 
. difference, change or alteration, without the concurrence and concert of both 
Governments, in consideration of mutual advantages, upon condition it does 
not interfere with the established custom duties at Amritsur, Lahore, and 
other inland places, or the other rivers in the Khalsa territory. 


Artois 1. 
Grain, wood, and limestone will be free from duty. 