


Arriciz 61H. 
Each party shall address the other on terms of equality, - 


ARTIOLE 77TH. 


Merchants of Afghanistan, who will be desirous of trading to Lahore,. 
Amritsur, or any other parts of the Maharajah’s possessions, shall not be 


Part I Punjab Proper—Lahore—No, XIV. 85 


stopped or molested on their way; on the contrary, strict orders shall be 
issued to facilitate their intercourse, and the Maharajah engages to observe 
the same Jine of conduct on his part, in respect to traders who may wish to 
proceed to Afchanistan. 


ARTICLE 8TH. 


The Maharajah will yearly send to the Shah the following articles in the 
way of friendship, 55 pieces of shawls, 25 pieces of muslin, 1] dopattahs, 6 
pieces of kinkhab, 5 scarves, 5 turbans, 55 loads of Bareh rice (peculiar to 
Peshawar), . 


ARTICLE 9TH. 


Any of the Maharajah’s officers who may be deputed to Afghanistan 
to purchase horses or on any Other business, as well as those who may be sent 
by the Shah into the Punjab for the purpose of purchasing piece-goods or 
shawls, etc,, to the amount of Rs. 11,000, will be treated by both sides with 
due attention, and every facility will be afforded to them in the execution of 
these commissions, 


Axgticis l0TH. 


Whenever the armies of the two States may happen to be assembled at 
the same place, on no account shall the slaughter of kine be permitted to take 
place. 


ARTICLE 1LlTH. 


In the event of the Shah taking an auxiliary force from the Maharajah, 
whatever booty may be acquired from the Barakzais, in jewels, horses, arms, 
great and small, shall be equally divided between the two contracting parties. 
If the Shah should succeed in obtaining possession of their property without 
the assistance of the Maharajah’s troops, the Shah agrees to send a portion 
of it by his own agent to the Maharajah in the way of friendship. 


ARTICLE 12TH. ° 


An exchange of missions charged with letters and presents shall con- 
stantly take place between the two parties. 


Articre 131TH. 


Should the Maharajah require the aid of any of the Shah’s troops “in 
furtherance of the objects contemplated by this Treaty,” the Shah engages to 
send a force commanded by one of his principal officers; in like manner the 
Mabarajah will furnish the Shah, when ‘required, with an auxiliary force com- 
posed of Mahomedans, and commanded by one of his principal officers as far 
as Cabool, in furtherance of the objects contemplated by this Treaty. When 
the Maharajaht may go to Peshawur, the Shah will depute a Shabzadah to visit 
him, on which occasions the Maharajah will receive and dismiss him with the ~ 
honour and consideration due to his rank and dignity. 


36 Punjab Proper—~Lahore—No. XIV. Part I 


Articie 1418. 


The friends and enemies of each of the three high powers, that is to say, 
the British and Sikh Governments and Shah Shooja-ool-Moolk, shall be the 
friends and enemies of all. 


ARTIoLe L5tTH. 


Shah Shooja-ool-Moolk engages, after the attainment of bis object, to pay 
without fail to the Maharajah the sum of two lakhs of Rupees of the Nanuk- 
shahie or Kuldar currency, calculating from the date on which the Sikh troops 
‘maay be despatched for the purpose of reinstating His Majesty in Cabool, in 
consideration of the Maharajah’s stationing a force of not less than 5,000 
men, Cavalry and Infantry, of the Mahomedan persuasion, within the limits 
of the Peshawur Territory, for the support of the Shah, and to be sent to the 
aid of His Majesty, whenever the British Government, in concert and counsel 
with the Maharajah, shall deem their aid necessary; and when any matter 
of great importance may arise to the westward, such measures will be adopt- 
ed with revard to it as may seem expedient and proper at the time fo the 
British and Sikh Governments. In the event of the Maharajah requiring the 
aid of any of the Shah’s troops, a deduction will be made from the Subsidy 
proportioned to the period for which such aid may be afforded, and the British 
Government holds itself responsible for the punctual payment of the above 
sum annually to the Maharajah so long as the provisions of this Treaty are 
duly observed. 