


Dated at Lahore, the 26th of December 1832. 
Seal and signature at the top. 


(Sd.) W. C. Bewrinex. 

Seal of . . 
the Governor- ‘i C. T. Mrtoanre. 
General. : 


» A. Ross. 


Ratified by the Right Honorable the Governor-General in Council at 
Fort William in Bengal, this Thirteenth (13th) day of September, a.p. 1833. 


(Sd.) W. H. Macnacuten, 
Secretary to the Government. 


28 Punjab Proper~Lahore—No. XI. Part TI 


No. XI. 


SUPPLEMENTARY Treaty between the British GoveRNnMENT 
and Maga Ragan RuyJeet Srneu, for establishing a toll on 
the Indus, dated 29th November 1834. 


In conformity with the subsisting relations of friendship as established 
and confirmed by former Treaties between the Honorable the East India 
Company and His Highness Maha Rajah Runjeet Singh, and whereas in the 
5th Article of the Treaty concluded at Lahore, on the 26th day of December 
1832, it was stipulated that a moderate scale of duties should be fixed by the 
two Governments in concert, to be levied on all merchandize in transit up and 
down the Rivers Indus and Sutlej, the said Governments being now of opinion 
that, owing to the inexperience of the people of these countries in such 
matfers, the mode of levying duties then proposed (v7z.,on the value and 
quantity of goods) could not fail to give rise to mutual misunderstandings 
and reclamations, have, with a view to prevent these results, determined to 
substitute a toll, which shall be levied on all boats with whatever merchandize 
laden ; the following Articles have therefore been adopted as supplementary to 
the former Treaty, and in conformity with them, each Government engages 
that the toll shall be levied, and its amount neither be increased nor dimin- 
ished, except by mutual consent. 


Seal of 
Runjeet 
Singh. 


ArticrE 1, 

A toll of 570 Rupees shall be levied on all boats laden with merchandize 
in transit on the Rivers Indus and Sutlej, between the sea and Rooper, 
without reference to their size orto the weight or value of their cargo; the 
above toll to be divided among the different States, in proportion to the 
extent of territory which they possess on the banks of these rivers. 


; ARTICLE %. 

The portion’ of the above toll appertaining to the Lahore Chief, in right 
of his territory on both banks of these rivers, as determined in the subjoined 
scale, shall be levied opposite to Mithinkot on boats coming from the sea 
towards Rooper, and in the vicinity of Herree-ke-Pettin on boats going from 
Rooper towards the sea, and at no other place. 

"In right of territory on the right In right of territory on the left bank 
bank of the Rivers Indus and Sutlej, of the Rivers Indus and Sutlej, the 
Rupees 155-40. Maha Rajah’s Share of Rupees 67-15-0, 


Artiote 3. 


Tn order to facilitate the realization of the toll due to the different States, 
as well as for the speedy and satisfactory adjustment of any disputes which 


Part I Punjab Proper~—Lahore—No. XII. 29 


may arise connected with the safety of the navigation ‘and the welfare of tho 
trade by the new route, a British officer will reside opposite to Mithinkot— 
and a native agent on the part of the British Government opposite to Herree- 
ke-Pettin. These officers will be subject to the orders of the British Agent 
at Loodeanah, and the agents who may be appointed to reside at those places 
on the part of the other States concerned in the navigation, v/z., Bhawulpore 
and Sindh, together with those of Lahore, will co-operate with them in the 
execution of their duties. 