


ARTICLE 4, 


In order to guard against imposition on the part of merchants in making 
false complaints of being plundered of property which formed no part of their 
cargoes, they are required, when taking out their passport, to produce an in- 
voice of their cargo, which being duly authenticated, a copy of it will be 
annexed to their passports ; and wherever their boats may be Lrought to for 
the night, they are required to give immediate notice to the thanadars or 
officers of the place, and to request protection for themselves; at the same 
time showing the passports they may bave received at Mithinkot or Herreeke, 
as the case may be, 

Articue 5. 


Such parts of the 5th, 7th, 9th, and 10th Articles of the Treaty of the 
26th of December 1832, as have reference to the fixing aduty on the value 
and quantity of merchandize, and to the mode of its collection, are hereby 
rescinded, and the foregoing Articles substituted in their place, agreeably to 
which and the conditions of the preamble the toll will be levied. 


(Sd.)  W.C. Bewnrincx. 


‘caus »  _W. Browz. 
General. 9 A. Ross. 
” W. Morison. 


Ratified by the Right Honourable the Governor-General of India in 


ea at Fort William in Bengal, this Twenty-Third day of January, 4.D. 
835. 


(Sd,) W. H. Maonaearen, 
; Secretary to the Government of India, 


No. XII. 


AGREEMENT entered into with the GovernMENT of LanorE, 
regarding the duties to be levied on the transit of Merchandize 
by the Rivers Sutlej and Indus, in modification of the Sup- 
plementary Articles of the Treaty of 1832. 


Dated 19th May 1839. 
Objections having been urged against the levy of the same duty. on a 
boat of a small as on one of a large size; and the merchants having solicited 


30 Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. XIT. Part I 


that the duties might be levied on the maundage or measurement of the boats, 
or on the value of the goods: it is therefore agreed, that hereafter the whole 
duty shall be paid at one place, and either at Loodiana or Ferozepore, or at 
Mithinkot: and that the duty be levied on the merchandize, and not on the 
boats, as follows :— 


Rates of Duty leviable by Maha Rajak Runject Singh on merchandize navi- 
gating the Sutle; and the Indus, 


Bs. a. 9. Rs. a. pe 
Sh: iu ae «» 10 0 Of Pellitory ... ee Akurkorba eas 
ns wea eee on 8 0 Cloves <a is Kurafal ake 
Indigo see wee or 28 0 | Nutmeg... wo» Saeefal is 
Almonds... Pe oe a) Maco pe oo. dJavattree , 
Pishtashes ... oa jas H Cinnamon... ove parenernce ee 
isi mall and large aaa ie ocorma 
Prise oi is “1a 9 0 | Dry Dates .. “UU Khooshk 
Pine Kernel... ws ad ie Tarbith Root ws Toorbood i, 
Sulphur ae a ove ue Cocoanut ... «+ Naryeel sas 
Figs ose dee one a0 | Aegundh ... e» =Asgundh ww? 0 48 
And other dried fruits ... a tad Orpiment ... «» Hurtal “ee 
Red Dye (Rubia Munjeet) Pr .. © 8 0 | Bamboo Sugar «. Tubasheer -_ 
Silk of all sorts, manufactured and otherwise Armenian Larth .. Gil-i-Armunnee .,, 
Broadcloth of every description ... ee Black Pepper «. Fildil-i-Seeah  .., 
Velvet oe ose ab «> 0 6 0 | Bed ditto... we Filfil-}-Darraz .., 
Batin Se in Sei Galluut is. +» Mazoo one 
Chintzes or figured Velveteen ate haan eee Pi bes Zhurmobiel oa 
‘ Parcheb 0: 28 Root ... ar obcheepeo — we 
White Cotton Cloth of f “Roiemonee Hume) Morinda Citrifolia ., Au... a 
i ns mah Kissum ... Betelnat... «« Sonparee wy 
Chintzes of all sorts .., Aksam-i-Cheent.., Yea oe oe Chah tes 
Sugar a +» Sakurturee oo All sorts of Glassware ... asenat Sheesh 
Molasses —«.s Shuker Soorkh : alla we 
“*? and Kund Seeah Assofetida ... «. Angozeh ee | 040 
Clarified Batter ». Roghunzurd —.,. B’dellium ... «» Googul aa 
oil «» Roghun Seeah ... Mneen one +» Maeen sae 
Costus ie a. Kooth wf 0 4 0 pe a we ee ates Be ow 
8 tee eee t Sea Phi ave tee bitkar ide 
Sugarcandy we a Fara card st Mooltan Earth 2 Gil-i-Mooltanes «..J 
The emblic myrobalans Amleh . Copper oe se Miss ow) 
The belleric myrobalans Bolleleh ee Tin oe . Kullee ane 
Cotton nts «» Pumbab see Quicksilver .,, «. Seemaub eis 
Small Gall ... «. Hulleleh Zange.| Lead eee «. Soorb... ~~ 0 230 
Chestnut... ve Akhrot we Pewter. se Jab ove | 
Anise Seed _... + Badeean Ae rage oo «. Birunjee me 
Cichoriam Endwia «. Kasnee we) Bell Metal ... «» Roeen... ae | 
Mellon Seed... +. Khupyaryn see Articles of Ironmongery Aksam-i-Ahua ,,, 
Tormeric we Zurd chob- és And other articles of Import from Bombay ... 
Ginger coe we Adruk ass Rice ive oo» Birunj a 
A kind of Collyriam ... Russout - Wheat ooo «. Gondsom sas 
Alves oo ew. Sibr 6 Gram od +» Nukbood aan 
Saffron te oo pafen oa Mosnch sku 
ti ase « Katha ie 7 ee aie 
Sone. “I Reetha eG. ao |e ‘ Mash “Lo g0 
i US ws ene 
The Jane of the Birch Bhoj Puttur “| Barley sy Pegs ey * 
Dry Ginger .., we Zanjbeel kes Anisseed a. + Koonjad ‘ay 
ae other iNpaslar Illnech vis Baja aes 
eee a and allan. Indian Corn... of tke i 
Beeds of ditto +. Danh Ilaechee ... Jowar... ond 