


ARTICLE 2, 


The British Government hereby agrees that in case a pacification should 
vot be effected between that Government and Jeswunt Rao Holkar, the British 
Army shall move from its present encampment on the banks of the River 
Beah as soon as Jeswunt Rao Holkar aforesaid shall have marched with his 
army to the distance of 30 coss from Amritsur; and that in any Treaty 
which may hereafter be concluded between the British Government and Jes- 
wunt Rao Holkar, it shall be stipulated that, immediately after the conclusion 
of the said Treaty, Holkar shall evacuate the territories of the Sikhs and march 
towards his own, and that he shall in no way whatever injure or destroy such 
parts of the Sikh country as may lie in his route, The British Government 
further agrees that as long as the said Chieftains Runjeet Sing and Futteh 
Sing abstain from holding any friendly connection with the enemies of that 
Government, or from committing’ any act of hostility on their own parts 
against the said Government, the British Armies shall never enter the terri- 
tories of the said Chieftains, nor will the British Government form any plans 
for the seizure or sequestration of their possessions or property, 


Dated 1st January 1806, corresponding with 10th Shawul, 1220 H. E. 


Seal of Run- Segl of 
e ; egl 0 
jeet Sing. Futteh Sing. 


 eemeneee 


Part I Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. VIII. 23 


No. VIII. 


TREATY with the Ragan or Lanore, 1809. 


’ Whereas certain differences which had arisen between the British Govern- 
ment and the Rajah of Lahore have been happily and amicably adjusted, and 
both parties being anxious to maintain the relations of perfect amity and 
concord, the following Articles of Treaty, which shall be binding on the heirs 
and successors of the two parties, have been concluded by Rajab Runjeet Sing 
on his own part, and by the agency of Charles Theophilus Metcalfe, Esquire, 
on the part of the British Government. 


ARTICLE 1. 

Perpetual friendship shall subsist between the British Government and 
the State of Lahore. The latter shall be considered, with respect to the 
former, to be on the footing of the most favoured powers; and the British 
Government will haye no concern with the territories and subjects of the 
Rajah to the northward of the River Sutlej. 


ARTICLE 2, 


The Rajah will never maintain in the territory occupied by him and his 
dependants, on the left bank of the River Sutlej, more troops than are neces- 
sary for the internal duties of that territory, nor commit or suffer any 
encroachments on the possessions or rights of the Chiefs in its vicinity. 


ARricce 8. 


In the event of a violation of any of the preceding Articles, or of a 
departure from the rules of friendship on the part of either State, this Treaty 
shall be considered to be null and void: 


ARTICLE 4, 


This Treaty, consisting of four Articles, having been settled and con- 
eluded at Amritsur, on the 25th day of April 1809, Mr. Charles -Theophilus 
Metcalfe has delivered to the Rajah of Lahore a'copy of the same, in English 
and Persian, under his seal and signature, and the said Rajah has. delivered 
another copy of the same, under his seal and signature; and Mr. Charles 
‘ Theophilus Metcalfe engages to procure, within the space of two months, a 
copy of the same duly ratified by the Right Honourable the Governor-General 
in Council, on the receipt of which by the Rajah, the preseut Treaty shall be 
deemed complete and binding on both parties, and the copy of it now deli- 
vered to the Rajah shall be returned. ; 