


82 Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. XIII. Part I 


ARTICLE 2. 


With exception to the above, every commodity to pay duty according to 
the measurement of the boat. | 


ARTICLE 3. 


Duty on a boat not exceeding two hundred and fifty maunds 
of freight, proceeding from the foot of the hills, Roopur or 
Loodiana, to Mithenkote or Rojan, or from Rojan or 
Mithenkote to the foot of the hills, Roopur or Loodiana, 


; will be e e e e a e e . Rs, 50 
viz. 
From the foot of the: Hills to Ferozepore, or back : « 20 
From —to Bhawulpore, or back . 15 


From Bhawulpore to Mithenkote or Rojan, or back , - 1. 
The whole trip, up or down — 50 


Duty on a boat above two hundred and fifty maunds, but not 
exceeding five hundred maunds, from the foot of the hills, 
Roopur or Loodiana, to Mithenkote or Kojan, or from 
Rojan or Mithenkote to the foot of the hills, Roopur or 


Loodiaua, willbe . e ° ° . » Rs, 100 
viz. 
From the foot of the hills to Ferozepore, or back ‘ - 40 
Frum Ferozepore to Bhawulpore, or back ‘ ‘ - 380 


From Bhawulpore to Mithenkote or Rojan, or back . - 80 
The whole trip, up or down -— 100 
Duty on all boats above five hundred maunds will be . » Rs, 150 


vz, 
From the foot of the hills to Ferozepore, or back : - 60 
From Ferozepore to Bhawulpore, or back . . 45 


From Bhawulpvre to Mithenkote or Rojan, or back : » 45 


The whole trip, up or down. — 150 


ARTICLE 4, 
Boats to be classed 1, 2, or 8, and the same to be written on the boat, 
and every boat to be registered. 
ARTICLE 5. 


These duties on merchandize frequenting the Sutlej and Scinde, are not to 
interfere with the duties on the banks of other rivers, or with the established 


Part I Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. XIV. 338 


inland custom houses, throughout the Khalsa Territory, which will remain on 
their usual footing. 


Dated 18th Assar, Sumbut 1897, corresponding with 27th June 1840. 
(True translation.) 
(Sd.) G, Crerr, 
Agent.to the Governor-General, 


Approved by the Governor-General, 10th August 1840, 


No. XIV. 


Treaty between the British GOVERNMENT, ManARAJAH 
Runseet Sinen and SHaw SHOOJAH-00L-MooLK—1838, 


Whereas a Treaty was formerly concluded between Maharajah Runjeet 
Singh and Shah Shoojah-ool-Moolk, consisting of fourteen Articles, exclusive 
of the preamble and the conclusion, and whereas the execution of the provi- 
sions of the said Treaty was suspended for certain reasons, and whereas at 
this time Mr. W. H. Macnaghten having been deputed by the Right Honour- 
able George Lord Auckland, 6.c.8., Governor General of India, to the pre- 
sence of Maharajah Runjeet Singh, and vested with full powers to form a 
Treaty in a manner consistent with the friendly engagements subsisting 
between the two States, the Treaty aforesaid is revived and concluded with 
certain modifications and four new Articles have been added thereto, with the 
approbation of, and in concert with, the British Government, the provisions 
whereof, as contained in the following eighteen Articles, will be duly and 
faithfully observed. 