


Articie 38. 


The Lahore Government engages to apply itself immediately and earnestly 
to the reorganization of its army according to the prescribed conditions, 
and to communicate fully with the British authorities left at Lahore, as to 
the progress of such reorganization, and as to the location of the troops. 


ARTICLE 4, 


If the Lahore Government fails in the performance of the conditions 
of the foregoing Article, the British Government.shall be at liberty to with- 
draw the force from Lahore at any time before the expiration of the period 
specified in Article 1. 


ARTICLE 5, 


The British Government agrees to respect the bond fide rights of those 
jachiredars, within the territories ceded by Articles 8 and 4 of the Treaty 
of Lahore, dated 9th instant, who were attached to the families of the late 
Maharajahs Runjeet Sing, Kurruk Sing and Shere Sing; and the British 

, Government will maintain those jaghiredars in their bond fide possessions 
during their lives, 


Artio.s 6. 


The Lahore Government shall receive the assistance of the British Local 
Authorities in recovering the arrears of revenue justly due to the Lahore 
Government from the kardas and managers in the territories ceded by the 
provisions of Articles 3 and 4 of the Treaty of Lahore, to the close of 
the khureef harvest of the current year, viz., 1902 of the Sumbut bikramajeet- 


Part I Punjab Proper~Lahore—No. XVIII. : 45 


ARTICLE 7. 


The Lahore Government shall be at liberty to remove from the forts, in 
the territories specified in the foregoing Article, all treasure and State pro- 
perty, with the exception of guns. Should, however, the British Government 
desire to retain any part of the said property, they shall be at liberty to do 
so, paying for the same at a fair valuation, and the British officers shall give 
their assistance to the Lahore Government in disposing on the spot of such 
part of the aforesaid property as the Lahore Government may not wish to 
remove, and the British Officers may not desire to retain. 


ARTICLE 8. 

Commissioners shall be immediately appointed by the two Governments 
to settle and lay down the boundary between the two States, as defined by 
Article 4 of the Treaty of Lahore, dated March 9th, 1846. 

(Sd.) H. Harpines. [L. S.} 
(Sd.) Maaarasan Dauiesr Sine. [L. S.] 


Pe Buags Ram Sine. [L. 8.] 
3 Rayan Lat Sine. ([L. S.J 
a Sirpar Tes Sine. = [L. 8.) 
» Sirvar Caorror Sine Arrargewatia. [ L. 8.] 
re Sirpar Runsors Sine Maszetaia, [L. 8.] 
4%) Dewan Deena Nata. [L. S.] 
. Fuqeer Noorooppzen. [L. S.] 
No. XVIII. 


Anrtioues of AGREEMENT concluded between the BRITISH GOVERN- 
MENT and the Lanore DuRBAR on the 16th December 1846. 


Whereas the Lahore Durbar and the principal Chiefs and Sardars of the 
State have in express terms communicated to the British Government their 
anxious desire that the Governor-General should give his aid and assistance 
to maintain the administration of the Lahore State during the minority of 
Maharajah Dulleep Sing, and have declared this measure to be indispensable 
for the maintenance of the Government ; and whereas the Governor-General 
has, under certain conditions, consented to give the aid and assistance solicited, 
the following Articles of Agreement, in modification of the Articles of Agree- 