


Artiore 10. 


If the British Government should, at any time, desire to pass troops 
through the territories of His Highness the Maharajah, for the protection of 
the British Territories, or those of their Allies, the British Troops shall, on 
such special occasion, due notice being given, be allowed to pass through the 
Lahore Territories. In such case the Officers of the Lahore State will afford 
facilities in providing supplies and boats for the passage of rivers, and the 
British Government will pay the full price of all such provisions and boats, 
and will make fair compensation for all private property that may be endamag- 

a 


G 


42 Punjab Proper ~ Lahore—No. XVI. Part I 


ed. The British Government will, moreover, observe all due consideration to 
the religious feelings of the inhabitants of those tracts through which the 
army may pass. 


Artictze ll. 


The Maharajah engages never to take or to retain in bis service any 
British subject—nor the subject of any European or American State—without 
the consent of the British Government, 


ARTICLE 12. 


In consideration of the services rendered by Rajah Golab Sing, of Jummoo, 
to the Lahore State, towards procuring the restoration of the relations of amity 
between the Lahore and British Governments, the Maharajah hereby agrees to 
recognize the Independent Sovereignty of Rajah Golab Sing in such terri- 
tories and districts in the hills as may be made over to the said Rajah Golab 
Sing, by separate Agreement between himself and the British Government, 
with the dependencies thereof, which may have been in the Rajah’s possession 
since the time of the late Maharajah Kburruck Sing, and the British Govern- 
ment, in consideration of the good conduct of Rajah Golab Sing, also agrees 
to recognize his independence in such territories, and to admit him to the 
privileges of a separate Treaty with the British Government, 


Agticte 13. 
In the event of any dispute or difference arising between the Lahore 
State and Rajah Golab Sing, the same shall be referred to the arbitration of 
the British Government, and by its decision the Maharajah engages to abide. 


Article 14, 


The limits of the Lahore Territories shall not be, at any time, changed 
without the concurrence of the British Government. 


Articie 15. 


The British Government will not exercise any interference in the internal 
administration of the Lahore State—but in all cases or questions which may 
be referred to the British Government, the Governor-General will give the 
aid of his advice and good offices for the furtherance of the interests of the 
Lahore Government. 


Articie 16, 


The subjects of either State shall, on visiting the territories of the other, 
be on the footing of the subjects-of the most favoured nation. 

This Treaty, consisting of sixteen articles, has been this day settled by 
Frederick Currie, Esquire, and Brevet-Major Henry Montgomery Lawrence 
acting under the directions of the Right Hon’ble Sir Henry Hardinge, o.0.3., 