


46 Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. XVIII. Part I 


ment executed at Lahore on the 11th March last, have been concluded on the 
part of the British Government by Frederick Currie, Esquire, Secretary to 
Government of India, and Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Montgomery Lawrence, 
c.B., Agent to the Governor-General, North-West Frontier, by virtue of 
full powers to that effect vested in them by the Right Honorable Viscount 
Hardinge, c.o.8., Governor-General, and on the part of His Highness 
Maharajah Dulleep Sing, by Sirdar Tej Sing, Sirdar Shere Sing, Dewan 
Dena Nath, Fukeer Nooroodeen, Rai Kishen Chund, Sirdar Runjore Sing 
Majethea, Sirdar Utter Sing Kaleewalla, Bhaee Nidhan Sing, Sirdar Khan 
Sing Majethea, Sirdar Shumshere Sing, Sirdar Lall Sing Morarea, Sirdar 
Kher Sing Sindhanwalla, Sirdar Urjun Sing Rungrungalea; acting with 
the unanimous consent and concurrence of the Chiefs and Sirdars of the 
State assembled at Lahore. 


Arvtictes 1. 


All and every part of the Treaty of peace between the British Govern- 
ment and the State of Lahore, bearing date the 9th day.of March 1846, 
except in so far as it may be temporarily modified in respect to Clause 15 of 
the said Treaty by this engagement, shall remain binding upon the two 
Governments. 


ARTICLE 2, 


A British Officer, with an efficient establishment of assistants, shall be 
appointed by the Governor-General to remain at Lahore, which officer shall 
have full authority to direct and control all matters in every Department of 
the State. 


ARTICLE 3. 


Every attention shall be paid in conducting the administration to the 
feelings of the people, to preserving the national institutions and customs, and 
to maintaining the just rights of all classes. 


ARTICLE 4, 


Changes in the mode and details of administration shall not be made, 
except when found necessary for effecting the objects set forth in the fore- 
going Clause, and’ for securing the just dues of the Lahore Government. 
These details shall be conducted by Native officers as at’ present, who shall be 
appointed and superintended by a Council of Regepey composed of Jeading 
Sane and Sirdars acting under the control and guidance of the British 
Resident. 


ARTICLE 5, 


‘The following persons shall in the first instance constitute the Council 
of Regency, vzz., Sirdar Tej Sing, Sirdar Shere Sing Attareewalla, Dewan 
Dena Nath, Fukeer Nooroodeen, Sirdar Runjore Sing Majethea, Bhaee 


Part I Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. XVIII. 47 


Nidhan Sing, Sirdar Utter Sing Kaleewalla, Sirdar Shumshere Sing Sin- 
dhanwalla, and no change shal] be made in the persons thus nominated, with- 
out the consent of the British Resident, acting under the orders of tbe 
Governor-General. 


ARTICLE 6, 


The administration of the country shall be conducted by this Council of 
Regency in such manner as may be determined on by themselves in consult- 
ation with the British Resident, who shall have full authority to direct and 
control the duties of every department, 