


Part I Punjab Proper—Leahore—No. XVII. 43 


Governor-General, on the part of the British Government, and by Bhaee Ram 
Sing, Rajuh Lal Sing, Sirdar Tej Sing, Sirdar Chuttur Sing Attareewalla, 
Sirdar Runjore Sing Majeethia, Dewan Deena Nath, and Fuqueer Noorooddeen, 
on the part of the Maharajah Dhuleep Sing, and the said Treaty has been 
this day ratified by the seal of the Right Hon’ble Sir Henry Hardinge, 


G.c.B., Governor-General, and by that of His Highness Maharajah Dhuleep 
Sing. 


Done at Lahore, this ninth day of March, in theyear of Our Lord one 
thousand eight hundred and forty-six, corresponding with the tenth day of 
Rubbee-ool-awul, 1262 Hijree, and: ratified on the same date. : 


(Sd)  H. Harvines. [L, 8.) 
(Sd.)  Manarasan Duuneer Sine. [L. 8.] 


‘i Buare Ram Sine. [L.8.] 
‘ Ragan Lat Sine. [L. S.] 
3 Srrpaz Tey Sine. [L. 8.) 
5 Smpark Cuurtor Sine Arrarggwatta. [L. §.] 
3 Strpar Runyors Sing Massgruza. [L. §,] 
ms Dewan Deena Nats. [L. 8.] 
Ms Fuquzer Noorooppgen. [Iu. S.] 
No. XVII. 


ARTICLES oF AGREEMENT concluded between the Britisn Gov- 
ERNMENT and the Lanore Durzar on the 11th March 1846. 


Whereas the Lahore Government has solicited the Governor-General to 
leave a British Force at Lahore, for the protection of the Maharajab’s person 
and of the Capital, till the reorganization of the Lahore Army, according 
to the provisions of Article 6 of the Treaty of Lahore, dated the 9th instant; 
and Whereas the Governor-General has, on certain cunditions, consented to 
the measure ; and Whereas it is expedient that certain matters concerning the 
territories ceded by Articles 3 and 4 of the aforesaid Treaty should be 
specifically determined, the following eight Articles of Agreement have this 
day been concluded between the aforementioned contracting parties. 


ARTICLE I. 


The British Government shall leave at Lahore, till the close of the current 
year, A.D. 1846, such force as shall seem to the Governor-General adequate 


44 Punjab Proper—Lahore—WNo. XVII. Part £ 


for the purpose of protecting the person of the Maharajah and the inhabitants 
of the City of Lahore, during the reorganization of the Sikh Army, in accord- 
ance with the provisions of Article 6 of the Treaty of Lahore. That force 
to be withdrawn at any convenient time before the expiration of the year, if 
the object to be fulfilled shall, in the opinion of the Durbar, have been at- 
tained—but the force shall not be detained at Lahore beyond the expiration of 
the current year. 


ARTIOLE 2, 


The Lahore Government agrees that the force left at Lahore for the pur- 
pose specified in the foregoing Article, shall be placed in full possession of 
the Fort and the City of Lahore, and that the Lahore troops shall be removed 
from within the City. The Lahore Government engages to furnish convenient 
quarters for the officers and men of the said force, and to pay to the British 

“Government all the extra expenses in regard to the said force, which may be 
incurred by the British Government, in consequence of the troops being em- 
ployed away from their own Cantonments and in a Foreign Territory. 