


Argrictr 1. 


There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between the British Govern- 
ment on the one part, and Maharajah Dholeep Sing, his heirs and succes- 
sors on the other. 


ARticte 2, 


The Maharajah of Lahore renounces for himself, his heirs and successors, 
all claim to, or connection with, the territories lying to the south of the River 
Sutlej, and engages never to have any concern with those territories or the 
inhabitants thereof. 


Arricie 8. 


The Maharajah cedes to the Hon’ble Company, in perpetual sovereignty, 
all his forts, territories and rights in the Doab or country, hill and plain, 
situated between the Rivers Beas and Sutlej. 


ARTICLE 4, ‘5 


The British Government having demanded from the Lahore State, as 
indemnification for the expenses of the war, in addition to the cession of 
territory described in Article 8, payment of one and half crore of Rupees, 
and the Lahore Government, being unable to pay the whole of this sum at 
this time, or to give security satisfactory to the British Government for its 
eveutual payment, the Maharajah cedes to the Honorable Company, in per- 
petual sovereignty, as equivalent for one crore of Rupees, all his forts, terri- 
tories, rights and interests in the hill countries, which are situated between the 
Rivers Beas and Indus, including the Provinces of Cashmere and Haza‘ah. 


ARTICLE 5, 
The Maharajah will pay to the British Government the sum of 50 lakhs 
of Rupees on or before the ratification of this Treaty. 


ARTICLE 6, 


The Maharajah engages to disband the mutinous troops of the Lahore 
Army, taking from them their arms—and His Highness agrees to reorganize 


Part I Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. XVI. 41 


the Regular or Aeen Regiments of Infantry, upon the system, and according 

to the Regulations as to pay and allowances, observed in the time of the late 

Maharajah Runjeet Sing. The Maharajah further engages to pay up all 

yan to the soldiers that are discharged, under the provisions of this 
rticle. 


Articte 7, 


The Regular Army of the Lahore State shall henceforth be limited to 25 
Battalions of Infantry, consisting of 800 bayonets each—with twelve thousand 
‘Cavalry—this number at no time to be exceeded without the concurrence of the 
British Government. Should it be necessary at any time—for any special | 
cause— that this force should be increased, the cause shall be fully explained 
to the British Government, and when the special necessity shall have passed, 
the regular troops shall be again reduced to the standard specified in the 
former Clause of this Article. 


ARTIOLE 8. 


The Maharajah will surrender to the British Government all the guns— 
thirty-six in number—which have been pointed against the British Troops— 
and which, having been placed on the right bank of the River Sutlej, were 
not captured at the battle of Subraon. 


ARTICLE 9. 


The control of the Rivers Beas and Sutlej, with the continuations of the 
latter river, commonly called the Gurrah and the Punjond, to the confluence 
of the Indus at Mithunkote—and the control of the Indus from Mithunkote 
to the borders of Beloochistan, shall, in respect to tolls and ferries, rest with 
the British Government. The provisions of this Article shall not interfere 
with the passage of boats belonging to the Lahore Government on the said 
rivers, for the purposes of traffic or the conveyance of passengers up and down 
their course. Regarding the ferries between the two countries respectively, 
at the several ghats of the said rivers, it is agreed that the British Govern- 
ment, after defraying all the expenses of management and establishments, 
shall account to the Lahore Government for one-half of the net profits of the 
ferry collections. The provisions of this Article have no reference to the ferries 
on that part of the River Sutlej which forms the boundary of Bhawulpore and 
Lahore respectively. 