


Terms granted to the Maharajah Dulleep Sing Bahadoor, on the part 
of the Honorable East India Company, by Henry Meirs Elliot, Esq., Foreign 
Secretary to the Government of India, and Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Henry 
Montgomery Lawrence, .0.B., Resident, in virtue of full powers vested in 
them by the Right Honorable James, Earl of Dalhousie, Knight of the Most 
Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle, one of Her Majesty’s Most 
Honorable Privy Council, Governor-General appointed by the Honorable East 
India Company to direct and contro] all their affairs in the East Indies, and 
accepted on the part of His Highness the Maharajah, by Rajah Tej Sing, 
Rajah Deena Nath, Bbaee Nidhan Sing, Fukeer Noorooddeen, Gundur Sing, 
Agent of Sirdar Shere Sing Sindhanwalla, and Sirdar Lall Sing, Agent and 
son of Sirdhar Uttur Sing Kaleanwalla, Members of the Council of Regency, 
invested with full power and authority on the part of His Highness. 


Ist.—His Highness the Maharajah Dulleep Sing shall resign for himself, 
his heirs, and his successors, all right, title, and claim to the sovereignty of 
the Punjab, or to any sovereign power whatever. . 

2ud.—All the property of the State, of whatever description and where- 
soever found, shall be confiscated to the Honorable East India Company, in 
part payment of the debt due by the State of Lahore to the British Govern- 
ment, and of the expenses of the war. 

‘3rd.—The Gem called the Kob-i-noor, which was taken from Shah 
Shooja-ool-Moolk by Maharajah Runjeet Sing, shall be surrendered by the 
Maharajah of Lahore to the Queen of England. . 

4th.— His Highness Dulleep Sing shal] receive from the Honorable East: 
India Company, for the support of himself, his relatives, and the servants of 
the State, a pension not Jess than four and not exceeding five lakhs of Com- 
pany’s Rupees per annum. 

5th.—His Highness shall be treated with respect and honor. He shall 
retain the title of Maharajah Dulleep Sing Bahadoor, and he shall continue 
to receive, during his.life, such portion of the abovenamed pension as may be 


H 


50 Punjab Proper—Lakore—No. XIX. Part I 


allotted to himself personally, provided he shall remain obedient to the 
British Government, and shall reside at such place as the Governor-General 
of India may select. 


Granted and accepted at Lahore, on the 29th of March 1849, and ratified 
by the Right Honorable the Governor-General on the 5th April 1849, 


——_ 


(Sd.)  Masarasan Duwieep suio| L s| 


wd 


os RasAu Tzy Sina. | L. 8, 


— 


1.8, 


(Sd.) Da.nousiz. 


(Sd.)  Rasan Deena Natu. E 8. | 


—e 


H. M. ELLiot.’ L. Ss. | 
(Sd.) Buaze Nipaan Sina. L, 8. 
», H. M, Lawrznoz.| L. | 
(Sd.) Fuxerr NooroopprEen, ie S. 
” Gunpur Sina, L. 8. 
Agent of Sirdar Shere Sing, 
Sindhanwalla. 
” Sirpar Laut Sina, L. 8. | 


Agent and Son of —— 
Sirdar Uttur Sing Kaleanwalla. 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala. BL 


IIL.—CIS-SUTLEJ STATES. 


From Reports by the Punjab Government and original papers in the Foreign 
Office. 