

_ Notwithstanding the disorganised state: of the Lahore Government 
during the-last two years and many most unfriendly proceedings on the: part 


- 


38 {Punjab Proper—Lahore~No. XV. Part f 


of the Durbar, the Governor-General in Council has continued to evince his 
desire to maintain the relations of amity and concord which had so long exist- 
ed between the two States for the mutual interests and happiness of both. 
He has shown on every occasion the utmost. forbearance from consideration to 

the helpless state of the infant Maharajah Dulleep Singh, whom the British 

aoe had recognised as the successor to the late Maharajah Shere 
ign, ‘ 

The Governor-General in Council sincerely desired to see a strong Seikh 
Government re-established in the Punjab, able to control its army, and to 
protect its subjects. He had not, up to the present moment, abandoned the 
hope of seeing that important object effected by the patriotic efforts of the 
Chiefs and people of that country, 

The Seikh Army recently marched from Lahore towards the British 
Frontier, as it was alleged by the orders of the Durbar, for the purpose of 
invading the British Territory. , 

The Governor-General’s Agent, by direction of the Governor-General 
demanded an explanation of this movement—and no reply being returned 
within a reasonable time, the demand was repeated The Governor-General 
unwilling to believe in the hostile intentions of the Sikh Government, to 
which no provocation had been given, refrained from taking any measures 
which might have a tendency to embarrass the Government of the Maha- 
rajah or to induce collision between the two States. 

When no reply was given to the repeated demand for explanation, ard 
while active military preparations were continued at Lahore, the Governor- 
General considered it necessary to order the advance of troops towards the 
Frontier to reinforce the Frontier posts. 


The Seikh Army has now, without a shadow of provocation, invaded the 
British Territories. 

The Governor-General must therefore take measures for effectually pro 
tecting the British Provinces, for vindicating the authority of the British 
Government, and for punishing the violators of treaties and the disturbers of 
the public peace. 

The Governor-General hereby declares the possessions of Maharajah 
Dulleep Sing. on the left or British bank of the Sutlej confiscated and annex- 
ed to the British Territories, 


The Governor-General will respect the existing rights of all jaghiredars, 
zemindars, and tenants in the said possessions, who, by the course they now 
pursue, evince their fidelity to the British Government. 


"he Governor-General hereby calls upon all the Chiefs and Sirdars in the 
protected territories to co-operate cordially with the British Government for 
the punishment of the common enemy, and for the maintenance of order in 
these States, Those of the Chiefs who show alacrity and fidelity in the dis- 
charge of this duty, which they owe to the protecting power, will find their 
interests promoted thereby, and those who take a contrary course will be 
irate as enemies to the British Government, and will be punished accord- 
ingly. ; 