


ARtIcLE 167TH. 


Shah Shooja-ool-Moolk agrees to relinquish for himself, his heirs and 
successors all claims of supremacy and arrears of tribute over the country now 
held by the Ameers of Sinde (and which will continue to belong to the 
Ameers and successors in perpetuity), on condition of the payment to him by 
the Ameers of such a sum as may be determined under the mediation of the 
British Government, fifteen Jakhs of such payment being made over by him 
to Maharajah Runjeet Singh. On these payments being completed, Article 4 
of the Treaty of the 12th of March 1888 will be considered cancelled, and 
the customary interchange of letters and suitable presents hetween the Maha- 
rajah and the Ameers of Sinde shall be maintained as heretofore. 


Articizs 17TH, 


When Shah Shooja-ool-Moolk shall have succeeded in establishing his 
authority in Afghanistan, he sball not attack or molest his nephew, the 
ruler of Herat, in the possession of the territories now subject to his Govern- 
ment. 


Artiote 187H. 
Shah Shooja-ool-Moolk binds himself, bis heirs and successors to refrain 


from entering into negotiations with any Foreign State, without the know- 
ledge. and consent of the British and Sikh Governments, and to oppose any 


Part I Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. XV. 37 


power having the design to invade the British or Sikh territories by force of 
arms to the utmost of his ability. 

The three Powers, parties to this Treaty, vzz., the British Government, 
Maharajah Runjeet Singh, uad Shah Shooja-ool-Moolk, cordially agree to 
the foregoing articles, There shall be no deviation from them, and in that 
case the present Treaty shall be considered binding for ever, and this Treaty 
shall come into operation from and after the date on which the seals and 
signatures of the three contracting parties shall have been affixed thereto, 


Done at Lahore, this 26th day of June in the year of Our Lord 19838, 
corresponding with the 15th of the month of Asark 1895—Era of Bikarmajzt. 


Signed and sealed this 26th day of July, in the year A. D. 1838, at Simla 


(Sd.) AUCKLAND. 


: Seal and Seal and 
Pate . : _ signature signature of 
. ps nor of Runjeet Sbah Shoeoja- 
eneral, , Singh. ool-Moolk.. 
No. XV. 
Procnamation by the Rigut Honoraste the Governor-GEnerator InpIa— 
1845. 


The British Government has ever been on terms of friendship with that 
of the Punjab. 

In the year 1809, a Treaty of amity and concord was concluded between 
the British Government and the late Maharajah Runjeet Singh, the condi- 
tions of which have always been faithfully observed by the British Govern- 
ment, and were scrupulously fulfilled by the late Maharajab. 

The same friendly relations have been maintained with the successors 
of Maharajah Runjeet Singh by the British Government up to the present 
time. 

Since the death of the late Maharajah Shere Singh, the disorganised 
state of the Lahore Government has made it incumbeut on the Governor- 
General in Council to adopt precautionary measures for the protection of the 
British Frontier, The nature of these measures and the cause of their 
adoption were at the time fully explained to the Lahore Durbar. 