


Part I Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. XVI. 39 


The inhabitants of all the territories on the left bank of the Sutlej are 
hereby directed to abide peaceably in their respective villages, where they will 
receive efBcient protection by the British Government. All parties of men 
found in armed bands, who can give no satisfactory account of their proceed- 
ings, will be treated as disturbers of the public peace. 


All subjects of the British Government and those who possess estates on 
both sides the River Sutlej, who by their faithful adherence to the British 
Government, may be liable to sustain loss, shall be indemnified and secured in 
all their just rights and privileges, 

On the other hand, all subjects:of the British Government, who shall 
continue in the service of the Lahore State, and who disobey this Proclamo- 
tion by not immediately returning to their allegiance, will be liable to bave 
their property on this side the Sutlej confiscated, and declared to be aliens 
and enemies of the British Government, 


By order of the Right Honorable the Governor-General of India. 
{Sd.) FP. Curniz, 


Secretary to the Govt.'of India, 
with the Governor-General. 


Came Lusoxurres Kuan xen Sera, 
The 13th December 1845. 


No. XVI. 


Treaty between the British GoveRNMENT and the STaTE OF 
LAHoRE—1846. 


Whereas the treaty of amity aud concord, which was concluded between 
the British Government and the late Maharajah Runjeet Sing, the Ruler 
of Lahore, in 1809, was broken by the unprovoked aggression, on the British 
Provinces, of the Sikh Army, in December last; and Whereas, on that 
occasion, by the Proclamation, dated 13th December, the territories then in 
the occupation of the Maharajah of Lahore, on the left ov British bank of 
the River Sutlej, were confiscated and annexed to the British Provinces; and 
Since that time hostile operations have been prosecuted by the two Govern- 
ments, the one against the other, which have resulted in the occupation of 
Lahore by the British troops; and Whereas it has been determined that, 
upon certain conditions, peace shall be re-established between the two Govern- 
ments, the following treaty of peace between the Honorable English Hast 
India Company and Maharajah Dhuleep Sing Bahadoor, and his children, 


40 Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. XVI. Part I 


heirs and successors, has been concluded on the part of the Honorable Com- 
pany by Frederick Currie, Esquire, and Brevet-Major Henry Montgomery 
Lawrence, by virtue of full powers to that effect vested in them by the Right 
Hon'ble Sir Henry Hardinge, ¢.0.B., one of Her Britannic Majesty’s Most 
Hon’ble Privy Council, Governor-General, appointed by the Hon’ble Com- 
pany to direct and control all their affairs in the East Indies, and on the part 
of His Highness Maharajah Dhuleep Sing by Bhaee Ram Sing, Rajah Lal 
Sing, Sirdar Tej Sing, Sirdar Chuttur Sing, Attareewalla, Sirdar Runjore 
Sing Majeethia, Dewan Deena Nath and Fakeer Noorooddeen, vested with 
full powers and authority on the part of His Highness, 