


’ 


ARTICLE 7, 


A British Force of such strength and numbers, and in such positions as 
the Governor-General may think fit, shall remain at Lahore for the protection 
of the Maharajah and the preservation of the peace of the country. 


ArtIcLe 8. 


The Governor-General shall be at liberty to occupy with British soldiers 
any fort or military poet in the Lahore Territories, the occupation of which 
may be deemed necessary by the British Government, for the security of the 
capital or for maintaining the peace of the country. 


ARTICLE 9. 


The Lahore State shall pay to the British Government twenty-two lakhs 
of new Nanuck Shahee Rupees of full tale and weight per annum for the 
maintenance of this force, and to meet the expenses incurred by the British 
Government. Such sum to be paid by two instalments, or 18,20,000 in May 
or June, and 8,80,000 in November or December of each year. 


Artiote 10. 


Inasmuch as it is fitting that Her Highness the Maharanee, the mother 
of Maharajah Dulleep Sing, should have a proper provision made for the 
maintenance of herself and dependants, the sum of one lakh and fifty thousand 
rupees shall be set apart annually for that purpose, and shall be at Her 
Highness’ disposal. 


ARTIOLE 11. 


The provisions of this Engagement shall have effect during the minority 
of His Highness Maharajah Dulleep Sing, and shall cease and terminate on 
His Highness attaining the full age of sixteen years, or on the 4th September 
of the year 1854, but it shall be competent to the Governor-General to cause 
the arrangement to cease at any period prior to the coming of age of His 
Highness, at which the Governor-General and the Lahore Durbar may be 


48 Punjab Proper—Lahore—No. XVIII. Part I 


satisfied that the interposition of the British Government is no longer neces- 
sary for maintaining the Government of His Highness the Maharajah. 


This Agreement, consisting of eleven Articles, was settled and executed at 
Lahore by the Officers and Chiefs and Sirdars above-named, on the 16th day of 
December 1846. , 

(Sd.) FP, Corniz. 


” _H. M. Lawrences. 


(Sd.) Sivan Tey Siren. [L. 8.] 


Sirpan Suere Sine. [L. 8.] 


3) 


Dewan Dena Nats. [L, 8.] 


PP) 


” Fouxzer Nooroopvzey. [L. 8.} 


33 


Rat Kisnen Cuunp. [L. 8,] 


» Srepar Runsore Siva Maszragza. [L. S.] 


55 Sirpar Urrer Sine Kateewatta. [L. 8.] 


Buare Nipuan Sine, [L. S.] 


2 


” Smpar Kuan Sine Masetues. [L, 8.] 


» SrrpaR Suumsners Sine. [L.8.] 


5 Srzpar Lat Sine Morarza, [1 8.] 


i Srepar Kuer Sina Sinpwanwatta. [L, 8,] 


t 
Sinpaz Urnsun Sine RuneruneaLea, [L, §.] ; 


(Sd.) Harpince. L. 8 


ee, 


aia | (Sd.)  Dutizer Sine, 


Part I Punjab Proper—LZahore—No. XIX. 49 


Ratified by the Hight Honorable the Governor-General, at Bbhyrowal 
Ghat on the left bank of the Beeas, the twenty-sixth day of December One 
Thousand Eight Hundred and Forty-six. 


(Sd.) F, Currin, 
Secy. to the Govt. of India, 


No. XIX. 


Terms granted to, and accepted by, Manarasan DULLEEP 
Sine—1849, 