


independent during good conduct and good management, . 


No further changes occurred until 1257. During that year Raja Bhar- 
pur Singh rendered important services to the British Government, and was 
rewarded by a grant of land out of the Jhajjar territory, yielding a lakh and 
six thousand Rupees per annum, on condition of political and military service 
at any time of general danger or disturbance. 


On the occasion of the Governor-General’s visit to the Punjab in 1860, the 
Raja received a Sanad (No. XXXVI) similar to those given to the Patiala and 
Jind Chiefs, including the right of adoption, A later Sanad (No. XXXVII), 
conferring the right of adoption, was also granted. Subsequently the Raja 
was allowed to "purchase a portion of the Kanaud tahsil of the Jhajjar District, 
in liquidation of a: debt due to him from the British Government, and he 
received a supplementary Sanad (No. XXXVIII.) on this account. ==, 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Nabiha. 59 


Raja Bharpur Singh died in November 1863, not without suspicions of 
poison: shortly after the death of the Raja, one of his aunts was assassinated 
in British territory, and a judicial enquiry was held, which resulted in the 
removal of all suspicions as to the cause of the Kaja’s death, and the arraign- 
ment of Gurbakhsh Singh, the minister of the State, on the charge of having 
abetted the murder of the Raja’s aunt. He was acquitted, but was forbidden 
to visit or reside in the Nabha territory. 


Raja Bharpur Singh left neither natural nor adopted heirs; it thus de. 
volved upon the Maharaja of Patiala and the Raja of Jind in accordance with 
clause 8 of the Sanad of the 5th May 1860 (No, XXXVI) to select a successor 
in concert with the British Government from among the Phulkian family. 
Their choice fell upon Bhagwan Singh, younger brother of Bharpur Singh, 
who had always been looked upon as his heir, and it was confirmed by the 
British Government, nazarana being levied as provided in clause 2 of the sanad 
above alluded to. 


Raja Bhagwan Singh died in May 1871 without heirs; the procedure 
laid down in such cases by the sanad of 1860 was followed, and a collateral 
relative, Hira Singh of Badrukhan, then 18 years of age, a feudatory of Jind, 
was chosen. The selection was approved by the British Government, and the 
customary nazarana levied. Hira Singh’s share in the estate of Badrukban 
Was considered as a succession on failure of direct heirs, and was made over 
unconditionally to the Raja of Jind. 


In 1873 the Raja entered into an Agreement (No. XXIX.) similar to 


‘that executed by the Maharaja of Patiala for the construction of the Sirhind 
‘canal. 


_. In 1879 Raja Hira Singh was created a Knight Grand Commander of the 
Order of the Star of India in recognition of the services of the contingent 
furnished by him in 1878 for employment in Afghanistan. 


For many years a dispute existed between the Sonthi Sikhs and their 
‘feudal superior, the Raja of Nabha, relative to certain acts of feudal obedience 
which the former were bound to pay to their Chief, to the equivalent to be 
paid in money for that service when it ceased, and to the division of the profits 
of certain villages in which both parties had rights. The dispute commenced 
‘in 1820 regarding the times and occasions when the Sonthi Sikhs were to 
furnish a quota of horsemen, In 1861 an arrangement was made with the 