


Maharaja Mahendar Singh died on the 14th April 1876, leaving two infant 
sons. The elder, four years of age, was recognised by the British Government 
as the late Maharaja’s successor. For the administration of the State during 
the minority of Maharaja Rajendar Singh a Council of Regency was selected 
in accordance with the arrangements sanctioned in 1858, and the State re- 
mained under its management until 1889: when the Maharaja was invested 
with powers tentatively. On October 23rd, 1890, on his attaining 18 years of 
age, he was formally confirmed in these powers. 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Jind. 55 


On the outbreak of war in Afghanistan in 1878 the Patiala State placed 
its troops at the disposal of the British Government, and they were employed 
in the Kuram Valley, along with the contingents of some other Native States 
in the Punjab, under the command of a British General. In consideration of 
these services the present Maharaja has been exempted for his life from pre- 
senting a nazar in Darbar. 

A postal Convention (No. XXX) was concluded in October 1884 between 
the British Government and the Patiala State, under which an exchange of 
postal communication is now established between British territory and Pa- 
tiala. 

In 1891 the Darbar granted, free of cost, the land in Patiala territory 
which was required for the Delhi-Umballa-Kalka Railway; and an agreement 
is now in course of execution which provides for the working of the Rajpura- 
Bhatinda, line by the North-Western Railway management. 

The territories of the Maharaja comprise an area of 5,951 square miles, 
and contain a population of 1,583,521 according to the census of 1891. The 
approximate revenue is Rupees 56,40,252. These territories include the an- 
cestral possessions of the Maharaja and the additional districts granted by the 
British Government. 

The Maharaja of Patiala used to-furnish a contingent of 100 horse for 
general duty, but he was exempted from this obligation in 1892. He is 
entitled to a salute of seventeen guns. 


The military force of Patiala consists (1891) of 2,452 cavalry, 4,878 
infantry, including gunners, 20 field and 89 other guns. Of this force the 
Maharaja has offered to place two regiments of infantry containing 600 men 
each and 600 cavalry at the disposal of Government for Imperial service. 


2. JIND. 


The Chief of Jind belongs to the same clan as the Mabaraja of Patiala 
but is descended from the elder branch. Like the Maharaja, he is a Sikh, 
The family have béen established as ruling princes more than a century. The 
Raja and his ancestors have always been most steady adherents of the British 
Government. Among the foremost and most sincere of those who proffered 
their allegiance to the British Government, after the overthrow of the Mah- 
rattas, was Bhag Singh, then Chief of Jind. The good offices of this Chief were 
not unimportant in the negotiations which followed the advance of Lord Lake 
in pursuit of Holkar to the banks of the Beas, Bhag Singh was the maternal 