


More recently a portion of the Kanaud Pargana of the Jhajjar territory 
and the taluka of Khamanun were sold to the Maharaja in perpetual sover- 
eiguty in liquidation of debts due to him by the British Government and in 
payment of the large interest due on loans. For these transfers a supplement- 
ary Sanad (No. XXVI) was granted. 


Maharaja Narendar Singh was invested, on the 1st November 1861, with 
the Insignia of the most Exalted Order of the Star of India, and on the 5th 
March 1862 the right of adoption conferred by Sanad of the 5th May 1860 
was confirmed (No. XXVII). The Maharaja died suddenly on the 14th 
November 1862, leaving a son, Mahendar Singh, twelve years old, whose 
Succession was recognised by the British Government. 


In 1858 the Chiefs of Patiala, Jind, and Nabha had preferred certain 
‘requests to the British Government, one of which was that in the event of 
the death of any of them, leaving an infant heir, a Council of Regency, 
consisting of three old and trusted ministers of the State, not related to 


54 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala. Part I 


the heir, should be selected by the British Government acting with the advice 
of the other two Chiefs. This request was granted. On the death of Ma- 
haraja Narendar Singh it was argued by the Chiefs of Jind and Nabha that 
the terms of the sanads of 1860 gave them the power of superseding at will 
the arrangements to which they had asked the British Government to consent 
in 1858. But the sanads in reality made no change in the status of these 
Chiefs towards the British Government: they were merely to exercise such 
sovereignty as they had been accustomed to exercise. The argument was 
therefore untenable and a Council of Regency was formed in accordance with 
the arrangements of 1858, In 1867, with the view of supporting the author- 
ity, of the Council, certain Patiala officials, guilty of intrigues against the 
State, were deported by the British Government to Benares, In 1870 the 
system by which Patiala had been superintended by the Commissioner of 
Umballa, was superseded, and the State was placed under the direct control of 
the Local Government. 


Maharaja Mahendar Singh was vested with full powers of administration 
in 1870, and in the following year received the dignity of a Knight Grand 
Commander of the Most Exalted Order of the Star of India. 


In 1872 the Maharaja abolished transit dues, amounting in value to.about 
half a lakh. of rupees per annum, in the territories assigned to his father in 
1858, and in the same year concluded an Agreément (No..XX VIII) with the 
British Government for the construction of a line of telegraph from Umballa 
to Patiala. In 1873 an Agreement (No. XXIX) was signed by which terms 
were arranged for the construction of the Sirhind Canal and the supply of 
water to the Patiala State. In the same year a code of rules for regulating 
the pursuit and extradition of criminals on the Patiala and Jaipur border was 
drawn up and received the sanction of the British Government (see Jaipur, 
‘Vol. III). The rules were adopted in 1879 for the Patiala and Alwar border 
also. 