

Raja Raghbir Singh died on the 7th March 1887, and was succeeded by 
his grandson Ranbir Singh, aged 6 years. During the minority the State is 
administered by a Council of Regency appointed in terms of the arrangement 
of 1858 (vide page 53 supra). 

In 1878 the Raja of Jind entered into an Agreement (No, XXIX) similar 
to that concluded with the Maharaja of Patiala for the construction of the Sirhind 
canal, and in 1875 signed an engagement of the same nature as regards the 
Western Jumna Canal. ‘This latter engagement was however superseded by a 
fresh Agreement (No, XXXV) executed in 1892. 

The State furnished 4 contingent to the British Government in 1878, on 
the outbreak of the war in Afghanistan, 

At the Imperial Assemblage held at Delhi on the Ist January 1877 the 
late Raja Raghbir Singh received the ‘honourable title of “ Councillor of the 
Empress ” with an addition of 2 guns to his salute as a personal distinction. On 
the lst January 1878 His Highness was declared an ex-officio Companion and 
Member of the Order of the Indian Empire. 

Tn 1881 the Raja was granted the title of * Raja-i-Rajagan.” * 

The code of rules regarding the pursuit and extradition of criminals sanc. 
tioned in 1873 for the Jaipur and Patiala border has been adopted to regulate 
the procedure between Jind and the States of Jaipur and Bikanir. 

A posta] Convention (see note to No. XXX)-was exeented in 1884 be- 
tween the Raja and the British Government, under which an exchange of 
postal communication is now, established between Jind and British territory, 

An Agreement for the construction of a line of telegraph from Maler 
Kotla to Sangrur is at the present time under consideration... 

The Jind State is under the immediate political supervision of the Lieu. 
tenant-Governor of the Punjab. 

The. Jind territory comprises an area of 1,268 square miles, and has, ac- 
cording to the census of 1891, a population of 284,560. It consists of the 
ancient family possessions added to the later grants of the British Govern- 


Tent, The estimated revenue is between six and seven lakhs of rupees pr 


annum. 
i 


58 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Wabha. Part I 


The Raja keeps up (1891) a military force of 12 field guns, 378 cavalry, 
and 1,730 infantry including gunners, and formerly supplied a contingent of 25 
sowars for general duty, but from this obligation he was exempted in 1892. 
The Darbar has offered 150 cavalry and 600 infantry for Imperial service, 


The Chief receives a salute of eleven guns. 


3. NABHA, 


The Chief of Nabha is descended from the same stock as the Maharaja of 
Patiala and the Raja of Jind, but like the latter belongs to the elder branch 
of the family. Nothing important occurred in the relations of the British 
Government with this State, until the period of the first Sikh war, when Raja 
Devendar Singh, then ruling Chief, withheld supplies, and systematically 
neglected to attend to the requisitions of the Governor General’s Agent. The 
Chief was deposed, and a pension of Rupees 50,000 per annum assigned to 
him from the resources of the Nabha State. The ex-Chief resided under sur- 
veillance at Lahore until his death. His eldest son, Bharpur Singh, was placed.’ 
in power. All transit duties were abolished, except the customs of the town 
of Nabha, over which the local. officers were to continue to have full authority. 
One-fourth of the territory, less Rupees 32,200, was confiscated, and a portion 
was divided equally between the Maharaja of Patiala and the Kaja of Faridkot 
in reward for their services, In all domestic affairs the young Raja was to be 