


56 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Jind. Part I 


uncle of Ranjit Singh of Lahore. Lord Lake confirmed to the Raja the grants 
of land he held under the Emperors of Delbi, or under Sindhia, and as a special 
reward conferred on him in addition Kharkauda and Bhawani, each worth 
about Rs, 25,000 annually. The Raja also received jointly with Bhai Lal 
Singh of Kaithal the grant of Barsat Faridpar, in Panipat, worth about 
Rs. 70,000, These grants were, however, for life only, and lapsed many years 
ago tosthe British Government. After the Sutle} campaign, the Governor 
General bestowed a grant of lands, not exceeding Rs, 3,000 a year, on the 
Raja of Jind, as a mark of satisfaction with his conduct. 

In 1847 the Chief of Jind received a Sanad (No. XXXI) from the British 
Government, similar to that given to the Maharaja of Patiala. During this 
year the Raja received an additional grant of land confiscated from the Lahore 
Government, yielding Rs. 1,000 per annum, in perpetuity, in consideration of 
his having abolished customs and transit duties. 

In 1857 the Raja of Jind was the first person who marched against the 
mutineers at Delhi. His troops acted as the vanguard of the army. He re» 
mained in the British Camp before Delhi until the re-oceupation of the city, 
and a portion of his troops also took part in the assault. or these services he 
received a grant of additional territory, yielding Rupees 116,813 per annum, 
on condition of fidelity and political and military service in time of difficulty 
and dangér. 

In 1860 the Raja received anew Sanad (No. XXXII) similar to that given. 
to the Maharaja of Patiala, including the privilege of adoption, which privilege 
was especially confirmed by another Sanad (No. XXXIII). By a subsequent 
Sanad (No. XXXIV) the Raja was allowed to purchasé a portion of the Kan- 
aud tahsil of the Jhajjar territory, on payment ‘of nazarand. 

Raja Bhag Singh died in 1819 and his successor, Fateh Singh, in 1822. 
The next Chief, Raja Sangat Singh, died in 1884 without issue and was suc- 
ceeded by Raja Sarup Singh, not however,. without a struggle; atone time 
indeed, his claims were denied, and the principality was declared an escheat. 
But eventually his right, though a collateral, to‘all the possessions of the family 
held by Raja Gajpat Siigh, the common ancestor, was admitted. But all 
subsequent accession of, territory acquired by Rajas Bhag Singh and Sangat 
Singh, amounting to one-half-of the principality,.was declared an escheat, so 
that Raja Sarup Singh did not enjoy the united possessions of his family, but 
only the first conquest made by his ancestor, Raja Gajpat Singh, added, as 
above stated, to the later grants of the British Government. Raja Sarup 


Part I “  Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Jind, 57 


Singh died in January 1864 and was succeeded by his son, Raghbir Singh. 
Raja Raghbir Singh was invested at Calcutta on the Ist January 1876 by 
His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales in person with the Insignia of a 
Knight Grand Commander of the Most Exalted Order of tha Star of India. 