


60 Panjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Nabhe, Part I 


approval of Government, by which the Raja was to give the Sonthi Sikhs 
Rupees 5,000 per annum in discharge of all matters in dispute between 
them. 

The Sonthi Sikhs appealed against this decision. After a protracted inves- 
tigation it was decided by the Government of India in 1869 that the Sonthi 
Sikhs’ share of the revenues of the villages in dispute should be Rupees 24,500 
per annum, and that the Raja of Nabha had a right in respect of escheats, 
commutation for loss of service of horsemen, and a deduction of one-eighth on 
account of confiscated and restored territory, amounting in all to Rupees 11,502, 
leaving the balance to be paid to the Sonthi Sikhs at Rupees 12,998 per 
annum. As an alternative the Sikhs were permitted, should they desire it, to 
receive villages producing a clear income of Rupees 8,000 per annum under 
certain specified conditions. They elected to take the assigument from land 
revenue of Rupees 12,998 per annum. Payment was made in full by the 
Raja in 1872. 

In 1884 the Raja of Nabha ceded to the British Government full 
jurisdiction over those portions of land which lie within his State, and are 
occupied, or may be hereafter occupied, by the railways comprised in the Raj- 
putana-Malwa Railway system, including the lands occupied as stations, out- 
buildings, and for other railway purposes, 


A postal Convention (see note to No. XXX) was executed in 1884 between 
the Raja and the British Government, under which an exchange of postal 
communication is now. established between Nabba and British territory. 

The Patiala-Jaipur Extradition Code has been adopted for the border 
between the States of Alwar and Jaipur on the one hand and Nabha on the 
other. 

The Nabha State is under the immediate political supervision of the 
Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab. 


The Nabba territory has an area of 936 square miles, a population, 
according to the census of 1891, of 282,756, and an estimated revenue of 
seven lakhs of rupees. The Raja does not furnish any contingent for general 
duty, the value thereof having been included in the portion of the territory of 
that State adjndged to be confiscated after the Sutlej] campaign. He is enti- 
tled to a salute of eleven guns. In 1877 the present chief was granted a 
personal salute of thirteen guns, The military force consists (1891) of 6 field 
gans, 361 cavalry, and 1,509 infantry including gunuers. Of these, 150 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Kalsia. 6L 


cavalry and 600 infantry have been offered to Government for Imperial 
service. 


4. KALSIA. 


Sardar Gurbakhsh Singh, the founder of the family, came originally from 
Kalsia, a village in the Manjha. At the time of the extension of the British 
protection to the Cis-Sutle} States,a copy of the proclamation issued by Sir D. 
Ochterlony was not sent to Jodh Singh, then ruling Chief, as his disposition 
towards the British Government was doubtful; and it was proposed that 
if the Chief -continued indifferent to British protection, and determined to 
unite himself with Ranjit Singh, he should be declared an enemy and dispbs- 
sessed of his territories, After two months, however, Sardar Jodh Singh fol- 
lowed the example of others, and was assured of protection. 