


In 1830 the hill territory of Simla was obtained from Patiala in exchange 
for three villages in Pargana Bharauli. After this nothing of importance 
occurred in the relations of the British Government with this Chief, until the 
winter of 1845-46, when the Khalsa army invaded the Cis-Sutlej territories. 
On that occasion the Maharaja obtained for his services during the campaign 
the gift of a portion of the territory confiscated from the Raja of Nabha in 
consequence of his misconduct. 


In 1847, at the request of the Maharaja, a Sanad (No. XXIV) was con- 
ferred on him, confirming him for ever in his ancient possessions, and those 
granted by the British Government, with all rights thereto pertaining. The 
Chief was enjoined to do justice and to promote the welfare of his subjects, 
while the latter were to consider the Chief their rightful lord and master. The 
Maharaja on his part relinquished for himself and successors all right to levy 
excise and transit duties, and engaged to suppress sati, infanticide, and slave- 
dealing, and to attend in person with his forces should the Cis-Sutlej erri- 
tories be invaded by an enemy; while the ‘British Government gave up all 
claims to tribute, revenue, or commutation in lieu of troops or otherwise. The 
Maharaja during this year received an additional grant of territory confiscat- 
ed from the Lahore Darbar, amounting to Rupees 10,000, in consideration of 
his having given up customs and transit duties. 


During the mutiny of 1857 Maharaja Narendar Singh aided the British 
Government by furnishing an auxiliary force, which. proceeded to Delhi and 
kept open the communication on: the Grand Trunk Road. He, also sent troops 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala. 53 


to Gwalior and Dholpur, and helped the Government with money. Tor these 
services be received from the British Government, besides other rewards, the — 
-Narnaul division of the Jhajjar territory, yielding a revenue of Rupees 2,00,000 
per annum, in perpetual sovereignty, on condition of political and military 
service at any time of general danger or disturbance. In addition to this, the 
British Government ceded to the Maharaja jurisdiction over Bhadaur, and the 
right of escheats and reversion of lapsed estates therein, together with the an- 
nual commutation tax, amounting to Rupees 5,265 per annum, 


In 1860 a new Sanad (No. XXV) was given to the Maharaja, under 
which he and his successors were to exercise sovereign powers over their an- 
cestral and acquired possessions, and all dependents and feudatories of every 
degree were bound to render obedience. The British Government engaged 
never to demand any tribute on account of revenue, service, or on any other 
plea, and also conferred on the Maharaja the right of adoption in default of 
direct heirs ; but in the case of the Chief dying without male issue, and witb- 
out adopting a successor, nazarana was to be paid to the British Government, 
The power of life and death has been conceded to the Maharaja over his own 
subjects. He is bound to co-operate with the British forces on an enemy 
appearing, and to provide carriage and supplies. He is also required to fur- 
nish material for railways and communications on payment, and to grant land 
free for such works. 