

Tux establishment of the British power in the Cis-Sutlej States dates 
from the treaty with Ranjit Singh of the 25th April 1809, by the 2nd article 
of which Ranjit Singh engaged neither to commit nor suffer any encroachments 
on the possessions or rights of the Chiefs on the left bank of the Sutlej. On 
the 38rd May 1809 a Proclamation (No. XX) was issued extending the protec- 
tion of the British Government to the Chiefs of Sirhind and Malwa without 
demand of tribute, requiring service in time of war, and defining generally the 
relation of the protected States to the British Government. The general. 
scope of the proclamation of 1809 was to establish the Chiefs in the States 
they held before they were received under British protection. Relieved of 
their fear of Ranjit Singh, however, the stronger Chiefs began to encroach on 
the weaker, and in August 1811 it was found necessary to issue a second Pro- 
clamation (No. XXI), directing the restoration of such usurped estates, and 
prohibiting such encroachments. 


After the first Sikh war, the relations of the British Government with 


* Patiala, the Chiefs of the Cis-Sutlej] States were entirely 
cael changed. With the exception of nine of the larger 
Kolsia. States,* all the Chiefs were deprived of their sove- 
Maler Kotla. : : ° aye : 
Faridkot. reign powers, and in lieu of the military service 
Pilg. which they were bound to render they were required 
Raikot. - to pay a commutation tax fixed at the rate of two 


annas in the rupee, or 124 per cent. on their income. The States of Dialgarh 
and Raikot have since lapsed to the British Government, and the Chief of 
Mamdot has been reduced to the position of a mere jagirdar. 


Of the territory taken under protection in 1809, lands now assessed at 
Rupees 4,97,485 have lapsed to the British Government from failure of heirs, 
and lands assessed at Rupees 8,90,477 have been confiscated. Out of the ter- 
ritory thus acquired, jagirs worth Rupees 75,961 have been granted, 


1. PATIALA, 


This is the largest of the Sikh States. The founder of the family emi- 
grated from the Manjha, and carved out a principality for himself more than 


52 Punjab—-Cis-Sutlej States— Patiala. Part I 


a century ago. The Maharaja belongs to the Sidhu Jat tribe of Sikhs. The 
immediate ancestor was Chaudhri Phul, who founded a village in the Nabha 
territory called after his name. He had two sons, Tiloka and Rama, who be- 
came founders of a dynasty of princes, the Jind and-Nabha Chiefs being de- 
scended from the elder and the Maharaja of Patiala from the younger son. 
These Chiefs are known as the Phulkian Houses. The family had been estab- 
lished in the Cis-Sutlej States about five generations as ruling princes when 
Sardar Ala Singh founded the capital of Patiala. 


During the Nepal war the Patiala Chief aided the British Government 
with troops, and on the conclusion of the war Sanads (Nos. XXII and XXIII) 
were granted to him, conferring on him portions of the Keonthal and Bagbat 
States, yielding a revenue of Rupees 35,000, on payment of two lakhs and 
eighty thousand rupees, 