

‘Sardar Sobha Singh, the son and successor of Sardar Jodh Singh, died 
on the 14th February 1858, and the British Government recognised his son, 
Lehna Singh, as his heir and successor. He received a Sanad (No. XXXIX) 
conferring on him the right of adoption. 

Sardar Lebna Singh died on the 19th February 1869, and was succeeded 
by his son Bishan Singh, a minor, about fifteen years of age, The State 
was at first managed by a committee composed of a British official and two 
others selected from Jind and Kalsia respectively, but was subsequently placed 
in charge of a Nazim subject to the control of the Commissioner of Umballa, 
The Chief was entrusted tentatively with the administration in 1874. 


Sardar Bishan Singh died on the 10th July 1888, leaving two sons, the 
elder of whom, Sardar Jagjit Singh, then aged 3 years, succeeded him. Sar- 
dar Jagjit Singh died in August 1886, and was succeeded by his younger 
brother, Sardar Ranjit Singh, aged 4 years. The State is managed by a Coun- 
cil of Regency subject to the control of the Commissioner of Delhi. 

This Chief receives a money payment of Rupees 2,851 per annum in per- 
petuity from the British Government, as compensation for the loss occasioned 
by the abolition of customs duties, 

In 189] the Chief ceded, free of cost, the land in Kalsia territory which 
‘Was required for the Delhi-Umballa-Kalka Railway, 

& fs : 

The revenue of the Kalsia State is estimated at Rupees 1,93,708 per 

annum. It has an area of 149 square miles, and a population, according to 


62 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Maler Kotla. Part I 


the census of 1891, of 68,633, The military force consists (1891) of 48 cavalry, 
192 infantry including gunners, and 3 guns. 


5. MALER KOTLA. 


This family came to India from Kabul. It was originally a brother- 
hood dividing the estate among the several members in equal or unequal shares, 
according as the power and influence of the several branches might be pre+ 
dominant at the time of succession. 

The ancestors of the present Chief occupied positions of trust in the Sir- 
hind province under the Mughal Emperors, and gradually became independent, 
as the Mughal dynasty sank into decay. The family is somewhat older than 
the Sikh families of Patiala, Jind, and Nabha, by which it is surrounded. 
The Chief of Maler Kotla joined Lord Lake with his followers, and the protec~ 
tion of the British Government was extended to this principality at the same 
time as to the other States. Nawab Sikandar Ali Khan succeeded his father 
Mabbub Ali Khan in 1858, and was assured by Sanad (No. XL) that any 
succession to his State, which might be in conformity with Muhammadah law 
would be respected. 


Nawab Sikandar Ali Khan died without male issue on the ‘16th July 
1871, having selected as his heir Ibrahim Ali Khan, the representative of one 
of the two extant branches of the family, descended from a common ancestor, 
Jamal Ali Khan. The choice was confirmed by the British Government. 