


By family custom, in the case of a death without issue, the property wag 
divided equally among the branches descended from Jamal Ali Khan, an -extra 
share being allotted to the Chief, The near relations of the Nawab also exer- 
cised sovereign powers in their estates subject to a general subordination to 
the Nawab. These customs frequently gave rise to family dissensions and mal- 
administration, On the succession therefore of the present Nawab, the opportu. 
nity was taken to determine that the Chief’s holding should be divided into 
two portions, the share which he received as Chief with all subsequent accre- 
tions to remain undivided or held by the Chief for the time being, the other 
portion to be divided according to family custom. It was further determined 
to limit the exercise of powers independent of the Chief to present possessors. 


The State was placed under British management during the minority of 
Nawab Ibrahim Ali Khan; he attained the age of eighteen. in October: 1875, 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutle} States—Faridkot. 63 


when he was entrusted with the yaa coe of his affairs subject to the 
control of the Commissioner of Umbatla until he attained the age of twenty- 
one, 

In 1885, owing to the mental incapacity of the Chief, the State was 
temporarily placed under the management of a Superintendent, subject to 
the control of the Commissioner of Delhi, 


. The Chief receives compensation from Government, amounting to 
Rupees 2,500 per annum, in perpetuity, on account of loss of revenue caused 
by the abolition of customs duties. 


Area of Maler Kotla, 162 square miles; population, according to the census 
of 1891, 75,755 souls; estimated revenue of the portion belonging to the 
Nawab, Rupees 2,84,000. The military force of the State numbers (1891) 60 
cavalry and 254°infantry including gunners; and 6 guns. This State for- 
merly furnished a contingent of 25 horsemen for general service, but was 
exempted from this liability in 1892. The Chief is entitled to asalute of 
nine guns; but the present Chief has been granted a salute of eleven guns 
as a personal distinction. 


6. FARIDKOT. 


The territory of the Faridkot State consists of two portions, viz., Farid- 
kot Proper and Kot-Kapura. It is situated to the south-west of the Firozpur 
district, and borders to the south-east on Patiala. The Chief of this State 
belongs to the Barar Jat tribe, one of whom, named Bhallan, in the time of 
the Emperor Akbar, acquired great influence, and laid the foundation of the 
greatness of his house, His nephew built the fort of Kot-Kapura, and made 
himself an independent ruler, Early in the present century, the Kot-Kapura 
pargana was seized by the Lahore Diwan, Mohkam Chand, and on the occasion 
of the Sikh war in 1846, it was confiscated by the British Government. But 
in reward for his attachment toithe British cause, and for the aid he rendered 
to the British ‘forces at Mudki during the Sutlej campaign in 1845-46, the 
Faridkot Chief was raised to the rank of Raja, and the ancestral estate of 
Kot-Kapura was conferred on him in jagir. 