


No. XXV. 


TRANSLATION of the SuNNUD given to His Hieuness the Mana- 
RAJA of Purrrata by His ExcELLency the VicERoy and 
GOVERNOR-GENERAL. 

Simla, 5th May 1860. 


Since the establishment of British authority in India, His Highness the 
present Maharajah of Puttiala and his predecessors bave always been steady in 
their allegiance. They have frequently received rewards for their fidelity in 
the accession of fresh honours, dignity, and territory. More recently His 
Highness the present Ruler of Puttiala has surpassed the former achievements 
of his race by the constancy and courage he evinced during the mutiny of 
1¢57-58. In memory of this unswerving and conspicuous loyalty, His Excel- 
lency the Viceroy and Governor-General in India has conferred additional 
honors and territory upon the Maharajah for himself and his heirs for ever, 
and has graciously acceded to His Highness’ desire to receive a Sunnud or 
grant under the hand and seal of the Viceroy, guaranteeing to the Maharajah 
the free and unreserved possession of his ancient territories, as well as of those 
tracts bestowed on His Highness and his predecessors at various times by the 
British Government. It is accordingly ordained as follows :— 


Clause 1. His Highness the Maharajah and his heirs for ever will 
exercise full sovereignty over his ancestral and acquired domains according to 


L 


74 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States— Paticla—No. XXV. Part I 


‘the annexed list, All the rights, privileges, and prerogatives which His 
Highness enjoys in his hereditary territories, he will equally enjoy in bis 
acquired territories. All feudatories and dependents of every degree will be 
bound to render obedience to him throughout his dominions. 


_ Clause 2, Except as provided in Clause 8, the British Government 
will never demand from His Highness or any of his successors, or from.any 
of his feudatories, relations, or dependents, any tribute on account of revenue, 
service, or on any other plea. 


Clause 8, The British Government cordially desires to see the noble 
house of Puttiala perpetuated, and in this spirit confers upon His Highness 
and his heirs for ever, whenever male issue may fail, the right of adopting a 
successor from among the descendants of the Phoolkeefn family. If, how- 
ever, at any time any Maharajah of Puttiala should die without male iesue, 
and without adopting a successor, it will still be open to the Rajahs of Nabha 
and Jheend, in concert with the Commissioner or Political Agent of the 
British Government, to select a successor from among the Phoolkeedn family, 
but in that case a nuzzoranah or fine equal to one-third of the gross annual 
revenue of the Puttiala State shall be paid to'the British Government. 


Clause 4. In 1847 the British Government empowered the Maharajah 
to inflict capital punishment after reference to the Commissioner. It now 
removes the restriction imposed by this reference, and invests His Highness 
with absolute power of lifeand death over his own subjects. With regard to 
British subjects committing crime and apprehended in his territory, the Maha- 
rajah will be guided by the rules contained in the Despatch of the Honorable 
Court of Directors to the Madras Government, No. 3, dated Ist June 1863. 
The Maharajah will exert himself to execute justice and to promote the 
happiness and welfare of his people. He engages to prohibit suttee, slavery, 
and female infanticide throughout his territories, and to punish withthe, 
utmost rigor those who are found guilty of any of these crimes, 