


Clause 6, The Maharajah will never fail in his loyalty and devotion to 
the Sovereign of Great Britain. 


Clause 6. If any force hostile to the British Government should appear 
in this neighbourhood, the Maharajah will co-operate with the British Govern- 
ment and oppose the enemy. He will exert himself to the utmost of his 
resources in providing carriage and supplies for the British Troops, according 
to requisitions he may receive. . 

Clause 7. The British Government will not receive any complaints 
from any of the subjects of the Maharajah, whether maafeedars, jaghiredars, 
relatives, dependents, servants, or other classes, 

Clause 8. The British Government will respect the household and 
family arrangements of the Maharajah, and abstain from any interference 
therein, 

Clause 9. His Highness the Maharajah will as heretofore furnish at 
current rates, through the agency of his own officers, the necessary materials 
required for the construction of rail-roads, railway stations, and imperial roads 


‘ 


—— 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Paticla—~No. XXV. 75 


and bridges. He will also freely give the land required for the construction 
of rail-roads and imperial lines of road. 


Clanse 10. The Maharajah and his successors, etc., will always pursue 
the same course of fidelity and devotion to the British Government, and the 
Government, will always be ready to uphold the honor and dignity of the 
Maharajah and his house. 


ScnEeDuLE of Territories belonging to the Manaragan of 


PUTTIALA. 
Ancestral, 
Pergunnah Puittiala Khas, and Sunour. Talooqua Bhawaneegurh oorf Doda. 
Talooqua Murdénpoor. »  Boha. 
» Ghunonr. »  Sardooleurh oorf Dodhal. 


Ranee Muzra. »  Akalgurh or Moonuk. 


” Umergurh, 7 Kurm-gurh or Kulbanoon Dirha. 

» _ Chinarthul. 3 Bangurh or Nurwanah. 

» Sonam. »  Pinjore. 

» Rajpoora. »  Govindgurh or Buttindah. 

* Anahudgurh or Burnila. » Ramgurh or Ghooram. 

3 Sherepoor. 95 Sahibeurh or Paéel. 

- Bheekee. » Futtehgurh or Sirhind. 

i Bunonoor, ; ” Alamgurh or Nundpoor Kullour, 
Acquired Territories, 

Talooqua Umraleh. Pergunnah: Bussye Moolk Hyfur. 

The Hill District of Bugh&t. ‘ Fullah J hoonere. 

The Hill District of Keontbul. 5 Muhla. 

Talooqua Chumkoeedn. ie Narnoul. 

j List of Fendatories. 

Sikhs of Lunda, Sikhs of Budalee Bhaéee. 
»  Loharee. » Beer Singh. 
»  Bhet Koot, » _Rampoor. 
+»  Gvonar Chukeea, , » Kote Doona. 
»  Rara. ’ Jaghiredara of Bhuddour, 
»  Kotila. 3s Jewndan, 
»  Bullara Bullaree. 

Jaghiredars of Khumanoon ... eee ? At present under the jurisdiction, for life, 
re Tullakour : «. (of the Maharajah of Puttialla, but paying 
es Dhuneoree’ sie ... (Commutation Tax in lieu of service to British 

Lukhnour se ... ?Government,. 


Bhaeo Roopa tee ans ... Shared with Nabha apd Jheend. 


76 . Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States - Patiala—No. XXVI. Part I 


No. XXVI. 


TRaNsLaTion of a Sunnup or Grant of portions of the Pergun- 
nah of Kunoudh and Boodwana, District Jhujjur, and of 
Elaquah Khumanoon, District Umballa, bestowed upon His 
Hicuyess the Mawarasan or Purtiana by His Excen- 
LENCY EarL Oannine, G.C.B., Viceroy and GovEernor- 
GENERAL oF INDIA. 