


72 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala—No. XXIV. Part I 


ing a portion of Sirmore, together with all the rights and appurtenances 
belonging thereto, in exchange for the sum of Rupees 1,30,000, and the said 
sum having been paid at the Company’s treasury, no further demand will ever 
be made on the Rajah on this account, The British Government will always 
protect and support the said Rajah in possession of the said lands, and the 
Rajah taking possession of the aforesaid lands shall not encroach on the 
possession of another, In case of war, the troops stationed by the Rajah for 
the protection of the said lands shall be sent to join the British Forces. The 
Rajah will promote the welfare of his ryots, and the ryots on their part, etc. 


(As tn preceding sunnud.,) 
* 20th October 1815, 


No. XXIV. 


Suynup to the Manaragan of Purrsata, dated 22nd Septem- 
ber 1847. 


The Right Honorable the Governor-General having resolved to bestow 
certain lands on the Rajah of Putteala asa mark of consideration for his 
attachment and services to the British during the late war with the Lahore 
State, and the Rajah of Putteala having requested that he may at the same 
time receive a renewed assurance of protection and guarantee of his rights 
in his former possessions, the Governor-General is pleased to confer this 
assurance in the form of a Sunnud or Grant as follows, in order that the 
Maharajah and his successors after him may, with perfect confidence, con- 
tinue to exercise the same rights and authority in his possessions as heretofore. 


The Maharajah’s ancient hereditary estates, according to annexed schedule, 
shall continue for ever in’ the possession of himself and his successors, with. 
all Government rights thereto belonging of Police jurisdiction and collection 
of revenue as heretofore, The Maharajah’s chaharumains, feudatories, ad- 
herents and dependents will continue bound in their adherence and obliga- 
tions to the Rajah as heretofore. His Highness will exert himself to do 
justice and to promote the welfare and happiness of his subjects, while they, 
on their part, considering the Rajah as their true and rightful lord, must 
obey him and hjs successors accordingly, and pay the revenue punctually, and 
be always zealous to promote. the cultivation of their lands, and to testify 
their loyalty and obedience. The Maharajah bas relinquished for himself and 
his successors for ever all right to levy excise and transit duties which have 
been abolished throughout the Putteala territory. His Highness also binds 
himself and his successors to the suppression of suttee, infanticide, and slave- 
dealing within his territories. If, unknown to the Maharajah’s authorities, 
any persons should be guilty of these acts, the Maharajah’s authorities will op 
conviction punish them with such severity as to deter cthers. The British 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala—No,. XXV. 73 


Government will never demand from the Maharajah and his successors and 
their dependents above named anything inthe way of tribute or revenue or 
commutation in lieu of troops, or otherwise, for the reason that His Highness 
will ever coutinue as heretofore sincerely devoted to the service and interests 
of the British, The British authorities will not entertain complaints of the 
Maharajah’s subjects or dependents, or interfere with the Maharajah’s autho- 
rity. Should an enemy approach from any quarter to this side the Beas or 
Sutlej for the purpose of conquering this country, the Rajah will join the 
British Army with his forces and exert himself in expelling the enemy, and 
act under discipline and obedience, and in time of war place the resources of 
his country at the disposal of the British Government. His Highness engages 
to have made and to keep in repairs, through his own officers, the military 
roads through his territory, for the passaye of British troops from Umballa 
and other Stations to Ferozepore, of a width and elevation to be determined 
ou by the Engineer Officer charged with the duty of laying down the roads. 
His Highness wil! also appoint encamping grounds for British troops at the 
different stages which shall be marked off, so that there be no claims made 
hereafter on account of damaged crops. 