


(Sd.) D. Ocutertony, 


Agent to Governor-General, 
Loodiana, 22nd August 1811, 


No. XXII. 


Sunnup to RagaH KURRUM SING of Purreata for PERGUNNAHS 
Manrezen, etc., under the Seal and Signature of His 
EXceLLency the GOVERNOR-GENERAL in Cotuncit—1815. 


Whereas all the hill country has come into the possession of the British 
Government, and whereas Rajah Kurrum Sing was forward to afford the 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Paticla—No. XXIII. 71 


co-operation of his troops during the late contest, therefore the present 
Sunnud is granted, conferring on the said Rajah Karrum Sing and on his 
heirs for ever, the Pergunnahs of Maheelee, Kuljoun, Buntheera, Koosalia, 
Chubrote, Kehmullee, Baddayheer, Sangur, Toorasutgowa, Jaubul, and Palla- 
kotee, together with the saeer duties of the same, and all the rights and 
appurtenances belonging to them in exchange for a nuzzuranah of the sum 
of one lakh and fifty thousand Rupees; and the said sum having been paid 
into the Company’s Treasury by kists, as agreed upon, nothing further shall 
ever be demanded on this account. The British Government will always pio- 
tect and support the saic Rajah and his heirs in the possession of this terri- 
tory. The Rajah, considering this Sunnud a legal and valid instrument, will 
immediately take possession of the aforesaid lands, but he must not encroach 
on any Jands beyond the acknowledged limits of the pergunnahs enumerated. 
To case of war, the Rajah must, on the requisition of the British authorities, 
furnish armed men and Begarees to join the detachment of British Troops, 
which may be stationed for the protection of the hill country. He will omit 
no exertion to do justice, and to promote the welfare and happiness of the 
ryots ; while they, on their part, considering the said Rajah as their true and 
rightful lord, must obey him accordingly, and pay their revenue punctually, 
and be always zealous to promote the cultivation of their lands, and to testify 
their loyalty and obedience. 


20th October 1815. 


No. XXITI. 


Stynup to Ragan Kurrum Sine of Pourrzana for the 
THAKCORAEE oF BucwauT and JUGGUTGURH, under the 
Seal and Signature of His ExcELLENcY the GoveRNor- 
GENERAL in Councit—1815. 


Whereas all the hill country has come into the possession of the British 
Government, and whereas Rajah Kurrum Sing was forward in affording the 
Co-operation of his troops during the late contest; Wherefore, by order of the 
Right Honorable the Governor-General, the present Sunoud is granted to the 
said Rajah, conferring on him and on his heirs for ever: 1s¢.—The Pergunnah 
of Bughaut and the City of Taksal with the first Fort at Sookchinepoor ; and 
the’ second Fort at the end of the Bazar of Talsai, and the Fort of Tharooguth ; 
and Pergunnah Parleek-har with the Fort of Ajeergurh; and Pergunnah 
Keeateen with the Fort of Rajgurh ; and Pergunnah Lucherang and Pergun- 
nah Berowlee ; and together with these Pergunnahs and the five Forts specified, 
saeer collections amounting to ohe thousand eight hundred Rupees, the whole 
forming a portion of the Thakooraee of Bughaut; also, 2ud/y—The Fort of 
Juggatgurh with the Pergunnah of Juggutgurh and its dependencies, form- 