


The Nawab so grievously misgoverned his State and misused his powers, 
that in 1856, after deliberate enquiry, the British Government declared his 
sovereign powers to be forfeited for ever, reduced the State to the position of a 
mere jagir, and removed the Nawab to Lahore, where he continued to receive 
the surplus revenues of Mamdot after the expenses of its management by 
British officials were defrayed. 


In 1868 the Nawab died, and the British Government were pleased to 
revive the fief in the person and family of his brother Jalal-ud-din Khan, 
who was recognised as Nawab of Mamdot, with powers carefully restricted 
by Sanad (No, XLII). 


Jalal-ud-din Khan died in 1875 and the succession of his son Nizam-ud- 
din Khan, then thirteen years of age, was recognised by Government. 


Nizam-ud-din Khan died in January 1891, leaving an infant son, Kutub- 
ud-din Khan, and the State is now again under Government management, 


8. MINOR CIS-SUTLEJ CHIEFS. 


When the minor Cis-Sutlej Chiefs were deprived of their sovereign powers, 
the police management of their estates was assumed by the British Govern- 
ment, all customs duties were abolished without compensation, except in the 
case of the Nawab of Kunjpura and the Mir of Kotaha, and the Chiefs were 
reduced to the rank of ordinary jagirdars, But, in consideration of these great 
changes, some privileges of person and property were extended to a limited 

K 


66 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States— Minor Chiefs. Part I 


, bumber of the Chiefs for their lives. Cases in which the cause of action 
had arisen before the 8th June 1849 were declared not to be cognizable by 
the civil and revenue courts. For criminal offences committed previous to 
January 1847 the Chiefs were declared amenable only to the Commissioner as 
Political Agent. For any criminal offence committed since January 1847 the 
Chiefs were declared exempt from arrest for their lives, and their family houses 
from police interference, except in capital cases or heinous offences against 
person and property, for which they were to be responsible only to the Com- 
missioner. For any civil claims presented to the civil or revenue courts, the 
Chiefs were declared to be exempt from personal arrest, and their dwellings 
from attachment. The landed estates of such Chiefs being liable to lapse to 
the British Government in default of male heirs, were declared to be only 
subject to attachment for rents and profits under decree of court during the 
lifetime of incumbents, All estates shared batween the disfranchised and the 
superior Chiefs were brought under the civil, revenue, and criminal jurisdic- 
tion of the British Government, but exchanges might be effected of such 
coparcenary tenures. 


In 1857 all these Chiefs rendered services to the British Government, and 
as a reward Government sanctioned a permanent reduction in twenty-three 
estates of Rupees 21,416 per annum in the amount payable in commutation 
for personal service. 


More recently thirteen of the more influential Chiefs were appointed 
jagirdar magistrates, with jurisdiction over their own estates, and in some in- 
stances over contiguous Government villages, 