


... + In lieu of customs abolished, the British Government agreed to pay to 
the Raja the annual sum of Rupees 2,000, and at the same time, as there were 


64 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Faridkot, Part [ 


many rent-free holdings in the Kot-Kapura estate which would lapse to the 
British Government, an arrangement was made by which each rent-free hold - 
ing, as it lapsed, was made over to the Raja, and a corresponding reduction 
was made in the amount of compensation for customs. 


For Raja Wazir Singh’s services during the mutiny, he was exempted 
from the service of 10 sowars which he used formerly to furnish, and certain 
honorary additions were made to his title. On the 21st April 1863 a Sanad 
(No. XLI) was conferred upon the Raja. The sanad is in some respects 
similar to those granted in 1860 to the Maharaja of Patiala and the Rujas 
of Jind and Nabha. But it differs from them in this most important respect, 
that it conferred no new rights or privileges on the Raja but merely guaranteed 
and confirmed those which he then enjoyed. The right of adoption was 
conceded to him by Sanad (No, XXXIX). 


Raja Wazir Singh died in April 1874, and was succeeded by his only 
son, Bikram Singh, then thirty-one years of age. Nazarana.on successions is 
levied from this State. 


In the Afghan war of 1878 the Raja placed his troops at the disposal of 
the British Government, and they were employed in the Kuram Valley. 


In 1884 the Raja ceded to the British Government full jurisdiction over 
the lands in his territory occupied by the Rewari-Firozpur Railway. In 1886 
a postal Convention was concluded with the British Government similar to that 
made with Patiala (see note to No. XXX). 


No contingents are furnished for general service, and no tribute is paid 
by the State to the British Government. 


Faridkot is under the political jurisdiction of the Commissioner of the 
Jullunder Division. 


The L’aja receives a salute of eleven guns; he keeps up (1891) a force 
of 70 cavalry, and 332 infantry including gunners, with six guns. Of this 
force 50 cavalry and 150 infantry have been offered to Government for 
Imperial service. 


Faridkot contains an area of 643 square miles; its population, according 
to the census of 1891, is 115,040 souls; and its revenué is estimated at Rupees 
8,00,000 per annum. 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Mamdot, Minor Chie/s. 65 


7 MAMDOT JAGIR. 


The Chief of Mamdot was not brought under British protection with the 
other Cis-Sutlej] States in 1809, but remained a feudatory of the Lahore 
Darbar, to whom he furnished a contingent of one hundred horse. The 
Mamdot contingent fought on the side of the Sikh army during the Sutlej 
campaign, but towards the close of the war the Chief, Jamal-ud-din Khan, 
deserted to the side of the British and subsequently rendered good service, for 
which he received the title of Nawab, and his contingent was reduced to 50 
horse in time of peace and 75 in war. No enquiry seems to have been made 
regarding the status of the Chief, nor were his relations to the British Govern- 
ment defined. 