


Whereas the devotion and loyalty of His Highness the Maharajah of 
Puttiala and of his ancestors have always been conspicuous 
since the establishment of British supremacy in India, His 
Excellency the Viceroy and Governor-General, being desirous of marking his 
high appreciation of those qualities, has been pleased to bestow upon the 
Maharajah portions of Pergunnabs Kunoudh and Boodwana, of the District 
of Jhujjur, containing one hundred and ten villages (110), according to verna- 
cular list annexed, assessed at a yearly revenue of ninety-six thousand nine 
hundred and forty rupees (96,940), and to accept from His Highness a 
“ yuzzuranah” of nineteen Jakhs thirty-eight thousand and eight hundred 
Rupees (19,38,800). Further, His Excellency has been pleased in like manner 
to bestow upon the Maharajah the Elaquab of Khumanoon, District Umbulla, 
with the service commutation tax and the right to escheats, and to accept 
from His Highness a nuzzuranah of one lakh seventy-six thousand three 
hundred and sixty (1,76,360) Rupees. ; 


It is accordingly ordained as follows :— 


Preamble. 


Article 1. 


The teyritories above mentioned are conferred upon His Highness the 
Mabarajah of Puttiala and his heirs for ever, 


ARTICLE 2, 


The Maharajah and bis successors will exercise the same rights, privi- 
leges, and prerogatives in these newly acquired territories as His Highness 
at present enjoys in his ancestral possessions, according to the terms of the 
Sunnud, dated 5th May 186, and signed by His Excellency Earl Canning, 
Viceroy and Governor-General of India. 


ARTICLE 8. 


The Maharajah and his successors will continue to maintain the same 
loyal relations with the British Government, and to fulfil the same obligations 
with regard to these newly-acquired territories, as were imposed upon His 
Highness by the terms of the Sunnud, dated 5th May 1860, relating, to His 
Highness’ ancestral spossessions, 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiela—Nos. XXVII & XXVIII. 177 


No, XXVII. 


To Forzunp Kuss Dowtut-1-EneLisHia Munsoor ZuMaN 
AMEER-OOL-UmMra ManwarRaAsJAH DHEERAT Rasusstr SREE 
Mauwarasan Rasecan NaREnDER Sinc Manenper Bawa- 
poor, of Purrrata, Knrienr of the Mosr Exatrep OrDER 
of the Star of InpIA.—1862. 


Her Majesty being desirous that the Governments of the several Princes 
and Chiefs of India who now govern their own territories should be perpe- 
tuated, and that the representation and disnity of their Houses should be 
continued, I hereby. in fulfilment of this desire, repeat to you the assurance 
which I communicated to you in the Sunnud under my signature, dated 5th 
May 1860, that on failure of natural heirs, the adoption by Yourself and the 
future rulers of your State of a successor, from the ancient Phoolkian House, 
of which your family forms a part, will be recognized and confirmed ; and 
that if at any time any Maharajah of Puttinla should die without male issue, 
and without adopting a successor, it will still be open to the Rajahs of Jheend 
and Nabha, in*concert with the Commissioner or Political Agent of the British 
Government, to select a successor from among the Phoolkian family ; but in 
that case a nuzzuranah or fine equal to one-third of the gross annual revenue 
of the Puttiala State shall be paid to the British Government, 