


No. XX. 


TRANSLATION of an Trr1vau-Namen addressed to the Curers of 
the country of Matwaand Sr1ruinp on this side of the River 
Sutlege, 8rd May 1809. 


It is clearer than the sun, and better proved than the existence of yester- 
day, that the detachment of British Troops to this side of the Sutlege was 
entirely in acquiescence fo the application and earnest entreaty of the Chiefs, 
and originated solely through friendly considerations in the British to preserve 
the Chiefs in their possessions and independence, A Treaty having been con- 
eluded on the 5th April 1809 between Mr. Metcalfe on the part of the British 
Government and Maharajah Runjeet Sing agreeably to the orders of the 
Right Honorable the Governor-General in Council, I have the pleasure of 
publishing, for the satisfaction of the Chiefs of the country of Malwa and 
Sirhind, the pleasure and resolutions of Government contained in the seven 
following Articles :— 


ARTICLE 1. 


The country of the Chiefs of Malwa and Sirhind having entered under 
the protection of the British Government, in future it shall be secured from 
the authority and control of Maharajah Runjeet Sing, conformably to the 
terms of the Treaty. 


ARTICLE 2, 


The country of the Chiefs thus taken under protection shall be exempted 
from all pecuniary tribute to the British Government. 


ArricLs 3, 


The Chiefs shall remain in the exercise of the same rights and authority 
within their own possessions, which they enjoyed before they were taken under 
the British protection, : 


ArtIctr 4, 


Whenever a British Force, for purposes connected with the general wel- 
fare, shall be judged necessary to march through the country of the said 
Chiefs, every Chief shall, within bis own possession, assist and furnish the 
British Force, to the full of his power, with supplies of grain and other neces- 
saries which may be demanded. 


ARTICLE 5. 


Should an enemy approach from any quarter for the purpose of conquer- 
ing this country, friendship aud mutual interest require that the Chiefs join 
the British Army with their forces, and, exerting themselves in expelling the 
enemy, act under discipline and obedience, 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Sirhind—No. XXTI. 69 


ARTICLE 6. 


Avy European articles brought by merchants from the eastern districts, 
for the use of the army, shall be allowed to pass by the thanadars and sirdars 
of the several districts belonging to the Chiefs without molestation or the 
demand of duty. 

ARTICLE 7. 


All horses purchased for the use of the Cavalry Regiments, whether in 
Sirhind or elsewhere, the bringers of which being furnished with sealed 
rahdarees from the Resident at Delhi, or Oficer Commanding at Sirhind, the 
several Chiefs shall allow such horses to pass without molestation or the 
demand‘of duty, ~ 


No. XXI. 


PROCLAMATION addressed to the Srxu Srrpars, ETC., 22nd August 
1811. 


On the 8rd of May 1809 an Ittalah-nameh, comprised of seven Articles, 
was issued by the orders of the British Government, purporting that the coun- 
try of the Sirdars of Sirhind and Malwa, having come under their protection, 
Rajah Runjeet Sing, agreeably to Treaty, had no concern with the possession 
of the above Sirdars ; that the British Government had no intention of claim- 
ing pesheush or nuzzuranah, and that they should continue in the full control 
and enjoyment of their respective possessions, The publication of the above 
Ittalah-nameh was intended to afford every confidence to the Sirdars that they 
had no intention of control, and that those having possession should remain in 
full and quiet enjoyment thereof, 