


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej] States—fatiala—No. XXIX. 83 


bf 
shall be entitled to claim a remission of seigniorage in proportion to the in- 
come so derived. ' ; 


23. The several States shall pay the same share of the annual charges for 
maintenance of the main canal as they pay of the first cost of that portion 
of the works. 


24, The original construction of the Puttiala branches, with their colla- 
teral works, including rajbubas, shall be carried out exclusively by the British 
Government under its own officers, as in the case of the main canal and the 
British branches. 


25. Subsequent to the admission of water, the management of the main 
channels of the Puttiala branches and their connected works shall rest entirely 
in the hands of the British Government, but all expenses of maintenance of 
these channels shall be defrayed by the several States in shares proportioned to 
the quantities of water allotted to each. 


26. The management and distribution of water from rajbuhas and all 
other arrangements connected therewith shall be under the control of, and the 
whole of the costs of maintenance and management of the rajbuhas shall be 
defrayed by, the States to which they respectively belong. 


27. The details of superintendence, powers of local officers, and other 
matters connected with the management, shall be settled by the Punjab Gov- 
ernment with the States concerned, subject to the confirmation of the Supreme 
Government. 


28. Offenders against Canal Regulations in villages irrigated from the 
Puttiala or British branches, or bordering on Puttiala or British branches 
shall be made over by the Canal Officers for infliction of penalties to the offi- 
cers of the Government in whose territory those villages are situated, a right 
of reference to the Punjab Government being allowed in case of any dispute 
or difference of opinion. 


29, Each State shall be bound to give a right of passage through its 
lands for any water channel, large or small, when required by any other of the 
States concerned, the only compensation claimable from the State to which 
such water-course belongs being the-value of the land occupied and the pro- 
perty thereon. The supervision of rajbuhas and other minor channels thus 
made shall remain with the Government to which they belong, as in the case 
of other similar works within its own territories. 


30. In case of dispute between any two States as to the amount of come 
pensation to be paid on account of land taken up, or any other matter under 
this agreement, the amount of compensation or dispute shall be determined by 
an officer appointed by the British Government. 


81. The tolls levied on boats, rafts, etc., navigating the canals shall be 
the same on all the channels, whether those channels belong to the British or 
any other State. 


b 32. No transit duties on goods passing along the canals shall be levied 
Y any of the Governments concerned. This will not prevent the levy of cus- 


