


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala—No, XXIX. 85 


town of Umballa, the water-course to carry about 20 cubic feet per second. 
A proportion of the charge for seigniorage on the Sutlej water shal] be remitted 
to compensate for the grant of the Guggur water if this water-course be made ; 
no other claim to lie against the British Government in connection with the 
construction of the water-course. 


43. In case of any difference of opinion arising between any officers of 
the States concerned and the British Canal Officers on any matter relating 
to the management of the canal, it shall be referred to the Lieutenant- 
Governor of the Punjab, whose decision shall be final. If any difference of 
opinion shall arise between any of the States concerned and the Lieutenant- 
Governor of the Punjab, as to the construction of this agreement, a reference 
pay be made to the Governor-General in Council, whose decision shall be 

nal. 

44, It shall at any time ke competent for the British Government to 
resume thé entire management of the canal works or irrigation in the terri- 
tories of any of the States concerned, if it shall consider that that State has 
not properly fulfilled the obligations which attach to the discharge of the 
duties which will devolve on it under the arrangement detailed above. 


45. These obligations may be summed up as follows :— 


1st.—Complete regularity in the payment of the salaries of all persons 
employed on the canals and in the provision of ‘the funds necessary for carry- 
ing ae the works which will be needed for the proper maintenance of the 
canals. 

If from any want of proper attention on the part of any of the States 
concerned, the British Government is atany time forced to advance money for 
the due performance of works or payments of salaries, ete., which will properly 
fall on that State under these arrangements, then the British Government 
must be understood to have the right to take complete charge of the whole 
administration of the canal, channels, and irrigation pertaining to that State, 
and to retain them under its own officers until the evil complained of be cor- 
rected and matters be pluced on a sound footing. Butin such case, out of 
the income from the canal after deducting expenses, any surplus which may 
acerue shall be made over to that.State concerned in whose territory such ad- 
ministration may have been assumed. 


2nd.—Complete impartiality in the distribution of the water among the 
villages along the canals, so that the British villages and those of other Na. 
tive States shall, if required, share the water equally with the villages of the 
States concerned ; also an equal administration of justice to all persons over 
whom the officers of the States concerned may exercise jurisdiction, so that 
the subjects of the British Government or of any Native State shall be dealt 
with according to the same principles of law as are respected by the officers of 
the British Government. 


