


5. The Telegraph Office at Puttiala shall remain open night and day 
for the receipt and despatch of messages, or during such hours as from time 
to time may be arranged by the Durbar in communication with the Lieutenant- 
Governor of the Punjab. 


6. The entire proceeds from the line between Umballa and Puttiala 
shall belong to the Puttiala Telegraph line. The charges on messages delivered 
at Puttiala for transmission along-any British line and the charge levied at 
any British Telegraph Station for delivery at Puttiala shall include the charge 
for both lines, and the account between the British Government and the 
Puttiala State for such messages shall be adjusted quarterly, viz., on 3)st 
March, 30th June, 30th September, and 31st December of each year. 


7. For the first year, the whole of the receipts for telegrams sent from the 
Puttiala Office shall appertain to His Highness the Maharaja of Puttiala, and 
the receipts for all messages sent to Puttiala shall appertain to the British Gov- 
ernment ; subsequent thereto the Government of India reserves to itself the right 
at any time, on giving three months’ notice on inteution thereof, to change 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala—-No. XXVIII. 79 


the system from that in force during the first year, and to divide the revenues 
derived from messages sent toand from Puttiala between His Highness and 
the British Government in proportion to the average distance over which the 
messages are transmitted, 


8. The Telezraph Master, the Signallers, and all officials employed in the 
Puttiala Telegraph Office shall be officers of the British Telegraph staff; but 
they shall be natives and not Europeans or Eurasians; aud his Highness the 
Maharaja agrees to pay them regularly month by month such pay as they may 
be entitled to from their position in the British service. 

9. His Highness the Maharaja agrees to apply to the Puttiala Telegraph 
Line the provisions of the British ''elegraph Act, No. VILI of 1860, and 
such other Acts or legal provisions as have been or may hereafter be passed by 
the British Government with reference to Telegraphs. 


10. His Highness the Maharaja agrees to apply to the Puttiala Telecraph 
Line any rules or regulations that are now or may hereafter he made applicable 
to lines of Telegraph in British India. The British Government will under- 
take to furnish the Puttiala State with accurate translations of such Acts, 
rules and regulations, 


11, His Highness the Maharaja agrees that the Puttiala Telegraph Line 
shall be open to the inspection and supervision of the Director General of 
Telegraphs and of any ollicer deputed by him for that purpose. 

12. The British Government agrees that, whenever the Maharaja shall 
find occasion to be dissatisfied with any of the officials employed in the Put 
tiala Telegraph Office and may wish to remove them from office, such officials 
shall, on His Highness the Maharaja’s application, be at once removed, and 
other officers shall be sent to fill their place as soon afterwards as practicable. 