84 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala—No. XXIX. Part I 


tomary duties on goods or merchandize landed from boats, ete., plying on 
the canals for consumption in towns, etc, 

23. The’ amount of toll levied on through traffic shall be shared between 
the British Government and the States concerned, in proportion tothe distance 
traversed on the channels belonging respectively to each. 

84, A share of the navigation tolls of the main canal shall be allotted 
to the States concerned in proportion to their share of the entire water-supply. 

35. In all other cases the tolls shall belong to the State in exclusive pos- 
session of the channels traversed. 

>» 86. The navigation tolls to be credited to the States concerned in the 
Puttiala branches thus consist of three portions :—~ 


Ist.—Share of tolls on the main canal. 


2nd.—Share of “ through ” traffic tolls between the British and Puttiala 
branches. 


3rd.—All tolls on boats, ete., navigating the Puttiala branches exclusively. 
The amount will be shared by the States concerned in proportion to the shares 
of the first costs of the channels defrayed by each respectively. 


37. A share of the value of miscellaneous produce such as wood, grass, 
ete., on the main caual shall be credited to the Puttiala branches in proportion 
to the share of the water-supply allotted to them. 

88. The above share of produce on the main canal with the whole of the 
value of similar produce on the Puttiala branches (not including rajbuhas) will 
be shared by the States concerned, in proportion to their shares in the’ first 
cost. 


39. Each State will supply annually, as required, the whole of the funds 
for maintenance of the work, etc., appertaining to its own territory, as well as 
a share of the estimated cost of maintenance of the branches, plus the portion 
of the maintenance expenses of the main canal referred to in paragraph 23: 
these last in shares proportioned to their shares in the first cost. 


40. The British Government reserves to itself the right of extending or 
altering the canal at any future time in any way it pleases, on the under- 
standing that the share of the water first assigned to the Puttiala branches, 
and the other rights of the States concerned under this agreement shall not 
be interfered with or diminished without their consent being first obtained, 
And the expenses of such extension or alteration will be distributed in propor- 
tion to the advantages expected to acerue from such action to any of the 
parties concerned under this agreement, . 

41, So long as the original construetjon of the Puttiala branches shall 
be in progress, it shall be the duty of the officers in charge to pay due atten- 
tion to any representations of the Chiefs of the States concerned or their 
officers, and to carry out their wishes as far as may be practicable or advisable. 

42. In consideration of the advantages given by the canal from the Sut- 
lej, the Puttiala State will allow the British Government, if it desires to do so, 
to take a small water-course from the Guggur to supply the cantonment and 