


13. Jurisdiction in regard to offences against the Telegraph Act, com- 
mitted in Puttiala territory by native subjects of the British Government or 
by subjects of the Maharaja, will be regulated by clause 4. of the Sunnud 
dated 5th May 1860, ‘granted to His Highness the Maharaja by the British 
Government. European British subjects accused of such offences shall be 
tried in British Courts, . . 

14. The British Government shall furnish, for the information of the 
Puttiala State, a half-yearly or yearly report embodying all the proceedings 
of the Puttiala Office showing the total receipts and disbursements, the total 
number of messages in a classified form, and other necessary facts, 

15. In most urgent cases the Puttiala State will, during the pleasure of 


the British Government, have the power of ordering the line to be cleared. 
Signed and sealed at Simla, 


On the fourteenth day of August 1872, 


Signature of the Meer Moon- : 
Seal. | shee of the Puttiala State. (Sd) R, Morray, Lieut.-Col. 
| iat (Sd) -Norrusroox. 


80 ‘Punjeb—Cis-Sutlej States—Paticla—No. XXIX. Part I 


Ratified by His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor General of India 
at Simla on the 27th day of August 1872. 


(Sd) C. U. Artcuison, 
Secy. to the Gout. of India, Foreiyn Dept. 


No. XXIX. 


Terms of AGREEMENT between the British GoveRnmMENT and 
the Staves of Purriaua, JHEEND, and NaBuHa regarding the 
Sirhind Canal, executed at Umballa, on the one part, on 
behalf of the British Government, by Mr. Gore Ouszzy, 
Commissioner, UmBaLia Division, duly empowered by H1s 
ExceLiEency the Viceroy and GovERNoR GENERAL of INDIA 
in Counciz ; and on the other part, on behalf of the Puttiala 
State, by Kaatira Syup Manomep Hossein, Mezr Moon- 
SHEE, duly empowered by His Higuness the Manaragsa of 
Porrrata; and on behalf of the Jheend State, by Strpar 
TumUND Sine and Latta Mounovr Sine, duly empowered by 
His Hicuness the Rasa of JneEnD; and on behalf of the 
Nasaa Sratz, by Meer MoonsHez RamMpyaL and SIRDAR 
BisHEN Sine, Adawluttee, duly empowered by His Hien. 
ness the Rasa of Naswa—1873. 

1, The project to be drawn out under the exclusive control of the British 

Government on the general basis of taking the water in the most economical 


manner to those districts east of the Sutlej to whom it can in an engineering 
point of view most advantageously be carried, 


2, The original designs for the Canal works will be drawn out under the 
sole direction of the British Government, every possible attention being given 
to the wishes of the Governments of the other States concerned as to the pre- 
cise direction and position of the Canals, &c., consistently with sound engi- 
neering principles, 

3. On the final settlement of the project the share of the water-supply 
to be allotted to the Branch Canal shall be determined on the general basis 
of giving a fairly equal proportion to all the districts traversed by the entire 
system of canals, having regard to the lands that will actually be capable of 
receiving irrigation from them. 