8rd.—Ready and friendly compliances on the part of the Governments of 
the States concerned with those requests of the Punjab Government and its 
superior officers, who have chief charge of the Irrigation Department in the 


e 


86 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala—No. XXX. Part I 


Punjah, which shall be declared by them to be essential for the proper main- 
tenance aud satisfactory working of the canals as a whole. 


The Governor-General in Council will at all times be ready to receive any 
representation from the Government of any of the States concerned, if that 
Government considers that the spirit of the present proposals are from any 
cause not fully acted up to by the officers of the Punjab Government on whom 


the immediate duty of carrying them out will devolve. 
Executed at Umballa this eighteenth day of February 1873. 


(Sd.) Gore OusELEy, 
Commissioner, Umballa Division, 


| Seal, | (Sd.) Nortasroox. 


Ratified by His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor-General of India. 2t 
Calcutta on the twenty-sixth day of March 1873. 


(Sd.) C. U. Arrcnison, 
Secretary to the Government of India, 
Foreign Department. 


i om engagements were entered into by the Chiefs of Jheend and 
abha. 


No. XXX. 


PostaL CONVENTION for the EXCHANGE of CORRESPONDENCE, 
PARCELS, INSURED and VALUE-PAYABLE ARTICLES, MONEY 
ORDERS and INDIA PostTaL vores, between the IMPERIAL 
Post OFFICE OF Britisn INDIA and the Posr OFFICES in 
the rerritoRIEs of His Hicgunuss the Mawaraga of Pas 
TIALA—1884, 

, Arrice 1, 
There shall be a mutual exchange of correspondence, parcels, money 
orders and India postal notes between the Imperial Post Office of British In- 
dia, hereinafter termed the “Imperial Post,” and the Post Offices in the 


territories of His Highness the Maharaja of Patiala, hereinafter termed the 
“ Patiala State Post.” This exchange, which shall also include registered, 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala—No. XXX. 87 


insured and value-payable articles, shall be governed by the rales given in 
the Indian Postal Guide for the time being. The term “ correspondence ” 
shall include letters, post-cards, newspapers, and book and pattern packets. 


Articte 2. 


There shall be two Offices of Exchange, viz., the Imperial Post Office at 
Umballa, on the side of British India, ‘and the Patiala State Post Office at 
Patiala, on the side of the Patiala State. These Offices of Exchange shall alone 
be authorised to deal with articles giving rise to accounts, 


. 


ARTICLE 8, 


Indian postage stamps, post-cards and embossed envelopes overprinted 
with the words “ Patiala State,’ shall be supplied on indent by the Govern- 
ment of India to the Patiala State at cost price. They shall be sold by the 
Patiala State to the public at the value marked on each postage stamp, post- 
card or embossed envelope. Indian postage stamps overprinted with the word 
“ Service,” in addition to the words “ Patiala State,’ shall also be supplied on 
indent by the Government of India to the Patiala State at cost price, and 
‘these overprinted stamps shall be used solely for the purpose of prepaying 
correspondence on the service of the Patiala State posted in that State. 