


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala—No. XXIX. : 81 


4, In the subsequent parts of this Agreement the Ubohur and Bhuttinda 
branch canals will be referred to as the British branches, and the Kutlah, the 
Central, and the Choa Branches will, for the sake of brevity, be alluded to as 
the Puttiala branches, as they chiefly pass through the territory of the Put. 
tiala State. ‘ 

5. Water shall be distributed, if required and so far as practi¢able, from 
the British branch canals rateably to all villages along their courses whose 
lands can be advantageously irrigated therefrom, whether those villages are 
under British jurisdiction, or that of any other State. 

6. Similarly on the Puttiala branches the distribution shall be made 
rateably to all villages, whether belonging to the Puttiala or any other 
State. 

7. The land required for the'canals and works in connection with them 
shall be made over by the Government of each State traversed according to 
its own usage, all payments of compensation being made by the British 
Government in accordance with the regulations in force in the several States, 
and the amount being dealt with as a part of the general expenditure on the 
eanal works, 

oe Compensation will be paid for any building or house injured by the 
works. : 

9. The entire cost of the main canal, inclusive of original surveys and 
the preparation of the project, shall be borne by the British Government and 
Native States concerned in proportion to the water-supply allotted .to each ; 
but the whole cost of the Puttiala branches shall be borne entirely by the 
States concerned in similar proportion. 


_ NV.B—Puttiala paid the expense of the preliminary surveys and project 
incurred in 1862. This will be added to the general cost of the whole project 
and he shared by all the parties concerned. 


10. Each State will defray the entire expenditure on its own rajbuhas, 
Which ‘will be designed (unless otherwise mutually agreed upon) as far as 
possible so as to provide separately for the lands of the several States, and 
will be specially assigned to the States by the British Government which will 
determine all doubtful points relating to this assignment. 


11, The States interested in the Puttiala branches concerned shall supply 
annually, to meet the cost of construction while the works are in progress, a 
.proportion of the estimated annual outlay on the main canal equal to the 
Share of the entire water-supply allotted to those branches, as well as the 
Whole of the funds required for those branches in shares proportioned to the 
quantity of water allotted to each. 

12. On the completion of the works an account will be drawn out by 
the British Government of the actual expenditure on those portions of the 
project of which the cost is to be defrayed proportionally by the several 
Governments, and a final statement will be prepared of the exact sum due 
from the several States concerned, when each State will pay or receive 
back any difference between its actual payments year by year aud its ultimate 