


ARTICLE 4. 


These overprinted postage stamps, post-cards and embossed envelopes, 
overprinted with the words “ Patiala State” shall alone be used in the Patiala 
State for the prepayment of INLAND correspondence, and they shall be recog- 
nized by the Imperial Post only when attached to inland correspondence posted 
within the limits of the State of Patiala. 


ARTICLE 5. 


The rates of postage, fe’s or commission charged by the Patiala State 
Post on all classes of correspondence, paid and unpaid, registered and unregis- 
tered, insured and value-payable; on all parcels, and on all money orders, and 
on all India postal notes, shall not be in excess of the rates charged by the 
Imperial Post. 


ARTICLE 6, 


Responsibility for articles insured, aud for payment of compensation 
under the rules given in the Indian Postal Guide for the time being, shall 
rest with the Imperial Post Office while the articles concerned are in its eus- 
tody ; and with the Patiala State while the articles concerned are in its 
custody. 


ARTICLE 7, 


Articles of all kinds superscribed “On Postal Service,’ and franked by 
the signature and official designation of an officer of the Imperial Post or an 


38 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala—No. XXX. Part I 


officer of the Patiala State Post, shall be exchanged free of all charge: as re- 
spects postage. . 
: ARTICLE 8, 


The Government of India shall bear the cost of conveying mails within 
the limits of British territory, and the Patiala Darbar shall bear the cost of 
conveying mails within the limits of the State of Patiala. But the Imperial. 
Post shall be entitled to the free conveyance of mails over postal lines in the 
Patiala State, whether such mails be intended for transmission toa Patiala 
State Post Office or an Imperial Post Office, and similarly the Patiala State 
Post shall be entitled to the free conveyance of mails over Imperial postal lines 
whether such mails be intended for transmission to an Imperial Post Office 
or a Patiala State Post Office. 


ARTICLE 9. 


Inland correspondence, registered and unregistered, received from the 
Patiala State Post, fully prepaid with the overprinted postage stamps de- 
scribed in Article 3, including correspondence prepaid by Patiala State Service 
Stamps, shall be delivered in British India free of all charge on account of 
postage. 

Articte 10. 


Inland correspondence received from the Patiala State Post, not fully pre- 
paid with the overprinted postage stamps described in Article 3, shall be 
treated by the Imperial Post as though originally posted in British India, and 
charged on delivery with the usual rates for inland unpaid postage, which 
shall be retained by the Imperial Post. 


ARTIOLE 11. 


Fully prepaid inland correspondence, registered and unregistered (includ- 
ing correspondence prepaid by service stamps), transferred by the Imperial 
Post, shall be delivered by the Patiala State Post, free of all charge on ac- 
count of postage. 

ARTICLE 12. 