

Be assured that nothing shall disturb the Engagement thus made to you 
so long as your House is loyal to the Crown and faithful to the conditions of 
the Treaties, Grants, or Engagements which record its obligations to the 
British Goverument. ; 


(Sd.) CANNING. 
Dated 5th March 1862. 


No. XXVIII. 


AGREEMENT between the BRITISH GovERNMENT and the PUTTIALA 
Srave for the construction, maintenance, and working of a 
line of telegraph from Umballa to Puttiala—1872. 


Whereas His Highness Maharaja Rajegan Mohendro Sing Mohender 
Bahadoor, G.C.S.I., ete, of Puttiala, is desirous of constructing a line of 
telegraph from Umballa to Puttiala to be worked in connection with the 
British lines of telegraph, the following terms are agreed upon by Lientenant- 
Colonel Robert Murray, Officiating Director General of Telegraphs, on the 
Part of the British Government, duly empowered by the Viceroy and Governor- 

eueral of India in Council on that behalf, and by Khalifa Syud Mahomed 


78 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala—No. XXVIII. Part I 


Hoossein, Meer Moonshee, on the part of the Puttiala State, duly empowered 
- by His Highness the Maharaja of Puttiala on that behalf. 

1. The British Government agree to construct for the Puttiala State a 
line of telegraph consisting of one wire, on the standards to be erected between 
Umballa and Lahore, from Umballa to Kajpoor, and a one-wire line from 
Rajpoor to Puttiala, at a cost of Rupees (15,526) fifteen thousand five hundred 
and twenty-six, more or less; and His Highness the Maharaja of Puttiala 
agrees to pay the actual cost incurred in the construction of the line, on its 
being officially reported to His Highness that the Telegrah Office at Puttiala 
has been established and opened ; and His Highness the Maharaja of Puttiala 
also agrees to defray all expenses and cost on account of the salaries of the 
signallers, and of the necessary menial servants attached to the Office and 
peons for the delivery of messages, and to provide free of charge or rent and 
to keep in good and habitable repair a suitable house or building, to be approved 
of by the Director-General of Telegraplis in India, if necessary, for the accom- 
modation of the Telegraph Office to be established and maintained at Puttiala, 
and of the employés and others considered necessary for the efficient working 
of it. 

2. With the consent of the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab, extra 
wires may at any time be added by the Telegraph Department for the Puttiala 
State, on terms and conditions to be agreed upon at the time between the 
Puttiala State and the Government of India. - 

3, This line sball be called the Puttiala Telegraph line, and the materials 
‘shall be the property of the Puttiala State. But if from any special reason 
the Puttiala State should at any time deem it proper to abolish the line, it 
will be necessary for that State to give notice to the Punjab Government six 
months beforehand for dismantling the line. 

4, His Highness the Maharaja agrees to pay annually such sums as 
may be required to keep the line in good repair, together with the sum_ of 
Rupees (900) nine hundred only to cover the cost of supervision. 