


Share of the cost. " 


82 ‘Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala-No. XXIX. Part I 


13. The above account of total cost will include the charges for the 
original surveys and proper charges for establishments, &¢., whether incurred 
by the British or any of the other Governments concerned ; and credit: will be 
given to every State for payments made by it directly. 


14, Copies of such parts of the British accounts of the expenditure on 
construction will be furnished periodically to the Governments of the several 
States concerned, so far as may be desired by them. 


15. The several States concerned shall pay to the British Government 
an annual sum as seigniorage on the Sutlej water supplied to the Puttiala 
branches in shares proportioned to the quantity of water allotted to each. 


16. The seigniorage to be paid by the States interested in the Puttiala 
branches in consideration of the water supplied to them by the British Govern- 
ment will be at a rate not exceeding four annas per acre. 


17. The sum to be paid annually will be calenlated on the area actually 
irrigated during the year by the British branches of the canal, and in propor- 
tion to the relative volumes of water passing at the time down the British 
and Puttiala branches respectively, that is to say, if, with,2,000 cubic feet per 
second passing down the British branches, 20,000 acres have been irrigated, 
and 1,000 cubic feet per second have been at the same time discharged.in the 
Puttiala branches, the seigniorage to be paid would be 100,000 acres at four 
anbas, equal to Rupees 25,000, 

N.B.—The area irrigated will be the actual area, i.¢., an acre of double 
crop land will not be reckoned as two acres, ‘ 


18. No seigniorage will be demanded so long as the British eanals yield 
no profit, and as long as the profits from the British branches shall be so small 
as would render the seigniorage rate of four annas per acre unduly high, such 
seigniorage shall be proportionately reduced to one, two, or three annas per 
acre at the discretion of the British Government, 


F The British Accounts Department will determine when the canals yield 
profit. 


19, The first payment of seigniorage will be demanded on the eleventh 
year after the admission of water into the Puttiala branches. 


20. In cases of any falling off in the annual supply of water entering the 
main canal channel, the British Government and the other States will share 
the actual supply according to the original proportion fixed, and the other 
States shall have no claim for compensation from the British Government on 
account of any such reduction of the supply, 

21. The gauge registers at the regulating head of the British and 
Puttiala branches shall be held to give authoritative data for calculating the 
quantity of water supplied, 


22. No State will have any claim against the British Government on 
account of water escaping, unused from the branches, because it, is not required 
or used in their territories. Should the British Government realize any income 
from the surplus (unused) water of the Puttiala branches, the States concerned 