


(Sd.) C. Grant. 
Secy. to the Govt. of India, Foreign Department. 


Similar conventions baye been executed with the following States in the 
Punjab, being ratified by the Viceroy on the dates stated :— 


Nabha on the 28rd March = 1885, 
Jind on the 8rd June 1885. 
Faridkot on the 80th November 1886. 
Chamba onthe 4th December 1886, 


92 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Jind—No. XXXI. Part I 


No. XXXI. 


Suynvp to the Ragan or JHEEND, dated 22nd September 1847. 


The Right Honorable the Governor-General having resolved to bestow 
certain lands on the Rajah of Jheend, as a mark of consideration for his 
attachment and services to the British during the late war with the Lahore 
State, and the Rajah of Jheend having requested that he may at the same 
time receive a renewed assurance of protection and guarantee of his rights in 
his former possessions, the Governor-General is pleased to confer this+assur- 
ance in the form of a Sunnud or Grant as follows, inorder that the Maharajah 
and his successors after him may, with perfect confidence, continue to exercise 
the same rights and authority in his possessions as heretofore. 

The Maharajah’s ancient hereditary estates, according to annexed Sche- 
dule, shall continue for ever in the possession of himself and his successors, 
with all Government rights thereto belonging of Police jurisdiction and’ col- 
lection of revenue as heretofore. The Maharajah’s chaharumians, feudatories, 
adherents, and dependants will continue bound in their adherence and obliga- 
tions to the Rajah as heretofore. His Highness will exert himself to do 
justice, and to promote the welfare and happiness of his subjects, while they, 
on their part, considering the Rajah as their true and rightful lord, must obey 
him and his successors accordingly, and pay the revenue punctually, and be 
always zealous to promote the cultivation of their lands, and testify their 
loyalty and obedience. The Maharajah has relinquished for himself and his 
successors for ever all right to levy excise and transit duties which have been 
abolished throughout the Jheend territory. His Highness also binds himself 
and his successors to the suppression of suttee, infanticide, and slave-dealing 
within his territories, If, unknown to the Maharajah's authorities, any per- 
sons should be guilty of these acts, the Maharajah’s authorities will, on con- 
viction, punish them with such severity as to deter others. The British Govern- 
ment will never demand from the Maharajah and his successors and their 
dependants above named anything in the way of tribute dr revenue or commu- 
tation in lieu of troops or otherwise, for the reason that His Highness will 
ever continue as heretofore sincerely devoted to the service and interests of the 
British, The British authorities will not entertain complaints of the Maha- 
rajah’s subjects or dependants, or interfere with the Maharajah’s authority, 
Should an enemy approach from any quarter to this side the Beas or Sutlej, 
for the purpose of conquering this country, the Rajah will join the British 
Army with his forces, and exert himself in expelling the enemy and act under 
discipline and obedience, and in time of war place the resources of his country 
at the disposal of the British Government. His Highness engages to have 
made and to keep in repairs, through his own officers, the military roads 
through his territory for the passage of British troops from Umballa and 
other stations to Ferozepore, of a width and elevation to be determined on 
by the Engineer Officer charged with the duty of laying down the roads, 
His Highness will also appoint encamping grounds for British troops at the 
different stages, which shall be marked off, so that there be no claims made 
hereafter on account of damaged crops. 