


94 Punjab--Cis-Sutlej States—Jind—No. XXXII. Part I 


Court of Directors, to the Madras Government, No. 3, dated lst June 1836, 
The Rajah will exert himself to execute justice, and to promote the happiness 
and welfare of his people. He engages to prohibit suttee, slavery, and female 
infanticide throughout his territories, and to punish with the utmost rigor 
those who are found guilty of any of these crimes. 


Clause 5.—The Rajah will never fail in his loyalty and devotion to the 
Sovereign of Great Britain. 


Clause 6.—If any force hostile tothe British Government should appear 
in the neighbourhood, the Rajah will co-operate with the British Government 
and oppose the enemy. He will-exert himself to the utmost of his resources 
in providing carriage and supplies for the British troops according to requisi- 
tions he may receive. 

Clause 7.—The British Government will not receive any complaints from 
any of the subjects of the Rajab, whether maafeedars, jaghiredars, relatives, 
dependents, servants, or other classes. 


Clause 8,~-The British Government will respect the household'and family 
arrangements of the Rajah, and abstain from any interference therein. 


Clause, 9.—The Rajah, as heretofore, will furnish at current rates, through 
the agency of his own Officers, the necessary materials required for the con- 
struction of Railroads, Railway Stations, and Imperial Roads and Bridges. 
He will also freely give the land required for the construction of Ruilroads and 
Imperial Lines-of Road. 


Clause 10.—The Rajah and his successors, ete., will always pursue the 
same course of fidelity and devotion to the British Government, and the 
Government will always be ready to uphold the honour and dignity of the 
Rajah and his house. 


Cory of SCHEDULE of the TerrirorrEes belonging to the Ragan 
: of JHEEND. 
Ancestral possessions. 

1. Pergunnah Jheend and the villages surnamed the Punjgraon Circle, 

2, Pergunnah Sufeedoon. 

3. Pergunnah Lujwanah. 

4, Pergunnah Balewallee. 

5. Pergunnah Lungroor, with the villages Mahlan and Ghabdan, 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Jind—No. XXXIII. 95 


6. Pergunnah Bazeedpoor, with Mouzah Laloda. 
7. A share in the village of Bhaeeroopa. 


Acquired Possessions. 


Mouzah Dalumwalla (now in Pergunnah Jheend). 


: Now in Pergunnah Sufeedoon, granted 
Moot ee : . by Sunnud, dated 22nd September 1847, 
Mouzah Khatla ° : *’) signed by Viscount Hardinge, Governor- 
° ‘ General. ; 
Pergunnah Dadree . ; -( By letter from Secretary to Govern- 
14 Villages of Pergunnah Kool} 


aram e e e e e 


, ment of India, dated 2nd June 1858, No. 
1549 A, 


Jagheer Feudatories, 


Dyalpoora Sikhs, 


No. XXXIII. 


~o Forzunp Ditaunp RasEKoon IranQad Dowivt-1-ENGLisura 
Ragan Suroop Sine Bawapoor, of JHEEND, dated 5th 
March 1862. 


Her Majesty being desirous that the Governments of the several Princes 
and Chiefs of India who now govern their own territories should be perpe- 
tuated, and that the representation and dignity of their Houses should be 
continued, I hereby, in fulfilment of this desire, repeat to you the assurance 
which I communicated to you in the Sunnud under my signature, dated 5th 
May 1860, that, on failure of natural heirs, the perpetuation of your family 
by your adoption of an heir from the Phoolkeean House will be in accordance 
with the wishes of the paramount power, and will be gladly recognized and 
confirmed; and that if at any time any Rajah of Jheend should die without 
male issue, and without adopting 4 successor, it will still be open to the 
Maharajah of Putialla and the Rajah of Nabha, in concert with the Com- 
missioner or Political Agent of the British Government, to select a successor 
from among the Phoolkeean family ; but in that case a nuzzuranah, or fine, 
equal to one-third of the gross annual revenue of the Jheend State, shall be 
paid to the British Government, 