

9. Masonry diaphragms shall be constructed in the first two miles of 
each distributary, Which shall be held to indicate the normal bed-levels and 


100 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Jind—No, RXXV. Part I 


cross-sections of the channel in which they are situated. The Jind State 
shalf make all clearances of these channels as nearly as may be in conformity 
with the levels and cross-sections thus indicated, and shall not increase the 
capacity of any of the channels beyond the limits indicated by the said dia- 
phragms without the consent of the British Government. The British Canal 
-Officers shall be at liberty to inspect the said djaphragms and to repair them 
at the cost of the British Government should they be found to require it. 

10. The amount payable annually by the Jind State for the supply of 
water for irrigation shall be calculated on an area of 50,000 (fifty thousand) 
acres, the rate per acre being the average of some few years of measured 
irrigation in lands similarly situated in British territory, but the amount 
shall be subject to deduction on account of —~ 

(1) Cost of repairs and maintenance of distributaries as provided in 
Article 4, 


(2) Reduction of canal establishment resulting from the transfer of 
sole management of the distributaries to the State. 


(8) Fees to Lambardars and Patwaris at the rate of 5 (five) per cent. 
on the amount payable. 


Note.—The net-amount payable by the State, after making the stipulated 
deductions, has been fixed for the present at Rs. 1,05,500 (one hundred and 
five thousand five hundred) as detailed below. The rate of 2:4 (two and 
four-tenths) rupees per acre was obtained by striking a mean for five years 
ending 1883-84 of actual realizations per acre irrigated in the Jind State : — 


Gross sum payable— Rs, 
, 50,000 acres at Rs. 2°4 per acre e : . ; 1,20,000 
Deductions— 
Rs. 
(1) Maintenance and repairs ‘ . . 5,000 
(2) Establishment savings 7 e e 3,500 


(3) Fees to Lambardars and Patwaris < * 6,000 
Fae eee 14,500 


Net amount payable per annum os . ; - __ 1,04,500 


———— 


11. In the event of there being a general reduction of water-rates on the 
canal, a rateable reduction shall be made in the amount payable by the State ; 
and in the event of the rates being increased, a rateable increase shall be 
demandable from the State. 

12. In case of any difference of opinion arising between avy Officers of 
the Jind State and the. British Canal Officers relating to the supply of water, 
it shall be referred to the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab, whose decision 
shall be final. If any difference of opinion shall arise between the Jind State 
and the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab as to the construction of this 
agreement, a reference may be made to the Governor-General in Council, 
whose decision shall be final, 


i 


-Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Naiha—No. XXXVI. 101 


Executed at Sangrur this twenty-fourth day of July 189% on behalf of 
His Highness the Raja of Jind by Sardar Ratan Singh, President, Council of 
Regency, in presence of me, L. Chandu Lal, Mir Munshi. 