


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Jind—No. XXXII. 93 


No. XXXII. 


TRANSLATION of the SunNUD given to the Ragan of JHEEND by 
His Excetnency the Viczroy and GoVERNoR-GENERAL, 
Simua, 5th May 1860. 


Since the establishment of British authority in India, the present Rajah 
of Jheend and his predecessors have always been steady’ in their allegiance. 
They have frequently received rewards for their fidelity in the accession of 
fresh honors, dignity, and territory. More recently the present ruler of 
Jheend has surpassed the former achievements of his race, by the constancy 
and courage he evinced during the mutiny of 1857-58. In memory of this 
unswerving and conspicuous loyalty, His Excellency the Viceroy and Gov- 
ernor-General of India has conferred additional honors and territory upon the 
Rajah for himself and his heirs for ever, and has graciously acceded to the 
Rajah’s desire to receive a Sunnud or Grant under the hand and seal of the 
Viceroy, guaranteeing to the Rajah the free and unreserved possession of his 
ancient territories, as well as of those tracts bestowed on the Rajah and his 
predecessors at various times by the British Government. 


Clause 1.—The Rajah and his heirs for ever will exercise full sovereignty 
over his ancestral and acquired dominions according to the annexed list. All 
the rights, privileges, and prerogatives which the Rajah enjoys in his heredi- 
tary territories he will equally enjoy in his acquired territories. All feudato- 
ries and dependents of every degree will be' bound to render obedience to him 
throughout his dominions. 


Clause 2.—Except as provided in Clause 3, the British Government .will 
never demand from the Rajah, or any of his successors, or from any of his 
feudatories, relations, or dependents any tribute on account of revenue, service, 
or any other plea. 


Clause 3.—The British Government cordially desires to see the Noble 
House of Jheend perpetuated, and in this spirit confers upon the Rajah and 
his’ heirs for ever, whenever male issue may fail, the right of adopting a suc- 
cessor from among the descendants of the Phoolkeean family. If, however, at 
any time any Rajah of Jheend should die without male issue and without adopt- 
ing a successor, it will still be open to the Maharajah of Puttialla and the Rajah 
of Nabha, in concert with the Commissioner or Political Agent of the British 
Government, to select a successor from among the Phoolkecan family; but in 
that case a nuzzuranah or fine, equal to one-third of the gross annual revenue 
of the Jheend State, shall be paid to the British Government. 


Clause 4.—In 1847 the British Government empowered the Rajah to 
inflict capital punishment, after reference to the Commissioner, It now 
removes the restriction imposed by this reference, and invests the Rajah with 
absolute power of life and death over his own subjects. With regard to 
British subjects committing crime and apprehended in his territory, the Rajah 
will be guided by the rules contained in the Despatch of the Honourable the 