


by the Imperial Post. 
ARTICLE 24, 


India postal notes, bearing the words “ Patiala State” stamped on them, 
shall be supplied free by the Government of India to the Patiala State, 


ARTICLE 25. 

The full value of every India postal note sold by the Patiala State Post 
shall be payable in British India at any Imperial Post Office named, no charge 
being levied for payment, 

ARTICLE 26, 


The full value of every India postal note sold by the Imperial Post shall: 
be payable in the Patiala State at any Patiala State Post Office named, no 
charge being levied for payment. ' 


ARTICLE 27, 


The Imperial Post shall retain the entire commission on the India postal 
notes which it sells, and the Patiala State Post shall retain the entire commis- 
sion on the India postal notes which it sells. 


ARTICLE 28, 


Monthly lists shall be rendered by the Patiala Office of Exchange to the 
Umballa Office of Exchange showing the India postal notes sold and the India 
postal notes paid during each month, the vouchers for payments consisting of 
the original paid notes, 


ARTIOLE 29. 
A monthly account current showing the amount to be credited to the 


Patiala State on account of money orders and India postal notes paid by the 
Patiala State Post, and the amount to be debited to the Patiala State on ac- 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States~—Paticla—No. XXX. 91 


count of money orders issued and India pestal notes sold by the Patiala State 
Post, shall be rendered by the Imperial Office of Exchange (Umballa) to the 
Patiala Office of Exchange. If the balance of this account is in favour of the 
Patiala State Post, it shall be paid at once by the Imperial Office of Exchange 
(Umballa), and if it is in favour of the Imperial Post, it shal] be paid by the 
Patiala Office of Exchange immediately after the monthly account current is 
rendered. : 


Axticie 380. 


The Director-General of the Post Office of India and the Patiala Darbar 
shall have authority to draw up, in direct communication with one another, 
detailed regulations for giving effect. to this convention, and to settle all mat- 
ters of detail and procedure connected with the exchange of articles .between 
the Imperial Post “and the Patiala State Post, including the selection of Post 
Offices, situated in British India or in the Patiala State, between which postal 
communication shall be maintained. The detailed regulations so drawn up 
shall be subject to such modification as may, from time to time, be mutually 
agreed to by the said authorities. 


Signed by the Director-General of Signed by the Motamid of the Patiala 
the Post Office of India on the 15th State on the 15th day of Septem- 


day of September 1884. ber 1884. 
(Sd.) A. U. Fanspawe, Nanak Baxuss, 
Off. Dir.-Genl., Post Office of India. Motamid, Sarkar Patiala, 


(Signed in Persian character.) 


RIPON, 


Viceroy and Governor-General of India. 


This convention was ratified by His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor- 
General of India at Simla on the 3rd day of October, A.D. one thousand eight 
hundred and eighty-four. 