

On inland correspondence, not fully prepaid, transferred by the Imperial 
Post for delivery through the Patiala State Post, the latter shall retain the 
postage it realizes, 

Articie 13, 


Unclaimed and refused inland correspondence shall be exchanged in both 
directions, but the exchange shall be accompanied by no accounts. 
Anriote 14, 


Fully prepaid foreign correspondence, addressed to any place in the 
Patiala State, shall be delivered by the Patiala State’ Post free of all charges 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiale—No. XXX. 89 


on account of postage ; but if such correspondence be unpaid or insufficiently 
paid, it shall be delivered on payment of. the amount taxed thereon by the 
Imperial Post ; and the amount so collected shall be remitted to the Imperial 
Office of Exchange (Umballa). 


Artictz 15. 


On foreign correspondence posted in the Patiala State postage can only 
be prepaid by means of Imperial postage stamps, not bearing the overprint 
“ Patiala State.” Postage stamps overprinted with the words “ Patiala State” 
shall not be recognized in payment of postage on foreign correspondence. : 


ArrTIcte 16. 


Prepayment of inland parcel postage between the Imperial Post and the 
Patiala State Post, in both directions, shall be compulsory. 


ArtiIoLe 17. 


Inland parcels, received from the Patiala State Post, shall be delivered in 
British India free of all charge on account of postage. 


Articte 18, 


Inland parcels, transferred by the Imperial Post for delivery through the 
Patiala State Post, shall be delivered free of all charge on account of postage, 


ARtTIcLE 19. 


Fully prepaid foreign parcels, addressed to any place in the Patiala State, 
shall be delivered by the Patiala State Post free of all charge on account of 
‘postage; but if such parcels be unpaid, they shall be delivered on payment of 
the amount taved thereon by the Imperial Post, and the amount so collected 
shall be remitted to the Imperial Office of Exchange (Umballa). 


ARTICLE 20, 


Prepayment in cash of postage, at the rates published in the Indian Postal 
Guide, is compulsory in the case of all foreign parcels posted in Patiala. 
The postage so collected shall be remitted to the Imperial Office of Exchange 
(Umballa). 


ARTICLE 21. 


The Imperial inland money order rules, as given in the Indian Postal Guide 
for the time being, shall be adopted by the Patiala State Post, and the Imperial 
inland form of money order shall be used. 


N 


90 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Patiala—No. XXX. Part I 


ARTICLE 22, 


Money orders, issued by the Patiala State Post for payment in British 
India, shal] all be sent by the Patiala Office of Exchange to the Imperial Office 
of Exchange (Umballa), Such money orders shall be paid in fullin British 
India free of all charges and without deduction on any account ‘whatsoever. 
The entire commission on these motiey orders ghall be retained by the Patiala 

. State Post. 
ARTICLE 28, 

Money orders, issued by the Imperial Post for payment by the Patiala 
State Post, shall be transferred to the Patiala Office of Exchange by the Impe- 
rial Office of Exchange (Umballa). Such money orders shall be paid in full in 
the Patiala State free of all charges and without deduction on any account 
whatsoever, The entire commission on these money orders shall be retained 