


6. The British Canal Officer shall have full power to shut off or reduce 
the supply to the Butava distributary at his discretion in accordance with the 
exigencies of irrigation, and the outlets provided on that distributary for the 
irrigation of Jind territory shall be subject to such periodical and special 
closures as may be ordered from time to time for British outlets in accordance 
with Rule 15, passed under Act VIII of 1873, due intimation of such orders 
being given to the Jind Canal Officer, but no closure shall be ordered 
on account of alleged wastage of water owing to disrepair of irrigating 
channels. 


7. The distributaries shall be constructed of sufficient capacity, when 
running toa full gauge, to irrigate, in combination with the four water- 
courses from the Butana distributary, an aggregate area of 60,000 (sixty 
thousand) acres per annum, but in order to compensate for all irregularities 
or deficiencies in the supply passed into them, the annual charge for the water 
supplied shall be calculated on an irrigated area of 50,000 (fifty thousand) 
acres only, and no claims shall be raised by the Jind State for reduction of 
such annual charge on the grounds of short supply, 


8. Gauges shall be placed at the head of each distributary for the deter- 
mination of full supplies, the zero of the gauge in each case being placed on 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Jind—No. XXXV. 99 


the level of the bed of the distributary. The following gauge readings shall 
be held to represent full supplies in the case of each distributary :— 


Fall supply 


Number of distributary, gouge reading 


40 
II ° . . » 6 . . ry e e e e e 2:0 
WI ° e e e e s e e ‘ e ° ® e 35 


35 


Nors.—(No. 1V is a branch of No. LIT and has no separate head in the canal.) 


No. I distributary having been constructed to carry double the full 
supply sufficient for the irrigation of the area dependent on it shall be closed 
at the head during every alternative week or other convenient interval of 
time, and shall be opened in the correspouding alternative intervals. The 
remaining nine distributaries shall be allowed to run constantly, subject to 
temporary closures of the Hansi Branch under Article 5 of this agreement. 
Every distributary, when open, shall be entitled to as full a supply as the sup- 
ply in the Hansi Branch will permit without being headed up, provided that 
the above-mentioned gauge readings shall, in no case, be exceeded. 

8(a). The heads of all the Jind distributaries shall remain under the sole 
control of the British Canal Officer, who will arrange for the maintenance of 
the supply in each at the gauge indented for by the Jind Canal Officer, if not 
in excess of the full supply gauge reading prescribed in Article 7 and, as far 
as the available depth of water in the Hansi Branch will permit. In the 
event of a breach or sudden cessation of the demand on a Jind distributary, 
the supply entering at the head shall not be reduced. except in accordance 
with the general or special orders in this regard that may be issued from time 
to time by the British Canal Officer, but all reductions of supply applied for 
by the Jind Canal Officer will be effected after due and: sufficient notice has 
been given. 