

3. The said distributaries and the said water-course heads taking out of 
the Butana distributary shall be constructed at the cost of the British Gov- 
ernment, but when completed shall be handed over to the Jind State, with 
the exception of the masonry heads and the portions of the channels within 
canal limits. 


4. The distributaries'so made over shall be kept in repair by the Jind 
. State, a deduction being made on this account from the. annual charge for 
water. The deduction shall be calculated at a certain rate for irrigated area 
fixed with reference to the average cost per acre for maintenance of distribu- 
taries elsewhere in British territories, 


5. So soon as the ten main distributaries taking out from the Hansi 
Branch are made over to the Jind State, the British Canal Officer shall 
thenceforth exercise no interference in regard to the internal management and 
the distribution of water from them, nor shall he, unless at the request or 
with the consent of the Jind Canal Officer, reduce the supply entering the 
heads, provided the full gauge readings specified in Article 7 be not exceeded ; 
but the British Canal Officer shall have full power to shut off or to reduce 
the supply entering the Hansi Branch under the following circumstances :— 

(a) As part of a general closure of the Western Jumna Canal for 
nezessary or emergent repairs, of which due notice will be-pub- 
lished in the Punjab Gazette for closuresof more than ten days’ 
duration. 


* Not printed, 
‘ ‘ 


98 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Jind—No. XXXV. Part I 


(6) Fer purpose of repairs to any canal work or for usual or necessary 
; silt clearances on the Hansi Branch. 


(c) On occasions of excessive rainfall or general reduction of the 
demand for canal water, that may render a reduction of the 
supply necessary, either for the safety of the canal banks or 
works or to prevent undue flooding or waste of water. 


(2) For the purpose of amore effective distribution of the supply 
available for the distributaries on the New Main Line, and for 
the Delhi and Hansi Branches and the Butana distributary, all 
closures and reductions of the supply to the Hansi Branch being 
as far as possible compensated for by an immediately previous or 
suhsequent increase of the supply which would otherwise be due 
to that branch. 


(ce) In the event of the supply available for the distributaries on 
the New Main Line and for the Delhi and Hansi Branches and 
Butana distributary falling below the demand, in which case 
the supply to the Hansi Branch shall either be rateably reduced 
or shall be regulated as provided in clause (2) of this Article. 


As long previous notice as possible shall be given to the Jind Canal 
Officer of all closures or reductions of the supply ordered under clauses (2),. 
(4), (d), and (¢). 


Immediate notice of all closures or reductions of the supply ordered under 
clause (e) shall also be given to the Jind Canal Officer, who will be consulted 
as to the length of the period during which the reduction of the supply should 
be maintained. 