


(Sd.) C. L. Tupprr, 
Chief Secretary to the Government of the Punjab. 
The 10th August 1892. 


Approved and confirmed by His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor- 
General of India, 


. 


(Sd.) H. M. Duranp, 
Secretary to the Government of India. 
Forrien Department ; 
Sina, 
The 16th September 1892. 


No. XXXVI. 


TRANSLATION of the SuNNuD given to the Rasag of NaBua by His 
EXcELLENCY the VickRoy and GoverNnor-GENERAL. 


Simla, 5th May 1860. 


Since the establishment of British Supremacy in India, the present Rajah 
of Nabha and his ancestor, Rajah Juswant Sing, have given various proofs of 
their loyalty to the British Government. More recently the present Chief of 
Nabha has surpassed the former achievements of his race, by the constancy 
and courage he evinced during the mutiny of 1857-58. In memory of this 
unswerving and conspicuous loyalty, His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor- 
General of India has conferred additional honours and territory upon the Rajah 
for himself and his heirs for ever, and has graciously acceded to the Rajah’s 
desire to receive a Sunnud or Grant under the hand and seal of the Viceroy, 
guaranteeing to the Rajah the free and unreserved possession of his ancestral 
territories, as well as of those tracts bestowed on the Rajah by the British 
Government. 

Clause 1.—The Rajah and his heirs for ever will exercise full sovereignty 
over his ancestral and acquired dominions, according to the annexed list. All 
the rights, privileges, and prerogatives which the Rajah enjoys in his heredi- 
tary territories, he will equally enjoy in his acquired territories, All feudatories, 
_ and dependants, of every degree, will be bound to render obedience to him 
throughout his dominions. 


108939 


etre anno nta  A 
102 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Nabhe—No. XXXVI. Part I 


——m 


Clause 2.-—-Except as provided in Clause 3, the British Government will 
never demand from the Rajah, or any of his successors, or from any of his 
feudatories, relations or dependents, any tribute on account of revenue, service, 
or any other plea. 


Clause 3.—The British Government cordially desires to see the noble house 
of Nabha perpetuated, and in this spirit confers upon the Rajah and his heirs 
for ever, whenever male issue may fail, theright of adopting a successor from 
among the descendants of the Phoolkeean family. If, however, at any time 
the Rajah of Nabha should die without male issue, and without adopting a 
successor, it will still be open to the Maharaja of Putiulla and the Rajah of 
Theend, in concert with the Commissioner or Political Agent of the British 
Government, to select a successor from among the Phoolkeean family ; but in 
that case a nuzzuranah or fine equal to one-third of the grors annual revenue 
of the Nabha State shall be paid to the British Government. 

Clause 4.—In 1847 the British Government empowered the Rajah to 
inflict capital punishment after reference to the Commissioner. It now removes 
the restriction imposed by this reference, and invests the Rajah with absolute 
power of life and death over his own subjects. With regard to British subjects 
committing crime and apprehended in his territory, the Rajah will be guided 
by the rules contained in the Despatch of the Honorable Court of Directors, 
to the Madras Government, No. 3, dated Ist June 1836. The Rajah will 
exert himself to execute justice and to promote the happiness and welfare of 
his people, He engages to prohibit suttee, slavery, and female infanticide 
throughout his territories, and to punish with the utmost rigor those who are 
_ found guilty of any of these crimes, 