


96 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Jind—No. XXXIV. Part I 


Be assured that nothing shall disturb the Engagement thus made to you 
so long as your House is loyal to the Crown and faithful to the conditions cf 
the Treaties, Grants, or Engagements which record its obligations to the 
British Government, 


(Sd.)  Cannina. 


No, XXXIV. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD or GRantT of portions of the Pergunnah 
of Boopwanau, District JHUJIUR, bestowed on the RaJan 
oF JHEEND by His ExceLLEncy EAaRu CANNING, G. C. B., 
VicEroy and GovERNoR-GENERAL of INDIA. 


Whereas the devotion and loyalty of the Rajah of Jheend and of his: 
ancestors have always been conspicuous since the estab- 
lishment of British supremacy in India, His Excel- 
lency the Viceroy and Governor-General, being desirous of marking his high 
appreciation of these qualities, has been pleased to bestow upon the Rajah 
portions of Pergunnah Boodwanah, of the District of Jhujjur, containing 
nineteen villages, according to vernacular list annexed, assessed at a yearly 
revenue of (eighteen thousand five hundred and twenty Rupees) 18,520 Rupees, 
and to accept from the Rajah a “nuzzuranah” of (Rupees 3,70,004) three 
lakhs seventy thousand and four. It is accordingly ordained as follows :—~ 


Preamble. 


ARTICLE 1. 


The territory above mentioned is conferred upon the Rajah of Jheend and 
his heirs for ever. ' 


ARTICLE 2. 


The Rajah and his successors will exercise the same rights, privileges, and 
prerogatives in this newly-acquired territory as he at present enjoys in his 
ancestral possessions, according to the terms of the Sunnud, dated 5th May 
1860, and signed by His Excellency Earl Canning, Viceroy and Governor- 
General of India. 


' ARTICLE 3, 


The Rajah dnd his successors will continue to maintain the same Joyal 
relations with the British Government, and to fulfil the same obligations, with 
regard to this newly-acquired territory, as were imposed on him by the terms 
of the Sunnud, dated 5th May -1860, relating to the Rajah’s ancestral 
possessions. 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Jind—No. KXXKV. 97 


No. XXXV. 


AMENDED TEerRms of AGREEMENT between the BririsH GOVERN- 
MENT and the Stars of Jinp, for regulating the supply of 
water for irrigation from the Western Jumma Canal, executed 
at Simla on behalf of the BritisH GovERNMENT by C. L. 
Tupper, Esq., CHIEF SrcRETARY to the GovernmENT of the 
Punjab, duly empowered by His Excsnuency the VICcEROX 
and GovERNOR-GENERAL in CoUNCIL, and at SANGRUR on 
behalf of the Jinp Srare by Sarpar Ratan Sryeu, Presi- 
dent, Council of Regency, duly empowered by His Hieu- 
nzEss the Rasa of Jinp—1892, 


The terms of agreement* executed on the 29th April 1875 are hereby 
eancelled, 


2. In lieu of the cuts from the canal, by means of which irrigation was 
originally effected, ten main distributaries with proper masonry heads taking 
out of the Hansi Branch of the Western Jumna Canal, and four masonry 
heads for water-courses taking out of the Butana distributary, shall be pro- 
vided for the irrigation of the State from the Western Jumna Canal. 