


Clause §.—The Rajah will never fail in his loyalty and devotion to the 
Sovereigu of Great Britain. 

Clause 6.—If any force hostile to the British Government should appear 
in his neighbourhood, the Rajah will co-operate with the British Government 
and oppose the enemy. He will exert himself to the utmost of his resources 
in providing carriage and supplies for the British troops, according to requisi- 
tions he may receive. 

Clause 7.—The British Government will not receive any complaints from 
any of the subjects of the Rajah, ‘whether maafeedars, jaghiredars, relatives, 
dependents, servants, or other classes. 

Clause 8.—The British Government will respect the household and family 
arrangements of the Rajah, and abstain from any interference therein, 

Clause 9,—-The Rajah, as heretofore, will furnish at current rates through 
the agency of his own officers the necessary materials required for the con- 

struction of railroads, railway stations and Imperial roads and bridges. He 
will also freely give the land required for the construction of railroads and 
Imperial lines of road. 

Clause 10.—The Rajah and his successors, etc., will always pursue the same 
course of fidelity and devotion to the British Government, and the Government 
will always be ready to uphold the honor and dignity of the Rajah and his - 
house. 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej, States—Natice—No. XXXVII. 103 


ScHEDULE of the TerriTorRIEs belonging to the Rasau of 
NasHa. 


Ancestral Possessions. 


Pergunnah Nabha Khas. 
35 Umloh. 
Pe Bhadsoon. 
» Kapoorgurh. 
ss Dhunowla. 


” Pool with Dyalpoora. 
9 Jeytokee. 
‘3 Lotbuddee. 


Share of Bhaeeroopa with right of jurisdiction and right over all 
subordinate rent-free holders residing therein. 


Acquired Possessions. 


Pergunnah Kantee A By letter from Secretary, Government 
‘ Bawal of India, dated 2nd June 1858, No. 15494. 


Feudatories and Tributaries. 
The Sikhs of Sonthee, 
The Sikhs of Ram Doss Boongguranwalla, 
Lodh Kurreea Goomteewalla. 


No. XXXVII. 


To Furzunp Arnvsmunp ExrEDUT Prresunp DovwLUT-I-ENG- 
LIsHA Burarsiuns SurMouR Ragan BuvURPORE SING 
MaAnENDER BaHADooR of Napna—1862. 


Her Majesty being desirous that the governments of the several Princes 
and Chiefs of India who now govern their own territories should be perpe< 
tuated, and that the representation and dignity of their Houses should be con- 
tinued, I hereby, in fulfilment of this desire, repeat to you -the assurance 
which I communicated to you in the Sunnud under my signature, dated 5th 
May 1860, that on failure of natural heirs, your adoption of an heir from 
amongst the members of the Phoolkeean house will be gladly recognized and 
confirmed ; and that if at avy time the Rajab of Nabha should die without 


104 . Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Natia—No. XXXVIII. Part I 


male issue, and without adopting a successor, it will still be open to the 
Maharajah of Puttialla and the Rajah of Jheend, in coneert with the Com- 
missioner or Political Agent of the British Government, to select a successor 
from among the Phoolkeean family, but in that case a: nuzzuranah or fine 
equal to one-third of the gross annual revenue of the Nabba State shall be 
paid to the British Government. : 