

Capital sentences passed by these Chiefs require the confirmation of the 
British authorities before being carried out. 

In 1847 transit duties were abolished throughout these States, A yearly 
sum of Rupees 18,735 is paid in compensation by Government. 

The right of adoption has been granted to all the Chiefs of the Hill 
States by Sanad (No. XXXIX). 


The Hill States are under the political supervision of the Superintendent, 
Hill States. 


1. SIRMUR or NAHAN, 


When the Gurkhas were expelled from the hills, Karam Parkash, of a 
Rajput family claiming connection with the Maharawals of Jaisalmir, was the 
ruling Chief. He was, however, excluded from the succession, on the ground 
of his notorious profligacy and imbecility, and the Chieftainship was bestow- 
ed on his eldest son, Fateh Parkash. 

The Sanad (No. XLIII) to the Raja is dated 21st September 1815, and 
confers on him and his heirs in perpetuity his ancient possessions, with the 
exception of the fort and pargana of Morni, which were made over to the Mir 
of Kotaha to whom they had originally belonged ; theKiarda Dun, which was 
subsequently, in 1833, restored (No. XLIV) on payment of a nazarana of 
Rupees 50,000; a tract of hill country to the north of the river Giri made 


112 Punjab—Hill States—Xahiur, Part I 


over to the Rana of Keonthal ; and the parganas of Jaunsar and Bawar, in the 
Dehra Dun district, annexed to the British dominions. 

The present Raja, by name Shamsher Parkash, is about fifty years of age. 
In recognition of his services during the mutiny he received a kbilat of the value 
of Rupees 5,000, and a salute of seven guns, which was increased to eleven 
in 1867, and again increased to thirteen guns in 1886, on the latter occasion 
as a personal distinction. On the Ist January 1876 he was invested at Calcutta 
by His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales in person with the Insignia of a 
Knight Commander of the Most Exalted Order of the Star of India, and 
again in 1888 he was invested at Simla by Lord Dufferin with the Insignia 
of a Grand Commander of the same Order. 


On the outbreak of war in Afghanistan in 1878 the Nahan State placed 
its troops at the disposal of the British Government, and they were employed 
in the Kuram Valley. 


By article 4 of the sanad of 1815 the Raja of Sirmur was bound to 
consult the British Government before appointing a Diwan or Mutsaddi. In 
1872 this clause was cancelled at the request of Raja Shamsher Parkash and 
a revised Sanad (No. XLY) ‘was issued to him. 

The revenue of Sirmur is estimated at Rupees 2,10,000 a year. The 
Raja keeps up (1891) a small force of drilled sepoys, numbering 100 cavalry, 
40% infantry, and 10 field guns, He has offered a body of 150 sappers for 
Imperial service. .The population, according to the census of 1891, amounts 
to 124,184. The area of the State is 1,108 square miles, The Raja pays no 
tribute, but is bound to render feudal service. 


2 KAHLUR or BILASPUR. 


The Chief of this State belongs to a Rajput family said to have come 
from the Deccan. One of the sons of Harihar Chand, fourteenth in descent 
from the founder of the family, conquered Chamba, and Bilaspur was founded 
by Bir Chand, another son. Ajit Chand, twelfth in descent from Bir Chand, 
founded the State of Nalagarh, and bestowed it on his brother, Ajai Chand. 
The Raja of Kahlur had estates on both sides of the Sutlej, but the Sanad 
(No. XLVI) given to Raja Maha Chand, in 1815, confirmed to him the east- 
ern portion only. Raja Kharak Chand died in 1839, and was succeeded by a 
collateral, Jagat Chand ; the claime of an alleged posthumous son, Garab Chand, 