


the orders of the Chief Commissioner of the Punjab, No. 345, dated 4th 
May 1858, 


Feudatories and Tributaries. 
Mouza Mamosana, Perguonah Fureed Kote. 


No. XLII. 


Sunnup conferring the Frer of Mumpors upon Nawas JELLAL- 
0OD-DEEN—1864. 

Having taken into consideration the position of yourself and relatives in 

consequence of the death of your late brother, Nawab Jumal-ood-deen, I 


hereby confer on you the fief of Mumdote and the title of Nawab, with suc- 
cession to your male issue according to the rules of primogeniture. 


This grant is subject to the following conditions :— 


ARTICLE I, 


You and your successors in the fief must provide a reasonable mainten- 
ance for your relations, the.descendants of yourself and Jumal-ood-deen. 


ARTICLE 2, 


You will exercise no magisterial authority within the fief, nor'will you 
interfere in the management of the estate. You will behave properly to 


the proprietors and cultivators, so far as you may have intercourse with 
them. 


Aeticte 38. 
1, Beebee Rance, widow of Kootub-ood-deen and racial th You will not ; carried iy i 
Se esse Talies witer af Kuscsroatae) a pagel ih: She Warsi which 
step-mother of the abovel. ” 600 5) 


8. Parsa Begum, widow of “tho late Nawab and. 


will be paid through Officers 
mother of his children, . ° . e . 
4, Mossumat Tajan, widow of the late Nawab 


of the British Government ; 
(hosnochildren) . 6 ww lt ll 600. 7 i j 
_5. Booboo Shab, daughter of Kootub-ood-deen and % but you will receive the benefit 
ister of thelateNawab . . =. = + «+ 4 1,200 of all lapses or reductions in 
pian wee, 6000 ¢Sone tothe y B® 4800 pensions to the issue of present 
. a ro. (its, 6, jong oO ¢ « 
7, Mahomed Hoon 2 $0004 lato Nawaby 1 * 20,0v0 incumbents, which may be 
‘ —— sanctioned by the Governor 
‘otal « Bs, 14,800 x . . 
—— General of India in Council. 


» 1,200 


ARTICLE 4, 


The Government demands on the fief of Mumdote are fixed at one-third 
the income of the estate, in lieu of all claim fur expenses of management, 


Part I Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States—Mamdot—No. XLII. 109 


commutation for service, police charges, and the like ; to commence from 
the beginning of the next Fuslee year. 


ArtTictE 5, _ 


You will at all times conduct yourself as a good and faithful subject of 
the British Crown, and will, wheu required, render service to the satisfac- 
tion of the British Government. 


Be assured that so long as the above conditions are fully and faithfully 


fulfilled the fief of Mumdote will remain to yourself and your male issue a 
perpetual possession. 


(Sd.) Jon Lawrence. 
The 5th December 1864, 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Strmur. 1 


IV.—HILL STATES. 


Previous to the Nepal war in 1814 the Gurkhas had extended their con- 
quests westwards as far as the Sutlej. By the 5th article of the treaty of 
1815 (Vide Vol. II, Part III) the Nepalese renounced all claim to the countries 
west of the Kali, and the British were left in possession of the whole tract of 
hills from the Gogra to the Sutlej. Kumaon and the Dehra Dun were annexed 
to the British dominions, and the rest of the territory, with the exception of 
Sabathu, Raingarh, Sandoch (now known as Kotguru or erroneously as Kot- 
garh) and a few other military posts, was restored to the hill Rajas from 
whom it had been conquered by the Nepalese. The Rajas were brought under 
the general protection of the British Government, and were placed, with 
respect to each other, as nearly as possible in the position they had occupied 
before their subjugation. 