

Be assured that nothing shall disturb the engagements thus made to yow 
so Jong as your House is loyal to the Crown and faithful to the conditions 
of the Treaties, Grants or Engagements which record its obligations to the 
British Government. 

(Sd.) Cannine. 

Dated 5th March 1862, 


No. XXXVIII. 


TRANSLATION of a SunnupD or Grant of portions of the Per- 
gunnahs of KunovupH and Boopwanag, District Juussur, 
bestowed on the Rasan of Nasaa by His ExceLnEency 
Earyu CANNING, G.0.B., VICEROY and GOVERNOR-GENERAL 
of InpIA. 


Whereas the devotion and loyalty of the Rajah of Nabha and of his 
ancestor, Rajah Juswant Singh, have always been conspi- 
cuous since the establishment of British supremacy in India, 
His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor-General, being desirous of marking 
his high appreciation of these qualities, has been pleased to bestow upon the 
Rajah portions of Pergunnahs Kunoudh and Boodwanab, of the district of 
Jhujjur, containing forty-two (42) villages, according to a vernacular list 
annexed, assessed at a yearly revenue of forty-seven thousand five hundred 
and twenty-five (Rs. 47,525), and to accept from the Rajah a nuzzuranah of 
nine lakhs fifty thousand and five hundred (Rs, 9,50,500). It is accordingly 
ordained as follows :— 


Preamble. 


Articte 1, 


The territories above-mentioned are conferred upon’ the Rajah of Nabha 


and his heirs for ever. 
ARTICLE 2, 


The Rajah and his successor will exercise the same rights, privileges and 
prerogatives in these newly-acquired territories as he at present enjoys in his 
ancestral possessions, according to the terms of the Sunnud, dated 5th May 
1860, and signed by His Excellency Earl Canning, Viceroy and Governor- 
General of India. 


Part I Punjab—C.-S. States —Kalsia, Maler Kotla—No. XXXIX & XL. 105 


ARTIOLE 3. 


The Rajah and his successors will continue to maintain the same loyal 
relations with the British Government, and to fulfil the same obligations with 
regard to this newly-acquired territory, as were imposed on him by the terms 
of the Sunnud, dated 5th May 1860, relating to the Rajah’s ancestral posses- 
sions, 


No. XXXIX. 
ADOPTION SUNNUD granted to the CureF of KtLszEa—1862. 


Her Majesty being desirous that the governments of the several Princes 
and Chiefs of India who now govern their own territories should be perpe- 
tuated, and that the representation and dignity of their Houses should be con- 
tinued, in fulfilment of this desire, this Sunnud is given to you to convey to 
you the assurance that, on failure of natural heirs, the British Government 
will recognize and confirm any adoption of a successor made by yourself or 
by any future Chief of your State that may be in accordance with Hindoo 
law and the customs of your race. 

Be assured that nothing shall disturb the Engagement thus made to 
you so long as your House is loyal to the Crown. and faithful to the conditions 
of the Treaties, Grants, or Engagements which record its obligations to -the 
British Government, 