


Rs. 
Revenue-free holdings in Illaka Kotkupoora, which have Anpeed 
or are resumable hereafter 5 . ; . 4,238 
Deduct yearly amount of compensation granted to the Rajah as 
the abolition of customs in his territory é ,000 
eee 
Balance » 2,238 


eee 


Part I Punjab Cis-Sutle} States—Faridkot—No. XLI. 107 


Clause 3.——The Rajah has, in consideration of the compensation granted 
by the British Government, relinquished for himself and his successors for 
ever all right to levy excise or transit duties which have been abolished 
throughout the territory of Fureed Kote, 

Clause 4.—The British Government desiring to see the House of Fureed 
Kote perpetuated, has conferred upon the Rajah and his successors for ever, 
whenever male heirs lawfully begotten may fail, the right of adopting a 
successor in accordance with the customs of his race. 


Clause §.—With regard to British subjects committing crime and appre- 
hended in his territory, the Rajah and his successors will exercise the powers 
provided for in the despatch of the Honorable Court of Directors to the 
Madras Government, No. 8, dated Ist June 1836. 


The Rajah and his successors will exert themselves to execute justice and 
promote the happiness and welfare of their people. They will, in accordance 
with the terms of a previous engagement, prohibit “suttee,” slavery, and 
female infanticide throughout their territory, and punish with exemplary 
rigor those who are found guilty of these crimes. 


Clause 6.—The Rajah and his successors will never fail in their devotion 
and loyalty to the Sovereign of Great Britain. 

Clause 7.—If at any time any force hostile to the British Government 
should appear in this direction, the Rajah will co-operate with the British 
Government and oppose the enemy. He will exert himself to the utmost 
of his resources in providing carriage and supplies according to requisitions 
he may receive from the officers of the British Government. 

Clause 8.—The Rajah as heretofore will furnish at current rates, through 
the agéncy of his own officers, the necessary. materials required for the con- 
struction of railroads, railway stations, and Imperial roads and bridges. 
He will also freely give the land required for the construction of railroads 
and Imperial lines of road. 

Clause 9.—The Rajah and his successors will always pursue the same 
course of fidelity and devotion to the British Government, and the Govern- 
mete will always be ready to uphold the honour and dignity of the Rajah and 

is house. 


Scurpuxg of the Terrirorins belonging to the Rasa of Fursep Kore, 
Ancestral Possessions, 


Perg unnah e e ° e ‘ F ureed. Kote. 
” . gS ‘ » Deep Singwalla, 


Acquired Possessions. 
Villages of Pergunnah Kote Kupoora, given to the Rajah in exchange for 
Pergunnah Sultan Kbanwalla. 


Villages of Kote Kupoora and Bbugtah granted by the British Govern- 
ment, excepting the village of Sibbian, included in British territory under 


108 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej] States—Mamdot—No. XLII. Part I 