


5th March 1862. (Sd.) Canning. 


Sunnuds in the same terms have been granted to the Chiefs of Dhamee, 
Bilaspore, Baghat, Rhajjee, Kothar, Durkoti, Bejah, Bulsun, Nalagurh, Suket, 
Chumba, Kunhiar, Mundee, Meilog, Nahun, Fureedkot, Keontul, Tiroj, 
Kumharsein, Mungul, Jubbal, Bagbul, and Bashahr, in the Panjab. 


. No. XL. 
Apoption Sunnup granted to NawaB and Rars SECUNDER ALI 
Kaan of Matzrr Kotia.—1862. 


Her Majesty being desirous that the governments of the several Princes 
and Chiefs of India who now govern their own territories should be perpetu- 
ated, and the representation and dignity of their Houses should be continued, 
in fulfilment of this desire, this Sunnud is given to you to convey to you the 
assurance that, on failure of natural heirs, the British Government will recog- 
nize and confirm any succession to your State which may be legitimate 
according to Mahomedan law. 

P 


106 Punjab—Cis-Sutlej States~Furidkot—No. XLI. Part I 


Be assured that nothing shall disturb the Engagement thus made to 
you so long as your House is loyal to the Crown and faithful to the condi- 
tions of the Treaties, Grants or Engagements which record its obligations to 
the British Government. 


Dated 5th March 1862. (Sd.) CanNniIna. 


No. XLI. 


Sunnup granted to RasAH WuzeeER Sine of Furrrp Kore, 
dated 21st April 1863. : 


Since the establishment of. British supremacy in India Rajah Wuzeer 
Sing and his ancestors have given proofs of loyalty to the British Govern- 
ment, and have received rewards in the accession of fresh honours, dignity 
and territory. More recently the present chief of Fureed Kote evinced his 
adherence to the cause of the British Government during the mutiny of 
1857-58, in consideration of which service the British Government has, out 
of Royal grace and condescension, remitted the service of ten sowars hitherto 
furnished by the Rajah; has added to the forms under which he is officially 
addressed ; has increased the Khillut to which he is entitled, and raised the 
number of guns by which he is to be saluted to the number of eleven; and 
has graciously acceded to the Rajah’s desire to receive a Sunnud or Grant 
under the hand and seal of the Viceroy, confirming and guaranteeing to the 
Rajah and his heirs for ever the possession of his ancient hereditary territory, 
as well as the territory acquired by the Rajah from the British Government 
by grant or exchange under the following provisions :— 


Clause 1—The hereditary domain now in the possession of the Rajah, 
and the coantry acquired by the Rajah by grant and exchange, according to 
the annexed list, are hereby confirmed and guaranteed to the Rajah and his 
male heirs lawfully begotten, for ever, together with all the powers and 
authority, civil, criminal and fiscal, at present exercised by the Rajah. 

Clause 2.— With the exception of the unredeemed revenue-free holdings 
in Illaka Kotkupoora noted below, the British Government will never demand 
from the Rajah, or any of his successors, or from any of his feudatories, 
relatives, or dependants, any tribute on account’ of revenue, service, or any 
other plea. 