


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Hindur—~No. XLVITII. 131 


6th.—That he shall not alienate or mortgage any portion of his territory 
without the knowledge and permission of Government. 

6th.—That he shall abolish in his territory slave-dealing, suttee, female 
infanticide, and the practice of burning or drowning lepers, as these practices 
are opposed to British law, and that he shall issue such strict orders in respect 
thereof that no one may venture to commit any of the said crimes. 


The Rajah shall not encroach beyond the boundaries of his own territory 
. or the territory of another. He shall consider this Sunnud as a ratified décu- 
ment, and use his exertions to fulfil the terms thereof, to promote the 
welfare of his people, to improve the condition of his country, to adupt 
measures for the increase of cultivation, to redress grievances, to maintain 
lawful rights, and to keep the roads secure. He shall not exact money from 
his subjects, but treat them with kindness, that they may always be thankful 
tohim, Itis the duty of the subjects to regard him and, after him, his 
successor, as above described, as their sole and lawful lord, to pay without fail 
the revenue due to him, to remain obedient to him at all times, and to behave 
themselves well. 


No. XLVIII. 


Sunnup to Ragan Ram Sine (or Ram Surzvuy) for Hrnpoor. 
—1815. 


Whereas all the hill country has come into the possession of the British 
Government ; and whereas Rajah Ram Sing has, during the present war, per- 
formed worthily the part of an ally of the British Government, joining the 
British troops in person with his forces, and furnishing begarees to level roads 
and to perform other work, wherefore, by order of the Right Honorable the 
Governor-General, this Sunnud is granted to the said Rajah, conferring on 
him and his heirs for ever Hindoor, &c., seven Pergunnabs; and Buhtowlee 
with twelve villages, and Munjhoolee with four villages (excepting, however, 
the half share of Fyzoollah-poora, in Pergunnah Khas Hindoor, and the Fort 
of Malown, with six villages of Mouzah Malown Chakiran, which are on the 
point (tegh] of the Hill of Malown, and Mouzas Malown-badhoo, Chulan 
dooaree-wallah, &c., the jumma of the whole seven villages being 118 rupees 
and 1234 maunds of grain), together with all the rights and appurtenanees 
belonging thereto, and the sayer collections, and right of distributing justice 
to the ryots; without exaction of begarees, or of service, or of nuzzuranah, 
all these dues being remitted. Whatever number of begarees the Rajah shall 
furnish in case of war, shall be paid for by the British Government at the 
rate of 4 rupees per man. The Rajah, however, will not receive any pay for 
himself and his troops in joining the British Forces. The Rajah, considering 
this Sunnud a full and valid tifle for himself and his descendants, will exert 
himself to the utmost to promote the welfare of his subjects, and will abstaia 


132 Punjab—Hill States—Hindur—No. XLIX. Part I 