


Ist.—That Futteh Pergass and those who follow him in possession shall 
respect the rights of the people, and administer justice with impartiality to 
all, of whatever class or persuasion. 


2nd.—That the said Futteh Pergass and his successors shall levy no 
transit or customs duties on any species of merchandize which may pass 
through, or be exported from, or imported into, the aforesaid lands. 

3rd.—That the said Futteh Pergass and his successors shall keep in 
repair the roads which at present exist in the aforesaid lands, and render such 
further assistance in constructing and repairing new roads as the: British 
Government may at any future period, or from time to time, think proper to 
direct. . 
4th.—That the said Futteh Pergass and his suecesgors shall maintain a 
sufficient police, and erect towers at convenient distances for the protection of 
travellers and merchants passing through the aforesaid Keardadoon. 


5th.—That the said Futteh Pergass and his successors shall, at no time, 
or under any pretence, levy from his subjects dues or bounties or forced 
contributions of any sort, usually known by the name of Roomalee Nuzzur-, 
anah and the like, or any other fines or arbitrary exactions or impositions. 


Given under the seal and signature of the Right Hon'ble the Governor 
General in Council, this fifth day of September 1833 A.D. 


— (Sd.) W. C. Bentincx. 
L. 8. »  C. T. Mercarrs, 
= » <A. Ross. 

No. XLV. 


Sunnup granted to Ragan Suamsuer ParKasn of Nanun—1872. 


: ¢ 

Whereas in the sunnud, bearing date the 21st September 1815, granted 
to Rajah Futteh Sing, of Nahun, conferring on him and his heirs for ever 
the land of Sirmoor, with all the rights and appurtenances belonging thereto, 
a clause was inserted to the effect that Rajah Futteh Singh must not appoint 
a Dewan or Mutsuddees, or do anything in the management of the Raj of 
Sirmoor without communicating and consulting with the officer who will 
be stationed there on the part of the British Government; and whereas 
Rajah Shamsher Parkash, the present Chief of Nahun, has represented that 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Kahlur—No. XLVI. 127 


such clause as aforesaid was only inserted by reason of his‘ ancestor Rajah 
Futteh Sing being, at the time of the grant of the Sunnud, a minor, a child 
of tender years, and that the restrictiog contained in such clause was removed 
by the Political Agent on Rajah Futteh Singh attaining his majority; and 
further that no British Officer is now stationed at Nahun, and has accordingly . 
applied for the grant of a revised Sunnud from which the restrictive clause 
abovementioned may be excluded; His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor- 
General in Council, recognizing the reasonable gfounds of Rajah Shamsher 
Parkash’s representation, has been pleased to cancel in the Sunnud, dated 21st 
September 1815, the following paragraph— Further, he must not appoint 
a Dewan or Mutsuddees, or do anything in the management of the Raj of 
Sirmoor without communicating and consulting with the Officer who will 
be stationed there on the part of the British Government,” 