


4th—No claim to any places 
which the Goorkhas gave to the 
Rajah, besides his ancient territory 
of Khyloor, can be listened to. In 
conformity with the terms of the 
Proclamation of the 17th October, 
no tribute nor pecuniary demand of 
any kind shall be exacted from the 
Rajah. In return for all the bene- 
fits which the Rajah will enjoy, the 
British Government only requires 
that while the war with the Goor- 
khas shall last, the Rajah shall co- 
operate with the British ‘Troops, and 
that in future also, on every occa- 

8 


130 Panjab—Hill States—Xatlur—No. XLVII. Part I 


sion of a British Force coming into 
this quarter to act against an enemy, 
the Rajah shall be ready to join and 
to afford every assistance in his 
power, by providing supplies of grain 
and discharging all the other obli- 
gations of fealty and submission. 


No. XLVII. 


TRANSLATION of a SuNNUD granting territories to Rasan Juceur 
Cuunp of Kuntor (Bexasrors), dated 21st October 1847. 


Whereas by the Treaty concluded between the British Government and 
the State of Lahore, on the 9th March 1846, the hill territories came into 
the possession of the Honorable Company, and whereas Rajah Juggut Chund 
ef Kuhlor bas always. evinced his obedience and submission to the British 
Officers, the (Government hereby confirms in perpetuity to Rajah Juggut 
Chund and the heirs male lawfully begotten of his body by his Ranee, the 
‘Territory of Kuhlor, with such botindaries as have been in his possession 
since the commencement of the British rule in the Trans-Sutlej States, with 
full administrative powers therein. In default of an heir of the above 
description, the territory, with full powers, will be conferred upon the male 
heir who may be proved to the British Government to be next of kin to the 
Rajah. Be it known to the Rajah, that if, any of his successors is found 
incompetent and unable to administer the affairs of the State, the British 
Government reserves to itself the power of removing him and installing 
another heir next of kin to the Rajah, who may be found entitled to it, and 
capable of administering the territory. Whoever shall, according to the 
foregoing terms, succeed the Rajah, will remain in the undisturbed possession 
of his territory and State, on the conditions which are specified in the Agree- 
ment executed by the Rajah, and which are as follows :— 

1st.—That he shall abolish all transit duties in his territory, and consider 
it incumbent upon him to afford protection to the bankers, tradesmen, and 
dealers in his State. \ 

2nd.—That he shall construct roads not less than 12 feet broad in his 
State, and repair them when necessary. 

3rd.—That on the occasion of a war, he shall, when directed, join the 
British Army with his own retainers and hill-porters, keep-himself in readiness 
to execute the orders of the Officers of Government, and supply provisions 
according to his means, 

4th.—That all disputes which may take place between the Rajah of Kublor 
and any other Chiefs shall be referred to the British Courts. 