


2Qnd.—It is well known that the 
Forts of Futtehpore, Mundgur, Beha- 
durpoor, and Ruttunpoor, constructed 


Answers. 


If the Rajah shall have really and 
truly withdrawn himself from his 
connection with the Goorkhas, and 
shall attach himself to the British 
Government, he shall undoubtedly 
be confirmed in the possession of his 
ancient territory of Khyloor, lying 
on this side of the River Sutledge, 
agreeably to the terms of the Pro- 
clamation which was issued under the 
authority of the Governor-General, 
on the 17th of October last, and it 
shall, in every respect, be considered 
to be under the protection of the 
British Government. In the event 
of peace between the British Gov- 
ernment and the Goorkhas, no repre- 
sentation of the Goorkhas against 
the Rajah, at variance with the dues 
of protection, shall be attended to. 
But on the subject of guaranteeing 
the country of Khyloor a reference 
shall be made to the Governor-Gen- 
eral, 


2Qnd.—~I am also acquainted with 
the fact of the Forts of Futtehpoor, 
Mundgur, Behadurpoor, and Ruttun- 


Part I 


by my ancestors, were held by me; 
suddenly, however, they were seized by 
Rajah Ram Sura, who held them for 
seven months, when I caused them to 
be restored to me. I hope that in con- 
tinuing to me my ancient possessions, 
those Forts will be included therein. 

3rd.—With respect to the affair of 
the twelve Thakoors, although they of 
old belonged to me, yet owing to my 
weakness, the Surmoreea Rajah some- 
times got possession of them and some- 
times they were held by Rajah Ram 
Surn. When the Goorkhas came here 
I was re-established'in the possession of 
the twelve Thakoors. On the return 
of the Goorkhas from the Fort of Kan- 
gra they required that I should assign 
something out of the twelve Thakoors 
for the maintenance of the troops. In 
consideration of my connection with 
them, and also of my inability to 
oppose their requisition, nine of the 
twelve Thakoors were given to them. 
The Thakoors of Dhamee, Bubjee, and 
Kotee, are still in my possession. I 
have stated this merely in the way of 
information. Otherwise in every res- 
pect I am submissive to the pleasure 
of the British Government in this 
affair, and consider it a happiness to 
conform to its orders. 


4th.—The Goorkhas gave several 
places to me besides those included in 
my original possessions, The Major- 
General is now vested with the same 
authority which they exercised. As he 
shall order, so will I consider it as 
happiness to act. Be .pleased now to 
show we favour, or when I shall have 
rendered good service to the Govern- 
ment. The Major-General is my friend 
and patron on the part of the British 
Government. 


Punjab—Hill States—Kahlur—No. XLVI. 


129 


poor, beiug of old dependencies of 
the country of Khyloor. Provided 
the Rajah shall withdraw from the 
Goorkhas, and connect himself with 
the British Government, they shall 
remain to him as heretofore, 


3rd.—Any proposition by the 
Rajah regarding the twelve Tha- 
koors is improper, for the real state 
of the case is very different. Al- 
though I must give a positive refu- 
sal to this request, for when the time 
for the settlement of the twelve 
Thakoors shall come they must be 
adjudged to the real proprietors, 
yet should the Rajah render good 
service to the British Government, 
and abandon the cause of the 
Goorkhas, the same consideration 
which he experienced with respect 
to one or two of the Thakoors from 
the Goorkhas, may, in my opinion, 
be also shown to him by the British 
Government. 