


No. XLVI. 


SUNNUD to Rasamw Mana Cuunp of Benasrore, dated Gth 
March 1815. 


Whereas Rajah Maha Chund of Belaspore has, with sincerity of heart, 
professed obedience and submission to the British Government, and become a 
dependent of the Honorable Company, and has cast off all connection with 
the Goorkha State; therefore, in conformity with the tenor of the Procla- 
mation issued under the authority of His Excellency the Governor-General 
on the 17th of October 1814, the Rajah is hereby confirmed in the possession 
of the lands of his ancient territory of Kyloor, actually occupied by him on 
this side of the River Sutledge, subject to the following conditions :—He shall 
never openly or secretly ally himself with the Goorkha State, or with any 


enemy of the Honorable Company, but remaining steadfast in the path of 


obedience and submission to the orders of the British Government, shall at 
all times be prepared, with the force which he may have, to render useful 
service to the British troops, providing supplies of grain and furnishing begars 
(for the conveyance of burdens), and generally performing whatever may be 
entrusted to his charge. He shall ever be ready to obey such orders as may 
be signified to him at the present period, or which may be given to him at any 
future time, more especially on the occasion of any British force being sent 
against an enemy in that quarter, when he shall not fail to discharge to the 
utmost of his ability the obligations of fidelity and attachment to the British 
Government, Exclusive of the stipulations above-mentioned, the British 
Government, in its liberality and favor, will not require from the Rajah any 
tribute or pecuniary indemnification of any kind. And in the event of a 
peace between the British Government and the Goorkha State, provided the 
Rajah shall have rendered faithful service, the British Government engages 


128 Punjab—Bill States—Kahlur—No. XLVI. Part I 


that nothing contrary to the conditions of protection as affecting the Rajah 
shall be listened to by the British Government. Moreover, the terms of the 
replies to the Rajah’s requests, bearing the signature of Major-General 
Ochterlony, and dated on the 18th of February 1815, areapproved and ratified 
by the Governor-General. It becomes the duty of the Rajah, therefore, that 
being firmly fixed and established in his Raj, he set his mind at rest on that 
point, and divesting himself of all apprehension, devote his time to the promo- 
tion of the happiness and comfort of his subjects, and consider this as a valid 
Sunnud for his country. - 


TRANSLATION of Paper of REQUESTS presented by the AGENTS 


of RasaAn Mana CGuunp, and answers by Mason-GenrraL 
OcHTERLONY, 18th February 1815. 


Requests, 


Ist.—Since I have withdrawn from 
my connection with the Goorkbas, and 
attaching myself to the British Gov- 
ernment, consider my connection with 
it the same as my honor and my life, I 
hope that I shall be continued in pos- 
session of my ancient territory, and 
that it shall be under the protection of 
the Honorable Company, and that if at 
apy time when the Goorkhas shall sub- 
mit to the British Power, they shall 
propose anything to my disadvantage 
from a spirit of revenge for my having 
abandoned their cause, it shall not be 
listened to. 