


No. XLITI. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD granted to Ragan Furren Srneu of 
Nauown, dated 21st September 1815. 


Whereas the Goorkhas have been completely expelled from these districts, 
and the whole of the hill country has come into the possession of the British 
Government, wherefore, by order of the Governor-General, this Sunnud is 
granted to Rajah Futteh Singh conferring on him and his heirs for ever the 
lands of Sirmoor, with all the rights and appurtenances belonging thereto. 


The forts of Monnee and Jugeutgurh, and Doonkyardah, and the 
districts of Jounsar and Banwar Moolakee have been disjoined from the Raj 
of Sirmoor, and taken into the possession of the British Government, and the 
forts of Kbhurchuree and Hunur, with the lands attached, on the west of the 
Kurree Naddee, have been annexed to the Thakooraee of Keonthul, and the 
forts of Ghft and Sulhur on the east of the Kurree Nuddee have been annexed 
to the Raj of Sirmoor. 


It is proper that Futteh Singh, being grateful to the British Government 
for its favour, should occupy the lands granted to him, and never at any time 
think of laying claim to the places above enumerated, which have been dis- 
joined froin Sirmoor, and annexed partly to the British territories, and partly 
to the Thakooraee of Keonthul. 

Further, he must not appoint 2 Dewan or Mutsuddees or do anything 
in the management of the Raj of Sirmoor without communicating and con- 
sulting with the officer who will be stationed there on the part of the British 
Government. He will conform to the above stipulations, and paying strict 
obedience to the British Government, he will, in case of war, join, when 
required, the British troops with all his force, and do the part of a true ally. 
He will also make roads 12 feet broad throughout his territory. 


If he shall fail in any of the above obligations (which are again enume- 
rated), or shall encroach on the possessions of others, be will fall under the 
displeasure of the British Government and will be dispossessed, He must 
consider this a valid instrument, and conforming to its conditions, take posses- 
sion of the Jands granted to him, and he must promote the welfare of his 
ryots and the extension of cultivation, and distribute justice, and look to 
the security of the roads, and not exact more from the ryots than their engage. 
ments, and, in short, make all people happy and contented. 


The ryots on their part will be bound to consider Futteh Singh aforesaid 
as their rightful lord, and to obey him accordingly. 


No. XLIV. 


Sunnup granted to Ragan Furren Prreass of Nanun—1833. 


Whereas the Right Honorable the Governor General in Council has heen 
Pleased to bestow on Futteh Pergass, Rajah of Nahun, and on his heirs and 


126 Punjab—Hill States—Sirmur~No, XLV. Part I 


successors in perpetuity a grant of the Jands, commonly called the Kearda- 
doon, to form part of the Raj of Sirmoor; Be- it- known unto all that the 
aforesaid lands, namely, those of Keardadoon, are given up to Futteh Pergass 
and his heirs and successors for ever under the following conditions :— 