


(Sd.) Joatta Doss, Vuzeer. (Sd.) SHam Suere Siva, 
»  SuURsuEt, i Rajah of Bussahir and 
» Furrenray, ey Rampoor. 
»  HEERANUND, - Simla, 28th June 1564. 
» JoatLa Doss. In presence of 
ai rOmBEDEOH DOES. Lr,-Con. R, C. Lawrenosg, C.B., 
»  PrtumBer Doss, Supdt,, Hill States, 


and Dr, CrecHorn, M.D., 
Conservator-Genl. of Forests. 
Tt 


1388 Punjab—Hill States—Bashahr~--No. LIV. Part £ 


No. LIV. 


AGREEMENT—1871. 


Whereas by an agreement, bearing date 28th June 1864, the Rajah Shum- 
shere Sing of Bassahir and Rampoor has leased to the British Government, 
for a term of 50 years, all the forests under his control in the territories of 
Bassahir ; and 

; Whereas the said Rajah Shumshere Sing is desirous of leasing to the 
British Government all rights within his territory to waif, drift, and windfall 
timber, both on land and in water; and 

Whereas in the said agreement, dated 28th June 1864, the terms on which 
the British Government shuli pay the said Rajah of Bassahir and Rarapoor 
‘the exercises of the rights hereinbefore last mentioned have not been expressed : 


It is agreed between the said Rajah Shumshere Sing of the one part, and 
Superintendent of the Simla Hill States on behalf of the British Government 
of the other part, as follows :— 


This agreement shall commence to te in operation from and for the 
working season of the Christian year 1870-71. 

The British Government shall, through such officers as it shall from time 
to time appoint in that behalf, and on the conditions hereafter agreed to, have 
the sole and entire contro] and management of, and the entire right and title 
to, all waif, drift, and windfall timber, both on land or in water, stranded or 
collected in the territories subject to the Rajah of Bassahir and Rai poor. 


In lieu of such right to waif, windfall, and drift timber, the British 
Government shall and will pay to the said Rajah of Bassahir and Rampoor, 
or to such person as he shall'appoint to receive the same, the yearly sums 
hereinafter stated, that is to say— 


For each of the years 1870-71, 1871-72, and 1872-78 the sum of rupees 
fifteen hundred (1,500). 

For each of the years 1873-74 and 1874-75 the sum of rupees twelve 
hundred (1,200). : 

And for the year 1875.76 and following years the annual sums of one 
thousand rupees (1,000). 


The British Government shall. not, in virtue of any right vested in it by 
this agreement, interfere with the privilege of villagers and others residing on 
or near the banks of the River Sutlej, or its tributaries, of collecting fragments 
and small pieces of timber to be used for fire-wood without payment for the 
same. 

Provided always that the privilege aforesaid shall not be deemed to entitle 
any person to take any piece, fragment, or log of wood of any size larger 
than one man can himself and without assistance lift or carry. 

In witness whereof the Rajah Shumshere Sing of Bassahir and Rampoor 
of the one part, and Superintendent of the Simla Hill States acting on behalf 