

Provided always tbat fair and equitable compensation shall be paid there- 
for to the persons entitled thereto. 


5. The British Government shall on its part appoint and maintain at its‘ 
own expense such officers and such subordinate establishments as to it} may 
seem good for the purpose of controlling, managing, and working the said 
forests, ee controlling and managing the transport.and floating of timber as 
aforesaid. 


The term Forest Officer’ when used in this agreement or the schedule 
thereto annexed, shall be deemed to mean any officer so appointed. 


6. The rule set forth in the schedule annexed for the protection and 
management of the forests and for regulating the floating of timber and other 
matters shall be deemed to be in force throughout Bashahr, and the British 
Government may invest any Forest Officer with all or any of the powers of a 
Magistrate as described in the Code of Criminal Procedure in force in British 
India, to be exercised within the State of Bashahr for the purpose of trying 
and punishing offences against,the rules aforesaid. 


And the Raja of Bashahr engages to render every aid required by the 
officer or officers authorized to exercise such powers for bringing to justice all 
persons charged with offences against the rules, and for enforcing any lawful 
judgment awarded against them. 

7. Further it is agreed that during the currency of this lease the 
whole preservation, control, and right of shooting game birds in the Bashahr 
forest shall exclusively belong to the British Government. Licenses to shoot 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Bashatr—No. LV. 141 


in the Bashahr forests shall be granted only by the Superintendent of the 
Hill States : 


Provided always that the Raja of Bashahr may grant annually to residents 
of Bashahr licenses to shoot game birds for their own consumption, but not 
for sale. The number of such licenses shall not exceed thirty. Any person 
found shooting without a license, or netting, trapping, or snaring game birds: 
shall be liable to the penalties mentioned for such offences in the rules forming 
a schedule to this lease. 


8. The whole cost of conserving the forest in Bashahr under the rules 
annexed, together with all costs of felling and transporting timber for tae 
use of the British Government, and of maintaining the necessary establish- 
ments in such forests, shall be borne by the British Government. 


9, This agreement shall continue in force for a term of fifty years, com- 
mencing from the date of the present agreement. On the expiry of this term 
it shall be renewable atthe pleasure of the British Government for a further 
term of fifty years. It shall be again renewable in like manner at the end of 
every term of fifty years: 


Provided always that any alterations in the Forest Rules attached hereto 
that may be agreed to by both parties may be made at any time without affect- 
ing the continuance of this agreement. 


Executed this first day of November 1877 at Simla. 
(Sd.) SHAMSHER Sine, 
Raja of Bashahr and Rampoor. 