


11th September 1815. 


No. LVIII. 


TRANSLATION of a SuNNUD granting Pergunnah Poonvr to RaNs 
Sunsar Sine of KEoNTHUL, under the seal and signature of 
Captain RoBERtT Ross, Deputy Superintendent of Sirhind 


and Hill States. 
Dated 5th April 1823. 


Whereas, by the grace of God the Goorkhas have been completely expelled 
from this country, and all the places of this district have come into the posses- 
sion of the British Government, the Pergunnah of Poonur, which, agreeably 
to the Government orders of the 20th September 1816 received through 
General ‘Sir David Ochterlony, was confirmed to Rana Sunsar Sing of 
Keonthul in perpetuity, with all the rights and appurtenances belonging thereto, 
is hereby annexed to the Thakooraee of Keonthul. It behoves the above- 
named Rana, considering this Sunnud as a valid deed, to hold possession of the 
said Pergunnah ; to abstain from encroaching upon the territories of others; 
to improve the condition of the people; to distribute justice to the aggrieved ; 
to evince his unswerving attachment to the Government, by executing all 
its orders with promptitute and zeal; to acknowledge his obligations for this 
favor; to join in person the British Forces with his retainers on the occasion 
of a war; and not to disregard orders of Government requiring begarees 
from his territory in time of need. He shall consider it incumbent upon bim 
to construct roads fit for carts to pass at such places in his territory where 
the Hutoor (I) may stay. Excepting the above, no tribute or nuzzuranah 
shall be demanded from bim. : 

It will be duty of the ryots of Pergunnah Poonur to consider Rana 
Sunsar Sing and his descendants as their rightful lord, and to obey his 
orders. 

Dated 5th April 1823, corresponding with 22ud Rujub 1238 4B, 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Bagial, Beghat—Nos. LIX & LX. 145 


No. LIX. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD granted to Rana Juacut Sine of 
Baguut. 


Dated 8rd September 1815. 


Whereas the Goorkhas have been completely expelled from these districts 
and the whole of the hill country has come into the possession of the British 
Government: Wherefore, by order of the Right Honorable the Governor- 
General, this Sunnud is granted to Rana Juggut Sing, conferring on him 
and his heirs for ever the Thakooraee of Baghul, with all the rights and 
appurtenances belonging thereto, on condition. of his paying annually the 
stipulated nuzzuranah for defraying the expense of protection by the British 
troops, and of his attending with begarees and sepoys, as specified below, in 
case of his being so required. The said Rana Juggut Sing’ will promote the 
welfare of his ryots, and the cultivation of the lands, and look to the security 
of the roads, and ensure the due payment of his nuzzuranah for defraying the 
expense of British troops, and be ready to attend with begarees and sepoys, as 
detailed below, when called upon; and will pay strict obedience to the British 
Government, and abstain from. encroaching beyond his own limits, And if 
at any time the said Rana Juggut Sing fail in the performance of any of 
the above obligations (again enumerated) he will be dispossessed. Consider- 
ing this Sunnud as a valid instrument, he will conform to its terms. The 
duty of the ryots of the Thakooraee, on their part, will be, considering Rana 
Juggut Sing -as their rightful lord, to obey him accordingly, and pay the 
revenues regularly. 