


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Keonthal—Nos. LWI & LVIL 148 


No. LVI. 


TRANSLATION of a SuNNUD granted to Rava Sunsar Sine for 
part of the THAKOORAEE of KnontTHUL—1815, 


“Whereas the Goorkhas have been completely expelled from these districts, 
.and the whole of the hill country has come into the possession of the British 
Government: Wherefore, by order of the Right Honorable the Governor- 
General, this Sunnud is granted to Rana Sunsar Sing, conferring on him and 
his heirs for ever the Pergunnahs Goolhanj and eight Pergunnahs, with che 
sayer collections of the same. The Rajah, considering this a valid instrument, 
will take possession of the said Pergunnahs, paying strict allegiance to the 
British Government, and will promote the welfare of his ryots, and will 
abstain from encroaching on the other Pergunnahs of Keonthul, and will 
never at any time advance a claim to the other Pergunnahs. In case of war 
the Rajah will join the British Force with his troops. 

The duty of the ryots and of the Thakooraee on their part ‘will be, 
considering Rana Sunsar Sing as their rightful lord, to obey him accordingly 
and pay the revenues regularly, 

If the Rajah should be wanting in obedience to Government, or should 


fail to join with his troops in case of war, the lands conferred on him by this 
Sunnud will be forfeited. 


6th September 1815. 


No. LVII. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD granted to Rana Sunsar Sine.—1815. 


Whereas the Goorkhas have been completely expelled from these districts, 
and the whole of the bill country has come into the possession of the British 
Government: Wherefore, by order of the Governor-General, this Sunnud is 
granted to Rana Sunsar Sing conferring on him and his heirs for ever the 
Thakooraees of Bethook, Gootee, Khond, and Kyaree, which have been from 
of old comprehended within and subject to the Raj of Keonthul, the Ranas 
of which Raj havé always received nuzzuravah from each. The Rana afore- 
said will take nuzzuranah annually from the said Thakooraees by two instal- 
ments, in the following proportions :— 


er : Rs. 

From Bethook . . - . . 

», Gootee , ‘ . : 3 : Bs 
» Khond . 3 : 7 ° . . 250 
” Kyaree ‘a * ry 

% 


"T3650 


144 Punjab—Hill States—Keonthai—No. LVIII. Part I 


And the said Rana shall promote the welfare of the ryots, and shall pro- 
tect the Thakoors. The Rana shall also, on requisition from the British 
authorities, furnish begarees and sepoys from each Thakooraee. . He shall also 
distribute justice to all, and shall oblige the Thakoors to keep the roads in 
repair. And considering this a valid instrument, he will always acknowledge 
his obligations to the British Government, and conform to the stipulations of 
the Sunoud. The Thakoors will consider the Rana aforesaid to be their right- 
ful lord, and will obey him accordingly, and pay their nuzzuranah according 
to the amount above stated, or, failing in the performance of these duties, they 
will be ejected. lLuet them therefore conform to these injunctions and not en- 
croach on the possessions of others, 