


from encroaching on the possessions of others; and being grateful for the 
favour which has been shown him by the British Government, he will continue 
firm in allegiance to it, and will conform to all the conditions of this Sunnud. 

It will be the duty of the ryots on their part to consider the Rajah as 
their rightful lord, and to pay their revenue punctually, and show obedience 
to his authority, and to exert themselves to improve the cultivation of their 
lands and to augment the Rajah’s resources. ; 


20th October 1815. 


No. XLIX. 


SunnuD to Ragan Ram Sine (or Ram SvuRervn) for the 
THAKOORAEE of BUROWLEE.—1815. 


Whereas all the hill country has come into the possession of the British . 
Government, and many Chiefs have had their former possessions wholly re- 
stored to them ; and whereas the Fort of Malown, with six villages, the esti- 
mated annual jumma of which is 118 rupees and 118 maunds of grain, has 
been withheld from Rajah Ram Sing, in order to be retained as a post for 
British troops; therefore, as a compensation for the said fort and six villages, 
this Sunnud is, by order of the Right Honorable the Governor-General, 
granted to Rajah Ram Sing, conferring on him and his heirs for ever the 
Thakooraee of Burowlee, with all the appurtenances belonging thereto, 
and the sayer collections. The said Rajah, considering this Sunnud to he 
a valid instrument, will, after leaving to the Ranee of the said Thakooraee 
four villages for her subsistence, take possession of the remainder. In case 
of war he will be bound to furnish begarees and sepoys, and to pay nuzzura- 
nah according to the statement subjoined. He will make roads in all diree- 
tions around the said Thakooraee, and he will be careful not to encroach on 
the possessicns of others. He will promote the welfare of his ryots, and pay 
strict obedience to the British Government, to whom he will be grateful for 
the favours which he has received. The duty of the ryots, on the other hand, | 
will be to consider the Rajah as their rightful lord, and to pay their revenue 
-punctually, and to show obedience to his authority, and to exert themselves 
to improve the cultivation of their lands and to augment the Rajah’s 
resources. 


Statement alluded to above. — 


Begarees, remitted altogether : nuzzuranah, remitted altogether, Roads 
to be prepared in every direction around the Thakooraee, 


20th October 1815. 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Hindur—No. L. 138 


No. L. 


TRANSLATION of a SunnupD granting the Fort of Maiown, 
with its dependent villages, and two guns and ammunition, 
to Ragan Ram Srnexu of Naracura. 


Dated 29th October 1846, 


Whereas Rajah Ram Sing, the Rajah of Nalagurh, has always been firm 
in his attachment and devotion to the British Government, and whereas he 
was the only Cis-Sutlej Chief who evinced his fidelity by waiting on the 
Governor-General at Lushkurree Khan-ke-Seraie, on the eve of the Lahore 
Campaign, while the Seitkh Army was crossing the Sutlej, the Fort of Malown, 
with its undermentioned six dependent villages, and the two 18-pounders and 
ammunition in the Fort are hereby granted to him by the British Govern- 
ment nuslun badi nusulin and botunun badi botunin (from generation to 
generation ), on the following conditions specified in the ikrarnamah entered 
into by him, viz.— 