


Be it further known that the grant has been made on condition of good 


behaviour and of service, Military and Political, at any time of general danger 
or disturbance. 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Basiakr—No. LII. 185 


No. LIT. 


TRANSLATION of a copy of a SunNuD, dated 8th February 1816, 
signed and sealed by Lord Morra, Governor General, con- 
ferring on Ragan MUHENDRA Sineu, Bussagirwana, the 
Raj of Rampoor, Bussahir, and Thakuraees of Dulaitee, 
Kurangto, and Kuanaitee. 


Whereas all the hill territory has come into the possession of the 
Hon’ble Company, the Most Noble the Governor General hereby confers on 
Rajah Muhendra Singh in perpetuity, generation after generation, the Raj of 
Rampoor, Bussahir, and Thakuraees of Dulaitee, Kurangto, and Kanaitee, with 
all their revenues and internal and external rights, conditional on the said Rajah 
paying Rs. 15,000 (Kuldar) per annum tribute money, in instalments as 
detailed below, for defraying the expenses of the protecting English force, and 
conditional on bis rendering personal service with his armed followers and 
begarees when called upon to do so, and constructing roads on all four sides of 
his territories. 

The forts of Rawin, Salegan, Hatto, and Baghee, together’ with the lands 
attached to them, and pergunnah Saudbboj and mouza Khepoo, étc., having been 
detached from the Rampoor Bussahir ilaka, and retained in possession and occu- 
pation of the British Government, he (the Rajah) should never ever think of 
advancing his claim to the said places, and being bound by the -terms of this 
sunnud remain heartily submissive and obedient to the British authorities and 
not encroach beyond his territories, 


The Rajah shall pay the tribute money by fixed instalments, and in time 
of war shall, on @ requisition from the Superintendent of Hill States, join the 
British army.in person with his armed retainers and hill porters, keep himself 
in readiness to execute orders, and remain submissive. He shall construct 
roads throughout his territory four yards wide. 


If the Rajab neglects or hesitates in paying the fixed tribute; in joining 
the British army with his retainers on the occasion of war; in showing sub- 
mission and obedience to the British authorities ; and in constructing roads in 
his territory, or encroaches upon the territories of others, he shall incur dis- 
pleasure and will be deposed. 


The Rajah shall consider this sunnud as a ratified document, and use his 
exertions to fulfil the terms thereof, to promote the welfare of his people, to 
improve the condition of his country and cultivation, to redress grievances, 
and to keep the public roads safe. 


The Rajah shall not extort money from his subjects, but treat them with 
kindness so that they may always be thankful to him. His subjects should 
regard him, and his (successors) as above described, as their sole and lawful 
lord, pay without fail the revenue due to him, remain obedient to him at all 
times, and behave themselves well. 