


186 Punjab—Hill State—Zeshahr—No. LITI. Part I 


Tribute money to be paid by instalments as follows : — 


Rs. 
(1) In month of Poos (December-January) ‘ . : - 5,000 
(2) ” Bysack (April-May) ‘ é F “ . 6,000 
(3) 5 Sawun (July-August) . . , . « 5,000 


To join the British army with his armed retainers and hill porters when 
called upon to do so in time of war. 
To construct roads on all four sides in his territory four yards in width. 


No. LITI. 


AGREEMENT with Rajah of Bussahir for lease of his forests, 1864. 


The Rajah of Bussahir having found the management of his forests 
troublesome, desires to Jease them to the British Government for a term of 
fifty years, and requests the Superintendent, Hill States, to submit the follow- 
ing proposals for the approval of the Punjab Government :— 


’ ArticLe 1, 


I make over the entire control of the whole forests of Bussahir to the 
British Government, who will appoint an English Officer to take charge of 
the said forests. 


ARTICLE 2. 


No contractor or other person shall be permitted to cut timber in any 
forest of my dominions, except in places and under conditions specified by the 
officer appointed to be Conservator of Forests. 


ARTICLE 3. 


For every tree felled in the forests of Bussahir by authority of the 
Conservator, the British Government shall pay at the following rates :— 


Deodar (Kelu) . . . . , : . . . 8 8 0 
Walaut (Akhrot) . : . ‘ : - 200 
Birch (Bhojputea) - . . . . . : - 180 
Other kinds. . . . é . . ‘ 200 


ARTICLE 4. 


The accounts shall be made up quarterly or half-yearly and rendered, 
and payments made at the abovementioned rates quarterly or half-yearly. 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Bashair—No, LITI. 137 


: ArtioLe 5. : 

I will have nothing to do with the establishments appointed by the 
Forest Officer. The British Government will defray all expenses connected 
with the conservancy of the forests, felling and transporting timber to the 
Sutlej, and floating down to the depéts. 


ARTICLE 6, 


I agree that the officer appointed to the forest should have power of a 
Subordinate Magistrate, Ist class, defined in Section 28 of Act XXV, 186:, 
to try and decide cases of offences against property and property marks, 


ARTICLE 7. 


I will give every assistance required by the Conservator in the exercise of 
the above powers for apprehending offenders, or supposed offenders, and for 
confirming the penalties awarded by him. 


ARTICLE 8, 


I hereby grant to the British Government a lease of the forests of Bussa- 
hir for (50) fifty years, commencing from such date as the Government may 
confirm the lease. 


ARTICLE 9, 


I will furnish an Indent to the Government for any timber I may require, 
specifying the amount and kinds of wood, and the purpose for which it is to be 
applied, 


Articis 10. 


The Zemindars shall be permitted’ to cut timber for fuel, charcoal, house- 
building, and vine frames. They are not to be prohibited from cutting down 
the inferior forests for purposes of cultivation. 