


is Ropert Parry NisBeEt, 
Superintendent, Hill States. 


In presence of— 


(Sd.) B, H. Rapen-Powett, 
Conservator of Korests 


5 AspuLLa Mavtv1. 


Sou EDULE. 


Rules for the Bashahr Forests. 


1. Unless expressly permitted by the Chief Forest Officer, the follow} 
acts are prohibited in all forests of the Bashahr State :-— : Pe 
(2) Breaking up forest Jand for cultivation. 


(2) Setting fire to grass tracts in the vicinity of forests or negligently 
permitting fire to extend thereto. : 


142 Punjab—Hill States—Boshakr—No. LV. Part I 


(c) Setting fire to trees, brushwood, or stumps. 
(¢) Cutting out slabs, torches, etc., from the stems of standing trees, 
barking or boring for turpentine, or otherwise injuring trees. 

(e) Felling or lopping trees. 

(f) Selling timber. 

(9) Removing dead leaves and surface soil. 

(4) Shooting without a license, netting, trapping, or snaring any game 

bird, 

2. Permission free of charge shall be given by the Forest Officer of Bashahr 
to all zemindars,’ who may require it, to break up forest land for cultivation, 
to cut timber for fuel, charcoal, house-building, and vine frames, to cut and 
collect branches and leaves for cattle fodder and manure, to burn ‘grass for 
pasture, to cut torches, and to collect turpentine, bark, roots, ringall, and 
other minor forest produce. 

These privileges shall be exercised in such portions only of the forest as 
the Forest Officer shall from time to time assign. 

The collection of the seeds of the Ri (Neoza) shall be free to all who have 
a right to collect them. ’ 

8. The British Government shall have power to demarcate, or fence any 
portion or portions of the forest in Bashahr. 

If the boundaries of any demarcated forest are not clearly indicated by 
roads, rivers, or other existing boundaries or landmarks, they must be marked 
out by permanent marks in such manner as the Punjab Government may di-’ 
rect. 

4. In the demarcated or fenced forests grazing by cattle, except by per- 
mission of the Forest Officer of Bashahr, is prohibited, in addition to the pro-~ 
hibitions enumerated in rule 1. 

5. The Raja of Bashahr will furnish an indent to the British Govern- 
ment for any timber he may require, specifying the amount and kinds of wood 
and the purpose for which 1t is to be applied. Such timber shall not be ap- - 
plied to other purposes than those specified in the indent, and shall not be 
sold. 

_ twill rest with the Punjab Government to decide what quantity shall be 
given, 

6. No person shall, without the permission of the Forest Officer of Ba- 
shahr, remove, cut up, burn, deface the marks of, or mark any timber in 
transit, whether stranded or floating, provided that this rule shall not interfere 
with the privilege of the villagers to take for firewood stranded pieces of bro- 
ken timber, which are not, however, to be larger than one man can hift by him- 
self, ; 

7. Any person who breaks rule I, 4, or 6 shall be liable, on conviction 
before a Magistrate, to fine not exceeding Rupees 200, or, in default of pay- 
ment, to three months’ imprisonment with or without hard labour, 