

Lst.—That the Rajah binds himself and his successors to rule the people 
hereby transferred to his authority with justice and moderation, so that they 
may in no respect be sufferers by being transferred from the rule of the British 
Government to that of the Rajah. 

end,—That the Rajah will recognize their right to appeal to the local 
British Agent against oppression or injustice. 

3rd.—That he will, on pain of forfeiture of the grant, pay implicit atten- 
tion to any advice or remonstrance which the British Agent may have occa- 
sion to offer on their behalf. It behoves the Rajah to consider this Sunnud a 
complete and valid document, and in return for this favour to remain ever firm 
in his loyalty towards the British Government. 


1. Mouza Malown Chakran. 

2. Mouza Malown Budhoo. 

3. Mouza Chelan Duwuroowallah. 
4, Mouza Soharghatty, 

5. Mouza Malown. 

6. Mouza Leig. 


‘ ae “9th October 1846, corresponding with LOth Kartick Soodee 1903 
UMOU. { 


TRANSLATION OF AN IKRARNAMAH entered into by Rasan Ram 
SincH of NALAGURH. 
Dated 29th October 1846. 


Whereas the British Government has been pleased to grant me, under a 
Sunnud nuslun badi nusulin and botunun bads botuyin, the Fort of Malown 


CO a See 


134 Punjab—Hill States—Hindur—No. LI. Part’ I 


and its six dependent villages specified in that Sunnud, together with the two 
18-pounders and the ammunition in that Fort: I do hereby execute an ikrar- 
namah, binding myself and my successors to the following three conditions :—. 


1st.—I will rule the people transferred to my authority by virtue of the 
aforesaid Sunnud with justice and moderation, so that they may in no respect 
be sufferers by being transferred from the rule of the British Government 
to that of Hindoor, 


2nd.—I will recognise their right to appeal:to the local British Agent 
against oppression or injustice. 

8rd.—I engage, on pain of forfeiture of the grant, to pay implicit obedi- 
ence to any advice or remonstrance which the British Agent may have occa- 
sion to offer on their behalf, 


No. LI, 


TRaNsLation of a SuNNUD granting the State of NaLacura 
with the title of Ragan, to Rasan Ucur Srne. 


Dated the 19th January 1860.: 


Whereas Rajah Bejey Sing, lawful son of Rajah Ram Sing, of Nala- 
gurh, having died, leaving no legitimate male heir of his body, the territory 
of Nalagurh has lapsed to the British Government, and is entirely at its 
disposal ; but in consideration of the fidelity of Rajah Ram Sing, and of 
the useful services which he rendered during the Goorkha War in 1818 and 
1814, the Government wishes to grant the State of Nalagurh, wlfich was 
in the possession of the late Rajah, to Ugur Sing, an illegitimate son of the 
said late Rajah Ram Sing: Accordingly the Government hereby confers 
the State of Nalagurh, with the title of Rajah, upon Ugur Sing and the heirs 
male of his body lawfully begotten. 


Be it known that Rajah Ugur Sing and his heirs shall pay to the British 
Treasury an annual tribute of five thousand rupees; that the Government 
guarantees the jaghire of the brothers of Rajah Ugur Sing ; that the Rajah 
shall allow the free access of British subjects, Native and European, into 
his territory, for commerce or otherwise, and treat them on an equal footing 
with the subjects of his own territory ; and that Government has reserved to 
itself the power of making roads through the Nalagurh State. 