


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Bashalr—No. LV. 139 


. 


of the British Government of the other part, have hereto set their hands this 
first day of August 1871. 


ae (Sd.) SHUMSHERE SING; 


Shumshere Rajak of Bassahtr and Rampoor. 
‘Sing, Rajeh of 
Bassahir and 

Rampoor, 


In the presence of 
(Sd.)  C. Barcuetor, Alajor, 
Dy. Conservator of Forests, Sutlej Division. 
(Sd.) J. Parsons, 
Supdt., Hill States. 
In the presence of 
(Sd.) A. Cuisuotm, Head Clerk, 
Supdt., Hill States Office. 


No. LV. 


AGREEMENT with the Raga of BASHAHR.—1877. 


Whereas by the terms of an agreement having date at Simla, the twen- 
tieth day of June 1864, His Highness the Raja of Rampoor-Bashahr, having 
requested the aid of the British Government in the management of his forests, 
did for that purpose lease the said forests to the British Government; and 


Whereas by a further agreement, dated the first day of August 1871, His 
Highness the said Raja did grant to the British Government (in consideration 
of certain payments therein provided to be made) his rights in waif and 
windfall timber ; and 

Whereas it is now desirable to embody the terms of the said agreements 
in one agreement, and further in such new agreement to secure to His High- 
ness a more equitable remuneration in consideration of the grant of his forests 
and other rights, and at the same time to make more definite provision for 
the conservancy of the forests aforesaid : : 

. The following Articles have been agreed upon between His Highness the 
Raja of Rampoor-Bashahr of the one part, and Captain Robert Parry Nisbet, 
Superintendent of Hill States, Simla, on behalf of the British Government, of 
the other part :— 

1, From and after the date of the execution of this present agreement, 
the former agreements, bearing date at Simla, the 20th June 1864 and Ist 
August 1871, respectively, shall cease to be of force, and shall be deemed to 
be cancelled and superseded by this present agreement. 


140 Punjab—Hill States—Baskahr—No. LV. Part I 


_ .2 The term “forest,” as used in these Articles, shall mean and 
include— 


(2) Those tracts of country covered with trees, or from which the trees 
have been felled, which pay no revenue as cultivated Jand to the 
Rampoor-Bashahr State. 

(6) Such other tracts of land, cultivated or uncultivated, covered with 
trees or barren, as the Raja of Rampoor-Bashahr may from time 
to time consent to give up for the purpose of consolidating or 
extending the area of any existing forest, or of forming new 
plantations or forests. 


. 

3. In consideration of the sum of Rs. 10,000 to be paid in two half- 
yearly instalments, oz., on the 30th Apri] and 3lst October in every year, 
His Highness the Raja of Rampoor-Bashabr hereby grants the entire and sole 
control of the whole forests of Bashahr to the British Government. 


4. The Raja of Bashahr further grants to the British Government all 
his rights in unclaimed waif, drift, and windfall timber. within his territory 
both on land and in water, and further grants to the said Government the entire 
control of the rivers and streams in Bashahr in so far as concerns the floating 
and management of timber in transit; and the Raja of Bashahr further agrees 
that the British Government shall have power to take up land not being for- 
est when such land is required for timber slides and other necessary works : 