


Detail. 


Hundred begarees with Captain Ross at Subathoo ; and in case of a war 
joining the British troops with his forces; and making roads 12. feet broad 
throughout his Thakooraee. Nuzzuranah remitted. 


No. LX. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD granted to MonINDER Sine—1815. . 


Whereas the Goorkhas have been completely expelled from these districts 
and all the hill country has come into the possession of the British Govern- 
ment; and whereas, in consequence of Mohinder Sing’s having failed to 
join the British forces during the war with the Goorkhas the whole country 
of Bughaut is entirely forfeited to the British Government, that Government, 
of which magnanimity is the characteristic feature, is pleased, as an act of 
pure favor and grace, to grant anew to Mohinder Sing the Pergunnabs 


. ity 


146 Punjab—Hill States--Baghat—No. LXI. Part I 


Kusowlee, Boohuj, Bewal, and Golee Masil, being four Pergunnahs of Bughaut 
which were forfeited along with the rest. Wherefore, by order of the Right 
Honorable the Governor-General, this Sunnud is given, conferring the four 
Pergunnahs aforesaid on Mohinder Sing and his heirs for ever. It is neces- 
sary therefore that he should reside at Dhurum Poorah and take possession of 
the said Pergunnahs, promoting the welfare of the ryots and dispensing justice 
to all. He must beware not to encroach beyond: the ancient and fixed 
boundaries of the four Pergunnahs aforesaid on any of the other Pergunnahs of 
Bughaut, and he must never lay claim to any of the other Pergunnahs, or to 
the produce of the sayer collections of Bughaut, amounting to 1,300 rupees, 
which has been given to Maha Rajah Kurrum Sing. He must pay allegiance 
to the British Government, and in case of war must join the British troops 
with such a force as he is able to collect. He must moreover keep always 
twenty begarees with the Officer at Subathoo. 

If at any time he shall depart from these engagements, he will be imme- 
diately dispossessed of the lands in question. The ryots of the said lands 
must, on their part, consider Mohinder Sing to be the rightful lord of the 
territory, and pay their revenue punctually, and show due deference to his just 
authority. 


Dated 4th September 1815. 


No. LXI. 


SuNNUD granted to DutLEeP Sine of Buewar. 


Dated 31st January 1862. 


On the, death of Beeja Sing, the last Chief of Bughat, without issue the 
estate lapsed to the British Government. It was, however, the gracious in- 
tention of Her Majesty’s Governmént to restore the, estate in perpetuity to 
Sirdar Omeid Sing, cousin of Beeja Sing, and his descendants, on certain 
conditions; Omeid Sing died before this intention could be fulfilled, and'I 
now hereby confer on you, his legitimate son, and on the heirs of your body 
in perpetuity, the estate of Bughat, subject to the following conditions :-— 

Ist—The estate of Bughat shall be chargeable with an annual tribute 
of Rupees 2,000. 

2nd.—So much of the estate of Bughat (including the lands at present 
owned by Major-General Innes) as now yields a gross revenue of 2,500 rupees 
a year, shall be retained in perpetuity by the British Government in payment 
of this tribute. : 