


Detail. 


Forty begarees, nuzzuranah remitted ; to keep up roads ; to join with 
his troops in case of war. 


7 


: No. LXXI, 


TRANSLATION of a SuNNUD granted to Maun Cuunp of BrEsan. 


Dated 4th September 1815. 


Whereas the Goorkhas have been completely expelled from these districts, 
and the whole of the hill country has come into the possession of the British 
Government : Wherefore, by order of the Right Honorable the Governor- 
General, this Sunnud is granted to Maun Chund, conferring on him and his 
heirs for ever the Thakooraee of Beejah, with all the rights and appurte- 
nances belonging thereto, on condition of his paying annually the stipulated 
guzzuranah for defraying the expense of protection by the British troops, and 
of his attending with begarees and sepoys as specified below, in case of his 
being so required. The said Maun Chund will promote the welfare of his 
ryots, and the cultivation of the lands, and look to the security of the roads, 
and ensure the due payment of his nuzzuranah for defraying the expense of 
British troops, and be ready to attend with begarees and sepoys, as detailed 
below, when called upon, and will pay strict obedience to the British Govern- 
ment, and abstain from encroaching beyond his own limits, And if at any 
time the said Maun Chund fail in the performance of any of the above oblig- 
ations (again enumerated) he will be dispossessed. Considering this Sunnud 
as a valid instrument, be will conform to its terms. The duty of the ryots of 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Zerhkoch—~No. LXXII. 155 


the Thakooraee, on their part, will be, considering Maun Chund as their 
rightful lord, to obey him accordingly, and pay the revenues regularly, 


Detail. 


Five begarees ; roads; nuzzuranah remitted ; to join with troops in case of 
war. 


No. LXXII. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD conferring THAKOOKAEE TUROCH upon 
THAKOOR JHOOBOO, son of THAKOOR LuGoocHUND, under the 
seal and signature of Captain Ross. 


Dated 31st January 1819. 


Whereas the Goorkhas have been completely expelled from the Hill 
States, and the whole of the hill country has come into the possession of the 
British Government, and whereas the aforesaid Rana being absent on the 
occasion of the settlement which was ordered by the Right Honorable the 
Governor-General, Lord Moira, to be made in the Hill Territories, the grant 
of a Sunnud for Thakooraee Turoch to the said Rana was delayed: Now 
from the commencement of the year 1819, corresponding with 1234, A.H. 
and 1875 Sumbut, the abovenamed Rana being present, this Sunnud is grant. 
ed to him under my seal and signature, conferring upon him in perpetuity 
Thakooraee Turoch, with all the rights and appurtenances belonging thereto, 
on condition’ of his paying annually the stipulated nuzzuranah for defraying 
the expense of protection by the British troops, and of his attending with 
begarees and retainers, as set forth below, in case of his being so required, and 
of obedience to the British Government, It behoves him to exert himself in 
the administration of the affairs of his possessions; to consider himself a de- 
pendent of the Government, and not of any other power; to abstain from 
encroaching upon the territories of others; to promote the welfare of the 
people ; to improve the cultivation of the land; and to secure the safety of the 
roads, If at any time he fail in the performance of any of the above condi- 
tions he shall be dispossessed of the grant. Considering this Sunnud as a 
valid instrument, he will conform to the foregoing conditions in the adminis- 
tration of the affairs of his territory. It will be the duty of the ryots of the 
said Thakooraee to regard the aforesaid Rana and his descendants as their 
rightful lord, to obey him accordingly, and pay the revenues regularly. 