


Begarees shall be supplied when required for the construction of roads. 
Dated 8rd Ughan 1872 Sumbhut, corresponding with 18th November 1815. 


No. LXIV. 


TRANSLATION of a SuNNUD granted to Rooper Paut of BuDSJEE, 
dated 4th September 1815. 


Whereas the Goorkhas have been completely expelled from these districts 
and the whole of the hill country has come into the possession of the British 
Government: Wherefore, by order of the Right Honorable the Governor- 
General, this Sunnud is granted to Rooder Paul, conferring on him and his 
heirs for ever the Thakooraee of Budjee, with-all the rights and appurtenances 
belonging thereto, on condition of his paying annually the stipulated 
nuzzuranah for defraying the expense of protection by the British troops, 
and of his attending with begarees and sepoys, as specified below, in case’ of 
his being so required. The said Rooder Paul will promote the welfare of his 
ryots, and the cultivation of the lands, and look to the security of the roads, 
and ensure the due payment of his nuzzuranah for defraying the expense of 
British troops, and be ready to attend with begarees and sepoys, as detailed 
below, when called upon, and will pay strict obedience to the British Govern- 
ment, and abstain from encroaching beyond his own limits; and if at any 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Birajji-No. LXV. 149 


ry 


time the said Rooder Paul fail in the performance of any of the above obliga- 
tions (again enumerated), he will be dispossessed. Considering this Sunnud 
as a valid instrument, he will conform to its terms. The duty of the ryots of 
the Thakooraee, on their part, would be, considering Rooder Paul as their 
rightful lord, to obey him accordingly and pay the revenues regularly. 


Detail. 


Forty begarees at Subathoo; to join with his force in case of war; to 
keep up roads throughout the Thakooraee. Nuzzuranah remitted. 


No. LXV. 


TRANSLATION of a SuNNUD granting THAKooRAEE BuDJEE to 
Rana Run Banapoor Sine, Carer of Bunsen, dated 10th 
July 1845. 


Whereas, on the 27th Kartick 1899 Sumbut, corresponding with 10th 
November 1841, Thakoor Rooder Paul, Chief of Budjee, of his own accord 
and free will, made over the administration of the affairs of Budjee to his son 
Rana Run Bahadoor Sing, and whereas a copy of a letter-from the said Tha- 
koor was transmitted in a report, No. 16, to Mr, Maddock, the Chief Secretary, 
for the orders of the Right Honorable the Governor-General, Lord Ellen- 
borough, to which a reply, dated 12th November 1841, No, 1106, under the 
signature of the said Secretary, was received, granting the prayer of Thakoor 
Rooder Paul: This sunnud is granted-to Rana Run Bahadoor Sing, confer- 
ring upon him in perpetuity the said Thakooraee, with all the rights and 
appurtenances belonging thereto, on the condition that he shall pay year after 
year, Fusul after Fusul, a nuzzuranah of one thousand four hundred and forty 
rupees in lieu of begarees, and that he shall, when required, appear-in person 
with begarees and retainers as detailed below, It behoves him to promote the 
welfare of the people ; to improve the cultivation ; to seoure'the safety of the 
roads; to pay annually by instalments the fixed nuzzuranah; to appear in 
person with begarees and armed retainers when required ; to show obedience to 
the British Officers ; to abstain from entroaching on the territories of others; 
to obey the usual orders in respect to the supply of begarees and retainers 
from his ilaqua in time of need; and to consider himself bouad to construct 
roads throughout his territory. . ; 