


ee 


No. LXVII. 


_ TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD granted to Rana Buoor Sine of 
KorHar. 


Dated 8rd September 1815. 


Whereas the Goorkhas have been completely expelled from these districts 
and the whole of the hill country has come into the possession of the British 
Government: Wherefore, by order of the Right Honorable the Governor- 
General, this Sunnud ig granted to Rana Bhoop Sing, conferring on him and 
his heirs for ever the Thakooraee of Kothar, with all the rights and appurte- 
nances belonging thereto, on condition of his paying annually the stipulated 
nuzzuranah for defraying the expense of protection by the British troops, and 
of his attending with eee and sepoys, as specified below, in case of his 

‘being so required, The |said Rana Bhoop Sing will promote the welfare of 
his ryots, and the cultivation of the lands, and look to the security of-the 
roads, and ensure the due payment of his nuzzuranah for defraying the 
expense of British troops, and be ready to attend with begarees and sepoys, as 
detailed below, when called upon ; and will pay strict obedience to the British 
Goyernment, and abstain from encroaching beyond his own limits. Aad if at 
any time the said Rana Bhoop Sing failin the performance of any of the 
above obligations (again enumerated) he will be dispossessed. Considering 
this Sunnad as a valid instrument, he will conform to its terms. The duty of 


152 Punjab—Hill States—Diemi—No. LXVIII. Part I 


the ryots of the Thakooraee, on their part, will be, considering Rana Bhoop 
Sing as their rightful lord, to obey him accordingly and pay the revenues 
regularly, , 


Detail, 


Forty begarees, and ‘making roads throughout the Thakooraee; and in 
case of war, joining the British troops with his whole force. 


Nuzzuranah altogether remitted. 


No. LXVIII. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD granted to GoBuRDHUN Sine of 
DHAMEE. 


_ Dated 4th September 1815. 


Whereas the Goorkhas have been completély expelled from these districts 
and the whole of the hill country. has come into the possession of the British 
Government: Wherefore, by order of the Right Honorable the Governor- 
General, this Sunoud is granied to Goburdhun Sing, conferring on ‘him and 
his heirs for ever the Thakooraee of Dhamee with all the rights and appur- 
tenances belonging thereto, on condition of his paying annually the stipulated 
nuzzuranah for defraying the expense of protection by the British troops, and 
of his attending with begarees and sepoys, as specified below, in case of his 
being so required. The said Goburdhun Sing will promote the welfare of his 
ryots, and the cultivation of the lands, and lovk to the security of the roads, 
and ensure the due payment of his nuzzuranah for defraying the expense of 
British troops, and be ready to attend with begarees and sepoys, as detailed 
below, when called upon; and will pay strict obedience to the British Govern- 
ment and abstain from encroaching beyond his own limits. And if at any 
time the said Goburdhun Sing fail in the performance of any of the above 
obligations (again enumerated) he will be dispossessed. Considering this 
Sunnud as a valid instrument, he will conform to its terms. The duty of the 
ryots of the Thakooraee on their part, will be, consid ering Goburdhun Sing 
: ti rightful lord, to obey him accordingly and pay the revenues regu- 