


(True translation.) 


(Sd.) Joun C, Ersxiye, 
Sub-Commr., N-W. F. 


LXXIV. 


TRANSLATION of a SuNNUD granting THAKOORAEE TuRocH to 
THAKOOR RuNJEET Srnea, son of THakoor Kur Srve, under 
the seal and signature of the HoNoraBLe JouNn ERSKINE, 
Sub-Commissioner and Superintendent of the N.-W..Fron- 
tier, 


Dated 27th June 1845, 


Whereas, in terms of a letter from Mr. Secretary Hamilton, No. 2, dated 
6th July 1843, and also of paragraphs 38 to 40 of a letter from the Honor- 
able Court of Directors, No. 15, dated 31st August 1842, Thakooraee Turoch 
was granted to the above Thakoor, this Sunnud is now given to him under 
my seal and signature, conferring upon him in perpetuity the aforesaid 
Thakoorace, with all the rights and appurtenances belonging thereto. It 
behoves him to consider himself a dependent of the British Government, and 
not of any other power ; to promote the welfare of the people ; to improve the 
cultivation of the lands ; to look to the security of roads; to construct roads in 


158 Punjab—Hill States—Kunkiar—No. LXXV. Part I 


his Tlaqua ; to appear in person with begarees and armed retainers according to 
his means when required ; to pay annually by three instalments two hundred 
and eighty-eicht Rupees, which have hitherto been paid into the Government 
Treasury, and also to pay by instalments an annual sum of two hundred 
and fifty Rupees, on account of Sheam Sing, a former Thakoor of Turoch ; 
and not to deviate from the terms of the agreement which is on record in this 
office regarding the settlement of Thakooraee Turoch and the protection and 
safety of the people. . 


It will be the duty of the ryots of the said Thakooraee to consider him 
ard, after him, his descendants as their rightful lord, to pay their revenue 
punctually, to be obedient to him, and not to refuse to execute his reasonable 
orders. 


No, LXXV. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD granted to THakooR Roy MUNGREE 
Deo of Koona#1ar.—1815. 


Whereas the Goorkhas have been completely expelled from these districts, 
and the whole of the hill country has come into the possession of the British 
Government: Wherefore, by order of the Right Honorable the Governor- 
General, this Sunnud is granted to Thakoor Roy Mungree Deo, conferring on 
him and his heirs for ever the Thakooraee of Koonhiar, with all the rights 
and appurtenances belonging thereto, on condition of his paying annually the 
stipulated nuzzuranah for defraying the expense of protection by the British 
troops, and of his attending with begarees and sepoys, as specified below, in 
case of his being so required. The said Thakoor Roy Mungree Deo will 
promote the welfare of his ryots, and the cultivation of the lands, and look to 
the security of the roads, and ensure the due.payment of his nuzzuranah for 
defraying the expense of British troops, and be ready to attend witli begarees 
and sepoys, as detailed below, when called upon, and will pay strict obedience 
tothe British Government, and abstain from encroaching beyond his own 
limits, And if at any time the said Thakoor Roy Mungree Deo fail in the 
performance of any of the above obligations (again enumerated) he will be 
dispossessed. Considering this Sunnud as a valid instrument, he will conform 
to its terms. The duty of the ryots of the Thakooraee, on their part, will be, 
considering Thakoor Roy Mungree Deo as their rightful lord, to obey him 
accordingly, and pay the revenues regularly. 