


8rd.—The remainder of the estate shall be free from payment of tribute. 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Baghai—No. LXII. 147 


Be assured that so long as you and, your successors remain loyal to the 
British Crown and faithful in the discharge of your obligations to the British 
Government the estate of Bughat shall remain to your house a perpetual 
possession. 


No. LXII. 


Sunnup granted to Duneer Sine of Buenat—1864. 


On the death of Beejah Sing, the last Chief of Bughat, without issue, 
the estate lapsed to the British Government. It was, however, the gracious 
intention of Her Majesty’s Government to restore the estate in perpetuity to 
Sirdar Oomeid Sing, cousin of Beejah Sing, and his descendants on certain 
conditions. Omeid Sing died before this intention could be fulfilled, and I 
now hereby confer on you, his legitimate son, and on the heirs of your body 
in perpetuity the estate of Bughat, subject to the following conditions :— 


ArtictE 1. 


The estate of Bughat shall be chargeable with an annual tribute of 
Rupees 2,000. 


ARTICLE 2. 


So much of the estate of Bughat as has been acquired by, Major-General 
Innes and is assessed at Rupees 1,002-15 a year shall be retained in perpetuity 
by the British Government in payment of so much of the tribute, and the 
remainder of the tribute, viz., Rupees 997-1, shall be annually paid by the 
Chief of Bughat in cash to the British Government. 


ARTICLE 3. 


The Chief of Bughat shall respect the revenue settleménts which were 
made, and the rights of the under-tenants which were recognised, by the 
British Government while the estate of Bughat was under its administration. 

Be assured that so long as you and your successors remain loyal to the 
British Crown and faithful in the discharge of your obligations to the British 
Government the estate of Bughat shall remain to your House a perpetual 
Possession. 


Joun Lawrence, 
Dated 18th July 1864, 


148 Punjab—Hill States—Jubtsal, Bhajji—Nos. LXIII & LXIV. Part I 


No, LXTII. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD granting THAKOORAEE Joosut to RANA 
Poorun Cuunp, of JooBuL, under the Seal and Signature of 
Captain Ross, dated 18th November 1815. 


Whereas, on the expulsion of the Goorkhas, the whole of the hill territory 
has come into the possession of the British Government, this Sunnud agree- 
ably to the orders of the Right Honorable the Governor-General, Lord Moira, 
received through General Sir David Ochterlony, is granted to Rana Poorun 

‘Chund, conferring upon him Thakooraee and Territory of Joobul, of which he 

shall hold possession in perpetuity, in the same manner as he did during the 
-time of the Goorkhas. He shall exert himself to serve the Government in 
‘the following manner :— 


1st.—He shall employ seventy begarees in the constant service of Govern- 
ment throughout the year. 


2nd.—No nuzzuranah shall be taken from him. 


3rd,—-The armed retainers of Joobul shall join the British Force on the 
occasion of a war, and shall not serve any other power. 