

arly : 


Detail. , ; 


Twenty begarees at Subathoo; to make roads 12 feet broad ; nuzzuranah 
remitted ; to join in case of war with troops, 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—RBalsan, Matlog—Nos. LXIX & LXX. 153 


No. LXIX. 


TRANSLATION of a SunNUD granted to THaxkoor Joog Ras of 
Burson. 


Dated 21st September 1815. 


Whereas the Goorkhas bave been completely expelled from these districts, 
and the whole of the hill country has come into the possession of the British 
Government: Wherefore, by order of the Right Honorable the Governor. 
General, this Sunnud is granted to Thakoor Joog Raj conferring on him aud 
his heirs for ever the Thakooraee of Bulsun, with all the rights and appur- 
tenances belonging thereto, on condition of his paying annually the stipulated 
nuzzuranah for defraying the expense of protection by the British troops, and 
of his attending with begarees and sepoys, as specified below, in case of his 
being so required. The said Thakoor Joog Raj will promote the welfare of his 
ryots and the cultivation of the lands, and look to the security of the roads 
and ensure the due payment of his nuzzuranah for defraying the expense of 
British troops, and be ready to attend with begarees and sepoys, detailed 
below, when called upon, and will pay strict obedience to the British Govern- 
ment and abstain from encroaching beyond his own limits. And if at any 
time the said Thakoor Joog Raj fail in the performance of any of the above 
obligations (again enumerated) he will be dispossessed. Considering this 
Sunnud as a valid instrument, he will conform to its terms; the duty of the 
ryots of the Thakooraee, on their part, will be, considering Thakoor Joog Raj 
as their rightful lord, to obey him accordingly and pay the revenues regularly, 


Detail. 


Thirty begarees at Subathoo; to attend with his force in case of war. 
Roads 12 feet broad, Nuzzuranah remitted. 


No. LXX. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD granted to THaKkooR SUNSAROO of 
Mytoe. 
Dated 4th September 1815, 


Whereas the Goorkhas have been completely expelled from these districts, 
and the whole of the hill country has come into the possession of the British 
Government: Wherefore, by order of the Right Honorable the Governor- 
General, this Sunnud is granted to Thakoor Sunsaroo, conferring on him and 
his heirs for ever the Thakooraee of Mylog, with all the rights and appurte- 


x 


164 Punjab—Hill States—Beja—No. LXXI. . Part F 


nances belonging thereto, on condition of his paying annually the stipulated 
nuzzuranah for defraying the expense of protection by the British troops ; 
and of his attending with begarees and sepoys, as specified below, in case 
of his being so required. The said Thakoor Sunsaroo will promote the 
welfare of his ryots, and the cultivation of the lands, and look to the security 
of the roads,and ensure the due payment of his nuzzuranah for defraying 
the expense of British troops, and be ready to attend with begarees and 
sepoys, as detailed below, when called upon, and will pay strict obedience to 
the British Government, and abstain from encroaching beyond his own limits. 
And if at any time the said Thakoor Sunsaroo fail in the performance of any 
of the above obligations (again enumerated) he will be dispossessed. Consi- 
dering this Sunnud as a valid instrument, he will conform to its terms ; the 
duty of the ryots of the Thakooraee, on their part will be, considering 
Thakoor Sunsaroo as their rightful lord, to obey him accordingly and pay 
the revenues regularly, 