


Detatl, 


Right begarees to remain in attendance throughout the year. 
No nuzzuranah shall be taken. 


156 Punjab—Hill States—Tarhoch—No. LXXTIII. Part I 


He shall construct roads throughout his territory. 


He shall join the British Officers in person with his armed retainers and 
begarees on the occasion of war. 


ye 31st January 1819, corresponding with 1st Rubbeeoossanee 1234 


No. LXXITI. 


TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT taken from Runsert Sine to 
govern the TurocH SraTE in justice and in equity—1843. 


Whereas it having pleased the Right Honorable the Governor General 
of India to confer upon me the grant of the Thakooraee of the territory of 
Turoch ; I, Runjeet Sing, son of Thakoor Kurrum Sing of Turoch deceased, 
do bind myself, my heirs and successors, to perform truly, diligently, and 
faithfully the whole of the several conditions specified in this agreement, 
VIZ, — 

i} 

1st.—That I will punctually pay into the Government Treasury the 
amount of tribute as heretofore. 

2nd.—That I will without excuse or objection pay to Seyam Sing, pend- 
ing further orders, the annual sum of five hundred Rupees allotted to Jhooboo 
and Seyam Sing by Government. * 


3rd.—That I will abolish the practice which hitherto prevailed of levying 
a fine from both parties in a suit after adjustment ; and that the said practice 
shall only affect the guilty party in fature, 


4th.—I agree to discontinue the practice which has hitherto prevailed in 
Turoch, of wantonly dispossessing a subject of his patrimonial inheritance in 
land, and giving it to another in consideration of a nuzzuranah, Such an 
evil custom shall have no support from me. 


6th.—I shall not adopt, nor permit, the improper practice which has pre- 
vailed in cases where @ woman having been seduced and taken to the house 
of her seducer, the husband or plaintiff on suing for the recovery of the 
marriage portion or expenses does not receive justice, as the money in question 
' is seized by the Chiefs and his followers. I shall do justice to all parties. 


6th.—The practice which obtained of the Chieftain seizing entirely upon 
the goods and chattels of any of his subjects who may die ‘without issue, 
thus leaving the widow and mother of the deceased destitute and without 
assistance, shall be henceforth put a stop to. I shall leave all the deceased’s 
property whether in cash or kind for the maintenance of his mother and 
widow, to whom I will also extend my protection. 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Zarhoch—No. LXXIV. 157 


7th will exterminate from Turoch the objectionable practice of 
female infanticide and punish severely all cases that may occur. 


8th.—No suttees shall be permitted throughout the Turoch territory. 
9tk.—No dealings in slaves shall be permitted, 


10th, ~I further bind myself, my heirs and successors, to preserve the 
inhabitants in peace and contentment, avoiding all oppression and tyranny 
and preventing it in others. On the contrary I shall govern with justice and 
equify, and continue steadfast in my allegiance and loyalty to the British 
Government, and since it has pleased the Government to bestow the succes- 
sion on me, I shall commit no act of injustice; but will cheerfully comply 
with all orders that may be conveyed to me, and lastly, I bind myself, my 
heirs and successors, to observe inviolate for ever the whole of the several 
conditions herein specified, in the fulfilment and performance of which there 
shall be no falling off whatsoever. In witness whereof I have hereunto set 
my hand and seal this 12th day of April 1843. 