


Deéattl. ’ 
Five begarees ; roads, 12 feet ; nuzzuranah remitted ; to join with troops. 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Seangri, Mangal—Nos. LXXVI & LXXVII. 159 


LXXVI. 


TBANSLATION of a SunNNuvD conferring the THAKooral of Sangriand 
the fort of Kaneon with the Pergunnah of Cheekul upon 
Raga Bixermaseet of KuLLoo—16th December 1815. 


Whereas the Goorkhas have been completely expelled from the hill dis- 
trict, and all the places of this district have come into the possession of the 
British Government, and whereas the fort of Kangul with the Pereunnah 
of Cheekul and the Thakoorai of Sangri was during the time of the Goorkhas 
held by the Raja of Kulloo, therefore pow, agreeably to the order of the Right 
Hon’ble Lord Moira, the Governor General, to General Sir David Ochterlony, 
the Fort of Kangul with the Pergunnah of Cheekul and the Thakoorai of 
Sangri with all the rights and appurtenances belonging thereto is conferred 
upon Raja Bikermajeet of Kulloo. It behoves the said Raja to consider this 
Sunnud as avalid instrument, to hold possession of the fort of Kangul, the 
Pergunnah of Cheekul, and the Thakoorai of Sangri, to abstain himself from 
encroaching beyond his own old limits in the possession of others, to improve 
the condition of the people, to distribute justice to the aggrieved, to obey the 
officers of the Company Bahadur, and to execute their orders with prompti- 
tude and zeal. On the occasion of a war, the troops and begarees of the Raja 
of Kulloo should be in attendance for the purpose of performing the work of 
Government, He shall consider it incumbent upon him to construct roads in 
all directions of the said Talooka, Pergunnah and Thakoorai whenever he is 
required to do so by the officers of the Company. 

Tt will be the duty of the ryots of the pergunnah of Cheekul and the 
Thakoorai of Sangri to regard Raja Bikermajeet as their rightful lord, and 
leave nothing undone of their duty to him. 


No. LXXVII. 


TRANSLATION ,of a SunNuD granting THakoorare MANeUL to 
Rana Bawanoor Sine of MANcuL, under the seal and signa= 
ture of Caprarn Rosert Ross, Deputy SUPERINTENDENT of 
SIRHIND and the H1uu Starss. 


Dated 20th December 1815. 


Whereas, on the expulsion of the Goorkhas from the hill country, all 
these districts have come into the possession of the British Government, this 
Sunnud is granted to Rana Bahadoor Sing according to the orders of the 
Right Honorable the Governor General, Lord Moira, received through General 


160 Punjab—Hill States—Darkoti—Nos. LXXVIII. Part I 


Sir David Ochterlony, conferring upon him Thakooraee Mangul. He shall 
hold possession of it in perpetuity in the same manner as he did during the 


time of the Goorkhas, and abide by the following terms, vz, :— 
Jst.—He shall supply begarees for the constant service of Government 


throughout the year. 
2nd.—~ Nuzzuranah and Mamela should not be taken from him. 


Srd.—On the occasion of war he shall join the British Army with his 


