

It will be the duty of the ryots of the said Thakooraee to consider Rana 


Run Bahadoor Sing as their rightful lord for ever, and not swerve from obe- 
dience to his orders, 


150 : Punjab—Hill States—Kumharsain—No. LXVI. Part I 


Detail, 


An annual nuzzuranah of one thousand four hundred and forty rupees to 
be paid by him by instalments. 

On the occasion of a war he shall join the British Officers in person with 
all his refainers. 


He shall construct roads 4 yards broad in his territory. 


Dated 10th July 1845, corresponding with 4th Rujjub 126114.H., and 9th 
Assar 1902 Sumbut. 


No. LXVI. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD granting THAKooRAEE KoMHARSEIN 
to Rana Kuer Sine, under the Seal and Signature of Grn- 


* BERAL SIR DAVID OCHTERLONY. 
Dated 7th February 1816. 


Whereas the Goorkhas have been completely expelled from the Hill 
States and the whole of the hill country has come into the possession of the 
British Government: this Sunnud is, by order of the Right Honorable the 
Governor-General, Lord Moira, granted under my seal and signature to the 
aforesaid Rana, conferring upon him in perpetuity Thakooraee Komharsein, 
with all the rights and appurtenances belonging thereto, on condition of his 
paying annually the stipulated nuzzuranah for defraying the .expenses of 
protection by the British Troops, and of his attending with begarees and 
sepoys, as specified below, in case of his being so required, The said Rana 
will exert himself with zeal to promote the welfare of his ryots, to improve 
the cultivation of the lands, and to secure the safety of the roads, and ensure 
the due payment of his nuzzuranah for defraying the expenses’of the troops 
protecting the hill country; and will be ready to appear in person when 
required, with begarees and armed retainers ds set forth below, and will pay 
strict obedience to the British Government, and abstain from encroaching 
upon the lands of others. If at any time he shall fail in the performance of 
any of the above conditions he will incur the displeasure of Governiment, and 
be dispossessed of the grant. Considering this Sunnud as a valid instrument, 
he will conform to its terms in the administration of the affairs of ‘his terri- 
tory- 

Jt will be the duty of the ryots of the ‘aforesaid Thakooraee to consider 
the said Rana, and after him his descendants, as their rigbtful lord, to pay 
their revenue punctually; to show obedience to his authority, and not to 
swerve from obedience to his reasonable orders. 


Part I Punjab—Hill States—Kothar—No. LXVII. 151 


Detarl, 


. Forty begarees to be supplied* throughout the year for the service of the 
Government. 2 ; 
He shall serve the Government in person with all his retainers on the 
occasion of war. . 


He shall construct in his territory roads 4 yards wide. 
No nuzzuranah shall be taken. 


Dated 7th February 1816: ‘ 


* The Sunnud of 1840 prescribes that the R2,000 a year in lieu of these begarees shall 
be paid in the following instalments :—~ 
Rap 
In April P . . - 66610 8 
In August . . . « 66610 8 
In December - : . - 66610 8 