


A postal Convention (note to No, XXX), similar to that with Patiala, 
was concluded in 1886 between the British Government and the Chamba 
State, under which an exchange of postal communication’ has been established 
between British territory and Chamba. 

The area of Chamba is 3,126 square miles; the population by the census 
of 1891, 124,082 ; the revenue is now about Rupees 3,50,000. The mili- 
tary force consists (1891) of 12 cavalry and 206 infantry including gunners 
With three guns. The Raja receives a salute of eleven guns, 


4, SUKET, 


This ancient Hindu Rajput principality also came into the possession of 
the British Government by the treaty of Lahore. In 1846 the State, with 
full administrative powers, was conceded to the Raja, Ugar Sen, in a Sanad 


(No, LXXXV), embodying conditions similar to those in the sanad granted 
to the Chief of Mandi. 


The right of adoption was conferred on the Raja by Sanad (No. XXXIX). 
Raja Ugar Sen died in 1875 and was succeeded by his son Rudar Sen. 

After a rule of some three years’ duration Raja Rudar Sen was deposed 
in April 1878, his incapacity to govern being proved. His eldest son, Ari 
Mardan Sen, whom the Government of India had proposed to recognise as his 
successor if found fit on attaining majority, died in November , 1878, before 


168 Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Jagirdars. Part I 


reaching the age of 18 years ; the second son, Dusht Nikandan Sen, was accord- 
ingly allowed to succeed, and was installed as Raja on the 29th March 1879. 
The ex-Raja Rudar Sen died in November 1886. 


The government of the State was carried on by a Council of Regency, 
assisted by a Government official as Manager, until Raja Dusht Nikandan 
' Sen attained his majority. On the Ist May 1884 full ruling powers were 
Semi to him. 


" The administration of Raja Dusht Nikandan Sen has been so unsatis- 
factory as to give rise to numerous complaints and to call for the interference 
of the Punjab Government, The Raja has been given a year’s trial to enable . 
him to retrieve his position asa Ruler, and at his own request an Assistant 
Commissioner has been deputed to act as his counsellor and adviser during 
that period. , 


The area of Suket is 404 square miles, with a population, by the census of 
1891, of about 52,403. The revenue amounts to about one lakh of rupees, 
The Raja keeps up (1891) a force of 12 cavalry and 26 infantry, including 
gunners, with four field guns. He receives a salute of eleven guns. 


5. TRANS-SUTLEJ JAGIRDARS WITH ADOPTION SANADS. 


Sanads (No. LXXXVI) granting the right of adoption were also given to 
Sardar Shamsher Singh, Sandhanwalia, and Raja Tej Singh. These, however, 
were ordinary jagirdars, having ordinary magisterial and revenue powers within 
their estates, but no powers of government, Raja Tej Singh died in Decem- 
ber 1862, and was succeeded by his adopted son, now Raja Harbans Singh. 
Sardar Shamsher Singh, who has also died, has been succeeded by his adopted 
son, Sardar Bakhshish Singh. 