


‘Whereas all the northern and eastern hill territory, between the Rivers 
Sutlej and Sindh, formerly attached to the territory of the Punjab, has been 
transferred to the British Government by the Treaty of the 9th March 1846, 
concluded between the Honorable Company and the Government of Lahore, 
the country of Chumba, which at the time the above Treaty was concluded 
was in the possession of the Rajah of the place, is hereby conferred in, perpe- 
tuity upon him and his heirs male, who, according to the shastres, may be 
deemed his rightful successors. ‘In the event of the Rajah leaving no male 
heirs, his next brother, who may be the eldest of the surviving brothers, will 
succeed him. The Rajahs of Chumba will retain full administrative powers 
Within the limits of their own country, on the following conditions, viz.:— 

1st.—The Rajah shall pay every year into the treasury of Kangra an 
annual sum of twelve thousand Rupees by two instalments ; the first instal- 
ment to be paid in the month of Cheit; the second in the month of Magh. 


172° Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Chamia—No. LXXXIII. Part I 


2nd.—The Rajah shall at ‘once abolish in his country the suttee rites, 
female infanticide, the slave trade, and the practice of mutilation. 

8rd.—The Rajah shall protect merchants and travellers, and. abolish 
Frayer duties, &c., in bis territory. 

4th.—The Rajah shall cause roads 12 feet wide to be constructed through 
his country, and shall keep them in good repair. 

5¢,—On the occasion of war, the Rajah shall join the British army, fur- 
nish provisions, and supply soldiers on a monthly pay of five Rupees each, 
and ‘bearers to carry baggage ona salary of four Rupees each per mensem. 
Should ariy of the Rajahs of Chumba mismanage the affairs of the country, 
the British Government will remove him and appoint in his place another of 
the family. It is not the object of the British Government to take the coun- 
try into its hands: the only thing which it has in view is that, from the good 
management of the territory and the impartial administration of justice, the 
‘people should continue to enjoy peace and happiness. 

6th.—If a dispute of any kind arise between the Rajah of Chumba and 
any other chief, the case shall be laid before the British Government, and the 
Rajah shall abide by the decision which the Government shall pass thereon. 
Without the consent of the British Government, the Rajah shall enter into no 
negotiations with any other Chief, but shall confine himself to his own coun- 
‘try, and exert himself to the utmost to promote the welfare and happiness of 
‘his people, to inorease the cultivation of the territory, and to administer justice 
to all, * 


No. LXXXIII. © 


-AGREEMENT for the Leask of the CHUMBA Forests.—1864. 


The Rajah of Chumba finding great difficulty in arranging for the pres 
‘servation of the forests in his territory has requested the aid of the British 
Government and has agreed to give to the British officer whom the Govern- 
ment may appoint for this purpose the sole control of the forests in the terri- 
tory of Chumba. To give effect, therefore, to the wishes of the Rajah, the 
following arrangements are agreed to by the Rajah of Chumba on the one 
hand and by and on behalf of the British Government on the other hand :— 