

Y 


162 Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Xapurthala. Part I 


Rupees 5,77,763. The terms of the confirmation were in favour of the 
Sardar and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, on condition of good con- 
duct and good management, that no customs or duties of any kind be levied, 
and that he make and keep in repairs the high roads through bis lands. 

The commutation for military service in the Jullunder Doab was fixed at 
Rupees 1,88,000, but subsequently a reduction of Rupees 7,000 was made from 
this on account of the Nurmahal jagir, which was included with the Kapur- 
thala territory when first. calculating the tribute due by the Raja, but which 
was afterwards declared to be distinct therefrom, The Bari Doab estates, 
estimated to yield Rupees 25,270, but which have since been assessed at 
Rupees 16,742, were released to Sardar Nihal Singh on a life tenure, and sub- 
ject to British jurisdiction. 

in 1849 Sardar Nihal Singh was created a Raja. He died in Septem- 
ber 1852, and was succeeded by his son, Randhir Singh, During the mutiny 
of 1857, and subsequently in Oudh in 1858, Raja Randhir Singh rendered ser- 
vice to the British Government. In recognition of the services performed by 
him at that time in the Jullunder Doab, the Government, among other rewards, 
remitted a year’s tribute, and permanently reduced the tribute by Rupees 25,000. 
The Raja, however, requested that the hereditary jagir in the Bari Doab, 
which had been resumed on the death of Raja Nihal Singh in 1852, though. 
of less present value, might be restored to him in lieu of the remission of 
tribute. ‘This request was complied with, and the jagir was released to the. 
Raja in perpetuity, the civil and police jurisdiction remaining in the hands of 
the British authorities. The tribute payable, by the Raja accordingly stands 
at its former amount, viz., Rupees 1,31,000. 

For his services in Oudh, where, at the head of his contingent, Randhir 
Singh took part in several engagements with the enemy, some valuable Taluk- 

dari estates in that province were conferred upon him (No. LXXIX). 

(1) The Baundi and Bithauli estates on the Ghagra, in the Bahraich 
and Barabanki districts, granted at a favourable assessment 
fixed in perpetuity. The revenue demand on these estates is 
Rupees 59,950. 

(2) The Akona and Dongapur estates in the Bahraich district 
granted at ordinary rates and temporarily settled. 

By a Sanad (No, LXXX) the Raja was guaranteed the right of adop- 


Part I Punjab —Trans-Sutlej States— Kapurthaia. 163 


Raja Nihal Singh shortly before his death in 1852 executed a will 
empowering his two younger sons, Bikrama Singh and Suchet Singh, to claim 
@ partition of the fi¢f. Dissensions arose among the brothers, and in 1853 
Suchet Singh demanded and received his share, which he held independently 
of the Raja and as a jagirdar of the British Government. 


In 1859 Suchet Singh having become reconciled to his brothers desired 
that the arrangement ordered by his father’s will might be set aside, and the 
lands restored to the Kapurthala State, to be held by him in subordination to 
the Raja. This request was sanctioned by the British Government, and 
the dismemberment of the State having thus been prevented by voluntary 
agreement between the brothers, the cancelment of the will and the restora- 
tion to the Raja of his territory on the same footing as it existed in former 
times were announced by Lord Canning at a Darbar held on the 3lst January 
1860, at which all the brothers were present, In 1866 dissensions again arose 
among the brothers, and Bikrama Singh and Suchet Singh claimed the execu- 
tion of their father’s will. It was decided, however, that Lord Canning’s 
order should be upheld, that the Raja should exercise paramount authority 
over the whole of the Kapurthala State, and that the younger brothers should 
each receive Rupees 60,000 per annum in cash, the net annual value of the pro- 
perty bequeathed to them. 