

Raja Bijai Sen was entrusted with the administration of the State in 
1866, but its affairs soon fell into such disorder that it was found necessary 
to address a severe warning to the Raja and to appoint a British officer as 
Councillor. Under his advice reforms were carried out, and the administra- 
tion having been put on a satisfactory footing, he was withdrawn in 1873, 


Part I Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States— Mandi. 165 


In-consequence of the loss of revenue produced by the introduction into 
British territory of untaxed salt from the Mandi mines, an arrangement was 
made with the Raja in 1870, by which the price of salt at the Mandi mines was 
doubled, and the increase made over to the British Government as compensa- 
tion for the loss of revenue. A customs establishment for registering the sale 
and destination of the salt was stationed at the mines. This arrangement was 
modified in 1875, and the establishment withdrawn, the Raja agreeing tc pay 
an annual sum of Rupees 50,000, to keep up an efficient registering establish- 
ment, and not to lower the existing price of Mandi salt without the consent of 
the British Government, 

These arrangements have been modified more than once at the instance of 
the Raja, but at the close of the year 1883-84 the procedure was this: The 
salt was sold at the mines at a fixed price of 10 annas per maund, and a duty 
of similar amount was levied upon it. The whole of the pri¢e and one-third 
of the duty were received by the Raja, while two-thirds of the duty were 
credited to the British Government. 

From the commencement of the year 1884 a further modification in the 
system was introduced. By the existing arrangement, which is intended 
to be permanent, the duty has been reduced to 6 annas per maund, and for 
the future this duty is to vary as the duty on salt in British India may vary, 
in the proportion of 1 to 5, that is, whenever the duty in British India is 
raised or lowered by 24 annas, that on Mandi salt will rise or fall by 4 an 
anna ; it being also a condition that the price, 10 annas per maund, is not to 
be reduced without the previous sanction of the British Government. 


The right of adoption was conferred on the Raja by Sanad (No. 
XXXIX). 

On the Ist of January 1885 the Raja leased to the British Government 
the right to collect drift and waif timber on the River Beas in Mandi territory 
for a period of five years on a payment of Rupees 500 per annum, and this 
lease is about (1892) to be renewed for a further period of five years. 

A Telegraph line has been constructed between Palampur in the Kangra 
district and the Raja’s capital. 

The area of Mandi is 1,131 square miles ; its population, according to the 
census of 1891, is 166,923 ; and its revenue Rupees 4,06,075. The State pays a 
tribute of Rupees 1,00,000. The Raja has (1891) a military force of 20 cavalry 
and 169 infantry, including gunners, with 5 serviceable and 11 other guns, 
He receives a salute of eleven guns. 


