retainers. 
’ 4th.—He shall, on requisition, supply begarees from his Ilaqua for the 
construction of roads, and execate orders of the British authorities with zeal 


and alacrity. 
Dated 20th December 1815, corresponding with 6th Poos 1872 Sumbut. 


No. LXXVIIL 


TRANSLATION of a SuNNUD granting THaKoorarE DuRKorTEE to 
Rana Sures Ram under the seal and signature of Caprarn 


Rozsert Ross—1815. 
Dated 10th Ughan 1872 Sumbut. 


Whereas all the Ranas of the hill country and its neighbourhood are under’ 
the rule of the British Government, and also the Thakoor of Durkotee is 
subject thereto, Captain Ross directs that Rana Sutes Ram of Durkotee shall 
always be under the control of ‘the British Govérnment, and shall ndt place 
himself under the authority of any other power. Other Ranas shall have no 
concern with Durkotee, and shall not dispute in any wise the right of the said 


Rana Sutes. 


Part I Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Kapurthaia. 161 


V.—TRANS-SUTLEJ STATES. 


From Reports by the Punjab Government and Original Papers in the Foreign 
Office. 


1, KAPURTHALA. 


The Chief of Kapurthala at one time held possessions both in the Cis and 
Trans-Sutlej, and also in the Bari Doab. The scattered possessions in the Bari 
Doab were gained by the sword, and were the first acquisitions made by Sardar 
Jassa Singh, the founder of the family. In them lies the village of Ablu, 
whence the family spring, and from which the style of Ahluwalia is derived, 
The Trans-Sutlej estates were also acquired by conquest, and from the chief 
city therein, Kapurthala, the family derives its general designation. Of the 
Cis-Sutlej possessions some were conquered and some were granted by Maha- 
raja Ranjit Singh, prior to September 1808. The total value of the Cis-Sutlej 
possessions was estimated at Rupees 5,65,000. 

By the treaty of the 25th April 1809 the Sardar of Kapurthala was 
pledged to furnish supplies to British troops moving through or cantoned in 
his Cis-Sutlej territory ; and by article 5 of the Declaration of the 6th May 
1809 he was bound to join the British standard with his followers during 
war. 


In 1826 the Sardar, Fateh Singh, fled to the Cis-Sutle] States for the pro- 
tection of the British Government against the aggressions of Ranjit Singh- 
and protection was accorded, It was declared that the Ahluwalia Chief was 
under British protection in respect to his ancestral possessions east of the Sut- 
lej, but dependent on Lahore for places conferred by the Lahore Government 
prior to September 1808, v2s., Bassi, Naraingarh, and Jagraon. . The protec. 
tion of the British Government, however, extended over both. 

In the first Sikh war the troops of Kapurthala fought against the British 
at Aliwal, and in consequence of these hostilities and of the failure of the Sardar 
to furnish supplies from his Cis-Sutlej estates to the British army, his Cis- 
Sutlej estates were confiscated. When the Jullunder Doab came under the 
dominion of the British Government in 1846, the Trans-Sutlej possessions of 
the Ahluwalia Sardar were maintained in ‘his independent possession, condition- 
ally on his paying to the British Government a commutation in cash of the 
service engagements by which he had previously been bound to the Govern- 
ment of Lahore. The value of the Jullunder estates was estimated at 