


Part I Punjab—T.-S. States—Kapurthala—Nos. LXXIX & LXXX. 169 


No. LX XIX. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD granting the Esrares of BounpDEE and 
BITHowLEE to RAJaAH RUNvEEER SING BABnADoor of Kur- 
POORTHULLA. 


. Dated 15th Aprit 1859, 


Whereas it appears from the report of the Chief Commissioner of Oudh 
that during the disturbances Rajah Rundheer Sing Bahadoor Ahloowalla, 
from loyalty to the British Government, came in person to Lucknow at the 
head of his troops and rendered valuable service: asa mark of satisfaction, 
l hereby confer upon Rajah Rundheer Sing Bahadoor the zemindaree of 
Boundee and Bithowlee at half revenue in istumraree tenure, on the condition 
that in time of difficulty and danger the Rajah shall render military and 
political service. It is understood that this grant confers on the Rajah only 
the rights enjoyed by the former proprietors of the above zemindaree, and 
nothing more. 


A khillut of the value of Rupees 10,000 (ten thousand Rupees) is 
bestowed upon tne Rajah. 


No. LXXX. 


To Furzcnp Dizpund RaseKoon Ivengap Ragan RaseeaNn 
RagaH KUNDHEER Sina Bawapoor, of KuproorrHvULua. 
—1862. 


Her Majesty being desirous that the Governments of the several Princes 
and Chiefs of India who now govern their own territories should be perpeta- 
ated, and that the representation and dignity of their Houses should be conti- 
nued, I hereby, in fulfilment of this desire, convey to you the assurance that, 
on failure of natural heirs, the adoption by yourself and future Rulers of your 
State of a successor, according to Hindoo Law and to the customs of your 
race, will be recognized and confirmed. 


‘Be assured that nothing shall disturb the Engagement thus made to you 
80 long as your House is loyal to the Crown and faithful to the conditions 
of the Treaties, Grants, or Engagements which record its obligations to the 
British Government. 


5th March 1862, (Sd.)_ CANNING. 
Zz 


170 Punjab-Trans-Sutlej States —Mundi- No. LKXXI. Part 


ae 


No. LXXXI. 


TRANSLATION of a SuNNUD from the GovERNOR-GENERAL, grant- 
ing the Stare of MunpEEto Ragan BuLBexr SEIN of 


MuUNDzEE. 
Dated 24tk October 1846, 


Whereas by the Treaty concluded between the British and Sikh Govern- 
ménts, on 9th March 1846, the hill country has come into the possession of 
the Honorable Compauy ; and whereas Rajah Bulbeer Sein, Chief of Mundee, 
the highly dignified, evinced his sincere attachment and devotion to the 
British Government: the State of Mundee,' comprised within the-same 
boundaries as at the commencement of the British occupation, together with 
full administrative powers within the same, is now granted by the British 
Government to him and the heirs male of bis body by his Ranee, from ‘gene- 
ration to generation. On failure of such heirs, any other male heir who may 
be proved to the British Government to be next of kin to the Rajah, shall 
obtain the above State with administrative powers. 


Be it known to the Rajah, that the British Government shall be at 
liberty to remove any one from the Guddee of Mundee who may prove td 
be of worthless character and incapable of properly conducting the adminis- 
tration of his State, and to appoint such other nearest heir of the Rajab to 
succeed him, as may be capable of the administration of the State and entitled 
to succeed. The Rajah or any one as above described, who may succeed him, 
shall abide by the following terms entered in this Sunnud, vzz. :— 