


Ist.—The,Rajah shall pay annually into the treasury of Simla and 
Subathoo, one lakh of Company’s Rupees as nuzzuranah by two instalments, 
the first instalment on the Ist of June, corresponding with Jeth, and the 
second instalment on the Ist November, corresponding with Kartick. 

2nd.— He shall not levy tolls and duties on goods imported and exported, 
but shall consider it incumbent on him to protect bankers and traders within 
his State. 

3rd,—He shall construct roads within his territory not less than 12 feet 
in width, and keep them in repair, 

4th.—He shall pull down and level the Forts of Kumlagurh,* Anund- 
pore, &c,, and never attempt to re-build them. 


5th.—On the breaking out of disturbances, he shall, together with his 
troops and hill porters, whenever requiréd, join the British army, and be 
ready to execute whatever orders may be issued to him by the British author- 
ities, and supply provisions according to his means, 


* The condition regarding the Fort of Kumlagurh wns afterwards modified and the Rajuh 
was allowed to preserve the upper buildings of the principal height, which contain shrines and 
temples ; but the buildings on the other heights, not close to the temples, and especially the tombs, 
were to be destroyed. Not more than twonty men and six light guus for salutes were to be kept 
in tHe fort, 


Part I Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Chumbua—No. LXXXTII. 171 


6th—He shall refer to the British Courts whatever dispute may arise 
between him and any other Chief. ‘ 

7th,—In regard to the duties on the iron and salt mines, &c., situated 
in the territory of Mundee, rules shall be laid down after consultation with the 
Superintendent of the Hill States, and those rules shall not be departed from. 


Sth.—The Rajah skall not alienate any portion of the lands of the said 
territory without the knowledge aud consent of the British Government, nor 
transfer it by way of mortgage. 

9th.—He shall so puta stop to the practices of slave-dealing, suttee, 
female infanticide, and the burning or drowning of lepers, which are opposed 
to British laws, that no one shall venture in future to revive them. 


It behoves the Rajah not to encroach beyond the boundaries of his State 
on’ the territory of any other Chief, but to abide by the terms of this Sunnud 
and adopt such measures as may tend to the welfare of his people, the pros- 
perity of his country, andthe improvement of the soil, and ensure the admin- 
istration of even-handed justice to the aggrieved, the restoration to the people 
of their just rights, and the security of the roads. He shall not subject 
his people to extortion, but keep them always contented. The subjects of the 
State of Mundee shall regard the Rajah and his successors as above’ described 
to be the sole proprietor of that territory, and never refuse to pay him the 
ee due by them, but remain obedient to him, and act up to his just 
orders. 


. 


No. LXXXITI. 


TRANSLATION of a SunnupD from the GoverNoR-GENERAL, erant- 
ing the ‘Territory of CouMBA to Ragan Sreu Sine, dated 
6th April 1848. 