166 Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States— Chamba, Part I 


; 3. CHAMBA, 


This is an ancient Hindu Rajput principality, which came into the pos- 
session of the British Government in 1846, and part of which was made over 
to Maharaja Gulab Singh. 


By an agreement with the Maharaja of Kashmir in 1847, Chamba came 
aguin entirely under the British Government, and a Sanad (No. LX XXII) was 
given to the Raja, Sri Singh, assigning the Chamba territory to him and to 
his male heirs who are entitled to inherit according to the Shastras, and, on 
failure of direct issue, to the heirs of the brothers according to seniority. If 
under any of the Rajas misgovernment should exist, the Government may 
depose that Raja, and place on the gadi any other of the family. 


In 1854 the sanitarium of Dalhousie, in the Chamba territory, was made 
over to Government by the Raja, the stipulation being that Rupees 2,000 
should be remitted from the yearly tribute, which then stood at Rupees 10,000, 
until 1867.. In that year a further remission of Rupees 5,000 per annum 
was made in compensation for lands taken up for military purposes. 


A Sanad (No, XXXIX) was given tp the Raja conferring on him the 
right of adoption, In 1864 the Raja of Chamba leased (No..LXXXIII) all 
the forests in his territories to the British Government. In 1872 the above 
agreement was revised (No. LXXXIV) with a view to the better. conser- 
vancy of the forests in Chamba. The lease of 1864 expired in 1884 and has 
been renewed for a further period of 20 years, 


In 1862, at the request of the Raja, who had become deeply involved 
in debt, a British officer was appointed Superintendent with the most bene- 
ficial results to the State, the revenue having risen in eight years from Rupees 
1,20,900 to Rupees 1,738,000. It now amounts to Rupees 2,35,000. 

Raja Sri Singh died, without issue, in October 1870; and as by the 
terms of the sanad the succession, in default of legitimate heirs, devolved 
upon the eldest of the surviving brothers, Gopal Singh, half-brother of Raja 
Sri Singh, was recognised as Chief of Chamba, to the exclusion of his younger 
brother, Suchet Singh, who claimed the Chiefship on the ground of his being 
the full brother of the late Raja. 


In April 1873 Gopal Singh, finding himself incapable of governing the 
eountry, abdicated in favour of his son, Sham Singh, then a boy of eight 


Part I Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States —Suket. 167 


years of age. Suchet Singh renewed his claims to the Chiefship, but they 
were again rejected. 


The administration of Chamba was carried on during the young Raja’s 
minority by a British officer in concert with officials of the State. Sham 
Singh attained the age of 18 years in 1884 and was invested with full powers 


in October of that year. The conditions which have been attached to his in- 
vestiture are— 


(1) That the Raja shall appoint a suitable Wazir, the nominee to be ap- 
proved by the Commissioner of the Division ; 

(2) That the appointment of Superintendent be temporarily maintained, 
and that in all matters affecting the administration in which the 
Superintendent sees occasion to give the Raja authoritative advice, 
that advice shall be followed. 