


Articie 1, 


The sole control of all forests in the territory of Chumba is vested in the 
British Government, who shall appoint an officer to-be Conservator of the 
same, 
ARticLE 2, ° 


The British Government shall be at liberty to place under strict conser- 
vaney management such forest tracts as it shall from time to time select, and 
to lay down such general rules as it thinks proper for the control of all forests. 


Part I Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Chamia—No. LXXXIII. 172 


‘ARTICLE 8, 


Such exemption from these rules shall be granted, or such other arrange- 
ments shall be made as shall be necessary to prevent interference with any 
acknowledged or established rights of the inhabitants of Chumba to cut wood. 
for their own use, 


ARTICLE 4. 


No contractor or other person shall be allowed to cut timber in any of 
. the forests within the Rajah’s territories, except with the express permission 
of the Conservator, and on the rates and under the conditions fixed by him. 


ARTICLE 5. 


For every Deodar (Kelu) tree felled on the Chenab and its tributaries, 
and within the Chumba territory by authority of the Conservator, the British 
Government shall pay to the Rajah of Chumba four (4) Rupees, and on the 
Ravee and its tributaries for each Deodar (Kelu) five (5) Rupees, and for other 
trees as follows :— 


Akhrot, Walnut, three (3) Rupees per tree. 

Boorj, Birch, one Rupee eight annas (1-8) per tree. 

Susoon, Ash, and all other descriptions, including inferior sorts of pine, 
two (2) Rupees. 

The above rates shall be understood to refer to trees above six (6) feet 
in girth, measured at man’s height from the ground; for trees of a smaller 
size half rates shall be paid. 


Out of this sum one (1) Rupee per tree is tobe set aside for conservancy 
purposes, of which the following is to be considered a detail :— ; 


1.—Planting trees, fencing in young plantations, aud arboriculture 
generally. 


2.—For local daks. 


The expenditure for such conservancy to be entirely under the control of 
the Conservator, and that of the daks under the Rajah’s agency. 

3.—The balance from this fund after paying expenses as above to be 
divided evenly between the Forest Department and the Rajah, and to be 
expended af the discretion of each onthe construction and improvement of 
roads and communication generally. 

4.—That for each of the two official years, namely, 1864-65 and 1865- 
66, the Rajah will receive from the Conservator of Forests the sum of Rupees 
one thousand (1,000) in lieu of all his claims to waif timbers on the Ravee 
within his territories, and that after that period and during the currency of 
this lease he will receive five hundred (Rupees 500) per annum on this account, 
all such timber becoming from date of said lease the property of the British 
Government, : 


, 


174 Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Chamba—No. LX XXIII. Part I 


Arricie 6.- 


The accounts shall be madé up half-yearly to 30th April and 31st of 
October, and shall be rendered to the Rajah, and the payments made at the 
above-mentioned rates half-yearly in the months of May and November. 