


In order to secure to the Rajah a fixed moderate income from his forests, 
the British Government agree that a minimum payment of Rupees twenty 
thousand (20,000) per annum be fixed, and that in the event of its not cut- 
ting wood to that amount in any year, the Rajah will still receive from the 
said Government this sum as rent, and in event of the value of annual cutting 

‘being in excess of twenty thousand (Rupees 20,000) the British Government 
agree to pay amount at the rates fixed and as in this lease, 

Ruecuted this the tenth (10th) day of September 1864 (eighteen hundred 
and sixty-four), 27th Badon 1821, at Dalhousie, in presence of the undersigned. 


(Sd.) C. V, Jenxiys, Asst. Commr., 


: Offg. Supdt. of Chumba State. 
Signature of Rajah fixed in my presence. 


4 


(Sd.) Epwarp Prinsep, Settlement Commr. 
(Sd.) Grorce McAnpaew, Major, 
Depy. Luspr.-Genl. of Police. 


Certified that the word additional, and ag noted in the terms of this lease 
and in paragraph 18, having been erroneously entered in this and 13th para- 
graph of this lease,is hereby erased by me and altered as above, and in 
compliance with docket memo, No. 376!, Public Works Department, dated 
19th November 1864, Lahore. 

(Sd.) C.'V. Jenkins, dsst. Commr., 
Offg. Supdt. of Chumba, 
CuumBa, 
November 22nd, 1864, ; 


No. LXXXIV. 


REVISED AGREEMENT for the lease of the CHAMBA ForESts—1872. 


Whereas. by the terms of an agreement bearing date at Dalhousie 
the tenth day of September 1564, His Highness the Kaja of Chamba, having 


\ . 
176 Punjab—Trans-Sutloj States - Chamba—No. LEXXIV. Part I 


requested the aid of the British Government in the management of his 
forests, has, for that purpose, leased the said forests to the British Govern- 
ment ; and whereas certain additions to, and alterations in, the said agreement 
having been from time to time consented to by the parties thereto: it is 
advisable now to embody the said additions and alterations in a new form 
of agreement, and also, at the same time, to make more definite provision by 
the terms of such agreement for the proper conservancy of the forests 
aforesaid. ; 


The following articles have been agreed upon between His Highness 
the Raja of Chamba, of the one part, and Major-General Reynell George 
Taylor, C.B., C.8.1., Commissioner, at present, for the Amritsar Division of 
the Punjab, on behalf of the British Government, of the other part :—~ 


1. From and after the date of the execution of this present agreement, 
the former agreement bearing date at Dalhousie the 10th day of September 
1864, shall cease to be of force, and shall be deemed to be cancelled and 
superseded by this present agreement. 

2. The term “ Forest,” as used in these articles, shall mean and 
include— 


(a) Those tracts of country covered with trees, or from which the 
trees have been felled, which, for seven years past and upwards, have paid no 
revenue as cultivated land to the Chamba State. 


(3) Such other tracts of land, cultivated, or uncultivated, covered with 
trees or barren, as the Raja of Chamba may from time to time consent to 
give up for the purpose of consolidating or extending the area of any existing 
forest, or of forming new plantations or forests, 