


8. With the exception of the forests enumerated in Article 6, all 
forests in territories subject to His Highness the Raja of Chamba shall be 
preserved, worked, and managed according to the rules set forth in the sche- 
dule hereto annexed, and the right to the produce thereof shall vest in the 
several parties therein declared to be entitled thereto. 

Provided that the said rales shall be in force for three years from date of 
this agreement, at the end of which time the British Government may call 
for a report thereon and decide whether they shall continue as they are or be 
in any respect added to, modified, or amended. 

‘4 The Raja of Chamba agrees to grant to the British Government, 
during the currency of this agreement, all his rights in unclaimed, waif and 
wind-fall timber on the rivers. “‘ Chenab ” and “ Ravi” and their several tribu- 
taries, and in all other parts of his territories; and further to grant to the 

said Government the entire control of rivers and streams coming from and 
passing through the forests in so far as concerns the floating, management, 
or collection of timber in transit to the timber depdts. 

5. The British Government may invest all or any of the officers in 
whom, under the said rules, the control of any forest, or of timber-floating 
operations, is vested with all or any of the powers of a Magistrate as described 
in the Code of Criminal Proceedure in force in British India, to be exercised 


Part I Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Chamia—No, LX XXIV. 177 


within the Chamba territory, for the purpose of trying and punishing offences 
against the rules aforesaid. 

And the Raja of Chamba engages to render every aid required by the 
officer or officers authorized to exercise such powers for bringing to justice all 
persons charged with offences against the rules, and for enforcing the judg- 
ment awarded against them. 

6. The following forests, groves, and trees shall be excluded from the 
operation of Article 8, that is to say— 

(1) The forests known as “ Jamwar and Kajjia,” as demarcated and 
defined according to the terms of a letter from the Superintendent of the 
Chamba State to the Secretary to the Government of the Punjab in the 
Department of Public Works, No. 22, dated July 5th 1869. 

(2) Two hundred trees (200) of “Kelu”? (Cedrus deodara) around the 
temple at Kilar ; 20 of the same kind af Baira; 15 at Kothair, 60 at Bassu, 
60 at Pieura of the same kind; at Chanota also sixty of the same kind, 

_ Provided always, as regards trees mentioned in the preceding clause, 
that they shall not.be felled, but that such trees as fall by natural causes 
shall be at the disposal of the managers of the shrine or temple for which they 
are set apart for the purposes of repairing the same. 

Provided also that such excepted trees may, where necessary, be marked: 
or the area in which they stand demarcated, 

(8) All trees growing on village or other lands under cultivation, not 
‘being forest lands within the meaning of Article 2. 