


Proof of ownership. 


Cuarrer 5. 
Of the Punishment of Forest Offences. 


17. Offences in Unreserved Forests——Any person who breaks any rule 
relating to Unreserved Forests shall be liable to the jurisdiction of the Raja 
of Chamba for punishment according to law. 


18, In Reserved Forests.—Any person who breaksany rule relating to the 
“ Reserved Forests” shall be liable, on conviction before the Superintendent 
of Chamba State, or before a forest officer invested with magisterial powers 
under Article 5 of the Agreement, to fine not exceeding one hundred rupees, 
ees default of payment, to three months’ imprisonment with or without hard 
abour. 


Proviso where act in breach of rules also constitutes a serious offence.— 
Provided always that when the act which is a breach of the rules amounts to 
a serious offence, such as mischief or theft, if the case is brought before the 
Superintendent, he may try the case as for such grave offence instead of pro- 
ceeding under these rules ; and if the case is brought before a forest officer with 
powers as aforesaid, he may, instead of proceeding as for a breach of the 
rules, forward the case with written report to the Superintendent of the 
Chamba State, who may try the case and award such punishment as may be 
proper, 


184 Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Suket—No. LXXXV. Part I 


No. LXXXV. 


TRANSLATION of a SUNNUD from the GOVERNOR-GENERAL grant. 
ing the State of Sooxerr to Raga Ooager SEIN, dated 24th 
October 1846. 


Whereas by the Treaty concluded between the British and Sikh Govern- 
ments on 9th March 1846, the hill country has come into the possession of the 
Honorable Company ; and whereas Raja Ooger Sein, Chief of Sookeit, the’ 
highly dignified, evinced his sincere attachment and devotion to the British 
Government ; the State of Sookeit comprised within the same boundaries as 
at the commencement of the British occupation, together with full administra- 
tive powers within the same, is now granted by the British Government to him, 
and the heirs male of his body by his Ranee, from generation to generation. 
On failure of such heirs, any other male heir who may be proved to the British 
Government to be next of kin to the Raja shall obtain the above State, with 
administrative powers. 


Be it known to the Raja that the British Government shall be at liberty 
to remove any one from the Guddee of Sookeit who may prove to be of 
worthless character and incapable of properly conducting the administration 
of his State, and to appoint such other nearest heir of the Raja to succeed 
him as may be capable of the administration of the State and entitled to suc- 
ceed. The Raja, or any one as above described who may succeed him, shall 
abide by the followiug terms entered in this Sunnud, viz. -— 

1st-—Thé Raja shall pay annually into the treasury of Simla and Suba- 
thoo eleven thousand Company’s Rupees as nuzzuranah by two instalments ; 
the first instalment on the Ist of June, corresponding with Jeth, and the 
second instalment on the lst of November, corresponding with Kartick. 