

3. Procedure after final demarcation.—When the boundaries have been 
finally determined as aforesaid, the Forest Officer shall, if the tract is not 
already defined by natural boundaries, demarcate the same by conspicuous 
boundary marks according to the final decision aforesaid. 

Record of boundaries.—A record of the “boundaries shall be then prepared, 
accompanied by suchmaps as may be necessary. The record shall be signed 
by the Conservator of Forests, and an attested copy of it shall be sent for 
deposit to the Superintendent of the Chamba State. is 


4. After final demarcation public notice to be given.—Wherever any 
forest is reserved and finally demarcated under this rule, due notice shall be 
publicly given in the vicinity of such forest, and the inhabitants be warned 
against trespass or other infringement of the forest rules. 

5. Procedure in including waste or cultivated land for plantations, §e— 
If in any case it is desired to include in a reserved forest area any waste or 
cultivated land which is not forest within the meaning of Article 2 of the 
agreement, or to take up a plot of such land for the purpose of plantation, 
such plot shall only be included or taken up with the consent of the Superin- 
tendent of the Chamba State, and after payment of such compensation, if any, 
as he may award. After declaration of such consent andthe determination of 
compensation, if any, the plot may be included in the area of a reserved forest 
or demarcated as a separately reserved forest, as the case may be. 


6. Control of reserved forests.—Reserved forests shall be under the exclu- 
sive control of the officer appointed by the British Government to be Con- 
servator of Forests in the Punjab, and of such officers subordinate to the Con- 
servator as may be appointed by the said Government to the charge of any 
divisions of the forests. 


7. General sights to produce in reserved forests.—Except where otherwise 
expressly provided, the British Government shall have the exclusive right to 
the produce of such forests. 

8. Management of unreserved forests.—All other forests to which these 
rules apply are called “ unreserved ” forests. They will be under the manage- 
ment of the Superintendent of the Chamba State. 

9. Right to produce in unreserved forests.—Subject to the protective 
provision hereinafter contained, the unreserved forests are open to the Raja of 
Chamba for his own use for the exercise of such forest privileges as are 

allowed by His Highness, but not for the purpose of sale or merchandize. 


Part I Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Chamia—No. LXXXIV. 18] 


Carrer 2. 


Of the protection of Unreserved Forests. 


10. Conservancy of unreserved forests ; acts proktbited.—Unless expressly 
permitted by the Superintendent of the Chamba State, the following acts are 
prohibited in all unreserved forests :-— 


(a) Breaking of forest land for cultivation. 


(4) Setting fire to grass tracts in the vicinity of forests, or negligently 
permitting fire to extend thereto. 