

2nd.—He shall not levy tolls and duties on goods imported and exported, 
but shall consider it incumbent on him to protect bankers and traders within 
his State. 

3rd.—He shall construct roads within his territory not less than 12 feet in 
width, and keep them in repair. 

4th.—On the breaking out of disturbances he shall, together with his 
troops and hill porters, whenever required, join the British army, and be ready 
to execute whatever orders may be issued to him by the British authorities 
and supply provisions according to his means, an 

5ih.—He shall refer to the British Courts whatever dispute may arise 
between him and any other chief. 

6th.—The Rajah shall not alienate any portion of the lands of the said 
territory without the knowledge and consent of the British Government, nor 
transfer it by way of mortgage. 

7tk.—He shall so put a stop to the practices of slave-dealing, suttee, 
female infanticide, and the burning or drowning of lepers, which are opposed 
to British laws, that no one shall venture in future to revive them. 


Part I Punjab—Trans-Sutlej Jaigirdars—No. LXXXVI. 185 


It behoves the Raja not to encroach beyond the boundaries of his 
State on the territory of any other Chief, but to abide by the terms of this 
Sunnud, and adopt such measures as may tend to the welfare of his people, the 
prosperity of his country, and the improvement of the soil, and ensure the 
administration of even-handed justice to the aggrieved, the restoration to the 
people of their just rights,and the security of the roads. He shall not 
subject his people to extortion, but keep them always contented. The subjects 
of the State of Sookeit shall regard the Raja and his successors as above 
described to be the sole proprietor of that territory, and never refuse to pay 
him the revenue due by them, but remain obedient to him and act up to his 
just orders. 


No. LXXXVI. 


Cory of Sunnup granted to Srrpar SHAMSHERE Sine SINDHAN- 
WALLA. 


Her Majesty being desirous that the Governments of the several Princes 
and Chiefs of India who now govern their own territories should be perpetu- 
ated, and that the representation and dignity of their. Houses should be 
continued, in falfilment of this desire this Sunnud is given to you to convey 
to you the assurance that, on failure of natural heirs the British Government 
will permit'and confirm any adoption of a successor made by yourself or by 
any future Chief of your State that may be in accordance with Hindoo law 
and the customs of your race. ; 

Be assured that nothing shall disturb the Engagement thus made to you 
80 long as your House is loyal to the Crown and faithful to the conditions of 
the Treaties, Grants, or Engagements which record its obligations to the 
British Government, 


Note.—A similar Sunnud was granted to Rajah Tej Sing. 


Part I Puyj ab—Bahawalpur. 187 


VI.-BAHAWALPUR. 


From Original Papers in the Foreign Office and Reports by the Punjab 
Government. 

The rulers of Bahawalpur assumed independence during the dismember. 
meut of the Durani empire, which followed the expulsion of Shah Shuja from 
Kabul. On the rise of Ranjit Singh, the Nawab, Bahawal Khan, made 
several applications to the British Government for an engagement of protec- 
tion, These, however, were declined, although the result of the treaties of 
Lahore, whereby Ranjit Singh was confined to the right bank of the Sutlej, 
in reality effected his protection. 