


(c) Setting fire to trees, brushwood, or stumps. 


(d) Cutting out slabs, torches, etc., from the stems of standing trees, 
barking or boring for turpentine, or otherwise injuring standing trees. 


(ce) Lopping the branches of the valwable kinds of trees afterwards 
enumerated; cutting young trees of the va/uadle kinds if less than four feet 
in girth at three feet from the ground. 


(7) Selling standing trees. 


(9) Cutting the valuable kinds of trees hereafter enumerated without 
the written permission of the Superintendent of the Chamba State, or of 


some one authorized by him to grant such permission, The. valuable kinds 
of trees alluded to in the foregoing rules are— 


Kelu (C. deodara), 
Darchil (C. excelsa). 


Chil (P. longifolia) (in tracts where the Superin- 
tendent may specially order), 


Akrot, walnut (Juglans regta). 

Sunnu, ash (Fraxinus floribunda), 

Tun or dour, hill tun (Cedreda serrata). 

Chinar, plane (Platanus orientalis), 
Permission shall not be given for the felling of more than an aggregate 
number, in all the unreserved forests together, of 800 Keln trees in any 


one year, and return of Kelu trees ‘so felled shall be annually rendered by 
the Superintendent of Chamba State to the Conservator of Forests. 


Crapter 8. 


Of the Protection of “ Reserved Forests.” 


11. Conservancy of Reserved Forests.~All the prohibitions enumerated 
in Rule 10 shall (mutatis mutandis) be enforced in reserved forests, In addi- 
tion thereto, the following acts are prohibited in reserved forests :— 


(4) Traversing a forest.except on authorized or public roads and pathways. 


(:) Grazing or trespass by cattle or flocks and driving of cattle or flocks 
except on authorized or public roads and pathways, 


(4) Collecting grass, brushwood, or fodder. 


182 Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Crzamba—No. LXXXIV. Part I 


(2) Collecting fallen timber. 

(m) Collecting gums, resins, wax, honey, or other forest produce. 

(~) Kindling a fire in the forest or carrying fire except on an authoriz- 
ed road or pathway. 

(0) Carrying any implements or cutting wood or grass except on an 
authorized public road or pathway, and except it is carried in pursuance of a 
license to cut, 


And generally no forest rights or privileges of any kind shall be exercised 
in reserved tracts. 

Proviso for cases where privileges are to be allowed in Reserved Forests.— 
Provided always that, if in any case it has not been found practicable, when 
making the ‘selection of reserved forests, to leave a sufficient or conveniently 
situated area of forest as unreserved for the exercise of forest privileges, or if 
there are no sufficient grazing grounds in the vicinity, or if in any other 
special case it shall be deemed desirable, the exercise of certain forest privileges 
may be allowed in the “‘ Reserved ” Forests, 


Privileges allowed.—But in such cases the privileges to be allowed are— 
(2) Cutting wood for necessary building and agricultural purposes. 
(6) Cutting grass. 
(c) Grazing of cattle. 
(2) Fuel. 