


ARTICLE 7, 


The British Government shall manage the Chumha forests in accordance 
with the general system of forest management which may be in force for 
similar forests within the territories of the British Government, and for the 
preservation of the same shall maintain such establishments as it shall consider * 
suitable in each case. The British Government will defray all the expenses 
of these establishments connected with the conservancy of forests except as 
provided for in paragraph 5, Clauses 2 and 3. 7 


4 


4 
ARTICLE 8. 


The British Government, ‘or the contractors employed by it, will defray 
all expenses of felling and transporting the timber, and they shall be at liberty 
to dispose of it by sale or otherwise at their pleasure, subject to no other 
claim from the Rajah than the payments referred to‘in paragraph 5 of the 
present Agreement ; and it is distinctly understood that any former or custom- 
ary charge on the employés of the British Government, such as “ Dulalee,” 
&e., is now abvlished. 

ARTICLE 9. 

All timber passing down the Rivers Chenab: and Ravee across the boun~ 
dary of the Chumba territory, unless covered by a‘pass from the Conservator 
and duly marked in the manner described in the pass, shall be presumed to be 
the property of the British Government, and may be taken possession of as 
such by the Conservator or his Agents, and the onus of proving the timber to 
belong to any other person shall rest upon such person, 


AnrricLe, 10. 


The Conservator shall be authorized to exercise within the Chumba terri- 
tory the powers of a Subordinate Magistrate of the Ist Class, as described 
in Act XXV. of 1861, for the trial of offences against property, and relating to 
property marks, mischief, assaults, and contravention of such forest rules as 
may from time to time be in force in the territories under the Government of 


the Punjab. 
Articxe 11, 


The Rajah engages to render every aid required by the Conservator in 
the exercise of the above powers for apprehending offenders or supposed offend- 
ers and for enforcing the penalties awarded by him. 


ARTICLE 12. 


This agreement shall continue in force for a period of twenty (20) years 
from the Ist of May 1864, but on the expiry of that term shall be renewable 


Part I Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Chamba—No. Lxxxiv. 175 


at the pleasure of the British Government for a further period of (20) twenty 
years, and shall then be again renewable in like manner until the term of 
ninety-nine (99) years from the original date (1st May 1864) shall have 
expired. At the expiry of that period it shall be at the option of the Rajah 
to renounce the agreement or enter into a fresh one. 

Provided that any revision ‘or modification of the rates and mode of pay- 
ment described in Clauses 5, 6, and 18 that sllall be agreed to by both con- 
tracting parties may tuke placé at any time without affecting the continuance 
of the agreement or any of its provisions. 


Articis 18, 