


12, Definition of such privileges and conditions of exercise.—When any 
privileges are allowed in a reserved forest under the proviso to the last preced- 
ing rule, such privileges shall be defined by the Superintendent of Chamba in . 
concert with forest officers and recorded, and the signature of the headmen 
of the village shall be affixed to such record. 


Conditions of felling.—All trees felled under such circumstances shall be 
so pursuant to a written permit granted by the forest officer, which shall 
specify the place and other conditions of felling, and shall fix a fair and suffi- 
cient time within which such license must be exercised. Permits to fell must 
be returned to the forest officer as soon as the time mentioned therein has 
expired, or as soon as the trees have been felled, if felled before the expiry of 
the time, 

Of other privileges.—Cutting grass, grazing, and the collection of fuel to 
be practised in such portion of, the forest as the forest officers shall assign for 
the purpose. : 


18. Timber required for public works in special cases.—If in any case, in 
the execution of any public work, or in the making of any road or bridge, 
His Highness the Raja shall require timber which cannot conveniently be 
taken from an unreserved forest, the forest officer shall, if the amount be 
reasonable, and can be spared withost injury to the forest, give a written 
permit authorizing the timber to be felled in a reserved forest in a suitable 
and proper locality. 


Part I Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Chamda—No. LXXXIV. 1838 


14. Closing unnecessary footpaths 1m Reserved Forests —Whenever any 
unnecessary footpath or road passes through a reserved forest, thereby ren- 
dering its proper conservancy difficult to maintain, the forest officers may, 
with the consent of the Superintendent of Chamba, close it against traffic. 
Due notice of the closing of such road or pathway sball be publicly given in 
the vicinity. ; 

Cuartsr 4, 


Of Timber in transit. 


15, Right to timber in transit not covered by a pass.—All timber passing 
down the rivers Chenab and Ravi across the boundary of the Chamba territory, 
unless covered by a pass from the Conservator of Forests, or one of his sub- 
ordinates authorized to grant such passes, and unless marked in the manner 
described in the pass, shall be deemed to be the property of the British Govern- 
ment, and may be taken possession of by the 
Conservator of Forests or his subordinate as 
aforesaid: such timber shall not be released until the claimant proves his title 
to the satisfaction of the Conservator of Forests, or of his subordinate as 
aforesaid, and pays such expenses as may have been incurred in catching and 
keeping the timber. 

16. Removal, destruction, and defacement of logs.—No person shall, 
without the permission of the Conservator of Forests, or his subordinate, remove, 
cut up, burn, deface the marks of, or mark again, any timber whether 
stranded or floating, provided that this rule shall not interfere with the 
privilege of the villagers to take for firewood stranded pieces of timber, 
which are not, however, to be larger than one man can lift by himself. 