

(4) Certain groves in the vicinity of the town of Chamba, v7z., a grove 
of Chil trees between the River Ravi and Sao; and a grove of Shisham trees, 
about two miles from Chamba, between the river Ravi and the new road to 
Dalhousie. 

(5) All trees growing within 200 feet on either side of the public roads 
hereinafter enumerated, or in the vicinity of any spring or well. 

Provided that, when such road or spring or well passes through, or is 
situated within, a forest which is reserved under the rules hereto annexed, this 
clause shall not be held to affect such forest, but it shall remain in all respects 
‘, asa “yeserved forest” under the rules,—the British Government on their 
part engaging nof to fell trees in such forest within 200 feet of such public 
road, or in the vicinity of such spring or well, without the previous consent of 
the Superintendent of the Chamba State. 


The public roads are as follows :— 
1, Chamba to Pangi. 
2, Chamba to Dalhousie v2 Chil. 
§. Chamba to Barmour and Jurma, in British Lahoul, 
4, Kilar, in Pangi, to Padar, in Kashmir territory, 
5. Kilar, in Pangi, to Jurma, in British Lahoul. 
6. Chamba to Nurpur. QA 


‘ 


178 Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States— Chamba—-No. LXXXIV. Part I 


7. Chamba to Dharmsala. 
8. Chamba to Badrwar, in Kashmir territory. 
9. Dalhousie to Dharmsala and Nurpur. 
10. Chamba to Madhopur, at the head of the Bari Doab Canal. 
11. Chamba to Dalhousie, vid the Kujjiar Forest. 
12,, Chamba to Dalhousie, by the new level road. 
13. Chamba to Jumwar. 
14. Chamba to Sao. : 
15. Dalhousie to Danera through the Chamba territory. 
16. Chamba to Shabpur, on the Ravi. 


7. In consideration of the rights and privileges conveyed to the 
British Government by the preceding articles, the British Government agree 
to pay to His Highness the Raja of Chamba seigniorage for every tree felled 
for the use of the British Government at the following rates :-— 


Kelu (Cedrus deodara), if felled on the Chenab 


and its tributaries : . ; ~ Rs 4 0 «0 
Kelu (Cedrus deodara), if felled on the Ravi 

or its tributaries. . ‘ . »~» 5 0 0 
Akrot (Walnut) ‘ ‘ : ‘ ~-» & 0 O 
Burj (Birch) . . ;‘ : : ae & oe O 
Sunnoon (Ash) * é i F - » 2 8 0 
All other trees (including all conifers except 


Ko} 


Kelu) ‘ : : : ; 2 0 0 

Provided always that, if the number of trees felled by the British Govern- 
‘ment in any one year is not sufficient to make the seigniorage thereon amount 
to the sum of twenty thousand rupees, the seigniorage payable in such year 
to the Raja shall be twenty thousand rupees and not less, 

And, in consideration of the right to waif and windfall conveyed by 
Article 4, the British Government further agree to pay to the Raja the 
sum of one thousand rupees annually. 

8. One-fourth part of all sums paid to the Raja in respect of trees 
felled under Article 7 shall be set aside and devoted to the following 
special purposes, that is to say :— 

Twenty rupees per centum of the said fourth part shall be for the Raja 
of Chamba to expend upon local postage service ; thirty rupees per centum 
of the said fourth part shall be for the Raja of Chamba to spend upon 
making and repairing roads and bridges; fifty rupees per centum of the said 
fourth part shall be returned to the British Government to be expended on 
the planting, restoration and conservancy of forests. 