

9. The accounts shall be made up half-yearly to the 31st of March 
and the 80th of September, and shall be rendered to His Highness the Raja 
of Chamba, and the payments agreed upon in Article 7 shall be made 


Ad 93 


Part I Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Chamia—No. LXXXIV. 179 


half-yearly in the months of April and October, on or before the 5th day of 
the month. ; 

10. No fees or other payments except those agreed upon in Article 7 
shall be demanded or be payable by the British Government or its servants on 
account of any forest produce. Provided that nothing in this clause shall be 
held to prevent the levy of tolls at bridges and ferries, or roads, lawfully 
payable to the Chamba State. 

11. Except as provided by Article 8, the whole cost of conserving 
the forests which are “reserved” under the rules, together with all costs of 
felling and transporting timber for the use of the British Government and of 
maintaining the necessary establishments in such forests, shall be borne by 
the British Government. 

12. This agreement shall continue in force for a term of 20 years, 
commencing from the first day of May 1864. 

On the expiry of this term, it shall be renewable at the pleasure of the 
British Government for a further term of 20 years, on expiry whereof it shall 
be again renewable in a like manner until the term of 99 years, counting from 
the first day of May 1864, shall have expired. 

At the expiry of such term it shall be at the option of .the Raja of 
Chamba to renew this agreement or enter into a fresh one. 


Provided always that any revision or modification of the rates and mode 
of payment described in Articles 7, 8, 9 that may be agreed to by both parties 
may be made at any time without affecting the continuance of this agreement 
or any of its provisions, 


Executed this eighth day of July 1872 at Chamba, 
In the presence of 


J. Monreomery, 
Assistant Commisstoner. 
(Sd.) Reyyett G. Tayzor, 


Commr. and Supdt., Amritsar Division, 
on behalf of the British Government. 


In the presence of Gorat Sine, 


Gorge MoAnprew, Colonel, oa Y, a 
Polstical Superintendent of Chamba, 3 FC 


Scuepuie 1. 
RULES ror CHAMBA FORESTS. 
. Cuartrer 1. 


Of the Division of Forest Land tnio Reserved and Unreserved. 


1. Classification of Forests, —There will be two classes of forests, to be 
called reserved and unreserved, The Conservator of Forests or such other 


180 Punjab—Trans-Sutlej States—Chamda—No. LXXXIV. Part = 


officer as he may authorize in that bebalf may from time to time, but subject 
always to the exceptions agreed to by the terms of the lease, declare that any 
forests shall, be “ reserved.” 

2. Selection and demarcation of reserved forests.——The Conservator of 
Forests, or other officer as aforesaid, may indicate by posts or other temporary 
marks the boundaries which, after local enquiry in concert with an official of 
the Chamba State deputed for the purpose, are in his opinion tbe true limits 
of the tract to be reserved. But it shall rest with the Superintendent of the 
Chamba State, in concert with the Conservator of Forests, to determine 
finally the boundaries of such tracts. 