

, to God, and the prosperity of the surrounding States, the following are the 
Articles of a Treaty which has been concluded through the agency of that 
Officer between the Honourable the East India Company on the one part, and 
Nawab Ruken-ud-Dowlah Hafizul-Mulk Mukhlisud Dowlah Mahomed Bhawul 
Khan Abbassee Nusret Jung Behauder, the Chief of the Dacodpootras, on 
the other, for the purpose of confirming the friendship of the two States, the 
opening of the trade by the above-mentioned rivers and regulating the manner 
in which the arrangements connected with it are to be carried into effect :— 


Articte 1. 

There shall be eternal friendship and alliance between the Honorable 
the East India Company and Nawab Mahomed Bhawul Khan, his heirs and 
successors. 

ARtTicLE 2, 

The Honorable the East India Company engage never to interfere with 

the hereditary or other possessions of the .Bhawulpore Government. 


ARTICLE 3. 


As regards the internal administration of his Government and the exer- 
cise of his sovereign rights over his subjects, the Nawab shall be entirely 
independent as heretofore. 

ARTICLE 4, 

The Officer who may be appointed on the part of the’ British Govern. 
ment to reside in the Bhawulpore State, shall, in conformity with the preced- 
ing Article, abstain from all interference with the Nawab’s Government, and 
respect the preservation of the friendly relations of the two contracting 
parties. , 

ARTICLE 5, 


The Honourable the East India Company having requested the use of the 
rivers Indus and Sutlej, and the roads of Bhawulpore for the merchants of 
8 


192 Punjab—Behkawalpur—No. LXXXVII. Part B 


Hindostan, etc., the Government of Bhawulpore agrees to grant the same, 
through its own boundaries, if the persons aforesaid be provided with passports. 


ARTICLE 6. 


The Government of Bhawulpore engages to fix, in concert with the 
British Government, certain proper and moderate duties to be levied on mer- 
chandize proceeding by the aforesaid route, and never to increase or diminish 
the same, except with the consent of both parties. 


ARticiE 7. 


It is further agreed that the tariff or table of duties, fixed as above, shall 
be published for general information, and the Custom-house officers and 
farmers of the revenues of the Bhawulpore Government will be specially 
directed not to detain the passing trade, after having collected the duties, 
on pretence of waiting for fresh orders from their Government, or any other 
pretext. 

Artioue 8, 


The tariff which is to be established for the line of navigation in question 
is intended to apply exclusively to ,the passage of merchandize by that route, 
and not to interfere with the transit duties levied on goods proceeding from 
one bank of the river to the other, or with the established chokies inland. 


These will remain as heretofore. 
ARTICLE 9. 


Merchants frequenting the said route, while within the limits of the 
Nawab’s Government, are required to show a due regard to his authority, 
as is done by merchants generally, and not to commit any acts offensive to: 
the civil and religious institutions of the country. 