


190 Punjab—Bchawalpur. Part I 


assumed, a plot for the elevation of Jafar Khan to the masnad was discovered, 
and at the request of the Darbar he was removed to Lahore as a State pri- 
soner. An attempt was made in 1867 by Muhammad Nizam Khan, the former 
minister of Bahawalpur, to excite disaffection among the soldiery, and he was 
therefore removed from Bahawalpur and not permitted to return. The country 
has not since been disturbed by political troubles. 

In 1872 the Nawab ceded lands in perpetuity for railway purposes to- 
géther with full proprietary and sovereign rights therein (No. XCV). 

The present Nawab, Sadik Muhammad Khan, attained the age of 18 
years in November 1879 and was then invested with full powers over his 
State, the British Agency in Bahawalpur being abolished ; but the Council of 
experienced officials who had been associated with the Political Agent, and 
latterly with the Nawab himself, in the conduct of affairs, was declared, as a 
special case, to be irremovable, except with the consent of the Punjab Govern” 
ment, until the Chief completed his twenty-first year. 

In 1877 the Bahawalpur State abolished customs duties on salt and other 
articles, and suppressed the local manufacture of salt in its territory, and the 
British Government agreed to pay Rupees 80,000 per annum to the State as 
compensation for the loss incurred. An Agreement to this effect (No. XCVI) 
was concluded in 1879. 

On the outbreak of the war in Afghanistan in 1878, the Nawab placed 
a military contingent at the disposal of the British Government, and the troops 
were employed on the frontier, 

The Nawab was created a Knight Grand Commander of the Most Exalted 
Order of the Star of India on the 9th November 1880, 

The Chief receives a salute of 17 guns. 

The territory of Bahawalpur, exclusive of the desert portion, is a narrow 
strip of country of an average width of eight miles, extending for 300 miles 
along the left banks of the Sutlej, Chenab, and Indus successively. The 
population by the census of 1891 is 650,042. The prosperity of the 
country under British management is evinced by its revenue having increased 
from less than ten lakhs in 1866 to twenty lakhs in 1875. The present 
revenue is estimated at about sixteen lakhs, The military force of the State, 
as now re-organised, consists (1891) of 455 cavalry and 1,414 infantry, includ. 
ing gunners, with 10 serviceable and 5 other guns, Of these, 150 cavalry 
and 300 infantry have been placed by the Nawab at the disposal of Govern 
ment for Imperial service, 


Part I Punjab—Bahkawalpur-No. LXXXVII. 191 


No. LXXXVII. 


TREATY concluded between the HonouRaBLe the East Inpra 
Company and Nawas Buawut Kaan, the Ruter of BHa- 
WULPORE, dated the 2nd of February 1833. 


By the blessing of God the friendly connection betweew the Honorable 
the East India Company and the State of Bhawulpore, which commenced on 
the occasion of the Honourable Mr, Elphinstone’s visit to Cabul in 1808-9, 
has continued uninterrupted to the present time; and now that Captain C. M. 
Wade, Political Agent at Loodianah, has arrived at Bhawulpore on the part 
of the Right Honorable Lord W. C. Bentinck, ¢.c.B. and 6.c.u., the Gov- 
ernor-General of British India, in order to improve these amicable relations 
and concert the opening of the navigation of the rivers Indus and Sutlej, 
with a view to promote the general interests of commerce, which is pleasing 