


ArticteE 10. 


The proportion of duties to which the Nawab may be entitled shall be 
collected by his officers at the appointed places, 


Artiote 11, 


The officers who are to be entrusted with the examination of the goods 
and collection of the duties on the part of the Bhawulpore Government shall 
be stationed opposite to Mithenkote and Hureekee, At no other place but 
those two shall boats in transit on the river be liable to examination or 
stoppage. 

ARTICLE 12. 


When the persons in charge of boats stop of their own accord to take 
in or give out cargo, the goods wil) be liable to the local transit duty of the 
Bhawulpore Government previously to their being embarked and subsequently 
to their being landed, as provided in Article 8, 


g 
Part I Punjab—Behkawalpyr-No. LXXXVIII. 193 


ARTICLE 18. 


The Superintendent stationed opposite to Mithenkote having examined 
the cargo, will levy the established duty and gravt a passport with a written 
account of the cargo and freight; on the arrival of the boat at Hureekee, 
the Superintendent at that station will compare the passport with the cargo, 
and whatever goods are found in excess will be liable to the payment of the 
established duty, while the rest, having already paid duty at Mithenkote, will 
pass on free, 


Articis 14, 


The same regulation shall be in force for merchandize coming from Huree- 
kee towards Sindh. 


ARTICLE 15, 


With regard to the safety of merchants who may frequent this route 
the Nawab’s officers will afford them every protection in their power, and 
wlierever merchants may happen to halt for the night, it will be incumbent 
on them to show their passport to the thanadar or other officers in authority 
at the place, and demand their protection, 


’ Arriciz 16. ; 


The Articles of the present Treaty shall, in all respects, whether relating 
to the internal goverament of the Nawab’s country or to commerce, be 
mutually observed, and form an everlasting bond of friendship between the 
two States. 


Dated at Bhawulpore, the 22nd of February 1833. 


Company’s 


Seal. (Sd.) W. C. Bentinck. 


Ratified by the Governor-General in Council on the 18th Septem- 
ber 1838, 


No. LXXXVITI. 


ARTICLES of a SUPPLEMENTARY TREATY between the HonoraBie 
East Inpra Company and the GovERNMENT of BHAWULPORE. 


Whereas in the 6th Article of the Treaty concluded between the Honor- 
able the East India Company and the Bhawulpore Government, dated the 
22nd of February 18338, it was stipulated that a moderate scale of duties 
should be fixed by thé two Governments in concert, to be levied on all 


20 


194 Punjeb—Bekawalpur—No, LXXXVIII. Part I 


merchandize in transit up and down the rivers Indus and Sutlej, the said 
Governments, being -now of opinion that, owing to the inexperience of the 
people of these countries in such matters, the mode of levying duties then 
proposed (viz., on the value and quantity of goods) could not fail to give rise 
to mutual misunderstandings and reclamations, have, with a view to prevent 
these results, determined to substitute a toll which shall be levied on all boats 
with whatever merchandize laden: the following Articles have therefore been 
adoptéd ‘as supplementary to the former Treaty, and in confurmity with them 
each Government engages that the toll shall be levied, and its amount neither 
be increased nor diminished, except with the consent of both parties :— 