

5. Mahommed Sadik Khan agrees to give up all claim to take away any 
persons connected with him, except his wives and female servants, to the 
number of 10 persons. 


6. Mahommed Sadik Khan agrees and consents never to sue the ruler of 
Bhawulpore in any Court of the British Government either here or in Eng- 
land, on account of any claim on: the Government of Bhawulpore; and he will 
never at any time institute any action or complaint against the ruler. His 
claims ‘are void and unworthy of a hearing in accordance with this Agreement. 


7. Mahommed Sadik Khan freely allows that he has no further claims 
to any property in the State of Bhawulpore beyond the allowance made him 
for retinue, jewels, etc., and beyond the sum of Rs, 1,600 as his personal 
allowance, the half of which sum is Rs. 800. 


8. The State of Bhawulpore agrees to pay, through British Officers, into 
the Mooltan treasury, every’ month, for the life of Mahommed Sadik Khan, 
monthly allowances, besides such particular expenses as may be absolutely 
necessary, but nothing else besides. After the death of Mahommed Sadik 
Khan, the half of his monthly allowance (of Rs. 1,600) will be paid to his 
heirs. 

9. The British Government provides and guarantees that the conditions 
above-mentioned shall be maintained by Mahommed Sadik Khan, without his 
attempting any disturbance towards Futteh Khan and towards his heir, and 


Part I Punjab—Bakawalpur—Nos. XCIV & XCV. 201 


the Nawab Mahommed Futteh Khan Bahadoor will remain seated on the 
throne of Bhawulpore with the consent of the British Government, 
(A true translation.) 
(Sd.) W. Seton-Karr, 


No, XClV. 
PrRoctaMatrion—1866. 


The Government of India having, at the earnest and repeated solicita- 
tion of His Highness the Nawab of Bhawulpore, and the leading men of the 
State, consented to interfere in the affairs of the country and administer 
them through a British officer, during the minority of the present Chief, the 
Hon’ble the Lieutenant-Governor is pleased, with the approval of the Right 
Honorable the Governor General in Council, to appoint W. Ford, Esquire, 
C.8.1., Commissioner of the Multan Division, to be Political Agent and 
Superintendent of Bhawulpore, with effect from the 20th July. 

By order, ete., 

The 3rd August 1866. (Sd.) T. H. 'Tsxornton, 


Secy. to Govt., Punjab. 


, No. XCV. 


TRANSLATION of a letter signed by Cartain L. H. Grey,’ 
Orricratine PontricaL AcENnt and SUPERINTENDENT, and 
Tas Manomep Kaan, Councritor, CommanverR of the 
Forces, and Jurru Muon,:Scs-Councriuor, of the’ Bua- 
WULPooR Stats, and bearing the Seal of the NawaB Manom- 
ED SADIK KHAN, addressed to the Secretary to the Gov- 
ERNMENT, PUNJAB—1872. 


In reply to your letter No. 878, dated 5th December 1871, it is written 
that it is necessary to make over to the British Government the lands required 
for ‘the: railway in the territory of this State, together with proprietary and 
sovereign rights therein, in accordance with the writing of His Excellency the 
Viceroy and Governor General of India, They are conveyed to the British 
Government in perpetuity by free-will on part of this State, together with 
complete criminal and revenue atid other jurisdiction over the limits of the 