


A boat above 250 maunds, and not exceeding 500 maunds =. 20) 
A boat above 500 maunds . . . . < ~ 40 


ARTICLE 4, 
Nos. 1, 2, or 3 to be written in large letters on the boat, to show the. 
class to which each boat belongs, : 


Dated 5th August 1840, corresponding with 5th Jummad-oos-sanee 1256 
Hegira. 


(True translation.) 
(Sd.) Gzorer Crerk, 
_ Agent, Governor-General. 


Sanctioned by the Governor-General of India in Council on the 31st™ 
August 1640, : 


No. XCI. 


AGREEMENT regarding’ the levy of DUTIES on MERCHANDIZE in 
transit through the BuawuvLPoor State (excepting the mer- 
chants and mercantile firms, the proper subjects of the 
Bhawulpoor State). The following Articles have been agreed 


to between the British and the Bhawulpoor Governments.— 
1843 :— 


First.—On boats freighted with merchandize going up or down the river 


through the Bhawulpoor Country, the duties shall be only one-half of the 
present fixed rates, 


Second,—On merchandize passing in any: direction by land, no other 
duties shall be levied than the following, viz, :— 


Rs. a. P- 
On a hackery Jaden with merchandize . é u . 200 
On a camel ditto ditto > rae 


2 100 and 
On a mule, pony, bullock or an ass laden with merchandize » 0 8 0 


198 Punjab—Bahkawalpur—No. XCII. Part I 


Third.—Any merchant having with him a passport or “rowannah,” 
according to the form annexed to this Agreement, shall pass safe, unmolested, 
and without search by the local officers on the road, 

Fourth.—I£ any merchant buy or sell the merchandize at any place or 
town on the road, he will have to pay there the usual local duties. 

Fifth.—As there exist no pukha wells and caravanseraies for the use of 
travellers on the road from Bhawulpore to Sirsa, the Bhawulpore Government 
will, throughout its jurisdiction, at every stage, prepare pukha wells and cara- 
vanseraies for the comfort of travellers, as well as. a road along that route, 
and keep it in order by taking constant care to keep it in repair. 

Siath.—This agreement has been drawn up in accordance with the friend- 
ship subsisting between the two Governments, and in order that merchants 
may satisfactorily, and in true confidence, engage in the trade. 


Dated 15th Shaban, 1269 Hegira, corresponding with 11th Sentember' 
1843 A. D, 


Seal of the ( True translation.) 


Nawab. (Sd.) R. N. C. Hamiron, | 


_ Notified in the Calcutia Gazette by Order of the Governor-General of 
Tndia in Oouncil on the 28th October 1843. 


No. XCIT. 


Treaty between the Honorasie the Eneuisa East INbIA 
Company and Nawas Baawut Kxan Bawapoor, the 
Nawas of Boawutrors, concluded by Lizutenant MACKE- 
son on the part of the Honorabiz Company, in virtue of 
full powers granted by the Ricut HonoraBLe GEoxGE 
Lorp AucKLaNnD, G.C.B., GovVERNOR-GENERAL of INDIA, and 
by Moonsnez CHowxkaS Rat on the part of the NawaB 
Buawvt Kuan BaHADoor, according to full powers given 
by the Nawas—1838. 


Articte ). 


There shall be perpetual friendship, alliance, and unity of interests 
between the Honorable Company and Nawab Bhawul Khan Bahadoor and his 