


The first Treaty with Bahawalpur was that of 1833 (No. LXXXVII), 
which was negotiated at the same time as the treaty with Ranjit Singh for 
regulating traffic on the Indus, It secured the independence of the Nawab 
within his own territories, and opened the traffic on the Indus and Sutlej, at a 
fixed tariff to be levied at Mithankot and Hariki. In 1835 a toll on boats was 
by Treaty (No. LXXXVIII) substituted for a tariff; in 1838 the schedule of 
tolls was revised (No. LXX XIX); and again in 1840 (No. XC); and in 1848 
the tolls were by Agreement (No. XCI) reduced one-half, and a scale of duties 
was fixed on merchandise in transit through Bahawalpur by land. In 1847 
the Nawab, at the instance of the Resident at Lahore, remitted all duties on 
boats passing through his territory and refused to take any compensation. 
In 1855, when the Sind postal authorities proposed to establish a camel train 
through Bahawalpur, the Nawab reduced the duty on goods passing by the 
land route, and shortly afterwards he consented to revise the ferry rates on the 
Sutlej, which were formerly a customs duty, and to reduce them to what , 
ought to be remuneration for the labour of crossing passengers and goods over 
the river, 


When arrangements were made in 1838 for the restoration of Shah Shuja, 
a Treaty (No. XCII) was concluded with the Nawab, by which he placed 
himself under the supremacy of, and bound himself to act in subordinate co- 
operation with, the British Government, receiving its ‘protection and being 
recognised as the absolute ruler of his country. During the Afghan war the 
Nawab rendered assistance, both in facilitating the passage of troops and fur- 
nishing supplies, for which he was rewarded by the grant of the districts of 
Sabzalkot and Bhaung Barra, 


188 Punjab— Bahawalpur, Part I 


Tn carrying out the provisions of Act XIV of 1843, it became desirable 
to extend the British customs line as far as the Sutlej; and for this purpose, 
in 1844, the Nawab made over in free gift the strip of land required. 

In 1847-48 Bahawal Khan, the Nawab, co-operated heartily in the opera- 
tions against Multan, and was rewarded by the grant of a life pension of a 
lakh of rupees per annum, commencing from the date of our assuming the 
government of the Punjab. 

in 1850 the Nawab proposed to supersede his eldest son, Muhammad 
Fateh Khan, and to appoint his third son, Saadat Khan, to be his heir. The 
Governor-General decided that the Government of India was not called upon 
to interfere in any way with the selection of a successor by His Highness, 
When Bahawal Khan died the heir-select succeeded him, but he was deposed 
by the eldest son with the aid of the Daudputras. In his difficulties the Nawab 
solicited the aid of the British Government, but the Governor-General de- 
cided that, according to the treaties with Bahawalpur, the British Govern- 
ment was bound to support the Chief against his external enemies, but was 
not bound to aid him against intestine commotions. The victorious brother 
having accepted the treaties existing between the British Government and 
the Bahawalpur State, was recognised as Chief of Bahawalpur, and the deposed 
Nawab, through the mediation of the British Government, obtained asylum 
in British territory, and was assigned a cash allowance of Rupees 1,600 per 
mensem from the Bahawalpur Government, the claim to which principality 
he relinquished for ever on the part of himself and his heirs. The Agreement 
(No. XCIIT) then executed was guaranteed by the British Government. 