


Articte 1, ; 

A toll of 570 Rupees shall be levied on all boats laden with merchandize 
in trausit on the rivers Indus and Sutlej, between the sea and Rooper, with- 
out reference to their size or to the weight or value of their cargo; the above 
toll to be divided among the different States in proportion to the extent of 
territory which they possess on the banks of these rivers. 


. 


ARTICLE 2, 


The portion of the above toll appertaining to the Bhawulpore State, and 
amounting to Rupees 106-12-244, shall be levied opposite to Mithenkote on 
boats coming from the sea towards Rooper, and in the vicinity of Hureekee 
Petten on boats going from Rooper towards the sea, and at no other place. 


a 


. 


' ARTICLE 8, 


In order to facilitate the realization of the toll due to the different 
States, as well as for the speedy and satisfactory adjustment of any disputes 
which may arise connected with the safety of the navigation and the welfare 
of the trade by tke new route, a British Officer will reside near Mithenkote, 
and a Native Agent on the part of the British Government in the vicinity of 
Hureekee Petten. ‘These officers will be subject to the orders of the British 
Agent at Loodianah ; and the Agents who may be appointed to. reside at 
those ‘places on the pdrt of the other States concerned in the navigation will 
co-operate with them in the execution of their duties. : 


ARTICLE 4, 


The British Government binds itself that the British Officer, who may 
reside near Mithenkote, shall not engage in trade, and (in conformity with 
the 4th Article of the former Treaty) that he shall not interfere in any way 
with the internal administration of the Bhawulpore Government. 


ARTICLE 5, 


In order to guard against imposition on the part of merchants in making 
false complaints of being plundered of property which they never possessed, 
they are required, when taking out their passports, to produce an invoice of 
their cargo, which, being duly authenticated, a copy of it’ will be annexed to 
their passports. ~ ev ie 


Part I Punjab — Bahawalpur—No. LXXXTX. . 195 


Antics 6. 


Such parts of the 6th, 7th, 11th, 13th, and 14th Articles of the Treaty 
of the 22nd of February 1883, as have reference to the fixing a duty on the 
value and quantity of merchandize and to the mode of its collection, are here- 
by xescinded, and the foregoing Articles substituted in their place, agreeably 
to which and the conditions of the preamble, the toll shall be levied. 


(True copy and translation.) 


(Sd.) C, M. Wang, 
Political Agent, ele. 


Company’s (Sd.) W. C. Bentinck. 


Seal, 


Ratified by the Governor-General in Council on the 5th March 1835, 


, No, LXXXIX. 


DETAILED STATEMENT of the amount of Toll leviable in the 
Bhawulpore Territory on boats proceeding up and down 
the Rivers Sutlej and Indus—1838. 


Whereas by the Treaty of the 27th of the month of Shahban, 1250 
Hegira, agreeing with the twenty-ninth of the month of December 1834 
A.D., the Bhawulpore Government is entitled, on account of the whole extent 
of its territory, to levy at the appointed places a toll of one hundred and 
six rupees, twelve annas, and three pice, onall boats laden with merchandize 
proceeding from Rooper towards the sea, or from the sea towards Rooper, the 
same will continue in force; but as some of the boats are found not to pass 
through the whole extent of the Bhawulpore territory, but, on the contrary, 
to lay in cargoes at, and set out from, or dispose of their cargoes at, and 
return from, places on the way, it is therefore agreed that, on such boats, the 
amounts of toll to be levied shall be regulated by the relative distances of the 
places from which, after laying in a cargo, they take their departure, or from 
which, after disposing of their yoods, they return, as follows :—~ 