

1st.—On all boats laden with merchandize proceeding from be- Bee: 
yond the eastern frontier of the Bhawulpore Territory to 
Khairpur Shargia, and vice versd, the Bhawulpore Govern. 
ment is entitled to levy, both in coming and guing, on ac- 
count of river toll, the sum noted in the margin P . 68 6 13 
Ditto ditto from beyond the eastern frontier to Bhawulp»re, 
and vice vers. a me p é 2 ‘ . 6611 8 


196 Punjab—Behawalpur—No. XC. Part I 


Rs. a. p. 
On all boats laden with mercbandize proceeding from beyond - 
the eastern frontier to Chacbram, and vice versh st - 9 6 8% 
Ditto ditto from beyond the N.-E. frontier to the S.-W. 
frontier, and vice versd . 5 . 7 Sie - 10612 3 
2nd.—In the same manner on all boats laden with merchan- 
dize proceeding from beyond the S.-E. frontier to Chachram, 
and vice vers, the Bhawulpore Government is entitled to 
levy, both in coming and going, on account of river toll, the 
som noted in the margin : . . . . - 13 6 6 
In the same manner on all boats laden with merchandize pro- 
ceeding from beyond the S.-W. frontier to Bhawulpore, and 
vice versh 7 . . . . . . - 40 0 6 
Ditto ditto from beyond the S.-W. frontier to Khairpur, : 
and vice versd gw F < F ‘ : é - 6 6 
Ditto ditto from beyond the S.-W. frontier to the N.-E. 
frontier, and vice.versé . j . ss < . - 10612 3 
8rd.—On all boats laden with merchandize from the rivers of 
the Punjab that enter the channel of the Sutlej and Indus, . 
opposite the ferry of Bakyi, if they-proceed from the above 
ferry to beyond the S.-W. frontier of the Bhawulpore Terri- 
tory, and into a foreign territory, or vice versd, the Bhawal- 
pore Government is entitled to levy, on account of river toll, 
and according to the extent of its territory traversed, the 
sum noted in the margin os met a . . . 
Ditto ditto on boats proceeding from the ferry of Bakri to 
beyond the N.-E. frontier and into a foreign territory, and 
vice versa . ‘ 7 ; . 7 < - 8 1 2h 
4th.—On empty boats no duty is to be levied. ‘ . £ 
5th.—At whatever place in the Bhawulpore Territory merchants may ‘stop to lay in, 
or dispose of, cargo, agreeably to the former Treaties, they will pay the established 
duties of that place on the purchase and sale of goods. 


26 11 02 


(Sd.) F. Macxzson. 
Approved by the Governor-General of India on the 11th October 1838; 


No. XC. 


Propossp Rates for the Navieation of the Surues and the 
Inpus by MERCANTILE Boats (excepting the NawaB 
BuaawvtL Kuan’s own merchants and subjects) to be paid 
for the transit through the BuawuLPorE TerRITORY —1840. 


Articie 1, 


Grain, wood, and limestone, free, as in the Lahore Territory. 


Part I Punjab—Behawalpur—No. XCI. 197 


ARTICLE 2. 


Besides the above three things, duties to be levied on all sorts of merchan- 
dize, according to the three’sizes of boats. 


Articre 8. Rs, 


A boat not capable of containing more than 250 maunds of 
freight proceeding from Rojhan, or Kote Mithun, to the foot 
of the hills, Roopur, Loodiana, etc., or from Roopur, or 
Loodiana, to Rojhan or Kote Mithun ‘ ‘ ; 