

But within a year the ex-Chief violated his engagement. He addressed: 

the Chief Commissioner of the Punjab soliciting a re-consideration of his case, 
stated that he would never during his life renounce his claim to the Chief- 
ship, and begged permission to proceed to Bahawalpur to recover the masnad, 
In consideration of the guarantee of the British Government to cause the ob- 
servance of the agreement by both parties, the Governor-General directed the 
ex-Chief to be placed under strict surveillance. He was detained in custody 
in the fort at Lahore, and died in 1863. 

Nawab Mubammad Fateh Khan died on the 8rd October 1858, and was 
succeeded by his eldest son, Rahim Yar Khan, under the title of Bahawal 
Khan, 

- In 1863 an insurrection, caused by the tyranny and cruelty of the Nawab, 
broke out among the Daudputra Chiefs. It was suppressed, but not until 


Part I Punjab— Bahawalpur. 189 


the Nawab had put to death three of his uncles through fear of their being 
released by the rebels from their imprisonment in the fort of Derawar. For 
this atrocious crime the Nawab incurred the severe displeasure of the British 
Government, and was subsequently required to make over to the protection of 
the British authorities others among his relations who had suffered from his 
harsh treatment. Some of the rebels took refuge in British territory, where 
they remained unmolested as long as they refrained from hostilities against 
the Nawab. An attack on a Bahawalpur village was, however, organised, and 
on its failure the leaders again sought refuge in British territory, but were 
placed in confinement for abuse of the asylum formerly afforded them. The 
misgovernment of Bahawalpur continued to endanger the peace of the country, 
and a formidable insurrection took place in March 1866, which was with diffi- 
culty suppressed. On the 25th March 1866 the Nawab died suddenly, not 
- without suspicion of having been poisoned, and was succeeded by his son, 
Sadik Muhammad Khan, then a minor of four years ofage. A rival claimant 
appeared in the person of Jafar Khan, half-brother of Nawab Bahawal Khan, 
who had been kept a close prisoner during the lifetime of the late Nawab. At 
the same time the leader of the troops sent by the late Nawab to quell the in- 
surrection threw off his allegiance and marched on the capital. As the British 
Government were under no treaty obligation to interfere in the internal affairs 
of Bahawalpur, intervention was at first limited to a declaration that the 
British Government recognised the succession of the young Nawab and in- 
tended to accord him full moral support. The presence of the Native Agent 
of Government at the capital, where he had been instructed to reside in order 
to give the Nawab and his advisers the benefit of his counsel, was sufficient to 
secure the dispersion of the rebels; their leader was taken prisoner, and all 
overt resistance ceased. 


The state of affairs, however, continued to be very unsatisfactory. Many 
influential men had been alienated by the conduct of the late Nawab ; the 
army was discontented, and there was no party of sufficient influence to carry 
on the administration. Under these circumstances the Bahawalpur Darbar 
preferred a formal request that the British Government would undertake the 
administration .of the State during the minority of the Nawab. Convinced 
of the impossibility of otherwise maintaining order and security for life and 
property, Government consented, on the understanding that the British officer 
appointed should have full powers; and a Proclamation (No. XCIV) was 
issued explaining fully the reasons which had compelled the British Govern- 
ment to interfere. Shortly after the management of the country had been 