


Part I Punjab—Bahawalpur—No. XCII. 199 


heirs and successors, and the friends and enemies of one party shall be the 
friends and enemies of both parties, 


_ ARTICLE 2, 


The British Government engages to protect the Principality and Territory 
of Bhawulpore. 


Articts 38. 


Nawab Bhawul Khan, and his heirs and successors, will act in subordinate 
co-operation with the British Government, and acknowledge its supremucy, 
and will not have any connection with any other Chiefs or States, 


\ 
ARTICLE 4, 


The Nawab, and bis heirs and successors, will not enter into negociation 
with any Chief or State without the knowledge and sanction of the British 
Government, but the usual amicable correspondence with frieuds and relations 
shall continue, 


ARTIOLE 5. 


The Nawab, and his heirs and successors, will not commit aggressions on 
any one. If by accident any dispute arise with any one, the settlement of it 
shall be submitted to the arbitration and award of the British Government. 


ARTICLE 6, 


The Nawab of Bhawulpore will furnish troops at the requisition of the 
British Government according to his means. 


Articte 7, 


The Nawab, and his heirs and successors, shall be absolute rulers of their 
country, and the British jurisdiction shall not be introduced into that 
Principality. 

ARTICLE 8. 


This ‘Treaty of seven Articles having been concluded and signed and 
sealed by Lieutenant Mackeson and‘Moonshee Chowkas Rai, the ratifications 
by the Right Honorable the, Governor-General and Nawab Bhawul Khan 
Bahadoor shall be exchanged within 40 days from the present date. 


_ Done at Ahmudpore this 5th day of October A.D. 1838, corresponding 
with the 14th of Rajabul Murajeb, 1254 Hegira. 


Governor- 


General’s (Sd ) AUCKLAND 
Seal. ’ 


Ratified and confirmed by the Right Honorable the Governor-General at 
Simla, the 22nd day of October Anno Domini 1838. 


200 Punjab—Behawalpur—No. XCITI. Part I 


No. XCIII, 


, AGREEMENT EXECUTED by Manommep Saprk Kuan, Ex-CHIEeF 
, oF BHAWULPORE. 


1, Mahommed Sadik Yar alias Mahommed Sadik Khan agrees on his own 
behalf and on that of his descendants from generation to generation to give 
up all claim of right to the throne of Bhawalpore. 


2. Mahommed Sadik Khan agrees and consents to this, that neither he 
himself for the remainder of his life, nor his descendants after him, now or at 
any future time, will ever, without the permission of the Nawab Futteh Khan 
Bahadoor, put foot on the territory of Bhawulpore. 


3. Mahommed Sadik Khan agrees never at any time, without the per- 
mission of the ruler of Bhawulpore, to send letters or messages to, or to hold 
secret or open interviews with, any of the loral officers or agents of the 
Bhawulpore State, and if he acts contrary to this, he will be liable to render a 
strict account to the British Government, 


4, Mahommed Sadik Khan agrees to this, that, after once entering 
British territory, he will not, without the permission of the ruler of Bhawul- 
pore, at any time, present or future, entertain near him any servants or de- 
pendants of the Bhawulpore State, whether in the employ of, or dismissed by, 
that State. 