


Part I Punjab—North-Westera Froutier—Yusefzais. 215. 


to blockade them and burn Shahtut, Ata Muhammad Khan was permitted. 
to return to Agror in 1870, and was reinstated in the possession of his 
estates, but not of his jagir, on condition that he was to be responsible for the 
internal peace of the valley as well as for the security and protection of the 
frontier, and with a warning that any hostile or treasonable action on his part 
against the British Government, would entail his dispossession and removal. 

He died in October 1875, and was succeeded by his son, Ali Gauhar Khan, 
upon whom, in June 1887, the Viceroy conferred the title of Khan Bahadur 
as a personal distinction, at the same time granting him an annual allowance 
for life of Rupees 2,000 from the revenue of the Agror valley, 

After the return of the Khan the troops which had been stationed in 
Agror were withdrawn ; but the raids did not cease, the principal offenders be- 
ing the Akazais, After 1872 matters somewhat improved, but in April 1875 
a serious raid was committed by the Akazais and the Khan Khel clan of the 
Hasanzais on the British village of Ghanian in the Agror valley. Before 
any measures for the punishment of the tribes could be decided upon, a quarrel 
took place between the Hasanzais and Akazais, which led, mainly through the 
jnfluence of the independent Saiyids of Tilli, to the voluntary and complete 
submission, in September 1875, of the latter, who engaged to abstain from all 
opposition to Government, a promise which they did not keep. The Hasan- 
zais and their allies, the Basi Khel Chagarzais, subsequently, in December, 
came in and professed a desire (for pardon. In the meantime Shahtut 
was occupied. and the land distributed among other communities. In 1882 
the question of restoring Shahtut to the Akazais came under consideration. 
Government were willing to restore it on a tribal guarantee for good behaviour, 
The majority of the tribe were prepared to give the required engagement; but 
as a sub-section of the clan declined, the negotiations fell through for the time. 
In March 1882 Hashim Ali Khan, the nominal Chief of the Hasanzais, 
raided Kolakha, a village near Oghi, in Agror; but the tribe was not believed 
to be implicated. 

The disputes between the Khan of Agror and his cousin, Abdulla Khan, 
of Dilbori, regarding the latter’s land interests in the Agror valley, culminated 
in 1884 iu active hostility. Abdulla Khan secured the aid of the Saiyids of 
Pariavi with their Chagarzai tenants, and of a section of the Akazais. These 
tribes acting in Abdulla Khan’s behalf, committed numerous raids throughout 
the summer of 1884 on the villages of the valley. A blockade was established ; 
and finally, in September 1884, a small military force was sent against them 


216 Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Yusafeais. Part I 


while engaged in attacking the village of Ghanian, The tribes were routed 
and driven out of British territory. Petty raids continued for sonie months 
afterwards ; but finally, in October 1885, the Pariari Saiyids and the Chagarzais 
submitted, paid the fines imposed upon them, and gave hostages for future 
good conduct. 