

In the Kohat district the tract of Miranzai, a narrow valley to the west 
of Kohat, was annexed in 1851 at the earnest entreaty of the inhabitants. 
Yhe Waziri and Shirani tribes gave some annoyance on the Kohat and Bannu 
border, especially the former, who, in 1852, attacked the village of Bahadur 
Khel in order to plunder the salt mines. They were repulsed by the military 
police, and a fort was built at Bahadur Khel. Later in the year a successful 
raid was made on the Umarzai section of the Waziris for this offence. Further 
south the Bozdars in force attacked a detachment of the 4th Punjab Cavalry 
at Vidor, near Dera Ghazi Khan ; but the villagers turned 6ut and routed the 
marauders. In March 1858 it was fesolved to punish the Shiranis and Kas- 
ranis; The principal villages of these tribes were destroyed, and they received 
a salutary lesson, which had a marked effect on their future conduct, In 


. 


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier. 207 


1858 the Afridis of the ‘Kohat and Jawaki passes also gave some trouble. 
After a time they gave in, agreeing to keep the Kohat pass open for trade in 
consideration of a fixed allowance. In February 1855 the Basi Khel Afridis 
made an unprovoked attack upon an officer who was encamped in British 
territory near their settlements. They were immediately blockaded from — 
the Peshawar district, and twice punished by attacks on their villages, After 
being excluded from British territory for a year, and after being heavily 
punished in the expeditions, they submitted and made amends for their edn- 
duct. In this year the behaviour of the Michni Mohmands again led to the 
destruction of their strongholds and to the confiscation of the jagirs they had 
hitherto enjoyed in the Peshawar district. The Orakzais, on the border of 
the Kohat district, were punished for miscondact during the year; it was 
also found necessary to reduce the newly-annexed valley of Upper Miranzai 
and the Kabul Khel Waziris. 


Throughout the crisis of 1857 the behaviour of the frontier tribes was 
excellent, and numbers flocked down to take service. The wanton murder of 
Captain Mecham and raids by the Kabul Khel Waziris in 1859 led to an 
expedition into their settlements, in the course of which the clan was punish- 
ed and the murderers were hanged; shortly afterwards, in the spring of 
1860, the Mahsud Waziris were punished in consequence of a bold raid on 
the town of Tank. The British troops, repelling a resolute hight attack 
on their camp by the Mahsuds, marched through the Waziri country, and 
after some demur the Mahsuds accepted the terms offered to them. 


In the year 1868 occurred the first serious trouble on the frontier. Fiom a 
time before the annexation of the Punjab, a colony of Hindustani fanatics, the 
relics of the party of Saiyid Ahmad, the Wahabi, who held the city of Peshawar 
for a short time during the reign of Ranjit Singh, had lived at Sitana on the 
Indus river. They professed to be preparing for a holy war, and received money 
and recruits from Hindustan and Bengal. Their presence near the British 
border being objectionable they were expelled from Sitana in 1858. They 
then moved to Malka, in the Mahaban range, which flanks the north-eastern 
corner of the Peshawar district. As the peace of the border had for some 
years been disturbed by their fanatical operations, it became necessary to 
eject them from that part of the country. A force of 5,000 men advanced 
in October 1863 up the Ambela pass with the intention of reaching Malka 
by acircuitous route. A temporary check-converted what might have been 
an easy march to Malka and back into two months’ severe fighting in the 