


‘Much has also been done during the last ten years to strengthen and 
improve the border police and militia along the Peshawar and Derajat frontiers. 


The most serious events of more recent times have been the Bunerw 
disturbances, which commenced in 1884, aud were not settled till 1887; 
the expeditions against the Black Mountain tribes in 1888 and 1891; and 
the Miranzai expeditions in the Kohat district in 1891. Considerable pro- 
gress has recently Leen made towards the pacification of the Waziris and 
other tribes of the Derajat frontier in connection with, and in consequence 
of, the opening of the Goma] Pass in 1889-99. 


(I) PESHAWAR FRONTIER. 


The principal tribes with which the British Government has had dealings 
on the northern or Peshawar division of the frontier are the Swatis, Yusafzais, 
Gaduns, Mohmands, Afridis, Orakzais, Zaimukhts and Turis, each of whom 
will be noticed in the following narrative. - 


1.—SWATIS. 


The Swatis are not pure Pathans, but appear to be of Indian origin. 
They formerly possessed 'the territories extending from the western branch of 
the Hydaspes to near Jalalabad. They were gradually confined to narrower 
limits by the Afghan tribes. Retiring before the invasions of the Yusafzais, 
who wrested from them Swat and Buner, they crossed the Indus and settled 
in the tracts which they now occupy, v2z., Alahi, Nandihar, Tikri, and the 
northern ylens of the Hazara district, Kaghan, Bogarmang, Konsh, Agror, 
and the Pakli plain. This migration was led by Saiyid Jalal Babu in the 


beginning of the sixteenth century. 
2B 


210 Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Swatis. Part I 


Alahi,—Alahi is the mountainous country adjoining Kobistan, and march 
ing with Kaghan and the northern border of the Bogarmang glens. It is occu- 
pied by a clan of Swatis called Tor or Thor, who do not possess shares in the 
rest of the Swati country. Heré, asin the rest of the Swati possessions, 
the Saiyids and other religious fraternities hold about one-fourth of the district. 

In 1868, during the Black Mountain expedition, the Alahiwals attacked 
one of the survey camps. They were summoned to come in and answer for 
this, but never did so. 

In November 1874 the Alahiwals under Arsala Khan, in prosecution of a 
feud with the Kohistanis, violated British territory. Retaliatory measures were 
taken, and a blockade established. Finally, on the 24th May 1875, the 
jirga of the Alahiwals came in, apologised, and paida fine. At the same 
time they entered into a written Agreement (No. XCVII) for the mainte- 
nance of friendly relations for the future, and for the surrender of property 
stolen from British territory, Arsala Khan himself did not, however, tender 
his submission, and the agreement was never acted up to. 

In November 1878 Arsala Khan attacked Battal in the Konsh valley, car- 
tying off some Hindu men and women, British subjects. This and other raids 
committed in the succeeding month under the leadership of Khawas Khan, son 
of Abbas Khan, the freebooter, were attributed to personal influences mainly 
connected with the imprisonment of Abbas Khan (see im/ra). The Alahiwals 
were thereupon closely blockaded. In February 1879 Arsala Khan menaced: 
the border at the head of a large gathering, ‘but, being threatened by the 
Swatis of Pakli, he retired and dispersed his followers. In 1880 the Alahiwals 
gave in and surrendered the Hindus captured.at Battal. The dine imposed has 
not yet been paid, and no final settlement has been arranged, but the attitude 
of Arsala Khan, who established his authority in Alahi, was for some time 
more satisfactory. 