

Ine. Henceforth the Bhawulpoor State-will have no jurisdiction therein. 
2D 


202 Punjab—Bahawalpur—No. XCVI. Part I 


No. XCVI. 


Acreement for the security of the Salt revenue of British India, 
in the event of the abolition of the Inland Customs Line, 
and for the abolition of duties within the Bahawalpur State, 
between the British GoveRNMENT and His Hicuwess 
Sapiq Munammap Kuan Axpzasi, Nawab of Bahawalpur, 
his heirs and successors, executed on the one part by Magor 
LeoroLp Joun HeErsert Grey, C.8.1., Political Agent and 
Superintendent, Bahawalpur, under authority from, the , 
How’stE Rozertr Eyres Eeerton, C.S.1., Lieutenant-Gov- 
ernor of the Punjab, in virtue of the full powers vested in 
His Honor by the Governor-General of India in Council, 
and on the other part by Gut Munammap Kauav, maternal 
unele of His Highness the Nawab of Bahawalpur, and 
Jurtu Mutt, Maxupum GuLam Aut SHAw, and ALi 
Gonar Kuay, Ministers of the State—1879. 


The following Articles are agreed upon :— 


Arties I. 


His Highness the Nawab of Bahawalpur agrees to suppress, and abso- 
lutely prohibit and prevent, the manufacture of salt withm any part of the 
Bahawalpur State, whether overtly or under the guise of manufacturing salt- 
petre or other saline product, and to destroy and erase all existing salt-works, 
so that salt cannot there be made. 


ARTICLE 2. 


No tax, ‘toll, transit’ duties, or due of any kind whatsoever, shall be 
levied by, or with the permission or knowledge of, the Nawab of Bahawalpur, 
on salt, sugar, or any other articles, whether exported from, or imported into, 
or carried through, the Bahawalpur State. Provided that nothing in this 
Article shail be held to prohibit the levy, at the town gates, of octroi, 
choongi, or other cess or duty on the aforesaid articles, imported, for actual 
consumption therein, into towns the population of which exceeds 5,000 
inhabitants. Provided also that nothing in this Article shall be held to debar 
the Nawab of Bahawalpur from levying such duties on bhang, ganja, spirits, 
opium, or other intoxicating drug or preparation as he may consider neces- 
sary for excise purposes, 


Part I Punjab—Bakawalpur -No. XCVI. 208 


ARTICLE 3. 


The Nawab of Bahawalpur agrees to prevent the importation into, and 
consumption within, the Bahawalpur State of any salt whatever other than 
salt on which duty has been levied by the British Government. The Nawab 
of Bahawalpur agrees also, if so required by the British Government, to 
prohibit the export from his State into British territory of bhang, ganja, 
spirits, opium, or other intoxicating drug or preparation. 


ARTICLE 4, 


If any considerable stocks of salt be proved to exist within the Bahawal- 
pur State at the time when this Agreement comes into force, the Nawab of 
Bahawalpur will, if so required by the British Government, take possession 
of such stocks, and will give the owners thereof the option either of transfer- 
ring the salt to the British Government at such equitable valuation as may be 
fixed by His Highness, in concurrence with the Political Agent, or of paying 
to the said Agent such duty, not exceeding two rupees eight annas per maund 
on such salt, as the Governor-General in Council may fix. In the event of 
the owners as aforesaid accepting the latter alternative, they shall be allowed 
to, retain the salt on which duty so provided may be paid, but not otherwise. 