


Deshi.—Deshi lies on that part of the eastern face of the Black 


212 Punjab--North-Western Frontier— Yusafzais, Fart I 


Mountain which lies north of Agror. It does not actually touch the British 
frontier, 

The Deshis took part with the other Black Mountain tribes in 1868 in 
the invasion of the Agror valley, and a fine of Rupees 1,000 was exacted from 
them for their share in these disturbances. In 1876 they sentin their jirga to 
testify their good-will to the British Government. 


2.—YUSAFZAIS. 


This tribe is divided into two principal sections, called Mandan and Yusaf, 
which are descended from a common ancestor. Ineach section there are divi- 
sions and sub-divisions, till ultimately the component units of the section are 
reached in individual families. 

I. Mandan —The Mandan section inhabits both the Yusafzai plain 
within our border and independent territory beyond -it; its population may 
be estimated at 140,000 souls, of whom 30,000 are fighting men. The 
section has several main divisions, among them being the Usmanzai, Utmanzat, 
and Razar. 

The Utmanzai division of this section occupies the southern slopes of the 
Mahaban mountain on the right bank of the Indus; the clans which compose 
it are numerically weak, having only about 1,200 matchlockmen. The 
Utmanzais of Kabal and Kya gave every assistance to Sir Sydney Cotton’s 
force in his operations against the Hindustani fanatical Muhammadans of 
Sitana in 1858. Saiyid Ahmad Shah, the founder of the colony of’Sitana, 
was a native of Bareilly, and at one period of his life the companion in arme of 
the celebrated Amir Khan of Tonk. His doctrines were essentially those of 
the Wahabis. In 1824 he arrived amongst the Yusafzai tribes on the 
Peshawar border and proclaimed a religious war against the Sikhs, but was 
defeated and fled to Swat, and took refuge with Fateh Khan of Panjtar, 
Having succeeded in attaching to himself the Pathans, he was for several 
years successful in his struggles with the Barakzai Sardars, but in 1829 a 
general insurrection, produced by his oppressive exactions, took place among 
the Pathans, many of his followers were massacred, and he was compelled 
to flee to Hazara. His followers again rallied round him there, but were 
completely defeated in 1830 by a force under Sher Singh, and Saiyid 
Ahmad Shah fell in the action. A portion of his followers found their way 
to Sitana, a village belonging to Saiyid Akbar Shah, who had served ag 
a treasurer and counsellor of Saiyid Ahmad, After the annexation of 


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Yusafzais, 213 


Peshawar the Akhund of Swat prevailed on the people of that valley to 

Yeceive Saiyid Akbar Shah as their temporal ruler: he died in 1857. -Though 
the Hindustanis were known to have aided the Hasanzais in an attack made by 
them in 1852 on the territory of the Nawab of Amb,* no actual collision took 
place with them till April 1858, when, in order to punish them for an attack 
on the camp of a British officer near the border, a force of British and Native 
troops, 5,000 strong, under Sir Sydney Cotton, was despatched against them. 
The buildings at Sitana and also at Panjtar, Chinglai, and Mingal Thara, 
where the fanatics had been invited by Mukarrab Khan, son of Fateh Khan of 
Panjtar, were destroyed, and the Hindustanis were expelled from Sitana. 
The fanatics subsequently re-settled at Malka in the Amazai territory on the 
north-western slopes of Mahaban, and in the early part of 1861 occupied Suri in 
the vicinity of Sitana and resumed their former depredations on British 
territory. It therefore became necessary to take steps against them, and the 
Utmanzais were called to account for permitting them to re-settle and’to pass 
through their country when proceeding to and returning from British terri- 
tory. A blockade was instituted, and soon afterwards these clans expressed 
themselves willing to submit to any terms demanded of them. After some 
interval they agreed (No. C) to pay a fine of Rupees 1,000, to close 
their country against the Sitana fanatics and other robbers, and to cease from 
levying certain oppressive dues from traders proceeding up and down the 
Indus. 