

In 1887 the Madakhel Miyans, who live at the head of Alahi, made a 
raid on pastures on the mountains on the Bogarmang border and carried off 
cattle worth several thousand rupees. During the Black Mountain Expedition 
of 1888 Arsala Khan and the Alahi jirga were summoned to attend the 
British camp to make satisfaction for this and for the raid on Battal in 1878, 
as yet unpunished. ‘Lenient terms were offered to them; but, as Arsala Khan 
remained obdurate, a force crossed from Nandihar to Alabi by the Gorapher 
route on the Chaila range and burnt Pokal. Arsala Khan has steadily refused 
to make submission or to visit British territory, and during his life it is un- 


‘Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Suatis, 21 


likely that any really satisfactory arrangements can be made with the 
Alahiwals. 

Arsala Khan’s predominance in Alahi bas of late been challenged’ by his 
rival, Bahadur Khan of Shakargah. After desultory fighting a truce has been 
patched ip, but Arsala’s power and influence have received a serious check. 
Simultaneously his attitude towards Government has become more friendly. 
He has lately returned unharmed a Hindu child whom a ruffian of our terri- 
tory had kidnapped ; he has been told that this friendly action will be held to 
atone for his past hostility, but that Government has still demands against 
the Madakhel Miyans of Raishang for the raid of 1487 mentioned in the text. 

Nandihar.—Nandibar borders on the Hazara valley of Konsh, between 
Agror and Bogarmang. For some years prior to 1877 this frontier was infested 
by a band of outlaws under a noted freebooter, Abbas Khan. In that year the 
gang was broken up, and Abbas Khan was captured in British territory, and 
imprisoned, 

The Swatis of Nandihar belong to four sections—Khan Khel, Dodal, 
Panjghol, and Panjmirai. The leading Khan, Amir Khan of Bhatagram, is 
a Darbari of Hazara and has a jagir in the British district. 

The Nandiharis are ordinarily well-behaved, and as they occupy a fertile 
valley to which access is easy, fear keeps them friendly. In 1888 a jirga of 
the Chief Maliks entered into an Agreement (No. XCVIIT) to prevent their 
clansmen from committing offences in British territory and to surrender 
property stolen or make reparation. 

Tikri—Tikri adjoins Konsh and Agror, The inhabitants belong to two 
principal clans,—Ashtor and Malkal. 


The principal men, Ghafur Khan of ‘Kila Trand and Rahim Khan of 
Chirmang, are perpetually at feud. Deputations have come in from time to 
time and promised good behaviour, but such promises have been i]]-kept. 
For some years before 1887 men from Tikri, and the neighbouring Black 
Mountain glens, which are known as Pariari or Pharari, and are occupied by 
Saiyids and Chagarzais, had joined in raids on British territory, 

Tikri was occupied in 1888 during the Black Mountain Expedition, and 
a fine of Rupees 1,000 was levied from the chief men. Since then they have 

- given little trouble. They entered into an Agreement (No, XCIX) for the 
good behaviour of their clansmen in November 1888. 