


208 Punjab—North-Western Frontior. Part I 


difficult country at the crest of the pass. The tribes had time to collect, and 
a large vonfederacy, numbering from 15,000 to 20,000) men, was opposed to 
the troops, the conflict causing much excitement on both sides of the Peshawar 
border. By December 1863, however, all opposition was overcome ; the com- 
bination was broken up, and. Malka was destroyed. The Wahabis retired to 
a village called Palosi, higher up the Indus. 

The Mohmands took advantage of the Ambela™campaign to enter the 
Peshawar district-inZforce, led by their Khans, They were however easily 
defeated with loss. Since then they have settled down to peaceable relations 
with the British Government, which have been interrupted only by isolated 
acts of offence, the chief being the murder of Major Macdonald, Commandant 
of Fort Michni, in 1873, and an attack upon a survey party which penetrated 
into the Mohmand hills during the late Afghan war. In both cases full pun- 
ishment was inflicted upon the offending sections. 

The next four years after the Ambela campaign, from 1864 to 1868, were 
a period of almost unbroken tranquillity on the frontier. In October 1868 the 
unsettled condition of the Agror valley, on the western border of the Hazara 
district, and the hostile attitude of the neighbouring independent tribes, 
terminating in, an attack on the police post of Oghi in Agror, made it neces- 
sary to send a force for the punishment of the inhabitants of the Black Moun- 
tain range, This was effective, and met with but trifling resistance. 

From 1869 to 1877 occasional outrages were committed, and clans were 
coerced by blockades or reprisals, but the affairs were relatively unimportant,and 
they,do not need special notice, These years witnessed the first organisation 
of a frontier militia for the defence of the border. In 1876-77 the blockade 
of the Kohat pass Afridis caused some excitement. The expedition against 
the Jawakis that followed is remarkable, partly for the number of troops 
employed, but chiefly as being the first occasion on which the revolution 
effected by the breech-loader in border warfare became apparent. 


From 1877 to 1881 the frontier was abnormally disturbed, as it was 
impossible that the strained relations of the British Government with the 
Amir, Sher Ali Khan, and the war in Afghanistan, should not re-act upon 
the tribes. In 1877 a raid on the Yusafzai border by Bunerwals, insti- 
gated by Ajab Khan, a leading Khan in the Peshawar district (for which he 
was hanged), exposed the evils of the system, which bas now been abandoned, 
-of employing middlemen, residing in British territory, to conduct relations 
between British officers and the frontier tribes. The course of the Afghan 


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontior—Suwatis. 209 


war was also marked by raids on the Hazara border, attacks on the line of 
communications in Kohat, and the burning of Tank by-Mahsud Waziris. ~ 
The Hazara and Kohat tribes were punished by fines and blockades; the 
Zaimukhts of the Kohat district were coerced by an expedition; and an 
expedition in force was sent in 1881 against the Mahsud Waziris, who were 
compelled to make the reparation demanded. On the withdrawal of British 
troops from Northern Afghanistan and the Khaibar, in October 1880, the 
pass was made over to the Afridis, who engaged to keep it open, receiviig 
allowances therefor, with the aid of a corps of Jezailchis (now known as the 
Khaibar Rifles) raised from the tribe. 