


ARTICLE 5. 


The losses of salt manufacturers in the Bahawalpur State, consequent on 
the suppression of local salt-works hereinbefore provided for, having been 
considered in concert by the British and Bahawalpur Governments, the British 
Government hereby agree to pay to the Nawab of Babawalpura lump sum of 
Rupees one thousand and two hundred (Rupees |,200) as compensation to the 
said manufacturers, and the Nawab of Bahawalpur agrees to distribute the 
whole of the said sum, in consultation with the Political Agent, amongst the 
said persons in such wise as may be niost equitable. 


ARTICLE 6. 


In consideration of the due and effectual observance by the Nawab of 
Bahawalpur of all the stipulations hereinbefore provided, the British Govern- 
ment agree to pay to His Highness yearly the sum of Rupees eighty thousand 
(Rupees 80,000) in half-yearly instalments, the first instalment to be paid 
after the expiration of six months from the date on which this Agreement 
comes into torce. 


Further, the Nawab of Bahawalpur hereby engages to compensate 
equitably any of his feudatories, jaghirdars, or other subordinate right-holders 
for any losses they may sustain in consequence of the abolition of duties on 
salt and sugar heretofore rightfully levied by them. 


ArticLe 7, 


None of the stipulations set forth in this Agreement shall be modified 
or annulled without the previous consent of both the contracting parties. 


204 Punjab—Bekawalpur—No. XCVI. Part i 


ARTICLE 8. 


This Agreement is to come into force from a date to be fixed by the 


British Government. 

Signed at Bahawalpur on the thirteenth day of January A.D. one thou- 
sand eight hundred and seventy-nine, corresponding to the nineteenth day 
of Mohurrum in the year of the Hejira twelve hundred and ninety-six. 


Leorotp Joun Hersert Crey, Major, 


| | Poltl. Agent and Supdt. of the 
Bahawalpur State. 


Signed in Persian characters, 
Gut Munamap. 
Signed in Persian characters, 
| Jatt Mau. 


Signed in Persian characters, 
Gautam ALi SHAd.. 


Signed in Persian characters, 
Aut Gavuar Kuan. 


(Sd.) LYTTON, 
Viceroy and Governor General of India. 


| 


This Agreement was ratified by the Governor-General of India in Council 


at Lahore on the first day of April A.D. 1879. 
(Sd.) A, C. LYALL, 


Secy. to the Govt. of India, Foreign Dept, 


é 


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier. 205 


VIL—NORTH-WESTERN FRONTIER OF THE PUNJAB. 


From original papers in the Foreign Office, Macgregor’s Gazetteer, Paget’s 
Record of Expeditions, Administration Reports and Reports by the Punjab 
Government. 


The line of the north-western frontier of the Punjab may be taken to 
start from the head of the Khagan valley, It then passes round the north- 
western boundary of Hazaraand along the left bank of the Indus to Torbela, 
where it crosses the river and winds round the northern and north-westan 
boundary of the Peshawar valley to the Khaibar pass. Leaving the Khaibar 
pass it skirts the Afridi hills as far as Kohat, and passes round the western 
boundary of that district and along the Samana ridge overlooking the Miranzai 
valley. The frontier then passes round the Waziri hills by Bannu to the 
Gomal river, where it meets the Baluchistan Agency. To the west of such a 
liné there are numerous independent or semi-independent tribes, who have 
a total of over 180,000 fighting men. All these tribes, from Hazara to Dera 
Ismail Khan and the northern limits of the Baluchistan Agency, are, with a 
few insignificant exceptions, of Pathan origin, 