

Before describing in detail the relations subsisting between the British 
Government and the principal tribes, it will be convenient to give a short 
general sketch of border history. 

The Sikh method of administering the border tribes was of the loosest 
description. Strong forces were maintatned at the head-quarters of districts, 
round which a semblance of authority existed ; next followed a belt of country 
owning a doubtful allegiance, and paying revenue at uncertain intervals under 
compulsion ; at a further distance from the garrisons the shadowy power of 
the Sikh governors faded away till it was difficult to say whether the villages 
were independent or not; and lastly came the tribes ‘who openly asserted 
their independence, The Sikhs looked mainly to the realisation of the revenue; 
for the rest the tribes conducted matters in their own way, and retained 
their own wild laws and relations with their neighbours in the bills. Between 
the independent hill country and the settled tracts of Sikb days there inter- 
vened a kind of debateable country, the residents of which, save for the 
periodical visits of the revenue-collecting Sikh armies, were practically inde- 
pendent ; with their sufferings at the hands of the hillmen the Sikbs had no 
concern, and they were free to retaliate as they pleased on their enemies. The 


206 Punjab—North-Western Frontier. Part I 


Sikh armies rarely, if ever, penetrated so far as to inflict punishment on the 
tribes in the hills, The latter consequently fancied themselves unconquerable, 
aud considered the plains their prey. On the annexation of the. Punjab in 
1849 the margin of the settled country was pushed forward to the verge of 
the frontier line, and’ the incursions of the hillmen brought them at once into 
conflict with a Government whose resources and power they were unable to 
: realise without the palpable lessons of retaliatory expeditions. 

+ The frontier to the north was disturbed in the years 1849 to 1851 by 
Mohmand marauders along’ the border of the Peshawar district from the Swat 
to the Kabul rivers, and in the south by a sudden attack by the Kasranis 
on the town of Dera Fateh Khan, Further incursions and raids followed 
in the next two years. The Sayads of Kaghan, a remote glen of the Hazara 
district, refused to pay revenue in 1852, but speedily gave way before a show 
of force. In December 1851 Messrs, Carne and Tapp, of the Salt Depart- 
ment, were cruelly murdered by Hasanzais on the south-western border of 
Hazara, within the British boundary. A force subsequently entered the 
_ Hasanzai settlements on the Black Mountain and exacted retribution, In the 
Peshawar district the Mohmands continued to rob and plunder, led on by the 
Khan of Lalpura, who had been hostile during the occupation of Afghanistan 
in 1839, and had been deposed but had regained his position on the departure of 
the British troops in 1841. A force from Peshawar destroyed the border 
villages of the Mohmands, and forts were built at Michni and Shabkadar-to 
control them. After this the Mohmands, 6,000 strong, made an incursion into’ 
the Peshawar district, but were defeated with loss by a small detachment of 
British troops ; and they then made a temporary, peace. 