

The Amazai clan of the Utmanzai division was among the first to 
join the Hindustanis and Bunerwals in their opposition to the advance of the 
British troops under Sir Neville Chamberlain in the Ambela campaign of 
1868, the object of which was to drive the Hindustani fanatics out of Malka, 
where they had returned after the blockade of the Utmanzais and Gaduns 
in 1861. The Amazais after a show of resistance were pacified by the Buney 
Chiefs, joined with them in burning Malka, and in January 1864 entered into 
Agreements (No, CI & CII) to exclude the Hindustanis altogether from 
their limits. They can turn out about 1,500 matchlockmen. 

IL Yusaf.—The Yusaf section of the tribe inhabits the hills to the north 
of the Peshawar district, It contains 

(1) Isazai. | (2) Miaszai. . ave ; : f 

(8) Malizai. | (4) Ranizai, | (6) Akazai, several eub-divisions, numbering in all 
. about 106,000, of whom about 43,200 
are fighting men. 


‘*The Nawab of Amb holds lands on both sides of the Indus; on the right bank he has 
Amb and a gmall bit of hill country round it; in British territory cis-Indus he holds Tanawal on 


a kind of feudal tenure. He is allowed to administer this tract, about 200 square miles, =, 


, re 
“214 Punjab—North-Western Frontier— Yusafzais. Part I 


To the (1) Isazai sub-division belong the Hasanzai, Akazai, and Mada 
Khel clans; they can turn out a total of about 5,000 fighting men. These 
elans live on both sides of the Indus: those cis-Indus on the western slopes of 
.the Black Mountain ; those trans-Indus immediately opposite to it. 
In November 1851 the Hasanzais murdered Messrs, Carne and Tapp, 
‘two officers of the Customs Department. To punish this crime a force under 
‘Colonel Mackeson was sent against them in December 1852, and their villages 
and stores of grain were burnt. The councils of the tribe did not, however, 
‘come in or tender their submission. Bostan Khan, minister of the Nawab o 
Amb, who had plotted the murder, was sent a prisoner to Lahore, where 
‘he died. After this lesson the Hasanzais abstained from aggression till August 
1863, when they made a raid in force on some Tanawal villages. It was’ in- 
ended that the troops employed for the expulsion of the Hindustani fanatics 
at Malka should cross the Mahaban to the Indus and punish the Hasanzais ; 
but the plan was never executed. The clan, however, subsequently in 1864 
entered into Engagements (No. CIII), which they kept until July, 1868, when, 
in concert with the Akazais and the Chagarzais, a clan of the Malizai sub-divi- 
‘sion, they attacked a British police post at Oghi in the Agror valley. A 
‘small force under Colonel Rothney was at once despatched from Abbottabad, 
-and was joined on arrival at Oghi by a contingent under the command of the 
Nawab of Amb. The bold front shown by these troops prevented the occupa» 
tion of the Agror valley by bands of plunderers from the adjacent hills, and 
‘in the following October a force of 14,500 British and Native troops with 
26 guns, under the command of Brigadier-General Wilde, including a con- 
tingent furnished by the Maharaja of Kashmir in accordance with the provi- 
sions of the treaty of Amritsar, was despatched against the Black Mountain 
tribes. The resistance offered was trifling, and the severest punishment could 
have been inflicted on them. Their submission was, however, accepted, the 
'Akazais being informed that the village of Shahtut within the British frontier, 
which they had hitherto held as an independent village and revenue-free, 
would bein future assessed and held by them as British subjects. The attack 
‘on Oghi was traced to the instigation of Ata Muhammad Khan, Khan of 
Agror, who was for various reasons disaffected towards the British Government, 
He was consequently removed in 1868 to Lahore as a State prisoner, his jagir 
of the annual value of Rupees 1,608 was confiscated, and his estates were placed 
under the management of a British officer. Raids continued to be made by 
the Hasanzais aud Alazais during his confinement, and it was found necessary 