


- 


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Mohmands, 225 


After the submission of Nawab Khan the Mohmands abstained from 
aggression until 1868, when the emissaries of the Akbund of Swat succeeded in 
‘creating open disturbance among the Mohmands of the Peshawar valley. 
A body of them, 3,000 strong, led by Sultan Muhammad Khan, son of Saadat 
Khan, entered British territory, but were attacked and routed near Shabkadar 
.by a small British detachment of 55 cavalry and 100 infantry. Under the 
influence of the fanatical preachings of a band of mullas from Ningrahar, 
5,500 Mohmands, under Nauroz Khan, another son of Saadat Khan, threatened 
the fort of Shabkadar in January 1864, but were met by a British force of 
8 guns, 460 sabres, and 1,230 bayonets under the command of Colonel 
Macdonell and completely defeated. For his share in these proceedings the 
‘Amir of Kabul removed Saadat Khan from the Chiefship of Lalpura and 
deported him with his son Nauroz Khan to Kabul. He was subsequently 
released, but died soon afterwards. In 1871 Sultan Muhammad Khan was 
Chief of Lalpura, buf was assassinated by one of the Torabsz branch of the 
family. He was succeeded by his brother Nauroz Khan. In 1873 the Hafiz- 
kor clan of the Tarakzai Mohmands was prohibited from entering British 
territory for three years, and its lands were confiscated, for having fired at 
Captain Anderson, Commandant of Shabkadar. 

Bahram Khan, half-brother of Nauroz Khan, cansed the murder of Major 
Macdonald, Commandant of the fort of Michni, in 1873. For his negligence 
in allowing the murderer to escape Nauroz Khan was removed from the 
Chiefship by the Amir, but was afterwards restored, only to be deprived of it 
again in 1875, when he was replaced by Muhammad Shah Khan, son of Sultan 
Muhammad Khan. Nauroz Khan died at Gandas in 1877, and his sons went 
to Peshawar. 


In April 1879 Muhammad Sadik Khan, the eldest son of Nauroz Khan, 
joined the Amir Yakub Khan, As soon as our troops left; Dakka in 1879, 
Muhammad Sadik Khan was appointed by the Amir Khan of Lalpura in the 
place of Muhammad Shah Khan. He was acknowledged as Khan by the Gov- 
ernment of India at the end of 1879, Butin January 1880 Muhammad Sadik 
Khan broke into open hostility at the head of a large rabble of Mohmands, some 
"5,000 strong. They crossed the river and threatened Dakka and the Landi 
Kotal road. A small British force was sent against them, and they were 
routed, suffering considerable loss. Negotiations were then opened with 
‘Sadik Khan’s half-brother, Akbur Khan. Eventually a Sanad (No. CXVI) 


was granted to Akbar Khan conferring upon him the Chiefsbip of Lalpura 
26 


228 Punjab—North-Western Frontioer—4/ridis. Part I 


and all the jagirs and allowances appertaining thereto, subject to the condition 
of his Joyalty and good service to the British Government. 

Later on the Amir Abdur Rabman Khan was ibformed that Akbar had 
been appointed Khan of Lalpura by the British Government, and that the 
Khanship of Lalpura was under British protection. At the end of 1880 
Akbar Khan was confirmed in the Khanship by the Amir. The Khan is 
responsible for the Khaibar pass from Landi Khana to Dakka, 