


In 1892, however, the Hasanzai and Mada Khel allowed Hashim All 
to return to their country and to settle at Baio. They were warned that, if 
they did not surrender or expel him within a month, troops would be sent 
against them ; and, as they persisted in refusing compliance, a force was sent 
under General Lockhart to Baio. The place was found empty: the defences 
were destroyed; and the force was withdrawn, Hashim Ali being still at 
large. 


The (2) Lliaszai and (3) Malizai sub-divisions of the Yusaf section are 
located in the Buner valley in Yaghistan. The Bunerwals, as they are also 
called, number about 11,000 souls, of whom 2,000 are fighting men. The first 
occasion on which they came into collision with the British Government was 
during the Ambela campaign of 1863. They displayed considerable bravery, 
but finally agreed (No. CIX) to disband their force, destroy Malka, and 
expel the Hindustani fanatics from Buner. To these engagements they 
adhered and caused no further trouble till 1868, when the: Salarzai clan, of 
the Iliaszai sub-division, burnt a village in British Yusafzai. For this they 
were blockaded until they agreed to cus the village and pay a fine to the 


British Government. 


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Yusafzais, 219 


In 1875 the Chagarsai section’ of the Maliznis joined the Akazais and 
Hasanzais in their raids on the Agror border, which have been described ‘above. 
The Nasrat Khel clan of the Chagarzais came in with the Akazais in Septem- 
ber of that year, and the Bast, Khel clan with the Hasanzais in December 
following. 

In July 1877 the Bunerwals made a raid on the border villages of the 
Sudum valley, incited thereto by Ajab Khan, a leading Chief, who hoped thus to 
injure his enemies and enhance his importance in the eyes of Government. 
The Buverwals were gallantly beaten back by the villagers, and the Govern. 
ment imposed a blockade on the tribe and exacted a fine. Ajab Khan was 
arrested and tried at Peshawar as a common criminal, and was convicted and 
executed in June 1878. Some excitement and disquietude prevailed for a year 
after, but the effect on the whole was good, and tranquillity was restored. 

On 16th May 1884 the peace was disturbed by the Salarzai section, 
who burnt the village of Pirzai. The Salarzais were asked to come in and 
submit, but proved recusant; and in the end of the year a‘ blockade was estab- 
Jished against them. Shortly after the Pirzai outrage, in June 1884, the Ashuzat 
clan of Buner made a raid on Baroch, and were included in this blockade. In 
December 1864 the Vurzaé clan was also guilty of violence, and was conse- 
quently blockaded. Matters after this became worse. The Bunerwals held 
out, and at one time it was intended to send a strong military force into 
the hills. The Bunerwals, however, at length submitted in February 1887, 
complying with the terms imposed by Government. 


The Yusafzais of the (4) Ranizai division live beyond the British border 
on the slopes of the Totai hills;-and in the western part of the Swat valley ; 
they can turn out about 3,000 matchlockmen. 