

No agreement was entered into at that time with the Utman Khel, Lut 
their defeat at Pranghar had a wholesome effect for several years. The 
Ranizai Chiefs shortly afterwards submitted, and wished to become British 
subjects, This was not acceded to, but they were allowed by Cclonel Macke- 


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Gaduns or Jaduns, 221 


son, then Commissioner of Peshawar, to re-settle on terms (No. CX) to 
which they have since steadfastly adbered. At the same time a fort was 
constructed at Abazai, on the Swat river, to check these tribes, The result of 
the expedition was to restore order and security to the Hashtnagar tahsil, 
and to put a stop to the flight of chiefs and maliks. 

In December 1876 the Utman Khel wantonly raided a gang of unarmed 
Muhammadan coolies working on the Swat canal near Abazai. An example 
was demanded, and iv 1878 a small expedition was sent into the hills, which 
surprised and punished the Utman Khel village of Sapri. The village of 
Bacha was subsequently visited, where the tribal leaders attended, and submit- 
ted to the terms imposed by Government. 

In 1877 the Ranizai village of Skakot having taken to harbouring 
outlaws, and proved otherwise troublesome and disobedient, a small force 
was sent against it, when the terms demanded by the Government were at 
once complied with. The neighbouring villages came in and gave similar 
guarantees, 

Among the allies of the Yusafzai tribe may be reckoned the Utman 
Khel (distinct from those mentioned in connection with the Ranizais and 
from the Orakzai Utman Khel), who live in the north of the Baizai sub- 
division of Yusafzai. Their conduct as British subjects was formerly refrac- 
tory, and in the Ambela campaign in 1863 they caused much annoyance 
by cutting off stragglers between the British position and the rears As a 
punishment a fine of Rupees 2,500 was inflicted upon them. The adjustment 
of the shares in which this was to be borne by the different villages led to much 
bloodshed among them. Order was for a time restored, but the feuds broke 
out again in 1865, and as some of the independent tribes were concerned in 
the disturbances, a strong force under Brigadier-General Dunsford was de- 
spatched in January 1866 to the spot. Their villages were levelled to the 
ground and re-built on the plain, where they are no longer inaccessible or 
in ‘the way of assistance from independent tribes. In 1872 they again gave 
trouble in connection with. the revenue settlement operations then proceeding 
in the district. Troops were sent out : but the recusant villages finally made 
submission, and have since given no cause of complaint, 


3.—GADUNS OR JADUNS. 


The Gaduns are a Pathan tribe, who reside partly on the southern slopes 
of the Mahaban mountain, and partly in the Hazara district. They are termed 
Gaduns in the Peshawar district and Jaduns in Hazara. They muster 


222 Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Mokmands. Part I 


about 2,500 men, The tribe is divided into two main sections—Salar and 
Mansur, They have principally come into contact with the British Gov- 
ernment through their connection with the Hindustani fanatical Muham- 
madans of Sitana. In 1858, when Sitana was destroyed, the Gaduns remain- 
ed quiet, and agreed to prevent the return there of the Hindustani fanatics. | 
In 1861 they were called to account, in common with the Utmanzai Yusafzais, 
for permitting these fanatics to re-settle and to pass through their country 
when proceeding to and returning from British territory. A blockade was 
iastituted, which soon resulted in the submission of the tribe, and an Engage- 
ment (No! C) was taken from the Salar section of the tribe similar to 