

The most important terms were that the clans acknowledged their respon- 
sibility for Hashim Ali Khan, or their Chief, whoever he might he, and bound 
themselves to control his behaviour, They also acknowledged the right of 
the British Government to send its servants, troops, or police, along its own 
border on the crest of the Black Mountain; and promised to attend when sum- 
moned to acconipany any troops making a peaceable march on this border. 
The Akazais also admitted they had no claim to Shahtut, which had long 
been a source of contention on the Black Mountain. 

In 1890 the Government of India, with a view to enforce the results of 
the expedition of 1888 and to secure more control over the clans beyond the 
Black Mountain, determined to make certain roads in Agror up to and along 
the crest of the hill, and to send a small force to march along the crest and thus 
assert the intention of holding the clans to their agreement, The tribes were 
invited to send in deputations to arrange either to assist in these projects or at 
least to see that no offence was offered. 

Shortly before troops actually started to march along the’ Black;Mountain 
the clans were warned that, if in violation of their agreements they attempted 
to molest or oppose British troops marching peaceably on the border, they 
would be severely punished: To all warnings and advice they turned a deaf 
ear, and permitted Hashim Ali Khan, some Akazai headmen, and other leading 
malcontents, to assemble bodies on the crest of the hill to oppose the force sent 
from Abbottabad. When the intention of the clans was clearly proved by 
their coming into British territory and firing at the eamp at Barchar, the 
‘troops under orders retired and the Hasanzais and Akazais were warned that 
they would be punished by an expedition to be sent against them in the spring. 

2F 


218 . Punjab—North-Western Frontier— Yusafzais. Part I 


In pursuance of this threat the expedition of 1891 against the Black 
Mountain was undertaken. The Hasanzais and Akazais were warned that 
their unconditional submission was demanded, and the Mada Khel as a branch 
_of the Isazai tribe were told they must join the other clans in any final ar- 
" rangement of which Government might approve regarding the Khanship of 
Seri, The Hazara Field Force marched from Darband about the middle of 
March and gradually occupied the whole of the territories of the Hasanzais and 
Akazais, Neither clan offered serious or organised opposition, but they did 
not make complete submission till the end of May,.when, finding that unless 
they gave in the occupation of their villages would be maintained and a second 
harvest lost, they sent in complete jirgas and accepted all the terms demand- 
ed save that of the surrender of Hashim Ali Khan, which his flight had put 
out of their power. They also undertook to keep Hashim Ali out of their 
country and to surrender him if he returned to it. The Hasanzais and 
Akazais executed an Agreement (No. CVI) embodying the terms imposed. 
The Mada Khel followed and made a similar Agreement (No, CVII). Before. 
the force broke up the headmen of Pariari came into Oghi and executed an 
Agreement of a similar nature (NoCVIII). 